Systematic Theology, Vol. 3 (Charles Hodge, 1874)
==========================================================
Hodge's Systematic Theology, volume 3 (1874 edition) — eschatology and the Princeton completion of the great Calvinist system. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

SYSTEMATIC


THEOLOaT.


BT

CHARLES   HODGE,  D.  D.,

PROFKSSdK    tN   TIIK   TlIKOLOGtCAI,   SEMIN'AUY,    PKINCKTON,   SEW    JEKSKY.


YOL.  III.


NEW    YORK:
SCEIBNER,  ARMSTRONG,  AND  CO.

SUCCESSORS  TO

CHARLES  SCRIBNER  AND  CO.

LONDON  AND  EDINBURGH :  T.  NELSON  AND  SONS.

1874.


Entered  according  to  act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1872,  oy

ScRiBNEK,  Armstrong,  and  Company,
in  the  Office  of  the  Librarian  of  Congress  at  Washington.


lUTEKSICE,  CAHBRIDGl. .

StEREOTYPED     AND    PRINTED   BT

H.    0.    HOUOKTOX   AND   COMPANY.


CONTENTS  OF  THE  THIRD  VOLUME.


PART    III.      {Continued.)
CHAPTER  XV.

REGENERATION.

PAOB

§  1.  Usage  of  the  word  Regeneration 3

§  2.  Nature  of  Regeneration 5

Not  a  Change  in  the  Substance  of  the  Soul.  —  Not  an  Act  of  the
Soul.  —  Doctor  Eumion's  Docti'ine.  —  Professor  Finney's  Doc-
trine. —  Doctor  Nathaniel  Taylor's  View.  —  Not  a  Change  in
any  one  Faculty.  —  Not  merely  Illumination.  —  Not  a  Change  of
the  Higher  Powers  of  the  Soul  exclusively.  —  Modern  Specula-
tive Views.  —  Ebrard's  Doctrine.  —  Delitzsch's  Doctrine     .         .     25

Doctrine  of  the  Latin  Church  •  • 27

Doctrine  of  the  Church  of  England 28

§  3.  The  EvangeUcal  Doctrine 29

Exposition  of  the  Doctrine 30

An  Act  of  Divine  Power 31

In  the  Subjective  Sense  of  the  Word  not  an  Act    .         .        .        .32
It  is  a  New  Principle  of  Life.  —  A  New  Birth.  —  A  New  Heart.  —

The  whole  Soul  the  Subject  of  it 36

§  4.  Objections  to  the  Evangelical  Doctrine 37

CHAPTER  XVL

KAITH.

§  1.  Preliminary  Remarks 41

§  2.  Psychological  Nature  of  Faith 42

Primary  Idea  of  Faith  is  Trust.  —  More  limited  Sense  of  the  Word
Definitions  of  Faith  founded  on  its  Subjective  Nature,  —

First,  a  Degree  of  Conviction  less  than  Knowledge,  but  stronger

than  Opinion 46

Second,  a  Conviction  determined  by  the  Will  .         .         .         49

Definition  founded  on  the  Objects  of  Faith.  —  Conviction  of  the

Truth  of  Things  not  seen o3

Definitions  founded  on  the  Kind  of  Evidence  on  which  the  Convic-
tion rests,  —

First,  a  Conviction  founded  on  Feeling S7

Second,  a  Conviction  founded  on  Testimony    ....         60


IV


CONTENTS  OF  THE  THIRD  VOLUME.


PAOK

§  3.  Different  Kinds  of  Faith .         .         .67

§  4.  llelation  of  Faith  and  Knowledge 75

§  5.  Relation  of  Faith  and  Feeling 88

§  6.  Relation  of  Faith  and  Love 93

§  7.  Object  of  Saving  Faith 95

§  8.  Effects  of  Faith 104

Assurance        .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .10(5

Certainty  of  Salvation 110


§1-
S  2.


§3.

§4.
§5.
§6.

§'.

§8.

§10
§11


CHAPTER  XVn.

JUSTIFICATIOX.

Symbolical  Statement  of  the  Doctrine 114

Justification  a  forensic  Act 118

Proof  of  the  Doctrine »  120

Calvin's  Doctrine  .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .133

Works  not  the  Ground  oi'  Justification        .         .         .         .         .         .134

Romish  Doctrine.  —  Remonstrant  Doctrine.  —  Protestant  Doctrine  13  7
The  Righteousness  of  Christ  the  Ground  of  Justification  .  .  .141
Imputation  of  Righteousness   .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .144

Proof  of  the  Doctrine  of  Imputation 150

Consequences  of  the  Imputation  of  Christ's  Righteousness     .         .        IGl
Relation  of  Faith  to  Justification        .         .         .         .         .         .         .165

Romish  Doctrine.  —  Remonstrant  Doctrine.  —  Protestant  Doctrine    1  7U
Objections  to  the  Protestant  Doctrine  of  Justification     .         .         .171
,  Departures  fi'om  the  Protestant  Doctrine  .         .         .         .         .         .179

Osiander.  —  Stancarus. —  Piscator.  —  Arminian  Doctrine  .       185

.  Modern  Views  on  Justification  .         .         .         .         .         .         .195

Rationalistic    Theories.  —  Philosophical    Theories.  —  Speculative
Theologians 199


CHAPTER  XVIII.


SANCTIFICATION.

§  1.  Its  Nature 213

Supernatural        .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .213

§  2.  Wherein  it  consists 220

§  3.  Method  of 226

§  4.  Fruits  of 231

Nature  of  Good  AVorks.  —  Romish  Doctrine.  —  Works  of  Super-
erogation. —  Precepts  and  Counsels      ......  235

§  5.  Necessity  of  Good  Works 238

Antinomianism         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         ,         .241

§  G.  Relation  of  Good  Works  to  Reward 241

§  7.  Perfectionism       ...........  245

§  8,  Theories  of  Perfectionism        ........       250

Pelagian. —  Romish.  —  Arminian.  —  Oberlin  .         .         .         .         .  255


CONTENTS   OF   THE    THIRD  VOLUME.  ▼

CHAPTER  XIX.

THE    LAW.

PAOg

§  1.  Preliminary  Principles 259

Theism  the  Foundation  of  the  Moral  Law.  —  Christian  Liberty  in
Matters  of  Indifference.  —  Scriptural  Use  of  the  Word  "  Law."
—  Different  Kinds  of  Laws.  —  Perfection  of  the   Law.  —  The

Decaloiue.  —  Rules  of  Interpretation 272

§  2.  Division  of  the  Contents  of  the  Decalogue 272

§  3.  The  Preface  to  the  Ten  Commandments 275

§  4.   Tlie  First  Commandment        .         .         .         .277

§  5.  Invocation  of  Saints 281

Mariolatry 285

§  6.   The  Second  Commandment     ....  290

Worship  of  Images  forbidden.  —  Doctrine  and  Usage  of  the  Ro-
mish Church     ..........  296

Relies 300

§  7.  The  Third  Commandment  ....       305

Import  of  the  Command.  —  Oaths.  — Romish  Doctrine.  —  Vows.  —
Monastic  Vows 219

§  8.   The  Fourth  Commandment  .         .         .       321

Its  Design. —  Origin  and  Perpetual  Obligation  of  the  Sabbath      .  323

How  it  is  to  be  sanctified 336

Sunday  Laws 340

§  9.   The  Fifth  Commandment.  —  Its  Design  .  348

Filial  Relation.  —  Parental  Duties.  —  The  Obedience  due  to  Civil

Magistrates 356

Obedience  to  the  Church 360

§10.   The  Sixth  Commandment.  —  Its  Design     .       362

Capital  Punishment 363

Self-defence.  —  War.  —  Suicide.  —  Duelling        ....       368

§  11.   The  Seventh  Commandment       .         .        .       368

Celibacy.  —  Marriage  a  Divine  Institution 376

As  a  Civil  Institution        . 377

Monogamy 380

Converted  Polygamists     .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .387

Divorce 391

Doctrine  of  the  Church  of  Rome.  —  In  what  Sense  Marriage  is

a  Sacrament 398

Laws  of  Protestant  Countries 401

The  Social  Evil 406

Prohibited  Marriages 407


\i  CONTENTS   OF   THE   THIRD   VOLUME.

PAOB

§  12.   The  Eighth  Commandment         .         .         .       421

Foundation  of  tlie  Rio;ht  of  Property.  —  Community  of  Goods.  —
Communism  and  Socialism.  —  International  Society.  —  Viola-
tions of  the  Eighth  Commandment 434

§  13.   The  Ninth  Commandment     .         .         .         .437

Importance  of  Truth.  —  Detraction.  —  Falsehood. — Mental  Res-
ervation.—  Pious  Frauds.  —  False  Miracles         .         .         .         .452

§  14.   The  Tenth  Commandment     .         ,         .         .  4G3
CHAPTER   XX.

THE    MEANS    OF    GRACE.

§  1.  The  Word  of  God 466

OfRce  of  the  Word  as  a  Means  of  Grace.  —  Lutheran  Doctrine         4  7D

§  2.   The  Sacraments  .         .         .         .485

Their  Nature.  —  Usage  of  the  Word.  —  Theological  Definition.  —
Lutheran  Doctrine.  —  Romish  Doctrine.  —  Remonstrant  Doc-
trine               .         .         .         .4  90

§  3.  Number  of  the  Sacraments      .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .492

§  4.  Efficacy  of  the  Sacraments  ........  41)8

Zwinglian  and  Remonstrant  Doctrine.  —  Reformed  Doctrine.  —
Lutheran  Doctrine.  —  Romish  Doctrine.  —  The  "Ex  Opere  Op-
erate "   Doctrine       .........       509

§  5.  The  Necessity  of  the  Sacraments 516

§  6.  The  Validity  of  the  Sacraments      ..'....       523

§  7.  Baptism 526

Its  Mode.  —  Use  of  the  Word 526

§  8.  The  Formula  of  Baptism .539

§  9.  The  Subjects  of  Baptism.  —  Qualifications  for  Adult  Baptism         .       541

§  10.  Infant  Baptism 546

Visible  Church  is  a  Divine  Institution.  —  It  does  not  consist  exclu-
sively of  the  Regenerate.  —  The  Commonwealth  of  Israel  was
the  Church.  —  The  Church  under  the  Christian  Dispensation
Identical  with  that  of  the  Old.  —  The  Terms  of  Admission  into
the  Church  the  Same  under  both  Dispensations.  —  Infants  were
Members  of  the  Church  under  the  Old  Testament  Economy.  —
They  are  still  Members  of  the  Church.  —  They  need  and  are
capable  of  receiving  the  Benefits  of  Redemption  .         .         .557

§  11.  Whose  Children  are  entitled  to  Baptism? 558

Usage  of  the  Church  of  Rome.  —  Theories  adopted  by  many  Prot-
estants. —  President  Edwards's  Doctrine.  —  The  Half- Way  Cove-
nant       5G7

Puritan  Doctrine.  —  Usage  of  the  Reformed  Churches         .         .       5  73

§12.  Efficacy  of  Baptism 5  7!)

Doctrine  of  the  Reformed  Churches.  —  Baptismal  Regeneration        591


CONTENTS   OF  THE  THIRD   VOLUME.  vii

rAGG

§  13.  Lutheran  Doctrine  of  Baptism 604

§  14.  Doctrine  of  the  Church  of  Rome 609

§15.  The  Lord's  Supper       .        .        .        .611

Of  Perpetual  Obligation 612

Elements  to  be  Used.  —  Sacramental   Actions.  —  Its   Design.  —

Qualifications  for  the  Lord's  Supper 623

§  16.  Doctrine  of  the  Reformed  Churches 626

Zwinglian  View.  —  Calvin's  Doctrine.  —  The  Form  of  Statement

in  which  the  Zwinglians  and  Calvinists  Agree         .        .        .       631
The  Sense  in  which  Christ  is  Present  in  the  Sacrament  .        .637

Manducation 643

What  is  Received  in  the  Lord's  Supper  .        .        .        .        .        .  645

The  Efficacy  of  the  Lord's  Supper 647

§  17.  Modern  Views  on  this  Sacrament 650

§  18.  The  Lutheran  Doctrine 661

§  19.  Doctrine  of  the  Church  of  Rome 677

Transubstantiation.  —  Withholding  the  Cup  from  the  Laity        .       685
The  Lord's  Supper  as  a  Sacrifice 685

§  20.  Prayer 692

The  Object  of  Prayer 700

Requisites  for  Acceptable  Prayer 701

Different  Kinds  of  Prayer 705

Public  Prayer 707

Power  of  Prayer 708


PAET  lY.

ESCHATOLOGY.

CHAPTER  L

STATE  OF  THE  SOUL  AFTER  DEATH.

§  1.  Protestant  Doctrine 71.^

The  Old  Testament  Doctrine  on  the  Future  State  .        .716

Intermediate  State •       724

§  2.  Sleep  of  the  Soul 730

§  3.  Patristic  Doctrine  of  the  Intermediate  State 733

§  4.  Doctrine  of  the  Church  of  Rome 743

Purgatory 749

CHAPTER  n.

RESURRECTION.

§  1.  Scriptural  Doctrine •        •        .        •        •771

§  2.  History  of  the  Doctrine 785


vB  CONTENTS   OF  THE  THIRD  VOLUME.

CHAPTER  m.

SECOND   ADVENT.

PAGB

§  1.  Preliminary  Remarks 790

§  2.  The  Churcli  Doctrine 792

§  3.  Personal  Advent  of  Clirist 792

§  4.  Calling  of  the  Gentiles 800

§  5.  Conversion  of  the  Jews 805

Are  the  Jews  to  be  Restored  to  their  Own  Land  ?       .         .         .807

§  6.  Antichrist 812

The  Papacy  the  Antichrist  of  St.  Paul.—  The  Antichrist  of  Daniel  823

The  An-tichrist  of  the  Apocalypse 825

Roman  Catholic  Doctrine  of  Antichrist 831

CHAPTER  IV.

CONCOMITANTS   OF   THE    SECOND   ADVENT.

§  1.  The  General  Resurrection 837

§  2.  The  Final  Judgment 844

§  3.  The  End  of  the  World 851

§  4.  The  Kingdom  of  Heaven 855

§  5.  Theory  of  the  Premillennial  Advent 861

Did  the  Apostles  expect  the  Second  Advent  in  their  Day?    .         .867
§  6,  Future  Punishment 868

Dm'ation  of  Future  Punishment.  —  Objections  to  the  Scriptural
Doctrine 878


SYSTEMATIC    THEOLOGY.


PART    III.    (Continued.)
SOTERIOLOGY.


SYSTEMATIC   THEOLOGY.


CHAPTER   XV.

REGENEKATION.

§  1.    Usage  of  the  Word.

The  subjective  change  -vvrought  in  the  soul  by  the  grace  of
God,  is  variously  designated  in  Scripture.  It  is  called  a  new
birth,  a  resurrection,  a  new  life,  a  new  creature,  a  renewing  of  the
mind,  a  dying  to  sin  and  living  to  righteousness,  a  translation
from  darkness  to  light,  etc.  In  theological  language,  it  is  called
regeneration,  renovation,  conversion.  These  terms  are  often  used
interchangeably.  They  are  also  used  sometimes  for  the  whole
process  of  spiritual  renovation  or  restoration  of  the  image  of  God,
and  sometimes  for  a  particular  stage  of  that  process.  Thus  Cal-
vin gives  the  term  its  widest  scope  :  "  Uno  verbo  poenitentiam
interpretor  regenerationem,  cujus  non  alius  est  scopus  nisi  ut  im-
ago Dei,  quse   per  Adje  transgTessionem  foedata  et  tantum   non

obliterata  fuerat,  in  nobis  reformetur Atque  li;ec  quidem

instauratio  non  uno  momento,  vel  die,  vel  anno  impletur,  sed  per
continuos,  imo  etiam  lentos  interdum  profectus  abolet  Deus  in
electis  suis  carnis  corruptelas."  ^

With  the  theologians  of  the  seventeenth  century  conversion  and
regeneration  were  synonymous  terms.  In  the  acts  of  the  Synod
of  Dort,  we  find  such  expressions  as  "  Status  conversionis  aut  re-
generationis,"  and  "effecta  ad  conversionem  sive  regenerationem
prasvia."  John  Owen,  in  his  work  on  the  Holy  Spirit,  follows
the  same  usage.  The  fifth  chapter  of  the  third  book  of  that  work
is  entitled  "  The  nature  of  regeneration,"  and  one  of  the  heads
under  this  is,  "  Conversion  not  ^vi'ought  by  moral  suasion  only."
"  If  the  Holy  Spirit,"  he  says,  "  acts  no  otherwise  on  men  in
regeneration  or  conversion,"  then  so  and  so  follows.  Turrettin,
as  we  have  seen,  distinguishes  between  what  he  calls  "  conversio
1  Institutio,  lib.  in.  cap.  iii.  9,  edit.  Berlin,  1834,  vol.  i.  p.  389.


4  PART  III.    Ch.  XV.  —  regeneration.

habitualis  "  and  "  conversio  actualis."  "  Conversio  liabitualis
sen  passiva,  fit  per  habituum  supernaturalium  infusionem  a
Spiritu  Sancto.     Actualis  vero  sen  activa  per  bonorum  istorum

exercitium Per  illam  homo  renovatur  et  convertitvir  a  Deo.

Per  istam  homo  a  Deo  renovatus  et  convertus  convertit  se  ad
Deum,  et  actus  agit.  Ilia  melius  regeneratio  dicitur,  quia  se
habet  ad  modum  novte  nativitatis,  qua  homo  reformatur  ad  imag-
jjiem  Creatoris  sui.  Ista  vero  conversio,  quia  includit  hominis
ipsius  operationem."  ^  This  is  clear  and  accurate.  As  these  two
things  are  distinct  they  should  be  designated  by  different  terms.
Great  confusion  arises  from  this  ambiguity  of  terms.  The  ques-
tions whether  man  is  active  or  passive  in  regeneration  and  whether
regeneration  is  effected  by  the  mediate  or  immediate  influence  of
the  Spirit  miist  be  answered  in  one  way  if  regeneration  includes
conversion,  and  in  another  if  it  be  taken  in  its  restricted  sense.
In  the  Bible,  the  distinction  is  generally  preserved  ;  /xcrarota,
repentance,  change  of  mind,  turning  to  God,  ^'.  e.,  conversion,  is
what  man  is  called  upon  to  do  ;  avayiwrja-Ls,  regeneration,  is  the
act  of  God.  God  regenerates  ;  the  soul  is  regenerated.  In  the
Romish  Church  justification  is  making  subjectively  just,  ^.  <?.,  free
from  sin  and  inwardly  holy.  So  is  regeneration.  So  is  sanctifi-
cation.  These  terms,  therefore,  in  the  theology  of  that  church  are
constantly  interchanged.

Even  by  the  Lutherans,  in  the  "  Apology  for  the  Augsburg
Confession,"  regeneration  is  made  to  include  justification.  That
is,  it  is  made  to  include  tlie  whole  process  by  which  the  sinner  is
transferred  from  a  state  of  sin  and  condemnation  into  a  state  of
salvation.  In  the  "  Form  of  Concord  "  it  is  said,  "  Vocabuliun
regenerationis  interdum  in  eo  sensu  accipitur,  ut  simul  et  reniis-
sionem  peccatorum  (qure  duntaxat  propter  Christum  contingit)
et  subsequentem  renovationem  complectatur,  quam  Spiritus  Sanc-
tus  in  illis,  qui  per  fidem  justificati  sunt,  operatur,  quandoque
etiam  solam  remissionem  peccatorum,  et  adoptionem  m  filios  Dei
significat.  Et  in  hoc  posteriore  usu  srepe  multumque  id  vocabu-
lum  in  Apologia  Confessionis  ponitur.    Verbi  gratia,  cum  dicitur:

Justificatio  est  regeneratio Quin  etiam  vivificationis  vo-

cabulum  interdum  ita  accipitur,  ut  remissionem  peccatorum  notet.
Cum  enim  homo  per  fidem  (quam  quidem  solus  Spiritus  Sanctus
operatur)  justificatur,  id  ipsum  revera  est  qutedam  regeneratio,
quia  ex  filio  irro  fit  filius  Dei,  et  hoc  modo  e  morte  in  vitam  trans-
fertur Deinde  etiam  regeneratio  sa^pe  pro  sanctificatione

1  Locus  XV.  qu;us.  iv.  13,  edit.  Edinburgh,  1847,  vol.  ii.  p.  460.


§2.]  ITS  NATURE.  5

et  renovatione  (qu^  fidei  iiistificationem  sequitur)  usurpatur.  In
qua  significatione  D.  Liitherus  liac  voce,  turn  in  libro  de  ecclesia
et  conciKis,  turn  alibi  etiam,  multnm  usu  est."  ^

As  this  lax  use  of  terms  was  unavoidably  attended  with  great
confusion,  the  "  Form  of  Concord  "  itself,  and  the  later  Lutheran
theologians  were  more  precise.  They  made  especially  a  sharp
distinction  between  justification  and  anything  signifying  a  sub-
jective change  in  the  sinner.

In  the  early  Church  regeneration  often  expressed,  not  any  in-
ward moral  change,  but  an  external  change  of  state  or  relation.
Among  the  Jews  when  a  heathen  became  a  proselyte  to  their
religion,  he  was  said  to  be  born  again.  The  change  of  his  status
from  without  to  within  the  theocracy,  was  called  regeneration.
This  usage  in  a  measure  passed  over  to  the  Christian  Chui-ch.
When  a  man  became  a  member  of  the  Church  he  was  said  to  be
born  anew  ;  and  baptism,  which  was  the  rite  of  initiation,  was
called  regeneration.  This  use  of  the  word  has  not  yet  entirely
passed  away.  A  distinction  is  still  sometimes  made  between
regeneration  and  spiritual  renovation.  The  one  is  extei-nal,  the
other  internal.  Some  of  the  advocates  of  baptismal  regeneration
make  this  distinction,  and  interpret  the  language  of  the  formulas
of  the  Church  of  England  in  accordance  with  it.  The  regenera-
tion effected  in  baptism,  in  their  view,  is  not  any  spiritual
change  in  the  state  of  the  soul,  but  simply  a  birth  into  the  \dsible
Church.

§  2.  Nature  of  Regeneration.

By  a  consent  almost  universal  the  word  regeneration  is  now
used  to  designate,  not  the  whole  work  of  sanctification,  nor  the
first  stages  of  that  work  comprehended  in  conversion,  much  less
justification  or  any  mere  external  change  of  state,  but  the  in-
stantaneous change  from  spiritual  death  to  spiritual  life.  Regen-
eration, therefore,  is  a  spiritual  resurrection  ;  the  beginning  of
a  new  life.  Sometimes  the  word  expresses  the  act  of  God.  God
regenerates.  Sometimes  it  designates  the  subjective  effect  of  his
act.  The  sinner  is  regenerated.  He  becomes  a  new  creature.
He  is  born  again.  And  this  is  his  regeneration.  These  two  ap-
plications of  the  word  are  so  allied  as  not  to  produce  confusion.
The  nature  of  regeneration  is  not  explained  in  the  Bible  further
than  the  account  therein  given  of  its  author,  God,  in  the  exercise
of  the  exceeding  greatness  of  his  power ;  its  subject,  the  whole
soul ;  and  its  effects,  spiritual  hfe,  and  all  consequent  holy  acta

1  HI.  19,  30,  21 ;  Hase,  Lihri  SymboUd,  3d  edit.  p.  68G.


6'  PART  m.   Ch.  XV.  —  regeneration.

and  states.  Its  metaphysical  nature  is  left  a  mystery.  It  is  not
the  province  of  either  philosophy  or  theology  to  solve  that  mys-
tery. It  is,  however,  the  duty  of  the  theologian  to  examine  the
various  theories  concerning  the  nature  of  this  saving  change,  and
to  reject  all  such  as  are  inconsistent  with  the  Word  of  God.

Not  a  change  in  the  Substance  of  the  Sotd.

Regeneration  does  not  consist  in  any  change  in  the  substance
of  the  soul.  The  only  advocate  of  the  opposite  doctrine  among
Protestant  theologians  was  Flacius  Illyricus,  so  called  from  the
place  of  his  birth.  He  was  one  of  the  most  prominent  Lutheran
theologians  in  what  is  called  the  second  Reformation  in  Germany.
He  did  great  service  in  the  cause  of  truth  in  resisting  the  syner-
gism of  iNIelancthon,  and  the  concessions  which  that  eminent  but
yielding  reformer  was  disposed  to  make  to  the  papists.  He  con-
tributed some  of  the  most  important  works  of  the  age  in  which
he  lived  to  the  vmdication  of  "the  Protestant  faith.  His  "  Cata-
logus  Testium  Veritatis,"  designed  to  prove  that  the  doctrines
of  the  Reformation  had  had  their  witnesses  in  all  ages  ;  his
"  Clavis  Scripturte  Sacrae;"  and  especially  the  great  historical
work,  "The  Magdeburg  Centuries"  (in  thirteen  volumes,  folio),
of  which  he  was  the  originator  and  principal  author,  attest  his
learning,  talents,  and  untiring  industry.  His  fervent  and  un-
compromising spirit  involved  him  in  many  difficulties  and  sorrows.
He  died  worn  out  b}^  suffering  and  labour,  says  his  biographer  ;
one  of  those  men  of  faith  of  whom  the  world  was  not  worthy.
Always  extreme  in  his  opmions,  he  held  that  original  sin  was  a
corruption  of  the  substance  of  the  soul,  and  regeneration  such  a
change  of  that  substance  as  to  restore  its  normal  purity.  All  his
friends  who  had  sided  mth  him  in  his  controversy  with  the  Syn-
ergists and  the  supporters  of  the  Leipzig  Interim,  forsook  him
now,  and  he  stood  alone.  In  the  "  Form  of  Concord,"  adopted
to  settle  all  the  controversies  of  the  period,  these  peculiar  views
of  Flacius  were  condemned  as  a  vii-tual  revival  of  the  jManich^an
heresy.  It  was  urged  that  if  the  substance  of  the  soul  be  sinful,
God,  by  whom  each  individual  soul  is  created,  must  be  the  author
of  sin ;  and  that  Christ  who,  in  assuming  our  nature,  became
consubstantial  with  us,  must  be  a  partaker  of  sin.  No  Christian
Church  has  assumed  the  responsibility  of  the  doctrine  of  Flacius,
or  held  that  regeneration  involves  a  change  of  the  essence  of  the
soul.


§2.]  ITS  NATURE.  T

Regeneration  does  not  consist  in  an  Act  of  the  Soul.

Regeneration  does  not  consist  in  any  act  or  acts  of  the  soul.
The  word  here,  of  course,  is  to  be  understood  not  as  including
conversion,  much  less  the  whole  work  of  sanctification,  but  in
its  restricted  sense  for  the  commencement  of  spiritual  life.  The
opposite  view,  which  makes  regeneration,  even  in  its  narrowest
sense,  an  act  of  the  soul,  has  been  held  by  very  different  classes
of  theologians.  It  is,  of  course,  involved  in  the  Pelagian  doctrine
which  denies  moral  character  to  everything  except  acts  of  the  will.
If  "  all  sin  is  sinning,"  and  "  all  love  loving,"  then  every  moral
change  in  man  must  be  a  change  from  one  form  of  voluntary
activity  to  another.  As  the  later  Remonstrants  held  the  princi-
ple in  question  they  made  regeneration  to  consist  in  the  sinner's
own  act  in  turning  unto  God.  The  influence  exerted  on  him
was  one  which  he  could  yield  to  or  resist.  If  he  yielded,  it  was
a  voluntary  decision,  and  in  that  decision  his  regeneration,  or  the
beginning  of  his  religious  hfe,  consisted.

Br.  Emmons'' s  View.

Dr.  Emmons,  holding  that  all  sin  and  hohness  consist  in  acts,
which  acts,  whether  sinful  or  holy,  are  immediately  created  by
God,  makes  regeneration  to  consist  in  God's  giving  rise  to  the
comijiencement  of  a  series  of  holy  acts.  In  his  discom-se  on  Re-
generation, the  first  proposition  which  he  undertakes  to  establish
is,  "  that  the  Spirit  of  God,  in  regeneration,  produces  nothing
but  love."  This  is  maintained  in  opposition  to  those  who  say
that  the  Spirit  produces  a  new  nature,  principle,  disposition,  or
taste.  "  Those  in  the  state  of  nature,"  he  says,  "  stand  in  no
need  of  having  any  new  power,  or  faculty,  or  principle  of  action
produced  in  them,  in  order  to  their  becoming  holy.     They  are

just  as  capable  of  loving  as  of  hating  God This  is  true  of

all  sinners,  who  are  as  much  moral  agents,  and  the  proper  sub-
jects of  moral  government,  before  as  after  regeneration.  When-
ever, therefore,  the  divine  Spirit  renews,  regenerates,  or  sanctifies
them,  He  has  no  occasion  of  producing  anything  in  their  minds
besides  love."  ^  "  The  love  which  the  Spirit  of  God  produces  in
regeneration  is  the  love  of  benevolence,  and  not  the  love  of  com-
placence." 2  "Though  there  is  no  natural  or  necessary  connection
between  the  first  exercise  of  love  and  all  future  exercises  of  grace,
yet  there  is  a  constituted  connection,  which  renders  future  exer-

1  Sermon  51;  Worhs,  edit.  Boston,  1842,  vol.  v.  p.  112.  2  ibUl.  p.  lU.


8  PART  m.   Ch.  XV.  — regeneration.

cises  of  grace  as  certain,  as  if  they  flowed  from  a  new  nature,  or
holy  principle,  as  many  suppose."  ^  His  first  inference  from  the
doctrine  of  his  sermon  is,  "  If  the  Spirit  of  God  produces  nothing
but  love  in  regeneration,  then  there  is  no  ground  for  the  distmc-
tion  which  is  often  made  between  regeneration,  conversion,  and
sanctification.  They  are,  m  nature  and  kind,  precisely  the  same
fruits  of  the  Spirit.  In  regeneration,  He  produces  holy  exercises ;
in  conversion.  He  produces  holy  exercises ;  and  in  sanctification.
He  produces  holy  exercises."  ^  Secondly,  "  If  the  Spirit  of  God
in  regeneration  produces  nothing  but  love,  then  men  are  no  more
passive  in  regeneration  than  in  conversion  or  sanctification.
Those  who  hold  that  the  divine  Spirit  in  regeneration  produces
something  prior  to  love  as  the  foundation  of  it,  that  is,  a  new
nature,  or  new  principle  of  hohness,  maintain  that  men  are  pas-
sive in  regeneration,  but  active  in  conversion  and  sanctification.
....  But  if  what  has  been  said  in  this  discourse  be  true,  there
is  no  new  nature,  or  principle  of  action,  produced  in  regeneration,
but  only  love,  which  is  activity  itself."   ^

Professor  Finney'' s  Doctrine.

Professor  Finney,  in  his  "  Lectures  on  Systematic  Theology,"
teaches :  (1.)  That  satisfaction,  happiness,  blessedness,  is  the
only  absolute  good ;  that  virtue  is  only  relatively  good,  i.  e.,  good
as  tending  to  produce  happiness.  (2.)  That  all  virtue  lies  in  the
intention  to  promote  the  happiness  of  being,  that  is,  of  universal
being.  There  is  no  virtue  in  emotion,  feeling,  or  any  state  of  the
sensibility,  for  these  are  involuntary.  Love  to  God  even  is  not
complacency  in  his  excellence,  but  "willing  him  good."  (3.)  All
sin  is  selfishness,  or  the  choice  of  our  own  happiness  in  preference
to  the  good  of  universal  being.  (4.)  Every  moral  agent  is  always
"  as  sinful  or  holy  as  with  their  knowledge  they  can  be."
(5.)  "  As  the  moral  law  is  the  law  of  nature,  it  is  absurd  to
suppose  that  entu*e  obedience  to  it  should  not  be  the  unalterable
condition  of  salvation."  *  (6.)  Regeneration  is  an  "  instantane-
ous "  change  "  fi-om  entire  sinfulness  to  entire  holiness."  ^  It  is
a  simple  change  of  purpose.

The  system  of  Professor  Finney  is  a  remarkable  product  of
relentless  logic.     It  is  valuable  as  a  warning.     It  shows  to  what

1  Sermon  51;  Works,  edit.  Boston,  1842,  vol.  v.  p.  116.  2  Hid.  p.  116.

8  Ibid.  pp.  117,  118.

4  Lectures  on  Systematic  Theology,  by  Charles  G.  Finney,  edit.  Oberlin,  Boston,  and  New
York,  1846,  p.  364.

5  Ibid.  p.  500.


§2.]  ITS  NATURE.  9

extremes  the  human  mind  may  be  carried  when  abandoned  to  its
own  guidance.  He  begins  ^\dth  certain  axioms,  or,  as  he  calls
tliem,  truths  of  the  reason,  and  from  these  he  draws  conclusions
which  are  indeed  logical  deductions,  but  which  shock  the  moral
sense,  and  prove  nothing  but  that  his  premises  are  false.  His
fundamental  principle  is  that  ability  limits  obligation.  Free  will
is  defined  to  be  "  the  power  of  choosing,  or  refusing  to  choose,  in
compliance  with  moral  obligation  in  every  instance."  '  "  Con-
sciousness of  the  affirmation  of  ability  to  comply  with  any  requi-
sition, is  a  necessary  condition  of  the  affirmation  of  obligation  to
comply  with  that  requisition."^  "To  talk  of  inability  to  obey
moral  law,  is  to  talk  sheer  nonsense."  ^

But  it  is  acknowledged  that  man's  ability  is  confined  to  acts  of
the  will,  therefore  moral  character  can  be  predicated  only  of  such
acts.  The  acts  of  the  will  are  either  choices  or  volitions.  "  By
choice  is  intended  the  selection  or  choice  of  an  end.  By  volition
is  intended  the  executive  efforts  of  the  will  to  secure  the  end  in-
tended." *  We  are  responsible,  therefore,  only  for  our  choices  in
the  selection  of  an  ultimate  end.  "It  is  generally  agreed  that
moral  obligation  respects  strictly  only  the  ultimate  intention  or
choice  of  an  end  for  its  o^vn  sake."  ^  "I  have  said  that  moral
obligation  respects  the  ultimate  intention  only.  I  am  now  pre-
pared to  say,  still  further,  that  this  is  a  first  truth  of  reason."  ^
"  Right  can  be  predicated  only  of  good-will,  and  wrong  only  of

selfishness It  is  right  for  him  [for  a  man]  to  intend  the

highest  good  of  being  as  an  end.  If  he  honestly  does  this,  he
cannot,  doing  this,  mistake  his  duty,  for  in  doing  this  he  really
performs  the  whole  of  duty."  ^  "  Moral  character  belongs  solely
to  the  ultimate  intention  of  the  mind,  or  to  choice,  as  distin-
guished from  volition."  ^

The  end  to  be  chosen  is  "  the  highest  good  of  being."  "  Good
may  be  natural  or  moral.  Natural  good  is  synonymous  with  val-
uable. Moral  good  is  synonymous  with  virtue."  ^  Moral  good
"  is  only  a  relative  good.  It  does  meet  a  demand  of  our  being.
and  therefore  produces  satisfaction.  This  satisfaction  is  the  ulti-
mate good  of  being."  ^^  "I  come  now  to  state  the  point  upon
which  issue  is  taken,  to  wit :  That  enjoyment,  blessedness,  or
mental  satisfaction,  is  the  only  ultimate  good."  "    "  Of  what  value

1  Lectures  on  Systematic  Theology,  by  Charles  G.  Fiiiney,  edit.  Oberlin,  Boston,  and  New
york,  1846,  p.  26.

2  Ibid.  p.  33.  3  Jltid.  p.  4.  *  Il^id.  p.  44.
5  Ibid.  p.  26.                                    6  Jlnd.  p.  36.                              "  Jlnd.  p.  14'J.

8  ibid.  p.  157.  9  Ibid.  p.  45.  1"  Ibid.  p.  4S.  "  Ibid.  p.  120.


10  PART  m.   ch.  XV.  —  regeneration.

is  the  true,  the  right,  the  just,  etc.,  aside  from  the  pleasure  or
mental  satisfaction  resulting  from  them  to  sentient  existences.'  ^

It  follows  from  these  principles  that  men  perform  tlieir  whole
duty,  and  are  perfect,  if  they  intend  the  happiness  of  being  in
general.  There  is  no  morality  in  emotions,  sentiments,  or  feel-
ings. These  are  involuntary  states  of  the  sensibility,  and  are  in
themselves  neither  good  nor  bad.  "  If  any  outward  action  or
state  of  the  feeling  exists,  in  opposition  to  the  intention  or  choice
of  the  mind,  it  cannot  by  any  possibility  have  moral  character.
Whatever  is  beyond  the  control  of  a  moral  agent,  he  cannot  be
responsible  for."^    "  Love  may,  and  often  does  exist,  as  every  one

knows,  in  the  form  of  a  mere  feeling  or  emotion This

emotion  or  feeling,  as  we  are  all  aware,  is  purely  an  involuntary
state  of  mind.  Because  it  is  a  phenomenon  of  the  sensibility,
and  of  course  a  passive  state  of  mind,  it  has  in  itself  no  moral
character."  ^  Gratitude,  "  as  a  mere  feeling  or  phenomenon  of
the  sensibility,  ....  has  no  moral  character."  *  The  same  is
said  of  benevolence,  compassion,  mercy,  conscientiousness,  etc.
The  doctrine  is,  "  No  state  of  the  sensibility  has  any  moral  char-
acter in  itself."  ^  The  love  which  has  moral  excellence,  and
which  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law,  is  not  a  feeling  of  complacency,
but  "  good-will,"  willing  the  good  or  happiness  of  its  object.
Should  a  man,  therefore,  under  the  impulse  of  a  benevolent  feel-
ing, or  a  sense  of  duty,  perform  a  right  act,  he  would  sin  as  really
as  if,  under  the  impulse  of  malice  or  cupidity,  he  should  perform
a  bad  act.  The  illustration  is,  that  to  pay  a  debt  from  a  sense  of
justice,  is  as  ^vicked  as  to  steal  a  horse  from  acquisitiveness.  A
man  "  may  be  prevented  [from  committing  commercial  injustice]
by  a  constitutional  or  phrenological  conscientiousness  or  sense  of
justice.  But  this  is  only  a  feeling  of  the  sensibility,  and  if  re-
strained only  by  this,  he  is  just  as  absolutely  selfish  as  if  he  had
stolen  a  horse  in  obedience  to  acquisitiveness."  ^  "  If  the  selfish
man  were  to  preach  the  gospel,  it  would  be  only  because  upon  the
whole  it  was  most  pleasing  or  gratifying  to  himself,  and  not  at
all  for  the  sake  of  the  good  of  being  as  an  end.  If  he  should  be-
come a  pirate,  it  would  be  exactly  for  the  same  reason

Whichever  course  he  takes,  he  takes  it  for  precisely  the  same
reason  ;  and  with  the  same  degree  of  light  it  must  involve  the
same  degree  of  guilt."  "      To  feed  the  poor  from  a  feeling  of

1  Lectures  on  Systematic  Theology,  bv  Charles  G.  Finnev,  edit.  Oberlin,  Boston,  and  New
York,  184G,  p.  122.

2  Ibid.  p.  lU.  8  Jbiri,  p.  21.3.  *  Ibid.  p.  278.
6  Jiid.  p.  521.                                     6  Jlid.  p.  317,  318.  ^  [bid.  p.  355.


§  2.J  ITS  NATURE..  U

benevolence,  and  to  murder  a  parent  from  a  feeling  of  malice,
involve  the  same  degree  of  guilt !  Such  a  sacrifice  to  logic  was
never  made  by  any  man  before.  But  still  more  wonderful,  if
possible,  is  the  declaration  that  a  man  may  "  feel  deeply  malicious
and  revengeful  feelings  toward  God.  But  sin  does  not  consist  in
these  feelings,  nor  necessarily  imply  them."  ^

Moral  excellence  is  not  an  object  of  love.  To  say  that  we  are
bound  to  love  God  because  He  is  good,  is  said  to  be  "  most  non-
sensical. What  is  it  to  love  God  ?  Why,  as  is  agreed,  it  is  not
to  exercise  a  mere  emotion  of  complacency  in  Him.  It  is  to  will
something  to  Him."  ^  "  Should  it  be  said  that  God's  holiness  is
the  foundation  of  our  obligation  to  love  Him,  I  ask  in  what  sense
it  can  be  so  ?  What  is  the  nature  or  form  of  that  love,  which
his  virtue  lays  us  under  an  obligation  to  exercise  ?  It  cannot  be
a  mere  emotion  of  complacency,  for  emotions  being  involuntary
states  of  mind  and  mere  phenomena  of  the  sensibility,  are  Avith-
out  the  pale  of  legislation  and  morality."  ^  "  We  are  under  in-
finite obligation  to  love  God,  and  to  will  his  good  with  all  our
power,  because  of  the  intrinsic  value  of  his  well-being,  whether
He  is  holy  or  sinful.  Upon  condition  that  He  is  holy,  we  are
under  obligation  to  will  his  actual  blessedness,  but  certainly  we
are  under  obligation  to  will  it  with  no  more  than  all  our  heart,
and  soul,  and  mind,  and  strength.  But  this  we  are  required  tc
do  because  of  the  intrinsic  value  of  his  blessedness,  whatever  his
character  might  be."  *  Surely  such  a  system  is  a  vTroSeiy/ia  r^s
arreiOeia?.

Dr.  Taylor''s  View.

The  system  of  Dr.  Taylor  of  New  Haven  agrees  with  that  of
Professor  Finney  in  making  free  agency  include  plenary  poAver  ;
in  limiting  responsibility  and  moral  character  to  voluntary  acts  ;
in  regarding  happiness  as  the  chief  good  ;  and  in  making  regen-
eration to  consist  in  a  change  of  purpose.  The  two  systems  dif-
fer, however,  essentially  as  to  the  ground  of  moral  obligation  or
nature  of  virtue  ;  and  as  to  the  nature  of  that  change  of  pm-pose  in
which  regeneration  consists.  Professor  Finney  adopts  the  common
eudaemonistic  theory  which  makes  the  happiness  of  being,  i.  e..
of  the  universe,  the  chief  good  ;  and  therefore  makes  virtue  con-
sist in  the  governing  purpose  to  promote  that  happiness,  and  all
sin  in  the  purpose  to  seek  our  own  happiness,  instead  of  the  hap-

1  Lectures  on  Systematic  Theology,  by  Charles  G.  Finney,  Oberlin,  Boston,  and  New
York,  1846,  p.  296.

2  Jbid.  p.  64.  «  Ibid.  p.  91.  *  Ibid.  p.  W


12  PART  ni.   ch.  XV.  —  regeneration  .

piness  of  being ;  consequently,  regeneration  is  a  change  of  that
purpose  ;  that  is,  it  is  a  change  from  selfishness  to  benevolence.

Dr.  Taylor,  on  the  other  hand,  recognized  the  fact  that  as  the
desire  of  happiness  is  a  constituent  element  of  our  nature,  or  law
of  our  being,  it  must  be  innocent,  and  therefore  is  not  to  be  con-
founded with  selfishness.  He  hence  inferred  that  this  desire  of
happiness  is  rightfully  the  controlling  principle  of  action  in  all
sentient  and  rational  creatures.  Sin  consists  in  seeking  happi-
ness in  the  creature ;  holiness  in  seeking  happiness  in  God  ;  re-
generation is  the  purpose  or  decision  of  a  sinner  to  seek  his  hap-
piness in  God  and  not  in  the  world.  This  change  of  purpose,  he
sometimes  calls  a  "  change  of  heart,"  sometimes  "  giving  the
heart  to  God,"  sometimes  "  loving  God."  As  regeneration  is  the
choice  of  God  as  our  chief  good,  it  is  an  intelligent,  voluntary  act
of  the  soul,  and  therefore  must  take  place  according  to  the  estab-
lished laws  of  mental  action.  It  supposes  the  preliminary  acts  of
consideration,  appreciation,  and  comparison.  The  sinner  contem-
plates God  as  a  source  of  happiness,  estimates  his  suitableness  to
the  necessities  of  his  nature,  compares  Him  with  other  objects
of  choice,  and  decides  to  choose  God  as  his  portion.  Sometimes
the  word  regeneration  is  used  in  a  comprehensive  sense,  including
the  whole  process  of  consideration  and  decision  ;  sometimes  in  a
restricted  sense,  for  the  decision  itself.

Such  being  the  nature  of  regeneration,  it  is  of  course  brought
about  through  the  influence  of  the  truth.  The  Bible  reveals  the
nature  of  God,  and  his  capacity  and  willingness  to  make  his
creatures  happy  ;  it  exhibits  all  the  motives  which  should  deter-
mine the  soul  to  take  God  for  its  portion.  As  regeneration  is  a
rational  and  voluntary  act,  it  is  inconceivable  that  it  should  take
place  except  in  view  of  rational  considerations.  The  Spirit's  in-
fluence in  this  process  is  not  denied.  The  fact  is  admitted  that
all  the  considerations  which  ought  to  determine  the  sinner  to
make  choice  of  God,  will  remain  without  saving  effect,  unless  the
Spirit  renders  them  effectual.

These  views  are  presented  at  length  in  the  ''  Christian  Specta-
tor "  (a  quarterly  review)  for  1829.  On  the  nature  of  the
change  in  question,  Dr.  Taylor  says  :  "  Regeneration,  considered
as  a  moral  change  of  which  man  is  the  subject  —  giving  God  the
heart — making  a  new  heart  —  loving  God  supremely,  etc.,  are
terms  and  phrases  which,  in  popular  use,  denote  a  complex  act.
....  These  words,  in  all  ordinary  speech  and  writing,  are  used
to  denote  one  act,  and  yet  this  one  act  includes  a  process  of  mental


§2.]  ITS  NATURE.  13

acts,  consisting  of  the  perception  and  comparison  of  motives,  the
estimate  of  their  relative  vs^orth,  and  the  choice  or  willing  of  the
external  action."  "  When  we  speak  of  the  means  of  regenera-
tion, we  shall  use  the  word  regeneration  in  a  more  limited  import
than  its  ordinary  popular  import ;  and  shall  confine  it,  chiefly  for
the  sake  of  convenient  phraseology,  to  the  act  of  the  will  or  heart,
in  distinction  from  other  mental  acts  connected  with  it ;  or  to  that
act  of  the  will  or  heart  which  consists  in  a  preference  of  God  to
every  other  object ;  or  to  that  disposition  of  the  heart,  or  govern-
ing affection  or  purpose  of  the  man,  which  consecrates  him  to  the
service  and  glory  of  God."  ^

"  Self-love  or  desire  of  happiness,  is  the  primary  cause  or  rea-
son of  all  acts  of  preference  or  choice  which  fix  supremely  on  any
object.  In  every  moral  being  who  forms  a  moral  character,  there
must  be  a  first  moral  act  of  preference  or  choice.  This  must  re-
spect some  one  object,  God  or  mammon,  as  the  chief  good,  or  as
an  object  of  supreme  affection.  Now  whence  comes  such  a  choice
or  preference  ?  Not  from  a  previous  choice  or  preference  of  the
same  object,  for  we  speak  of  the  first  choice  of  the  object.  The
answer  which  human  consciousness  gives,  is,  that  the  being  con-
stituted with  a  capacity  for  happiness  desires  to  be  happy ;  and
knowing  that  he  is  capable  of  deriving  happiness  from  different
objects,  considers  from  which  the  greatest  happiness  may  be  de-
rived, and  as  in  this  respect  he  judges  or  estimates  their  relative
value,  so  he  chooses  or  prefers  the  one  or  the  other  as  his  chief
good.  While  this  must  be  the  process  by  which  a  moral  being
forms  his  first  moral  preference,  substantially  the  same  process  is
indispensable  to  a  change  of  this  preference.  The  change  involves
the  preference  of  a  new  object  as  the  chief  good  ;  a  preference
which  the  former  preference  has  no  tendency  to  produce,  but  a
direct  tendency  to  prevent ;  a  preference,  therefore,  not  result-
ing from,  or  in  any  way  occasioned  by  a  previous  preference  of
any  given  object,  but  resulting  from  those  acts  of  considering  and
comparing  the  sources  of  happiness,  which  are  dictated  by  the
desire  of  happiness  or  self-love."  ^

Regeneration  being  a  change  of  purpose,  the  mode  in  which  it
is  produced  is  thus  explained.  "  If  man  ^vithout  divine  gi-ace  is
a  moral  agent,  then  he  is  qualified  so  to  consider,  compare,  and
estimate  the  objects  of  choice  as  means  of  happiness,  and  capable
also  of  such  constitutional  excitement  in  \aew  of  the  good  and
evil  set  before  him,  as  might  result  in  his  giving  his  heart  to  God,

1  Chrhtlnn  Spectator,  vol.  i.  New  Haven,  1829,  pp.  16-19.  2  fb'  i.  p.  21.


14  PART  III.     Ch.   XV.  —  regeneration.

withoiit  grace The  act  of  giving  God  the  heart  must

take  place  iii  perfect  accordance  with  the  laws  of  moral  agency
and  of  voluntary  action.  If  the  interposing  grace  violate  these
laws,  the  effect  cannot  be  moral  action ;  and  it  must  violate  these
laws,  if  it  dispense  with  the  class  of  mental  acts  now  under  con-
sideration. Whatever,  therefore,  be  the  influence  which  secures
a  change  of  heart  in  the  sinner,  the  change  itself  is  a  moral
change,  and  implies  the  exercise  of  all  the  powers  and  capacities
of  the  moral  agent,  which  in  the  nature  of  things  are  essential  to
a  moral  act."  ^  On  a  previous  page  it  had  been  said,  "  The
Scriptures  authorize  us  to  assert,  generally,  that  the  mode  of
divine  influence  is  consistent  with  the  moral  nature  of  this
change  as  a  voluntary  act  of  man ;  and,  also,  that  it  is  through
the  truth,  and  implies  attention  to  truth  on  the  part  of  man."  ^
"  Cannot,"  Dr.  Taylor  asks,  "  He  who  formed  the  mind  of
man,  reach  it  -with  an  influence  of  his  Spirit,  which  shall  accord
with  all  the  laws  of  voluntary  and  moral  action  ?  Because  mo-
tives, without  a  divine  interposition,  will  not  secure  this  moral
change  in  sinful  man,  and  because  they  have  no  positive  efficiency
in  its  production,  must  God  in  producing  it  dispense  with  motives
altogether  ?  INIust  the  appropriate  connections  between  motives
and  acts  of  will,  or  between  the  exercise  of  affections  and  the  per-
ception of  their  objects,  be  dissolved,  and  have  no  place  ?  Must
God,  if  by  his  grace  He  brings  sinners  to  give  Him  their  heart
in  holy  love,  accomplish  the  change  in  such  a  manner  that  they
shall  have  no  prior  perception  or  view  of  the  object  of  their  love  ;
and  know  not  what  or  whom  they  love,  or  wherefore  they  love
Him,  rather  than  their  former  idols  ?  Does  a  consistent  theol-
ogy thus  limit  the  Holy  One,  and  oblige  Him  to  accomplish  the
veriest  impossibilities,  in  transforming  the  moral  character  of  sin-
ful man  ?  "  ^  This  may  be  a  correct  account  of  the  process  of
conversion,  with  which  this  system  confounds  regeneration.  Con-
version is  indeed  a  voluntary  turning  of  the  soul  from  sin  to  God.
From  the  nature  of  the  case  it  is  produced  proximately  by  appro-
priate motives,  or  it  would  be  neither  rational  nor  holy.  But
this  proves  nothing  as  to  the  nature  of  regeneration.  The  most
accurate  analysis  of  the  laws  of  vision  can  throw  no  light  on  the
way  in  which  Christ  opened  the  eyes  of  the  blind.

Remarks.
It  is  plain  that  these  views  of  regeneration  are  mere  philosoph-
ical theories.     Dr.  Emmons  assumes  that  such  is  the  dependence

1  Christian  Spectator,  1829,  p.  223.  2  74;^^.  p.  17  3  Jhij,   p,  ^89.


§2.]  ITS   NATURE.  15

of  a  creature  upon  the  creator,  that  it  cannot  act.  No  creature
can  be  a  cause.  There  is  no  efficiency  in  second  causes.  Then,
of  course,  the  first  cause  must  produce  all  effects.  God  creates
everything,  even  volitions.  In  the  soul  there  are  only  acts  or  ex-
ercises. Regeneration,  therefore,  is  an  act  or  volition  created  by
God ;  or,  it  is  the  name  given  to  the  commencement  of  a  new
series  of  exercises  Avhich  are  holy  instead  of  sinful.

Professor  Finney  assumes  that  plenary  ability  is  essential  to
moral  agency  ;  that  a  man,  so  far  as  his  internal  life  is  con-
cerned, has  power  oidy  over  his  choices  and  volitions ;  all,  there-
fore, for  which  he  is  responsible,  all  that  constitutes  moral  char-
acter, must  fall  under  the  category  of  choice,  the  selection  of  an
ultimate  end.  Assuming,  moreover,  that  happiness  is  the  only
absolute  good,  all  sin  consists  in  the  undue  pursuit  of  our  oAvn
happiness,  and  all  virtue  in  benevolence  or  the  purpose  to  seek
the  happiness  of  being.  Regeneration,  therefore,  consists  in  the
change  of  the  purpose  to  seek  our  own  happiness,  for  the  piu'pose
to  seek  as  our  ultimate  end  the  happiness  of  the  universe.

Dr.  Taylor,  agreeing  vnih  Professor  Finnej^  on  the  nature  of
free  agency,  and  in  the  doctrine  that  happiness  is  the  chief  good,
holds  with  him  that  all  sin  and  holiness  consist  in  voluntary  ac-
tion. But  assuming  that  self-love,  as  distinguished  from  selfish-
ness, is  the  motive  in  all  rational  moral  action,  he  makes  regen-
eration to  consist  in  the  choice  of  God  as  the  source  of  our
0"\vn  happiness.

All  these  speculations  are  outside  of  the  Bible.  They  have  no
authority  or  value  which  they  do  not  derive  from  their  inherent
truth,  and  any  man  is  at  liberty  to  dispute  them,  if  they  do  not
commend  themselves  to  his  own  reason  and  conscience.  But  be-
sides the  purely  philosophical  character  of  these  views,  it  would
be  easy  to  show,  not  only  that  they  have  no  valid  ground  on
which  to  rest,  but  also  that  they  are  inconsistent  with  the  teach-
ings of  Scripture  and  with  genuine  Christian  experience.  This
will  be  attempted  when  the  Scriptural  account  of  regeneration
comes  to  be  considered.

Regeneration  not  a  change  in  any  one  Faculty  of  the  Soul.
Regeneration  does  not  consist  in  a  change  in  any  one  of  the
faculties  of  the  soul,  whether  the  sensibility,  or  the  will,  or  the
intellect.  According  to  some  theologians,  the  feelings,  or  heart,
in  the  restricted  sense  of  that  word,  is  the  exclusive  seat  of  orig-
inal sin.     Hereditary  corruption,  in  other  words,  is  made  to  con-


16  PART  III.    Ch.  XV.  — regeneration.

sist  in  the  aversion  of  the  heart  from  divine  things,  and  a  prefer-
ence for  the  things  of  the  world.  The  end  to  be  accomplished  in
regeneration,  therefore,  is  simply  to  correct  this  aversion.  The
understanding,  it  is  urged,  so  far  as  moral  and  religious  truth  is
concerned,  apprehends  aright  and  appreciates  what  is  loved  ;  and
in  like  manner,  in  the  same  sphere,  we  believe  what  we  appre-
hend as  right  and  good.  If,  therefore,  the  feelings  are  made
what  they  ought  to  be,  all  the  other  operations  of  the  mind,  or
iimer  man,  "will  be  right.  This  theory  is  founded  in  part  upon
a  mistaken  view  of  the  meaning  of  the  word  "  heart "  as  used
in  the  Scriptvires.  In  a  multitude  of  cases,  and  in  all  cases
where  regeneration  is  spoken  of,  it  means  the  whole  soul ;  that
is,  it  includes  the  intellect,  "vvill,  and  the  conscience  as  well  as  the
affections.  Hence  the  Bible  speaks  of  the  eyes,  of  the  thoughts,
of  the  purposes,  of  the  devices,  as  well  as  of  the  feelings  or  affec-
tions of  the  heart.  In  Scriptural  language,  therefore,  a  "  new
heart "  does  not  mean  simply  a  new  state  of  feeling,  but  a  radi-
cal change  in  the  state  of  the  whole  soul  or  interior  man.  Be-
sides, this  theory  overlooks  what  the  Bible  constantly  assumes :
the  unity  of  our  inward  life.  The  Scriptures  do  not  contemplate
the  intellect,  the  will,  and  the  affections,  as  independent,  separa-
ble elements  of  a  composite  whole.  These  faculties  are  only
different  forms  of  activity  in  one  and  the  same  subsistence.  No
exercise  of  the  affections  can  occur  without  an  exercise  of  the
intellect,  and,  if  the  object  be  moral  or  religious,  Avithout  includ-
ing a  correspondent  exercise  of  our  moral  nature.

Regeneration  not  merely  Illumination.

Another  and  antagonistic  theory  equally  one-sided,  is  that  the
intellect  only  is  in  fault,  and  that  regeneration  resolves  itself  into
illumination.  This  view  is  far  more  plausible  than  the  preced-
ing. The  Bible  makes  eternal  life  to  consist  in  knowledge  ;  sin-
fulness is  blindness,  or  darkness;  the  transition  from  a  state  of
sm  to  a  state  of  holiness  is  a  translation  from  darkness  into
light ;  men  are  said  to  be  renewed  unto  knowledge,  i.  e.,
knowledge  is  the  effect  of  regeneration  ,  conversion  is  said  to  be
effected  by  the  revelation  of  Christ ;  the  rejection  of  Him  as  the
Son  of  God  and  Saviour  of  men  is  referred  to  the  fact  that  the
eyes  of  those  who  believe  not  are  blinded  by  the  god  of  this
world.  These  Scriptural  representations  prove  much.  They
prove  that  knowledge  is  essential  to  all  holy  exercises ;  that  truth,
as  the  object  of  knowledge,  is  of  vital  importance,  and  that  error


§  2.]  ITS  NATURE.  17

is  always  evil  and  often  fatal ;  and  that  the  effects  of  regenera-
tion, so  far  as  they  reveal  themselves  in  our  consciousness,  con-
sist largely  in  the  spiritual  apprehension  or  discernment  of  divine
things.  These  representations  also  prove  that  in  the  order  of
nature,  knowledge,  or  spiritual  discernment,  is  antecedent  and
causative  relatively  to  all  holy  exercises  of  the  feelings  or  affec-
tions. It  is  the  spiritual  apprehension  of  the  truth  that  awakens
love,  faith,  and  delight ;  and  not  love  that  produces  spiritual
discernment.  It  was  the  vision  Paul  had  of  the  divine  glory  of
Christ  that  made  him  instantly  and  forever  his  worshipper  and
servant.  The  Scriptures,  however,  do  not  teach  that  regenera-
tion consists  exclusively  in  illumination,  or  that  the  cognitive
faculties  are  exclusively  the  subject  of  the  renewing  power  of  the
Spirit.  It  is  the  soul  as  such  that  is  spiritually  dead  ;  and  it  is
to  the  soul  that  a  new  principle  of  life  controlling  all  its  exer-
cises, whether  of  the  intellect,  the  sensibility,  the  conscience,  or
the  will  is  imparted.

Not  a  Change  of  the  Higher^  as  distinguished  from  the  Lower
Powers  of  the  Soul.

There  is  another  view  of  the  subject,  which  falls  under  this
head  of  what  may  be  called  partial  regeneration.  It  is  founded
on  trichotomy,  or  the  assumption  of  three  elements  in  the  consti-
tution of  man,  namely,  the  body,  the  soul,  and  the  spirit  (the
(Tw/xa,  \pv)(r]^  and  TTvevfxa')  ;  the  first  material,  the  second  animal,  the
third  spiritual.  To  the  second,  i.  e.,  to  the  soul  or  i^vx^.  are  re-
ferred what  man  has  in  common  with  the  lower  animals  ;  life,
sensibility,  mil,  and  understanding ;  to  the  spirit  what  is  peculiar
to  us  as  rational,  moral,  and  religious  beings,  namely,  conscience
and  reason.  Tliis  third  element,  the  7rrev/xa,  or  reason,  is  often
called  divine  ;  sometimes  in  a  literal,  and  sometimes  in  a  figura-
tive sense.  In  either  case,  according  to  the  theory  under  consid-
eration, it  is  not  the  seat  of  sin,  and  is  uncorrupted  by  the  fall.
It  remains,  although  clouded  and  perverted  by  the  disorder  in
the  lower  departments  of  our  nature,  the  point  of  contact  and
connection  between  man  and  God.  This  at  least  is  one  view  of
the  matter.  According  to  another  view,  neither  the  body  nor  the
soul  (neither  o-wjua  nor  </'i',x'^)i  has  any  moral  character.  The  seat
of  the  moral  and  divine  life  is  exclusively  the  intvpa  or  spirit.
This  is  said  to  be  paralyzed  by  the  fall.  It  is  figuratively  dead ;
unsusceptible  of  impression  from  divine  things.  There  are  as
many  theories  of  the  nature  of  regeneration  among  the  advocates


18  PART  III.     Ch.  XV.  —  regeneration.

of  this  threefold  division  in  the  constitution  of  man,  as  there  are
systems  of  anthropology.  The  idea  common  to  all,  or  to  a  ma-
jority of  them,  is  that  regeneration  consists  in  restoring  the  Trvevfxa
or  spirit  to  its  normal  v-ontrolling  influence  over  the  whole  man.
According  to  some,  this  is  a  natural  process  in  which  an  animal
man,  i.  e.,  a  man  governed  by  the  ^"XV-,  comes  to  be  reasonable,
or  pneumatic,  i.  e.,  governed  by  the  iwevixa  or  higher  powers  of
his  nature.  According  to  others,  it  is  a  supernatural  effect  due
to  the  action  of  the  divine  (Uvevfjia)  Spirit  upon  the  human  rrvtv^jia
or  spirit.  In  either  case,  however,  the  Tn/ev/iartKos,  or  spiritual
man,  is  not  one  in  whom  the  Holy  Spirit  dwells  as  a  principle  of
a  new,  spiritual  life  ;  but  one  who  is  governed  by  his  own  7n/€9/xa
or  spirit.  According  to  others  again,  the  7ri/«i}/xa  or  reason  in
man  is  God,  the  God-consciousness,  the  Logos,  and  regeneration
is  the  gradually  acquired  ascendency  of  this  divine  element  of  our
nature.

In  reference  to  these  views  of  regeneration  it  is  sufficient  to
remark,  (1.)  That  the  threefold  division  of  our  nature  on  which
they  are  founded  is  antiscriptural,  as  we  have  already  attempted
to  prove.  (2.)  Admitting  that  there  is  a  foundation  for  such  a
distinction,  it  is  not  of  the  kind  assumed  in  these  theories.  The
soul  and  spirit  are  not  distinct  substances  or  essences,  one  of
which  may  be  holy  and  the  other  unlioly,  or  negative.  This  is
inconsistent  with  the  unity  of  our  interior  life  which  the  Scrip-
tures constantly  assume.  (3.)  It  subverts  the  Scriptural  doc-
trine of  regeneration  and  sanctification  to  make  the  governing
principle  in  the  renewed  to  be  their  0"\vn  TrveC/za  or  spirit,  and  not
the  Holy  Spirit.

Modern  Speculative  Views  on  this  Subject.

The  modern  speculative  philosophy  has  introduced  such  a
radical  change  in  the  views  entertained  of  the  nature  of  God,  of
his  relation  to  the  world,  of  the  nature  of  man"  and  of  his  rela-
tion to  God,  of  the  person  and  work  of  Christ,  and  of  the  appli-
cation of  his  redemption  to  the  salvation  of  men,  that  all  the  old,
and,  it  may  be  safely  said.  Scriptural  forms  of  these  doctrines
have  been  superseded,  and  others  introduced  which  are  unin-
telligible except  in  the  light  of  that  philosophy,  and  which  to  a
great  extent  reduce  the  truths  of  the  Bible  to  the  form  of  philo-
sophical dogmas.  We  cease  to  hear  of  the  Holy  Ghost  as  the
third  person  of  the  Trinity,  applying  to  men  the  redemption  pur-
chased by  Christ ;  of  regeneration  by  his  almighty  power,  or  of


§2.]  ITS  NATURE.  19

his  dwelKng  in  the  hearts  of  believers.  The  forms  of  this  new
theology  are  very  diversified.  They  are  all  perhaps  compre-
hended under  three  classes  :  first,  those  which  are  avowedly  pan-
theistic, although  claiming  to  be  Christian ;  secondly,  those  which
are  Theistic  but  do  not  admit  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  ;  and
thirdly,  those  which  endeavour  to  bring  theology  as  a  philoso-
phy into  the  forms  of  Christian  doctrine.  In  all,  however,  the
anthropology,  christology,  soteriology,  and  ecclesiology  advo-
cated, are  so  changed  as  to  render  it  impossible  to  retain  in  their
exhibition  the  terms  and  formulas  with  which  the  Church  from
the  beginning  has  been  familiar.  Regeneration,  justification,  and
sanctification  are  almost  antiquated  terms  ;  and  what  remains  of
the  truths  those  terms  were  used  to  express,  is  merged  into  the
one  idea  of  the  development  of  a  new  divine  life  in  the  soul.  As
to  anthropology,  these  modern  speculative,  or  as  they  often  call
themselves,  and  are  called  by  others,  mystic,  theologians  teach,
(1.)  That  there  is  no  dualism  in  man  between  soul  and  body.
There  is  but  one'  life.  The  body  is  the  soul  projecting  itself  ex-
ternally. Without  a  body  there  is  no  soul.  (2.)  That  there  is
no  real  dualism  between  God  and  man.  The  identity  between
God  and  man  is  the  last  result  of  modern  speculation  ;  and  it  is"
the  "fundamental  idea  of  Christianity.

Soul  and  Body  one.

As  to  the  former  of  these  points,  Schleiermacher^  says,  "There
are  not  a  spiritual  and  a  corporeal  world,  a  corporeal  and  spirit-
ual existence  of  man.  Such  representations  lead  to  nothing  but
the  dead  mechanism  of  a  preestablished  harmony.  Body  and
spirit  are  actual  only  in  and  with  each  other,  so  that  corporeal
and  spiritual  action  can  only  be  relatively  distinguished."  The
late  President  Ranch  ^  says,  "  A  dualism  which  admits  of  two
principles  for  one  being,  offers  many  difliculties,  and  the  greatest
is,  that  it  cannot  tell  how  the  principles  can  be  united  in  a  third.
A  river  may  originate  in  tAvo  fountains,  but  a  science  cannot,  and
much  less  individual  life."  "  It  would  be  wrong  to  say  that  man
consists  of  two  essentially  different  substances,  of  earth  and  the
soul ;  but  he  is  soul  only,  and  cannot  be  anything  else.  This
soul,  however,  unfolds  itself  externally  in  the  life  of  the  body,  and
internally  in  the  life  of  the  mind."  So  Olshausen^  teaches  that
the  soul  has  no  subsistence  but  in  the  body.     Dr.  J.  W.  Nevin  *

1  Dinhktik,  sect.  290-295  ;    Worls,  Berlin,  1839,  3d  div.  vol.  iv.  part  2,  pp.  2i5-255.

2  Psychology,  Xew  York,  1840,  pp.  169,  173.  3  Commentary,  1  Cor.  xv.  20.
*  Mystical  Presence,  edit.  Pliiladelpliia,  1846,  p.  171.


20  PART  m.   Ch.  XV.  —  regeneration.

Bays,  "  "We  have  no  right  to  think  of  the  body  in  any  way  as  a
form  of  existence  of  and  by  itself,  into  which  the  soul  as  another
form  of  such  existence  is  thrust  in  a  mechanical  way.  Both  form
one  Hfe.  The  soul  to  be  complete,  to  develop  itself  at  all  as  a
soul,  must  externalize  itself,  throw  itself  out  in  space ;  and  this
externalization  is  the  body."

Crod  and  Man  one.

As  to  the  second  point,  or  the  oneness  of  God  and  man,  as  the
soul  externalizes  itself  in  the  body,  "  dividing  itself  only  that  its
unity  may  become  thus  the  more  free  and  intensely  complete,"  ^  so
God  externalizes  HimseK  in  the  world.  Schleiermacher  says,  it  is
in  vain  to  attempt  to  conceive  of  God  as  existing  either  before  or
out  of  the  world.  They  may  be  distinguished  in  thought,  but  are
only  "  zwei  Werthe  fur  dieselbe  Forderung,  two  values  of  the
same  postulate."  According  to  this  ]3liilosopliy,  it  is  just  as  true,
"  No  world,  no  God,"  as  "  No  body,  no  soul."  "  The  world,^  in
its  lower  view,  is  not  simply  the  outward  theatre  or  stage  on
which  man  is  to  act  his  part  as  a  candidate  for  heaven.  In  the
midst  of  all  its  different  forms  of  existence,  it  is  pervaded  through-
out with  the  power  of  a  single  life,  which  comes  ultimately  to  its
full  sense  and  force  only  in  the  human  person."  The  world,
therefore,  is  pervaded  by  "  the  power  of  a  single  life ;  "  the  high-
est form  of  that  hfe  (on  earth)  is  man.  What  is  that  life  ?  What
is  that  pervading  principle  which  reveals  itself  in  such  manifold
forms  of  existence,  and  culminates  in  man  ?  It  is,  of  course,
God.  Man,  therefore,  as  Schleiermacher  says,  is  "  the  existence-
form  "  of  God  on  earth. ^  Ullmann  *  says  that  the  German  mys-
tics in  the  Middle  Ages  taught  "  the  oneness  of  Deity  and  hu-
manity." The  results  reached  by  the  mystics  under  the  guidance
of  feeling,  he  says,  modern  philosophy  has  reached  by  specula-
tion. This  doctrine  of  the  essential  oneness  of  God  and  man,  the
speculative  theologians  adopt  as  the  fundamental  idea  of  Chris-
tianity. To  work  out  that  idea  in  a  manner  compatible  mth
Theism  and  the  Gospel,  is  the  problem  which  those  theologians
have  attempted  to  solve.  These  attempts  have  resulted,  in  some
cases,  in  avowed  Christian  Pantlieism,  as  it  is  called ;  in  others,

1  My/ttlcal  Presence,  edit.  Philadelphia,  1846,  p.  172.

2  Mercersburff  Review,  1850,  vol.  ii.  p.  550.

8  Domer's  ChrUlulot/ie,lst  t'dit.,  Stuttgart,  lS3i),  p.  488.

*  "Charakter  des  Chrititenthums,"  Studien  und  Kri/iken,  1845,  erstes  Heft,  p.  59.  See
aieo  a  translation  of  this  article  at  the  beginning  of  The  Mystical  Presence,  by  J.  W.  Nevin,
D.  I),,  Philadelphia.  1846.


§2.]  ITS  NATURE.  21

in  forms  of  doctrine  so  nearly  pantheistic  as  to  be  hardly  distin-
guished from  Pantheism  itself  ;  and  in  all,  in  a  radical  modifica-
tion, not  only  of  the  theology  of  the  Church  as  expressed  in  hei
received  standards,  but  also  of  the  Scriptural  form  of  Christian
doctrines,  if  not  of  their  essence.  This  is  seen  to  be  true  in  the
anthropology  of  this  system,  which  destroys  the  essential  differ-
ence between  the  creator  and  his  creatures,  between  God  and
man.

The  christology  of  this  modern  theology  has  already  been  pre-
sented in  its  essential  features.  There  is  no  dualism  in  Christ  as
between  soul  and  body.  The  two  are  one  hfe.  Neither  is  there
any  dualism  between  divinity  and  humanity  in  Him.  The  divine
and  human  in  his  person  are  one  life.  In  being  the  ideal  or  per-
fect man.  He  is  the  true  God.  The  deification  which  humanity
reached  in  Christ,  is  not  a  supernatural  act  on  the  part  of  God ;
it  is  reached  by  a  process  of  natural  development  in  his  people,
i.  e.,  the  Church.

Soteriology  of  these  Philosophers.

The  soteriology  of  this  system  is  simple.  The  soul  projects
itseK  in  the  body.  They  are  one  life,  but  the  body  may  be  too
much  for  the  soul.  The  development  of  tliis  one  life  in  its  two-
fold form,  inward  and  outward,  may  not  be  symmetrical.  So
humanity  as  a  generic  life,  a  form  of  the  life  of  God,  as  projected
externally  in  the  world  from  Adam  onward,  has  not  developed
itself  aright.  If  left  unaided  it  would  not  reach  the  goal,  or  un-
fold itself  as  divine.  A  new  start,  therefore,  must  be  given  to  it,
a  new  commencement  made.  This  is  done  by  a  supernatural
intervention  resulting  in  the  production  of  the  person  of  Christ.
In  Him  divinity  assumes  the  fashion  of  a  man,  —  the  existence-
form  of  man,  —  God  becomes  man,  and  man  is  God.  This  renewed
entrance,  so  to  speak,  of  God  into  the  v.^orld,  this  special  form  of
divine-human  life,  is  Christianity,  which  is  constantly  declared  to
be  "a  life,"  "the  life  of  Christ,"  "a  new  theanthropic  life."
Men  become  Christians  by  being  partakers  of  this  life.  They
become  partakers  of  this  life  by  union  with  the  Church  and  re-
ception of  the  sacraments.  The  incarnation  of  God  is  continued
in  the  Church  ;  and  this  new  principle  of  ''divine-human  life  "
descends  from  Christ  to  the  members  of  his  Church,  as  naturally
and  as  much  by  a  process  of  organic  development,  as  humanity,
derived  from  Adam,  unfolded  itself  in  his  descendants.  Christ,
therefore,  saves  us,  not  so  much  by  what  He  did,  as  by  what  He  is.


22  PART  m.   Ch.  XV.  -  regeneration.

He  made  no  satisfaction  to  the  divine  justice  ;  no  expiation  for
sin  ;  no  fulfilling  of  the  law.  There  is,  therefore,  really  no  justifi-
cation, no  real  pardon  even,  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  Avord.
There  is  a  healing  of  the  soul,  and  with  that  healing  the  removal
of  the  evils  incident  to  disease.  Those  who  become  partakers  of
this  new  principle  of  life,  which  is  truly  liuman  and  truly  divine,
become  one  with  Christ.  All  the  merit,  righteousness,  excellence,
and  power,  inherent  in  this  "  divine-human  life  "  of  course  be-
long to  those  who  partake  of  that  life.  This  righteousness,  ex-
cellence, etc.,  are  our  own.  They  are  subjective  in  us,  and  form
our  character,  just  as  the  nature  derived  from  Adam  was  ours,
with  all  its  corruptions  and  infirmities.

If  asked  what  is  regeneration  according  to  this  system,  the
proper  answer  would  probably  be,  that  it  is  an  obsolete  term.
There  is  no  room  for  the  thing  usually  signified  by  the  word,  and
no  reason  for  retaining  the  word  itself.  Regeneration  is  a  work
of  the  Holy  Spirit.  But  this  system  in  its  integrity  does  not
acknowledge  the  Holy  Spirit  as  a  distinct  person  or  agent.  And
those  who  are  constrained  to  make  the  acknowledgment  of  his
personality,  are  evidently  embarrassed  by  the  admission.  What
the  Scriptures  and  the  Church  attribute  to  the  Spirit  working
with  the  freedom  of  a  personal  agent,  Avhen  and  where  he  sees  fit,
this  system  attributes  to  the  "  theanthropic-life  "  of  Christ,  work-
ing as  a  new  force,  according  to  the  natural  laws  of  develop-
ment.^

The  impression  made  upon  the  readers  of  the  modern  theolo-
gians of  this  school,  is  that  made  by  any  other  form  of  philosoph-
ical disquisition.  It  has  not,  and  from  its  nature  it  cannot  have
anything  more  than  human  authority.  This  system  may  be
adopted  as  a  matter  of  opinion,  but  it  cannot  be  an  object  of
faith.  And  therefore  it  cannot  support  the  hopes  of  a  soul  con-
scious of  guilt.  In  turning  from  such  writings  to  the  Word  of
God,  the  transition  these  theologians  would  have  us  believe,  is
from  yvwo-i?  to  TTio-Tis ;  but  to  the  consciousness  of  the  Christian,  it
is  like  the  transition  from  the  confusion  of  tongues  at  Babel,
where  no  man  understood  his  fellow,  to  the  symphonious  utter-
ance of  those  "  who  spake  as  they  were  moved  b}^  the  Holy
Ghost."

Doctrine  of  Ehrard.

Of  the  \vi-Iters  who  belong  to  the  general  class  of  "  speculative  "
theologians,   some  adhere  much  more  nearly  to  the  Scriptures

1  Mystical  Presence,  edit.  Philadelphia,  1846,  pp.  225-229.


§2.]  ITS  NATURE.  23

than  others.  Dr.  J.  H.  A.  Ebrard,  of  Erlangen,  has  ah-eady
been  repeatedly  referred  to  as  addicted  to  the  Reformed  faith  ;
and  where  he  consciously  departs  from  it,  he  considers  himself  as
only  carrying  out  its  legitimate  principles.  His  "  Dogmatik  "
has,  in  fact,  a  far  more  Scriptural  character  than  most  of  the
modern  German  systems.  In  Ebrard,  as  in  others,  we  find  a
compromise  attempted  between  the  Church  doctrine  of  regenera-
tion, and  the  modern  theory  of  the  incarnation  of  God  in  the  race
of  man.  Not  only  is  a  distinction  made  between  repentance,  con-
version, and  regeneration ;  but  also  true  repentance  and  genuine
conversion  are  made  to  precede  regeneration.  The  two  former
take  place  in  the  sphere  of  the  consciousness.  In  all  the  states
and  exercises  connected  with  repentance  and  conversion,  the  soul
is  active  and  cooperative  ;  and  the  only  influence  exercised  by
God  or  his  Spirit,  is  mediate  and  moral.  It  is  not  until  the  sin-
ner has  obeyed  the  command  to  repent,  to  believe  in  Christ,  and
to  return  unto  God,  that  God  gives  the  soul  that  divine  some-
thing which  makes  it  a  new  creature,  and  effects  its  living  organic
union  with  Christ.  In  this  latter  process  the  soul  is  simply  pas-
sive. God  is  the  only  agent.  What  is  said  to  be  communicated
to  the  soul  is  Christ ;  the  person  of  Christ ;  the  life  of  Christ ;  his
substance,  or  a  new  substance.  A  distinction,  however,  is  made
between  essence  and  substance.  Ebrard  insists  ^  that  the  most
hidden,  substantial  germ  of  our  being  is  born  again  in  regenera-
tion —  not  merely  changed,  but  new-born.  Nevertheless,  he  says
that  the  "  essentia  animae  humane  "  is  not  changed,  and  assents  to
the  statement  by  Bucan,  "  Renovatio  fit  non  quoad  essentiam  ut
deliravit  Illyricus,  sed  quoad  qualitates  inhserentes."  What  he
asserts,^  frequently  elsewhere,  is,  "  That  Christ,  real  and  substan-
tial, is  born  in  us."  But  he  adds  that  the  words  "real  and  sub-
stantial" are  used  to  guard  against  the  assumption  that  regenera-
tion consists  simply  in  some  inward  exercise,  or  transient  state  of
the  consciousness.  It  is,  as  he  truly  teaches,  much  more  ;  some-
thing lower  than  the  consciousness  ;  a  change  in  the  state  of  the
soul,  which  determines  the  acts  and  exercises  which  reveal  them-
selves in  the  consciousness,  and  manifest  themselves  in  the  life.
He  finds  his  doctrine  of  regeneration,  not  in  what  Calvin  and
some  few  of  the  Reformed  theologians  taught  under  that  head,
but  in  what  they  teach  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  of  the  mystical
union.     Calvin  ^  says,  ".Sunt  qui  manducare  Christi  camera,  et

1  Dogmatik,  edit.  Konigsberg,  1852,  vol.  ii.  p.  320.  2  JUd.  p.  309

8  Institutio,  IV.  xvii.  5,  edit.  Berlin,  1834,  vol.  ii.  p.  403.


24  PART  m.   ch.  XV.  —  regeneration.

sanguinem  ejus  bibere,  uno  verbo  definiunt,  nihil  esse  alind,  quam
in  Christum  ipsum  credere.  Sed  mihi  expressius  quiddam  ac
subliniius  videtur  voluisse  docere   Christus    ....    nempe  vera

sui  participatione  nos  vivificari Quemadmodum  enim  non

aspectus  sed  esus  panis  corpori  alimentum  suJSicit,  ita  vere  ac
penitus  participeni  Christi  animam  fieri  convenit,  ut  ipsius  virtute
in  vitam  spiritualem  vegetetur."  "  We  have  here  certainly,"
says  Ebrard,!  "  the  doctrine  of  a  secret,  mystical  communication
of  Christ's  substance  to  the  substantial  centre  in  man  (the
'anima'),  which  develops  itself  on  the  one  hand  in  the  physical,
and  on  the  other,  in  the  noetic  life."  These  writers  are  correct
in  denying  that  regeneration  is  a  mere  change  in  the  purposes,
or  feelings,  or  conscious  states  of  any  kind  in  man  ;  and  also  in
affirming  that  it  involves  the  communication  of  a  new  and  abid-
ing principle  of  life  to  the  soul.  But  they  depart  from  Scripture
and  from  the  faith  of  the  Church  universal  in  substituting  "  the
theanthropic  nature  of  Christ,"  "  his  divine-human  Hfe,"  "  gen-
eric humanity  healed  and  exalted  to  the  power  of  a  divine  life  "
(i.  e.,  deified),  for  the  Holy  Ghost.  This  substitution  is  made
avowedly  in  obedience  to  modern  science,  to  the  new  philoso-
phy which  has  discovered  a  true  anthropology  and  revealed  "  the
real  oneness  of  God  and  man."  As  already  remarked,  it  is  as-
sumed that  this  communication  of  the  "  theanthropic  nature  of
Christ "  carried  with  it  his  merits  as  well  as  his  blessedness  and
power.  All  we  have  of  Christ,  we  have  vdthin  us.  And  if  we
can  discover  little  of  God,  and  little  God-Hke  in  our  souls,  so
much  the  worse.  It  is  all  we  have  to  expect,  until  our  inner
life  is  further  developed.  The  Christ  mthin  (as  some  of  the
Friends  also  teach),  is,  according  to  this  system,  all  the  Christ
we  have.  Ebrard,  therefore,  in  one  view  identifies  regeneration
and  justification.  "  Regeneration,"  he  says,'-^  "  as  the  act  of
Christ,  is  the  cause  ('causa  efficiens')  of  justification;  He  com-
municates his  life  to  us,  and  awakens  a  new  life  in  us."  This  is
justification,  an  inward  subjective  change,  which  involves  merit
as  well  as  holiness.  This  confounding  the  work  of  the  Holy
Spirit  in  regeneration,  with  the  judicial,  objective  act  of  justifi-
cation,belong3  to  the  system.  At  least  it  is  only  on  the  ground
of  this  infused  life  that  we  are  pronounced  rigliteous  in  the  sight
of  God.  What  we  receive  is  "  the  real  divine-human  life  of
Christ,"  and  "whatever  there  may  be, of  merit,  \'irtue,  efiicacy,
or  moral  value  in  any  way,  in  the  mediatorial  work  of  Christ,  it

1  Dogmatlh,  vol.  ii.  p.  310.  2  Jbid.  p.  315.


§2.]  ITS  NATURE.  25

is  all  lodged  in  the  life,  by  the  power  of  which  alone  this  work
has  been  accomphshed,  and  in  the  presence  of  which  only  it  can
have  either  reahty  or  stability.  The  imagination  that  the  merits
of  Christ's  hfe  may  be  sundered  from  his  life  itself,  and  conveyed
over  to  his  people  under  this  abstract  form,  on  the  ground  of  a
merely  outward  legal  constitution,  is  unscriptural  and  contrary  to
all  reason  at  the  same  time."  ^  Regeneration  consisting  in  the
communicating  the  Hfe  of  Christ,  his  substance,  to  the  soul,  and
this  divine-human  life  comprehending  all  the  merit,  virtue,  or
efficacy  belonging  to  Christ  and  his  work,  —  regeneration  involves
justification,  of  which  it  is  the  ground  and  the  cause.

Doctrine  of  Delitzsch.

Delitzsch  devotes  one  division  of  his  "  Bibhcal  Psychology  "  to
the  subject  of  regeneration.  He  begins  the  discussion  with  a  dis-
course on  Christ's  person.  "  When  we  wish  to  consider  the  new
spiritual  life  of  the  redeemed  man,  we  proceed  from  the  divine
human  archetype,  the  person  of  the  Redeemer."  ^  Man  was,  as
to  his  spirit  and  soul,  originally  constituted  in  the  image  of  God ;
the  spirit  was  the  image  "  of  His  triune  nature  and  the  latter  [the
soul]  of  His  sevenfold  'doxa.'  "  Man  was  free  to  conform  his  life
to  the  spirit,  or  divine  principle  within  him,  or  to  allow  the  con-
trol of  his  life  to  be  assumed  by  the  soul.  Utter  ruin  was  the
consequence  of  the  fall.  This  could  be  corrected  and  man  re-
deemed only  by  "a  new  beginning  of  similar  creative  intensity."^
This  new  beginning  was  effected  in  the  incarnation.  The  Son  of
God  became  man,  not  by  assuming  our  nature,  in  the  ordinary
sense  of  those  words,  but  by  ceasing  to  be  almighty,  omniscient,
and  omnipresent,  and  contracting  Himself  to  the  limits  of  human-
ity. It  was  a  human  life  into  which  He  thus  entered ;  a  life
including  a  spirit,  soul,  and  body.  There  is  no  dualism  in  Christ's
person,  as  between  the  corporeal  and  spiritual,  or  between  the
human  and  divine.  It  is  the  divine  nature  in  the  form  of  human-
ity, or  this  divine-human  nature,  which  is  purely  and  simply,
though  perfectly,  human,  which  is  communicated  to  the  jDCople  of
God  in  their  regeneration.  To  this  fellowship  in  the  life  of
Christ,  faith  is  indispensable,  and  therefore  Ebrard  says,  infants
cannot  be  the  subjects  of  regeneration,  while  Delitzsch,  a  Lu-
theran, maintains  that  infants  are  capable  of  exercising  faith,  and

1  Mystical  Presence,  by  J.  W.  Nevin,  D.  D.,  Philadelphia,  1846,  p.  191.

2  A  System  of  Biblical  Psychology,  by  Franz  Delitzsch,  D.  D.,  translated  by  R.  E.
Wallis,  Ph.  D. ;  edit.  Edinburgh,  1867,  p.  381.

3  Ibid.  p.  382.


26  PART  m.   Ch.  XV.  —  regeneration.

therefore  are  capable  of  being  regenerated.  What  is  received
from  Christ,  or  that  of  which  his  people  are  made  partakers,  is
''the  Spirit,  the  soul,  the  body  of  Christ."  ^  The  new  man,  or
Becond  Adam,  was  made  a  "  life-giving  spirit,"  and  gradually
subdues  the  old  man,  or  our  Adamic  nature,  and  brings  the
whole  man  (TrieC/Aa,  ijjvxrj,  and  o-uJ/xa),  spirit,  soul,  and  body,  up  to
the  standard  of  the  life  of  Christ,  in  whom  the  divine  and  hu-
man are  merged  into  one,  or  rather  appear  in  their  original  one-
ness.

The  communication  of  the  theanthropic  hfe  to  the  soul  is  an
act  of  the  divine  Spirit  in  which  we  have  neither  agency  nor  con-
sciousness. Delitzsch  infers  from  what  our  Lord  said  to  Nicode-
mus,  John  iii.  that  "  The  operation  of  the  Spirit  of  regeneration
is,  therefore,  (1.)  A  free  one,  withdrawn  from  the  power  of  hu-
man volition,  of  human  special  agency.  (2.)  A  mysterious  one,
lying  beyond  human  consciousness,  and  only  to  be  recognized  by
its  effects."  ^  "  It  is  peculiar  to  all  God's  creative  agencies,  that
the  creature  which  is  thereby  brought  into  existence,  or  in  which
this  or  that  is  brought  into  existence,  has  no  consciousness  of  what
is  occurring."  ^

Various  as  are  the  modifications  of  this  doctrine  as  presented
by  different  writers  of  this  general  school,  regeneration  is  by  all
of  them  understood  to  be  the  communication  of  the  life  of  Christ
to  the  soul.  By  the  life  of  Christ  is  meant  his  manhood,  his  hu-
man nature,  which  was  at  the  same  time  divine,  and  therefore  is
theanthropic.  It  may  be  called  human,  and  it  may  be  called
divine,  for  although  being  one,  one  life,  it  is  truly  divine  by  being
perfectly  human.  We  are  all  partakers  of  humanity  as  polluted
and  degraded  by  the  apostasy  of  Adam.  Christ,  or  rather,  the
Eternal  Son  of  God,  assumed  human  nature,  in  that  He  became
man,  and  being  God,  humanity  in  Him  was  filled  -with  the  treas-
ures of  wisdom  and  knowledge  and  grace  and  power  ;  of  that  hu-
manity we  must  partake  in  order  to  have  any  part  in  the  salva-
tion of  Christ.  The  communication  of  this  life  to  us,  which  is  our
regeneration,  is  through  the  Church,  which  is  his  body,  because
animated  by  his  human  life.  As  we  derive  our  deteriorated
humanity  by  descent  from  Adam,  we  are  made  partakers  of  this
renovated,  divine  humanity  by  union  -with  the  Church,  in  which
Christ  as  a  man,  and  God-man,  lives  and  dwells.     And  as  the

1  A  System   of  Biblical  Psychology,  by  Franz   Delitzsch,  D.  D.,  translated  by  R.  B
Wallis,  I'h.  D.;  edit.  Edinburgh,  1867,  p.  398.
■i  Ibid.  p.  402.  8  lUd.  p.  403.


§2.]  ITS  NATURE.  27

communication  of  humanity  as  it  existed  in  fallen  Adam  to  his
descendants  is  by  a  natural  process  of  organic  development ;  so
the  communication  of  the  renovated  humanity  as  it  exists  in
Christ,  to  his  people,  and  through  the  v^orld,  is  also  a  natural
process.  It  supposes  no  special  interference  or  intervention  on
the  part  of  God,  any  more  than  any  other  organic  development
in  the  vegetable  or  animal  world.  The  only  thing  supernatural
about  it  is  the  starting  point  in  Christ.

Doctrine  of  the  Latin  Church.

In  the  later  Latin  Church  the  word  regeneration  is  used  as
synonymous  with  justification,  and  is  taken  in  a  wide  sense  as
including  everything  involved  in  the  translation  of  the  sovil  from
the  kingdom  of  darkness  into  the  kingdom  of  God's  dear  Son.
In  regeneration  the  sinner  becomes  a  child  of  God.  It  is  made
therefore,  to  include,  (1.)  The  removal  of  the  "reatus  "  or  guill
of  sin.  (2.)  The  cleansing  away  of  inherent  moral  corruption
(3.)  The  "infusion  of  new  habits  of  grace;"  and  (4.)  Adop-
tion, or  recognition  of  the  renewed  as  sons  of  God.  The  Council
of  Trent  says,^  "  Justificatio  ....  non  est  sola  peccatorum  remis-
sio,  sed  et  sanctificatio,  et  renovatio  interioris  hominis  per  volun-
tariam  susceptionem  gratise,  et  donorum,  unde  homo  ex  injusto
fit  Justus,  et  ex  inimico  amicus,  ut  sit  heres  secundum  spem  vitfe
setern^."  The  instrumental  cause  of  justification  in  this  sense,
is  declared  to  be  "  sacramentum  baptismi,  quod  est  sacramentum
fidei,  sine  qua  nuUi  umquam  contigit  justificatio."  As  to  the
effect  of  baptism,  it  is  taught  ^  that  it  takes  away  not  only  guilt,
but  everything  of  the  nature  of  sin,  and  communicates  a  new  life.
"  Si  quis  per  Jesu  Christi  Domini  gratiam ;  quas  in  baptismate
confertur,  reatum  originalis  peccati  remitti  negat,  aut  etiam  as-
sent, non  tolH  totum  id,  quod  veram,  et  propriam  peccati  ra-
tionem  habet ;  sed  illud  dicit  tantum  radi,  aut  non  imputari :
anathema  sit.  In  renatis  enim  nihil  odit  Deus,  quia  niliil  est
damnationis  iis  qui  vere  consepulti  sunt  cum  Christo  per  baptisma
in  mortem  :  qui  non  secundum  carnem  ambulant,  sed  veterem
hominem  exuentes,  et  novum,  qui  secundum  Deum  creatus  est,
induentes,  innocentes,  immaculati,  puri,  innoxii,  ac  Deo  dilecti
effecti  sunt,  heredes  quidem  Dei,  coheredes  autem  Christi,  ita  ut
nihil  prorsus  eos  ab  ingressu  coeH  remoretur."  ^

1  Sessio  vi.  cap.  7.  *  Hid.  v.  B.

8  Streitwolf,  Libi-i  Symbolici,  Gottingen,  1846,  pp.  24,  25,  19.


28  PART  III.     Ch.   XV.  —  regeneration.

Regeneration,  therefore,  as  effected  in  baptism,  is  the  removal
of  the  guilt  and  pollution  of  sin,  the  infusion  of  new  habits
of  grace,  and  introduction  into  the  family  of  God.  It  is  in
baptism  that  all  the  benefits  of  the  redemption  of  Christ  are
conveyed  to  the  soul,  and  this  is  its  regeneration  or  birth  mto
the  kingdom  of  God.

Doctrine  of  the  Church  of  England.

1.  There  has  always  been  a  class  of  theologians  in  the  English
Church  who  hold  the  theology  of  the  Church  of  Rome  in  its  lead-
ing characteristics.  They  accept,  therefore,  the  definition  of
regeneration,  or  justification,  as  they  call  it,  as  given  by  the
Council  of  Trent,  and  quoted  above.

2.  Others  make  a  distinction  between  conversion  and  regener-
ation. The  latter  is  that  grace  which  attends  baptism,  and  as
that  sacrament  without  sacrilege  cannot  be  repeated,  so  regenera-
tion can  be  experienced  only  once.  Conversion  is  "  a  change  of
heart  and  life  from  sin  to  holiness."  "  To  the  heathen  and  infi-
del conversion  is  absolutely  and  always  necessary  to  salvation."
To  the  baptized  Christian  conversion  is  not  always  necessary.
"  Some  persons  have  confused  conversion  with  regeneration,  and
have  taught  that  all  men,  the  baptized,  and  therefore  in  fact  re-
generate, must  be  regenerated  afterwards,  or  they  cannot  be
saved.  Now  this  is  in  many  ways  false  :  for  regeneration,  which
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  himseK  has  connected  with  holy  baptism,
cannot  be  repeated :  moreover,  not  all  men  (though  indeed  most
men  do)  fall  into  such  sin  after  baptism,  that  conversion,  or  as
they  term  it,  regeneration,  is  necessary  to  their  salvation  ;  and  if
a  regeneration  were  necessary  to  them,  it  could  only  be  obtained
through  repetition  of  baptism,  which  were  an  act  of  sacrilege."
"  They  who  object  to  the  expression  baptismal  regeneration,  by
regeneration  mean,  for  the  most  part,  the  first  influx  of  irresisti-
ble and  indefectible  grace ;  grace  that  cannot  be  repelled  by  its
subject,  and  which  must  issue  in  its  final  salvation.  Now,  of
such  grace  our  Church  knows  nothing,  and  of  course,  therefore,
means  not  by  regeneration  at  baptism,  the  first  influx  of  such
grace.  That  the  sins,  original  and  actual,  of  the  faithful  recipi-
ent of  baptism,  are  washed  away,  she  doth  indeed  believe  ;
and  also  that  grace  is  given  to  him  by  the  immediate  agency  of
the  Holy  Spirit ;  yet  so  that  the  conscience  thus  cleansed  may  be
again  defiled,  and  that  the  baptized  person  may,  and  often  does,
by  his  own  fault,  fall  again  into  sin,  in  which  if  he  die  he  shall


^


§3.J  THE   EVANGELICAL   DOCTRINE.  29

•without  doubt  perish  everlastingly  ;  his  condemnation  not  being
avoided,  but  rather  increased,  by  his  baptismal  privilege."  ^

3.  A  third  form  of  doctrine  on  this  subject,  held  by  some  di-
vines of  this  church,  is  that  regeneration  properly  expresses  an
external  change  of  relation,  and  not  an  internal  change  of  the
state  of  the  soul  and  of  its  relation  to  God.  As  a  proselyte
was  regenerated  when  he  professed  himself  a  Jew,  so  any  one  in-
itiated into  the  visible  Church  is  thereby  regenerated.  This  is
held  to  be  entirely  different  from  spiritual  renovation.  Regener-
ation, in  this  outward  sense,  is  admitted  to  be  by  baptism  ;  ren-
ovation is  by  the  Spirit.

4.  A  large  class  of  English  theologians  have  ever  remained
faithful  to  the  evangeHcal  doctrine  on  this  subject,  in  accordance
with  the  views  of  the  Reformers  in  their  Church,  who  were  in
full  sympathy  both  in  doctrine  and  in  ecclesiastical  and  Chiistian
fellowship  with  other  Protestant  churches.

§  3.   The  Evangelical  Doctrine.

In  the  Lutheran  Symbols  the  doctrine  of  Regeneration,  which
is  made  to  include  conversion,  is  thus  stated  :  "  Conversio  hominis
tabs  est  immutatio,  per  operationem  Spiritus  Sancti,  in  hominis
intellectu,  voluntate  et  corde,  qua  homo  (operatione  videlicet
Spiritus  Sancti)  potest  oblatam  gratiam  apprehendere."  ^

"  Hominis  autem  nondum  renati  intellectus  et  voluntas  tantum
sunt  subjectum  convertendum,  sunt  enim  hominis  spiritualiter
mortui  intellectus  et  voluntas,  in  quo  horaine  Spiritus  Sanctus
conversionem  et  renovationem  operatur,  ad  quod  opus  hominis
convertendi  voluntas  nihil  confert,  sed  patitur,  ut  Deus  in  ipsa
operetur,  donee  regeneretur.  Postea  vero  in  aliis  sequentibus
bonis  operibus  Spiritui  Sancto  cooperatur,  ea  faciens,  quae  Deo
grata  sunt."  ^

"  Sicut  igitur  homo,  qui  corporaliter  mortuus  est,  seipsum  pro-
priis  viribus  pr^eparare  aut  accommodare  non  potest,  ut  vitam
externam  recipiat :  ita  homo  spiritualiter  in  peccatis  mortuus,
seipsum  propriis  viribus  ad  consequendam  spiritualem  et  coelestem
justitiam  et  vitam  prajparare,  applicare,  aut  vertere  non  potest,
nisi  per  Filium  Dei  a  morte  peccati  liberetur  et  vivificetur."  ^

"  Rejicimus  errorem  eorura  qui  fingunt,  Deum  in  conversione  et
regeneratione  hominis  substantiam  et  essentiam  veteris  Adami,  et

1  A  Church  Dictionary,  by  Walter  Farqiihar  Hook,  D.  D.,  Vicar  of  Leeds,  article  "  Con-
version"; 6th  edition,  Philadelphia,  1854.

2  Form  of  Concord,  ii.  83.  3  Jhid.  91.  *  Ibid.  11.


80  PART  m.   ch.  XV.  — regeneration.

praecipue  animam  rationalem  penitus  abolere,  novamque  ammae
essentiam  ex  niliilo,  in  ilia  conversione  et  regeneratione  creare."^

With  these  statements  the  doctrines  taught  in  the  Symbols  and
by  the  theologians  of  the  Reformed  churches,  perfectly  agree.  It
is  sufficient  to  quote  the  standards  of  our  own  Church.  The
♦'  Westminster  Confession  "  says,  "  Man,  by  his  fall  into  a  state
of  sin,  hath  wholly  lost  all  ability  of  will  to  any  spiritual  good
accompanying  salvation  ;  so  as  a  natural  man  being  altogether
averse  from  that  wliich  is  good,  and  dead  in  sin,  is  not  able,  by
his  own  strength,  to  convert  himself,  or  to  prepare  himself  there-
unto." "  When  God  converts  a  sinner,  and  translates  him  into  the
state  of  grace.  He  freeth  him  from  his  natural  bondage  under  sin,
and  by  his  grace  alone  enables  him  freely  to  mil  and  to  do  that
which  is  spiritually  good."  "  All  those  whom  God  hath  predes-
tinated unto  Hfe,  and  those  only.  He  is  pleased,  in  his  appointed
and  accepted  time,  effectually  to  call,  by  liis  Word  and  Spirit,
out  of  that  state  of  sin  and  death  in  which  they  are  by  nature,  to
grace  and  salvation  by  Jesus  Christ ;  enlightening  their  minds,
spiritually  and  savingly,  to  understand  the  things  of  God,  taking
away  their  heart  of  stone,  and  giving  unto  them  an  heart  of
flesh ;  renewing  their  wills,  and  by  his  Almighty  power,  deter-
mining them  to  that  which  is  good,  and  effectually  drawing  them
to  Jesus  Christ ;  yet  so  as  they  come  most  freely,  being  made
willing  by  his  grace."  "  This  effectual  call  is  of  God's  free  and
special  grace  alone,  not  from  anything  at  all  foreseen  in  man,  who
is  altogether  passive  therein,  until  being  quickened  and  renewed
by  the  Holy  Ghost,  he  is  tliereby  enabled  to  answer  this  call,  and
embrace  the  grace  offered  and  conveyed  in  it."  ^

The  Larger  Catechism  ^  says,  "  What  is  effectual  calling  ?
Effectual  calling  is  the  work  of  God's  almighty  power  and  grace,
whereby  (out  of  his  free  and  especial  love  to  his  elect,  and  from
nothing  in  them  moving  Him  thereunto)  He  doth  in  his  accepted
time  invite  and  draw  them  to  Jesus  Christ  by  his  Word  and  Spirit ;
savingly  enlightening  their  minds,  renewing  and  powerfuil}^  de-
termining their  wills,  so  as  they  (although  in  themselves  dead  in
sin)  are  hereby  made  wilhng  and  able,  freely  to  answer  his  call,
and  to  accept  and  embrace  the  grace  offered  and  conveyed  there-
in."

Uxposition  of  the  Doctrine.

According  to  the  common  doctrine  of  Protestants,  i.  e.,  of
Lutherans  and  Reformed,  as  appears  from  the  above  quotations, —

1  Ibid.  U  ;  Hase,  Libri  SymboUd,  3d  edit.  Leipzig,  1336,  pp.  679,  681,  658,  581.

2  IX.  3,  4;  X.  1,  2.  2  Question  67.


§3.1  THE  EVANGELICAL  DOCTRINE.  31

Regeneration  an  Act  of  Crod.

1.  Regeneration  is  an  act  of  God.  It  is  not  simply  referred  to
Him  as  its  giver,  and,  in  that  sense,  its  author,  as  He  is  the  giver
of  faith  and  of  repentance.  It  is  not  an  act  which,  by  argument
and  persuasion,  or  by  moral  power,  He  induces  the  sinner  to  per-
form. But  it  is  an  act  of  which  He  is  the  agent.  It  is  God  who
regenerates.  The  soul  is  regenerated.  In  this  sense  the  soul  is
passive  in  regeneration,  which  (subjectively  considered)  is  a
change  wrought  in  us,  and  not  an  act  performed  by  us.

Regeneration  an  Act  of  G-od's  Power.

2.  Regeneration  is  not  only  an  act  of  God,  but  also  an  act  of
his  almighty  power.  Agreeably  to  the  express  declarations  of  the
Scriptures,  it  is  so  presented  in  the  Symbols  of  the  Protestant
churches.  If  an  act  of  omnipotence,  it  is  certainly  efficacious,  for
notliing  can  resist  almighty  power.  The  Lutherans  indeed  deny
tliis.  But  the  more  orthodox  of  them  mean  simply  that  the
simier  can  keep  himself  aloof  from  the  means  through  which,  or,
rather,  in  connection  with  which  it  pleases  God  to  exercise  his
power.  He  can  absent  himself  from  the  preaching  of  the  Word,
and  the  use  of  the  sacraments.  Or  he  may  voluntarily  place
himself  in  such  an  inward  posture  of  resistance  as  determines
God  not  to  exert  his  power  in  his  regeneration.  The  assertion
that  regeneration  is  an  act  of  God's  omnipotence,  is,  and  is  in-
tended to  be,  a  denial  that  it  is  an  act  of  moral  suasion.  It  is  an
affirmation  that  it  is  "  physical  "  in  the  old  sense  of  that  word,
as  opposed  to  moral ;  and  that  it  is  immediate,  as  opposed  to
mediate,  or  through  or  by  the  truth.  When  either  in  Scripture
or  in  theological  writings,  the  word  regeneration  is  taken  in  a
wide  sense  as  including  conversion  or  the  voluntary  turning  of  the
soul  to  God,  then  indeed  it  is  said  to  be  by  the  Word.  The  resto-
ration of  sight  to  the  blind  by  the  command  of  Christ,  was  an  act
of  omnipotence.  It  was  immediate.  Nothing  in  the  way  of  in-
strumentary  or  secondary  cooperating  influence  intervened  be-
tween the  divine  volition  and  the  effect.  But  all  exercises  of  the
restored  faculty  were  through  and  by  the  light.  And  without
light  sight  is  impossible.  Raising  Lazarus  from  the  dead  was  an
act  of  omnipotence.  Nothing  intervened  between  the  volition
and  the  effect.  The  act  of  quickening  was  the  act  of  God.  In
that  matter  Lazarus  was  passive.  But  in  all  the  acts  of  the
restored  vitality,  he  was  active  and  free.    According  to  the  evan-


32  PART  in.   ch.  XV.— regeneration.

gelical  system  it  is  in  this  sense  that  regeneration  is  the  act  of
God's  almighty  power.  Nothing  intervenes  between  his  volition
that  the  soul,  spiritually  dead,  should  live,  and  the  desired  effect.
But  in  all  that  belongs  to  the  consciousness  ;  all  that  precedes  or
follows  the  imparting  of  tliis  new  life,  the  soul  is  active  and  is
influenced  by  the  truth  acting  according  to  the  laws  of  ovtx  mental
constitution.

Regeneration  in  the  Subjective  Sense  of  the  Word  not  an  Act.

3.  Regeneration,  subjectively  considered,  or  viewed  as  an  effect
or  change  wrought  in  the  soul,  is  not  an  act.  It  is  not  a  new
purpose  created  by  God  (if  that  language  be  intelligible),  or
formed  by  the  sinner  under  his  influence.  Nor  is  it  any  conscious
exercise  of  any  kind.  It  is  something  which  lies  lower  than  con-
sciousness.

Not  a  Change  of  Substance.

4.  It  is  not,  however,  according  to  the  Church  doctrine,  any
change  in  the  substance  of  the  soul.  This  is  rejected  universally
as  Manicheism,  and  as  inconsistent  with  the  nature  of  sin  and
holiness.  It  is,  indeed,  often  assumed  that  there  is  nothing  in  the
soul  but  its  substance  and  its  acts  ;  and,  therefore,  if  regenera-
tion be  not  a  change  in  the  acts,  it  must  be  a  change  of  the  sub-
stance of  the  soul.  This  assumption,  however,  is  not  only  arbi-
trary, but  it  is  also  opposed  to  the  intimate  convictions  of  all
men.  That  is,  of  all  men  in  their  normal  state,  when  not  specu-
lating or  theorizing.  That  such  is  the  common  judgment  of  men
has  already  been  proved  under  the  heads  of  original  righteousness
and  original  sin.  Every  one  recognizes,  in  the  first  place,  that
such  constitutional  principles  as  parental  love,  the  social  affec-
tions, a  sense  of  justice,  pity,  etc.,  are  immanent  states  of  the
soul  which  can  be  resolved  neither  into  its  essence  nor  acts.  So
also  acquired  habits  are  similar  permanent  and  immanent  states
which  are  not  acts,  much  less  modifications  or  changes  of  the
essence.  The  same  is  true  of  dispositions,  amiable  and  unamia-
ble.  The  refinement  of  taste  and  feeling  due  to  education  and
culture,  is  not  a  change  in  the  essence  of  the  mind.  It  cannot
reasonably  be  denied  that  a  state  of  mind  produced  by  culture,
may  be  produced  by  the  volition  of  God.  What  is  true  in  every
other  department  of  our  inner  life,  is  true  of  our  moral  and  re-
ligious nature.  Besides  those  acts  and  states  which  reveal  them-
selves in  the  consciousness,  there  are  abiding  states,  dispositions,
principles,  or  habits,  as  they  are  indifferently  called,  which  con-


§3.]  THE  EVANGELICAI.  DOCTRINE.  33

stitute  character  and  give  it  stability,  and  are  the  proximate,
determining  cause  why  our  vohmtary  exercises  and  conscious
states  are  what  they  are.  This  is  what  the  Bible  calls  the  heart,
which  has  the  same  relation  to  all  our  acts  that  the  nature  of  a
tree,  as  good  or  bad,  has  to  the  character  of  its  fruit.  A  good,
tree  is  known  to  be  good  if  its  fruit  be  good.  But  the  goodness
of  the  fruit  does  not  constitute  or  determine  the  goodness  of  the
tree,  but  the  reverse.  In  like  manner,  it  is  not  good  acts  which
make  the  man  good ;  the  goodness  of  the  man  determines  the  char-
acter of  his  acts.

It  is  a  New  Life.
5.  While  denying  that  regeneration  is  a  change  either  in  the
essence  or  acts  of  the  soul,  evangelical  Christians  declare  it  to  be,
in  the  language  of  Scripture,  "  a  quickening,"  a  ^woTroteti',  a  com-
munication of  a  new  principle  of  life.  It  is  hard,  perhaps  impos-
sible, to  define  what  life  is.  Yet  every  man  is  familiar  with  its
manifestations.  He  sees  and  knows  the  difference  between  death
and  life,  between  a  dead  and  living  plant  or  animal.  And,  there-
fore, when  the  Bible  tells  us  that  in  regeneration  God  imparts  a
new  form  of  life  to  the  soul,  the  language  is  as  intelligible  as
human  language  can  be  in  relation  to  such  a  subject.  We  know
that  when  a  man  is  dead  as  to  the  body  he  neither  sees,  feels,
nor  acts.  The  objects  adapted  to  impress  the  senses  of  the  living
make  no  impression  upon  him.  They  awaken  no  corresponding
feeling,  and  they  call  forth  no  activity.  The  dead  are  insensible
and  powerless.  AVhen  the  Scriptures  declare  that  men  are  spir-
itually dead  they  do  not  deny  to  them  physical,  intellectual,
social,  or  moral  life.  They  admit  that  the  objects  of  sense,  the
truths  of  reason,  our  social  relations  and  moral  obligations,  are
more  or  less  adequately  apprehended ;  these  do  not  fail  to  awaken
feeling  and  to  excite  to  action.  But  there  is  a  higher  class  of
objects  than  these,  what  the  Bible  calls  "  The  things  of  God,"
"  The  things  of  the  Spirit,"  "  The  things  pertaining  to  salva-
tion." These  things,  although  intellectually  apprehended  as
presented  to  our  cognitive  faculties,  are  not  spiritually  discerned
by  the  unrenewed  man.  A  beautiful  object  in  nature  or  art  may
be  duly  apprehended  as  an  object  of  vision  by  an  uncultivated
man,  who  has  no  perception  of  its  aesthetic  excellence,  and  no
corresponding  feeling  of  delight  in  its  contemplation.  So  it  is
with  the  mirenewed  man.  He  may  have  an  intellectual  Imowl-
edge  of  the  facts  and  doctrines  of  the  Bible,  but  no  spiritual  dis-
cernment of  their  excellence,  and  no  delight  in  them.     The  same


84  PART  in.    Ch.  XV.— REGENERATION.

Christ,  as  portrayed  in  the  Scriptures,  is  to  one  man  without
form  or  comeliness  that  we  should  desire  Him  ;  to  another  He  is
the  chief  among  ten  thousand  and  the  one  altogether  lovely ;
"  God  manifest  in  the  flesh,"  whom  it  is  impossible  not  to  adore,
.  love,  and  obey.

This  new  life,  therefore,  manifests  itself  in  new  views  of  God,
of  Christ,  of  sin,  of  holiness,  of  the  world,  of  the  gospel,  and  of
the  hfe  to  come  ;  in  short,  of  all  those  truths  which  God  has  re-
vealed as  necessary  to  salvation.  This  spiritual  illumination  is
so  important  and  so  necessary  and  such  an  immediate  effect  of  re-
generation, that  spiritual  knowledge  is  not  only  represented  in  the
Bible  as  the  end  of  regeneration  (Col.  iii.  10  ;  1  Tim.  ii.  4),  but
the  whole  of  conversion  (which  is  the  effect  of  regeneration)  is
summed  up  in  knowledge.  Paul  describes  his  conversion  as  con-
sisting in  Christ's  being  revealed  to  Him  (Gal.  i.  16)  ;  and  the
Scriptures  make  all  religion,  and  even  eternal  life,  to  be  a  form
of  knowledge.  Paul  renounced  everything  for  the  excellency  of
the  knowledge  of  Christ  (Phil.  iii.  8),  and  our  Lord  says  that
the  knowledge  of  Himself  and  of  the  Father  is  eternal  life.
(John  xvii.  3).  The  whole  process  of  salvation  is  described  as
a  translation  from  the  kingdom  of  darkness  into  the  kingdom  of
light.  There  is  no  wonder,  therefore,  that  the  ancients  called
regeneration  a  ^toncr/xd?,  an  illumination.  If  a  man  born  blind
were  suddenly  restored  to  sight,  such  a  flood  of  knowledge  and
dehght  would  flow  in  upon  him,  through  the  organ  of  vision,  that
he  might  well  think  that  all  living  consisted  in  seeing.  So  the
New  Testament  writers  represent  the  change  consequent  on
regeneration,  the  opening  the  eyes  on  the  certainty,  glory,  and
excellence  of  divine  things,  and  especially  of  the  revelation  of
God  in  the  person  of  his  Son,  as  comprehending  almost  every-
thing which  pertains  to  spiritual  life.  Inseparably  connected
with  this  knowledge  and  included  in  it,  is  faith,  in  all  the  forms
and  exercises  in  which  spiritual  truths  are  its  objects.  Delight
in  the  things  thus  revealed  is  the  necessary  consequence  of  spirit-
ual illimiination  ;  and  with  delight  come  satisfaction  and  peace,
elevation  above  the  world,  or  spiritual  mindedness,  and  such  a
sense  of  the  importance  of  the  things  not  seen  and  eternal,  that
all  the  energies  of  the  renewed  soul  are  (or,  it  is  acknowledged,
they  should  be)  devoted  to  securing  them  for  ourselves  and
others.

This  is  one  of  the  forms  in  which  the  Bible  sets  forth  the  doc-
trine of  regeneration.     It  is  raising  the  soul  dead  in  sin  to  spiritual


§3.]  THE  EVANGELICAL   DOCTRINE.  35

life.    And  tliis  spiritual  life  unfolds  or  manifests  itself  just  as  any
other  form  of  life,  in  all  the  exercises  appropriate  to  its  nature.

It  is  a  New  Birth.
The  same  doctrine  on  this  subject  is  taught  in  other  words
when  regeneration  is  declared  to  be  a  new  birth.  At  birth  the
child  enters  upon  a  new  state  of  existence.  Birth  is  not  its  own
act.  It  is  born.  It  comes  from  a  state  of  darkness,  in  which  the
objects  adapted  to  its  nature  cannot  act  on  it  or  awaken  its  activ-
ities. As  soon  as  it  comes  into  the  Avorld  all  its  faculties  are
awakened  ;  it  sees,  feels,  and  hears,  and  gradually  unfolds  all  its
faculties  as  a  rational  and  moral,  as  well  as  physical  bemg.  The
Scriptures  teach  that  it  is  thus  in  regeneration.  The  soul  enters
upon  a  new  state.  It  is  introduced  into  a  new  world.  A  whole
class  of  objects  before  unknown  or  unappreciated  are  revealed  to
it,  and  exercise  upon  it  their  appropriate  influence.  The  "  things
of  the  Spirit "  become  the  chief  objects  of  desire  and  pursuit,  and
all  the  energies  of  the  new-born  soul  are  du*ected  towards  the
spiritual,  as  distinguished  from  the  seen  and  temporal.  This
representation  is  in  accordance  with  the  evangelical  doctrine  on
this  subject.  It  is  not  consistent  with  any  of  the  false  theories
of  regeneration,  which  regard  regeneration  as  the  sinner's  own
act ;  as  a  mere  change  of  purpose  ;  or  as  a  gradual  process  of
moral  culture.

A  New  Heart.

Another  mode  in  which  this  doctrine  is  set  forth  is  found  in
those  passages  in  which  God  is  represented  as  giving  his  people
a  new  heart.  The  heart  in  Scripture  is  that  which  thinks,  feels,
wills,  and  acts.  It  is  the  soul ;  the  seK.  A  new  heart  is,  there-
fore, a  new  self,  a  new  man.  It  implies  a  change  of  the  whole
character.  It  is  a  new  nature.  Out  of  the  heart  proceed  all
conscious,  voluntary,  moral  exercises.  A  change  of  heart,  there-
fore, is  a  change  which  precedes  these  exercises  and  determines
their  character.  A  new  heart  is  to  a  man  what  goodness  is  to
the  tree  in  the  parable  of  our  Lord.

In  regeneration,  therefore,  there  is  a  new  life  communicated  to
the  soul ;  the  man  is  the  subject  of  a  new  birth  ;  he  receives  a
new  nature  or  new  heart,  and  becomes  a  new  creature.  As  the
change  is  neither  in  the  substance  nor  in  the  mere  exercises  of  the
soul,  it  is  in  those  immanent  dispositions,  principles,  tastes,  or
habits  which  underhe  aU  conscious  exercises,  and  determine  the
character  of  the  man  and  of  all  his  acts.


86  PART  m.  ch.  XV.— regeneration.

The  whole  Soul  the  Subject  of  this  change.

6.  According  to  the  evangelical  doctrine  the  whole  soul  is  the
subject  of  regeneration.  It  is  neither  the  intellect  to  the  exclu-
sion of  the  feelings,  nor  the  feelings  to  the  exclusion  of  the  intel-
lect ;  nor  is  it  the  will  alone,  either  in  its  wider  or  in  its  more
limited  sense,  that  is  the  subject  of  the  change  in  question.  Tliis
is  evident,  —

(1.)  Because  the  soul  is  a  unit,  and  is  so  recognized  in  Scrip-
ture. Its  faculties  are  not  so  dissociated  that  one  can  be  good
and  another  bad,  one  saved  and  another  lost,  one  active  in  the
sphere  of  morals  and  religion  and  the  others  inactive.  In  ev-
ery such  exercise  the  intelligence,  the  feelings,  the  will,  and  the
conscience,  or  moral  consciousness,  are  of  necessity  involved.

(2.)  In  the  description  of  this  work  all  the  faculties  of  the  soul
are  represented  as  ajffected.  The  mind  is  illuminated,  the  eyes  of
the  understanding  are  opened  ;  the  heart  is  renewed  ;  the  will  is
conquered,  or,  the  man  is  made  willing.

(3.)  When  Lazarus  was  restored  to  life,  it  was  not  one  member
of  the  body,  or  one  faculty  that  received  the  vivifying  influence.
It  was  not  the  heart  that  was  set  in  motion,  the  brain  and  lungs
being  restored  by  its  action.  It  was  the  whole  man  that  was
made  alive.     And  it  is  the  whole  soul  that  is  regenerated.

(4.)  This  is  further  evident  from  the  effects  ascribed  to  regen-
eration. These  effects  are  not  confined  to  any  one  department
of  our  nature.  Regeneration  secures  right  knowledge  as  well  as
right  feeling ;  and  right  feeling  is  not  the  effect  of  right  knowl-
edge, nor  is  right  laiowledge  the  effect  of  right  feeling.  The  two
are  the  inseparable  effects  of  a  work  which  affects  the  whole
soul.

(5.)  When  our  Lord  teaches  that  the  tree  must  be  made  good
in  order  that  the  fruit  should  be  good,  it  was  not  any  one  part
of  the  tree  which  must  be  changed,  but  the  whole  tree.  In  lilce
manner  it  is  the  soul,  in  the  centre  and  unit}''  of  its  life,  that  is
the  subject  of  that  hfe-giving  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  which
it  becomes  a  new  creature.  The  doctrine  that  regeneration  is  a
change  affecting  only  one  of  the  faculties  of  the  soul  has  its  foun-
dation entirely  outside  of  the  Scriptures.  It  is  simply  an  infer-
ence from  a  particular  psychological  theory,  and  has  no  authority
in  theology.


§  4.]  OBJECTIONS.  37

§  4.    Objections.
The  same  objections  which  are  urged  against  other  doctrines
of  grace  are  pressed  against  the  Augustinian  view  of  the  nature
of  regeneration.     These  objections  are  of  tlu-ee  classes.

Denial  of  Supernaturalism.

1.  The  first  class  of  objections  are  founded  on  the  denial  of
Theism  ;  or  at  least  on  the  denial  of  the  Scriptural  doctrine  of
the  relation  of  God  to  the  world.  It  is  an  assumption  com-
mon to  most  of  the  forms  of  modern  philosophy  that  the  only-
agency  of  the  Supreme  Being  (whether  personal  or  impersonal)
is  according  to  law.  It  is  ordered,  uniform,  and  in,  with,  and
through  second  causes,  if  such  causes  are  admitted.  Everythinsr
is  natural,  and  nothing  supernatural,  either  in  the  outward  world
or  in  the  sphere  of  things  spiritual.  There  can  be  no  creation
"  ex  nihilo,"  no  miracles,  no  immediate  revelation,  no  inspiration
in  the  church  sense  of  that  term  ;  no  supernatural  work  upon  the
heart,  and  therefore  no  regeneration  in  the  sense  of  an  immediate
operation  of  almighty  power  on  the  soul.  Those  who  depart  from
their  principles  so  far  as  to  admit  the  person  of  Christ  to  be  su-
pernatural in  its  origin  contend  that  the  supernatural  in  Him
becomes  natural,  and  that  from  Him  onward  the  diffusion  of
spiritual  life  is  by  a  regular  process  of  development,  as  simply
natural  as  the  development  of  humanity  from  Adam  through  all
his  posterity.

This  is  purely  a  philosophical  theory.  It  has  no  authority  for
Christians.  As  it  is  contrary  to  the  express  teaching  of  the
Scriptures  it  cannot  be  adopted  by  those  who  recognize  them  as
the  infallible  rule  of  faith  and  practice.  As  it  contradicts  the
moral  and  religious  convictions  arising  from  the  constitution  of
our  nature,  it  must  be  hurtful  in  all  its  tendencies,  and  can  be
adopted  by  those  only  who  sacrifice  to  speculation  their  interior
life.

Resting  on  False  Psychological  Theories.

2.  A  second  class  of  objections  are  founded  on  certain  psycho-
logical theories  on  free  agency,  on  the  nature  of  the  soul,  and  on
the  conditions  of  moral  obhgation.  No  theories  on  these,  or  any
other  subjects,  have  any  authority,  except  those  which  underlie
and  are  necessarily  assumed  in  the  facts  and  doctrines  of  the
Scripture.  If  any  theory  teaches  that  plenary  ability  is  essential
to  free  agency  ;  that  God  cannot  control  with  certainty  the  acts


8S  PART  m.   Ch.  XV.— regeneration.

of  free  agents  without  destroying  their  liberty  ;  or  that  free  acts
cannot  be  foreseen,  predicted,  or  foreordained,  then  such  theory
must  be  false  if  the  Scriptures  assert  facts  which  imply  the  con-
trary. If  a  theory  teaches  that  men  are  responsible  only  for
acts  of  the  will,  under  their  own  control,  that  theory  must  be
rejected  if  the  Bible  teaches  that  we  are  responsible  for  states
of  mind  over  which  the  will  has  no  direct  power.  The  facts  in-
volved in  the  evangelical  doctrine  of  regeneration,  as  stated
above,  contradict  the  theories  on  which  the  arguments  of  the
Remonstrants,  Pelagians,  and  others  against  that  doctrine  rest,
and  therefore  those  theories  must  share  the  fate  of  every  doctrine
which  contradicts  established  facts.  This  has  been  demonstrated
over  and  over  in  different  ages  of  the  Church.  The  principles
involved  in  these  objections  have  been  discussed  in  the  preceding
pages,  and  need  not  be  again  considered.

Objections  founded  on  the  Divine  Perfection.

3.  A  third  class  of  objections  are  drawn  from  the  supposed
inconsistency  of  this  doctrine  with  the  moral  perfections  of  God.
If  all  men  are  dead  in  sin,  destitute  of  the  power  to  restore  them-
selves to  life,  then  not  only  is  it  unjust  that  they  should  be  con-
demned, but  it  is  also  incompatible  with  the  divine  rectitude  that
God  should  exert  his  almighty  power  in  the  regeneration  of  some,
while  He  leaves  others  to  perish.  Justice,  it  is  said,  demands  that
all  should  have  an  equal  opportunity  ;  that  all  should  have,  by
nature  or  from  grace,  power  to  secure  their  own  salvation.  It
is  obvious  that  such  objections  do  not  bear  peculiarly  against  the
Augustinian  system.  They  are  urged  by  atheists  against  Theism.
If  there  be  a  personal  God  of  infinite  power,  why  does  He  permit
sin  and  misery  to  hold  joint  supremacy  on  earth  ;  why  are  good
and  evil  so  unequally  distributed,  and  why  is  the  distribution  so
arbitrary  ?

Deists  make  the  same  objections  against  the  divine  authority
of  the  Bible.  They  cannot  receive  it  as  the  Word  of  God  because
it  represents  the  Creator  and  Governor  of  the  world  as  placing
men  under  circumstances  which  secure  in  some  way  the  univer-
sality of  sin,  and  then  punishing  them  with  inexorable  severity
even  for  their  idle  words.

It  is  also  plain  that  the  different  anti- Augustinian  systems
afford  no  real  relief  from  these  difficulties.  Admitting  that  re-
generation is  the  simier  a  own  act ;  admitting  that  every  man
has  all  the  knowledge  and  all  the  ability  necessary  to  secure  his


§  4.]  OBJECTIONS.  39

salvation,  it  remains  true  that  few  are  saved,  and  that  God  does
not  interpose  to  prevent  the  great  majority  of  adult  men  in  the
present  state  of  the  world  perishing  in  their  sins.

Augustinians  do  not  deny  these  difficulties.  They  only  main-
tain that  they  are  not  peculiar  to  their  system  ;  and  they  rest
content  with  the  solution  of  them  given  in  the  Scriptures.  That
solution  agrees  with  all  the  facts  of  consciousness  and  experience,
so  far  as  consciousness  and  experience  extend.  The  Bible  teaches
that  man  was  created  holy  ;  that  by  his  voluntary  transgression
of  the  divine  law  he  apostatized  from  God  ;  that  in  consequence
of  this  apostasy  all  men  come  into  the  world  in  a  state  of  spiritual
death,  both  guilty  and  polluted  ;  that  God  exercises  no  influence
to  lead  them  into  sin,  but  on  the  contrary,  by  his  truth,  his  prov-
idence, and  by  his  Spirit  exerts  all  that  influence  over  them
which  should  induce  rational  beings  to  repent  and  seek  his  par-
doning mercy  and  sanctifying  grace  ;  .that  all  those  who  sincerely
and  faithfully  seek  reconciliation  with  God  in  the  way  of  his
appointment  He  actually  saves  ;  that  of  his  sovereign  grace  He,
in  the  exercise  of  his  mighty  power,  renews  and  sanctifies  a  mul-
titude which  no  man  can  number,  who  would  otherwise  have
continued  in  their  sins.  With  these  representations  of  the  Scrip-
tures everything  within  the  sphere  of  our  knowledge  agrees.
Consciousness  and  experience  testify  that  we  are  an  apostate
race  ;  that  all  men  are  sinners,  and,  being  sinners,  have  forfeited
all  claims  on  the  favour  of  God  ;  that  in  continuing  in  sin  and  in
rejecting  the  overtures  of  mercy  men  act  voluntarily,  following
the  desires  of  their  own  hearts.  Every  man's  conscience,  more-
over, teaches  him  that  he  lias  never  sought  the  salvation  of  his
soul  with  the  sincerity  and  perseverance  with  which  men  seek
the  things  of  the  world,  and  yet  failed  in  his  efforts.  Every  man
who  comes  short  of  eternal  life  knows  that  the  responsibility  rests
upon  himself.  On  the  other  hand,  the  experience  of  every  be-
liever is  a  witness  to  him  that  it  is  of  God  and  not  of  himself  that
he  is  in  Christ  (1  Corinthians  i.  30)  ;  every  believer  knows  that
if  God  had  left  him  to  himself  he  would  have  continued  in  unbe-
lief and  sin.  Why  God  intervenes  to  save  one  and  not  another,
when  all  are  equally  undeserving  ;  why  tlie  things  of  God  are
revealed  unto  babes  while  hidden  from  the  wise  and  prudent,  can
only  be  answered  in  the  language  of  our  Lord,  "  Even  so.  Father,
for  so  it  seemed  good  in  thy  sight."     (MatthcAV  xi.  26.)

The  more  popular  and  common  objections  that  the  Augustinian
doctrine  of  reo-eneration  leads  to  the  neglect  of  the  means  of


40  PAKT  III.     Ch.   XV.  —  regeneration.

grace,  "  to  waiting  for  God's  time,"  to  indifference  or  despair ;
that  it  is  inconsistent  with  exhortations  and  commands  addressed
to  sinners  to  repent  and  believe,  and  incompatible  with  moral
responsibility,  have  already  been  repeatedly  considered.  It  is
enough  to  say  once  more  that  these  objections  are  founded  on  the
assumption  that  inability,  even  when  it  arises  out  of  our  own  sin-
fulness, is  incompatible  with  obligation.  Besides,  it  is  the  natural
and  actual  tendency  of  a  sense  of  helplessness  under  a  burden  of
evil,  to  lead  to  earnest  and  importunate  application  for  relief  to
Him  who  is  able  to  afford  it,  and  by  whom  it  is  offered.


CHAPTER   XVI.
FAITH.

§  1.  Preliminary  Remarks.

The  first  conscious  exercise  of  the  renewed  soul  is  faith ;  as
the  first  conscious  act  of  a  man  born  blind  whose  eyes  have  been
opened,  is  seeing.  The  exercise  of  vision  in  such  a  man  is  indeed
attended  by  so  many  new  sensations  and  emotions  that  he  cannot
determine  how  much  of  this  new  experience  comes  through  the
eye,  and  how  much  from  other  sources.  It  is  so  with  the  believer.
As  soon  as  his  eyes  are  opened  by  the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost
he  is  in  a  new  world.  Old  things  have  passed  away,  all  things
are  become  new.  The  apprehension  of  "  the  things  of  God  "  as
true  lies  at  the  foundation  of  all  the  exercises  of  the  renewed  soul.
The  discussions  on  the  question.  Whether  faith  precedes  repent-
ance, or  repentance  faith,  can  have  no  place  if  the  meaning  of
of  the  words  be  agreed  upon.  Unless  faith  be  hmited  to  some  of
its  special  exercises  there  can  be  no  question  that  in  the  order  of
nature  it  must  precede  repentance.  Repentance  is  the  turning
of  the  soul  from  sin  unto  God,  and  unless  this  be  produced  by  the
believing  apprehension  of  the  truth  it  is  not  even  a  rational  act.
As  so  much  prominence  is  assigned  to  faith  in  the  Scriptures,  as
all  the  promises  of  God  are  addressed  to  believers,  and  as  all  the
conscious  exercises  of  spiritual  life  involve  the  exercise  of  faith,
without  which  they  are  impossible,  the  importance  of  this  grace
cannot  be  overestimated.  To  the  theologian  and  to  the  practical
Christian  it  is  indispensable  that  clear  and  correct  ideas  should
be  entertained  on  the  subject.  It  is  one  of  special  difficulty.
This  difficulty  arises  partly  from  the  nature  of  the  subject ;  partly
from  the  fact  that  usage  has  assigned  the  word  faith  so  many
different  meanings ;  partly  from  the  arbitrary  definitions  given
of  it  by  philosophers  and  theologians  ;  and  partly  from  the  great
diversity  of  aspects  under  which  it  is  presented  in  the  Word  of
God.

The  question,  What  is  Faith  ?  is  a  very  comprehensive  one.
In  one  view  it  is  a  metaphysical  question.     What  is  the  psycho-


42  PART  III.     Ch.   XVL  — faith.

logical  nature  of  the  act  or  state  of  the  mind  which  we  designate
faith,  or  belief  ?  In  this  asjDect  the  discussion  concerns  the  phi-
losopher as  much  as  the  theologian.  Secondly,  faith  may  be
viewed  as  to  its  exercise  in  the  whole  sphere  of  religion  and
morality.  Thirdly,  it  may  be  considered  as  a  Christian  grace,
the  fruit  of  the  Spirit ;  that  is,  those  exercises  of  faith  which  are
peculiar  to  the  regenerated  people  of  God.  This  is  what  is
meant  by  saving  faith.  Fourthly,  it  may  be  viewed  in  its  rela-
tion to  justification,  sanctification,  and  holy  living,  or,  as  to  those
special  exercises  of  faith  which  are  required  as  the  necessary
conditions  of  the  sinner's  acceptance  with  God,  or  as  essential  to
holiness  of  heart  and  life.

§  2.   The  Psychological  Nature  of  Faith.

Faith  in  the  widest  sense  of  the  word,  is  assent  to  the  truth,
or  the  persuasion  of  the  mind  that  a  thing  is  true.  In  ordinary
popular  language  we  are  said  to  believe  whatever  we  regard  as
true.  The  primary  element  of  faith  is  trust.  The  Hebrew  word
I^S  means  to  sustain,  to  uphold.  In  the  Niphil,  to  be  firm,  and,
in  a  moral  sense,  to  be  trustworthy.  In  the  Hiphil,  to  regard  as
firm,  or  trustworthy,  to  place  trust  or  confidence  in.  In  like
manner  the  Greek  Trio-reuw  (from  TrtVris,  and  that  from  Trct'^co,  to
persuade),  means  to  trust,  i.  e.,  to  be  persuaded  that  a  person  or
thing  is  trustworthy.  Hence  the  epithet  Tno-rds  is  applied  to  any
one  who  is,  and  who  shows  himself  to  be,  worthy  of  trust.  In
Latin  credere  (whence  our  word  credit)  has  the  same  meaning.
In  mercantile  matters  it  means  to  lend,  to  trust  to  ;  and  then  in
general,  to  exercise  trust  in.  "  Crede  milii,"  trust  me,  rely  on
my  word.  Fides  (horn  fido,  and  that  from  Tret^w),  is  also  trust,
confidence  exercised  in  regard  to  any  person  or  thing ;  then  the
disposition,  or  virtue  which  excites  confidence  ;  then  the  promise,
declaration,  or  pledge  which  is  the  outward  ground  of  confidence.
In  the  cognate  words,  fidens,  Jidelis,  fiducia,  the  same  idea  is
prominent.  The  German  word  "  Glaube  "  has  the  same  general
meaning.  It  is  defined  by  Pleinsius  (Worterbuch)  :  "  der  Zustand
des  Gemiithes,  da  man  eine  Sache  f  Lir  wahr  halt  und  sich  darauf
verliisst,"  ^.  e.,  "  that  state  of  mind  in  which  a  man  receives  and
relies  upon  a  thing  as  true."  The  English  word  "  faith  "  is  said  to
be  from  the  Anglo-Saxon  "  fa^gan  "  to  covenant.  It  is  that  state
of  mind  which  a  covenant  requires  or  supposes ;  that  is,  it  is  con-
fidence in  a  person  or  thing  as  trustworthy.  "  To  believe,"  is
defined  by  the  Latin  "  credere,  fidem  dare  sive  habere."     "  The


§2.]  ITS  PSYCHOLOGICAL  NATURE.  43

etymologists,"  says  Richardson,  "  do  not  attempt  to  account  for
this  important  word :  it  is  undoubtedly  formed  on  the  Dut.  Le-
ven  ;  Ger.  Ziehen;  A.-S.  Lif-ian,  Be-lif-ian  ;  Goth.  Liban,  vivere,
to  live,  or  be-live,  to  dwell.  Live  or  leve,  be-  or  bi-live  or  leve^
are  used  indifferently  by  old  writers,  whether  to  denote  vivere  or

credere To  believe,  then,  is  to  Uve  by  or  according  to,  to

abide  by  ;  to  guide,  conduct,  regulate,  govern,  or  direct  the  life
by  ;  to  take,  accept,  assume  or  adopt  as  a  rule  of  life  ;  and,  con-
sequently, to  think,  deem,  or  judge  right ;  to  be  firmly  persuaded
of,  to  give  credit  to  ;  to  trust,  or  think  trustworthy  ;  to  have  or
give  faith  or  confidence  ;  to  confide,  to  think  or  deem  faithful."

The  Primary  Idea  of  Faith  is  Trust.

From  all  this  it  appears  that  the  primary  idea  of  faith  is  trust.
The  primary  idea  of  truth  is  that  which  is  trustworthy  ;  that
which  sustains  our  expectations,  which  does  not  disappoint,  be-
cause it  really  is  what  it  is  assumed  or  declared  to  be.  It  is
opposed  to  the  deceitful,  the  false,  the  unreal,  the  empty,  and  the
worthless.  To  regard  a  thing  as  true,  is  to  regard  it  as  worthy
of  trust,  as  being  what  it  purports  to  be.  Faith,  in  the  compre-
hensive and  legitimate  meaning  of  the  word,  therefore,  is  trust.

In  accordance  with  this  general  idea  of  faith,  Augustine  ^  says,
"  Credere,  nihil  aliud  est,  quam  cum  assensione  cogitare."  Thus,
also,  Reid^  says,  "  Belief  admits  of  all  degrees,  from  the  slightest
suspicion  to  the  fullest  assurance There  are  many  opera-
tions of  the  mind  in  which  ....  we  find  belief  to  be  an  essen-
tial ingredient Belief  is  an  ingredient  in  consciousness,

in  perception,  and  in  remembrance We  give  the  name  of

evidence  to  whatever  is  a  ground  of  belief What  this  evi-
dence is,  is  more  easily  felt  than  described The  common

occasions  of  life  lead  us  to  distinguish  evidence  into  different
kinds,  ....  such  as  the  evidence  of  sense,  the  evidence  of  mem-
ory, the  evidence  of  consciousness,  the  evidence  of  testimony,  the

evidence  of  axioms,  the  evidence  of  reasoning They  seem

to  me  to  agree  only  in  this,  that  they  are  all  fitted  by  nature  to
produce  belief  in  the  human  mind."

1  De  Prcedestinatione  Sanctorum  [ii.],  5;  Works,  edit.  Benedictines,  Paris,  1838,  vol.  x.
p.  1349  b.

2  On  the  Intellectual  Powers,  Essay  ii.  ch.  xx. ;  Works,  Edinburgh,  1849,  pp.  327  b,
328  a,  b.


44  PART  m.  ch.  x\a.— faith.

The  more  limited  Sense  of  the  Word.
There  is,  however,  in  most  cases  a  great  difference  between  the
general  signification  of  a  word  and  its  special  and  characteristic
meaning.  Although,  therefore,  there  is  an  element  of  belief  in
all  our  cognitions,  there  is  an  important  difference  between  what
is  strictly  and  properly  called  faith,  and  those  states  or  acts  of  the
mind  which  we  designate  as  sight  or  perception,  intuition,  opinions,
conclusions,  or  apodictic  judgments.  What  that  characteristic
difference  is,  is  the  point  to  be  determined.  There  are  modes  of
statement  on  this  subject  current  among  a  certain  class  of  philos-
ophers and  theologians,  which  can  hardly  be  regarded  as  defini-
tions of  faith.  They  take  the  word  out  of  its  ordinary  and  estab-
lished meaning,  or  arbitrarily  limit  it  to  a  special  sphere  of  our
mental  operations.  Thus  Morell  ^  says,  "  Faith  is  the  intuition
of  eternal  verities."  But  eternal  verities  are  not  the  only  objects
of  faith  ;  nor  is  intuition  the  only  mode  of  apprehending  truth
which  is  of  the  nature  of  belief.  The  same  objections  bear  against
the  assertion  that  "  Faith  is  the  organ  for  the  supernatural  and
divine  ;  "  or,  as  Eschenmayer  expresses  it,  "  Ein  vom  Denken,
Fiihlen  mid  Wollen  verschiedenes,  eigenthiimliches  Organ  f  iir  das
Ewige  und  Heilige  ;  a  special  organ  for  the  eternal  and  the  holy."
The  supernatural  and  divine,  however,  are  not  the  exclusive  ob-
jects even  of  religious  faith.  It  is  by  faith  we  know  that  the
worlds  were  made  by  the  word  of  God  ;  it  was  by  faith  Noah
prepared  the  ark,  and  Abraham,  being  called  of  God,  went  out
not  knowing  whither  he  went.  The  objects  of  faith  in  these  cases
are  not  what  is  meant  by  "  eternal  verities."  It  is,  moreover,  an
arbitrary  assumption  that  faith  is  "  a  special  organ,"  even  when
tilings  supernatural  and  divine  are  its  object.  Our  nature  is
adapted  to  the  reception  of  all  kinds  of  truth  of  which  we  can
have  any  idea.  But  it  is  not  necessary  to  assume  a  special  organ
for  historical  truths,  a  special  organ  for  scientific  truths,  and  an-
other for  the  general  truths  of  revelation,  and  still  another  for
•'  the  eternal  and  the  holy."  God  has  constituted  us  capable  of
belief,  and  the  complex  state  of  mind  involved  in  the  act  of  faith
is  of  course  different  according  to  the  nature  of  the  truth  believed,
and  the  nature  of  the  evidence  on  wliich  our  faith  is  founded.
But  this  does  not  necessitate  the  assumption  of  a  distinct  organ
for  each  kind  of  truth.

1  Philosophy  of  Religion,


§2.]  ITS  PSYCHOLOGICAL  NATUKE.  45

Faith  not  to  he  regarded  as  simply  a  Christian  Crrace.

No  less  unsatisfactory  are  those  descriptions  of  faith  which
regard  it  only  in  its  character  as  a  Christian  and  saving  grace.
Delitzsch,  for  example,^  describes  faith  as  the  most  central  act
of  our  being  ;  the  return  to  God,  the  going  out  of  our  inner  life
to  Him.  "  This  longing  after  God's  free,  merciful  love,  as  liis  own
Word  declares  it,  —  a  longing,  reaching  forth,  and  grasping  it ;
this  naked,  unselfish  craving,  feeling  itself  satisfied  with  nothing
else  than  God's  promised  grace  ;  this  eagerness,  absorbing  every
ray  of  light  that  proceeds  from  God's  reconciled  love  ;  this  con-
vinced and  safety-craving  appropriation  and  clinging  to  the  word
of  grace  ;  —  this  is  faith.  According  to  its  nature,  it  is  the  pure
receptive  correlative  of  the  word  of  promise  ;  a  means  of  approach-
ing again  to  God,  which,  as  the  word  itseK,  is  appointed  through
the  distance  of  God  in  consequence  of  sin ;  for  faith  has  to  con-
fide in  the  word,  in  spite  of  all  want  of  comprehension,  want  of
sight,  want  of  experience.  No  experimental  actus  reflexi  belong
to  the  nature  of  faith.  It  is,  according  to  its  nature,  actio  directa,
to  wit,  fidiicia  sujyplex.''^  All  this  is  doubtless  true  of  the  believer.
He  does  thus  long  after  God,  and  appropriate  the  assurance  of  his
love,  and  cling  to  his  promises  of  grace ;  but  faith  has  a  wider
range  than  this.  There  are  exercises  of  faith  not  included  in  this
description,  recorded  in  Scripture,  and  especially  in  the  eleventh
chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.

Erdmann^  says  that  religious  faith,  the  faith  on  which  the
Scriptures  lay  so  much  stress,  is,  "  Bewusstseyn  der  Versohnung
mit  Gott,  consciousness  of  reconciliation  with  God."  He  insists
that  faith  cannot  be  separated  from  its  contents.  It  is  not  the  man
who  holds  this  or  that  to  be  true,  who  is  a  believer ;  but  the  man
who  is  convinced  of  a  specific  truth,  namely,  that  he  is  reconciled
with  God.  Calling  faith  a  consciousness  is  not  a  definition  of  its
nature.  And  limitins:  it  to  a  consciousness  of  reconciliation  with
God  is  contrary  to  the  usage  of  Scripture  and  of  theology.

Definitions  of  Faith  founded  on  its  Subjective  Nature.
The  more  common  and  generally  received  definitions  of  faith,
may  perhaps  be  reduced  to  tliree  classes,  all  of  which  include  the
general  idea  of  persuasion  of  the  truth.     But  some  seek  the  dis-

1  BiblicaJ  Psychology,  p.  174.

2  Vorhsungen  ijher  Glauben  und  Wissen,  von  Johann  Eduard  Erdmann,  Berlin,  1837,
p.  30.


46  PART  III.    Ch.  XVL— faith.

tinguisliing  character  of  faith  in  its  subjective  nature ;  others,  in
the  nature  of  its  object ;  others,  in  the  nature  of  the  evidence,  or
ground  on  which  it  rests.

Faith  as  distinguished  from  Opinion  and  Knowledge.

To  the  first  of  these  classes  belong  the  following  definitions :
Faith  or  belief  is  said  to  be  a  persuasion  of  the  truth  stronger
than  opinion,  and  weaker  than  knowledge.  Metaphysicians  di-
vide the  objects  of  our  cognitions  into  the  possible,  the  real,  and
the  necessary.  With  regard  to  the  merely  possible  we  can  form
only  conjectures,  or  opinions,  more  or  less  plausible  or  probable.
With  regard  to  things  which  the  mind  with  greater  or  less  confi-
dence views  as  certain,  although  it  cannot  justify  that  confidence
to  itself  or  others,  i.  e.,  cannot  demonstrate  the  certainty  of  the
object,  it  is  said  to  believe.  What  it  is  perfectly  assured  of,  and
can  demonstrate  to  be  true  so  as  to  coerce  conviction,  it  is  said  to
know.  Thus  Locke  defines  faith  to  be  the  assent  of  the  mmd  to
propositions  which  are  probably,  but  not  certainly  true.  Bailey  ^
says,  "I  propose  to  confine  it  [belief  or  faith]  first,  to  the  effect
on  the  mind  of  the  premises  in  what  is  termed  probable  reason-
ing, or  what  I  have  named  contingent  reasoning  —  in  a  word  the
premises  in  all  reasoning,  but  that  which  is  demonstrative  ;  and
secondly,  to  the  state  of  holding  true  when  that  state,  far  from
being  the  effect  of  any  premises  discerned  by  the  mind,  is  disso-
ciated from  all  evidence."  To  believe  is  to  admit  a  thins  as
true,  according  to  Kant,  on  grounds  sufficient  subjectively,  insuffi-
cient objectively.  Or,  as  more  fully  stated,  "  Holding  for  true,
or  the  subjective  validity  of  a  judgment  in  relation  to  conviction
(which  is,  at  the  same  time,  objectively  valid)  has  the  three  fol-
lowing degrees :  opinion,  behef,  and  knowledge.  Opinion  is  a
consciously  insufficient  judgment,  subjectively  as  well  as  object-
ively. Belief  is  subjectively  sufficient,  but  is  recognized  as  being
objectively  insufficient.  Knowledge  is  both  subjectively  and  ob-
jectively sufficient.  Subjective  sufficiency  is  termed  conviction
(for  myself)  ;  objective  sufficiency  is  termed  certainty  (for  all)."^
Erdmann  ^  says,  "  Man  versteht  unter  Glauben  eine  jede  Gewiss-
heit,  die  geringer  ist  als  das  Wissen,  und  etwa  starker  ist  als  ein
blosses  Meinen  oder  Fiirmoglichhalten  (z.  B.  ich  glaube,  dass  es

1  Letters  on  the  Philosophy  of  the  Human  Mind,  Lcadou,  1855,  pp.  75.  76.

2  Meiklejohii's  Translation  of  Critic  of  Pure  Reason,  London,  1855,  p.  498.
8  Glauben  und  Wissen,  Berlin,  1837,  p.  29.


§2.]  ITS  PSYCHOLOGICAL  NATURE.  47

heute  regnen  wird)."  "  By  faith  is  understood  any  persuasion
whicli  is  Aveaker  than  knowledge,  but  somewhat  stronger  than  a
mere  deeming  possible  or  probable,  as,  e.  (/.,  I  believe  it  will  rain
to-day."  This  he  gives  as  the  commonly  accepted  meaning  of
the  word,  although  he  utterly  repudiates  it  as  a  definition  of  re-
ligious faith.

It  is  urged  in  support  of  this  definition  of  faith  that  with  re-
gard to  everything  of  which  we  are  not  absolutely  sure,  and  yet
are  persuaded  or  convinced  of  its  truth,  we  say  we  believe.  Thus
with  respect  to  things  remembered ;  if  the  recollection  is  indis-
tinct and  uncertain,  we  say  we  think,  e.  g.^  we  think  we  saw  a
certain  person  at  a  given  time  and  place  ;  we  are  not  sure,  but
such  is  our  impression.  If  our  persuasion  of  the  fact  be  stronger,
we  say  we  believe  it.  If  we  have,  and  can  have,  no  doubt  about
it,  we  say  we  know  it.  In  like  manner  the  testimony  of  our
senses  may  be  so  weak  as  to  produce  only  a  probability  that  the
thing  is  as  it  appears  ;  if  clearer,  it  produces  a  belief  more  or  less
decided  ;  if  so  clear  as  to  preclude  all  doubt,  the  effect  is  knowl
edge.  If  we  see  a  person  at  a  distance,  and  we  are  entirely  un-
certain who  it  is,  we  can  only  say  we  think  it  is  some  one  whom
we  know.  If  that  persuasion  becomes  stronger,  we  say,  we  be-
lieve it  is  he.  If  perfectly  sure,  we  say,  we  know  it.  In  all
these  cases  the  only  difference  between  opinion,  belief,  and  knowl-
edge, is  their  relative  strength.  The  objects  are  the  same,  their
relation  to  the  mind  is  the  same,  and  the  ground  or  evidence  on
which  they  severally  rest  is  of  the  same  kind.  It  is  said  that  it
would  be  incorrect  to  say,  "  We  believe  that  we  slept  in  our  house
last  night ;  "  if  perfectly  sure  of  the  fact.  If  a  Avitness  in  a  court
of  justice  simply  says,  "  I  believe  I  was  at  a  certain  place  at  a
given  time,"  his  testimony  would  be  of  no  value.  He  must  be
able  to  say  that  he  is  sure  of  the  fact  —  that  he  knows  it.

Objections  to  this  Definition.

Of  this  definition  of  faith,  it  may  be  remarked,  —
1.  That  the  meaning  which  it  assigns  to  tlie  word  is  certainly
legitimate,  sustained  by  established  usage.  The  states  of  mind
expressed  by  the  words,  I  think  a  thing  to  be  true  ;  I  believe  it ;
I  know  it,  are  distinguished  from  each  other  simply  by  the  differ-
ent degrees  of  certainty  which  enter  into  them  respectively.  The
probable  ground  of  this  use  of  the  word  to  beheve,  is,  that  there
is  more  of  the  element  of  trust  (or  a  voluntarily  giving  to  evi-
dence a  greater  influence  on  the  mind  than  of  necessity  belongs


48  PART  m.   Ch.  XVI.  — faith.

to  it),  manifest  in  our  consciousness,  than  is  expressed  by  saying,
Ave  think,  or,  we  know.  However  this  may  be,  it  cannot  be
denied  that  the  word  belief  often  expresses  a  degree  of  conviction
gi'eater  than  opinion  and  less  than  knowledge.

2.  But  this  is  not  the  distinguishing  characteristic  of  faith,  or
its  differentia.  There  are  exercises  of  faith  into  which  this  un-
certamty  does  not  enter.  Some  of  the  strongest  convictions  of
which  the  mind  is  capable  are  beliefs.  Even  our  assurance  of
the  veracity  of  consciousness,  the  foundation  of  all  other  convic-
tions, is  of  the  nature  of  faith.  So  the  primary  truths  which  are,
and  must  be  assumed  in  all  our  researches  and  arguments,  are
beliefs.  They  are  taken  on  trust.  They  cannot  be  proved.  If
any  man  denies  them,  there  is  nothing  more  to  be  said.  He  can-
not be  convinced.  Sir  William  Hamilton  ^  says,  "  St.  Austin
accurately  says,  '  We  know  what  rests  upon  reason ;  we  believe
what  rests  upon  authority.'  But  reason  itself  must  at  last  rest
upon  authority  ;  for  the  original  data  of  reason  do  not  rest  on
reason,  but  are  necessarily  accepted  by  reason  on  the  authority  of
what  is  beyond  itself.  These  data  are,  therefore,  in  rigid  pro-
priety, beliefs  or  trusts.  Thus  it  is  that,  in  the  last  resort,  we
must,  perforce,  philosophically  admit,  that  belief  is  the  primary
condition  of  reason,  and  not  reason  the  ultimate  ground  of  belief.
We  are  compelled  to  surrender  the  proud  Intellige  ut  credas  of
Abelard,  to  content  ourselves  with  the  humble  Crede  ut  intelligas
of  Anselm."

The  same  is  true  in  other  spheres.  The  effect  on  the  mind
produced  by  human  testimony  is  universally  recognized  as  faith.
If  that  testimony  is  inadequate  it  does  not  preclude  doubt ;  but  it
may  be.  so  strong  as  to  make  all  doubt  impossible.  No  sane  man
can  doubt  the  existence  of  such  cities  as  London  and  Paris.  But
to  most  men  that  existence  is  not  a  matter  of  knowledge  either
intuitive  or  discursive.  It  is  something  taken  on  trust,  on  the
authority  of  others ;  which  taking  on  trust  is  admitted  by  philos-
ophers, theologians,  and  the  mass  of  men,  to  be  a  form  of  faith.
Again,  in  some  moral  states  of  mind  a  man's  conviction  of  the
reahty  of  a  future  state  of  reward  and  punishment  is  as  strong  as
his  belief  in  his  own  existence,  and  much  stronger  than  his  confi-
dence in  the  testimony  of  his  senses.  And  yet  a  future  state  of
existence  is  not  a  matter  of  knowledge.  It  is  an  object  of  faith,
or  a  thing  believed.  We  accordingly  find  that  the  Scriptures
teach  that  there  is  a  full  assurance  of  faith ;  a  faith  which  pre-

1  Reid's  Works ;  edit.  Edinburgh,  1849,  note  A,  §  5,  p.  760  b.


§2.]  ITS  PSYCHOLOGICAL  NATURE.  49

eludes  the  possibility  of  doubt.  Paul  says,  "I  know  whom  I
have  believed,  and  am  persuaded  that  he  is  able  to  keep  that
which  I  have  committed  unto  him  against  that  day."  (2  Tim.
i.  12.)  As  Job  had  said  ages  before,  "  I  know  that  my  Re-
deemer liveth."  The  Apostle  declares,  Hebrews  xi.  1,  faith  to
be  an  vTrdo-Tao-ts  and  €/\ey_>(o?,  than  wliich  no  stronger  terms  could  be
selected  to  express  assured  conviction.  The  power,  also,  which
the  Bible  attributes  to  faith  as  the  controlling  principle  of  life,  as
overcoming  the  world,  subduing  kingdoms,  stopping  the  mouths
of  lions,  quenching  the  violence  of  fire,  turning  to  flight  the  armies
of  the  aliens,  is  proof  enough  that  it  is  no  weak  persuasion  of  the
truth.  That  definition,  therefore,  which  makes  the  characteristic
of  faith  to  be  a  measure  of  confidence  greater  than  opinion,  but
less  than  knowledge,  camiot  be  deemed  satisfactory.

Faith  not  a  Voluntary  Conviction.

A  second  definition  of  faith,  founded  on  its  nature,  is  that
which  makes  it  "a  voluntary  conviction  or  persuasion  of  the
truth."  This  is  a  very  old  view  of  the  matter.  According  to
Theodoret,^  Trtcrrts  eWu'  cKoJo-to?  T^s  ^v)(rj<i  avyKardBeaLq,  i.  e.,  "a  Vol-
untary assent  of  the  mind."  And  Thomas  Aquinas  says,^  "  Cre-
dere est  actus  intellectus  assentientis  veritati  divinas  ex  imperio
voluntatis  a  Deo  motre  per  gi-atiam."^  He  distinguishes  between
Iviiowledge  and  faith  by  representing  the  former  as  the  conviction
produced  by  the  object  itseK  seen  intuitively  or  discursively
("  sicut  patet  in  principiis  primis,  ....  vel  ....  sicut  patet
de  conclusionibus")  to  be  true  ;  whereas  in  the  latter  the  mind
is  not  sufficiently  moved  to  assent  "  ab  objecto  proprio,  sed  per
quandam  electionem,  voluntarie  declinans  in  unam  partem  magis
quam  in  alteram.  Et  siquidem  haec  sit  cum  dubitatione  et  for-
midine  alterius  partis,  erit  opinio.  Si  autem  sit  cum  certitudine
absque  tali  formidine,  erit  fides."

This  definition  admits  of  different  explanations.  The  word
"  voluntary,"  if  its  meaning  be  determined  by  the  wide  sense  of
the  word  '  will,"  includes  every  operation  of  the  mind  not  purely
intellectual.  And  therefore  to  say  that  faith  is  a  voluntary  assent
is  to  say  that  faith  is  not  merely  a  speculative  assent,  an  act  of
the  judgment  pronouncing  a  thing  to  be  true,  but  includes  feeling.
Kitsch,  therefore,  defines  faith  to  be  a  "  gef iihlsmiissiges  Erken-

1  Grcecarum  Affectlonum  Curatio,  sermo  i.  edit.  Commelinus,  Heidelberg( '?),  1592,  p.  16,
ines  11,  12.

2  Summa,  ii.  ii.  qu.-est.  ii.  art.  9,  edit.  Colofrue,  IG-IO,  p.  8  b,  of  third  set.

3  Ibid.  qiuBst.  i.  art.  4,  pp.  3  b,  4  a,  of  third  set.


60  PART  III.     Ch.   XVL  — faith.

nen."  "  Die  Einheit  des  Gefiihls  und  der  Erkenntniss  ;  ^  a  knowl-
edge or  persuasion  of  truth  combined  with  feehng,  —  tlie  unity  of
feelinof  and  knowledge."  But  if  the  word  "  will "  be  taken  in  the
sense  of  the  power  of  self-determination,  then  nothing  is  volun-
tary which  does  not  involve  the  exercise  of  that  power.  If  in
this  sense  faith  be  voluntary,  then  we  must  have  the  power  to
beheve  or  disbelieve  at  pleasure.  If  we  believe  the  truth,  it  is
because  we  choose  or  determine  ourselves  to  receive  it ;  if  we
reject  it,  it  is  because  we  will  to  disbeUeve  it.  The  decision  is
determined  neither  by  the  nature  of  the  object  nor  by  the  nature
or  degree  of  the  evidence.  Sometimes  both  of  these  meanings  of
the  word  voluntary  seem  to  be  combined  by  those  who  define  faith
to  be  a  voluntary  assent  of  the  mind,  or  an  assent  of  the  intellect
determined  by  the  will.  This  appears  from  what  Aquinas,  for
example,  says  when  he  discusses  the  question  whether  faith  is  a
virtue.  He  argues  that  if  faith  be  a  virtue,  which  he  admits  it  to
be,  it  must  include  love,  because  love  is  the  form  or  principle  of
all  the  virtues  ;  and  it  must  be  self-determined  because  there  could
be  no  virtue  in  faith  if  it  were  the  inevitable  effect  of  the  evi-
dence or  testimony.  If  a  virtue,  it  must  include  an  act  of  self-de-
termination ;  we  must  decide  to  do  what  we  have  the  power  not  to

do.

Remarks  on  this  Definition  of  Faith.

This  definition  of  faith  contains  many  elements  of  truth.  In
the  first  place,  it  is  true  that  faith  and  feeling  are  often  insepa-
rable. They  together  constitute  that  state  of  mind  to  which  the
name  faith  is  given.  The  perception  of  beauty  is  of  necessity
connected  with  the  feehng  of  delight.  Assent  to  moral  truth
involves  the  feehng  of  moral  approbation.  In  like  manner  spir-
itual discernment  (faith  when  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit)  includes
delight  in  the  things  of  the  Spirit,  not  only  as  true,  but  as  beau-
tiful and  good.  This  is  the  difference  between  a  living  and  dead
faith.  This  is  the  portion  of  truth  involved  in  the  Romish  doc-
trine of  a  formed  and  unformed  faith.  Faith  (assent  to  the
truth)  connected  with  love  is  the  fides  formata ;  faith  without
love  is  fides  informis.  While,  however,  it  is  true  that  faith  is
often  necessarily  connected  with  feehng,  and,  therefore,  in  one
sense  of  the  term,  is  a  voluntary  assent,  yet  this  is  not  ahvays  the
case.  Whether  feeling  attends  and  enters  into  the  exercise  of
faith,  depends  upon  its  object  (or  the  thing  believed)  and  the
evidence  on  which  it  is  founded.     When  the  object  of  faith  is  a

1  System  der  ChristUchen  Lehre,  Eiul.  ii.  A.  §  8.  3,  5th  edit.  Bonn,  1844,  p.  18.


§2.]  ITS  PSYCHOLOGICAL  NATURE.  51

speculative  truth,  or  some  historical  event  past  or  future  ;  oi
when  the  evidence  or  testimony  on  which  faith  is  founded  is  ad-
dressed only  to  the  understanding  and  not  to  the  conscience  or
to  our  emotional  or  religious  nature,  then  faith  does  not  involve
feeling.  AVe  beheve  the  great  mass  of  historical  facts  to  which
we  assent  as  true,  simply  on  historical  testimony,  and  mthout
any  feeling  entering  into,  or  necessarily  connected  with  it.  The
same  is  true  with  regard  to  a  large  part  of  the  contents  of  the
Bible.  They,  to  a  great  extent,  are  historical,  or  the  predictions
of  historical  events.  When  we  believe  what  the  Scriptures
record  concerning  the  creation,  the  deluge,  the  calling  of  Abra-
ham, the  overthrow  of  the  cities  of  the  plain,  the  history  of
Joseph,  and  the  like,  our  faith  does  not  include  feeling.  It  is
not  an  exercise  of  the  will  in  either  sense  of  that  word.  It  is
simply  a  rational  conviction  founded  on  sufficient  evidence.  It
may  be  said,  as  Aquinas  does  say,  that  it  is  love  or  reverence
towards  God  which  inclines  the  mil  to  believe  such  facts  on  the
authority  of  his  Word.  But  mcked  men  believe  them,  and  can-
not help  believing  them.  A  man  can  hardly  be  found  who  does
not  believe  that  the  Israelites  dwelt  in  Egypt,  escaped  from
bondage,  and  took  possession  of  the  land  of  Canaan.

In  the  second  place,  it  is  true  not  only  that  faith  is  in  many
cases  inseparable  from  feeling,  but  also  that  feeling  has  much
influence  in  determining  our  faith.  This  is  especially  true  when
moral  and  religious  truths  are  the  objects  of  faith.  Want  of  con-
geniality with  the  truth  produces  insensibility  to  the  evidence  by
which  it  is  supported.  Our  Lord  said  to  the  Jews,  "  Ye  believe
not,  because  ye  are  not  of  my  sheep."  (John  x.  26.)  And  in
another  place,  "  If  any  man  will  do  his  will,  he  shall  know  of
the  doctrine,  Avhether  it  be  of  God."  (vii.  17.)  And  the  Apos-
tle says  of  those  that  are  lost,  "  The  god  of  this  world  hath
blinded  the  minds  of  them  which  believe  not,  lest  the  light  of  the
glorious  gospel  of  Christ,  who  is  the  image  of  God,  should  shine
unto  them."  (2  Cor.  iv.  4.)  The  truth  was  present,  attended
by  appropriate  and  abundant  evidence,  but  there  was  no  suscep-
tibility. The  defect  was  in  the  organ  of  vision,  not  in  the  want
of  light.  The  Scriptures  uniformly  refer  the  unbelief  of  those
who  reject  the  gospel  to  the  state  of  their  hearts.  There  can
be  no  doubt  that  all  the  true  children  of  God  received  Christ  as
their  God  and  Saviour  on  the  evidence  which  He  gave  of  his
divine  character  and  mission,  and  that  He  was  rejected  only  by
the  unrenewed  and  the  wicked,  and  because  of  their  wickedness.


62  PART  III.     Ch.   XVL  — faith.

Hence  unbelief  is  so  great  a  sin.  Men  are  condemned  because
they  believe  not  on  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God.  (John  iii.  18.)
All  this  is  true.  It  is  true  of  saving  faith.  But  it  is  not  true  of
all  kinds  of  even  religious  faith  ;  that  is,  of  faith  which  has  re-
ligious truth  for  its  object.  And,  therefore,  it  cannot  furnish  the
differentia  or  criterion  to  distinguish  faith  from  other  forms  of
assent  to  truth.  There  are  states  of  mind  not  only  popularly,
but  correctly  called  belief,  of  which  it  is  not  true  that  love,  or
congeniality,  is  an  element.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  dead  faith,
or  orthodoxy.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  speculative  faith.  Simon
Masrus  believed.  Even  the  devils  believe.  And  if  we  turn  to
other  than  religious  truths  it  is  still  more  apparent  that  faith  is
not  necessarily  a  voluntary  assent  of  the  mind.  A  man  may  hear
of  something  most  repugnant  to  his  feehngs,  as,  for  example,  of
the  triumph  of  a  rival.  He  may  at  first  refuse  to  believe  it ;  but
the  testimony  may  become  so  strong  as  to  force  conviction.  This
conviction  is,  by  common  consent,  faith  or  belief.  It  is  not  sight ;
it  is  not  intuition ;  it  is  not  a  deduction  ;  it  is  belief ;  a  conviction
fomided  on  testimony.  This  subject,  i.  e.,  the  connection  between
faith  and  feeling,  will  come  up  again  in  considermg  other  defini-
tions.

In  the  third  place,  if  we  take  the  word  voluntary  in  the  sense
which  implies  volition  or  self-determination,  it  is  still  more  evi-
dent that  faith  cannot  be  defined  as  voluntary  assent.  It  is,
indeed,  a  proverb  that  a  man  convinced  against  his  will  remains
unconvinced.  But  this  is  only  a  popular  way  of  expressmg  the
truth  just  conceded,  namely,  that  the  feelings  have,  in  many  cases,
great  influence  in  determining  our  faith.  But,  as  just  remarked,
a  man  may  be  constrained  to  believe  against  his  will.  He  may
struggle  against  conviction  ;  he  may  determine  he  will  not  be-
lieve, and  yet  conviction  may  be  forced  upon  him.  Napoleon,  at
the  battle  of  Waterloo,  hears  that  Grouchy  is  approaching.  He
gladly  believes  it.  Soon  the  report  reaches  him  that  the  advan-
cing columns  are  Prussians.  This  he  will  not  believe.  Soon,
however,  as  courier  after  courier  confii'ms  the  unwelcome  fact,  he
is  forced  to  believe  it.  It  is  not  true,  therefore,  that  in  faith  as
faith  there  is  always,  as  Aquinas  says,  an  election  "  voluntarie
declinans  in  unam  partem  magis  quam  in  alteram."  There  is
another  frequent  experience.  We  often  hear  men  say  they  would
give  the  world  if  they  could  believe.  The  dying  Grotius  said  he
would  give  all  his  learning  for  the  simple  faith  of  his  unlettered
servant.     To  tell  a  man  he  can  believe  if  he  will  is  to  contradict


S  2.]  ITS  PSYCHOLOGICAL  NATURE.  53

liis  consciousness.  He  tries  to  believe.  He  earnestly  prays  for
faith  ;  but  lie  cannot  exercise  it.  It  is  true,  as  concerns  the  sin-
ner in  relation  to  the  gospel,  that  this  inability  to  believe  arises
from  the  state  of  his  mind.  But  this  state  of  the  mind  lies  below
the  will.  It  cannot  be  determined  or  changed  by  the  exercise  of
any  voluntary  power.  On  these  grounds  the  definition  of  faith,
whether  as  generic  or  religious,  as  a  voluntary  assent  to  truth,
must  be  considered  unsatisfactory.

Definitions  founded  on  the  Object  of  Faith.

The  preceding  definitions  are  all  founded  on  the  assumed  sub-
jective nature  of  faith.  The  next  definition  is  of  a  different  kind.
It  is  founded  on  the  nature  of  its  object.  Faith  is  said  to  be  the
persuasion  of  the  truth  of  things  not  seen.  This  is  a  very  old  and
familiar  definition.  "  Quid  est  fides,"  asks  Augustine,^  "  nisi  cre-
dere quod  non  vides."  And  Lombard  ^  says,  "  Fides  est  virtus
qua  creduntur  quae  non  videntur."  Hence  faith  is  said  to  be
swallowed  up  in  vision ;  and  the  one  is  contrasted  with  the  other ;
as  when  the  Apostle  says,  "  We  walk  by  faith,  not  by  sight."
And  in  Hebrews,  eleventh  chapter,  all  the  objects  of  faith  under
the  aspect  in  which  it  is  considered  in  that  chapter,  are  included
under  the  categories  of  to.  iX-m^ofjieva  and  to.  ov  fSXeiroixeia,  '*  things
hoped  for,  and  things  not  seen."  The  latter  includes  the  former.
"  We  hope,"  says  the  Apostle,  "  for  that  we  see  not."  (Romans
viii.  25.)  The  word  sight,  in  this  connection,  may  be  taken  in
three  senses.  First,  in  its  literal  sense.  We  are  not  said  to  be-
lieve what  we  see  with  our  eyes.  What  we  see  we  know  to  be
true.  AVe  believe  that  the  planet  Saturn  is  surrounded  by  a  belt,
and  that  Jupiter  has  four  satellites,  on  the  unanimous  testimony
of  astronomers.  But  if  we  look  through  a  telescope  and  see  the
belt  of  the  one  and  the  satellites  of  the  other,  our  faith  passes
mto  knowledge.  We  believe  there  is  such  a  city  as  Rome,  and
that  it  contains  the  Colosseum,  Trajan's  Arch,  and  other  monu-
ment,s  of  antiquity.  If  we  visit  that  city  and  see  these  things  for
ourselves,  our  faith  becomes  knowledge.  The  conviction  is  no
stronger  in  the  one  case  than  in  the  other.  We  are  just  as  sure
there  is  such  a  city  before  having  seen  it,  as  though  we  had  been
there  a  hundred  times.  But  the  conviction  is  of  a  different  kind.
Secondly,  the  mind  is  said  to  see  when  it  perceives  an  object  of

1  In  Joannis  Evangelium  Tractatm,  XL.  9 ;   Works,  edit.  Benedictines,  Paris,  1837,  vol.
iii.  p.  2088  b.
a  Libir  Sententiarum,  iii.  xxiii.  B.,  edit.  1472(  ?).


54  PART  in.     Cu.   XVL  — FAITH.

thought  to  be  true  in  its  oatii  light,  or  by  its  own  radiance.  This
mental  vision  may  be  either  immediate  or  mediate  —  either  intui-
tive or  through  a  process  of  proof.  A  child  may  believe  that  the
angles  of  a  triangle  are  together  equal  to  two  right  angles,  on
the  authority  of  his  teacher.  When  he  understands  the  demon-
stration of  that  proposition,  his  faith  becomes  knowledge.  He
sees  it  to  be  true.  The  objects  of  sense-perception,  the  objects  of
intuition,  and  what  we  recognize  as  true  on  a  process  of  proof,
are  not,  according  to  this  definition  of  the  term,  objects  of  faith.
We  know  what  we  see  to  be  true  ;  we  believe  when  we  recognize
as  true  what  we  do  not  see.  It  is  true  that  the  same  thing  may
be  an  object  of  faith  and  an  object  of  knowledge,  but  not  at  the
same  time.  We  may  recognize  as  true  the  being  of  God,  or  the
immortality  of  the  soul,  because  the  propositions,  "  God  is,"  "  the
soul  is  immortal,"  are  susceptible  of  proof.  The  arguments  in
support  of  those  propositions  may  completely  satisfy  our  minds.
But  they  are  truths  of  revelation  to  be  believed  on  the  authority
of  God.  These  states  of  mind  which  we  call  knowledge  and  faith,
are  not  identical,  neither  are  they  strictly  coexisting.  The  effect
produced  by  the  demonstration  is  one  thing.  The  effect  produced
by  the  testimony  of  God's  word,  is  another  thing.  Both  include
a  persiiasion  of  the  truth.  But  that  persuasion  is  in  its  nature
different  in  the  one  case  from  what  it  is  in  the  other,  as  it  rests
on  different  grounds.  When  the  arguments  are  before  the  mind,
the  conviction  which  they  produce  is  knowledge.  When  the  tes-
timony of  God  is  before  the  mind,  the  conviction  which  it  pro-
duces is  faith.  On  this  subject  Thomas  Aquinas  says,^  "  Neces-
sarium  est  homini  accipere  per  modum  fidei  non  solum  ea,  quse
sunt  supra  rationem  :  sed  etiam  ea,  quae  per  rationem  cognosci
possunt.     Et  hoc  propter  tria,  Primo  quidem,  ut  citius  homo  ad

veritatis  divinse  cognitionem  perveniat Secundo,  ut  cog-

nitio  Dei  sit  communior.     Multi  enim  in  studio  scientite  proficere

non  possunt Tertio  modo  propter  certitudinem.     Ratio

enim  humana  in  rebus  divinis  est  multum  deficiens."

Thirdly,  under  the  "  things  not  seen,"  some  would  include  all
things  not  present  to  the  mind.  A  distinction  is  made  between
presentative  and  representative  knowledge.  In  the  former  the
object  is  present  at  the  time  ;  we  perceive  it,  we  are  conscious  of
it.  In  representative  knowledge  there  is  an  object  now  present,
representing  an  absent  object.  Thus  we  have  the  conception  of
a  person  or  thing.     That  conception  is  present,  but  the  thing

1  Summa,  ii.  ii.  qusest.  ii.  art.  4,  edit.  Cologne,  1630,  pp.  6  b,'  i,  of  third  set.


§2.]  ITS  PSYCHOLOGICAL  NATURE.  55

represented  is  absent.  It  is  not  before  the  mind.  It  belongs  to
the  category  of  things  not  seen.  The  conception  which  is  present
is  the  object  of  knowledge  ;  the  thing  represented  is  an  object  of
faith.  That  is,  we  know  we  have  the  conception ;  we  believe  that
the  thing  which  it  represents,  does  or  did  exist.  If  we  visit  a
particular  place  while  present  to  our  senses  we  know  that  it  ex-
ists ;  when  we  come  away  and  form  an  idea  or  conception  of  it,
that  is,  when  we  recall  it  by  an  effort  of  memory,  then  we  be-
lieve in  its  existence.  "  Whenever  we  have  passed  beyond  pre-
sentative  knowledge,  and  are  assured  of  the  reality  of  an  absent
object,  there  faith  ....  has  entered  as  an  element."  ^

Sir  William  Hamilton  ^  says,  "  Properly  speaking,  we  know
only  the  actual  and  the  present,  and  all  real  knowledge  is  an  im-
mediate knowledge.  What  is  said  to  be  mediately  known,  is,  in
truth,  not  known  to  be,  but  only  believed  to  be."  This,  it  may
be  remarked  in  passing,  would  apply  to  all  the  propositions  of
Euclid.  For  they  are  "  mediately  known,"  ^.  e.,  seen  to  be  true
by  means  of  a  process  of  proof.  Speaking  of  memory,  Hamilton
says,  "  It  is  not  a  knowledge  of  the  past  at  all ;  but  a  knowledge
of  the  present  and  a  belief  of  the  past."  "We  are  said,"  accord-
ing to  Dr.  McCosh,  "to  know  ourselves,  and  the  objects  presented
to  the  senses  and  the  representations  (always  however  as  presen-
tations) in  the  mind  ;  but  to  believe  in  objects  which  we  have
seen  in  time  past,  but  which  are  not  now  present,  and  in  objects
which  we  have  never  seen,  and  very  specially  in  objects  which  we
can  never  fully  know,  such  as  an  Infinite  God."  ^

Objections  to  this  Definition.

According  to  this  view,  we  know  what  is  present  to  the  mind,
and  believe  what  is  absent.  The  first  objection  to  this  repre-
sentation is  the  ambiguity  of  the  words  present  and  absent  as
thus  used.  When  is  an  object  present?  and  when  is  it  absent?
It  is  easy  to  answer  this  question  when  the  object  is  something
material  or  an  external  event.  Such  objects  are  present  ("prge
sensibus  ")  when  they  affect  the  senses  ;  and  absent  when  they
do  not.  A  city  or  building  is  present  when  we  actually  see  it ;
absent,  when  we  leave  the  place  Avhere  it  is,  and  recall  the  image
of  it.  But  how  is  it  with  propositions  ?  The  Bible  says  all  men
are  sinners.     The  truth  thus  announced  is  present  to  the  mind.

1  McCosh,  Intuitions  of  the  Mind,  part  ii.  book  ii.  ch.  1,  edit.  New  York,  1860,  p.  197.

2  Lectures  on  Metaphysics  and  Logic,  vol.  i.  "  Metaphysics,"  lect.  xii.  sub  fin  ,  edit.
Boston,  1859,  pp.  152,  153.

3  Intuitions  of  the  Mind,  p.  198.


66  PART  m.   ch.  XVI.  — faith.

"We  do  not  know  it.  We  cannot  prove  it.  But  we  believe  it
upon  the  authority  of  God.  The  Scriptures  teach  that  Christ
died  as  a  ransom  for  many.  Here,  not  only  the  historical  fact
that  He  died  is  announced,  but  the  purpose  for  which  He  died.
Here  again,  we  have  a  truth  present  to  the  mind,  which  is  an  ob-
ject of  faith.

The  second  objection  is  involved  in  the  first.  The  terms  pres-
ent and  absent  are  not  only  ambiguous  in  this  connection,  but  it
is  not  true,  as  just  stated,  that  an  object  must  be  absent  in  order
to  be  an  object  of  faith.  The  differentia^  in  other  words,  be-
tween knowledge  and  faith,  is  not  found  in  the  presence  or  ab-
sence of  their  objects.  We  can  know  what  is  absent,  and  we  can
believe  what  is  present.

The  third  objection  is,  that  the  conviction  we  have  of  the  real-
ity or  truth  of  what  we  distinctly  remember  is  knowledge,  and
not  distinctively  faith,  unless  we  choose  to  establish  a  new  and
arbitrary  definition  of  the  word  knowledge.  We  know  what  is
perceived  by  the  senses ;  we  know  what  the  mind  sees,  either  in-
tuitively or  discursively,  is  and  must  be  true ;  and  we  know  what
we  distinctly  remember.  The  conviction  is  in  all  these  cases  of
the  same  nature.  In  all  it  resolves  itself  into  confidence  in  the
veracity  of  consciousness.  We  are  conscious  that  we  perceive
sensible  objects.  We  are  conscious  that  we  cognize  certain
truths.  We  are  conscious  that  we  remember  certain  events.
In  all  these  cases  this  consciousness  involves  the  conviction  of
the  reality  or  truth  of  what  is  seen,  mentally  apprehended  or
remembered.  This  conviction  is,  or  may  be,  as  strong  in  any
one  of  these  cases  as  in  either  of  the  others ;  and  it  rests  in  all
ultimately  on  the  same  ground.  There  is,  therefore,  no  reason
for  calling  one  knowledge  and  the  other  belief.  Memory  is  as
much  a  knowledge  of  the  past,  as  other  forms  of  consciousness
are  a  knowledge  of  the  present.

The  fourth  objection  is  that  to  deny  that  memory  gives  us  the
knowledge  of  the  past,  is  contrary  to  estabhshed  usage.  It  is
true  we  are  said  to  believe  that  we  remember  such  and  such
events,  when  we  are  uncertain  about  it.  But  this  is  because  in
one  of  the  established  meanings  of  the  word,  belief  expresses  a
less  degree  of  certainty  than  knowledge.  But  men  never  speak
of  believing  past  events  in  their  experience  concerning  which  they
are  absolutely  certain.  We  know  that  we  were  alive  yesterday.
No  man  says  he  believes  he  has  seen  his  father  or  mother  or  any
intimate  friend,  whom  he  had  known  for  years.  Things  dis-
tinctly remembered  are  known,  and  not  merely  believed.


§2.]  ITS  PSYCHOLOGICAL  NATURE.  57

The  definition  which  makes  faith  to  be  the  persiiasion  of  the
truth  of  things  not  seen,  is,  however,  correct,  if  by  "  things  not
seen  "  are  meant  things  which  are  neither  objects  of  the  senses,
nor  of  intuition,  nor  of  demonstrative  proof.  But  it  does  not
seem  to  be  correct  to  inchide  among  the  "things  not  seen,"  which
are  the  special  objects  of  faith,  things  remembered  and  not  now
present  to  mind.  This  definition  of  faith,  while  correct  in  limit-
ing it  as  to  its  objects  to  things  not  seen,  in  the  sense  above
stated,  is  nevertheless  defective  in  not  assigning  the  ground  of
our  conviction  of  their  truth.  Why  do  we  beheve  things  to  be
true,  which  we  have  never  seen  and  which  we  cannot  prove  ?
Different  answers  are  given  to  that  question  ;  and,  therefore,  the
definition  which  gives  no  answer  to  it,  must  be  considered  de-
fective.

Definitions  founded  on  the  Nature  of  the  Evidence  on  which  Faith

rests.

Some  of  the  definitions  of  faith,  as  we  have  seen,  are  founded
on  its  subjective  nature  ;  others  on  its  objects.  Besides  these
there  are  others  whicli  seek  its  distinguishing  characteristic  in  the
ground  on  which  the  conviction  which  it  includes,  rests.  The
first  of  these  is  that  which  makes  faith  to  be  a  conviction  or  per-
suasion of  truth  founded  on  feeling.  This  is  by  many  regarded
as  the  one  most  generally  received.  Hase  ^  says,  "  Every  culti-
vated language  has  a  word  for  that  form  of  conviction  which,  in
opposition  to  the  seK-evident  and  demonstrable,  rests  on  moral
and  emotional  grounds."  That  word  in  Greek  is  ^ricms;  in  Eng-
lish "  faith."  In  his  "  Hutterus  Redivivus,"  ^  he  says,  "  The
common  idea  of  faith  is  :  unmittelbar  Filrwahrhalten,  ohne  Ver-
mittelung  eines  SchlussbcAveises,  durch  Neigung  und  Bediirfniss,"
i.  e.,  "A  persuasion  of  the  truth,  without  tlie  intervention  of
argument,  determined  by  inclination  and  inward  necessity."  He
quotes  the  definition  of  faith  by  Twesten,  as  "  a  persuasion  or
conviction  of  truth  produced  by  feeling ;  "  and  that  of  Nitzsch,
given  above,  "the  unity  of  knowledge  and  feeling."  Strauss^
says,  "  The  way  in  which  a  man  appropriates  the  contents  of  a
revelation,  the  inward  assent  which  he  yields  to  the  contents  of
the  Scriptures  and  the  doctrine  of  the  Church,  not  because  of
critical  or  philosophical  research,  but  often  in  opposition  to  them,

1  Dogmatik,  3(1  edit.  Leipzig,  1842,  p.  307.

2  Sixth  edit.  Leipzig,  1845,  p.  4.

3  Dogmatik,  §  20,  edit.  Tlibiiigen  and  Stuttgart,  1840,  vol.  i.  p.  282.


58  PART  HI.     Ch.   XVI. —  faith.

overpowered  by  a  feeling  wliich  the  Evangelical  Church  calls
the  testimony  of  the  Spirit,  but  which  in  fact  is  only  the  percep-
tion of  the  identity  of  his  owii  religious  life  Avitli  that  portrayed
in  the  Scripture  and  prevailing  in  the  Church,  —  this  assent  deter-
mined by  feeling  —  in  ecclesiastical  language,  is  called  Faith."
Again,^  he  says,  "  The  pious  man  receives  religious  truth  because
he  feels  its  reaUty,  and  because  it  satisfies  his  religious  wants,"
and,  therefore,  he  adds,  "  No  religion  was  ever  propagated  by
means  of  arguments  addressed  to  the  understanding,  or  of  histori-
cal or  philosophical  proofs,  and  this  is  undeniably  true  of  Chris-
tianity." Every  preacher  of  a  new  religion  assumes  in  those  to
whom  he  presents  it,  an  unsatisfied  rehgious  necessity,  and  all  he
has  to  do  is  to  make  them  feel  that  such  necessity  is  met  by  the
religion  which  he  proposes.  Celsus,  he  tells  us,  made  it  a  ground
of  reproach  against  the  Christians  that  they  beheved  blindly  ;
that  they  could  not  justify  the  doctrines  which  they  held  at  the
bar  of  reason.  To  this  Origen  answered,  that  this  was  true  only
of  the  people  ;  that  with  the  educated,  faith  was  elevated  into
knowledge,  and  Christianity  transformed  into  a  philosophy.  The
Church  was  divided  between  believers  and  knowers.  The  rela-
tion between  faith  and  knowledge,  between  religion  and  philoso-
phy, has  been  the  subject  of  controversy  from  that  day  to  this.
Some  took  the  ground  of  Origen  and  of  the  Alexandrian  school
generally,  that  it  is  incumbent  on  educated  Cliristians  to  justify
their  doctrines  at  the  bar  of  reason,  and  prove  them  to  be  true  on
philosophical  grounds.  Others  held  that  the  truths  of  revelation
were,  at  least  in  many  cases,  of  a  kind  which  did  not  admit  of
philosophical  demonstration,  although  they  were  not  on  that
account  to  be  regarded  as  contrary  to  reason,  but  only  as  beyond
its  sphere.  Others,  again,  taught  that  there  is  a  direct  conflict
between  faith  and  knowledge  ;  that  what  the  believing  Christian
holds  to  be  true,  can  be  shown  by  the  philosopher  to  be  false.
This  is  Strauss's  own  doctrine,  and,  therefore,  he  concludes  his
long  discussion  of  this  point  by  saying,  "  The  believer  should  let
the  kjiower  go  his  own  way  in  peace,  just  as  the  knower  does  the
believer.  We  leave  them  their  faith,  let  them  leave  us  our  phi-
losophy  There  have  been  enough  of  false  irenical  at-
tempts- Henceforth  only  separation  of  opposing  principles  can
lead  to  any  good."^  On  the  same  page  he  admits  the  great
truth,  "  That  human  nature  has  one  excellent  characteristic :
what  any  man  feels  is  for  him  a  spiritual  necessity,  he  allows  no
man  to  take  from  him."

1  Dogmalik,  edit.  Tiibingtn  and  Stuttgart,  1840,  vol.  i.  p.  208.  2  ii,id.  p.  356.


8  8.]  ITS  PSYCHOLOGICAL  NATURE.  59

Remarks  on  this  Definition.

With  regard  to  the  definition  of  faith  which  makes  it  a  convic-
tion founded  on  feeling,  it  may  be  remarked,  —

First,  That  there  are  forms  of  faith  of  which  this  is  not  true.
As  remarked  above,  when  treating  of  the  cognate  definition  of
faith  as  a  vohmtary  assent  of  the  mind,  it  is  not  true  of  faith
in  general.  We  often  believe  unwillingly,  and  what  is  utterly
repugnant  to  our  feelings.

Secondly,  It  is  not  true  even  of  religious  faith,  or  faith  which
has  religious  truth  for  its  object.  For  there  may  be  faith  with-
out love,  ^.  e.,  a  speculative,  or  dead  faith.

Thirdly,  It  is  not  true  of  many  of  the  exercises  of  faith  in  good
men.  Isaac  believed  that  Jacob  would  be  preferred  to  Esau,
sorely  against  his  Avill.  Jacob  beheved  that  his  descendants
would  be  slaves  in  Egypt.  The  prophets  beheved  in  the  seventy
years  captivity  of  their  countryiuen.  The  Apostles  believed  that
a  great  apostasy  in  the  Church  was  to  occur  between  their  age
and  the  second  coming  of  the  Lord.  The  answer  of  Thomas
Aquinas  to  this,  is,  that  a  man  is  constrained  by  his  will  (^.  e.,
his  feelings)  to  believe  in  the  Scriptures,  and  then  he  believes  all
the  Scriptures  contain.  So  that  his  faith,  even  in  the  class  of
truths  just  referred  to,  rests  ultimately  on  feeling.  But  this  an-
swer is  unsatisfactory.  For  if  the  question  is  asked.  Why  did  the
prophets  believe  in  the  captivity,  and  the  Apostles  in  the  apos-
tasy ?  the  answer  would  be,  not  from  the  effect  of  these  truths
upon  their  feelings,  but  on  the  authority  of  God.  And  if  it  be
further  asked.  Why  did  they  believe  the  testimony  of  God  ?  the
answer  may  be  because  God's  testimony  carries  conviction.  He
can  make  his  voice  heard  even  by  the  deaf  or  the  dead.  Or,  the
answer  may  be,  because  they  were  good  men.  But  in  either  case,
the  question  carries  us  beyond  the  ground  of  their  faith.  They
beheve  because  God  had  revealed  the  facts  referred  to.  Their
goodness  may  have  rendered  them  susceptible  to  the  evidence
afforded,  but  it  did  not  constitute  that  evidence.

Fourthly,  It  is  admitted  that  the  exercise  of  saving  faith,  i.  e.,
of  that  faith  which  is  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  and  product  of  re-
generation, is  attended  by  feeling  appropriate  to  its  object.  But
this  is  to  be  referred  to  the  nature  of  the  object.  If  we  believe  a
good  report,  the  effect  is  joy  ;  if  an  evil  report,  the  effect  is  sor-
row. The  perception  of  beauty  produces  dehght ;  of  moral  ex-
3eUence,  a  glow  of  approbation  ;  of  spiritual  things,  in  many  cnses.
a  joy  that  is  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.


60  PART  m.   Ch.  xvl  — faith.

Fifthly,  It  is  also  true  that  all  these  truths,  if  not  all  truth,
have  a  self-evidencing  light,  which  cannot  be  apprehended  with-
out a  conviction  that  it  really  is  what  it  is  apprehended  as  being.
It  may  also  be  admitted,  that  so  far  as  the  consciousness  of  true
beUevers  is  concerned,  the  evidence  of  truth  is  the  truth  itself  ;
in  other  words,  that  the  ground  of  their  faith  is,  in  one  sense,
subjective.  They  see  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus
Christ,  and  therefore  believe  that  He  is  God  manifested  in  the
flesh.  They  see  that  the  representations  made  by  the  Scriptures
of  the  sinfulness,  guilt,  and  helplessness  of  fallen  man,  correspond
with  their  own  inward  experience,  and  they  are  therefore  con-
strained to  receive  these  representations  as  true.  They  see  that
the  plan  of  salvation  proposed  in  the  Bible  suits  their  necessities,
their  moral  judgments  and  religious  aspirations,  they  therefore
embrace  it.  All  this  is  true,  but  it  does  not  prove  faith  to  be
a  conviction  founded  on  feeling ;  for  there  are  many  forms  of
faith  which  confessedly  are  not  founded  on  feeling ;  and  even  in
the  case  of  true  believers,  their  feelings  are  not  the  ultimate
ground  of  faith.  They  always  fall  back  on  the  authority  of  God,
who  is  regarded  as  the  author  of  these  feelings,  through  which
the  testimony  of  the  Spirit  is  revealed  to  the  consciousness.  "  We
may  be  moved  and  induced,"  says  the  "  Westminster  Confes-
sion,"^ "  by  the  testimony  of  the  Church  to  an  high  and  reverend
esteem  of  the  Holy  Scripture  ;  and  the  heavenliness  of  the  mat-
ter, the  efficacy  of  the  doctrine,  the  majesty  of  the  style,  the  con-
sent of  all  the  parts,  the  scope  of  the  whole  (which  is  to  give  all
glory  to  God),  the  full  discovery  it  makes  of  the  only  way  of  man's
salvation,  the  many  other  incomparable  excellences,  and  the  en-
tire perfection  thereof,  are  arguments  whereby  it  doth  abundantly
evidence  itseK  to  be  the  word  of  God ;  yet,  notwithstanding,  our
full  persuasion  and  assurance  of  the  infallible  truth  and  divine
authority  thereof  is  from  the  inward  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,
bearmg  witness  by  and  with  the  word  in  our  hearts."  The  ulti-
mate ground  of  faith,  therefore,  is  the  witness  of  the  Spirit.

Faith  a  Conviction  of  the  Truth  founded  07i  Testimony/.

The  only  other  definition  of  faith  to  be  considered,  is  that
which  makes  it,  a  conviction  of  truth  founded  on  testimony.  We
have  already  seen  that  Augustine  says,  "  We  know  what  rests
upon  reason ;  we  believe  what  rests  upon  authority."  A  defini-
tion to  which  Sir  William  Hamilton  gives  his  adhesion.''^    In  the

1  Chapter  i.  §  5.  2  gee  page  46.


§2.]  ITS   PSYCHOLOGICAL  NATURE.  61

Alexandrian  School  also,  tlie  Christian  ttlctti?,  was  Aiictoritats-
Glanbe,  a  faith  founded  on  authority,  opposed,  on  the  one  hand,
to  the  heathen  iTno-Ti^/xy],  and  on  the  other  to  the  Cliristian  yi'wo-is,
or  philosophical  explanation  and  proof  of  the  truths  believed.
Among  the  school-men  also,  this  was  the  prevalent  idea.  When
they  defined  faith  to  be  the  persuasion  of  things  not  seen,  they
meant  things  which  we  receive  as  true  on  authority,  and  not  be-
cause we  either  Iniow  or  can  prove  them.  Hence  it  was  constant-
ly said,  faith  is  human  when  it  rests  on  the  testimony  of  men  ;
divine  when  it  rests  on  the  testimony  of  God.  Thomas  Aquinas  ^
says,  "  Non  fides,  de  qua  loquimur,  assentit  alicui,  nisi  quia  est  a
Deo  revelatum."  "  Faith,  of  which  we  speak,  assents  to  nothing
except  because  it  is  revealed  by  God."  We  believe  on  the  author-
ity of  God,  and  not  because  we  see,  know,  or  feel  a  thing  to  be
true.  This  is  the  purport  of  the  teaching  of  the  great  body  of
the  scholastic  divines.  Such  also  was  the  doctrine  of  the  Reform-
ers, and  of  the  theologians  of  the  subsequent  age,  both  Lutheran
and  Reformed.  Speaking  of  assent,  which  he  regards  as  the  sec-
ond act  or  element  of  faith,  Aquinas  says,  "  Hie  actus  fidei  non
rerum  evidentia  aut  causarum  et  proprietatum  notitia,  sed  Dei
dicentis  infalhbih  auctoritate."  Turrettin^  says,  "  Non  quteritur,
An  fides  sit  scientia,  quas  habeat  evidentiam :  Sic  enim  distin-
guitur  a  scientia,  quae  habet  assensum  certum  et  evidentem,  qui
nititur  ratione  clara  et  certa,  et  ab  opinione,  qu®  nititur  ra-
tione  tantum  probabili ;  ubi  fides  notat  assensum  certum  quidem,
sed  inevidentem,  qui  non  ratione,  sed  testimonio  divino  nititur."
De  Moor  ^  says,  "  Fides  subjectiva  est  persuasio  de  veritate  rei,
alterius  testimonio  nixa,  quomodo  fides  ilia  generatim  descripta,

scientire  et  conjecturas  opponitur Dividitur  ....  in

fidem  divinam,  quse  nititur  testimonio  divino,  et  humanam,  quae
fundata  est  in  testimonio  humano  fide  accepto."  Owen,^  "  All
faith  is  an  assent  upon  testimony ;  and  divine  faith  is  an  assent
upon  a  divine  testimony."  John  Howe^  asks,  "Why  do  I  be-
lieve Jesus  to  be  the  Christ  ?  Because  the  eternal  God  hath  given
his  testimony  concerning  Him  that  so  He  is."  "A  man's  behev-
ing  comes  all  to  nothing  without  this,  that  there  is  a  divine  testi-
mony."    Again,^  "  I  believe  such  a  tiling,  as  God  reveals  it,  be-

1  Summa,  ii.  ii.  quaest.  i.  art.  1,  edit.  Cologne,  1640,  p.  2,  a,  of  third  set.
^  Institutio,  XV.  ix.  3,  edit.  Edinburgh,  1847,  vol.  ii.  p.  497.

8  Commentarius  in  Joliannis  Marclcii  Covipendium,  cap.  xxii.  §  4,  Lej'den,  1766,  vol.  ir.
p.  299.

4  Doctrine  of  Justijicntion,  ch.  i.  edit.  Philadelphia,  1841,  p.  84.

5  Works,  vol.  ii.  p.  885,  Carter's  edition.  New  York,  1809.  6  Ibi-d.  p.  1170.


62  PART  III.     Ch.   XVL  — faith.

cause  it  is  reported  to  me  upon  tlie  authority  of  God."  Bishop
Pearson  ^  says,  "  When  anything  propounded  to  us  is  neither
apparent  to  our  sense,  nor  evident  to  our  understanding,  in  and
of  itself,  neither  certainly  to  be  collected  from  any  clear  and
necessary  connection  with  the  cause  from  which  it  proceedeth,  or
the  effects  which  it  naturally  produceth,  nor  is  taken  up  upon  any
real  arguments  or  reference  to  other  acknowledged  truths,  and  yet
notwithstanding  appeareth  to  us  true,  not  by  a  manifestation,
but  attestation  of  the  truth,  and  so  moveth  us  to  assent  not  of
itself,  but  by  virtue  of  the  testimony  given  to  it ;  this  is  said
properly  to  be  credible  ;  and  an  assent  unto  this,  upon  such  cred
ibility,  is  in  the  proper  notion  faith  or  behef."

This  View  almost  universally  Held.

This  view  of  the  nature  of  faith  is  all  but  universally  received,
not  by  theologians  only,  but  by  philosophers,  and  the  mass  of
Christian  people.  The  great  question  has  ever  been,  whether
we  are  to  receive  truth  on  authority,  or  only  upon  rational  evi-
dence. Leibnitz  begins  his  "  Discours  de  la  Conformity  de  la  Foi
avec  la  Raison,"  by  saying,  "  Je  suppose,  que  deux  v(3rites  ne
sauroient  se  contredire ;  que  I'objet  de  la  foi  est  la  verite  que
Dieu  a  r^velee  d'une  maniere  extraordinaire,  et  que  la  raison  est
I'enchainment  des  Veritas,  mais  particulierement  (lorsqu'elle  est
compares  avec  la  foi)  de  celles  oii  I'esprit  humain  peut  atteindre
natm'ellement,  sans  etre  aide  des  lumieres  de  la  foi."^

It  has  already  been  admitted  that  the  essential  element  of
faith  is  trust ;  and,  therefore,  in  the  general  sense  of  the  word  to
believe,  is  to  trust.  Faith  is  the  reliance  of  the  mind  on  any-
thing as  true  and  worthy  of  confidence.  In  this  wide  sense  of
the  word,  it  matters  not  what  may  be  the  objects,  or  what  the
grounds  of  this  trust.  The  word,  however,  is  commonly  used  in
reference  to  truths  which  we  receive  on  trust  without  being  able
to  prove  them.  Thus  we  are  said  to  believe  in  our  own  exist-
ence, the  reality  of  the  external  world,  and  all  the  primary
truths  of  the  reason.  These  by  common  consent  are  called  be-
liefs. Reason  begins  with  believing,  i.  e.,  with  taking  on  trust
what  it  neither  comprehends  nor  proves.  Again,  it  has  been
admitted  that  the  word  belief  is  often  and  legitimately  used  to
express  a  degree  of  certainty  less  than  knowledge  and  stronger
than  probabiHty  ;  as  when  we  say,  we  are  not  sure,  but  we  be-
lieve that  a  certain  thing  happened.

1  An  Exposition  of  the  Creed,  7th  edit.  London,  1701,  p.  3.

2  Theodicee,  Works,  edit.  Berlin,  18-10,  1839,  part  ii.  p.  479.


§  2.]  ITS  PSYCHOLOGICAL  NATURE.  63

The  Strict  Sense  of  the  Word  "  Faiths
But  ill  the  strict  and  special  sense  of  the  word,  as  discrimi-
nated from  knowledge  or  opinion,  faith  means  the  belief  of
things  not  seen,  -on  the  ground  of  testunony.  By  testimony,
however,  is  not  meant  merely  the  affirmation  of  an  intelligent
witness.  There  are  other  methods  by  which  testimony  may  be
given  than  affirmation.  A  seal  is  a  form  of  testimony  ;  so  is  a
sign.  So  is  everything  which  pledges  the  authority  of  the  at-
tester  to  the  truth  to  be  established.  When  Elijah  declared  that
Jehovah  was  God,  and  Baal  a  lie,  he  said,  "  The  God  that  an-
swereth  by  fire,  let  him  be  God."  The  descent  of  the  fire  was
the  testimony  of  God  to  the  truth  of  the  prophet's  declaration.
So  in  the  New  Testament  God  is  said  to  have  borne  witness  to
the  trutli  of  the  Gospel  by  signs,  and  wonders,  and  divers  mira-
cles, and  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (Heb.  ii.  4)  ;  and  the  Spirit  of
God  is  said  to  witness  with  our  spirits  that  we  are  the  children  of
God  (Rom.  viii.  16).  The  word  in  these  cases  is  fxaprvpiu),  to
testify.  This  is  not  a  lax  or  improper  use  of  the  word  testi-
mony ;  for  an  affirmation  is  testimony  only  because  it  pledges  the
authority  of  him  who  makes  it  to  the  truth.  And  therefore
whatever  pledges  that  authority,  is  as  truly  of  the  nature  of  tes-
timony, as  an  affirmation.  When,  therefore,  it  is  said  that  faith
is  founded  on  testimony,  it  is  meant  that  it  is  not  founded  on
sense,  reason,  or  feehiig,  but  on  the  authority  of  him  by  whom  it
is  authenticated.

Proof  from  the  G-eneral  Use  of  the  Word.

That  such  is  the  foundation  and  the  distinctive  characteristic
of  faith,  may  be  argued,  — 1.  From  the  general  use  of  the  word.
We  are  said  to  know  what  we  see  or  can  prove  ;  and  to  believe
what  we  regard  as  true  on  the  authority  of  others.  This  is  ad-
mitted to  be  true  of  what  is  called  historical  faith.  This  includes
a  great  deal ;  all  that  is  recorded  of  the  past ;  all  that  is  true  of
present  actualities,  which  does  not  fall  within  the  sphere  of  our
personal  observation' ;  all  the  facts  of  science  as  received  by  the
masses ;  and  almost  all  the  contents  of  the  Bible,  whether  of  the
Old  or  of  the  New  Testament.  The  Scriptures  are  a  record  of
the  history  of  the  creation,  of  the  fall,  and  of  redemption.  The
Old  Testament  is  the  history  of  the  preparatory  steps  of  this  re-
demption. The  New  Testament  is  a  history  of  the  fulfilment
of  the  promises  and  types  of  the  Old  in  the  incarnation,  life,  suf-


^4  PART  m.   ch.  xvl  — faith.

ferings,  death,  and  resurrectiou  of  the  Son  of  God.  Whoever
believes  this  record  has  set  to  his  seal  that  God  is  true,  and  is  a
child  of  God.

Proof  from  Consciousness.

2.  In  the  second  place,  consciousness  teaches  us  that  such  is
the  nature  of  faith  not  only  when  historical  facts  are  its  objects,
but  when  propositions  are  the  things  believed.  The  two  indeed
are  often  inseparable.  That  God  is  the  creator  of  the  world,  is
both  a  fact  and  a  doctrine.  It  is  as  the  Apostle  says,  a  matter  of
faith.  We  believe  on  the  authority  of  the  Scriptures,  which  de-
clare that  "  In  the  beginning  God  created  the  heaven  and  the
earth."  That  God  set  forth  his  Son  to  be  a  propitiation  for  our
sins,  is  a  doctrine.  It  rests  solely  on  the  authority  of  God.  We
receive  it  upon  his  testimony.  So  with  all  the  great  doctrines  of
grace ;  of  regeneration,  of  justification,  of  sanctification,  and  of  a
future  life.  How  do  we  know  that  God  will  accept  all  who  be-
lieve in  Christ  ?  Who  can  know  the  things  of  God,  save  the
Spirit  of  God,  and  he  to  whom  the  Spirit  shall  reveal  them  (1
Cor.  ii.  10,  11)  ?  From  the  nature  of  the  case,  "  the  things  of
the  Spirit,"  the  thoughts  and  purposes  of  God,  can  be  kno■v\^l
only  by  revelation,  and  they  can  be  received  only  on  the  author-
ity of  God.     They  are  objects  neither  of  sense  nor  of  reason.

Proof  from  Scripture.

3.  It  is  the  uniform  teaching  of  the  Bible  that  faith  is  founded
on  the  testimony  or  authority  of  God.

The  first  proof  of  this  is  the  fact  that  the  Scriptm-es  come
to  us  under  the  form  of  a  revelation  of  things  we  could  not
otherwise  know.  The  prophets  of  the  Old  Testament  were
messengers,  the  mouth  of  God,  to  declare  what  the  people  were
to  believe  and  what  they  were  to  do.  The  New  Testament  is
called  "  The  testimony  of  Jesus."  Christ  came,  not  as  a  philos-
opher, but  as  a  witness.  He  said  to  Nicodemus,  "  We  speak
that  we  do  know,  and  testify  that  we  have  seen ;  and  ye  receive
not  our  witness."    (John  iii.  11).     "  He  that  cometh  from  above

is  above  all And  what  he  hath  seen -and  heard,  that  he

testifieth ;  and  no  man  receiveth  his  testimony.  He  that  hath
received  liis  testimony  hath  set  to  his  seal  that  God  is  true  "
(verses  31-33).  In  like  manner  the  Apostles  were  witnesses.
As  such  they  were  ordained  (Luke  xxiv.  48).  After  his  resur-
rection, and  immediately  before  his  ascension,  our  Lord  said  to
them,    "  Ye  shall  receive  power,  after  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is


§2.]  ITS  PSYCHOLOGICAL  NATURE.  65

come  upon  jyn  :  and  ye  shall  be  witnesses  unto  me,  both  in
Jerusalem,  and  in  all  Judea,  and  in  Samaria,  and  unto  the
uttermost  part  of  the  earth."  (Acts  i.  8).  When  they  de-
clared the  death  and  resurrection  of  Christ,  as  facts  to  be  be-
lieved, they  said,  "  Whereof  Ave  are  witnesses "  (Acts  ii.  32,
iii.  15,  V.  32).  In  this  last  passage  the  Apostles  say  they  were
witnesses  not  only  of  the  fact  of  Christ's  resurrection  but  that
God  had  "  exalted  "  Him  "  with  his  right  hand  to  be  a  prince
and  a  saviour,  for  to  give  repentance  to  Israel,  and  forgiveness
of  sins."  See  Acts  x.  39-43,  where  it  is  said,  "  He  commanded
us  to  preach  mito  the  people,  and  to  testify  that  it  is  he  Avliich
was  ordained  of  God  to  be  the  judge  of  quick  and  dead.  To  him
give  all  the  prophets  witness,  that  thi^ough  his  name  whosoever
believeth  in  him  shall  receive  remission  of  sins."

The  great  complaint  against  the  Apostles,  especially  in  the
Grecian  cities,  was  that  they  did  not  present  their  doctrines  as
propositions  to  be  proved ;  they  did  not  even  state  the  philosoph-
ical gTOunds  on  which  they  rested,  or  attempt  to  sustain  them  at
the  bar  of  reason.  The  answer  given  to  this  objection  by  St.
Paul  is  twofold  :  First,  that  philosophy,  the  wisdom  of  men,
had  proved  itself  utterly  incompetent  to  solve  the  great  problems
of  God  and  the  universe,  of  sin  and  redemj)tion.  It  was  in  fact
neither  more  nor  less  than  foolishness,  so  far  as  all  its  specula-
tions as  to  the  things  of  God  were  concerned.  Secondly,  that  the
doctrines  which  He  taught  were  not  the  truths  of  reason,  but
matters  of  revelation  ;  to  be  received  not  on  rational  or  philo-
sophical grounds,  but  upon  the  authority  of  God  ;  that  they,  the
Apostles,  were  not  philosophers,  but  witnesses  ;  that  they  did  not
argue  using  the  words  of  man's  wisdom,  but  that  they  simply
declared  the  counsels  of  God,  and  that  faith  in  their  doctrines
was  to  rest  not  on  the  wisdom  of  men,  but  on  the  powerful  testi-
mony of  God.

The  second  proof,  that  the  Scriptures  teach  that  faith  is  the
reception  of  truth  on  the  ground  of  testimony  or  on  the  author-
ity of  God,  is,  that  the  thing  which  we  are  commanded  to  do,  is
to  receive  the  record  which  God  has  given  of  his  Son.  This  is
faith ;  receiving  as  true  what  God  has  testified,  and  because  He
has  testified  it.  "He  that  believeth  not  God  hath  made  him  a
liar ;  because  he  believeth  not  the  record  that  God  gave  of  his

Son."       The  Greek  here  is,  ov  n^TTLcnevKev   eU  rip'  /j-aprvptav  rjv  fxejiap-

TvprjKiv  b  0€os  T7ep\  tov  vlov  avrov,  "  believeth  uot  the  testimony  which
God  testified  concerning  his  Son."     "  And  this  is  the  testimony,


66  PART  ni.    Ch.  XVI.— faith.

(17  fiaprvpia)  that  God  hath  given  to  us  eternal  life,  and  this  life  is
in  his  Son  "  (1  John  v.  10,  11).  There  could  hardly  be  a  more
distinct  statement  of  the  Scriptural  doctrine  as  to  the  nature  of
faith.  Its  object  is  what  God  has  revealed.  Its  ground  is  the
testimony  of  God.  To  receive  that  testimony,  is  to  set  to  our
seal  that  God  is  true.  To  reject  it,  is  to  make  God  a  liar.  "  If
we  receive  the  witness  of  men,  the  witness  of  God  is  greater :  for
this  is  the  witness  of  God  which  he  hath  testified  of  his  son."

Such  is  the  constant  teaching  of  Scripture.  The  ground  on
which  we  are  authorized  and  commanded  to  believe  is,  not  the
conformity  of  the  truth  revealed  to  our  reason,  nor  its  effect  upon
our  feelings,  nor  its  meeting  the  necessities  of  our  nature  and  con-
dition, but  simply,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord."  The  truths  of  reve-
lation do  commend  themselves  to  the  reason  ;  they  do  powerfully
and  rightfully  affect  our  feelings  ;  they  do  meet  all  the  necessities
of  our  natm^e  as  creatures  and  as  sinners ;  and  these  considerations
may  incline  us  to  believe,  may  strengthen  our  faith,  lead  us  to
cherish  it,  and  render  it  joyful  and  effective  ;  but  they  are  not  its
ground.     We  believe  on  the  testimony  or  authority  of  God.

It  is  objected  to  this  view  that  we  believe  the  Bible  to  be  the
Word  of  God  on  other  ground  than  testimony.  The  fulfilment
of  prophecies,  the  miracles  of  its  authors,  its  contents,  and  the
effects  which  it  produces,  are  rational  grounds  for  believing  it  to
be  from  God.  To  this  objection  two  answers  may  be  made  :  First,
that  supernatural  occurrences,  such  as  prophecies  and  miracles,
are  some  of  the  forms  in  which  the  divine  testimony  is  given.
Paul  says  that  God  bears  "  witness  both  Avith  signs  and  wonders  "
(Hebrews  ii.  4).  And,  secondly,  that  the  proxunate  end  of  these
manifestations  of  supernatural  foresight  and  power  was  to  authen-
ticate the  divine  mission  of  the  messengers  of  God.  This  being
established,  the  people  were  called  upon  to  receive  their  message
and  to  believe  on  the  authority  of  God,  by  whom  they  were  sent.

The  third  proof,  that  the  Scriptures  teach  that  faith  is  a  re-
ception of  truth  on  the  ground  of  testimony,  is  found  in  the
examples  and  illustrations  of  faith  given  in  the  Scriptures.  Im-
mediately after  the  fall  the  promise  was  made  to  our  first  parents
that  the  seed  of  the  woman  should  bruise  the  serpent's  head.  On
what  possible  ground  could  faith  in  this  promise  rest  exce^Dt  on
the  authority  of  God.  When  Noah  was  warned  of  God  of  the
coming  deluge,  and  commanded  to  prepare  the  ark,  he  believed,
not  because  he  saw  the  signs  of  the  approaching  flood,  not  be-
cause liis  moral  judgment  assured  him  that  a  just  God  would  in


§3.]  DIFFERENT  KINDS    OF   FAITH.  67

that  way  avenge  his  violated  law  ;  but  simply  on  the  testimony
of  God.  Thus  when  God  promised  to  Abraham  the  possession  of
the  land  of  Canaan,  that  he,  a  childless  old  man,  should  become
the  father  of  many  nations,  that  through  his  seed  all  the  nations  of
the  earth  should  be  blessed,  his  faith  could  have  no  other  founda-
tion than  the  authority  of  God.  So  of  every  illustration  of  faith
given  by  the  Apostle  in  the  eleventh  chapter  of  his  epistle  to  the
Hebrews.  The  same  is  true  of  the  whole  Bible.  We  have  no
foundation  for  our  faith  in  a  spiritual  world,  in  the  heaven  and
hell  described  in  Scriptvire,  in  the  doctrines  of  redemption,  in  the
security  and  ultimate  triumph  of  the  Church  other  than  the  testi-
mony of  God.  If  faith  does  not  rest  on  testimony  it  has  nothing
on  which  to  rest.  Paul  tells  us  that  the  whole  Gospel  rests  on
the  fact  of  Christ's  resurrection  from  the  dead.  If  Christ  be  not
risen  our  faith  is  vain,  and  we  are  yet  in  our  sins.  But  our  assur-
ance that  Christ  rose  on  the  third  day  rests  solely  upon  the  testi-
mony which  God  in  various  ways  has  given  to  that  fact.

This  is  a  point  of  great  practical  importance.  If  faith,  or  our
persuasion  of  the  truths  of  the  Bible,  rests  on  philosophical
grounds,  then  the  door  is  opened  for  rationalism  ;  if  it  rests  on
feeling,  then  it  is  open  to  mysticism.  The  only  sure,  and  the  only
satisfying  foundation  is  the  testimony  of  God,  who  cannot  err,
and  who  will  not  deceive.

Faith  may,  therefore,  be  defined  to  be  the  persuasion  of  the
truth  founded  on  testimony.  The  faith  of  the  Christian  is  the
persuasion  of  the  truth  of  the  facts  and  doctrines  recorded  in
the  Scriptures  on  the  testimony  of  God.

§  3.  Different  Kinds  of  Faith.

Though  the  definition  above  given  be  accepted,  it  is  to  be  ad-
mitted that  there  are  different  kinds  of  faith.  In  other  words,
the  state  of  mind  which  the  word  designates  is  very  different  in
one  case  from  what  it  is  in  others.  This  difference  arises  partly
from  the  nature  of  its  objects,  and  partly  from  the  nature  or  form
of  the  testimony  on  which  it  is  founded.  Faith  in  a  historical
fact  or  speculative  truth  is  one  thing;  faith  in  aesthetic  truth
another  thing ;  faith  in  moral  truth  another  thing  ;  faith  in  spir-
itual truth,  and  especially  faith  in  the  promise  of  salvation  made
to  ourselves  another  thing.  That  is,  the  state  of  mind  denomi-
nated faith  is  very  different  in  any  one  of  these  cases  from  what
it  is  in  the  others.  Again,  the  testimony  which  God  bears  to  the
truth  is  of  different  kinds.     In  one  form  it  is  directed  especially


68  PART  in.   Ch.  xvl  — faith.

to  the  understanding ;  in  another  to  the  conscience ;  in  another
to  our  regenerated  nature.  This  is  the  cause  of  the  difference
between  speculative,  temporary,  and  saving  faith.

Speculative  or  Dead  Faith.

There  are  many  men  who  beheve  the  Bible  to  be  the  Word  of
God ;  who  receive  all  that  it  teaches  ;  and  who  are  perfectly  or-
thodox in  their  doctrinal  belief.  If  asked  why  they  believe,  they
may  be  at  a  loss  for  an  answer.  Reflection  might  enable  them
to  say  they  believe  because  others  believe.  They  receive  their
faith  by  inheritance.  They  were  taught  from  their  earliest  years
thus  to  believe.  The  Church  to  which  they  belong  inculcates
this  faith,  and  it  is  enjoined  upon  them  as  true  and  necessary.
Others  of  greater  culture  may  say  that  the  evidence  of  the  divine
origin  of  the  Bible,  both  external  and  internal,  satisfies  their
minds,  and  produces  a  rational  conviction  that  the  Scriptures  are
a  revelation  from  God,  and  they  receive  its  contents  on  his  au-
thority. Such  a  faith  as  this,  experience  teaches,  is  perfectly
compatible  with  a  worldly  or  wicked  life.  This  is  what  the
Bible  calls  a  dead  faith.

Temporary  Faith.

Again,  nothing  is  more  common  than  for  the  Gospel  to  produce
a  temporary  impression,  more  or  less  deep  and  lasting.  Those
thus  impressed  believe.  But,  having  no  root  in  themselves,
sooner  or  later  they  fall  away.  It  is  also  a  common  experience
that  men  utterly  indifferent  or  even  skeptical,  in  times  of  danger,
or  on  the  near  approach  of  death,  are  deeply  convinced  of  the
certainty  of  those  religious  truths  previously  kno^\^l,  but  hitherto
disregarded  or  rejected.  This  temporary  faith  is  due  to  common
grace  ;  that  is,  to  those  influences  of  the  Spirit  common  in  a
measure  greater  or  less  to  all  men,  which  operate  on  the  soul
without  renewing  it,  and  which  reveal  the  truth  to  the  conscience
and  cause  it  to  produce  conviction.

Saving  Faith.

That  faith  which  secures  eternal  life ;  which  unites  us  to  Christ
as  living  members  of  his  body  ;  which  makes  us  the  sons  of  God  ;
which  interests  us  in  all  the  benefits  of  redemption  ;  which  works
by  love,  and  is  fruitful  in  good  works  ;  is  founded,  not  on  the
external  or  the  moral  evidence  of  the  truth,  but  on  the  testimony
of  the  Spirit  with  and  by  the  truth  to  the  renewed  soul.


§8.]  DIFFERENT  KINDS   OF  FAITH.  69

What  is  meant  hy  the  Testimony  of  the  Spirit.

It  is  necessary,  before  going  further,  to  determine  what  is
meant  by  the  testimony  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  said  to  be  the
ground  of  saving  faith.

God,  or  the  Spirit  of  God,  testifies  to  tlie  truth  of  the  Scrip-
tures and  of  the  doctrines  which  they  contain.  This  testimony,
as  has  been  seen,  is  partly  external,  consisting  in  prophecies  and
miracles,  partly  in  the  nature  of  the  truths  themselves  as  related
to  the  intellectual  and  moral  elements  of  the  soul,  and  partly
special  and  supernatural.  Unrenewed  men  may  feel  the  power
of  the  two  former  kinds  of  testimony,  and  believe  with  a  faith
either  merely  intellectual  and  speculative,  or  with  what  may  be
called  from  its  ground,  a  moral  faith,  which  is  only  temporary.
The  spiritual  form  of  testimony  is  confined  to  the  regenerated.
It  is,  of  com'se,  inscrutable.  The  operations  of  the  Spirit  do  not
reveal  themselves  in  the  consciousness  otherwise  than  by  their
effects.  We  know  that  men  are  born  of  the  Spirit,  that  the
Spirit  dwells  in  the  people  of  God  and  continually  influences
their  thoughts,  feelings,  and  actions.  But  we  know  this  only  from
the  teaching  of  the  Bible,  not  because  we  are  conscious  of  his
operations.  "  The  "vvind  bloweth  where  it  listeth,  and  thou  hear-
est  the  sound  thereof,  but  canst  not  tell  whence  it  cometh,  and
whither  it  goetli:  so  is  every  one  that  is  born  of  the  Spirit."
(John  iii.  8.)

This  witness  of  the  Spirit  is  not  an  afiirmation  that  the  Bible
is  the  Word  of  God.  Neither  is  it  the  production  of  a  blind,  un-
intelligent conviction  of  that  fact.  It  is  not,  as  is  the  case  with
himian  testimony,  addressed  from  without  to  the  mind,  but  it  is
within  the  mind  itself.  It  is  an  influence  designed  to  produce
faith.  It  is  called  a  witness  or  testimony  because  it  is  so  called
in  Scripture  ;  and  because  it  has  the  essential  nature  of  testimony,
inasmuch  as  it  is  the  pledge  of  the  authority  of  God  in  support
of  the  truth.

The  effects  of  this  inward  testimony  are,  (1.)  What  the  Scrip-
tures call  "  spiritual  discernment."  This  means  two  things:  A
discernment  due  to  the  influence  of  the  Spirit ;  and  a  discernment
not  only  of  the  truth,  but  also  of  the  hoHness,  excellence,  and
glory  of  the  things  discerned.  The  word  spiritual,  in  this  sense,
means  conformed  to  the  nature  of  the  Spirit.  Hence  the  law  is
said  to  be  spiritual,  i.  e.,  holy,  just,  and  good.  (2.)  A  second
effect  flowing  necessarily  from  the  one  just  mentioned  is  delight


70  PART  m.   Ch.  XVI.  — faith.

and  complacenc}^,  or  love.  (3.)  The  apprehension  of  the  suit-
ableness of  the  truths  revealed,  to  our  nature  and  necessities.
(4.)  The  firm  conviction  that  these  things  are  not  only  true,  but
divine.  (5.)  The  fruits  of  this  conviction,  {.  e.,  of  the  faith  thus
produced,  good  works,  —  holiness  of  heart  and  life.

When,  therefore,  a  Christian  is  asked,  Why  he  believes  the
Scriptures  and  the  doctrines  therein  contained,  his  simple  answer
is,  On  the  testimony  or  authority  of  God.  How  else  could  he
know  that  the  worlds  were  created  by  God,  that  our  race  aposta-
tized from  God,  that  He  sent  his  Son  for  our  redemption,  that
faith  in  Him  will  secure  salvation.  Faith  in  such  truths  can  have
no  other  foundation  than  the  testimony  of  God.  If  asked.  How
God  testifies  to  the  truth  of  the  Bible  ?  If  an  educated  man
whose  attention  has  been  called  to  the  subject,  he  will  answer,
In  every  conceivable  way  :  by  signs,  wonders,  and  miracles ;  by
the  exhibition  which  the  Bible  makes  of  di\ane  knowledge,  excel-
lence, authority,  and  power.  If  an  uneducated  man,  he  may
simply  say,  "  Whereas  I  was  blind,  now  I  see."  Such  a  man,
and  indeed  every  true  Christian,  passes  from  a  state  of  unbelief
to  one  of  saving  faith,  not  by  unj  process  of  research  or  argument,
but  of  inward  experience.  The  change  may,  and  often  does,  take
place  in  a  moment.  The  faith  of  a  Christian  in  the  Bible  is,  as
before  remarked,  analogous  to  that  which  all  men  have  in  the
moral  law,  wliich  they  recognize  not  only  as  truth,  but  as  having
the  authority  of  God.  What  the  natural  man  perceives  with
regard  to  the  moral  law  the  renewed  man  is  enabled  to  perceive
in  regard  to  "the  things  of  the  Spirit,"  by  the  testimony  of  that
Spirit  with  and  by  the  truth  to  his  heart.

Proof  from  Express  Declarations  of  Scripture.

1.  That  this  is  the  Scriptural  doctrine  on  the  subject  is  plain
from  the  express  declarations  of  the  Scriptures.  Our  Lord  prom-
ised to  send  the  Spirit  for  this  very  purpose.  "  He  will  reprove
the  world  of  sin,"  especially  of  the  sin  of  not  believing  in  Christ ;
"  and  of  righteousness,"  that  is,  of  his  righteousness,  —  the  right-
fulness of  his  claims  to  be  regarded  and  received  as  the  Son  of
God,  God  manifest  in  the  flesh,  and  the  Saviour  of  the  world ;
*'and  of  judgment,"  that  is,  of  the  final  overthrow  of  the  kingdom
of  darkness  and  triumph  of  the  kingdom  of  light.  (John  xvi.  8.)
Faith,  therefore,  is  always  represented  in  Scripture  as  one  of  the
fruits  of  the  Spirit,  as  the  gift  of  God,  as  the  product  of  his  en-
^^'gy  ('^'^'^^^5  T^«  ei'tpyetas  tou  ©cou)  (Colossians  ii.  12).     Men  are


§3.]  DIFFERENT   KINDS   OF   FAITH.  71

said  to  believe  in  virtue  of  the  same  power  which  wrought  in
Christ,  when  God  raised  Him  from  the  dead.  (Eph  i.  19,  20.)
The  Apostle  Paul  elaborately  sets  forth  the  ground  of  faith  in
the  second  chapter  of  First  Corinthians.  He  declares  that  he
relied  for  success  not  on  the  enticing  Avords  of  man's  wisdom,  but
on  the  demonstration  of  the  Spirit,  in  order  that  the  faith  of  the
people  might  rest  not  on  the  wisdom  of  men,  but  on  the  power  of
God.  Faith  was  not  to  rest  on  argument,  on  historical  or  philo-
sophical proof,  but  on  the  testimony  of  the  Spirit.  The  Spirit
demonstrates  the  truth  to  the  mind,  ^.  g.,  produces  the  conviction
that  it  is  truth,  and  leads  the  soul  to  embrace  it  with  assurance
and  delight.  Passages  have  already  been  quoted  which  teach
that  faith  rests  on  the  testimony  of  God,  and  that  unbelief  con-
sists in  rejecting  that  testimony.  The  testimony  of  God  is  given
through  the  Spirit,  whose  office  it  is  to  take  of  the  things  of
Christ  and  show  them  unto  us.  The  Apostle  John  tells  his  read-
ers,  "  Ye  have  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One,  and  ye  know  all

things The    anointing  which    ye   have   received  of  him

abideth  in  you  :  and  ye  need  not  that  any  man  teach  you  :  but
as  the  same  anointing  teacheth  you  of  all  things,  and  is  truth,
and  is  no  lie,  and  even  as  it  hath  taught  you,  ye  shall  abide  in
him."  (1  John  ii.  20,  27.)  This  passage  teaches,  (1.)  That
true  believers  receive  from  Christ  (the  Holy  One)  an  unction.
(2.)  That  this  unction  is  the  Holy  Ghost.  (3.)  That  it  secures
the  knowledge  and  conviction  of  the  truth.  (4.)  That  this  in-
ward teaching  which  makes  them  believers  is  abiding,  and  secures
them  from  apostasy.

1  Corinthians  ii.  14.

Equally  explicit  is  the  passage  in  1  Corinthians  ii.  14,  "  The
natm^al  man  receiveth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God  ;  for
they  are  foolishness  unto  him  :  neither  can  he  know  them,  because
they  are  spiritually  discerned.  But  he  that  is  spiritual  judgeth
all  things,  yet  he  himself  is  judged  of  no  man."  The  things  of  the
Spirit,  are  the  things  which  the  Spirit  has  revealed.  Concerning
these  things,  it  is  taught :  (1.)  that  the  natural  or  unrenewed  man
does  not  receive  them.  (2.)  That  the  spiritual  man,  i.  e.,  the
man  in  whom  the  Spirit  dwells,  does  receive  them.  (3.)  That
the  reason  of  this  difference  is  that  the  former  has  not,  and  that
the  latter  has,  spiritual  discernment.  (4.)  This  spiritual  dis-
cernment is  the  apprehension  of  the  truth  and  excellence  of  the
things  discerned.    (5.)  It  is  spiritual,  as  just  stated,  both  because


72  PART  III.    Ch.  XVI.  — faith.

due  to  the  operation  of  tlie  Spirit,  and  because  the  conformity  oi
tlie  truths  discerned  to  the  nature  of  the  Spirit,  is  apprehended.

When  Peter  confessed  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ  the  Son  oi
the  Uving  God,  om-  Lord  said,  "  Blessed  art  thou,  Simon  Bar-
jona :  for  flesh  and  blood  hath  not  revealed  it  unto  thee,  but  my
Father  which  is  in  heaven."  (Matt.  xvi.  17.)  Other  men  had
the  same  external  evidence  of  the  divinity  of  Christ  that  Peter
had.  His  faith  was  due  not  to  that  evidence  alone,  but  to  the
inward  testimony  of  God.  Om^  Lord  rendered  thanks  that  God
had  hidden  the  mysteries  of  his  kingdom  from  the  wise  and  pru-
dent and  revealed  them  unto  babes.  (Matt.  xi.  25.)  The  ex-
ternal revelation  was  made  to  both  classes.  Besides  this  external
revelation,  those  called  babes  received  an  inward  testimony  which
made  them  believers.  Hence  our  Lord  said,  No  man  can  come
unto  me  except  he  be  di-awn  or  taught  of  God.  (John  vi.  44,  45.)
The  Apostle  tells  us  that  the  same  Gospel,  the  same  objective
truths,  with  the  same  external  and  rational  evidence,  which  was
an  offence  to  the  Jew  and  foolishness  to  the  Greek,  was  to  the
called  the  wisdom  and  the  power  of  God.  Why  this  difference  ?
Not  the  superior  knowledge  or  greater  excellence  of  the  called,
but  the  inward  di\dne  influence,  the  kXtjo-k;,  of  which  they  were
the  subjects.  Paul's  instantaneous  conversion  is  not  to  be  referred
to  any  rational  process  of  argument ;  nor  to  his  moral  suceptibility
to  the  truth  ;  nor  to  the  visible  manifestation  of  Christ,  for  no
miracle,  no  outward  light  or  splendour  could  change  the  heart  and
transform  the  whole  character  in  a  moment.  It  was,  as  the
Apostle  himself  tells  us  (Gal.  i.  15, 16),  the  inward  revelation  of
Christ  to  liim  by  the  special  grace  of  God.  It  was  the  testimony
of  the  Spirit,  which  being  inward  and  supernatural,  enabled
him  to  see  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ.  The
Psahnist  prayed  that  God  Avould  open  his  eyes  that  he  might  see
wondrous  things  out  of  his  law.  The  Apostle  prayed  for  the
Ephesians  that  God  would  give  them  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  the
eyes  of  their  souls  might  be  opened,  that  they  might  know  the
things  freely  given  to  them  of  God.  (Eph.  i.  17,  18.)  Every-
where in  the  Bible  the  fact  that  any  one  believes  is  referred  not
to  his  subjective  state,  but  to  the  work  of  the  Spirit  on  his  heart.

Proof  from  tlie  Way  the  Apostles  acted.

2.  As  the  Scriptures  thus  expressly  teach  that  the  ground  of
true  or  saving  faith  is  the  inward  witness  of  the  Spirit,  the  Apos-
tles always  acted  on  that  principle.     They  announced  the  truth,


§  3.]  DIFFERENT  KINDS   OF   FAITH.  73

and  demanded  its  instant  reception,  under  the  paiii  of  eternal
death.  Our  Lord  did  the  same.  "  He  that  believeth  not  is  con-
demned ah-eady,  because  he  hath  not  believed  in  the  name  of  the
only  begotten  Son  of  God."  (John  iii.  18.)  Immediate  faith
was  demanded.  Bemg  demanded  by  Christ,  and  at  his  command
by  the  Apostles,  that  demand  must  be  just  and  reasonable.  It
could,  however,  be  neither  unless  the  evidence  of  the  truth  at-
tended it.  That  evidence  could  not  be  the  external  proofs  of  the
divinity  of  Clirist  and  his  Gospel,  for  those  proofs  were  present  to
the  minds  of  comparatively  few  of  the  hearers  of  the  Gospel ;  nor
could  it  be  rational  proof  or  philosophical  arguments,  for  still
fewer  could  appreciate  such  evidence,  and  if  they  could  it  would
avail  nothing  to  the  production  of  saving  faith.  The  evidence  of
truth,  to  which  assent  is  demanded  by  God  the  moment  it  is  an-
nounced, must  be  in  the  truth  itself.  And  if  this  assent  be  obli-
gatory, and  dissent  or  unbelief  a  sin,  then  the  evidence  must  be  of
a  nature,  to  which  a  corrupt  state  of  the  soul  renders  a  man  in-
sensible. "  If  our  gospel  be  hid,"  says  the  Ajiostle,  "  it  is  hid  to
them  that  are  lost :  in  whom  the  God  of  this  world  hath  blinded
the  minds  of  them  which  believe  not,  lest  the  light  of  the  glorious
gospel   of  Christ,  who  is  the  image  of  God,  should  shine  unto

them [But]    God,  who  commanded  the    light   to    shine

out  of  darkness,  hath  shined  in  our  hearts,  to  give  the  light  of  the
knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ."  (2
Cor.  iv.  3-6.)  It  is  here  taught,  (1.)  That  wherever  and  when-
ever Christ  is  preached,  the  evidence  of  his  divinity  is  presented.
The  glory  of  God  shines  in  his  face.  (2.)  That  if  any  man  fails
to  see  it,  it  is  because  the  God  of  this  world  hath  blinded  his
eyes.  (3.)  That  if  any  do  perceive  it  and  believe,  it  is  because
of  an  inward  illumination  produced  by  Him  who  first  commanded
the  light  to  shine  out  of  darkness.

Proof  from  the  Practice  in  the  Church.

3.  As  Christ  and  the  Apostles  acted  on  this  principle,  so  have
all  faithful  ministers  and  missionaries  from  that  day  to  this.
They  do  not  expect  to  convince  and  convert  men  by  historical
evidence  or  by  philosophical  arguments.  They  depend  on  the
demonstration  of  the  Spirit.

Proof  from  Analogy.

4.  This  doctrine,  that  the  true  and  immediate  ground  of  faith
in  the  things  of  the  Spirit  is  the  testimony  of  the  Spirit,  produ-


74  PART   IIT.     Cii.   XVI.  — FAITH.

cing  spiritual  discernment,  is  sustained  by  analogy.  If  a  man
cannot  see  the  splendour  of  the  sun,  it  is  because  he  is  blind.  If
he  cannot  perceive  the  beauties  of  nature  and  of  art,  it  is  because
he  has  no  taste.  If  he  cannot  apprehend  "  the  concord  of  sweet
sounds,"  it  is  because  he  has  not  a  musical  ear.  If  he  cannot  see
the  beauty  of  virtue,  or  the  divine  authority  of  the  moral  law,  it
is  because  his  moral  sense  is  blunted.  If  he  cannot  see  the  glory
of  God  in  his  works  and  in  his  Word,  it  is  because  his  religious
nature  is  perverted.  And  in  like  manner,  if  he  cannot  see  the
glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ,  it  is  because  the  god  of
this  world  has  blinded  his  eyes.

No  one  excuses  the  man  who  can  see  no  excellence  in  virtue,
and  who  repudiates  the  authority  of  the  moral  law.  The  Bible
and  the  instinctive  judgment  of  men,  condemn  the  atheist.  In  like
manner  the  Scriptures  pronounce  accursed  all  who  do  not  believe
that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  the  Son  of  the  living  God.  This  is  the
denial  of  supreme  excellence  ;  the  rejection  of  the  clearest  mani-
festation of  God  ever  made  to  man.  The  solemn  judgment  of
God  is,  "  If  any  man  love  not  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  let  him  be
anathema  marahatha."  (1  Cor.  xvi.  22.)  In  tliis  judgment  the
whole  intelligent  universe  will  ultimately  acquiesce.

Faith  in  the  Scriptures,  therefore,  is  founded  on  the  testimony
of  God.  By  testimony,  as  before  stated,  is  meant  attestation,
anything  which  pledges  the  authority  of  the  attester  in  support
of  the  truth  to  be  established.  As  this  testimony  is  of  different
kinds,  so  the  faith  which  it  produces,  is  also  different.  So  far  as
the  testimony  is  merely  external,  the  faith  it  produces  is  simply
historical  or  speculative.  So  far  as  the  testimony  is  moral,  con-
sisting in  the  power  which  the  Spirit  gives  to  the  truth  over  the
natural  conscience,  the  faith  is  temporary,  depending  on  the  state
of  mind  which  is  its  proximate  cause.  Besides  these,  there  is  the
inward  testimony  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  of  such  a  nature  and  of
such  power  as  to  produce  a  perfect  revolution  in  the  soul,  com-
pared in  Scripture  to  that  effected  by  opening  the  eyes  of  the
blind  to  the  reality,  the  wonders,  and  glories  of  creation.  There
is,  therefore,  all  the  difference  between  a  faith  resting  on  this
inward  testimony  of  the  Spirit,  and  mere  speculative  faith,  that
there  is  between  the  conviction  a  blind  man  has  of  the  beauties  of
nature,  before  and  after  the  opening  of  his  eyes.  As  this  testi-
mony is  informing,  enabling  the  soul  to  see  the  truth  and  excel-
lence of  the  "  things  of  the  Spirit,"  so  far  as  the  consciousness
of  the  believer  is  concerned,  his  faith  is  a  form  of  knowledge.
He  sees  to  be  true,  what  the  S]iirit  reveals  and  authenticates.


§4.]  FAITH   AND   KNOWLEDGE.  75

§  4.  Faith  a?id  Knowledge.
The  relation  of  faith  to  knowledge  is  a  wide  field.  The  dis-
cussions on  the  subject  have  been  varied  and  endless.  There  is
little  probability  that  the  points  at  issue  will  ever  be  settled  to
the  satisfaction  of  all  parties.  The  ground  of  faith  is  authority.
The  ground  of  knowledge  is  sense  or  reason.  We  are  concerned
here  only  Avith  Christian  faith,  i.  e.,  the  faith  which  receives  the
Scriptures  as  the  Word  of  God  and  all  they  teach  as  true  on  his
authority.

7s  a  Supernatural  Revelation  needed  ?

The  first  question  is,  Whether  there  is  any  need  of  a  supernat-
ural revelation,  whether  human  reason  be  not  competent  to
discover  and  to  authenticate  all  needful  truth.  This  question
has  already  been  considered  under  the  head  of  Rationahsm,
where  it  was  shown,  (1.)  That  every  man's  consciousness  tells
him  that  there  are  questions  co/icerning  God  and  his  own  origin
and  destiny,  which  his  reason  cannot  answer.  (2.)  That  he
knows  a  prioi'i^  that  the  reason  of  no  other  man  can  satisfactorily
answer  them.  (3.)  That  he  knows  from  experience  that  they
never  have  been  answered  by  the  -wisdom  of  men,  and  (4.)  That
the  Scriptures  declare  that  the  world  by  wisdom  knows  not  God  ;
that  the  wisdom  of  the  world  is  foolishness  in  his  estimation,  and
that  God  has  therefore  himself  made  known  truths  undiscovera-
ble  by  reason,  for  the  salvation  of  man.

Must  the  Truths  of  Revelation  he  Demonstrable  hy  Reason  ?

A  second  question  is,  Whether  truths,  supernaturally  revealed,
must  be  able  to  authenticate  themselves  at  the  bar  of  reason  be-
fore they  can  be  rationally  received  ;  so  that  they  are  received,
not  on  the  ground  of  authority,  but  of  rational  proof.  This  also
has  been  previously  discussed.  It  has  been  shown  that  the  as-
sumption that  God  can  reveal  nothing  which  human  reason  can-
not, when  known,  demonstrate  to  be  true,  assumes  that  human
reason  is  the  measure  of  all  truth  ;  that  there  is  no  intelligence
in  the  universe  higher  than  that  of  man  ;  and  that  God  cannot
have  purposes  and  plans,  the  grounds  or  reasons  of  which  we  are
not  competent  to  discover  and  appreciate.  It  emancipates  the
soul  from  the  authority  of  God,  refusing  to  beheve  anything  ex-
cept on  the  authority  of  reason.  Why  may  we  not  believe  on  the
testimony  of  God  that  there  is  a  spiritual  world,  as  well  as  be-


76  PART  m.    Ch.  XVI.— faith.

lieve  that  there  is  such  a  nation  as  the  Chinese  on  the  testimony
of  men  ?  No  man  acts  on  the  principle  of  beheving  only  what
he  can  understand  and  prove,  in  any  other  department.  There
are  multitudes  of  truths  which  every  sane  man  receives  on  trust,
without  bemg  able  either  to  prove  or  comprehend  them.  If  we
can  believe  only  what  we  can  prove  at  the  bar  of  reason  to  be
true,  then  the  Idngdom  of  heaven  would  be  shut  against  all  but
the  wise.  There  could  be  no  Christian  who  was  not  also  a  plii-
losopher.  In  point  of  fact  no  man  acts  on  this  principle.  It  is
assumed  in  the  pride  of  reason,  or  as  an  apology  for  rejecting
unpalatable  truths,  but  men  believe  in  God,  in  sin,  in  freedom
of  the  will,  in  responsibility,  without  the  ability  of  comprehend-
ing or  reconciling  these  truths  with  each  other  or  with  other
facts  of  consciousness  or  experience.

May  not  Revealed  Truths  he  PhilosopMcally  vindicated?

A  third  question  is.  Whether,  admitting  a  supernatural  revela-
tion, and  moreover  admittmg  the  obligation  to  receive  on  the
authority  of  God  the  doctrines  which  revelation  makes  knowai,
the  revealed  doctrmes  may  not  be  philosophically  vindicated,  so
as  to  commend  them  to  the  acceptance  of  those  who  deny  rev-
elation. May  not  the  Scriptural  doctrines  concerning  God,  crea-
tion, providence,  the  trinity,  the  incarnation,  sin,  redemption,
and  the  future  state,  be  so  stated  and  sustained  philosophically,
as  to  constrain  acquiescence  in  them  as  truths  of  the  reason.
This  was  the  ground  taken  in  the  early  Church  by  the  theolo-
gians of  the  Alexandrian  School,  who  undertook  to  elevate  the
TTto-Tts  of  the  people  into  a  yvwo-is  for  the  philosophers.  Thus  the
sacrod  ^vriters  were  made  Platonists,  and  Christianity  was  trans-
muted into  Platonism.  A  large  part  of  the  mental  activity  of  the
School-men,  during  the  Middle  Ages,  was  expended  in  the  same
way.  They  received  the  Bible  as  a  supernatural  revelation  from
God.  They  received  the  Church  interpretation  of  its  teacliings.
They  admitted  their  obligation  to  believe  its  doctrines  on  the
authority  of  God  and  of  the  Church.  Nevertheless  they  held
that  all  these  doctrines  could  be  philosophically  proved.  In  later
times  Wolf  undertook  to  demonstrate  all  the  doctrines  of  Chris-
tianity on  the  principles  of  the  Leibnitzian  pliilosophy.  In  our
OAvn  day  this  principle  and  these  attempts  have  been  carried  fur-
ther than  ever.  Systems  of  theology,  constructed  on  the  philoso-
phy of  Hegel,  of  Schelling,  and  of  Schleiermacher,  have  almost
superseded  the  old  Biblical  systems.     If  any  man  of  ordinary


§4.]  FAITH   AND   KNOWLEDGE.  77

culture  and  intelligence  should  take  up  a  volume  of  what  is
called  "  Speculative  Theology,"  (that  is,  theology  presented  in
the  forms  of  the  speculative  philosophy,)  he  would  not  understand
a  page  and  would  hardly  understand  a  sentence.  He  could  not
tell  whether  the  theology  which  it  proposed  to  present  was
Christianity  or  Buddhism.  Or,  at  best,  he  would  find  a  few
drops  of  Biblical  truth  so  diluted  by  floods  of  human  speculation
that  the  most  delicate  of  chemical  tests  would  fail  to  detect  the
divine  element.

Attempts  to  do  this  Futile.

All  such  attempts  are  futile.  The  empirical  proof  of  this  is,
that  no  such  attempt  has  ever  succeeded.  The  experiment  has
been  made  hundreds  of  times,  and  always  with  the  same  result.
Where  are  now  the  philosophical  expositions  and  vindications  of
Scripture  doctrines  by  the  Platonizing  fathers ;  by  the  School-
men ;  by  the  Cartesians ;  by  the  Leibnitzians  ?  What  power
over  the  reason,  the  conscience,  or  the  life,  has  any  of  the  specu-
lative systems  of  our  day  ?  Who,  beyond  the  devotees  of  the
systems  which  they  represent,  understand  or  adopt  the  theology
of  Daub,  of  Marheinecke,  of  Lange,  and  others  ?  Strauss,  there-
fore, is  right  when  he  repudiates  all  these  vain  attempts  to  rec-
oncile Christianity  with  philosophy,  or  to  give  a  form  to  Chris-
tian doctrine  which  satisfies  the  philosophical  thinker.^

But  apart  from  this  argument  from  experience,  the  assump-
tion is  preposterous  that  the  feeble  intellect  of  man  can  explain,
and  from  its  own  resources,  vindicate  and  prove  the  deep  things
of  God.  An  infant  might  as  well  undertake  to  expound  New-
ton's "  Principia."  If  there  are  mysteries  in  nature,  in  every
blade  of  grass,  in  the  insect,  in  the  body  and  in  the  soul  of  man,
there  must  be  mysteries  in  religion.  The  Bible  and  our  con-
sciousness teach  us  that  God  is  incomprehensible,  and  his  ways
past  finding  out ;  that  we  cannot  explain  either  his  nature  or  his
a-cts  ;  we  know  not  how  he  creates,  upholds,  and  governs  without
biterfering  with  the  nature  of  his  creatures  ;  how  there  can  be
three  persons  in  the  Godhead  ;  how  in  the  one  person  of  Christ
there  can  be  two  intelligences  and  two  wills  ;  how  the  Spirit  in-
spires, renews,  sanctifies,  or  comforts.  It  belongs  to  the  "  self-
deifying  "  class  of  philosophers  to  presume  to  know  all  that  God
knows,  and  to  banish  the  incomprehensible  from  the  religion
which  he  has  revealed.     "  To  the  school  of  Hegel,"  says  Bret-

1  See  above,  p.  58.


78  PART  in.   Ch.  xyl  — faith.

Schneider,  "  there  are  mysteries  in  religion  only  for  those  who
have  not  raised  themselves  to  the  Hegelian  grade  of  knowledge.
For  the  latter  all  is  clear  ;  all  is  knowledge  ;  and  Christianity
is  the  solution,  and  therefore  the  revelation  of  all  mysteries."^
This  may  be  consistent  in  those  who  hold  that  man  is  God  in  the
highest  form  of  his  existence,  and  the  philosopher  the  highest
style  of  man.  Such  an  assertion,  however,  by  whomsoever  it
may  be  made,  is  the  insanity  of  presumption.

May  what  is  True  in  Religion  he  False  in  Philosophy  ?

A  fourth  question  included  in  this  general  subject  is.  Whether
there  is  or  may  be  a  real  conflict  between  the  truths  of  reason
and  those  of  revelation  ?  Whether  that  which  is  true  in  religion
may  be  false  in  philosophy  ?  To  this  question  different  answers
have  been  given.

The  Fathers  on  this  Question.

First,  while  the  Greek  fathers  were  disposed  to  bring  religion
and  philosophy  into  harmony,  by  giving  a  philosophical  form  to
Christian  doctrines,  the  Latins  were  inclined  to  represent  the
two  as  irreconcilable.  "  What,"  asks  Tertullian,  "  has  Athens
to  do  with  Jerusalem  ?  The  academy  with  the  Church  ?  What
have  heretics  to  do  with  Christians  ?  Oiu*  instruction  is  from  the
porch  of  Solomon,  who  himself  taught  that  the  Lord  was  to  be

sought  in  the  simplicity  of  the  heart We  need  no  seeking

for  truth  after  Christ ;  no  research  after  the  Gospel.  When  we
believe,  we  desire  nothing  beyond  faith,  because  we  believe  that

there  is  nothing   else  we   should   do To   know  nothing

beyond  is  to  know  all  things."  ^  He  went  so  far  as  to  say,
"  Prorsus  credibile  est,  quia  ineptum  est ;  ....  certum  est,
quia  impossibile  est."  ^  Without  going  to  this  extreme,  the  the-
ologians of  the  Latin  Church,  those  of  them  at  least  most  zealous

1  Systematische  EntwicTcelung,  §  29,  4th  edit.  Leipzig,  1841,  p.  163.

2  De  Prcescnptlontbus  adversus  Uareticos,  cap.  7,  8,  14,  Works,  Paris,  1608  (t.  iii.),
p.  331:  "  Quid  ergo  Athenis  ct  Hierosolyrais  V  quid  AcademiiE  et  Ecclesiaj?  quid  hajreti-
eis  et  Christianis?  Nostra  institutio  de  portiou  Solomonis  est,  qui  et  ipse  tradiderat:
Dominum  in  simplicitate  cordis  esse  quoerendum.  Viderint  qui  Stoicum,  et  Platonicum,  et
Dialecticum,  Christiaiiissimum  protulerunt.  Nobis  curiositate  opus  non  est  post  Christum
Jesum,  nee  inquisitione  post  Evangelium.    Cum  credimus,  nihil  desideramus  ultra  credere.

Hoc  enim  prius  credimus,  non  esse  quod  ultra  credere  debeamus Cedat  curiositas

fidei,  cedat  gloria  saluti.  Certe  aut  non  obstrepant,  aut  quiescaut  adversus  regulam.
Nihil  ultra  scire,  omnia  scire  est."

8  De  Came  C/irlsli,  cap.  5,  Wo)-ks  (t.  iii.),  p.  555:  "Natus  est  Dei  filius:  non  pudet.
quia  pudendum  est.  Et  niortuus  est  Dei  lilius:  prorsus  credibile  est,  quia  ineptum  est.
Et  sepultus,  resurrexit:  certum  est,  quia  impossibile  est."


§4.]  FAITH   AND   KNOWLEDGE.  79

for  Church  doctrines,  were  inchned  to  deny  to  reason  even  the
prerogative  of  O:  judicium  contradictionis.  They  were  constrained
to  take  this  ground  because  they  were  called  upon  to  defend  doc-
trines which  contradicted  not  only  reason  but  the  senses.  When
it  was  objected  to  the  doctrine  that  the  consecrated  wafer  is  the
real  body  of  Christ,  that  our  senses  pronounce  it  to  be  bread,
and  that  it  is  impossible  that  a  human  body  should  be  in  heaven
and  in  all  parts  of  the  earth  at  the  same  time,  what  could  they
say  but  that  the  senses  and  reason  are  not  to  be  trusted  in  the
sphere  of  faith  ?  That  what  is  false  to  the  reason  and  the  senses
may  be  true  in  religion  ?

Lutheran  Teaching  on  this  Point.

The  Lutherans  were  under  the  same  necessity.  Their  doctrine
of  the  person  of  Christ  involves  the  denial  of  'the  primary  truth,
that  attributes  cannot  be  separated  from  the  substance  of  which
they  are  the  manifestation.  Their  doctrine  concerning  the  Lord's
Supper  involves  the  assumption  of  the  ubiquity  of  Christ's  body,
which  seems  to  be  a  contradiction  in  terms.

Luther's  utterances  on  this  subject  are  not  very  consistent.
When  arguing  against  the  continued  obligation  of  monastic  vows,
he  did  not  hesitate  to  say  that  what  was  contrary  to  reason  was
contrary  to  God.  "  Was  nun  der  Vernunft  entgegen  ist,  ist  gewiss
dass  es  Gott  vielmehr  entgegen  ist.  Denn  wie  sollte  es  nicht  wider
die  gottliche  Wahrheit  seyn,  das  wider  Vernunft  und  menschliche
Wahrheit  ist."  ^  But  in  the  sacramentarian  controversy  he  will  not
allow  reason  to  be  heard.  "  In  the  things  of  God,"  he  says,  reason
or  nature  is  stock-star-and-stone  blind.  "  It  is,  indeed,"  he  adds,
"  audacious  enough  to  plunge  in  and  stumble  as  a  blind  horse  ;
but  all  that  it  explains  or  concludes  is  as  certainly  false  and
wrong  as  that  God  lives."  ^  In  another  place  he  says  that  reason,
when  she  attempts  to  speculate  about  divine  things,  becomes  a
fool ;  which,  indeed,  is  very  much  what  Paul  says.  (Rom.  i.  22  ;
1  Cor.  i.  18-31.)

The  Lutheran  theologians  made  a  distinction  between  reason
in  the  abstract,  or  reason  as  it  was  in  man  before  the  fall,  and
reason  as  it  now  is.  They  admit  that  no  truth  of  revelation  can
contradict  reason  as  such  ;  but  it  may  contradict  the  reason  of
men  all  of  whose  faculties  are  clouded  and  deteriorated  by  sin.
By  this  was  not  meant  simply  that  the  unrenewed  man  is  opposed
to  the  truth  of  God  ;  that  "  the  things  of  the  Spirit "  are  fool

1  Works,  edit.  Walch,  vol.  xix.  p.  11)40.  -  Ihil  \v\.  x.i.  pp.  SOU,  -tOO.


80  PART  III.     Ch.    XVI. —  faith.

ishness  to  him  ;  that  it  seems  to  him  absurd  that  God  should  be
found  in  fasliion  as  a  man ;  that  He  should  demand  a  satisfaction
for  sin  ;  or  save  one  man  and  not  another,  according  to  his  own
good  pleasure.  This  the  Bible  clearly  teaches  and  all  Christians
believe.  In  all  this  there  is  no  contradiction  between  reason  and
religion.  The  being  of  God  is  foolislmess  to  the  atheist ;  and  per-
sonal immortality  is  foolishness  to  the  pantheist.  Yet  who  would
admit  that  these  doctrines  are  contrary  to  reason  ?  The  Lutheran
theologians  intended  to  teach,  not  only  that  the  mysteries  of  the
Bible  are  above  reason,  that  they  can  neither  be  understood  nor
demonstrated  ;  and  not  only  that  "the  things  of  the  Spirit  "  are
foolishness  to  the  natural  man,  but  that  they  are  really  in  conflict
with  the  human  understanding  ;  that  by  a  correct  process  of  rea-
soning they  can  be  demonstrated  to  be  false  ;  so  that  in  the  strict
sense  of  the  terms  what  is  true  in  religion  is  false  in  philosophy.
"  The  Sorbonne,"  says  Luther,  "  has  pronounced  a  most  abom-
inable decision  in  saying  that  what  is  true  in  religion  is  also  true
ill  philosophy  ;  and  moreover  condemning  as  heretics  all  who  as-
sert the  contrary.  By  this  horrible  doctrine  it  has  given  it  to  be
clearly  understood  that  the  doctrines  of  faith  are  to  be  subjected
to  the  yoke  of  human  reason."  ^

Sir  William  Hamilton.

Secondly,  the  ground  taken  by  Sir  William  Hamilton  on  this
subject  is  not  precisely  the  same  with  that  taken  by  the  Luther-
ans. They  agree,  indeed,  in  this,  that  we  are  bound  to  believe
what  (at  the  bar  of  reason)  we  can  prove  to  be  false,  but  they
differ  entirely  as  to  the  cause  and  nature  of  this  conflict  between
reason  and  faith.  According  to  the  Lutherans,  it  arises  from  the
corruption  and  deterioration  of  our  nature  by  the  fall.  It  is  re-
moved ill  part  in  this  world  by  regeneration,  and  entirely  here-
after by  the  perfection  of  our  sanctifi cation.  According  to  Ham-
ilton, this  conflict  arises  from  the  necessary  limitation  of  human
thought.  God  has  so  made  us  that  reason,  acting  according  to  its
own  laws,  of  necessity  arrives  at  conclusions  directly  opposed  to
the  doctrines  of  religion  both  natural  and  revealed.  We  can
prove  demonstrably  that  the  Absolute  bemg  cannot  know,  cannot
be  a  cause,  cannot  be  conscious.  It  may  be  proved  ^vith  equal
clearness  that  the  Infinite  cannot  be  a  person,  or  possess  moral
attributes.  Here,  then,  what  is  true  in  religion,  what  we  are
bound  to  believe,  and  what  in  point  of  fact  all  men,  in  virtue  of

1  Works,  edit.  Walch,  vol,  x.  p.  1399.


M-]  FAITH  AND  KNOWLEDGE.  81

the  constitution  of  their  nature  do  believe,  can  be  proved  to  be
false.  There  is  thus  an  UTeconcilable  conflict  between  our  intel-
lectual and  moral  nature.  But  as,  according  to  the  idealist,  reason
forces  us  to  the  conclusion  that  the  external  world  does  not  exist,
while,  nevertheless,  it  is  safe  and  proper  to  act  on  the  assumption
that  it  is,  and  is  what  it  appears  to  be ;  so,  according  to  Hamil-
ton, it  is  not  only  safe,  but  obligatory  on  us  to  act  on  the  assump-
tion that  God  is  a  person,  although  infinite,  while  our  reason
demonstrates  that  an  infinite  person  is  a  contradiction.  The  con-
flict between  reason  and  faith  is  avowed,  while  the  obligation  of
faith  on  the  testimony  of  our  moral  and  religious  nature  and  of
the  "Word  of  God  is  affirmed.  This  point  has  been  already  dis-
cussed.

The  View  of  Speculative  Philosophers.
Thirdly,  we  note  the  view  taken  by  the  speculative  philoso-
phers. They,  too,  maintain  that  reason  demonstrates  the  doc-
trines of  revelation  and  even  of  natural  religion  to  be  false.  But
they  do  not  recognize  their  obligation  to  receive  them  as  objects
of  faith.  Being  contrary  to  reason,  those  doctrines  are  false,  and
being  false,  they  are,  by  enlightened  men,  to  be  rejected.  If  any
cling  to  them  as  a  matter  of  feeling,  they  are  to  be  allowed  to  do
so,  but  they  must  renounce  all  claim  to  philosophic  insight.

May  the  Objects  of  Faith  he  above ^  and  yet  not  against  Reason?

A  fifth  question  is.  Whether  the  objects  of  faith  may  be  above,
and  yet  not  contrary  to  reason  ?  The  answer  to  this  question  is
to  be  in  the  affirmative,  for  the  distinction  implied  is  sound  and
almost  universally  admitted.  What  is  above  reason  is  simply
incomprehensible.  What  is  against  reason  is  impossible.  It  is
contrary  to  reason  that  contradictions  should  be  true ;  that  a
part  should  be  greater  than  the  whole  ;  that  a  thing  should  be
and  not  be  at  the  same  time ;  that  right  should  be  wrong  and
wrong  right.  It  is  incomprehensible  how  matter  attracts  matter ;
how  the  mind  acts  on  the  body,  and  the  body  on  the  mind.  The
distinction  between  the  incomprehensible  and  the  imjjossible,  is
therefore  plain  and  admitted.  And  the  distinction  between  what
is  above  reason,  and  what  is  against  reason,  is  equally  obvious
and  just.  The  great  body  of  Christian  theologians  have  ever
taken  the  ground  that  the  doctrines  of  the  Bible  are  not  contrary
to  reason,  although  above  it.  That  is,  they  are  matters  of  faith
to  be  received  on  the  authority  of  God,  and  not  because  they  can
be  either  understood  or  proved.     As  it  is  incomprehensible  how  a


82  PART  m.   ch.  xvl  — faith.

soul  and  body  can  be  united  in  one  conscious  life  ;  so  it  is  incom-
prehensible how  a  divine  and  hiunan  nature  can  be  united  in  one
person  in  Christ.  Neither  is  impossible,  and  therefore  neither  is
contrary  to  reason.  We  know  the  one  fact  from  consciousness  ;
we  believe  the  other  on  the  testimony  of  God.  It  is  impossible,
and  therefore  contrary  to  reason,  that  three  should  be  one.  But
it  is  not  impossible  that  the  same  numerical  essence  should  sub-
sist in  three  distinct  persons.  Realists  tell  us  that  humanity,  as  one
numerical  essence,  subsists  in  all  the  millions  of  human  individuals.
Thomas  Aquinas  takes  the  true  ground  when  he  says  :  "  Ea  quae
sunt  supra  naturam,  sola  fide  tenemus.  Quod  autem  credimus,
auctoritati  debemus.  Unde  in  omnibus  asserendis  sequi  debemus
naturam  rerum,  praeter  ea,  quae  auctoritate  divina  traduntur,  quae
sunt  supra  naturam."  ^  "  Quae  igitur  fidei  sunt,  non  sunt  tentanda
probare  nisi  per  auctoritates  his,  qui  auctoritates  suscipiunt.  Apud
alios  vero  sufficit  defendere  non  esse  impossibile  quod  praedicat
fides."  '^  "  Quidquid  in  aliis  scientiis  invenitur  veritati  hujus  scien-
tiae  [sacra3  doctrinae]  repugnans,  totum  condemnatur  ut  falsum."^

The  Objects  of  Faith  are  consisteoit  with  Reason.

While,  therefore,  the  objects  of  faith  as  revealed  in  the  Bible,
are  not  truths  of  the  reason,  i.  e.,  which  the  human  reason  can
discover,  or  comprehend,  or  demonstrate,  they  are,  nevertheless,
perfectly  consistent  with  reason.  They  involve  no  contradictions
or  absurdities  ;  nothing  impossible,  nothing  inconsistent  with  the
intuitions  either  of  the  intellect  or  of  the  conscience  ;  nothing  in-
consistent with  any  well  established  truth,  whether  of  the  exter-
nal world  or  of  the  world  of  mind.  On  the  contrary,  the  contents
of  the  Bible,  so  far  as  they  relate  to  things  within  the  legitimate
domain  of  human  knowledge,  are  found  to  be  consistent,  and  must
be  consistent,  with  all  we  certainly  know  from  other  sources  than
a  divine  revelation.  All  that  the  Scriptures  teach  concerning  the
external  world  accords  with  the  facts  of  experience.  They  do
not  teach  that  the  earth  is  a  plain  ;  that  it  is  stationary  in  space  ;
that  the  sun  revolves  around  it.  On  the  other  hand,  they  do
teach  that  God  made  all  plants  and  animals,  each  after  its  o^vn
kind  ;  and,  accordingly,  all  experience  shows  that  species  are  im-
mutable. All  the  anthropological  doctrines  of  the  Bible  agree
with  what  we  know  of  man  from  consciousness  and  observation.
The  Bible  teaches  that  God  made  of  one  blood  all  nations  which
dwell  on  the  face  of  the  earth.     We  accordingly  find  that  all  the

1  Suvima,  I.  quaest.  xcix.  art.  1,  edit.  Cologne,  16-iO,  p.  185,  a.

3  Jbid.  quxst.  xxxii.  art.  1,  p.  64,  a.  ^  Ibid,  quaest.  i.  art.  6,  p.  2,  b.


§4.]  FAITH   AND  KNOWLEDGE.  83

varieties  of  our  race  have  the  same  anatomical  structure ;  the
same  physical  nature  ;  the  same  rational  and  moral  faculties.
The  Bible  teaches  that  man  is  a  free,  accountable  agent ;  that
all  men  are  sinners ;  that  all  need  redemption,  and  that  no  man
can  redeem  himself  or  find  a  ransom  for  his  brother.  With  these
teachings  the  consciousness  of  all  men  agrees.  All  that  the  Scrip-
tures reveal  concerning  the  nature  and  attributes  of  God,  corre-
sponds with  our  religious  nature,  satisfying,  elevating,  and  sancti-
fying all  om:  powers  and  meeting  all  our  necessities.  If  the
contents  of  the  Bible  did  not  correspond  with  the  truths  which
God  has  revealed  in  his  external  works  and  the  constitution  of
our  nature,  it  could  not  be  received  as  coming  from  Him,  for  God
cannot  contradict  himself.  Nothing,  therefore,  can  be  more
derogatory  to  the  Bible  than  the  assertion  that  its  doctrines  are
contrary  to  reason.

Faith  in  the  Irratio7ial  impossible.

The  assumption  that  reason  and  faith  are  incompatible ;  that
we  must  become  irrational  in  order  to  become  believers  is,  how-
ever it  may  be  intended,  the  language  of  infidelity ;  for  faith  in
the  irrational  is  of  necessity  itself  irrational.  It  is  impossible  to
believe  that  to  be  true  which  the  mind  sees  to  be  false.  This
would  be  to  believe  and  disbelieve  the  same  thing  at  the  same
time.  If,  therefore,  as  modern  philosophers  assert,  it  is  impossi-
ble that  an  infinite  being  can  be  a  person,  then  faith  in  the  per-
sonality of  God  is  impossible.  Then  there  can  be  no  religion,  no
sin,  no  accountability,  no  immortality.  Faith  is  not  a  blind,  irra-
tional conviction.  In  order  to  believe,  we  must  know  what  we
beheve,  and  the  grounds  on  which  our  faith  rests.  And,  there-
fore, the  refuge  which  some  would  take  in  faith,  from  the  univer-
sal scepticism  to  which  they  say  reason  necessarily  leads,  is  inse-
cure and  worthless.

While  admitting  that  the  truths  of  revelation  are  to  be  received
upon  the  authority  of  God  ;  that  human  reason  can  neither  com-
prehend nor  prove  them ;  that  a  man  must  be  converted  and
become  as  a  httle  child  before  he  can  truly  receive  the  doctrines
of  the  Bible  ;  and  admitting,  moreover,  that  these  doctrines  are
irreconcilable  with  every  system  of  philosophy,  ever  framed  by
those  who  refuse  to  be  taught  of  God,  or  who  were  ignorant  of
his  Word,  yet  it  is  ever  to  be  maintained  that  those  doctrines  are
unassailable  ;  that  no  created  intellect  can  prove  them  to  be  im-
possible or  irrational.     Paul,  while  spurning  the  wisdom  of  the


84  PART  m.     Ca.   XVL  — FAITH.

world,  still  claimed  that  lie  taught  the  highest  wisdom,  even  the
wisdom  of  God.  (1  Cor.  ii.  6,  7.)  And  who  will  venture  to  say-
that  the  wisdom  of  God  is  irrational  ?

Knowledge  essential  to  Faith.

A  sixth  question,  included  under  the  head  of  the  relation  of
faith  to  knowledge  is,  Whether  knowledge  is  essential  to  faith  ?
That  is,  whether  a  truth  must  be  knoAvn  in  order  to  be  believed  ?
This  Protestants  affirm  and  Romanists  deny.

Protestants  of  course  admit  that  mysteries,  or  truths  which  we
are  unable  to  comprehend,  may  be,  and  are,  proper  objects  of
faith.  They  repudiate  the  rationalistic  doctrine  that  we  can  be-
heve  only  what  we  understand  and  what  we  can  prove,  or,  at
least,  elucidate  so  that  it  appears  to  be  true  in  its  own  light.
What  Protestants  maintain  is  that  knowledge,  i.e.,  the  cognition
of  the  import  of  the  proposition  to  be  believed,  is  essential  to
faith ;  and,  consequently,  that  faith  is  limited  by  knowledge.  We
can  believe  only  what  we  know,  i.  e.,  what  we  intelligently  ap-
prehend. If  a  proposition  be  announced  to  us  in  an  unknown
lanffuasre,  we  can  affirm  nothing  about  it.  We  can  neither  be-
lieve  nor  disbelieve  it.  Should  the  man  who  makes  the  declara-
tion, assert  that  it  is  true,  if  we  have  confidence  in  his  competency
and  integrity,  we  may  believe  that  he  is  right,  but  the  proposi-
tion itself  is  no  part  of  our  faith.  The  Apostle  recognizes  this
obvious  truth  when  he  says,  "  Except  ye  utter  by  the  tongue
words  easy  to  be    understood  Qevarjixov  Adyov),   how  shall  it  be

known  what  is  spoken  ?  for  ye  shall  speak  into  the  air

If  I  know  not  the  meaning  of  the  voice,  I  shall  be  unto  him  that
speaketh  a  barbarian,  and  he  that  speaketh  shall  be  a  barbarian

unto  me When  thou  shalt  bless  with  the  Spirit,  how  shall

he  that  occupieth  the  room  of  the  unlearned,  say  Amen  at  thy
giving  of  thanks  ?  seeing  he  understandeth  not  what  thou  say-
est?"  (1  Cor.  xiv.  9-16.)  To  say  Amen,  is  to  assent  to,  to
make  one's  own.  According  to  the  Apostle,  therefore,  knowl-
edge, or  the  intelhgent  apprehension  of  the  meaning  of  what  is
proposed,  is  essential  to  faith.  If  the  proposition  "  God  is  a
Spirit,"  be  announced  to  the  unlearned  in  Hebrew  or  Greek,  it  is
impossible  that  they  should  assent  to  its  truth.  If  they  under-
stand the  language  ;  if  they  know  what  the  word  "  God  "  means,
and  what  the  word  "  Spirit "  means,  then  they  may  receive  or
reject  the  truth  which  that  proposition  affirms.  The  declaration
"  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God,"  admits  of  different  interpretations.


§4.]  FAITH  AND  KNOWLEDGE.  8f

Some  say  the  term  Son  is  an  official  title,  and  therefore  the  prop-
osition "■  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God,"  means  that  Jesus  is  a  ruler.
Others  say  it  is  a  term  of  affection,  then  the  proposition  means
that  Jesus  was  the  special  object  of  the  love  of  God.  Others  say
that  it  means  that  Jesus  is  of  the  same  nature  with  God  ;  that  He
is  a  divine  person.  If  this  be  the  meaning  of  the  Spirit  in  de-
claring Jesus  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  then  those  who  do  not  attach
that  sense  to  the  words,  do  not  believe  the  truth  intended  to  be
taught.  When  it  is  said  God  set  forth  Christ  to  be  a  propitiation
for  our  sins,  if  we  do  not  understand  what  the  word  propitiation
means,  the  proposition  to  us  means  nothing,  and  nothing  cannot
be  an  object  of  faith.

Knoivledge  the  Measure  of  Faith.

It  follows  from  what  has  been  said,  or  rather  is  included  in  it,
that  knowledge  being  essential  to  faith,  it  must  be  the  measure
of  it.  What  lies  beyond  the  sphere  of  knowledge,  lies  beyond
the  sphere  of  faith.  Of  the  unseen  and  eternal  we  can  believe
only  what  God  has  revealed ;  and  of  what  God  has  revealed,  we
can  believe  only  what  we  know.  It  has  been  said  that  he  who
beheves  the  Bible  to  be  the  Word  of  God,  may  properly  be  said
to  believe  all  it  teaches,  although  much  of  its  instructions  may  be
to  him  unkno^vn.  But  this  is  not  a  correct  representation.  The
man  who  believes  the  Bible,  is  prepared  to  believe  on  its  author-
ity whatever  it  declares  to  be  true.  But  he  cannot  properly  be
said  to  believe  any  more  of  its  contents  than  he  knows.  If  asked
if  he  believed  that  men  bitten  by  poisonous  serpents  were  ever
healed  by  merely  looking  at  a  brazen  serpent,  he  might,  if  igno-
rant of  the  Pentateuch,  honestly  answer,  No.  But  should  he
come  to  read  and  understand  the  record  of  the  healing  of  the
dying  Israelites,  as  found  in  the  Bible,  he  would  rationally  and
sincerely,  answer.  Yes.  This  disposition  to  believe  whatever  the
Bible  teaches,  as  soon  as  we  know  what  is  taught,  may  be  called
an  implicit  faith,  but  it  is  no  real  faith.  It  has  none  of  its
characteristics  and  none  of  its  power.

Proof  that  Knowledge  is  Essential  to  Faith.

That  knowledge,  in  the  sense  above  stated,  is  essential  to  faith
is  obvious,  —

1.  From  the  very  nature  of  faith.  It  includes  the  conviction
of  the  truth  of  its  object.  It  is  an  affirmation  of  the  mind  that
a  thing  is  true  or  trustworthy,  but  the  mind  can  affirm  noth-
ing of  that  of  which  it  knows  nothing.


86  PART  m.     Ch.XVL— FAITH.

2.  The  Bible  everywhere  teaches  that  without  k-iowledge  there
can  be  no  faith.  This,  as  just  stated,  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Apos-
tle Paul.  He  condemned  the  speaking  in  an  unkno^^^l  tongue  in
a  promiscuous  assembly,  because  the  hearers  could  not  understand
what  was  said ;  and  if  they  did  not  know  the  meaning  of  the
words  uttered,  they  could  neither  assent  to  them,  nor  be  profited
by  them.  In  another  place  (Rom.  x.  14)  he  asks,  "  How  shall
they  believe  in  him  of  whom  they  have  not  heard  ?  "  "  Faith,"
he  saj's,  "  cometh  by  hearing."  The  command  of  Christ  was  to
preach  the  Gospel  to  every  creature ;  to  teach  all  nations.  Those
who  received  the  instructions  thus  given,  should.  He  assured  his
disciples,  be  saved ;  those  who  rejected  them,  should  be  damned.
This  takes  for  granted  that  without  the  knowledge  of  the  Gospel,
there  can  be  no  faith.  On  this  principle  the  Apostles  acted
everywhere.  They  went  abroad  preaching  Christ,  proving  from
the  Scriptures  that  He  was  the  Son  of  God  and  Saviour  of  the
world.  The  communication  of  knowledge  always  preceded  the
demand  for  faith.

3.  Such  is  the  intimate  connection  between  faith  and  knowl-
edge, that  in  the  Scriptures  the  one  term  is  often  used  for  the
other.  To  know  Christ,  is  to  believe  upon  Him.  To  laiow  the
truth,  is  intelligently  and  believingly  to  apprehend  and  appropri-
ate it.  Conversion  is  effected  by  knowledge.  Paid  says  he  was
made  a  believer  by  the  revelation  of  Christ  within  him.  The
Spirit  is  said  to  open  the  eyes  of  the  understanding.  Men  are
said  to  be  renewed  so  as  to  know.  We  are  translated  from  the
kingdom  of  darkness  into  the  kingdom  of  light.  Believers  are
children  of  the  Hght.  Men  are  said  to  perish  for  the  lack  of
knowledge.  Nothing  is  more  characteristic  of  the  Bible  than  the
importance  which  it  attaches  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth.  We
are  said  to  be  begotten  by  the  truth  ;  to  be  sanctified  by  the
truth ;  and  the  whole  duty  of  ministers  and  teachers  is  said  to  be
to  hold  forth  the  word  of  life.  It  is  because  Protestants  believe
that  knowledge  is  essential  to  faith,  that  they  insist  so  strenu-
ously on  the  circulation  of  the  Scriptures  and  the  instruction  of
the  people.

Romish  Doctrine  on  this  Subject.

Romanists  make  a  distinction  between  expUcit  and  implicit
faith.  By  the  former  is  meant,  faith  in  a  known  truth  ;  by  the
latter  faith  in  truths  not  known.  They  teach  that  only  a  few
primary  truths  of  religion  need  be  known,  and  that  faith  without
knowledge,  as  to  all  other  truths,  is  genuine  and  sufficient.     On


§4.]  FAITH  AND  KNOWLEDGE.  87

this  subject  Thomas  Aquinas  says,  "  Quantum  ad  prima  credihi-
lia,  quae  sunt  articuli  fidei,  tenetur  homo  explicite  credere.  Quan-
tum autem  ad  aha  credibiha  non  tenetur  homo  exphcite  credere,
sed  sohim  imphcite,  vel  in  praeparatione  animi,  in  quantum  para-
tus  est  credere  quidquid  divina  Scriptura  continet."  ^  Imphcit
faith  is  defined  as,  "  Assensus,  qui  omnia,  quamvis  ignota,  quae
ab  ecclesia  probantur,  amplectitur."  ^  Belhirmin^  says,  "  In  eo
qui  credit,  duo  sunt,  apprehensio  et  judicium,  sive  assensus :  sed
apprehensio  non  est  fides,  sed  ahud  fidem  praecedens.  Possunt
enim  infideles  apprehendere  mysteria  fidei.  Prseterea,  apprehen-
sio non  dicitur  proprie  notitia Mysteria  fidei,  qu£e  ratio-

nem  superant,  credimus,  non  intelligimus,  ac  per  hoc  fides  distin-
guitur  contra  scientiam,  et  mehus  per  ignorantiam,  quam  per
notitiam  definitur."  The  faith  required  of  the  people  is  simply,
"  A  general  intention  to  believe  whatever  the  Church  believes."  4
The  Church  teaches  that  there  are  seven  sacraments.  A  man
who  has  no  idea  what  the  word  sacrament  means,  or  what  rites
are  regarded  by  the  Church  as  having  a  sacramental  character,  is
held  to  believe  that  orders,  penance,  matrimony,  and  extreme  unc-
tion, are  sacraments.  So,  of  all  other  doctrines  of  the  Church.
True  faith  is  said  to  be  consistent  with  absolute  ignorance.  Ac-
cording to  this  doctrine,  a  man  may  be  a  true  Christian,  if  he
submits  to  the  Church,  although  in  his  internal  convictions  and
modes  of  thought,  he  be  a  pantheist  or  pagan.

It  is  to  this  grave  error  as  to  the  nature  of  faith,  that  much
in  the  character  and  practice  of  the  Romish  Church  is  to  be
referred,  —

1.  This  is  the  reason  why  the  Scriptures  are  withheld  from  the
people.  If  knowledge  is  not  necessary  to  faith,  there  is  no  need
that  the  people  should  know  what  the  Bible  teaches.

2.  For  the  same  reason  the  services  of  public  worship  are  con-
ducted in  an  unknown  language.

3.  Hence,  too,  the  symbohsm  wliicli  characterizes  their  wor-
ship. The  end  to  be  accomplished  is  a  blind  reverence  and  awe.
For  this  end  there  is  no  need  that  these  symbols  should  be  under-
stood.    It  is  enough  that  they  affect  the  imagination.

4.  To  the  same  principle  is  to  be  referred  the  practice  of
reserve  in  preaching.     The  truth  may  be  kept  back  or  concealed.

1  Summa,  ii.  ii.  quiest.  ii.  art.  5,  edit.  Cologne,  1640,  p.  7,  a,  of  third  set.

2  Hutterus  Redivkus,  §  108,  6th  edit.  Leipzig,  1345,  p.  271.

3  De  Justificatione,  lib.  i.  cap.  7,  Disputationes,  edit.  Paris,  1608,  vol.  iv.  p.  714,  a,  c.

*  Strauss,  Dogmatik,  Die  Christlicke  Glaubenslehre,  Tubingen  and  Stuttgart,  1840,  vol
i.  p.  284


88  PART  ni.   Ch.  XVI.  — faith.

The  cross  is  held  up  before  the  people,  but  it  is  not  necessary
that  the  doctrine  of  the  sacrifice  for  sin  made  thereon  should  be
taught.  It  is  enough  if  the  people  are  impressed ;  it  matters  not
whether  they  believe  that  the  sign,  or  the  material,  or  the  doc-
trine symbolized,  secures  salvation.  Nay,  the.  darker  the  mind,
the  more  vague  and  mysterious  the  feehng  excited,  and  the  more
blind  the  submission  rendered,  the  more  genuine  is  the  exercise
of  faith.  "Religious  light,"  says  Mr.  Newman,  "  is  intellectual
darkness."  ^

5.  It  is  on  the  same  princijDle  the  Roman  Catholic  missions
have  always  been  conducted.  The  people  are  converted  not  by
the  truth,  not  by  a  course  of  instruction,  but  by  baptism.  They
are  made  Christians  by  thousands,  not  by  the  intelligent  adop-
tion of  Christianity  as  a  system  of  doctrine,  of  that  they  may  be
profoundly  ignorant,  but  by  simple  submission  to  the  Church  and
its  prescribed  rites.  The  consequence  has  been  that  the  Catholic
missions,  although  continued  in  some  instances  for  more  than  a
hmidred  years,  take  no  hold  on  the  people,  but  almost  uniformly
die  out,  as  soon  as  the  supply  of  foreign  ministers  is  cut  off.

§  5.  Faith  and  Feeling.

It  has  abeady  been  seen,  —

1.  That  faith,  the  act  of  believing,  cannot  properly  be  defined
as  the  assent  of  the  understanding  determined  by  the  will.
There  are,  unquestionably,  many  cases  in  which  a  man  believes
against  his  will.

2.  It  has  also  been  argued  that  it  is  not  correct  to  say  that
faith  is  assent  founded  on  feeling.  On  this  point  it  was  ad-
mitted that  a  man's  feelings  have  great  influence  upon  his  faith  ;
that  it  is  comparatively  easy  to  believe  what  is  agreeable,  and
difficult  to  believe  what  is  disagreeable.  It  was  also  admitted
that  in  saving  faith,  the  gift  of  God,  resting  on  the  inward  illu-
minating testimony  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  there  is  a  discernment
not  only  of  the  truth  but  of  the  divine  excellence  of  the  things
of  the  Spirit,  which  is  inseparably  connected  with  appropriate
feeling.  It  was  moreover  conceded  that,  so  far  as  the  conscious-
ness of  the  believer  is  concerned,  he  seems  to  receive  the  truth
on  its  own  evidence,  on  its  excellence  and  power  over  his  heart
and  conscience.  This,  however,  is  analogous  to  other  facts  in
his  experience.  When  a  man  repents  and  believes,  he  is  con-
scious only  of  his  own  exercises  and  not  of  the  supernatural  in-

1  Sermons,  vol.  i.  p.  12i.


§5.]  FAITH  AND   FEELING.  89

fluences  of  the  Spirit,  to  which  those  exercises  owe  their  origin
and  nature.  Thus  also  in  the  exercise  of  faith,  consciousness
does  not  reach  the  inward  testimony  of  the  Spirit  on  which  that
faith  is  founded.  Nevertheless,  notwithstanding  these  admissions,
it  is  still  incorrect  to  say  that  faith  is  founded  on  feeling,  be-
cause it  is  only  of  certain  forms  or  exercises  of  faith  that  this  can
even  be  plausibly  said  ;  and  because  there  are  many  exercises
of  even  saving  faith  (that  is,  of  faith  in  a  true  believer,)  which
are  not  attended  by  feeling.  This  is  the  case  when  the  object
of  faith  is  some  historical  fact.  Besides,  the  Scriptures  clearly
teach  that  the  ground  of  faith  is  the  testimony  of  God,  or  dem-
onstration of  the  Spirit.  He  has  revealed  certain  truths,  and
attends  them  with  such  an  amount  and  kind  of  evidence,  as  pro-
duces conviction,  and  we  receive  them  on  his  authority.

3.  Faith  is  not  necessarily  connected  with  feeling.  Sometimes
it  is,  and  sometimes  it  is  not.  Whether  it  is  or  not,  depends,  —
(a.)  On  the  nature  of  the  object.  Belief  in  glad  tidings  is  of
necessity  attended  by  joy  ;  of  evil  tidings  with  grief.  Belief  in
moral  excellence  involves  a  feeling  of  approbation.  Belief  that  a
certain  act  is  criminal,  involves  disapprobation.  (5.)  On  the
proximate  gromid  of  faith.  If  a  man  believes  that  a  picture  is
beautiful  on  the  testimony  of  competent  judges,  there  is  no  aes-
thetic feeling  connected  with  his  faith.  But  if  he  personally  per-
ceives the  beauty  of  the  object,  then  delight  is  inseparable  from
the  conviction  that  it  is  beautiful.  In  like  manner  if  a  man
believes  that  Jesus  is  God  manifest  in  the  flesh,  on  the  mere  ex-
ternal testimony  of  the  Bible,  he  experiences  no  due  impression
from  that  truth.  But  if  his  faith  is  founded  on  the  inward  tes-
timony of  the  Spirit,  by  which  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of
Jesus  Christ  is  revealed  to  him,  then  he  is  filled  with  adoring
admiration  and  love.

Religious  Faith  more  than  Simple  Assent.

4.  Another  question  agitated  on  this  subject  is.  Whether  faith
is  a  purely  intellectual  exercise  ;  or  Whether  it  is  also  an  exercise
of  the  affections.  This  is  nearly  allied  to  the  preceding  question,
and  must  receive  substantially  the  same  answer.  Bellarmin,^
says,  "  Tribus  in  rebus  ab  haereticis  Catholici  dissentiunt ;
Primum,  in  objecto  fidei  justificantis,  quod  liEeretici  restringunt
ad  solam  promissionem  misericordiaa  specialis,  CathoHci  tarn
late  patere  volunt,  quam  late  patet  verbum  Dei.  .  .  .  Deinde

1  De  Justificatione,  lib.  i.  cap.  4,  Disputationes,  edit.  Paris,  1608,  vol.  iv.  p.  706,  d,  e.


90  PART  III.     Cu.   XVI.— FAITH.

in  facultate  et  potentia  animi  quas  sedes  est  fidei.  Siquidein
illi  fidem  collocant  in  voluntate  [sen  in  corde]  cum  fiduciam
esse  definiunt ;  ac  per  hoc  earn  cum  spe  confundunt.  Fiducia
enim  nihil  est  aliud,  nisi  spes  roborata.  .  .  .  CathoUci  fidem
in  intellectu  sedem  habere  docent.  Denique,  in  ipso  actu  intel-
lectus.  Ipsi  enim  per  notitiam  fidem  definiunt,  nos  per  assensum.
Assentimvtr  enim  Deo,  quamvis  ea  nobis  credenda  proponat,
quae  non  intelligimus."  Regarding  faith  as  a  mere  intellectual
or  speculative  act,  they  consistently  deny  that  it  is  necessarily
connected  vnth  salvation.  According  to  their  doctrine,  a  man
may  have  true  faith,  i.  e.,  the  faith  which  the  Scriptures  de-
mand, and  yet  perish.  On  this  point  the  Covincil  of  Trent  says :
"  Si  quis  dixerit,  amissa  per  peccatum  gratia,  sunul  et  fidem  sem-
per amitti,  aut  fidem,  quse  remanet,  non  esse  veram  fidem,  licet
non  sit  viva  ;  aut  eum,  qui  fidem  sine  caritate  habet,  non  esse
Christianum  ;  anathema  sit."  ^

Protestant  Doctrine.

On  the  other  hand  Protestants  with  one  voice  maintain  that
the  faith  which  is  connected  with  salvation,  is  not  a  mere  intel-
lectual exercise.  Calvin  says :  ^  "  Verum  observemus,  fidei
sedem  non  in  cerebro  esse,  sed  in  corde :  neque  vero  de  eo  con-
tenderim,  qua  in  parte  corporis  sita  sit  fides  :  sed  quoniam  cor-
dis nomen  pro  serio  et  sincero  affectu  fere  capitur,  dico  firmam
esse  et  efficacem  fiduciam,  non  nudam  tantum  notionem."  He
also  says :  ^  Quodsi  expenderent  illud  Pauli,  Corde  creditm-  ad
justitiam  (Rom.  x.  10)  :  fingere  desinerent  frigidam  illam  qual-
itatem.  Si  una  hsec  nobis  suppeteret  ratio,  valere  deberet  ad
htem  finiendam :  assensionem  scilicet  ipsam  sicuti  ex  parte  at-
tigi,  et  fusius  iterum  repetam,  cordis  esse  magis  quam  cerebri,  et
affectus  magis  quam  intelligentige."

The  answer  in  the  Heidelberg  Catechism,  to  the  question,
What  is  Faith  ?  is,  "  It  is  not  merely  a  certain  knowledge,
whereby  I  receive  as  true  all  that  God  has  revealed  to  us  in  his
Word,  but  also  a  cordial  trust,  which  the  Holy  Ghost  works  in
me  by  the  Gospel,  that  not  only  to  others,  but  to  me  also,  the
forgiveness  of  sin,  and  everlasting  righteousness  and  hfe  are
given  by  God,  out  of  pure  grace,  and  only  for  the  sake  of
Christ's  merit."'*

1  Session  vi.,  Canon  28  ;  Streitwolf,  Libri  Symbolici,  Gottingen,  1846,  vol.  i.  p.  37.
••i  On  Romans  x.  10  ;   Commtntaries,  edit.  Berlin,  1831,  vol.  v.  p.  139.
8  Institution  III.  ii.  8  ;  edit.  Berlin,  1834,  vol.  i.  p.  358.
*  Question  21.


§5.]  FAITH   AND   FEELING.  91

That  saving  faith  is  not  a  mere  speculative  assent  of  the  un-
derstanding, is  the  uniform  doctrine  of  tlie  Protestant  symbols.
On  this  point,  however,  it  may  be  remarked,  in  the  first  place,
that,  as  has  often  been  stated  before,  the  Scriptures  do  not  make
the  sharp  distinction  between  the  understanding,  the  feelings,
and  the  will,  which  is  common  in  our  day.  A  large  class  of  our
inward  acts  and  states  are  so  complex  as  to  be  acts  of  the  whole
soul,  and  not  exclusively  of  any  one  of  its  faculties.  In  repent-
ance there  is  of  necessity  an  intellectual  apprehension  of  our-
selves as  sinners,  of  the  holiness  of  God,  of  his  law  to  which  we
have  failed  to  be  conformed  and  of  his  mercy  in  Christ ;  there  is
a  moral  disapprobation  of  our  character  and  conduct ;  a  feehng
of  sorrow,  shame,  and  remorse  ;  and  a  purpose  to  forsake  sin  and
lead  a  holy  life.  Scarcely  less  complex  is  the  state  of  mind  ex-
pressed by  the  word  faith  as  it  exists  in  a  true  believer.  In  the
second  place,  there  is  a  distmction  to  be  made  between  faith  in
general  and  saving  faith.  If  we  take  that  element  of  faith
which  is  common  to  every  act  of  believing  ;  if  we  understand  by
it  the  apprehension  of  a  thing  as  true  and  worthy  of  confidence,
whether  a  fact  of  history  or  of  science,  then  it  may  be  said  that
faith  in  its  essential  nature  is  intellectual,  or  intelligent  assent.
But  if  the  question  be,  What  is  that  act  or  state  of  mind  which  is
required  in  the  Gospel,  when  we  are  commanded  to  believe  ;  the
answer  is  very  different.  To  beheve  that  Christ  is  "  God  mani-
fest in  the  flesh,"  is  not  the  mere  intellectual  conviction  that  no
one,  not  truly  divine,  could  be  and  do  what  Christ  was  and  did  ;
for  this  conviction  demoniacs  avowed ;  but  it  is  to  receive  Him  as
our  God.  This  includes  the  apprehension  and  conviction  of  his
divine  glory,  and  the  adoring  reverence,  love,  confidence,  and
submission,  which  are  due  to  God  alone.  When  we  are  com-
manded to  believe  in  Christ  as  the  Sa\dour  of  men,  we  are  not
required  merely  to  assent  to  the  proposition  that  He  does  save
sinners,  but  also  to  receive  and  rest  upon  Him  alone  for  our  own
salvation.  What,  therefore,  the  Scriptures  mean  by  faith,  in
this  connection,  the  faith  which  is  required  for  salvation,  is  an
act  of  the  whole  soul,  of  the  understanding,  of  the  heart,  and  of
the  will.

Proof  of  the  Protestant  Doctrine.

The  Protestant  doctrine  that  saving  faith  includes  knowledge,
assent,  and  trust,  and  is  not,  as  Romanists  teach,  mere  assent,  is
sustained  by  abundant  proofs.

1.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  proved  from  the  nature  of  the  object


92  PART  III.     Ch.   XVL  — faith.

of  saving  faith.  That  object  is  not  merely  the  general  truth  of
Scripture,  not  the  fact  that  the  Gospel  reveals  God's  plan  of  sav-
ing sinners  ;  but  it  is  Christ  himself ;  his  person  and  work,  and
the  offer  of  salvation  to  us  personally  and  individually.  From
the  nature  of  the  case  we  cannot,  as  just  remarked,  believe  in
Christ  on  the  inward  testimony  of  the  Spirit  which  reveals  his
glory  and  his  love,  Avithout  the  feehngs  of  reverence,  love,  and
trust  mingling  A^dtli  the  act  and  constituting  its  character.  Nor
is  it  possible  that  a  soul  oj)pressed  with  a  sense  of  sin  should  re-
ceive the  promise  of  deliverance  from  its  guilt  and  power,  with-
out any  feehng  of  gratitude  and  confidence.  The  act  of  faith  in
such  a  promise  is  in  its  nature  an  act  of  appropriation  and  confi-
dence.

2.  We  accordingly  find  that  in  many  cases  in  the  Bible  the
word  trust  is  used  instead  of  faith.  The  same  act  or  state  of
mind  which  in  one  place  is  expressed  by  the  one  word,  is  in
others  expressed  by  the  other.  The  same  promises  are  made  to
trust  as  are  made  to  faith.  The  same  effects  are  attributed  to
the  one,  that  are  attributed  to  the  other.

3.  The  use  of  other  words  and  forms  of  expression  as  explana-
tory of  the  act  of  faith,  and  substituted  for  that  word,  shows  that
it  includes  trust  as  an  essential  element  of  its  nature.  We  are
conunanded  to  look  to  Christ,  as  the  dying  Israehtes  looked  up
to  the  brazen  serpent.  This  looking  involved  trusting ;  and
looking  is  declared  to  be  believing.  Simiers  are  exhorted  to  flee
to  Christ  as  a  refuge.  The  man-slayer  fled  to  the  city  of  refuge
because  he  relied  upon  it  as  a  place  of  safety.  We  are  said  to
receive  Christ,  to  rest  upon  Him,  to  lay  hold  of  Him.  All  these,
and  other  modes  of  expression  wliicli  teach  us  what  we  are  to  do
when  we  are  commanded  to  beheve,  show  that  trust  is  an  essen-
tial element  in  the  act  of  saving  faith.

4.  The  command  to  believe  is  expressed  by  the  word  Trto-rcvw
not  only  when  followed  by  the  accusative,  but  also  when  followed
by  the  dative  and  by  the  prepositions  eVt,  eU,  iv.  But  the  hteral
meaning  of  Trto-rcuetv  et?,  or  eVt,  or  iv,  is  not  simply  to  believe,  but
to  believe  upon,  to  confide  in,  to  trust.  Faith  in  a  promise  made
to  ourselves,  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  is  an  act  of  confidence
in  him  who  makes  the  promise.

5.  Unbelief  is,  therefore,  expressed  by  doubt,  fear,  distrust,
and  despair.

6.  The  believer  knows  from  his  own  experience  that  when  he
believes  he  receives  and  rests  on  Jesus  Clirist  for  salvation,  as  He
is  freely  offered  to  us  in  the  Gospel.


§6.]  FAITH  AND  LOVE.  93

The  controversy  between  Romanists  and  Protestants  on  this
subject  turns  on  the  view  taken  of  the  plan  of  salvation.  If,  as
Protestants  hold,  every  man  in  order  to  be  saved,  must  receive
the  record  which  God  has  given  of  his  Son ;  must  believe  that  He
is  God  manifest  in  the  flesh,  the  propitiation  for  our  sins,  the
prophet,  priest,  and  king  of  his  people,  then  it  must  be  admitted
that  faith  involves  trust  in  Christ  as  to  us  the  source  of  wisdom,
righteousness,  sanctification,  and  redemj)tion.  But  if,  as  Roman-
ists teach,  the  benefits  of  redemption  are  conveyed  only  through
the  sacraments,  effective  ex  opere  operato,  then  faith  is  the  oppo-
site of  infidelity  in  its  popular  sense.  If  a  man  is  not  a  believer,
he  is  an  infidel,  i.  e.,  a  rejecter  of  Christianity.  The  object  of
faith  is  divine  revelation  as  contained  in  the  Bible.  It  is  a  sim-
ple assent  to  the  fact  that  the  Scriptures  are  from  God,  and  that
the  Church  is  a  divinely  constituted  and  supernaturally  endowed
institute  for  the  salvation  of  men.  Beheving  this,  the  sinner
comes  to  the  Church  and  receives  through  her  ministrations,  in
his  measure,  all  the  benefits  of  redemption.  According  to  this
system  the  nature  and  office  of  faith  are  entirely  different  from
what  they  are  according  to  the  Protestant  theory  of  the  Gospel.

§  6.  Faith  and  Love.

As  to  the  relation  between  faith  and  love  there  are  three  differ-
ent views :  —

1.  That  love  is  the  ground  of  faith  ;  that  men  believe  the  truth
because  they  love  it.  Faith  is  founded  on  feehng.  This  view
has  already  been  sufficiently  discussed.

2.  That  love  is  the  invariable  and  necessary  attendant  and
consequent  of  sa^dng  faith.  As  no  man  can  see  and  believe  a
thing  to  be  morally  good  without  the  feeling  of  approbation  ;  so
no  one  can  see  and  believe  the  glory  of  God  as  revealed  in  the
Scriptures  without  adoring  reverence  being  awakened  in  his  soul ;
no  one  can  believe  unto  salvation  that  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God
and  the  Son  of  Man  ;  that  He  loved  us  and  gave  Himself  for  us,
and  makes  us  kings  and  priests  unto  God,  without  love  and  devo-
tion, in  proportion  to  the  clearness  and  strength  of  this  faith,  fill-
insT  the  heart  and  controllinsc  the  life.  Hence  faith  is  said  to
work  by  love  and  to  purify  the  heart.  Romanists,  indeed,  ren-
der TTto-Tis  8i'  ayairrj'i  ivipyovfiivr)  in  this  passage  (Gal.  V.  6),  "  faith
perfected  or  completed  by  love."  But  this  is  contrary  to  the
constant  usage  of  the  word  hepyCKrOai  in  the  New  Testament,
which  is  always  used  in  a  middle  sense,  "  vim  suam  exserere."


94  PART  III.     Cn.   XVI.  — FAITH.

According  to  the  Apostle's  teacliing  in  Rom.  vii.  4-6,  love  with-
out faith,  or  anterior  to  it,  is  impossible.  Until  we  believe,  we
are  under  the  condemnation  of  the  law.  While  under  condemna-
tion, we  are  at  enmity  with  God.  While  at  enmity  with  God,
we  bring  forth  fruit  unto  death.  It  is  only  when  reconciled  to
God  and  united  to  Christ,  that  we  bring  forth  fruit  unto  God
Believing  that  God  loves  us  we  love  Him.  Believing  that  Christ
gave  Himself  for  us,  we  devote  our  lives  to  Him.  Believing  that
the  fashion  of  this  world  passes  away,  that  the  things  unseen  are
eternal,  those  who  have  that  faith  which  is  the  substance  of  things
hoped  for,  and  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen,  set  their  affections
on  things  above  where  Christ  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  God.
This  necessary  connection  between  faith  and  love,  has  already
been  sufficiently  insisted  upon.

Romanists  make  Love  the  Essence  of  Faith.

3.  The  third  doctrinal  view  on  this  subject  is  that  of  the  Ro-
manists, who  make  love  the  essence  of  faith.  In  other  words,  love
with  them  is  the  form  (in  the  scholastic  sense  of  the  word)  of
faith  ;  it  is  that  which  gives  it  being  or  character  as  a  Christian
virtue  or  grace.  While  on  the  one  hand  they  teach,  as  we
have  seen  with  the  Council  of  Trent,  that  faith  is  in  itself  mere
intellectual  assent,  without  any  moral  virtue,  and  which  may  be
exercised  by  the  unrenewed  or  by  those  in  a  state  of  mortal  sin ;
on  the  other  hand,  they  hold  that  there  is  such  a  Christian  grace
as  faith  ;  but  in  that  case,  faith  is  only  another  name  for  love.
This  is  not  the  distinction  between  a  living  and  dead  faith  which
the  Scriptures  and  all  Evangelical  Christians  recognize.  With
Romanists  the  fides  informis  is  true  faith,  and  the  fides  formata
is  love.  On  this  point,  Peter  Lombard  ^  says  :  "  Fides  qua  dici-
tur  [creditur  ?] ,  si  cum  caritate  sit,  virtus  est,  quia  caritas  ut  ait
Ambrosias  mater  est  omnium  virtutum,  qua?  omnes  informat,  sine
qua  nulla  vera  virtus  est."  Thomas  Aquinas^  says  :  "  Actus  fidei
ordinatur  ad  objectum  voluntatis,  quod  est  bonum,  sicut  ad  finem.
Hoc  autem  bonum  quod  est  finis  fidei,  scilicet  bonum  divimim,  est
proprium  objectum  charitatis  :  et  ideo  charitas  dicitur  forma  fidei,
in  quantum  per  charitatem  actus  fidei  perficitur  et  formatur."
Bellarmin  ^  says  :  "  Quod  si  charitas  est  forma  fidei,  et  fides  non
justificat  formaliter,  nisi   ab  ipsa  caritate   formata  certe    multo

1  Liber  Sententiarum,  iii.  xxiii.  C.  edit.  1472(?).

2  Summa,  u.  ii.  quajst.  iv.  art.  3,  edit.  Cologne,  1640,  p.  11,  a,  of  third  set.

8  De  Juslificatione,  lib.  ii.  cap.  4;  Disputationes,  edit.  Paris,  1608,  vol.  iv.  pp.  789,  a,  b
790,  c.


§  7.]  ITS   OBJECT.  95

magis  charitas  ipsa  justificat Fides  quse  agitur,  ac  move-

tur,  formatur,  et  quasi  animatur  per  dilectionem Apostolus

Paulus  ....  explicat  dilectionem  formam  esse  extrinsecam  fidei
non  intrinsecam,  quse  det  illi,  non  ut  sit,  sed  ut  moveatur."  All
this  is  intelKgible  and  reasonable,  provided  we  admit  subjective
justification,  and  the  merit  of  good  works.  If  justification  is
sanctification,  then  it  may  be  admitted  that  love  has  more  to  do
with  making  men  holy,  than  faith  considered  as  mere  intellectual
assent.  And  if  it  be  conceded  that  we  are  accepted  by  God  on
the  ground  of  our  own  virtue,  then  it  may  be  granted  that  love  is
more  valuable  than  any  mere  exercise  of  the  intellect.  Roman-
ists argue,  "  Maxima  virtus  maxime  justificat.  Dilectio  est  max-
ima virtus.  Ergo  maxime  justificat."  It  was  because  this  distinc-
tion between  a  "  formed  and  unformed  faith  "  was  made  in  the
interest  of  justification  on  the  groimd  of  our  own  character  and
merit,  that  Luther,  with  his  usual  vehement  power,  says  :  "  Ipsi
dupKcem  facivmt  fidem,  informem  et  formatam,  hanc  pestilentissi-
mam  et  satanicam  glossamnon  possum  non  vehementer  detestari."
It  is  only  as  connected  with  false  views  of  justification  that  this
question  has  any  real  importance.  For  it  is  admitted  by  all  Prot-
estants that  saving  faith  and  love  are  inseparably  connected ;
that  faith  without  love,  i.  e.,  that  a  faith  which  does  not  produce
love  and  good  works,  is  dead.  But  Protestants  are  strenuous  in
denying  that  we  are  justified  on  account  of  love,  which  is  the
real  meaning  of  the  Romanists  when  they  say  "  fides  non  justifi-
cat formaliter,  nisi  ab  ipsa  caritate  formata."

§  7.   The  Object  of  Saving  Faith.
Fides  Creneralis.

It  is  conceded  that  all  Christians  are  bound  to  believe,  and  that
all  do  believe  everything  taught  in  the  Word  of  God,  so  far  as  the
contents  of  the  Scriptures  are  known  to  them.  It  is  correct,  there-
fore, to  say  that  the  object  of  faith  is  the  whole  revelation  of  God
as  contained  in  his  Word.  As  the  Bible  is  with  Protestants  the
only  infallible  rule  of  faith  and  practice,  nothing  not  expressly
taught  in  Scripture,  or  deduced  therefrom  by  necessary  inference,
can  be  imposed  on  the  people  of  God  as  an  article  of  faith.  This
is  "  the  hberty  wherewith  Christ  has  made  us  free,"  and  in  which
we  are  bound  to  stand  fast.  This  is  our  protection  on  the  one
hand,  against  the  usurpations  of  the  Church.  Romanists  claim
for   the  Church  the  prerogative  of  infallible   and  authoritative


96  PART  III.     Ch.   XVI.— faith.

teacliing.  The  people  are  bound  to  believe  whatever  the  Church,
i.  e.,  its  organs  the  bishops,  declare  to  be  a  part  of  the  revelation
of  God.  They  do  not,  indeed,  assume  the  right  ^'  to  make  "  new
articles  of  faith.  But  they  claim  the  authority  to  decide,  in  such
a  way  as  to  bind  the  conscience  of  the  people,  what  the  Bible
teaches  ;  and  what  by  tradition  the  Church  knows  to  be  included
in  the  teacliing  of  Christ  and  his  Apostles.  This  gives  them  lat-
itude enough  to  teach  for  doctrines  the  commandments  of  men.
Bellarmin^  says:  "  Omnium  dogmatum  firmitas  pendet  ab  aucto-
ritate  prajsentis  ecclesiee."  On  the  other  hand,  however,  it  is  not
only  against  the  usurpations  of  the  Church,  that  the  principle
above  mentioned  is  our  security,  but  also  against  the  tyranny
of  public  opinion.  Men  are  as  impatient  of  contradiction  now  as
they  ever  were.  They  manifest  the  same  desire  to  have  their
own  opinions  enacted  into  laws,  and  enforced  by  divine  authority.
And  they  are  as  fierce  in  their  denunciations  of  all  who  venture
to  oppose  them.  Hence  they  meet  in  conventions  or  other  assem-
blies, ecclesiastical  or  voluntary,  and  decide  what  is  true  and  what
is  false  in  doctrine,  and  what  is  right  and  what  is  wrong  in  mor-
als. Against  all  undue  assumptions  of  authority,  true  Protestants
hold  fast  to  the  two  gTeat  principles,  —  the  right  of  private  judg-
ment, and  that  the  Scriptures  are  the  only  infallible  rule  of  faith
and  practice.  The  object  of  faith,  therefore,  is  all  the  truths  re-
vealed in  the  Word  of  God.  All  that  God  in  the  Bible  declares
to  be  true,  we  are  bound  to  believe.  This  is  what  theologians
call  fides  generalis.

Fides  Specialis.

But,  besides  this,  there  is  a  fides  specialis  necessary  to  salvation.
In  the  general  contents  of  the  Scriptures  there  are  certam  doc-
trines concerning  Christ  and  his  work,  and  certain  promises  of
salvation  made  through  Him  to  sinful  men,  which  we  are  bound  to
receive  and  on  which  we  are  required  to  trust.  The  special  object
of  faith,  therefore,  is  Christ,  and  the  promise  of  salvation  through
Him.  And  the  special  definite  act  of  faith  which  secures  our  sal-
vation is  the  act  of  receiving  and  resting  on  Him  as  He  is  offered
to  us  in  the  Gospel.  This  is  so  clearly  and  so  variously  taught  in
the  Scriptures  as  hardly  to  admit  of  being  questioned.

Chrises  Testimony.
In  the  first  place,  our  Lord  repeatedly  declares  that  what  men
are  required  to  do,  and  what  they  are  condemned  because  they

1  De  Sacrum,  lib.  ii.  c.  2.  (?)


§  7.]  ITS   OBJECT.  97

do  not  do,  is  to  believe  on  Him.  He  was  lifted  up,  "  That  who-
soever believeth  in  him  should  not  perish,  but  have  eternal  life."
(John  iii.  15.)  "  He  that  believeth  on  him  is  not  condenmed:
but  he  that  believeth  not  is  condemned  already,  because  he  hath
not  beheved  in  the  name  of  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God."
(v.  18.)  "  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  life:
but  he  that  believeth  not  the  Son  shall  not  see  hfe  ;  but  the
wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him."  (v.  36.)  "  This  is  the  will  of
him  that  sent  me,  that  every  one  which  seeth  the  Son,  and  be-
lieveth on  him,  may  have  everlasting  hfe  :  and  I  will  raise  him
up  at  the  last  day."  (John  vi.  40.)  "  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto
you.  He  that  believeth  on  me  hath  everlasting  life.     I  am  that

bread  of  life This  is  the  bread  which  cometh  down  from

heaven,  ....  if  any  man  eat  of  this  bread,  he  shall  live  for-
ever." (vers.  47-51.)  In  another  place  our  Lord  says,  "  This
is  the  work  of  God,  that  ye  believe  on  him  whom  he  hath  sent."
(John  vi.  29.)  The  passages,  however,  in  which  faith  in  Christ
is  expressly  demanded  as  the  condition  of  salvation,  are  too  nu-
merous to  be  cited.

We  are  said  to  be  saved  hy  receiving  Christ.

That  Christ  is  the  immediate  object  of  saving  faith  is  also
taught  in  all  those  passages  in  which  we  are  said  to  receive
Christ,  or  the  testimony  of  God  concerning  Christ,  and  in  which
this  act  of  receiving  is  said  to  secure  our  salvation.  For  example,
in  John  i.  12,  "  As  many  as  received  him,  to  them  gave  he  power
to  become  the  sons  of  God."  "I  am  come  in  my  Father's  name,
and  ye  receive  me  not."  (John  v.  43.)  "  If  we  receive  the
witness  of  men,  the  witness  of  God  is  greater :  for  this  is  the  ^vit-
ness  of  God  which  he  hath  testified  of  his  Son.  He  that  believeth
on  the  Son  of  God  hath  the  witness  in  himself :  he  that  believeth
not  God  has  made  him  a  liar ;  because  he  believeth  not  the  record
that  God  gave  of  his  Son."  (1  John  v.  9,  10.)  "  He  that  hath
the  Son  hath  life ;  he  that  hath  not  the  Son  of  God  hath  not
life."  (v.  12.)  "  Whosoever  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Clu'ist
is  born  of  God."  (v.  1.)  It  is,  therefore,  receiving  Christ ;  re-
ceiving the  record  which  God  has  given  of  his  Son  ;  believing  that
He  is  the  Christ  the  Son  of  the  living  God,  which  is  tlie  specific
act  required  of  us  in  order  to  salvation.  Christ,  therefore,  is  the
immediate  object  of  those  exercises  of  faith  which  secure  salva-
tion. And,  therefore,  faith  is  expressed  by  looking  to  Christ  j
coming  to  Christ ;  committing  the  soul  to  Him,  etc.


98  PART  m.   Ch.  XVI.— faith.

Teaching  of  the  Apostles.
Accordingly  the  Apostle  teaclies  we  are  justified  "  by  the  faith
of  Christ."  It  is  not  faith  as  a  pious  disposition  of  the  mind ;
not  faith  as  general  confidence  in  God ;  not  faith  in  the  truth  of
divine  revelation;  much  less  faith  "in  eternal  verities,"  or  the
general  principles  of  truth  and  duty,  but  that  faith  of  which
Christ  is  the  object.  Romans  iii.  22 :  "  The  righteousness  of  God
which  is  by  faith  of  Jesus  Christ  unto  all  and  upon  all  them  that
believe."  Galatians  ii.  16  :  "  Knowing  that  a  man  is  not  justified
by  the  works  of  the  law,  but  by  the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ,  even
we  have  believed  in  Jesus  Christ,  that  we  might  be  justified  by
the  faith  of  Christ,  and  not  by  the  works  of  the  law."  iii.  24  :
"  The  law  was  our  schoolmaster  to  bring  us  unto  Christ,  that  we
might  be  justified  by  faith."  v.  26  :  "  For  ye  are  all  the  children
of  God  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus."  Galatians  ii.  20  :  "I  live  by
the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God,"  etc.,  etc.

Christ  our  Ransom.

Christ  declares  that  He  gave  Himself  as  a  ransom  for  many  ;
He  was  set  forth  as  a  propitiation  for  sins  ;  He  offered  Himself  as
a  sacrifice  unto  God.  It  is  through  the  merit  of  his  righteousness
and  death  that  men  are  saved.  All  these  representations  which
pervade  the  Scriptures  necessarily  assume  that  the  faith  which
secures  salvation  must  have  special  reference  to  Him.  If  He  is
our  Redeemer,  we  must  receive  and  trust  Him  as  such.  If  He  is
a  propitiation  for  sins,  it  is  through  faith  in  liis  blood  that  we  are
reconciled  to  God.  The  whole  plan  of  salvation,  as  set  forth  in
the  Gospel,  supposes  that  Christ  in  his  person  and  work  is  the
object  of  faith  and  the  ground  of  confidence.

We  live  in  Christ  hy  Faith.

The  same  thing  follows  from  the  representations  given  of  the
relation  of  the  believer  to  Christ.  We  are  in  Him  by  faith.  He
dwells  in  us.  He  is  the  head  from  whom  we,  as  members  of  his
body,  derive  our  life.  He  is  the  vine,  we  are  the  branches.  It  is
not  we  that  Hve,  but  Christ,  who  liveth  in  us.  These  and  other
representations  are  utterly  inconsistent  with  the  doctrine  that  it  is
a  vague  general  faith  in  God  or  in  the  Scriptures  which  secures
our  salvation.  It  is  a  faith  which  terminates  directly  on  Christ,
which  takes  Him  to  be  our  God  and  Saviour.  God  sent  his  Son
into  the  world,  clothed  in  our  nature,  to  reveal  his  will,  to  die  for


§  7.1  ITS   OBJECT.  99

our  sins  and  to  rise  again  for  our  justification.  In  Him  dwells
the  fulness  of  the  Godhead,  from  his  fuhiess  we  are  filled.  He  to
us  is  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification,  and  redemption.  Those
who  receive  this  Saviour  as  being  all  He  claimed  to  be,  and  com-
mit their  souls  into  his  hands  to  be  used  in  his  service  and  saved
to  his  glory,  are,  in  the  Scriptural  sense  of  the  term,  behevers.
Christ  is  not  only  the  object  of  their  faith,  but  their  whole  in-
ward, spiritual  life  terminates  on  Him.  Nothing,  therefore,  can
be  more  foreign  to  the  Gospel  than  the  Romish  doctrine,  substan-
tially revived  by  the  modern  philosophy  wliich  turns  the  mind
away  from  the  historical,  really  existing,  objective  Christ,  to  the
work  within  us ;  leaving  us  nothing  to  love  and  trust,  but  what
is  in  our  own  miserable  hearts.

Christ  is  not  received  in  a  Special  Office  alone.

Admitting  that  Christ  is  the  immediate  and  special  object  of
those  acts  of  faith  which  secure  salvation,  it  is  asked,  Whether  it
is  Christ  in  all  his  ofiices,  or  Christ  in  his  priestly  office,  especially,
that  is  the  object  of  justifying  faith  ?  Tliis  seems  an  unnecessary
question.  It  is  not  raised  in  the  Bible  ;  nor  does  it  suggest  itseK
to  the  believer.  He  receives  Christ.  He  does  not  ask  himself  for
what  special  function  of  his  saving  work  he  thus  accepts  Him.  He
takes  Him  as  a  Saviour,  as  a  deliverer  from  the  guilt  and  power
of  sin,  from  the  dominion  of  Satan,  and  from  all  the  evils  of  his
apostasy  from  God.  He  takes  Him  as  his  wisdom,  righteousness,
sanctification,  and  redemption.  He  takes  Him  as  liis  God  and
Sa^dour,  as  the  full,  complete,  satisfying,  life-giving  portion  of
the  soul.  If  this  complex  act  of  apprehension  and  surrender  were
analyzed  it  doubtless  would  be  found  to  include  submission  to  all
his  teaching,  reliance  on  his  righteousness  and  intercession,  sub-
jection to  his  will,  confidence  in  his  protection,  and  devotion  to
his  service.  As  He  is  offered  to  us  as  a  prophet,  priest,  and  king,
as  such  He  is  accepted.  And  as  He  is  offered  to  us  as  a  source
of  life,  and  glory,  and  blessedness,  as  the  supreme  object  of  ado-
ration and  love,  as  such  He  is  joyfully  accepted.

Is  the  Sinner  required  to  believe  that  Grod  loves  him  ?
Again,  it  is  questioned.  Whether  the  object  of  saving  faith  is
that  God  is  reconciled  to  us  ;  that  our  sins  are  forgiven ;  that  we
are  the  objects  of  the  saving  love  of  God  ?  This  is  not  the  ques-
tion above  considered,  namely.  Whether,  as  Romanists  say,  the
object  of  faith  is  the  whole  revelation  of  God,  or,  as  Protestants


100  PART  m.   Ch.  xvl  — faith.

contend,  Christ  and  the  promise  of  redemption  through  Him,  al-
though many  of  the  arguments  of  the  Romanists  are  directed
against  the  special  form  of  the  doctrine  just  stated.  They  argue
that  it  is  contradictory  to  say  that  we  are  pardoned  because  we
believe ;  and,  in  the  same  breath,  to  say  that  the  thing  to  be
believed  is  that  our  sins  are  already  pardoned.  Again,  they  argue
that  the  only  proper  object  of  faith  is  some  revelation  of  God,  but
it  is  nowhere  revealed  that  we  individually  are  reconciled  to  God,
or  that  our  sins  are  pardoned,  or  that  we  are  the  objects  of  that
special  love*  which  God  has  to  his  own  people.

In  answer  to  the  first  of  these  objections,  the  Reformed  theolo-
gians were  accustomed  to  say,  that  a  distinction  is  to  be  made
between  the  remission  of  sin  de  jure  already  obtained  through  the
death  of  Christ,  and  remission  de  facto  through  the  efficacious
apphcation  of  it  to  us.  In  the  former  sense,  "  remissio  peccatorum
jam  impetrata  "  is  the  object  of  faith.  In  the  latter  sense,  it  is
"remissio  impetranda,"  because  faith  is  the  instrumental  cause  of
justification,  and  must  precede  it.  "  Unde,"  says  Turrettin,^
"  ad  obtinendam  remissionem  peccatorum,  non  debeo  credere
peccata  mihi  jam  remissa,  ut  perperam  nobis  impingunt ;  sed
debeo  credere  peccata  mihi  credenti  et  poenitenti,  juxta  promis-
sionem  factam  credentibus  et  poenitentibus,  remissum  iri  certis-
sune,  quse  postea  actu  secundari  et  reflexo  ex  sensu  fidei  credo
mihi  esse  remissa."

The  second  objection  was  answered  by  distinguishing  between
the  direct  and  the  reflex  act  of  faith.  By  the  direct  act  of  faith,
we  embrace  Christ  as  our  Sa\iour ;  by  the  reflex  act,  arising  out
of  the  consciousness  of  believing,  Ave  believe  that  He  loved  us  and
died  for  us,  and  that  nothing  can  ever  separate  us  from  his  love.
These  two  acts  are  inseparable,  not  only  as  cause  and  effect,  ante-
cedent and  consequent ;  but  they  are  not  separated  in  time,  or  in
the  consciousness  of  the  believer.  They  are  only  different  ele-
ments of  the  complex  act  of  accepting  Christ  as  He  is  offered  in
the  Gospel.  We  cannot  separate  the  joy  and  gratitude  with
which  a  great  favour  is  accepted.  Although  a  psychological
analysis  might  resolve  these  emotions  into  the  effects  of  the  act  of
acceptance,  they  belong,  as  revealed  in  consciousness,  to  tjie  very
nature  of  the  act.  It  is  a  cordial  and  grateful  acceptance  of  a
promise  made  to  all  who  embrace  it.  If  a  general  promise  of
pardon  be  made  to  criminals  on  the  condition  of  the  confession  of
guilt,  every  one  of  their  number  who  makes  the  confession  knows
1  Inttitutio,  XV.  xii.  6;   Works,  edit.  Edinburgh,  1847,  vol.  ii.  p.  508.


§7.]  ITS   OBJECT.  101

or  believes  that  the  promise  is  made  to  him.  On  this  point  the
early  Reformed  and  Lutheran  theologians  were  agreed  in  teaching
that  Avhen  the  sinner  exercises  saving  faith  He  beUeves  that  for
Christ's  sake  he  is  pardoned  and  accepted  of  God.  In  other
words,  that  Christ  loved  him  and  gave  Himself  for  him.  We
have  already  seen  that  the  "  Heidelberg  Catechism,"  ^  the  symbol-
ical book  of  so  large  a  portion  of  the  Reformed  Church,  declares
saving  faith  to  be  "  Certa  fiducia,  a  Spiritu  Sancto  per  evange-
lium  in  corde  meo  accensa,  qua  in  Deo  acquiesco,  certo  statuens,
non  solum  aliis,  sed  mihi  quoque  remissionem  peccatorum  asternam,
justitiam  et  vitam  donatam  esse,  idque  gratis,  ex  Dei  misericordia,
propter  unius  Christi  meritum."  In  the  "  Apology  of  the  Augs-
burg Confession  of  the  Lutheran  Church  "  it  is  said,^  "  Nos  prse-
ter  illam  fidem  [fidem  generalem]  requirimus,  ut  credat  sibi  quis-
que  remitti  peccata."  Calvin  says,^  "  Gratiae  promissione  opus
est,  qua  nobis  testiiicetur  se  propitium  esse  Patrem  :  quando  nee
aliter  ad  eum  appropinquare  possumus,  et  in  eam  solam  reclinare

cor  hominis  potest Nunc  justa  fidei  definitio  nobis  consta-

bit,  si  dicamus  esse  divinse  erga  nos  benevolentije  firmam  certara-
que  cognitionem,  quaa  gratuitae  in  Christo  promissionis  veritate
fundata,  per  Spiritum  Sanctum  et  revelatur  mentibus  nostris  et
cordibus  obsignatur."  "  Hie  praBcipuus  fidei  cardo  vertitur,  ne
quas  Dominus  offert  misericordise  promissiones,  extra  nos  tantum
veras  esse  arbitremur,  in  nobis  minime  :  sed  ut  potius  eas  intus

complectendo  nostras  faciamus In  summa,  vere  fidehs  non

est  nisi  qui  sohda  persuasione  Deum  sibi  propitium  benevolumque
patrem  esse  persuasus,  de  ejus  benignitate  omnia  sibi  poUicetur :
nisi  qui  divinge  erga  se  benevolentioe  promissionibus  fretus,  indu-
bitatam  salutis  expectationem  prtesumit."

This  is  strong  language.  The  doctrine,  however,  is  not  that
faith  impHes  assurance.  The  question  concerns  the  nature  of  the
object  seen,  not  the  clearness  of  the  vision ;  what  it  is  that  the
soul  believes,  not  the  strength  of  its  faith.  This  Calvin  himself
elsewhere  beautifully  expresses,  saying,  "  When  the  least  di-op  of
faith  is  instUled  into  our  minds,  we  begin  to  see  the  serene  and
placid  face  of  our  reconciled  Father  ;  far  off  and  on  high,  it  may
be,  but  still  it  is  seen."  A  man  m  a  dungeon  may  see  only  a  ray
of  light  streaming  through  a  crevice.  This  is  very  different  from
broad  daylight.     Nevertheless,  what  he  sees  is  hght.     So  what

i  XXI. ;  Niemeyer,  CoUectio  Confessionum,  Leipzig,  1840,  p.  434.

2  v.  60;  Hase,  Libri  Symbolici,  Leipzig,  1846,  p.  172.

8  Institutio,  lib.  m.  ii.  7,  16;  edit.  Berlin,  1834,  vol.  i.  pp.  357,  364.


102  PART  m.   Ch.  XVI.  — faith.

the  penitent  sinner  believes  is,  that  God  for  Christ's  sake  is  recon-
ciled to  him.  It  may  be  Avith  a  very  dim  and  doubtfnl  vision,  he
apprehends  that  truth  ;  but  that  is  the  truth  on  which  his  trust

is  stayed.

Proof  of  this  Doctrine.

This  is  involved  in  the  appropriation  of  the  general  promise  of
the  Gospel.  The  Scriptures  declare  that  God  is  love  ;  that  He
set  forth  his  Son  to  be  a  propitiation  for  sin  ;  that  in  Him  He  is
reconciled  ;  that  He  will  receive  all  who  come  to  Him  through
Christ.  To  appropriate  these  general  declarations,  is  to  believe
that  they  are  true,  not  only  in  relation  to  others,  but  to  ourselves
that  God  is  reconciled  to  us.  We  have  no  right  to  exclude  our-
selves.  This  self-exclusion  is  unbelief.  It  is  refusing  to  take  of
the  waters  of  life,  freely  offered  to  all.

Cralatians  ii.  20.

Accordingly  the  Apostle  in  Galatians  ii.  20,  says,  "  The  life
which  I  now  Hve  in  the  flesh,  I  live  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of
God,  who  loved  me,  and  gave  HimseK  for  me."  The  object  of
the  Apostle's  faith,  therefore,  the  truths  which  he  believed,  and
faith  in  which  gave  life  to  his  soul,  were,  (1.)  That  Christ  is  the
Son  of  God  ;  (2.)  That  He  loved  him  ;  (3.)  That  He  gave  Him-
self for  him.  The  faith  by  which  a  believer  lives,  is  not  specifi-
cally different  in  its  nature  or  object  from  the  faith  required  of
every  man  in  order  to  his  salvation.  The  life  of  faith  is  only  the
continued  repetition,  it  may  be  with  ever  increasing  strength  and
clearness,  of  those  exercises  by  which  we  first  receive  Christ,  in
all  his  fulness  and  in  all  his  offices,  as  our  God  and  Saviour.
"  Qui  fit  ut  vivamus  Christi  fide  ?  quia  nos  dilexit,  et  se  ipsum
tradidit  pro  nobis.  Amor,  inquam,  quo  nos  complexus  est
Christus,  fecit  ut  se  nobis  coadunaret.  Id  implevit  morte  sua  :
nam  se  ipsum    tradendo  pro  nobis,  non  secus   atque  in  persona

nostra  passus  est Neque  parum  energise   habet   pro  me :

quia  non  satis  fuerit  Christum  pro  mundi  salute  moVtuum  repu-
tare,  nisi  sibi  quisque  effectum  ac  possessionem  hujus  gratis  pri-
vatim  vindicet."  ^

It  is  objected  to  this  view  of  the  case  that  by  the  "  love  of
God,"  or  "  of  Christ,"  in  the  above  statement,  is  not  meant  the
general  benevolence  or  philanthropy  of  God,  but  his  special,  elect-
ing, and  saving  love.  When  Paul  said  he  lived  by  the  faith  of
Christ  who  loved  him,  and  gave  Himself  for  him,  he  meant  some*

1  Calvin  tn  loco.


§7.]  ITS   OBJECT.  103

thing  more  than  that  Christ  loved  all  men  and  therefore  him
among  the  rest.  He  evidently  believed  himself  to  be  a  special
object  of  the  Saviour's  love.  It  Avas  this  conviction  vrhich  gave
power  to  his  faith.  And  a  like  conviction  enters  into  the  faith  of
every  true  beUever.  But  to  this  it  is  objected  that  faith  must
have  a  divine  revelation  for  its  object.  But  there  is  no  revela-
tion of  God's  special  love  to  individuals,  and,  therefore,  no  indi-
vidual has  any  Scriptural  ground  to  beheve  that  Christ  loved
him,  and  gave  Himself  for  him.  Whatever  force  there  may  be  in
this  objection,  it  bears  against  Paul's  declaration  and  experience.
He  certainly  did  believe  that  Christ  loved  him  and  died  for  him.
It  will  not  do  to  say  that  this  was  a  conclusion  drawn  from  his
o\vn  experience  ;  or  to  assume  that  the  Apostle  argued  himself
into  the  conviction  that  Christ  loved  him.  Christ  specially  loves
all  who  believe  upon  Him.  I  believe  upon  Him.  Therefore
Christ  specially  loves  me.  But  a  conclusion  reached  by  argu-
ment is  not  an  object  of  faith.  Faith  must  rest  on  the  testimony
of  God.  It  must  be,  therefore,  that  God  m  some  way  testifies
to  the  soul  that  it  is  the  object  of  his  love.  This  he  does  in  two
ways.  First,  by  the  general  invitations  and  promises  of  the  Gos-
pel. The  act  of  appropriating,  or  of  accepting  these  promises,  is
to  believe  that  they  belong  to  us  as  well  as  to  others.  Secondly,
by  the  inward  witness  of  the  Spirit.  Paul  says  (Rom.  v.  5),
"  The  love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts  by  the  Holy
Ghost  which  is  given  unto  us."  That  is,  the  Holy  Ghost  con-
vinces us  that  we  are  the  objects  of  God's  love.  This  is  done,  not
only  by  the  various  manifestations  of  his  love  in  providence  and
redemption,  but  by  his  inward  dealings  with  the  soul.  "  He
that  loveth  me  shall  be  loved  of  my  Father,  and  I  will  love  him,
and  will  manifest  myself  to  him."  (John  xiv.  21).  This  manifes-
tation is  not  outward  through  the  word.  It  is  inward.  God  has
fellowship  or  intercourse  with  the  souls  of  his  people.  The
Spirit  calls  forth  our  love  to  God,  and  reveals  his  love  to  us.
Again,  in  Romans  viii.  16,  the  Apostle  says,  "  The  Spirit  itself
beareth  witness  with  our  spirit,  that  we  are  the  children  of  God."
This  docs  not  mean  that  the  Spirit  excites  in  us  filial  feelings
toward  God,  from  whence  we  infer  that  we  are  his  children.
The  Apostle  refers  to  two  distinct  sources  of  evidence  of  our  adop-
tion. The  one  is  that  we  can  call  God  Father  ;  the  other,  the
testimony  of  the  Spirit.  The  latter  is  joined  with  the  former.
The  word  is  o-u/x/xaprvpei,  unites  in  testifying.  Hence  we  are  said
to  be  sealed,  not  only  marked  and  secured,  but  assured  by  the


104  PART  III.     Cn.  XVI.  — FAITH.

Spirit ;  and  the  Spirit  is  a  pledge,  an  assurance,  that  we  are,  and
ever  shall  be,  the  objects  of  God's  saving  love.  (Eph.  i.  13,  14  ;
iv.  30.     2  Cor.  i.  22.)

This  is  not  saying  that  a  man  must  believe  that  he  is  one  of
the  elect.  Election  is  a  secret  purpose  of  God.  The  election  of
any  particular  person  is  not  revealed,  and,  therefore,  is  not  an
object  of  faith.  It  is  a  thing  to  be  proved,  or  made  sure,  as  the
Apostle  Peter  says,  by  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit.  All  that  the  doc-
trine of  the  Reformers  on  this  subject  includes  is,  that  the  soul  in
committing  itself  to  Christ  does  so  as  to  one  who  loved  it  and
died  for  its  salvation.  The  woman  healed  by  touching  our  Sav-
iour's garment,  believed  that  she  was  an  object  of  his  compassion-
ate love,  because  all  who  touched  Him  with  faith  were  included
in  that  number.     Her  faith  included  that  conviction.

%^.  Effects  of  Faith.
Union  with  Christ.

The  first  effect  of  faith,  according  to  the  Scriptures,  is  union
with  Christ.  We  are  in  Him  by  faith.  There  is  indeed  a  fed-
eral union  between  Christ  and  his  people,  founded  on  the  cove-
nant of  redemption  between  the  Father  and  the  Son  in  the  coun-
sels of  eternity.  We  are,  therefore,  said  to  be  in  Him  before  the
foundation  of  the  world.  It  is  one  of  the  promises  of  that  cove-
nant, that  all  whom  the  Father  had  given  the  Son  should  come
to  Him  ;  that  his  people  should  be  made  willing  in  the  day  of  his
power.  Christ  has,  therefore,  been  exalted  to  the  right  hand  of
God,  to  give  repentance  and  the  remission  of  sins.  But  it  was
also,  as  we  learn  from  the  Scriptures,  included  in  the  stipulations
of  that  covenant,  that  his  people,  so  far  as  adults  are  concerned,
should  not  receive  the  saving  benefits  of  that  covenant  until  they
were  united  to  Him  by  a  voluntary  act  of  faith.  They  are  "  by
nature  the  children  of  wrath,  even  as  others."  (Eph.  ii.  3.)
They  remain  in  this  state  of  condemnation  until  they  believe.
Their  union  is  consummated  by  faith.  To  be  in  Christ,  and  to
believe  in  Christ,  are,  therefore,  in  the  Scriptures  convertible
forms  of  expression.  They  mean  substantially  the  same  thing,
and,  therefore,  the  same  effects  are  attributed  to  faith  as  are  at-
tributed to  union  Avith  Clirist.


§8.]  ITS  EFFECTS.  105

Justification  an  Effect  of  Faith.
The  proximate  effect  of  this  union,  and,  consequently,  the  sec-
ond effect  of  faith,  is  justification.  We  are  "  justified  by  the
faith  of  Christ."  (Gal.  ii.  16.)  "  There  is  therefore  now  no
condemnation  to  them  which  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  (Rom.  viii.
1.)  "He  that  believeth  on  him  is  not  condemned."  (John
iii.  18.)  Faith  is  the  condition  on  which  God  promises  in  the
covenant  of  redemption,  to  impute  unto  men  the  righteousness
of  Clirist.  As  soon,  therefore,  as  they  believe,  they  camiot  be
condemned.  They  are  clothed  with  a  righteousness  which  an-
swers all  the  demands  of  justice.  "Who  shall  lay  anything  to
the  charge  of  God's  elect  ?  It  is  God  that  justifieth.  Who  is  he
that  condemneth  ?  It  is  Christ  that  died,  yea  rather,  that  is  risen
again,  who  is  even  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  who  also  maketh
intercession  for  us."     (Rom.  viii.  33,  34.)

Participation  of  Christ'' s  Life  an  Effect  of  Faith.

The  third  effect  of  faith,  or  of  union  with  Christ,  is  a  partici-
pation of  his  life.  Those  united  with  Christ,  the  Apostle  teaches
(Rom.  vi.  4-10),  so  as  to  be  partakers  of  his  death,  are  par-
takers also  of  his  hfe.  "  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also."
(John  xiv.  19.)  Christ  dwells  in  our  hearts  by  faith.  (Eph.
iii.  17.)  Christ  is  in  us.  (Rom.  viii.  10.)  It  is  not  we  that
live,  but  Christ  liveth  in  us.  (Gal.  ii.  20.)  Our  Lord's  illustra-
tion of  this  vital  union  is  derived  from  a  vine  and  its  branches.
(John  XV.  1-6.)  As  the  life  of  the  vine  is  diffused  through  the
branches,  and  as  they  live  only  as  connected  with  the  vine,  so
the  life  of  Christ  is  diffused  through  his  people,  and  they  are
partakers  of  spiritual  and  eternal  life,  only  in  virtue  of  their
union  with  Him.  Another  familiar  illustration  of  this  subject  is
derived  from  the  human  body.  The  members  derive  their  life
from  the  head,  and  perish  if  separated  from  it.  (Eph.  i.  22 ;
1  Cor.  xii.  12-27,  and  often).  In  Ephesians  iv.  15,  16,  the
Apostle  carries  out  this  illustration  in  detail.  "  The  head,  even
Christ :  from  whom  the  whole  body  fitly  joined  together  and
compacted  by  that  which  every  joint  supplieth,  accorduig  to  the
effectual  worldng  in  the  measure  of  every  part,  maketh  increase
of  the  body  unto  the  edifying  of  itself  in  love."  As  the  prin-
ciple of  animal  life  located  in  the  head,  through  the  compli-
cated yet  ordered  system  of  nerves  extending  to  every  member,
diffuses  life  and  energy  thi'ough  the  whole  body ;   so  the  Holy


106  PART  III.     Ck.   XVI.  — faith.

Spirit,  given  "wdthout  measure  to  Christ  the  head  of  the  Church,
wliich  is  his  body,  diffuses  Hfe  and  strength  to  every  member.
Hence,  according  to  Scripture,  Christ's  dwelHng  in  us  is  explained
as  the  Spirit's  dwelHng  in  us.  The  indwelhng  of  the  Spirit  is  the
indweUing  of  Christ.  If  God  be  in  you ;  if  Christ  be  in  you ;  if
the  Spirit  be  in  you,  —  all  mean  the  same  thing.  See  Romans
viii.  9-11.

To  explain  this  vital  and  mystical  union  between  Christ  and
his  people  as  a  mere  union  of  thought  and  feeling,  is  utterly  in-
admissible. (1.)  In  the  first  place,  it  is  contrary  to  the  plain
meaning  of  liis  words.  No  one  ever  speaks  of  Plato's  dwelling  in
men ;  of  his  being  their  life,  so  that  without  him  they  can  do  noth-
ing ;  and  much  less,  so  that  holiness,  happiness,  and  eternal  life
depend  upon  that  union.  (2.)  Such  interpretation  supposes  that
om-  relation  to  Christ  is  analogous  to  the  relation  of  one  man  to
another.  Whereas  it  is  a  relation  between  men  and  a  divine  per-
son, who  has  life  in  Himself,  and  gives  life  to  as  many  as  He
wiUs.  (3.)  It  ignores  all  that  the  Scriptures  teach  of  the  work
of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  of  his  dwelling  in  the  hearts  of  men.
(4.)  It  overlooks  the  supernatural  character  of  Christianity,  and
would  reduce  it  to  a  mere  philosophical  and  ethical  system.

Peace  as  the  Fruit  of  Faith.

The  fourth  effect  of  faith  is  peace.  "  Being  justified  by
faith,  we  have  peace  with  God,  tlu-ough  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."
(Rom.  V.  1.)  Peace  arises  from  a  sense  of  reconciliation.  God
promises  to  pardon,  to  receive  into  his  favour,  and  finally  to  save
all  who  believe  the  record  which  He  has  given  of  his  Son.  To
believe,  is  therefore  to  believe  this  promise ;  and  to  appropriate
this  promise  to  ourselves  is  to  believe  that  God  is  reconciled  to
us.  This  faith  may  be  weak  or  strong.  And  the  peace  which
floAvs  from  it  may  be  tremulous  and  intermitting,  or  it  may  be
constant  and  assured.

Assurance.
To  make  assurance  of  personal  salvation  essential  to  faith,  is
contrary  to  Scripture  and  to  the  experience  of  God's  people.  The
Bible  speaks  of  a  weak  faith.  It  abounds  with  consolations  in-
tended for  the  doubting  and  the  desponding.  God  accepts  those
who  can  only  say,  "  Lord,  I  believe  ;  help  thou  mine  unbehef."
Those  who  make  assurance  the  essence  of  faith,  generally  reduce
faith  to  a  mere  intellectual  assent.    They  are  often  censorious,  re


§8.]  ITS  EFFECTS.  107

fusing  to  recognize  as  brethren  those  who  do  not  agree  Avitli  them ;
and  sometimes  they  are  antinomian.

At  the  same  time,  Scripture  and  experience  teach  that  assur-
ance is  not  only  attainable,  but  a  privilege  and  a  duty.  There
may  indeed  be  assurance,  where  there  is  no  true  faith  at  all ;  but
where  there  is  true  faith,  the  want  of  assurance  is  to  be  referred
either  to  the  weakness  of  faith,  or  to  erroneous  views  of  the  plan
of  salvation.  Many  sincere  believers  are  too  introspective.  They
look  too  exclusively  within,  so  that  their  hope  is  graduated  by  the
degree  of  evidence  of  regeneration  which  they  find  in  their  own
experience.  This,  except  in  rare  cases,  can  never  lead  to  the  as-
surance of  hope.  We  may  examine  our  hearts  with  all  the  micro-
scopic care  prescribed  by  President  Edwards  in  his  work  on  "The
Religious  Affections,"  and  never  be  satisfied  that  we  have  elimi-
nated every  ground  of  misgiving  and  doubt.  The  grounds  of
assurance  are  not  so  much  within,  as  vdthout  us.  They  are,  ac-
cording to  Scripture,  (1.)  The  universal  and  unconditional  prom-
ise of  God  that  those  who  come  to  Him  in  Christ,  He  will  in  no
wise  cast  out ;  that  whosoever  will,  may  take  of  the  water  of  Kfe
without  money  and  without  price.  We  are  bound  to  be  assured
that  God  is  faithful  and  will  certainly  save  those  who  beheve.
(2.)  The  infinite,  immutable,  and  gratuitous  love  of  God.  In  the
first  ten  verses  of  the  fifth  chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,
and  in  the  eighth  chapter  of  that  epistle  from  the  thirty-first
verse  to  the  end,  the  Apostle  dwells  on  these  characteristics  of
the  love  of  God,  as  affording  an  immovable  foundation  of  the
believer's  hope.  (3.)  The  infinite  merit  of  the  satisfaction  of
Christ,  and  the  prevalence  of  his  continued  intercession.  Paul,
in  Romans  viii.  34,  especially  emphasizes  these  points.  (4.)  The
covenant  of  redemption  in  which  it  is  promised  that  all  given  by
the  Father  to  the  Son,  shall  come  to  Him,  and  that  none  of  them
shall  be  lost.  (5.)  From  the  witness  of  the  Spirit,  Paul  says,
"  We  ....  rejoice  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God,"  because  the
love  of  God  is  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts,  by  the  Holy  Ghost
given  unto  us.  That  is,  the  Holy  Ghost  assures  us  that  we  are
the  objects  of  that  love  which  he  goes  on  to  describe  as  infinite,
immutable,  and  gratuitous.  (Rom.  v.  3-5.)  And  again,  "  The
Spirit  itself  beareth  witness  with  our  spirit  that  we  are  the  chil-
dren of  God."  If,  therefore,  any  true  believer  lacks  the  assurance
of  faith,  the  fault  is  in  himself  and  not  in  the  plan  of  salvation,
or  in  the  promises  of  God.


108  PART  ni.   ch.  xvl  — faith.

Sanctifieation  a  Fruit  of  Faith.

The  fifth  effect  of  faith  is  sanctifieation.  "  Which  are  sancti-
fied," says  our  Lord  "by  faith  that  is  in  me."  Although  in  this
verse  (Acts  xxvi.  18),  the  words  "by  faith"  do  not  quahfy  the
preceding  clause,  "  are  sanctified,"  alone,  but  are  to  be  referred
to  all  the  preceding  particulars,  —  illumination,  deliverance  from
Satan,  forgiveness  of  sins,  and  the  eternal  inheritance,  —  yet  the
immediate  antecedent  is  not  to  be  omitted.  We  are  sanctified  by
faith  as  is  elsewhere  clearly  taught.  "  Faith  which  worketh  by
love  and  purifies  the  heart."     (Gal.  v.  6,  and  Acts  xv.  9.)

The  relation  of  faith  to  sanctifieation  is  thus  set  forth  in  the
Scriptures,  —

1.  We  are  justified  by  faith.  So  long  as  we  are  under  the  law,
we  are  mider  the  curse,  and  bring  forth  fruit  unto  death.  There
is,  and  can  be  no  love  to  God,  and  no  holy  living  until  we  are  de-
livered from  his  wrath  due  to  us  for  sin.  We  are  freed  from  the
law,  delivered  from  its  condemnation,  by  the  body  or  death  of
Christ.  It  is  by  faith  in  Him  as  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteous-
ness, that  we  personally  are  freed  from  condemnation  and  restored
to  the  favour  of  God.  See  all  this  clearly  taught  in  Romans  vi.,
and  in  the  first  six  verses  of  the  seventh  chapter.  It  is  thus  by
faith  we  pass  from  judicial  death  to  judicial  life,  or  justification.
This  is  the  first  and  indispensable  step  of  sanctifieation  so  far  as
it  reveals  itself  in  the  consciousness  of  the  behever.

2.  It  is  by  faith  that  we  receive  the  indwelling  of  the  Spirit.
Christ  (or  the  Spirit  of  Christ)  dwells  in  our  hearts  by  faith.
Faith  is  the  indispensable  condition  (so  far  as  adults  are  con-
cerned) of  this  indwelhng  of  the  Spirit.  And  the  indwelHng  of
the  Spirit  is  the  source  of  all  spiritual  life.  Faith  is  indeed  the
fruit  of  the  Spirit,  and  therefore  the  gift  of  the  Spirit  must  pre-
cede the  exercise  of  faith.  It  is  nevertheless  true  that  faith  is  the
condition  of  the  indwelling  of  the  Spirit,  and  consequently  of
spiritual  life.  Life  must  precede  breathing,  and  yet  breathing  is
the  necessary  condition  of  living.

3.  Faith  is  not  only  the  condition  of  the  Spirit's  dwelling  in  us
as  the  source  of  spiritual  life,  but  we  live  by  faith.  That  is,  the
continuance  and  exercise  of  spiritual  hfe  involve  and  suppose  the
constant  exercise  of  faith.  We  live  by  exercising  faith  in  God,
in  his  attributes,  in  his  providence,  in  his  promises,  and  in  all  the
truths  which  He  has  revealed.  Especially  is  this  life  sustained
by  those  exercises  of  faith  of  which  Christ  is  the  object ;  his  divint


§8.]  ITS  EFFECTS.  109

and  mysteriously  constituted  person,  as  God  manifest  in  the  flesh ;
his  finished  work  for  our  redemption ;  his  constant  intercession  ;
his  intimate  relation  to  us  not  only  as  our  prophet,  priest,  and
king,  but  as  our  living  head  in  whom  our  Hfe  is  hid  in  God,  and
from  whom  it  flows  into  our  souls.  We  are  thus  sanctified  by
faith,  because  it  is  through  faith  that  all  the  religious  affections
and  all  the  activities  of  spiritual  life  are  called  into  exercise.

4.  We  are  sanctified  by  faith,  as  it  is  the  substance  of  tilings
hoped  for,  and  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen.  "  The  things  of
God,"  the  truths  which  He  has  revealed  concerning  the  spiritual
and  eternal  world  exist  for  us  while  in  this  world,  only  as  the  ob-
jects of  faith.  But  faith  is  to  the  soul  what  the  eye  is  to  the  body.
It  enables  us  to  see  the  things  unseen  and  eternal.  It  gives  them
substance,  reality,  and  therefore  power,  —  power  in  some  Httle
measure  in  proportion  to  their  value.  Thus  the  things  seen  and
temporal  lose  their  dominant  power  over  the  soul.  They  are  not
worthy  to  be  compared  mth  the  things  which  God  has  prepared
for  them  that  love  Him.  The  believer,  —  the  ideal,  and  at  times
the  actual  believer,  as  we  learn  from  Scripture  and  from  history,
is  raised  above  the  things  of  time  and  sense,  overcomes  the  world,
and  becomes  heavenly  minded.  He  lives  in  heaven,  breathes  its
atmosphere,  is  pervaded  by  its  spirit,  and  has  a  prelibation  of  its
joys.  This  renders  him  pure,  spiritual,  humble,  self-denying,
laborious,  meek,  gentle,  forgiving,  as  well  as  firm  and  courageous.
The  whole  of  the  eleventh  chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews
is  devoted  to  the  illustration  of  the  power  of  faith  especially  in
this  aspect.  The  Apostle  shows  that  in  times  past,  even  under  the
dim  light  of  the  former  dispensation,  it  enabled  Noah  to  stand
alone  against  the  world,  Abraham  to  offer  up  his  only  son,  Moses
to  prefer  the  reproach  of  Christ  to  the  treasures  of  Eg}^t ;  that
others  through  faith  subdued  kingdoms,  wrought  righteousness,
stopped  the  mouths  of  lions,  quenched  the  violence  of  fire  ;  that
others  were  by  faith  made  strong  out  of  weakness,  waxed  valiant
in  fight ;  that  others  submitted  to  the  trial  of  cruel  mockings  and
scourgings  ;  that  others  by  faith  endured  to  be  stoned,  sawn  asun-
der, or  slain  with  the  sword ;  and  that  yet  others  through  faith
consented  to  wander  about  in  sheepskins  and  goatskins,  destitute,
afflicted,  and  tormented.  All  these,  we  are  told,  through  faith
obtained  a  good  report.

5.  Faith  sanctifies  because  it  is  the  necessary  condition  of  the
efficacy  of  the  means  of  grace.  It  is  through  the  Word,  sacra-
ments, and  prayer,  that  God  communicates  constant  supplies  of


110  PART  m.   Ch.  XVI.  — faith.

grace.  They  are  the  means  of  caUing  the  activities  of  spiritual
life  into  exercise.  But  these  means  of  grace  are  inoperative  un-
less they  are  received  and  used  by  faith.  Faith  does  not,  indeed,
give  them  their  power,  but  it  is  the  condition  on  which  the  Spirit
of  God  renders  them  efficacious.

Tliat  good  works  are  the  certain  effects  of  faith  is  inchided  in
the  doctrine  that  we  are  sanctified  by  faith.  For  it  is  impossible
that  there  should  be  inward  holiness,  love,  spirituality,  brotherly
kindness,  and  zeal,  without  an  external  manifestation  of  these
graces  in  the  whole  outward  life.  Faith,  therefore,  without  works,
is  dead.  We  are  saved  by  faith.  But  salvation  includes  deliver-
ance from  sin.  If,  therefore,  our  faith  does  not  deliver  us  from
sin,  it  does  not  save  us.     Antinomianism  involves  a  contradiction

in  terms.

Certainty  of  Salvation.

A  sixth  effect  attributed  to  faith  in  the  Scriptures  is  security,
or,  certainty  of  salvation.  "  God  so  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave
his  only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him  should
not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life."  (John  iii.  16.)  "  He  that
heareth  my  word,  and  believeth  on  him  that  sent  me,  hath  ever-
lasting life,  and  shall  not  come  into  condemnation ;  but  is  passed
from  death  unto  life."  (John  v.  24.)  "  I  am  the  living  bread
which  came  down  from  heaven :  if  any  man  eat  of  this  bread,  he.
shall  live  forever."  (John  vi.  51.)  "  All  that  the  Father  giveth
me  shall  come  to  me  ;  and  him  that  cometh  to  me  I  will  in  no

wise  cast  out And  this  is  the  will  of  him  that  sent  me,

that  every  one  which  seeth  the  Son,  and  believeth  on  him,  may
have  everlasting  life :  and  I  will  raise  him  up  at  the  last  day."
(John  vi.  37,  40.)  "  My  sheep  hear  my  voice,  and  I  know  them,
and  they  follow  me :  and  I  give  unto  them  eternal  life  ;  and  they  •
shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any  man  pluck  them  out  of  my
hand."     (John  x.  27,  28.)

The  Eighth  Chapter  of  Romans.

The  whole  of  the  eighth  chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans
is  designed  to  prove  the  certain  salvation  of  all  who  believe.  The
proposition  to  be  established  is,  that  there  is  "no  condemnation  to
them  which  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  That  is,  they  can  never  per-
ish ;  they  can  never  be  so  separated  from  Christ  as  to  come  into
condemnation.  The  Apostle's  first  argument  to  establish  that
proposition,  is,  that  believers  are  delivered  from  the  law  by  the
sacrifice  of  Christ.     The  believer,  therefore,  is  not  under  the  law


§8.]  ITS   EFFECTS.  Ill

wliicli  condemns,  as  Paul  had  before  said  (Rom.  vi.  14),  "  Ye
are  not  under  the  hiw,  but  under  grace."  But  if  not  under  the
law  he  cannot  be  condemned.  The  law  has  had  its  course,  and
found  full  satisfaction  in  the  work  of  Christ,  who  is  the  end  of  the
law  for  righteousness  to  every  one  that  believeth.  He  renders
every  one  righteous,  in  the  sight  of  the  law,  who  beUeves  on  Him.
This  is  the  j&rst  reason  which  the  Apostle  gives  why  those  who
are  in  Christ  shall  never  be  condemned.

His  second  argument  is  that  they  have  already  within  them  the
principle  of  eternal  life.  That  principle  is  the  Spirit  of  God  ;
"  the  life-giving  "  as  He  was  designated  by  the  ancient  Church.
To  be  carnally  minded  is  death.  To  be  spiritually  minded  is  life
and  peace.  Sin  is  death  ;  holiness  is  life.  It  is  a  contradiction
to  say  that  those  in  whom  the  Spirit  of  life  dwells,  should  die.
And,  therefore,  the  Apostle  says.  Although  the  body  dies,  the
soul  lives.  And  if  the  Spirit  of  Him  who  raised  up  Jesus  from
the  dead  dwell  in  you.  He  that  raised  up  Christ  from  the  dead
shall  also  quicken  even  your  mortal  bodies  by  his  Spirit  that
dwelleth  in  you.  The  indwelling  of  the  Spirit,  therefore,  secures
not  only  the  life  of  the  soul,  but  also  the  ultimate  and  glorious
life  of  the  body.

The  third  argument  for  the  security  of  believers,  is,  that  they
are  the  sons  of  God.  As  many  as  are  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God,
they  are  the  sons  of  God.  That  is,  they  are  partakers  of  his  na-
ture, the  special  objects  of  his  love,  and  entitled  to  the  inheritance
which  He  gives.  If  sons  then  heirs,  heirs  of  God  and  joint  heirs
with  Christ.  According  to  the  Apostle's  mode  of  thinking,  that
any  of  the  sons  of  God  should  perish,  is  impossible.  If  sons  they
shall  certainly  be  saved.

The  fourth  argument  is  from  the  purpose  of  God.  Those
whom  He  has  predestinated  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  his
Son,  them  He  calls  to  the  exercise  of  faith  and  repentance  ;  and
whom  He  thus  calls  He  justifies,  He  provides  for  them  and  im-
putes to  them  a  righteousness  which  satisfies  the  demands  of  the
law,  and  which  entitles  them  in  Christ  and  for  his  sake  to  eternal
life  ;  and  those  whom  He  justifies  He  glorifies.  There  is  no  flaw
in  this  chain.  If  men  were  predestinated  to  eternal  life  on  the
grovmd  of  their  repenting  and  believing  through  thsir  own
strength,  or  through  a  cooperation  Avith  the  grace  of  God  which
others  fail  to  exercise,  then  their  continuance  in  a  state  of  grace
might  be  dependent  on  themselves.  But  if  faith  and  repentance
are  the  gifts  of  God,  the  results  of  his  effectual  vocation,  then  be-


112  PART  III.     Ch.  XVI. —  faith.

stowing  those  gifts  is  a  revelation  of  the  purpose  of  God  to  save
those  to  whom  they  are  given.  It  is  an  evidence  that  God  has
predestinated  them  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  his  Son,  i.  e.,
to  be  Uke  Him  in  character,  destiny,  and  glory,  and  that  He  will
infallibly  carry  out  his  purpose.  No  one  can  pluck  them  out  of
his  hands.

Paul's  fifth  argument  is  from  the  love  of  God.  As  stated
above,^  the  Apostle  argues  from  the  greatness,  the  freeness,  and
the  immutabihty  of  that  love  that  its  objects  never  can  be  lost.
"  He  that  spared  not  his  own  Son,  but  delivered  him  up  for  us
all,  how  shall  he  not  with  him  also  freely  give  us  all  things."  If
He  has  done  the  greater,  Avill  He  not  do  the  less  ?  If  he  gave
even  his  own  Son,  will  He  not  give  us  faith  to  receive  and  con-
stancy to  persevere  even  unto  the  end  ?  A  love  so  great  as  the
love  of  God  to  his  people  cannot  fail  of  its  object.  This  love  is
also  gratuitous.  It  is  not  founded  on  the  attractiveness  of  its  ob-
jects. He  loved  us  "  while  we  were  yet  sinners;"  "when  we
were  enemies."  "  Much  more,  then,  being  now  justified  by  his
blood,  we  shall  be  saved  from  wrath  through  Him.  For  if,  when
we  were  enemies,  we  were  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  his
Son,  much  more,  being  reconciled,  we  shall  be  saved  by  his  life."
God's  love  in  this  aspect  is  compared  to  parental  love.  A  mother
does  not  love  her  child  because  it  is  lovely.  Her  love  leads  her  to
do  all  she  can  to  render  it  attractive  and  to  keep  it  so.  So  the
love  of  God,  being  in  Hke  manner  mysterious,  unaccountable  by
anything  in  its  objects,  secures  his  adorning  his  cliildren  with  the
graces  of  his  Spirit,  and  arrajdng  them  in  all  the  beauty  of  hoh-
ness.  It  is  only  the  lamentable  mistake  that  God  loves  us  for  our
goodness,  that  can  lead  any  one  to  suppose  that  his  love  is  de-
pendent on  our  self-sustained  attractiveness,  when  we  should  look
to  his  fatherly  love  as  the  source  of  all  goodness,  and  the  ground
of  the  assurance  that  He  will  not  allow  Satan  or  our  own  evil
hearts  to  destroy  the  lineaments  of  his  likeness  wliich  He  has  im-
pressed upon  our  souls.  Having  loved  liis  own.  He  loves  them  to
the  end.  And  Christ  prays  for  them  that  their  faith  may  not
fail.

It  must  be  remembered  that  what  the  Apostle  argues  to  prove
is  not  merely  the  certainty  of  the  salvation  of  those  that  beheve  ;
but  their  certain  perseverance  in  holiness.  Salvation  in  sin,  ac-
cording to  Paul's  system,  is  a  contradiction  in  terms.  This  per-
severance in  holiness  is  secured  partly  by  the  inward  secret  influ-

1  Page  lOT.


§8.]  ITS  EFFECTS.  113

ence  of  the  Spirit,  and  partly  by  all  the  means  adapted  to  secure
that  end  —  instructions,  admonitions,  exhortations,  warnings,  the
means  of  grace,  and  the  dispensations  of  his  providence.  Ha^ang,
through  love,  determined  on  the  end.  He  has  determined  on  the
means  for  its  accoraphshment.

The  sixth  argument  of  the  Apostle  is  that,  as  the  love  of  God
is  infinitely  great  and  altogether  gratuitous,  it  is  also  immutable,
and,  therefore,  believers  shall  certainly  be  saved.  Hence  the
conclusion,  "  I  am  persuaded  that  neither  death,  nor  life,  nor  an-
gels, nor  prmcipalities,  nor  powers,  nor  things  present,  nor  things
to  come,  nor  height,  nor  depth,  nor  any  other  creature,  shall  be
able  to  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God,  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus
our  Lord."

It  will  be  seen  that  the  Apostle  does  not  rest  the  perseverance
of  the  saints  on  the  indestructible  nature  of  faith,  or  on  the  im-
perishable nature  of  the  prmciple  of  grace  in  the  heart,  or  on
the  constancy  of  the  believer's  will,  but  solely  on  what  is  out  of
ourselves.  Perseverance,  he  teaches  us,  is  due  to  the  purpose  of
God,  to  the  work  of  Christ,  to  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit,
and  to  the  primal  source  of  all,  the  infinite,  mysterious,  and  im-
mutable love  of  God.  We  do  not  keep  ourselves  ;  we  are  kept
by  the  power  of  God,  through  faith  unto  salvation.  (1  Peter
i.5.)


CHAPTER   XVII.

JUSTIFICATION.

§  1.  Symholical  Statement  of  the  Doctrine.

Justification  is  defined  in  the  Westminster  Catechism,  "  An
act  of  God's  free  grace,  wherein  He  pardoneth  all  our  sins,  and
accepteth  us  as  righteous  in  his  sight,  only  for  the  righteousness
of  Christ  imputed  to  us,  and  received  by  faith  alone."

The  Heidelberg  Catechism  in  answer  to  the  question,  "  How
dost  thou  become  righteous  before  God?  "  answers,  "  Sola  fide  in
Jesum  Christum,  adeo  ut  licet  mea  me  conscientia  accuset,  quod
adversus  omnia  mandata  Dei  graviter  peccaverim,  nee  ullum
eorum  servaverim,  adhaec  etiamnum  ad  omne  malum  propensus
sim,  nihilominus  tamen  (modo  haec  beneficia  vera  animi  fiducia
amplectar),  sine  ullo  meo  merito,  ex  mera  Dei  misericordia,
mihi  perfecta  satisfactio,  justitia,  et  sanctitas  Christi,  imputetur
ac  donetur  ;  perinde  ac  si  nee  ullum  ipse  peccatum  admisissem,
nee  ulla  mihi  labes  inhtereret ;  imo  vero  quasi  eam  obedientiam,
quam  pro  me  Christus  prsestitit,  ipse  perfecte  prsestitissem."  And
in  answer  to  the  question,  Why  faith  alone  justifies  ?  it  says.
"  Non  quod  dignitate  mete  fidei  Deo  placeam,  sed  quod  sola  satis-
factio, justitia  ac  sanctitas  Christi,  mea  justitia  sit  coram  Deo.
Ego  vero  eam  non  alia  ratione,  quam  fide  amplecti,  et  milii  appli-
care  queam."

The  Second  Helvetic  Confession,^  says  "  Justificare  sigiiificat
Apostolo  in  disputatione  de  justificatione,  peccata  remittere,  a
culpa  et  poena  absolvere,  in  gratiam  recipere,  et  justum  pronun-
ciare.  Etenim  ad  Romanes  dicit  apostolus,  '  Deus  est,  qui  justi-
ficat,  quis  ille,   qui  condemnet  ?  '  opponuntur  justificare   et  con-

demnare Etenim  Christus  peccata  mundi  in  se  recepit  et

sustulit,  divinseque  justitise  satisfecit.  Deus  ergo  propter  solum
Christum  passum  et  resuscitatum,  propitius  est  peccatis  nostris,
nee  ilia  nobis  imputat,  imputat  autem  justitiam  Christi  pro  nos-
tra :  ita  ut  jam  simus  non  solum  mundati  a  peccatis  et  purgati,
vel  sancti,  sed  etiam  donati  justitia  Christi,  adeoque  absoluti  a

1  Chapter  xv.


§  1.]         SYMBOLICAL   STATEMENT   OF   THE   DOCTRINE.        115

peccatis,  morte  vel  condemnatione,  justi  deiiique  ac  hiBredes  vitie
aeternae.  Proprie  ergo  loquendo,  Deus  solus  nos  justificat,  et  dun-
taxat  propter  Clmstuni  justificat,  non  imputans  nobis  peccata,
sed  imputans  ejus  nobis  justitiani."  ^

These  are  the  most  generally  received  and  authoritative  stand-
ards of  the  Reformed  Churches,  with  which  all  other  Reformed
symbols  agree.  The  Lutheran  confessions  teach  precisely  the
same  doctrine  on  this  subject.*     "  Unanimi  consensu,  docemus  et

confitemur quod  homo  peccator  coram  Deo  justificetur,  hoc

est,  absolvatur  ab  omnibus  suis  peccatis  et  a  judicio  justissimce
condemnationis,  et  adoptetiu-  in  numerum  filiorum  Dei  atque
hseres  ieternte  vitge  scribatur,  sine  ullis  nostris  meritis,  aut  dignitate,
et  absque  ullis  pmecedentibus,  praesentibus,  aut  sequentibus  nostris
operibus,  ex  mera  gratia,  tantummodo  propter  unicum  meritum,
perfectissimam  obedientiam,  passionem  acerbissimam,  mortem  et
resurrectionem  Domini  nostri,  Jesu  Christi,  cujus  obedientia  nobis
ad  justitiam  imputatur."  ^

Again,  "  Credimus,  docemus,  et  confitemur,  hoc  ipsum  nostram
esse  coram  Deo  justitiam,  quod  Dominus  nobis  peccata  remittit,
ex  mera  gratia,  absque  ullo  respectu  praicedentium,  pra^sentium,
aut  consequentium  nostrorum  operum,  dignitatis,  aut  meriti.
Ille  enim  donat  atque  imputat  nobis  justitiam  obedientise
Christi  ;  propter  eam  justitiam  a  Deo  in  gratiam  recipimur  et
justi  reputamur."  ^  "  Justificari  significat  hie  non  ex  impio
justum  effici,  sed  usu  forensi  justum  pronuntiari."  And  "  Justi-
ficare  hoc  loco  (Rom.  v.  1.)  forensi  consuetudine  significat
reum  absolvere  et  pronuntiare  justum,  sed  propter  alienam  justi-
tiam, videhcet  Christi,  quee  ahena  justitia  communicatur  nobis
per  fidem."  ^  So  also  "  Vocabulum  justificationis  in  hoc  negotio
sigmficat  justum  pronuntiare,  a  peccatis  et  geternis  peccatorum
suppliciis  absolvere,  propter  justitiam  Christi,  quae  a  Deo  fidei
imputatur."  ^

Hase,'''  concisely  states  the  Lutheran  doctrine  on  this  subject  in
these  words  :  "  Justificatio  est  actus  forensis,  quo  Deus,  sola  gra-
tia ductus,  peccatori,  propter  Christi  meritum  fide  apprehensum,
justitiam  Christi  imputat,  peccata  remittit,  eumque  sibi  reconcil-
iat."

1  See  Niemej'er,  CoUectio  Confesdonum,  Leipzig,  1840.

2  The  main  passages  are  Augsburg  Confession,  part  i.,  article  iv.  ;  the  Apology  for  that
Confession,  article  iii. ;  and  the  Form  of  Concord,  article  iii.

8  Forin  of  Concord,  iii.  9.

4  Ibid.  Epitome,  m.  4.

5  Apology  for  the  Augsburg  Confession,  Art.  ill.  131,  184.

6  Form  of  Concord  in.  17.     See  Hase,  Libri  Symbolici,  3d  edit.,  Leipzig,  1836.

7  Eutterus  Redivivus,  §  109,  6th  edit.  Leipzig,  1845,  p.  274.


116  PART  ni.   Ch.  XVII.  —  justification.

The  "  Form  of  Concord  "  says,  "  Hie  articulus,  de  justitia  fidei,
prjecipuus  est  (ut  Apologia  loquitur)  in  tota  doctrina  Christiana,
sine  quo  conscientias  perturbatge  nullam  veram  et  firmam  consola-
tionem  habere,  aut  divitias  gratige  Clu'isti  recte  agnoscere  possunt.
Id  D.  Lutherus  suo  etiam  testimonio  confirmavit,  cum  inquit:  Si
unicus  his  articulus  sincerus  permanserit,  etiam  Christiana  Eccle-
sia  sincera,  concors  et  sine  omnibus  sectis  permanet :  sin  vero  cor-
rumpitur,  impossibile  est,  ut  uni  errori  aut  fanatico  spiritui  recte
obviam  iri  possit."  ^  The  Lutheran  theologians,  therefore,  speak
of  it  as  the  "  d/<po7roAis  totius  Christianas  religionis,  ac  nexus,  quo
omnia  corporis  doctrinae  Christianse  membra  continentur,  quoque
rupto  solvuntur."  ^

President  Edwards.

Tliis  statement  of  the  doctrine  of  justification  has  retained
symbohcal  authority  in  the  Lutheran  and  Reformed  churches,  to
the  present  day.  President  Edwards,  who  is  regarded  as  having
initiated  certain  departures  from  some  points  of  the  Reformed
faith,  was  firm  in  his  adherence  to  this  view  of  justification,  which
he  held  to  be  of  vital  importance.  In  his  discourse  on  "  Justifi-
cation by  Faith  alone,"  he  thus  defines  justification :  "  A  person
is  said  to  be  justified  when  he  is  approved  of  God  as  free  from
the  guilt  of  sin  and  its  deserved  punishment ;  and  as  having  that
righteousness  belonging  to  him  that  entitles  to  the  reward
of  life.  That  we  should  take  the  word  in  such  a  sense  and  un-
derstand it  as 'the  judge's  accepting  a  person  as  having  both  a
negative  and  positive  righteousness  belonging  to  him,  and  looking
on  him  therefore  as  not  only  quit  or  free  from  any  obligation  to
punishment,  but  also  as  just  and  righteous,  and  so  entitled  to  a
positive  reward,  is  not  only  most  agreeable  to  the  etymology  and
natural  import  of  the  word,  which  signifies  to  make  righteous,  or
to  pass  one  for  righteous  in  judgment,  but  also  manifestly  agree-
able to  the  force  of  the  word  as  used  in  Scripture."  He  then
shows  how  it  is,  or  why  faith  alone  justifies.  It  is  not  on  ac-
count of  any  virtue  or  goodness  in  faith,  but  as  it  unites  us  to
Christ,  and  involves  the  acceptance  of  Him  as  our  righteousness.
Thus  it  is  we  are  justified  "  by  faith  alone,  without  any  manner
of  virtue  or  goodness  of  our  own."

The  ground  of  justification  is  the  righteousness  of  Christ  im-
puted to  the  believer.  "  By  that  righteousness  being  imputed  to
us,"  says  Edwards,  "  is  meant  no  other  than  this,  that  that  right-
1  III.  6.  "  Quenstedt.


§  i.]        SYMBOLICAL  STATEMENT  OF  THE   DOCTRINE.        117

eousness  of  Christ  is  accepted  for  us,  and  admitted  instead  of
that  perfect  inherent  righteousness  that  ought  to  be  in  ourselves :
Christ's  perfect  obedience  shall  be  reckoned  to  our  account,  so
that  we  shall  have  the  benefit  of  it,  as  though  we  had  performed
it   ourselves  :  and  so   we  suppose  that  a  title  to  eternal  hfe  is

given  us  as  the  reward  of  this  righteousness The  opposers

of  this  doctrine  suppose  that  there  is  an  absurdity  in  it :  they  say
that  to  suppose  that  God  imputes  Christ's  obedience  to  us,  is  to
suppose  that  God  is  mistaken,  and  thinks  that  we  performed  that
obedience  that  Christ  performed.  But  why  cannot  that  righteous-
ness be  reckoned  to  our  account,  and  be  accepted  for  us,  mthout
any  such  absurdity  ?  Why  is  there  any  more  absurdity  in  it,
than  in  a  merchant's  transferring  debt  or  credit  from  one  man's
account  to  another,  when  one  man  pays  a  price  for  another,  so
that  it  shall  be  accepted,  as  if  that  other  had  paid  it  ?  Why  is
there  any  more  absurdity  in  supposing  that  Christ's  obedience  is
imputed  to  us,  than  that  his  satisfaction  is  imputed  ?  If  Christ
has  suffered  the  penalty  of  the  law  for  us,  and  in  our  stead,  then
it  will  follow,  that  his  suffering  that  penalty  is  imputed  to  us,
I.  g.,  that  it  is  accepted  for  us,  and  in  our  stead,  and  is  reckoned
to  our  account,  as  though  we  had  suffered  it.  But  why  may  not
his  obeying  the  law  of  God  be  as  rationally  reckoned  to  our  ac-
count, as  his  suffering  the  penalty  of  the  law  ?  "  ^

Points  included  in  the  above  Statement  of  the  Doctrine.

According  to  the  above  statements,  justification  is,  —

1.  An  act,  and  not,  as  sanctification,  a  continued  and  pro-
gressive work.

2.  It  is  an  act  of  grace  to  the  sinner.  In  himself  he  deserves
condemnation  when  God  justifies  him.

3.  As  to  the  nature  of  the  act,  it  is,  in  the  first  place,  not  an
efficient  act,  or  an  act  of  power.  It  does  not  produce  any  sub-
jective change  in  the  person  justified.  It  does  not  effect  a  change
of  character,  making  those  good  who  were  bad,  those  holy  who
were  unholy.  That  is  done  in  regeneration  and  sanctification.
In  the  second  place,  it  is  not  a  mere  executive  act,  as  when  a
sovereign  pardons  a  criminal,  and  thereby  restores  him  to  his  civil
rights,  or  to  his  former  status  in  the  commonwealth.  In  the
third  place,  it  is  a  forensic,  or  judicial  act,  the  act  of  a  judge,  not
of  a  sovereign.  That  is,  in  the  case  of  the  sinner,  or,  in  foro  Dei,
it  is  an  act  of  God  not  in  his  character  of  sovereign,  but  in  his

1  Works  of  President  Edwards,  New  York,  1868,  vol.  iv.  pp.  66,  91,  92.


118  PART  III.     Ch.  XYII.  —  justification.

cliaracter  of  judge.  It  is  a  declarative  act  in  which  God  pro-
nounces the  sinner  just  or  righteous,  that  is,  declares  that  the
claims  of  justice,  so  far  as  he  is  concerned,  are  satisfied,  so  that
he  cannot  be  justly  condemned,  but  is.  in  justice  entitled  to  the
reward  promised  or  due  to  perfect  righteousness.

4.  The  meritorious  ground  of  justification  is  not  faith  ;  we  are
not  justified  on  account  of  our  faith,  considered  as  a  virtuous  or
holy  act  or  state  of  mind.  Nor  are  our  works  of  any  kind  the
ground  of  justification.  Nothing  done  by  us  or  wrought  in  us
satisfies  the  demands  of  justice,  or  can  be  the  ground  or  reason  of
the  declaration  that  justice  as  far  as  it  concerns  us  is  satisfied.
The  ground  of  justification  is  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  active
and  passive,  i.  e.,  including  his  perfect  obedience  to  the  law  as  a
covenant,  and  his  enduring  the  penalty  of  the  law  in  our  stead
and  on  our  behalf.

5.  The  righteousness  of  Christ  is  in  justification  imputed  to  the
believer.  That  is,  is  set  to  his  account,  so  that  he  is  entitled  to
plead  it  at  the  bar  of  God,  as  though  it  were  personally  and  in-
herently his  own.

6.  Faith  is  the  condition  of  justification.  That  is,  so  far  as
adults  are  concerned,  God  does  not  impute  the  righteousness  of
Christ  to  the  sinner,  until  and  unless,  he  (through  grace),  receives
and  rests  on  Christ  alone  for  his  salvation.

That  such  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Reformed  and  lAitheran
churches  on  this  important  doctrine,  cannot  be  disputed.  The
statements  of  the  standards  of  those  churches  are  so  numerous,
explicit,  and  discriminating  as  to  preclude  all  reasonable  doubt  on
this  subject.  That  such  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Word  of  God  ap-
pears from  the  following  considerations.

It  will  not  be  necessary  to  discuss  all  the  points  above  specified
separately,  as  some  of  them  are  necessarily  included  in  others.
The  following  propositions  include  all  the  essential  points  of  the

doctrine.

§  2.  Justification  is  a  Forensic  Act.

By  this  the  Reformers  intended,  in  the  first  place,  to  deny  the
Romish  doctrine  of  subjective  justification.  That  is,  that  justifi-
cation consists  in  an  act  or  agency  of  God  making  the  sinner  sub-
jectively holy.  Romanists  confound  or  unite  justification  and
sanctification.  They  define  justification  as  "  the  remission  of  sin
and  infusion  of  new  habits  of  grace."  By  remission  of  sin  they
mean  not  simply  pardon,  but  the  removal  of  everytliing  of  the  na-
ture of  sin  from  the  soul.     Justification,  therefore,  with  them,  is


§2.]  JUSTIFICATION   A  FORENSIC   ACT.  119

purely  subjective,  consisting  in  tlie  destruction  of  sin  and  the  infu-
sion of  holiness.  In  opposition  to  this  doctrine,  the  Reformers
maintained  that  by  justification  the  Scriptures  mean  something
different  from  sanctification.  That  the  two  gifts,  although  insep-
arable, are  distinct,  and  that  justification,  instead  of  being  an  effi-
cient act  changing  the  inward  character  of  the  simier,  is  a  declar-
ative act,  announcing  and  determining  his  relation  to  the  law  and
justice  of  God.

In  the  second  place,  the  Symbols  of  the  Reformation  no  less  ex-
plicitly teach  that  justification  is  not  simply  pardon  and  restora-
tion. It  includes  pardon,  but  it  also  includes  a  declaration  that
the  believer  is  just  or  righteous  in  the  sight  of  the  law.  He  has
a  right  to  plead  a  righteousness  which  completely  satisfies  its  de-
mands.

And,  therefore,  in  the  third  place,  affirmatively,  those  Symbols
teach  that  justification  is  a  judicial  or  forensic  act,  i.  e.,  an  act  of
God  as  judge  proceeding  according  to  law,  declaring  that  the  sin-
ner is  just,  i.  e.,  that  the  law  no  longer  condemns  him,  but  acquits
and  pronounces  liim  to  be  entitled  to  eternal  life.

Here,  as  so  often  in  other  cases,  the  ambiguity  of  words  is  apt
to  create  embarrassment.  The  Greek  word  Si^ato?,  and  the  Eng-
lish word  righteous,  have  two  distinct  senses.  They  sometimes
express  moral  character.  When  we  say  that  God  is  righteous,
we  mean  that  He  is  right.  He  is  free  from  any  moral  imperfec-
tion. So  when  we  say  that  a  man  is  righteous,  we  generally
mean  that  he  is  upright  and  honest ;  that  he  is  and  does  what  he
ought  to  be  and  do.  In  this  sense  the  word  expresses  the  rela-
tion which  a  man  sustains  to  the  rule  of  moral  conduct.  At  other
times,  however,  these  words  express,  not  moral  character,  but  the
relation  wliich  a  man  sustains  to  justice.  In  this  sense  a  man  is
just  with  regard  to  whom  justice  is  satisfied  ;  or,  against  whom
justice  has  no  demands.  The  lexicons,  therefore,  tell  us  that
StKaio?  sometimes  means,  leges  observans  ;  at  others  iJisons,  culpa
vacans  (free  from  guilt  or  obligation  to  punishment)  — judicio
Dei  insons.  Pilate  (Matt,  xxvii.  24)  said,  "  I  am  innocent  of
the  blood  of  this  just  person ; "  i.  e.,  of  this  person  Avho  is  free
from  guilt ;  free  from  anything  which  justifies  his  condemnation
to  death.  "  Clrrist,  also,"  says  the  Apostle,  "  hath  once  suffered
for  sins,  the  just  for  the  unjust ;  "  the  innocent  for  the  guilty.
See  Romans  ii.  13 ;  v.  19.  "  As  by  one  man's  disobedience  many
were  made  sinners,  so  by  the  obedience  of  one  shall  many  be  inade
righteous."    "  As  the  predicate  oi  judicandus  in  his  relation  to  the


120  PART  m.   Ch.  xvn.— justification.

judge,  '  righteousness '  expresses,  not  a  positive  virtue,  but  a  judi-
cial negative  freedom  from  reatus.  In  the  presence  of  his  judge,
he  is  P^"iT"  who  stands  free  from  guilt  and  desert  of  punishment
(straflos),  either  because  he  has  contracted  no  guilt  (as,  e.  g.,
Christ),  or,  because  in  the  way  demanded  by  the  Judge  (under
the  Old  Testament  by  expiatory  sacrifice)  he  has  expiated  the
guilt  contracted."^  If,  therefore,  we  take  the  word  righteous  in
the  former  of  the  two  senses  above  mentioned,  when  it  expresses
moral  character,  it  would  be  a  contradiction  to  say  that  God  pro-
nounces the  sinner  righteous.  This  would  be  equivalent  to  saying
that  God  pronounces  the  sinner  to  be  not  a  sinner,  the  wicked  to
be  good,  the  unholy  to  be  holy.  But  if  we  take  the  word  in  the
sense  in  which  the  Scriptures  so  often  use  it,  as  expressing  rela-
tion to  justice,  then  when  God  pronounces  the  sinner  righteous  or
just,  He  simply  declares  that  his  guilt  is  expiated,  that  justice  is
satisfied,  that  He  has  the  righteousness  wliich  justice  demands.
This  is  precisely  what  Paul  says,  when  he  says  that  God  "  justi-
fieth  the  ungodly."  (Rom.  iv.  5.)  God  does  not  pronounce  the
ungodly  to  be  godly  ;  He  declares  that  notwithstanding  his  per-
sonal sinfulness  and  unworthiness,  he  is  accepted  as  righteous  on
the  ground  of  what  Christ  has  done  for  him.

Proof  of  the  Doctrine  just  stated.

That  to  justify  means  neither  simply  to  pardon,  nor  to  make
inherently  righteous  or  good  is  proved,  —

From  the  Usage  of  Scripture.

1.  By  the  uniform  usage  of  the  word  to  justify  in  Scripture.
It  is  never  used  in  either  of  those  senses,  but  always  to  declare
or  pronounce  just.  It  is  unnecessary  to  cite  passages  in  proof
of  a  usage  which  is  uniform.  The  few  follo^ving  examples  are
enough.  Deuteronomy  xxv.  1,  "  If  there  be  a  controversy  be-
tween men,  and  they  come  unto  judgment,  that  the  judges  may
judge  them ;  then  they  shall  justify  the  righteous,  and  con-
demn the  wicked."  Exodus  xxiii.  7,  "  I  will  not  justify  the
wicked."  Isaiah  v.  23,  "  Which  justify  the  wicked  for  re-
ward." Proverbs  xvii.  15,  "  He  that  justifieth  the  "wicked  "  is
"  abomination  to  the  Lord."  Luke  x.  29,  "  He  willing  to
justify  himself."  Luke  xvi.  15,  "  Ye  are  they  which  justify
yourselves  before  men."     Matthew   xi.    19,  "  Wisdom  is   justi-

1  Chr'istliche  Lorjmatilc,  von  Johannes  Heinrich  Auicust  Ebrard,  §  402,  edit.  Konigsberg,
1852,  vol.  ii.  p.  1(53.


§2.]  JUSTIFICATION  A  FORENSIC  ACT.  121

fied  of  her  cMldren."  Galatians  ii.  16,  "  A  man  is  not  justi-
fied by  the  works  of  the  law."  v.  6,  "  Whosoever  of  you  are
justified  by  the  law  ;  ye  are  fallen  from  grace."  Thus  men  are
said  to  justify  God.  Job  xxxii.  2,  "  Because  he  justified
himself,  rather  than  God."  Psalms  h.  4,  "  That  thou  might-
est  be  justified  when  thou  speakest."  Luke  vii.  29,  "  All  the
people  that  heard  him,  and  the  publicans,  justified  God."  The
only  passage  in  the  New  Testament  where  the  word  ^iKaiow  is
used  in  a  different  sense  is  Revelation  xxii.  11,  6  SiVato?,  SiKatw-
()rjT<ii  hi,  "  He  that  is  righteous,  let  him  be  righteous  still."  Here
the  first  aorist  passive  appears  to  be  used  in  a  middle  sense,
'  Let  him  show  himself  righteous,  or  continue  righteous.'  Even
if  the  reading  in  this  passage  were  undoubted,  this  single  case
would  have  no  force  against  the  estabhshed  usage  of  the  word.
The  reading,  however,  is  not  merely  doubtful,  but  it  is,  in  the
judgment  of  the  majority  of  the  critical  editors,  Tischendorf  among
the  rest,  incorrect.  They  give,  as  the  true  text,  hiKatodvvqv  iroirjaaTo)
en.  Even  if  this  latter  reading  be,  as  De  Wette  thinks,  a  gloss,
it  shows  that  o  BUaio^  StKatw^r^Tw  ert  was  as  intolerable  to  a  Greek
ear  as  the  expression,  '  He  that  is  righteous,  let  him  justify  him-
self still,'  would  be  to  us.

The  usage  of  common  fife  as  to  this  word  is  just  as  uniform  as
that  of  the  Bible.  It  would  be  a  perfect  solecism  to  say  of  a
criminal  whom  the  executive  had  pardoned,  that  he  was  justified  ;
or  that  a  reformed  drunkard  or  thief  was  justified.  The  word
always  expresses  a  judgment,  whether  of  the  mind,  as  when  one
man  justifies  another  for  his  conduct,  or  officially  of  a  judge.  If
such  be  the  established  meaning  of  the  word,  it  ought  to  settle  all
controversy  as  to  the  nature  of  justification.  We  are  bound  to
take  the  words  of  Scripture  in  their  true  estabhshed  sense.  And,
therefore,  when  the  Bible  says,  "  God  justifies  the  behever,"  we
are  not  at  liberty  to  say  that  it  means  that  He  pardons,  or  that
He  sanctifies  him.  It  means,  and  can  mean  only  that  He  pro-
nounces him  just.

Justification  the  Opposite  of  Condemnation.

2.  This  is  still  further  evident  from  the  antithesis  between
condemnation  and  justification.  Condemnation  is  not  the  oppo-
site either  of  pardon  or  of  reformation.  To  condemn  is  to  pro-
nounce guilty  ;  or  worthy  of  punishment.  To  justify  is  to
declare  not  guilty ;  or  that  justice  does  not  demand  punish-
ment ;  or  that  the  person  concerned  cannot  justly  be  condemned.


122  PART  m.   Ch.  XVII.— justification.

When,  therefore,  the  Apostle  says  (Rom.  viii.  1),  "  There  is,
therefore,  now  no  condemnation  to  them  which  are  in  Clirist  Je-
sus," he  declares  that  they  are  absolved  from  guilt ;  that  the  pen-
alty of  the  law  cannot  justly  be  inflicted  upon  them.  "  Who,"
he  asks,  "  shall  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  ?  God
who  justifieth  ?  Who  is  he  that  condemneth  ?  Christ  who
died?  "  (vers.  33,  34.)  Against  the  elect  in  Christ  no  ground  of
condemnation  can  be  presented.  God  pronounces  them  just,  and
therefore  no  one  can  pronounce  them  guilty.

This  passage  is  certainly  decisive  against  the  doctrine  of  sub-
jective justification  in  any  form.  This  opposition  between  con-
denmation  and  justification  is  familiar  both  in  Scripture  and  in
common  life.  Job  ix.  20,  "  If  I  justify  myself,  mine  own
mouth  shall  condemn  me."  xxxiv.  17,  "And  wilt  thou  con-
demn him  that  is  most  just."  If  to  condemn  does  not  mean  to
make  wicked,  to  justify  does  not  mean  to  make  good.  And  if
condenmation  is  a  judicial,  as  opposed  to  an  executive  act,  so  is
justification.  In  condemnation  it  is  a  judge  who  pronounces  sen-
tence on  the  guilty.  In  justification  it  is  a  judge  who  pronounces
or  Avho  declares  the  person  arraigned  free  from  guilt  and  entitled
to  be  treated  as  righteous.

Argument  from  Equivalent  Forms  of  Expression.

3.  The  forms  of  expression  which  are  used  as  equivalents  of
the  word  "  justify  "  clearly  determine  the  nature  of  the  act.
Thus  Paul  speaks  of  "  the  blessedness  of  the  man  unto  whom  God
imputeth  righteousness  without  works."  (Rom.  iv.  6.)  To  im-
pute righteousness  is  not  to  pardon  ;  neither  is  it  to  sanctify.  It
means  to  justify,  i.  e.,  to  attribute  righteousness.  The  negative
form  in  which  justification  is  described  is  equally  significant.
"  Blessed  are  they  whose  iniquities  are  forgiven,  and  whose  sins
are  covered.  Blessed  is  the  man  to  whom  the  Lord  will  not  im-
pute sin."  (Rom.  iv.  7,  8.)  As  "  to  impute  sin  "  never  means
and  cannot  mean  to  make  wicked;  so  the  negative  statement
"  not  to  impute  sin  "  cannot  mean  to  sanctify.  And  as  "  to  im-
pute sin  "  does  mean  to  lay  sin  to  one's  account  and  to  treat  him
accordingly  ;  so  to  justify  means  to  lay  righteousness  to  one's  ac-
count and  treat  him  accordingly.     "  God  sent  not  his  Son  into  the

world  to  condemn  the  world He  that  beheveth  on  liim

is  not  condemned :  but  he  that  beheveth  not  is  condemned
aheady."     (John  iii.  17,  18.)

For  "  as  by  the  offence  of  one  judgment  came  upon  all  men  to


§2.]  JUSTIFICATION   A   FORENSIC   ACT.  123

condemnation ;  even  so  by  the  righteousness  of  one  the  free  gift
came  upon  all  men  unto  justification  of  life."  (Rom.  v.  18.)  It
was  Kpljia^  a  judicial  sentence,  which  came  on  men  for  the  offence
of  Adam,  and  it  is  a  judicial  sentence  (justification,  a  StKaiwais)
which  comes  for  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  or,  as  is  said  in  ver.
16  of  the  same  chapter,  it  was  a  Kpifjua  cts  KaraKpifxa^  a  condemnatory
sentence  that  came  for  one  offence ;  and  a  x'^P'-^l^^  ^'■^  StKaiw/Aa.  a
sentence  of  gratuitous  justification  from  many  offences.  Lan-
guage cannot  be  plainer.  If  a  sentence  of  condemnation  is  a  ju-
dicial act,  then  justification  is  a  judicial  act.

Argument  from  the  Statement  of  the  Doctrine.

4.  The  judicial  character  of  justification  is  involved  in  the
mode  in  which  the  doctrine  is  presented  in  the  Bible.  The
Scriptures  speak  of  law,  of  its  demands,  of  its  penalty,  of  sinners
as  arraigned  at  the  bar  of  God,  of  the  day  of  judgment.  The
question  is.  How  shall  man  be  just  with  God  ?  The  answer  to
this  question  determines  the  whole  method  of  salvation.  The
question  is  not.  How  a  man  can  become  holy  ?  but,  How  can  he
become  just  ?  How  can  he  satisfy  the  claims  which  justice  has
against  him  ?  It  is  obvious  that  if  there  is  no  such  attribute  as
justice  in  God  ;  if  what  we  call  justice  is  only  benevolence,  then
there  is  no  pertinency  in  this  question.  Man  is  not  required  to
be  just  in  order  to  be  saved.  There  are  no  claims  of  justice  to  be
satisfied.  Repentance  is  all  that  need  be  rendered  as  the  condition
of  restoration  to  the  favour  of  God.  Or,  any  didactic  declaration
or  exhibition  of  God's  disapprobation  of  sin,  would  open  the  way
for  the  safe  pardon  of  sinners.  Or,  if  the  demands  of  justice
were  easily  satisfied ;  if  partial,  imperfect  obedience  and  fatherly
chastisements,  or  self-inflicted  penances,  would  suffice  to  satisfy
its  claims,  then  the  sinner  need  not  be  just  with  God  in  order  to
be  saved.  But  the  human  soul  knows  intuitively  that  these  are
refuges  of  lies.  It  knows  that  there  is  such  an  attribute  as  jus-
tice. It  knows  that  the  demands  thereof  are  inexorable  because
they  are  righteous.  It  knows  that  it  cannot  be  saved  unless  it  be
justified,  and  it  knows  that  it  cannot  be  declared  just  unless  the
demands  of  justice  are  fully  satisfied.  Low  views  of  the  evil  of
sin  and  of  the  justice  of  God  he  at  the  foundation  of  all  false
views  of  this  great  doctrine.

The  Apostle's  Argument  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans.
The  Apostie  begins  the  discussion  of  this  subject  by  assuming


124  PART  III.   ch.  xvn.  —  justification.

that  the  justice  of  God,  his  purpose  to  punish  all  sin,  to  demand
perfect  conformity  to  his  law,  is  revealed  from  heaven,  i.  e.,  so
revealed  that  no  man,  whether  Jew  or  Gentile,  can  deny  it.
(Rom.  i.  18.)  Men,  even  the  most  degraded  pagans,  know  the
righteous  judgment  of  God  that  those  who  sin  are  worthy  of  death,
(ver.  32.)  He  next  proves  that  all  men  are  sinners,  and,  being
simiers  are  under  condemnation.  The  whole  world  is  "  guilty
before  God."  (iii.  19.)  From  this  he  infers,  as  intuitively  certain
(because  plainly  included  in  the  premises),  that  no  flesh  living
can  be  justified  before  God  "  by  the  deeds  of  the  law,"  i.  e.,  on
the  ground  of  his  own  character  and  conduct.  If  guilty  he  can-
not be  pronounced  not  guilty,  or  just.  In  Paul's  argument,  to
justify  is  to  pronounce  just.  AUaLo^  is  the  opposite  of  vttoSikos
(z.  e.,  "  reus,  satisf actionem  alteri  debens"  ).  That  is,  righteous
is  the  opposite  of  guilty.  To  pronounce  guilty  is  to  condemn.
To  pronounce  righteous,  ^.  e.,  not  guilty,  is  to  justify.  If  a  man
denies  the  authority  of  Scripture  ;  or  if  he  feels  at  liberty,  while
holding  what  he  considers  the  substance  of  Scripture  doctrines,
to  reject  the  form,  it  is  conceivable  that  he  may  deny  that  justifi-
cation is  a  judicial  act ;  but  it  seems  impossible  that  any  one
should  deny  that  it  is  so  represented  in  the  Bible.  Some  men
professing  to  believe  the  Bible,  deny  that  there  is  anything  super-
natural in  the  work  of  regeneration  and  sanctification.  '  Being
born  of  the  Spirit ; '  '  quickened  by  the  mighty  power  of  God ; '
'  created  anew  in  Christ  Jesus,'  are  only,  they  say,  strong  orien-
tal expressions  for  a  self-wrought  reformation.  By  a  similar  pro-
cess it  is  easy  to  get  rid,  not  only  of  the  doctine  of  justification  as
a  judicial  act,  but  of  all  other  distinguishing  doctrines  of  the
Scriptures.     This,  however,  is  not  to  interpret,  but  to  pervert.

The  Apostle,  having  taught  that  God  is  just,  i.  e.,  that  He
demands  the  satisfaction  of  justice,  and  that  men  are  sinners
and  can  render  no  such  satisfaction  themselves,  announces  that
such  a  righteousness  has  been  provided,  and  is  revealed  in  the
Gospel.  It  is  not  our  own  righteousness,  which  is  of  the  law,
but  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  and,  therefore,  the  righteousness
of  God,  in  virtue  of  which,  and  on  the  ground  of  which,  God  can
be  just  and  yet  justify  the  sinner  who  beheves  in  Christ.  As  long
as  the  Bible  stands  tliis  must  stand  as  a  simple  statement  of  what
Paul  teaches  as  to  the  method  of  salvation.  Men  may  dispute
as  to  what  he  means,  but  this  is  surely  what  he  says.


§2.1  JUSTIFICATION   A  FORENSIC   ACT.  125

Argument  from  the  Grround  of  Justification.

5.  The  nature  of  justification  is  determined  by  its  ground.
This  indeed  is  an  anticipation  of  another  part  of  the  subject,  but
it  is  in  point  here.  If  the  Bible  teaches  that  the  ground  of  justi-
fication, the  reason  why  God  remits  to  us  the  penalty  of  the  law
and  accepts  us  as  righteous  in  his  sight,  is  something  out  of  our-
selves, something  done  for  us,  and  not  what  we  do  or  experience,
then  it  of  necessity  follows  that  justification  is  not  subjective.  It
does  not  consist  in  the  infusion  of  righteousness,  or  in  making  the
person  justified  personally  holy.  If  the  "  formal  cause  "  of  our
justification  be  our  goodness  ;  then  we  are  justified  for  what  we
are.  The  Bible,  however,  teaches  that  no  man  living  can  be  jus-
tified for  what  he  is.  He  is  condemned  for  what  he  is  and  for
what  he  does.     He  is  justified  for  what  Christ  has  done  for  him.

Justification  not  mere  Pardon.

For  the  same  reason  justification  cannot  be  mere  pardon.  Par-
don does  not  proceed  on  the  ground  of  a  satisfaction.  A  prisoner
dehvered  by  a  ransom  is  not  pardoned.  A  debtor  whose  obHga-
tions  have  been  cancelled  by  a  friend,  becomes  entitled  to  free-
dom from  the  claims  of  his  creditor.  •  When  a  sovereign  pardons
a  criminal,  it  is  not  an  act  of  justice.  It  is  not  on  the  ground  of
satisfaction  to  the  law.  The  Bible,  therefore,  in  teaching  that
justification  is  on  the  ground  of  an  atonement  or  satisfaction;
that  the  sinner's  guilt  is  expiated ;  that  he  is  redeemed  by  the
precious  blood  of  Christ ;  and  that  judgment  is  pronounced  upon
him  as  righteous,  does  thereby  teach  that  justification  is  neither
pardon  nor  infusion  of  righteousness.

Argument  from  the  Immutability  of  the  Law.

6.  The  doctrine  that  justification  consists  simply  in  pardon,  and
consequent  restoration,  assumes  that  the  divine  law  is  imperfect
and  mutable.  In  human  governments  it  is  often  expedient  and
right  that  men  justly  condemned  to  suffer  the  penalty  of  the  law
should  be  pardoned.  Human  laws  must  be  general.  Thej^  can-
not take  in  all  the  circumstances  of  each  particular  case.  Their
execution  would  often  work  hardship  or  injustice.  Human  judg-
ments may  therefore  often  be  set  aside.  It  is  not  so  with  the  di-
vine law.  The  law  of  the  Lord  is  perfect.  And  being  perfect  it
cannot  be  lisregarded.  It  demands  nothing  which  ought  not  to  be
demanded.     It  threatens  nothins:  which  ought  not  to  be  inflicted.


126  PART  m.   Ch.  xvil  —  justification.

It  is  in  fact  its  own  executioner.  Sin  is  death.  (Rom.  viii.  6.)
The  justice  of  God  makes  pimishment  as  inseparable  from  sin,  as
life  is  from  holiness.  The  penalty  of  the  law  is  immutable,  and
as  httle  capable  of  being  set  aside  as  the  precept.  Accordingly
the  Scriptures  everywhere  teach  that  in  the  justification  of  the
sinner  there  is  no  relaxation  of  the  penalty.  There  is  no  setting
aside,  or  disregarding  the  demands  of  the  law.  We  are  delivered
from  the  law,  not  by  its  abrogation,  but  by  its  execution.  (Gal.
ii.  19.)  We  are  freed  from  the  law  by  the  body  of  Clirist.
(Rom.  vii.  4.)  Christ  having  taken  our  place,  bore  our  sins  in
liis  own  body  on  the  tree.  (1  Pet.  ii.  24.)  The  handwriting
which  was  against  us,  he  took  out  of  the  way,  nailing  it  to  his
cross.  (Col.  ii.  14.)  We  are  therefore  not  under  the  law,  but
under  grace.  (Rom.  vi.  14.)  Such  representations  are  incon-
sistent with  the  theory  which  supposes  that  the  law  may  be  dis-
pensed with  ;  that  the  restoration  of  sinners  to  the  favour  and
fellowsliip  of  God,  requires  no  satisfaction  to  its  demands  ;  that
the  behever  is  pardoned  and  restored  to  fellowship  with  God,  just
as  a  thief  or  forger  is  pardoned  and  restored  to  his  civil  rights  by
the  executive  in  human  governments.  This  is  against  the  Scrip-
tures. God  is  just  in  justifying  the  sinner.  He  acts  according
to  justice.

It  will  be  seen  that  everything  in  this  discussion  turns  on  the
question.  Whether  there  is  such  an  attribute  in  God  as  justice  ?
If  justice  be  only  "  benevolence  guided  by  wisdom,  "  then  there
is  no  justification.  What  evangelical  Christians  so  regard,  is
only  pardon  or  sanctification.  But  if  God,  as  the  Scriptures
and  conscience  teach,  be  a  just  God,  as  immutable  in  his  justice
as  in  his  goodness  and  truth,  then  there  can  be  no  remission  of
the  penalty  of  sin  except  on  the  ground  of  expiation,  and  no
justification  except  on  the  ground  of  the  satisfaction  of  justice ;
and  therefore  justification  must  be  a  judicial  act,  and  neither  sim-
ply pardon  nor  the  infusion  of  righteousness.  These  doctrines
sustain  each  other.  What  the  Bible  teaches  of  the  justice  of
God,  proves  that  justification  is  a  judicial  declaration  that  justice
is  satisfied.  And  what  the  Bible  teaches  of  the  nature  of  justi-
fication, proves  that  justice  in  God  is  something  more  than  be-
nevolence. It  is  thus  that  all  the  great  doctrines  of  the  Bible
are  concatenated.


§2.]  JUSTIFICATION  A  FORENSIC   ACT.  127

Argument  from  the  Nature  of  our  Union  with  Christ.
7.  The  theory  which  reduces  justification  to  pardon  and  its
consequences,  is  inconsistent  with  what  is  revealed  concerning  our
union  with  Christ.  That  union  is  mystical,  supernatural,  repre-
sentative, and  vital.  We  were  in  Him  before  the  foundation  of
the  world  (Eph.  i.  4)  ;  we  are  in  Him  as  we  were  in  Adam
(Rom.  V.  12,  21 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  22)  ;  we  are  in  Him  as  the  members
of  the  body  are  in  the  head  (Eph.  i.  23,  iv.  16  ;  1  Cor.  xii.  12,  27,
and  often)  ;  we  are  in  Him  as  the  branches  are  in  the  vine  (John
XV.  1-12).  We  are  in  Him  in  such  a  sense  that  his  death  is  our
death,  we  were  crucified  with  Him  (Gal.  ii.  20  ;  Rom.  vi.  1-8)  ;  we
are  so  united  with  Him  that  we  rose  with  Him,  and  sit  with  Him
in  heavenly  places.  (Eph.  ii.  1-6.)  In  virtue  of  this  union  we  are
(in  our  measure)  what  He  is.  We  are  the  sons  of  God  in  Him.
And  what  He  did,  we  did.  His  righteousness  is  our  righteousness.
His  hfe  is  our  life.  His  exaltation  is  our  exaltation.  Such  is
the  pervading  representation  of  the  Scriptures.  All  this  is  over-
looked by  the  advocates  of  the  opposite  theory.  According  to
that  view,  Christ  is  no  more  united  to  his  people,  except  in  sen-
timent, than  to  other  men.  He  has  simply  done  what  renders  it
consistent  with  the  character  of  God  and  the  interests  of  his  king-
dom, to  pardon  any  and  every  man  who  repents  and  believes.
His  relation  is  purely  external.  He  is  not  so  united  to  his  people
that  his  merit  becomes  their  merit  and  his  life  their  life.  Christ  is
not  in  them  the  hope  of  glory.  (Col.  i.  27.)  He  is  not  of  God
made  unto  them  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification,  and  redemp-
tion. (1  Cor.  i.  30.)  They  are  not  so  in  Him  that,  in  virtue  of
that  union,  they  are  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God.  (Col.  ii.  10  ;
and  Eph.  iii.  19.)  On  the  other  hand,  the  Protestant  doctrine  of
justification  harmonizes  mth  all  these  representations.  If  we  are
so  united  to  Christ  as  to  be  made  partakers  of  his  life,  we  are  also
partakers  of  his  righteousness.  What  He  did  in  obeying  and  suf-
fering He  did  for  his  people.  One  essential  element  of  his  redeem-
ing work  was  to  satisfy  the  demands  of  justice  in  their  behalf,
so  that  in  Him  and  for  his  sake  they  are  entitled  to  pardon  and
eternal  hfe.

Arguments  from  the  Effects  ascribed  to  Justification.
8.  The  consequences  attributed  to  justification  are  inconsistent
with  the  assumption  that  it  consists  either  in  pardon  or  in  the  in-
fusion of  righteousness.     Those  consequences  are  peace,  reconcil-


128  PART  m.   ch.  xvii.  -  justification.

iation,  aud  a  title  to  eternal  life.  "  Being  justified  by  faith,"  says
the  Apostle,  "  we  have  peace  with  God."  (Rom.  v.  1.)  But
pardon  does  not  produce  peace.  It  leaves  the  conscience  unsatis-
fied. A  pardoned  criminal  is  not  only  just  as  much  a  criminal  as
he  was  before,  but  his  sense  of  guilt  and  remorse  of  conscience  are
in  no  degree  lessened.  Pardon  can  remove  only  the  outward
and  arbitrary  penalty.  The  sting  of  sin  remains.  There  can
be  no  satisfaction  to  the  mind  until  there  is  satisfaction  of  justice.
Justification  secures  peace,  not  merely  because  it  includes  pardon,
but  because  that  pardon  is  dispensed  on  the  ground  of  a  full
satisfaction  of  justice.  What  satisfies  the  justice  of  God,  satisfies
the  conscience  of  the  sinner.  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  cleans-
eth  from  all  sin  (1  John  i.  7)  by  removing  guilt,  and  thus  pro-
ducing a  peace  which  passes  all  understanding.  When  the  soul
sees  that  Christ  bore  his  sins  upon  the  cross,  and  endured  the
penalty  which  he  had  incurred  ;  that  all  the  demands  of  the  law
are  fully  satisfied  ;  that  God  is  more  honoured  in  his  pardon
than  m  his  condemnation ;  that  all  the  ends  of  punishment  are
accomphshed  by  the  work  of  Christ,  in  a  far  lugher  degree  than
they  could  be  by  the  death  of  the  sinner  ;  and  that  he  has  a  right
to  plead  the  infinite  merit  of  the  Son  of  God  at  the  bar  of  divine
justice,  then  he  is  satisfied.  Then  he  has  peace.  He  is  humble  ;
he  does  not  lose  his  sense  of  personal  demerit,  but  the  conscience
ceases  to  demand  satisfaction.  Criminals  have  often  been  luiown
to  give  themselves  up  to  justice.  They  could  not  rest  until  they
were  punished.  The  infliction  of  the  penalty  incurred  gave  them
peace.  This  is  an  element  in  Christian  experience.  The  coii-
vinced  sinner  never  finds  peace  until  he  lays  his  burden  of  sin  on
the  Lamb  of  God  ;  until  he  apprehends  that  his  sins  have  been
punished,  as  the  Apostle  says  (Rom.  viii.  3),  in  Christ.

Again,  we  are  said  to  be  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  his
Son.  (Rom.  v.  10.)  But  pardon  does  not  produce  reconciKation.
A  pardoned  criminal  may  be  restored  to  his  civil  rights,  so  far
as  the  penalty  remitted  involved  their  forfeiture,  but  he  is  not
reconciled  to  society.  He  is  not  restored  to  its  favour.  Justifica-
tion, however,  does  secure  a  restoration  to  the  favour  and  fellow-
ship of  God.  We  become  the  sons  of  God  by  faith  in  Jesus
Chiist.  (Gal.  iii.  26.)  No  one  can  read  the  eighth  chapter  of  the
Epistle  to  the  Romans  without  being  convinced  that  in  Paul's
apprehension  a  justified  behever  is  something  more  than  a  par-
doned criminal.  He  is  a  man  whose  salvation  is  secure  because  he
is  free  from  the  law  and  all  its  demands  ;  because  the  righteousness


§2.]  JUSTIFICATION   A  FORENSIC   ACT.  129

of  tlie  law  (i.  e.,  all  its  righteous  requirements)  has  been  fulfilled
in  him ;  because  thereby  he  is  so  united  to  Christ  as  to  become  a
partaker  of  his  life  ;  because  no  one  can  lay  anything  to  the
charge  of  those  for  whom  Christ  died  and  whom  God  has  justi-
fied ;  and  because  such  believers  being  justified  are  revealed  as  the
objects  of  the  mysterious,  immutable,  and  infinite  love  of  God.

Again,  justification  includes  or  conveys  a  title  to  eternal  life.
Pardon  is  purely  negative.  It  simply  removes  a  penalty.  It
confers  no  title  to  benefits  not  previously  enjoyed.  Eternal  life,
however,  is  suspended  on  the  positive  condition  of  perfect  obedi-
ence. The  merely  pardoned  simier  has  no  such  obedience.  He  is
destitute  of  what,  by  the  immutable  principles  of  the  divine  gov-
ernment, is  the  indispensable  condition  of  eternal  life.  He  has
no  title  to  the  inheritance  promised  to  the  righteous.  This  is  not
the  condition  of  the  behever.  The  merit  of  Christ  is  entitled  to
the  reward.  And  the  behever,  being  partaker  of  that  merit,
shares  in  that  title.  This  is  constantly  recognized  in  the  Scrip-
tures. B}'-  faith  in  Christ  we  become  the  sons  of  God.  But  son-
ship  involves  heirship,  and  heirship  involves  a  title  to  the  inher-
itance. "  If  children,  then  heirs ;  heirs  of  God,  and  joint  heirs
with  Christ."  (Rom.  viii.  17.)  This  is  the  doctrine  taught  in
Romans  v.  12-21.  For  the  offence  of  one,  judgment  passed  on  all
men  to  condemnation.  For  the  righteousness  of  one,  the  sentence
of  justification  of  hfe  has  passed  on  all ;  that  is,  of  a  justifica-
tion which  entitles  to  life.  As  the  sin  of  Adam  was  the  judicial
ground  of  om*  condemnation  (^.  e.,  was  the  ground  on  which  justice
demanded  condemnation),  so  the  righteousness  of  Christ  is  the  ju-
dicial ground  of  justification.  That  is,  it  is  the  ground  on  which
the  hfe  promised  to  the  righteous  should  in  justice  be  granted  to
the  behever.  The  Church  in  all  ages  has  recognized  this  truth.
Behevers  have  always  felt  that  they  had  a  title  to  eternal  life.
For  this  they  have  praised  God  in  the  loftiest  strains.  They  have
ever  regarded  it  as  intuitively  true  that  heaven  must  be  merited.
The  only  question  was.  Whether  that  merit  was  in  them  or  in
Christ.  Being  in  Christ,  it  was  a  free  gift  to  them;  and  thus
righteousness  and  peace  kissed  each  other.  Grace  and  justice
unite  in  placing  the  crown  of  righteousness  on  the  believer's  head.

It  is  no  less  certain  that  the  consequences  attributed  to  justi-  •
fica,tion   do  not  flow   from   the   infusion  of   righteousness.     The
amount  of  holiness  possessed  by  the  believer  does  not  give  him
peace.     Even  perfect  holiness  would  not  remove  guilt.    Repent-
ance does  not  atone  for  the  crime  of  murder.     It  does  not  still


130  PART  m.   ch.  xvn.  —  justification.

the  murderer's  conscience  ;  nor  does  it  satisfy  the  sense  of  justice  in
the  public  mind.  It  is  the  -n-pwrov  i/^eSSo?  of  Romanism,  and  of  every
theory  of  subjective  justification,  that  they  make  nothing  of  guilt,
or  reduce  it  to  a  minimum.  If  there  were  no  guilt,  then  infusion
of  righteousness  would  be  all  that  is  necessary  for  salvation.  But
if  there  be  justice  in  God  then  no  amount  of  holiness  can  atone
for  sin,  and  justification  cannot  consist  in  making  the  sinner  holy.
Besides  this,  even  admitting  that  the  past  could  be  ignored,  that
the  guilt  which  burdens  the  soul  could  be  overlooked  or  so  easily
removed,  subjective  righteousness,  or  holiness,  is  so  imperfect  that
it  could  never  give  the  beUever  peace.  Let  the  holiest  of  men
look  within  himself  and  say  whether  what  he  sees  there  satisfies
his  own  conscience.  If  not,  how  can  it  satisfy  God.  He  is  greater
than  our  hearts,  and  knoweth  all  things.  No  man,  therefore,  can
have  peace  with  God  founded  on  what  he  is  or  on  what  he  does.
Romanists  admit  that  nothing  short  of  perfect  hohness  justifies
or  gives  peace  to  the  soul.  In  answer  to  the  Protestant  argument
founded  on  that  admission,  Bellarmin  says  :  ^  "  Hoc  argumentum,
si  quid  probat,  probat  justitiam  actualem  non  esse  perfectam :  non
autem  probat,  justitiam  habitualem,  qua  formahter  justi  sumus,
....  non  esse  ita  perfectam,  ut  absolute,  simpliciter,  et  proprie
justi  nominemur,  et  simus.  Non  enim  formaliter  justi  sumus  opere
nostro,  sed  opere  Dei,  qui  simul  maculas  peccatorum  tergit,  et
habitum  fidei,  spei,  et  caritatis  infundit.       Dei    autem   perfecta

sunt  opera Unde  parvuli  baptizati,  vere  justi  sunt,  quamvis

nihil  operis  fecerint."  Again,  "  Justitia  enim  actualis,  quamvis
aliquo  modo  sit  imperfecta,  propter  admixtionem  venalium  delic-
torum,  et  egeat  quotidiana  remissione  peccati,  tamen  non  prop-
terea  desinit  esse  vera  justitia,  et  suo  etiam  quodam  modo  per-
fecta." No  provision  is  made  in  this  system  for  guilt.  If  the  soul
is  made  holy  by  the  infusion  of  habits,  or  principles,  of  gi'ace,  it
is  just  in  the  sight  of  God.  No  guilt  or  desert  of  punishment  re-
mains. "  Reatus,"  says  Bellarmin,^  .  ..."  est  relatio,"  but  if
the  thing  of  which  it  is  a  relation  be  taken  away,  where  is  the
relation.  It  is  impossible  that  such  a  view  of  justification  can
give  peace.  It  makes  no  provision  for  the  satisfaction  of  justice,
and  places  all  our  hopes  upon  what  is  within,  which  our  con-
science testifies  cannot  meet  the  just  requirements  of  God.

Neither  can  the  theor}'^  of  subjective  justification  account  for
reconciliation  with  God,  and  for  the  same  reasons.     What  is  in-

1  De  Justificatione,  ii.  14  ;  Disputationes,  edit.  Paris,  1608,  vol.  iv.  p.  819,  a,  b.

2  De  Amissione  Gratim  et  Statu  Peccati,  v.  7  ;  Ibid,  p.  287.


§2.]  JUSTIFICATION   A   FOKENSIC   ACT.  131

fused,  the  degree  of  holiness  imparted,  does  not  render  us  the  ob-
jects of  divine  complacency  and  love.  His  love  to  us  is  of  the
nature  of  grace ;  love  for  the  unlovely.  We  are  reconciled  to
God  by  the  death  of  his  Son.  That  removes  the  obstacle  arising
from  justice  to  the  outflow  toward  us  of  the  mysterious,  unmer-
ited love  of  God.  We  are  accepted  in  the  beloved.  We  are  not
in  ourselves  fit  for  fellowship  with  God.  And  if  driven  to  de-
pend on  what  is  within,  on  our  subjective  righteousness,  instead
of  peace,  we  should  have  to  despair.

Again,  justification  according  to  the  Scriptures  gives  a  title  to
eternal  life.  For  this  our  own  righteousness  is  utterly  inade-
quate. So  far  from  anything  in  us  being  meritorious,  or  entitled
to  reward,  the  inward  state  and  the  exercises  of  the  holiest  of
men,  come  so  far  short  of  perfection  as  to  merit  condemnation.
In  us  there  is  no  good  thing.  When  we  would  do  good,  evil  is
present  with  us.  There  is  ever  a  law  in  our  members  warring
against  the  law  of  the  mind.  Indwelling  sin  remains.  It  forced
even  Paul  to  cry  out,  "  O  wi-etched  man  that  I  am  !  who  shall
deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death."  (Rom.  vii.  24.)
"  Nullum  unquam  exstitisse  pii  hominis  opus,  quod,  si  severe
Dei  judicio  examinaretur,  non  esset  damnabile."  ^  Ignoring  this
jDlain  truth  of  Scripture  and  of  Christian  experience  expressing
itself  in  daily  and  hourly  confession,  humiliation,  and  prayers  for
forgiveness,  the  doctrine  of  subjective  justification  assumes  that
there  is  no  sin  in  the  believer,  or  no  sin  which  merits  the  condem-
nation of  God,  but  on  the  contrary  that  there  is  in  him  what  mer-
its eternal  life.  The  Romanists  make  a  distinction  between  a  first
and  second  justification.  The  first  they  admit  to  be  gratuitous,
and  to  be  founded  on  the  merit  of  Christ,  or  rather,  to  be  gratui-
tously bestowed  for  Christ's  sake.  This  consists  in  the  infusion
of  habitual  grace  (^.  e.,  regeneration).  Tliis  justifies  in  render-
ing the  soul  subjectively  just  or  holy.  The  second  justification  is
not  a  matter  of  grace.  It  is  founded  on  the  merit  of  good  works,
the  fruits  of  regeneration.  But  if  these  fruits  are,  as  our  con-
sciousness testifies,  defiled  by  sin,  how  can  they  merit  eternal  life  ?
How  can  they  cancel  the  handwi'iting  which  is  against  us  ?  How
can  they  be  the  ground  of  Paul's  confident  challenge,  "  Who
shall  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  ?  "  It  is  not  what
is  within  us,  but  what  is  without  us  ;  not  what  we  are  or  do,  but
what  Christ  is  and  has  done,  that  is  the  ground  of  confidence  and
of  our  title  to  eternal  life.     This  is  the  admitted  doctrine  of  the

1  Calvin,  fnstilutio,  iii.  xiv.  11;  edit.  Berlin,  1834,  part  ii.  p.  38.


132  PART  m.   Ch.  xvil  — justification.

Protestant  Reformation.  "  Apud  theologos  Augustanse  confessio-
nis  extra  controversiam  positum  est,"  says  the  "  Form  of  Con-
cord," "  totam  justitiam  nostram  extra  nos,  et  extra  omnium  homi-
num  merita,  opera,  virtutes  atqne  dignitatem  qua?rendam,  eamqiie
in  solo  Domino  nostro,  Jesu  Christo  consistere."  As  high  as  the
heavens  are  above  the  earth,  so  high  is  a  hope  founded  on  the
work  of  Christ  for  us,  above  a  hope  founded  on  the  merit  of  any-
thing wrought  in  us.  Calvin  teaches  the  same  doctrine  as  Lu-
ther.^ He  quotes  Lombard  as  saying  that  our  justification  in
Christ  may  be  interpreted  in  two  waj^s  :  "  Primum,  mors  Christi
nos  justificat,  dum  per  earn  excitatur  caritas  in  cordibus  nostris,
qua  justi  efficimur  :  deinde  quod  per  eandem  exstinctum  est  pec-
catum  ;  quo  nos  captivos  distinebat  diabolus,  ut  jam  non  habeat
unde  nos  damnet."  To  which  Calvin  replies,  "  Scriptura  autem,
quem  de  fidei  justitia  loquitur,  longe  alio  nos  ducit :  nempe  ut  ab
intuitu  operum  nostrorum  aversi,  in  Dei  misericordiam  ac  Christi

perfectionem,  tantum  respiciamus Hie  est  fidei  sensus,  per

quem  peccator  in  possessionem  venit  suae  salutis,  dum  ex  Evan-
gelii  doctrina  agnoscit  Deo  se  reconciliatum  :  quod  intercedente
Christi  justitia,  impetrata  peccatorum  remissione,  justificatus  sit  :
et  quanquam  Spiritu  Dei  regeneratus,  non  in  bonis  operibus,  qui-
bus  incumbit,  sed  sola  Christi  justitia  repositam  sibi  perpetuam
justitiam  cogitat."

That  justification  is  not  merely  pardon,  and  that  it  is  not  the
infusion  of  righteousness  whereby  the  sinner  is  made  inherently
just  or  holy,  but  a  judgment  on  the  part  of  God  that  the  de-
mands of  the  law  in  regard  to  the  believer  are  satisfied,  and  that
he  has  a  right  to  a  righteousness  which  entitles  him  to  eternal
life,  has  been  argued,  (1.)  From  the  uniform  usage  of  Scripture
both  in  the  Old  and  New  Testament.  (2.)  From  the  constant
opposition  between  justification  and  condemnation.  (3.)  From
equivalent  forms  of  expression.  (4.)  From  the  whole  design  and
drift  of  the  Apostle's  argument  in  his  Epistles  to  the  Romans  and
to  the  Galatians.  (5.)  From  the  ground  of  justification,  namely,
the  righteousness  of  Christ.  (6.)  From  the  immutability  of  the
law  and  the  justice  of  God.  (7.)  From  the  nature  of  our  union
with  Christ.  (8.)  From  the  fact  that  peace,  reconciliation  with
God,  and  a  title  to  eternal  life  which  according  to  Scripture,  are
the  consequences  of  justification,  do  not  flow  either  from  mere  par-
don or  from  subjective  righteousness,  or  from  sanctification.    That

1  Solirla  Dedaratio,  iii.  55;  Hase,  Libri  Symbolic!,  3d  edit.  Leipzig,  1846,  p.  695.

2  Institutio,  III.  xi.  15,  16;  ut  supra,  p.  17.


§2.]  JUSTIFICATION  A  FORENSIC   ACT.  133

this  is  the  doctrine  of  Protestants,  both  Lutheran  and  Reformed,
cannot  with  any  show  of  reason  be  disputed.

CalviTi's  Doctrine.

It  is  true,  indeed,  that  by  the  earher  Reformers,  and  especially
by  Calvin,  justification  is  often  said  to  consist  in  the  pardon  of
sin.  But  that  that  was  not  intended  as  a  denial  of  the  judicial
character  of  justification,  or  as  excluding  the  imputation  of  the
righteousness  of  Christ  by  which  the  believer  is  counted  just  in
the  sight  of  the  law,  is  obvious, —

1.  From  the  nature  of  the  controversy  in  which  those  Reform-
ers were  engaged.  The  question  between  them  and  the  Roman-
ists was,  Does  justification  consist  in  the  act  of  God  making  the
sinner  inherently  just  or  holy  ?  or.  Does  it  express  the  judgment
of  God  by  which  the  believer  is  pronounced  just  ?  What  Calvin
denied  was  that  justification  is  a  making  holy.  What  he  afiirmed
was  that  it  was  delivering  the  believer  from  the  condemnation
of  the  law  and  introducing  him  into  a  state  of  favour  with  God.
The  Romanists  expressed  their  doctrine  by  saying  that  justifica-
tion consists  in  the  remission  of  sin  and  the  infusion  of  charity  or
righteousness.  But  by  the  remission  of  sin  they  meant  the  re-
moval of  sin  ;  the  putting  off  the  old  man.  In  other  words,  jus-
tification with  them  consisted  (to  use  the  scholastic  language  then
in  vogue)  in  the  removal  of  the  habits  of  sin  and  the  infusion  of
habits  of  grace.  In  those  justified,  therefore,  there  was  no  sin,
and,  therefore,  nothing  to  punish.  Pardon,  therefore,  followed
as  a  necessary  consequence.  It  was  a  mere  accessary.  This  view
of  the  matter  makes  nothing  of  guilt ;  nothing  of  the  demands  of
justice.  Calvin  therefore,  insisted  that  besides  the  subjective  ren-
ovation connected  with  the  sinner's  conversion,  his  justification
concerned  the  removal  of  guilt,  the  satisfaction  of  justice,  which
in  the  order  of  nature,  although  not  of  time,  must  precede  the
communication  of  the  life  of  God  to  the  soul.  That  Calvin  did
not  differ  from  the  other  Reformers  and  the  whole  body  of  the
Reformed  Church  on  this  subject  appears  from  his  own  explicit
declarations,  and  from  the  perfectly  unambiguous  statements  of
the  Confessions  to  which  he  gave  his  assent.  Thus  he  says,^
"  Porro  ne  impingamus  in  ipso  limine  (quod  fieret  si  de  re
incognita  disputationem  ingrediremur)  primum  explicemus  quid
sibi  velint  istse  loquutiones,  Hominem  coram  Deo  justificari.  Fide
justificari,  vel  operibus.     Justificari  coram  Deo  dicitur  qui  judicio

1  Institutio,  III.  xi.  2 ;  ut  supra,  p.  6.


134  PART  m.  ch.  XVII. —  justification.

Dei  et  censetur  Justus,  et  acceptus  est  ob  suam  justitiam  :  siqui-
dem  ut  Deo  abominabilis  est  iniquitas,  ita  nee  peccator  in  ejus  oc-
uKs  potest  invenire  gratiara,  quatenus  est  peccator,  et  quamdiu
talis  censetur.  Proinde  ubicunque  peccatum  est,  illic  etiam  se
profert  ira  et  ultio  Dei.  Justijficatur  autem  qui  non  loco  peccato-
ris,  sed  justi  habetur,  eoque  nomine  consistit  coram  Dei  tribunali,
ubi  peccatores  omnes  corruunt.  Quemadmodum  si  reus  innocens
ad  tribunal  jequi  judicis  adducatur,  ubi  secundum  innocentiam
ejus  judicatum  fuerit,  justificatus  apud  judicem  dicitur  :  sic  apud
Deum  justificatu.r,  qui  numero  peccatorum  exemptus,  Deuni  ha-
bet  suae  justitia3  testem  et  assertorem.  Justificari,  ergo,  operibus
ea  ratione  dicetur,  in  cujus  vita  reperietur  ea  puritas  ac  sanctitas
qusB  testimonium  justitige  apud  Dei  thronum  mereatur :  seu  qui
operum  suorum  integritate  respondere  et  satisfacere  illius  judicio
queat.  Contra,  justificabitur  ille  fide,  qui  operum  justitia  ex-
clusus,  Christi  justitiam  per  fidem  apprehendit,  qua  vestitus  in
Dei  conspectu  non  ut  peccator,  sed  tanquam  Justus  apparet.  Ita
nos  justificationem  simpliciter  interpretamvir  acceptionem,  qua
nos  Deus  in  gratiam  receptos  pro  justos  habet.  Eamque  in  pec-
catorum remissione  ac  justitiae  Christi  imputatione  positam  esse
dicimus."

This  passage  is  decisive  as  to  the  views  of  Calvin  ;  for  it  is  pro-
fessedly a  formal  statement  of  the  "  Status  Qutestionis  "  given
with  the  utmost  clearness  and  precision.  Justification  consists
"  in  the  remission  of  sins  and  the  imputation  of  the  righteousness
of  Christ."  "He  is  justified  in  the  sight  of  God,  who  is  taken
from  the  class  of  sinners,  and  has  God  for  the  witness  and  as-
sertor  of  his  righteousness."

§  3.  Works  not  the   Grround  of  Justification.

In  reference  to  men  since  the  fall  the  assertion  is  so  explicit  and
so  often  repeated,  that  justification  is  not  of  works,  that  that  prop-
osition has  never  been  called  in  question  by  any  one  professing  to
receive  the  Scriptvires  as  the  word  of  God.  It  being  expressly
asserted  that  the  whole  world  is  guilty  before  God,  that  by  the
works  of  the  law  no  flesh  living  can  be  justified,  the  only  ques-
tion open  for  discussion  is,  What  is  meant  by  works  of  the  law  ?

To  this  question  the  following  answers  have  been  given.  First,
that  by  works  of  the  law  are  meant  works  prescribed  in  the  Jew-
ish law.  It  is  assmned  that  as  Paul's  controversy  was  with  tliose
who  taught  that  unless  men  were  circumcised  and  kept  the  law
of  Moses,  they  could  not  be  saved  (Acts  xv.  1,  2-1),  all  he  intended


§3.]  WORKS  NOT  ITS  GROUND.  135

to  teach  was  the  reverse  of  that  proposition.  He  is  to  be  un-
derstood as  saying  that  the  observance  of  Jewish  rites  and  cere-
monies is  not  essential  to  salvation  ;  that  men  are  not  made  right-
eous or  good  by  external  ceremonial  works,  but  by  works  morally
good.  This  is  the  ground  taken  by  Pelagians  and  by  most  of  the
modern  Rationalists.  It  is  only  a  modification  of  this  view  that
men  are  not  justified,  that  is,  that  their  character  before  God  is
not  determined  so  much  by  their  particular  acts  or  works,  as  by
their  general  disposition  and  controlling  principles.  To  be  justi-
fied by  faith,  therefore,  is  to  be  justified  on  the  ground  of  our
trust,  or  pious  confidence  in  God  and  truth.  Thus  ^Vegscheider  ^
says,  "  Homines  non  singulis  quibusdam  recte  factis  operibusque
operatis,  nee  propter  meritum  quoddam  iis  attribuendum,  sed  sola
vera  fide,  i.  e.,  animo  ad  Christi  exemplinn  ejusdemque  prascepta
composito  et  ad  Deum  et  sanctissimum  et  benignissimvim  conver-
so,  ita,  ut  omnia  cogitata  et  facta  ad  Deum  ejusque  voluntatem
sanctissimam  pie  referant,  Deo  vere  probantur  et  benevolentia)
Dei  confisi  spe  beatitatis  futurae  pro  dignitate  ipsorum  morali
iis  concedendae  certissima  imbuuntur.  "  Steudlin,^  expresses  the
same  view.  "  All  true  reformation,  every  good  act,"  he  says,
"  must  spring  from  faith,  provided  we  understand  by  faith  the
conviction  that  something  is  right,  a  conviction  of  general  moral
and  religious  principles."  Kant  says  that  Christ  in  a  religious
aspect  is  the  ideal  of  humanity.  When  a  man  so  regards  him
and  endeavours  to  conform  his  heart  and  hfe  to  that  ideal,  he  is
justified  by  faith.^  According  to  all  these  views,  mere  ceremo-
nial works  are  excluded,  and  the  ground  of  justification  is  made
to  be  our  own  natural  moral  character  and  conduct.

Romish,  Doctrine.

Secondly.  The  doctrine  of  Romanists  on  this  subject  is  much
higher.  Romanism  retains  the  supernatural  element  of  Chris-
tianity throughout.  Indeed  it  is  a  matter  of  devout  thankfulness
to  God  that  underneath  the  numerous  grievous  and  destructive
errors  of  the  Romish  Church,  the  great  truths  of  the  Gospel  are
preserved.  The  Trinity,  the  true  divinity  of  Christ,  the  true
doctrine  concerning  his  person  as  God  and  man  in  two  distinct
natures  and  one  person  forever  ;  salvation  through  his  blood,  re-
generation and  sanctification  through  the  almighty  power  of  the

1  TnstUutiones  Theologice,  ui.  iii.  §  155,  5th  edit.  Halle,  1826,  p.  476.

2  Do/jm.  p.  417.

3  See  Strauss,  Dogmatik,  Tubingen  and  Stuttgart,  1841,  vol.  ii.  pp.  493,  494.


136  PART  III.   Ch.  xvil— justification.

Spirit,  the  resurrection  of  the  body,  and  eternal  Hfe,  are  doctrines
on  which  the  people  of  God  in  that  communion  Uve,  and  which
have  produced  such  saintly  men  as  St.  Bernard,  Fen^lon,  and
doubtless  thousands  of  others  who  are  of  the  number  of  God's
elect.  Every  true  worshipper  of  Christ  must  in  his  heart  recog-
nize as  a  Christian  brother,  wherever  he  may  be  found,  any  one
who  loves,  worships,  and  trusts  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  God
manifest  in  the  flesh  and  the  only  Saviour  of  men.  On  the  mat-
ter of  justification  the  Romish  theologians  have  marred  and  de-
faced the  truth  as  they  have  almost  all  other  doctrines  pertaining
to  the  mode  in  which  the  merits  of  Christ  are  made  available
to  our  salvation.  They  admit,  indeed,  that  there  is  no  good  in
fallen  man ;  that  he  can  merit  nothing  and  claim  nothing  on  the
ground  of  anything  he  is  or  can  do  of  himself.  He  is  by  nature
dead  in  sin  ;  and  until  made  partaker  of  a  new  life  by  the  super-
natural power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  he  can  do  nothing  but  sin.  For
Christ's  sake,  and  only  through  his  merits,  as  a  matter  of  grace,
this  new  life  is  imparted  to  the  soul  in  regeneration  (^'.  e.,  as  Ro-
manists teach,  in  baptism).  As  hfe  expels  death  ;  as  light  ban-
ishes darkness,  so  the  entrance  of  this  new  divine  life  into  the  soul
expels  sin  (i.  e.,  sinful  habits),  and  brings  forth  the  fruits  of  right-
eousness. Works  done  after  regeneration  have  real  merit,  "  mer-
itmn  condigni,"  and  are  the  ground  of  the  second  justification  ;
the  first  justification  consisting  in  making  the  soul  inherently  just
by  the  infusion  of  righteousness.  According  to  this  view,  we  are
not  justified  by  works  done  before  regeneration,  but  we  are  justi-
fied for  gracious  works,  i.e.,  for  works  which  spring  from  the  prin-
ciple of  divine  life  infused  into  the  heart.  The  whole  ground  of
om-  acceptance  with  God  is  thus  made  to  be  what  we  are  and  what

we  do.

Remonstrant  Doctrine.

Thirdly.  According  to  the  Remonstrants  or  Arminians  the
works  which  are  excluded  from  our  justification  are  works  of  the
law  as  distinguished  from  works  of  the  Gospel.  In  the  covenant
made  with  Adam  God  demanded  perfect  obedience  as  the  condi-
tion of  life.  For  Christ's  sake,  God  in  the  Gospel  has  entered  into
a  new  covenant  mth  men,  promising  them  salvation  on  the  condi-
tion of  evangelical  obedience.  This  is  expressed  in  different  forms.
Sometimes  it  is  said  that  we  are  justified  on  account  of  faith.
Faith  is  accepted  in  place  of  that  perfect  righteousness  demanded
by  the  Adamic  law.  But  by  faith  is  not  meant  the  act  of  re-
ceiving and  resting  upon  Christ  alone  for  salvation.    It  is  regarded


§8.]  WORKS  NOT  ITS  GROUND.  137

as  a  permanent  and  controlling  state  of  mind.  And  therefore
it  is  often  said  that  we  are  justified  by  a  "fides  obsequiosa,"  an
obedient  faith  ;  a  faith  which  includes  obedience.  At  other  times,
it  is  said  that  we  are  justified  hj  evangelical  obedience,  i.e.,  that
kind  and  measure  of  obedience  which  the  Gospel  requires,  and
which  men  since  the  fall,  in  the  proper  use  of  "  sufficient  grace  "
granted  to  all  men,  are  able  to  render.  Limborch  says,  "Scien-
dum, quando  dicimus,  nos  fide  justificari,  nos  non  excludere  opera,
quae  fides  exigit  et  tanquam  f  oecunda  mater  producit ;  sed  ea  inclu-
dere."  And  again,  "  Est  itaque  [fides]  talis  actus,  qui,  licet  in  se
spectatus  perfectus  nequaquam  sit,  sed  in  multis  deficiens,  tamen  a
Deo,  gratiosa  et  Uberrima  voluntate,  pro  pleno  et  perfecto  accep-
tatur,  et  propter  quem  Deus  homini  gratiose  remissionem  pecca-
torum  et  vitae  seternge  premium  conferre  vult."  Again,^  God,
he  says,  demands,  "  obedientiam  fidei,  hoc  est,  non  rigidam  et  ab
omnibus  sequalem,  prout  exigebat  lex ;  sed  tantam,  quantam  fides,
id  est,  certa  de  divinis  promissionibus  persuasio,  in  unoquoque  effi-
cere  potest."  Therefore  justification,  he  says,^  "  Est  gratiosa  ses-
timatio,  seu  potius  acceptatio  justitise  nostras  imperfectse  pro  per-
fecta,  propter  Jesum  Christum."

Protestant  Doctrine,

Fourthly.  According  to  the  doctrine  of  the  Lutherans  and  Re-
formed, the  works  excluded  from  the  ground  of  our  justification
are  not  only  ritual  or  ceremonial  works,  nor  merely  works  done
before  regeneration,  nor  the  perfect  obedience  required  by  the
law  given  to  Adam,  but  works  of  all  kinds,  everything  done  by
us  or  wrought  in  us.  That  this  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Bible  is
plain,  —

1.  Because  the  language  of  Scripture  is  unlimited.  The  dec-
laration is,  that  we  are  not  justified  "  by  works."  No  specific
kind  of  works  is  designated  to  the  exclusion  of  all  others.  But
it  is  "  works  ;  "  what  we  do  ;  anything  and  everything  we  do.
It  is,  therefore,  without  authority  that  any  man  limits  these
general  declarations  to  any  particular  class  of  works.

2.  The  word  law  is  used  in  a  comprehensive  sense.  It  includes
all  revelations  of  the  will  of  God  as  the  rule  of  man's  obedience  ;
and,  therefore,  by  "  works  of  the  law  "  must  be  intended  all
kinds  of  works.  As  v6iJio<;  means  that  which  binds,  it  is  used  for
the  law  of  nature,  or  the  law  written  on  the  heart  (Rom.  ii.  14),

1  Theologia  Christiana,  vi.  iv.  32,  31,  37  ;  edit.  Amsterdam,  1725,  pp.  705,  b,  a,  706,  a
9  Limborch,  vi.  iv.  18  ;  ut  supra,  p.  703,  a.


138  PART  m.   Oh.  x\il  —  justification.

for  the  Decalogue,  for  the  law  of  Moses,  for  the  whole  of  the
Old  Testament  Scriptures.  (Rom.  iii.  19.)  Sometimes  one,
and  sometimes  another  of  these  aspects  of  the  law  is  specially
referred  to.  Paul  assures  the  Jews  that  they  could  not  be  jus-
tified by  the  works  of  the  law,  which  was  especially  binding  on
them.  He  assures  the  Gentiles  that  they  could  not  be  justified
by  the  law  written  on  their  hearts.  He  assures  believers  under
the  Gospel  that  they  cannot  be  justified  by  works  of  the  law
binding  on  them.  The  reason  given  includes  all  possible  works.
That  reason  is,  that  all  human  obedience  is  imperfect ;  all  men
are  sinners  :  and  the  law  demands  perfect  obedience.  (Gal.  iii.
10.)  Therefore,  it  is  that  "  by  the  deeds  of  the  law  there  shall
no  flesh  be  justified."     (Rom.  iii.  20.)

3.  The  law  of  which  Paul  speaks  is  the  law  which  says,  "  Thou
shalt  not  covet  "  (Rom.  vii.  7)  ;  the  law  which  is  spiritual  (ver.
14)  ;  which  is  "  holy,  and  just,  and  good  "  (ver.  12)  ;  the  law  of
which  the  great  command  is,  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God
with  all  thy  heart,  and  thy  neighbour  as  thyself.  Besides,  what
are  called  works  of  the  law  are  in  Titus  iii.  5  called  "  works  of
righteousness."  Higher  works  than  these  there  cannot  be.  The
Apostle  repudiates  any  ground  of  confidence  in  his  "  own  right-
eousness "  (Phil.  iii.  9),  i.  e.,  own  excellence,  whether  habitual
or  actual.  He  censures  the  Jews  because  they  went  about  to
establish  their  own  righteousness,  and  would  not  submit  to  the
righteousness  of  God.  (Rom.  x.  3.)  From  these  and  many
similar  passages  it  is  clear  that  it  is  not  any  one  or  more  specific
kinds  of  work  which  are  excluded  from  the  ground  of  justifica-
tion, but  all  works,  all  personal  excellence  of  every  kind.

4.  This  is  stiU  further  evident  from  the  contrast  constantly
presented  between  faith  and  works.  We  are  not  justified  by
works,  but  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  (Gal.  ii.  16,  and  often
elsewhere.)  It  is  not  one  kind  of  works  as  opposed  to  another  ;
legal  as  opposed  to  evangelical ;  natural  as  opposed  to  gracious  ;
moral  as  opposed  to  ritual ;  but  works  of  every  kind  as  opposed
to  faith.

5.  The  same  is  evident  from  what  is  taught  of  the  gratuitous
nature  of  our  justification.  Grace  and  works  are  antithetical.
"  To  him  that  worketh  is  the  reward  not  reckoned  of  grace,  but
of  debt."  (Rom.  iv.  4.)  "  If  by  grace,  then  is  it  no  more  of
works  :  otherwise  grace  is  no  more  grace."  (Rom.  xi.  6.)  Grace
of  necessity  excludes  works  of  every  kind,  and  more  especially
those  of  the  highest  kind,  which  might  have  some  show  of  merit.


§3.]  WORKS   NOT  ITS   GROUND.  139

But  merit  of  any  degree  is  of  necessity  excluded,  if  our  salvation
be  by  grace.

6.  When  the  positive  ground  of  justification  is  stated,  it  is
always  declared  to  be  not  anything  done  by  us  or  wrought  in  us,
but  what  was  done  for  us.  It  is  ever  represented  as  something
external  to  ourselves.  We  are  justified  by  the  blood  of  Christ
(Rom.  V.  9)  ;  by  his  obedience  (Rom.  v.  19)  ;  by  his  righteous-
ness (ver.  18).  This  is  involved  in  the  whole  method  of  salva-
tion. Christ  saves  us  as  a  priest ;  but  a  priest  does  not  save
by  making  those  who  come  to  him  good.  He  does  not  work  in
them,  but  for  them.  Christ  saves  us  by  a  sacrifice  ;  but  a  sacri-
fice is  effectual,  not  because  of  its  subjective  effect  upon  the
offerer,  but  as  an  expiation,  or  satisfaction  to  justice.  Christ  is
our  Redeemer ;  he  gave  himself  as  a  ransom  for  many.  But  a
ransom  does  not  infuse  righteousness.  It  is  the  payment  of  a
price.  It  is  the  satisfaction  of  the  claims  of  the  captor  upon  the
captive.  The  whole  plan  of  salvation,  therefore,  as  presented  in
the  Bible  and  as  it  is  the  Kfe  of  the  Church,  is  changed,  if  the
ground  of  our  acceptance  with  God  be  transferred  from  what
Christ  has  done  for  us,  to  what  is  wrought  in  us  or  done  by  us.
The  Romish  theologians  do  not  agree  exactly  as  to  whether
habitual  or  actual  righteousness  is  the  ground  of  justification.
Bellarmin  says  it  is  the  former.^  He  says,  "  Solam  esse  habit-
ualem  justitiam,  per  quam  formahter  justi  nominamur,  et  su-
mus :  justitiam  vero  actualem,  id  est,  opera  vere  justa  justificare
quidem,  ut  sanctus  Jacobus  loquitur,  cum  ait  cap.  2  ex  operibus
hominem  justificari,  sed  meritorie,  non  formaliter."  This  he
says  is  clearly  the  doctrine  of  the  Council  of  Trent,  which
teaches,^  "  Causam  formalem  justificationis  esse  justitiam,  sive
caritatem,  quam  Deus  unicuique  propriam  infundit,  secundum
mensuram  dispositionum,  et  quae  in  cordibus  justificatorum  in-
hseret."  This  follows  also,  he  argues,  from  the  fact  that  the
sacraments  justify,^  "  per  modum  instrumenti  ad  infusionem
justitise  habituahs."  This,  however,  only  amounts  to  the  dis-
tinction, already  referred  to,  between  the  first  and  second  justi-
fication. The  infusion  of  righteousness  renders  the  soul  inher-
ently righteous  ;  then  good  works  merit  salvation.  The  one  is
the  formal,  the  other  the  meritorious  cause  of  the  sinner's  justi-
fication. But  according  to  the  Scriptures,  both  habitual  and
actual  righteousness,  both  inherent  grace  and  its  fruits  are  ex-
cluded from  any  share  in  the  ground  of  our  justification.

1  De  Justificatione,  n.  15 ;  Disputationes,  edit.  Paris,  1608,  vol.  iv.  p.  820,  a.
*  See  Session  vi.  cap.  7.  8  Bellarmin,  ut  supra,  p.  820,  b.


140  PART  in.   ch.  xvn.  —  justification.

7.  This  still  further  and  most  decisively  appears  from  the
grand  objection  to  his  doctrine  which  Paul  was  constantly  called
upon  to  answer.  That  objection  was,  that  if  our  personal  good-
ness or  moral  excellence  is  not  the  ground  of  our  acceptance  with
God,  then  all  necessity  of  being  good  is  denied,  and  all  motive
to  good  works  is  removed.  We  may  continue  in  sin  that  grace
may  abound.  This  objection  has  been  reiterated  a  thousand
times  since  it  was  urged  against  the  Apostles.  It  seems  so  un-
reasonable and  so  demoralizing  to  say  as  Paul  says,  Romans  iii.
22,  that  so  far  as  justification  is  concerned  there  is  no  difference
between  Jew  and  Gentile ;  between  a  worshipper  of  the  true
God  and  a  worsliipper  of  demons  ;  between  the  greatest  sinner
and  the  most  moral  man  in  the  world,  that  men  have  ever  felt
that  they  were  doing  God  service  in  denouncing  this  doctrine  as
a  soul-destroying  heresy.  Had  Paul  taught  that  men  are  jus-
tified for  their  good  moral  works  as  the  Pelagians  and  Ration-
ahsts  say  ;  or  for  their  evangehcal  obedience  as  the  Remonstrants
say  ;  or  for  their  inherent  righteousness  and  subsequent  good
works  as  the  Romanists  say,  there  would  have  been  no  room  for
this  formidable  objection.  Or,  if  through  any  misapprehension
of  his  teaching,  the  objection  had  been  urged,  how  easy  had  it
been  for  the  Apostle  to  set  it  aside.  How  obvious  would  have
been  the  answer,  '  I  do  not  deny  that  really  good  works  are  the
gromid  of  our  acceptance  with  God.  I  only  say  that  ritual  works
have  no  worth  in  his  sight,  that  He  looks  on  the  heart ;  or,  that
works  done  before  regeneration  have  no  real  excellence  or  merit ;
or,  that  God  is  more  lenient  now  than  in  his  dealing  with  Adam  ;
that  He  does  not  demand  perfect  obedience,  but  accepts  our  im-
perfect, well-meant  endeavours  to  keep  his  holy  commandments.'
How  reasonable  and  satisfactory  would  such  an  answer  have
been.  Paul,  however,  does  not  make  it.  He  adheres  to  his
doctrine,  that  our  own  personal  moral  excellence  has  nothing  to
do  with  our  justification ;  that  God  justifies  the  ungodly,  that
He  receives  the  chief  of  sinners.  He  answers  the  objection  in-
deed, and  answers  it  effectually  ;  but  his  answer  supposes  him
to  teach  just  what  Protestants  teach,  that  we  are  justified  with-
out works,  not  for  our  own  righteousness,  but  gratuitously,  with-
out money  and  without  price,  solely  on  the  ground  of  what  Christ
has  done  for  us.  His  answer  is,  that  so  far  from  its  being  true
that  we  must  be  good  before  we  can  be  justified,  we  must  be
justified  before  we  can  be  good ;  that  so  long  as  we  are  under
the  curse  of  the  law  we  bring  forth  fruit  unto  death ;  that  it  is


§4.]      THE  RIGHTEOUSNESS  OF  CHRIST  ITS  GROUND.      141

not  until  reconciled  unto  God  by  the  death  of  his  Son,  that  we
bring  forth  fruit  unto  righteousness  ;  that  when  justified  by  the
righteousness  of  Christ,  we  are  made  partakers  of  his  Spirit;
being  justified  we  are  sanctified  ;  that  union  with  Christ  by  faith
secures  not  only  the  imputation  of  his  righteousness  to  our  justi-
fication, but  the  participation  of  his  life  unto  our  sanctification  ;
so  that  as  surely  as  He  Uves  and  lives  unto  God,  so  they  that
believe  on  Him  shall  live  unto  God  ;  and  that  none  are  partakers
of  the  merit  of  his  death  who  do  not  become  partakers  of  the
power  of  his  life.  We  do  not,  therefore,  he  says,  make  void  the
law  of  God.  Yea,  we  estabhsh  the  law.  We  teach  the  only  true
way  to  become  holy  ;  although  that  way  appears  foolishness  unto
the  wise  of  this  world,  whose  wisdom  is  folly  in  the  sight  of  God.

§  4.  The  Righteousness  of  Christ  the  Grround  of  Justification.

The  imperative  question  remains,  How  shall  a  man  be  just
with  God  ?  If  our  moral  excellence  be  not  the  ground  on  which
God  pronounces  us  just,  what  is  that  ground  ?  The  grand  reason
why  such  different  answers  are  given  to  this  question  is,  that  it
is  understood  in  different  senses.  The  Scriptural  and  Protestant
answer  is  absurd,  if  the  question  means  what  Romanists  and
others  understand  it  to  mean.  If  "  just  "  means  good,  ^.  e.,  if
the  word  be  taken  in  its  moral,  and  not  in  its  judicial  sense,  then
it  is  absurd  to  say  that  a  man  can  be  good  with  the  goodness  of
another  ;  or  to  say  that  God  can  pronounce  a  man  to  be  good
who  is  not  good.  Bellarmin  says  an  Ethiopian  clothed  in  a  white
garment  is  not  white.  Curcellseus,  the  Remonstrant,  says,  "  A
man  can  no  more  be  just  with  the  justice  of  another,  than  he  can
be  white  with  the  whiteness  of  another."  Moehler  ^  says,  it  is
impossible  that  anything  should  appear  to  God  other  than  it
really  is  ;  that  an  unjust  man  should  appear  to  him,  or  be  pro-
nounced by  him  just.  All  this  is  true  in  the  sense  intended  by
these  writers,  "  The  judgment  of  God  is  according  to  truth."
(Rom.  ii.  2.)  Every  man  is  truly  just  whom  He  justifies  or  de-
clares to  be  just.  It  is  in  vain  to  dispute  until  the  "  status  qu^es-
tionis  "  be  clearly  determined.  The  word  SiKaios,  "  righteous,"  or
"  just,"  has  two  distinct  senses,  as  above  stated.  It  has  a  moral,
and  also  a  legal,  forensic,  or  judicial  sense.  It  sometimes  ex-
presses moral  character,  sometimes  simply  a  relation  to  law  and
justice.  In  one  sense  to  pronounce  a  man  just,  is  to  declare  that
he  is  morally  good.     In  another  sense,  it  is  to  declare  that  the

1  Symbolik,  §  14,  6th  ed.  Mainz,  1843,  p.  139.


142  PART  m.   ch.  XVII.  —  justification.

claims  of  justice  against  him  are  satisfied,  and  that  he  is  enti-
tled to  the  reward  promised  to  the  righteous.  When  God  jus-
tifies the  ungodly,  he  does  not  declare  that  he  is  godly,  but  that
his  sins  are  expiated,  and  that  he  has  a  title  founded  in  justice  to
eternal  Hfe.  In  this  there  is  no  contradiction  and  no  absurdity.
If  a  man  under  attainder  appear  before  the  proper  tribunal,  and
show  cause  why  the  attainder  should  in  justice  be  reversed,  and
he  be  declared  entitled  to  his  rank,  titles,  and  estates,  a  decision  in
his  favour  would  be  a  justification.  It  would  declare  him  just  in
the  eye  of  the  law,  but  it  would  declare  notliing  and  effect  noth-
ing as  to  his  moral  character.  In  the  hke  manner,  when  the
simier  stands  at  the  bar  of  God,  he  can  show  good  reason  why  he
caimot  be  justly  condemned,  and  why  he  should  be  declared  en-
titled to  eternal  hfe.  Now  the  question  is,  "  On  what  ground
can  God  pronounce  a  sinner  just  in  this  legal  or  forensic  sense  ?  "
It  has  been  shown  that  to  justify,  according  to  uniform  Scriptural
usage,  is  to  pronounce  just  in  the  sense  stated,  that  it  is  not  mere-
ly to  pardon,  and  that  it  is  not  to  render  inherently  righteous  or
holy.  It  has  also  been  shown  to  be  the  doctrine  of  Scripture,  what
indeed  is  intuitively  true  to  the  conscience,  that  our  moral  excel-
lence, habitual  or  actual,  is  not  and  cannot  be  the  ground  of  any
such  judicial  declaration.  What  then  is  the  ground  ?  The  Bible
and  the  people  of  God,  with  one  voice  answer,  "  The  righteous-
ness of  Christ."  The  ambiguity  of  words,  the  speculations  of
theologians,  and  misapprehensions,  may  cause  many  of  the  peo-
ple of  God  to  deny  in  words  that  such  is  the  proper  answer,  but
it  is  nevertheless  the  answer  rendered  by  every  believer's  heart.
He  relies  for  liis  acceptance  with  God,  not  on  himself  but  on
Christ,  not  on  what  he  is  or  has  done,  but  on  what  Christ  is  and
has  done  for  him.

Meaning   of  the   Terms.

By  the  righteousness  of  Christ  is  meant  all  he  became,  did,
and  suffered  to  satisfy  the  demands  of  divine  justice,  and  merit
for  his  people  the  forgiveness  of  sin  and  the  gift  of  eternal  life.
The  righteousness  of  Christ  is  commonly  represented  as  including
his  active  and  passive  obedience.  This  distinction  is,  as  to  the
idea.  Scriptural.  The  Bible  does  teach  that  Christ  obeyed  the
law  in  all  its  precepts,  and  that  he  endured  its  penalty,  and  that
this  was  done  in  such  sense  for  his  people  that  they  are  said  to
have  done  it.  They  died  in  Him.  They  were  crucified  with
Him.  They  were  dehvered  from  the  curse  of  the  law  by  his  be-
ing made  a  curse  for  them.     He  was  made  under  the  law  that  he


§4.]       THE  RIGHTEOUSNESS   OF   CHRIST  ITS   GROUND.      143

might  redeem  those  who  were  under  the  law.  We  are  freed
from  the  law  by  the  body  of  Christ.  He  was  made  sin  that  we
might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Him.  He  is  the  end
of  the  law  for  righteousness  to  all  them  that  believe.  It  is  by
his  obedience  that  many  are  made  righteous.  (Rom.  v.  19.)
We  obeyed  in  Him,  according  to  the  teaching  of  the  Apostle,  in
Romans  v.  12-21,  in  the  same  sense  in  which  we  sinned  in  Adam.
The  active  and  passive  obedience  of  Christ,  however,  are  only  dif-
ferent phases  or  aspects  of  the  same  thing.  He  obeyed  in  suffer-
ing. His  highest  acts  of  obedience  were  rendered  in  the  garden,
and  upon  the  cross.  Hence  this  distinction  is  not  so  presented  in
Scripture  as  though  the  obedience  of  Clirist  answered  one  pur-
pose, and  his  sufferings  another  and  a  distinct  purpose.  We  are
justified  by  his  blood.  We  are  reconciled  unto  God  by  his  death.
We  are  freed  from  all  the  demands  of  the  law  by  his  body  (Rom.
vii.  4),  and  we  are  freed  from  the  law  by  his  being  made  under
it  and  obeying  it  in  our  stead.  (Gal.  iv.  4,  5.)  Thus  the  same
effect  is  ascribed  to  the  death  or  sufferings  of  Christ,  and  to  his
obedience,  because  both  are  forms  or  parts  of  his  obedience  or
righteousness  by  which  we  are  justified.  In  other  words  the  obe-
dience of  Christ  includes  all  He  did  in  satisfying  the  demands  of
the  law.

The  Righteousness  of  Christ  is  the  Righteousness  of  Crod.

The  righteousness  of  Christ  on  the  ground  of  which  the  believer
is  justified  is  the  righteousness  of  God.  It  is  so  designated  in
Scripture  not  only  because  it  was  provided  and  is  accepted  by
Him ;  it  is  not  only  the  righteousness  which  avails  before  God,
but  it  is  the  righteousness  of  a  divine  person  ;  of  God  manifest
in  the  flesh.  God  purchased  the  Church  with  his  own  blood.
(Acts  XX.  28.)  It  was  the  Lord  of  glory  who  was  crucified.
(1  Cor.  ii.  8.)  He  who  was  in  the  form  of  God  and  thought  it
not  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God,  became  obedient  unto  death,
even  the  death  of  the  cross.  (Phil.  ii.  6-8.)  He  who  is  the
brightness  of  the  Father's  glory,  and  the  express  image  of  his
person,  who  upholds  all  things  by  the  word  of  his  power  ;  whom
angels  worship ;  who  is  called  God ;  who  in  the  beginning  laid
the  foundations  of  the  earth,  and  of  whose  hands  the  heavens  are
the  workmanship  ;  who  is  eternal  and  immutable,  has,  the  Apostle
teaches,  by  death  destroyed  him  who  has  the  power  of  death  and
delivered  those  who  through  fear  of  death  (^.  e.,  of  the  wrath  of
God)  were  all  their  lifetime  subject  to  bondage.     (Heb.  i.,  ii.)


144  PART  III.    Ch.  XVII. —justification.

He  wliom  Thomas  recognized  and  avowed  to  be  his  Lord  and
God  was  the  person  into  whose  wounded  side  he  thrust  his  hand.
He  whom  John  says  he  saw,  looked  upon,  and  handled,  he  de-
clares to  be  the  true  God  and  eternal  life.  The  soul,  in  which
personaUty  resides,  does  not  die  when  the  man  dies,  yet  it  is  the
soul  that  gives  dignity  to  the  man,  and  which  renders  his  life  of
mispeakably  greater  value  in  the  sight  of  God  and  man,  than  the
life  of  any  irrational  creature.  So  it  was  not  the  divine  nature
in  Christ  in  which  his  personahty  resides,  the  eternal  Logos,  that
died  when  Christ  died.  Nevertheless  the  hypostatic  union  be-
tween the  Logos  and  the  human  nature  of  Christ,  makes  it  true
that  the  righteousness  of  Christ  (his  obedience  and  sufferings)
was  the  righteousness  of  God.  Tliis  is  the  reason  why  it  can
avail  before  God  for  the  salvation  of  the  whole  world.  This  is
the  reason  why  the  believer,  when  arrayed  in  this  righteousness,
need  fear  neither  death  nor  hell.  This  is  the  reason  why  Paul
challenges  the  universe  to  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's
elect.

§  5.  Imputation  of  Righteousness.

The  righteousness  of  Christ  is  imputed  to  the  believer  for  his
justification.  The  word  impute  is  familiar  and  unambiguous.
To  impute  is  to  ascribe  to,  to  reckon  to,  to  lay  to  one's  charge.
When  we  say  we  impute  a  good  or  bad  motive  to  a  man,  or  that
a  good  or  evil  action  is  imputed  to  him,  no  one  misunderstands
our  meanmg.  Philemon  had  no  doubt  what  Paul  meant  when  he
told  him  to  impute  to  him  the  debt  of  Onesimiis.  "  Let  not  the
king  impute  anything  unto  his  servant."  (1  Sam.  xxii.  1.5.)
"  Let  not  my  lord  impute  iniquity  unto  me."  (2  Sam.  xix.  19.)
"Neither  shall  it  be  imputed  unto  him  that  offereth  it."  (Lev.
vii.  18.)  "  Blood  shall  be  imputed  mito  that  man;  he  hath  shed
blood."  (Lev.  xvii.  4.)  "  Blessed  is  the  man  unto  whom  the
Lord  imputeth  not  iniquity."  (Ps.  xxxii.  2.)  "  Unto  whom
God  imputeth  righteousness  without  works."  (Rom.  iv.  6.)
God  is  "  in  Christ  not  imputing  their  trespasses  unto  them."
(2  Cor.  V.  19.)

The  meaning  of  these  and  similar  passages  of  Scripture  has
never  been  disputed.  Every  one  understands  them.  We  use
the  word  impute  in  its  simple  admitted  sense,  when  we  say  that
the  righteousness  of  Christ  is  imputed  to  the  behever  for  his  jus-
tification.

It  seems  uimecessary  to  remark  that  this  does  not,  and  cannot
mean  that  the  righteousness  of  Christ  is  infused  into  the  behever,


§5.]  IMPUTATION  OF  RIGHTEOUSNESS.  145

or  in  any  way  so  imparted  to  him  as  to  change,  or  constitute  his
moral  character.  Imputation  never  changes  the  inward,  subject-
ive state  of  the  person  to  whom  the  imputation  is  made.  When
sin  is  imputed  to  a  man  he  is  not  made  sinful ;  when  the  zeal  of
Phmehas  was  imputed  to  him,  he  was  not  made  zealous.  When
you  impute  theft  to  a  man,  you  do  not  make  him  a  thief.  When
you  impute  goodness  to  a  man,  you  do  not  make  him  good.  So
when  righteousness  is  imputed  to  the  behever,  he  does  not  thereby
become  subjectively  righteous.  If  the  righteousness  be  adequate,
and  if  the  imputation  be  made  on  adequate  grounds  and  by  com-
petent authority,  the  person  to  whom  the  imputation  is  made  has
the  right  to  be  treated  as  righteous.  And,  therefore,  in  the  fo-
rensic, although  not  in  the  moral  or  subjective  sense,  the  imputa-
tion of  the  righteousness  of  Christ  does  make  the  sinner  righteous.
That  is,  it  gives  him  a  right  to  the  full  pardon  of  all  his  sins  and
a  claim  in  justice  to  eternal  life.

That  this  is  the  simple  and  universally  accepted  view  of  the
doctrine  as  held  by  all  Protestants  at  the  Reformation,  and  by
them  regarded  as  the  corner-stone  of  the  Gospel,  has  already  been
sufficiently  proved  by  extracts  from  the  Lutheran  and  Reformed
Symbols,  and  has  never  been  disputed  by  any  candid  or  competent
authority.  This  has  continued  to  be  the  doctrine  of  both  the
great  branches  of  the  Protestant  Church,  so  far  as  they  pretend
to  adhere  to  their  standards.  Schmid  ^  proves  this  by  a  whole
catena  of  quotations  so  far  as  the  Lutheran  Church  is  concerned.
Schweizer  ^  does  the  same  for  the  Reformed  Church.  A  few  cita-
tions, therefore,  from  authors  of  a  recognized  representative
character  will  suffice  as  to  this  point.  Turrettin  with  his  charac-
teristic precision  says :  "  Cum  dicimus  Christi  justitiam  ad  jus-
tificationem  nobis  imputari,  et  nos  per  justitiam  illam  imputatam
justos  esse  coram  Deo,  et  non  per  justitiam  ullam  qu^-e  nobis  in-
haereat ;  Nihil  aliud  volumus,  quam  obedientiam  Christi  Deo  Patri
nomine  nostro  prasstitam,  ita  nobis  a  Deo  donari,  ut  vere  nostra
censeatur,  eamque  esse  unicam  et  solam  illam  justitiam  propter
quam,  et  cuju.s  merito,  absolvamur  a  reatu  peccatorum  nostrum,
et  jus  ad  vitam  obtinemus ;  nee  ullam  in  nobis  esse  justitiam,
aut  uUa  bona  opera,  quibus  beneficia  tanta  promereamur,  qufe
ferre  possint  severum  judicii  divini  examen,  si  Deus  juxta  legis
suae  rigorem  nobiscum  agere  veUet ;  nihil  iu)s  illi  posse  opponere,

1  Die  Dogmatik  der  evangelisch-lutherischen  Ktrche,  dargestellt  und  cms  den  Qiiellen
helegt,  3d  edit.  Frankfort  and  Erlangen,  1853.

2  Die  Glauhendehre  der  evangelisch-reformirten  Kirche  dargestellt  und  aus  den  Quellen
belegt,  Zurich,  18W,  1847.

VOL.  ui.  10


146  PART  III.  ch.  xvn.  —  justification.

nisi  Christi  meritum  et  satisf actionem,  in  qua  sola,  peccatorum
conscientia  territi,  tutum  adversus  iram  divinam  perfugium,  et
animarum  nostrarum  pacem  invenire  possumus."  ^

On  the  following  page  he  refers  to  Bellarmin,^  who  says,  "  Si
[Protestantes  hoc]  solum  vellent,  nobis  imputari  Christi  merita,
quia  [a  Deo]  nobis  donata  sunt,  et  possmnus  ea  [Deo]  Patri
off  ere  pro  peccatis  nostris,  quoniam  Christus  suscepit  super  se  onus
satisfaciendi  pro  nobis,  nosque  Deo  Patri  reconcihandi,  recta  esset
eorum  sententia."  On  this  Turrettin  remarks,  "  Atqui  nihil  aliud
volumus ;  Nam  quod  addit,  nos  velle  '  ita  imputari  nobis  Christi
justitiam,  ut  per  earn  formaliter  justi  nominemur  et  simus,'  hoc
gratis  et  falso  supponit,  ex  perversa  et  praepostera  sua  hypothesi
de  justificatione  morali.  Sed  quseritur.  Ad  quid  imputatio  ista
fiat  ?  An  ad  justificationem  et  vitani,  ut  nos  pertendimus,  An
yero  tantum  ad  gratise  interna^  et  justitise  inhserentis  infusionem,
ut  illi  volunt ;  Id  est,  an  ita  imputentur  et  communicentur  nobis
merita  Christi,  ut  sint  causa  meritoria  sola  nostras  justificationis,
nee  ulla  alia  detur  justitia  propter  quam  absolvamur  in  conspectu
Dei ;  quod  volumus ;  An  vero  ita  imputentur,  ut  sint  conditiones
causaa  formalis,  id.  justitise  inhgerentis,  ut  ea  homo  donari  possit,
vel  causte  extrinsecte,  quas  mereantur  infusionem  justitire,  per
quam  justificatur  homo  ;  ut  ita  non  meritum  Christi  proprie,  sed
justitia  inhffirens  per  meritum  Christi  acquisita,  sic  causa  propria
et  vera,  propter  quam  homo  justificatur  ;  quod  illi  statuunt."  It
may  be  remarked  in  passing  that  according  to  the  Protestant  doc-
trine there  is  properly  no  "  formal  cause  "  of  justification.  The
righteousness  of  Christ  is  the  meritorious,  but  not  the  formal  cause
of  the  sinner's  being  pronounced  righteous.  A  formal  cause  is
that  which  constitutes  the  inlierent,  subjective  nature  of  a  person
or  thing.  The  formal  cause  of  a  man's  being  good,  is  goodness  ;
of  his  being  holy,  holiness  ;  of  his  being  wicked,  -wickedness.  The
formal  cause  of  a  rose's  being  red,  is  redness  ;  and  of  a  wall's  being
white,  is  whiteness.  As  we  are  not  rendered  inherently  righteous
by  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  it  is  hardly  correct  to  say  that  his
righteousness  is  the  formal  cause  of  our  being  righteous.  Owen,
and  other  eminent  vn-iters  do  indeed  often  use  the  expression  re-
ferred to,  but  they  take  the  word  "  formal "  out  of  its  ordinary
scholastic  sense.

Campegius  Vitringa^  says:  "Tenendum  est  certissimum  hoc
fundamentum,  quod  justificare  sit  vocabulum  forense,  notetque  in

1  InstUutio,  loe.  xvi.  iii.  9,  edit.  Edinburgh,  1847,  vol.  ii.  p.  570.

2  De  Justijlc'iilom,  ii.  7;   Disputationes,  Paris,  1603,  p.  801,  b.

«  Doctrina  Christianx  ^eligionis,  ill.  xvi.  2;  Leyden,  1764,  vol.  iil.  p.  254,  ff.


§  6.]  IMPUTATION   OF   RIGHTEOUSNESS.  147

Scriptura  actum  judicis,  quo  causam  alicujus  in  judicio  justam
esse  declarat ;  sive  eum  a  crimine,  cujus  postulatus  est,  absolvat
(quas  est  genuina,  et  maxime  propria  vocis  significatio),  sive  etiam
jus  ad  hanc,  vel  illam  rem  ei  sententia  addicat,  et  adjudicet."

"  17.  Per  justificationem  peccatoris  intelligimus  actum  Dei
Patris,  ut  judicis,  quo  peccatorem  credeiitem,  natura  filium  irae,
neque  uUum  jus  ex  se  habentem  bona  coelestia  petendi,  declarat
immunem  esse  ab  omni  reatu,  et  condemnatione,  adoptat  in  iilium,
et  in  eum  ex  gratia  confert  jus  ad  suam  communionem,  cum  sa-
lute teterna,  bonisque  omnibus  cum  ea  conjunctis,  postulandi."

"27.  Teneamus  nullara  carnem  in  se  posse  reperire  et  ex  se  pro-
ducere  causam,  et  fundamentum  justificationis.  29.  Quajrendum
igitur  id,  propter  quod  peccator  justificatur,  extra  peccatorem  in
obedientia  Filii  Dei,  quam  prsestitit  Patri  in  liumana  natura  ad
mortem,  imo  ad  mortem  crucis,  et  ad  quam  pra3standam  se  ob-
strinxerat  in  sponsione.  (Rom.  v.  19.)"  "  32.  Hsec  [obedien-
tia] imputatur  peccatori  a  Deo  judice  ex  gratia  juxta  jus  sponsi-
onis,  de  quo  ante  dictum."

,  Owen  in  his  elaborate  work  on  justification,^  proves  that  the
word  to  justify,  "whether  the  act  of  God  towards  men,  or  of  men
towards  God,  or  of  men  among  themselves,  or  of  one  towards
another,  be  expressed  thereby,  is  always  used  in  a  '  forensic '
sense,  and  does  not  denote  a  physical  operation,  transfusion,  or
transmutation."  He  thus  winds  up  the  discussion  :  "  Wherefore
as  condemnation  is  not  the  infusing  of  a  habit  of  wickedness  into
him  that  is  condemned,  nor  the  making  of  him  to  be  inherently
wicked,  who  was  before  righteous,  but  the  passing  a  sentence
upon  a  man  with  respect  to  his  wickedness  ;  no  more  is  justifi-
cation the  change  of  a  person  from  inherent  unrighteousness  to
righteousness,  by  the  infusion  of  a  principle  of  gi'ace,  but  a  sen-
tential declaration  of  him  to  be  righteous."  ^

The  ground  of  this  justification  in  the  case  of  the  believing
sinner  is  the  imputation  of  the  righteousness  of  Christ.  This  is
set  forth  at  length.^  "  The  judgment  of  the  Reformed  Churches
herein,"  he  says,  "  is  known  to  all  and  must  be  confessed,  unless
we  intend  by  vain  cavils  to  increase  and  perpetuate  contentions.
Especially  the  Church  of  England  is  in  her  doctrine  express  as  to
the  imputation  of  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  both  active  and
passive,  as  it  is  usually  distinguished.  This  has  been  of  late  so
fully  manifested  out  of  her  authentic  writings,  that  is,  the  '  Ar-

1  Justification,  chap.  4,  edit.  Philadelphia,  1841,  p.  144.

2  Ibid.  p.  154.  3  n,id.  chap.  7,  p.  187.


148  Jf ART  m.     Ch.  XVn.— JUSTIFICATION.

u

tides  of  Religion '  and  '  Books  of  Homilies,'  and  other  writings
publicly  authorized,  that  it  is  altogether  needless  to  give  any  fur-
ther demonstration  of  it."

President  Edwards  in  his  sermon  on  justification  ^  sets  forth
the  Protestant  doctrine  in  all  its  fulness.  "  To  suppose,"  he  says,
"  that  a  man  is  justified  by  his  own  \drtue  or  obedience,  derogates
from  the  honour  of  the  Mediator,  and  ascribes  that  to  man's  \drtue
that  belongs  only  to  the  righteousness  of  Christ.  It  puts  man  in
Christ's  stead,  and  makes  him  his  own  saviour,  in  a  respect  in
which  Christ  only  is  the  Saviour  :  and  so  it  is  a  doctrine  contrary
to  the  nature  and  design  of  the  Gospel,  which  is  to  abase  man,  and
to  ascribe  all  the  glory  of  our  salvation  to  Christ  the  Redeemer.
It  is  inconsistent  with  the  doctrine  of  the  imputation  of  Christ's
righteousness,  which  is  a  gospel  doctrine.  Here  I  would  (1.)  Ex-
plain what  we  mean  by  the  imputation  of  Christ's  righteousness.
(2.)  Prove  the  thing  intended  by  it  to  be  true.  (3.)  Show  that
this  doctrine  is  utterly  inconsistent  with  the  doctrine  of  our  being
justified  by  our  own  virtue  or  sincere  obedience.

"  First.  I  would  explain  what  we  mean  by  the  imputation  of^
Christ's  righteousness.  Sometimes  the  expression  is  taken  by  our
divines  in  a  larger  sense,  for  the  imputation  of  all  that  Christ  did
and  suffered  for  our  redemption,  whereby  we  are  free  from  guilt,
and  stand  righteous  in  the  sight  of  God  ;  and  so  implies  the  im-
putation both  of  Christ's  satisfaction  and  obedience.  But  here
I  intend  it  in  a  stricter  sense,  for  the  imputation  of  that  right-
eousness or  moral  goodness  that  consists  in  the  obedience  of
Christ.  And  by  that  righteousness  being  imputed  to  us,  is
meant  no  other  than  this,  that  that  righteousness  of  Christ  is  ac-
cepted for  us,  and  admitted  instead  of  that  perfect  inherent  right-
eousness that  ought  to  be  in  ourselves  :  Christ's  perfect  obedi-
ence shall  be  reckoned  to  our  account  so  that  we  shall  have  the
benefit  of  it,  as  though  we  had  performed  it  ourselves  :  and  so  we
suppose  that  a  title  to  eternal  life  is  given  us  as  the  reward  of
this  righteousness."  In  the  same  connection,  he  asks,  "  Why  is
there  any  more  absurdity  in  supposing  that  Christ's  obedience  is
imputed  to  us,  than  that  his  satisfaction  is  imputed  ?  If  Christ
has  suffered  the  penalty  of  the  law  for  us,  and  in  our  stead,  then
it  will  follow  that  his  suffering  that  penalty  is  imputed  to  us,  i.  e..
that  it  is  accepted  for  us,  and  in  our  stead,  and  is  reckoned  to
our  account,  as  though  we  had  suffered  it.  But  why  may  not  his
obeying  the  law  of  God  be  as  rationally  reckoned  to  om*  account,

1  Serm.  IV.  Worhs,  edit.  N.  Y.  1868,  vol.  iv.  pp.  91,  92.


§5.]  IMPUTATION  OF  RIGHTEOUSNESS.  149

as  his  suffering  the  penalty  of  the  law."  He  then  goes  on  to
argue  that  there  is  the  same  necessity  for  the  one  as  for  the  other.

Dr.  Shedd  says,  "  A  second  difference  between  the  Anselmic
and  the  Protestant  soteriology  is  seen  in  the  formal  distinction
of  Christ's  work  into  his  active  and  his  passive  righteousness.
By  his  passive  righteousness  is  meant  his  expiatory  sufferings,
by  which  He  satisfied  the  claims  of  justice,  and  by  his  active
righteousness  is  meant  his  obedience  to  the  law  as  a  rule  of
life  and  conduct.  It  was  contended  by  those  who  made  this  dis-
tinction, that  the  purpose  of  Christ  as  the  vicarious  substitute
was  to  meet  the  entire  demands  of  the  law  for  the  sinner.  But
the  law  requires  present  and  perfect  obedience,  as  well  as  satis-
faction for  past  disobedience.  The  law  is  not  completely  fulfilled
by  the  endurance  of  penalty  only.  It  must  also  be  obeyed.
Christ  both  endured  the  penalty  due  to  man  for  disobedience,
and  perfectly  obeyed  the  law  for  him  ;  so  that  He  was  a  vicarious
substitute  in  reference  to  both  the  precept  and  the  penalty  of  the
law.  By  his  active  obedience  He  obeyed  the  law,  and  by  his
passive  obedience  He  endured  the  penalty.  In  this  way  liis  vica-
rious work  is  complete."  ^

The  earlier  Symbols  of  the  Reformation  do  not  make  this  dis-
tinction. So  far  as  the  Lutheran  Church  is  concerned,  it  first
appears  in  the  "Form  of  Concord"  (A.  D.  1576).  Its  statement
is  as  follows  :  "  That  righteousness  which  is  imputed  to  faith,  or  to
believers,  of  mere  grace,  is  the  obedience,  suffering,  and  resurrec-
tion of  Christ,  by  which  He  satisfied  the  law  for  us,  and  expiated
our  sins.  For  since  Christ  was  not  only  man,  but  truly  God  and
man  in  one  undivided  person,  He  was  no  more  subject  to  the  law
than  He  was  to  suffering  and  death  (if  his  person,  merely,  be
taken  into  account),  because  He  was  the  Lord  of  the  law.
Hence,  not  only  that  obedience  to  God  his  Father  which  He  ex-
hibited in  his  passion  and  death,  but  also  that  obedience  which  He
exhibited  in  voluntarily  subjecting  Himself  to  the  law  and  fulfil-
ling it  for  our  sakes,  is  imputed  to  us  for  righteousness,  so  that
God  on  account  of  the  total  obedience  which  Christ  accomplished
(prgestitit)  for  our  sake  before  his  heavenly  Father,  both  in  acting
and  in  suffering,  in  life  and  in  death,  may  remit  our  sins  to  us,
regard  us  as  good  and  righteous,  and  give  us  eternal  salvation."  ^
In  this  point  the  Reformed  or  Calvinistic  standards  agree.

It  has  ah-eady  been  remarked  that  the  distinction  between  the

1  History  of  Christian  Doctrine,  New  York,  1863,  vol.  ii.  p.  341.

2  Hase,  Libri  Symbolid,  3(i.  edit.,  Leipzig,  1846,  pp.  684,  685.


150  PART  m.   ch.  XVII.  —  justification.

active  and  passive  obedience  of  Christ  is,  in  one  view,  unimpor-
tant. As  Christ  obeyed  in  suffering,  his  sufferings  were  as  much
a  part  of  his  obedience  as  his  observance  of  the  precepts  q^  the
law.  The  Scriptures  do  not  expressly  make  this  distinction,  as
they  include  everything  that  Christ  did  for  our  redemption  under
the  term  righteousness  or  obedience.  The  distinction  becomes
important  only  when  it  is  denied  that  liis  moral  obedience  is  any
part  of  the  righteousness  for  which  the  believer  is  justified,  or
that  his  whole  work  in  making  satisfaction  consisted  in  expiation
or  bearing  the  penalty  of  the  law.  This  is  contrary  to  Scripture,
and  vitiates  the  doctrine  of  justification  as  presented  in  the
Bible.

§  6.  Proof  of  the  Doctrine.

That  the  Protestant  doctrine  as  above  stated  is  the  doctrine  of
the  word  of  God  appears  from  the  following  considerations  :  —

1.  The  word  StKatdw,  as  has  been  shown,  means  to  declare  8iKaio<s.
No  one  can  be  truthfully  pronounced  StKaios  to  whom  St/catoo-i'i'i;
cannot  rightfully  be  ascribed.  The  sinner  (ex  vi  verbi)  has  no
righteousness  of  his  own.  God,  therefore,  imputes  to  liim  a
righteousness  which  is  not  his  own.  The  righteousness  thus  im-
puted is  declared  to  be  the  righteousness  of  God,  of  Christ,  the
righteousness  which  is  by  faith.  This  is  almost  in  so  many  words
the  declaration  of  the  Bible  on  the  subject.  As  the  question,
What  is  the  method  of  justification  ?  is  a  BibHcal  question,  it
must  be  decided  exegetically,  and  not  by  arguments  drawn  from
assumed  principles  of  reason.  We  are  not  at  liberty  to  say  that
the  righteousness  of  one  man  cannot  be  imputed  to  another  ;  that
this  would  involve  a  mistake  or  absurdity  ;  that  God's  justice  does
not  demand  a  righteousness  such  as  the  law  prescribes,  as  the  con-
dition of  justification  ;  that  He  may  pardon  and  save  as  a  father
without  any  consideration,  unless  it  be  that  of  repentance  ;  that
it  is  inconsistent  with  his  grace  that  the  demands  of  justice  should
be  met  before  justification  is  granted  ;  that  this  view  of  justifica-
tion makes  it  a  sham,  a  calHng  a  man  just,  when  he  is  not  just,
etc.  All  this  amounts  to  nothing.  It  all  pertains  to  that  wisdom
which  is  foolishness  with  God.  All  we  have  to  do  is  to  deter-
mine, (1.)  What  is  the  meaning  of  the  word  to  justify  as  used  in
Scripture  ?  (2.)  On  what  ground  does  the  Bible  affirm  that  God
pronounces  the  ungodly  to  be  just  ?  If  the  answer  to  these  ques-
tions be  what  the  Church  in  all  ages,  and  especially  the  Church
of  the  Reformation  has  given,  then  we  should  rest  satisfied.  The
Apostle  in  express  terms  says  that  God  imputes  righteousness  to


§6.]  PROOF  OF   THE  DOCTRINE.  151

the  sinner.  (Rom.  iv.  6,  24.)  By  righteousness  every  one  admits
is  meant  that  which  makes  a  man  righteous,  that  which  tlie  law
deman<is.  It  does  not  consist  in  the  sinner's  own  obedience,  or
moral  excellence,  for  it  is  said  to  be  "  without  works  ;  "  and  it  is
d'eclared  that  no  man  can  be  justified  on  the  ground  of  his  own
character  or  conduct.  Neither  does  tliis  righteousness  consist  in
faith;  for  it  is  "of  faith,"  "through  faith,"  "by  faith."  We
are  never  said  to  be  justified  on  account  of  faith.  Neither  is  it  a
righteousness,  or  form  of  moral  excellence  springing  from  faith,
or  of  which  faith  is  the  source  or  proximate  cause ;  because  it  is
declared  to  be  the  righteousness  of  God ;  a  righteousness  which  is
revealed ;  which  is  offered  ;  which  must  be  accepted  as  a  gift.
(Rom.  V.  17.)  It  is  declared  to  be  the  righteousness  of  Christ ;
his  obedience.  (Rom.  v.  19.)  It  is,  therefore,  the  righteousness
of  Christ,  his  perfect  obedience  in  doing  and  suffering  the  will  of
God,  which  is  imputed  to  the  believer,  and  on  the  ground  of  which
the  believer,  although  in  himself  ungodly,  is  pronounced  righteous,
and  therefore  free  from  the  curse  of  the  law  and  entitled  to  eternal
life.

The  ApostWs  Argument.

2.  All  the  points  above  stated  are  not  only  clearly  affirmed  by
the  Apostle  but  they  are  also  set  forth  in  logical  order,  and  elabor-
ately sustained  and  vindicated  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans.
The  Apostle  begins  with  the  declaration  that  the  Gospel  "  is  the
power  of  God  imto  salvation."  It  is  not  thus  divinely  efficacious
because  of  the  purity  of  its  moral  precepts  ;  nor  because  it  brings
immortality  to  light ;  nor  because  it  sets  before  us  the  perfect
example  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  nor  because  it  assures  us  of
the  love  of  God ;  nor  because  of  the  elevating,  sanctifying,  life-
giving  influence  by  which  it  is  attended.  There  is  something  pre-
liminary to  all  this.  The  first  and  indispensable  requisite  to
salvation  is  that  men  should  be  righteous  before  God.  They  are
imder  his  wi'ath  and  curse.  Until  justice  is  satisfied,  until  God  is
reconciled,  there  is  no  possibility  of  any  moral  influence  being  of
any  avail.  Therefore  the  Apostle  says  that  the  power  of  the
Gospel  is  due  to  the  fact  that  "  therein  is  the  righteousness  of  God
revealed."  This  cannot  mean  the  goodness  of  God,  for  such  is
not  the  meaning  of  the  word.  It  cannot  in  this  connection  mean
his  justice,  because  it  is  a  righteousness  which  is  "of  faith  ;  "  be-
cause the  justice  of  God  is  revealed  from  heaven  and  to  all  men ;
because  the  revelation  of  justice  terrifies  and  drives  away  from
God  ;  because  what  is  here  called  the  righteousness  of  God,  is


152  PART  m.   ch.  xvil— justification.

elsewhere  contrasted  mth  our  "  owii  righteousness  "  (Rom.  x.  3 ;
Phil.  iii.  9)  ;  and  because  it  is  declared  to  be  the  righteousness  of
Christ  (Rom.  v.  18),  which  is  (Rom.  v.  19)  explained  by  his
"obedience,"  and  in  Romans  v.  9  and  elsewhere  declared  to  be
"  his  blood."  This  righteousness  of  Christ  is  the  righteousness
of  God,  because  Christ  is  God  ;  because  God  has  provided,  re-
vealed, and  offers  it ;  and  because  it  avails  before  God  as  a  suf-
ficient ground  on  which  He  can  declare  the  believing  sinner  right-
eous. Herein  lies  the  saving  power  of  the  Gospel.  The  ques-
tion, How  shall  man  be  just  with  God  ?  had  been  sounding  in  the
ears  of  men  from  the  beginning.  It  never  had  been  answered.
Yet  it  must  be  answered  or  there  can  be  no  hope  of  salvation.  It
is  answered  in  the  Gospel,  and  therefore  the  Gospel  is  the  power
of  God  unto  salvation  to  every  one  that  believeth  ;  {.  g.,  to  every
one,  whether  Jew  or  Gentile,  bond  or  free,  good  or  bad,  who,  in-
stead of  going  about  to  establish  his  own  righteousness,  submits
himself  in  joyful  confidence  to  the  righteousness  which  his  God
and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  has  wrought  out  for  siimers,  and  which
is  freely  offered  to  them  in  the  Gospel  without  money  and  without
price.

This  is  Paul's  theme,  wliich  he  proceeds  to  unfold  and  estab-
lish, as  has  been  already  stated  under  a  previous  head.  He  begins
by  asserting,  as  indisputably  true  from  the  revelation  of  God  in
the  constitution  of  our  nature,  that  God  is  just,  that  He  "will
punish  sin ;  that  He  cannot  pronounce  him  righteous  who  is  not
righteous.  He  then  shows  from  experience  and  from  Scripture,
first  as  regards  the  Gentiles,  then  as  regards  the  Jews,  that  there
is  none  righteous,  no  not  one ;  that  the  whole  world  is  guilty  be-
fore God.    There  is  therefore  no  difference,  since  all  have  sinned.

Since  the  righteousness  which  the  law  requires  cannot  be  found
in  the  sinner  nor  be  rendered  by  him,  God  has  revealed  another
righteousness  (Rom.  iii.  21)  ;  "  the  righteousness  of  God,"
granted  to  every  one  who  believes.  Men  are  not  justified  for
what  they  are  or  for  what  they  do,  but  for  what  Christ  has  done
for  them.  God  has  set  Him  forth  as  a  propitiation  for  sin,  in  order
that  He  might  be  just  and  yet  the  justifier  of  them  that  believe.

The  Apostle  teaches  that  such  has  been  the  method  of  justifi-
cation from  the  beginning.  It  was  witnessed  by  the  law  and  the
prophets.  There  had  never,  since  the  fall,  been  any  other  way
of  justification  possible  for  men.  As  God  justified  Abraham
because  he  believed  in  the  promise  of  redemption  through  the
Messiah ;  so  He  justifies  those  now  who  believe  in  the  fulfilment


§6.]  PROOF   or   THE   DOCTRINE.  153

of  that  promise.  (Rom.  iv.  3,  9,  24.)  It  was  not  Abraham's
believing  state  of  mind  that  was  taken  for  righteousness.  It  is
not  faith  in  the  believer  now  ;  not  faith  as  a  virtue,  or  as  a  source
of  a  new  life,  which  renders  us  righteous.  It  is  faith  in  a  spe-
cific promise.  Righteousness,  says  the  Apostle,  is  imputed  to  us,
"  if  we  believe  on  Him  that  raised  up  Jesus  our  Lord  from  the
dead."  (Rom.  iv.  24.)  Or,  as  he  expresses  it  in  Romans  x.  9,  "If
thou  slialt  confess  with  thy  mouth  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  shalt  be-
lieve in  thine  heart  that  God  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead,
thou  shalt  be  saved."  The  promise  which  Abraham  believed,  is
the  promise  which  we  believe  (Gal.  iii.  14)  ;  and  the  relation
of  faith  to  justification,  in  his  case,  is  precisely  what  it  is  in  ours.
He  and  we  are  justified  simply  because  we  trust  in  the  Messiah
for  our  salvation.  Hence,  as  the  Apostle  says,  the  Scriptures  are
full  of  thanksgiving  to  God  for  gratuitous  pardon,  for  free  justifi-
cation, for  the  imputation  of  righteousness  to  those  who  have  no
righteousness  of  their  own.  This  method  of  justification,  he  goes
on  to  show,  is  adapted  to  all  mankind.  God  is  not  the  God  of
the  Jews  only  but  also  of  the  Gentiles.  It  secures  peace  and  rec-
onciliation with  God.  (Rom.  v.  1-3.)  It  renders  salvation  cer-
tain, for  if  we  are  saved  not  by  what  we  are  in  ourselves,  but  for
what  Christ  has  done  for  us,  we  may  be  sure  that  if  we  are  "  jus-
tified by  his  blood,  we  shall  be  saved  from  wrath  through  him."
(Rom.  V.  9.)  This  method  of  justification,  he  further  shows,  and
this  only,  secures  sanctification,  namely,  holiness  of  heart  and  life.
It  is  only  those  who  are  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  his
Son,  that  are  "  saved  by  his  life."  (v.  10.)  This  idea  he  expands
and  vindicates  in  the  sixth  and  seventh  chapters  of  this  Epistle.

The  Parallel  between  Adam  and  Christ.

3.  Not  content  with  this  clear  and  formal  statement  of  the
truth  that  sinners  can  be  justified  only  through  the  imputation  of
a  righteousness  not  their  own  ;  and  that  the  righteousness  thus
imputed  is  the  righteousness  (active  and  passive  if  that  distinc-
tion be  insisted  upon)  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  he  proceeds  to
illustrate  this  doctrine  by  drawing  a  parallel  between  Adam  and
Christ.  The  former,  he  says,  was  a  type  of  the  latter.  There  is
an  analogy  between  our  relation  to  Adam  and  our  relation  to
Christ.  We  are  so  united  to  Adam  that  his  first  transgression
was  the  ground  of  the  sentence  of  condemnation  being  passed  on
all  mankind,  and  on  account  of  that  condemnation  we  derive  from
him  a  corrupt  nature  so  that  all  mankind  descending  from  him


154  PART  m.   Ch.  XVII.  — justification.

by  ordinary  generation,  come  into  the  world  in  a  state  of  spirit-
ual death.  In  like  manner  we  are  so  united  to  Christ,  when  we
believe,  that  his  obedience  is  the  ground  on  which  a  sentence  of
justification  passes  upon  all  thus  in  Him,  and  in  consequence  of
that  sentence  they  derive  from  Him  a  new,  holy,  divine,  and  im-
perishable principle  of  spiritual  life.  These  truths  are  expressed
in  explicit  terms.  "  The  judgment  was  by  one  (offence)  to  con-
demnation, but  the  free  gift  is  of  many  offences  unto  justification."
(Rom.  V.  16.)  "  Therefore  as  by  the  offence  of  one  judgment
came  upon  all  men  to  condemnation  ;  even  so  by  the  righteous-
ness of  one  the  free  gift  came  upon  all  men  unto  justification  of
life.  For  as  by  one  man's  disobedience  many  were  made  sinners,
so  by  the  obedience  of  one  shall  many  be  made  righteous."  (v.  18,
19.)  These  two  great  truths,  namely,  the  imputation  of  Adam's
sin  and  the  imputation  of  Christ's  righteousness,  have  graven
themselves  on  the  consciousness  of  the  Church  universal.  They
have  been  reviled,  misrepresented,  and  denounced  by  theologians,
but  they  have  stood  their  ground  in  the  faith  of  God's  people,
just  as  the  primary  truths  of  reason  have  ever  retained  control
over  the  mass  of  men,  in  spite  of  all  the  speculations  of  philoso-
phers. It  is  not  meant  that  the  truths  just  mentioned  have  al-
ways been  expressed  in  the  terms  just  given  ;  but  the  truths
themselves  have  been,  and  still  are  held  by  the  people  of  God,
wherever  found,  among  the  Greeks,  Latins,  or  Protestants.  The
fact  that  the  race  fell  in  Adam  ;  that  the  evils  which  come  upon
us  on  account  of  his  transgression  are  penal ;  and  that  men  are
born  in  a  state  of  sin  and  condemnation,  are  outstanding  facts  of
Scripture  and  experience,  and  are  avowed  every  time  the  sac-
rament of  baptism  is  administered  to  an  infant.  No  less  univer-
sal is  the  conviction  of  the  other  great  truth.  It  is  implied  in
every  act  of  saving  faith  which  includes  trust  in  what  Christ  has
done  for  us  as  the  ground  of  our  acceptance  with  God,  as  opposed
to  anything  done  by  us  or  wrought  in  us.  As  a  single  proof  of
the  hold  which  this  conviction  has  on  the  Christian  consciousness,
reference  may  be  made  to  the  ancient  direction  for  the  visitation
of  the  sick,  attributed  to  Anselm,  but  of  doubtful  authorship :
"  Dost  thou  believe  that  thou  canst  not  be  saved,  but  by  the
death  of  Christ  ?  The  sick  man  answereth.  Yes.  Then  let  it  be
said  unto  him.  Go  to,  then,  and  whilst  thy  soul  abideth  in  thee,
put  all  thy  confidence  in  this  death  alone,  place  thy  trust  in  no
other  thing,  commit  thyself  wholly  to  this  death,  cover  thyself
wholly  with  this  alone,  cast  thyself  wholly  on  this  death,  wrap


§6.]  PROOF   OF   THE   DOCTRINE.  155

thyself  wholly  in  this  death.  And  if  God  would  judge  thee,  say,
Lord,  I  place  the  death  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  between  me  and
thy  judgment ;  and  otherwise  I  will  not  contend,  or  enter  into
judgment  with  thee.  And  if  He  shall  say  unto  thee,  that  thou
art  a  sinner,  say,  I  place  the  death  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be-
tween me  and  my  sins.  If  He  shall  say  unto  thee,  that  thou  hast
deserved  damnation,  say.  Lord,  I  put  the  death  of  our  Lord  Je-
sus Christ  between  thee  and  all  my  sins  ;  and  I  offer  his  merits
for  my  own,  which  I  should  have,  and  have  not.  If  He  say  that
He  is  angry  with  thee :  say,  Lord,  I  place  the  death  of  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ  between  me  and  thy  anger."  ^

Such  being  the  real  and  only  foundation  of  a  sinner's  hope
towards  God,  it  is  of  the  last  importance  that  it  should  not  only
be  practically  held  by  the  people,  but  that  it  should  also  be
clearly  presented  and  maintained  by  the  clergy.  It  is  not  what
we  do  or  are,  but  solely  what  Christ  is  and  has  done  that  can
avail  for  our  justification  before  the  bar  of  God.

Other  Passages  teachiyig  the  same  Doctrine.         ^

4.  This  doctrine  of  the  imputation  of  the  righteousness  of
Christ ;  or,  in  other  words,  that  his  righteousness  is  the  judicial
ground  of  the  believer's  justification,  is  not  only  formally  and
argumentatively  presented  as  in  the  passages  cited,  but  it  is  con-
stantly asserted  or  implied  in  the  word  of  God.  The  Apostle
argues,  in  the  fourth  chapter  of  his  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  that
every  assertion  or  promise  of  gratuitous  forgiveness  of  sin  to  be
found  in  the  Scriptures  involves  this  doctrine.  He  proceeds  on
the  assumption  that  God  is  just ;  that  He  demands  a  righteous-
ness of  those  whom  He  justifies.  If  they  have  no  righteousness  of
their  own,  one  on  just  grounds  must  be  imputed  to  them.  If,
therefore.  He  forgives  sin,  it  must  be  that  sin  is  covered,  that
justice  has  been  satisfied.  "  David,  also,"  he  says,  "  describeth
the  blessedness  of  the  man,  unto  whom  God  imputeth  righteous-
ness without  works  ;  saying,  Blessed  are  they  whose  iniquities
are  forgiven,  and  whose  sins  are  covered.  Blessed  is  the  man  to
whom  the  Lord  will  not  impute  sin."  (Rom.  iv.  6-8.)  Not  to
impute  sin  implies  the  imputation  of  righteousness.

In  Romans  v.  9,  we  are  said  to  be  "  justified  by  his  blood."
In  Romans  iii.  25,  God  is  said  to  have  set  Him  forth  as  a  propi-
tiation for  sin,  that  He  might  be  just  in  justifying  the  ungodly.
As  to  justify  does  not  mean  to  pardon,  but  judicially  to  pro-

1  See  "  The  General  Considerations,"  prefixed  by  Owen  to  his  work  on  Justification.


156  PART  m.   Ch.  xvn.  -  justification.

iiounce  righteous,  this  passage  distinctly  asserts  that  the  work
of  Christ  is  the  ground  on  which  the  sentence  of  justification  is
passed.  In  Romans  x.  3,  4,  he  says  of  the  Jews,  "  They  being
ignorant  of  God's  righteousness,  and  going  about  to  estabhsh
their  own  righteousness,  have  not  svibmitted  themselves  unto  the
righteousness  of  God.  For  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  for  right-
eousness to  every  one  that  believeth."  It  can  hardly  be  ques-
tioned that  the  word  (StKatoo-ri'ij)  righteousness  must  have  the
same  meaning  in  both  members  of  the  first  of  these  verses.  If
a  man's  "  own  righteousness  "  is  that  which  would  render  him
righteous,  then  "  the  righteousness  of  God,"  in  this  connection,
must  be  a  justifying  righteousness.  It  is  called  the  righteous-
ness of  God,  because,  as  said  before.  He  is  its  author.  It  is  the
righteousness  of  Christ.  It  is  provided,  offered,  and  accepted
of  God.  Here  then  are  two  righteousnesses  ;  the  one  human,
the  other  divine  ;  the  one  valueless,  the  other  infinitely  merito-
rious. The  folly  of  the  Jews,  and  of  thousands  since  their  day,
consists  in  refusing  the  latter  and  trusting  to  the  former.  This
folly  the  Apostle  makes  apparent  in  the  fourth  verse.  The  Jews
acted  under  the  assumption  that  the  law  as  a  covenant,  that  is,
as  prescribing  the  conditions  of  salvation,  was  still  in  force,  that
men  were  still  bound  to  satisfy  its  demands  by  their  personal
obedience  in  order  to  be  saved,  whereas  Christ  had  made  an  end
of  the  law.  He  had  abolished  it  as  a  covenant,  in  order  that
men  might  be  justified  by  faith.  Christ,  however,  has  thus  made
an  end  of  the  law,  not  by  merely  setting  it  aside,  but  by  satisfy-
ing its  demands.  He  delivers  us  from  its  curse,  not  by  mere
pardon,  but  by  bemg  made  a  curse  for  vis.  (Gal.  iii.  13.)  He
redeems  us  from  the  law  by  being  made  under  it  (Gal.  iv.  4,  5),
and  fulfilling  all  righteousness.

In  Philippians  iii.  8,  9,  the  Apostle  says,  he  "  suffered  the
loss  of  all  things,"  that  he  might  be  found  in  Christ,  not  having
his  "  own  righteousness,  which  is  of  the  law,  but  that  which  is
through  the  faith  of  Christ,  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God
by  faith."  Here  again  one's  own  righteousness  is  contrasted
with  that  which  is  of  God.  The  word  must  have  the  same  sense
in  both  members.  What  Paul  trusted  to,  was  not  his  own  right-
eousness, not  his  own  subjective  goodness,  but  a  righteousness
provided  for  him  and  received  by  faith.  De  Wette  (no  Augus-
tinian)  on  this  passage  says,  the  righteousness  of  God  here
means,  "  a  righteousness  received  from  God  (graciously  imputed)
on  condition  of  faith  "  ("  die  von  Gott  empfangene  (aus  Gnaden
zugerechnete)  Gerechtigkeit  uni  des  Glaubenswillen.")


§6.]  PROOF  OF   THE  DOCTRINE.  157

The  Apostle  says  (1  Cor.  i.  30),  Christ  "  of  God  is  made
unto  us  wisdom,  and  righteousness,  and  sanctification,  and  re-
demption." In  this  enumeration  sanctification  and  righteous-
ness are  distinguished.  The  one  renders  us  holy  ;  the  other
renders  us  just,  i.  g.,  satisfies  the  demands  of  justice.  As  Clirist
is  to  us  the  source  of  inward  spiritual  life,  so  He  is  the  giver  of
that  righteousness  which  secures  our  justification.  Justification  is
not  referred  to  sanctification  as  its  proxhnate  cause  and  ground.
On  the  contrary,  the  gift  of  righteousness  precedes  that  of  sanc-
tification. We  are  justified  in  order  that  we  may  be  sanctified.
The  point  here,  however,  is  that  righteousness  is  distinguished
from  anything  and  everything  in  us  which  can  recommend  us  to
the  favour  of  God.  We  are  accepted,  justified,  and  saved,  not
for  what  we  are,  but  for  what  He  has  done  in  our  behalf.  God
"  made  him  to  be  sin  for  us,  who  knew  no  sin ;  that  we  might
be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him."  (2  Cor.  v.  21.)
As  Christ  was  not  made  sin  in  a  moral  sense  ;  so  we  are  not  (in
justification)  made  righteousness  in  a  moral  sense.  As  He  was
made  sin  in  that  He  "  bare  our  sins  ;  "  so  we  are  made  righteous-
ness in  that  we  bear  his  righteousness.  Our  sins  were  the  ju-
dicial ground  of  his  humiliation  under  the  law  and  of  all  his
sufferings ;  so  his  righteousness  is  the  judicial  ground  of  our
justification.  In  other  words,  as  our  sins  were  imputed  to  Him ;
so  his  righteousness  is  imputed  to  us.  If  imputation  of  sin  did
not  render  Him  morally  corrupt ;  the  imputation  of  righteous-
ness does  not  make  us  holy  or  morally  good.

Argument  from  the   Q-eneral  Teachings  of  the  Bible.

5.  It  is  unnecessary  to  dwell  upon  particular  passages  in  sup-
port of  a  doctrine  which  pervades  the  whole  Scriptures.  The
question  is.  What  is  the  ground  of  the  pardon  of  sin  and  of  the
acceptance  of  the  believer  as  righteous  (in  the  forensic  or  judi-
cial sense  of  the  word),  in  the  sight  of  God  ?  Is  it  anythmg  we
do,  anything  experienced  by  us,  or  wrought  in  us  ;  or,  is  it  what
Christ  has  done  for  us  ?  The  whole  revelation  of  God  concern-
ing the  method  of  salvation  shows  that  it  is  the  latter  and  not
the  former.  In  the  first  place,  this  is  plain  fi-om  what  the
Scriptures  teach  of  the  covenant  of  redemption  between  the
Father  and  the  Son.  That  there  was  such  covenant  cannot  be
denied  if  the  meaning  of  the  words  be  once  agreed  upon.  It  is
plain  from  Scripture  that  Clirist  came  into  the  world  to  do  a
certain  work,  on  a  certain  condition.     The  promise  made  to  Him


158  PART  m.  ch.  xvn.  — justification.

was  that  a  multitude  whom  no  man  can  number,  of  the  fallen
race  of  man,  should  be  saved.  This  included  the  promise  that
they  should  be  justified,  sanctified,  and  made  partakers  of  eter-
nal life.  The  very  nature  of  this  transaction  involves  the  idea
of  vicarious  substitution.  It  assumes  that  what  He  was  to  do
was  to  be  the  ground  of  the  justification,  sanctification,  and  salva-
tion of  his  people.

In  the  second  place  this  is  involved  in  the  nature  of  the  work^
which  He  came  to  perform.  He  Avas  to  assume  ovir  nature,  to
be  born  of  a  woman,  to  take  part  of  flesh  and  blood  with  all
their  infirmities,  yet  vnthout  sin.  He  was  to  take  his  place
among  sinners ;  be  made  subject  to  the  law  which  they  are
bound  to  obey,  and  to  endure  the  curse  which  they  had  incurred.
If  this  be  so,  then  what  He  did  is  the  ground  of  our  salvation
from  first  to  last ;  of  our  pardon,  of  our  reconciliation  with  God,
of  the  acceptance  of  our  persons,  of  the  indwelling  of  the  Spirit,
of  our  being  transformed  into  His  image,  and  of  om-  admission
into  heaven.  "  Not  unto  us,  O  Lord,  not  unto  us,  but  unto  Thy
name  give  glory,"  has,  therefore,  been  the  spontaneous  language
of  every  believer  from  the  beginning  until  now.

In  the  third  place,  the  manner  in  which  Christ  was  to  execute
the  work  assigned  as  described  in  the  prophets,  and  the  way  in.
which  it  was  actually  accomphshed  as  described  by  Himself  and
by  his  Apostles,  prove  that  what  He  did  and  suffered  is  the
ground  of  our  salvation.  He  says  that  He  came  "  to  give  his
life  a  ransom  for  many."  (Matt.  xx.  28.)  "  There  is  one  God,"
says  the  Apostle,  "  and  one  mediator  between  God  and  men,  the
man  Christ  Jesus  ;  who  gave  HimseK  a  ransom  for  all."  (1  Tim.
ii.  5,  6.)  The  deliverance  effected  by  a  ransom  has  no  reference
to  the  character  or  conduct  of  the  redeemed.  Its  effects  are  due
exclusively  to  the  ransom  paid.  It  is,  therefore,  to  deny  that
Christ  was  a  ransom,  that  we  are  redeemed  by  his  blood,  to  af-
firm that  the  proximate  ground  of  our  deliverance  from  the  curse
of  the  law  and  of  our  introduction  into  the  liberty  of  the  sons  of
God,  is  anything  wi-ought  in  us  or  done  by  us.  Again,  from  the
beginning  to  the  end  of  the  Bible,  Christ  is  represented  as  a
sacrifice.  From  the  first  institution  of  sacrifices  in  the  family  of
Adam  ;  during  the  patriarchal  period  ;  in  all  the  varied  and  costly
ritual  of  the  Mosaic  law  ;  in  the  predictions  of  the  prophets  ;  in
the  clear  didactic  statements  of  the  New  Testament,  it  is  taught
with  a  constancy,  a  solemnity,  and  an  amplitude,  which  ])roves  it
to  be  a  fundamental  and  vital  element  of  the  divine  plan  of  re-


§  6.]  PROOF   OF   THE   DOCTRINE.  159

demptiou,  that  the  Redeemer  was  to  save  his  people  by  offering
himself  as  a  sacrifice  unto  God  in  their  behalf.  There  is  no  one
characteristic  of  the  plan  of  salvation  more  deeply  engraven  on
the  hearts  of  Christians,  which  more  effectually  determines  their
mward  spiritual  life,  which  so  much  pervades  their  prayers  and
praises,  or  which  is  so  directly  the  foundation  of  their  hopes,  as
the  sacrificial  nature  of  the  death  of  Christ.  Strike  from  the
Bible  the  doctrine  of  redemption  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  and
what  have  we  left  ?  But  if  Christ  saves  us  as  a  sacrifice,  then
it  is  what  He  does  for  us,  his  objective  work,  and  nothing  subjec-
tive, nothing  in  us,  which  is  the  ground  of  our  salvation,  and  of
all  that  salvation  includes.  For  even  our  sanctification  is  due  to
his  death.  His  blood  cleanses  from  all  sin.  (1  John  i.  7.)  It
cleanses  from  the  guilt  of  sin  by  expiation  ;  and  secures  inward
sanctification  by  securing  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit.

Again,  the  whole  Bible  is  full  of  the  idea  of  substitution,
Christ  took  our  place.  He  undertook  to  do  for  us  what  we  could
not  do  for  ourselves.  This  is  taught  in  every  possible  way.  He
bore  our  sins.  He  died  for  us  and  in  our  place.  He  was  made
under  the  law  for  us.  He  was  made  a  curse  for  us.  He  was
made  sin  for  us  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God
in  Him.  The  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  laid  on  Him.  Every-
thing, therefore,  which  the  Bible  teaches  of  the  method  of  salva-
tion, is  irreconcilable  with  the  doctrine  of  subjective  justification
in  all  its  forms.  We  are  always  and  everywhere  referred  to  some-
thing out  of  ourselves  as  the  ground  of  our  confidence  toward
God.

In  the  fourth  place,  the  effects  ascribed  to  the  work  of  Christ,
as  before  remarked,  are  such  as  do  not  flow  from  anything  in  the
believer  himself,  but  must  be  referred  to  what  has  been  done  for
him.  These  effects  are  expiation  of  sin,  propitiation,  the  gift
and  indwelling  of  the  life-giving  Spirit  of  God  ;  redemption,  or
deliverance  from  all  forms  of  e\il ;  and  a  title  to  eternal  life  and
actual  participation  in  the  exaltation,  glory,  and  blessedness  of
the  Son  of  God.  It  is  out  of  all  question  that  these  wonderful
effects  should  be  referred  to  what  we  personally  are  ;  to  our  merit,
to  our  holiness,  to  our  participation  of  the  life  of  Cluist.  In
whatever  sense  these  last  words  may  be  understood,  they  refer  to
what  we  personally  are  or  become.  His  life  in  us  is  after  all  a
form  of  our  life.  It  constitutes  our  character.  And  it  is  self-evi-
dent to  the  conscience  that  our  character  is  not,  and  cannot  be  the
ground  of  our  pardon,  of  God's  peculiar  love,  or  of  our  eternal
glory  and  blessedness  in  heaven.


160  PART  m.   Ch.  xvn.  —  justification.

In  the  fifth  place,  the  condition  on  which  our  participation  of
the  benefits  of  redemption  is  suspended,  is  inconsistent  with  any
form  of  the  doctrine  of  subjective  justification.  We  are  never
said  to  be  justified  on  account  of  faith,  considered  either  as  an
act  or  as  a  principle,  as  an  exercise  or  as  a  permanent  state  of  the
mind.  Faith  is  never  said  to  be  the  ground  of  justification.  Nor
are  we  saved  by  faith  as  the  source  of  holiness  or  of  spiritual  life
in  the  soul,  or  as  the  organ  of  receiving  the  infused  life  of  God.
We  are  saved  simply  "by  "  faith,  by  receiving  and  resting  upon
Christ  alone  for  salvation.  The  thing  received  is  something  out
of  ourselves.  It  is  Christ,  his  righteousness,  his  obedience,  the
merit  of  his  blood  or  death.  We  look  to  Him.  We  flee  to  Him.
We  lay  hold  on  Him.  We  hide  ourselves  in  Him.  We  are
clothed  in  his  righteousness.  The  Romanist  indeed  says,  that  an
Ethioj)ian  in  a  white  robe  does  not  become  white.  True,  but  a
suit  of  armor  gives  security  from  the  sword  or  spear,  and  that  is
what  we  need  before  attending  to  the  state  of  our  complexion.
We  need  protection  from  the  wrath  of  God  in  the  first  instance.
The  inward  transformation  of  the  soul  into  his  likeness  is  pro-
vided for  by  other  means.

In  the  sixth  place  and  finally,  the  fact  that  we  are  saved  by
grace  proves  that  the  ground  of  salvation  is  not  in  ourselves.  The
grace  of  God,  his  love  for  the  unlovely,  for  the  guilty  and  pol-
luted, is  represented  in  the  Bible  as  the  most  mysterious  of  the
divine  perfections.  It  was  hidden  in  God.  It  could  not  be  dis-
covered by  reason,  neither  was  it  revealed  prior  to  the  redemption
of  man.  The  specific  object  of  the  plan  of  salvation  is  the  mani-
festation of  this  most  wonderful,  most  attractive,  and  most  glorious
attribute  of  the  divine  nature.  Everything  connected  with  our
salvation,  says  the  Apostle,  is  intended  for  the  "  praise  of  the
glory  of  his  grace  "  (Eph.  i.  6.)  God  hath  quickened  us,  he  says,
and  raised  us  up,  and  made  us  sit  together  in  heavenly  places
in  Clu'ist  Jesus,  in  order  "that  in  the  ages  to  come,  he  might
show  the  exceeding  riches  of  his  grace,  in  his  Idndness  toward
us,  through  Christ  Jesus."

From  their  nature,  grace  and  works  are  antithetical.  The  one
excludes  the  other.  What  is  of  grace,  is  not  of  works.  And
by  works  in  Scripture,  in  relation  to  this  subject,  is  meant  not
individual  acts  only,  but  states  of  mind,  anything  and  everything
internal  of  which  moral  character  can  be  predicated.  When,
therefore,  it  is  said  th;it  salvation  is  of  grace  and  not  of  works,
it  is  thereby  said  that  it  is  not  founded  upon  anything  in  the  be*


§  7.]  CONSEQUENCES   OF  IMPUTATION.  161

liever  himself.  It  was  not  any  moral  excellence  in  man,  that
determined  God  to  interpose  for  his  redemption,  while  He  left  the
apostate  angels  to  their  fate.  This  was  a  matter  of  grace.  To
deny  this,  and  to  make  the  provision  of  a  plan  of  salvation  for
man  a  matter  of  justice,  is  in  such  direct  contradiction  to  every-
thing in  the  Bible,  that  it  hardly  ever  has  been  openly  asserted.
The  gift  of  his  Son  for  the  redemption  of  man  is  ever  represented
as  the  most  wonderful  display  of  unmerited  love.  That  some  and
not  all  men  are  actually  saved,  is  expressly  declared  to  be  not  of
works,  not  on  account  of  anything  distinguishing  favourably  the
one  class  from  the  other,  but  a  matter  of  pure  grace.  When  a
sinner  is  pardoned  and  restored  to  the  favour  of  God,  this  again  is
declared  to  be  of  grace.  If  of  grace  it  is  not  founded  upon  any-
thing in  the  sinner  himself.  Now  as  the  Scriptures  not  only
teach  that  the  plan  of  salvation  is  thus  gratuitous  in  its  incep-
tion, execution,  and  application,  but  also  insist  upon  tliis  charac-
teristic of  the  plan  as  of  vital  importance,  and  even  go  so  far  as
to  teach  that  unless  we  consent  to  be  saved  by  grace,  we  cannot
be  saved  at  all,  it  of  necessity  follows  that  the  doctrine  of  sub-
jective justification  is  contrary  to  the  whole  spirit  of  the  Bible.
That  doctrine  in  all  its  forms  teaches  that  that  which  secures
our  acceptance  with  God,  is  something  in  ourselves,  something
which  constitutes  character.  If  so,  then  salvation  is  not  of  grace ;
and  if  not  of  grace,  it  is  unattainable  by  siiuiers.

§  7.   The   Consequences  of  the  Imputation  of  Righteousness.

It  is  frequently  said  that  justification  consists  in  the  pardon  of
sin  and  in  the  imputation  of  righteousness.  This  mode  of  state-
ment is  commoi^ly  adopted  by  Lutheran  theologians.  This  exhi-
bition of  the  doctrine  is  founded  upon  the  sharp  distinction  made
in  the  "  Form  of  Concord"  between  the  passive  and  active  obe-
dience of  Christ.  To  the  former  is  referred  the  remission  of  the
penalty  due  to  us  for  sin  ;  to  the  latter  our  title  to  eternal  life.
The  Scriptures,  however,  do  not  make  this  distinction  so  promi-
nent. Our  justification  as  a  whole  is  sometimes  referred  to  the
blood  of  Christ,  and  sometimes  to  his  obedience.  This  is  intel-
ligible because  the  crowning  act  of  his  obedience,  and  that  with-
out which  all  else  had  been  unavailing,  was  his  laying  down  his
life  for  us.  It  is,  perhaps,  more  correct  to  say  that  the  righteous-
ness of  Christ,  including  all  He  did  and  suffered  in  our  stead,  is
imputed  to  the  believer  as  the  ground  of  his  justification,  and
that  the  consequences  of  this  imputation  are,  first,  the  remission

VOL.  III.  11


162  PART  III.     Ch.  XVII.  —  justification.

of  sin,  and  secondly,  the  acceptance  of  the  believer  as  righteous.
And  if  righteous,  then  he  is  entitled  to  be  so  regarded  and  treated.
By  the  remission  of  sin  Romanists  understand  the  removal  of
the  pollution  of  sin.  So  that  their  definition  of  justification  as
consisting  in  the  remission  of  sin  and  infusion  of  righteousness,  is
only  a  statement  of  the  negative  and  positive  aspects  of  sanctifi-
cation,  i.  e.,  putting  off  the  old  man  and  putting  on  the  new
man.  The  effect  of  remission  is  constantly  declared  to  be  that
nothino;  of  the  nature  of  sin  remains  in  the  soul.  The  Council  of
Trent  says,  "  Justificatio  ....  non  est  sola  peccatorum  remissio,
sed  et  sanctificatio,  et  renovatio  interioris  hominis  per  volunta-

riam  susceptionem  gratioe  et  donorum Quanquam  nemo

possit  esse  Justus,  nisi  cui  merita  passionis  Domini  nostri  Jesu
Clrristi  communicantur :  id  tamen  in  hac  impii  justifieatione  fit,
dum  ejusdem  sanctissimce  passionis  merito  per  Spiritum  Sanctum
caritas  Dei  diffunditur  in  cordibus  eorum,  qui  justificantur,  atque
ipsis  inliteret."  "  Quibus  verbis  justificationis  impii  descriptio
insinuatur,  ut  sit  translatio  ab  eo  statu,  in  quo  homo  nascitur  filius
primi  Ad^e,  in  statum  gratise  et  adoptiouis  filiorum  Dei,  per  secun-
dum Adam  Jesum  Christum,  salvatorem  nostrum :  quae  quidem
translatio  post  evangelium  promulgatum  sine  lavacro  regenera-
tionis,  aut  ejus  voto  fieri  non  potest."  ^  By  "  status  gratiae  "  in
this  definition  is  not  meant  a  state  of  favoxir,  but  a  state  of  sub-
jective grace  or  holiness  ;  because  in  other  places  and  most  com-
monly justification  is  said  to  consist  in  the  infusion  of  g-race.  In
this  definition,  therefore,  the  pardon  of  sin  in  the  proper  sense  of
the  words  is  not  included.  Bellarmin  ^  says  this  translation  into
a  state  of  adoption  as  sons  of  God,  "  non  potest  ....  fieri,  nisi
homo  per  remissionem  peccati  desinat  esse  impius  ;  et  per  infu-
sionem  justitiaa  incipiat  esse  plus.  Sed  sicut  aer  cum  illustratur
a  sole  per  idem  lumen,  quod  recipit,  desinit  esse  tenebrosus  et  in-
cipit  esse  lucidus :  sic  etiam  homo  per  eandem  justitiam  sibi  a
sole  justiti^>3  donatam  atque  infusam  desinit  esse  injustus,  delente
videlicet  lumine  gratitB  tenebras  peccatorum."  The  remission  of
sin  is  therefore  defined  to  be  the  removal  of  sin.  Bellarmin  argues
in  support  of  this  view  that  guilt  is  removed  by  holiness,  that
guilt  is  a  relation  ;  the  relation  of  sin  to  justice.  When  the  thing
itself  is  taken  away,  the  relation  itself  of  course  ceases.-^  Hence
remission  of  sin,  even  in  the  sense  of  pardon,  is  effected  by  the

1  Sess.  VI.  cap.  7,  4;  Streitwolf,  Libri  Symbolici,  Gcittingen,  18-46,  pp.  24,  25,  22.

2  De  Justifieatione,  ii.  ii. ;  Disputationes,  edit.  Paris,  1608,  vol.  iv.  pp.  780,  e,  781,  a.
«  De  Amissione  Gratice  et  Statu  Peccati,  v.  vii.,  Ibid.  p.  287,  a,  b.


§7.]  CONSEQUENCES   OF   IMPUTATION.  163

infusion  of  righteousness,  as  darkness  is  banished  by  the  intro-
duction of  light.  It  is  thus,  as  remarked  above,  that  guilt  is
either  ignored,  or  reduced  to  a  minimum  by  the  Romish  theory
of  justification.  There  is  really  no  satisfaction  of  justice  in  the
case.  The  merits  of  Christ  avail  to  secure  for  man  the  gift  of
the  Holy  Ghost,  by  whose  power  as  exercised  in  the  sacrament
of  baptism,  the  soul  is  made  holy,  and  by  the  introduction  of  holi-
ness everything  of  the  nature  of  sin  is  banished,  and  all  ground
for  the  infliction  of  punishment  is  removed.  A  scheme  so  opposed
to  Scripture,  and  so  inconsistent  with  even  the  natural  conscience,
cannot  be  practically  adopted  by  the  mass  of  the  people.  The
conviction  is  too  intimate  that  the  desert  of  punishment  is  not
removed  by  the  reformation,  or  even  by  the  regeneration  of  the
sinner,  to  allow  the  conscience  to  be  satisfied  with  any  scheme  of
salvation  which  does  not  provide  for  the  expiation  of  the  guilt  of
sin  by  what  really  satisfies  the  justice  of  God.

In  the  Bible,  therefore,  as  well  as  in  common  life,  pardon  is  not
a  mere  consequence  of  sanctification.  It  is  exemption  from  the
infliction  of  the  deserved  penalty  of  the  law.  Whether  this  ex-
emption is  a  mere  matter  of  caprice,  or  unworthy  partiality  for .
the  offender,  or  for  considerations  of  expediency,  or  at  the
promptings  of  compassion,  or  upon  the  ground  of  an  adequate
satisfaction  to  the  demands  of  justice,  makes  no  difference  so  far
as  the  nature  of  pardon  is  concerned.  It  is  in  all  cases  the  re-
mission of  a  penalty  adjudged  to  be  deserved.  It  is  in  this  sense,
therefore,  that  justification  is  declared  to  include  the  pardon  of
sins,  founded  on  the  imputation  to  the  believing  sinner  of  the
perfect  righteousness  of  Clirist.  It  is  this  that  gives  the  believer
peace.  He  sees  that  he  is  delivered  from  "  the  wrath  and  curse
of  God  "  due  to  him,  not  by  any  arbitrary  exercise  of  executive
authority,  but  because  God,  as  a  righteous  judge,  can,  in  virtue
of  the  propitiation  of  Christ,  be  just  and  yet  justify  the  ungodly.

The  sins  which  are  pardoned  in  justification  include  all  sins,
past,  present,  and  future.  It  does  indeed  seem  to  be  a  solecism
that  sins  should  be  forgiven  before  they  are  committed.  For-
giveness involves  remission  of  penalty.  But  how  can  a  penalty
be  remitted  before  it  is  incurred  ?  This  is  only  an  apparent  dif-
ficulty arising  out  of  the  inadequacy  of  human  language.  The
righteousness  of  Christ  is  a  perpetual  donation.  It  is  a  robe
which  hides,  or  as  the  Bible  expresses  it,  covers  from  the  eye  of
justice  the  sins  of  the  believer.  They  are  sins  ;  they  deserve  the
wi-ath  and  curse  of  God,  but  the  necessity  for  the  infliction  of


164  PART  III.   ch.  xvn.  —  justification.

that  curse  no  longer  exists.  The  believer  feels  the  constant  ne-
cessity for  confession  and  prayer  for  pardon,  but  the  ground  of
pardon  is  ever  present  for  him  to  offer  and  plead.  So  that  it
would  perhaps  be  a  more  correct  statement  to  say  that  in  justifi-
cation the  behever  receives  the  promise  that  God  will  not  deal
with  him  according  to  his  transgressions,  rather  than  to  say  that
sins  are  forgiven  before  they  are  committed.

This  subject  is  thus  presented  by  the  Apostle  :  believers  "  are
not  under  the  law  but  under  grace."  (Rom.  vi.  14.)  They  are
not  xmder  a  legal  system  administered  according  to  the  principles
of  retributive  justice,  a  system  which  requires  perfect  obedience
as  the  condition  of  acceptance  with  God,  and  which  says,  "  Cursed
is  every  one  that  contmueth  not  in  all  things  which  are  written
in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them."  They  are  under  grace,  that
is,  under  a  system  in  which  believers  are  not  dealt  with  on  the
principles  of  justice,  but  on  the  principles  of  undeserved  mercy,
in  which  God  does  not  impute  "  their  trespasses  unto  them."
(2  Cor.  V.  19.)  There  is  therefore  to  them  no  condemnation.
They  are  not  condemned  for  their  sins,  not  because  they  are  not
sins  and  do  not  deserve  condemnation,  but  because  Christ  has
already  made  expiation  for  their  guilt  and  makes  continual  inter-
cession for  them.  .

The  second  consequence  attributed  to  the  imputation  of  Christ's
righteousness,  is  a  title  to  eternal  life.  This  in  the  older  writers
is  often  expressed  by  the  words  "  adoption  and  heirship."  Being
made  the  children  of  God  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus  (Gal.  iii.  26),
the}^  are  heirs  of  God  and  jomt  heirs  with  Jesus  Christ  of  a  heav-
enly inheritance.  (Rom.  viii.  17.)  The  mere  expiation  of  guilt
confers  no  title  to  eternal  life.  The  condition  of  the  covenant
under  which  man  was  placed  was  perfect  obedience.  This,  from
all  that  appears  in  Scripture,  the  perfection  of  God  requires.
As  He  never  pardons  sins  unless  the  demands  of  justice  be  satis-
fied, so  He  never  grants  eternal  life  unless  perfect  obedience  be
rendered.  Heaven  is  always  represented  as  a  purchased  posses-
sion. In  the  covenant  between  the  Father  and  the  Son  the
salvation  of  his  people  was  promised  as  the  reward  of  his  humil-
iation, obedience,  and  death.  Having  performed  the  stipulated
conditions.  He  has  a  claim  to  the  promised  recompense.  And
this  claim  inures  to  the  benefit  of  his  people.  But  besides  this,
as  the  work  of  Christ  consisted  in  his  doing  all  that  the  law  of
God,  or  covenant  of  works  requires  for  the  salvation  of  men,  and
as  that  righteousness  is  freely  offered  to  every  one  that  believes.


gS.]  RELATION  OF  FAITH  TO  JUSTIFICATION.  165

every  sucli  believer  has  as  valid  a  claim  to  eternal  life  as  lie
•^^ould  have  had,  had  he  personally  done  all  that  the  law  demands.
Thus  broad  and  firm  is  the  foundation  which  God  has  laid  for
the  hopes  of  his  people.  It  is  the  rock  of  ages ;  Jehovah  our
righteousness.

§  8.  Relation  of  Faith  to  Justification.

All  who  profess  to  be  Christians  admit  the  doctrine  of  justifi-
cation by  faith.  There  are  different  views,  however,  as  to  the
relation  between  faith  and  justification,  as  has  been  already  inti-
mated.

1.  Pelagians  and  rationalists  teach  that  faith  in  God's  being
and  perfection,  or  in  the  great  principles  of  moral  and  religious
truth,  is  the  source  of  that  moral  excellence  on  account  of  which
we  are  accepted  of  God.  It  is  perhaps  only  a  different  way  of
expressing  the  same  idea,  to  say  that  God,  in  the  case  of  Abra-
ham, and,  therefore,  of  other  men,  accepts  the  pious  state  of
mind  involved  in  the  exercise  of  faith  or  confidence  in  God,  in
lieu  of  perfect  righteousness.

2.  Romanists  make  faith  mere  assent.  It  does  not  justify
as  a  virtue,  or  as  apprehending  the  offered  righteousness  of
Christ.  It  is  neither  the  formal  nor  the  instrumental  cause  of
justification,  it  is  merely  the  predisposing  or  occasional  cause.
A  man  assents  to  the  truth  of  Christianity,  and  to  the  more  spe-
cial truth  that  the  Church  is  a  divine  institution  for  saving  men.
He  therefore  comes  to  the  Church  and  receives  the  sacrament  of
baptism,  by  which,  "  ex  opere  operato,"  a  habit  of  grace,  or  spirit-
ual life  is  infused  into  the  soul,  which  is  the  formal  cause  of  jus-
tification ;  i.  e.,  it  renders  the  soul  inherently  just  or  holy.  In
this  sense  the  sinner  may  be  said  to  be  justified  by  faith.  This
is  the  first  justification.  After  the  man  is  thus  rendered  holy  or
regenerated,  then  the  exercises  of  faith  have  real  merit,  and  en-
ter into  the  ground  of  his  second  justification,  by  which  he  be-
comes entitled  to  eternal  life.  But  here  faith  stands  on  a  level
with  other  Christian  graces.  It  is  not  the  only,  nor  the  most
important  ground  of  justification.  It  is  in  this  view  inferior  to
love,  from  which  faith  indeed  derives  all  its  virtue  as  a  Chris-
tian grace.  It  is  then  "  fides  formata,"  i.  e.,  faith  of  which  love
is  the  essence,  the  principle  which  gives  it  character.


166  PART  m.    Ch.  xvil— justification.

The  Romish  Doctrine.

According  to  the  Romish  scheme  (1.)  God  is  the  efficient  cause
of  justification,  as  it  is  by  his  power  or  supernatural  grace  that
the  soul  is  made  just.  (2.)  Christ  is  the  meritorious  cause,  as  it
is  for  his  sake  God  grants  this  saving  grace,  or  influence  of  the
Spirit  to  the  children  of  men.  (3.)  Inherent  righteousness  is  the
formal  cause,  since  thereby  the  soul  is  made  really  just  or  holy.
(4.)  Faith  is  the  occasional  and  predisposing  cause,  as  it  leads  the
sinner  to  seek  justification  (regeneration),  and  disposes  God  to
grant  the  blessing.  In  this  aspect  it  has  the  merit  of  congruity
only,  not  that  of  condignity.  (5.)  Baptism  is  the  essential  instru-
mental cause,  as  it  is  only  through  or  by  baptism  that  inherent
righteousness  is  infused  or  j^ustification  is  effected.  So  much  for
the  first  justification.  After  this  justification,  which  makes  the
sinner  holy,  then,  (6.)  Good  works,  all  the  fruits  and  exercises
of  the  new  life,  have  real  merit  and  constitute  the  ground  of  the
Christian's  title  to  eternal  life.

The  language  of  the  Council  of  Trent  on  this  subject  is  as  fol-
lows :  "  Hujus  justificationis  causae  sunt,  finaHs  qnidem,  gloria
Dei  et  Christi,  ac  vita  asterna :  efliciens  vero,  misericors  Deus,  qui
gratuito  abluit  et  sanctificat,  signans  et  ungens  Spiritu  promissi-
onis  sancto,  ....  meritoria  autem  dilectissimus  unigenitus  suus,
Dominus  noster,  Jesus  Christus,  qui,  cum  essemus  inimici,  prop-
ter nimiam  caritatem,  qua  dilexit  nos,  sua  sanctissima  passione
in  ligno  crucis  nobis  justificationem  \i.  g.,  regeneration]  meruit  et
pro  nobis  Deo  Patri  satisfecit :  instrumentalis  item,  sacramentum
baptismi,  quod  est  sacramentum  fidei,  sine  qua  nuUi  unquam  con-
tigit  justificatio  :  demum  unica  formalis  causa  est  justitia  Dei,
non  qua  ipse  Justus  est,  sed  qua  nos  justos  facit :  qua  videHcet  ab
eo  donati,  renovamur  spiritu  mentis  nostrse,  et  non  modo  reputa-
mur,  sed  vere  justi  nominamur,  et  sumus,  justitiam  in  nobis  re-
cipientes,  unusquisque  suam  secundum  mensuram,  quam  Spiritus
Sanctus  partitur  singulis  prout  vult,  et  secundum  propriam  cuj  us-
que dispositionem  et  cooperationem."  Again,  it  is  said  :  "  Quae
enim  justitia  nostra  dicitur,  quia  per  eam  nobis  inharentem
justificamur  ;  ilia  eadem  Dei  est,  quia  a  Deo  nobis  infunditur  per
Christi  meritum."  ^  All  this  relates  to  the  first  justification,  or
regeneration,  in  which  the  soul  passes  from  spiritual  d(!ath  to
spiritual  life.  Of  the  second  justification,  wliich  gives  a  title  to
eternal  life,  Bellarmin  says,  ^    "  Habet   communis   catholicorimi

1  Sess.  VI.  cap.  7,  16;  Streitwolf,  Libri  Symbolici,  Gottingen,  1846,  vol.  i.  pp.  24,  25,  32.

2  De  Justificatione,  v.  1;  Disputationes,  Paris,  1608,  p.  949,  a.


§8.]  RELATION   OF   FAITH  TO   JUSTIFICATION.  167

omnium  sententia,  opera  bona  justorum  vere,  ac  proprie  esse  mer-
ita,  et  merita  non  cujuscunque  pr^emii,  sed  ipsius  vitas  ffiternae."
The  thirty-second  canon  of  the  Tridentine  Council  at  this  sixth
session  anathematizes  any  one  who  teaches  a  different  doctrine.
"  Si  quis  dixerit,  hominis  justificati  bona  opera  ita  esse  dona  Dei,
ut  non  sint  etiam  bona  ipsius  justificati  merita  ;  aut  ipsum  justifi-
catum  bonis  operibus,  qu«  ab  eo  per  Dei  gratiam  et  Jesu  Christi
meritum,  cujus  vivum  membrum  est,  fiunt,  non  vere  mereri  aug-
mentum  gratise,  vitam  aeternam,  et  ipsius  vitoe  eeternge,  si  tamen
in  gratia  decesserit,  consecutionem,  atque  etiam  glorias  augmen-
tum  ;  anathema  sit."  It  appears  from  all  this  that,  according  to
the  doctrine  of  the  Church  of  Rome,  faith  has  no  special  or  direct
connection  with  justification,  and  that  "justification  by  faith  "  in
that  Church  means  something  entirely  different  from  what  is  in-
tended by  those  words  in  the  lips  of  evangehcal  Christians.

Remonstrant  View.

3.  According  to  the  Remonstrants  or  Arminians,  faith  is  the
ground  of  justification.  Under  the  Gospel  God  accepts  our  im-
perfect obedience  including  faith  and  springing  from  it,  in  place
of  the  ]3erfect  obedience  demanded  by  the  law  originally  given  to
Adam.  There  is  one  passage  in  the  Bible,  or  rather  one  form  of
expression,  which  occurs  in  several  places,  which  seems  to  favour
this  view  of  the  subject.  In  Romans  iv.  3,  it  is  said,  "  Abraham
believed  God,  and  it  was  counted  unto  him  for  righteousness  ;  "
and  again  in  ver.  22  of  that  chapter,  and  in  Galatians  iii.  6.  If
this  phrase  be  interpreted  accordiiig  to  the  analogy  of  such  pas-
sages as  Romans  ii.  26,  "  Shall  not  his  uncircumcision  be  counted
for  circumcision  ? "  it  does  mean  that  faith  is  taken  or  accepted
for  righteousness.  The  Bible,  however,  is  the  word  of  God  and
therefore  self-consistent.  Consequently  if  a  passage  admits  of
one  interpretation  inconsistent  with  the  teaching  of  the  Bible  in
other  places,  and  of  another  interpretation  consistent  Avith  that
teaching,  we  are  bound  to  accept  the  latter.  This  rule,  simple
and  obvious  as  it  is,  is  frequently  violated,  not  only  by  those  who
deny  the  inspiration  of  the  Scriptures,  but  even  by  men  profess-
ing to  recognize  their  infallible  authority.  They  seem  to  regard  it
as  a  proof  of  independence  to  make  each  passage  mean  simply  what
its  grammatical  structure  and  logical  connection  indicate,  without
the  least  regard  to  the  analogy  of  Scripture.  This  is  unreason-
able. In  Genesis  xv.  we  are  told  that  Abraham  lamented  before
the  Lord  that  he  was  childless,  and  that  one  born  in  his  house  was


168  PART  III.     Ch.   XVII.  —  justification.

to  be  his  heir.  And  God  said  unto  him,  "  This  shall  not  be  thine
heir  ;  but  he  that  shall  come  forth  out  of  thine  own  bowels,  shall
be  thine  heir.  And  he  brought  him  forth  abroad,  and  said,
Look  now  toward  heaven,  and  tell  the  stars,  if  thou  be  able  to
number  them.  And  he  said  unto  him,  So  shall  thy  seed  be.
And  he  believed  in  the  Lord  ;  and  He  counted  it  to  him  for
righteousness."  Taking  this  passage  by  itself,  it  is  inferred  that
the  object  of  Abraham's  faith  was  the  promise  of  a  numerous
posterity.  Supposing  this  to  be  true,  which  it  certainly  is  not,
what  right  has  any  one  to  assume  that  Abraham's  faith's  being
imputed  to  him  for  righteousness,  means  anything  more  than  when
it  is  said  that  the  zeal  of  Phinehas  was  imputed  for  righteous-
ness (Ps.  cvi.  31)  ;  or  when  in  Deuteronomy  xxiv.  13,  it  is  said
that  to  return  a  poor  man's  pledge  "  shall  be  righteousness  unto
thee  before  the  LoED  thy  God."  No  one  supposes  that  one  man-
ifestation of  zeal,  or  one  act  of  benevolence,  is  taken  for  complete
obedience  to  the  law.  All  that  the  phrase  "  to  impute  for  right-
eousness "  by  itself  means,  according  to  Old  Testament  usage,  is,
to  esteem  as  right,  to  approve.  The  zeal  of  Phinehas  was  right.
Returning  a  poor  man's  pledge  was  right.  These  were  acts
which  God  approved.  And  so  He  approved  of  Abraham's  faith.
He  gained  the  favour  of  God  by  believing.  Now  while  this  is
true,  far  more,  as  the  Apostle  teaches,  is  true.  He  teaches,  first,
that  the  great  promise  made  to  Abraham,  and  faith  in  which  se-
cured his  justification,  was  not  that  his  natural  descendants
should  be  as  numerous  as  the  stars  of  heaven,  but  that  in  his
seed  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  should  be  blessed ;  secondly,  that
the  seed  intended  was  not  a  multitude,  but  one  person,  and  that
that  one  person  was  Christ  (Gal.  iii.  16)  ;  and,  thirdly,  that  the
blessing  which  the  seed  of  Abraham  was  to  secure  for  the  world
was  redemption.  "  Christ  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of
the  law,  being  made  a  curse  for  us  :  .  .  .  .  that  the  blessing  of
Abrahain  (f.  e.,  the  promise  made  to  Abraham)  might  come  on  "
us.  The  promise  made  to  Abraham,  therefore,  was  redemption
through  Clu-ist.  Hence  those  who  are  Christ's,  the  Apostle
teaches,  are  Abraham's  seed  and  heirs  of  his  promise.  AVhat,
therefore,  Abraham  believed,  was  that  the  seed  of  the  woman,  the
Shiloh,  the  promised  Redeemer  of  the  world,  was  to  be  born  of
him.  He  believed  in  Christ,  as  his  Saviour,  as  his  righteousness,
ami  deliverer,  and  therefore  it  was  that  he  was  accepted  as  right-
eous, not  for  the  merit  of  his  faith,  and  not  on  the  ground  of
faith,  or  by  taking  faith  in  lieu  of  righteousness,  but  because  he
received  and  rested  on  Christ  alone  for  his  salvation.


§8.]  RELATION   OF   FAITH   TO   JUSTIFICATION.  169

Unless  such  be  the  meaning  of  the  Apostle,  it  is  hard  to  see
how  there  is  any  coherence  or  force  in  his  arguments.  His  ob-
ject is  to  prove  that  men  are  justified,  not  by  works,  but  gratu-
itously ;  not  for  what  they  are  or  do,  but  for  what  is  done  for
them./  They  are  saved  by  a  ransom ;  by  a  sacrifice.  But  it  is
absurd  to  say  that  trust  in  a  ransom  redeems,  or  is  taken  in
place  of  the  ransom  ;  or  that  faith  in  a  sacrifice,  and  not  the  sac-
rifice itself,  is  the  ground  of  acceptance.  To  prove  that  such  is
the  Scriptural  method  of  justification,  Paul  appeals  to  the  case
of  Abraham.  He  was  not  justified  for  his  works,  but  by  faith
in  a  Redeemer.  He  expected  to  be  justified  as  ungodly.  (Rom.
iv.  5.)  This,  he  tells  us,  is  what  we  must  do.  We  have  no
righteousness  of  our  own.  We  must  take  Christ  for  our  msdom,
righteousness,  sanctification,  and  redemption.  In  the  immedi-
ately preceding  chapter  the  Apostle  had  said  we  are  justified  by
faith  in  the  blood  of  Christ,  as  a  propitiation  for  sin ;  and  for
him  to  prove  this  from  the  fact  that  Abraham  was  justified  on
account  of  his  confiding,  trusting  state  of  mind,  which  led  him
to  believe  that,  although  a  hundred  years  old,  he  should  be  the
father  of  a  numerous  posterity,  would  be  a  contradiction.

Besides,  it  is  to  be  remembered,  not  only  that  the  Scriptures
never  say  that  we  are  justified  "  on  account  "  of  faith  (Sia  ttiVtiv),
but  always  "  by,"  or  "through  "  faith  (S'o,  or  eV-  TriVrccos,  or  Trto-rct)  ;
but  also  that  it  is  not  by  faith  as  such ;  not  by  faith  in  God,  nor  in
the  Scriptures  ;  and  not  by  faith  in  a  specific  divine  promise  such
as  that  made  to  Abraham  of  a  numerous  posterity,  or  of  the  pos-
session of  the  land  of  Canaan  ;  but  only  by  faith  in  one  particu-
lar promise,  namely,  that  of  salvation  through  Christ.  It  is,
therefore,  not  on  account  of  the  state  of  mind,  of  which  faith  is
the  evidence,  nor  of  the  good  works  which  are  its  fruits,  but  only
by  faith  as  an  act  of  trust  in  Christ,  that  we  are  justified.  This
of  necessity  supposes  that  He,  and  not  our  faith,  is  the  ground  of
our  justification.  He,  and  not  our  faith,  is  the  ground  of  our
confidence.  How  can  any  Christian  wish  it  to  be  otherwise  ?
What  comparison  is  there  between  the  absolutely  perfect  and
the  infinitely  meritorious  righteousness  of  Christ,  and  our  own
imperfect  evangelical  obedience  as  a  ground  of  confidence  and
peace  !

This  doctrine  is  moreover  dishonouring  to  the  Gospel.  It  sup-
poses the  Gospel  to  be  less  holy  than  the  law.  The  law  required
perfect  obedience ;  the  Gospel  is  satisfied  with  imperfect  obedi-
ence.    And  how  imperfect  and  insufficient  our  best  obedience  is,


170  PART  III.     Ch.   XVIL  — justification.

the  conscience  of  every  believer  certifies.     If  it  does  not  satisfy
us,  how  can  it  satisfy  God  ?

The  grand  objection,  however,  to  this  Remonstrant  doctrine
as  to  the  relation  between  faith  and  justification,  is  that  it  is  in
direct  contradiction  to  the  plain  and  pervading  teachings  of  the
Word  of  God.  The  Bible  teaches  that  we  are  not  justified  by
works.  This  doctrine  affirms  that  we  are  justified  by  works.
The  Bible  teaches  that  we  are  justified  by  the  blood  of  Christ ;
that  it  is  for  his  obedience  that  the  sentence  of  justification  is
passed  on  men.  This  doctrine  affirms  that  God  pronounces  us
righteous  because  of  our  own  righteousness.  The  Bible  from
first  to  last  teaches  that  the  whole  ground  of  our  salvation  or  of
our  justification  is  objective,  what  Christ  as  our  Redeemer,  our
ransom,  our  sacrifice,  our  surety,  has  done  for  us.  This  doctrine
teaches  us  to  look  within,  to  what  we  are  and  to  what  we  do,
as  the  ground  of  our  acceptance  with  God.  It  may  safely  be
said  that  this  is  altogether  unsatisfactory  to  the  awakened  con-
science. The  sinner  cannot  rely  on  anything  in  himself.  He
instinctively  looks  to  Christ,  to  his  work  done  for  us  as  the
ground  of  confidence  and  peace.  This  in  the  last  resort  is  the
hope  of  all  believers,  whatever  their  theory  of  justification  may
be.  Whether  Papist,  Remonstrant,  or  Augustinian,  they  all
cast  their  dying  eyes  on  Christ.  "  As  Moses  lifted  up  the  ser-
23ent  in  the  wilderness,  even  so  must  the  Son  of  man  be  lifted
up  ;  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him  should  not  perish,  but  have
eternal  life."

Protestant  Doctrine.

4.  The  common  doctrine  of  Protestants  on  this  subject  is  that
faith  is  merely  the  instrumental  cause  of  justification.  It  is  the
act  of  receiving  and  resting  upon  Christ,  and  has  no  other  rela-
tion to  the  end  than  any  other  act  by  which  a  proffered  good  is
accepted.  This  is  clearly  the  doctrine  of  Scripture,  (1.)  Be-
cause we  are  constantly  said  to  be  justified  by,  or  through  faith.
(2.)  Because  the  faith  which  justifies  is  described  as  a  looking,
as  a  receiving,  as  a  coming,  as  a  fleeing  for  refuge,  as  a  laying
hold  of,  and  as  a  calling  upon.  (3.)  Because  the  gromid  to
which  our  justification  is  referred,  and  that  on  which  the  sinner's
trust  is  placed,  is  declared  to  be  the  blood,  the  death,  the  right-
eousness, the  obedience  of  Christ.  (4.)  Because  the  fact  that
Christ  is  a  ransom,  a  sacrifice,  and  as  such  effects  our  salvation,
of  necessity  supposes  that  the  faith  which  interests  us  in  the
merit  of  his  work  is  a  simple  act  of  trust.     (5.)  Because  any


§  9.]  OBJECTIONS.  171

other  view  of  the  case  is  inconsistent  with  the  gratuitous  nature
of  justification,  with  the  honour  of  Christ,  and  with  the  comfort
and  confidence  of  the  behever.

§  9.    Objections  to  the  Protestant  Doctrine  of  Justification.
It  is  said  to  lead  to  Licentiousness.

1.  The  first,  most  obvious,  and  most  persistently  urged  objec-
tion against  the  doctrine  of  gratuitous  justification  through  the
imputation  of  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  has  akeady  been  inci-
dentally considered.  That  objection  is  that  the  doctrine  leads
to  license  ;  that  if  good  works  are  not  necessary  to  justification,
they  are  not  necessary  at  all ;  that  if  God  accepts  the  chief  of
sinners  as  readily  as  the  most  moral  of  men,  on  the  simple  con-
dition of  faith  in  Christ,  then  what  profit  is  there  in  circum-
cision ?  in  Judaism  ?  in  being  in  the  Church  ?  in  being  good
in  any  form  ?  Why  not  live  in  sin  that  grace  may  abound  ?
This  objection  having  been  urged  against  the  Apostle,  it  needs
no  other  answer  than  that  which  he  himself  gave  it.  That  an-
swer is  found  in  the  sixth  and  seventh  chapters  of  his  Epistle  to
the  Romans,  and  is  substantially  as  follows  :

First,  the  objection  involves  a  contradiction.  To  speak  of  sal-
vation in  sin  is  as  great  an  absurdity  as  to  speak  of  life  in
death.  Salvation  is  deliverance  from  sin.  How  then  can  men
be  delivered  from  sin  in  order  that  they  may  live  in  it.  Or,
as  Paul  expresses  it,  "  How  shall  we,  that  are  dead  to  sin,  live
any  longer  therein  ?  "

Secondly,  the  very  act  of  faith  which  secures  our  justification,
secures  also  our  sanctification.  It  cannot  secure  the  one  without
securing  also  the  other.  This  is  not  only  the  intention  and  the
desire  of  the  believer,  but  it  is  the  ordinance  of  God  ;  a  necessary
feature  of  the  plan  of  salvation,  and  secured  by  its  nature.  We
take  Christ  as  our  Redeemer  from  sin,  from  its  power  as  well  as
from  its  guilt.  And  the  imputation  of  his  righteousness  conse-
quent on  faith  secures  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit  as  cer-
tainly, and  for  the  very  same  reasons  (the  covenant  stipulations),
that  it  secures  the  pardon  of  our  sins.  And,  therefore,  if  we  are
partakers  of  his  death,  Ave  are  partakers  of  his  life.  If  we  die
with  Him,  we  rise  with  Him.  If  we  are  justified,  we  are  sancti-
fied. He,  therefore,  who  lives  in  sin,  proclaims  himself  an  unbe-
liever. He  has  neither  part  nor  lot  in  the  redemption  of  Him
who  came  to  save  his  people  from  their  sins.

Thirdly,  our  condition,  the  Apostle  says,  is  analogous  to  that


172  PART  III.     Ch.   XVIL  — justification.

of  a  slave,  belonging  first  to  one  master,  tlien  to  another.  So
long  as  he  belonged  to  one  man,  he  was  not  under  the  authority
of  another.  But  if  freed  from  the  one  and  made  the  slave  of
the  other,  then  he  comes  under  an  influence  which  constrains
obedience  to  the  latter.  So  we  were  the  slaves  of  sin,  but  now,
freed  from  that  hard  master,  we  have  become  the  servants  of
righteousness.  For  a  behever,  therefore,  to  live  in  sin,  is  just  as
impossible  as  for  the  slave  of  one  man  to  be  at  the  same  time
the  slave  of  another.  We  are  indeed  free  ;  but  not  free  to  sin.
We  are  only  free  from  the  bondage  of  the  devil  and  introduced
into  the  pure,  exalted,  and  glorious  liberty  of  the  sons  of  God.

Fourthly,  the  objection  as  made  against  the  Apostle  and  as
constantly  repeated  since,  is  urged  in  the  interests  of  morality
and  of  common  sense.  Reason  itself,  it  is  said,  teaches  that  a
man  must  be  good  before  he  can  be  restored  to  the  favour  of
God  ;  and  if  we  teach  that  the  number  and  heinousness  of  a
man's  sins  are  no  barrier  to  his  justification,  and  his  good  works
are  no  reason  why  he  should  be  justified  rather  than  the  chief  of
sinners,  we  upset  the  very  foundations  of  morality.  This  is  the
vdsdom  of  men.  The  wisdom  of  God,  as  revealed  in  the  Scrip-
tures, is  very  different.  According  to  the  Bible  the  favour  of
God  is  the  life  of  the  soul.  The  light  of  his  countenance  is  to
rational  creatures  what  the  light  of  the  sun  is  to  the  earth,  the
source  of  all  that  is  beautiful  and  good.  So  long,  therefore,  as
a  soul  is  under  his  curse,  there  is  no  life-giving  or  life-sustaining
intercourse  between  it  and  God.  In  this  state  it  can  only,  as
the  Apostle  expresses  it,  "  bring  forth  fruit  unto  death."  As
soon,  however,  as  it  exercises  faith,  it  receives  the  imputation  of
the  righteousness  of  Christ,  God's  justice  is  thereby  satisfied,
and  the  Spirit  comes  and  takes  up  his  dwelling  in  the  believer
as  the  source  of  all  holy  living.  There  can  therefore  be  no
holiness  until  there  is  reconciliation  with  God,  and  no  reconcilia-
tion with  God  except  through  the  righteousness  imputed  to  us
and  received  by  faith  alone.  Then  follow  the  indwelling  of
the  Spirit,  progressive  sanctification,  and  all  the  fruits  of  holy
living.

It  may  be  said  that  this  scheme  involves  an  inconsistency.
There  can  be  no  holiness  until  there  is  reconciliation,  and  no  rec-
onciliation (so  far  as  adults  are  concerned)  until  there  is  faith.
But  faith  is  a  fruit  of  the  Spirit,  and  an  act  of  the  renewed  soul.
Then  there  is  and  must  be,  after  all,  holy  action  before  there  is
reconciliation.     It  might  be  enough  to  say  in  answer  to  this  objec-


9.]


OBJECTIONS.  178


tion,  that  logical  order  and  chronological  succession  are  different
things  ;  or  that  the  order  of  natiu'e  and  order  of  time  are  not  to
be  confounded.  Many  things  are  contemx^oraneous  or  co-instan-
taneous which  nevertheless  stand  in  a  certain  logical,  and  even
causal  relation  to  each  other.  Christ  commanded  the  man  with
a  withered  arm  to  stretch  forth  his  hand.  He  immediately  obeyed,
but  not  before  he  received  strength.  He  called  to  Lazarus  to
come  forth  from  the  grave  ;  and  he  came  forth.  But  this  pre-
supposes a  restoration  of  life.  So  God  commands  the  sinner  to
believe  in  Christ ;  and  he  thereupon  receives  Him  as  his  Saviour  ;
though  this  supposes  supernatural  power  or  grace.

Our  Lord,  however,  gives  another  answer  to  this  objection.
He  says,  as  recorded  in  John  xvii.  9,  "  I  pray  not  for  the  world,
but  for  them  which  thou  hast  given  me  ;  for  they  are  thine."
The  intercession  of  Christ  secures  for  those  given  to  Him  by  the
Father  the  renemng  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  first  act  of  the
renewed  heart  is  faith ;  as  the  first  act  of  a  restored  eye  is  to  see.
Whether  this  satisfies  the  understanding  or  not,  it  remains  clear
as  the  doctrine  of  the  Bible  that  good  works  are  the  fruits  and
consequences  of  reconciliation  with  God,  through  faith  in  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ.

Inconsistent  tvith  the  Grrace  of  the  Gospel.
2.  It  is  objected  that  the  Protestant  doctrine  destroys  the
gratuitous  nature  of  justification.  If  justice  be  satisfied;  if  all
the  demands  of  the  law  are  met,  there  can,  it  is  said,  be  no  grace
in  the  salvation  of  the  sinner.  If  a  man  owes  a  debt,  and  some
one  pays  it  for  him,  the  creditor  shows  no  grace  in  giving  an  ac-
quittal. This  objection  is  familiar,  and  so  also  is  the  answer.
The  work  of  Christ  is  not  of  the  nature  of  a  commercial  transac-
tion. It  is  not  analogous  to  a  pecmiiary  satisfaction  except  in  one
point.  It  secures  the  deliverance  of  those  for  whom  it  is  offered
and  by  whom  it  is  accepted.  In  the  case  of  guilt  the  demand  of
justice  is  upon  the  person  of  the  offender.  He,  and  he  alone  is
bound  to  answer  at  the  bar  of  justice.  No  one  can  take  his
place,  unless  with  the  consent  of  the  representative  of  justice  and
of  the  substitute,  as  well  as  of  the  sinner  himself.  Among  men,
substitution  in  the  case  of  crime  and  its  penalty  is  rarely,  if  ever
admissible,  because  no  man  has  the  right  over  his  own  life  or  lib-
erty ;  he  cannot  give  them  up  at  pleasure  ;  and  because  no  human
magistrate  has  the  right  to  relieve  the  offender  or  to  inflict  the
legal  penalty  on  another.     But  Christ  had  power,  i.  e.,  the  right


174  PART  m.   Ch.  XVII.— justification.

(itova'n)  to  lay  clown  his  life  and  "  power  to  take  it  again."  And
God,  as  absolute  judge  and  sovereign,  the  Lord  of  the  conscience,
and  the  proprietor  of  all  his  creatures,  was  at  full  liberty  to
accept  a  substitute  for  sinners.  This  is  proved  beyond  contradic-
tion by  what  God  has  actually  done.  Under  the  old  dispensation
every  sacrifice  appointed  by  the  law  was  a  substitute  for  him  in
whose  behalf  it  was  offered.  In  the  clearest  terms  it  was  pre-
dicted that  the  Messiah  was  to  be  the  substitute  of  his  people  ;
that  the  chastisement  of  their  sins  was  to  be  laid  on  Him,  and
that  He  was  to  make  his  soul  an  offering  for  sin.  He  was  hailed
as  He  entered  on  his  ministry  as  the  Lamb  of  God  who  was  to
bear  the  sins  of  the  world.  He  died  the  just  for  the  unjust.  He
redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law  by  being  made  a  curse
for  us.  This  is  what  is  meant  by  being  a  substitute.  To  deny
this  is  to  deny  the  central  idea  of  the  Scriptural  doctrine  of  re-
demption. To  explain  it  away,  is  to  absorb  as  with  a  sponge  the
life-blood  of  the  Gospel.

It  is  the  glory,  the  power,  and  the  preciousness  of  the  Protes-
tant doctrine  that  it  makes  the  salvation  of  sinners  a  matter  of
grace  from  the  beginning  to  the  end.  On  the  part  of  the  eternal
Father  it  was  of  grace,  ^.  e.,  of  unmerited,  mysterious,  and  im-
measurable love  that  He  provided  a  substitute  for  sinners,  and  that
He  spared  not  his  own  Son,  but  freely  gave  Him  up  for  us  all.
It  was  a  matter  of  grace,  i.  e.,  of  love  to  sinners,  to  the  ungodly,
to  his  enemies,  that  the  eternal  Son  of  God  became  man,  assumed
the  burden  of  our  sins,  fulfilled  all  righteousness,  obeying  and
suffering  even  unto  death,  that  we  might  not  perish  but  have
eternal  life.  It  is  of  grace  that  the  Spirit  applies  to  men  the  re-
demption purchased  by  Clirist ;  that  He  renews  the  heart ;  that
He  overcomes  the  opposition  of  sinners,  making  them  willing  in
the  day  of  his  power ;  that  He  bears  with  all  their  ingratitude,
disobedience,  and  resistance,  and  never  leaves  them  mitil  his  work
is  consummated  in  glory.  In  all  this  the  sinner  is  not  treated
according  to  his  character  and  conduct.  He  has  no  claim  to  any
one  in  this  long  catalogue  of  mercies.  Everything  to  him  is  a
matter  of  unmerited  grace.  Merited  grace,  indeed,  is  a  solecism.
And  so  is  merited  salvation  in  the  case  of  sinners.

Grace  does  not  cease  to  be  grace  because  it  is  not  exercised  in
violation  of  order,  propriety,  and  justice.  It  is  not  the  weak  fond-
ness of  a  doting  parent.  It  is  the  love  of  a  holy  God,  who  in
order  to  reveal  that  love  and  manifest  the  exceeding  glory  of  that
attribute  when   exercised   towards   the  unworthy,  did  what  was


§  9.:  OBJECTIONS.  175

necessary  to  render  its  exercise  consistent  with  the  other  perfec-
tions of  the  divine  nature.  It  was  indispensable  that  God  should
be  just' in  justifying  the  ungodly,  but  He  does  not  thereby  cease
to  be  gracious,  inasmuch  as  it  was  He  who  provided  the  ran-
som by  which  the  objects  of  his  love  are  redeemed  from  the  curse
of  the  law  and  the  power  of  sin.

Crod  cannot  declare  the  Unjust  to  he  Just.

3.  Another  standing  objection  to  the  Protestant  doctrine  has
been  so  often  met,  that  nothing  but  its  constant  repetition  justifies
a  repetition  of  the  answer.  It  is  said  to  be  absurd  that  one  man
should  be  righteous  with  the  righteousness  of  another ;  that  for
God  to  pronounce  the  unjust  just  is  a  contradiction.  This  is  a
mere  play  on  words.  It  is,  however,  very  serious  play  ;  for  it  is
caricaturing  truth.  It  is  indeed  certain  that  the  subjective,  inhe-
rent quality  of  one  person  or  thing  cannot  by  imputation  become
the  inherent  characteristic  of  any  other  person  or  thing.  Wax
cannot  become  hard  by  the  imputation  of  the  hardness  of  a  stone  ;
nor  can  a  brute  become  rational  by  the  imputation  of  the  intelli-
gence of  a  man  ;  nor  the  wicked  become  good  by  the  imputation
of  the  goodness  of  other  men.  But  what  has  this  to  do  with  one
man's  assuming  the  responsibility  of  another  man  ?  If  among
men  the  bankrupt  can  become  solvent  by  a  rich  man's  assuming
his  responsibilities,  why  in  the  court  of  God  may  not  the  guilty
become  righteous  by  the  Son  of  God's  assuming  their  responsi-
bilities ?  If  He  was  made  sin  for  us,  why  may  we  not  be  made
the  righteousness  of  God  in  Him  ?  The  objection  assumes  that
the  word  "just"  or  "righteous"  in  this  connection,  expresses
moral  character  ;  whereas  in  the  Bible,  when  used  in  relation
to  this  subject,  it  is  always  used  in  a  judicial  sense,  i.  e.,  it  ex-
presses the  relation  of  the  person  spoken  of  to  justice.  Atxaios
is  antithetical  to  -u-o'S/kos.  The  man  with  regard  to  whom  justice
is  unsatisfied,  is  v-toSiko?,  "guilty,"  He  with  regard  to  whom
justice  is  satisfied,  is  StKaio?,  "  righteous."  To  declare  rig]iteou.s,
therefore,  is  not  to  declare  holy  ;  and  to  impute  righteousness  is
not  to  impute  goodness  ;  but  simply  to  regard  and  pronounce
those  who  receive  the  gift  of  Christ's  righteousness,  free  from  con-
demnation and  entitled  to  eternal  life  for  his  sake.  Some  philo-
sophical theologians  seem  to  think  that  there  is  real  antagonism
between  love  and  justice  in  the  divine  nature,  or  that  these  at-
tributes are  incompatible  or  inharmonious.  This  is  not  so  in  man  ;
why  then  should  it  be  so  in  God  ?     The  highest  form  of  moral


176  PART  ni.   ch.  xvil— justification.

excellence  includes  these  attributes  as  essential  elements  of  its
perfection.  And  the  Scriptures  represent  them  as  mysteriously
blended  in  the  salvation  of  man.  The  gospel  is  a  revelation  to
principalities  and  powers  in  heaven  of  the  Tro\v!rotKLXo<;  a-of^la  tov
©€oi),  because  therein  He  shows  that  He  can  be  just  and  yet  justify,
love,  sanctify,  and  glorify  the  cliief  of  sinners.  For  which  all
sinners  should  render  Him  everlasting  thanksgiving  and  praise.

C/im^'s  Righteousness  due  for  Himself.

4.  It  was  natural  that  Socinus,  who  regarded  Christ  as  a  mere
man,  should  object  to  the  doctrine  of  the  imputation  of  his  right-
eousness to  the  believer,  that  Christ  was  under  the  same  obHga-
tion  to  obey  the  law  and  to  take  his  share  of  human  suffering  as
other  men,  and  therefore  that  his  righteousness  being  due  for  Him-
self, could  not  be  imputed  to  others.  This  objection  is  substan-
tially urged  by  some  who  admit  the  divinity  of  Christ.  In  doing
so,  however,  they  vu^tually  assume  the  Nestorian,  or  dualistic  view
of  Christ's  person.  They  argue  on  the  assumption  that  He  was
a  human  person,  and  that  he  stood,  m  virtue  of  his  assumption  of
our  nature,  in  the  same  relation  to  the  law  as  other  men.  It  is
admitted,  however,  that  the  Son,  who  became  incarnate,  was  from
eternity  the  second  person  in  the  Godliead.  If,  therefore,  hu-
manity as  assumed  by  him  was  a  person,  then  we  have  two  per-
sons, • —  two  Christs,  —  the  one  human,  the  other  divine.  But  if
Christ  be  only  one  person,  and  if  that  person  be  the  eternal  Son
of  God,  the  same  in  substance,  and  equal  in  power  and  glory  with
the  Father,  then  the  whole  foundation  of  the  objection  is  gone.
Christ  sustained  no  other  relation  to  the  law,  except  so  far  as
voluntarily  assumed,  than  that  which  God  himself  sustains.  But
God  is  not  under  the  law.  He  is  HimseK  the  primal,  immutable,
and  infinitely  perfect  law  to  all  rational  creatures.  Christ's  sub-
jection to  the  law  therefore,  -svas  as  voluntary  as  his  submitting
to  the  death  of  the  cross.  As  He  did  not  die  for  Himself,  so  nei-
ther did  He  obey  for  Himself.  In  both  forms  of  his  obedience  He
acted  for  us,  as  our  representative  and  substitute,  that  through
his  righteousness  many  might  be  made  righteous.

As  to  the  other  form  of  this  objection,  it  has  the  same  founda-
tion and  admits  of  the  same  answer.  It  is  said  that  the  obedience
and  sufferings  of  Christ,  being  the  obedience  and  sufferings  of  a
mere  man,  or  at  best  of  only  the  human  element  in  the  constitu-
tion of  his  person,  could  have  only  a  human,  and,  therefore,  only  a
finite  value,  and  consequently  could  be  no  adequate  satisfaction


§  9.]  OBJECTIONS.  1T7

for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world.  Our  Ijovd  told  his  disciples,  "  Ye
are  of  more  value  than  many  sparrows."  If,  then,  in  the  sight  of
God  a  man  is  of  far  greater  value  than  irrational  creatures,  why
should  it  be  thought  incredible  that  the  blood  of  the  eternal  Son
of  God  should  cleanse  from  all  sin  ?  What  a  man  does  with  his
hands,  the  man  does ;  and  what  Clu'ist  through  his  human  nature
did,  in  the  execution  of  his  mediatorial  work,  the  Son  of  God  did.
Therefore,  men  who  spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy
Spirit  did  not  hesitate  to  say,  that  the  Lord  of  glory  was  crucified
(1  Cor.  ii.  8),  and  that  God  purchased  the  Church  "  with  Ins  own
blood."  (Acts  XX.  28.)^  If,  then,  the  obedience  rendered,  and  the
sufferings  endured,  were  those  of  a  divine  person,  we  can  only  shut
our  mouths  and  bow  down  before  God  in  adoring  wonder,  with
the  full  assurance  that  the  merit  of  that  obedience  and  of  those
sufferings,  must  be  abundantly  sufficient  for  the  justification  of
every  sinner  upon  earth,  in  the  past,  the  present,  or  the  future.

Believers  continue  Gruilty^  and  liable  to  Punishment.

5.  It  is  sometimes  objected  to  the  Protestant  doctrine  on  this
subject,  that  believers  not  only  recognize  themselves  as  justly  ex-
posed to  condemnation  for  their  present  shortcomings  and  trans-
gressions, but  that  the  Scriptures  so  represent  them,  and  con-
stantly speak  of  God  as  punishing  his  people  for  their  sins.  How
is  this  to  be  reconciled  with  the  doctrine  that  they  are  not  under

1  The  text  in  this  passage  is  indeed  disputed.  The  common  text  has  Qeov,  "  the  Church  of
God;  "  which  is  retained  by  Mill,  Beugel,  Kuapp,  Hahn, and  others  in  their  editions  of  the
New  Testament.  Many  MSS.  have  xvpioO  km  Oeou;  and  others,  simply  Kvpiov.  The  fact  that
the  phrase  "  the  Church  of  God  "  occurs  eleven  times  in  the  New  Testament,  while  "  Church
of  the  Lord  "  never  occurs,  is  urged  as  a  reason  in  favour  of  the  latter  reading,  as  it  is  as-
sumed that  transcribers  would  be  apt  to  adopt  a  familiar,  rather  than  an  unexampled  ex-
pression. There  may  be  some  force  in  this.  On  the  other  hand,  the  presumption  is  that
the  sacred  writers  adhere  to  their  own  "  usus  loquendi."  The  words  in  Acts  xx.  28  are
Paul's  words,  and  as  he,  at  least  in  ten  other  eases,  speaks  of  the  "  Church  of  God,"  and
never  once  uses  the  expression  "  Church  of  the  Lord,"  it  is  in  the  highest  degree  improb-
able that  he  uses  that  phrase  here.  Besides,  it  is  evident  that  transcribers,  critics,  and  her-
etics would  have  a  strong  disposition  to  get  rid  of  such  a  phrase  as  "the  blood  of  God."
Modern  critics  do  not  hesitate  to  assign,  as  one  of  their  reasons  for  rejecting  the  common
text,  that  the  expression  is  "too  strong."  The  passage,  however,  though  sacred,  is  not  es-
sential. The  usage  pervades  the  New  Testament  of  predicating  of  the  person  of  Christ
what  is  true  of  either  clement,  the  human  or  the  divine,  of  his  mysteriously  constituted
personality.  In  Hebrews  i.  3  the  person  who  upholds  the  universe  by  the  word  of  his  pow-
er, is  said  to  have  purged  our  sins  by  Himself,  i.  e.,  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself.  And  in
ii.  14,  the  person  whom  the  sacred  writer  had  set  forth  as  higher  than  the  angels,  as  God,  as
creator  of  heaven  and  earth,  as  eternal  and  immutable,  is  said  to  have  become  partaker
of  flesh  and  blood,  in  order  that  by  death  He  might  destroy  him  that  had  the  power  of  death.
And  in  Philippians  ii.  6,  9,  he  who  was  in  the  form  of  God  and  thought  it  not  robbery  to  be
equal  with  God,  became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  ci-oss.  Nevertheless,  al-
though Acts  XX.  28  be  not  essential  to  prove  any  doctrine,  those  who  believe  it  as  it  reads
in  the  common  text,  to  be  part  of  the  word  of  God,  are  bound  to  stand  by  it.

VOL.    III.  13


178  PART  in.    ch.  XVII.— justification.

condemnation  ;  that,  as  regards  tliem,  justice  has  been  fully  sat-
isfied, and  that  no  one  can  justly  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of
God's  elect.

It  must  be  admitted,  or  rather  it  is  fully  acknowledged  that
every  believer  feels  himself  unworthy  of  the  least  of  God's  mercies.
He  knows  that  if  God  were  to  deal  with  him  according  to  his
character  and  conduct,  he  must  inevitably  be  condemned.  This
sense  of  ill-desert  or  demerit,  is  indelible.  It  is  a  righteous  judg-
ment which  the  sinner  passes,  and  cannot  but  pass  upon  him-
self. But  the  ground  of  his  justification  is  not  in  himself.  The
believer  acknowledges  that  in  himself  he  deserves  nothing  but
indignation  and  wrath,  not  only  for  what  he  has  been,  but  for
what  he  now  is.  This  is  what  he  feels  when  he  looks  at  himseK.
Nevertheless,  he  knows  that  there  is  no  condemnation  to  them
that  are  in  Christ  Jesus  ;  that  Christ  has  assumed  the  responsi-
bility of  answering  for  him  at  the  bar  of  God  ;  that  He  constantly
pleads  his  own  perfect  righteousness,  as  a  reason  why  the  de-
served penalty  should  not  be  inflicted.  If  punishment  were  not
deserved,  pardon  would  not  be  gratuitous  ;  and  if  not  felt  to  be
deserved,  deliverance  could  not  be  received  as  a  favour.  The  con-
tinued sense  of  ill-desert,  on  the  part  of  the  believer,  is  in  no  wise
inconsistent  with  the  Scriptural  doctrine  that  the  claims  of  jus-
tice in  regai'd  to  him  have  been  satisfied  by  his  substitute  and
advocate.  There  is  a  great  difference,  as  often  remarked,  be-
tween demerit  and  guilt.  The  latter  is  the  liability  in  justice  to
the  penalty  of  the  law.  The  former  is  personal  ill-desert.  A
criminal  who  has  suffered  the  legal  punishment  of  his  crime,  is  no
longer  justly  exposed  to  punishment  for  that  offence.  He  how-
ever thinks  of  himself  no  better  than  he  did  before.  He  knows  he
cannot  be  subjected  to  further  punishment ;  but  his  sense  of  de-
merit is  not  thereby  lessened.  And  so  it  is  with  the  believer  ;  he
knows  that,  because"  of  what  Christ  has  done  for  him,  he  cannot
be  justly  condemned,  but  he  feels  and  admits  that  in  himself  he
is  as  hell-deserving  as  he  was  from  the  beginning.  The  heart  of
the  believer  solves  many  difficulties  which  the  speculative  under-
standing finds  it  hard  to  unravel.  And  it  need  not  inordinately
trouble  him,  if  the  latter  be  dissatisfied  with  the  solution,  pro-
vided he  is  sure  that  he  is  under  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit  by
the  word.

This  Theory  concerns  only  the  Outward.

6.  Modern  theologians  in  many  instances  object  to  the  Protes-
tant doctrine  of  justification,  that  it  is  outward ;  concerns  only


§  10]        DEPARTURES   FROM   PROTESTANT   DOCTRINE.         179

legal  relations  ;  disregards  the  true  nature  of  the  mystical  union  ;
and  represents  Christ  and  his  righteousness  as  purely  objective,
instead  of  looking  upon  Christ  as  giving  Himself,  his  life  to  become
the  life  of  the  believer,  and  with  his  hfe  conveying  its  merits  and
its  power.  We  are  not  concerned  at  present  Avith  the  theory  on
which  this  objection  is  founded,  but  simply  with  the  objection
itself.  What  is  urged  as  an  objection  to  the  doctrine  is  true.
It  does  concern  what  is  outward  and  objective ;  what  is  done  for
the  sinner  rather  than  what  is  done  within  him.  But  then  it  is
to  be  considered,  first,  that  this  is  what  the  sinner  needs.  He  re-
quires not  only  that  his  nature  should  be  renewed  and  that  a  new
principle  of  spiritual  or  divine  life  should  be  communicated  to
him  ;  but  also  that  his  guilt  should  be  removed,  his  sins  expiated,
and  justice  satisfied,  as  the  preliminary  condition  of  his  enjoying
this  new  life,  and  being  restored  to  the  favour  of  God.  And  sec-
ondly, that  such  is  the  constant  representation  of  Scripture,  our
only  trustworthy  guide  in  matters  of  religious  doctrine.  The  Bible
makes  quite  as  prominent  what  Christ  does  for  us,  as  what  He
does  in  us.  It  says  as  much  of  his  objective,  expiatory  work,  as
of  the  communication  of  a  higher  spiritual  life  to  behevers.  It  is
only  by  ignoring  this  objective  work  of  Christ,  or  by  merging
justification  into  inward  renovation,  that  this  objection  has  force
or  even  plausibility.  Protestants  do  not  depreciate  the  value  and
necessity  of  the  new  life  derived  from  Christ,  because,  in  obedience
to  the  Scriptures,  they  insist  so  strenuously  upon  the  satisfaction
which  He  has  rendered  by  his  perfect  righteousness  to  the  justice
of  God.     Without  the  latter,  the  former  is  impossible.

§  10.  Departures  from  the  Protestant  Doctrine.
Osiander.
During  the  lifetime  of  the  Reformers,  a  very  earnest  contro-
versy began  in  the  Lutheran  Church  on  the  nature  of  justification.
This  arose  from  the  views  of  Andreas  Osiander,  a  man  of  distin-
guished learning  and  of  a  speculative  turn  of  mind  ;  eminent  first
as  a  preacher,  and  afterwards  as  a  professor  in  the  miiversity  of
Konigsberg.  His  principal  work  is  entitled  "  De  Unico  Media-
tore  Jesu  Christo  et  Justificatione  Fidei.  Confessio  Andreae
Osiandri."  His  difference  of  opinion  from  the  other  Reformers
is  clearly  indicated  in  the  following  words,  in  which  he  denounces
the  errors  which  he  means  to  oppose :  "  Omnes  horribiliter  errant.
Primo,  quia  verbum  justificare  tantum  pro  justum  reputare  et
pronunciare  intelligunt,  atque  interpretantur,  et  non  pro  eo,  quod


180  PART  m.     Ch.   XVn.  — JUSTIFICATION".

est,  reipsa  et  in  veritate  justum  efficere.  Deinde  etiam  in  hoc,
quod  nnllam  differentiam  tenent  inter  redemptionem  et  justifica
tionein,  quum  tamen  magna  differentia  sit,  sicut  vel  inde  intelligi
sit,  quod  homines  furem  a  suspendio  redimere  possunt,  bonum  et
justum  efficere  non  possunt.  Porro  etiam  in  hoc,  quod  nihil  certe
statuere  possunt,  quid  tandem  justitia  Christi  sit,  quam  per  fidem
in  nobis  esse,  nobisque  imputari  oporteat.  Ac  postremo  errant
omnimn  rudissime  etiam  in  hoc,  quod  divinam  naturam  Christi  a
justificatione  separant,  et  Christum  dividunt  atque  solvunt,  in
quod  haud  dubie  execrandi  Satanae  opus  est."  ^

Osiander  taught,  (1.)  That  Christ  has  redeemed  us  by  the
satisfaction  which  He  rendered  to  divine  justice.  (2.)  But  he
denied  that  this  was  any  part  of  our  justification.  (3.)  He
maintamed  that  to  justify  does  not  mean  to  declare  just,  or  to
render  righteous  in  a  judicial  or  forensic  sense,  but  to  render  in-
herently or  subjectively  just  and  holy.  (4.)  That  the  righteous-
ness of  Christ  by  which  the  believer  is  justified,  and  which  he
receives  by  faith,  and  which  is  imputed  to  him  in  the  judgment  of
God,  is  not,  as  the  Protestants  taught,  the  work  of  Christ,  con-
sisting in  what  He  did  and  suffered  as  the  substitute  of  siimers,
nor  is  it,  as  Romanists  teach,  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  consist-
ing in  the  infusion  of  a  holy  nature  or  of  new  habits  of  grace,  but
it  is  the  "essential  righteousness  of  God,"  "the  divine  essence,"
"  God  Himself."  (5.)  That  consequently  the  proximate  and
real  ground  of  our  acceptance  with  God,  and  of  oiu-  reception  into
heaven,  is  what  we  are,  or  what  we  become,  in  virtue  of  this  in-
dwelling of  God  in  the  soul.

The  speculations  of  Osiander  as  to  the  nature  of  God  and  his
relation  to  man,  might  have  led  him  under  any  circumstances  to
adopt  the  peculiar  views  above  stated,  but  the  proximate  cause
Avas  no  doubt  the  reaction  from  the  too  exclusive  prominence
given  at  that  tmie  to  the  objective  work  of  Christ.  This  is  not
to  be  wondered  at,  and  perhaps  was  not  to  be  blamed.  The  Ro-
manists, with  whom  the  Protestants  had  to  contend,  did  not  deny
the  necessity  of  an  mward  change  in  the  nature  of  fallen  man.
But  they  made  this  almost  all  of  Cln-ist's  redeemmg  work.
What  He  did  for  the  expiation  of  sin  and  for  meeting  the  de-
mands of  justice,  was  only  to  open  the  way  for  God's  giving  re-
newing and  sanctifying  grace  to  sinners.  Men  were  themselves
to  merit  eternal  life.  It  was  unavoidable  therefore,  that  the  Re-
formers should  strenuously  insist  upon  what   Christ  did  for  us,

i  Conf.  Fidei,  p.  42.


§  10.]       DEPARTURES  FROM  PROTESTANT  DOCTRINE.        181

and  that  tliey  should  protest  against  confounding  justification
^rith  sanctitication.  Osiander's  cast  of  mind  made  him  revolt  at
this,  and  carried  him  completely  over  to  the  Romish  side,  so  far
as  the  nature  of  justification  is  concerned.  He  said  that  the
Protestant  doctrine  of  justification  is  "  colder  than  ice."  It  is  as
though  a  man  should  pay  the  ransom  of  a  Turkish  slave,  and
leave  liim  and  his  children  in  bondage.  Still  more  violent  is  his
denunciation  of  the  doctrine  that  Christ's  righteousness,  of  which
we  partake  through  faith,  consists  of  his  obedience  and  sufferings.
What  good  can  they  do  us  ?  Christ  obeyed  and  suffered  centuries
ago  ;  we  cannot  appropriate  what  He  then  did  and  make  it  our
own.  Imputing  it  to  us  does  not  alter  the  case.  It  does  not  make
us  better.  Speculative  as  well  as  Biblical  reasons,  however,  pre-
vented Osiander  from  accepting  the  Romish  solution  of  the  dif-
ficulty. What  we  are  said  to  receive  is  "  the  righteousness  of
Christ,"  "the  righteousness  of  God;  "  but  sanctifying  grace  is
never  called  the  righteousness  of  God.  If,  therefore,  that  right-
eousness by  which  the  believer  is  constituted  righteous,  be  neither
the  obedience  of  Christ,  nor  infused  grace,  what  can  it  be  other
than  the  essential  righteousness  of  God,  the  divine  essence  itself  ?
Calvin,  who  in  his  "  Institutes  "  earnestly  combats  the  theory  of
Osiander,  says  that  he  invented  "  monstrum  nescio  quod  essentialis
justitige."  "  Dilucide  exprimit,  se  non  ea  justitia  contentum,  quae
nobis  obedientia  et  sacrificio  mortis  Christi  parta  est,  fingere  nos
substantialiter  in  Deo  justos  esse  tam  essentia  quam  qualitate  in-

fusa Substantialem  mixtionem  ingerit,  qua  Deus  se  in

nos  transfundens,  quasi  partem  sui  faciat.  Nam  virtute  Spiritus
sancti  fieri,  ut  coalescamus  cum  Christo,  nobisque  sit  caput  et
nos  ejus  membra,  fere  pro  nihilo  ducit,  nisi  ejus  essentia  nobis
misceatur."  ^

But  what  theory  of  the  nature  of  God  and  of  his  relation  to
man  did  Osiander  hold,  which  admitted  of  this  doctrine  of  the
infusion  of  the  divine  essence  into  the  soul  ?  His  views  on  this
point  were  not  clearly  brought  out,  but  the  primary  idea  which
underlies  his  speculation  is  the  old  doctrine  of  the  oneness  of  God
and  man.  Man  is  God  in  at  least  one  form  of  his  existence.
He  held  that  Christ  is  the  image,  the  representative,  the  realized
ideal  of  the  Godhead,  not  as  Logos  or  Son,  but  as  Godman,  the
Theanthropos.  As  from  its  nature  or  from  the  nature  of  God
this  idea  must  be  realized,  this  manifestation  of  God  in  his  true
idea  must  occur,  and  therefore  the  incarnation  would  have  taken

1  Institutio,  HI.  xi.  5,  edit.  Berlin,  1834,  part  ii.  p.  8.


182  PART  m.     Ch.XVIL— JUSTIFICATION.

place  had  man  never  sinned.  The  fall  of  Adam  only  modified
the  circumstances  attending  the  incarnation,  determining  that  it
should  involve  suffering  and  death.  But  the  incarnation  itseK,
the  appearance  of  God  in  fashion  as  a  man  arose  from  a  law  of
the  divine  nature.  Adam  was  created  not  after  the  image  of
God  as  such,  but  after  the  image  of  Christ ;  in  some  sort,  a  God-
man.  The  affinity  of  this  theory  with  the  modern  pantheistic
speculations  is  apparent.  Baur,  therefore,  is  doubtless  right
when  he  says,  at  the  close  of  his  apologetic  notice  of  Osiander's
doctrine,  that  his  idea  of  the  relation  between  the  divine  and  hu-
man "is  that  which  at  last  found  its  adequate  scientific  expression
by  Schleiermacher  and  Hegel,  that  Christ  as  Redeemer  is  the  per-
fected creation  of  human  nature ;  or,  that  the  divine  nature  is  the
truth  of  humanity,  and  human  nature  the  reality,  or  existence-
form  (die  Wirklichkeit)  of  the  divine  nature."  ^

Stancarus.
Stancarus,  a  contemporary  and  opponent  of  Osiander,  went  to
the  extreme  of  asserting  that  the  righteousness  of  Christ  was  the
work  of  his  human  nature  exclusively.  This  doctrine  was  how-
ever repudiated  by  the  Romanists  as  well  as  by  Protestants.  If
it  was  Christ's  human  nature  as  such  (and  not  the  divine  person)
who  obeyed,  then  the  human  nature  in  Christ  was  a  distinct  sub-
sistence, and  thus  the  unity  of  his  person  is  destroyed.  Besides,
if  it  was  not  a  divine  person  in  his  human  nature  who  obeyed
and  suffered,  then  we  have  but  a  human  Saviour,  and  a  righteous-
ness of  no  higher  than  a  human  value.  We  know  from  Scrip-
ture that  it  was  the  Lord  of  glory  who  was  crucified,  the  Son  of
God  who,  being  born  of  a  woman,  was  made  under  the  law.

Piscator.

The  first  conspicuous  departure  from  the  Protestant  doctrine
of  justification  among  the  Reformed,  was  on  the  part  of  Piscator,
whose  denial  of  the  imputation  of  the  active  obedience  of  Christ
to  the  behever,  excited  for  some  years  a  good  deal  of  discussion,
but  it  passed  away  without  leaving  any  distinct  trace  in  the
theology  of  the  Reformation.  Baur,  indeed,  assigns  to  it  more
importance,  as  he  regards  it  as  the  first  step  in  the  downfall  of
the  whole  doctrine  of  the  satisfaction  of  Christ,  over  which  he
rejoices.     Piscator  was  a  native  of  Strasburg,  and  a  member  of

1  Baur,    Die    ChristUche  Lehre  von  der    Versohnung,  ii.  i.  1,  Tubingen,    1838,  p.  330,
note.


§  10.]   DEPARTURES  FROM  PROTESTANT  DOCTRINE.    183

the  Lutheran  Church,  to  whose  service  his  first  ministerial  and
professional  labors  were  devoted.  It  coming  to  the  knowledge
of  the  ecclesiastical  authorities  that  in  his  exposition  of  the
Epistle  to  the  Philippians  he  denied  the  ubiquity  of  the  human
nature  of  Christ,  and  taught  the  doctrine  of  predestination,  he
was  deprived  of  his  position  in  the  Lutheran  Church  and  passed
over  to  the  Reformed.  He  was  soon  appointed  one  of  the  pro-
fessors of  the  new  Institution  of  Hebron  founded  b}^  the  Duke
of  Nassau.  He  remained  in  connection  with  that  institution
from  1584  until  his  death  in  1625,  in  the  seventy-ninth  year  of
his  age.  He  was  a  prolific  writer.  Besides  a  new  translation
of  the  Bible,  he  wrote  numerous  commentaries  on  books  of  the
( Md  and  New  Testaments,  and  conducted  many  controversies
with  Lutherans  and  Romanists,  before  he  embroiled  himself  with
the  theologians  of  his  own  church.^  He  took  the  gi-ound  that
the  "  imputatio  justitia?  "  and  "  remissio  peccatorum  "  are  iden-
tical ;  the  former  means  nothing  more  than  the  latter ;  and  con-
sequently that  Christ's  work  consists  simply  in  the  expiation  of
sin.  His  active  obedience  to  the  divine  law  constitutes  no  part
of  the  righteousness  by  which  the  believer  is  justified  before  God.
He  admits  that  Christ  rendered  a  tAvofold  obedience,  —  the  one
to  the  law  of  God  as  a  rule  of  duty  ;  the  other  to  the  special
command  given  to  Him  as  Mediator.  He  came  to  accomplish  a
certain  work  ;  to  do  the  will  of  the  Father,  which  was  to  make
satisfaction  for  sin.  In  this  we  are  interested  ;  but  his  obedience
to  the  moral  law  was  for  Himself,  and  was  the  necessary  condi-
tion of  his  satisfaction.  He  could  not  have  made  atonement  for
otliers  had  He  not  been  Himself  holy.  "  Tribuitur  morti,"  he
says,^  "  quod  ei  tribuendum,  nimirum,  quod  sit  plenissima  satis-
factio  pro  peccatis  nostris ;  sic  etiam  vitse  obedientise  tribuitur,
quod  scriptura  ei  tribuendum  perhibet,  nimirum,  quod  sit  causa,
sine  qua  non  potuerat  Christus  idoneus  esse  mediator  inter  Deum
et  hominem."  Although  Piscator  made  some  effort  to  prove
exegetically  that  pardon  and  justification,  the  remission  of  sin
and  imputation  of  righteousness,  are  identical,  yet  his  arguments
against  the  received  doctrine,  that  the  obedience  of  Christ  is  part
of  our  justifying  righteousness,  are  not  Biblical.  The  question
before  his  mind  was  not  simply.  What  do  the  Scriptures  teach  ?
but.  What  is  true,  logical,  and  symmetrical?     He  saw  objections

1  Theses  Theolog.,  vol.  iii.  locus  39:  "De  causa  meritoria  iustificationis  hominis  coram
Oeo,  sive  de  ea  re,  quie  a  Deo  ad  jiistitiam  imputatur."

2  Log.  xxvi.  p.  331.


184  PART  III.     Ch.   XVn.  —  JUSTIFICATION.

to  the  imputation  of  the  active  obedience  of  Christ,  which  seemed
to  him  fatal,  and  on  the  ground  of  those  objections  he  rejected
the  doctrine.  Thus,  for  example,  he  argues  that  Christ's  obedi-
ence to  the  law  was  due  from  Himself  as  a  man,  and  therefore
not  imputable  to  others.  He  argues  thus,^  "  Qui  Christum  di-
cunt  ubique  ut  hominem,  Christum  dicunt  non  hominem,  dura
enim  dico  ubique,  dico  Deum,  qui  solus  est  in  coelo  et  in  terra.
Similiter  cum  dico  subjectum  legi,  dico  hominem.  Qui  ergo
Christum  subjectum  legi  negant,  negant  ipsum  esse  hominem."
Every  man  as  such  in  virtue  of  being  a  man  is  individually
bound  to  obey  the  moral  law.  Christ  was  a  man ;  therefore  He
was  bound  to  obey  the  law  for  Himself.  He  did  not  perceive,  or
was  not  -willing  to  admit,  that  the  word  "man"  is  taken  in  differ-
ent senses  in  the  different  members  of  this  syllogism,  and  there-
fore, the  conclusion  is  vitiated.  In  the  first  clause,  "man"  means
a  human  person ;  in  the  second  clause,  it  means  human  nature.
Christ  was  not  a  human  person,  although  He  assumed  human
nature.  He  was  a  man  in  the  sense  in  which  we  are  dust  and
ashes.  But  because  we  are  dust,  it  does  not  follow  that  all  that
may  be  predicated  of  dust,  may  be  predicated  of  us ;  e.  (/.,  that
we  have  no  life,  no  reason,  no  immortality.  In  hke  manner,
althougli  the  eternal  Son  of  God  took  upon  Himself  a  true  body
and  a  reasonable  soul,  yet  as  He  was  a  divine  person,  it  does  not
follow  that  everything  that  is  true  of  human  persons  must  be
true  of  Him.  Piscator  also  argues  that  the  law  binds  either  to
punishment  or  to  obedience,  but  not  to  both  at  once.  Therefore,
if  Christ's  obedience  is  imputed  to  us,  there  was  no  necessity
that  He  should  die  for  us.  On  the  other  hand,  if  He  died  for  us,
there  was  no  necessity  that  He  should  obey  for  us.  The  principle
here  assumed  may  be  true  with  regard  to  unfallen  man.  But
where  sin  has  been  committed  there  is  need  of  expiation  as  well
as  of  obedience,  and  of  obedience  as  well  as  expiation,  if  the  re-
ward of  perfect  obedience  is  to  be  conferred.  Again,  he  says,
if  Christ  has  fulfilled  the  law  for  us,  we  are  not  bound  to  keep  it.
Tliis  is  the  old  objection  of  the  Jews  ;  if  justified  by  grace  we
may  live  in  sin.  But  Christ  has  fulfilled  the  law  for  us  only  as
a  covenant  of  works.  In  that  sense,  says  the  Apostle,  we  are
not  under  the  law.  but  it  does  not  thence  follow  that  we  are  free
from  all  moral  obligation  arising  from  our  relation  to  God,  as
rntional  creatures.  It  may  be  true  as  Baur,  himself  a  thorough
skeptic  in  the  English  and  American  sense  of  that  word,  thinks,

1  Loc.  xxvi.  p.  334.


§  10  J       DEPARTURES   FROM   PROTESTANT  DOCTRINE.         185

tliat  this  innovation  of  Piscator  prepared  the  way  for  the  rejec-
tion of  the  whole  Scriptural  doctrine  of  satisfaction.  Certain  it
is  that  both  Lutherans  and  Reformed  united,  with  scarcely  a
dissenting  voice,  in  the  condemnation  of  Piscator's  doctrine.  It
was  judicially  repudiated  by  the  national  Synod  of  France  on
several  different  occasions  ;  first  in  1603,  again  at  La  Rochelle
in  1607,  and  afterwards  in  1612  and  1613.  The  Swiss  churches
in  the  "  Formula  Consensus  Helvetica,"  which  received  symbol-
ical authority  in  Switzerland,  pronounced  clearly  in  favour  of  the
old  doctrine.  This  matter  was  soon  lost  sight  of  in  consequence
of  the  rise  of  Arminianism  of  far  more  historical  importance.

The  Arminian  Doctrine.

Jacobus  Arminius,  a  man  of  learning,  talents,  attractive  ac-
complishments, and  exemplary  character,  was  born  in  Holland
1560,  and  died  professor  in  the  University  of  Leyden,  in  1609,
having  filled  the  chair  of  theology  since  1603.  His  departures
from  the  Reformed  doctrines  in  which  he  had  been  educated
were  far  less  serious  than  those  of  his  successors,  although  involv-
ing them,  apparently,  by  a  logical  necessity.  His  great  difficulty
was  with  the  doctrine  of  predestination  or  the  sovereignty  of  God
in  election.  He  could  not,  however,  get  rid  of  that  doctrine
without  denying  the  entire  inability  of  man  to  do  what  is  spirit-
ually good.  He,  therefore,  taught  that  although  mankind  fell
in  Adam  and  are  born  in  a  state  of  sin  and  condemnation,  and
are  of  themselves  entirely  unable  to  turn  from  sin  to  holiness,  yet
that  they  are  able  to  cooperate  with  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit
given  to  all  men,  especially  to  all  who  hear  the  Gospel,  in  suffi-
cient measure  to  enable  them  to  repent  and  believe,  and  to  per-
severe in  holy  living  unto  the  end.  But  whether  any  man  does
thus  repent  and  believe,  or,  having  believed,  perseveres  in  a  holy
life,  depends  on  himself  and  not  on  God.  The  purpose  of  elec-
tion, therefore,  is  not  a  purpose  to  save,  and  to  that  end  to  give
faith  and  repentance  to  a  definite  number  of  individuals,  but  a
purpose  to  save  those  who  repent,  believe,  and  persevere  in  faith
until  the  end.  The  work  of  Christ  has,  therefore,  an  equal  ref-
erence to  all  men.  He  made  full  satisfaction  to  God  for  the  sius
of  all  and  every  man,  so  that  God  can  now  consistently  offer
salvation  to  all  men  on  the  conditions  laid  down  in  the  Gospel.

Tliis  is  a  self-consistent  scheme.  One  part  impHes,  or  necessi-
tates the  admission  of  the  others.  The  above  statement  includes
all  the  doctrines  presented  by  the  followers  of  Arminius,  after


186  PART   III.     Ch.   XVII.  —  justification.

his  death,  to  the  authorities  in  the  form  of  a  Remonstrance,  as  a
justification  of  their  views.  Hence  the  Arminians  were  called
Remonstrants.  The  document  just  mentioned  contains  the  five
points  on  which  its  authors  and  their  associates,  differed  from  the
Reformed  faith.  The  first  relates  to  predestination,  which  is  ex-
plained as  the  purpose  "  illos  in  Christo,  propter  Christum  et  per
Christum  servare,  qui  Spiritus  Sancti  gratia,  in  eundem  ejus  fil-
ium  credunt,  et  in  ea,  fideique  obedientia,  per  eandem  gratiam
in  finem  perseverant :  contra  vero  eos,  qui  non  convertentur  et
infideles,  in  peccato  et  irse  subjectos  relinquere,  et  condemnare,
secundum  illud  Evang.  Joann.  iii.  36."

The  second  relates  to  the  work  of  Christ,  as  to  which  it  is  said,
"  Proinde  Jesum  Christum  mimdi  servatorem  pro  omnibus  et
singulis  mortuum  esse,  atque  ita  quidem,  ut  omnibus  per  mortem
Christi  reconciliationem  et  peccatorum  remissionem  impetravit :
ea  tamen  conditione,  ut  nemo  ilia  remissione  peccatorum  re  ipsa
fruatur,  prteter  hominem  fidelem,  et  hoc  quoque  secundum  Evang.
Joann.  iii.  16,  et  1  Joann.  ii.  2."

The  third,  concerning  the  sinner's  ability,  declares,  "  Hominem
vero  salutarem  fidem  a  se  ipso  non  habere,  nee  vi  liberi  sui
arbitrii,  quandoquidem  in  statu  defectionis  et  peccati  nihil  boni,
quandoquidem  vere  bonum  est,  quale  quid  est  fides  salutaris,
ex  se  possit  cogitare,  vel  facere  :  sed  necessarium  esse  eum  a  Deo
in  Christo  per  Spiritum  Sanctum  regigni  et  renovari  mente,
affectibus,  seu  voluntate  et  omnibus  facultatibus,  ut  aliquid  boni
possit  intelligere,  cogitare,  velle  et  perficere.  Ev.  Joann.  xv.  5."
No  Augustinian,  whether  Lutheran  or  Calvinist,  can  say  more
than  that,  or  desire  more  to  be  said  by  others.

The  fourth  article,  concerning  grace,  however,  shows  the  point
of  departure  :  "  Hanc  Dei  gratiam  esse  initium,  progressum  ac
perfectionem  omnis  boni,  atque  id  eo  quidem  usque  ut  ipse  homo
regenitus  absque  hac  proecedentia,  seu  adventitia  excitante,  conse-
quente  et  cooperante  gratia,  neque  boni  quid  cogitare,  velle,  aut
facere  possit,  neque  etiam  ulli  malse  tentatione  resistere  ;  adeo
quidem  ut  omnia  bona  opera,  quje  excogitare  possumus,  Dei
gratitB  in  Christo  tribuenda  sint ;  quod  vero  modum  operationis
illius  gratite,  ilia  non  irresistibilis  ;  de  multis  enim  dicitur  eos
Spiritui  Sancto  resistere.  Act.  vii.  51  et  alibi  multis  locis."  It
was  not  to  be  expected,  in  a  brief  exposition  of  principles  de-
signed for  the  justification  of  those  who  hold  them,  as  members
of  a  Reformed  or  Calvinistic  church,  that  doubtful  terms  should
be  explained.     It  is  beyond  controversy,  however,  and,  it  is  be-


§  10.]   DEPARTURES  FROM  PROTESTANT  DOCTRINE.    187

lievecl,  is  not  controverted,  that  irresistible  is  here  used  in  the
sense  of  certainly  efficacious.  The  Holy  Spirit  operates  on  the
hearts  of  all  men.  Some  are  thereby  renewed  and  brought  to
faith  and  repentance  ;  others  are  not.  This  difference,  according
to  the  Remonstrants,  is  not  to  be  referred  to  the  nature  of  the
influence  exerted,  but  to  the  fact  that  some  yield  to  this  grace
and  cooperate  with  it ;  while  others  reject  and  resist  it.

The  fifth  article  refers  to  the  perseverance  of  the  saints,  and
is  indefinite.  It  admits  that  the  Spirit  furnishes  grace  abun-
dantly sufficient  to  enable  the  believer  to  persevere  in  holiness  :
"  Sed  an  illi  ipsi  negligentia  sua  initium  sui  esse  in  Chi-isto
deserere  non  possint,  et  prsesentem  mundum  iterum  amplecti,  a
sancta  doctrina  ipsis  semel  tradita  deficere,  conscientise  naufra-
gium  facere,  a  gratia  excidere ;  penitus  ex  sacra  Scriptura  esset
expendum,  antequam  illud  cum  plena  animi  tranquillitate  et
-7j-/\77po0opia  docere  possent,"  Of  course  no  man  who  believed  the
doctrine  could  write  thus,  and  this  doubtful  mode  of  expression
was  soon  laid  aside,  and  "  falling  from  grace,"  in  the  common
sense  of  the  phrase,  was  admitted  to  be  an  Arminian  doctrine.

It  will  be  observed  that  the  doctrine  of  justification  is  not  em-
braced in  the  five  points  in  the  Remonstrance  as  presented  to  the
authorities  in  Holland,  and  as  made  the  basis  of  the  decisions  of
the  Synod  of  Dort.  The  aberration  of  the  Arminians,  however,
from  the  faith  of  the  Reformed  churches,  extended  to  all  the
doctrines  connected  with  the  plan  of  salvation.  Arminius  him-
self, at  least,  held  far  higher  and  more  Scriptural  views  on  origi-
nal sin,  inability,  and  the  necessity  of  supernatural  grace,  than
those  which  have  since  become  so  prevalent  even  among  the  Re-
formed or  Calvinistic  churches  themselves.  In  matters  concern-
ing the  method  of  salvation,  especially  as  to  the  nature  of  Christ's
work  and  its  application  to  the  behever,  they  at  first  adhered
closely  to  the  language  of  the  Reformed  confessions.  Thus  they
did  not  hesitate  to  say  that  Christ  made  full  satisfaction  for  the
sins  of  men  ;  that  He  was  a  ransom,  a  sacrifice,  a  propitiation  ;
that  He  made  expiation  for  sin  ;  that  his  righteousness  or  obedi-
ence is  the  ground  of  our  acceptance  with  God ;  that  the  faith
which  saves  is  not  mere  assent  to  truth,  or  pious  confidence  in
God,  but  specifically  faith  in  Christ  as  the  Saviour  of  men ;  and
that  justification  is  an  act  of  God  pronouncing  the  sinner  just,
or  in  which  He  pardons  sin  and  accepts  the  sinner  as  righteous.
All  this  is  satisfactory  to  the  ear.  Language,  however,  admits
of   different  interpretations;    and  it  soon  became  apparent  and


188  PART  in.   Ch.  XVII.  —  justification.

avowed  that  the  Remonstrants  intended  something  very  different
from  what  the  Reformed  Church  meant  to  express  by  the  same
terms.

1.  They  said  that  Christ's  work  was  a  satisfaction  to  divine
justice.  But  tliey  did  not  mean  by  satisfaction,  either  a  "  solu-
tio,''  a  real  vahie  rendered  for  what  was  due  ;  nor  even  an  "  ac-
ceptio,"  taking  one  thing  for  another  as  an  equivalent ;  but  an
"  acceptilatio,"  a  gracious  acceptance  as  a  satisfaction  of  that
which  in  its  own  natvire  was  no  equivalent ;  as  though  God
should  accept  the  Kfe  of  a  brute  for  that  of  a  man  ;  or  faith  for
perfect  obedience.  Neither  did  the  Remonstrants  mean  by  jus-
tice the  attribute  which  requires  the  righteous  distribution  of  re-
wards and  punishments,  and  which  renders  it  necessary  that  the
penalty  of  the  law  should  be  executed  in  case  of  transgression.

With  regard  to  this  latter  point  (the  nature  of  justice)  the
language  of  Grotius,  and  of  the  great  body  of  the  Remonstrant
or  Arminian  theologians,  is  perfectly  explicit.  Grotius  says :
"  Poenas  infligere,  aut  a  poenis  aliquem  hberare,  quem  punire
possis,  quod  justificare  vocat  Scriptura,  non  est  nisi  rectoris,  qua
talis  primo  et  per  se  :  ut,  puta,  in  familia  patris  ;  in  republica

regis,  in  universo  Dei Unde  sequitur,  omnino  hie  Deum

considerandum,  ut  rectorem."^  Again,^  "Ratio  [cur  '  rectori
relaxare  legem  talem  non  liceat,  nisi  causa  aliqua  accedat,  si  non
necessaria,  certe  sufficiens ']....  est,  quod  actus  ferendi  aut
relaxandi  legem  non  sit  actus  absoluti  dominii,  sed  actus  imperii,
qui  tendere  debeat  ad  boni  ordinis  conservationem."  ^  "  Poena
enim  omnis  propositum  habet  bonum  commune."  "  Prudentia
quoque  hoc  nomine  rectorem  ad  poenam  incitat.  Augetur  prte-
terea  causa  puniendi,  ubi  lex  aliqua  publicata  est,  quse  poenam
minatur.  Nam  tunc  omissio  poenae  ferme  aliquid  detrahit  de
legis  authoritate  apud  subditos."  *

Here  everything  is  purely  governmental.  It  is  not  justice,  in
the  proper  and  ordinary  sense  of  the  word,  that  is  satisfied,  but
God's  wise  and  benevolent  regard  to  the  interests  of  his  moral
government.  This  changes  everything.  If  God's  justice  be  not
satisfied  guilt  is  not  removed,  and  sin  is  not  expiated.  And  there-
fore conscience  is  not  appeased  ;  nor  can  the  real  authority  and
honour  of  the  law  be  upheld.

As  to  the  other  point,  the  nature  of  the  satisfaction  rendered  ;

1  De  Satisfactione  Christi,  cap.  2;    Works,  edit.  London,  1679,  vol.  iii.  p.  306,  b  (19-24)

2  Jbid.  cap.  5;  p.  317,  b  (35-41).  a  Ibid.  cap.  2;  p.  308,  b  (62,  63).
4  Ibid.  cap.  5;  p.  316,  b  (9-13.)


§  10.]   DEPARTURES  FROM  PROTESTANT  DOCTRINE.    189

it  was  not  a  real  equivalent,  which  by  its  intrinsic  value  met
the  obligations  of  the  sinner,  but  it  was  something  graciously  ac-
cepted as  such.  Although  Grotius  rejects  the  use  of  the  word
"  acceptilatio,"  and  endeavours  to  show  that  it  does  not  express  his
meaning,  nevertheless,  though  he  repudiates  the  word,  he  retains
the  idea.  He  says,^  "  Ea  est  pretii  natura,  ut  sui  valore  aut  ses-
timatione  alterum  moveat  ad  concedendam  rem,  aut  jus  aliquod,
puta  impunitatem."  This  amounts  to  the  principle  of  Duns
Scotus  that  a  thing  avails  (is  worth)  for  what  God  pleases  to
take  it.  Although  Grotius  does  not  carry  out  the  principle  to
the  length  to  which  the  Schoolmen  carried  it,  and  say  that  God
might  have  accepted  the  death  of  one  man  as  a  satisfaction  for  the
sins  of  the  world,  or  the  blood  of  bulls  or  of  goats  as  a  real  expi-
ation, nevertheless,  he  teaches  that  God  graciously  accepted  "  ali-
quid  pro  aliquo,"  the  death  of  Christ  for  the  death  for  all  the
world,  not  because  of  its  being  a  real  equivalent  in  itself,  but  be-
cause as  ruler,  having  the  right  to  remit  sin  without  any  satisfac-
tion, He  saw  that  the  interests  of  his  government  could  thereby
be  promoted.  Still  more  clearly  is  this  idea  expressed  by  Lim-
borch  : ^  "In  eo  errant  quam  maxime,  quod  velint  redemtionis
pretium  per  omnia  equivalens  esse  debere  miseriae  illi,  e  qua  re-
demtio  fit :  redemtionis  pretiu.m  enim  constitui  solet  pro  libera
aistimatione  illius,  qui  captivum  detinet,  non  autem  solvi  pro  cap-

tivi  merito Ita  pretium,  quod  Christus  persolvit,  juxta

Dei  Patris  testimationem  persolutum  est."

According  to  Grotius,  Christ  died  as  an  example,  "  exemplum
poense."  The  whole  efficacy  of  his  work  was  its  moral  impres-
sion on  the  universe.  It  was  not  an  expiation  or  satisfaction  for
past  sins,  but  a  means  of  deterring  from  the  commission  of  sin  in
the  future.  This,  as  Baur^  and  Strauss*  remark,  is  the  point  in
which  the  theory  of  Grotius  and  that  of  Socinus  coincide.  They
both  refer  the  efficacy  of  Christ's  work  to  the  moral  impression
which  it  makes  on  the  minds  of  intelHgent  creatures.  They  refer
that  moral  influence,  indeed,  to  different  causes,  but  moral  impres-
sion is  all  the  efficacy  it  has.  Although  the  word  satisfaction  is
retained  by  Grotius,  the  idea  attached  to  it  by  the  Church  is  re-
jected. The  leading  Remonstrant  or  Arminian  theologians,  as
Episcopius,  CurcellfBus,  and  Limborch,  differ  from  Grotius  in  their
mode  of  presenting  this  subject.  Instead  of  regarding  the  work
of  Clirist  as  an  example  of  punishment,  designed  to  deter  from

1  De  Sntisfacdone,  cap.  8;   Works,  fdit  London,  1679,  vol.  iii.  p.  328,  b  (12-14).

2  Tkeolurjin  Christiana,  iii.  xxi.  8,  edit.  Amsterdam,  1715,  p.  262,  a.

3  Die  ckristliche  Lehre  von  der  Versohnimg,  ij.  i.  4,  Tiiliingen,  1838,  p.  429.

4  Dogmatik,  Tiibinsren  and  Stuttgart,  1841,  vol.  ii,  p.  315.


190  PART  UL   Ch.  xvn.  —  justification.

the  commission  of  sin,  they  adhere  to  the  Scriptural  mode  of  r(;-
garding  Him  as  a  ransom  and  sacrifice.  The  difference  however
is  more  in  form  than  in  reality.  They  admit  that  Christ  redeems
us  by  giving  Himself  as  a  ransom  for  many.  But  a  ransom,  as
Curcellseus  says,  is  not  an  equivalent ;  it  is  anything  the  holder  of
the  captive  sees  fit  to  accept.  It  is  admitted,  also,  that  Christ
gave  Himself  as  a  sacrifice  for  our  salvation ;  but  a  sacrifice  is
said  not  to  be  a  satisfaction  to  justice,  but  simply  the  condition
on  which  pardon  is  granted.  Under  the  Old  Testament  God
pardoned  sin  on  the  occasion  of  the  sacrifice  of  irrational  animals ;
under  the  New  Testament,  on  the  occasion  of  the  sacrifice  of
Ciirist.  "  Sacrificia,"  says  Limborch,^  "non  sunt  solutiones  debi-
torum,  neque  plenariae  pro  peccatis  satisfactiones  ;  sed  illis  perac-
tis  conceditur  gratuita  peccati  remissio."  "  Redemtionis  pretium
constitui  solet  pro  libera  sestimatione  illius,  qui  captivum  detmet."
We  know,  however,  from  Scripture  that  a  sacrifice  was  not  merely
an  arbitrarily  appointed  antecedent  of  gratuitous  forgiveness  ;  it
was  not  simply  an  acknowledgment  of  guilt.  We  know  also  that
the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats  under  the  Old  Testament  could
not  take  away  sin  ;  it  availed  only  to  the  purifying  of  the  flesh,
or  the  remission  of  ceremonial  penalties.  The  only  efficacy  of
the  Old  Testament  sacrifices,  so  far  as  sin  committed  against
God  is  concerned,  was  sacramental ;  that  is,  they  signified,  sealed,
and  applied  the  benefits  of  the  only  real  and  effectual  expiation
for  sin,  to  those  who  believed.  As  the  victim  symbolically  bore
the  penalty  due  to  the  offender,  so  the  eternal  Son  of  God  really
bore  our  sins,  really  became  a  curse  for  us,  and  thus  made  a  true
and  perfect  satisfaction  to  God  for  our  offences.

2.  As  the  Remonstrants  denied  that  Christ's  work  was  a  real
satisfaction  for  sin,  they  of  necessity  denied  any  real  justification
of  the  sinner.  Justification  with  them  is  merely  pardon.  This
is  asserted  by  Grotius  in  the  passage  above  cited ;  and  even  the
Rev.  Richard  Watson,  whose  excellent  system  of  theology,  or
"  Theological  Institutes,"  which  is  deservedly  in  high  repute
among  the  Wesleyan  JNIethodists,  not  only  over  and  over  defines
justification  as  pardon,  but  elaborately  argues  the  question.
"  The  first  point,"  he  says,  "which  we  find  established  by  the
language  of  the  New  Testament  is,  that  justification,  the  pardon
and  remission  of  sins,  the  non-imputation  of  sin,  and  the  imputa-
tion of  righteousness,  are  terms  and  plu'ases  of  the  same  im-
port."^    He  then  goes  on  to  establish  that  position.

1  Theolo(]ia  Christi'nn,  in.  xxi.  •),  8,  '/'  ■^■ipri,  pji.  2ol,  a,  232,  a.

2  n.  xxiii ;  edit.  New  York,  1832,  p.  426.


§  10.]       DEPARTURES   FROM   PROTESTANT  DOCTRINE.         191

If  therefore,  pardon  and  justification  are  distinct  things,  the
one  the  executive  act  of  a  ruler,  the  other  a  judicial  act ;  the  one
setting  aside  the  demands  of  justice,  the  other  a  declaration  that
justice  is  satisfied  ;  then  those  who  reduce  justification  to  mere
pardon,  deny  the  doctrine  of  justification  as  understood  and  pro-
fessed by  the  Lutheran  and  Reformed  chm^ches.  It  of  course  is
not  intended  that  these  Remonstrant  or  Arminian  theologians  do
not  hold  what  they  call  justification  ;  nor  is  it  denied  that  they
at  times,  at  least,  express  their  doctrine  in  the  very  language  of
the  Symbols  of  the  Protestant  churches.  Thus  the  Remonstrants  ^
say,  "  Justificatio  est  actio  Dei,  quain  Deus  pure  pute  in  sua  ip-
sius  mente  efiicit,  quia  nihil  aliud  est,  quam  volitio  aut  decretum,
quo  peccata  remittere,  et  justitiam  imputare  ahquando  vult  iis,
qui  credunt,  id  est,  quo  vult  poenas,  peccatis  eorum  promeritas,
iis  non  infligere,  eosque  tanquam  justos  tractare  et  premio  affi-
cere."  Nevertheless  they  tell  us  that  they  mean  by  this  only
pardon.  Protestants,  when  they  say  justification  includes  pardon
"  and"  the  imputation  of  righteousness,  mean  two  distinct  things
by  pardon  and  imputation  of  righteousness.  The  Remonstrants
regard  them  as  identical,  and,  therefore,  can  use  the  very  language
of  Protestants,  while  rejecting  their  doctrine.  As  every  one  feels
and  knows  that  when  a  criminal  is  pardoned  by  the  executive,
and  allowed  to  resume  his  rights  of  property  and  right  of  voting,
he  is  not  thereby  justified ;  so  every  candid  mind  must  admit
that  there  is  an  immense  difference  between  the  Remonstrant  or
Arminian  doctrine  of  justification  and  that  held  as  the  cardinal
principle  of  the  Reformation  by  both  Lutherans  and  Reformed.

3.  This  difference  becomes  still  more  apparent  when  we  con-
sider what  the  Remonstrants  make  the  ground  of  justification.
As  they  deny  that  Christ  made  any  real  satisfaction  to  divine
justice  (as  distinguished  from  benevolence),  so  they  deny  that
the  righteousness  of  Christ  is  imputed  to  the  believer  as  the
ground  of  his  justification.  On  this  point,  Limborch  ^  says,
"  Hsec  autem,  qua3  nobis  imputatur,  non  est  Christi  justitia ;  nus-
quam  enim  Scriptura  docet,  Christi  justitiam  nobis  imputari ;  sed
tantum  fidem  nobis  imputari  in  justitiam,  et  quidem  jjropter
Christum."  And  Curcellaeus^  says,  "  NuUibi  docet  Scriptura
justitiam  Christi  nobis  imputari,  Et  id  absurdum  est.  Nemo
enim  in  se  in  Justus  aliena  justitia  potest  esse  formaliter  Justus,
non  magis,  quam  aliena  albedine  ^thiops  esse  albus."

1  Apolofjia  pro  Confesdone  Rtmonstrantiiim,  cap.  11,  12;  Episcopii  Opera,  edit.  Rotter-
dam, 1665,  vol.  ii.  p.  166,  a,  of  second  *et.

2  Theologia  Christinna.  vi.  iv.  18,  ut  supra,  p.  703,  a.        3  Eelig.  Christ.  Inst.  7,  9,  6.


192  PART  JII.     Ch.   XVII.  —  justification.

As  the  righteousness  of  Christ  is  not  imputed  to  the  believer,
the  ground  of  his  justification,  that  which  is  accepted  as  right-
eousness, is  faith  and  its  fruits,  or  faith  and  evangehcal  obedience.
On  this  subject  Limborch  says,^  that  under  the  new  covenant
God  demands  "  obedientiam  fidei,  hoc  est,  non  rigidam  et  omnibus
iequalem,  prout  exigebat  lex ;  sed  tantam,  quantam  fides,  id  est,
certa  de  divinis  promissionibus  persuasio,  in  unoquoque  efficere
potest ;  in  qua  etiam  Deus  mviltas  imperfectiones  et  lapsus  con-
donat,  modo  animo  sincero  pra^ceptorum  ipsius  observationi  m-
cumbamus,  et  continue  in  eadem  proficere  studeamus."

And  again,^  "  Deus  non  judicat  hominum  justitiam  esse  per-
fectam,  imo  earn  judicat  esse  iniperfectam ;  sed  justitiam,  quam
imperfectam  judicat,  gratiose  accipit  ac  si  perfecta  esset."  He,
therefore,"''  thus  defines  justification,  "  Est  gratiosa  testimatio,  seu
potius  acceptatio  justiticB  nostras  imperfectge  (quas,  si  Deus  rigide
nobiscum  agere  vellet,  in  judicio  Dei  nequaquam  consistere  posset)
pro  perfecta,  propter  Jesuni  Christum."

The  same  view  is  presented  when  he  speaks  of  faith  in  its  rela-
tion to  justification.  Faith  is  said  to  be  imputed  for  righteous-
ness ;  but  Limborch  says,^  "  Sciendum,  quando  dicimus,  nos  fide
justificari,  nos  non  excludere  opera,  qute  fides  exigit  et  tanquam
foecunda  mater  producit ;  sed  ea  includere."  Again,^  "  Fides  est
conditio  in  nobis  et  a  nobis  requisita,  ut  justificationem  conse-
quamur.  Est  itaque  talis  actus,  qui,  licet  in  se  spectatus  per-
fectus  nequaquam  sit,  sed  in  multis  deficiens,  tamen  a  Deo  gratiosa
et  Uberrima  voluntate  pro  pleno  et  j)erfecto  acceptatur  et  prop-
ter quem  Deus  homini  gratiose  remissionem  peccatorum  et  vitoe
ajternas  prsemium  conferre  vult."

Fletcher  "^  says,  "  With  respect  to  the  Christless  law  of  paradi-
saical obedience,  we  entirely  disclaim  sinless  perfection."  "  We
shall  not  be  judged  by  that  law ;  but  by  a  law  adapted  to  our
present  state  and  circumstances,  a  milder  law,  called  the  law  of
Christ."  "  Our  Heavenly  Father  never  expects  of  us,  in  our
debilitated  state,  the  obedience  of  immortal  Adam  in  paradise."

Dr.  Peck'  says,  "  The  standard  of  character  set  up  in  the  Gospel
mvist  be  such  as  is  practicable  by  man,  fallen  as  he  is.  Coming
up  to  tills  standard  is  what  we  call  Christian  perfection."

1  Theologia  Christiana,  vi.  iv  37,  ttt  supra,  p.  706,  a.

2  Tbid.  VI.  iv.  41 ;  p.  706,  b,  707,  a.

3  Hid.  VI.  iv.  18;  p.  703,  a.  4  Tbid.  vi.  iv.  32;  p.  705,  b.
6  Ibid.  VI.  iv.  31;  p.  705,  a.

«  Last  Check  to  Antiauniianlsni,  sect,  i;  II'o?7i-,«,  X.  Y.  1833,  vol.  ii,  pp.  493,  494-
t  Christian  Perfection,  Xew  Yorlv,  1843,  p.  294.


§10.]       DEPARTURES   FROM  PROTESTANT  DOCTRINE.         193

Under  the  covenant  of  works  as  made  with  Adam,  perfect
obedience  was  the  condition  of  acceptance  with  God  and  of  eternal
life  ;  under  the  Gospel,  for  Christ's  sake,  imperfect,  or  evangelical
obedience,  is  the  ground  of  justification,  i.  e.,  it  is  that  (propter
quam)  on  account  of  which  God  graciously  grants  us  the  remission
of  sin  and  the  reward  of  eternal  life.

We  have  then  the  tlu-ee  great  systems.  First,  that  of  the  Ro-
manists, which  teaches  that  on  account  of  the  work  of  Christ
God  grants,  through  Christian  baptism,  an  infusion  of  divine
grace,  by  which  all  sin  is  purged  from  the  soul  and  all  ground  for
the  infiiction  of  the  penalty  is  removed  and  the  sinner  rendered
inherently  just  or  holy.  This  is  the  first  justification.  Then  in
virtue  of  the  new  principle  of  spiritual  life  thus  imparted,  the
baptized  or  regenerated  are  enabled  to  perform  good  works,  which
are  really  meritorious  and  on  account  of  which  they  are  admitted
to  heaven.

Secondly,  the  Arminian  theory,  that  on  account  of  what  Christ
has  done,  God  is  pleased  to  grant  sufiicient  grace  to  all  men,  and
to  accept  the  imperfect  obedience  which  the  believer  is  thus  en-
abled to  render  in  lieu  of  the  perfect  obedience  required  under
the  covenant  made  with  Adam,  and  on  account  of  that  imperfect
obedience,  eternal  life  is  graciously  bestowed.

Thirdly,  the  Protestant  doctrine  that  Christ,  as  the  representa-
tive and  substitute  of  sinners  or  of  his  people,  takes  their  place
under  the  law,  and  in  their  name  and  in  their  behalf  fulfils  all
righteousness,  thereby  making  a  real,  perfect,  and  infinitely  mer-
itorious satisfaction  to  the  law  and  justice  of  God,  which  right-
eousness is  imputed,  or  set  to  the  account  of  the  believer,  who  is
thereupon  and  on  that  account  freely  pardoned  and  pronounced
righteous  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  entitled  not  only  to  the  remis-
sion of  sin  but  also  to  eternal  life.  Being  united  to  Christ  by
faith,  the  believer  becomes  partaker  of  his  life,  so  that  it  is  not
he  that  lives  but  Christ  that  liveth  in  him,  and  the  life  which
the  believer  now  lives  in  the  flesh  is  by  faith  of  the  Son  of  God,
who  loved  him,  and  gave  Himself  for  him.

Comparison  of  the  Different    Doctrines.

The  first  remark  which  suggests  itseK  on  the  comparison  of
these  several  schemes  is,  that  the  relation  between  the  believer
and  Christ  is  far  more  close,  peculiar,  and  constant  on  the  Protes-
tant scheme  than  on  any  other.  He  is  dependent  on  Him  every
hour  ;  for  the  imputation  of  his  righteousness  ;  for  the  supphes  of

VOL.  m.  13


]04  TAUT  in.   ch.  xvil— justification.

the  Spirit  of  life  ;  and  for  his  care,  guidance,  and  intercession.
He  must  look  to  Him  continually  ;  and  continually  exercise  faith
in  Him  as  an  ever  psesent  Saviour  in  order  to  live.  According  to
the  other  schemes,  Christ  has  merely  made  the  salvation  of  all
men  possible.  There  his  work  ended.  According  to  Romanists,
He  has  made  it  possible  that  God  should  give  sanctifying  grace  in
baj)tism;  according  to  the  Remonstrants,  He  has  rendered  it  pos-
sible for  Him  to  give  sufficient  grace  to  all  men  whereby  to  sanc-
tify and  save  themselves.  We  are  well  aware  that  this  is  theory  ;
that  the  true  people  of  God,  whether  Romanists  or  Remonstrants,
do  not  look  on  Christ  thus  as  a  Saviour  afar  off.  They  doubtless
have  the  same  exercises  towards  Him  that  their  fellow  behevera
have  ;  nevertheless,  such  is  the  theory.  The  theory  places  a  great
gulf  between  the  soul  and  Christ.

Secondly,  it  hardly  admits  of  question  that  the  Protestant
view  conforms  to  the  Scriptural  mode  of  presenting  the  plan  of
salvation.  Christ  in  the  Bible  is  declared  to  be  the  head  of  his
people,  their  representative  ;  they  were  in  Him  in  such  a  sense
that  they  died  in  Him  ;  they  are  raised  mth  Him,  and  sit  with
Him  in  heavenly  places.  They  were  in  Him  as  the  race  was  in
Adam,  and  as  branches  are  in  the  vine.  They  individually  receive
the  sprinkling  of  that  blood  which  cleanses  from  all  sin.  They
are  constituted  righteous  by  his  obedience.  As  He  was  made  sin
for  them,  so  are  they  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Him.  He
is  not  only  an  example  of  punishment  as  Grotius  represents,  a
mere  governmental  device,  but  a  sacrifice  substituted  for  us,  on
whose  head  every  believer  must  lay  his  hand  and  to  whom  he
must  transfer  the  burden  of  his  sins.

Thirdly,  what  is  included  indeed  in  the  above,  but  is  so  impor-
tant and  decisive  as  to  require  distinct  and  repeated  mention  ;  all
schemes,  other  than  the  Protestant,  refer  the  proximate  ground
of  our  acceptance  with  God  to  our  own  subjective  character.  It
is  because  of  our  own  goodness  that  we  are  regarded  and  treated  as
righteous.  Whereas  conscience  demands,  the  Scriptures  reveal,
and  the  believer  instinctively  seeks  something  better  than  that.
His  own  goodness  is  badness.  It  cannot  satisfy  his  own  bleared
\'ision ;  how  then  can  it  appear  before  the  eyes  of  God  ?  It
matters  not  how  the  Romanist  may  exalt  his  "  inward  habits  of
grace  ;  "  or  how  the  Arminian  may  sublimate  his  evangelical
obedience  to  perfection  ;  neither  can  satisfy  either  the  conscience
or  God.

Fourthly,  the  Protestant  doctrine  is  the  only  one  on  which  the


§  11.]  MODERN  THEORIES.  195

soul  can  live.  This  has  been  urged  before  when  speaking  of  the
work  of  Christ.  It  is  fair  to  appeal  from  theology  to  hymnology  ;
from  the  head  to  the  heart ;  from  what  man  thinks  to  what  God
makes  men  feel.  It  is  enough  to  say  on  this  point,  that  Lutheran
and  Reformed  Christians  can  find  nowhere,  out  of  the  Bible,
more  clear,  definite,  soul-satisfying  expression  of  their  doctrinal
views  upon  this  subject,  than  are  to  be  found  in  many  of  the
hymns  of  the  Latin  and  Arminian  churches.  As  a  single  ex-
ample may  be  cited  the  following  stanzas  from  John  Wesley's
"  Hymns  and  Spiritual  Songs  "  :  —

"  Join,  earth  and  heaven  to  bless
The  Lord  our  Righteousness.
The  mystery  of  redemption  this,
This  the  Sa\'iour's  strange  design  —
Man's  offence  was  counted  his.
Ours  his  righteousness  divine.

"  In  Him  complete  we  shine;
His  death,  his  life,  is  mine;
Fully  am  I  justified.
Free  from  sin,  and  more  than  free,
Guiltless,  since  for  me  He  died;
Righteous,  since  He  lived  for  me."

§  11.  Modern  Views  on  Justification,
Rationalistic   Theories.

These  cannot  be  given  in  detail.  Certain  classes  of  opinions
can  be  referred  to  only  in  the  briefest  manner.  The  Rationalists
were  divided  into  two  classes  ;  first,  those  who  regarded  the
Scriptures  as  a  supernatural  revelation  of  natural  religion,  or  of
the  truths  of  reason  ;  and  secondly,  those  who  denied  the  super-
natural origin  of  the  Scriptures  altogether,  assigning  to  them  no
higher  authority  than  belongs  to  the  writings  of  good  and  wise
men.

The  former  class  came  to  agree  very  nearly  with  the  latter  as
to  what  the  Bible  actually  teaches,  or,  at  least,  as  to  what  is  by
us  to  be  regarded  and  received  as  true.  Those  who  admitted  the
divine  origin  of  the  Scriptures  got  rid  of  its  distinctive  doctrines
by  the  adoption  of  a  low  theory  of  inspiration,  and  by  the  appli-
cation of  arbitrary  principles  of  interpretation.  Inspiration  was,
in  the  first  instance,  confined  to  the  religious  teachings  of  the
Bible,  then  to  the  ideas  or  truths,  but  not  to  the  form  in  which
they  were  presented,  nor  to  the  arguments  by  which  they  were
supported.  The  fact  that  Christ  saves  men  in  some  way  was  ad-
mitted, but  not  as  a  sacrifice  nor  as  a  ransom,  nor  by  being  a


196  PART  III.   ch.  xvn.  —  justification.

substitute  for  sinners.  The  miracles  of  Christ  were  acknowledged
as  historical  facts,  but  they  were  explained  as  mere  natural  events
distorted  by  tlie  imaginations  of  spectators  and  historians.  It
was  granted  by  some  that  Christ  and  the  Apostles  did  teach
the  Church  doctrines,  but  this,  it  Avas  said,  was  done  only  by  way
of  accommodation  to  the  prejudices,  superstitions,  or  modes  of
thought  of  the  men  of  that  generation.  The  first  step  in  this
process  was  the  denial  of  all  distinction  between  the  prophetic,
priestly,  and  kingly  offices  of  Christ.  In  this  way  a  wet  sponge
was  passed  over  all  the  doctrines  of  redemption,  and  their  out-
lines obhterated.  This  unnatural  process  could  not  be  long  con-
tinued, and,  therefore,  the  majority  of  Rationalists  soon  threw  off
all  regard  to  the  normal  authority  of  the  Bible,  and  avowed  their
faith  in  nothing  which  did  not  commend  itself  to  their  own  un-
derstanding as  true,  and  for  that  reason  alone.

As  to  the  doctrine  of  justification,  the  whole  tendency  of  the
efforts  during  this  period  was,  as  Baur  correctly  says,^  to  make
the  reconciliation  of  man  to  God  the  work  of  the  man  himself.
"  A  man  was  entitled  to  regard  himself  as  reconciled  with  God
as  soon  as  he  determined  to  repent  and  to  reform."  God  was  re-
garded as  a  father.  A  father  is  displeased  with  a  son  only  so
long  as  he  is  disobedient.  The  only  end  of  any  chastisement  he
may  inflict,  is  the  reformation  of  his  child.  If  that  be  accom-
phshed,  all  necessity  and  all  propriety  of  punishment  cease.
Wegscheider,  a  representative  of  this  class  of  theologians,  ^ays,^
"  Quicunque  e  vita  turpi,  qua  poenas  sibi  contraxit,  ad  virtutem
emerserit,  is  eadem  proportione,  qua  jam  in  virtutis  studio  pro-
gressus  fuerit,  in  gratiam  cum  Deo  reversus,  ab  eodem  prtemiis
dignus  judicabitur."

PJiilosophical  Theories.

The  philosophical  theories  on  this  subject  were  as  different  as
the  systems  on  which  they  were  founded.  Some  of  these  systems
were  theistic,  others  pantheistic,  and  others  monistic,  ^.  <?.,  founded
on  the  oneness  of  God  and  man,  without  denying  the  distinct
personality  of  either.

The  influence  of  Kant's  philosophy  upon  theology,  for  a  time
at  least,  was  very  great,  and  in  some  aspects  salutary.  As  he
exalted  the  power  of  the  pure  reason,  making  it  give  law  to  the
out  vard,  subordinating,  as  his  disciples  say,  the  objective  to  the

1  Die  Chnstliche  Lehre  von  der  Versohnung,  iii.  i.  Tiibinj^en,  1830,  p.  565.
«  Jnstltutiones  Theologiae,  in.  ii.  §  140,  5th  edit.  Halle,  1826,  p.  438.


§11.]  MODERN  THEORIES.  197

subjective,  so  in  the  sphere  of  religion  and  morahty  he  exalted
the  power  and  authority  of  the  practical  reason.  Everything
was  subordinate  to  moral  excellence.  Happiness  was  not  the
end  It  was  only  a  means  of  promoting  and  rewarding  what  is
moi'ally  good.  The  attainment  of  the  highest  amount  of  moral
excellence  requires  perfect  harmony  between  happiness  and  good-
ness, that  is,  that  rational  creatures  should  be  happy  in  exact
proportion  to  their  goodness,  and  miserable  in  proportion  as  they
are  wicked.  The  punishment  of  sin  is  therefore  inevitable.  It
is  determined  by  the  immutable  moral  order  of  the  universe,
which  can  no  more  be  changed  or  set  aside  than  any  physical  law
on  which  the  existence  or  order  of  the  external  world  depends.

From  these  principles  some  of  the  Kantian  theologians  inferred
that  the  pardon  of  sin  is  impossible.  Misery  is  as  inseparable
from  sin  as  pain  is  from  the  laceration  of  the  body.  If  the  only
punishment  of  sin,  however,  be  its  natural  consequences,  then  the
removal  of  sin  effects  the  removal  of  punishment.  This  deter-
mines the  view  which  many  of  the  disciples  of  Kant  take  of  the
nature  of  redemption.  It  is  purely  subjective.  Men  are  delivered
from  sin  and  thereby  from  its  punishment.

To  others,  however,  this  view  was  unsatisfactory,  (1.)  Because
the  punishment  of  sin  is  not  purely  or  exclusively  natural.  It  is
not  so  even  in  this  world,  as  is  proved  by  the  deluge,  by  the  de-
struction of  the  cities  of  the  plain,  and  by  a  thousand  other  in-
stances. Much  less  is  it  true  with  regard  to  the  future  world.
Conscience  is  not  the  only  worm  that  never  dies,  or  remorse  the
only  fire  which  is  never  quenched.  (2.)  Because  tliis  theory
reverses  the  natural  order  of  events.  It  makes  reformation  pre-
cede, pardon,  whereas  pardon  must  precede  reformation.  On  this
point  Bretschneider  1  quotes  even  Ewald'"^  as  saying,  "It  is  as
unpsychological  as  it  is  unchristian  so  to  present  Christian  refor-
mation, that  a  man  must  become  better  before  he  is  forgiven.  It
is  precisely  through  the  love  of  God  anticipating  our  reformation,
by  which  the  man  morally  dead  is  quickened,  that  the  elements  of
all  religion,  gratitude,  trust,  and  love  are  called  into  exercise."
This  is  certainly  Paul's  doctrine.  (3.)  The  theory  in  question
overlooks  guilt,  responsibility  to  justice  for  sins  already  commit-
ted. (4.)  The  ends  of  punishment  (according  to  the  Kantians)
are,  first,  the  satisfaction  of  the  moral  excellence  of  God,  who
by  necessity  of  his  moral  perfection  must  punish  sin  ;  secondly,

1  Dogmatik,  §  159,  3d  edit.  Leipzig,  1828,  vol.  ii.  p.  320,  uote.

2  Die  Religionslehren  der  Bibel,  ii.  v.  «u  nro.  27 ;  Stuttgart  and  Tubingen,  1812,  vol
ii.  p.  149.


198  PART  III.     Cn.  XVII.  -  JUSTIFICATION.

the  improvement  of  the  offender ;  and  thu-dly,  the  upholding  the
moral  order  of  the  universe.  The  two  former  of  these  ends,
Bretschneider  says,  may  be  answered  by  the  reformation  of  the
sinner.  When  a  man  ceases  to  sin,  he  ceases  to  be  opposed  to
God,  and  God  ceases  to  be  opposed  to  him.  But  the  third  end  of
punishment,  namely,  preserving  the  moral  order  of  the  universe,
is  not  answered  by  the  sinner's  reformation.  He  is  not  the  only
person  to  be  considered.  The  interests  of  morality  would  suffer,
if  he  were  rendered  happy  notmthstanding  his  past  transgression.
The  question  then  is,  is  there  any  way  in  which  the  authority  of
the  moral  law  can  be  sustained,  and  yet  the  sinner  be  forgiven  and
rendered  blessed  ?  The  Church  answer  to  this  question,  the  dis-
ciples of  Kant  reject  as  contrary  to  reason  ;  but  reason,  says  Bret-
schneider, has  nothing  to  object  to  the  doctrine  stated  generally
that  God  can  consistently  pardon  sin  for  Clrrist's  sake.  He  sums
up  under  the  follo^ving  heads,  what  reason  may  accept  in  regard
to  this  whole  subject.  (1.)  That  the  divine  nature  of  Christ
rendered  his  sufferings  more  important  for  the  spiritual  world
and  more  available  for  man  than  they  otherwise  would  have
been.  (2.)  We  cannot  properly  say  that  He  suffered  the  penalty
of  the  law,  or  the  punishment  of  our  sins,  but  that  He  endured
his  unmerited  sufferings  for  the  good  of  the  world.  (3.)  That
He  did  not  make  satisfaction  for  sin,  but  rendered  secure  the
moral  order  of  the  universe.  (4.)  Although  He  did  not  make
satisfaction,  He  procured  or  mediated  our  pardon.  He  is  not  our
sponsor,  but  our  "  mediator  salutis."  (5.)  The  expression  "  the
merit  of  Christ "  does  not  mean  any  good  imputed  to  us,  or  any
title  belonging  to  us,  but  simply  the  claim  of  Christ  that  his  suf-
ferings shall  avail  to  the  good  of  men.  (6.)  The  word  "  recon-
ciliation "is  anthropopathic.  It  does  not  express  any  change  in
God ;  but  either  objectively  the  possibility  of  pardon,  or  subjec-
tively the  hope  of  pardon.  (7.)  "  To  impute  the  merit  of  Christ "
does  not  mean  that  God  regards  Christ's  obedience  as  our  obe-
dience, or  his  sufferings  as  our  punishment,  but  simply  that,
through  love,  God  has  determined  to  render  his  sufferings  avail-
able for  the  good  of  men.  (8.)  That  Christ's  death  was  vicari-
ous in  so  far  that  in  consequence  thereof  sin  may  be  pardoned  in
the  renewed.  (9.)  Justification  is  the  application  to  individuals
of  the  general  declaration  of  God  that  He  will  save  all  who  strive
to  reform.  This  is  the  liiirhest  form  in  which  theoloo^ians  res^arded
as  rationalistic  are  willing  to  receive  the  doctrines  of  atonement
and  justification.


§11.]  MODERN   THEORIES  199

Speculative    Theologians.

The  views  of  the  sj)eculative  theologians  on  these  points  have
ah'ead}'^  been  presented  in  the  chapters  on  the  person  of  Christ
and  on  his  work,  as  fully  as  is  proper  in  such  a  work  as  this.

However  much  this  class  of  theologians  may  differ  as  to  their
philosophical  principles,  or  as  to  the  length  to  which  they  carry
those  principles  in  their  explanation  of  Christian  doctrine,  they
agree,  first,  in  rejecting  the  Church  view  of  the  plan  of  salvation  ;
they  deny  that  Christ  obeyed  the  law  and  bore  its  penalty  vica-
riously, or  as  the  substitute  of  sinners  ;  they  deny  that  his  right-
eousness is  imputed  to  the  believer  as  the  ground  of  his  justifica-
tion ;  they  deny  that  saving  faith  consists  in  receiving  and  resting
on  the  righteousness  of  Christ  as  something  objective  ;  they  deny
that  justification  is  a  forensic  or  judicial  act  in  which  God  pro-
nounces the  sinner  just,  not  on  the  ground  of  his  subjective  state
or  character,  but  on  the  ground  of  what  Christ  has  done  for  him.
All  this  they  pronounce  mechanical,  external,  magical,  unreal,
and  unsatisfactory.  On  the  other  hand,  they  agree  in  represent-
ing justification  as  an  act  by  which  the  sinner  is  made  inherently
or  subjectively  just ;  and  consequently  that  his  acceptance  with
God,  and  his  title  to  eternal  life,  are  founded  on  what  he  is  ;
they  agree  in  regarding  faith  as  that  state  of  mind  which  renders
the  sinner  receptive  of  the  infusion  of  whatever  it  is  that  renders
him  thus  subjectively  righteous  in  the  sight  of  God.  What  that
is,  is  the  main  point  on  which  their  representations  differ.  Those
who  regard  man  as  only  a  form  of  the  manifestation  of  God,  say
that  one  man's  being  justified  and  not  another,  means  that  God
is  more  fully  developed  in  the  one  than  in  the  other  ;  or  that
the  one  realizes  more  truly  the  idea  of  man  than  the  other;  and
this,  after  all,  consists  in  one's  coming  to  the  consciousness  of  his
oneness  with  God,  which  others  have  not  attained.  "  The  most
universal  and  essential  idea  of  redemption  and  reconciliation  is
man's  becoming  one  with  God.  The  necessary  objective  assump-
tion, on  which  alone  the  individual  can  be  one  with  God,  or  re-
deemed and  reconciled,  is  the  truth,  that  man  as  such  is  one  with
God  (dass  der  Mensch  an  sich  mit  Gott  Eins  ist)."^  This,  ac-
cording to  one  view,  is  an  eternal  process  ;  God  is  ever  becoming
man,  and  man  is  ever  returning  into  God.  According  to  Schleier-
macher,  as  already  repeatedly  stated,  this  manifestation  of  God  in
man  was  hindered  and  could  never  become  perfect  by  a  process

1  Baiir,  Die  ChrisHiche  Lekre  von  der  Versohnung,  Tubingen,  1838,  p.  628.


200  PART   in.     Cn.  XVII.— JUSTIFICATION.

of  natural  development ;  and,  therefore,  by  a  new  creative  act
Christ  was  produced,  in  whom  the  idea  of  man  was  fully  real-
ized, or  in  whom  the  oneness  of  God  and  man  was  clearly  exhib-
ited, and  from  Him  a  new  process  of  development  commenced  as
perfectly  natural  as  the  process  before  his  advent,  and  the  re-
demption of  man  consists  in  the  communication  of  the  sinlessness
and  blessedness  of  Christ  to  the  individual.  This  is  expressed
commonly  by  saying  that  the  life  of  Christ,  —  not  the  Holy
Spirit  as  derived  from  Him  ;  not  his  divine  nature  ;  not  his
humanity  ;  but  his  divine-human  life,  —  is  communicated  to  the
Church  and  to  all  its  members.  In  other  words,  as  Christ  is  God
in  human  form,  so  is  every  believer.  The  incarnation  goes  for-
ward in  the  Church.  In  the  language  of  the  older  mystics,  what
is  communicated  is  "  the  essential  righteousness  of  God,"  or
"  the  essence  of  God,"  the  life  of  God,  or  God  Himself.

According  to  this  view  the  objective  work  of  Christ,  what  He
did  and  suffered  is  of  no  avail  for  us  ;  it  is  not  that  which  makes
us  righteous,  or  by  which  we  are  redeemed.  Redemption  and
reconciliation  are  a  purely  subjective  process ;  something  which
takes  place  in  the  sinner's  own  soul,  and  not  something  which
was  done  for  him.  It  matters  little  whether  there  was  a  histor-
ical Christ  or  not ;  or,  at  least,  whether  the  facts  recorded  of
Him  be  true  or  untrue  ;  Avhether  the  Gospels  are  liistorical  or
mythical.

According  to  another  view,  the  work  of  Christ  was  in  no  sense
a  satisfaction  to  divine  justice  ;  neither  his  obedience  nor  his  suf-
fering was  designed  to  be  set  over  to  his  people  -with  its  merit,
as  the  ground  of  their  justification.  The  Word  became  flesh.
He  assumed  our  fallen  humanity  into  personal  union  with  Him-
self. This  necessitated  conflict  and  suffering  as  the  only  way  in
which  the  new  life  could  triumph  over  the  law  of  sin  and  death
which  belonged  to  our  fallen  humanity.  This  was  the  atone-
ment of  Christ,  the  triumph  of  health  over  disease.  This  was
the  victory  of  Christ  over  sin  and  hell.  Thus  He  becomes  the
author  of  salvation  to  men.  Humanity  in  Christ  suffered  and
died,  and  rose  again.  That  humanity  is  our  nature.  It  is  that
which  constitutes  us  what  we  are.  By  union  with  the  Church,
which  is  the  body  of  Christ  animated  by  his  theanthropic  nature
or  life,  we  become  one  with  Him.  What  is  communicated  to
us  is  not  liis  merit,  nor  his  Spirit,  but  his  essence,  his  substance,
his  hfe.  There  is  no  duaUsm  between  the  soul  and  body.  They
are  one  life.     The  soul  externalizes  itself  in  the  body,  they  are


§  11.]  MODERN  THEORIES.  201

one.  So  there  is  no  dualism  in  Christ ;  not  a  divine  and  human
substance  ;  not  a  divine  and  human  life  ;  but  one  Hfe  which  is
simply  and  purely  human  and  yet  divine  ;  for  God  and  man  are
one ;  and  humanity  reaches  its  completion  only  when  thus  iden-
tified with  the  divine.  This  divine-human  life  passes  over  from
Christ  to  the  Church  ;  and  this  takes  place  in  the  way  of  history,
growth,  and  development.  Partaking  thus  of  the  life  of  Christ,
we  partake  of  its  righteousness,  its  holiness,  and  its  glory.  Thus
redemption  is  purely  subjective.  It  is  wrought  in  us,  although
the  source  is  without  us.  As  we  partake  of  Adam's  sin  and
condemnation,  because  we  partake  of  his  nature  ;  so  we  partake
of  Christ's  righteousness  and  holiness  because  we  partake  of
his  divine-human  life,  or  of  humanity  as  healed  and  exalted  in
Him.i

Ehrard  of  Erlangen.

There  is  an  important  class  of  modern  theological  writers,
of  whom  Dr.  J.  H.  A.  Ebrard  of  Erlangen  may  be  taken  as  a
representative,  who  consider  themselves  faithful  to  the  doctrines
of  the  Reformation,  while  developing  them  into  new  forms.  As
Ebrard  represents  this  class  of  writers  among  the  Reformed,  so
Delitzsch  does  the  same  for  the  Lutheran  theologians.  These
writers  are  abundantly  orthodox  in  their  exposition  of  the  nature
of  Christ's  work.  This  is  especially  true  of  Delitzsch  in  his  ad-
mirable treatise  on  "  The  Vicarious  Satisfaction  of  Christ."  ^  As
these  writers  identify  regeneration  and  justification,  their  views
may  be  found  briefly  stated  in  the  chapter  on  regeneration.

Christ,  it  is  admitted,  made  expiation  for  sin  and  satisfied  the
justice  of  God  as  our  substitute  by  his  vicarious  obedience  and
sufferings.  This  righteousness,  however,  becomes  ours  not  by
being  received  by  faith  and  imputed  to  us  by  the  just  judgment
of  God,  but  by  regeneration,  whereby  we  become  partakers  of
the  life,  substance,  or  essence,  however  it  may  be  designated,  of
Christ.  On  this  subject  Ebrard  says :  "  Regeneration  is  the
substantial  objective  ground  both  of  the  transient  act  of  justifi-
cation, and  of  the  progressive  work  of  sanctification ;  whereas
conversion  (repentance  and  faith)  is  the  subjective  condition  of
both.  And  justification  as  the  act  of  the  Father,  is  a  forensic
judicial  act ;  as  the  act  of  Christ,  it  is  identical  with  regenera-

1  See  Mystical  Presence,  by  John  W.  Nevin,  D.  D. ;  ISIorell's  Phllosojjhy  of  Religion,  and
Princeton  Review,  April,  1848.

2  Ueher  den  festen  Schriftgrund  der  Kirchenlehre  von  der  stellvertretenden  Genug-
thuung,  printed  as  a  second  Appendix  to  his  elaborate  commentary  on  the  Epistle  to  the
Hebrews.


202  PART  III.     Ch.   XVII. -justification.

tion,  i.  e.,  with  tlie  real  implantation  of  Christ  in  us  and  of  U8
in  Christ."  Both  propositions,  therefore,  he  says,  are  equally
true,  namely,  "  Clirist  justifies  us  ;  and  faith  justifies  us."  Id
explaining  this,  he  says :  "  Atxato?  before  God  is  one  who  does  not
merit  punishment ;  who  is  free  from  guilt  in  the  sight  of  God's
eternal  law,  either  because  he  is  absolutely  sinless,  or  holy,
never  having  contracted  guilt,  as  in  the  case  of  Christ ;  or  be-
cause his  guilt  has  been  expiated,  and  his  lack  of  the  righteous-
ness demanded  by  the  law  is  covered.  AiKaovv  means  either  to
acknowledge  as  Sitcatos  one  who  is  Sifcatos ;  or  to  make  SUato^  one
who  is  not  Suv-ato?."  The  latter  is  its  sense  when  used  in  refer-
ence to  sinners.  In  their  case,  "  The  act  of  Stxatwo-ts  consists,
(1.)  In  the  gift  of  the  expiation  (Siihne)  made  by  Christ  with-
out the  sinner's  cooperation  ;  and  (2.)  In  jfche  gift  of  the  absolute
righteousness  of  Christ,  in  such  sense  that  God  does  not  regard
the  sinner  as  he  is  by  nature,  and  by  self-development,  but  as  he
is  as  implanted  in  Christ."  There  is,  therefore,  a  clear  distinction
to  be  made  between  the  appropriation  of  righteousness,  and  the
procuring  of  righteousness.  "  Christ  has  procured  and  merited
(erworben  hat)  righteousness  by  his  historical  hfe  and  suffer-
ings ;  it  is  applied  by  Christ's  being  born  in  us."  "  The  Scrip-
tures," he  says,  "  do  not  speak  of  Christ's  righteousness  being
imputed  to  us.  They  teach  that  it  comes  upon  us  (Rom.  v.  18),
and  becomes  our  own.  It  is  our  own,  however,  because  the  per-
son of  Christ  becomes  ours  in  the  strictest  possible  (allerrealsten,
the  most  literal)  sense  of  the  terms."  What  Ebrard  contends
for  is  (die  substantielle  Lebenseinheit  mit  der  Person  Christi),
the  substantial  oneness  of  life  with  Christ ;  ^  or,  as  he  often  else-
where expresses  it,  "  the  mysterious,  mystical  communication  of
the  substance  of  Christ  to  the  central  substance  of  man."  ^  Dr.
Alexander  Schweizer  of  Ziirich,^  although  differing  much  ia
other  points  from  Ebrard,  agrees  with  him  in  this.  The  essen-
tial element  in  the  work  of  Christ,  he  says,  "  is  the  fomiding  and
upholding  a  community  animated  or  pervaded  by  his  thean-
thropic  life  (gottmenschlichen  Lebenspotenz).  Dr.  Nevin*  says,
"  Our  nature  reaches  after  a  true  and  real  union  with  the  nature
of  God,  as  the  necessary  complement  and  consummation  of  its
own  life.  The  idea  which  it  embodies  can  never  be  fuUy  actual-
ized, under  any  other  form.     The  incarnation  is  the  proper  com-

1  Christliche  Dogmatik,  ii.  i.  2,  §  443;  Konigsberg,  1852,  vol.  ii.  pp.  311,  312,  314.

2  Ibid.  p.  310.

8  Glaubenslekre,  Zurich,  1847,  vol.  ii.  p.  385.

*  Mystical  Presence,  Philadelphia,  1846,  pp.  200,  201.


§  11.]  MODERN  THEORIES.  203

pletion  of  humanity.  Christ  is  the  true  ideal  man."  "  The
incarnation  was  no  mere  theophany  ;  no  transient  Avonder  ;  no

iUusion  exhibited  to  the  senses The  Word  became  flesh  ;

not  a  single  man  only,  as  one  among  many ;  but  '  flesh,'  or  hu-
manity in  its  universal  conception.  How  else  could  He  be  the
principle  of  a  general  life,  the  origin  of  a  new  order  of  existence
for  the  human  world  as  such  ?  How  else  could  the  value  of  his
mediatorial  work  be  made  over  to  us  in  a  real  way,  by  a  true
imputation,  and  not  a  legal  fiction  only  ?  "  ^  "  Christianity  is  a
life,  not  only  as  revealed  at  first  in  Christ,  but  as  continued  also
in  the  Church.  It  flows  over  from  Christ  to  his  people,  always
in  this  form.  They  do  not  simply  bear  his  name  and  acknowl-
edge his  doctrine.  They  are  so  united  to  Him  as  to  have  part
in  the  substance  of  his  life  itself."  ^  He  had  before  said,^  that
"  by  the  hypostatical  union  of  the  two  natures  in  the  person  of
Jesus  Christ,  our  humanity  as  fallen  in  Adam  was  exalted  again
to  a  new  and  imperishable  divine  life."  "  The  object  of  the
incarnation  was  to  couple  the  human  nature  in  real  union  with
the  Logos,  as  a  permanent  source  of  life."  Again,*  "the  new
life  of  which  Christ  is  the  source  and  organic  principle,  is  in  all
respects  a  true  human  life  ;  .  .  .  .  not  a  new  humanity,  wholly
dissevered  from  that  of  Adam  ;  but  the  humanity  of  Adam  itself,
only  raised  to  a  higher  character,  and  filled  with  new  meaning

and  power,  by  its  union  with  the  divine  nature Christ's

life,  as  now  described,  rests  not  in  his  separate  person,  but  passes
over  to  his  people  ;  thus  constituting  the  Church,  which  is  his
body,  the  fulness  of  Him  that  filleth  all  in  all."  "  Christ  com-
municates his  own  life  substantially  to  the  soul  on  which  He  acts,
causing  it  to  grow  into  his  very  nature.  This  is  the  mystical
union  :  the  basis  of  our  whole  salvation  ;  the  only  medium  by
which  it  is  possible  for  us  to  have  an  interest  in  the  grace  of
Christ  under  any  other  view."  ^  With  his  substance,  his  life,
his  divine-human  nature  thus  communicated  to  the  soul  come
his  merit,  his  holiness,  his  power,  his  glory.  These  are  predi-
cates of  the  nature  which  becomes  ours,  constituting  our  personal
life  and  character.  Even  the  resurrection  is  to  be  effected,  not
by  the  power  of  Christ  operating  "  ab  extra,"  as  when  He  raised
Lazarus  from  the  dead,  but  by  "  a  new  divine  element,  intro-
duced into  our  nature  by  the  incarnation."  ®

1  Mystical  Presence,  Philadelphia,  1846,  pp.  210,  211.  2  ma,  p.  218.

8  lUd.  p.  165.  4  ihid.  p.  167.  6  Ihid.  p.  168.  6  Ihid.  p.  226.


204  PART  m.  Ch.  xvil— justification.

Objections  to  these  Theories.

In  opposition  to  these  views  it  may  be  said  very  briefly  in  the
way  of  recapitulation  of  what  has  been  more  fully  said  in  the
chapters  above  referred  to,  —

1.  That  this  is  a  philosophy.  The  scheme  has  its  entire  basis
in  a  philosophical  theory  as  to  the  nature  of  man  and  his  relation
to  God.  This  is  undeniable,  and  is  hardly  denied.  Dr.  Nevin
states  three  "  scientific  principles,"  ignorance  of  which  led  the
Reformers  to  a  misapprehension  and  imperfect  representation  of
Christianity,  and  the  recognition  of  which  and  of  their  applica-
tion to  theology,  enables  the  modern  theologian  to  set  forth  the
nature  and  plan  of  salvation  in  a  much  more  satisfactory  light.
Those  principles  are,  (1.)  The  true  import  of  organic  law.  The
Reformers  did  not  make  a  clear  distinction,  he  says,  "  between
the  idea  of  the  organic  law  which  constitutes  the  proper  iden-
tity of  a  human  body,  and  the  material  volume  it  is  found  to
embrace  as  exhibited  to  the  senses."  There  may  be,  therefore,
a  real  communication  of  Christ  and  even  of  his  body  to  his  peo-
ple without  a  communication  of  his  flesh.  (2.)  The  absolute
unity  involved  in  personality.  In  the  case  of  Clirist,  body,  soul,
and  divinity  are  united  in  "a  single  indivisible  life,"  so  that
where  the  one  is,  all  are.  To  communicate  Christ  to  the  soul  is
therefore  to  communicate  that  indivisible  life,  including  in  it  as
an  organizing,  organic  principle,  body,  soul,  and  divinity.  (3.)
The  distinction  between  individual  and  generic  life.  "  In  every
sphere  of  hfe,"  it  is  said,  "  the  individual  and  the  general  are
found  closely  united  in  the  same  subject."  The  acorn,  in  one
view,  is  only  a  single  existence  ;  but  it  includes  the  force  of  a  life
capable  of  reaching  far  beyond  itself.  The  hfe  of  a  forest  of  oaks
is  only  the  expansion  of  the  life  of  the  original  acorn,  "  and  the
whole  general  existence  thus  produced  is  bound  together,  in-
wardly and  organically,  by  as  true  and  close  a  unity  as  that
which  holds  in  any  of  the  single  existences  embraced  in  it,  sepa-
rately considered."  Thus  also  Adam,  in  one  view,  was  a  man ;
in  another,  he  was  the  man.  A  whole  world  of  separate  person-
alities lay  involved  in  his  life,  as  a  generic  principle  or  root.
'■''  Adam  lives  m  his  posterity  as  truly  as  he  has  ever  lived  in  his
own  person."  In  like  manner,  although  in  a  higher  form,  the
life  of  Christ  is  to  be  viewed  under  the  same  twofold  aspect.
In  one  view  the  Saviour  was  a  man  ;  but  in  another,  He  was  the
man,  "  the  Son  of  man,  in  whose  person  stood  revealed  the  true


§11.]  MODERN  THEORIES.  205

idea  of  humanity,  under  its  ultimate  and  most  comprehensive
form.  Without  any  loss  or  change  of  character  in  the  first  view,
his  life  is  carried  over  in  this  last  view  continually  into  the  per-
sons of  his  people.  He  lives  in  HimseK,  and  yet  lives  in  them
really  and  truly  at  the  same  time."  As  we  participate  in
Adam's  whole  nature,  soul  and  body,  so  the  people  of  Christ  par-
ticipate in  his  whole  nature,  body,  soul,  and  divinity.  These  are
one  indivisible  life  ;  and  that  one  theanthropic  life  is  communi-
cated to  believers  and  constitutes  them  Christians.  In  this  is  in-
cluded all  their  participation  in  the  righteousness,  merit,  and  glory
of  their  Redeemer.^

Behind  and  under  these  three  scientific  principles  there  is
another  without  which  the  three  mentioned  amount  to  nothing  ;
namely,  the  unity  of  God  and  man.  Man  in  his  highest  form ;
the  ideal  or  perfect  man  ;  He  in  whom  the  idea  of  humanity  is
fully  realized,  is  God.  What  does  it  amount  to,  if  we  admit  that
"  organic  law  "  constitutes  identity,  as  in  the  case  of  man ;  or  that
personality  includes  the  idea  of  "  one  indivisible  life  ;  "  that  in
man  there  is  not  one  life  of  the  body  and  another  of  the  soul,  that
these  are  only  different  manifestations  of  one  and  the  same  life  ;
that  the  soul  can  no  more  be  without  the  body  than  the  body
without  the  soul ;  and  that  in  Christ  there  is  not  one  hfe  of  the
divinity  and  another  of  his  humanity  ?  Suppose  we  deny  what
the  Church  in  all  ages  has  affirmed,  that  there  are  two  eVepyetat  in
Christ,  what  does  this  amount  to  ?  Or  what  does  it  avail  to
admit  the  realistic  doctrine  of  a  generic  life  ;  if  that  life  (one
and  indivisible)  be  merely  human,  Adamic  ?  How  can  it  redeem
us  ?  It  is  only  on  the  assumption  that  the  human  and  the  divine
are  one,  that  this  unity,  fully  realized  in  Christ,  constitutes  the
"  one  indivisible  life  "  which  passes  over  to  us  ;  that  it  has  any
redeeming  power  ;  and  that  it  exalts  man  from  his  degradation,
and  brings  him  back  to  conscious  as  well  as  real  unity  with  God.

This  theory  as  presented  by  Schleiermacher,  its  author  in  mod-
ern times,  was  undeniably  pantheistic ;  as  held  by  many  of  his
disciples,  it  is,  in  their  apprehension,  theistic.  In  either  form  the
leading  idea  of  the  identity  of  God  and  man  is  retained.^  Christ
is  the  ideal  man.  In  Him  the  idea  of  humanity  is  fully  realized  ;
and  therefore  He  is  God.  The  manifestation  of  God  in  the  form
of  man,  belongs  to  the  divine  nature.     The  incarnation  is  entirely

1  See  Mystical  Presence,  section  first  of  the  Scientific  Statement.

2  See  this  clearly  presented  in  Dr.  Ullmann's  paper  on  "  The  Distinctive  Character  of
Christianity,"  in  the  Studien  und  Kritiken  for  January,  1845,  translated  by  Dr.  Nevin  and
prefixed  as  a  Preliminary  Essay  to  his  work  on  7^7(6  Mystlccd  Presence.


206  PART  III.     Ch.   XVIL— justification.

independent  of  the  fall  of  man  ;  or,  admitting  that  the  failure  of
the  race  to  reach  its  true  ideal  in  the  first  instance  was  the  oc-
casion of  a  new,  special,  and  supernatural  intervention,  yet  the
whole  end  of  that  intervention  was  to  realize  the  original  idea  of
humanity  as  God  made  flesh.

The  watchword  of  this  whole  system  is,  in  the  language  of  Dr.
Ullmann,  "  The  life  of  Christ  is  Christianity ;  "  i.  e.,  the  one
indivisible  life  of  Christ ;  the  life  of  God  in  the  form  of  humanity.
And  that  life  as  communicated  to  men  brings  them  to  this  real,
substantial  hfe  union  with  God.  "  What,"  asks  Dr.  Ullmann,
"  is  that  in  the  personality  of  Christ  by  which  He  is  constituted
a  perfect  Saviour  in  the  way  of  atonement  and  redemption  ?  We
reply  generally,  his  own  substantial  nature,  at  once  human  and
divine ;  his  hfe  filled  with  all  the  attributes  of  God,  and  repre-
senting at  the  same  time  the  highest  conception  of  nature  and
man  ;  complete  and  self-sufficient  in  its  own  fulness,  and  yet  by
this  fulness  itself  the  free  principle  of  a  new  corresponding  life-
process,  in  the  way  of  self-communication,  for  the  human  world.
This  life  itself,  however,  has  again  its  central  heart,  to  which  es-.
pecially  we  must  look  for  the  pecuhar  being  of  Christ.  Here  the
whole  theology  of  the  present  time,  in  all  its  different  tendencies,
may  be  said  to  have  but  one  voice.  That  which  constitutes  the
special  being  of  Christ,  makes  Him  to  be  what  He  is  and  gives
Him  thus  his  highest  significance  for  the  world,  is  the  absolute
unity  of  the  divine  and  human  in  his  nature.  Deity  and  man-
hood in  Him  come  fully  together  and  are  made  one.  This  is  the
last  ground  of  Christianity.  Here  above  all  we  are  to  look  for  its
distinctive  character."  He  goes  on  to  show  that  on  this  point  all
are  agreed.  God  and  man  are  one.  The  difference  is  between
the  pantheistic  and  the  Christian  view  which  acknowledges  a
personal  God  and  a  positive  revelation.  "  For  the  whole  ap-
prehension of  Christianity,  we  may  say,  not  only  that  much,  but
that  all  depends  on  the  question,  which  of  these  views  shall  be
adopted  ;  whether  this  central  fact  shall  be  regarded  as  a  general
'  unity  of  the  divine  and  human '  realizing  itself  in  the  conscious-
ness of  the  race  as  such,  or  be  conceived  of  as  a  concrete  '  union
of  God  and  man,'  that  actuahzes  itseff  from  a  definite  point  and
only  under  certain  moral  conditions."  ^  That  is,  whether  God  is
incarnate  in  the  race  or  in  the  Church.  According  to  the  latter
view,  the  life  of  Christ,  his  human  life,  "  filled  with  all  the  attri-
butes of  God,"  passes  over  to  his  people,  by  a  process  of  natural

1  See  Nevin's  Mystical  Presence,  pp.  27,  28,  29.


§11.]  MODERN   THEORIES.  207

de\elopinent.  As  we  are  fallen  men  by  partaking  of  the  nature
or  generic  life  of  Adam,  we  are  God-men,  and  therefore  redeemed
by  partaking  of  the  divine  human  nature  or  generic  life  of  Christ.

That  the  oneness  of  God  and  man  is  the  ultimate  principle  on
which  this  'irepov  evayyiXiov  rests,  is  obvious  not  only  from  the  gen-
eral character  of  the  philosophy  from  which  it  is  derived,  but  also
from  the  fact  that  everything  is  made  to  depend  upon  the  life  of
Christ  becoming  the  hfe  of  his  people,  not  by  his  controlling  their
life  by  his  Spirit  dwelling  in  them,  but  by  a  substantial  union
and  identification  of  their  life  with  his,  of  them  with  Him.  We
can  measurably  understand  what  is  meant  by  life,  by  organic  life,
by  a  life  principle  or  force  which  develops  itself,  and  communi-
cates and  transmits  itself  in  a  given  form.  We  know  what  is
meant  when  it  is  said  that  the  life  of  the  acorn  is  developed  into
an  oak,  and  communicated  to  other  acorns,  and  thus  to  other  oaks
in  endless  succession  and  boundless  multiphcation.  But  here  the
essential  idea  is  the  unity  and  sameness  of  the  hfe  transmitted.
You  cannot  combine  the  "  organic  law,"  or  life,  of  the  apple
with  that  of  the  acorn,  so  that  the  hfe  transmitted  should  be  "  an
acorn-apple-life."  Much  less  can  you  combine  the  organic  life
principle  of  an  animal  with  that  of  the  acorn,  so  as  to  produce  an
"  acorn-bovine,"  or,  "  an  acorn-equine  life."  Least  of  all  can  you
combine  the  intellectual  life  of  man  with  that  of  the  oak,  so  as  to
have  a  "  human-oak-life."  Therefore  if  the  life  of  God  and  the  life
of  man  be  so  combined  as  to  constitute  one  life  and  that  a  divine-
human  life,  then  God  and  man  must  be  one  ;  i.  e.,  one  substance,
one  life  differently  manifested.  Those  who  press  the  modern  doc-
trine of  the  correlation  of  forces  to  the  extreme  of  making  thought
and  gravity  identical,  may  accept  these  conclusions.  With  them
the  universe  and  all  it  contains,  all  its  physical,  mental,  aesthetic,
moral,  and  religious  phenomena  are  to  be  referred  to  one  and  the
same  force  variously  modified.  The  same  force  modified  by  the
brain  produces  all  the  phenomena  of  mind  ;  as  modified  by  animal
tissues,  all  the  phenomena  of  animal  life  ;  and  as  modified  by  veg-
etable organisms  all  the  phenomena  of  vegetable  life,  —  a  theory
which  has  been  annihilated  as  by  a  bolt  from  heaven  by  the  sin-
gle question  :  Where  is  the  brain  which  elaborated  the  mind,
which  framed  the   universe  ?

It  may  indeed  be  said,  and  is  said  by  modern  theologians,
that  God  became  man,  and  therefore  man  may  become  God.
God  and  man,  they  say,  were  so  united  as  to  become  one  nature
or  life  in  the  person  of  Christ.     But  this  is  contrary  to  Scripture


208  PART  m.   Ch.  xvn.— justification.

and  to  the  faith  of  the  Church  universal.  There  is  not  a  histor-
ical Church  on  earth,  and  never  has  been,  whose  creed  does  not
teach  that  in  the  person  of  Clirist  two  distinct  natures  or  sub-
stances are  united  ;  that  He  was  born,  not  merely  "  per,"  but  "  ex
matre  sua  Maria,"  of  her  substance  ;  that  He  is  as  man  consub-
stantial  with  men,  as  God  consubstantial  with  the  Father  ;  or  as
the  Apostle  expresses  it,  Kara  aapKa  He  is  the  son  of  David,  Kara
irvevtia  the  Son  of  God.  Humanity  and  divinity  in  Him  are  no
more  identified  or  reduced  to  one  life,  than  soul  and  body  in  man
are  identified  or  reduced  to  one  life.

This  whole  modern  theory  of  the  Gospel  rests,  therefore,  ulti-
mately on  the  idea  of  the  identity  of  God  and  man  ;  that  man  is
a  "  modus  existendi  "  of  God.

The  grand  objection  to  this  scheme  is  that  it  is  a  philosophy.
It  is  a  product  of  the  human  mind.  It  is  the  wisdom  of  the
world.  It  is  the  recent  philosophy  of  the  speculative  school  of
Germany,  clothed  in  Bibhcal  forms  and  phrases.  The  reason
why  the  Reformers  did  not  present  the  plan  of  salvation  in  this
form,  is  declared  to  be  that  they  were  ignorant  of  modern  philos-
ophy. It  is  because  Hegel  thought  that  the  Gospel  admitted  of
being  cast  into  the  mould  of  his  philosophy  that  he  pronounced
Christianity  to  be  the  absolute  religion.  All,  therefore,  that  the
Bible  says  of  the  "  wisdom  of  the  wise,"  "  of  the  wisdom  of  men,"
of  "  the  wisdom  of  the  world,"  of  "  philosophy  as  a  vain  deceit,"
applies,  and  was  intended  to  apply  to  this  scheme  and  to  all  of
like  nature.  "  To  the  poor  the  gospel  is  preached."  The  Gos-
pel is  designed  for  babes  and  sucklings.  He  that  runs  may  read
and  understand  it.  This  system  not  one  man  in  ten  thousand
can  understand.

These   Theories   Unscriptural.

2.  The  second  great  objection  to  this  scheme  is  that  it  is  un-
scriptural. The  Bible  tells  us  that  Christ  saves  us  as  a  priest
This  a  child  can  understand.  He  knows  that  a  priest  takes  the
place  of  those  for  whom  he  acts  ;  that  he  approaches  God  in  their
behalf  ;  that  he  makes  expiation  for  sin  ;  that  he  does  what
satisfies  the  demands  of  God's  justice  against  the  sinner,  so  that
He  can  be  just  and  yet  justify  the  ungodly.  He  knows  that  a
priest  saves,  not  by  what  he  does  in  us,  not  by  imparting  his  life
to  us,  but  by  what  he  does  for  us  ;  by  an  objective,  and  not  by  a
subjective  work.  "What  there  is  of  an  inward  work,  and  that  is
much  and  absolutely  necessary,  is  not  the  work  of  a  priest,  imder


§  11.]  MODERN  THEORIES.  209

•whicli  aspect  the  work  of  Christ  is  so  prominently  presented  in
the  Scriptures.  Again,  Christ  saves  us  as  a  sacrifice  ;  but  a  sacri-
fice is  a  substitute  ;  it  bears  the  sins  of  the  offender  ;  dies  in  his
stead,  and  by  its  vicarious  death  dehvers  the  offerer  from  the
penalty  which  he  had  incurred.  A  sacrifice  is  not  a  symbol  of  an
inward  conflict  between  good  and  evil ;  its  proximate  design  is
not  to  effect  a  subjective  change  in  the  sinner  ;  it  does  not  produce
or  communicate  a  new  principle  of  Hfe,  much  less  its  own  generic
life  to  the  offerer  by  which  his  real  redemption  is  effected.

In.  like  manner  the  Bible  teaches  that  Christ  gave  Himself  as  a
ransom  for  many.  But  a  ransom  is  a  price  paid.  Those  dehvered
by  it  are  bought.  They  are  delivered  by  purchase.  A  ransom
meets  and  satisfies  the  claims  of  a  third  party.  This  is  its  es-
sential idea,  and  cannot  be  omitted  without  rejecting  the  very
truth,  which  the  Scriptures,  in  the  use  of  the  term,  design  to
teach.  This  again  is  an  objective  work.  It  is  something  which
the  person  redeemed  neither  does,  nor  inwardly  experiences ;  but
which  is  done  for  him  and  without  him  and  not  in  him.

Moreover,  the  whole  idea  of  redemption,  the  primary  truth
taught  in  setting  forth  Christ  as  a  Redeemer,  is  that  He  delivers
his  people  not  by  power,  not  by  instruction,  not  by  moral  influ-
ence, not  by  any  subjective  change  wrought  in  them,  and  not  by
any  new  form  of  life  imparted  to  them,  but  by  purchase.  This
is  the  signification  and  the  meaning  of  the  word.  The  words
d7ro/\('Tpaicr(.9,  XvTpovu,  dyopa^eti',  i^aynpd^eiv,  are  never  used  in  Scrip-
ture in  reference  to  the  work  of  Christ  in  any  other  sense  than
that  of  deliverance  by  purchase  or  payment  of  a  ransom  ;  and
to  substitute  any  other  mode  of  deliverance,  is  to  put  man's
thoughts  in  the  place  of  God's  truth  ;  it  is  to  substitute  the  hu-
man for  the  divine  ;  the  worthless  for  the  priceless.

Moreover,  Christ  is  constantly  represented  as  a  rock,  a  refuge,
a  hiding  place.  The  duty  required  of  sinners  is  trust ;  relying
on  Him  and  his  work,  as  something  out  of  themselves  on  which  to
place  their  hope  toward  God.

These    Theories  lead  Men  to  trust  to   themselves.

3.  This  introduces  the  third  great  objection  to  this  scheme.
It  makes  redemption  subjective.  It  is  what  we  are  ;  what  we  be-
come ;  it  is  the  Christ  within  us  ;  the  new  heart,  the  new  nature,
the  new  hfe,  the  divine-human  life  of  Christ,  or  whatever  else  it
may  be  called,  which  is  at  once  the  ground  of  our  justification
and  the  source  of  sanctification.     This  is  utterly  inconsistent  with

VOL.   lU.  14


210  PART  III.     Ch.  XVII.  —  justification.

the  Bible,  and  with  the  experience  of  the  people  of  God  in  all
ages  and  under  all  dispensations.  In  no  instance  are  beUevers
represented  as  trusting  to  what  is  within  them,  but  to  what  is
without  them.  The  Protestant  doctrine,  as  we  have  seen,  makes
full  provision  for  an  inward  work  of  deliverance  from  the  power
of  sin,  as  well  as  for  redemption  from  the  curse  of  the  law ;  for
sanctification  as  well  as  for  justification.  But  it  does  not  con-
found the  two,  neither  does  it  refer  either  or  both  to  the  new  prin-
ciple of  hfe,  the  new  seed  or  leaven  implanted  or  inserted  which
works  as  "  an  organic  law,"  and  by  a  regular  process  of  develop-
ment, as  natural  as  the  operation  of  any  other  law.  The  whole
work  of  the  Spirit  is  ignored  in  this  new  theory  of  redemption.
What  in  the  Bible  is  referred  to  the  Spirit  of  God  is,  by  the
theologians  of  this  class,  referred  to  the  "  divine-human  "  nature
of  Christ.  The  latter,  and  not  the  former,  is  the  proximate  and
efficient  source  of  holiness  of  heart  and  life.  "  Christ,"  says  Dr.
Nevin,  "  does  dwell  in  us,  by  his  Spirit ;  but  only  as  his  Spirit
constitutes  the  very  form  and  power  of  his  own  presence  as  the
incarnate  and  everlasting  Word."  ^  That  is,  the  Spirit  is  the
power  of  the  incarnate  Word,  i.  <?.,  of  the  divine-human  hfe  of
Christ.  "  The  life,"  he  adds,  "  thus  wrought  in  our  souls  by  his
agency,  is  not  a  production  out  of  nothing,  but  the  very  life  of
Jesus  Himself  organically  continued  in  this  way  over  into  our
persons."  "  It  is  with  the  mediatorial  life  of  Christ  that  the
Christian  salvation,  in  the  form  now  contemplated,  is  concerned.
In  this  is  comprehended  the  entire  new  creation  revealed  by  the
Gospel :  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  and  all  the  benefits  He  has
procured  for  his  people.  But  the  mediatorial  life,  by  the  com-
munication of  which  only  all  this  grace  is  made  to  pass  over  to
men,  is  one  and  undivided  ;  "  and  this  life,  as  he  goes  on  to  show,
includes  his  body,  soul,  and  divinity.  To  the  same  effect,^  it  is
said,  "•  That  the  whole  spiritual  life  of  the  Christian,  including
the  resurrection  of  his  body,  is  thus  organically  connected  with
the  mediatorial  life  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  might  seem  to  be  too
plainly  taught  in  the  New  Testament  to  admit  of  any  question  ;
and  yet  we  find  many  slow  to  allow  the  mystery,  notwithstand-
ing. A  very  connnon  view  appears  to  be,  that  the  whole  salva-
tion of  the  Gospel  is  accomplished  in  a  more  or  less  outward  and
mechanical  way,  by  supernatural  might  and  power,  rather  than
by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  as  a  revelation  of  a  new  historical  life
in  the  person  of  the  believer  Himself,  So  we  have  an  outward
1  Mystical  Presence,  pp.  197,  198.  ^  Jbid.  p.  228,  note.


§11.]  MODERN   THEORIES.  211

imputation  of  righteousness  to  begin  witli ;  a  process  of  sanctifica-
tion  carried  forward  by  the  help  of  proper  spiritual  machinery
brought  to  bear  on  the  soul,  including  perhaps,  as  its  basis,  the
notion  of  an  abrupt  creation  '  de  novo,'  by  the  fiat  of  the  Holy
Ghost ;  and  finally,  to  croAvn  all,  a  sudden  unprepared  refabrica-
tion  of  the  body,  to  be  superadded  to  the  life  of  the  spirit  already
complete  in  its  state  of  glory."     The  doctrines  of  justification  by
the  imputation  of  the  righteousness  of  Christ ;  of  the  regenera-
tion and  sanctification  of  the  soul  by  the  supernatural  power  of
the  Spirit,  and  the  resurrection  of  the  body  by  the  power  of  God
at  the  last  day,  are  rejected  and  despised  ;  and  the  doctrine  sub-
stituted for  them  is,  that  the  divine-human  life  of  Christ,  as  a  new
organic  law,  develops  itself  in  the  Church,  just  as  the  life  of  the
acorn  develops  itself  in  the  oak  and  in  the  forest,  by  a  natural,
historical  process,  so  that  the  members  of  the  Church,  in  virtue  of
their  participation  of   this  life,  are  justified  and  sanctified,  and
their  bodies  (since  the  life  of  Christ  is  a  human  life  actuahzing
itself  outwardly  in  a  body  as  well  as  inwardly  in  a  soul),  ulti-
mately raised  from    the    dead,  are   fashioned   after  the  glorious
body  of    Christ.     The   resurrection  of   the   body  is   as  much  a
natural  pi'ocess  as  the  development  of  a  seed  into  a  flower,  or  of
a  grub  into  a  butterfly.     This  is  Dr.  Nevin's  own  illustration :
"  The  birth  of  the  butterfly,  as  it  mounts  in  the  air  on  wings  of
light,  is  comparatively  sudden,  too  ;  but  this  is  the  revelation  only
of  a  life  which  had  been  gradually  formed  for  this  efflorescence
before,  under  cover  of   the  vile,  unsightly   larve."     "  The  new
creation,"  he  says,  "  is  indeed  supernatural ;    but  as  such  it  is
strictly  conformable  to  the  general  order  and  constitution  of  life.
It  is  a  new  creation  in  Christ  Jesus,  not  by  Him  in  the  way  of
mere  outward  power.    The  subjects  of  it  are  saved,  only  by  being
brought  within   the    sphere  of  his  life,  as  a  regular,  historical,
divine-human  process,  in  the  Church.     The  new  nature  implanted
in  them  at  their  regeneration,  is  not  a  higher  order  of  existence
framed  for  them  at  the  moment  out  of  nothing  by  the  fiat  of
God,  but  truly  and  strictly  a  continuation  of  Christ's  life  over  in
their  persons."  ^

This  is  the  modern  view  of  Christianity  introduced  by  Schleier-
macher,  modified  more  or  less  by  his  disciples,  and  which  has
passed  over  into  England  and  into  this  country.  Humanity  as
revealed  in  Adam  as  a  generic  hfe  was  too  feeble.  Its  devel-
opment failed  and  would  have  ever  failed  to   reach  the   ideal.

1  Mystical  Presence,  pp.  228,  229.


212  PART  m.   ch.  xvn.  — justification.

Therefore  God  interposed  and  interrupted  the  process  of  natural
development  by  the  production  of  a  new  ideal  man  containing  in
himself  a  generic  life,  a  seed,  a  principle,  an  organic  law,  which
develops  itself  in  the  Church  by  a  historical  process,  just  as  the
life  of  Adam  developed  itself  in  his  posterity.  We,  therefore,  are
justified,  not  by  what  Christ  did,  but  by  his  life  in  us,  which  is  as
truly  and  properly  our  life,  as  the  hfe  we  derived  from  Adam  is
our  own  life.  We  must  stand  before  God  to  be  justified  or  con-
demned, accepted  or  rejected,  on  the  ground  of  what  we  are.
We  have  nothing  to  offer  but  our  own  subjective,  inherent  char-
acter such  as  it  is.  The  man  is  to  be  pitied  who  dares  to  do  this.
It  is  surely  better  to  agree  with  Paul,  who  renounced  his  own
righteousness,  liis  own  goodness,  everything  pertaining  to  him-
self, everything  subjective,  and  trusted  only  and  confidently  to
the  righteousness  of  Christ  received  by  faith.


CHAPTER   XVIII.

SANCTIFICATION.

§  1.  Its  Nature.

SANCTIFICATION  in  the  Westminster  Catechism  is  said  to  be
"  the  work  of  God's  free  grace,  whereby  we  are  renewed  in  the
whole  man  after  the  image  of  God,  and  are  enabled  more  and
more  to  die  unto  sin  and  live  unto  righteousness."

Agreeably  to  this  definition,  justification  differs  from  sanctifi-
cation,  (1.)  In  that  the  former  is  a  transient  act,  the  latter  a
progressive  work.  (2.)  Justification  is  a  forensic  act,  God  act-
ing as  judge,  declaring  justice  satisfied  so  far  as  the  believing  sin-
ner is  concerned,  whereas  sanctification  is  an  effect  due  to  the
divine  efficiency.  (3.)  Justification  changes,  or  declares  to  be
changed,  the  relation  of  the  sinner  to  the  justice  of  God  ;  sanc-
tification involves  a  change  of  character.  (4.)  The  former,
therefore,  is  objective,  the  latter  subjective.  (5.)  The  former  is
founded  on  what  Christ  has  done  for  us ;  the  latter  is  the  effect
of  what  He  does  in  us.  (6.)  Justification  is  complete  and  the
same  in  all,  while  sanctification  is  progressive,  and  is  more  com-
plete in  some  than  in  others.

Sanctification  is  declared  to  be  a  work  of  God's  free  grace.
Two  things  are  included  in  this.  First,  that  the  power  or  influ-
ence by  which  it  is  carried  on  is  supernatural.  Secondly,  that
granting  this  influence  to  any  sinner,  to  one  sinner  rather  than
another,  and  to  one  more  than  to  another,  is  a  matter  of  favour.
No  one  has  personally,  or  in  himself,  on  the  gromid  of  anything
he  has  done,  the  right  to  claim  this  divine  influence  as  a  just  rec-
ompense, or  as  a  matter  of  justice.

It  is  a  Supernatural   Work.

In  representing,  in  accordance  with  Scripture,  sanctification  as
a  supernatural  work,  or  as  a  work  of  grace,  the  Church  intends  to
deny  the  Pelagian  or  Rationalistic  doctrine  which  confounds  it
with  mere  moral  reformation.  It  not  unfrequently  happens  that
men  who  have  been  immoral  in  their  lives,  change  their  whole


214  PART  m.     Ch.   XVIII.  — SANCTIFICATIO NT.

course  of  living.  They  become  outwardly  correct  in  tlieir  de-
portment, temperate,  pure,  honest,  and  benevolent.  This  is  a
great  and  praiseworthy  change.  It  is  in  a  high  degree  beneficial
to  the  subject  of  it,  and  to  all  with  whom  he  is  connected.  It  may
be  produced  by  different  causes,  by  the  force  of  conscience  and
by  a  regard  for  the  authority  of  God  and  a  dread  of  his  disap-
probation, or  by  a  regard  to  the  good  opinion  of  men,  or  by  the
mere  force  of  an  enlightened  regard  to  one's  own  interest.  But
whatever  may  be  the  proximate  cause  of  such  reformation,  it
falls  very  far  short  of  sanctification.  The  two  things  differ  in
nature  as  much  as  a  clean  heart  from  clean  clothes.  Such  exter-
nal reformation  may  leave  a  man's  inward  character  in  the  sight
of  God  unchanged.  He  may  remain  destitute  of  love  to  God,  of
faith  in  Christ,  and  of  all  holy  exercises  or  affections.

Nor  is  sanctification  to  be  confounded  with  the  effects  of  moral
culture  or  discipline.  It  is  very  possible,  as  experience  proves,  by
careful  moral  training,  by  keeping  the  young  from  all  contami-
nating influences,  and  by  bringing  them  under  the  forming  influ-
ences of  right  principles  and  good  associates,  to  preserve  them
from  much  of  the  evil  of  the  Avorld,  and  to  render  them  like  the
young  man  in  the  Gospel  whom  Jesus  loved.  Such  training  is
not  to  be  undervalued.  It  is  enjoined  in  the  Word  of  God.  It
cannot,  however,  change  the  nature.  It  cannot  impart  life.  A
faultless  statue  fashioned  out  of  pure  marble  in  all  its  beautj'',  is
far  below  a  living  man.

The  word  supernatural,  as  before  said,  is  used  in  two  senses.
First,  for  that  which  is  above  nature,  and  by  nature  is  meant
everything  out  of  God.  An  effect,  therefore,  is  said  to  be  super-
natural, in  the  production  of  which  nature  exercises  no  efficiency.
But  secondly,  the  word  is  often  used  to  mark  the  distinction  be-
tween the  providential  efiiciency  of  God  operating  according  to'
fixed  laws,  and  the  voluntary  agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The
Bible  makes  a  wide  distinction  between  the  providence  of  God
and  the  operations  of  his  grace.  The  difference  between  the
two  is,  in  some  repects,  analogous  to  that  between  the  efficiency
of  a  law,  or  of  a  uniformly  acting  force,  and  the  agency  of  a  per-
son. The  one  is  ordered,  the  other  is  exercised  from  time  to
time,  the  Spirit  distributing  his  gifts  to  every  one  severally  as  He
wills.  In  the  providential  agency  of  God,  the  effects  produced
never  transcend  the  power  of  second  causes  as  upheld  and  guided
by  Him  ;  whereas  the  effects  produced  by  the  Spirit  do  transcend
the  power  of  second  causes.     The  effect  is  due  neither  to  the


§1.]  ITS  NATURE.  215

power  of  the  trutli,  nor  to  that  of  the  rational  subject  in  whom
the  effect  is  produced.  It  is  due  to  the  power  of  God  over  and
above  the  power  of  the  second  causes  concerned.  The  effects  of
grace,  or  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  are  above  the  sphere  of  the  natural ;
they  belong  to  the  supernatural.  The  mere  power  of  truth,  ar-
gument, motive,  persuasion,  or  eloquence  cannot  produce  repent-
ance, faith,  or  holiness  of  heart  and  life.  Nor  can  these  effects
be  produced  by  the  power  of  the  mil,  or  by  all  the  resources  of
man,  however  protracted  or  skilful  in  their  application.  They
are  the  gifts  of  God,  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit.  Paid  may  plant
and  A  polios  water,  but  it  is  God  who  gives  the  increase.

In  this  latter  sense  of  the  word  supernatural,  the  cooperation
of  second  causes  is  not  excluded.  When  Christ  opened  the  eyes
of  the  blind  no  second  cause  interposed  between  his  volition  and
the  effect.  But  men  work  out  their  own  salvation,  while  it  is
God  who  worketh  in  them  to  will  and  to  do,  according  to  his
own  good  pleasure.  In  the  work  of  regeneration,  the  soul  is  pas-
sive. It  cannot  cooperate  in  the  communication  of  spiritual  life.
But  in  conversion,  repentance,  faith,  and  growth  in  grace,  all  its
powers  are  called  into  exercise.  As,  however,  the  effects  pro-
duced transcend  the  efficiency  of  our  fallen  nature,  and  are  due
to  the  agency  of  the  Spirit,  sanctification  does  not  cease  to  be
supernatural,  or  a  work  of  grace,  because  the  soul  is  active  and
cooperating  in  the  process.

Proof  of  its  Supernatural   Character.

That  sanctification  is  a  supernatural  work  in  the  sense  above
stated  is  proved,  —

1.  From  the  fact  that  it  is  constantly  referred  to  God  as  its
author.  It  is  referred  to  God  absolutely,  or  to  the  Father,  as  in
1  Thessalonians  v.  23,  "  The  very  God  of  peace  sanctify  you
wholly."  Hebrews  xiii.  20,  21,  "  The  God  of  peace  that  brought
again  from  the  dead  our  Lord  Jesus  .  .  .■  .  make  you  perfect  in
every  good  work  to  do  his  will,  working  in  you  that  which  is
well  pleasing  in  his  sight."  It  is  also  referred  to  the  Son,  as  in
Titus  ii.  14,  He  "  gave  himself  for  us,  that  he  might  ....
purify  unto  himself  a  peculiar  people  zealous  of  good  works."
Ephesians  v.  25,  He  "  loved  the  church  and  gave  himself  for  it,
that  he  might  sanctify  and  cleanse  it  with  the  washing  of  water  by
the  word,  that  he  might  present  it  to  himseK  a  glorious  church,
not  having  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing ;  but  that  it
should  be  holy  and  without  blemish."     Predominantly  sanctifica-


216  PART  III.   ch.  xvm.  —  sanctification.

tion  IS  referred  to  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  his  peculiar  work  in  the
economy  of  redemption.  Hence  He  is  called  the  Spirit  of  all
grace  ;  the  Spirit  of  joy,  of  peace,  of  love,  of  faith,  and  of  adoption.
All  Christian  graces  are  set  forth  as  fruits  of  the  Spirit.  We
are  said  to  be  born  of  the  Spirit,  and  by  Him  to  be  enlightened,
taught,  led,  and  cleansed.  We  are  said  to  be  in  the  Spirit,  to
live,  to  walk,  and  to  rejoice  in  the  Spirit.  The  Spirit  dwells  in
the  people  of  God,  and  is  the  abiding  source  of  all  the  actings  of
that  spiritual  life  which  He  implants  in  the  soul.  The  Bible
teaches  that  the  Son  and  Spirit  are  in  the  Holy  Trinity  subordi-
nate to  the  Father,  as  to  their  mode  of  subsistence  and  operation,
although  the  same  in  substance,  and  equal  in  power  and  glory.
Hence  it  is  that  the  same  work  is  often  attributed  to  the  Father,
to  the  Son,  and  to  the  Spirit ;  and  as  the  Father  and  Son  operate
through  the  Spirit,  the  effects  due  to  the  agency  of  God  are  re-
ferred specially  to  the  Holy  Ghost.

This  reference  of  sanctification  to  God  proves  it  to  be  a  super-
natural work,  because  the  insufficiency  of  second  causes  to  pro-
duce the  effect  is  declared  to  be  the  ground  of  this  reference.
It  is  because  men  cannot  cleanse  or  heal  themselves,  that  they
are  declared  to  be  cleansed  and  healed  by  God.  It  is  because
rites,  ceremonies,  sacraments,  truth,  and  moral  suasion,  cannot
bring  the  soul  back  to  God,  that  it  is  said  to  be  transformed,  by
the  renewing  of  the  mind,  through  the  power  of  the  Spirit,  into
the  image  of  God.  We  are,  therefore,  declared  to  be  God's  work-
manship, created  unto  good  works.  And  it  is  not  we  that  live,
but  Christ  that  liveth  in  us.

All  Holy  Exercises  referred  to  the  Spirit  as  their  Author.

2.  This  reference  of  sanctification  to  God  as  its  author,  the
more  decisively  proves  the  supernatural  character  of  the  work,
because  the  reference  is  not  merely  general,  as  when  the  wind  and
rain,  and  the  production  of  vegetable  and  animal  life,  are  referred
to  his  universal  providential  agency.  The  reference  is  special.
The  effect  is  one  which  the  Scriptures  recognize  as  not  within  the
sphere  of  second  causes,  and  therefore  ascribe  to  God.  They
recognize  the  free  agency  of  man  ;  they  acknowledge  and  treat
him  as  a  moral  and  rational  being  ;  they  admit  the  adaptation  of
of  truth  to  convince  the  understanding,  and  of  the  motives  pre-
sented to  determine  the  ^vill  and  to  control  the  affections,  and
nevertheless  thoy  teach  that  these  secondary  causes  and  influences
are  utterly  ineffectual  to  the  conversion  and  sanctification  of  the


§  1.]  ITS  NATURE.  217

soul,  without  the  demonstration  of  the  Spirit.  The  sacred  writ-
ers, therefore,  constantly  pray  for  this  divine  influence,  "  extrin-
secus  accidens,"  to  attend  the  means  of  grace  and  to  render  them
effectual,  as  well  for  sanctification  as  for  regeneration  and  conver-
sion. Every  such  prayer,  every  thanksgiving  for  gi'ace  imparted,
every  recognition  of  the  Christian  virtues  as  fruits  of  the  Spirit,
and  gifts  of  God,  are  so  many  recognitions  of  the  great  truth
that  the  restoration  of  man  to  the  image  of  God  is  not  a  work
of  nature,  either  originated  or  carried  on  by  the  efficiency  of  sec-
ond causes,  but  is  truly  and  properly  supernatural,  as  due  to  th©
immediate  power  of  the  Spirit  producing  effects  for  which  second
causes  are  inadequate.

We  are  taught  to  pray  for  Repentance^  Faith,  and  other  Graces.

3.  We  accordingly  find  the  Apostle  and  the  sacred  writers
generally,  referring  not  only  regeneration,  the  communication
of  spiritual  life  to  those  spiritually  dead,  but  the  continuance  of
that  life  in  its  activity  and  growth,  not  merely  to  the  power  of
God,  but  to  his  almighty  power.  Paul  prays  in  Ephesians  i.  19,
that  his  readers  might  know  "  what  is  the  exceeding  greatness  of
his  power  to  us-ward  who  believe  according  to  the  working  of
his  mighty  power,  which  he  wrought  in  Christ  when  he  raised  him
from  the  dead."  The  same  almighty  power  which  was  exhibited
in  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  is  exercised  in  the  spiritual  resurrec-
tion of  the  believer.  And  as  the  power  which  raised  Christ  from
the  dead  was  exercised  in  his  ascension  and  glorification  ;  so  also
the  same  power,  according  to  the  Apostle,  which  is  exerted  in  the
spiritual  resun-ection  of  the  believer,  is  exercised  in  carrying  on
his  sanctification,  which  is  inward  and  real  glorification.  Accord-
ingly, in  the  same  Epistle  (iii.  7),  he  ascribes  all  the  grace  whereby
he  was  fitted  for  the  apostleship,  "  to'  the  effectual  working  of  his
poAver."  And  further  on  (ver.  20),  to  encourage  the  people  of  God
to  pray  for  spiritual  blessings,  he  reminds  them  of  his  omnipotence
Avhereby  He  was  "  able  to  do  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that
we  ask  or  think,  according  to  the  power  that  worketh  in  us."
It  is  almighty  power,  therefore,  and  not  the  impotence  of  second-
ary influences,  which  works  in  the  believer  and  carries  on  the
work  of  his  salvation.

They  who  are  in  Christ,  therefore,  are  new  creatures.  They
are  created  anew  in  Christ  Jesus.  This  does  not  refer  exclu-
sively to  their  regeneration,  but  to  the  process  by  which  the  sin-
ner is  transformed  into  the  image  of  Christ.


218  PART  m.    Ch.  XVIII.  —  sanctification.

Argument  from  the  Believer^  s  Union  with  Christ.

4.  All  that  the  Scriptures  teach  concernmg  the  union  between
the  believer  and  Christ,  and  of  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit,
proves  the  supernatural  character  of  our  sanctification.  Men  do
not  make  themselves  holy ;  their  holiness,  and  their  growth  in
grace,  are  not  due  to  their  own  fidelity,  or  firmness  of  purpose,  or
watchfulness  and  diligence,  although  all  these  are  required,  but
to  the  divine  influence  by  which  they  are  rendered  thus  faithful,
watchful,  and  diligent,  and  which  produces  in  them  the  fruits  of
righteousness.  Without  me,  saith  our  Lord,  ye  can  do  nothing.
As  the  branch  cannot  bear  fi-uit  of  itseK,  except  it  abide  in  the
vine,  no  more  can  ye,  except  ye  abide  in  me.  The  hand  is  not
more  dependent  on  the  head  for  the  continuance  of  its  vitahty,
than  is  the  believer  on  Christ  for  the  continuance  of  spiritual  life
in  the  soul.

Argument  from  related  Doctrines.

5.  This,  however,  is  one  of  those  doctrines  which  pervade  the
whole  Scriptures.  It  follows  of  necessity  from  what  the  Bible
teaches  of  the  natural  state  of  man  since  the  fall ;  it  is  assumed,
asserted,  and  implied  in  all  that  is  revealed  of  the  plan  of  salva-
tion. By  their  apostasy,  men  lost  the  image  of  God  ;  they  are
born  in  a  state  of  ahenation  and  condemnation.  They  are  by  na-
ture destitute  of  spiritual  life.  From  this  state  it  is  as  impossible
that  they  should  deliver  themselves,  as  that  those  in  the  grave
should  restore  life  to  their  wasted  bodies,  and  when  restored,
continue  and  invigorate  it  by  their  own  power.  Our  whole  sal-
vation is  of  Christ.  Those  who  are  in  the  grave  hear  his  voice.
They  are  raised  by  his  power.  And  when  they  live  it  is  He  who
lives  in  them.  This  is  the  doctrine  which  our  Lord  Himself  so
clearly  and  so  frequently  teaches,  and  upon  which  his  Apostles  so
strenuously  insist.  St.  Paul  in  the  sixth  and  seventh  chapters  of
his  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  where  he  treats  of  this  subject  "  in  ex-
tenso,"  has  for  his  main  object  to  prove  that  as  we  are  not  justified
for  our  own  righteousness,  so  we  are  not  sanctified  by  our  own
power,  or  by  the  mere  objective  power  of  the  truth.  The  law,  the
revelation  of  the  will  of  God,  including  everything  which  He  has
made  known  to  man  either  as  a  rule  of  obedience  or  as  exliibiting
his  own  attributes  and  purposes,  was  equally  inadequate  to  secure
justification  and  sanctification.  As  it  demanded  perfect  obedience
and  pronounced  accursed  those  who  continue  not  in  all    things


§  1.]  ITS  NATURE.  219

wi-itten  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them,  it  can  only  condemn.
It  can  never  pronounce  the  sinner  just.  And  as  it  was  a  mere
outward  presentation  of  the  truth,  it  could  no  more  change  the
heart  than  light  could  give  sight  to  the  blind.  He  winds  up  his
discussions  of  the  subject  with  the  exclamation,  "  O  wretched
man  that  I  am  !  who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this
deatli  ?  I  thank  God,  tlrrough  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  His  de-
liverance was  to  be  eflfected  by  God  through  Jesus  Christ.  We
learn  from  the  eighth  chapter  that  he  was  fvdly  confident  of  this
deliverance,  and  we  learn  also  the  ground  on  which  that  confi-
dence rested.  It  was  not  that  he  had  in  regeneration  received
strength  to  sanctify  himself,  or  that  by  the  force  of  his  own  will,
or  by  the  diligent  use  of  natural  or  appointed  means,  the  end  was
to  be  accomplished  without  further  aid  from  God.  On  the  con-
trary, his  confidence  was  founded,  (1.)  On  the  fact  that  he  had
been  delivered  from  the  law,  from  its  curse,  and  from  its  inexor-
able demand  of  perfect  obedience.  (2.)  On  the  fact  that  he  had
received  the  Spirit  as  the  source  of  a  new,  divine,  and  imperishable
life.  (3.)  This  life  was  not  a  mere  state  of  mind,  but  the  life  of
God,  or  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelhng  in  the  heart ;  which  indwelling
secured  not  only  the  continuance  of  "  spiritual  mindedness,"  but
even  the  resurrection  from  the  dead.  "  For  if,"  says  he,  "  the
spirit  of  him  that  raised  up  Jesus  from  the  dead  dwell  in  you,  he
that  raised  up  Christ  from  the  dead  shall  also  quicken  (^ojoTrotT^o-et,
make  alive  with  the  life  of  Christ)  your  mortal  bodies  by  his  Spirit
that  dwelleth  in  you."  (i.)  Being  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God  as
the  controlling  principle  of  their  inward  and  outward  life,  believers
are  the  sons  of  God.  The  Spirit  of  God  which  is  in  them  being
the  Spirit  of  the  Son,  is  in  them  the  Spirit  of  sonship,  i.  e.,  it  pro-
duces in  them  the  feelings  of  sons  toward  God,  and  assures  them
of  their  title  to  all  the  privileges  of  his  children.  (5.)  The  sanc-
tification  and  ultimate  salvation  of  believers  are  secured  by  the
immutable  decree  of  God.  For  those  "  whom  he  did  foreknow  he
also  did  predestinate  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  his  Son  ;
....  moreover,  whom  he  did  predestinate,  them  he  also  called :
and  whom  he  called,  them  he  also  justified :  and  whom  he  justified,
them  he  also  glorified."  This  last  includes  sanctification ;  the  in-
ward glory  of  the  soul ;  the  divine  image  as  retraced  by  the  Spirit
of  God,  which  to  and  in  the  behever  is  the  Spirit  of  glory.  (1
Pet.  iv.  14.)  The  indwelling  of  the  Spirit  renders  the  believer
glorious.  (6.)  The  infinite  and  immutable  love  which  induced
God  to  give  his  own  Son  for  our  salvation,  renders  it  certain  that


220  PART  in.   ch.  xvni  —  sanctification.

nil  otlier  tilings  shall  be  given  necessary  to  keep  tliem  in  the  love
and  fellowship  of  God.  Salvation,  therefore,  from  beginning  to
end  is  of  grace  ;  not  only  as  being  gratuitous  to  the  exclusion  of
all  merit  on  the  part  of  the  saved,  but  also  as  being  carried  on  by
the  continued  operation  of  grace,  or  the  supernatural  power  of
the  Spirit.  Christ  is  our  all.  He  is  of  God  made  unto  us  wis-
dom, and  righteousness,  sanctification,  and  redemption.

§  2.    Wherein  it  consists.

Admitting  sanctification  to  be  a  supernatural  work,  the  ques-
tion still  remains,  What  does  it  consist  in  ?  What  is  the  nature
of  the  effect  produced  ?  The  truth  which  lies  at  the  foundation
of  all  the  Scriptural  representations  of  this  subject  is,  that  regen-
eration, the  quickening,  of  which  believers  are  the  subject,  while
it  involves  the  implanting,  or  communication  of  a  new  principle
or  form  of  life,  does  not  effect  the  immediate  and  entire  de-
liverance of  the  soul  from  all  sin.  A  man  raised  from  the  dead
may  be  and  long  continue  to  be,  in  a  very  feeble,  diseased,  and
suffering  state.  So  the  soul  by  nature  dead  in  sin,  may  be  quick-
ened together  with  Christ,  and  not  be  rendered  thereby  perfect.
The  principle  of  hfe  may  be  very  feeble,  it  may  have  much  in
the  soul  uncongenial  with  its  nature,  and  the  conflict  between  the
old  and  the  new  life  may  be  protracted  and  painful.  Such  not
only  may  be,  but  such  in  fact  is  the  case  in  all  the  ordinary  ex-
perience of  the  people  of  God.  Here  we  find  one  of  the  charac-
teristic and  far-reaching  differences  between  the  Romish  and
Protestant  systems  of  doctrine  and  religion.  According  to  the
Romish  system,  nothing  of  the  nature  of  sin  remains  in  the  soul
after  regeneration  as  effected  in  baptism.  From  this  the  theology
of  the  Church  of  Rome  deduces  its  doctrine  of  the  merit  of  good
works  ;  of  perfection  ;  of  works  of  supererogation ;  and,  indi-
rectly, those  of  absolution  and  indulgences.  But  according  to
the  Scriptures,  the  miiversal  experience  of  Cliristians,  and  the
undeniable  evidence  of  history,  regeneration  does  not  remove  all
sm.  The  Bible  is  filled  with  the  record  of  the  inward  conflicts  of
the  most  eminent  of  the  servants  of  God,  with  their  falls,  their
backslidings,  their  repentings,  and  their  lamentations  over  their
continued  shortcomings.  And  not  only  this,  but  the  nature  of
the  conflict  between  good  and  evil  in  the  heart  of  the  renewed
is  fully  described,  the  contending  principles  are  distinguished  and
designated,  and  the  necessity,  difficulties,  and  perils  of  the  strug-
gle, as  well  as  the  method  of  properly  sustaining  it,  are  set  forth


§  2.]  WHEREIN  IT  CONSISTS.  221

repeatedly  and  in  detail.  In  the  seventh  chapter  of  the  Epistle
to  the  Romans  we  have  an  account  of  this  conflict  elaborately  de-
scribed by  the  Apostle  as  drawn  from  his  own  experience.  And
the  same  thing  occurs  in  Galatians  v.  16,  17.  This  I  say  then,
"  Walk  in  the  Spirit,  and  ye  shall  not  fulfil  the  lust  of  the  flesh.
For  the  flesh  lusteth  against  the  Spirit,  and  the  Spirit  against  the
flesh :  and  these  are  contrary  the  one  to  the  other :  so  that  ye
cannot  do  the  things  that  ye  would."  Again,  in  Ephesians  vi.  10
-18,  in  view  of  the  conflict  which  the  believer  has  to  sustain  with
the  evils  of  his  own  heart  and  with  the  powers  of  darkness,  the
Apostle  exhorts  his  brethren  to  be  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the

power  of  his  might "  Wherefore  take  unto  you  the  whole

armour  of  God,  that  ye  may  be  able  to  withstand  in  the  evil  day,
and  having  done  all,  to  stand."

With  the  teachings  of  the  Scriptures  the  experience  of  Chris-
tians in  all  ages  and  in  all  parts  of  the  Church  agrees.  Their
writings  are  filled  with  the  account  of  their  struggles  with  the  re-
mains of  sin  in  their  own  hearts  ;  with  confessions  ;  with  prayers
for  divine  aid ;  and  with  longings  after  the  final  victory  over  all
evil,  which  is  to  be  experienced  only  in  heaven.  The  great  hghts
of  the  Latin  Church,  the  Augustines  and  Bernards  and  Pensions,
were  humble,  penitent,  struggling  behevers,  even  to  the  last,  and
with  Paul  did  not  regard  themselves  as  having  aheady  attained,
or  as  being  already  perfect.  And  what  the  Bible  and  Christian
experience  prove  to  be  true,  history  puts  beyond  dispute.  Either
there  is  no  such  thing  as  regeneration  in  the  world,  or  regenera-
tion does  not  remove  all  sin  from  those  who  are  its  subjects.

Putting  off  the  Old,  and  putting  on  the  New  Man.

Such  being  the  foundation  of  the  Scriptural  representations
concerning  sanctification,  its  nature  is  thereby  determined.  As
all  men  since  the  fall  are  in  a  state  of  sin,  not  only  sinners  be-
cause guilty  of  specific  acts  of  transgression,  but  also  as  depraved,
their  nature  perverted  and  corrupted,  regeneration  is  the  infusion
of  a  new  principle  of  life  in  this  corrupt  nature.  It  is  leaven
introduced  to  diffuse  its  influence  gradually  through  the  whole
mass.  Sanctification,  therefore,  consists  in  two  things :  first,
the  removing  more  and  more  the  principles  of  evil  still  infecting
our  nature,  and  destroying  their  power ;  and  secondly,  the
growth  of  the  principle  of  spiritual  life  until  it  controls  the
thoughts,  feelings,  and  acts,  and  brings  the  soul  into  conformity
to  the  image  of  Christ.


222  PART  m.   Ch.  xvni.  —  sanctification.

Paul  details  his  own  Experience  in  Romans  vii.  7—25.

The  classical  passages  of  the  New  Testament  on  the  nature
of  this  work  are  the  following,  —  Romans  vii.  7-25.  This  is  not
the  place  to  enter  upon  the  discussion  whether  the  Apostle  in
this  passage  is  detailing  his  own  experience  or  not.  This  is  the
interpretation  given  to  it  by  Augustinians  in  all  ages.  It  is
enough  to  say  here  that  the  "  onus  probandi  "  rests  on  those  who
take  the  opposite  view  of  the  passage.  It  must  require  very
strong  proof  that  the  Apostle  is  not  speaking  of  himself  and
giving  his  own  experience  as  a  Christian,  when,  —

1.  His  object  in  the  whole  discussion  thi-oughout  the  sixth  and
seventh  chapters,  is  to  prove  that  the  law,  as  it  cannot  justify,
neither  can  it  sanctify  ;  as  it  cannot  deliver  from  the  guilt,  so
neither  can  it  free  us  from  the  power  of  sin.  This  is  not  the
fault  of  the  law,  for  it  is  spiritual,  holy,  just,  and  good.  It  com-
mends itself  to  the  reason  and  the  conscience  as  being  just  what
it  ought  to  be  ;  requiring  neither  more  nor  less  than  what  it  is
right  should  be  demanded,  and  threatening  no  penalty  which
want  of  conformity  to  its  requirements  does  not  justly  merit.
What  is  the  effect  of  the  objective  presentation  of  the  ideal  stand-
ard of  moral  perfection  to  which  we  are  bound  to  be  conformed
on  the  penalty  of  death  ?  The  Apostle  tells  us  that  the  effects
are,  (a.)  A  great  increase  of  loiowledge.  He  had  not  known
lust,  had  not  the  law  said.  Thou  shalt  not  covet.  (5.)  A  sense
of  moral  pollution,  and  consequently  of  shame  and  self-loathing,
(c.)  A  sense  of  guilt,  or  of  just  exposure  to  the  penalty  of  the
law  of  which  our  whole  lives  are  a  continued  transgression.  (cZ.)
A  sense  of  utter  helplessness.  The  standard,  although  holy,  just,
and  good,  is  too  high.  We  know  we  never  can  of  ourselves  con-
form to  it ;  neither  can  we  make  satisfaction  for  past  transgres-
sion, (g.)  The  result  of  the  whole  is  despair.  The  law  kills.
It  destroys  not  only  all  self-complacency,  but  all  hope  of  ever
being  able  to  effect  our  own  salvation.  (/.)  And  thus  it  leads
the  sinner  to  look  out  of  himself  for  salvation;  i.  e.,  for  deliver-
ance from  the  power,  as  well  as  tlie  guilt  of  sin.  The  law  is  a
schoolmaster  to  lead  us  to  Christ.  Why  could  not  the  Apostle
say  all  this  of  himself  ?  There  is  nothing  here  inconsistent  with
the  character  or  experience  of  a  true  believer.  It  is  as  true  of
the  Christian  that  he  is  not  sanctified  by  moral  suasion,  by  the
objective  presentation  of  truth,  as  it  is  of  the  unrenewed  sinner,
that  he  is  not  regenerated  by  any  such  outward  influences.     It  is,


§  2.]  WHEREIN  IT   CONSISTS.  223

therefore,  perfectly  pertinent  to  the  Apostle's  object  that  he
should  detail  his  own  experience  that  sanctification  could  not  be
effected  by  the  law.

2.  But  in  the  second  place,  he  uses  the  first  person  singular
throughout.  He  says,  "  I  had  not  known  sin,"  "  I  died,"  "  The
commandment  which  was  ordained  to  life,  I  found  to  be  unto
death,"  "  I  consent  unto  the  law  that  it  is  good,"  "  I  delight  in
the  law  of  God  after  the  inward  man,  but  I  see  another  law  in
my  members,"  etc.,  etc.  We  are  bound  to  understand  the  Apos-
tle to  speak  of  himself  in  the  use  of  such  language,  unless  there
be  something  in  the  context,  or  in  the  nature  of  what  is  said,  to
render  the  reference  to  him  impossible.  It  has  been  shown,  how-
ever, that  the  context  favours,  if  it  does  not  absolutely  demand
the  reference  of  what  is  said  to  the  Apostle  himself.  And  that
there  is  nothing  in  the  experience  here  detailed  inconsistent  with
the  experience  of  the  true  children  of  God,  is  evident  from  the
fact  that  the  same  humility,  the  same  sense  of  guilt,  the  same
consciousness  of  indwelling  sin,  the  same  conviction  of  helpless-
ness, here  expressed,  are  found  in  all  the  penitential  portions  of
Scripture.  Job,  David,  Isaiah,  and  Nehemiah,  make  the  same
confessions  and  lamentations  that  the  Apostle  here  makes.  The
same  is  true  of  believers  since  the  coming  of  Christ.  There  is
no  oiie  of  them,  not  even  the  holiest,  who  is  not  constrained  to
speak  of  himseK  as  Paul  here  speaks,  unless  indeed  he  chooses  to
give  the  language  of  the  Apostle  a  meaning  which  it  was  never
intended  to  express.

3.  While  the  passage  contains  nothing  inconsistent  -with  the
experience  of  true  believers,  it  is  inconsistent  with  the  experi-
ence of  unrenewed  men.  They  are  not  the  subjects  of  the  in-
ward conflict  here  depicted.  There  is  in  them  indeed  often  a
strviggle  protracted  and  painful,  between  reason  and  conscience
on  the  one  side,  and  evil  passion  on  the  other.  But  there  is  not
in  the  unrenewed  that  utter  renunciation  of  self,  that  looking
for  help  to  God  in  Christ  alone,  and  that  delight  in  the  law  of
God,  of  which  the  Apostle  here  speaks.

Wliat  Romans  vii.  7-25  teaches.

Assuming,  then,  that  we  have  in  this  chapter  an  account  of  the
experience  of  a  true  and  even  of  an  advanced  Christian,  we  learn
that  in  every  Christian  there  is  a  mixture  of  good  and  evil ;  that
the  original  corruption  of  nature  is  not  entirely  removed  by  re-
generation ;  that  although  the  believer  is  made  a  new  creature,


224  PART  III.    Ch.   XVIII.  — SANCTIFICATION.

is  translated  from  the  kingdom  of  darkness  into  the  kingdom  of
God's  dear  Son,  he  is  but  partially  sanctified ;  that  his  selfishness,
pride,  discontent,  worldliness,  still  cleave  to,  and  torment  him ;
that  they  effectually  prevent  his  "  doing  what  he  would,"  they
prevent  his  living  without  sin,  they  prevent  his  intercourse  mth
God  being  as  intimate  and  uninterrupted  as  he  could  and  does
desire.  He  finds  not  only  that  he  is  often,  even  daily,  overcome
so  as  to  sin  in  thought,  word,  and  deed,  but  also  that  his  faith,
love,  zeal,  and  devotion  are  never  such  as  to  satisfy  his  own  con-
science ;  much  less  can  they  satisfy  God.  He  therefore  is  daily
called  upon  to  confess,  repent,  and  pray  for  forgiveness.  The
Apostle  designates  these  conflicting  principles  which  he  found
within  himself,  the  one,  indwelling  sin ;  "  sin  that  dwelleth  in
me ;  "  or  the  "  law  in  my  members  ;  "  "  the  law  of  sin ; "  the
other,  "  the  mind,"  "  the  law  of  my  mind,"  "  the  inward  man."
His  internal  self,  the  Ego,  was  sometimes  controlled  by  the  one,
and  sometimes  by  the  other.

We  learn,  further,  that  the  control  of  the  evil  principle  is  re-
sisted, that  subjection  to  it  is  regarded  as  a  hateful  bondage,  that
the  good  principle  is  in  the  main  victorious,  and  that  through
Christ  it  will  ultimately  be  completely  triumphant.  Sanctifica-
tion  therefore,  according  to  this  representation,  consists  in  the
gradual  triumph  of  the  new  nature  implanted  in  regeneration
over  the  evil  that  still  remains  after  the  heart  is  renewed.  In
other  words,  as  elsewhere  expressed,  it  is  a  dying  unto  sin  and
living  unto  righteousness.     (1  Pet.  ii.  24.)

Cfalatians  v.  16-26.

Another  passage  of  like  import  is  Galatians  v.  16-26,  "  Walk
in  the  Spirit,  and  ye  shall  not  fulfil  the  lust  of  the  flesh.  For
the  flesh  lusteth  against  the  Spirit,  and  the  Spirit  against  the
flesh  ;  and  these  are  contrary  the  one  to  the  other  :  so  that  ye
cannot  do  the  things  that  ye  would,"  etc.,  etc.  The  Scriptures
teach  that  the  Spirit  of  God  dwells  in  his  people,  not  only  col-
lectively as  the  Church,  but  individually  in  every  believer,  so
that  of  every  Christian  it  may  be  said,  he  is  a  temple  of  the
Holy  Ghost.  God  is  said  to  dwell  wherever  He  permanently
manifests  his  presence,  whether  as  of  old  in  the  temple,  or  in
the  hearts  of  his  people,  in  the  Church,  or  in  heaven.  And  as
the  Spirit  dwells  in  believers,  He  there  manifests  his  life-giving,
controlling  power,  and  is  in  them  the  principle,  or  source,  or  con-
trolling influence  which  determines  their  inward  and  outward  life.


§2.]  WHEREIN  IT   CONSISTS.  225

By  tlie  flesh,  in  the  doctrinal  portions  of  Scripture,  is  never,  un-
less the  word  be  hmited  by  the  context,  meant  merely  our  sen-
suous nature,  but  our  fallen  nature,  i.  e.,  our  nature  as  it  is  in
itself,  apart  from  the  Spirit  of  God.  As  our  Lord  says  (John
iii.  6),  "  That  which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh  ;  and  that  which
is  born  of  the  Spirit  is  spirit."  These  then  are  the  principles
which  "  are  contrary  the  one  to  the  other."  No  man  can  act
independently  of  both.  He  must  obey  one. or  the  other.  He
may  sometimes  obey  the  one,  and  sometimes  the  other ;  but  one
or  the  other  must  prevail.  The  Apostle  says  of  believers  that
they  have  crucified  the  flesh  with  its  affections  and  lusts.  They
have  renounced  the  authority  of  the  evil  principle  ;  they  do  not
willingly,  or  of  set  purpose,  or  habitually  yield  to  it.  They
struggle  against  it,  and  not  only  endeavour,  but  actually  do  cru-
cify it,  although  it  may  die  a  long  and  painful  death.

Uphesians  iv.  22-24.

In  Ephesians  iv.  22-24,  we  are  told  to  "  put  off  concerning  the
former  conversation  the  old  man,  which  is  corrupt  according  to
the  deceitful  lusts  ;  and  be  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  your  mind  ;
and  "  put  ye  "  on  the  new  man,  which  after  God  is  created  in
righteousness  and  true  holiness."  By  the  old  man  is  to  be  un-
derstood the  former  seK  with  all  the  evils  belonging  to  its  natural
state.  This  was  to  be  laid  aside  as  a  worn  and  soiled  garment,
and  a  new,  pure  self,  the  new  man,  was  to  take  its  place.  This
change,  although  expressed  in  a  figure  borrowed  from  a  change
of  raiment,  was  a  profound  inward  change  produced  by  a  creating
process,  by  which  the  soul  is  new  fashioned  after  the  image  of
God  in  righteousness  and  holiness.  It  is  a  renewing  as  to  the
Spirit,  i.  e.,  the  interior  life  of  the  mind  ;  or  as  Meyer  and  Elli-
cott,  the  best  of  modern  commentators,  both  interpret  the  phrase,
"  By  the  Spirit "  (the  Holy  Spirit)  dwelling  in  the  mind.
This  is  a  transformation  in  which  believers  are  exhorted  to
cooperate  ;  for  which  they  are  to  labour,  and  which  is  therefore  a
protracted  work.  Sanctification,  therefore,  according  to  this  rep-
resentation, consists  in  the  removal  of  the  evils  which  belong  to
us  in  our  natural  condition,  and  in  being  made  more  and  more
conformed  to  the  image  of  God  through  the  gracious  influence  of
the  Spirit  of  God  dwelling  in  us.

It  is  not,  however,  merely  in  such  passages  as  those  above  cited
that  the  nature  of  sanctification  is  set  forth.  The  Bible  is  full  of
exhortations  and  commands  addressed  to  the  people  of  God,  to

VOL.  III.  15


226  PART  m.     Cn.   XVm.  —  SANCTIFICATION.

those  recognized  and  assumed  to  be  regenerate,  requiring  them,
on  the  one  hand,  to  resist  their  evil  passions  and  propensities,  to
lay  aside  all  malice,  and  wrath,  and  pride,  and  jealousy  ;  and  on
the  other,  to  cultivate  all  the  graces  of  the  Spirit,  faith,  love,
hope,  long-suffering,  meekness,  lowliness  of  mind,  and  brotherly
kindness.  At  the  same  time  they  are  reminded  that  it  is  God  who
worketh  in  them  both  to  will  and  to  do,  and  that  therefore  they
are  constantly  to  seek  his  aid  and  to  depend  upon  his  assistance.
It  follows  from  this  view  of  the  subject  that  sanctification  is  not
only,  as  before  proved,  a  supernatural  work,  but  also  that  it  does
not  consist  exclusively  in  a  series  of  a  new  kind  of  acts.  It  is
the  making  the  tree  good,  in  order  that  the  fruit  may  be  good.
It  involves  an  essential  change  of  character.  As  regeneration  is
not  an  act  of  the  subject  of  the  work,  but  in  the  language  of  the
Bible  a  new  birth,  a  new  creation,  a  quickening  or  communicat-
ing a  new  life,  and  in  the  language  of  the  old  Latin  Church,  the
infusion  of  new  habits  of  grace ;  so  sanctification  in  its  essential
nature  is  ]iot  holy  acts,  but  such  a  change  in  the  state  of  the  soul,
that  sinful  acts  become  more  infrequent,  and  holy  acts  more  and
more  habitual  and  controlling.  This  view  alone  is  consistent
with  the  Scriptural  representations,  and  with  the  account  given  in
the  Bible  of  the  way  in  which  this  radical  change  of  character  is
carried  on  and  consummated.

§  3.  The  Method  of  Sanctification.
It  has  already  been  shown  that  although  sanctification  does
not  exclude  all  cooperation  on  the  part  of  its  subjects,  but,  on  the
contrary,  calls  for  their  unremitting  and  strenuous  exertion,  it  is
nevertheless  the  work  of  God.  It  is  not  carried  on  as  a  mere
process  of  moral  culture  by  moral  means  ;  it  is  as  truly  supernat-
ural in  its  method  as  in  its  nature.  What  the  Bible  teaches  in
answer  to  the  question.  How  a  soul  by  nature  spiritually  dead,
being  quickened  by  the  mighty  power  of  God,  is  gradually  trans-
formed into  the  image  of  Christ,  is  substantially  as  follows,  —

The  Soul  is  led  to  exercise  Faith.

1.  It  is  led  to  exercise  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  to  re-
ceive Him  as  its  Saviour,  coimnitting  itself  to  Him  to  be  by  his
merit  and  grace  delivered  from  the  guilt  and  power  of  sin.  This
is  the  first  step,  and  secures  all  the  rest,  not  because  of  its  inlier-
ent  virtue  or  efficacy,  but  because,  according  to  the  covenant  of
grace,  or  plan  of  salvation,  which  God  has  revealed  and  which  He


§3.]  METHOD   OF   SAl^CTIFICATION.  227

has  pledged  Himself  to  carry  out,  He  becomes  bound  by  his
promise  to  accompHsh  the  full  salvation  from  sin  of  every  one
who  believes.

The  Effect  of  Union  with   Christ.

2.  The  soul  by  this  act  of  faith  becomes  united  to  Christ.
We  are  in  Him  by  faith.  The  consequences  of  this  union  are,
(a.)  Participation  in  his  merits.  His  perfect  righteousness,
agreeably  to  the  stipulations  of  the  covenant  of  redemption,  is
imputed  to  the  believer.  He  is  thereby  justified.  He  is  intro-
duced into  a  state  of  favour  or  grace,  and  rejoices  in  hope  of  the
glory  of  God.  (Rom.  v.  1-3.)  This  is,  as  the  Bible  teaches,
the  essential  preliminary  condition  of  sanctification.  While
under  the  law  we  are  under  the  curse.  While  under  the  curse
we  are  the  enemies  of  God  and  bring  forth  fruit  unto  death.  It
is  only  when  delivered  from  the  law  by  the  body  or  death  of
Christ,  and  united  to  Him,  that  we  bring  forth  fruit  unto  God.
(Rom.  vi.  8  ;  vii.  4-6.)  Sin,  therefore,  says  the  Apostle,  shall  not
reign  over  us,  because  we  are  not  under  the  law.  (Rom.  vi.  14.)
Deliverance  from  the  law  is  the  necessary  condition  of  deliv-
erance from  sin.  All  the  relations  of  the  believer  are  thus
changed.  He  is  translated  from  the  kingdom  of  darkness  and
introduced  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  sons  of  God.  Instead
of  an  outcast,  a  slave  under  condemnation,  he  becomes  a  child  of
God,  assured  of  his  love,  of  his  tenderness,  and  of  his  care.  He
may  come  to  Him  with  confidence.  He  is  brought  under  all  the
influences  which  in  their  full  effect  constitute  heaven.  He  there-
fore becoines  a  new  creature.  He  has  passed  from  death  to  life  ;
from  darkness  to  light,  from  hell  (the  kingdom  of  Satan)  to
heaven.  He  sits  with  Christ  in  heavenly  places.  (Eph.  ii.  6.)
(5.)  Another  consequence  of  the  union  with  Christ  effected  by
faith,  is  the  indwelling  of  the  Spirit.  Christ  has  redeemed  us
from  the  curse  of  the  law  by  being  made  a  curse  for  us,  in  order
that  we  might  receive  the  promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  (Gal.  iii.
13,  14.)  It  was  not  consistent  with  the  perfections  or  purposes
of  God  that  the  Spirit  should  be  given  to  dwell  with  his  saving  in-
fluences in  the  apostate  children  of  men,  until  Christ  had  made  a
full  satisfaction  for  the  sins  of  the  world.  But  as  with  God  there
are  no  distinctions  of  time,  Christ  was  slain  from  the  foundation  of
the  world,  and  his  death  availed  as  fully  for  the  salvation  of  those
who  lived  before,  as  for  that  of  those  who  have  Kved  since  his
coming  in   the   flesh.     (Rom.    iii.  25,  26  ;  Heb.  ix.  15.)     The


228  PART^  III.     Ch.   XVIII.  —  SANCTIFICATION.

Spirit  was  given  to  the  people  of  God  from  the  beginning.  But
as  our  Lord  says  (John  x.  10)  that  He  came  into  the  world  not
only  that  men  might  have  life,  but  that  they  might  have  it  more
abundantly,  the  effusion,  or  copious  communication  of  the  Spirit
is  always  represented  as  the  great  characteristic  of  the  Messiah's
advent.  (Joel  ii.  28,  29  ;  Acts  ii.  16-21  ;  John  vii.  38,  39.)  Our
Lord,  therefore,  in  his  last  discourse  to  his  disciples,  said  it  w^as
expedient  for  them  that  He  went  away,  for  "  if  I  go  not  away,
the  Comforter  (the  TlapaKX-qro';,  the  helper)  will  not  come  unto
you  ;  but  if  I  depart,  I  will  send  Him  unto  you."  (John  xvi.  7.)
He  was  to  supply  the  place  of  Christ  as  to  his  visible  presence,
carry  on  his  work,  gather  in  his  people,  transform  them  into  the
likeness  of  Christ,  and  communicate  to  them  all  the  benefits  of
his  redemption.  Where  the  Spirit  is,  there  Christ  is  ;  so  that,
the  Spirit  being  with  us,  Christ  is  with  us  ;  and  if  the  Spirit
dwells  in  us,  Christ  dwells  in  us.  (Rom.  -vdii.  9-11.)  In  par-
taking, therefore,  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  believers  are  partakers  of
the  life  of  Christ.  The  Spirit  was  given  to  Him  without  meas-
ure, and  from  Him  flows  down  to  all  his  members.  This  partici-
pation of  the  believer  in  the  life  of  Clirist,  so  that  every  believer
may  say  with  the  Apostle,  "  I  live ;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth
in  me  "  (Gal.  ii.  20),  is  prominently  presented  in  the  Word  of
God.  (Rom.  vi.  5  ;  vii.  4  ;  John  xiv.  19  ;  Col.  iii.  3,  4.)  The
two  great  standing  illustrations  of  this  truth  are  the  vine  and  the
human  body.  The  former  is  presented  at  length  in  John  xv.  1-8  ;
the  latter  in  1  Corinthians  xii.  11-27  ;  Romans  xii.  5  ;  Ephe-
sians  i.  22,  23  ;  iv.  15,  16  ;  v.  30 ;  Colossians  i.  18  ;  ii.  19  ;  and
frequently  elsewhere.  As  the  life  of  the  vine  is  diffused  through
all  the  branches,  sustaining  and  rendering  tliem  fruitful ;  and  as
the  life  of  the  head  is  diffused  through  all  the  members  of  the
body  making  it  one,  and  imparting  life  to  all,  so  the  life  of  Christ
is  diffused  through  all  the  members  of  his  mystical  body  making
them  one  body  in  Him  ;  having  a  common  life  with  their  common
head.  This  idea  is  urged  specially  in  Ephesians  iv.  15,  16,  where
it  is  said  that  it  is  from  Christ  that  the  whole  body  fitly  joined
together,  through  the  spiritual  influence  granted  to  every  part
according  to  its  measure,  makes  increase  in  love.  It  is  true  that
this  is  spoken  of  the  Church  as  a  whole.  But  what  is  said  of
Christ's  mystical  body  as  a  whole  is  true  of  all  its  members  sev-
erally. He  is  the  prophet,  priest,  and  king  of  the  Church  ;  but
He  is  also  the  prophet,  priest,  and  king  of  every  believer.  Our
relation  to  Him  is  individual  and  personal.     The  Church  as  a


§8.]  METHOD   OF   SANCTIFICATION.  229

whole  is  the  temple  of  God ;  but  so  is  eveiy  believer.  (1  Cor.
iii.  16  ;  vi.  19.)  The  Church  is  the  bride  of  Christ,  but  every
believer  is  the  object  of  that  tender,  peculiar  love  expressed  in
the  use  of  that  metaphor.  The  last  verse  of  Paul  Gerhardt's
hymn,  "  Ein  Liimmlein  geht  und  tragt  die-  Schuld,"  every  true
Christian  may  adopt  as  the  expression  of  his  own  hopes  :  —

"  Wann  endlich  ich  soil  treten  ein
In  deines  Reiches  Freuden,
So  soil  diess  Blut  mein  Purpur  seyn,
Ich  will  mich  darein  kleiden  ;
Es  soil  seyn  meines  Hauptes  Kron'
In  welcher  ich  will  vor  den  Thron
Des  hcichsten  Vaters  gehen,
Und  dir,  dem  er  mich  anvertraut,
Als  eine  wohlgeschmiickte  Braut,
An  deiner  Seiten  stehen."

The  Inward  Work  of  the  Spirit.

3.  The  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit  thus  secured  by  union
with  Christ  becomes  the  source  of  a  new  spiritual  life,  which
constantly  increases  in  power  until  everything  uncongenial  with
it  is  expelled,  and  the  soul  is  perfectly  transformed  into  the  image
of  Christ.  It  is  the  office  of  the  Spirit  to  enlighten  the  mind ;
or,  as  Paul  expresses  it,  "  to  enlighten  the  eyes  of  the  understand-
ing" (Eph.  i.  18),  that  we  may  know  the  things  freely  given  to
us  of  God  (1  Cor.  ii.  12)  ;  i.  g.,  the  things  which  God  has  re-
vealed ;  or,  as  they  are  called  in  v.  14,  "  The  things  of  the
Spirit  of  God."  These  things,  which  the  natural  man  cannot
know,  the  Spirit  enables  the  believer  "  to  discern,"  i.  e.,  to  ap-
prehend in  their  truth  and  excellence  ;  and  thus  to  experience
their  power.  The  Spirit,  we  are  taught,  especially  opens  the  eyes
to  see  the  glory  of  Christ,  to  see  that  He  is  God  manifest  in  the
flesh  ;  to  discern  not  only  his  divine  perfections,  but  his  love  to
us,  and  his  suitableness  in  all  respects  as  our  Saviour,  so  that
those  who  have  not  seen  Him,  yet  believing  on  Him,  rejoice  in
Him  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.  This  apprehension
of  Christ  is  transforming ;  the  soul  is  thereby  changed  into  his
image,  from  glory  to  glory  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord.  It  was
tliis  inward  revelation  of  Christ  by  which  Paul  on  his  way  to
Damascus  was  instantly  converted  from  a  blasphemer  into  a  wor-
shipper and  self-sacrificing  servant  of  the  Lord  Jesus.

It  is  not,  however,  only  one  object  which  the  opened  eye  of  the
believer  is  able  to  discern.  The  Spirit  enables  him  to  see  the
glory  of  God  as  revealed  in  his  works  and  in  his  word ;  the  holiness


230  PART  III.     Ch.   XVIIT.  —  SANCTIFICATION.

and  spirituality  of  the  law  ;  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin ;  his
own  guilt,  pollution,  and  helplessness  ;  the  length  and  breadth,  the
height  and  depth  of  the  economy  of  redemption ;  and  the  reality,
glory,  and  infinite  importance  of  the  things  unseen  and  eternal.
The  soul  is  thus  raised  above  the  world.  It  hves  in  a  higher
sphere.  It  becomes  more  and  more  heavenly  in  its  character  and
desires.  All  the  great  doctrines  of  the  Bible  concerning  God,
Christ,  and  things  spiritual  and  eternal,  are  so  revealed  by  this
inward  teaching  of  the  Spirit,  as  to  be  not  only  rightly  discerned,
but  to  exert,  in  a  measure,  their  proper  influence  on  the  heart
and  life.  Thus  the  prayer  of  Christ  (John  xvii.  17),  "  Sanctify
them  through  thy  truth,"  is  answered  in  the  experience  of  his
people.

G-od  calls  the  Crraces  of  Ms  People  into  Exercise.

4.  The  work  of  sanctification  is  carried  on  by  God's  giving
constant  occasion  for  the  exercise  of  all  the  graces  of  the  Spirit.
Submission,  confidence,  self-denial,  patience,  and  meekness,  as
well  as  faith,  hope,  and  love,  are  called  forth,  or  put  to  the  test,
more  or  less  effectually  every  day  the  believer  passes  on  earth.
And  by  this  constant  exercise  he  grows  in  grace  and  in  the  knowl-
edge of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  It  is,  however,  prin-
cipally by  calling  his  people  to  labour  and  suffer  for  the  advance-
ment of  the  Redeemer's  kingdom,  and  for  the  good  of  their
fellow-men,  that  this  salutary  discipline  is  carried  on.  The  best
Christians  are  in  general  those  who  not  merely  from  restless
activity  of  natural  disposition,  but  from  love  to  Clirist  and  zeal
for  his  glory,  labour  most  and  suffer  most  in  his  service.

The   Church  and  Sacraments  as  means  of  G-race.

5.  One  great  end  of  the  establishment  of  the  Church  on  earth,
as  the  communion  of  saints,  is  the  edification  of  the  people  of
God.  The  intellectual  and  social  life  of  man  is  not  developed  in
isolation  and  solitude.  It  is  only  in  contact  and  colUsion  with
his  fellow-men  that  his  powers  are  called .  into  exercise  and  his
social  virtues  are  cultivated.  Thus  also  it  is  by  the  Church-
life  of  believers,  by  their  communion  in  the  worship  and  service
of  God,  and  b}^  their  mutual  good  offices  and  fellowship,  that 'the
spiritual  life  of  the  soul  is  developed.  Therefore  the  Apostle
says,  "  Let  us  consider  one  another,  to  provoke  unto  love  and  to
good  works  :  not  forsaking  the  assembling  of  ourselves  together,
as  the  manner  of  some  is ;  but  exhorting  one  another ;  and  so


§4.]  GOOD   WORKS.  231

much  the  more  as  ye  see  the  day  approaching."     (Heb.  x.  24,
25.)

6.  The  Spirit  renders  the  ordinances  of  God,  the  word,  sacra-
ments, and  prayer,  effectual  means  of  promoting  the  sanctifi-
cation  of  his  people,  and  of  securing  their  ultimate  salvation.
These,  however,  must  be  more  fully  considered  in  the  sequel.

The  Kingly   Office  of  Christ.

1.  In  this  connection,  we  are  not  to  overlook  or  undervalue  the
constant  exercise  of  the  kingly  office  of  Christ.  He  not  only
reigns  over  his  people,  but  He  subdues  them  to  Himself,  rules
and  defends  them,  and  restrains  and  conquers  all  his  and  their
enemies.  These  enemies  are  both  inward  and  outward,  both  seen
and  unseen  ;  they  are  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil.  Tlie
strength  of  the  believer  in  contending  with  these  enemies,  is  not
his  own.  He  is  strong  only  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power  of
his  might.  (Eph.  vi.  10.)  The  weapons,  both  offensive  and
defensiA^e,  are  supplied  by  Him,  and  the  disposition  and  the  skill
to  use  them  are  his  gifts  to  be  sought  by  praying  without  ceasing.
He  is  an  ever  present  helper.  Whenever  the  Christian  feels  his
weakness  either  in  resisting  temptation  or  in  the  discharge  of  duty,
he  looks  to  Christ,  and  seeks  aid  from  Him.  And  all  who  seek
find.  When  we  fail,  it  is  either  from  self-confidence,  or  from
neglecting  to  call  upon  our  ever  present  and  almighty  King,  avIio
is  always  ready  to  protect  and  deliver  those  who  put  their  trust
in  Him.  But  there  are  dangers  which  we  do  not  apprehend,
enemies  whom  we  do  not  see,  and  to  which  we  would  become  an
easy  prey,  were  it  not  for  the  watchful  care  of  Him  who  came
into  the  world  to  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil,  and  to  bruise
Satan  under  our  feet.  The  Christian  runs  his  race  "  lookino-  unto
Jesus  ;  "  the  hfe  he  lives,  he  lives  by  faith  in  the  Son  of  God  ;  it
is  by  the  constant  worship  of  Christ ;  by  the  constant  exercise
of  love  toward  Him  ;  by  constant  endeavours  to  do  his  will ;  and
by  constantly  looking  to  Him  for  the  supply  of  grace  and  for  pro-
tection and  aid,  that  he  overcomes  sin  and  finally  attains  the  prize
of  the  high-calling  of  God.

§  4.  The  Fruits  of  Sanctification,  or  Crood  Works.

Their  Nature.

The  fruits  of  sanctification  are  good  works.  Our  Lord  says,
"  A  good  tree  bringeth  not  forth  corrupt  fruit  ;  neither  doth  a


232  PART  III.     Ch.   XVIII.  —  SANCTIFICATION.

corrupt  tree  bring  forth  good  fruit,  For  every  tree  is  known  by
his  own  fruit :  for  of  thorns  men  do  not  gather  figs,  nor  of  a  bram-
ble bush  gather  they  grapes."  (Luke  vi.  43,  44.)  By  good  works,
in  this  connection,  are  meant  not  only  the  inward  exercises  of
the  religious  life,  but  also  outward  acts,  such  as  can  be  seen  and
appreciated  by  others.

There  are  three  senses  in  which  works  may  be  called  good,  —

1.  When  as  to  the  matter  of  them  they  are  what  the  law  pre-
scribes. In  this  sense  even  the  heathen  perform  good  works  ;  as
the  Apostle  says,  Romans  ii.  14,  "  The  Gentiles  ...  do  by  na-
ture the  things  contained  in  the  law."  That  is,  they  perform  acts
of  justice  and  mercy.  No  man  on  earth  is  so  mcked  as  never,
in  this  sense  of  the  term,  to  be  the  author  of  some  good  works.
This  is  what  the  theologians  call  civil  goodness,  whose  sphere  is
the  social  relations  of  men.

2.  In  the  second  place,  by  good  works  are  meant  works  which
both  in  the  matter  of  them,  and  in  the  design  and  motives  of  the
agent,  are  what  the  law  requires.  In  other  words,  a  work  is  good,
when  there  is  nothing  either  in  the  agent  or  in  the  act  which  the
law  condemns.  In  this  sense  not  even  the  works  of  the  holiest  of
God's  people  are  good.  No  man  is  ever,  since  the  fall,  in  this
life,  in  such  an  inward  state  that  he  can  stand  before  God  and
be  accepted  on  the  ground  of  what  he  is  or  of  what  he  does.
All  our  righteousnesses  are  as  filthy  rags.  (Is.  Ixiv.  6.)  Paul
found  to  the  last  a  law  of  sin  in  his  members.  He  groaned  under
a  body  of  death.  In  one  of  his  latest  epistles  he  says  he  had  not
attained,  or  was  not  already  perfect,  and  all  Christians  are  re-
quired to  pray  daily  for  the  forgiveness  of  sin.  What  the  Scrip-
tures teach  of  the  imperfection  of  the  best  works  of  the  believer,
is  confirmed  by  the  irrepressible  testimony  of  consciousness.  It
matters  not  what  the  lips  may  say,  every  man's  conscience  tells
him  that  he  is  always  a  sinner,  that  he  never  is  free  from  moral
defilement  in  the  sight  of  an  infinitely  holy  God.  On  this  sub-
ject the  Form  of  Concord  ^  says,  "  Lex  Dei  credentibus  bona  opera
ad  eum  modum  praescribit,  ut  simul,  tanquam  in  speculo,  nobis
commonstret,  ea  omnia  in  nobis  in  hac  vita  adhuc  imperfecta  et
impura  esse ;  "  and  '^  "  Credentes  in  hac  \ata  non  perfecte,  com-
pletive vel  consummative  (ut  veteres  locuti  sunt)  renovantm-.  Et
quamvis  ipsorum  peccata  Christi  obedientia  absolutissima  con-
tecta  sint,  ut  credentibus  non  ad  damnationem   imputentur,  et

1  VI.  21  ;  Ha.se,  lAbri  Si/mbollci,  3cl  edit.  Lcipzii,',  184G,  p.  723.

2  VI.  7  ;  Ibid.  p.  719.


§4.]  GOOD  WORKS.  233

per  Spiritum  Sanctum  veteris  Adami  mortificatio  et  renovatio  in
spiritu  mentis  eorum  inclioata  sit :  tamen  vetus  Adam  in  ipsa  na-
tura,  omnibusque  illius  interioribus  et  exterioribns  viribus  adliuc
semper  inhseret."  Calvin  ^  says,  "  Seligat  ex  tota  sua  vita  sanc-
tus  Dei  servus,  quod  in  ejus  cursu  maxime  eximium  se  putabit
edidisse,  bene  revolvat  singulas  partes :  deprehendet  procul  dubio
alicubi  quod  carnis  putredinem  sapiat,  quando  numquam  ea  est
nostra  alacritas  ad  bene  agendum  quse  esse  debet,  sed  in  cursu
retardando  multa  debilitas.  Quanquam  non  obscuras  esse  maculas
videmus,  quibus  respersa  sint  opera  sanctorum,  fac  tamen  minutis-
simos  esse  nsevos  duntaxat  :  sed  an  oculos  Dei  niMl  offendent,
coram  quibus  ne  stellae  quidem  purae  sunt  ?  Habemus,  nee  unum
a  Sanctis  exire  opus,  quod,  si  in  se  censeatur,  non  mereatur  justam
opprobrii  mercedem . ' '

Romish  Doctrine  on  Good  Works.

Against  the  doctrine  that  the  best  works  of  the  believer  are
imperfect,  the  Romanists  are  especially  denunciatory.  And  with
good  reason.  It  subverts  their  whole  system,  which  is  founded
on  the  assumed  merit  of  good  works.  If  the  best  works  of  the
saints  merit  "  justam  opprobrii  mercedem"  (z.  e.,  condemnation),
they  cannot  merit  reward.  Their  argument  on  this  subject  is,
that  if  the  Protestant  doctrine  be  true  which  declares  the  best
works  of  the  believer  to  be  imperfect ;  then  the  fulfilment  of  the
law  is  impossible  ;  but  if  this  be  so,  then  the  law  is  not  binding  ;
for  God  does  not  command  impossibilities.  To  this  it  may  be  an-
swered, first,  that  the  objection  is  inconsistent  with  the  doctrine
of  Romanists  themselves.  They  teach  that  man  in  his  natural
state  since  the  fall  is  unable  to  do  anything  good  in  the  sight
of  God,  until  he  receives  the  grace  of  God  communicated  in
])aptism.  According  to  the  principle  on  which  the  objection  is
founded,  the  law  does  not  bind  the  unbaptized.  And  secondly,
the  objection  assumes  the  fundamental  principle  of  Pelagianism,
namely  that  ability  limits  obligation  ;  a  principle  which,  in  the^
sphere  of  morals,  is  contrary  to  Scripture,  consciousness,  and  the
common  judgment  of  mankind.  We  cannot  be  required  to  do
what  is  impossible  because  of  the  limitation  of  our  nature  as  creat-
ures, as  to  create  a  world,  or  raise  the  dead ;  but  to  love  God
perfectly  does  not  exceed  the  power  of  man  as  he  came  from
the  hands  of  his  maker.  It  is  not  absolutely,  but  only  relatively
impossible,  that  is,  in  relation  of  the  thing  commanded,  to  us  not

1  Institutio,  III.  xiv.  9  ;  edit.  Berlin,  183-i,  part  ii.  p.  37.


234  PART  m.    Ch.  XVIII.  —  sanctification.

as  men,  but  as  shiners.  Althovigh  it  is  essential  to  the  Romish
doctrine  of  merit,  of  indulgences,  of  works  of  supererogation,  and
of  purgatory,  that  the  renewed  should  be  able  perfectly  to  fulfil
the  demands  of  the  law,  nevertheless,  Romanists  themselves  are
compelled  to  admit  the  contrary.  Thus  Bellarmin  says,^  "  Defec-
tus  charitatis,  quod  videlicet  non  faciamus  opera  nostra  tanto  fer-
vore  dilectionis,  quanto  faciemus  in  patria,  defectus  quidem  est,
sed  culpa  et  peccatum  non  est Unde  etiam  charitas  nos-
tra, quamvis  comparata  ad  charitatem  beatorum  sit  imperfecta,
tamen  absolute  perfecta  dici  potest."  That  is,  although  our  love
is  in  fact  imperfect,  it  may  be  called  perfect.  But  calling  it  per-
fect, does  not  alter  its  nature.  To  the  same  effect  another  of  the
leading  theologians  of  the  Roman  Church,  Andradius,  says,  "  Pec-
cata  venalia  per  se  tam  esse  minuta  et  levia,  ut  non  adversentur
perfectioni  caritatis,  nee  impedire  possint  perfectam  et  absolutam
legis  obedientiam :  utpote  quas  non  sint  ira  Dei  et  condemnatione,
sed  venia  digna,  etiamsi  Deus  cum  iUis  in  judicium  intret."^
That  is,  sins  are  not  sins,  because  men  choose  to  regard  them  as
trivial.

Works  of  Supererogation.

But  if  no  work  of  man  since  the  fall  in  this  life  is  perfectly
good,  then  it  not  only  follows  that  the  doctrine  of  merit  must  be
given  up,  but  still  more  obviously,  all  works  of  supererogation
are  mipossible.  Romanists  teach  that  the  renewed  may  not
only  completely  satisfy  all  the  demands  of  the  law  of  God,  which
requires  that  we  should  love  Him  with  all  the  heart,  and  all  the
mind,  and  all  the  strength,  and  our  neighbour  as  ourselves ;  but
that  they  can  do  more  than  the  law  demands,  and  thus  acquire
more  merit  than  they  need  for  their  own  salvation,  which  may
be  made  available  for  those  who  lack.

It  is  impossible  that  any  man  can  hold  such  a  doctrine,  unless
he  first  degrades  the  law  of  God  by  restricting  its  demands  to
very  narrow  limits.  The  Romanists  represent  our  relation  to  God
as  analogous  to  a  citizen's  relation  to  the  state.  Ci\'il  laws  are
limited  to  a  narrow  sphere.  They  concern  only  our  social  and  po-
litical obligations.  It  is  easy  for  a  man  to  be  a  good  citizen  ;  to
fulfil  perfectly  all  that  the  law  of  the  land  requires.  Such  a  man,
through  love  to  his  country,  may  do  far  more  than  the  law  can
demand.  He  may  not  only  pay  tribute  to  whom  tribute  is  due,
custom  to  whom  custom,  and  honour  to  whom  honour  ;  but  he  may

1  De  Justificatione,  iv.  xvii  ;  Disputationes,  edit.  Paris,  1008,  vol.  iv.  p.  933,  b.

2  See  Chemnitz  Examen,  De  Bonis  Operibus,  iii.  edit.  Frankfort,  1574,  part  i.  p.  209,  a.


§4.]  GOOD  WORKS.  235

also  devote  his  time,  his  talents,  his  whole  fortune  to  the  ser\'ice  of
his  country.  Thus  also,  according  to  Romanists,  men  may  not
only  do  all  that  the  law  of  God  requires  of  men  as  men,  but  they
may  also  through  love,  far  exceed  its  demands.  Tliis  Mohler  rep-
resents as  a  great  superiority  of  Romish  ethics  over  the  Protestant
system.  The  latter,  according  to  Mm,  limits  man's  obligations  to
his  legal  liabilities,  to  what  in  justice  may  be  exacted  from  him
on  pain  of  punishment.  Whereas  the  former  rises  to  the  higher
sphere  of  love,  and  represents  the  believer  cordially  and  freely  ren-
dering unto  God  what  in  strict  justice  could  not  be  demanded  of
him.  "  It  is  the  nature  of  love,  which  stands  far,  even  immeas-
urably higher  than  the  demands  of  the  law,  never  to  be  satisfied
with  its  manifestation,  and  to  become  more  and  more  sensitive,  so
that  believers,  who  are  animated  with  this  love,  often  appear  to
men  who  stand  on  a  lower  level  as  fanatics  or  lunatics."^  But
what  if  the  law  itself  is  love  ?  What  if  the  law  demands  all  that
love  can  render  ?  What  if  the  love  which  the  law  requires  of
every  rational  creature  calls  for  the  devotion  of  the  whole  soul,
with  all  its  powers  to  God  as  a  living  sacrifice  ?  It  is  only  by
making  sin  to  be  no  sin ;  by  teaching  men  that  they  are  perfect
when  even  their  own  hearts  condemn  them  ;  it  is  only  by  lowering
the  demands  of  the  law  which,  being  founded  on  the  nature  of
God,  of  necessity  requires  perfect  conformity  to  the  divine  image,
that  any  man  in  this  life  can  pretend  to  be  perfect,  or  be  so  in-
sane as  to  imagine  that  he  can  go  beyond  the  demands  of  the  law
and  perform  works  of  supererogation.

Precepts  and  Counsels.

The  distinction  which  Romanists  make  between  precepts  and
counsels,  rests  upon  the  same  low  view  of  the  divine  law.  By  pre-
cepts are  meant  the  specific  commands  of  the  law  which  bind  all
men,  the  observance  of  which  secures  a  reward,  and  non-observ-
ance a  penalty.  Whereas  counsels  are  not  commands ;  they  do
not  bind  the  conscience  of  any  man,  but  are  recommendations  of
things  peculiarly  acceptable  to  God,  compliance  with  which  mer-
its a  much  higher  reward  than  the  mere  observance  of  precepts.
There  are  many  such  counsels  in  the  Bible,  the  most  important  of
which  are  said  to  be  celibacy,  monastic  obedience,  and  poverty .^
No  man  is  bound  to  remain  unmarried,  but  if  he  voluntarily  de-
termines to  do  so  for  the  glory  of  God,  that  is  a  great  virtue.     No

1  Mohler,  SymboUk,  6th  edit.  Mainz,  1843,  p.  216.

2  Bellamiin,  De  Memhris  Ecclesue  MiUtaiitis,  lib.  ii.  de  Monachis,  cap.  7,  8;  Dispufa
tiones,  edit  Paris,  1608,  vol.  ii.  pp.  363-365.


236  PART  m.   Ch.  xvm.  —  sanctification.

one  is  bound  to  renounce  the  acquisition  of  property,  but  if  he
voUmtarily  embraces  a  life  of  absokite  poverty,  it  is  a  great
merit.  Our  Lord,  however,  demands  everything.  He  saith,  "  He
that  loveth  father  or  mother  more  than  me,  is  not  worthy  of  me  :
and  he  that  loveth  son  or  daughter  more  than  me,  is  not  worthy
of  me."  "He  that  findeth  his  life,  shall  lose  it:  and  he  that
loseth  his  life  for  my  sake,  shall  find  it."  (Matt.  x.  37,  39.)  "  If
any  man  come  to  me,  and  hate  not  his  father,  and  mother,  and
wife,  and  children,  and  brethren,  and  sisters,  yea,  and  his  own
life  also,  he  cannot  be  my  disciple."  (Luke  xiv.  26.)  The  law
of  Christ  demands  entire  devotion  to  Him.  If  his  service  re-
quires that  a  man  should  remain  unmarried,  he  is  bound  to  live  a
life  of  cehbacy  ;  if  it  requires  that  he  should  give  up  all  his  prop-
erty and  take  up  his  cross,  and  follow  Christ,  he  is  bound  to  do
so ;  if  it  requires  him  to  lay  down  his  life  for  Christ's  sake,  he  is
bound  to  lay  it  down.  Greater  love  hath  no  man  than  this,  that
a  man  lay  down  his  life  for  his  friends.  Nothing  can  go  beyond
this.  There  can  be  no  sacrifice  and  no  service  which  a  man  can
make  or  render,  which  duty,  or  the  law  of  Christ,  does  not  de-
mand when  such  sacrifice  or  service  becomes  necessary  as  the
j^roof  or  fruit  of  love  to  Christ.  There  is  no  room,  therefore,  for
this  distinction  between  counsels  and  precepts,  between  what  the
law  demands  and  what  love  is  willing  to  render.  And  therefore
the  doctrine  of  works  of  supererogation  is  thoroughly  anti-Chris-
tian.

The  Sense  in  which  the  Fruits  of  the  Spirit  in  Believers  are
called  Crood.

3.  Although  no  work  even  of  the  true  people  of  God,  while
they  continue  in  this  world,  is  absolutely  perfect,  nevertheless
those  inward  exercises  and  outward  acts  which  are  the  fruits  of
the  Spirit  are  properly  designated  good,  and  are  so  called  in
Scriptiu'e.  Acts  ix.  36,  it  was  said  of  Dorcas  that  she  "  was
full  of  good  works."  Ephesians  ii.  10,  believers  are  said  to  be
"  created  in  Christ  Jesus  unto  good  works."  2  Timothy  iii.  17,
teaches  that  the  man  of  God  should  be  "  thoroughly  furnished
unto  all  good  works."  Titus  ii.  14,  Christ  gave  Himself  for  us
that  He*  might  "  purify  unto  himself  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of
good  works."  There  is  no  contradiction  in  pronomicing  the  same
work  good  and  bad,  because  these  terms  are  relative,  and  the  re-
lations intended  may  be  different.  Feedmg  the  poor,  viewed  in
relation  to  the  nature  of  the  act,  is  a  good  work.     Viewed  in  re-


§4.]  GOOD  WORKS.  237

lation  to  tlie  motive  whicli  prompts  it,  it  may  be  good  or  bad.  If
done  to  be  seen  of  men,  it  is  offensive  in  tlie  sight  of  God.  If
done  from  natural  benevolence,  it  is  an  act  of  ordinary  morality.
If  done  to  a  disciple  in  the  name  of  a  disciple,  it  is  an  act  of
Christian  virtue.  The  works  of  the  children  of  God,  therefore,
although  stained  by  sin,  are  truly  and  properly  good,  because,
(1.)  They  are,  as  to  their  nature  or  the  thing  done,  commanded
by  God.  (2.)  Because,  as  to  the  motive,  they  are  the  fruits,  not
merely  of  right  moral  feeling,  but  of  religious  feeling,  i.  e.,  of  love
to  God ;  and  (3.)  Because  they  are  performed  with  the  purpose
of  complying  with  his  will,  of  honouring  Christ  and  of  promoting
the  interests  of  his  kingdom.

It  follows  from  the  fundamental  principle  of  Protestantism,
that  the  Scriptures  are  the  only  rule  of  faith  and  practice,  that
no  work  can  be  regarded  as  good  or  obligatory  on  the  conscience
which  the  Scriptures  do  not  enjoin.  Of  course  it  is  not  meant  that
the  Bible  commands  in  detail  everything  which  the  people  of  God
are  bound  to  do,  but  it  prescribes  the  principles  by  which  their
conduct  is  to  be  regulated,  and  specifies  the  kind  of  acts  which
those  principles  require  or  forbid.  It  is  enough  that  the  Scrip-
tures require  children  to  obey  their  parents,  citizens  the  magis-
trate, and  believers  to  hear  the  Church,* without  enjoining  every
act  which  these  injunctions  render  obligatory.  In  giving  these
general  commands,  the  Bible  gives  all  necessary  limitations,  so
that  neither  parents,  magistrates,  nor  Church  can  claim  any  au-
thority not  granted  to  them  by  God,  nor  impose  anything  on  the
conscience  which  He  does  not  command.  As  some  churches  have
enjoined  a  multitude  of  doctrines  as  articles  of  faith,  which  are
not  taught  in  Scripture,  so  they  have  enjoined  a  multitude  of  acts,
which  the  Bible  neither  directly,  nor  by  just  or  necessary  infer-
ence requires.  They  have  thus  imposed  upon  those  who  recognize
their  authority  as  infallible  in  teaching,  a  yoke  of  bondage  which
no  one  is  able  to  bear.  After  the  example  of  the  ancient  Phari-
sees, they  teach  for  doctrines  the  commandments  of  men,  and
claim  divine  authority  for  human  institutions.  From  this  bond-
age it  was  one  great  design  of  the  Reformation  to  free  the  peo-
ple of  God.  This  deliverance  was  effected  by  proclaiming  the
principle  that  nothing  is  sin  but  what  the  Bible  forbids,  and  noth-
ing is  morally  obligatory  but  what  the  Bible  enjoins.

Such,  however,  is  the  disposition,  on  the  one  hand,  to  usurp
authority,  and,  on  the  other,  to  yield  to  it,  that  it  is  only  by  the
constant  assertion  and  vindication  of  this  principle,  that  the  lib-
erty wherewith  Christ  has  made  us  free  can  be  preserved.


238  PART  m.   Ch.  xvni.  —  sanctification.

§  5.  Necessity  of  Grood  Works.

On  this  subject  there  has  never  been  any  real  difference  of
opinion  among  Protestants,  although  there  Avas  in  the  early
Lutheran  Church  some  misunderstanding.  First.  It  was  univer-
sally admitted  that  good  works  are  not  necessary  to  our  justifica-
tion ;  that  they  are  consequences  and  indirectly  the  fruits  of
justification,  and,  therefore,  cannot  be  its  ground.  Secondly,  it
was  also  agreed  that  faith,  by  which  the  sinner  is  justified,  is  not
as  a  work,  the  reason  why  God  pronounces  the  sinner  just.  It
is  the  act  by  which  the  sinner  receives  and  rests  upon  the  right-
eousness of  Christ,  the  imputation  of  which  renders  him  righteous
in  the  sight  of  God.  Thirdly,  faith  does  not  justify  because  it
includes,  or  is  the  root  or  principle  of  good  works  ;  not  as  "  fides
obsequiosa."  Fourthly,  it  was  agreed  that  it  is  only  a  living
faith,  i.  e.,  a  faith  which  works  by  love  and  purifies  the  heart,
that  unites  the  soul  to  Christ  and  secures  our  reconciliation  with
God.  Fifthl}^,  it  was  universally  admitted  that  an  immoral  fife  is
inconsistent  with  a  state  of  grace  ;  that  those  who  wilfully  con-
tinue in  tlie  practice  of  sin  shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God.
The  Protestants  while  rejecting  the  Romish  doctrine  of  subject-
ive justification,  strenuously  insisted  that  no  man  is  delivered
from  the  guilt  of  sin  who  is  not  delivered  from  its  reigning
power ;  that  sanctification  is  inseparable  from  justification,  and
that  the  one  is  just  as  essential  as  the  other.

The  controversy  on  this  subject  was  due  mainly  to  a  misun-
derstanding, but  in  a  measure  also  to  a  real  difference  of  opinion
as  to  the  oSice  of  the  law  under  the  Gospel.  Melancthon  taught
that  repentance  was  the  effect  of  the  law  and  anterior  to  faith,
and  used  forms  of  expression  which  were  thought  to  imply  that
good  works,  or  sanctification,  although  not  the  ground  of  justifi-
cation, were  nevertheless  a  "  causa  sine  qua  non  "  of  our  accept-
ance with  God.  To  this  Luther  objected,  as  true  sanctification
is  the  consequence,  and  in  no  sense  the  condition  of  the  simier's
justification.  We  are  not  justified  because  we  are  holy  ;  but
being  justified,  we  are  rendered  holy.  Agricola  (born  in  Eisle-
ben,  1492,  died  lo66),  a  pupil  of  Luther,  and  greatly  influential
as  a  preacher,  took  extreme  ground  against  Melancthon.  He
not  only  held  that  repentance  was  not  due  to  the  operation  of  the
law,  and  was  the  fruit  of  faith,  but  also  that  the  law  should  not
be  taught  under  the  Gospel,  and  that  good  works  are  not  neces-
sary to  salvation.     The  believer  is  entirely  free  from  the  law ;


§5.]  NECESSITY   OF   GOOD   WORKS.  239

is  not  under  tlie  law  but  under  grace ;  and  being  accepted  for
what  Christ  did,  it  is  of  little  consequence  what  he  does.  Luther
denounced  this  perversion  of  the  Gospel,  which  overlooked  en-
tirely the  distinction  between  the  law  as  a  covenant  of  works
demanding  perfect  obedience  as  the  condition  of  justification,  and
the  law  as  the  revelation  of  the  immutable  will  of  God  as  to
what  rational  creatures  should  be  and  do  in  character  and  con-
duct. He  insisted  that  faith  Avas  the  receiving  of  Christ,  not
only  for  the  pardon  of  sin,  but  also  as  a  saviour  from  its  power ;
that  its  object  was  not  merely  the  death,  but  also  the  obedience
of  Christ.i

The  controversy  was  renewed  not  long  after  in  another  form,
in  consequence  of  the  position  taken  by  George  Major,  also  a
pupil  of  Luther  and  Melancthon,  and  for  some  years  professor
of  theology  and  preacher  at  Wittenberg.  He  was  accused  of  ob-
jecting to  the  proposition  "  we  are  saved  by  faith  alone  "  and  of
teaching  that  good  works  were  also  necessary  to  salvation.  This
was  understood  as  tantamount  to  saying  that  good  works  are
necessary  to  justification.  Major,  indeed,  denied  the  justice  of
this  charge.  He  said  he  did  not  teach  that  good  works  were
necessary  as  being  meritorious,  but  simply  as  the  necessary  fruits
of  faith  and  part  of  our  obedience  to  Christ ;  nevertheless,  he
maintained  that  no  one  could  be  saved  without  good  works.
How  then  can  infants  be  saved  ?  And  how  can  this  uncondi-
tional necessity  of  good  works  be  consistent  with  Paul's  doctrine
that  we  are  justified  by  faith  without  works  ?  Whom  God  jus-
tifies He  glorifies.  Justification  secures  salvation  ;  and,  therefore,
if  faith  alone,  or  faith  without  works,  secures  justification,  it  se-
cures salvation.  It  is  very  evident  that  this  was  a  dispute  about
words.  Major  admitted  that  the  sinner  was  in  a  state  of  salva-
tion the  moment  he  believed,  but  held  that  if  his  faith  did  not
produce  good  works  it  was  not  a  saving  faith.  In  his  sermon  "  On
the  Conversion  of  Paul,"  he  said :  "  As  thou  art  now  justified  by
faith  alone,  and  hast  become  a  child  of  God,  and  since  Christ
and  the  Holy  Ghost  through  that  faith  dwell  in  thy  heart,  so
are  good  works  necessary,  not  to  obtain  salvation  (which  thou
already  hast  as  a  matter  of  grace,  without  works,  through  faith
alone  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ),  but  to  hold  fast  your  salvation,
that  it  be  not  lost,  and  also  because  if  thou  dost  not  produce
good  works,  it  is  an  evidence  that  thy  faith  is  false  and  dead,  a
mere  pretence  or  opinion."     Amsdorf,  the  chief   representative

1  See  Dorner,  Gesclilchte  der prutestantiachen  Theologie,  Munich,  18G7,  pp.  3-'3G-3-4-i.


240  PART  m.    Ch.  xvui.  —  sanctification.

of  the  extremists  in  this  controversy,  laid  down  his  doctrine  in
the  following  propositions :  (1.)  Etsi  hsec  oratio  :  bona  opera
sunt  necessaria  ad  salutem  in  doctrina  legis  abstractive  et  de  idea
tolerari  potest,  tamen  multae  sunt  graves  causjB,  propter  quas
vitanda,  et  fugienda  est  non  minus,  quam  hsec  oratio  :  Christus
est  creatura.  (2.)  In  foro  justificationis  hajc  propositio  nullo
modo  ferenda  est.  (3.)  In  foro  novse  obedientise  post  reconcili-
ationem  nequaquam  bona  opera  ad  salutem,  sed  propter  alias
causas  necessaria  sunt.  (4.)  Sola  fides  justificat  in  principio,
medio,  et  fine.  (5.)  Bona  opera  non  sunt  necessaria  ad  retinen-
dam  salutem.  (6.)  Synonyma  sunt  et  sequipoUentia,  sen  ter-
mini convertibiles,  justificatio  et  salvatio,  nee  ulla  ratione  distrahi
aut  possunt  aut  debent.  (7.)  Explodatur  ergo  ex  ecclesia  co-
thurnus papisticus  propter  scandala  multiplicia,  dissensiones  imiu-
merabiles  et  alias  causas,  de  quibus  Apostoli  Act.  xv.  loquuntur."

The  "  Form  of  Concord,"  in  which  this  and  other  controversies
in  the  Lutheran  Church  were  finally  adjusted,  took  the  true
ground  on  this  subject,  midway  between  the  two  extreme  views.
It  rejects  the  unquahfied  proposition  that  good  works  are  necessary
to  salvation,  as  men  may  be  saved  who  have  no  opportunity  to
testify  to  their  faith  by  their  works.  On  the  other  hand,  it  utterly
condemns  the  unwarrantable  declaration  that  good  works  are  hurt-
ful to  salvation ;  wliich  it  pronounces  to  be  pernicious  and  full  of
scandal.  It  teaches  that  "  Fides  vera  nunquam  sola  est,  quin  car-
itatem  et  spem  semper  secum  habeat."  ^

The  same  doctrine  was  clearly  taught  in  the  Lutheran  Symbols
from  the  beginning,  so  that  the  charge  made  by  Romanists,  that
Protestants  divorced  morahty  from  rehgion,  was  without  founda-
tion, either  in  their  doctrine  or  practice.  In  the  "  Apology  for  the
Augsburg  Confession  "  it  is  said :  "  Quia  fides  affert  Spiritum
Sanctum,  et  parit  novam  vitam  in  cordibus,  necesse  est,  quod  pa-
riat  spirituales  motus  in  cordibus.  Et  qui  sint  illi  motus,  ostendit
propheta,  cum  ait :  '  Dabo  legem  meam  in  corda  eorum.'  Post-
quam  igitur  fide  justificati  et  reuati  sumus,  incipimus  Deum
timere,  dihgere,  petere,  et  expectare  ab  eo  auxilium In-
cipimus et  diligere  proximos,  quia  corda  habent  spirituales  et
sanctos  motus.  Haec  non  possunt  fieri,  nisi  postquam  fide  justi-
ficati sumus  et  renati  accipimus  Spiritum  Sanctum Pro-

fitemur   igitur,  quod   necesse    est,  inchoari  in   nobis  et  subinde

magis  magisque  fieri  legem.     Et  complectimur  simul  utrumque,

videhcet  spirituales  motus  et  externa  bona  opera.     Falso  igitur

1  Epitome,  iii.  xi. ;  Hase,  Libri  Si/mholici,  3d  edit.  1810,  p.  586.


§6.]  RELATION    OF   GOOD   WORKS   TO  REWARD.  241

calumniantur  nos  adversarii,  quod  nostri  non  doceant  bona  opera,
cum  ea  non  solum  requirant,  sed  etiam  ostendant,  quomodo  fieri
possint."  ^

Antinomianism.

Antinomianism  has  never  liad  any  hold  in  the  churches  of  the
Reformation,  There  is  no  logical  connection  between  the  neglect
of  moral  duties,  and  the  S3-stem  which  teaches  that  Christ  is  a
Saviour  as  well  from  the  power  as  from  the  penalty  of  sin ;  that
faith  is  the  act  by  which  the  soul  receives  and  rests  on  Him  for
sanctification  as  well  as  for  justification  ;  and  that  such  is  the  na-
ture of  the  union  with  Christ  by  faith  and  indwelling  of  the  Spirit,
that  no  one  is,  or  can  be  partaker  of  the  benefit  of  his  death,  who
is  not  also  partaker  of  the  power  of  his  life  ;  which  holds  to  the
divine  authority  of  the  Scripture  which  declares  that  without
holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord  (Heb.  xii.  14)  ;  and  Avliich,  in
the  language  of  the  great  advocate  of  salvation  by  grace,  warns  all
who  call  themselves  Christians  :  "  Be  not  deceived  :  neither  for-
nicators, nor  idolaters,  nor  adulterers,  nor  effeminate,  nor  abusers
of  themselves  ^vith  mankind,  nor  thieves,  nor  covetous,  nor  drunk-
ards, nor  revilers,  nor  extortioners  shall  inlierit  the  kingdom  of
God."  (1  Cor.  vi.  9,  10.)  It  is  not  the  system  which  regards
sin  as  so  great  an  evil  that  it  requires  the  blood  of  the  Son  of
God  for  its  expiation,  and  the  law  as  so  immutable  that  it  re-
quires the  perfect  righteousness  of  Christ  for  the  sinner's  justifica-
tion, which  leads  to  loose  views  of  moral  obligation  ;  these  are
reached  by  the  system  which  teaches  that  the  demands  of  the  law
have  been  lowered,  that  they  can  be  more  than  met  by  the  im-
perfect obedience  of  fallen  men,  and  that  sin  can  be  pardoned
by  priestly  intervention.  This  is  what  logic  and  history  alike
teach.

§  6.  Relation  of  G-ood  Works  to  Reward.

Romish  Doctrine.

On  this  subject  the  Romanists  make  a  distinction  between
works  done  before,  and  those  done  after  regeneration.  Works  as
to  the  matter  of  them  good,  when  performed  from  mere  natural
conscience,  have  no  other  merit  than  that  of  congruity.  They  are
necessarily  imperfect,  and  constitute  no  claim  on  the  justice  of
God.  But  works  performed  under  the  control  of  gracious  prin-
ciples infused  in  baptism,  are  perfect ;  they  have  therefore  real
merit,  i.  e.,  the  merit  of  condignity.     They  give  a  claim  for  re-

-  III.  iv.,  V,,  XV.;  Hase,  pp.  83,  85.
vol..  in.  16


242  PART  III.     Ch.  XVIII.  —  SANCTIFICATION.

ward,  not  merely  on  the  ground  of  the  divine  promise,  but  also  of
the  divine  justice.  To  him  that  worketh  is  the  reward  not  reck-
oned of  grace,  but  of  debt.  (Rom.  iv.  4.)  On  this  subject  the
Council  of  Trent,^  says  :  "  Si  quis  dixerit,  hominis  justificati
bona  opera  ita  esse  dona  Dei,  ut  non  sint  etiam  bona  ipsius  jus-
tificati merita  ;  aut  ipsum  justificatum  bonis  operibus,  quse  ab  eo
per  Dei  gratiam,  et  Jesu  Christi  meritum  cujus  vivum  membrum
est,  fiunt,  non  vere  mereri  augmentum  gTatisE,  vitam  aternam,
et  ipsius  vitas  jBternns,  si  tamen  in  gratia  decesserit,  consecutio-
nem,  atque  etiam  gloria;  augmentum  ;  anathema  sit."  Bellar-
min  ^  says  :  "-  Habet  communis  cathoHcorum  omnium  sententia,
opera  bona  justorum  vere,  ac  proprie  esse  merita,  et  merita  non
cujuscunque  premii,  sed  ipsius  vitge  ajternae."

The  conditions  of  such  meritorious  works,  according  to  Bel-
larmin,  are:  (1.)  That  they  be  good  in  their  nature.  (2.)  Done  in
obedience  to  God.  (3.)  By  a  man  in  this  hfe.  (4.)  That  they  be
voluntary.  (5.)  That  the  agent  be  in  a  state  of  justification  and
favour  ^\Tith  God.  (6.)  That  they  be  prompted  by  love.  (7.)  That
some  divine  promise  be  attached  to  them.

Refutation   of  this  Romish  Doctritie.

1.  This  whole  doctrine  of  merit  is  founded  on  the  assumption
that  justification,  their  term  for  regeneration,  removes  everything
of  the  nature  of  sin  from  the  soul ;  that  works  performed  by  the
renewed  being  free  from  sin  are  perfect ;  that  a  renewed  man
can  not  only  fulfil  all  the  demands  of  the  law,  but  also  do  more
tliau  the  law  requires.  As  these  assumptions  are  contrary  to
Scripture,  and  to  the  experience  of  all  Christians,  the  doctrine
founded  on  them  must  be  false.

2.  The  doctrine  is  inconsistent,  not  only  with  the  express  decla-
rations of  the  word  of  God,  but  also  with  the  whole  nature  and
design  of  the  Gospel.  The  inmiediate  or  proximate  design  of  the
plan  of  salvation,  as  the  Scriptures  abundantly  teach,  is  the  man-
ifestation of  the  grace  of  God,  and  therefore  it  must  be  gi-atuitous
in  all  its  parts  and  provisions,  to  the  entire  exclusion  of  all  merit.
Unless  salvation  be  of  grace  it  is  not  a  revelation  of  grace,  and  if
of  grace  it  is  not  of  works.

3.  The  doctrine  is  so  repugnant  to  the  inward  teachings  of  the
Spirit,  as  well  as  to  the  teachings  of  his  word,  that  it  cannot  be
practically  beheved  even  by  those  who  profess  it.     The  children

1  Sess.  vi.  canon  32;  Streitwolf,  Lib7-i  Symbolici,  Gottingen,  1846,  vol.  i.  p.  37.

2  De  Justificatione,  v.  i. ;  Dlsjmtationes,  edit.  Paris,  1608,  vol.  iv.  p.  949,  a.


§  6.]  RELATION   OF    GOOD   WORKS   TO   REWARD.  243

of  God,  in  spite  of  their  theories  and  their  creeds,  do  not  trust
for  their  salvation,  either  in  whole  or  in  part,  to  what  they  are  or
to  what  they  do  ;  but  simply  and  exclusively  to  what  Christ  is  and
has  done  for  them.  In  proof  of  this,  appeal  may  be  made  to  the
written  or  recorded  experience  of  ail  the  great  hghts  of  the  Latin
Church.  If  every  Christian  is  intimately  convinced  that  he  is
unholy  in  the  sight  of  God ;  that  all  his  best  acts  are  polluted ;
and  that  in  no  one  thing  and  at  no  time  does  he  come  up  to  the
standard  of  perfection ;  it  is  impossible  that  he  can  believe  that
he   merits  eternal  life  on  the  ground  of  his  own  works.

4.  As  the  doctrine  of  merit  is  opposed  to  the  nature  and  design
of  the  Gospel,  and  to  the  express  declarations  of  Scripture  that
we  are  not  justified  or  saved  by  works,  but  gratuitously  for
Christ's  sake,  so  it  is  derogatory  to  the  honour  of  Christ  as  our
Saviour,  He  gave  Himself  as  a  ransom ;  he  oJEfered  Himself  as  a
sacrifice  ;  it  is  by  his  obedience  we  are  constituted  righteous  ;  it  is,
therefore,  only  on  the  assumption  that  his  ransom,  sacrifice,  and
obedience  are  inadequate  that  the  merit  of  our  works  can  be
needed  or  admitted.  The  Romanists  attempt  to  evade  the  force
of  this  objection  by  saying  that  we  owe  to  Christ  the  grace  or
spiritual  life  by  which  we  perform  good  works.  Had  He  not  died
for  our  sins,  God  would  not  in  baptism  wash  away  our  guilt  and
pollution  and  impart  those  "habits  of  grace"  by  which  we  are
enabled  to  merit  eternal  life.  This  does  not  help  the  matter ;  for
salvation  remains  a  debt  as  a  matter  of  justice  on  the  ground  of
our  good  works.  It  is  this  which  is  so  contrary  to  Scripture,  to
the  intimate  conviction  of  every  Christian,  and  to  the  glory  of
Christ,  to  whom  the  whole  honour  of  our  salvation  is  due.

Doctrine  of  the  older  Protestant  Divines.
The  older  theologians,  in  order  the  more  effectually  to  refute
the  doctrine  of  merit,  assumed  that  a  work,  to  be  meritorious,
must  be  (1.)  "  Indebitum,"  i.  e.,  not  due.  Something  which
.ve  are  not  bound  to  do.  (2.)  Our  own.  (3.)  Absolutely  per-
fect. (4.)  Equal,  or  bearing  a  due  proportion  to  the  recompense.
(5.)  And,  therefore,  that  the  recompense  should  be  due  on  the
gi'ound  of  justice,  and  not  merely  of  promise  or  agreement.  On
these  conditions,  all  merit  on  the  part  of  creatures  is  impossible.
It  is,  however,  clearly  recognized  in  Scripture  that  a  labourer  is
worthy  of  his  hire.  To  him  that  worketh,  says  the  Apostle,  tho
reward  is  not  reckoned  of  grace,  but  of  debt.  It  is  something  due
in  justice.     This  principle  also  is  universally  recognized  among


244  PART  III.     Ch.   XVm.  —  SANCTIFICATION.

men.  Even  on  the  theory  of  slavery,  where  the  hibourer  himself,
his  time,  and  strength,  and  all  he  has,  are  assumed  to  belong  to
his  master,  the  servant  has  a  claim  to  a  proper  recompense,  wliich
it  would  be  unjust  to  withhold  from  him.  And  in  every  depart-
ment of  life  it  is  recognized  as  a  simple  matter  of  justice,  that  the
man  who  performs  a  stipulated  work,  earns  his  wages.  The  pay-
ment is  not  a  matter  of  favour  ;  it  is  not  due  simply  because  prom-
ised ;  but  because  it  has  been  earned.  It  is  a  debt.  So  in  the  case
of  Adam,  had  he  remained  perfect,  there  would  have  been  no
ground  in  justice  why  he  should  die,  or  forfeit  the  favour  of  God  ;
which  favour  is  life.

The  passage  in  Luke  x\di.  10,  is  relied  upon  as  proving  that  a
creature  can  in  no  case  perform  a  meritorious  act,  i.  e.,  an  act
which  lays  a  claim  in  justice  for  a  reward.  Our  Lord  there  says,
"  When  ye  shall  have  done  all  those  things  which  are  commanded
you,  say,  '  We  are  unprofitable  servants :  we  have  done  that
which  was  our  duty  to  do.'  "  This  does  not  teach  that  the  la-
bourer is  not  worthy  of  his  hire.  The  passage  is  part  of  a  par-
able in  which  our  Lord  says,  that  a  master  does  not  thank  his  ser-
vant for  merely  doing  his  duty.  It  does  not  call  for  gratitude.
But  it  does  not  follow  that  it  would  be  just  to  withhold  the  ser-
vant's wases,  or  to  refuse  to  allow  him  to  eat  and  drink.  God
is  just,  and  being  just.  He  rewards  every  man  according  to  his
works,  so  long  as  men  are  under  the  law.  If  not  under  the  law,
they  are  dealt  with,  not  on  the  principles  of  law,  but  of  grace.

But  although  Protestants  deny  the  merit  of  good  works,  and
teach  that  salvation  is  entirely  gratuitous,  that  the  remission  of
sins,  adoption  into  the  family  of  God,  and  the  gift  of  the  Holy
Spirit  are  granted  to  the  believer,  as  well  as  admission  into
heaven,  solely  on  the  ground  of  the  merits  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ ;  they  nevertheless  teach  that  God  does  reward  his  people
for  their  works.  Having  graciously  promised  for  Christ's  sake  to
overlook  the  imperfection  of  their  best  services,  they  have  the
assurance  founded  on  that  promise  that  he  who  gives  to  a  disciple
even  a  cup  of  cold  Avater  in  the  name  of  a  disciple,  shall  in  no
■wise  lose  his  reward.  The  Scriptures  also  teach  that  the  happi-
ness or  blessedness  of  believers  in  a  future  hfe,  will  be  greater
or  less  in  proportion  to  their  devotion  to  the  service  of  Chi-ist  in
this  life.  Those  who  love  little,  do  httle  ;  and  those  who  do  Httle,
enjoy  less.  What  a  man  sows  that  shall  he  also  reap.  As  the
rewards  of  heaven  are  given  on  the  ground  of  the  merits  of  Christ,
and  as  He  has  a  right  to  do  what  He  mil  with  his  own,  there


g  7.]  PERFECTIONISM.  245

would  be  no  injustice  were  the  thief  saved  on  the  cross  as  highly
exalted  as  the  Apostle  Paul.  But  the  general  drift  of  Scrip-
ture is  in  favour  of  the  doctrine  that  a  man  shall  reap  what  he
sows  ;  that  God  mil  reward  every  one  according  to,  although  not
on  account  of  his  works.

§  7.  Perfectionism.
Protestant  Doctrine.

The  doctrine  of  Lutherans  and  Reformed,  the  two  great
branches  of  the  Protestant  Church,  is,  that  sanctification  is  never
perfected  in  this  life ;  that  sin  is  not  in  any  case  entirely  sub-
dued ;  so  that  the  most  advanced  believer  has  need  as  long  as  he
continues  in  the  flesh,  daily  to  pray  for  the  forgiveness  of  sins.

The  question  is  not  as  to  the  duty  of  believers.  All  admit  that
we  are  bound  to  be  perfect  as  our  Father  in  heaven  is  perfect.
Nor  is  it  a  question  as  to  the  command  of  God ;  for  the  first,
original,  and  universally  obligatory  commandment  is  that  we
should  love  God  with  all  our  heart  and  our  neighbour  as  ourselves.
Nor  does  the  question  concern  the  provisions  of  the  Gospel.  It  is
admitted  that  the  Gospel  provides  all  that  is  needed  for  the  com-
plete sanctification  and  salvation  of  believers.  What  can  we
need  more  than  we  have  in  Christ,  his  Spirit,  his  word  and  his
ordinances  ?  Nor  does  it  concern  the  promises  of  God  ;  for  all
rejoice  in  the  hope,  founded  on  the  divine  promise,  that  we  shall
be  ultimately  delivered  from  all  sin.  God  has  in  Clmst  made
provision  for  the  complete  salvation  of  his  people :  that  is,  for
their  entire  deliverance  from  the  penalty  of  the  law,  from  the
power  of  sin,  from  all  sorrow,  pain,  and  death  ;  and  not  only  for
mere  negative  deliverance,  but  for  their  being  transformed  into
the  image  of  Christ,  filled  with  his  Spirit,  and  glorified  by  the
beauty  of  the  Lord.  It  is,  however,  too  plain  that,  unless  sanctifi-
cation be  an  exception,  no  one  of  these  promises  besides  that
which  concerns  justification,  is  perfectly  fulfilled  in  this  life.
Justification  does  not  admit  of  degrees.  A  man  either  is  under
condemnation,  or  he  is  not.  And,  .therefore,  from  the  nature  of
the  case,  justification  is  instantaneous  and  complete,  as  soon  as  the
sinner  believes.  But  the  question  is,  whether,  when  God  prom-
ises to  make  his  people  perfectly  holy,  perfectly  happy,  and  per-
fectly glorious.  He  thereby  promises  to  make  them  perfect  in
holiness  in  tliis  life  ?  If  the  promises  of  happiness  and  glory  are
not  perfectly  fulfilled  in   this   life,  why  should  the  promise  of


246  PART  m.     Cii.   XVm.  —  SANCTIFICATION.

sanctification  be  thus  fulfilled  ?  It  is,  however,  a  mere  question
of  fact.  All  admit  that  God  can  render  his  people  perfect  before
death  as  well  as  after  it.  The  only  question  is,  Has  He  promised,
with  regard  to  sanctification  alone,  that  it  shall  be  perfected  on
this  side  of  the  grave  ?  and.  Do  we  see  cases  in  which  the  prom-
ise has  been  actually  fulfilled  ?  The  answer  given  to  these  ques-
tions by  the  Church  universal  is  in  the  negative.  So  long  as  the
believer  is  in  this  world,  he  will  need  to  pray  for  pardon.
The  grounds  of  this  doctrine  are,  —

1.  The  spirituality  of  the  divine  law  and  the  immutability
of  its  demands.  It  condemns  as  sinful  any  want  of  conformity  to
the  standard  of  absolute  perfection  as  exhibited  in  the  Bible.
Anything  less  than  loving  God  constantly  with  all  the  heart,  all
the  soul,  all  the  mind,  and  all  the  strength,  and  our  neighbour  as
ourselves,  is  sin.

2.  The  express  declaration  of  Scripture  that  all  men  are  sin-
ners. This  does  not  mean  simply  that  all  men  have  sinned,  that
all  are  guilty,  but  that  all  have  sin  cleaving  to  them.  "If,"  de-
clares the  Apostle,  "  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin,  we  deceive
ourselves,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  us."  (1  John  i.  8.)  As  the
wise  man  had  said  before  him,  "  There  is  not  a  just  man  upon
earth,  that  doeth  good,  and  sinneth  not."  (Eccles.  vii.  20.)
And  in  1  Kings  viii.  46,  it  is  said,  "  There  is  no  man  that  sin-
neth not."  And  the  Apostle  James,  iii.  2,  says  :  "  In  many
things  we  offend  all."  It  is  a  manifest  perversion  of  the  simple
grammatical  meaning  of  the  words  to  make  d/xaprtav  ovk  €';(o/xev  to
refer  to  the  past.  The  verb  is  in  the  present  tense.  The  truth
is  not  in  us,  says  the  Apostle,  if  we  say  we  have  no  sin,  i.  e.,  that
we  are  not  now  polluted  by  sin.  In  the  context  he  sets  forth
Christ  as  the  "  Word  of  Life,"  as  having  life  in  Himself,  and  as
being  the  source  of  life  to  us.  Having  fellowship  with  Him,
we  have  fellowship  with  God.  But  God  is  light,  i.  e.,  is  pure,
holy,  and  blessed ;  if,  therefore,  we  walk  in  darkness,  i.  e.,  in  igno-
rance and  sin,  we  can  have  no  fellowship  with  Him.  But  if  we
walk  in  the  light,  as  He  is  in  the  light,  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ
cleanseth  us  from  all  sin.  If  we  say  we  have  no  sin,  and  do  not
need  now  and  at  all  times  the  cleansing  power  of  Christ's  blood,
we  deceive  ourselves,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  us.

Argument  from  the  Greneral  Mejyresentations  of  Scripture.

The  declarations  of  Scripture,  which  are  so  abundant,  that
there   is  none  righteous,  no  not  one  ;  that  all  have  sinned  and


§  7.]  PERFECTIONISM.  247

come  short  of  the  glory  of  God  ;  that  no  flesh  living  is  just  in  the
sight  of  God ;  and  that  every  one  must  lay  his  hand  upon  his
mouth,  and  his  mouth  in  the  dust  in  the  sight  of  the  infinitely
holy  God,  who  accuses  his  angels  of  folly,  refer  to  all  men  with-
out exception ;  to  Jews  and  Gentiles  ;  to  the  renewed  and  unre-
newed ;  to  babes  in  Christ  and  to  mature  Clmstians.  All  feel,
and  all  are  bound  to  acknowledge  that  they  are  sinners  whenever
they  present  themselves  before  God  ;  all  know  that  they  need
constantly  the  intervention  of  Christ,  and  the  application  of  his
blood,  to  secure  fellowship  with  the  Holy  One.  As  portrayed  in
Scripture,  the  inward  life  of  the  people  of  God  to  the  end  of  their
course  in  this  world,  is  a  repetition  of  conversion.  It  is  a  con-
tinued turning  unto  God ;  a  constant  renewal  of  confession,  re-
pentance, and  faith  ;  a  dying  unto  sin,  and  living  mito  righteous-
ness. This  is  true  of  all  the  saints,  patriarchs,  prophets,  and
apostles  of  whose  inward  experience  the  Bible  gives  us  any  ac-
count.

Passages  ivJiicJi  describe  the  Conjiiet  between  the  Flesh  and  the

Spirit.

3.  More  definitely  is  this  truth  taught  in  those  passages  which
describe  the  conflict  in  the  believer  between  the  flesh  and  the
Spirit.  To  this  reference  has  already  been  made.  That  the
seventh  chapter  of  Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Romans  is  an  account  of
his  own  inward  life  at  the  time  of  writing  that  Epistle,  has  al-
ready, as  it  is  believed,  been  sufiiciently  proved  ;  and  such  has
been  the  belief  of  the  great  body  of  evangelical  Christians  in  all
ages  of  the  Church.  If  this  be  the  correct  interpretation  of  that
passage,  then  it  proves  that  Paul,  at  least,  was  not  free  from  sin  ;
that  he  had  to  contend  with  a  law  in  his  members,  warring
against  the  law  of  his  mind  ;  that  he  groaned  constantly  under
the  burden  of  indwelling  sin.  At  a  still  later  period  of  his  life,
when  he  was  just  ready  to  be  offered  np,  he  says  to  the  Philip-
pians,  iii.  12-14,  "  Not  as  though  I  had  already  attained,  either
were  already  perfect :  but  I  follow  after,  if  that  I  may  appre-
hend that  for  which  also  I  am  apprehended  of  Christ  Jesus.
Brethren,  I  count  not  myself  to  have  apprehended  :  but  this  one
thing  I  do,  forgetting  those  things  which  are  behind  and  reaching
forth  unto  those  things  which  are  before,  I  press  toward  the  mark
for  the  prize  of  the  high  caUing  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus."  This
is  an  unmistakable  declaration  on  the  part  of  the  Apostle  that
even  at  this  late  period  of  his  life  he  was  not  yet  perfect ;  he  had


218  PART  III.     Ch.   XVIII.  —  SANCTIFICATION.

not  attained  the  end  of  perfect  conformity  to  Christ,  but  was  press-
ing forward,  as  one  in  a  race,  with  all  earnestness  that  he  might
reach  the  end  of  his  calling.  To  answer  this,  as  has  been  done
by  some  distinguished  advocates  of  perfectionism,  by  saying  that
Paul's  not  being  perfect,  is  no  proof  that  other  men  may  not  be ;
is  not  very  satisfactory.

The  parallel  passage  in  Galatians,  v.  16-26,  is  addressed  to
Christians  generally.  It  recognizes  the  fact  that  they  are  imper-
fectly sanctified ;  that  in  them  the  renewed  principle,  the  Spirit
as  the  source  of  spiritual  life,  is  in  conflict  with  the  flesh,  the  re-
jnains  of  their  corrupt  nature.  It  exhorts  them  to  mortify  the
flesh  (not  the  body,  but  their  corrupt  nature),  and  to  strive  con-
stantly to  walk  under  the  controlling  influence  of  the  Spirit.
The  characteristic  difference  between  the  unrenewed  and  the  re-
newed is  not  that  the  former  are  entirely  sinful,  and  the  latter
23erf ectly  holy ;  but  that  the  former  are  wholly  under  the  control
of  their  fallen  nature,  while  the  latter  have  the  Spirit  of  God
dwelling  in  them,  which  leads  them  to  crucify  the  flesh,  and  to
strive  after  complete  conformity  to  the  image  of  God.  There  was
nothing  in  the  character  of  the  Galatian  Cliristians  to  render  this
exhortation  applicable  to  them  alone.  What  the  Scriptures
teach  concerning  faith,  repentance,  and  justification,  is  intended
for  all  Christians ;  and  so  what  is  taught  of  sanctification  suits
the  case  of  all  believers.  Indeed,  if  a  man  thinks  himself  perfect,
and  apprehends  that  he  has  already  attained  what  Ms  fellow  be-
lievers are  only  striving  for,  a  great  part  of  the  Bible  must  for
him  lose  its  value.  What  use  can  he  make  of  the  Psalms,  the
vehicle  through  which  the  people  of  God  for  millenniums  have
poured  out  their  hearts  ?  How  can  such  a  man  sympathize  with
Ezra,  Nehemiah,  or  any  of  the  prophets  ?  How  strange  to  him
must  be  the  language  of  Isaiah,  "  Woe  is  me  !  for  I  am  undone  :
because  I  am  a  man  of  unclean  lips,  and  I  dwell  in  the  midst  of
a  people  of  unclean  lips :  for  mine  eyes  have  seen  the  King,  the
LoED  of  hosts."

Argument  from  the  Lord^s  Prayer.

4.  Not  only  do  the  holy  men  of  God  throughout  the  Scriptures
in  coming  into  his  presence,  come  with  the  confession  of  sin  and
imperfection,  prajang  for  mercy,  not  only  for  what  they  were  but
also  for  Avhat  they  are,  but  our  Loi'd  has  taught  all  liis  disciples
whenever  they  address  their  Father  in  heaven  to  say,  "  Foi'givQ
us  our  trespasses."     This  injunction  has  ever  been  a  stumbling


§  7.]  PERFECTIONISM.  249

block  in  the  way  of  the  advocates  of  perfection  from  Pelagius  to
the  present  day.  It  was  iirged  by  Augustine  in  his  argument
against  the  doctrine  of  his  great  opponent  that  men  could  be  en-
tirely free  from  sin  in  the  present  life.  The  answer  given  to  the
argument  from  this  source  has  been  substantially  the  same  as  that
given  by  Pelagius.  It  is  presented  in  its  best  form  by  the  Rev.
Richard  Watson.^  That  writer  says,  "  (1.)  That  it  would  be
absurd  to  suppose  that  any  person  is  placed  under  the  necessity
of  '  trespassing,'  in  order  that  a  general  prayer  designed  for  men
in  a  mixed  condition  might  retain  its  aptness  to  every  particular
case.  (2.)  That  trespassing  of  every  kind  and  degree  is  not  sup-
posed by  this  prayer  to  be  continued,  in  order  that  it  might  be
used  always  in  the  same  import,  or  otherwise  it  might  be  pleaded
against  the  renunciation  of  any  trespass  or  transgression  whatever.
(3.)  That  this  petition  is  still  relevant  to  the  case  of  the  entirely
sanctified  and  the  evangelically  perfect,  since  neither  the  perfec-
tion of  the  first  man  nor  that  of  angels  is  in  question  ;  that  is,  a
perfection  measured  by  the  perfect  law,  which  in  its  obligations,
contemplates  all  creatures  as  having  sustained  no  injury  by  moral
lapse,  and  admits,  therefore,  of  no  excuse  from  infirmities  and
mistakes  of  judgment ;  nor  of  any  degree  of  obedience  below  that
which  beings  created  naturally  perfect,  were  capable  of  rendering.
There  may,  however,  be  an  entire  sanctification  of  a  being  ren-
dered naturally  weak  and  imperfect,  and  so  liable  to  mistake  and
infirmity,  as  well  as  to  defect  as  to  the  degi^ee  of  that  absolute
obedience  and  service  which  the  law  of  God,  never  bent  to  human
weakness,  demands  from  all.  These  defects,  and  mistakes,  and
infirmities,  may  be  quite  consistent  with  the  entire  sanctification
of  the  soul  and  the  moral  maturity  of  a  being  still  naturally  in-
fi.rm  and  imperfect."

The  first  and  second  of  these  answers  do  not  touch  the  pcrint.
No  one  pretends  that  men  are  placed  under  the  necessity  of  sin-
ning, "  in  order  that  "  they  may  be  able  to  repeat  the  Lord's
prayer.  This  would  indeed  be  absurd.  The  argument  is  this.  If
a  man  prays  to  be  forgiven,  he  confesses  that  he  is  a  sinner,  and
if  a  sinner,  he  is  not  free  from  sin  or  perfect.  And  therefore,
the  use  of  the  Lord's  prayer  by  all  Christians,  is  an  acknowledg-
ment that  no  Christian  in  this  life  is  perfect.  The  third  answer,
which  is  the  one  principally  relied  upon  and  constantly  repeated,
involves  a  contradiction.  It  assumes  that  what  is  not  sin  requires
to  be  forgiven.     Mr.  Watson  says  the  petition,  "  Forgive  us  our

1  Theoloffwal  Institutes,  u.  xxix. ;  edit.  New  York,  1832,  p.  545.


250  PART  m.   ch.  xvni.  —  sanctification.

trespasses,"  may  be  properly  used  by  those  who  are  free  from
sin.  This  is  saying  that  sin  is  not  sin.  The  argument  by  which
this  position  is  sustamed  also  involves  a  contradiction.  Our  "  in-
firmities "  are  sins  if  judged  by  "  the  perfect  law  "  ;  but  not  if
judged  by  "  the  evangehcal  law."  As  we  are  not  to  be  judged
by  the  former,  but  by  the  latter,  want  of  conformity  to  the  law
is  not  sin.  The  only  inability  under  which  men,  since  the  fall,
labour,  arises  from  their  sinfulness,  and  therefore  is  no  excuse  for
want  of  conformity  to  that  law  which  it  is  said,  and  said  rightly,
is  "  never  bent  to  human  weakness."

Argument  from  the  Experience  of  Christians.

6.  Appeal  may  be  made  on  this  subject  to  the  testimony  of  the
Church  universal.  There  are  no  forms  of  worship,  no  formulas
for  private  devotion,  in  any  age  or  part  of  the  Church,  which  do
not  contain  confession  of  sin  and  prayer  for  forgiveness.  The
whole  Christian  Church  with  all  its  members  prostrates  itself  be-
fore God,  saying,  "  Have  mercy  upon  us  miserable  sinners."  If
here  and  there  one  and  another  among  tliis  prostrate  multitude
refuse  to  bow  and  join  in  this  confession,  they  are  to  be  wondered
at  and  pitied.  They  are,  however,  not  to  be  found.  Conscious-
ness is  too  strong  for  theory,  and  therefore,

6.  We  may  appeal  to  the  conscience  of  every  believer.  He
knows  that  he  is  a  sinner.  He  never  is  in  a  state  which  satisfies
his  own  conviction  as  to  what  he  ought  to  be.  He  may  call  his
deficiencies  infirmities,  weaknesses,  and  errors,  and  may  refuse
to  call  them  sins.  But  this  does  not  alter  the  case.  Whatever
they  are  called,  it  is  admitted  that  they  need  God's  pardoning
mercy.

§  8.   Theories  of  Perfectionism.
Pelagian  Theory.

The  two  radical  principles  of  Pelagianism  are,  first,  that  the
nature  of  man  is  uninjured  by  the  fall,  so  that  men  are  free  from
sin  until  by  voluntary  transgression  they  incur  guilt.  Secondly,
that  our  natural  powers,  since,  as  well  as  before  the  fall,  are  fully
competent  to  render  complete  obedience  to  the  law.

From  these  principles  Pelagius  inferred,  (1.)  That  a  man
(even  among  the  heathen)  might  live  from  birth  to  death  free
from  all  sin,  although  he  did  not  assert  that  any  man  ever  had
so  lived.  (2.)  That  when  converted,  men  might,  and  numbers  of
men  did,  live  without  sin  ;  perfectly  obeying  the  law.    (3.)  That


§8.]  THEORIES   OF  PERFECTIONISM.  251

this  obedience  was  rendered  in  the  exercise  of  their  ability,  as-
sisted by  the  grace  of  God.

By  grace,  Pelagins  says  that  we  are  to  understand,  (1.)  The
goodness  of  God  in  so  constituting  our  nature  that  we  can  com-
pletely obey  the  law  in  virtue  of  our  free  agency.  (2.)  The
revelation,  precepts,  and  example  of  Christ.  (3.)  The  pardon
of  sins  committed  before  conversion.  (4.)  The  moral  influences
of  the  truth  and  of  the  circumstances  in  which  we  are  placed.
The  effect  of  grace  thus  understood,  is  simply  to  render  obedience
more  easy.

In  the  Council  of  Carthage,  A.  D.  418,  the  Pelagians  were
condemned,  among  other  things,  for  teaching,  (1.)  That  the  effect
of  grace  was  merely  to  render  obedience  more  easy.  (2.)  That
the  declaration  of  the  Apostle  John,  "  If  we  say  that  we  have  no
sin,  we  deceive  ourselves,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  us,"  is,  as  to
some,  a  mere  expression  of  humihty.  (3.)  That  the  petition  in
the  Lord's  prayer,  "  Forgive  us  our  trespasses,"  is  not  suited  to
the  saints.  They  use  it  only  as  expressing  the  desire  and  neces-
sity of  others.

According  to  the  Pelagian  theory,  therefore,  (1.)  The  sin
from  which  the  believer  may  be  perfectly  free  is  the  voluntary
transgression  of  known  law.  Nothing  else  is  of  the  nature  of  sin.
(2.)  The  law  to  which  perfect  conformity  in  this  life  is  possible,
and  in  many  cases  actual,  is  the  moral  law  in  all  its  strictness.
(3.)  This  obedience  may  be  rendered  without  any  supernatural
influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit.

MomisJi  Theory.

Romanists  teach,  (1.)  That  by  the  infusion  of  grace  in  justifi-
cation as  effected  by  or  in  baptism,  everything  of  the  nature  of
sin  is  removed  from  the  soul.  (2.)  That  good  works  performed
in  a  state  of  grace  are  free  from  the  taint  of  sin,  and  are  perfect.
"  Si  quis  in  quolibet  bono  opere  justum  saltern  venahter  peccare
dixerit  ....  anathema  sit."  ^  (3.)  That  the  law  may  be  and
often  is,  perfectly  obeyed  by  the  children  of  God  in  this  life.
(4.)  That  men  may  not  only  do  all  that  the  law  requires,  but
may  even  go  beyond  its  demands.  (5.)  Nevertheless,  as  there  is
a  higher  law  than  that  by  which  men  are  to  be  judged,  no  man
is  entirely  free  from  venial  sins,  i.  e.,  sins  which  do  not  bring  the
soul  under  condemnation,  and  therefore  all  men  in  this  life  have
need  to  say,  "  Forgive  us  our  trespasses."

1  Council  of  Trent,  Sess.  vi.  Canon  25 ;  Streitwolf ,  vol.  i.  p.  36.


252  PART  in.     Ch.   XVIII. -SANCTIFICATION.

From  this  statement  it  appears,  —

1.  That  by  sin  from  which  advanced  believers  are  said  to  be
free,  is  meant  only  what  merits  condemnation,  and  in  itself  de-
serves the  forfeiture  of  grace  or  divine  favour.  It  is  admitted
that  "  concupiscence,"  or  the  remains  of  original  sin,  is  not  re-
moved by  baptism,  but  it  is  not  of  the  nature  of  sin,  in  the  sense
just  stated.  Neither  are  venial  sins,  i.  e.,  sins  which  do  not  for-
feit grace,  properly  sins,  if  judged  by  the  law  under  which  believ-
ers are  now  placed.  So  far,  therefore,  as  the  negative  part  of
perfection,  or  freedom  from  sin  is  concerned,  the  Romanists  do
not  mean  freedom  from  moral  faults,  but  simply  freedom  from
what  incurs  the  sentence  of  the  law.  It  is  perfection  as  judged
by  a  lower  standard  of  judgment.

2.  The  law  to  which  we  are  now  subject,  and  the  demands  of
wliich  Romanists  say  are  satisfied  by  the  obedience  of  the  saints,
is  not  the  moral  law  in  its  original  strictness,  but  the  smn  of  that
which  is  due  from  man  in  his  present  circumstances ;  in  other
words,  the  demands  of  the  law  are  accommodated  to  the  condi-
tion of  men  in  this  life.  This  is  evident,  because  they  say  that
the  saints  obey  the  law  so  far  as  it  is  now  binding,  and  because
they  admit  that  saints  commit  venial  sins,  which  can  only  mean
sins  wliich,  under  a  stricter  rule  of  judgment,  would  merit  con-
demnation.

3.  As  stated  above,  they  distinguish  between  the  law  and  love.
The  former  is  that  wliich  all  men,  and  especially  Clu-istians,  are
bound  to  observe,  but  love  is  a  higher  principle  which  prompts
to  doing  more  than  the  law  or  justice  demands.  Consequently,
the  positive  part  of  perfection,  or  conformity  to  the  law,  does  not
imply  the  highest  degree  of  moral  excellence  of  which  our  nature
is  susceptible,  but  only  such  as  answers  to  the  lower  demands  of
the  law  to  which  we  fer«  now  subject.  In  a  passage  already
quoted,  Bellarmin  says,  "  Defectus  charitatis,  quod  videlicet  non
faciamus  opera  nostra  tanto  fervore  dilectionis,  quanto  faciemus
in  patria,  defectus  quidem  est,  sed  culpa,  et  peccatum  non  est.
Unde  etiam  charitas  nostra,  quamvis  comparata  ad  charitatem
beatorum  sit  imperfecta,  tamen  absolute  perfecta  dici  potest."  ^
In  like  manner  Moehler  says,''^  "  In  modern  times  the  attempt  has
been  made  to  sustain  the  old  orthodox  doctrine  by  assuming  that
the  moral  law  makes  ideal  demands,  which,  as  every  other  ideal,
must  remain  unattainable.     If  this  be  true,  then  the  man  who

1  Be  Jtistificatione,  IV.  xvii. ;  Disputationcs,  edit.  Paris,  1608,  vol.  iv.  p.  933,  b.
'■*  Symbolik,  6th  edit.  Mainz,  1843,  p.  216.


§8.]  THEORIES   OF   PERFECTIONISM.  253

falls  short  of  this  ideal  is  as  little  responsible,  and  as  little  de-
serving of  punishment,  as  an  epic  poet  who  should  fall  short  of
the  Iliad  of  Homer."

The  Romish  theory  is  consistent.  In  baptism  all  sin  is  washed
away.  By  the  infusion  of  grace  full  ability  is  given  to  do  all  that
is  required  of  us.  Nothing  can  be  required  beyond  what  we  are
able  to  perform,  and,  therefore,  the  demands  of  the  law  are  suited
to  our  present  state.  By  obedience  to  this  modified  law,  we  merit
increased  supplies  of  grace  and  eternal  Hfe.

The  perfection,  therefore,  which  Romanists  insist  upon  is
merely  relative  ;  not  an  entire  freedom  from  sin,  but  only  from
such  sins  as  merit  condemnation  ;  not  holiness  which  is  absolutely
perfect,  but  perfect  only  relatively  to  the  law  under  which  we  are
now  placed.  It  is  clear  that  there  is  a  radical  difference  between
Romanists  and  Protestants  as  to  the  nature  of  sin  and  the  Kmits
of  moral  obligation.  If  they  were  to  adopt  our  definition  of  sin,
they  would  not  pretend  to  any  perfection  in  the  present  life.

The  Arminian  Theory.

The  perfection  which  the  Arminians  teach  is  attainable,  and
which,  in  many  cases,  they  say  is  actually  attained  in  this  life,
is  declared  to  be  complete  conformity  to  the  law  ;  mcluding  free-
dom from  sin,  and  the  proper  exercise  of  all  right  affections  and
the  discharge  of  all  duties.

Episcopius  defines  it  to  be,  keeping  the  commandments  of  God
with  a  perfect  fulfilment ;  or  loving  God  as  much  as  we  ought  to
love  Him,  according  to  the  requirements  of  the  Gospel ;  or  accord-
ing to  the  covenant  of  grace.  "  By  a  perfection  of  degrees  is
meant  that  highest  perfection  which  consists  in  the  highest  exer-
tion of  human  strength  assisted  by  grace."  "  This  perfection
includes  two  things,  (1.)  A  perfection  pr^ortioned  to  the  powers
of  each  individual ;  (2.)  A  desire  of  making  continual  progress,
and  of  increasing  one's  strength  more  and  more."

Limborch  defines  it  as  "  keeping  the  precepts  of  the  Gospel
after  such  manner,  and  in  such  degree  of  perfection  as  God  re-
quires of  us  under  the  denunciation  of  eternal  damnation."  This
obedience  is  "  perfect  as  being  correspondent  to  the  stipulations
contained  in  the  divine  covenant."  "  It  is  not  a  sinless  or  abso-
lutely perfect  obedience,  but  such  as  consists  in  a  sincere  love  and
habit  of  piety,  which  excludes  all  habit  of  sin,  with  all  enor-
mous and  deliberate  actions."  ^   This  perfection  has  three  degrees

1  Tlieolo(/ia  Christiana,  v.  Ixxix.  2,  8,  14;  edit.  Amsterdam,  1715,  pp.  658,  a,  659,  b,
661,  a.


254  PART  m.     Ch.   XVIII.  -  SANCTIFICATION.

(1.)  That  of  beginners.  (2.)  That  of  proficients.  (3.)  That
of  the  truly  perfect,  who  have  subdued  the  habit  of  sin,  and  take
delight  in  the  practice  of  virtue.

Wesley  ^  says  ;  "  Perfection  is  the  loving  God  with  all  the  heart,
mind,  soul,  and  strength.  This  imphes  that  no  wrong  temper,
none  contrary  to  love,  remains  in  the  soul ;  and  that  all  the
thoughts,  words,  and  actions,  are  governed  by  love."  Dr.  Peck^
says  that  it  is  "a  state  of  hoHness  which  fully  meets  the  require-
ments of  the  Gospel."

Although  these  definitions  differ  in  some  respects,  they  agree
in  the  general  idea  that  perfection  consists  in  entire  conformity
to  the  law  to  which  we  are  now  subject,  and  by  which  we  are  to
be  judged.

The  Law  to  which  Believers  are  subject.

What,  according  to  the  Arminian  theory,  is  that  law  ?  The
answer  to  that  question  is  given  in  a  negative,  and  in  a  positive
form.  Negatively,  it  is  said  by  Dr.  Peck  not  to  be  the  Adamic
law,  or  the  law  originally  given  to  Adam.  Fletcher  ^  says  :  "  With
respect  to  the  Christless  law  of  paradisiacal  obedience,  we  utterly
disclaim  sinless  perfection."  "  We  shall  not  be  judged  by  that
law  ;  but  by  a  law  adapted  to  our  present  state  and  circumstances,
called  the  law  of  Christ."  "  Our  Heavenly  Father  never  expects
of  us,  in  our  debilitated  state,  the  obedience  of  immortal  Adam
in  paradise."  The  positive  statements  are,  "It  is  the  law  of
Christ."  "  The  Gospel."  "  The  standard  of  character  set  up  in
the  Gospel  must  be  such  as  is  practicable  by  man,  fallen  as  he  is.
Coming  up  to  this  standard  is  what  we  call  Christian  perfection."  *

From  this  it  appears  that  the  law  according  to  which  men  are
pronounced  perfect,  is  not  the  original  moral  law,  but  the  miti-
gated law  suited  to  the  debilitated  state  of  man  since  the  fall.
The  sin  from  which  the  believer  may  be  entirely  free,  is  not
all  moral  imperfection  which  in  itself  deserves  punishment,  but
only  such  delinquencies  as  are  inconsistent  with  the  mitigated
law  of  the  Gospel.

On  this  point  the  language  of  Limborch  above  quoted,  is  ex-
plicit. It  is  not  "  an  absolutely  sinless  perfection  "  that  is  asserted.
And  Fletcher  says.  We  utterly  disclaim  "  sinless  perfection  "  ac-
cording to  the  paradisiacal  law.     Wesley  says.  By  sin  is  ^meant

1  Plain  Account  of  Christian  Perfection,  p.  48.

2  Christian  Perfection,  New  York,  1843,  p.  292.

3  See  above,  p.  102.

*  Peck,  Christian  Perfection,  p.  294.


§8.]  THEORIES   OF   PERFECTIONISM.  255

(1.)  Voluntary  transgression  of  known  law.  In  this  sense  all  who
are  born  of  God  are  free  from  sin.  (2.)  It  means  all  unholy  tem-
pers, self-will,  pride,  anger,  sinful  thoughts.  From  these  the  per-
fect are  free.  (3.)  But  mistakes  and  infirmities  are  not  sins.
"  These  are,"  indeed,  "  deviations  from  the  perfect  law,  and  conse-
quently need  atonement.  Yet  they  are  not  properly  sins."  "  A
person  filled  with  the  love  of  God  is  still  liable  to  these  involun-
tary transgressions.  Such  transgressions  you  may  call  sins,  if  you
please,  I  do  not."  ^  The  question,  however,  is  not  what  Wesley
or  any  other  man  chooses  to  call  sin ;  but  what  does  the  law  of
God  condemn.  Nothing  which  the  law  does  not  condemn  can
need  expiation.  If  these  transgressions,  therefore,  need  atonement,
they  are  sins  in  the  sight  of  God.  Our  refusing  to  recognize  them
as  such  does  not  alter  their  nature,  or  remove  their  guilt.

According  to  the  Arminian  system,  especially  as  held  by  the
Wesleyans,  this  perfection  is  not  due  to  the  native  ability,  or  free
will  of  man,  but  to  the  grace  of  God,  or  supernatural  influence
of  the  Spirit.  Perfection  is  a  matter  of  grace,  (1.)  Because  it
is  solely  on  account  of  the  work  of  Christ  that  God  lowers  the
demands  of  the  law,  and  accepts  as  perfect  the  obedience  which
the  milder  law  of  the  Gospel  demands.  (2.)  Because  the  ability
to  render  this  obedience  is  due  to  the  gracious  influence  of  the
Holy  Spirit.  (3.)  Because  behevers  constantly  need  the  inter-
cession of  Christ  as  our  High  Priest,  to  secure  them  from  con-
demnation for  involuntary  transgressions,  which,  judged  by  the
law,  would  incur  its  penalty.

Oherlin  Theory.

This  theory  is  so  called  because  its  prominent  advocates  are  the
officers  of  the  Oberlin  University  in  Ohio.  President  Mahan^
says,  perfection  in  holiness  implies  a  full  and  perfect  discharge
of  our  entire  duty ;  of  all  existing  obligations  in  respect  of  God
and  all  other  beings.  It  is  loving  God  with  all  the  heart,  soul,
mind,  and  strength.  It  implies  the  entire  absence  of  selfishness
and  the  perpetual  presence  and  all  pervading  influence  of  pure
and  perfect  love.

Professor  Finney  says :  "  By  entire  sanctification,  I  understand
the  consecration  of  the  whole  being  to  God.  In  other  words,  it
is  the  state  of  devotedness  to  God  and  his  service  required  by  the
moral  law.  The  law  is  perfect.  It  requires  just  what  is  right ;
all  that  is  right,  and  nothing  more.     Nothing  more  nor  less  can

1  Plain  Account,  pp.  62-67.  2  Christian  Perfection,  p.  7.  '


256  PART  m.    Ch.  XVIII.  —  sanctification.

possibly  be  perfection  or  entire  sanctification  than  obedience  to
the  hxw.  Obedience  to  the  law  of  God  in  an  uifant,  a  man,  an
angel,  and  in  God  himself,  is  perfection  in  each  of  them.  And
nothing  can  possibly  be  perfection  in  any  being  short  of  this  ;  nor
can  there  possibly  be  anything  above  it."  ^

The  law  which  now  binds  men  and  to  which  they  are  bound  to
be  perfectly  conformed,  is  the  original  moral  law  given  to  Adam.
But  that  law  demands  nothing  more  and  nothing  less  than
what  every  man  in  his  inward  state  and  outward  circumstances
is  able  to  render.  The  law  meets  man  at  every  step  of  his  as-
cending or  descending  progress.  The  more  grace,  knowledge,  or
strensth  he  has,  the  more  does  the  law  demand.  On  the  other
hand,  the  less  of  knowledge,  culture,  moral  susceptibihty,  or
strength  he  possesses,  the  less  does  the  law  require  of  him.

President  Mahan  says.  Perfection  does  not  imply  that  we  love
God  as  the  saints  do  in  heaven,  but  merely  that  we  love  Him  as
far  as  practicable  with  our  present  powers.

Professor  Finney  says.  The  law  does  not  require  that  we  should
love  God  as  we  might  do,  had  we  always  improved  our  time,  or
had  we  never  sinned.  It  does  not  suppose  that  our  powers  are  in
a  perfect  state.     The  service  required  is  regulated  by  our  ability.

The  principle  of  this  perfect  obedience  is  our  own  natural  abil-
ity. A  free  moral  agent  must  be  able  to  be  and  to  do  all  that
the  law  can  justly  demand.  Moral  ability,  natural  ability,  gra-
cious abihty,  are  distinctions  wliich  Professor  Finney  pronounces
perfectly  nonsensical.  "  It  is,"  he  says,  "  a  first  truth  of  reason
that  moral  obligation  implies  the  possession  of  every  kind  of
ability  which  is  required  to  render  the  required  act  possible."  ^

The  Oberlin  theory  of  perfection  is  founded  on  the  following
principles :  —

1.  Holiness  consists  in  disinterested  benevolence,  i.  e.,  a  perfect
wilHngness  that  God  should  do  whatever  the  highest  good  of  the
universe  demands.  A  man  either  has,  or  has  not,  this  willingness.
If  he  has,  he  has  all  that  is  required  of  him.  He  is  perfect.  If
he  has  not  this  willingness  he  is  in  rebellion  against  God.  There-
fore it  is  said,  "  Perfection,  as  implied  in  the  action  of  our  vol-
untary powers  in  full  harmony  with  our  present  convictions  of
duty,  is  an  irreversible  condition  of  eternal  hfe."  ^

2.  There  is  no  sin  but  in  the  voluntary  transgression  of  known
law.

1  Oberlin  EimnrjeUst,  vol.  ii.  p.  1.

'•^  Sei'nions,  vol.  iv.  No.  18.

8  Oberlin  Quarterly  Eedew,  May  18iG,  p.  468.


§8.]  THEORIES    OF   PERFECTIONISM.  257

3.  There  is  no  moral  character  in  anything  but  generic  volitions,
or  those  purposes  which  terminate  on  an  ultimate  end.  There  is
no  moral  character  in  feehng,  and  much  less  in  states  of  mind  not
determined  by  the  will.  When  a  man's  purpose  is  to  promote
the  happiness  of  the  universe  he  is  perfectly  holy  ;  when  it  is
anything  else,  he  is  perfectly  sinful.

4.  Every  man,  in  virtue  of  being  a  free  agent,  has  plenary  ability
to  fulfil  all  his  obHgations.  This  principle,  though  mentioned
last,  is  the  root  of  the  whole  system.

The  Relation  between  these   Theories  of  Perfection.

The  Pelagian  and  the  Oberlin  theories  agree  as  to  their  views
of  the  nature  of  sin  ;  the  ability  of  man  ;  and  the  extent  of  the
obligation  of  the  law.

They  differ  as  to  their  A^ews  of  the  nature  of  virtue  or  holi-
ness. The  Pelagian  system  does  not  assume  that  disinterested
benevolence,  or  the  purpose  to  promote  the  highest  good  of  the
universe,  is  the  sum  of  all  virtue  ;  i.  e.,  it  does  not  put  the  universe
in  the  place  of  God,  as  that  to  which  our  allegiance  is  due.  They
differ  also  in  that,  while  the  Oberlin  divines  maintain  the  plenary
ability  of  man,  they  give  more  importance  to  the  work  of  the
Holy  Spirit ;  and  in  that,  it  is  generally  admitted  that  although
men  have  the  ability  to  do  their  whole  duty,  yet  that  they  will
not  exert  it  aright  unless  influenced  by  the  grace  of  God.

The  Romish  and  Arminian  theories  agree,  (1.)  In  that  both
teach  that  the  law  to  which  we  are  bound  to  be  conformed  is  not
"  ideal  excellence  ;  "  not  the  Adamic  law  ;  not  the  moral  law  in  its
original  strictness  ;  but  a  milder  law  suited  to  our  condition  since
the  fall.  (2.)  That  by  freedom  from  sin  is  not  meant  freedom  from
what  the  law  in  its  strictness  condemns,  and  what  in  its  nature
needs  expiation  and  pardon,  but  from  everything  which  the  milder
law,  "  the  law  of  Christ,"  condemns.  (3.)  They  agree  in  denying
to  men  since  the  fall  ability  perfectly  to  keep  the  commandments
of  God,  but  attribute  the  ability  and  disposition  to  obey  to  the
grace  of  God  ;  or  the  supernatural  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit.

They  differ  as  to  the  mode  in  which  this  grace  is  communicated,
in  that  the  Romanists  say  that  it  is  only  through  the  sacraments ;
whereas  Arminians  say  that  sufficient  grace  is  given  to  all  men,
which,  if  duly  improved,  secures  such  larger  measures  of  grace  as
will  enable  the  believer  to  become  perfect.  They  differ  also  as  to
the  nature  of  good  works  in  so  far  as  Romanists  include  under
that  category  many  things  not  commanded  in  the  Scriptures  ;  and

VOL,.   III.  17


258  PART  in.   ch.  xvni.  —  sanctification.

as  they  teach  the  possibility  of  performing  works  of  supereroga-
tion, which  the  Arminians  deny.  The  Romanists  also  teach  that
good  works  merit  eternal  life,  which  evangelical  Arminians  do
not.

These  theories,  however,  all  agree  in  teaching  that  the  law  of
God  has  been  lowered  in  so  far  that  its  demands  are  satisfied  by  a
less  degree  of  obedience  than  was  required  of  Adam,  or  of  man
in  his  normal  state ;  and  therefore  in  calling  that  perfection  which
in  fact  is  not  perfection,  either  in  the  sight  of  God  or  of  an  en-
lightened conscience.  It  is  a  contradiction  to  say  that  a  man
is  perfect  whose  acts  and  shortcomings  need  expiation  and  the
pardoning  mercy  of  God.

It  may  be  safely  assumed  that  no  man  living  has  ever  seen  a
fellow-man  whom,  even  in  the  imperfect  light  in  which  a  man  re-
veals himself  to  his  fellows,  he  deems  perfect.  And  no  sound-
minded  man  can  regard  himself  as  perfect,  unless  he  lowers  the
standard  of  judgment  to  suit  his  case.  And  here  lies  one  of  the
special  dangers  of  the  whole  system.  If  the  law  of  God  can  be
relaxed  in  its  demands  to  suit  the  state  of  its  subjects,  then  there
is  no  limit  to  be  assigned  to  its  condescension.  Thus  perfection-
ism has  sometimes,  although  not  among  the  Methodists,  lapsed
into  antinomianism.


CHAPTER  XiX.

THE  LAW.

§  1.  Preliminary  Principles.

The  Personality  of  Grod  involved  in  the  Idea  of  Law  ;  and^  there-
fore, all  Morality  is  founded  on  Religio7i.

The  principal  meanings  of  the  word  law  are,  (1.)  An  estab-
lished order  in  the  sequence  of  events.  A  law,  in  this  sense,
is  a  mere  fact.  That  the  planets  are  distant  from  the  sun  accord-
ing to  a  determined  proportion ;  that  the  leaves  of  a  plant  are
arranged  in  a  regular  spiral  around  the  stem ;  and  that  one  idea
by  association  suggests  another,  are  simple  facts.  Yet  they  are
properly  called  laws,  in  the  sense  of  established  orders  of  sequence
or  relation.  So  also  what  are  called  the  laws  of  light,  of  sound,
and  of  chemical  affinity,  are,  for  the  most  part,  mere  facts.  (2.)  A
uniformly  acting  force  which  determines  the  regular  sequence  of
events.  In  this  sense  the  phj^sical  forces  which  we  see  in  operation
around  us,  are  called  the  laws  of  nature.  Gravitation,  light,  heat,
electricity,  and  magnetism,  are  such  forces.  The  fact  that  they
act  uniformly  gives  them  the  character  of  laws.  Thus  the  Apos-
tle speaks  also  of  a  law  of  sin  in  his  members  which  wars  against
the  law  of  the  mind.  (3.)  Law  is  that  which  binds  the  conscience.
It  imposes  the  obligation  of  conformity  to  its  demands  upon  all
rational  creatures.  This  is  true  of  the  moral  law  in  its  widest
sense.  It  is  also  true  of  human  laws  within  the  sphere  of  their
legitimate  operation.

In  all  these  senses  of  the  word,  law  implies  a  law-giver ;  that  is,
an  intelligence  acting  voluntarily  for  the  attainment  of  an  end.
The  irregular,  or  unregulated  action  of  physical  forces  produces
chaos  ;  their  ordered  action  produces  the  cosmos.  But  ordered
action  is  action  preestablished,  sustained,  and  directed  for  the
accomplishment  of  a  purpose.

This  is  still  more  obviously  true  with  regard  to  moral  laws.
The  slightest  analysis  of  our  feelings  is  sufficient  to  show  that
moral  obligation  is  the  obligation  to  conform  our  character  and
conduct  to  the  will  of  an  infinitely  perfect  Being,  who  has  the


260  PART  III.    Ch.  XIX.  — the  LAW.

authority  to  make  his  will  imperative,  and  who  has  the  power
and  the  right  to  punish  disobedience.  The  sense  of  guilt  especially
resolves  itself  into  a  consciousness  of  being  amenable  to  a  moral
governor.  The  moral  law,  therefore,  is  in  its  nature  the  revela-
tion of  the  will  of  God  so  far  as  that  will  concerns  the  conduct  of
his  creatures.  It  has  no  other  authority  and  no  other  sanction
than  that  which  it  derives  from  Him.

The  same  is  true  with  regard  to  the  laws  of  men.  They  have
no  power  or  authority  unless  they  have  a  moral  foundation.  And
if  they  have  a  moral  basis,  so  that  they  bind  the  conscience,  that
basis  must  be  the  divine  will.  The  authority  of  civil  rulers,  the
rights  of  property,  of  marriage,  and  all  other  civil  rights,  do  not
rest  on  abstractions,  nor  on  general  principles  of  expediency.
They  might  be  disregarded  mthout  guilt,  were  they  not  sustained
by  the  authority  of  God.  All  moral  obligation,  therefore,  resolves
itself  into  the  obligation  of  conformity  to  the  will  of  God.  And
all  human  rights  are  founded  on  the  ordinance  of  God.  So  that
theism  is  the  basis  of  jurisprudence  as  well  as  of  morality.  This
doctrine  is  taught  by  Stalil,  perhaps  the  greatest  Uving  authority
on  the  j^hilosophy  of  law.  "  Every  philosophical  science,"  he  says,
"  must  begin  with  the  first  principle  of  all  things,  that  is,  with
the  Absolute.  It  must,  therefore,  decide  between  Theism  and
Pantheism,  between  the  doctrine  that  the  first  cause  or  principle
is  the  personal,  extramundane,  self-reveaUng  God,  and  the  dgc-
trine  that  the  first  principle  is  an  impersonal  power  immanent  in
the  world."  ^  It  is  not  pantheism,  but  fetichism  to  make  all  things
God.  The  real  question  is.  Whether  the  Absolute  has  personality
and  self-consciousness  or  not  ?  Stuhl  had  previously  said  to  the
same  effect,  that  every  philosophy,  and  every  religion,  and  espe-
cially the  Christian,  must  proceed  on  a  theory  of  the  universe  (a
Weltanschauung).  It  is  the  Christian  doctrine  of  God  and  of
his  relation  to  the  world,  that  he  makes  the  foundation  of  legal
and  political  science  (of  Rechts-  und  Staatslehre).^  He  therefore
calls  his  system  "  theological "  in  so  far  as  it  makes  the  nature  and
Avill  of  God  the  foundation  of  all  duties  and  the  source  of  all
rights.

He  recognizes,  however,  the  distinction  between  morality  and
religion.  "  Morality,"  he  says,  "  is  the  perfection  (Vollendung)  of
man  in  himself  (so  far  as  the  will  is  concerned)  ;  or  the  revelation

1  Die  Pliilosophle  dcs  Rechts,  von  Friedrich  Julius  Stahl;  Rechts-  und  Staatslehre,  I.  i.  1,
§  1;  4th  edit.  Heidelberg,  1870,  vol.  ii.  part  1,  p.  7.
'^  Einleituny,  §  5,  ut  supra,  p.  4.


§  1]  PRELIMINARY  PRINCIPLES.  261

of  tlie  divine  being  in  man.  Man  is  the  image  of  God,  and  there-
fore in  his  nature  is  like  God,  perfect  or  complete  in  himself ;  and
conformity  to  tlie  divine  image  is  for  him  the  goal  and  command.
(Matt.  V.  45.)  Religion,  on  the  other  hand,  is  the  bond  between
man  and  God,  or  Avhat  binds  men  to  God,  so  that  we  should  know
and  will  only  in  Him,  refer  everything  to  Him,  —  entire  consecra-
tion, the  personal  iinion  with  God.  Thus,  love  of  our  neighbour,
courage,  spirituality  -(the  opposite  of  sensuality),  may  be  simply
moral  virtues  ;  whereas  faith  and  the  love  of  God  are  purely
religious.  The  courage  of  Napoleon's  guard  was  a  moral  virtue
(a  state  of  the  mil)  ;  the  courage  of  Luther  was  religious  (a
power  derived  from  his  relation  to  God)."  ^

Religion  and  morality,  although  thus  different,  are  not  indepen-
dent. They  are  but  different  phases  of  our  relation  to  God.  Stahl,
therefore,  controverts  the  doctrine  of  Grotius,  that  there  would  be
a  jus  naturale  if  there  were  no  God  ;  which  is  really  equivalent
to  saying  that  there  would  be  an  obligation  to  goodness  if  there
were  no  such  thing  as  goodness.  Moral  excellence  is  of  the  very
essence  of  God.  He  is  concrete  goodness  ;  infinite  reason,  excel-
lence, knowledge,  and  power  in  a  personal  form  ;  so  that  there  can
be  no  obligation  to  virtue  which  does  not  involve  oblig-ation  to
God.  Wolf  carried  out  the  doctrine  of  Grotius  to  the  length  of
saying  that  an  Atheist,  if  consistent,  would  act  just  as  the  Chris-
tian acts.  This  principle  of  Grotius,  says  Stahl,  contained  the
germ  of  separation  from  religion,  which  unfolded  itself  with  Kant
into  an  ignoring,  and,  with  those  who  followed  him,  into  the  denial
of  God.2

"  The  primary  idea  of  goodness,  is  the  essential,  not  the  crea-
tive, will  of  God.  The  divine  will  in  its  essence  is  infinite  love,
mercy,  patience,  truth,  faithfulness,  rectitude,  spirituality,  and  all
that  is  included  in  holiness,  which  constitutes  the  inmost  nature  of
God.  The  holiness  of  God,  therefore,  neither  precedes  his  will
('  sanctitas  antecedens  voluntatem  '  of  the  Schoolmen),  nor  fol-
lows it,  but  is  his  will  itself.  The  good  is  not  a  law  for  the  divine
will  (so  that  God  wills  it  because  it  is  good)  ;  neither  is  it  a  crea-
tion of  his  will  (so  that  it  becomes  good  because  He  wills  it);
but  it  is  the  nature  (das  UrwoUen)  of  God  from  everlasting  to
everlasting."  ^  Again  it  is  said,  "  Hence  it  follows  that  moral
goodness  is  concrete,  specific,  ....  absolute,  origmal,  as  little
determined  by  logical  laws  as  by  a  relation  to  external  ends

1  Stahl,  ut  supra  i.  ii.  1,  §  24;  TKd.  p.  71.  2  Ibid.  pp.  73,74.

8  Ibid.   I.  ii.  2,  §  29;  Ibid.  pp.  84,  85.


262  PART  III.   Ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

This  is  not  the  doctrine  of  modern  ethics.  According  to  the  eu«
daimonistic  view  adopted  by  the  EngHsh  philosophers,  by  Thom-
asius,  and  others,  the  good  is  good  because  it  tends  to  produce  hap-
piness.      According   to    the  rationalists,  the  good  is  conformity

with  the  laws  of   thought  (Denkrichtigkeit) This  was

the  real  doctrine  of  Wolf,  who  made  morality  to  consist  in  order
(Regelmjissigkeit);  still  more  decidedly  was  it  the  doctrine  of
Kant,  with  whom  the  moral  law  is  a  consequence  of  the  laws  of
thought.  He  says,  expressly,  that  the  idea  of  moral  good  must
be  derived  from  preceding  law,  that  is,  the  law  of  reason.^

These  two  principles,  then,  are  to  be  taken  for  granted ;  first,
that  moral  good  is  good  in  its  own  nature,  and  not  because  of  its
tendencies,  or  because  of  its  conformity  to  the  laws  of  reason ;  and,
second,  that  all  law  has  its  foundation  in  the  nature  and  will  of
God.  These  principles  are  very  comprehensive.  They  are  of
special  importance  in  the  exposition  of  the  law  in  its  aspect  as  the
revealed  will  of  God  designed  to  regulate  human  character  and
conduct.

Protestant  Principles  limiting  Obedience  to  Human  Laws.

There  is  another  principle  regarded  as  fundamental  by  all  Prot-
estants, and  that  is,  that  the  Bible  contains  the  whole  rule  of
duty  for  men  in  their  present  state  of  existence.  Nothing  can
legitimately  bind  the  conscience  that  is  not  commanded  or  forbid-
den by  the  Word  of  God.  This  principle  is  the  safeguard  of  that
liberty  wherewith  Christ  has  made  his  people  free.  If  it  be  re-
nounced, we  are  at  the  mercy  of  the  external  Church,  of  the
State,  or  of  public  opinion.  This  is  simply  the  principle  that  it
is  right  to  obey  God  rather  than  man.  Our  obligation  to  render
obedience  to  human  enactments  in  any  form,  rests  upon  our  obli-
gation to  obey  God ;  and,  therefore,  whenever  human  laws  are
in  conflict  with  the  law  of  God  we  are  bound  to  disobey  them.
When  heathen  emperors  commanded  Christians  to  worship  idols,
the  martyrs  refused.  When  popes  and  councils  commanded
Protestants  to  worsliip  the  Virgin  Mary,  and  to  acknowledge  the
supremacy  of  the  bishop  of  Rome,  the  Protestant  martyrs  refused.
When  the  Presbyterians  of  Scotland  were  required  by  their  ru-
lers in  Church  and  State  to  submit  themselves  to  the  author-
ity of  prelatical  bishops,  they  refused.  When  the  Pm'itans  of
England  were  called  upon  to  recognize  the  doctrine  of  "passive
obedience,"  they  again  refused.     And  it  is  to  the  stand  thus  taken

1  Stahl,  ut  supra,  p.  87.


§  1.]  PRELIMINARY   PRINCIPLES.  263

by  those  martyrs  and  confessors  that  the  world  is  indebted  for  all
of  the  religious  and  civil  liberty  it  now  enjoys.

Whether  any  enactment  of  the  Church  or  State  conflicts  with
the  truth  or  law  of  God,  is  a  question  wliich  every  man  must  de-
cide for  himself.  On  him  individually  rests  the  responsibility,
and  therefore  to  him,  as  an  individual,  belongs  the  right  of  judg-
ment.

Although  these  principles,  when  stated  in  thesi^  are  universally
recognized  among  Protestants,  they  are  nevertheless  very  fre-
quently disregarded.  This  is  true  not  only  of  the  past  when  the
Church  and  State  both  openly  claimed  the  right  to  make  laws  to
bind  the  conscience.  It  is  true  at  the  present  time.  Men  still
insist  on  the  right  of  making  that  sin  which  God  does  not  forbid ;
and  that  obligatory  which  God  has  not  commanded.  They  pre-
scribe rules  of  conduct  and  terms  of  church  fellowship,  which
have  no  sanction  in  the  Word  of  God.  It  is  just  as  much  a  duty
for  the  people  of  God  to  resist  such  usurpations,  as  it  was  for  the
early  Christians  to  resist  the  authority  of  the  Roman  Emperors
in  matters  of  religion,  or  for  the  early  Protestants  to  refuse  to
recognize  the  right  of  the  Pope  to  determine  for  them  what  they
were  to  believe,  and  what  they  were  to  do.  The  essence  of  infi-
delity consists  in  a  man's  putting  his  own  convictions  on  matters
of  truth  and  duty  above  the  Bible.  Tliis  may  be  done  by  fanatics
in  the  cause  of  benevolence,  as  well  as  by  fanatics  in  any  other
cause.  It  is  infidelity  in  either  case.  And  as  such  it  should  be
denounced  and  resisted  unless  we  are  mlling  to  renounce  our  alle-
giance to  God,  and  make  ourselves  the  servants  of  men.

Christian  Liberty/  in  Matters  of  Indifference.

It  is  perfectly  consistent  with  the  principle  above  stated,  that  a
thing  may  be  right  or  wrong  according  to  circumstances,  and,
therefore,  it  may  often  be  ^vrong  for  a  man  to  do  what  the  Bible
does  not  condemn.  Paul  himself  circumcised  Timothy  ;  yet  he
told  the  Galatians  that  if  they  allowed  themselves  to  be  circum-
cised, Clu'ist  would  profit  them  nothing.  Eating  meat  offered  in
sacrifice  to  idols  was  a  matter  of  indifference.  Yet  the  Apostle
said,  "  If  meat  make  my  brother  to  offend,  I  will  eat  no  flesh
while  the  world  standeth,  lest  I  make  my  brother  to  offend."

There  are  two  important  principles  involved  in  these  Scriptural
facts.  The  first  is,  that  a  thing  indifferent  in  itself  may  become
even  fatally  wrong  if  done  with  a  wrong  intention.  Circumcision
was  nothing,  and  uncircumcision  was  nothing.     It  mattered  little


264  PART  III.     Ch.   XIX. —  THE   LAW.

whether  Ji  man  was  circumcised  or  not.  But  if  any  one  sub-
mitted to  circumcision  as  an  act  of  legal  obedience,  and  as  the
necessary  condition  of  his  justification  before  God,  he  thereby  re-
jected the  Gospel,  or,  as  the  Apostle  expressed  it,  he  fell  fi'om
grace.  He  renounced  the  gratuitous  method  of  justification,  and
Christ  became  of  no  effect  to  him.  In  like  manner,  eating  meat
which  had  been  offered  in  sacrifice  to  an  idol,  was  a  matter  of  in-
difference. "  Meat,"  says  Paul,  "  commendeth  us  not  to  God:  for
neither,  if  we  eat,  are  we  the  better ;  neither,  if  we  eat  not,  are
we  the  worse."  Yet  if  a  man  ate  such  meat  as  an  act  of  reverence
to  the  idol,  or  under  circumstances  which  implied  that  it  was  an
act  of  worship,  he  was  guilty  of  idolatry.  And,  therefore,  the
Apostle  taught  that  participation  in  feasts  held  within  the  pre-
cincts of  an  idol's  temple,  was  idolatry.

The  other  principle  is  that,  no  matter  what  our  intention  may
be,  we  sin  against  Christ  when  we  make  such  use  of  our  liberty,
in  matters  of  indifference,  as  causes  others  to  offend.  In  the  first
of  these  cases  the  sin  was  not  in  being  circumcised,  but  in  making
circumcision  a  condition  of  our  justification.  In  the  second  case,
the  idolatry  consisted  not  in  eating  meat  offered  in  sacrifice  to
idols,  but  in  eating  it  as  an  act  of  worship  to  the  idol.  And  in
the  third  case,  the  sin  was  not  in  asserting  our  liberty  in  matters
of  indifference,  but  in  causing  others  to  offend.

The  rules  which  the  Scriptures  clearly  lay  down  on  this  subject
are  :  (1.)  That  no  man  or  body  of  men  has  the  right  to  pronoimce
that  to  be  sinful  which  God  does  not  forbid.  There  was  no  sin
in  being  circumcised,  or  in  eating  meat,  or  in  keeping  the  sacred
days  of  the  Hebrews.  (2.)  That  it  is  a  violation  of  the  law  of
love,  and  therefore  a  sin  against  Christ,  to  make  such  use  of  our
hberty  as  to  cause  others  to  sin.  "  Take  heed,"  says  the  Apostle,
'■'■  lest  by  any  means  this  liberty  of  yours  become  a  stumbling
block  to  them  that  are  weak."  "  When  ye  sin  so  against  the
brethren,  and  wound  their  weak  conscience,  ye  sin  against  Cluist."
(1  Cor.  viii.  9, 12.)  "  It  is  good  («'.  e.,  morally  obligatory)  neither
to  eat  flesh,  nor  to  drink  wine,  nor  any  thing  whereby  th}^  brother
stumbleth,  or  is  offended,  or  is  made  weak."  "  All  things  indeed
are  pure,  but  it  is  evil  for  that  man  who  eatetli  with  offence."
(Rom.  xiv.  21,  20.)  (3).  Nothing  in  itself  indifferent  can  be  made
the  ground  of  permanent  and  universal  obligation.  Because  it  was
wrong  in  Galatia  to  submit  to  circumcision,  it  does  not  follow  that
it  was  wrong  in  Paul  to  circumcise  Timothy.  Because  it  was
wrong  in  Corinth  to  eat  meat,  it  does  not  follow  that  it  is  wrong


§1.]  PRELIMINARY   PRINCIPLES.  166

always  and  everywhere.  An  obligation  arising  out  of  circum-
stances must  vary  with,  circumstances.  (4.)  When  it  is  oblig-
atory to  abstam  from  the  use  of  things  indifferent,  is  a  matter
of  private  judgment.  No  man  has  the  right  to  decide  that  ques-
tion for  other  men.  No  bishop,  priest,  or  church  court  has  the
right  to  decide  it.  Othervtdse  it  wovild  not  be  a  matter  of  liberty.
Paul  constantly  recognized  the  right  (e^ovo-ia)  of  Christians  to
judge  in  such  cases  for  themselves.  He  does  this  not  by  implica-
tion only,  but  he  also  expressly  asserts  it,  and  condemns  those
who  would  call  it  in  question.  "  Let  not  him  that  eateth  despise
him  that  eateth  not ;  and  let  not  him  which  eateth  not  judge  him
that  eateth :  for  God  hath  received  him.  Who  art  thou  that
judgest  another  man's  servant  ?  to  his  own  master  he  standeth  or
falleth."  "  One  man  esteemeth  one  day  above  another  :  another
esteemeth  every  day  alike.  Let  every  man  be  fully  persuaded  in
his  own  mind."  (Rom.  xiv.  3,  4,  5.)  It  is  a  common  saying
that  every  man  has  a  pope  in  his  own  bosom.  That  is,  the  dispo-
sition to  lord  it  over  God's  heritage  is  ahnost  universal.  Men
wish  to  have  their  opinions  on  moral  questions  made  into  laws  to
bind  the  consciences  of  their  brethren.  This  is  just  as  much  a
usurpation  of  a  divine  prerogative  when  done  by  a  private  Chris-
tian or  by  a  church  court,  as  when  done  by  the  Bishop  of  Rome.
We  are  as  much  bound  to  resist  it  in  the  one  case  as  in  the  other.
(5.)  It  is  involved  in  what  has  been  said  that  the  use  which  a  man
makes  of  his  Christian  liberty  can  never  be  legitimately  made  the
ground  of  church  censure,  or  a  term  of  Christian  communion.

Scriptural  Usage  of  the  Word  Law.

The  Scriptures  uniformly  understand  by  law  a  manifestation  of
the  will  of  God.  All  the  operations  of  nature  are  ordered  by
laws  of  his  appointment.  And  his  will  is  represented  as  the  ulti-
mate foundation  of  moral  obKgation.  In  Hebrew  it  is  called
nnm,  instruction,  because  it  is,  as  the  Apostle  says,  "  the  form  of
knowledge  and  of  the  truth."  It  is  the  standard  of  right  and
wrong.  In  Greek  it  is  called  vo/xos,  custom,  and  then,  as  custom
or  usage  regulates  the  conduct  of  men,  whatever  has  that  author-
ity, or  does  in  fact  control  action,  is  called  vopo'i.  In  the  New
Testament  it  is  constantly  used  in  this  wide  sense.  It  is  some-
times applied  to  a  rule  of  conduct  however  revealed ;  sometimes
to  the  Scriptures  as  the  supernaturally  revealed  will  of  God,  as
the  rule  of  faith  and  practice ;  sometimes  to  the  Pentateuch  or
Law  of  Moses ;  and  sometimes  specifically  to  the  moral  law.     It


266  PART  III.    Cii.  XIX.  — THE  LAW.

is  here  to  be  taken  to  mean  that  revelation  of  the  will  of  God
which  is  designed  to  bind  the  conscience  and  to  regulate  the  con-
duct of  men.

How  the  Laio  is  revealed.

This  law  is  revealed  in  the  constitution  of  our  nature,  and  more
fully  and  clearly  in  the  written  Word  of  God.  That  there  is  a
binding  revelation  of  the  law,  independently  of  any  supernatural
external  revelation,  is  expressly  taught  in  the  Bible.  Paul  says
of  the  heathen  that  they  are  a  law  unto  themselves.  They  have
the  law  \vritten  on  their  hearts.  This  is  proved,  he  tells  us,  be-
cause they  do,  (ftvaci,  by  nature,  i.  e.,  in  virtue  of  the  constitution
of  their  nature,  the  things  of  the  law.  The  same  moral  acts
which  the  written  law  prescribes,  the  conduct  of  the  heathen
shows  that  they  know  to  be  obligatory.  Hence  their  conscience
approves  or  disapproves,  as  they  obey  or  disobey  this  inwardly
revealed  law.  What  is  thus  taught  in  Scripture  is  confirmed
by  consciousness  and  experience.  Every  man  is  conscious  of  a
knowledge  of  right  and  wrong,  and  of  a  sense  of  obHgation,  which
are  independent  of  all  external  revelation.  He  may  be  unable  to
determine  whence  that  knowledge  comes.  He  knows,  however,
that  it  has  been  in  him  coeval  with  the  dawn  of  reason,  and  has
enlarged  and  strengthened  just  as  his  reason  unfolded.  His  con-
sciousness tells  liim  that  the  rule  is  withia,  and  would  be  there
though  no  positive  or  external  revelation  of  duty  existed.  In
other  words,  we  do  not  refer  the  sense  of  moral  obligation  to  an
externally  revealed  law,  as  its  source,  but  to  the  constitution  of
our  nature.  This  is  not  the  experience  of  any  class  of  men  ex-
clusively, but  the  common  experience  of  the  race.  Wherever
there  are  men,  there  is  the  sense  of  moral  obHgation,  and  a
knowledge  of  right  and  wi'ong.

It  is  frequently  objected  to  this  doctrine  that  men  differ  widely
in  their  moral  judgments.  What  men  of  one  age  or  country
regard  as  virtues,  men  of  other  ages  or  countries  denounce  as
crimes.  But  this  very  diversity  proves  the  existence  of  the  moral
sense.  Men  could  not  differ  in  judgments  about  beauty,  if  the
aesthetic  element  did  not  belong  to  their  nature.  Neither  could
they  differ  on  questions  of  morality  unless  the  sense  of  right  and
wrong  were  innate  and  universal.  The  diversity  in  question  is
not  greater  than  in  regard  to  rational  truths.  That  men  differ  in
their  judgments  as  to  what  is  true,  is  no  proof  that  reason  is  not
a  natural  and  essential  element  of  their  constitution.  As  there
are  certain  truths  of  the  reason  which  are  intuitive  and  perceived


§1.]  PRELIMINARY  PRINCIPLES.  267

by  all  men,  so  there  are  moral  truths  so  simple  that  they  are  uni-
versally recognized.  As  beyond  these  narrow  limits  there  is
diversity  of  knowledge,  so  there  must  be  diversity  of  judgment.
But  this  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  Scriptural  doctrine  that  even
the  most  degraded  heathen  are  a  law  unto  themselves,  and  show
the  work  of  the  law  written  on  their  hearts.  As  the  revelation
which  God  has  made  of  his  eternal  power  and  Godhead  in  his
works  is  true  and  trustworthy,  and  sufficient  to  render  ignorance
or  denial  of  his  existence  inexcusable,  while  it  does  not  supersede
the  necessity  of  a  clearer  revelation  in  his  word ;  so  there  is  an
imperfect  revelation  of  the  law  made  in  the  very  constitution  of
our  nature,  by  which  those  who  have  no  other  revelation  are  to
be  judged,  but  which  does  not  render  unnecessary  the  clearer
teachings  of  the  Scriptures.

Different  Kinds  of  Laws.

In  looking  into  the  Bible  as  containing  a  revelation  of  the  will
of  God,  the  first  thing  which  arrests  attention  is  the  great  diver-
sity of  precepts  therein  contained.  This  difference  concerns  the
nature  of  the  precepts,  and  the  ground  on  which  they  rest,  or  the
reason  why  they  are  obligatory.

1.  There  are  laws  which  are  founded  on  the  nature  of  God.
To  this  class  belong  the  command  to  love  God  supremely,  to  be
just,  merciful,  and  kind.  Love  must  everywhere  and  always  be
obligatory.  Pride,  envy,  and  malice  must  everywhere  and  al-
ways be  evil.  Such  laws  bind  all  rational  creatures,  angels  as
well  as  men.  The  criterion  of  these  laws  is  that  they  are  abso-
lutely immutable  and  indispensable.  Any  change  in  them  would
imply,  not  merely  a  change  in  the  relations  of  men,  but  in  the
very  nature  of  God,

2.  A  second  class  of  laws  includes  those  which  are  founded  on
the  permanent  relations  of  men  in  their  present  state  of  existence.
Such  are  the  moral,  as  opposed  to  mere  statute  laws,  concerning
property,  marriage,  and  the  duties  of  parents  and  children,  or
superiors  and  inferiors.  Such  laws  concern  men  only  in  their
present  state  of  being.  They  are,  however,  permanent  so  long  as
the  relations  which  they  contemplate  continue.  Some  of  these
laws  bind  men  as  men ;  others  husbands  as  husbands,  wives  as
wives,  and  parents  and  childi-en  as  such,  and  consequently  they
bind  all  men  who  sustain  these  several  relations.  They  are
founded  on  the  nature  of  things,  as  it  is  called  ;  that  is,  upon  the
constitution  which  God  has  seen  fit  to  ordain.     This  constitution


268  PART  ni.   Ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

might  have  been  different,  and  then  these  laws  would  have  had
no  place.  The  right  of  property  need  not  have  existed.  God
might  have  made  all  things  as  common  as  sun-light  or  air.  Men
might  have  been  as  angels,  neither  marrying  nor  giving  m  mar-
riage. Under  such  a  constitution  there  would  be  no  room  for  a
multitude  of  laws  which  are  now  of  universal  and  necessary  ob-
ligation.

3.  A  third  class  of  laws  have  their  foundation  in  certain  tempo-
rary relations  of  men,  or  conditions  of  society,  and  are  enforced
by  the  authority  of  God.  To  this  class  belong  many  of  the  judi-
cial or  civil  laws  of  the  ancient  theocracy  ;  laws  regulating  the
distribution  of  property,  the  duties  of  husbands  and  wives,  the
punishment  of  crimes,  etc.  These  laws  were  the  application  of
general  principles  of  justice  and  right  to  the  peculiar  circum-
stances of  the  Hebrew  people.  Such  enactments  bind  only  those
who  are  in  the  circumstances  contemplated,  and  cease  to  be
obligatory  when  those  circumstances  change.  It  is  always  and
everywhere  right  that  crime  should  be  punished,  but  the  kind  or
degree  of  punishment  may  vary  with  the  varying  condition  of
society.  It  is  always  right  that  the  poor  should  be  supported,
but  one  mode  of  discharging  that  duty  may  be  proper  in  one  age
and  country,  and  another  preferable  in  other  times  and  places.
All  those  laws,  therefore,  in  the  Old  Testament,  which  had  their
foundation  in  the  peculiar  circumstances  of  the  Hebrews,  ceased
to  be  binding  when  the  old  dispensation  passed  away.

It  is  often  difficult  to  determine  to  which  of  the  last  two  classes
certain  laws  of  the  Old  Testament  belong ;  and  therefore,  to  de-
cide whether  they  are  still  obhgatory  or  not.  Deplorable  evils
have  flowed  from  mistakes  as  to  this  point.  The  theories  of  the
union  of  Church  and  State,  of  the  right  of  the  magistrate  to  inter-
fere authoritatively  in  matters  of  religion,  and  of  the  duty  of  per-
secution, so  far  as  Scriptural  authority  is  concerned,  rest  on  the
transfer  of  laws  founded  on  the  temporary  relations  of  the  Hebrews
to  the  altered  relations  of  Christians.  Because  the  Hebrew  kings
were  the  guardians  of  both  tables  of  the  Law,  and  were  required
to  suppress  idolatry  and  all  false  religion,  it  was  inferred  that  such
is  still  the  duty  of  the  Christian  magistrate.  Because  Samuel
hewed  Agag  to  pieces,  it  was  inferred  to  be  right  to  deal  in  like
maimer  with  heretics.  No  one  can  read  the  history  of  the  Chiu'ch
\vithout  being  impressed  with  the  dreadful  evils  which  have
flowed  from  this  mistake.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  some
of  the  judicial  laws  of  the  Old  Testament  which  were  really


§  1.]  PRELIMINARY   PRINCIPLES.  269

founded  on  the  permanent  relations  of  men,  and  therefore,  were  in-
tended to  be  of  perpetual  obligation,  which  many  have  repudiated
as  pecuHar  to  the  old  dispensation.  Such  are  some  of  the  laws
relating  to  marriage,  and  to  the  infliction  of  capital  punishment
for  the  crime  of  murder.  If  it  be  asked,  How  are  we  to  deter-
mine whether  any  judicial  law  of  the  Old  Testament  is  still  in
force  ?  the  answer  is  first.  When  the  continued  authority  of  such
law  is  recognized  in  the  New  Testament.  That  for  Christians
is  decisive.  And  secondly.  If  the  reason  or  gromid  for  a  given  law
is  permanent,  the  law  itself  is  permanent.

4.  The  fourth  class  of  laws  are  those  called  positive,  which
derive  all  their  authority  from  the  expKcit  command  of  God.
Such  are  external  rites  and  ceremonies,  as  circumcision,  sacrifices,
and  the  distinction  between  clean  and  unclean  meats,  and  between
months,  days,  and  years.  The  criterion  of  such  laws  is  that  they
would  not  be  binding  unless  positively  enacted  ;  and  that  they
bind  those  only  to  whom  they  are  given,  and  only  so  long  as  they
continue  in  force  b}?^  the  appointment  of  God.  Such  laws  may  have
answered  important  ends,  and  vahd  reasons  doubtless  existed  why
they  were  imposed  ;  still  they  are  specifically  different  from  those
commands  which  are  in  their  own  nature  morally  obligatory.
The  obligation  to  obey  such  laws  does  not  arise  from  their  fit-
ness for  the  end  for  which  they  have  been  given,  but  solely  from
the  divine  command.

How  far  may  the  Laivs  contained  in  the  Bible  be  dispensed  with  ?

This  is  a  question  much  discussed  between  Protestants  and  Ro-
manists. Protestants  contended  that  the  Chiu-ch  had  not  the
power  claimed  by  Romanists,  to  relieve  men  from  the  obligation
of  an  oath,  and  to  render  marriages  lawful  which  -without  the
sanction  of  the  Church  would  be  invahd.  The  Church  has  neither
the  authority  to  set  aside  any  law  of  God,  nor  to  decide  the  cir-
cumstances under  A\^Mch  a  divine  law  ceases  to  be  obligatory,  so
that  it  continues  in  force  until  the  Church  declares  the  parties  free
from  its  obligation.  On  this  subject  it  is  plain,  (1.)  That  none
but  God  can  free  men  from  the  obligation  of  any  divine  law,  which
He  has  imposed  upon  them.  (2.)  That  with  regard  to  the  positive
laws  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  such  judicial  enactments  as  were
designed  exclusively  for  the  Hebrews  hving  under  the  theocracy,
they  were  all  abolished  by  the  introduction  of  the  new  dispensa-
tion. We  are  no  longer  under  obligation  to  circumcise  our  chil-
dren, to  keep  the  Passover,  or  feast  of  tabernacles,  or  to  go  up


270  PART  m.   Ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

three  times  in  the  year  to  Jerusalem,  or  to  exact  an  eye  for  an  eye,
or  a  tooth  for  a  tooth.  (3.)  With  regard  to  those  laws  whicli  are
founded  on  the  permanent  relations  of  men,  such  as  the  laws  of
property,  of  marriage,  and  of  obedience  to  parents,  they  can  be  set
aside  by  the  authority  of  God.  It  was  not  ^vrong  for  the  Hebrews
to  spoil  the  Egyptians  or  to  dispossess  the  Canaanites,  because  He
whose  is  the  earth  and  the  fulness  thereof,  authorized  those  acts.
He  had  a  right  to  take  the  property  of  one  people  and  give  it  to
another.  The  extermination  of  the  idolatrous  inhabitants  of  the
promised  land  at  the  command  of  Joshua,  was  as  much  an  act
of  God  as  though  it  had  been  effected  by  pestilence  or  famine.
It  was  a  judicial  execution  by  the  Supreme  Rviler.  In  hke  man-
ner, although  marriage  as  instituted  by  God  was  and  is  an  indis-
soluble covenant  between  one  man  and  one  woman,  yet  He  saw
fit  to  allow,  under  the  Mosaic  Law,  within  certain  limitations,  both
polygamy  and  divorce.  While  that  permission  continued,  those
things  were  hnvful ;  when  it  was  withdrawn,  they  ceased  to  be
allowable.

When  one  Divine  Law  is  superseded  hy  ayiotJier.

The  above  classification  of  the  divine  laws,  which  is  the  one
usually  adopted,  shows  that  they  differ  in  their  relative  dignity
and  importance.  Hence  when  they  come  into  conflict  the  lower
must  yield  to  the  higher.  This  we  are  taught  when  God  says,
"  I  will  have  mercy,  and  not  sacrifice."  And  our  Lord  also  says,
"  The  Sabbath  was  made  for  man,  and  not  man  for  the  Sabbath,"
and,  therefore,  the  Sabbath  might  be  violated  when  the  duties  of
mercy  rendered  it  necessary.  Throughout  the  Scriptures  we  find
positive  laws  subordinated  to  those  of  moral  obligation.  Christ
approved  of  the  lawyer  who  said  that  to  love  God  with  all  the
heart,  and  our  neighbour  as  ourselves,  "  is  more  than  all  whole
burnt-offerings  and  sacrifices."

Perfection  of  the  Law.

The  perfection  of  the  moral  law  as  revealed  in  the  Scriptures,
includes  the  points  already  considered,  —  (1.)  That  everything
tliat  the  Bible  pronounces  to  be  wrong,  is  wrong ;  that  everything
which  it  declares  to  be  right,  is  right.  (2.)  That  nothing  is  smful
which  the  Bible  does  not  condemn ;  and  nothing  is  obligatory  on
the  conscience  wliich  it  does  not  enjoin.  (3.)  That  the  Scriptures
are  a  complete  rule  of  duty,  not  only  in  the  sense  just  stated,  but
also  in  the  sense  that  there  is  and  can  be  no  higher  standard  of


§  1.]  PRELIMINARY   PRINCIPLES.  271

moral  excellence.  Romanists,  on  the  contrary,  teach  that  a  man
can  do  more  than  the  law  requires.  There  are  certain  things
which  are  commanded,  and  therefore  absolutely  obHgatory ;  and
others  which  are  recommended,  but  not  enjoined,  such  as  volun-
tary poverty,  celibacy,  and  monastic  obedience.  These  are  held
to  be  virtues  of  a  higher  grade  than  obedience  to  explicit  com-
mands. This  doctrine  is  founded  on  the  erroneous  views  of  the
Church  of  Rome  on  the  nature  of  sin,  and  the  gromids  of  moral
obligation.  If  nothing  is  sinful  but  voluntary,  i.  e.,  deliberate
transgression  of  known  law  ;  and  if  the  law  is  satisfied  by  volun-
tary action  in  this  sense  of  the  terms,  then  it  is  conceivable  that  a
man  may  in  this  life  render  perfect  obedience  to  the  law,  and  even
go  beyond  its  demands.  This  is  also  connected  with  the  distinc-
tion which  Romanists  make  between  mortal  and  venial  sins.  The
former  are  those  which  forfeit  baptismal  grace,  and  reduce  the
soul  to  its  original  state  of  spiritual  death  and  condemnation.
The  latter  are  sins  which  have  not  this  deadly  effect,  but  can  be
fully  atoned  for  by  confession  and  penance.  But  if  the  law  of
God  be  spiritual,  extending  to  the  thoughts  and  feelings  whether
impulsive  or  cherished ;  and  if  it  demands  all  kinds  and  degrees
of  moral  excellence,  or  complete  congeniality  with  God,  and  con-
formity to  his  image,  then  there  is  no  room  for  these  distinctions,
and  no  higher  rule  of  moral  conduct.  The  law  of  the  Lord,
therefore,  is  perfect  in  every  sense  of  the  word.

The  Decalogue.

The  question  whether  the  decalogue  is  a  perfect  rule  of  duty
is,  in  one  sense,  to  be  answered  in  the  affirmative.  (1.)  Because
it  enjoins  love  to  God  and  man,  which,  our  Saviour  teaches,  in-
cludes every  other  duty.  (2.)  Because  our  Lord  held  it  up  as  a
perfect  code,  when  he  said  to  the  young  man  in  the  Gospel,  "  This
do  and  thou  shalt  live."  (3.)  Every  specific  command  elsewhere
recorded  may  be  referred  to.  some  one  of  its  several  commands.
So  that  perfect  obedience  to  the  decalogue  in  its  spirit,  would  be
perfect  obedience  to  the  law.  Nevertheless,  there  are  many  things
obligatory  on  us,  which  without  a  further  revelation  of  the  will  of
God  than  is  contained  in  the  decalogue,  we  never  should  have
known  to  be  obligatory.  The  gi-eat  duty  of  men  under  the  Gos-
pel, is  faith  in  Christ.  This  our  Lord  teaches  when  He  says,
"  This  is  the  work  of  God,  that  ye  beheve  on  liim  whom  he  hath
sent."  This  comprehends  or  produces  all  that  is  required  of  us
either  as  to  faith  or  practice.  Hence  he  that  believeth  shall  be
saved.


272  PART  in.   Ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

Rules  of  Interpretation.
Theologians  are  accustomed  to  lay  down  numerous  rules  for  tlie
proper  interpretation  of  the  divine  law,  such  as  that  negative  pre-
cepts are  to  be  understood  as  including  positive,  and  positive,
negative ;  that,  in  forbidding  an  act,  everything  which  naturally
leads  to  it  is  comprehended ;  that,  in  condemning  one  offence,  all
others  of  a  like  kind  are  forbidden,  and  the  like.  All  such  rules
resolve  themselves  into  one.  The  decalogue  is  not  to  be  inter-
preted as  the  laws  of  men,  which  take  cognizance  only  of  external
acts,  but  as  the  law  of  God,  which  extends  to  the  thoughts  and
intents  of  the  heart.  In  aU  cases  it  will  be  found  that  the  several
commandments  contain  some  comprehensive  principle  of  duty,
under  which  a  multitude  of  subordinate  specific  duties  are  included.

§  2.  Division  of  the   Contents  of  the  Decalogue.

As  the  law  given  on  Sinai  and  wi'itten  on  two  tables  of  stone,
is  repeatedly  called  in  the  Scriptures  "  The  Ten  Words,"  or,  as  it
is  in  the  Enghsh  version  of  Exodus  xxxiv.  28,  "  The  Ten  Com-
mandments," there  is  no  doubt  that  the  contents  of  that  law  are
to  be  divided  into  ten  distinct  precepts.  (See  Deut.  iv.  13,  and
X.  4.)  This  suumiary  of  moral  duties  is  also  called  in  Scripture
"  The  Covenant,"  as  containing  the  fundamental  principles  of  the
solemn  contract  between  God  and  his  chosen  people.  Still  more
frequently  it  is  called  "  The  Testimony,"  as  the  attestation  of  the
will  of  God  concerning  human  character  and  conduct.

The  decalogue  appears  in  two  forms  which  differ  sHghtly  from
each  other.  The  original  form  is  found  in  Exodus  the  twentieth
chapter  ;  the  other  in  Deuteronomy  v.  6-21.  The  principal  differ-
ences between  them  are,  first,  that  the  command  respecting  the
Sabbath  is  in  Exodus  enforced  by  a  reference  to  God's  resting  on
the  seventh  day,  after  the  work  of  creation  ;  whereas  in  Deuteron-
omy it  is  enforced  by  a  reference  tQ  God's  dehvering  his  people
out  of  Egypt.  Secondly,  in  the  command  respecting  coveting,  in
Exodus,  it  is  said,  "  Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighboui's  house,
thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour's  wife,"  etc.  In  both  clauses
the  word  is  i^n-  In  Deuteronomy  it  is,  "Neither  shalt  thou  de-
sire (ir.r)  thy  neighbour's  wife ;  neither  shalt  thou  covet  (nis)
thy  neighbour's  house,"  etc.  This  latter  difference  has  been
magnified  into  a  matter  of  importance.

The  Scriptures  themselves  determine  the  number  of  the  com-
mandments, but  not  in  all  cases  what  they  are.     They  are  not


§2.]  DIVISION   OP   THE   DECALOGUE.  273

numbered  off  as  first,  second,  third,  etc.  The  consequence  is  that
different  modes  of  division  have  been  adopted.  The  Jews  from
an  early  period  adopted  the  arrangement  wliich  is  still  recognized
by  them.  They  regard  the  words  in  Exodus  xx.  2,  as  constitut-
ing the  first  commandment,  "  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God,  which  have
brought  thee  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  out  of  the  house  of  bond-
age." The  command  is  that  the  people  should  recognize  Jehovah
as  their  God  ;  and  the  special  ground  of  this  recognition  is  made
to  be,  that  He  dehvered  them  from  the  tyramiy  of  the  Egypt-
ians. These  words,  however,  are  not  in  the  form  of  a  command.
They  constitute  the  preface  or  introduction  to  the  solemn  injunc-
tions which  follow.  In  making  the  preface  one  of  the  .command-
ments it  became  necessary  to  preserve  the  number  ten,  by  unit-
i}ig  the  first  and  second,  as  they  are  commonly  arranged.  The
command,  "  Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods  before  me,"  and
"  Thou  shalt  not  make  unto  thee  any  graven  image,"  being
regarded  as  substantially  the  same ;  the  latter  being  merely  an
ampUfication  of  the  former.  An  idol  was  a  false  god ;  worship-
ping idols  was  therefore  having  other  gods  than  Jehovah.

Augustine,  and  after  him  the  Latin  and  Lutheran  churches,
agreed  with  the  Jews  in  uniting  the  first  and  second  command-
ments ;  but  differed  from  them  in  dividing  the  tenth.  There  is,
however,  a  difference  as  to  the  mode  of  division.  Augustine
followed  the  text  as  given  in  Deuteronomy,  and  made  the  words,
"  Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour's  wife ; "  the  ninth,  and
the  words,  "  Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour's  house,"  etc.,
the  tenth  commandment.  This  division  was  necessitated  by  the
union  of  the  first  and  second,  and  justified  by  Augustine  on  the
ground  that  the  "  cupido  impuras  voluptatis  "  is  a  distinct  of-
fence from  the  "  cupido  impuri  lucri."  The  Romish  Church,  how-
ever, adheres  to  the  text  as  given  in  Exodus,  and  makes  the
clause,  "  Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour's  house,"  the  ninth,
and  what  follows,  "  Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour's  wife,
nor  his  man  servant,  nor  his  maid  servant,"  etc.,  the  tenth
commandment.

The  third  method  of  arrangement  is  that  adopted  by  Jose-
phus,  Philo,  and  Origen,  and  accepted  by  the  Greek  Church,
and  also  by  the  Latin  until  the  time  of  Augustine.  At  the
Reformation  it  was  adopted  by  the  Reformed,  and  has  the  sanc-
tion of  almost  all  modern  theoloo^ians.  According  to  this  ar-
rangement,  the  first  commandment  forbids  the  worship  of  false

VOL,    III.  18


274  PART  m.  ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

gods  ;  tlie  second,  the  use  of  idols  in  divine  worship.     The  com-
mand, "  Thou  shalt  not  covet,"  is  taken  as  one  commandment.

It  is  vmiversally  admitted  that  there  are  two  tables  of  the  dec-
alogue ;  the  one  containing  the  precepts  concerning  our  duties  to
God,  and  the  other  those  which  concern  oiu"  duties  to  our  fellow-
men.  Philo  referred  five  commands  to  each  table,  as  he  regarded
reverence  to  parents,  enjomed  in  the  fifth,  as  a  religious  rather
than  a  moral  duty.  Those  who  unite  the  first  and  second,  and
divide  the  tenth,  refer  three  commandments  to  the  first  table  and
seven  to  the  second.  According  to  the  third  arrangement  men-
tioned above,  there  are  four  in  the  fu-st,  and  six  in  the  second.
The  only  objection  urged  against  this  is  founded  on  the  symbolism
of  numbers.  Three  and  seven  among  the  Jews  are  sacred  and
significant ;  four  and  six  are  not.

Arguments  for  the  Arrangement  adopted  hy  the  Reformed.

There  are  two  questions  to  be  determined.  First,  should  the
commandments  concerning  idolatry  be  united  or  separated  ?  In
favour  of  considermg  them  two  distinct  commandments,  it  may
be  urged,  (1.)  That  all  the  way  through  the  decalogue,  a  new
command  is  introduced  by  a  positive  mj unction  or  prohibition :
"  Thou  shalt  not  take  the  name  of  the  Lord  thy  God  in  vain  ;  "
"  Thou  shalt  not  steal ; "  "  Thou  shalt  not  kill,"  etc.  This  is
the  way  in  which  new  commands  are  introduced.  The  fact,
therefore,  that  the  command,  "  Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods,"  is
distinguished  by  the  repetition  of  the  injunction,  "  Thou  shalt  not
make  unto  thee  any  graven  image,"  is  an  indication  that  they
were  intended  as  different  commands.  The  tenth  commandment
is  mdeed  an  exception  to  this  rule,  but  the  principle  holds  good  in
every  other  case.  (2.)  The  things  forbidden  are  in  their  nature
distinct.  "VVorshippmg  false  gods  is  one  thuig ;  using  images  in
divine  worship  is  another.  They  therefore  called  for  separate
prohibitions.  (3.)  These  offences  are  not  only  different  in  their
own  nature,  but  they  differed  also  m  the  apprehension  of  the
Jews.  Tlie  Jews  regarded  worshipping  false  gods,  and  using  im-
ages in  the  worship  of  the  true  God,  as  very  different  things.
They  were  severely  punished  for  both  offences.  Both  external
and  internal  considerations,  therefore,  are  in  favour  of  re  taming
the  division  which  has  been  so  long  and  so  extensively  adopted  in
the  Church.

The  second  question  concerns  the  division  of  the  tenth  com-
mandment.    It  is  admitted  that  there  are  ten  commandmenta.


§3.]  PREFACE   TO   THE   COMMANDMENTS.  275

If,  therefore,  the  two  commands,  "  Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods,"
and  "  Thou  shalt  not  make  any  graven  image,"  are  distmct,  there
is  no  room  for  the  question  whether  the  command  agamst  coveting
should  be  divided.  There  is,  moreover,  no  pretext  for  such  divis-
ion, unless  we  follow  the  order  given  m  Deuteronomy,  which  puts
the  words,  "  Neither  shalt  thou  desire  thy  neighbour's  wife,"  be-
fore the  words,  "  Neither  shalt  thou  covet  thy  neighbour's  house,
his  field,"  etc.,  etc.  As  coveting  a  man's  "wife  is  a  different  of-
fence, or  at  least  a  different  form  of  a  general  offence,  from  covetmg
his  house  or  land,  if  the  order  given  in  Deuteronomy  be  considered
authoritative,  there  might  be  some  reason  for  the  separation.  But
if  the  order  given  in  Exodus  be  adhered  to,  no  such  reason  exists.
The  thmg  forbidden  is  cupidity,  whatever  be  its  object.  That  the
order  given  in  Exodus  is  authoritative  may  be  argued,  (1.)  Be-
cause the  law  as  there  given  was  not  only  the  first  chronologically,
but  also  was  solemnly  announced  from  Mount  Sinai.  (2.)  The  re-
cension given  in  Deuteronomy  differs  from  the  other  in  many  mi-
important  particulars.  If  the  order  in  which  the  objects  of  cupidity
are  mentioned  be  a  matter  of  mdifference,  then  the  diversity  is  a
matter  of  no  consequence.  But  if  it  be  made  a  matter  of  impor-
tance, controlling  the  order  and  interpretation  of  the  command-
ments, then  it  is  hard  to  account  for  it.  There  is,  therefore,  every
reason  for  regarding  it  as  one  of  those  diversities  which  were  not
intended  to  be  significant.  (3.)  The  distinction  is  nowhere  else
recognized  in  Scripture.  On  the  contrary,  the  command,  "  Thou
shalt  not  covet,"  is  elsewhere  given  as  one.  command.  Paul,  in
Romans  vii.  7,  says  :  "  I  had  not  known  sin  but  by  the  law :  for
I  had  not  known  lust,  except  the  law  had  said.  Thou  shalt  not
covet."  And  m  Romans  xiii.  9,  in  enumeratmg  the  laws  forbid-
ding sins  against  our  neighbour,  Paul  gives  as  one  command,
"  Thou  shalt  not  covet."  (4.)  Our  Lord  refers  the  sin  of  "  covet-
ing a  man's  wife  "  to  the  seventh  commandment.  If  included  un-
der that,  it  would  be  incongruous  and  out  of  harmony  with  the
context,  to  make  it  a  distinct  commandment  by  itself.

§  3.  Preface  to  the  Ten  Commandments.

"  I  am  Jehovah  thy  God,  which  have  brought  thee  out  of  the
land  of  Egypt,  out  of  the  house  of  bondage.  Thou  shalt  have  no
other  gods  before  me."  Theism  and  Monotheism,  the  foundation
of  all  rehgion,  are  taught  in  these  words.  The  first  clause  is  the
pr(}face  or  introduction  to  the  decalogue.  It  presents  the  ground
of  obHgatiou  and  the  special  motive  by  which  obedience  is  en-


276  PAET  m.    Ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

forced.  It  is  because  the  commandments  which  follow  are  the
words  of  God  that  they  bind  the  conscience  of  all  those  to  whom
they  are  addressed.  It  is  because  they  are  the  words  of  the  cov-
enant God  and  Redeemer  of  his  people  that  we  are  specially
bomid  to  render  them  obedience.

Histor}^  seems  to  prove  that  the  question  whether  the  Infinite
is  a  person  cannot  be  satisfactorily  answered  by  the  unassisted
reason  of  man.  The  historical  fact  is,  that  the  great  majority  of
those  who  have  sought  the  solution  of  that  question  on  philosoph-
ical principles  have  answered  it  in  the  negative.  It  is  impossible,
therefore,  duly  to  estimate  the  importance  of  the  truth  involved  in
the  use  of  the  pronoun  "  I  "  in  these  words.  It  is  a  person  who  is
here  presented.  Of  that  person  it  is  affirmed,  first,  that  He  is  Je-
hovah ;  and  secondly,  that  He  is  the  covenant  God  of  his  people.

In  the  first  place,  in  calling  himself  Jehovah,  God  reveals  that
He  is  the  person  known  to  his  people  by  that  name,  and  that  He
is  in  his  nature  all  that  that  name  imports.  The  etymology  and
signification  of  the  name  Jehovah  seem  to  be  given  by  God  Him-
self in  Exodus  iii.  13,  14,  where  it  is  written,  "  Moses  said  unto
God,  Behold,  when  I  come  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  and  shall
say  unto  them.  The  God  of  your  fathers  hath  sent  me  unto  you  ;
and  they  shall  say  to  me,  What  is  his  name  ?  what  shall  I  say
unto  them,  and  God  said  unto  Moses,  I  AM  that  I  AM  :  and  he
said.  Thus  shalt  thou  say  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  I  AM  hath
sent  me  unto  you."

Jehovah,  therefore,  is  the  I  AM  ;  a  person  always  existing  and
always  the  same.  SeK-existence,  eternity,  and  immutabihty  are
included  in  the  signification  of  the  word.  This  being  the  case,
the  name  Jehovah  is  presented  as  the  ground  of  confidence  to  the
people  of  God ;  as  in  Deuteronomy  xxxii.  40,  and  Isaiah  xl.  28,
"  Hast  thou  not  known  ?  hast  thou  not  heard,  that  the  everlasting
God,  Jehovah,  the  Creator  of  the  ends  of  the  earth,  fainteth  not,
neither  is  weary  ?  there  is  no  searching  of  his  understanding."
These  natural  attributes,  however,  would  be  no  ground  of  con-
fidence if  not  associated  with  moral  excellence.  He  who  as  Jeho-
vah is  declared  to  be  infinite,  eternal,  and  immutable  in  his  being,
is  no  less  infinite,  eternal,  and  immutable  in  his  laiowledge,  wis-
dom, holiness,  goodness,  and  truth.  Such  is  the  Person  whose  com-
mands are  recorded  in  the  decalogue.

In  the  second  place,  it  is  not  only  the  nature  of  the  Being  who
speaks,  but  the  relation  in  which  He  stands  to  his  people  that  is
here  revealed.     "  I  am  Jehovah  thy  God."    The  word  God  has  a


§4]  THE  FIRST   COMMANDMENT.  277

defimte  meaning  from  which  we  are  not  at  liberty  to  depart.
We  may  not  substitute  for  the  idea  whicli  the  word  in  Scripture
and  in  ordinary  language  is  intended  to  express,  any  arbitrary
pliilosophieal  notion  of  our  own.  God  is  the  Being,  who,  because
He  is  all  that  the  word  Jehovah  implies,  is  the  proper  object  of
worship,  that  is,  of  all  the  religious  affections,  and  of  their  appro-
priate expression.  He  is,  therefore,  the  only  appropriate  object
of  supreme  love,  adoration,  gratitude,  confidence,  and  submission.
Him  we  are  bound  to  trust  and  to  obey.

Jehovah  is  not  only  God,  but  He  says  to  his  people  collectively
and  individually,  "  I  am  thy  God."  That  is,  not  only  the  God
whom  his  people  are  to  acknowledge  and  worship,  but  who  has
entered  into  covenant  with  them ;  promising  to  be  their  God,  to
be  all  that  God  can  be  to  his  creatures  and  children,  on  condition
that  they  consent  to  be  his  people.  The  special  covenant  which
God  formed  witli  Abraham,  and  Avhich  was  solemnly  renewed  at
]\Iomit  Sinai,  was  that  He  would  give  to  the  childi-en  of  Abraham
the  land  of  Palestine  as  their  possession  and  bless  them  in  that
mheritance  on  condition  that  they  kept  the  laws  delivered  to  them
by  his  servant  Moses.  And  the  covenant  which  He  has  made
with  the  spiritual  children  of  Abraham,  is  that  He  will  be  their
God  for  time  and  eternity  on  condition  that  they  acknowledge,
receive,  and  trust  his  only  begotten  Son,  the  promised  seed  of
Abraham,  in  whom  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  are  to  be  blessed.
And  as  in  this  passage  the  redemption  of  the  Hebrews  from  their
bondage  in  Egypt  is  referred  to  as  the  pledge  of  God's  fidehty  to
his  promise  to  Abraham,  and  the  special  ground  of  the  obhgation
of  the  Hebrews  to  acknowledge  Jehovah  as  their  God ;  so  the
mission  of  the  Eternal  Son  for  the  redemption  of  the  world  is  at
once  the  pledge  of  God's  fidelity  to  the  promise  made  to  our  first
parents  after  their  fall,  and  the  special  ground  of  our  allegiance  to
our  covenant  God  and  Father.

§  4.  The  First  Commandment.

The  first  commandment  is,  "  Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods
before  me."  I,  that  is,  the  person  whose  name,  and  nature,  and
whose  relation  to  his  people  are  given  in  the  preceding  words,
and  I  only,  shall  be  recognized  by  you  as  God.

This  command,  therefore,  includes,  first,  the  injunction  to  rec-
ognize Jehovah  as  the  true  God.  As  this  recognition  must  be
intelligent  and  sincere,  it  mcludes,  —

1.  Knowledge.    We  must  know  who,  or  what  Jehovah  is.    This


278  PART  III.    Ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

implies  a  knowledge  of  his  attributes,  of  his  relation  to  the  world
as  its  creator,  preserver,  and  governor,  and  especially  his  relation
to  his  rational  creatures  and  to  his  own  chosen  people.  This  of
course  involves  a  knowledge  of  our  relation  to  Hira  as  dependent
and  responsible  creatures  and  .as  the  objects  of  his  redeeming  love.

2.  Faith.  We  must  believe  that  God  is,  and  that  He  is  what
He  declares  Himself  to  be ;  and  that  we  are  his  creatures  and  his
children.

3.  Confession.  It  is  not  enough  that  we  secretly  in  our  hearts
recognize  Jehovah  as  the  true  God ;  we  must  openly  and  under
all  circumstances  and  despite  of  all  opposition,  whether  from  mag-
istrates or  from  philosophers,  avow  our  faith  in  Him  as  the  only
living  and  true  God.  This  confession  must  be  made,  not  only  by
the  avowal  of  the  lips  as  when  we  repeat  the  Creed,  but  by
all  appropriate  acts  of  worship  in  public  and  private,  by  praise,
prayer,  and  thanksgiving.

4.  As  the  law  is  spiritual,  not  only  as  bearing  the  impress  of
the  Spirit,  and,  therefore,  holy,  just,  and  good,  but  also  as  taking
cognizance  of  the  inward  as  well  as  of  the  outward  life,  of  the
thoughts  and  feelings  as  well  as  of  external  acts,  this  recognition
of  Jehovah  as  our  God  includes  the  exercise  towards  Him  of  all
the  religious  affections ;  of  love,  fear,  reverence,  gratitude,  sub-
mission, and  devotion.  And  as  this  is  not  an  occasional  duty  to
be  performed  at  certain  times  and  places,  but  one  of  perpetual
obligation,  a  habitual  state  of  mind  is  the  thing  required.  The
recognition  of  Jehovah  as  our  God  involves  a  constant  sense  of
his  presence,  of  his  majesty,  of  his  goodness,  and  of  liis  providence,
and  of  our  dependence,  responsibility,  and  obligation.  We  are  to
have  God  always  before  our  eyes  ;  to  walk  and  live  with  Him,
having  a  constant  reference  to  his  will  in  the  conduct  of  our  inward
and  outward  life  ;  recognizing  continually  his  hand  in  everything
that  befalls  us,  submitting  to  all  his  chastisements  and  grateful
for  all  his  mercies.

The  second  or  negative  aspect  of  the  command  is  the  condem-
nation of  the  failure  to  recognize  Jeliovah  as  the  true  God  ;  fail-
ing to  believe  in  his  existence  and  attributes,  in  his  government
and  authority  ;  failing  to  confess  him  before  men  ;  and  faiHng  to
render  him  the  inward  reverence  and  the  outward  homage  which
are  his  due,  that  is,  the  first  commandment  forbids  Atheism
whether  theoretical  or  practical.  It  moreover  forbids  the  recog-
nition of  any  other  than  Jehovah  as  God.  This  includes  the
prohibition  of   ascribing  to   any  other  being  divine  attributes


§4.]  THE  FIRST  COMMANDMENT.  279

rendering  to  any  creature  the  homage  or  obedience  due  to  God
alone ;  or  exercising  towards  any  other  person  or  object  those
feeUngs  of  love,  confidence,  and  subinission  which  belong  of  right
only  to  God.

It  is,  therefore,  a  violation  of  this  commandment  either  to  fail
in  the  full  and  sincere  recognition  of  God  as  God,  or  to  give  to
any  creature  the  place  in  our  confidence  and  love  due  to  God
alone.

This  the  Chief  of  all  the  Commandments.

The  duty  enjoined  in  this  commandment  is  the  highest  duty  of
man.  It  is  proved  to  be  so  in  the  estimation  of  God  by  the  ex-
press declaration  of  Christ.  When  asked,  "  Which  is  the  great
commandment  in  the  law,"  He  answered,  "  Thou  shalt  love  the
Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,  and  Avith  all  thy  soul,  and  with
all  thy  mind.  This  is  the  first  and  great  commandment."  (Matt,
xxii.  37,  38.)  It  is  so  also  in  the  sight  of  reason.  That  infinite
excellence  should  be  reverenced  ;  that  He  who  is  the  author  of
our  being  and  giver  of  all  our  mercies ;  on  whom  we  are  abso-
lutely dependent ;  to  whom  we  are  responsible  ;  Avho  is  the  rightful
possessor  of  our  souls  and  bodies ;  and  whose  will  is  the  highest
rule  of  duty,  should  be  duly  recognized  by  his  creatures,  from  the
nature  of  the  case  must  be  the  highest  duty  of  all  rational  beings.
It  is,  moreover,  the  first  and  greatest  of  the  commandments  if
measured  by  the  influence  which  obedience  to  its  injunction  has
upon  the  soul  itself.  It  places  the  creature  in  its  proper  relation
to  its  Creator  on  which  its  o^vn  excellence  and  well-being  depend.
It  purifies,  ennobles,  and  exalts  the  soul.  It  calls  into  exercise
all  the  higher  and  nobler  attributes  of  our  nature  ;  and  assimilates
man  to  the  angels  who  surround  the  throne  of  God  in  heaven.
The  preeminence  of  this  commandment  is  further  evident  from
the  fact  that  rehgion,  or  the  duty  we  owe  to  God,  is  the  founda-
tion of  morality.  Without  the  former,  the  latter  cannot  exist.
This  is  plain,  (1.)  From  the  nature  of  the  case.  Morality  is
the  conformity  of  an  agent's  character  and  conduct  to  the  moral
law.  But  the  moral  law  is  the  revealed  will  of  God.  If  there
be  no  God,  there  is  no  moral  laAV ;  and  it"  a  man  does  not  ac-
knowledge or  recognize  God,  there  is  no  higher  law  than  his  own
reason  to  which  he  can  feel  any  obhgation  to  be  conformed.
(2.)  It  is  a  principle  of  our  nature  that  if  a  man  disregard  a  higher
obhgation,  he  ^vill  not  be  controlled  by  a  lower.  This  principle
was  recognized  by  our  Lord  when  He  said,  "  He  that  is  faithful
in  that  which  is  least,  is  faithful  also  in  much  ;  and  he  that  is


280  PART   III.     Ch.   XIX.  — the   LAW.

unjust  in  the  least,  is  unjust  also  in  much."  (Luke  xvi.  10.)  This
involves  the  converse  :  He  that  is  unfaithful  in  much,  is  unfaith-
ful in  that  which  is  least.  (3.)  It  is  the  testimony  of  experience
that  where  religion  has  lost  its  hold  on  the  minds  of  the  people,
there  the  moral  law  is  trampled  under  foot.  The  criminal  and
dangerous  class  in  every  community  consists  of  those  who  have
no  fear  of  God  before  their  eyes.  (4.)  It  is  the  secret  conviction  of
every  man  that  his  duty  to  God  is  his  highest  duty,  as  is  evinced  by
the  fact  that  the  charge  of  atheism  is  one  from  which  the  human
soul  instinctively  recoils.  It  is  felt  to  be  a  charge  of  the  utter  de-
gradation, or  of  the  deadness  of  all  that  is  highest  and  noblest  in
the  nature  of  man.  (5.)  The  most  decisive  and  solemn  evidence  of
this  truth,  however,  is  to  be  found  in  the  revealed  purpose  of
God  to  forsake  those  who  forsake  Him ;  to  give  up  to  the  uncon-
strained control  of  their  evil  passions,  those  who  cast  off  their
allegiance  to  Him.  The  Apostle  says  of  the  heathen  world  that
it  was  "  Because  that  when  they  knew  God,  they  glorified  him
not  as  God,  neither  were  thanldul,  ....  God  gave  them  up  unto
^Tile  affections."  (Rom,  i.  21,  26.)  And  again  in  ver.  28,  "  As
they  did  not  like  to  retain  God  in  their  knowledge,  God  gave
them  over  to  a  reprobate  mind,  to  do  those  things  which  are  not
convenient ;  being  filled  with  all  unrighteousness,  fornication,
wickedness,  covetousness,  maliciousness  ;  full  of  en\^,  murder,
debate,  deceit,  malignity  ;  whisperers,  backbiters,  haters  of  God,
despiteful,  proud,  boasters,  inventors  of  evil  things,  disobedient  to
parents,  mthout  understanding,  covenant  breakers,  without  natu-
ral affection,  implacable,  unmerciful."  Such  are  the  natural,  the
actual,  the  inevitable,  and  the  judicially  ordained  effects  of  men's
refusing  to  retain  God  in  their  knowledge.

Notwithstanding  all  this  we  see  multitudes  of  men  of  whom  it
may  be  said  that  God  is  not  in  all  their  thoughts.  They  never
think  of  Him.  They  do  not  recognize  his  providence.  They  do
not  refer  to  his  will  as  a  rule  of  conduct.  They  do  not  feel  their
responsibility  to  Him  for  what  they  think  or  do.  They  do  not
worship  Him ;  nor  thank  Him  for  their  mercies.  They  are  with-
out God  in  the  world.  Yet  they  think  well  of  themselves.  They
are  not  aware  of  the  dreadful  guilt  involved  in  thus  forgetting  God,
in  habitually  failing  to  discharge  the  first  and  highest  duty  that
rests  on  rational  creatures.  Self-respect  or  regard  to  public  opin-
ion often  renders  such  men  decorous  in  their  lives.  But  they  are
really  dead  while  they  live  ;  and  they  have  no  security  against
the  powers  of  darkness.     It  is  painful  also  to  see  that  scientific


§5.]  INVOCATION  OF   SAINTS.  281

men  and  philosophers  so  often  endeavour  to  invahdate  the  argu-
ments for  the  existence  of  God,  and  advance  opinions  inconsistent
with  Theism ;  arguing,  as  they  in  many  cases  do,  to  prove  either
that  there  is  no  evidence  of  the  existence  of  any  power  in  the
universe  other  than  of  pliysical  force,  or  that  no  knowledge,  con-
sciousness, or  voluntary  action  can  be  predicated  of  an  infinite
Being.  This  is  done  in  apparent  unconsciousness  that  they  are
undermining  the  foundations  of  all  religion  and  morality ;  or  that
they  are  exhibiting  a  state  of  mind  which  the  Scriptures  pro-
nounce worthy  of  reprobation.

§  5.   The  Invocation  of  Saints  and  Angels.

Saints  and  angels,  and  especially  the  Virgin  Mary,  are  confess-
edly objects  of  worsliip  in  the  Romish  Church.  The  word  "wor-
ship," however,  means  properly  to  respect  or  honour.  It  is  used
to  express  both  the  inward  sentiment  and  its  outward  manifesta-
tion. Tliis  old  sense  of  the  word  is  still  retained  in  courts  of  law
in  which  the  judge  is  addressed  as  "  Your  Worship,"  or  as  "  wor-
shipful." The  Hebrew  word  m^^i'^n  and  the  Greek  Trpoa-Kwew,
often  translated  in  the  English  version  by  the  word  "  worship,"
mean  simply  to  bow  down,  or  prostrate  one's  self.  They  are
used  whether  the  person  to  wdiom  the  homage  is  rendered  be  an
equal,  an  earthly  superior,  or  God  Himself.  It  is  not,  therefore,
from  the  use  of  any  of  these  words  that  the  nature  of  the  homage
rendered  can  be  determined.  Romanists  are  accustomed  to  dis-
tinguish between  the  cultus  civilis  due  to  earthly  superiors  ;
Sob'Aeta  due  to  saints  and  angels  ;  vTrepSovXeM  due  to  the  Virgin
Mary  ;  and  Xarpeta  due  to  God  alone.  These  distinctions,  how-
ever, are  of  little  use.  They  afford  no  criterion  by  which  to  dis-
tinguish between  SuvXeta  and  vTrepBovXeta  and  between  vTrepSovXeia  and
XuTpeia.  The  important  principle  is  this :  Any  homage,  internal
or  external,  which  involves  the  ascription  of  divine  attributes  to
its  object,  if  that  object  be  a  creature,  is  idolatrous.  Whether
the  homage  paid  by  Romanists  to  saints  and  angels  be  idolatrous
is  a  question  of  fact  rather  than  of  theory  ;  that  is,  it  is  to  be
determined  by  the  homage  actually  rendered,  and  not  by  that
which  is  prescribed.  It  is  easy  to  say  that  the  saints  are  not  to
be  honoured  as  God  is  honoured ;  that  He  is  to  be  regarded  as
the  original  source  and  giver  of  all  good,  and  they  as  mere  inter-
cessors, and  as  channels  of  divine  communications  ;  but  this  does
not  alter  the  case  if  the  homage  rendered  them  assumes  that  they
possess  the  attributes  of  God ;  and  if  they  arc  to  the  people  the
objects  of  religious  affection  and  confidence.


282  PART  in.     Cii.   XIX.  — THE   LAW.

What  the  Chitrch  of  Rome  teaches  on  this  subject  may  be
learned  from  the  folloAving  passages,  from  the  decisions  of  the
Council  of  Trent,  from  the  Roman  Catechism,  and  from  the  writ-
ings of  the  leading  theologians  of  that  Church  :  ^  "■  Mandat  sancta
synodus  omnibus  episcopis  ....  ut  ...  .  fideles  diligenter  in-
struant,  docentes  eos,  sanctos,  una  cum  Christo  regnantes,  ora-
tiones  suas  pro  hominibus  Deo  offerre  ;  bonum,  atque  utile  esse
suppliciter  eos  invocare  ;  et  ob  beneficia  impetranda  a  Deo  per
filium  ejus  Jesus  Christum,  Dominum  nostrum,  qui  solus  noster
redemptor  et  salvator  est,  ad  eorum  orationes,  opem  auxiliumque
confugere :  illos  vero,  qui  negant  sanctos,  jeterna  felicitate  in  coelo
fruentes,  invocandos  esse  ;  aut  qui  asseruut,  vel  illos  pro  homini-
bus non  orare ;  vel  eorum,  vit  pro  nobis  etiam  singulis  orent,  invo-
cationem  esse  idolatriam  ;  vel  pugnare  cmn  verbo  Dei ;  adversa-
rique  honori  unius  mediatoris  Dei  et  hominum  Jesu  Chi'isti ;  vel
stultum  esse  in  coelo  regnantibus  voce,  vel  mente  supphcare ;  im-
pie  sentire."  "  Et  quamvis  in  honorem  et  memoriam  sanctorum
nonnullas  interdum  niissas  ecclesia  celebrare  consueverit ;  non
tamen  illis  sacrificium  offeri'i  docet,  sed  Deo  soli,  qui  illos  coro-
navit ;  unde  nee  sacerdos  dicere  solet,  offero  tibi  sacrificium  Petre,
vel  Paule  ;  sed  Deo  de  illorum  victoriis  gratias  agens,  eorum  pa-
trocinia  implorat,  ut  ipsi  pro  nobis  intercedere  dignentur  m  coelis,
quorum  memoriam  facimus  in  terris."  ^

The  Roman  Catechism  ^  teaches  the  same  doctrine.

"  Invocandi  sunt  [angeli  eorum];  quod  et  perpetuo  Deum  intu-
entur  et  patrocinium  salutis  nostrje,  sibi  delatum,  libentissime  sus-
cipiunt."  This  invocation,  it  says,  does  not  conflict  with  the  law
"  de  uno  Deo  colendo."

Thomas  Aquinas  says  :  "  Quanquam  solus  Deus  sit  orandus,  ut
vel  gratiam  vel  gloriam  nobis  donet ;  sanctos  nihilominus  viros
orare  expedit,  ut  illorum  precibus  et  meritis,  nostras  orationes  sor-
tiantur  effectum."  *

On  this  subject  Bellarmin  lays  down  the  following  propositions,
(1.)  ''  Non  licet  a  Sanctis  petere,  ut  nobis  tanquam  auctores  divi-
norura  beneficiorum,  gloriam,  vel  gratiam  aliaque  ad  beatitudinem
media  concedunt."  This,  however,  he  virtually  nullifies,  when  he
adds,  "  Est  tamen  notandum,  cum  dicimus,  non  debere  peti  a
Sanctis,  nisi  ut  orent  pro  nobis,  nos  non  agere  de  verbis,  sed  de

1  Concilii  Tridentini,  sess.  xxv.

2  Jbid.  sess.  xxii.  caput  iii.

8  III.  ii.  qu.  4  [xix.  10].  See  Streitwolf,  Libii  Symbolici,  Gittingen,  184G,  pp.  93,  78,  7!^
479.
*  Summa,  ii.  ii.  qusest.  83,  art.  4,  edit.  Cologne,  1640,  p.  153,  a,  of  third  set.


§5.]  INVOCATION   OF   SAINTS.  283

sensii  verborum  ;  nam  quantum  ad  verba,  licet  dicere,  S.  Petre
miserere  milii,  salva  me,  aperi  mihi  aditum  coeli :  item,  da  mihi
sanitatem  corporis,  da  patientiam,  da  mihi  fortitudinem."  (2.)
"  Sancti  non  sunt  immediati  intercessores  nostri  apud  Deum,  sed
quidquid  a  Deo  nobis  impetrant,  per  Cbristum  impetrant."  (3.)
"  Sancti  orant  pro  nobis  saltem  in  genere,  secundum  Scripturas."
(4.)  "  Sancti  qui  regnant  cum  Christo,  pro  nobis  orant,  non  solum
in  genere,  sed  etiam  in  particulari."  ^  As  to  the  question,  How
the  saints  in  heaven  can  know  what  men  on  earth  desire  of  them,
he  says  four  answers  are  given.  First,  some  say  that  the  angels,
who  are  constantly  ascending  to  heaven  and  thence  descending  to
us,  communicate  to  the  saints  the  prayers  of  the  people.  Sec-
ondly, others  say,  "  Sanctorum  animas,  sicut  etiam  angelos,  mira
quadam  celeritate  naturaa,  quodammodo  esse  ubique ;  et  per  se
audire  preces  supplicantium."  Tliirdly,  others  again  say,  "  Sanc-
tos  videre  in  Deo  omnia  a  principio  suae  beatitudinis,  quje  ad
ipsos  aliquo  modo  pertinent,  et  proinde  etiam  orationes  nostras
ad  se  directas."  Fourthly,  others  say  that  God  reveals  to  them
the  prayers  of  the  people.  As  on  earth  God  revealed  the  future
to  the  prophets  and  gives  to  men  at  times  the  power  to  read  the
thoughts  of  others,  so  He  can  reveal  to  the  saints  in  heaven  the
wants  and  prayers  of  those  who  call  upon  them.  This  last  solu-
tion of  the  difficulty  Bellarmin  himself  prefers.^

The   objections   which   Protestants   are   accustomed   to  urge
against  this  invocation  of  saints  are,  —

1.  That  it  is,  to  say  the  least,  superstitious.  It  requires
faith  without  evidence.  It  assumes  not  only  that  the  dead  are  in
a  conscious  state  of  existence  in  another  world  ;  and  that  departed
believers  belong  to  the  same  living  mystical  body  of  Christ,  of
which  their  brethren  still  on  earth  are  members,  both  of  which
Protestants,  on  the  authority  of  God's  word,  cheerfully  admit ;
but  it  assumes,  without  any  evidence  from  Scripture  or  experience,
that  the  spirits  of  the  dead  are  accessible  to  those  who  are  still  in
the  flesh  ;  that  they  are  near  us,  capable  of  hearing  our  prayers,
knowing  our  thoughts,  and  answering  our  reqviests.  The  Church
or  the  soul  is  launched  on  an  ocean  of  fantasies  and  folli(!S,  with-
out a  compass,  if  either  suffers  itself  to  believe  without  evidence ;
then  there  is  nothing  in  astrology,  alchemy,  or  demonology  which
may  not  be  received  as  true,  to  perplex,  to  pervert,  or  to  torment.

1  De  Eccleda  Triumphante,  lib.  i.,  Be  Sanctorum  Beatitudine,  cap.  xvii.  xviii. ;  IHs^ra
tationes,  edit.  Paris,  1608,  vol.  ii.  pp.  718-721.

2  Ut  supra,  cap.  xx.  p.  735.


284  PART  in.   Ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

2.  The  whole  thing  is  a  deceit  and  illusion.  If  in  fact  departed
saints  are  not  authorized  and  not  enabled  to  hear  and  answer  the
prayers  of  suppliants  on  earth,  then  the  people  are  in  the  condi-
tion of  those  who  trust  in  gods  who  cannot  save,  who  have  eyes
that  see  not,  and  ears  that  cannot  hear.  That  the  saints  have  no
such  office  as  the  theory  and  practice  of  invocation  suppose  is  plain,
because  the  fact  if  true  cannot  be  known  except  by  divine  revela-
tion. But  no  such  revelation  exists.  It  is  a  purely  superstitious
belief,  ^vithout  the  support  of  either  Scripture  or  reason.  The
conjectural  methods  suggested  by  Bellarmin  of  explaining  how
the  saints  may  be  cognizant  of  the  wants  and  wishes  of  men,  is  a
confession  that  nothing  is  known  or  can  be  known  on  the  subject ;
and,  therefore,  that  the  invocation  of  the  saints  has  no  Scriptural
or  rational  foundation.  If  tliis  be  so,  then  how  dreadfully  are
the  people  deluded !  How  fearful  the  consequences  of  turning
their  eyes  and  hearts  from  the  one  divine  mediator  between  God
and  man,  wlio  ever  lives  to  make  intercession  for  us,  and  whom
the  Father  heareth  always,  and  causing  them  to  direct  their
prayers  to  ears  which  never  hear,  and  to  place  their  hopes  in  arms
which  never  save.  It  is  turninsj  from  the  fountain  of  living
waters,  to  cisterns  which  can  hold  no  water.

3.  The  invocation  of  saints  as  practised  in  the  Church  of  Rome
is  idolatrous.  Even  if  it  be  conceded  that  the  theory  as  ex-
pounded by  theologians  is  free  from  this  charge,  it  remains  true
that  the  practice  involves  all  the  elements  of  idolatry.  Blessings
are  sought  from  the  saints  which  God  only  can  bestow  ;  and  attri-
bvites  are  assumed  to  belong  to  them  which  belong  to  God  alone.
Every  kind  of  blessing,  temporal  and  spiritual,  is  sought  at  their
hands,  and  sought  directly  from  them  as  the  givers.  This  Bellar-
min admits  so  far  as  the  words  employed  are  concerned.  He
says  it  is  right  to  say  :  "  Holy  Peter,  save  me  ;  open  to  me  the
gates  of  heaven  ;  give  me  repentance,  courage,"  etc.  God  alone
can  grant  these  blessings  ;  the  people  are  told  to  seek  them  at  the
liands  of  creatures.  This  is  idolatry.  Practically  it  is  taken  for
granted  that  the  saints  are  everywhere  present,  that  they  can
hear  prayers  addressed  to  them  from  all  parts  of  the  earth  at  the
same  time  ;  that  they  know  our  thoughts  and  unexpressed  desires.
This  is  to  assume  that  they  possess  divine  attributes.  In  fact,
therefore,  the  saints  are  the  gods  whom  the  people  worship,  whom
they  trust,  and  who  are  the  objects  of  the  religious  affections.

The  polytheism  of  the  Church  of  Rome  is  in  many  respects
analogous  to  that  of  heathen  Rome.     In  both  cases  we  find  gods


§5.]  INVOCATION  OF   SAINTS.  285

many  and  lords  many.  In  both  cases  either  imaginary  beings  are
the  objects  of  worship,  or  imaginary  powers  and  attributes  are
ascribed  to  them.  In  both  cases,  also,  the  homage  rendered,  the
blessings  sought,  the  prerogatives  attributed  to  the  objects  of
worship  and  the  affections  exercised  toward  them,  involve  the  as-
sumption that  they  are  truly  divine.  In  both  cases  the  hearts  of
the  people,  their  confidence  and  hopes,  are  turned  from  the  Crea-
tor to  the  creature.  There  is  indeed,  however,  this  great  differ-
ence between  the  two  cases.  The  objects  of  heathen  worship
were  unholy ;  the  objects  of  worship  in  the  Church  of  Rome  are
regarded  as  ideals  of  holiness.  This,  in  one  view,  makes  an  im-
mense difference.  But  the  idolatry  is  in  either  case  the  same.
For   idolatry   consists   in  paying   Creatures   the   homage  due  to

God.

Mariolatry.

The  mother  of  our  Lord  is  regarded  by  all  Christians  as
"  blessed,"  as  "  the  most  highly  favoured  of  women."  No  mem-
ber of  the  fallen  family  of  man  has  had  such  an  honour  as  she
received  in  beino;  the  mother  of  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  The
reverence  due  to  her  as  one  thus  highly  favoured  of  God,  and  as
one  whose  heart  was  pierced  through  with  many  sorrows,  led  the
way  to  her  being  regarded  as  the  ideal  of  all  female  grace  and
excellence,  and  gradually  to  her  being  made  the  object  of  divine
honours,  as  the  Church  lost  more  and  more  of  its  spirituality.

The  deification  of  the  Virgin  Mary  in  the  Church  of  Rome
was  a  slow  process.  The  first  step  was  the  assertion  of  her  per-
petual virginit3^  This  was  early  taken  and  generally  conceded.
The  second  step  was  the  assertion  that  the  birth,  as  well  as  the
conception  of  our  Lord,  was  supernatural.  The  third  was  the
solemn,  authoritative  decision  by  the  ecumenical  council  of
Ephesus,  A.  D.  431,  that  the  Virgin  Mary  was  the  "  Mother  of
God."  On  this  decision  it  may  be  remarked,  (a.)  That  it  was
rendered  rather  as  a  vindication  of  the  divinity  of  Christ,  than
as  an  exaltation  of  the  glory  of  the  Blessed  Virgin.  It  had  its
origin  in  the  Nestorian  controversy.  Nestorius  was  accused  of
teaching  that  the  Logos  only  inhabited  the  man  Jesus,  whence  it
was  inferred  that  he  held  that  the  person  born  of  the  Virgin  was
simply  human.  It  was  to  emphasize  the  assertion  that  the
"  person  "  thus  born  was  truly  divine  that  the  orthodox  insisted
that  the  Virgin  should  be  called  the  Mother  of  God.  (6.)  There
is  a  sense  in  which  the  designation  is  proper  and  according  to  the
analogy  of  Scripture.     The  Virgin  was  the  Mother  of  Christ ;


286  PART  in.   ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

Christ  is  God  manifest  in  the  flesh  :  therefore  she  was  the  Mother
of  God.  The  infant  Saviour  was  a  divine  person.  Christians  do
not  hesitate  to  say  that  God  purchased  his  Church  with  his  own
blood.  According  to  the  usage  of  Scripture,  the  person  of  Christ
may  be  designated  from  one  nature,  when  the  predicate  belongs
to  the  other.  He  may  be  called  the  Son  of  man  when  we  speak
of  his  filling  immensity  ;  and  He  may  be  called  God  when  we
speak  of  his  being  born,  (c.)  Nevertheless,  although  the  designa-
tion be  in  itseK  justifiable,  m  the  state  of  feeling  which  then  per-
vaded the  Church,  the  decision  of  the  Council  tended  to  increase
the  superstitious  reverence  for  the  Virgin.  It  was  considered  by
the  common  people  as  tantamount  to  a  declaration  of  divinity.
The  members  of  the  Council  were  escorted  from  their  place  of
meeting  by  a  multitude  bearing  torches,  preceded  by  women
bearing  censers  filled  with  burning  incense.  '  In  combating  the
assumed  Nestorian  doctrine  of  two  persons  in  Christ,  there  was  a
strong  tendency  to  the  opposite,  to  the  doctrine  of  Eutyches,  who
held  that  there  was  in  our  Lord  but  one  natui'e.  According  to
this  view  the  Virgin  might  be  regarded  as  the  Mother  of  God  in
the  same  sense  that  any  ordinary  mother  is  the  parent  of  her
child.  However  it  may  be  accounted  for,  the  fact  is  that  the  de-
cision of  the  Council  of  Ephesus  marks  a  distinct  epoch  in  the
progress  of  the  deification  of  the  Virgin.

The  fourth  step  soon  followed  in  the  dedication  to  her  honour  of
numerous  churches,  shrines,  and  festivals  ;  and  in  the  mtroduction
of  solemn  offices  designed  for  public  and  private  worship  in  which
she  was  solemnly  invoked.  No  limit  was  placed  to  the  titles  of
honour  by  which  she  was  addressed  or  to  the  prerogatives  and
powers  which  were  attributed  to  her.  She  was  declared  to  be
deificata.  She  was  called  the  Queen  of  heaven.  Queen  of  queens  .
said  to  be  exalted  above  all  principalities  and  powers  ;  to  be
seated  at  the  right  hand  of  Christ,  to  share  with  Him  in  the
universal  and  absolute  power  committed  to  his  hands.  All  the
blessings  of  salvation  were  sought  at  her  hands,  as  well  as  protec-
tion from  all  enemies,  and  deliverance  from  all  evils.  Prayers,
hymns,  and  doxologies  Avere  allowed  and  prescribed  to  be  ad-
dressed to  her.  The  whole  Psalter  has  been  transformed  into  a
book  of  praise  and  confession  to  the  Mother  of  Christ.  What  in
the  Bible  is  said  to  God  and  of  God,  is  in  this  book  addressed  to
the  Virgin.  In  the  First  Psalm,  for  example,  it  is  said,  "  Blessed
is  the  man  who  walketh  not  in  the  counsel  of  the  ungodly,"  etc.
In  the  Psalter  of  the  Virgin  it  reads,  "  Blessed  is  the  man  who


§5.]  INVOCATION   OF   SAINTS.  287

loveth  thy  name,  O  Virgin  Mary  ;  thy  grace  shall  comfort  his
soul.  As  a  tree  irrigated  by  fountains  of  water,  he  shall  bring
forth  the  richest  fruits  of  righteousness."  In  the  second  Psalm
the  prayer  is  directed  to  the  Virgin  :  "  Protect  us  with  thy  right
hand,  O  Mother  of  God,"  etc.  Ps.  ix.,  "  I  will  confess  to
Thee,  O  Lady  (Domina)  ;  I  will  declare  among  the  people  thy
praise  and  glory.  To  thee  belong  glory,  thanksgiving,  and  the
voice  of  praise."  Ps.  xv.,  "  Preserve  me,  O  Lady,  for  I  have
hoped  in  thee."  Ps.  xvii.,  "  I  will  love  thee  O  Queen  of
heaven  and  earth,  and  will  glorify  thy  name  among  the  Gentiles."
Ps.  xviii.,  "  The  heavens  declare  thy  glory,  O  Virgin  Mary  ;
the  fragrance  of  thy  ointments  is  dispersed  among  all  nations."
Ps.  xli.,  "  As  the  hart  panteth  after  the  water  brooks,  so
panteth  my  soul  for  thy  love,  O  Holy  Virgin."  And  so  on  to  the
end.  The  Virgin  is  throughout  addressed  as  the  Psalmist  ad-
dressed God  ;  and  the  blessings  which  he  sought  from  God,  the
Romanist  is  taught  to  seek  from  her.^

In  like  manner  the  most  holy  offices  of  the  Church  are  parodied.
The  Te  Deum,  for  example,  is  turned  into  an  addi-ess  to  the  Vir-
gin. "  We  praise  thee.  Mother  of  God  ;  we  acknowledge  thee  to
be  a  virgin.  All  the  earth  doth  worship  thee,  the  spouse  of  the
eternal  Father.  All  the  angels  and  archangels,  all  thrones  and
powers,  do  faitlifully  serve  thee.  -  To  thee  all  angels  cry  aloud,
with  a  never-ceasing  voice,  Holy,  Holy,  Holy,  Mary,  Mother  of

God The  whole   court   of   heaven  doth  honour  thee  uu

queen.     The  holy  Church  throughout  all  the  world  doth  invoke

and  praise  thee,  the  mother  of  divine  majesty Thou  sittest

with  thy  Son  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Father In  thee,

sweet  Mary,  is  our  hope;  defend  us  for  evermore.  Praise  be-
cometh  thee  ;  empire  becometh  thee ;  virtue  and  glory  be  unto
thee  for  ever  and  ever."  ^

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  refer  to  the  Litanies  of  the  Virgin
INIary  in  further  proof  of  the  idolatrous  worship  of  which  she  is
the  object.  Those  litanies  are  prepared  in  the  form  usually  adopted
in  the  worship  of  the  Holy  Trinity ;  containing  invocations,  dep-
recations, intercessions,  and    supplications.     They    contain  such

1  This  Psalter  is  published  under  the  title  Psnlter'mm  Virginis  Mar'ice,  a  Devoto  Doctore
Sancto  Bonm^entura  compllatum.  It  is  given  at  length  by  Chemnitz  in  his  Exainen  Coti-
cilli  Tndentini,  edit.  Frankfort,  157-i,  part  iii.  pp.  166-179.  Chemnitz  does  not  refer  its
authorship  to  Bonaventura;  but  gives  it  as  a  document  sanctioned  and  used  in  the  Church
of   Rome.

■-  See  A  Church  Dictionary.  By  Walter  Farquhar  Hook,  D.  D.,  Vicar  of  Leeds.
Sixth  edition.  Philadelphia,  18.54,  article  iSIariolatry.  Dr.  Hook  quotes  the  so-called
"  Psalter  of  Bonaventura;  "  and  refers  to  Sancti  Bonaventura;  Opera,  torn.  vi.  part  ii.  from
p.  466  to  473.  Fol.  Moguntia?,  1609.


288  PART  m.    Ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

prayers  as  the  following  :  "  Peccatores,  te  rogamus  audi  nos  ;  Ut
sanctam  Ecclesiam  piissima  conservare  digneris,  Ut  justis  gloriam,
peccatoribus  gratiam  impetrare  digneris,  Ut  navigantibus  portum,
infirmantibus  sanitateni,  tribulatis  consolationem,  captivis  libe-
rationem,  impetrare  digneris,  Ut  famulos  et  famulas  tuas  tibi
devote  servientes,  consolare  digneris,  Ut  cunetum  populum  Clms-
tianum  filii  tui  pretioso  sanguine  redemptum,  conservare  digneris,
Ut  cufictis  fidelibus  del unctis,  eternam  requiem  impetrare  digneris,
Ut  nos  exaudire  digneris.  Mater  Dei,  Filia  Dei,  Sponsa  Dei,  Mater
carissima,  Domina  nostra,  miserere,  et  dona  nobis  perpetuam
pacem."  More  than  this  cannot  be  sought  at  the  hands  of  God
or  Christ.  The  Virgin  Mary  is  to  her  worshippers  what  Christ  is
to  us.  She  is  the  object  of  all  religious  affections  ;  the  ground  of
confidence  ;  and  the  source  whence  all  the  blessings  of  sab'ation
are  expected  and  sought.

There  was,  however,  always  an  undercurrent  of  opposition  to
this  deification  of  the  mother  of  our  Lord.  This  became  more
apparent  in  the  controversy  on  the  question  of  her  immaculate
conception.  This  idea  was  never  broached  in  the  early  Church.
The  first  form  in  which  the  doctrine  appeared  was,  that  from  the
fact  that  God  says  of  Jeremiah,  "  Before  thou  camest  forth  out
of  the  womb  I  sanctified  thee"  (Jer.  i.  5),  it  was  maintained
that  the  same  might  be  said  of  the  Virgin  INIary.  Jeremiah  indeed
was  sanctified  before  birth,  in  the  sense  that  he  was  consecrated
or  set  apart  in  the  purpose  of  God  to  the  prophetic  office  ;  whereas
Mary,  it  was  held,  was  thus  sanctified  in  the  sense  of  being  made
holy.  All  the  great  lights  of  the  Latin  Church,  Augustine,
Anselm,  Bernard  of  Clairvaux,  and  Thomas  Aquinas,  held  that
if  the  Virgin  Mary  were  not  a  partaker  of  the  sin  and  apostasy
of  man,  she  could  not  be  a  partaker  of  redemption.  As  Thomas
Aquinas,  and  after  him  the  Dominicans,  took  the  one  side  in  this
controversy,  Duns  Scotus  and  the  Franciscans  took  the  other.
The  public  feeling  was  in  favour  of  the  Franciscan  doctrine  of  the
immaculate  conception.  Even  John  Gerson,  chancellor  of  the
University  of  Paris,  distinguished  not  only  for  his  learning  but
also  for  his  zeal  in  reforming  abuses,  in  1401  came  out  publicly  in
support  of  that  view.  He  was,  however,  candid  enough  to  admit
that  it  had  not  hitherto  been  the  doctrine  of  the  Church.  But  he
held  that  God  communicated  the  truth  gradually  to  the  Church  ;
hence  Moses  knew  more  than  Abraham,  the  prophets  more  than
Moses,  the  Apostles  more  than  the  prophets  ;  in  like  mamrer,  the
Church  has  received   from  the  Spirit  of   God  many  truths  not


§5.]  INVOCATION   OF   SAINTS.  289

known  to  the  Apostles.  Tliis  of  course  implies  the  rejection  of
the  doctrine  of  tradition.  That  doctrine  is,  that  a  plenary  revela-
tion of  all  Christian  doctrine  was  made  by  Clmst  to  the  Apostles
and  by  them  communicated  to  the  Church,  partly  in  their  writings
and  partly  by  oral  instructions.  To  prove  that  any  doctrine  is  of
divhie  authority,  it  must  be  proved  that  it  was  taught  by  the
Apostles,  and  to  prove  that  they  taught  it,  it  must  be  proved  that
it  has  been  always  and  everywhere  held  by  the  Church.  But  ac-
cording to  Gerson  the  Church  of  to-day  may  hold  what  the  Apos-
tles never  held,  and  even  the  very  reverse  of  what  was  held  by
them  and  by  the  Church  for  ages  to  be  true.  He  teaches  that
the  Church  before  his  time  taught  that  the  Virgin  Mary,  in
common  vdth  all  other  members  of  the  human  race,  was  born  with
the  infection  of  original  sin  ;  but  that  the  Church  of  his  day,
under  the  inspiration  of  the  Spirit,  believed  in  her  immaculate
conception.  This  resolves  tradition  into,  or  rather  substitutes  for
it,  the  sensus  communis  ecclesice  of  any  given  time.  It  has  al-
ready been  shown  ^  that  Moehler  in  his  "  Symbohk  "  teaches  sub-
stantially the  same  doctrine.

This  question  was  undecided  at  the  time  of  the  meeting  of  the
Council  of  Trent,  and  gave  the  fathers  there  assembled  a  great
deal  of  trouble.  The  Dominicans  and  Franciscans,  of  nearly  equal
influence  in  the  Council,  each  urged  that  their  peculiar  views
should  be  sanctioned.  The  legates  in  their  perplexity  referred
to  Rome  for  instructions,  and  were  directed  for  fear  of  schism  to
prevent  any  further  controversy  on  the  subject,  and  so  to  frame
the  decision  as  to  satisfy  both  parties.  This  could  only  be  done
by  leaving  the  question  undecided.  This  was  substantially  the
course  which  the  Council  adopted.  After  affirming  that  all  man-
kind sinned  in  Adam  and  derive  from  him  a  corrupt  nature,  it
adds  :  "  Declarat  tamen  hsso  ipsa  Sancta  Synodus,  non  esse  suae
intentionis  comprehendere  in  hoc  decreto,  ubi  de  peccato  originali
agitur,  beatam,  et  immaculatam  Viriginem  Mariam,  Dei  gene-
tricem  ;  sed  observandas  esse  constitutiones  felicis  recordationis
Xysti  papse  IV.,  sub  poeuis  in  eis  constitutionibus  contentis,  quas
inaovat.^  This  last  clause  refers  to  the  Bull  of  Sixtus  IV.,  issued
in  1483,  threatening  both  parties  in  this  controversy  with  the  pains
of  excommunication  if  either  pronomiced  the  other  guilty  of  heresy
or  mortal  sin.

1  Vol.  j.  p.  114.

■2  This  is  from  Streitwolf,  Libri  Symbolici,  Gottingen,  1846,  p.  20.    A  foot-note  says,
■'  Totum  hanc  periodum,  '  Declarat-innovat,'  omnes  fere  editiones  ante  Romanas  omittunt."
VOL.  m.  19


200  PART  m.     Cn.  XIX.  — THE   LAW.

The  controversy  went  on,  therefore,  after  the  Council  of  Trent
very  much  as  it  had  done  before,  until  the  present  Pope,  himself
a  devoted  worshipper  of  the  Virgin,  announced  his  purpose  to
have  the  immaculate  conception  of  the  Mother  of  our  Lord  de-
clared. This  purpose  he  carried  into  effect,  and  on  the  eighth
of  December,  1854,  he  went  in  great  pomp  to  St.  Peter's  in
Rome,  and  pronounced  the  decree  that  the  "  Virgin  Mary,  from
the  first  moment  of  conception  by  the  special  grace  of  almighty
God  in  view  of  the  merits  of  Christ,  was  preserved  from  all  stain
of  original  sin."  She  was  thus  placed,  as  to  complete  sinlessness,
on  an  equality  with  her  adorable  Son,  Jesus  Christ,  whose  place
she  occupies  in  the  confidence  and  love  of  so  large  a  part  of  the
Roman  Cathohc  world.

§  6.  The  Second  Commandment.

The  two  fundamental  principles  of  the  rehgion  of  the  Bible  are
first,  that  there  is  one  only  the  li^nng  and  true  God,  the  maker
of  heaven  and  earth,  who  has  revealed  Himself  under  the  name
Jehovah  ;  secondly,  that  this  God  is  a  Spirit,  and,  therefore,  inca-
pable of  being  conceived  of  or  represented  under  a  visible  form.
The  first  commandment,  therefore,  forbids  the  worship  of  any
other  being  than  Jehovah ;  and  the  second,  the  worship  of  any
visible  object  whatever.  This  includes  the  prohibition,  not  only
of  inward  homage,  but  of  all  external  acts  wliich  are  the  natural
or  conventional  expression  of  such  inward  reverence.

That  the  second  commandment  does  not  forbid  pictorial  or  sculp-
tured representations  of  ideal  or  visible  objects,  is  plain  because
the  whole  command  has  reference  to  religious  worship,  and  be-
cause Moses,  at  the  command  of  God  himself,  made  many  such
images  and  representations.  The  curtains  of  the  tabernacle  and
especially  the  veil  separating  between  the  Holy  and  Most  Holy
places,  were  adorned  with  embroidered  figures  representing  cher-
ubim ;  cherubim  overshadowed  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant  with
their  wings  ;  the  Golden  Candlestick  was  in  the  form  of  a  tree
"  with  branches,  knops,  and  flowers ;  "  the  hem  of  the  high  priest's
robe  was  adorned  with  alternate  bells  and  pomegranates.  When
Solomon  built  the  temple,  "  he  carved  all  the  walls  of  the  house
round  about  with  carved  figures  of  cherubim,  and  palm-ti'ees,
and  open  flowers,  "within  and  without."  (1  Kings  vi.  29.)  The
"  molten  sea  "  stood  upon  twelve  oxen.  Of  this  house  thus  adorned
God  said,  "  I  have  hallowed  this  house,  which  thou  hast  built,  to
put  my  name  there  forever ;  and  mine  eyes  and  mine  heart  shall


§6.]  THE   SECOND   COMMANDMENT.  291

be  there  perpetually."  (1  Kings  ix.  3.)  There  can  therefore  be
no  doubt  that  the  second  commandment  was  intended  only  to  for-
bid the  making  or  using  the  likeness  of  anythmg  in  heaven  or
earth  as  objects  of  worship.^

The  Worship  of  Images  forbidden.

It  is  equally  clear  that  the  second  commandment  does  forbid
the  use  of  images  in  divine  worship.  In  other  words,  idolatry
consists  not  only  in  the  worship  of  false  gods,  but  also  in  the
worship  of  the  true  God  by  images.     This  is  clear,  —

1.  From  the  literal  meaning  of  the  words.  The  precise  thing
forbidden  is,  bowing  down  to  them,  or  serving  them,  i.  e.,  ren-
dering them  any  kind  of  external  homage.  This,  however,  is
exactly  what  is  done  by  all  those  who  employ  images  as  the  ob-
jects, or  aids  of  religious  worship.

2.  This  is  still  further  plain  because  the  Hebrews  were  solemnly
enjoined  not  to  make  any  visible  representation  of  the  unseen
God,  or  to  adopt  anything  external  as  the  symbol  of  the  invisible
and  make  such  symbol  the  object  of  worship  ;  i.  e.,  they  were
not  to  bow  down  before  these  images  or  symbols  or  serve  them.
The  Hebrew  word  -t.i'7  rendered  ''to  serve,"  includes  all  kinds  of
external  homage,  burning  incense,  making  oblations,  and  kissing
in  token  of  subjection.  The  Hebrews  were  surrounded  by  idol-
aters. The  nations,  having  forgotten  God,  or  refusing  to  acknowl-
edge Him,  had  given  themselves  up  to  false  gods.  It  was  nature's
invisible  force,  of  which  they  saw  constant,  and  often  fearful
manifestations  around  them,  that  was  the  great  object  of  their
reverence  and  fear.  But  nature,  force,  the  mvisible,  could  no
more  satisfy  them,  than  the  invisible  Jehovah.  They  symboHzed
not  the  unknown,  but  the  real,  first  in  one  way  and  then  in
another.  Light  and  darkness  were  the  two  most  obvious  symbols
of  good  and  evil ;  light,  therefore,  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars,  the
host  of  heaven,  were  among  the  earlier  objects  of  religious  rev-
erence. But  anything  external  and  visible,  living  or  dead,  might
be  made  to  the  people,  by  association  or  arbitrary  appointment,
the  representative  of  the  great  unkno^vn  power  by  which  all  things

1  The  later  Jews  interpreted  this  commandment  more  strictly  than  either  Moses  or  Solo-
mon. Josephus,  Ant.  8,  7,  5,  pronounced  making  the  figures  of  oxen  to  support  the  brazen
laver  to  be  contrary  to  the  law.  One  of  the  most  distinguished  ministers  of  our  Church
objected  to  the  American  Sunday  School  Union,  that  they  published  books  with  pictures.
^Vhen  asked,  What  he  thought  of  maps?  he  answered  that  so  far  as  maps  were  designed
simply  to  show  the  relative  position  of  places  on  the  face  of  the  earth,  they  were  allowed ;
but  if  they  had  any  shading  on  them  to  represent  mountains,  they  were  forbidden  by  the
second  commandment.


292  PART  III.     Ch.   XIX.  — the  law.

were  controlled.  Most  naturally,  men  distinguislied  by  force  of
character  and  by  their  exploits  would  be  regarded  as  manifesta-
tions of  the  unknown.  Thus  nature-worship  and  hero-worship,
the  two  great  forms  of  heathenism,  are  seen  to  be  radically  the
same.  It  was  in  view  of  this  state  of  the  Gentile  world,  all
nations  being  given  to  the  worship  of  the  visible  as  the  symbol
of  the  invisible,  that  Moses  delivered  the  solemn  address  to  the
chosen  people  recorded  in  the  fourth  chapter  of  Deuteronomy.
"  Only  take  heed  to  thyself,"  said  the  prophet,  "  and  keep  thy
soul  diligently,  lest  thou  forget  the  things  which  thine  eyes  have
seen,  and  lest  they  depart  from  thy  heart  all  the  days  of  thy  life ;
but  teach  them  thy  sons,  and  thy  sons'  sons."  What  is  it  that  he
thus  earnestly  called  on  them  to  remember  ?  It  was  that  in  all
the  wonderful  display  of  the  divine  presence  and  majesty  upon
Sinai,  they  had  seen  "  no  siraihtude,"  but  only  heard  a  voice,
"  Take  ye  therefore  good  heed  unto  yourselves  ;  (for  ye  saw  no
manner  of  similitude  on  the  day  that  the  Lord  spake  unto  you
in  Horeb  out  of  the  midst  of  the  fire,)  lest  ye  corrupt  yourselves,
and  make  you  a  graven  image,  the  similitude  of  any  figure,  the
likeness  of  male  or  female,  the  likeness  of  any  beast  that  is  on
the  earth,  the  likeness  of  any  winged  fowl  that  fheth  in  the  air,
the  likeness  of  anything  that  creepeth  on  the  ground,  the  Hke-
ness  of  any  fish  that  is  in  the  waters  beneath  the  earth  :  and  lest
thou  lift  up  tliine  eyes  unto  heaven,  and  when  thou  seest  the  sun,
and  the  moon,  and  the  stars,  even  all  the  host  of  heaven,  shouldest
be  driven  to  worship  them  [literally,  "  to  prostrate  thyself  before
them  "],  and  serve  them,  which  the  Loed  thy  God  hath  divided

unto  all  nations  under  the  whole  heaven Take  heed  unto

yourselves,  lest  ye  forget  the  covenant  of  the  Lord  your  God,
which  he  made  with  you,  and  make  you  a  graven  image,  the
likeness  of  anything  which  the  LoED  thy  God  hath  forbidden
thee.  For  the  Loed  thy  God  is  a  consuming  fire,  even  a  jeal-
ous God."  The  thing  thus  repeatedly  and  solemnly  forbidden  as
a  violation  of  the  covenant  between  God  and  the  people,  was
the  bowing  down  to,  or  using  anything  visible,  whether  a  natural
object  as  the  sun  or  moon,  or  a  work  of  art  and  man's  device,  as
an  object  or  mode  of  divine  worship.  And  in  this  sense  the  com-
mand has  been  understood  by  the  people  to  Avhom  it  was  given,
from  the  time  of  Moses  until  now.  The  worship  of  the  true  God
by  images,  in  the  eyes  of  the  Hebrews,  has  ever  been  considered
as  much  an  act  of  idolatry  as  the  worship  of  false  gods.

3.  A  third   argument  on  this   subject  is,  that  the  worship  of


§6.]  THE   SECOND   COMMANDMENT.  293

Jehovah  by  the  use  of  images  is  denounced  and  punished  as  an
act  of  apostasy  from  God.  When  the  Hebrews  in  the  wilderness
said  to  Aaron,  "  Make  us  gods  which  shall  go  before  us,"  neither
they  nor  Aaron  intended  to  renounce  Jehovah  as  their  God  ;  but
they  desired  a  visible  symbol  of  God,  as  the  heathen  had  of  their
gods.  This  is  plain,  because  Aaron,  when  he  fashioned  the  golden
calf  and  built  an  altar  before  it,  made  proclamation,  and  said,
"  To-morrow  is  a  feast  to  Jehovah."  "  Their  sin  then  lay,  not  in
their  adopting  another  god,  but  in  their  pretending  to  worship  a
visible  symbol  of  Him  whom  no  symbol  could  represent."  ^

In  like  manner,  when  the  ten  tribes  separated  from  Judah  and
were  erected  into  a  separate  kingdom  under  Jeroboam,  the  wor-
ship of  God  by  idols  was  regarded  as  an  apostasy  from  the  true
God.  It  is  evident  from  the  whole  narrative  that  Jeroboam  did
not  intend  to  introduce  the  worship  of  any  other  god  than  Jeho-
vah. It  was  the  place  and  mode  of  worship  which  he  sought  to
change.  He  feared  that  if  the  people  continued  to  go  up  to  Jeru-
salem and  worship  in  the  temple  there  established,  they  would  soon
return  to  their  pJlegiance  to  the  house  of  David.  To  prevent  this,
he  made  two  golden  calves,  as  Aaron  had  done,  symbols  of  the
God  who  had  brought  his  people  out  of  Egypt,  and  placed  one  in
Dan  and  the  other  in  Bethel,  and  commanded  the  people  to  resort
to  those  places  for  worship.  Thus  also  Jehu,  who  boasted  of  his
"  zeal  for  Jehovah,"  and  exterminated  the  priests  and  worshippers
of  Baal,  retained  the  service  of  the  golden  calves,  because,  as  Winer
expresses  it,  "  that  had  become  the  established  form  of  the  Je-
hovah-worship in  Israel."  "  Er  [Jehu]  behielt  den  Kalberdienst
in  Dan  und  Bethel,  als  in  Israel  einheimisch  gewordenen  Jehovah-
dienst."  ^  In  Le\dticus  xxvi.  1,  it  is  said  :  "  Ye  shall  make  you
no  idols  nor  gi-aven  image,  neither  rear  you  up  a  standing  image,
neither  shall  ye  set  up  any  image  of  stone  in  your  land,  to  bow
down  unto  it :  for  I  am  the  Lord  your  God."  And  Moses  com-
manded that  when  the  people  had  gained  possession  of  the  prom-
ised land,  six  of  the  tribes  should  be  gathered  on  Mount  Gerizim
to  bless,  and  six  upon  Mount  Ebal  to  curse  :  "  And  the  Levites
shall  speak  and  say  unto  all  the  men  of  Israel  with  a  loud  voice,
cursed  be  the  man  that  maketh  any  graven  or  molten  image,  an
abomination  unto  the  LoRD,  the  work  of  the  hands  of  the  crafts-
man, and  putteth  it  in  a  secret  place.  And  all  the  people  shall
ansAver  and  say.  Amen."     (Deut.  xxvii.  15.)

1  The  Holy  Bible,  with  an  Explanatory  and  Critical  Commentary.  By  Bishops  and  other
Clergy  of  the  Anglican  Church.    New  York:  Charles  Scribner  &  Co.,  1871,  vol.  i.  p.  405.

2  Biblisches  Bealworterbuch,  von  Dr.  Georg  Benedict  Winer,  3d  edit.  Leipzig,  1847,
art.  "Jehu."


294  PART  III.     Ch.   XIX.  — the   law.

The  specific  thing  thus  frequently  and  solemnly  forbidden  is
the  boTving  down  to  images,  or  rendering  them  any  religious  ser-
vice. In  this  sense  these  commands  were  understood  by  the  an-
cient people  of  (xod  to  whom  they  were  originally  given,  and  by
the  whole  Christian  Church  until  the  sudden  influx  of  nominally
converted  heathen  into  the  Church  after  the  time  of  Constantine,
who  brought  -with  them  heathenish  ideas  and  insisted  on  heathen
modes  of  worship.

The  simple  obvious  facts  with  regard  to  the  religion  of  the
gentile  world  are,  (1.)  That  the  gods  of  the  nations  were  imag-
inary beings  ;  that  is,  they  either  had  no  existence  except  in  the
imaginations  of  their  worshippers,  or  they  did  not  possess  the  at-
tributes which  were  ascribed  to  them.  Therefore  they  are  called
in  Scripture  vanity,  lies,  nonentities.  (2.)  Of  these  imaginary
beings  symbols  were  selected  or  images  formed,  to  which  all  the
homage  supposed  to  be  due  to  the  gods  themselves  was  paid.
This  was  not  done  on  the  assumption  that  the  symbols  or  images
were  really  gods.  The  Greeks  did  not  think  that  Jupiter  was  a
block  of  marble.  Neither  did  the  heathen  mentioned  in  the  Bible
believe  that  the  sun  was  Baal.  Nevertheless  some  connection
was  supposed  to  exist  between  the  image  and  the  divinity  which
it  was  intended  to  represent.  With  some  this  connection  was
simply  that  between  the  sign  and  the  thing  signified ;  with  others
it  was  more  mystical,  or  what  in  these  days  we  should  call
sacramental.  In  either  case  it  was  such  that  the  homage  due  to
the  divinity  was  paid  to  his  image  ;  and  any  indignity  offered  to
the  latter  was  resented  as  offered  to  the  former.

As,  therefore,  the  heathen  gods  were  no  gods,  and  as  the  homage
due  to  God  was  paid  to  the  idols,  the  sacred  writers  denounced
the  heathen  as  the  worshippers  of  stocks  and  stones,  and  con-
demned them  for  the  folly  of  making  gods  out  of  wood  or  metal
"graven  by  art  and  man's  device."  They  made  little  or  no  dif-
ference between  the  worshipping  of  images  and  the  worshipping
false  gods.  The  two  things  were,  in  their  view,  identical.  Hence
in  the  Bible  the  worship  of  images  is  denounced  as  idolatry,
without  regard  to  the  divinity,  whether  true  or  false,  to  whom  the
image  was  dedicated.

The  Reasons  annexed  to  this  Commandment.

The  relation  between  the  soul  and  God  is  far  more  intimate
than  that  between  the  soul  and  any  creature.  Our  life,  spiritual
and  eternal,  depends  on  our  relation  to  our  Maker.     Hence  our


§6.]  THE   SECOND   COMMANDMENT.  295

highest  duty  is  to  Him.  The  greatest  sin  a  man  can  commit  is
to  refuse  to  render  to  God  the  admiration  and  obedience  which
are  his  due,  or  to  transfer  to  the  creature  the  allegiance  and  ser-
vice which  belong  to  Him.  Hence  no  sin  is  so  frequently  or  so
severely  denounced  in  the  Scriptures.

The  most  intimate  relation  which  can  subsist  among  men  is
that  of  marriage.  No  injury  which  can  be  rendered  by  one  man
against  another  is  greater  than  the  violation  of  that  relation  ;  and
no  sin  which  a  wife  can  commit  is  more  heinous  and  degrading
than  infidelity  to  her  marriage  vows.

This  being  the  case,  it  is  natural  that  the  relation  between  God
and  his  people  should  be,  as  it  is,  in  the  Bible  so  often  illustrated
by  a  reference  to  the  marriage  relation.  A  people  who  refuse
to  recognize,  or  an  individual  man  who  refuses  to  recognize  Jeho-
vah as  his  God,  who  transfers  the  allegiance  and  obedience  due  to
God  alone  to  any  other  object,  is  compared  to  an  unfaithful  wife.
And  as  jealousy  is  the  strongest  of  human  passions,  the  relation
of  God  to  those  who  thus  forsake  Him  is  illustrated  by  a  refer-
ence to  the  feelings  of  an  injured  and  forsaken  husband.  It  is
in  this  way  that  the  Scriptures  teach  that  the  severest  displeasure
of  God,  and  the  most  dreadful  manifestations  of  his  wrath,  are
the  certain  consequences  of  the  sin  of  idolatry  ;  that  is,  of  the  sin
of  having  any  other  God  than  Jehovah,  or  of  giving  to  images,
to  stocks  and  stones,  the  external  homage  due  to  Him  who  is  a
spirit,  and  who  must  be  worshipped  in  spirit  and  in  truth.

The  Lord,  therefore,  in  this  commandment,  declares  Himself  to
be  "  a  jealous  God,  visiting  the  iniquities  of  the  fathers  upon  the
children  unto  the  third  and  fourth  generation  ;  and  showing
mercy  unto  thousands  (unto  the  thousandth  generation)  of  tlieni
that  love  me,  and  keep  my  commandments."  The  evil  conse-
quences of  apostasy  from  God  are  not  confined  to  the  original
apostates.  They  are  continued  from  generation  to  generation.
They  seem  indeed,  and,  humanly  speaking,  in  fact  are  remediless.
The  degradation  and  untold  miseries  of  the  whole  heathen  world
are  the  natural  and  inevitable  consequence  of  their  forefathers'
having  turned  the  truth  of  God  into  a  lie,  and  worshipped  and
served  the  creature  more  than  the  Creator.  These  natural  conse-
quences, however,  are  designed,  ordained,  and  judicial.  They
are  not  mere  calamities.  They  are  judgments,  and  therefore  are
not  to  be  counteracted  or  evaded.  Consequently  those  who  teach
atheism,  or  who  undermine  religion,  or  who  corrupt  and  degrade
the  worship  of  God  by  associating  with  it  the  worship  of  creat-


296  PART  in.    ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

ures ;  or  who  teach  that  we  may  make  graven  images  and  bow
down  to  them  and  serve  them,  are  bringing  down  upon  them-
selves and  upon  coming  generations  the  most  direful  calamities
that  can  degrade  and  afflict  the  children  of  men.  Such  must  be
the  issue  unless  they  not  only  can  counteract  the  operation  of  nat-
ural causes,  but  also  can  thwart  the  purpose  of  Jehovah.

It  is  a  great  cause  for  thankfulness,  and  adapted  to  fill  the
hearts  of  God's  faithful  people  with  joy  and  confidence,  to  know
that  He  will  bless  their  children  to  the  thousandth  generation.

The  Doctrine  and  Usage  of  the  Romish  Church  as  to  Images.

Salvation,  our  Lord  said,  is  of  the  Jews.  The  founders  of  the
Christian  Church  were  Jews.  The  religion  of  the  Old  Testament
in  which  they  had  been  educated  forbade  the  use  of  images  in
divine  worsliip.  All  the  heathen  were  worshippers  of  idols.
Idol-worship,  therefore,  was  an  abomination  to  the  Jews.  With
the  Old  Testament  authority  against  the  use  of  images  and
with  this  strong  national  prejudice  against  their  use,  it  is  abso-
lutely incredible  that  they  should  be  admitted  in  the  more  spir-
itual worship  of  the  Christian  Church.  It  was  not  until  three
centuries  after  the  introduction  of  Christianity,  that  the  influence
of  the  heathen  element  introduced  into  the  Church  was  strong
enough  to  overcome  the  natural  opposition  to  their  use  in  the
service  of  the  sanctuary.  Three  parties  soon  developed  themselves
in  connection  with  this  subject.  The  first  adhered  to  the  teach-
ings of  the  Old  Testament  and  the  usage  of  the  Apostolic  Chm-ches,
and  repudiated  the  religious  use  of  images  in  any  form.  The
second  allowed  the  use  of  images  and  pictures  for  the  purpose  of
instruction,  but  not  for  worship.  The  common  people  could  not
read,  and  therefore  it  was  argued  that  visible  representations  of
Scriptural  persons  and  incidents  were  allowable  for  their  benefit.
The  third  contended  for  their  use  not  only  as  a  means  of  instruc-
tion, but  also  for  worship.

As  early  as  A.  d.  305,  the  Council  of  Elvira  in  Spain  con-
demned the  use  of  pictures  in  the  Church.^  In  the  thirty-sixth
Canon  the  Council  says,^  "  Placuit  picturas  in  ecclesia  esse  non
debere ;  ne  quod  colitur  et  adoratur  in  parietibus  depingatur."
Augustine  complained  of  the  superstitious  use  of  images  ;  Euse-
bius  of  Cassarea,  and  Epiphanius  of  Salamis,  protested  against

1  The  year  305  is  usually  assigned  as  the  date  of  tliis  Council,  although  the  precise  time
of  its  session  is  matter  of  dispute.

-  Binius,  Conciliu  Gemralia  et  Provinculia,  Culognc,  1013,  t.  i.  vol.  i.  p.  195,  b.  c.


§  6.]  THE   SECOND   COMMANDMENT.  297

their  being  made  objects  of  worship ;  and  Gregory  the  Great
allowed  their  use  only  as  aneans  of  instruction.^

In  A.  D.  726  the  Emperor  Leo  III.  issued  an  ordinance  forbid-
ding the  use  of  images  in  churches  as  heathenish  and  heretical.
To  support  his  action  a  council  was  called,  which  met  in  Constan-
tinople A.  D.  754,  and  which  gave  ecclesiastical  sanction  to  this
condemnation.  In  A.  D.  787,  however,  the  Empress  Irene,  under
Roman  influence,  called  a  council,  which  Romanists  of  the  Italian
school  consider  ecumenical,  at  Nice,  by  which  image-worship  was
fully  sanctioned.  This  Council  first  met  in  Constantinople,  but
there  the  opposition  to  the  use  of  images  was  so  strong  that  it  was
disbanded  and  called  to  meet  the  following  year  at  Nice.  Here
the  face  of  things  had  changed ;  enemies  had  been  converted ;  op-
ponents became  advocates ;  even  Gregory  of  Neo-Csesarea,  who  had
been  a  zealous  supporter  of  the  policy  of  Leo  III.  and  of  his  son
Constantine  Copronymus,  was  brought  to  say,  "  Si  omnes  consen-
tiunt,  ego  non  dissentio."  Few  could  Avithstand  the  promises  and
threats  of  those  in  power,  and  the  cogency  of  the  argument  for
image  worship  drawn  from  the  numerous  miracles  adduced  in  fa-
vour of  their  worship.  This  Council,  therefore,  declared  the  pre-
vious Council,  called  by  Leo  HI.,  heretical,  and  ordained  the  wor-
ship of  pictures  in  the  churches  ;  not  indeed  with  Xarpeta,  or  the

reverence    due   to    God,    but   with  do-Tracr/xos   koL   ti/xt^tik^   TrpoaKwrja-K;

(with  salutations  and  reverent  prostrations).  The  Council  an-
nounced the  principle  on  which  image-worship,  whether  among
the  heathen  or  Christians,  has  generally  been  defended,  ^.  e.,  that
the  worship  paid  the  image  terminates  on  the  object  which  it  rep-
resents. H  TTys  eiKoros  Tt/jy]  Ittl  to  irp  .totvttov  Sia^atVet  koa.  o  TrpoaKWUiv
T)jv  eiKOva  TrpoaKvvel  iv  avrfj  tov  iyypacjyoixevov  Tr}v  inrocrTacni'.

The  decisions  of  this  Council,  although  sanctioned  by  the  Pope,
gave  offence  to  the  Western  Churches.  The  Emperor  Charle-
magne not  only  caused  a  book  to  be  written  (entitled  "  Libri
Carolini  ")  to  refute  the  doctrines  inculcated,  but  also  summoned
a  council  to  meet  at  Frankfort  on  the  Main  A.  D.  794,  at  which
delegates  from  Britain,  France,  Germany,  Italy,  and  even  two  le-
gates from  the  Bishop  of  Rome,  were  present ;  where  the  decrees
of  the  so-called  General  Council  of  Nice  were  "  rejected,"  "  de-
spised," and  "  condemned."  All  worshipping  of  pictures  and  im-
ages was  forbidden,  but  their  presence  in  the  churches  for  instruc-
tion and  ornament  was  allowed.

The  friends  of  image-worship,  however,  rapidly  gained  the  as-

1  See  Guericke,  Kirchengeschichte,  ii.  iii.  2,  §  77,  6th  edit.  Leipzig,  1846,  vol.  i.  p.  350.


298  PART  m.    ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

cendancy,  so  that  Thomas  Aquinas,  one  of  the  best  as  well  as  tlie
greatest  of  the  Romish  theologians  in  the  thirteenth  century,  held
the  extreme  doctrine  on  this  subject.  He  taught  that  images
were  to  be  used  in  the  churches  for  three  purposes,  first,  for  the
instruction  of  the  masses  who  could  not  read ;  secondly,  that  the
mystery  of  the  incarnation  and  the  examples  of  the  saints  may  be
the  better  remembered ;  and  thirdly,  that  pious  feelings  may  be
excited,  as  men  are  more  easily  moved  by  what  they  see  than  by
what  they  hear.  He  taught  that  to  the  image  in  itself  and  for
itself  no  reverence  is  due,  but  that  if  it  represents  Clirist,  the  rever-
ence due  to  Christ  is  due  to  the  image.  "  Sic  ergo  dicendum  est,
quod  imagini  Christi  in  quantum  est  res  qujedam  (puta  hgnum
vel  pictum)  nulla  reverentia  exhibetur ;  quia  reverentia  nonnisi
rationali  naturse  debetur.  Relinquitur  ergo  quod  exhibeatur  ei
reverentia  solum,  in  quantum  est  imago  :  et  sic  sequitur,  quod
eadem  reverentia  exhibeatur  imagini  Christi  et  ipsi  Christo.  Cum
ergo  Christus  adoretur  adoratione  latriae,  consequens  est,  quod
ejus  imago  sit  adoratione  latrife  adoranda."  ^

Tridentine  Doctrine.

The  Council  of  Trent  acted  with  reference  to  the  worship  of
images  with  its  usual  caution.  It  decreed  that  to  the  images  of
Christ  and  the  saints  "  due  reverence  "  should  be  paid,  without
defining  what  that  reverence  is.  The  council  decided  :  "  Imagines
porro  Christi,  Deipara^  Virginis,  et  aliorum  sanctorum,  in  templis
prffisertim  habendas,  et  retinendas  ;  eisque  debitum  honorem,  et
venerationem  impertiendam  :  non  quod  credatur  inesse  aliqua
in  eis  divinitas,  vel  virtus,  proj)ter  quam  sint  colendaB ;  vel  quod
ab  eis  sit  aliquid  petendum  ;  vel  quod  fiducia  in  imaginibus  sit
figenda  ;  veluti  olim  fiebat  a  gentibus,  qu.se  in  idolis  spem  suam
collocabant ;  sed  quoniam  honos,  qui  eis  exhibetur  refertur  ad  pro-
totypa,  quffi  illa3  representant :  ita  ut  per  imagines,  quas  osculamur,
et  coram  quibus  caput  aperimus,  et  procumbimus,  Christum  adore-
mus  ;  et  sanctos,  quorum  illse  similitudinem  gerunt,  veneremur."

In  the  same  session  it  was  decreed  concerning  relics :  "  Sanc-
torum quoque  martyrum,  et  aliorum  cum  Christo  viventium  sancta
corpora,  quae  viva  membra  fuerunt  Christi,  et  templum  Spiritus
Sancti,  ab  ipso  ad  asternam  vitam  suscitanda,  et  glorificanda,  a
fidelibus  veneranda  esse  ;  per  quse  multa  beneficia  a  Deo  hominibus
prtestantur  :  ita  ut  affirmantes,  sanctorum  reliquiis  venerationem,
atque  honorem  non  deberi ;  vel  eas,  aliaque  sacra  monumenta  a

1  Summa,  iii.  qurest.  xxv.  art  3,  edit.  Cologae,  1640,  p.  53  of  fourth  set.


§6.]  THE   SECOND   COMMANDMENT.  299

fidelibus  inutiliter  honorari ;  atque  eorum  opis  inipetrancl;i3  causa
sanctorum  memorias  frustra  frequentari ;  omnino  damiiandos  esse ;
prout  jampridem  eos  damnavit,  et  nunc  etiam  damnat  ecclesia."  ^
On  relic-worship  the  Roman  Catechism,  says,  "  Cui  fidem  non
faciant  et  honoris,  qui  Sanctis  debetur,  et  patrocinii,  quod  nostri
suscipiunt,  mirabiles  effects  res  ad  eorum  sepulcra,  et  oculis,  et
manibus  membrisque  omnibus  captis,  in  pristinura  statum  restitu-
tis,  mortuis  ad  vitam  revocatis,  ex  corporibus  hominum  ejectis
demoniis  ?  quse  non  audisse,  ut  multi,  non  legisse,  ut  pkirimi
gravissimi  viri,  sed  vidisse,  testes  locupletissimi  sancti  Ambrosius
et  Augustinus  litteris  prodiderunt.  Quid  multa  ?  si  vestes,  su-
daria,  si  umbra  sanctorum,  priusquam  e  vita  migrarent,  depulit
morbos,  viresque  restituit,  quis  tandem  negare  audeat,  Deum  per
sacros  cineres,  ossa,  ceterasque  sanctorum  reliquias  eadem  mirabili-
ter  efficere  ?  Declaravit  id  cadaver  illud,  quod  forte  illatum  in
sepulcrum  Elisei,  ejus  tacto  corpore,  subito  revixit."  ^

Bellarmin.

The  whole  of  the  Liber  Secundus  of  Bellarmin's  Disputation
"  De  Ecclesia  Triumphante  "  in  the  second  volume  of  his  works,
is  devoted  to  the  discussion  of  the  question  of  the  worship  of  the
relics  and  images  of  the  saints.  As  to  the  worship  of  images  he
says  there  are  three  opinions  among  Romanists  themselves  :
"  Prima,  quod  imago  non  sit  uUo  modo  in  se  colenda,  sed  solum
coram  imagine  colendum  exemplar."  "  Secunda  opinio  est,  quod
idem  honor  debeatur  imagini  ut  exemplari,  et  proinde  Christi
imago  sit  adoranda  cultu  latrige,  Beatse  Marias  cultu  hyperduliae,
sanctorum  aliorum,  cultu  dulias."  "  Tertia  opinio  versatur  in
medio,  estque  eorum,  qui  dicunt,  ipsas  imagines  in  se,  et  proprie
honorari  debere,  sed  honore  minori,  quam  ipsum  exemplar,  et
proinde  nullam  imaginem  adorandam  esse  cultu  latrige."  ^  His
own  opinion  is  given  in  the  following  propositions  :  "  Prima  sen-
tentia,  sive  propositio.  Imagines  Christi,  et  sanctorum  venerandas
sunt,  non  solum  per  accidens,  vel  improprie,  sed  etiam  per  se  pro-
prie, ita  ut  ipsae  terminent  venerationem  ut  in  se  considerantur,
et  non  solum  ut  vicem  gerunt  exemplaris."  "  Secunda  propositio.
Quantum  ad  modum  loquendi  proesertim  in  concione  ad  populum,
non  est  dicendum  imagines  ullas  adorari  debere  latria,  sed  e  con-
trario   non  debere  sic   adorari."     "  Tertia  propositio.     Si    de  re

»  Scsw--.  XXV.;  Streitwolf,  Libri  SymhoUci,  Gi  ttingen,  1846,  vol.  i.  pp.  93,  94.
-  III.  ii.  8  (15,  XXX.,  xxxi.);  Streitwolf,  vol.  i.  p.  482.

"  De  KccJi-dd  Triumphnnfe,  lib.  ii.,  /A  J mayinibus  Sanctorum,  cap.  xx. ;  Disputationes
Paris,  1(108,  vol.  ii.  pp.  801,  802.


300  PART  m.   Ch.  XIX. —  the  law.

ipsa  agatur,  admitti  potest,  imagines  posse  coli  improprie,  vel  per
accideiis,  eodem  genere  cultus,  quo  exemplar  ipsum  colitur."
"  Quarta  propositio.  Imago  per  se,  et  proprie  non  est  adoranda
eodem  cultu,  quo  ipsum  exemj)lar,  et  proinde  nulla  imago  est
adoranda  cultu  latriae  per  se,  et  proprie."  "  Quinta  conclusio,
Cultus,  qui  per  se,  proprie  debetur  imaginibus,  est  cultus  quidam
iraperfectus,  qui  analogice  et  reductive  pertinet  ad  speciem  ejus
cultus,  qui  debetur  exemplari."  ^

Relics.

Bellarmin  in  his  defence  of  the  "  cultus  reliquiarum  "  begins
with  an  attempted  refutation  of  Calvin's  five  argmnents  against
such  worship.  He  then  presents  his  own  in  favour  of  it.^  They
are  such  as  these :  First,  from  Scriptural  examples:  (a.)  Moses
carried  the  bones  "  sancti  Josephi  "  with  him  when  he  left  Egypt ;
(6.)  God  honoured  the  remains  of  ]\Ioses  by  burying  them  with
his  own  hands ;  (c.)  A  dead  man  Avas  restored  to  life  by  contact
with  the  bones  of  Elisha  (2  Kings  xiii.  21)  ;  (c?.)  Isaiah  predicted
that  the  sepulchre  of  the  Messiah  should  be  glorious.  The  Vul-
gate renders  Isaiah  xi.  10,  "  Et  erit  sepulcrum  ejus  gloriosum  ;  "
which  Bellarmin  understands  as  foretelling  "  ut  sepulcrum  Domini,
ab  omnibus  honoraretur."  And  adds,  "  Ex  quo  refellitur  Lutheri
blasphemia,  qui  in  libro  de  abolenda  Missa  dicit,  Deo  non  majo-
rem  curam  esse  de  sepulcro  Domini,  quam  de  bobus.  "  (g.)  The
woman  mentioned  in  the  Gospel  was  healed  by  touching  Christ's
garment ;  the  sick,  according  to  Acts  v.  15,  were  placed  in  the
streets  "  that  at  least  the  shadow  of  Peter  passing  by  might  over-
shadow some  of  them  "  ;  again,  in  Acts  xix.  11, 12,  it  is  said  :  "  God
wrought  special  miracles  by  the  hands  of  Paal :  so  that  from  liis
body  were  brought  unto  the  sick  handkerchiefs  or  aprons,  and
the  diseases  departed  from  them,  and  the  evil  spirits  went  out  of
them."  If,  says  Bellarmin,  Christ  were  now  on  earth,  and  we
should  kiss  his  garment,  the  Protestants  would  call  us  idolaters.

His  second  argument  is  from  the  decisions  of  councils  ;  the
third  from  the  testimony  of  the  fathers  ;  the  fourth  and  fifth
from  the  miracles  wrought  by  and  in  the  relics  of  the  saints,  of
which  he  cites  numerous  examples  ;  the  sixth  from  the  miraculous
discovery  of  the  remains  of  the  saints,  "  Si  enim  Deo  cultus  re-
liquiarum non  placeret,  cur  ipse  servis  suis  corpora  sanctorum,
qme  latebant,  ostenderet  ?  "  the  seventh,  from  the  translation
of  relics  from  one  place  to  another.     He  also  argues  from  th4

1  Ut  supra,  call,  xxi.-xxv.  pp.  802-809.         ^  Ut  supra,  cap.  iii.  pp.  746-753.


§6.]  THE  SECOND   COMMANDMENT.  301

custom  of  depositing  the  remains  of  the  saints  under  altars,  and
burning  incense  and  lamps  before  their  tombs. ^

Remarks.

1.  From  all  this  it  appears  that  the  Romanists  worship  im-
ages in  the  same  way  that  the  heathen  of  old  did,  and  pagans  of
our  own  day  still  do.  They  "  bow  down  to  them  and  serve  them."
They  pay  them  all  the  external  homage  which  they  render  to
the  persons  they  are  intended  to  represent.

2.  The  explanations  and  defence  of  such  worship  are  the  same
in  both  cases.  The  heathen  recognized  the  fact  that  the  images
made  of  gold,  silver,  wood,  or  marble  were  lifeless  and  insensible
in  themselves  ;  they  admitted  that  they  could  not  see,  or  hear,  or
save.  They  attributed  no  inherent  virtue  or  supernatural  power
to  them.  They  claimed  that  the  homage  paid  to  them  terminated
on  the  gods  which  they  represented  ;  that  they  only  worshipped
before  the  images,  or  at  most  through  them.  So  far  as  the
Greeks  and  Romans  are  concerned,  they  were  less  reverential  to
the  mere  image,  and  claimed  far  less  of  the  supernatural  in  con-
nection ^vith  their  use.

3.  Both  among  the  heathen  and  the  Romanists,  for  the  unedu-
cated people  the  images  themselves  were  the  objects  of  worship.
It  would  be  hard  to  find  in  any  heathen  author  such  justification
of  image-worship  as  the  Romish  theologians  put  forth.  What
heathen  ever  said  that  the  same  homage  was  due  to  the  image  of
Jupiter  as  to  Jupiter  himself  ?  This  Thomas  Aquinas  says  of
the  images  of  Christ  and  of  the  saints.  Or  what  heathen  ever
has  said,  as  Bellarmin  says,  that  although  the  homage  to  be  paid

1  In  the  Decreta  et  Articuli  Jidti  jurandi  per  Episcopos  et  alios  Prcelatos  in  susceptione
inuneris  consecrationis,  publicati  Romm  in  Consistorio  ap.  S.  Marcum  d.  IV,  Septbr.  a.
AfDLX.,  are  the  following  articles:  "  Virgo  Dei  genitrix,  Angeli,  et  Sancti,  religiose  coli
debent,  et  invocari,  ut  eorum  meritis,  et  precibus  juvemur.

"  Crux  Christi,  et  imagines,  ac  qusecunque  attigerunt,  adoranda  sunt,  juxta  Ecclesiae
catholicre  doctrinam,  etfidem.

"  DeipariB  Virginis  Mariie,  angelorum,  et  sanctorum  sunt  imagines  adorandce  (id  est  in
honore  habenda;,  as  it  reads  in  the  margin)  turn  corpora,  et  reliquiae  qucevis."  See  Streit-
wolf,  Libri  SijmboUci  Ecclesim  Catholicce,  GiJttingen,  1846,  vol.  ii.  p.  328.

Notwithstanding  such  authoritative  declarations,  Bellarmin  enumerates  it  as  among  the
"  mendacia"  of  the  Centuriators  and  of  Calvin  that  they  say  that  the  Catholics  "  Non
solum  sauctos  Christi  loco  adorant,  sed  etiam  eorum  ossa,  vestes,  calceos,  et  simulacra;"
and  asks:  "  At  quis  unquam  Catholicorum  reliquias  invocavit?  Quis  unquam  auditus  est
in  precibus,  aut  litaniis  dixisse:  '  Sanctae  reliquias,  orate  pro  me?'  Et  quis  easdem  im-
quam  divino  honore  affecit,  vel  Christi  loco  adoravit:  nos  enim  reliquias  quidem  hono-
ramus,  et  osculamur  ut  sacra  pignora  patronorum  nostrorum :  sed  nee  adoramus  ut  Deum
nee  invocamus  ut  sanctos,  sed  minore  cultu  veneramur,  quam  sanctorum  spiritus,  nedum
quam  Deum  ipsum."  De  Ecclesia  Triumphante,  lib.  ii.,  De  Reliquiis  Hanctorum,  cap.  ii. ;
blsputat tones,  edit.  Paris,  1608,  vol.  ii.  pp.  745,  e,  746,  a.


302  PART  m.   ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

to  the  image  is  not  strictly  and  properly  the  same  as  that  due  to
its  prototype,  it  is  nevertheless  improperly  and  analogically  the
same  ;  the  same  in  kind  although  not  in  degree  ?  What  can  the
common  people  know  of  the  difference  between  proprie  and  im-
proprie  ?  They  are  told  to  worship  the  image,  and  they  worship
it  just  as  the  heathen  worshipped  the  images  of  their  gods.  As
the  Bible  pronounces  and  denounces  as  idolatry  not  only  the  wor-
ship of  false  gods,  but  also  the  worship  of  images,  '  the  bowing
down  to  them  and  serving  them,'  it  is  clear  that  the  Roman  Church
is  as  wholly  given  to  idolatry  as  was  Athens  when  visited  by  Paul.

4.  The  moral  and  religious  effects  of  image  worship  are  al-
together evil.  It  is  enough  to  prove  that  it  is  evil  in  its  conse-
quences that  God  has  forbidden  it,  and  threatened  to  visit  the
worshippers  of  idols  with  his  severe  judgments.  It  degrades  the
worship  of  God.  It  turns  off  the  minds  of  the  people  from  the
proper  object  of  reverence  and  confidence,  and  leads  the  un-
educated masses  to  put  their  trust  in  gods  who  cannot  save.

5.  As  to  the  worship  of  relics,  it  is  enough  to  say,  (a.)  That
it  has  no  support  from  Scripture.  The  outline  of  Bellarmin's
arguments  given  above,  is  sufficient  to  show  that  the  Bible  fur-
nishes no  apology  for  this  superstitious  custom.  (6.)  What  pass
for  relics,  in  tlie  great  majority  of  cases,  are  spurious.  There  is
no  end  to  the  deceptions  practised  on  the  people  in  this  regard.
There  are,  it  is  said,  enough  fragments  of  the  cross  exhibited  in
different  sanctuaries,  to  build  a  large  ship  ;  and  there  are  innumer-
able nails  which  are  reverenced  as  the  instruments  of  our  Lord's
torture.  Bones  not  only  of  ordinary  men,  but  even  of  brutes,
are  set  before  the  people  as  relics  of  the  saints.^  In  one  of  the
cathedrals  of  Spain  there  is  a  magnificent  ostrich  feather  preserved
in  a  gorgeous  casket,  which  the  priests  affirm  fell  from  the  wing
of  the  angel  Gabriel.  Romanists  themselves  are  obliged  to  resort
to  the  doctrine  of  "  economics "  or  pious  fraud,  to  justify  these
palpable  impositions  on  the  credulity  of  the  people.  Of  such
impositions  the  most  flagrant  example  is  the  blood  of  St.  Janua-
rius,  which  is  annually  liquefied  in  Naples,     (c.)  Ascribing  mirac-

1  Luther  in  the  Smaleald  Articles,  says:  "  Reliquife  sanctorum  refertie  multis  mendaciis,
ineptis  et  fatuitatibus.  Canum  et  equorum  ossa  ibi  s»pe  reperta  suut."  In  German  it
reads  thus:  "  Das  Heiligthum  (reliquiie  sanctorum),  darinne  so  manche  offentliche  Liigen
und  Narrenwerk  erfunden,  von  Hunds-  und  Rossknochcn,  das  auch  um  solcher  Biiberei
willen,  das  der  Teufel  gelacht  hat,  langst  sollte  verdammt  worden  seyn,  wenn  gleich  etwas
Gutes  daran  wiire,  dazu  auch  ohne  Gottes  Wort,  weder  geboten  noch  gerathen,  giinzun-
nothig  und  unniitz  Ding  ist."     Pars  ii.  art.  ii.  22.

In  the  church  at  Wittenberg  there  hangs  an  original  portrait  of  Luther  under  which  is
written,  "All  his  words  were  thunderbolts."


§  6.]  THE    SECOND   COM.AIAXDilENT.  303

iilous  poAvers  to  these  pretended  relics  as  Romanists  do,  is  to  the
last  degree  superstitious  and  degrading.  It  is  true  that  a  Kttle
more  than  a  century  ago  belief  in  necromancy  and  witchcraft  was
almost  universal  even  among  Protestants.  But  there  is  the
greatest  possible  difference  between  superstitious  behefs  prevailing
for  a  time  among  the  people,  and  those  beliefs  being  adopted
by  the  Church  and  enacted  into  articles  of  faith  to  bind  the  con-
science of  the  people  in  all  time.  The  Church  of  Rome  is  chained
down  by  the  decisions  of  her  popes  and  councils  pronomicing
the  grossest  superstitions  to  be  matters  of  divine  revelation  sanc-
tioned and  approved  by  God.  She  has  rendered  it  impossible  for
men  entitled  to  be  called  rational  to  believe  what  she  teaches.
The  great  lesson  taught  by  the  history  of  image-worship  and
the  reverencing  of  relics,  is  the  importance  of  adhering  to  the
word  of  God  as  the  only  rule  of  our  faith  and  practice ;  receiv-
ing nothing  as  true  in  religion  but  what  the  Bible  teaches,  and
admitting  nothing  into  divine  worship  which  the  Scriptures  do
not  either  sanction  or  enjoin.

Protestant  Doctrine  on  the  Subject.

As  the  worship  of  images  is  expressly  forbidden  in  the  Scrip-
tures, Protestants,  as  well  Lutheran  as  Reformed,  condemned
their  being  made  the  objects  of  any  rehgious  homage.  As,  how-
ever, their  use  for  the  purposes  of  instruction  or  ornament  is  not
thus  expressl}^  forbidden,  Luther  contended  that  such  use  was
allowable  and  even  desirable.  He,  therefore,  favoured  their  being
retained  in  the  Churches.  The  Reformed,  however,  on  account
of  the  great  abuse  which  had  attended  their  introduction,  insisted
that  they  should  be  excluded  from  all  places  of  worsliip.

The  Lutheran  standards  do  not  dilate  on  this  subject.  In  the
Apology  for  the  Augsburg  Confession  it  is  said  :  "  Priinum  quia
cum  alii  mediatores  pr^eter  Christum  qu^runtur,  collocatur  fiducia
in  alios,  obruitur  tota  notitia  Christi,  idque  res  ostendit.  Videtur
initio  mentio  sanctorum,  qualis  est  in  veteribus  orationibus,  toler-
abili  consilio  recepta  esse.  Postea  secuta  est  invocatio,  invoca-
tionem  prodigiosi  et  plus  quam  ethnici  abusus  secuti  simt.  Ab
invocatione  ad  imagines  ventum  est,  hse  quoque  colebantur,  et
putabatur  eis  inesse  qu^eedam  vis,  sicut  Magi  vim  inesse  iingunt
imaginibus  signorum  coelestium  certo  tempore  sculjDtis."  ^

Luther  was  tolerant  of  the  use  of  images  in  the  churches.  On
this  subject  he  says :  "If  the  worship)  of  images  be  avoided,  we

1 IX.  3-1;  Hase,  Libvi  SymboUci,  3cl  edit.  Leipzig,  1846,  p.  229.


304  PART  III.     Ch.  XIX.  — the   LAW.

may  use  tliem  as  we  do  the  words  of  Scripture,  which  bring  things
before  the  mind  and  cause  us  to  remember  them."  ^  "  Who  is  so
stone  bhnd,"  he  asks,  "  as  not  to  see  that  if  sacred  events  may
be  described  in  words  mthout  sin  and  to  the  profit  of  tlie  hearers,
they  may  with  the  same  propriety,  for  the  benefit  of  the  un-
educated, be  portrayed  or  sculptured,  not  only  at  home  and  in
our  houses,  but  in  the  churches."  ^  In  another  place  he  says  that
when  one  reads  of  the  passion  of  Christ,  whether  he  will  or  not,
an  iaiage  of  a  man  suspended  on  a  cross  is  formed  in  his  mind,
just  as  certainly  as  his  face  is  reflected  when  he  looks  into  the
water.  There  is  no  sin  in  having  such  an  image  in  the  mind ;
why  then  should  it  be  sinful  to  have  it  before  the  eyes  ?  ^

The  Reformed  went  further  than  this.  They  condemned  not
only  the  worsliip  of  images,  but  also  their  introduction  into
places  of  worship,  because  they  were  unnecessary,  and  because
they  were  so  liable  to  abuse.  The  Second  Helvetic  Confession
says,  "  Rejicimus  non  modo  gentium  idola,  sed  et  Christianorum
simulachra.  Tametsi  enim  Christus  humanam  assumpserit  natu-
ram,  non  ideo  tamen  assumpsit,  ut  typum  prseferret   statuariis

atque  pictoribus Et  quando  beati  spiritus  et  divi  coelites,

dum  hie  viverent,  omnem  cultum  sui  averterunt,  et  statuas  op-
pugnarunt,  cui  verisimile  videatur  divis  coelestibus  et  angelis  suas
placere  imagines,  ad  quas  genua  flectunt  homines,  detegimt  capita,
aliisque  prosequuntur  honoribus  ?  "  In  another  paragraph  of  the
same  chapter  it  is  said  :  "Idcirco  approbamus  Lactantii  veteris,
scriptoris  sententiam,  dicentis,  Non  est  dubium,  quui  religio  nulla
est,  ubicunque  simulachrum  est."  *

The  Heidelberg  Catechism,  says,^  "  Is  it  forbidden  to  make  any
images  or  statues  ?  God  cannot  and  ought  not  in  any  way  to  be
depicted  ;  and  although  it  is  lawful  to  make  representations  of
creatures,  yet  God  forbids  that  they  should  be  worshipped,  or  He
through  them.  But  may  not  images  be  tolerated  in  the  churches
for  the  instruction  of  the  vmeducated  ?  By  no  means  ;  for  it  does
not  become  us  to  be  wiser  than  God,  who  has  willed  that  his
Church  be  instructed,  not  by  dumb  images,  but  by  the  preaching
of  his  word."

No  one  who  has  ever  seen  any  of  the  masterpieces  of  Christian
art,  whether  of  the  pencil  or  of  the  chisel,  and  felt  how  hard  it

1  On  Micah  i.  7;   Works,  edit.  Walch,  vol.  vi.  p.  27-17.  2  /fov/.  p.  2740.

'i  Wider  die  hiinmlibchtn  Prophtfeit,  von  den  Bildurn  und  SacrauK-ni,  GO;  I/jtd.  vol.  x.x.
X  213.

*  Confessio  Helvetica  P(.<ier!'f,  cap.  iv. ;  Nienieyi.T,  C'olUctio  Confi:ii.tioHiiin,  Loipzig
1840,  p.  472.

6  Qu<!st.  97,  98 ;  Nieme yer,  pp.  4.53,  4o4.


§  7.]  THE   THIRD   COMMANDMENT.  305

is  to  resist  the  impulse  to  "  bow  down  to  tliem  and  serve  them,"
can  doubt  the  ^visdom  of  their  exchision  from  places  of  public
worship.

§  7.   The   Third  Commandment.

"  Thou  shalt  not  take  the  name  of  the  Lord  thy  God  in  vain ;
for  the  Lord  will  not  hold  him  guiltless  that  taketh  his  name  in
vain."

The  literal  meaning  of  this  command  is  doubtful.  It  may
mean,  "  Thou  shalt  not  utter  the  name  of  God  in  a  vain  or  irrev-
erent manner  ;  "  or,  "  Thou  shalt  not  utter  the  name  of  God  to  a
lie,"  i.  e.,  "  Thou  shalt  not  swear  falsely."  The  Septuagint  ren-
ders the  passage  thus  ;    01  ^y^lj  to  0;'o,«a  Kv;nov  nw  6(.ov  crov  inl  /xaratw.

The  Vulgate  has,  "  Non  assumes  nomen  Domini  Dei  tui  in  va-
num."  Luther,  as  usual,  freely  ad  sensum :  "  Du  sollst  den
Namen  des  Herrn,  deines  Gottes,  nicht  missbrauchen."  Our
translators  have  adopted  the  same  rendering.

The  ancient  Syriac  Version,  the  Targum  of  Onkelos,  Philo,  and
many  modern  commentators  and  exegetes  understand  the  com-
mand as  directed  against  false  swearing :  "  Thou  shalt  not  utter
the  name  of  God  to  a  lie."  So  the  elder  Michaelis  in  his  anno-
tated Hebrew  Bible,  explains  "  ad  vanum  confirmandum  :  non
frustra,  nedum,  falso."  Gesenius  in  his  Hebrew  Lexicon  renders
the  passage,^  "  Du  sollst  den  Namen  Jehova's  nicht  zur  Llige
aussprechen  ;  nicht  falsch  schworen."  Rosenmiiller  ^  renders  it :
"  Nolli  enunciare  nomen  Jova  Dei  tui  ad  falsum  sc.  comproban-
dum."  Knobel  ^  reads :  "  Nicht  sollst  du  erheben  den  Namen
Jehova's  zm-  Nichtigkeit ;  "  and  adds,  "  The  prohibition  is  directed
specially  against  false  swearing."

This  interpretation  is  consistent  with  the  meaning  of  the  words,
as  sittS  here  rendered  "  vanity,  "  or  with  the  preposition,  "  in
vain,"  elsewhere  means  "  falsehood."  (See  Ps.  xii.  3  (2)  ;  xli.  7
(6)  ;  Isaiah  lix.  4  ;  Hos.  x.  4.)  To  lift  up,  or  pronounce  the  name
of  God  for  a  lie,  naturally  means,  to  call  upon  God  to  confirm  a
falsehood.  The  preposition  b  also  has  its  natural  force.  Compare
Leviticus  xix.  12,  "  Ye  shall,  not  swear  by  my  name  ["i[7.tt?b  '  to  a
lie  ']  falsely."  The  general  import  of  the  command  remains  the
same,  whichever  interpretation  be  adopted.  The  command  not  to
misuse  the  name  of  God,  includes  false  swearing,  which  is  the

lEdit.  Leipzig,  1857,  sub  voce,  SV".

2  Scholia  in  Vetus  Testamentum  in  Compendium  redacta,  Leipzig,  1828,  vol.  i.  p.  404.
8  Kurzyefasstes  exerjetische  Ilnndhuch  zum  Alttn  Testament :  Exodus  und  Leviticus  er-
hldrt  von  August  Knobel,  Leipzig,  1857,  p.  205.
VOL,  lu.  20


306  PART  III.    Ch.  XIX.  — the  LAW.

greatest  indignity  which  can  be  offered  to  God.  And  as  the  com-
mand, "  Thou  shalt  do  no  murder,"  inchides  all  indulgence  of  ma-
licious feelings ;  so  the  command,  "  Thou  shalt  not  forswear  thy-
self," includes  all  lesser  forms  of  irreverence  in  the  use  of  the
name  of  God.

It  is  urged,  as  an  objection  to  the  second  interpretation  given
above,  that  perjury  is  an  offence  against  our  neighbour,  and  there-
fore belongs  to  the  second  table  of  the  Law ;  and  that  it  is  in
fact  included  in  the  ninth  commandment,  '•'  Thou  shalt  not  bear
false  witness  against  thy  neighbour."  Bearing  false  testimony
and  false  swearing  are,  however,  different  offences.  The  first  and
second  commandment  forbid  the  worship  of  any  other  being  than
Jehovah,  and  worshipping  Him  in  any  way  not  appointed  in  his
word ;  and  the  third,  supposing  it  to  forbid  false  swearing,  is  here
in  place,  as  false  swearing  is  a  practical  denial  of  the  being  or
perfections  of  God.

Impoy^t  of  the  Command.

The  word  "  name  "  is  used  in  reference  to  God  in  a  very  com-
prehensive sense.  It  often  means  a  personal  or  individual  desig-
nation ;  as  when  God  says,  "  This  is  my  name,  "  /.  e.,  Jehovah.
Frequently  the  "  name  of  God  "  is  equivalent  to  God  himself.
To  call  on  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and  to  call  on  God,  are  synon-
ymous forms  of  expression.  As  names  are  intended  to  distinguish
one  person  or  thing  from  another,  anything  distinguishing  or
characteristic  may  be  included  under  the  term.  The  name  of
God,  therefore,  includes  everything  by  which  He  makes  Himself
known.  This  commandment,  therefore,  forbids  all  irreverence  to-
wards God  ;  not  only  the  highest  act  of  irreverence  in  calling  on
Him  to  bear  witness  to  a  falsehood,  but  also  all  irreverent  use  of
his  name ;  all  careless,  unnecessary  reference  to  Him;  or  his  attri-
butes ;  all  indecorous  conduct  in  his  worship  ;  and  in  short,  every
indication  of  the  want  of  that  fear,  reverence,  and  awe  due  to  a
Being  infinite  in  all  his  perfections,  on  whom  we  are  absolutely
dependent,  and  to  whom  we  are  accountable  for  our  charactei
and  conduct.

The  third  commandment,  therefore,  specially  forbids  not  only
perjm-y,  but  also  all  profane,  or  unnecessary  oaths,  all  careless
appeals  to  God,  and  all  irreverent  use  of  his  name.  All  litera-
ture, whether  profane  or  Christian,  shows  how  strong  is  the  ten-
dency in  human  nature  to  introduce  the  name  of  God  even  on
the  most  trivial  occasions.     Not  only  are  those  formulas,  such  as


§  7.]  THE   THIRD    COMMANDMENT.  307

Adieu,  Good-bye  or  God  be  with  you,  and  God  forbid,  which  may
have  had  a  pious  origin,  constantly  used  ^vithont  any  recognition
of  their  true  import,  but  even  persons  professing  to  fear  God
often  alloAV  themselves  to  use  his  name  as  a  mere  expression  of
surprise.  God  is  everywhere  present.  He  hears  all  we  say.  He
is  worthy  of  the  highest  reverence  ;  and  He  will  not  hold  him
guiltless  who  on  any  occasion  uses  his  name  irreverently.

Oaths.

The  command  not  to  call  upon  God  to  confirm  a  lie,  cannot  be
considered  as  forbidding  us  to  call  upon  Him  to  confirm  the  truth.
And  such  is  the  general  nature  of  an  oath.  Oaths  are  of  two
kinds,  assertatory,  when  we  affirm  a  thing  to  be  true  ;  and  prom-
issory, when  we  bring  ourselves  under  an  obligation  to  do,  or  to
forbear  doing  certain  acts.  To  this  class  belong  official  oaths
and  oaths  of  allegiance.  In  both  cases  there  is  an  appeal  to  God
as  a  witness.  An  oath,  therefore,  is  in  its  nature  an  act  of  wor-
ship. It  implies,  (1.)  An  acknowledgment  of  the  existence  of  God.
(2.)  Of  his  attributes  of  omnipresence,  omniscience,  justice,  and
power.  (3.)  Of  his  moral  government  over  the  world  ;  and  (4.)  Of
our  accountability  to  Him  as  our  Sovereign  and  Judge.  Hence
"  to  swear  by  the  name  of  Jehovah,"  and  to  acknowledge  Him  as
God,  are  the  same  thing.     The  former  involves  the  latter.

Such  being  the  case,  it  is  evident  that  a  man  who  denies  the
truths  above  mentioned  cannot  take  an  oath.  For  him  the  words
he  utters  have  no  meaning.  If  he  does  not  believe  that  there  is  a
God  ;  or  suppose  that  he  admits  that  there  is  some  being  or  force
which  may  be  called  God,  if  he  does  not  believe  that  that  Being
knows  what  the  juror  says,  or  that  He  will  punish  the  false
swearer,  the  whole  service  is  a  mockery.  It  is  a  great  injustice,
tending  to  loosen  all  the  bonds  of  society,  to  allow  atheists  to  give
testimony  in  courts  of  justice.^

The  imprecation  usually  introduced  in  the  formula  of  an  oath,  is
not  essential  to  its  nature.  It  is  indeed  mvolved  in  the  appeal  to
God  to  bear  witness  to  the  tru.th  of  what  we  say,  but  its  direct
assertion  is  not  necessary.  Indeed,  it  is  not  found  in  any  of  the
oaths  recorded  in  the  Bible.     Some  strenuously  object  to  its  intro-

1  In  a  recent  murder  trial  in  one  of  the  courts  of  New  York,  a  young  scientific  physician
was  called  to  give  testimony  on  what  constitutes  insanity.  He  distinctly  asserted  that
thought  was  a  function  of  the  brain;  that  where  there  is  no  brain  there  can  be  no  thought;
and  that  a  disordered  brain  necessitates  disordered  mental  action.  Of  course,  God  having
no  brain  cannot  be  intelligent;  in  other  words,  there  can  be  no  God.  Such  a  man  may
be  a  good  chemist  or  a  good  surgeon ;  but  he  is  no  more  competent  to  be  a  witness  in  a
court  of  justice,  than  he  is  fit  to  be  a  preacher.


808  PART  m.     Ch.   XIX.  -  THE   LAW.

duction,  as  involving  a  renunciation  of  all  hope  of  the  mercy  and
grace  of  God,  and  as  an  equivalent  to  an  imprecation  on  one's  self
of  everlasting  perdition.

The  Lawfulness  of  Oaths.

The  lawfulness  of  oaths  may  be  inferred,  —

1.  From  their  nature.  Being  acts  of  worship  involving  the
acknowledgment  of  the  being  and  attributes  of  God,  and  6i  our
responsibility  to  Him,  they  are  in  their  nature  good.  They  are  not
superstitious,  founded  on  wrong  ideas  of  God  or  of  his  relation  to
the  world ;  nor  are  they  irreverent ;  nor  are  they  useless.  They
have  a  real  power  over  the  consciences  of  men  ;  and  that  power
is  the  greater  according  as  the  faith  of  the  juror  and  of  society
in  the  truths  of  religion,  is  the  more  intelligent  and  the  stronger.

2.  In  the  Scriptures,  oaths,  on  proper  occasions,  are  not  only
permitted,  but  commanded.  "  Thou  shalt  fear  the  LORD  thy
God,  and  shalt  swear  by  his  name.  (Deut.  vi.  13.)  "  He  who
blesseth  himself  in  the  earth,  shall  bless  himself  in  the  God  of
truth  ;  and  he  that  sweareth  in  the  earth,  shall  swear  by  the  God
of  truth."  (Is.  Ixv.  16.)  "It  shall  come  to  pass,  if  they  will  dih-
gently  learn  the  ways  of  my  people,  to  swear  by  my  name,  Jeho-
vah Hveth  ;  (as  they  taught  my  people  to  swear  by  Baal ;)  then
shall  they  be  built  in  the  midst  of  my  people."  (Jer.  xii.  16  ;  iv.
2.)  God  Himself  is  represented  as  swearing.  (Psalms  ex.  4  ;  Heb-
rews vii.  21.)  "  When  God  made  promise  to  Abraham,  because  he
could  swear  by  no  greater,  he  sware  by  himself."  (Heb.  vi.  1-3.)
Our  blessed  Lord  also,  when  put  upon  his  oath  by  the  high  priest,
did  not  hesitate  to  answer.  (Matt.  xxvi.  63.)  The  words  are,
'E^o^)K:t'^w  ere  Kara  tov  ©eou  tov  ^wrro?,  which  are  correctly  rendered  by
our  version,  "  I  adjure  thee  (call  on  thee  to  swear)  by  the  hving
God."  Meyer  in  his  comment  on  this  passage  says  :  "  An  affir-
mative answer  to  this  formula  was  an  oath  in  the  full  meaning  of
the  word."  And  our  Lord's  reply,  "  Thou  sayest,"  is  the  usual
Rabbinical  form  of  direct  affirmation.^  The  Hebrew  word  i'.-'atl^n
is  rendered  in  the  Septuagint  by  opKi'Cw  and  IcopKii,^,  and  in  the
Vulgate  by  adjuro.  See  Genesis  1.  5,  "  My  father  made  me  swear,
w/)Kto-e  /xe."  Num.  V.  19,  "  The  priest  shall  charge  her  by  an  oath,
hpKiCi  uLi7->/i."  It  appears  from  this  passage  as  well  as  from  others
in  the  Old  Testament,  that  oaths  were  on  certain  occasions  en-
joined by  God  himself.  (Ex.  xxii.  10.)  They  cannot,  therefore,
be  unlaAvful.

J  See  Schoettgen's  Ilorae  Hebmiae  et  Talmudicce.


§  7.]  THE   THIRD    COMMANDMENT.  309

Seeing,  then,  that  an  oath  is  an  act  of  worship  ;  that  it  is  en-
joined on  suitable  occasions  ;  that  our  Lord  himself  submitted  to  be
j)ut  upon  his  oath  ;  and  that  the  Apostles  did  not  hesitate  to  call
God  to  witness  to  the  truth  of  what  they  said ;  we  cannot  admit
that  Christ  intended  to  pronounce  all  oaths  unlawful,  when  he
said,  as  recorded  in  Matthew  v.  34,  "  Swear  not  at  all,"  This
would  be  to  suppose  that  Scripture  can  contradict  Scripture,  and
that  Christ's  conduct  did  not  conform  to  his  precepts.  Neverthe-
less, his  words  are  very  explicit.  They  mean  in  Greek  just  what
our  version  makes  them  mean.  Our  Lord  did  say,  "  Swear  not  at
all."  But  in  the  sixth  commandment  it  is  said,  "  Thou  shalt  not
kill."  That,  however,  does  not  mean  that  we  may  not  kill  ani-
mals for  food ;  for  that  is  permitted  and  commanded.  It  does  not
forbid  homicide  in  self-defence,  for  that  also  is  permitted.  Neither
does  it  forbid  capital  punishment ;  for  that  is  not  only  permitted
but  even  commanded.  The  meaning  of  this  command  has  never
been  doubted  or  disputed,  because  it  is  sufficiently  explained  by
the  context  and  occasion,  and  by  the  light  shed  upon  it  by  other
parts  of  Scripture.  As,  therefore,  the  command,  "  Thou  shalt
not  kill,"  forbids  only  unlawful  kilHng  ;  so  also  the  command,
"  Swear  not  at  all,"  forbids  only  unlawful  swearing.

This  conclusion  is  confirmed  by  the  context.  A  great  part  of
our  Lord's  Sermon  on  the  Mount  is  devoted  to  the  correction  of
perversions  of  the  law,  introduced  by  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees.
They  made  the  sixth  commandment  to  forbid  only  murder  ;  our
Lord  said  that  it  forbade  all  malicious  passions.  They  limited
the  seventh  commandment  to  the  outward  act ;  He  extended
it  to  the  inward  desire.  They  made  the  precept  to  love  our
neighbour  consistent  with  hating  our  enemies ;  Christ  says,
"  Love  your  enemies,  bless  them  that  curse  you."  In  like  man-
ner, the  Scribes  taught  that  the  law  allowed  all  kinds  of  swearing,
and  swearing  on  all  occasions,  provided  a  man  did  not  forswear
himself  ;  but  our  Lord  said,  I  say  unto  you,  in  your  communica-
tions swear  not  at  all ;  this  is  plain  from  ver.  37,  "  Let  your  com-
munications (Aoyos,  word,  talk)  be  Yea,  yea ;  Nay,  nay  :  for
whatsoever  is  more  than  these,  cometh  of  evil."  It  is  unneces-
sary, colloquial,  irreverent  swearing  our  Lord  condemns.  Tliis  has
nothing  to  do  with  those  solemn  acts  of  worship,  permitted  and
commanded  in  the  word  of  God.  The  Jews  of  that  age  were  espe-
cially addicted  to  colloquial  swearing,  holding  that  the  law  for-
bade only  false  swearing,  or  swearing  by  the  name  of  false  gods  ;  ^
1  See  Meyer  on  this  passage,  who  refers  to  Philo,  De  Spec.  Leg. ;  A.  Lightfoot,  Ho.  a ;


810  PART   III.     Ch.  XIX. —  the   law.

hence  oiu'  Lord  had  the  more  occasion  to  rebuke  this  sin,  aud
show  the  evil  of  any  such  adjurations.

When  are  Oaths  lawful.

1.  As  an  oath  involves  an  act  of  Avorship,  it  is  plain  that  it
should  not  be  taken  on  any  trivial  occasion,  or  in  an  irreverent
manner.

2.  An  oath  is  lawful  when  prescribed  and  administered  by
duly  authorized  officers  of  the  State,  or  of  the  Church ;  they  are
the  "  ministers  of  God,"  acting  in  his  name  and  by  his  authority.
There  are  many  who  do  not  regard  it  as  proper  that  an  oath
should  ever  be  taken,  except  when  thus  imposed  by  those  in
authority.  The  Church  of  England  in  the  thirty-ninth  article,
says :  "  As  we  confess  that  vain  and  rash  swearing  is  forbidden
Christian  men  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  James  his  Apos-
tle ;  so  we  jndge  that  Christian  religion  doth  not  prohibit,  but  that
a  man  may  swear  when  the  magistrate  requireth,  in  a  cause  of
faith  and  charity,  so  it  be  done  according  to  the  prophet's  teach-
ing, in  justice,  judgment,  and  truth."  The  same  ground  has  been
taken  by  many  moral  philosophers  and  theologians.

There  does  not,  however,  seem  to  be  any  sufficient  reason  for
this  restriction,  either  in  the  nature  or  design  of  an  oath,  or  in
the  teachings  of  Scripture.  The  oath  being  an  apj)eal  to  God  to
bear  witness  to  the  truth  of  our  declarations,  or  the  sincerity  of
our  promises,  there  is  no  reason  why  this  appeal  should  not  be
made  whenever  any  important  end  is  to  be  accomplished  by  it.
There  should  be  a  necessity  for  it ;  that  is,  no  man  should  swear
lightly  or  profanely,  but  only  when  all  the  conditions  which
justify  this  appeal  to  God  are  present.  According  to  the  old  law
those  conditions  are,  "  judicium  in  jurante,  justitia  in  objecto,
veracitas  in  mente."  That  is,  the  jm-or  must  be  competent.
He  must  have  a  just  judgment  of  the  nature  and  obligation  of  an
oath,  so  as  to  understand  what  he  is  about  to  do.  Therefore  an
idiot,  a  child,  or  an  unbeliever  cannot  properly  be  put  upon  his
oath.  By  "justitia  in  objecto,"  is  meant  that  the  object  con-
cerning which  the  oath  is  taken,  should  be  a  proper  object.  If
it  be  a  promissory  oath,  the  thing  we  engage  to  do  must  be  pos-
sible and  lawful  ;  if  an  assertatory  oath,  the  object  must  have
due  importance ;  it  must  be  within  the  knowledge  of  the  juror ;
and  there  must  be  an  adequate  reason  why  this  appeal  to  God

and  Meuschen,  N.  T.  ex  Tnlm.  Ulustr.     See,  also,  Winer's  Realioorterhuch,  and  Tholuck's
Auslegung  der  Bergprtdigt  Christi,  3d  edit.  Hamburg,  1846.


§  7.]  THE   THIRD   COMMANDMENT.  311

should  be  made.  The  "  veracitas  in  niente,"  includes  the  sincere
purpose  of  doing  what  we  promise,  or  of  telling  the  whole  truth,
and  nothing  but  the  truth,  to  the  best  of  our  knowledge  in  the
case  in  which  we  testify.  This  excludes  all  intention  to  deceive,
all  mental  reservation,  and  all  designed  ambiguity  of  language.
All  these  conditions  may  be  present  in  private,  as  well  as  in
judicial  or  official  oaths.

Then  again,  as  the  design  of  an  oath  is  to  produce  conviction
of  the  truth,  to  satisfy  others  of  our  sincerity  and  fidelity,  and
to  make  an  end  of  controversy,  it  is  evident  that  circumstances
may  arise  in  private  life,  or  in  the  intercou.rse  of  a  man  with  his
fellow-men,  Avhen  an  oath  may  be  of  the  greatest  importance.
If  we  risk  a  great  deal  on  the  fidelity  or  veracity  of  a  man,  we
have  a  right  to  bind  him  by  the  solemnity  of  an  oath  ;  or  if  it  is
of  great  importance  that  others  should  confide  in  our  veracity  or
fidelity,  it  may  be  right  to  give  them  the  assurance  which  an
oath  is  suited  and  intended  to  afford.

As  to  the  Scriptural  examples,  by  far  the  greater  number  of
the  oaths  recorded  in  the  Bible,  and  that  with  the  implied  appro-
bation of  God,  are  of  a  non-judicial  character.  Abraham  swore  to
Abimelech.  (Gen.  xxi.  23.)  Abraham  made  his  servant  swear  to
him.  (Gen.  xxiv.  3.)  Isaac  and  Abimelech  interchanged  oaths.
(Gen.  xxvi.  31.)  Jacob  caused  Joseph  to  swear  not  to  bury  him  in
Egyjit.  (xlvii.  31.)  Joseph  exacted  a  similar  oath  from  his  breth-
ren. So  we  read  of  David's  swearing  to  Saul,  and  to  Jonathan,
of  Jonathan's  to  David,  and  of  David's  to  Shimei.  Such  private
oaths  seem  at  times  to  have  been  prescribed  in  the  Mosaic  law.
In  Exodus  xxii.  19,  it  is  said,  if  a  man  deliver  any  animal  to  his
neighbour  for  safe-keeping,  and  it  die  on  his  hands,  "  then  shall
an  oath  of  the  Lord  be  between  them  both,  that  he  hath  not
put  his  hand  unto  his  neighbour's  goods."  In  the  New  Testament
we  find  the  Apostle  frequently  appealing  to  God  to  witness  to
the  truth  of  what  he  said  (Rom.  i.  9  ;  Phil.  i.  8  ;  1  Thess.  ii.
5,  10)  ;  doing  this  also  in  the  most  formal  manner,  as  in  2  Corin-
thians i.  23,  "  I  call  God  for  a  record  upon  my  soul."

Augustine's  rule  on  this  subject  is  good  :  "  Quantum  ad  me
pertinet,  juro  ;  sed  quantum  mihi  videtur,  magna  necessitate  com-
putus." ^  The  multiplicity  of  oaths  is  a  great  evil.  The  rapid
and  irreverent  administration  of  them  is  profane.

1  Sermo  clxxx.  10  [ix.] ;    Works,  edit.  Benedictines,  Paris,  1837,  vol.  v.  p.  1250,  a.


312  PART  III.     Ch.   XIX.  — the   law.

The  Form  of  an  Oath.
Under  tlie  Old  Testament,  in  voluntary  oaths  the  usual  form
was,  "  The  Lord  do  so  to  me,  and  more  also."  (Ruth  i.  17  ;  2
Sam.  iii.  9,  35  ;  1  Kmgs  ii.  23  ;  2  Kings  vi.  31.)  Or  simply,  "  As
the  Lord  liveth."  (Ruth  iii.  13  ;  Judges  viii.  19  ;  2  Sam.  ii.  27  ;
Jer.  xxxviii.  16)  ;  or  as  it  is  in  Jeremiah  xlii.  5,  "  The  Lord  be  a
true  and  faithful  witness."  In  judicial  proceedings  the  oath  con-
sisted in  a  simple  assent  to  the  adjuration,  which  assent  was  ex-
pressed in  Hebrew  by  y^:^,  ^^'^^  i^i  Greek  by  av  etTras.  The  form
is  a  matter  of  indifference ;  any  form  of  words  which  implies
an  appeal  to  God  as  a  witness  is  an  oath.  In  swearing,  the  right
hand  was  usually  elevated  towards  heaven.  Genesis  xiv.  22,
'' Abrum  said  to  the  king  of  Sodom,  I  have  lift  up  mine  hand  unto
the  Lord,  the  most  high  God,  the  possessor  of  heaven  and  earth."
Hence  "  to  lift  up  the  hand  "  was  to  swear.  (See  Dent,  xxxii.
40 ;  Ex.  vi.  8  (in  the  Hebrew)  ;  Ezek.  xx.  5.)  Lifting  up
the  hand  was  evidently  intended  to  intimate  that  the  juror  ap-
pealed to  the  God  of  heaven.  Among  Christians  it  is  usual  to  put
the  hand  upon  the  Bible,  to  indicate  that  the  oath  is  taken  in  the
name  of  the  God  of  the  Bible,  and  that  the  judgment  invoked  in
case  of  perjury  is  that  which  the  Bible  denounces  against  false
swearing.  Kissing  the  Bible,  another  usual  part  of  the  ceremonial
of  an  oath,  is  an  expression  of  faith  in  the  Bible  as  the  word  of
God.  There  is  nothing  unseemly  or  superstitious  in  this.  On
the  contrary,  instead  of  appealing  to  the  God  of  nature,  it  is  most
appropriate  that  the  Christian  should  appeal  to  the  God  of  the
Bible,  who,  through  Jesus  Christ,  is  our  reconciled  God  and
Father.

Rules  which  determine  the  Interpretation  and  Obligation  of  an

Oath.
An  oath  must  be  interpreted  according  to  the  plain  natural
meaning  of  the  words,  or  the  sense  in  which  they  are  understood
by  the  party  to  whom  the  oath  is  given  or  by  whom  it  is  imposed.
This  is  a  plain  dictate  of  honesty.  If  the  juror  understands  the
oath  in  a  sense  different  from  tliat  attached  to  it  by  the  party  to
whom  it  is  given,  the  whole  service  is  a  deceit  and  mocker3^  The
commander  of  whom  Paley  speaks,  who  swore  to  the  garrison  of
a  besieged  to^vn  that  if  they  surrendered,  a  drop  of  their  blood
shoiild  not  be  shed,  and  buried  tliem  all  alive,  was  guilty,  not
only  of  perjury,  but  also  of  dastardly  and  cruel  mockery.     The


§  7.]  THE   THIRD   COMMANDMENT.  313

animus  imponentis,  as  is  universally  admitted,  must  therefore
determine  the  interpretation  of  an  oath.  It  was  the  fact  that  the
Jesuits  inculcated  the  lawfulness  of  mental  reservation,  which
more  than  anything  else  made  them  an  abomination  in  the  eyes
of  all  Christendom.  It  was  this  which  furnished  the  sharpest
thong  to  the  scourge  with  which  Pascal  drove  them  out  of
Europe.

This  is  a  matter  about  which  men  who  mean  to  be  honest  are
not  always  sufficiently  careful.  Their  conscience  is  satisfied  if
what  they  say  will  bear  an  interpretation  consistent  with  the
truth,  although  the  obvious  sense  is  not  true.^

No  oath  is  obligatory  which  binds  a  man  to  do  what  is  unlawful
or  impossible.  The  sin  lies  in  taking  such  an  oath,  not  in  break-
ing it.  The  reason  of  this  rule  is,  that  no  man  can  bring  himself
under  an  obligation  to  commit  a  sin.  Herod  was  not  bound  to
keep  his  oath  to  the  daughter  of  Herodias  when  she  demanded
the  head  of  John  the  Baptist.  Neither  were  the  forty  men,  who
had  bound  themselves  with  "  an  oath  of  execration  "  to  kill  Paul.
But  an  oath  voluntarily  taken  to  do  what  is  lawful  and  within  the
power  of  the  juror  binds  the  conscience,  (a.)  Even  when  fulfilhng
it  involves  injury  to  the  temporal  interests  of  the  juror.  The
Bible  pronounces  the  man  blessed  who  "  sweareth  to  his  own  hurt
and  changeth  not."  (Ps.  xv.  4.)  (J.)  When  the  oath  is  obtained
by  deceit  or  violence.  In  the  latter  case  the  juror  makes  a  choice
of  evils.  He  swears  to  make  a  sacrifice  to  save  himself  from
what  he  dreads  more  than  the  loss  of  what  he  promises  to  relin-
quish. This  may  often  be  a  hard  case.  But  such  is  the  solemnity
of  an  oath,  and  such  the  importance  of  its  inviolable  sanctity  being
preserved,  that  it  is  better  to  suffer  injustice  than  that  an  oath
should  be  broken.  The  case  where  an  oath  is  obtained  by  deceit
is  more  difficult,  for  when  such  deceit  is  practised  the  juror  did
not  intend  to  assume  the  obligation  which  the  oath  imposes.  He
might,  therefore,  plausibly  argue  that  if  he  did  not  intend  to
assume  an  obhgation,  it  was  not  assumed.  But,  on  the  other
hand,  the  principle  involved  in  the  commercial  maxim,  caveat
emptor,  applies  to  oaths.  A  man  is  bound  to  guard  against  de-
ception ;  and  if  deceived  he  must  take  the  consequences.  Besides,
those  to  whom  the  oath  is  given  trust  to  it,  and  act  upon  it,  and,
in  a  certain  sense  at  least,  acquire  rights  under  it.  The  Scriptures,
however,  in  this  as  in  all  other  cases,  are  our  safest  guide.    When

1  A  gentleman  was  charged  with  having  wTitten  a  certain  article  in  a  newspaper.  He
declared  that  he  did  not  write  it.     That  was  true.     But  he  had  dictated  it.


314  PART  m.   ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

the  Israelites  conquered  Canaan,  the  Gibeonites  who  dwelt  in  the
land,  sent  delegates  to  Joshua  pretending  that  they  were  from  a
distant  country,  and  "  Joshua  made  peace  with  them,  and  made
a  league  with  them,  to  let  them  live  :  and  the  princes  of  the  con-
gregation sware  unto  them."  When  the  deception  was  discovered,
the  people  clamoured  for  their  extermination.  "  But  all  the
princes  said  unto  all  the  congregation.  We  have  sworn  unto  them
by  the  Lord  God  of  Israel :  now,  therefore,  we  may  not  touch
them."  (Joshua  ix.  15,  19.)  This  oath,  as  appears  from  2  Sam-
uel xxi.  1,  was  sanctioned  by  God  and  the  people  were  punished
for  violating  it.

Romish  Doctrine.

The  principle  on  which  the  authorities  of  the  Roman  Church
assume  the  right  to  free  men  from  the  obligation  of  their  oaths,  is
that  no  man  can  bind  himself  to  do  what  is  sinful.  It  is  the  pre-
rogative of  the  Church  to  decide  what  is  sinful.  If  therefore  the
Church  decide  that  an  oath  to  obey  a  sovereign  disobedient  to  the
Pope,  to  preserve  inviolate  a  safe  conduct,  or  to  keep  faith  with
heretics  or  infidels  is  sinful,  the  obligation  of  every  such  oath
ceases  as  soon  as  the  judgment  of  the  Church  is  rendered.

In  answer  to  the  question,  "  Cui  competit  potestas  dispensandi
super  juramento  ?  "  the  Romish  theologians  answer :  "  Prin-
cipaliter  competit  summo  Pontifici ;  non  tamen  nisi  ex  rationabih
causa,  quia  dispensat  in  jure  alieno  :  competit  etiam  jure  ordinario
Episcopis,  non  Parochis.  Requirit  autem  hsec  dispensatio  potes-
tatem  jurisdictionis  majoris."  ^  The  casuists,  on  this  as  on  all
other  practical  subjects,  go  into  the  most  minute  details  and  subtle
distinctions.  Dens,  for  example,  in  the  section  above  quoted,
gives  no  less  than  ten  conditions  under  which  the  obhgation  of  an
oath  ceases.  To  the  question  :  "  Quibus  modis  potest  cessare
obligatio  juramenti  promissorii  ?  "  he  answers:  "1.  Irritatione.
2.  Dispensatione  et  relaxatione.  3.  Commutatione.  4.  Materiae
mutatione  vel  subtractione.  5.  Cessante  fine  totali  complete.
6.  Ratione  conditionis  non  adimpleta.  7.  Cessante  principali  obH-
gatione  cessat  juramentum  pure  accessorium.  8.  Non  acceptatione,
et  condonatione,  seu  remissione.  9.  Si  juramentum  incipiat  vergere
in  deteriorem  exitum,  vel  in  pr?e judicium  boni  communis,  vel  etiam
ahcujus  particularis,  v.  g.  quis  juravit  occultare  furtum  alterius,
sed  inde  alter  liberius  prolabitur  ad  alia  furta :  item  cessat  jura-
mentum, quando  directe  est  majoris  boni  impeditivum.  10.  Deni-

1  Theologia  3f oralis  Dogmatica  Reverendi  et  Eruditissimi  Domini  Petri  Dens ;  de  Jura-
mento, N.  177.  edit.  Dublin,  1832,  vol.  iv.  pp.  214-216.


§  7.J  THE   THIRD   COMMANDMENT.  315

que  cessat  obligatio  jnramenti,  licet  improprie,  per  adimpletionem
sive  totalem  solutionem  rei  juratge  :  et  e  contra  dicitur  cessare  ab
initio,  quia  juramentum  fuit  nullum,  sive  quia  nullam  ab  initio
obligationem  produxit."  Number  nine  opens  a  very  wide  door  ;
the  last  clause  especially  seems  to  teach  that  a  promissory  oath
ceases  to  bind  whenever  it  is  expedient  to  break  it.^

The  whole  Romish  system  is  the  masterpiece  of  the  "  wisdom
of  the  world."  As  many  promissory  oaths  are  not  obligatory,  it
would  seem  to  be  wise,  instead  of  leaving  the  question  of  their
continued  obhgation  to  be  decided  by  the  individual  juror,  who  is
so  liable  to  be  unduly  biased,  to  refer  the  mattar  to  some  compe-
tent authority.  This  would  tend  to  prevent  false  judgments,  to
satisfy  the  conscience  of  the  juror  and  the  public  mind.  And  as
the  question  is  a  matter  of  morals  and  religion,  it  would  seem  to
be  proper  that  the  decision  should  be  referred  to  the  organs  of  the
Church.  Rome  makes  all  these  seemingly  wise  arrangements.
But  as  God  has  exalted  no  human  authority  over  the  individual
conscience,  as  no  man  can-  delegate  his  responsibility  to  another,
but  every  man  must  answer  to  God  for  himself,  it  is  clear  that
no  such  arrangement  can  be  consistent  with  the  divine  will.
Again,  if  it  were  true  that  the  Church  were  divinely  guided  so
as  to  be  infallible  in  its  judgment,  this  tremendous  power  over
the  consciences  of  men  might  be  safely  intrusted  to  it ;  but  as
in  fact  the  representatives  of  the  Church  are  men  of  like  passions
as  other  men,  and  no  more  infallible  than  their  fellows,  Roman-
ism is  nothing  more  than  a  device  to  put  the  prerogatives  and
power  of  God  into  the  hands  of  sinful  men.  History  teaches
how  this  usurped  power  has  been  used.

Vow8.

Vows  are  essentially  different  from  oaths,  in  that  they  do  not
involve  any  appeal  to  God  as  a  witness,  or  any  imprecation  of
his  displeasure.  A  vow  is  simply  a  promise  made  to  God.  The
conditions  of  a  lawful  vow  are,  first,  as  to  the  object,  or  matter
of  the  vow,  (1.)  That  it  be  something  in  itself  lawful.  (2.)
That  it  be  acceptable  to  God.  (3.)  That  it  be  within  our  own
power.  (4.)  That  it  be  for  our  spiritual  edification.  Secondly,
as  to  the  person  making  the  vow,  (1.)  That  he  be  competent ;
that  is,  that  he  have  sufficient  intelligence,  and  that  he  be  sui

1  In  conversation  with  a  very  intelligent  Romish  priest  who  had  been  educated  at  May-
nooth,  the  question  was  asked,  What  was  the  effect  of  a  course  of  "  Moral  Theology  "  de-
signed to  train  priests  for  the  confessional?  The  prompt  answer  was,  Utterly  to  destroy  the
moral  sense.


316  PART  III.     Ch.   XIX.  — the   LAW.

juris.  A  child  is  not  competent  to  make  a  vow  ;  neither  is  one
under  authority  so  that  he  has  not  liberty  of  action  as  to  the
matter  vowed.  (2.)  That  he  act  with  due  deliberation  and
solemnity  ;  for  a  vow  is  an  act  of  worship.  (3.)  That  it  be
made  voluntarily,  and  observed  cheerfully.

All  these  principles  are  recognized  in  the  Bible.  "  When
thou  shalt  vow  a  vow  unto  the  Lord  thy  God,  thou  shalt  not
slack  to  pay  it :  for  the  Lord  thy  Ood  will  surely  require  it  of
thee  ;  and  it  would  be  sin  in  thee.  But  if  thou  shalt  forbear
to  vow,  it  shall  be  no  sin  in  thee.  That  which  is  gone  out  of
thy  lips  thou  shalt  keep  and  perform :  even  a  freewill  offering,
according  as  thou  hast  vowed  unto  the  Lord  thy  God,  which
thou  hast  promised  with  thy  mouth."  (Deut.  xxiii.  21-23.)  In
Numbers  xxx.  3-5,  it  is  enacted  that  if  a  woman  in  her  father's
house  make  a  vow,  and  her  father  disallow  it,  it  shall  not  stand,
"  and  the  Lord  shall  forgive  her,  because  her  father  disallowed
her."  The  same  rule  is  applied  to  wives  and  to  children,  on
the  obvious  principle,  that  where  the  rights  of  others  are  con-
cerned, we  are  not  at  liberty  to  disregard  them.

All  the  conditions  requisite  to  the  lawfulness  of  a  vow,  may
be  included  under  the  old  formula,  "  judicium  in  vovente,  justitia
in  objecto,  Veritas  in  mente."  There  are  two  conditions  insisted
upon  by  Romanists  to  which  Protestants  do  not  consent.  The
one  is  that  a  vow  must  be  "  de  meliore  bono,"  i.  e.,  for  a  greater
good.  If  a  man  vows  to  devote  himself  to  the  priesthood,  to
make  a  pilgrimage,  to  found  a  church,  or  to  become  a  monk,
the  thing  vowed  is  not  only  good  in  itself,  but  it  is  better  than
its  opposite.  The  other  condition  is,  that  the  thing  vowed  must
be  in  itself  not  obligatory,  so  that  the  sphere  of  duty  is  enlarged
by  the  vow.  These  conditions  are  included  in  those  laid  down
by  Dens.  ^  He  says  :  "  Quinque  ex  causis  provenire,  quod  aliquid
non  sit  apta  materia  voti ;  1°.  quia  est  impossibile  ;  2°.  quia  est
necessarium  ;  3°.  quia  est  illicitum  ;  4°.  quia  est  indifferens  vel
inutile  ;  5°.  quia  non  est  bonum  melius."  The  two  conditions
just  specified  no  doubt  concur  in  many  vows  acceptable  to  God,
but  they  are  not  essential.  A  man  may  vow  to  do  what  he
is  bound  to  do,  as  is  the  case  with  every  man  who  consecrates
himself  to  God  in  baptism.  Nor  is  it  necessary  that  the  thing
vowed  should  be  in  its  own  nature  a  greater  good.  A  man
may  bind  himself  to  a  work  out  of  gratitude  to  God,  which  in
its  own  nature   is  indifferent.     This   was  the   case  with  many

1  Tractatus  de  Voto ;  Theologia,  edit.  Dublin,  1832,  vol.  iv.  N.  91,  p.  111.


§  7.]  THE  THIRD   COMMANDMENT.  317

of  the  particulars  included  in  the  vows  of  the  Nazarite.  There
was  no  special  virtue  in  abstaining  from  wine,  vinegar,  grapes
moist  or  dry,  or  in  letting  "  the  locks  of  the  hair  of  his  head
grow."  (Num.  vi.  3-5.)  The  Romish  doctrine  on  this  subject
is  connected  with  the  distinction  which  Papists  make  between
precepts  and  counsels.  The  former  bind  the  conscience,  the
others  do  not.  There  is  sjDecial  merit,  according  to  their  theory,
in  doing  more  than  is  commanded.  No  man  is  commanded  to
devote  himself  to  a  life  of  obedience,  cehbacy,  and  poverty,  but
if  he  does,  so  much  the  better  ;  he  has  the  greater  merit.

As  usual,  the  Romanists  connect  so  many  subordinate  rules
with  the  general  principles  laid  down  that  they  are  explained
away,  or  rendered  of  little  use.  Thus  the  rule  that  the  matter
of  a  vow  must  be  "  bonum  melius,"  is  explained  to  mean  better
in  itself  considered,  and  not  better  in  relation  to  the  person  mak-
ing the  vow.  Thus  it  may  be  very  injurious  to  a  man's  spiritual
interests  to  be  bound  by  monastic  vows  ;  nevertheless,  as  the
monastic  hfe  is  in  itself  a  "  bonum  mehus,"  the  vows  once  taken
are  obligatory.  Then  as  to  the  condition  of  possibility  ;  if  pos-
sible as  to  the  substance,  but  impossible  as  to  the  accidents,  the
vow  is  binding.  Thus  if  a  man  vows  to  make  a  pilgrimage  to
Jerusalem  on  his  knees,  although  going  on  his  knees  be  impos-
sible, he  is  bound  to  go  in  some  way.

Lawfulness  of  Vows.

On  this  subject  there  is  httle  or  no  diversity  of  opinion.  That
they  are  lawful  appears,  —

1.  From  their  nature.  A  vow  is  simply  a  promise  made  to
God.  It  may  be  an  expression  of  gratitude  for  some  signal
favour  already  given,  or  a  pledge  to  manifest  such  gratitude  for
some  blessing  desired  should  God  see  fit  to  grant  it.  Thus  Jacob
vowed  that  if  God  would  bring  him  back  in  peace  to  his  father's
house,  he  would  consecrate  to  Him  the  tenth  of  all  that  he  pos-
sessed. The  Bible,  and  especially  the  Psalms,  abound  with
examples  of  such  vows  of  thank-offerings  to  (jrod.  Even  Calvin,
notwithstanding  his  deep  sense  of  the  evils  entailed  on  the
Church  by  the  abuse  of  vows  by  the  Romanists,  says,  "  Ejusmodi
vota  hodie  quoque  nobis  in  usu  esse  possunt,  quoties  nos  Dominus
vel  a  clade  ahqua,  vel  a  morbo  difficili,  vel  ab  aho  quovis  dis-
crimine  eripuit.  Neque  enim  a  pii  hominis  officio  tunc  abhorret,
votivam  oblationem,  velut  sollenne  recognitionis  symbolum,  Deo
consecrare  :  ne  ingratus  erga  ejus  benignitatem  videatur."  ^     He

1  Jnstitutio,  IV.  xiii.  4,  edit.  Berlin,  1834,  par.  ii.  p.  338.


318  PART  m.   Ch.  XIX. —  the  law.

also  recognizes  the  propriety  of  vows  of  abstinence  from  indul-
gences wbicli  we  have  found  to  be  injurious  ;  and  also  of  vows
the  end  of  which  is  to  render  us  more  mindful  of  duties  which
we  may  be  inclined  to  neglect.  In  all  such  vows  there  is  a  de-
vout recognition  of  God,  and  of  our  obligations  to  Hun.  They,
therefore,  as  well  as  oaths,  are  acts  of  worship.  They  are
regarded  as  such  in  the  Symbols  of  the  Reformed  Churches.
Thus,  for  example,  the  "  Declaratio  Thoruniensis "  ^  includes,
under  acts  of  worship,  "  jusjurandum  legitimum,  quo  Deum  cor-
dium  inspectorem,  ut  veritatis  testem,  et  falsitatis  vindicem  ap-
pellamus.  Denique  votum  sacrum,  quo  vel  nos  ipsos,  vel  res
aut  actiones  nostras  Deo,  velut  sacrificium  quoddam  spirituale,
consecramus  et  devovemus."

2.  The  fact  that  the  Scriptures  contain  so  many  examples  of
vows,  and  so  many  injunctions  to  their  faithful  observance,  is  a
sufficient  proof  that  in  their  place,  and  on  proper  occasions,  they
are  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God.

3.  This  is  further  evident  from  the  fact  that  the  baptismal
covenant  is  of  the  nature  of  a  vow.  In  that  ordinance  we  sol-
emnly promise  to  take  God  the  Father  to  be  our  Father,  Jesus
Christ  his  Son  to  be  our  Saviour,  the  Holy  Ghost  to  be  our
Sanctifier,  and  his  word  to  be  the  rule  of  our  faith  and  practice.
The  same  is  true  of  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper  ;  in  that
ordinance  we  consecrate  ourselves  to  Christ  as  the  purchase  of
his  blood,  and  vow  to  be  faithful  to  Him  to  the  end.  The  same
thing  is  true  also  of  the  marriage  covenant,  because  the  promises
therein  made  are  not  merely  between  the  parties,  but  by  both
parties  to  the  contract,  to  God.

But  while  the  lawfulness  of  vows  is  to  be  admitted,  they
should  not  be  unduly  multiplied,  or  made  on  slight  occasions,  or
allowed  to  interfere  with  our  Christian  hberty.  Not  only  have
the  violation  of  these  rules  been  productive  of  the  greatest  evils
in  the  Church  of  Rome,  but  Protestant  Christians  also  have
often  reduced  themselves  to  a  miserable  state  of  bondage  by  the
multiplication  of  vows.  When  such  cases  occur,  it  is  healtliful
and  right  for  the  Christian  to  assert  his  liberty.  As  a  believer
cannot  rightfully  be  brought  into  bondage  to  men,  so  neither
can  he  rightfully  make  a  slave  of  himself.  He  should  remember
that  God  prefers  mercy  to  sacrifice  ;  that  no  service  is  accept-
able to  Him  which  is  injurious  to  us  ;  that  He  does  not  require
us  to  observe  promises  which  we  ought  never  to  have  made
1  De  CuUu  Dei,  5;  Niemeyer,  Collectio  Con/essionum,  Leipzig,  18-40,  p.  678.


§  7.]  THE   THIRD   COMaiANDMENT.  S19

and  that  vows  about  trifles  are  irreverent,  and  should  neither  be
made  nor  regarded,  but  should  be  repented  of  as  sins.  Even
Thomas  Aquinas  says,  "  Vota  quiB  sunt  de  rebus  vanis  et  inu-
tilibus,  sunt  magis  deridenda,  quam  servanda."  ^

Monastic   Vows.

At  the  time  of  the  Reformation  the  doors  of  all  the  monas-
teries in  lands  in  which  Protestants  had  the  power,  were  thrown
open,  and  their  inmates  declared  free  in  the  sight  of  God  and
man,  from  the  vows  by  which  they  had  hitherto  been  bound.
Protestants  did  not  maintain  that  there  was  anything  intrinsic-
ally wrong  in  a  man,  or  a  company  of  men  renouncing  the  ordi
nary  avocations  of  life,  and  devoting  himself  or  themselves  to  a
religious  life.  Nor  did  they  object  to  svich  men  living  together
and  conforming  to  a  prescribed  rule  of  discipline ;  nor  did  they
deny  that  such  institutions  under  proper  regulations,  might  be,
and  in  fact  had  been  of  great  and  manifold  utility.  They  had
been  places  of  security  for  those  who  had  no  taste  for  the  conflicts
by  which  all  Christendom  was  so  long  agitated.  In  many  cases
they  were  places  of  education  and  seats  of  learning.  Their  ob-
jections to  them  were,  —

1.  That  they  had  been  perverted  from  their  origmal  design,
and  had  become  the  sources  of  evil  and  not  of  good,  in  every  part
of  the  Church.  Instead  of  its  being  free  to  every  one  to  enter
and  to  leave  these  institutions  at  discretion,  those  once  initiated
were  bound  for  life  by  the  vows  which  they  had  made,  and,  in-
stead of  the  obligations  assumed  being  rational  and  Scriptural,
they  were  unreasonable  and  unscriptural.  Instead  of  the  inmates
of  these  institutions  supporting  themselves  by  their  own  labour,
they  were  allowed  to  live  in  idleness,  supported  by  alms  or  by  the
revenues  of  the  convents,  which  had  in  many  cases  become  enor-
mous. This  objection  was  directed  to  the  very  principle  on  which
the  monastic  institutions  of  the  Romish  Church  were  founded.
On  tills  point  Calvin  says,  "  Proinde  meminerint  lectores,  fuisse
me  de  monachismo  potius  quam  de  monachis  loquutum,  et  ea
vitia  notasse,  non  quse  in  paucorum  vita  haerent,  sed  quae  ab  ipso
vivendi  instituto  separari  nequemit."  ^

2.  To  this,  however,  was  added  the  argument  from  experience.
Monastic  institutions  had  become  the  sources  of  untold  evils  to
t'le  Chm'ch.     Being  in  a  great  measure  independent  of  the  ordi-

1  Summa,  ii.  ii.  quiBst.  Ixxxviii.  2 ;  edit.  Cologne,  1640,  p.  164,  b,  of  third  set.
3  Imtitutio,  IV.  xiii.  15  ;  edit.  Berlin,  1834,  vol.  ii.  p.  345.


320  PART  in.     Ch.   XIX.  -  THE   LAW.

nary  ecclesiastical  authorities,  they  were  the  cause  of  conflict  and
agitation.  Each  order  was  an  "  iniperium  in  imperio,"  and  one
order  was  arrayed  against  another,  as  one  feudal  baron  against
his  fellows.  Besides,  the  corruption  of  manners  witliin  the  con-
vents as  portrayed  by  Romanists  themselves,  rendered  them  such
a  scandal  and  offence  as  to  justify  their  summary  suppression.
Much  is  implied  in  the  answer  of  Erasmus  to  Frederick  the  Wise,
"  Lutherus  peccavit  in  duobus,  nemj)e  quod  tetigit  coronam  pon-
tificis  et  ventres  monachorum."  ^

3.  Practical  evils  might  be  reformed,  but  Protestants  objected
that  the  whole  system  of  monkery  was  founded  on  the  false  prin-
ciple of  the  merit  of  good  works.  It  was  only  on  the  assump-
tion that  men  could  work  out  a  righteousness  of  their  own,  that
they  submitted  to  the  self-denial  and  restraints  of  the  monastic
hfe.  If,  however,  as  Protestants  beheve,  there  is  no  merit  in  the
sight  of  God  in  anything  fallen  men  can  do,  and  the  righteous-
ness of  Christ  is  the  sole  ground  of  our  acceptance  with  God,  the
whole  groimd  on  which  these  institutions  were  defended  is  mider-
mined.  To  enter  a  monastery,  on  the  theory  of  the  Romish
Church,  Avas  to  renomice  the  doctrine  of  salvation  by  grace.  Be-
sides, it  was  also  taught  that  celibacy,  obedience,  and  voluntary
poverty,  being  uncommanded,  the  monastic  vow  to  observe  these
rules  of  hfe,  involved  special  merit.  This  was  a  twofold  error.
First,  it  is  an  error  to  suppose  that  there  can  be  any  work  of  su-
pererogation. The  law  of  God  demanding  absolute  perfection  of
heart  and  life,  there  can  be  no  such  thing  as  going  beyond  its  re-
quirements. And,  secondly,  it  is  an  error  to  assume  that  there  is
any  virtue  at  all  in  celibacy,  monastic  obedience,  or  voluntary
poverty.  These  are  not  "  meliora  bona  "  in  the  Romish  sense  of
the  words.     In  this  view,  also,  monastic  vows  are  antichristian.

4.  A  fourth  reason  urged  by  Protestants  for  pronovmcing  mo-
nastic vows  invalid,  was  that  they  were  milawful,  not  only  for  the
reason  just  assigned,  but  also  because  they  were  contrary  to  the
law  of  Christ.  No  man  has  the  right  to  swear  away  his  liberty  ;
to  reduce  himself  to  a  state  of  absolute  subjection  to  a  fellow-
mortal.  To  his  own  master  he  must  stand  or  fall.  The  vow  of
obedience  made  by  every  monk  or  nun  was  a  violation  of  the
apostolic  injunction,  "  Be  not  ye  the  servants  of  men."  The
same  remark  is  applicable  to  the  vow  of  celibacy.  No  one  has  a
right  to  take  that  vow ;  because  celibacy  is  right  or  wi-ong  ac-
cording to  circumstances.  It  may  be  a  sin,  and  therefore  no  such
vow  can  bind  the  conscience.

1  Guericke's  Kirchengeschiclite,  vii.  i.  ii.  §  174,  6th  edit.  Leipzig,  1846,  vol.  iii.  p.  69.


§8.]  THE   FOURTH   COMMANDMENT.  321

5.  Monastic  life,  instead  of  being  subservient  to  holiness  of
heart,  was  in  the  vast  majority  of  cases  injurious  to  the  monks
themselves.  The  fearful  language  of  Jerome  is  full  of  instruction :
"  O  quoties  ego  ipso  in  eremo  constitutus  in  ilia  vasta  solitudine,
quae  exusta  solis  ardoribus,  horridum  monachis  praistat  habitacu-

lum,  putavi  me  Romanis  interesse  deliciis Ille  igitur  ego,

qui  ob  Gehennse  metum  tali  me  carcere  ipse  damnaveram,  scorpi-
orum  tantum  socius  et  ferarum,  srepe  choris  intereram  puellarum.
Pallebant  ora  jejuniis,  et  mens  desideriis  festuabat  in  frigido  cor-
pore,  et  ante  hominem  sua  jam  in  carne  prsemortuum,  sola  libidi-
num  incendia  bulliebant."  ^  In  the  day  when  that  which  is  hidden
shall  be  made  manifest,  there  ^vill  probably  be  no  such  fearful
revelation  of  self-torture  as  that  made  by  unveiling  the  secret  hfe
of  the  inmates  of  monastic  institutions.  They  are  in  necessary
conflict  with  the  laws  of  nature  and  with  the  law  of  God.

The  Protestants  adopted  the  rule  announced  by  Calvin :  '^
"  Omnia  non  legitima  nee  rite  concepta,  ut  apud  Deum  nihili
sunt,  sic  nobis  irrita  esse  debere."  For,  he  immediately  adds,
as  in  human  contracts  only  that  continues  binding,  which  he  to
whom  the  promise  is  made  wishes  us  to  observe,  so  it  is  to  be
supposed  that  we  are  not  bound  to  do  what  God  does  not  wish
us  to  do,  simply  because  we  have  promised  Him  to  do  it.  On
these  grounds  the  Reformers  with  one  accord  pronounced  all  mo-
nastic vows  to  be  null  and  void.  Thus  the  Gospel  became  a
proclamation  of  liberty  to  the  captive,  and  the  opening  of  the
prison  to  those  who  were  bound.

§  8.   The  Fourth   Commandment.

Its  Design.

The  design  of  the  fourth  commandment  was,  (1.)  To  com-
memorate the  work  of  creation.  The  people  were  commanded
to  remember  the  Sabbath-day  and  to  keep  it  holy,  because  in  six
days  God  had  made  the  heavens  and  the  earth.     (2.)  To  pre-

1  Epistola  xxii ;  Ad  Eustochium,  Paula  Filiam,  De  Custodia  Virgimtatis,  Opera,  ed.
Migne,  Paris,  1845,  vol.  i.  p.  398.  This  long  epistle  is  addressed  to  a  young  Roman  lady
•■>f  rank  and  wealth  ;  and  is  designed  to  confirm  her  in  her  resolution  not  to  marry.  It  is
founded  on  the  assumption  that  virginity  was  not  only  a  great  virtue,  but  also  that  a  spe-
cial reward,  a  glory  not  otherwise  attainable,  was  attached  to  it.  He  says  to  her  :  "Cave,
:iu3eso,  ue  quando  de  te  dicat  Deus  :  '  Virgo  Israel  cecidit,  et  non  est  qui  suscitet  cam '
(Amos  V.  2).  Audeuter  loquar  :  Cum  omnia  possit  Deus,  suscitare  virginem  non  potest
post  ruinam.  Valet  quidem  liberare  de  poena,  sed  non  vult  eoronare  corruptam."  Ibid,  p,  -
394.  He  enjoins  upon  her  all  kinds  of  ascetic  observances  even  while  confessing  thsir  ia-
efficacyin  his  own  case.

2  'institution  IV.  xiii.  20;  edit.  Berlin,  1834,  vol.  ii.  p.  349.
A'OL.   III.  21


322  PART  m.   ch.  XIX. —  the  law.

serve  alive  the  knowledge  of  the  only  living  and  true  God.  If
heaven  and  earth,  that  is,  the  universe,  were  created,  they  must
have  had  a  creator ;  and  that  creator  must  be  extramundane,  ex-
isting before,  out  of,  and  independently  of  the  world.  He  must
be  almighty,  and  infinite  in  knowledge,  wisdom,  and  goodness  ;  for
all  these  attributes  are  necessary  to  account  for  the  Avonders  of
the  heavens  and  the  earth.  So  long,  therefore,  as  men  believe  in
creation,  they  must  believe  m  God.  This  accounts  for  the  fact
that  so  much  stress  is  laid  upon  the  right  observance  of  the  Sab-
bath. Far  more  importance  is  attributed  to  that  observance  than
to  any  merely  ceremonial  institution.  (3.)  This  command  was
designed  to  arrest  the  current  of  the  outward  hfe  of  the  people
and  to  turn  their  thoughts  to  the  unseen  and  spiritual.  Men  are
so  prone  to  be  engrossed  by  the  things  of  this  world  that  it  was,
and  is,  of  the  highest  importance  that  there  should  be  one  day
of  frequent  recurrence  on  wliich  they  were  forbidden  to  think  of
the  things  of  the  world,  and  forced  to  think  of  the  things  unseen
and  eternal.  (4.)  It  was  intended  to  afford  time  for  the  instruc-
tion of  the  people,  and  for  the  public  and  special  worship  of  God.
(5.)  By  the  prohibition  of  all  servile  labour,  whether  of  man  or
beast,  it  was  designed  to  secure  recuperative  rest  for  those  on
whom  the  primeval  curse  had  fallen  :  "In  the  sweat  of  thy  face
shalt  thou  eat  bread."  (6.)  As  a  day  of  rest  and  as  set  apart
for  intercourse  with  God,  it  was  designed  to  be  a  type  of  that
rest  which  remains  for  the  people  of  God,  as  we  learn  from
Psalms  xcv.  11,  as  expounded  by  the  Apostle  in  Hebrews  iv.  1-
10.  (7.)  As  the  observance  of  the  Sabbath  had  died  out  among
the  nations,  it  was  solemnly  reenacted  under  the  Mosaic  dispensa-
tion to  be  a  sign  of  the  covenant  between  God  and  the  children
of  Israel.  They  were  to  be  distinguished  as  the  Sabbath-keeping
people  among  all  the  nations  of  the  earth,  and  as  such  were  to  be
the  recipients  of  God's  special  blessings.  Exodus  xxxi.  13,  "  Ver-
ily my  Sabbaths  ye  shall  keep  :  for  it  is  a  sign  between  me  and  you
throughout  your  generations ;  that  ye  may  know  that  I  am  the
Lord  that  doth  sanctify  you."  And  in  verses  16,  17,  "  AVhere-
fore  the  children  of  Israel  shall  keep  the  Sabbath,  to  observe  the
Sabbath  throughout  their  generations,  for  a  perpetual  covenant.
It  is  a  sign  between  me  and  the  children  of  Israel  forever."  And
in  Ezekiel  xx.  12,  it  is  said,  "  Moreover,  also,  I  gave  them  my
Sabbaths,  to  be  a  sign  between  me  and  them,  that  they  might
know  that  I  am  the  Loed  that  sanctify  them."


§8.]  THE    FOURTH   COMMANDMENT.  323

The  Sabbath  was  instituted  from  the  Beginning^  and  is  of  Per-
petual   Obligation.

1.  This  may  be  inferred  from  the  nature  and  design  of  the  in-
stitution. It  is  a  generally  recognized  principle,  that  those  com-
mands of  the  Old  Testament  which  were  addressed  to  the  Jews
as  Jews  and  Avere  founded  on  their  peculiar  circumstances  and
relations,  passed  away  when  the  Mosaic  economy  was  abolished ;
but  those  founded  on  the  immutable  nature  of  God,  or  upon  the
permanent  relations  of  men,  are  of  permanent  obligation.  There
are  many  such  commands  which  bind  men  as  inen  ;  fathers  as
fathers  ;  children  as  children  ;  and  neighbours  as  neighbours.  It
is  perfectly  apparent  that  the  fourth  commandment  belongs  to  this
latter  class.  It  is  important  for  all  men  to  know  that  God  created
the  world,  and  therefore  is  an  extramundane  personal  being,  in-
finite in  all  his  perfections.  All  men  need  to  be  arrested  in  their
worldly  career,  and  called  upon  to  pause  and  to  turn  their
thoughts  God  ward.  It  is  of  incalculable  importance  that  men
should  have  time  and  opportunity  for  religious  instruction  and
worship.  It  is  necessary  for  all  men  and  servile  animals  to  have
time  to  rest  and  recuperate  their  strength.  The  daily  nocturnal
rest  is  not  sufficient  for  that  purpose,  as  physiologists  assure  us,
and  as  experience  has  demonstrated.  Such  is  obviously  the  judg-
ment of  God.

It  appears,  therefore,  from  the  nature  of  this  commandment  as
moral,  and  not  positive  or  ceremonial,  that  it  is  original  and  uni-
versal in  its  obligation.  No  man  assumes  that  the  commands,
"  Thou  shalt  not  kill,"  and  "  Thou  shalt  not  steal,"  were  first
announced  by  Moses,  and  ceased  to  be  obligatory  when  the  old
economy  passed  away.  A  moral  law  is  one  that  binds  from  its
OAvn  nature.  It  expresses  an  obligation  arising  either  out  of  our
relations  to  God  or  out  of  our  permanent  relations  to  our  fellow-
men.  It  binds  whether  formally  enacted  or  not.  There  are  no
doubt  positive  elements  in  the  fourth  commandment  as  it  stands
in  the  Bible.  It  is  positive  that  a  seventh,  and  not  a  sixth  or
eighth  part  of  our  time  should  be  consecrated  to  the  public  ser-
vice of  God.  It  is  positive  that  the  seventh  rather  than  any
other  day  of  the  week  should  be  thus  set  apart.  But  it  is  moral
that  there  should  be  a  day  of  rest  and  cessation  from  worldly
avocations.  It  is  of  moral  obligation  that  God  and  his  great
•works  should  be  statedly  remembered.  It  is  a  moral  duty  that
the  people  should  assemble  for  religious  instruction  and  for  the


324  PART  III.     Cn.   XIX.  — THE   LAW.

united  worship  of  God.  All  this  was  obligatory  before  the  time
of  Moses,  and  would  have  been  binding  had  he  never  existed.
All  that  the  fourth  commandment  did  was  to  put  this  natural
and  universal  obligation  into  a  definite  form.

2.  The  original  and  universal  obligation  of  the  law  of  the
Sabbath  may  be  inferred  from  its  having  found  a  place  in  the
decalogue.  As  all  the  other  commandments  in  that  fundamental
revelation  of  the  duties  of  men  to  God  and  to  their  neighbour,  are
moral  and  permanent  in  their  obligation,  it  would  be  incongruous
and  unnatural  if  the  fourth  should  be  a  solitary  exception.  This
argument  is  surely  not  met  by  the  answer  given  to  it  by  the  ad-
vocates of  the  o23posite  doctrine.  The  argument  they  say  is  valid
only  on  the  assumption  "  that  the  Mosaic  law,  because  of  its  di-
vine origin,  is  of  universal  and  permanent  authority."  ^  May  it
not  be  as  well  said.  If  the  command,  "  Thou  shalt  not  steal,"  be
still  in  force,  the  whole  code  of  the  Mosaic  law  must  be  binding  ?
The  fourth  commandment  is  read  in  all  Christian  churches,  when-
ever the  decalogue  is  read,  and  the  people  are  taught  to  say,
"  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us,  and  incline  our  hearts  to  keep  this
law."

3.  'Another  argument  is  derived  from  the  penalty  attached  to
the  violation  of  this  commandment.  "  Ye  shall  keep  the  Sab-
bath, therefore,  for  it  is  holy  unto  you :  every  one  that  defileth  it
shall  surely  be  put  to  death."  (Ex.  xxxi.  14.)  The  violation
of  no  merely  ceremonial  or  positive  law  was  visited  "svith  this
penalty.  Even  the  neglect  of  circumcision,  although  it  involved
the  rejection  of  both  the  Abrahamic  and  the  Mosaic  covenant,  and
necessarily  worked  the  forfeiture  of  all  the  benefits  of  the  theoc-
racy, was  not  made  a  capital  offence.  The  law  of  the  Sabbath
by  being  thus  distinguished  was  raised  far  above  the  level  of
mere  positive  enactments.  A  character  was  given  to  it,  not  only
of  primary  importance,  but  also  of  special  sanctity.

4.  We  accordingly  find  that  in  the  prophets  as  well  as  in  the
Pentateuch,  and  the  historical  books  of  the  Old  Testament,  the
Sabbath  is  not  only  spoken  of  as  "  a  delight,"  but  also  its  faith-
ful observance  is  predicted  as  one  of  the  characteristics  of  the
Messianic  period.  Thus  Isaiah  says,  "  If  thou  turn  away  thy
foot  from  the  Sabbath,  from  doing  thy  pleasure  on  my  holy  day ;
and  call  the  Sabbath  a  Delight,  the  Holy  of  the  Lord,  Hon-
ourable ;  and  shalt  honour  him,  not  doing  thine  own  ways,  nor
finding  thine  own  pleasure,  nor  speaking  thine  own  words  :  then

1  Palmer,  in  Herzog's  Real-Encyhlopddie,  art.  "  Sonntagsfeier."


§8]  THE   FOURTH   COMMANDMENT.  325

slialt  tliou  delight  thyself  in  the  Lord  ;  and  I  will  cause  thee  to
ride  upon  the  high  places  of  the  earth,  and  feed  thee  with  the
heritage  of  Jacob  thy  father  ;  for  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath
spoken  it."  (Is.  Iviii.  13,  14.)  Gesenius  is  very  much  puzzled  at
this.  The  prophets  predicted  that  under  the  Messiah  the  true
religion  was  to  be  extended  to  the  ends  of  the  earth.  But  the
public  worship  of  God  was  by  the  Jewish  law  tied  to  Jerusalem.
That  law  was  neither  designed  nor  adapted  for  a  universal
religion.  To  those,  therefore,  who  believe  that  the  Sabbath  was
a  temporary  Mosaic  institution  to  pass  away  when  the  old  econ-
omy was  abolished,  it  is  altogether  incongruous  that  a  prophet
should  represent  the  faithful  observance  of  the  Sabbath  as  one
of  the  chief  blessings  and  glories  of  the  Messiah's  reign.

These  considerations,  apart  from  historical  evidence  or  the  di-
rect assertion  of  the  Scriptures,  are  enough  to  create  a  strong,  if
not  an  invincible  presumption,  that  the  Sabbath  was  instituted
from  the  beginning,  and  was  designed  to  be  of  universal  and  per-
manent obligation.  Whatever  law  had  a  temporary  ground  or
reason  for  its  enactment,  was  temporary  in  its  obligation.  Where
the  reason  6i  the  law  is  permanent  the  law  itself  is  permanent.

The  greater  number  of  Christian  theologians  who  deny  all  this,
still  admit  the  Sabbath  to  be  a  most  wise  and  beneficent  institu-
tion. Nay,  many  of  them  go  so  far  as  to  represent  its  violation,
as  a  day  of  religious  rest,  as  a  sin.  This,  however,  is  a  conces-
sion that  the  reason  for  the  command  is  permanent,  and  that  if
God  has  not  required  its  observance,  the  Church  or  State  is  bound
to  do  so.

Direct  Evidence  of  the  ante-Mosaic  institution  of  the  Sabhath.

Presumptive  evidence  may  be  strong  enough  to  coerce  assent.
The  advocates  of  the  early  institution  of  the  Sabbath,  however,
are  not  limited  to  that  kind  of  evidence.  There  is  direct  proof
of  the  fact  for  which  they  contend,  —

1.  In  Genesis  ii.  3,  it  is  said,  "  God  blessed  the  seventh  day,  and
sanctified  it ;  because  that  in  it  he  had  rested  from  all  his  work
which  God  created  and  made."  It  is  indeed  easy  to  say  that  this
is  a  prolepsis  ;  that  the  passage  assigns  the  reason  why  in  the
times  of  Moses,  God  selected  the  seventh,  rather  than  any  other
day  of  the  week  to  be  the  Sabbath.  This  is  indeed  possible,  but
it  is  not  probable.  It  is  an  unnatural  interpretation  which  no
one  would  adopt  except  to  suit  a  purpose.  The  narrative  pur-
ports to  be  an  accoimt  of  what  God  did  at  the  time  of  the  crea-


826  PART  III.     Ch.   XIX.  — the   law.

tion.  When  the  earth  Avas  prepared  for  his  reception,  God  cre-
ated man  on  the  sixth  day,  and  rested  from  the  work  of  creation
on  the  seventh,  and  set  apart  that  day  as  a  holy  day  to  be  a  per-
petual memorial  of  the  great  work  which  He  had  accomplished.^
This  is  the  natural  sense  of  the  passage,  from  which  only  the
strongest  reasons  would  authorize  ns  to  depart.  All  collateral
reasons,  however,  are  on  its  side.

In  support  of  this  interpretation  the  authority  of  the  most
impartial,  as  well  as  the  most  competent  interpreters  might  be
quoted.  Grotius  did  not  believe  in  the  perpetuity  of  the  Sabbath,
yet  he  admits  that  in  Genesis  ii.  3,  it  is  said  that  the  seventh  day
was  set  apart  as  holy  from  the  creation.  He  assumes,  on  the  au-
thority, as  he  says,  of  many  learned  Hebrews,  that  there  were
two  precepts  concerning  the  Sabbath.  The  one  given  at  the
beginning  enjoined  that  every  seventh  day  should  be  remembered
as  a  memorial  of  the  creation.  And  in  this  sense,  he  says,  the
Sabbath  was  doubtless  obsei-ved  by  the  patriarchs,  Enoch,  Noah,
Abraham,  etc.  The  second  precept  was  given  from  IMount  Sinai
when  the  Sabbath  was  made  a  memorial  of  the  deliverance  of  the
Israelites  from  Egyptian  bondage.  This  latter  law  enjoined  rest
from  labour  on  the  Sabbath.  The  Scriptural  argument  which  he
urges  in  support  of  this  theory,  is,  that  in  all  the  accounts  of  the
journeyings  of  the  patriarchs,  we  never  read  of  their  resting  on
the  seventh  day  ;  whereas  after  the  law  given  from  Mount  Sinai,
this  reference  to  the  resting  of  the  people  on  the  Sabbath  is  of
constant  occurrence. ^

Delitzsch  says  "  Hengstenberg  understands  Genesis  ii.  3,  as
though  it  were  written  from  the  stand-point  of  the  Mosaic  law,  as
if  it  were  said,  God  for  this  reason  in  after  times  blessed  the  seventh
day  ;  which  scarcely  needs  a  refutation.  God  himself,  the  Creator,
celebrated  a  Sabbath  immediately  after  the  six  days'  work,  and
because  his  o-a^^ano-^os  could  become  the  cra^/?aTio-//os  of  his  creat-
ures, He  made  for  that  purpose  the  seventh  day,  by  his  blessing,
to  be  a  perennial  fountain  of  refreshment,  and  clothed  that  day
by'hallowing  it  -with  special  glory  for  all  time  to  come."  ^

Baumgarten  in   his  comment   on  this  verse  says   the  separa-

1  The  force  of  this  argument  does  not  depend  on  the  supposition  that  the  days  of  creation
were  periods  of  twenty-four  hours.  Admitting  that  they  were  geologic  periods,  at  the  end
of  the  sixth  of  which  man  appeared,  and  that  then  followed  a  period  of  permanent  rest,
that  would  be  reason  enough  why  every  seventh  day  should  be  selected  as  a  memorial  of
the  creation,  to  teach  Adam  and  his  descendants  that  the  earth  did  not  owe  its  existence  to
a  blind  process  of  development,  but  to  the  tiat  of  Jehovah.

■■2  De  Veritate  Rdly'wnis  Christiaiue,  v.  10;  Works,  London,  1679,  vol.  iii.  p.  79.

3  Die  Genesis  Attttr/elefjt,  von  Franz  Delitzsch,  Leipzig,  18.52,  pp.  84,  85.


§8.]  THE   FOURTH   COMMANDMENT.  327

fcion  of  this  day  from  all  others  was  made  so  that  "  the  return  of
this  blessed  and  holy  day  should  be  to  him  a  memorial,  and  par-
ticipation of  the  divine  rest."  ^  And  Knobel,  one  of  the  most  pro-
nounced of  the  rationalistic  commentators,  says,  "  That  the  author
of  Genesis  makes  the  distinction  of  the  seventh  day  coeval  with
the  creation,  although  the  carrying  out  of  the  purjjose  thus  inti-
mated was  deferred  to  the  time  of  Moses.  Nothing  is  known
of  any  ante-Mosaic  celebration  of  the  Sabbath."  ^

2.  Apart  from  the  fact  that  the  reason  for  the  Sabbath  existed
from  the  beginning,  there  is  direct  historical  evidence  that  the
hebdomadal  division  of  time  prevailed  before  the  deluge.  Noah
in  Genesis  viii.  10,  12,  is  said  tmce  to  have  rested  seven  days.
And  again  in  the  time  of  Jacob,  as  appears  from  Genesis  xxix.  27,
28,  the  division  of  time  into  weeks  was  recognized  as  an  estab-
lislied  usage.  As  seven  is  not  an  equal  part  either  of  a  solar  year
or  of  a  lunar  month,  the  only  satisfactory  account  of  this  fact,
is  to  be  found  in  the  institution  of  the  Sabbath.  This  fact  more-
over proves  not  only  the  original  institution,  but  also  the  con-
tinued observance  of  the  seventh  day.  There  must  have  been
something  to  distinguish  that  day  as  the  close  of  one  period  or
the  commencement  of  another.  It  is  altogether  unnatural  to  ac-
count for  this  hebdomadal  division  by  a  reference  to  the  wor-
ship of  the  seven  planets.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the  planets
were  objects  of  worship  at  that  early  period  of  the  world,  or  for
a  long  time  afterwards,  especially  among  the  Shemitic  races.
Besides,  this  explanation  is  inconsistent  with  the  account  of  the
creation.  The  divine  authority  of  the  book  of  Genesis  is  here
taken  for  granted.  What  it  asserts,  Christians  are  bound  to
believe.  It  is  undeniably  taught  in  this  book  that  God  created
the  heavens  and  the  earth  in  six  days  and  rested  on  the  seventh.
It  matters  not  how  the  word  "  days  "  may  be  explained,  we  have
in  the  history  of  the  creation  this  hebdomadal  division  of  time.
No  earlier  cause  for  the  prevalence  of  that  division  can  be  given,
and  no  other  is  needed,  or  can  reasonably  be  assumed.

This  division  of  time  into  weeks,  was  not  confined  to  the  He-
brew race.  It  was  almost  universal.  This  fact  proves  that  it
must  have  had  its  origin  in  the  very  earliest  period  in  the  history
of  the  world.^

1  TheologiscJie  Commentar  zum  Pentateuch,  Kiel,  1843,  vol.  i.  p.  29.

2  Die  Genesis  FrHcirt,  von  August  Knobel,  Leipzig,  1852.

3  Of  this  general  prevalence  in  the  ancient  world,  of  a  special  reverence  for  the  seventh
daj'  and  of  the  division  of  time  into  weeks,  Grotius  gives  abundant  evidence  in  his  work,
De  Veritate  Relif/ionis  Christiarue,  1. 16;  Works,  vol.  iii.  p.  16.  On  this  subject,  see  Winer's


328  PART  III.     Ch.   XIX.  — the   law.

3.  That  the  law  of  the  Sabbath  was  not  first  given  on  Mount
Sinai,  may  also  be  inferred  from  the  fact  that  it  was  referred  to
as  a  known  and  familiar  institution,  before  that  law  was  promul-
gated. Thus  in  the  sixteenth  chapter  of  Exodus  the  people  were
directed  to  gather  on  the  sixth  day  of  the  week  manna  sufficient
for  the  seventh,  as  on  that  day  none  would  be  provided.  And
more  particularly  in  the  twenty-third  verse,  it  is  said,  "  To-mor-
row is  the  rest  of  the  holy  Sabbath  unto  the  Lord  :  bake  that
which  ye  will  bake  to-day,  and  seethe  that  ye  will  seethe  ;  and
that  which  remaineth  over  lay  vip  for  you,  to  be  kept  until  morn-
ing." And  in  the  twenty-sixth  verse  we  read,  "  Six  days  ye
shall  gather  it ;  but  on  the  seventh  day,  which  is  the  Sabbath,  in
it  there  shall  be  none."  There  was  therefore  a  Sabbath  before
the  Mosaic  law  was  given.  Again,  the  language  used  m  the  fourth
commandment,  "  Remember  the  Sabbath  day  to  keep  it  holy,"
naturally  implies  that  the  Sabbath  was  not  a  new  institution.  It
was  a  law  given  in  the  beginning,  that  had  doubtless  in  a  good
measure,  especially  during  their  bondage  in  Egypt,  become  obso-
lete, which  the  people  were  henceforth  to  remember  and  faith-
fully observe.

The  objection  to  the  pre-Mosaic  institution  of  the  Sabbath
founded  on  the  silence  of  Genesis  on  the  subject  in  the  history  of
the  patriarchs,  is  of  little  weight.  It  is  to  be  remembered  that
the  book  of  Genesis,  comprised  in  some  sixty  octavo  pages,  gives
us  the  history  of  nearly  two  tliousand  years.  All  details  not
bearing  immediately  on  the  design  of  the  author  were  of  necessity
left  out.  If  nothing  was  done  but  what  is  there  recorded,  the
antediluvians  and  patriarchs  lived  almost  entirely  without  re-
ligious observances.

The  Sabbath  does  not  stand  alone.  It  is  well  known  that
Moses  adopted  and  incorporated  with  his  extended  code  many  of
the  ancient  usages  of  the  chosen  people.  This  was  the  case  with
sacrifices  and  circumcision,  as  well  as  with  all  the  principles  of
the  decalogue.  That  a  particular  law,  therefore,  is  found  in  the
Mosaic  economy  is  not  sufficient  evidence  that  it  had  its  origin
with  the  Hebrew  Lawgiver,  or  that  it  ceased  to  be  binding  when
the  old  dispensation  was  abrogated.  If  the  reason  for  the  law
remains,  the  law  itself  remains  ;  and  if  given  to  mankind  before
the  birth  of  Moses,  it  binds  mankind.     On  this  point  even  Dr.

Renlworterbuch,  word  "  Sabbath."  Winer  refers,  ainon^  other  authorities  discussing  this
question  of  the  antiquity  of  the  Sabbath,  to  Sehlen,  Jus  Xitt.  et  Gent.;  Spencer,  Legg.  ritual.,
Eichlioni,  Urgesch.;  Hebenstreit,  De  Sabb.  ante  legg.  Afo.i.  cxintcnle ;  Michaelis,  Mos.  Recht


5  8.]  THE  FOURTH  COMMANDMENT.  329

Paley  says :  "If  the  divine  command  was  actually  delivered  at
the  creation,  it  was  addressed,  no  doubt,  to  the  whole  human
species  alike,  and  continues,  unless  repealed  by  some  subsequent
revelation,  binding  upon  all  who  come  to  the  knowledge  of  it."  ^
That  the  law  of  the  Sabbath  was  thus  given  is,  as  has  been
shown,  the  common  opinion  even  of  those  who  deny  its  perpetual
obligation,  and  therefore  its  permanence  cannot  reasonably  be
questioned  by  those  who  admit  the  principle  that  what  was  given
to  mankind  was  meant  for  manlvind.

4.  It  is  a  strong  argument  in  favour  of  this  conclusion,  that  the
law  of  the  Sabbath  was  taken  up  and  incorporated  in  the  new
dispensation  by  the  Apostles,  the  infallible  founders  of  the  Chris-
tian Church.  All  the  Mosaic  laws  founded  on  the  permanent
relations  of  men  either  to  God  or  to  their  fellows,  are  in  like
manner  adopted  in  the  Christian  Code.  They  are  adopted,  how-
ever, only  as  to  their  essential  elements.  Every  law,  ceremonial
or  typical,  or  designed  only  for  the  Jews,  is  discarded.  Men  are
still  bound  to  worship  God,  but  this  is  not  now  to  be  done  espe-
cially at  Jerusalem,  or  by  sacrifices,  or  through  the  ministration
of  priests.  Marriage  is  as  sacred  now  as  it  ever  was,  but  all  the
special  laws  regulating  its  duties,  and  the  penalty  for  its  violation,
are  abrogated.  Homicide  is  as  great  a  crime  now  as  under  the
Mosaic  economy,  but  the  old  laws  about  the  avenger  of  blood  and
cities  of  refuge  are  no  longer  in  force.  The  rights  of  property
remain  unimpaired  under  the  gospel  dispensation,  but  the  Jewish
laws  regarding  its  distribution  and  protection,  are  no  longer  bind-
ing. The  same  is  true  with  regard  to  the  Sabbath.  We  are  as
much  bound  to  keep  one  day  in  seven  holy  unto  the  Lord,  as  were
the  patriarchs  or  Israelites.  This  law  binds  all  men  as  men,  be-
cause given  to  all  mankind,  and  because  it  is  founded  upon  the
nature  common  to  all  men,  and  the  relation  which  all  men  bear
to  God.  The  two  essential  elements  of  the  command  are  that  the
Sabbath  should  be  a  day  of  rest,  that  is,  of  cessation  from  worldly
avocations  and  amusements ;  and  that  it  should  be  devoted  to  the
worship  of  God  and  the  services  of  religion.  All  else  is  circum-
stantial and  variable.  It  is  not  necessary  that  it  should  be  ob-
served with  special  reference  to  the  deliverance  of  the  Israehtes
out  of  Egypt ;  nor  are  the  details  as  to  the  things  to  be  done  or
avoided,  or  as  to  the  penalty  for  transgression  obligatory  on  us.
We  are  not  bound  to  offer  the  sacrifices  required  of  the  Jews,  nor
are  we  bound  to  abstain   from  lighting  a  fire  on   that  day.     In

1  Principles  of  Moral  and  Political  Philosoj)liy,  v.  7;  edit.  Boston,  1848,  vol.  ii.  p.  48.


330  PART  III.     Ch.   XIX.  — the   law.

like  manner  the  day  of  tlie  week  is  not  essential.  The  change
from  the  seventh  to  the  first  was  circumstantial.  If  made  for
sufficient  reason  and  by  competent  authority,  the  change  is  oblig-
atory. The  reason  for  the  change  is  patent.  If  the  dehverance
of  the  Hebrew  from  the  bondage  in  Egypt  should  be  commemo-
rated, how  much  more  the  redemption  of  the  world  by  the  Son
of  God.  If  the  creation  of  the  material  universe  should  be  kept
in  perpetual  remembrance,  how  much  more  the  new  creation  se-
cured by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead.  If  men
wish  the  knowledge  of  that  event  to  die  out,  let  them  neglect  to
keep  holy  the  first  day  of  the  week  ;  if  they  desire  that  event  to
be  everywhere  known  and  remembered,  let  them  consecrate  that
day  to  the  worship  of  the  risen  Saviour.  This  is  God's  method
for  keeping  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  on  which  our  salvation
depends,  in  perpetual  remembrance.

This  change  of  the  Sabbath  from  the  seventh  to  the  first  day
of  the  week  was  made  not  only  for  a  sufficient  reason,  but  also  by
competent  authority.  It  is  a  simple  historical  fact  that  the
Christians  of  the  apostolic  age  ceased  to  observe  the  seventh,  and
did  observe  the  first  day  of  the  week  as  the  day  for  religious  wor-
ship. Thus  from  the  creation,  in  unbroken  succession,  the  people
of  God  have,  in  obedience  to  the  original  command,  devoted  one
day  in  seven  to  the  worship  of  the  only  living  and  true  God.  It
is  hard  to  conceive  of  a  stronger  argument  than  this  for  the  per-
petual obligation  of  the  Sabbath  as  a  divine  institution.  It  is  not
worth  while  to  stop  to  answer  the  objection,  that  the  record  of
this  uninterrupted  observance  of  the  Sabbath  is  incomplete.
History  does  not  record  everything.  We  find  the  fountain  of
this  river  of  mercy  in  paradise ;  we  trace  its  course  from  age  to
age  ;  we  see  its  broad  and  beneficent  flow  before  our  eyes.  If
here  and  there,  in  its  course  through  millenniums,  it  be  lost  from
view  in  a  morass  or  cavern,  its  reappearance  proves  its  identity
and  the  divinity  of  its  origin.  The  Sabbath  is  to  the  nations
what  the  Nile  is  to  Egypt,  and  you  might  as  well  call  the  one  a
human  device  as  the  other.  Nothing  but  divine  authority  and
divine  power  can  account  for  the  continued  observance  of  this
sacred  institution  from  the  beginning  until  now.

5.  It  is  fair  to  argue  the  divine  origin  of  the  Sabbath  from  its
supreme  importance.  As  to  the  fact  of  its  importance  all  Chris-
tians are  agreed.  They  may  differ  as  to  the  ground  on  which
the  obligation  to  observe  it  rests,  and  as  to  the  strictness  with
which  the  day  should  be  observed,  but  that  men  are  bound  to


§8.J  THE   FOURTH   C0:MMANDMENT.  331

observe  it,  and  that  its  due  observance  is  of  essential  importance,
there  is  no  difference  of  opinion  among  the  churches  of  Christen-
dom. But  if  so  essential  to  the  interests  of  religion,  is  it  con-
ceivable that  God  has  not  enjoined  it  ?  He  has  given  the  world
the  Church,  the  Bible,  the  ministry,  the  sacraments  ;  these  are
not  human  devices.  And  can  it  be  supposed  that  the  Sabbath,
without  which  all  these  divine  institutions  would  be  measurably
inefficient,  should  be  left  to  the  will  or  wisdom  of  men  ?  This
is  not  to  be  supposed.  That  these  divinely  appointed  means  for
the  illumination  and  sanctification  of  men,  are  in  a  great  measure
Avithout  effect,  where  the  Sabbath  is  neglected  or  profaned,  is  a
matter  of  experience.  It  is  undeniable  that  the  mass  of  the
people  are  indebted  to  the  services  of  the  sanctuary  on  the  Lord's
Day,  for  their  religious  knowledge'.  Any  community  or  class  of
men  who  ignore  the  Sabbath  and  absent  themselves  from  the
sanctuary,  as  a  general  thing,  become  heathen.  They  have  little
more  true  religious  knowledge  than  pagans.  But  without  such
knowledge  morality  is  impossible.  Religion  is  not  only  the  life-
blood  of  morality,  so  that  without  the  former  the  latter  cannot
be  ;  but  God  has  revealed  his  purpose  that  it  shall  not  be.  If
men  refuse  to  retain  Him  in  their  knowledge.  He  declares  that
He  will  give  them  up  to  a  reprobate  mind.  (Rom.  i.  28.)  Men
do  not  know  what  they  are  doing,  when  by  their  teaching  or
example  they  encourage  the  neglect  or  profanation  of  the  Lord's
Day.  We  have  in  the  French  Communists  an  illustration  and  a
warning  of  what  a  community  without  a  Sabbath,  ^.  e.,  without
religion,  must  ultimately  and  inevitably  become.  Irreligious  men
of  course  sneer  at  religion  and  deny  its  importance,  but  the  Bible
and  experience  are  against  them.

Objections.

The  general  objections  against  the  doctrine  that  the  law  of  the
Sabbath  is  of  universal  and  perpetual  obligation,  have  already
been  incidentally  considered.  Those  derived  from  the  New  Tes-
tament are  principally  the  following :  —

1.  An  objection  is  dra^vn  from  the  absence  of  any  express  com-
mand. No  such  command  was  needed.  •  The  New  Testament
has  no  decalogue.  That  code  having  been  once  announced,  and
never  repealed,  remains  in  force.  Its  injunctions  are  not  so  much
categorically  repeated,  as  assumed  as  still  obhgatory.  We  find
no  such  words  as,  "  Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods  before  me,"  or
"  Thou  shalt  not  make  unto  thee  any  graven  image."     Paul  says.


332  TART  m.     Ch.    XIX.  — the   LAW.

"  I  had  not  known  lust,  except  the  law  had  said,  Thou  shalt  not
covet."  (Rom.  \di.  7.)  The  law  which  said  "  Thou  shalt  not
covet,"  is  in  the  decalogue.  Paul  does  not  reenact  the  command,
he  simply  takes  for  granted  that  the  decalogue  is  now  as  ever  the
law  of  God.

2.  It  is  virged  not  only  that  there  is  no  positive  command  on
the  subject,  but  also  that  there  is  a  total  silence  in  the  New  Tes-
tament respecting  any  obligation  to  keep  holy  one  day  in  seven.
Our  Lord  in  his  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  it  is  said,  while  correcting
the  false  interpretations  of  the  Mosaic  law  given  by  the  Pharisees,
and  expounding  its  precepts  in  their  true  sense,  says  nothing  of
the  fourth  commandment.  The  same  is  true  of  the  council  in  Je-
rusalem. That  council  says  nothing  about  the  necessity  of  the
heathen  converts  observing  a  Sabbath.  But  all  this  may  be  said
of  other  precepts  the  obligation  of  which  no  man  questions.
Neither  our  Lord  nor  the  council  say  anything  about  the  wor-
shipping of  graven  images.  Besides,  our  Lord  elsewhere  does
do,  with  regard  to  the  fourth  commandment,  precisely  wdiat  He
did  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  with  regard  to  other  precepts  of
the  decalogue.  He  reproved  the  Pharisees  for  their  false  inter-
pretation of  that  commandment,  without  the  slightest  intimation
that  the  law  itself  was  not  to  remain  in  force.

3.  Appeal  is  made  to  such  passages  as  Colossians  ii.  16,  "  Let
no  man  therefore  judge  you  in  meat,  or  in  drink,  or  in  respect  of
an  holy  day,  or  of  the  new  moon,  or  of  the  Sabbath  days ;  "  and
Romans  xiv.  5,  "  One  man  esteemeth  one  day  above  another ;
another  esteemeth  every  day  alike.  Let  every  man  be  fully  per-
suaded in  his  own  mind."  Every  one  knows,  however,  that  the
apostolic  churclies  were  greatly  troubled  by  Judaizers,  who  in-
sisted that  the  Mosaic  law  continued  in  force,  and  that  Christians
were  bound  to  conform  to  its  prescriptions  with  regard  to  the  dis-
tinction between  clean  and  unclean  meats,  and  its  numerous  feast
days,  on  which  all  labour  was  to  be  intermitted.  These  were  the
false  teachers  and  this  was  the  false  doctrine  against  which  so
much  of  St.  Paul's  epistles  was  directed.  It  is  in  obvious  refer-
ence to  these  men  and  their  doctrines  that  such  passages  as  those
cited  above  were  written.  They  have  no  reference  to  the  weekly
Sabbath,  which  had  been  observed  from  the  creation,  and  which
the  Apostles  themselves  introduced  and  perpetuated  in  the  Chris-
tian Church.

4.  It  also  frequently  said  that  a  weekly  Sabbath  is  out  of  keep-
ing with  the  spirit  of  the  Gospel,  which  requires  the  consecration


§  8.]  THE   FOURTH   COMMANDMENT.  .  333

of  the  whole  hfe  and  of  all  our  time  to  God.  With  the  Christian,
it  is  said,  every  day  is  holy,  and  one  day  is  not  more  holy  than
another.  It  is  not  true,  however,  that  the  New  Testament  re-
quires greater  consecration  to  God  than  the  Old.  The  Gospel
has  many  advantages  over  the  Mosaic  dispensation,  but  that  is
not  one  of  them.  It  was  of  old,  even  from  the  beginning,  re-
quired of  all  men  that  they  should  love  God  with  all  the  heart,
Avith  all  the  mind,  and  with  all  the  strength  ;  and  their  neighbour
as  themselves.  More  than  this  the  Gospel  demands  of  no  man.
If  it  consists  with  the  spirituality  of  the  Church  that  believers
should  not  neglect  the  assembling  themselves  together  ;  and  that
they  should  have  a  stated  ministry,  sacramental  rites,  and  the
power  of  excommunication,  and  all  this  by  Divine  appointment ;
then  it  is  hard  to  see  why  the  consecration  of  one  day  in  seven  to
the  service  of  God,  should  be  inconsistent  with  its  spiritual  char-
acter. So  long  as  we  are  in  the  body,  religion  cannot  be  exclu-
sively a  matter  of  the  heart.  It  must  have  its  institutions  and  or-
dinances ;  and  any  attempt  to  dispense  with  these  would  be  as
unreasonable  and  as  futile  as  for  the  soul,  in  this  our  present  state
of  existence,  to  attempt  to  do  without  the  body.

5.  Another  ground  is  often  taken  on  this  subject.  The  impor-
tance of  the  Sabbath  is  not  denied.  The  obligation  to  keep  it
holy  is  admitted.  It  is  declared  to  be  sinful  to  engage  in  worldly
avocations  or  amusements  on  that  day ;  but  it  is  denied  that  this
obligation  to  consecrate  the  day  to  God  rests  upon  any  divine
command.  It  is  denied  that  the  original  sanctification  of  the
seventh  day  at  the  creation  binds  all  men  to  keep  one  day  in
seven  holy  to  the  Lord.  It  is  maintained  that  the  fourth  com-
mandment, both  as  to  its  essence  and  as  to  its  accidents  is  abro-
gated; and,  therefore,  that  there  is  no  express  command  of  God
now  in  force  requiring  us  to  keep  holy  the  Sabbath.  The  obliga-
tion is  either  self-imposed,  or  it  is  imposed  by  the  Church.  The
Church  requires  its  members  to  observe  the  Lord's  Day,  as  it  re-
quires them  to  observe  Christmas  or  Good  Friday  ;  and  Chris-
tians, it  is  said,  are  bound  to  obey  the  Church,  as  citizens  are
bound  to  obey  the  state.  But  Protestants  deny  that  the  Church
has  power  to  make  laws  to  bind  the  conscience.  That  is  the  pre-
rogative of  God.  If  the  Church  may  do  it  in  one  case  it.  may
in  another ;  and  we  should  be  made  the  servants  of  men.  It  is  by
this  simple  principle,  that  men  are  bound  to  obey  the  Church,  that
Rome  has  effectually  despoiled  all  who  acknowledge  her  author-
ity of  the  liberty  wherewith  Christ  has  made  his  people  free.


334  PART  ni.     Ch.  XIX.  — the   LAW.

Most  of  the  modern  evangelical  theologians  in  Germany  say
that  the  obligation  to  observe  the  Sabbath  is  self-imposed.  That
is,  that  every  man,  and  esj)ecially  every  Christian,  is  bound  to
do  all  he  can  to  promote  the  interests  of  religion  and  the  good  of
society.  The  consecration  of  the  Lord's  Day  to  the  worship  of
God  is  eminently  conducive  to  these  ends ;  therefore  men  are
bound  to  keep  it  holy.  But  an  obHgation  self-imposed  is  hmited
to  self.  One  man  thinks  it  best  to  devote  Sunday  to  religion  ;
another  that  it  should  be  kept  as  a  day  of  relaxation  and  amuse-
ment. One  man's  liberty  cannot  be  judged  by  another  man's
conscience.  Expediency  can  never  be  the  ground  of  a  universal
and  permanent  obligation.  The  history  of  the  Church  proves
that  no  such  views  of  duty  are  adequate  to  coerce  the  conscience
and  govern  the  lives  of  men.  The  Sabbath  is  not  in  fact  con-
secrated to  religion,  where  its  divine  authority  is  denied.  The
churches  may  be  more  or  less  frequented,  but  the  day  is  princi-
pally devoted  to  amusement.  A  German  theologian^  says  that
the  doctrine  that  the  religious  observance  of  the  Sabbath  rests
on  an  express  divine  command,  "prevails  throughout  the  whole
English-speaking  part  of  Christendom,"  and  that  in  the  Evan-
gelical Church  in  Germany,  some  either  from  a  too  legal  view  of
Christianity,  or  from  servile  subjection  to  the  letter  of  the  Bible,
or  impressed  by  the  solemn  stillness  of  an  English  Sunday  as
contrasted  with  its  profanation  elsewhere,  have  ever  been  inclined
to  the  same  views.  Although  this  writer,  the  representative  of
a  large  class,  asserts  his  Christian  liberty  to  observe  one  day
above  another,  or  all  days  alike,  he  admits  that  the  rehgious  ob-
servance of  the  Lord's  Day  is  not  a  matter  of  indifference  ;  on
the  contrary,  he  says  that  "  its  profanation  (Verleztung)  is  a  sin."
To  make  a  thing  sinful,  however,  he  says  it  is  not  necessary  that
it  should  be  against  an  express  divine  command.  A  Christian's
conscience,  "  guided  by  the  word,  and  enlightened  by  the  Spirit
of  God,"  is  his  rule  of  conduct.  Conscience  thus  guided  and
enlightened,  may  enjoin  or  forbid  much  for  which  no  explicit
directions  can  be  found  in  the  Scriptures.  No  man  denies  all
this  ;  but  a  man's  conscience  is  a  guide  for  himself,  and  not  for
other  people.  If  we  hold  fast  the  fundamental  principle  of  om-
Protestant  faitli  and  freedom,  "  that  the  Scriptures  are  the  only
infallible  rule  of  faith  and  practice,"  we  must  be  able  to  plead
express  divine  authority  for  the  religious  observance  of  the  Lord's
Day,  or  allow  every  man  so  to  keep  it  or  not  as  he  sees  fit.     To

1  Palmer  in  Herzog's  Real-Encyklopadie,


§8.]  THE   FOURTH   COMMANDMENT.  335

his  own  master  he  stands  or  falls ;  to  Him  alone  is  he  accountable
for  the  use  which  he  makes  of  his  Christian  liberty.  But  as  no
man  is  at  liberty  to  steal  or  not  to  steal  as  .he  sees  fit,  so  all
"  English  speaking  "  Christians  with  one  voice  say,  he  is  not  at
liberty  to  sanctify  or  profane  the  Sabbath,  as  he  sees  fit.  He  is
bound  by  the  primal  and  immutable  law  given  at  the  creation,
to  keep  one  day  in  seven  holy  to  the  Lord.

If  it  be  true  that  it  is  peculiar  to  the  Anglo-Saxon  race  to
hold  this  view  of  the  obligation  of  the  Christian  Sabbath,  then
they  have  special  reason  for  profound  gratitude  to  God.  God
of  old  said  to  the  Israelites,  "  Hallow  my  Sabbaths ;  and  they
shall  be  a  sign  between  me  and  you,  that  ye  may  know  that  I  am
the  Lord  your  God."  That  is,  it  shall  be  for  a  sign  that  you
are  my  people.  So  long  as  you  keep  the  Sabbath  holy  I  will
bless  you  ;  when  you  neglect  and  profane  it,  your  blessings  shall
depart  from  you.  (Jer.  xvii.  20-27.)  If  it  be  then  the  dis-
tinction of  Anglo-Saxon  Christians,  that  they  are  a  sabbath-
keeping  people,  it  is  one  to  be  highly  prized  and  sedulously
guarded ;  and  in  this  country  especially,  we  should  be  watchful
lest  the  influx  of  immigrants  of  other  nationalities  deprive  us  of
this  great  distinction  and  its  blessings.

It  is  a  popular  objection  against  the  religious  observance  of
the  Lord's  Day,  that  the  labouring  classes  need  it  as  a  day  of
recreation.  On  this  it  is  obvious  to  remark,  (1.)  That  there  are
many  grievous  evils  in  our  modern  civilization,  but  these  are  not
to  be  healed  by  trampling  on  the  laws  of  God.  If  men  crowd
labourers  into  narrow  premises,  and  overwork  them  in  heated
factories  six  days  in  the  week,  they  cannot  atone  for  that  sin
by  making  the  Lord's  Day  a  day  for  amusement.  (2.)  So  far
from  Sunday,  as  generally  spent  by  the  labouring  class,  being
a  day  of  refreshment,  it  is  just  the  reverse.  Monday  is  com-
monly with  them  the  worst  day  in  the  week  for  labour ;  it  is
needed  as  a  day  for  recovery  from  the  effects  of  a  misspent  Sun-
day. (8.)  If  the  labouring  classes  are  provided  with  healthful
places  of  abode  and  are  not  overworked,  then  the  best  restora-
tive is  entire  rest  from  ordinary  occupations,  and  directing  their
thoughts  and  feelings  into  new  channels,  by  the  purifying  and
elevating  offices  of  religion.  This  is  the  divinely  appointed
method  of  preserving  the  bodies  and  souls  of  men  in  a  healthful
state,  a  method  which  no  human  de\dce  is  likely  to  improve.


336  PART  m.   Ch.  XIX.— the  law.

How  is  the  Sabbath  to  be  Sanctified?
It  may  be  said  in  general  terms  to  be  the  opinion  of  the  whole
Jewish  and  Christian  Church,  that  the  sanctification  required  by
God,  consists  not  merely  in  cessation  from  worldly  avocations,
but  also  in  the  consecration  of  the  day  to  the  offices  of  religion.
That  this  is  the  correct  view  is  proved,  (1.)  Not  only  by  the  gen-
eral consent  of  the  people  of  God  under  both  dispensations,  but
also  by  the  constant  use  of  the  words  to  "  hallow,"  to  "  make  "
or,  "  keep  holy,"  and  to  "  sanctify."  The  uniform  use  of  such
expressions,  shows  that  the  day  was  set  apart  from  a  common  to
a  sacred  use.  (2.)  From  the  command  to  increase  the  number  of
sacrifices  in  the  temple  service,  which  proves  that  the  day  was
to  be  religiously  observed.  (3.)  From  the  design  of  the  insti-
tution, which  from  the  beginning  was  religious  ;  the  commemora-
tion of  the  work  of  creation,  and  after  the  advent,  of  the  resur-
rection of  Christ.  (4.)  In  Leviticus  xxiii.,  a  list  is  given  of  those
days  on  which  there  was  to  be  "a  holy  convocation  "  of  the  peo-
ple ;  i.  e.,  on  which  the  people  were  to  be  called  together  for
public  worship,  and  the  Sabbath  is  the  first  given.  (5.)  The
command  is  constantly  repeated  that  the  people  should  be  faith-
fully instructed  out  of  the  law,  which  was  to  be  read  to  them  on
all  suitable  occasions.  To  give  opportunity  for  such  instruction
was  evidently  one  of  the  principal  objects  of  these  "  holy  convo-
cations." (Deut.  vi.  6,  7,  17-19  ;  Josh.  i.  8.)  This  instruction
of  the  people  was  made  the  special  duty  of  the  Levites  (Deut.
xxxiii.  10)  ;  and  of  the  priests.  (Lev.  x.  11,  comp.  Mai.  ii.  7.)
The  reading  of  the  law  was  doubtless  a  regular  part  of  the
service  on  all  the  days  on  which  the  people  were  solemnly  called
together  for  religious  worship.  Thus  in  Deuteronomy  xxxi.  11,
12,  we  read,  "  When  all  Israel  is  come  to  appear  before  the
LoED  thy  God  in  the  place  which  he  shall  choose,  thou  shalt
read  this  law  before  all  Israel  in  their  hearing.  Gather  the
people  together,  men,  and  women,  and  children,  and  thy  stranger
that  is  within  thy  gates,  that  they  may  hear,  and  that  they  may
learn,  and  fear  the  Lord  your  God,  and  observe  to  do  all  the
words  of  this  law."  Such  was  the  design  of  the  convocation  of
the  people.  We  know  from  the  New  Testament  that  the  Scrip-
tures were  read  every  Sabbath  in  the  synagogues  ;  and  the  syn-
agogues were  among  the  earliest  institutions  of  the  chosen  peo-
ple. 2  Kings  iv.  23,  at  least  proves  that  at  that  period  it  was
customary  for  the  people  to  resort  on  the  Sabbath  to  holy  men


§  8.]  THE    FOURTH   COMMANDMENT.  337

for  instruction.  In  Psalm  Ixxiv.  8,  it  is  said  of  the  heathen,
"  The}^  have  burned  up  all  the  synagogues  of  God  in  the  land."
The  word  here  rendered  "  synagogues,"  means  "  assemblies,"
but  burning  up  "  assemblies  "  can  only  mean  places  of  assembly ;
as  burning  up  churches,  in  our  mode  of  expression,  can  only
mean  the  edifices  where  churches  or  congregations  are  accus-
tomed to  assemble.  What  other  places  of  assembling  the  Psalm-
ist could  refer  to,  if  synagogues  did  not  then  exist,  it  is  hard
to  understand.  But  admitting  that  synagogues  were  not  com-
mon among  the  Jews  until  after  the  exile,  which  is  a  very  im-
probable supposition,  the  fact  that  reading  the  Scriptures  on
the  Sabbath  was  an  established  part  of  the  synagogue  service,
goes  far  to  prove  that  it  was  a  sabbatical  service  long  before  the
exile.  (6.)  The  place  of  the  fourth  command  in  the  decalogue  ;
the  stress  laid  upon  it  in  the  Old  Testament ;  the  way  in  which
it  is  spoken  of  in  tlie  prophets  ;  and  the  Psalms  appointed  to  be
used  on  that  day,  as  for  example  the  ninety-second,  all  show
that  the  day  was  set  apart  for  religious  duties  from  the  begm-
ning.  (7.)  This  may  also  be  argued  from  the  whole  character
of  the  old  dispensation.  All  its  institutions  were  religious  ;  they
were  all  intended  to  keep  alive  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God,
and  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  coming  of  Clirist.  It  would  be
entirely  out  of  keeping  with  the  spii'it  of  the  Mosaic  economy
to  assume  that  its  most  important  and  solemn  holy  day  was
purely  secular  in  its  design.^

It  is  admitted  that  the  precepts  of  the  decalogue  bind  the
Church  in  all  ages  ;  while  the  specific  details  contained  in  the
books  of  Moses,  designed  to  point  out  the  way  in  which  the  duty
they  enjoined  was  then  to  be  performed,  are  no  longer  in  force.
The  fifth  commandment  still  binds  children  to  obey  their  par-
ents ;  but  the  Jewish  law  giving  fathers  the  power  of  life  and
death  over  their  children,  is  no  longer  in  force.  The  seventh
commandment  forbids  adultery,  but  the  ordeal  enjoined  for  the
trial  of  a  woman  suspected  of  that  crime,  is  a  thing  of  the  past.
The  same  principle  applies  to  the  interpretation  of  the  fourth
commandment.     The  command  itself  is  still  in  force  ;  the  Mosaic

1  The  doctrine  that  the  Jewish  sabbath  was  simply  a  day  of  relaxation  from  labour,
was  advanced  among  Protestants  towards  the  close  of  the  seventeenth  century,  by  Selden,
in  his  work  De  Legibus  Hebraorum.  This  opinion  was  adopted  by  Vitringa  in  the  first
book  of  his  Obscrontwnes  Sacrce.  It  is  also  advocated  by  Biihr  in  his  Symb.  des  Mas.  Cul-
tus.  The  coutrary  doctrine  was  adopted  by  all  the  Reformers,  and  by  the  great  body  of
Christian  theologians;  and  is  ably  sustained  by  Hengstenberg  in  his  treatise  Ueber  den
Tag  des  Hcrrn,  pp.  29-41.  This  subject  is  discussed  in  the  January  number  of  the  Prince-
tun  Review  for  1831,  pp.  86-134.

VOL.  III.  22


3-38  PART  in.   ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

laws  respecting  the  mode  of  its  observance  have  passed  away
with  the  economy  to  which  they  belonged.  It  is  unjust  there-
fore to  represent  the  advocates  of  the  continued  obligation  of  the
fourth  commandment,  as  Judaizers.  They  are  no  more  Juda-
izers  than  those  who  hold  that  the  other  precepts  of  the  dec-
alogue are  still  in  force.

There  are  two  rules  by  which  we  are  to  be  guided  in  determin-
ing how  the  Sabbath  is  to  be  observed,  or  in  decidmg  what  is,
and  what  is  not  lawful  on  that  holy  day.  The  first  is,  the  design
of  the  commandment.  What  is  consistent  with  that  design  is
lawful ;  what  is  inconsistent  with  it,  is  unlawful.  The  second
rule  is  to  be  found  in  the  precepts  and  example  of  our  Lord  and
of  his  Apostles.  The  design  of  the  command  is  to  be  learned
from  the  words  in  which  it  is  conveyed  and  from  other  parts  of
the  word  of  God.  From  these  sources  it  is  plain  that  the  design
of  the  institution,  as  already  remarked,  was  in  the  main  twofold.
First,  to  secure  rest  from  all  worldly  cares  and  avocations  ;  to
arrest  for  a  time  the  current  of  the  worldly  life  of  men,  not  only
lest  their  minds  and  bodies  should  be  overworked,  but  also  that
opportmiity  should  be  afforded  for  other  and  higher  interests  to
occupy  their  thoughts.  And  secondly,  that  God  should  be  prop-
erly worshipped,  his  word  duly  studied  and  taught,  and  the  soul
brought  under  the  influence  of  the  tilings  unseen  and  eternal.
Any  man  who  makes  the  design  of  the  Sabbath  as  thus  revealed
in  Scripture  his  rule  of  conduct  on  that  day,  can  hardly  fail  in  its
due  observance.  The  day  is  to  be  kept  holy  unto  the  Lord.  In
Scriptural  usage  to  hallow  or  make  holy  is  to  set  apart  to  the
service  of  God.  Thus  the  tabernacle,  the  temple,  and  all  its
utensils  were  made  holy.  In  this  sense  the  Sabbath  is  holy.  It
is  to  be  devoted  to  the  duties  of  religion,  and  what  is  inconsistent
with  such  devotion,  is  contrary  to  the  design  of  the  institution.

It  is  however  to  be  remembered  that  the  specific  object  of  the
Christian  Sabbath  is  the  commemoration  of  the  resurrection  of
Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead.  All  the  exercises  of  the  day,  there-
fore, should  have  a  special  reference  to  Him  and  to  his  redeeming
work.  It  is  the  day  in  which  He  is  to  be  worshipped,  thanked,
and  praised ;  in  which  men  are  to  be  called  upon  to  accept  his
offers  of  grace,  and  to  rejoice  in  the  hope  of  his  salvation.  It  is
therefore  a  day  of  joy.  It  is  utterly  incongruous  to  make  it  a
day  of  gloom  or  fasting.  In  the  early  Church  men  were  forbid-
den to  pray  on  their  knees  on  that  day.  They  were  to  stand
erect,  exulting  in  the  accomplishment  of  the  work  of  God's  re-
deeming love.


§8.]  THE   FOURTH   COMMANDMENT.  339

The  second  rule  for  our  guidance  is  to  be  found  in  the  precepts
and  example  of  our  Lord.  In  the  fii-st  place,  He  lays  down  the
principle,  "  The  Sabbath  was  made  for  man,  and  not  man  for  the
Sabbath."  It  is  to  be  remarked  that  Christ  says,  "  the  Sabbath
was  made  for  man,"  not  for  the  Jews,  not  for  the  people  of  any
one  age  or  nation,  but  for  man  :  for  man  as  man,  and  therefore
for  all  men.  Moral  duties,  however,  often  conflict,  and  then  the
lower  must  yield  to  the  higher.  The  life,  the  health,  and  the
well-being  of  a  man  are  higher  ends  in  a  given  case,  than  the
punctilious  observance  of  any  external  service.  This  is  the  rule
laid  down  by  the  prophet  (Hosea  vi.  6)  :  "I  desired  mercy,  and
not  sacrifice  ;  and  the  knowledge  of  God  more  than  burnt  offer-
ing." This  passage  our  Lord  quotes  twice  in  application  to  the
law  of  the  Sabbath,  and  thus  establishes  the  general  principle
for  our  guidance,  that  it  is  right  to  do  on  the  Sabbath  whatever
mercy  or  a  due  regard  to  the  conrfort  or  welfare  of  ourselves  or
others  requires  to  be  done.  Christ,  therefore,  says  expressly,  "  It
is  la^\^ul  to  do  well  (/caAws  TToieii',  that  is,  as  the  context  shows,
to  confer  benefits)  on  the  Sabbath  days."  (Matt.  xii.  12.  See
also  jNIark  iii.  4.)

Again,  we  are  told  by  the  same  authority,  that  "  the  priests  in
the  temple  profane  the  Sabbath  and  are  blameless."  (Matt.  xii.  5.)
The  services  of  the  temple  Avere  complicated  and  laborious,  arid
yet  were  lawful  on  the  Sabbath.  On  another  occasion  He  said  to
his  accusers,  "  If  a  man  on  the  Sabbath  day  receive  circumcision,
that  the  law  of  Moses  should  not  be  broken  ;  are  ye  angry  at  me,
because  I  have  made  a  man  every  whit  whole  on  the  Sabbath
day  ?  Judge  not  according  to  the  appearance,  but  judge  right-
eous judgment."  (John  vii.  23,  -24.)  From  this  we  learn  that
whatever  is  necessary  for  the  due  celebration  of  religious  worship,
or  for  attendance  thereon,  is  lawful  on  the  Sabbath.

Again  in  Luke  xiv.  1-14,  we  read,  "  And  it  came  to  pass,  as
lie  went  into  the  house  of  one  of  the  chief  Pharisees,  to  eat  bread
on  the  Sabbath  day,  that  they  watched  him.  And,  behold,  there
was  a  certain  man  before  him,  which  had  the  dropsy.  And  Jesus
answering,  spake  unto  the  lawyers  and  Pharisees,  saying,  Is  it
lawful  to  heal  on  the  Sabbath  day  ?     And  they  held  their  peace.

And  lie  took  him,  and  healed  him,  and  let  him  go And

he  put  forth  a  parable  to  those  which  were  bidden,  when  he
marked  how  they  chose  out  the  chief  rooms  ;  saying  unto  them,"
etc.,  etc.  This  was  evidently  a  large  entertainment  to  which
guests  were  "  bidden."     Christ,  therefore,  thought  right,  in  the


340  PART  III.     Ch.   XIX.  — the   law.

prosecution  of  his  work,  to  attend  on  such  entertainments  on  the
Sabbath.

The  frequency  with  which  our  Lord  was  accused  of  Sabbath-
brealdng  by  the  Pharisees,  proves  that  his  mode  of  observing  that
day  was  very  different  from  theirs,  and  the  way  in  which  He
vindicated  himself  proves  that  He  regarded  the  Sabbath  as  a
divine  institution  of  perpetual  obligation.  It  had  been  easy  for
Him  to  say  that  the  law  of  the  Sabbath  was  no  longer  in  force  ;
that  He,  as  Lord  of  the  Sabbath,  erased  it  from  the  decalogue.
It  may  indeed  be  said  that  as  the  whole  of  the  Mosaic  law  was  in
force  until  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  or  until  the  day  of  Pente-
cost, the  observance  of  the  Sabbath  was  as  a  matter  of  course
then  obligatory,  and  therefore  that  Christ  so  regarded  it.  In
answer  to  this,  however,  it  is  obvious  to  remark,  that  Christ  did
not  hesitate  to  abrogate  those  of  the  laws  of  Moses  which  were
in  conflict  Avith  the  spirit  of  the  Gospel.  This  He  did  with  the
laws  relating  to  polygamy  and  divorce.  Under  the  old  dispen-
sation it  was  lawful  for  a  man  to  have  more  than  one  Avif e  ;  and
also  to  put  away  a  wife  by  giving  her  a  bill  of  divorcement.
Both  of  these  things  Christ  declared  should  not  be  allowed  under
the  Gospel.  The  fact  that  He  dealt  with  the  Sabbath  just  as  He
did  with  the  fifth,  sixth,  and  seventh  precepts  of  the  decalogue,
which  the  Pharisees  had  misinterpi-eted,  shows  that  He  regarded
the  fourth  commandment  as  belonging  to  the  same  category  as
the  others.  His  example  affords  us  a  safe  guide  as  to  the  way  in
which  the  day  is  to  be  observed.

The  Sunday  Laivs.

It  is  very  common,  especially  for  foreign-born  citizens,  to  object
to  all  laws  made  by  the  civil  governments  in  this  country  to  pre-
vent the  public  violation  of  the  Lord's  Day.  It  is  urged  that  as
there  is  in  the  United  States  an  entire  separation  of  the  Church
and  State,  it  is  contrary  to  the  genius  of  our  institutions,  that  the
observance  of  any  religious  institution  should  be  enforced  by  civil
laws.  It  is  further  objected  that  as  all  citizeiis  have  equal  rights
irrespective  of  their  religious  opinions,  it  is  an  infringement  of
those  rights  if  one  class  of  the  people  are  required  to  conform
their  conduct  to  the  religious  opinions  of  another  class.  Why
should  Jews,  INIohammedans,  or  infidels  be  required  to  respect
the  Christian  Sabbath  ?  Why  should  any  man,  who  has  no
faith  in  the  Sabbath  as  a  divine  institution,  be  prevented  from
doing  on  that  day  whatever  is  lawful  on  other  days  ?    If  the  State


§8.]  THE  FOURTH  COMMANDMENT.  341

may  require  the  people  to  respect  Sunday  as  a  day  of  rest,  why
niuy  it  not  require  the  people  to  obey  any  or  all  other  precepts
of  the  Bible  ?

State  of  the   Question.

It  is  conceded,  (1.)  That  in  every  free  country  every  man  has
equal  rights  with  his  fellow-citizens,  and  stands  on  the  same
ground  in  the  eye  of  the  law.  (2.)  That  in  the  United  States
no  form  of  religion  can  be  established ;  that  no  religious  test  for
the  exercise  of  the  elective  franchise  or  for  holding  of  office  can
be  imposed  ;  and  that  no  preference  can  be  given  to  the  members
of  one  religious  denomination  above  those  of  another.  (3.)  That
no  man  can  be  forced  to  contribute  to  the  support  of  any  church,
or  of  any  religious  institution.  (4.)  That  every  man  is  at  liberty
to  regulate  his  conduct  and  hfe  according  to  his  convictions  or
conscience,  provided  he  does  not  violate  the  law  of  the  land.

On  the  other  hand  it  is  no  less  true,  —

1.  That  a  nation  is  not  a  mere  conglomeration  of  individuals.
It  is  an  organized  body.  It  has  of  necessity  its  national  life,  its
national  organs,  national  principles  of  action,  national  character,
and  national  responsibility.

2.  In  every  free  country  the  government  must,  in  its  organ-
ization and  mode  of  action,  be  an  expression  of  the  mind  and  will
of  the  people.

3.  As  men  are  rational  creatures,  the  government  cannot
banish  all  sense  and  reason  from  their  action,  because  there  may
be  idiots  among  the  people.

4.  As  men  are  moral  beings,  it  is  impossible  that  the  govern-
ment should  act  as  though  there  were  no  distinction  between
right  and  wi"ong.  It  cannot  legalize  theft  and  murder.  No  mat-
ter how  much  it  might  enrich  itself  by  rapine  or  by  the  extermi-
nation of  other  nations,  it  would  deserve  and  receive  universal
condemnation  and  execration,  should  it  thus  set  at  nought  the
bonds  of  moral  obligation.  This  necessity  of  obedience  to  the
moral  law  on  the  part  of  civil  governments,  does  not  arise  from
the  fact  that  they  are  instituted  for  the  protection  of  the  hves,
rights,  and  property  of  the  people.  Why  have  our  own  and  other
Christian  nations  proiiounced  the  slave-trade  piracy  and  punish-
able with  death "?  Not  because  it  interferes  with  the  rights  or
liberty  of  their  citizens  but  because  it  is  wicked.  Cruelty  to
animals  is  visited  with  civil  penalties,  not  on  the  principle  of  profit
and  loss,  but  because  it  is  a  violation  of  the  moral  law.     As  it  is


842  PART  m.   Ch.  xtx.  — the  law.

impossible  for  the  individual  man  to  disregard  all  moral  obliga-
tions, it  is  no  less  impossible  on  the  part  of  civil  governments.

5.  Men  moreover  are  religious  beings.  They  can  no  more
ignore  that  element  of  their  nature  than  their  reason  or  their
conscience.  It  is  no  matter  what  they  may  say,  or  may  pretend
to  think,  the  law  which  binds  them  to  allegiance  to  God,  is  just
as  inexorable  as  the  law  of  gravitation.  They  can  no  more
emancipate  themselves  from  the  one  than  they  can  from  the  other.
^Morality  concerns  their  duty  to  their  fellow-men;  religion  con-
cerns their  duty  to  God.  The  latter  binds  the  conscience  as
much  as  the  former.  It  attends  the  man  everywhere.  It  must
influence  his  conduct  as  an  individual,  as  the  head  of  a  family,  as
a  man  of  business,  as  a  legislator,  and  as  an  executive  officer.
It  is  absurd  to  say  that  civil  governments  have  nothing  to  do
with  religion.  That  is  not  true  even  of  a  fire  company,  or  of  a
manufactory,  or  of  a  banking-house.  The  religion  embraced  by
the  individuals  composing  these  associations  must  influence  their
corporate  action,  as  well  as  their  individual  conduct.  If  a  man
may  not  blaspheme,  a  publishing  firm  may  not  print  and  dis-
seminate a  blasphemous  book.  A  civil  government  cannot  ignore
religion  any  more  than  physiology.  It  was  not  constituted  to
teach  either  the  one  or  the  other,  but  it  must,  by  a  like  necessity,
conform  its  action  to  the  laws  of  both.  Indeed  it  would  be  far
safer  for  a  government  to  pass  an  act  violating  the  laws  of  health,
than  one  violating  the  religious  convictions  of  its  citizens.  The
one  would  be  unwise,  the  other  would  be  tj-rannical.  Men  put
up  with  folly,  with  more  patience  than  they  do  with  injustice.
It  is  vain  for  the  potsherds  of  the  earth  to  contend  \vith  their
Maker.  They  must  submit  to  the  laws  of  their  nature  not  only
as  sentient,  but  also  as  moral  and  religious  beings.  And  it  is
time  that  blatant  atheists,  whether  communists,  scientists,  or  phi-
losophers, should  know  that  they  are  as  much  and  as  justly  the
objects  of  pity  and  contempt,  as  of  indignation  to  all  right-minded
men.  By  right-minded  men,  is  meant  men  who  think,  feel,  and
act  according  to  the  laws  of  their  nature.  Those  laws  are  or-
dained, administered,  and  enforced  by  God,  and  there  is  no  escape
from  their  obligation,  or  from  the  penalties  attached  to  their
violation.

6.  The  people  of  this  country  being  rational,  moral,  and  relig-
ious beings,  the  government  must  be  administered  on  the  prin-
ciples of  reason,  morality,  and  rehgion.  By  a  like  necessity  of  right,
the  people   being  Christians  and   Protestants,  the    government


§8.]  THE   FOURTH   COMMANDMENT.  343

^nust  be  administered  according  to  the  principles  of  Protestant
Christianity.  By  this  is  not  meant  that  the  government  should
teach  Christianity,  or  make  the  profession  of  it  a  condition  of
citizenship,  or  a  test  for  office.  Nor  does  it  mean  that  the  govern-
ment is  called  upon  to  punish  every  violation  of  Christian  prin-
ciple or  precept.  It  is  not  called  upon  to  punish  every  violation
of  the  moral  law.  But  as  it  cannot  violate  the  moral  law  in  its
own  action,  or  require  the  people  to  violate  it,  so  neither  can  it
ignore  Christianity  in  its  official  action.  It  cannot  require  the
people  or  any  of  its  own  officers  to  do  what  Christianity  forbids,
nor  forbid  their  doing  anything  which  Christianity  enjoins.  It
has  no  more  right  to  forbid  that  the  Bible  should  be  taught  in  the
pubhc  schools,  than  it  has  to  enjoin  that  the  Koran  should  be
taught  in  them.  If  Christianity  requires  that  one  day  in  seven
should  be  a  day  of  rest  from  all  worldly  avocations,  the  govern-
ment of  a  Christian  people  cannot  require  any  class  of  the  com-
munity or  its  o^vn  officers  to  labour  on  that  day,  except  in  cases
of  necessity  or  mercy.  Should  it,  on  the  ground  that  it  had
nothing  to  do  with  religion,  disregard  that  day,  and  direct  that
the  custom-houses,  the  courts  of  law,  and  the  legislative  halls
should  be  open  on  the  Lord's  Day,  and  public  business  be  trans-
acted as  on  other  days,  it  would  be  an  act  of  tyranny,  wliich
would  justify  rebellion.  It  would  be  tantamount  to  enacting  that
no  Christian  should  hold  any  office  under  the  government,  or  have
any  share  in  making  or  administering  the  laws  of  the  country.
The  nation  would  be  in  complete  subjection  to  a  handful  of  im-
ported atheists  and  infidels.

Proof  that  this  is  a  Christian  and  Protestant  Nation.

The  proposition  that  the  United  States  of  America  are  a  Chris-
tian and  Protestant  nation,  is  not  so  much  the  assertion  of  a  prin-
ciple as  the  statement  of  a  fact.  That  fact  is  not  simply  that  the
great  majority  of  the  people  are  Christians  and  Pi'otestants,  but
that  the  organic  life,  the  institutions,  laws,  and  official  action  of
the  government,  whether  that  action  be  legislative,  judicial,  or  ex-
ecutive, is,  and  of  right  should  be,  and  in  fact  must  be,  in  accord-
ance with  the  principles  of  Protestant  Christianity.

1.  This  is  a  Christian  and  Protestant  nation  in  the  sense  stated
in  virtue  of  a  universal  and  necessary  law.  If  you  plant  an
acorn,  you  get  an  oak.  If  you  plant  a  cedar,  you  get  a  cedar.  If
a  country  be  settled  by  Pagans  or  Mohammedans,  it  develops  into
a  Pagan  or  Mohammedan  community.     By  the  same  law,  if  a


3-U  PART  III.     Ch.   XIX. —  the   law.

country  be  taken  possession  of  and  settled  by  Protestant  Chris-
tians, the  nation  which  they  come  to  constitute  must  be  Protes-
tant and  Christian.  This  country  was  settled  by  Protestants.
For  the  first  hundred  years  of  our  history  they  constituted  almost
the  only  element  of  our  population.  As  a  matter  of  course  they
were  governed  by  their  religion  as  individuals,  in  their  families,
and  in  all  their  associations  for  business,  and  for  municipal,  state,
and  national  government.  This  was  just  as  much  a  matter  of
necessity  as  that  they  should  act  morally  in  all  these  different
relations.

2.  It  is  a  historical  fact  that  Protestant  Christianity  is  the  law
of  the  land,  and  has  been  from  the  beginning.  As  the  great  ma-
jority of  the  early  settlers  of  the  country  were  from  Great  Britain,
they  decla];ed  that  the  common  law  of  England  should  be  the  law
here.  But  Christianity  is  the  basis  of  the  common  law  of  Eng-
land, and  is  therefore  of  the  law  of  this  country ;  and  so  our  courts
have  repeatedly  decided.  It  is  so  not  merely  because  of  such  de-
cisions. Courts  cannot  reverse  facts.  Protestant  Christianity  has
been,  is,  and  must  be  the  law  of  the  land.  Whatever  Protestant
Christianity  forbids,  the  law  of  the  land  (^vitliin  its  sphere,  ^.  e.,
within  the  sphere  in  which  civil  authority  may  appropriately  act)
forbids.  Christianity  forbids  polygamy  and  arbitrary  divorce,  so
does  the  civil  law.  Romanism  forbids  divorce  even  on  the  ground
of  adultery  ;  Protestantism  admits  it  on  that  ground.  The  laws
of  all  the  states  conform  in  this  matter  to  the  Protestant  rule.
Christianity  forbids  all  unnecessary  labour,  or  the  transaction  of
worldly  business,  on  the  Lord's  Day  ;  that  day  accordingly  is  a
dies  non,  throughout  the  land.  No  contract  is  binding,  made  on
that  day.  Xo  debt  can  be  collected  on  the  Christian  Sabbath.  If  a
man  hires  himself  for  any  service  by  the  month  or  year,  he  cannot
be  required  to  labour  on  that  day.  All  public  offices  are  closed,
and  all  official  business  is  suspended.  From  j\Iaine  to  Georgia,
from  ocean  to  ocean,  one  day  in  the  week,  by  the  law  of  God  and
by  the  law  of  the  land,  the  people  rest.

Tills  controlUng  Influence  of  Christianity  is  Reasonable  and  Might.

It  is  in  accordance  with  analogy.  If  a  man  goes  to  China,  he
expects  to  find  the  government  administered  according  to  the
rehgion  of  the  country.  If  he  goes  to  Turkey,  he  expects  to  find
the  Koran  supreme  and  regulating  all  public  action.  If  he  goes
to  a  Protestant  country,  he  has  no  right  to  complain,  should  he
find  the  Bible  in  the  ascendancy  and  exerting  its  benign  influence
not  only  on  the  people,  but  also  on  the  government.


§  8.]  THE  FOURTH  COI^IMANDMENT.  345

The  principle  that  the  religion  of  a  people  rightfully  controls
the  action  of  the  government,  has  of  course  its  limitation.  If  the
religion  itself  be  evil  and  require  what  is  morally  wrong,  then  as
men  cannot  have  the  right  to  act  wickedly,  it  is  plain  that  it
would  be  wrong  for  the  government  to  conform  to  its  requirements.
If  a  religion  should  enjoin  infanticide,  or  the  murder  of  the  aged
or  infirm,  neither  the  people  nor  the  government  should  conform
their  conduct  to  its  laws.  But  where  the  religion  of  a  people  re-
quires nothing  unjust  or  cruel  or  in  any  way  immoral,  then  those
who  come  to  live  where  it  prevails  are  bound  to  submit  quietly  to
its  controlling  the  laws  and  institutions  of  the  country.

The  principle  contended  for  is  recognized  in  all  other  depart-
ments of  life.  If  a  number  of  Christian  men  associate  themselves
as  a  manufacturing  or  banldng  company,  it  would  be  competent  for
them  to  admit  unbelievers  in  Christianity  into  their  association,
and  to  allow  them  their  full  share  in  its  management  and  control.
But  it  would  be  utterly  unreasonable  for  such  unbelievers  to  set
up  a  cry  of  religious  persecution,  or  of  infringement  of  their  rights
and  hberty,  because  all  the  business  of  the  company  was  suspended
upon  the  Lord's  Day.  These  new  members  knew  the  character
and  principles  of  those  with  whom  they  sought  to  be  associated.
They  knew  that  Christians  would  assert  their  right  to  act  as
Christians.  To  require  them  to  renounce  their  religion  would  be
simply  preposterous.

When  Protestant  Christians  came  to  this  country  they  possessed
and  subdued  the  land.  They  worshipped  God,  and  his  Son  Jesus
Christ  as  the  Saviour  of  the  world,  and  acknowledged  the  Scrip-
tures to  be  the  rule  of  their  faith  and  practice.  They  introduced
their  religion  into  their  families,  their  schools,  and  their  colleges.
They  abstained  from  all  ordinary  business  on  the  Lord's  Day,  and
devoted  it  to  religion.  They  built  churches,  erected  school-houses,
and  taught  their  children  to  read  the  Bible  and  to  receive  and
obey  it  as  the  word  of  God.  They  formed  themselves  as  Chris-
tians into  municipal  and  state  organizations.  They  acknowledged
God  in  their  legislative  assemblies.  They  prescribed  oaths  to  be
taken  in  his  name.  They  closed  their  courts,  their  places  of  busi-
ness, their  legislatures,  and  all  places  under  the  public  control,  on
the  Lord's  Day.  They  declared  Christianity  to  be  part  of  the  com-
mon law  of  the  land.  In  the  process  of  time  thousands  have  come
among  us,  who  are  neither  Protestants  nor  Christians.  Some  are
papists,  some  Jews,  some  infidels,  and  some  atheists.  All  are  wel-
comed ;  all  are  admitted  to  equal  rights  and  privileges.    All  are


346  PART  m.   Ch.  XIX.  — the  laav.

allowed  to  acquire  property,  and  to  vote  in  every  election,  made
eligible  to  all  ofl&ces,  and  invested  with  equal  influence  in  all  pub-
lic affairs.  All  are  allowed  to  worship  as  they  please,  or  not  to
worship  at  all,  if  they  see  fit.  No  man  is  molested  for  his  religion
or  for  his  want  of  religion.  No  man  is  required  to  profess  any
form  of  faith,  or  to  join  any  religious  association.  More  than  this
cannot  reasonably  be  demanded.  More,  however,  is  demanded.
The  infidel  demands  that  the  government  should  be  conducted  on
the  principle  that  Christianity  is  false.  The  atheist  demands  that
it  should  be  conducted  on  the  assumption  that  there  is  no  God,
and  the  positivist  on  the  principle  that  men  are  not  free  agents.
The  sufficient  answer  to  all  this  is,  that  it  cannot  possibly  be
done.

The  Demands  of  Infidels  are  Unjust.

The  demands  of  those  who  require  that  religion,  and  especially
Christianity,  should  be  ignored  in  our  national,  state,  and  muni-
cipal laws,  are  not  only  unreasonable,  but  they  are  in  the  high-
est degree  mijust  and  tyrannical.  It  is  a  condition  of  service  in
connection  with  any  railroad  which  is  operated  on  Smidays,  that
the  employee  be  not  a  Christian.  If  Chi-istianity  is  not  to  con-
trol the  action  of  our  municipal,  state,  and  general  governments,
then  if  elections  be  ordered  to  be  held  on  the  Lord's  Day,  Chris-
tians cannot  vote.  If  all  the  business  of  the  country  is  to  go  on,
on  that  as  on  other  days,  no  Christian  can  hold  office.  We
should  thus  have  not  a  religious,  but  an  anti-religious  test-act.
Such  is  the  free-thinker's  idea  of  liberty.^  But  still  further,  if
Christianity  is  not  to  control  the  laws  of  the  country,  then  as
monogamy  is  a  purely  Christian  institution,  we  can  have  no
laws  against  polygamy,  arbitrary  divorce,  or  "  free  love."  AU
this  must  be  yielded  to  the  anti-Christian  party  ;  and  consistency
will  demand  that  we  yield  to  the  atheists,  the  oath  and  the
decalogue  ;  and  all  the  rights  of  citizenship  must  be  coiffined  to
blasphemers.  Since  the  fall  of  Lucifer,  no  such  tyrant  has  been
made  known  to  men  as  August  Comte,  the  atheist.  If,  there-
fore, any  man  wishes  to  antedate  perdition,  he  has  nothing  to  do
but  to  become  a  free-thinker  and  join  in  the  shout,  "  Civil  gov-
ernment has  nothing  to  do  with  religion ;  and  religion  has
nothing  to  do  with  civil  government."

1  A  free-thinker  is  a  man  whose  understanding  is  emancipated  from  his  conscience.  It
IS  therefore  natural  for  him  to  wish  to  see  civil  government  emancipated  from  religion.


§8.1  THE   FOUKTH  COMMANDMENT.  347

Conclusion.

We  are  bound,  therefore,  to  insist  upon  the  maintenance  and
faithful  execution  of  the  laws  enacted  for  the  protection  of  the
Christian  Sabbath.  Christianity  does  not  teach  that  men  can
be  made  religious  by  law ;  nor  does  it  demand  that  men  should  be
required  by  the  civil  authority  to  profess  any  particular  form  of
religious  doctrine,  or  to  attend  upon  religious  services ;  but  it
does  enjoin  that  men  should  abstain  from  all  unnecessary  worldly
avocations  on  the  Lord's  Day.  This  civil  Sabbath,  this  cessation
from  worldly  business,  is  what  the  civil  government  in  Christian
countries  is  called  upon  to  enforce.  (1.)  Because  it  is  the  right
of  Christians  to  be  allowed  to  rest  on  that  day,  which  they  can-
not do,  Avithout  forfeiting  their  citizenship,  unless  all  pubHc  busi-
ness be  arrested  on  that  day.  (2.)  Because  such  rest  is  the
command  of  God  ;  and  this  command  binds  the  conscience  as  much
as  any  other  command  in  the  decalogue.  So  far  as  the  point  in
hand  is  concerned,  it  matters  not  whether  such  be  the  command
of  God  or  not ;  so  long  as  the  people  beheve  it,  it  binds  their  con-
science ;  and  this  conscientious  belief  the  government  is  bound  to
respect,  and  must  act  accordingly.  (3.)  Because  the  civil  Sabbath
is  necessary  for  the  preservation  of  our  free  institutions,  and  of
the  good  order  of  society.  The  indispensable  condition  of  social
order  is  either  despotic  power  in  the  magistrate,  or  good  morals
among  the  people.  Morality  without  religion  is  impossible ;
religion  cannot  exist  without  knowledge ;  knowledge  cannot  be
disseminated  among  the  people,  imless  there  be  a  class  of
teachers,  and  time  allotted  for  their  instruction.  Christ  has
made  all  his  ministers,  teachers ;  He  has  commanded  them  to
teach  all  nations  ;  He  has  appointed  one  day  in  seven  to  be  set
apart  for  such  instruction.  It  is  a  historical  fact  that  since  the
introduction  of  Christianity,  nine  tenths  of  the  people  have
derived  the  greater  part  of  their  religious  knowledge  from  the
services  of  the  sanctuary.  If  the  Sabbath,  therefore,  be  abol-
ished, the  fountain  of  life  for  the  people  will  be  sealed.^

Hengstenberg,  after  referring  to  the  authority  of  the  Church
and  other  grounds,  for  the  observance  of  the  Lord's  Day,  closes

i  The  Sabbath  and  Free  Institutions.  A  paper  read  before  the  National  Sabbath  Con-
vention, Saratoga,  August  13,  1863,  by  the  Rev.  Mark  Hopkins,  D.  D.,  President  of
Williams  College,  Mass.  See  also  an  able  article  from  the  pen  of  the  Rev.  Joshua  H.
Mcllvaine,  D.  D.,  entitled,  "A  Nation's  Right  to  Worship  God,"  in  the  Princeton  Rev! ,  ■■
Sor  October,  1859;  also  the  article  on  "  Sunday  Laws,"  in  the  same  number  of  that
journal.


PART  III.     Ch.   XIX.  — the   law.

his  discusidon  of  tlie  subject  with  these  words :  "  Thank  God
tliese  are  only  the  outworks ;  the  real  fortress  is  the  command
that  sounded  out  from  Sinai,  with  the  other  divine  commands
therewith  connected,  as  preparatory,  confirmatory,  or  explana-
tory. The  institution  was  far  too  important,  and  the  tempta-
tions too  powerful,  that  the  sohd  ground  of  Scriptural  command
could  be  dispensed  ^vith.  ...  It  is  as  plain  as  day  that  the
obligation  of  the  Old  Testament  command  instead  of  being  les-
sened is  increased.  This  follows  of  course  from  the  fact  that  the
redemption  through  Christ  is  infinitely  more  glorious  than  the
deliverance  of  the  Israelites  out  of  Egypt,  which  in  the  preface
to  the  Ten  Commandments  is  referred  to  as  a  special  motive  to
obedience.  No  ingratitude  is  blacker  than  refusing  to  obey  Him
who  for  our  sakes  gave  up  his  only  begotten  Son."-^  He  had  said
before  that  the  Sabbath  "  rests  on  the  unalterable  necessities  of
our  nature,  inasmuch  as  men  inevitably  become  godless  if  the
cares  and  labours  of  their  earthly  life  be  not  regularly  inter-
rupted." 2

§  9.     The  Fifth  Commandment.
Its  Design.

The  general  principle  of  duty  enjoined  in  this  commandment,
is  that  we  should  feel  and  act  in  a  becoming  manner  towards
our  superiors.  It  matters  not  in  what  their  superiority  consists,
whether  in  age,  office,  power,  knowledge,  or  excellence.  There
are  certain  feelings,  and  a  certam  line  of  conduct  due  to  those
who  are  over  us,  for  that  very  reason,  determined  and  modified
in  each  case  by  the  degree  and  nature  of  that  superiority.  To
superiors  are  due,  to  each  according  to  the  relation  in  which  he
stands  to  us,  reverence,  obedience,  and  gratitude.  The  ground
of  this  obligation  is  to  be  found,  (1.)  In  the  will  of  God,  who  has
enjoined  this  duty  upon  all  rational  creatures.  (2.)  In  the
nature  of  the  relation  itself.  Superiority  supposes,  in  some  form
or  degree,  on  the  part  of  the  inferior,  dependence  and  indebted-
ness, and  therefore  calls  for  reverence,  gratitude,  and  obedience ;
and,  (3.)  In  expediency,  as  the  moral  order  of  the  divine  gov-
ermnent  and  of  human  society  depend  upon  this  due  submis-
sion to  authority.

In  the  case  of  God,  as  his  superiority  is  infinite  the  submission
of  his  creatures  must  be  absolute.  To  Him  we  owe  adoration
or  the   profoundest   reverence,  the  most  fervent  gi-atitude,  and

1  Utber  den  Ta</  (its  IJerrn,  Berlin,  1852,  pp.  92-94.  2  md.  p.  40.


§9.]  THE   FIFTH   COMMANDMENT.  349

implicit  obedience.  The  fifth  commandment,  however,  concerns
our  duty  to  our  fellow-creatures.  First  in  order  and  in  impor-
tance is  the  duty  of  children  to  their  parents,  hence  the  general
duty  is  embodied  in  the  specific  command,  "  Honour  thy  father
and  thy  mother."

The  Filial  Relation.

When  a  child  is  born  into  the  world  it  is  entirely  helpless  and
dependent.  As  it  derives  its  existence  from  its  parents,  so  it
would  immediately  perish  ^^^thout  their  assiduous  and  constant
care.  The  parents  are  not  only  its  superiors  in  knowledge,  in
power,  and  in  every  other  attribute  of  humanity  ;  but  they  are
also  the  proximate  source  of  all  good  to  the  child.  They  protect,
cherish,  feed,  clothe,  educate,  and  endow  it.  All  the  good  be-
stowed, is  bestowed  disinterestedly.  Self  is  constantly  sacrificed.
The  love  of  parents  to  their  children  is  mysterious  and  immutable,
as  well  as  self-sacrificing.  It  is  a  form  of  love  which  none  but  a
parent  can  know.  A  mother's  love  is  a  mystery  and  a  wonder.
It  is  the  most  perfect  analogue  of  the  love  of  God.

As  the  relation  in  which  parents  stand  to  their  children  has
this  close  analogy  to  the  relation  in  which  God  stands  to  his
rational  creatures,  and  especially  to  his  own  people,  so  the  duties
resulting  from  that  relation  are  analogous.  They  are  expressed
by  the  same  word.  Filial  piety  is  as  correct  an  expression  as  it
is  common.  Parents  stand  to  their  dependent  children,  so  to
speak,  in  the  place  of  God.  They  are  the  natural  objects  of  the
child's  love,  reverence,  gratitude,  confidence,  and  devotion.  These
are  the  sentiments  which  naturally  flow  out  of  the  relation ;  and
which  in  all  ordinary  cases  do  flow  from  it ;  so  that  Calvin  is  jus-
tified in  saying  that  children  destitute  of  these  feehngs,  "  monstra
sunt  non  homines."  This  endearing  and  intimate  relation  be-
tween parents  and  children  (which  cannot  exist  where  monog-
amy is  not  the  law),  binding  ail  in  the  closest  union  which  can
exist  among  men,  makes  the  family  the  corner-stone  of  the  well-
being  of  society  on  earth,  and  the  type  of  the  blessedness  of
heaven.  The  Church  is  the  family  of  God.  He  is  the  Father,
its  members  are  bretln-en.

While  the  relative  duties  of  parents  and  children  must  be
everywhere  and  always  essentially  the  same,  yet  they  are  more  or
less  modified  by  varying  conditions  of  society.  There  are  laws
on  this  subject  in  the  Bible,  which  being  intended  for  the  state  of
tilings  existmg  before  the  coming  of  Christ,  are  no  longer  binding


350  PART  in.   ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

upon  us.  It  was  unavoidable  in  the  patriarchal  state  of  society,
and  especially  in  its  nomadic  state,  that  the  father  of  a  family
should  be  at  once  father,  magistrate,  and  priest.  And  it  was
natural  and  right  that  many  of  the  parental  prerogatives  neces-
sary in  such  a  state  of  society,  should  be  retained  in  the  tempo-
rary and  transition  state  organized  under  the  Mosaic  institutions.
We  find  accordingly  that  the  laws  of  Moses  invested  parents
with  powers  which  can  no  longer  properly  belong  to  them ;  and
sustained  parental  authority  by  penal  enactments  which  are  no
longer  necessary.  Thus  it  was  ordered,  "  He  that  curseth  (or
revileth,  Septuagint  o  Ka/<(AoyaJr,  Vulgate  '  qui  maledixerit ')  his
father  or  his  mother  shall  surely  be  put  to  death."  (Exod.  xxi.
17.)  In  the  fifteenth  verse  of  the  same  chapter  it  is  said,  "  He
that  smiteth  his  father  or  his  mother,  shall  be  surely  put  to
death."  (Compare  Deut.  xxvii.  16  ;  Prov.  xx.  20  ;  Matt.  xv.  4.)
It  may  be  remarked  here,  in  passing,  that  our  Lord's  comment  on
this  commandment  given  in  Matthew  xv.  4-6,  shows  that  the
honouring  of  their  parents  required  of  children,  does  not  mean
simply  the  cherishing  right  feelings  towards  them,  but  as  well
the  ministering  to  their  support  when  necessary.  Christ  said  to
the  Pharisees,  "  God  commanded,  saying.  Honour  thy  father  and
mother  ;  .  .  .  .  but  ye  say.  Whosoever  shall  say  to  his  father
or  his  mother.  It  is  a  gift  (consecrated  to  God),  by  whatsoever
thou  mightest  be  profited  by  me,  and  honour  not  his  father  or
his  mother,  he  shall  be  free."  That  is,  the  Pharisees  taught  that
a  son  might  evade  the  obligation  to  honour,  ^.  e.,  to  support  his
father  or  mother,  by  saying  that  his  property  was  consecrated  to
God.

The  Mosaic  law  also  enacted  that  "  If  a  man  have  a  stubborn
and  rebellious  son,  which  will  not  obey  the  voice  of  his  father,  or
the  voice  of  his  mother,  and  that,  when  they  have  chastened  him,
will  not  hearken  unto  them ;  then  shall  his  father  and  his  mother
lay  hold  on  him,  and  bring  him  out  unto  the  elders  of  his  city,
and  unto  the  gates  of  his  place  :  and  they  shall  say  unto  the  elders
of  his  city.  This  our  son  is  stubborn  and  rebellious  ;  he  will  not
obey  our  voice  ;  he  is  a  glutton,  and  a  drunkard.  And  all  the
men  of  the  city  shall  stone  him  with  stones,  that  he  die."  (Deut.
xxi.  18-21.)

Fathers  under  the  old  economy  had  the  right  to  choose  wives
for  their  sons  and  to  give  their  daughters  in  marriage.  (Gen.
xxiv. ;  Ex.  xxi.  9  ;  Judges  xiv.  2  ;  Gen.  xxix.  18  ;  xxxiv.  12.)
Children  also  were  liable  to  be  sold  to  satisfy  the  debts  of  their


§  9.]  THE   FIFTH   COMMANDMENT.  3*1

fathers,  (Levit.  xxv.  39-41  ;  2  Kings  iv.  1 ;  Is.  1.  1 ;  Matt,
xviii.  25.)  These  judicial  enactments  have  passed  away.  They
serve  to  prove,  however,  how  intimate  in  the  sight  of  God  is  the
relation  between  parents  and  children.  A  father's  benediction
was  coveted  as  the  greatest  blessing ;  and  his  curse  deprecated
as  a  fearful  evil.     (Gen.  xxvii.  4,  12,  34-38  ;   xlix.  2  fp.)

In  tlie  New  Testament  the  duty  enjoined  in  the  j&fth  com-
mandment is  frequently  recognized  and  enforced.  Our  blessed
Lord  himself  was  subject  to  his  parents.  (Luke  ii.  51.)  The
Apostle  commands  children  to  obey  their  parents  in  the  Lord
(Eph.  vi.  1),  and  to  obey  them  in  all  things,  for  this  is  well  pleas-
ing unto  the  Lord.  (Col.  iii.  20.)  This  obedience  is  to  be  not
only  religious,  but  specifically  Christian,  as  the  word  Lord,  in
Ephesians  vi.  1,  refers  to  Christ.  This  is  plain  because  in  ch.  v.  21,
the  Apostle  says  that  these  specific  duties  are  to  be  performed
"  in  the  fear  of  Christ ;  "  ^  because  the  Lord  is  always  in  the  New
Testament  to  be  understood  of  Christ,  unless  the  context  forbids ;
and  because  especially  throughout  these  chapters  Lord  and  Christ
are  interchanged,  so  that  it  is  evident  that  both  words  refer  to
the  same  person.  Children  are  reqviired  to  obey  their  parents  in
the  Lord,  i.  e.,  as  a  religious  duty,  as  part  of  the  obedience  due
to  the  Lord.  They  are  to  obey  them  "  in  all  things  ;  "  ^.  e.,  in
all  things  falling  ^vithin  the  sphere  of  parental  authority.  God
has  never  committed  unlimited  power  to  the  hands  of  men.  The
limitations  of  parental  authority  are  determined  partly  by  the
nature  of  the  relation,  partly  by  the  Scriptures,  and  partly  by
the  state  of  society  or  the  law  of  the  land.  The  nature  of  the
relation  supposes  that  parents  are  to  be  obeyed  as  parents,  out  of
gratitude  and  love ;  and  that  their  will  is  to  be  consulted  and  re-
spected even  where  their  decisions  are  not  final.  They  are  not
to  be  obeyed  as  magistrates,  as  though  they  were  invested  with
the  power  to  make  or  to  administer  civil  laws  ;  nor  yet  as  proph-
ets or  priests.  They  are  not  lords  of  the  conscience.  They  can-
not control  our  faith  or  determine  for  us  questions  of  duty  so  as
to  exonerate  us  from  personal  obligation.  Being  a  service  of  love,
it  does  not  admit  of  strictly  defined  boundaries.  Children  are  to
conform  to  the  wishes  and  to  be  controlled  by  the  judgments  of
their  parents,  in  all  cases  where  such  submission  does  not  conflict
with  higher  obligations.

1  The  common  text  indeed  in  Ephesians  v.  21,  has  ©eoO,  but  the  authority  of  the  MSS.
is  so  decidedly  in  favour  of  Xpto-roO  tliat  that  reading  is  almost  universally  adopted  by
editors  and  commentators.


352  PART  III.     Ch.   XIX.  — the   law.

The  Scriptural  rule  is  simple  and  comprehensive.  It  does  not
go  into  unnecessary  details.  It  prescribes  the  general  rule  of
obedience.  The  exceptions  to  that  rule  must  be  such  as  justify
themselves  to  a  divinely  enlightened  conscience,  i.  e.,  a  conscience
enlightened  by  the  Word  and  Spirit  of  God.  The  general  prin-
ciple given  in  the  Bible  in  all  such  cases  is,  "  It  is  right  to  obey
God  rather  than  man."

The  Promise.
This  commandment  has  a  special  promise  attached  to  it.  This
promise  has  a  theocratical  form  as  it  stands  in  the  decalogue,
"  That  thy  days  may  be  long  upon  the  land  which  the  Lord  thy
God  giveth  thee."  The  Apostle,  in  Ephesians  vi.  3,  by  leaving
out  the  last  clause  generalizes  it,  so  that  it  applies  to  no  one  land
or  people,  but  to  obedient  children  everywhere.  The  promise  an-
nounces the  general  purpose  of  God  and  a  general  principle  of  his
providential  government.  "  The  hand  of  the  diligent  maketh
rich,"  that  is  the  general  rule,  which  is  not  invalidated  if  here
and  there  a  diligent  man  remams  poor.  It  is  well  with  obedient
children  ;  they  prosper  in  the  world.  Such  is  the  fact,  and  such
is  the  divine  promise.  The  family  being  the  corner-stone  of  so-
cial order  and  prosperity,  it  follows  that  those  families  are  blessed
in  which  God's  plan  and  purpose  are  most  fully  carried  out  and
reahzed.

Parental  Duties.

As  children  are  bound  to  honour  and  obey  their  parents,  so
parents  have  duties  no  less  important  in  reference  to  their  chil-
dren. These  duties  are  summarily  expressed  by  the  Apostle  in
Ephesians  vi.  4,  first  in  a  negative,  and  then  in  a  positive  form.
"  Ye  fathers  provoke  not  your  children  to  wi-ath."  This  is  what
they  are  not  to  do.  They  are  not  to  excite  the  bad  passions  of
their  children  by  anger,  severity,  injustice,  partiality,  or  any  un-
due exercise  of  authority.-  This  is  a  great  evil.  It  is  sowing
tares  instead  of  wheat  in  a  fruitful  soil.  The  positive  part  of
parental  duty  is  expressed  by  the  comprehensive  direction,  "  but
bring  them  up  in  the  nurture  (-atoeia)  and  admonition  (vovi9eo-ta)
of  the  Lord."  The  former  of  these  words  is  comprehensive,  the
latter  specific.  The  one  expresses  the  whole  process  of  education
t  or  training  ;  the  other  the  special  duty  of  warning  and  correction.
The  "  nurture  and  admonition  "  is  to  be  Christian  ;  that  is,  not
only  such  as  Christ  approves  and  enjoins,  but  which  is  truly  his,


§9.J  THE  FIFTH  COIOIANDMENT.  353

i.  e.,  that  whicli  He  exercises  by  his  word  and  Spirit  through  the
j)arent  as  his  organ.  "  Christ  is  represented  as  exercising  this
nurture  and  admonition,,  in  so  far  as  He  by  his  Spirit  influences
and  controls  the  parent."  ^  According  to  the  Apostle,  this  re-
hgious  or  Christian  element  is  essential  in  the  education  of  the
young.  Man  has  a  religious  as  well  as  an  intellectual  nature.
To  neglect  the  former  would  be  as  unreasonable  as  to  neglect  the
latter  and  make  all  education  a  matter  of  mere  physical  training.
We  must  act  in  accordance  with  facts.  It  is  a  fact  that  men
have  a  moral  and  religious  nature.  It  is  a  fact  that  if  their  moral
and  religious  feelings  are  enlightened  and  properly  developed,  they
become  upright,  useful,  and  happy  ;  on  the  other  hand,  if  these
elements  of  their  nature  are  uncultivated  or  perverted,  they  be-
come degraded,  miserable,  and  wicked.  It  is  a  fact  that  this  de-
partment of  our  nature  as  much  needs  right  culture  as  the  intel-
lectual or  the  physical.  It  is  a  fact  that  this  culture  can  be
effected  only  by  the  truth  instilled  into  the  mind  and  impressed
upon  the  conscience.  It  is  a  fact  that  this  truth,  as  all  Christians
believe,  is  contained  in  the  Holy  Scriptures.  It  is  a  fact,  accord-
ing to  the  Scriptures,  that  the  etenial  Son  of  God  is  the  only
Saviour  of  men,  and  that  it  is  by  faith  in  Him  and  by  obedience
to  Him,  men  are  delivered  from  the  dominion  of  sin  ;  and  there-
fore it  is  a  fact  that  unless  children  are  brought  up  in  the  nurture
and  admonition  of  the  Lord,  they,  and  the  society  which  they  con-
stitute or  control,  will  go  to  destruction.  Consequently,  when
a  state  resolves  that  religious  instruction  shall  be  banished  from
the  schools  and  other  literary  institutions,  it  virtually  resolves  on
self-destruction.  It  may  indeed  be  said  that  such  a  resolution
does  not  imply  that  religious  education  is  to  be  neglected.  It
simply  declares  that  it  is  not  a  function  of  the  state,  that  it  is  a
duty  which  belongs  to  the  family  and  to  the  Church.  This  is
plausible,  but  it  is  fallacious.

1.  All  the  education  received  by  a  large  portion  of  the  people
of  any  country,  is  received  in  its  primary  schools.  If  that  be  ir-
religious (in  the  negative  sense,  if  in  this  case  there  be  such  a
sense),  their  whole  training  is  irreHgious.

2.  It  is  to  be  remembered  that  the  Christian  people  of  a  coun-
try are  the  Church  of  that  country.  The  Christians  of  Antioch
were  the  Chm-ch  of  Antioch,  and  the  Christians  of  Rome  were  the
Church  of  Rome.  In  like  manner  the  Christians  in  the  United
States  are  the  Church  in  the  United  States.     As  therefore  the

1  Meyer,  Commentary  in  loco.


354  PART  III.     Ch.   XIX. —the   law.

schools  belong  to  the  people,  as  they  are  their  organs  for  the
education  of  their  children  ;  if  the  people  be  Christians,  the  schools
of  right  must  be  Christian.  Any  law  which  declares  that  they
shall  not  be  so,  is  tyrannical.  It  may  be  said  that  the  law  does
not  forbid  Christians  having  religious  schools,  it  only  says  that
such  schools  shall  not  be  supported  by  the  pubhc  money.  But
the  people  are  the  public  ;  and  if  the  people  be  Christians,  Chris-
tians are  the  public.  The  meaning  of  such  a  law,  therefore,
really  is,  that  Christians  shall  not  use  their  own  money  for  the
support  of  their  own  schools.

3.  If  Christian  men  therefore  constitute  a  nation,  a  state,  a
comity,  a  town,  or  a  village,  they  have  the  right,  with  which  no
civil  power  can  justly  interfere,  of  having  Christian  schools.  If
any  who  are  not  Christians  choose  to  frequent  such  schools,  they
should  not  be  required  to  attend  upon  the  religious  instruction.
They  can  derive  all  the  benefit  they  seek,  although  they  omit
attendance  on  what  is  designed  for  the  children  of  Christian
parents.

4.  It  is  true  that  Church  and  State  are  not  united  in  this  coun-
try as  they  ever  have  been  in  Europe.  It  is  conceded  that  this
separation  is  wise.  But  it  is  not  to  be  inferred  from  that  conces-
sion that  the  state  has  nothing  to  do  with  rehgion  ;  that  it  must
act  as  though  there  were  no  Christ  and  no  God.  It  has  already
been  remarked  that  this  is  as  impossible  as  it  would  be  for  the
state  to  ignore  the  moral  law.  It  may  be  admitted  that  Church
and  State  are,  in  this  country,  as  distinct  as  the  Church  and  a
banking  company.  But  a  banking  company,  if  composed  of
Christians,  must  conduct  its  business  according  to  Christian  prin-
ciples, so  far  as  those  principles  apply  to  banking  operations.  So
a  nation,  or  a  state,  composed  of  Christians,  must  be  governed  by
Christianity,  so  far  as  its  spirit  and  precepts  apply  to  matters  of
civil  p-overnment.  If  therefore  the  state  assumes  that  the  edu-
cation  of  the  people  is  one  of  its  functions,  it  is  bound  in  a
Christian  country,  —  a  country  in  which  ninety  hundredths  of  the
population  consist  of  Christians, —  to  conduct  the  schools  on  Chris-
tian principles,  otherwise  it  tramples  on  the  most  sacred  rights  of
the  people.  This  the  people  never  will  submit  to,  until  they  lose
all  interest  in  their  religion.  No  one  doubts  that  the  Bible  does
require  that  education  should  be  religiously  conducted.  "  These
words  which  I  command  thee  this  day,  shall  be  in  thine  heart :
and  thou  shalt  teach  them  diligently  unto  thy  children,  and  shalt
talk  of  them  when  thou  sittest  in  thine  house,  and  when  thou  walk-


§  9.]  ■    THE   FIFTH   COMMANDMENT.  355

est  by  the  way,  and  wlien  tliou  liest  down,  and  when  thou  risest
up."  (Deut.  vi.  G,  7.  and  xi.  19.)  "  He  estabhshed  a  testimony
in  Jacob,  and  appointed  a  law  in  Israel,  which  he  commanded
our  fathers,  that  they  should  make  them  known  to  their  chil-
dren ;  that  the  generation  to  come  might  know  them,  even  the
children  which  should  be  born,  who  should  arise  and  declare  them
to  their  children  ;  that  they  might  set  their  hope  in  God,  and  not
forget  the  works  of  God,  but  keep  his  commandments."  (Ps.
Ixxviii.  5,  6,  7.)  "  Train  up  a  child  in  the  way  he  should  go  ;
and  Avhen  he  is  old  he  will  not  depart  from  it."  (Prov.  xxii.  6.)
Fathers  bring  up  your  children  "  in  the  nurture  and  admonition
of  the  Lord."  (Eph.  vi.  4.)  These  are  not  ceremonial  or  obsolete
laws.  They  bind  the  consciences  of  men  just  as  much  as  the  com-
mand, "■  Thou  shalt  not  steal."  If  parents  themselves  conduct  the
education  of  their  children,  these  are  the  principles  upon  which  it
must  be  conducted.  If  they  commit  that  work  to  teachers,  they
are  bound,  by  the  law  of  God,  to  see  that  the  teachers  regard  these
divine  prescriptions ;  if  they  commit  the  work  to  the  state,  they
are  under  equally  sacred  obhgation  to  see  that  the  state  does  not
violate  them.     This  is  an  obligation  which  they  cannot  escape.

5.  When  the  Sunday  laws  were  under  discussion,  on  a  previous
page,  it  was  urged  that  it  would  be  unreasonable  and  unjust  for
a  man  who  joined  a  business  association  of  moral  men,  to  insist
that  the  affairs  of  the  association  should  be  conducted  on  im-
moral principles  ;  if  he  joined  a  company  of  Christian  manufac-
turers, it  would  be  unjust  for  him  to  require  that  they  should
violate  the  laws  of  Christianity.  So  if  a  Christian  should  go  to
Turkey,  it  would  be  preposterous  for  him  to  insist  that  the  Ko-
ran should  be  banished  from  the  public  schools.  No  less  prepos-
terous is  it  for  any  man  to  demand  that  Christians  in  this  coun-
try should  renounce  their  religion.  Christianity  requires  that
education  in  alj.  its  departments  should  be  conducted  religiously.
If  any  set  of  men  should  found  a  school  or  a  university  from  which
all  religious  instruction  should  be  banished,  the  law  of  the  land
would  doubtless  permit  them  to  do  so.  But  for  the  law  to  for-
bid that  the  religion  of  the  people  should  be  taught  in  schools
sustained  by  the  money  of  the  people,  ought  not  to  be  sub-
mitted to.

6.  The  banishment  of  relierious  iirfluence  from  our  schools  is
impossible.  If  a  man  is  not  rehgious,  he  is  irreligious  ;  if  he  is
not  a  believer,  he  is  an  unbeliever.  This  is  as  true  of  organiza-
tions and  institutions,  as  it  is  of  individuals.     Byron  uttered  a


356  PART  m.*  ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

profound  truth  when  he  put  into  the  mouth  of  Satan  the  words
"  He  that  does  not  bow  to  God,  has  bowed  to  me."  If  you
banish  light,  you  are  in  darkness.  If  you  banish  Christianity
from  the  schools,  you  thereby  render  them  infidel.  If  a  child  is
brought  up  in  ignorance  of  God,  he  becomes  an  atheist.  If
never  taught  the  moral  law,  his  moral  nature  is  as  undeveloped
as  that  of  a  pagan.  This  controversy,  therefore,  is  a  controversy
between  Christianity  and  infidehty ;  between  light  and  dark-
ness ;  between  Christ  and  Behal.^

It  is  admitted  that  this  subject  is  encumbered  with  practical
difficulties  where  the  people  of  a  country  differ  widely  in  their
religious  convictions.  In  such  cases  it  would  be  far  better  to
refer  the  matter  to  the  people  of  each  school  district,  than  by  a
general  law  to  prohibit  all  religious  instruction  from  the  pubhc
schools.  This  would,  in  fact,  be  to  make  them  infidel,  in  defer-
ence to  a  numerically  insignificant  minority  of  the  people.  It  is
constantly  said  that  the  state,  if  it  provides  for  anything  more
than  secular  education,  is  travelling  out  of  its  sphere  ;  that  civil
govermnent  is  no  more  organized  to  teach  religion  than  a  fire
company  is.  This  latter  assertion  may  be  admitted  so  far  as
this,  —  that  the  same  rule  applies  to  both  cases.  That  is,  all
individual  men,  and  all  associations  of  men,  are  bound  to  act
according  to  the  principles  of  morality  and  religion,  so  far  as
those  principles  are  applicable  to  the  work  which  they  have  to
do.  ISIen  cannot  lawfully  cheat  in  banking,  nor  can  they  right-
fully conduct  their  business  on  the  Lord's  Day.  In  like  manner
if  God  requires  that  education  should  be  conducted  religiously,
the  state  has  no  more  right  to  banish  religion  from  its  schools,
than  it  has  to  violate  the  moral  law.  The  whole  thing  comes  to
this :  Christians  are  bound  by  the  express  command  of  God,
as  well  as  by  a  regard  to  the  salvation  of  their  children  and
to  the  best  interests  of  society,  to  see  to  it  that  their  chil-
dren are  brought  up  "  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the
Lord  ;  "  this  they  are  bound  to  do  ;  through  the  state  if  they
can  ;  mthout  it,  if  they  must.

Obedience  due  to  Civil  Magistrates.
If  the  fifth  commandment  enjoins  as  a  general  principle,  re-
spect and  obedience  to  our  superiors,  it  includes  our  obligations

1  So  little  is  this  matter  understood,  that  one  of  the  most  respectable  and  influential  jour-
nals in  the  land,  recently  announced  the  fact  that  one  of  the  cantons  of  Switzerland  had
prohibited  all  religious  instruction  in  the  schools,  as  a  proof  that  "the  world  was  getting
tired  of  sacerdotalism."    Thus  religion  is  reduced  to  sacerdotalism  or  priestcraft.


§9.]  THE  FIFTH  COMMANDMENT.  357

to  civil  rulers ;  we  are  commanded  to  "  Submit  ourselyes  to
every  ordinance  of  man  for  the  Lord's  sake :  whether  it  be  to
the  king  as  supreme ;  or  unto  governors,  as  unto  them  that  are
sent  by  him  for  the  punishment  of  evil  doers,  and  for  the  praise
of  them  that  do  well.  For  so  is  the  will  of  God."  (1  Peter  ii.
13-15.)  The  whole  theory  of  civil  government  and  the  duty  of
citizens  to  their  rulers,  are  comprehensively  stated  by  the  Apos-
tle in  Romans  xiii.  1-5.  It  is  there  taught,  (1.)  That  all
authority  is  of  God.  (2.)  That  civil  magistrates  are  ordained  of
God.  (3.)  That  resistance  to  them,  is  resistance  to  Him  ;  they
are  ministers  exercising  his  authority  among  men.  (4.)  That
obedience  to  them  must  be  rendered  as  a  matter  of  conscience,
as  a  ]3art  of  our  obedience  to  God.

From  this  it  appears,  —  First,  that  civil  government  is  a  divine
ordinance.  It  is  not  merely  an  optional  human  institution ;
something  which  men  are  free  to  have  or  not  to  have,  as  they
see  fit.  It  is  not  founded  on  any  social  compact ;  it  is  something
which  God  commands.  The  Bible,  however,  does  not  teach  that
there  is  any  one  form  of  ci"vdl  government  which  is  always  and
everywhere  obligatory.  The  form  of  government  is  determined
by  the  providence  of  God  and  the  will  of  the  people.  It  changes
as  the  state  of  society  changes.  Much  less  is  it  implied  in  the
proposition  that  government  is  a  divine  institution,  that  God
designates  the  persons  who  are  to  exercise  the  various  functions
of  the  government ;  or  the  mode  of  their  appointment ;  or  the
extent  of  their  powers.

Secondly,  it  is  included  in  the  Apostle's  doctrine,  that  magis-
trates derive  their  authority  from  God  ;  they  are  his  ministers  ;
they  represent  Him.  In  a  certain  sense  they  represent  the  peo-
ple, as  they  may  be  chosen  by  them  to  be  the  depositaries  of
this  divinely  delegated  authority  ;  but  the  powers  that  be  are
ordained  by  God  ;  it  is  his  will  that  they  should  be,  and  that
they  should  be  clothed  with  authority.

Thirdly,  from  this  it  follows  that  obedience  to  magistrates  and
to  the  laws  of  the  land,  is  a  religious  duty.  We  are  to  submit
to  "  every  ordinance  of  man,"  for  the  Lord's  sake,  out  of  our
regard  to  Him,  as  St.  Peter  expresses  it ;  or  for  "  conscience
sake,"  as  the  same  idea  is  expressed  by  St.  Paul.  We  are
bound  to  obey  magistrates  not  merely  because  we  have  promised -
to  do  so  ;  or  because  we  have  appointed  them  ;  or  because  they
are  wise  or  good ;  but  because  such  is  the  vrill  of  God.  In  hke
manner  the  laws  of  the  land  are  to  be  observed,  not  because  we


358  PART  m.   Ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

approve  of  them,  but  because  God  has  enjoined  such  obedience.
This  is  a  matter  of  great  importance ;  it  is  the  only  stable  foun-
dation of  civil  government  and  of  social  order.  There  is  a  great
difference  between  obedience  to  men  and  obedience  to  God ;  be-
tween lying  to  men  and  lying  to  God ;  and  between  resistance  to
men  and  resistance  to  God.  This  principle  runs  through  the
Bible,  which  teaches  that  all  authority  is  of  God,  and  therefore
all  obedience  to  those  in  authority  is  part  of  our  obedience  to
God.  This  applies  not  only  to  the  case  of  citizens  and  rulers,
but  also  to  parents  and  children,  husbands  and  wives,  and  even
masters  and  slaves.  In  all  these  relations  we  are  to  act  not  as
the  servants  of  men,  but  as  the  servants  of  God.  This  gives  to
authority  by  whomsoever  exercised  a  divine  sanction  ;  it  gives  it
power  over  the  conscience  ;  and  it  elevates  even  menial  service
into  an  element  of  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  sons  of  God.  No
man  can  have  a  servile  spirit  who  serves  God  in  rendering  obe-
dience to  men.  None  but  a  law-abiding  people  can  be  free  or
prosperous;  and  no  people  can  be  permanently  law-abiding  who
do  not  truly  believe  that  "  the  powers  that  be  are  ordained  of
God.  "  Whosoever,  therefore,  resisteth  the  power  (those  in  au-
thority), resisteth  the  ordinance  of  God :  and  they  that  resist
shall  receive  to  themselves  damnation  (KpT/xa)."  That  is,  God
will  punish  them.

Fourthly,  another  principle  included  in  the  Apostle's  doctrine
is,  that  obedience  is  due  to  every  de  facto  government,  whatever
its  origin  or  character.  His  directions  were  written  under  the
reign  of  Nero,  and  enjoined  obedience  to  him.  The  early  Chris-
tians were  not  called  to  examine  the  credentials  of  their  actual
rulers,  every  time  the  prsetorian  guard  chose  to  depose  one  em-
peror and  install  another.  The  people  of  England  were  not  free
from  their  obhgation  to  William  and  Mary  when  once  established
on  the  throne,  because  they  might  thinlf  that  James  II.  was  enti-
tled to  the"  crown.  We  are  to  obey  "  the  powers  that  be."  They
are  in  authority  by  the  mil  of  God,  which  is  revealed  by  facts,  as
clearly  as  by  words.  It  is  by  Him  that  "  kings  reign  and  princes
decree  justice."  "  He  raiseth  up  one,  and  putteth  down  another."

Fifthly,  the  Scriptures  clearly  teach  that  no  human  authority
is  intended  to  be  unlimited.  Such  limitation  may  not  be  expressed,
but  it  is  always  implied.  The  command  "  Thou  shalt  not  kill,"
is  unlimited  in  form,  yet  the  Scriptures  recognize  that  homicide
may  in  some  cases  be  not  only  justifiable  but  obligatory.  The
principles  which  limit  the  authority  of  civil  government  and  of


§  9.]  THE    FIFTH   COMMANDMENT.  359

its  agents  are  simple  and  obvious.  The  first  is  that  governments
and  magistrates  have  authority  only  within  their  legitimate
spheres.  As  civil  government  is  instituted  for  the  protection  of
life  and  property,  for  the  preservation  of  order,  for  the  punish-
ment of  evil  doers,  and  for  the  praise  of  those  v^^lio  do  well,  it  has
to  do  only  with  the  conduct,  or  external  acts  of  men.  It  cannot
concern  itself  with  their  opinions,  whether  scientific,  philosophical,
or  religious.  An  act  of  Parliament  or  of  Congress,  that  English-
men or  Americans  should  be  materialists  or  idealists,  would  be  an
absurdity  and  a  nullity.  The  magistrate  cannot  enter  our  families
and  assume  parental  authority,  or  our  churches  and  teach  as  a
minister.  A  justice  of  the  peace  cannot  assume  the  prerogatives
of  a  governor  of  a  state  or  of  a  president  of  the  United  States.
Out  of  his  legitimate  sphere  a  magistrate  ceases  to  be  a  magis-
trate. A  second  limitation  is  no  less  plain.  No  human  authority
can  make  it  obligatory  on  a  man  to  disobey  God.  If  aU  power
is  from  God,  it  cannot  be  legitimate  when  used  against  God.  This
is  seK-evident.  The  Apostles  when  forbidden  to  preach  the  Gos-
pel, refused  to  obey.  When  Daniel  refused  to  bow  down  to  the
image  which  Nebuchadnezzar  had  made  ;  when  the  early  Chris-
tians refused  to  worship  idols  ;  and  when  the  Protestant  martyrs
refused  to  profess  the  errors  of  the  Romish  Church,  they  all  com-
mended themselves  to  God,  and  secured  the  reverence  of  all  o-ood
men.  On  this  point  there  can  be  no  dispute.  It  is  important
that  this  principle  should  be  not  only  recognized,  but  also  ]3ublicly
avowed.  The  sanctity  of  law,  and  the  stability  of  human  govern-
ments, depend  on  the  sanction  of  God.  Unless  they  repose  on
Him,  they  rest  on  nothing.  They  have  his  sanction  only  when
they  act  according  to  his  will ;  that  is  in  accordance  with  the
design  of  their  appointment  and  in  harmony  with  the  moral  law.

Sixthly,  another  general  principle  is  that  the  question,  When
the  civil  government  may  be,  and  ought  to  be  disobeyed,  is  one
which  every  man  must  decide  for  himself.  It  is  a  matter  of  pri-
vate judgment.  Every  man  must  answer  for  himself  to  God,  and
therefore,  every  man  must  judge  for  himself,  whether  a  given  act
is  sinful  or  not.  Daniel  judged  for  himself.  So  did  Shadrach,  Me-
shech,  and  Abednego.  So  did  the  Apostles,  and  so  did  the  martyrs.

An  unconstitutional  law  or  commandment  is  a  nullity  ;  no  man
sins  in  disregarding  it.  He  disobeys,  however,  at  his  peril.  If
his  judgment  is  right,  he  is  free.  If  it  be  wrong,  in  the  view  of
the  proper  tribunal,  he  must  suffer  the  penalty.  There  is  an  ob-
vious distinction  to  be  made  between  disobedience  and  resistance.


360  PART  m.     Cir.   XIX. -THE  LAW.

A  man  is  bound  to  disobey  a  law,  or  a  command,  wliicli  requiiHis
him  to  sin,  but  it  does  not  follow  that  he  is  at  liberty  to  resist
its  execution.  The  Apostles  refused  to  obey  the  Jewish  author-
ities ;  but  they  submitted  to  the  penalty  inflicted.  So  the  Chris-
tian martyrs  disobeyed  the  laws  requiring  them  to  worship  idols,
but  they  made  no  resistance  to  the  execution  of  the  law.  The
Quakers  disobey  the  law  requiring  military  service,  but  quietly
submit  to  the  penalty.  This  is  obviously  right.  The  right  of
resistance  is  in  the  community.  It  is  the  right  of  revolution,  which
God  sanctions,  and  which  good  men  in  past  ages  have  exercised  to
the  salvation  of  civil  and  religious  liberty.  When  a  government
fails  to  answer  the  purpose  for  which  God  ordained  it,  the  people
have  a  right  to  change  it.  A  father,  if  he  shamefully  abuses  his
power,  may  rightfully  be  deprived  of  authority  over  his  children. ^

Obedience  to  the  Church.

The  Apostle  commands  Christians  "  Obey  them  that  have  the
rule  over  you,  and  submit  yourselves :  for  they  watch  for  your
souls."  "  Remember  them  which  have  the  rule  over  you,  who
have  spoken  unto  you  the  word  of  God."  (Heb.  xiii.  17,  7.)
Our  Lord  said  to  his  disciples,  that  if  an  offending  brother  resisted
other  means  to  bring  him  to  repentance,  his  offence  must  be  told
to  the  Church ;  and  that  if  he  neglected  to  hear  the  Church,  he
was  to  be  regarded  as  a  heathen  man  and  a  publican.  (Matt.
xviii.  17.)

The  principles  which  regulate  our  obedience  to  the  Church,  are
very  much  the  same  as  those  which  concern  our  relation  to  the
State,  —

1.  The  visible  Church  is  a  divine  institution.  In  one  sense
indeed  it  is  a  voluntary  society,  in  so  far  as  that  no  man  can  be
coerced  to  join  it.  If  he  joins  it  at  all,  it  must  be  of  his  own
free  will.  Nevertheless  it  is  the  will  of  God  that  the  "vnsible
Church  as  an  organized  body  should  exist ;  and  every  man  who
hears  the  Gospel,  is  bound  to  enroll  himself  among  its  members
and  to  submit  to  its  authority.

2.  All  Church  power  is  of  God,  and  all  legitimate  Church
officers  are  his  ministers.  They  act  in  his  name  and  by  his  au-
thority. Resistance  to  them,  therefore,  is  resistance  to  the  ordi-
nance of  God.

1  All  these  subjects  are  fully  expounded  in  the  great  works  on  Jurisprudence  and  Civil
Poiity.  For  a  popular  discussion  of  fhcm,  reference  may  be  made  to,  Discussions  of  Church
Prinrijdcs.  V>y  William  Cuiiningliam,  1).  D.,  Principal  of  New  College,  Edinburgh.  Edin-
burgh: T.  and  T.  Clark,  1863,  particularly  chapters  vi.  and  vii.  See  also  the  Princeton
Review  for  January,  1851,  article  "  Civil  Government."


§  [».]  THE   FIFTH   COMiMANDMENT.  361

3.  All  the  prerogatives  of  the  Church  and  all  the  powers  of  its
oj0&cers  are  laid  down  in  the  word  of  God.

4.  The  prerogatives  of  the  Church  are,  first,  to  teach.  Its
great  commission  is  to  teach  all  nations.  It  is  to  teach  what  God
has  revealed  in  his  word  as  to  what  men  are  to  believe  and  what
they  are  to  do.  Beyond  the  limits  of  the  revelation  contained  in
the  Scriptures  the  Church  has  no  more  authority  to  teach  than
any  other  association  among  men.  Secondly,  the  Church  has  the
right  and  duty  to  order  and  conduct  public  worship,  to  administer
the  sacraments,  to  select  and  ordain  its  own  officers,  and  to  do
whatever  else  is  necessary  for  its  own  perpetuity  and  extension.
Thirdly,  it  is  the  prerogative  of  the  Church  to  exercise  discipline
over  its  own  members,  and  to  receive  or  to  reject  them  as  the  case
may  be.

5.  As  to  the  external  organization  of  the  Church  all  Cliristians
agree  that  there  are  certain  rules  laid  down  in  the  word  of  God
which  are  of  universal  and  perpetual  obligation.  All  Christian
churches,  however,  have  acted  on  the  assumption,  that  beyond
these  prescribed  rules,  the  Church  has  a  certain  discretion  to  mod-
ify its  organization  and  its  organs  to  suit  varying  emergencies.

6.  The  visible  Church  being  organized  for  a  definite  purpose,
its  power  being  derived  from  God,  and  its  prerogatives  being  all
laid  down  in  the  Scriptures,  it  follows  not  only  that  its  powers  are
limited  within  the  bounds  thus  prescribed,  but  also  that  the  ques-
tion, whether  its  decisions  and  injunctions  are  to  be  obeyed,  is  to
be  determined  by  every  one  concerned,  on  his  own  responsibility.
If  the  decision  is  within  the  limits  to  which  God  has  confined  the
action  of  the  Church,  and  in  accordance  with  the  Scriptures,  it  is
to  be  obeyed.  If  it  transcends  those  limits,  or  is  contrary  to  the
word  of  God,  it  is  to  be  disregarded.  If  therefore  the  Church
through  any  of  its  organs  should  assume  to  decide  questions  of
pure  science,  or  of  political  economy,  or  of  civil  law,  such  de-
cisions v/ould  amount  to  nothing.  Or,  if  it  should  declare  that  to
]}e  true  which  the  Scriptures  pronounce  to  be  false ;  or  that  to
be  false  which  the  Scriptures  declare  to  be  true,  such  judgment
would  bind  no  man's  conscience.  And  in  like  manner,  should  the
Church  declare  any  thing  to  be  sinful  which  the  word  of  God
teaches  to  be  right  or  indifferent ;  or  that  to  be  right  and  obliga
tory  which  that  word  pronomices  to  be  evil,  then  again  its  teach-
ing is  void  of  all  authority.  All  this  is  included  in  the  principle
that  we  must  obey  God  rather  than  man  ;  and  that  as  to  when
obedience  to  man  conflicts  with  our  allegiance  to  God,  every  man


362  PART  ni.   Ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

from  the  nature  of  the  case  must  judge  for  himself.  No  man  can
estimate  the  importance  of  these  simple  principles.  It  was  by
disregarding  them  that  the  Church  came  gradually  to  deny  the
right  of  private  judgment ;  to  subordinate  the  Scriptures  to  its
decisions  ;  and  to  put  itself  in  the  place  of  God.  In  this  way  it
has  imposed  miscriptural  doctrines  upon  the  faith  of  men  ;  made
multitudes  of  things  to  be  obligatory  which  God  never  enjoined ;
and  declared  the  greatest  sins,  such  as  treason,  persecution,  and
massacre  to  be  Christian  duties.

While,  therefore,  the  duty  of  obedience  to  our  superiors,  and
submission  to  law,  as  enjoined  in  the  fifth  commandment,  is  the
source  of  all  order  in  the  family,  the  Church,  and  the  State  ;  the
limitation  of  this  duty  by  our  higher  obligation  to  God,  is  the
foundation  of  aU  civil  and  religious  hberty.

§  10.   The  Sixth  Commandment.
Its  Design.

This  commandment,  as  expounded  by  our  Lord  (Matt.  v.  21,
22),  forbids  malice  in  all  its  degrees  and  in  aU  its  manifestations.
The  Bible  recognizes  the  distinction  between  anger  and  malice.
The  former  is  on  due  occasion  allowable  ;  the  other  is  in  its  nature,
and  therefore  always,  evil.  The  one  is  a  natural  or  constitutional
emotion  arising  out  of  the  experience  or  perception  of  wrong,
and  includes  not  only  disapprobation  but  also  indignation,  and  a
desire  in  some  way  to  redress  or  punish  the  wrong  inflicted.  The
other  includes  hatred  and  the  desire  to  inflict  evil  to  gratify  that
evil  passion.  Our  Lord  is  said  to  have  been  angry  ;  but  in  Him
there  was  no  malice  or  resentment.  He  was  the  Lamb  of  God  ;
when  He  was  reviled,  He  reviled  not  again  ;  when  He  suffered,
He  threatened  not ;  He  prayed  for  his  enemies  even  on  the  cross.

In  the  several  commandments  of  the  decalogue,  the  highest
manifestation  of  any  evil  is  selected  for  prohibition,  with  the
intention  of  including  all  lesser  forms  of  the  same  evil.  In  for-
bidding murder,  all  degrees  and  manifestations  of  malicious  feel-
ing are  forbidden.  The  Bible  assigns  special  value  to  the  life  of
man,  first,  because  he  was  created  in  the  image  of  God.  He  is
not  only  like  God  in  the  essential  elements  of  his  nature,  but  he
is  also  God's  representative  on  earth.  An  indignity  or  injury
inflicted  on  Imn,  is  an  act  of  irreverence  toward  God.  And  sec-
ondly, all  men  are  brethren.  They  are  of  one  blood  ;  children  of
a  common  father.  On  these  grounds  we  are  bound  to  love  and
respect  all  men  as  men  ;  and  to  do  all  we  can  not  only  to  protect


§  10.]  THE    SIXTH   COMMANDMENT.  363

their  lives  but  also  to  promote  their  well-being.  Murder,  there-
fore, is  the  highest  crbne  which  a  man  can  commit  against  a  fel-
low-man.

Capital  Punishment.

As  the  sixth  commandment  forbids  malicious  homicide,  it  is
plain  that  the  infliction  of  capital  punishment  is  not  included  in
the  prohibition.  Such  punishment  is  not  inflicted  to  gratify  re-
venge, but  to  satisfy  justice  and  for  the  preservation  of  society.
As  these  are  legitimate  and  most  important  ends,  it  follows  that
the  capital  punishment  of  murder  is  also  legitimate.  Such  punish-
ment, in  the  ease  of  murder,  is  not  only  lawful,  but  also  obliga-
tory.

1.  Because  it  is  expressly  declared  in  the  Bible,  "  Whoso
sheddeth  man's  blood,  by  man  shall  his  blood  be  shed :  for  in
the  image  of  God  made  he  man."  (Gen.  ix.  6.)  That  this  is  of
perpetual  obligation  is  clear,  because  it  was  given  to  Noah,  the
second  head  of  the  human  race.  It  was,  therefore,  not  intended
for  any  particular  age  or  nation.  It  is  the  announcement  of
a  general  principle  of  justice  ;  a  revelation  of  the  will  of  God.
Moreover  the  reason  assigned  for  the  law  is  a  permanent  reason.
Man  was  created  in  the  image  of  God  ;  and,  therefore,  whoso
sheds  his  blood,  by  man  shall  his  blood  be  shed.  This  reason  has
as  much  force  at  one  time  or  place  as  at  anj^  other.  Rosenmiiller's
comment  on  this  clause  is,  "  Cum  homo  ad  Dei  imaginem  sit  f actus,
aequum  est,  ut,  qui  Dei  imaginem  violavit  et  destruxit,  occidatur,
cum  Dei  imagini  injuriam  faciens,  ipsum  Deum,  illius  auctorem,
petierit."  ^  Tliis  is  a  very  solemn  consideration,  and  one  of  wide
application.  It  applies  not  only  to  murder  and  other  injuries  in-
flicted on  the  persons  of  men,  but  also  to  anything  which  tends  to
degrade  or  to  defile  them.  The  Apostle  applies  it  even  to  evil
words,  or  the  suggestion  of  corrupt  thoughts.  If  it  is  an  outrage
to  defile  the  statue  or  portrait  of  a  great  and  good  man,  or  of  a
father  or  mother,  how  much  greater  is  the  outrage  when  we  defile
the  imperishable  image  of  God  impressed  on  the  immortal  soul
of  man.  We  find  the  injunction,  that  the  murderer  should  sure-
ly be  put  to  death,  repeated  over  and  over  in  the  Mosaic  law.
(Ex.  xxi.  12,  14 ;  Lev.  xxiv.  17  ;  Num.  xxxv.  21  ;  Deut.  xix.
11,  13.)

There  are  clear  recognitions  in  the  New  Testament  of  the  con-
tinued obligation  of  the  divine  law  that  murder  should  be  pun-
ished with  death.     In  Romans  xiii.  4,  the  Apostle  says  that  tho

1  Scholia  in  Vetus  Testamentum,  Leipzig,  1795.


364  PART  m.   ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

magistrate  "bearetli  not  the  sword  in  vain."  The  sword  was
worn  as  the  symbol  of  the  power  of  capital  punishment.  Even
by  profane  ^\Titers,  says  Meyer,  "  bearing  the  sword  "  by  a  mag-
istrate was  the  emblem  of  the  power  over  life  and  death.  The
same  Apostle  said  (Acts  xxv.  11)  :  "  If  I  be  an  offender,  or  have
committed  anything  worthy  of  death,  I  refuse  not  to  die ;  "
which  clearly  implies  that,  in  his  judgment,  there  were  offences,
for  which  the  appropriate  penalty  is  death.

2.  Besides  these  arguments  from  Scripture,  there  are  others
drawn  from  natural  justice.  It  is  a  dictate  of  our  moral  nature
that  crime  should  be  punished ;  that  there  should  be  a  just  pro-
portion between  the  offence  and  the  penalty  ;  and  that  death,  the
highest  penalty,  was  the  proper  punishment  for  the  greatest  of  all
crimes.  That  such  is  the  instinctive  judgment  of  men  is  proved
by  the  difficulty  often  experienced  in  restraining  the  people  from
taldng  summary  vengeance  in  cases  of  atrocious  murder.  So
strong  is  this  sentiment  that  a  species  of  wild  justice  is  sure  to  step
in  to  supply  the  place  of  judicial  remissness.  Such  justice,  from
being  lawless  and  impulsive,  is  too  often  misguided  and  erroneous,
and,  in  a  settled  state  of  society,  is  always  criminal.  It  being  the
nature  of  men,  that  if  the  regular,  lawful  infliction  of  death  as  a
judicial  penalty  be  abolished,  it  will  be  inflicted  by  the  avenger  of
blood,  or  by  tumultuous  assemblies  of  the  people,  society  has  to
choose  between  securing  to  the  homicide  a  fair  trial  by  the  consti-
tuted authorities,  and  giving  him  up  to  the  blind  spirit  of  revenge.

3.  Experience  teaches  that  where  human  life  is  undervalued,
it  is  insecure  ;  that  where  the  murderer  escapes  mth  impunity
or  is  inadequately  punished,  homicides  are  fearfully  multipUed.
The  practical  question,  therefore,  is.  Who  is  to  die  ?  the  innocent
man  or  the  murderer  ?

Homicide   m  Self -Defence.

That  homicide  in  self-defence  is  not  forbidden  by  the  sixth
commandment,  is  plain,  (1.)  Because  such  homicide  is  not  mali-
cious, and,  therefore,  does  not  come  within  the  scope  of  the  pro-
hibition. (2.)  Because  self-preservation  is  an  instinct  of  our
nature,  and  therefore,  a  revelation  of  the  will  of  God.  (3.)  Be-
cause it  is  a  dictate  of  reason  and  of  natural  justice  that  if  of  two
persons  one  must  die,  it  should  be  the  aggressor  and  not  the
aggrieved.  (4.)  Because  the  universal  judgment  of  men,  and
the  Word  of  God,  pronounce  the  man  innocent  who  kills  an*
other  in  defence  of  his  own  life  or  that  of  his  neighbor.


510.]  THE   SIXTH  COMMANDMENT.  365

War.

It  is  conceded  that  war  is  one  of  the  most  dreadful  evils  that
can  be  inflicted  on  a  people  ;  that  it  involves  the  destruction  of
property  and  life  ;  that  it  demoralizes  both  the  victors  and  the
vanquished  ;  that  it  visits  thousands  of  non-combatants  with  all
the  miseries  of  poverty,  widowhood,  and  orphanage  ;  and  that  it
tends  to  arrest  the  progress  of  society  in  everything  that  is  good
and  desirable.  God  overrules  wars  in  many  cases,  as  He  does  the
tornado  and  the  earthquake,  to  the  accomplishment  of  his  benev-
olent purposes,  but  this  does  not  prove  that  war  in  itself  is  not
a  great  evil.  He  makes  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  Him.  It  is
conceded  that  wars  undertaken  to  gratify  the  ambition,  cupidity,
or  resentment  of  rulers  or  people,  are  unchristian  and  wicked.  It
is  also  conceded  that  tlie  vast  majority  of  the  wars  which  have
desolated  the  world  have  been  unjustifiable  in  the  sight  of  God
and  man.  Nevertheless  it  does  not  follow  from  this  that  war  in
all  cases  is  to  be  condemned.

1.  This  is  proved  because  the  right  of  self-defence  belongs  to
nations  as  well  as  to  individuals.  Nations  are  bound  to  protect
the  lives  and  property  of  their  citizens.  If  these  are  assailed  by
force,  force  may  be  rightfully  used  in  their  protection.  Nations
also  have  the  right  to  defend  their  own  existence.  If  that  be
endangered  by  the  conduct  of  other  nations,  they  have  the  natural
right  of  self-protection.  A  war  may  be  defensive  and  yet  in  one
sense  aggressive.  In  other  words,  self-defence  may  dictate  and
render  necessary  the  first  assault.  A  man  is  not  bound  to  wait
until  a  murderer  actually  strikes  his  blow.  It  is  enough  that  he
sees  undeniable  manifestations  of  a  hostile  purpose.  So  a  nation
is  not  bound  to  wait  until  its  territories  are  actually  invaded  and
its  citizens  murdered,  before  it  appeals  to  arms.  It  is  enough  that
there  is  clear  evidence  on  the  part  of  another  nation  of  an  inten-
tion to  commence  hostilities.  While  it  is  easy  to  lay  down  the
principle  that  war  is  justifiable  only  as  a  means  of  self-defence,
the  practical  application  of  this  principle  is  beset  with  difficulties.
The  least  aggression  on  national  property,  or  the  slightest  in-
fringement of  national  rights,  may  be  regarded  as  the  first  step
toward  national  extinction,  and  therefore  justify  the  most  extreme
measures  of  redress.  A  nation  may  think  that  a  certain  enlarge-
ment of  territory  is  necessary  to  its  security,  and,  therefore,  that
it  has  the  right  to  go  to  war  to  secure  it.  So  a  man  may  say
that  a  portion  of  his  neighbour's  farm  is  necessary  to  the  full  en-


366  PART  m.   Ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

joyment  of  his  o^vn  property,  and  therefore  that  he  has  the  right
to  appropriate  it  to  himself.  It  is  to  be  remembered  that  nations
are  as  much  bound  by  the  moral  law  as  individual  men  ;  and
therefore  that  what  a  man  may  not  do  in  the  protection  of  his
own  rights,  and  on  the  plea  of  self-defence,  a  nation  may  not  do.
A  nation  therefore  is  bound  to  exercise  gi-eat  forbearance,  and  to
adopt  every  other  available  means  of  redressing  wrongs,  before  it
plunges  itself  and  others  into  all  the  demorahzing  miseries  of  war.
2.  The  lawfulness  of  defensive  war,  however,  does  not  rest  ex-
clusively on  these  general  principles  of  justice  ;  it  is  distinctly
recognized  in  Scripture.  In  numerous  cases,  under  the  Old  Tes-
tament, such  wars  were  commanded.  God  endowed  men  with
special  qualifications  as  warriors.  He  answered  when  consulted
through  the  Urim  and  Thummim,  or  by  the  prophets,  as  to  the
propriety  of  military  enterprises  (Judges  xx.  27  f.,  1  Sam.
xiv.  37,  xxiii.  2,  4  ;  1  Kings  xxii.  6  ff.)  ;  and  He  often  interfered
miraculously  in  behalf  of  his  people  when  they  were  engaged  m
battle.  Many  of  the  Psalms  of  David,  dictated  by  the  Spirit,
are  either  prayers  for  divine  assistance  in  war  or  thanksgivings
for  victory.  It  is  very  plain,  therefore,  that  the  God  whom  the
patriarchs  and  prophets  worshipped  did  not  condemn  war,  when
the  choice  was  between  war  and  annihilation.  It  is  a  very  clear
case  that  if  the  Israelites  had  not  been  allowed  to  defend  them-
selves against  their  heathen  neighbours  they  would  have  soon  been
extirpated,  and  their  religion  would  have  perished  with  them.

As  the  essential  principles  of  morals  do  not  change,  what  was
permitted  or  commanded  under  one  dispensation,  cannot  be
unlawful  mider  another,  unless  forbidden  by  a  new  revelation.
The  New  Testament,  however,  contains  no  such  revelation.  It
does  not  say,  as  in  the  case  of  divorce,  that  war  was  permitted
to  the  Hebrews  because  of  the  hardness  of  their  hearts,  but  that
under  the  Gospel  a  new  law  was  to  prevail.  This  very  silence
of  the  New  Testament  leaves  the  Old  Testament  rule  of  duty
on  this  subject  still  in  force.  Accorduigly,  although  there  is
no  express  declaration  on  the  subject,  as  none  was  needed,  we
find  the  lawfulness  of  war  quietly  assumed.  When  the  soldiers
inquired  of  John  the  Baptist  what  they  should  do  to  prepare  for
the  kingdom  of  God,  he  did  not  tell  them  that  they  must  forsake
the  profession  of  arms.  The  centurion,  whose  faith  our  Lord  so
highly  commended  (Matt.  viii.  5-13),  was  not  censm-ed  for
beino-  a  soldier.  So  also  the  centurion,  a  devout  man,  whom
God  in  a  vision  commanded  to  send  for  Peter,  and  on  whom,


§  lO.J  THE   SIXTH   COMMANDMENT.  367

and  Lis  associates,  according  to  the  record  in  the  tenth  chapter
of  Acts,  the  Holy  Ghost  came  with  miraculous  gifts,  was  allowed
to  remain  in  the  army  of  even  a  heathen  emperor.  If  magis-
trates, as  Ave  learn  from  the  thirteenth  chapter  of  Romans,  are
armed  with  a  right  or  power  of  life  and  death  over  their  own
citizens,  they  certainly  have  the  right  to  declare  war  in  self-
defence.

In  the  early  ages  of  the  Church  there  was  a  great  disinchna-
tion  to  engage  in  military  service,  and  the  fathers  at  times  jus-
tified this  reluctance  by  calling  the  lawfulness  of  all  wars  into
question.  But  the  real  sources  of  this  opposition  of  Christians
to  entering  the  army,  were  that  they  thereby  gave  themselves
up  to  the  ser\dce  of  a  power  which  persecuted  their  rehgion ;
and  that  idolatrous  usages  were  inseparably  connected  with  mil-
itary duties.  When  the  Roman  empire  became  Christian,  and
the  cross  was  substituted  for  the  eagle  on  the  standards  of  the
army,  this  opposition  died  away,  till  at  length  we  hear  of  fight-
ing prelates,  and  of  military  orders  of  monks.

No  historical  Christian  Church  has  pronounced  all  war  to  be
unlawful.  The  Augsburg  Confession  ^  expressly  says  that  it  is
proper  for  Christians  to  act  as  magistrates,  and  among  other
things  "  jure  bellare,  mill  tare,"  etc.  And  Presbyterians  espec-
ially have  shown  that  it  is  not  against  their  consciences  to  con-
tend to  the  death  for  their  rights  and  liberties.

Suicide.

It  is  conceivable  that  men  who  do  not  believe  in  God  or  in  a
future  state  of  existence,  should  think  it  allowable  to  take  refuge
in  annihilation  from  the  miseries  of  this  life.  But  it  is  unac-
countable, except  on  the  assumption  of  temporary  or  permanent
insanity,  that  any  man  should  rush  uncalled  into  the  retributions
of  eternity.  Suicide,  therefore,  is  most  frequent  among  those
who  have  lost  all  faith  in  religion.^  It  is  a  very  complicated
crime ;  our  life  is  not  our  own ;  we  have  no  more  right  to  de-
stroy our  life  than  we  have  to  destroy  the  life  of  a  fellow-man.
Suicide  is,  therefore,  self  murder.  It  is  the  desertion  of  the
post  which  God  has  assigned  us  ;  it  is  a  deliberate  refusal  to
submit  to  Ms  will ;  it  is  a  crime  which  admits  of  no  repentance,
and  consequently  involves  the  loss  of  the  soul.

1  I.  xvi.  2 ;  Hase,  Libri  Symbolici,  3d  edit.  p.  14.

2  It  is  estimated  that  one  death  out  of  175  in  London  is  suicide ;  in  New  York,  one  in
172;  in  Vienna,  one  in  160;  in  Paris,  one  in  72.


368  PART  m.   ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

Duelling.
Duelling  is  another  violation  of  the  sixth  commandment.  Its
advocates  defend  it  on  the  same  principle  on  which  international
war  is  defended.  As  independent  nations  have  no  common  tri-
bunal to  which  they  can  resort  for  the  redress  of  injuries,  they
are  justifiable,  on  the  principle  of  seK-defence,  in  appealing  to  arms
for  the  protection  of  their  rights.  In  like  manner,  it  is  said,
there  are  offences  for  which  the  law  of  the  land  affords  no
redress,  and  therefore,  the  individual  must  be  allowed  to  seek
redress  for  himself.  But  (1.)  There  is  no  evil  for  which  the  law
does  not,  or  should  not,  afford  redress.  (2.)  The  redress  sought
in  the  duel  is  unjustifiable.  No  one  has  the  right  to  kiR  a  man
for  a  slight  or  an  insult.  Taking  a  man's  hfe  for  a  hasty  word,
or  even  for  a  serious  injury,  is  murder  in  the  sight  of  God,  who
has  ordained  the  penalty  of  death  as  the  pmiishment  for  only
the  most  atrocious  crimes.  (^3.)  The  remedy  is  preposterous  ;
for  most  frequently  it  is  the  aggrieved  party  who  loses  his  life.
(4.)  Duelhng  is  the  cause  of  the  greatest  suffering  to  innocent
parties,  which  no  man  has  a  right  to  inflict  to  gratify  his  pride  or
resentment.  (5.)  The  survivor  in  a  fatal  duel  entails  on  himself,
unless  his  heart  and  conscience  be  seared,  a  life  of  misery.

§  11.   The  Seventh  Commandment.

This  commandment,  as  we  learn  from  our  Lord's  exposition  of
it,  given  in  his  sermon  on  the  mount,  forbids  all  impurity  in
thought,  speech,  and  beha\dour.  As  the  social  organization  of  so-
ciety is  founded  on  the  distinction  of  the  sexes,  and  as  the  well-
being  of  the  state  and  the  purity  and  prosperity  of  the  Church
rest  on  the  sanctity  of  the  family  relation,  it  is  of  the  last  impor-
tance that  the  normal,  or  divinely  constituted  relation  of  the  sexes
be  preserved  in  its  integrity.

Celibacy.

Among  the  important  questions  to  be  considered  under  the
head  of  this  commandment,  the  first  is.  Whether  the  Bible
teaches  that  there  is  any  special  virtue  in  a  life  of  celibacy  ?
This  is  really  a  question,  whether  there  was  an  error  m  the  cre-
ation of  man.

1.  The  very  fact  that  God  created  man,  male  and  female,  de-
claring that  it  was  not  good  for  either  to  be  alone,  and  constituted
marriage  in   paradise,  should  be  decisive  on  this  subject.     The


§  11.]         THE  SEVENTH  COMMANDMENT.         369

doctrine  which  degrades  marriage  by  makiBg  it  a  less  holy  state,
has  its  foundation  in  Manicheeism  or  Gnosticism.  It  assumes
that  evil  is  essentially  connected  with  matter  ;  that  sin  has  its
seat  and  source  in  the  body ;  that  holiness  is  attainable  only
through  asceticism  and  "  neglecting  of  the  body  ;  "  that  because
the  "  vita  angelica "  is  a  higher  form  of  life  than  that  of  men
here  on  earth,  therefore  marriage  is  a  degradation.  The  doctrine
of  the  Romish  Church  on  this  subject,  therefore,  is  thoroughly
anti-Christian.  It  rests  on  principles  derived  from  the  philoso-
phy of  the  heathen.  It  presupposes  that  God  is  not  the  author
of  matter  ;  and  that  He  did  not  make  man  pure,  when  He  in-
vested him  with  a  body.

2.  Throughout  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  marriage  is  rep-
resented as  the  normal  state  of  man.  The  command  to  our  first
parents  before  the  fall  was,  "  Be  fruitful,  and  multiply,  and  re-
plenish the  earth."  Without  marriage  the  purpose  of  God  in
regard  to  our  world  could  not  be  carried  out ;  it  is,  therefore,
contradictory  to  the  Scriptures  to  assume  that  marriage  is  less
holy,  or  less  acceptable  to  God  than  celibacy.  To  be  unmarried,
was  regarded  under  the  old  dispensation  as  a  calamity  and  a  dis-
grace. (Judges  xi.  37  ;  Ps.  Ixxviii.  63  ;  Is.  iv.  1 ;  xiii.  12.)  The
highest  earthly  destiny  of  a  woman,  according  to  the  Old  Testa-
ment Scriptures,  which  are  the  word  of  God,  was  not  to  be  a  nun,
but  to  be  the  mistress  of  a  family,  and  a  mother  of  children.
(Gen.  XXX.  1 ;  Ps.  cxiii.  9  ;  cxxvii.  3  ;  cxxviii.  3,  4 ;  Prov.  xviii.
22  ;  xxxi.  10,  28.)

3.  The  same  high  estimate  of  marriage,  characterizes  the  teach-
ings of  the  New  Testament.  Marriage  is  declared  to  be  "  honour-
able in  all."  (Heb.  xiii.  4.)  Paul  says,  "  Let  every  man  have  his
own  wife,  and  let  every  woman  have  her  own  husband."  (1
Cor.  vii.  2.)  In  1  Timothy  v.  14,  he  says:  "I  will,  that  the
younger  women  marry."  In  1  Timothy  iv.  3,  "forbidding  to
marry  "  is  included  among  the  doctrines  of  devils.  As  the  truth
comes  from  the  Holy  Spirit,  so  false  doctrines,  according  to  the
Apostle's  mode  of  thinking,  come  from  Satan,  and  his  agents,  the
demons  ;  they  are  "  the  seducing  spirits  "  spoken  of  in  the  same
verse.i    Our  Lord  more  than  once  (Matt.  xix.  5  ;  Mark  x.  7)

1  Calvin  in  his  comment  on  this  verse  says :  "  Non  multo  post  Apostoli  mortem  exorti  sunt
Encratitre  (qui  nomen  sibi  a  continentia  indiderimt)  Taciani:  Cathari;  Montanus  cum  sua
secta,  et  tandem  Manichtei,  qui  ab  esu  carnium  et  conjugio  abhorrerent,  et  tanquam  res

profanas  damnarent Excipiunt  [Papista?]  se  Encratitis  et  Manichajis  esse  dissimiles,

quia  non  simpliciter  usum  conjugii  et  carnium  interdicunt,  sed  certis  tantum  diebus  cogunt
ad  carnis  abstinentiam,  solos  autem  monaclios  et  sacerdotes  cum  monialibus  ad  votum  coe-
libatus  cogmit.  Verum  bmc  ....  niniis  frivola  est  excusatio.     Nam  sanctimoniam  nihilo-
voL.  III.  24


370  PART  HI.     Ch.   XIX.  -  THE   LAW.

quotes  and  enforces  the  original  law  given  in  Genesis  ii.  24,  that  a
man  shall  "  leave  his  father  and  his  mother,  and  shall  cleave  unto
his  wife,  and  they  shall  be  one  flesh."  The  same  passage  is
quoted  by  the  Apostle  as  containing  a  great  and  symbolical  truth.
(Eph.  V.  31.)  It  is  thus  taught  that  the  marriage  relation  is  the
most  intimate  and  sacred  that  can  exist  on  earth,  to  which  all
other  human  relations  must  be  sacrificed.  We  accordingly  find
that  from  the  beginning,  with  rare  exceptions,  patriarchs,  proph-
ets, apostles,  confessors,  and  martyrs,  have  been  married  men.  If
marriage  was  not  a  degradation  to  them,  surely  it  cannot  be  to
monks  and  priests.

The  strongest  proof  of  the  sanctity  of  the  marriage  relation  in
the  sight  of  God,  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  both  in  the  Old
and  in  the  New  Testaments,  it  is  made  the  symbol  of  the  relation
between  God  and  his  people.  "  Thy  Maker  is  thy  husband,"  are
the  words  of  God,  and  contain  a  world  of  truth,  of  grace,  and  of
love.  The  departure  of  the  people  from  God,  is  illustrated  by  a
reference  to  a  wife  forsaking  her  husband ;  while  God's  forbear-
ance, tenderness,  and  love,  are  compared  to  those  of  a  faithful
husband  to  his  wife.  "  As  the  bridegroom  rejoiceth  over  the
bride,  so  shall  thy  God  rejoice  over  thee."  (Is.  Ixii.  5.)  In  the
New  Testament,  this  reference  to  the  marriage  relation,  to  illus-
trate the  union  between  Christ  and  the  Church,  is  frequent  and
instructive.  The  Church  is  called  "  the  Bride,  the  Lamb's  wife."
(Rev.  xxi.  9.)  And  the  consummation  of  the  work  of  salvation  is
set  forth  as  the  marriage,  or  the  marriage-supper  of  the  Lamb.
(Rev.  xix.  7,  9.)  In  Ej)hesians  v.  22-33,  the  union  between  hus-
bands and  wives,  and  the  duties  thence  resulting,  are  set  forth  as
so  analogous  to  the  union  between  Christ  and  his  Church,  that  in
some  cases  it  is  hard  to  determine  to  which  miion  the  language  of
the  Apostle  is  to  be  applied.  It  is  a  matter  of  astonislmient,  in
view  of  all  these  facts,  that  marriage  has  so  extensively  and  persist-
ently been  regarded  as  something  degrading,  and  celibacy  or  per-
petual virginity  as  a  special  and  peculiar  virtue.  No  more  strik-
ing evidence  of  the  influence  of  a  false  philosophy  in  perverting
the  minds  of  even  good  men,  is  afforded  in  the  whole  history  of
the  Church.  Even  the  Reformers  did  not  escape  altogether  from
its  influence.  They  often  speak  of  marriage  as  the  less  of  two
e\ih  :  not  as  in  itself  a  good ;  and  not  as  the  normal  and  appro-
priate state  in  which  men  and  women  should  live,  as  designed

minus  in  his  rebus  locant;  deinde  falsum  et  adulterinum  Dei  cultum  instituunt:  postremo
conscientias  alligant  necessitati,  a  qua  debebant  esse  liberae. ' '    Edit.  Berlin,  1831.


§  11.]  THE   SEVENTH   COMMANDMENT.  371

by  God  ill  the  very  constitution  of  their  nature,  and  as  the  best
adapted  to  the  exercise  and  development  of  all  social  and  Chris-
tian virtues.  Thus  Calvin  says  :  "  Unde  constat  et  aliam  quam-
libet,  extra  conjugium,  societatem  coram  ipso  [Deo]  maledictam
esse  ;  et  illam  ipsam  conjugalem  in  necessitatis  remedium  esse  or-

dinatam,  ne  in  effrenem  libidinem  proruamus Jam  quum

per  naturae  conditionem  et  accensa  post  lapsum  libidine,  mulieris
consortio  bis  obnoxii  simus,  nisi  quos  singulari  gratia  Deus  inde
exemit ;  videant  singuli  quid  sibi  datum  sit.  Virginitas,  fateor,
virtus  est  iion  contemnenda  :  sed  quoniam  aliis  negata  est,  aliis
nonnisi  ad  tempus  concessa,  qui  ab  incontinentia  vexantur,  et  su-
periores  in  certamine  esse  nequeunt  ad  matrimonii  subsidium  se
conferant,  ut  ita  in  sure  vocationis  gradu  castitatem  colant."  ^
That  is,  virginity  is  a  virtue.  Celibacy  is  a  higher  state  than
marriage.  Those  who  cannot  live  in  that  state,  should  descend  to
the  lower  platform  of  married  life.  With  such  dregs  of  Mani-
chean  philosophy  was  the  pure  truth  of  the  Bible  contaminated,
even  as  held  by  the  most  illustrious  Reformers.

4.  The  teaching  of  Scripture  as  to  the  sanctity  of  marriage  is
confirmed  by  the  experience  of  the  world.  It  is  only  in  the  mar-
riage state  that  some  of  the  purest,  most  disinterested,  and  most
elevated  principles  of  our  nature  are  called  into  exercise.  All
that  concerns  filial  piety,  and  parental  and  especially  maternal
affection,  depends  on  marriage  for  its  very  existence.  Yet  on  the
purifying  and  restraining  influence  of  these  affections  the  vrell-
being  of  human  societ}"  is  in  a  large  measure  dependent.  It  is  in
the  bosom  of  the  family  that  there  is  a  constant  call  for  acts  of
kindness,  of  self-denial,  of  forbearance,  and  of  love.  The  family,
therefore,  is  the  sphere  the  best  adapted  for  the  development  of
all  the  social  virtues ;  and  it  may  be  safely  said  that  there  is  far
more  of  moral  excellence  and  of  true  religion  to  be  found  in  Chris-
tian households,  than  in  the  desolate  homes  of  priests,  or  in  the
gloomy  cells  of  monks  and  nuns.  A  man  with  his  children  or
grandchildren  on  his  knees,  is  an  object  of  higher  reverence  than
any  emaciated  anchorite  in  his  cave.

5.  Our  Lord  teaches  that  a  tree  is  known  by  its  fruits.  There
has  been  no  more  prolific  source  of  evil  to  the  Church  than  the
unscriptural  notion  of  the  special  virtue  of  \arginity  and  the  en-
forced celibacy  of  the  clergy  and  monastic  vows,  to  which  that
notion  has  given  rise.  This  is  the  teaching  of  history.  On  this
point  the  testimony  of  Romanists  as  well  as  of  Protestants  is  de-

iJnstiiuHo,  u.  viii.  41,  42;  edit.  Berlin,  1834,  vol.  i.  pp.  264,  265.


372  PART  III.     Ch.   XIX.  — the   law.

cisive  and  overwhelming.  It  may  be  admitted  that  the  CathoHc
clergy  in  this  and  in  some  other  countries  are  as  decorous  in  their
lives,  as  the  clergy  of  other  denominations,  without  invalidating
the  testimony  of  history  as  to  the  evils  of  vows  of  celibacy.

Protestants,  while  assertmg  the  sanctity  of  marriage  and  deny-
ing the  superior  virtue  of  a  life  of  celibacy,  do  not  deny  that  there
are  times  and  circumstances  in  which  celibacy  is  a  virtue  :  i.  e.^
that  a  man  may  perform  a  virtuous  act  in  resolving  never  to
marry.  The  Church  often  has  work  to  do,  for  which  single  men
are  the  only  proper  agents.  The  cares  of  a  family,  in  other  words,
would  unfit  a  man  for  the  execution  of  the  task  assigned.  This,
however,  does  not  suppose  that  celibacy  is  in  itself  a  virtue.  It
may  also  happen  that  a  rich  man  may  be  called  upon  to  under-
take a  work  which  would  necessitate  his  disencumbering  himseK
of  the  care  of  his  estate,  and  subjecting  himself  to  a  life  of  pov-
erty. The  same  is  true  of  the  state.  In  fact  military  service,
for  the  great  majority  of  the  rank  and  file  of  an  army,  is  an  es-
tate of  forced  celibacy  so  long  as  the  service  continues.  And  even
with  regard  to  the  officers,  the  liberty  to  marry  is  very  much  re-
stricted in  the  standing  armies  of  Europe.  There  are  times  when
marriage  is  inexpedient.  Our  Lord  in  foretelling  the  destruction
of  Jerusalem  said,  "  Woe  unto  them  that  are  with  child,  and  to
them  that  give  suck  in  those  days."  It  is  the  part  of  wisdom  to
escape  such  woes.  When  Cliristians  had  no  security  for  life  or
home  ;  when  they  were  liable  to  be  torn  away  from  their  famihes,
or  to  have  all  means  of  providing  for  their  wants  taken  out  of
their  hands,  it  was  better  for  them  not  to  marry.  It  is  in  refer-
ence to  such  times  and  circumstances  that  the  words  of  Christ,  in
the  nineteenth  chapter  of  Matthew,  were  uttered,  and  the  advice
of  the  Apostle,  in  the  seventh  chapter  of  First  Corinthians  was
given.  The  Pharisees  asked  our  Lord  whether  a  man  could  put
away  his  wife  at  pleasure.  He  referred  them  to  the  original  in-
stitution of  marriage,  as  showing  that  it  was  mtended  to  be  an
indissoluble  connection.  His  disciples  said,  In  that  case  it  is  bet-
ter that  a  man  should  not  marry.  Our  Lord  replied  :  Whether
it  is  better  for  a  man  to  marry  or  not,  is  not  a  question  for  every
man  to  decide  for  himself.  ''  That  the  unmarried  state  is  better,
is  a  saying  not  for  every  one,  and  indeed  only  for  such  as  it  is
divinely  intended  for."  ^     That  is,  those  to  whom  the  requisite

1  Commentary,  Critical  and  Explanatory,  on  The  Old  and  New  Testament.  Matthew
xix.  11.  By  Rev.  Robert  Jamieson,  St.  Paul's,  Glasgow,  Scotland;  Rev.  A.  R.  Fausset,  A.
M.,  St.  Cutlibert,  York,  England;  and  the  Rev.  David  Brown,  D.  D.,  Aberdeen,  Scotland.
Hartford,  Conn.  1871.


g  11.]         THE  SEVENTH  COMMANDMENT.  373

grace  is  given,  "  O  nines  liujus  dicti  capaces  esse  negans,  significat
electionem  non  esse  positain  in  manu  nostra,  acsi  de  re  nobis  sub-
jecta  esset  consultatio.  Si  qnis  ntile  sibi  esse  putat  uxore  carere,
atque  ita  nullo  examine  habito,  coelibatus  legem  sibi  edicit,  longe
fallitnr.  Dons  enini,  qui  pronnntiavit  bonum  esse,  nt  viro  adjutrix
sit  mulier,  contempti  sui  ordinis  poenam  exiget :  quia  nimium  sibi
arrogant  mortales,  dum  se  a  coelesti  vocatione  eximere  tentant.
Porro  non  esse  omnibus  liber um,  eligere  utrum  libuerit,  inde  probat
Cliristus,  quia  speciale  sit  continentife  donum :  nam  quum  dicit,  non
omnes  esse  capaces,  sed  quibus  datum  est,  clare  demonstrat  non
omnibus  esse  datum."  ^  Those  to  whom  it  is  given  to  lead  an
unmarried  life,  as  our  Lord  teaches  (Matt.  xix.  10),  are  not  only
those  who  by  their  natural  constitution  are  unfit  for  the  marriage
state,  but  those  whom  God  calls  to  special  service  in  his  Church
and  whom  He  fits  for  that  work.

The  doctrine  which  Paul  teaches  on  this  subject  is  perfectly
coincident  with  the  teachings  of  our  Lord.  He  recognizes  mar-
riage as  a  divine  institution  ;  as  in  itself  good ;  as  the  normal  and
proper  state  in  which  men  and  women  should  live  ;  but  as  it  is
necessarily  attended  by  many  cares  and  distractions,  it  was  ex-
pedient in  times  of  trouble,  to  remain  unmarried.  This  is  the
purport  of  Paul's  teachings  in  First  Corinthians  vii.  No  one
of  the  sacred  ^vriters,  whether  in  the  Old  or  in  the  New  Testa-
ment, so  exalts  and  glorifies  marriage  as  does  this  Apostle  in  his
Epistle  to  the  Ephesians.  He,  therefore,  is  not  the  man,  guided
as  he  was  in  all  his  teachings  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  to  depreciate
or  undervalue  it,  as  only  the  less  of  two  evils.  It  is  a  positive
good  :  the  union  of  two  human  persons  to  supplement  and  comple-
ment the  one  the  other  in  a  way  which  is  necessary  to  the  per-
fection or  full  development  of  both.  The  wife  is  to  her  husband
what  the  Church  is  to  Christ.  Nothing  higher  than  this  can  pos-
sibly be  said.

1  Calvin  on  Matthew  xix.  10,  11,  in  N.  T.  Comment.  Berlin,  1838,  vol.  ii.  p.  159.  Although
Calvin  sometimes  speaks  disparagingly  of  marriage,  at  other  times,  especially  when  writ-
ing against  the  Papists,  he  vindicates  its  sanctity.  Thus  in  connection  with  the  passage
(juoted  above,  he  says:  "  Si  conjugium  instituitDeus  in  communem  humani  generis  salutem,
licet  quasdam  minus  gi-ata  secuni  trahat,  non  ideo  protinus  spernenduni  est.  Discanius  ergo,
fsi  quid  in  Dei  beneficiis  nobis  non  aiTidet,  non  tarn  lauti  esse  ac  niorosi,  quin  reverenter  illis
utamur.  Pr»seitim  nobis  in  sancto  conjugio  cavenda  est  hive  pravitas:  nam  quia  multis
molestiis  implicitum  est,  semper  conatus  est  Satan  odio  et  infamia  gravare,  ut  homines  ab
60  sub^luceret.  Et  Hieronymus  nimis  luculentum  maligni  perversique  ingenii  specimen  in
eo  edidit,  quod  non  tantura  calumniis  exagitat  sacrum  ilium  et  divinum  vit«  ordinem,  sed
quascunque  potest  ex  profanis  auctoribus  XoiSopCas  accumulat,  quae  ejus  honestatem  de-
ferment." —  Ibid.  p.  158.


874  PART  III.   Ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

History.
No  one  can  read  the  Epistles  of  Paul,  especially  those  to  the
Ephesians  and  Colossians,  without  seeing  clear  indications  of  the
prevalence,  even  in  the  apostolic  churches,  of  the  principles  of
that  philosophy  which  held  that  matter  was  contaminating ;  and
which  inculcated  asceticism  as  the  most  efficacious  means  of  the
purification  of  the  soul.  This  doctrine  had  already  been  adopted
and  reduced  to  practice  by  the  Essenes  among  the  Jews.  Farther
East,  under  a  somewhat  different  form,  it  had  prevailed  for  ages
before  the  Christian  era,  and  still  maintains  its  ground.  Accord-
ing to  the  Brahminical  philosophy  the  individuality  of  man  de-
pends on  the  body.  Complete  emancipation  from  the  body,  there-
fore, secures  the  merging  of  the  finite  into  the  infinite.  The  drop
is  lost  in  the  ocean,  and  this  is  the  highest  and  ultimate  destiny  of
man.  It  is  not  therefore  to  be  wondered  at,  that  the  early  fathers
came  more  or  less  under  the  influence  of  these  principles,  or  that
asceticism  gained  so  rapidly  and  maintained  so  long  its  ascendancy
in  the  Church.  The  depreciation  of  the  divine  institution  of  mar-
riage, and  the  exaltation  of  virginity  into  the  first  place  among
Christian  virtues,  was  the  natural  and  necessary  consequence  of
this  spirit.  Ignatius  called  voluntary  virgins  "  the  jewels  of
Christ."  Justin  Martyr  desired  celibacy  to  prevail  to  the  "•  great-
est possible  extent."  Tatian  regarded  marriage  as  inconsistent
with  spiritual  worship.  Origen  "  disabled  himself  in  his  youth  "
and  regarded  marriage  as  a  pollution.  Hieracas  made  "virginity
a  condition  of  salvation."  Tertullian  denounced  second  marriage
as  criminal,  and  represented  celibacy  as  the  ideal  of  Christian  life,
not  only  for  the  clergy,  but  also  for  the  laity.  Second  marriage
was  early  prohibited  so  far  as  the  clergy  were  concerned,  and  soon
came  in  their  case  the  prohibition  of  marriage  altogether.  The
Apostolical  Constitutions  prohibited  priests  from  contracting  mar-
riage after  consecration.  The  Council  of  Ancjo-a,  A.  D.  314,
allowed  deacons  to  marry,  provided  they  stipulated  for  the  privi-
lege before  ordination.  The  Council  of  Elvira,  A.  D.  305,  forbade
the  continuance  of  the  marriage  relation  (according  to  the  com-
mon interpretation  of  its  canons)  to  bishops,  presbyters,  and  dea-
cons on  pain  of  deposition.^  Jerome  was  fanatical  in  his  denun-
ciation of  marriage  ;  and  even  Augustine  was  carried  away  by
the  spirit  of  the  age.  In  answer  to  the  objection  that  if  men  acted
on  his  principles  the  world  would  be  depopulated,  he  answered  :
1  See  Schaff,  History  of  The  Christian  Church,  New  York,  1867,  vol.  i.  §§  91,  96.


§11.]  THE    SEVENTH   COMMANDMENT.  375

So  much  the  better,  for  in  that  case  Christ  would  come  the
sooner.  ^  Siricius,  Bishop  of  Rome  A.  D.  385,  decided  that  mar-
riage was  inconsistent  with  the  clerical  office  ;  and  was  followed  in
this  view  by  his  successors.  Great  opposition,  however,  was  ex-
perienced in  enforcing  celibacy,  and  it  required  all  the  energy  of
Gregory  VII.  to  have  the  decisions  of  councils  carried  into  effect.
Ultimately,  however,  the  rule,  so  far  as  the  clergy  are  concerned,
was  acquiesced  in,  and  received  the  authoritative  sanction  of  the
Council  of  Trent.  That  Council  decided,^  "  Si  quis  dixerit,  statum
conjugalem  anteponendum  esse  statui  virginitatis,  vel  coelibatus,  et
non  esse  melius,  et  beatius  manere  in  virgiiiitate  aut  coelibatu,
quam  jungi  matrimonio  :  anathema  sit."  On  this  assumed  higher
virtue  of  celibacy,  in  the  preceding  canon  it  was  ordered  :  "  Si
quis  dixerit,  clericos  in  sacris  ordinibus  constitutos,  vel  regulares,
castitatem  solemniter  professos,  posse  matrimonium  contrahere,
contractumque  validum  esse,  non  obstante  lege  ecclesiastica,  vel
voto  :  et  oppositum  nil  aliud  esse,  quam  damnare  matrimonium ;
posseque  omnes  contrahere  matrimonium,  qui  non  sentiunt  se
castitatis,  etiam  si  eam  voterint,  habere  donum  ;  anathema  sit ;
cum  Dens  id  recte  petentibus  non  deneget,  nee  patiatur  nos  supra
id,  quod  possumus,  tentari."

Although  the  doctrine  that  virginity,  as  the  Roman  Catechism
expresses  it,  "  summopere  commendatur,"  as  being  better,  and
more  perfect  and  holy  than  a  state  of  marriage,  is  made  the
ostensible  ground  of  the  enforced  celibacy  of  the  clergy,  it  is
manifest  that  hierarchical  reasons  had  much  to  do  in  making  the
Romish  Church  so  strenuous  in  insisting  that  its  clergy  should  be
unmarried.  This  Gregory  VII.  avows  when  he  says,^  "  Non
liberari  potest  ecclesia  a  servitute  laicorum,  nisi  liberentur  clerici
ab  uxoribus."  And  Melancthon  felt  authorized  to  say  in  refer-
ence to  the  celibacy  of  the  clergy  in  the  Church  of  Rome,  "  Una
est  vera  et  sola  causa  tuendi  coelibatus,  ut  opes  commodius  ad-
ministrentur  et  splendor  ordinis  retineatur."'*

As  the  Reformation  was  a  return  to  the  Scriptures  as  the  only
infallible  rule  of  faith  and  practice  ;  and  as  in  the  Scriptures  mar-
riage is  exalted  as  a  holy  state,  and  no  preeminence  in  excellence
is  assigned  to  celibacy  or  virginity  ;  and  as  the  Reformers  denied
the  authority  of  the  Church  to  make  laws  to  bind  the  conscience
or  to  curtail  the  liberty  -svith  which  Christ  had  made  his  people

'  Auc:iistine,  De  Bono  Conjugali,  10;    Works,  edit.   Benedictines,   Paris,  1837,  vol.  vi.
p.  551,  c.
*  Sess.  xxiv.,  canon  10;    Streitwolf,  Libri  SymboUci,  Gctting:en,  1846,  p.  91.
3  Epist.  lib.  iii.  p.  7.  ■*  See  Herzog's  Real-EnajHopwlie,  Art.  "  Ccilibat."


376  PART  III.     Ch.   XIX. —  THE   LAW.

free,  Protestants  pronounced  with  one  voice  against  the  obliga-
tion of  monastic  vows  and  of  the  celibacy  of  the  clergy.

The  Greek  Church  petrified  at  an  early  date.  It  assumed  the
form  which  it  still  retains,  before  the  doctrine  of  the  special  sanc-
tity of  celibacy  had  gained  ascendancy.  It  abides  therefore  by
the  decisions  of  the  Council  of  Chalcedon,  A.  D.  451,  and  of
Trullo,  A.  D.  692,  which  permitted  marriage  to  priests  and  dea-
cons. Those  Greeks  who  are  in  communion  with  the  Cluirch  of
Rome  enjoy  the  same  liberty.  Benedict  XIV.  declared  in  refer-
ence to  them,  "  Etsi  expetendum  quam  maxime  esset,  ut  Grseci,
qui  sunt  in  sacris  ordinibus  constituti,  castitatem  non  secus  ac
Latini  servarent.  Nihilominus,  ut  eorum  clerici,  subdiaconi,
diaconi  et  presbyteri  uxores  in  eorum  ministerio  retineant,  dum-
modo  ante  sacros  ordines,  virgines,  non  viduas,  neque  corruptas
duxerint,  Romana  non  prohibet  Ecclesia.  Eos  autem,  qui  viduam
vel  corruptam  duxerint,  vel  ad  secunda  vota,  prima  uxore  mortua,
convolarint,  ad  subdiaconatum,  diaconatum  et  presbyteratum  pro-
moveri  omnino  prohibemus."  ^  In  the  Russian  Church  the  priests
are  required  to  be  married  men ;  but  second  marriages  are  for
them  prohibited.  The  bishops  are  chosen  from  the  monks  and
must  be  unmarried.

Marriage  a  Divine  Institution.

Marriage  is  a  divine  institution.  (1.)  Because  founded  on  the
nature  of  man  as  constituted  by  God.  He  made  man  male  and
female,  and  ordained  marriage  as  the  indispensable  condition  of
the  continuance  of  the  race.  (2.)  IMarriage  was  instituted  before
the  existence  of  civil  society,  and  therefore  cannot  in  its  essential
nature  be  a  civil  institution.  As  Adam  and  Eve  were  married
not  in  virtue  of  any  civil  law,  or  by  the  intervention  of  a  civil
magistrate,  so  any  man  and  woman  cast  together  on  a  desert
island,  could  lawfully  take  each  other  as  husband  and  wife.  It
is  a  deoTadation  of  the  institution  to  make  it  a  mere  ci^dl  con-
tract.  (3.)  God  commanded  men  to  marry,  when  He  com-
manded them  to  increase,  and  multiply  and  replenish  the  earth.
(4.)  God  in  his  word  has  prescribed  the  duties  belonging  to  the
marriage  relation  ;  He  has  made  known  his  will  as  to  the  parties

1  Herzog's  Real-Encyklopadie,  Art.  "Ciilibat."  The  controversies  in  the  Church  on
this  subject  are  detailed  by  the  leading  modem  ecclesiastical  historians,  as  Neander,  Giese-
ler,  and  Schaff.  The  merits  of  the  question  are  discussed  in  numerous  separate  treatises,
as  well  as  in  such  books  as  Burnet's  Exposition  of  the  Thirty-nine  Articles,  Jeremy  Tay-
lors Ductor  Dubit-intiiini  (in.  iv.  Works,  Loudon,  1828,  vol.  xiii.  pp.  549-61G),  Elliott's
Ddineition  of  Romanism,  Thiersch's  Vurksuntjen  liher  Katholidsmus  uni  Protcstantismus,
2d  edit.  Krlatigen,  1848.


§  11.]  THE    SEVENTH   COMMANDMENT.  377

wlio  may  lawfully  be  united  in  marriage ;  He  has  determined  the
continuance  of  the  relation  ;  and  the  causes  which  alone  justify
its  dissolution.  These  matters  are  not  subject  to  the  will  of  the
parties,  or  to  the  authority  of  the  State.  (5.)  The  vow  of  mutual
fidelity  made  by  husband  and  wife,  is  not  made  exclusively  by
each  one  to  the  other,  but  by  each  to  God.  When  a  man  con-
nects himself  with  a  Christian  Church  he  enters  into  covenant
with  his  brethren  in  the  Lord  ;  mutual  obligations  are  assumed  ;
but  nevertheless  the  covenant  is  made  vnth  God.  He  joins  the
Church  in  obedience  to  the  will  of  God ;  he  jaromises  to  regulate
his  faith  and  practice  by  the  divine  word ;  and  the  vow  of  fidelity
is  made  to  God.  It  is  the  same  in  marriage.  It  is  a  voluntary,
mutual  compact  between  husband  and  wiie.  They  promise  to  be
faithful  to  each  other  ;  but  nevertheless  they  act  in  obedience  to
God,  and  promise  to  Him  that  they  will  live  together  as  man  and
<vife,  according  to  his  word.  Any  violation  of  the  compact  is,
therefore,  a  violation  of  a  vow  made  to  God.

Marriage  is  not  a  sacrament  in  the  sense  which  in  baptism
and  the  Lord's  Supper  are  sacraments,  nor  in  the  sense  of
the  Romish  Church  ;  but  it  is  none  the  less  a  sacred  institution.
Its  solemnization  is  an  office  of  religion.  It  should,  therefore,  be
entered  upon  with  due  solemnity  and  in  the  fear  of  God  ;  and
should  be  celebrated,  i.  e.,  the  ceremony  should  be  performed  by
a  minister  of  Christ.  He  alone  is  authorized  to  see  to  it  that  the
law  of  God  is  adhered  to ;  and  he  alone  can  receive  and  register
the  marriage  vows  as  made  to  God.  The  civil  magistrate  can
only  witness  it  as  a  civil  contract,  and  it  is  consequently  to  ignore
its  religious  character  and  sanction  to  have  it  celebrated  by  a
civil  officer.  As  the  essence  of  the  marriage  contract  is  the
mutual  compact  of  the  parties  in  the  sight  of  God  and  in  the  pres-
ence of  witnesses,  it  is  not  absolutely  necessary  that  it  should  be
celebrated  by  a  minister  of  religion  or  even  by  a  civil  magistrate.
It  may  be  lawfully  solemnized,  as  among  the  Quakers,  without
the  intervention  of  either.  Nevertheless  as  it  is  of  the  greatest
importance  that  the  religious  nature  of  the  institution  should  be
kept  in  view,  it  is  incumbent  on  Clnristians,  so  far  as  they  them-
selves are  concerned,  to  insist  that  it  should  be  solemnized  as  a
religious  service.

Marriage  as  a   Civil  Institution.

As  a  man's  beins;  a  servant  of  God  and  bound  to  make  his  word
the    rule  of  his  faith    and  practice,  is  not  inconsistent  with  his


378  PART  in.   Ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

being  a  servant  of  tlie  state,  and  bound  to  render  obedience  to  ita
laws  ;  so  it  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  fact  that  marriage  is  an
ordinance  of  God,  that  it  should  be,  in  another  aspect,  a  civil
institution.  It  is  so  implicated  in  the  social  and  civil  relations  of
men  that  it  of  necessity  comes  under  the  cognizance  of  the  state.
It  is  therefore  a  civil  institution.  (1.)  In  so  far  as  it  is,  and
must  be,  recognized  and  enforced  by  the  state.  (2.)  It  imposes
civil  obligations  which  the  state  has  the  right  to  enforce.  The
husband  is  bound  to  sustain  his  wife,  for  example,  and  he  is
constrained  by  the  civil  law  to  the  performance  of  this  duty.
(3.)  Marriage  also  involves,  on  both  sides,  rights  to  property ;
and  the  claims  of  cliildren  born  in  wedlock  to  the  property  of
their  parents.  All  these  questions  concerning  property  fall  legit-
imately under  the  control  of  the  civil  law.  In  many  countries
not  only  property,  but  rank,  title,  and  political  prerogatives  are
implicated  with  the  question  of  marriage.  (4.)  It  belongs  to  the
state,  therefore,  as  the  guardian  of  these  rights,  to  determine
what  marriages  are  la^vful  and  what  unlawful ;  how  the  contract
is  to  be  solemnized  and  authenticated ;  and  what  shall  be  its  legal
consequences.  All  these  laws  Christians  are  bound  to  obey,  so
far  as  obedience  to  them  is  consistent  with  a  good  conscience.

The  legitimate  power  of  the  state  in  all  these  matters  is  hmited
by  the  revealed  v^dll  of  God.  It  can  make  nothing  an  impediment
to  marriage  which  the  Scriptures  do  not  declare  to  be  a  bar  to
that  union.  It  can  make  nothing  a  ground  of  dissolving  the  mar-
riage contract  which  the  Bible  does  not  make  a  valid  ground  of
divorce.  And  the  state  can  attach  none  other  than  civil  pains
and  penalty  to  the  violation  of  its  laws  concerning  marriage.
This  is  only  saying  that  a  Christian  government  is  bound  to
respect  the  conscientious  convictions  of  the  people.  It  is  a  viola-
tion of  the  principles  of  civil  and  religious  liberty  for  the  state  to
make  its  will  paramomit  to  the  will  of  God.  Plain  as  this  prin-
ciple seems  to  be,  it  is  nevertheless  constantly  disregarded  in
almost  all  Christian  nations,  whether  Catholic  or  Protestant.  In
England,  for  example,  it  is  still  the  law,  that  no  member  of  the
royal  family  can  marry  without  the  consent  of  the  reigning  sov-
ereign. If  this  meant  nothing  more  than  that  any  member  of  the
royal  family  thus  marrying,  should  forfeit  for  himself  and  his
children  all  right  of  succession  to  the  cro"vvn,  it  might  be  all  right.
But  the  real  meaning  is  that  such  a  marriage  is  null  and  void ;
that  parties  otherwise  lawfully  married  and  whom  God  has  joined
together  as  man  and  wife,  are  not  man  and  wife.     This   is  to


§11.]  THE    SEVENTH   COMMANDMENT.  379

bring  the  law  of  man  and  the  law  of  God  into  direct  collision,
and  make  the  human  supersede  the  divine.  In  Prussia  a  subor-
dinate officer  of  the  army  cannot  marry  Avithout  the  consent  of
his  commander.  If  he  should  marry  without  that  consent,  it
might  be  right  to  make  him  throw  up  his  commission  ;  but  to  say
that  his  wife  is  not  a  wife,  is  not  only  untnie,  but  it  is  a  monstrous
injustice  and  cruelty.  In  England,  until  of  late  years,  no  mar-
riage was  valid  unless  solemnized  in  church,  within  canonical
hours,  and  by  a  man  in  priest's  orders.  This  law  was  designed
specially  for  the  protection  of  heiresses  from  the  wiles  of  fortune-
hunters.  It  might  be  just  to  determine  that  no  marriage  not
thus  solemnized  should  convey  any  right  to  property  ;  but  to  say
that  parties  married  five  minutes  after  twelve  o'clock,  noon,  are
not  married  at  all,  whereas  had  the  ceremony  been  performed  ten
minutes  sooner,  they  would  be  truly  man  and  wife,  shocks  the
conscience  and  common  sense  of  men.  So  in  this  country  before
the  abolition  of  slavery,  according  to  the  laws  of  our  Southern
States,  no  slave  could  marry.  A  young  white  man  married  a
young  woman,  whom  no  one  in  the  community  supposed  had  a
drop  of  African  blood  in  her  veins.  It  was  proved,  however,  that
she  was  a  slave.  Her  husband  purchased  her,  manumitted  her,
repudiated  her,  married  another  woman,  and  was  received  into
the  communion  of  a  Presbyterian  Church.  The  law  of  God  was
thus  regarded  as  a  mere  nullity.^  .

Because  marriage  is  in  some  of  its  aspects  a  civil  institution,  to
be  regulated  within  certain  limits,  by  the  civil  law,  men  have
treated  it  as  though  it  were  a  mere  business  engagement.  They
ignore  its  character  as  a  divine  institution,  regulated  and  con-
trolled by  divine  laws.  Civil  legislatures  should  remember  that
they  can  no  more  annul  the  laws  of  God  than  the  laws  of  nature.
If  they  pronounce  those  not  to  be  married  who,  by  the  divine
law,  are  married  ;  or  if  they  separate  those  whom  God  hath  joined
together,  their  laws  are  absolute  nullities  at  the  bar  of  con-
science and  in  the  sight  of  God.

1  Tliis  however  was  in  accordance  with  the  canonical  law,  which  made  error  as  to  the
condition  of  one  of  the  parties,  as  bond  or  free,  a  ground  of  annulling  the  marriage  contract.
Stahl,  De  Matrimonio  Eescindendo.  Berlin,  1841.  Canon  Leg.  cap.  2,  4,  x.,  de  conjugio
servorum,  4,  9.  See  Goschen  in  Herzog's  Encyklopddk,  art.  "Ehe."  This  is  still  the
doctrine  of  the  Romish  Church.  See  Dens,  Tractatus  de  Matrimonio ;  Theologln,  edit.
Dublin,  1832,  vol.  vii.,  N.  72,  p.  199.  See  also  Commcntanes  on  the  Law  of  Marrlaf/e  and
Divorce,  by  Joel  Prentiss  Bishop.     4th  edition,  Boston,  1864,  vol.  i.  chap.  x.  §§  154-163.


380  PART  m.   Ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

Monogamy.

Marriage  is  a  compact  between  one  man  and  one  woman  to  live
together,  as  man  and  wife,  until  separated  by  death.  According
to  this  definition,  first,  the  marriage  relation  can  subsist  only
between  one  man  and  one  woman  ;  secondly,  the  union  is  per-
manent, i.  g.,  it  can  be  dissolved  only  by  the  death  of  one  or  both
of  the  parties,  except  for  reasons  specified  in  the  word  of  God  ;
and  thirdly,  the  death  of  one  of  the  parties  dissolves  the  union,  so
that  it  is  lawful  for  the  survivor  to  marry  again.

As  to  the  first  of  these  points,  or  that  the  Scriptural  doctrine
of  marriage  is  opposed  to  and  condemns  polygamy,  it  is  be
remarked,  —

1.  That  such  has  been  the  doctrine  of  the  Christian  Church  in
all  ages  and  in  every  part  of  the  world.  There  has  never  been  a
church  calling  itself  Christian  which  tolerated  a  plurality  of  wives
among  its  members.  There  could  hardly  be  a  stronger  proof  than
this  fact  that  such  is  the  law  of  Christ.  It  is  morally  certain  that
the  whole  Church  cannot  have  mistaken,  on  such  a  subject  as
this,  the  mind  and  will  of  its  divine  Head  and  Master.

2.  Marriage  as  originally  constituted  and  ordained  by  God  was
between  one  man  and  one  woman.  And  the  language  of  Adam
when  he  received  Eve  from  the  hands  of  her  Maker,  proves  that
such  was  the  essential  natui'e  of  the  relation :  "  And  Adam  said,
This  is  now  bone  of  my  bones,  and  flesh  of  my  flesh There-
fore shall  a  man  leave  his  father  and  his  mother,  and  shall  cleave
unto  his  wife  and  they  shall  be  one  flesh."  (Gen.  ii.  23,  24.)  Or,
as  our  Lord  quotes  and  expounds  the  passage,  "  They  twain  shall
be  one  flesh:  so  then  they  are  no  more  twain,  but  one  flesh."
(Mark  x.  8.)  "  The  two,"  and  no  more  than  two,  become  one.
This  was  not  only  the  language  of  unfallen  Adam  in  Paradise,
but  the  language  of  God  utte^red  through  the  lips  of  Adam,  as
appears  not  only  from  tlie  circumstances  of  the  case,  but  also  from
our  Lord's  attributing  to  them  divine  authority,  as  He  evidently
does  in  the  passage  just  quoted.  Thus  the  law  of  marriage  as
originally  instituted  by  God,  required  that  the  union  should  be
between  one  man  and  one  woman.  This  law  could  be  changed
only  by  the  authority  by  which  it  was  originally  enacted.  De-
Htzsch  remarks  on  this  passage:^  "In  these  words  not  only  the
deepest  spiritual  union,  but  a  union  comprehending  the  whole
nature  of  man,  an  all  compreliending  personal  communion,  is  rep-

1  Die  Genesis,  Leipzig,  1852,  p.  114.


§  11.]  THE    SEVENTH   COMMANDMENT.  381

resented  as  the  essence  of  marriage ;  and  monogamy  is  set  forth
as  its  natural  and  divinely  appointed  form."

3.  Although  this  original  law  was  partially  disregarded  in  later
times,  it  was  never  abrogated.  Polygamy  and  divorce  were  in  a
measure  tolerated  under  the  Mosaic  law,  yet  in  all  ages  among
the  Hebrews,  monogamy  was  the  rule,  and  polygamy  the  ex-
ception, as  it  was  among  other  civilized  nations  of  antiquity.
Polygamy  first  appears  among  the  descendants  of  Cain.  (Gen.  iv.
19.)  Noah  and  his  sons  had  each  but  one  wife.  Abraham  had
but  one  wife,  until  the  impatience  of  Sarah  for  children  led  him
to  take  Hagar  as  a  concubine.  The  same  rule  of  marriage  was
observed  by  the  prophets  as  a  class.  Polygamy  was  confined  in
a  great  measure  to  kings  and  princes.  There  was  also  an  honour-
able distinction  made  between  the  wife  and  the  concubine.  The
former  retained  her  preeminence  as  the  head  of  the  family.  Nu-
merous passages  of  the  Old  Testament  go  to  prove  that  monogamy
was  considered  as  the  law  of  marriage,  from  which  plurality  of
wives  was  a  departure.  Throughout  the  Proverbs,  for  example,
it  is  the  blessing  of  a  good  wife,  not  of  wives,  that  is  continually
set  forth.  (Prov.  xii.  4  ;  xix.  14  ;  xxxi.  10  ff.)  The  apocryphal
books  contain  clear  evidence  that  after  the  exile  monogamy  was
almost  universal  among  the  Jews  ;  and  it  may  be  inferred  from
such  passages  as  Luke  i.  5  ;  Acts  v.  1,  and  many  others,  that  the
same  was  true  at  the  time  of  the  advent  of  Christ.

With  regard  to  the  toleration  of  polygamy  under  the  Mosaic
law,  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  the  seventh  commandment  be-
longs to  the  same  category  as  the  sixth  and  eighth.  These  laws
are  not  founded  on  the  essential  nature  of  God,  and  therefore
are  not  immutable.  They  are  founded  on  the  permanent  relations
of  men  in  their  present  state  of  existence.  From  this  it  follows,
(1.)  That  they  bind  men  only  in  their  present  state.  The  laws
of  property  and  marriage  can  have  no  application,  so  far  as  we
know,  to  the  future  world,  where  men  shall  be  as  angels,  neither
marrying  nor  giving  in  marriage.  (2.)  These  laws  being  founded
on  the  permanent  and  natural  relations  of  men,  cannot  be  set
aside  by  hviman  authority,  because  those  relations  are  not  subject
to  the  will  or  ordinance  of  men.  (3.)  They  may  however  be
dispensed  with  by  God.  He  commanded  the  Israelites  to  despoil
the  Egyptians  and  to  dispossess  the  Canaanites,  but  this  does
not  prove  that  one  nation  may,  of  its  own  motion,  seize  on  the
inheritance  of  another  people.  If  God,  therefore,  at  any  time
and  to  any  people  gi-anted  permission  to  practise  polygamy,  then


382  PART  in.   Ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

so  long  as  that  permission  lasted  and  for  those  to  whom  it  was
given,  polygamy  was  lawful,  and  at  all  other  times  and  for  all
other  persons  it  was  unlawful.  This  principle  is  clearly  recog-
nized in  what  our  Saviour  teaches  concerning  divorce.  It  was
permitted  the  Jews  under  the  Mosaic  law  to  put  away  their
wives  ;  as  soon  as  that  law  was  abolished,  the  right  of  divorce
ceased.

4.  Monogamy,  however,  does  not  rest  exclusively  on  the  orig-
inal institution  of  marriage,  or  upon  the  general  drift  of  the
Old  Testament  teaching,  but  mainly  on  the  clearly  revealed  will
of  Christ.  His  mil  is  the  supreme  law  for  all  Christians,  and
rightfully  for  all  men.  When  the  Pharisees  came  to  Him  and
asked  Him  whether  a  man  could  lawfully  put  away  his  wife,
He  answered,  that  marriage  as  instituted  by  God  was  an  indis-
soluble union  between  one  man  and  one  woman ;  and,  therefore,
that  those  whom  God  had  joined  together  no  man  could  put  asmi-
der.  This  is  the  doctrine  clearly  taught  in  Matthew  xix.  4-9 ;
Mark  x.  4-9  ;  Luke  xvi.  18  ;  Matthew  v.  32.  In  these  passages
our  Lord  expressly  declares  that  if  a  man  marries  while  his  first
wife  is  living  he  commits  adultery.  The  exception  which  Christ
himself  makes  to  this  rule,  will  be  considered  under  the  head  of
divorce.

The  Apostle  teaches  the  same  doctrine  in  Romans  vii.  2,  3  :
"  The  woman  which  hath  an  husband  is  bound  by  the  law  to  her
husband,  so  long  as  he  liveth ;  but  if  the  husband  be  dead,  she  is
loosed  from  the  law  of  her  husband.  So  then,  if  while  her  hus-
band liveth,  she  be  married  to  another  man,  she  shall  be  called
an  adulteress :  but  if  her  husband  be  dead,  she  is  free  from  that
law ;  so  that  she  is  no  adulteress,  though  she  be  married  to  another
man."  The  doctrine  of  this  passage  is  that  marriage  is  a  com-
pact between  one  man  and  one  woman,  which  can  be  dissolved
only  by  the  death  of  one  of  the  parties.  So  in  1  Corinthians
vii,  2 :  "•  Let  every  man  have  his  own  wife,  and  let  every  woman
have  her  own  husband,"  it  is  taken  for  granted  that,  in  the
Christian  Church,  a  plurality  of  \vives  is  as  much  out  of  the  ques-
tion as  a  plurality  of  husbands.  This  assumption  runs  through
the  whole  New  Testament.  We  not  only  never  read  of  a  Chris-
tian's having  two  or  more  wives  ;  but  whenever  the  duty  of  the
marriage  relation  is  spoken  of,  it  is  always  of  the  husband  to  his
wife,  and  of  the  wife  to  her  husband.  In  the  judgment,  therefore,
of  the  whole  Christian  Church,  marriage  is  a  covenant,  between
one  man  and  one  woman  to  live  together  as  husband  and  wife,
until  separated  by  death.


§  11.]  THE   SEVENTH   COMMANDMENT.  833

5.  This  Scriptural  law  is  confirmed  by  the  providential  law
which  secures  the  numerical  equality  of  the  sexes.  Had  polygamy
been  according  to  the  divine  purpose,  we  should  naturally  expect
that  more  women  would  be  born  than  men.  But  the  reverse  is
the  fact.  There  are  more  men  than  women  born  into  the  world.
The  excess,  however,  is  only  sufficient  to  provide  for  tlie  greater
peril  to  life  to  which  men  are  exposed.  The  law  of  providence
is  the  numerical  equality  of  the  sexes  ;  and  this  is  a  clear  inti-
mation of  the  will  of  God  that  every  man  should  have  his  own
wife,  and  every  woman  her  own  husband.  Such  being  the  will  of
God,  as  revealed  both  in  his  word  and  in  his  providence,  every-
thing which  tends  to  counteract  it  must  be  evil  in  its  nature  and
consequences.  The  doctrine  which  depreciated  marriage,  and
made  celibacy  a  virtue,  flooded  the  Chiu-ch  with  corruption.  And
everything  in  our  modern  civilization  and  modes  of  living
which  renders  marriage  diflicult,  and  consequently  infrequent,  is
to  be  deprecated,  and  if  possible  removed.  That  every  man
should  have  his  own  wife  and  every  woman  her  own  husband,  is
the  divinely  appointed  preventive  of  the  "  Social  Evil"  Avith  aU
its  unutterable  horrors.^  Every  other  preventive  is  human  and
worthless.  Rather  than  that  the  present  state  of  things  should
continue,  it  would  be  better  to  return  to  the  old  patriarchal  usage,
and  let  parents  give  their  sons  and  daughters  in  marriage  as  soon
as  they  attained  the  proper  age,  on  the  best  terms  they  can.

6.  As  all  the  permanently  obligatory  laws  of  God  are  founded
on  the  nature  of  his  creatures,  it  follows  that  if  He  has  ordained
that  marriage  must  be  the  union  of  one  man  and  one  woman,  there
mu,st  be  a  reason  for  this  in  the  very  constitution  of  man  and  in
the  nature  of  the  marriage  relation.  That  relation  must  be  such
that  it  cannot  subsist  between  one  and  many ;  between  one  man
and  more  than  one  woman.  This  is  plain,  first,  from  the  nature
of  the  love  which  it  involves ;  and  secondly,  from  the  nature  of
the  union  which  it  constitutes.  First,  conjugal  love  is  peculiar
and  exclusive.  It  can  have  but  one  object.  As  the  love  of  a
mother  for  a  child  is  peculiar,  and  can  have  no  other  object  than
her  own  child,  so  the  love  of  a  husband  can  have  no  other  object
than  his  wife,  and  the  love  of  a  wife  no  other  object  than  her
husband.  It  is  a  love  not  only  of  complacency  and  delight,  but
also  of  possession,  of  property,  and  of  rightful  ownership.  This
is  the  reason  why  jealousy  in  man  or  woman  is  the  fiercest  of  all

1  The  fact  that  men  and  women,  who  make  the  murder  of  infants  a  profession,  are  roll-
ing in  wealth,  is  enough  to  rouse  any  community  from  its  false  security.


384  PART  III.     Cu.   XIX.  — THE   LAW.

liuinan  passions.  It  involves  a  sense  of  injury  ;  of  the  violation
of  the  most  sacred  rights ;  more  sacred  even  than  the  rights  of
property  or  life.  Conjugal  love,  therefore,  cannot  by  possibility
exist  except  between  one  man  and  one  woman.  Monogamy  has
its  foundation  in  the  very  constitution  of  our  nature.  Polygamy
is  umiatural,  and  necessarily  destructive  of  the  normal,  or  divinely
constituted  relation  between  husband  and  wife.

Secondly,  in  another  aspect,  the  union  involved  in  marriage  can-
not exist  except  between  one  man  and  une  woman.  It  is  not  merely
a  union  of  feeling  and  of  interests.  It  is  such  a  union  as  to  pro-
duce, in  some  sense,  identity.  The  two  become  one.  Such  is  the
declaration  of  our  Lord.  Husband  and  wife  are  one,  in  a  sense
which  justified  the  Apostle  in  saying  as  he  does,  in  Ephesians  v.  30,
that  the  wife  is  bone  of  her  husband's  bone,  and  flesh  of  his  flesh.
She  is  his  body.  She  is  himself  (v.  28).  Such  is  this  union  that
"  Qui  uxorem  repudiat,  quasi  dimidiam  sui  partem  a  seipso  avel-
ht.  Hoc  autem  minime  patitur  natura,  ut  corpus  suum  quisque
discerpat."  What  all  this  means  it  may  be  hard  for  us  to  under-
stand. It  is  certain,  —  (1.)  'That  it  does  not  refer  to  anything
material,  or  to  any  identification  of  substance.  When  Adam
said  of  Eve,  "  This  is  bone  of  my  bones,  and  flesh  of  my  flesh,"
he  doubtless  referred  to  her  being  formed  out  of  his  body.  But
as  these  words  are  used  by  the  Apostle  to  express  the  relation  of
all  wives  to  their  husbands,  they  must  be  understood  of  something
else  than  identity  of  substance.  (2.)  The  oneness  of  man  and
wife,  of  which  the  Scriptures  speak,  cannot  be  nnderstood  in  any
sense  inconsistent  with  their  distinct  subsistence  or  personahty.
They  may  be  very  different  in  character  and  destiny.  The  one
may  be  saved,  the  other  lost.  (3.)  It  is  evident,  however,  that
the  meaning  of  the  strong  language  of  Scriptm-e  on  this  subject
is  not  exhausted,  by  representing  the  marriage  union  as  being
merely  one  of  afliection  ;  or  b}^  saying  that  the  husband  is  the
complement  of  the  -svife  and  the  wife  of  the  husband  ;  that  is,  that
the  marriage  relation  is  necessary  to  the  completeness  of  our
nature  and  to  its  full  development  in  the  present  state  of  exist-
ence ;  that  there  are  capacities,  feelings,  and  virtues  which  are  not
other^vise  or  elsewhere  called  into  exercise.  All  this  may  be  true,
but  it  is  not  the  whole  truth.  (4.)  There  is,  m  a  certain  sense,
a  community  of  Hfe  between  husband  and  mfe.  We  are  accus-
tomed to  say,  and  to  say  truly,  that  the  life  of  parents  is  commu-
nicated to  their  children.  Each  nation  and  every  historical  family
has  a  form  of  life  by  which  it  is  distinguished.     As,  therefore,  the


§11.]  THE   SEVENTH  COMMANDMENT.  38-''

life  of  a  father  and  the  life  of  his  son  are  the  same,  in  that  the
blood  (^'.  e.,  the  life)  of  the  parent  flows  in  the  veins  of  his  chil-
dren; so  in  an  analogous  sense  the  life  of  the  husband  and  wife  is
one.  They  have  a  common  life,  and  that  common  or  joint  life  is
transmitted  to  their  offspring.  This  is  the  doctrine  of  the  early
Church.     The  Apostolical  Constitutions  say  :  ^  rj  ywr]  koivwvos  ecrrt

^Lov,  ipovfiivT)  ets  ev  crw/xa  eK  8vo  iraoa.  6eov.

The  analogy  which  the  Apostle  traces  out  in  Ephesians  v.  22—
33,  between  the  conjugal  relation  and  the  union  between  Christ
and  his  Church,  brings  out  the  Scriptural  doctrine  of  marriage
more  clearly  than  perhaps  iinj  other  passage  in  the  Bible.  No
analogy  is  expected  to  answer  in  all  respects,  and  no  illustration
borrowed  from  earthly  relations  can  bring  out  all  the  fulness  of
the  things  of  God.  The  relation,  therefore,  between  a  husband
and  his  vnfe,  is  only  an  adumbration  of  the  relation  of  Cln-ist  to
his  Church.  Still  there  is  an  analogy  between  the  two,  (1.)  As
the  Apostle  teaches,  tlie  love  of  Christ  to  his  Church  is  peculiar
and  exclusive.  It  is  such  as  He  has  for  no  other  class  or  body  of
national  creatures  in  the  universe.  •  So  the  love  of  the  husband
for  his  wife  is  pecidiar  and  exclusive.  It  is  such  as  he  has  for  no
other  object ;  a  love  in  which  no  one  can  participate.  (2.)  Christ's
love  for  his  Church  is  self-sacrificing.  He  gave  himself  for  it.
He  purchased  the  Church  with  his  blood.  So  the  husband  should,
and  wlien  true,  does,  m  all  things  sacrifice  himself  for  his  ^\^fe.
(3.)  Christ  and  his  Church  are  one ;  one  in  the  sense  that  the
Church  is  his  body.  So  the  husband  and  wife  are  in  such  a  sense
one,  that  a  man  in  loving  his  vrife  loves  himself.  (4.)  Christ's
life  is  communicated  to  the  Church.  As  the  life  of  the  head  is
communicated  to  the  members  of  the  human  body ;  and  the  life
of  the  vine  to  the  branches,  so  there  is,  in  a  mysterious  sense,  a
community  of  life  between  Christ  and  his  Church.  In  like  man-
ner, in  a  sense  no  less  truly  mysterious,  there  is  a  community  of
Hfe  between  husband  and  wife.

From  all  this  it  follows  that  as  it  would  be  utterly  incongruous
and  impossible  that  Chiist  should  have  two  bodies,  two  brides,
two  churches,  so  it  is  no  less  incongruous  and  impossible  that  a
man  should  have  two  wives.  That  is,  the  conjugal  relation,  as  it
is  set  forth  in  Scripture,  cannot  by  i^ossibihty  subsist,  except  be-
tween one  man  and  one  woman.

1  Lib.  VI.  cap.  xiv. ;    TVoi'Jcs  of  Clement  of  Rome,  edit.  Migne,  Paris,  1857,  vol.  i.  p.
945,  c.

VOL.  ni.  25


386  PART  III.     Ch.   XIX.  — the   law.

Conclusions.

1.  If  such  be  the  true  doctrine  of  marriage,  it  follows,  as  just
stated,  that  polygamy  destroys  its  very  nature.  It  is  founded
on  a  wrong  view  of  the  nature  of  woman  ;  places  her  in  a  false
and  degrading  position  ;  dethrones  and  despoils  her ;  and  is  pro-
ductive of  innumerable  evils.

2.  It  follows  that  the  marriage  relation  is  permanent  and  in-
dissoluble. A  limb  may  be  violently  severed  from  the  body,  and
lose  all  vital  connection  with  it ;  and  husband  and  wife  may  be
thus  violently  separated,  and  their  conjugal  relation  annulled  ;
but  in  both  cases  the  normal  connection  is  permanent.

3.  It  follows  that  the  state  can  neither  constitute  nor  dissolve
the  marriage  relation.  It  can  no  more  free  a  husband  or  wife  "  a
vinculo  matrimonii,"  than  it  can  free  a  father  "  a  vinculo  pater-
nitatis."  It  may  protect  a  child  from  the  injustice  or  cruelty  of
its  father,  or  even,  for  due  cause,  remove  him  from  all  parental
control,  and  it  may  legislate  about  its  property,  but  the  natural
bond  between  parents  and  clrildren  is  beyond  its  control.  So  the
state  may  legislate  about  marriage,  and  determine  its  accidents
and  legal  consequences  ;  it  may  decide  who,  in  the  sight  of  the
law,  shall  be  regarded  as  husband  and  "wife,  and  when,  or  under
what  circumstances,  the  legal  or  civil  rights  and  privileges  arising
out  of  the  relation  shall  cease  to  be  enforced ;  and  it  may  protect
the  person  and  rights  of  the  wife,  and,  if  necessary,  remove  her
from  the  control  of  her  husband,  but  the  conjugal  bond  it  can-
not dissolve.  All  decrees  of  divorce  "  a  vinculo  matrimonii,"  is-
sued by  civil  or  ecclesiastical  authorities,  so  far  as  the  conscience
is  concerned,  are  perfectly  inoperative,  unless  antecedently  to  such
decree  and  by  the  law  of  God,  the  conjugal  relation  has  ceased
to  exist.

4.  It  follows  from  the  Scriptural  doctrine  of  marriage  that
all  laws  are  evil  which  tend  to  make  those  two  whom  God  pro-
nounces to  be  one  ;  such  laws,  for  example,  as  give  to  the  Avife
the  right  to  conduct  business,  contract  debts,  and  sue  and  be  sued,
in  her  own  name.  This  is  attempting  to  correct  one  class  of  evils
at  the  cost  of  incurring  others  a  hundred-fold  greater.  The  Word
of  God  is  the  only  sure  guide  of  legislative  action  as  well  as  of  in-
dividual conduct.

5.  It  need  hardly  be  remarked  that  it  follows  from  the  nature
of  marriage,  that  next  to  murder,  adultery  is  the  greatest  of  all
social  crimes.     Under  the  Old  Dispensation  it  was  punishable


§  11.]  THE    SEVENTH   COJiMANDMENT  .  387

with  death.  And  even  now  it  is  practically  impossible  to  con-
vict a  husband  of  murder  who  kills  the  man  who  has  committed
adultery  with  his  wife.  This  comes  from  human  laws  being  in
conflict  with  the  laws  of  nature  and  of  God.  The  law  of  God  re-
gards marriage  as  identifying  a  man  and  his  wife ;  the  laws  of  the
state  too  often  regard  it  as  merely  a  civil  contract,  and  give  an
injured  husband  no  redi'ess  but  a  suit  for  damages  for  the  pecmi-
iary  loss  he  has  sustained  by  being  deprived  of  the  services  of  his
wife.  The  penalty  for  adultery,  to  be  in  any  due  proportion  to
the  magnitude  of  the  crime,  should  be  severe  •'id  degrading.

6.  The  relative  duties  of  husband  and  wife  arisino;  out  of  their
relation,  may  be  expressed  in  a  few  comprehensive  words.  The
husband  is  to  love,  protect,  and  cherish  his  wife  as  himseK,  ^.  g.,
as  being  to  him  another  seK.  The  duties  of  the  wife  are  set
forth  in  the  time-honoured  Clmstian  formula,  "love,  honoui",  and
obey."

Converted  Polygamists.

The  question  has  been  mooted.  Whether  a  polygamist,  when
converted  to  Christianity,  should  be  required  to  repudiate  all  his
wives  but  one,  as  a  condition  of  his  admission  into  the  Christian
Church  ?  The  answer  to  this  question  has  been  sought  from
three  sources :  First,  the  Scriptural  doctrine  of  marriage ;  sec-
ondl}'',  the  example  of  the  Apostles  when  dealing  with  such  cases  ;
and  thirdly,  from  a  consideration  of  the  effects  which  would  follow
from  making  monogamy  an  indispensable  condition  of  admission
to  the  Church.

As  to  the  first  point,  it  is  admitted  by  all  Christians,  that  it  is
the  law  of  God,  the  law  of  Christ,  and  consequently^  the  law  of
the  Christian  Church  that  polygamy  is  sinful,  being  a  violation
of  the  original  and  permanently  obligatory  law  of  marriage.  As
every  man  who  enters  the  Church  professes  to  be  a  Christian,
and  as  every  Christian  is  bound  to  obey  the  law  of  Christ,  it
seems  plain  that  no  man  should  be  received  into  the  communion
of  the  Church  who  does  not  conform  to  the  law  of  Christ  concern-
ing marriage.  The  only  question  is.  Whether  Christ  has  made
a  special  exception  in  favour  of  those  who  in  the  times  of  their
ignorance,  contracted  the  obhgations  of  marriage  with  more  than
one  woman  ?  It  is  of  coui-se  possible  that  such  an  exception
might  have  been  made.  It  would  be  analogovis  to  the  temporary,
suspension  of  the  original  law  of  marriage  in  favour  of  the  hard-
hearted Jews.  Has  then  such  an  exception  been  made  ?  This  is
the  second  point  to  be  considered.     It  concerns  a  matter  of  fact.


388  PART  m.   Ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

Those  who  assume  that  such  an  exception  has  been  made,  are
bound  to  produce  the  clearest  evidence  of  the  fact.  This  is  neces-
sary not  only  to  satisfy  the  consciences  of  the  parties  concerned,
but  also  to  justify  a  departure' from  a  plainly  revealed  law  of  God.
It  would  be  a  very  serious  matter  to  set  up  in  a  heathen  country,
a  church  not  conformed  in  this  matter  to  the  usual  law  of  Chris-
tendom. Missionaries  are  sent  forth  to  teach  not  only  Christian
doctrines  but  Christian  morals.  And  the  churches  which  they
found,  profess  to  be  -wdtnesses  for  Christ  as  to  what  He  would
have  men  to  believe,  and  as  to  what  He  would  have  them  to  do.
They  ought  not  to  be  allowed  to  bear  false  testimon3^  It  is  cer-
tain that  there  is  no  clear  and  definite  expression  of  the  will  of
Christ,  recorded  in  the  New  Testament,  that  the  case  contem-
plated should  be  an  exception  to  the  Scriptural  law  of  marriage.
There  is  no  instance  recorded  in  the  New  Testament,  of  the  ad-
mission of  a  polygamist  to  the  Christian  Church.  It  has,  indeed,
been  inferred  from  1  Timothy  iii.  2,  where  the  Apostle  says,  a
bishop  must  be  "  the  husband  of  one  wife,"  that  a  private  mem-
ber of  the  Church  might  have  more  mves  than  one.  But  this  is
in  itself  a  ver^'^  precarious  inference  ;  and  being  inconsistent  mth
Christ's  express  prohibition,  it  is  altogether  inadmissible.  The
meaning  of  the  passage  has  been  much  disputed.  What  the
Apostle  requires  is  that  a  bishop  should  be  in  all  respects  an
exemplary  man  :  not  given  to  wine,  no  striker,  not  greedy  of
filthy  lucre  ;  the  husband  of  one  ^afe,  i.  g.,  not  a  polygamist.
This  no  more  implies  that  other  men  may  be  polygamists,  than
his  saying  that  a  bishop  must  not  be  greedy  of  filthy  lucre  and
not  a  brawler,  implies  that  other  men  may  be  covetous  or  con-
tentious. According  to  another  and  widely  accepted  interpreta-
tion of  the  passage  in  1  Timothy  iii.  2,  and  the  corresponding  pas-
sage in  Titus  i.  6,  the  injunction  of  the  Apostle  is  that  a  man
who  has  been  married  more  than  once,  must  not  be  appointed  a
bishop  or  presbyter.  If  this  be  the  true  meaning  of  the  Apos-
tle, his  language  affords  still  less  ground  for  the  argument  drawn
from  it  in  favour  of  the  la^vfulness  of  polygamy  in  church  mem-
bers. If  even  second  marriage  was  forbidden  to  presbyters,  a  for-
tiori must  polygamy  be  regarded  as  inconsistent  mth  the  law
of  Christ.

This  interpretation  was  very  generally  adopted  in  the  early
Church,  during  the  Middle  Ages,  and  by  Romanists,  and  is  sus-
tained by  many  of  the  recent  commentators.  Bishop  Ellicott  de-
cides m  favour  of  this  interpretation.  His  reasons  are,  —  (1.)  The


§  11.]         THE  SEVENTH  COMMANDMENT,  389

opinion  of  tlie  early  writers  and  of  some  councils.  (2.)  The  special
respect  paid  among  pagans  to  a  woman  who  was  "  univira."
(3.)  The  propriety,  in  the  case  of  iTria-KOTToi  and  8idKovoi,  of  a  greater
temperance.  (4.)  And  the  manifestation  of  a  greater  sanctity
( (Te/y,i  oT//s)  of  a  single  marriage,  which  he  thinks  is  indicated  even
in  Scriptm-e  (Luke  ii,  36,  37).     The  objections  to  it  are,  —

In  the  first  place,  that  it  rests  on  an  unscriptural  view  of  mar-
riage. According  to  the  Bible,  marriage  is  a  better,  higher,  and
holier,  because  the  normal  state,  than  celibacy.  It  was  only  in
the  interest  of  the  doctrine  of  the  peculiar  sanctity  of  cehbacy,
that  this  interpretation  was  adopted  by  the  fathers.

In  the  second  place,  it  rests  on  the  no  less  unscriptural  assump-
tion of  the  superior  holiness  of  the  clergy.  No  higher  degree
of  moral  purity  is  required  of  them  than  of  other  men,  for  the
simple  reason  that  every  man  is  required  to  be  perfectly  holy  in
heart  and  hfe.  The  interpretation  in  question  gained  the  stronger
hold  of  the  Church  as  the  doctrine  of  "  the  grace  of  orders,"
and  of  the  priesthood  of  the  clergy  gained  ascendancy.  When
the  Reformation  came  and  swept  away  these  two  doctrines,  it
removed  the  two  principal  supports  of  the  interpretation  in  ques-
tion. It  is  not  to  be  admitted  that  there  can  be  anything  unholy
in  second  marriages,  which  an  infinitely  holy  God  declares  to  be
lawful  (Rom.  vii.  3),  nor  can  it  be  conceded  that  the  clergy
are  holier  than  other  behevers,  seeing  that  the  only  priesthood  in
the  Church  on  earth  is  the  priesthood  common  to  all  believers.

In  the  third  place,  the  interpretation  which  makes  the  Apos-
tle interdict  second  marriages  to  bishops  and  deacons,  is  con-
trary to  the  natural  meaning  of  the  words.  The  parallel  passage
in  Titus  i.  5,  6,  reads  thus  :  "  That  thou  shouldest,  ....  ordain
elders  in  every  city,  as  I  had  appointed  thee :  if  any  be  blame-
less, the  husband  of  one  wife,  etc  ;  "  et  ns  iaTh  .  .  .  /xtas  yuiatKo?,
an'p,  '  if  any  one  is  at  this  present  time  the  husband  of  one  wife.'
It  is  the  present  state  and  character  of  the  man  that  are  to  be
taken  into  the  account.  He  might  before  have  been  unmarried,
or  even  a  polygamist,  but  when  ordained,  he  must,  if  married  at
all,  be  the  husband  of  but  one  woman.  "  Qui  sit :  non  autem,
Qui  fuerit,"  says  Calvin  in  his  comment  on  1  Timothy  iii.  2.  And
on  Titus  i.  6  he  says,  "  Qui  defuncta  uxore  alteram  jam  coelebs
inducit,  nihilominus  unius  uxoris  maritus  censeri  debet.  Non .
enim  eligendum  docet  qvii  fuerit  maritus  unius  uxoris,  sed  qui
sit."  Whichever  of  these  interpretations  of  1  Timothy  iii.  2,  be
adopted,  whether  we  understand   the  Apostle  to  forbid   that  a


390  PART  in.     Cn.   XIX.  — THE   LAW.

polygamist,  or  that  a  man  t^vice  married,  sliould  be  admitted  to
the  ministry,  in  neither  case  does  the  passage  give  authority  to
receive  a  polygamist  into  the  fellowship  of  the  Church.  Consid-
ering, then,  that  monogamy  is  the  undoubted  law  of  Christ ;
considering  that  we  have  no  evidence  that  He  made  an  exception
in  favour  of  heathen  converts  ;  and  considering  the  great  impor-
tance that  churches,  founded  in  heathen  lands,  should  bear  true
witness  of  the  doctrines  and  precepts  of  Christianity,  it  would
seem  clear  that  no  man  having  more  than  one  wife  should  be
admitted  to  Christian  fellowship.

The  third  aspect  of  this  question  concerns  the  effects  of  enfor-
cing the  Christian  law  of  marriage  in  heathen  lands.  It  is  urged
that  this  would  result  in  great  cruelty  and  inju.stice.  For  a  man
to  cast  off  women  whom  he  had  engaged  to  protect  and  cherish,
to  abandon  not  only  them  but  their  children,  it  is  said,  cannot  be
reconciled  with  any  right  principle.  To  this  it  may  be  replied,  —
(1.)  That  in  many  heathen  countries  it  is  not  the  husband  who
supports  the  wives,  but  the  wives  who  support  the  husband.  They
are  his  slaves,  and  sustain  him  by  their  labour.  There  would  be
no  great  hardship  in  his  setting  them  free.  (2.)  But  when  this  is
not  the  case,  it  does  not  follow  that  because  a  man  ceases  to  re-
gard several  women  as  his  wives,  he  should  cease  to  provide  for
them,  and  for  the  welfare  of  his  children.  This  in  any  event,  as  a
Christian,  he  is  bound  to  do.

It  is  also  suggested,  as  a  difficulty  in  this  matter,  that  it  is  hard
to  determine  which  of  his  several  wives  a  converted  polygamist
should  retain.  Some  say,  that  it  is  the  one  first  married ;
others  say,  that  he  should  be  allowed  to  make  his  own  selection.
If  marriage  among  the  heathen  w^ere  what  it  is  in  Christian
countries,  there  would  be  no  room  for  doubt  on  this  subject.
Then  the  first  contract  would  be  the  only  binding  one,  and  all
the  rest  null  and  void.  But  in  the  Christian  sense  of  the  word
there  has  been  no  marriage  in  any  case.  There  has  been  no
promise  and  vow  of  mutual  fidelity.  The  relation  of  a  hea-
then polygamist  to  the  women  of  his  harem,  is  more  analogous
to  concubinage  than  to  Christian  marriage.  The  relation  of  a
heathen  polygamist  to  his  mimerous  wives,  is  so  different  from
the  conjugal  relation  as  contemplated  in  Scripture,  as  to  render
it  at  least  doubtful  whether  the  husband's  obligation  is  exclu-
sively, or  preeminently,  to  the  woman  first  chosen.  This  is  a
point  of  casuistry  to  which  those  who  expect  to  labour  in  heathen
countries  should  direct  their  attention.     The  Romish  Church  de-


§  11,]  THE   SEVENTH   COMMANDMENT.  391

cides  in  favour  of  the  first  vnie.  The  Roman  Catechism  ^  says  :
"  Atque  ob  earn  rem  fieri  intelligimus,  ut,  si  infidelis  quispiam,
gentis  su£e  more  et  consuetudine,  plm^es  uxores  duxisset,  cum  ad
veram  religionem  conversus  fuerit,  jubeat  eum  Ecclesia  ceteras
cranes   rehnquere,  ac  priorem  tantum   justjB  et  legitimse  uxoris

loco  habere."

Divorce.

The  questions  which  call  for,  at  least  a  brief  consideration,
under  this  head  are,  (1.)  What  is  divorce,  and  what  are  its  legit-
imate effects  ?  (2.)  What  are  the  Scriptural  grounds  of  divorce  ?
(3.)  What  are  the  Romish  doctrine,  and  practice  on  this  subject  ?
(4.)  What  are  the  doctrine  and  practice  of  Protestant  Churches
and  countries?  (5.)  What  is  the  duty  of  the  Church  and  of  its
officers  in  cases  where  the  laws  of  the  state  on  tliis  subject  are  in
conflict  with  the  law  of  God  ?  Works  on  civil  and  canon  law,
when  treating  of  divorce,  take  a  much  wider  range  than  this,  but
the  points  above  indicated  seem  to  include  those  of  most  interest
and  importance  to  the  theologian.

Divorce  ;  its  Nature  and  Effects.

Divorce  is  not  a  mere  separation,  whether  temporary  or  perma-
nent, "  a  mensa  et  tlioro."  It  is  not  such  a  separation  as  leaves
the  parties  in  the  relation  of  husband  and  wife,  and  simply  re-
lieves them  from  the  obligation  of  their  relative  duties.  Divorce
annuls  the  "  vinculum  matrimonii,"  so  that  the  parties  are  no
longer  man  and  wife.  They  stand  henceforth  to  each  other  in
the  same  relation  as  they  were  before  marriage.  That  this  is  the
true  idea  of  divorce  is  plain  from  the  fact  that  under  the  old
dispensation  if  a  man  put  away  his  wife,  she  was  at  liberty  to
marry  again.  (Deut.  xxiv.  1,  2.)  Tliis  of  course  supposes  that
the  marriage  relation  to  her  former  husband  was  effectually  dis-
solved. Our  Lord  teaches  the  same  doctrine.  The  passages  in
the  Gospels,  referring  to  this  subject,  are  Matthew  v.  31,  32  ;  xix.
3-9 ;  Mark  x.  2-12 ;  and  Luke  xvi.  18.  The  simple  meaning
of  these  passages  seems  to  be,  that  marriage  is  a  permanent  com-
pact, which  cannot  be  dissolved  at  the  will  of  either  of  the  par-
ties. If,  therefore,  a  man  arbitrarily  puts  away  his  "wife  and
marries  another,  he  commits  adultery.  If  he  repudiates  her  on
just  grounds  and  marries  another,  he  commits  no  offence.  Our
Lord  makes  the  guilt  of  marrying  after  separation  to  depend
on  the  ground  of  the  separation.     Saying,  '  tliat  if  a  man  puts

III.  viii.  17  (19, XXVI.);  Streitwolf,  Lihri  Symbolici,  Gtittiugen,  1846,  vol.  i.  p.  458.


392  PART  III.     Ch.   XIX.  — the  law.

away  his  wife  for  any  cause  save  fornication,  and  marries  another,
he  commits  adultery  ' ;  is  saying  that  '  the  offence  is  not  commit-
ted if  the  specified  ground  of  divorce  exists.'  And  this  is  saying
that  divorce,  when  justifiable,  dissolves  the  marriage  tie.

Although  this  seems  so  plainly  to  be  the  doctrine  of  the  Scrip-
tures, the  opposite  doctrine  prevailed  early  in  the  Church,  and
soon  gained  the  ascendancy.  Augustine  himself  taught  in  his
work  "  De  Conjugiis  Adulterinis,"^  and  elsewhere,  that  neither
of  the  parties  after  divorce  could  contract  a  new  marriage.  In
his  "  Retractions,"  however,  he  expresses  doubt  on  the  subject.
It  passed,  however,  into  the  canon  law,  and  received  the  author-
itative sanction  of  the  Council  of  Trent,  which  says,^  "  Si  quis  dixe-
rit,  ecclesiam  errare,  cum  docuit  et  docet,  juxta  evangelicam  et
apostolicam  doctrinam,  propter  adulterium  alterius  cojijugum
matrmionii  vinculum  non  posse  dissolvi  ;  et  utrumque,  vel  etiam
iimocentem,  qui  causam  adulterio  non  dedit,  non  posse,  altero
conjuge  vivente,  aliud  matrimomum  contrahere ;  moecharique
eum,  qui,  dimissa  adultera,  aliam  duxerit,  et  eam,  quse,  dimisso
adultero,  alii  nupserit ;  anathema  sit."  This  is  the  necessary
consequence  of  the  doctrine,  that  the  marriage  relation  can  be
dissolved  only  by  death.  The  indisposition  of  the  mediaeval  and
Romish  Church  to  admit  of  remarriages  after  divorce,  is  no  doubt
to  be  attributed  in  part  to  the  low  idea  of  the  marriage  state  pre-
vailing in  the  Latin  Church.  It  had  its  ground,  however,  in  the
interpretation  given  to  certain  passages  of  Scripture.  In  Mark
X.  11,  12,  and  in  Luke  xvi.  18,  our  Lord  says  without  any  qual-
ification :  "  Whosoever  putteth  away  his  "wife,  and  marrieth  an-
other, committeth  adultery ;  and  whosoever  marrieth  her  that  is
put  away  from  her  husband,  committeth  adultery."  This  was
taken  as  the  law  on  the  subject,  without  regard  to  what  is  said
in  INIatthew  v.  31,  32,  and  xix.  3-9.  As,  however,  there  is  no
doubt  of  the  genuineness  of  the  passages  in  Matthew,  they  cannot
be  overlooked.  One  expression  of  the  will  of  Christ  is  as  authori-
tative and  as  satisfactory  as  a  thousand  repetitions  could  make  it.
The  exception  stated  in  INIatthew,  therefore,  must  stand.  The
reason  for  the  omission  in  Mark  and  Luke  may  be  accounted  for
in  different  ways.  It  is  said  by  some  that  the  exception  was  of
necessity  understood  from  its  very  nature,  whether  mentioned  or
not.  Or  having  been  stated  twice,  its  repetition  was  unneces-
sary.   Or  what  perhaps  is  most  probable,  as  our  Lord  was  speak-

1  Worl-s,  edit.  Beiiedictines,  Paris,  1837,  vol.  vi.  p.  0-58.

2  Sess.  xxiv.  Canon  7;  Streitwolf,  Libri  Symbolici,  GiJttingen,  1846,  vol.  i.  pp.  90,  91.


§  11.]  THE    SEVENTH  COMMANDMENT.  39:J

iiig  to  Pharisees,  who  held  that  a  man  might  put  away  liis  wife
when  he  pleased,  it  was  enough  to  say  that  such  divorces  as  they
were  accustomed  to,  did  not  dissolve  the  bonds  of  marriage,  and
that  the  parties  remained  as  much  man  and  wife  as  they  were
before.  Under  the  Old  Testament,  divorce  on  the  ground  of
adultery,  was  out  of  the  question,  because  adultery  was  pun-
ished by  death.  And,  therefore,  it  was  only  when  Christ  was
laying  down  the  law  of  his  own  kingdom,  under  which  the  death
penalty  for  adultery  was  to  be  abolished,  that  it  was  necessary
to  make  any  reference  to  that  crime.

It  has  been  earnestly  objected  to  the  doctrine  that  adultery
dissolves  the  marriage  bond,  that  both  parties,  the  guilty  as
well  the  innocent  become  free,  and  either  may  contract  a  new
marriage.  If  this  be  so,  it  is  said,  that  all  that  a  man,  who
wishes  to  get  rid  of  his  ^vife,  has  to  do,  is  to  commit  that  offence.
He  will  then  be  at  liberty  to  marry  whom  he  chooses.  To  this
it  might  be  a  sufficient  answer  to  say  that  the  objection  bears
rather  against  the  wisdom  of  the  law,  than  against  the  fact  that
it  is  the  law  ;  or  in  other  words,  the  objection  is  against  the
plain  meaning  of  the  words  of  Christ.  But  it  is  to  be  remem-
bered, that  adultery  is  a  crime  in  the  sight  of  man  as  well  as  in
the  sight  of  God,  and  as  such  it  ought  to  be  punished.  Under
the  old  dispensation  it  was  punished  by  death  ;  under  the  new,
it  may  be  published  by  imprisonment,  or  by  prohibition  of  any
future  marriage.  Clu-ist  leaves  the  punishment  of  this,  as  of  other
crimes,  to  be  determined  by  his  disciples  in  their  civil  capacity.
All  He  does  is  to  teach  what  its  effects  are,  "  in  foro  conscien-
tise,'"  as  to  the  marriage  bond.

Crrounds  of  Divorce.

As  already  stated,  marriage  is  an  indissoluble  compact  between
one  man  and  one  woman.  It  cannot  be  dissolved  by  any  volun-
tary act  of  repudiation  on  the  part  of  the  contracting  parties  ;
nor  by  any  act  of  the  Church  or  State.  "  Those  whojn  God
has  joined  together,  no  man  can  put  asunder."  The  compact
may,  however,  be  dissolved,  although  by  no  legitimate  act  of
man.  It  is  dissolved  by  death.  It  is  dissolved  by  adultery  ;
and  as  Protestants  teach,  by  wilful  desertion.  In  other  words,
there  are  certain  things  which  from  their  nature  Avork  a  dissolu-
tion of  the  marriage  bond.  All  the  legitimate  authority  the
state  has  in  the  premises  is  to  take  cognizance  of  the  fact  tliat  the


894  PART  m.    Ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

marriage  is  dissolved  ;  officially  to  announce  it,  and  to  make  suit-
able provision  for  the  altered  relation  of  the  parties.

Under  the  preceding  head  it  has  already  been  shown  that  ac-
cording to  the  plain  teaching  of  our  Saviour  the  marriage  bond  is
annulled  by  the  crime  of  adultery.  The  reason  of  this  is,  that
the  parties  are  no  longer  one,  in  the  mysterious  sense  in  which
the  Bible  declares  a  man  and  his  wife  to  be  one.^  The  Apostle
teaches  on  this  subject  the  same  doctrine  that  Christ  had  taught.
The  seventh  chapter  of  his  First  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  is
devoted  to  the  subject  of  marriage,  in  reference  to  which  several
questions  had  been  proposed  to  him.

He  first  lays  down  the  general  principle,  founded  on  the  Word
of  God  and  the  nature  of  man,  that  it  is  best  that  every  man
should  have  his  own  \^dfe  and  every  ^^dfe  her  own  husband  ;  but
in  view  of  the  "present  (or  imminent)  distress,"  he  advises  his
readers  not  to  marry.  He  writes  to  the  Corinthians  as  a  man
would  write  to  an  army  about  to  enter  on  a  most  unequal  conflict
in  an  enemy's  country,  and  for  a  protracted  period.  He  tells
them  :  '  This  is  no  time  for  you  to  think  of  marriage.  You  have
a  right  to  marry.  And  hi  general  it  is  best  that  all  men  should
marry.  But  in  your  circumstances  marriage  can  only  lead  to
embarrassment  and  increase  of  suffering.'  This  limitation  of  his
advice  not  to  marry,  to  men  in  the  circumstances  of  those  to
whom  the  advice  is  given,  is  not  only  stated  in  so  many  words  in
verse  26,  but  it  is  the  only  way  in  which  Paul  can  be  reconciled
with  himself  or  with  the  general  teaching  of  the  Bible.  It  has
already  been  remarked,  that  no  one  of  the  sacred  %vriters  speaks
in  more  exalted  terms  of  marriage  than  this  Apostle.  He  rep-
resents it  as  a  most  ennobling  spiritual  union,  which  raises  a  man
out  of  himself  and  makes  him  Hve  for  another  ;  a  union  so  ele-
vated and  refinmg  as  to  render  it  a  fit  symbol  of  the  union  be-
tween Christ  and  his  Church.  Marriage,  according  to  this  Apos-
tle, does  for  man  in  the  sphere  of  nature,  what  miion  with  Christ
does  for  him  in  the  sphere  of  grace.

Having  thus  given  it  as  a  matter  of  advice  that  it  was  best,
under  existing  circumstances,  for    Christians   not   to  marry,  he

1  That  the  word  TTopvda,  as  used  in  Matthew  v.  32,  and  xix.  9,  means  adultery,  there  can
be  no  reasonable  doubt.  Uopieia  is  a  general  term  including  all  unlawful  sexual  cohabitation,
as  Theodoret  on  Iloraans  i.  29  (edit.  Halle,  1771),  says,  Ka.\el  nopieiav  rij^  ov  Kara  ydtJLov  yi-
vo^ieiTjc  avvovaiav;  whereas  ixoix^iais  the  same  offence  when  committed  by  a  married  per-
son. For  the  definite  use  of  the  word  iropveia,  see  1  Corinthians  v.  1.  Tholuck  discusses
the  meaning  of  this  word  as  used  by  Matthew,  at  great  length  in  his  Berypi-ediyt,  3d
edit.  Hamburg,  1845,  pp.  225-230.


§11.]  THE   SEVENTH   COMMANDMENT.  395

proceeds  to  give  directions  to  those  who  were  already  married.
Of  these  there  were  two  classes  :  first,  those  where  both  husband
and  wife  were  Christians  ;  and  secondly,  those  where  one  of  the
parties  was  a  believer  and  the  other  an  unbeliever,  {.  e.,  a  Jew  or
a  heathen.  With  regard  to  the  former  he  says,  that  as  according
to  the  law  of  Clirist  the  marriage  is  indissoluble,  neither  party
had  the  right  to  repudiate  the  other.  But  if,  in  violation  of  the
law  of  Christ,  a  wife  had  deserted  her  husband,  she  was  bound
either  to  remain  unmarried,  or  to  be  reconciled  to  her  husband.
The  Apostle  thus  impliedly  recognizes  the  principle  that  there
may  be  causes  which  justify  a  woman's  leaving  her  husband,
which  do  not  justify  a  dissolution  of  the  marriage  bond.

With  regard  to  those  cases  in  which  one  of  the  parties  was  a
Christian  and  the  other  an  unbeliever,  he  teaches,  first,  that  such
marriages  are  lawful,  and,  therefore,  ought  not  to  be  dissolved.
But,  secondly,  that  if  the  unbelieving  partner  depart,  ^.  e.,  repu-
diates the  marriage,  the  believing  partner  is  not  bound  ;  ^.  e.,  is
no  longer  bound  by  the  marriage  compact.  This  seems  to  be  the
plain  meaning.  If  the  unbeheving  partner  is  willmg  to  continue
in  the  marriage  relation,  the  believing  party  is  bound  ;  bound,
that  is,  to  be  faithful  to  the  marriage  compact.  If  the  unbeliever
is  not  wilHng  to  remain,  the  behever  in  that  case  is  not  bound  ;
i.  g.,  bound  by  the  marriage  compact.  In  other  words,  the  mar-
riage is  thereby  dissolved.  This  passage  is  parallel  to  Romans
vii.  2.  The  Apostle  there  says,  a  wife  "  is  bound  by  the  law  to
her  husband,  so  long  as  he  liveth  ;  but  if  the  husband  be  dead,  she
is  loosed  from  the  law  of  her  husband."  So  here  he  says,  '  A  wife
is  bound  to  her  husband  if  he  is  willing  to  remain  with  her  ;  but
if  he  deserts  her,  she  is  free  from  him.'  That  is,  wiKul  deser-
tion annuls  the  marriage  bond.  This  desertion,  however,  must
be  dehberate  and  final.  This  is  impHed  in  the  whole  context.
The  case  contemplated  is  where  the  unbeheving  husband  refuses
any  longer  to  regard  his  believing  partner  as  his  wife.

This  interpretation  of  the  passage  is  given  not  only  by  the
older  Protestant  interpreters,  but  also  by  the  leading  modern  com-
mentators, as  De  Wette,  Meyer,  Alford,  and  Wordsworth,  and  in
the  Confessions  of  the  Lutheran  and  Reformed  Churches.  Even
the  Romanists  take  the  same  view.  They  hold,  indeed,  that
among  Christians  marriage  is  absolutely  indissoluble  except  by
the  death  of  one  of  the  parties.  But  if  one  of  the  partners  be  an
unbehever,  then  they  hold  that  desertion  annuls  the  marriage  con-
tract.    On  this  point  Cornelius  a  Lapide,  of  Louvain  and  Rome,


396  PART  m.   Ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

says,  "  Nota,  Apostolum  permittere  hoc  casu  non  tan  turn  tliori
divortium  sed  etiam  matrimonii ;  ita  ut  possit  conjux  fidelis  aliud
matrimonium  iiiire."  Lapide  refers  to  Augustine,  Thomas  Aqui-
nas, and  Ambrose  in  support  of  this  opinion.^  The  Canon  Law,
under  the  title  "  Divortiis '"  teaches  the  same  doctrine.  Words-
worth's comment  on  the  passage  is,  "  Although  a  Christian  may
not  put  away  his  wife,  being  an  unbeliever,  jet  if  the  wife  desert
her  husband  (xwptC«TaO  he  may  contract  a  second  marriage."

The  Romanists  indeed  rest  their  sanction  to  remarriage  in  the
case  supposed,  on  the  ground  that  there  is  an  essential  difference
between  marriage  where  one  or  both  the  parties  are  heathen,
and  mari^iage  where  both  parties  are  Christians.  This,  however,
makes  no  difference.  Paul  had  just  said  that  such  unequal  mar-
riages were  la^vful  and  vahd.  Neither  party  could  legitimately
repudiate  or  leave  the  other.  The  ground  of  divorce  indicated
is  not  difference  of  religion,  but  desertion.

There  is  a  middle  ground  taken  by  many,  both  ancients  and
moderns,  in  the  interpretation  of  this  passage.  They  admit  that
desertion  jvistifies  divorce,  but  not  the  remarriage  of  the  party
deserted.     To  this  it  may  be  objected,  —

1.  That  this  is  inconsistent  with  the  nature  of  divorce.  We
have  already  seen  that  divorce  among  the  Jews,  as  explained  by
Clrrist,  and  as  understood  in  the  apostolic  Church,  was  such  a  sep-
aration of  man  and  wife  as  dissolved  the  marriage  bond.  This
idea  was  expressed  in  the  use  of  the  words  aTrokveiv,  dcfaipai,  -^uipL^eiv,
and  these  are  the  words  here  used.

2.  This  interpretation  is  inconsistent  with  the  context  and
with  the  design  of  the  Apostle.  Among  the  questions  submitted
to  his  decision,  was  this,  '  Is  it  lawful  for  a  Christian  to  remain
in  the  marriage  relation  mth  an  unbeliever  ?  '  Paul  answers,
'  Yes  ;  such  marriages  are  lawful  and  vahd.  Therefore  if  the  un-
believer is  ^villing  to  continue  the  marriage  relation,  the  behever
remains  bound  ;  but  if  the  unbeliever  refuses  to  continue  the
marriage,  the  believer  is  no  longer  bound  by  it.'  To  say  that  the
believer  is  no  longer  bound  to  give  up  his  or  her  religion,  which
seems  to  be  Neander's  idea,  or  is  not  bound  to  force  himself  or
herself  upon  an  unwilling  partner,  would  be  nothing  to  the  point.
No  Christian  could  think  himself  bound  to  give  up  his  religion,
and  no  one  could  think  it  possible  that  married  life  could  be  con-
tinued without  the  consent  of  the  parties.  The  question,  in  this
sense,  was  not  worth  either  asking  or  answering.

1  Comment.  1  Cor.  vii.  15;  edit.  Venice,  1717.


§11.]  THE   SEVENTH   COMMANDMENT.  397

3.  Desertion,  from  the  nature  of  the  offence,  is  a  dissolution  of
the  marriage  bond.  Why  does  death  dissolve  a  marriage  ?  It  is
because  it  is  a  final  separation.  So  is  desertion.  Incompatibility
of  temper,  cruelty,  disease,  crime,  insanity,  etc.,  which  human
laws  often  make  grounds  of  divorce,  are  not  inconsistent  with  the
marriage  relation.  A  woman  may  have  a  disagreeable,  a  cruel,
or  a  wicked  husband,  but  a  man  in  his  gra^e,  or  one  who  refuses
to  recognize  her  as  his  wife,  cannot  be  her  husband.

It  is  said,  indeed,  that  tliis  doctrine  makes  marriage  depend  on
the  option  of  the  parties.  Either  may  desert  the  other  ;  and  then
the  marriage  is  dissolved.  The  same  objection  was  made  to  our
Lord's  doctrine  that  adultery  destroys  the  marriage  bond.  It  was
said  that  if  this  be  so,  either  party  might  dissolve  the  marriage,
by  committing  that  crime.  As  the  objections  are  the  same,  the
answer  is  the  same.  As  adultery  is  a  crime,  so  is  desertion  ;  and
both  should  be  punished.  The  question  is  not  what  these  crimes
deserve,  but  what  are  their  legitimate  effects,  according  to  the
Scriptures,  on  the  marriage  relation.

That  desertion  is  a  legitimate  ground  of  divorce,  was  therefore,
as  before  mentioned,  the  doctrine  held  by  the  Reformers,  Luther,
Calvin,  and  Zwingle,  and  almost  without  exception  by  all  the
Protestant  churches.^

Doctrine  of  the   Church  of  Rome.

Marriage  is  thus  defined  in  the  Roman  Catechism  :  "  Matrimo-
nium  est  viri,  et  mulieris  maritalis  conjunctio  inter  legitimas
personas,  individuam  vitae  consuetudinem  retinens."  The  clause
"inter  legitimas  personas,"  is  explained  by  saying,  "  Qui  a  nup-
tiarum  conjunctione  legibus  omnino  exclusi  sunt,  ii  matrimonium
inire  non  possunt  ;  neque,  si  ineant,  ratum  est,  exempli  enim  gra-
tia :  qui  intra  quartum  gradum  propinquitate  conjuncti  sunt,  puer-
que  ante  decimum  quartum  annum,  aut  puella  ante  duodecimum,
quae  ffitas  legibus  constituta  est,  ad  matrimonii  justa  foedera  in-
eunda  apti  esse  non  possunt."  The  clause,  "  Individuam  vitas
consuetudinem  retinens,"  it  is  said,  "  indissolubilis  vinculi  naturam
declarat  quo  vir,  et  uxor  colligantur."  ^

Marriage  is  to  be  contemplated  under  two  aspects.  It  is  an
institution  founded  in  nature,  and  therefore  exists  wherever  men

1  See  the  elaborate  article  on  "  Ehe  "  in  Herzog's  Encyhlopddie,  and  President  Woolsey's
recent  Essay  on  Divorce,  New  York,  1869,  chap.  iv.  President  Woolsey  does  not,  for  him-
self, understand  1  Corinthians  vii.  15,  to  teach  that  desertion  justifies  divorce.

2  CatecJiismus,  ex  Decreto  Concilil.  Tridentini,  ad  Parochos,  Pii  V.  Pont.  Max.  Jussu
editus,  II.  viii.  qusest.  3;  Streitwolf,  vol.  i.  p.  448.


398  PART  III.     Ch.   XIX.  — the   law.

exist.  It  is  a  lawful  institution  among  the  heathen  as  well  as
among  Chi'istians.  But  as  it  is  an  ordinance  of  God  it  has  a
character  among  those  who  know  the  true  God  and  thus  regard  it,
far  higher  than  it  has  for  those  who  are  the  worshippers  of  false
gods.  And,  therefore,  marriage,  under  the  old  dispensation,  had  a
much  higher  character  than  it  had  among  the  heathen.  Never-
theless, among  Christians  marriage  is  something  far  more  sacred
than  it  was  under  the  Mosaic  economy.  Christ  had  raised  it  to
the  dignity  of  a  sacrament.^

Marriage   a  Sacrament.

The  word  sacrament  is  one  of  vague  and  various  meaning.
Sometimes  it  means  that  which  is  sacred  or  consecrated  ;  some-
times that  which  has,  or  is  intended  to  have  a  sacred  meaning  ;
i.  e.,  an  external  sign  of  some  religious  truth  or  grace  ;  sometimes
a  divinely  appointed  external  rite  instituted  to  be  a  means  of
grace ;  and  sometimes  a  divinely  appointed  external  sign  that
contains  and  conveys  the  grace  which  it  signifies.  It  is  in  this
last  sense  that  the  word  is  used  by  Romanists  ;  and  it  is  in  this
sense  they  teach  that  marriage  is  a  sacrament.  The  principal
Scriptural  authority  for  this  doctrine  they  find  in  Ephesians  v.  32,
where,  as  they  understand  the  passage,  the  words  r6  ixvar-qpiov
TovTo  fj-eya  tarcv,  rendered  in  the  Vulgate,  "  Sacramentum  hoc
magnum  est,"  are  spoken  of  marriage.  According  to  this  version
and  interpretation,  the  Apostle  does  indeed  directly  assert  that
marriage  is  a  mystery.  But  (1.)  The  words  do  not  refer  to
marriage,  but  to  the  mystical  union  between  Christ  and  his  people
as  appears  from  the  Apostle's  own  explanation  in  the  following
clause  :  "I  speak  concerning  Christ  and  the  Church."  The  two
subjects,  the  union  of  husband  and  wife  and  the  union  between
Christ  and  his  people,  had  been  so  combined  and  interwoven  in  the
preceding  verses,  that  it  would  have  been  difficult  to  determine
to  which  the  words,  "  This  is  a  great  mystery,"  were  mtended
to  refer,  had  not  the  Apostle  himself  told  us.  But  (2.)  Even
if  the  Apostle  does  say  that  the  marriage  union  is  a  great  mystery,
which  in  one  sense  it  clearly  is,  that  would  not  prove  that  it  is  a
sacrament.  The  word  "mystery,"  as  used  in  the  Bible,  means
something  hidden  or  unknown ;  something  which  can  be  known
only  by  divine  revelation.  Thus  the  Gospel  itself  is  repeatedly
said  to  be  a  mystery  (Eph.  iii.  3-9)  ;  the  future  conversion  of  the
Jews  is  said  to  be  a  mystery  (Rom.  xi.  25)  ;  the  incarnation  is

1  Catechismus  Romanus,  u.  viii.  quaest.  14,  16 ;  Streitwolf ,  vol.  i.  pp.  454-457.


§11.]  THE    SEVENTH   COMMANDMENT.  39D

said  to  be  the  great  mystery  of  godliness  (1  Tim.  iii.  16) ;  and
anything  obscure  or  enigmatical  is  called  a  mystery  (Rev.  xvii.
5)  ;  thus  the  mystery  of  the  seven  candlesticks  is  their  secret
meaning.  If,  therefore,  Paul  says  that  marriage  is  a  great  mys-
tery in  the  sense  that  no  one  can  fully  understand  what  is  meant
when  God  says  that  husband  and  wife  are  one,  or  even  in  the  sense
that  marriage  has  a  sacred  import,  that  it  is  a  symbol  of  a  great
religious  truth,  this  is  what  all  Protestants  admit  and  what  is
clearly  taught  in  Scripture.  Paul  had  himself  just  set  forth  mar-
riage as  the  great  analogue  of  the  mystical  union  of  Christ  and
the  Church.  (3.)  Admitting  still  further  that  marriage  was  prop-
erly called  "  sacranientum,"  that  would  prove  nothing  to  the  pur-
pose. That  Latin  word  had  not  the  sense  attached  to  it  by  Ro-
manists until  long  after  the  apostolic  age.  It  has  not  that  sense
even  in  the  Vulgate.  In  1  Timothy  iii.  16,  the  manifestation  of
God  in  the  flesh  is  declared  to  be  the  "  great  mystery  of  godli-
ness," which  the  Vulgate  translates  "  magnum  pietatis  sacramen-
tum  ; "  but  Romanists  do  not  hold  that  the  incarnation  is  a  sacra-
ment in  the  ecclesiastical  sense  of  that  term.  The  Latin  Church,
however,  having  gradually  come  to  attach  to  the  word  the  idea  of
a  divinely  appointed  rite  or  ceremony,  which  signifies,  contains,
and  conveys  grace,  and  finding,  as  the  words  were  understood,
marriage  declared  in  Ephesians  v.  32  to  be  a  "  sacramentum,"  it
came  to  teach  that  it  was  a  sacrament  in  the  same  sense  as  baptism
and  the  Lord's  Supper.

Romanists  then  teach  that  marriage  is  a  sacrament  not  merely
because  it  is  the  sign  or  symbol  of  the  union  of  Christ  and  his
Church.  The  Roman  Catechism  says,^  (1).  That  no  one  should
doubt  "  quod  scilicet  viri,  et  mulieris  conjunctio,  cujus  Deus  auctor
est,  sanctissimi  illius  vincuh,  quo  Christus  dominus  cum  Ecclesia
conjungitur,  sacramentum,  id  est,  sacrum  signum  sit."  If  this
were  all,  no  Protestant  could  object.  (2).  But  Romanists  teach
that  marriage  is  a  sacrament  because  it  not  only  signifies  but  also
confers  grace.  The  ceremony,  including  the  consent  of  the  par-
ties, the  benediction,  and  the  intention  of  the  priest,  renders  the
bride  and  groom  holy.  It  sanctifies  them.  "  Ex  opere  operato,"
it  transforms  mere  natural  human  love  into  that  holy  spiritual
affection  which  renders  their  union  a  fit  emblem  of  the  union  of
Christ  and  the  Church.  On  this  point  the  Council  of  Trent
says:^  "  Gratiam,  vero,  qua3  naturalem  ilium  amorem  perficeret,

1  11.  viii.  qunest.  15;  Streitwolf,  vol.  i.  pp.  455,  456.

2  Sess.  XXIV. ;  Ibid.   vol.  i.  p.  89.


400  PART   III.     Ch.  XIX. —  the   law.

et  indissolubilem  tuiitatem  confirmaret,  conjugesque  sanctificaret,
ipse  Clmstus,  venerabilium  sacramentorum  institutor,  atque  per-
fector,  sua  nobis  passione  promeruit."  It  would  be  a  great  bless-
ing if  this  were  so.  Facts,  however,  prove  that  the  sacramental
efficacy  of  matrunony  no  more  so  sanctifies  husbands  and  mves
as  to  make  their  mutual  love  like  the  holy  love  of  Christ  for  his
Church,  than  baptism  confers  (to  those  not  opposing  an  obstacle)
all  the  benefits,  subjective  and  objective,  of  the  redemption  of
Christ.  If  the  sacramentarian  theory  were  true,  all  Christians
Avould  be  perfect  and  Christendom  would  be  paradisiacal.

Marriage  between  Christians,  according  to  Romanists,  is  in-
dissoluble. Neither  adultery  nor  desertion  justifies  divorce.
Death  alone  can  sever  the  bond.  It  is  not  to  be  inferred  from
this,  however,  that  marriage  is  a  more  sacred  institution  among
Romanists  than  among  Protestants.  Any  departure  from  Scrip-
tural rides  is  sure  to  work  evil.  The  denial  that  adultery  de-
stroys the  marriage  bond,  leads  naturally,  and  in  fact  has  led,
not  only  to  render  that  crime  more  frequent,  but  also  to  un-
scriptural  devices  to  remedy  the  injustice  of  forcing  a  husband
or  wife  to  maintain  the  conjugal  relation  with  a  guilty  partner.
One  of  these  devices  is  the  multiplication  of  the  causes  of  separa-
tion "  a  mensa  et  thoro  "  ;  and  another  still  more  unscriptural,  is
the  multiplying  the  reasons  which  render  marriage  null  and  void
"  ab  initio."  No  less  than  sixteen  causes  which  render  mar-
riages null  are  enumerated  by  Romish  theologians.^

The  causes  which  justify  separation  "without  divorce,  are
vows,  adultery,  apostasy,  and  crimes.  Under  the  last  head  they
include  cruelty  and  prodigaKty.  If  the  parties  had  not  been
baptized,  divorce  "  a  vinculo "  was  allowed  when  one  of  the
partners  became  a  Romanist  and  the  other  refused  to,  and  also
for  any  serious  crime.  The  whole  matter  is  in  the  hands  of  the
Church,  which  claims  the  right  of  making  and  iinmaking  impedi-
ments to  marriage  at  pleasure.  "  Si  quis  dixerit  Ecclesiam  non
potuisse  constituere  impedimenta,  matrimonium  dirimentia,  vel
in  iis  constituendis  errasse  ;  anathema  sit."  ^     At  one  period  the

1  These  sixteen  causes  are  expressed  in  the  following  lines :  —

"Error,  conditio,  votum,  cognatio,  crimen,

Cultus  disparitas,  vis,  ordo,  ligainen,  honestas,

Amens,  affinis,  si  clandestinus  et  iinpos,

Si  mulier  sit  rapta,  loco  nee  reddita  tuto ;

Si  impubes,  ni  forte  potcntia  suppleat  annos:

Ha;c  socianda  vetant  connubia,  facta  retractant."
—  Dens,  Theoloyia  Moralis  tl  Ducjmatica,  De   Matriinonio,  N.    70,  edit.  Dublin,  1832,
vol.  vii.  p.  194.

2  Council  of  Trent,  Sess.  xxiv.  canon  4;  Streitwolf,  vol.  i.  p.  90.


§  11.]  THE    SEVENTH   COMMANDMENT.  401

Church  of  Rome  made  consanguinity  within  the  seventh  degree
an  impediment  to  marriage ;  at  present  it  forbids  marriage
within  the  fourth  degree  inchisive.  •'  The  old  Catholic  theory
of  marriage,"  says  President  Woolsey,  "  was  practically  a  failure
in  all  its  parts,  in  its  ascetic  frown  on  marriage,  in  its  demand
from  the  clergy  of  an  abstinence  not  required  from  the  Christian
laity,  in  teaching  that  nothing  but  death  could  release  the  mar-
ried pair  from  their  obhgations.  When  it  sought  for  impractic-
able virtue,  and  forbade  to  some  what  God  had  allowed  to  all,
it  opened  a  fountain  of  vice  with  the  smallest  incitement  to
virtue."  ^

Laivs  of  Protestant  Countries  concerning  Divorce.

It  has  already  been  shown  that  Protestants,  making  the  Scrip-
tures their  guide,  taught  that  the  dissolution  of  the  bond  of  mar-
riage was  allowable  only  for  the  two  offences  of  adultery  and
wilful  desertion.  So  far  as  the  churches  and  their  confessions
are  concerned,  this  is  still  the  doctrine  of  almost  all  Protestant  de-
nominations. When,  however,  marriage  came  to  be  regarded  as
essentially  a  civil  contract,  it  gradually  fell  under  the  jurisdiction
of  the  state,  and  laws  were  passed  varying  in  different  countries,
as  legislators  were  influenced  by  mere  views  of  justice  or  expe-
diency. The  legislation  of  all  European  nations  was  greatly
influenced  by  the  old  Roman  law  ;  and,  therefore,  when  mar-
riage was  removed  from  the  exclusive  jurisdiction  of  the  Church,
the  laws  concerning  it  were  more  or  less  adopted  from  that
ancient  code.  The  Roman  laws  concerning  divorce  were  very
lax.  Mutual  consent  was,  even  after  the  Roman  emperors
became  Christian,  regarded  as  a  sufficient  reason  for  dissolving
the  bond  of  marriage.  AVhen  the  Church  gained  the  ascendancy
over  the  State,  and  the  pope  became  the  virtual  legislator  of
Christendom,  divorce  for  any  reason  was  forbidden ;  and  when
and  where  the  pope  in  his  turn  was  dethroned,  there  was  a  gen-
eral tendency  to  return  to  the  laxity  of  the  Roman  legislation.

England.

England  was  an  exception  to  this  rule.  It  discarded  less  of
popish  usages  than  any  other  Protestant  nation.  For  a  long
time  after  the  Reformation  no  special  law  concerning  divorce
was  passed.  The  ecclesiastical  courts  could  decree  separation
"  a  mensa  et  thoro,"  but  a  full  divorce  "  a  vinculo  "  could  be

1  Essay  on  Divorce,  by  Theodore  D.  Woolsey,  D.  D.,  LL.  D.,  New  York,  1869,  p.  127.
VOL.  m.  26


402  PART  m.     Ch.   XIX.— THE   LAW.

obtained  only  by  a  special  act  of  Parliament.  Under  the  reign
of  the  present  sovereign  all  such  questions  were  removed  from
the  ecclesiastical  courts  and  remitted  to  a  civil  tribunal.  That
tribunal  is  authorized  to  grant  judicial  separation  "a  mensa  et
thoro  "  on  the  ground  of  adultery,  or  cruelty,  or  desertion  mth-
out  just  cause  for  two  years  and  upward ;  and  dissolution  of
marriage  on  account  of  simple  adultery  on  the  part  of  the  wife,
or  aggravated  adultery  on  the  part  of  the  husband.  Such  divorce
gives  both  parties  Uberty  to  contract  a  new  marriage.  "  On  the
whole,  with  serious  defects,"  says  President  Woolsey,  "it  seems
to  us  to  be  an  excellent  law.  It  does  honour  to  the  Christian
country  where  it  is  in  force,  and  it  is  certainly  a  great  improve-
ment on  the  former  mode  of  regulating  divorce  in  England."  ^
It  may  be  a  good  law  in  comparison  with  the  lawlessness  that
preceded  it,  and  in  comparison  with  the  lax  legislation  of  other
Protestant  nations,  but  it  is  not  good  so  far  as  it  is  not  con-
formed to  the  Scriptures.  The  New  Testament  makes  no  such
distinction  as  is  made  in  this  law,  between  adultery  on  the  part
of  the  wife  and  the  same  offence  on  the  part  of  the  husband.
And  it  is  not  good  in  not  allowing  wilful  desertion  to  be  a  legiti-
mate ground  of  divorce,  if,  as  Protestants  almost  universally
believe,  the  Bible  teaches  the  contrary.

France.

In  France  the  laws  of  the  Romish  Church  were  in  force  until
the  Revolution.  That  event  threw  everything  into  confusion,
and  the  sanctity  of  marriage  was  in  a  great  degree  disregarded.
Under  the  empire  of  the  first  Napoleon,  the  civil  code  allowed
divorce,  (1.)  for  simple  adultery  on  the  part  of  the  wife  ;  (2.)  for
aggravated  adultery  on  the  part  of  the  husband  ;  (3.)  for  outrages
and  cruelty  ;  (4.)  for  the  condemnation  of  either  party  to  an  in-
famous punishment ;  and  (5.)  for  mutual  persistent  consent.  The
restoration  of  the  Bom'bons  put  an  end  to  these  laws  and  led  to
the  entire  prohibition  of  divorce.

G-ermany.

Among  the  Protestants  of  Germany,  the  views  of  the  Reformers,
as  a  general  tiling,  controlled  the  action  of  the  several  states  on
this  subject  until  about  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century,
when  the  laws  of  marriage  were  greatly  relaxed.  Goschen  at-
tributes this  change  in  a  great  measure  to  the  influence  of  Tho-

1  Essay  on  Divorce,  p.  178.


§11.]  THE   SEVENTH   COMMANDMENT.  403

masius  (f  1728),  who  regarded  marriage  as  merely  a  civil  institu-
tion designed  for  the  purposes  of  the  state,  and  which,  therefore,
might  be  set  aside  whenever  it  failed  to  answer  the  desired  end.^
The  present  law  of  Prussia,  although  an  improvement  on  the
previous  legislation,  is  far  below  the  Scriptural  standard.  Be-
sides adultery  and  Avilful  desertion,  it  makes  many  other  offences
grounds  of  divorce,  for  example,  plots  endangering  the  life  or
health  of  the  other  party ;  gi-oss  injuries ;  dangerous  incompati-
bility of  temper  ;  crimes  entailing  an  infamous  punishment ;  ha-
bitual drunkenness  and  extravagance  ;  and  deliberate  mutual  con-
sent, if  there  be  no  children  fruit  of  the  marriage  to  be  dissolved.

The    United  States,

The  laws  of  the  several  states  of  this  Union  on  the  subject  of
divorce  vary  from  the  extreme  of  strictness  to  the  extreme  of
laxness.  In  South  Carolina  no  divorce  has  ever  been  given.  The
effect  of  refusing  to  regard  adultery  as  a  dissolution  of  the  mar-
riage bond  is,  as  proved  by  the  experience  of  Catholic  countries,
to  lead  the  people  to  regard  that  crime  as  a  pardonable  offence.
It  was  indictable.  In  New  York  adultery  is  the  only  ground  of
divorce  ;  but  separation  from  bed  and  board  is  granted  for  cruelty,
desertion,  and  refusal  on  the  part  of  the  husband  to  make  pro-
vision for  the  support  of  the  wife.  In  several  of  the  other  states,
besides  adultery  and  desertion,  many  other  grounds  are  made
sufficient  to  justify  divorce  ;  of  these  grounds  the  following  are  the
principal :  imprisonment,  neglect  to  provide  for  the  maintenance
of  the  wife,  habitual  drunkenness,  and  cruelty.  In  some  states
the  whole  matter  is  left  to  the  discretion  of  the  courts.  In  the
laws  of  Maine  it  is  said  that  divorce  "  a  vinculo  "  may  be  granted
by  any  justice  of  the  Supreme  Court,  ''  when  in  the  exercise  of  a
sound  discretion,  he  deems  it  reasonable  and  proper,  conducive  to
domestic  harmony,  and  consistent  with  the  peace  and  morality  of
society."  The  law  of  Indiana  says  divorce  may  be  granted  for
any  cause  for  which  the  court  deems  it  proper.^  In  Rhode  Island
to  the  enumeration  of  specific  causes  is  added,  "  and  for  any  other
gross  misbehaviour  and  Avickedness  in  either  of  the  parties,  repug-
nant to  and  in  violation  of  the  marriage  covenant."  In  Connect-
icut  the  statute  passed  in  1849  allows    divorce  for    "  any  such

1  See  his  elaborate  article  on  "  Ehe  "  in  Herzog's  Real-Encyhlopadie,  Stuttgart  and  Ham-
burg, 1855,  vol.  iii.  p.  703.

2  Bishop,  Marriage  and  Divorce,  book  vii.  chap.  xl.  §§  827  [542],  830  [544],  4th  edit,
Boston,  1864,  vol.  i.


404  PART  III.    Ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

misconduct  as  permanently  destroys  the  happiness  of  tlie  petitioner
and  defeats  the  purpose  of  the  conjugal  relation."  ^    .

Duty  of  the    Church  and  of  its    Officers.

There  are  certain  principles  bearing  on  this  subject  which  will
be  generally  conceded,  (1.)  Every  legislative  body  is  bound  to
conform  its  enactments  to  the  moral  law.  This  may  be  assumed
as  a  self-evident  proposition.  (2.)  Every  Christian  legislatiu-e  is
bound  to  conform  its  action  to  the  laws  of  Christianity.  By  a
Christian  legislature  is  meant  one  which  makes  laws  for  a  Chris-
tian people.  It  is  not  necessary  that  it  should  represent  them  as
Christians,  to  be  their  agents  in  teaching,  propagating,  or  en-
forcing the  principles  of  the  Christian  religion.  It  is  enough  to
constitute  it  a  Christian  legislature  that  the  great  body  of  its
constituents  Avho  are  bound  to  obey  its  laws  are  Christians.  No
one  hesitates  to  say  that  Italy,  Spain,  and  France  are  Catholic
countries  ;  or  that  England,  Sweden,  and  Prussia  are  Protestant.
As  all  the  powers  of  legislatures  are  derived  from  the  people,  it
is  irrational  to  suppose  that  the  people  would  delegate  to  their
representatives  authority  to  violate  their  religion.  No  legislature
of  a  Christian  state,  therefore,  can  have  the  right  to  make  laws
inconsistent  with  the  Christian  religion.  This  principle,  so  rea-
sonable and  obvious,  is  conceded  in  the  abstract.  No  state  in  this
Union  would  dare  to  legalize  adultery  or  bigamy.  Before  the  Ref-
ormation all  questions  concerning  marriage  were  under  the  juris-
diction of  the  Church  ;  after  that  event  they  were,  in  Protestant
countries,  referred  to  the  authorities  of  the  state.  "  It  never,
however,"  says  Stahl,  "  entered  the  minds  of  the  Reformers,  to
assert  that  marriage  was  purely  a  civil  institution,  to  be  deter-
mined by  civil,  and  not  religious  laws,  or  that  the  testimony  of
the  Church  as  to  the  divine  laws  of  man-iage  was  not  a  binding
rule  for  the  legislation  of  the  state."  ^  And  in  still  more  general
terms  he  declares  that  "  What  the  Church  as  such  [the  body  of
Christians]  testifies  to  be  an  unchangeable  divine  law,  '  jus  divi-
num,'  and  upholds  ^vithin  its  sphere,  is  the  impassable  rule  and
limit  for  the  legislation  of  a  Christian  state."  ^

3.  No  act  of  any  human  legislature  contrary  to  the  moral  law
can  bind  any  man,  and  no  such  act  contrary  to  the  law  of  Christ
can  bind  any  Christian.     If,  therefore,  a  human  tribunal  annuls

1  See  Woolsey,    Essay  on  Divorce,  New  York,  1869,  p.  205.

2  Die  Philosaplde  des  Rechts,  Rechts-  unci  Staatslehre,  I.  iii.  .3.  1.  §  69,  4th  edit.  Heidel-
berg, 1370,  vol.  ii.  part  1,  p.  441.

8  fbid.  §  08;  p.  435.


I  11.]  THE   SEVENTH   COMMANDMENT.  405

a  marriage  for  any  reason  other  than  those  assigned  in  the  Bible,
the  marriage  is  not  thereby  dissolved.  In  the  judgment  of  Chris-
tians it  remains  in  full  force  ;  and  they  are  bound  so  to  regard  it.
And  on  the  other  hand,  if  the  state  pronounces  a  marriage  valid,
which  the  Bible  declares  to  be  invalid,  in  the  view  of  Christians
it  is  invalid.  There  is  no  help  for  this.  Christians  cannot  give
up  their  convictions ;  nor  can  they  renounce  their  allegiance  to
Christ.  This  state  of  conflict  between  the  laws  and  the  con-
science of  the  people,  is  the  necessary  consequence,  if  a  body
making  laws  for  a  Cliristian  people  disregards  an  authority  which
the  people  recognize  as  divine.

4.  The  laws  of  many  of  the  states  of  this  Union,  on  the  mat-
ter of  divorce,  are  unscriptural  and  immoral.  If  the  former,
they  are  the  latter  in  the  view  of  all  who  believe  in  the  divine
authority  of  the  Bible.  If  the  Scrij)tures  be  the  only  infallible
rule  of  faith  and  practice,  they  contain  the  only  standard  of  right
and  wrong.  The  moral  law  is  not  something  self-imposed.  It
is  not  what  any  man  or  body  of  men  may  think  right  or  expe-
dient. It  is  the  revealed  will  of  God  as  to  human  conduct ;  and
whatever  is  contrary  to  that  will  is  morally  wrong.  If  this  be  so,
then  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  divorce  laws  of  many  of  our
states  are  immoral.  They  contravene  the  law  of  God.  They
annul  marriages  for  other  reasons  than  those  allowed  in  Scripture,
and  even,  in  some  cases,  at  the  discretion  of  the  courts.  They
pronounce  persons  not  to  be  man  and  wife,  who  by  the  law  of
God  are  man  and  wife.  They  pronounce  those  to  be  legally  mar-
ried, whose  union  Christ  declares  to  be  adulterous.  That  is,  they
legalize  adultery.  This  is  a  conclusion  which  cannot  be  avoided,
except  by  denying  either  the  authority  of  the  Bible,  or  that  it
legislates  on  the  subject  of  marriage.  If  marriage  were  a  mere
civil  compact,  Avitli  regard  to  which  the  Scriptures  gave  no  special
directions,  it  might  be  regulated  by  the  state  according  to  its
views  of  wisdom  or  expediency.  But  if  it  be  an  ordinance  of
God  ;  if  He  has  revealed  his  will  as  to  who  may,  and  who  may
not  intermarry,  and  who,  when  married,  may  or  may  not  be  re-
leased from  the  marriage  bond,  then  the  state  has  no  more  right
to  alter  these  laws  than  it  has  to  alter  the  decalogue,  and  to
legalize  idolatry  or  blasphemy.  There  is  no  use  in  covering  this
matter  over.  It  is  wrong;  to  regard  anti-Christian  laws  as  mat-
ters  of  small  importance.

The  action  of  the  state  in  this  matter  is  not  merely  negative.
It  does  not  simply  overlook  or  refuse  to  punish  the  violation  of


406  PART  m.    Ch.   XIX. —  the  LAW.

the  Scriptural  law  of  divorce,  but  it  intervenes  by  its  positive
action,  and  declares  that  certain  parties  are  not  man  and  wife,  be-
tween Avhom,  according  to  the  law  of  God,  the  bund  of  marriage
still  subsists.  It  condemns  bigamy,  but  it  sanctions  what  the
Bible  pronounces  bigamy.  The  law  of  the  state  and  the  law  of
God,  in  this  regard,  are  so  opposed  to  each  other,  that  he  who
obeys  the  one  violates  the  other.

5.  As  the  Church  and  its  officers  are  under  the  highest  obliga-
tions to  obey  the  law  of  Christ,  it  follows  that  where  the  action
of  the  state  conflicts  with  that  law,  such  action  must  be  disre-
garded. If  a  person  be  divorced  on  other  than  Scriptural  grounds
and  marries  again,  such  person  cannot  consistently  be  received  to
the  fellowship  of  the  Church.  If  a  minister  be  called  upon  to
solemnize  the  marriage  of  a  person  improperly  divorced,  he  can-
not, in  consistency  with  his  allegiance  to  Christ,  perform  the  ser-
vice. This  conflict  between  the  civil  and  divine  law  is  a  great
evil,  and  has  often,  especially  in  Prussia,  given  rise  to  great  dif-
ficulty.

As  all  denominations  of  Christians,  Romanists  and  Protestants,
are  of  one  mind  on  this  subject,  it  is  matter  of  astonishment  that
these  objectionable  divorce  laws  are  allowed  to  stand  on  the
statute-books  of  so  many  of  our  states.  This  fact  proves  either
that  public  attention  has  not  to  a  sufficient  degree  been  called  to
the  subject,  or  that  the  public  conscience  is  lamentably  blinded  or
seared.  The  remedy  is  with  the  Church,  which  is  the  witness  of
God  on  earth,  bound  to  testify  to  his  truth  and  to  uphold  his  law.
If  Christians,  in  their  individual  capacity  and  in  their  Church
courts,  would  unite  in  their  efforts  to  arouse  and  guide  public
sentiment  on  this  subject,  there  is  little  doubt  that  these  objec-
tionable laws  would  be  repealed.

The  Social  Evil.

This  is  not  a  subject  to  be  discussed  in  these  pages  ;  a  few  re-
marks, however,  in  reference  to  it  may  not  be  out  of  place.

1.  It  is  obviously  Utopian  to  expect  that  all  violations  of  the
seventh  commandment  can  be  prevented,  any  more  than  that  the
laws  against  theft  or  falsehood  should  never  be  disregarded.

2.  The  histor}"  of  the  world  shows  that  the  instinct  which  leads
to  the  evil  in  question  can  never  be  kept  within  proper  limits,  ex-
cept by  moral  principle,  or  by  marriage.

3.  To  these  two  means  of  correction,  therefore,  the  efforts  of
the  friends  of  virtue  should  be  principally  directed.     There  can


§11.]  THE   SEVENTH   COMMANDMENT.  407

be  no  efficient  moral  culture  ^athout  religious  training.  If  we
would  reform  our  fellow-men,  we  must  bring  and  keep  them  from
the  beginnincr  to  the  end  of  their  lives  under  the  influence  of  the
truth  and  ordinances  of  God  ;  to  accomplish  this  work  is  the
duty  assigned  to  the  Church.  Besides  this  general  moral  culture,
there  is  needed  special  effort  to  produce  a  proper  public  sentiment
with  regard  to  this  special  evil.  So  long  as  the  seventh  com-
mandment can  be  violated  without  any  serious  loss  of  self-respect
or  of  public  confidence,  one  of  the  strongest  barriers  against  vice  is
broken  down.  If  loss  of  character  as  certainly  followed  a  breach
of  the  seventh  commandment,  as  it  follows  theft  or  perjury,  the
evil  would  be  to  a  good  degree  abated.  This  is  already  the  fact
with  regard  to  certain  classes.  It  is  so  with  regard  to  women ;
and  it  is  so  in  the  case  of  the  clergy.  If  a  minister  of  the  gospel
be  guilty  of  this  offence,  he  is  as  certainly  and  effectually  ruined
as  he  would  be  by  the  commission  of  any  other  crime  short  of
murder.  The  same  moral  law,  however,  binds  all  men.  Theft
in  the  case  of  one  man  is,  in  its  essential  character,  just  what  it
is  in  the  case  of  any  other  man.

4.  The  divinely  appointed  preventive  of  the  social  evil  is  laid
down  in  1  Corinthians  vii.  2  :  "  Let  every  man  have  his  own  wife,
and  let  every  woman  have  her  own  husband."  That  there  are  se-
rious difficulties,  in  the  present  state  of  society,  in  the  way  of  fre-
quent and  early  marriages,  cannot  be  denied.  The  principal  of  these
is  no  doubt  the  expensive  style  of  living  generally  adopted.  Young
people  find  it  impossible  to  commence  life  with  the  conveniences
and  luxm-ies  to  which  they  have  been  accustomed  in  their  fathers'
houses,  and  therefore  marriage  is  neglected  or  postponed.  With
regard  to  the  poorer  classes,  provision  might  be  made  to  endow
young  women  of  good  character,  so  as  to  enable  them  to  begin
their  married  life  in  comfort.  Arrangements  may  also  be  made
in  various  ways  to  lessen  the  expense  of  family  living.  The  end
to  be  accomplished  is  to  facilitate  marriage.  Those  who  are  so
happy  as  to  find  in  a  dictum  of  Scripture  the  ultimate  reason  and
the  highest  motive,  may  see  the  end  to  be  attained,  although,  as
in  the  present  case,  they  are  obliged  to  leave  the  means  of  its  ac-
complishment to  experts  in  social  science.

Prohibited  Marriages.

That  certain  marriages  are  prohibited  is  almost  the  universal
judgment  of  mankind.  Among  the  ancient  Persians  and  Egyp-
tians, indeed,  the  nearest  relations  were  allowed  to  intermarry,


408  PART  m.    Ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

and  in  the  corrupt  period  of  the  Roman  Empire,  equal  hixnesa
more  or  less  prevailed.  These  isolated  facts  do  not  invalidate  the
argument  from  the  general  judgment  of  mankind.  What  all  men
think  to  be  wrong,  must  be  wrong.  This  unanimity  cannot  be
accounted  for,  except  by  assuming  that  the  judgment  in  which
men  thus  agree  is  founded  on  the  constitution  of  their  nature,  and
that  constitution  is  the  work  of  God.  There  are  cases,  therefore,
in  which  the  "  vox  populi  "  is  the  "  vox  Dei."

The    Ground  or  Reason  of  such  Prohibitions.

The  reason  why  mankind  so  generally  condemn  the  mtermar-
riage  of  near  relations  cannot  be  physical.  Physiology  is  not
taught  by  instinct.  It  is,  therefore,  not  only  an  unworthy,  but  is
an  altogether  unsatisfactory  assumption,  that  such  marriages  are
forbidden  because  they  tend  to  the  deterioration  of  the  race.  The
fact  assumed  may,  or  may  not  be  true  ;  but  if  admitted,  it  is
utterly  insufficient  to  account  for  the  condemnatory  judgment  in
question.

The  two  most  natural  and  obvious  reasons  why  the  intermar-
riage of  near  relations  is  forbidden  are,  first,  that  the  natural
affection  which  relatives  have  for  each  other  is  incompatible  with
conjugal  love.  They  cannot  coexist.  Tlie  latter  is  a  violation
and  destruction  of  the  former.  This  reason  need  only  be  stated.
It  requires  no  illustration.  These  natural  affections  are  not  only
healthful,  but  in  the  higher  grades  of  relationship,  even  sacred.
The  second  ground  for  such  prohibitions  is  a  regard  to  domestic
purity.  When  persons  are  so  nearly  related  to  each  other  as  to
justify  their  Hving  together  as  one  family,  they  should  be  sacred
one  to  the  other.  If  this  were  not  the  case,  evil  could  hardly
fail  to  occur,  when  young  people  grow  up  in  the  famiharity  of
domestic  Hfe.  The  slightest  inspection  of  the  details  of  the  law
as  laid  down  in  the  eighteenth  chapter  of  Leviticus,  shows  that
this  principle  underlies  many  of  its  specifications.

J.  D.  Michaehs,  in  his  work  on  the  law  of  Moses,  makes  this
the  only  reason  for  the  Levitical  prohibitions.  He  goes  to  the
extreme  of  denying  that  "  nearness  of  kin  "is  in  itself  any  bar
to  marriage.  His  views  had  great  influence,  not  only  on  public
opinion,  but  even  on  legislation  in  Germany.  That  influence,
however,  passed  away  when  a  deeper  moral  and  religious  feeling
gained  ascendancy.^

1  Commentaries  on  the  Laws  of  ^^oscs.  By  Sir  Jolin  David  Michaelis,  Professor  of
PhiloRophy  in  the  University  of  Giittingen.  Translated  l)y  Alexander  Smith,  D.  D.,  London
1814,  vol.ii.  arts.  104-103,"pp.  54-76.


§11.1  THE   SEVENTH   COMMANDMENT.  409

Augustine^s  Theory.

Augustine  advanced  a  theory  on  this  subject,  which  still  has  its
earnest  advocates.  He  held  that  the  design  of  all  these  prohibi-
tory laws  was  to  widen  the  circle  of  the  social  affections.  Brothers
and  sisters  are  bound  together  by  mutual  love.  Should  they  inter-
marry the  circle  is  not  extended.  If  they  choose  husbands  and
wives  from  among  strangers,  a  larger  number  of  persons  are  in-
cluded in  the  bonds  of  mutual  love.  "  Habita  est  ratio  rectissima
charitatis,  ut  homines  quibus  esset  utilis  atque  honesta  concordia,
diversarum  necessitudinum  vincuhs  necterentur ;  nee  unus  in  uno
multas  haberet,  sed  singulte  spargerentur  m  singulos  ;  ac  sic  ad
socialem  vitam  diligentius  colligandam  plurimae  plurimos  obti-
nerent."  Thus  it  would  come  to  pass,  "  Ut  unus  homo  haberet
alteram  sororem,  alteram  uxofem,  alteram  consobrinam,  alteram
patrem,  alteram  avunculum,  alterum  socerum,  alteram  matrem,
alteram  amitam,  alteram  socrum  :  atque  ita  se  non  in  paucitate
coarctatum,  sed  latius  atque  numerosius  propinquitatibus  crebris
vinculum  sociale  diffunderet."  ^

A  writer  in  Hengstenberg's  "  Evangelische  Kirchen-Zeitung,"
adopts  and  elaborately  vindicates  this  theory.  He  endeavours  to
show  that  it  answers  all  the  criteria  by  which  any  theory  on  the
subject  should  be  tested.  These  marriages  are  called  "  abom-
inations ; "  and  he  asks.  Is  it  not  shameful  that  the  benevolent
ordinance  of  God  for  extending  the  circle  of  the  social  affections
should  be  counteracted  ?  They  are  called  "  confusion,"  because
they  unite  those  whom  God  commands  to  remain  separate.  It
also  accounts  for  the  propriety  of  the  intermarriage  of  brothers
and  sisters  in  the  family  of  Adam  ;  for  in  the  begimiing  the  circle
of  affection  did  not  admit  of  being  enlarged.  It  even  meets  the
case  of  the  Levirate  law  which  bound  a  man  to  marry  the  child-
less widow  of  his  brother.  The  law  which  forbids  the  marriage
of  relations,  holds  only  where  the  relationship  is  close.  There
must,  therefore,  be  cases  just  on  the  line  beyond  which  relation-
ship is  no  bar  to  marriage.  And  with  regard  to  those  just  within
the  Kne,  there  must  be  considerations  which  sometimes  outweigh
the  objections  to  a  given  marriage.  That  God  dispensed  with
the  law  forbidding  the  marriage  of  a  man  with  his  brother's
widow,  when  the  brotlier  died  without  children,  this  German
^vriter  regards  as  impossi1)1o.    "  Evil."  lie  says,  "  may  be  tolerated,

1  De  Civitate  Dei,  xv.  xvi.  1 ;  Works,  edit.  Benedictines,  Paris,  1838,  vol.  vii.  pp.  633,
634.


410  PART  ni.     Cn.   XIX.  —  THE   LAW.

but  not  commanded."  He  adds  that  it  provokes  a  smile  (man
muss  es  naiv  nennen)  that  Gerhard  finds  an  analogy  between  the
case  in  question  and  the  permission  given  to  the  Israelites  to  de-
spoil the  Egyptians.^  It  is  probable  that  the  venerable  Gerhard
would  smile  at  the  writer's  criticisms.  In  the  first  place,  God
can  no  more  allow  evil  than  He  can  command  it.  An  act  other-
wise evil,  ceases  to  be  so  when  He  either  allows  (z.  e.,  sanctions)
it,  or  commands  it.  If  He  commands  a  man  to  be  put  to  death,
it  ceases  to  be  murder  to  put  him  to  death.  There  are  two  prin-
ciples of  morality  generally  accepted  and  clearly  Scriptural ;  one
of  which  is,  that  any  of  those  moral  laws  which  are  founded,  not
on  the  immutable  nature  of  God,  but  upon  the  relations  of  men
in  the  present  state  of  existence,  may  be  set  aside  by  the  divine
.  law-giver  whenever  it  seems  good  in  his  sight ;  just  as  God
under  the  old  dispensation  set  aside  the  original  mouogamic  law
of  marriage.  Polygamy  was  not  sinful  as  long  as  God  permitted
it.  The  same  principle  is  involved  in  the  words  of  Christ,  God
loves  mercy  and  not  sacrifice.  When  two  laws  conflict,  the
weaker  yields  to  the  stronger.  It  is  wrong  to  labour  on  the  Sab-
bath, but  any  amount  of  labom-  on  that  day  becomes  a  duty,  if
necessary  to  save  life.  In  the  case  of  the  Levirate  law,  the  pro-
hibition to  marry  a  brother's  widow,  yielded  to  what  under  the
Mosaic  economy  was  regarded  as  a  higher  obligation,  that  is,  to
perpetuate  the  family.  To  die  childless  was  considered  one  of
the  greatest  calamities.

The  question,  however,  concerning  the  rationale  of  these  laws
is  one  of  minor  importance.  We  may  not  be  able  to  see  exactly
in  all  cases  why  certain  things  are  forbidden.  The  fact  that  they
are  forbidden  should  satisfy  the  reason  and  the  conscience.  The
two  important  questions  in  connection  with  this  subject,  to  be
considered,  are,  first,  is  the  Levitical  law  respecting  prohibited
marriages  still  in  force  ?  and,  second,  how  is  that  law  to  be  inter-
preted, and  what  marriages  does  it  forbid  ?

7s  the  Levitical  Law  of  Marriage  still  in  force  ?

1.  It  is  a  strong  a  priori  argument  in  favour  of  an  afiirmative
answer  to  that  question,  that  it  always  has  been  regarded  as  ob-
ligatory by  the  whole  Christian  Church.

2.  The  reason  assigned  for  the  prohibition  contained  in  that
law,  has  no  special  reference  to  the  Jews.  It  is  not  found  in
their  peculiar  circumstances,  nor  in  the  design  of  God  in  select-

i  Evangelische  Kirchen-Zeitung,  June  18i0,  pp.  369-416 ;  see  p.  378.


§11.]  THE    SEVENTH   COMMANDMENT.  411

ing  them  to  be  depositaries  of  his  truth  to  prepare  the  world  for
the  coming  of  the  Messiah.  The  reason  assigned  "  is  nearness
of  kin."  This  reason  has  as  much  force  at  one  time  as  at  an-
other, for  all  nations  as  for  any  one  nation.  There  was  nothing
peculiar  in  the  relation  in  wliich  Hebrew  parents  and  children,
Hebrew  brothers  and  sisters,  and  Hebrew  uncles  and  nieces,  stood,
which  was  the  ground  of  these  prohibitions.  That  ground  was
the  nearness  of  the  relationship  itself  as  it  exists  in  every  and  in
all  ages.  There  is,  therefore,  in  the  sight  of  God,  a  permanent
reason  why  neaT  relations  ought  not  to  intermarry.

3.  If  the  Levitical  law  be  not  still  in  force,  we  have  no  divine
law  on  the  subject.  Then  there  is  no  such  sin  as  incest.  It  is  an
offence  only  against  the  civil  law,  and  a  sin  against  God  only  in
so  far  as  it  is  sinful  to  violate  the  law  of  the  state.  But  this  is
contrary  to  the  universal  judgment  of  men,  at  least  of  Christian
men.  For  parents  and  children,  brothers  and  sisters,  to  inter-
marry is  universally  considered  as  sin  against  God,  irrespective  of
any  human  prohibition.  But  if  a  sin  against  God,  it  must  be
forbidden  in  his  Word,  or  we  must  give  up  the  fundamental  prin-
ciple of  Protestantism,  that  the  Scriptures  are  the  only  infallible
rule  of  our  faith  and  practice.  As  such  marriages  are  nowhere
in  the  Bible  forbidden  except  in  the  Levitical  law,  if  that  law
does  not  forbid  them,  the  Bible  does  not  forbid  them.

4.  The  judgments  of  God  are  denounced  against  the  heathen
nations  for  permitting  the  marriages  which  the  Levitical  law  for-
bids. In  Leviticus  xviii.  3,  it  is  said,  "  After  the  doings  of  the
land  of  Egypt,  wherein  ye  dwelt  shall  ye  not  do :  and  after  the
doings  of  the  land  of  Canaan,  whither  I  bring  you,  shall  ye  not
do  ;  neither  shall  ye  walk  in  their  ordinances."  This  is  the  intro-
duction to  the  law  of  prohibited  marriages,  containing  the  specifica-
tion of  the  "  ordinances  "  of  the  Egyptians  and  Canaanites,  which
the  people  of  God  were  forbidden  to  follow.  And  in  the  twenty-
seventh  verse  of  the  same  chapter,  at  the  close  of  these  specifica-
tions, it  is  said,  "  All  these  abominations  have  the  men  of  the
land  done,  which  were  before  you,  and  the  land  is  defiled."
Again,  in  ch.  xx.  23,  still  in  reference  to  these  marriages,  it  is
said,  "  Ye  shall  not  walk  in  the  manners  of  the  nations  which  I
cast  out  before  you :  for  they  committed  all  these  things,  and
therefore  I  abhorred  them."  This  is  a  clear  proof  that  these
laws  were  binding,  not  on  the  Jews  alone,  but  upon  all  people
and  at  all  times.

5.  The  continued  obligation  of  the  Levitical  law  on  this  subject


412  PART  m.   ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

is  also  recognized  in  the  New  Testament.  This  recognition  is
involved  in  the  constant  reference  to  the  law  of  Moses  as  the  law
of  God.  If  in  any  of  its  parts  or  specifications  it  is  no  longer  ob-
ligatory, that  is  to  be  proved.  It  contains  much  which  we  learn
frf)ni  the  New  Testament  was  designed  simply  to  keep  the  He-
brews a  distinct  people  ;  mnch  which  was  typical ;  much  which  was
a  shadow  of  things  to  come,  and  which  passed  away  when  the
substance  was  revealed.  It  contained,  however,  much  which  was
moral  and  of  permanent  obligation.  If  God  gives  a  law  to  men,
those  who  deny  its  perpetual  obligation  are  bound  to  prove  it.
The  presumption  is  that  it  continues  in  force  until  the  contrary
is  proved.  It  must  be  hard  to  prove  that  laws  founded  on  the
permanent  social  relations  of  men  were  intended  to  be  tempo-
rary.

Besides  this  general  consideration,  we  find  specific  recognitions
of  the  continued  obligation  of  the  Levitical  law  in  the  New  Tes-
tament. Jolm  the  Baptist,  as  recorded  in  Mark  vi.  18  and  Mat-
thew xiv.  4,  said  to  Herod  that  it  was  not  lawful  for  him  to  have
his  brother  Philip's  wife.  It  matters  not,  as  to  the  argument,
whether  Philip  was  living  or  not.  The  offence  charged  was  not
that  he  had  taken  another  man's  wife,  but  that  he  had  taken
his  brother's  wife.  It  may  be  objected  to  this  argument  that
during  the  ministry  of  John  the  Baptist  the  law  of  Moses  was
still  in  force.  This  Gerhard  denies,  Avho  argues  from  Matthew
xi.  13,  "  All  the  prophets  and  the  law  prophesied  until  John,"
that  the  Baptist's  ministry  belongs  to  the  new  dispensation.^
Tliis  may  be  doubted.  Nevertheless  John  expressed  the  moral
sentiment  of  his  age ;  and  the  record  of  the  fact  referred  to  by
the  Evangelists  whose  Gospels  were  wi'itten  after  the  Christian
Church  was  fully  organized,  is  given  in  a  form  which  involves
a  sanction  of  the  judgment  which  the  Baptist  had  expressed
against  the  marriage  of  Herod  with  his  brother's  wife.  It  is  also
to  be  remembered  that  the  Herodian  family  was  Idumean,  and
therefore,  that  a  merely  Jewish  law  would  have  no  natural  au-
thority over  them.

The  Apostle  Paul,  moreover,  in  1  Corinthians  v.  1,  speaks  of  a
man's  marrying  his  step-mother  as  an  unheard  of  offence.  That
this  was  a  case  of  marriage  and  not  of  adultery  is  plain  because  the
the  phrase  yvialKa  t^e"'  is  never  used  in  the  New  Testament  ex-
cept of  marriage.     This,  therefore,  is  a  clear  recognition  of  the

1  Loci  Theologicl,  xxvi.  v.  ii.  2. 1.  1.  §  129,  edit.  Tubingen,  1776,  vol.  xv.  p.  285.  Ger-
hard subjects  tbo,  whole  subject  of  prohibited  marriages  to  a  protracted  discussion.


§11.]  THE   SEVENTH   COjVIMANDMENT.  413

continued  obligation  of  the  law  forbidding  marriage  between
near  relations,  whether  the  relationship  was  by  consanguinity  or
affinity.

6.  The  Bible  everywhere  enforces  those  laws  which  have  their
foundation  in  the  natural  constitution  of  men.  That  this  Levit-
ical  law  is  a  divine  authentication  of  a  law  of  nature,  may  be  in-
ferred from  the  fact  that  with  rare  exceptions  the  intermarriage
of  near  relations  is  forbidden  among  all  nations.  Paul  says  that
the  marriage  of  a  man  with  his  step-mother  was  unheard  of
among  the  heathen  ;  i.  e.,  it  was  forbidden  and  abhorred.     Cicero

exclaims,  "  Nubit  genero  socrus O  mulieris  incredibile  et

praeter  hanc.  unam  in  omni  vita  inauditum  !  "  ^  Beza  says,  It
must  not  be  overlooked  that  the  civil  laws  of  the  Romans  agTee
completely  in  reference  to  this  subject  with  the  divine  law.
They  seemed  to  have  copied  from  it.^

No  Christian  Church  doubts  the  continued  obligation  of  any  of
the  laws  of  the  Pentateuch,  of  which  it  can  be  said  that  the  rea-
son assigned  for  their  enactment  is  the  permanent  relations  of
men  ;  that  the  heathen  are  condemned  for  their  violation  ;  and
that  the  New  Testament  refers  to  them  as  still  in  force :  and
which  heathen  nations  under  the  guidance  of  natural  conscience
have  enacted.

ffow  is  the  Levitical  Law  to  he  interpreted  ?

Admitting  the  Levitical  law  of  marriage  to  be  still  in  force,  the
next  question  is,  How  is  it  to  be  interpreted  ?  Is  it  to  be  under-
stood as  specifying  the  degrees  of  relation,  whether  of  consan-
guinity or  of  affinity,  within  which  intermarriage  is  forbidden  ?  or,
is  it  to  be  viewed  as  an  enumeration  of  particular  cases,  so  that
no  case  not  specifically  mentioned  is  to  be  included  in  the  pro-
hibition ?

The  former  of  these  rules  of  interpretation  is  the  one  generally
adopted  ;  for  the  following  reasons  :  —

1.  The  language  of  the  law  itself.  It  begins  with  a  general
prohibition  of  marriage  between  those  who  are.  near  of  kin.
Nearness  of  kindred  is  made  the  ground  of  the  prohibition.  The
specifications  which  follow  are  intended  to  show  what  degree  of
nearness  of  kindred  works  a  prohibition.  This  reason  appKes  to
many  cases  not  particularly  mentioned  in  Leviticus  xviii.  or  else-

1  Pro  A.  Cluentio,  v.  vi.  (14,  15);    Works  edit.  Leipzig,  1850,  p.  374,  b.

2  Beza,  De  Repudiis  et  Bivortiis,  Traciationes  Theologicm,  edit.  Eustathius  Vignon,  1582;
vol.  ii.  p.  52.


414  PART  m.    ch.  XIX.— the  law.

where.    The  law  would  seem  to  be  applicable  to  all  cases  in  which
the  divinely  assigned  reason  for  its  enactment  is  found  to  exist.

2.  The  design  of  the  law,  as  we  have  seen,  is  twofold :  first,
to  keep  sacred  those  relationships  which  naturally  give  rise  to
feelings  and  affections  which  are  inconsistent  with  the  marriage
relation  ;  and  secondly,  the  preservation  of  domestic  purity.  As
the  natural  affections  are  due  partly  to  the  very  constitution  of
our  nature,  and  partly  to  the  familiarity  and  constancy  of  inter-
course, and  the  interchange  of  kindly  offices,  it  is  natural  that
in  the  enumeration  of  the  prohibited  cases  regard  should  be  had,
in  the  selection,  to  those  in  which  this  familiarity  of  intercourse,
at  the  time  the  law  was  enacted,  actually  prevailed.  In  the  East
the  family  is  organized  on  different  principles  from  those  on
which  it  is  organized  in  the  West.  Among  the  early  Oriental
nations  especially,  the  males  of  a  family  with  their  wives  re-
mained together ;  while  the  daughters,  being  given  in  marriage,
went  away  and  were  amalgamated  with  the  families  of  their  hus-
bands. Hence  it  would  happen  that  relatives  by  the  father's  side
would  be  intimate  associates,  wliile  those  of  the  same  degree  on
the  mother's  side  might  be  perfect  strangers.  A  law,  therefore,
constructed  on  the  principle  of  prohibiting  marriage  between
parties  so  related  as  to  be  already  in  the  bonds  of  natural  affection
and  who  were  domesticated  in  the  same  family  circle,  would  deal
principally  in  specifications  of  relationships  on  the  father's  side.
It  would  not  follow,  however,  from  this  fact,  that  relations  of  the
same  grade  of  kindred  might  freely  mtermarry,  simply  because
they  were  not  specified  in  the  enumeration.  The  law  in  its  prin-
ciple applies  to  all  cases,  whether  enumerated  or  not,  in  wliich
the  nearness  of  kin  is  the  source  of  natural  affection,  and  in  wliich
it  leads  to  and  justifies  intimate  association.

3.  Another  consideration  in  favour  of  the  principle  of  interpre-
tation usually  adopted,  is,  that  the  opposite  rule  would  introduce
the  greatest  inconsistencies  into  the  law.  The  law  forbids  mar-
riage between  those  near  of  kin  ;  and,  according  to  this  rule,  it
goes  on  alternately  permitting  and  forbidding  marriages  where
the  relationship  is  precisely  the  same.  Thus,  a  man  cannot
marry  the  daughter  of  his  son ;  but  a  woman  may  marry  the  son
of  her  daughter  ;  a  man  cannot  marry  the  widow  of  his  father's
brother,  but  he  may  marry  the  widow  of  his  mother's  brother  ;  a
woman  cannot  marry  two  brothers,  but  a  man  may  marry  two
sisters.  These  inconsistencies  might  be  intelligible  if  the  law
were  a  temporary  and  local  enactment,  designed  for  a  transient


§11.]  THE   SEVENTH   COMMANDMENT.  415

state  of  society  ;  but  they  are  utterly  unaccountable  if  the  law
be  one  of  permanent  and  universal  obKgation.  A  rule  of  inter-
pretation which  brings  uniformity  and  consistency  into  these
enactments  of  Scripture,  is  certainly  to  be  preferred  to  one  which
renders  them  confused  and  inconsistent.

Prohibited  Degrees.

The  cases  specifically  mentioned  are :  1 .  Mother.  2.  Step-
mother. 3.  Grand-daughter.  4.  Sister  and  half-sister,  "  bom
at  home  or  born  abroad,"  i.  e.,  legitimate  or  illegitimate.  5.  Aunt
on  the  father's  side.  6.  Maternal  aunt.  7.  The  wife  of  a  father's
brother.  8.  Daughter-in-law.  9.  Brother's  wife.  10.  A  woman
and  her  daughter.  11.  A  wife's  grand-daughter.  12.  Two
sisters  at  the  same  time.

The  meaning  of  Leviticus  xviii.  18,  has  been  much  disputed.
The  question  is,  Whether  the  words  MnhS'bs  n^W,  "  a  woman  to
her  sister,"  are  to  be  understood  in  their  idiomatic  sense,  "one  to
another,"  so  that  the  law  forbids  bigamy,  the  taking  of  one  wife
to  another  during  her  lifetime  ;  or.  Whether  they  are  to  be  taken
literally,  so  that  this  law  forbids  a  man's  marrying  the  sister  of  hi?
wife  wliile  the  latter  is  hving.  It  is  certain  that  the  words  in  ques-
tion have  in  several  places  the  idiomatic  sense  ascribed  to  them.
In  Exodus  xxvi.  3,  "  Five  curtains  shaU  be  coupled  together  one
to  another,"  literally,  "  a  woman  to  her  sister  ;  "  so  in  verse  5,  the
loops  take  hold,  "  a  woman  and  her  sister  ;  "  ver.  6,  the  taches  of
gold  unite  the  cm-tains,  "  a  woman  and  her  sister."  Also  in  ver.
17.  Thus  also  in  Ezekiel  i.  9,  it  is  said,  "  their  wings  were  joined
one  to  another,"  "  a  woman  to  her  sister  ;  "  and  again  in  ch.  iii.  13.
The  words  therefore  admit  of  the  rendering  given  in  the  margin
of  the  English  version.  But  it  is  objected  to  this  interpretation
in  this  case  :  (1.)  That  the  words  in  question  never  mean  "  one
to  another,"  except  when  preceded  by  a  plural  noun ;  which  is  not
the  case  in  Leviticus  xviii.  18.  (2.)  If  this  explanation  be  adopted,
the  passage  contains  an  explicit  prohibition  of  polygamy,  which
the  law  of  Moses  permitted.  (3.)  It  is  minatural  to  take  the  words
"  wife"  and  "  sister  "  in  a  sense  different  from  that  in  which  they
are  used  throughout  the  chapter.  (4.)  The  ancient  versions  agree
with  the  rendering  given  in  the  text  of  the  English  Bible.  The
Septuagint  has  yvvau<a  Itr  dSeX^T]  aiuTTys ;  the  Vulgate,  "  sororem
uxoris  tu£e."

In  this  interpretation  the  modern  commentators  almost  without
exception  agree.     Thus  INIaurer  renders  the  passage :  "  '  Uxorem


416  PART  m.   Ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

ad  (e.  e.,  prater)  sororem  ejus  ne  ducito,'  i.  e.,  Nolli  prater  tuam
conjugem  aliam  insuper  uxorem  ducere,  qua  illius  soror  est."  ^
Baumgarten's  comment  is :  "  From  the  fact  that  the  prohibition
of  the  marriage  of  a  wife's  sister  is  expressly  conditioned  on  the
life  of  the  former,  we  must  infer  with  the  Rabbins,  that  after  the
death  of  the  wife  this  marriage  is  permitted.  True,  the  degree
of  affinity  is  here  the  same  as  in  ver.  16,  but  there  the  relationship
is  on  the  male,  here  on  the  female  side  ;  this  makes  a  differ-
ence, because  under  the  Old  Testament  the  woman  had  not  at-
tained to  the  same  degree  of  personality  and  independence  as  the
man."  ^  Rosenmiiller  says  :  "  Uxorem  ad  sororem  ejus  ne  ducas,
duas  sorores  ne  ducas  in  matrimonium,  scil.  rf^fni:  in  vita  ejus,  ^'.  e.,
uxore  tua  vivente.  Non  igitur  prohibet  Moses  matrimonium  cum
sorore  uxoris  mortua."  ^  Knobel  says  :  "  Finally,  a  man  shall
not  marrj^  ....  the  sister  of  his  "svife,  so  long  as  the  latter  lives.
....  To  marry  one  after  the  other,  after  the  death  of  the
other,  is  not  forbidden."  ^  Keil  understands  v.  18  in  the  same
way.  It  forbids,  according  to  his  view,  a  man's  having  two  sis-
ters, at  the  same  time,  as  his  wives.  "  After  the  death  of  the
first  ^vife,"  he  adds,' "  marriage  with  her  sister  was  allowed."  ^

The  inference  which  these  writers  draw  from'  the  fact  that  in
this  passage  the  marriage  of  a  wife's  sister  is  forbidden  during
the  life  of  the  wife,  that  the  marriage  of  the  sister,  after  the  death
of  the  wife,  is  allowed,  is  very  precarious.  All  that  the  passage
teaches  is,  that  if  a  man  chooses  to  have  two  wives,  at  the  same
time,  which  the  law  allowed,  they  must  not  be  sisters  ;  and  the
reason  assigned  is,  that  it  would  bring  the  sisters  into  a  false  re-
lation to  each  other.  This  leaves  the  question  of  the  propriety
of  marrying  the  sister  of  a  deceased  'wife  just  where  it  was.  This
verse  has  no  direct  bearing  on  that  subject.

The  cases  not  expressly  mentioned  in  Leviticus  xviii.,  although
involving  the  same  degree  of  kindred  as  those  included  in  the
enumeration,  are  :  1.  A  man's  own  daughter.  This  is  a  clear
proof  that  the  enumeration  was  not  intended  to  be  exhaustive.
2.  A  brother's  daughter.    3.  A  sister's  daughter.    4.  A  maternal

1  Commentarius  Grammaticiis  Criticus  in  Vetus  Testamentum,  Leipzig,  1835,  vol.  i.
p.  51.

2  Theologiscker  Commentar  zum  Pentateuch,  Kiel,  1844,  vol.  i.   part  2,  p.  204.

8  Scholia  in  Vetus  Testamentum  in  Compendium  redacta,  Leipzig,  1828,  vol.  i.  p.
539.

■4  Kurz(jefasstes  exef/etisches  Handbuch  zum  Alien  Testament.  Exodus  und  Leviticus
erkldrt,  von  August  Knobel,  Leipzig,  1857.  pp.  505,  50G.

6  Riblischer  Commentar  ilher  das  Alte  Testament,  Heraiisgegeben  von  Carl  Friedr.  Keil
und  Frank  Delitzsch;  Die  Biicher  Moses,  von  C.  F.  Keil,  Leipzig,  1862,  vol.  ii.  p.  117.


§  11.]  THE    SEVENTH   COMMANDMENT.  417

uncle's  widow.  5.  A  brother's  son's  widow.  6.  A  sister's  son's
widow.     7.  The  sister  of  a  deceased  wife.

As  nearness  of  kindred  is  made  the  ground  of  prohibition,  and
as  these  cases  are  included  within  "  the  degrees  "  specified,  the
Church  has  considered  them  as  belonging  to  the  class  of  prohib-
ited marriages.  It  is,  however,  to  be  considered  that  the  word
"  prohibited,"  as  here  used,  is  very  comprehensive.  Some  of  the
marriages  specified  in  the  Levitical  law  are  prohibited  in  very
different  senses.  Some  are  pronounced  abominable,  and  those
who  contract  them  are  made  punishable  with  death.  Others  are
pronounced  unseemly,  or  evil,  and  punished  by  exclusion  from
the  privileges  of  the  theocracy.  Others  again  incur  the  penalty
of  dying  childless ;  probably  meaning  that  the  children  of  such
marriages  should  not  be  enrolled  in  the  family  registers  which
the  Jews  were  so  careful  to  preserve.

As  this  distinction  is  recognized  in  the  law  itself,  so  it  is  founded
in  the  nature  of  the  case.  As  nearness  of  kin  varies  from  the
most  intimate  relationship  to  the  most  distant,  so  these  marriages
vary  in  their  impropriety  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest  degree.
Some  of  them  may,  in  certain  cases,  be  wrong,  not  in  themselves,
but  simply  from  the  obligation  to  uphold  a  salutary  law.  That
is,  there  may  be  cases  to  which  the  law,  but  not  the  reason  of  the
law  applies.  For  example  ;  a  man  may  go  thousands  of  miles
from  home  and  marry :  his  wife  would  stand  in  a  very  different
relation  to  her  husband's  brothers,  than  had  she  lived  in  the  same
house  with  them.  The  law  forbidding  a  woman  to  marry  the
brother  of  her  deceased  husband,  would  apply  to  her ;  but  the
reason  of  that  law  would  affect  her  in  a  very  slight  degree ;
nevertheless,  even  in  her  case,  the  law  should  be  observed.

There  is  another  obvious  remark  that  ought  to  be  made.  Strong
repugnance  is  often  felt  and  expressed  against  the  Levitical  law,
not  only  because  it  is  regarded  as  placmg  all  the  marriages  speci-
fied on  the  same  level,  representing  all  as  equally  offensive  in  the
sight  of  God,  but  also  from  the  assvmiption  that  all  the  marriages
forbidden  are,  if  contracted,  invalid.  This  is  a  ^vl•ong  \iew  of  the
subject.  It  is  inconsistent  with  the  law  itself,  and  contrary  to  the
analogy  of  Scripture.  The  law  recognizes  a  great  disparity  in
the  impropriety  of  these  marriages.  Some,  as  just  remarked,  are
utterly  abominable  and  insufferable.  Others  are  specified  because
inexpedient  or  dangerous,  as  conflicting  with  some  ethical  or  pru-
dential principle.

It  is  in  this  as  in  many  other  cases.    The  Mosaic  law  discounte-
voL.  m.  27


418  PART  m.   Ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

nancecl  and  discouraged  intermarriage  between  the  chosen  people
and  their  heathen  neighbours.  With  regard  to  the  Canaanites,
such  intermarriages  were  absohitely  forbidden  ;  with  other  heathen
nations,  although  discountenanced,  they  were  tolerated.  Joseph
married  an  Egyptian ;  Moses,  a  Midianite ;  Solomon  married
Pharaoh's  daughter.  Such  marriages,  in  the  settled  state  of  the
Jewish  nation,  may  have  been  wi-ong,  but  they  were  valid.  Even
now  under  the  Christian  dispensation,  believers  are  forbidden  to
be  unequally  yoked  together  with  unbelievers.  It  does  not  follow
from  this  that  every  marriage  between  a  believer  and  an  un-
believer is  invalid.  These  remarks  are  not  out  of  place.  The
truth  suffers  from  being  misapprehended.  If  the  Bible  is  made
to  teach  what  is  contrary  to  the  common  sense,  or  the  intuitive
judgments  of  men,  it  suffers  great  injustice.  No  man  can  force
himself  to  believe  that  a  man's  marrying  the  sister  of  a  deceased
wife  is  the  same  kind  of  offence  as  a  father's  marrying  his  own
daughter.  The  Bible  teaches  no  such  doctrine ;  and  it  is  a
•slander  so  to  represent  it.

Concluding  Remarks.

The  laws  of  God  are  sacred.  They  are  founded,  not  only  on
his  infinite  wisdom,  but  also  on  the  nature  of  his  creatm-es,  and,
therefore,  should  be  sedulously  observed.  There  may,  in  some
cases,  be  honest  difference  of  opinion  as  to  what  the  law  or  will
of  God  is,  but  when  ascertained,  it  is  our  wisdom  and  duty  to
make  it  the  rule  of  our  conduct.  This  is  so  obvious  that  the
statement  of  it  may  seem  entirely  superfluous.  It  is  so  common,
however,  for  men  professing  to  be  Christians  to  make  their  own
feelings,  opinions,  and  views  of  expediency,  the  rule  of  action
for  themselves  and  others,  that  it  is  by  no  means  a  work  of  super-
erogation, to  reiterate  on  all  proper  occasions  the  truism  that  there
is  no  wisdom  like  God's  wisdom,  and  that  men  are  never  ^vise
except  when  they  follow  the  wisdom  of  God  as  revealed  in  his
Word,  even  when  they  have  to  do  it  blindly.

There  are  certain  principles  which  underlie  the  marriage  laws
of  the  Bible,  which  all  men  in  their  private  capacity  and  when
acting  as  legislators,  would  do  well  to  respect,  —

1.  The  first  is,  that  marriage  is  not  a  mere  external  union  ;  it  is
not  simply  a  mutual  compact ;  it  is  not  merely  a  civil  contract.  It
is  a  real,  physical,  vital,  and  spiritual  union,  in  virtue  of  which  man
and  wife  become,  not  merely  in  a  figurative  sense,  but  really,  al-
though in  a  mysterious  sense,  one  flesh.    This  is  not  only  expressly


§  11.]  THE   SEVENTH   COMMANDMENT.  419

declared  by  Christ  himself  to  be  the  nature  of  marriage,  but  it  is
the  doctrine  which  underlies  the  whole  Levitical  law  on  this  sub-
ject. Nearness  of  kin  is  expressed  constantly  by  saying  that  one
is  "  flesh  of  the  flesh  "  of  the  other,  i-an  nsr^-,  "  Carnem  carnis
suse  s.  corporis  sui  esse  cognatam  propinquam,  quae  est  ut  caro
ejusdem  corporis."  ^  According  to  the  Scriptures,  therefore,  hus-
band and  wife  are  the  nearest  of  all  relations  to  each  other.  Ac-
cording to  the  spirit,  and  most  of  the  legislation  of  the  present
age,  they  are  no  relations  at  all.  They  are  simply  partners.  If
one  member  of  a  business  firm  die,  his  property  does  not  go  to
his  partner,  but  to  his  o^yn  family  ;  so  if  a  wife  die,  without  chil-
dren, her  property  does  not  go  to  her  husband,  but  to  her  third
or  fourth  cousins.  They,  in  the  eye  of  the  law,  are  more  nearly
related  to  her  than  her  husband.  This  is  not  the  hght  in  which
God  looks  upon  marriage.

2.  The  second  principle  which  underlies  these  marriage-laws  is,
that  affinity  is  as  real  a  bond  of  relationship  as  consanguinity.
Fully  one  half  of  the  marriages  specified  in  Leviticus  are  pro-
hibited on  the  ground  of  afiinity.  The  same  form  of  expression
is  used  to  designate  both  kinds  of  relationship.  Those  related  to
each  other  by  affinity  are  said  to  be  "  flesh  of  the  flesh,"  one  of
the  other,  just  as  blood  relations  ;  because  all  the  specifications
contained  in  the  eighteenth  chapter  of  Leviticus  are  included  un-
der the  general  prohibition  contained  in  the  sixth  verse,  "  None
of  you  shall  approach  to  any  that  is  near  of  kin  to  him ;  "  un-
der tliis  head  are  included  step-mothers  ;  mothers-in-law  ;  step-
daughters ;  sisters-in-law  (as  when  a  man  is  forbidden  to  marry
the  widow  of  his  brother)  ;  uncle's  vnie,  etc.  These  relation-
ships are  traced  out  in  the  line  of  affinity,  just  as  far  as  they  are
in  that  of  consanguinity.  The  declaration,  therefore,  contained
in  the  Westminster  Confession,^  "  The  man  may  not  marry  any
of  his  wife's  kindred  nearer  in  blood  than  he  may  of  his  own,  nor
the  woman  of  her  husband's  kindi-ed  nearer  in  blood  than  of  her
o-svn,"  is  a  simple  and  comprehensive  statement  of  the  law  as  laid
down  in  Leviticus.  In  saying  that  affinity  is  as  real  a  bond  of
relationship  as  consanguinity,  it  is  not  meant  that  it  is  as  strong.
A  daughter  is  a  nearer  relation  than  a  step-daughter,  or  daugh-
ter-in-law ;  a  mother  than  a  step-mother  ;  a  sister  than  a  sister-
in-law.     This,  as  we  have  seen,  is  recognized  in  the  law  itseK.

1  Rosenmiiller,  Scholia  in  Vetus  Testamentum  in  Compendium  redacta,  Leipzig,  1838,
vol.  i.  pp-  536,  537.

2  Chap.  xxiv.  4.


420  PART  III.     Cir.   XIX.— THE   LAW.

The  Bible  asserts  nothing  inconsistent  mth  fact  or  nature.  In
making  affinity  a  real  bond  of  kindred,  it  is  meant  that  it  is  not
merely  nominal,  or  conventional,  or  arbitrary.  It  has  its  fovmda-
tion  in  nature  and  fact.

Mr.  Bishop,  in  his  elaborate  work  on  "  Marriage  and  Divorce,"
says,  "  A  truly  enlightened  view  will  doubtless  discard  altogether
affinity  as  an  imj)ediment,  while  it  will  extend  somewhat  the
degrees  of  consanguinity  mthin  which  marriages  will  be  forbid-
den." 1  He  also  teaches  ^  that  "  the  relationship  by  affinity  "
ceases  "  with  the  dissolution  wliich  death  brings  to  the  marriage.
....  If,  when  a  man's  wife  dies,  she  is  still  his  wife,  then,  of

course,  her  sister  is  still  his  sister If,  on  the  other  hand,

the  wife  is  no  more  the  wife  after  her  death,  then  is  her  sister  no
more  the  sister  of  the  husband.  And  though  men  who  have  no
otlier  idea  of  religion  than  to  regard  it  as  a  bundle  of  absurd  and
loathed  forms,  may  not  be  able  to  see  how  the  termination  of  the
relationship  by  the  death  of  the  vtdfe  is  of  any  consequence  in  the
case,  yet  men  who  discern  differently  and  more  wisely,  will  dis-
cover nothing  unseemly  in  practically  acting  upon  a  fact  which
everybody  knows  to  exist."

It  is  very  evident  that  Mr.  Bishop  never  asked  himself  what,  in
the  present  connection,  the  word  "  relationship  "  means.  Had  he
had  any  clear  idea  of  the  meaning  of  the  word,  he  never  could
have  written  the  above  sentences.  By  relationship  is  here  meant
the  relation  in  which  parties  stand  to  each  other ;  and  that,  in  the
case  supposed,  is  a  matter  of  feeling,  affection,  and  intimacy.
This  relationship  is  not  dissolved  by  the  death  of  the  person
through  whom  it  arose.  A  wife's  sister  continues  to  cherish  to
her  mdowed  brother-in-law  the  same  sisterly  affection  after,  as  be-
fore her  sister's  death.  She  can  live  with  him,  guide  his  house,  and
take  cliarge  of  his  children,  without  the  slightest  violation  of  her
seK-respect,  and  without  fear  of  incurring  the  disrespect  of  others.

Besides,  if  relationship  by  affinity  is  dissolved  by  death,  then  a
son  may,  on  the  death  of  his  father,  marry  his  step-mother,  which
Paul  says  (1  Cor.  v.  1)  was  not  tolerated  among  the  heathen.
We  have  not  come  to  that  yet.  On  the  j)rinciple  of  JNIr.  Bishop,
a  man  may  marry  his  mother-in-law,  his  daughter-in-law,  and,
on  the  death  of  the  mother,  his  step-daughter.  All  this  the  Bible
forbids  ;  and  whatever  rehgion  in  some  of  its  manifestations  may

1  Commentaries  nn  the  Law  of  Marriage  and  Divorce,  by  Joel  Prentiss  Bishop,  Bostoiit
1864,  vol.  i.  §  320.

2  Jbid.  §  ZU,  note  2.


§  12.]  THE   EIGHTH   COJ^IMANDMENT.  421

he,  the  Bible,  surely,  is  not  "  a  bundle  of  absurd  and  loathed
forms."  It  is  the  wisdom  of  God,  in  the  presence  of  which  the
wisdom  of  man  is  foolishness.

3.  The  great  truth  contained  in  these  laws  is,  that  it  is  the
\vill  of  God,  the  dictate  of  his  infinite  and  benevolent  wisdom
tliat  the  affections  which  belong  to  the  relation  in  which  kin-
dred (whether  by  consanguinity  or  affinity)  stand  to  each  other,
should  not  be  disturbed,  perverted,  or  corrupted  by  that  essen-
tially different  kind  of  love  which  is  appropriate  and  holy  in  the
conjugal  relation  ;  and  that  a  protecting  halo  should  be  shed
around  the  family  circle.

§  12.   The  Eightli  Commandment.

This  commandment  forbids  all  violations  of  the  rights  of  prop-
erty. The  right  of  property  in  an  object  is  the  right  to  its  ex-
clusive possession  and  use.

The  foundation  of  the  right  of  property  is  the  will  of  God.
By  this  is  meant,  (1.)  That  God  has  so  constituted  man  that  he
desires  and  needs  this  right  of  the  exclusive  possession  and  use  of
certain  things.  (2.)  Having  made  man  a  social  being,  He  has
made  the  right  of  property  essential  to  the  healthful  development
of  human  society.  (3.)  He  has  implanted  a  sense  of  justice  in
the  nature  of  man,  whicli  condemns  as  morally  wrong  everything
inconsistent  with  the  right  in  question.  (4.)  He  has  declared  in
his  Word  that  any  and  every  violation  of  this  right  is  sinful.

This  doctrine  of  the  divine  right  of  property  is  the  only  secur-
ity for  the  individual  or  for  society.  If  it  be  made  to  rest  on
any  other  foundation,  it  is  insecure  and  unstable.  It  is  only  by
making  property  sacred,  guarded  by  the  fiery  sword  of  divine  jus-
tice, that  it  can  be  safe  from  the  dangers  to  which  it  is  everywhere
and  always  exposed.

Numerous  theories  have  been  advanced  on  this  subject.  These
theories  have  had  a  twofold  object :  the  one  to  explain  the  nature
and  ground  of  the  right ;  the  other  to  explain  how  the  right  was
originally  acquired.  These  objects  are  distinct  and  should  not  be
confounded.

1.  The  modern  philosophical  theory  that  might  is  right,  that
the  strongest  is  always  the  best,  includes  indeed  both  these  ob-
jects. If  being  is  the  only  good,  and  if  it  is  true  the  more  of
being  the  more  of  good,  then  he  who  has  the  most  of  being,  he
in  whom  the  infinite  is  most  fully  revealed,  has  the  right  to  have
and  to  hold  whatever  he  chooses  to  possess.


422  PART  III.     Ch.  XIX. —  the   law.

2.  If  a  regard  to  our  individual  well-being  be  the  only  ground
of  moral  obligation,  then  a  man  has  the  right  to  whatever  will
make  him  happy.  He  may,  and  he  certainly  would,  make  a  great
mistake,  if  he  supposed  that  taking  what  does  not  belong  to  him
would  promote  his  happiness ;  but  he  is  restrained  from  such  in-
justice only  by  a  sense  of  prudence.  He  is  entitled  to  have  what-
ever in  fact  would  make  him  happy,  and  for  that  reason.

3.  If  regard  to  the  general  good,  the  greatest  happiness  of  the
greatest  number,  or  expediency,  as  Paley  makes  it,  be  the  rule  and
ground  of  duty,  then  it  will  always  be  a  matter  of  opinion,  a  mat-
ter on  which  men  will  ever  differ,  what  is,  and  what  is  not  expedi-
ent. One  might  think  that  a  community  of  goods  would  promote
the  greatest  good,  and  then  he  would,  at  least  in  his  own  con-
science, be  entitled  to  act  on  that  principle.  Others  might  think
that  agrarianism,  or  the  periodic  distribution  of  all  the  land  of  the
country  in  equal  portions  among  the  people,  would  promote  the
general  good,  and  then  that  would  be  to  them  the  rule  of  action.
There  would  be  no  end  to  the  devices  to  promote  the  greatest
good,  if  the  rights  of  men  rested  on  no  other  foundation  than  that
of  expediency.

Some  of  the  most  distinguished  legal  and  philosophical  writers
of  the  present  age  teach  that  "  property  is  founded  on  utiUty."
With  some,  however,  utility  is  not  the  ground,  but  rather  the  test
of  human  rights  and  duties.  The  fact  that  an  institution  or  a
course  of  conduct  is  conducive  to  the  public  good,  is  not  so  much
the  reason  why  it  is  right,  as  a  proof  that  it  is  right  and  in  ac-
cordance mth  the  will  of  God.  "  God  designs  the  happmess  of
all  his  sentient  creatures.  Some  human  actions  forward  that  be-
nevolent purpose,  or  their  tendencies  are  beneficent  and  useful.
Other  human  actions  are  adverse  to  that  purpose,  or  their  ten-
dencies are  mischievous  or  pernicious.  The  former,  as  promoting
his  purpose,  God  has  enjoined.  The  latter,  as  opposed  to  his  pur-
pose, God  has  forbidden.  He  has  given  us  the  faculty  of  observ-
ing ;  of  remembering ;  and  of  reasoning  ;  and  by  duly  applying
those  faculties,  we  may  collect  the  tendencies  of  our  actions.
Knowing  the  tendencies  of  our  actions,  and  knowing  his  benevo-
lent purpose,  we  know  his  tacit  commands."  ^  It  is  no  doubt  true
that  it  is  a  fair  and  conclusive  argument  that  a  thing  is  right  or
wrong  in  itself  and  conformed  or  opposed  to  the  will  of  God,  that
its  tendency  is  of  necessity  and  always  to  produce,  on  the  one

1  Lectures  on  Jtirisprudence,  or  the  Philosophy  of  Positive  Law,  by  the  late  John  Austin.
8d  edit,  revised  and  edited  by  Robert  Campbell,  London,  1869,  vol.  i.  p.  109.


§12.]  THE   EIGHTH   COMMANDMENT.  423

hand,  good,  or,  on  the  other,  evil.  But  this  is  a  roundabout  way
of  getting  at  the  truth.  Whether  an  institution  or  a  course  of
action  be  useful  or  not,  must  be  a  matter  of  opinion.  And  if  a
matter  of  opinion,  men  will  differ  about  it ;  and  the  opinion  of
one  man,  or  even  of  the  majority  of  men,  will  have  no  authority
OA^er  others.  God  has  revealed  his  will  in  his  Word,  and  in  the
constitution  of  our  nature.  Paul  says  that  even  the  heathen  "  do
b}'-  nature  the  things  contained  in  the  law,"  that  the  law  is  "  writ-
ten in  their  hearts."  (Rom.  ii.  14,  15.)  Property  is  sacred,  not
because  in  our  opinion  it  is  a  useful  institution,  and  hence  infer-
ontially  approved  by  God,  but  He  has  said  in  the  Bible,  and  says
in  every  man's  conscience,  "  Thou  shalt  not  steal."  Mr.  Austin's
theory  does  not  prevent  his  teaching  that  "  property /ms  in  rem,''^
depends  on  "  principles  of  utility."  ^

4.  Paley  says  also  that  "  the  real  foundation  of  our  right  [to
property]  is  the  law  of  the  land."  He  admits,  however,  that  the
law  may  authorize  the  most  flagitious  injustice.  He  therefore
makes  a  distinction  between  the  words  and  the  intention  of  the
law ;  and  adds  :  "  With  the  law,  we  acknowledge,  resides  the  dis-
posal of  property  ;  so  long,  therefore,  as  we  keep  within  the  design
and  intention  of  a  law,  that  law  will  justify  us,  as  well  in  f 07-0  con-
scientice,  as  in  foro  hutnano,  whatever  be  the  equity  or  expediency
of  the  law  itself."  ^  The  law  of  the  land  has  indeed  legitimately
much  to  do  with  questions  of  property  ;  but  the  right  itself  does
not  rest  upon  that  law,  and  is,  in  the  sight  of  God,  independent  of
it.  The  right  exists  prior  to  all  law  of  the  state.  The  law  cannot
ignore  that  right.  It  cannot  rightfully  deprive  a  man  of  his  prop-
erty, except  in  punishment  of  crime,  or  on  the  ground  of  stringent
necessity,  and,  in  the  latter  case,  with  due  compensation.  Property,
however,  is  not  the  creature  of  the  law.  No  unjust  law  gives  a  title
to  property,  valid  in  the  sight  of  God ;  that  is,  a  title  which  should
satisfy  a  conscientious  man  in  entering  upon  its  possession  and
use.  Even  when  the  law  is  not  unjust,  it  may  work,  not  legal,
but  moral  injustice,  A  will,  for  example,  may  clearly  express
the  wishes  and  intention  of  a  testator,  but  for  some  clerical  or
technical  error  be  set  aside  and  the  property  go  to  a  person  for
whom  it  was  not  intended.  Such  person  would  have  a  legal,  but
not  a  morally  valid  title  to  the  property.  Good  men  are  some-
times heard  to  say :  "  We  mil  take  all  the  law  gives  us ; "    in

1  Jurisprudence,  vol.  i.  pp.  132,  382;  vol.  ii.  pp.  1161.

"^  The  Principles  of  Moral  and  Political  Philosophy,  book  iii.  part  i.  ch.iv.  ;edit.  Boston,
1»48,  vol.  i.  pp.  87-89.


424  PART  III.     Ch.   XIX.  — the   law.

saying  this,  they  do  not  apprehend  the  full  meaning  of  their
words;  it  amounts  to  saying  that  in  matters  of  property  they
will  make  the  law  of  the  land,  and  not  the  law  of  God,  the  ride
of  their  conduct.

5.  It  is  a  very  common  doctrine  that  the  right  of  property
is  founded  on  common  consent,  or  on  the  social  compact.
Men  agree  that  each  man  may  appropriate  to  himself  a  por-
tion of  what  originally  is  common  to  all.  But  this  consent
only  recognizes  a  right ;  it  does  not  create  it.  If  a  man  takes  a
glass  of  water  from  a  stream  common  to  all,  it  is  of  right  his ;
and  he  has  no  need  to  appeal  to  any  compact  or  consent  to  justify
his  appropriating  it  to  himself.  The  question  how  a  man  ac-
quires a  right  to  property,  and  the  nature  of  the  right  itself,  as
before  remarked,  are  different  questions,  although  intimately  re-
lated.

6.  Both  are  included  in  the  common  theory  on  the  subject.  If
a  man  puts  under  culture  a  portion  of  unappropriated  land,  it  is
for  the  time  being  his,  on  the  principle  that  a  man  owns  himseK,
and  therefore  the  fruits  of  his  labour.  Exclusive  possession  and
use  of  the  land  in  question  are  necessary  to  secure  the  man  those
fruits  ;  he  has,  therefore,  the  right  to  the  land  as  long  as  he  uses
it.  If  he  abandons  it,  his  right  ceases.  On  the  other  hand,  if
his  use  is  continued,  so  as  to  involve  occupancy,  his  right  of  pos-
session becomes  permanent.  It  is  on  this  principle  men  act  in
mining  districts  in  unoccupied  lands.  Each  man,  the  first  comer,
stakes  out  for  himself  a  claim  ;  this  he  works,  or  is  entitled  to
keep  to  himself.  If  he  abandons  it  and  goes  elsewhere,  it  ceases
to  be  his.  If  he  permanently  occupies  it,  it  is  permanently  his.
The  right  of  property  is  thus  made  to  rest  on  occupancy  and  use ;
in  other  words,  on  labour.  But  even  this,  according  to  Blackstone,
is  not  a  natural  right.  "  All  property,"  he  says,  "  must  cease
upon  death,  considering  men  as  absolute  individuals,  and  uncon-
nected with  civil  society :  for  then,  by  the  principles  before  es-
tablished, the  next  immediate  occupant  would  acquire  a  right  in
all  that  the  deceased  possessed.  But  as,  under  civilized  govern-
ments which  are  calculated  for  the  peace  of  mankind,  such  a
constitution  would  be  productive  of  endless  disturbances,  vmi-
versal  law  of  abuost  every  nation  (which  is  a  kind  of  second-
ary law  of  nature)  has  either  given  the  dying  person  a  power  of
continuing  his  property,  by  disposing  of  his  possessions  by  wiU  ;
or,  in  case  he  neglects  to  dispose  of  it,  or  is  not  permitted  to  make
any  disposition  at  all,  the  municipal  law  of  the  country  then  steps


§12.]  THE  EIGHTH   COMMANDMENT.  426

in,  and  declares  who  shall  be  the  successor,  representative,  or  heir
of  the  deceased ;  that  is,  who  alone  shall  have  a  right  to  enter
upon  this  vacant  possession,  in  order  to  avoid  that  confusion  which
its  becommg  again  common  would  occasion."  On  the  same  page,
speaking  of  the  right  of  inheritance,  he  says  :  "  We  are  apt  to
conceive  at  fii'st  view  that  it  has  nature  on  its  side  ;  yet  we  often
mistake  for  nature  what  we  find  established  by  long  and  invet-
erate custom.  It  is  a  wise  and  effectual,  but  clearly  a  political
establishment ;  since  the  permanent  right  of  property,  vested  in
the  ancestor  himself,  was  no  natural,  but  merely  a  civil  right."  ^
He  had  said  before,^  "  Necessity  begat  property  ;  and  in  order  to
insure  that  property,  recoiu'se  was  had  to  civil  society,  which
brought  along  with  it  a  long  train  of  inseparable  concomitants  ;
states,  government,  laws,  punishments,  and  the  public  exercise  of
religious  duties."  Tliis  seems  to  be  inverting  the  natural  order
of  things.  Disregard  of  the  moral  law  would  result  in  endless
evil,  and  there  is  an  absolute  necessity  tha,t  its  commands  should
be  observed  and  enforced  ;  but  the  obligation  of  the  law  does  not
rest  on  that  necessity  ;  it  is  altogether  anterior  and  independent
of  it.  So  the  right  of  property  is  anterior  and  independent  of
the  necessity  of  its  being  held  sacred,  in  order  to  secure  the  well-
being  of  mankind.  The  fact  is,  that  the  right  of  property  is
analogous  to  the  right  of  life,  liberty,  or  pursuit  of  happiness.
It  does  not  come  from  men  ;  it  is  not  given  by  man  ;  and  it  can-
not be  ignored,  or  arbitrarily  interfered  with  by  man.  It  rests
on  the  will  of  God  as  revealed  in  the  constitution  of  our  nature
and  in  our  relation  to  persons  and  things  around  us.

7.  Stahl,  the  distinguished  German  jurist,  gives  substantially
the  following  account  of  the  matter.  Man  was  formed  out  of  the
earth  ;  but  a  divine  spmt  was  breathed  into  him.  He  is,  there-
fore, on  the  one  hand,  dependent  on  the  material  world  ;  on  the
other,  exalted  above  it.  He  is  placed  here  as  its  lord  and  o^vner.
The  things  of  the  outer  world  are  given  to  him  for  the  satisfac-
tion of  his  physical  wants,  and  of  his  spiritual  necessities.  He,
therefore,  has  power  and  right  over  things  external,  and  they
must  be  permanently  and  securely  under  his  control.  This  is  the
foundation  of  the  right  of  property.  Property  is  the  means  for
the  development  of  the  individuality  of  the  man.  The  manner
in  which  it  is  acquired  and  used,  reveals  what  the  man  is  ;  his

1  Commentaries  on  the  Laws  of  England,  ii.  i.  by  Sir  William  Blackstone,  Knt.  16th
edit.  London,  1825,  vol.  ii.  p.  10.

2  md.  p.  7.


426  PART  m.   Ch.  XIX.— the  law.

food,  clothmg,  and  habitation  ;  bis  expenditures  for  sensual  enjoy-
ment, for  objects  of  taste,  of  art,  and  of  science,  and  for  hospi-
tality, benevolence,  and.  the  good  of  society  ;  and  the  consecration
of  his  acquisitions  to  the  interests  of  a  higher  hfe,  —  these  in  their
totality  as  they  rest  on  the  right  of  property,  make  out  a  man's
portrait.  Property,  however,  is  specially  designed  to  enable  a
man  to  discharge  his  moral  duties.  Every  man  has  duties  of  his
own  to  perform  ;  duties  which  belong  to  him  alone,  not  to  others,
not  to  society  ;  duties  which  arise  out  of  his  personal  vocation
and  standing,  especially  such  as  belong  to  his  own  family.  There-
fore he  must  have  what  is  exclusively  his  own.  Property,  there-
fore, is  not  intended  for  mere  self -gratification  or  support ;  nor  is
it  a  mere  objectless  mastery  over  tilings  external ;  it  is  the  neces-
sary means  to  enable  a  man  to  fulfil  his  divinely-appointed,  des-
tiny.    Herein  lies  the  divine  right  of  property  !  ^

The  right  of  property,  therefore,  is  not  founded  on  the  law  of
the  land,  or  on  any  explicit  or  implied  contract  among  men  ;  but
upon  the  law  of  nature.  It  is  true  that  natural,  as  distinguished
from  positive  laws,  have  been  differently  explained.  "  As  the
science  of  ethics,"  says  Lord  Mackenzie,  "  embraces  the  whole
range  of  moral  duties,  its  province  is  evidently  much  wider  than
that  of  jm-isprudence,  which  treats  only  of  those  duties  that  can
be  enforced  by  external  law."  ^  The  duties,  however,  which  can
be  thus  enforced  are  of  two  kinds  ;  those  which  arise  from  the
natural,  and  those  which  arise  from  common  or  statute  law.  "By
the  law  of  nature,"  says  Chancellor  Kent,'^  "  I  understand  those
fit  and  just  rules  of  conduct  which  the  Creator  has  prescribed  to
man  as  a  dependent  and  social  being,  and  which  are  to  be  as-
certained from  the  deduction  of  right  reason,  though  they  may  be
more  precisely  known  and  more  expHcitly  declared  by  divine  revela-
tion." Cicero,  teaches  that  God  is  the  author  of  natural  law,
and  that  its  duties  are  of  unchangeable  obhgation.  He  says,  "  Nee
erit  alia  lex  Romse,  aha  Athenis,  alia  nunc,  aha  posthac ;  sed  et
omnes  gentes  et  omni  tempore  una  lex  et  sempiterna  et  immu-
tabihs  continebit,  unusque  erit  communis  quasi  magister  et  im-
perator  omnium  deus."*

1  Die  Philosophie  des  Rechts,  Rechts-  und  Staatslehre,  i.  iii.  2,  1,  §  22,  4th  edit.
Heidelberg,  1870,  vol.  ii.  part  1,  p.  350  f.  The  paragraph  in  the  text  is  not  a  transla-
tion, but  a  condensation.

2  Studies  in  Roman  Laic,  with  Comparative  Vietos  of  the  Latus  of  France,  England,  and
Scotland,  by  Lord  JMaekenzie,  one  of  the  Judges  of  the  Court  of  Session  in  Scotland,  2d
edit.  Edinburgh  and  London,  1865,  p.  45.

8  Chancellor  Kent,  quoted  by  Lord  Mackenzie.

*  De  Republica,  in.  xxii.  33.  16,  edit.  Leipzig,  1850,  p.  1193,  a.


§  12.]  THE   EIGHTH   COMMANDMENT.  427

Lord  Mackenzie  gives  the  doctrine  of  Cicero  the  sanction
of  his  own  judgment :  "  Where,"  he  says,  "  the  law  of  nature  ab-
sokitely  commands  or  forbids,  it  is  immutable  and  of  universal
obligation,  so  that,  although  it  may  be  confirmed,  it  cannot  be
controlled  by  human  laws  without  a  manifest  violation  of  the
divine  will."  ^

In  these  days,  when  so  many  are  disposed  to  throw  off  the  au-
thority of  God,  and  regard  marriage  and  j)roperty  as  mere  creat-
ures of  the  law,  which  may  be  regulated  or  ignored  at  the  caprice
or  will  of  the  people,  it  is  well  to  remind  them  that  there  is  a  law
higher  than  any  law  of  man,  enforced  by  the  authority  of  God,
which  no  man  and  no  community  can  violate  with  impunity.

Although  the  right  of  property  involves  the  right  of  absolute
control,  so  that  a  man  can  do  what  he  will  with  his  own,  it  does
not  follow  that  this  right  is  unlimited,  or  that  the  civil  law  has  no
legitimate  control  over  the  use  or  distribution  of  his  property.  A
man  has  no  right  to  use  his  knowledge  or  strength  to  the  injury
of  his  fellow-men  ;  neither  can  he  use  his  property  so  as  to  make  it
a  public  nuisance  ;  nor  can  he  devote  it  to  any  immoral  or  hurtful
object ;  nor  can  he  dispose  of  it  by  will  so  as  to  militate  against
the  public  policy.  Of  course,  as  different  nations  are  organized
on  different  principles,  the  laws  regulating  the  use  and  distribution
of  property  must  also  differ.  Among  the  Hebrews  the  land  of
Canaan  was  originally  distributed  equitably  among  the  several
families.  The  head  of  the  family  had  not  the  unrestricted  con-
trol of  what  was  thus  given  him.  He  could  not  finally  alienate
it.  His  sons,  not  his  daughters,  unless  there  were  no  sons,  were
his  heirs.  The  first-born  had  a  double  portion.  (Deut.  xxi.  15  ff .)
These  limitations  of  the  right  of  property  were  ordained  by  God,
in  order  that  the  ends  of  the  theocracy  might  be  accomphshed.
God  saw  fit  to  render  it  impossible  that  any  large  portion  of  the
land  should  be  engrossed  by  one  or  by  a  few  families.  In  Eng-
land public  policy  has  assumed  that  it  is  important  to  maintain
a  powerful  order  of  nobility.  To  secure  that  end  the  laws  of
primogeniture  and  entail  have  been  long  in  force,  with  the  result
that  the  greater  part  of  the  land  in  Great  Britain  is  in  the  hands
of  comparatively  few  families.  This  unequal  distribution  of  prop-
perty  has  gone  on  rapidly  increasing,  so  that  Hugh  Miller,  when
editor  of  the  "  Edinburgh  Witness,"  said  that  England  was  now
like  a  pyramid  poised  on  its  apex.  In  France  the  right  of  a  testator
to  dispose  of  his  property  is  very  much  hmited.  "If  any  one  die
without  issue  or  ascendants,  he  may  leave  his  whole  property  t(i

1  StwHet  in  Roman  Law,  etc.,  p.  49.


428  PART  m.   Ch.  XIX. -the  law.

strangers ;  but  if  a  man  at  his  death  has  one  lawful  child,  he  can
only  so  dispose  of  the  haK  of  his  estate ;  if  he  leave  two  children,
the  third ;  and  if  he  leave  three  or  more  children,  the  fourth."
In  Scotland  "  if  a  man  die  without  either  wfe  or  issue,  his  whole
property  is  at  his  own  disposal ;  if  he  leave  a  mfe  and  issue,  his
goods  or  personal  property  are  divided  mto  three  equal  parts,  one
of  which  goes  to  his  wife  as  jus  relictce,  another  to  his  children  as
legitim  (i.  e.,  legitima  ■portio^,  and  the  third  is  at  liis  own  disposal ;
if  he  leave  no  ^vife,  he  may  dispose  of  one  half,  and  the  other  half
goes  to  his  children,  and  so  e  converso^  if  he  leave  no  children,  the
wife  is  entitled  to  one  half,  and  he  may  bequeath  the  other."  ^
These  facts  are  referred  to  simply  as  illustrations  of  the  way  in
which  the  law,  both  divine  and  human,  may  limit  the  exercise  of
the  right  of  property  while  the  sacredness  of  that  right,  as  higher
than  any  human  law,  is  fully  recognized.

Community  of  Croods.

Community  of  goods  does  not  necessarily  involve  the  denial  of
the  right  of  private  property.  When  Ananias,  having  sold  a
possession,  kept  back  part  of  the  price,  Peter  said  to  him :
"  While  it  remained  was  it  not  thine  own  ?  and  after  it  was  sold,
was  it  not  in  thine  own  power?"  (Acts  v.  4.)  Any  number  of
men  may  agree  to  live  in  common,  putting  all  their  possessions
and  all  the  fruits  of  their  labour  into  a  common  fund,  from  which
each  member  is  supplied  according  to  his  wants.  This  experiment
was  tried  on  a  small  scale  and  for  a  sliort  time,  by  the  early  Chris-
tians in  Jerusalem.  "  The  multitude  of  them  that  believed  were
of  one  heart  and  of  one  soul :  neither  said  any  of  them  that  ought
of  the  things  which  he  possessed  was  his  own  ;  but  they  had  all

things  common Neither  was  there  any  among  them  that

lacked :  for  as  many  as  were  possessors  of  lands  or  houses,  sold
them,  and  brought  the  prices  of  the  things  that  were  sold,  and
laid  them  doAvn  at  the  Apostles'  feet :  and  distribution  was  made
unto  every  man  as  he  had  need."  (Acts  iv.  32-35.)  Some  in-
deed say  that  these  passages  do  not  imply  any  actual  community
of  goods.  Having  "  all  things  common  "  is  understood  to  mean,
"  No  one  regarded  his  possessions  as  belonging  absolutely  to  him-
self, but  as  a  trust  for  the  benefit  of  others  also."  This  interpreta-
tion seems  inconsistent  with  the  whole  narrative.  Those  who  had
possessions  sold  them.  They  renounced  all  control  over  what  was
once  their  own.  The  price  was  handed  over  to  the  Apostles  and
distributed  by  them  or  under  their  direction.
1  Lord  Mackenzie,  ut  supra,  p.  2T0.


§12.]  THE   EIGHTH   COMMANDMENT.  429

On  the  narrative  as  given  in  the  Acts  it  may  be  remarked,  —

1.  That  the  conduct  of  these  early  Christians  was  purely  spon-
taneous. They  were  not  commanded  by  the  Apostles  to  sell  their
possessions  and  to  have  all  things  in  common.  There  is  not  the
sKghtest  intimation  that  the  Apostles  gave  any  encouragement  to
this  movement.  They  seem  simply  to  have  permitted  it.  They
allowed  the  people  to  act  under  the  impulse  of  then-  own  feelings,
each  one  doing  what  he  pleased  with  his  own.

2.  It  can  hardly  be  deemed  unnatural  that  the  early  Christians
were  led  mto  this  experiment.  To  us  the  wonders  of  redemption
are  "  the  old,  old  story,"  inexpressibly  precious  indeed,  but  it  has
lost  the  power  of  novelty.  In  those  to  whom  it  was  new  it  may
well  have  produced  an  ecstatic  bewilderment,  which  led  their
judgment  astray.  There  are  two  great  truths  involved  in  the
Gospel,  the  clear  perception  of  wliich  may  account  for  the  deter-
mination of  those  early  converts  to  have  all  things  in  common.
The  one  is  that  all  believers  are  one  body  in  Christ  Jesus  ;  all
united  to  Him  by  the  mdwelling  of  the  Holy  Spuit ;  all  equally
partakers  of  his  righteousness  ;  all  the  objects  of  his  love  ;  and  aU
destined  to  the  same  inheritance  of  glory.  The  other  great  truth
is  contained  in  the  Avords  of  Christ,  "  Inasmuch  as  ye  have  done
it  mito  one  of  the  least  of  these  my  brethren,  ye  have  done  it  unto
me."  It  was  no  wonder,  then,  that  men  whose  minds  were  filled
with  these  truths,  were  oblivious  of  mere  prudential  consider-
ations.

3.  This  experiment,  for  all  that  appears,  was  confined  to  the
Christians  in  Jerusalem,  and  was  soon  abandoned.  We  never
hear  of  it  elsewhere  or  afterwards.  It  has,  therefore,  no  precep-
tive force.

4.  The  conditions  of  the  success  of  this  plan,  on  any  large
scale,  cannot  be  found  on  earth.  It  supposes  something  near  per-
fection in  all  embraced  within  the  compass  of  its  operation.  It
supposes  that  men  will  labour  as  assiduously  without  the  stimulus
of  the  desire  to  improve  their  condition  and  to  secure  the  welfare
of  their  families  as  with  it.  It  supposes  absolute  disinterested-
ness on  the  part  of  the  more  wealthy,  the  stronger,  or  the  more
able  members  of  the  community.  Thej  must  be  wilHng  to
forego  all  personal  advantages  from  their  superior  endowments.
It  supposes  perfect  integrity  on  the  part  of  the  distributors  of  the
common  fund,  and  a  spirit  of  moderation  and  contentment  in  each
member  of  the  community,  to  be  satisfied  with  what  others,  and
n()t  he,  may  think  to  be  his  equitable  share.     We  shall  have  to


430  PART  III.     Ch.   XIX.  — the  law.

wait  till  the  millennium  before  these  conditions  can  be  fulfilled.
The  attempt  to  introduce  a  general  community  of  goods  in  the
present  state  of  the  world,  mstead  of  elevating  the  poor,  would
reduce  the  whole  mass  of  society  to  a  common  level  of  barbarism
and  poverty.  The  only  secure  basis  of  society  is  in  those  immut-
able principles  of  right  and  duty  which  God  has  revealed  in  his
Word,  and  written  upon  the  hearts  of  men.  And  these  truths,
even  if  acknowledged  as  matters  of  opinion,  lose  their  authority
and  power  if  they  cease  to  be  regarded  as  revelations  of  the  mind
and  will  of  God,  to  which  human  reason  and  human  conduct
must  conform.

Communism  and  Socialism.

Heaven  is  not  higher  than  "  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth,"  than
the  principles  and  aims  of  the  early  Cluistians  were  exalted  above
those  of  the  modern  advocates  of  the  community  of  goods.  This
idea  is  not  of  modern  origin.  It  appears  m  different  forms  in  all
ages  of  the  world.  It  entered  into  the  scheme  of  Plato's  Republic,
for  in  his  view  private  property  was  the  chief  source  of  all  social
evils.  It  was  included  in  the  monasticism  of  the  JNiiddle  Ages.
Renunciation  of  the  world  included  the  renunciation  of  all  prop-
erty. Voluntary  poverty  was  one  of  the  vows  of  all  monastic  in-
stitutions. It  was  adopted  by  many  of  the  mystical  and  fanatical
sects  which  appeared  before  the  Reformation,  as  the  Beghards,
and  "  Brethren  of  the  Free  Spu-it,"  who  taught  that  the  world
should  be  restored  to  its  paradisiacal  state,  and  that  all  the  dis-
tinctions created  by  law,  whether  of  social  organization,  property,
or  marriage,  should  be  done  away.  At  the  time  of  the  Reforma-
tion the  followers  of  Miinzer  adopted  the  same  principles,  and
their  efforts  to  carry  them  into  practice  led  to  the  miseries  of  the
"  peasant-war."  All  these  movements  were  connected  ^^dth  fa-
natical religious  doctrines.  The  leaders  of  these  sects  claimed
to  be  inspired,  and  represented  themselves  as  the  organs  and
messengers  of  God.

jNIodern  communism,  on  the  contrary,  so  far  as  its  general  char-
acter is  concerned,  is  materialistic  and  atheistic,  and  in  some  of  its
forms  pantheistic.  ^     This  is  consistent  with  the  admission  that

1  Enfantin,  a  disciple  of  St.  Simon,  began  one  of  his  public  discourses,  delivered  in  Paris
in  1831,  with  the  words,  "  Dieu  est  tout  ce  qui  est;  Tout  est  en  lui,  tout  est  par  lui,  Nul  de
nous  n'est  hors  delui;"  and  Henri  Heine  called  himself  a  Hegelian.  On  the  other  hand,
one  of  St.  Simon's  books  is  entitled  Le  nnuveau  Cliristiamsme.  See  Guerike's  Kir-
chen-Geschichte,  vii.  D.  §  220,  Gth  edit.  Leipzig,  184G,  vol.  iii.  p.  G79,  foot-notes.  We  are
tempted  to  quote  a  single  characteristic  sentence  from  Guerike,  ut  supra,  pp.  678-682:


§12.]  THE   EIGHTH   COMMANDMENT.  431

some  of  its  advocates,  as  St.  Simon,  Fourier,  and  others,  were
sincere  and  benevolent  men.  Some  of  them,  indeed,  said  that
they  only  desired  to  carry  out  the  principle  of  brotherly  love
so  often  inculcated  by  Christ.  Communism  and  sociahsm  are
not  properly  convertible  terms,  although  often  used  to  desig-
nate the  same  system.  The  one  has  reference  more  espe-
cially to  the  principle  of  commimity  in  property ;  the  latter  to
the  mode  of  social  organization.  With  Fourier,  the  former  was
subordinate  to  the  latter.  He  did  not  entirely  deny  the  right
of  propertj^,  but  insisted  that  society  was  badly  organized.  In-
stead of  living  in  distinct  families,  each  strugghng  for  support
and  advancement,  men  should  be  gathered  in  large  associations
having  common  property,  and  all  labouring  for  a  common  fund.
That  fund  was  to  be  distributed  according  to  the  capital  contrib-
uted by  each  member,  and  according  to  the  time  and  skill  em-
ployed in  the  common  service.  Proudhon,  immortahzed  by  the
book  in  which  the  question  "  What  is  property  ?  "  is  answered  by
saying,  "  Property  is  theft,"  makes  the  rule  for  the  distribution
of  the  common  fund  to  be  the  time  devoted  to  labour.  Louis
Blanc  puts  capital,  labour,  and  skill  out  of  consideration,  and
makes  the  wants  of  the  individual  the  only  rule  of  distribution.
It  is  common  to  all  these  schemes  that  the  right  to  property  in
land  or  its  productions  is  denied.  The  two  latter  deny  to  a  man
all  property  in  his  own  skill  or  talents ;  and  the  last,  even  in  his
labour,  so  that  the  idlest  and  least  efficient  member  of  society

"  Die  originellste  unci  selbstiindigste  religiiis-politische  Secte  der  neuesten  Zeit  aber,  von
einem  Manne  gegriindet,  dem  erst  durch  verungliickten,  Selbstmord  '  der  gottliche  Mensch
sichkuad  that '  (dem  franzosischen  Grafen  Claude  Henri  St.  Simon,  geb.  zu  Paris  1760,  gest.
am  19.  Mai  1825),  und  sodann  durcli  die  Juli-Revolution  1830  erst  in  rechten  Schwung
gebracht,  welche,  als  die  Quintessenz  des  tief  verderbten  autichristischen  Zeitgeistes,  als
die  einzig  ganz  cousequente  unter  alien  widergottliclien  Richtungen  der  Zeit,  Welt  und  Gott,
Staat  und  Kirche,  Fleisch  und  Geist,  Diesseits  und  Jenseits,  Bdse  und  Gut,  (auch  Weib
•  und  Mann)  sowohl  wissenschaftlisch  als  praktisch  unirte  und  identificirte,  unbeschriinkte
voUstiindig  organisirte  Herrschaft  des  widerguttlichen  Fleisches,  ungebundenes  system-
atisches  Leben  nur  f iir  diesseitige  (dieeiuzige)  Welt,  unbedingte  Geltungeines  consequenten
politisch-religii  sen  Mater! alismus  in  gliihender  Beredtsamkeit  predigte,  und  auf  den  Thron
des  heiligen  Gottes  den  '  reizenden  '  Fiirsten  dieser  Welt  setzte,  wollte  nicht  etwa  eine
christliche  Parthei  oder  Secte,  sondern  die  neue  Welt-religion  sein;  und  diese  seligen
'Menschen  der  Zukunft,'  so  verschollen  auch  mit  all  ihrer  abenteuerlich  glanzenden
Aeusserlichkeit  sie  wieder  f  iir  den  Moment  sind,  —  aber  in  einem  '  Jiingen-Deutschland,'
(zuerst  1834  und  besonders  183.5)  sowie  im  vollkommen  organisirten  englischen  Socialisten-
und  in  den  continentalischen  Communisten-Veroinen,  und  nun  nach  modischerem  vSchnitt,
verjiingt  auch  bereits  wider  erstanden,  und  in  allerlei  neuen  Formen  stets  neu  erstehend,  —
bahuten  so  einer  fiirchterlichen  Weltepoche  den  griisslich  anmuthigeu  Weg."  Unless  the
reader  is  somewhat  accustomed  to  find  his  way  through  the  mazes  of  Dr.  Guerike's  sen-
tences, he  may  experience  some  difficulty  in  threading  the  above  labyrinth.  It  is,  how-
ever, interesting,  as  characteristic  of  the  man  and  of  his  book.  One  of  his  countrymen
called  his  history  a  Strafpredigt.


432  PART  m.   Ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

should,  according  to  it,  receive  as  mucli  as  the  most  industrious
and  useful.

The  denial  of  the  right  of  property  is,  to  a  great  extent,  con-
nected with  the  rejection  of  religion  and  of  marriage.  Marriage,
next  to  religion  and  property,  was  declared  to  be  the  greatest
means  of  social  miser}'.  Children  were  not  to  belong  to  their
parents,  but  to  the  state  ;  inclination  and  enjojnnent  were  to  be
the  motive  and  the  end  and  the  rule  of  life.^

International  Society.

France  has  been  the  birthplace  and  the  principal  seat  of  Com-
munism in  its  modern  form.  The  principles  involved  in  the  sys-
tem have  made  wide  progTess  in  other  countries,  and  leavened  to
a  fearful  extent  the  minds  of  the  labouring  classes  both  in  Europe
and  in  America.  Organization  and  combination  among  the  scat-
tered millions  said  to  be  included  in  the  membership  of  this  soci-
ety have  given  it  an  importance  which  has  forced  itself  on  the
attention  of  almost  all  Christian  states.  What  the  principles
and  aims  of  this  formidable  body  are,  it  is  not  easy  satisfactorily
to  state.  There  has  been  no  authoritative  annunciation  of  prin-
ciples recognized  by  all  the  affiliated  societies.  They  differ,  within
certain  limits,  doubtless,  among  themselves.  Some  find  their  fit
^representatives  in  the  Communists  of  Paris  as  they  revealed  them-
selves during  the  current  year  (1871).  Others  would  shrink
from  the  excesses  which  rendered  the  name  of  Communists  an
object  of  execration  and  abhorrence  in  all  parts  of  the  civilized
world.  Enough,  however,  is  known  of  the  designs  of  the  society
in  question,  to  render  it  certain  that  its  success  would  involve  the
overthrow  of  all  existing  governments  ;  in  placing  all  power  in
the  hands,  not  of  the  people,  but  of  a  particular  class,  the  opera-
tives, the  proletariat  (the  men  without  land)  ;  in  the  dissolution
of  society  as  at  present  organized  ;  the  abolition  of  private  prop-
erty ;  the  extinction  of  the  family ;  the  abrogation  of  all  mar-
riage laws  ;  and  the  proscription  of  religion,  and  especially  of
Christianity,  as  a  public  evil.  Such  are  the  avowed  objects  of
some  of  the  leaders  of  the  movement,  and  such  are  the  logical
consequences  of  the  principles  advocated  by  the  more  reticent  of
their  number.

1  See  Herzog's  Real-EnajMojiadie,  art.  "  Communismus  untl  Socialismus."  Stalil's
Pli'dosopJiie  des  Rechts,  Rechts- und  Staatslehre,  I.  iii.  2.  2.  §§  31-34;  4tli  edit.  HeiueL
berg,  1870,  vol.  ii.  part  1.  pp.  -307-376.  Cyclopaedia  of  Biblical,  Theological,  and  Eccled-
a^tical  Literature,  prepared  by  the  Rev.  John  McCliiitock,  D.  D.,  and  James  Strong,  S.
T.  D.,  New  York,  1869,  art.  "Communism."  The  Cyclopaedias  above  referred  to  give
copious  references  to  the  literature  of  this  subject.


§  12.]  THE   EIGHTH   COMMANDMENT.  433

It  is  a  historical  fact  that  Communism  had  its  origin  in  its
modern  form  in  materialistic  atheism  ;  in  the  denial  of  God,  who
has  the  right  to  give  laws  to  men,  and  the  power  and  the  pm-pose
to  enforce  those  laws  by  the  retributions  of  justice ;  in  the  belief
that  the  present  life  is  the  whole  period  of  existence  allotted  to
men  ;  and  that  the  enjoyments  of  this  life  are,  therefore,  all  that
men  have  to  desire  or  expect.  These  principles  had  long  been
inculcated  by  such  men  as  Rousseau,  Voltaire,  d'Holbach,  Diderot,
and  others.  To  produce  a  conflagration,  however,  there  must
be  not  only  fire,  but  combustible  materials.  These  materialistic
principles  would  have  floated  about  as  mere  speculations,  had
there  not  been  such  a  mass  of  suffering  and  degradation  among
the  people.  It  was  minds  burdened  with  the  consciousness  of
misery  and  the  sense  of  injustice  which  were  inflamed  by  the  new
doctrines,  and  which  burst  forth  in  a  fire  that  for  a  time  set  all
Europe  in  a  blaze.  We  must  not  attribute  all  the  evil  either  to
the  infidels  or  to  the  people.  Had  it  not  been  for  the  preceding
centuries  of  cruelty  and  oppression,  France  had  not  furnished  such
a  bloody  page  to  the  history  of  modern  Europe.

"  LTnternationale  "  for  March  2Tth,  1870,  expressed  succinctly
the  object  of  the  International  Society :  "  The  rights  of  the  work-
ing-men, that  is  our  principle ;  the  organization  of  the  working-
men,  that  is  our  means  of  action  ;  social  revolution,  that  is  our
end."  It  is  "  working-men,"  artisans,  not  the  mass  of  the  peo-
ple, educated  or  uneducated ;  but  a  single  class  whose  interests
are  to  be  regarded.  It  is  not  a  political  revolution,  the  change  of
one  form  of  government  for  another,  that  is  the  end  aimed  at ;  but
a  social  revolution,  a  complete  upturning  of  the  existing  order  of
society.

As  this  institution  is  looming  up  with  such  portentous  aspect  in
every  direction,  the  question  is.  How  is  it  to  be  met,  and  its  influ-
ence counteracted  ?  Open  outbreaks  may  be  suppressed  by  force,
but  the  evil  cannot  be  healed  by  any  such  means.  Artillery  is
inefficient  against  opinions.  If  Communism,  as  organized  in  this
society,  owes  its  origin  to  the  causes  above  specified,  the  rational
method  of  procedure  is,  to  correct  or  remove  those  causes.  If
Communism  is  the  product  of  materialistic  Atheism,  its  cure  is
to  be  found  in  Theism  ;  in  bringing  the  people  to  know  and  be-
lieve that  there  is  a  God  on  whom  they  are  dependent  and  to
whom  they  are  responsible  ;  in  teaching  them  that  this  is  not  the
only  life,  that  the  soul  is  immortal,  and  that  men  will  be  rewarded
or  punished  in  the  world  to  come  according  to  their  character  and
VOL.  in.  28


434  PART  m.   Ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

conduct  in  the  present  life  ;  that  consequently  well-being  here  is
not  the  highest  end  of  existence ;  that  the  poor  here  may  here-
after be  far  more  blessed  than  their  rich  neighbours  ;  and  that  it
is  better  to  be  Lazarus  than  Dives.  It  will  be  necessary  to  bring
them  to  believe  that  there  is  a  divine  providence  over  the  affairs
of  the  world ;  that  events  are  not  determined  by  the  blind  opera-
tion of  physical  causes ;  but  that  God  reigns  ;  that  He  distributes
to  every  one  severally  as  He  pleases  ;  "  that  the  Lord  maketh
poor  and  maketh  rich ;  "  tliat  it  is  not  the  rich  and  the  noble,
but  the  poor  and  the  lowly,  that  are  his  special  favourites ;  and
that  the  right  of  property,  the  right  of  marriage,  the  rights  of
parents  and  magistrates,  are  all  ordained  by  God,  and  cannot  be
violated  without  incurring  his  displeasure  and  the  certain  inflic-
tion of  divine  punishment.  To  imbue  the  minds  of  the  mass  of
the  people,  especially  in  great  cities,  will  be  a  slow  and  difficult
work  ;  but  it  is  absolutely  necessary.  If  Materialism  and  Athe-
ism are  practically  embraced  by  the  mass  of  any  community,  it
will  inevitably  perish.  The  religious  training  of  the  people,  how-
ever, is  only  one  half  of  the  task  which  society  has  to  accomplish,
to  secure  its  own  existence  and  prosperity.  The  great  body  of
the  people  must  be  rendered  comfortable,  or  at  least  have  the
means  of  becoming  so  ;  and  they  must  be  treated  with  justice.
Misery  and  a  sense  of  wrong  are  the  two  great  disturbing  ele-
ments in  the  minds  of  the  people.  They  are  the  slumbering  fires
which  are  ever  ready  to  break  out  into  destructive  conflagration.

Violations  of  the  Eighth  Commandment.

It  may  well  be  doubted  whether  society  is  more  in  danger  from
the  destructive  principles  of  Communism,  than  from  the  secret  or
tolerated  frauds  which,  to  so  great  an  extent,  pervade  almost  all
the  departments  of  social  life.  If  tliis  commandment  forbids  all
unfair  or  unjust  appropriation  of  the  property  of  others  to  our
own  use  or  advantage,  if  every  such  appropriation  is  stealing  in
the  sight  of  God,  then  theft  is  the  most  common  of  all  the  out-
ward transgressions  of  the  decalogue.  It  includes  not  merely
vulgar  theft  such  as  the  law  can  detect  and  punish,  but, —

1.  All  false  pretences  in  matters  of  business  ;  representing  an
article  proposed  for  purchase  or  exchange  to  be  other  and  better
than  it  is.  This  includes  a  multitude  of  sins.  Articles  produced
at  home  are  sold  as  foreign  productions,  and  the  price  asked  and
given  is  determined  by  this  fraudulent  representation.  Shawls  of
Paris  are  sold  as  Indian  ;  Aviues  manufactured  in  this  country  are


§12.]  THE   EIGHTH   COMMANDMENT.  435

sold  as  tlie  productions  of  France,  Portugal,  or  Madeira.  It  is
said  that  more  Champagne  wine  is  drunk  in  Russia  than  is  made
in  France.  More  cigars  are  consumed  in  tliis  country,  under  the
name  of  Havanas,  than  Cuba  produces.  A  great  part  of  the
paper  made  in  the  United  States  bears  the  stamp  of  London  or
Bristol.  This  kind  of  fraud  has  scarcely  any  limit.  It  does  not
seem  to  disturb  any  man's  conscience.  Worse  than  this  is  the
selling  things  as  sound  and  genuine,  which  in  fact  are  spurious
and  often  worthless.  So  wide-spread  is  fraud  in  matters  of  trade
that  it  has  become  a  legal  maxim,  "  Let  the  buyer  take  care  of
himself."  He  should  expect  to  be  cheated,  and  therefore  is  re-
quired to  be  always  on  his  guard.  It  is  not  uncommon  to  hear
men  say  to  a  clergyman,  "  If  I  were  dealing  with  a  man  of  busi-
ness, I  would  of  course  try  to  cheat  him ;  for  I  know  he  would
try  to  cheat  me.  But  as  you  are  not  a  man  of  business,  I  make
an  exception  in  yoiir  case,  and  will  deal  honestly."

Under  this  head  of  false  pretences  comes  the  adulteration  of
articles  of  food,  of  medicine,  and  of  the  materials  for  clothing.
The  extent  to  which  this  is  carried  is  fearful.  The  English  Parlia-
ment not  long  since  appointed  a  commission  to  examine  into  the
adulterations  of  articles  of  food  sold  by  the  green  grocers  in
London.  The  result  of  the  examination  was  that  only  six  out  of
every  hundred  of  the  specimens  collected  were  pure,  i.  e.,  were
what  they  were  represented  or  declared  to  be.  There  is  no  reason
to  suppose  that  London  is  peculiar  or  preeminent  in  this  kind  of
fraud.  The  same  complaint  is  made  of  the  adulteration  of  drugs.
This  evil  was  so  great  that  some  governments  have  taken  the  prep-
aration of  medicine  for  their  navies  and  armies  into  their  own
hands.  If  we  are  to  believe  the  public  papers,  the  greater  part
of  the  wines  and  other  liquors,  spirituous  and  malt,  sold  to  the
public,  are  not  only  adulterated  but  mixed  with  poisonous  drugs.
The  clothing  furnished  soldiers  in  active  service,  exposed  to  all
the  severities,  and  changes  of  weather,  was  and  often  is,  made  of
worthless  materials.  There  would  be  no  end  to  the  enumeration
of  frauds  of  this  kind.  A  prominent  English  journal  recently
said  that  the  great  part  of  the  revenue  of  the  British  government
was  taken  up  in  endeavouring  to  prevent  and  detect  frauds  against
the  public.

2.  Another  large  class  of  violations  of  the  eighth  command-
ment comprises  attempts  to  take  undue  advantage  of  the  ignor-
ance or  of  the  necessities  of  our  fellow-men.  It  is  of  the  nature
of  theft  if  a  man  sells  an  article  knowinsf  it  to  be  of  less  value


436  PART  m.   Ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

than  he  to  whom  he  offers  it  for  sale  takes  it  to  be.  If  a  man  is
aware  that  the  credit  of  a  bank  is  impaired,  or  that  the  affairs  of
a  raihoad,  or  of  any  other  corporation,  are  embarrassed,  and  takes
advantage  of  that  knowledge,  to  dispose  of  the  stock  or  notes  of
such  corporations  to  those  ignorant  on  the  subject,  demanding
more  for  them  than  their  actual  worth,  he  is  guilty  of  theft,  if  tlie
command,  "•  Thou  shalt  not  steal,"  forbids  all  unfair  acquisition
of  the  property  of  our  neighbour.  In  like  manner  all  unfair  at-
tempts to  enhance  or  depress  the  value  of  articles  of  commerce,
are  violations  of  the  law  of  God.  Unfounded  reports  are  often
designedly  circulated  to  have  this  enhancing  or  depressing  effect
on  values,  so  that  advantage  may  be  taken  of  the  unwary  or  un-
informed. It  is  an  offence  of  the  same  kind  to  engross  commodi-
ties to  enhance  their  price.  "  He  that  withholdeth  corn,  the
people  shall  curse  him  :  but  blessing  shall  be  upon  the  head  of  him
that  selleth  it."  (Prov.  xi.  26.)  Again  it  is  a  violation  of  the  law
to  take  advantage  of  the  necessities  of  our  fellow-men  and  to
demand  an  exorbitant  price  for  what  they  may  need.  In  the
recent  di-eadful  conflagration  in  Chicago  a  thousand  dollars  were
demanded  for  the  use  of  a  horse  and  waggon  for  a  single  hour.  It
may  be  said  that  there  is  no  fixed  standard  of  vahie ;  that  a  thing
may  be  worth  what  it  costs  the  man  who  owns  it ;  or  what  it  is
worth  to  the  man  who  demands  it ;  or  what  it  will  bring  in  open
market.  If  an  hour's  use  of  the  horse  and  wao-on  was  worth
more  to  the  man  in  Chicago  than  a  thousand  dollars,  it  may  be
said  that  it  was  not  unfair  to  demand  that  sum.  If  this  be  so,
then  if  'a  man  perishing  of  thirst  is  willing  to  give  his  whole
estate  for  a  glass  of  water,  it  would  be  right  to  exact  that  price ;
or  if  a  man  in  danger  of  drowning  should  offer  a  thousand  dollars
for  a  rope,  we  might  refuse  to  throw  it  to  him  for  a  less  reward.
Such  conduct  every  man  feels  would  be  worthy  of  execration.
The  fact  is  that  things  have  an  intrinsic  value,  however  deter-
mined, which  cannot  be  enhanced  because  our  suffering  fellow-men
may  be  in  pressing  need  of  them.

3.  This  commandment  forbids  also  depriving  men  of  property,
on  the  ground  of  any  mere  technical  flaw,  or  legal  defect  in  their
title.  Such  defect  may  be  the  effect  of  unavoidable  ignorance  ;
or  loss  by  shipwreck,  fire,  theft,  or  other  so  called  accident,  of  the
evidence  of  their  right.  The  law  may  in  such  cases  be  inexora-
ble :  it  may  be  on  the  whole  right  that  it  should  be  so,  but  never-
theless the  man  who  avails  himself  of  such  defect  to  get  possession
of  his  neighbour's  property,  breaks  the  command  which   says,


§  13.]  THE   >sIXTn   COMMANDMENT.  437

"  Thou  sliiilt  not  steal ; "  i.  g.,  thou  shalt  not  take  what  in  the  sight
of  God  does  not  belong  to  you.  Gambling  falls  under  the  same
category  Avhere  advantage  is  taken  of  the  unwary  or  unskilful,  to
deprive  them  of  their  property  without  compensation.  It  is,  how-
ever, impossible  to  enumerate  or  to  classify  the  various  methods
of  fraud.  Tlie  code  of  morals  held  by  many  business  and  profes-
sional men  is  very  far  below  the  moral  law  as  revealed  in  the
Bible.  This  is  especially  true  in  reference  to  the  eighth  command-
ment in  the  decalogue.  Many  who  have  stood  well  in  society,
and  even  in  the  Church,  will  be  astonished  at  the  last  day  to  find
the  word  "  Thieves  "  written  after  their  names  in  the  great  book
of  judgment.

§  13.    The  Ninth  Commandment.

This  commandment  forbids  all  violations  of  the  obligations  of
veracity.  The  most  aggravated  of  this  class  of  offences  is  bearing
false  witness  against  our  neighbour.  But  this  includes  every  of-
fence of  the  same  general  character  ;  as  the  command  thou  shalt
not  kill,  forbids  all  indulgence  or  manifestation  of  malice.

The  command  to  keep  truth  inviolate  belongs  to  a  different  class
from  those  relating  to  the  Sabbath,  to  marriage,  or  to  property.
These  are  founded  on  the  permanent  relations  of  men  in  the  pres-
ent state  of  existence.  They  are  not  in  their  own  nature  im-
mutable. God  may  at  any  time  suspend  or  modify  them.  But
truth  is  at  all  times  sacred,  because  it  is  one  of  the  essential  at-
tributes of  God,  so  that  whatever  militates  against,  or  is  hostile
to  truth  is  in  opposition  to  the  very  nature  of  God.  Truth  is,  so
to  speak,  the  very  substratum  of  Deity.  It  is  in  such  a  sense  the
foundation  of  all  the  moral  perfections  of  God,  that  without  it
they  cannot  be  conceived  of  as  existing.  Unless  God  really  is
what  He  declares  Himself  to  be ;  unless  He  means  what  He  de-
clares Himself  to  mean  ;  unless  He  will  do  what  He  promises,  the
whole  idea  of  God  is  lost.  As  there  is  no  God  but  the  true
God,  so  without  truth  there  is  and  can  be  no  God.  As  this  at-
tribute is  the  foundation,  so  to  speak,  of  the  divine,  so  it  is  the
foundation  of  the  physical  and  moral  order  of  the  universe.  What
is  the  immutability  of  the  laws  of  natvire,  but  a  revelation  of  the
truth  of  God  ?  They  are  manifestations  of  his  purposes.  They
are  promises  on  which  his  creatures  rely,  and  by  which  they  must
regulate  their  conduct.  If  those  laws  were  capricious,  if  the  same
effects  did  not  uniformly  follow  from  the  same  causes,  the  very  ex-
istence of  living  beings  would  be  impossible.    The  food  of  one  day


438  PART  III.    Ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

might  be  poison  the  next.  If  a  man  did  not  reap  what  he  sowed,
there  could  be  no  security  for  anything.  The  truth  of  God,  there-
fore, is  ^vritten  on  the  heavens.  It  is  the  daily  proclamation  made
by  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars  in  their  solemn  procession  through
space,  and  it  is  echoed  back  by  the  earth  and  all  that  it  contains.

The  truth  of  God,  too,  is  the  foundation  of  all  knowledge.
How  do  we  know  that  our  senses  do  not  deceive  us  ;  that  conscious-
ness is  not  mendacious  ?  that  the  laws  of  belief  which  by  the  con-
stitution of  our  nature  we  are  forced  to  obey,  are  not  false  guides  ?
Unless  God  be  true  there  can  be  no  certainty  in  anything ;  much
less  can  there  be  any  security ;  we  can  have  no  confidence  in  the
future :  no  assurance  that  evil  will  not  ultimately  triumph  over
good,  darkness  over  light,  and  confusion  and  misery  over  order
and  happiness.  There  is,  therefore,  something  awfully  sacred  in
the  obligations  of  truth.  A  man  who  violates  the  truth,  sins
against  the  very  foundation  of  his  moral  being.  As  a  false  god
is  no  god,  so  a  false  man  is  no  man  ;  he  can  never  be  what  man
was  designed  to  be  ;  he  can  never  answer  the  end  of  his  being.
There  can  be  in  him  nothing  that  is  stable,  trustworthy,  or  good.

There  are  two  classes  of  sins  which  the  ninth  commandment
forbids.  The  first  is,  all  forms  of  detraction ;  everything  which
is  unjustly  or  unnecessarily  injurious  to  our  neighbour's  good
name ;  and  the  second,  all  violations  of  the  laws  of  truth.  This
latter,  indeed,  includes  the  former.  Bearing  false  witness,  how-
ever, being  the  definite  thing  forbidden,  should  be  separately  con-
sidered.

Detraction.

The  highest  form  of  this  offence  is  bearing  false  testimony  in  a
court  of  justice.  This  includes  the  guilt  of  malice,  falsehood,
and  mockery  of  God  ;  and  its  commission  justly  renders  a  man  in-
famous, and  places  him  outside  of  the  pale  of  society.  As  it
strikes  at  the  security  of  character,  property,  and  even  of  life,  it
is  an  offence  which  cannot  be  passed  by  with  impunity.  The
false  swearer  is,  therefore,  a  criminal  in  the  sight  of  the  civil  law,
and  subject  to  public  disgrace  and  punishment.

Slander  is  an  offence  of  the  same  character.  It  differs  from
the  sin  of  bearing  false  witness,  only  in  not  being  committed  in  a
judicial  process,  and  in  not  being  attended  by  the  same  effects.
The  slanderer,  however,  does  bear  false  witness  against  his  neigh-
bour. He  does  it  in  the  ears  of  the  public,  and  not  in  those  of  a
jury.  The  offence  includes  the  elements  of  malice  and  falsehood
against  which  thi-    command  is  specially  directed.     The  circula-


§  13.]  THE   NINTH   COACVIANDMENT.  439

tion  of  false  reports,  "  tale-bearing,"  as  it  is  called  in  Scripture,
is  indicative  of  the  same  state  of  mind,  and  comes  under  the
same  condemnation.  As  the  law  of  God  takes  cognizance  of  the
thoughts  and  intents  of  tlie  heart,  in  condemning  an  external  act
it  condemns  the  disposition  which  tends  to  produce  it.  In  con-
demning all  speaking  ill  of  our  neighbour,  the  Scriptures  condemn
a  suspicious  temper,  a  disposition  to  impute  bad  motives,  and  an
unwillingness  to  believe  that  men  are  sincere  and  honest  in  the
avowal  of  their  principles  and  aims.  This  is  the  opposite  of  that
charity  which  "thinketh  no  evil,"  "  believeth  all  things,  hopeth
all  things."  It  is  still  more  opposed  to  the  spirit  of  this  law,
that  we  should  cherish  or  express  satisfaction  in  the  disgrace  of
others,  even  if  they  be  our  competitors  or  enemies.  We  are  com-
manded to  "  rejoice  with  them  that  do  rejoice  and  weep  with  them
that  weep."     (Rom.  xii.  15.)

The  usages  of  life,  or  the  principles  of  professional  men,  allow
of  many  things  which  are  clearly  inconsistent  with  the  require-
mants  of  the  ninth  commandment.  Lord  Brougham  is  reported
to  have  said  in  the  House  of  Lords,  that  an  advocate  knows  no
one  but  his  client.  He  is  bound  per  fas  et  nefas,  if  possible,  to
clear  him.  If  necessary  for  the  accomplishment  of  that  object,
he  is  at  liberty  to  accuse  and  defame  the  innocent,  and  even  (as
the  report  stated)  to  ruin  his  country.^  It  is  not  unusual,  espe-
cially in  trials  for  murder,  for  the  advocates  of  the  accused  to
charge  the  crime  on  innocent  parties  and  to  exert  all  their  in-
genuity to  convince  the  jury  of  their  guilt.  This  is  a  cruel  and
wicked  injustice,  a  clear  violation  of  the  command  which  says,
"  Thou  shalt  not  bear  false  witness  against  thy  neighbour."

Falsehood.

1.  The  simplest  and  most  comprehensive  definition  of  falsehood
is,  enunciatio  falsi.  This  enunciation  need  not  be  verbal.  A
sign  or  gesture  may  be  as  significant  as  a  word.  If,  to  borrow
Paley's  illustration,  a  man  is  asked  which  of  two  roads  is  the
right  one  to  a  given  place,  and  he  intentionally  points  to  the
wrong  one,  he  is  as  guilty  of  falsehood  as  if  he  had  given  the
wrong  directions  in  words.  This  is  true ;  nevertheless  there  is  a
power  peculiar  to  words.     A  thought,  a  feeling,  or  a  conviction

1  Lord  Brougham,  according  to  the  public  papers,  uttered  these  sentiments  in  vindica-
tion of  the  conduct  of  the  famous  Irish  advocate  Phillips,  who  on  the  trial  of  Courvoisier
for  the  murder  of  Lord  Russell,  endeavored  to  fasten  the  guilt  on  the  butler  and  housemaid,
whom  he  knew  to  be  innocent,  as  his  client  had  confessed  to  him  that  he  had  committed
the  crime.


440  PART  in.   Ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

is  not  only  more  clearly  revealed  in  the  consciousness  when  clothed
in  words,  but  it  is  thereby  strengthened.  Every  man  feels  this
when  he  says,  "  I  believe  ;  "  or,  "  I  know  that  my  Redeemer
liveth."

2.  The  above  definition  of  falsehood,  although  resting  on  high
authority,  is  too  comprehensive.  It  is  not  every  enunclatlo  falsi
which  is  a  falsehood.  This  enunciation  may  be  made  through
ignorance  or  mistake,  and  therefore  be  perfectly  innocent.  It
may  even  be  deliberate  and  intentional.  This  we  see  in  the  case
of  fables  and  parables,  and  in  works  of  fiction.  No  one  regards
the  Iliad  or  the  Paradise  Lost  as  a  repertorium  of  falsehoods.  It
is  not  necessary  to  assume  that  the  parables  of  our  Lord,  are  ver-
itable histories.  They  were  not  designed  to  give  a  narrative  of
actual  occurrences.  Intention  to  deceive,  therefore,  is  an  element
in  the  idea  of  falsehood.  But  even  this  is  not  always  culpable.
When  Pharaoh  commanded  the  Hebrew  midwives  to  slay  the
male  children  of  their  countrywomen,  they  disobeyed  him.  And
when  called  to  account  for  their  disobedience,  they  said,  "  The
Hebrew  women  are  not  as  the  Egyptian  women ;  for  they  are
lively,  and  are  delivered  ere  the  midwives  come  in  unto  them.
Therefore  God  dealt  well  with  the  midwives  :  and  the  people
multiplied,  and  waxed  very  mighty."  (Ex.  i.  19,  20.)  In  1  Sam-
uel xvi.  1,  2,  we  read  that  God  said  to  Samuel,  "  I  will  send  thee
to  Jesse  the  Bethlehemite  :  for  I  have  provided  me  a  king  among
his  sons.  And  Samuel  said,  How  can  I  go  ?  if  Saul  hear  it,  he  will
kill  me.  And  the  Lord  said,  Take  an  heifer  with  thee,  and  say,
I  am  come  to  sacrifice  to  the  Lord."  Here,  it  is  said,  is  a  case
of  intentional  deception  actually  commanded.  Saul  was  to  be  de-
ceived as  to  the  object  of  Samuel's  journey  to  Bethlehem.  Still
more  marked  is  the  conduct  of  Elislia  as  recorded  in  2  Kings  vi.
14-20.  The  king  of  Syria  sent  soldiers  to  seize  the  prophet  at
Dothan.  "  And  when  they  came  down  to  him,  Elisha  prayed
unto  the  LoiiD,  and  said,  Smite  this  people  I  pray  thee  with
blindness.  And  He  smote  them  with  blindness,  according  to  the
word  of  Elisha.  And  Elisha  said  unto  them,  This  is  not  the  way
neither  is  this  the  city  :  follow  me  and  I  will  bring  you  to  the  man
whom  ye  seek.  But  he  led  them  to  Samaria.  And  it  came  to
pass,  when  they  were  come  into  Samaria,  that  Elisha  said,  Lord,
open  the  eyes  of  these  men,  that  they  may  see.  And  the  Lord
opened  their  eyes,  and  they  saw ;  and  behold,  they  were  in  the
midst  of  Samaria ;  "  that  is,  in  the  hands  of  their  enemies.  The
prophet,  however,  would  not  allow  them  to  be  injured ;  but  com-


§13.]  THE   NINTH   COJ^OIANDMENT.  441

nianded  that  tliey  should  be  fed  and  sent  back  to  their  master.
Examples  of  this  kind  of  deception  are  numerous  in  the  Old
Testament.  Some  of  them  are  simply  recorded  facts,  without
anything  to  indicate  how  they  were  regarded  in  the  sight  of  God  ;
but  others,  as  in  the  cases  above  cited,  received  either  directly  or
by  implication  the  divine  sanction.  Of  our  blessed  Lord  himself
it  is  said  in  Luke  xxiv.  28,  "  He  made  as  though  (Trpoo-eTroteiro,  he
made  a  show  of)  he  would  have  gone  further."  He  so  acted  as
to  make  the  impression  on  the  two  disciples  that  it  was  his  pur-
pose to  continue  his  journey.  (Comp.  Mark  vi.  48.)  Many  the-
ologians do  not  admit  that  the  fact  recorded  in  Luke  xxiv.  28,
involved  any  intentional  deception  ;  because  the  "  simulatio  non
fuerit  in  verbis  veritati  contradicentibus,  sed  in  gestibus  veritati
consentientibus.  Christus  ....  agebat,  ut  qui  iturus  esset
longius,  et  revera  iturus  fuerat,  nisi  rogatus  fuisset  a  discipulis,

alia  fortasse  ratione  se  iis  manifesturus Alii  dicunt,  simu-

lationem  fuisse  tentatoriam,  aeque  ac  illam,  quse  in  Abrahami
historia  a  scriptore  sacro  commemoratur  Gen.  xxii.  2.  In  eandem
sententiam  descendunt  Beausobre  et  L'Enfant,  qui  in  notis  gal-
licis  ad  Luc.  xxiv.  28,  ita  scribunt :  C'est  un  feinte  innocente  et
pleine  d'amour,  par  laquelle  J^sus-Christ  veut  ^prouver  la  foi  de
ses  disciples.  Ainsi  en  usent  les  medicins  a  I'^gard  des  malades,
et  les  peres  a  I'egard  de  leurs  enfans."  ^

It  is  the  general  sentiment  among  moralists  that  stratagems
in  war  are  allowable  ;  that  it  is  lawfvil  not  only  to  conceal  intended
movements  from  an  enemy,  but  also  to  mislead  him  as  to  your
intentions.  A  great  part  of  the  skill  of  a  military  commander  is
evinced  in  detecting  the  intentions  of  his  adversary,  and  in  con-
cealing his  own.  Few  men  would  be  so  scrupulous  as  to  refuse  to
keep  a  light  in  a  room,  when  robbery  was  apprehended,  with  the
purpose  of  producing  the  impression  that  the  members  of  the
household  were  on  the  alert.

On  these  grounds  it  is  generally  admitted  that  in  criminal  false-
hoods there  must  be  not  only  the  enunciation  or  signification  of
what  is  false,  and  an  intention  to  deceive,  but  also  a  violation  of
some  obligation.  If  there  may  be  any  combination  of  circum-
stances under  which  a  man  is  not  bound  to  speak  the  truth,  those
to  whom  the  declaration  or  signification  is  made  have  no  right  to
expect  him  to  do  so.  A  general  is  under  no  obligation  to  reveal
his  intended  movements  to  his  adversary  ;  and  his  adversary  has
no  right  to  suppose  that  his  apparent  intention  is  his  real  purpose.

^  Gerhard,  Loci  Theologid,  xiii.  177 ;  edit.  Tiibingen,  1760,  vol.  v.  p.  346,  Cotta's  note.


442  PART  m.    Ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

Elisba  was  under  no  obligation  to  aid  the  Syrians  in  securing  his
person  and  taking  his  Hfe ;  and  they  had  no  right  to  assume  that
he  would  thus  assist  them.  And,  therefore,  he  did  no  Avi-ong  in
misleading  them.  There  will  always  be  cases  in  which  the  rule
of  duty  is  a  matter  of  doubt.  It  is  often  said  that  the  rule  above
stated  applies  when  a  robber  demands  your  purse.  It  is  said  to
be  right  to  deny  that  you  have  anything  of  value  about  you.  You
are  not  bound  to  aid  him  in  committing  a  crime  ;  and  he  has  no
right  to  assume  that  you  will  facilitate  the  accomphshment  of  his
object.  This  is  not  so  clear.  The  obligation  to  speak  the  truth
is  a  very  solemn  one ;  and  when  the  choice  is  left  a  man  to  tell  a
lie  or  lose  his  money,  he  had  better  let  his  money  go.  On  the
other  hand,  if  a  mother  sees  a  murderer  in  pursuit  of  her  child,
she  has  a  perfect  right  to  mislead  him  by  any  means  in  her  power  ;
because  the  general  obligation  to  speak  the  truth  is  merged  or
lost,  for  the  time  being,  in  the  higher  obligation.  This  principle
is  not  invalidated  by  its  possible  or  actual  abuse.  It  has  been
greatly  abused.  Jesuits  taught  that  the  obligations  to  promote  the
good  of  the  Church  absorbed  or  superseded  every  other  obliga
tion.  And,  therefore,  in  their  system  not  only  falsehood  and
mental  reservation,  but  perjury,  robbery,  and  assassination  be-
came lawful  if  committed  with  the  design  of  promoting  the  in-
terests of  the  Church.  Notwithstanding  this  liability  to  abuse,
the  principle  that  a  higher  obHgation  absolves  from  a  lower  stands
firm.  It  is  a  dictate  even  of  the  natural  conscience.  It  is  evi-
dently right  to  inflict  pain  in  order  to  save  life.  It  is  right  to  sub-
ject travellers  to  quarautme,  although  it  may  grievously  interfere
with  their  wishes  or  interests,  to  save  a  city  from  pestilence.  The
principle  itseK  is  clearly  inculcated  by  our  Lord  when  He  said,  "  I
will  have  mercy  and  not  sacrifice  ; "  and  when  He  taught  that  it
was  right  to  violate  the  Sabbath  in  order  to  save  the  hfe  of  an  ox,
or  even  to  prevent  its  suffering.  The  Jesuits  erred  in  assuming
that  the  promotion  of  the  interests  of  the  Church  (in  their  sense
especially  of  the  word  Church)  was  a  higher  duty  than  obedience
to  the  moral  law.  They  erred  also  in  assuming  that  the  interests
of  the  Church  could  be  promoted  by  the  commission  of  crime ;
and  their  principle  was  in  direct  violation  of  the  Scriptural  rule
that  it  is  wrong  to  do  evil  that  good  may  come.

The  question  now  vnider  consideration  is  not  whether  it  is  ever
right  to  do  wrong,  which  is  a  solecism  ;  nor  is  the  question  whether
it  is  ever  right  to  lie  ;  but  rather  what  constitutes  a  lie.  It  is  not
simply  an  "  enu7iciatio  falsi,''  nor,  as  it  is  commc  nly  defined  by


§  13.]  THE  NINTH   COIVOIANDMENT.  443

the  moralists  of  the  Church  of  Rome,  a  "  locutio  contra  mentera
loquentis  ;  "  ^  but  there  must  be  an  intention  to  deceive  when  we
are  expected  and  bound  to  speak  the  truth.  That  is,  there  are
circumstances  in  which  a  man  is  not  bound  to  speak  the  truth,
and  therefore  there  are  cases  in  which  speaking  or  intimating  what
is  not  true  is  not  a  he.  The  Roman  moraUsts  just  referred  to,
answer  the  question,  Whether  it  is  ever  lawful  to  lie  ?  in  the  nega-
tive. Dens,  for  example  goes  so  far  as  to  say :  "  Non  licet  mentiri
(^.  e.,  to  utter  what  is  not  true,  as  he  defines  the  word  '  menda-
cium ')  ad  avertendum  mortem  aut  interitum  Reipublicge,  vel  quae-
cunque  alia  mala :  in  hujusmodi  perplexitatibus  debent  homines
confugere  ad  auxilium  Dei,  angeli  custodis,"  etc.''^  This  is  a
sound  rule,  provided  the  obhgation  to  speak  the  truth  exists.  It
is  far  better  that  a  man  should  die  or  permit  a  murder  to  be
committed,  than  that  he  should  sin  against  God.  Nothing  could
tempt  the  Christian  martyrs  to  save  their  own  lives  or  the  hves
of  their  brethren  by  denying  Christ,  or  by  professing  to  beUeve
in  false  gods ;  in  these  cases  the  obligation  to  speak  the  truth  was
in  full  force.  But  in  the  case  of  a  commanding  general  in  time
of  war,  the  obligation  does  not  exist  to  intimate  his  true  intentions
to  his  adversary.  Intentional  deception  in  his  case  is  not  morally
a  falsehood.  Although  the  Romanist  theologians  lay  down  the
rule  that  a  mendacium  is  never  lawful,  and  although  they  define
mendacium  as  stated  above,  yet  they  teach  that  if  a  confessor  is
asked  whether  he  knows  a  fact  confided  to  him  in  the  confessional,
he  is  at  liberty  to  answer.  No  ;  meaning  that  he  does  not  know  it
scientia  communicahili.  That  is,  he  is  authorized,  according  to
their  own  definition  of  the  word,  to  tell  a  downright  falsehood.
He  may  be  right  to  reply  to  the  question.  Whether  he  knows  a
fact  communicated  to  him  in  his  character  of  confessor,  by  saying,
"  I  am  not  at  liberty  to  answer  ;  "  but  it  is  hard  to  see  how  he
could  be  justified  in  a  direct  falsehood.'^

In  order  to  include  the  third  element  entering  into  the  nature
of  criminal  falsehood,  Paley  defines  a  lie  to  be  a  violation  of  a
promise.    Every  violation  of  a  promise  is  not  a  He,  for  it  may  not

^  This  definition  is  given  by  Dens,  Theologla,  Be  Mendacio,  N.  242,  edit.  Dublin,  1832.
vol.  iv.  p.  306.

2  Ibid.  N.  243,  p.  308.

8  "  Confessarius  iuterrogatus  a  tyranno  an  Titius  confessus  sit  honiicidium,  respondere
potest  et  debet:  '  nescio; '  quia  confessarius  id  nescit  scientia  communicabili.  Imo,  etiamsi
instaret  tyrannus,  et  diceret,  '  An  hoc  nescis  scientia  sacramentali  ?  '  Respondere  adhuc
posset:  'nescio.'  Ratio  est,  quia  tyrannus  bene  scit  se  de  hoc  jus  interrogandi  non  habc",
nee  confessarius  ut  homo  scit  se  scire,  sed  uti  vicarius  Dei  et  scientia  incommunicabili."
John  Peter  Gury,  Compendium  TheologUz  Moralis,  new  edit.     Tornaci,  vol.  i.  p.  201.


444  PART  m.  Ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

include  the  other  elements  of  a  falsehood  ;  but  every  lie  is  a  viola-
tion of  a  promise.  It  arises  out  of  the  very  nature  of  human
society,  and  from  the  relation  in  which  men  of  necessity  stand  to
each  other,  that  every  man  is  expected  to  speak  the  truth,  and  is
under  a  tacit  but  binding  promise  not  to  deceive  his  neighbours
by  word  or  act.  If  in  any  case  he  is  guilty  of  intentional  decep-
tion, he  must  be  able  to  show  that  in  that  particular  case  the
obhgation  does  not  exist ;  that  is,  that  the  party  deceived  has  no
right  to  expect  the  truth,  and  that  no  virtual  promise  is  violated
in  deceiving  him.  This  is  certainly  the  fact  in  military  ma-
noeuvres, and  in  some  other  cases  of  rare  occurrence.

This,  however,  is  not  always  admitted.  Augustine,  for  exam-
ple, makes  every  intentional  deception,  no  matter  what  the  ob-
ject or  what  the  circumstances,  to  be  sinful.  "  Ille  mentitur,"
he  says,  "  qui  aliud  habet  in  animo,  et  aliud  verbis  vel  quibusli-
bet  significationibus  enuntiat."  ^  Again  he  says,^  "  Nemo  autem
dubitat  mentiri  euni  qui  volens  falsum  enuntiat  causa  fallendi :
quapropter  enuntiationem  falsam  cum  voluntate  ad  fallendum
prolatam,  manifestum  est  esse  mendacium."  He  reviews  the
cases  recorded  m  the  Bible  which  seem  to  teach  the  opposite  doc-
trine. This  would  be  the  simplest  ground  for  the  moralist  to
take.  But,  as  shown  above,  and  as  generally  admitted,  there  are
cases  of  intentional  deception  which  are  not  crimmal.

Kinds  of  Falsehood.

Augustine  divides  falsehood  into  no  less  than  eight  classes.
But  these  differ  for  the  most  part  simjDly  as  to  their  subject  mat-
ter, or  their  effects.  The  division  as  given  by  Thomas  Aquinas
and  very  generally  adopted  since,^  is  into  three  classes  ;  the  per-
nicious, the  benevolent,  and  the  jocose.  Under  the  first  head
come  all  falsehoods  which  are  instigated  by  any  evil  motive  and
are  designed  to  promote  some  evil  end.  It  includes  not  only  the
direct  enunciation  of  what  is  false,  but  also  all  quibbling  or  pre-
varication.

1  De  Mendacio,  3;  Works,  edit.  Benedictines,  Paris,  1837,  vol.  vi.  p.  712,  a.

2  Ibid.  5,  (iv.),  p.  715,  a.

3  Aquinas,  Summa,  ii.  ii.  110,  2;  edit.  Cologne,  1640,  p.  203,  a,  of  third  set.  "Potest
dividi  mendacium,  in  quantum  liabet  rationem  culpas,  secimdum  ea  qiuc  aggravant,  vel
diminuunt  culpam  mendacii  ex  parte  finis  intcnti.  Aggravat  autem  culpam  meudacii,  si
aliquis  per  mendacium  intendat  alterius  nocumentum:  quod  vocatur  mendacium  pernicio-
sum.  Diminuitur  autem  culpa  mendacii,  si  ordinetur  ad  aliquod  bonum,  vel  delectabile,  et
sio  est  mendacium  jocosum :  vel  utile,  et  sic  est  mendacium  ofRciosum,  quo  intenditur
juvamentum  alterius,  vel  remotio  nocumenti.  Et  secundum  hoc  dividitur  mendacium  in  tria
priudicta  "  The  first,  according  to  Romanists,  is  a  mortal  sin,  the  two  latter  are  regarded
as  venial


§13.]  THE  NINTH  COMMANDMENT.  445

Mental  Reservation.

This  class  includes  also  all  cases  of  mental  reservation.  It
should  be  said  in  justice  to  the  teachers  of  Moral  Theology  in  the
Romish  Church,  that,  although  the  Jesuits  made  themselves  so
obnoxious  by  asserting  the  propriety  of  mental  reservation,  they
at  least  in  general  terras  condemn  it.  "  Restrictio  mentalis,"
says  Gury,  "  est  actus  mentis  verba  alicujus  propositionis  ad  alium
sensum  quam  naturalem  et  obvimn  detorquentis  vel  restringentis."
This  he  says  is  unlavsrful,  because  it  is  "  simpliciter  mendacium.'*
It  is  true  these  theologians  malce  serious  modifications  of  this  rule.
It  is  only  of  reservation  "  proprie  mentalis,"  that  is,  when  the
true  meaning  of  the  speaker  cannot  be  detected,  that  this  condem-
nation is  pronounced.  If  it  be  possible,  from  the  circumstances  or
the  mode  of  expression,  to  know  what  he  means,  the  rule  does  not
always  apply.  There  are  cases  in  which  it  is  allowable  to  permit
a  man  to  deceive  himself.  Under  this  head  is  brought  in  the  case
above  referred  to.  It  is  said  that  a  confessor  may  properly  say
that  he  does  not  laiow  a  thing,  when  he  means  that  he  does  not
know  it  as  a  man,  or  with  a  knowledge  that  is  communicable.  So
it  is  said  that  if  a  man  be  asked  by  one  who  has  no  right  to  inter-
rogate him,  whether  he  has  committed  a  crime,  he  may  say,  No  ;
meaning  none  that  he  was  bound  to  confess.  So  also  it  is  taught
that  public  persons,  ambassadors,  magistrates,  advocates,  etc.,
may  use  mental  reservation  in  its  wider  sense.  In  like  manner  a
servant  may  say  his  master  is  not  at  home,  whom  he  knows  to  be
in  the  house,  because  such  denial  so  often  means  that  the  person
inquired  for  does  not  wish  to  be  seen.^  This  opens  a  very  wide
door  of  which  not  onlj^  Jesuits,  but  men  professing  to  be  Protes-
tants and  Christians  freely  avail  themselves.  To  an  unsophis-
tical  mind  all  the  instances  above  specified  are  cases  of  unmiti-
gated falsehood.

The  extent  to  which  the  Jesuits  carried  the  principle  of  mental
reservation  is  a  matter  of  notoriety.  The  three  rules  by  which
they  perverted  the  whole  system  of  morals,  and  which  threatened
to  overturn  the  very  foundations  of  society,  and  which  led  at  one
time  to  the  suppression  of  the  order,  were,  —

1.  The  doctrine  that  the  character  of  an  act  depended  solely  on
the  intention.  If  the  intention  be  good,  the  act  is  good  ;  whether
it  be  falsehood,  perjury,  murder,  or  any  other  conceivable  crime.
Pascal  quotes  the  Jesuit  moralist  Escobar  as  laying  down  the  gen-

1  Gury,  uts7tj)ra,  vol.  i.  pp.  200,  201.


i46  PART  m.  ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

eral  principle,  "  that  promises  are  not  binding  unless  there  was
an  intention  of  keeping  them,  at  the  time  they  were  made."  ^
On  the  same  principle,  that  the  intention  determines  the  character
of  the  act,  the  murder  of  Henry  III.  in  1589 ;  of  the  Prince  of
Orange  in  1584  ;  of  Henry  IV.  of  France  in  1610  ;  and  especially
the  massacres  on  the  feast  of  St.  Bartholomew,  were  all  justified.
This  principle  is  not  confined  to  the  Jesuits.  When  in  1819  young
Sand  murdered  Kotzebue,  the  poet,  from  political  motives,  he  not
only  justified  the  act  to  the  last,  but  perhaps  the  general  senti-
ment among  his  younger  countrymen  was  that  of  approbation.
Even  De  Wette,  the  distinguished  theologian  and  commentator,
in  a  letter  of  consolation  to  the  mother  of  Sand,  spoke  of  the  as-
sassination as  "  a  favourable  sign  of  the  times."  ^  It  was  regarded
very  much  as  the  killing  of  Marat  by  Charlotte  Corday  is  re-
garded by  the  public  to  this  day.  When  the  doctrine  comes  to  be
formalized  as  a  moral  principle  that  the  intention  determines  the
character  of  the  act,  so  that  murder  committed  for  the  good  of
the  Church  or  the  State  is  commendable,  then  the  law  of  God  is
set  at  nought  and  the  bonds  of  society  are  unloosed.

2.  The  doctrine  of  probability.  If  it  was  probable  that  an  act
was  right  there  was  no  sin  in  committing  it,  although  in  the  con-
viction of  the  agent  the  act  was  wrong ;  and  an  act  was  probably
right,  if  among  the  moralists  there  was  a  difference  of  opinion
on  the  subject.

3.  The  above-mentioned  doctrine  of  mental  reservation.  It
was  taught  that  a  man  might  innocently  swear  he  did  not  do  a
certain  thing,  provided  he  said  to  himself,  not  audibly  to  others,
"  I  mean  I  did  not  do  it  ten  years  ago."  All  these  different
kinds  of  lying,  though  referred  to  different  heads  by  the  Jesuit
teachers,  belong  properly  to  the  class  of  pernicious  falsehoods,
such  as  the  law  of  God  utterly  condemns.

The  second  class,  called  "  mendacia  ofiiciosa,"  includes  all
falsehoods  uttered  for  a  good  object.  Such  as  those  told  the  sick
by  their  attendants,  to  comfort  or  encourage  them  ;  those  told  by

1  Blaise  Pascal,  Lettres  ecrites  a  un  Provincial,  edit.  Paris,  1829,  p.  180;  Escobar,  iii.
ex.  iii.  n.  48.

2  De  Wette  did  not  ai^prove  of  the  assassination  of  Kotzebue  in  a  moral  point  of  view.
His  language  was:  "  So  wie  die  That  geschehen  ist,  mit  diesem  Glauben,  mit  dieser  Zuver-
sicht,  ist  sie  ein  schi'nes  Zeichen  der  Zcit.  —  Die  That  ist  —  allgemein  betrachtet  —  unsitt-
lich  und  der  sittlichen  Gesetzgebung  zuwiderlaiifond.  Das  Buse  soil  nicht  durch  das  Bose
iiberwunden  werden,  sondern  allein  durch  das  Gute.  Durch  Unrecht,  List  und  Gewalt
kann  kein  Recht  gestif tet  werden,  und  der  gute  Zweek  heiligt  nicht  das  ungerechte  Mittel."
Quoted  in  the  Conversations-Lexicon,  7th  edit.  Leipzig,  1827,  art.  Wette  (de).  The  let-
ter, although  thus  guarded,  led  to  the  loss  of  bis  professorship  in  Berlin  and  his  virtual  ban-
'shnieut  from  the  city.


§13.]  THE   NINTH   COMMANDMENT.  447

detectives  for  the  discoveiy  of  crimes ;  or  those  which  are  de-
signed to  prevent  evil  or  secure  good  for  ourselves  or  others.
All  such  falsehoods  are  pronounced  by  Romanists  to  be  venial
sins,  mere  peccadilloes.^  The  example  given  by  Dens,  in  the
place  referred  to,  of  this  class  of  sins,  is  the  case  of  a  man  having
money,  denying  that  he  has  it  to  avoid  being  robbed.  This  is
very  different  from  the  doctrine  of  Augustine,  who  teaches  that  it
is  unlawful  to  lie  to  save  life,  or  even  to  save  a  soul.^  Augus-
tine's position  is  consistent  Avith  what  was  said  above,  that  there
are  occasions  on  which  a  higher  obligation  absolves  from  a  lower,
as  our  Lord  himself  teaches.  But  that  principle  applies  to  the
case  of  falsehood  only  when  the  enunciation  of  what  is  untrue
ceases  to  be  falsehood  in  the  criminal  sense  of  the  word.  It  has
been  seen  that  three  elements  enter  into  the  nature  of  false-
hood properly  so  called,  (1.)  The  enijnciation  of  what  is  false.
(2.)  The  intention  to  deceive.  (3.)  The  violation  of  a  promise  ;
that  is,  the  violation  of  the  obligation  to  speak  the  truth,  the
obligation  which  rests  upon  every  man  to  keep  faith  with  his
neighbour.  In  military  manoeuvres,  as  above  remarked,  there  is
no  expectation,  and  no  right  for  expectation,  that  a  general  will
reveal  his  true  intentions  to  his  adversary,  and  therefore  in  that
case  deception  is  not  falsehood,  because  there  is  no  violation  of
an  obligation.  But  when  a  confessor  was  called  upon  by  a
heathen  magistrate  to  say  whether  he  was  a  Christian,  he  was
expected,  and  bound  to  speak  the  truth,  although  he  knew  the
consequence  would  be  a  cruel  death.  So  when  a  man  is  asked  if
he  has  money  about  him,  he  is  expected  to  speak  the  truth,  and
has  no  right  to  lie  any  more  than  a  Christian  had  a  right  to  lie
to  save  his  life.  The  doctrine  that  "  mendacia  officiosa  "  are  only
venial  sins,  rests  on  the  principle  that  the  intention  determines
the  character  of  the  act.  The  simple  Scriptural  rule  is,  that  he
who  does  '^  evil  that  good  may  come,"  his  "  damnation  is  just."

It  is  a  fact  of  experience,  that,  so  far  as  our  inner  life  at  least
is  concerned,  exorbitant  attention  to  how  to  do  a  thing  destroys
the  ability  to  do  it.  An  adept  in  logic  may  be  a  very  poor  rea-
soner ;  and  a  man  Avho  spends  his  life  in  studying  the  rules  of
elocution  may  be  a  very  indifferent  orator.     So  a  man  versed  in

1  Dens,  ut  supra,  vol.  iv.  N.  242,  p.  307.  "  Mendacium  officiosum  dicitur,  quod  com-
mittitur  solum  causa  utilitatis  propriae  vel  alienae :  v.  g.  quis  dicit,  se  non  habere  pecunias,
ne  lis  spolietur  a  militibus."  And  on  the  same  page  he  says,  "  Officiosum  autem  et  joco-
sum  sunt  ex  genere  sue  peccatum  veniale."  So  also  Gury,  vol.  i.  p.  199.  "Mendacium
officiosum  peccatum  venale  est,  per  se,  quia  in  eo  gravis  deordinatio  non  appreheuditur."

2  De  Mendacio,  9,  (vi.);    Works,  ut  supra,  vol.  vi.  p.  719  ff.


448  PART  III.     Ch.   XIX.  — the   law.

all  the  subtleties  of  casuistry  is  apt  to  lose  the  clear  and  simple
apprehension  of  right  and  wrong.  Professor  Gury  has  for  the
motto  of  his  book  on  moral  theology,  the  Avords  of  St.  Gregory :
"  Ars  artium  regimen  animarum."  Very  true,  but  it  is  a  bad
'■vay  to  lead  a  man  to  a  given  point  to  jDut  him  into  a  labyrinth.
These  books  of  casuistry  only  serve  to  mystify  the  plainest  sub-
jects. Indulging  in  such  subtleties  can  hardly  fail  to  lead  to  the
adoption  of  false  principles.  It  is  very  plain  that  the  man  who
was  at  once  a  prince  and  a  bishop,  could  not  well  be  drunk  as
prince  and  sober  as  bishop ;  yet,  as  we  have  seen,  these  books
teach  that  a  priest  may  lie  as  a  man,  and  yet  speak  truth  as  a
vicar  of  God.  The  plain  directions  of  the  Word  of  God  and  a
conscience  enhghtened  by  his  Spirit,  are  safer  guides  in  matters
of  duty  than  all  the  books  on  moral  theology  the  Jesuits  ever
wrote.  This  is  not  saying  that  morals  are  not  a  proper  subject
of  study,  or  that  there  is  not  a  call  in  that  field  for  the  exercise
of  discrimination  and  distinction.  The  objection  is  not  to  the
study  of  morals,  but  to  inordinate  devotion  to  that  department,
and  to  the  perplexing  and  perverting  subtleties  of  casuistrj^

Pious  Frauds.

Pious  fraud  was  reduced  by  Romanists  to  a  science  and  an
art.  It  was  called  economics,  from  oi/coi'o/.u'a,  "  dispensatio  rei
familiaris,"  the  discretionary  use  of  things  in  a  family  according
to  circumstances.  The  theory  is  founded  on  the  principle  that  if
the  intention  be  lawful,  the  act  is  lawful.  Any  act,  therefore,
designed  to  promote  any  "pious"  end  is  justifiable  "in  fore
conscientiffi."  This  principle  was  introduced  at  an  early  period
into  the  Christian  Church.  Mosheim  attributes  to  it  a  heathen
origin.^  He  says  that  the  Platonists  and  Pythagoreans  taught
that  it  was  commendable  to  lie  to  promote  a  good  end.  The
evil,  however,  had  probably  an  independent  origin  wherever  it
appeared.  It  is  plausible  enough  to  rise  spontaneously  in  any
mind  not  under  the  control  of  the  Word  and  Spirit  of  God.

Augustine  had  to  contend  against  this  error  in  his  day.  There
were  certain  orthodox  Christians  who  thought  it  right  falsely  to
assert  that  they  were  Priscillianists  in  order  to  gain  their  confi-
dence and  thus  be  able  to  convict  them  of  heresy.  This  brought
up  the  question  whether  it  was  allowable  to  commit  a  fraud  for  a
good  end  ;  in  other  words,  whether  the  intention  determined  the
character  of  the  act.     Augustine  took  the  negative  of  the  ques-

1  Ecdenastical  History,  i.  ii.  2.  3.  §  15;  edit.  New  York,  1859,  vol.  i.  p.  130.


§  13.]  THE   NINTH   COMxMi  NDMENT.  449

tion,  and  argued  that  a  lie  was  always  a  lie,  and  always  mcked  ;
that  it  was  not  lawful  to  tell  a  falsehood  for  any  purpose  what-
ever. "  Interest  quidem  plurimum,"  he  says,  "  qua  causa,  quo
fine,  qua  intentione  quid  fiat :  sed  ea  quae  constat  esse  peccata,
nullo  bonaj  caus*    obtentu,  nullo    quasi   bono  fine,  nulla  velut

bona  intentione  facienda  sunt Cum  vero  jam   opera  ipsa

peccata  sunt ;  sicut  furta,  stupra,  blasphemiae,  vel  caetera  talia ;
quis  est  qui  dicat  causis  bonis  esse  facienda,  ut  vel  peccata  non
sint,  vel  quod  est  absurdius,  justa  peccata  sint  ?  Quis  est  qui
dicat :  ut  habeamus  quod  demus  pauperibus,  faciamus  furta
divitibus ;  aut,  testimonia  falsa  vendamus,  maxime  si  non  inde
innocentes  Iseduntur,  sed  nocentes  potius  damnaturis  judicibus
eruuntur?"^  He  specially  condemns  all  "pious  frauds,"  i.  k.,
frauds  committed  in  pretended  service  of  religion.

Notwithstanding  the  authority  of  Augustine,  the  doctrine  that
it  was  right  to  use  fraud  in  efforts  to  promote  the  interests  of  the
Church,  was  openly  avowed  by  some  of  his  contemporaries  and
many  of  his  immediate  successors,  and  during  the  Middle  Ages
was  the  practical  rule  of  the  Romish  Church,  as  it  is  at  the
present  day.  Among  the  early  advocates  of  this  lax  principle  of
morals  is  found  the  name  even  of  Jerome.  In  his  epistle  to
Pammachius,  he  says,  that  in  teaching,  a  man  is  bound  to  be
honest,  but  in  dealing  with  an  adversary,  he  may  do  what  he
pleases ;  it  is  right  "  nunc  h^ec  nunc  ilia  proponere.  Argumen-
tari  ut  libet,  aliud  loqui,  aliud  agere,  panem,  ut  dicitur,  osten-
dere,  lapidem  tenere."^  The  principle  that  the  intention  sancti-
fies the  deed,  is  clearly  asserted  by  John  Cassian,  a  disciple  of
Chrysostom.  Falsehood,  he  says,  is  like  poison :  taken  moderately
and  in  illness,  it  may  be  salutary ;  but  if  taken  inopportunely,
it  is  fatal.  "  Non  enim  Deus  verborum  tantum  actuumque  nos-
trorum  discussor  et  judex,  sed  etiam  propositi  ac   destinationis

inspector  est Ille  tamen  intimam  cordis  inspiciens  pieta-

tem,  non  verborum  sonum,  sed  votum  dijudicat  voluntatis,  quia
finis,  operis  et  affectus  considerandus  est  perpetrantis."  ^

1  Contra  Mendaclum  ad  Consentlum,  18;    Works,  edit.  Benedictines,  Paris,  1837,  vol.
vi.  pp.  767,  d,  768,  a,  b.

2  Eplstoln,  xlviii.  [30  seu  50]  13,  sen  Liber  Apologeticus  ad  Pammachium  ;  Works,  edit.
Migne,  Paris,  1845,  vol.  i.  p.  502.

8  CoUectiones,  xvii.  8,  quoted  by  Gieseler,  Ecclesiastical  History,  Per.  ii.  i.  6.     §  103,
tracs.ated  by  Samuel  Davidson,  LL.  D. ;  edit.  Edinburgh,  1848,  vol.  ii.  p.  56.
voiv.  lu.  29


450  PART  m.   Ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

Forgeries.

The  principle  having  been  once  admitted  that  it  is  right  to
deceive  in  order  to  accompHsh  a  good  object,  there  was  no  Hmit
set  in  practice  to  its  application.      Hence,  —

1.  Even  from  the  earhest  times  genuine  works  of  the  apostohc
fathers  were  corrupted  by  interpolations ;  and  works  were  issued
bearing  the  names  of  authors  who  were  dead  long  before  the
works  were  written.  Besides  the  apocryphal  books  which  are
now  admitted  to  be  spurious,  the  Letters  of  Ignatius,  a  portion  of
which  are  generally  received  as  authentic,  were  so  corrupted  as
to  be  the  source  of  an  extended  and  permanent  evil  influence.
Of  these  letters  there  are,  as  is  well  known,  three  recensions,  the
larger  containing  fifteen  epistles,  the  shorter,  and  the  Syrian,
founded  on  a  Syriac  translation.  The  larger  collection  is  given
up  by  scholars  as  spurious ;  as  to  the  others,  many  who  admit
their  authenticity,  insist  that  they  are  more  or  less  corrupted  by
interpolation.'

The  so-called  "  Apostolical  Constitutions  "  are  a  collection  of
rules  or  canons  derived  partly  from  the  New  Testament,  partly
from  the  decisions  of  early  provincial  councils,  and  partly  from
tradition ;  all,  however,  imposed  on  the  Church  as  of  apostolical
authority.  As  the  number  of  councils  increased  there  was  a
necessity  for  renewed  collections  of  their  decisions.  These  col-
lections inchided  "decretals"  issued  by  the  Bishop  of  Rome;
both  classes  being  included  under  the  name  of  "  canons,"  these
collections  were  gradually  consolidated  into  the  Canon  Law.  It
was  a  natural  and  eas}'  method  of  imposing  on  the  Church  to
insert  spurious  decretals  in  the  collections  from  time  to  time,  and
to  found  on  these  forgeries  exorbitant  pretensions  to  priestly  dig-
nity and  power.  The  most  notorious  of  these  impositions  is  what
is  known  as  the  Decretals  of  Isidore,  Bishop  of  Seville,  the  most
distinguished  writer  of  the  seventh  century.  He  died  A.  D.  636.
The  collection  which  went  under  his  name  did  not  make  its
appearance  until  the  ninth  century.  It  contains  many  genuine
decretals  and  canons,  but  also  many  that  are  manifest  forgeries.
The  author  of  the  collection  and  of  the  spurious  documents  it

1  A  brief  account  of  this  much  debated  question  is  given  by  Uhlhorn  in  Herzog's  Real
Encyklojiiidie,  art.   "Ignatius."  j

Neander  says  of  these  assumed  letters  of  Ignatius,  "Even  the  briefer  revision,  which  is
the  one  most  entitled  to  conlidence,  has  been  very  much  interpolated A  hierarch-
ical purpose  is  not  to  be  mistaken."  General  History  of  the  Christian  Religion  and
Church,  by  Dr.  Augustus  Neander.  Translated  by  Joseph  Torrey,  Professor  in  the
University  of  Vermont,  2d  edit.  Boston,  1849,  vol.  i.  p.  6G1.


§  13.]  THE   NINTH   COMMANDMENT.  451

contains  is  unknown.  Its  date  is  fixed  by  Gieseler  between  829
and  845.  These  decretals  "  were  soon  circulated,"  says  tbat  his-
torian, "  in  various  collections,  appealed  to  without  suspicion  in
public  transactions,  and  used  by  the  popes,  from  Nicolaus  I.,  im-
mediately after  he  had  become  acquainted  with  them  (864),
without  any  opposition  being  made  to  their  avithenticity,  and
continued  in  undiminished  reputation,  till  the  Reformation  led
to  the  detection  of  the  cheat.  On  these  false  decretals  were
founded  the  pretensions  of  the  popes  to  universal  sway  in  the
Church ;  while  the  pretended  '  donatio  Constantini  M.,'  a  fic-
tion of  an  earlier  time,  but  soon  adopted  into  them,  was  the
first  step  from  which  the  papacy  endeavoured  to  elevate  itself
even  above  the  state."  ^  The  authenticity  of  these  documents
was  first  seriously  attacked  by  the  Magdeburgh  Ceuturiators,
who  were  answered  by  the  Jesuit  Turrianus.  "  The  question
was  decided  by  Dav.  Blondelli  Pseudoisidorus  et  Turrianus  vapu-
lantes,  Genev.  1628.  The  Ultramontanists,  though  they  admit
the  deception,  deny  the  revolution  of  ecclesiastical  principles
caused  by  it."  ^  These  decretals  attribute  to  the  pope  absolute
supremacy  over  the  Church,  over  patriarchs,  bishops,  and  priests.
To  him  an  appeal  lies  in  all  questions  of  doctrine,  and  his  de-
cisions are  final.  The  gift  of  Constantine  conferred  on  the  pontiff
more  than  imperial  dignity  and  power.  It  conveyed  the  sove-
reignty of  the  city  of  Rome,  of  Italy,  and  of  the  western  prov-
inces. Among  other  things  it  says,  "  Et  sicut  nostram  terrenam
imperialem  potentiam,  sic  ejus  (Petri)  sacrosanctam  Romanam
Ecclesiam  decrevimus  veneranter  honorari,  et  amplius  quam  nos-
trum imperium  terrenumque  thronum,  sedem  sacratissimam  b.
Petri  gloriose  exaltari :  tribuentes  ei  potestatem  et  gloria3  dig-
nitatem, atque  vigorem  et  honorificentiam  imperialem.  Unde  ut
pontificalis  apex  non  vilescat,  sed  magis  quam  imperii  dignitas,
gloria  et  potentia  decoretur,  ecce  tam  palatium  nostrum,  ut
prgedictum  est,  quam  Romanam  urbem,  et  omnes  ItaliiB,  seu
occidentalium  regionum  provincias,  loca  et  civitates  prasfato
beatissimo  Pontifici  nostro  Sylvestro,  universali  papae,  contradi-
mus  atque  relinquimus :  et  ab  eo  et  a  successoribus  ejus  per
banc  divalem  nostram,  et  pragmaticum  constitutum  decernimus
disponenda,  atque  juri  sanctse  Romanae  Ecclesiae  concedimus  per-
mansm-a."^

1  Gieseler,  Ecclesiastical  History,  Per.  iii.  ii.    1.  1.  §  20 ;  edit.  Edinburgh,  1848,  vol.  U.
pp.  .331-336.

2  Ibid.  p.  335,  foot-notes.

8  Quoted  by  Gieseler,  ut  supra,  vol.  ii.  p.  337,  from  the  Decreta  Gratiani.


462  PART  m.   Ch.  XIX.  — the  law.

■  False  Miracles.

The  second  great  class  of  pious  frauds  by  which  the  Church  of
Rome  has  for  ages  endeavoured  to  sustain  its  errors  and  confirm
its  power,  is  that  of  pretended  miracles.  On  this  subject  it  may
be  remarked,  —

1.  That  there  is  nothing  in  the  New  Testament  inconsistent
with  the  occurrence  of  miracles  in  the  post-apostolic  age  of  the
Church.  The  Apostles  were  indeed  chosen  to  be  the  witnesses
of  Christ,  to  bear  testimony  to  the  facts  of  his  history  and  to  the
doctrines  which  He  taught.  And  among  the  signs  of  an  Apos-
tle, or  necessary  credentials  of  his  commission,  was  the  power
to  work  miracles.  (Rom.  xv.  18,  19  ;  2  Cor.  xii.  12.)  When
the  Apostles  had  finished  their  work,  the  necessity  of  miracles,  so
far  as  the  great  end  they  were  intended  to  accomplish  was  con-
cerned, ceased.  This,  however,  does  not  preclude  the  possibility
of  their  occurrence,  on  suitable  occasions,  in  after  ages.  It  is  a
mere  question  of  fact  to  be  decided  on  historical  evidence.  In
some  few  cases  the  nature  of  the  event,  its  consequences,  and  the
testimony  in  its  suj)port,  have  constrained  many  Protestants  to
admit  the  probability,  if  not  the  certainty  of  these  miraculous
interventions.^  Among  the  controversial  writings  which  the  great
questions  in  debate  in  the  late  Vatican  Council  have  called  forth,
there  are  two  of  special  interest  which  have  already  been  trans-
lated and  circulated  in  this  country.  The  one  is  entitled  "  The
Pope  and  The  Council,"  ^  a  series  of  papers  written  by  German
Catholic  scholars  of  distinction.  It  is  a  historical  argument
against  Ultramontanism.  Among  other  things  it  demonstrates
that  the  claims  of  the  Ultramontanists  have  been  sustained  by  a
regular  system  of  forgeries  in  all  ages  of  the  Church.^

The  other  work  is  by  the  late  Abbe  Gratry,*  one  of  the  most

1  Grotiiis  in  his  annotations  on  Mark  xvi.  17,  says:  "Cum  vero  multo  etiam  seriora
secula  plena  sint  testimoniis  ejus  rei,  nescio  qua  ratione  moti  quidani  id  donum  ad  prima
tantum  tempora  restringant;  quibus  ut  uberiorem  fuisse  miraculorum  copiam,  ad  jacienda
tanti  ffiditicii  fundamenta  contra  vim  mundi,  facile  concedo,  ita  cum  illis  expirasse  banc
Christi  promissionem  cur  credamus  non  video.  Quare  si  quis  nunc  etiam  g^entibus  Cbristi
ignaris  (illis  enim  proprie  miracula  inserviunt  1  Cor.  xiv.  22).  Christum,  ita  ut  ipse  annun-
tiari  voluit,  annuntiet,  promissionis  vim  duraturam  arbitror.  Sunt  enim  a/ieTane'XtjTa  toO
©eoO  Bwpa  (sine  poenitentia  dona  Dei).  Sed  nos  cujus  rei  culpa  est  in  nostra  ignavia  aut
indiffeventia  id  solemus  in  Deum  rejicere."  Works,  edit.  London,  1679,  tome  ii.  vol.  i.  p.
328,  b,  18-32.

2  The  Pope  and  the  Council,  by  Janus.  Authorized  Translation  from  the  German.
Boston,  1870.

3  See  especially  chap.  ill.  §  7,  pp.  76-122.

■*  Papal  InfalUbiUty  Untenable.  Three  Letters  by  A.  Gratry,  Priest  of  the  Oratory,  and
member  of  the  French  Academy.     Hartford,  1870.


§  13.]  THE  ni:n'th  commandment.  453

distinguished  Romish  ecclesiastics  of  France,  whose  death  has
just  been  announced.  In  these  masterly  letters  the  writer  es-
tablishes two  points,  as  he  says  truly  beyond  the  possibility  of
rational  denial.  The  first  is,  that  the  popes  have  erred  when
speaking  "  ex  cathedra,"  and  therefore  are  not  infallible ;  and
the  second,  that  the  claims  of  Papal  infallibility  have  been  sus-
tained by  the  most  bare-faced  and  persistent  forgeries  and  frauds.
Both  of  these  points  are  proved  specially  in  the  case  of  Pope
Honorius.  Yet,  sad  to  say,  this  eminent  man,  not  long  before
his  death,  submitted  to  the  decree  of  the  Vatican  Council  by
which  the  infallibility  of  the  Pope  was  made  an  article  of  faith.
He  said  he  "  erased  "  all  he  had  written  against  that  doctrine.^

2.  During  the  first  hundred  years  after  the  death  of  the  Apos-
tles we  hear  little  or  nothing  of  the  working  of  miracles  by
the  early  Christians.  On  this  point  Bishop  Douglass  says,  "  If
we  except  the  testimonies  of  Papias  and  Irenaus,  who  speak  of
raising  the  dead,  ....  I  can  find  no  instances  of  miracles  men-
tioned by  the  fathers  before  the  fourth  century,  as  wdiat  were
performed  by  Christians  in  their  times,  but  the  cm-es  of  diseases,
particularly  the  cures  of  demoniacs,  by  exorcising  them ;  which
last,  indeed,  seems  to  be  their  favourite  standing  miracle,  and  the
only  onQ  which  I  find  (after  having  turned  over  their  writings
carefully  and  with  a  view  to  this  point) :  they  challenged  their
adversaries  to  come  and  see  them  perform."  ^  The  fathers  of
the  fourth  century  freely  speak  of  the  age  of  miracles  as  past ;
that  such  interpositions,  being  no  longer  necessary,  were  no  longer
to  be  expected.  Thus  Chrysostom  says:  "  Ne  itaque  ex  eo,  quod
nunc  signa  non  fiunt,  argmnentum  ducas  tunc  etiam  non  fuisse.
Etenim  tunc  utiliter  fiebant,  et  nunc  utiliter  non  fiunt."  ^  And
Augustine  says :  "  Cur,  inquiunt,  nunc  ilia  miracula,  quae  prge-
dicatis  facta  esse,  non  fiunt  ?  Possem  quidem  dicere,  necessaria
fuisse  priusquam  crederet  mundus,  ad  hoc  ut  crederet  mundus."*

1  It  is  perfectly  intelligible  that  a  man  who  admits  the  infallibility  of  general  councils,
may  be  able  to  subject  his  strongest  personal  convictions  to  the  judgment  of  the  Church.
But  no  less  than  three  oecumenical  councils  and  twenty  Popes  had  pronounced  Honorius
a  heretic.  How  could  the  council  of  the  Vatican  reverse  those  decisions?  Besides,  Gratry
and  his  Gallican  and  German  coadjutors  denied  that  the  late  council  was  either  oecumenical
or  free.  Father  Hyacinth  wrote  to  Gratry  on  his  recantation,  and  said  to  him,  "You  speak
of  erasing  what  you  have  written,  but  how  can  you  erase  the  facts  which  you  have  demon-
strated, or  the  convictions  you  have  produced  in  the  minds  of  the  faithful?  "

2  Criterion,  or,  the  Rules  by  which  the  True  Miracles  recorded  in  the  Neto  Testament  are
distinguished  from  the  Spurious  Miracles  of  Pagans  and  Papists.  4th  edit.  Oxford,  1832,
pp.  228-232.  The  author  was  Dtan  of  Windsor,  Bisho])  of  Carlisle,  and  afterwards  of
Salisbury.

3  In  Epistolam  I.  ad  Corinthios,  Homilia,  vi.  2;  Worlcs,  edit.  Montfaucon,  Paris,  1837,
vol.  X.  p.  53,  a.

*  De  Civitate  Dei,  xxii,  viii.  1 ;  Works,  edit.  Benedictines,  Paris,  1838,  vol.  vii.  p.  1057,  d.


454  PART  III.     Ch.   XIX.  — the   law.

However  these  declarations  may  be  reconciled  with  the  fact  that
these  fathers,  themselves,  give  accounts  of  what  passed  for  mir-
acles in  their  day,  they  at  least  show  that  in  their  view  there
was  such  a  difference  bq,tween  the  Scriptural  and  ecclesiastical
miracles  that  they  did  not  belong  to  the  same  category.  Al-
though these  miracles  were  unfrequent  in  the  early  ages  of  the
Church,  yet  they  rapidly  increased  in  number  until  they  became
matters  of  every  day's  occurrence.

3.  They  admit  of  being  classified  on  different  principles.  As
to  their  nature,  some  are  grave  and  important ;  others  are  tri-
fling, childish,  and  even  babyish  ;  others  are  indecorous ;  and  others
are  irreverent  and  even  blasphemous.  Professor  Newman,  one  of
the  richest  prizes  gained  by  the  Romanists  from  the  Church  of
England  in  this  generation,  is  candid  enough  to  admit  the  con-
trast between  the  Scriptural  and  what  he  calls  ecclesiastical  mir-
acles. Of  the  former,  he  says,^  "  The  miracles  of  Scripture  are,
as  a  whole,  grave,  simple,  and  majestic :  those  of  ecclesiastical  his-
tory often  partake  of  what  may  not  unfitly  be  called  a  romantic
character,  and  of  that  wildness  and  inequality  which  enters  into
the  notion  of  romance."  He  says,'-^  "  It  is  obvious  to  apply  what
has  been  said  to  the  case  of  the  miracles  of  the  Church,  as  com-
pared with  those  in  Scripture.  Scripture  is  to  us  a  garden  of
Eden,  and  its  creations  are  beautiful  as  well  as  '  very  good,'  but
when  we  pass  from  the  Apostolic  to  the  following  ages,  it  is  as  if
we  left  the  choicest  valleys  of  the  earth,  the  quietest  and  most  har-
monious scenery,  and  the  most  cultivated  soil,  for  the  luxuriant
wildernesses  of  Africa  or  Asia,  the  natural  home  or  kingdom  of

1  T'wo  Essays  on  Scripture  Miracles  and  on  Ecclesiastical.  By  John  Henry  Ne^vman,
formerly  Fellow  of  Oriel  College,  Oxford,  2d  edit.  London,  1870,  p.  116.  These  Essays,
it  should  be  stated,  were  first  published  before  Dr.  Newman  entered  the  Church  of  Rome.
The  former  was  written  in  182.5-26,  and  the  latter  in  1842—13.  He  was  reconciled  to
Rome  in  1845.  In  the  second  edition  of  the  united  essays  published  in  1870,  he  endorses
them  anew  with  slight  qualification.  His  words  are  (p.  viii.),  "These  distinct  views  of
miraculous  agency,  thus  contrasted,  involve  no  inconsistency  with  each  other;  but  it  must
be  o^vned  that,  in  the  essay  upon  the  Scripture  miracles,  the  author  goes  beyond  both  the
needs  and  the  claims  of  his  argument,  when,  in  order  to  show  their  special  dignity  and
beauty,  he  depreciates  the  purpose  and  value  of  the  miracles  of  Church  history.  To  meet
this  undue  disparagement  in  his  first  essay,  of  facts  which  have  their  definite  place  in  the
divine  dispensation,  he  points  out  in  his  second  the  essential  resemblance  which  exists  be-
tween many  of  the  miracles  of  Scripture  and  those  of  the  later  times;  and  it  is  with  the
same  drift  that,  in  this  edition,  a  few  remarks  at  the  foot  of  the  page  have  been  added  in
brackets."  This  qualification  was  hardly  necessary,  as  the  fourth  chapter  of  the  second
essay  contains  tlie  most  ingenious  defence  of  ecclesiastical  miracles  anywhere  to  be  found.
It  is  generally  understood  that  Prof.  Newman  was  in  heart  a  Romanist  some  years  before
his  secession  from  the  Church  of  England.  Of  this  his  famous  Tract  Number  90  of  the
Oxford  series,  is  a  sufficient  proof.

2  Ibid,  p.  150.


§  13.]  THE   NINTH   COMMANDMENT.  455

brute  nature,  uninfluenced  by  man."  A  more  felicitous  illustration
can  hardly  be  imagined.  The  contrast  between  the  Gospels  and
the  legends  of  the  saints,  is  that  between  the  divine  and  the
human  and  even  the  animal ;  between  Christ  (with  reverence  be
it  spoken)  and  St.  Anthony.  Another  principle  on  which  these
ecclesiastical  miracles  may  be  classified,  is  the  design  for  which
they  were  wrought  or  adduced.  Some  are  brought  forth  as  proofs
of  the  sanctity  of  particular  persons,  or  places,  or  things  ;  some  to
sustain  particular  doctrines,  such  as  purgatory,  transubstantiation,
the  worsliipping  of  the  saints  and  of  the  Vii'gin  Mary,  etc.,  some
for  the  identification  of  relics.  It  is  no  injustice  to  the  authorities
of  the  Church  of  Rome,  to  say,  that  whatever  good  ends  these  mir-
acles may  in  any  case  be  intended  to  serve,  they  have  in  the  ag-
gregate been  made  subservient  to  the  accumulation  of  money  and
to  the  increase  of  power.  The  amount  of  money  drawn  from  the
single  doctrine  of  purgatory  and  the  assumed  power  of  the  keys
over  that  imaginary  place  of  torture,  is  beyond  all  computation.
And  the  whole  fabric  of  priestly  power,  the  most  absolute  and  the
most  dreaded  ever  exercised  over  men,  would  fall  to  the  ground
if  it  were  not  the  belief  of  the  people,  founded  mainly  on  "  lying
wonders,"  that  the  priests  have  power  to  forgive  sin,  to  save  or
to  destroy  souls  at  will,  or  at  discretion.  If  this  doctrine  be
false,  the  whole  Romish  system  is  false.  Romanists,  therefore,
have  everything  at  stake  on  this  question.  Bishop  Jeremy  Tay-
lor, writing  to  a  lady  "  seduced  to  the  Church  of  Rome,"  said
long  ago,  "  All  the  points  of  difference  between  us  and  your
Church  are  such  as  do  evidently  serve  the  ends  of  covetousness
and  ambition,  of  power  and  riches."  ^

4.  A  fourth  general  remark  on  this  subject  is,  that  it  is  no  just
matter  of  reproach  to  the  authorities  and  people  of  the  Romish
Church  that  they  believed  in  these  false  miracles.  Faith  in  the
frequently  recurring  interference  of  supernatural  influences  in
the  affairs  of  men,  was  for  ages  universal.  Even  so  late  as  the
seventeenth  century  Protestants  as  well  as  Catholics,  of  all  ranks,
believed  in  ghosts,  witches,  necromancy,  and  demonocracy.  Cotton
Mather's  "  Magnalia  "  is  a  match  for  the  Legends  of  the  Saints.

5.  It  is  not  that  Romanists  believed  in  the  fi-equent  occurrence
of  miracles,  but  that  they  propagated  reports  of  miracles,  know-
ing them  to  be  false  ;  that  this  was  done  for  the  purposes  of  de-
ceit ;  that  this  is  persisted  in  to  the  present  day  ;  and  that  the

1  Fh'st  Letter  to  One  Seduced  to  the  Church  of  Rome  ;   Works,  edit.  London,  1828,  vol.
xi.  p.  189.


456  PART  III.    Ch.  XIX. —  the  law.

honour,  tvutli,  integrity,  and  infallibility  of  the  Church  are  pledged
in  support  of  their  actual  occurrence.  The  truth  of  Christianity
depends  on  the  historical  truth  of  the  account  of  the  miracles  re-
corded in  the  New  Testament.  The  truth  of  Romanism  depends
on  the  truth  of  the  miracles  to  which  it  appeals.  What  would
become  of  Protestantism  if  it  depended  on  the  demonology  of
Luther,  or  the  witch  stories  of  our  English  forefathers.  The
Romish  Church,  in  assuming  the  responsibility  for  the  ecclesias-
tical miracles,  has  taken  upon  itself  a  burden  which  would  crush
the  shoulders  of  Atlas.  These  "  lying  wonders  "  are  endorsed,
not  only  by  the  negative  action  of  the  authorities  of  the  Church,
by  allowing  them  to  be  believed  and  cited  in  proof  of  its  doc-
trines and  divine  mission  ;  not  only  by  the  recognized  expounders
of  its  faith  referring  to  them  and  asserting  their  truth  ;  but  also
by  solemn  official  action  of  the  highest  ecclesiastical  dignitaries,
including  a  long  succession  of  popes.  As  no  one  could  be  canon-
ized unless  his  saintship  was  sustained  by  at  least  four  miracles,
when  any  one  was  proposed  for  canonization  a  commission  was
appointed  to  ascertain  the  facts  of  his  life,  and  especially  of  the
miracles  which  he  wrought.  This  commission  reported  to  the
Pope,  who,  if  satisfied,  decreed  the  enrolment  of  the  candidate
in  the  list  of  saints.  These  official  documents  contain  the  record
of  the  most  trivial,  and,  on  other  grounds,  most  objectionable
miracles. 1  And  to  such  miracles  the  Church  of  Rome  has  given
lier  sanction,  and  on  the  truth  of  these  it  must  stand  or  fall.

1  Accounts  of  these  miracles  may  be  found,  not  only  in  the  original  documents,  but  also
in  numerous  works,  as  those  of  Bishop  Stillingfleet  and  others,  written  to  expose  the  im-
postures of  the  Romish  Church.  The  Kev.  Jolin  Gumming  of  London,  in  his  Lectures
on  RumanUm  (IJoston,  185-i),  has  cited  from  these  official  records  examples  sufTiciently
numerous  to  satisfy  any  ordinary  man.  For  example,  it  is  said  of  Santa  Rosa  Maria  of
Lima,  among  many  other  things,  that  the  Virgin  often  appeared  to  her  and  talked  with
her;  that  the  Saviour  came  toiler  in  the  form  of  a  child  leaning  on  his  mother's  arm,  to  col-
lect roses  scattered  on  the  ground,  and  then  the  Divine  infant  took  one  of  them  and  said
''Thou  art  this  rose."  (Gumming,  p.  029.)  When  her  tomb  was  opened  tifteen  years
after  death,  her  remains  "  exhaled  the  odor  of  roses."  Of  St.  Philip  Neri  it  is  said  that  he
was  so  agitated  by  the  love  of  God,  that  the  Lord  broke  two  of  his  ribs  to  give  freer  action
to  his  heart,  (p.  634.)  Of  Sister  JLiria  Francisca,  it  is  certified  that  when  placing  a  holy
Bambino  (/.  e.,  image  of  the  infant  Jesus)  into  the  manger,  such  a  light  emanated  from  the
Bambino  as  to  blind  her  for  three  days.  On  another  occasion,  when  dressing  the  image,
she  said,  "  3Iy  little  child,  if  you  do  not  stretch  out  your  feet  I  cannot  put  on  your  shoes
and  stockings,"  and  the  wooden  image  immediately  stretched  out  its  feet.  It  is  also  asserted
that  she  obtained  from  Clnist  permission  to  suffer  vicariously  for  a  limited  time,  in  the
place  of  some  of  her  friemls,  the  pains  of  purgatory,  and  accordingly  endured  for  a  month
the  most  intense  agonies.  It  is  further  said,  that  she  had  imparted  to  her  the  sufferings  of
Christ,  his  bloody  sweat,  the  anguish  of  the  crown  of  thorns,  his  scourging  and  agonies  on.
the  enns,  and  had  his  wounds  visibly  impressed  upon  her.  (Gumming,  pp.  649-653.)  Car-
dinal 'Wiseman  edited  a  book  including  the  lives  of  several  saints,  and  among  them  that
of  St.  Veronica  Giuliani,  who  was  canonized  so  recently  as  1S39.  Of  this  saint,  he  says,
among  many  similar  things,  that  God  recompensed  her  readiness  to  drink  of  the  chalice  o/


§  13.]  THE   NINTH   COMMANDMENT.  457

There  are,  however,  two  special  and  standing  miracles  to  which
Romanists  are  fully  committed,  and  which  in  the  judgment  prob-
ably of  nine  tenths  of  the  educated  men  in  Christendom  are  bare-
faced impostures.  The  Church  of  Rome  by  its  highest  dignitaries
and  representatives  asserted  and  still  continues  to  assert  that  the
house  in  which  the  Virgin  Mary  dwelt  in  N.azareth  was,  when
that  city  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  infidels,  transported  by  angels
and  deposited  at  Loretto,  a  village  a  few  miles  from  Ancona  in
Italy.  The  first  step  in  this  transportation  occurred  in  1291  from
Nazareth  to  Dalmatia ;  the  second  in  1294  to  the  neighbourhood
of  Recanati  ;  and  the  third  in  1295  to  its  present  location.  The
house  is  thirty  feet  long,  fifteen  wide,  and  eighteen  high,  and  is
built  of  wood  and  brick.  It  is  now  greatly  adorned,  ha\dng  a
silver  door  and  a  silver  grating,  and  stands  in  the  midst  of  a  large
church  erected  over  and  around  it.  Its  shrine  was  enriched  with
offerings  of  priceless  value,  and  is  regarded  as  the  Mecca  of  Italy  ;
the  number  of  pilgrims  amounting  sometimes  to  two  hundred
thousand  in  a  single  year.  The  annual  income  of  the  house,  apart
from  presents,  is  stated  to  be  thirty  thousand  dollars.^  The  orig-
inal house  is  said  to  be  a  facsimile  of  hundreds  of  others  in  the
neighborhood  of  Ancona.  It  is  obvious  that  such  a  frail  building
could  not,  without  a  miracle,  have  been  preserved  thirteen  hun-
dred years ;  another  miracle  would  be  required  to  identify  it  after
so  long  a  period ;  another  stupendous  miracle  to  account  for  its
transportation  to  Dalmatia ;  and  two  more  nearly  as  great  to  ex-
plain its  reaching  its  present  location.  The  only  conceivable  de-
sign of  all  these  miracles,  must  be  to  sustain  the  doctrines  and
authority  of  the  Romish  Church,  and  to  pour  money  into  its  treas-
ury. Both  these  objects  they  have  accomplished  to  a  wonderful
degi'ee.  No  man  who  is  not  prepared  to  accept  all  these  mira-
cles without  a  particle  of  evidence,  can  rationally  believe  in  the
Church  of  Rome.

The  other  standing  miracle  for  which  the  Romish  Church  is
responsible  before  the  whole  world,  is  the  annual  liquefaction  of
the  blood  of  St.  Januarius  at  Naples.  The  tradition  concerning
him  is,  that  he  was  thrown  by  his  heathen  persecutors  into  a
heated  oven,  where  he  remained  three  days  uninjured.  He  was
afterwards  exposed  to  wild  beasts,  who  became  as  lambs  in  his

suffering,  by  making  her  a  partaker  of  the  torments  of  Christ's  passion.  Christ  accordingly
appeared  to  her  and  took  the  crown  of  thorns  and  placed  it  on  her  head.  (Gumming,  pp.
665-G75.)  Such  are  some  of  the  miracles  on  which  Rome  rests  her  claims  to  be  the  only
true  Church  and  the  infallible  teacher  of  man.

1  Cotwersationc-Lexicon,  7th  edit.  Leipzig,  1827,  art.  "Loretto."


458  PART  III.     Cii.   XIX.  — THE   LAW.

presence.  He  was  finally  beheaded,  A.  D.  305.  A  woman  is
said  to  have  canght  and  preserved  a  portion  of  his  blood.  This
vnth  other  of  his  remains  was  carried  to  Naples,  being  iden-
tified as  usual  by  a  miracle,  as  it  is  said,  "  Neapolitan!  beatum
Janaarium  revelatione  commoti  sustiilerunt."  The  blood,  pre-
served with  great  care  in  the  cathedral,  is  contained  in  two  crystal
vials,  a  larger  and  smaller  one.  In  its  ordinary  state  it  is  a  hard
substance,  sometimes  represented  as  filling  the  vial,  and  sometimes
as  appearing  in  a  hard  round  lump.  The  blood  of  other  saints  is
said  to  liquefy  on  the  anniversaries  of  their  martyrdom,  but  the
blood  of  Januarius  becomes  liquid  whenever  the  vial  containing
it  is  brought  near  to  the  skull  of  the  saint,  which  is  still  preserved.
It  turns  readily  when  good  is  impending,  and  refuses  to  change
when  evil  is  at  hand.  It  thus  serves  the  purpose  of  an  oracle.
It  is  annually  produced  and  exhibited  to  crowds  of  devotees
gathered  in  the  cathedral  on  the  first  Sunday  of  May,  and  also  on
the  nineteenth  day  of  September  and  twentieth  of  December,
and  at  other  times  on  extraordinary  emergencies.  To  this  miracle
the  Church  of  Rome  is  fully  committed  as  it  is  exhibited  every
year  under  the  eyes  of  the  pope  and  the  highest  dignitaries  of  the
Church.  There  is  not  a  particle  of  evidence  for  the  facts  above
stated  concerning  this  saint,  which  may  not  be  pleaded  for  any
one  of  the  thousands  of  stories  of  fairies  and  witches  with  which
the  histories  of  all  nations  abound,  except  the  liquefaction  of  the
blood.  As  to  that,  however,  it  is  to  be  said  that  there  is  no  evi-
dence that  the  substance  contained  in  the  vial  is  blood ;  or  if  blood,
that  it  is  human  blood  ;  or  if  human,  tliat  it  is  the  blood  of  Jan-
uarius ;  or  if  his,  that  the  cause  of  the  liquefaction  is  bringing
the  vial  into  proximity  to  the  saint's  cranium.  All  that  the  people
are  allowed  to  see,  the  change  of  a  dark-red  solid  substance  into
a  fluid,  any  chemist  could  effect  at  five  minutes'  notice.  It  is  true,
as  Dr.  Newman  admits,  that  these  miracles  do  not  so  much  prove
the  truth  of  the  Church,  as  the  Church  proves  the  truth  of  the
miracles.     Then  what  are  they  worth.

Melies.

Relics  are  the  remains  of  sacred  persons  and  things,  which  are
not  only  to  be  cherished  as  memorials,  but  to  which  "  cultus  "  or
a  certain  degree  of  religious  Avorship  is  due,  and  which  are  imbued
with  supernatural  power.  They  heal  the  sick,  restore  sight  to
the  blind,  hearing  to  the  deaf,  soundness  to  the  maimed,  and
even,  at  times,  life  to  the  dead.     Of  these  the  Catholic  world  is


§  13.]  THE   NINTH   COMMANDMENT.  459

full.^  Dr.  NeAvman  in  his  "  Lectures  on  tlie  Present  Position  of
Catholics  in  England,"  delivered  after  his  reconciliation  with  the
Church  of  Rome,  says,  "  At  Rome  there  is  the  True  Cross,  the
Crib  of  Bethlehem,  and  the  Chair  of  St.  Peter ;  portions  of  the
Crown  of  Thorns  are  kept  at  Paris  ;  the  Holy  Coat  is  shoAvn  at
Treves  ;  the  Winding-sheet  at  Turin  :  at  Monza  the  iron  Crown
is  formed  out  of  a  nail  of  the  Cross ;  and  another  nail  is  claimed
for  the  Duomo  of  Milan  ;  and  pieces  of  Our  Lady's  habit  are  to
be  seen  in  the  Escurial.  The  Agnus  Dei,  blest  medals,  the
Scapula,  the  cord  of  St.  Francis,  all  are  the  medium  of  divine
manifestations  and  graces."  ^

There  is  here  opened  an  illimitable  field  for  pious  fraud.  First,
in  palming  upon  the  credulous  people  spurious  relics,  and,  sec-
ondly in  falsely  attributing  to  them  supernatural  power.  It  has
been  proved  in  many  cases  that  remains  passed  off  as  relics  of  the
saints  were  bones  of  animals.  In  other  cases  it  is  impossible  that
all  should  be  genuine,  as  bodies,  or  the  same  parts  of  bodies,  of  one
and  the  same  man  are  exhibited  in  different  places.  There  is,
as  has  often  been  asserted,  enough  wood  of  the  true  cross,  held
sacred  in  different  localities,  out  of  which  to  construct  a  large
building.  Writing  not  long  after  the  alleged  discovery  of  the
cross  on  which  the  Saviour  died,  Cyril  of  Jerusalem  says,  "  Sanc-
tum crucis  lignum  testatur,  quod  ad  hodiernum  usque  diem  apud
nos  conspicitur,  ac  per  eos  qui  fide  impellente  ex  eo  frusta  decerp-
unt  orbem  fere  totum  hinc  jam  opplevit."  And  again,  he  speaks
of  "  crucis  lignum,  quod  per  particulas  ex  hoc  loco  per  totum
orbem  distributum  est."  ^  St.  Paulinas,  who  is  one  of  the  long
Hst  of  witnesses  quoted  in  defence  of  the  veneration  of  relics,  says
"  that  a  portion  of  the  cross  kept  at  Jerusalem  gave  off  fragments
of  itself  without  diminishing."     This  is  the  only  way  in  which

1  The  language  of  the  Council  of  Trent  in  reference  to  the  honour  due  to  the  relics  of  the
saints  has  already  been  quoted  when  treating  of  the  second  commandment.  Perrone  in  his
PrmlecHones  Theologicce,  De  Cultu  Sanctorum,  iv.  71,  edit.  Paris,  1861,  vol.  ii.  p.  112,  b,
adduces  as  one  of  his  arguments  in  favour  of  the  worship  of  relics  the  declaration  of  the
Epistle  of  the  Church  of  Smyrna,  that  the  heathen  feared  "  ne  Christian!,  relicto  Christo,
Polycarpum  adorare  inciperent;  omni  idcirco  qua  poterant  ratione  raartyrum  corpora,
ne  a  Christianis  colerentur,  ethnici  gladiatorum  corporibus  commiscebant;  in  amphitheatris
feris,  in  aquis  piscibus  ut  vorarentur  exponebant;  aut  saltern  igne  ilia  cremabant,  cinere
dispergentes,  uti  ex  martyrum  actis  constat."  It  was  "  adoration,"  "  worship,"  that  was
to  be  rendered  to  these  relics.  The  distinctions  between  the  different  kinds  of  worship,  had
little  effect  on  the  popular  mind.  Perrone  himself  teaches  that  the  "  material  heart  of
Christ  "  was  to  be  adored  latrice  cultu.     De  Incarnatione,  ii.  iv.  454;  Ibid.  p.  81,  a.

2  Quoted  by  Dr.  Gumming  in  his  Lectures  on  Romanism,  p.  595.

3  Catechesis,  x.  9,  and  xiii.  2;  Schram,  Analysis  Patrum,  Augsburg,  1787,  vol.  x.  pp.
175,  194.


460  PART  III.     Ch.   XIX.  — the   law.

the  fact  in  question  can  be  accounted  for.  If  this  solution  be  not
admitted,  then  it  must  be  acknowledged  that,  at  least,  the  great
majority  of  the  portions  of  the  cross  now  on  exhibition  must
be  spurious.  There  is  no  historical  evidence  of  any  value  that
any  portion  of  the  true  cross  has  been  preserved.  Nothing  was
heard  of  it  until  A.  D.  327.  About  tliat  time,  according  to  the
legend,  the  Empress  Helena,  in  searching  for  the  Holy  Sepulchre,
found  at  the  depth  of  thirty  feet  from  the  surface  of  the  earth,
three  crosses,  assumed  to  be  those  mentioned  in  the  Gospels.  The
true  cross  was  identified,  some  say,  by  its  inscription  ;  others,  by  a
sick  woman  being  touched  by  the  one  and  the  other  without  effect,
but  restored  to  j)erfect  health  the  moment  the  true  cross  came  in
contact  with  her  body.  Others  say  that  a  corpse  was  restored
to  life  by  the  touch  of  the  true  cross.  In  reference  to  this  account
it  may  be  remarked,  (1.)  That  there  is  a  strong  antecedent  im-
probability that  the  crosses  used  on  Calvary  were  ever  buried.
The  assumption  that  it  was  the  custom  of  the  Jews  to  bury
those  implements  of  torture,  rests  on  a  very  precarious  foundation.
(2.)  The  cross  was  a  very  sKght  structure,  as  it  could  be  borne
by  one  man ;  and,  therefore,  if  buried  superficially,  as  it  must
have  been  at  first,  it  could  hardly  have  continued  undecayed  three
hundred  years,  especially  considering  the  ploughings  and  over-
turnings  to  which  the  Holy  City  was  subjected.  (3.)  The  histor-
ical evidence  in  support  of  this  legend  is  of  little  account.  Cyril
of  Jerusalem,  twenty  years  after  the  date  assigned  to  the  discovery,
does  indeed  say  that  the  true  cross  was  then  in  .lerusalem,  as  Je-
rome does  some  sixty  years  later,  but  neither  of  them  makes  any
mention  of  Helena  in  connection  with  the  cross  or  the  sepulchre.
It  may,  therefore,  be  admitted  that  what  passed  for  the  true  cross
was  then  in  Jerusalem,  but  the  account  of  its  recovery  and  iden-
tification remains  without  support.  (4.)  The  historian  Eusebius,
a  contemporary  and  eye-witness,  makes  no  mention  of  the  finding
of  the  cross,  an  event  the  belief  in  which  agitated  all  Christendom,
and  led  to  the  immense  aggrandizement  of  the  bishopric  of  Jeru-
salem. It  is  inconceivable  that  such  an  event,  if  within  his  knowl-
edge, should  have  been  passed  over  in  silence  by  such  a  liistorian,
who  had  so  much  at  heart  to  enchance  the  glory  of  his  patron  the
Emperor.  (5.)  Calvary  and  the  sepulchre  we  know  were  without
the  city.  The  place  where  the  cross  is  said  to  have  been  found  is
in  the  centre  of  the  modern  city.  Whether  the  city  has  so  changed
its  limits  as  to  bring  the  place  of  the  crucifixion  and  burial  of
Christ  within  its  boundaries,  is  a  much  debated  question.     Dr.


§13.]  THE  NrNTH   COMMANDMENT.  461

Robinson,  one  of  the  most  reliable  of  explorers,  says,  "  The  hy-
pothesis which  makes  the  second  wall  so  run  as  to  exclude  the
alleged  site  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre,  is  on  topographical  grounds
untenable  and  impossible."  ^  That  is,  assuming  the  truth  of  the
statement  of  the  Evangelists  that  Christ  was  crucified  without  the
walls,  it  is  topographically  impossible  that  the  alleged  site  of  the
Holy  Sepulchre  should  be  the  true  one.  And  thus  the  whole
foundation  of  the  legend  of  finding  the  cross  on  that  spot  falls  to
the  ground.  Dr.  Robinson  winds  up  his  long  discussion  of  this
question  in  the  following  words  :  "  Thus  in  every  view  which  I
have  been  able  to  take  of  the  question,  both  topographical  and
historical,  whether  on  the  spot  or  in  the  closet,  and  in  spite  of  all
my  previous  prepossessions,  I  am  led  irresistibly  to  the  conclusion,
that  the  Golgotha  and  the  tomb  now  shown  in  the  Chm^ch  of  the
Holy  Sepulchre,  are  not  upon  the  real  places  of  the  crucifixion  and
resurrection  of  our  Lord.  The  alleged  discovery  of  them  by  the
aged  and  credulous  Helena,  like  her  discovery  of  the  cross,  may
not  improbably  have  been  the  work  of  pious  fraud.  It  would
perhaps  not  be  doing  injustice  to  the  Bishop  Macarius  and  his
clergy,  if  we  regard  the  whole  as  a  well  laid  and  successful  plan
for  restormg  to  Jerusalem  its  former  consideration,  and  elevating
his  see  to  a  higher  degree  of  influence  and  dignity."  ^

Dr.  Newman  says  we  must  either  admit  the  discovery  of  the
cross,  or  believe  the  Church  of  Jerusalem  guilty  of  imposture.^
It  is  hard  to  decide  how  much  is  due  in  this  matter  to  fraud,  and
how  much  to  superstitious  credulity.  That  both  prevailed  for
ages  in  the  Church  is  an  undoubted  historical  fact.  Are  we  to  be-
have all  that  Gregory  of  Nyssa  said  of  Gregory  of  Neo-Caesarea,
or  what  the  fathers  relate  of  St.  Anthony  ;  are  we  to  admit  all  the
legends  of  the  saints,  to  avoid  charging  creduKty  or  fraud  against
good  men  ?  It  is  lamentable  that  good  men  advocated  the  prin-
ciple that  it  is  right  to  deceive  for  a  good  end.  It  is  undeniable
that  the  doctrine  of  pious  frauds  has  been  avowed  and  acted  upon
in  the  Church  of  Rome  ever  since  it  began  to  aspire  to  ecclesiastical
supremacy.  Was  not  the  pretended  donation  of  Italy  by  Con-
stantino to  the  pope  a  fraud  ?  Are  not  the  Isidorian  Decretals  a
fraud  ?  Are  not  the  miracles  wrought  in  proof  of  the  dehvery  of
souls  from  purgatory,  frauds  ?     Is  not  the  alleged  house  of  the

1  Biblical  Researches  in  Palestine,  Mount  Sinai,  and  Arabia  Petrcea.  A  Journal  of  Trav-
els in  the  year  1833,  by  E.  Robinson  and  E.  Smith.  Drawn  up  from  the  Original  Dia-
ries, etc.  By  Edward  Robinson,  Professor  of  Biblical  Literature  in  the  Union  Theological
Seminary,  New  York.    Boston,  18-11,  vol.  ii.  p.  69.

2  Ibid.  p.  80.  8  Essays  on  Miracles,  p.  297.


462  PART   III.     Ch.   XIX.  — the   law.

Virgin  Mary  at  Loretto  a  fraud  ?  Is  not  the  foot-print  (ex  pede
Hercules)  on  a  marble  slab  in  the  Cathedi-al  of  Rouen,  a  fraud  ?
Is  not  the  feather  from  the  wing  of  the  Archangel  Gabriel  pre-
served in  one  of  the  Cathedrals  of  Spain,  a  fraud  ?  The  whole
Catholic  world  is  full  of  frauds  of  this  kind  ;  and  the  only  possible
ground  for  Romanists  to  take  is,  that  it  is  right  to  deceive  the
people  for  their  good.  "  Populus  vult  decipi,"  is  the  excuse  a
Romish  priest  once  made  to  Coleridge  in  reference  to  this  matter.

Secondly,  pious  frauds  are  practised,  not  only  in  the  exhibition
of  false  relics,  but  also  in  falsely  attributing  to  them  supernatural
power.  Dr.  Newman  says  :  "  The  store  of  relics  is  inexhaustible ;
they  are  multiplied  through  all  lands,  and  each  particle  of  each
has  in  it  at  least  a  dormant,  perhaps  an  energetic  virtue  of  super-
natural operation."  ^  Bellarmin  of  course  teaches  the  same^  doc-
trine. Cyril  of  Jerusalem  says,  "  Et  Elisaeum  qui  semel  et  iterum
suscitavit,  dum  viveret,  et  post  mortem  :  vivus  resurrectionem  per
suam  ipsius  animam  operatus  est,  ut  autem  non  animse  solum
justorum  honorarentur,  sed  crederetur  etiam  in  justorum  corpori-
bus  jacere  vim,  projectus  in  monumentum  Elissei  mortuus  proph-
ets corpus  attingens,  vitam  concepit,  4  Kin.  iv.  13,  ut  ostende-
retur,  absente  etiam  anima  inesse  vim  corpori  sanctorum  propter
animam  justam,  quae  in  eo  habitaverat."  ^  Dr.  Newman  says
that  miracles  wrought  by  relics  are  of  daily  occurrence  in  all
parts  of  the  world.  It  is  not  that  people  are  favourably  af-
fected by  them  through  the  imagination  or  feelings,  but  that
the  rehcs  themselves  are  imbued  with  supernatural  power.
Thus  Dr.  Newman,  one  of  the  most  cultivated  men  of  the  nine-
teenth century,  has  come  round  to  the  pure,  simple,  undiluted
fetichism  of  Africa.

Our  Lord  warned  his  disciples  against  being  deceived  by  lying
wonders.  The  Bible  (Deut.  xiii.  1-3)  teaches  that  any  sign  or
wonder  given  or  wrought  in  support  of  any  doctrine  contrary  to
the  Word  of  God,  is,  mthout  further  examination,  to  be  pro-
nounced false.  If,  therefore,  such  doctrines  as  the  supremacy  of
the  pope  ;  the  power  of  priests  to  forgive  sins  ;  the  absolute  neces-
sity of  the  sacraments  as  the  only  channels  of  communicating  the
merits  and  grace  of  Christ ;  the  necessity  of  auricular  confession  ;
purgatory ;  the  adoration  of  the  Virgin  and  of  the  consecrated
wafer  ;  and  the  worship  of  saints  and  angels,  are  contrary  to  the

1  Lectures  on  the  Position  of  Catholics  in  England,  p.  284.

2  See  above  pp.  300,  301.

8  Catechesis  Illuminandonim,  xviii.  7;  Schram,  Analysis  Pati-um,  Augsburg,  1789,  vol.  s
pp.  245,  246.


§11.]  THE   TENTH   COMMANDMENT.  463

Holy  Scriptures,  then  to  a  certainty  all  the  pretended  miracles
wrought  in  their  support  are  "  lying  wonders  ;  "  and  those  who
promulgate  and  sustain  them  are  guilty  of  pious  fraud.  If,  there-
fore, as  Newman  says,  The  Catholic  Church,  fi-om  east  to  west,
from  north  to  south,  is,  according  to  our  conceptions,  hung  with
miracles ;  so  much  the  worse.  It  is  hung  all  over  with  the  symbols
or  ensigns  of  apostasy.

§  14.    The  Tenth  Commandment

Is  a  general  prohibition  of  covetousness.  "  Thou  shalt  not
covet,"  is  a  comjorehensive  command..  Thou  shalt  not  inordi-
nately desire  what  thou  hast  not ;  and  especially  what  belongs
to  thy  neighbour.  It  includes  the  positive  command  to  be  con-
tented with  the  allotments  of  Providence ;  and  the  negative
injunction  not  to  repine,  or  complain  on  account  of  the  dealings
of  God  with  us,  or  to  envy  the  lot  or  possessions  of  others.  The
command  to  be  contented  does  not  imply  indifference,  and  it  does
not  enjoin  slothfulness.  A  cheerful  and  contented  disposition  is
perfectly  compatible  with  a  due  appreciation  of  the  good  things  of
this  Avorld,  and  diligence  in  the  use  of  all  proper  means  to  im-
prove our  condition  in  life.

Contentment  can  have  no  other  rational  foundation  than  relig-
ion. Submission  to  the  inevitable  is  only  stoicism,  or  apathy,
or  despair.  The  religions  of  the  East,  and  of  the  ancient  world
generally,  so  far  as  they  were  the  subject  of  thought,  being  essen-
tially pantheistic,  could  produce  nothing  but  a  passive  consent  to
be  borne  along  for  a  definite  period  on  the  irresistible  current  of
events,  and  then  lost  in  the  abyss  of  unconscious  being.  The
poor  and  the  miserable  could  Avith  such  a  faith  have  little  ground
for  contentment,  and  they  would  be  under  the  strongest  tempta-
tion to  envy  the  rich  and  the  fortunate.  But  if  a  man  believes
that  there  is  a  personal  God  infinite  in  power,  msdom,  and  love ;
if  he  believes  that  God's  providence  extends  over  all  creatures
and  over  all  events ;  and  if  he  believes  that  God  orders  every-
thing, not  only  for  the  best  on  the  whole,  but  also  for  the  best  for
each  individual  who  puts  his  trust  in  Him  and  acquiesces  in  his
will,  then  not  to  be  contented  with  the  allotments  of  infinite
wisdom  and  love  must  be  folly.  Faith  in  the  truths  referred
to  cannot  fail  to  produce  contentment,  wherever  that  faith  is  real.
When  we  further  take  into  view  the  peculiar  Christian  aspects
of  the  case ;  when  we  remember  that  this  universal  government
is  administered  by  Jesus  Christ,  into  whose  hands,  as  He  himself


464  PART  III.    Ch.  xtx.  — the  law.

tells  us,  all  power  in  heaven  and  earth  has  been  committed,  then
we  Icnow  that  our  lot  is  determined  by  Him  who  loved  us  and
gave  Himself  for  us,  and  who  watches  over  his  people  as  a  shep-
herd watches  over  his  flock,  so  that  a  hair  of  our  heads  cannot
perish  without  his  permission.  And  when  we  think  of  the
eternal  future  which  He  has  prepared  for  us,  then  we  see  that
the  sorrows  of  this  life  are  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the
glory  that  shall  be  revealed  in  us,  and  that  our  light  afflictions,
which  are  but  for  a  moment,  shall  work  out  for  us  a  far  more
exceeding  and  an  eternal  Aveight  of  glory ;  then  mere  content-
ment is  elevated  to  a  peace  which  passes  all  understanding,  and
even  to  a  joy  which  is  full  of  glory.  All  this  is  exemphfied  in
the  history  of  the  people  of  God  as  recorded  in  the  Bible.  Paul
could  not  only  say,  "  I  have  learned,  in  whatsoever  state  I  am,
tliercAAath  to  be  content "  (Phil.  iv.  11)  ;  but  he  could  also  say :
"  I  take  pleasure  in  infirmities,  in  reproaches,  in  necessities,  in
persecutions,  in  distresses  for  Christ's  sake."  (2  Cor.  xii.  10.)
This  has  measurably  been  the  experience  of  thousands  of  be-
lievers in  all  ages.  Of  all  people  in  the  world  Christians  are
bound  in  whatsoever  state  they  are  therewith  to  be  content.  It
is  easy  to  utter  these  words,  and  easy  for  those  in  comfort  to
imagine  that  they  are  exercising  the  grace  of  contentment ;  but
when  a  man  is  crushed  down  by  poverty  and  sickness,  surrounded
by  those  whose  wants  he  cannot  supply ;  seemg  those  whom  he
loves,  suffering  and  wearing  aAvay  under  their  privations,  then
contentment  and  submission  are  among  the  highest  and  rarest  of
Christian  graces.  Nevertheless,  it  is  better  to  be  Lazarus  than
Dives.

The  second  form  of  evil  condemned  by  this  commandment
is  envy.  This  is  something  more  than  an  inordinate  desire  of  un-
possessed good.  It  includes  regret  that  others  should  have  what
we  do  not  enjoy  ;  a  feeling  of  hatred  and  malignity  towards  those
more  favoured  than  ourselves ;  and  a  desire  to  deprive  them  of
their  advantages.  This  a  real  cancer  of  the  soul ;  producing  tor-
ture and  eating  out  all  right  feelings.  There  are,  of  course,  all
degrees  of  this  sin,  from  the  secret  satisfaction  experienced  at  the
misfortunes  of  others,  or  the  unexpressed  desire  that  evil  may  as-
sail them  or  that  they  may  be  reduced  to  the  same  level  with  our-
selves, to  the  Satanic  hatred  of  the  happy  because  of  their  happi-
ness, and  the  determination,  if  possible,  to  render  them  miserable.
There  is  more  of  this  dreadful  spirit  in  the  human  heart,  than
we  are  willuig  to  acknowledge.     Montesquieu  says  that  every


§  14.]  THE   TENTH   COJkEVIANDMENT.  465

man  has  a  secret  satisfaction  in  the  misfortunes  even  of  his
dearest  friends.  As  envy  is  the  antithesis  of  love,  it  is  of  all
sins  the  most  opposed  to  the  nature  of  God,  and  more  effectually
than  any  other  excludes  us  from  his  fellowship.

Thirdly,  the  Scriptures,  however,  make  mention  most  fre-
quently of  covetousness  under  the  form  of  an  inordinate  desire  of
wealth.  The  man  of  whom  covetousness  is  the  characteristic
has  the  acquisition  of  wealth  as  the  main  object  of  his  life.  This
fills  his  mind,  engrosses  his  affections,  and  absorbs  his  energy.
Of  covetousness  in  this  form  the  Apostle  says  it  is  the  root  of
all  evil.  That  is,  there  is  no  evil  —  from  meanness,  deceit,  and
fraud,  up  to  murder  —  to  the  commission  of  which  covetousness
has  not  prompted  men,  or  to  which  it  does  not  always  threaten
to  impel  them.  Of  the  covetous  man  in  this  sense  of  the
word  the  Bible  says,  (1.)  That  he  cannot  enter  heaven.
(1  Cor.  vi.  10.)  (2.)  That  he  is  an  idolater.  (Eph.  v.  5.)
Wealth  is  his  God,  i.  e.,  that  to  which  he  gives  his  heart  and
consecrates  his  life.     (3.)  That  God' abhors  him.     (Ps.  x.  3.)

This  commandment  has  a  special  interest,  as  it  was  the  means,
as  St.  Paul  tells  us,  of  leading  him  to  the  knowledge  of  sin.  "  I
had  not  kno^vn  lust,  except  the  law  had  said,  Thou  shalt  not
covet."  (Rom.  vii.  7.)  Most  of  the  other  commandments  for-
bid external  acts,  but  this  forbids  a  state  of  the  heart.  It  shows
that  no  external  obedience  can  fulfil  the  demands  of  the  law ;
that  God  looks  upon  the  heart,  that  He  approves  or  disapproves
of  the  secret  affections  and  purposes  of  the  soul ;  that  a  man  may
be  a  pharisee,  pure  outwardly  as  a  whited  sepulchre,  but  in-
wardly full  of  dead  men's  bones  and  of  all  uncleanness.

VOL.  in.  30


CHAPTER  XX.

THE  MEAl^^S   OF   GRACE.

By  means  of  grace  are  not  meant  every  instrumentality  which
God  may  please  to  make  the  means  of  spiritual  edification  to  his
children.  The  phrase  is  intended  to  indicate  those  institutions
which  God  has  ordained  to  be  the  ordinary  channels  of  grace,  z,  e.,
of  the  supernatural  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  the  souls  of
men.  The  means  of  grace,  according  to  the  standards  of  our
Church,  are  the  word,  sacraments,  and  prayer.

§  X.  The  Word.

1.  The-  word  of  God,  as  here  understood,  is  the  Bible.  And
the  Bible  is  the  collection  of  the  canonical  books  of  the  Old  and
New  Testaments.

2.  These  books  are  the  word  of  God  because  they  were  written
by  men  who  were  prophets,  his  organs,  or  spokesmen,  in  such  a
sense  that  whatever  they  declare  to  be  true  or  obligatory,  God
declares  to  be  true  and  binding.  These  topics  have  already  been
considered  in  the  first  volume  of  this  work,  so  far  as  they  fall
within  the  limits  of  systematic  theology.

3.  The  word  of  God,  so  far  as  adults  are  concerned,  is  an  in-
dispensable means  of  salvation.  True  religion  never  has  existed,
and  never  can  exist,  where  the  truths  revealed  in  the  Bible  are
unknown.  This  point  also  has  already  been  discussed  when
speaking  of  the  insufiiciency  of  natural  religion.

4.  The  word  of  God  is  not  only  necessar}^  to  salvation,  but  it
is  also  divinely  efficacious  to  the  accomplishment  of  that  end.
This  appears,  (,«.)  From  the  commission  given  to  the  Church.
After  his  resurrection  our  Lord  said  to  his  disciples :  "Go  ye
therefore,  and  teach  all  nations,  baptizing  them  in  the  name  of
the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  teaching
them  to  observe  all  things,  whatsoever  I  have  commanded  you :
and,  lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world.
Amen."  (Matt,  xxviii.  19,  20).  The  words  as  recorded  in  Mark
xvi.  15,  16,  are,  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the  gos-


§  1.]  THE   WORD.  467

pel  to  every  creature.  He  that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be
saved;  but  he  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned."  The  end  to
be  accomphshed,  was  the  salvation  of  men.  The  means  of  its
accomplishment  was  teaching.  The  disciples  were  to  teach  what
Christ  had  taught  them.  That  is,  they  were  to  teach  the  Gos-
pel to  every  creature  mider  heaven.  All  means  derive  their  effi-
ciency from  the  ordinance  of  God ;  as  He  has  ordained  the  Gospel
to  be  the  means  of  salvation,  it  must  be  efficacious  to  that  end.
(5.)  This  appears  further  from  the  manner  in  which  the  Apostles
executed  the  commission  which  they  had  received.  They  went
everywhere,  preaching  Christ.  They  were  sent  to  teach ;  and
teaching  was  their  whole  work.  "  I  determined,"  said  Paul,  "not
to  know  anything  among  you,  save  Jesus  Christ  and  him  cruci-
fied." (1  Cor.  ii.  2.)  (c.)  The  power  of  the  Word  is  proved  from
many  direct  assertions  in  the  Bible.  Paul  tells  the  Romans  that
he  was  not  ashamed  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ,  because  "it  is  the
power  of  God  unto  salvation."  (Rom.  i.  16.)  To  the  Corinthians
he  says,  in  view  of  the  utter  impotence  of  the  wisdom  of  the
world,  that  "  it  pleased  God  by  the  foolishness  of  preaching  to
save  them  that  believe."  (1  Cor.  i.  21.)  The  preaching  of  Christ
crucified  was  "  unto  the  Jews  a  stumbling-block,  and  unto  the
Greeks  foolishness  ;  but  unto  them  which  are  called,  both  Jews
and  Greeks,  Christ  the  power  of  God,  and  the  wisdom  of  God."
(Vers.  23,  24.)  In  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  it  is  said :  "  The
word  of  God  is  quick,  and  powerful,  and  sharper  than  any  two-
edged  sword,  piercing  even  to  the  dividing  asunder  of  soul  and
spirit,  and  of  the  joints  and  marrow,  and  is  a  discemer  of  the
thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart."   (Heb.  iv.  12.)

The  sacred  writers,  under  the  guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  are
exuberant  in  their  praise  of  the  Word  of  God,  as  its  power  was
revealed  in  their  own  experience.  "  The  law  of  the  Loed,"
says  the  Psalmist,  "  is  perfect,  converting  the  soul."  (Ps.  xix.  7.)
By  the  law  of  the  Lord  is  meant  the  whole  revelation  which  God
has  made  in  his  Word  to  determine  the  faith,  form  the  character,
and  control  the  conduct  of  men.  It  is  this  revelation  which  the
Psalmist  pronounces  perfect,  that  is,  perfectly  adapted  to  accom-
plish the  end  of  man's  sanctification  and  salvation.  "  Thy  word,"
he  says,  "  is  a  lamp  unto  my  feet,  and  a  Hght  unto  my  path."
(Ps.  cxix.  105.)  "  The  testimony  of  the  LoED  is  sure,  making  wise
the  simple  :  the  statutes  of  the  Loed  are  right,  rejoicing  the  heart :
the  conmiandment  of  the  LoED  is  pure,  enlightening  the  eyes  :
the  fear  of  the  Loed  is  clean,  enduring  forever:  the  judgments


468         PART  III.     Ch.   XX.  — the  MEANS    OF   GRACE.

of  the  Lord  are  true  and  righteous  altogether.  More  to  be  de-
sired are  they  than  gold,  yea,  than  much  fine  gold ;  sweeter  also
than  honey  and  the  honeycomb."  (Ps.  xix.  7-10.)  Almost  every
one  of  the  hundred  and  seventy -six  verses  of  the  one  hundred  and
nineteenth  Psalm  contains  some  recognition  of  the  excellence  or
power  of  the  Word  of  God.  "  Is  not  my  word  like  as  a  fire?
saith  the  Lord  ;  and  like  a  hammer  that  breaketh  the  rock  in
pieces?"     (Jer.  xxiii.  29.)

In  the  New  Testament  the  same  divine  efficacy  is  attributed  to
the  Word  of  God.  It  is  the  gospel  of  our  salvation,  ^.  e.,  that  by
which  we  are  saved.  Paul  said  that  Christ  commissioned  him  to
preach  the  Gospel  to  the  Gentiles,  saying,  for  this  purpose  I  ap-
peared unto  thee  to  make  thee  minister  and  a  witness,  delivering
thee  from  the  Gentiles,  "  unto  whom  now  I  send  thee,  to  open
their  eyes,  and  to  turn  them  from  darkness  to  light,  and  from  the
power  of  Satan  unto  God,  that  they  may  receive  forgiveness  of
sins,  and  inheritance  among  them  which  are  sanctified  by  faith
that  is  in  me."  (Acts  xxvi.  17,  18.)  All  this  was  to  be  effected
by  the  Gospel.  The  same  Apostle  writing  to  Timothy  says  :
"  From  a  child  thou  hast  knoAvn  the  Holy  Scriptures,  which  are
able  to  make  thee  wise  unto  salvation,  through  faith  which  is  in
Christ  Jesus.  All  Scripture  is  given  by  inspiration  of  God,  and  is
profitable  for  doctrine,  for  reproof,  for  correction,  for  instruction
in  righteousness."  (2  Tim.  iii.  15,  16.)  The  Apostle  Peter  says
that  men  are  "  born  again,  not  of  corruptible  seed,  biit  of  incor-'
ruptible,  by  the  word  of  God  which  liveth  and  abideth  forever."
(1  Pet.  i.  23.)  Our  Lord  prayed,  "Sanctify  them  through  thy
truth  :  thy  word  is  truth."   (John  xvii.  17.)

Testimony  of  History.

There  can,  therefore,  be  no  doubt  that  the  Scriptures  teach  that
the  Word  of  God  is  the  specially  appointed  means  for  the  sancti-
fication  and  the  salvation  of  men.  This  doctrine  of  the  Bible  is
fully  confirmed  by  the  experience  of  the  Church  and  of  the  world.
That  experience  teaches,  —  First,  that  no  evidences  of  sanctifica-
tion,  no  indications  of  the  saving  influences  of  the  Spirit  are  found
where  the  Word  of  God  is  unknown.  This  is  not  saying  tliat  none
such  occur.  We  know  from  the  Bible  itself,  "  That  God  is  no  re-
specter of  persons ;  but  in  every  nation  he  that  feareth  him,  and
worketh  righteousness,  is  accepted  with  liim."  (Acts  x.  34,  35.)
No  one  doubts  that  it  is  in  the  power  of  God  to  call  whom  He
pleases  from  among  the  heathen  and  to  reveal  to  them  enough


?  1]  THE  WORD.  469

truth  to  secure  their  salvation.^  Nevertheless  it  remains  a  fact
patent  to  all  eyes  that  the  nations  where  the  Bible  is  unknown  sit
in  darkness.  The  absence  of  the  Bible  is  just  as  distinctly  dis-
cernible as  the  absence  of  the  sun.  The  declaration  of  the  Scrip-
tures is  that  "  the  whole  world  lieth  in  wickedness  "  (1  John  v.
19)  ;  and  that  declaration  iS  confirmed  by  all  history.

A  second  fact  on  which  the  testimony  of  experience  is  equally
clear  is,  that  true  Christianity  flourishes  just  in  projDortion  to  the
degree  in  which  the  Bible  is  known,  and  its  truths  are  diffused
among  the  people.  During  the  apostolic  age  the  messengers  of
Christ  went  everywhere  preaching  his  Gospel,  in  season  and  out  of
season  ;  proving  from  the  Scriptures  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the
Son  of  the  living  God  ;  requiring  those  to  whom  they  preached  to
search  the  Scriptures  ;  exhorting  younger  ministers  to  preach  the
Word  ;  to  hold  forth  the  Word  of  life  ;  to  give  attendance  to  read-
mg,  exhortation,  and  doctrine  ;  to  fneditate  upon  these  things
and  to  give  themselves  wholly  to  them.  During  this  period  the
Gospel  made  more  rapid  progress,  and  perhaps  brought  forth  more
abundant  fruits  than  during  any  equally  long  period  of  its  history.
When,  however,  the  truth  began  to  be  more  and  more  corrupted
by  the  speculations  of  philosophy,  and  by  the  introduction  of  the
Jewish  doctrines  concerning  ceremonies  and  the  priesthood  ;  when
"  reserve  "  in  preaching  came  into  vogue,  and  it  was  held  to  be
both  lawful  and  wise  to  conceal  the  truth,  and  awaken  reverence
and  secure  obedience  by  other  means  ;  and  when  Christian  wor-
ship was  encumbered  by  heathen  rites,  and  the  trust  of  the  peo-
ple turned  away  from  God  and  Christ,  to  the  virgin  and  saints,
then  the  shades  of  night  overspread  the  Church,  and  the  darkness
became  more  and  more  intense,  until  the  truth  or  light  was  almost
entirely  obscured.  At  the  Reformation,  when  the  chained  Bible
was  brought  from  the  cloisters,  given  to  the  press,  and  scattered
over  Europe,  it  was  like  the  bright  rising  of  the  sun  :  the  darkness
was  dissipated ;  the  Church  arose  from  the  dust,  and  put  on  her
beautiful  garments,  for  the  glory  of  God  had  arisen  upon  her.
Wherever  the  reading  and  preaching  of  the  Word  was  unrestricted,
there  light,  liberty,  and  true  religion  prevailed,  in  a  proportionate

1  In  the  Second  Helvetic  Confession,  chapter  i.,  it  is  said:  "Cum  hodie  hoc  Dei  verbum
per  pricdicatores  legitime  vocatos  annunciatuv  in  ecclesia,  credimus  ipsum  Dei  verbum  an-
nunciari,  et  a  fidelibus  recipi,  neque  aliiid  Dei  verbum  vel  fingendum  vel  coelitus  esse  ex-

pectandiim Agnoscimus  interim,  Deum  illuminare  posse  homines  etiam  sine  externo

ministerio,  quos  et  quando  velit:  id  quod  ejus  potentiaj  est.  Nos  autem  loquimur  de  usitata
ratione  instituendi  homines,  et  prajcepto  et  exempio  tradita  nobis  a  Deo. "  —  Niemeyer,
CoUectio  Confessionum,  Leipzig,  1840,  pp.  467,  468.


470  PART  III.     Cii.   XX. —  THE   MEANS   OF    GRACE.

degree.  Wherever  the  Bible  was  suppressed  and  the  preaching
of  its  truths  was  forbidden,  there  the  darkness  continued  and  still
abides.

A  third  important  fact  equally  well  established  is,  that  true
religion  prevails  in  any  community,  in  proportion  to  the  degree
in  which  the  yoimg  are  instructed  in  ^he  facts  and  indoctrinated
in  the  truths  of  the  Bible.  This,  in  one  view,  is  included  under
the  previous  head,  but  it  deserves  separate  notice.  The  question
does  not  concern  the  reason  why  the  religious  education  of  the
young  is  so  important ;  or  the  way  in  which  that  education  can
most  advantageously  be  secured ;  but  simply  the  fact  that  where
the  young  are  from  the  beginning  imbued  with  the  knowledge  of
the  Bible,  there  pure  Christianity  abides  ;  and  where  they  are
allowed  to  grow  up  in  ignorance  of  divine  truth,  there  true  relig-
ion languishes  and  loses  more  and  more  its  power.  Such  is  the
testimony  of  experience.

It  is,  therefore,  the  united  testimony  of  Scripture  and  of  history
that  the  Bible,  the  Word  of  God,  is  the  great  means  of  promoting
the  sanctification  and  salvation  of  men,  that  is,  of  securing  their
temporal  and  eternal  well  being.  Those  consequently  who  are
opposed  to  religion  ;  who  desire  the  reign  of  indifferentism,  or  the
return  of  heathen  doctrines  and  heathen  morality,  are  consistent
and  -wise  in  their  generation,  in  endeavouring  to  undermine  the
authority  of  the  Bible ;  to  discourage  its  circulation ;  to  dis-
countenance attendance  on  its  preaching ;  and  especially  to  oppose
its  being  effectually  taught  to  the  young.  Those  on  the  other
hand  who  believe  that  without  holiness  no  man  can  see  God,  and
th-at  "without  the  light  of  divine  truth,  holiness  is  impossible,  are
bound  as  pastors,  as  parents,  and  as  citizens  to  insist  that  the  Bible
shall  have  free  course,  and  that  it  shall  be  faithfully  taught  to
all  under  their  influence  or  for  whose  training  they  are  responsible.

To  U'hat  is  the  Power  of  the  Word  to  be  attributed  ?

It  being  admitted  as  a  fact  that  the  Bible  has  the  power
attributed  to  it,  the  question  arises.  To  what  is  that  due  ?  To
this  question'  different  answers  are  given.  Some  say  that  its
whole  power  lies  in  the  nature  of  the  truths  which  it  contains.
This  is  the  doctrine  held  by  Pelagians  and  Rationalists.  On  this
subject  it  may  be  remarked,  (1.)  That  all  truth  has  an  adapta-
tion to  the  human  mind  and  tends  to  produce  an  impression  in
accordance  with  its  nature.  If  a  mind  could  be  conceived  of
destitute  of   all  truth,  it  would  be  in  a  state   of  idiocy.     The


§  1.]  .  THE   WORD.  471

mind  is  roused  to  action  and  expanded,  and  its  power  is  in-
creased by  the  truth,  and,  other  things  being  equal,  in  proportion
to  the  amoimt  of  truth  communicated  to  it,  (2.)  It  is  the  ten-
dency of  all  moral  truth  in  itself  considered,  to  excite  right  moral
feelings  and  to  lead  to  right  moral  action.  (3.)  It  is  further
conceded  that  the  truths  of  the  Bible  and  the  sources  of  moral
power  therein  contained  are  of  the  highest  possible  order.  The
doctrine,  for  example,  therein  taught  concerning  God,  that  He
is  a  Spirit,  infinite,  eternal,  and  unchangeable  in  being,  wis-
dom, power,  holiness,  justice,  goodness,  and  truth,  is  immeasur-
ably above  all  that  human  reason  ever  discovered  or  human
philosophy  ever  taught.  There  is  more  moral  power  in  that
single  truth,  than  in  all  the  systems  of  moral  philosophy.  The
same  may  be  said  of  what  the  Bible  teaches  of  God's  relation
to  the  world.  He  is  not  merely  its  creator  and  architect,  but
also  its  constant  preserver  and  governor ;  everywhere  present,
working  with  and  by  his  creatures,  using  each  according  to  its
nature,  and  overruling  all  things  to  the  accomplishment  of  the
highest  and  most  beneficent  designs.  To  his  rational  creatures,
especially  to  men,  He  reveals  Himself  as  a  father,  loving,  guid-
ing, and  providing  for  them ;  never  afflicting  them  willingly,  but
only  when  it  would  be  morally  wrong  to  do  otherwise.  The
Bible  doctrine  concerning  man  is  not  only  true,  conformed  to  all
that  man  reveals  himself  to  be,  but  it  is  eminently  adapted  to
make  him  what  he  was  designed  to  be :  to  exalt  without  inflat-
ing ;  to  humble  without  degrading  him.  The  Bible  teaches  that
God  made  man  out  of  the  dust  of  the  earth  and  breathed  into
him  the  breath  of  life,  and  he  became  a  living  soul  conformed
to  the  image  of  God  in  knowledge,  righteousness,  and  holiness.
Thus  man  is  apparently  the  lowest  of  God's  rational  creatures,
but  made  capable  of  indefinite  progress  in  capacity,  excellence,
and  blessedness.  The  actual  state  of  man  however  exhibits  a
sad  contrast  with  this  account  of  his  original  condition.  The
Bible  accordingly  informs  us  that  man  fell  from  the  state  in
which  he  was  created  by  sinning  against  God.  Thus  sin  was
introduced  into  the  world :  all  men  are  sinners,  that  is,  guilty,
polluted,  and  helpless.  These  are  facts  of  consciousness,  as  well
as  doctrines  of  the  Bible.  The  Scriptures  however  inform  us
that  God  so  loved  the  world  that  He  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,
that  whoso  believeth  on  Him  might  not  perish  but  have  ever-
lasting life.  We  are  told  that  this  Son  is  the  image  of  God,
equal  with  God.     By  Him  were  all  things  created  that  are  in


472         PART   III.     Cii.   XX.  — THE   MEANS   OF    GRACE.

heaven,  and  that  are  in  earth,  visible  and  invisible,  whether  they
be  thrones,  or  dominions,  or  principalities  or  powers :  all  things
were  created  by  Him  and  for  Him ;  and  He  is  before  all  things,
and  by  Him  all  things  consist.  This  divine  Person,  for  ns  and
for  our  salvation,  took  upon  Him  our  nature,  fulfilled  all  right-
eousness, bore  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree  ;  and  having
died  for  our  offences,  rose  again  for  our  justification ;  and  is  now
seated  at  the  right  hand  of  the  majesty  on  high ;  all  power  in
heaven  and  earth  having  been  committed  to  his  hands.  There  is
more  of  power  to  sanctify,  to  elevate,  to  strengthen  and  to  cheer
in  the  single  word  Jesus,  which  means  "  Jehovah-saviour,"  than
in  all  the  utterances  of  men  since  the  world  began.  This  divine
and  exalted  Saviour  has  sent  forth  his  disciples  to  preach  his
Gospel  to  every  creature,  promising  pardon,  sanctification,  and
eternal  life,  including  a  participation  in  his  glory,  to  every  one,
on  the  sole  condition  that  he  receive  Him  as  his  God  and  Sav-
iour, and,  trusting  in  Him  alone  for  salvation,  honestly  endeav-
our to  do  his  will ;  that  is,  to  love  God  with  all  his  heart  and
his  neighbour  as  himself,  and  to  do  to  others  as  he  would  have
others  do  to  him.  In  view  of  all  these  truths,  God  asks,  "  What
could  have  been  done  more  to  my  vineyard,  that  I  have  not  done
in  it?"  All  the  resources  of  moral  power  are  exliausted  in  the
Bible.  Every  consideration  that  can  affect  the  intellect,  the  con-
science, the  feelings,  and  the  hopes  of  man  is  therein  pi'esented :
yet  all  in  vain.

There  are  two  conditions  necessary  for  the  production  of  a
given  effect.  The  one  is  that  the  cause  should  have  the  requisite
efficiency ;  and  the  other,  that  the  object  on  which  it  acts  should
have  the  requisite  susceptibility.  The  sun  and  rain  shed  their
genial  influences  on  a  desert,  and  it  remains  a  desert ;  when
those  influences  fall  on  a  fertile  plain,  it  is  clothed  with  all  the
wonders  of  vegetable  fertility  and  beauty.  The  mid-day  bright-
ness of  the  sun  has  no  more  effect  on  the  eyes  of  the  blind  than  a
taper ;  and  if  the  eye  be  bleared  the  clearest  light  only  enables  it
to  see  men  as  trees  walking.  It  is  so  with  moral  truth :  no  mat-
ter what  may  be  its  inherent  power,  it  fails  of  any  salutary  effect
unless  the  mind  to  which  it  is  presented  be  in  a  fit  state  to
receive  it.

The  minds  of  men  since  the  fall  are  not  in  a  condition  to  receive
the  transforming  and  saving  power  of  the  truths  of  the  Bible ;
and  therefore  it  is  necessary,  in  order  to  render  the  Word  of  God
an  effectual  means  of  salvation,  that  it  should  be  attended  by  the


g  1.]  THE   WORD.  473

supernatural  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  Apostle  says  ex-
pressly, "  The  natural  man  receiveth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit
of  God  :  for  they  are  foolishness  unto  him :  neither  can  he  know
them,  because  they  are  spiritually  discerned."  (1  Cor.  ii.  14.)
In  the  preceding  chapter  he  had  said,  tliat  the  same  gospel  which
to  the  called  was  the  power  and  wisdom  of  God,  was  to  the  Jews
a  stumbling-block,  and  to  the  Greeks  foolishness.  Our  Lord  said
to  the  Jews :  "  Why  do  ye  not  understand  my  speech  ?  even  be-
cause ye  cannot  hear  my  Word.  He  that  is  of  God  heareth  God's
words :  ye  therefore  hear  them  not  because  ye  are  not  of  God."
(John  viii.  43,  47.)  Everything  that  the  Scriptures  teach  of  the
state  of  men  since  the  fall  proves  that  until  enlightened  by  the
Holy  Ghost  they  are  spiritually  blind,  unable  to  discern  the  true
nature  of  the  things  of  the  Spirit,  and  therefore  incapable  of  re-
ceiving a  due  impression  from  them.

Experience  confirms  this  teaching  of  the  Bible.  It  shows  that
no  mei'e  moral  power  of  truth  as  presented  objectively  to  the
mind  is  of  any  avail  to  change  the  hearts  of  men.  There  once
appeared  on  earth  a  divine  person  clothed  in  our  nature  ;  exhib-
iting the  perfection  of  moral  excellence  in  the  form  of  a  human
life  :  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  and  separate  from  sinners  ;  humble,
disinterested,  beneficent,  tender,  patient,  enduring,  and  dispensing
blessings  on  all  who  approached  him.  Yet  this  person  was  to  the
men  of  his  generation  without  form  or  comeliness.  He  came  to
his  own  and  his  o\vn  received  him  not.  They  rejected  him  and
preferred  a  murderer.  And  in  what  respect  are  we  better  than
they  ?  How  is  Christ  regarded  by  the  mass  of  the  men  of  this
generation.  Multitudes  blaspheme  Him.  The  majority  scarcely
think  of  Him.  He  is  to  them  no  more  than  Socrates  or  Plato.
And  yet  there  is  in  Him  such  a  revelation  of  the  glory  of  God,
as  would  constrain  every  human  heart  to  love  and  adore  Him,  had
not  the  god  of  this  world  blinded  the  eyes  of  those  who  believe
not.  It  is  vain  therefore  to  talk  of  the  moral  power  of  truth  con-
verting men.

There  are  some  who  throw  a  vail  over  this  rationalistic  doc-
trine, and  delude  themselves  and  others  into  the  belief  that  they
stand  on  more  Scriptural  ground  than  Rationalists,  because  they
admit  that  the  Spirit  is  operative  in  the  truth.  Every  theist  be-
lieves that  God  is  everywhere  present  in  the  world  and  always  sus-
taining and  cooperating  with  physical  causes  in  the  production  of
their  various  effects.  So  the  Spirit  is  in  the  world,  everywhere
present  and  everywhere  active,  cooperating  with  moral  causes  in


•174         PART   III.     Cii.   XX. —THE   MEANS    OF   GRACE.

producing  their  legitimate  effects.  There  is  nothing  in  the  opera-
tion of  physical  causes  transcending  their  legitimate  effects ;  and
there  is  nothing  in  the  regeneration,  conversion,  and  sanctification
of  men  which  transcends  the  legitimate  effects  of  moral  truth.
The  one  series  of  effects  is  just  as  natural,  and  just  as  little  super-
natural, as  the  other.  It  has  already  been  shown  on  a  previous
page,-^  that  this  is  all  that  the  most  advanced  rationalists  require.
It  excludes  the  supernatural,  which  is  all  they  demand.  In  the
effects  produced  by  physical  causes  guided  by  the  providential
efficiency  of  God,  there  is  nothing  which  exceeds  the  power  of
those  causes ;  and  in  the  effects  produced  by  the  moral  power  of
the  truth  under  the  cooperation  of  the  Spirit,  there  is  nothing
which  exceeds  the  power  of  the  truth.  The  salvation  of  the  soul
is  as  much  a  natural  process  as  the  growth  of  a  plant.  The  Scrip-
tures clearly  teach  that  there  is  an  operation  of  the  Spirit  on  the
soul  anterior  to  the  sanctifying  influence  of  the  truth,  and  neces-
sary to  render  that  influence  effective.  A  dead  man  must  be
restored  to  life,  before  the  objects  of  sense  can  produce  upon  him
their  normal  effect.  Those  spiritually  dead  must  be  quickened
by  the  almighty  power  of  God,  before  the  things  of  the  Spirit
can  produce  their  appropriate  effect.  Those  spiritually  blind
must  have  their  eyes  opened  before  they  can  discern  the  things
freely  given,  or  revealed,  to  them  of  God.  This  influence  being
anterior  to,  cannot  be  through,  the  truth.  Hence  we  find  numer-
ous prayers  in  every  part  of  the  Scriptures  for  this  antecedent
work  of  the  Spirit ;  prayers  that  God  would  change  the  hearts,
open  the  eyes,  and  unstop  the  ears  of  men  ;  or  that  He  would
give  them  ears  to  hear,  and  eyes  to  see.  The  Spirit  is  every-
where represented  as  a  personal  agent,  distributing  his  gifts  to
every  one  severally  as  He  Avill.  He  arouses  their  attention,  con-
trols their  judgments,  and  awakens  their  affections.  He  con-
vinces them  of  sin,  righteousness,  and  judgment.  He  works  in  the
people  of  God  both  to  will  and  to  do.  He  teaches,  guides,  com-
forts, and  strengthens.  His  influence  is  not  confined  to  one  activ-
ity producing  an  initial  change,  and  then  leaving  the  renewed
joul  to  the  influences  of  the  truth  and  of  the  ordinances.  It  is
abiding.  It  is  not  however  the  influence  of  a  uniformly  acting
force  cooperating  with  the  truth  ;  but  that  of  a  j^erson,  acting
when  and  where  He  pleases  ;  more  at  one  time  than  at  another,
sometimes  in  one  way  and  sometimes  in  another.  He  is  a  "  Helper  "
ivho  can  be  invoked,  or  who  can  be  grieved  and  resisted.  All  these
1  See  vol.  ii.  p.  657,  fF.


g  1.]  THE   WORD.  475

representations  of  the  Scriptures,  which  are  utterly  inconsistent
mth'the  purely  rationalistic  doctrine,  as  well  as  -with  the  doctrine
which  either  confounds  the  operations  of  the  Spirit  with  the
providential  ej6B.ciency  of  God,. or  regards  them  as  analogous,  have
impressed  themselves  on  the  general  consciousness  of  the  Church.
Every  believer  feels  that  he  stands  to  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  rela-
tion which  one  person  sustains  to  another :  a  person  on  whom  he
is  dependent  for  all  good  ;  whose  assistance  must  be  sought,  and
whose  assistance  may  be  granted  or  withheld  at  pleasure  ;  and
who  may  come  or  withdraw  either  for  a  season  or  forever.  Such
has  been  the  faith  of  the  Church  in  all  ages,  as  is  manifest  from
its  creeds,  its  hymns,  and  its  prayers.  "While  all  Christians  admit
that  God's  providential  efficiency  extends  over  all  his  works,  and
that  all  good  in  fallen  man  is  due  to  the  presence  and  power  of  his
Holy  Spirit,  yet  they  have  ever  felt  and  believed,  under  the  guid-
ance of  the  Scriptures,  that  the  divine  activity  in  these  different
spheres  is  entirely  different.  The  spheres  themselves  are  differ-
ent ;  the  ends  to  be  accomplished  are  different ;  and  the  mode
of  operation  is  different.  In  nature  (especially  in  the  external
world)  God  acts  by  law  ;  his  providential  efficiency  is  a  "  poten-
tia  ordinata  ;  "  in  grace  it  is  more  a  "  potentia  absoluta,"  untram-
melled by  law.  It  is  personal  and  sovereign.  He  does  not  act
continuously  or  in  any  one  way  ;  but  just  as  He  sees  fit.  He
works  in  us  "  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  good  pleasure."  (Phil,
ii.  13.)  As  just  remarked,  therefore,  every  Christian  feels  his  de-
pendence not  upon  law,  but  on  the  good-will  of  a  person.  Hence
the  prayers  so  frequent  in  Scripture,  and  so  constantly  on  the
Hps  of  believers,  that  the  Spirit  would  not  cast  us  off ;  would
not  give  us  up  ;  would  not  be  grieved  by  our  ingratitude  or  re-
sistance :  but  that  He  would  come  to  us,  enlighten  us,  purify,
elevate,  strengthen,  guide,  and  comfort  us  ;  that  He  would  come
to  our  households,  renew  our  children,  visit  our  churches,  and
multiply  his  converts  as  the  drops  of  the  morning  dew  ;  and  that
He  would  everywhere  give  the  Word  of  God  effect.

This  sovereignty  in  the  operations  of  the  Spirit  is  felt  and  rec-
ognized by  every  parent,  by  every  pastor,  and  by  every  mission-
ary. It  is  the  revealed  purpose  of  God  that  it  must  be  acknowl-
edged. "  See  your  calling  brethren,"  says  the  Apostle  ;  not  the
wise,  the  great,  the  good,  but  the  foolish,  those  who  are  of  no  ac-
count, hath  God  chosen  in  order  "  that  no  flesh  should  glory  in
his  presence."  (1  Cor.  i.  26-29.)  No  man  is  to  be  allowed  to
attribute  his  conversion  or  salvation  to  himself,  to  law,  or  to  tlie


ITG  PART  III.     Ch.  XX.— the   means   OF    GRACE.

efficiency  of  means.  It  is  in  the  hands  of  God.  It  is  of  Him
that  any  man  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  (1  Cor.  i.  30.)  In  hke  manner
He  so  gives  or  withholds  the  influences  of  the  Spirit  that  every
minister  of  the  Gospel,  as  the  Apostles  themselves  did,  should
feel  and  acknowledge  that  his  success  does  not  depend  on  his  offi-
cial dignity,  or  his  fidelity,  or  his  skill  in  argument,  or  his  power
of  persuasion,  but  simply  and  solely  on  the  demonstration  of  the
Spirit,  given  or  withheld  as  He  sees  fit.  Why  was  it  that  so  few
were  converted  under  the  ministry  of  Christ,  and  so  many  thou-
sands mider  that  of  the  Apostles  ?  Why  is  it  that  a  like  experi-
ence has  marked  the  whole  history  of  the  Church  ?  The  only
Scriptural  or  rational  answer  that  can  be  given  to  that  question
is,  "  Even  so,  Father  :  for  so  it  seemed  good  in  thy  sight."  We
know  indeed  that  the  Spirit's  sovereignty  is  determined  in  its
action  by  infinitely  wise  and  good  reasons  ;  and  we  know  that
his  withholding  his  cooperation  is  often  judicial  and  punitive ;
that  He  abandons  individuals,  churches,  communities,  and  nations
who  have  sinned  away  their  day  of  grace.  It  is  important  that
we  should  remember,  that,  in  living  under  the  dispensation  of  the
Spirit,  we  are  absolutely  dependent  on  a  divine  Person,  who
gives  or  withholds  his  influence  as  He  will ;  that  He  can  be
grieved  and  offended ;  that  He  must  be  aclaiowledged,  feared,
and  obeyed  ;  that  his  presence  and  gifts  must  be  humbly  and
earnestly  sought,  and  assiduously  cherished,  and  that  to  Him  all
right  thoughts  and  right  purposes,  all  grace  and  goodness,  all
strength  and  comfort,  and  all  success  in  winning  souls  to  Christ,
are  to  be  ascribed.

The   Office  of  the   Word  as  a  Means  of  Grace.

Christians  then  do  not  refer  the  savmg  and  the  sanctifpng
power  of  the  Scriptures  to  the  moi-al  power  of  the  truths  which
they  contain ;  or  to  the  mere  cooperation  of  the  Spirit  in  a  man-
ner analogous  to  the  way  in  which  God  cooperates  with  all  second
causes,  but  to  the  power  of  the  Spirit  as  a  divine  Person  acting
with  and  by  the  truth,  or  without  it,  as  in  his  sovereign  pleasure
He  sees  fit.  Although  light  cannot  restore  sight  to  the  blind,  or
heal  the  diseases  of  the  organs  of  sight,  it  is  nevertheless  essentkd
to  every  exercise  of  the  power  of  vision.  So  the  Word  is  essen-
tial to  all  holy  exercises  in  the  human  soul.

In  every  act  of  vision  there  are  three  essential  conditions  •
1.  An  object.  2.  Light.  3.  An  eye  in  a  healthful  or  normal
state.     In  all  ordinary  cases  this  is  all  that  is  necessary.     But


§  1.]  THE   WORD.  477

■when  the  object  to  be  seen  has  the  attribute  of  beauty,  a  fourth
condition  is  essential  to  its  proper  apprehension,  namely,  that  the
observer  have  esthetic  discernment  or  taste  natural  or  acquired.
Two  men  may  view  the  same  work  of  art.  Both  have  the  same
object  before  them  and  the  same  light  around  them.  Both  see
alike  all  that  affects  the  organ  of  vision  ;  but  the  one  may  see  a
beauty  which  the  other  fails  to  perceive  ;  the  same  object  there-
fore produces  on  them  very  different  effects.  The  one  it  delights,
elevates,  and  refines  ;  the  other  it  leaves  unmoved  if  it  does  not
disgust  him.  So  when  our  blessed  Lord  was  upon  earth,  the
same  person  went  about  among  the  people  ;  the  same  Word
soimded  in  their  ears  ;  and  the  same  acts  of  power  and  love  were
performed  in  their  presence.  The  majority  hated,  derided,  and
finally  crucified  Him.  Others  saw  in  Him  the  glory  of  the  only
begotten  Son  of  God  full  of  grace  and  truth.  These  loved,  adored,
worshipped,  and  died  for  Him.  Without  the  objective  revelation
of  the  person,  doctrines,  work,  and  character  of  Christ,  this  in-
ward experience  of  his  disciples  had  been  impossible.  But  this
outward  revelation  would  have  been,  and  in  fact  was  to  most  of
those  concerned,  utterly  in  vain,  without  the  power  of  spiritual
discernment.  It  is  clear,  therefore,  what  the  office  of  the  Word
is,  and  what  that  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  in  the  work  of  sanctifica-
tion.  The  Word  presents  the  objects  to  be  seen  and  the  light  by
which  we  see ;  that  is,  it  contains  the  truths  by  which  the  soul  is
sanctified,  and  it  conveys  to  the  mind  the  intellectual  knowledge
of  those  truths.  Both  these  are  essential.  The  work  of  the  Spirit
is  Avith  the  soul.  That  by  nature  is  spiritually  dead  ;  it  must  be
quickened.  It  is  blind  ;  its  eyes  must  be  opened.  It  is  hard  ;  it
must  be  softened.  •  The  gracious  work  of  the  Spirit  is  to  impart
life,  to  open  the  eyes,  and  to  soften  the  heart.  When  this  is
done,  and  in  proportion  to  the  measure  in  which  it  is  done,  the
Word  exerts  its  sanctifying  influence  on  the  soul.

It  is  a  clear  doctrine  of  the  Bible  and  fact  of  experience  that
the  truth  when  spiritually  discerned  has  this  transforming  power.
Paul  was  full  of  pride,  malignity,  and  contempt  for  Christ  and
his  Gospel.  When  the  Spirit  opened  his  eyes  to  behold  the  glory
of  Christ,  he  instantly  became  a  new  man.  The  effect  of  that
vision  —  not  the  miraculous  vision  of  the  person  of  the  Son  of  God,
but  the  spiritual  apprehension  of  his  divine  majesty  and  love  —
lasted  during  the  Apostle's  life,  and  will  last  to  all  eternity.
The  same  Apostle,  therefore,  teaches  us  that  it  is  by  beholding
the  glory  of  Christ  that  we  are  transformed  into  his  image,  from


478         PART   III.     Cn.   XX.  — THE   MEANS   OF    GRACE.

glory  to  glory,  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord.  (2  Cor.  iii.  18.)
Hence  the  Scriptures  so  constantly  represent  the  heavenly  state,
as  seeing  God.  It  is  the  beatific  vision  of  the  divine  glory,  in
all  its  brightness,  in  the  person  of  the  Son  of  God,  that  pvirifies,
ennobles,  and  enraptures  the  soul ;  filling  all  its  capacities  of
knowledge  and  happiness.  It  is  thus  that  we  are  sanctified
by  the  truth ;  it  is  by  the  spiritual  discernment  of  the  things
of  the  Spirit,  when  He  opens,  or  as  Paul  says,  enlightens
the  eyes  of  our  understanding.  We  thus  learn  how  we  must
use  the  Scriptures  in  order  to  experience  their  sanctifying
power.  We  must  diligently  search  them  that  we  may  know  the
truths  therem  revealed ;  we  must  have  those  truths  as  much  as
possible  ever  before  the  mmd ;  and  we  must  pray  earnestly  and
constantly  that  the  Spirit  may  open  our  eyes  that  we  may  see
wondrous  things  out  of  his  law.  It  matters  httle  to  us  how
excellent  or  how  powerful  the  truths  of  Scripture  may  be,  if  we
do  not  know  them.  It  matters  little  how  well  we  may  know
them,  if  we  do  not  think  of  them.  And  it  matters  little  how
much  we  think  of  them,  if  we  cannot  see  them ;  and  we  cannot
see  them  unless  the  Spirit  opens  the  eyes  of  our  heart.

We  see  too  from  this  subject  why  the  Bible  represents  it  as
the  great  duty  of  the  ministry  to  hold  forth  the  Word  of  life ;  by
the  manifestation  of  the  truth  to  commend  themselves  to  every
man's  conscience  in  the  sight  of  God.  This  is  all  they  need  do.
They  must  preach  the  Word  in  season  and  out  of  season,  whether
men  ^vill  hear,  or  whether  they  will  forbear.  They  know  that
the  Gospel  which  they  preach  is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation,
and  that  if  it  be  hid,  it  is  hid  to  them  that  are  lost :  in  Avhom
the  God  of  this  world  hath  blinded  the  minds  of  tlieni  which
believe  not,  lest  the  light  of  the  glorious  Gospel  of  Christ,  who
is  the  image  of  God,  should  shine  unto  them.  (2  Cor.  iv.  4.)
Paul  may  plant  and  Apollos  water,  but  God  only  can  give  the
increase.

Besides  this  general  sanctifying  power  of  the  Word  of  God,
when  spiritually  discerned,  it  is  to  be  further  remarked  that  it  is
the  means  of  calling  forth  all  holy  thoughts,  feelings,  purposes,
and  acts.  Even  a  regenerated  soul  without  any  truth  before  it,
would  be  in  blank  darkness.  It  would  be  in  the  state  of  a
regenerated  infant ;  or  in  the  state  of  an  unborn  infant  in  rela-
tion to  the  external  world ;  ha^dng  eyes  and  ears,  but  nothing  to
call  its  faculties  of  sight  and  hearing  into  exercise.  It  is  obvious
that  we  can  have  no  rational  feelings  of  gratitude,  love,  adora-


§  1.]  THE   WORD.  479

tion  and  fear  toward  God,  except  in  view  of  the  truths  revealed
concerning  Him  in  his  Word.  We  can  have  no  love  or  devotion
to  Christ,  except  so  far  as  the  manifestation  of  his  character  and
work  is  accepted  by  us  as  true.  We  can  have  no  faith  except
as  founded  on  some  revealed  promise  of  God ;  no  resignation  or
submission  except  in  view  of  the  wisdom  and  love  of  God  and  of
his  universal  providence  as  revealed  in  the  Scriptures ;  no  joyful
anticipation  of  future  blessedness  which  is  not  founded  on  what
the  Gospel  makes  known  of  a  future  state  of  existence.  The
Bible,  therefore,  is  essential  to  the  conscious  existence  of  the
divine  life  in  the  soul  and  to  all  its  rational  exercises.  The
Christian  can  no  more  hve  without  the  Bible,  than  his  body  can
live  without  food.  The  Word  of  God  is  milk  and  strong  meat,
it  is  as  water  to  the  thirsty,  it  is  honey  and  the  honeycomb.

The  Lutheran  Doctrine.

This  doctrine  has  already  been  briefly,  and,  perhaps,  suf-
ficiently discussed  on  a  preceding  page  ;  ^  it  cannot,  however,  be
properly  overlooked  in  this  connection.  The  Lutherans  agree
in  words  with  Rationalists  and  Remonstrants,  in  referring  the
efficiency  of  the  Word  of  God  in  the  work  of  sanctification  to  the
inherent  power  of  the  truth.  But  Rationalists  attribute  to  it  no
more  power  than  that  which  belongs  to  all  moral  truth  ;  such
truth  is  from  its  nature  adapted  to  form  the  character  and  influ-
ence the  conduct  of  rational  creatures,  and  as  the  truths  of  the
Bible  are  of  the  highest  order  and  importance,  they  are  willing
to  concede  to  them  a  proportionate  degree  of  power.  The
Lutherans,  on  the  other  hand,  teach,  —  First,  that  the  power  of
the  Word  which  is  inherent  and  constant,  and  which  belongs  to
it  from  its  very  nature  as  the  Word  of  God,  is  supernatural  and
divine.  Secondly,  that  its  efficiency  is  not  due  to  any  influence
of  the  Spirit,  accompanying  it  at  some  times  and  not  at  others,
but  solely  to  its  own  inherent  virtue.  Thirdly,  that  its  diversified
effects  are  due  not  to  the  Word's  having  more  power  at  one  time
than  at  another ;  or  to  its  being  attended  with  a  greater  or
less  degree  of  the  Spirit's  influence,  but  to  the  different  ways  in
which  it  is  received.  Christ,  it  is  said,  healed  those  who  had
faith  to  be  healed.  He  frequently  said :  "  According  to  your
faith  be  it  unto  you,"  or  "  Thy  faith  hath  saved  thee."  It  was
not  because  there  was  more  power  in  the  person  of  Christ  when
the  woman  touched  his  garment,  than  at  other  times,  that  she

1  See  vol.  ii.  p.  656  f.


480         PART   III.     Cii.   XX.  -  Tlii-:  MEANS    OF    GRACE.

was  healed,  but  because  of  her  faith.  Fourthly,  that  the  Spirit
never  operates  savingly  on  the  minds  of  men,  except  thi-ough  and
in  the  Word.  Luther  in  the  Smalcald  Articles  says :  "  Constanter
tenendum  est,  Deum  nemini  Spii'itum  vel  gratiam  suam  largiii
nisi  per  verbum  et  cum  verbo  externo  et  prtecedente,  ut  ita
pri^muniamus  nos  adversum  enthusiastas,  i.  e,,  spiritus,  qui  jac-
titant  se  ante  verbum  et  sine  verbo  Spiritum  habere."  ^  And
in  the  Larger  Catechism,^  he  says :  "  In  summa,  quicquid  Deus
in  nobis  facit  et  operatur,  tantum  externis  istius  modi  rebus  et
constitutionibus  operari  dignatur."  Luther  went  so  far  as  to
refer  even  the  inspiration  of  the  prophets  to  the  "  verbum  vocale,"
or  external  word.^

This  divine  power  of  the  Word,  however,  is  not,  as  before
remarked,  to  be  referred  to  the  mere  moral  power  of  the  truth.
On  this  point  the  Lutheran  theologians  are  perfectly  explicit.
Thus  Quenstedt^  says:  "Verbum  Dei  non  agit  solum  persua-
siones  morales,  proponendo  nobis  objectum  amabile;  sed  vero,
reali,  divino  et  ineffabili  influxu  potentias  suae  gratiosas."  This
influx  of  divine  power,  however,  is  not  something  occasional,
giving  the  word  a  power  at  one  time  which  it  has  not  at  another.
It  is  something  inherent  and  permanent.  Quenstedt  says :  ^
"  Verbo  Dei  virtus  divina  non  extrinsecus  in  ipso  usu  demum
accedit,  sed  ....  in  se  et  per  se,  intrinsice  ex  divina  ordina-
tione  et  communicatione,  efFicacia  et  vi  conversiva  et  regeneratrice
prseditum  est,  etiam  ante  et  extra  omnem  usum."  And  Hollaz^
says  it  has  this  power  "  propter  mysticam  verbi  cum  Spiritu  Sancto
unionem  intimam  et  individuam."

Professor  Schmid,  of  Erlaugen,  in  his  "  Dogmatik  der  evangel-
isch-lutherischeu  Kirche,"  quotes  from  the  leading  Lutheran  the-
ologians their  views  on  this  subject.  Hollaz,  for  example,  says
that  this  "  vis  divina  "  is  inseparably  conjoined  with  the  AVord  ;
that  the  Word  of  God  cannot  be  conceived  of  without  the  Spirit ;
that  if  the  Holy  Spirit  could  be  separated  from  the  Vv^ord,  it  would

1  n.  viii.  3 ;  Hase,  Libri  Symholici,  1846,  p.  331.

'■2  IV.  30 ;  Hase,  p.  540.

3  See  Smalcald  Articles,  ii.  viii.  10,  11:  "Quare  in  hoc  nobis  est,  constanter  perseve-
randuni,  quod  Deus  non  velit  nobiscum  aliter  agere,  nisi  per  vocale  verbum  et  sacramenta,
et  quod,  quidquid  sine  verbo  et  sacranientis  jactatur,  ut  spiritus,  sit  ipse  diabolus.  Nam
Deus  etiam  Mosi  voluit  apparere  per  rubum  ardentem  et  vocale  verbum.  Et  nullus
propheta,  sive  Elias,  sive  Elisieus,  Spiritum  sine  decalogo  sive  verbo  vocali  accepit."
Hase,  p.  333.

*  Tln'dliitjiti  Didactico-Fohmica,  I.  iv.  ii.  qu»st.  xvi.  ex0«ris,  4;  edit.  Leipzig,  1715,
p.  248.

0  J  bid.  I.  IV.  ii.  quaest.  yivi.funtes  svhitionum,  7;  p.  208.

C  Kxamen  Theoloijicum  Ao-oainaticum,  iii.  ii.  1,  qu;vst.  4;  edit.  Leipzig,  1763,  p.  992.


§  1.]  THE   WORD.  481

not  be  the  Word  of  God,  but  the  word  of  man.  ^  Qnenstedt  says
that  the  action  of  the  Word  and  of  the  Spirit  is  one  and  indi-
visible. Baier  says  :  ^  "  Nempe  eadem  ilia  infinita  virtus,  quae  es-
sentialiter,  per  se  et  independenter  in  Deo  est,  et  per  quam  Deus
homines  illuminat  et  convertit,  verbo  communicata  est :  et  tan-
quam  verbo  communicata,  divina  tamen,  hie  spectari  debet."  A  dis-
tinction, says  Qnenstedt,  is  to  be  made  between  the  natural  instru-
ments, such  as  the  staff  of  Moses,  or  rod  of  Aaron,  which  God  uses
to  produce  supernatural  effects,  and  those,  as  the  Word  and  sacra-
ments, which  are  "  sua  essentia  supernaturalia Ilia  indigent

novo  niotu  et  elevatione  nova  ad  effectum  novum  ultra  propria m
suam  et  naturalem  virtutem  producendum  ;  hoec  vero  a  prima  in-
stitutione  .et  productione  sufficienti,  hoc  est,  divina  et  summa  vi  ac
efficacia  prsedita  sunt,  nee  indigent  nova  et  peculiari  aliqua  eleva-
tione ultra  efficaciam  ordinariam,  jamdum  ipsis  inditam  ad  produ-
cendum spiritualem  effectum."^  That  the  Word  is  not  always
efficacious  is  not  because  it  is  attended  by  greater  power  in  one
case  than  another,  but  because  of  the  difference  in  the  moral  state
of  those  to  whom  it  is  presented.  On  this  point  Qnenstedt  says,
"  Quanquam  itaque  effectus  Verbi  divini  pra?dicati  nonnunquam
impediatur,  efficacia  tamen  ipsa,  sen  virtus  intrinseca  a  verbo  tolli
et  separari  non  potest.  Et  ita  per  accidens  fit  inefficax,  non  poten-
tiae  defectu,  sed  maHtiae  motu,  quo  ejus  operatio  impechtur,  quo
minus  effectum  suum  assequatur."  ^  A  piece  of  iron  glowing
with  heat,  if  placed  in  contact  with  anything  easily  combustible,
produces  an  immediate  conflagration.  If  brought  in  contact  with
a  rock,  it  produces  little  sensible  effect.  So  the  Word  of  God
fraught  with  divine  power,  when  presented  to  one  mind  regen-
erates, converts,  and  sanctifies,  and  when  presented  to  anothe"
leaves  it  as  it  was,  or  only  exasperates  the  evil  of  its  nature.  It
is  true  these  theologians  say  that  the  operation  of  the  Word  is  not
physical,  as  in  the  case  of  opium,  poison,  or  fire  ;  but  moral,  "  illus-
trando  mentem,  commovendo  voluntatem,"  etc.  Nevertheless  the
illustration  holds  as  to  the  main  point.  The  Word  has  an  inherent,
divine,  and  constant  power.  It  produces  different  effects  accord-
ing to  the  subjective  state  of  those  on  whom  it  acts.  The  Spirit
acts  neither  on  them  nor  on  it  more  at  one  time  than  at  another.

1  Hollaz,  Examen,  iii.  ii.  1,  -t,  edit.  HoliniiB  et  Lipsite;  1741,  p.  987.

2  Compendium  Tfiedo^Le  /'ci«77u\e,  Pi'ok'jjg-,  II.  xxxix.  d ;  edit.  Frankfort  and  Leipzig,
1739,  p.  lOG.

3  (Juenstedt,  Theoloffia,  I.  iv.  ii.  quiest.  xvi.  ex^ecri?,  7,  ut  supra,  p.  249.
■4   liiid.  qua?st.  xvi.  9.

vuL.  III.  31


482         PART  III.     Ch.   XX.  — the   means   OF   GRACE.

Remarlcs.

1.  It  is  obvious  that  tliis  pecuKar  theory  has  no  support  from
Scripture.  The  Bible  does  indeed  say  that  the  Word  of  God  is
quick  and  powerful ;  that  it  is  the  Avisdom  of  God  and  the  power
of  God  ;  and  that  it  convinces,  converts,  and  sanctifies.  But  so
does  the  Bible  say  that  Christ  gave  his  Apostles  power  to  work
miracles  ;  and  that  they  went  about  communicating  the  Holy
Ghost  by  the  laying  on  of  hands,  healing  the  sick,  and  raising  the
dead.  But  the  power  was  not  in  them.  Peter  was  indignant  at
such  an  imputation.  "  Why  look  ye  so  earnestly  on  us,"  he  said
to  the  people,  "  as  though  by  oiu-  OAvn  power  or  hoHness  w^e  had
made  this  man  to  walk  ?  "  If  the  Apostles'  working  miracles  did
not  prove  that  the  power  was  in  them,  the  effects  produced  by
the  Word  do  not  prove  that  the  power  is  in  it.

2.  This  doctrine  is  inconsistent  with  the  constant  representa-
tions of  the  Scriptures,  which  set  forth  the  Spirit  as  attending  the
Word  and  giving  it  effect,  sometimes  more  and  sometimes  less  ;
working  with  and  by  the  truth  as  He  sees  fit.  It  is  inconsistent
with  the  command  to  pray  for  the  Spirit.  Men  are  not  ac-
customed to  pray  that  God  would  give  fire  the  power  to  burn  or
ice  to  cool.  If  the  Spirit  were  always  in  mystical,  indissoluble
union  with  the  Word,  giving  it  inherent  divine  power,  there  would
be  no  propriety  in  praying  for  his  influence  as  the  Apostles  did,
and  as  the  Church  in  all  ages  has  ever  done,  and  continues  to  do.

3.  This  theory  cuts  us  off  from  all  intercourse  with  the  Spirit
and  all  dependence  upon  Him  as  a  personal  voluntary  agent.  He
never  comes  ;  He  never  goes  ;  He  does  not  act  at  one  time  more
than  at  another.  He  has  imbued  the  Word  mth  divine  power,
and  sent  it  forth  into  the  world.  There  his  agency  ends.  God
has  given  opium  its  narcotic  power,  and  arsenic  its  power  to  cor-
rode the  stomach,  and  left  them  to  men  to  use  or  to  abuse  as  they
see  fit.  Beyond  giving  them  their  properties.  He  has  nothing  to
do  with  the  effects  which  they  produce.  So  the  Spirit  has  noth-
ing to  do  wdth  the  conviction,  conversion,  or  sauctification  of  the
people  of  God,  or  with  illuminating,  consoling,  or  guiding  them,
beyond  once  for  all  giving  his  Word  divine  power.  There  it  is  :
men  raaj  use  or  neglect  it  as  they  please.  The  Spirit  does  not
incline  them  to  use  it.  He  does  not  open  their  hearts,  as  He
opened  the  heart  of  Lydia,  to  receive  the  Word.  He  does  not
enlighten  their  eyes  to  see  wondrous  things  out  of  the  law.

4.  Lutherans  do  not  attribute  divine  power  to  the  visible  words,


§1.]  THE  WORD.  483

or  to  the  audible  sounds  uttered,  but  to  the  truth  which  these
conventional  signs  are  the  means  of  communicating  to  the  mind.
They  admit  that  this  truth,  although  it  has  inherent  in  it  divine
power,  never  produces  any  supernatural  or  spiritual  effect  unle  s
it  is  properly  used.  They  admit  also  that  this  proper  use  includes
the  intellectual  apprehension  of  its  meaning,  attention,  and  the
purpose  to  believe  and  obey.  Yet  they  believe  in  infant  regenera-
tion. But  if  infants  are  incapable  of  using  the  Word  ;  and  if  the
Spirit  never  operates  except  in  the  Word  and  by  its  use,  how  is  it
possible  that  infants  can  be  regenerated.  If,  therefore,  the  Bible
teaches  that  infants  are  regenerated  and  saved,  it  teaches  that  the
Spirit  operates  not  only  with  and  by  the  Word,  but  also  without
it,  when,  how,  and  where  He  sees  fit.  If  Christ  healed  only  those
who  had  faith  to  be  healed,  how  did  He  heal  infants,  or  raise  the
dead  ?

5.  The  theory  in  question  is  contrary  to  Scripture,  in  that  it
assumes  that  the  reason  why  one  man  is  saved  and  another  not,
is  simply  that  one  resists  the  supernatural  power  of  the  Word  and
another  does  not.  Why  the  one  resists,  is  referred  to  his  o^vn  free
"will.  Why  the  other  does  not  resist,  is  referred  not  to  any  spe-
cial influence,  but  to  his  own  unbiased  will.  Our  Lord,  however,
teaches  that  those  only  come  to  Him  who  are  given  to  Him  by
the  Father ;  that  those  come  who  besides  the  outward  teaching  of
the  Word,  are  inwardly  taught  and  drawn  of  God.  The  Apostle
teaches  that  salvation  is  not  of  him  that  willeth  or  of  him  that
runneth,  but  of  God  who  showeth  mercy.  The  Lutheran  doctrine
banishes,  and  is  intended  to  banish,  all  sovereignty  in  the  distribu-
tion of  saving  grace,  from  the  dispensations  of  God.  To  those
who  believe  that  that  sovereignty  is  indelibly  impressed  on  the
doctrines  of  the  Bible  and  on  the  history  of  the  Church  and  of
the  world,  this  objection  is  of  itself  sufficient.  The  common
practical  belief  of  Christians,  whatever  their  theories  may  be,  is
that  they  are  Christians  not  because  they  are  better  than  other
men  ;  not  because  they  cooperate  with  the  common  and  sufficient
grace  given  to  all  men  ;  not  because  they  yield  to,  while  others
resist  the  operation  of  the  divine  Word  ;  but  because  God  in  his
sovereign  mei-cy  made  them  -willing  in  the  day  of  his  power  :  so
that  they  are  all  disposed  to  say  from  the  heart,  "  Not  vmto  us,  O
Lord,  not  unto  us,  but  unto  thy  name  give  glory."

6.  This  Lutheran  doctrine  is  inconsistent  vnth  the  experience
of  believers  individually  and  collectively.  On  the  day  of  Pente-
cost, what  fell  upon  the  Apostles  and  the  brethren  assembled  with


484         PART  III.     Ch.   XX.  — the   means    OF   GRACE.

them  ?  It  was  no  "  verbum  vocale;  "  no  sound  of  words  ;  and  no
new  external  revelation.  The  Spirit  of  God  Himself,  enlightened
their  minds  and  enabled  them  to  remember  and  to  understand  all
that  Christ  had  taught,  and  they  spoke  every  man,  as  the  Spirit
(not  the  Word)  gave  them  utterance.  Here  was  a  clear  manifesta-
tion of  the  Spirit's  acting  directly  on  the  minds  of  the  Apostles.
To  say  that  the  effects  then  exhibited  were  due  to  the  divine
power  inherent  in  the  words  of  Christ ;  and  that  they  had  resisted
that  power  up  to  the  day  of  Pentecost,  and  then  yielded  to  its
influence,  is  an  incredible  hypothesis.  It  will  not  account  for  the
facts  of  the  case.  Besides,  our  Lord  promised  to  send  the  Spirit
after  his  ascension.  He  commanded  the  disciples  to  remain  in
Jerusalem  until  they  were  imbued  with  power  from  on  high.
When  the  Spirit  came  they  were  instantly  enlightened,  endowed
with  plenary  knowledge  of  the  Gospel,  and  with  miraculous  gifts.
How  could  the  "verbum  vocale"  impart  the  gift  of  tongues,  or
the  gift  of  healing.  What  according  to  the  Lutheran  theory  is
meant  by  being  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  or,  by  the  indwelling  of
the  Spirit  ?  or,  by  the  testimony  of  the  Spirit  ?  or,  by  the  demon-
stration of  the  Spirit  ?  or,  b}^  the  unction  of  the  Holy  One  which
teaches  all  things  ?  or,  by  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  ?  In
short,  the  whole  Bible,  and  especially  the  evangelical  history  and
the  epistles  of  the  New  Testament,  represents  the  Holy  Spirit  not
as  a  power  imprisoned  in  the  truth,  but  as  a  personal,  vohmtary
agent  acting  with  the  truth  or  without  it,  as  He  pleases.  As  such
He  has  ever  been  regarded  by  the  Church,  and  has  ever  exhibited
himself  in  his  dealings  with  the  children  of  God.

7.  Luther,  glorious  and  lovely  as  he  was  —  and  he  is  certainly
one  of  the  grandest  and  most  attractive  figures  in  ecclesiastical
history  —  was  impulsive  and  apt  to  be  driven  to  extremes.^  The
enthusiasts  of  his  age  undervalued  the  Scriptures,  pretending  to
private  revelations,  and  direct  spiritual  impulses,  communicating
to  them  the  knowledge  of  truths  unrevealed  in  the  Bible,  and  a
rule  of  action  higher  than  that  of  the  written  Word.  This  doctrine
was  a  floodgate  through  which  all  manner  of  errors  and  extrava-
gances poured  forth  among  the  people  and  threatened  the  over-
throw of  the  Church  and  of  society.  Against  these  enthusiasts  all
the  Reformers  raised  their  voices,  and  Luther  denounced  them
with  characteristic  vehemence.     In  opposition  to  their  pretensions

1  'No  one  knows  Luther  who  has  not  read  pretty  faithfully  the  five  octavo  volumes  of  his
letters,  collected  and  edited  by  De  Wette.  These  exhiliit  not  only  his  power,  fidelity,  and
courage,  but  also  his  gentleness,  disinterestedness,  and  his  childlike  simplicity,  as  well  as
his  joyousness  and  humour.


§  2.]  THE   SACRAMENTS.    THEIR  NATURE.  485

he  took  the  ground  that  the  Spirit  never  operated  on  the  minds  of
men  except  through  the  Word  and  sacraments  ;  and,  as  he  held
the  conversion  of  sinners  to  be  the  greatest  of  all  miracles,  he  was
constrained  to  attribute  divine  power  to  the  Word.  He  was  not
content  to  take  the  ground  which  the  Church  in  general  has  taken,
that  while  the  Word  and  sacraments  are  the  ordinary  channels  of
the  Spirit's  influence,  He  has  left  himself  free  to  act  with  or  with-
out these  or  any  other  means,  and  when  He  makes  new  revela-
tions to  individuals  they  are  authenticated  to  others  by  signs,  and
miracles,  and  divers  gifts  ;  and  that  in  all  cases,  however  authen-
ticated, they  are  to  be  judged  by  the  written  Word  as  -the  only
infallible  rule  of  faith  or  jjractice ;  so  that  if  an  Apostle  or  an
angel  from  heaven  should  preach  any  other  gospel  than  that  which
we  have  received,  he  is  to  be  pronounced  accursed.  (Gal.  i.  8.)
"  We  are  of  God:  "  said  the  Apostle  John,  "  he  that  knoweth  God
heareth  us  ;  he  that  is  not  of  God  heareth  not  us.  Hereby  we
know  the  spirit  of  truth  and  the  spirit  of  error."  (1  John  iv.  6.)
The  Scriptures  teach  that  not  only  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  also  other
spirits  good  and  evil  have  access  to  the  minds  of  men,  and  more
or  less  effectually  control  their  operations.  Directions,  therefore,
are  given  in  the  Bible  to  guide  us  in  discriminating  between  the
true  and  false.

The  power  of  individual  men,  who  appear  in  special  junctures,
over  the  faith  and  character  of  coming  generations,  is  something
portentous.  Of  such  "  world  controllers,"  at  least  in  modern
times,  there  are  none  to  compare  with  Martin  Luther,  Ignatius
Loyola,  and  John  Wesley.  Though  so  different  from  each  other,
each' has  left  his  impress  upon  millions  of  men.  Our  only  security
from  the  fallible  or  perverting  influence  of  man,  is  in  entire,  un-
questioning submission  to  the  infallible  Word  of  God.

§  2.   The  Sacraments.   Their  Nature.

Usage  of  the  Word  Sacrament.

1.  In  classical  usage  the  word  "  sacramentum  "  means,  in  gen-
eral, something  sacred.  In  legal  proceedings  the  money  depos-
ited by  contending  parties  was  called  "  sacramentum,"  because
when  forfeited  it  was  applied  to  sacred  purposes.  "  Ea  pecunia,
quse  in  judicium  venit  in  litibus,  sacramentum  a  sacro."  "  Sac-
ramentum ?es  significat,  quod  poense  nomine  penditur,  sive  eo  quis
interrogatur  sive  contenditur."  Then  in  a  secondary  sense  it
meant  a  judicial  process.     In  military  usage  it  expressed  the  ob-


486         PART   III.      Ch.    XX.  — the   ME.VXS    OF   GRACE.

ligation  of  the  soldier  to  his  leader  or  country ;  then  the  oath  by
which  he  was  bound ;  and  generally  an  oath  ;  so  that  in  ordinary
language  "  sacramentum  dicere  "  meant  to  swear.  ^

2.  The  ecclesiastical  usage  of  the  word  was  influenced  by  vari-
ous circumstances.  From  its  etymology  and  signification  it  was
applied  to  anything  sacred  or  consecrated.  Then  to  anything
which  had  a  sacred  or  hidden  meaning.  In  this  sense  it  was
applied  to  all  religious  rites  and  ceremonies.  This  brought  it  into
connection  with  the  Greek  word  p.v(jT-qpwv,  which  properly  means  a
secret ;  something  into  the  knoAvledge  of  which  a  man  must  be
initiated.  Hence  in  the  Vulgate  "  sacramentum  "  is  used  as
the  translation  of  fiva-T^piov  in  Ephesians  i.  9,  iii.  9,  v.  32 ;  Colos-
sians  i.  27 ;  1  Timothy-  iii.  16  ;  Revelation  i.  20,  xvii.  7.  It  was
therefore  used  in  the  wide  sense  for  any  sign  which  had  a  secret
import.  Thus  Augustine  says,^  "  Nirais  autem  longum  est,  con
venienter  disputare  de  varietate  signorum,  qufe  cum  ad  res  divinaa
pertinent,  sacramenta  appellantur."  And  again  he  says,^  "  Ista
fratres  dicuntur  sacramenta,  quifl.  in  eis  aliud  videtur,  aliud  intelli-
gitur.  Quod  videtur  speciem  habet  corporalem,  quod  intelligitur,
fructum  habet  spiritualem."  All  religious  rites  and  ceremonies,
the  sign  of  the  cross,  anointing  with  oil,  etc.,  were  therefore  called
sacraments.  Augustine  frequently  calls  the  mystical  or  allegor-
ical exposition  of  Scripture,  a  sacrament.  Jerome^  says,  "  Sacra-
menta Dei  sunt  prgedicare,  benedicere  ac  confirmare,  communionem
reddere,  visitare  infirmos,  orare.^  Lombard  says,  "  Sacramentum
est  sacr^e  rei  signum."  ^

The  Theological  Usage  and  Definition  of  the  Word.

3.  It  is  evident  that  the  signification  of  the  word  "  sacrament  "
is  so  comprehensive  and  its  usage  so  lax,  that  little  aid  can  be  de-
rived from  either  of  those  sources  in  fixing  definitely  its  meaning
in  Christian  theology.  Hence  theologians  soon  began  to  frame
definitions  of  the  word  more  or  less  exact,  derived  from  the  teach-
ings of  the  New  Testament  on  the  subject.  The  two  simplest
and  most  generally  accepted  of  such  definitions  are  the  one  by
Augustine  and  the  other  by  Peter  Lombard.     The  former  says,  "^

1  Freund's  Lateinische  Worterbuch.

2  Epistola  cxxxviii.  (5);    Works,  edit.  Benedictines,  Paris,  18.36,  vol.  vii.  p.  615,  c.

3  Sermo  cclxxii.  (16);  Ibid.  vol.  v.  p.  1614,  b,  c.  ■»    WorU,  torn.  ix.  p.  59.  (?)

6  See  Gerhard,  Loci  Theologici,  xix.  i.  §§  6,  9;  edit.  Tiibingen,  1768,  vol.  viii.  pp.  204,
205.

6  Lombard,  Magister  Sententiarum,  lib.  iv.  dist.  i.  B.  edit.  (?)  1472.

7  In  Joannis  Evangelium  Tractatus,  Ixxx.  3;  Works,  edit.  Benedictines,  Paris,  1837,  vol
iii.  2290,  a.


§  2.]  THE    SACRAMENTS.     THEIR   NATURE.  48T

"  Acceclit  verbum  ad  elementum,  et  fit  sacramentum ; "  the  latter,^
"  Sacramentum  est  invisibilis  gratise  visibilis  forma."  These  defi-
nitions however  are  too  vague.

It  is  obvious  that  the  only  safe  and  satisfactory  method  of  ar-
riving at  the  idea  of  a  sacrament,  in  the  Christian  sense  of  the
word,  is  to  take  those  ordinances  which  by  common  consent  are
admitted  to  be  sacraments,  and  by  analyzing  them  determine
what  are  their  essential  elements  or  characteristics.  We  should
then  exclude  from  the  category  all  other  ordinances,  human  or
divine,  in  which  those  characteristics  are  not  found.  Baptism
and  the  Lord's  Supper  are  admitted  to  be  sacraments.  They  are
(1.)  Ordinances  instituted  by  Christ.  (2.)  They  are  in  their
nature  significant,  baptism  of  cleansing  ;  the  Lord's  Supper  of
spiritual  nourishment.  (3.)  They  were  designed  to  be  perpetual.
(4.)  They  were  appointed  to  signify,  and  to  instruct ;  to  seal,
and  thus  to  confirm  and  strengthen  ;  and  to  convey  or  aj)ply,  and
thus  to  sanctify,  those  avIio  by  faith  receive  them.  On  this  prin-
ciple the  definition  of  a  sacrament  given  in  the  standards  of  our
Church  is  founded.  "  A  sacrament,"  it  is  said,  "  is  an  holy  ordi-
nance instituted  by  Christ ;  wherein,  by  sensible  signs,  Christ
and  the  benefits  of  the  New  Covenant  are  represented,  sealed,
and  applied  to  believers."  '■^

To  the  same  effect  the  other  Reformed  Symbols  speak.  For
example,  the  Second  Helvetic  Confession  says  :  "  Sunt  sacramenta
symbola  mystica,  vel  ritus  sancti,  aut  sacroe  actiones,  a  Deo  ipso
institutic,  constantes  verbo  suo,  signis,  et  rebus  significatis,  qui-
bus  in  ecclesia  summa  sua  beneficia,  homini  exhibita,  retinet  in
memoria,  et  subinde  renovat,  quibus  item  promissiones  suas  ob-
signat,  et  quse  ipse  nobis  interius  prastat,  exterius  repr?esentat,  ac
veluti  oculis  contemplanda  subiicit,  adeoque  fidem  nostram,  Spir-
itu  Dei  in  cordibus  nostris  operante,  roborat  et  auget :  quibus
denique  nos  ab  omnibus  aliis  populis  et  religionibus  separat,
sibique  soli  consecrat  et  obligat,  et  quid  a  nobis  requirat,  sig-
nificat."  3

The  definition  given  in  the  Geneva  Catechism  is  that  a  sacra-
ment is  "  externa  divinte  erga  nos  benevolenticB  testificatio,  quse
visibiH  signo  spirituales  gratias  figurat,  ad  obsignandas  cordibus
nostris  Dei  promissiones,  quo  earum  Veritas  melius  confirmetur."  ^

The  Heidelberg  Catechism  says,  that  sacraments  are  ''  sacra  et

^  Lombard,  ut  sujira.

2   WesUninster  Shorter  Catechism,  quest.  92.

*  xix. ;  Niemeyer,  Collectio  Confessionum,  Leipzig,  1840,  p.  512.

*  V.  de  Sacramentis ;  Ibid.  p.  160.


4S8  TAUT   III.     Ca.    XX. —THE   MEANS   OF    GR.\CE.

in  oeulos  incuiTentia  signa,  ac  sigilla,  ob  earn  causam  a  Deo  in-
stituta,  ut  per  ea  nobis  promissionem  Evangelii  magis  declarat  et
obsignet :  quod  scilicet  non  universis  tantum,  veruni  etiam  singulis
credentibus,  propter  unicum  illud  Christi  sacrificiuni  in  cruce
peractum,  gratis  donet  remissionem  peccatorum,  et  vitam  geter-
nam."  ^

The  Thirty -nine  Articles  of  the  Church  of  England  teach  ^
that  "  Sacraments  ordained  of  Christ  be  not  only  badges  or  tokens
of  Clu'istian  men's  profession ;  but  rather  they  be  certain  sure
witnesses  and  effectual  signs  of  grace,  and  God's  will  toward  us,
by  the  which  He  doth  work  invisibly  in  us,  and  doth  not  only
quicken,  but  also  strengthen  and  confirm  our  faith  in  Him."

Lutheran  Doctrine.

The  Lutheran  definition  of  the  sacraments  agrees  in  all  essential
points  with  that  of  the  Reformed  churches.  In  the  Augsburg
Confession,  its  authors  say  :  "  De  usu  sacramentorura  docent,
quod  sacramenta  instituta  sint,  non  modo  ut  sint  not®  professionis
inter  homines,  sed  magis  ut  sint  signa  et  testimonia  voluntatis
Dei  erga  nos,  ad  excitandam  et  confirmandam  fidem  in  his,  qui
utuntur,  proposita.  Itaque  utendum  est  sacramentis  ita,  ut  fides
accedat,  qua;  credat  promissionibus,  qua?  per  sacramenta  exhiben-
tur  et  ostenduntur."  ^

In  the  Apology  for  that  Confession  it  is  said  :  "Si  sacramenta
vocamus  ritas,  qui  habent  mandatum  Dei,  et  quibus  addita  est
promissio  graticB,  facile  est  judicare,  qune  sint  proprie  sacramenta.
Nam  ritus  ab  hominibus  instituti  non  erunt  hoc  modo  proprie  dicta
sacramenta.  Non  est  enim  auctoritatis  humane,  promittere  gra-
tiam.  Quare  signa  sine  mandato  Dei  instituta,  non  sunt  certa
signa  gratijB,  etiamsi  fortasse  rudes  docent,  aut  admonent  ali-
quid."4

"  Dicimus  igitur  ad  sacramenta  proprie  sic  dicta  duo  potissi-
mum  requiri,  videlicet  verbum  et  elementum,  juxta  vulgatuni  illud
Augustini :  '  Accedit  verbum  ad  elementum,  et  fit  sacramentum.'
Fundamentum  hujus  adsertionis  ex  ipsa  natura  et  fine  saci'amen-
torum  pendet,  cum  enim  sacramenta  id,  quid  in  verbo  evangelii
praedicatur,  externo  elemento  vestitum  sensibus  ingerere  debeant,
ex  eo  sponte  sequitur,  quod  nee  verbum  sine  elemento,  nee  elemen-
tum sine  verbo  constituat  sacramentum.  Per  verbum  intelligitur
primo  mandatum  atque  institutio  divina,  per  quam  elementum

1  Ixvi. ;  Niemeyer,  p.  444.  ^  Art.  xxv.

8  I.  xiii.  1,  2;  Hase,  Leipzig,  1846,  p.  13.  *  vii.  3;  Hase,  p.  200.


§  2.]  THE   SACRAMENTS.    TFIEIR  NATURE.  489

....  separatiir  ab  usu  communi,  et  destinatur  usui  sacramen-
tali ;  cleinde  promissio  atque  ea  quidem  evangelic  propria,  per
sacramentum  adj)licanda  et  obsignanda.  Per  elementum  non
quodvis,  sed  certum  et  verbo  institutionis  expressum  accipitiir."^
In  all  tbis  the  Reformed  and  Lutberans  are  agreed.  Tbe
differences  between  tbem  in  relation  to  tbe  sacraments  do  not
concern  tbeir  nature.

Romish  Doctrine.

The  distinctive  doctrine  of  tbe  Romish  Church  on  this  subject  is
that  the  sacraments  contain  the  grace  which  they  signify,  and  that
such  grace  is  conveyed  "  ex  opere  operato."  That  is,  they  have
a  real  inherent  and  objective  virtue,  which  renders  them  effectual
in  communicating  saving  benefits  to  those  who  receive  them.  In
a  certain  sense  these  words  may  be  used  to  express  the  Lutheran
doctrine  ;  but  that  doctrine  differs  from  the  Romanist  doctrine,  as
will  appear  when  the  efficacy  of  the  sacraments  comes  to  be  con-
sidered. The  language  of  the  Council  of  Trent  on  this  subject
is  :  "Si  quis  dixerit  sacramenta  novge  legis  non  continere  gratiam,
quam  significant ;  aut  gratiam  ipsam  non  ponentibus  obicem  non
conferre ;  quasi  signa  tantum  externa  sint  acceptae  per  fidem
gratipe,  vel  justitife,  et  notre  qu?edam  Christianse  professionis,  qui-
bus  apud  homines  discernuntur  fideles  ab  infidelibus  ;  anathema
sit."  2

The  Roman  Catechism  defines  a  sacrament  "  Rem  esse  sensi
bus  subjectam,  quae  ex  Dei  institutione  sanctitatis  et  justitiae  tum
significandae,  tum  efficiendae  vim  habet."  ^  As  the  task  devolved
on  the  Council  of  Trent  was  to  present  and  harmonize  the  doc-
trines elaborated  by  the  Schoolmen  in  opposition  to  the  doctrines
of  the  Reformers,  the  definitions  and  exj^lanations  given  by  the
writers  of  the  Middle  Ages  throw  as  much  light  on  the  decrees
of  the  Council  as  the  expositions  of  the  later  theologians  of  the
Latin  Church.  On  this  point  Thomas  Aquinas  says  :  "  Oportet,
quod  virtus  salutifera  a  divinitate  Christi  per  ejus  humanitatem

in  ipsa  sacramenta  derivetur Sacramenta  ecclesiae  speciali-

ter  habent  virtutem  ex  passione  Christi,  cujus  virtus  quodammodo
nobis  copulatur  per  susceptionem  sacramentorum."  ^  Again :
"  Ponendo  quod  sacramentum  est  instrumental] s  causa  gratiae,
necesse  est  simul  ponere,  quod  in  siacramento  sit  quredam  virtus

1  Gerhard,  Loci  Theologici,  xix.  2.  §  11 ;  edit.  Tubingen,  1768,  vol.  viii.  p.  207.

2  Sess.  VII.  De  Sncramentis  in  genere,  canon  6 ;  Streitwolf ,  vol.  i.  p.  39.
8  II.  i.  quaest.  6  (x.  11);  Streitwolf,  vol.  i.  p.  241.

4  Sumnia,  iii.  Ixii.  5;  edit.  Cologne,  1610,  p.  129,  b,  of  fourth  set.


490  PART   in.     Cii.    XX.  — THE    MEANS    OF    GRACE.

instrumentalis  ad  inducenduin  sacramentalein  effectum Si-
cut  virtus  instrumentalis  acquiritur  instrumento,  ex  hoc  ipso  quod
movetur  ab  agente  principali,  ita  et  sacramentum  consequitur
spiritualem  virtutem  ex  benedictione  Christi  et  applicatione  minis-
tri  ad  usuni  sacramenti."  Thus  Thomas's  o^wn  opinion  was  adopted
by  tlie  Council  as  opposed  to  that  of  the  Scotists  to  which  Thomas
refers,  in  the  same  connection  :  "  Illi  qui  ponunt  quod  sacramenta
non  causant  gratiam,  nisi  per  quandam  concomitantiam  ponunt
quod  in  sacramento  non  sit  aliqua  virtus,  quae  operetur  ad  sacra-
menti effectum,  est  tamen  virtus  divina  sacramento  assistens,  quse
sacramentalera,  effectum  operatur."  ^  This  is  very  nearly  the
doctrine  of  the  Reformed  Church  upon  the  subject.  Bellarmin's
illustration  of  the  point  in  hand  is  that  as  fire  is  the  cause  of
combustion  when  brought  into  contact  with  proper  materials,  so
the  sacraments  produce  their  effect  by  their  own  inherent  virtue.
"  Exemplum,"  he  says,  "  esse  potest  in  re  naturali.  Si  ad  ligna
comburenda,  primum  exsiccarentur  ligna,  deinde  excuteretur  ex
silice,  tum  applicaretur  ignis  ligno,  et  sic  tandem  fieret  combvistio  ;
nemo  diceret,  causam  immediatam  combustionis  esse  siccitatem
aut  excussionem  ignis  ex  silice  aut  applicationem  ignis  ad  ligna,
sed  solum  ignem,  ut  causam  primariam,  et  solum  calorem  sen
calef  action  em,  ut  causam  instrumentalem."  ^

"  Jam  vero  sacramenta  gratiam,  quam  significant,  continere,
eamque  conferre  virtute  sibi  insita,  sen  ex  opere  operato,  Scrip-
turse,  patres,  constansque  Ecclesite  sensus  traditionalis  luculentis-
sime  docent."  ^  According  to  Romanists,  therefore,  a  sacrament
is  a  divine  ordinance  which  has  the  inherent  or  intrinsic  power  of
conferring  the  grace  which  it  signifies.

Remonstrant  Doctrine.

It  has  already  been  shown  that  it  was  the  tendency  of  the
Remonstrants  to  eliminate,  as  far  as  possible,  the  supernatural
element  from  Christianity.  They  therefore  regarded  the  sac-
raments not  properly  as  means  of  grace,  but  as  significant  rites
intended  to  bring  the  truth  vividly  before  the  mind,  which  truth
exerted  its  moral  influence  on  the  heart.  "  Sacramenta  cum  dici-
mus,  externas  ecclesias  ceremonias  sen  ritus  illos  sacros  ac  solennes
intelligimus,  quibus  veluti  foederalibus  signis  ac  sigillis  ^dsibili-
bus.  D'i'us  gratiosa  beneficia  sua,  in  fosdere  praasertim  evangehco

1  Aquinas,  ut  suprct,  Ixii.  4;  p.  129,  a.

2  Bellarmin,  De  Sacramentis,  ii.  i. ;  Disputationes,  Paris,  1G08,  vol.  iii.  p.  109,  a.

8  Joannes  Perrone,  Prcekctiones  Theologicce,  De  Sacramentis  in,  genere,  ii.  i.  39;  edifc
Paris,  1861,  vol.  ii.  p.  221,  a.


§  2.]  THE   SACRAMENTS.     THEIR  NATURE.  491

promissa,  non  modo  nobis  repraesentat  et  adumbrat,  sed  et  certo
modo  exliibet  atque  obsignat :  nosque  vicissim  palam  publiceque
declaramus  ac  testamur,  nos  promissiones  omnes  divinas  vera,
firma  atque  obsequiosa  fide  amplecti,  et  beneficia  ipsius  jugi  et
grata  semper  memoria  celebrare  velle."  ^

"  Restat,  ut  dicamus,  Deum  gratiam  suamper  sacramenta  nobis
exhibere,  non  earn  actu  per  ilia  conferendo  ;  sed  per  ilia  tanquam
signa  clara  ac  evidentia.eam  repr^sentando  et  ob  oculos  ponendo
non  eminus  aut  sub  figuris  quibusdam  tanquam  multo  post  fu-
turam,  sed  tanquam  praesentem  :  ut  ita  in  signis  istis  tanquam  in
speculo  quodam,  exhibitionem  illam  gratise,  quam  Deus  nobis  con-
cessit, quasi  conspiciamus.  Estque  bgec  efficacia  nulla  alia  quam
objectiva,  quae  requirit  facultatem  cognitivam  rite  dispositam,
ut  apprehendere  possit  illud,  quod  signum  objective  menti  offert.
Hinc  videmus,  quomodo  sacramenta  in  nobis  operentur,  nimirum
tanquam  signa  reprassentantia  menti  nostrae  rem  cujus  signa  sunt.
Neque  alia  in  illis  quaeri  debet  efficacia."  ^

Zwingle  alone  of  the  Reformers  seems  inclined  to  this  view  of
the  sacraments:  "Sunt  ....  sacramenta,"  he  says,  "signa  vel
ceremoniaB,  pace  tamen  omnium  dicam,  sive  neotericorum  sive
veterum,  quibus  se  homo  Ecclesi®  probat  aut  candidatum  aut
militem  esse  Christi,  redduntque  Ecclesiam  totam  potius  certi-
orem  de  tua  fide  quam  te.  Si  enim  fides  tua  non  aliter  fuerit  ab-
soluta,  quam  ut  signo  ceremoniah  egeat,  fides  non  est :  fides  enim
est,  qua  nitimur  misericordiag  Dei  inconcusse,  firmiter  et  indis-
tracte,  ut  multis  locis  Paulus  habet."  ^  Elsewhere  he  says :  "  Credo,
im.o  scio  omnia  sacramenta,  tarn  abesse  ut  gratiam  conferant,  ut

ne  adferant  quidem  aut  dispensent Dux  autem  vel  vehic-

ulum  Spiritui  non  est  necessarium,  ipse  enim  est  virtus  et  latio  qua
cuncta  f eruntur,  non  qui  f erri  opus  habeat :  neque  id  unquam  leg-
imus  in  scripturis  sacris,  quod  sensibilia,  qualia  sacramenta  sunt,
certo  secum  ferrent  Spiritum,  sed  si  sensibilia  unquam  lata  sunt
cum  Spiritu,  jam  Spiritus  fuit  qui  tulit,  non  sensibilia.  Sic  cum
ventus  vehemens  ferretur,  simul  adferebantur  linguae  venti  vir-
tute,  non  ferebatur  ventus  virtute  linguarum."*  It  is  obvious
that  all  that  Zwingle  here  says  of  the  sacraments,  might  be  said
of  the  Word  of  God ;  and,  therefore,  if  he  proves  anything  he

1  Confessio  Remonstrantium,  xxiii.  1;  Episcopii  Optra,  eclit.  Rotterdam,  1665,  vol.  ii.  p.
92,  a,  of  second  set.

2  Limborch,  Theologia  Christiana,  v.  Ixvi.  31,  32;  edit.  Amsterdam,  1715,  p.  606,  b.

3  De  Vera  et  Falsa  Religione,  Worhs,  edit.  Schuler  and  Schultess,  Turici,  1832,  vol.  iii.
p.  231.

*  Ad  Carolum  Rom.  Tmperatorem,  Fidei  Iluldrychi  Zwinglii  Ratio,  §  7;  Niemeyer's
Collectio  Confessionum,  p.  24.


492  PART   III.     Cii.   XX.  — THE   MEANS   OF    GRACE.

proves  that  the  sacraments  are  not  means  of  grace ;  he  proves
the  same  concerning  the  Word,  to  which  the  Scriptures  attribute
such  an  important  agency  in  the  sanctification  and  salvation  of
men.

§  3.  Number  of  the  Sacraments.

K  the  word  sacrament  be  taken  in  the  wide  sense  in  which  it
was  used  in  the  early  Church  for  any  significant  religious  rite,  it
is  obvious  that  no  definite  limit  can  be  set  to  their  number.  If
the  word  be  confined  to  such  divine  ordinances  as  answer  the
conditions  which  characterize  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper,
then  it  is  evident  that  they  are  the  only  sacraments  under
the  Christian  dispensation;  and  such  is  the  view  taken  by  all
Protestants.  It  is  true  that  in  the  Apology  for  the  Augsburg
Confession  it  is  said :  "  Vere  sunt  sacramenta,  baptismus,  Coena
Domini,  absolutio,  quae  est  sacramentum  poenitentise.  Nam  hi
ritus  habent  mandatum  Dei  et  promissionem  gratis,  quje  est  pro-
pria Novi  Testamenti."  The  last  was  soon  dropped  out  of  the
list  of  sacraments,  although  the  Lutherans  retained  confession  as
a  distinct  Church  institution.  The  confession  however  was  to  be
general,  an  enumeration  of  sins  not  being  requh-ed,  and  the
absolution  which  followed  was  simply  declarative,  and  not  ju-
dicial, as  among  the  Romanists.  The  Reformed  symbols  re-
quired private  confession  to  be  made  to  God,  and  general  con-
fession in  the  congregation  of  the  people ;  and  recommended
in  extraordinary  cases,  where  the  conscience  is  burdened  or
the  mind  perplexed,  private  confession  to  the  pastor  or  spiritual
adviser.

The  Romanists  have  seven  sacraments,  adding  to  baptism  and
the  Lord's  Supper,  matrimony,  orders,  penance,  confirmation,  and
extreme  unction.  Matrimony,  however,  although  a  divine  insti-
tution, was  not  ordained  for  signifying,  sealing,  and  applying
to  believers  the  benefits  of  redemption,  and  therefoi-e,  is  not  a
sacrament.  The  same  may  be  said  of  orders.  And  as  to  con-
firmation, penance,  and  extreme  unction,  in  the  sense  in  which
Romanists  use  those  terms,  they  are  not  divine  institutions  at  all.

Confirmation.

Confirmation  indeed,  or  a  service  attending  the  introduction  of
those  baptized  in  infancy,  into  full  communion  in  the  Church,
was  early  instituted  and  long  continued  among  Protestants  as
well  as  among  Romanists.     Those  who  had  been  baptized  in


§3]  THE   SACRAMENTS.     THEIR  NUMBER.  493

infancy,  had  their  standing  in  the  Church  on  the  ground  of  the
profession  of  faith  and  the  engagements  made  in  their  name,  by
their  parents  or  sponsors.  When  they  came  to  years  of  discre-
tion, they  were  examined  as  to  their  knowledge  and  conduct,
and  if  found  competently  instructed  and  free  irom  scandal,  they
assumed  the  obligation  of  their  baptismal  vows  upon  themselves,
and  their  church  membership  was  confirmed.  In  all  this,  how-
ever, there  was  nothing  of  a  sacramental  character.

This  simple  service  the  Romanists  have  exalted  into  a  sacra-
ment. The  "  material,"  they  say,  is  the  anointing  with  oil,  or
the  imposition  of  hands ;  or  as  Thomas  Aquinas  and  Bellarmin
say,  the  two  united.  Perrone  makes  the  anointing  the  essential
thing.  The  gift  or  grace  conveyed,  "  ex  opere  operato,"  is  that
supernatural  influence  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  enables  the
recipient  to  be  faithful  to  his  baptismal  vows.  The  administrator
must  be  a  prelate,  as  prelates  only  are  the  official  successors  of
the  Apostles,  and,  therefore,  they  only  have  the  power  of  con-
veying the  Holy  Spirit  by  the  imposition  of  hands,  which  was
one  of  the  prerogatives  of  the  apostleship.

Penance.

Romanists  distinguish  between  "  poenitentia,"  repentance  or
penitence,  as  a  virtue  and  as  a  sacrament.  As  a  virtue  it  consists
in  sorrow  for  sin,  a  determination  to  forsake  it,  and  a  purpose
"  ad  sui  vindictam  in  compensationem  injuriae  Deo  per  peccatum
illatns ; "  i.  e.,  a  purpose  to  make  satisfaction  to  God.  As  a
sacrament  it  is  an  ordinance  instituted  by  Christ  for  the  remis-
sion of  sins  committed  after  baptism,  through  the  absolution  of  a
priest  having  jurisdiction.  The  matter  of  the  sacrament  is  the
act  of  the  penitent  including  contrition,  confession,  and  satisfac-
tion. The  form  is  the  act  of  absolution  on  the  part  of  the  priest.
By  contrition  is  meant  sorrow,  or  remorse.  It  is  not  necessary
that  this  contrition  should  be  anything  more  than  a  natural,  as
distinguished  from  a  gracious,  exercise  or  state  of  mind ;  or  as
the  Romanists  express  it,  it  is  not  necessary  that  contrition
should  be  "  caritate  perfecta."  The  confession  included  in  this
assumed  sacrament,  must  be  auricular ;  it  must  include  all  mortal
sins ;  a  sin  not  confessed  is  not  forgiven.  This  confession  is
declared  by  the  Council  of  Trent  to  be  necessary  to  salvation.
"Si  quis  negaverit,  confessionem  sacramentalera  vel  institutam,
vel  ad  salutem  necessariam  esse  jure  divino ;  aut  dixerit,  mo-
clum  secreti  confitendi  soli  sacerdoti,  quem  Ecclesia  cathoKca  ab


494  PART  III.     Ch.   XX. —  the  means   OF   GRACE.

initio  semper  observavit,  et  observat,  alienum  esse  ab  iiistitu-
tione  et  mandato  Christi,  et  inventum  esse  humanum ;  anathema
sit."  ^  In  sin  there  is  both  a  "  reatus  culpse "  and  a  "  reatus
poense."  The  former,  together  with  the  penalty  of  eternal  death,
is  removed  by  absolution ;  but  "  reatus  poenae  "  as  to  temporal
punishment,  to  be  endured  either  in  this  life  or  in  purgatory,
remains  or  may  remain.  Hence  the  necessity  of  satisfaction  for
sin  in  the  sense  above  stated.  The  absolution  granted  by  the
priest,  is  not  merely  declaratory,  but  judicial  and  effective.  On
this  point  the  Romish  Church  teaches  "  1°  Christum  delere  pec-
cata  sacerdotum  ministerio ;  2°  sacerdotes  sedere  judices  in  trib-
miah  poenitentise ;  3°  illorum  sententiam  ratam  in  coelis  esse ;
4*^  sacerdotes  hac  potestate  prjestare  angelis  et  archangelis  ipsis."  '^
This  doctrine  that  no  real  sin,  committed  after  baptism,  can  be
forgiven  unless  confessed  to  a  priest ;  that  the  priest  has  the
power  to  remit  or  retain ;  that  he  carries  at  his  girdle  the  keys
not  only  of  the  visible  Church  on  earth,  but  also  of  heaven  and
hell ;  and  that  he  opens  and  no  man  shuts,  and  shuts  and  no
man  opens,  is  one  of  the  strongest  links  of  the  chain  b^''  which
the  Church  of  Rome  leads  captive  the  souls  of  men.  No  wonder
that  she  says  that  the  power  of  a  priest  is  above  that  even  of
angels  and  archangels.

Orders.

Orders  or  ordination  is  made  a  sacrament,  because  instituted  or
commanded  by  Christ,  and  because  therein  the  supernatural  power
of  consecrating  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  and  of  forgiving  sin
is  conferred.  It  is  thus  defined :  "  Ordo  sacer  et  sacramentum
divinitus  institutum,  quo  tribuitur  potestas  consecrandi  corpus  et
sanguinem  Domini,  nee  non  remittendi  et  retinendi  peccata."
On  this  subject  the  Council  of  Trent  says :  "  Si  quis  dixerit,  per
sacram  ordinationem  non  dari  Spiritum  Sanctum,  ac  proinde
frustra  episcopos  dicere :  Accipe  Spiritum  Sanctum ;  aut  per
eam  non  imprimi  characterem;  vel  eum,  qui  sacerdos  semel
fuit,  laicum  rursus  fieri  posse;  anathema  sit."^  The  right  and
power  to  ordain  belong  exclusively  to  prelates,  for  the}'  alone
possess  the  apostolical  prerogative  of  communicating  the  Holy
Spirit  by  the  imposition  of  hands.  The  Apostles,  however,  had
only  the  power  of  communicating  miraculous  gifts.     They  nei-

1  Sess.  xiv.  canon  6 ;  Streitwolf,  vol.  i.  p.  68.

2  Perrone,  PrmUctiones  Theologicce,  De  Pmmtcntin,  v.  i.  155;  edit.  Paris,  1861,  vol.  u.
p.  351,  a.

8  Sess.  xxiii.  canon  4;  Streitwolf,  vol.  i.  p.  88.


§  3.]  THE    SACRAMENTS.     THEIR   NUMBER.  495

ther  claimed  nor  pretended  to  exercise  the  power  of  confer-
ring the  sanctifying  or  saving  influences  of  the  Spirit.  As  the
Church  of  Rome  claims  for  its  clergy  a  power  far  above  that  of
angels  or  archangels,  so  it  claims  for  its  bishops  powers  far  tran-
scending those  of  the  Apostles.

Matrimony.

Matrhnony  is  declared  to  be  a  sacrament  because,  although
not  instituted  by  Christ,  it  was  made  by  Him  the  symbol  of  the
mystical  union  between  the  Church  and  its  divine  head ;  and  be-
cause by  its  due  celebration  divine  grace  is  conferred  upon  the
contracting  parties.  It  is  thus  defined :  "  Sacramentum  novae
legis,  quo  significatur  conjunctio  Christi  cum  Ecclesia,  et  gratia
confertur  ad  sanctificandam  viri  et  mulieris  legitimam  conjunc-
tionem,  ad  uniendos  arctius  conjugum  animos,  atque  ad  prolem
pie  sancteque  in  virtutis  officiis  et  fide  Christiana  instituendam."  ^

Extreme  Unction.

This  is  defined  to  be  a  sacrament  wherein  by  the  anointing
with  oil  (per  unctionem  olei  benedicti)  and  prayer  in  the  pre-
scribed form,  by  the  ministration  of  a  priest,  grace  is  conferred  to
the  baptized  dangerously  ill,  whereby  sins  are  remitted  and  the
strength  of  the  soul  is  increased.  "  Si  quis  dixerit,  sacram  in-
firmorum  unctionem  non  conferre  gratiam,  nee  remittere  peccata,
nee  alleviare  infirmos ;  sed  jam  cessasse,  quasi  olim  tantum
fuerit  gratia  curationum ;  anathema  sit."  "  Si  quis  dixerit,
presbyteros  Ecclesise,  quos  B.  Jacobus  adducendos  esse  infirmum
inunguendum  hortatur,  non  esse  sacerdotes  ab  Episcopo  ordinatos,
sed  ffitate  seniores,  in  qua  vis  communitate ;  ob  idque  proj)rium
extremse  unctionis  ministrum  non  esse  solum  sacerdotem  ;  anath-
ema sit."  2

Reasons  for  fixing  the  Number  of  the  Sacraments  at  Seven.

It  is  a  work  of  supererogation  for  Romanists  to  assign  an}'
reason  for  making  the  number  of  the  sacraments  seven,  and
neither  more  nor  less,  other  than  the  decision  of  the  Church.  If
the  Church  be  infallible  her  judgment  on  the  question  is  deci-
sive ;  if  it  be  not  infallible  no  other  reason  is  of  any  avail.  They
admit  that  there  is  no  authority  from  Scripture  on  this  point,

1  Perrone,  ut  supra,  De  Matrimonio,  1.  vol.  ii.  p.  407.

2  Cone.  Trident,  sess.  xiv.  "  De  sacramento  extremte  unctionis,"  can.  2,  4;  Streitwolf,
vol.  i.  pp.  70,  71.


496  PART  III.     Cii.   XX.- THE   MEANS   OF   GRACE.

and  on  no  subject  in  dispute  between  them  and  Protestants,  can
appeal  be  made  with  less  show  of  reason  to  the  testimony  of  tra-
dition. Romish  theologians,  therefore,  while  they  claim  com-
mon consent  in  support  of  their  doctrine  on  this  subject,  avail
themselves  of  all  the  collateral  aid  they  can  command.  Thomas
Aquinas  says  that  there  is  an  analogy  between  the  natural  and
spiritual  life  of  man.  He  is  born ;  he  is  strengthened ;  he  is
nourished ;  he  needs  means  of  recovery  from  illness  ;  he  needs  to
propagate  his  race ;  to  Hve  under  the  guidance  of  legitimate  au-
thority ;  and  to  be  prepared  for  his  departure  from  this  world.
The  sacraments  provide  for  all  these  necessities  of  his  spiritual
life.  He  is  born  in  baptism ;  strengthened  by  confirmation ;
nourished  by  the  Lord's  Supper ;  recovered  from  spiritual  illness
by  penance ;  the  Church  is  continued  by  holy  matrimony ;  the
sacrament  of  orders  provides  for  the  Christian  a  supernaturally
endowed  guide ;  and  extreme  unction  prepares  him  for  death.
Thus  through  the  seven  sacraments  all  his  spiritual  wants  are
suppUed.

Then  again  as  there  are  seven  cardinal  vu-tues,  there  should  be
seven  sacraments.  Besides  seven  is  a  sacred  number  :  there  are
seven  days  in  the  week ;  e.very  seventh  year  was  Sabbatical ;
and  there  were  seven  golden  candlesticks,  and  seven  stars  in  the
right  hand  of  Christ.  It  is  not  wonderful  therefore  that  there
should  be  seven  sacraments.  It  is  obvious  that  all  this  amounts
to  nothing.  The  two  sacraments  instituted  by  Christ  for  the
definite  purpose  of  "  signifying,  sealing,  and  applying  to  believ-
ers," the  benefits  of  redemption,  stand  alone  in  the  New  Testa-
ment. No  other  ordinance  has  the  same  characteristics  or  the
same  design.  Admitting,  therefore,  that  the  Fathers  and  the
Church  were  unanimous  in  calling  any  number  of  other  sacred
institutions  sacraments,  that  would  not  prove  that  they  belong  to
the  same  category  as  baptism,  and  the  Lord's  Supper.

It  is,  however,  notorious  that  no  such  general  consent  can  be
pleaded  in  support  of  the  seven  sacraments  of  the  Romanists.
The  simple  facts  on  this  subject  are,  —  (1.)  As  already  re-
marked, in  the  early  Church  every  sacred  rite  was  called  a  sacra-
ment. Then  their  number  was  indefinite.  (2.)  Tlie  preeminence
of  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper  over  all  other  sacred  rites  being
recognized,  they  were  called,  as  by  Augustine,  the  chief  sacra-
ments. (3.)  When  attention  was  directed  to  the  fact  that  some-
thing is  true  of  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper,  which  is  true  cf
no  other  sacred  ordinances  or  rites,  that  they,  and  they  only,  of


§3.]  THE   SACRAMENTS.     THEIll   NUMBER.  497

external  ceremonies  were  appointed  to  be  "  means  of  grace,"  then
tliey  were  declared  in  this  light  to  be  the  only  Christian  sacra-
ments. Justin  Martyr,  ^  Cyril  of  Jerusalem, ^  and  Augustine,^
so  speak  of  them.*  (4.)  As  a  ritualistic  spirit  increased  in  the
Church,  first  one  and  then  another  rite  was  assumed  to  be  a
"  means  of  grace,"  not  ahvays,  however,  the  same  rites,  and  thus
the  number  of  sacraments  was  increased.  (5.)  For  centuries,  how-
ever, no  definite  number  was  admitted  by  anything  like  general
consent.  Some  made  the  number  three  ;  the  Pseudo  Dionysius
in  the  sixth  century  made  six.  Peter  Damiani,  the  friend  of
Gregory  VII.,  made  twelve.  "  Ratherius,  Bishop  of  Verona
(t  974),  Fulbert,  Bishop  of  Chartres  (f  1028),  Bruno,  Bishop
of  Wurzburg  (f  1045),  Rupert,  Abbot  of  Deutz  (f  1135),  ad-
mitted only  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper ;  others,  as  Theo-
dulf.  Bishop  of  Orleans  (f  821),  Agobard,  Bishop  of  Lyons
(t  840),  Lanfranc,  Bishop  of  Canterbury  (f  1089),  Hildebert,
Bishop  of  Tours  (f  1134),  Hugo,  of  St.  Victor  (f  1141),  call
them  '  duo  sancta3  ecclesiffi  sacr amenta.'  "  ^  (6.)  It  is  certain,
says  the  writer  just  quoted,  that  Peter  Lombard  (f  1164)  is
the  first  who  enumerated  the  seven  sacraments  as  held  by  the
Romanists.  He  gives  no  reason  for  fixing  on  the  number  seven  ;
but  that  which  was  already  on  hand  in  the  traditional  sanctity,
attributed  to  that  number.  It  was  regarded  as  the  symbol  of
universality  and  perfection.  This  was  sufficient  for  deciding  on
an  arbitrary  number.  What  has  been  said  is  enough  to  show
that  Romanists  have  not  even  any  plausible  ground  for  their
appeal  to  common  consent  in  support  of  their  doctrine  on  this
subject.  Such  appeal  on  their  theory  is  unnecessary.  If  the
Church  be  infallible,  and  if  the  Church  testifies  that  Christ  or-
dained matrimony,  extreme  unction,  etc.,  to  be  sacraments  ;  that
testimony  is  decisive.  If,  however,  the  Church,  in  the  papal
sense  of  the  word,  be  the  very  reverse  of  infallible,  then  its  testi-
mony, so  far  as  the  faith  of  Christians  is  concerned,  amounts
to  nothing.

1  Apologia  I  [ii.]  AdAntoninum  Pium,  65,  66 ;  Worlcs,  edit.  Commeliniis,  Heidelberg,  1593,
p.  76.

2  Catechesis  Mystagogicce  Quinque,  Schram,  Analysis  Pntrum,  Augsburg,  1789,  vol.  x
pp.  250-268.

3  Enarratio  in  Psalmum  ciii.  14;  Worlcs,  edit.  Benedictines,  Paris,  18-iG,  vol.  iv.  p.  1626,  d.

4  Perrone  in  his  Prcelectiones  Theologicm,  De  Sacramentis  in  genere,  i.  14;  edit.  Paris,
1861,  vol.  ii.  p.  217;  refers  to  these  and  tries  to  explain  the  facts  away.

6  Herzog's  Reul-Encxjklopadie,  Art.  "  Sacramente,"  vol.  xiii.,  p.  241.    The  writer  of  the
elaborate  article  in  Herzog  refers  to  the  thorough  investigation  of  this  question  in  the  Dis-
gertation  by  G.  L.  Hahn,  entitled,  Doctrince  Rom.  de  numero  Saci-amentorum  septenario
rationes  historicce,Yvatis\.  1859.
VOL.  III.  32


498         PART   III.     Cii.   XX. —  THE   MEANS    OF    GRACE.

§  4.   The  Efficacy  of  the  Sacraments.
Zwinglian  and  Remo7istrant  Doctrine.

According  to  the  doctrine  of  Zwingle  afterwards  adopted  by  the
Remonstrants,  the  sacraments  are  not  properly  "  means  of  grace."
They  were  not  ordained  to  signify,  seal,  and  apply  to  believers
the  benefits  of  Christ's  redemption.  They  were  indeed  intended
to  be  significant  emblems  of  the  great  truths  of  the  Gospel.
Baptism  was  intended  to  teach  the  necessity  of  the  soul's  being
cleansed  from  guilt  by  the  blood  of  Christ  and  purified  from  the
pollution  of  sin  by  the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  They  were
further  designed  to  be  perpetual  memorials  of  the  work  of  re-
demption, and  especially  to  be  the  means  by  which  men  should,
in  the  sight  of  the  Church  and  of  the  world,  profess  themselves
to  be  Christians.  As  a  heathen,  when  he  desired  to  be  admitted
into  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  received  circumcision,  which  was
the  divinely  appointed  seal  of  the  Abrahamic  covenant,  so  par-
ticipation in  the  Christian  sacraments  was  the  appointed  means
for  tlie  public  profession  of  faith  in  Christ.  Paul  presents  the
matter  in  this  light  in  1  Corinthians  x.  15-22,  where  he  argues
that  participation  in  the  sacred  rites  of  a  religion  involves  a  pro-
fession of  that  religion,  whether  it  be  Christian,  Je^vish,  or  hea-
then. The  sacraments,  therefore,  are  "  badges  of  Christian  men's
profession."  This  doctrine,  however,  attributes  to  them  no  other
than  what  Zwingle  calls  in  the  passage  above  quoted,  "  an  objec-
tive power ; "  that  is,  the  objective  presentation  of  the  truth  which
they  signify  to  the  mind.

"  Ex    quibus  hoc  colligitur   sacramenta   dari    in  testimonium

publicum  ejus  gratiae,  quae  cuique  private  prius  adest Ob

banc  causam  sacramenta,  qufie  sacrjB  sunt  cerimonire  (accedit  enim
verbum  ad  elementum  et  fit  sacramentum),  religiose  colenda,  hoc
est  in  precio  habenda,  et  honorifice  tractanda  sunt,  \\t  enim  gra-
tiam  facere  non  possunt,  Ecclesiffi  tamen  nos  visibiliter  sociant,
qui  prius  invisibiliter  sumus  in  illam  recepti,  quod  cum  simul
cum  promissionis  divinae  verbis  in  ipsorum  actione  pronunciatur  ac
promulgatur,  summa  religione  suscipiendum  est."  ^  In  his  treatise
on  true  and  false  religion,  Z^vingle  says :  ^  Impossibile  est,  ut  res
aliqua  externa  fidem  hominis  internam  confirmet  et  stabiliat."^
And  again  he  says  ^  that  the  sacraments  as  other  memorials  can

1  Zwinglii  Fidei  Ratio,  Niemeyer,  vol.  i.  pp.  25,  26.

2  Works,  edit.  Schuler  und  Schultess.(V)  See  Strauss,  Dogmatik,  vol.  ii.  p.  519.
•  Espositio  Christianoe  Fidei,  70 ;  Niemeyer,  vol.  i.  p.  49.


§  4-.}  THE    SACUAMEXTS.     TllEIll   EFFICACY.  499

only  produce  historical,  but  not  religious  faith.  Zwingle  iu  tbe
use  of  such  language,  had  doubtless  more  a  negative,  than  an  af-
firmative object  before  his  mind.  He  was  more  intent  on  denying
the  Romish  doctrine  of  the  inlierent  power  of  the  sacraments,
than  of  asserting  anything  of  their  real  efficacy.  Nevertheless
it  is  true  that  Zwingle  has  ever  been  regarded  as  holding  the
lowest  doctrine  concerning  the  sacraments  of  any  of  the  Re-
formers. They  were  to  him  no  more  means  of  grace  than  the
rainbow  or  the  heaps  of  stone  on  the  banks  of  the  Jordan.  By
their  significancy  and  by  association  they  might  suggest  truth  and
awaken  feeling,  but  they  were  not  channels  of  divine  communi-
cation.

Doctrine  of  the    Reformed   Church.

The  first  point  clearly  taught  on  this  subject  in  the  Symbols  of
the  Reformed  Church  is  that  the  sacraments  are  real  means  of
grace,  that  is,  means  appointed  and  employed  by  Christ  for  con-
veying the  benefits  of  his  redemption  to  his  people.  They  are
not,  as  Romanists  teach,  the  exclusive  channels  ;  but  they  are
channels.  A  promise  is  made  to  those  who  rightly  receive  the
sacraments  that  they  shall  thereby  and  therein  be  made  partak-
ers of  the  blessings  of  which  the  sacraments  are  the  divinely  ap-
pointed signs  and  seals.  The  word  grace,  when  we  speak  of  the
means  of  grace,  includes  three  things.  1st.  An  unmerited  gift,
such  as  the  remission  of  sin.  2d.  The  supernatural  influence  of
the  Holy  Spirit.  3d.  The  subjective  effects  of  that  influence  on
the  soul.     Faith,  hope,  and  charity,  for  example,  are  graces.

The  second  point  in  the  Reformed  doctrine  on  the  sacraments
concerns  the  source  of  their  power.  On  this  subject  it  is  taught
negatively  that  the  virtue  is  not  in  them.  The  word  virtue  is  of
course  here  used  in  its  Latin  sense  for  power  or  efficiency.  What
is  denied  is  that  the  sacraments  are  the  efficient  cause  of  the
gracious  effects  which  they  produce.  The  efficiency  does  not
reside  in  the  elements,  in  the  water  used  in  baptism,  or  in  the
bread  and  wine  used  in  the  Lord's  Supper.  It  is  not  in  the  sacra-
mental actions ;  either  in  giving,  or  in  receiving  the  consecrated
elements.  Neither  does  the  virtue  or  efficiency  due  to  sacraments
reside  in,  or  flow  from  the  person  by  whom  they  are  administered.
It  does  not  reside  in  his  office.  There  is  no  supernatural  power
in  the  man,  in  virtue  of  his  office,  to  render  the  sacraments  ef-
fectual. Nor  does  their  efficiency  depend  on  the  character  of  the
administrator  in  the  sight  of  God ;  nor  upon  his  intention  ;  that
is,  his  purpose  to  render  them  effectual.     The  man  who  adminia-


500         PART   III.     Ch.   XX.  — the   means   OF   GRACE.

ters  the  sacraments  is  not  a  worker  of  miracles.  The  Apostlea
and  others  at  that  time  in  the  Church,  were  endued  with  super-
natural power  ;  and  they  had  to  will  to  exercise  it  in  order  to  its
producing  its  legitimate  effect.  It  is  not  so  with  the  officers  of
the  Church  in  the  administration  of  the  sacraments.  The  affirma-
tive statement  on  this  subject  is,  that  the  efficacy  of  the  sacra-
ments is  due  solely  to  the  blessing  of  Christ  and  the  working  of
his  Spirit.  The  Spirit,  it  is  to  be  ever  remembered,  is  a  personal
agent  who  works  when  and  how  He  will.  God  has  promised  that
his  Spirit  shall  attend  his  Word  ;  and  He  thus  renders  it  an
effectual  means  for  the  sanctification  of  his  people.  So  He  has
promised,  through  the  attending  operation  of  his  Spirit,  to  render
the  sacraments  effectual  to  the  same  end.

The  third  point  included  in  the  Reformed  doctrine  is,  that  the
sacraments  are  effectual  as  means  of  grace  only,  so  far  as  adults
are  concerned,  to  those  who  by  faith  receive  them.  They  may
have  a  natural  power  on  other  than  believers  by  presenting  truth
and  exciting  feeling,  but  their  saving  or  sanctifying  influence  is
experienced  only  by  believers.

All  these  points  are  clearly  presented  in  the  standards  of  our
OAvn  Church.  The  sacraments  are  declared  to  be  means  of  grace,
that  is,  means  for  signifying,  sealing,  and  applying  the  benefits  of
redemption.  It  is  denied  that  this  virtue  is  in  them,  or  in  him
by  whom  they  are  administered.  It  is  affirmed  that  their  ef-
ficiency in  conveying  grace,  is  due  solely  to  the  blessing  of  Christ
and  the  cooperation  of  his  Spirit ;  and  that  such  efficiency  is  ex-
perienced only  by  believers.  Thus  in  the  Shorter  Catechism,
the  sacraments  are  said  to  be  holy  ordinances  "  instituted  by
Christ ;  wherein,  by  sensible  signs,  Christ  and  the  benefits  of  the
new  covenant  are  represented,  sealed,  and  applied  to  believers."^
In  the  Larger  Catechism  the  sacraments  are  said  to  be  instituted
"  to  signify,  seal,  and  exhibit  unto  those  that  are  ^vithin  the  cove-
nant of  grace,  the  benefits  of  his  [Christ's]  mediation."^  The
word  "  exliibit,"  as  here  used,  means  to  confer,  or  impart,  as  the
Latin  word  "  exhibere  "  also  sometimes  means.  That  such  is  the
sense  of  the  word  in  our  standards,  is  plain  because  the  exhibition
here  spoken  of  is  confined  to  those  within  the  covenant ;  and  be-
cause this  word  is  interchanged  and  explained  by  the  word  "  con-
fer." Thus  in  the  Confession  of  Faith ^  it  is  said,  "The  grace
which  is  exhibited  in,  or  by  the  sacraments,  rightly  used,  is  not
conferred  by  any  virtue  in  them."     And  again,*  that  by  the  right

1  Ques.  92.  2  Ques.  162.  »  Chap,  xxvii.  3  <  Chap,  xxviii.  6.


§4.]  THE    SACRAMENTS.     THEIK  EFFICACY.  501

use  of  baptism  "  the  grace  promised  is  not  only  offered,  but  really
exhibited  and  conferred  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  such  (whether  of
age  or  infants)  as  that  grace  belongeth  unto,  according  to  the
counsel  of  God's  own  will,  in  his  appointed  time."  With  this
view  of  the  sacraments  as  means  of  grace  all  the  other  leading
symbols  of  the  Reformed  Churches  agree.  Thus  the  First  Hel-
vetic Confession  ^  says,  "  Asserimus,  sacramenta  non  solum  tes-
seras  quasdam  societatis  Christian^e,  sed  et  gratis  divmas  symbola
esse,  quibus  ministri,  Dommo,  ad  eum  finem,  quem  ipse  promittit,
offert  et  efficit,  cooperentur."  The  Galilean  Confession  says  :
"  Fatemur  talia  esse  signa  hsec  exteriora,  ut  Deus  per  ilia  Sancti
sui  Spiritus  virtute,  operetur,  ne  quicquam  ibi  frustra  nobis  sig-
nificetur."  ^  In  the  Geneva  Catechism  ^  it  is  said :  "  Quid  est  sac-
ramentum  ?  Externa  divinas  erga  nos  benevolentise  testificatio,
quse  visibili  signo  spirituales  gratias  figurat,  ad  obsignandos  cordi-
bus  nostris  Dei  promissiones,  quo  earum  Veritas  melius  confirmetur.
....  Vim  efficaciamque  sacramenti  non  in  externo  elemento  in-
clusam  esse  existimas,  sed  totam  a  Spiritu  Dei  manare  ?  Sic  sen-
tio :  nempe,  ut  virtutem  suam  exerere  Domino  placuerit  per  sua
organa,  quem  in  finem  ea  destinavit."  The  language  of  the  Belgic
Confession*  is  to  the  same  effect :  "  Sunt  enim  sacramenta  signa,
ac  symbola  visibilia  rerum  internarum  et  invisibilium,  per  quae,
ceu  per  media,  Deus  ipse  virtute  Spiritus  Sancti  in  nobis  opera-
tur.  Itaque  signa  ilia  minime  vana  sunt,  aut  vacua  :  nee  ad  nos
decipiendos  aut  frustrandos  instituta."

These  symbols  of  the  Reformed  Churches  on  the  continent  of
Europe  agree  with  those  of  our  own  Church,  not  only  in  repre-
senting the  sacraments  as  real  means  of  grace,  but  also  in  denying
that  their  efficacy  is  due  to  their  mherent  yirtue,  or  to  him  who
admmisters  them,  and  in  affirming  that  it  is  due  to  the  attending
operation  of  the  Spirit,  and  is  conditioned  on  the  presence  of  faith
in  the  recipient.  This  is  plain  from  the  quotations  already  made,
which  might  be  multiplied  indefinitely.  On  this  point  Calvin
says  :  "  Neque  sacramenta  hiUim  proficere  sine  Spiritu  Sancti  vir-
tute." And  again  :  "  Spiritus  Sanctus  (quem  non  omnibus  pro-
miscue  sacramenta  advehunt,  sed  quem  Dominus  peculiariter  suis
confert)  is  est  qui  Dei  gratias  secum  affert,  qui  dat  sacramentis
in  nobis  locum,  qui  efficit  ut  fructificent."^    Guerike^  gives  as  one

1  Art.  XXI. ;  Niemeyer,  Collectio  Confessionum,  Leipzig,  1840,  p.  120.

2  Art.  XXXIV. ;  Ibid.  p.  337.

8  V.  De  Sacramentis,  2  and  5 ;  Ibid.  pp.  160,  161.  4  Art.  xxxiii. ;  Ibid.  p.  383.

6  Imtitutio,  IV.  xiv.  9,  17;  edit.  Berlin,  1834,  part  ii.  pp.  355,  360.
8  Allgemeine  Chi-istliche  Symbolih,  von  H.  E.  Ferdinand  Guerike,  D.  D.,  Leipzig,  1839,
p.  878.


602       PART  III.    Ch.  XX.  — tup:  means  of  grace.

of  the  main  points  of  difference  between  the  Lutherans  and  Re-
formed on  this  subject,  that  the  latter  deny  the  inherent  power
of  the  sacraments,  and  insist  that  the  "virtus  Spiritus  Sancti
extrinsecus  accidens "  is  the  source  of  all  their  sanctifying  influ-
ence.

There  is,  therefore,  a  strict  analogy,  according  to  the  Reformed
doctrine,  between  the  Word  and  the  sacraments  as  means  of
grace.  (1.)  Both  have  in  them  a  certain  moral  power  due  to  the
truth  which  they  bring  before  the  mind.  (2.)  Neither  has  in
itself  any  supernatural  power  to  save  or  to  sanctify.  (3.)  All
their  supernatural  ejSiciency  is  due  to  the  cooperation  or  attending
influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  (4.)  Both  are  ordained  by  God  to
be  the  channels  or  means  of  the  Spirit's  influence,  to  those  who
by  faith  receive  them.  Nothing  is  said  in  the  Bible  to  place  the
sacraments  above  the  Word  as  a  means  of  communicating  to  men
the  benefits  of  Christ's  redemption.  On  the  contrary,  tenfold
more  is  said  in  Scripture  of  the  necessity  and  efiiciency  of  the
Word  in  the  salvation  of  men,  than  is  therein  said  or  implied  of
the  power  of  the  sacraments.

Besides  the  points  already  referred  to  as  characteristic  of  the
Reformed  doctrine  on  the  sacraments,  there  is  a  fourth,  which  is,
that  the  grace  or  spiritual  benefits  received  by  believers  in  the
use  of  the  sacraments,  may  be  attained  without  then-  use.  This,
however,  may  perhaps  be  more  properly  considered,  when  the
necessity  of  the  sacraments  comes  under  consideration.

The  Lutheran  Doctrine.

There  are  two  points  specially  insisted  upon  by  Lutherans  in
reference  to  the  efficacy  of  the  sacraments.  The  first  is,  the
absolute  necessity  of  faith  in  order  to  any  real  sanctifying  or  sav-
ing benefit  being  derived  from  the  use  of  those  ordinances.  On
this  point  they  are  in  perfect  accord  with  the  Reformed.  Hase  is
right  when  he  says  that  the  idea,  "  That  a  sacrament  can  confer
saving  benefit  without  faith  is  utterly  destructive  of  Protestant-
ism." ^  Augustine  had  long  ago  taught  the  doctrine,  "  Unde  ista
tanta  virtus  aqure,  ut  corpus  tangat,  et  cor  abluat,  nisi  faciente
verbo  :  non  quia  dicitur,  sed  quia  creditur."  ^  And  Bernard  of
Clairvaux  says  :  "  Sacramentmn  enim  sine  re  sacramenti  sumenti

1  EvatKjelische  Dogpiatik,  ii.  ii.  1,  §  213;  3d  edit.  Leipzig,  1842,  p.  442.

2  In  Joannis  Evangelium  Traciatus,  Lxxx.  3;  Works,  edit.  Benedictines,  Paris  1837
vol.  iii.  p.  2290,  a.


§4.]  THE   SACRAMENTS.     THEIR   EFFICACY.  503

mors  est :  res  vero  sacramenti,  etiam,  printer  sacrauientum,  su-
menti  vita  seterna  est."  ^

The  Lutheran  symbols  on  this  point  are  perfectly  explicit.  In
the  "  Augsburg  Confession  "  ^  it  is  said :  "  Itaque  utendum  est
sacramentum  ita,  ut  fides  accedat,  qnse  credat  proniissionibus,
quas  per  sacramenta  exliibentur  et  ostenduntur.  Damnant  igitur
illos,  qui  docent,  quod  sacramenta,  ex  opere  operato  justificent,
nee  docent  fidem  requiri  in  usu  sacramentorum,  quae  credat  re-
mi  tti  peccata."

In  the  "  Apology  for  the  Augsburg  Confession  "  ^  it  is  said  :
"  Damnamus  totum  populum  scholasticorum  doctorum,  qui  do-
cent, quod  sacramenta  non  ponenti  obicem  conferant  gratiam  ex
opere  operato,  sine  bono  motu  utentis.  Usee  simpliciter  Judaica
opinio  est,  sentire,  quod  per  ceremoniam  justificemur,  sine  bono

motu  cordis,  hoc  est,  sine  fide At  sacramenta  sunt  signa

promissionum.     Igitur  in  usu  debet  accedere  fides Loqui-

mur  hie  de  fide  speciali,  quae  prgesenti  promissioni  credit,  non  tan-
tum  qufe  in  genere  credit  Deum  esse,  sed  qute  credit  offerri  remis-
sionem  peccatorum."

The  second  point  in  the  doctrine  of  Lutherans  in  regard  to  the
efiicacy  of  the  sacraments  is  one  in  which  they  differ  from  the
Reformed,  and  as  Guerike,  himseif  a  strenuous  Lutheran,  cor-
rectly says,  approximate  to  the  Romanists.  They  hold  that  the
efficacy,  of  the  sacraments  is  due  to  their  own  inherent  vii'tue  or
power  ;  a  power  independent,  on  the  one  hand,  of  the  attendant
influences  of  the  Spirit  (extrinsecus  accidens),  and,  on  the  other
hand,  of  the  faith  of  the  recipient.  Faith,  indeed,  is  necessary  to
any  saving  or  sanctifying  effect,  but  that  is  only  a  subjective  con-
dition on  which  the  beneficial  operation  of  the  power,  inherent  in
the  sacraments,  is  suspended.  Bellarmin's  illustration  is  applica-
ble to  the  Lutheran  doctrine  as  well  as  to  his  own.  Fire  will  not
cause  wood  to  burn  unless  the  wood  be  dry  ;  but  its  dryness  does
not  give  fire  its  power.  Luther's  own  favourite  illustration  was
drawn  from  the  case  of  the  woman  who  touched  the  Saviour's
garment.  There  was  inherent  healing  virtue  in  Christ.  Those
who  touched  him  without  faith  received  no  benefit.  The  woman
having  faith  was  healed  the  moment  she  touched  the  hem  of  his
garment.  Her  faith,  however,  was  in  no  sense  the  source  of  the
power  which  resided  in  Christ.     Guerike  complains  that  the  Re-

1  Guigo  (attributed  to  St.  Bernard);    Works  of  St.  Bernard,  edit.  Migne,  Paris,  18.59.  vol.
iii.  p.  327,  b,  c  (ii.  214).
a  I.  xiii.;  Hase,  L^tri  SymboUci,  Leipzig,  1846,  p.  13.  3  vii.  18-21;  Ibi/I.  p.  203.


504    PART  III.  Cu.  XX.  — THE  MEANS  OF  GRACE.

formed  teacli  that  "  the  visible  signs  do  not  as  such  convey  any
invisible  divine  grace  ;  that  without  the  sacraments  the  Christian
may  enjoy  through  faith  the  same  divine  gifts  which  the  sacra-
ments are  mtended  to  convey,  and  hence  do  not  admit  their  abso-
lute necessity,  much  less  that  they  are  the  central  point  of  the
Christian  method  of  salvation  (der  christlichen  Heilsaiistalt)."^

Luther  did  not  at  first  hold  this  inherent  poAver  of  the  sacra-
ments, but  seemed  disposed  to  adopt  even  the  low  views  of  Zwin-
gle.  In  his  work  on  the  Babylonish  Captivity  he  says,  "  Bap-
tismus  neminem  justificat,  nee  ulli  prodest,  sed  fides  in  verbum
promissionis,  cui  additiu"  baptismus Nee  verum  esse  po-
test, sacramentis  inesse  vun  efhcacem  justificationis  sen  esse  signa
efficacia  gratise."  ^  Melancthon  uses  much  the  same  language  :
"  Non  justificant  signa,  ut  Apostolus  ait,  Circumcisio  nihil  est :
ita  baptismus  nihil  est.  Participatio  mensa3  Domini  nihil  est :
sed  testes  smit  koI  o-^/jaytSe?  divinge  voluntatis  erga  te,  quibus  con-
scientia  tua  certa  reddatur,  si  de  gratia,  de  benevolentia  Dei  erga

se  dubitet Quse  alii  sacramenta,  nos  signa  appellamus,

aut  si  ita  libet,  signa  sacramentalia.  Nam  sacramentum  ipsum
Christum  Paulus  vocat.*'^  "  Hinc  apparet,  quam  nihil  signa  sint,
nisi  fidei  exercendas  //ir/uorjura."  4

As,  however,  Luther  unders^^ood  our  Lord's  words  in  John  iii.
6,  as  teaching  the  necessity  of  baptism,  he  inferred  that  if  the
sacrament  is  necessary  to  salvation  it  must  have  saving  power.
But  as  the  Bible  teaches  that  no  one  can  be  saved  mthout  faith,
he  held  that  the  sacraments  could  have  no  saving  effect  unless
the  recipient  was  a  believer.  We  have  thus  the  two  essential
elements  of  the  Lutheran  doctrine  of  the  sacraments ;  they  have
inherent,  saving,  sanctifying  power  ;  but  that  power  takes  effect
for  good  only  upon  believers.

The  necessity  of  faith  is  clearly  stated  in  the  passages  already
quoted  from  the  "Augsburg  Confession"  and  the  "  Apology;"
the  inherent  power  of  the  sacraments  in  opposition  to  the  Reformed
doctrine  is  as  clearly  taught  in  tlie  Lutheran  standards.  Both
points  are  included  in  some  of  the  proof  passages  which  follow.
Guerike  says :  "  It  is  undoubtedly  the  Lutheran,  in  opposition
to  the  Reformed  doctrine  of  '  virtus   Spiritus  sancti  extrinsecus

1  Allgemeine  ChristUcJie  SymhoUk,  §  54,  Leipzig,  1839,  pp.  375,  376.

2  Luther,  Captivitas  Bnbyhnica,  de  Sacramento  Baptismi ;  Works,  edit.  Wittenberg
I'Latin),  1546,  vol.  ii.  leaf  7'J,  pajifc  2.

3  Loci  Communes  ;  Dt  Siijnis;  edit.  Strasburg,  1523,  in  Dodecas  Scriptoi-um  Theoloff'
icorum,  Nuremberg,  1046,  pp.  774,  775.

4  Ibid.,  De  Bfiptismo,  p.  778.


S  4.]  THE   SACRAMENTS.     THEIR  EFFICACY.  505

accedens,'  that  the  grace  is  in,  and  not  merely  with  or  by  (mit
oder  neben),  the  sacraments."  ^  He  refers  to  the  language  of
Luther  in  his  Larger  Catechism  in  reference  to  baptism.  Luther
says  :  "  Interrogatus,  quid  baptismus  sit  ?  ita  responde  :  non  esse
prorsus  aquam  simplicem,  sed  ejusmodi,  quae  verbo  et  prgecepto
Dei  comprehensa,  et  illi  inclusa  sit,  et  per  hoc  sanctificata  ita  ut
nihil  ahud  sit,  quam  Dei  seu  divina  aqua."  He  adds,  however,
"  non  quod  aqua  hasc  per  sese  quavis  aha  sit  prgestantior,  sed
quod  ei  verbum  ac  prfeceptum  Dei  accesserit.  Quocirca  mera
sycophantia  est  et  diaboh  illusio,  quod  hodie  nostri  novi  spiritus,
ut  blasphement  et  contumelia  afficiant  baptismum,  verbum  et
institutionem  Dei  ab  eo  divellimt,  nee  aliter  intuentur  eum,  quam
aquam  e  putreo  haustam  ac  deinceps  ita  blasphemo  ore  blaterant :
Quid  vero  utiUtatis  mahus  aquae  plena  prsestaret  animce  ?  Quis
vero  adeo  vecors  et  inops  animi  est,  qui  hoc  ignoret,  divulsis  bap-
tismi  partibus,  aquam  esse  aquam  ?  Qua  vero  fronte  tu  tibi
tantum  sumis,  ut  non  verearis  ab  ordinatione  Dei  pretiosissimum
KuiJirjXiov  avellere,  quo  Deus  illam  constrinxit  et  inclusit,  neque
inde  divelH  vult  aut  sejungi  ?  Quippe  verbum  Dei,  aut  prae-
ceptum,  item  nomen  Dei,  in  aqua  ipse  solet  esse  nucleus,  qui
thesaurus  ipso  coelo  et  terra  omnibus  modis  nobihor  est  et  prae-
stantior."  ^

Lutherans  are  wont  to  refer  to  the  analogy  between  the  Word
and  sacraments.  The  difference  between  them  and  the  Reformed
as  to  the  sacraments,  is  analogous  to  the  difference  between  the
two  churches  as  to  the  Word.  The  Reformed  refer  the  super-
natural power  of  the  Word,  not  to  the  hteral  Word  as  wi'itteu  or
spoken  ;  not  to  the  mere  moral  truth  therein  revealed,  but  to  the
cooperation,  or  as  Paul  calls  it,  the  demonstration,  of  the  Spirit.
The  Lutherans,  on  the  other  hand,  teach  that  there  is  inherent  in
the  divine  Word  (not  in  the  letters  or  the  sound  but  in  the  truth),
a  supernatural,  divine  virtue,  insej^arable  from  it,  and  indepen-
dent of  its  use ;  and  Avliich  is  the  same  to  believers  and  unbe-
lievers ;  sanctifying  and  saving  the  former,  because  of  their  faith,
and  not  benefiting  the  latter,  because  of  their  voluntary  resist-
ance. So  the  sacraments  have  an  inherent,  divine  power,  certain
of  producing  saving  effects,  if  they  meet  with  faith  in  those  who
receive  them.  "  The  Lutheran  Church,"  says  Guerike,  "  regards
the  sacraments  as  actions,  wherein  God,  through  external  sigiis
by  Him  appointed,  offers  and  confers  his  invisible  and  heavenly

1  Symbolik,  Leipzig,  1839,  p.  393,  note.

2  Catechismus  Major,  par.  iv.,  De  Baptismo ;  Hase,  Lihri  Symbolid,  edit.  Leipzig,  1846,
p.  537.


506       PART  in.   Ch.  XX. —  the  means  of  grace.

gifts  ;  they  see  in  the  sacraments  visible  signs,  which  in  virtue  of
the  divine  word  of  promise  pronounced  over  them,  in  such  sense
contain  the  invisible  divine  gifts  they  signify,  that  they  communi-
cate them  (mittheilen)  to  all  who  partake  of  them,  although  only
to  believers  to  their  good."  ^

This  inherent  divine  virtue  of  the  sacraments  does  not  reside
in  the  elements  ;  nor  does  it  flow  from  him  who  administers  them ;
nor  is  it  due  to  the  concurrent  operation  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  but
to  the  Word.  The  elements  employed  are  in  themselves  mere
elements ;  with  the  Word,  they  are  divinely  eflicacious,  because
the  divine  Word,  wherever  it  is,  is  fraught  with  this  divine,  super-
natural, saving,  and  sanctifying  power  which  always  takes  effect
on  those  who  have  faith  to  receive  it.

Dr.  Schmid  of  Erlangen,  however,  admits  that  there  is  a  dif-
ference of  view  on  this  subject,  between  the  earher  and  later
theologians  of  his  Church.  The  former  made  the  sacrament
consist  of  the  element  and  the  Word,  and  referred  its  supernatural
effect  to  the  inherent  divine  power  of  the  latter,  agreeably  to
Luther's  representation  in  his  Larger  Catechism,  where,  when
speaking  of  baptism,  he  says,  in  words  already  quoted :  "  non
tantum  naturalis  aqua  sed  etiam  divina,  coelestis,  sancta  et  sal-
utifera  aqua  (est)  ....  hocque  non  nisi  verbi  gratia,  quod
coeleste  ac  sanctum  verbum  est."  The  later  theologians,  how-
ever, from  the  time  of  Gerhard,  did  not  make  the  sacrament
consist  of  the  element  and  the  Word  ;  but  of  something  terrestrial
and  something  celestial.  The  former  is  the  element  or  external
symbol,  "quod  est  res  corporea  visibihs  ....  ordinata  ad  hoc  ;
ut  sit  rei  coelestis  vehiculum  et  medium  exhibitivum."  The
latter,  or  "  res  coelestis,"  is  "  res  invisibilis  et  intelligibihs,  re
terrena  visibiH,  tanquam  medio  divinitus  ordinate  exhibita,  a  qua
fructus  sacramenti  principaliter  dependet."  According  to  this
view  the  efficacy  of  the  sacrament  does  not  depend  upon  the
Word,  but  upon  this  "  res  coelestis,"  of  which  the  "  res  terrena  "
is  the  vehicle  and  medium.  The  office  of  the  Word  is  to  unite
the  two.  It  is  called  the  ''  alTiov  ttoij/tikov,  hoc  est,  efficere,  ut
duae  illse  partes  essentiales  unum  sacramentum  constituant  in  usu
sacramentorum."  ^  This  doctrine  of  the  later  Lutherans  is  at-
tended ^vith  serious  difficulties.  It  brings  them  into  conflict  with
Luther  and  Lutherans  of  the  older  school  who    are    strenuous

1  Guerike's  Symbolik,  p.  372.

2  Schmid,  Die  Dogmatik  der  evangelisch-lutherischen  Kirche.  Frankfort  and  ErI&ngen,
1863,  pp.  415-417.


§4.]  THE    SACRAMKNTS.     THEIR   EFFICACY.  507

in  referring  the  efl&cacy  of  the  sacraments  to  the  Word.  The
elements  without  the  Word,  are  mere  elements.  It  is  the  Word  in
which  the  supernatural  power  resides  which  produces  the  effect
the  sacrament  is  intended  to  accomplish.  But  according  to  this
later  view  there  are  in  the  sacraments  two  things,  the  sign  and
the  thing  signified;  a  "  res  terrena  "  and  a  "  res  coelestis."  They
are  so  united  that  where  the  one  is  given  and  received  by  faith,
the  other  is  received.  This  "  res  coelestis,"  however,  is  not  the
Word.  In  the  case  of  the  eucharist,  for  example,  it  is  the  real
body  and  blood  of  Christ,  and  these  being  inseparably  united
with  his  soul  and  divinity,  it  is  this  marvellous  gift,  and  not  the
Word,  which  makes  the  Lord's  Supper  the  life-sustaining  food  of
the  soul.

So  far  as  the  efl&cacy  of  the  sacraments  is  concerned,  the  main
point  of  difference  between  the  Lutherans  and  the  Reformed  is,
that  the  latter  attribute  their  sanctifying  power  to  the  attending
influences  of  the  Spirit ;  the  former  to  the  inherent,  supernatural
power  of  the  Word  which  is  an  essential  part  of  these  divme  ordi-
nances. Even  on  this  point  Chemnitz  expresses  himseK  in  a  way
to  which  any  Reformed  theologian  may  assent.  "  Recte  Apol-
ogia Augustanse  confessionis  dicit,  eundem  esse  effectum,  eandem
virtutem,  sen  efl&caciam,  et  verbi    et   sacramentorum,  quee  sunt

sigilla  promissionum Sicut  igitur  Evangelium  est  poten-

tia  Dei  ad  salutem  omni  credenti :  non  quod  magica  qusedam  vis
characteribus,  syllabis,  aut  sono  verborum  inhsereat,  sed  quia  est
medium,  organon  sen  instrumentum,  per  quod  Spiritus  Sanctus
eflficax  est,  proponens,  offerens,  exhibens,  distribuens  et  applicans
meritum  Christi,  et  gratiam  Dei,  ad  salutem  omni  credenti :  ita
etiam  sacramentis  tribuitur  vis  et  eflficacia  :  non  quod  in  sacra-
mentis  extra  seu  prater  meritum  Christi,  misericordiam  Patris,  et
efl&caciam  Spiritus  Sancti,  quaerenda  sit  gratia  ad  salutem ;  sed
sacramenta  sunt  causae  instrumentales  ita,  quod  per  ilia  media
seu  organa,  Pater  vult  gratiam  suam  exhibere,  donare,  applicare :
Fihus  meritum  sumn  communicare  credentibus  :  Spiritus  Sanctus
eflficaciam  suam  exercere,  ad  salutem  omni  credenti."  ^

The  Lutheran  doctrine  as  generally  presented  and  as  stated
above,  stands  opposed,  (1.)  To  the  doctrine  of  the  Romanists  which
denies  the  necessity  of  a  living  faith  in  the  recipient  in  order  to
his  experiencing  the  efl&cacy  of  the  sacraments  ;  and  which  not
only  represents  them  as  imbued  with  an  inherent  power,  but  also

1  Examen  Condlii  Tridentini,  de  Efficacia  et  Usu  Sacramentorum,  edit.  Frankfort-on-
the-Main,  1573,  1674,  part  ii.  p.  22,  b.


b08         PART   III.     Ch.   XX.  — the   MEANS   OF    GRACE.

teaches  that  they  confer  grace  "  ex  opere  operate."  (2.)  To  the
doctrine  which  makes  the  sacraments  merely  badges  of  a  Chris-
tian profession.  (3.)  To  the  doctrine  which  represents  them  as
mere  allegories  or  significant  exhibitions  of  truth.  (4.)  To  the
doctrine  which  regards  them  as  merely  commemorative,  as  a  por-
trait or  monument  may  be.  (5.)  To  the  doctrine  which  denies  to
them  inherent  efficacy  and  refers  their  sanctifymg  influence  to
the  accompanying  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit;  and  (6.)  To  the
doctrine  which  assumes  that  they  confer  nothing  which  may  not
be  obtained  by  faith  without  them.  In  all  these  points,  with  the
exception  of  the  last  two,  Lutherans  and  Reformed  are  agreed.

Doctrine  of  the  Church  of  Home  on  the  Efficacy  of  the  Sacra-
ments.

It  has  already  been  stated  that  the  Romanists  teach,  (1.)  That
the  sacraments  contain  the  grace  which  they  signify.  (2.)  That
they  convey  that  grace  "  ex  opere  operato."  (3.)  That  there  is
a  certain  efficacy  common  to  all  the  sacraments.  They  all  con-
vey grace,  i.  e.,  "  gratia  gratum  faciens,  sanctificans  ;  '•'  and  be-
sides this  common  influence,  in  baptism,  confirmation,  and  orders,
there  is  conveyed  an  indelible  character  (quoddam  indelebile)  in
virtue  of  which  they  can  never  be  repeated.  (4.)  That  the  con-
ditions of  the  efficacy  of  the  sacraments  on  the  part  of  the  ad-
ministrator are,  first,  that  he  have  authority  (this  is  limited  in  its
application  to  baptism)  ;  and  second,  that  he  have  the  intention
of  doing  what  the  Church  designs  to  be  done  ;  and  in  regard  to
the  recipient,  that  he  does  not  oppose  an  obstacle.  The  sacra-
ments are  declared  to  be  effectual  "  non  ponentibus  obicem."

In  what  Sense  do  the  Sacraments  contain  Grrace  ?

By  this  is  meant  that  they  possess  in  them  inherent  virtue  of
rendering  holy  those  to  whom  they  are  administered.  Their
power  in  the  sphere  of  religion  is  analogous  to  that  of  articles  of
the  "  materia  medica  "  in  the  sphere  of  physics.  Some  have  a
narcotic  power ;  some  act  on  one  organ  and  some  on  another ;
some  are  stimulants,  and  some  are  sedatives.  Or  to  refer  to  the
illustration  so  familiar  ^vith  Bellarmin ;  the  inherent  virtue  of
the  sacraments  to  confer  grace,  is  analogous  to  that  of  fire  to
burn.  Fire  produces  combustion  because  it  is  ordained  by  God
and  imbued  Avith  power  to  that  end.  The  sacraments  confer
grace  because  they  are  endowed  with  grace-imparting  efficacy,
and  are  ordained  by  God  for  ihat  purpose.  "  Containing  grace '


§4.]  THE   SACRAMENTS.     THEIR  EFFICACY.  509

and  "  conferring  grace  "  "  virtute  sibi  insita,"  are  explanatory
forms  of  expression.  The  sacraments  are  said  to  contain  grace
because  they  confer  it  by  their  inherent  virtue.  This  is  intended
as  a  denial  that  their  efficacy  is  due  to  the  moral,  or  to  the  super-
natural power  of  the  truth  ;  or  to  the  attending  influences  of  the
Spirit,  or  to  the  subjective  state  of  those  who  receive  them.

As  to  the  peculiar  effect  ascribed  to  baptism,  confirmation,  and
orders,  little  is  said.  These  sacraments  are  never  repeated.  For
this  some  reason  was  to  be  assigned,  and,  therefore,  it  was  as-
sumed that  they  left  an  indehble  impression  on  the  soul.  What
that  is,  cannot  be  stated  further  than  by  saying  that  it  is  a  "  Sig-
num  quoddam  spirituale  et  indelebile  in  anima  impressum.  Qui
eo  insigniti  sunt,  deputantar  ad  recipienda  vel  tradenda  aliis  ea,
qnse  pertinent  ad  cultum  Dei."  ^  The  language  of  the  Council
of  Trent  sheds  no  light  on  the  subject.  It  simply  says  :  -  "Si
quis  dixerit,  in  tribus  sacramentis,  baptismo  scilicet  confirmatione,
■  et  ordine,  non  imprimi  characterem  in  anima,  hoc  est  signum
quoddam  spirituale  et  indelebile,  unde  ea  iterari  non  possunt ;
anathema  sit."  The  only  passages  of  Scripture  referred  to  by
Perrone  in  support  of  this  assumption,  are  2  Corinthians  i.  22,
and  Ephesians  i.  13,  in  which  the  Apostle  speaks  of  all  behevers
being  sealed  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  In  those  passages  there  is  not
the  slightest  reference  to  any  sacramental  impression.  In  the
second  part  of  the  Roman  Catechism  in  answer  to  the  question.
What  "  character  "  in  this  connection  signifies,  it  js  said  that  it
is  something  which  cannot  be  removed,  and  which  renders  the
soul  fit  to  receive  or  to  perform  certain  spiritual  benefits  or  func-
tions. Thus  in  baptism  a  certain  something  is  impressed  upon
the  soul  by  which  it  is  prepared  to  receive  the  benefit  of  other
sacraments,  and  by  which  it  is  distinguished  from  the  souls  of
the  unbaptized.  In  confirmation  the  soul  is  marked  as  a  soldier
of  Christ  and  prepared  to  contend  against  all  spiritual  enemies.
In  orders  something  is  received  which  fits  the  recipient  to  admin-
ister the  sacraments,  and  which  distinguishes  him  from  all  other
Christians.

^x  Opere  Operato.

The  Council  of  Trent  anathematizes,  as  we  have  seen,  not  only
those  who  deny  that  the  sacraments  convey  grace,  but  also  those
who  deny  that  they  convey  it  "  ex  opere  operato."    The  meaning

1  Perrone,  Prcelectiones  Theologicce,  De  Sacramentis  in  genere,  cap.  ii.  1,  2;  edit.  Paris,
1861,  vol.  ii.  pp.  220,  a,  224.

2  Sess.  vii.  de  Sacramentis  in  genere,  canon  9 ;  Streitwolf ,  vol.  i.  p.  39.


510    PART  III.  Ch.  XX.  — the  means  OF  GRACE.

of  this  phrase  is  intelligible  enough  if  left  unexplained.  It  has
been  obscured  by  the  explanations  given  by  Romanists  themselves,
as  well  as  by  the  conflicting  views  of  Protestants  on  the  subject.
To  say  that  the  sacraments  contain  grace  ;  that  they  convey  it
"  virtute  sibi  insita,"  that  they  convey  it  "  ex  opere  operato,"  aU.
amount  to  the  same  thing.  The  simple  meaning  is  that  such  is
the  nature  of  the  sacraments  that,  when  duly  administered,  they
produce  a  given  effect.  There  is  no  necessity  and  no  propriety  in
looking  beyond  them  to  account  for  the  effect  produced.  If  you
place  a  coal  of  fire  on  a  man's  hand,  it  produces  a  certain  effect.
That  effect  follows  without  fail.  It  follows  from  the  very  nature
of  the  thing  done  and  from  the  act  of  doing  it.  It  makes  no
difference,  whether  Ave  say  that  the  coal  contains  heat ;  or,  that
it  burns  in  virtue  of  its  inherent  nature ;  or  that  the  effect  is  pro-
duced "  ex  opere  operato."

Of  course  there  are  certain  conditions  necessary  m  order  to  the
production  of  the  effect.  The  hand  must  be  alive,  otherwise  it  is
not  the  hand  of  a  man  ;  it  is  simply  a  lump  of  clay.  There
must  be  no  obstacle.  If  you  interpose  a  porcelain  plate  between
the  coal  and  the  hand,  the  hand  will  not  be  burnt.  The  coal
must  be  ignited,  not  simply  a  piece  of  carbon.  So  the  thing
done  must  be  a  real  sacrament.  It  must  have  everything  essen-
tial to  the  integrity  of  the  ordinance.  The  coal,  in  the  case  sup-
posed, must  be  brought  into  contact  with  the  hand  ;  but  whether
it  be  placed  there  by  the  use  of  a  silver  spoon,  or  of  a  pair  of  iron
tongs,  makes-  no  difference.  So  it  makes  no  difference  whether
the  priest  who  administers  the  sacrament  be  a  good  man  or  a  bad
man,  whether  he  be  orthodox  or  heretical.  He  must,  however,
do  the  thing  ;  and  he  cannot  do  it  without  intending  to  do  it.
If  the  man's  hand  is  to  be  burnt,  in  a  given  time  and  place,  the
coal  must  be  intentionally  placed  upon  it.

Although  the  doctrine  of  the  Church  of  Rome  as  to  the  way  in
which  the  sacraments  convey  grace,  seems  to  be  thus  simple,
there  is  no  little  apparent  diversity,  among  the  theologians  of  that
Church  in  their  views  on  the  subject.  This  diversity,  however,  is
really  more  in  the  mode  of  stating  the  doctrine,  than  in  the  doe-
trine  itself.  Lutherans  agree  with  Romanists  in  denying  that  the
efficacy  of  the  sacraments  is  due  to  the  attending  influences  of
the  Holy  Spirit ;  and  they  agree  with  them  in  attributing  to  them
an  inherent  supernatural  power.  The  main  point  of  difference
between  them  is  that  the  Lutherans  insist  on  the  presence  and
exercise  of  faith  in  the  recipient.     According  to  them  the  sacra-


§  l]  THE    SACRAMENTS.     THEIR   EFFICACY.  511

ments  convey  grace  only  to  believers.  Whereas  Romanists,  as
understood  by  Lutherans  and  indeed  by  all  Protestants,  deny
this  necessity  of  faith  or  of  good  dispositions  in  order  to  the
due  efficacy  of  the  sacraments.  This,  however,  Bellarmin  pro-
nounces a  deliberate  falsehood  on  the  part  of  the  Protestants ;
and  he  uses  language  on  this  subject  which  Luther  himself
might  have  employed,  "Est  merum  mendacium,"  he  says,  "  quod
Catholici  dicant,  sacramenta  prodesse  peccatoribus :  omnes  enim
Catholici  requirunt  poenitentiam,  tanquam  dispositionem  ad  gra-
tiam  recipiendam."  "  Falsum  est  Catholicos  non  habere  pro
obice  increduHtatem  :  omnes  enim  Catholici  requirunt  necessario
in  adultis  actualem  fidem,  et  sine  ea  dicunt  neminem  justificari."^
"  Volmitas,  fides,  et  poenitentia  in  suscipiento  adulto  necessario
requiruntur,  ut  dispositiones  ex  parte  subjecti,  non  ut  causae
active :  non  enim  fides  et  poenitentia  efficiunt  gratiam  sacra-
mentalem,  neque  dant  efficaciam  sacramento;  sed  solum  tollunt
obstacula  quae  impedirent,  ne  sacramenta  suam  efficaciam  exer-
cere  possent ;  unde  in  pueris,  ubi  non  requiritur  dispositio,  sine
his  rebus  fit  justificatio."  ^  Luther  would  not  agree  with  this
last  clause  about  infants ;  but  to  the  rest  of  the  paragraph  he
could  hardly  object.  Then  follows  in  Bellarmin  the  illustration
quoted  above.^  Fire  does  not  owe  its  efficacy  to  the  dryness  of
the  wood ;  nevertheless  the  dryness  is  a  necessary  condition  of
combustion.

In  another  passage  Bellarmin  is  still  more  explicit :  "  Igitur
ut  intelligamus,  quid  sit  opus  operatum,  notandum  est,  in  justifi-
catione,  quam  recipit  aliquis,  dum  percipit  sacramenta,  multa
concurrere ;  nimirum  ex  parte  Dei,  voluntatem  utendi  ilia  re  sensi-
bili ;  ex  parte  Christi,  passionem  ejus  ;  ex  parte  ministri  potesta-
tem,  voluntatem,  probitatem ;  ex  parte  suscipientis  voluntatem,
fidem,  et  poenitentiam  ;  denique  ex  parte  sacramenti  ipsam  ac-
tionam  externara,  qu;\3  consurgit,  ex  debita  applicatione  formae
et  materiag.  Caaterum  ex  his  omnibus  id,  quod  active,  et  proximo
atque  instrumentaliter  efficit  gratiam  justificationis,  est  sola  actio
ilia  externa,  qure  sacramentum  dicitur,  et  lijec  vocatur  opus
operatum,  accipiendo  passive  (operatum)  ita  ut  idem  sit  sacra-
mentum conferre  gratiam  ex  opere  operato,  quod  conferre  gratiam
ex  [vi]  ipsius  actionis  sacramentalis  a  Deo  ad  hoc  institutse,  non
ex  merito  agentis  vel  suscipientis."*

1  Bellarmin,  De  Sacramentis,  i.  2;  Dlsjmtationes,  Paris,  1608,  vol.  iii.  p  6,  b,  c.
a  Ibid.  11.  i.;  pp.  108,  d,  109,  a.  8  See  p.  490.

♦  De  Sacramentis  in  genere,  ii.  i. ;  ut  supra,  p.  108,  c.


512  PART  III.     Cii.  XX. —  THE   MEANS   OF    GRACE.

Not"witbstanding  all  this  the  Romanists  do  teach  the  very  doc-
trine which  the  Reformers  charged  upon  them,  and  which  the
Protestant  Symbols  so  strenuously  condemn.     This  is  clear,  —

1.  Because  the  same  words  do  not  always  mean  the  same  thing.
Bellarmin  says  that  Romanists  teach  that  faith  on  the  part  of  the
recipient  is  necessary  in  order  to  the  efficacy  of  the  sacraments,  at
least  in  the  case  of  adults.  Protestants  say  the  same  thing  ;  and
yet  their  meaning  is  entirely  different.  By  faith,  Protestants
mean  saving  faith ;  that  faith  which  is  one  of  the  fruits  of  the
Spirit,  which,  if  a  man  has,  his  salvation  is  certain.  Romanists,
however,  mean  by  faith  mere  assent,  which  a  man  may  have,  and
be  in  a  state  of  condemnation,  and  perish  forever.  This  is  their
formal  definition  of  faith,  as  given  by  Bellarmin  himself ;  and  the
Council  of  Trent  pronounces  accursed  those  who  say  that  the
assent  given  by  unrenewed  men  to  the  truth,  is  not  true  faith.
Romanists  do  not  hold  that  sacraments  convey  grace  to  avowed
atheists  or  professed  infidels ;  but  that  they  exert  saving  power
on  those  having  the  kind  of  faith  in  the  Church  which  the  bandits
of  Italy  profess  and  cherish.  So  also  the  repentance  required  is
not  the  godly  sorrow  of  which  the  Apostle  speaks,  but  that  re-
morse which  wicked  men  often  experience.  These  points  have
been  abundantly  proved  in  the  preceding  pages. ^  A  coal  of  fire
will  burn  a  man's  hand  ;  it  is  true  the  man  must  be  alive,  but
whether  he  is  a  good  or  bad  man  makes  no  difference.  The  sacra-
ments confer  grace  by  their  inherent  efficacy.  It  is  true  the  re-
cipient must  be  a  believer  ;  but  whether  he  has  what  St.  Peter
calls  "  the  precious  faith  of  God's  elect,"  or  the  same  kind  of  faith
that  Simon  Magus  had,  makes  no  difference.

2.  That  this  is  the  true  doctrine  of  the  Church  of  Rome  is  evi-
dent from  the  manner  m  which  it  is  presented  by  its  leading  the-
ologians. This  appears  from  the  great  distinction  which  they
make  between  the  sacraments  of  the  Old,  and  those  of  the  New
Testament.  The  former  only  signified,  the  latter  confer  grace
The  latter  are  effectual  "  ex  opere  operato ; "  the  former,  as
Thomas  Aquinas  says,  were  effectual  only  "  ex  fide  et  devotione
suscipientis."  Again,  the  necessity  of  anything  good  in  the  re-
cipient is  expressly  denied.  Thus  Gabriel  Biel  (f  1495)  says  :
"  Sacramentum  dicitur  conferre  gratiam  ex  opere  operato,  ita  quod
ex  eo  ipso,  quod  opus  illud,  puta  sacramentum,  exhibitur,  nisi  im-
pediat  obex  peccati  mortalis,  gratia  confertur  utentibus ;  sic  quod
praeter  exhibitionem  signi  foris  exhibiti  non  requiritur  bonus  motus

1  See  above,  the  chapter  on  Faith.


§4.]  THE    SACRAMENTS.     THEIR  EFFICACY.  513

seu  devotio  interior  in  suscipiente,"  ^  Koellner  also  quotes  from
Duns  Scotus  the  words,^  "  prseter  istam  (primam  causam  merito-
riam  so.  Clmstum)  non  oportet  dare  aliam  intrinsecam  in  recipi-
ente,  qua  conjungatur  Deo,  antequam  recipiat  gratiam;"  and  Pe-
trus  de  Palude,^  "  In  sacramentis  novse  legis  non  per  se  requiritur,
quod  homo  se  disponat :  ergo  per  ipsvim  sacramentum  disponitur."'
The  later  Romish  theologians  teach  the  same  doctrine.  Thus
Klee^  says  that  the  sacraments,  when  rightly  dispensed,  are  of
necessity  effectual.  And  Moehler  says  :  "  The  Cathohc  Church
teaches  that  the  sacrament  works  in  us,  in  virtue  of  its  char-
acter as  an  ordinance  of  Christ,  appointed  for  our  salvation
('  ex  opere  operato,  scl.  a  Christo,'  instead  of  '  quod  operatus  est
Christus  '),  i.  e.,  the  sacraments  bring  from  the  Saviour  a  divine
power,  which  can  be  caused  by  no  human  frame  of  mind  (Stim-
mung),  nor  by  any  spiritual  state  or  effort,  but  which  is  given  by
God  for  Christ's  sake  directly  in  the  sacrament."  ^  It  is  true,  he
immediately  adds,  "  Man  must  receive  them,  and  must  be  sus-
ceptible of  their  impression,  and  this  susceptibility  expresses  itself
in  repentance,  in  sorrow  for  sin,  in  longing  for  divine  help,  and
m  trusting  faith  ;  nevertheless  he  can  only  receive  them,  and
hence  only  have  the  requisite  susceptibility."  All  this,  however,
according  to  the  Romish  system,  the  unrenewed  man  has,  or  may
have.  In  the  case  of  infants  there  is  nothing  but  passivity :  sim-
ple non-resistance  ;  and  this  is  all  that  is  required  in  the  case  of
adults.

3.  One  of  the  points  of  controversy  between  the  Jansenists  and
Jesuits  related  to  this  very  subject.  The  Jansenists  maintained
that  the  efficacy  of  the  sacraments  depended  on  the  inward  state
of  the  recipient.  If  he  were  not  in  a  state  of  grace,  and  in  the
exercise  of  faith  when  they  were  received,  they  availed  nothing.
This  doctrine  the  Jesuits  controverted,  and  their  influence  pre-
vailed in  the  Church.  Jansenism  was  condemned  and  sup-
pressed.

4.  Another  argument  is  derived  from  the  constant  practice  of
the  Romish  Church.  There  is  no  pretence  of  her  recognized
ministers  demanding  the  profession,  or  evidence  of  what  Protes-
tants understand  by  saving  faith  in  order  to  the  reception  of  the

1  Epitome  seu  Collectorium  circa  Lomhardi  sententiarum,  libros  4,  d.  1,  q.  3;  quoted  by
Koellner  in  his  Symbolik,  vol.  ii.  p.  371.

2  Quoted  by  Killner,  p.  373.  3  4  d.  1,  q.  1;  Ibid.  p.  371.
*  1st  edit.  vol.  iii.  p.  9.5;  see  Kcillner,  p.  37G.

5  SymboUk  oder  Darstellung  der  do</matischen  Gegensdtze  der  KntholiJcen  und  Proles'
tanten;  ron  Dr.  J.  A.  Mihier,  iv.  §  28;  6th  edit.  Mainz,  1843,  p.  255,
VOL.  m.  33


514       PART  m.    ch.  XX.  — the  means  of  grace.

sacraments,  or  as  the  condition  of  their  sanctifying  influence.  On
the  contrary,  they  act  on  the  j^rinciple,  that  the  sacraments  confer
grace  in  the  first  instance.  They  baptize  crowds  of  uninstructed
lieathen,  without  the  slightest  pretence  that  they  are  penitents  or
believers.  If  faith  be  a  fruit  of  regeneration,  and  if,  as  Roman-
ists all  teach,  regeneration  is  effected  in  baptism,  how  can  the
presence  of  faith  in  the  recipient  be  a  condition  of  the  efficacy  of
baptism.^  •

The  Administrator.

Lutherans  and  Reformed  agree  in  teaching,  first,  that  the  effi-
cacy of  the  sacraments  does  not  depend  on  anything  in  him  who
administers  them  ;  and  second,  that  as  the  ministry  of  the  Word
and  sacraments  are  united  in  the  Scriptures,  it  is  a  matter  of
order  and  propriety  that  the  sacraments  should  be  administered
by  those  only  who  have  been  duly  called  and  appointed  to  that
service.  In  the  Second  Helvetic  Confession,^  therefore,  it  is  said,
"  Baptismus  pertinet  ad  officia  ecclesiastica."  According  to  the
Westminster  Confession,"^  "  There  be  only  two  sacraments  or-
dained by  Christ  our  Lord  in  the  Gospel.  That  is  to  say,  bap-
tism and  the  supper  of  the  Lord  :  neither  of  which  may  be
dispensed  by  any,  but  by  a  minister  of  the  AVord,  lawfully  or-
dained,"

The  doctrine  of  the  Lutheran  Church  is  thus  stated  by  Hol-
laz  :  "  Jus  dispensandi  sacramenta  Deus  concredidit  ecclesiaj,  quae
exsecutionem  aut  exercitium  hujus  juris,  observandi  ordinis  et
ewo-x^/ftoo-vj/T/s  causa  commendavit  ministris  verbi  divini  vocatis  et
ordinatis.  In  casu  autem  extremse  necessitatis,  ubi  sacramentum
est  necessarium  nee  nisi  periculo  salutis  omitti  potest,  quihbet
homo  Christianus  (laicus  aut  femina)  sacramentum  initiationis
valide  celebrare  potest."  *  This  is  considered  as  not  inconsistent
with  the  Augsburg  Confession,  which  says  :  ^  "  De  ordine  ecclesi-
astico  decent,  quod  nemo  debeat  in  ecclesia  publice  docere,  aut
sacramenta  administrare,  nisi  rite  vocatus."

The  doctrine  of  the  Church  of  Rome  on  this  subject  is  briefly
stated  in  the  canons  enacted  during  the  seventh  session  of  the

1  See  Ilistorischer  An}ian(/ iiber  die  Wirksamlceit  der  Sacramente  "ex  opere  operato,"
vol.  ii.  §  107,  p.  363,  of  KMlner's  Symholik.  Ki  liner  comes  to  the  conclusion  that  there  is
no  great  difference  between  the  Lutheran  and  Romish  doctrines  on  the  efficacy  of  the  sacra-
ments; a  conclusion  in  contlict  with  the  conviction  of  Luther  and  his  associates.

2  XX. ;  Niemeyer,  Colkctio  Confessionum,  Leipzig,  1840,  p.  518.
8  Chap,  xxvii.  4.

*  Exnmen,  in.  ii.  3,  qurest.  6;  edit.  Leipzig,  1840,  p.  518.

*  I,  14;  riase,  Libri  Sijmbolici,  3d  edit.  Leipzig,  184G,  p.  13.


§4.]  THE   SACRAMENTS.     THEIR   EFFICACY.  515

Council  of  Trent.^  We  read  thus  :  "  Si  quis  dixerit,  Christianos
omnes  in  verbo,  et  omnibus  sacramentis  administrandis  habere
potestatem  ;  anathema  sit."  The  Coimcil  say  in  "all"  the  sacra-
ments ;  for  the  Church  of  Ronie,  although  denying  the  power  of
any  but  canonically  ordamed  priests  to  render  the  administration
of  the  sacraments  efficacious,  admits  of  the  efficacy  of  lay  baptism.
Again,  "  Si  quis  dixerit,  in  ministris,  dum  sacramentis  conficimit,
et  conferunt,  non  requiri  intentionem  saltem  faciendi,  quod  facit
ecclesia ;  anathema  sit."  Intention  is  defined  to  be  the  purpose  of
doing  what  Christ  ordained  and  what  the  Church  is  accustomed  to
do.  On  this  subject  Bellarmin  says,  (1.)  It  is  not  necessary
(in  baptism  at  least)  that  the  administrator  should  have  an  intel-
ligent intention  of  doing  what  the  Church  does ;  for  he  may  be
ignorant  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Church  ;  all  that  is  required  is
that  he  intend  to  administer  a  Chui-ch  ordinance.  (2.)  It  is  not
necessary  that  he  intend  to  do  what  the  Chiuxh  of  Rome  does  ;
but  what  the  true  Church,  whatever  that  may  be,  is  accustomed
to  do.  Hence,  he  says,  the  Catholic  Church  does  not  rebaptize
those  who  have  been  baptized  by  the  Geneva  churches.  "  Non
tollit  efficaciam  sacramenti  error  ministri  circa  ecclesiam,  sed  de-
•fectus  intentionis."  (3.)  That  not  actual  intention,  but  only  vir-
tual, is  required.  "  Virtualis  dicitur,  cum  actualis  intentio  in
praesenti  non  adest  ob  ahquam  evagationem  mentis,  tamen  paulo
ante  adfuit  et  in  virtute  iUius  sit  operatio."  ^  On  this  account
the  Roman  Catechism  says,  that  baptism  administered  by  a  here-
tic, a  Jew,  or  a  heathen,  is  efficacious :  "  Si  id  efficere  propositum
eis  fuerit,  quod  ecclesia  Catholica  in  eo  administrationis  genere
efficit."^  This  agrees  with  the  popular  view  of  the  doctrine  of
intention.  The  administrator  must  intend  to  produce  the  eiiect
which  the  sacrament  was  designed  to  accomplish.  If  he  baptizes,
he  must  intend  to  regenerate  ;  if  he  absolves,  he  must  intend  to
absolve  ;  if  he  consecrates  the  bread  and  wine,  he  must  intend
their  transmutation  ;  if  he  offers  the  host,  he  must  intend  it  as  a
sacrifice  ;  and  if  offered  for  a  particular  person,  he  must  intend  it
to  take  effect  for  his  benefit.  According  to  this  view  everything
depends  on  the  ^7ill  of  the  officiatmg  priest.

1  Sess.  vii. ;  Canones  de  Sacramentis  in  genere,  10,  11;  Streitwolf,  vol.  i.  p.  40.

2  Bellarmin,  De  Sacramentis  in  genere,  i.  xxvii. ;  Disputationes,  edit.  Paris,  IGOS,  vol.
iii.  pp.  94,  d,  95.

3  Catechismus  Romanus,  n.  ii.  18  (xxii.  24) ;  Streitwolf,  Libri  Symbolici,  vol.  i.  p.  270.


616         PART  III.     Ch.   XX.  -  THE  MEANS   OF   GRACE.

§  5.  The  Necessity  of  the  Sacraments.
The  distinction  between  the  necessity  of  precept  and  the  ne-
cessity of  means,  is  obvious  and  important.  No  one  would  be
willing  to  say,  without  qualification,  that  it  is  unnecessary  to  obey
an  explicit  command  of  Christ.  And  as  He  has  commanded  his
disciples  to  baptize  all  wdio  are  received  as  members  of  his
Church,  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  and  required  his  disciples  statedly  to  commemorate  his
death  by  the  celebration  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  the  strongest
moral  obligation  rests  upon  his  people  to  obey  these  commands.
But  the  obligation  to  obey  any  command,  such  as  to  observe  the
Sabbath,  to  visit  the  sick,  and  to  relieve  the  poor,  depends  on
circumstances.  No  opportunity  may  be  offered ;  or  the  discharge
of  the  duty  may  be  hindered  by  external  circumstances  ;  or  we
may  lack  the  ability  to  render  the  service  required.  So  with
regard  to  the  command  to  be  baptized  and  to  commemorate  the
Lord's  death  at  his  table,  it  is  evident  that  many  circumstances
may  occur  to  prevent  obedience  even  on  the  part  of  those  who
have  the  disposition  and  purpose  to  do  whatever  their  Lord  re-
quires at  their  hands.  And  even  where  obedience  is  not  pre-
vented by  external  circumstances,  it  may  be  prevented  by  igno  -
ranee,  or  by  unfounded  scruples  of  conscience.

By  the  necessity  of  means  is  usually  understood  an  absolute
necessity,  a  "  sine  qua  non."  In  this  sense  food  is  a  necessity  of
life  ;  light  is  necessary  to  the  exercise  of  vision  ;  the  Word  is
necessary  to  the  exercise  of  faith,  for  it  is  its  object,  the  thing
which  is  to  be  believed ;  and  faith  is,  on  the  part  of  adults,  neces-
sary to  salvation,  for  it  is  the  act  of  receiving  the  grace  of  God
offered  in  the  Bible.  And  therefore  times  almost  without  num-
ber, it  is  said  in  Scripture,  that  we  are  saved  by  faith,  that  he
that  believeth  shall  be  saved,  and  that  he  that  belie vetli  not  shall
not  see  hfe.

The  question  betw^een  the  Reformed  on  the  one  hand,  and
Lutherans  and  Romanists  on  the  other,  is  in  which  of  these
senses  are  the  sacraments  necessary.  According  to  the  Reformed
they  have  the  necessity  of  precept.  The  use  of  them  is  enjoined
as  a  duty  ;  but  they  are  not  necessary  means  of  salvation.  Men
may  be  saved  without  them.  The  benefits  which  they  signify
and  which  they  are  the  means  of  signifying,  sealing,  and  appl}^-
ing  to  believers,  are  not  so  tied  to  their  use  that  those  benefits  can-
not be  secured  without  them.     Sins  may  be  forgiven,  and  the  soul


§5.J  THE   SACRAMENTS.     THEIR  NECESSITY.  517

regenerated  and  saved,  though  neither  sacrament  has  ever  been
received.  The  Lutherans  and  Romanists,  on  the  other  hand,
hold  that  the  sacraments  are  necessary  means  of  grace,  in  the
sense  that  the  grace  which  they  signify  is  not  received  otherwise
than  in  their  use.  There  is  no  remission  of  sin  or  regeneration
without  baptism  ;  no  reception  of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ
to  our  spiritual  nouiishment  and  growth  in  grace,  without  the
Lord's  Supper  ;  and,  according  to  Romanists,  no  forgiveness  of
post-baptismal  sins  ^vithout  priestly  absolution  ;  no  grace  of  orders
without  canonical  ordination ;  and  no  special  preparation  for
death  without  extreme  unction.  This  question  is  of  importance
chiefly  in  reference  to  baptism,  and  will  therefore  come  up  when
that  sacrament  is  under  consideration.  At  present  it  is  only  the
general  teachings  of  these  several  churches  that  need  be  referred
to.  The  "  Consensus  Tigurinus  "  is  the  most  carefully  considered
and  cautiously  worded  exposition  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Reformed
in  relation  to  the  sacraments,  belonging  to  the  period  of  the  Ref-
ormation. It  was  drawn  up  to  settle  the  differences  on  this  sub-
ject between  the  churches  of  Geneva  and  those  of  Zurich.  It
contains  the  statements  in  reference  to  the  sacraments  to  which
both  parties  agreed.  It  teaches^  (1.)  That  the  sacraments  are
"  notse  ac  tesserae "  of  Christian  fellowship  and  brotherhood  ;
incitements  to  gratitude,  faith,  and  a  holy  life,  and  "  syngraphae  "
binding  us  thereto.  They  were  ordained  especially  that  therein
God  might  testify,  represent,  and  seal  to  us  his  grace.  (2.)  The
things  signified  are  not  to  be  separated  from  the  signs.  Those
who  by  faith  receive  the  latter  receive  also  the  former.  (3.)  That
respect  is  to  be  had  rather  to  the  promise  to  which  ovir  faith  is
directed;  for  the  elements  without  Christ  "nihil  sint  quam  inanes
larvae."  (4.)  The  sacraments  confer  notliing  "  propria  eorum
virtute ; "  God  alone  works  in  us  by  his  Spirit.  They  are  organs
or  means  by  which  God  efficaciously  operates.  (5.)  They  are
sometimes  called  seals,  but  the  Spirit  alone  is  properly  the  seal
as  well  as  the  beginner  and  finisher  of  our  faith.  (6.)  God  does
not  operate  in  all  who  receive  the  sacraments,  but  only  in  his
o^vn  chosen  people.  (7.)  Hence  the  doctrine  is  to  be  rejected
that  the  sacraments  convey  grace  to  all  who  do  not  oppose  the
obstacle  of  mortal  sin.  The  grace  of  God  is  not  so  bomid  to  the
signs,  that  all  who  have  the  latter  have  the  former.  (8.)  Believ-
ers receive  without  the  sacraments  the  blessings  which  they  re-
ceive in  their  use.     "  Extra  eorum  usuni  fidelibus  constat,  quae

1  Niemeyer,  Collectio  Confesdonum,  Leipzig.  1840,  pp.  193-195.


518    PART  III.  Cn.  XX.  — THE  MEANS  OF  GRACE.

illic  figuratur  Veritas."  Paul  received  baptism  for  the  remission
of  sins  ;  but  his  sins  were  remitted  before  he  was  baptized.  Bap-
tism was  to  Cornelius  the  laver  of  regeneration,  but  he  had  re-
ceived the  Spirit  before  he  was  thus  externally  washed.  In  the
Lord's  Supper  we  receive  Christ,  but  Christ  dwells  in  every  be-
liever, and  we  must  have  faith  before  we  can  acceptably  approach
the  table  of  the  Lord.  (9.)  The  benefit  of  the  sacraments  is
not  confined  to  the  time  in  which  they  are  administered  or  re-
ceived. God  often  regenerates  long  after  baptism  those  baptized
in  infancy  ;  some  in  early  youth,  some  in  old  age.  The  benefit
of  baptism,  therefore,  continues  through  the  whole  life,  because
the  promise  signified  therein  continues  always  in  force.

As  to  the  Lutheran  doctrine  on  this  subject,  Guerike  says  that
the  three  churches,  the  Greek,  Roman,  and  Lutheran,  "  are  agreed
in  holding  that  in  the  sacraments  the  visible  signs  as  such  really
convey  the  invisible  divine  things,  and  therefore,  that  a  participa-
tion of  the  sacraments  is  necessary  in  order  to  a  participation  of
the  heavenly  gifts  (gottliche  Sache)  therein  contained.  While  on
the  contrary  the  Reformed  Church  teaches  that  the  visible  signs
as  such  do  not  convey  the  invisible  gi-ace,  and  that  the  Christian
can  by  faith  receive  the  same  divine  benefits  without  the  use  of
the  sacraments,  and  consequently  that  the  sacraments  are  not  ab-
solutely necessary,  much  less  the  middle  point  of  the  Christian
plan  of  salvation."  ^  The  language  of  the  Lutheran  Symbols
justifies  this  strong  language  of  Guerike.  Thus  the  signers  of
the  Augsburg  Coirfession,^  "  Damnant  Anabaptistas  qui  impro-
bant  baptismum  puerorum  et  afl&rmant  pueros  sine  baptismo  salvos
fieri."  And  in  the  comment  on  that  article  in  the  "  Apology  for
the  Confession,"  it  is  said,^  "  Nonus  articulus  approbatus  est,  in
quo  confitemur,  quod  baptismus  sit  necessarius  ad  salutem,  et
quod  pueri  sint  baptizandi,  et  quod  baptismus  puerorum  non  sit
irritus,  sed  necessarius  et  efiicax  ad  salutem."  The  Lutheran
theologians,  however,  in  treating  of  the  necessity  of  baptism,
make  a  distinction  between  adults  and  infants.  Witli  regard  to
the  former,  regeneration  should  precede  baptism.  In  reference  to
them,  tlie  design  of  baptism  is  to  seal  and  confirm  the  grace
already  received.  In  regard  to  infants  it  is  the  organ  or  means
of  regeneration.  Thus  Baier  says  :  *  "  Plic  autem,  quod  ad
finem  proximum  attinet,  diversitas  occurrit,  respectu  subjectonim

1  SymboUk,  p.  374.

2  Par.  I.  ix.  3;  Hase,  Libri  Symbolicl,  3d  edit.  Leipzig,  1846,  p.  12.
8  Apologia,  iv.  51;  Ibid.  p.  15G.

*  Compendium  Tkeoloc/ice  Positives,  iii.  x.  10;  edit.  Frankfort  and  Leipzig,  1739,  p.  648


§  5.]  THE   SACRAMENTS.     THEIR  NECESSITY.  519

diversorum.  Nam  infantibus  quidem  seque  omnibus  per  baptis-
mum  primum  confertur  et  obsignatur  fides,  per  quam  meritum
Cliristi  illis  applicetur  :  Adultis  vero  illis  tantum,  qui  fidem  ex
verbo  conceperunt  ante  baptismi  susceptionem,  baptismus  earn
obsignat  et  confii-mat."  So  also  Gerhard  says  :  "  Infantibus
baptismus  principaliter  est  medium  ordinarium  regenerationis  et
muiidationis  a  peccatis,  etc.  Secundario  autem  sigillum  justitiae
et  fidei  confirmatio  ;  adultis  credentibus  baptismus  principaliter
prjfistat  usum  obsignationis  ac  testificationis  de  gratia  Dei,  vljOea-ia
et  vita  ffiterna  ;  sed  minus  principaliter  renovationem  et  dona
Spiritus  Sancti  auget.  Infantes,  per  baptismum  primitias  Spiri-
tus  et  fidei  accipiunt :  adulti  qui  per  verbum  primitias  fidei  et
Spiritus  Sancti  acceperunt,  per  baptismum  incrementa  ejusdem
consequuntur."  ^

The  doctrine  of  the  Church  of  Rome  on  this  subject  is,  noi
that  aU  the  seven  sacraments  are  necessary  to  salvation,  but  that
each  is  necessary  to  the  reception  of  the  gift  or  grace  which  it  is
intended  to  convey.  There  can  be  no  "grace  of  orders  "  without
canonical  ordination,  but  it  is  not  necessary  that  every  man  should
bo  ordained.  The  sacrament  of  penance  is  necessary  only  in
the  case  of  post-baptismal  sin,  and  even  the  eucharist,  which
they  regard  as  far  the  greatest  of  their  sacraments  "  in  dignity
and  mystery,"  is  not  necessary  to  infants.  Baptism,  however,
being  the  only  channel  through  which  remission  of  sins  and  re-
generation are  conveyed,  is  absolutely  necessary  to  salvation.
And  priestly  absolution  is  absolutely  necessary  for  the  remission
of  sins  committed  after  baptism.  Such  revolting  consequences
would  flow  from  carrying  this  principle  rigorously  out,  that  Ro-
manists shrink  from  its  assertion.  It  would  exclude  many  con-
fessors and  martyrs  from  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  It  is,  there-
fore, taught  that  when  circumstances  render  it  impossible  that
these  sacraments  can  be  received,  the  purpose  and  desire  to
receive  them  secure  their  benefits.  These  cases  are,  however,
exceptions,  and  are  generally  overlooked  in  the  statement  of  the
doctrine.  This  exception  does  not  apply  to  infants,  and,  there-
fore, they  cannot  enjoy  its  benefits.  It  is  the  doctrine  of  the
Church  of  Rome  that  all  unbaptized  persons  fail  of  eternal  life.
This  is  included  in  their  idea  of  the  Church.  None  are  saved
who  are  not  within  the  pale  of  the  true  Church.  None  are
within  the  pale  of  the  Church  who  have  not  been  baptized,  and
who  are  not  subject  to  canonical  bishops,  and  especially  to  the

1  Loci  Thevloyici,  xxi.  vii.  §  124;  edit.  Tubingen,  1769,  vol.  ix.  p.  169.


620         PART  III.     Cn.   XX. —THE   MEANS   OF   GRACE.

bishop  of  Rome.  The  unbaptized,  therefore,  not  being  in  the
Church,  as  defined  by  Romanists,  are  of  necessity  excluded  from
the  king-dom  of  heaven.

The  hmguage  of  the  Roman  standards  is  perfectly  explicit.
The  Council  of  Ti'ent  says  :  ^  "Si  quis  dixerit,  non  dari  gratiam
per  hujusmodi  sacramenta  semper,  et  omnibus,  quantum  est  ex
parte  Dei,  etiam  si  rite  ea  suscipiant,  sed  aliquando,  et  aliquibus ;
anathema  sit."  And  again  :^  "Si  quis  dixerit  baptismum  libe-
rum  esse,  hoc  est  non  necessarium  ad  salutem  ;  anathema  sit."
In  the  Roman  Catechism^  we  find  the  following :  "  Estne  Baptis-
mus  ad  salutem  omnibus  necessarius  ?  "  the  answer  is  :  "Sed  cum
ceterarum  rerum  cognitio,  qua3  hactenus  ex]30sitaB  sunt,  fidelibus
utillissima  habenda  sit,  tum  vero  nihil  magis  necessarium  \aderi
potest,  quam  ut  doceantur,  omnibus  hominibus  baptism!  legem
a  Domino  prEescriptam  esse,  ita  ut,  nisi  per  baptismi  gratiam  Deo
renascantur,  in  sempiternam  miseriam,  et  interitum  a  parentibus,
sive  illi  fideles,  sive  infideles  sint,  procreentur."  According  to
the  Church  of  Rome,  therefore,  all  the  unbaptized,  whether  their
parents  be  believers  or  infidels,  are  doomed  to  eternal  misery  and
perdition.  With  regard  to  penance,  the  Council  of  Trent  says  :  *
"  Est  hoc  sacramentum  poenitentiae  lapsis  post  baptismum  ad  sa-
lutem necessarium,  ut  nondum  regeneratis  ipse  baptismus."  It
also  teaches  that  full  confession  of  all  sins  committed  after  bap-
tism is  "  jure  divino  "  necessary,  because  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
about  to  ascend  into  heaven,  left  his  priests  as  his  vicars,  as
"  presides  et  judices,"  to  whom  all  mortal  sins,  into  which  Chris-
tians may  fall,  are  to  be  communicated,  and  who  are  authorized
to  pronounce  the  sentence  of  remission  or  retention.  It  is  said^
moreover,  that  our  Lord  teaches  that  priests,  who  themselves  are
in  a  state  of  mortal  sin,  in  virtue  of  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit
given  tliem  in  ordination,  exercise,  as  ministers  of  Christ,  this
function  of  remitting  sins,  and  those  err  who  contend  that  wicked
priests  have  not  this  power.  All  this  is  reiterated  in  the  canons
and  amplified  and  enforced  in  the  Catechism.^

In  this  connection  it  is  sufficient  to  remark,  —

1.  That  the  doctrine  that  the  sacraments  are  necessary  to  sal-
vation, on  the  ground  that  they  are  the  only  channels  for  convey-
ing to  men  the  benefits  of  Christ's  redemption,  is  clearly  contrary
to  the  express  teachings  of  the  Bible.    The  Scriptures  everywhere

1  Sess.  vii.,  De  Sacramentis  in  genere,  canon  7;  Streitwolf,  vol.  i.  p.  39.

2  Jbkl.,  Be  Biijitismo,  canon  5;  Ih'ul.  p.  41.

8  Par.  II.  cap.  ii.  qua's.  25  (31,  xxx.);  Ibid.  p.  274.

*  Sess.  xiv.  cap.  2;  Ibid.  p.  55.  ^  Sess.  xiv.  cap.  5,  6;  Ibid.


§  5.]  THE   SACRAMENTS.     THEIR  NECESSITY.  521

teach  that  God  looks  upon  the  heart ;  that  He  requires  of  fallen
men  simply  faith  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  repentance  to-
ward God  as  the  only  indispensable  conditions  of  salvation ;  that
all  men  have  free  access  to  God,  through  the  mediation  of  Christ,
to  obtain  at  his  hands  the  remission  of  sins  and  all  the  benefits  of
redemption  ;  that  they  need  no  intervention  of  joriests  to  secure
for  them  this  access  or  the  communication  of  those  benefits  ;  and
that  no  external  rites  have  power  in  themselves  to  confer  grace.
God  so  loved  the  world,  that  He  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  that
whosoever  believeth  on  Him  should  not  perish  but  have  everlasting
life.  He  that  believeth  on  Him  is  not  condemned  ;  but  he  that
believeth  not  is  condemned  already.  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ  and  thou  shalt  be  saved.  Whosoever  calleth  on  the  name
of  the  Lord,  shall  be  saved.  Whoso  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the
Christ,  is  born  of  God.  The  Scripture  camiot  be  broken.  It  can-
not be  that  he  who  truly  believes  the  record  wliich  God  has  given
of  his  Son  should  fail  of  eternal  life.  We  become  the  sons  of  God
by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  true  we  are  commanded  to  be
baptized,  as  we  are  commanded  to  confess  Christ  before  men  or
to  love  the  brethren.  But  these  are  duties  to  which  faith  secures
obedience  ;  they  are  not  the  means  of  salvation.

2.  This  ritual  system  is  utterly  inconsistent  with  the  whole
genius  of  Christianity.  God  is  a  Spirit,  and  He  requires  those
who  worship  Him,  to  worship  Him  in  spirit  and  in  truth.  Ex-
ternal rites  are  declared  to  be  nothing.  Circumcision  is  nothing,
and  uncircumcision  is  nothing.  "  He  is  not  a  Jew,  which  is  one
outwardly ;  neither  is  that  circumcision,  which  is  outward  in  the
flesh  :  but  he  is  a  Jew,  which  is  one  inwardly  ;  and  circumcision
is  that  of  the  heart,  in  the  spirit,  and  not  in  the  letter  ;  whose
praise  is  not  of  men,  but  of  God."  (Rom.  ii.  28,  29.)  This  is  not
merely  a  fact,  but  a  principle.  What  St.  Paul  here  says  of  cir-
cumcision and  of  Jews,  may  be  said,  and  is  substantially  said  by
St.  Peter  in  reference  to  baptism  and  Christianity.  A  man  who
is  a  Christian  outwardly  only,  is  not  a  Christian  ;  and  the  bap-
tism which  saves,  is  not  the  washing  of  the  body  with  water,  but
the  conversion  of  the  soul.  (1  Peter  iii.  21.)  The  idea  that  a
man's  state  before  God  depends  on  anything  external,  on  birth,
on  membership  in  any  visible  organization,  or  on  any  outward
rite  or  ceremony,  is  utterly  abhorrent  to  the  religion  of  the  Bible.
It  did  not  belong  to  Judaism  except  in  the  corrupt  form  of  Phari-
saism. It  is  true,  that  under  the  old  dispensation  a  man  could
not  be  saved  unless  he  belonged  to  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,


522         PART  m.     Ch.   XX.  -THE   MEANS   OF    GRACE,

and  was  one  of  the  children  of  Abraham.  But  according  to  St.
Paul  (Rom.  ix.  8  ;  Gal.  iii.  7  and  29),  this  only  meant  that  they
must  believe  in  Abraham's  God  and  the  promise  of  redemption
through  his  seed.  If  a  man  of  heathen  birth  and  culture  came  to
the  knowledge  of  the  truth,  beUeved  the  doctrines  which  God
had  revealed  to  his  chosen  people,  rehed  on  the  promise  of  salva-
tion through  Christ,  and  purposed  to  obey  the  law  of  God,  then
ho  was  a  Jew  inwardly  and  one  of  Abraham's  seed.  His  circum-
cision was  only  "  a  seal  of  the  righteousness  of  the  faith  which  he
had,  yet  being  uncircumcised."  (Rom.  iv.  11.)  The  doctrine  that
such  a  man,  notvidthstanding  this  thorough  change  in  his  inward
state  m  knowledge,  conviction,  and  character,  is  under  the  wrath
and  curse  of  God,  until  a  little  piece  of  flesh  is  cut  from  his  body,
never  was  a  part  of  the  religion  of  God.  It  is  part  and  parcel  of
the  rehgion  of  his  great  adversary.  Any  one,  therefore,  who
teaches  that  no  man  can  be  saved  without  the  rite  of  baptism,
and  that  by  receiving  that  rite  he  is  made  a  child  of  God  and  heir
of  heaven,  is  antichrist,  and  "  even  now  are  there  many  anti-
christs."    (1  John  ii.  18.)

3.  This  rituahstic  system,  which  makes  the  sacraments  the  only
channels  of  grace,  and  consequently  absolutely  necessary  to  salva-
tion, naturally  leads  to  the  divorce  of  religion  and  morality.  A
man,  according  to  this  system,  may  be  in  the  true  Church  a  child
of  God,  and  assured  of  heaven,  and  yet  utterly  frivolous,  worldly,
and  even  immoral  in  his  inward  and  outward  life.  This  is  illus-
trated on  a  large  scale  in  every  Roman  Catholic  country.  In  such
countries  some  of  the  greatest  devotees  are  openly  wicked  men.
And  wherever  this  system  prevails  we  find  its  most  zealous  advo-
cates among  people  of  the  world,  who  live  at  ease  in  full  security
of  salvation,  because  they  are  in  the  Church  and  faithful  in  ob-
serving "  days,  and  months,  and  times,  and  years ; "  and  are
punctiliously  "  subject  to  ordinances,  touch  not,  taste  not,  handle
not."  ^  The  great  question  at  issue  in  the  controversy  with  ritu-
alism is.  Whether  a  man's  salvation  depends  on  his  inward  state,
or  upon  outward  rites  ;  or,  as  some  would  give  it.  Whether  liis
state  is  determined  by  outward  rites,  or  whether  the  rites  depend
for  their  value  and  efficacy  on  his  inward  state.  In  either  form
the  question  is.  Are  we  saved  by  faith  or  by  sacraments  ?  The
Apostle  teaches  us  that  "  in  Christ  Jesus  neither  circumcision
availeth  anything  nor  uncircumcision,  but  a  new  creature."  (Gal.
vi.  15.)

1  A  gentleman  of  discrimination  and  candour,  not  long  since  said  to  a  friend,  "  You  are
very  pious,  but  you  have  no  religion.     I  am  religious,  but  I  have  no  piety."


§6.]  THE    SACKAMEXTS.     THEIR   VALIDITY.  523

4.  The  above  remarks  are  not  intended  to  apply,  and  in  fact
are  not  applicable  to  the  Lutheran  system.  Lutherans  do,  indeed,
teach  the  necessity  of  the  sacraments,  but  as  they  also  teach  that
true,  living,  savmg  faith  is  the  indispensable  condition  of  their
efficacy  ;  and,  as  they  further  teach  that  in  the  case  of  adults  such
faith  produced  by  the  Word  precedes  baptism,  they  do  not  make
baptism  the  ordinary  and  indispensable  channel  for  the  communi-
cation of  the  saving  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  They  hold
that  all  who,  through  the  reading  or  hearing  of  the  Word,  are  led
to  embrace  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  their  God  and  Saviour,  are
thereby  made  children  of  God  and  heirs  of  eternal  life.  They
believe  with  the  Apostle  (Gal.  iii.  26),  that  we  "  are  all  the  chil-
dren of  God  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus."  It  is  this  doctrine  of  sal-
vation by  faith,  or  as  Luther  has  it,  "  by  faith  alone,"  that  has
saved  the  Lutheran  system  from  the  viriis  of  ritualism.

§  6.    Validity  of  the  Sacraments.

That  is  valid  which  avails  for  the  end  intended.  The  question,
therefore,  as  to  the  validity  of  the  sacraments  is  a  question  as  to
what  is  necessary  to  their  being  that  which  they  purport  to  be.
The  answer  to  this  question  is  that  they  must  conform  to  the
prescriptions  given  in  the  Bible  concerning  them.  The  elements
employed  must  be  those  which  Christ  ordained.  The  form,  or
the  manner  in  which  those  elements  are  given  and  received,  must
be  in  accordance  with  his  directions ;  and  the  ordinance  must  be
administered  with  the  intention  of  doing  what  He  has  com-
manded. Thus  if  baptism  be  a  washing  with  water,  then  it  is
necessary  that  water  should  be  the  element  employed  in  its  ad-
ministration. If  it  be  a  washing  with  water  in  the  name  of  the
Father,  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  then  those  words,  or
that  form,  must  be  used  ;  and  the  ordinance  must  be  administered
and  received  in  the  faith  of  the  Trinity.  The  general  faith  of
the  Church  has  been  in  favour  of  the  validity  of  heretical  bap-
tism ;  but  heresy  was  made  to  include  other  departures  from  the
standard  of  faith,  than  the  denial  of  the  essential  doctrines  of
the  Gospel.  Baptism  is  a  Christian  ordinance.  It  involves  on
the  part  of  both  the  administrator  and  the  recipient  the  profes-
sion of  the  Christian  religion.  It  is  perfectly  evident  that  the
same  service,  as  to  matter  and  form,  performed  by  a  heathen  to
A  heathen,  who  attached  an  entirely  different  meaning  to  what
was  done,  could  not  be  regarded  as  a  Christian  ordinance.

The  other  condition  necessary  to  the  vahdity  of  the  sacraments


524       PART  III.   Ch.  XX.  — the  means  of  grace.

concerns  the  intention  of  those  engaged  in  the  service.  They
must  intend  to  do  what  Christ  commanded.  If  a  man  receiyes  the
ordinance  of  baptism,  he  must  intend  to  profess  liis  faith  in  tlie
Gospel  and  to  accept  the  terms  of  salvation  therein  presented.
And  the  administrator  must  have  the  purpose  to  initiate  the  re-
cipient into  the  number  of  the  professed  disciples  of  Christ.  A
sacrament,  therefore,  administered  by  an  idiot,  or  a  maniac,  or  in
sport,  or  in  mockery,  is  utterly  null  and  void.  It  has  no  mean-
ing and  is  entirely  vrorthless.

The  only  question  on  which  there  is  much  diversity  of  opinion
on  this  subject,  is,  Whether  the  validity  of  the  sacraments  de-
pends on  the  official  standing  of  the  person  by  whom  they  are
administered  ?  We  have  seen  that  Romanists  make  canonical
ordination  or  consecration  absolutely  essential.  If  any  man  but
a  bishop  (in  their  sense  of  the  word)  should  confirm  or  ordain,
nothing  is  done.  The  service  in  either  case  is  an  empty  one,  con-
veying neither  grace  nor  authority.  If  any  other  than  a  priest
should  absolve  a  penitent,  no  absolution  takes  place  ;  and  so  of
the  Lord's  Supper,  the  words  of  consecration  pronounced  by  any
lips  but  those  of  a  canonically  ordained  priest,  produce  no  change
in  the  elements.  The  reason  of  this  is,  not  merely  that  the  offi-
ciator  acts  in  such  cases  disorderly  and  improperly,  but  that  he
has  neither  the  prerogative  nor  the  power  to  render  the  sacra-
ments effectual.  They  are  invalid,  because  they  do  not  avail  to
accomplish  the  end  for  which  they  were  appointed.  Romanists
are  guilty  of  a  benevolent  inconsistency  in  making  baptism  an
exception  to  this  rule.  There  is  the  same  logical  or  theoretical
reason  that  baptism  should  be  invalid  when  administered  by  an
unordained  person,  as  that  confirmation,  ordination,  or  absolution,
when  thus  administered,  should  be  imll  and  void.  But  as  baptism
is  held  to  be  essential  to  salvation,  souls  must  often  perish,  when
a  priest  is  inaccessible,  unless  lay  baptism  be  allowed.  In  cases
of  such  emergency  the  Church  of  Rome,  therefore,  pronounces
baptism  to  be  valid  (i.  e.,  efficacious)  when  administered  by  a
layman,  a  woman,  or  even  by  a  pagan,  provided  the  adminis-
trator really  intends  to  baptize,  ^.  e.,  to  do  what  the  Church  con-
templates in  the  administration  of  that  ordinance.

The  standards  of  the  Lutheran  and  Reformed  Churches  place
preaching  the  Word  and  the  administration  of  the  sacraments  on
the  same  ground.  They  teach  (1.)  That  Christ  has  appointed
certain  officers  in  his  Church.  (2.)  That  by  his  Spirit  he  calls
and  qualifies  certain  men  for  the  discharge  of  the  duties  of  those


§  6.]  THE    SACRAMENTS.     THEIR   VALIDITY.  525

offices.  (3.)  That  tliose  wlio  aspire  to  them  are  to  be  examined
as  to  their  call  and  qualifications.  (4.)  That  if  found  competent
they  are  to  be  set  apart  or  ordained  in  an  orderly  manner  to  the
office  to  which  they  deem  themselves  called.  (5.)  That  the
special  functions  of  one  class  of  these  officers,  are  preaching  and
the  administration  of  the  sacraments.  (6.)  It  follows  from  all  this
that  for  any  one  not  thus  called  and  ordained  to  undertake  the
exercise  of  either  of  these  functions  of  the  ministry,  in  a  settled
state  of  the  Church,  is  wrong  ;  it  is  a  violation  of  the  divinely
constituted  order  of  Christ's  Church.  According  to  this  view,
lay  preaching  and  lay  administration  of  the  ordinances  (in  ordi-
nary circumstances)  are  equally  wrong.  But  are  they  invalid  ?
That  is  a  very  different  question.  We  know  that  Romanists,
when  they  pronounce  a  sacrament  invalid,  mean  that  it  is  power-
less. We  know  that  when  the  old  English  law  pronounced  any
marriage  invalid  if  not  solemnized  by  a  man  in  holy  orders,  the
meaning  was,  that  the  cereniony  was  null  and  void ;  that  the  par-
ties were  not  married.  But  what  can  be  meant  by  lay  preach-
ing being  invalid  ?  Is  the  Gospel  invalid  ?  Does  it  lose  its  truth,
authority,  or  power  ?  Tliis  cannot  be.  Neither  its  authority  nor
its  power  depend  upon  the  clay  lips  by  which  it  is  proclaimed.
Again,  if  a  number  of  pious  Christians  assemble,  where  no  min-
ister can  be  had,  to  celebrate  the  Lord's  Supper,  in  what  sense  is
such  a  service  invalid  ?  Do  they  not  commemorate  the  death  of
Christ  ?  Are  not  the  bread  and  wine  to  them  the  symbols  of  his
body  and  blood  ?  If  faith  be  in  exercise,  may  they  not  receive
those  symbols  to  their  spiritual  nourishment  and  growth  in  grace?
Again,  if  baptism  be  a  washing  with  water  in  the  name  of  the
Holy  Trinity,  to  signify  and  seal  our  engrafting  into  Christ,  does
it  cease  to  be,  or  to  signify  this  if  not  administered  by  an  ordained
minister  ?  Does  not  the  man  thus  baptized  make  a  profession  of
his  faith  in  Christ  ?  and  does  he  not  thereby  become  a  member
of  that  great  body  which  confesses  Him  before  men  ?  Can  it,
therefore,  be  any  more  invalid  than  the  Gospel,  when  preached  by
a  layman  ?

What  the  Bible,  therefore,  seems  to  teach  on  this  subject  is,
that  Christ  having  appointed  certain  officers  in  his  Church  to
preach  his  Word  and  to  administer  his  ordinances,  for  any  man,
under  ordinary  circumstances  not  duly  appointed,  to  assume  the
functions  of  the  ministry,  is  irregular  and  wrong,  because  con-
trary to  the  order  of  Christ's  Church.  Further  than  this  the
Reformed  and  Lutheran  standards  do  not  appear  to  have  gone.


626  PART  III.     Ch.   XX.  — the   MEAInS   OF    GRACE.

§  7.  Baptism.
"  Baptism  is  a  sacrament,  wherein  the  washing  with  water,  in
the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
doth  signify  and  seal  our  engrafting  into  Christ  and  partaking  of
the  benefits  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  and  our  engagement  to  be
the  Lord's."  i

The  Mode  of  Baptism.

According  to  the  definition  given  above,  baptism  is  a  washing
with  water.  By  washing  is  meant  any  such  application  of  water
to  the  body  as  effects  its  purification.  This  may  be  done  by  im-
mersion, affusion,  or  sprinkling.  The  command,  therefore,  to
baptize  is  simply  a  command  to  wash  with  water.  It  is  not
specifically  a  command  to  immerse,  to  affuse,  or  to  sprinkle.  The
mode  of  applying  water  as  the  purifying  medium  is  unessential.
The  only  necessary  thing  is  to  make  such  an  application  of  water
to  the  person,  as  shall  render  the  act  significant  of  the  purification
of  the  soul.

The  first  argument  in  favour  of  this  view  of  the  ordinance  is
an  a  priori  one.  As  by  common  consent  the  design  of  the  insti-
tution is  either  to  symbolize  or  to  effect  the  cleansing  of  the  soul
from  the  guilt  and  pollution  of  sin,  by  the  blood  and  spirit  of
Christ,  it  would  seem  to  follow  that  washing  with  water,  how-
ever done,  is  all  that  is  necessary  to  the  integrity  of  the  ordi-
nance. The  idea  of  purification  is  as  clearly  and  as  frequently
signified  by  affusion  as  by  immersion.  Besides,  to  make  anything
so  purely  circumstantial  as  the  manner  in  which  water  is  used  in
the  act  of  cleansing,  essential  to  a  Christian  sacrament,  which,
according  to  some,  is  absolutely  necessary  to  salvation ;  and,  ac-
cording to  others,  is  essential  to  membership  in  the  visible  Church
of  Christ,  is  opposed  to  the  whole  nature  of  the  Gospel.  It  is  to
render  Christianity  more  Judaic  than  Judaism,  even  as  understood
by  the  Pharisees  ;  for  they  purified  themselves,  their  offerings,  and
holy  places  and  utensils,  by  immersion,  affusion,  or  sprinkling  as
was  most  appropriate  or  convenient.

Use  of  the    Word  in  the   Classics.

The  second  argument  on  this  subject,  is  drawn  from  the  usage
of  the  word.  In  the  Classics ;  in  the  Septuagint  and  the  Apoc-
ryphal writings  of  the  Old  Testament ;  in  the  New  Testament ;
and   m   the    writings    of   the    Greek   fathers,   the   words   ^a-rrrut,

1   Westminster  Shorter  Catechism,  Ques.  94.


§  7.]  BAPTISM.    ITS  MODE.  527

^aTrrt^w,  and  their  cognates,  are  used  with  such  latitude  of  mean-
ing, as  to  prove  the  assertion  that  the  command  to  baptize  is  a
command  to  immerse,  to  be  utterly  unauthorized  and  mireason-
able.

Ever  since  the  Reformation  and  the  rise  of  the  Baptists  as  a
distinct  denomination,  who  hold  that  "  baptizing  is  dipping,  and
dipping  is  baptizing,"  the  meaning  of  the  Greek  words  in  ques-
tion has  been  a  matter  of  dispute,  on  which  hundreds  of  volumes
have  been  written.  It  is  evidently  impossible  to  enter  on  that
discussion  in  these  pages.  All  that  can  be  attempted  is  a  brief
statement  of  the  conclusions  believed  to  be  established,  while  the
proofs  on  which  those  conclusions  rest  must  be  sought  in  works
devoted  to  the  subject.  As  to  the  classic  use  of  the  words  in
question,  it  is  clear  that  fSairroi  means  (1.)  To  dip.  (2.)  To  dye
by  dipping.  (3.)  To  dye  without  regard  to  the  mode  m  which
it  is  done  ;  as  a  lake  is  said  to  be  baptized  (^.  e.,  dyed)  by  the
blood  shed  in  it ;  a  garment  is  spoken  of  as  baptized  by  colour-
ing matter  dropping  on  it.  (4.)  It  also  means  to  gild ;  also  to
glaze,  as  when  earthenware  is  covered  with  any  vitreous  matter.
(5.)  To  wet,  moisten,  or  wash.  (6.)  To  temper,  as  hot  iron  is
tempered ;  this  may  be  done  by  plmiging  or  pouring.  "  Tem-
pered, VTTQ  eAatou,"  does  uot  mean  plunged  into  oil.  (7.)  To  im-
bue. The  mind  is  said  to  be  baptized  with  fantasies ;  not
plunged  into  them,  for  it  is  vtto  rwv  c/>ai'racrtojc.i

A  man  is  said  to  be  "  imbued  with  righteousness."  This  can-
not mean  "  dipped."  It  is  obvious,  therefore,  that  a  command  to
baptize,  made  in  the  use  of  the  word  ^aTrrw,  cannot  be  limited  to  a
command  to  dip,  plunge,  or  immerse.

As  to  the  classic  use  of  /JajrriCw,  it  means,  (1.)  To  immerse,  or
submerge.  It  is  very  frequently  used  when  ships  are  spoken  of
as  sunk  or  buried  in  the  sea.  They  are  then  said  to  be  baptized.
(2.)  To  overflow  or  to  cover  with  water.  The  sea-shore  is  said
to  be  baptized  b}^  the  rising  tide,  (o.)  To  wet  thoroughly,  to
moisten.  (4.)  To  pour  upon  or  drench.  (5.)  In  any  way  to  be
overwhelmed  or  overpowered.  Hence  men  are  said  to  hs  bajjtized
with  wine  ("i  (Sefia-n-nafjJvoi  are  the  intoxicated),  with  opium,
with  debts,  with  puzzling  questions.  Wine  is  said  to  be  baptized
by  having  water  poured  into  it.^

1  There  are  two  recent  American  writers  whose  works  contain  all  that  most  students
would  be  disposed  to  read  on  this  subject.  The  one  is  the  Eev.  Dr.  Conant,  in  his  book,
Meaninf/  and  Use  of  the  Word  Bnptizein,  New  York,  1808;  and  the  other  the  Rev.  James
W.  Dale,  in  his  Classic  Baptism  ;  Judaic  Baptism ;  and  Johaniiic  Baptism ;  to  be  followed
by  Christiiin  Baptism.

2  Illustrations  of  some  of  these  uses  of  the  word  may  be  found  in  Stephen's  Thesaurm


528         PART  III.     Ch.   XX.  — the   means   of   GRACE.

The  word  /SaTrrt^o),  as  Dr.  Dale  so  strenuously  argues,  belongs
to  that  class  of  words  which  mdicate  an  effect  to  be  produced
without  expressing  the  kind  of  action  by  which  that  effect  is  to
be  brought  about.  Li  this  respect  it  is  analogous  to  the  word  "  to
bury."  A  man  may  be  buried  by  being  covered  up  in  the  gromid  ;
by  being  placed  in  an  empty  cave ;  by  being  put  into  a  sarcoph-
agus ;  or  even,  as  among  our  Indians,  by  being  placed  upon  a
platform  elevated  above  the  ground.  The  command  to  bury,  may
be  executed  in  any  of  these  ways.  So  with  regard  to  the  Avord
/SaTTTL^io,  there  is  a  given  effect  to  be  produced,  without  any  specific
mj  unction  as  to  the  mamier  ;  whether  by  immersion,  pouring,  or
sprinkHng.

Use  of  the  Words  in  the  Septuagint  and  Apocrypha.

These  words  are  of  rare  occurrence  in  the  Greek  version  of
the  Old  Testament.  In  the  fifth  chapter  of  Second  Kings  we
have  the  history  of  Naaman  the  Syrian,  who  came  to  the  prophet
to  be  healed  of  his  leprosy.  And  "  Elislia  sent  a  messenger  unto
him,  saying.  Go  and  wash  in  Jordan  seven  times  "  (ver.  10).
"  Then  went  he  down  and  dipped  himseff  (J.^a-TiaaTo')  seven
times  in  Jordan  "  (ver.  14).  The  only  special  interest  in  this
passage  is  the  proof  it  affords  that  baptism  and  washing  are
identical.  The  command  to  wash  was  obeyed  by  bai^tizing  him-
self. The  Vulgate  does  not  change  the  words  in  the  two  passages,
"  Vade  et  lavare  septies  in  Jordane  "  (ver.  10).  "  Descendit  et
lavit  m  Jordane  septies  "  (ver.  14).  The  Septuagint  has  Aoitrat
in  verse  10,  and  ejSaTrrt'o-uro  in  verse  14.

In  Daniel  iv.  33,  it  is  said  that  the  body  of  Nebuchadnezzar
"  was  wet  (baptized,  i^(j-4>V->  [LXX.  ver.  30])  with  the  dew  of
heaven."     Here  the  idea  of  dipping  is  absolutely  precluded.

The  word  /3a7rra),  when  meaning  to  dip,  does  not  necessarily
■  include  the  idea  of  entire  immersion.  A  mere  touch  or  partial
immersion  is  often  all  the  word  is  intended  to  express  ;  as  in  Le-
viticus iv.  17 :  "  The  priest  shall  dip  (^ai/^et)  his  finger  in  some
of  the  blood."  Leviticus  xiv.  6 :  "  As  for  the  living  bird,  he  shall
take  it,  and  the  cedar  wood,  and  the  hyssop,  and  shall  dip  (/Sat//*)
them  and  the  living  bird  in  the  blood  of  the  bird  that  was  killed
over  the  running  water."  All  these  things  could  not  be  immersed
in  the  blood  of  a  bird.  Boaz  said  to  Ruth,  at  meal-time  ''  dip
(;8a(/'€is)  thy  morsel  in  the  vinegar."    (Ruth  ii.  14.)    Joshua  iii.  15  :

and  Scapula's  Lexicon,  and  of  all  in  the  works  of  Dr.  Conant  and  Dr.  Dale,  who  discuss
the  bearing  of  each  on  the  matter  in  debate  from  their  respective  stand-points.


§  7.J  BAPTISM.    ITS  MODE.  529

"  The  feet  of  the  priests  that  bare  the  ark  were  dipped  Qe/Sd-
^/yo-av)  in  the  brim  of  the  water."  1  Samuel  xiv.  27  :  Jonathan
"  dipped  "  (Jjiaxp^i)  the  end  of  the  rod  which  was  in  his  hand  "  in
an  honey-comb."  Psahn  Ixviii.  23  (24),  "  That  thy  foot  may
be  dipped  (/Jac^fy)  in  the  blood  of  thine  enemies."  These  exam-
ples prove  that  even  /SaTTTw,  as  used  in  the  Septuagint,  does  not,
when  it  means  to  dip,  include  the  idea  of  complete  immersion.

(iaTTTLCui  (according  to  Trommius),  besides  the  passage  already
quoted  from  2  Kings  v.  14,  occurs  in  the  Septuagint  only  in  Isaiah
xxi.  4,  where  the  Greek  is  17  avoixia  /xe  ^aTrrt'Cet,  "  iniquity  baptizes
(or  overwhelms)  me."  The  English  version,  adhering  to  the
Hebrew,  reads,  "  Kearfulness  affrighted  me."  The  Vulgate  has
"  Tenebras  stupefecerunt  me."  The  word  occurs  twice  in  the
Apocrypha,  Judith  xii.  7,  and  Sirach  xxxiv.  27  [xxxi.  25].
Wahl,^  referring  to  these  two  passages,  defines  "^aTrru/xat,  me  lavo
=  vLTrTO}jiai,''  "  I  wash  myself."  In  Sirach  the  expression  is,  Ba-n--
Ti^o/A€i/os  uTTo  v€Kpou,  "  baptlzed  froui  a  dead  body,"  i.  c,  purified
from  the  uncleanness  contracted  by  touching  a  dead  body.  Or,
as  Fritzsche  translates  it,  "  Der  sich  wascht  von  einem  Todten,
einer  Leiche,  sich  reinigt  von  der  Befleckung,  die  ihm  die  Berii-
hrung  des  Leichn  aus  zugezogen,  vrgl.  4  Moses  xix.  11."^  That
is,  "  He  that  washes  from  a  corpse  purifies  himself  from  the
defilement  occasioned  by  touching  it."  We  learn  from  the  pas-
sage referred  to  for  illustration  (Numbers  xix.  11-13),  that  this
purification  Avas  effected  by  sprinkling  the  ashes  of  a  heifer.  (See
ver.  9,  and  compare  Heb.  ix.  13.)  In  Numbers  xix.  13,  it  is  said,
"  Whosoever  toucheth  the  dead  body  of  any  one  that  is  dead,  and
purifieth  not  himself,  defileth  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lord  ;  and
that  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from  Israel,  because  the  water  of  sepa-
ration was  not  sprinkled  upon  him,  he  shall  be  unclean  ;  his  un-
cleanness is  yet  upon  him."  The  water  of  separation  was  the
water  in  which  the  ashes  of  a  red  heifer  had  been  mingled,  as
described  in  the  preceding  part  of  the  chapter.  And  it  was  the
sprinkling  of  that  water  which  effected  the  baptism,  or  purifica-
tion, of  the  defiled  person.

The  passage  in  Judith  determines  nothing  either  way  as  to  the
meaning  of  the  word.  It  merely  says,  e/JaTrri^cro  iv  rrj  7rapcfj.(3oXy
eVt  Trjs  Trrjyrj^  tov  {SSaros,  "  slie  baptized  herself  in  the  camp  at  a
fountain  of  water."     If  it  be  a  settled  point  that  /JaTrn'^w  alwa^'s

1  Claris  Librorum  V.  T.  Apocryplwi-um  Philologica,  Auctore  Christ.  Abrah.  Wahl,  Philos.
et  Tlieol.  Doctore,  Leipzig,  1853.

2  Kurzf/cfiisiites  exegetisches  Handhuch  zu  den  Apohryphen  des  Alten  Testamentes,  Ton
Otto  Fridoliu  Fritzsche,  Leipzig,  1859,  vol.  v.  p.  195.

VOL.  III.  34


630    PART  III.  Ch.  XX  —THE  MEANS  OF  GRACE.

means  to  immerse,  then  this  passage  asserts  that  Judith  immersed
herself  in  the  fountain.  But  if,  as  the  vast  majority  of  Chris-
tians believe,  the  word  often  means  to  wash,  or  purify,  without
regard  to  the  way  in  which  the  purification  is  effected,  then  the
passage  cannot  be  proved  to  assert  anything  more  than  that
Judith  washed  herself  at  the  fountain.  The  circumstances  of
the  case  are  all  in  favour  of  the  latter  interpretation.  According
to  the  narrative,  the  land  had  been  invaded  by  an  immense  host
of  Assyrians  under  the  command  of  Holofernes.  Resistance
seemed  hopeless,  and  utter  destruction  was  imminent.  In  this
emergency  Judith,  a  young,  beautiful,  and  rich  woman,  inflamed
with  zeal  for  her  country  and  her  religion,  determined  to  make  a
desperate  effort  for  the  salvation  of  her  people.  For  this  purpose,
arrayed  to  the  best  advantage,  she  made  her  way  into  the  ene-
mies' cam]3  and  presented  herself  to  Holofernes  and  promised  to
aid  him  in  the  conquest  of  the  land.  The  Assyrian  general,  cap-
tivated by  her  charms,  treated  her  with  great  favour.  She  re-
mained undisturbed  in  her  tent  for  three  days,  but  was  permitted
at  night  to  resort  to  the  fountain  for  purification.  On  the  fourth
day  she  was  invited  to  a  great  feast,  at  which  Holofernes  drank
to  excess,  so  that  when  the  guests  had  retired  and  the  general
was  in  a  state  of  helpless  intoxication,  Judith,  with  the  assistance
of  her  maid,  cut  off  his  head  and  carried  it  to  the  camp  of  hei
own  people.  This  led  to  the  overthrow  of  the  Assyrians  and  the
deliverance  of  the  land.

The  circumstances  in  this  case  which  favour  the  assumption
that  Judith  went  to  the  fountain  not  for  immersion,  but  for  ablu-
tion, are,  (1.)  It  was  within  the  camp,  necessarily,  for  such  a
host,  of  large  dimensions.  But  a  camp  filled  with  soldiers  does
not  seem  to  be  an  appropriate  bathing-place  for  a  lady  of  distinc-
tion even  at  night.  (2.)  Dr.  Conant  says :  "  There  was  evi-
dently  no  lack  of  water  for  the  immersion  of  the  body,  after
the  Jewish  manner,  namely  by  walking  into  the  water  to  the
proper  depth,  and  then  sinking  down  till  the  whole  body  was
immersed."  ^  The  probability,  however,  seems  all  the  other  way.
It  must  have  been  an  extraordinary  fountain,  if  it  allowed  of
immersion  in  any  such  way.  If  the  word  /^aTTTt'tw  can  only  mean
"  to  immerse,"  these  considerations  amount  to  nothing.  But  if
the  word  means  to  wash  or  to  purify  as  well  as  to  immerse,  then
they  are  of  sufficient  Aveight  to  turn  the  scale  in  favour  of  the
former  explanation.  Of  itself,  however,  the  passage  proves  noth-
ing.

1  Meaning  and  Use  of  Baptizein,  New  York,  1868,  p.  85.


§  7.]  BAPTISM.     ITS   MODE.  '  531

The  New  Testament  Usage.

The  word  fidirTeiv  is  used  four  times  in  the  New  Testament,  in
no  one  of  which  does  it  express  the  idea  of  entire  immersion.  In
Luke  xvi.  24,  "  That  he  may  dip  (/3a(//r;)  the  tip  of  his  finger  in
water."  The  finger,  when  dipped  in  water,  is  not  submerged.
When  placed  horizontally  on  the  water  and  slightly  depressed,  it
retains  more  of  the  moisture  than  if  plunged  perpendicularly  into
it.  John  xiii.  26,  speaks  twice  of  dipping  the  sop  (ySat/zas  and
€//,/3ai//as) .  But  a  morsel  held  in  the  fingers,  is  only  partly  im-
mersed. In  Revelation  xix.  13,  the  words  Trcpi/JcySAr^/AeVos  i/xanov
l3e/3aixfxevov  at/xari  obviously  mean  '  clothed  with  a  vesture  stained
or  dyed  with  blood.'  The  allusion  is  probably  to  Isaiah  Ixiii.  1  If. :
"  Who  is  this  that  conieth  from  Edom,  with  dyed  garments  from
Bozrah  ?  .  .  .  .  Wherefore  art  thou  red  in  thine  apparel,  and
thy  garments  lUce  him  that  treadeth  in  the  wine-fat  ?  I  have
trodden  the  wine-press  alone  ;  .  .  .  .  and  their  blood  shall  be
sprinkled  upon  my  garments,  and  I  will  stain  all  my  raiment."
In  this  case,  therefore,  the  baptism  was  by  sprinkling.  BaTTTt^w
occurs  in  the  New  Testament  about  eighty  times  ;  ^airTLa^a  some
twenty  times  ;  and  jSaTrrto/xo's  four  times.  As  every  one  admits
that  baptism  may  be  effected  by  immersion,  and  as  the  purifica-
tions under  the  Old  Testament  (called  by  the  Apostle,  Hebrews
ix.  10,  in  Greek,  "  diverse  baptisms  ")  were  effected  by  immer-
sion, affusion,  and  sprinkling,  it  would  not  be  surprising  if  in
some  of  these  numerous  passages,  the  baptism  spoken  of  necessa-
rily implied  immersion.  It  so  happens,  or,  it  has  been  so  ordered,
however,  that  there  is  no  such  passage  in  the  whole  of  the  New
Testament.  Tlie  places  in  which  these  words  occur  may  be  ar-
ranged in  the  following  classes  :  (1.)  Those  in  which,  taken  by
themselves,  the  presumption  is  in  favour  of  immersion.  (2.)
Those  in  which  the  idea  of  immersion  is  necessarily  excluded.
(3.)  Those  which  in  themselves  are  not  decisive,  but  where  the
presvunption  is  altogether  in  favour  of  affusion.

To  the  first  class  belong  those  passages  which  speak  of  the
persons  baptized  going  into  (eis)  the  water,  and  "  coming  up  out
of  the  water."  (Matt.  iii.  16  ;  Acts  viii.  38,  39.)  Such  pas-
sages, however,  must  be  isolated  in  order  to  create  a  presumption
in  favour  of  immersion.  According  to  ancient  accounts,  the  com-
mon way  of  baptizmg  was  for  the  person  to  step  into  Avater,  when
water  was  poured  on  his  head,  and  then  he  came  up  out  of  the
water,  not  in  the  least  incommoded  by  dripping  garments.     And


532  PART   III.     Ch.   XX.  — the   means   OF    GRACE.

wlien  we  remember  that  it  is  said  concerning  Jolm,  that  '^  Then
went  out  to  him  Jerusalem,  and  all  Judea,  and  all  the  region
round  about  Jordan,  and  were  baptized  of  him  in  Jordan,  con-
fessing their  sins  "  (Matt.  iii.  5,  6),  it  seems  physically  impossible
that  he  should  have  immersed  all  this  multitude.  When  all  the
circumstances  are  taken  into  view,  the  presumption  in  favour  of
immersion,  even  in  this  class  of  passages,  disappears.

2.  The  second  class  of  passages,  those  from  which  the  idea  of
immersion  is  excluded,  includes  all  those  which  relate  to  the  bap-
tism of  the  Spirit.  The  Spirit  is  frequently  said  to  be  poured
out  on  men  ;  but  men  are  never  said  to  be  dipped  or  immersed
into  the  Holy  Spirit.  Such  an  idea  is  altogether  incongruous.
When,  therefore,  it  is  said  that  men  are  baptized  by  the  Holy
Spirit,  as  is  so  often  done,  the  reference  must  be  to  eil'usion,  or
affusion  of  the  Spirit  by  which  the  soul  is  cleansed  from  sin.  As
the  Holy  Spirit  is  a  person,  and  not  a  mere  influence  or  force,  the
preposition  ei/  used  in  this  connection  (Matt.  iii.  11  ;  Mark  i.  8  ;
John  i.  33  ;  Acts  i.  5,  xi.  16  ;  1  Cor.  xii.  13)  must  have  its  in-
strumental force.  The  work  performed  in  us  by  the  Hcly  Spirit
is  a  baptism.  As  water  in  the  hands  of  John  was  the  purifying
medium  for  the  body,  so  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  sent  or  given  by
Jesus  Christ,  purifies  the  soul.  Some  of  the  modern  commen-
tators are  such  purists  that  they  are  unwilling  to  allow  of  the
slightest  departure  from  classic  usage  in  the  Greek  of  the  New
Testament.  They  speak  as  though  the  sacred  writers  were  Greek
grammarians,  instead  of,  as  was  in  most  cases  the  fact,  unlettered
men  writing  in  what  to  them  was  a  foreign  language.  Thus  be-
cause the  particle  tva  in  classic  Greek  has  always  a  telic  force,
they  deny  that  it  is  ever  used  ecbatically  in  the  New  Testament,
even  in  such  cases  as  Luke  xxii.  30,  "  I  appoint  unto  you  a  king-
dom, ....  rn  order  that  ye  may  eat  and  drink  at  my  table."
John  vi.  7,  ''  Two  hundred  pennyworth  of  bread  is  not  sufficient
for  them,  in  order  that  every  one  of  them  may  have  a  little."
Romans  xi.  11,  "  Have  they  stumbled  tvith  the  design  that  they
should  fall?"  1  Corinthians  xiv.  13,  "Let  him  that  speak-
eth  in  an  unknown  tongue  pray  in  order  that  he  may  interpret,"
etc.,  etc.  Thus,  also,  because  the  words  ■tricTTe.vi:),  ttuttl^,  and  tticttos
in  the  classics  are  rarely  found  in  construction  with  the  preposi-
tion £! ,  they  give  the  most  unnatural  interpretation  to  many  pas-
sages in  order  to  avoid  admitting  that  construction  in  the  New
Testament.  This  is  done  in  the  face  of  such  passages  as  i\Lark  i.
16,  Trio-rerere  Iv  tw  evayyeXi'o).     Galatians  iii.  26,  "  Ye  are  all  the


§  ;.]  BAPTISM.     ITS  MODE.  533

children  of  God,  Sta  rrj^  TrtWecos  iv  XptcTTw  'Ir;o-o£i."  Ephesians  i.  15,
"  After  I  heard  of  your,  ttio-tlv  eV  rw  Kvplio  'Itjo-o9,"  and  many  others
of  like  kind.  In  like  manner  because  the  instrumental  force  of
iv  is  rare  in  the  classics,  it  is  avoided  as  much  as  possible  in  the
Scriptures.  Baptism  iv  Tnei'/y-art,  instead  of  being  understood  as
meaning  a  baptism  by,  or  with  the  Spirit,  is  made  to  mean  "  in
the  sphere  of  the  Spirit,"  and  baptism  iv  ~vpi,  baptism  "  in  the
sphere  of  fire."  AVhat  this  means,  it  would  be  difficult  for  most
of  those  for  whom  the  Bible  is  intended  to  understand.  The  bap-
tism of  John  and  that  of  Christ  are  contrasted.  The  one  baptized
with  water  ;  the  other  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  In  Acts  i.  5,  it  is
said,  "  John  truly  baptized  with  water  ({'Sart,  the  simple  instru-
mental dative)  ;  but  ye  shall  be  baptized  (iv  llve.vp.aTL  ayt'w)  with
the  Holy  Ghost  not  many  days  hence."  As  to  baptize  v8art  can-
not mean  to  immerse  in  water,  so  neither  can  baptising  h-  to*
Tivevixan  mean  immersing  in  the  Spirit.  The  fact  is  (SaTnc'CeLv  does
not  express  any  particular  mode  of  action.  As  to  dye,  expresses
any  kind  of  action  by  which  an  object  is  coloured  ;  to  bury,  any
kind  of  action  by  which  an  object  is  hidden  and  protected ;  so  to
baptize,  expresses  any  act  by  which  a  person  or  thing  is  brought
into  the  state  of  being  wet,  purified,  or  even  stupefied,  as  by
opium  or  wine.

Another  passage  in  which  this  word  occurs  where  the  idea  of
immersion  is  precluded,  is  1  Corinthians  x.  1,  2,  "  All  our  fathers
were  under  the  cloud,  and  all  passed  through  the  sea  ;  and  were
all  baptized  unto  Moses  in  the  cloud  and  in  the  sea."  The  peo-
ple went  through  the  sea  dry  shod.  As  far  as  known  not  a  drop
of  water  touched  them.  The  cloud  referred  to  was  doubtless  the
pillar  of  cloud  by  day  and  the  pillar  of  fire  by  night  which  guided
the  people  through  the  wilderness.  The  simple  and  generally
accepted  meaning  of  the  passage  is,  that  as  a  man  is  brought  by
Christian  baptism  into  the  number  of  the  professed  and  avowed
disciples  of  Christ,  so  the  Hebrews  were  brought  by  the  suj^er-
natural  manifestations  of  divine  power  specified,  into  the  relation
of  disciples  and  followers  to  Moses.  There  is  no  allusion  to  im-
mersion, affusion,  or  sprinkling  in  the  case.

Another  passage  belonging  to  this  class  is  Mark  vii.  4,  "  When
they  come  from  the  market,  except  they  wash  (/Sa-Tto-wi'Tai),  they
eat  not.  And  luany  other  things  there  be,  which  they  have
received  to  hold,  as  the  washing  of  cups,  and  pots,  brazen  ves-
sels, and  of  tables  («/\uw  ,  couches)."  To  maintain  that  beds  or
couches  were  immersed,  is  a  mere  act  of  desperation.     Baptism


534   PART  III.  Cji.  XX.  — the  means  of  grace.

means  here,  as  it  does  everywhere  when  used  of  a  religious  rite,
symbolical  purification  by  water,  without  the  slightest  reference
to  the  mode  in  Avliich  that  purification  was  effected.

3.  The  third  class  of  passages  includes  all  those  in  which  the
idea  of  immersion,  though  not  absolutel}^  precluded,  is  to  the  last
degree  improbable.  The  late  Dr.  Edward  Robinson,  than  wdiom
there  is  no  higher  authority  on  all  that  relates  to  the  topography
;ind  physical  geography  of  Palestine  and  the  habits  of  its  in-
liabitants,  so  far  as  they  are  determined  by  the  nature  of  the
country,  says  :  (1.)  "  The  idea  of  private  baths  in  families  in
Jerusalem  and  Palestine  generally  is  excluded."  (2.)  "  In  Acts
ii.  41,  three  thousand  persons  are  said  to  have  been  baptized  at
Jerusalem  apparently  in  one  day  at  the  season  of  Pentecost  in
June  ;  and  in  Acts  iv.  4,  the  same  rite  is  necessarily  implied  in
respect  to  five  thousand  more.  Against  the  idea  of  full  immer-
sion in  these  cases  there  lies  a  difficulty,  apparently  insuperable,
in  the  scarcity  of  water.  There  is  in  summer  no  running  stream
in  the  vicinity  of  Jerusalem,  except  the  mere  rill  of  Siloam  a  few
rods  in  length  ;  and  the  city  is  and  was  supplied  with  water
from  its  cisterns  and  public  reservoirs.^  From  neither  of  these
sources  could  a  supply  have  been  well  obtained  for  the  immersion
of  eight  thousand  persons.  The  same  scarcity  of  water  forbade
the  use  of  private  baths  as  a  general  custom  ;  and  thus  also
further  precludes  the  idea  of  bathing"  in  such  passages  as  Luke
xi.  38  ;  INIark  vii.  2-8.  He  confirms  his  conclusion  by  further
remarking,  (3.)  "  In  the  earliest  Latin  versions  of  the  New  Tes-
tament, as,  for  example,  the  Itala,  M'hich  Augustine  regarded  as
the  best  of  all,^  which  goes  back  apparently  to  the  second  century
and  to  usage  connected  with  the  apostolic  age,  the  Greek  verb,
/SaTTTt'^'o),  is  uniformly  given  in  the  Latin  form,  "  baptizo,"  and  is
never  translated  by  "  immergo,"  or  any  like  word,  showing  that
there  was  something  in  the  rite  of  baptism  to  which  the  latter  did
not  correspond.*^  (4.)  The  baptismal  fonts  still  found  ^  among
the  ruins  of  the  most  ancient  Greek  churches  in  Palestine,  as  at
Tekoa  and  Gophna,  and  going  back  apparently  to  very  early
times,  are  not  large  enough  to  admit  of  the  baptism  of  adult
persons  by  immersion,  and  were  obviously  never  intended  for  that
use."  5

1  See  Biblical  Researches  in  Palestine,  vol.  i.  pp.  479-51G.

2  De  Doctrina  Christiana,  ii.  22  [xv.] ;    Works,  edit.  Benedictines,  Paris,  18.36,  vol.  iii,
p.  54,  d.

3  See  Blanehini,  Eraiif/eliorum  Quadruplex,  etc.,  Rom.  1749.

^  See  Robinson's  Biblical  Researches  in  Palestine,  edit.  Boston,  1841,  vol.  ii.  p.  182;  vol
ni.  p.  78.
6  See  Robinson's  Lexicon  of  the  New  Testament,  word  fianriioi.  New  York,  1850.


§  7.]  BAPTISM.     ITS   MODE.  boo

It  is,  therefore,  to  the  last  degree  improbable  that  the  thou-
sands mentioned  in  the  early  chapters  of  Acts  were  baptized  by
immersion.  The  same  improbability  exists  as  to  the  case  of  the
centurion  in  Cassarea  and  the  jailer  at  Philippi.  With  regard  to
the  former,  Peter  said,  "  Can  any  man  forbid  water?"  which  nat-
urally implies  that  water  was  to  be  brought  to  Cornelius,  and
not  he  be  taken  to  the  water.  As  to  the  jailer,  it  is  said  (Acts
xvi.  33)  that  he  and  all  his  were  baptized  within  the  prison,  as
the  narrative  clearly  implies,  at  midnight.  There  is  the  same
improbability  against  the  assumption  that  the  eunuch,  mentioned
in  Acts  viii.  27-38,  was  baptized  by  immersion.  He  was  travel-
ling through  a  desert  part  of  the  country  towards  Gaza,  when
Philip  joined  him,  "  And  as  they  went  on  their  way  they  came
unto  a  certain  water  (eVi  rt  vBwp,  to  some  water)."  There  is  no
known  stream  in  that  region  of  sufficient  depth  to  allow  of  the
immersion  of  a  man.  It  is  possible,  indeed,  that  there  might
have  been  a  reservoir  or  tank  in  that  neighbourhood.  But  that
is  a  fact  to  be  assumed  without  evidence  and  against  probability.
It  is  said  they  "  went  down  both  into  the  water,"  and  came  "  up
out  of  the  water."  But  that  might  be  said,  if  the  water  were
not  deep  enough  to  cover  their  ankles.

The  presumption  is  still  stronger  against  immersion  in  the  case
mentioned  in  Mark  vii.  4.  It  is  there  said  of  "the  Pharisees  and
all  the  Jews,"  that  "when  they  come  from  the  market,  except
they  baptize  themselves  (eav  fxi]  /DaTrr/o-wirai)  they  eat  not."  Let
it  be  here  considered,  (1.)  That  private  baths  were  in  Jerusalem
very  rare,  from  the  necessity  of  the  case.  (2.)  That  what  is  said,
is  not  said  merely  of  men  of  wealth  and  rank  who  might  be  sup-
posed to  have  conveniences  and  luxuries  which  the  common  peo-
ple could  not  command.  It  is  said  of  the  "  Pharisees,"  a  large
class,  and  not  only  of  that  class,  but  of  "  all  the  Jews."  It  is
wellnigh  incredible,  under  such  circumstances,  that  "  all  the
Jews"  should  immerse  themselves  every  time  they  came  from
the  ayopu,  i.  e.,  "a  place  of  public  resort  in  towns  and  cities  ;  any
open  place,  where  the  people  came  together  either  for  business  or
to  sit  and  converse.  In  oriental  cities  such  open  places  Avere  at
the  inside  of  the  gates  ;  and  here  public  business  Avas  transacted,
and  tribunals  held,  as  also  markets."  '  That  all  the  Jews  im-
mersed themselves  every  time  they  came  from  such  a  place  of
public  resort,  is  very  hard  to  believe,  considering  that  the  facil-
ities for  such  immersion  were  not  at  their  command.     (3.)  The

^  Robinson,  sub  voce.


5oG  PART   III.     Cii.   XX.  — THE   MILAXS   OF    GRACE.

words  baptize  and  wash  are  interchanged  in  this  whole  connection
in  such  a  way  as  to  show  that,  in  the  mind  of  the  writer,  they
were  synonymous  expressions.  The  Pharisees  comphxined  that
the  disciples  ate  with  unwashen  (di  tVrots)  hands ;  for  they  eat  not
unless  they  wash  (i t'l/zojiTai)  their  hands  ;  and  when  they  come
from  the  market  they  do  not  eat  unless  they  wash  Q/SaiTTia-on'Tai)  ;
and  they  hold  to  the  washing  (;Sa7rTto-/j.ous)  of  cups,  and  pots,  of
brazen  vessels,  and  of  tables  or  couches.  To  baptize  the  hands
was  to  wash  the  hands,  and  the  usual  mode  of  ablution  in  the
east  is  by  pouring  water  on  the  hands  (see  2  Kings  iii.  11).

It  is  notorious  that  the  various  ablutions  prescribed  by  the
Mosaic  law  were  effected  sometimes  by  immersion,  sometimes  by
affusion,  and  sometimes  by  sprinkling.  And  it  is  no  less  true
that  all  these  modes  of  purification  are  called  b}-  the  sacred
■^-riters  dLiicfiopoi  (3ar,TLafxoi,  as  in  Hebrews  ix.  10,  and  JNIark  vii.  4.

So  far,  therefore,  as  the  New  Testament  is  concerned,  there  is
not  a  single  case  where  baptism  necessarily  implies  immersion  ;
there  are  many  cases  in  which  that  meaning  is  entirely  inadmis-
sible, and  many  more  in  which  it  is  in  the  highest  degree  improb-
able. If  immersion  were  indispensable,  why  was  not  the  word
KaraSuw  used  to  express  the  command  ?  If  sprinkling  were  exclu-
sively intended,  why  was  not  patvw  or  pairt^w  used  ?  It  is  simply
because  the  mode  is  nothing  and  the  idea  everj^  thing,  that  a  word
was  chosen  which  includes  all  the  modes  in  which  water  can  be
applied  as  the  means  of  purification.  Such  a  word  is  /SaTTTt'Cw,  for
which  there  is  no  legitimate  substitute,  and  therefore  that  word
has  been  retained  by  all  the  Churches  of  Christendom,  even  by
the  Baptists  themselves.

The  Patristic  Usage.

This  is  a  wide  and  densely  wooded  field,  in  which  a  man  may
find  anything  he  chooses  to  look  for,  unless  it  be  for  proof  that
the  fathers  always  used  the  word  /Sa-Tt>  in  the  sense  of  immer-
sion. They  speak  of  the  waters  of  chaos  as  baptized  by  the
Spirit  of  God  brooding  over  them ;  they  were  thereby  sanctified
and  a  sanctifying  power  was  imparted  to  the  waters.  The  onlv
point  of  interest  here  is,  that  Tertullian,  for  example,  regarded
this  as  "baptismi  figura,"  a  figure  of  bajjtism.  The  point  ol
resemblance  assuredly  was  not  immersion.

But  besides  this,  Suicer  gives  and  copiously  illustrates,  from
the  writing  of  the  fathers,  no  less  than  eight  "  significations  of
the  word  baptism  (vocis  /SunrTicr/xa  significationes)."     (1.)    The


§  7.]  BAPTISM.    ITS   MODE.  537

deluge  was  a  baptism,  not  only  for  the  world,  purging  away  its
sins,  but  also  for  Noah  and  his  family,  as  a  means  of  salvation.
As  they  were  saved  by  the  waters  buoying  up  the  ark,  so  are  we
saved  by  baptism.  (2.)  The  baptism  of  Moses  when  he  passed
through  the  Red  Sea.  The  sea  was  the  symbol  of  the  water  of
baptism  ;  the  cloud,  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  (3.)  That  of  the  He-
brews, as  among  them  any  person  or  thing  impure,  eAovero  v^art,
was  washed  with  water.  This  washing,  however  done,  was  bap-
tism. (4.)  The  baptism  of  John,  which  was  regarded  as  intro-
ductory, not  spiritual,  or  conferring  the  Spirit,  but  simply  leading
to  repentance.  (5.)  The  baptism  of  Jesus.  BaTrrt'Cet  Iqaim,  aX\'
iv  TTvevfjLaTi.  Here  immersion  is  precluded.  (6.)  Of  tears,  8ia  8aK-
pvwv.  "  I  know  a  fifth,"  says  Gregory  Nazianzen,^  "  by  tears,  but
very  laborious,  when  a  man  washes  (o  Aouwi/)  his  pillow  and  his
bed  every  night  with  his  tears."  (7.)  Of  blood.  The  martyrs
were  baptized  with  blood.  Christ's  cross  and  death  were  called
his  baptism,  because  thereby  purification  was  made  for  the  sins
of  men.  (8.)  The  baptism  of  fire.  This  is  sometimes  under-
stood of  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  purifies  as  fire  does  ;  at  others  of
the  final  conflagration  when  the  earth  is  to  be  purified  by  fire.
With  the  fathers,  therefore,  the  act  of  purification,  and  not  sim-
ply or  only  the  act  of  immersion,  was  baptism.?

It  is  not  denied  that  ^a-n-TiC^u'  means  to  immerse,  or  that  it  is
frequently  so  used  by  the  fathers  as  by  the  classic  authors  ;  it  is
not  denied  that  the  Christian  rite  was  often  administered,  after
the  apostolic  age,  by  immersion ;  it  is  not  even  denied  that  dur-
ing certain  periods  of  the  history  of  the  Church,  and  in  certain
regions.  Immersion  was  the  common  method  in  which  baptism
was  administered.  But  it  is  denied  that  immersion  is  essential
to  baptism  ;  that  it  was  the  common  method  in  the  apostolic
Churches ;  that  it  was  at  any  time  or  in  any  part  of  the  Church
the  exclusive  method  ;  and  more  especially  is  it  denied  that  im-
mersion is  now  and  everywhere  obligatoiy  or  necessary  to  the
integrity  of  Christian  baptism.^

1  Ornt.  39,  p.  634.

2  Joh.  Caspar!  Suiceri,  Thesaurus  Ecclesiasticus  e  Patribus  Greeds  ordine  alphabetico  ex-
hibens  Qncecunque  Phrases,  Ritus,  Dofjmrtta,  ITcereses,  et  hiijusmorli  alia  spectant.  Opus
viginti  annorum  indefesso  labore  adornatum,  2d  edit.,  Amsterdam,  1728.

3  See  Hermann  Cremer,  Blblisch-TheoIor/ischcs  Worterhuch  der  NcutestimentUchen  Grci-
citcit,  Gotha,  1866.  After  referring  to  the  Old  Teistameiit  ablutions  the  author  says,  on  p.
87:  "We  must,  therefore,  by  /jJan-Ti^eiv  understand  a  washing,  the  design  of  which,  as  of
the  theocratical  washings  and  purifieations,  was  the  purification  of  the  soul  from  sin  (Ent-
siindigung)."  On  p.  89  it  is  said,  "We  find  the  secondary  meaning  of  iin.vriC,eiv  in  Mat-
thew iii.  11:    BttTTT.  iv  TrvevfiaTi  ayiia   Ka\   nvpi,  opp.  ev  iiSan   ei?   ixeTavOLHf .  Ci  mp.  Luke  ill.  16:

John  i.  33.     That  it  is  not  the  meaning  of  immersion,  but  of  '  washing  with  the  design  of


538       PART  m.   Ch.  XX.  — the  means  of  grace.

The  Catholicity  of  the  G-ospel.
The  third  general  argument  on  tliis  subject  is  derived  from  the
fact  that  the  Gospel  is  designed  for  all  classes  of  persons  and  for
all  parts  of  the  earth.  It  is  not  mtended  exclusively  for  the
strong  and  robust,  but  also  for  the  vs^eak,  the  sick,  and  the  dying.
It  is  not  to  be  confined  to  the  warm  or  temperate  regions  of  the
earth,  but  it  is  to  be  preached  and  its  ordinances  are  to  be  admin-
istered wherever  fallen  men  can  be  found.  Baptism  by  immer-
sion would  be  to  many  of  the  sick  certainly  fatal ;  to  the  dying
impossible.  To  the  inhabitants  of  Greenland,  if  possible,  it
would  be  torture  ;  and  to  those  dwelling  in  the  deserts  of  Arabia
or  Africa,  it  could  be  admmistered  only  at  long  intervals  or  at
the  end  of  a  long  pilgrimage.  Yet  baptism  is  an  imperative
duty.  The  command  of  Christ  is,  "  Go  ye,  therefore,  and  teacli
all  nations,  baptizing  them  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the
Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  It  is  not  to  be  believed  that  our
blessed  Lord  would  have  enjoined  an  external  rite  as  the  mode  of
professing  his  religion,  the  observance  of  which,  under  many  cir-
cumstances, would  be  exceedingly  difficult,  and  sometimes  impos-
sible.

Argument  from  the  Bengn  of  the  Ordiyiance.

This  argument  was  adverted  to  in  the  beginning  of  this  section.
It  requires,  however,  a  more  particular  consideration.  (1.)  It  is
admitted  that  baptism  is  a  sign,  and  that  the  blessing  which  it
signifies  is  ^purification  from  sin.  (2.)  It  is  admitted  that  the
theocratical  purifications,  having  the  same  general  import,  were
effected  by  immersion,  affusion,  and  sprinkling.  (3.)  It  is  ad-
mitted that  the  soul  is  cleansed  from  the  guilt  of  sin  by  the  blood
of  Christ.  (4.)  It  is  admitted  that  imder  the  Old  Testament  the
application  of  the  blood  of  the  sacrifices  for  sin  was  expressed  by
the  act  of  sprinkling.  It  was  sprinkled  on  the  people  (Ex.  xxiv.
8)  for  whose  benefit  the  sacrifices  were  offered ;  it  was  sprinkled
upon  the  altar  ;  and,  by  the  High  Priest,  upon  the  mercy  seat.
In  the  New  Testament  the  application  of  the  blood  of  Christ  is
expressed  by  the  same  word.  "  Elect  ....  unto  ....  sprink-
ling of  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ."  (1  Pet.  i.  2.)  "  The  blood  of
sprinkling,  that  speaketh  better  things  than  that  of  Abel."  (Heb.
xii.  24.)  (5.)  It  is  admitted,  further,  that  the  purification  of  the
soul  from  the  moral  pollution  of  sin  is  effected  by  the  renewing

purification,'  that  is  transferred,  is  plain  from  the  antithesis  between  ei*  iiS.  and  iv  itv.
whereby  the  two  baptisms  are  distinguished."


§8.]  BAPTISM.     ITS   FORMULA.  539

of  the  Holy  Ghost.  (6.)  It  is  admitted  that  the  communication
of  the  sanctifying  influences  of  the  Spirit  is  expressed  in  the  use
of  two  familiar  figures,  that  of  anointing  with  oil,  and  that  of
the  pouring  of  water.  Kings,  priests,  and  prophets  were  anointed.
The  people  of  God  are  called  his  "  anointed."  The  Apostle  John
says  to  believers  :  "  Ye  have  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One,  and

ye  know  all  things The  anointing  which  ye  have  received

of  Him  abideth  in  you."  (1  John  ii.  20  and  27.)  The  other
figure  is  no  less  familiar.  (Is.  xxxii.  15  ;  Joel  ii.  28.)  The
Spirit's  influences  are  compared  to  rain  which  waters  the  earth,
and  to  the  dew  which  falls  on  the  mown  grass.  From  all  this  it
appears  that  the  truth  symbolized  in  baptism  may  be  signified  by
immersion,  affusion,  or  sprinkling ;  but  that  the  ordinance  is  most
significant  and  most  conformed  to  Scripture,  when  administered
by  affusion  or  sprinkling.

§  8.   The  Formula  of  Baptism.

This  is  authoritatively  prescribed  in  Matthew  xxviii.  19.
Christ  gave  a  command  perpetually  binding  on  his  Church  to
baptize  men  "  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of
the  Holy  Ghost."  In  this  passage  the  preposition  ets  (cts  t6  ovoixa)
means  unto,  or,  in  reference  to.  Paul  asks  the  Corinthians,
"  were  ye  baptized  cts  to  ovofxa  IlauXou;"  (1  Cor.  i.  13.  Did  your
baptism  make  you  the  disciples  of  Paul?)  He  tells  them  (1
Cor.  X.  2)  that  the  fathers,  "  were  baptized  unto  Moses  "  ets
Tov  Mwo-T^v,  they  were  made  and  professed  to  be  the  disciples  of
Moses.  So  in  Romans  vi.  3,  it  is  said  we  "  were  baptized  ek
XpuTTov  Iiyo-ow  unto  Jesus  Christ."  Galatians  iii.  27,  "  Baptized
into  (ei?)  Christ."  According  to  this  formula,  he  who  receives
baptism  as  a  Christian  rite,  thereby  professes  to  stand  in  that  re-
lation to  the  Father,  Son,  and  Spirit  which  those  who  receive  the
religion  of  Christ  sustain.  That  is,  he  professes  to  receive  God
the  Father,  as  his  father  ;  God  the  Son,  as  his  Saviour,  and  God
the  Holy  Ghost  as  his  teacher  and  sanctifier  ;  and  this  involves  the
engagement  to  receive  the  Word,  of  which  the  Spirit  is  the  author,
as  the  rule  of  his  faith  and  practice. ^

1  Fritzsche  on  Romans  vi.  3,  says:  "Loquutio,  (SaTrrtioi  ni-o  ei?  nra  (ec?  n)  per  se  non
minus  late  patet,  quam  vernacula  Jemanden  auf  Jemanden  (aut  etwas)  taufen.  Non  enim
nisi  banc  geueralem  notionem  complectitur:  aliquem  aqune  ita  iminergere,  ut  ejus  cogita-
tiones  in  aliquem  (aliquod)  dirigas,  Jemanden  unter  Beziehung,  Hindeutung  auf  jemanden
(etwas)  taufen.  At  multis  de  eausis  ei  qui  lavatur  res  memorabilis  mon.strari  potest,  v.  c,
ut  in  aliquo  fidem  collocet,  ut  aliquem  ducem  sequatur,  ut  aliquid  pie  revereatur,  ut  aliquid

effectum  reddat,  ut  aliquid  sibi  evenisse  sciat  et  sic  porro Sic  dubitare  non  potest,

quin  jSan-Ti^u  Tiva.  ei?  XpccToi'  (Gal.  iii.  27),  aqusB  aliquem  sic  immergere,  ut  aniniuni  ad


540         PART  III.     Ch.   XX.  — the   means   OF   GRACE.

There  are  several  cases  in  wliicli  baptism  is  said  to  have  been
administered  cV  rw  ovofiart  in,  or  on,  the  name  of  Christ,  instead  of
£is  TO  ovofia  into,  or,  in  reference  to.  And  in  Acts  ii.  38,  the
preposition  eVi  is  used,  eVl  tu>  oiofiarc.  It  is  doubtful  whether  any-
thing materially  different  was  intended  to  be  expressed  by  this
change  of  the  prepositions  and  cases.  To  baptize,  eVi  or  iv  ovo/xaTi,
means  to  baptize  "  upon  the  name,"  sc,  of  Christ,  that  is,  upon
the  authority  of  Christ.  The  rite  is  administered  in  obedience
to  his  command,  in  the  form  in  which  he  prescribed,  and  with  the
intent  for  which  he  ordained  it.

In  the  Acts  it  is  repeatedly  said  that  the  Apostles  baptized
their  converts  in  "  the  name  of  Christ."  It  is  not  to  be  inferred
from  this  fact  that  they  departed  from  the  form  prescribed  in
Matthew  xxviii.  19,  and  administered  the  ordinance  in  the  use  of
the  words,  '  I  baptize  thee  in  the  name  of  Christ ; '  or,  'I  bap-
tize thee  et's  XpicTTov  unto  Christ.'  Such  inference  is  unnecessary ;
as  baptism  administered  in  the  way  prescribed  in  Matthew  xxviii.
19,  is  a  baptism  both  in  the  name,  or,  by  the  authority  of
Christ,  and  unto  or  in  reference  to  Him.  As  this  inference  is
uimecessary  so  it  is  improbable.  It  is  in  the  highest  degree  im-
probable that  the  Apostles  would  have  departed  from  the  form
so  solemnly  prescribed  by  their  Divine  Master  ;  and  it  is  more-
over improbable  that  any  such  departure  took  place  from  the  fact
that  the  form  prescribed  in  Matthew  has  been  used  in  all  age?
and  parts  of  the  Church.

§  9.   The  Subjects  of  Baptism.

"  Baptism  is  not  to  be  administered  to  any  that  are  out  of  the
visible  Church,  till  they  profess  their  faith  in  Christ  and  obedience
to  Him  :  but  the  infants  of  such  as  are  members  of  the  visible
Church  are  to  be  baptized."  ^

The  question.  Who  are  the  proper  subjects  of  baptism  ?  is  de-
termined by  the  design  of  the  ordinance  and  the  practice  of  the
Apostles.  It  has  been  shown  that,  according  to  our  standards,
the  sacraments  (and  of  course  baptism)  were  instituted,  to  sig-
nify, seal,  and  apply  to  believers  the  benefits  of  the  redemption
of  Christ.  The  reception  of  baptism,  so  far  as  adults  are  con-
cerned, is  an  intelligent,  voluntary  act,  which  from  its  nature  in-

Christum  applicare  eum  jubeas,  valeat  ita  aliquem  aqua  lustrare  ut  Christo  fidem  haben-

dam  esse  ei  signilices  (Act.  xix.  4),  et  /iaTTTt^w  ru'a  eU  t6  oidju.o  toC  narpo?,  ktX notet

lustro  aliquem  reverentia,  quae  Patris  —  nomini  debeatur,  eum  obstring(!ns."     Edit.  Ilalle,
1836,  vol.  1.  pp.  359,  360.

1   Westminster  Shorter  Catechism,  quest.  95.


§9.]  BAPTISM.    ITS   SUBJECTS.  541

volves,  (1.)  A  profession  of  faith  in  Christ,  and  (2.)  A  promise
of  allegiance  to  Him.
This  is  clear, —

1.  From  the  command  of  Christ  to  make  disciples  of  all  na-
tions, baptizing  them  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  of  the  Son,  and
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  A  disciple,  however,  is  both  a  recipient  of
doctrines  taught,  and  a  follower.  Every  one,  therefore,  who  is
made  a  disciple  by  baptism,  enrolls  himself  among  the  number
of  those  who  receive  Christ  as  their  teacher  and  Lord,  and  who
profess  obedience  and  devotion  to  his  service.

2.  This  is  further  clear  from  the  uniform  practice  of  the  Apos-
tles. In  every  case  on  record  of  their  admmistering  the  rite,  it
was  on  the  condition  of  a  profession  of  faith  on  the  part  of  the
recipient.  The  answer  of  Philip  to  the  eunuch  who  asked.  What
doth  hinder  me  to  be  baptized?  "If  thou  believest  with  all  thine
heart  thou  mayest,"  discloses  the  principle  on  which  the  Apostles
uniformly  acted  in  this  matter.

3.  This  has  in  all  ages  been  the  practice  of  the  Church.  No
man  was  admitted  to  baptism  without  an  intelligent  profession  of
faith  in  Christ,  and  a  solemn  engagement  of  obedience  to  Him.
The  practice  of  Romanist  missionaries  in  baptizing  the  heathen
in  crowds,  can  hardly  be  considered  as  invahdating  this  state-
ment.

Although  this  has  been  the  principle  universally  admitted,
there  has  been  no  little  diversity  as  to  its  application,  according
to  the  different  views  of  the  nature  of  the  faith,  and  of  the  char-
acter of  the  obedience  required  by  the  Gospel.  In  some  points,
however,  there  has  ever  been  a  general  agreement.

Qualifications  for  Adult  Baptism.

1.  Faith  supposes  knowledge  of  at  least  the  fundamental  doc-
trines of  the  Gospel.  Some  may  unduly  enlarge,  and  some  unduly
restrict  the  number  of  such  doctrines ;  but  no  Church  advocates
the  baptism  of  the  absolutely  ignorant.  If  baptism  involves  a
profession  of  faith,  it  must  involve  a  profession  of  faith  in  cer-
tain doctrines  ;  and  those  doctrines  must  be  known,  in  order  to
be  professed.  In  the  early  Church,  therefore,  there  was  a  class
of  catechumens  or  candidates  for  baptism  who  were  under  a  reg-
ular course  of  instruction.  This  course  continued,  according  to
circumstances,  from  a  few  months,  to  three  years.  These  cate-
chumens were  not  only  young  men,  but  often  persons  in  mature
life,  and   of   all  degrees   of   menial   culture.     Where   Christian


542         PART  III.     Ch.   XX.  — the  means   OF    GRACE.

chui'ches  were  established  in  the  midst  of  large  heathen  cities,
the  Gospel  could  not  fail  to  excite  general  attention.  The  interest
of  persons  of  all  classes  would  be  more  or  less  awakened.  Many-
would  be  so  impressed  with  the  excellence  of  the  new  rehgion,
as  to  desire  to  learn  its  doctrines  and  join  themselves  to  the  com-
pany of  believers.  These  candidates  for  baptism,  being  in  many
cases  men  of  the  highest  culture,  it  was  necessary  that  their
teachers  should  be  men  thoroughly  instructed  and  disciplined.
We  accordingly  find  such  men  as  Pantajnus,  Clemens,  and  Origen
successively  at  the  head  of  the  catechetical  school  of  Alexandria.^
These  schools,  although  primarily  designed  for  converts  from
among  the  Jews  and  heathen,  on  accomit  of  their  high  character,
soon  began  to  be  frequented  by  other  classes,  and  especially  by
those  who  were  in  training  for  the  ministry.  When  Christianity
became  the  prevalent  religion,  and  the  ranks  of  the  Church  were
filled  up,  not  by  converts  of  mature  age,  but  by  those  born  mthin
its  pale  and  baptized  in  their  infancy,  the  necessity  for  such  schools
no  longer  existed.  Their  place,  however,  was  supplied  by  the
systematic  instruction  of  the  yomig  in  preparation  for  their  con-
firmation or  their  first  communion.

2.  All  churches  are  agreed  in  demanding  of  adults  who  are
candidates  for  baptism,  a  profession  of  their  faith  in  Christ  and
the  Gospel  of  his  salvation.

3.  They  agree  in  requiring  of  those  who  are  baptized  the  re-
nunciation of  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil.  This  involves
a  turning  from  sin,  and  a  turning  to  God.

Although  these  principles  are,  as  just  remarked,  generally  ad-
mitted, there  is,  in  practice,  great  diversity  in  their  application.
Where  the  Church  was  pure  and  its  mmisters  faithful,  these
requisitions  were  strenuously  enforced  ;  but  where  the  reverse  was
the  case,  the  most  formal,  and  often  evidently  insincere,  assent  to
the  creed  of  the  Church  was  taken  for  a  profession  of  faith  ;  and
a  renunciation  of  the  world  compatible  with  devotion  to  its  pleas-
ures and  its  sins,  was  accepted  in  the  place  of  genuine  repentance.
It  is  well,  however,  to  have  a  clear  idea  of  what  the  Church  has
a  right  to  demand  of  adults  when  they  apply  for  baptism.  It  is
evident  from  the  teachings  of  Scripture,  and  from  the  avowed
principles  of  all  Christian  churches,  that  we  are  bound  to  require
of  all  such  candidates,  (1.)  A  competent  knowledge  of  the  Gospel.
(2.)  A  credible  profession  of  faith.  (3.)  A  conversation  void  of
offence.

1  H.  E.  F.  Guerike,  De  Schola  qum  Alexandrice  floruit,  catechetica,  Halle,  182'i.


§9.]  BAPTISM.     ITS   SUBJECTS.  543

The  question,  although  thus  simple  in  its  general  statement,  is
nevertheless  one  of  great  difficulty.  As  it  is  almost  universally
the  fact  that,  so  far  as  adults  are  concerned,  the  qualifications  for
baptism  are  the  same  as  those  for  admission  to  the  Lord's  table,
the  question,  What  are  the  quahfications  for  adult  baptism  ?  re-
solves itself  into  the  question.  What  are  the  quahfications  for
church-membership  ?  The  answer  to  that  question,  it  is  evident,
must  be  determined  by  the  views  taken  of  the  nature  and  the
prerogatives  of  the  Church.  We  accordingly  find  that  there  are
three  general  views  of  the  qualifications  for  adult  baptism,  founded
on  the  three  generic  views  of  the  nature  of  the  Church.

Romish  Theory  of  the   Church.

First,  the  theory  derived  from  the  ancient  theocracy  and  from
the  analogy  between  the  Church  and  a  civil  commonwealth.  The
theocracy.,  or  the  Church,  under  the  old  dispensation,  was  essen-
tially an  externally  organized  body.  All  the  natural  descendants
of  Abraham,  through  Isaac,  were,  in  virtue  of  their  birth,  mem-
bers of  the  "  Commonwealth  of  Israel."  As  such,  independently
of  their  own  moral  character  or  that  of  their  parents,  they  were
entitled  to  all  the  privileges  of  the  economy  under  which  they
lived.  They  were  freely  admitted  to  the  services  of  the  Temple,
to  the  Passover,  and  to  all  the  sacred  festivals,  and  typical  insti-
tutions of  the  Mosaic  dispensation,  even  to  those  which  were  truly
of  a  sacramental  character.  The  Hebrews  were,  of  course,  sub-
ject to  the  laws  of  the  theocracy  under  which  they  lived;  for
minor  offences  they  forfeited  this  or  that  privilege,  or  were  sub-
jected to  some  specified  penalty ;  and  for  graver  offences  they
were  excommunicated  or  cut  off  from  among  the  people.  All
this  finds  a  parallel  in  the  kingdoms  of  this  world.  All  native
born  Englishmen  are  subjects  of  the  crown,  and  are  entitled  to  ail
the  privileges  of  Englishmen  ;  they  may  be  good  or  bad  citi-
zens, but  their  citizenship  does  not  depend  upon  their  character ;
they  may  be  punished  for  their  offences,  but  they  cannot  be  de-
prived of  their  rights  as  citizens  unless  they  are  outlawed.

This  theory  has,  by  Romanists  and  Romanizers,  been  trans-
ferred bodily  to  the  Church.  The  Church,  according  to  them,  is
essentially  an  externally  organized  society.  All  born  within  its
pale  are  "  ipso  facto  "  its  members,  and  entitled  to  all  its  priv-
ileges. They  are  entitled  to  all  its  sacraments  and  ordinances,  not
in  virtue  of  their  character,  but  in  virtue  of  their  birthright.
Thus  Mr.  Palmer,^  of  the  Oxford  Anglican  School,  says  that  the

1  Palmer,  On  the  Church,  New  York,  1841,  vol.  i.  p.  377.


544  PART  III.     Ch.   XX.  — the  means   OF   GRACE.

Scriptures  make  no  mention  of  regeneration,  sanctity,  or  real
piety  visible  or  invisible,  as  prerequisites  for  admission  to  the
sacrament  of  baptism. ^  No  doubt  a  pious  Hebrew  priest  would
exhort  those  who  came  to  offer  sacrifices  or  to  celebrate  the  Pass-
over, that  they  should  attend  on  those  services  in  a  devout  spirit
and  in  the  exercise  of  faith,  assuring  them  that  the  mere  external
service  was  of  no  account.  The  Romanist,  with  his  "  ex  opere
operato  "  theory  of  the  sacraments,  could  hardly  go  as  far  as  that,
but  he  would  doubtless  exliort  the  candidate  for  baptism,  and  all
who  come  to  the  sacraments  of  the  Church,  to  perform  those
duties  in  a  proper  spirit.  But  this  has  nothing  to  do  with  the
right  of  approach.  We  may  exhort  citizens  to  exercise  their  civil
rights  conscientiously,  and  with  a  due  regard  to  the  interests  of
the  country,  but  the  rights  themselves  are  not  to  be  disputed.

The  same  result  is  reached,  although  on  a  different  theory,  in
all  those  countries  in  which  Church  and  State  are  so  united  that
the  head  of  the  State  is  the  head  of  the  Church  ;  and  that  mem-
bership in  the  Church  is  a  condition  of  citizenship  in  the  State.
This  was  the  case  for  centuries  in  England,  and  is  so  to  a  great
extent  to  the  present  day.  The  reigning  sovereign  is  still  the
head  of  the  Church,  the  supreme  authority  in  administering  its
government.  The  laws  of  the  Church  are  acts  of  Parliament ;
every  Englishman,  miless  he  voluntarily  makes  himself  an  excep-
tion, has  a  right  to  all  the  services  of  the  Church,  including  the
right  to  be  buried  as  a  Christian  "  in  the  sure  hope  of  a  blessed  res-
urrection." Until  of  late  years  no  man  could  hold  any  important
office,  especially  in  the  army  or  navy,  who  was  not  in  communion
with  the  established  Church.  So  also  in  Prussia,  the  head  of  the
State  governs  the  Church.  No  man,  unless  a  Romanist  or  a  He-
brew, can  marry,  become  an  apprentice,  or  enter  on  the  practice
of  a  profession  without  producing  a  certificate  of  baptism  and
confirmation.

Puritan  Theory  of  the   Church.

The  second  general  theory  of  tlie  nature  of  the  Church  is  that,
which  for  convenience  sake,  may  be  called  the  Puritan.  The
word  Puritan  has  in  history  a  much  wider  sense  than  that  as-
signed to  it  in  modern  usage.  In  English  history  the  designation
Puritan  was  applied  to  all  those,  who  under  the  reigns  of  Eliza-

1  This  is  not  inconsistent  with  what  was  said  above  of  all  churches  requii-ing  as  the  con-
ditions of  adult  baptism,  competent  knowledge,  a  profession  of  faith,  and  the  renunciation
of  the  world.  What  was  there  said  concerned  the  rooeption  of  members  into  the  Church,
ab  extra.    What  is  here  said  concerns  those  who  are  members  of  the  Church  by  birth.


§9.]  BAPTISM.     ITS   SUBJECTS.  545

beth  and  Charles  I.  were  desirous  of  a  further  reformation  of  the
Church.  Many  prelates,  and  thousands  of  Episcopalians  and
Presbyterians,  were  included  in  that  class.  Modern  usage  has
confined  the  term  to  the  Independents  or  Congregationalists,  the
followers  of  Brown  and  Robinson.  They  were,  therefore,  often
called  Brownists.  According  to  them  the  visible  Church  consists
of  the  regenerate  ;  and  it  is  the  duty  and  the  prerogative  of  the
Chm^ch  to  sit  in  judgment  on  the  question  whether  the  applicant
for  admission  to  the  sacraments  is  truly  born  of  God.  Hence  in
New  England,  there  was  a  broad  distinction  made  between  the
Church  and  the  parish.  The  former  consisted  of  the  body  of
communicants  ;  the  latter  of  those  Avho,  though  not  communi-
cants, frequented  the  same  place  of  worship  and  contributed  to
the  support  of  the  minister  and  to  other  congregational  expenses.
"  To  join  the  Church,"  thus  came  to  mean  joinmg  the  number
of  those  who  were  admitted  to  the  Lord's  Supper.  This  of  course
implies,  that  communicants  only  are  in  the  Church.  This  view
has  gained  ascendancy  in  this  covmtry  even,  to  a  great  extent,
among  Presbyterians.

The   Common  Protestant  Theory.

According  to  our  standards  the  visible  Church  consists  of  all
those  who  profess  the  true  religion  together  Avith  their  children.
The  common  Protestant  theory  of  the  Church  agrees  with  that
of  the  Puritans  in  the  following  points.  (1.)  That  the  true  or
invisible  Church  as  a  whole  consists  of  the  elect.  This  is  the
Church  which  Christ  loved,  for  which  He  gave  Himself,  that  He
might  sanctify  it,  and  present  it  to  Himself  a  glorious  Church
without  spot  or  wrinkle.  (Eph.  v.  25-27.)  (2.)  That  the  true
or  invisible  Church  on  earth  consists  of  all  true  believers.
(3.)  That  the  profession  of  faith  made  b}^  those  who  are  bap-
tized, or  come  to  the  table  of  the  Lord,  is  a  profession  of  true
faith.  That  is,  those  baptized  profess  to  be  Christians.  The
point  of  difference  between  the  theories  concerns  the  duty  and
prerogative  of  the  Church  in  the  matter.  According  to  the  one
view  the  Church  is  bound  to  be  satisfied  in  its  judgment  that  the
applicant  is  truly  regenerate  ;  according  to  the  other,  no  such
judgment  is  expressed  or  implied  in  receiving  an}''  one  into  the
fellowship  of  the  Church.  As  Christ  has  not  given  his  people
the  power  to  search  the  heart.  He  has  not  imposed  upon  them
the  duty  which  implies  the  possession  of  any  such  power.  Both
parties  require  a  credible  profession  of  faith  on  the  part  of  the

VOL.  III.  35


546  PART  III.     Ch.   XX.  — the   means    OF   GRACE.

applicant  for  membership.  But  the  one  means  by  credible,  that
wliich  constrains  belief  ;  the  other,  that  which  may  be  believed,
i.  e.,  that  against  which  no  tangible  evidence  can  be  adduced.  If
such  applicant  be  a  heretic,  or  if  liis  manner  of  life  contradicts
his  profession,  he  ought  not  to  be  received  ;  and  if  already  in  the
Church,  he  ought,  as  the  Apostle  says,  to  be  rejected.  The  com-
mon Protestant  doctrine  is  that  nothing  authorizes  us  to  refuse  a
man  admission  to  the  Church,  which  would  not  justify  his  exclu-
sion if  already  a  member  of  it.  If  guilty  of  any  "  offence  "  or
"  scandal,"  he  ought  to  be  excluded  ;  and  if  chargeable  with  any
such  "  offence  "  or  "  scandal,"  he  ought  not  to  be  admitted  to
membership,  no  matter  what  his  profession  or  detail  of  experience
may  be.  The  late  Dr.  John  M.  Mason  clearly  and  forcibly  ex-
presses the  common  doctrine  on  this  subject,  when  he  says  :  "  A
credible  profession  of  Christianity,  is  all  that  she  [the  Church]
may  require  in  order  to  communion.  She  may  be  deceived  ;  her
utmost  caution  may  be,  and  often  has  been,  ineffectual  to  keep
bad  men  from  her  sanctuary.  And  this,  too,  without  her  fault,
as  she  is  not  omniscient.  But  she  has  no  right  to  suspect  sin-
cerity, to  refuse  privilege,  or  inflict  censure,  where  she  can  put
her  finger  upon  nothing  repugnant  to  the  love  or  the  laws  of
God."  ^  And  on  the  following  page  he  says  :  "  A  profession  of
faith  in  Christ,  and  of  obedience  to  Him,  not  discredited  by
other  traits  of  character,  entitles  an  adult  to  the  privileges  of  his
Church."

This  is  not  the  place  for  the  discussion  of  the  question  concern-
ing the  nature  of  the  Church.  These  theories  are  simply  men-
tioned here  because  of  their  bearing  on  the  subject  of  adult  bap-
tism. According  to  all  these  theories  believing  adults  are,  by  the
command  of  Christ,  entitled  to  Christian  baptism.  Much  more
difficulty  attends  the  question  concerning

§  10.  Infant  Baptism.

The  difficulty  on  this  subject  is  that  baptism  from  its  very
nature  involves  a  profession  of  faith  ;  it  is  the  way  in  which  by
the  ordinance  of  Christ,  He  is  to  be  confessed  before  men  ;  but
infants  are  incapable  of  making  such  confession  ;  therefore  they
are  not  the  proper  subjects  of  baptism.  Or,  to  state  the  matter
in  another  form :  the  sacraments  belong  to  the  members  of  the
Church  ;  but  the  Church  is  the  company  of  behevers ;  infants

1  Essays  on  the  Church  of  God,  by  John  M.  Mason,  D.  D.,  New  York,  1843,  Essay  iii.
|>.57.


§  lO.j  BAPTISM   OF   INFANTS.  547

cannot  exercise  faith,  therefore  they  are  not  members  of  the
Church,  and  consequently  ought  not  to  be  baptized.

In  order  to  justify  the  baptism  of  infants,  we  must  attain  and
authenticate  such  an  idea  of  the  Church  as  that  it  shall  include
the  children  of  believing  parents.  The  word  Church  is  used  in
Scripture  and  in  common  life,  in  many  different  senses,  (1.)  It
means  the  whole  body  of  the  elect,  as  in  Ephesians  v.  25,  and
when  the  Church  is  said  to  be  the  body,  or  the  bride  of  Christ,
to  be  filled  by  his  Spirit,  etc.  (2.)  It  means  any  number  of  be-
lievers collectively  considered  ;  or  the  whole  number  of  believers
residing  in  any  one  place,  or  district,  or  throughout  the  world.
In  this  sense  we  use  the  word  when  we  pray  God  to  bless  his
Church  universal,  or  his  Church  in  any  particular  place.  (3.)  It
is  used  as  a  collective  term  for  the  body  of  professed  believers  in
any  one  place  ;  as  when  we  speak  of  the  Church  of  Jerusalem,  of
Ephesus,  or  of  Corinth.  (4.)  It  is  used  of  any  number  of  pro-
fessed believers  bound  together  by  a  common  standard  of  doctrine
and  discipline ;  as  the  Church  of  England,  the  Church  of  Scot-
land, the  Lvitheran  Church,  and  the  Reformed  Church.  And
(5.)  It  is  used  for  all  the  professors  of  the  true  religion  through-
out the  world,  considered  as  united  in  the  adoption  of  the  same
general  creed  and  in  common  subjection  to  Christ.

It  is  evident  that  no  one  definition  of  the  Church  can  include
all  the  senses  in  which  the  word  is  legitimately  used ;  and,  there-
fore, that  we  may  aflirm  of  the  Church  in  one  sense  of  the  word,
what  must  be  denied  of  it  in  a  different  sense ;  and  the  same
person  may  be  said  to  be,  or  not  to  be  a  member  of  the  Church
according  to  the  meaning  attached  to  the  word.  In  the  present
discussion,  by  the  Church  is  meant  what  is  called  the  visible
Church  ;  that  is,  the  whole  body  of  those  who  profess  the  true
religion,  or,  any  number  of  such  professors  united  for  the  pur-
pose of  the  public  worship  of  Christ,  and  for  the  exercise  of
mutual  watch  and  care.  With  regard  to  infant  baptism  the  fol-
lowing propositions  may  be  maintained.

First  Proposition.     The  Visible  Church  is  a  Divine  Institution.

Concerning  the  Church  in  this  sense,  it  is  clearly  taught  in
Scripture,  that  it  is  the  ^dll  of  God  that  such  a  Church  should
exist  on  earth.  This  no  Christian  denies.  God  has  imposed
duties  upon  his  people  which  render  it  necessary  for  them  thus
to  associate  in  a  visible  organized  body.  They  are  to  unite  in  his
worship  ;  in  teaching  and  propagating  his  truth ;  in  testifying  for


548       PART  III.    Ch.  XX.  — the  means  of  grace.

God  in  all  ages  and  in  all  parts  of  the  world.  He  has  prescribed
the  conditions  of  membership  in  this  body,  and  taught  who  iare
to  be  excluded  from  its  communion.  He  has  appointed  officers,
specified  their  qualifications,  their  prerogatives,  and  the  mode  of
their  appointment.  He  has  enacted  laws  for  its  government.  Its
rise,  progress,  and  consummation  are  traced  in  history  and  proph-
ecy, from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  Bible.  This  is  the
kingdom  of  God  of  Avhich  our  Lord  discourses  in  so  many  of  his
parables,  and  which  it  is  predicted  is  ultimately  to  include  all  the
nations  of  the  earth.

Second  ProjJosition.     The  Visible  Church  does  not  consist  exclu-
sively of  the  Regenei'cite.

It  is  no  less  clearly  revealed  that  it  is  not  the  purpose  of  God
that  the  visible  Church  on  earth  should  consist  exclusively  of  true
believers.  This  is  plain,  (1.)  Because  the  attainment  of  such  a
result  in  any  society  or  government  administered  by  men  is  an
impossibilit}".  It  would  require  that  the  officers  of  the  Church
or  the  Church  itself  should  have  the  power  to  read  the  heart,
and  be  infallible  in  judgments  of  character.  (2.)  The  condi-
tions which,  under  both  dispensations.  He  has  prescribed  for  ad-
mission into  this  visible  society  of  his  professed  worshij^pers,  are
such  as  men  not  truly  regenerated  may  possess.  Those  qualifica-
tions, as  we  have  seen,  are  competent  knoAvledge,  and  a  credible
profession  of  faith  and  obedience.  (3.)  Our  Lord  expressly  for-
bids the  attempt  being  made.  He  compares  his  external  king-
dom, or  visible  Church,  to  a  field  in  which  tares  and  wheat  grow
together.  He  charged  his  disciples  not  to  undertake  to  separate
them,  because  they  could  not,  in  all  cases,  distinguish  the  one
from  the  other.  Both  were  to  be  allowed  to  grow  together  initil
the  harvest.  (4.)  Christ,  to  whom  all  hearts  are  known,  admit-
ted Judas  to  the  number  of  his  most  favoured  disciples,  and  even
made  him  an  Apostle.  (5.)  All  attempts  to  make  a  Church
consisting  exclusively  of  the  regenerate,  have  failed.  So  far  as
known,  no  such  Church  has  ever  existed  on  the  face  of  the  earth
This  of  itself  is  proof  that  its  existence  did  not  enter  into  the
purpose  of  God.

Third  Pr'o position.     The  Commomvealth  of  Israel  was  the  Church.

(1.)  It  is  so  called  in  Scripture.  (Acts  vii.  38.)  (2.)  The  He-
brews were  called  out  from  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  to  be  the
peculiar  people  of  God.    They  constituted  Ids  kingdom.     (3.)  To


§10]  BAPTISM   OF   INFANTS.  549

them  were  committed  the  oracles  of  God.  They  were  Israelites ;
to  them  pertained  the  adoption,  and  the  glory,  and  the  covenants,
and  the  giving  of  the  law,  and  the  service,  and  the  promises.
(Rom.  ix.  4.)  Nothing  more  can  be  said  of  the  Church  under
the  new  dispensation.  They  were  selected  for  a  Church  purpose,
namely,  to  be  mtnesses  for  God  in  the  world  in  behalf  of  the
ti'ue  religion  ;  to  celebrate  his  worship ;  and  to  observe  his  ordi-
nances. Their  religious  officers,  prophets,  and  priests,  were  ap-
pointed by  God  and  were  his  ministers.  No  man  could  become
a  member  of  the  Commonwealth  of  Israel,  Avho  did  not  profess
the  true  religion  ;  promise  obedience  to  the  law  of  God  as  re-
vealed in  his  Word ;  and  submit  to  the  rite  of  circumcision  as  the
seal  of  the  covenant.  There  is  no  authorized  definition  of  the
Church,  which  does  not  include  the  people  of  God  under  the
Mosaic  law.

Fourth  Proposition.     The  Church  under  the  Neio  Dispensation
is  identical  with  that  under  the  Old.

It  is  not  a  new  Church,  but  one  and  the  same.  It  is  the  same
olive-tree.  (Rom.  xi.  16,  17.)  It  is  founded  on  the  same  cove-
nant, the  covenant  made  with  Abraham.  It  has,  indeed,  often
been  said  that  it  is  to  belittle  the  truth  to  put  the  idea  of  a
covenant  between  God  and  man  in  the  place  of  a  general  law  or
economy.  It  is,  however,  to  be  remembered  that  God  is  a  per-
son, capable  of  speaking  with  other  persons,  of  promising  and
threatening.  These  promises  are  not  merely  announcements  of
the  results  of  cosmical  laws,  physical  or  moral.  That  Christ
should  be  born  of  the  seed  of  Abraham,  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,
and  of  the  house  of  David,  is  not  to  be  attributed  to  the  Avorking
of  any  general  law.  Nothing  pertaining  to  his  advent,  his  per-
son, his  work,  or  to  the  application  of  his  redemption,  is  to  be
accounted  for  in  any  such  way.  Our  Lord  gives  us  an  infinitely
higher  idea  of  God's  relation  to  the  world  when  He  tells  us  that
He  feeds  the  young  ravens  when  they  cry  ;  and  that  the  hairs  of
our  heads  are  all  numbered ;  than  when  He  is  regarded  as  merely
the  author  or  source  of  the  physical  and  moral  order  of  the  uni-
verse. A  covenant  is  a  promise  suspended  upon  a  condition.  It
is  beyond  controversy  that  God  did  make  such  a  promise  to
Adam,  to  Abraham,  and  to  the  Hebrew  nation  through  Moses  ;
and  these  transactions  are  in  Scripture  constantly  called  cove-
nants. It  does  not,  therefore,  seem  very  reverent  to  speak  of
God  as  behtthng  his  truth  by  the  form  in  which  He  presents  it.


550  PART  HI.     Ch.   XX.    -THE  MEANS    OF   GRACE.

God,  then,  did  enter  into  covenant  vnth  Abraham.  In  that
covenant  He  promised  that  Abraham,  although  nearly  a  hundred
years  old,  should  have  a  son.  He  promised  that  his  descendants,
through  Isaac,  should  be  as  numerous  as  the  stars  in  heaven  ;
that  He  would  give  them  the  land  of  Canaan  for  a  possession  ;
that  He  would  be  their  national  God,  and  that  the  Hebrews  as  a
nation  should  be  His  peculiar  people ;  and  above  all  He  promised
the  patriarch  that  in  his  seed  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  should
be  blessed.  By  seed  was  not  meant  his  descendants  collectively,
but  one  person,  that  is,  Christ.  (Gal.  iii.  16.)  The  blessing
promised,  therefore,  was  the  blessing  of  redemption  through
Christ,  his  promise  to  Abraham  was  a  repetition  of  the  prom-
ise made  to  our  first  parents  after  the  fall,  this  promise  was
the  Gospel.  The  Gospel  or  emyyeAtov  has  a  definite  meaning  in
the  Scriptures.  It  means  the  announcement  of  the  plan  of  sal-
vation through  Christ,  and  the  offer  of  that  salvation  to  every
one  that  believes.  This  Gospel,  Paul  says,  was  preached  before
unto  Abraham.  The  pious  Hebrews  are,  therefore,  described  as
(tov<s  TT/^oT/ATTiKoras  iv  tw  XpicTTu))  those  w^ho  hoped  in  Christ  before
his  advent.  (Eph.  i.  12.)  This  promise  of  redemption  made  to
Abraham  was  that  "  unto  which,"  Paul  says,  "  our  twelve  tribes,
instantly  serving  God  day  and  night,  hope  to  come."  (Acts
xxvi.  7.)  The  condition  of  all  these  Abrahamic  promises  was
faith.  This  the  Apostle  abundantly  teaches,  especially  in  the
fourth  chapter  of  Romans  and  the  third  chapter  of  Galatians.
Abraham  believed  in  the  promise  of  the  birth  of  Isaac.  (Rom.
iv.  19,  20.)  Tliose  of  his  descendants  who  believed  in  the  prom-
ises of  national  blessings  made  to  the  Hebrews,  received  those
blessings,  those  who  believed  in  the  promise  of  redemption  through
Christ  were  made  partakers  of  that  redemption.

Such  being  the  nature  of  the  covenant  made  with  Abraham,  it
is  plain  that  so  far  as  its  main  element  is  concerned,  it  is  still  in
force.  It  is  the  covenant  of  grace  under  which  we  now  live,  and
upon  which  the  Church  is  now  founded.  This  cannot  be  doubted
by  any  who  admit  the  account  just  given  of  the  Abrahamic  cove-
nant. This  is  clear  because  the  promise  is  the  same.  Paul  says
(Gal.  iii.  14)  that  the  blessing  promised  to  Abraham  has  come
upon  us.  In  his  speech  before  Agiippa,  he  said  :  "  I  stand,  and  am
judged  for  the  hope  of  the  promise  made  of  God  unto  our  fathers.
....  For  which  hope's  sake,  king  Agrippa,  I  am  accused  of  the
Jews."  (Acts  xxvi.  6,  7.)  As  the  promise  is  the  same,  so  also
the  condition  is  the  same.     The  Apostle  argues  that  men  now


§  10.]  BAPTISM   OF   INFANTS.  551

must  be  justified  by  faitli,  because  Abraliam  was  thus  justified.
Christians,  therefore,  are  said  to  be  the  sons  or  heirs  of  Abraham,
because  faith  in  the  promise  of  redemption  secures  their  redemp-
tion just  as  faith  in  the  same  promise  secured  his.  And  he  tells
the  Galatians,  "  If  ye  be  Christ's,  then  are  ye  Abraham's  seed,
and  heirs  according  to  the  promise."  (Gal.  iii.  29.)  This  doc-
trine, that  the  Chm'ch  now  rests  on  the  Abrahamic  covenant,  in
other  words,  that  the  plan  of  salvation  revealed  in  the  Gospel
was  revealed  to  Abraham  and  to  the  other  Old  Testament  saints,
and  that  they  were  saved  just  as  men  since  the  advent  of  Christ
are  saved,  by  faith  in  the  promised  seed,  is  not  a  matter  incident-
ally revealed.  It  is  wrought  into  the  very  substance  of  the  Gos-
pel. It  is  involved  in  all  the  teachings  of  our  Lord,  who  said  that
He  came  not  to  destroy,  but  to  fulfil ;  and  who  commanded  in-
quirers to  search  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  if  they  would
learn  what  He  taught.  The  Apostles  did  the  same  thing.  The
Bereans  were  commended,  because  they  searched  the  Scriptures
daily  to  see  whether  the  doctrines  taught  by  the  Apostles  ac-
corded with  that  infallible  standard.  (Acts  xvii.  11.)  The  mes-
sengers of  Christ  constantly  quoted  the  Old  Testament  in  support
of  their  teachings.  Paul  says  that  the  Gospel  which  he  preached
had  been  taught  already  in  the  law  and  the  prophets.  (Rom.  iii.
21.)  He  tells  the  Gentiles  that  they  were  grafted  in  the  old
olive-tree  and  made  partakers  of  its  root  and  fatness.

The  conclusion  is  that  God  has  ever  had  but  one  Church  in  the
world.  The  Jehovah  of  the  Old  Testament  is  our  Lord  ;  the
God  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  is  our  covenant  God  and
Father ;  our  Saviour  was  the  Saviour  of  the  saints  who  lived
before  his  advent  in  the  flesh.  The  divine  person  who  delivered
the  Israelites  out  of  Egypt ;  who  led  them  through  the  wilder-
ness ;  who  appeared  in  his  glory  to  Isaiah  in  the  temple ;  towards
whose  coming  the  eyes  of  the  people  of  God  were  turned  in  faith
and  hope  from  the  beginning,  is  He  whom  we  recognize  as  God
manifest  in  the  flesh,  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  He,
therefore,  who  was  the  head  of  the  theocracy  is  the  head  of  the
Church.  The  blood  which  He  shed  for  us,  was  shed  from  the
foundation  of  the  world,  as  much  "  for  the  redemption  of  the
transgressions  which  were  under  the  first  testament "  (Heb.  ix.
15),  as  for  us  and  for  our  salvation.  The  promise  unto  which
the  twelve  tribes,  instantly  serving  God  day  and  night,  hoped
to  come  (Acts  xxvi.  7),  is  the  promise  on  which  we  rely.  The
faith  which   saved  Abraham  was,    both   as   to   its   natm-e   and


552       PART  III.    ch.  XX.  — the  means  of  grace.

as  to  its  object,  that  which  is  the  condition  of  salvation  under  the
Gospel.  "  The  city  which  hath  foundations,  whose  builder  and
maker  is  God "  (Heb.  xi.  10),  is  "  Jerusalem  the  golden,"  the
heaven  to  which  we  aspire.

Fifth  Proposition.  The  terms  of  admission  into  the  Church
before  the  Advent  were  the  same  that  are  required  for  admis-
sion into  the  Christian  Church.

Those  terms  were  a  credible  profession  of  faith  in  the  true
religion,  a  promise  of  obedience,  and  submission  to  the  appointed
rite  of  initiation.  Every  sincere  Israehte  really  received  Jehovah
as  his  God,  relied  upon  all  his  promises,  and  especially  upon  the
promise  of  redemption  through  the  seed  of  Abraham.  He  not
only  bound  himself  to  obey  the  law  of  God  as  then  revealed,  but
smcerely  endeavoured  to  keep  all  his  commandments.  Those
who  were  Israelites  only  in  name  or  form,  or,  as  the  Apostle  ex-
presses it,  were  "  Jews  outwardly,"  made  the  same  professions
and  engagements,  but  did  so  only  with  the  lips  and  not  with  the
heart.  If  any  from  among  the  heathen  assayed  to  enter  the  con-
gregation of  the  Lord,  they  were  received  upon  the  terms  above
specified,  tmd  to  a  place  equal  to,  and  in  some  cases  better  than,
that  of  sons  and  of  daughters.  If  any  Israehte  renounced  the
religion  of  his  fathers,  he  was  "cut  off  from  among  the  people.
All  this  is  true  in  reference  to  the  Church  that  now  is.  The
Christian  Church  requires  of  those  whom  it  receives  to  member-
ship in  visible  communion,  nothmg  more  than  a  credible  profes-
sion of  faith,  the  promise  of  obedience  to  Christ,  and  submission
to  baptism  as  the  rite  of  initiation.  There  has,  therefore,  been
no  change  of  the  terms  of  admission  to  the  Church,  effected  by
the  introduction  of  the  Gospel.

Sixth  ProjJosition.     Infants  were  Members  of  the  Church  binder
the  Old  Testament  Economy.

This  is  conclusively  proved  by  the  fact  that  infants,  by  the
command  of  God,  were  circumcised  on  the  eighth  day  after  their
birth.  It  is  indeed  said  that  circumcision  was  the  sign  of  the
national  covenant  between  God  and  the  Hebrews  ;  and,  there-
fore, that  its  administration  to  children  was  only  a  recognition
of  their  citizenship  in  the  commonwealth  of  Israel.

To  this  it  may  be  answered,  first,  that  under  the  old  economy,
the  Church  and  State  were  identical.  No  man  could  be  a  mem-
ber of  the  one  without  being  a  member  of  the  other.     Exclusion


§  1 0.]  BAPTISM   OF   INFANTS.  553

from  the  one  was  exclusion  from  the  other.  In  the  pure  the-
ocracy the  high  priest  was  the  head  of  the  State  as  well  as  the
head  of  the  Church.  The  priests  and  Le^ites  were  civil  as  well  as
religious  officers.  The  sacrifices,  and  the  festivals,  even  the  Pass-
over, ever  regarded  as  a  sacrament,  were  national  as  well  as  relig-
ious services.  If,  therefore,  circumcision  was  a  sign  and  seal  of
membership  in  the  Hebrew  nation,  it  was  a  sign  and  seal  of  mem-
bership in  the  Hebrew  Church.  All  this  arose  from  the  nature
of  God's  covenant  with  Abraham.  In  that  covenant,  as  we  have
seen,  were  included  both  national  and  religious  promises.  God
selected  the  descendants  of  that  patriarch  through  Isaac  to  be  a
peojjle  peculiar  to  himself.  He  constituted  them  a  nation  to  be
secluded  and  hedged  around  from  other  nations.  He  gave  them
the  land  of  Canaan  for  a  habitation,  and  He  enacted  for  them
a  code  of  laws,  embracing  their  civil,  national,  social,  personal,
and  religious  duties.  All  these  enactments  were  mingled  to-
gether. The  people  were  not  regarded  as  bearing  distinct  relations
to  the  magistrate  and  to  God.  All  their  obligations  were  to
Him.  They  were  a  holy  people  ;  a  Church  in  the  form  of  a  na-
tion. The  great  promise,  as  we  have  seen,  was  the  promise  of
the  redemption  of  the  world  by  the  Messiah.  To  this  every-
thing else  was  subordinate.  The  main  design  of  the  constitution
of  the  Hebrews  as  a  distinct  nation,  and  of  their  separation  from
all  other  people,  was  to  keep  alive  the  knowledge  of  that  promise.
Almost  the  whole  significancy  and  value  of  the  priesthood,  sacri-
fices, and  temple  ser\dce,  were  to  prefigure  the  pereon,  offices,  and
work  of  the  Messiah.  To  the  Hebrews  as  a  people  were  com-
mitted the  "  oracles  of  God  ;  "  this  was  their  grand  distinction.
Those  oracles  had  reference  to  the  great  work  of  redemption.
To  suppose  a  man  to  be  a  Jew,  and  not  at  least  a  professed  be-
liever in  those  promises  and  predictions,  is  a  contradiction.  A
man,  therefore,  was  a  member  of  the  Je^\dsh  commonwealth,  only
in  virtue  of  his  being  a  member  of  the  Jewish  Church  ;  at  least,
he  could  not  be  the  former  without  being  the  latter.  Conse-
quently, every  child  who  was  circumcised  in  evidence  that  he  was
one  of  the  chosen  people,  was  thereby  sealed  as  a  member  of  the
Church  of  God  as  it  then  existed.

Secondly,  that  circumcision  was  not  the  sign  exclusively  of  the
national  covenant  with  the  Hebrews,  is  plain  because  it  was  en-
joined upon  Abraham  and  continued  in  practice  hundreds  of  years
before  the  giving  of  the  law  on  Mount  Sinai,  when  the  people
were  inaugurated  as  a  nation.     It  was  instituted  as  the  sign  of


554       PART  m.    Ch.  XX.  — the  means  of  grace.

the  covenant  (that  is  the  Scriptural  and  proper  word)  made  with
Abraham.  The  essential  features  of  that  covenant  we  learn  from
such  passages  as  Genesis  xii.  o,  "  In  thee  shall  all  families  of  the
earth  be  blessed."  xvii.  7,  "  I  will  establish  my  covenant  be-
tween me  and  thee,  and  thy  seed  after  thee,  in  their  generations,
for  an  everlasting  covenant,  to  be  a  God  unto  thee,  and  to  thy
seed  after  thee."  These  passages  are  explained  in  the  New  Tes-
tament. They  are  shown  to  refer,  not  to  temporal  or  national
blessings,  but  to  the  blessings  of  redemption.  Tlius  in  Romans
XV.  8,  it  is  said,  "  Jesus  Christ  was  a  minister  of  the  circumcision
for  the  truth  of  God,  to  confirm  the  promises  made  unto  the
fathers."  Christ  has  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  that
the  blessing  of  Abraham  might  come  on  us.  (Gal.  iii.  14.)  This
covenant,  the  Apostle  goes  on  to  argue,  "  that  was  confirmed  be-
fore of  God  in  Christ,  the  law,  which  was  four  hundred  and  thirty
years  after,  camiot  disannul,  that  it  should  make  the  promise  of
none  effect."  In  short,  the  whole  New  Testament  is  designed  to
show  that  the  covenant  made  with  Abraham,  and  the  promises
therein  contained,  were  executed  and  fulfilled  in  Jesus  Christ.
Of  that  covenant  circumcision  was  the  sign  and  seal.

Thirdly,  this  is  directly  asserted  by  the  Apostle  in  Romans  iv.
9—12,  where  he  proves  that  circumcision  cannot  be  the  ground  of
justification,  because  Abraham  was  justified  before  he  was  circura
cised,  and  "  received  the  sign  of  circumcision,  a  seal  of  the  right-
eousness of  the  faith  which  he  had  being  yet  uncircumcised."
This  is  saying  that  circumcision  is  the  seal  of  the  covenant  which
promises  salvation  on  the  condition  of  faith.  That  is,  it  is  the
seal  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  or  of  the  plan  of  salvation  which
has  been  the  only  ground  of  hope  for  man  since  his  apostasy.  If,
therefore,  children  were  circumcised  by  the  command  of  God,  it
was  because  they  were  included  in  the  covenant  made  with  their
fathers.

Fourthly,  that  circumcision  was  not  merely  a  civil  or  national
institution,  is  further  plain  from  its  spiritual  import.  It  signifies
the  cleansing  from  sin,  just  as  baptism  now  does.  Thus  we  read
even  in  the  Old  Testament  of  the  circumcision  of  the  heart.
(Deut.  X.  16  ;  Jer.  iv.  4  ;  Ezek.  xliv.  7.)  Therefore  uncircum-
cised lips  are  impure  lips,  and  an  uncircumcised  heart  is  an  un-
clean heart.  (Ex.  vi.  12  ;  Lev.  xxvi.  41.  See,  also,  Acts  vii.  51.)
Paul  says  the  true  circumcision  is  not  that  which  is  outward  in
the  flesh  ;  but  that  which  is  inward,  of  the  lieart,  by  the  Spirit.
(Rom.  ii.  28,  29.)      Therefore  the  Apostle  speaking  of  himself


§10.]  BAPTISM   OF    INFANTS.  5oo

and  of  other  believers  says,  "  We  are  the  circumcision,  which
worship  God  in  the  Spirit,  and  rejoice  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  have
no  confidence  in  the  flesh."  (Phil.  iii.  3.)  Such  being  the  spir-
itual import  of  circumcision,  its  reference  to  the  national  covenant
was  a  very  subordinate  matter.  Its  main  design  was  to  signify
and  seal  the  promise  of  deliverance  from  sin  through  the  redemp-
tion to  be  effected  by  the  promised  seed  of  Abraham.

Children,  therefore,  were  included  in  the  covenant  of  grace  as
revealed  under  the  old  dispensation,  and  consequently  were  mem-
bers of  the  Church  as  it  was  then  constituted.  In  the  sight  of
God  parents  and  children  are  one.  The  former  are  the  author-
ized representatives  of  the  latter ;  they  act  for  them  ;  they  con-
tract obligations  in  their  name.  In  all  cases,  therefore,  where
parents  enter  into  covenant  with  God,  they  bring  their  children
with  them.  The  covenant  made  with  Adam  included  all  his
posterity ;  the  promise  made  to  Abraham  was  to  him  and  to  his
seed  after  him  ;  and  when  the  Mosaic  covenant  was  solemnly  in-
augurated, it  was  said,  "  Ye  stand  this  day  all  of  you  before  the
Lord  your  God  ;  your  captains  of  your  tribes,  your  elders,  and
your  officers,  with  all  the  men  of  Israel,  your  little  ones,  your
wives,  and  thy  stranger  that  is  in  thy  camp,  from  the  hewer  of
thy  wood  unto  the  drawer  of  thy  water  :  that  thou  shouldst  enter
into  covenant  wdth  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  into  his  oath,  which
the  Lord  thy  God  maketh  with  thee  this  day."  (Deut.  xxix.
10—12.)  It  is  vain  to  say  that  children  cannot  make  contracts  or
take  an  oath.  Their  parents  can  act  for  them  ;  and  not  only
bring  them  under  obligation,  but  secure  for  them  the  benefits  of
the  covenants  into  which  they  thus  vicariously  enter.  If  a  man
joined  the  commonwealth  of  Israel  he  secured  for  his  children
the  benefits  of  the  theocracy,  unless  they  willingly  renounced
them.  And  so  when  a  believer  adopts  the  covenant  of  grace,  he
brings  his  children  within  that  covenant,  in  the  sense  that  God
promises  to  give  them,  in  his  own  good  time,  all  the  benefits  of
redemption,  provided  they  do  not  willingly  renounce  their  baptis-
mal engagements.

This  is  really  the  turning  point  in  the  controversy  concerning
infant  church -membership.  If  the  Church  is  one  under  both  dis-
pensations ;  if  infants  were  members  of  the  Church  under  the
theocracy,  then  they  are  members  of  the  Church  now,  unlass  the
contrary  can  be  proved.  The  next  proposition,  therefore,  on  this
subject,  to  be  established  is,  the


556  PART   III.     Ch.   XX.  — TIJE   MEANS    OF    GRACE.

Seventh  Proposition,  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  New  Testament
which  justifies  the  Exclusion  of  the  Children  of  Believers  from
Membership  in  the   Church.

The  "  onus  proband!  "  rests  on  those  who  take  the  negative  on
this  subject.  If  cliikU-en  are  to  be  deprived  of  a  birthright
which  they  have  enjoyed  ever  since  there  was  a  Church  on  earth,
there  must  be  some  positive  command  for  their  exclusion,  or  some
clearly  revealed  change  in  the  conditions  of  membership,  which
renders  such  exclusion  necessary.  It  need  hardly  be  said  that
Christ  did  not  give  any  command  no  longer  to  consider  the
children  of  believers  as  members  of  the  Church,  neither  has
there  been  any  change  in  the  conditions  of  church-membership
which  necessarily  works  their  exclusion.  Those  conditions  are
now  what  they  were  from  the  beginning.  It  Avas  inevitable,  there-
fore, when  Christ  commanded  his  Apostles  to  disciple  all  nations,
baptizing  them  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  of  the  Son,  and  of
the  Holy  Spirit,  that  they  should  act  on  the  principle  to  which
they  had  always  been  accustomed.  When  under  the  Old  Testa-
ment, a  parent  joined  the  congregation  of  the  Lord,  he  brought
his  minor  children  with  him.  When,  therefore,  the  Apostles
baptized  a  head  of  a  family,  it  was  a  matter  of  course,  that  they
should  baptize  his  infant  children.  We  accordingly  find  several
cases  of  such  household  baptism  recorded  in  the  Acts  of  the
Apostles.  In  Acts  xvi.  15,  it  is  said  Lydia  "  was  baptized,  and
her  household,"  and  of  the  jailer  at  Philippi  (ver.  33),  that  "  he
and  all  his ""  were  baptized  ;  and  in  1  Corinthians  i.  16,  Paul  says
that  he  baptized  the  household  of  Stephanas.  The  Apostles,
therefore,  acted  on  the  principle  which  had  always  been  acted  on
under  the  old  economy.  It  is  to  be  remembered  that  the  history
of  the  Apostolic  period  is  very  brief,  and  also  that  Christ  sent  the
Apostles,  not  to  baptize,  but  to  preach  the  Gospel,  and,  therefore,
it  is  not  surprising  that  so  few  instances  of  household  baptism  are
recorded  in  the  New  Testament.  The  same  remark  apphes  sub-
stantially to  the  age  immediately  succeeding  that  of  the  Apostles.
The  Church  increased  ^vith  great  rapidit}^,  but  its  accessions  were
from  without ;  adult  converts  from  among  the  Jews  and  Gentiles,
who  in  becoming  Christians,  brought,  as  a  matter  of  course,  their
children  with  them  into  the  fold  of  Christ.  Little,  therefore,
during  this  period  is  heard  of  the  baptism  of  infants.  As  soon,
however,  as  children  born  Avithin  the  Church  constituted  the
chief  source  of  supply,  then  we  hear  more  of  baptisms  for  the


§  10.]  BAPTISM   OF  INFANTS.  657

dead ;  the  ranks  of  the  Church,  as  they  were  thinned  by  the  de-
cease of  beUevers,  being  filled  by  those  who  were  baptized  to  take
their  jjlaces.  In  the  time  of  Tertullian  and  Origen  infant  bap-
tism is  spoken  of,  not  only  as  the  prevailing  usage  of  the  Church,
but  as  having  been  practised  from  the  beginning.  When  Pela-
gius  was  sorely  pressed  b)'  Augustine  mth  the  argument  in  sup-
port of  the  doctrine  of  original  sin  derived  from  the  baptism  of
infants,  he  did  not  venture  to  evade  the  argument  by  denying
either  the  prevalence  of  such  baptisms  or  the  divine  warrant  for
them.  He  could  only  say  that  they  were  baptized,  not  on  account
of  what  they  then  needed,  but  of  what  they  might  need  hereafter.
The  fact  of  infant  baptism  and  its  divine  sanction  were  ad-
mitted. These  facts  are  here  referred  to  only  as  a  collateral
proof  that  the  practice  of  the  New  Testament  Church  did  not  in
this  matter  differ  from  that  of  the  Church  as  constituted  before
the  advent  of  Christ.

The  conduct  of  our  Lord  in  relation  to  children,  in  its  bearing
on  this  subject  must  not  be  overlooked.  So  far  from  excluding
them  from  the  Church  in  whose  bosom  they  had  always  been
cherished,  He  called  them  the  lambs  of  his  flock,  took  them  into
his  arms,  and  blessed  them,  and  said,  of  such  is  the  kingdom  of
heaven.  If  members  of  his  kingdom  in  heaven,  why  should  they
be  excluded  from  his  kingdom  on  earth  ?  Whenever  a  father  or
mother  seeks  admission  to  the  Christian  Church,  their  heart
prompts  them  to  say :  Here  Lord  am  I  and  the  children  whom
thou  hast  ffiven  me.  And  his  gracious  answer  has  alwavs  been  :
Suffer  little  children  to  come  unto  me  and  forbid  them  not.

Eighth  Proposition.      Children  need,  and  are  capable  of  receiv-
ing the  Benefits  of  Redemption.

On  this  point  all  Christians  are  agreed.  All  churches  —  the
Greek,  the  Latin,  the  Lutheran,  and  the  Reformed  — unite  in  the
belief  that  infants  need  "  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus
Christ  "  and  the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  ordei-  to  their
salvation.  The  Reformed,  at  least,  do  not  believe  that  those
blessings  are  tied  to  the  ordinance  of  baptism,  so  that  the  recep-
tion of  baptism  is  necessary  to  a  participation  of  the  spiritual
benefits  which  it  symbolizes  ;  but  all  agree  that  infants  are  saved
by  Christ,  that  they  are  the  purchase  of  his  blood,  and  that  they
need  expiation  and  regeneration.  They  are  united,  also,  in  be-
lieving thut  all  who  seek  the  benefits  of  the  Avork  of  Christ,  are
bound  to  be  baptized  in  acknowledgment   of    its   iieces'^ity  and


558  PART  III.     Ch.  XX.— the  means   OF   GRACE.

of  their  faitli,  and  that  those  who  need,  but  cannot  seek,  are,  by
the  ordinance  of  God,  entitled  to  receive  the  appointed  sign  and
seal  of  redemption,  whenever  and  wherever  they  are  pi-esented
by  those  who  have  the  right  to  represent  them.

§  11.    Whose  Children  are  entitled  to  Baptism  ?

This  is  a  very  delicate,  difficult,  and  important  question.  No
answer  which  can  be  given  to  it  can  be  expected  to  give  general
satisfaction.  The  answers  will  be  determined  by  the  views  taken
of  the  nature  of  the  Church  and  the  design  of  the  sacraments.
Probably  the  answer  which  would  include  most  of  the  views
entertained  on  the  subject,  is,  that  the  children  of  the  members
of  the  visible  Church,  and  those  for  whose  religious  training  such
members  are  willing  to  become  responsible,  should  be  baptized.
But  this  leaves  many  questions  undecided,  and  allows  room  for
great  diversity  of  practice.

Difference  between  the  Jewish  and  Christian  Usage.

We  have  already  seen  under  the  old  dispensation,  (1.)  That  God
made  a  nation  his  Church  and  his  Church  a  nation.  (2.)  Conse-
quently that  membership  in  the  one  involved  membership  in  the
other,  and  exclusion  from  the  one,  exclusion  from  the  other.
(3.)  That  the  conditions  of  a;dmission  to  the  Church  were,  there-
fore, the  same  as  the  conditions  of  admission  into  the  common-
wealth. (4.)  That  those  conditions  were  profession  of  faith  in  the
true  religion,  and  a  promise  of  obedience  to  the  will  of  God  as  re-
vealed in  his  word.  (5.)  That  the  State  exacted  this  profession
and  enforced  this  obedience  so  far  as  the  external  conduct  was  con-
cerned. All  the  people  were  required  to  be  circumcised,  to  offer
sacrifices,  to  observe  the  festivals,  and  to  frequent  the  temple
services.  And,  (6.)  That  this  was  God's  way  of  preserving  the
knowledge  of  the  true  religion  in  that  age  of  the  world.  And  it
succeeded.  When  Christ  came,  the  uncorrupted  Scriptures  were
read  in  the  synagogues  ;  the  sacrifices  as  divinely  appointed  were
offered  in  the  temple ;  the  high  priest  in  his  offices  and  work  still
stood  before  the  people,  as  the  type  of  Him  who  was  to  come.
Under  this  system  there  could  be  no  question  as  to  whose  chil-
dren were  to  be  circumcised.

Wlien  Christ  came  and  broke  down  the  wall  of  partition
between  the  Jews  and  Gentiles,  and  announced  his  Gospel  as
designed  and  adapted  for  all  men,  all  this  was  changed.  It  fol-
lowed from  the  fact  that  the  Church  was  to  embrace  all  nations,


§11.]     BAPTISM.     WHOSE   CHILDREN   TO   BE   BAPTIZED?    559

(1.)  That  the  Church  and  State  could  no  longer  be  united  or
identified  as  they  had  been  under  the  theocracy.  The  Christian
Chui'ch  at  the  first  was  established  in  an  enemy's  country.  For
three  centuries  it  was  not  only  independent  and  separate  from  the
State,  but  it  was  in  every  way  opposed  and  persecuted  by  the
civil  power.  It  is  still  the  fact  that  the  Christian  Church  exists
in  Pagan  and  Mohammedan  countries.  (2.)  From  the  necessity
of  the  case  it  is  a  body  independent  of  the  State.  It  has  its  own
organization,  its  own  laws,  its  own  officers,  and  its  own  conditions
of  membership.  It  has  the  right  to  administer  its  own  disciphne
agreeably  to  the  laws  of  Christ  its  king  and  head.  (3.)  As  it
was  intended  by  Christ  that  his  Church  should  be  thus  catholic
or  universal,  existing  under  all  forms  of  human  government,
civilized  or  savage,  it  was  clearly  his  intention  that  it  should  be
thus  independent  and  distinct  from  the  State.  He  declared  that
his  kingdom  was  not  of  this  world.  It  is  not  of  the  same  kind
with  worldly  kingdoms  ;  it  has  different  ends  to  accomplish,  and
different  means  for  the  attainment  of  those  ends.  It  is  spiritual,
that  is,  concerned  with  the  religious  or  spiritual,  as  distinguished
from  the  secular  interests  of  men.  It  moves,  therefore,  in  a  dif-
ferent sphere  from  the  State,  and  the  two  need  never  come  into
collision.  (4.)  As  the  Church,  since  the  advent  is  identical  with
the  Church  which  existed  before  the  advent,  although  so  different
in  its  organization,  in  its  officers,  and  in  its  mode  of  worshijj,  the
conditions  of  church-membership  are  now  what  the}^  were  then.
Those  conditions  still  are  credible  profession  of  faith,  and  obedi-
ence to  the  divine  law.  But  it  is  no  longer  the  duty  of  the  State
to  require  such  profession  or  to  enforce  such  obedience,  so  that
every  citizen  of  the  State  should  be  "i|)so  facto"  a  member  of  the
Church.  The  two  bodies  are  now  distinct.  A  man  may  be  a
member  of  the  one,  and  not  a  member  of  the  otlier.  The  Church
has  the  right  to  exercise  its  own  discretion,  within  the  limits  pre-
scribed by  Christ,  as  to  the  admission  or  exclusion  of  members.

Doctrine  of  the    Church  of  Rome  on  the  Baptism  of  Children.

It  has  already  been  remarked  that  the  Romish  theory  of  the
Church  is  founded  on  that  of  the  ancient  theocracy.  That  theory,
however,  is  necessarily  modified  by  the  cathohcity  of  the  Church.
Being  designed  for  all  nations,  it  could  not  be  identified  with  any
one  nation.  National  citizenship  is  no  longer  the  condition  of
churcli- membership.     Rome,  however,  teaches, —

1.  That  the  Church  is,  in  its  essential  character,  an  external,


oGO  PART   III.     Cti.   XX. —  THE   MEANS   OF    GRACE.

organized  society,  so  that  no  man  can  be  a  member  of  Christ's
body  and  a  partaker  of  his  life,  who  is  not  a  member  of  that
society.

2.  The  Church  is  an  institute  of  salvation.  Its  sacraments  are
exclusively  the  channels  for  conveying  to  men  the  benefits  of  the
redemption  of  Christ.

3.  As  the  sacraments  are  the  only  channels  of  grace,  no  gracious
affections  or  fruits  of  the  Spirit  can  be  required  of  those  who
receive  them.  Being  designed  to  make  men  good,  goodness  can-
not be  the  condition  of  their  reception  or  efficacy.

4.  Tiie  sacraments,  and  especially  baptism,  being  thus  neces-
sary to  salvation,  it  is  the  duty  of  all  men  to  apply  that  they  should
be  administered  to  them  and  to  their  childi'en.

5.  With  regard  to  those  children  whose  parents,  through  igno-
rance or  indifference,  neglect  to  bring  them  to  the  Church  for
baptism,  they  may  be  joresented  by  any  one  who  takes  an  interest
in  their  salvation,  that  they  may  be  baptized  on  the  faith  of  the
Church,  or  on  that  of  those  who  are  willing  to  act  as  their  spon-
sors. It.  is  no  matter,  therefore,  whether  the  parents  of  such
children  are  Christians,  Jews,  Mohammedans,  or  Pagans,  as  they
all  need,  so  they  are  all  entitled  to  the  sacrament  of  baptism.
To  exclude  them  from  baptism,  is  to  exclude  them  from  hea^^en.

The  Roman  Catechism  ^  declares  that  the  people  must  be  taught
that  our  Lord  has  enjoined  baptism  on  all  men,  so  that  they  A\ill
all  perish  eternally  unless  they  be  renewed  by  the  grace  of  bap-
tism, whether  their  parents  be  believers  or  unbelievers.  In  the
answer  to  the  next  question  the  Scriptural  authority  for  the  bap-
tism of  infants  is  given  ;  and  in  answer  to  the  following  question
it  is  taught  that  infants,  when  baptized,  receive  the  grace  signi-
fied, not  because  they  believe  by  the  assent  of  their  own  mind,
but  because  of  the  faith  of  their  parents  if  believers,  and  if  not,
then  by  the  faith  of  the  Church  universal ;  and  they  may  be
properly  offered  for  baptism  by  any  one  who  is  willing  to  present
them,  by  whose  eliarity  they  are  brought  into  the  communion  of
the  Holy  Spirit.

6.  Altliougli  not  identified  with  the  State,  the  Church  theoreti-
cally absorbs  the  State,  and  does  so  in  fact  wherever  it  has  the
ascendancy.  The  Church  is  a  body  which  has  two  arms  —  a  spir-
itual and  a  secular.  It  demands  that  the  State  require  all  its
subjects  to  profess  its  faith,  to  receive  its  sacraments,  and  to  sub-
mit to  its  discipline  ;  and  where  it  has  not  the  power  thus  to  ren-

^  II.  ii.  qua-s.  25  [31.  xxx.] ;  Streitwolf,  vol,  i.  p.  274.


§11.]     BAPTISM.     WHOSE   CHILDREN   TO   BE   BAPTIZED?     561

der  the  State  its  tool,  it  openly  asserts  its  right  to  do  so.  One  of
the  encyclical  letters  of  the  present  pope  so  openly  denied  the
liberty  of  conscience,  the  liberty  of  the  press,  and  the  lawfulness
of  tolerating  any  other  religion  than  that  of  the  Church  of  Rome,
that  the  late  Emperor  of  the  French  forbade  its  publication  in
France ;  yet  the  Archbishop  of  New  York  read  it  in  his  cathedral
to  an  immense  and  approving  audience.

The  Roman  Church,  therefore,  believing  that  baptism  is  essen-
tial to  salvation,  baptizes  all  children  presented  for  that  ordinance
without  regard  to  their  immediate  parentage  or  remote  descent.

Theories  on  tvJiich  many  Protestants  contend  for  the  propriety
of  the  baptism  of  children  other  than  those  of  believing  par-
ents.

There  are  two  principles  on  which  the  baptism  of  children
whose  parents  are  not  members  of  the  visible  Church,  is  defended.
The  first  is,  that  the  promise  is  to  parents  and  their  children,  and
their  children's  children  even  to  the  thousandth  generation.
Children,  therefore,  whose  immediate  parents  may  have  no  con-
nection with  the  Church,  have  not  forfeited  their  privileges  as
children  of  the  covenant.  If  the  promise  be  to  them,  its  sign
and  seal  belongs  to  them.  The  second  principle  is,  that  of  spir-
itual adoption.  Children  who  are  orphans,  or  whose  parents  are
unfit  or  unwilling  to  bring  them  up  in  a  Christian  manner,  may
be  so  far  adopted  by  those  willing  and  quahfied  to  assume  the
responsibility  of  their  religious  education  as  to  become  proper
subjects  of  baptism.  This  principle  is  sanctioned  in  the  Scrip-
tures. In  Genesis  xvii.  12,  God  said  to  Abraham,  "  He  that  is
eight  days  old  shall  be  circumcised  among  you,  every  man  child
in  your  generations  ;  he  that  is  born  in  the  house,  or  bought  with
money  of  any  stranger,  which  is  not  thy  seed."  Our  Church  on
the  same  princijjle  in  1787  enjoined  with  regard  to  apprentices
that  "  Christian  masters  and  mistresses,  whose  religious  profes-
sions and  conduct  are  such  as  to  give  them  a  right  to  the  ordi-
nance of  baptism  for  their  own  children,  may  and  ought  to  dedi-
cate the  children  of  their  household  to  God,  in  that  ordinance,
when  they  have  no  scruple  of  conscience  to  the  contrary."  In
1816,  it  was  decided,  "  (1.)  It  is  the  duty  of  masters  who  are
members  of  the  Church  to  present  the  children  of  parents  in
servitude  to  the  ordinance  of  baptism,  provided  they  are  in  a
situation  to  train  them  up  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the
Lord,  thus  securing  to  them  the  rich  advantages  which  the  Gos-
VOL.  jii.  36


5G2         PART  III.     Ch.   XX.  — the  MEANS   OF   GRACE.

pel  provides.  (2.)  It  is  the  duty  of  Christ's  ministers  to  incul-
cate this  doctrine,  and  to  baptize  all  children  of  this  description
when  presented  by  their  masters."  On  the  baptism  of  heathen
children  the  Church  in  1843  decided  that  such  cliildren  are  to  be
baptized,  "  who  are  so  committed  to  the  missions,  or  other  Chris-
tian tuition,  as  to  secure  effectually  their  entire  religious  educa-
tion." 1

It  was  on  the  authority  of  the  two  principles  above  mentioned
that  many  of  the  most  distinguished  theologians  of  Holland  con-
tend that  foundlings,  whose  parents  were  unknown,  illegitimate
children,  and  the  children  of  excommunicated  persons,  should  be
admitted  to  baptism.  The  question  whether  heathen  children,
committed  to  the  care  of  Christian  missionaries,  should  be  bap-
tized was  submitted  to  the  Synod  of  Dort.  There  was  a  diversity
of  opinion  on  the  subject  among  the  members,  but  the  majority
decided  against  it ;  not,  as  would  appear,  from  the  language  em-
ployed, because  of  either  of  the  above  principles  being  denied,
but  because  of  the  uncertain  tenure  by  which  such  children  were
held.  It  was  feared  that  they  might  return  to  heathenism,  and
thus  the  scandal  of  baptized  persons  practising  heathen  rites  be
afforded.^

A  second  theory  advanced  on  this  subject  was  that  of  a  two-
fold covenant ;  one  external,  the  other  internal ;  answering  to  the
distinction  between  the  Church  visible  and  invisible.  God,  under
the  old  dispensation,  entered  into  a  covenant  with  the  Hebrew
nation  constituting  them  his  visible  Church,  which  covenant  was
distinct  from  that  in  which  eternal  life  was  promised  to  those  that
truly  believe  in  the  Redeemer  who  was  to  come.  The  conditions
of  admission  mto  this  external,  visible  society,  were  outward  pro-
fession of  the  true  religion,  and  external  obedience.  The  condi-
tion of  admission  into  the  invisible  Church,  was  true  and  saving
faith.  The  sacraments  were  attached  to  the  external  covenant.
All  who  made  this  external  profession  and  yielded  this  outward
obedience  to  the  Mosaic  law,  were  of  right  entitled  to  circum-
cision, to  the  passover,  and  to  all  the  privileges  of  the  theocracy.
So  it  is  now.  according  to  the  theory  in  hand.     Christ  designed

1  Batiri^s  Diffcst  of  the  Acts,  Deliverances,  and  Testimonies  of  the  Sujireme  Judicatory  of
the  Presbyterian  Church,  Pliiladelpliia,  pp.  106,  107;  edit.  1856,  pp.  82,  83.

2  Doctrina  Christianm  Religionis  per  Aphorismos  summatim  Bescrijjta.  Editio  sexta.
Cui  nunc  accedit  YTroTun-ajCTts  i  !m  n'ogire  Elenctica;  in  usum  Scholarum  Domesticarum  Cam-
pegii  Vitringfc.     Curante  Martino  Vitringa,  cap.  xxiv.    Lyons,  1779,  vol.  vii.  p.  153,  note  i.

Bernhardini  de  Moor,  Commentnrius  Perpetuus  in  Johannis  MarcMi  Compendium  The,-
ologice  Christlance.     Pars  v:  cap.  30,  §  19,  y. ;  Lyons,  1768,  vol.  v.  pp.  500-502.


§11.]     BAPTISM.     WHOSE    CHILDREN   TO   BE   BAPTIZED?     563

to  form  an  external,  visible  Churcli,  furnished  "with  a  constitution,
laws,  and  proper  officers  for  their  administration.  The  conditions
of  admission  into  this  visible  society,  were  the  profession  of  spec-
ulative, or  historical  faith  in  his  religion,  .and  external  conformity
to  its  laws  and  the  laws  of  his  Church.  To  this  external  body
all  the  ordinances  of  his  religion  are  attached.  Those,  there-
fore, who  apply  for  baptism  or  the  Lord's  Supper,  do  not  profess
to  be  the  regenerated  childi-en  of  God.  They  simply  profess  to
be  believers  as  distinguished  from  infidels  or  scorners,  and  to  be
desirous  to  avail  themselves  of  Church  privileges  for  their  own
benefit  and  for  the  good  of  their  children.  From  this  body  Christ
gathers  the  great  majority  of  his  own  people,  making  them  mem-
bers of  his  mystical  body.

De  Moor  gives  a  long  account  of  the  controversy.  Vitringa,  it
appears,  strenuously  opposed  this  theory  of  a  twofold  covenant  in
its  appHcation  to  the  New  Testament  economy.  Marck  as  stren-
uously defended  it.^

This  seems  substantially  the  ground  taken  by  the  Rev.  Mr.
Stoddard,  grandfather  of  President  Edwards.  Mr.  Stoddard  pub-
lished, in  1707,  a  sermon  on  the  Lord's  Supper,  in  which  he
maintained,  "  That  sanctification  is  not  a  necessary  qualification
to  partaking  of  the  Lord's  Supper,"  and  "  That  the  Lord's  Sup-
per is  a  converting  ordinance."  This  was  answered  in  a  "  Dis-
sertation "  by  Dr.  Increase  Mather.  To  this  Mr.  Stoddard  re-
phed  m  "  An  Appeal  to  the  Learned  ;  being  a  Vindication  of  the
right  of  visible  saints  to  the  Lord's  Supper,  though  they  be  des-
titute of  a  saving  work  of  God's  Spirit  on  their  hearts  ;  against
the  exceptions  of  Mr.  Increase  Mather."  President  Edwards  suc-
ceeded his  grandfather  as  pastor  of  the  Church  in  Northampton,
Mass.,  in  1727,  and  for  twenty  years  continued  to  act  on  the
same  principle  on  this  subject  as  his  grandfather.  Having  be-
come convinced  that  that  principle  was  unscriptural,  he  published,
in  1749,  "An  humble  Inquiry  into  the  Rules  of  the  Word  of
God,  concerning  the  qualifications  requisite  to  a  complete  stand-
ing and  full  communion  in  the  visible  Christian  Church."  His
design  was  to  prove  that  no  one  should  be  admitted  to  the  Lord's
table  who  is  not  in  the  judgment  of  the  Church  truly  regenerate.
This  doctrine  was  very  obnoxious  to  the  people  of  his  charge,
and  opposed  to  the  sentiment  and  practice  of  the  majority  of  the
neighbouring  churches.^     The  difficulty  arising  from  this  coutro-

1  De  Moor,  ut  supra,  cap.  xxx.  §  xvi.  vol.  v.  pp.  470-473.

3  It  is  stated  in  the  Life  of  President  Edwards,  by  Serene  E.  Dwight,  prefixed  to  an


564         PART  III.     Ch.   XX.  — the  means   OF   GRACE.

versy  was  one  of  the  principal  causes  which  led  to  the  dismission
of  President  Edwards  from  his  pastoral  charge  at  Northampton.
The  views  of  Edwards  soon  gained  the  ascendancy  in  the  Evan-
gelical churches  of  New  England,  and  to  a  great  extent  also
among  Presbyterians.

The  Rev.  John  Blair,  a  prominent  minister  of  our  Church,  took
substantially  the  ground  of  a  twofold  covenant.  Mr.  Blair,  as
well  as  his  more  distinguished  brother,  Rev.  Samuel  Blair,  took
an  active  part  with  Whitefield  and  the  Tennents  in  the  great
revival  which  occurred  about  the  middle  of  the  last  century,  and
belonged  to  what  were  called  the  New  Lights  in  the  controversy
which  issued  in  the  schism  of  1741.  He  does  not,  indeed,  admit
of  a  twofold  covenant,  but  he  teaches  the  same  doctrine  which
that  expression  was  intended  to  assert.  The  Church  of  Christ,
he  says,  is  very  properly  distinguished  as  visible  and  invisible.
By  the  former  is  meant  "  the  whole  number  of  true  believers
wherever  they  are."  "  The  visible  Church  consists  of  all  those
who  by  an  external  profession  of  the  doctrines  of  the  Gospel,  and
subjection  to  the  laws  and  ordinances  of  Christ,  appear  as  a
society  separated  from  the  world,  and  dedicated  to  God  and  his
service.  In  this  view,  in  the  present  imperfect  state,  the  Church
comprehends  branches  that  are  withered,  as  well  as  those  that
bear  fruit.  Now  the  covenant  of  grace  subsists  between  the
blessed  God  and  the  Church,  as  such  a  visible  Society,^  and  is
rendered  visible  by  a  visible  transaction  and  external  administra-
tion in  various  ordinances  ;  and  comprehends  sundry  external
privileges  for  the  advantage  and  spiritual  edification  of  the
Church.  Here  are  not  two  covenants,  one  for  the  invisible
Church  and  another  for  the  visible."  Gomarus,  a  leader  in  the
Synod  of  Dort,  says  two  covenants  should  be  distinguished.  That
with  the  visible  Church  he  calls  hypothetical,  that  with  the  in-
visible Church  absolute.  In  the  main  point,  however,  they  agree,
for  Mr.  Blair  goes  on  to  say  :  "  It  is   [to]   the  covenant  of  grace

edition  of  Edwards'  Works,  in  ten  vols.,  New  York,  1829,  vol.  i.  p.  307,  that  "All  the
churches  in  the  county,  except  two,  and  all  the  clergy,  except  three,  approved  of  the  lax
mode  of  admission."     That  is,  were  opposed  to  Edwards'  doctrine  on  the  suVijeet.

1  To  this  sentence  Mr.  Blair  appends  the  following  note:  "  In  no  other  way  can  we  con-
ceive the  covenant  to  subsist  between  God  and  believers  as  a  Church.  In  the  exercise  of
faith,  believers  have  union  to,  and  communion  with  .Jesus  Christ;  but  by  this  alone,  fhc%'
could  have  no  fellowship  with  one  another;  for  ea^h  one  could  only  be  conscious  of  his  own
exercise  of  faith,  and  could  have  no  society  with  any  other  therein.  Whatever  real  rela-
tion to  each  other  is  founded  in  their  common  union  to  Christ,  yet  they  could  not  at  all  per-
ceive it.  They  would  be  members  of  Christ,  but  utterly  detached  from  each  other,  and  so
not  formally  a  body.  It  is  only  as  incorporated  in  the  visible  Church,  that  they  are  fitly
placed  in  the  body,  and  have  any  knowledge  one  of  another,  and  so  have  fellowship."


§11]     BA.-TISM.    WHOSE   CHILDREN  TO  BE  BAPTIZED?    565

in  this  view,  namely,  as  visibly  subsisting  between  God  and  his
Church,  considered  as  a  visible  society,  a  public  body  separated
and  distinguished  from  the  world,  and  dedicated  to  God,  that  the
sacraments  are  annexed  as  visible  signs  and  seals  thereof."  ^

A  man,  therefore,  in  coming  to  the  Lord's  table,  or  in  present-
ing himself  or  his  children  for  baptism,  does  not  profess  to  be  a
member  of  the  invisible,  but  only  of  the  visible  Church.  God  has
commanded  men  not  to  steal,  and  not  to  neglect  their  religious
duties ;  He  commands  them  to  pray  ;  to  hear  his  word  ;  to  attend
the  assemblies  of  his  saints  gathered  for  his  worship  ;  to  be  bap-
tized ;  and  to  commemorate  the  Redeemer's  death  in  the  way  of
his  appointment.  All  these  duties  are  obligatory  ;  and  they  are
all  to  be  performed  in  a  right  spirit.  But  a  man,  argues  Mr.
Blair,  is  not  to  wait  until  he  thinks  himself  regenerate  and  is  so
regarded  by  the  Church,  before  he  attempts  to  obey  them.  The
sacraments,  he  says,^  "  are  not  instituted  to  be  visible  signs  of
persons'  opinion  or  judgment  concerning  the  exercises  of  their
own  hearts."  He  no  more  professes  to  be  regenerated  when  he
comes  to  be  baptized  than  when  he  prays.  His  prayer  is  from
its  nature  a  profession  of  faith  in  the  divine  existence  and  perfec-
tions, in  the  power  of  God  to  hear  and  answer  his  requests  ;  it  is
a  confession  of  his  necessities  and  of  his  dependence.  And  this
profession  and  confession  are  sincere  ;  so  smcere  that  it  is  not
only  his  duty,  but  his  right  to  pray  —  a  right  which  no  man  may
take  from  him.  In  like  manner  a  man  may  be,  in  the  same
sense,  sincere  in  his  belief  of  the  truth  of  the  Gospel ;  sincere  in
his  desire  to  obey  the  command  of  Christ,  and  secure  the  benefits
of  his  salvation.  "  When  the  sons  of  the  stranger,"  says  Mr.
Blair,  "  are  instructed  in  the  doctrines  of  the  Gospel,  are  con-
vinced in  their  judgment  and  conscience,  they  are  true  and  ex-
hibit the  true  religion  ;  that  they  are  bound  by  the  authority  of
God  to  embrace  it,  and  yield  obedience  to  the  divine  laws  ;  it
is  their  immediate  duty  to  embrace  it,  and  that  publicly  and
avowedly  by  joining  themselves  to  the  Lord,  and  his  Church,  in
the  sacrament  of  baptism  ;  and  thus  make  a  public  profession  of
the  true  religion,  come  under  solemn  obligations  to  walk  in  the
ways  of  God's  commandments,  and  under  the  care  and  discipline

1  Essays  on,  I.  The  Nature,  Uses,  and  Subjects  of  the  Sacraments  of  the  New  Testament ;
II.  On  Regeneration,  wherein  the  principle  of  Spiritual  Life  thereby  implanted  is  particu-
larly considered  ;  III.  On  the  Nature  and  Use  of  the  Means  of  Grace.  By  John  Blair,
A.  M.,  Pastor  of  the  Church  of  Good- Will  (alias  Wallkill),  in  the  Province  of  New  York
New  York :  printed  by  John  Holt,  at  the  Exchange,  1771.     Essay  i.  pp.  13-15.

•2  Itdd.  p.  35.


666       PART  in.   Ch.  XX.  — the  means  of  grace.

of  the  Church."  ^  Such  persons  "  are  brought  under  the  bond
of  the  covenant.  This  should  be  early  laid  before  them,  to  let
them  see  that  by  this  dedication  to  God,  they  are  bound  to  per-
form all  duties  of  religion  for  which  they  have  capacity,  to  receive
instruction  and  appear  for  rehgion  as  the  professors  thereof.  As
soon  as  they  have  a  competency  of  knowledge,  and  are  capable
of  the  discipline  of  the  Church,  they  are  bound  to  commemorate
the  death  of  Christ,  and  renew  their  engagements  to  Him  at  his
table,  u^nless  debarred  by  discipline  for  unchristian  conduct.
When  they  shall  become  parents,  they  are  bound  to  dedicate
their  children  to  God  in  baptism."  ^

Such  were  the  views  on  this  subject  entertained  by  some  of  the
most  evangehcal  ministers  of  our  Church  during  the  last  century
and  long  afterwards.  The  same  views  prevailed,  to  some  extent,
also  in  New  England.

A  third  theory  on  which  the  baptism  of  cliildren,  whose  par-
ents are  not  communicants,  is  contended  for,  makes  a  distinction
between  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper.  More  is  required  for
the  latter  than  for  the  former  ;  and,  therefore,  adults  who  are
entitled  to  baptism  for  themselves  and  for  their  children,  may
not  be  entitled  to  admission  to  the  Lord's  table.  This  is  one  of
the  views  on  this  general  subject  referred  to  by  Vitringa  and  De
Moor  in  the  works  above  mentioned.  The  advocates  of  this
theory  appeal  to  the  fact  that  the  Apostles,  who  were  no  more
able  than  other  men  to  read  the  heart,  baptized  thousands  on  the
spot,  on  a  simple  external  profession  of  faith.  So  Paul  baptized
the  jailer  at  Philippi  and  his  family  "  straightway,"  that  is,  as
would  appear,  at  midnight  in  the  prison.  Philip  baptized  the
eunuch  of  Ethiopia  as  soon  as  he  confessed  that  Jesus  is  the  Son
of  God,  although  he  knew  nothing,  so  far  as  appears  in  the  nar-
rative, of  his  conduct  either  before  or  after.  On  the  other  hand,
it  is  urged  that  these  same  Apostles  required  all  who  came  to
the  Lord's  Supper  to  examine  themselves,  and  see  whether  they
were  in  the  faith,  or  whether  Christ  dwelt  in  them.  This  seems
to  have  been  the  ground  taken  by  Mr.  Blair  in  the  earlier  part
of  his  ministry  ;  for  he  says  in  his  preface  ^  to  his  Essays :
"  Many  of  my  friends  will,  probably,  be  surprised,  to  find  I  have
changed  my  sentiments  with  respect  to  some  subjects  of  one  of
the  sacraments  ;  for  they  know  it  was  formerly  my  opinion,  that
the  unregenerate  ought  not,  by  any  means,  to  adventure  to  the
Lord's  table  ;  though  they  ought  to  dedicate  their  children  to
God  in  baptism."

1  Blair,  Essays,  ut  supra,  p.  28.  ^  Jbid.  p.  43.  ^  JMd.  p.  4.


§11.]     BAPTISM.    WHOSE   CHILDREN   TO   BE   BAPTIZED?     667

This  is  also  the  theory  which  Avas  known  in  New  England  as
the  "  Half-Way  Covenant."  Many  were  recognized  as  entitled
to  present  tlieir  children  for  baptism,  who  were  not  prepared  for
admission  to  the  Lord's  Supper.  The  controversy  on  this  subject
began  in  Hartford,  Connecticut,  in  1654,  1655.  Several  councils
were  called,  which  failed  to  produce  unanimity.  The  question
was  referred  to  a  Sjmod  of  divines  to  meet  in  Boston.  The
Synod  met  and  sat  two  or  tliree  weeks.  "  As  to  the  case  of  such
baptized  persons  as,  without  being  prepared  to  come  to  the  Lord's
Supper,  were  of  blameless  character,  and  would  own  for  them-
selves their  baptismal  obligations,  it  decided  that  they  ought  to
be  allowed  to  present  their  childi'en  for  baptism.  This  assuming
of  baptismal  obhgations  was  called  by  opponents,  taking  the
Half-way  Covenant."  ^

The  Synod  decided  in  favour  of  the  folloAVUig  propositions  :  —

"1.  They  that,  according  to  Scripture,  are  members  of  the
visible  Church,  are  the  subjects  of  baptism.

"2.  The  members  of  the  visible  Church,  according  to  Sci'ip-
ture,  are  confederate  visible  believers,  in  particular  churches,  and
their  infant  seed,  i.  e.,  children  in  minority,  whose  next  parents,
one  or  both,  are  in  covenant.

"3.  The  infant  seed  of  confederate  visible  believers,  are  mem-
bers of  the  same  Church  vsdth  their  parents,  and  when  grown  up
are  personally  under  the  watch,  discipline,  and  government  of
that  church.

"  4.  These  adult  persons  are  not,  therefore,  to  be  admitted  to
full  communion,  merel}^  because  they  are,  and  continue  members,
without  such  further  qualifications  as  the  Word  of  God  requireth
thereunto.

"5.  Church-members  who  were  admitted  in  minority,  under-
standing the  doctrine  of  faith,  and  publicly  professing  their  assent
thereto,  not  scandalous  in  life,  and  solemnly  owning  the  covenant
before  the  Church,  wherein  they  give  up  themselves  and  their
children  to  the  Lord,  and  subject  themselves  to  the  government
of  Christ  in  the  Church,  their  children  are  to  be  baptized.

"  6.  Such  church -members,  who  either  by  death,  or  some  other
extraordinary  providence,  have  been  inevitably  hindered  from  pub-
licly acting  as  aforesaid,  yet  have  given  the  Church  cause,  in  judg-
ment of  charity,  to  look  at  them  as  so  qualified,  and  such  as,  had

1  A  History  of  New  England,  from  the  Discovery  by  Europeans  to  the  Revolution  of  the
Seventeenth  Century,  being  an  Abridgment  of  his  "History  of  New  England  during  the
Stuart  Dynasty.^'     By  John  Gorham  Palfrey.     New  York,  1866,  vol.  ii.  p.  19.


568  PART  III.     Ch.   XX. —the   means   OF   GRACE.

they  been  called  thereunto,  would  have  so  acted,  their  children
are  to  be  baptized.

"  7.  The  members  of  orthodox  churches,  being  sound  in  the
faith  and  not  scandalous  in  life,  and  presenting  due  testimony
thereof ;  these  occasionally  coming  from  one  church  to  another
may  have  their  children  baptized  in  the  church,  whither  they
come,  by  virtue  of  communion  of  churches.  But  if  they  remove
their  habitation  they  ought  orderly  to  covenant  and  subject  them-
selves to  the  government  of  Christ  in  the  church  where  they  set-
tle their  abode,  and  so  their  children  to  be  baptized.  It  being
the  church's  duty  to  receive  such  into  communion,  so  far  as  they
are  regularly  fit  for  the  same."  ^

These  propositions  are  founded  on  the  following  prmciples  :  -

1.  That  as  under  the  old  economy  the  Temple  was  one,  it  had
its  outer  and  inner  courts,  and  those  who  had  access  to  the  former
were  not  thereby  entitled  to  enter  the  latter  ;  so  under  the  new
dispensation  the  visible  Church  is  one,  but  it  includes  two  classes
of  members  ;  baptized  professors  of  the  true  religion,  and  those
who,  giving  evidence  of  regeneration,  are  admitted  to  the  Lord's
Supper.

2.  That  the  qualifications  for  baptism  and  for  full  communion
are  not  identical.  INIany  may  properly  be  admitted  to  the  former,
who  are  not  prepared  for  the  latter.

3.  That  baptism  being  a  sign  and  seal  of  the  covenant  of  grace,
all  who  are  baptized,  whether  adults  or  infants,  are  properly
designated  "foederati,"  members  of  the  visible  Church,  believers,
saints,  Christians.

4.  That  those  baptized  in  infancy  remain  members  of  the  visi-
ble Church  until  they  are  "  discovenanted,"  as  the  Congrega-
tionalists  express  it ;  or,  separated  from  it  by  a  regular  act  of
discipline.

5.  That  being  members  of  the  Church,  if  free  from  scandal
and  continuing  their  profession,  they  are  entitled  to  present  their
children  for  baptism.

The  decision  of  this  Synod  did  not  put  an  end  to  the  contro-
versy. It  was,  however,  in  accordance  with  the  views  of  the
majority  of  the  New  England  churches.  Its  chief  opponents
were  found  among  "  the  more  conservative  class  of  laymen.  Its
advocates  among  tlie  clergy  were  from  the  first  a  majority,  which

1  MagnnUa  ChHsti  Americana,  by  Itev.  Cotton  IMalher,  D.  D.,  F.  R.  S.,  Hartford,  1853,
vol.  ii.  pp.  27G-31G.  The  passage  referred  to  contains  a  full  account  of  the  controversy-
The  words  above  are  on  page  279.


§  11.]     BAPTISM.     WHOSE    CHILDREN   TO   BE  BAPTIZED?    569

went  on  increasing  from  generation  to  generation  ;  and  the  Half-
way Covenant,  as  it  was  opprobriously  called,  came  to  be  ap-
proved by  the  general  practice  of  the  Congregational  churches
of  New  England."  ^  Such,  also,  it  is  believed,  although  on  some-
what different  principles,  was  the  general  practice  of  the  Presby-
terian Church  in  this  country  until  within  a  comparatively  recent
period  of  its  history.

The  Puritan  Doctrine  on  this  Subject.

The  Puritans,  in  the  restricted  sense  of  that  word,  held,  (1.)
That  the  Church  consists  of  the  regenerate.  (2.)  That  a  par-
ticular church  consists  of  a  number  of  true  believers  united  to-
gether by  mutual  covenant.  (3.)  That  no  one  should  be  admit-
ted to  church-membership  who  did  not  give  credible  evidence  of
being  a  true  child  of  God.  (4.)  They  understood  by  credible
evidence,  not  such  as  may  be  believed,  but  such  as  constrains
belief.  (5.)  All  such  persons,  and  no  others,  were  admitted  to
the  Lord's  Supper.  They,  therefore,  constituted  the  Church,  and
to  them  exclusively  belonged  the  privileges  of  church-member-
ship, and  consequently  to  them  was  confined  the  right  of  present-
ing their  children  for  baptism.  All  other  professors  of  the  true
religion,  however  correct  in  their  deportment,  were  denied  that
privilege.

These  principles,  when  introduced  by  the  Brownists  in  Eng-
land, were  opposed  by  the  great  body  of  Protestants  in  Great
Britain  and  upon  the  Continent.  They  were  brought  to  this
country  by  the  disciples  of  Robinson,  and  controlled  the  New
England  churches  for  many  years.  They  were  gradually  relaxed
when  the  theory  above  stated  gained  the  ascendancy,  which  it
retained  until  President  Edwards  published  his  "  Essay,"  to  which
we  have  referred,  which  gradually  changed  the  opinions  and  prac-
tice of  the  Congregational  churches  throughout  the  land,  and  to
a  great  extent  those  of  Presbyterians  also.

President  Edwards,  however,  lays  down  one  proposition,  and
devotes  his  whole  treatise  to  proving  another.  The  proposition
which  he  u.ndertakes  to  establish  is,  that  none  "  ought  to  be  ad-
mitted to  the  communion  and  privileges  of  members  of  the  visible
Church  of  Christ  in  complete  standing,  but  such  as  are  in  profes-
sion, and  in  the  eye  of  the  Church's  Christian  judgment,  godly
or  gracious  persons."  ^  What  he  proposes  to  prove,  therefore,  is
that  those  only  who,  in  the  judgment  of  the  Church,  are  godly

1  Palfrey,  p.  103.  2  Works,  edit.  New  York,  1868,  vol.  i.  p.  89.


570       PART  m.   Ch.  XX. —  the  means  of  grace.

or  gracious  persons  are  to  be  admitted  to  the  sacraments.  All
his  arguments,  however,  ten  in  number,  are  directed  to  prove  that
those  who  come  to  the  Christian  sacraments  profess  to  be  Chris-
tians. These  propositions  are  very  different.  Many  who  assent
to  the  latter,  reject  the  former.  The  one  has  reference  to  the
qualifications  for  church-membership  in  the  sight  of  God  ;  the
other  concerns  the  legitimate  power  of  the  Church  in  receiving
or  rejecting  those  who  apply  for  access  to  the  ordinances  which
Christ  has  appointed  as  means  of  grace  for  the  people.  Edwards
had  far  higher  notions  of  Church  power  in  this  matter,  than
those  entertained  by  the  great  body  of  Protestants.  The  reason
why  President  Edwards  confounded  the  propositions  above  men-
tioned, was,  that  those  against  whom  he  wrote  did  not  deny  the
prerogative  of  the  Church  to  sit  in  judgment  on  those  who  ap-
plied for  Church  privileges ;  that,  with  them,  was  not  the  matter
in  dispute.  The  question  concerned  the  divinely  appointed  qual-
ifications for  membership  in  the  Christian  Church.  Did  Christ
intend  and  ordain  that  those  only  whom  the  Church  judged  to
be  truly  regenerated  should  be  admitted  ;  or  did  He  design  the
sacraments,  as  Stoddard  contended,  for  the  unconverted ;  they,
as  well  as  preaching,  being  appointed  as  means  of  conversion.
This  being,  then,  the  only  matter  of  debate,  to  it  Edwards  nat-
urally confined  his  attention.

Edwards  is  very  explicit  in  his  statement  of  the  prerogative
and  duty  of  the  Church  in  acting  as  a  judge  of  the  real  char-
acter of  those  who  profess  to  be  Christians.  He  says :  "  By
Christian  judgment  I  intend  something  further  than  a  kind  of
mere  negative  charity,  implying  that  we  forbear  to  censure  and
condemn  a  man,  because  we  do  not  know  but  that  he  may  be
godly,  and  therefore  forbear  to  proceed  on  the  foot  of  such  a
censure  or  judgment  in  our  treatment  of  him :  as  we  would
kindly  entertain  a  stranger,  not  knowing  but  in  so  doing  we
entertain  an  angel  or  precious  saint  of  God,  But  I  mean  a  posi-
tive judgment,  founded  on  some  positive  appearance,  or  visibility,
some  outward  manifestations  that  ordinarily  render  the  thing
probable.  There  is  a  difference  between  suspending  our  judg-
ment, or  forbearing  to  condemn,  or  having  some  hope  that  possi-
bly the  tiling  may  be  so,  and  so  hoping  the  best  ;  and  a  positive
judgment  in  favour  of  a  person."  ^

Edwards  is  careful  not  to  make  any  detail  of  religious  experi-
ence the  ground  upon  which  the  Church  was  to  rest  its  judgment.

1   Works,  edit.  New  York,  1868,  vol.  i.  pp.  91,  92.


§11.]     BAPTISM.     WHOSE   CHILDREN   TO   BE  BAPTIZED?    571

This  was  one  of  the  charges  brought  against  his  scheme  which
he  earnestly  resists.  In  reply  to  this  objection  ^  he  quotes  the
following  passage  from  his  work  on  "  Religious  Affections :  "
"  In  order  to  persons'  making  a  proper  profession  of  Christianity,
such  as  the  Scripture  directs  to,  and  such  as  the  followers  of
Christ  should  require  in  order  to  the  acceptance  of  the  professors
with  full  charity,  as  of  their  society,  it  is  not  necessary  they
should  give  an  account  of  the  particular  steps  and  method,  by
which  the  Holy  Spirit,  sensibly  to  them,  wrought  and  brought
about  those  great  essential  things  of  Christianity  in  their  hearts.
There  is  no  footstep  in  Scripture  of  any  such  way  of  the  Apos-
tles, or  primitive  ministers  and  Christians  requiring  any  such
relation  in  order  to  their  receiving  and  treating  others  as  their
Christian  brethren,  to  all  intents  and  purposes  ;  or  of  their  first
examining  them  concerning  the  particular  method  and  order  of
their  experiences.  They  required  of  them  a  profession  of  the
things  wrought ;  but  no  account  of  the  manner  of  working  was
required  of  them.  Nor  is  there  the  least  shadow  in  the  Scripture
of  any  such  custom  in  the  Church  of  God,  from  Adam  to  the
death  of  the  Apostle  John."

According  to  this  theory,  therefore,  the  Church  consists  of
those  who  are  "  judged  "  to  be  regenerate.  None  but  those  thus
declared  to  be  true  believers  are  to  be  received  as  members  of  the
Church.  They  alone  are  entitled  to  the  sacraments  either  for
themselves  or  for  their  children,  and  consequently  only  the  chil-
dren of  communicants  are  to  be  admitted  to  baptism.  It  may  be
remarked  on  this  theory,  —

1.  That  it  is  a  novelty.  It  had  never  been  adopted  or  acted
upon  by  any  church  on  earth,  until  the  rise  of  the  Independents,

2.  It  has  no  warrant  from  Scripture  either  by  precept  or  exam-
ple. Under  the  old  economy  those  who  professed  the  true  relig-
ion were  admitted  to  the  theocracy  ;  but  no  body  of  men  sat  in
judgment  on  the  question  of  their  regeneration.  Those  thus
admitted,  unless  excluded  judicially,  had  a  right  to  the  sacra-
ments of  the  Church  for  themselves  and  for  their  children.  The
Apostles  acted  upon  precisely  the  same  principle.  It  is  impossi-
ble that  they  should  have  examined  and  decided  favourably  as  to
the  regeneration  of  each  of  the  five  thousand  persons  added  to  the
Church  in  one  day  in  Jerusalem.  The  whole  Church,  for  more
than  a  thousand  years,  followed  the  example  of  the  Apostles  in
this  matter.

1  Misrepresentations  Corrected  and  Truth  Vindicated,  in  a  Reply  to  the  Rev.  Solomon
Williams'  Book;  Works,  edit.  N«^  York,  1868,  vol.  i.  pp.  206,  207.


^12         PART  III.     Cn.   XX. —THE  MEANS    OF    GRACE.

3.  The  attempt  to  make  the  visible  Church  consist  exclusively  of
true  believers  must  not  only  inevitably  fail  of  success,  but  it  must
also  be  productive  of  evil.  Dr.  Cotton  Mather,  in  defending  the
decision  of  the  Synod  of  Boston,  which  allowed  baptism  to  the
children  of  non-communicants,  quotes  Parpens  as  saying,  "  In
church  reformation,  'tis  an  observable  truth  that  those  that  are
for  too  much  strictness,  do  more  hurt  than  profit  the  Church."
And  he,  himself,  says,  "  Baptism  is  a  seal  of  the  whole  covenant
of  grace  ;  but  it  is  by  way  of  initiation.  Hence  it  belongs  to
all  that  are  within  the  covenant  or  have  the  first  entrance  there-
into. And  is  there  no  danger  of  corruption  by  overstraining  the
subject  of  baptism  ?  Certainly,  it  is  a  corruption  to  take  from
the  rule,  as  well  as  add  to  it.  Moses  found  danger  in  not  apply-
ing the  initiating  seal,  to  such  for  whom  it  was  appointed.  Is
there  no  danger  of  putting  those  out  of  the  visible  Church,  whom
our  Lord  would  have  kept  in  ?  .  .  .  .  If  we  do  not  keep  in  the
way  of  a  converting,  grace-giving  covenant,  and  keep  persons  un-
der those  church  dispensations,  wherein  gi-ace  is  given,  the  Church
will  die  of  a  lingering,  though  not  violent,  death.  The  Lord
hath  not  set  up  churches  only  that  a  few  old  Christians  may  keep
one  another  warm  while  they  live,  and  then  carry  away  the
Church  into  the  cold  grave  with  them  when  they  die ;  no,  but
that  they  might  with  all  care,  and  with  all  the  obligations  and .
advantages  to  that  care  that  may  be,  nurse  up  still  successively
another  generation  of  subjects  to  our  Lord,  that  may  stand  up
in  his  kingdom  when  they  are  gone."  ^

4.  Experience  proves  that  it  is  a  great  evil  to  make  the  Church
consist  only  of  communicants  and  to  cast  out  into  the  world,
without  any  of  that  watch  and  care  which  God  intended  for
them,  all  those  together  with  their  children,  who  do  not  see  their
way  clear  to  come  to  the  Lord's  table.  Admitting  Avith  gratitude
all  that  can  be  said  of  the  great  advance  made  by  the  Church  in
this  country  within  the  last  fifty  or  sixty  years,  there  are  loud  and
almost  universal  complaints  made  of  the  decay  of  family  religion,
of  family  training,  and  especially  of  the  ecclesiastical  instruction
of  the  young.  It  is  within  the  memory  of  many  now  liAang  that
in  almost  every  Presbyterian  and  every  Congregationalist  family
in  the  land,  as  a  matter  of  course,  the  children  were  regularly
taught  the  "  Westminster  Catechism."     It  is  not  so  now.^

^  Mather's  Magnalia,  vol.  ii.  p.  809.

2  The  venerable  Mr.  Spaulding,  during  his  recent  visit  to  this  country,  after  spending
thirty-five  years  as  a  missionary  of  the  American  Board  in  Cej'lon,  was  so  much  struck
with  the  change  in  these  respects  which  had  taken  place  during  his  absence,  that  he  s'aid


§11.]     BAPTISM.     WHOSE    CHILDREN  TO   BE  BAPTIZED?    573

Doctrine  and   Usage  of  the  Reformed  Churches.

The  language  of  the  Reformed  Churches  as  the  proper  sub-
jects of  mfant  baptism  is  perfectly  uniform.  In  the  "  Second
Helvetic  Confession "  it  is  said,^  "  Damnamus  Anabaptistas,
qui  negant  baptisandos  esse  infantulos  recens  natos  a  fidelibus.
Nam  juxta  doctrinam  evangelicam,  horum  est  regnum  Dei,  et
sunt  in  foedere  Dei,  cur  itaque  non  daretur  eis  signum  foederis
Dei  ?  "

The  "  Gallic  Confession "  says :  ^  "  Quamvis  baptismus  sit
fidei  et  resipiscentige  sacramentum,  tamen  cum  una  cum  parenti-
bus  posteritatem  etiam  illorum  in  ecclesia  Deus  recenseat,  affirm-
amus,  infantes  Sanctis  parentibus  natos,  esse  ex  Christi  authoritate
baptizandos."

The  "  Belgic  Confession  "  says  :  ^  "  (Infantes  e  fidehbus  parent-
ibus natos)  baptizandos  et  signo  foederis  obsignandos  esse  credi-
mus."

The  "  Westminster  Confession"  says  :*  "  Now  only  those  that
do  actually  profess  faith  in,  and  obedience  luito  Christ,  but  also
the  infants  of  one  or  both  believing  parents  are  to  be  baptized."

The  "  Larger  Catechism  "  says  :  ^  "  Infants  descending  from
parents,  either  both  or  but  one  of  them,  professing  faith  in  Clu-ist,
and  obedience  to  Him,  are,  in  that  respect,  within  the  covenant,
and  are  to  be  baptized."

The  "  Shorter  Catechism  "  says  :  ^  "  Baptism  is  not  to  be  ad-
ministered to  any  that  are  out  of  the  visible  Church,  till  they
profess  their  faith  in  Christ  and  their  obedience  to  Him  ;  but  the
children  of  such  as  are  members  of  the  visible  Church,  are  to  be
baptized."

The  "  Directory  for  Worship  "  says :  ^  "  The  seed  of  the  faith-
ful have  no  less  right  to  this  ordinance,  under  the  Gospel,  than
the  seed  of  Abraham  to  circumcision."

It  is,  therefore,  plain  that  according  to  the  standards  of  the
Reformed  Church,  it  is  the  children  of  the  members  of  the  \dsi-
ble  Church  who  are  to  be  baptized.  Agreeably  to  Scriptural
usage  such  members  are  called  "  foederati,"  saints,  believers,
faithful,  holy  brethren,  partakers  of  the  heavenly  calling.  The
Apostles  in  addressing  professing  Christians  in  the  use  of  such

he  thought  the  time  would  come  when  the  Tamul  people  would  be  called  upon  to  send  mis-
sionaries to  America.

1  Cap.  XX.;  Niemeyer,  Collectio  Confessionum,  Leipzig,  1840,  p.  518.

2  Art.  XXXV.  Ibid.  p.  338.  8  Art.  xxxiv.  Ibid.  p.  384.  4  Chap.  xxviii.  4.
6  Quest.  166.                                   6  Quest.  95.  7  ciiap.  vii.  4.


574       PART  m.   ch.  XX.  — the  means  of  grace.

terms  did  not  express  any  judgment  of  their  state  in  tlie  sight
of  God.  They  designated  them  according  to  their  profession.
If  they  professed  to  be  believers,  they  were  called  beUevers,  and
were  treated  as  such  ;  unless  they  gave  tangible  evidence  to  the
contrary,  and  in  that  case  they  were  excommunicated.  The  Re-
formed, as  well  as  the  Lutheran  theologians,  therefore,  speak  of
the  members  of  the  visible  Church  as  believers,  and  of  their
children  as  born  of  believing  parents.  All  that  is  intended,
therefore,  by  the  language  above  cited  is,  that  the  sacraments  of
the  Church  are  to  be  confined  to  members  of  the  Church  and
to  their  children.  It  never  entered  the  minds  of  the  authors  of
those  symbols  that  the  visible  Church  consists  exclusively  of  the
regenerate,  or  of  those  who  gave  such  evidence  of  their  regenera-
tion as  to  constrain  a  judgment  in  their  favour.

It  has  already  been  stated  that  the  common  doctrine  of  Protes-
tants on  this  whole  subject  is,  —

1.  That  the  visible  Church  has  always  consisted  of  those  who
professed  the  true  religion,  together  with  theu'  children.

2.  That  the  terms  of  church-membership  under  all  dispensations
have  been  the  same,  namely,  profession  of  faith  and  promise  of
obedience.

3.  The  requirements  for  participation  in  the  sacraments  were
the  same.  That  is,  any  one  entitled  to  the  rite  of  circumcision,
was  entitled  to  partake  of  the  passover ;  those,  under  the  Chris-
tian dispensation,  entitled  to  baptism,  are  entitled  to  the  Lord's
Supper.  Those  who,  unbaptized,  would  be  entitled  to  baptism
for  themselves,  are  entitled,  and  they  only,  to  present  their  chil-
dren for  baptism.  This  is  only  saying  that  the  privileges  of  the
Church  are  confined  to  members  of  the  Church.

4.  The  profession  of  faith  required  for  admission  to  the  Church
or  its  ordinances  is  a  profession  of  true  faith ;  and  the  promise
of  obedience  is  a  promise  of  the  obedience  of  the  heart  as  well
as  of  the  outward  life.  When  a  man  professed  to  be  a  Jew
he  professed  to  be  truly  a  Jew.  It  is  inconceivable  that  God
required  of  him  only  an  insincere,  hypocritical,  or  formal  faith.
This  point  is  strenuously  urged  by  President  Edwards.  He
argues  that  those  who  enter  the  Cliristian  Church  enter  into
covenant  ^dth  God,  because  under  the  Mosaic  economy  all  the
people  thus  pledged  themselves  to  be  the  sincere  worshippers  of
God.  He  appeals  to  such  passages  as  Deuteronomy  vi.  13,  x.  20,
"  Thou  shalt  fear  the  Lord  thy  God ;  Him  shalt  thou  serve,  and
to  Him  shalt  thou  cleave,  and  swear  by  his  name."     "  This  insti-


§11.]    baft:sm.    whose  children  to  be  bapjized?   575

tutioii,  in  Deuteronomy,  of  swearing  into  the  name  of  the  Lord,
or  visibly  and  explicitly  uniting  themselves  to  Him  in  covenant,
was  not  prescribed  as  an  extraordinary  duty,  or  a  duty  to  be  per-
formed on  a  return  from  a  general  apostasy,  and  some  other  ex-
traordinary occasions  :  but  is  evidently  mentioned  in  the  institu-
tion as  a  part  of  the  public  worship  of  God  to  be  performed  b}'
all  God's  people."  ^  This  Avas  an  institution,  he  adds,  belonging
not  only  to  Israel  under  the  Old  Testament,  but  also  to  Gentile
converts,  and  to  Christians  under  the  New  Testament.  This
exphcit  open  covenanting  with  God,  he  argues,^  ought  to  be  re-
quired of  persons  before  they  are  admitted  to  the  privileges  of
adult  members  of  the  Church.  Circumcision  and  the  passover
were  not  designed  for  the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles.  Those
only  were  admitted  to  these  ordinances  who  professed  to  be  con-
verted. In  like  manner  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper  are  not
converting  ordinances.  They  are  to  be  administered  only  to  those
who  profess  to  be  Christians.  It  is  plain,  from  the  nature  of  the
case,  that  those  who  partake  of  the  Christian  sacraments  profess
to  be  Christians.  This  is  not  so  much  asserted  as  assumed  as
self-evident  by  the  Apostle,  when  he  dissuades  the  Corinthians
from  frequenting  the  feasts  given  in  the  temples  of  idols.  As,
he  says,  those  who  partake  of  the  bread  and  wine  in  the  Lord's
Supper  thereby  profess  to  be  in  communion  with  Christ ;  and  as
those  who  partake  of  the  Jewish  altar,  thereby  profess  to  be  the
worshippers  of  Jehovah  ;  so  those  who  partake  of  feasts  given
in  honour  of  idols,  thereby  profess  to  be  idolators.  (1  Cor.  x.
14—21.)  In  baptism  the  recipient  of  that  ordinance  publicly  de-
clares that  he  takes  God  the  Father  to  be  his  father  ;  God  the
Son  to  be  his  Saviour  ;  and  God  the  Holy  Ghost  to  be  his  sancti-
fier.  More  than  this  no  Christian  can  profess.  That  this  pro-
fession should  not  be  insincere  or  hypocritical,  or  merely  a  matter
of  form,  need  not  be  argued.  When  a  parent  presents  his  child
for  baptism,  he  makes  precisely  these  professions  and  engage-
ments ;  and  he  can  do  no  more  when  he  comes  to  the  Lord's
Supper.

5.  The  prerogative  of  the  Church  is  limited  to  the  demand  of
a  credible  profession  of  faith  and  promise  of  obedience.  And  by
a  credible  profession  is  to  be  understood,  such  as  may  be  believed  ;
that  is,  one  against  which  no  decisive,  tangible  evidence  can  be
adduced.  If  a  man  professes  faith  who  is  an  avowed  heretic,  or
avows  a  purpose  of  obedience  Avhile  leading  an  ungodly  life,  the

1   Works,  edit.  New  York,  1868,  vol.  i.  pp.  106,  107.  2  Jbtd.  p.  109.


576         TART   III.     Ch.   XX.  — the   MEANS    OF   GRACE.

Churcli  is  authorized  and  bound  to  refuse  to  receive  him.  Noth-
ing, however,  can  consistently  be  made  a  ground  of  such  refusal,
which  would  not  be  regarded  as  a  sufficient  ground  for  the  disci-
pline of  one  already  in  the  communion  of  the  Church.  Two
things  are  to  be  considered,  the  one  concerns  the  applicants  for
Church  privileges.  They  are  bound  to  obey  the  command  of
Christ  to  be  baptized  and  to  present  their  children  for  baptism  ;
and  they  are  bound  to  commemorate  his  death  in  the  way  of  liis
appointment.  They  assume  a  grave  responsibility  who  refuse  to
allow  them  to  comply  with  those  commands.  It  is  moreover  not
only  a  duty,  but  a  right,  a  privilege,  and  a  blessing  to  receive  the
sacranients  of  the  Church.  They  are  divinely  appointed  means
of  grace.  We  must  have  good  reasons  if  we  venture  to  refuse
any  of  our  fellow  sinners  the  use  of  the  means  of  salvation  which
Christ  has  appointed.  It  is  to  be  feared  that  many  have  come
short  of  eternal  life,  who,  had  they  been  received  into  the  bosom
of  the  Church  and  enjoyed  its  guardian  and  fostering  care,  might
have  been  saved.  (This  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  doctrine  of
election,  as  that  doctrine  is  taught  in  Scripture.)

Besides  the  duties  and  rights  of  the  people,  the  other  thing  to
be  considered  in  this  matter,  is  the  proper  office  of  the  Church.
The  Church  has  a  solemn  duty  to  perform.  That  duty  is  clearly
laid  down  in  the  Word  of  God.  It  is  bound  to  refuse  to  recog-
nize as  Christian  brethren  those  who  deny  the  faith,  and  those
whose  manner  of  life  is  inconsistent  with  the  law  of  Christ.  The
Bible  gives  a  list  of  offences  which  exclude  those  who  commit
them  from  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  for  which  the  Church  is
commanded  to  exclude  men  from  her  communion.  In  doing  this
it  secures  all  the  purity  it  is  possible,  in  the  present  state  of  exist-
ence, to  attain.  Beyond  this  the  Church  has  neither  the  right
nor  the  power  to  go.  It  cannot  legitimately  assume  the  preroga-
tive of  sitting  in  judgment  on  the  hearts  of  men.  It  has  no
right  to  decide  the  question  whether  those  who  apply  for  the
privileges  of  Christ's  house  are  regenerate  or  unregenerate.  The
responsibility  as  to  their  inward  spiritual  state  rests  upon  those
who  seek  to  become  members  of  the  Church.  They  should  be
taught  what  it  is  they  profess  and  promise.

That  the  Church  is  not  called  upon  to  pronounce  a  judgment
as  to  the  real  piety  of  applicants  for  membership  is  plain,  —

1.  Because  no  such  prerogative  was  assumed  under  the  Old
Testament.  The  terms  of  membership  were  then  what  they  are
now.     The  same  inward   sincerity  was  required  then  as  now.


§11.]     BAPTISM.     WHOSE  CHILDREN   TO  BE   BAPTIZED?     577

This  Edwards  insists  upon,  yet  he  does  not  venture  to  assert  that
all  Jews  admitted  to  circumcision  and  the  passover,  were,  in  the
judgment  of  charity,  truly  regenerate  persons.

2.  The  New  Testament  contains  no  command  to  the  Church
to  assume  the  prerogative  in  question.  There  is  the  command
often  repeated  to  recognize  as  brethren  all  who  profess  their  faith
in  Christ.  There  are  explicit  directions  given  as  to  those  who,
although  calling  themselves  brethren,  are  to  be  rejected.  (1  Cor.
V.  9,  10  ;  llom.  xvi.  17  ;  2  Thess.  iii.  6  ;  Tit.  iii.  10  ;  Matt.  vii.
15-17.)  But  there  is  no  command  to  exclude  those  whom  the
Church  or  its  officers  do  not  in  their  hearts  believe  to  be  the  true
children  of  God.  The  gates  of  the  kingdom  of  God  are  not  to
be  opened  or  shut  at  the  discretion  of  weak,  fallible  men.  Every
man  has  a  right  and  is  bound  to  enter  those  gates,  except  those
whom  Christ  has  commanded  his  Church  to  reject.

3.  The  Apostles,  it  is  plain,  never  acted  on  the  principle  in
question.  This  is  clear,  as  remarked  above,  from  their  baptizing
converts  immediately  after  the  profession  of  their  faith.  It  is
obviously  impossible  that  there  should  have  been  any  protracted
examination  of  the  religious  experience  of  the  three  thousand
converted  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  or  of  the  five  thousand  brought
in  by  the  sermon  of  Peter,  recorded  in  the  third  chapter  of  Acts.
The  Acts  of  the  Apostles  and  the  Epistles  of  the  New  Testament
afford  abundant  evidence  that  the  early  churches  did  not  consist
exclusively  of  those  whom  the  Apostles  "  judged  "  to  be  regen-
erated persons.  The  Church  of  Jerusalem  was  filled  with  men
who  were  so  "  zealous  of  the  law,"  that  Paul  feared  that  they
would  not  receive  him  even  when  he  came  to  bring  alms  to  the
people.  Paul  charges  the  churches  of  Galatia  with  having  turned
aside  to  another  gospel.  He  reproves  the  Corinthians  with  the
grossest  irregularities  ;  and  the  Epistles  of  John  are  no  less  ob-
jurgatory.

4.  Experience  proves  that  all  attempts  to  preserve  the  purity
of  the  Church  by  being  more  strict  than  the  Bible,  are  utterly
futile.     The  tares  cannot  be  separated  from  the  wheat.

5.  Such  attempts  are  not  only  futile,  they  are  seriously  inju-
rious. They  conti-avene  the  plan  of  God.  They  exclude  from
the  watch  and  care  of  the  Church  multitudes  wliom  He  com-
mands his  people  to  look  after  and  cherish.  In  confining  the
visible  Church  to  communicants,  it  unchurches  the  great  majority
even  of  the  seed  of  the  faithful.

6.  There  is  an  obvious  inconsistency  in  having  one  rule  for
vol..  lu.  37


r)78    PART  HI.  Ch.  XX.  — the  MEANS  OF  GRACE.

admission  into  the  Church,  and  another  for  continued  member-
ship. If  Christ  requires  us  to  reject  all  whom  in  the  judgment
of  charity  we  are  not  constrained  to  believe  to  be  regenerate,
then  He  requires  us  to  excommunicate  all  those  of  whom  this
belief  is  not  entertained.  But  no  Church  acts,  or  can  act  on
that  principle.  No  man  once  admitted  to  Church  privileges  can
be  debarred  from  them,  except  after  a  trial  and  conviction  on  the
charge  of  some  "  scandal  "  or  "  offence."

The  sacraments  as  all  admit  are  to  be  confined  to  members  of
the  Church.  But  the  Church  does  not  consist  exclusively  of
communicants.  It  includes  also  all  who  having  been  baptized
have  not  forfeited  their  membership  by  scandalous  living,  or  by
any  act  of  Church  discipline.  All  members  of  the  Church  are
professors  of  religion.  They  profess  faitb  in  Christ  and  are
under  a  solemn  vow  to  obey  his  laws.  If  they  are  insincere  or
heartless  in  this  profession,  the  guilt  is  their  o-\vn.  The  Church
is,  and  can  be  responsible  only  for  their  external  conduct ;  so
long  as  that  is  not  incompatible  with  the  Christian  character,
and  so  long  as  the  faith  is  held  fast,  the  privileges  of  member-
ship continue.

This  seems  clearly  the  doctrine  of  the  standards  of  our  own
Church.  Those  standards  teach,  (1.)  That  the  sacraments  are
signs  and  seals  of  the  covenant  of  grace.  (2.)  That  consequently
all  who  partake  of  them  do  thereby  profess  to  accept  of  that
covenant  for  their  own  salvation  ;  they  profess  to  receive  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  He  is  offered  to  them  in  the  gospel.  (3.)
That  although  a  man  may  doubt  of  his  being  in  Christ  he  umy
be  a  worthy  partaker  of  the  sacraments,  if  he  "  unfeignedly
desires  to  be  found  in  Christ,  and  to  depart  from  iniquity."  ^
(4.)  That  the  Church  has  no  authority  to  exchide  from  the
sacraments  any  except  those  who,  although  they  may  profess
faith,  are  ignorant  or  scandalous.  In  answer  to  the  question,
"  May  any  who  profess  the  faith,  and  desire  to  come  to  the
Lord's  Supper,  be  kept  from  it  ?  "  it  is  answered,  "  Such  as  are
found  to  be  ignorant  or  scandalous,  notwithstanding  their  pro-
fession of  the  faith,  and  desire  to  come  to  the  Lord's  Supper,
may  and  ought  to  be  kept  from  that  sacrament  by  the  power
which  Christ  hath  left  in  his  Church,  until  they  receive  instruc-
tion, and  manifest  their  reformation."  This,  according  to  Pres-
byterians, is  the  extent  of  the  power  of  the  Church,  h\  ^no
matter  of  shutting  the  doors  of  the  kingdom  of  God.
I  Larger  Catechism,  answer  to  the  172(i  Question.


§12.]  BAPTISM.     ITS   EFFICACY.  579

Those,  therefore,  who,  havmg  been  themselves  baptized,  and
still  professing  their  faith  in  the  true  religion,  having  competent
knowledge,  and  being  fi'ee  from  scandal,  should  not  only  be  per-
mitted but  urged  and  enjoined  to  present  their  children  for  bap-
tism, that  they  may  belong  to  the  Church,  and  be  brought  up
under  its  watch  and  care.  To  be  unbaptized  is  a  grievous  injury
and  reproach  ;  one  which  no  parent  can  innocently  entail  upon
his  children.  The  neglect  of  baptism,  which  implies  a  want  of
appreciation  of  the  ordinance,  is  one  of  the  crying  sins  of  this
generation.

§  12.  Efficaey  of  Baptisrn.

Doctrine  of  the  Reformed   Churches.

In  the  section  which  treats  of  the  efficacy  of  the  sacraments  in
general,  it  was  shown  that  according  to  the  Reformed  Church
the  sacraments  (1.)  Are  ordinances  of  divine  appointment.  (2.)
That  they  are  means  of  grace,  and  therefore  are  not  to  be  under-
valued or  neglected.  (3.)  That  their  efficacy  does  not  depend
upon  any  virtae  in  them  or  in  him  by  wdiom  they  are  adminis-
tered, but  upon  the  attending  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  (4.)
That  their  efficacy  is  not  tied  to  the  time  of  their  administra-
tion ;  and  that  they  are  not  the  exclusive  channels  of  the  spir-
itual benefits  which  they  signify,  so  that  such  benefits  can  be
received  only  through  and  in  the  use  of  the  sacraments.  We
have  by  faith  alone,  and  by  the  free  gift  of  God,  all  that  the  sac-
raments are  made  the  means  of  communicating.  The  same  may
be  said  of  reading  and  hearing  the  Word  of  God :  neither  is  to
be  neglected,  because  either,  or  one  without  the  other,  may  be
made  effectual.  The  sacraments  are  not  to  be  neglected  or
undervalued,  because  men  can  be  saved  without  them.  (5.)
That,  so  far  as  adults  are  concerned,  true,  living  faith  in  those
who  receive  the  sacraments  is  the  indispensable  condition  of
their  saving  or  sanctifying  influence.

All  these  positions  are  affirmed  to  be  true  of  baptism  as  well
as  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  Of  the  former  the  principal  Reformed
symbols  use  such  language  as  the  following :  "  Obsignantur
haec  omnia  baptismo.  Nam  intus  regeneramur,  purificamur,  et
renovamur  a  Deo  per  Spiritum  Sanctum  :  foris  autem  accipimus
obsignationem  maximorum  donorum,  in  aqua,  qua  etiam  maxima
ilia  beneficia  representantur,  et  veluti  oculis  nostris  conspicienda
proponuntur."  ^

1  Confcssin  Ilehetica  posterior,  xx  ;  Niemeyer,  Cvllectio  Confessionum,  Leipzig,  1840,
p.  517.


580         TART   III.     Cii.   XX.  — THE   MEANS   OF    GRACE.

"  Baptismus  nobis  testificandffi  nostra  adoptioni  datus,  quoniam
in  eo  inserimur  Christi  corpori,  ut  ejus  sanguine  abluti  simul
etiam  ipsius  Spiritu  ad  vitae  sanctimoniam  renovemur."  ^

"  (Baptismi  sigiiificatio)  duas  partes  liabet.     Nam  ibi  remissio

peccatorum,  deinde  spiritualis  renovatio  figuratur Annon

aliud  aquo3  tribuis  nisi  ut  ablutionis  tantura  sit  figura  ?  Sic  fig-
uram  esse  sentio  ut  simul  annexa  sit  Veritas.  Neque  enim  sua
nobis  dona  pollicendo  nos,  Deus  frustratur.  Proinde  et  peccato-
rum veniam  et  vitte  novitatem  offeri  nobis  in  baptismo  et  recipi
a  nobis,  certum  est."  ^

"  Baptism  is  not  only  a  sign  of  profession,  and  mark  of  differ-
ence, whereby  Christian  men  are  discerned  from  others  that  be
not  christened ;  but  it  is  also  a  sign  of  regeneration  or  new  birth,
whereby  as  by  an  instrument  they  who  receive  baptism  rightly
are  grafted  into  the  Church.  The  promises  of  the  forgiveness  of
sins,  of  our  adoption  to  be  the  sons  of  God  by  the  Holy  Ghost,
are  visibly  signed  and  sealed ;  faith  is  confirmed  and  grace  in-
creased by  virtue  of  prayer  to  God."  ^

The  Heidelberg  Catechism  says  :  "  Is  then  the  external  baptism
of  water,  the  washing  away  of  sins  ?  It  is  not :  For  the  blood  of
Jesus  Christ  alone  cleanses  us  from  all  sin.  Why  then  does  the
Holy  Spirit  call  baptism  the  washing  of  regeneration,  and  the
washing  away  of  sins  ?  God  speaks  thus  not  without  sufficient
cause,  not  only  that  He  may  teach  us,  that  just  as  pollution  of
the  body  is  purged  by  water,  so  our  sins  are  expiated  by  the
blood  and  Spirit  of  Christ ;  but  much  more  that  He  may  assure
us  by  this  divine  symbol  and  pledge,  that  we  not  less  trul}'-  are
cleansed  from  our  sins  by  inward  washing,  than  that  we  are  puri-
fied b}^  external  and  visible  water."  "*

The  Consensus  Tigurinus  is  the  most  carefully  prepared  and
guarded  statement  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Reformed  Church  which
has  come  doAvn  from  the  age  of  the  Reformation.  It  was  drawn
up  to  adjust  the  difficulties  arising  from  the  diverging  views  on
this  subject  between  Calvin  and  the  clergy  of  Geneva  on  the  one
hand,  and  the  Zwinglian  clergy  of  Zvirich  on  the  other.  In  the
ninth  article  it  is  said,  "  that  although  we  distinguish,  as  is
proper,  between  the  sign  and  the  things  signified  ;  yet  we  do  not
disjoin  the  truth  from  the  signs  :  moreover  all  who  embrace  by
faith  the  promises  therein  offered,  spiritually  receive  Clnist  to-

''■  C'onf(.<sio  GnUicnna,  Art.  xxxv. ;  /bid.  p.  338.

2  CaU-rhitiimis  Genevensis  [v.],  Niemeyer,  pp.  1G2,  103.

3  Thirty-nine  Articles,  xxvii.  ■*  Ques.  72  and  73,  Niemeyer,  pp.  445,  446.


§  12.]  BAPTISM.     ITS   EFFICACY.  581

getlier  Avitli  his  spiritual  gifts  ;  and  so  those  who  before  had  been
made  partakers  of  Christ,  continue  and  renew  tliat  participation."
In  articles  immediately  following-  it  is  taught  that  regard  is  to  be
had,  not  to  the  naked  signs,  but  to  the  promises  annexed  to  them  ;
that  the  signs  without  Christ  are  "  inanes  larvcC  ; "  that  if  any
good  be  conferred  by  the  sacraments,  it  is  not  from  their  proper
inherent  virtue  ;  for  it  is  God  alone  who  acts  through  liis  Spuit.
Article  sixteenth  is  in  these  words,  "  Praeterea  sedulo  docemus,
Deuni  non  promiscue  vim  suam  exerere  in  omnibus  qui  sacra-
menta  recipiunt,  sed  tantum  in  electis.  Nam  quemadmodum  non
ahos  in  fidem  illummat,  quam  quos  preordinavit  ad  vitam :  ita
arcana  Spiritus  sui  virtute  efficit,  ut  percipiant  electi  qua3  offerunt
sacramenta."  Article  nineteenth  teaches  that  the  benefits  signi-
fied by  the  sacraments  may  be  obtained  mthout  their  use.  Paul's
sins  were  remitted  before  he  was  baptized.  Cornelius  received
the  Spirit  before  he  received  the  external  sign  of  regeneration.
In  the  twentieth  article  it  is  taught  that  the  benefit  of  the  sacra-
ments is  not  confined  to  the  time  of  their  administration.  God
sometimes  regenerates  in  their  old  age  those  who  were  baptized
in  infancy  or  youth.  ^

Li  the  Westminster  Confession  it  is  said  :  "  Although  it  be  a
great  sin  to  contemn  or  neglect  this  ordinance  [baptism],  yet
grace  and  salvation  are  not  so  inseparably  annexed  unto  it,  as
that  no  person  can  be  regenerated  or  saved  without  it,  or  that
all  that  are  baptized,  are  undoubtedly  regenerated.  The  efiicacy
of  baptism  is  not  tied  to  that  moment  of  time  wherein  it  is  ad-
ministered ;  yet,  notwithstanding,  by  the  right  use  of  this  ordi-
nance the  grace  promised  is  not  only  offered,  but  really  exhibited
and  conferred  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  such  (whether  of  age  or
infants)  as  that  grace  belongeth  unto,  according  to  the  counsel
of  God's  own  will,  in  his  appointed  time."  '^

Calvin  controverts  the  Romish  doctrme  that  the  Sacraments  of
the  New  Testament  have  greater  efficacy  than  tliose  of  the  Old.
"  Nihilo  splendidius  de  illis  Apostolus  quam  de  his  loquitur,  quum
docet  patres  eandem  nobis.cum  spiritualem  escam  manducasse  ;  et
escam  illam  Christum  interpretatur."  (1  Cor.  x.  3.)  And  again,
in  the  same  paragraph,  "  Nee  vero  baptismo  nostro  plus  tribuere
fas  est,  quam  ipse  ahbi  circumcisioni  tribuit,  quum  vocat  '  sigillum
justitia3  fidei.'  (Rom.  iv.  11.)  Quicquid  ergo  nobis  hodie  in
sacramentis  exhibetur,  id  in  suis  ohm  recipiebant  Judsei,  Christum
scilicet  cum  spiritualibus  suis  divitiis.     Quam  habent  nostra  vir-

1  Niemeyer,  pp.  194,  195.  ^  Chap,  xxviii.  §§  5,  6.


582    PART  III.  Ch.  XX.  — the  means  OF  GRACE.

tutem,  earn  quoque  iii  suis  sentiebant:  ut  scilicet  essent  illis  divinas
erga  se  benevolentia3  sigilla  in  spem  salutis  geterna?."  ^

Tlie  doctrine  of  the  Reformed  Church,  therefore,  on  the  efficacy
of  baptism  inchides  in  the  first  place  the  rejection  or  denial  of
certain  false  doctrines  on  the  subject.  (1.)  That  baptism  conveys
grace  "  ex  opere  opei-ato  "  in  the  sense  which  Romanists  attach  to
those  words,  by  any  objective  supernatural  power  belonging  to
the  ordinance  itself ;  or  in  virtue  of  the  divine  efficiency  inherent
in  the  word  or  promise  of  God  connected  With  the  sacrament.
(2.)  That  the  cooperation  of  the  Spirit,  to  which  the  efficacy  of
the  ordinance  is  due,  always  attends  its  administration,  so  that
those  who  are  baptized,  in  all  cases,  if  unresisting,  experience  the
remission  of  sins  and  the  rene^ving  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  (3.)  That
baptism  was  appointed  to  be  the  ordinary  means  or  channel  of
conveying,  in  the  first  instance,  the  merits  of  Christ's  death  and
the  saving  influences  of  the  Spirit,  so  that  those  benefits  may  not,
except  in  extraordinary  cases,  be  obtained  before  or  without  bap-
tism.

In  the  second  place  the  Reformed  doctrme  on  this  subject  af-
firms, (1.)  That  baptism  is  a  divine  ordinance.  (2.)  That  it  is
a  means  of  grace  to  believers.  (3.)  That  it  is  a  sign  and  seal  of
the  covenant  of  grace.  (4.)  That  the  ordinance  was  intended  to
be  of  perpetual  obligation,  in  the  sense  that  all,  not  baptized  in
infancy,  are  required  to  submit  to  baptism  as  the  divinely  ap-
pointed way  of  publicly  professing  their  faith  in  Christ  and  their
allegiance  to  Him  as  their  God  and  Saviour ;  and  that  all  such
professors  of  the  true  religion  are  bound  to  present  their  childi'en
for  baptism  as  the  divinely  appointed  way  of  consecrating  them  to
God.  (5.)  That  God,  on  his  part,  promises  to  grant  the  benefits
signified  in  baptism  to  all  adults  who  receive  that  sacrament  in
the  exercise  of  faith,  and  to  all  infants  who,  when  they  arrive  at
maturity,  remain  faithful  to  the  vows  made  in  their  name  when
they  were  baptized.

Proof  of  the  JRef armed  Doctrine.

As  to  the  affirmations  included  in  the  doctrine  of  the  Reformed
churches  concerning  baptism,  little  need  be  said,  ns  they  are  gen-
erall}'  conceded.  In  all  ages,  since  the  apostolic,  the  tendency  in
the  Church  has  been  not  to  detract  fi^om  the  importance  of  the
Christian  sacraments,  but  unduly  to  exalt  them.  Nothing  is
plainer  from  the  whole  tenor  of  the  New  Testament  than  tha.t  the

1  Institutio,  IV.  xiv.  23,  edit.  Berlin,  1334,  part  ii.  p.  364.


§  12]  BAPTISM.     ITS   EFFICACY.  583

sacraments  hold  a  place  much  below  that  of  the  truth.  Whereas
in  all  churches  in  a  state  of  decay  the  reverse  is  the  fact.  Tlie
Jewish  Church  in  the  time  of  Clirist,  had  become  completely  rit-
ualistic. Rites  and  ceremonies  had  usurped  the  place  of  truth
and  holy  living.  A  man  might  be  proud,  avaricious,  unjust,  and
as  our  Lord  expresses  it,  in  every  way  a  "  child  of  the  devil,"  yet
if  punctilious  in  the  observance  of  church  rites  and  church  festi-
vals, he  esteemed  himself  and  was  esteemed  by  others,  a  saint  so
holy  as  to  be  contaminated  by  fellowship  or  contact  with  those
who  were  the  true  children  of  God.  This  was  the  form  in  which
corruption  entered  the  Christian  Chui'ch  soon  after  the ,  age  of
the  Apostles.  This  "  myster}^  of  iniquity  "  even  in  that  age  had
begun  to  work,  and  when  he  that  "  did  let  "  was  taken  out  of
the  way,  the  evil  was  fully  revealed,  and  the  Christian  Church
became  as  thoroughly  rituaUstic  as  the  Jewish  Church  had  been
when  Christ  came.  The  Reformation  was  in  its  essential  charac-
ter a  protest  against  ritualism.  It  proclaimed  salvation  by  a  liv-
ing faith  which  purified  the  heart,  in  opposition  to  the  doctrine  of
salvation  by  rites  and  ceremonies.  It  insisted  that  religion  was
a  matter  of  the  heart,  and  therefore  denounced  as  apostasy  the
Church  returning  to  "  weak  and  beggarly  elements,"  to  observ-
ing "days,  and  months,  and  times,  and  years,"  subjecting  the
people  to  "  ordinances,  touch  not  ;  taste  not ;  handle  not ;  which
are  all  to  perish  with  the  using ;  after  the  commandments  and  doc-
trines of  men."  Ritualism  is  a  broad,  smooth,  and  easy  road  to
heaven,  and  is  always  crowded.  It  was  much  easier  in  Paul's
time  to  be  a  Jew  outwardly  than  to  be  one  inwardly  ;  and  circum-
cision of  the  flesh  was  a  slight  matter  when  compared  to  the  cir-
cumcision of  the  heart.  A  theory  which  allows  a  man  to  be  re-
ligious, without  being  holy  ;  to  serve  both  God  and  mammon  ;  to
gain  heaven  without  renouncing  the  world,  will  never  fail  to  find
numerous  supporters.  That  there  is  such  a  theory  ;  that  it  has
prevailed  extensively  and  influentially  in  the  Church  ;  and  that
it  is  prevalent  over  a  large  part  of  Christendom,  cannot  be  dis-
puted. It  does  not  follow,  however,  that  all  who  are  called  ritual-
ists, or  who  in  fact  attribute  undue  importance  to  external  rites,
are  mere  formalists.  Many  of  them  are,  no  doubt,  not  only  sin-
cere, but  spiritual  Christian  men.  This  is  no  proof  that  the
system  is  not  false  and  evil.  All  Protestants  cheerfully  admit
that  many  Romanists  are  holy  men  ;  but  they  no  less  strenuously
denounce  Romanism  as  an  apostasy  from  the  pure  Gospel.
■     As  the  corruption  of  the  Church  of  Rome  consisted  largely  in


5rf4  I'Alir  III.     Cii.   XX.  — THE   MEANS   OF   GRACE.

p.iakiug  Cliri.stianity  to  consist  in  the  punctual  attendance  on
cliiu'cli  rites  ;  in  teaching  that  the  merits  of  Christ  and  the  renew-
ing of  the  Holy  Ghost  were  conveyed  in  baptism  even  to  unbe-
lievers («'.  e.,  to  those  destitute  of  saving  faith)  ;  that  when  those
blessings  had  been  forfeited  by  sin,  they  could  be  restored  by
confession  and  absolution ;  that  the  eucharist  is  a  true  propitiatory
sacrifice  for  the  living  and  the  dead  ;  and  that,  in  short,  the  rehg-
ion  of  Christ  is  purely  rituahstic,  its  benefits  being  conferred
through  external  rites,  and  in  no  other  way,  so  that  those  rites
were  mdispensably  necessary  to  salvation ;  it  would  have  been
natural  had  the  Reformers  gone  to  the  opposite  extreme,  and  un-
duly depreciated  the  importance  of  the  sacraments  which  Christ
himself  had  appointed.  From  this  extreme,  however,  they  were
mercifully  preserved.     They  taught,  first,  that  in  one  sense,  —

Baptism  is  a  Condition  of  Salvation.

This  is  included  in  the  commission  which  Christ  gave  to  the
Apostles,  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the  gospel  to
every  creature.  He  that  belie veth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved."
(^Matt.  xvi.  15,  16.)  Baptism,  therefore,  has  the  necessity  of
precept,  not  that  of  a  means.  Our  Lord  does  not  say  that  he
that  is  unbaptized  shall  be  damned.  That  denunciation  falls  only
on  those  who  believe  not.  In  this  respect  baptism  is  analogous
to  confession.  Christ  attributes  the  same  necessity  to  the  latter
as  to  the  former.  In  Matthew  x.  32,  it  is  written,  "  Whosoever
shall  confess  me  before  men,  him  will  I  confess  also  before  my
Father  which  is  in  heaven.  But  whosoever  shall  deny  me  before
men,  him  will  I  also  deny  before  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven."'
And  St.  Paul  says  (Rom.  x.  9,  10),  "  If  thou  shalt  confess  with
tliy  mouth  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  shalt  believe  in  thy  heart  that
God  hath  raised  Him  from  tlie  dead,  thou  shalt  be  saved.  For
with  the  heart  man  believeth  unto  righteousness  ;  and  with  the
mouth  confession  is  made  unto  salvation."  Confession  does  not
make  a  man  a  Christian.  It  is  the  public  avowal  that  he  is  a
Christian  ;  that  he  is  a  believer  in  Christ,  in  his  divinity,  in  his
incarnation,  and  in  his  being  and  doing  all  that  He  claimed  to  be,
and  that  the  Scriptures  declare  He  did  for  us  and  our  salvation.
Such  confession  is  a  duty,  a  privilege,  and  a  dictate  of  gratitude
and  loyalty,  which  cannot  be  repressed.  His  people  will  glory  in
confessing  Him.  While  there  is  this  desire  and  purpose  to  acknowl-
edge Christ  before  men,  due  occasion  for  tliis  confession  may  not
be  atforded,  or  ii;  mav  be  hindered  bv  self-dithdence  or  ionoranoe.  •


§  12.j  BAPTISM.     ITS  EFFICACr.  585

As  our  Lord  intended  not  only  to  save  men  by  the  renewing  of
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  thus  to  bring  them  into  membership  in  his
mystical  body,  but  also  to  constitute  a  visible  church  to  consist  of
all  those  who  confessed  Him  to  be  their  God  and  Saviour,  He  ap-
pointed an  outward  visible  sign  by  which  they  should  be  known
and  enrolled  among  his  people.  This  was  in  accordance  with  the
example  set  in  the  Old  Testament.  When  God  determined  to
organize  Abraham  and  his  descendants  into  a  visible  church,  to
be  the  depository  of  the  truth  and  the  treasure-house  of  his  gifts,
he  appointed  circumcision  to  be  the  sign  of  the  covenant  and
the  badge  of  membership  in  the  commonwealth  of  Israel.  This
also  is  according  to  the  common  usage  in  human  society.  When  a
foreigner  wishes  to  become  a  citizen  of  another  state,  he  is  called
upon  to  take  an  oath  of  allegiance  to  his  adopted  country.  When
a  man  is  elected  or  appointed  to  an  important  office,  he  must  be
duly  inaugurated,  and  take  the  oath  of  fidelity.  The  oath  taken
by  the  President  of  the  United  States  does  not  make  him  Presi-
dent ;  it  neither  confers  the  right  to  the  office,  nor  does  it  confer
the  qualifications  for  the  proper  discharge  of  its  duties.  Circum-
cision did  not  make  a  man  a  Jew.  It  gave  him  neither  the  knowl-
edge nor  the  grace  necessary  to  his  being  one  of  the  true  children
of  Israel.  It  was  the  appointed  means  of  avowing  that  he  was  a
Jew  ;  it  was  the  sign  of  his  being  included  among  the  worship-
pers of  the  true  God  ;  and  it  secured  for  him  the  privileges  of  the
theocracy.  In  like  manner,  baptism  does  not  make  a  man  a
Christian.  It  is  the  appointed  means  of  avowing  that  he  is  a
Christian  ;  it  is  the  badge  of  his  Christian  profession  before  men,
it  secures  for  him  the  privileges  of  membership  in  the  visible
Church,  and  it  is  a  pledge  on  the  part  of  God  that,  if  sincere  and
faithful,  he  shall  partake  of  all  the  benefits  of  the  redemption
of  Christ.  It  is  only  in  this  sense  that  the  Reformed  Church
teaches  the  necessity  of  baptism.  It  has  the  necessity  of  a
divine  precept.  It  is  the  condition  of  salvation,  in  the  same
sense  in  Avhich  confession  is,  and  in  which  circumcision  was.  The
uncircumcised  child  was  cut  off  from  among  the  people.  He
forfeited  his  birthright.  But  he  did  not  forfeit  his  salvation.
The  Apostle  teaches  us  that  if  an  uncircumcised  man  kept  the
law,  his  uncircumcision  was  counted  for  circumcision.  To  this
the  Jews  objected  by  asking,  What  profit  then  is  there  in  circum-
cision ?  Paul  answered.  Much  every  way.  It  is  not  useless,  be-
cause not  essential.  The  same  is  true  of  baptism.  Although  not
the  means  of  salvation  or  necessary  to  its  attainment,  its  benefits
are  great  and  manifold.


586       PART  m.   ch.  XX.  — the  means  of  grace.

Baptism  as  a  Duty,

The  Reformed  Church  teaches  that  baptism  is  a  duty.    If  a  man

wishes  to  be  and  to  be  regarded  as  a  disciple  of  Christ,  he  is  bound

to  be  baptized.    If  he  wishes  to  consecrate  his  children  to  God,  he

is  bound  to  do  it  in  the  w^ay  of  his  appointment.    This  is  plain,  —

1.  From  the  command  of  Christ.  If  He  directed  the  Apostles
to  make  disciples  by  baptizing  them,  He  thereby  commanded
those  who  claimed  to  be  disciples  to  submit  to  baptism.  After
such  a  command,  the  refusal  to  be  baptized,  unless  that  refusal
arises  from  mistake  of  the  nature  of  the  command  or  through
ignorance,  is  tantamount  to  refusing  to  be  a  disciple  at  all.

2.  This  is  further  plain  from  the  conduct  of  the  Apostles.
Under  the  first  sermon  preached  by  the  Apostle  Peter  after  the
effusion  of  the  Spirit,  multitudes  were  "  pricked  in  their  heart,"
and  Peter  "  said  unto  them.  Repent  and  be  baptized."  "  Then
they  that  gladly  received  the  Word  were  baptized."  When  Philip
preached  the  Word  in  Samaria,  those  who  believed  were  bap-
tized, both  men  and  women  ;  and  when  he  was  sent  to  join  the
"  man  of  Ethiopia,"  and  "  preached  unto  him,"  in  that  short  dis-
course, probably  less  than  an  hour  long,  he  must  have  insisted  on
the  duty  of  baptism,  for  the  man  said,  "  Here  is  water ;  what
doth  hinder  me  to  be  baptized."  It  is  not  probable  that  a  minis-
ter of  our  day  in  his  first  brief  discourse  with  an  inquirer  would
urge  upon  him  the  duty  of  being  baptized.  As  soon  as  Cornelius
received  the  Spirit,  Peter  ordered  water  to  be  brought  that  he
might  be  baptized.  When  Ananias  came  to  Paul  who  was  blind
from  his  vision  of  the  glory  of  Christ,  he  at  once  baptized  him.
And  Paul  himself,  as  soon  as  the  jailer  in  Philippi  professed  his
faith,  baptized  him  and  his  straightway.  It  is  obvious,  therefore,
that  the  Apostles  regarded  baptism  as  an  imperative  duty  bind-
ing on  all  those  who  professed  to  be  the  disciples  of  Christ.

3.  This  is  still  further  plain  from  the  uniform  practice  of  the
Christian  Chm-ch  in  all  ages  and  in  all  parts  of  the  world.  All
Christians  have  felt  themselves  bound  by  the  authority  of  Christ
to  confess  Him  before  men  in  the  ordinance  of  baptism.  It  is  in-
credible that  they  should  be  mistaken  in  such  a  matter  as  this ;
that  they  should  regard  an  external  rite  as  universally  obliga-
tory, if  it  had  not  in  fact  been  enjoined  by  their  divine  Master.
Those,  therefore,  who  look  upon  baptism  as  an  unimportant  cere-
mony which  may  be  neglected  with  impunity,  are  acting  in  oppo-
sition to  the  convictions  of  the  Apostles  as  manifested  by  their


§  12]  BAPTISM.    ITS  EFFICACY.  587

conduct,  and  to  the  faith  of  the  Church  universal.  It  is  not  good
for  a  man  to  have  the  people  of  God  of  all  ages  against  him.

4.  The  duty  of  baptism  may  be  argued  from  its  manifold  ad-
vantages. In  the  first  place,  it  is  a  great  honour  and  distinction.
If  among  men  it  is  a  coveted  distinction  to  wear  the  badge  of  the
Legion  of  Honour,  it  is  a  far  more  desirable  distinction  to  wear
the  badge  of  disciples  of  Christ,  to  be  enrolled  among  his  pro-
fessed followers,  and  to  be  marked  as  belonging  to  Him  and  not
to  the  world.  In  the  second  place,  those  who  are  baptized,  un-
less they  renounce  their  privilege,  are  members  of  the  visible
Church.  The  visible  Church  is  an  institution  of  God  ;  it  is  his
treasure-house.  The  Church  under  the  new  dispensation  has
great  advantage  over  the  ancient  theocracy,  and  yet  the  Apostle
speaks  in  glowing  terms  of  the  privileges  of  the  Jews.  "  Who
are  Israelites ;  to  whom  pertaineth  the  adoption,  and  the  glory,
and  the  covenants,  and  the  giving  of  the  law,  and  the  service  of
God,  and  the  promises."  (Rom.  ix.  4.)  Notwithstanding,  when
in  2  Corinthians  iii.  6-11,  he  compares  the  two  dispensations,  he
says,  "  If  the  ministration  of  death,  written  and  engraven  in
stones,  was  glorious,  ....  how  shall  not  the  ministration  of  the
Spirit  be  rather  glorious  ?  .  .  .  .  For  even  that  which  was  made
glorious  had  no  glory  in  this  respect,  by  reason  of  the  glory  that
excelleth."  This  contrast  between  the  Old  and  New  Economies
is  presented  in  still  stronger  terms  throughout  the  Epistle  to  the
Galatians,  and  in  that  to  the  Hebrews.  In  Galatians  he  makes
Hagar  the  slave  the  symbol  of  the  one,  and  Sarah  the  free  woman
the  symbol  of  the  other.  And  in  Hebrews  the  Mosaic  economy,
with  its  temples,  sacrifices,  priesthood,  and  ritual,  is  declared  to
be  the  unsubstantial  shadow,  of  which  the  gospel  dispensation  is
the  substance.  If,  then,  it  was  such  a  distinction  to  belong  to  the
old  theocracy,  what,  in  the  view  of  Paul,  must  be  the  honour  and
blessedness  of  membership  in  the  Christian  Church.

Membership  in  the  visible  Church  is  not  only  a  great  honour,
it  is  a  great  advantage.  To  the  Church  are  committed  the  ora-
cles of  God.  It  is  the  depository  of  that  truth  which  is  able  to
.  make  men  \^ise  unto  salvation.  It  is  the  divinely  appointed  in-
strumentality for  preserving  and  communicating  that  truth.  Every
one  admits  that  it  is  a  blessing  to  be  born  in  a  Christian,  instead
of  in  a  heathen  land.  It  is  no  less  obviously  true  that  it  is  a  bless-
ing to  be  within  the  pale  of  the  Church  and  not  cast  out  into  the
world.  It  is  good  to  have  the  vows  of  God  vipon  us.  It  is  good
to  be  under  the  watch  and  care  of  the  people  of  God.     It  is  good


588         PART  III.     Ch.   XX. —  the  means   OF   GRACE.

to  have  a  special  claim  upon  their  prayers  and  upon  their  efforts
to  bring  us  into,  or  keep  us  in  the  paths  of  salvation.  And  above
all,  it  is  good  to  be  of  the  number  of  those  to  whom  God  has  made
a  special  promise  of  grace  and  salvation.  For  the  promise  is  unto
us  and  to  our  children.  It  is  a  great  evil  to  be  "  ahens  from  the
commonwealth  of  Israel,  and  strangers  from  the  covenants  of
promise."  They,  therefore,  sin  against  God  and  their  own  souls
who  neglect  the  command  to  be  baptized  in  the  name  of  the  Lord ;
and  those  parents  sin  grievously  against  the  souls  of  their  chil-
dren who  neglect  to  consecrate  them  to  God  in  the  ordinance  of
baptism.  Do  let  the  httle  ones  have  their  names  written  in  the
Lamb's  book  of  life,  even  if  they  afterwards  choose  to  erase  them.
Being  thus  enrolled  may  be  the  means  of  their  salvation.

Baptism  as  a  Means  of  Grace.

The  Reformed  Church  teaches  that  baptism  is  a  means  of  grace.
1.  It  is  a  sign.  It  signifies  the  great  truths  that  the  soul  is
cleansed  from  the  guilt  of  sin  by  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of
Christ,  and  purified  from  its  pollution  by  the  renewing  of  the
Holy  Ghost.  The  Bible  teaches  that  God  sanctifies  and  saves
men  through  the  truth ;  that  the  Spirit  works  with  and  by  the
truth  in  conveying  to  men  the  benefits  of  redemption.  It  matters
not  whether  that  truth  be  brought  before  the  mind  by  hearing  or
readmg  it,  or  in  the  use  of  significant  divinely  appointed  emblems.
The  fact  and  the  method  of  the  deliverance  of  the  children  of  Is-
rael from  their  bondage  in  Egypt,  were  as  clearly  taught  in  the
sacrament  of  the  Passover,  as  in  the  written  words  of  Moses.  So
the  fundamental  truths  just  mentioned  are  as  clearly  and  impres-
sively taught  in  the  sacrament  of  baptism,  as  in  the  discourses  of
our  blessed  Lord  himseK.  It  is,  therefore,  just  as  intelligible  how
the  Spirit  makes  the  truth  signified  in  baptism  the  means  of  sanc-
tification,  as  how  he  makes  that  same  truth,  as  read  or  heard,  an
effectual  means  of  salvation.  The  Spirit  does  not  always  cooper-
ate with  the  truth  as  heard,  to  make  it  a  means  of  grace  ;  neither
does  He  always  attend  the  administration  of  baptism,  with  his
sanctifying  and  saving  power.

2.  Baptism  is  a  seal  or  pledge.  When  God  promised  to  Noah
that  He  would  never  again  dro^vvn  the  world  in  a  deluge.  He  set
the  rainbow  in  the  heavens  as  a  pledge  of  the  promise  which  He
had  made.  When  he  promised  to  Abraham  to  be  a  God  to  him
and  to  his  seed  after  him.  He  appointed  circumcision  as  the  seal
and  pledge  of  that  promise.     So  when  He  promised  to  save  men


§  12.]  BAPTISM.    ITS   EFFICACY.  589

by  the  blood  of  Christ  and  by  the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
he  appointed  baptism  to  be,  not  only  the  sign,  but  also  the  seal
and  pledge  of  those  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises.  No
believer  in  the  Bible  can  look  on  the  rainbow  without  having  his
faith  strengthened  in  the  promise  that  a  deluge  shall  never  again
destroy  the  earth.  No  pious  Jew  could  -witness  the  rite  of  cir-
cumcision administered,  or  advert  to  that  sign  in  his  own  person,
without  an  increased  confidence  that  Jehovah  was  his  God.  And
no  Christian  can  recall  his  own  baptism,  or  witness  the  baptism
of  others,  without  having  his  faith  strengthened  in  the  great
promises  of  redemption.  Every  time  the  ordinance  of  baptism  is
administered  in  our  presence,  we  hear  anew  the  voice  from  heaven
proclaiming,  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his  Son  cleanseth  us
from  all  sin ; "  "  He  saved  us,  by  the  washing  of  regeneration
and  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost."

3.  Baptism,  however,  is  not  only  a  sign  and  seal ;  it  is  also  a
means  of  grace,  becaiise  in  it  the  blessings  which  it  signifies  are
conveyed,  and  the  promises  of  which  it  is  the  seal,  are  assured  or
fulfilled  to  those  who  are  baptized,  provided  they  beheve.  The
Word  of  God  is  declared  to  be  the  wisdom  and  power  of  God  to
salvation  ;  it  is  the  means  used  by  the  Holy  Spirit  in  conferring
on  men  the  benefits  of  redemption.  Of  course  all  who  merely
hear  or  read  the  Word  of  God  are  not  saved  ;  neither  do  all  who
receive  the  baptism  of  water  experience  the  baptism  of  the  Holy
Ghost ;  but  this  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  Word's  being  the
means  of  salvation,  or  with  baptism's  being  the  washing  of  regen-
eration. Our  Lord  says  we  are  sanctified  by  the  truth.  Paul
says  we  put  on  Christ  in  baptism  (Gal.  iii.  27).  When  a  man
receives  the  Gospel  with  a  true  faith,  he  receives  the  blessings
which  the  Gospel  promises  ;  when  he  receives  baptism  in  the  ex-
ercise of  faith,  he  receives  the  benefits  of  which  baptism  is  the
sign  and  seal.  Unless  the  recipient  of  this  sacrament  be  insin-
cere, baptism  is  an  act  of  faith,  it  is  an  act  in  which  and  by
which  he  receives  and  appropriates  the  offered  benefits  of  the
redemption  of  Christ.  And,  therefore,  to  baptism  may  be  prop-
erly attributed  all  that  in  the  Scriptures  is  attributed  to  faith.
Baptism  washes  away  sin  (Acts  xxii.  16)  ;  it  unites  to  Christ
and  makes  us  the  sons  of  God  (Gal.  iii.  26,  27)  ;  we  are  therein
buried  with  Christ  (Rom.  vi.  3)  ;  it  is  (according  to  one  inter-
pretation of  Titus  iii.  5)  the  washing  of  regeneration.  But  all  this
is  said  on  the  assumption  that  it  is  what  it  purports  to  be,  an  act
of  faith.    The  gospel  of  our  salvation  is,  to  those  who  believe  not,  a


690  PxVRT  III.     Ch.  XX.  — the   means   of   grace.

savour  of  death  unto  death.  Circumcision  to  the  unbehevinsf  Jew,
was  uncircumeision.  Baptism,  without  faith,  is  without  effect.
Such  being  the  case,  it  is  plain  that  baptism  is  as  truly  a  means  of
grace  as  the  Word.  It  conveys  truth  to  the  mind ;  it  confii'ms  the
promise  of  God ;  and  it  is  the  means  in  the  hands  of  the  Spirit  of
conveying  to  believers  the  benefits  of  redemption.  Hence  it  is  a
grievous  mistake  and  a  great  sin  to  neglect  or  undervalue  it.

All  this  is  plam  so  far  as  adults  are  concerned.  But  if  the  sav-
ing benefits  of  baptism  are  suspended  on  the  condition  of  faith  in
the  recipient,  what  benefit  can  there  be  in  the  baptism  of  infants  ?
To  this  it  may  be  answered,  —

1.  That  it  is  the  commandment  of  God.  This  should  be  enough.
It  might  as  well  be  asked  what  benefit  could  there  be  in  the  cir-
cumcision of  infants  under  the  law.  Paul  teUs  us  that  the  benefit
to  them  as  well  as  to  others  was  much  every  way.  It  secured
their  membership  in  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  which  was  a
greater  honour  and  privilege  than  the  highest  peerage  on  earth.
So  baptism  secures  the  membership  of  infants  in  the  visible
Church  of  God,  which  is  a  still  greater  distinction  and  blessing.

2.  Infants  are  the  objects  of  Christ's  redemption.  They  are
capable  of  receiving  all  its  benefits.  Those  benefits  are  promised
to  them  on  the  same  conditions  on  which  they  are  promised  to
their  parents.  It  is  not  every  one  who  says  Lord,  Lord,  who
shall  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God.  It  is  not  every  baptized
adult  who  is  saved ;  nor  are  all  those  who  are  baptized  in  infancy
made  partakers  of  salvation.  But  baptism  signs,  seals,  and  actu-
ally conveys  its  benefits  to  all  its  subjects,  whether  mfants  or
adults,  who  keep  the  covenant  of  which  it  is  the  sign.  As  a  be-
Hever  who  recalls  some  promise  of  the  Scriptures  which  he  has
read  or  heard,  receives  the  full  benefit  of  that  promise  ;  so  the  in-
fant when  arrived  at  maturity  receives  the  full  benefit  of  baptism,
if  he  believes  in  the  promises  signified  and  sealed  to  him  m  that
ordinance.  Baptism,  therefore,  benefits  infants  just  as  it  does
adults,  and  on  the  same  condition.

It  does  not  follow  from  this  that  the  benefits  of  redemption  may
not  be  conferred  on  infants  at  the  time  of  their  baptism.  That  is
in  the  hands  of  God.  What  is  to  hinder  the  imputation  to  them
of  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  or  their  receiving  the  renewing  of
the  Holy  Ghost,  so  that  their  whole  nature  may  be  developed  in
a  state  of  reconcihation  with  God  ?  Doubtless  this  often  occurs  ;
but  whether  it  does  or  not,  their  baptism  stands  good ;  it  assures
them  of  salvation  if  they  do  not  renounce  their  baptismal  cove-
nant.


§  12.1  BAPTISM.    ITS  EFFICACY.  591

Baptismal  Regeneration.

Different  meanings  are  attached  to  the  words  baptismal  regen-
eration. It  has  been  ah-eady  stated,  in  a  preceding  chapter,  that
by  regeneration  is  sometimes  meant  an  external  change, — transla-
tion from  the  world,  as  the  kingdom  of  darkness,  into  the  Church,
as  the  kingdom  of  Hght.  In  this  sense  it  implies  no  subjective
change.  Sometimes  it  means  the  life-long  process  by  which  a  soul
is  more  and  more  transformed  into  the  image  of  God.  Sometimes
it  means  the  whole  process  which  takes  place  in  the  consciousness
when  a  sinner  turns  from  sin  through  Christ  unto  God.  It  is
then  synonymous  with  conversion.  In  our  day,  in  ordinary  the-
ological language,  it  means  that  supernatural  change  effected  by
the  Spirit  of  God  by  which  a  soul  is  made  spiritually  alive.  "  You
hath  He  quickened  (eCwoTroty/tre),"  (see  Eph.  ii.  1,  5),  says  the
Apostle  to  the  Ephesians.  In  their  former  state  they  were  dead
in  trespasses  and  sins.  Their  regeneration  consisted  in  their  be-
ing made  spiritually  alive  ;  or,  in  their  having  the  principle  of  a
new  spiritual  life  imparted  to  them.  Such  being  the  diversity  of
meaning  attached  to  the  word  in  question,  the  phrase  baptismal
regeneration  may  be  understood  in  very  different  senses.  The
sense  in  which  it  is  to  be  here  taken  is  that  in  which,  as  is  be-
lieved, it  is  generally  understood.  According  to  the  faith  of  the
Church  universal,  Greek,  Latin,  and  Protestant,  all  men  since  the
fall  are  born  in  a  state  of  sin  and  condemnation  —  spiritually  dead.
It  is  a  wide-spread  belief  that  when  baptism  is  administered  to
new-born  infants,  they  are  regenerated  inwardly  by  the  Holy
Spirit ;  they  are  so  born  again  as  to  become  the  children  of  God
and  heirs  of  his  kingdom.  The  word,  however,  includes  more
than  simply  the  renewing  of  the  soul.  Prior  to  baptism,  accord-
ing to  the  Catechism  of  the  Church  of  England,  infants  are  in  a
state  of  sin  and  the  children  of  wrath ;  by  baptism  they  are  said
to  be  made  members  of  Christ,  children  of  God,  and  inheritors  of
the  kingdom  of  heaven.  In  other  words,  in  baptism  the  blessings
signified  in  that  ordinance  are  conveyed  to  the  soul  of  the  infant.
Those  blessings  are  the  cleansing  from  guilt  by  the  blood  of
Christ,  and  purification  from  pollution  by  the  renewing  of  the
Holy  Ghost.

The  doctrine  of  baptismal  regeneration,  in  this  sense  of  the
term,  has  been  very  extensively  held  in  the  Church.  The  pas-
sages of  Scripture  relied  upon  for  its  support,  are  principally  the
following  :  John  iii.  5,  "•  Except  a  man  be  born  of  water  and  of


Ch.  XX.  — the  means  of  grace.

tlie  Spirit,  he  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God."  Our  Lord
is  understood  in  these  words  to  teach  the  necessity  of  baptism  to
salvation.  But  none  of  the  fallen  family  of  man  can  be  saveti
without  "  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,"  and  "  sanc-
tification  of  the  Spirit ;  "  if  baptism  saves  the  soul,  it  must  be  by
communicating  to  it  those  blessings ;  or,  in  other  words,  those
blessings  must  attend  its  administration.  The  jDrincipal  support
of  this  interpretation  is  tradition.  It  has  been  handed  down  from
age  to  age  in  the  Church,  until  its  authority  seems  firmly  estab-
lished.    It  may  be  remarked  in  reference  to  this  passage,  —

1.  That  if  it  be  admitted  that  the  words  "  born  of  water  "  are  to
be  understood  of  baptism,  the  passage  does  not  prove  the  doctrine
of  baptismal  regeneration.  It  asserts  the  necessity  of  baptism  to
admission  into  the  kingdom  of  God,  just  as  our  Lord  insists  on  the
necessity  of  the  public  confession  of  his  name.  Confession  is  not
a  means  of  salvation.  It  does  not  convey  the  benefits  of  Christ's
redemption.  It  is  a  duty  which  Christ  imposes  on  all  who  desire
to  be  confessed  by  Him  in  the  last  day.  The  Reformed  acknowl-
edge that  baptism  has  this  necessity  of  precept.

2.  The  phrase  "  kingdom  of  God "  sometimes  means  heaven,
the  future  state  of  blessedness  ;  sometimes  the  external  or  visible
Church,  as  consisting  of  those  who  profess  to  acknowledge  Christ
as  their  king ;  and  sometimes  the  invisible  Church,  consisting  of
those  m  and  over  whom  Christ  actually  reigns.  At  other  times
the  phrase  is  used  comprehensively  as  including,  without  discrimi-
nating, these  several  ideas.  In  this  last  sense  the  conditions  of  ad-
mission into  the  kingdom  of  God  are  the  conditions  of  discipleship,
and  the  conditions  of  discipleship  are  baptism  and  inward  regen-
eration ;  precisely  as  under  the  old  dispensation,  for  a  man  to  be-
come truly  a  Jew  it  was  necessary  that  he  should  be  circumcised
and  believe  the  true  religion  as  then  revealed.  But  this  does  not
imply  that  circumcision  of  the  flesh  was  circumcision  of  the  heart ;
or  that  the  latter  uniformly  attended  the  former.  Neither  does
our  Lord's  language  in  John  iii.  5,  even,  if  understood  of  baptism,
imply  that  the  inward  grace  uniformly  attends  the  outward  or-
dinance, John  the  Baptist  (Matt.  iii.  11,  12)  made  a  marked
distinction,  not  only  between  his  baptism  and  Christian  baptism,
but  between  baptism  with  water  and  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost.
He  could  administer  the  former,  Christ  only  could  impart  the
latter.  The  two  were  not  necessarily  connected.  A  man  might
receive  the  one  and  not  the  other.  Thousands  did  then,  and  do
now,  receive  baptism  with  water  who  did  not,  and  do  not,  expe-
rience the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost.


§  12.]  BAPTISM.     ITS  EFFICACY.  593

3.  mere  is  no  necessity  for  assuming  that  tliere  is  any  refer-
ence in  John  iii.  5,  to  external  baptism.  The  passage  may  be  ex-
plained after  the  analogy  suggested  by  what  is  said  in  JNIatthew
iii.  11.  There  it  is  said  that  Christ  would  baptize  with  the  Holy
Ghost  and  with  fire.  No  one  understands  this  of  literal  fire.
Fire  was  one  of  the  familiar  Scriptural  emblems  of  purification.
(Is.  iv.  4 ;  Jer.  v.  14  ;  Mai.  iii.  2 ;  Acts  ii.  3.)  To  baptize  with
fire,  was  to  effect  a  real,  and  not  merely  an  outward  purification.
Accordmg  to  this  analogy,  to  be  born  of  water  and  of  the  Spirit,
is  to  experience  a  cleansing  of  the  soul  analogous  to  that  effected
for  the  body  by  water.  This  is  the  interpretation  generally
adopted  by  the  Reformed  theologians.  It  is  in  accordance,  not
only  with  the  passage  in  Matthew  iii.  11,  but  -with  the  general
usage  of  Scripture.  In  that  usage  the  sign  and  the  thing  signi-
fied are  often  united,  often  interchanged,  the  one  being  used  for
the  other.  Water,  essential  to  the  existence  of  all  living  crea-
tures on  the  face  of  the  earth,  not  only  the  means  of  cleansing  and
refreshment,  but  also  one  of  the  elements  of  life,  is  familiarly  used
for  the  divine  blessing,  and  especially  for  the  saving,  sanctifying,
refreshing,  and  sustaining  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Thus  in
the  gracious  invitation  of  the  prophet,  "  Ho,  every  one  that  thirst-
eth,  come  ye  to  the  waters."  (Is.  Iv.  1.)  Before  in  chapter  xii.
3,  he  had  said,  "  With  joy  shall  ye  draw  water  out  of  the  wells  of
salvation."  Isaiah  xxxv.  G,  "  In  the  wilderness  shall  waters  break
out,  and  streams  in  the  desert."  Isaiah  xliv.  3,  "I  will  pour
water  upon  him  that  is  thirsty."  Ezekiel  xxxvi.  25,  "  Then  will
I  sprinkle  clean  water  upon  you.,  and  ye  shall  be  clean."  Jere-
miah ii.  13,  God  says.  My  people  "  have  forsaken  me,  the  fountain
of  living  waters."  Zechariah  xiv.  8,  "  Living  waters  shall  go  out
from  Jerusalem."  (Compare  Ezekiel  xlvii.  1-5.)  Our  Lord  said
to  the  woman  of  Samaria,  "  If  thou  knewest  the  gift  of  God,  and
who  it  is  that  saith  to  thee,  Give  me  to  drink ;  thou  wonkiest  have
asked  of  him,  and  he  would  have  given  thee  living  water."  (John
iv.  10.)  On  another  occasion,  he  said,  "If  any  man  thirst,  let
him  come  unto  me  and  drink.  He  that  believeth  on  me  as  the
Scripture  hath  said,  out  of  his  belly  shall  flow  rivers  of  living
waters.  But  this  he  spake  of  the  Spirit."  (John  vii.  37,  38.)
Revelation  xxi.  6,  "  I  will  give  unto  him  that  is  athirst  of  the
fountain  of  the  water  of  life  freely."  xxii.  17,  "  Whosoever  will,
let  him  take  the  water  of  life  freely."  It  would  be  a  sad  mistake
to  understand  by  water  in  all  these  passages,  the  physical  element,
or  even  sacramental  water.    When  God  promises  to  sprinkle  clean


694         PART   in.     Cn.   XX.  — THE   MEANS    OF   GRACE.

water  upon  us,  He  promises  the  renemng  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and
when  Christ  says,  we  must  be  born  of  water,  He  explains  it  by
saying,  we  must  be  born  of  the  Spirit.

That  our  Lord,  in  John  iii.  5,  does  not  make  baptism  essen-
tial to  admission  into  the  kingdom  of  God,  but  regeneration  by
the  Spirit,  is  the  more  probable,  because  Christian  baptism  was
not  instituted  when  the  words  there  recorded  were  uttered.  It  is
impossible  that  Nicodemus,  or  any  who  heard  those  words,  could
understand  them  of  that  sacrament.  Christ,  however,  intended
to  be  understood.  He  intended  that  Nicodemus  should  under-
stand what  was  necessary  to  his  salvation.  He  was  accustomed
to  hear  the  sanctifying  influence  of  God's  grace  called  water ;  he
knew  what  the  Scriptures  meant  by  being  washed  with  clean
water ;  and  it  was  easy  for  liim  to  understand  that  being  "  born
of  water  "  meant  to  be  purified  ;  but  he  could  not  know  that  it
meant  baptism.  To  make  the  passage  refer  to  the  baptism  of
John  is  out  of  the  question,  although  sustained  by  the  authority  of
Grotius,  Episcopius,  Bengel,  Neander,  Baumgarten-Crusius,  Hof-
man,  and  others.  The  baptism  of  John  was  confined  to  the  Jews.
It  admitted  no  man  to  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  Our  Lord  is  lay-
ing down  the  conditions  of  salvation  for  all  men,  and  therefore
cannot  be  understood  to  refer  to  a  baptism  of  which  the  Gentiles
were  not  partakers,  and  of  which,  in  the  vast  majority  of  cases,
they  had  never  heard.^

Another  argument  on  this  subject  is  derived  from  the  fact  that
in  the  sixth  and  eighth  verses  of  this  chapter,  where  our  Lord  in-
sists on  the  necessity  of  regeneration,  he  says  nothing  of  being
born  of  water.  It  is  simply  regeneration  by  the  Spirit  that  He
declares  to  be  necessary.  It  cannot  be  supposed  that  one  doc-
trine is  taught  in  the  fifth  verse  and  another  in  the  sixth  and
eighth  verses  ;  the  former  teaching  that  baptism  and  the  renew-
ing of  the  Holy  Ghost  are  both  necessary,  and  the  latter  insisting
only  on  a  new  birth  by  the  Spirit.  If  the  two  passages  teach  the
same  doctrine,  then  the  fifth  verse  must  teach  that  being  born  of

1  That  the  baptism  of  John  was  not  Christian  baptism  would  seem  yjlain,  (1.)  Because
it  belonged  to  the  old  dispensation.  The  Christian  Church  was  not  yet  established.  (2.)  It
bound  no  man  to  faith  in  .Jesus  Christ  as  the  Son  of  God  and  Saviour  of  the  world.  (3.)  He
baptized  all  Judea,  but  all  the  people  in  Judea,  pharisees  and  others,  were  not  thereby
made  professing  Christians.  (4.)  It  was  a  baptism  simply  unto  repentanct,  as  a  prepar-
ation for  the  coming  of  Christ.  (5.)  Those  who  were  baptized  b}' John  were  rebaptized
when  they  professed  to  become  Christians.  Of  the  multitudes  converted  on  the  day  of
Pentecost  and  inmiediately  after,  many  no  doubt  had  been  baptized  by  John,  and  yet  they
were  baptized  anew.  And  according  to  the  interpretation,  almost  universal!y  received  in
om*  day,  of  Acts  xix.  1-6,  Paul  baptized  in  Ephcsus  "certain  disciples"  in  the  name  of
the  Lord  Jesus,  who  bad  already  been  baptized  by  John.


§  12.]  BAPTISM.     ITS   EFFICACY.  595

water  and  being  born  of  the  Spirit  are  one  and  the  same  thing,
the  one  expression  being  figurative,  and  the  other  literal,  precisely
as  in  Matthew  iii.  11,  where  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and
of  fire  are  spoken  of.

Again,  if  "born  of  water"  means  baptism,  and  "born  of  the
Spirit,"  spiritual  regeneration,  then  the  two  things  are  distinct.
Accordingly  Liicke  says  that  being  "  born  of  water  "  is  a  figura-
tive expression  for  repentance,  which  must  pi'ecede  regeneration
by  the  Spirit.  "  The  spirit  of  wisdom  flees  the  sinful  soul,"  as  is
said  in  the  Book  of  Wisdom.  Only  the  pure  in  heart  can  see
God,  our  Lord  himself  teaches,  and  therefore  Liicke  argues  only
those  who  truly  repent  are  susceptible  of  regeneration.^  This
disjoining  the  two  things  as  distinct  is  natural,  if  the  one  refers  to
baptism  and  the  other  to  inward  regeneration,  and  therefore  would
indicate  that  regeneration  is  not  by  baptism,  contrary  to  the  doc-
trine of  the  advocates  of  baptismal  regeneration.  Hengstenberg
also  makes  the  two  things  distinct.  Water,  he  says,  signifies  the
remission  of  sins  ;  this  is  effected  in  baptism ;  the  new-birth  by
the  Spirit  follows  after,  which,  m  his  view,  is  a  slow  process.^

All  the  arguments  against  the  doctrine  in  question  drawn  from
the  general  teachings  of  the  Bible  are,  of  course,  arguments  against
the  traditionary  interpretation  of  this  particular  passage.

Another  passage  on  which  special  reliance  is  placed  as  a  sup-
port of  the  doctrine  of  baptismal  regeneration  is  Titus,  iii.  5.
The  Apostle  there  says,  God  saves  us  "  by  the  washing  of  regen-
eration, and  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  By  "  the  washing  of
regeneration  "  is  understood  baptism ;  and  the  Apostle  is  under-
stood to  assert  two  things,  first,  that  baptism  is  necessary  to  sal-
vation ;  and  second,  that  baptism  is,  or  is  the  means  of,  regenera-
tion. It  is,  as  the  commentators  say,  the  causa  medians  of  an
inward  change  of  heart ;  or,  as  Bishop  Ellicott  says  :  "  The  gen-
itive 7raAly•ye^■e(rtas  apparently  marks  the  attribute  or  inseparable
accompaniments  of  the  \ovTp6v,  thus  falling  mider  the  general  head
of  the  possessive  genitive."  ^  On  this  mterpretation  it  may  be
remarked,  —

1.  That,  taking  the  words  Xovrpov  TraXtyyei^eo-ias  by  themselves,

1  Commentar  iiber  das  Evangelium  des  Johannes,  von  Dr.  Friedrich  Liicke,  Professor  der
Theologie  zu  Gottingen,  3d  edit.  Bonn,  1840;  part  i.  p.  522.

'■2  Das  Evanyelium  des  heiligen  Johannes  erldutert,  von  E.  W.  Hengstenberg:  Berlin,
1861,  vol.  i.  pp.  186-189.

3  A  Critical  and  Grammatical  Commentary  on  the  Pastoral  Epistles,  with  a  revised
Translation.  By  Rt.  Rev.  Charles  J.  Ellicott,  D.D.,  Lord  Bishop  of  Gloucester  and  Bristol.
Andover,  1865,  p.  213.


596  PART   m.     Ch.   XX.  —  THE  MEANS   OF   GRACE.

they  may  liave  the  meaning  attached  to  them.  They  may  mean
that  baptism  is  the  cause  or  means  of  regeneration ;  or,  that  re-
generation is  its  inseparable  accompaniment.  But  this  is  very
far  from  proving  that  they  either  have  or  can  have  that  sense  in
this  connection.

2.  Admitting  that  these  words  are  to  be  understood  of  bap-
tismal regeneration,  they  do  not  teach  that  regeneration  is  insep-
arably connected  with  baptism.  When  Paul  speaks  of  the  "  gos-
pel of  your  salvation,"  he  does  not  mean  to  say  that  salvation  is
inseparable  from  the  mere  hearing  of  the  Gospel.  When  he  says,
"  Faith  cometh  by  hearing,"  he  does  not  mean  that  all  who  hear
believe.  When  our  Lord  says.  We  are  sanctified  by  the  truth,
He  does  not  teach  that  the  truth  always  has  this  sanctifying
efficacy.  The  Bible  teaches  that  the  Word  does  not  profit  unless
"  mixed  with  faith  in  them  that "  hear  it.  So  St.  Paul  teaches
that  baptism  does  not  effect  our  union  with  Christ,  or  secure  the
remission  of  sins,  or  the  gift  of  the  Spirit,  unless  it  be,  and  be-
cause it  is  an  act  of  faith.  This  Bishop  Ellicott  admits.  He
says  we  must  remember  "  that  St.  Paul  speaks  of  baptism  on  the
supposition  that  it  was  no  mere  observance,  but  that  it  was  a
sacrament  in  which  all  that  was  inward  properly  and  completely
accompanied  all  that  was  outward."

3.  Still,  admitting  that  the  words  refer  to  baptism,  they  may
just  as  fairly  be  explained  '  Baptism  which  is  the  sign  and  seal
of  regeneration,'  as  '  Baptism  which  is  the  means  or  invariable
antecedent  of  regeneration.'  The  construction  indicates  the  in-
timate relation  between  the  two  nouns,  without  determining  what
that  relation  is,  whether  it  be  that  of  cause  and  effect,  or  of  a  sign
and  the  thing  signified.  Calvin's  comment,  "  partam  a  Christo
salutem  baptismus  nobis  obsignat,"  ^  is  therefore  fully  justified.

4.  There  are,  however,  strong  reasons  for  denying  that  there  is
any  reference  to  baptism  as  an  external  rite  in  this  passage.

First,  the  genitive  TraXtyyei-ecrtas  may  be  the  simple  genitive  of
apposition ;  '  the  washing  which  is  regeneration.'  There  are  two
kinds  of  washing,  the  outward  and  the  inward.  We  are  saved  by
that  washing  which  is  regeneration,  namely,  the  renewing  of  the
Holy  Ghost.  The  latter  clause  being  exegetical  of  the  former.
This  interpretation  is  simple  and  natural.  It  does  no  violence  to
the  meaning  of  the  words  or  to  the  construction  of  the  passage.

Secondly,  if  the  latter  clause  be  not  exegetical,  it  must  be  acces-
sary.    It  must  express  something  new,  something  not  expressed

1  In  Novum  Testamentum  Commentarii,  edit,  Berlin,  1831,  vol.  vi.  p.  360.


§12.]  BAPTISM.    ITS  EFFICACY.  ^^1

by  the  former  clause.  The  Apostle  would  then  be  made  to  say,
We  are  saved  by  the  washing  of  regeneration,  and  also  by  the
renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Which  amounts  to  saying,  We  are
saved  by  regeneration  and  by  regeneration.  This  argument  can
only  be  met  by  making  regeneration  mean  the  commencement,  and
the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  progress  and  development  of
the  new  life.  But  this  is  contrary  to  the  analogy  between  this
passage  and  that  in  John  iii.  5.^

1  Bishop  Ellicott  refers  to  "  the  able  treatise  on  this  text  by  Waterland,  a  tract  which,
though  extending  only  to  thirty  pages,  will  be  found  to  include  and  to  supersede  much  that
has  been  written  on  this  subject."  The  treatise  thus  commended  furnislies  an  excellent
illustration  of  the  difficulty  of  those  understanding  each  other,  who  differ  seriously  in  their
modes  of  thinking  and  in  their  use  of  terms.  To  Waterland  himself,  and  to  those  who  agree
with  him  in  his  theory  of  religion  and  in  his  use  of  words,  this  tract  doubtless  appears  well
ordered  and  consistent ;  by  the  majority  of  evangelical  Christians  of  our  day  it  can  hardly
fail  to  be  regarded  as  full  of  confusion  and  contradictions.  (This  treatise  may  be  found  in
Waterland;  Works,  edit.  Oxford,  1843,  vol.  iv.  pp.  425-458.)  Waterland  begins  by  say-
ing, (1.)  That  Titus  iii.  5,  teaches  that  under  the  Christian  dispensation,  God  saves  men
"  by  the  sacrament  of  Christian  baptism,  considered  in  both  its  parts,  the  outward  visible
sign,  which  is  water,  and  the  inward  things  signitied  and  exhibited,  namely,  a  death  unto
sin,  and  a  new  birth  unto  righteousness,  therein  wrought  by  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God."  (Page
427.)  (2.)  The  passage  distinctly  speaks  both  of  a  regeneration,  and  of  a  renovation,  as  two
things,  and  both  of  them  wrought  ordinarily  in  one  and  the  same  baptism,  here  called  the
laver  of  regeneration  and  of  renewing.  (3.)  "  Regeneration,"  he  says,  "  passively  consid-
ered, is  but  another  name  for  the  new  birth  of  a  Christian :  and  that  new  birth,  in  general,
means  a  spiritual  change  wrought  upon  any  person,  by  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  use  of  bap-
tism; whereby  he  is  translated  from  his  natural  state  in  Adam,  to  a  spiritual  state  in
Christ."  (Page  429.)  Most  persons  in  our  day  would  understand  this  to  mean  that  re-
generation is  a  subjective  change  in  the  state  of  the  soul ;  a  change  from  spiritual  death  to
.spiritual  life.  This,  however,  is  afterwards  denied.  Regeneration  is  not  a  change  of  mind.
It  is  a  change  of  state.  It  is  a  change  in  the  relation  which  the  sinner  bears  to  God.  "A
translation  from  the  curse  of  Adam  into  the  grace  of  Christ.  This  change,  translation,  or
adoption,  carries  in  it  many  Christian  blessings  and  privileges,  but  all  reducible  to  two,
namely,  remission  of  sins  (absolute  or  conditional),  and  a  covenant  claim,  for  the  time  be-
ing, to  eternal  happiness."  (Page  433.)  "  Regeneration  on  the  part  of  the  grantor,  God  Al-
mighty, means  admission  or  adoption  into  sonship  or  spiritual  citizenship:  and  on  the  part
of  the  grantee,  namely,  man,  it  means  his  birth,  or  entrance  into  that  state  of  sonship,  or
citizenship."  (Page  432.)  In  this  sense  regeneration  implies  no  subjective  change.  The
soul  remains  precisely  in  the  same  inward  state  in  which  it  was  before.  Adoption  does  not
change  a  man's  inward  state.  Waterland,  therefore,  maintains  that  Simon  Magus  was  re-
generated although  it  did  him  no  good,  leaving  him  in  "the  gall  of  bitterness  and  in  the
bond  of  iniquity."  Sonship  was  granted  him,  but  he  did  not  accept  it.  He  did  not,  how-
ever, need  a  second  regeneration,  but  only  to  repent,  then  his  regeneration  or  adoption  in
baptism  would  take  effect.  (Pages  442-444.)  In  this  sense  also  he  teaches  that  renovation
or  "the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  must  precede  baptism,  as  well  as  attend  and  follow
it.  It  must  precede  it  to  produce  faith  and  repentance,  without  which  regeneration  or
adoption  does  no  good.  (Page  434.)  In  infants,  "their  innocence  and  incapacity  are  to
them  instead  of  repentance,  which  they  do  not  need,  and  of  actual  faith  which  they  cannot
have."  (Page  439.)  Infant  baptism,  however,  effects  no  inward  or  subjective  change.  It
leaves  the  soul  in  the  same  condition,  not  in  the  same  state  or  relative  position  in  which  it
was  before.  On  page  433,  in  stating  the  difference  between  regeneration  and  renovation,
the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  he  says,  "Regeneration  is  itself  a  kind  of  renewal;  but
then  it  is  of  the  spiritual  state  Considered  at  large;  whereas  renovation  is  a  "renewal  of
heart  or  mind,"  a  "renewal,  namely,  of  the  inward  frame,  or  disposition  of  the  man."
In  proof  of  this  difference  between  regeneration  and  renovation  he  says:  "Regeneration


598         PART   IIT.     Cii.    XX.  — THE   MEANS   OF   GRACE.

Tliirdly,  it"  the  doctrine  of  baptismal  regeneration  can  be
shown  to  be  thoroughly  anti-scriptural,  then  it  cannot  be  taught
in  Titus  iii.  5.  If  any  passage  admit  of  two  interpretations,  one
opposed  to  the  analogy  of  Scripture,  and  the  other  in  harmony
with  it,  we  are  bound  to  adopt  the  latter.

The  same  remark  applies  to  Acts  xxii.  16,  where  it  is  recorded
that  Ananias  said  to  Paul,  "  Arise,  and  be  baptized,  and  wash
away  thy  sins,  calling  on  the  name  of  the  Lord."  If  it  were  the
clear  doctrine  of  the  Bible  that  baptism  does  wash  away  sin,  that

may  be  granted  and  received  (as  in  infants)  where  that  renovation  has  no  place  at  all,  for
the  time  being:  and  therefore,  most  certainly,  the  notions  are  very  distinct."  Baptismal
regeneration,  tlierefore,  involves  no  change  "of  heart  or  mind,"  no  change  "of  the  inward
frame  or  disposition."  On  page  443,  in  justifying  the  assumption  that  Simon  Magus  was
regenerated  by  his  baptism,  he  makes  the  benefits  of  baptism  merely  outward.  He  says
that  "As  the  Holy  Spirit  consecrates  and  sanctifies  the  waters  of  baptism,  giving  them  an
outward  and  relative  holiness:  so  He  consecrates  the  persons  also  in  an  outward  and  rela-
tive sense,  whether  good  or  bad,  by  a  sacred  dedication  of  them  to  the  worship  and  service
of  the  whole  Trinity:  which  consecration  is  forever  binding,  and  has  its  effect;  either  to
the  salvation  of  the  parties,  if  they  repent  and  amend,  or  to  their  greater  damnation  if  they
do  not."

Thus  we  have  three,  if  not  four  different  definitions  of  regeneration  mixed  up  together
in  this  treatise,  and  interchanged  one  for  the  other  to  suit  emergencies.  First,  the  word  is
taken  in  the  sense  which  it  now  usually  bears.  It  is  the  new  birth,  a  change  of  heart,  the
commencement  of  spiritual  life  in  the  soul;  a  change  from  a  state  of  spiritual  death  to  that
of  spiritual  life.  The  Christian  is  said  to  be  the  subject  of  three  births.  "  Once  he  is  bom
into  the  natural  life,  bom  of  Adam;  once  he  is  born  into  the  spiritual  life,  born  of  water
and  the  Spirit;  and  once  also  into  a  life  of  glory,  born  of  the  resurrection  at  the  last  day."
(Page  432.)  In  this  sense  regeneration  and  renovation  differ  as  the  commencement  and  the
development  of  life  differ;  or,  as  in  ordinary  language,  regeneration  and  the  life-long  proc-
ess of  sanctification  differ.  Secondly,  regeneration  is  made  to  mean  "  the  death  unto  sin."
Romanists  teach  that  in  baptism  there  is  the  removal  of  sin  both  as  to  its  guilt  and  power,
and  an  infusion  of  new  habits  of  grace.  Waterland,  on  page  427,  appears  to  confine  it  to
the  death  of  sin,  which  on  page  439  he  explains  by  the  words  "  plenar}^  remission."  In
words  already  quoted,  God  saves  us  "  by  the  sacrament  of  Christian  baptism  considered  in
both  its  parts,  the  outward  visible  sign,  which  is  water,  and  the  inward  things  signified  and
exhibited,  namely,  a  death  unto  sin,  and  a  new  birth  unto  righteousness."  It  will  be  ob-
served he  says  "  inward  things,"  a  death  and  a  new  birth,  which  he  after  distinguishes  as
regeneration  and  renovation.  In  baptism,  therefore,  we  have  simply  "remission  of  srn,"
renovation  precedes  and  follows  it.  Thirdly,  he  makes  baptism  to  confer  a  covenant  claim
to  the  privileges  or  blessings  all  included  under  the  heads  of  remission  of  sins  and  a  title
to  eternal  happiness.  These  are  granted  to  adults  conditionally,  i.  e.,  provided  they  have
faith  and  repentance;  and  to  infants  absolutely,  because  in  their  case  innocence  supplies
the  place  of  faith  and  repentance.  This  implies  no  subjective  change.  It  is  simply  adop-
tion, such  as  Paul  says,  in  Romans  ix.  4,  pertained  to  the  Jews  as  a  nation.  And  fourthly,
he  teaches  that  baptism  confers  on  the  recipient,  whether  good  or  bad,  an  outward  and  rel-
ative holiness,  by  consecrating  him  to  the  worship  and  service  of  God.    (Page  443.)

It  would  thus  appear  that  every  theory  of  baptism,  whether  Romanist  or  Protestant,
High  Church  or  Low  Church,  Evangelical  or  Ritual,  can  find  support  in  this  treatise.  If
the  clear  headed  Bishop  Ellicott  has  a  clew  through  this  labyrinth,  he  would  do  well  to  im-
part it  to  the  public.  The  great  characteristic  of  a  large  and  representative  class  of  the
learned  theologians  of  the  Church  of  England  during  the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth
centuries,  was  that  they  derived  their  theology  from  the  Bil)le  through  the  medium  of  the
Fathers.  Whereas  the  theologians  of  the  Continent  drew  their  doctrines  immediately  from
the  Bible;  and  this  makes  the  difference  between  biblical  and  patristical  Christianity;  tht
difference,  to  common  eyes,  between  twilight  and  noon.


§12.]  BAPTISM.    ITS   EFFICACY.  599

such  ablution  can  be  effected  in  no  other  way,  then  we  should  be
forced  to  admit  that  Paul's  sins  had  not  been  remitted  until  he
was  baptized.  But  as  this  would  contradict  the  plainest  teach-
ings of  Scripture  ;  as  Paul  himself  says  that  God  called  him  by
his  grace,  and  made  him  a  true  Christian  by  revealing  his  Son  in
him,  by  opening  his  eyes  to  see  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of
Jesus  Clirist,  which  revelation  attended  the  vision  he  had  on  his
way  to  Damascus ;  and  as  the  effect  of  that  spiritual  revelation
was  to  transform  his  whole  nature  and  lead  him  to  fall  to  the
ground,  and  say,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  no  one
can  believe  that  he  was  under  the  wrath  and  curse  of  God,  dur-
ing the  three  days  which  intervened  between  his  conversion  and
his  baptism.  He  did  not  receive  baptism  in  order  that  his  sins
should  be  washed  away  ;  but  as  the  sign  and  pledge  of  their  for-
giveness on  the  part  of  God.  He  was  to  be  assured  of  his  for-
giveness in  the  ordinance  of  baptism  ;  just  as  a  Gentile  proselyte
to  Judaism  was  assured  of  his  acceptance  as  one  of  the  people  of
God,  by  the  rite  of  circumcision ;  but  circumcision  did  not  make
him  a  child  of  God.  This  passage  is  perfectly  parallel  to  Acts  ii.
38,  where  it  is  said,  "  Repent,  and  be  baptized  every  one  of  you
in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  for  the  remission  of  sins,  eis  acj^eaiv
afxapTLojv."  The  remission  of  sins  was  that  to  which  baptism  was
related  ;  that  of  which  it  was  the  sign  and  seal.  John's  baptism
was  ei's  ,7€Tavoittv  uuto  repentance.  This  does  not  mean  that  his
baptism  made  men  penitent.  But  it  was  a  confession  on  the  part  of
those  who  received  it,  that  they  needed  repentance,  and  it  bound
them  to  turn  from  their  sins  unto  God.  In  Luke  iii.  3,  it  is  said,
John  came  "  preaching  the  baptism  of  repentance  for  the  remis-
sion of  sins."  No  man  understands  this  to  mean  that  his  baptism
secured  the  remission,  or  the  washing  away,  of  sin  in  the  experi-
ence of  all  the  multitude  who  flocked  to  his  baptism.  Neither
does  the  Bible  anywhere  teach  that  Christian  baptism  effects
either  pardon  or  regeneration  in  those  still  out  of  Christ.

Direct  Arguments  against  the  Doctrine  of  Baptismal  Regenera-
tion.

It  has  been  shown  in  the  note  on  the  preceding  page  that  the
word  regeneration  in  the  phrase  "  baptismal  regeneration,"  is  used
in  very  different  senses.  The  sense  usually  attached  to  it,  in  our
day,  is  that  inward  change  in  the  state  of  the  soul  wrought  by
the  Holy  Spirit,  by  which  it  passes  from  death  unto  life  ;  by
which  it  is  born  again  so  as  to  become  a  child  of  God  and  an  heir


600  PART   111.     Cii.   XX. —  THE   MEANS   OF   GRACE.

of  eternal  life.  The  doctrine  of  baptismal  regeneration  is  the
doctrine  that  this  inward  saving  change  is  effected  in  baptism  ;  so
that  those  who  are  baptized  are  the  subjects  of  that  new  birth
which  Christ  declares  to  be  necessary  to  salvation ;  and  those  who
are  not  baptized  have  not  experienced  that  new  birth  and  are  not
in  a  state  of  salvation.

1.  The  first,  the  most  obvious,  and  the  most  decisive  argument
against  this  doctrine  is,  that,  so  far  as  any  work  or  act  of  the  sin-
ner is  concerned,  the  Bible  everywhere  teaches  that  the  only  in-
dispensable condition  of  salvation  is  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  "  As
Moses  lifted  up  the  serpent  in  the  wilderness,  even  so  must  the
Son  of  man  be  lifted  up  :  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him  should
not  perish,  but  have  eternal  life.  For  God  so  loved  the  world,
that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in
him  should  not  perish,  but  have  everlastmg  life."  (John  iii.
14—16.)  "  He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  evei-lasting  life :
and  he  that  believeth  not  the  Son  shall  not  see  life  :  but  the
wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him  "  (ver.  36).  "  I  am  the  bread
of  life :  he  that  cometli  to  me  shall  never  hunger  ;  and  he  that
believeth  on  me  shall  never  thirst."  (John  vi.  35.)  "  This  is
the  will  of  him  that  sent  me,  that  every  one  which  seeth  the  Son,
and  believeth  on  him,  may  have  everlasting  life  :  and  I  will  raise
him  up  at  the  last  day  "  (ver.  40).  "  He  that  believeth  in  me,
though  he  were  dead,  yet  shall  he  live  :  and  whosoever  liveth
and  believeth  in  me  shall  never  die."  (John  xi.  25,  26.)  These
are  the  words  of  Jesus.  This  is  the  gospel  which  the  Apostles
preached,  going  everywhere  and  saying  to  every  sinner  whom
they  met,  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be
saved."  (Acts  xvi.  31.)  "Whosoever  believeth  that  Jesus  is
the  Christ  is  born  of  God."  (1  John  v.  1.)  "  Who  is  he  that
overcometh  the  world,  but  he  that  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the
Son  of  God  ?  "  (ver.  5.)  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but
these  words  can  never  pass  away.  No  man  may  add  to  them,  or
detract  from  them.  Whosoever  believes  on  the  Son  hath  ever-
lasting life.  This  stands  firm.  It  matters  not  to  what  Church  he
may  belong  ;  it  matters  not  whether  he  be  Jew  or  Gentile,  bond
or  free,  learned  or  unlearned,  good  or  bad,  baptized  or  unbaptized
whosoever  believes  shall  be  saved.

,  Not  every  one,  however,  who  says  he  believes  is  a  t]-ue  be-
liever ;  n(,)t  every  one  who  believes  as  the  devils  believe  ;  but  he
who  has  that  faith  which  works  by  love  and  purifies  the  heart,
the  precious  faith  of  God's  elect,  every  such  believer  is  sure  of


§  12.  BAPTISM.    ITS   EFFICACY.  601

eternal  life.  It  does  not  follow  from  this  that  faith  stands  alone  ;
that  obedience  is  not  necessary.  But  obedience  is  the  fruit  of
faitJi.  He  that  does  not  obey,  does  not  believe.  For  any  one,
therefore,  to  say  tliat  although  a  man  truly  believes  the  record
God  has  given  of  his  Son,  yet  that  he  is  not  a  Christian,  unless  he
belongs  to  some  particular  church  organization,  unless  he  is  bap-
tized with  water,  unless  he  comes  to  the  Lord's  table,  contradicts
not  tlie  general  teaching  of  the  Bible  only,  but  the  fundamental
principle  of  the  gospel  method  of  salvation.  Even  Gabriel  would
not  dare  to  shut  the  gates  of  paradise  on  the  thief  converted  on
the  cross,  because  he  had  not  been  baptized.

2.  It  is  plain  that  baptism  cannot  be  the  ordinary  means  of  re-
generation, or  the  channel  of  conveying  in  the  first  instance  the
benefits  of  redemption  to  the  souls  of  men,  because,  in  the  case
of  adults,  taith  and  repentance  are  the  conditions  of  baptism.  But
faith  and  repentance,  according  to  the  Scriptures,  are  the  fruits
of  regeneration.  He  who  exercises  repentance  towards  God  and
faith  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  in  a  state  of  salvation  before
baptism  and  therefore  in  a  state  of  regeneration.  Regeneration
consequently  precedes  baptism,  and  cannot  be  its  effect,  according
to  the  ordinance  of  God.  That  the  Apostles  did  require  the  pro-
fession of  faith  and  repentance  before  baptism,  cannot  be  denied.
This  is  plain,  not  only  from  their  recorded  practice  but  also  from
the  nature  of  the  ordinance.  Baptism  is  a  profession  of  faith  in
the  Father,  and  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Spirit;  not  of  a  faith  to  be
obtained  through  the  ordinance,  but  of  a  faith  already  entertained.
•When  the  Eunuch  applied  to  Philip  for  baptism,  he  said :  "  If
thou  believest  Avith  all  thine  heart  thou  mayest."  Of  those  who
heard  Peter's  sermon  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  it  is  said,  "  they
that  gladly  received  his  woi'd  were  baptized."  (Acts  ii.  41.)  On
this  point,  however,  there  can  be  no  dispute.  The  only  way  in
which  Romanists  and  Romanizers  evade  this  argument,  is  by
denying  that  faith  and  repentance  are  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  or
of  regeneration.  They  are  in  their  view  not  gracious,  but  natural
works,  works  done  before  regeneration ;  woi-ks  which  leave  the
soul  in  a  state  of  perdition.  But  in  this  they  contradict  the  ex-
press words  of  Christ,  who  says,  whosoever  believes  shall  be
saved.  And,  in  contradicting  Christ,  thev  contradict  the  whole
Bible.

3.  The  doctrine  of  baptismal  regeneration,  in  the  sense  above
explained,  is  opposed  to  the  whole  nature  of  true  religion  as
set  fortli  in  tlie  Scriptures.     The  two  great  errors  against  which


G02  PART  IIT.     Cu.   XX  —THE   MEANS   OF   GRACE.

the  Gospel,  as  taught  by  Christ  and  unfolded  by  his  Apostles,  was
directed  ;  were  first  the  doctrine  of  human  merit ;  the  merit  of
good  works,  the  doctrine  that  men  are  to  be  saved  on  the  ground
of  their  own  character  or  conduct ;  and  the  second  was  ritualism,
the  doctrine  of  the  necessity  and  inherent  supernatural  virtue  of
external  rites  and  ceremonies.  Our  Lord  taught  that  men  were
saved  by  looking  to  Him  as  the  dying  Hebrews  in  the  wilderness
were  saved  by  looking  to  the  brazen  serpent.  He  further  taught
that  unless  a  man,  no  matter  how  punctilious  in  observing  the
ceremonial  law,  was  born  of  the  Spirit,  he  could  not  enter  into
the  kingdom  of  God.  And  the  great  burden  of  apostolic  teach-
ing was  first,  that  we  are  saved,  not  by  works  but  by  faith,  not  for
our  own  righteousness,  but  on  the  ground  of  the  righteousness  of
Christ ;  and  secondly,  that  religion  is  a  matter  of  the  heart,  not  of
ritual  or 'ceremonial  observances.  The  Jews  of  that  day  taught
that  no  uncircumcised  man  could  be  saved.  Romanists  and  Ro-
manizers  teach  that  no  unbaptized  person,  whether  infant  or  adult,
is  saved.  The  Jews  taught  that  "  no  circumcised  person  ever
entered  hell,"  provided  he  remained  within  the  pale  of  the
theocracy.  Romanists  and  Romanizers  say  that  no  baptized
person  is  ever  lost,  provided  he  remains  within  the  pale  of  the
Roman  Church.  The  Jews  believed  that  circumcision  secured  its
benefits,  not  only  as  a  seal  of  the  covenant,  but  from  its  own  sanc-
tifying power.  This  Avas  only  one  aspect  of  the  doctrine  of  salva-
tion by  works,  against  which  the  sacred  writers  so  earnestly
protested.  "  He  is  not  a  Jew,"  says  St.  Paul,  "  which  is  one
outwardly  ;  neither  is  that  circumcision,  which  is  outward  in  the
flesh  :  but  he  is  a  Jew,  which  is  one  inwardly  ;  and  circumcision  is
that  of  the  heart,  in  the  spirit  and  not  in  the  letter  ;  whose  praise
is  not  of  men,  but  of  God."  (Rom.  ii.  28,  29.)  The  doctrine  of
the  Bible,  therefore,  is  that  he  is  not  a  Christian  who  is  one  out-
wardly, but  that  he  is  a  Christian  who  is  one  inwardly ;  and  the
baptism  which  saves  the  soul  is  not  baptism  with  water,  but  the
baptism  of  the  heart  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  This  doctrine  of  salva-
tion by  rites  was,  in  the  view  of  the  Apostles,  a  much  lower  form
of  doctrine,  more  thoroughly  Judaic,  than  the  doctrine  of  salvation
by  works  of  righteousness.

It  is  evident  that  the  doctrine  of  baptismal  regeneration,  as  held
by  Romanists  and  their  followers,  changes  the  whole  nature  of
religion.  It  makes  mere  external  observances  the  conditions  of
salvation,  assuming  that  outward  rites  are  exclusively  the  channels
through  which  the  benefits  of   redemption  are  conveyed  to  the


§12.]  BAPTISM.     ITS   EFFICACY.  603

souls  of  men.  It  excludes  from  tlie  liope  of  heaven  men  who
truly  believe,  repent,  and  lead  a  boly  life ;  and  it  assures  those  of
their  title  to  eternal  life,  who  are  unrenewed  and  unsanctified.

4.  A  fourth  argument  against  the  doctrine  under  consideration,
is  derived  from  the  analogy  between  the  Word  and  sacraments
everywhere  presented  in  the  Bible.  God,  it  is  said,  saves  men  by
preachmg ;  the  gospel  is  declared  to  be  the  power  of  God  unto
salvation  ;  faith  is  said  to  come  by  hearing :  we  are  begotten  by
the  Word  :  we  are  sanctified  by  the  truth.  No  Christian,  whether
Romanist  or  Protestant,  believes  that  all  who  hear  the  Gospel  are
saved ;  that  it  is  always  the  vehicle  of  conveying  the  saving  and
sanctifying  influences  of  the  Spirit.  Why  then  should  it  be
assumed,  because  we  are  said  to  be  united  to  Christ  by  baptism,
or  to  wash  away  our  sins  in  that  ordinance,  either  that  baptism
'^  ex  opere  operato  "  produces  these  effects,  or  that  the  Spirit
always  attends  its  administration  with  his  saving  influences.

5.  Again,  all  Christians  admit  that  multitudes  of  the  baptized
come  short  of  eternal  life,  but  no  regenerated  soul  is  ever  lost.
Our  Lord  in  teaching  that  none  but  those  who  are  born  of  the
Spirit,  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  thereby  teaches  that
those  who  are  thus  new-born  are  certainly  saved.  This  is  in-
cluded also  in  his  repeated  declarations,  that  those  who  believe  in
Him  have  eternal  life  ;  being  partakers  of  his  life,  if  He  Hves
they  shall  live  also.  And  the  Apostle,  in  Romans  viii.  30,  ex-
pressly declares  that  all  the  regenerate  are  saved.  Whom  God
predestinates,  he  says,  them  He  also  calls  (regenerates),  and  whom
He  calls,  them  he  also  justifies  ;  and  whom  He  justifies,  them  he
also  glorifies.  If  baptism,  therefore,  is,  in  all  ordinary  cases,
attended  by  the  regeneration  of  the  soul,  then  all  the  baptized
will  be  saved.  If  they  are  not  made  the  heirs  of  salvation,
they  are  not  made  the  subjects  of  regeneration,

6.  The  doctrine  of  baptismal  regeneration  is  contradicted  by
the  facts  of  experience.  Regeneration  is  no  slight  matter.  It  is
a  new  birth  ;  a  new  creation  ;  a  resurrection  from  spiritual  death
to  spiritual  life.  It  is  a  change,  wrought  by  the  exceeding  great-
ness of  God's  power,  analogous  to  that  which  was  wrought  in
Christ,  when  He  was  raised  from  the  dead,  and  exalted  to  the
right  hand  of  the  majesty  on  high.  It  cannot  therefore  remain
without  visible  effect.  It  controls  the  whole  inward  and  outward
life  of  its  subject,  so  that  he  becomes  a  new  man  in  Christ  Jesus,
The  mass  of  those  baptized,  however,  exhibit  no  evidence  of  any
such  change.     There  is  no  apparent  difference  between  them  arid


604  PART  III.     Cn.   XX.  — THE  MPLVNS   OF   GRACE.

the  unbaptized.  The  \vhole  pojjulation  of  Europe,  speaking  in
general  terms,  are  baptized.  Are  they  all  regenerated  ?  Then
regeneration  amounts  to  nothing.  This  doctrine,  therefore,  utterly
degrades  regeneration,  the  precious  life-giving  gift  of  the  Holy
Spirit.  To  say  that  those  who  receive  regeneration  by  baptism  in
infancy  fall  away ;  that  the  principle  of  life  imparted  to  them,
being  uncherished,  remains  undeveloped,  is  no  satisfactory  answer
to  this  argument.  Life,  especially  the  life  of  God  in  the  soul,  is
not  thus  powerless.  To  say  that  a  dead  body  is  restored  to  life,
when  it  exhibits  no  evidence  of  vitality ;  or,  that  a  dead  tree  is
]uade  alive  which  puts  forth  no  foliage  and  bears  no  fruit,  is  to
say  that  it  is  alive  and  yet  dead.  It  is  true  that  a  seed  may  have
a  principle  of  life  in  it  wliich  remains  long  undeveloped,  but  un-
folds itself  when  placed  imder  the  normal  conditions  of  growth.
But  the  normal  conditions  of  growth  of  the  principle  of  spiritual
life  in  an  infant,  are  the  development  of  the  intelligence  and  the
presence  of  the  truth.  If  .these  conditions  occur,  the  growth  of
the  germ  of  spiritual  life  is  certain.  It  is  to  be  remembered  that
that  germ  is  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  has  life  in  Himself,  and  gives
life  to  all  in  whom  He  dwells.  The  doctrine  of  baptismal  re-
generation is  contradicted  by  facts.  The  baptized  as  a  body
remam  unchanged  in  heart  and  life.

§  13.  Juutlieran  Doctrine  of  Baptism.
Its  Necessity.

On  this  point  the  Lutheran  standards  hold  the  following  lan-
guage. In  the  Augsburg  Confession  those  who  adopt  that  sym-
bol say :  "  De  baptismo  decent,  quod  sit  necessarius  ad  salutem,
quodque  per  baptismum  offeratur  gratia  Dei  ;  et  quod  pueri  sint
baptizandi,  qui  per  baptismum  oblati  Deo  recipiantur  in  gratiam
Dei.  Damnant  Anabaptistas,  qui  improbant  baptismum  puerorum
et  affirmant  pueros  sine  baptismo  salvos  fieri."  The  Apology  for
that  Confession  repeats  that  declaration,  and  affirms  "that  the
baptism  of  infants  is  not  in  vain  but  necessary  and  effectual  to
salvation."  ^  The  same  doctrine  is  taught  in  the  two  catechisms
of  Luther,  the  larger  and  smaller.

This  doctrine  the  Lutheran  divines  have  softened  down.  They
affirm  that  baptism  is  ordinarily  necessary  ;  yet  that  the  necessity
is  not  absolute,  so  that  if  its  administration  be  prevented  by  una-

1  Confessio  i.  ix.  et  Apoloyin  iv.  51;  Hase,  Libri  Symholici,  p.  12  and  p.  156.     "Quod
baptismus  puerorum  iiou  sit  irritus,  sed  necessarius  et  efficax  ad  salutem."


§  13.]  BAPTISM.     LUTHERAN   DOCTRINE.  605

voidable  circumstances,  the  want  of  baptism  is  not  fatal.  Thus
Gerhard,!  says  Docemus,  "  baptismum  esse  quidem  ordinarium
initiationis  sacramentum  et  regenerationis  medium  omnibus  oni-
nino  etiam  fidelium  liberis  ad  regenerationem  et  salutem  neces-
sarium ;  interim  tamen  in  casu  privationis  sive  impossibihtatis
salvari  Kberos  Christianorum  per  extraordinariam  et  peculiarem
dispensationem  divinam."  Again  ^  he  says  :  "  Infantes  illos,  qui
vel  in  utero  raaterno  ^  vel  repentino  quodam  casu  ante  baptismi
susceptionem  exstinguuntur,  temere  damnare  nee  possumus  nee
debemus,  quin  potius  statuimus,  preces  piorum  parentum,  vel  si
parentes  hac  in  parte  negligentes  fuerunt,  preces  Ecclesia3  ad  Deum
pro  his  infantibus  fusas  clementer  exaudiri,  eosdemque  in  gratiam
et  vitam  a  Deo  recipi."  In  this  view  the  great  body  of  Lutheran
divines  concur.  Dr.  Krauth  'says  :  "  On  God's  part  it  is  not  so
necessary  that  He  may  not,  in  an  extraordinary  case,  reach,  in  an
extraordinary  way,  what  baptism  is  his  ordinary  mode  of  ac-
complishing. Food  is  ordinarily  necessary  to  human  life  ;  so  that
the  father  who  voluntarily  withholds  food  from  his  child  is  at
heart  its  murderer.  Yet  food  is  not  so  absolutely  necessary  to
Jiuman  life  that  God  may  not  sustain  life  without  it."  *

Its  Effects.

As  Lutherans  regard  baptism  as  ordmarily  the  necessary  means
of  salvation,  they  must  hold  that  it  communicates  all  that  is
essential  to  that  end.  It  must  be  the  ordinary  means  of  convey-
ing the  merits  of  Christ  for  the  remission  of  sin  and  the  inward
renovation  or  regeneration  of  the  soul.  Such  is,  therefore,  the
doctrine  taught  in  the  standards  of  the  Lutheran  Church.  In
Luther's  Larger  Catechism  it  is  said,  "  Quare  rei  sunimam  ita
simplicissime  complectere,  hanc  videlicet  baptismi  virtutem,  opus,
fructum  et  finem  esse,  ut  homines  salvos  faciat.     Nemo  enim  in

1  Gerhard,  Loci  Theohgici,  xxi.  viii.  238;  edit.  Tiibiiigen,  1769,  vol.  ix.  p.  282.

2  Ibid.  p.  284.

3  Romanists,  when  a  child  is  in  imminent  peril,  baptize  it  in  utero.

4  The  Conservative  Reformation  and  its  Theolot/i/,  as  represented  in  tJie  Aitr/sburff  Con-
fession, and  in  the  History  and  Literature  of  the  Evangelical  Lutheran  Church.  By
Charles  P.  Krauth,  D.D.,  Norton  Professor  of  Theolog\'  in  the  Evangelical  Lutheran  Sem-
inary, and  Professor  of  Intellectual  and  Moral  Philosophy  in  the  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania, Philadelphia:  .J.  B.  Lippincott  &  Co.  1871,  pp.  4-31.  We  are  sorry  to  see  that  Dr.
Krauth  labours  to  prove  that  the  Westminster  Confession  teaches  that  only  a  certain  part,
or  some  of  those  who  die  in  infancy,  are  saved  ;  this  he  does  by  putting  his  own  construc-
tion on  the  language  of  that  Confession.  We  can  only  say  that  we  never  saw  a  Calvinistic
theologian  who  held  that  doctrine.  We  are  not  learned  enough  to  venture  the  assertion
that  no  Calvinist  ever  held  it;  but  if  all  Calvinists  are  responsible  for  what  every  Calvinist
has  ever  said,  and  all  Lutherans  are  responsible  for  everything  Luther  or  Lutherans  have
ever  said,  then  Dr.  Krauth  as  well  as  ourselves  mil  have  a  heavy  burden  to  cany.


600  PART  III.     Ch.   XX.  — the  means   OF   GRACE.

hoc  baptizatm-,  ut  princeps  evadat,  verum  siciit  verba  sonant,  ufc
salvus  fiat.  Cffiteriim  salvum  fieri  scinius  nihil  aliud  esse,  quam
a  peccati,  mortis  et  diaboh  tyrannide  hberari,  in  Christi  regnum
deferri,  ac  cum  eo  immortalem  vitam  agere."  ^  Gerhard  says  all
the  effects  of  baptism  may  be  included  under  the  two  heads
mentioned  in  Titus  iii.  5,  regeneration  and  renovation.  The
former  he  says  includes,  (^1.)  The  gift  of  faith.  (2.)  The  re-
mission of  sins.  (3.)  Reception  into  the  covenant  of  grace.
(4.)  Putting  on  Christ.  (5.)  Adoption  into  the  number  of  the
sons  of  God.  (6.)  Deliverance  from  the  power  of  Satan,  and,
(7.)  The  possession  of  eternal  life.  Under  the  head  of  renova-
tion he  includes  :  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  begins  to  renew
the  intellect,  the  will,  and  all  the  powers  of  the  soul ;  so  that  the
lost  image  of  God  begins  to  be  restored ;  the  inward  man  is  re-
newed, the  old  man  put  off,  and  the  new  man  put  on  ;  the  Spirit
resists  and  gains  dominion  over  the  flesh,  that  sin  may  not  reign
in  the  body.  The  same  doctrine,  in  different  words,  is  taught  by
all  the  leading  Lutheran  theologians.^

To  what  is  this  Efficacy  of  Baptism  to  he  referred  ?

The  effects  attributed  to  baptism  are  not  to  be  referred  to  any
power  inherent  in  the  water ;  nor  to  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit
"  extrinsecus  accidens  ;  "  but  to  the  power  of  the  Spirit  inherent
in  the  Word.  It  has  been  repeatedly  mentioned  that  Lutherans
teach  that  there  is  a  divine,  supernatural  power  in  the  Word  of
God,  which  always  produces  a  saving  effect  upon  those  who  hear
it,  unless  it  is  voluntarily  resisted.  In  the  case  of  infants  there
is  no  such  voluntary  resistance  ;  and  therefore  to  them  baptism  is
always  efficacious  in  conveying  to  them  all  the  benefits  of  re-
demption, which,  however,  may  be  forfeited  by  neglect,  mibelief,
or  bad  conduct  in  after  life.  The  word  connected  with  baptism
includes  the  command  to  baptize  ;  the  formula,  the  ordinance  being
administered  in  the  name  of  the  Holy  Trinity ;  and  especially  the
promise,  "He  that  believeth  and  is  baptized,  shall  be  saved."
In  Luther's  Shorter  Catechism,  in  answer  to  the  question,  "  Qui
potest  aqua  tam  magnas  res  efficere?  it  is  said,  "Aqua  certe
tantas  res  non  efficit,  sed  verbum  Dei,  quod  in  et  cum  aqua  est,
et  fides,  qure  verbo  Dei  aqure  addito  credit.  Quia  aqua  sine  verbo
Dei  est  simpliciter  aqua,  et  non  est  baptismus  :  sed  addito  verbo

1  Ccttechismtis  Major,  iv.  24,  2.5;  Hase,  ut  supra,  p.  539.

2  Gerhard,  ut  supra,  vol.  ix.  pp.  148-1.57.     For  other  Lutheran  tlieologians  see  Schmid,
Dogmatik  der  evangelisch-luthcrischen  Kirche,  Frankfort  and  Erlangen,  1353.


g  13.]  BAPTISM.    LUTHERAN  DOCTRINE.  607

Dei  est  baptismus,  hoc  est,  salutaris  aqua  gratire  et  vitre,  et  lava-
cruni  regenevationis  in  Spiritu  Sancto,  sicut  Paulus  ait  ad  Tit.
iii.  5."  ^  These  ideas  are  expanded  in  the  Larger  Catechism.
Among  other  things  it  is  there  said,  "  Ad  hunc  modum  ita  dis-
cerne,  longe  aliam  rem  esse  baptismum,  atque  omnes  ahas  aquas  :
non  naturalis  essentif\3  gratia,  sed  quod  huic  ahquid  prffistantioris
rei  adjungitar.  Ipse  enim  Deus  baptismum  suo  honestat  nomine,
suaque  virtute  confirmat.  Eam  ob  rem  non  tantum  naturahs
aqua,  sed  etiam  divina,  coelestis,  sancta  et  sahitifera  aqua,  quo-
cunque  alio  laudis  titulo  nobilitari  potest,  habenda  et  dicenda  est ;
hocque  non  nisi  verbi  gratia,  quod  coeleste  ac  sanctum  verbum  est,
neque  a  quoquam  satis  ampHter,  digne  et  cumulate  laudari  potest,
siquidem  omnem  Dei  virtutem  et  potentiam  in  se  habet  compre-
hensam.  Inde  quoque  baptismus  suam  accipit  essentiam,  ut  sac-
ramenti  appellationem  mereatur,  quemadmodum  sanctus  etiam
docet  Augustinus :  Accedit,  inquit,  verbum  ad  elementum,  et  fit
sacramentum,  hoc  est,  res  sancta  et  divina."  ^  If  the  Word  com-
prehends in  itself,  "  all  the  virtue  and  power  of  God,"  and  if  that
Word  is  united  with  the  water  of  baptism,  it  is  easy  to  understand
how  the  ordinance  has  all  the  potency  attributed  to  it.

The  Condition  07i  which  the  Efficacy  of  Baptisrn  is  suspended.

That  condition  is  faith.  It  is  the  clearly  pronounced  doctrine
of  the  Lutheran  Church  that  baptism  is  altogether  useless  or  void
of  any  saving  effect,  unless  the  recipient  be  a  believer.  And  by
faith  is  not  meant  mere  speculative  assent,  such  as  Simon  Magus
had,  but  true,  living,  and  saving  faith.  On  these  points  the
Lutheran  standards  are  explicit.  In  the  Larger  Catechism,  it  is
said  :  "  Qui  crediderit  et  baptizatus  fuerit,  salvus  erit.  Hoc  est :
sola  fides  personam  dignam  facit,  ut  hanc  salutarem  et  divinam
aquam  utiliter  suscipiat.  Cum  enim  hoc  in  verbis  una  cum  aqua
nobis  offeratur  et  proponatur,  non  alia  ratione  potest  suscipi,  quam
ut  hoc  ex  animo  credamus.  Citra  fidem  nihil  prodest  baptismus,
tametsi  per  sese  coelestis  et  inaestimabilis  thesaurus  esse  negari
non  possit."  And  again  it  is  said,  "  Absente  fide,  nudum  et  in-
efiicax  signum  tantummodo  permanet."^

From  this  it  follows  that  in  the  case  of  adults,  faith  and  there-
fore regeneration,  must  precede  baptism.  And  consequently  in
their  case  the  design  and  effect  of  baptism  cannot  be  to  convey
the  remission  of  sin  and  renovation  of  the  heart,  but  simply  to  con-

1  Catechismus  Minor,  iv.  9,  10;  Hase,  p.  377.

2  Catechismus  Majnr,  iv.  17,  18;  Jbifl.  pp.  537,  538.

3  IV.  33,  34,  and  73 ;  Hasc,  pp.  541,  549.


608  PART  in.     Cii.   XX.  — THE  MEANS   OF   GRACE.

firm  and  strengthen  a  faith  ah-eady  possessed.  Thus  Gerhard  and
Baier  as  quoted  above,  say  :  ^  "  Adultis  credentibus  principaliter
pr;«stat  usum  obsignatioiiis  ac  testificationis  de  gratia  Dei,"  and
"•  Infantibus  quidem  roque  omnibus  per  baptismum  primuni  con-
fertur  et  obsignatur  fides,  per  quam  meritum  Christi  appUcatur.
Adultis  Vero  ilKs  tautum,  qui  fideni  ex  verbo  conceperunt  ante
baptismi  susceptionem,  baptismus  earn  obsignat  et  confirmat.'"

With  regard  to  infants  Lutherans  teach  that  they  have  true
faith.  Gerhard  says  :  "  Nos  non  de  modo  fidei  sunius  solliciti,
sed  in  ilia  simplicitate  acquiescimus,  quod  infantes  vere  credant."^
Chenuiitz  says  :  "  Nequaquam  concedendum  est,  infantes,  qui  bap-

tizantur,  vel  sine  fide  esse,  vel  in  ahena  fide  baptizari

Aliena  quidem  vel  parentum  vel  offerentium  fides,  parvulos  ad
Christum  in  baptismo  adducit  Marc.  x.  13,  et  orat,  ut  propria
fide  donentur.  Sed  per  lavacrum  aqus  in  verbo,  Christum  Spiritu
suo  infantibus  qui  baptizantur,  operari  et  efficacem  esse,  ut  reg-
num  Dei  accipiant,  non  est  dubium  :  licet,  quoraodo  illud  fiat,
non  intelligamus."  Again,  "  Sicut  enim  circumcisio  etiam  par-
vulorem  in  V.  T.  fuit  signaculum  justitise  fi.dei,  ita,  quia  in  N.  T.
mfantes  baptizati  Deo  placent,  et  salvi  sunt,  non  possunt,  nee
debent  inter  infideles  rejici,  sed  recte  annumerantur  fidelibus."  ^

As  the  word  produces  faith  in  those  who  hear  it,  provided  they
do  not  resist  its  influence,  so  baptism  in  which  the  word  is  em-
bodied (so  that  it  is  verbuni  visibile),  produces  faith  in  infants
who  are  incapable  of  resistance.  On  this  subject  Dr.  Krauth
says :  "  That  this  grace  is  offered  whenever  baptism  is  adminis-
tered, and  is  actually  conferred  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  Avhenever  the
individual  receiving  it  does  not  present  in  himself  a  conscious  vol-
untar}^  barrier  to  its  efiicacy.  This  barrier,  in  the  case  of  an
individual  personally  responsible,  is  unbelief.  In  the  case  of  an
infant,  there  is  no  conscious  voluntary  barrier,  and  there  is  a
divinely  wrought  receptivity  of  grace.  The  objector  says,  the
infant  cannot  voluntarily  receive  the  grace,  therefore  grace  is  not
given.  We  reverse  the  proposition  and  reply,  the  infant  cannot
voluntarily  reject  grace,  therefore  the  grace  is  given.  When  we
speak  of  a  divinely  wrought  receptivity  of  grace,  we  imply  that
whatever  God  offers  in  the  Word  or  element  bears  with  the  offer
the  power  of  being  received.  When  He  says  to  the  man  with  a
withered  arm,  '  Reach  forth  thine  arm  ! '  that  which  was  impos-
sible by  nature  is  made  possible  by  the  very  word  of  command.

1  Pages  518,  519.

2  Loci  Thculofjici,  xxi.  viii.  §  230;  edit.  Tiibiiigen,  1769,  vol.  ix.  pp.  275,  276.

8  Loc.  Theol.  iii.  De  BajAisiiw,  edit.  Frankfort  and  Wittenberg,  1653,  p.  147,  b,  of  third  set.


§  14  ]   BAPTISM.     DOCTRmE   OF   THE   CHURCH   OF  ROME.  609

The  Word  and  Sacraments  per  se  break  up  the  absoluteness  of
the  natural  bondage ;  they  brmg  an  instant  possibility  of  salva-
tion. Grace  is  in  them  so  far  prevenient  that  he  who  has  them
may  be  saved,  and  if  he  be  lost,  is  lost  by  his  own  fault  alone."  ^

§  14.  Doctrine  of  the  Church  of  Rome.

The  Canons  of  the  Council  of  Trent  on  the  subject  of  bap-
tism are  brief  and  comprehensive.  The  Canons  anathematize
those  who  teach  that  Christian  baptism  has  no  superior  efficacy  to
that  of  John  ;  that  true,  natural  water  is  not  essential  in  the  ad-
ministration of  this  sacrament,  or  that  the  language  of  our  Lord
in  John  iii.  5,  "  Except  a  man  be  born  of  water,"  etc.,  is  to  be
understood  metaphorically  ;  that  heretical  baptism  if  performed
in  the  right  way  and  with  the  intention  of  doing  what  the  Church
does  is  not  valid  ;  that  baptism  is  a  matter  of  indifference,  and
not  necessary  to  salvation  ;  and  also  those  who  deny  the  propriety,
necessity,  or  efficacy  of  infant  baptism,  etc.  The  Roman  Cate-
chism enters  much  more  fully  on  the  subject.  It  defines  baptism
as  the  "  sacramentum  regenerationis  per  aquam  in  verbo."  Its
material  is  "  omne  naturalis  aquse  genus,  sive  ea  maris  sit,  sive
fluvii,  sive  paludis,  sive  putei,  aut  fontis,  qute  sine  ulla  adjunctione
aqua  dici  solet."  ^  The  form  prescribed  by  Christ  in  Matthew
xxviii.  19,  is  to  be  observed.  As  baptism  is  an  ablution  it  may
be  performed  by  immersion,  affusion,  or  sprinkling.  There  should
be  sponsors  to  assume  the  responsibility  of  the  religious  education
of  the  newly  baptized.  Sponsorship  is  such  an  impediment  to
marriage  that  if  a  sponsor  should  marry  his  or  her  godchild,  the
marriage  would  be  null  and  void.  Baptism  by  laymen  or  by
women,  in  cases  of  necessity,  is  allowable.  Infants  receive  in
baptism  spiritual  grace ;  "  non  quia  mentis  sure  assensione  cre-
dant,  sed  quia  '  parentum  fide,  si  parentes  fideles  fuerint,  sin
minus,  fide  (ut  D.  Augustini  verbis  loquamur)  universte  societatis
sanctorum  muniuntur.'  "  Those  who  are  admitted  to  baptism  must
desire  to  be  baptized.  Hence  the  unwilling,  the  insane,  the  un-
conscious (nisi  vitse  periculum  immineat),  are  not  the  proper  sub-
jects of  baptism.  In  the  case  of  infants,  the  will  of  the  Church
answers  for  their  will.  Faith  also  is  necessary  ;  for  our  Lord
says,  "  He  that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved."  So
also  is  repentance.  "  Cum  baptismus  ob  earn  rem  expetendus  sit,
ut  Christum  induamus,  et  cum  eo  conjungaraur,  plane  constat,

1  The  Cunsei'Vdtive  Reformation  and  its  Theology,  p.  439.

2  II,  ii.  quies.  •!,  G  [7] ;  Slreitwolf,  Lihri  SymboUci,  vol.  i.  pp.  259,  260.
VOL.  III.  39


GIO  TAUT  III.     Ch.  XX.— the  MEANS   OF   GRACE.

merito  a  sacra  ablutioiie  rejiciendum  esse,  cui  in  vitiis  et  peccatis
perseverare  propositum  est ;  prassertini  vero,  quia  nihil  eorum,
qii;e  ad  Christum,  et  Ecclesiani  pertinent,  frustra  suscipiendum
est:  inanemque  baptismuni,  si  justitia?,  et  sakitis  gratiam  specte-
nuis,  in  eo  futurum  esse,  satis  intelligimus,  qui  secundum  carnem
ambulare,  non  secundum  Spiritum  cogitat :  etsi,  quod  ad  sacra-
mentum  pertinet,  perfectani  ejus  rationem  sine  ulla  dubitatione
consequitur,  si  modo,  cum  rite  baptizatur,  in  animo  habeat  id
accipere,  quod  a  sancta  Ecclesia  administratur."  ^

The  first  effect  of  baptism  is  the  remission  of  sin.  And  by-
remission  is  meant  not  only  pardon,  but  the  removal  of  sin.  The
soul  is  so  cleansed  that  nothing  of  the  nature  of  sin  remains  in  it.
"  Hoc  primum  tradere  oportet,  peccatum  sive  a  primis  parentibus
origine  contractum,  sive  a  nobis  commissum,  quamvis  etiam  adeo
nefarium  sit,  ut  ne  cogitari  quidem  posse  videatur,  admirabiK
hujus  sacramonti  virtute  remitti,  et  condonari."  The  Catechism
quotes  the  anathema  pronounced  by  the  Council  of  Trent  on  those
who  teach,  "  Quamvis  peccata  in  baptismo  remittantur,  ea  tamen
prorsus  non  tolli,  aut  radicitus  evelli,  sed  quodam  modo  abradi,
ita  ut  peccatorum  radices  animo  infixge  adhuc  remaneant."  ^  The
language  of  the  Council  is,  "  In  renatis  nihil  odit  Deus,  quia  nihil
est  damnationis  iis,  qui  vere  consepulti  sunt  cum  Christo  per  bap-
tisma  in  mortem  :  qui  non  secundum  carnem  ambulant,  sed  vete-
rem  hominem  exuentes,  et  novum,  qui  secundum  Deum  creatus
est,  induentes,  innocentes,  immaculati,  puri,  innoxii,  ac  Deo  dilecti
effecti  sunt."  ^  "  Concupiscentia,  quae  ex  peccato  est,  nUiil  aliud
est,  nisi  animi  appetitio,  natura  sua  rationi  repugnans :  qui  tamen
motus  si  voluntatis  consensum,  aut  negligentiam  conjunctam  non
habeat,  a  vera  peccati  natura  longe  abest."*

One  of  the  propositions  which  Perrone  lays  down  on  this  sub-
ject, is,  that  "  Per  D.  N.  J.  C.  gratiam,  qua?  in  baptismo  confer-
tur,  reatus  originalis  peccati  remittitur,  ac  tollitur  totum  id,  quod
veram  et  propriam  peccati  rationem  habet."''

Baptism,  according  to  Romanists,  avails  not  only  for  the  remis-
sion and  removal  of  all  sin,  but  also  for  the  inward  sanctification
of  the  soul.  "Exponendum  erit,  hujus  sacramenti  virtute  nos  non
solum  a  malis,  qu;e  vere  maxima  dicenda  sunt,  liberari,  verum
etiam  eximiis  bonis  augeri.     Animus  enim  noster  divina  gratia

1  II.  ii.  27  [xxxiii.]  30  [xxxviii.] ;  Streitwolf,  pp.  276,  279.

2  Catechismus  Eomanus,  ii.  ii.  31  [xlii.] ;  Streitwolf,  vol.  i.  pp.  280,  281.
8  Sess.  V.  5;  Ibid.  vol.  i.  p.  19.

■*  Cattclnsmus  Roinanus,  ii.  ii.  32  [xliii.];  Ihid.  pp.  281,  282.

*  Prcelectiones  Thcoloc/ica,  De  Baptismo,  cap.  vi.  170,  5th  edit.  Tiu'in,  1839,  vol.  vi.  p.  59


§  15.]  THE  LORD'S  SUPPER.     THE  SCRIPTURAL  ACCOUNT.   611

repletur,  qua  justi,  et  filii  Dei  effecti,  seternoe  quoque  salutis
herecles  instituiniur."'  ^  It  thus  appears,  that,  according  to  the
Church  of  Rome,  all  the  benefits  of  the  redemption  of  Christ  are
conveyed  to  the  soul  by  bajDtisni ;  and  that  there  is  no  other
divinely  appointed  channel  of  their  communication.

The  Council  of  Trent  declared,  "  Si  quis  dixerit,  in  tribus  sacra-
nientis,  baptismo  scilicet,  confirmatione,  et  ordine,  non  imprimi
characterem  in  anima,  hoc  est  signum  quoddam  spirituale,  et  in-
delebile,  unde  ea  iterari  non  possunt ;  anathema  sit."  ^  What  this
internal  spiritual  something  is,  does  not  admit  of  explanation.  It
neither  reveals  itself  in  the  consciousness  nor  manifests  itseK  in
the  life.  It  is  assumed  to  be  something  analogous  in  the  spiritual
sphere,  to  the  insignia  of  merit  or  decorations  of  nobility  in  the
sphere  of  civil  or  social  Ufe.

§  15.   The  Lord's  Supper.

The  passages  of  Scripture  directly  referring  to  the  sacrament
of  the  Lord's  Supper  are  the  follomng  :  Matthew  xxvi.  26-28,
"  And  as  they  were  eating,  Jesus  took  bi'ead,  and  blessed  it
(euyVo-yi/fjas),  and  brake  it,  and  gave  it  to  the  disciples,  and  said,
Take,  eat ;  this  is  my  body.  And  he  took  the  cup  and  gave
thanks  (euxapto'T'ja'as),  and  gave  it  to  them,  saying,  Drink  ye  all
of  it :  for  this  is  my  blood  of  the  new  testament,  which  is  shed  for
many  for  the  remission  of  sins."

Mark  xiv.  22-2-J:,  "  And  as  they  did  eat,  Jesus  took  bread,  and
blessed,  and  brake  it,  and  gave  to  them,  and  said.  Take,  eat ;  this
is  my  body.  And  he  took  the  cup ;  and  when  he  had  given
thanks,  he  gave  it  to  them :  and  they  all  drank  of  it.  And  he
said  unto  them.  This  is  my  blood  of  the  new  testament,  which  is
shed  for  many."

Luke  xxii.  19,  20,  "  And  he  took  bread,  and  gave  thanks,  and
brake  it,  and  gave  unto  them,  saying.  This  is  my  body  which  is
given  for  you  :  this  do  in  remembrance  of  me.  Likewise  also  the
cup  after  supper,  saying.  This  cup  is  the  new  testament  in  my
blood,  which  is  shed  for  you."

1  Corinthians  x.  15-17,  "  I  speak  as  to  wise  men ;  judge  ye  what
I  say.  The  cup  of  blessing  which  we  bless,  is  it  not  the  commu-
nion of  the  blood  of  Christ  ?  The  bread  which  we  break,  is  it  not
the  communion  of  the  body  of  Christ  ?  For  we  being  many  are
one  bread,  and  one  body ;  for  we  are  all  partakers  of  that  one
bread  "

1  CatecMsniHS  Romanus,  ii.  ii.  38  [1] ;  Streitwolf,  vol.  i.  p.  286.

2  Sess.  vii.  De  Sacramentis  in  genere,  canon  9 ;  Streitwolf,  pp.  39,  40.


612       PART  m.   Ch.  XX.  — the  means  of  grace.

1  Corintliiaiis  xi.  23-29,  "  For  I  have  received  of  tlie  Lord  that
which  also  I  delivered  unto  you,  That  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  same
night  in  which  he  was  betrayed,  took  bread :  and  when  he  had
given  thanks,  he  brake  it,  and  said.  Take,  eat ;  this  is  my  body,
which  is  broken  for  you :  this  do  in  remembrance  of  me.  After  the
same  manner  also  he  took  the  cup,  when  he  had  supped,  r.aying,
This  cup  is  the  new  testament  in  my  blood  :  this  do  ye,  as  oft  as
ye  drink  it,  in  remembrance  of  me.  For  as  often  as  ye  eat  this
bread,  and  drink  this  cup,  ye  do  shew  the  Lord's  death  till  he
come.  Wherefore,  whosoever  shall  eat  this  bread,  and  drink  this
cup  of  the  Lord,  unworthily,  shall  be  guilt}^  of  the  body  and  blood
of  the  Lord.  But  let  a  man  examine  himself,  and  so  let  him  eat
of  that  bread,  and  drink  of  that  cup.  For  he  that  eateth  and
drinketh  unworthily,  eateth  and  drinketh  damnation  to  himself,
not  discerning  the  Lord's  body."

Apart  from  matters  of  doubtful  interpretation,  these  passages
plainly  teach,  First,  that  the  Lord's  Supper  is  a  divine  institution
of  perpetual  obligation.  Second,  that  the  material  elements  to  be
used  in  the  celebration,  are  brea,d  and  wine.  Third,  that  the  im-
portant constituent  parts  of  the  service  are,  (1.)  The  consecration
of  the  elements.  (2.)  The  breaking  of  the  bread  and  pouring
out  of  the  wine.  (3.)  The  distribution  and  the  reception  by  the
communicants  of  the  bread  and  wine.  Fourth,  that  the  design
of  the  ordinance  is,  (1.)  To  commemorate  the  death  of  Christ.
(2.)  To  represent,  to  effect,  and  to  avow  our  participation  in  the
body  and  blood  of  Christ.  (3.)  To  represent,  effect,  and  avow
the  union  of  believers  mth  Christ  and  with  each  other.  And
(4.)  To  signify  and  seal  our  acceptance  of  the  new  covenant  as
ratified  by  the  blood  of  Christ.  Fifth,  the  conditions  for  profit-
able communion  are,  (1.)  Knowledge  to  discern  the  Lord's  body.
(2.)  Faith  to  feed  upon  Him.  (3.)  Love  to  Christ  and  to  his
people.

The  main  points  of  controversy  concerning  this  ordinance  are :
(1.)  The  sense  in  which  the  bread  and  wine  are  the  body  and
blood  of  Christ.  (2.)  The  sense  in  whicli  the  communicaut  re-
ceives the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  in  this  ordinance.  (3.)  The
benefits  which  the  sacrament  confers,  and  the  manner  in  which
those  benefits  are  conveyed.  (4.)  The  conditions  on  which  the
efficacy  of  the  ordinance  is  suspended.

The  Lord's  Supper  is  a  divme  Ordinance  of  perpetual  Obligation.

This  has  never  been  doubted  in  the  Christian  Church.  That
Christ    intended    that  the  ordinance  should    continue  to  be  ob-


g  i.^.l    THE  LORD'S  SUPPER.  ITS  PERPETUAL  OBLIGATION.  613

served  in  liis  Church  until  his  second  advent  is  plain,  (1.)  From
hi«  express  command  given  in  Lulce  xxii.  19,  and  repeated  by  the
Apostle  in  1  Corinthians  xi.  24.  (2.)  The  design  of  the  ordinance
which  is  declared  to  be  the  commemoration  of  Christ ;  the  con-
stantly repeated  proclamation  of  his  expiatory  death  in  the  ears  of
men  ;  and  the  communication  of  the  benefits  of  that  death  to  his
people,  necessarily  assumes  that  it  is  to  be  observed  so  long  as
Christ,  in  the  visible  manifestation  of  his  person,  is  absent  from  his
Church.  (3.)  That  the  Apostles  so  understood  the  command  of
Christ  is  plain  from  their  continuing  to  observe  this  ordinance
to  which  such  frequent  reference  is  made  in  their  writings,  under
the  designations,  "breaking  of  bread,"  "the  Lord's  Supper,"  and
"  The  Lord's  table."  (4.)  The  uniform  practice  of,  the  Church  on
this  subject  admits  of  no  other  solution,  than  the  appointment  of
Christ  and  the  authority  of  the  Apostles.

The  names  given  to  this  sacrament  in  the  early  Church  were  very
various.  It  was  called,  (1.)  Euxaptorca,  not  only  by  the  Greeks  but
also  by  the  Latins,  because  as  Chrysostom  says,  iroXXwv  amv  evepye-
Tqjxa.T(jiv  L'dixvqai'i?-  It  is  a  solemn  thanksgiving  for  the  blessings  of
redemption.  This  designation  being  so  appropriate,  all  Eng-
lish speaking  Christians  are  fond  of  calling  it  the  eucharist.
(2.)  EuAoyta,  for  the  same  reason.  The  words  evxapio-Tew  and  evAoyew
are  interchanged.  Sometimes  the  one  and  sometimes  the  other  is
used  for  the  same  act,  and  hence  evxa-pio-ria  and  euAoyta  are  used  in
the  same  sense.  In  1  Corinthians  x.  16,  St.  Paul  calls  the  sacra-
mental cup  TO  TTorrjptov  Trjs  ei'Aoytas,  "  the  cup  of  blessing,"  in  allusion
to  the  rT'::^.7in  Di3  drunk  at  the  paschal  supper.  (3.)  Upoaijiopd,
"  offering,"  because  of  the  gifts  or  offerings  for  the  poor  and  for
the  service  of  the  Church  made  when  the  Lord's  Supper  was  cel-
ebrated. (4.)  @v(TLa,  "  sacrifice."  Properly,  the  act  of  sacrific-
ing ;  metonymically,  the  thing  sacrificed  or  the  victim  ;  tro^Mcally
of  anything  offered  to  God,  as  obedience  or  praise.  In  Philij)-
pians  ii.  17,  Paul  speaks  of  "  the  sacrifice  and  service  of  faith ;  "
and  in  iv.  18,  he  says  that  the  contributions  of  the  saints  were  "an
odour  of  a  sweet  sm.ell,  a  sacrifice  acceptable,  well  pleasing  to  God."
And  in  Hebrews  xiii.  15  we  read  of  a  Ovrria  atico-eojc,  "  a  sacrifice  of
praise."  The  praise  was  the  sacrifice  or  offering  made  to  God.
The  Lord's  Supper  in  this  sense  was  at  first  called  a  sacrifice,
both  because  it  was  itself  a  thank-offering  to  God  and  because
attended  by  alms  which  were  regarded  as  tokens  of  gratitude  to

1  Tn  Mntthenm  Homilia  xxv.  [xxvi.]  3  ;  Works,  edit.  Montfaucon,  Paris,  1836,  vol.  vii.
p.  352  [310.  d].


614         PART  III.     Ch.   XX.  — the   means    OF   GRACE.

Christ  for  the  benefits  of  his  redemption.  Afterwards,  it  was  so
called,  because  it  was  a  commemoration  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ
upon  tlie  cross;  and  finally  because  it  came  to  be  regarded  by
Romanists  as  itself  an  expiatory  sacrifice.  For  this  reason  the
consecrated  wafer  is  by  them  called  "  hostia,"  the  host,  or  victim,
because  it  was  assumed  to  be  the  true  body  of  Christ  offered  to
God  in  expiation  of  the  sins  of  the  faithful.  (.5.^  Mvanqpiov,
something  secret,  or  having  a  sacred  or  secret  import.  As  the
Lord's  Supper  was  a  significant  memorial  of  the  greatest  of  all
mysteries,  the  death  of  the  Son  of  God  upon  the  cross,  it  was  ap-
propriately designated  /j-va-T^piov.  This  word,  however,  is  applied
in  its  general  sense  to  both  sacraments  and  even  to  other  sacred
rites.  Anotlier  reason  may  be  assigned  for  this  designation.  The
Lord's  Supper  was  celebrated  in  secret ;  in  so  far  that  the  pro-
miscuous body  of  attendants  on  Christian  worship  was  dismissed
before  the  sacrament  was  administered.  (6.)  Suvat-ts,  "the  assem-
bly," because  from  the  nature  of  the  service  it  implied  the  coming
together  of  believers.  (7.)  "  Sacramentum,"  in  the  general  sense
of  pvcnripiov,  by  way  of  eminence  applied  to  the  Lord's  Supper
as  "  the  "  sacrament.  It  was  also  after  the  idea  of  the  sacrificial
character  of  the  eucharist  became  prevalent,  called  "  sacramen-
tum altaris,"  the  sacrament  of  the  altar.  This  designation  sur-
vived the  doctrine  on  which  it  was  founded,  as  it  was  retained  by
Luther,  who  earnestly  repudiated  the  idea  that  the  Lord's  Supper
is  a  sacrifice.  (8.)  "  Missa,"  or  mass.  This  word  has  been
variously  explained  ;  but  it  is  almost  universally,  at  the  present
time,  assumed  to  come  from  the  words  used  in  dismission  of  the
congregation.  "  Ite,  missa  est,"  "  Go,  the  congregation  is  dis-
missed." First  the  unconverted  hearers  were  dismissed,  and  then
the  catechumens,  the  baptized  faithful  only  remaining  for  the
communion  service.  Hence  there  was  in  the  early  Cliurch  a
''  missa  infidelium,"  a  "  missa  catechumenorum,"  and  finally  a
"  missa  fidelium."  There  seems  to  have  been  a  different  service
adapted  to  these  several  classes  of  hearers.  Hence  the  word
"  missa  "  came  to  be  used  in  the  sense  of  the  Greek  word  Aetrovp-yta
or  service.  As  under  the  Old  Testament  the  offering  of  sacrifices
was  the  main  part  of  the  temple  service,  so  in  the  Christian
Church,  when  the  Lord's  Supper  was  regarded  as  an  expiatory
offering,  it  became  the  middle  point  in  public  worship  and  was
called  emphatically  the  service,  or  mass.  Since  the  Reformation
this  has  become  universal  as  the  designation  of  the  eucharist  as
celebrated  in  the  Church  of  Rome.


§  15.]  THE   LORD'S    SUPPER.     THE   ELEMENTS.  615

The  Elements  to  he  used  in  the  Lord's  Supper.

The  Avord  element,  in  this  connection,  is  used  in  the  same  sense
as  the  Latin  word  "  elementum,"  and  the  Greek  word  orotxeta,
for  the  component  parts  of  any  tiling ;  the  simple  materials  or
rudiments.  Bread  and  wine  are  the  elements  employed  in  the
celebration  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  because  they  are  the  simple
corporeal  materials  employed  as  the  symbols  of  the  body  and
blood  of  Christ.

As  the  Lord's  Supper  was  originally  instituted  in  connection
with  the  Passover,  there  is  no  doubt  that  unleavened  bread  was
used  on  that  occasion.  It  is  evident,  however,  from  the  apostolic
liistory,  that  the  Apostles  used  whatever  kind  of  bread  was  at
hand.  There  is  no  significancy  either  in  the  kind  of  bread  or  in
the  form  of  the  loaf.  It  is  enough  that  it  is  bread.  This  makes
it  the  proper  emblem  of  Him  who  declared  Himself  to  be  the
true  bread  which  came  down  from  heaven.

Although  it  seems  so  obvious  that  it  is  a  matter  of  indifference
what  kind  of  bread  is  used  in  the  Lord's  Supper,  a  serious  con-
troversy arose  on  this  subject  in  the  eleventh  century  between
the  Greek  and  Latin  churches :  the  former  condemning  the  use
of  unleavened  bread  as  a  remnant  of  Judaism,  and  the  latter
insisting  not  only  on  its  propriety,  but  on  its  being  the  only  kind
allowable,  because  used  by  Christ  himself  when  He  instituted
the  sacrament.  The  two  churches  adhere  to  their  ancient  con-
victions and  practice  to  the  present  day.  The  Lutherans  in  this
matter  side,  in  their  practice,  with  the  Roinanists.  The  Reformed
regard  it  as  a  matter  of  indifference  ;  although  they  object  to
the  "  placentulce  orbiculares,"  or  round  wafers,  used  by  Roman-
ists in  this  ordinance  ;  because  flour  and  water  or  flour  and  some
glutinous  substance  is  not  bread  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the
word.  It  is  not  used  for  nourishment.  The  use,  therefore,  is
inconsistent  with  the  analogy  between  the  sign  and  the  thing
signified.  The  eucharist  is  a  supper  ;  it  represents  our  feeding
upon  Christ  for  our  spiritual  nourishment  and  growth  in  grace.
Besides,  the  use  of  the  wafer  was  introduced  with  the  rise  of  the
doctrine  of  transubstantiation.  The  consecrated  bread  bemg
regarded  as  the  real  body  of  Christ,  it  was  natural  that  it  should
be  made  in  a  form  which  precluded  the  danger  of  any  particle  of
it  being  profaned.^

I'The  question  of  the  kind  of  bread  used  in  the  eucharist  at  different  times  and  in  dif-
ferent churches  is  discussed  with  great  minuteness  of  detail  in  the  recent  work,  Notilin


616       PART  in.   ch.  XX.  — the  means  of  grace.

Some  of  the  Reformed  theologians  ruise  the  question  whethet
in  places  where  bread  and  wine  cannot  be  obtained,  it  is  lawful
to  use  in  their  stead  other  articles  of  nourishment,  the  most
allied  to  them  in  nature  ?  This  question  they  answer  afHrma-
tively ;  while  they  insist  that  the  command  of  Christ  and  the
practice  of  the  Apostles  should  be  strictly  adhered  to  where  such
adherence  is  possible.

By  wine  as  prescribed  to  be  used  in  this  ordinance,  is  to  bo
understood  "  the  juice  of  the  grape  ; "  and  "  the  juice  of  the
grape  "  in  that  state  which  was,  and  is,  in  common  use,  and  in
the  state  in  which  it  was  known  as  wine.  The  wine  of  the
Bible  was  a  manufactured  article.  It  was  not  the  juice  of  the
grape  as  it  exists  in  the  fruit,  but  that  juice  submitted  to  such  a
process  of  fermentation  as  secured  its  preservation  and  gave  it
the  qualities  ascribed  to  it  in  Scripture.  That  otvo^  in  the  Bible,
when  unqualified  by  such  terms  as  neio,  or  siveet,  means  the  fer-
mented juice  of  the  grape,  is  hardly  an  open  question.  It  has
never  been  questioned  in  the  Church,  if  we  except  a  few  Chris-
tians of  the  present  day.  And  it  may  safely  be  said  that  there
is  not  a  scholar  on  the  continent  of  Europe,  who  has  the  least
doubt  on  the  subject.  Those  in  the  early  Church,  whose  zeal
for  temperance  led  them  to  exclude  wine  from  the  Lord's  table,
were  consistent  enough  to  substitute  water.  They  were  called
Tatiani,  from  the  name  of  their  leader,  or  Encratitaj,  Hydro-
parastatas,  or  Aquarii,  from  their  principles.  They  not  only
abstained  from  the  use  of  wine  and  denounced  as  "  improbos
atque  impios "  those  Avho  di-ank  it,  but  they  also  repudiated
animal  food  and  marriage,  regarding  the  devil  as  their  author.^
The)'^  soon  disappeared  from  history.  The  plain  meaning  of  the
Bible  on  this  subject  has  controlled  the  mind  of  the  Church,  and
it  is  to  be  hoped  will  continue  to  control  it  till  the  end  of  time.^

In  most  churches,  the  wine  used  in  the  Lord's  Supper  is  mixed
with  water.    The  reasons  assigned  for  this  custom,  are,  (1.)  That

Eucharisticn,  a  Commentary.  Expl'tnatory,  Docfrinnl  and  Historical  on  the  Order  for  the
Administration  of  the  LnrcVs  Supper  or  Holy  Communion,  accordinrj  to  the  Use  of  the
Church  cf  En<;l'ind.  By  W.  E.  Scudamore,  M.  A.,  Rector  of  Ditchinghaiu  and  formerly
Fellow  of  St.  .John's  College,  Cambridge;  Kivingtons,  London,  Oxford  and  Cambridge,
1872,  pp.  749-765.

1  Suicer,  Thesaurus  Ecclesiasticus,  sub  VJCe  Syvo-li;  ;  edit.  Amsterdam,  172S,  vol.  ii.
p.  1123.

2  This  is  not  the  place  for  the  discussion  of  what,  in  this  country,  is  called  "  The  Wine
Question."  The  reader  will  find  it  amply  ventilated  in  the  Princeton  Review  for  April  and
October,  18-11,  in  two  articles  from  the  pen  of  Rev.  .John  Maclean,  D.  D.,  and  more  recently
by  the  Rev.  Lyman  H.  Atwatcr,  D.  D.,  in  tlie  same  Review,  October,  1871,  and  January
1872.


§  15.]     THE   LORD'S   SUPPER.     SACRAMENTAL   ACTIONS.      617

the  eucharist  having  been  instituted  at  the  table  of  the  Paschal
supper,  and  the  wine  used  in  the  Passover  being  mixed  with
water,  it  is  morally  certain  that  the  wine  used  by  Christ  when
instituting  this  sacrament,  was  also  thus  mixed.  Hence  it  was
inferred  that  his  disciples  in  all  ages  should  follow  his  example.
That  the  Paschal  cup  contained  wine  mixed  with  water  rests  on
the  authority  of  Jewish  writers.  "  It  was  the  general  practice  of
the  Jews  to  dilute  their  wine  mth  water.  '  Their  wine  was  very
strong,'  says  an  ancient  Jewish  writer,^  '  and  not  fit  for  drinking
unless  water  was  mixed  with  it.'  "  ^  It  is  certain,  from  the  wri-
tings of  the  fathers,  that  this  custom  prevailed  extensively  in  the
primitive  Church.  As  the  Greeks  and  Romans  were  in  the  habit
of  mixing  water  with  their  wine  on  all  ordinary  occasions,  it  is
the  more  natural  that  the  same  usage  should  prevail  in  the
Church.  It  is  still  retained,  both  by  Romanists  and  by  the  Ori-
ental Church.  (2.)  Besides  this  historical  reason  for  the  usage  in
question,  it  Avas  urged  that  it  adds  to  the  appropriate  significance
of  the  ordinance.  As  water  and  blood  flowed  from  the  side  of
our  Lord  on  the  cross,  it  is  proper,  it  is  said,  that  water  should
be  mixed  with  the  wine  in  the  service  intended  to  be  commemo-
rative of  his  death.  This  being  the  case,  the  quantity  of  the
water  used  was  declared  to  be  a  matter  of  indifference.  In  the
First  Book  of  Edward  VI.  prepared  for  the  Church  of  England,
the  minister  was  ordered  to  put  into  the  cup  "  a  little  pure  and
clean  water."  This  order  was  omitted  from  the  rubric,  and  has
never  been  restored.  Merati,  of  the  Church  of  Rome,  says:
"  A  little  water  ought  to  be  mixed  by  the  priest  with  the  wine
on  the  altar,  not  .  .  .  .  for  necessity  of  the  sacrament  or  divine
precept,  ....  but  only  of  ecclesiastical  precept  obliging  under
mortal  sin."  ^

The  Sacramental  Actio7is.

The  first  of  these  is  the  introductory  and  consecrating  prayer.
The  object  of  this  prayer  is  threefold :  —

1.  To  give  thanks  to  God  for  the  gift  of  his  Son,  whose  death
we  are  about  to  commemorate.

2.  To  prepare  the  hearts  of  the  communicants  for  the  solemn
service  on  which  they  are  attending.  To  this  end  the  prayer
must  be  appropriate.  And  to  be  appropriate,  it  should  be  well
considered.     This   is   a   matter   of   great   importance.     It  often

1  Gloss  in  Lightfoot,  Tlora  ITebraicce  in  St.  Matthew  xxvi.  27,  n.  v.  0pp.  torn.  ii.  p.  380.

2  Scudamore,  tit  supra,  p.  350.

3  Note  by  Merati  in  Gavanti.  Commeniaria  in  Riihricas  MissaUs  Roman!.,  pars  iii.  tit.  iv.
n.  vi.;  Thesaurus  Sacrorum  Kituum,  auctore  Gavanto.    Autrsburg,  1763,  vol.  i.  p.  333.  b.


618  PART  m.     Cii.   XX.  — THE   MEANS   OF   GRACE.

happens  that  the  prayers  offered  on  such  occasions  are  long  and
rambling.  Petitions  are  offered  for  all  classes  of  men ;  for  the
3^oung  and  old ;  for  the  sick  and  afflicted ;  for  Sunday-schools ;
for  missions,  and  all  the  other  objects  usually  embraced  in  the
long  prayer  before  the  sermon.  The  consequence  is,  that  the
minds  of  the  people  are  distracted.  Their  attention  is  turned
away  from  the  service  before  them  ;  and  they  are  much  less  pre-
pared to  celebrate  the  Lord's  death  when  the  prayer  is  ended,
than  they  were  before  it  began.  This  is  as  inappropriate  and  as
hurtful  as  it  would  be  for  a  minister  to  spend  his  strength  in
praying  for  the  conversion  of  the  heathen  or  the  Jews,  when
kneeling  at  the  bedside  of  a  dying  sinner.  The  officiating
clergyman  little  thinks  of  the  pain  he  inflicts  by  such  desultory
prayers.  He  not  only  puts  himself  out  of  sympathy  with  the
people,  but  there  is  a  constant  antagonism  between  him  and
them  during  the  progress  of  the  prayer,  and  when  it  is  over  there
is  a  painful  effort  to  collect  their  scattered  thoughts,  and  to  sup-
press the  feelings  of  disapprobation,  displeasure,  and  sense  of  in-
jury awakened  by  the  want  of  thought  or  want  of  tact  on  the
part  of  the  pastor.

3.  The  third  object  of  this  introductory  prayer,  is  the  conse-
cration of  the  elements.  Bread  and  wine  in  themselves,  or  as
found  in  common  use,  are  not  the  symbols  of  the  body  and  blood
of  Christ.  They  become  such  only  by  being  set  apart  for  that
purpose.  This  is  an  important  part  of  the  service  ;  and  there-
fore, is  made  prominent  in  the  liturgies  of  all  Churches,  and
especially  enjoined  not  only  in  our  Directory  for  Worship,  but
also  in  the  Confession  of  Faith  and  in  our  Larger  Catechism. ^

In  all  these  points  there  is  an  analogy  between  this  prayer  and
"  the  grace  before  meat,"  used  at  an  ordinary  meal.  In  that
service  we  recognize  the  goodness  of  God  in  providing  food  for
our  bodies  ;  we  prepare  our  minds  for  the  thankful  reception  of
his  gifts ;  and  we  pray  that  the  portion  received  may  be  set
apart  or  rendered  effectual  for  the  renewal  of  our  strength.
When,  therefore,  it  is  said  that  our  Lord  gave  thanks  or  blessed
the  cup  and  the  bread,  it  is  to  be  understood  that  He  not  only
thanked  God  for  his  mercies,  but  that  He  also  invoked  his  bless-
ing, or,  in  other  words,  prayed  that  the  bread  and  wine  might  be,
what  He  intended  them  to  be,  the  symbols  of  his  body  and
blood,  and  the  means  of  spiritual  nourishment  to  his  disciples.
This  is  also  taught  by  the  Apostle  in  1  Corinthians  x.  10,  where

1  Directory,  viii.  5;  Confession,  xxix.  3;  Larger  Catechism,  Q.  169.


§15.]    THE   LORD'S   SUPPER.    SACRAMENTAL   ACTIONS.      619

he  sjDeaks  of  "  the  cup  of  blessing,"  i.  e.,  the  cup  which  has  been
blessed,  or  consecrated  by  prayer  to  a  sacred  use  ;  as  is  explained
by  the  following  Avords,  "  which  we  bless."

Breaking  the  Bread.

This  is  the  second  of  the  prescribed  sacramental  actions.  It  is
an  important,  because  it  is  a  significant,  part  of  the  service.
Christ  broke  the  bread  which  He  gave  to  his  disciples.  The
bread  is  the  symbol  not  merely  of  Christ's  body,  but  of  his
body  as  broken  for  us.  "  The  bread  which  we  break,"  says  the
Apostle,  thereby  showing  that  the  breaking  was  a  constituent
part  of  the  service.  So  significant  is  this  act  that  it  was  used  as
a  designation  of  the  sacrament  itself,  which  was  called  the
"  breaking  of  bread,"  Acts  ii.  42.  The  breaking  of  the  bread  en-
ters into  the  significancy  of  the  ordinance  not  only  as  referring  to
the  broken  body  of  Christ,  but  also  as  the  participation  of  one
bread  is  the  symbol  of  the  nnity  of  believers.  There  is  one
bread,  and  one  body.  This  significance  is  lost,  when  separate
wafers  are  distributed  to  the  communicants.  Above  all  it  is  ex-
pressly commanded.  It  is  recorded  that  Christ  blessed,  broke,
and  gave  the  bread  ;  and  then  added :  "  This  do."  The  com-
mand includes  the  blessing,  the  breaking,  and  the  giving.

This  important  part  of  the  service  continued  to  be  observed  in
the  Church  until  the  doctrine  that  the  bread  after  consecration  is
the  real  body  of  Christ  began  to  prevail.  Then  the  use  of  the
wafer  was  introduced,  which  is  placed  unbroken  in  the  mouth  of
the  communicant.  This  is  clearly  a  departure  from  apostolic
usage,  and  evinces  a  departure  from  apostolic  doctrine.

The  Distribution  and  Reception  of  the  Elements.

It  is  recorded  that  Christ  after  having  blessed  the  bread  and
broken  the  bread,  gave  it  to  his  disciples,  saying:  "  Take,  eat."
And  in  like  manner  after  having  blessed  the  cup,  he  gave  it  to
them,  saying :  "  Drink  ye  all  of  it."  All  this  is  significant.
Christ  gives ;  the  disciples,  each  one  for  himself,  receive  and
partake  of  the  offered  gifts.

From  all  this  it  is  clear,  (1.)  That  it  is  contrary  to  the  rule
prescribed  in  Scripture  when  the  communicant  does  not  for  him-
self, receive  with  his  own  hand  the  elements  of  bread  and  wine.
(2.)  That  it  is  utterly  inconsistent  with  the  nature  of  the  sacra-
ment, when,  as  in  the  private  masses  of  the  Romanists,  the  ofii-
ciating  priest  alone  partakes  of  the  consecrated  bread  or  wine.


620       PART  in.   ch.  XX.  — the  means  of  grace.

(3.)  That  it  is  against  the  nature  of  the  sacrament,  when  instead
of  the  two  elements  being  distributed  separately,  the  bread  is
dipped  into  the  wine,  and  both  are  received  together.  This  mode
of  administering  the  Lord's  Supper,  was,  it  is  said,  introduced  at
first,  only  in  reference  to  the  sick ;  then  it  was  practised  in  some
of  the  monasteries  ;  and  was  partially  introduced  into  the  par-
ishes. It  never,  however,  received  the  sanction  of  the  Roman
Chm-eh.  In  the  Greek  and  the  other  oriental  churches  it  became
the  ordinary  method,  so  far  as  the  laity  are  concerned.  The
bread  and  wine  are  mixed  together  in  the  cup,  and,  by  a  spoon,
placed  in  the  mouth  of  the  recipient.  Among  the  Syrians  the
usual  custom  was  for  the  priest  to  take  a  morsel  of  bread,  dip  it
in  the  wine  and  place  it  in  the  mouth  of  the  communicant.
From  the  East  this  passed  for  a  time  over  to  the  West,  but  was
soon  superseded  by  a  still  greater  departure  from  the  Sciiptural
rule.^  (4.)  The  most  flagrant  violation  of  the  integrity  of  this  sac-
rament is  that  of  which  the  Church  of  Rome  for  the  last  seven
hundred  years  has  been  guilty,  in  withholding  the  cup  from  the
laity.  This  is  inconsistent  not  only  with  the  command  of  Christ,
and  the  example  of  the  Apostles,  but  also  with  the  practice  of
the  Universal  Church  for  eleven  hundred  years.  This  is  not
denied  by  Romanists  themselves.  They  do  not  pretend  to  claim
the  authority  of  antiquity  for  this  custom.  They  fall  back  on
the  authority  of  the  Church.  They  deny,  indeed,  that  the  words
of  Christ  include  a  command  that  the  wine  as  Avell  as  the  bread
should  be  distributed  in  the  Lord's  Supper  ;  but  they  affirm  that
after  consecration,  the  whole  substance  of  the  bread  is  trans-
muted into  the  substance  of  Christ's  body  ;  and  that  as  his  body
and  blood  are  inseparable,  they  who  receive  the  bread-do  thereby
receive  his  blood ;  and,  therefore,  that  the  Avhole  benefit  of  the
sacrament  is  experienced  by  the  laity  although  the  cup  be  with-
held from  them.  This  being  the  case,  they  maintain  that  it  is
wise  in  the  Church,  for  prudential  reasons,  especially  to  avoid
the  danger  of  the  blood  of  Christ  being  spilled  and  profaned,  to
confine  the  administration  of  the  cup  to  the  clergy.  On  the  prin-
ciple that  the  whole  Christ  is  in  the  bread,  the  language  of  the
Council  of  Trent  is  :  ^  "  Si  quis  negaverit,  in  venerabili  Sacra-
mento eucharistige  sub  unaquaque  specie,  et  sub  singuhs  cuj usque
speciei   partibus,    separatione  facta,  totum    Christum   contineri ;

1  Suicer,  Thesaurus  Ecdesiasticus,   ut    sujjra,   vol.   ii.   p.   1127.      Scudamore,  Notitia
KtKhartstica,  ut  supra,  pp.  614-618.
■•*  Sess.  xiii.  canon  3;  Streitwolf,  Libri  Symbolici,  vol.  i.  p.  51.


§  15.]  THE  LORD'S   SUPPER.    ITS  DESIGN.  621

anathema  sit."  The  comment  of  Perrone  on  these  words  is  as
follows  :  "  Ha3C  porro  Veritas  est  corollarium  dogmatis  de  tran-
substantione  ;  panis  enim  et  vinum  per  consecrationem  convertuntur
in  illud  Christi  corpus  et  sanguinem,  qui  in  coelis  est,  et  in  eodem
statu  glorioso  ;  jam  vero  corpus  illud  inseparabile  est  a  sanguine,
anima  et  divinitate,  et  e  converso  pariter  sanguis  separari  nequit
a  corpore,  anima,  et  divinitate,  ergo  sub  quavis  specie  totus  Chris-
tus  prgesens  fiat  necesse  est."^  Withholding  the  cup  from  the
laity  is  therefore  founded  on  the  doctrine  of  transubstantiation,
and  must  fall  with  it.  The  custom  was  introduced  gradually,
and  it  was  not  until  the  Council  of  Constance,  A.  D.  1415,
that  it  was  made  a  law  in  the  Latin  Church.  And  that  Council
admits  that  its  action  was  contrary  to  the  primitive  practice,  for
it  says  :  "  Although  in  the  primitive  Church  this  sacrament  was
received  under  both  kinds,  yet  has  this  custom  been  introduced,
that  it  should  be  taken  by  the  celebrants  under  both  kinds,  and
by  the  laity  under  the  kind  of  bread  only.  Wherefore  since  this
custom  has  been  introduced  by  the  Church  and  the  holy  fathers
on  reasonable  grounds,  and  has  been  very  long  observed,  it  is  to
be  accounted  for  a  law,  etc."  ^

The  Design  of  the  Lord''s  Supper.

As  the  death  of  the  incarnate  Son  of  God  for  us  men  and  for
our  salvation  is  of  all  events  the  most  important,  it  should  be  held
in  perpetual  remembrance.  It  was  to  this  end  that  our  blessed
Lord  instituted  this  sacrament,  and  accompanied  the  institution
with  the  command,  "  This  do  in  remembrance  of  me."  And  the
Apostle  in  1  Corinthians  xi.  26,  tells  his  readers,  "  As  often  as  ye
eat  this  bread,  and  drmk  this  cup,  ye  do  shew  the  Lord's  death
till  he  come."  This  itself  is  of  great  importance.  The  fact  that
the  Lord's  Supper  has  been  celebrated  without  interruption  in
the  Church,  from  the  day  of  the  crucifixion  to  the  present  time,  is
an  irresistible  proof  of  the  actual  occurrence  of  the  event  which  it
is  intended  to  commemorate.  It  is,  therefore,  just  as  certain  that
Christ  died  upon  the  cross  as  that  Christians  everywhere  celebrate
the  Lord's  Supper.  It  is  not  only,  however,  the  fact  of  Christ's
death,  which  this  sacrament  thus  authenticates ;  but  also  its  design.
Our  Lord  declared  that  He  died  as  a  substitute  and  sacrifice.
"  This  is  my  body  which  is  given  for  you ; "  or,  as  the  Apostle
reports  it,  "broken  for  you."     "This  is  my  blood  of  the  New

1  PrcBlectiones  Theologicce,  5th  edit.  Turin,  1839,  vol.  vi.  p.  168.
3  Notitia  Euchaiistica,  ut  sujira,  p.  624.


622       PART  in.   ch.  XX.  — the  means  of  grace.

Testiiment,  whicli  is  shed  for  many  for  the  remission  of  sins."
Redemption,  therefore,  is  not  by  power,  or  by  teaching,  or  by
moral  influence,  but  by  expiation.  It  is  this  truth  which  the
Lord's  Supper  exhibits  and  authenticates.  Still  further,  as  Christ
affirms  that  his  body  was  to  be  broken  and  his  blood  shed  for  the
remission  of  sin,  this  from  the  nature  of  the  case  involves  on  his
part  the  promise  and  pledge,  that  the  sins  of  those  who  receive
and  trust  Him,  shall  certainly  be  forgiven.  The  sacrament  thus
becomes  not  only  a  sign  but  also  a  seal.  It  is  the  handwriting
and  signet  of  the  Son  of  God  attached  to  the  promise  of  redemp-
tion. As,  therefore,  the  truth  revealed  in  the  Word  has  the
highest  power  that  can  belong  to  truth  in  its  normal  influence  on
the  human  mind  ;  so  even  the  natural  effect  of  the  truths  symbol-
ized and  authenticated  in  the  Lord's  Supper,  is  to  confirm  the
faith  of  the  believer.  But  as  the  natural  or  objective  power  of
the  truth  as  revealed  in  the  Word  is  insufficient  for  conversion  or
sanctification  without  the  supernatural  influences  of  the  Spirit,  so
the  truths  set  forth  in  the  eucharist  avail  nothing  towards  our
salvation  unless  the  Spirit  of  all  grace  gives  them  effect.  On  the
other  hand,  as  the  Word  when  attended  by  the  demonstration  of
the  Spirit,  becomes  the  wisdom  and  power  of  God  unto  salvation ;
so  does  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  when  thus  attended,
become  a  real  means  of  grace,  not  only  signifying  and  sealing,  but
really  conveying  to  the  beheving  recipient,  Christ  and  all  the
benefits  of  his  redemption.

In  the  Lord's  Supper,  therefore,  the  believer  receives  Christ.
He  receives  his  body  and  blood.  The  Apostle  asserts  that  the
bread  which  we  break  is  a  participation  (koivwi  ta)  of  the  body  of
Christ,  and  that  the  cup  which  we  bless  is  a  participation  of  the
blood  of  Christ.  (1  Cor.  x.  16.)  Our  Lord  in  John  vi.  53  says,
"  Except  yet  eat  the  flesh  of  the  Son  of  man,  and  drink  his  blood,
ye  have  no  life  in  you."  There  must  be  a  sense,  therefore,  in
which  believers  receive  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ.  The  effect
of  this  reception  of  Christ  is  two  fold.  First,  He  and  his  people
become  one  ;  and  secondly,  all  true  believers  in  virtue  of  this  union
with  Christ  become  one  body  "•  and  every  one  members  one  of  an-
other." Christ  and  his  people  are  one  in  such  a  sense  that  it  is
not  they  that  live,  but  Christ  that  liveth  in  them.  (Gal.  ii.  20.)
He  dwells  in  them ;  his  life  is  their  life ;  because  He  lives  they
shall  live  also.  (John  xiv.  19.)  They  are  one  in  a  sense  analo-
gous to  that  in  which  the  head  and  members  of  the  human  body
are  one.     The  Holy  Spirit  given  to  Him  without  measure  is  com-


§1.5.]         QUALIFICATIONS   FOR   THE   LORD'S   SUPPER.  623

municated  toliis  people  so  that  they  become  one  body  fitly  joined
together.  (Eph.  iv.  16.)  By  one  Spirit  they  are  all  baptized  into
one  body.  (1  Cor.  xii.  13.)  This  union  between  Christ  and  his
people  is  also  illustrated  by  the  union  between  the  vine  and  its
branches.  The  life  of  the  vine  and  of  its  branches  is  one.  (John
XV.)  Again,  Christ  and  his  people  are  one,  as  husband  and  wife
are  one  flesh.  "  We  are  members  of  his  body,  of  his  flesh,  and
of  his  bones."     (Eph.  v.  30.)

In  being  thus  united  to  Christ  as  their  common  head,  believers
become  one  body,  in  a  mystical  sense.  The  Holy  Spirit  dwelling
in  each  and  in  all  constitutes  them  one.  They  have  one  principle
of  life.  The  Spirit  works  in  all  alike  "  both  to  will  and  to  do."
They  have,  consequently,  one  faith,  and  one  religious  experience,
as  well  as  one  Lord,  and  one  God  and  Father.  Tbey  are  so
bound  together  that  if  one  member  suffer,  all  the  members  suffer
with  it ;  or  if  one  member  be  honoured,  all  the  members  rejoice
with  it.  (1  Cor.  xii.  26.)  So  far  as  this  all  churches  seem  to
agree.  They  all  admit  that  in  the  Lord's  Supper  believers  are
thus  united  to  Christ  and  to  one  another.

Qualifications  for  the  Lord's  Supper.

It  is  plain  from  the  preceding  account  of  the  nature  and  design
of  this  sacrament,  that  it  is  intended  for  believers  ;  and  that  those
who  come  to  the  table  of  the  Lord  do  thereby  profess  to  be  his  dis-
ciples. If  sincere  in  this  profession,  they  receive  the  inestimable
gifts  which  it  is  intended  to  convey.  If  insincere,  they  eat  and
drink  judgment  to  themselves.  The  Apostle,  therefore,  argues
that  as  those  who  partook  of  the  Jewish  altars  did  thereby  pro-
fess to  be  Jews ;  and  as  those  who  participated  in  the  heathen
saciifices,  did  thereby  profess  to  be  heathen  ;  so  those  who  par-
take in  the  Lord's  Supper,  do  thereby  profess  to  be  Christians.
But  to  be  a  Christian  a  man  must  have  competent  knowledge  of
Christ  and  of  his  gospel.  He  must  believe  the  record  which  God
has  given  of  his  Son.  He  must  believe  that  Christ  died  for  our
sins  ;  that  his  body  was  broken  for  us.  He  must  accept  of  Christ
as  He  is  thus  offered  to  him  as  a  propitiation  for  sin.  All  this,  or,
the  profession  of  all  this  is  involved  in  the  very  nature  of  the  ser-
vice. The  faith,  however,  of  those  who  would  acceptably  partake
of  the  Lord's  Supper,  is  faith  not  only  in  Christ,  but  also  in  the
sacrament  itself.  That  is,  faith  in  its  divine  appointment,  and  in
its  being  what  in  the  New  Testament  it  is  declared  to  be.  We
must  not  look  upon  it  as  a  mere  human  device,  as  a  mere  ritual


624         PART  ITT.     Ch.   XX.  — the  MEANS   OF    GRACE.

observance  or  ceremony  ;  but  as  a  means  ordained  by  God  of  sig-
nifying, sealing,  and  conveying  to  believers  Christ  and  the  bene-
fits of  his  redemption.  The  reason  why  believers  receive  so  little
by  their  attendance  on  this  ordinance  is,  that  they  expect  so  little.
They  expect  to  have  their  affections  somewhat  stirred,  and  their
faith  somewhat  strengthened ;  but  they  perhaps  rarely  expect  so
to  receive  Christ  as  to  be  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God.  Yet
Christ  in  offering  Himself  to  us  in  this  ordinance,  offers  us  all  of
God  we  are  capable  of  receiving.  For  we  are  complete  QTreTrkqpw-
ueVot)  filled,  i.  e.,  filled  with  the  fulness  of  God  in  Him.  (Col.
ii.  10.)

It  is  impossible  that  the  faith  which  this  sacrament  demands
should  exist  in  the  heart,  without  producing  supreme  love  and
gratitude  to  Christ,  and  the  fixed  purpose  to  forsake  all  sin  and
to  live  devoted  to  his  service.  Our  Church,  therefore,  teaches
that  it  is  required  of  them  who  would  worthily  partake  of  the
Lord's  Supper,  that  they  examine  themselves,  of  their  knowledge
to  discern  the  Lord's  body,  of  their  faith  to  feed  upon  Him,  of
their  repentance,  love,  and  new  obedience.

It  is,  however,  not  to  be  inferred  from  this  that  a  man  must  be
assured  that  he  is  a  true  believer  before  he  can  properly  approach
the  Lord's  table.  It  often  happens  that  those  who  are  most  con-
fident that  they  are  Christians,  have  the  least  of  Christ's  Spirit.
And  therefore  we  are  taught  in  the  Larger  Catechism,^  that
"  One  who  doubteth  of  his  being  in  Christ,  or  of  his  due  prepara-
tion to  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  may  have  true  inter-
est in  Christ,  though  he  be  not  assured  thereof ;  and  in  God's
account  hath  it,  if  he  be  duly  affected  with  the  apprehension  of
the  want  of  it,  and  unfeignedly  desires  to  be  found  in  Christ,  and
to  depart  from  iniquity  ;  in  which  case  (because  promises  are  made,
and  this  sacrament  is  appointed,  for  the  relief  even  of  weak  and
doubting  Christians)  he  is  to  bewail  his  unbelief,  and  labour  to
have  his  doubts  resolved  ;  and  so  doing,  he  may  and  ought  to  come
to  the  Lord's  Supper,  that  he  may  be  further  strengthened."

It  is  no  valid  objection  to  the  doctrine  that  faith,  love,  and  new
obedience  are  the  qualifications  for  an  acceptable  approach  to  the
Lord's  table,  that  under  the  Old  Testament  all  the  people  were
allowed  to  partake  of  the  Passover.  This  only  shows  the  differ-
ence between  what  God  demands,  and  what  fallible  men  are
authorized  to  enforce.  It  cannot  be  doubted  that  it  was  required
of  the  Jews  in  coming  to  the  paschal  supper  that  they  should

1  Ques.  172.


§  15.]         QUALIFICATIONS   FOR   THE   LORD'S   SUPPER.  625

believe  the  fact  of  their  miraculous  deliverance  out  of  Egypt ;
that  they  should  be  duly  grateful  to  God  for  that  great  mei-cy ;
and  that  they  should  have  faith  in  the  promise  of  that  still
greater  redemption  through  Him  of  whom  their  paschal  lamb  was
the  divinely  appointed  type.  All  this  was  implied  in  an  intelli-
gent and  sincere  attendance  on  the  Jewish  Passover.  The  priests,
however,  were  not  authorized  to  sit  in  judgment  on  the  sincerity
of  the  worshippers,  and  to  exclude  all  whom  they  deemed  insin-
cere. So  while  faith,  love,  and  the  purpose  of  new  obedience  are
clearly  required  of  all  who  come  to  the  table  of  the  Lord,  all  that
the  Church  can  demand  is  a  credible  profession ;  that  is,  a  profes-
sion against  which  no  tangible  evidence  can  be  adduced.  Even  to
acceptable  prayer,  faith  and  love  and  the  purpose  of  obedience
are  demanded,  and  yet  we  cannot  exclude  from  access  to  God  all
whom  we  do  not  deem  true  believers.  Confounding  the  Church
and  the  world  is  a  great  evil,  but  the  Church  cannot  be  kept
pure  by  any  human  devices.  Men  must  be  so  instructed  that
they  will  be  kept  back  from  making  profession  of  a  faith  they  do
not  possess,  by  their  own  consciences ;  and  those  who  act  un-
worthily of  their  Christian  profession  should  be  subjected  to  the
discipline  of  the  Church.  Further  than  this  the  Bible  does  not
authorize  us  to  go,  and  all  attempts  to  improve  upon  the  Bible
must  be  productive  of  evil.  According  to  our  Directory  for  Wor-
ship, the  minister  "is  to  warn  the  profane,  the  ignorant,  and
scandalous,  and  those  that  secretly  indulge  themselves  in  any
known  sin,  not  to  approach  the  holy  table."  To  these  classes  his
power  of  exclusion  is  confined.  "  On  the  other  hand,  he  shall  in-
vite to  this  holy  table,  such  as,  sensible  of  their  lost  and  helpless
state  of  sin,  depend  upon  the  atonement  of  Christ  for  pardon  and
acceptance  with  God ;  such  as,  being  instructed  in  the  Gospel
doctrine,  have  a  competent  knowledge  to  discern  the  Lord's  body,
and  such  as  desire  to  renounce  their  sins,  and  are  determined  to
lead  a  holy  and  godly  life."  ^

Although  all  churches  substantially  agree  as  to  the  nature  and
design  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  so  far  as  the  general  statements  above
given  are  concerned,  they  differ  essentially  in  their  explanations
of  those  statements  ;  just  as  all  profess  to  receive  Avhat  the  Scrip-
tures say  of  this  ordinance,  while  they  differ  so  widely  as  to  what
the  Bible  really  teaches.  So  far  as  these  differences  of  views  con-
cern the  qualifications  for  participating  in  the  Lord's  Supper ;
the  benefits  the  ordinance  is  intended  to  convey  ;  and  the  nature

1  Westminster  Directory,  chap.  viii.  p.  4.
VOL.  iir.  40


')2G       PART  m.   Ch.  XX.  — the  means  of  grace.

of  tlie  efficacy  attributed  to  it,  they  have  been  akeady  sufficiently
considered  when  teaching  of  the  sacraments  in  general.  There
are,  however,  certain  points  in  reference  to  this  sacrament  in  par-
ticular, which  are  so  important  that  they  have  determined  the
course  of  ecclesiastical  history.  Those  pomts  are  all  intimately
related.  (1.)  In  what  sense  are  the  bread  and  wine  in  the  eu-
charist  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ.  (2.)  In  what  sense  are  his
body  and  blood  received  in  that  ordinance  by  the  communicant.
(3.)  In  what  sense  is  Christ  in  the  Lord's  Supper.  These  points
are  so  related  that  they  cannot  well  be  considered  separately.
These  are  the  points  as  to  which  the  Reformed,  the  Lutheran,
and  the  Roman  Churches  are  opposed  to  each  other.

§  16.  Doctrine  of  the  Reformed  Church  on  the  Lord^s  Supper.

It  is  a  very  difficult  matter  to  give  an  account  of  the  Re-
formed doctrine  concerning  the  Lord's  Supper  satisfactory  to  all
parties.  This  difficulty  arises  partly  from  the  fact  that  words
have  changed  their  meaning  since  the  days  of  the  Reformation.
The  Reformed  as  well  as  Lutherans  asserted  that  there  is  "  a  real
presence"  of  Christ  in  the  Lord's  Supper  ;  and  that  the  believer
receives  the  true  body  and  blood,  or  the  substance  of  the  body  and
blood  of  Christ.  Such  expressions  would  be  understood  in  our  day
very  differently  from  what  they  were  then.  Another  source  of  dif-
ficulty on  this  subject  is  that  the  statements  of  the  Reformed  had
for  one  great  object  the  prevention  of  a  schism  in  the  ranks  of  the
Protestants.  They  did  all  they  could  to  conciliate  Luther.  They
adopted  forms  of  expression  which  could  be  understood  in  a
Lutheran  sense.  So  far  was  this  irenical  spirit  carried  that  even
Romanists  asked  nothing  more  than  what  the  Reformed  conceded.
Still  another  difficulty  is  that  the  Reformed  were  not  agreed
among  themselves.  There  were  three  distinct  types  of  doctrine
among  them,  the  Zwinglian,  the  Calvinistic,  and  an  intermediate
form,  which  ultimately  became  symbolical,  being  adopted  in  the
authoritative  standards  of  the  Church.

Zwinglian  Statements.

It  was  the  tendency  of  the  Zwinglian  element  of  the  Reformed
Church,  to  make  less  of  the  supernatural  aspect  of  the  sacraments
than  their  associates  did.  There  was,  however,  no  essential  differ-
ence, as  afterwards  appeared  between  the  Churches  of  Zurich  and
those  of  Geneva.  Zwmgle  taught  that  "  The  Lord's  Supper  is
nothing  else  than  the  food  of  the  soul,  and  Christ  mstituted  the


§16.]     THE  LORD'S   SUPPER.     THE    REFORMED   CHURCH.     627

ordinance  as  a  memorial  of  Himself.  When  a  man  commits  him-
self to  the  sufferings  and  redemption  of  Christ  he  is  saved.  Of
this  He  has  left  us  a  certain  visible  sign  of  his  flesh  and  blood,
both  of  which  He  has  commanded  us  to  eat  and  drmk  in  remem-
brance of  Him."  This  is  said  in  a  document  presented  to  the
council  of  Zurich  in  1523.

In  his  "  Expositio  Christianas  Fidei,"  wi-itten  just  before  his
death,  and  published  by  Bullinger  in  1536,  he  says :  "  The
natural  substantial  body  of  Chi'ist  in  which  He  suffered,  and  in
which  He  is  now  seated  m  heaven  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  is
not  m  the  Lord's  Supper  eaten  corporeally,  or  as  to  its  essence,

but    spiritually  onl}^ Spiritually  to   eat  Christ's  body  is

nothing  else  than  with  the  spirit  and  mmd  to  rely  on  the  good-
ness and  mercy  of  God  through  Christ Sacramentally  to

eat  his  body,  is,  the  sacrament  being  added,  with  the  mind  and
spirit  to  feed  upon  Him."  ^

The  Confessions  most  nearly  conformed  to  the  views  of  Z^vingle
are  the  "  Confessio  Tetrapohtana,"  the  "  First  Basil,"  and  the
"  First  Helvetic."  These  are  all  apologetic.  The  last  mentioned
protests  against  the  representation  that  the  Reformed  regard  the
sacraments  as  mere  badges  of  profession,  and  asserts  that  they  are
signs  and  means.  The  Lord's  Supper  is  called  "  coena  mystica  "
"  in  which  Christ  truly  offers  his  body  and  blood,  and  hence  Him-
self, to  his  people  ;  not  as  though  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ
were  naturally  united  with  the  bread  and  wine,  locally  included
in  them,  or  sensibly  there  present,  but  in  so  far  as  the  bread  and
wine  are  symbols,  through  which  we  have  communion  in  his  body
and  blood,  not  to  the  nourishment  of  the  body,  but  of  the  spiritual
or  eternal  life."  ^

In  "The  Sincere  Confession  of  the  Ministers  of  the  Church  of
Zurich,"  dated  1545,  we  find  the  following  precise  statement  of
their  doctrine  :  "  We  teach  that  the  great  design  and  end  of  the

1  "  In  ccena  domini  iiaturale  ac  substantiale  istud  corpus  Christi,  quo  et  hie  passus  est  et
nunc  in  coelis  ad  dexteram  p.atris  sedet,  iion  naturaliter  atque   per  essentiam  editur,  sed

spiritualiter  tantura Spiritualiter  edere,  corpus  Cliristi,  nihil  est  aliud  quam  spiritu

ac  mente  niti  misericordia  et  bonitate  Dei  per  Christum Sacramentaliter  edere  corpus

Christi,  cum  proprie  vohimus  loqui,  est,  adjuncto  sacramento,  mente  ac  spiritu  corpus
Christi  edere."     Niemeyer,  Collectio  Confesslonum,  Leipzig,  18i0,  pp.  44,  47.

2  "Coenam  mysticam,  in  qua  dominus  corpus  et  sanguinem  suuni.  id  est,  seipsum  suis
vere  ad  hoc  offerut,  ut  magis,  magisque  in  illis  vivat,  et  illi  in  ipso.  Non  quod  pani  et  vino
corpus  et  sanguis  domini  vel  naturaliter  uniantur:  vel  hie  localiter  includantur,  vel  ulla  hue
carnali  prwsentia,  statuantur.  Sed  quod  panis  et  vinum  ex  institutione  domini  symbola
sint,  quibus  ab  ipso  domino  per  ecclesiie  ministerium  vera  corporis  et  sanguinis  ejus  com-
municatio,  non  in  periturum  ventris  cibum,  sed  in  wternse  vitse  alimoniam  exhibeatur."
Art.  xxii. ;  Niemeyer,  pp.  120,  121.


628  PART  III.     Ch.   XX. -the  means   OF    GRACE.

Lord's  Sujjper,  that  to  which  the  whole  service  is  directed,  is  the
remembrance  of  Christ's  body  devoted,  and  of  his  blood  shed  for
the  remission  of  onr  sins.  This  remembrance,  however,  cannot
take  place  without  true  faith.  And  although  the  things  of  which
the  service  is  a  memorial,  are  not  visible  or  present  after  a  visible
or  corporal  manner,  nevertheless  believing  apprehension  and  the
assurance  of  faith  renders  them  present  in  one  sense  to  the  soul
of  the  behever.  He  has  truly  eaten  the  bread  of  Christ  .....
who  believes  on  Christ,  very  God  and  very  man,  crucified  for  us,
on  whom  to  believe  is  to  eat,  and  to  eat  is  to  believe Be-
lievers have  in  the  Lord's  Supper  no  other  life-giving  food  than
that  which  they  receive  elsewhere  •  than  in  that  ordinance.  The
believer,  therefore,  receives  both  in  and  out  of  the  Lord's  Supper,
in  one  and  the  same  way,  and  by  the  same  means  of  faith,  one
and  the  same  food,  Christ,  except  that  in  the  supper  the  reception
is  connected  with  the  actions  and  signs  appointed  by  Christ,  and
accompanied  with  a  testifying,  thanksgiving,  and  binding  service.
....  Christ's  flesh  has  done  its  work  on  earth,  having  been  offered
for  our  salvation ;  now  it  no  longer  benefits  on  earth  and  is  no
longer  here."

Calvin's  Doctrine. .

While  Calvin  denied  the  real  presence  of  the  body  and  blood
of  Christ  in  the  eucharist,  in  the  sense  in  which  that  presence
was  asserted  by  Romanists  and  Lutherans,  yet  he  affirmed  that
they  were  dynamically  present.  The  sun  is  in  the  heavens,  but
his  light  and  heat  are  present  on  earth.  So  the  body  of  Christ
is  in  heaven,  but  from  that  glorified  body  there  radiates  an  influ-
ence, other  than  the  influence  of  the  Spirit  (although  through  his
agency),  of  which  believers  in  the  Lord's  Supper  are  the  recipients.
Li  this  way  they  receive  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  or,  their
substance,  or  life-giving  power.  He  held,  therefore,  that  there
was  something  not  only  supernatural,  but  truly  miraculous,  in  this
divine  ordinance.

He  says  :  ^    "  We  conclude  that  our  souls  are  fed  by  the  flesh  and

1  Institutio  IV.  xvii.  10;  edit.  Berlin,  1834,  part  ii.  p.  407.  "  Summa  sit,  non  aliter
animas  nostras  carne  et  sanguine  Christi  pasci,  qiiam  panis  et  vinum  corporalem  vitara
tuentur  et  sustinent.  Neque  enim  aliter  quadrarct  nnalogia  signi,  nisi  alimentum  suum
animas  in  Christo  rcperirent:  quod  fieri  non  potest,  nisi  nobiscum  Christus  vere  in  unura
coalescat  nosque  reficiat  carnis  suoe  esu  et  sanguinis  potu.  Etsi  autem  incredibile  videtur,
in  tanta  locorum  distantia  penetrare  ad  nos  Christi  carnem,  ut  nobis  sit  in  cibum,  mem-
inerimus,  quantum  supra  sensus  omnes  nostros  emineat  arcana  Spiritus  sancti  virtus  et
quam  stultum  sit,  ejus  immensitatem  mode  ntistro  vellc  motiri.  Quod  ergo  mens  nostra  non
comprehcndit,  concipiat  fides.  Spiritual  vere  unire,  qu;i3  locis  disjuncta  sunt.  Jam  sacram
illam  carnis  et  sanguinis  sui  comraunicationem,  qua  vitam  suam  in  nos  transfundit  Christus,


§  16.]     THE   LORD'S   SUPPER.     THE  REFORMED  CHURCH.     629

blood  of  Christ,  just  as  our  corporal  life  is  preserved  by  bread
and  wine.  For  the  analogy  of  the  signs  would  not  hold,  if  our
souls  did  not  find  their  aliment  in  Christ,  which,  however,  cannot
be  the  case,  unless  Christ  truly  coalesce  into  one  with  us,  and
support  us  through  the  use  of  his  ilesh  and  blood.  It  may  seem
incredible  indeed  that  the  flesh  of  Christ  should  reach  us  from
such  an  immense  local  distance,  so  as  to  become  our  food.  But
we  must  remember  how  far  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  trans-
cends all  our  senses,  and  what  folly  it  must  be  even  to  think  of
reducing  his  immensity  to  our  measure.  Let  faith  then  embrace
what  the  understanding  cannot  grasp,  namely,  that  the  spirit
truly  unites  things  which  are  totally  separated.  Now  this  sacred
communication  of  his  flesh  and  blood,  by  which  Christ  transfuses
his  life  into  us,  just  as  if  He  penetrated  our  bones  and  marrow,
He  testifies  and  seals  in  the  holy  supper ;  not  by  the  exliibition  of
a  vain  and  empty  sign,  but  by  putting  forth  such  an  energy  of
his  Spirit  as  fulfils  what  He  promises."

In  1561  Calvin  wrote  in  answer  to  the  Lutheran  Hesshuss,  and
with  an  irenical  purpose,  his  tract  "  De  participatione  carnis  et
sanguinis  Christi  in  sacra  coena."  In  an  appendix  to  that  Tract,
he  says,  "  The  same  body  then  which  the  Son  of  God  once  offered
in  sacrifice  to  the  Father,  he  daily  offers  to  us  in  the  supper,  that
it  may  be  our  spiritual  aliment.  Only  that  must  be  held  which
was  intimated  as  to  the  mode,  that  it  is  not  necessary  that  the
essence  of  the  flesh  should  descend  from  heaven  in  order  that  we
may  feed  upon  it ;  but  that  the  power  of  the  Spirit  is  sufficient  to
penetrate  through  all  impediments  and  to  surmount  all  local  dis-
tance. At  the  same  time  we  do  not  deny  that  the  mode  here  is
incomprehensible  to  human  thought ;  for  flesh  naturally  could
neither  be  the  life  of  the  soul,  nor  exert  its  power  upon  us  from
heaven  ;  and  not  without  reason  is  the  communication,  which
makes  us  flesh  of  his  flesh,  and  bone  of  his  bones,  denominated  by
Paul  a  great  mystery.  In  the  sacred  supper  we  acknowledge  it  a
miracle,  transcending  both  nature  and  our  understanding,  that
Christ's  life  is  made  common  to  us  with  Himself,  and  his  flesh
given  to  us  as  aliment."  ^

Again,  "  These  things  being  disposed  of,  a  doubt  still  appears
with  respect  to  the  word  '  substance ' ;  which  is  readily  allayed  if
we  put  away  the  gross  imagination  of  a  manducation  of  the  flesh,

trn  secus  acsi  in  ossa  et  medullas  penetraret,  in  ccena  etiam  testatur  et  obsignat;  etquidem
non  objecto  inani  aut  vacuo  signo,  sed  efficaciam  Spiritus  sui  illic  profereus,  qua  impleat,
quod  promittit."
1  Wo7'ks,  Amsterdam,  1GG7;  vol.  viii.  p.  744,  a.  b.  *


630       PART  III.    ch.  XX.  — the  means  of  grace.

as  though  it  were  corporal  food,  that,  beuig  taken  into  the  mouth,
is  received  into  the  stomach.  For  if  this  absurdity  be  removed,
there  no  reason  why  we  should  deny  that  we  are  fed  with  Christ's
flesh  substantially,  since  we  truly  coalesce  with  Him  in  one  body
by  faith,  and  are  made  one  with  Him.  Whence  it  follows  that
we  are  joined  with  Him  in  substantial  connection,  just  as  sub-
stantial vigour  flows  down  from  the  head  into  the  members.  The
definition  there  must  stand  that  we  are  made  to  partake  oi
Christ's  flesh  substantially ;  not  m  the  way  of  carnal  mixture,  or
as  if  the  flesh  of  Christ  drawn  down  from  heaven  entered  into  us,
or  were  swallowed  by  the  mouth  ;  but  because  the  flesh  of  Christ,
as  to  its  power  and  efficacy,  vivifies  our  souls,  not  otherwise  than
the  body  is  nourished  by  the  substance  of  bread  and  wine."  ^

The  Reformed  symbols  which  most  nearly  conform  to  the  pecul-
iar \dews  of  Calvin  are  the  Galilean,  the  Belgian,  and  the  early
Scottish.  The  first  mentioned  teaches  ^  "  Quaravis  [Christus]
nunc  sit  in  ccelis,  ibidem  etiam  mansurus  donee  veniat  mundum
judicaturus :  credimus  tamen,  eum  arcana  et  incomprehensibili
Spiritus  sui  virtute  per  fidem  apprehensa,  nos  nutrire  et  vivificare
sui  corporis  et  sanguinis  substantia.  Dicimur  autem  hoc  spiritu-
aliter  fieri,  non  ut  efficacise  et  veritatis  loco  imaginationem  aut
cogitationem  supponamus,  sed  potius,  quoniam  hoc  mysterium  nos-
trse  cum  Christo  coalitionis  tam  sublime  est,  ut  omnes  nostros  sen-
sus  totumque  adeo  ordinem  nature  superet :  denique  quoniam  sit
divinum  ac  coeleste,  non  nisi  fide  pereipi  ac  apprehendi  potest."

"  Credimus,  sicut  antea  dictum  est,  tam  in  ccena  quam  in  baptis-
mo,  Deum  nobis  reipsa,  id  est,  vere  et  efficaciter  donare  quicquid
ibi  sacramentaliter  figurat,  ac  proinde  cum  signis  conjungimus
veram  possessionem  ac  fruitionem  ejus  rei,  quae  ita  nobis  offertur.
Itaque  aflirmamus  eos  qui  ad  sacram  mensam  Domini  puram  fidem
tanquam  vas  quoddam  afferunt,  vere  recipere  quod  ibi  signa  testi-

1  At  the  meeting  of  the  national  Synod  of  France  in  1571,  Beza  being  president,  an  ap-
plication was  made  by  certain  deputies  to  have  the  clause  in  Article  37  of  the  Confession
altered,  which  asserts  that  we  are  nourished  with  "  the  substance  of  Christ's  body  and
blood."  The  Synod  refused  to  make  the  alteration,  and  explained  the  expression  by  say-
ing they  did  not  understand  by  it,  "  any  confusion,  commixture,  or  conjunction,  ....  but
this  onlv,  that  by  his  virtue  all  that  is  in  Him  tliat  is  needful  to  our  salvation,  is  hereby
most  frcelv  given  and  communicated  to  us.  Nor  do  we  agree  with  those  who  say  we  com-
municate in  his  merits  and  gifts  and  Spirit,  witliout  his  being  made  ours;  but  with  the
Apostle  (Eph.  V.  23),  admiring  this  supernatural,  and  to  us,  incomprehensible,  mystery,  we
believe  we  are  partakers  of  his  body  delivered  to  death  for  us,  and  of  his  blood  shed  for  us,
so  tliat  we  arc  flesh  of  his  flesh  and  bone  of  his  bones,  and  that  we  receive- Him  together
with  his  gifts  by  faith,  wrought  in  us  by  the  incomprehensible  virtue  and  etficacy  of  the
Holy  Spirit."     This  decision  offended  tlie  Zurich  ministers.

*  Art.  XXXV  i.  xxxvii. ;  Niemeyer,  p.  3-38.


§  16.]     THE   LORD'S    SUPPER.     THE   REFORMED    CHURCH.     631

ficantur,  nempe  corpus  et  sanguinem  Jesu  Cliristi,  non  minus  esse
cibumac  potum  anirane,  quam  panis  et  vinum  sunt  corporis  cibus,"

In  the  Scotch  Confession  of  1560,  it  is  said,  "  We  confess  that
believers  in  the  right  use  of  the  Lord's  Supper  thus  eat  the  body
and  drink  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  we  firmly  believe  that  He
dwells  in  them,  and  they  in  Him,  nay,  that  they  thus  become
flesh  of  his  flesh  and  bone  of  his  bones.  For  as  the  eternal  Deity
gives  life  and  immortality  to  the  flesh  of  Christ,  so  also  his  flesh
and  blood,  when  eaten  and  drunk  by  us,  confer  on  us  the  same
prerogatives."  ^

In  the  Belgic  Confession  adopted  in  1563,  it  is  said,  "  Ut  iis  no-
bis [ChristusJ  testificatur,  quam  vere  accipimus  et  tenemus  mani-
bus  nostris  hoc  sacramentum,  illudque  ore  comedimus  (unde  et
postmodum  vita  haac  nostra  sustentatur),  tam  vere  etiam  nos  fide
(quna  aniniffi  nostrjie  est  instar  et  manus  et  oris)  recipere  verum
corpus   et  verum  sanguinem  Christi,  in  animis  nostris,  ad  vitam

spiritualem    in   nobis  fovendam Dicimus  itaque  id  quod

comeditur  esse  ipsissimum  Christi  corpus  naturale,  et  id  quod
bibitur  verum  ipsius  sanguinem :  at  instrumentum  seu  medium
quo  hasc  comedimus  et  bibimus  non  est  os  corporeum,  sed  spiritus
ipse  noster,  idque  per  fidem."  ^

Confessions  in  ivhich  Zwinglians  and  Calvinists  agree.

The  most  important  of  •  these,  as  already  mentioned,  is  the
"  Consensus  Tigurinus,"  because  drawn  up  for  the  express  pur-
pose of  settling  the  disputes  between  the  two  parties,  and  because
it  was  adopted  by  both.  It  was  written  by  Calvin  and  published
under  the  title  "  Consensio  mutua  in  re  Sacramentaria  Ministro-
rum  Tigurinas  Ecclesias,  et  D.  Joannis  Calvini  Ministri  Geneven-
sis  Ecclesiae,  jam  nunc  ab  ipsis  authoribus  edita."  This  "  Consen-
sus "  was  vehemently  attacked  by  the  Lutherans  ;  and  Calvin,
four  years  after  its  publication,  felt  called  upon  to  publish  an  ex-
planation and  defence  of  it.  In  his  letter  prefixed  to  that  defence
and  a.ddressed  to  the  ministers  of  Zurich  and  other  Swiss  churches,
he  says :  The  Lutherans  now  see  tliat  those  whom  they  de-
nounced as  Sacramentarians  agree,  and  then  adds  :  "  Nee  vero  si
superstites  hodie  essent  optimi  et  eximii  Christi  servi  Zwinglius
et  Oecolampadius,  verbulum  in  ea  sententia  mutarent."^  No
document,  therefore,  can  have  a  higher  claim  to  represent  the  true

1  Art.  xxi. ;  Niemeyer,  p.  352.  2  Art.  xxxv. ;  Ih'ul.  pp.  385,  386.

8  See  his  Letter  to  the  Swiss  Churches  prefixed  to  his  Consensionis  Capitum  Escpositio ;
Niemeyer,  ut  supra,  p.  201.


632       PART  m.   Ch.  XX.  — the  means  of  grace.

doctrine  of  the  Reformed  Church  than  this  "  Consensus."  This
document  has  ah-eady  been  quoted  on  a  previous  page  to  prove
that  its  authors,  (1.)  Did  not  regard  the  sacraments  as  mere  signs,
or  as  simply  badges  of  a  Christian  profession.  (2.)  But  as  means
of  grace,  appointed,  not  only  to  signify  and  seal,  but  also  to  con-
vey the  benefits  of  redemption.  (3.)  That  their  saving  and  sancti-
fying efficacy  is  not  due  to  any  virtue  in  them  or  in  him  that  doth
administer  them,  but  solely  to  the  blessing  of  God  and  the  work-
ing of  his  Spirit.  (4.)  That  the  sacraments  are  not  means  of  grace
to  all  indiscriminately,  or  to  all  who  are  their  passive  recipients,
but  only  to  believers  or  the  chosen  people  of  God.  (5.)  That  their
efficacy  is  not  tied  to  the  time  of  their  administration.  (6.)  That
the  grace  or  saving  gifts  which  the  sacraments,  when  God  so
wills,  are  made  the  channels  of  communicating,  may  be,  and  in  fact
are,  received  before  and  without  their  use.

The  last  seven  articles  of  the  "  Consensus"  concern  the  Lord's
Supper.  In  the  twenty-first  the  local  presence  of  Christ  in  that
sacrament  is  denied.  "  Prsesertim  vero  tollenda  est  quaelibet  lo-
calis  prsesentiae  imaginatio.  Nam  quum  signa  hie  in  mundo  sint,
oculis  cernuntur,  palpentur  manibus :  Chiistus  quatenus  homo
est,  non  alibi  quam  in  coelo,  nee  aliter  quam  mente  et  fidei  intel-
Hgentia  quterendus  est.  Quare  perversa  et  impia  superstitio  est,
ipsum  sub  elementis  hujus  mundi  includere."

The  twenty-second  article  teaches  that  the  words,  "  This  is  my
body,"  in  the  form  of  institution,  are  to  be  understood  figura-
tively. "  Proinde,  qui  in  solennibus  Coense  verbis.  Hoc  est  corpus
meum.  Hie  est  sanguis  mens :  pnecise  Hteralem,  ut  loquuntur,  sen-
sum  urgent,  eos  tanquam  praeposteros  interpretes  repudiamus.
Nam  extra  controversiam  ponimus,  figurate  accipienda  esse,  ut  esse
panis  et  vinum  dicantur  id  quod  significant.  Neque  vero  novum
hoc  aut  insolens  videri  debet,  ut  per  metonymiam  ad  signum
transferatur  rei  figuratas  nomen,  quum  passim  in  Scripturis  ejus-
modi  locutiones  occurrant :  et  nos  sic  loquendo  nihil  asserimus,
quod  non  apud  vetustissimos  quosque  et  probatissimos  Ecclesia^
scrip  tores  extet."

Article  twenty-third  relates  to  spiritual  manducation.  "  Quod
autem  carnis  suaj  esu  et  sanguinis  potione,  qune  hie  figurantur,
Christus  animas  nostras  per  fidem  Spiritus  sancti  virtute  pascit,  id
non  perinde  accipiendum,  quasi  fiat  aliqua  substantia  vel  commix-
tio  vel  transfusio :  sed  quoniam  ex  carne  semel  in  sacrificium  oblata
et  sanguine  in  expiatione  effuso  vitam  hauriamus."

Article  twenty-fourth  is  directed  against  transubstantiation  and


§  16.]     THE   LORD'S   SUPPER.     THE   REFORMED   CHURCH.     638

other  errors.  "  Hoc  modo  non  tantum  refutatur  Papistariim
commentum  de  transubstantione,  sed  crassa  omnia  figmenta
atque  futiles  argutise,  quse  vel  coelcsti  ejus  glorise  detrahimt  vel
veritati  liumanse  naturae  minus  sunt  consentaneas.  Neque  enim
minus  absurdum  judicamus,  Christus  sub  pane  locare  vel  cum  pane
copulare,  quam  panem  transubstantiare  in  corpus  ejus."

Article  twenty-fiitli  teaches  that  Christ's  body  is  locally  in
heaven.  "  Ac  ne  qua  ambiguitas  restet,  quum  in  coelo  quaeren-
dum  Christum  dicimus,  h^ec  locutio  locorum  distantiam  nobis
sonant  et  exprimit.  Tametsi  enim  philosophice  loquendo  supra
coelos  locus  non  est ;  quia  tamen  corpus  Christi,  ut  fert  humani
corporis  natura  et  modus,  finitura  est  et  coelo,  ut  loco,  continetur,
necesse  est  a  nobis  tanto  locorum  intervallo  distare,  quanto  coelum
abest  a  terra."

Article  twenty-sixth,  the  last  of  the  series,  is  directed  against
the  adoration  of  the  host,  or  consecrated  wafer.^

The  Heidelberg  Catochism  was  prepared  at  the  command  of
Frederick  HI.,  Elector  of  the  Palatinate,  by  Caspar  Olevian,  a
disciple  of  Calvin,  and  by  Ursinus,  a  friend  of  Melancthon,  and
adopted  by  a  General  Synod  held  at  Heidelberg  in  1563.  This
Catechism,  having  symbolical  authority  both  in  the  German  and
in  the  Dutch  Reformed  Churches,  is  entitled  to  special  respect  as
a  witness  to  the  faith  of  the  Reformed  Church.

The  sacraments  are  declared  to  be  "  Sacred,  visible  signs,  and
seals,  instituted  by  God,  that  through  them  He  may  more  clearly
present  and  seal  the  promise  of  the  gospel,  namely,  that  He,  for
the  sake  of  the  one  offering  of  Christ  accomplished  on  the  cross,
grants  not  to  all  only  but  even  to  separate  believers  the  forgive-
ness of  sin  and  eternal  life."

"  How  art  thou  reminded  and  assured,  in  the  Holy  Supper,  that
thou  art  a  partaker  of  the  one  offering  of  Christ  on  the  cross,  and
of  all  his  benefits  ?  "

"  Thus,  that  Christ  has  commanded  me  and  all  believers,  to
eat  this  broken  bread,  and  to  drink  this  cup  in  remembrance
of  Him ;  adding  these  promises :  that  his  body  was  offered  and
broken  on  the  cross  for  me,  and  his  blood  shed  for  me,  as  cer-
tainly as  I  see  with  my  eyes  the  bread  of  the  Lord  broken  for  me,
and  the  cup  communicated  to  me :  and  further,  that  He  feeds
and  nourishes  my  soul  to  everlasting  life,  with  his  crucified  body
and  shed  blood,  as  assuredly  as  I  receive  from  the  hands  of  the
minister,  and  take  with  my  mouth,  the  bread  and  cup,  as  certain
signs  of  t]ie  body  and  blood  of  Chi'ist."

1  Nieme_ver,  Collectio  Confession  urn,  Leir/,i<i-,  ISiO,  \).  196.


634         PART  III.     Cn.   XX.  — THE   [MEANS   OF   GRACE.

"  What  is  it  then  to  eat  the  crucified  body,  and  drink  the  shed
blood  of  Clmst?"

"  It  is  not  only  to  embrace  with  a  believing  heart  all  the  suffer-
ings and  death  of  Christ,  and  thereby  to  obtain  the  pardon  of  sin
and  eternal  life  ;  but  also,  besides  that,  to  become  more  and  more
united  to  his  sacred  body  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  dwells  at  once
both  in  Christ  and  in  us  ;  so  that  we,  though  Christ  is  in  heaven,
and  we  on  earth,  are  notwithstanding,  flesh  of  his  flesh  and  bone
of  his  bone ;  and  we  live  and  are  governed  forever  by  one  Spirit,
as  the  members  of  the  same  body  are  by  one  soul."

"  Do  then  the  bread  and  wine  become  the  very  body  and  blood
of  Christ?"

"  Not  at  all :  but  as  the  water  in  baptism  is  not  changed  into  the
blood  of  Christ,  neither  is  the  washing  away  of  sin  itseK,  being
only  the  sign  and  pledge  of  the  things  sealed  to  us  in  baptism ;
so  the  bread  in  the  Lord's  Supper  is  not  changed  into  the  very
body  of  Christ;  though  agreeably  to  the  nature  and  properties
of  sacraments,  it  is  called  the  body  of  Christ  Jesus."  ^

The  Confession  of  Faith  of  the  Reformed  Dutch  Church  was
revised  by  the  Synod  of  Dort  in  1618  and  1619.  In  the  thirty-
fifth  article  of  that  Confession,  it  is  said  that  as  man  has  a  natu-
ral life  common  to  all  men,  so  believers  have  besides,  a  spiritual
life  given  in  their  regeneration ;  and  as  God  has  provided  food  for
our  natural  life,  He  has  in  like  manner  provided  food  for  our
spiritual  life.  That  food  is  Christ,  who  is  the  true  bread  which
came  down  from  heaven  ;  "  who  nourishes  and  strengthens  the
spiritual  life  of  believers,  when  they  eat  Him,  that  is  to  say,  when
they  apply  and  receive  Him  by  faith  in  the  Spirit."  As  we  re-
ceive the  bread  and  wine  by  the  mouth  "we  also  do  as  certainly
receive  by  faith  (which  is  the  hand  and  mouth  of  our  soul)  the
true  body  and  blood  of  Christ  our  only  Saviour  in  our  souls  for
the  support  of  our  spiritual  life."  The  manner  of  this  reception
is  hidden  and  incomprehensible.  "  In  the  mean  time  we  err  not,
when  we  say,  that  what  is  eaten  and  drunk  by  us  is  the  proper
and  natural  body,  and  the  proper  blood  of  Christ.  But  the  man-
ner of  our  partaking  of  the  same,  is  not  by  the  mouth,  but  by  the
Spirit  through  faith."

The  Second  Helvetic  Confession  is,  on  some  accounts,  to  be  re-
garded as  the  most  authoritative  symbol  of  the  Reformed  Church,
as  it  was  more  generally  received  than  any  other,  and  was  sanc-
tioned by  different  parties.      It  was  drawn  up  by  BuUinger  in

1  Ques.  Ixvi.  Ixxv.  Ixxvi.  Ixxviii.;  Niemeyer,  pp.  444-447.


§16.]     THE   LORD'S   SUPPER.     THE   REFORMED   CHURCH.     635

1562.  In  1565,  the  Elector  Frederick,  distressed  at  the  conten-
tions respecting  the  sacraments  which  agitated  the  Church,  wrote
to  Bulhnger  to  send  him  a  confession  which  might  if  possible
unite  the  conflicting  parties,  or,  at  least  meet  the  objections  of
the  Lutherans.  Biillinger  sent  him  this  Confession  which  he  had
prepared  some  years  before  ;  with  which  the  Elector  was  perfectly
satisfied.  To  give  it  tlie  greater  authority  it  was  adopted  by  the
Helvetic  churches.  As  it  was  drawn  up  by  Bullinger  the  succes-
sor of  Zwingle  at  Zurich,  it  cannot  be  supposed  to  contain  any-
thing to  which  a  Zwinglian  could  object.  The  nineteenth  chap-
ter treats  of  the  sacraments  in  general,  and  teaches,  (1.)  That
they  are  mystic  symbols,  or  holy  rites,  or  sacred  actions,  includ-
ing the  word,  signs,  and  thing  signified.  (2.)  That  there  were
sacraments  under  the  old,  as  well  as  under  the  new  economy.
(3.)  That  God  is  their  author,  and  operates  through  them.
(4.)  That  Christ  is  the  great  object  presented  in  them,  the  sub-
stance and  matter  of  them,  the  lamb  slain  from  the  foundation
of  the  world,  the  rock  from  which  all  the  fathers  drank,  etc.
(5.)  Therefore,  as  far  as  the  substance  is  concerned,  the  sacra-
ments of  the  two  dispensations  are  equal ;  they  have  the  same
author,  the  same  significancy,  and  the  same  effects.  (6.)  The  old
have  been  abolished,  and  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper  intro-
duced in  their  place.  (7.)  Then  follows  an  exposition  of  the
constituent  parts  of  a  sacrament.  First,  the  word,  by  which  the
elements  are  constituted  sacred  signs.  Water,  bread,  and  wine,  are
not  in  themselves,  apart  from  the  divine  appointment,  sacred  sym-
bols; it  is  the  word  of  God  added  to  them,  consecrating,  or  setting
them  apart,  which  gives  them  their  sacramental  character.  Sec-
ondly, the  signs,  being  thus  consecrated,  receive  the  names  of  the
things  signified.  Water  is  called  regeneration  ;  the  bread  and  wine
are  called  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ.  They  are  not  changed
in  their  o^vn  nature.  They  are  called  by  the  names  of  the  things
signified,  because  the  two  are  sacramentally  united,  that  is,  united
by  mystical  significance  and  divine  appointment.  (8.)  In  the
next  paragraph,  this  Confession  rejects,  on  the  one  hand  the  Ro-
mish doctrine  of  consecration,  and  on  the  other,  the  idea  that  the
sacraments  are  mere  empty  signs.  (9.)  The  benefits  signified
are  not  so  included  in  the  sacraments  or  bound  to  them,  that  all
who  receive  the  signs  receive  the  things  which  they  signify  ;  nor
does  their  efficacy  depend  on  the  administrator ;  nor  their  integ-
rity upon  the  receiver.  As  the  Word  of  God  continues  his  Word,
whether  men  beheve  or  not ;  so  is  it  with  the  sacraments.


636  PART   III.     Ch.   XX. —  the  means   OF   GRACE.

The  twenty-first  chapter  is  devoted  to  the  Lord's  Supper.  It
contains  the  following  passages  :  "  Ut  autem  rectius  et  perspicacius
intelHgatur,  qnomodo  caro  et  sanguis  Christi  sint  cibus  et  potus
fidehum,  percipianturque  a  fidelibus  ad  vitam  seternam,  paucula
liaBC  adjiciemus.  Manducatio  non  est  unius  generis.  Est  enini
nianducatio  corporalis,  qua  cibus  in  os  percipitur  ab  homine,  den-

tibus  atteritur,  et  iii  ventreni    degiutitur Est  et  spiritu-

alis  manducatio  corporis  Christi,  non  ea  quidem,  qua  existimemus
cibum  ipsum  mutari  in  spiritum,  sed  qua,  manente  in  sua  essen-
tia et  proprietate  corpore  et  sanguine  Domini,  ea  nobis  communi-
cantur  spiritualiter,  utique  non  corporali  modo,  sed  spirituali,  per
Spiritum  Sanctum,  qui  videlicet  ea,  qu;ii  per  carnem  et  sanguinem
Domini  pro  nobis  in  mortem  tradita,  parata  sunt,  ipsam  inquam
remissionem  peccatorum,  liberationem,  et  vitam  geternam,  appli-
cat  et  confert  nobis,  ita  ut  Christus  in  nobis  vivat,  et  nos  in  ipso
vivamus,  efficitque  ut  ipsum,  quo  talis  sit  cibus  et  potus  spiritu-

alis  noster,  id  est,  vita  nostra,  vera  fide  percipiamus Et

sicut  oportet  cibum  in  nosmetipsos  edendo  recipere,  ut  operetur
in  nobis,  suamque  in  nobis  efficaciam  exerat,  cum  extra  nos  posi-
tus,  nihil  nobis  prosit :  ita  necesse  est  nos  fide  Christum  recipere,

ut  noster  fiat,  vivatque  in  nobis,  et  nos  in  ipso Ex  quibus

omnibus  claret  nos,  per  spiritualem  cibum,  minime  intelligere  ira-
aginarium,  nescio  quem,  cibum,  sed  ipsum  Domini  corpus  pro
nobis  traditum,  quod  tamen  percipiatur  a  fidelibus,  non  corporal-

iter,  sed    spiritualiter    per    fidem Fit  autem  hie  esus  et

potus  spiritualis,  etiam  extra  Domini  coenam,  quoties,  aut  ubicun-
que  homo  in  Christum  crediderit.  Quo  fortassis  illud  Augustini
^Dertinet,  Quid  paras  dentem  et  ventrem  ?  crede,  et  manducasti."

"  Praeter  superiorem  manducationem  spiritualem,  est  et  sacra-
mentalis  manducatio  corporis  Domini,  qua  fidelis  non  tantum  spir-
itualiter et  interne  participat  vero  corpore  et  sanguine  Domini,
sed,  foris  etiam  accedendo  ad  mensam  Domini,  accipit  \dsibile  cor-
poris et  sanguinis  Domini  sacramentum."  ^

It  is  a  remarkable  fact  that  the  confessions  of  the  Church  of
England  conform  more  nearly  to  the  Zwinglian  than  to  the  Cal-
vinistic  ideas  and  phraseology  in  respect  to  the  Lord's  Supper.
This  may  be  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  it  was  less  important
for  the  English  than  for  the  German  churches  to  conciliate  the
L'uih(irans.  In  the  articles  adopted  by  the  Synod  of  London  in
1552,  and  approved  by  Edward  VI.,  the  first  clause  of  the  state-
ment of  the  doctrine  of  the  Lord's  Supper  is  in  the  language  of

1  See  Nieraeyer,  Collectio  Confessionum,  Leipzig,  1840,  pp.  512-521.


§  16.]     THE  LORD'S   SUPPER.     THE   REFORMED   CHURCH.     637

Scripture  :  "  To  those  who  receive  it  worthily  and  with  faith,  the
bread  which  we  break  is  the  communion  of  the  body  of  Christ."
The  second  clause  rejects  transubstantiation.  The  third  is  di-
rected against  the  Lutheran  doctrine,  and  asserts  that  as  Christ  is
in  heaven;  "non  debet  quisquam  fidelium  carnis  ejus  et  sanguinis
realem  et  corporalem  (ut  loquuntur)  prajsentiam  in  eucharistia  vel
credere  vel  profiteri."

Article  twenty-eight  of  the  Thirty-nine  Articles  adopted  in
1562,  contains  the  first  three  clauses  substantially  as  they  ap-
peared in  the  article  of  Edward  VI.,  and  then  adds  :  "  The  body
of  Christ  is  given,  taken,  and  eaten  in  the  supper  only  after  a
heavenly  and  spiritual  manner  ;  and  the  mean  whereby  the  body
of  Christ  is  received  and  eaten  in  the  supper,  is  faith.  The  sa-
crament of  the  Lord's  Supper  was  not  by  Christ's  ordinance  re-
served, carried  about,  lifted  up,  and  worshipped."  In  the  early
edition  of  these  articles,  the  clause  against  transubstantiation  was
amplified  as  follows :  "  Forasmuch  as  the  truth  of  man's  nature
requireth,  that  the  body  of  one  and  the  selfsame  man  cannot  be
at  one  time  in  divers  places,  but  must  needs  be  in  one  certain
place  ;  therefore  the  body  of  Christ  cannot  be  present  at  one  time
in  many  and  divers  places  :  and  because  as  Holy  Scripture  doth
teach,  Christ  was  taken  up  into  heaven,  and  there  shall  continue
unto  the  end  of  the  world ;  a  faithful  man  ought  not  either  to  be-
heve,  or  openly  confess  the  real  and  bodily  presence,  as  they  term
it,  of  Christ's  flesh  and  blood  in  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Sup-
per." ^  All  this  is  implied  in  the  form  in  which  the  article  now
stands.  It  affords  clear  evidence  what  were  the  sentiments  of  the
English  Reformers  on  this  subject.  It  is  principally  interesting  as
it  repudiates  the  idea  of  the  "  real  presence  "  of  the  flesh  and  blood
of  Christ  in  the  sacrament ;  which  even  Zwingle  was  willing  to  al-
low. He,  however,  used  the  word  "  real  "  in  a  very  different  sense
from  that  in  which  it  is  used  by  either  Romanists  or  Lutherans.

The  Sense  in  which  Christ  is  present  in  the  Lord's  Supper.

The  extracts  from  the  sjmibols  of  the  Reformed  Church  enable
us  to  answer.  First,  the  question  in  what  sense  according  to  that
Church,  Christ  is  present  in  the  Lord's  Supper.  The  Reformed
theologians  are  careful  to  explain  what  they  mean  by  the  word
presence.  Anything  is  said  to  be  present  when  it  operates  duly  on
our  perceiving  faculties.    A  sensible  object  is  present  (prje  sensi-

1  See  Exposition  of  Thirty-nine  Articles  by  Gilbert  [Burnet],  6th  edit.  Dublin,  1790,  p.
403.


638       PART  m.   ch.  XX. —  the  means  of  grace.

bus)  when  it  affects  the  senses.  A  spiritual  object  is  present  when
it  is  intellectually  apprehended  and  when  it  acts  upon  the  mind.
It  is  said  of  the  wicked,  "  God  is  not  in  all  their  thoughts."  They
are  without  God.  They  are  "  far  off."  On  the  other  hand,  God  is
present  with  his  people  when  He  controls  their  thoughts,  operates
on  their  hearts,  and  fills  them  with  the  sense  of  his  nearness  and
love.  This  presence  is  not  imaginary,  it  is  in  the  highest  sense
real  and  effective.  In  like  manner  Christ  is  present  when  He
thus  fills  the  mind,  sheds  abroad  his  love  in  om-  hearts  by  the
Holy  Ghost  given  unto  us  ;  and  not  only  communicates  to  us  the
benefits  of  his  sufferings  and  death,  that  is,  the  remission  of  our
sins  and  Kiconciliation  with  God,  but  also  infuses  his  life  into  us.
Nothing  is  plainer  from  Scripture  than  that  there  is  this  commu-
nication of  life  from  Christ  to  his  people.  It  is  not  only  directly
asserted  as  when  Paul  says,  "  I  Hve  ;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth
in  me  "  (Gal.  ii.  20)  ;  and,  He  "  is  our  life  "  (Col.  iii.  4)  ;  but  it
is  also  illustrated  in  every  way.  As  the  body  derives  life  from  the
head  (Col.  ii.  19)  and  the  branches  from  the  vine,  so  do  behev-
ers  derive  their  life  from  Him  :  on  this  point  there  is  no  dispute
among  Christians.  This,  again,  is  a  presence  to  us  and  in  us  wliich
is  not  imaginary,  but  in  the  highest  sense  real  and  effective.

But  what  is  meant  by  the  word  Christ  when  He  is  said  to  be
thus  present  with  us  ?  It  does  not  mean  merely  that  the  Logos,
the  eternal  Son  of  God,  who  fills  heaven  and  earth,  is  present  with
us  as  He  is  with  all  his  creatures ;  or,  simply  that  He  operates  in  us
as  He  operates  throughout  the  universe.  Nor  does  it  mean  mei-ely
that  his  Spirit  dwells  in  believers  and  works  in  them  both  to  vrill
and  to  do  of  his  good  pleasm-e.  Something  more  than  all  this  is
meant.  Christ  is  a  person  ;  a  divine  person  with  a  human  nature  ;
that  is  with  a  true  body  and  a  reasonable  soul.  It  is  that  person
who  is  present  with  us.  This  again  does  not  mean,  that  Christ's
human  nature,  his  body  and  soul  are  ubiquitovis ;  but  it  does  mean
that  a  divine  person  with  human  affections  and  sympathies  is  near
us  and  within  us.  We  have  now  a  high -priest  who  can  be  touched
wdth  a  sense  of  our  infirmities.  (Heb.  iv.  15.)  He  and  we  are
one  in  such  a  sense  that  He  is  not  ashamed  to  call  us  brethren.
(Heb.  ii.  11.)  In  all  things  He  was  made  like  unto  his  brethren
that  He  might  be  what  He  still  is,  a  merciful  and  faithful  high-
priest.     (Heb.  ii.  17.)     Of  this  evor}^  Christian  is  assured.^    The

1  The  late  Dr.  Cutler,  of  precious  memory,  formerly  rector  of  St.  Aiiu's  Church,  Brook-
lyn, a  short  time  before  his  death,  met  the  wi-iter  in  Chestnut  Street,  Philadelphia,  and,
without  a  word  of  salutation,  said,  "  Have  you  ever  thought  of  the  difference  between  com-


§16]     THE   LORD'S   SUITER.     THE   REFORMED   CHURCH.     639

prayers  and  hymns  of  the  Church  addressed  to  Christ  all  assume
that  He  has  human  sympathies  and  affections  which  make  his  re-
lation to  us  entirely  different  from  what  it  is  to  any  other  order
of  beings  in  the  universe.  If  any  one  asks,  How  the  humanity  of
Christ,  his  body  and  soul  in  heaven,  can  sympathize  -with  his  peo-
ple on  earth  ?  the  answer  is,  that  it  is  in  personal  union  with  the
Logos.  If  this  answer  be  deemed  insufficient,  then  the  questioner
may  be  asked.  How  the  dust  of  which  the  human  body  is  formed
can  sympathize  with  the  immortal  spirit  with  which  it  is  united  ?
Whether  the  mystery  of  this  human  sympathy  of  Christ  can  be  ex-
plained or  not,  it  remains  a  fact  both  of  Scripture  and  of  experience.
In  this  sense,  and  not  in  a  sense  which  implies  any  relation  to
space,  it  may  be  said  that  wherever  the  divinity  of  Christ  is,  there
is  his  humanity,  and  as,  by  common  consent.  He  is  present  at  his
table.  He  is  there  in  the  fulness  of  his  human  sympathy  and  love.
But  this  presence  of  Christ  in  the  eucharist  is  predicated,  not
of  his  person  only,  but  also  of  his  body  and  blood.  This  presence
the  Reformed,  as  Zwingle  said,  "  if  they  must  have  words,"  were
willing  to  call  real.  But  then  they  explained  the  word  "  real  "
as  the  opposite  of  "  imaginary."  The  negative  statements  con-
cerning this  presence  of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  in  the  Lord's
Supper  are,  —

1.  That  it  is  not  local  or  corporeal.  It  is  not  material  or  of
the  matter.

2.  It  is  not  to  the  senses.

3.  It  is  not  peculiar  to  this  sacrament.  Christ  and  his  benefits,
his  body  and  blood,  and  all  their  influences  on  the  believer,  are
said  to  be  accessible  to  him,  and  as  truly  received  by  him  out  of
the  supper  as  in  it.

On  this  point  the  Confessions,  even  those  signed  by  Calvin,
are  perfectly  explicit.  In  the  Zurich  Confession,  A.  D.  1545,  it
is  said,  "  Believers  have  in  the  Lord's  Supper  no  other  life-
giving  food  than  that  which  they  I'eceive  elsewhere  than  in  that
ordinance."  In  the  Second  Helvetic  Confession  this  is  taught
at  length,  and  the  doctrine  vindicated  from  the  objection  that
it  renders  the  sacrament  useless,  that  if  we  can  receive  without
it  what  we  receive  in  it,  the  importance  of  the  sacrament  is
gone.  The  answer  is,  that  as  we  continually  need  food  for  the
body,  so  we  continually  need  food  for  the  soul ;  and  that  the  sacra-

miinion  with  God  and  communion  with  Christ?"  and  passed  on  without  adding  a  word.
These  were  the  hist  words  the  writer  ever  heard  from  lips  which  the  Spirit  had  often
touched  with  a  coal  from  the  altar.


640         PART   III.     Ch.   XX.  — the  MEANS   OF   GRACE.

ments  as  well  as  the  Word  are  divinely  appointed  means  for  con-
veying that  spiritual  nourishment.  That  the  sacraments  are  means
of  grace,  does  not  render  the  Word  unnecessary  ;  neither  does  the
Word's  being  effectual  and  sufficient  unto  salvation,  rtnider  the
sacraments  useless.  Calvin  teaches  the  same  doctrine  :  ^  "  The
verity  which  is  figured  in  the  sacraments  believers  receive  outside
of  the  use  of  them.  Thus  in  baptism,  Paul's  sins  were  washed
away,  which  had  already  been  blotted  out.  Baptism  was  to  Cor-
nelius the  laver  of  regeneration,  although  he  had  before  received
the  Spirit.  And  so  in  the  Lord's  Supper,  Christ  communicates
Himself  to  us,  although  He  had  already  imparted  Himself  to  us
and  dwells  within  us."  The  office  of  the  sacraments,  he  teaches,
is  to  confirm  and  increase  our  faith.  In  his  defence  of  this  "  Con-
sensus," he  expresses  surprise  that  a  doctrine  so  plainly  proved  by
Scripture  and  experience  should  be  called  into  question.^  In  the
decree  of  the  French  National  Synod  of  1572,  it  is  said, '"  The  same
Lord  Jesus  both  as  to  his  substance  and  gifts,  is  offered  to  us  in
baptism  and  the  ministry  of  the  word,  and  received  by  believers."

The  Church  of  England  teaches  the  same  doctrine,  for  in  the
office  for  the  communion  of  the  sick,  the  minister  is  directed  to
instruct  a  parishioner  who  is  prevented  from  receiving  the  sacra-
ment "that  if  he  do  truly  repent  him  of  his  sins,  and  steadfastly
believe  that  Jesus  Christ  hath  suffered  death  upon  the  cross  for
hun,  and  shed  his  blood  for  his  redemption,  earnestly  remember-
ing the  benefits  he  hath  thereby,  and  giving  Him  hearty  thanks
therefor,  he  doth  eat  and  drink  the  body  and  blood  of  our
Saviour  Christ  profitably  to  his  soul's  health,  although  he  do  not
receive  the  sacrament  with  his  mouth."  On  this  point  there  was
no  diversity  of  opinion  in  the  Reformed  Church.  There  is  no
communion  with  Christ,  no  participation  of  his  body  and  blood
in  the  Lord's  Supper,  which  is  not  elsewhere  offered  to  believers
and  experienced  by  them.

4.  There  is  still  another  position  maintained  by  the  Reformed
which  is  especially  important  as  determining  their  doctrine  on
this  subject.  Tliey  not  only  deny  that  believers  receive  the  body
and  blood  of  Christ  in  the  Lord's  Supper  otherwise  than  these  are

1  "  Extra  eorum  [sacramentonim]  nsum  fidelibus  constat,  quie  ill ic  figuratur  Veritas.  Sic
baptismo  abluta  sunt  Pauli  peccata,  qiiie  jam  priiis  abluta  erant.  Sic  idem  baptismus  Cor-
nelio  fuit  lavacrum  regpneratioiiis,  (jui  tamcn  jam  Spiritii  Sancto  donatus  erat.  Sic  in  ccena
se  communicat  Christus,  qui  tamon  et  prius  se  nobis  impertierat  et  perpetuo  manet  in
nobis."     Consensus  Tiijunnus,  art.  xix.;  Nienie\'er,  Colkctio  Confesslonum,  p.  195.

2  Niemeyer,  p.  212.  "  Quod  deinde  prosequimur,  fidelibus  spiritualium  bonorum  effectum
qune  figurant  sacranienta,  extra  eorum  usum  constare,  quanuo  et  quotidie  vei'um  esse  ex-
perimur  et  probatur  Scriptune  testimouiis,  mirura  est  si  cui  displiceat."_


§  16]     THE   LORD'S  SUPPER.     THE   PvEFORMED  CHURCH.     641

received  through  the  Word,  but  they  deny  that  believers  receive
anything  in  the  eucharist  that  was  not  granted  and  communicated
to  the  saints  under  the  Old  Testament.  This  of  course  is  decisive.
Under  the  old  dispensation  it  was  only  the  sacrificial  efficacy  of
his  broken  body  and  shed  blood  that  could  be  enjoyed.  He  died
for  the  remission  of  sins  "-under  the  first  testament."  (Heb.  ix.
15.)  Therefore  the  fathers  as  well  as  we,  and  they  as  fully  as
we,  are  cleansed  by  the  sprinkling  of  his  blood  ;  to  them,  as  well
as  to  us,  He  was  the  true  bread  which  came  down  from  heaven  ;
they  all  drank  of  that  Spiritual  Rock  which  was  Christ.  Calvin
devotes  several  pages  to  the  refutation  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Ro-
manists that  the  sacraments  of  the  Old  Testament  only  signified
grace,  while  those  of  the  New  actually  convey  it.  He  maintains
that,  though  different  in  form,  they  are  the  same  in  nature,
object,  and  effect.  "  Scholasticum  autem  illud  dogma,  quo  tam
longum  discrimen  inter  veteris  ac  novse  Legis  sacramenta  notatur,
perinde  acsi  ilia  non  aliud  quam  Dei  gratiam  adumbrarint,  hoec
vero  prassentem  conferant,  penitus  explodendum  est.  Siquidem
nihilo  splendidius  de  illis  Apostolus  quam  de  his  loquitur,  quum
docet  patres  eandem  nobiscuni  spiritualem  escam  nianducasse  :  et

escam  illam  Christum  interpretatur  (1  Cor.  x.  3) Quic-

quid  ergo  nobis  hodie  in  sacramentis  exhibetur,  id  in  suis  olim  re-
cipiebant  Judtei,  Christum  scihcet  cum  spiritualibus  suis  divitiis.
Quam  habent  nostra  virtutem,  eam  quoque  in  suis  sentiebant ;  ut
scilicet  essent  illis  divinae  erga  se  benevolentiae  sigilla  in  spem
seternfe  salutis."  He  quotes  freely  from  Augustine  to  prove  that
that  eminent  father  taught  "  Sacramenta  Judcieorum  in  signis
fuere  diversa  :  in  re  qufe  significatur,  paria,  diversa  specie  visibili,
paria  virtute  spirituali."  ^

With  these  negative  statements  agree  all  the  affirmations  con-
cerning the  presence  of  the  body  and  blood  in  the  Lord's  Supper.
What  is  affirmed  to  be  present  is  not  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ
absolutely,  but  his  body  as  broken,  and  his  blood  as  shed.  It  is
the  sacrifice  which  He  offered  that  is  present  and  of  which  the
believer  partakes.  It  is  present  to  the  mind,  not  to  our  bodies.
It  is  perceived  and  received  by  faith  and  not  othermse.  He  is
not  present  to  unbelievers.  By  presence  is  meant  not  local  near-
ness, but  intellectual  cognition  and  apjarehension,  believing  ap-
propriation, and  spiritual  operation.  The  body  and  blood  are
present  to  us  when  they  fill  our  thoughts,  are  apprehended  by

1  See  Institutio,  iv.  xiv.  §§  20-26,  especially  §§  23,  26;  edit.  Berlin,  183-i,  part  ii  pp.
362-367.

VOL.    III.  41


642         PART  III.    Ch.   XX.  — the  MEANS   OF   GRACE.

faith  as  broken  and  shed  for  our  salvation,  and  exert  upon  us  their
proper  effect.^  "  The  body  of  Christ  is  in  heaven  at  the  right
hand  of  God,"  says  the  Helvetic  Confession.  "  Yet  the  Lord  is  not
absent  from  his  Church  when  celebrating  his  supper.  The  sun  is
absent  from  us  in  heaven,  nevertheless  it  is  efficaciously  present
AAdth  us  ;  how  much  more  is  Christ,  the  sun  of  righteousness,
though  absent  as  to  the  body,  present  with  us,  not  corporally  in
deed,  but  spiritually,  by  his  vivifying  influence,"  Calvin  says  :
"  Every  imagination  of  local  presence  is  to  be  entirely  removed.
For  while  the  signs  are  upon  earth  seen  by  the  eyes  and  handled
by  the  hands,  Christ,  so  far  as  He  is  a  man,  is  nowhere  else
than  in  heaven  ;  and  is  to  be  sought  only  by  the  mind  and  by
faith.  It  is,  therefore,  an  irrational  and  impious  superstition  to
include  Him  in  the  earthly  elements."  He  likewise  teaches  that
Christ  is  present  in  the  promise  and  not  in  the  signs. ^  Ursinus,
one  of  the  principal  authors  of  the  Heidelberg  Catechism,  in  his
Exposition  of  that  formulary,  says :  "  These  tAvo,  I  mean  the
sign  and  the  thing  signified,  are  united  in  this  sacrament,  not  by
any  natural  copulation,  or  corporal  and  local  existence  one  in
the  other  ;  much  less  by  transubstantiation,  or  changing  one  into
the  other;  but  by  signifying,  sealing,  and  exhibiting  the  one  by
the  other ;  that  is,  by  a  sacramental  union,  whose  bond  is  the
promise  added  to  the  bread,  requiring  the  faith  of  the  receivers.
Whence  it  is  clear,  that  these  things,  in  their  lawful  use,  are
always  jointly  exhibited  and  received,  but  not  without  faith  of
the  promise,  viewing  and  apprehending  the  thing  promised,  now
present  in  the  sacrament ;  yet  not  present  or  included  in  the  sign
as  in  a  vessel  containing  it ;  but  present  in  the  promise,  which  is
the  better  part,  life,  and  soul  of  the  sacrament.  For  they  want
judgment  who  affirm  that  Christ's  body  cannot  be  present  in  the
sacrament  except  it  be  m  or  under  the  bread ;  as  if,  forsooth,  the
bread  alone,  without  the  promise,  were  either  a  sacrament,  or
tlie  principal  part  of  a  sacrament."  ^

1  "  Corpus  Christi  in  coelis  est  ad  dextram  patris.  Sursum  ergo  elevanda  suntcorda,  et
non  defigenda  in  panem,  nee  adorandus  doniinus  in  pane.  Et  tamen  non  est  absens  ec-
clesiae  suiC  celebranti  coenam  dominus.  Sol  absens  a  nobis  in  coelo,  nihilominiis  efficaciter
praesens  est  nobis:  quanto  magis  sol  jiistitiie  Christus,  corpora  incoelis  absens  nobis,  prwsens
est  nobis,  non  corporaliter  quidem,  sed  spiritualiter  per  viviticam  operationem.  ;xxi. ;
Niemeyer,  CoUectio  Confesslonum,  Leipzig,  1840,  p.  522.)  Calvin  says  {Consensus  Tiyu-
nnus,  XXI. ;  Ibid.  p.  196):  "  Prcesertim  vero  tollenda  est  quailibet  localis  pnesentia;  imagi-
natio.  Nam  quum  signa  hie  in  mundo  sint,  ociilis  cernantiir,  palpentur  manibus:  Christus
quatenus  homo  est,  non  alibi  quaui  in  coelo,  nee  aliter  quam  mente  et  lidei  intelligentia
quserendus  est.  Quare  perversa  et  impia  superstitio  est,  ipsum  sub  elementis  hujus  niundi
includere."

2  Consensus  Tigurimis,  x.;  p.  194.

^  Summe  of  Christian  Religion,  by  Zacharias  Ursinus,  London,  1645;  Catechism  of
Christian  Religion,  quest.  77,  p.  434.


§  16.]      THE  LORD'S  SUPPER.     THE  REFORMED  CHURCH.      bVd

There  is,  therefore,  a  presence  of  Christ's  body  in  the  Lord's
Supper  ;  not  local,  but  spiritual ;  not  to  the  senses,  but  to  the
mind  and  to  faith ;  and  not  of  nearness,  but  of  efficacy.  If  the
presence  is  in  the  promise,  then  tlie  body  of  Christ  is  present,
offered  to  and  received  by  the  believer  whenever  and  wherever  he
embraces  and  appropriates  the  promise.  So  far  the  doctrine  of
the  Reformed  Church  is  clear.

Manducation.

Our  Lord  in  John  vi.  53-58,  expressly  and  solemnly  declares
that  except  a  man  eat  of  his  flesh,  and  drink  his  blood,  he  has
no  hfe  in  him ;  and  that  whoso  eatetli  his  flesh  and  drinketh  his
blood,  hath  eternal  Hfe.  It  is  here  taught  that  the  eating  spoken
of  is  necessary  to  salvation.  He  who  does  not  eat  of  the  flesh  of
the  Son  of  Man,  has  no  life  in  him.  .  He  who  does  thus  eat,  shall
li,ve  forever.  Now  as  no  Christian  Church,  not  even  the  Roman,
maintains  that  a  participation  of  the  Lord's  Supper  is  essential  to
salvation,  it  is  plain  that  no  such  Church  can  consistently  believe
that  the  eating  spoken  of  is  that  which  is  peculiar  to  that  ordi-
nance. Again,  the  Scriptures  so  clearly  and  variously  teach  that
those  who  believe  in  Christ ;  who  receive  the  record  God  has
given  of  his  Son  ;  who  receive  Him  ;  who  flee  to  Him  for  refuge  ;
who  lay  hold  of  Him  as  their  God  and  Saviour,  shall  never  perish
but  have  eternal  life  ;  it  is  plain  that  what  is  expressed  in  John
vi.  by  eating  the  flesh  of  Christ  and  drinking  his  blood,  must
be  the  same  thing  that  is  elsewhere  expressed  in  the  various  ways
just  referred  to.  When  we  eat  our  food  we  receive  and  appro-
priate it  to  the  nourishment  of  our  bodies ;  so  to  eat  the  flesh  of
Christ,  is  to  receive  and  appropriate  Him  and  his  sacrificial  work
for  the  life  of  our  souls.  Without  this  appropriation  of  Christ  to
ourselves  we  have  no  life  ;  with  it,  we  have  life  eternal,  for  He  is
our  hfe.  As  this  appropriation  is  an  act  of  faith,  it  is  by  believing
that  we  eat  his  flesh  and  drink  his  blood.  We  accordingly  find  that
this  is  recognized  in  all  the  leading  Confessions  of  the  Reformed
Church.  Thus  in  the  Zurich  Confession  it  is  said,  "  Eating  is
believing,  and  believing  is  eating."  The  Helvetic  Confession,  as
quoted  above,^  says,  that  this  eating  takes  place  as  often  as  and
wherever  a  man  beheves  in  Christ.  The  Belgic  Confession  says,^
"God  sent  Christ  as  the  true  bread  from  heaven  which  nourishes

1  Page  636.

2  "  Deus  panem  vivificum  misit,  qui  de  coelo  descendit,  nempe  Jesum  Christum :  is  nu-
trit  et  sii.^tfiitat  vitam  fidelium  spiritualem,  ?!  coinedatur,  id  est,  applicetur  et  recipiatur
Spiritu  per  iidem."    xxxv.;  Niemeyer,  Colkctio  Confessiunuin,  ^.  ZSb.


644  PART  III.     Ch.   XX.  — the  means   OF   GRACE.

and  sustains  the  spiritual  life  of  believers,  if  it  be  eaten,  that  is,  if
it  be  applied  and  received  by  the  Spirit  through  faith."  Faith,  as
shown  above,  is,  in  all  these  Confessions,  declared  to  be  the  hand
and  the  mouth  by  which  this  reception  and  appropriation  are  ef-
fected. A  distinction  may  be,  and  often  is,  made  between  spirit-
ual and  sacramental  manducation.  But  the  difference  between
them  is  merely  circumstantial.  In  the  former  the  behever  feeds
on  Christ  to  his  spiritual  nourishment,  without  the  intervention
and  use  of  the  elements  of  bread  and  wine  ;  in  the  latter,  he  does
the  same  thing  in  the  use  of  those  elements  as  the  divinely  ap-
pointed sign  and  seal  of  the  truth  and  promise  of  God.

Althouo-h  the  Confessions  are  thus  uniform  and  clear  in  their
assertion,  "  that  eating  is  believing,"  the  theologians,  in  some  in-
stances, make  a  distinction  between  them.  Thus  Calvin  says  :  ^
"  There  are  some  who  define  in  a  word,  that  to  eat  the  flesh  of
the  Christ,  and  to  drink  his  blood,  is  no  other  than  to  believe  on
Christ  Himself.  But  I  conceive  that  in  that  remarkable  discourse,
in  which  He  recommends  us  to  feed  upon  his  body.  He  intended
to  teach  us  something  more  striking  and  sublime  ;  namely,  that
we  are  quickened  by  a  real  participation  of  Him,  which  he  desig-
nates by  the  terms  eating  and  drinking,  that  no  person  might
suppose  the  life  which  we  receive  from  Him  to  consist  in  simple

knowledge At   the    same  time,  we  confess  there   is    no

eating  but  by  faith,  and  it  is  impossible  to  imagine  any  other  ;
but  tlie  difference  between  me  and  those  whose  opinion  I  now
oppose  is  this,  ....  they  consider  eating  to  be  faith  itself,  but  I
apprehend  it  to  be  rather  a  consequence  of  faith."  Among  the
moderns  Dean  Alford  makes  much  the  same  distinction.  "  What
is  this  eating  and  drinking  ?  Clearly,  not  merely  faith  :  for  faith
answers  to  the  hand  reached  forth  for  the  food,  —  but  not  the
act  of  eating.  Faith  is  a  necessary  condition  of  the  act :  so  that
Ave  can  hardly  say,  with  Augustine,  '  Crede,  et  manducasti ;  '  but
'  crede  et  manucabis.'  "  ^     Eating,  he  says,  implies  the  act  of  ap-

1  "  Sunt  enim  qui  manducare  Christi  carneni,  et  sanguinem  ejus  bibere,  unoverbo  defln-
iunt,  nihil  esse  aliud,  quam  in  Christum  ipsum  credere.  Sed  mihi  expressius  quiddam  ac
sublimius  videtur  voluisse  docere  Christus  in  prreclara  ilia  concione,  ubi  carnis  sua3  niandu-
cationem  nobis  commeudat :  nempe  vera  sui  participationc  nos  vivificari,  quam  manducandi
etiam  ac  bibendi  verbis  ideo  designavit,  ne,  quam  ab  ipso  vitam  percipimus,  simplici  cog-
nitione  percipi  quispiam  putaret.  Quemadmodum  enim  non  aspectus,  sed  esus  panis  cor-
pori  alimentum  sufficit,  ita  vere  ac  penitus  participem  Christi  animam  fieri  convenit,  ut
ipsius  virtute  in  vitam  spiritualem  vegetetur.  Interim  vero  hanc  non  aliam  esse,  quam
fiilei  manducationem  fatemur,  ut  nulla  alia  fingi  potest.  Verum  hoc  inter  niea  et  istorum
verba  interest,  quod  illis  manducare  est  duntaxat  credere:  ego  credendo  manducari  Christi
ctimem,  quia  fide  noster  efficitur,  eamque  manducationem  fructum  effectumque  esse  fidei
dice."     Institutio,  iv.  xvii.  5;  edit.  Berlin,  1834,  pp.  403,  404.

2  Grtek  Testament,  John  vi.  .53;  edit.  London,  1850,  vol.  i.  p.  723.


§1(1.]      THE  LOKD'S  SUPPER.    THE  REFORMED  CHURCH.      645

propriation.  This  is  a  distinction  without  a  difference.  It  con-
cerns simply  the  extent  given  to  the  meaning  of  the  word  faith.
If  faith  be  merely  knowledge  and  assent,  then  there  is  a  difference
between  believing  and  eating,  or  appropriating.  But  if  by  faith
we  not  merely  receive  as  with  the  hand,  but  appropriate  and  ap-
ply what  is  thus  received,  the  difference  between  believing  and
eating  disappears.  When  we  are  commanded  to  eat  the  flesh  and
to  drink  the  blood  of  Christ,  we  are  commanded  to  act ;  and  the
act  required  is  an  act  of  faith  ;  the  act  of  receiving  and  appro-
priating Christ  and  the  benefits  of  his  redemption.  The  language
of  Calvin  above  quoted  is  to  be  taken  in  connection  with  his  ex-
plicit declaration  already  cited,  that  tlie  Christian  receives  and
feeds  on  Christ  whenever  he  truly  believes  ;  and  with  the  fact  that
he  admits  that  the  believer  eats  Christ  as  fully  elsewhere  as  in
the  Lord's  Supper ;  and  especially  with  the  fact  that  the  saints
under  the  old  dispensation  ate  of  the  same  spiritual  meat  and
drank  of  the  same  spiritual  drink  as  fully  and  as  really  as  believ-
ers now  do.  The  Reformed  understood  that  "  eating  and  drink-
ing," as  used  in  John  vi.  51-58,  must  be  understood  "  figuratively
of  the  spiritual  appropriation  of  Christ  by  faith,"  because  our
Lord  makes  such  eating  and  drinking  essential  to  salvation.  On
this  point  the  Lutherans  are  of  one  mind  with  the  Reformefl.,  in
so  far  as  their  leading  theologians  understand  all  that  is  said  in
John  vi.  of  eating  his  flesh  and  di'inking  his  blood,  of  the  appro-
priation of  his  sacrificial  death  by  the  act  of  believing.

What  is  received  in  the  Lord's  Sujjper.

The  question.  What  is  the  act  we  perform  in  eating  ?  and,
What  it  is  we  eat  ?  are  distinct,  though  the  answer  to  one  may
determine  the  answer  to  the  other.  If  the  manducation  is  not
with  the  mouth  but  by  faith,  then  the  thing  eaten  must  be  spirit-
ual and  not  material.  Nevertheless  our  Lord  says  we  must  eat  his
flesh  and  drink  his  blood  ;  and  all  the  Reformed  Confessions  teach
that  we  receive  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  although  not  "  after
a  corporal  or  carnal  manner."  In  answer  to  the  question.  What
is  here  meant  by  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  ?  the  almost  uni-
form answer  is,  (1.)  That  it  is  not  the  matter  of  his  body  and
blood.  (2.)  That  it  is  not  his  body  and  blood  as  such.  (3.)  That
it  is  not  his  glorified  body  now  in  heaven.  His  body  and  blood
were  received  by  the  disciples  before  his  death,  and  consequently
before  his  ascension  and  glorification,  and  it  is  not  disputed  that
believers  since  the  apostolic  age  receive  what  the  Apostles  re-


646         PART  III.     Ch.   XX.  — the  MEANS   OF   GRACE.

ceived  when  this  sacrament  was  instituted.  (4.)  That  we  receive
Christ's  body  as  broken,  or  as  given  unto  death  for  us,  and  his
blood  as  shed  for  the  remission  of  sins.  (5.)  That  therefore  to
receive  the  body  and  blood  as  offered  in  the  sacrament,  or  in  the
Word,  is  to  receive  and  appropriate  the  sacrificial  virtue  or  effects
of  the  death  of  Christ  on  the  cross.  And,  (6.)  That  as  Christ
and  his  benefits  are  inseparable,  they  who  receive  the  one  receive
also  the  other  ;  as  by  faith  through  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy
Ghost  we  are  united  to  Christ  so  as  to  be  members  of  that  body  of
which  He  is  the  head  and  the  perpetual  source  of  life.  By  faith,
therefore,  we  become  one  with  Him,  so  as  to  be  flesh  of  his  flesh,
in  a  sense  analogous  to  that  in  which  husband  and  wife  are  no
more  two,  but  one  flesh.

Although  Calvin  admitted  all  these  propositions,  he  neverthe-
less, at  times,  teaches  that  what  the  believers  receive  is  specifically
an  influence  from  the  glorified  body  of  Christ  in  heaven.  Thus
he  says:  "We  admit  without  circumlocution  that  the  flesh  of
Christ  is  life-giving,  not  only  because  in  it  once  our  salvation  was
obtained,  but  because  now,  we  being  united  to  Him  in  sacred
union,  it  breathes  fife  into  us.  Or,  to  use  fewer  words,  because,  be-
ing by  the  secret  power  of  the  Spirit  engrafted  into  the  body  of
Christ,  we  have  a  common  life  ^Yith.  Him  ;  for  from  the  hidden
fountain  of  divinity,  life  is,  in  a  wonderful  manner,  infused  into
the  flesh  of  Christ,  and  thence  flows  out  to  us."  ^  Again,  "  Christ
is  absent  from  us  as  to  the  body  ;  by  his  Spirit,  however,  dwelling
in  us.  He  so  lifts  us  to  Himself  in  heaven,  that  he  transfuses  the
life-giving  vigour  of  his  life  into  us,  as  we  grow  by  the  vital  heat
of  the  sun."  ^  If  by  the  word  "  flesh,"  in  this  connection,  we
understand  the  humanity  of  Christ,  there  is  a  sense  in  which  the
passages  above  quoted  may  be  understood  in  accordance  with  the
common  doctrine  not  only  of  the  Reformed,  but  of  all  Christian
churches.  When  Paul  said  "  I  five  ;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth
in  me,"  he  no  doubt  meant  by  Christ  the  incarnate  Son  of  God
clothed  in  our  nature  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  It  is  a  divine-
human  Saviour,  He  who  is  both  God  and  man  in  two  distinct  na-
tures and  one  person  forever,  in  whom  and  by  whom  we  live,  and
who  dwells  in  us  by  his  Spirit.  Unless  we  are  willing  to  accuse
the  illustrious  Calvin  of  inconsistency,  his  meaning  must  be  made
to  harmonize  with  what  he  says  elsewhere.  In  the  "  Consensus
Tigurinus,"  he  says  :  "  Christus  quatenus  homo  est,  non  ahbi
quam  in  coelo,  nee  aliter  quam  mente  et  fidei  intelligentia  quse*

^  See  his  Consensionis  Capitum  Expositio,  Niemeyer,  pp.  213,  214.  ^  Hid.  p.  215.


§  16.]     THE  LORD'S  SUPPER.    THE  REFORMED  CHURCH.      647

renclus  est ;  "  and  again,  "  Quod  autem  carnis  suge  esu  et  sangui-
nis potione,  qu^e  hie  figurantur,  Cliristus  animas  nostras  per  fidem
Spiritus  sancti  virtute  pascit,  id  non  perinde  accipiendum,  quasi
fiat  aliqua  substantia  vel  conimixtio  vel  transfusio  :  sed  quoniam
ex  carne  semel  in  sacrificiuni  oblata  et  sanguine  in  expiationem
effuso  vitamhauriamus."  ^  It  is  here  expressly  said  that  what  the
behever  receives  in  the  Lord's  Supper  is  not  any  supernatural  in-
fluence flowing  from  the  glorified  body  of  Christ  in  heaven  ;  but
tlie  benefits  of  his  death  as  an  expiation  for  sin.  It  is  to  be  re-
marked that  Calvin  uses  the  very  words  of  the  twenty-third  arti-
cle of  the  Consensus  in  explanation  of  what  he  meant  by  saying,
"  ex  abscondito  Deitatis  fonte  in  Christi  carnem  mirabiliter  infusa
est  vita,  ut  inde  ad  nos  flueret."  ^  To  preserve  the  consistency  of
tlie  great  Reformer  his  language  must  be  interpreted  so  as  to  har-
monize Avith  the  two  crucial  facts  for  which  he  so  earnestly  con-
tends ;  first,  that  believers  receive  elsewhere  by  faith  all  they
receive  at  the  Lord's  table ;  and  secondly,  that  we  Clmstiana
receive  nothing  above  or  beyond  that  which  was  received  by  the
saints  under  the  Old  Testament,  before  the  glorified  body  of  Christ
had  any  existence.  It  is  also  to  be  remembered  that  Calvin
avowed  his  agreement  with  Zwingle  and  Oecolampadius  on  all
questions  relating  to  the  sacraments.^

The  Efficacy  of  the  LorcTs  Supper  as  a  Sacrament.

This  includes  two  points,  first,  The  effect  produced  ;  and  second,
The  agency  or  influence  to  which  the  effect  is  due.  In  the  Lord's
Supper  we  are  said  to  receive  Christ  and  the  benefits  of  his  redemp-
tion to  our  spiritual  nourishment  and  growth  in  grace.  As  our
natural  food  imparts  hfe  and  strength  to  our  bodies,  so  this  sacra-
ment is  one  of  the  divinely  appointed  means  to  strengthen  the
principle  of  life  in  the  soul  of  the  believer,  and  to  confirm  his  faith
in  the  promises  of  the  gospel.  The  Apostle  teaches  that  by  par-
taking of  the  bread  and  wine,  the  symbols  of  Christ's  body  and
blood  given  for  us,  we  are  thereby  united  to  him  as  our  head,  and
mth  all  our  fellow  believers  as  joint  members  of  his  mystical  body.
The  union  between  the  head  and  members  of  the  human  body
and  between  the  vine  and  its  branches,  is  a  continuous  union.
There  is  a  constant  flow  of  vital  influence  from  the  one  to  the
other.  In  hke  manner  the  union  between  Christ  and  his  peo-
ple is  continuous.  He  constantly  imparts  his  life-giving  influence
to  all  united  to  Him  by  faith  and  by  the  indwelling  of  his  Spirit.

1  Art.  xxi.  xxiii. ;  Niemeyer,  p.  196.  ^  Niemeyer,  p.  214.  ^  gge  page  GJll.


648       PART  m.   Ch.  XX.- the  means  of  grace.

It  has  often  been  stated  akeady  that  the  Bible  teaches,  (1.)  That
Christ  and  his  people  are  one ;  that  this  union  is  not  merely  a
union  of  congeniality  or  feeling,  but  such  as  constitutes  them  one  in
a  real  but  mysterious  sense.  (2.)  That  the  bond  of  union  is  faith
and  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  dwelling  in  Him  Avith-
out  measure  is  communicated  from  Him  to  all  his  members.  As
God  is  everywhere  present  and  everywhere  operative  by  his
Spirit,  so  Christ  dwells  in  our  hearts  by  faith  through  or  in  virtue
of  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  (3.)  He  is  thus  our  life.  He
works  in  us  to  will  and  to  do  according  to  his  own  good  pleasure.
As  God  works  everywhere  throughout  nature  continually  control-
Hng  all  natural  causes  each  after  its  kind,  to  produce  the  effects  in-
tended ;  so  does  Christ  work  in  us  according  to  the  laws  of  our
nature  in  the  production  of  everything  that  is  good  ;  so  that  it  is
from  Him  that  "  all  holy  desires,  all  good  counsels,  and  all  just
works  do  proceed."  It  is  not,  therefore,  we  that  live,  but  Christ
that  liveth  in  us.

As  our  Lord  in  addressing  the  Apostles  and  through  them  all
his  disciples,  said  this  is  my  body  and  blood  given  for  you.  He
says  the  same  in  the  most  impressive  manner  in  tliis  ordinance  to
every  believing  communicant :  "  This  is  my  body  broken  for  you."
"  This  is  my  blood  shed  for  you."  These  words  when  received  by
faith  fill  the  heart  with  joy,  confidence,  gratitude,  love,  and  de-
votion ;  so  that  such  a  believer  rises  fi'om  the  Lord's  table  re-
freshed by  the  infusion  of  a  new  life.

The  efficacy  of  this  sacrament,  according  to  the  Reformed  doc-
trine, is  not  to  be  referred  to  any  virtue  in  the  ordinance  itself,
whether  in  its  elements  or  actions  ;  much  less  to  any  virtue  in  the
administrator ;  nor  to  the  mere  power  of  the  truths  which  it  sig-
nifies ;  nor  to  the  inherent,  divine  power  in  the  word  or  promise
by  which  it  is  attended ;  nor  to  the  real  presence  of  the  material
body  and  blood  of  Christ  (^.  e.,  of  the  body  born  of  the  Virgin),
whether  by  the  Avay  of  transubstantiation,  consubstantiation,  or
impanation  ;  ^  nor  to  a  supernatural  life-giving  influence  emanating

'^  One  of  the  numerous  theories  concerning  the  eucharist  prevalent  more  or  less  in  the
early  church,  was  that  which  is  known  in  the  history  of  doctrine  as  impanation.  As  in
man  the  soul  is  united  to  the  body  imparting  to  it  life  and  efficiency  without  itself  becom-
ing material,  or  rendering  the  body  spirit;  and  as  the  Eternal  Logos  became  flesli  by  tak-
ing to  Himself  a  true  body  and  a  reasonable  soul,  without  receiving  anything  human  into
his  divine  nature,  or  imparting  divinity  to  his  humanity;  so  the  same  Logos  becomes  united
with  the  consecrated  bread,  without  any  substantial  change  in  it  or  in  Him.  His  relation
to  the  bread,  however,  is  analogous  to  that  of  the  soul  to  the  body  in  man  and  of  the  Logos
to  humanity  in  the  jierson  of  our  Lord.  As  the  assumption  of  our  nature  by  the  Son  of
God  is  exi>ressed  by  the  word  "  incarnation,"  so  his  assumption  and  union  with  the  bread  in
the  Lord's  Supper  is  called  "  impanation."     The  only  distinguished  modern  theologian  (so


§  16.]    THE  LORD'S  SUPPER.    THE  REFORMED  CHURCH.      649

from  the  glorified  body  of  Christ  in  heaven,  nor  to  the  communica-
tion of  the  theanthropic  nature  of  Christ,  but  only  to  "the  bless-
ing of  Christ,  and  the  working  of  his  Spirit  in  them  that  receive  "
the  sacrament  of  his  body  and  blood.

By  some  of  the  early  fathers  the  resurrection  of  the  body
was  regarded  as  a  specific  effect  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  which  was
therefore  called,  as  by  Ignatius,  ^  <ha.piJ.aK.>v  aOavama?,  ai-rtS-jTos  toC
a-oOaveh'.  This  idea  was  comiected  in  their  minds  with  the  doc-
trine of  impanation  referred  to  in  the  foregoing  foot-note.  Of
this  there  is  httle  trace  in  the  theology  of  either  the  Reformed
or  Lutheran  Church.  In  the  Scotch  Confession  of  1560,  it  is  in-
deed said  :  "  As  the  eternal  deity  gives  life  and  immortality  to
the  flesh  of  Christ,  so  also  his  flesh  and  blood,  when  eaten  and
drunk  by  us,  confer  on  us  the  same  prerogatives  ;  "  and  in  the
confession  adopted  by  the  Lutherans  in  1592  it  is  said,  the  body
of  Christ  is  received  by  the  mouth  "  in  pignus  et  certificationem
resurrectionis  nostrorum  corporum  ex  mortuis ;  "  on  which  Phil-
ippi  remarks  that  those  words  do  not  imply  any  "  immediate  cor-
poreal operation  or  any  implanting  in  us  of  a  germ  of  a  resurrection
body.  They  only  teach  that  this  sacrament  is  a  pledge  of  our  res-
urrection ;  and  as  this  idea  is  introduced  only  in  one  place  in  the
acknowledged  standards  of  the  Church,  and  there  only  inciden-
tally, it  is  to  be  considered  as  a  subordinate  matter.  The  main  point
is  the  pledge  of  the  pardon  of  sin  and  of  eternal  life  which  includes
an  assurance  of  the  resurrection  of  the  body."  ^

According  to  the  standards  of  the  Reformed  Church,  therefore  :

far  as  known  to  the  ■svritei-),  who  advocated  this  doctrine,  was  the  late  Dr.  August  Hahn
of  the  University  of  Leipzig.  "Bread  and  wine,"  he  says,  "in  the  Lord's  Supper,  are
what  the  human  body  tonnerly  was  when  the  Son  of  God  (the  divine  Logos)  was  here  on
earth ;  that  is,  the  means  of  his  perceptible  presence  and  efficiency  on  those  who  receive
Him  in  a  penitent  and  believing  heart;  they  are  therefore  =  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ;
since  in  them  the  Lord,  who  is  the  Light,  the  Life,  and  the  Resurrection,  communicates
Himself  actually,  truly,  and  essentially  (wirklich  und  wahrhaftig  und  wesentlich)  to  his
people,  and  makes  this  bread,  the  bread  of  eternal  life."  See  Lehrbuch  des  Christlichen
Glauhens,  von  August  Hahn,  Leipzig,  1828,  p.  602.  On  page  603,  he  says,  Luther  was  right
in  rejecting  the  doctrine  of  transubstantiation,  and  "  he  would  have  been  right  had  he  taught
that  with  in,  with,  and  under  the  bread  and  wine  in  the  Holy  Supper,  we  actually  and  essen-
tially or  really  (wirklich  und  wesentlich)  receive  the  present  person  Jesus  Christ  or  the  Logos,
and  hence  this  bread  and  this  wine  are  the  body  and  the  blood  of  Christ,  wherein  He  now
communicates  the  bread  which  is  from  heaven  to  believers,  as  formerly  when  He  came  in  lit-
eral tlesh  and  blood  He  gave  Himself  to  them.  But  Luther  erred  when  he  asserted  that  with,
in,  and  under  the  bread  and  wine,  the  real  body  which  suffered  for  us,  and  the  blood  of
Jesus  Christ  which  was  shed  for  us,  are  communicated,  because  according  to  the  Scriptures
(1  Cor.  XV.  45-50),  the  spiritual,  heavenly  body  of  our  glorified  Lord,  is  not  liesh  and
blood;  and  a  body,  whatever  be  its  nature,  cannot  as  body  be  ubiquitous."

1  Ad  Ephcsi'is,  XX. ;  Epistles,  edit.  Oxford,  1709,  p.  19.

2  Kirchliche  Glaubenslehre,  von  D.  Fr.  Ad.  I'hilippi,  ordeutlichem  Professor  der  Theo-
logie  zu  Rostock,  G'itersloh,  1871,  vol.  v.  p.  266.


050       PART  m.   Ch.  XX.— the  means  of  grace.

The  Lord's  Supper  is  a  holy  ordinance  instituted  by  Christ ;  as  a
memorial  of  his  death,  wherein,  under  the  symbols  of  bread  and
wine,  his  body  as  broken  and  his  blood  as  shed  for  the  remis-
sion of  sins,  are  signified,  and,  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
sealed  and  applied  to  believers ;  whereby  their  union  with  Christ
and  their  mutual  fellowship  are  set  forth  and  confirmed,  their  faith
strengthened,  and  their  souls  nourished  unto  eternal  life.

Christ  is  really  present  to  his  people  in  this  sacrament,  not  bodily,
but  in  spirit ;  not  in  the  sense  of  local  nearness,  but  of  efficacious
operation.  They  receive  Him,  not  with  the  mouth  but  by  faith ;
the}'  receive  his  flesh  and  blood,  not  as  flesh,  not  as  material  par-
ticles, not  its  human  life,  not  the  supernatural  influence  of  his
glorified  body  in  heaven  ;  but  his  body  as  broken  and  his  blood
as  shed.  The  union  thus  signified  and  effected  is  not  a  corporeal
union,  not  a  mixture  of  substances,  but  a  spiritual  and  mystical
union  due  to  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  efficacy  of
this  sacrament,  as  a  means  of  grace,  is  not  in  the  signs,  nor  in
the  service,  nor  in  the  minister,  nor  in  the  word,  but  in  the  at-
tending influence  of  the  Holy  Ghost.

§  17.  3Iodern   Vieivs  concerning  the  Lord^s  jSujjper.

The  modern  philosophy  has  introduced  certain  principles  as  to
the  nature  of  God  and  his  relation  to  the  world,  and  as  to  the
nature  of  man  and  his  relation  to  God,  which  when  applied  to
Christian  doctrines  have  produced  a  revolution  in  theology.  It
has  already  been  shown  that  the  principles  of  this  philosophy  in
theii'  application  to  the  origin  and  present  state  of  man,  to  the  per-
son and  work  of  Christ,  and  to  the  way  in  which  men  are  made
partakers  of  his  salvation,  have  introduced  a  method  of  presenting
the  gospel  utterly  unintelligible  to  those  unacquainted  with  the
modern  speculations.  The  word  philosophy  is  to  be  understood  in
a  sense  wide  enough  to  include  a  great  diversity  of  systems,  which
although  they  have  certain  principles  in  common,  differ  widely
from  each  other.  They  belong  to  two  general  classes,  the  panthe-
istic and  theistic,  which  merge  off  into  each  other  in  every  variety
of  form,  and  in  different  degrees  of  approximation  towards  identity.

According  to  the  pantheistic  theory,  the  world  is  the  ever
varying  and  unfolding  existence  form  of  God ;  and  man  is  the
form  in  which  He  comes  to  consciousness  on  this  earth.  Accord-
ing to  the  theistic  theory,  the  world  owes  its  existence  to  the
will  of  God,  in  which  He  is  immanent  and  of  which  He  is  the
life.     Man  is  the  form  in  which  generic  humanity  is  manifested


§  1 :.]  THE   LORD'S    SUPPER.     MODERN   VIEWS.  651

in  connection  with  a  given  corporeal  organization.  On  neither
view  is  there  any  real  dualism  between  God  and  the  world,  or
God  and  man  except  as  occasioned  by  sin.  The  oneness  of  God
and  man  is  affirmed  by  both  classes,  by  Cousin  and  Ullman  for  ex-
ample, with  equal  earnestness.  This  is  a  oneness  which  admits  of
diversity  ;  it  is  a  unity  in  plurality ;  but  it  is  a  oneness  of  life  ;  and
such  a  unity  of  nature  that  God  may  become  man,  and  man  God.

The  individuality  or  personality  of  man  depends  on  the  body.
Generic  humanity  is  not  in  itself  a  person.  It  becomes  personal
only  by  its  union  with  an  organized  body.  It  loses  its  personaUty
Avhen  it  has  no  body  ;  and  therefore  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  as
distinct  from  the  body,  is  pronounced  by  Olshausen  an  anti-Chris-
tian or  pagan  idea.  Whatever  of  conscious  existence  the  soul  has
between  death  and  the  resurrection  must  be  connection  with  its
body,  which  is  not  the  prison,  or  garment,  or  shell,  or  hull  of
the  soul ;  it  is  not  in  any  way  one  form  of  existence  and  the  soul
another  ;  both  form  one  life.  The  soul  to  be  complete  to  develop
itself,  as  a  soul,  must  externalize  itself,  throw  itself  out  in  space  ;
and  this  externalization  is  the  body.  All  is  one  process,  one  and  the
same  organic  principle,  dividing  itseK  only  that  its  unity  may  be
come  the  more  free  and  intensely  complete.  The  soul  and  body
are  one  ;  one  and  the  same  organic  principle.^

The  same  principles  are  applied  to  the  explanation  of  the
doctrine  of  the  person  of  Christ.  According  to  the  decisions  of
the  ecumenical  councils  of  Chalcedon  and  Constantinople,  which
have  been  accepted  by  all  Christendom,  the  Eternal  Son  of  God
became  man  by  taking  to  Himself  a  true  body  and  a  reasonable
soul,  and  so  was,  and  continues  to  be,  both  God  and  man  in  two
distinct  natures  and  one  person  forever.  By  nature  (^vo-t?)  is
meant  substance  (ouo-i'a),  as  these  words  are  used  interchangeably.
By  the  one  nature  He  is  consubstantial  with  us  men;  and  by  the
other  He  is  consubstantial  with  the  Father.

This  dualism,  this  hypostatic  union  of  two  distinct  substances
in  the  person  of  Christ,  involves,  as  taught  by  those  councils  and
believed  by  all  Christendom,  two  ivepyaai^  two  operations,  two
wills.  There  is  no  mixture  or  confusion  of  these  two  natures ;  no
transfer  of  the  properties  of  the  one  to  the  other,  but  each  retains
its  own  peculiar  attributes.

On  the  other  hand,  the  modern  German  theology  rejects  this

1  The  commonlj-  received  distinction  of  mind  and  matter  on  this  theory  must  be  given
up.  They  are  not  two  distinct  substances  having  distinct  and  incompatible  properties  or
attributes.


652  PART  III.     Ch.   XX.  — the  means   OF   GRACE.

distinction  of  natures  in  Christ.  It  denies  all  dualism  in  the  con-
stitution of  his  person.  It  teaches  that  Christ  did  not  assume
"  a  reasonable  soul  "  into  personal  union  with  Himself,  but  either
that  He  himself  became,  by  a  process  of  self -limitation,  such  a
soul,  or  that  He  assumed  generic  humanity,  so  that  He  did  not
become  a  man,  but  the  man.  His  assumption  of  humanity  was
something  general,  and  not  merely  particular.  The  Word  be-
came flesh ;  not  a  single  man  only  as  one  of  many ;  but  flesh  or
humanity  in  its  universal  conception  ;  otherwise  He  could  not  be
the  principle  of  a  new  order  of  existence  for  the  human  world  as
such.  By  this  assumption  of  humanity,  the  divine  and  human,
God  and  man,  become  one  in  such  a  sense  as  to  exclude  all  dual-
ism. There  are  not  a  divine  and  a  human,  but  there  is  a  thean-
thropic,  or  divine-human  nature  or  life.  As  in  man  there  is  not
one  life  of  the  body  and  another  of  the  soid,  but  the  two  are
one  and  the  same  organic  principle,  so  in  the  case  of  Christ  the
divine  and  human  are  one  and  the  same.  The  divine  nature  of
Christ  is  at  the  same  time  human  in  the  fullest  sense.  Humanity
is  never  complete  till  it  reaches  his  person.  It  includes  in  its  very
constitution  a  struggle  towards  the  form  in  which  it  is  here  ex-
hibited, and  can  never  rest  until  this  end  is  attained.  Our  nature
reaches  after  a  true  and  real  union  with  the  nature  of  God,  as  the
necessary  complement  and  consummation  of  its  own  life.  The
idea  which  it  embodied  can  never  be  fully  actualized  under  any
other  form.  The  incarnation,  then,  is  the  proper  completion  of
humanity.  Christ  is  the  true  ideal  man.  Here  is  reached  ulti-
mately the  highest  summit  of  human  life,  which  is  of  course  the
crowning  sense  of  the  word,  or  that  in  which  it  finds  its  last  and
full  significance.

The  first  man,  Adam,  is  to  be  viewed  under  a  twofold  character.
In  one  respect  he  was  simply  a  man ;  in  another,  he  was  the  man,
in  whose  person  was  included  the  whole  human  race.  His  in-
dividual personality  was  limited  wholly  to  himself  ;  but  a  whole
world  of  like  separate  personalities  lay  involved  in  his  life,  at  the
same  time,  as  a  generic  principle  or  root.  All  these  in  a  deep
•  sense,  form  at  last  but  one  and  the  same  life.  Adam  lives  in  his
posterity  as  truly  as  he  ever  lived  in  his  own  person.  They
participate  in  his  whole  nature,  soul  and  body,  and  are  truly  bone
of  his  bone  and  flesh  of  his  flesh.  So  the  hfe  of  Christ  is  to  be
viewed  under  the  same  twofold  aspect.  He,  as  was  Adam,  is  an
individual  person.  But  as  Adam  included  in  himself  the  race,  he
included  all  other  human  persons  in  his  life  ;  so  Christ,  having


§  17.]  THE   LORD'S   SUPPER.     MODERN   VIEWS.  653

assumed  generic  humanity  into  personal  union  with  Himself,  in-
cludes in  a  still  higher  sense  a  world  of  other  personahties.  "  He
was  Himself  the  race."  He  has  assumed  generic  humanity  into
personal  union  with  Himself  and  thereby  rendered  it  divine  ;  it  ii
indeed  a  true  human  life,  but  it  is  nevertheless  divine.  It  is  one
life  ;  not  the  hfe  of  the  Logos  separately  considered,  but  the  life
of  the  Word  made  flesh.  He  was  man  more  perfectly  than  Adam
himself,  before  the  fall ;  humanity  stood  revealed  in  Him  under  its
most  perfect  form.  The  humanity  which  He  assumed  was  not
new,  but  the  humanity  of  Adam  raised  to  a  higher  character,  and
filled  with  new  meaning  and  power,  by  its  union  with  the  divine
nature.  The  identity  of  Adam  and  his  race  is  not  material.  Not
a  particle  of  Adam's  body  has  come  into  ours.  The  identity  re-
solves itseK  into  an  invisible  law ;  and  it  is  not  one  law  for  the
body  and  another  law  for  the  soul ;  but  one  and  the  same  law  in-
volves the  presence  of  both,  as  the  power  of  a  common  life.
Where  the  law  works,  there  Adam's  life  is  reproduced,  body  and
soul  together.  And  still  the  individual  Adam  is  not  blended  with
his  posterity  in  any  such  way  as  to  lose  his  own  personality  or  to
swallow  up  theirs.  His  identity  with  his  posterity  is  generic ;  but
none  the  less  real  or  close  on  that  account.  The  case  in  regard
to  Christ  and  his  people  is  analogous.  His  life,  generic  humanity
as  united  in  one  life  with  the  divine  in  his  person  passes  over  to
his  people.  And  as  the  race  of  individual  men  is  developed  by  a
regular,  natural,  organic  process  from  the  generic  humanity  in  the
person  of  Adam,  so  the  .life  of  Christ  rests  not  in  his  separate
person,  but  passes  over  to  his  people ;  this  takes  place  in  the  way
of  history,  growth,  or  regular  living  development.  In  regenera-
tion we  become  partakers  of  this  new  principle  of  life,  that  is,  of
generic  humanity  as  united  with  the  divine  nature,  which  involves
a  participation  of  the  entire  humanity  of  Christ.  We  are  not
joined  in  a  real  life  unity  with  the  everlasting  Logos,  apart  from
Christ's  manhood,  in  the  way  of  direct  personal  in-bemg.  This
would  make  us  equal  with  Christ.  Tlie  mystical  union  would  then
be  the  hypostatical  union  itself  repeated  in  the  person  of  every
believer.  It  is  not  the  divine  life  of  the  Logos  as  such,  but  the
theanthropic  life  of  Christ  which  passes  over  to  his  people.  "  The
personality  of  the  Son,"  says  Olshausen  ^  "  as  comprehensive,  in-
cludes in  itself  all  the  personalities  of  his  people  and  pervades
them  with  his  own  life,  as  the  living  centre  of  an  organism,  from
which  life  flows  forth  and  to  which  it  returns."

1  John  xiv.  20;  Commentar,  3d  edit.  Kunigsberg,  1838,  vol.  ii.  p.  352.


654         PART   III.      Ch.   XX.  — the   means   OF   GRACE.

The  Jii'o  which  is  thus  conveyed  to  us  is  a  true  human  life,  con-
troHing  not  only  the  soul  but  also  the  body.  It  is  corporeal  as
well  as  incorporeal.  It  must  put  on  an  outward  form  and  project
itself  in  space.  It  is  to  be  remembered  that  human  life  is  not  to
be  split  into  two  lives,  one  of  the  body  and  another  of  the  soul,
thus  constituting  a  dualism  in  our  nature,  instead  of  the  absolute
unity  which  belongs  to  it  in  fact.  Soul  and  body,  are,  in  their
ground,  but  one  life  ;  identical  in  their  origin  ;  bound  together  by
interpenetration  subsequently  at  every  point,  and  holding  together
in  the  presence  and  power  of  the  same  organic  law.  The  life
of  Christ,  lodged  in  us,  works  in  us  according  to  the  law  which  it
includes  in  its  own  constitution.  That  is,  it  works  as  a  human
Ufe ;  and  as  such  becomes  the  law  of  regeneration  in  the  body  as
truly  as  in  the  soul.  This  does  not  suppose  any  actual  approach
of  Christ's  body  to  the  persons  of  his  people ;  nor  any  ubiquity  or
ideahstic  dissipation  of  that  body  ;  nor  any  fusion  of  this  personal-
ity with  ours.  We  must  distinguish  between  the  simple  man  and
the  universal  man,  here  joined  in  the  same  person.  Adam  was  an
individual  and  the  whole  race.  There  is  no  dissipation  of  Christ's
personality  into  the  general  consciousness  of  the  Church  involved
in  the  affirmation  that  his  person  forms  the  ground,  out  of  which
and  in  the  power  of  which  only,  the  whole  life  of  the  Church  con-
tinually subsists.  In  this  view  Christ  is  personally  present  always
in  the  Church,  that  is,  of  course,  in  the  power  of  his  divine  nature.
But  his  divine  nature  is  at  the  same  time  human,  in  the  fullest
sense,  and  wherever  his  presence  is  revealed  in  a  real  way,  it  in-
cludes the  person  necessarily  under  the  one  aspect  as  well  as  un-
der the  other ;  with  all  this,  however,  which  is  something  very  dif-
ferent from  the  conception  of  a  proper  ubiquity  in  the  case  of
Christ's  body,  we  do  not  relinquish  the  thought  of  his  separate
human  individuality.  We  distinguish  between  his  universal  hu-
manity in  the  Church,  and  his  humanity  as  a  particular  man,
whom  the  heavens  have  received  till  the  time  of  the  restitution
of  all  things.  His  glorified  body,  we  doubt  not,  is  possessed  of
qualities,  attributes,  and  powers,  that  transcend  immeasurably  all
we  know  or  can  think  of  a  human  body  here.  Still  it  is  a  body,
a  particular  human  body,  having  organized  parts  and  an  outward
form.  As  such  of  course  it  must  be.  defined  and  circumscribed
by  local  limits,  and  cannot  be  supposed  to  be  present  in  differ-
ent places  at  the  same  time.

The  life  of  Christ  as  communicated  to  his  people  is  a  true  hu-
man life ;  and  all  life,  in  the  case  of  man,  is  actuahzed,  and  can  be


§17.]  THE   LORD'S    SUPPER.      MODERN  VIEWS.  655

actualized,  only  in  the  way  of  process  or  gradual  historical  develop-
ment. All  that  belongs,  then,  to  the  new  life  of  the  Christian,  con-
ceived as  complete  at  the  last  day,  must  be  allowed  to  be  in-
volved in  it  as  principle  and  process  from  the  beginning.  In
every  stage  of  its  progress  it  is  a  true  human  life  answerable  to
the  nature  of  its  organic  root,  and  to  the  nature  also  of  the  sub-
ject in  which  it  is  lodged.  The  bodies  of  the  saints  in  glory  will
be  only  the  last  result,  in  organic  continuity,  of  the  divine  life  of
Christ  implanted  in  their  souls  at  their  regeneration.  There  is
nothing  abrupt  in  Christianity.  It  is  a  supernatural  constitution
indeed ;  but  as  such  it  is  clothed  in  a  natural  form,  and  involves
in  itself  as  regular  a  law  of  historical  development,  as  the  old
creation  itself.  The  resurrection  body  will  be  simply  the  ultimate
outburst  of  the  life  that  had  been  ripening  for  immortality  under
cover  of  the  old  Adamic  nature  before.  The  winged  psyche  has
its  elemental  organization  in  the  worm,  and  does  not  lose  it  in  the
tomb-like  chrysalis.  The  resurrection  of  the  body  is,  therefore,  as
much  a  natural  process  as  the  development  of  the  butterfly  from
the  grub,  or  the  flower  from  the  seed.^

1  To  avoid  the  clanger  of  misrepresentation  the  exhibition  of  the  principles  of  this  mod-
ern aspect  of  theology  has  been  given  in  great  measure  in  the  language  of  its  advocates.  No
reference  to  name^is  given,  so  that  no  one  is  made  responsible  for  the  views  expressed.
Experience  teaches  that  quoting  a  man's  words  is  no  security  against  the  charge  of  misrepre-
sentation. The  writer  was  grieved  to  learn  that  his  friend  of  more  than  forty  years  stand-
ing, Dr.  John  W.  Nevin,  considers  himself  to  be  unjustly  charged  by  us  with  holding  doc-
trines which  he  earnestly  repudiates.  On  page  429  of  the  second  volume  of  this  work  he  is
quoted  as  saying  that  Hegel's  Christological  ideas,  "are  verj' significant  and  full  of  in-
struction." This  has  been  construed  as  charging  him  with  being  a  thorough  Hegelian.  A^,  .o
this  construction,  we  would  say,  first,  that  nothing  was  further  from  the  writer's  mind  than
the  intention  of  making  such  an  imputation ;  and  secondly,  that  the  language  used  gives  no
fair  ground  for  such  an  interpretation.  On  the  preceding  page  (428)  Dorner  is  quoted  as
saying  that  "the  foundations  of  the  new  Christology  were  laid  by  Schelling,  Hegel,  and
Schleiermacher."  Dorner  certainly  did  not  mean  to  intimate  that  all  the  modern  Christolo-
gists,  himself  included,  were  Hegelians.  Neither  did  we  intend  to  intimate  that  Dr.  Nevin
adopted  Hegel's  philosophy  as  a  system,  which  we  know,  from  his  own  authority,  he  ab-
hors.

Again,  it  is  said  that  Dr.  Nevin  is  represented  as  denying  the  divinity  of  Christ,  because
he  is  quoted  as  saying  that  our  Lord  was  the  ideal,  or  perfect  man,  that  "  his  divine  nature  is
at  the  same  time  human  in  the  fullest  sense."  {Mystical  Presence,  Philadelphia,  1840,  p.
174. )  Those  who  understand  this  language  as  necessarily  involving  the  denial  of  the  divinitv
of  Christ  are  forgetful  of  the  fact  that  the  oneness  of  God  and  man  is  the  primary  principle
of  the  New  Theologj'.  Even  Lutherans  hold  that  the  humanity  of  Christ  is  capable  of  re-
ceiving the  attributes  of  divinity,  that  as  a  man  He  is  omniscient,  omnipresent,  and  almightv.
Schleiermacher,  as  we  understand  him,  had  no  other  personal  God,  than  Christ.  We  doubt
not,  and  have  never  intimated  anything  to  the  contrary,  that  Dr.  Nevin,  although  he  makes
Christ  the  ideal  or  perfect  man,  attributes  to  Him  in  his  theory  and  in  his  heart,  all  the  per-
fections with  which  the  most  devout  believer  in  his  divinity  invests  the  adorable  Eedeemer.
How  he  reconciles  this  with  his  representing  Him  as  the  Ideal  man;  and  with  the  assertion
that  He  has  but  one  life  and  that  life  in  the  fullest  sense  human,  it  is  not  for  us  to  sav.
The  same  thing,  however,  is  done  by  many  others  besides  Dr.  Nevin.


656         PART  III.     Ch.   XX.  — the   means   OF   GRACE.

Applications  of  these  Principles  to  the  Lord's  Supper.

It  is  obvious  that  as  the  principles  above  stated  must  modify
the  whole  method,  and,  so  to  speak,  theory  of  salvation,  so  they
must  also  determine  the  view  taken  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  They
necessarily  exclude  the  Romish  doctrine  of  transubstantiation  ;  and
the  Lutheran  doctrine  that  the  real  natural  body  and  blood  of
Christ  are  present  in,  with,  and  under  the  bread  and  wine  in  this
sacrament,  and  received  after  a  corporal  manner  ("  corporaliter  ")
by  the  mouth.  No  less  obviously  do  they  exclude  the  doctrine  of
Calvin  that  what  is  received  by  the  believer  in  the  Lord's  Supper
is  a  supernatural  influence  emanating  from  the  glorified  body  of
Christ  in  heaven.  In  like  manner  they  exclude  the  Reformed
doctrine  that  what  is  received  are  the  sacrificial  benefits  of  the
broken  body  of  Christ,  which  benefits  are  not  only  the  forgiveness
of  sins  and  reconciliation  with  God,  but  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy
Spirit  by  which  we  are  united  to  Christ  and  made  partakers  of  his
salvation.  As  our  redemption,  according  to  this  theory,  is  effected
by  introducing  into  the  centre  of  our  being  a  new  principle  of  life,
a  new  organic  law,  which  by  its  operation  and  gradual  develop-
ment works  out  our  salvation ;  and  as  this  new  life  is  generic
humanity  united  with  the  divine  nature  of  Christ  so  as  to  become
truly  divine  while  it  is  still  truly  human,  and  yet  only  one  and
the  same  life,  it  follows  that  it  is  not  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ,
but  his  theanthropic  nature  that  we  receive  in  the  Hol}^  Commun-
ion.

We  are  therefore  told  that  the  real  commmiication  which  be-
lievers have  with  Christ  in  the  Holy  Supper,  extends  to  liis  whole
person.  To  be  real  and  not  simpl}^  moral,  it  must  be  thus  com-
prehensive. We  may  divide  Christ  in  our  thoughts,  abstracting
his  divinity  from  his  humanity,  or  his  soul  from  his  body.  But
no  such  duahsm  lias  place  in  his  actual  person  —  that  is,  no  dual-
ism between  his  divinlt}^  and  humanity,  or,  between  his  soul  and
body.  If  therefore  He  be  received  by  us  at  all,  He  must  be  re-
ceived in  a  whole  way.  We  partake  not  of  certain  rights  and
privileges  only,  which  have  been  secured  for  us  by  the  breaking
of  his  body  and  the  shedding  of  his  blood,  but  of  the  veritable
substantial  life  of  the  beloved  Immanuel  Himself,  as  the  fountain
and  channel  by  which  alone  all  these  benefits  can  be  conveyed
into  our  souls.  We  partake  not  of  his  divinity  only,  nor  yet
of  his  Spirit  as  separate  from  Himself,  but  also  of  his  true  and
proper  humtlnity.     Not  of  his  humanity  in  a  separate  form,  hia


§17.]  THE   LORD'S   SUPPER.      MODERN   VIEWS.  657

flesh  and  blood  disjoined  from  his  Spirit ;  but  of  the  one  life
which  is  the  union  of  both  —  Spirit  in  such  connections  seems  to
stand  not  for  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  for  the  divine  nature  of  Christ,
for  the  life  of  Christ  is  not  the  union  of  the  Holy  Spirit  with  his
humanity  —  and  in  virtue  of  which  the  presence  of  the  one  must
ever  involve  in  the  same  form,  and  to  the  same  extent,  the  pres-
ence of  the  other.  What  we  receive  is  therefore  his  whole  life,
as  a  single  undivided  form  of  his  existence,  by  one  and  the  same
process.  The  participation  of  Christ's  life  in  the  sacrament  is  in
no  sense  corporeal,  but  altogether  spiritual,  as  the  necessary  con-
dition of  its  being  real.  It  is  the  soul  or  spirit  of  the  believer
that  is  immediately  fed  with  the  grace  which  is  conveyed  to  it
mystically  in  the  holy  ordinance.  But  this  is  in  fact  a  fruition
which  belongs  to  the  entire  man,  for  the  life  made  over  to  him
under  such  central  form,  becomes  at  once  in  virtue  of  its  own
human  character,  and  of  the  human  character  of  the  believer
himself,  a  renovating  force  which  reaches  out  into  his  person  on
all  sides,  and  fills  with  its  presence  the  totality  of  his  nature.
The  same  system  substantially  is  unfolded  by  Ebrard  in  his
"Christliche  Dogmatik."  What  is  taught  concerning  the  Lord's
Supper  presupposes  what  is  taught  of  the  nature  of  man  and  of
the  person  of  Christ.  In  the  sacrament  of  the  supper  we  are
united  to  Christ ;  but  the  nature  of  our  union  with  Christ  de-
pends upon  the  nature  of  the  parties  to  that  union.  Humanity
as  a  generic  life  developed  from  Adam  as  its  root  and  centre,  be-
ing corrupted  by  sin,  is  healed  by  its  union  with  the  divine  nature
in  the  person  of  Christ,  or  according  fo  Ebrard's  mode  of  repre-
sentation, by  the  Logos  becoming  a  man  by  a  process  of  self-lim-
itation. Every  man  from  the  first  moment  of  his  existence  pos-
sesses "  ein  substantielles  Centrum  seines  mikrokosmischen  Lebens,
....  ein  Centrum,  welches  da  war,  ehe  der  Mensch  bewusste
Gedanken  hatte,  und  welches  bleiben  wird,  wenn  der  Leib  dem
Tode  verfjillt,  welches  also  an  sich  weder  Gedanke  (mens)  noch
materieller  Stoff  ist."  ^  That  is,  every  man  has  from  the  cotti-
mencement  of  his  being  "  a  substantial  centre  of  life,  which  pre-
cedes conscious  mental  activity,  and  which  will  remain  when  the
body  dies,  and  therefore  in  itself  is  neither  mind  (mens)  nor  mat-
ter," This  life-centre  is  instinct  with  a  force  which  develops  itself
as  mind  and  body,  physically  and  psychologically.  It  is  the  Ego,
the  personality.  It  is  the  seat  of  regeneration  which  consists  in
introducing  into  this  substantial  centre  of  our  being  a  new  organic

1  Christliche  Dogmatih,  iii.  iii,  2,  §  444;  Konigsberg,  1852,  vol.  ii.  p.  316.
VOL,  ni.  42


658         PART  III.     Ch.   XX.  — the  means   OF   GRACE.

law  which  gives  rise  to  a  new  development.  This  new  law,  or
principle  of  life  is  the  substance  of  Christ.  Herein  consists  the
mystical  union.  "  This  union  is  a  central,  that  is,  an  organic  union
between  the  soul-centre,  (seelischen  Centrum)  of  the  exalted  In-
carnate one  and  our  soul-centre,  so  that  Christ  from  our  centre
pervades,  controls,  and  sanctifies,  both  our  phA^sical-somatic,  and
our  noetic  life."  ^  A  few  lines  further  on  it  is  said,  "  This  com-
munication is  real,  not  imaginary,  ....  in  that  before  all  our
thought,  the  substantial  centre  of  our  physical  and  noetic  life  is
organically  united  with  Christ's  centre,  [so  that  in  the  Lord's  Sup-
per] we  receive  a  new  communication  of  the  substance  (Substanz-
mittheilung]  of  the  glorified  Son  of  man."  ^  What  is  communi-
cated is  sometimes  said  to  be  "the  person  of  Christ,"  sometimes
"  the  whole  Christ,"  sometimes  "  his  life,"  sometimes  "  his  whole
human  life,"  and  sometimes  the  "  organic  law  of  Christ's  human
life."  The  Lord's  Supper,  therefore,  is  by  Ebrard  declared  to  be
an  ordinance  "  wherein  Christ  renews  the  mystical  union,  the  real
life-bond,  with  his  people,  in  that  He  renewedly  implants  Him-
self, his  person,  and  glorified  humanity  in  them,  objectively,  really,
and  centrally,  and  thus  confirms  and  renews  their  participation
in  the  benefits  of  his  death."  ^

This  theory  repudiates  the  doctrine  of  transubstantiation,  the
Lutheran  doctrine  of  oral  manducation  of  the  true,  natural  body
and  blood  of  Christ ;  the  Calvinistic  idea  of  an  emanation  from
the  glorified  body  of  Christ,  the  Reformed  doctrine  of  the  re-
ception of  the  benefits  of  Christ's  sacrificial  death,  and  of  Christ
Hhnself  by  the  indwelling  of  his  Spirit,  and  insists  on  the  com-
munication of  the  divine  humanity  of  Christ  to  the  soul  of  the
believer  as  a  new  organic  law,  somewhat  in  the  same  way  as
magnetism  is  added  to  iron  as  a  new  controlling  law.  Philippi  *
reviews  the  exhibitions  of  the  doctrine  of  the  eucharist  given  by
the  leading  German  theologians  from  Schleiermacher  to  Lange.
The  epithet  of  "  mystic-theosophical,"  which  he  applies  to  the
doctrine  of  Lange,  applies  with  more  or  less  propriety  to  all  the

1  Christliche  Dogmatik,  iii.  iii.  2.  2.  B.  §  545  ;  Konigsberg,  1852,  vol.  ii.  p.  651.

2  On  page  322,  Ebrard,  when  treating  of  regeneratioti  and  of  the  mystical  union  with
Christ  thereby  effected,  quotes  the  following  passage  from  The  Mystical  Presence,  by
Dr.  J.  W.  Nevin,  Philadelphia,  1846,  p.  160,  as  expressing  his  own  views  on  the  subject :
"  Christ's  person  is  one,  and  the  person  of  the  believer  is  one  ;  and  to  secure  a  real  com-
munication of  the  whole  human  life  of  the  first  over  into  the  personality  of  the  second,  it  is
only  necessary  that  the  communication  should  spring  from  the  centre  of  Christ's  life  and
pass  over  to  the  centre  of  ours."

*  Christliche  Dogmatik,  iii.  iii.  2.  2.  B.  §  545  ;  Konigsberg,  1852,  vol.  ii.  p.  650.

«  Kirchliche  Glaubenslehre,  von  D.  Fr.  Ad.  Philippi,  Giitersloh,  1871,  vol.  v.  pp.  364-380.


§  17.]  THE   LORD'S   SUPPER.     MODERN   VIEWS.  659

modern  German  theories.  They  are  unintelhgible  to  the  majority
of  educated  men,  and  as  to  the  poor,  for  whom  the  gospel  is  es-
pecially designed,  they  are  absolutely  meaningless.

Remarks.

As  the  theory  above  referred  to,  in  its  main  features  has  been
repeatedly  brought  under  review  in  these  pages,  there  is  the  less
need  for  any  remarks  in  its  application  to  the  doctrine  of  the
Lord's  Supper.  It  may  be  sufficient  to  call  attention  to  the  fol-
lowing points :  —

1.  If  there  be  no  such  thing  as  generic  humanity,  no  such  ob-
jective reality  ;  if  Adam  were  not  the  human  race ;  if  he  and  his
posterity  are  not  identical  in  such  a  sense  that  his  acts  were  their
acts  as  truly  as  they  were  his  own ;  in  other  words,  if  the  scholastic
doctrine  of  reaUsm,  which  until  of  late,  has  been  regarded  as  ut-
terly exploded,  be  not  true,  then  this  whole  theory  collapses.
Its  foundation  is  gone.

2.  If  it  be  not  true  that  in  man  the  soul  and  body  are  one ;
one  hving  substance  developing  itself  under  two  aspects,  so  that
there  can  be  no  soul  without  a  body ;  if  in  the  person  of  Christ
there  are  two  substances  or  natures  hypostatically  united,  and  not
only  one  nature  and  hfe,  so  that  his  divine  nature  is  in  the  fullest
sense  human,  and  his  human,  divine,  then  again  the  whole  foun-
dation of  the  theory  is  gone ;  then  there  can  be  no  communi-
cation of  his  divine  humanity  or  theanthropic  hfe  to  his  people
to  be  in  them  the  germ  of  a  new  life,  noetic  and  somatic,  to  be
historically  developed  as  was  the  nature  derived  from  Adam,  until
it  issues  in  the  resurrection  and  final  consummation.

3.  It  is  to  be  remembered  that  it  is  said  that  this  generic  hu-
manity which  constitutes  the  identity  between  Adam  and  his
race  which  is  the  analogue  of  the  mystical  union  between  Christ
and  his  people,  resolves  itseK  into  "  an  invisible  law."  Now  what
does  that  mean  ?  What  is  a  law  ?  In  the  lips  of  philosophers
and  scientists  the  word  law  often  means  nothing  more  than  a  fact.
What  are  the  laws  of  Kepler  but  facts  ?  By  the  laws  of  nature  is
often  meant  nothing  more  than  generalizations  concerning  the
orderly  sequence  of  events.  At  other  times  a  law  means  a  uni-
formly acting  force.  An  organic  law  is  a  force  uniformly  acting
to  produce  a  given  organic  result.  The  germ  of  a  bird  and  of  a
fish  are  undistinguishable  by  the  microscope  or  by  chemical
agents ;  yet  by  an  organic  law,  a  uniformly  acting  force,  the  one
develops  into  a  bird,  the  other  into  a  fish.    What  then  is  meant  by


660  PAltT  III.     Ch.  XX.  — the  means   OF   GRACE.

saying  that  generic  humanity  resolves  itself  in  a  law  ?  Can  it  mean
anything  more  than  a  uniformly  acting  force  ?  Then  when  it  is
said  that  generic  humanity  as  united  with  the  divine  nature,  so
as  to  become  itself  divine  wiiile  it  continues  human,  is  communi-
cated to  us,  does  it  mean  anything  more  than  that  a  new  uni-
formly acting  force  is  implanted  in  our  nature,  as  when  tlie  mag-
netic force  is  introduced  into  a  piece  of  iron  —  an  illustration,
obviously  imperfect  indeed,  used  by  the  advocates  of  the  theory  ?
Then  what  becomes  of  a  personally  present  Christ  ?  All  Christ
does  for  us  is  to  implant  a  new  law  in  our  nature,  which  by  its
natural,  historical  development  works  out  our  salvation.  It  is  this
aspect  of  the  case  that  made  the  German  opposers  of  Schleierma-
cher,  say  that  after  all  he  liad  a  Christ  that  was,  but  is  not  now.
Christ  appeared  in  the  world,  and  produced  a  certain  effect,  and
then  passed  away,  leaving  nothing  but  his  memory.  It  is  not
said  that  the  advocates  of  the  theory  in  question  view  the  matter
in  this  light ;  but  it  is  said  that  some  of  the  first  minds  among  his
countrymen  regarded  this  as  the  logical  consequence  of  Schleier-
macher's  system.  That  system  passed  in  Germany  for  what  it
was  worth,  an  ingenious  philosophical  theory.  In  this  country
it  is  propounded  as  the  truth  of  God.

4.  It  is  a  part  of  the  theory  under  consideration  that  we  become
partakers  of  Christ's  redemption  only  in  virtue  of  our  partici-
pation of  his  life.  His  life  brings  with  it  his  merit  and  his  power.
He  is  our  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification,  and  redemption  only
so  far  as,  and  only  because,  we  become  subjectively  wise,  right-
eous, holy,  and  free  from  the  consequences  of  our  sins.  It  is  the
Christ  within  us  and  not  the  Christ  without  us  and  above  us,  that
is  our  confidence  and  glory.  It  is  hard  to  see  on  this  theory  what
meaning  there  is  in  praying  to  Christ  for  his  intercession,  his  guid-
ance, his  protection,  or  his  love.  He  has  implanted  a  new  law
within  us  which  works  out  our  salvation  by  just  as  natural  a  pro-
cess of  development,  as  that  by  which  a  seed  expands  into  plant
and  flower.  It  is  not  for  other  men  to  say  how  a  theory  lies  in
the  minds  of  its  advocates,  or  to  sit  in  judgment  on  their  religious
experience  ;  but  they  have  the  right  to  protest  against  any  theory
which,  in  their  apprehension  of  it,  takes  away  their  personal  Sav-
iour and  gives  them  nothing  but  a  new  invisible  law  in  their
members ;  which  substitutes  for  the  Incarnate  Son  of  God  "  the
organic  law  of  Christ's  human  life."

5.  This  new  doctrine  is  a  philosophy ;  and  philosophy  we
know  from  an  infallible  authority,  is  a  vain  deceit.     It  is  vain


§18.]     THE  LORD'S  SUPPER.     THE  LUTHERAN  DOCTRINE.      661

(Kei>;)  empty ;  void  of  truth,  weightless  and  worthless.  It  is
moreover,  a  deceit ;  it  disappoints  and  misleads.  This  is  not  said
of  natm-al  philosophy,  which  concerns  itself  with  the  facts  and  laws
of  nature  ;  nor  of  moral  philosophy,  which  treats  of  the  phenomena
and  laws  of  our  moral  nature ;  nor  of  intellectual  philosophy,
which  deals  with  the  operations  and  laws  of  mind  as  revealed  in
consciousness.  But  it  is  said  of  speculative  philosophy  ;  of  every
system  which  undertakes  to  determine  on  a  priori  speculative
principles,  the  nature  of  God,  the  origin  and  constitution  of  the
universe,  the  nature  of  man  and  of  his  relation  to  God,  or  to  use
common  language,  of  the  finite  to  the  infinite.  It  was  the  orien-
tal philosophy  which  the  Spirit  of  God  by  the  pen  of  St.  Paul,  in
his  Epistle  to  the  Colossians,  pronounced  "  a  vain  deceit."  He
says  the  same  thing  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  of  the  Greek
philosophy,  whether  Eleatic  or  Platonic.  This  judgment  of  inspi-
ration is  confirmed  by  experience.  Who  now  cares  a  straw  for
the  speculations  of  the  ancients,  of  the  schoolmen,  or  of  their  mod-
ern successors.  Who  is  now  a  Hegelian  ?  Forty  years  ago,  who
was  not  ?  We  were  told  then,  as  we  are  told  now,  that  certain
scientific  principles  have  a  right  to  be  respected  and  employed  in
the  exposition  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Bible.  But  what  is  called
science  —  in  the  sphere  of  speculation  —  in  one  age,  is  repudiated
as  nonsense  in  another.  No  philosophy  has  the  right  to  control  or
modify  the  exposition  of  the  doctrines  of  the  Bible,  except  the
philosophy  of  the  Bible  itself;  that  is,  the  principles  which  are
therein  asserted  or  assumed.

§  18.   The  Lutheran  Doctrine  concerning  the  Lord's  Supper,

Protestants  at  the  time  of  the  Reformation  agreed  on  all  the
great  doctrines  of  the  Gospel.  Luther  was  as  thorough  an  Augus-
tinian  as  Calvin.  There  would  have  been  no  schism  had  it  not
been  for  the  difference  of  views  which  gradually  arose  on  the  true
nature  of  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  And  even  on  this
point,  such  was  the  desire  to  avoid  division,  and  such  the  spirit  of
concession  manifested  by  the  Reformed,  that  a  schism  would  have
been  avoided,  had  it  not  been  that  Luther  insisted  on  the  adoption
of  the  very  words  in  which  he  stated  his  doctrine  on  the  subject.
That  there  was  a  real  difference  between  the  parties  must  be  ad-
mitted, but  that  difference  was  not  such  as  to  justify  a  division
in  the  ranks  of  Protestants  ;  and  the  Reformed  were  willing  to
adopt  a  mode  of  stating  the  doctrine  which  both  parties  could  re-
ceive without  a  violation  of  conscience.     One  attempt  after  an-


662       PART  in.   Ch.  XX.  — the  means  of  grace.

other  designed  to  effect  a  compromise  failed,  and  the  Lutherans
and  Reformed  separated  into  two  ecclesiastical  denominations,  and
so  remain  at  the  present  time.  In  the  Evangelical  Church  of
Prussia  under  the  pressure  of  the  government,  the  two  partie.s
have  been  brought  into  one  Church  which  comprehends  the
greater  part  of  the  people.  But  beyond  the  limits  of  Prussia  the
two  Churches  remain  distinct,  though  no  longer  in  a  state  of
mutual  alienation.

Luther  took  his  stand  on  the  words  of  Christ,  "  This  is  my
body,"  which  he  insisted  must  be  understood  literally.  He  would
admit  of  no  figure  in  the  subject,  copula,  or  predicate.  Christ
affirmed  that  "  This,"  that  which  I  hold  in  my  hand,  and  which
I  give  you  to  eat,  is  my  body.^     This  position  having  been  as-

1  Lutherans  laj'  great  stress  on  the  fact  that  in  Matthew  xxvi.  26,  toOto  (this)  is  neuter,
and  (ipTos  (bread)  is  masculine,  and  therefore  that  the  meaning  cannot  be  '  This  bread  is
my  body,'  but '  This  that  I  give  you  to  eat  is  my  body.'  It  must  be  admitted  that  the  neuter
pronoun  cannot  be  referred  to  the  masculine  noun  grammatically,  but  it  evidently  does  re-
fer to  it  ad  sensuin.  '  This  thing  which  I  hold  in  mj'  hand  and  which  I  give  you  to  eat  is
my  body.'  But  the  thing  which  Christ  gave  liis  disciples  was  the  bread  which  he  had  taken
and  broken;  and  therefore  it  was  the  bread  which  He  affirmed  was,  either  literally  or
figuratively,  his  body.  Lutherans  themselves  cannot  avoid  saying  and  admitting  that  the
bread  in  the  Lord's  Supper  is  the  body  of  Christ.  Thus  Luther  {Lnryer  Catechism,  v.  12,
13;  Hase,  Lihri  Symholici,  p.  554)  tells  his  catechumen  to  say,  "  Though  infinite  myriads
of  devils  and  all  fanatics  should  impudently  demand.  How  bread  and  wine  can  be  the  body
and  blood  of  Christ  ?  I  know  that  all  spirits  and  all  learned  men  put  together  have  not  as
much  intelligence  as  Almighty  God  has  in  his  little  finger."  The  bread  therefore  he  teaches
is  the  body  of  Christ.  And  Dr.  Krauth  (p.  609)  says,  ".Tnst  as  it  would  be  blasphemy  to
say,  'Man  is  God,'  and  is  yet  literally  true  of  Christ,  'This  man  is  God,'  so  would  it  be
blasphemy  to  say,  'Bread  is  Christ's  body,'  and  yet  it  is  literally  true,  '  This  bread  is
Christ's  body.'  "  It  is  conceded,  therefore,  that  after  all,  the  pronoun  "  This  "  (roGro),  in
the  words  of  institution,  does  refer  to  the  noun  "bread,"  and  that  if  the  language  of
Christ  is  to  be  understood  literally.  He  affirms  that  the  bread  in  the  Lord's  Supper  is  his
body.  On  this  concession  it  maj' be  remarked,  (1.)  That  it  seems  to  yield  everything  to
the  Romanists.  If  the  bread  is  literally  the  body  of  Christ,  it  is  no  longer  bread;  for  no  one
asserts  that  the  same  thing  can  be  bread  and  flesh  at  the  same  time.  If,  therefore,  the
words  of  Christ  are  to  be  taken  literally,  they  teach  the  doctrine  of  transubstantiation.
(2.)  It  will  not  do  to  sa}"-  that  the  bread  remains  bread  and  that  the  body  of  Christ  is  in,
with,  and  under  it,  for  that  makes  the  language  figurative,  and  the  literal  interpretation,
the  main,  if  not  the  only,  prop  of  the  Lutheran  doctrine,  is  given  up.  When  Christ  says,
"This  cup  is  the  New  Testament,"  it  is  admitted  that  the  cup  is  used  metonymically  for
the  wine  in  the  cup.  And  if  the  language  of  our  Lord,  '  This  bread  is  my  body,'  means.
This  bread  is  the  vehicle  of  my  body,  then  He  spoke  figuratively  and  not  literally;  and
whether  the  figure  used  be  metonymy  or  metaphor  is  a  question  to  be  determined  by  the
nature  of  the  proposition,  the  context,  and  the  analogy  of  Scripture.  But  the  advocates
of  the  metonymical  sense  are  not  entitled  to  charge  those  who  adopt  the  metaphorical
meaning,  with  giving  up  the  literal  sense.  That  is  done  by  the  one  party  as  well  as  by
the  other.

A  great  deal  of  discussion  has  been  expended  on  the  meaning  of  the  substantive  verb
"is,"  in  the  proposition,  "  This  is  my  body."  The  Reformed  are  wont  to  say  that  it
means,  "signifies,"  "represents,"  or  "symbolizes"  my  body.  The  Lutherans  maintain
that  it  is  the  mere  copula  between  the  subject  and  predicate,  and  never  has,  or  can  have
the  meaning  assigned  to  it  by  the  Reformed  ;  and  in  this  they  are  right.  Yet  it  seems  to
be  a  dispute  about  words.     There  is  no  real  difference  between  the  parties.     When  the  Re-


§  18.]     THE  LORD'S  SUPPER.     THE  LUTHERAN  DOCTRINE.       063

sumed  it  necessarily  led  to  a  statement  of  what  is  meant  by  the
body  and  blood  of  Christ ;  in  what  sense  the  bread  is  his  body
and  the  wine  his  blood  ;  how  they  are  given  and  received ;  and
what  are  the  effects  of  such  reception.  On  all  these  points  the
surest  sources  of  information  on  the  real  doctrine  of  the  Lutheran
Church  is  to  be  found  in  its  authorized  symbols.

Statement  of  the  Doctrine  in  the  Symbolical  Books.

The  tenth  article  of  the  first  part  of  the  Augsburg  Confession
is  very  short,  and  is  couched  in  language  which  Calvin  would  not,
and  did  not,  hesitate  to  adopt.  ""  De  Coena  Domini  docent,  quod
corpus  et  sanguis  Christi  vere  adsint  et  distribuantur  vescentibus
in  Coena  Domini,  et  improbant  secus  docentes."  ^

The  language  of  the  Apology  is  more  explicit :  "  Decimus
articulus  approbatus  est,  in  quo  confitemur,  nos  sentire,  quod  in
Coena  Domini  vere  et  substantialiter  adsint  corpus  et  sanguis
Christi,  et  vere  exhibeantur  cum  ilhs  rebus,  quae  videntur,  pane
et  vino,  his,  qui  sacramentum  accipiunt."  "  Non  negamus  recta
nos  fide  caritateque  sincera  Christo  spiritualiter  conjungi ;  sed
nullam  nobis  conjunctionis  rationem  secundum  carnem  cum  illo
esse,  id  profecto  pernegamus,  idque  a  divinis  Scripturis  omnino
alien um  dicimus."  ^

In  the  Smalcald  Articles^  it  is  said:  "  De  sacramento  altaris
sentimus,  panem  et  vinum  in  Coena  esse  verum  corpus  et  sanguinem
Christi,  et  non  tantum  dari  et  sumi  a  piis,  sed  etiam  impiis  chris-
tianis."

formed  say  that  " is  "  means  or  may  mean  "signifies,"  all  they  intend  is  that  the  one
word,  in  the  case  in  question,  may  be  properly  substituted  for  the  other.  The  idea  intended
to  be  expressed  by  the  words,  "  The  seven  ears  are  seven  years,"  may  be  expressed  by
saying,  'The  seven  ears  signify  seven  years.'  This  does  imply  that  "are"  means
"signify."  Dr.  Krauth  tells  us  that  Luther  in  his  version  of  the  Bible  employs  forty-six
different  substitutes  for  the  substantive  verb  as  used  in  the  Hebrew  and  Greek.  It  would
hardly  be  fair  to  say  that  Luther  gives  forty-six  different  lexicographical  meanings  to  the

Hebrew  word  "^J^,  or  the  Greek  ei|Ut.  Whether  the  proposition  "This  is  my  body  "  is  to
be  understood  literally  or  figuratively  is  an  open  question ;  but  there  can  be  no  question  as
to  the  lexicographical  meaning  of  the  word  "  is."  No  one  doubts  that  such  propositions
as  "I  am  the  living  bread,"  "  That  rock  was  Christ,"  "  The  seven  candlesticks  .  .  .  are
the  seven  churches,"  and  hundreds  of  others  of  like  kind  occurring  in  the  Bible  and  in  ordi-
nary language,  are  to  be  understood  figuratively.  And  it  may  be  safely  said  that  if  the
proposition,  "  This  (bread)  is  my  body  "  were  submitted  to  a  thousand  intelligent  men,
who  knew  nothing  of  Christianity,  not  one  of  them  would  hesitate  to  say  that  the  words,
according  to  all  the  laws  of  interpretation,  must  be  understood  figuratively.  The  fact  that
they  have  been  understood  literally  by  so  large  a  part  of  Christendom,  is  to  be  accounted
for  by  other  reasons  than  any  ambiguitj'  in  the  words  themselves.

1  Hase,  Libri  Sijmbolici,  p.  12.

2  IV.  54-56 ;  Hase,  pp.  157,  158.     Cyril  on  John  xv.
8  VI.  1,  5;  Hase,  p.  330.


QG^         PART   III.     Ch.   XX.  — the   means   OF    GRACE.

"  De  transubstantione  subtilitateni  sophisticam  nihil  curamus,
qua  finguiit,  panem  et  vinum  relinquere  et  amittere  naturalera
suam  substantiam,  et  tantum  speciem  et  colorem  panis,  et  iion
verum  panein  remanere.  Optime  enim  cum  sacra  Scriptura  coii-
gruit,  quod  panis  adsit  et  maneat,  sicut  Paulus  ipse  nominat :
Panis  quern  franginius.     Et :     Ita  edat  de  pane."

In  tlie  Smaller  Catechism  it  is  asked :  "  Quid  est  sacramentum
altaris  ?  Responsio.  Sacramentum  altaris  est  verum  corpus  et
verus  sanguis  Domini  nostri  Jesu  Christi,  sub  pane  et  vino,  nobis
Christianis  ad  manducandum  ac  bibendum  ab  ipso  Christo  insti-
tutum.  Quid  vero  prodest,  sic  comedisse  et  bibisse  ?  Responsio.
Id  indicant  nobis  haec  verba  :  Pro  vobis  datur  ;  et :  Effunditur  in
remissionem  peccatorum.  Nempe  quod  nobis  per  verba  ilia  in
Sacramento  remissio  peccatorum,  vita,  justitia  et  salus  donentur.
Ubi  enim  remissio  peccatorum  est,  ibi  est  et  vita  et  salus.  Qui
potest  corporalis  ilia  manducatio  tantas  res  efficere  ?  Responsio.
Manducare  et  bibere  ista  certe  non  efficiunt,  sed  ilia  verba,  quas
hie  ponuntur :  Pro  vobis  datur,  et :  Effunditur  in  remissionem
peccatorum  ;  qure  verba  sunt  una  cum  corporali  manducatione
caput  et  summa  hujus  sacramenti.  Et  qui  credit  his  verbis,  ille
habet,  quod  dicunt,  et  sicut  sonant,  nempe  remissionem  pecca-
torum." 1

Luther  in  his  Larger  Catechism  enlarges  on  all  these  points  ;
answers  various  objections  to  his  doctrine  ;  insists  upon  the  neces-
sity of  faith  in  order  to  the  profitable  reception  of  the  ordinance ;
and  exhorts  to  frequent  attendance  on  the  ordinance.

The  Form  of  Concord  gives  the  affirmative  statement  of  the
doctrine  ;  and  then  the  negation  of  all  the  opposing  views.  It
affirms :  First,  the  true  and  substantial  presence  of  the  body  and
blood  of  Christ  in  tliis  sacrament.  Second,  that  the  words  of  in-
stitution are  to  be  understood  literally,  so  that  the  bread  does  not
signify  the  absent  body,  nor  the  wine  the  absent  blood  of  Christ,
but  on  account  of  the  sacramental  union  "panis  et  vinum  vera
sint  corpus  et  sanguis  Christi."  Third,  that  the  cause  of  this
presence  is  not  the  consecration  by  man,  but  is  due  solely  to  the
omnipotent  power  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Fourth,  the  pre-
scribed words  of  institution  are  on  no  account  to  be  omitted.
Fifth,  the  fundamental  principles  on  which  the  doctrine  rests  are,
(1.)  That  Jesus  Christ  is  inseparably  true,  essential,  natural,
perfect  God  and  man  in  one  person.  (2.)  That  the  right  hand
of  God  is  everywhere,  and,  therefore,  Christ,  "  ratione  human-
i  V.  1-8;  Hase,  pp.  380,  381.


§  18  J     THE  LORD'S  SUPPER.     THE  LUTHERAN  DOCTRINE.      665

itatis  suffi,"  being  truly  and  actually  at  the  right  hand  of  God
is,  as  to  his  humanity,  everywhere  present.  (3.)  "  Quod  verbum
Dei  non  est  falsum,  aut  mendax."  (4.)  That  God  knows,  and
has  in  his  power  various  modes  of  presence,  and  is  not  bound  to
that  particular  mode  which  philosophers  are  accustomed  to  call
local  or  circumscriptive.  Sixth,  that  the  body  and  blood  of
Christ  are  received  not  only  spiritually  by  faith,  but  also  by  the
mouth,  yet  not  "  capernaitice,"  but  in  a  supernatural  and  celes-
tial way,  as  sacramentally  united  with  the  bread  and  wine.
Seventh,  that  not  only  the  worthy  and  believing,  but  also  the
unworthy  and  unbelieving  communicants  received  the  body  and
blood  of  Christ  in  this  sacrament.^  Such  are  the  most  impor-
tant affirmations  concerning  the  Lord's  Supper.

The  Form  of  Concord,  on  the  other  hand,  denies  or  rejects,
(1.)  The  papal  doctrine  of  transubstantiation.  (2.)  The  doc-
trine of  the  sacrifice  of  the  Mass.  (3.)  The  withholding  the
cup  from  the  laity.  (4.)  The  figurative  interpretation  of  the
words  of  institution.  (5.)  The  doctrine  that  the  body  of  Christ
is  not  received  by  the  mouth.  (6.)  That  the  bread  and  ^vine  are
only  symbols  or  signs  of  a  Christian  profession.  (7.)  That  the
bread  and  wine  are  only  symbols,  signs,  or  types  of  the  absent
body  of  Christ.  (8.)  That  they  are  merely  signs  and  seals  by
which  our  faith  is  confirmed,  by  being  directed  heavenward,  and
there  made  partaker  of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ.  (9.)  That
our  faith  is  strengthened  by  receiving  the  bread  and  wine  and
not  by  the  true  body  and  blood  really  present  in  the  supper.
(10.)  That  in  the  sacrament  only  the  virtue,  efficacy,  and  merit
of  the  absent  body  and  blood  are  dispensed.  (H-)  That  the
body  of  Christ  is  so  shut  up  in  heaven,  that  "  nullo  prorsus  modo  "
can  it  be  present  at  one  and  the  same  time  in  many  or  all  places
where  the  Lord's  Supper  is  celebrated.  (12.)  That  Christ  could
not  have  promised  or  offered  the  presence  of  his  body  in  the
eucharist,  because  such  presence  is  inconsistent  with  the  nature  of
a  body.  (13.)  That  God  cannot  by  his  omnipotence  make  the
body  of  Christ  to  be  present  in  more  than  one  place  at  the  same
time.  (14.)  That  faith  and  not  the  omnipotent  word  of  Christ,
is  the  cause  of  the  presence  of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  in
the  supper.  (15.)  That  believers  are  to  seek  the  Lord's  body  in
heaven  and  not  in  the  sacrament.  (16.)  That  the  impenitent
and.  unbelievers  do  not  receive  the  body  and  blood  of  Chiist,
but  only  the  bread  and  wine.     (17.)   That   the  dignity  of  the

1  Eintome,  vii.  1-16 ;  Ease,  pp.  599,  600.


G66  PART  III.     Ch.   XX.  — TPIE   MEANS   OF   GRACE.

communicants  in  this  ordinance  is  not  alone  from  true  faith  in
Christ,  but  from  some  human  source.  (18.)  That  true  be-
lievers may  eat  the  Lord's  Supper  to  condemnation  if  imperfect
in  their  conversation.  (19.)  That  the  visible  elements  of  bread
and  wine  in  this  sacrament  should  be  adored.  (20.)  Pncter  htec
justo  Dei  judicio  relinquimus  omnes  curiosas,  sannis  virulentis
tinctas,  et  blasphemas  qugestiones,  quae  honeste,  pie  et  sine  gravi
offensione  recitari  nequeunt,  aliosque  sermones,  quando  de  super-
naturah  et  coelesti  mysterio  hujus  sacramenti  crasse,  carnaliter,
capernaitice,  et  plane  abominandis  modis,  blaspheme,  et  maximo
cum  ecclesiae  offendiculo,  Sacramentarii  loquuntur.  (21.)  Fi-
nally any  corporal  manducation  of  the  body  of  Christ  is  denied,
as  though  it  was  masticated  by  the  teeth  or  digested  as  ordinary
food.  A  supernatural  manducation  is  again  affirmed  ;  a  mandu-
cation which  no  one  by  his  senses  or  reason  can  comprehend. ^

Although  the  Lutheran  doctrine  on  this  subject  may  be  re-
garded as  stated  with  sufficient  clearness  in  the  Epitome  of  the
Form  of  Concord,  it  becomes  still  plainer  by  the  more  expanded
and  controversial  exposition  in  the  second,  and  much  more  ex-
tended portion  of  that  document,  called  the  "  Sohda  Declaratio."
The  seventh  chapter  of  that  Declaration,  in  giving  the  "  Status
Controversias,"  between  the  Lutherans  and  the  Reformed,  says
that  although  the  Sacramentarians  (as  the  Reformed  were  called)
laboured  to  come  as  near  as  possible  to  the  language  of  the  Lu-
therans and  used  the  same  forms  of  expression,  yet  Avhen  pressed,
it  became  apparent  that  their  true  meaning  was  very  different.
They  admitted  the  presence  of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  in
the  supper,  but  it  was  a  presence  to  faith.  The  real  body  of
Christ  is  in  heaven  and  not  on  earth ;  therefore  they  denied  that
his  body  and  blood,  "  in  terra  adesse,"  and  taught  that  nothing
in  the  sacrament  is  received  by  the  mouth  but  the  bread  and
wine.  This  is  one  point  of  difference  between  the  Lutherans  and
the  Reformed.  The  former  teaching  that  the  literal,  natural  body
of  Clu-ist,  born  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  is  actually  present  in,  with,  and
under  the  bread,  and  his  blood  shed  upon  the  cross  and  Avhich
was  the  life  of  his  body  while  on  earth,  is  present  in,  with,  and
under  the  consecrated  wine.  The  latter  teach  that  the  natural
body  of  Christ  is  in  heaven,  and  is  not  on  earth,  and  thei'efore
is  not  present  in  the  elements  of  bread  and  in  the  supper  of
the  Loixl.  What  is  present,  according  to  Calvin,  is  not  the  nat-
ural body  and  blood  of  Christ,  but  a    supernatural,    life-giving

1  Epitome,  vii.  22-42  ;  Hase,  pp.  002-604.


§  18.]     THE  LORD'S  SUPPER.     THE  LUTEIERAN  DOCTRINE.      667

influence  emanating  from  his  glorified  body  in  heaven,  and  con-
veyed to  the  believer  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Accord-
ing to  the  Reformed  generally,  it  is  not  this  supernatural  power
of  the  glorified  body  of  Christ  that  is  present  and  received,  but
the  sacrificial  efficacy  of  his  body  broken  and  his  blood  shed  for
the  remission  of  sins.

Secondly,  as  the  thing  received,  according  to  the  two  doctrines,
is  different,  so  are  the  mode  and  organ  and  condition  of  recep-
tion. According  to  the  Lutherans  the  body  and  blood  are  re-
ceived "  corporaliter  ;  "  the  organ  is  the  mouth  ;  the  only  condi-
tion is  the  actual  reception  of  the  bread  and  wine.  The  body
and  blood  of  Christ  are  received  equally  by  believers  and  unbeliev-
ers ;  although  to  their  spiritual  good  only  by  the  former.  Accord-
ing to  the  Reformed,  the  mode  of  reception  is  not  corporeal,  but
spiritual ;  the  organ  is  not  the  mouth,  but  faith  ;  and  the  condi-
tion of  reception  is  the  presence  and  exercise  of  faith  on  the  part
of  the  communicant.  This  point  of  difference  is  clearly  recog-
nized in  the  Form  of  Concord,  when  it  says  that  the  Reformed
think  that  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  "  tantum  in  coelis,  et
prgeterea  nullibi  esse,  ideoque  Christum  nobis  cum  pane  et  vino
verum  corpus  et  verum  sanguinem  manducandum  et  bibendum
dare,  spiritualiter,  per  fidem,  sed  non  corporaliter  ore  sumen
dum."  1

Manducation.

Thirdly,  another  point  of  difference,  which  the  Form  of  Con-
cord points  out  between  the  two  Churches,  concerns  the  mandu-
cation or  eating  which  takes  place  in  the  Lord's  Supper.  Our
Lord  in  the  sixth  chapter  of  St.  John's  Gospel,  although  not  there
treating  of  the  Eucharist,  says,  that  He  is  the  true  bread  which
came  down  from  heaven,  and  that  whosoever  eateth  of  that  bread
shall  live  forever.  And  in  the  same  chapter,  with  a  change  of
language  but  not  of  meaning.  He  says,  "  The  bread  that  I  will
give  is  my  flesh."  "  Except  ye  eat  the  flesh  of  the  Son  of  man,
and  drink  his  blood,  ye  have  no  life  in  you.  Whoso  eateth  my
flesh,  and  drinketh  my  blood,  hath  eternal  life ;  and  I  will  raiso
him  up  at  the  last  day."  Such  being  the  language  of  Christ,
every  Christian  must  admit  that  there  is  a  sense  in  which  the
believer  may  properly  be  said  to  eat  the  flesh  and  to  drink  the
blood  of  the  Son  of  man.     The  only  question  is.  What  does  such

1  Solida  Declaratio,  vii.  6;  Hase,  Lihri  Symbolici,  p.  727.  See  also  Dr.  Julius  Miiler.
Verghichung  der  Lehren  Luthers  und  Calvins  vom  heiligen  Abendmahl,  in  his  DoqmO'
titche  Abhandlungen,  Bremen,  1870,  p.  425.


668       PART  in.   Ch.  XX.  — the  means  of  grace.

language  mean  ?  According  to  the  Reformed  tlie  meaning  is  that
it  is  the  indispensable  condition  of  eternal  life,  that  we  should
receive  Christ  as  He  is  offered  to  us  in  the  gospel ;  and  as  He  is
there  offered  to  us  as  a  sacrifice  for  our  sins,  his  body  broken  and
his  blood  shed  for  us,  we  must  receive  and  appropriate  Him  in
that  character.  To  receive  Him  as  the  true  bread,  and  to  eat  of
that  bread,  is  to  receive  and  appropriate  Him  as  being  to  us  the
source  of  eternal  life  ;  and  to  eat  his  flesh  and  drink  his  blood  is
to  receive  and  appropriate  Him  as  the  broken  and  bleeding  sacri-
fice for  our  sins.  In  other  words,  to  eat  is  to  believe.  The  Form
of  Concord  correctly  recognizes  this  as  the  doctrine  of  the  Re-
formed Church.  It  says,^  that  the  Reformed  in  rejecting  the
literal  sense  of  the  words  "  eat,  this  is  my  body,"  teach  "  ut  edere
corpus  Christi  nihil  aliud  ipsis  significet,  quam  credere  in  Chris-
tum, et  vocabulum  corporis  illis  nil  nisi  symbolum,  hoc  est,  sig-
num  sen  figuram  corporis  Christi  denotet,  quod  tamen  non  in  ter-
ris  in  sacra  coena  praesens,  sed  tantum  in  coelis  sit."  That  the
Reformed  are  right  in  this  matter  may,  in  passing,  be  argued,
(1.)  From  the  fact  that  our  Lord  in  John  vi.  interchanges  as
equivalent  the  words  "  eating  "  and  "  believing."  He  says,  "  If
any  man  eat  of  this  bread,  he  shall  live  forever ;  "  and,  "  He  that
believeth  on  me  hath  everlasting  life.  I  am  that  bread  of  hfe."
The  same  specific  effect  is  ascribed  to  eating  and  believing,  and
therefore  the  two  words  express  the  same  act.  (2.)  The  eating
spoken  of  is  declared  to  be  the  indispensable  condition  of  eternal
life.  "  Except  ye  eat  the  flesh  of  the  Son  of  man,  and  drink  his
blood,  ye  have  no  life  in  you."  But  it  is  the  clear  doctrine  of  the
Bible,  and  the  common  doctrine  of  the  Lutheran  and  Reformed
Churches,  that  the  only  eating  which  is  necessary  to  eternal  life  is
that  which  consists  in  believing.  Lutherans  are  as  far  as  the  Re-
formed from  making  the  sacramental  eating  of  the  body  and  blood
of  Christ  in  the  supper  essential  to  salvation.  (3.)  Nothing  is  es-
sential to  salvation  under  the  new  dispensation  that  was  not  essen-
tial under  the  old.  This  also  is  a  part  of  the  common  faith  of
both  Churches.  But  under  the  Old  Testament  there  could  be  no
other  eating  of  the  flesh  of  Christ,  than  believing  on  Him  as  the
passover,  or,  lamb  of  God  that  taketli  away  the  sins  of  the  world.
(4.)  Any  corporal  eating  of  the  flesh  of  Christ's  body  and  drink-
ing of  his  blood,  as  He  sat  at  table  with  his  disciples,  would  seem
to  be  inconceivable.  (5.)  Our  Lord  Himself,  in  opposition  to  the
sense  put  upon  his  words  by  the  people  of  Capei'naum,  said  :  "  It
1  VII.  7;  Hase,  Libri  SymhoUci,  p.  727.


§18.]   THE  LORD'S  SUPPER.      THE  LUTHERAN  DOCTRINE.     069

is  the  Spirit  that  quickeneth  ;  the  flesh  profiteth  nothing ;  the
•words  that  I  speak  unto  yon,  they  are  spirit,  and  they  are  hfe."
It  was  not  his  Hteral  flesh  that  He  was  to  give  us  to  eat,  for  that
would  profit  nothing.  His  words,  on  that  subject,  were  to  be  un-
derstood in  a  spiritual  sense.^

But  although  the  Lutherans  reject  the  doctrine  of  the  Re-
formed who  teach  that  the  eating  of  the  body  of  Christ  in  the
sacrament  is  spiritual  and  by  faith,  and  assert  that  it  is  corporal
(corporaliter)  and  by  the  mouth,  yet  they  strenuously  resist  the
idea  that  it  is  after  the  manner  of  ordinary  food.  They  maintain
that  the  manner  is  supernatural  and  incomprehensible.  The
Lutherans  distinguish  between  a  spiritual  maiiducation,  of  which
says  the  Form  of  Concord,  Christ  treats  especially  in  the  sixth
chapter  of  St.  John,  and  which  is  by  faith,  and  a  sacramental
manducation  which  is  by  the  mouth,  when  in  the  Lord's  Supper,
"  verum  et  substantiale  corpus  et  sanguis  Christi  ore  accipiuntur
atque  participantur  ab  omnibus,  qui  panem  ilium  benedictum  et
vinum  in  coena  Dominica  edunt  et  bibunt."  The  words  of  Christ,
it  is  said,  "  non  potest  nisi  orali,  non  autem  de  crassa,  carnali,
capernaitica,  sed  de  supernaturali  et  incomprehensibili  manduca-
tione  corporis  Christi  intelligi."  ^  Being  incomj)rehensible,  it  is
of  course  inexplicable.

However,  although  the  Lutherans  reject  the  idea  that  the  body
of  Christ  in  the  Lord's  Supper  is  eaten  after  the  manner  of  ordi-
nary food,  yet  the  language  of  Luther  on  this  subject,  adopted  or
defended  by  his  followers,  can  hardty  be  understood  in  any  other
sense.  In  his  instruction  to  Melancthon,-^  he  says,  "  Of  our  doc-
trine this  is  the  sum,  that  the  body  of  Christ  is  truly  eaten  in
and  mth  the  bread,  so  that  what  the  bread  does  and  suffers,  the
body  of  Christ  does  and  suffers  ;  it  is  distributed,  eaten,  and  masti-
cated (zerbissen)  by  the  teeth."  On  this  passage  Philippi*  re-
marks that  as  Luther  says  that  this  is  propter  unionem  sacra-
mentalem^  it  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  language  of  the  Form
of  Concord  which  denies  that  the  body  of  Christ  is  lacerated  by
the  teeth  and  digested  as  ordinary  food.  He  says  it  is  analo-
gous to  the  proposition,  God  died,  not  as  to  his  divine  nature

1  There  are  two  modes  of  interpreting;  tlie  passage  John  vi.  50-58.  According  to  the
one,  it  is  to  be  understood  as  referring  to  a  participation  of  the  benefit  of  Christ's  sacri-
ficial death,  according  to  the  other,  of  the  reception  of  his  body  and  blood  in  the  Supper.
A.  large  portion  of  the  Lutheran  theologians  adopt  the  former.

2  Form  of  Concord,  vii.  63,  64;  Hase,  Lihri  Symholici,  pp.  744,  745.
8   Worlcs,  edit.  Walch.  1745,  vol.  xvi.  p.  2489.

4  KirchUche  Gt'tu'j<:ndchre,  vol,  v.  p.  350.


670         PART   111.     Ch.   XX.  — the   means   OF   GRACE.

but  as  to  Ms  assumed  human  nature.     The  language  of  Luther
on  this  subject  is  seldom  now  heard  from  the  lips  of  Lutherans.

Mode  of  Presence.

A  thing  is  present  where  it  is  perceived  and  where  it  acts.  The
nature  of  that  presence  varies  with  the  nature  of  the  object  of
which  it  is  affirmed.  A  body  is  present  where  it  is  perceived  by
the  senses  or  acts  upon  them.  The  soul  is  present  where  it  per-
ceives and  acts.  It  is  somewhere,  and  not  everywhere.  God  is
present  everywhere,  as  He  fills  immensity.  There  is  no  portion
of  space  from  which  He  is  absent  as  to  his  essence,  knowledge,  or
power.i  As  the  Lutherans  affirm  the  presence  of  the  substance
of  Christ's  natural  body  and  blood  in  the  Lord's  Supper,  of  that
body  which  was  born  of  the  Virgin  and  suffered  on  the  cross ;
and  as  that  body  was  and  is  material,  it  would  seem  to  follow
that  the  presence  affirmed  is  local.  It  is  a  presence  in  a  definite
place.  The  Reformed,  therefore,  always  understood  the  Luther-
ans to  assert  the  local  presence  of  the  body  of  Christ  in  the
Lord's  Supper.  The  Lutherans,  however,  deny  that  they  teach
any  such  presence.  This  after  all  may  be  a  dispute  about  words.^
The  parties  may  take  the  word  "  local "  in  different  senses.  The
Lutherans  say  that  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  are  with,  in,
and  under  the  bread  and  wine.  They  are  held  in  the  hand  and
taken  into  the  mouth.  This  is  all  the  Reformed  mean  when  they
speak  of  a  local  presence  ;  a  presence  in  a  definite  portion  of  space.
Magnetism  is  locally  present  in  the  magnet ;  electricity  in  the
Ley  den  jar.  The  soul  is  locally  present  in  the  body.  The  man
is  locally  present  in  mind  and  body  where  he  perceives  and  acts  and
where  he  is  perceived  and  acted  upon.     Lutherans  appear  to  take

1  Luther  and  Lutherans  speak  of  three  modes  of  Christ's  presence:  First,  that  in  which
He  was  present  when  here  on  earth;  "  raiinierfullende  and  vom  Kaum  umschollene,"  space-
filling and  by  space  circumscribed;  Second,  that  which  is  in  space,  but  does  not  till  any  por-
tion of  it,  and  is  not  circumscribed  by  it.  In  this  state  Christ's  body  rose  from  the  grave
and  passed  through  closed  doors.  This  kind  of  presence  belongs  to  angels.  Third,  the
divine  and  celestial  mode  of  presence,  according  to  which  Christ,  in  virtue  of  the  union  of
the  two  natures  in  his  person,  is  present  in  ins  humanity,  in  his  soul  and  body,  wherever
God  is  present.  It  is  specially  in  the  second  and  third  modes  (the  definitive  and  the  re-
pletive)  that  Luther  asserted  the  presence  of  Christ's  body  in  the  eueharist;  although  he
asserted  that  the  first  was  possible,  "Denn  er  wolle  in  keiner  Weise  liiugnen,  dass  Gottes
Gewalt  nicht  sollte  so  viel  verm(')gen,  dass  ein  Leib  zugleich  an  vielen  Orten  sein  mige,
auch  leiblicher,  begreiflicher  Weise."     Philippi,  ut  supra,  vol.  v.  p.  34G.

'-  On  this  word  Gerhard  remarks:  "  Terminum  localis  prssentia;  esse  ambiguum.     Corpus
Christi  prresens  esse  dicimus  in  illo  loco,  in  quo  cclebratur  coena,  sed  modo  locali  et  cir-
cumscriptivo  prsesens  esse  negamus.     Si  pr:\5sentiam  localem  sensu  posteriori  intclligunt,
habentnos  sibi  consentientes;  si  priori,  repugnamus."     Loci  Thtolo(jid,  •x.xii. -sX.  §  106
edit.  Tiibingen,  1770,  vol.  x.  p.  180.


gl8.]    THE  LOllD'S  SUPPER.      THE  LUTHERAN  DOCTRINE.     671

the  word  "  local "  in  a  sense  in  which  it  characterizes  the  presence
of  a  body  which  is  present  exchisively,  i.  e.,  both  in  the  sense  of
exchiding  all  other  bodies  from  the  same  portion  of  space,  being
bounded  by  it,  and  of  being  nowhere  else.  The  Reformed  say
that  it  is  contrary  to  the  nature  of  such  a  body  as  that  which  be-
longs to  man,  that  it  should  be  in  many  places  at  the  same  time,
much  less  that  it  should  fill  all  space.  The  idea  that  the  flesh
and  blood  of  Christ  are  omnipresent,  seems  to  involve  a  contradic-
tion. It  is  in  vain  to  appeal  to  the  omnipotence  of  God.  Contra-
dictions are  not  the  objects  of  power.  It  is  no  more  a  limitation
of  the  power  of  God  to  say  that  He  cannot  do  the  impossible,  that
He  cannot  make  right  wrong,  or  the  finite  infinite,  than  it  is  a  lim-
itation of  his  wisdom  that  He  cannot  teach  the  untrue  or  the  un-
wise. All  such  assumptions  destroy  the  idea  of  God  as  a  rational
Being.  If  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  be  everywhere  present,
then  they  are  received  in  every  ordinary  meal  as  well  as  in  the
Lord's  Supper.  The  answer  which  Lutherans  give  to  this  objec-
tion, namely,  that  it  is  one  thing  for  the  body  of  Christ  to  be  om-
nipresent, and  another  for  it  to  be  accessible,  or  everywhere  given,
is  unsatisfactory  ;  because  the  virtue  resides  in  the  body  and
blood,  and  if  they  are  everywhere  present  and  received  they  are
everywhere  operative,  at  least  to  believers.  If  this  omnipresence
of  the  body  of  Christ  was  actual  only  after  his  ascension,  then,  as
Miiller  ^  argues,  the  Apostles  must,  at  the  institution  of  the  Lord's
Supper,  have  partaken  of  his  body  and  blood  in  a  manner  pecul-
iar to  that  one  occasion,  and  Christ,  so  far  as  other  Christians  are
concerned,  only  foretold  that  his  body  would  be  ubiquitous  and
therefore  present  in  the  eucharist.  Luther,  therefore,  says,  "  If
Christ  at  the  Last  Supper  had  not  uttered  the  words  '  this  is  my
body,'  yet  the  words,  Christ  sits  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  prove
that  his  body  and  blood  may  be  in  the  Lord's  Supper  as  well  as
everywhere  else."  ^  As  Christ  in  his  human  nature  and  therefore
in  his  human  body  sits  at  the  right  hand  of  God  ;  and  as  the
right  hand  of  God  is  everywhere,  his  body  must  be  everywhere,
and  therefore  in  the  bread  as  used  in  the  sacrament.  The  cur-
rent representations,  however,  of  the  Lutheran  theologians  on
this  point  are,  that  the  presence  of  the  body  of  Christ  in  the
Lord's  Supper  is  peculiar,  something  which  occurs  there  and  no-
where else.  This  presence  is  due,  not  to  the  words  of  consecra-
tion as  uttered  by  the  minister,  but  to  the  almighty  power  which

1  Bogrnatische  Ahhandlmiyen,  Bremen,  1870,  p.  455,  note.

2  Das  diese  Worte,  etc.,  §  118;  Works,  edit.  Walch's,  vol.  xx.  p.  1011.


672         PART  III.     Cii.   XX.  — THE  MEANS    OF   GRACE.

attended  the  original  utterance  of  the  words,  This  is  my  body,
and  continues  to  operate  whenever  and  wherever  this  sacrament
is  administered.

This  presence  of  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  in,  with,  and
ander  the  bread  and  wine  has  been  generally  expressed  by  non-
Lutherans  by  the  word  consubstantiation,  as  distinguished  from
the  Romish  doctrine  of  transubstantiation.  The  propriety  of
this  word  to  express  the  doctrine  of  Luther  is  admitted  by  Phil-
ippi,  if  it  be  understood  to  mean,  what  in  fact  is  meant  by  it
when  used  by  the  Reformed,  "  das  reale  Zusammensein  beider
Substanzen,"  ^'.  e.,  the  real  coexistence  of  the  two  substances,  the
earthly  and  the  heavenly.  But  Lutherans  generally  object  to  the
word  because  it  is  often  used  to  express  the  idea  of  the  mixing
two  substances  so  as  to  form  a  third  ;  or  the  local  inclusion  of  the
one  substance  by  the  other.^

The  Lutheran  doctrine  of  the  mode  of  the  presence  of  the  body
and  blood  of  Christ  in  the  eucharist,  is  thus  carefully  stated  by  Ger-
hard :  2  "  Quam  vere  in  sacra  coena  prcesens  est  res  terrena,  panis
et  vinum  :  tam  vere  e tiara  praesens  res  coelestis,  corpus  et  sanguis
Christi :  proinde  credimus,  docemus  et  confitemur  in  eucharistiae
Sacramento  veram,  realem  et  substantialem  corporis  et  sanguinis
Christi  prsesentiam,  exhibitionem,  manducationem  et  bibitionem,
quaa  praesentia  non  est  essentialis  conversio  panis  in  corpus  et  vini
in  sanguinem  Christi,  quam  transubstantionem  vocant,  neque  est
corporis  ad  panem,  ac  sanguinis  ad  vinum  extra  usum  coente  local-
is  aut  durabilis,  neque  est  panis  et  corporis  Christi  personalis  unio,
qualis  est  divinas  et  humanae  naturae  in  Christo  unio,  neque
est  locahs  inclusio  corporis  in  panem,  neque  est  impanatio,
neque  est  incorporatio  in  panem,  neque  est  consubstantio,  qua
panis  cum  corpore  Christi,  et  vinum  cum  ipsius  sanguine  in
unam  massam  physicam  coalescat :  neque  est  naturalis  inexis-
tentia,  neque  delitescentia  corpusculi  sub  pane,  neque  quidquam
hujusmodi  carnale  aut  physicum ;  sed  est  praesentia  et  unio  sa-
cramentalis,  qutB  ita  comparata  est,  ut  juxta  ipsius  salvatoris
nostri,  veracis,  sapientis,  et  omnipotentis  institutionem,  pani
benedicto  tanquam  medio  divinitus  ordinato  corpus  :  et  vino  bene-
dicto  tanquam  medio  itidem  divinitus  ordinato,  sanguis  Christi
modo  nobis  incomprehensibili  miiatur,  ut  cum  illo  pane  corpus
Christi  una  manducatione  sacramentali  et  cum  illo  vino  sangui-
nem Christi  una  bibitione  sacramentah  in  sublimi  mysterio  suma-

1  Philippi,  ut  sujji-a,  vol.  v,  p.  35G,  and  Krauth,  ut  snpra,  pp.  130,  339.

2  John  Gerhard,  Loci  Theologici,  xxii.  x.  §  69;  edit.  Ti'bingen,  1769,  vol.  x.  pp.  116,
117.


§  18.]    THE  LORDS  SUPPER.      THE  LUTHERAX  DOCTRINE.    673

mus,  manducemus  ac  bibamus.  Breviter  non  airova-iai'  absentiam,
lion  h'ovaiav  inexistentiaiii,  non  avvovcrcai'  cousubstantionem,  non
fi€Tov<xLay  traiisubstaiitionem,  sed  TvapovaUv  corporis  et  sanguinis
Cliristi  in  sacra  coena  statuimus."

The  whole  doctrine  of  the  Lutheran  Church  on  the  Lord's
Supper  is  briefly  and  authoritatively  stated  in  the  "  Articuli  Visi-
tatorii  "  issued  in  1592  for  the  Electorate  and  northern  provinces  of
of  Saxony,  which  all  church  officers  and  teachers  were  required  to
adopt.  The  first  Article  is  as  follows  :  "  Pura  et  vera  doctrina
nostrarum  Ecclesiarum  de  Sacra  Coena.  (1.)  Quod  verba  Christi :
Accipite  et  comedite,  hoc  est  corpus  meum  :  Bibite,  hie  est  sanguis
mens  simpliciter,  et  secundum  literam,  sicut  sonant,  intelHgenda
sint.  (2.)  Quod  in  sacraiuento  duge  res  sint,  qute  exhibentur
et  simul  accipiuntur :  una  terrena,  quie  est  panis  et  viiium ;
et  una  coelestis,  quEe  est  corpus  et  sanguis  Christi.  (3.)  Quod
base  unio,  exhibitio  et  sumptio  fiat  hie  inferius  in  terris,  non  su-
perius  in  coehs.  (4.)  Quod  exhibeatur  et  accipiatur  verum  et
naturale  corpus  Christi,  quod  in  cruce  pependit,  et  verus  ac  natu-
ralis  sanguis,  qui  ex  Christi  latere  fluxit.  (5.)  Quod  corpus  et
sanguis  Christi  non  fide  tantum  spiritualiter,  quod  etiam  extra
coenani  fieri  potest,  sed  cum  pane  et  vino  orahter,  modo  tamen
imperscrutabili,  et  supernaturali,  illic  in  coena  accipiantur,  idque
in  pignus  et  certificationem  resurrectionis  nostrorum  corporum  ex
mortuis.  (6.)  Quod  oralis  perceptio  corporis  et  sanguinis  Christi
non  solum  fiat  a  dignis,  verum  etiam  ab  indignis,  qui  sine  poeni-
tentia  et  vera  fide  accedunt ;  eventu  tamen  diverse.  A '  dignis
euim  percipitur  ad  salutem,  ab  indignis  autem  ad  judicium."  ^

The  Benefit  received  at  the  Lord's  Sui^per.

In  the  Augsburg  Confession,  in  the  Apology,  m  the  Shorter
and  Larger  Catechism,  and  in  the  Form  of  Concord,  the  benefits
conferred  upon  believers  in  this  sacrament  are  declared  to  be  for-
giveness of  sin  and  confirmation  of  faith.  These  are  said  to  be  its
special  and  intended  effects.  Thus  in  the  Shorter  Catechism  the
question  is  asked,  "  Quid  vero  prodest,  sic  comedisse  et  bibisse  ?  "
The  answer  is  "  Id  indicant  hsec  verba  :  Pro  vobis  datur  ;  et :  ef-
funditur  in  remissionem  peccatorum.  Nempe  nobis  per  verba  ilia
in  Sacramento  remissio  peccatorum,  vita,  justitia  et  salus  doiien-
tur.  Ubi  enim  remissio  peccatorum  est,  ibi  est  et  vita  et  salus."
The  next  question  is,  "  Qui  potest  corporalis  ilia  manducatio  tan-
tas  res   efficere?"      To  which   the   following   answer  is   given:

1  Hase,  Libvi  SymboUci,  3d  edit.  Leipzig,  1840,  pp.  857,  858.
VOL.  III.  id


674         PART  III.     Ch.   XX.  — the   means    OF   GRACE.

"  Manducare  et  bibere  ista  certe  non  efficiunt,  sed  ilia  verba,  quae
liic  ponuntur  :  Pro  vobis  datur,  et :  Effunditur  in  ,  remissiouem
peccatorum ;  quae  verba  sunt  una  cum  corporal!  manducatione
caput  et  summa  hujus  sacramenti.  Et  qui  credit  his  verbis,  ille
babet,  quod  dicunt,  et  sicut  sonant,  nempe  remissioneni  peccato-
rum." ^  To  the  same  effect  in  the  Larger  Catechism,  after  refer-
ring to  the  words  of  institution  it  is  said  that  in  coming  to  the  Lord's
Supper  we  receive  the  remission  of  sins.  "  Quare  hoc  ?  Ideo,
quod  verba  illic  extant  et  haec  dant  nobis.  Siquidem  propterea  a
Christo  jubeor  edere  et  bibere,  ut  meum  sit,  mihique  utilitatem
afferat,  veluti  certum  pignus  et  arrhabo,  imo  potius  res  ipsa,  quam
pro  peccatis  meis,  morte  et  omnibus  malis  ille  opposuit  et  oppig-
noravit.  Inde  jure  optimo  cibus  animaa  dicitur,  novum  hominem
alens  atque  fortificans."  ^

All  that  is  here  said  is  in  perfect  accord  with  the  Reformed
doctrine  both  as  to  the  benefits  to  be  derived  from  this  sacrament
and  as  to  the  source  from  which  those  benefits  are  to  be  received.
The  believing  communicant  receives  at  the  Lord's  table  the  bene-
fits of  his  redeeming  death,  and  his  faith  is  confirmed  by  the  di-
vinely appointed  seals  and  pledge  of  the  promises  of  God.  And
the  sacrament  has  these  effects,  because  through  the  grace  of  the
Holy  Spirit  the  worthy  communicant  embraces  by  faith  the  offer
of  pardon  and  acceptance  made  in  the  ordinance.  This  implies
the  ignoring  or  repudiation  of  the  idea  that  the  benefits  con-
ferred are  to  be  attributed  to  any  magical  or  supernatural  in-
fluence from  the  actual,  natural  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  which,
according  to  the  Lutheran  doctrine,  are  orally  received  in  this  or-
dinance ;  or  to  a  divine  influence  emanating  from  the  glorified
body  of  Christ  in  heaven  ;  or  to  the  theanthropic  life  of  Christ
conveyed  into  the  believer  as  a  new  organic  law.  Neverthe-
less there  is  another  mode  of  representation  occurring  in  the
writings  of  Luther  and  of  Lutherans.  According  to  this  repre-
sentation there  is  a  divine,  supernatural  power  inherent  in  the
body  and  blood  of  Christ,  which  being  received  in  the  Lord's
Supper  conveys  to  the  believer,  as  to  his  soul  and  body,  a  new
spiritual  and  immortal  life.  Thus,  in  his  Larger  Catechism,  in
answer  to  the  question  how  bread  and  wine  can  have  the  power
attributed  to  the  Lord's  Supper,  he  says  it  is  not  bread  as  such
which  produces  the  effect,  "•  but  such  bread  and  wine  which  are
the  body  and  blood   of    Christ,  and  which  have  the  words  [of

1  V.  5-8 ;  Hase,  Libri  SymboUd,  pp.  381,  382.

2  V,  22,  23;  i6jc?.  pp.  555,  556.


§18.]    THE  LORD'S  SUPPER.      THE  LUTHERAN  DOCTRINE.     675

institution]  connected  with  them."  To  this  lie  adds  :  "  Qnin  etiam-
illud  pro  certo  constat,  Christi  corpus  et  sanguineni  nequaquam
rem  otiosam  et  infrugiferam  esse  posse,  qute  nihil  fructus  aut
utilitatis  afferat."  ^  Luther's  Catechisms  have  symbolical  au-
thority, having  been  adopted  by  the  whole  Lutheran  Church.
Tlie  same  authority  does  not  belong  to  his  private  writings,  in
which  the  idea  advanced  of  the  life-giving  power  of  the  body
and  blood  of  Christ  as  received  in  the  sacrament  is  (at  least  as
often  understood)  more  fully  expanded.  In  his  work  entitled
'  Das  diese  Worte  Christi,  '  das  ist  mein  Leib  u.  s.  w.,'  noch  fest
stehen  wider  die  Schwarmgeister,"  published  in  1527,^  he  says
Christ  gives  us  his  own  body  and  blood  as  food  "  in  order  that
with  such  a  pledge  he  may  assm^e  and  comfort  us,  that  our  body
shall  live  forever,  because  it  here  on  earth  enjoys  eternal  liv-
ing food."  ^  "  The  mouth,  which  corporeally  eats  Christ's  flesh,
knows  not,  it  is  true,  what  it  eats,  but  the  heart  knows  :  by  itself
it  would  gain  nothing,  for  it  cannot  comprehend  the  word  [of
promise] .  But  the  heart  knows  well  what  the  mouth  eats.  For
it  comprehends  the  word  and  eats  spiritually,  what  the  mouth  eats
corporeally."  But  since  the  mouth  is  a  member  of  the  heart,  it
must  live  forever,  on  account  of  the  heart,  which  through  the
word  lives  forever,  because  the  body  corporeally  eats  the  same
everlasting  food,  which  the  soul  with  it  spiritually  eats.  Again  :  *
"  The  heart  cannot  eat  corporeally,  and  the  mouth  cannot  eat
spiritually.  God,  however,  has  arranged  it,  that  the  mouth  eats
for  the  heart  corporeally,  and  the  heart  eats  for  the  body  spirit-
ually, so  both  are  satisfied  with  the  same  food  and  are  saved.  For
the  body  having  no  understanding,  knows  not  that  it  eats  such
food  whereby  it  shall  live  forever.  Because  it  feels  it  not,  but
dies  and  moulders  away,  as  though  it  had  eaten  other  food,  as  an
irrational  brute.  But  the  soul  sees  and  understands,  that  the
body  must  live  forever,  because  it  is  a  partaker  of  an  everlasting
food ;  which  will  not  allow  it  to  decay  and  waste  away  in  the
grave."  ^  Still  more  strongly  is  this  idea  expressed  in  such  pas-
sages as  the  following.    When  a  man  eats  this  food  "^  "  it  changes

1  V.  28-30 ;  Hase,  Libri  Stjmbolici,  p.  557.
'■2  Das  diese  Woi-te,  etc.,  edit.  Walch,  vol.  xx.

3  Ibid,  §  180,  p.  1045.

4  Jbid,  p.  1046.

5  Philippi,  Kirchliche  Glaubenslehre,  vol.  v.  p.  267.  Philippi  admits  that  these  passages
appear  to  teach  that  the  seeds  of  immortalit_v  are  implanted  in  the  bodies  of  believers  by
the  corporeal  participation  of  the  body  of  Christ,  though  he  endeavoui-s  to  explain  them  as
teaching  that  the  Lord's  Supper  is  a  pledge  of  the  believer's  resurrection.  On  p.  268,  how-
ever, he  admits  that  there  are  other  passages  which  cannot  be  thus  explained.

6  Das  diese  Worte,  §§  207,  208,  pp.  1055,  1050.


676         PART  ITT.     Cii.   XX.  — THE  MEANS   OF   GllACE.

(verdaut)  and  transmutes  his  flesh,  so  that  it  becomes  spiritual,
that  is,  endued  with  immortal  life  and  blessed,  as  Paul,  1  Corinthi-
ans XV.  44,  says  :  It  is  raised  a  spiritual  body."  Luther  gives  what
he  calls  a  gross  illustration.  He  supposes  a  wolf  to  devour  a  sheep
and  the  flesh  of  the  sheep  to  have  power  enough  to  transmute  the
wolf  into  a  sheep.  "  So  we,  when  we  eat  Christ's  flesh  corpo-
really and  spiritually,  the  food  is  so  strong  that  it  changes  us  into
itself,  so  that  out  of  carnal,  sinful,  mortal  men,  we  are  made  spir-
itual, holy,  and  living  men  ;  such  we  already  are,  but  hidden  in
faith  and  hope,  and  not  yet  revealed ;  at  the  last  day  we  shall  see
it."  Again :  ^  "  God  is  in  this  flesh.  It  is  divine  and  spiritual
(a  weak  translation  of  ein  Gottesfleisch,  ein  Geistfleisch),  it  is  in
God,  and  God  is  in  it,  therefore  it  is  living  and  gives  life  both  as
to  soul  and  body  to  all  who  eat  it."  Again  :  ^  "If  we  eat  Him
corporeally,  so  He  is  in  us  corporeally,  and  we  in  Him.  He  is
not  digested  and  assimilated,  but  He  continually  transmutes  us,  the
soul  into  righteousness,  the  body  into  immortality."  After  quot-
ing these  and  similar  passages,  Philippi  admits  that  they  teach
that  "  the  body  of  Christ  is  not  only  the  pledge  of  our  resurrec-
tion, but  also  that  it  is  the  life-giving,  operative  power  through
which  our  bodies  are  prepared  for  our  final  resurrection."  ^

There  were  two  views  of  the  benefit  of  the  Lord's  Supper  in
the  mind  of  Luther.  He  commonly  represents  its  special  benefit
to  be  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  which  is  received  whenever  faith  in
the  gospel  is  exercised.  This  efl^ect  is  due,  not  to  what  is  in  the
sacrament  received  by  the  mouth,  but  to  the  Word  as  received
by  faith.  According  to  this  view,  as  Dorner  *  says,  the  Lord's
supper  is  a  sign  and  pledge  of  the  forgiveness  of  sin.  To  this
view,  he  adds,  the  Lutheran  Church  has  adhered.     Therefore,  the

1  Das  diese  Worte,  p.  125.  (  ?)  2  md,  p.  132.  (  V)

3  See  Philippi,  nt  supra,  p.  269.  So  also,  Gerhard,  Loci  Theologid,  xxii.  xi.  §  103;
edit.  Tiibingen,  1770,  vol.  x.  p.  17-5,  pays  that  the  fathers  teach  that  our  bodies  "  suscipi-
antex  contactu  carnis  Christi  vim  quandam  ad  gloriosam  resurrectionem  et  vitain  ;eternam  ;  "
an  opinion  to  which  Gerhard  accedes.  Calvin  (fnstUutio,  iv.  xvii.  32,  edit.  Berlin,  1834,
part  ii.  p.  426)  uses  language  of  similar  import:  "  De  carnis  etiam  nostra^  immoi-talitate
securosnos  reddat,  siquidem  ab  immortali  ejus  carne  jam  vivificatur  et  quodammodo  ejus
immortalitate  communicat."  There  is,  however,  an  essential  difference,  as  to  this  point
between  Luther  and  Calvin.  Luther  held  that  what  is  received  in  the  Supper  is  the  true,
natural  body  of  Christ;  that  it  is  received  corporeally,  by  the  mouth,  that  it  is  received  by
unbelievers  as  well  as  by  the  believers;  and  that  it  is  to  the  natural  body  thus  received,
that  the  believer  owes  the  glorious  resurrection  that  awaits  him.  All  these  points  Calvin
denies.  It  is  not  the  natural  body  of  Christ,  which  hung  upon  the  cross,  that  is  received.
It  is  not  received  corporeally  by  the  mouth,  but  only  by  the  soul  through  faith.  It  is  re-
ceived out  of  the  Lord's  Supper  as  well  as  iu  that  ordinance  The  resurrection  of  believers,
therefore,  according  to  Calvin,  is  due  to  our  union  with  Christ,  effected  by  faith ;  and  not
to  eating  his  true,  natural  body.

■i  Geschichte  dtr prottstantischen  Theologie,  Munich,  1867,  p.  152.


§  ID.]  THE   LORD'S   SUPPER.    ROMISH  DOCTRINE.  677

Apology  says  :  "  Idem  effectus  est  verbi  et  ritus,  sicut  pra3clare
dictum  est  ab  Augustine,  sacramentum  esse  verbum  visibile,  quia
ritus  oculis  accipitur,  et  est  quasi  pictura  verbi,  idem  significans,
quod  verbum.     Quare  idem  est  utriusque  effectus."  ^

At  other  times,  however,  Luther,  as  appears  from  the  passages
above  quoted,  attributes  to  the  Lord's  Supper  a  peculiar  effect
due  to  the  real,  natural  body  of  Christ  therein  received,  which,
in  virtue  of  its  union  with  his  divine  nature,  is  imbued  with  a  su-
pernatural, life-giving  power.  To  this  power  he  refers  the  glo-
rious future  resurrection  of  the  believer.  In  this  he  made  some
approximation  to  the  modern  doctrine  that  the  redemptive  work
of  Christ  consists  in  the  infusion  into  our  nature  of  a  new  force,
or  organic  law  which,  by  a  process  of  natural,  historical  develop-
ment, works  out  the  salvation  of  soul  and  body.  Julius  Miiller
rejoices  that  this  view  did  not  take  root  in  the  Lutheran  Church,
as  it  is,  as  he  says,  plainly  contrary  to  Scripture.  If  the  resur-
rection of  believers  be  due  to  the  body  of  Christ  as  received  in
the  Lord's  Supper,  what  is  to  become  of  children,  of  confessors
and  martyrs,  and  of  all  the  Old  Testament  saints,  who  never
partook  of  the  Lord's  Supper.^

§  19.  Doctrine  of  the  Church  of  Home  on  the  Lord^s  Supper.

Romanists  regard  the  eucharist  under  two  distinct  aspects  as  a
sacrament  and  as  a  sacrifice.  The  latter  in  their  system  is  by  far
the  more  important.  Mohler  in  his  "  Symbolik  "  almost  entirely
overlooks  its  sacramental  character.  And  in  the  worship  of  the
Romish  Church  the  sacrifice  of  the  mass  is  the  central  point.
In  the  symbolical  books,  however,  the  two  views  are  kept  distinct.
It  is  a  sacrament  inasmuch  as  it  signifies,  contains,  and  conveys
grace.  It  includes  an  external  sign  and  things  signified.  The
external  signs  are  bread  and  wine,  which  retain  their  form  after
consecration  and  after  the  change  in  their  substance  thereby
affected.  The  things  signified  are,  (1.)  The  passion  of  Christ.
(2.)  The  grace  of  God  given  in  the  sacrament.  (3.)  Eternal
life.^  It  has  virtue  to  produce  grace.  "  On  voit,"  says  Cardinal
Gousset  in  the  place  referred  to,  "  que  le  signe  eucharistique  est
un  signe  qui  a  la  vertu  de  produire  la  grace  ;  mais  il  n'a  cette
vertu  que  par  I'institution  de  J^sus  Christ."

The  grace  bestowed  is  not  spiritual  life,  for  that  is  communi-

1  VII.  5;  Hase,  Libri  Symbolici,  p.  201.

2  Dogmatische  Ahhanfllungen,  pp.  417,  418.

s  Theologie  Dogmatique.  Par  S.  fi.  Le  Cardinal  Gousset,  Archev§que  de  Reims.  Dt
I'Eucharistie  i.  i.  695,  lOtli  edit.  Paris,  1866,  vol.  ii.  p.  452.


678         PART  III.     Cn.   XX.— THE   MEANS   OF   GRACE.

cated  in  baptism,  ;md  is  presupposed  in  those  who  receive  the
eucharist  as  a  sacrament.  On  this  point  the  language  of  the  Ro-
man Catechism  and  other  Roman  authorities  is  exphcit,  and  in
tone  evaiigelieal  and  Protestant.  Thus  the  Catechism  says,
"  Constat  queraadmodum  mortuis  corporibus  naturale  ahmentum
nihil  prodest,  ita  etiam  animge,  quae  spiritu  non  vivit,  sacra  mys-
teria  non  prodesse,  ac  propterea  panis,  et  vini  speciem  habent,  ut
significetur,  non  quidem  revocandse  ad  vitam  animas,  sed  in  yita
conservandffi  causa  instituta  esse."  ^  The  benefits  received  are
analogous  to  those  which  the  body  receives  from  its  natural  food.
Bread  and  wine  strengthen  and  refresh  the  body ;  so  the  eucharist
strengthens  and  refreshes  the  soul.  And  more  than  this,  the  food
of  the  body  is  transmuted  into  the  body ;  whereas  the  divine
food  received  in  this  sacrament  transmutes  the  soul  into  its  own
nature.  "  Neque  enim  hoc  sacramentum  in  substantiam  nostram,
ut  panis,  et  vinum,  mutatur  ;  sed  nos  quodam  modo  in  ejus  na-
turam  convertimur  :  ut  recte  illud  D.  Augustini  ad  hunc  locum
transferri  possit :  ^  '  Cibus  sum  grandium  ;  cresce,  et  manducabis
me.  Nee  tu  me  in  te  mutabis,  sicut  cibum  carnis  tuse  ;  sed  tu
mutaberis  in  me.'  "  ^

Lutherans  make  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  a  blessing  which  the
believer  constantly  needs,  the  great  benefit  of  this  ordinance.
This  is  not  its  design  in  the  view  of  Romanists,  for  they  teach
that  for  a  man  to  approach  the  altar  in  a  state  of  mortal  sin,  is  a
dreadful  profanation.  They  enjoin,  therefore,  confession  and  ab-
solution in  the  sacrament  of  penance,  as  a  necessary  preparation
for  this  ordinance.  Only  venial  sins  are  remitted  by  receiving
the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  Nevertheless,  as  according
to  Romanists,  Christ  is  really  in  both  natures  present  in  the  eu-
charist, they  say  "  necessario  fons  omnium  gratiarum  dicenda  est,
cum  fontem  ipsum  coelestium  charismatum,  et  donorum,  omnium-
que  sacramentorum  auctorem  Christum  dominum  admirabili  modo
in  se  contineat."  ^  The  virtue  of  the  eucharist,  both  as  a  sacra-
ment and  as  a  sacrifice,  rests,  according  to  Romanists,  in  the  doc-
trine of

Transuhstantiation.

Christ  is  present  in  this  ordinance,  not  spiritually  as  taught  by
the  Reformed,  nor  by  the  real  presence  of  his  body  and  blood  in,
with,  and  under  the  bread  and  wine,  but  by  the  bread  and  wine

1  Caiecliismus  Romanits,  ii.  iv.  quKst.  40  [60,  li.] ;  Streitwolf,  Gottingen,  1846,  vol.  i.  p
344.

2  Confessionum,  vii.  x.  16;    Works,  edit.  Benedictines,  Paris,  1836,  vol.  i.  p.  241,  c.
'  Cateckismus  Eomantcs,  ut  supra,  qusest.  39;  p.  343.  *  Ibid.  p.  342.


§19.]  THE   LORD'S    SUPPER.     ROMISH   DOCTRINE.  679

being  by  the  almighty  power  of  God  changed  into  his  body  and
blood.  As  at  the  feast  in  Cana  of  Galilee,  the  water  was  changed
into  wine,  so  in  the  eucharist,  the  bread  and  wine  are  changed
into,  and  remain  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ.  This  doctrine  is
thus  set  forth  in  the  Canons  of  the  Council  of  Trent :  —

"  1,  Si  quis  negaverit,  in  sanctissimse  eucharistijB  sacramento
confcineri  vere,  realiter,  et  substantialiter  corpus  et  sanguinem  una
cum  anima,  et  divinitate  Domini  nostri,  Jesu  Christi,  ac  proinde
totum  Christum,  sed  dixerit  tantummodo  esse  in  eo,  ut  in  signo,
rel  figura  aut  virtute ;  anathema  sit.

"  2.  Si  quis  dixerit  in  sacrosanct©  eucharistife  sacramento  rema-
nore  substantiam  panis,  et  vini,  una  cum  corpore  et  sanguine
Domini  nostri,  Jesu  Christi,  negaveritque  mirabilem  illam  et  sin-
gularem  conversionem  totius  substantiffi  panis  in  corpus,  et  totius
substantive  vini  in  sanguinem,  manentibus  duntaxat  speciebus
panis,  et  vini,  quam  quidem  conversionem  catholica  ecclesia  aptis-
sime  transubstantionem  appellat ;  anathema  sit.

"  3.  Si  quis  negaverit,  in  venerabili  sacramento  eucharistise  sub
unaquaque  specie,  et  sub  singulis  cujusque  speciei  partibus,  sepa-
ratione  facta,  totum  Christum  contineri ;  anathema  sit.

"  4.  Si  quis  dixerit,  peracta  consecratione,  in  admirabili  eu-
charistifB  sacramento  non  esse  corpus,  et  sanguinem  Domini  nostri
Jesu  Christi,  sed  tantum  in  usu  dum  sumitur,  non  autem  ante,  vel
post ;  et  in  hostiis,  sen  particulis  consecratis,  quffi  post  communi-
onem  reservantur,  vel  supersunt,  non  remanere  verum  corpus
Domini  ;  anathema  sit.

"5.  Si  quis  dixerit,  vel  prrecipuum  fructum  sanctissimas  eu-
charistiPB  esse  remissionem  peccatorum,  vel  ex  ea  non  alios  effec-
tus  provenire  ;  anathema  sit.

"  6.  Si  quis  dixerit,  in  sancto  eucharistiaB  sacramento  Chris-
tum, unigenitum  Dei  filium,  non  esse  cultu  latrioe,  etiam  externo,
adorandum  ;  atque  ideo  nee  festiva  peculiari  celebritate  veneran-
dum  ;  neque  in  processionibus,  secundum  laudabilem,  et  univer-
salem  ecclesias  ritum,  et  consuetudinem,  solemniter  circumgestan-
dum,  vel  non  publice,  ut  adoretur,  populo  proponendum,  et  ejus
adoratores  esse  idololatras  ;  anathema  sit.

"  7.  Si  quis  dixerit,  non  licere  sacram  eucharistiam  in  sacrario
reservari,  sed  statim  post  consecrationem  adstantibus  necessario
distribuendam,  aut  non  licere,  ut  ilia  ad  infirmos  honorifice  defer-
atur ;  anathema  sit.

"  8.  Si  quis  dixerit,  Christum,  in  eucharistia  exhibitum,  spirit-
ualiter  tantum  manducari,  et  non  etiam  sacramentaliter,  et  reali-
ter :  anathema  sit.


680       PART  m.    ch.  XX.— the  means  of  grace.

"9.  Si  quis  negaverit,  omnes,  et  singulos  Cliristi  ficleles  utrius-
que  sexus,  cum  ad  annos  discretionis  pervenerint,  teneri  singulis
annis,  saltern  in  paschate,  ad  communicandum,  juxta  pra?ceptum
sanctas  matris  ecclesiaB  ;  anathema  sit.

"10.  Si  quis  dixerit,  non  licere  sacerdoti  celebranti  seipsum
communicare ;  anathema  sit.

"  11.  Si  quis  dixerit,  solam  fidem  esse  sufficientem  pra^para-
tionem  ad  sumendum  sanctissimse  eucharistiae  sacramentum ;
anathema  sit.  Et  ne  tantum  sacramentum  indigne  atque  ideo  in
mortem,  condemnationem  sumatur,  statuit,  atque  declaret  ipsa
sancta  synodus,  illis,  quos  conscientia  peccati  mortalis  gravat,
quantumcunque  etiam  se  contritos  existiment,  habita  copia  con-
fessoris,  necessario  praBmittendam  esse  confessionem  sacramenta-
lem.  Si  quis  autem  contrarium  docere,  praidicare,  vel  pertinaciter
asserere,  seu  etiam  publice  disputando  defendere  pra^sumpserit  eo
ipso  excommunicatus  existat."  ^

From  this  statement  it  appears,  first,  as  concerns  the  elements
of  bread  and  wine,  that  in  and  by  the  act  of  consecration,  their
whole  substance  is  changed.  Nothing  of  the  substance  or  essence
of  either  remains.  The  accidents,  or  sensible  properties,  how-
ever, continue  as  they  were.  The  form,  colour,  taste,  odour,  the
specific  gravity,  their  chemical  affinities,  and  their  nutritive  qual-
ities remain  the  same.  So  far  as  the  senses,  chemical  analysis,
and  physics  are  concerned  or  are  to  be  trusted,  no  change  has
taken  place.  As  the  sensible  properties  of  the  bread  and  wine  do
not  and  cannot  inhere  in  the  substance  of  Christ's  body  and  blood,
and  as  their  own  substance  no  longer  exists,  those  properties  do
not  inhere  in  any  substance.  "  Cum  antea  demonstratum  sit,  cor-
pus Domini,  et  sanguinem  vere  in  sacramento  esse,  ita  nulla  am-
plius  subsit  panis,  et  vini  substantia  ;  quoniam  ea  accidentia
Christi  corpori,  et  sanguini  inheerere  non  possunt :  relinquitur,  ut
supra  omnem  natures  ordinem  ipsa  se,  nulla  alia  re  nisa,  sustentent,
hcBC  perpetua,  et  constans  fuit  catholics  Ecclesiag  doctrma."  ^

Secondly,  as  to  what  is  said  to  be  present  under  the  species  of
bread  and  wine,  it  is  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ ;  the  body
which  hung  upon  the  cross  ;  the  blood  which  flowed  from  his  side  ;
with  the  nerves,  bones,  and  whatever  pertains  to  the  completeness
of  man.  ("'  Ossa,  nervi,  et  qugecumque  ad  hominis  perfectionem
pertinent.")  ^  As,  however,  the  body  of  Christ  is  inseparably  con-
nected with  his  soul,  so  that  where  the  one  is,  the  other  must  be ;

1  Council  of  Trent,  Sess.  xiii.  canones;  Strcitwolf,  vol.  i.  pp.  50-52.

2  Catechismus  Romanus,  ii.  iv.  qutest.  37  [45,  xliv.] ;  Jbid.  p.  341.

3  Ibid,  qiiicst.  27  [33,  xxxi.],  p.  333.


§  19.]  THE   LORD'S   SUPPER.     ROMISH   DOCTRINE.  081

md  as  his  soul  is  in  like  manner  connected  witli  his  divinity,  it
follows  that  the  whole  Christ,  body,  soul,  and  divinity,  is  present,
and  is  received  orally,  i.  e.,  by  the  mouth,  by  the  commmiicant.
"  Docere  autem  oportet,  Christum  nomen  esse  Dei,  et  hominis,
unius  scihcet  personas,  in  qua  divina,  et  humana  natura  conjuncta
sit,  quare  utramque  substantiam,  et  quae  utriusque  substantite  con-
sequentia  sunt,  divinitatem,  et  to  tarn  humanam  naturam,  quae  ex-
anima,  et  omnibus  corporis  partibus,  et  sanguine  etiam  constat,
complectitur :  quse  omnia  in  sacramento  esse  credendum  est,  nam
cum  in  coelo  tota  huraanitas  divinitati,  in  una  persona,  et  hypos-
tasi  conjuncta  sit,  nefas  est  suspicari,  corpus,  quod  in  sacramento
inest,  ab  eadem  divinitate  sejunctum  esse."  ^

Thirdly,  the  whole  Christ  is  in  the  bread  and  the  whole  Christ
is  in  the  wine  :  ^  and  not  onlj'-  so,  but  in  each  and  every  particle
Qf  both  species.  Thus  the  Catechism,  says  "  non  solum  in  utra-
que  specie,  sed  in  quavis  utriusque  specie!  parti cula  totum  Chris-
tum contineri."

Fourthly,  Lutherans  teach  that  the  presence  of  the  body  and
blood  of  Christ  in,  with,  and  under  the  bread  and  wine,  is  con-
fined to  the  time  of  the  administration  of  the  sacrament.  Ro-
manists, on  the  other  hand,  teach  that  as  there  is  an  entire
chang-e  of  the  substance  of  the  elements  into  the  substance  of  the
body  and  blood  of  Christ,  that  change  is  permanent.  From  this
it  is  inferred,  (1.)  That  the  consecrated  wafer  as  containing
the  whole  Christ,  may  be  preserved.  (2.)  That  it  may  be  carried
to  the  sick.  (3.)  That  it  may  be  borne  about  in  processions.
(4.)  That  it  should  be  adored.

It  is  well  known  that  Romanists  distinguish  between  the  "  cul-
tus  civilis,"  or  worship  (^.  e.,  respect)  due  to  our  superiors  among
men  ;  SovAeta,  due  to  saints  and  angels  ;  iiTrenS  uAct'a,  due  to  the  Vir-
gin Mary,  and  Xarpeta,  due  to  God  alone.  The  ground  of  this
worship  is  the  real  or  supposed  possession  of  divine  perfections  in
its  object.  When  our  Lord  was  upon  the  earth  He  was  the  proper
object  of  this  divine  worship,  because  He  was  God  manifested  in
the  flesh.  The  worship  terminated  on  the  person  ;  and  that  per-
son is  and  was  divine.  If  Christians  err  in  believing  that  the
person  known  in  history  as  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  was,  and  is  the
Eternal  Son  of  God  clothed  in  our  nature,  then  their  worship  of
Him  is  idolatry.     They  ascribe  divine  perfections  and  render  di-

1  Catechismus  Romanus,  ut  supra,  quasst.  27  [33,  xxxi.],  p.  334.

2  Romanists  teach  that  even  after  coiisecratiou,  it  is  proper  to  call  the  elements  bread
and  wine,  because,  although  the  substance  is  changed,  the  accidents  of  bread  and  wine
remain.     Catechismus  Romanus,  ut  supra,  quicst,  30  [xxxv.  36},  p.  3^.


682       PART  ni.   ch.  XX.  — the  means  of  grace.

vine  honours  to  a  creature,  and  therein  consists  the  essence  of  idol-
atry. In  like  manner  Romanists  teach  that  Xarpeta,  the  worship
due  to  God  alone,  is  to  be  rendered  to  the  host,  or  consecrated
wafer.  This  worship,  of  course,  is  not  rendered  to  the  wafer
as  such,  any  more  than  the  worship  of  Christians  was  rendered
to  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  when  He  was  here  on  earth.
But  Romanists  worship  the  host  on  the  assumption  that  it  is  the
body  of  Christ,  with  which  his  soul  and  divinity  are  inseparably
comiected.  If  their  doctrine  of  transubstantiation  be  false  ;  if
the  host  be  no  more  the  body  of  Christ  than  any  other  piece  of
bread  ;  if  his  soul  and  divinity  be  no  more  present  in  it  than  in
other  bread,  then  they  must  admit  that  the  worship  of  the  host
is  as  pure  and  simple  idolatry  as  the  world  has  ever  seen.  As
all  Protestants  believe  the  doctrine  of  transubstantiation  to  be
utterly  unscriptural  and  false,  they  are  unanimous  in  pronouncing
the  worship  of  the  consecrated  elements  to  be  idolatry.

Proof  of  the  Doctrine.

The  arguments  urged  by  Romanists  in  support  of  the  fearful
dogma  of  transubstantiation,  are  derived  partly  from  Scripture
and  partly  from  tradition.  Without  the  latter,  the  former,  to  all
appearance,  even  in  the  estimation  of  Romanists  themselves,
would  be  of  little  account.  The  Scriptural  passage  principally
relied  upon,  is  John  vi.  48-65.  As  to  this  discourse  of  our
Lord,  Cardinal  Gousset  lays  down  two  propositions :  first,  that
it  is  to  be  understood  of  the  Lord's  Supper  ;  and  second,  that  the
eating  of  which  it  speaks  is  oral,  by  the  mouth,  and  not  merely
spiritual,  by  faith.  If  these  points  be  granted,  then  it  follows
that  our  Lord  does  speak  of  a  literal  eating  of  his  flesh,  and
therefore  that  liis  flesh  must  be  in  the  literal  sense  of  the  words
eaten  at  the  Lord's  Supper.  Such  eating  it  must  be  conceded
necessitates  the  admission  of  the  doctrine  of  transubstantiation.
It  is  enough,  in  this  place,  to  say  of  this  argument,  that  it  proves
too  much.  Our  Lord  expressly  declares  that  the  eating  of  which
He  speaks  is  essential  to  salvation.  If,  therefore,  his  words  are
to  be  understood  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  then  a  participation  in
that  sacrament  is  essential  to  salvation.  But  this  the  Church
of  Rome  expKcitly  denies,  and  must  in  consistency  with  its  whole
system,  insist  on  denying.  Romanists  teach  that  spiritual  life  is  as
necessary  to  an  experience  of  the  benefits  of  this  sacrament,  aa
natural  hfe  is  to  the  body's  being  nourished  by  food.^

1  CatechUmus  Romanus,  ii.  iv.  40  [li.  50],  Streitwolf,  vol.  i.  p.  344.


§19.]  THE  LOKD'S   SUPPER.    ROMISH  DOCTRINE.  683

They  further  teach  that  baptism,  which  precedes  the  eucharist,
conveys  all  the  saving  benefits  of  Christ's  redemption  ;  they  there-
fore cannot  make  the  eucharist  essential,  and  consequently  they
cannot,  without  contradicting  Christ  or  themselves,  interpret  John
vi.  48-65  as  referring  to  the  Lord's  Supper.^

Appeal,  of  course,  is  also  made  to  the  words  of  institution,  "  This
is  my  body."  In  this  argument  enough  has  already  been  said.
There  is  no  more  necessity  for  understanding  those  words  liter-
ally than  the  declaration  of  Christ,  "  I  am  the  true  bread,"  or,
"  I  am  the  door."  The  elements  are  declared  to  be  bread  and
wine  both  by  Christ  and  by  the  Apostles,  after  as  well  as  before
consecration.

Romanists,  however,  teach  that  there  are  many  doctrines  which
Christ  and  his  Apostles  taught,  which  are  either  not  revealed  at
all,  or  but  very  imperfectly  in  Scripture,  and  which  are  to  be  re-
ceived on  the  authority  of  tradition.  On  that  authority  they
rely  for  the  support  of  all  their  peculiar  doctrines.  As  to  that
argument,  as  urged  in  behalf  of  the  doctrine  of  transubstantia-
tion,  Protestants  say,  first,  that  the  Scriptures  are  the  only  infal-
lible rule  of  faith  and  practice,  and,  therefore,  that  no  doctrine,
which  cannot  be  proved  from  the  Bible,  can  be  received  as  an
article  of  faith.  And  as  the  doctrine  of  transubstantiation  can-
not be  so  proved,  it  is  to  be  rejected  as  a  mere  human  theory.
And,  secondly,  that  even  admitting  the  authority  of  tradition,  it
can  be  demonstrated  that  the  doctrine  in  question  has  no  claim
to  support  from  the  rule,  "  quod  semper,  quod  ubique,  quod  ab
omnibus."  The  rise  and  gradual  development  of  this  doctrine
can  be  historically  traced.  The  conflicts  attending  its  introduc-
tion as  an  article  of  faith  are  matters  of  record,  and  it  can  no
more  be  proved,  even  by  tradition,  than  the  doctrine  of  purga-
tory and  extreme  unction.  This  is  the  conclusion  reached  after
years  of  controversy,  and  it  is  not  likely  ever  to  be  shaken.  It
was  on  this  point  that  the  leading  divines  of  the  Church  of  Eng-
land laid  out  their  strength  in  their  controversy  with  the  Church
of  Rome.2

It  is  a  vaHd  objection  to  this  doctrine  that  it  involves  an  im

i"Le  sacrement  de  I'eucharistie  n'est  point  n^cessaire  au  salut,  d'une  necessity  de
moyen;  on  peut  etre  sauv6  sans  avoir  re(?u  la  communion.  La  raison,  c'est  que  se  sacre-
ment  n'a  point  6t6  institue  comme  moyen  de  conf^rer  la  premiere  grace  sanctifiante  ou  de
remettre  le  p^ch6  mortel,  ce  qui  est  r^serv^  aux  sacraments  de  bapteme  et  de  penitence."
Gousset,  Theologie,  Paris,  1866,  vol.  ii.  p.  516.

2  In  Herzog's  Real-Encyklopddie,  vol.  xvi.,  there  is,  under  the  head  of  "  Transubstan-
tiation," an  elaborate  article  of  fifty-five  royal  octavo  pages  on  the  history  of  this  doctrine,
in  which  its  rise  through  the  patristical  and  mediaeval  periods  is  minutely  traced.


684       PART  in.   ch.  XX.— the  means  of  grace.

possibility.  The  impossible  cannot  be  true,  and,  therefore,  can-
not, rationally,  be  an  object  of  faith.  It  is  impossible  that  the
accidents  or  sensible  properties  of  the  bread  and  wine  should  re-
main if  the  substance  be  changed.  Such  a  proposition  has  no
more  meaning  in  it  than  the  assertion  that  an  act  can  be  without
an  agent.  Accidents  or  properties  are  the  phenomena  of  sub-
stance ;  and  it  is  self-evident  that  there  can  be  no  manifestations
where  there  is  not  something  to  be  manifested.  In  other  words
nothing,  a  "  non-ens  "  cannot  manifest  itself.  Romanists  cannot
turn  to  the  theory  that  matter  is  not  a  substance  ;  for  that  is  not
their  doctrine.  On  the  contrary,  they  assert  that  the  substance
of  the  bread  is  transmuted  into  the  substance  of  Christ's  body.
Nor  can  they  help  themselves  by  resorting  to  the  pantheistic  doc-
trine that  all  accidents  are  phenomena  of  God,  for  that  would  up-
set their  whole  system.

It  is  moreover  impossible  that  the  well-attested  testimony  of
our  senses  should  be  deceptive.  If  it  once  be  assumed  that  we
cannot  trust  to  the  laws  of  belief  impressed  on  our  nature,  of
which  faith  in  our  sense  perceptions  is  one  of  the  most  important,
then  the  foundation  of  all  knowledge,  faith,  and  religion  is  over-
turned. What  has  Catholicism  to  say  for  itself,  if  the  people
cannot  trust  their  ears  when  they  hear  the  teachings  of  the
Church,  or  their  eyes  when  they  read  its  decrees  ?  It  has  nothing
to  stand  upon.  It  is  engulfed  with  all  things  else  in  the  abyss  of
nihilism.  To  believe  in  transubstantiation  we  must  disbelieve
our  senses,  and  this  God  requires  of  no  man.  It  involves  disbehef
in  Him  who  is  the  author  of  om'  nature  and  of  the  laws  which
are  impressed  upon  it.  There  is  no  more  complete  and  destruc-
tive infidelity  than  the  want  of  faith  in  the  veracity  of  conscious-
ness, whether  it  be  consciousness  of  our  sense  perceptions,  or  of
the  truths  involved  in  our  rational,  moral,  or  religious  nature.

It  is  another  objection  to  this  doctrine  that  it  logically  leads,
and  in  fact  has  led,  to  the  greatest  practical  evils.  It  has  led  to
superstitious,  in  the  place  of  rational  and  Scriptural  reverence  for
the  sacrament ;  to  the  idolatrous  worship  of  the  consecrated  wafer ;
to  attributing  to  it  magical,  or  supernatural  virtue  contrary  to
Scripture  ;  to  perverting  a  simple  sacrament  into  a  propitiatory
sacrifice,  and  to  investing  the  ministers  of  Christ  with  the  char-
acter of  sacrificing  priests,  empowered  to  offer,  for  money,  a  pro-
pitiatory oblation  securing  forgiveness  even  for  the  sins  of  the  de-
parted. It  has  been  made  a  mine  of  wealth  to  the  priesthood
and  the  Church.     It  was  principally  the  popular  belief   in  this


§  19.]  THE   LORD'S   SUPPER.     ROMISH   DOCTRINE.  685

great  error,  that  secured  the  transfer  of  the  greater  part  of  the
land  and  wealth  of  Europe  into  the  hands  of  the  elergj'-  and  gave
them  almost  unlimited  power  over  the  people.

WithJioldincf  the  Cup  from  the  Laity.

The  Romish  Church  admits  that  this  is  contrary  to  the  original
institution  of  the  ordinance,  and  to  the  usage  of  the  primitive
Church,  It  is  defended,  (1.)  On  the  ground  that  the  cup  is  un-
necessary to  the  completeness  of  the  sacrament.  The  blood  is  in
the  body  ;  he  therefore  who  receives  the  latter  receives  the  former.
And  as  the  whole  Christ,  as  to  his  body,  soul,  and  divinity  is  not
only  in  each  species,  but  in  every  particle  of  both,  he  who  re-
ceives the  consecrated  bread  receives  the  whole  Christ,  and  de-
rives all  the  benefit  from  communing,  the  sacrament  is  capable  of
affording.  (2.)  That  there  is  great  danger  in  passing  the  cup
from  one  communicant  to  another  that  a  portion  of  its  contents
should  be  spilt ;  and  as  the  cup  after  consecration  contains  the
real  blood  of  Christ,  its  falling  to  the  ground  and  being  trod-
den under  foot,  is  a  profanation,  by  every  means  to  be  avoided.
(3.)  The  Church  did  not  of  its  own  motion  introduce  this  innova-
tion. It  was  introduced  and  had  become  general,  before  the  Church
saw  fit,  for  sufficient  reasons,  to  interfere  and  change  a  custom  into
a  law.

The  Lord's  Supper  as  a  Sacrifice.

On  this  subject  the  Church  of  Rome  teaches,  according  to  the
Council  of  Trent,  —

"1.  Si  quis  dixerit,  in  missa  non  offerri  Deo  verum,  et  proprium
sacrificium ;  aut  quod  offerri  non  sit  aliud,  quam  nobis  Christum
ad  manducandum  dari ;  anathema  sit.

"  2.  Si  quis  dixerit,  illis  verbis,  '  Hoc  facite  in  meam  com-
memorationem  ; '  Christum  non  instituisse  Apostolos  sacerdotes  ;
aut  non  ordinasse,  ut  ipsi,  aliique  sacerdotes  offerent  corpus,  et
sanguinem  suum  ;  anathema  sit.

"3.  Si  quis  dixerit,  missae  sacrificium  tantum  esse  laudis,  et
gratiarum  actionis,  aut  nudum  commemorationem  sacrificii  in
cruce  peracti,  non  autem  propitiatorium  ;  vel  soli  prodesse  su-
menti ;  neque  pro  vivis,  et  defunctis,  pro  peccatis,  poenis,  satis-
factionibus,  et  aliis  necessitatibus  offerri  debere  ;  anathema  sit.

"  4.  Si  quis  dixerit,  blasphemiam  irrogari  sanctissimo  Christi
sacrificio,  in  cruce  peracto,  per  missoe  sacrificium  ;  aut  illi  per  hoc
derogari ;  anathema  sit.

"  5.  Si  quis  dixerit,  imposturam  esse,  missas  celebrare  in  liono-


686       PART  m.   Ch.  XX. —the  means  of  grace.

rem  sanctorum,  et  pro  illorum  intercessione,  apud  Deum  obtinenda,
sicut  ecclesia  intendit ;  anathema  sit.

"6.  Si  quis  dixerit,  canones  missae  errores  continere,  ideoque
abrogandum ;  anathema  sit.

"7.  Si  quis  dixerit,  cseremonias,  vestes,  et  externa  signa,  quibus
in  missarum  celebratione  ecclesia  catholica  utitur,  irritabula  im-
pietatis  esse,  magis  quam  ofl&cia  pietatis  ;  anathema  sit.

"  8.  Si  quis  dixerit,  missas,  in  qmbus  solus  sacerdos  sacra-
mentahter  communicat,  illicitas  esse,  ideoque  abrogandas  ;  anathe-
ma sit.

"  9.  Si  quis  dixerit,  ecclesise  Romante  ritum,  quo  summissa
voce  pars  canonis,  et  verba  consecrationis  proferuntur,  damnandum
esse ;  aut  Hngua  tantum  vulgari  missam  celebrari  debere  ;  aut
aquam  non  miscendam  esse  vino  in  cahce  offerendo,  eo  quod  sit
contra  Christi  institutionem  ;  anathema  sit."  ^

From  this  it  appears,  —

1.  That,  according  to  the  Church  of  Rome,  the  eucharist  is  a
real,  propitiatory  sacrifice,  for  the  expiation  of  sin,  for  reconciha-
tion  with  God,  and  for  securing  providential  and  gracious  bless-
ings from  his  hands.

2.  That  what  is  offered  is  Christ,  his  body,  soul,  and  divinity,
all  which  are  present  under  the  form  of  bread  and  wine.  The
sacrifice  of  the  mass  is  the  same,  therefore,  as  the  sacrifice  of
the  cross ;  the  former  being  a  constant  repetition  of  the  latter.
"  Unum  itaque  et  idem  sacrificium  esse  fatemur,  et  haberi  debet,
quod  m  missa  peragitur,  et  quod  in  cruce  oblatum  est :  quemad-
modum  una  est  et  eadem  hostia  Christus,  videlicet  Dominus  noster,
qui  se  ipsum  in  ara  crucis  semel  tantummodo  cruentum  immo-
lavit.  Neque  enim  cruenta,  et  incruenta  hostia,  dute  sunt  hostiae,
sed  una  tantum,  cujus  sacrificium,  postquam  Dominus  ita  prse-
cepit,  '  Hoc  facite  in  meam  commemorationem,'  in  eucharistia
quotidie  instauratur."  ^

3.  As  the  sacrifice  is  the  same,  so  also  is  the  priest.  Christ
offered  Himself  once  on  the  cross,  and  He  offers  Himself  daily  in
the  mass.  "  Sed  unus  etiam  atque  idem  sacerdos  est  Christus
dominus,  nam  ministri,  qui  sacrificium  faciunt,  non  suam,  sed
Christi  personam  suscipiunt,  cum  ejus  corpus  et  sanguinem  con-
ficiunt,  id  quod  et  ipsius  consecrationis  verbis  ostenditur,  neque
enim  sacerdos  inquit,  Hoc  est  corpus  Christi,  sed,  '  Hoc  est  corpus
meum : '  personam  videlicet  Christi  domini  gerens,  panis,  et  vini

1  Sess.  xxii.  canones;  Streitwolf,  vol.  i.  pp.  81,  82.

2  Catechismus  Romanus,  par.  ii.  cap.  iv.  quiest.  GO  [Ixxxii.  76],  Ibid.  p.  359.


§  19.]  THE   LORD'S   SUPPER.     ROMISH  DOCTRINE.  687

substantiam,  in  veram  ejus  corjjoris,  et  sanguinis  substantiam
convei'tit."  ^  On  this  statement  it  may  be  remarked  in  passing,
that  if  the  ministers  are  not  the  real  offerers,  they  are  not  real
priests.  A  priest  is  one  appointed  to  offer  sacrifices.  But  ac-
cording to  the  theory,  the  ofiiciating  minister  in  the  service  of  the
mass,  does  not  offer  the  sacrifice.  He  is  a  supernumerary.  He
has  no  function.  There  is  no  reason  why  without  his  interven-
tion, Christ  should  not  when  his  people  meet  to  commemorate  his
death,  offer  Himself  anew  to  God.  The  Roman  theory  in  this,
as  in  many  other  points,  is  not  seK-consistent.  Romanists  repre-
sent ministers  as  true  priests ;  mediators  between  God  and  the
people,  without  whose  intervention,  no  sinner  can  have  access  to
God  or  obtain  pardon  or  acceptance.  They  are  not  only  invested
with  jDriestly  authority  and  prerogatives,  but  imbued  with  super-
natural power.  The  words  of  consecration  pronounced  by  other
than  sacerdotal  lips,  are  inoperative.  The  mass  unless  performed
by  a  priest  is  no  sacrifice.  All  this  supposes  that  their  office  is  a
reality,  that  ministers  are  really  priests ;  but  according  to  the
passage  just  quoted,  they  are  not  priests  at  all.  According  to
the  common  mode  of  representation,  however,  the  minister  in
the  mass  as  truly  offers  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ,  as  the
priests  under  the  Old  Testament  offered  the  blood  of  lambs  or  of
goats.  Cardinal  Gousset,  for  example,  says  :  "  According  to  the
faith  of  the  Catholic  Church,  the  mass  is  a  sacrifice  of  the  new
law,  in  which  the  priest  offers  to  God  the  body  and  blood  of  Jesus>
Christ  under  the  form  of  bread  and  wine.  The  mass  is  a  true  sac-
rifice instituted  by  Jesus  Christ."  "  A  sacrifice,  from  its  nature,
is  an  act  of  supreme  worship,  due  to  God  alone.  Hence  when  a
mass  is  celebrated  in  the  name  of  a  saint,  it  is  not  to  be  believed
that  the  sacrifice  is  offered  to  the  saint ;  but  simply  in  his  mem-
ory, to  implore  his  protection,  and  to  secure  his  intercession.  It
is  a  sacrifice  in  which  is  offered  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ.
Jesus  Christ,  whose  body  and  blood  are  present  under  the  forms
of  bread  and  wine,  is  Himself  the  victim.  Finally,  the  eucha-
ristic  sacrifice  is  made  by  the  hands  of  the  priest,  but  Jesus  Christ
is  the  principal  minister  ;  He  is  at  once  priest  and  victim,  offer-
ing himself  to  God  the  Father  by  the  ministry  of  his  priests."^

4.  As  under  the  Old  Testament  some  of  the  sin  offerings
availed  for  those  who  brought  the  victims,  and  for  whose  benefit
they  were  offered  ;  and  others,  as  the  morning  and  evening  sacri-

1  Catechismus  Romanus,  ii.  iv.  qusest.  61  [Ixxxiii.  77],  Streitwolf,  vol.  i.  pp.  359.  360.
*  Gousset,  Theoloyie,  ut  supra,  vol.  ii.  p.  522.


688       PART  ni.   Ch.  XX. —  the  means  of  ghace.

fices,  and  those  offered  on  the  feast  days,  and  especially  that  on
the  great  day  of  atonement,  were  intended  for  the  whole  nation ;
so  according  to  Romanists,  the  propitiatory  sacrifice,  in  the  ordi-
nary public  service,  is  offered  for  the  sins  of  the  faithful  in  gen-
eral, while  at  other  times  it  is  offered  for  particular  individuals.
And  as  it  matters  not  whether  such  individuals  be  living  or
dead,  it  is  obvious  that  such  masses  may  be  indefinitely  multi-
pHed.  As  according  to  the  Church  of  Rome  the  great  majority
of  those  djdng  within  the  pale  of  the  Church,  pass  into  purga*
tory,  where  they  remain  in  a  state  of  suffering  for  a  period  to
which  there  is  no  certainly  known  termination  before  the  day
of  judgment ;  for  their  benefit,  to  alleviate  or  shorten  their  suffer-
ings, masses  may  be,  and  should  be  offered  by  their  surviving
friends.  It  has  ever  been  found  that  men  at  the  approach  of
death,  or  the  affectionate  relatives  of  the  departed,  are  willing  to
appropriate  money  at  their  command,  to  pay  for  masses  for  their
benefit.  This,  as  just  remarked,  has  proved  an  inexhaustible
mine  of  wealth  to  the  Church.  "  Hujus  sacrificii  eam  vim  esse,
parochi  docebunt,  ut  non  solum  immolanti,  et  sumenti  prosit,  sed
omnibus  etiam  fidelibus,  sive  illi  nobiscum  in  terris  vivant,  sive
jam  in  Domino  mortui,  nondum  plane  expiati  sint.  Neque  enim
minus  ex  Apostolorum  certissima  traditione,  pro  his  utiliter  offer-
tur,  quani  pro  vivorum  peccatis,  poenis,  satisfactionibus,  ac  quibus-
vis  calamitatibus,  et  angustiis."  ^

Remarks.

No  doctrine  of  the  Church  of  Rome  is  more  portentous  or  more
fruitful  of  evil  consequences  than  this  doctrine  of  the  mass  ;  and
no  doctrine  of  that  Church  is  more  entirely  destitute  of  even  a
semblance  of  Scriptural  support.  The  words  of  Christ,  "  This  do
in  remembrance  of  me,"  are  made  to  mean,  "  Offer  the  sacrifice
which  I  myself  have  just  offered"  (Offrez  le  sacrifice  que  je  vien
d'offrir  moi-meme)  ?  These  words  constituted  the  Apostles  and  all
their  successors  priests.  The  Council  of  Trent  even  anathema-
tizes all  who  do  not  put  that  preposterous  interpretation  on  those
simple  words.^  Romanists  also  appeal  to  the  fact  that  Christ  is
said  to  be  a  priest  forever  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek,  from
which  they  infer  that  He  continually  repeats  the  sacrifice  once
offered  on  the  cross.     They  even  argue  from  such  passages  as

1  Catechismus  Romanus,  par.  ii.  cap.  iv.  qutest.  63  [36      'ixxvi],  Streitwolf,  vol.  i.  pp.
360,  361.

2  Goiisset,  Theologie,  ut  supra,  vol.  ii.  p.  538.

8  See  Sess.  xxii.  canon  2;  quoted  above  on  page  685.


§  19.]  THE   LORD'S    SLPPER.     ROMISH   DOCTRINE.  689

Malaclii  i.  11,  in  which  the  universal  spread  of  the  true  rehgion  is
predicted  by  saying  that  from  the  rising  of  the  sun  to  the  going
down  of  the  same,  "  in  every  place  incense  shall  be  offered  unto
my  name,  and  a  pure  offering."  ^

Protestants  reject  the  doctrine  that  the  eucharist  is  a  true  pro-
pitiatory sacrifice,  —

1.  Because  it  is  not  only  destitute  of  all  support  from  the
Scriptures,  but  is  directly  contrary  to  the  whole  nature  of  the
ordinance,  as  exhibited  in  its  original  institution  and  in  the  prac-
tice of  the  apostolic  church.  There  it  is  set  forth  as  a  sacred
feast  commemorative  of  the  death  of  Christ.

2.  Because  it  is  founded  on  the  monstrous  doctrine  of  transub-
stantiation.  If  the  whole  substance  of  the  bread  be  not  changed
into  the  substance  of  Christ's  body,  and  the  whole  substance  of
the  wine  into  the  substance  of  his  blood,  and  if  the  whole  Christ,
body,  soul,  and  divmity  be  not  really  and  truly  present  under  the
form  (or  species)  or  appearance  of  the  bread  and  wine,  then  the
priest  in  the  mass  has  nothing  to  offer.  He  in  fact  offers  nothing,
and  the  whole  service  is  a  deceit.  Just  so  certainly,  therefore,  as
the  impossible  and  the  unscriptural  cannot  be  true,  just  so  certain
is  it,  that  the  mass  is  not  a  propitiatory  sacrifice.

3.  The  Romish  doctrine  is  that  the  Apostles  were  priests,  and
were  invested  with  authority  and  power  to  continue  and  perpetu-
ate in  the  Church  the  priestly  office  by  ordination  and  the  impo-
sition of  hands  by  which  the  supernatural  gifts  of  the  Holy
Spirit  are  conveyed.  All  this  is  unscriptural  and  false.  First,
because  a  priest  is  a  man  appointed  to  be  a  mediator  between  God
and  other  men,  drawing  near  to  Him  in  behalf  of  those  who  have
not  liberty  of  access  for  themselves,  and  whose  function  it  is  to
offer  gifts  and  sacrifices  for  sin.  But  there  is  no  such  office  under
the  Christian  dispensation,  save  in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ.
He  is  our  only,  and  all  sufficient  priest ;  everywhere  present  and
everywhere  accessible,  who  has  opened  for  us  a  new  and  living
way  of  access  to  God,  available  to  all  sinners  of  the  human  race
without  the  intervention  of  any  of  their  fellow  sinners.  Every
believer  is  as  much  a  priest  under  the  Gospel,  as  any  other  be-

1  In  this  passage  the  words  tt.''3p  "^''f/";^,  correctly  rendered  in  the  English  version
"  incense  shall  be  offered,"  in  the  Vulgate  are  translated  "  sacrificatiir."  In  the  Septiiagint
it  I'i  flu/iiafia  TTpoo-aytTai.  Luther's  version  is,  "  geriiuchert."  Even  if  the  Vulgate  version
were  correct,  and  the  prophet  had  said  vliat  "  in  every  place  sacrifice  should  be  made,"  that
would  prove  nothing  to  the  point.  The  Old  Testament  prophets  predicted  the  spread  of  the
true  religion  under  the  Gospel  dispensation  in  the  use  of  terms  borrowed  from  the  Old
Testament  ritual.

VOL.   lu.  4-i


690  PART  III.     Ch.   XX.  — the   means   OF   GRACE.

liever,  for  through  Christ  they  all  have  equal  freedom  of  access
unto  God.  It  subverts  the  whole  nature  of  the  gospel,  to  make
the  mterveniioii  of  any  human  priest  necessary  to  our  reconcilia-
tion with  God.  Secondly,  Christian  ministers  are  never  called
priests  in  the  New  Testament.  Every  title  of  dignity,  every  term
expressive  of  the  nature  of  their  office,  is  bestowed  on  them,  but
the  title  priest,  so  familiar  to  Jewish  and  Gentile  ears,  is  never
given  to  them.  Nor  is  any  priestly  function  ascribed  to  them.
They  are  not  mediators.  They  are  not  appointed  to  offer  sacri-
fices for  sin.  Every  priest  is  a  mediator,  but  it  is  expressly  de-
clared that  Christians  have  but  one  mediator,  the  man  Christ
Jesus.  There  is  but  one  sacrifice  for  sin,  the  all  sufficient  sacri-
fice of  Christ  upon  the  cross,  who  died  once  for  all  to  bring  us
hear  to  God.  Thirdly,  Christ  Himself  and  the  Apostles  after
Him  in  all  their  addresses  to  the  people,  instead  of  directing  them
to  go  to  ministers  as  priests  to  obtain  the  benefits  of  redemption,
uniformly  assume  that  the  way  is  open  for  the  return  of  every
sinner  to  God  without  human  intervention.  "  Come  unto  me  "  is
the  invitation  of  Christ  to  every  heavily  laden  sinner.  "  Believe
on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved,"  is  the  gospel
preached  by  the  Apostles  both  to  Jews  and  Gentiles.  The  eman-
cipation of  the  Christian  world  effected  by  the  Reformation,  con-
sisted in  large  measure  in  freeing  man  from  the  belief  that
Christian  ministers  are  priests  through  whom  alone  sinners  can
draw  near  to  God.  It  was  preaching  deliverance  to  captives,  and
the  opening  of  the  prison  to  those  who  were  bound,  to  announce
that  believers  through  Christ  are  all  made  kings  and  priests
unto  God ;  subject  to  no  authority  but  the  authority  of  God  (and
of  course  to  such  as  He  has  ordained),  and  all  having  access  by
one  Spirit  unto  the  Father.  If  then  ministers  are  not  priests,  the
eucharist  is  not  a  sacrifice.

4.  The  Romish  doctrine  is  derogatory  to  the  sacrifice  of  the
cross.  It  supposes  that  the  work  of  Christ  in  making  satisfaction
for  the  sins  of  men,  needs  to  be  constantly  repeated.  This  is
directly  contrary  to  Scripture,  which  teaches  that  by  the  one  offer-
ing of  Himself,  He  has  forever  perfected  them  that  beheve.  His
one  sacrifice  has  done  all  that  need  be  done,  and  all  that  a  sacri-
fice can  do.  Romanists  say  that  the  same  sacrifice  which  was
made  on  the  cross,  is  made  in  the  mass.  The  only  difference  be-
tween the  two  is  modal.  It  concerns  only  the  manner  of  obla-
tion. Then  why  is  the  latter  needed  ?  Why  does  not  the  one
offering  of  Christ  suffice  ?  Certain  it  is  the  Bible  refers  us  to
nothing  else  ;  and  the  believer  craves  nothing  else.


§  19.]  THE   LORD'S   SUPPER.     ROMISH   DOCTRINE.  691

5.  The  doctrine  of  the  sacrificial  character  of  the  eucharist,  is
an  integral  part  of  the  great  system  of  error,  which  must  stand
or  fall  as  a  whole.  Romanism  is  another  gospel.  It  proposes  a
different  method  of  salvation  from  that  presented  in  the  word  of
God.  It  teaches  that  no  one  can  be  saved  who  is  out  of  the  pale
of  that  visible  society  of  which  the  pope  of  Rome  is  the  head  ;  and
that  all  are  saved  who  die  within  that  pale.  It  teaches  that  no
one  can  be  regenerated  who  is  not  baptized  ;  and  that  there  is  no
forgiveness  for  post-baptismal  sins,  except  by  the  sacrament  of
penance  and  absolution  at  the  hands  of  a  priest.  It  teaches  that
no  one  can  have  the  benefit  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  who  does
not  receive  it  at  the  hands  of  a  properly  ordained  officer  of  the
Church  of  Rome.  It  teaches  that  there  is  no  valid  ministry,  and
that  there  are  no  valid  ordinances  except  in  the  line  of  the
apostolic  succession  as  recognized  by  the  pope.  It  follows  men
beyond  the  grave.  It  teaches  that  the  souls  in  purgatory  are
still  under  the  power  of  the  keys  ;  that  their  stay  in  that  place
or  state  of  torment,  can  be  prolonged  or  shortened  at  the  will  of
the  Church.  The  pope  assumes,  and  has  often  pretended  to  ex-
ercise, the  power  of  granting  indulgences  for  even  a  thousand
years.  This  whole  theory  hangs  together.  If  one  assumption
be  false,  the  whole  is  false.  And  if  the  theory  in  its  primary
principle'  of  a  perpetual  apostleship,  infallible  in  teaching  and  of
plenary  power  in  government  and  discipline,  be  false,  then  every
particular  doctrine  involving  that  principle  must  be  false.

Moehler,  whose  philosophical  and  mitigated  Romanism,  has
called  down  upon  him  no  little  censure  from  his  stricter  brethren,
represents  the  doctrine  of  the  eucharist  as  the  point  in  which  all
the  differences  between  Romanists  and  Protestants  converge.  On
the  view  taken  of  this  doctrine  depends  the  question  whether  the
Christian  Church  has  a  true  living  "  cultus  "  or  not.  With  him
the  Church,  of  course,  is  the  body,  which,  professing  the  true  re-
ligion, is  united  in  the  reception  of  the  same  sacraments,  in  sub-
jection to  bishops  canonically  consecrated,  and  especially  to  the
pope  of  Rome.  For  him,  and  all  Romanists,  this  Church  is  Christ.
He  dwells  in  it ;  animates  it  ;  operates  through  it  exclusively  in
the  salvation  of  men.  The  teaching  of  the  Church  is  his  teach-
ing ;  its  commands  are  his  commands ;  He  regenerates  only
through  its  sacrament  of  baptism  ;  He  remits  sin  only  through
the  sacrament  of  penance  ;  He  strengthens  in  confirmation  ;  He
nourishes  his  people  with  his  body  and  blood  in  the  eucharist ;
and  in  the  ordination  of  priests.    He  appoints  the  organs  through


692         PART  III      Ch.   XX.  — the  means   OF   GRACE.

which  all  this  is  done  by  his  ceaseless  activity.  "  The  Church,"
says  INIoehler,  "is  vicariously  (auf  eine  abbilcllich-lebendige  Weise)
Christ  manifested  and  working  through  all  time.  Tlie  Redeemer
did  not  merely  live  eighteen  hundred  years  ago,  and  then  disap-
pear, to  be  remembered  only  as  a  historical  person  as  any  other  of
the  departed  ;  on  the  contrary  He  is  ever  living  in  the  Church."  ^
Romanists,  therefore,  practically  take  away  Christ,  and  give  ns
the  Church  in  his  stead.  It  is  to  be  remembered  that  by  the
Church  they  do  not  mean  the  body  consisting  of  true  believers,
but  the  external,  organized  body  of  which  the  pope  is  the  head.
It  is  this  body  represented  in  history  by  the  Hildebrands,  the
Borgias,  and  the  Leos,  which  Romanism  puts  in  the  place  of
Christ,  clothing  it  with  his  prerogatives,  and  claiming  for  it  the
obedience,  the  reverence,  and  the  confidence  due  to  God  alone.
It  is  against  this  theory,  which  practically  puts  man  in  the  place
of  God,  that  the  most  fearful  denunciations  of  the  Scriptures  are
pronounced.

§  20.  Prayer.

Prayer  is  the  converse  of  the  soul  with  God.  Therein  we
manifest  or  express  to  Him  our  reverence,  and  love  for  his  divine
perfection,  our  gratitude  for  all  his  mercies,  our  penitence  for
our  sins,  our  hope  in  his  forgiving  love,  our  submission  to  his  au-
thority, our  confidence  in  his  care,  our  desires  for  his  favour,  and
for  the  providential  and  spiritual  blessings  needed  for  ourselves
and  others.  As  religion,  in  the  subjective  sense  of  the  word,  is
the  state  of  mind  induced  by  the  due  apprehension  of  the  chai-ac-
ter  of  God  and  of  our  relation  to  Him  as  our  Creator,  Preserver,
and  Redeemer  ;  so  prayer  is  the  expression,  uttered  or  unuttered,
of  all  the  feelings  and  desires  which  that  state  of  mind  produces
or  excites.  A  prayerless  man  is  of  necessity,  and  thoroughly  irre-
ligious. There  can  be  no  life  without  activit3^  As  the  body  is
dead  when  it  ceases  to  act,  so  the  soul  that  goes  not  forth  in  its
actions  towards  God,  that  lives  as  though  there  were  no  God,  is
spiritually  dead.

Prayer  takes  a  great  deal  for  granted.  It  assumes,  in  the  first
place,  the  personality  of  God.  Only  a  person  can  say  I,  or  be
addressed  as  Thou  ;  only  a  person  can  be  the  subject  and  object
of  intelligent  action,  can  apprehend  and  answer,  can  love  and  be
loved,  or  hold  converse  with  other  persons.  If  God,  therefore,  be
only  a  name  for  an  unknown  force,  or  for  the  moral  order  of  the
1  SymhoUh,  von  Dr^  J.  A.Moehler,  6th  edit.  Mainz,  1843,  p.  300.


§  20.]  PRAYER,  693

universe,  prayer  becomes  irrational  and  impossible.^  Secondly,
God,  however,  altliovigh  a  person,  may  dwell  far  off  in  immensity,
and  have  no  intercourse  with  his  creatures  on  earth.  Prayer,
therefore,  assumes  not  only  the  personality  of  God,  but  also  that
He  is  near  us ;  that  He  is  not  only  able,  but  also  willing  to  hold
intercourse  with  us,  to  hear  and  answer ;  that  He  knows  our
thoughts  afar  off  ;  and  that  unuttered  aspirations  are  intelligible
to  Him.  Thirdly,  it  assumes  that  He  has  the  personal  control  of
all  nature,  i.  e.,  of  all  things  out  of  Himself ;  that  He  governs  all
his  creatures  and  all  their  actions.  It  assumes  that  He  has  not
only  created  all  things  and  endowed  matter  and  mind  with  forces
and  powers,  but  that  He  is  everywhere  present,  controlling  the
operation  of  such  forces  and  powers,  so  that  nothing  occurs  with-
out his  direction  or  permission.  When  it  rains,  it  is  because
He  wills  it,  and  controls  the  laws  of  nature  to  produce  that  effect.
When  the  earth  produces  fruit  in  abundance,  or  when  the  hopes
of  the  husbandman  are  disappointed,  these  effects  are  not  to  be
referred  to  the  blind  operation  of  natural  laws,  but  to  God's  intel-
ligent and  personal  control.  There  is  no  such  reign  of  law  as
makes  God  a  subject.  It  is  He  who  reigns,  and  orders  all  the
operations  of  nature  so  as  to  accomplish  his  own  purposes.

This  does  not  suppose  that  the  laws  of  nature  are  mutable,  or
that  the}^  are  set  aside.  There  is  scarcely  any  effect,  either  in  na-
ture or  in  the  acts  of  men,  due  to  the-  operation  of  any  one  natural
force.  We  produce  effects  by  combining  such  forces,  so  that  the
result  is  due  to  this  intelligent  and  voluntary  combination.  In
like  manner,  in  the  ordinary  operations  of  nature,  God  accom-
plishes his  purpose  by  a  similar  intelligent  and  voluntary  com-
bination of  natural  causes.  When  He  wills  that  it  should  rain,
He  wills  that  all  the  secondary  causes,  productive  of  that  effect,
should  be  brought  into  operation.  The  doctrine  of  providence
only  supposes  that  God  does,  on  the  scale  of  the  universe,  what  we
do  within  the  limited  sphere  of  'our  efficiency.  We,  indeed,  so  far
as  effects  out  of  ourselves  are  concerned,  are  tied  to  the  use  of

1  Philosophers,  says  Dr.  Chahiiers,  "look  ou  the  Supreme  Principle  to  be  in  every  way
.as  inflexible  and  sure  as  they  have  uniformly  found  of  the  subordinate  principles;  and  that
He  is  as  unlit  to  be  addressed  by  a  petition  or  the  expression  of  a  wish,  as  any  fancied  spirit
that  may  reside  in  a  volcano  or  a  storm,  in  any  other  department  of  nature's  vast  niachin-
er-  —  that  the  cries  of  urgency  and  distress  are  of  no  more  avail  when  sent  up  to  Him  who
wields  the  elements  of  the  world,  as  if  they  were  only  lifted  to  the  elements  themselves  —
that  the  same  unchangeableness  which  pervades  all  nature,  is  also  characteristic  of  nature's
God:  and  so  they  deem  to  be  an  aberration  from  sound  philosophj',  both  the  doctrine  of  a
special  providence  and  the  observation  of  prayer."  Chalmers,  Works,  ed.  New  York,
1844,  vol.  ii.  p.  319.


694  PART   IIT.     Ch.   XX. —  the  MEANS   OF   GRACE.

secondary  causes.  We  can  act  neither  against  them,  nor  without
them.  God  is  not  thus  limited.  He  can  operate  without  second
causes  as  well  as  with  them,  or  against  them.  There  seems  to  be
no  little  confusion  in  the  minds  of  many  writers  on  this  subject.
They  insist  on  the  immutability  of  the  laws  of  nature,  and  some
times  speak  of  God  as  constantly  controlling  their  operation  by
combining  and  directing  their  forces  ;  and  yet  they  resolve  all
second  causes  into  the  divine  efficiency  ;  that  is,  an  efficiency  di-
rected by  intelligence  and  will.  "  It  is  but  reasonable,"  says  Sir
John  Herschel,  "  to  regard  the  force  of  gravitation  as  the  direct
or  indirect  result  of  a  consciousness  or  will  existing  somewhere."  ^
"  It  may  be  that  all  natural  forces  are  resolvable  in  some  one
force,  and  indeed  in  the  modern  doctrine  of  the  correlation  of
forces,  an  idea  which  is  a  near  approach  to  this,  has  already  en-
tered the  domain  of  science.  It  may  also  be  that  this  one  force,
into  which  all  others  return  again,  is  itself  but  a  mode  of  action
of  the  Divine  Will."  ^  It  is  a  common  remark  that  the  only  force
of  which  we  have  any  direct  knowledge  is  mind-force,  and  hence
that  it  is  unphilosophical  to  assume  any  other.  From  this  it  is  in-
ferred that  all  the  forces  operating  in  nature  are  the  energy  of  the
one  Supreme  Intelligence.  This  doctrine,  as  shown  when  treat-
ing of  the  doctrine  of  Providence,  almost  inevitably  leads  to  pan-
theism. But  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  those  who  take  this  view
can  consistently  speak  of  the  immutability  of  law,  or  of  God's  be-
ing free  only  within  its  limits.  It  is  essential  to  the  idea  of  mind-
power,  that  it  should  be  free  ;  that  it  should  act  wdien,  where,
and  how  it  pleases.  In  the  case  of  God,  indeed,  it  cannot  act
unwisely  or  unjustly.  But  if  all  the  forces  of  nature  are  only
manifestations  of  the  divine  efficiency,  what  meaning  can  be  at-
tached to  the  proposition  that  He  operates  with,  and  through,  and
never  independently  of  natural  law  ?

The  Scriptural  doctrine  is  that  God  is  an  extra-mundane,  per-
sonal Being,  independent  of  the  world,  who  has  created  it,  and
endowed  all  things  material  with  their  several  properties  or  pow-
ers, which  He  in  his  omnipresent,  and  infinitely  wise  omnipotence,
constantly  controls.  This  doctrine  is  presupposed  in  prayer  ;  for
"  prayer  and  the  answer  of  prayer,  are  simply  ....  the  pre-
ferring of  a  request  upon  the  one  side,  and  compliance  with  that
request  upon  the  other.  Man  applies,  God  complies.  Man  asks
a  favour,  God  bestows  it.     These  are  conceived  to  be  the  two

1  Outlines  of  Astronomy,  5th  ed.  p.  292.

2  The  Rei(jn  of  Law,  by  the  Duke  of  Argylc,  5th  ed.  London    1867,  p.  129.


§20.]  PRAYER.  ,  695

terms  of  a  real  interchange  that  takes  place  between  the  parties
—  the  two  terms  of  a  sequence,  in  fact,  whereof  the  antecedent  is
a  praj^er  lifted  up  from  earth,  and  the  consequent  is  the  fulfilment
of  that  prayer  in  virtue  of  a  mandate  from  heaven."  ^

Prayer  also  supposes  that  the  government  of  God  extends  over
the  minds  of  men,  over  their  thoughts,  feelings,  and  volitions  ;
that  the  heart  is  in  his  hands,  and  that  He  can  turn  it  even  as
the  rivers  of  water  are  turned.

It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  not  only  atheism,  pantheism,  mate-
rialism, and  every  other  system  of  philosophy  which  involves  the
denial  of  the  existence  or  the  personality  of  God,  but  also  all
other  theories,  whether  scientific  or  philosophical,  which  do  not
admit  of  the  control  of  God  over  the  operations  of  nature  and  the
character  and  conduct  of  men,  are  inconsistent  with  prayer.  Ac-
cording to  all  these  systems  there  is  either  no  one  to  pray  to,  or
nothing  to  pray  for.  If  there  be  no  personal  God,  there  is  no
one  to  pray  to  ;  and  if  God,  supposing  such  a  Being  to  exist,
has  no  control  over  nature  or  man,  then  there  is  no  rational  mo-
tive for  prayer ;  there  is  nothing  to  be  accomplished  by  it.  The
idea  that  the  service  would  still  be  of  value  for  its  subjective
effect  is  irrational,  because  its  subjective  effect  is  due  to  faith  in
its  objective  efficiency.  If  a  man  believes  that  there  is  no  God,
he  cannot  make  himself  a  better  man  by  acting  hypocritically,
and  pouring  forth  his  prayers  and  praises  to  a  nonentity.  Or,  if
a  believer  in  the  existence  of  God,  if  he  has  such  a  theory  of  his
nature  or  of  his  relation  to  the  world,  as  precludes  the  possibility
of  his  hearing,  or  if  He  hears,  of  his  answering  our  prayers,  then
prayer  becomes  irrational.  Candid  men,  therefore,  who  in  their
philosophy  hold  any  of  the  theories  referred  to,  do  not  hesitate
to  pronounce  prayer  superstitious  or  fanatical,  Kant,  although  a
theist,  regards  all  as  unphilosophical  entliusiasts  who  assume  that
God  hears  or  answers  prayer.^

Professor  Tjmdall,  one  of  the  representative  scientific  men  of
the  age,  says,  "  One  by  one  natural  phenomena  have  been  as-
sociated with  their  proximate  causes  ;  and  the  idea  of  direct  per-
sonal volition,  mixing  itself  in  the  economy  of  nature,  is  retreating
more  and  more."  Science,  he  tells  us  "  does  assert,  for  example,
that  without  a  disturbance  of  natural  law,  quite  as  serious  as  the
stoppage  of  an  eclipse,  or  the  rolling  the  St.  Lawrence  up  the

1  Chalmers,  vt  supra,  p.  321.

2  Kant's  Lehim,  von  Borowsky,  p.  199  (Biichner's  Bihlische  Rtal-und  Verbal-Concm-
dam,  word  "  Bitte  "  ) ;  Halle,  1840,  6th  ed.  p.  560.


696       PAiiT  III.   Ch.  XX.  — the  means  of  grace.

Falls  of  Niagara,  no  act  of  humiliation,  individual  or  national,
could  call  one  shower  fi'om  heaven,  or  deflect  towards  vis  a  siuofle
beam  of  the  sun."  [IVIan  may  deflect  the  beams  of  the  sun  at
pleasure,  but  God  cannot.  Man,  according  to  Professor  Espy,
can  make  it  rain,  but  God  cannot.]  "  Those,  therefore,  who  be-
lieve that  the  miraculous  is  still  active  in  nature,  may  with  per-
fect consistency  join  in  our  periodic  prayers  for  fair  weather  and
for  rain  :  while  those  who  hold  that  the  age  of  miracles  is  past,
will  refuse  to  join  in  such  petitions."  ^  With  Professor  Tyndall
and  the  large  class  of  scientists  to  which  he  belongs,  there  never
has  been  an  event  in  the  external  world  due  to  the  exercise  of  any
other  force  than  the  undirected  operation  of  physical  causes.
"  Nothing  has  occurred  to  indicate  that  the  operation  of  the  law
[of  gravity]  has  for  a  moment  been  suspended  ;  nothing  has  ever
intimated  that  nature  has  been  crossed  by  spontaneous  action,  or
that  a  state  of  things  at  any  time  existed  which  could  not  be
rigorously  deduced  from  the  preceding  state.  Given  the  distribu-
tion of  matter  and  the  forces  in  operation  in  the  time  of  Galileo,
the  competent  mathematician  of  that  day  could  predict  Avhat  is
now  occurring  in  our  own."  ^  What  is  meant  by  "  spontaneous
action  "  ?  Spontaneous  is  antithetical  to  necessary.  Spontaneous
action,  therefore,  is  free  action  ;  the  action  of  intelligence  and
will ;  such  action  as  Professor  Tyndall  displays  in  writing  or  de-
livering his  lectures.  His  assertion,  therefore,  is  that  there  has
never  occurred  in  nature  any  effect  which  may  not  be  referred
to  necessary,  ^'.  e.^  to  blind,  unintelligent  causes.  This  of  course
precludes  the  possibility  of  miracles.  For  a  miracle  is  an  event
in  the  external  world  which  cannot  be  referred  to  any  natural
cause,  but  which  must  from  its  nature  be  ascribed  to  the  im-
mediate efficiency,  or  the  "  spontaneous  action  "  of  God.  When
Christ  said,  "  I  will ;  be  thou  clean,"  and  the  leper  was  cleansed,
the  only  cause,  or  efficient  antecedent  of  the  cure,  was  his  will ;
a  volition.  So  when  He  said,  "  Lazarus  come  forth,"  or  when  He
"  said  unto  the  sea.  Peace,  be  still.  And  the  wind  ceased  and
there  was  a  great  calm."  The  scientific  man  has  no  idea  how
small  he  looks,  when,  in  the  presence  of  Christ,  he  ventures  to  say
that  nature  has  never  been  crossed  by  "  sponta]ieous  action  ;  "
that  Christ's  will  was  not  a  cause,  when  he  healed  the  sick,  or
opened  the  eyes  of  the  blind,  or  raised  the  dead,  by  a  word  ;  or

J  Friyments  of  Science  for  Unsclentijic  People,  by  John  Tyndall,  LL.  D.,  F.  R.  S.|
London  1871,  pp!  31,  32,  arid  36.
2  Ibid.  pp.  63,  64.


§  20.]  PRAYER.  697

when  He  himself  rose  by  his  own  power  from  the  grave.  To
say  that  these  facts  never  occurred,  simply  because,  according  to
the  ephemeral  theory  of  the  hour,  they  could  not  occur,  is  the
infinite  of  folly.  It  is  a  thousand  fold  more  certain  that  they  oc-
curred than  that  the  best  authenticated  facts  of  history  are  true.
For  such  facts  we  have  only  ordinary  historical  evidence ;  for  the
truth  of  Christ's  miracles,  and  especially  of  his  resurrection,  we
have  the  evidence  of  all  the  facts  of  history  from  his  day  to  the
present.  The  actual  state  of  the  world,  and  the  existence  of  the
Church,  necessitate  the  admission  of  those  facts,  to  which  God
himself  bore  witness  of  old  in  signs,  and  wonders,  and  divers
miracles,  as  He  does  still  in  a  manner  absolutely  irresistible,  in
the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  To  hear  the  whole  gospel,  even  con-
structively, pronounced  a  lie,  is  a  sore  trial  to  those  who  have  even
a  glimmer  of  the  faith  of  Paul,  and  who  can  only  say  with  quiver-
ing lips,  what  he  said  with  the  fulness  of  assurance,  "  I  know
whom  I  have  believed."  ^  Scientific  men  are  prone  to  think  that
there  is  no  other  evidence  of  truth,  than  the  testimony  of  the
senses.  But  the  reason  has  its  intuitions,  the  moral  nature  its
a  priori  judgments,  the  religious  consciousness  its  immediate
apprehensions,  which  are  absolutely  infallible  and  of  paramount
authority.  A  man  might  as  easily  emancipate  himself  from  the
operation  of  the  laws  of  nature,  as  from  the  authority  of  the  moral
law,  or  his  responsibility  to  God.  When,  therefore,  men  of  sci-
ence advance  theories  opposed  to  these  fundamental  convictions,
they  are  like  bats  impinging  against  the  everlasting  rocks.

But  apart  from  the  case  of  miracles,  it  may  be  safely  said,  that
so  far  from  its  being  true  that  nature  has  never  been  "  crossed
by  spontaneous  action,"  such  action  in  nature  is  familiar,  con-
stant, and  almost  universal.  What  is  an  organism,  but  the  prod-
uct of  spontaneous  action  ?  that  is,  of  the  intelligent  (and  there-
fore voluntary)  selection  and  application  of  appropriate  means  for
the  accomplishment  of  a  foreseen  and  intended  end  ?  If  the
world  is  full  of  the  evidences  of  spontaneous  action  on  the  part  of
man,  nature  is  full  of  evidence  of  such  action  on  the  part  of  God.
The  evidence  is  of  the  same  kind,  and  just  as  palpable  and  irre-
sistible in  the  one  case  as  in  the  other.  It  is  admitted  of  necessity
by  those  who  deny  it.  Darwin's  books,  for  example,  are  full  of
such  expressions  as  "wonderful  contrivance,"  "ingenious  device,"

1  In  the  volume  above  referred  to,  there  is  an  article  entitled,  "Miracles  and  Special
Providences,"  being  a  review  by  Professor  Tyndall  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Mozley's  Bampton
Lectures  on  Miracles.  In  that  review  "magic,  miracles,  and  witchcraft"  are  placed  in
the  same  category.


698       PAKT  m.   Ch.  XX.— the  means  of  grace.

"  marvellous  arrangements."  These  expressions  reveal  the  per-
ception of  spontaneous  action.  They  have  no  meaning  except  on
the  assumption  of  such  action.  "  Contrivance,"  "  device,"  imply
design,  and  would  not  be  used  if  the  perception  of  intention  did
not  suggest  and  necessitate  them.  Some  twenty  times  already,
in  the  course  of  this  work,  it  has  been  shown  that,  in  many  cases,
those  who  begin  with  denying  any  spontaneous  action  in  nature,
end  with  asserting  that  there  is  no  other  kind  of  action  anywhere  ;
that  all  force  is  mind-force,  and  therefore  spontaneous  as  well
as  intelligent.

Spontaneous  action  cannot  be  got  rid  of.  If  denied  in  the
present,  it  must  be  admitted  in  the  past.  If,  as  even  Professor
Huxley  teaches,  "  Organization  is  not  the  cause  of  hfe;  but  life
is  the  cause  of  organization,"^  the  question  is.  Whence  comes
life  ?  Not  out  of  nothing,  surely.  It  must  have  its  origin  in  the
spontaneous,  voluntary  act  of  the  ever,  and  the  necessarily  Liv-
ing One.

The  theory  of  the  universe  which  underlies  the  Bible,  which  is
everywhere  assumed  or  asserted  in  the  sacred  volume,  which  ac-
cords with  our  moral  and  religious  nature,  and  which,  therefore,
is  the  foundation  of  natural,  as  well  as  of  revealed  religion,  is
that  God  created  all  things  by  the  word  of  his  power  ;  that  He
endowed  his  creatures  with  their  properties  or  forces  ;  that  He  is
everj'Where  present  in  the  universe,  cooperating  with  and  con-
trolling the  operation  of  second  causes  on  a  scale  commensurate
with  his  omnipresence  and  omnipotence,  as  we,  in  our  measure,
cooperate  with,  and  control  them  within  the  narrow  range  of  our
efficiency.  According  to  this  theory,  it  is  not  irrational  that  we
should  pray  for  rain  or  fair  weather,  for  prosperous  voyages  or
healtlif ul  seasons ;  or  that  we  should  feel  gratitude  for  the  in-
numerable blessings  which  we  receive  from  this  ever  present,
ever  operating,  and  ever  watchful  benefactor  and  Father.  Any
theory  of  the  universe  which  makes  religion,  or  prayer,  irrational,
is  self-evidently  false,  because  it  contradicts  the  nature,  the  con-
sciousness, and  the  irrepressible  convictions  of  men.  As  this
control  <jil  God  extends  over  the  minds  of  men,  it  is  no  less  ra-
tional that  we  should  pray,  as  all  men  instinctively  do  pray,  that
He  would  influence  our  own  hearts,  and  the  hearts  of  others,  for
good,  than  that  we  should  pray  for  health.

It  is  also  involved  in  the  assumptions  already  referred  to,  that
the  sequence  of  events  in  the  physical  and  moral  world  is  not

1  Elements  of  Comparative  Anatomy,  pp.  10,  11.


§  20.]  PRAYER.  699

determined  by  any  inexorable  fate.  A  fatalist  cannot  consist-
ently pray.  It  is  only  on  the  assumption  that  there  is  a  God,
who  does  his  pleasure  in  the  army  of  heaven  and  among  the
inhabitants  of  the  earth,  that  we  can  rationally  address  Him  as
the  hearer  of  prayer.

In  like  manner  it  is  assumed  that  there  is  no  such  foreordination
of  events  as  h  inconsistent  with  God's  acting  according  to  the  good
pleasure  of  his  will.  When  a  man  enters  upon  any  great  enter-
prise, he  lays  down  beforehand  the  plan  of  his  operations  ;  selects
and  determines  his  means,  and  assigns  to  each  subordinate  the
part  he  is  to  act ;  he  may  require  each  to  apply  continually  for
guidance  and  directions ;  and  may  assure  him  that  his  requests
for  assistance  and  guidance  shall  be  answered.  Were  it  possible
that  every  instance  of  such  application  or  request  could  be  fore-
seen and  the  answer  predetermined,  this  would  not  be  inconsistent
with  the  duty  or  propriety  of  such  requests  being  made,  or  with
the  liberty  of  action  on  the  part  of  the  controller.  This  illustra-
tion may  amount  to  Kttle ;  but  it  is  certain  that  the  Scriptures
teach  both  foreordination  and  the  efficacy  of  prayer.  The  two,
therefore,  cannot  be  inconsistent.  God  has  not  determined  to  ac-
complish his  purposes  without  the  use  of  means ;  and  among  those
means,  the  prayers  of  his  people  have  their  appropriate  place.
If  the  objection  to  prayer,  founded  on  the  foreordination  of  events,
be  valid,  it  is  valid  against  the  use  of  means  in  any  case.  If  it
be  unreasonable  to  say,  '  If  it  be  foreordained  that  I  should  hve,
it  is  not  necessary  for  me  to  eat,'  it  is  no  less  unreasonable  for  me
to  say,  '  If  it  be  foreordained  that  I  should  receive  any  good,  it
is  not  necessary  for  me  to  ask  for  it.'  If  God  has  foreordained  to
bless  us.  He  has  foreordained  that  we  should  seek  his  blessing.
Prayer  has  the  same  causal  relation  to  the  good  bestowed,  as  any
other  means  has  to  the  end  with  which  it  is  connected.

The  God  of  the  Bible,  who  has  revealed  Himself  as  the  hearer
of  prayer,  is  not  mere  intelligence  and  power.  He  is  love.  He
feels  as  well  as  thinks.  Like  as  a  father  pitieth  his  children,  so
the  Lord  pitieth  them  that  fear  Him.  He  is  full  of  tenderness,
compassion,  long-suffering,  and  benevolence.  This  is  not  anthro-
pomorphism. These  declarations  of  Scripture  are  not  mere
"  regulative  truths."  They  reveal  what  God  really  is.  If  man
was  made  in  his  image,  God  is  like  man.  All  the  excellences  of
our  nature  as  spirits  belong  to  Him  without  limitation,  and  to  an
infinite  degree.  There  is  mystery  here,  as  there  is  everywhere.
But  we  are  all  used  to  mysteries,  the  naturalist  as  well  as  the


700  PART  III.     Ch.   XX.  — the   means   OF   GRACE.

theologian.  Both  have  been  taught  the  folly  of  denying  that  a
thing  is,  because  we  cannot  tell  how  it  is.  It  is  enough  for  us  to
know  that  God  loves  us  and  cares  for  us  ;  that  a  sparrow  does  not
fall  to  the  ground  without  his  notice,  and  that  we  are,  in  his
sight,  of  more  value  than  many  sparrows.  All  this  for  the
believer  is  literal  truth,  having  in  its  support  the  highest  kind  of
evidence.     The  "  how  "  he  is  content  to  leave  unexplained.

It  is  an  objection  often  urged  against  the  propriety  of  address-
ing prayer  to  God,  that  it  is  inconsistent  with  his  dignity  as  an
infinite  Being  to  suppose  that  He  concerns  Himself  with  the
trifling  affairs  of  men.  This  objection  arises  from  a  forgetful-
ness  that  God  is  infinite.  It  assumes  that  his  knowledge,  power,
or  presence,  is  limited  ;  that  He  would  be  distracted  if  his  atten-
tion were  directed  to  all  the  minute  changes  constantly  occurring
throughout  the  universe.  This  supposes  that  God  is  a  creature
like  ourselves ;  that  bounds  can  be  set  to  his  intelligence  or  effi-
ciency. When  a  man  looks  out  on  an  extended  landscape,  the
objects  to  which  his  attention  is  simultaneously  directed  are  too
numerous  to  be  counted.  What  is  man  to  God  ?  The  absolute
intelligence  must  know  all  things  ;  absolute  power  must  be  able
to  direct  all  things.  In  the  sight  of  God,  the  distinction  between
few  and  many,  great  and  small,  disappears.  In  Him  all  creatures
live,  and  move,  and  have  their  being.

The   Object  of  Prayer.

As  prayer  involves  the  ascription  of  divine  attributes  to  its  ob-
ject, it  can  be  properly  addressed  to  God  alone.  The  heathen
prayed  to  imaginary  beings,  or  to  idols,  who  had  eyes  that  saw
not,  and  hands  that  could  not  save.  Equally  unscriptural  and
irrational  are  prayers  addressed  to  any  creature  of  whose  presence
we  have  no  knowledge,  and  of  whose  abihty  either  to  hear  or
answer  our  petitions  we  have  no  evidence.

In  the  Old  Testament,  the  prayers  therein  recorded  are  uni-
formly addressed  to  God,  as  such ;  to  the  one  Divine  Being,  be-
cause the  distinction  of  the  persons  in  the  Godhead  was  then  but
imperfectly  re vealed.  In  the  New  Testament,  prayer  is  addressed
either  to  God,  as  the  Triune  God,  or  to  the  Father,  to  the  Son,
and  to  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  distinct  persons.  In  the  Christian
doxology,  used  wherever  the  Bible  is  known,  the  several  persons
of  the  Trinity  are  separately  addressed.  The  examples  of  prayer
addressed  to  Christ,  recorded  in  the  New  Testament,  are  very
numerous.     As  prayer,  in  the  Scriptural  sense  of  the  term,  in-


§20.]  PRAYER.  701

eludes  all  converse  with  God  either  in  the  form  of  praise,  thanks-
giving, confession,  or  petition  ;  all  the  ascriptions  of  glory  to  Him,
as  well  as  all  direct  supplications  addressed  to  Him,  come  under
this  head.  The  Apostles  prayed  to  Him  while  He  was  yet  ^vith
them  on  earth,  asking  of  Him  blessings  which  God  only  could
bestow,  as  when  they  said,  "  Lord,  increase  our  faith."  The
dying  thief,  taught  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  said,  "  Lord,  remember
me,  when  thou  comest  into  thy  kingdom."  The  last  words  of  the
first  martyr,  Stephen,  were,  "  Lord  Jesus,  receive  my  spirit."
Paul  besought  the  Lord  thrice  that  the  thorn  in  his  flesh  might  de-
part from  him.  So  in  1  Timothy  i.  12,  he  says,  "  I  thank  Christ
Jesus  our  Lord,  who  hath  enabled  me,  for  that  He  counted  me
faithful,  putting  me  into  the  ministry."  In  Revelation  i.  5,  6,  it
is  said,  "  Unto  him  that  loved  us,  and  washed  us  from  our  sins
in  his  own  blood,  and  hath  made  us  kings  and  priests  unto  God
and  his  Father  ;  to  Him  be  glory  and  dominion  for  ever  and  ever.
Amen."  Revelation  v.  13,  "  Every  creature  which  is  in  heaven,
and  on  the  earth,  and  under  the  earth,  and  such  as  are  in  the  sea,
and  all  that  are  in  them,  heard  I  saying,  '  Blessing,  and  honour,
and  glory,  and  power,  be  unto  Him  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne,
and  unto  the  Lamb,  for  ever  and  ever.'  "  As  the  Bible  so  clearly
teaches  that  Christ  is  God  manifest  in  the  flesh  ;  that  all  power
in  heaven  and  earth  is  committed  to  his  hands ;  that  He  is  ex-
alted to  give  repentance  and  the  remission  of  sins ;  as  He  gives
the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  as  He  is  said  to  dwell  in  us,  and  to  be  our
life ;  it  does  thereby  teach  us  that  He  is  the  proper  object  of
prayer.  Accordingly,  as  all  Christians  are  the  worshippers  of
Christ,  so  He  has  ever  been  the  object  of  their  adoration,  thanks-
givings, praises,  confessions,  and  supplications.

-   Requisites  of  Acceptable  Prayer.

1.  The  first  and  most  obviously  necessary  requisite  of  accepta-
ble prayer,  is  sincerity.  God  is  a  Spirit.  He  searches  the  heart.
He  is  not  satisfied  with  words,  or  with  external  homage.  He
cannot  be  deceived  and  will  not  be  mocked.  It  is  a  great  offence,
therefore,  in  his  sight,  when  we  utter  words  before  Him  in  which
our  hearts  do  not  join.  We  sin  against  Him  when  we  use  terms,
in  the  utterance  of  which  the  angels  veil  their  faces,  with  no  cor-
responding feelings  of  reverence  ;  or  use  the  formulas  of  thanks-
giving without  gi'atitude  ;  or  those  of  humility  and  confession
without  any  due  sense  of  our  unworthiness  ;  or  those  of  petition
without  desire  for  the  blessings  we  ask.     Every  one  must  ac-


702       PART  m.   ch.  XX.  — the  means  of  grace.

knowledge  that  this  is  an  evil  often  attending  the  prayers  of  sin-
cere Christians ;  and  with  regard  to  the  multitudes  who,  in  places
of  pubhc  worship,  repeat  the  solemn  forms  of  devotion  or  profess
to  unite  with  those  who  utter  them,  without  any  corresponding
emotions,  the  service  is  little  more  than  mockery.

2.  Reverence.  God  is  an  infinitely  exalted  Being  ;  infinite  in
his  holiness  as  well  as  in  knowledge  and  power.  He  is  to  be
had  in  reverence  by  all  who  are  round  about  Him.  This  holy
fear  is  declared  to  be  the  first  element  of  all  true  religion.  His
people  are  designated  as  those  who  fear  his  name.  We  are
required  to  serve  Him  with  reverence  and  godly  fear.  And
whenever  heaven  is  opened  to  our  view,  its  inhabitants  are  seen
prostrate  before  the  throne.  We  offend  God,  therefore,  when
we  address  Him  as  we  would  a  fellow  creature,  or  use  forms  of
expression  of  undue  familiarity.  Nothing  is  more  characteristic
of  the  prayers  recorded  in  the  Bible,  than  the  spirit  of  reverence
by  which  they  are  pervaded.  The  Psalms  especially  may  be  re-
garded as  a  prayer-book.  Every  Psalm  is  a  prayer,  whether  of
worship,  of  thanksgiving,  of  confession,  or  of  supplication.  In
many  cases  all  these  elements  are  intermingled.  They  relate  to
all  circumstances  in  the  inward  and  outward  life  of  those  by
whom  they  were  indited.  They  recognize  the  control  of  God
over  all  events,  and  over  the  hearts  of  men.  They  assume  that
He  is  ever  near  and  ever  watchful,  sustaining  to  his  people  the
relation  of  a  lovmg  Father.  But  with  all  this,  there  is  never  any
forgetfulness  of  his  infinite  majest}^  There  is  a  tendency  some-
times in  the  best  of  men,  to  address  God  as  though  He  were  one
of  ourselves.  Luther's  famiUar  formula  was,  Lieber  Herr,  or
Lieber  Herr  Gott  (dear  Lord,  dear  Lord  God).  As  Lieber  Herr
is  the  usual  mode  of  address  among  friends  (equivalent  to  our
Dear  Sir),  it  sounds  strangely  when  God  is  thus  addressed.  In
Luther  it  was  the  expression  of  faith  and  love  ;  in  many  who
imitate  him  it  is  the  manifestation  of  an  irreverent  spirit.

3.  Humility.  This  includes,  first,  a  due  sense  of  our  insignifi-
cance as  creatures  ;  and  secondly,  a  proper  apprehension  of  our
ill-desert  and  uncleanness  in  the  sight  of  God  as  sinners.  It  is
the  opposite  of  self-righteousness,  of  self-comijlacency  and  self-
confidence.  It  is  the  spirit  manifested  by  Job,  when  he  placed
his  hand  upon  his  mouth,  and  his  mouth  in  the  dust,  and  said,  I
ablior  myself,  and  repent  in  dust  and  ashes  ;  by  Isaiah  when  he
said,  Woe  is  me  !  because  I  am  a  man  of  unclean  lips,  and  I  dwell
in  the  midst  of  a  people  of  unclean  lips  ;  and  by  the  publican,  who


§  20.J  PRAYER.  703

was  afraid  to  lift  up  so  much  as  his  eyes  unto  heaven,  but  smote
upon  his  breast,  and  said,  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  simier.  Such
language  is  often  regarded  as  exaggerated  or  hypocritical.  It  is,
however,  appropriate.  It  expresses  the  state  of  mind  which  can-
not fail  to  be  produced  by  a  proper  apprehension  of  our  charac-
ter as  sinners,  in  the  sight  of  a  just  and  holy  God.  Indeed  there
is  no  language  which  can  give  adequate  expression  to  that  rational
sense  of  sin  which  the  people  of  God  often  experience.

4.  Importunity.  This  is  so  important  that  on  three  different
occasions  our  Lord  impressed  its  necessity  upon  his  disciples.
This  was  one  evident  design  of  the  history  of  the  Syrophenician
woman,  who  could  not  be  prevented  from  crying,  "  Have  mercy
on  me,  O  Lord,  thou  son  of  David."  (Matt.  xv.  22.)  Thus  also
in  the  parable  of  the  unjust  judge,  who  said,  "  Because  this
widow  troubleth  me,  I  will  avenge  her,  lest  by  her  continual  com-
ing she  weary  me.  And  the  Lord  said.  Hear  what  the  unjust
judge  saith.  And  shall  not  God  avenge  his  own  elect,  which  cry
day  and  night  unto  Him,  though  He  bear  long  with  them  ?  I
tell  you  that  He  Avill  avenge  them  speedily."  (Luke  xviii.  5-8.)
Again  in  Luke  xi.  5-8,  we  read  of  the  man  who  refused  to  give
his  friend  bread,  of  whom  Christ  said,  "  Though  he  will  not  rise
and  give  him,  because  he  is  his  friend,  yet  because  of  his  impor-
tunity he  will  rise  and  give  him  as  many  as  he  needeth."  God
deals  with  us  as  a  wise  benefactor.  He  requires  that  we  should
appreciate  the  value  of  the  blessings  for  which  we  ask,  and  that
we  should  manifest  a  proper  earnestness  of  desire.  If  a  man
begs  for  his  own  life  or  for  the  life  of  one  dear  to  him,  there  is  no
repressing  his  importunity.  He  will  not  be  refused.  If  the  life
of  the  body  is  to  be  thus  earnestly  sought,  can  we  expect  that  the
life  of  the  soul  \^'ill  be  granted  to  those  who  do  not  seek  it  with
importunate  earnestness.

5.  Submission.  Every  man  who  duly  appreciates  his  relation
to  God,  will,  no  matter  what  his  request,  be  disposed  to  say,
"  Lord,  not  my  will  but  thine  be  done."  Even  a  child  feels  the
propriety  of  subjecting  his  will  in  all  his  requests  to  his  earthly
father.  How  much  more  should  we  submit  to  the  will  of  our
Father  in  heaven.  He  alone  knows  what  is  best ;  granting  our
request  might,  in  many  cases,  be  our  destruction.  Our  Lord  in
the  garden  of  Gethsemane  set  us  an  example  in  this  matter,  that
should  never  be  forgotten.

6.  Faith.  We  must  beheve.  (a.)  That  God  is.  (b.)  That
He  is  able  to  hear  and  answer  our  prayers,     (c.)  That  He  is  dis-


704         PART   III.     Ch.   XX.  — the  means   OF   GRACE.

posed  to  answer  them.  (cZ.)  That  He  certamly  will  answer
them,  if  consistent  with  his  own  wise  purposes  and  with  our  best
good.  For  this  faith  we  have  the  most  express  assurances  in  the
Bible.  It  is  not  only  said,  "  Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive  ;  seek  and
ye  shall  find,"  but  our  Lord  says  exphcitly,  "  Whatsoever  ye  shall
ask  in  my  name,  that  will  I  do."  (John  xiv.  13.)  And  again,
"  If  two  of  you  shall  agree  on  earth,  as  toucliing  anything  that
they  shall  ask,  it  shall  be  done  for  them  of  my  Father  which  is  in
heaven."  (Matt,  xviii.  19.)  All  the  promises  of  God  are  con-
ditional. The  condition,  if  not  expressed,  is  impHed.  It  cannot
be  supposed  that  God  has  subjected  Himself  in  the  government
of  the  world,  or  in  the  dispensation  of  his  gifts,  to  the  short-
sighted wisdom  of  men,  by  promising,  without  condition,  to  do
whatever  they  ask.  No  rational  man  could  wish  this  to  be  the
case.  He  would  of  his  own  accord  supply  the  condition,  which,
from  the  nature  of  the  case  and  from  the  Scriptures  themselves,
must  be  understood.  In  1  John  v.  14,  the  condition  elsewhere
implied  is  expressed.  "  This  is  the  confidence  that  we  have  in
Him,  that  if  we  ask  anything  according  to  his  will.  He  heareth
us."  The  promise,  however,  gives  the  assurance  that  all  prayers
offered  in  faith,  for  things  according  to  the  will  of  God,  will  be
answered.  The  answer,  indeed,  may  be  given,  as  in  the  case  of
Paul  when  he  prayed  to  be  delivered  from  the  thorn  in  the  flesh,
in  a  way  we  do  not  expect.  But  the  answer  will  be  such  as  we,
if  duly  enlightened,  would  ourselves  desire.  More  than  this  we
need  not  wish.  Want  of  confidence  in  these  precious  promises  of
God  ;  want  of  faith  in  his  disposition  and  readiness  to  hear  us,  is
one  of  the  greatest  and  most  common  defects  in  the  prayers  of
Christians.  Every  father  desires  the  confidence  of  his  children,
and  is  grieved  by  any  evidence  of  distrust ;  and  God  is  our
Father ;  He  demands  from  us  the  feelings  which  children  ought
to  have  towards  their  earthly  parents.

7.  The  prayers  of  Christians  must  be  offered  in  the  name  of
Christ.  Our  Lord  said  to  his  disciples :  "  Hitherto  have  ye  asked
nothing  in  my  name :  ask,  and  ye  shall  receive."  (John  xvi.  24.)
"  I  have  chosen  you  ....  that  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  of  the
Father  in  my  name,  He  may  give  it  you."  (xv.  16.)  "  What-
soever ye  shall  ask  in  my  name,  that  will  I  do."  (xiv.  13.)  By
"  the  name  of  God  "  is  meant  God  himself,  and  God  as  mani-
fested in  his  relation  to  us.  Both  ideas  are  usually  united.
Thus  to  believe  "  in  the  name  of  the  onl}^  begotten  Son  of  God  "
is  to  believe  that  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God,  and  that  as  such  He


§  20.J  PRAYER.  705

is  manifested  as  the  only  Saviour  of  men.  To  act  in  the  name
of  any  one  is  often  to  act  by  his  authority,  and  in  the  exercise  of
his  power.  Thus  our  Lord  speaks  of  the  works  which  He  did
"  in  his  Father's  name  ;  "  that  is,  by  the  Father's  authority  and
in  the  exercise  of  his  efficiency.  And  of  the  Apostles  it  is  fre-
quently said  that  they  wrought  miracles  in  the  name  of  Christ,
meaning  that  the  miracles  were  wrought  by  his  authority  and
power.  But  when  one  asks  a  favour  in  the  name  of  another,  the
simple  meaning  is,  for  his  sake.  Regard  for  the  person  in  whose
name  the  favour  is  requested,  is  relied  on  as  the  ground  on  which
it  is  to  be  granted.  Therefore,  when  we  are  told  to  pray  in  the
name  of  Christ,  we  are  required  to  urge  what  Christ  is  and  what
He  has  done,  as  the  reason  why  we  should  be  heard.  We  are
not  to  trust  to  our  own  merits,  or  our  own  character,  nor  even
simply  to  God's  mercy  ;  we  are  to  plead  the  merits  and  worth  of
Christ.  It  is  only  in  Him,  in  virtue  of  his  mediation  and  worth,
that,  according  to  the  Gospel,  any  blessing  is  conferred  on  the
apostate  children  of  men.

Different  Kinds  of  Prayer.

As  prayer  is  converse  with  God,  it  includes  those  spiritual  ex-
ercises, those  goings  forth  of  the  soul  towards  God  in  thought  and
feeling,  which  reveal  themselves  in  the  forms  of  reverence,  grati-
tude, sorrow  for  sin,  sense  of  dependence,  and  obligation.  In
this  sense,  the  man  who  Hves  and  walks  with  God,  prays  always.
He  fulfils  to  the  letter  the  injunction  "  Pray  without  ceasing."  It
is  our  duty  and  high  privilege  to  have  this  constant  converse  with
God.  The  heart  should  be  like  the  altar  of  incense,  on  which  the
fire  never  went  out.

It  is,  however,  a  law  of  our  nature  that  we  should  clothe  our
thoughts  and  feelings  in  words.  And  therefore,  prayer  is  in  one
form  speech.  Even  when  no  audible  utterance  is  given,  words  as
the  clothing  or  expression  of  inward  states  are  present  to  the
mind.  There  is  power,  however,  in  articulate  words.  The
thought  or  feeling  is  more  distinct  and  vivid  even  to  ourselves,
when  audibly  expressed.  Prayer,  in  this  sense,  is  usually  dis-
tinguished as  secret,  social,  and  public.  It  would  be  a  great
mistake,  if  a  Christian  should  act  on  the  assumption  that  the  life
of  God  in  his  soul  could  be  adequately  preserved  by  that  form  of
prayer,  which  consists  in  habitual  communion  with  God.  The  be-
liever needs,  in  order  to  maintain  his  spiritual  health  and  vigour,
regular  and  stated  seasons  of  prayer,  as  the  body  needs  its  daily

VOL.  III.  45


706       PART  in.   Ch.  XX.  — the  means  of  grace.

meals.  "  When  thou  prayest,"  is  the  direction  given  by  our
Lord,  "  enter  into  thy  closet,  and  when  thou  hast  shut  thy  door,
pray  to  thy  Father  which  is  in  secret ;  and  thy  Father,  which
seeth  in  secret,  shall  reward  thee  openly."  (Matt.  vi.  6.)  The
Bible  presents  to  us  the  example  of  the  people  of  God,  and  of
our  blessed  Lord  himself,  as  a  rule  of  conduct  on  this  subject.
We  read  that  Christ  often  retired  for  the  purpose  of  prayer,  and
not  unfrequently  spent  whole  nights  in  that  exercise.  If  the
spotless  soul  of  Jesus  needed  these  seasons  of  converse  with  God,
none  of  his  followers  should  venture  to  neglect  this  important
means  of  grace.  Let  each  day,  at  least,  begin  and  end  with
God.

Social  prayer  includes  family  prayer,  and  prayer  in  the  assem-
blies of  the  people  for  social  worship.  As  man's  nature  is  social,
he  must  have  fellowship  with  his  fellow  men  in  all  that  concerns
his  inward  and  outward  life.  No  man  lives,  or  can  Hve  for  him-
self, in  religion  any  more  than  in  any  other  relation.  As  the
family  is  the  most  intimate  bond  of  fellowship  among  men,  it  is
of  the  utmost  importance  that  it  should  be  hallowed  by  religion.
All  the  relations  of  parents,  children,  and  domestics  are  purified
and  strengthened,  when  the  whole  household  is  statedly  assem-
bled, morning  and  evening,  for  the  worship  of  God.  There  is  no
substitute  for  this  divinely  appointed  means  of  promoting  family
religion.  It  supposes,  indeed,  a  certain  amount  of  culture.  The
head  of  the  family  should  be  able  to  read  the  Scriptm'es  as  well
as  to  lead  in  the  prayer.  Those,  however,  who  cannot  do  the  for-
mer, may  at  least  do  the  latter.  All  persons  subject  to  the  watch
or  care  of  the  Church  should  be  required  to  maintain  in  their
households  this  stated  worship  of  God.  The  character  of  the
Church  and  of  the  state  depends  on  the  character  of  the  family.
If  religion  dies  out  in  the  family,  it  cannot  elsewhere  be  main-
tained. A  man's  responsibility  to  his  children,  as  well  as  to  God,
binds  him  to  make  his  house  a  Bethel ;  if  not  a  Bethel,  it  will  be
a  dwelling  place  of  evil  spirits.

When  and  where  the  mass  of  the  people  were  so  ignorant  as
to  be  incompetent  profitably  to  maintain  religious  services  in  their
families,  it  was  natural  and  proper  for  the  Church  daily  to  open
its  doors,  and  call  the  people  to  matins  and  vespers.  It  was  far
better  to  have  this  opportunity  for  daily  worship,  than  that  such
stated  service  should  be  neglected.  It  is  not  wise,  however,  to
continue  a  custom  when  the  grounds  on  which  it  was  introduced
no  longer  exist ;  or  to  make  a  church  ordinance  the  substitute
for  a  divine  institution.


§  20.]  PRAYER.  707

Public  Prayer.

The  public  services  of  the  sanctuary  are  designed  for  worship
and  instruction.  The  former  includes  prayer  and  singing ';  the
latter,  the  reading  the  word  of  God  and  preaching.  These  ele-
ments should  be  preserved  in  due  proportion.  In  some  churches,
instruction  is  made  entirely  subordinate  to  worship ;  twice  the
time  being  devoted  to  the  latter  that  is  allotted  to  the  former.
This  seems  to  be  contrary  to  the  Scriptural  rule.  Knowledge  in
the  Bible  is  represented  as  the  essential  element  of  religion.
There  can  be  no  true  worship  of  God  without  adequate  knowl-
edge of  God ;  there  can  be  no  repentance,  faith,  or  holy  living
unless  the  truths  on  which  these  exercises  and  this  living  are
dependent  are  understood,  and  are  present  to  the  mind.  Religion
is  a  reasonable,  that  is  (XoyiK-rf)  a  rational  service,  with  which
ignorance  is  incompatible.  Christian  ministers,  therefore,  are  al-
ways in  the  New  Testament  called  SiSdaKaXoi,  teachers.  Their
great  commission  received  from  Christ  was  "  to  teach  all  nations."
The  Apostles,  therefore,  went  everywhere,  preaching.  Paul  says
Christ  did  not  send  him  to  baptize,  or  to  perform  mere  religious
services,  but  to  preach  the  Gospel,  which  he  declared  to  be  the
wisdom  of  God  and  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation.  No  human
authority  could  have  transformed  Paul  from  a  preacher  into  an
offerer  of  prayers.  It  was  not  until  pagan  ideas  of  worship  be-
gan to  pervade  the  Church,  and  ministers  were  transmuted  from
teachers  into  priests,  that  the  teaching  element  was  made  so  en-
tirely subordinate  to  that  of  worship,  as  it  has  been  for  ages  in
the  Church  of  Rome.

Wliile  teaching  should  be,  as  it  clearly  was  during  the  apos-
tolic age,  the  prominent  object  in  the  services  of  the  Lord's  day,
the  importance  of  public  prayer  can  hardly  be  overestimated.
This,  it  is  often  said,  is  the  weak  point  in  the  Presbyterian  Sab-
bath service.  This  is  probably  true.  That  is,  it  is  probably  true
that  there  are  more  good  preachers  than  good  prayers.  The
main  reason  for  this  is,  that  the  minister  devotes  a  great  part  of
the  labour  of  the  week  to  the  preparation  of  his  sermon,  and  not
a  thought  to  his  prayers.  It  is  no  wonder,  therefore,  that  the  one
should  be  better  than  the  other.

In  order  that  this  part  of  divine  service  should  be  conducted
to  the  edification  of  the  people,  it  is  necessary,  (1.)  That  the  of-
ficiating minister  should  have  a  truly  devout  spirit ;  that  the  feel-'
ings  and  desires,  of  which  the  prayers  are  the  utterance,  should


708       PART  m.   Ch.  XX.— the  means  of  grace.

be  in  exercise  in  his  own  heart.  (2.)  That  his  mind  and  memory
should  be  well  stored  with  the  thoughts  and  language  of  Scrip-
ture. Holy  men  of  old  spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy
Ghofet.  Their  utterances,  whether  in  adoration,  thanksgiving,
confession,  or  supplication,  were  controlled  by  the  Spirit  of  God.
Hence  they  express  the  mind  of  the  Spirit ;  they  are  the  most  ap-
propriate vehicles  for  the  expression  of  those  feelings  and  desires
which  the  Spirit  awakens  in  the  minds  of  God's  people.  No
prayers,  therefore,  are  more  edifying,  other  things  being  equal,
than  those  which  abound  in  the  appropriate  use  of  Scriptural  lan-
guage. (3.)  The  praj^er  should  be  well  ordered,  so  as  to  em-
brace all  the  proper  parts  and  topics  of  prayer  in  due  proportion.
This  will  prevent  its  being  rambling,  diffuse,  or  repetitious.  (4.)
It  should  also  be  suited  to  the  occasion,  whether  that  be  the  ordi-
nary service  on  the  Lord's  day,  or  the  administration  of  the  sacra-
ments, or  the  special  service  on  days  of  thanksgiving  or  of  fasting
and  humiliation.  (5.)  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  say  that  the  lan-
guage employed  should  be  simple,  solemn,  and  correct.  (6.)  The
prayers  should  be  short.  Undue  length  in  this  service  is  gener-
ally owing,  not  more  to  diffuseness  than  to  useless  repetitions.

Prayer  as  a  Means  of  Grrace.

Means  of  grace,  as  before  stated,  are  those  means  which  God
has  ordained  for  the  end  of  communicating  the  hfe-giving  and
sanctifying  influences  of  the  Spirit  to  the  souls  of  men.  Such  are
the  word  and  sacraments,  and  such  is  prayer.  It  has  not  only  the
relation  which  any  other  cause  has  to  the  end  for  which  it  was
appointed,  and  thus  is  the  condition  on  which  the  blessings  of  God,
providential  or  spiritual,  are  bestowed  ;  but  it  brings  us  near  to
God,  who  is  the  source  of  all  good.  Fellowship  with  Him,  con-
verse with  Him,  calls  into  exercise  all  gracious  affections,  rever-
ence, love,  gratitude,  submission,  faith,  joy,  and  devotion.  When
the  soul  thus  draws  near  to  God,  God  draws  near  to  it,  mani-
fests his  glory,  sheds  abroad  his  love,  and  im^^arts  that  peace  which
passes  all  understanding.  Our  Lord  says,  "  If  a  man  love  me,  he
will  keep  my  words :  and  my  Father  will  love  him,  and  we  will
come  unto  him,  and  make  our  abode  with  him."  (John  xiv.  23.)
In  such  fellowship,  the  soul  must  be  holy  and  must  be  blessed.

The  Power  of  Prayer.

The  course  of  human  events  is  not  controlled  by  physical  force
alone.     There  are  other  powers  at  work  in  the  government  of  the


§  20.]  PRAYER.  709

world.  There  is  the  power  of  ideas,  true  or  false  ;  the  power  of
truth  ;  the  power  of  love  and  hviman  sympathy ;  the  power  of  con-
science ;  and  above  all,  the  Supreme  Power,  immanent  in  the
world  as  well  as  over  it,  which  is  an  intelligent,  voluntary,  per-
sonal power,  cooperating  with  and  controlling  the  operations  of  all
creatures,  without  violating  their  nature.  This  Supreme  Power
is  roused  into  action  by  prayer,  in  a  way  analogous  to  that  in
which  the  energies  of  a  man  are  called  into  action  by  the  entreat-
ies of  his  fellow-men.  This  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Bible  ;  it  is
perfectly  consistent  with  reason,  and  is  confirmed  by  the  whole
history  of  the  world,  and  especially  of  the  Church.  Moses  by
his  prayer  saved  the  Israelites  from  destruction  ;  at  the  prayer
of  Samuel  the  army  of  the  Philistines  was  dispersed  ;  "  Elias
was  a  man  subject  to  like  passions  as  we  are,  and  he  prayed  ear-
nestly that  it  might  not  rain  :  and  it  rained  not  on  the  earth  by
the  space  of  three  years  and  six  months.  And  he  prayed  again,
and  the  heavens  gave  rain,  and  the  earth  brought  forth  her  fruit."
These  facts  are  referred  to  by  the  Apostle  James,  for  the  purpose
of  proving  that  the  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  availeth  much.
Paul  constantly  begged  his  Christian  brethren  to  pray  for  him,
and  directed  that  prayer  should  "  be  made  for  all  men :  for  kings,
and  for  all  that  are  in  authority  ;  that  we  may  lead  a  quiet  and
peaceable  life  in  all  godhness  and  honesty."  This  of  course  sup-
poses that  prayer  is  a  power.  Queen  Mary  of  Scotland  was  not
beside  herself,  when  she  said  she  feared  the  prayers  of  John  I^ox,
more  than  an  army.  Once  admit  the  doctrine  of  theism,  that  is
of  the  existence  of  a  personal  God,  and  of  his  constant  control
over  all  things  out  of  Himself,  and  all  ground  for  doubt  as  to  the
efficacy  of  prayer  is  removed,  and  it  remains  to  us,  as  it  has  been
to  the  people  of  God  in  all  ages,  the  great  source  of  spiritual  joy
and  strength,  of  security  for  the  present  and  confidence  for  the
future.  The  Forty-sixth  Psalm  still  stands :  "  The  Loed  of
Hosts  is  with  us  ;  the  God  of  Jacob  is  our  refuge."


SYSTEMATIC    THEOLOGY


PART    IV.
ESCHATOLOGY.


CHAPTER    I.

STATE   OF   THE   SOUL  AFTEE   DEATH.

§  1.  Protestant  Doctrine.

The  Protestant  doctrine  on  the  state  of  the  soul  after  death
incUides,  first  of  all,  the  continued  conscious  existence  of  the  soul
after  the  dissolution  of  the  body.  This  is  opposed,  not  only  to
the  doctrine  that  the  soul  is  merely  a  function  of  the  body  and
perishes  with  it,  but  also  to  the  doctrine  of  the  sleep  of  the  soul
during  the  interval  between  death  and  the  resurrection.

The  former  doctrine  belongs  to  the  theory  of  materialism,  and
stands  or  falls  with  it.  If  there  be  no  substance  but  matter,  and
no  force  but  such  as  is  the  phenomenon  of  matter ;  and  if  the
form  in  which  physical  force  manifests  itself  as  mind,  or  mental
action,  depends  on  the  highly  organized  matter  of  the  brain,
then  when  the  brain  is  disorganized  the  mind  ceases  to  exist.
But  if  the  soul  and  body  are  two  distinct  substances,  then  the
dissolution  of  the  latter  does  not  necessarily  involve  the  end  of
the  conscious  existence  of  the  former.

There  is  another  view  on  this  subject  adopted  by  many  who
are  not  materialists,  but  who  still  hold  that  mind  cannot  act  or
manifest  itself  without  a  mateiial  organ.  Thus,  for  example,  the
late  Isaac  Taylor  says  that  as  extension  is  an  attribute  of  matter,
the  soul  without  a  body  cannot  be  extended.  But  extension  is  a
relation  to  space  ;  what  is  not  extended  is  consequently  nowhere.
"  We  might  as  well,"  he  says,  "  say  of  a  pure  spirit  that  it  is
hard,  heavy,  or  red,  or  that  it  is  a  cubic  foot  in  dimensions,  as
say  that  it  is  here  or  there,  or  that  it  has  come,  and  is  gone."
"  When  we  talk  of  absolute  immateriality,  and  wish  to  withdraw
mind  altogether  from  matter,  we  must  no  longer  allow  ourselves
to  imagine  that  it  is,  or  that  it  can  be,  in  any  place,  or  that  it
has  any  kind  of  relationship  to  the  visible  and  extended  uni-
verse." In  like  manner,  he  argues  that  mind  is  dependent
upon  its  corporeity,  or  union  with  matter,  for  its  relationship  to
time.  A  pure  spirit  could  not  tell  the  difference  between  a  mo-
ment and  a  century  ;  it  could  have  no  perception  of  the  equable


714    PART  IV.     Ch.  I  — state   OF   SOUL  AFTER  DEATH.

flow  of  duration,  for  that  is  a  knowledge  drawn  from  the  external
world  and  its  regular  motions.  To  its  union  with  matter,  mind
is  indebted  also  for  its  sensibility  or  sensations,  for  its  power  over
matter,  for  its  imaginative  emotions,  and  for  its  "  defined,  recog-
nizable individuality,"  and  of  course  for  its  personality.  The
soul  after  death,  therefore,  must  either  cease  its  activity,  at  least
in  reference  to  all  out  of  itself,  or  be  furnished  at  once  with  a
new  body.  The  latter  assumption  is  the  one  commonly  adopted.
"  Have  the  dead  ceased  to  exist  ?  "  he  asks,  "  Have  those  who  are
fallen  asleep  perished  ?  No  ;  —  for  there  is  a  spiritual  body,  and
another  vehicle  of  human  nature,  as  well  as  a  natural  body  ;  and,
therefore,  the  dissolution  of  this  animal  structure  leaves  the  life
untouched.  The  animal  body  is  not  itself  the  life,  nor  is  it  the
cause  of  life  ;  nor  again  is  the  spiritual  body  the  hfe,  nor  the
cause  of  it ;  but  the  one  as  well  as  the  other  are  the  instruments
of  the  mind,  and  the  necessary  medium  of  every  productive  exer-
cise of  its  faculties."  ^

On  this  theory  of  the  dependence  of  mind  on  matter,  "  for
every  productive  exercise  of  its  faculties,"  for  its  individuality,
and  its  susceptibilities,  it  may  be  remarked,  (1.)  That  the  the-
ory is  admitted  to  be  untrue  in  relation  to  God.  He  has  no
body  ;  and  He  can  act  and  be  acted  upon,  and  his  activity  is  pro-
ductive. If  such  be  the  case  with  God  who  is  a  pure  spirit,  it  is
altogether  arbitrary  to  deny  that  it  is  true  with  regard  to  the
human  soul.  Man  as  a  spirit  is  of  the  same  nature  with  God.
He  is  like  Him  in  all  that  is  essential  to  the  nature  of  a  spirit.
(2.)  The  theory  has  no  support  from  Scripture,  and,  therefore,  has
no  right  to  intrude  itself  into  the  explanation  of  Scriptural  doc-
trines. The  Bible  never  attributes  corporeity  to  angels ;  yet  it
ascribes  to  them  a  "  ubi "  ;  speaks  of  their  coming  and  going  ;
and  of  their  being  mighty  in  power  to  produce  effects  in  the  ma-
terial and  spiritual  worlds.  It  never  speaks  of  man's  having  any
other  body  besides  his  earthly  tabernacle,  and  the  body  which  he
is  to  have  at  the  resurrection.  And  yet  it  speaks  of  the  soul  as
active  and  conscious  when  absent  from  the  body  and  present  with
the  Lord.  (3.)  If  the  soul  is  a  substance  it  has  power,  power  of
self-manifestation,  and  productive  power  according  to  its  nature.
Electricity  may  be  a  force  in  nature  manifested  to  us,  in  our  pres-
ent state,  only  under  certain  conditions.  But  that  does  not  prove
that  it  is  active  only  under  those  conditions,  or  that  beings  consti-

1  Physical  Theory  of  Another  Life.  By  Isaac  Taylor.  New  York,  1852,  p.  23,  and
the  whole  of  chap.  ii.


§1.]  PROTESTANT  DOCTRINE.  715

tuted  differently  from  what  we  are,  may  not  be  cognizant  of  its
activity.  It  is  enough,  however,  that  the  theory  in  question  is
extra-scriptural,  and  therefore  has  no  authority  in  matters  of
faith.

It  is  no  less  evident  that  according  to  the  pantheistic  theory,
in  all  its  phases,  which  regards  man  as  only  one  of  the  transient
forms  of  God's  existence,  there  is  no  room  for  the  doctrine  of  the
conscious  existence  of  the  soul  after  death.  The  race  is  immor-
tal, but  the  individual  man  is  not.  Trees  and  flowers  cover  the
earth  from  generation  to  generation  ;  yet  the  same  flower  blooms
but  once.  The  mass  of  men  whose  convictions,  on  such  subjects,
are  founded  on  their  moral  and  religious  nature,  have  in  all  ages
believed  in  the  continued  existence  of  the  soul  after  death.  And
that  universality  of  belief  is  valid  evidence  of  the  truth  believed.
But  men  whose  opinions  are  under  the  control  of  the  speculative
understanding,  have  never  arrived  at  any  settled  conviction  on
this  subject.  To  be,  or  not  to  be  ?  was  a  question  speculation
could  not  answer.  The  dying  Hume  said  he  was  about  to  take
a  leap  in  the  dark.  The  continued  existence  of  the  soul  after
death  is  a  matter  of  divine  revelation.  It  was  part  of  the  faith
of  the  Church  before  the  coming  of  Christ.  The  revelation  of  all
the  great  doctrines  which  concern  the  destiny  and  salvation  of
men  has  been  indeed  progressive.  It  is  not,  therefore,  a  matter
of  surprise  that  the  doctrine  of  the  future  state  is  much  less
clearly  unfolded  in  the  Old  Testament  than  in  the  New.  Still  it
is  there.  When  the  Apostle  Paul  (2  Tim.  i.  10)  speaks  of  "  Our
Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  who  hath  abolished  death,  and  hath  brought
hfe  and  immortality  to  light  through  the  Gospel,"  he  is  not  to  be
understood  as  saying  that  the  future  life  was  unknown,  as  Arch-
bishop Whately  argues,  before  the  coming  of  Christ.  This
would  be  inconsistent  with  the  most  explicit  declarations  else-
where. It  is  often  said  that  Christ  came  to  preach  the  Gospel,
to  make  propitiation  for  sin,  and  to  reveal  the  way  of  reconcilia-
tion with  God.  Paul  says  in  Galatians  iii.  23,  "  before  faith
came  we  were  kept  under  the  law."  Yet  he  strenuously  insists
that  the  Gospel,  or  plan  of  salvation  which  he  taught,  was  taught
by  the  law  and  prophets  (Rom.  iii.  21)  ;  and  that  the  patriarchs
were  saved  by  faith  in  the  same  promise  on  which  sinners  are
now  called  upon  to  rely.  What  was  imperfectly  revealed  under
the  old  economy,  is  clearly  revealed  under  the  new.  This  is  all
that  those  passages  which  speak  of  the  Gospel  bringing  new
truths  to  light,  are  intended   to  teach.     Christ  shed  a  flood  of


716  PART  IV.  Ch.  L  — state  OF  SOUL  AFTER  DEATH.

light  on  tlie  darkness  beyond  the  grave.  Objects  before  dimly-
discerned  in  that  gloom,  now  stand  clearly  unveiled  ;  so  that  it
may  well  be  said  He  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light.  He
revealed  the  nature  of  this  future  state,  and  showed  how,  for  the
people  of  God,  that  state  was  one  of  life.  It  may  be  observed  in
passing,  that  many  Christian  writers  who  speak  of  the  doctrine
of  a  future  life  being  unknown,  at  least  to  the  patriarchs,  and  to
the  writers  of  the  Psalms,  mean  "  the  Christian  doctrine  "  on
that  subject.  They  do  not  intend  to  deny  that  the  people  of
God  from  the  beginning  believed  in  the  conscious  existence  of  the
soul  after  death.  This  Hengstenberg,  for  example,  distinctly
asserts  concerning  himself.^

Doctrine  of  a  Future  Life  revealed  under  the  Old  Testament.

1.  The  first  argument  on  this  subject  is  an  d  priori  one.  That
the  Hebrews,  God's  chosen  people,  the  recipients  and  custodians
of  a  supernatural  revelation,  should  be  the  only  nation  on  the
face  of  the  earth,  in  whose  religion  the  doctrine  of  a  future  state
had  no  place,  would  be  a  solecism.  It  is  absolutely  incredible,
for  it  supposes  human  nature  in  the  case  of  the  Hebrews  to  be
radically  different  from  what  it  is  in  other  men.

2.  Instead  of  the  Hebrews  having  lower  views  of  man  than  other
nations,  they  alone  were  possessed  of  the  truth  concerning  his  origin
and  nature.  They  had  been  taught  from  the  beginning  that  man
was  created  in  the  image  of  God,  and,  therefore,  like  God,  of  the
same  nature  as  a  spirit,  and  capable  of  fellowship  with  his  maker.
They  had  also  been  taught  that  man  was  created  immortal  ;  that
the  death  even  of  the  body,  was  a  punishment  ;  that  the  sen-
tence of  death  (in  the  sense  of  dissolution)  concerned  only  the
body.  "  Dust  thou  art,  and  unto  dust  shalt  thou  return."  The
soul  is  not  dust,  and  therefore,  according  to  the  earliest  theology
of  the  Hebrews,  was  not  to  return  to  dust ;  it  was  to  return  to
God  who  gave  it.

3.  We  accordingly  find  that  tliroughout  the  Old  Testament
Scriptures  the  highest  views  are  presented  of  the  nature  and  des-
tiny of  man.  He  is  the  child  of  God.  destined  to  enjoy  his  fel-
lowship and  favour  ;  the  possessions  and  enjoyments  of  earth  are
always  represented  as  temporary  and  insignificant,  not  adapted
to  meet  the  soul's  necessities  ;  they  were  taught  not  to  envy  the

1  Commentar  uher  die  Psalmen,  von  G.  W.  Hengstenberg.  Abhandlung  No.  7.  Zur
Glnubenslehre  der  Psalmen,  edit.  Berlin,  1847,  vol.  iv.  part  2.  On  p.  321,  he  says,  "  When
we  deny  the  doctrine  of  immortality  to  the  writers  of  the  Psalms,  it  is  in  the  Christian
sense"  of  the  word.


§  1]  PROTESTANT  DOCTRINE.  717

wicked  in  their  prosperity,  but  to  look  to  God  as  their  portion  ;
they  were  led  to  say,  "  Whom  have  I  in  heaven  but  thee?  and
there  is  none  upon  earth  that  I  desire  besides  thee ;  "  and  "  I  had
rather  be  a  door-keeper  in  the  house  of  my  God,  than  to  dwell
in  the  tents  of  wickedness."  In  the  Old  Testament,  the  right-
eous are  always  represented  as  strangers  and  pilgrims  upon  the
earth,  whose  home  and  whose  reward  are  not  in  this  world ;  that
their  portion  is  in  another  world,  and,  therefore,  that  it  is  better  to
be  the  humblest  and  most  afflicted  of  God's  people  than  to  be  the
most  prosperous  of  the  wicked.  The  judgments  of  God  are  repre-
sented as  falling  on  the  wicked  in  a  future  state,  and  thus  effect-
ually vindicating  the  justice  of  God  in  his  dealings  with  men.
The  Psalmist  said,  he  was  envious  at  the  foolish,  when  he  saw
the  prosperity  of  the  wicked,  until  he  went  into  the  sanctuary  of
God  and  miderstood  their  end.     In  contrasting  his  own  state  and

prospects  with  theirs,  he  said,  "  I  am  continually  with  thee

Thou  shalt  guide  me  with  thy  counsel,  and  afterward  receive  me
to  glory."  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  23,  24.)  Such  is  the  drift  and  spirit  of
the  Old  Testament  Scriptures.  Their  whole  tendency  was  to
raise  the  thoughts  of  the  people  from  the  present  and  turn  them
towards  the  future  ;  to  make  men  look  not  at  the  things  seen,  but
at  the  things  unseen  and  eternal.

4.  The  dead  in  the  Old  Testament  are  always  spoken  of  as
going  to  their  fathers,  as  descending  into  "  Sheol,"  i.  e.,  into  the
invisible  state,  which  the  Greeks  called  Hades.  Sheol  is  repre-
sented as  the  general  receptacle  or  abode  of  departed  spirits,  who
were  there  in  a  state  of  consciousness ;  some  in  a  state  of  misery,
others  in  a  state  of  happiness.  In  all  these  points  the  pagan  idea
of  Hades  corresponds  to  the  Scriptural  idea  of  Sheol.  All  souls
went  into  Hades,  some  dwelling  in  Tartarus,  others  in  El^^sium.
That  the  Hebrews  regarded  the  sou.ls  of  the  dead  as  retaining
their  consciousness  and  activity  is  obvious  from  the  practice  of
necromancy,  and  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  of  the  appearance  of
Samuel  to  Saul,  as  recorded  in  1  Samuel  xxviii.  The  represen-
tation given  in  Isaiah  xiv.  of  the  descent  of  the  King  of  Babylon,,
when  all  the  dead  rose  to  meet  and  to  reproach  him,  takes  for
granted  and  authenticates  the  popular  belief  in  the  continued
conscious  existence  of  departed  spirits.

5.  In  several  passages  of  the  Old  Testament,  the  doctrine  of  a
future  life  is  clearly  asserted.  We  know  ujjon  the  authority  of
the  New  Testament  that  the  Sixteenth  Psalm  is  to  be  understood
of  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  with  which,  the  Apostle  teaches  us,


718    PART   IV.     Ch.   I. -STATE    OF   SOUL   AFTER   DEATH.

that  of  his  people  is  inseparably  connected.  His  soul  was  not  to
be  left  in  Sheol ;  nor  was  his  body  to  see  corruption.  In  Psalm
xvii.  15,  after  having  described  the  cruelty  and  prosperity  of  the
wicked,  the  Psalmist  says,  in  regard  to  himself :  "  I  will  behold
thy  face  in  righteousness :  I  shall  be  satisfied,  when  I  awake,
with  thy  likeness."  Isaiah  xxvi.  19,  says  :  "  Thy  dead  men  shall
live,  together  with  my  dead  body  shall  they  arise.  Awake  and
sing,  ye  that  dwell  in  dust,  for  my  dew  is  as  the  dew  of  herbs,
and  the  earth  shall  cast  out  the  dead."  (Dan.  xii.  2.)  "And
many  of  them  that  sleep  in  the  dust  of  the  earth  shall  awake  ;
so]ne  to  everlasting  life,  and  some  to  shame  and  everlasting  con-
tempt. And  they  that  be  wise,  shall  shine  as  the  brightness
of  the  firmament ;  and  they  that  turn  many  to  righteous-
ness, as  the  stars  forever  and  ever."  These  prophetic  declara-
tions are  indeed  often  explained  as  referring  to  the  restoration  of
the  nation  from  a  state  of  depression  to  one  of  prosperity  and
glory.  But  the  language  employed,  the  context  in  which  there
is  clear  reference  to  the  ^Messianic  period,  and  the  sanction  given
by  Christ  and  his  Apostles  to  the  doctrine  taught  by  the  literal
sense  of  the  words  here  used,  are  considerations  decisive  in  favour
of  the  ordinary  interpretation,  which  is  adopted  by  Delitzsch,^
Hengstenberg,^  Oehler,^  and  many  others  of  the  modern  inter-
preters. Even  Mr.  Alger,  in  his  elaborate  work  on  the  doctrine
of  a  future  life,  concedes  the  point  so  far  as  the  passage  in  Daniel
is  concerned.  "  No  one,"  he  says,  "  can  denj^  that  a  judgment,
in  which  reward  and  punishment  shall  be  distributed  according
to  merit,  is  here  clearly  foretold."*  Those  German  writers  whose
views  of  inspiration  are  so  low  as  to  enable  them  to  interpret
each  book  of  the  Bible  as  the  production  of  an  individual  mind,
and  to  represent  the  several  writers  as  teaching  different  doc-
trines, in  many  cases  take  the  ground  that  in  the  early  books  of
the  Scriptures,  the  simple  fact  of  a  future  life  is  taken  for  granted,
but  not  taught,  and  that  nothing  was  made  known  as  to  the
nature  of  that  life.     Thus  Schultz  says,  "  That   all  the  books  of

1  Commentar  iiber  den  Psalter,  Leipzig,  18G0,  vol.  ii.  p.  420.

2  Commentar  iiber  die  Pgalmen,  Abhandlunr/  No.  7.  Berlin,  ISi?,  vol.  iv.  part  2,  p.
273  ff.

3  Veteris  Testamenti  Sententia  de  Rebus  post  Mortem  Futuris.  G.  F.  Oehler,  Stuttgart,
1840,  p.  50.

*  A  Ciitical  History  of  the  Doctrine  of  a  Future  Life,  loith  a  Complete  Bibliography  of
the  Subject.  By  William  Roiinseville  Alger.  Philadelphia,  1846,  p.  149.  The  Appendix,
an  instructive  volume,  being  "A  Catalogue  of  Works  relating  to  the  Nature,  Origin,  and
Destiny  of  the  Soul.  The  Titles  classiified  and  arranged  chronologically,  with  Notes  and
Indexes  of  Authors  and  Subjects.    By  Ezra  Abbot,"  is  a  marvel  of  ability  and  learning.


§1.]  PROTESTANT  DOCTRINE.  719

the  Old  Testament  assume  that  men  are  in  some  way  or  other  to
live  after  death.  Even  in  the  Pentateuch  this  is  taken  for
granted.  It  is  not  taught,  but  assumed  as  a  self-evident  truth,
immanent  in  the  consciousness  of  the  people."^

6.  It  is  to  be  remembered  that  we  have  in  the  New  Testament
an  inspired,  and,  therefore,  an  infallible  commentary  on  the  Old
Testament  Scriptures.  From  that  commentary  we  learn  that  the
Old  Testament  contains  much  which  otherwise  we  should  never
have  discovered.  Not  only  is  the  compass  of  the  truths  revealed
to  the  fathers  shown  to  be  far  greater  than  the  simple  words
would  suggest,  but  truths  are  declared  to  be  therein  taught,  which,
without  divine  assistance,  we  could  not  have  discovered.  There
is  another  thing  concerning  the  faith  of  the  Old  Testament  saints
to  be  taken  into  consideration.  They  may  have  understood,  and
probably  did  understand  their  Scriptures  far  better  than  we  are
disposed  to  think  possible.  They  had  the  advantage  of  the  con-
stant presence  of  inspired  men  to  lead  them  in  their  interpreta-
tion of  the  written  word,  and  they  enjoyed  the  inward  teaching
of  the  Holy  Spirit.  What  that  spiritual  illumination  availed  in
their  case,  we  cannot  tell ;  but  we  know  that  now  the  humble
Christian  who  submits  himself  to  the  teachings  of  the  Spirit,  un-
derstands the  Bible  far  better  than  any  mere  verbal  critic.

We  have  then  in  the  New  Testament  the  most  explicit  dec-
larations, not  only  that  the  doctrine  of  a  future  state  was  revealed
in  the  Old  Testament,  but  that  from  the  beginning  it  was  part
of  the  faith  of  the  people  of  God.  Our  Lord  in  refuting  the
Sadducees,  who  denied  not  only  the  resurrection  of  the  body,  but
also  the  conscious  existence  of  man  after  death,  and  the  existence
of  any  merely  spiritual  beings,  appeals  to  the  fact  that  in  the
Pentateuch,  the  authority  of  which  the  Sadducees  admitted,  God
is  familiarly  called  the  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  ;  but
as  He  is  the  God  not  of  the  dead  but  of  the  living,  the  designa-
tion referred  to  proves  that  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  are  now
living,  and  living  too  in  the  fellowship  and  enjoyment  of  God.
"  Christ,"  says  Mr.  Alger,  whom  we  quote  the  rather  because  he
belongs  to  the  class  of  men  who  call  themselves  liberal  Chris-
tians,'-^ "  Christ  once  reasoned  with  the  Sadducees  '  as  touching

1  Die  Vormissctzungen  dcr  christlichen  Lehre  von  der  Unsterblichkeit  dargestellt  von
Hermann  Schultz,  Dr.  der  Philosophie,  Licent.  der  Theologie,  etc.,  GiJttingen,  18G1,  p.
207.

-  On  page  438,  he  .^ays:  "The  essence  of  rationalism  is  the  affirmation  that  neither  the
fathers,  nor  the  t'hurch,  nor  the  Scriptures,  nor  all  of  them  together,  can  rightfully  estab-
lish any  proposition  opposed  to  the  logic  of  sound  philosophy,  the  principles  of  reason,  and


720    PART  IV.     Cn.   I.  — STATE   OF   SOUL   AFTER  DEATH.

the  dead,  that  they  rise ;'  in  other  words,  that  the  souls  of  men
upon  the  decease  of  the  body  pass  into  another  and  an  unend-
ing state  of  existence :  — '  Neither  can  they  die  any  more  ;  for
they  are  equal  with  the  angels,  and  are  the  children  of  God,
being  children  of  the  resurrection.'  His  argument  was,  that  God
is  the  God  of  the  living,  not  of  the  dead ;  that  is,  the  spiritual
nature  of  man  involves  such  a  relationship  with  God  as  pledges
his  attributes  to  its  perpetuity.  The  thought  which  supports  this
reasoning  penetrates  far  into  the  soul  and  grasps  the  moral  rela-
tions between  man  and  God.  It  is  most  interesting,  viewed
as  the  unqualified  affirmation  by  Jesus,  of  the  doctrine  of  a
future  life  which  shall  be  deathless."  ^  The  reasoning  of  Christ,
however,  is  not  only  an  affirmation  of  the  truth  of  the  doctrine
of  a  future  deathless  life,  but  an  affirmation  also  that  that  doe-
trine  is  taught  in  the  Old  Testament.  The  words  which  He
quotes  are  contained  in  the  book  of  Exodus  ;  and  those  words,
as  explained  by  Him,  teach  the  doctrine  of  the  blessed  and  un-
ending life  of  the  righteous.

That  the  Jews  when  Christ  came,  universally,  with  the  excep-
tion of  the  sect  of  the  Sadducees,  believed  in  a  future  life,  is  be-
yond dispute.  The  Jews  at  this  period  were  divided  into  three
sects  :  the  Sadducees,  who  were  materialistic  skeptics,  believing
neither  in  the  resurrection,  nor  in  angels,  nor  in  spirits ;  the  Es-
senes,  who  were  a  philosophical  and  ascetic  sect,  believing  that
the  souls  of  the  just  being  freed  at  death  from  the  prison  of  the
body,  rejoice  and  are  borne  aloft  where  a  happy  life  forever  is
decreed  to  the  virtuous ;  but  the  wicked  are  assigned  to  eternal
punishment  in  a  dark  cold  place  ;  ^  and  the  Pharisees,  who,  as
we  know  from  the  New  Testament,  believed  in  the  resurrection
of  the  body  in  the  sense  in  which  Paul  believed  that  doctrine
(Acts  xxvi.  6),  for  he  claimed  in  his  controversy  with  the  Sad-

the  evident  truth  of  nature.  Around  this  thesis  the  battle  has  been  fought  and  the  victory
won;  and  it  will  stand  with  spreading  favour  as  long  as  there  are  unenslaved  and  cultivated
minds  in  the  world.  This  position  is,  in  logical  necessity,  and  as  a  general  thing  in  fact,
that  of  the  large  though  loosely-cohering  body  of  believers  known  as  '  Liberal  Christians;'
and  it  is  tacitly  held  by  still  larger  and  evergrowing  numbers  nominally  connected
with  sects  that  officially  eschew  it  with  horror."  Mr.  Alger  doubtless  considered  this  as
simply  a  declaration  of  independence  of  human  authority  in  matters  of  religion.  To
other,  and  perhaps  to  wiser  men,  it  sounds  like  a  declaration  of  independence  of  God,  the
infinite  Reason;  as  an  assertion  that  the  Infinite  God  can  teach  him  nothing;  or,  at  least,
that  He  cannot  so  authenticate  his  teachings  as  to  render  them  authoritative.  The  men
are  to  be  pitied  who  have  no  better  knowledge  of  the  mysteries  of  the  present  and  the
future  than  is  to  be  found  in  themselves.

1  Alger,  ut  supra,  p.  340.

2  Josephus,  De  Bella  Judaico,  ii.  viii,  11;    Woi-ks,  edit.  Leipzig,  1827,  vol.  v.  pp.  215,
216,  [165.]


§  1.]  PROTESTANT   DOCTRINE.  721

ducees,  that  the  Pharisees  were  on  his  side.  They  believed  that
the  soul  was  in  its  nature  immortal ;  that  the  righteous  only  are
happy  after  death,  and  that  the  wicked  are  eternally  miserable.
That  the  Jews  derived  their  doctrine  from  their  OAvn  Scriptures  is
plain,  (1.)  Because  they  admitted  no  other  source  of  religious
knowledge.  The  Scriptures  were  their  rule  of  faith,  as  tliose
Scriptures  had  been  understood  and  explained  by  their  fathers.
(2.)  There  is  no  other  known  source  from  which  the  doctrine  of
a  future  state  as  held  by  the  Jews  in  the  time  of  Christ,  could
have  been  obtained.  The  doctrines,  whether  religious  or  philo-
sophical, of  their  heathen  neighbours  were  antagonistic  to  their
own.  This  is  true  even  of  the  doctrines  of  Zoroaster,  which  in
some  points  had  most  affinity  with  those  of  the  Jews.  (B.)  The
inspired  writers  of  the  New  Testament  teach  the  same  doctrines,
and  affirm  that  their  knowledge  was  derived  not  from  men,  but
from  the  revelation  of  God  as  contained  in  the  Old  Testament,
and  as  made  by  Christ.

A  few  of  the  passages  in  which  the  Apostles  teach  that  the
doctrine  of  a  future  life  was  known  to  the  patriarchs  before  the
coming  of  Christ,  are  the  following  :  Paul  was  arraigned  before
the  council  in  Jerusalem,  and  "  when  Paul  perceived  that  the
one  part  were  Sadducees,  and  the  other  Pharisees,  he  cried  out
in  the  council,  Men  and  brethren,  I  am  a  Pharisee,  the  son  of  a
Pharisee :  of  the  hope  and  resurrection  of  the  dead  I  am  called  in
question."  (Acts  xxiii.  6.)  He  here  declares  that  in  the  dispute
between  these  two  parties,  on  the  question  whether  the  doctrine
of  a  future  life  and  of  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  was  taught  in
the  Scriptures  which  both  parties  acknowledged,  he  sided  with
the  Pharisees.  Again  in  his  speech  before  Agrippa,  he  said  :
"  I  stand,  and  am  judged  for  the  hope  of  the  promise  made  of
God  unto  our  fathers  :  unto  which  promise  our  twelve  tribes  in-
stantly serving  God  day  and  night,  hope  to  come.  For  which
hope's  sake,  King  Agrippa,  I  am  accused  of  the  Jews.  AVhy
should  it  be  thought  a  thing  incredible  with  you,  that  God  should
raise  the  dead?"  (Acts  xxvi.  6-8.)  The  promise  to  which  he
refers  is  the  promise  of  redemption  through  the  Messiah,  which
redemption  includes  the  deliverance  of  his  people  from  the  power
of  death  and  other  evil  consequences  of  sin.  This  was  the  prom-
ise to  which  the  twelve  tribes  hoped  to  come.  The  belief,  there-
fore, in  a  future  life  is  thus  declared  to  have  been  a  part  of  the
religion  of  the  whole  Hebrew  nation.

In  Galatians  iii.  8,  the  Apostle  says,  God  "  preached  before
VOL,  III,  46


722  PART  IV.  Ch.  I.  — state  OF  SOUL  AFTER  DEATH.

the  gospel  unto  Abraham."  The  Gospel,  however,  in  the  Apos-
tle's sense  of  the  term,  is  the  glad  tidings  of  salvation  ;  and  sal-
vation is  deliverance  from  the  penalty  of  the  law  and  restoration
to  the  image  and  favour  of  God.  This  of  necessity  involves  the
idea  of  a  future  life ;  of  a  future  state  of  misery  from  which  the
soul  is  delivered,  and  of  a  future  state  of  glory  and  blessedness
into  which  it  is  introduced.  In  teaching,  therefore,  that  men  be-
fore the  coming  of  Christ  needed  and  desired  salvation,  in  the
Christian  sense  of  the  word,  the  Apostle  assumed  that  they  had
a  knowledge  of  the  evils  which  awaited  unpardoned  sinners  in
the  world  to  come.  The  evidence,  however,  that  the  New  Testa-
ment affords  of  the  fact  that  the  Hebrews  believed  in  a  future
state,  is  not  found  exclusively  in  direct  assertions  of  that  fact,
but  in  the  whole  nature  of  the  plan  of  salvation  therein  unfolded.
The  New  Testament  takes  for  granted  that  all  men,  since  the
apostasy  of  Adam,  are  in  a  state  of  sin  and  condemnation  ;  that
from  that  state  no  man  can  be  delivered  except  through  the  Mes-
siah, the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  the  only  Saviour  of  men.  It
is,  therefore,  taught  that  the  knowledge  of  this  Redeemer  was
communicated  to  our  race  from  the  beginning,  and  in  express
terms  in  the  promise  made  to  Abraham  ;  that  the  condition  of
salvation  was  then,  as  it  is  now,  faith  in  Christ ;  that  the  bless-
ings secured  for  believers  were  enjoyed  before  the  advent  of  the
Son  of  God  in  the  flesh,  as  well  as  since.  The  heaven  of  be-
lievers is  called  the  bosom  of  Abraham.  All  this  of  course  as-
sumes that  the  truths  made  known  in  the  New  Testament  are  in
their  germs  revealed  in  the  Old  ;  just  as  all  the  doctrines  un-
folded in  the  Epistles  are  contained  in  the  words  of  Christ  as
recorded  in  the  Gospels.

The  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  is  specially  devoted  to  the  object
of  unfolding  the  relation  between  the  Old  Dispensation  and  the
New.  The  former  was  the  shadow,  or  image,  of  the  latter.
What  in  the  New  is  taught  in  words,  in  the  Old,  was  taught
through  types.  That  men  are  sinners,  and  as  such  under  con-
demnation ;  that  sin  can  only  be  cleansed  by  blood,  or  that  the
expiation  of  guilt  by  a  vicarious  sacrifice  is  necessary  in  order  to
forgiveness  ;  that  men  therefore  are  saved  by  a  priest  appointed
to  draw  near  to  God  in  their  behalf  and  to  offer  gifts  and  sacri-
fices for  sin ;  and  that  the  effect  of  this  priestly  intervention  is
eternal  salvation,  are  said  to  be  the  truths  which  underlie  the
religion  of  the  Old  Testament,  as  they  constitute  the  life  of  the
religion  of  the  New.    Faith  was  to  the  saints  of  old  as  it  is  to  us,


§  1.]  PROTESTANT   DOCTRINE.  723

"  the  substance  of  things  hoped  for,  the  evidence  of  things  not
seen,"  They  wallced  by  faith,  and  not  by  sight.  They  hved  with
their  eyes  fixed  on  the  unseen  and  eternaL  It  was  the  future  that
filled  their  vision  and  elevated  them  above  the  present.  They
"  died  in  faith,  not  having  received  the  promises,  but  having  seen
them  afar  off,  and  were  persuaded  of  them,  and  embraced  them,
and  confessed  that  they  were  strangers  and  pilgrims  on  the  earth.
For  they  that  say  such  things  declare  plainly  that  they  seek  a
country.  And  truly,  if  they  had  been  mindful  of  that  country
from  whence  they  came  out,  they  might  have  had  opportunity  to
have  returned  ;  but  now  they  desire  a  better  country,  that  is,  an
heavenly  ;  wherefore  God  is  not  ashamed  to  be  called  their  God :
for  He  hath  prepared  for  them  a  city."  (Heb.  xi.  13-16.)  Moses
by  faith  chose  rather  "  to  suffer  affliction  with  the  people  of  God,
than  to  enjoy  the  pleasures  of  sin  for  a  season."  It  was  through
faith,  the  belief  and  hope  of  a  better  life  hereafter,  that  the  saints
of  old  "  subdued  kmgdoms,  wrought  righteousness,  obtained
promises,  stopped  the  mouths  of  lions,  quenched  the  violence  of
fire,  escaped  the  edge  of  the  sword,  out  of  weakness  were  made
strong,  waxed  valiant  in  fight,  turned  to  flight  the  armies  of  the
aliens.  Women  received  their  dead  raised  to  life  again :  and
others  were  tortured,  not  accepting  deliverance  ;  that  they  might
obtain  a  better  resurrection  :  and  others  had  trial  of  cruel  mock-
ings  and  scourgings,  yea,  moreover  of  bonds  and  imprisonment :
they  were  stoned,  they  were  sawn  asunder,  were  tempted,  were
slain  with  the  sword  :  they  wandered  about  in  sheep-skins  and
goat-skins  ;  being  destitute,  afflicted,  tormented  (of  whom  the
world  was  not  worthy)  ;  they  wandered  in  deserts,  and  in  moun-
tains, and  in  dens  and  caves  of  the  earth."  Nothing  more  than
this  can  be  said  of  Christian  confessors  and  martyrs.  The  faith
of  the  Old  Testament  saints  in  the  unseen  and  eternal  was,  there-
fore, as  strong  as  that  of  any  set  of  men  since  the  creation.  It
has  been  said  that  the  opinion  of  the  New  Testament  writers  is
of  no  weight  in  a  matter  of  criticism,  and,  therefore,  it  is  of  no
consequence  what  they  thought  about  the  teachings  of  the  Old
Testament.  This  is  true,  if  those  wi'iters  were  ordinary  men ;
but  if  they  spoke  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  then
what  they  said,  God  said.  We  have,  therefore,  the  sure  word  of
inspiration  that  the  people  of  God  from  the  beginning  of  the
world  have  beheved  in  a  state  of  conscious  existence  beyond  the
grave.  That  such  is  the  doctrine  of  the  New  Testament  is  not
disputed,  and  therefore  need  not  be  argued.


724  PART  IV.  Ch.  L— state  OF  SOUL  AFTER  DEATH.

The  Intermediate  State.

As  all  Christians  beUeve  in  the  resurrection  of  the  body  and  a
future  judgment,  they  all  believe  in  an  intermediate  state.  That
is,  they  believe  that  there  is  a  state  of  existence  which  intervenes
between  death  and  the  resurrection  ;  and  that  the  condition  of  the
departed  during  that  interval  is,  in  some  respects,  different  from
that  which  it  is  to  be  subsequent  to  that  event.  It  is  not,  there-
fore, as  to  the  fact  of  an  intermediate  state,  but  as  to  its  nature,
that  diversity  of  opinion  exists  among  Christians.

The  common  Protestant  doctrine  on  this  subject  is  tliat  "  the
souls  of  believers  are  at  their  death,  made  perfect  in  holiness,
and  do  immediately  pass  into  glory  ;  and  their  bodies,  being  still
united  to  Christ,  do  rest  in  their  graves  till  the  resurrection."
According  to  this  view  the  intermediate  state,  so  far  as  believers
are  concerned,  is  one  of  perfect  freedom  from  sin  and  suffering,
and  of  great  exaltation  and  blessedness.  This  is  perfectly  consist-
ent with  the  belief  that  after  the  second  coming  of  Christ,  and
the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  the  state  of  the  soul  will  be  still
more  exalted  and  blessed.

In  support  of  the  Protestant  doctrine  as  thus  stated,  it  may  be
remarked,

1.  That  it  is  simply  a  question  of  fact.  What  do  the  Scrip-
tures teach  as  to  the  state  of  the  soul  of  a  believer  immediately
after  death  ?  It  is  not  legitimate  to  decide  this  question  on
psychological  grounds ;  to  argue  that  such  is  the  nature  of  the
soul  that  it  cannot  retain  its  individuality,  or  personality,  when
separated  from  the  body  ;  or,  that  it  is  a  mere  function  of  the
brain  ;  or,  that  it  cannot  act  or  be  acted  upon  —  can  neither
perceive  nor  be  perceived  except  through  and  by  means  of  the
senses ;  or,  that  as  vegetable  and  animal  life  are  only  manifest  and
active  in  connection  with  some  form  of  matter,  in  other  words,
as  there  must  be  a  physical  basis  of  life,  so  the  soul  necessarily
requires  a  material  basis  for  its  manifestation  and  activity.  All
these  speculations,  or  theories,  are,  for  the  Christian,  of  no  account,
if  the  Bible  teaches  the  fact  of  the  continued,  personal,  individual
existence  of  the  soul  after  the  death  and  dissolution  of  the  body.
The  Bible  does  not  formally  teach  anthropology  in  either  of  the
branches  of  physiology  or  psychology,  as  a  department  of  human
science,  but  it  assumes  a  great  deal  that  falls  under  these  several
heads.  It  assumes  that  soul  and  body  in  man  are  two  distinct
substances  united  in  a  vital  union  so  as  to  constitute  the  man,  in


§1.]  PROTESTANT   DOCTRINE.  725

the  present  state  of  existence,  one  individual  person.  It  assumes
that  the  seat  of  this  personality  is  the  soul.  The  soul  is  the  self,
the  Ego,  of  which  'the  body  is  the  organ.  It  assumes  that  the
soul  continues  its  conscious  existence,  and  its  power  of  acting  and
of  being  acted  upon  after  its  separation  from  the  body.  This  we
have  seen  to  be  the  doctrine  of  the  whole  Bible.  The  dead,  ac-
cording to  the  Scriptures,  do  not  cease  to  be ;  they  do  not  cease
to  be  conscious  and  active.

There  is,  therefore,  nothing  in  the  psychology  of  the  Scriptures,
which  is  that  of  the  vast  majority  of  men,  learned  or  unlearned,
inconsistent  with  the  doctrine  that  the  souls  of  believers  do,  at
death,  immediately  pass  into  glory.

2.  According  to  the  Scriptures  and  the  faith  of  the  Church,
the  probation  of  man  ends  at  death.  As  the  tree  falls,  so  it  lies.
He  that  is  unjust  let  him  be  unjust  still,  and  he  that  is  righteous
let  him  be  righteous  still.  When  the  bridegroom  comes,  they
that  are  ready  enter  in,  and  the  door  is  shut.  According  to  the
parable  of  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus,  there  is  no  passing  after
death  from  one  state  to  another  ;  there  is  a  great  gulf  between  the
righteous  and  the  mcked  from  that  time  for  evermore.  It  is  ap-
pointed unto  all  men  once  to  die,  and  after  that  the  judgment.
The  destiny  of  the  soul  is  decided  at  death.

3.  There  is  no  satisfaction  to  be  rendered  in  the  future  life  for
the  sins  done  in  the  body.  The  Romish  doctrine  of  satisfactions
renders  necessary  the  assumption  of  a  purgatorial  state  after  death
for  those  who  have  not  in  this  life  made  full  expiation  for  their
sins.  But  if  the  one  offering  of  Christ  forever  perfects  them  that
believe ;  if  his  sacrifice  be  a  perfect  satisfaction  for  our  sins,  then
there  is  no  reason  why  believers  should  be  kept  out  of  blessedness
until  they  have  expiated  their  sins  by  their  own  sufferings.

4.  There  is  nothing  contrary  to  Scripture,  or  to  analogy,  in  the
assumption  of  a  sudden  and  immediate  change  from  imperfect  to
perfect  holiness.  The  Protestant  doctrine  is  that  the  souls  of  be-
lievers are  at  death  made  perfect  in  holiness.  But  it  is  asked,
what  sanctifying  power  is  there  in  death  ?  Progress  in  moral  ex-
cellence is  gradual ;  as  no  one  becomes  thoroughly  evil  by  one
act,  or  in  a  moment,  so,  it  is  said,  it  is  unreasonable  to  suppose
that  a  sudden  change  from  imperfect  to  perfect  moral  excellence
takes  place  at  the  moment  of  death.  This  objection  supposes
that  the  salvation  of  men  is  a  natural  process  ;  if  it  be  a  super-
natural work,  the  objection  has  no  for«e.  Curing  a  man  of  leprosy
was  a  slow  process ;  but  when  Christ  said  to  the  leper  "  I  will;


726  PART  IV.  Cii.  I.— STATE  OF  SOUL  AFTER  DEATH.

be  thou  clean,"  he  was  healed  in  a  moment.  The  change  which
takes  place  in  a  believer  at  death,  can  hardly  be  much  greater
than  that  instantaneously  produced  in  Paul  on  his  journey  to  Da-
mascus. Paul,  in  Galatians  i.  16,  attributes  that  change  to  the
revelation  of  the  Son  of  God  to  him.  If  the  momentary  vision  of
the  divine  glory  of  Christ  produced  such  an  effect  upon  the
Apostle,  is  it  strange  that  the  Scriptures  should  teach  that  the
souls  of  believers,  when  separated  from  the  world  and  the  flesh,
and  redeemed  from  the  power  of  the  devil,  and  bathed  in  the  full
brightness  of  the  glory  of  the  blessed  Redeemer,  should  in  a  mo-
ment be  purified  from  all  sin  ?

If,  therefore,  there  be  nothing  in  the  nature  of  the  soul  incon-
sistent with  its  separate  existence  ;  if  the  body  be  not  a  necessary
condition  of  its  consciousness  or  activity  ;  if  its  probation  termi-
nates at  death  ;  if  the  perfection  of  Christ's  work  precludes  all
necessity  of  future  satisfaction  for  sin ;  and  if  the  immediate
change  from  imperfect  to  perfect  holiness  be  consistent  with  the
analogy  of  faith,  then  there  is  no  «  priori  objection  to  the  doc-
trine that  the  souls  of  believers  at  death  do  immediately  pass  into
glory.

5.  That  such  is  the  doctrine  of  Scripture  may  be  argued  from
the  general  drift  of  the  sacred  volume,  so  far  as  this  subject  is
concerned.  The  Bible  constantly  speaks  of  the  present  life  as  a
state  of  conflict,  of  labour,  and  of  suffering  ;  and  of  death  as  the
entrance  into  rest.  There  remains  a  rest  for  the  people  of  God.
That  rest  follows  the  state  of  labour  and  trial.  Believers  then
cease  from  their  works.  The  rest  on  which  they  enter  is  not
merely  a  rest  from  conflict  and  sin,  but  a  rest  which  arises  from
the  attainment  of  the  end  of  their  being,  from  their  restoration  to
their  proper  relation  to  God,  and  all  their  capacities  being  satisfied
and  filled.

6.  Besides  these  general  considerations  the  doctrine  in  question
is  taught  in  many  passages  of  Scripture  with  more  or  less  distinct-
ness. Thus,  in  Revelation  xiv.  13,  the  Apostle  says,  "  I  heard  a
voice  from  heaven  saying  unto  me.  Write,  Blessed  are  the  dead
which  die  in  the  I^ord  from  henceforth  :  Yea,  saith  the  Spirit,
that  they  may  rest  from  their  labours  ;  and  their  works  do  follow
them."  The  simple  meaning  of  this  passage  is  that  those  who
die  in  the  Lord  are,  from  that  moment  onward,  in  a  state  of  bless-
ednesss  ;  because  they  cease  from  their  labours,  and  enter  on  the
reward  of  the  righteous.  Death  is  for  them  emancipation  from
evil,  and  the  introduction  into  a  state  of  happiness.


§1.]  PROTESTANT   DOCTRINE.  727

Our  Lord  constantly  teaches  concerning  those  who  believe  in
Him,  (1.)  That  they  are  not  condemned.  They  are  no  longer
under  the  sentence  of  the  law.  (2.)  That  they  have  eternal  life.
That  the  effect  of  the  union  between  Himself  and  them,  consum-
mated by  faith,  is  that  they  partake  of  his  life  in  a  sense  analo-
gous to  that  in  which  the  branch  partakes  of  the  life  of  the  vine.
As  He  lives  always,  those  who  partake  of  his  life  can  never  perish.
And  as  He  hves  unto  God,  so  the  life  of  his  people  is  a  holy  and
divine  life.  That  life,  from  its  nature,  is  an  unfailing  source  of
blessedness.  It  purifies,  exalts,  and  glorifies.  It  is  impossible
that  the  souls  in  which  Christ  thus  lives  should  remain  in  a  state
of  misery  and  degradation,  or  in  that  dreamy  state  of  existence  in
"  the  under-world  "  which  so  many  of  the  fathers  imagined  to  be
the  abode  of  the  departed  spirits  of  believers,  awaiting  the  second
coming  of  Christ.  (3.)  Our  Lord  promised  that  He  would  raise
his  people  from  the  dead  on  the  last  day.  It  would  seem,  there-
fore, to  be  involved  in  the  nature  of  the  redemption  of  Christ,  and
of  the  union  between  Him  and  his  people,  that  when  absent  from
the  body  they  are  present  with  the  Lord.  It  is  inconceivable  that
with  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelling  in  them,  which  is  the  Spirit  of
holiness  and  of  glory,  they  should  sink  at  death  into  a  lower  state
of  existence  than  that  which  they  enjoyed  in  this  world.  We  ac-
cordingly find  that  in  the  parable  of  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus,
Christ  says  :  "  The  beggar  died,  and  was  carried  by  the  angels  into
Abraham's  bosom."  (Luke  xvi.  22.)  The  implication  is  unde-
niable that  in  his  case  the  transition  was  immediate  from  earth
to  lieaven.  Still  more  explicit  is  the  declar;ition  of  our  Lord  to
the  penitent  thief,  "  To-day  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in  paradise."
(Luke  xxiii.  43.)  The  word  paradise  occurs  in  two  other  places
in  the  New  Testament.  In  2  Corinthians  xii.  4,  Paul  says  he
was  caught  up  into  paradise,  which  he  explains  by  saying  that  he
was  caught  up  into  the  third  heaven.  And  in  Revelation  ii.  7,
Christ  says  :  "  He  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit
saith  unto  the  churches  :  To  him  that  overcometh  will  I  give  to
eat  of  the  tree  of  life,  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the  paradise  of
God."  There  can,  therefore,  be  no  doubt  that  paradise  is  heaven,
and  consequently  when  Christ  promised  the  dying  thief  that  he
should  that  day  be  in  paradise,  he  promised  that  he  should  be  in
heaven.  It  would,  therefore,  seem  impossible  that  any  who  do
not  rest  their  faith  on  the  fathers  rather  than  on  the  Bible,  should
deny  that  the  souls  of  believers  do  at  death  immediately  pass  into
heaven.     The  fathers  made  a  distinction  between  paradise  and


728   PART  IV.  Ch.  L  — state  OF  SOUL  AFTER  DEATH.

heaven  which  is  not  found  in  the  Scriptures.  Some  of  tliem  re-
garded the  former  as  one  division  of  Hades,  corresponding  to  the
Elysivim  of  the  pagans  ;  others  located  it  somewhere  on  the  earth  ;
while  others  regarded  it  as  a  locality  high  up  above  the  earth,  but
below  the  dwelling-place  of  God.  These  are  mere  fancies.  The
word  heaven  is  indeed  a  term  of  wide  application  in  the  Bible  as
it  is  in  common  life.  We  speak  of  the  fowls  of  heaven  ;  of  the
stars  of  heaven  ;  of  our  Father  who  is  in  heaven ;  and  of  believers
being  the  citizens  of  heaven.  In  each  of  these  cases  the  word  has
a  different  sense.  Whether  paradise  and  heaven  are  the  same  is
a  mere  dispute  about  words.  If  the  word  heaven  be  taken  in  one
of  its  legitimate  senses,  they  are  the  same  ;  if  it  be  taken  in  an-
other of  its  senses,  they  are  not  the  same.  It  would  not  be  in  ac-
cordance with  Scriptural  usage  to  say  that  believers  are  now  in
paradise  ;  but  the  Apostle  does  say  they  are  now  iy  roh  iirovpaiauL<:
(Eph.  ii.  6),  {.  e.,  in  heaven.  Paradise,  as  the  word  is  used  by
Christ  and  his  Apostles,  is  the  place  where  Christ  now  is,  and
where  He  manifests  his  presence  and  glory.  Whether  it  is  the
place  where  He  will  finally  establish  his  kingdom  ;  and  whether
all  the  redeemed,  clothed  in  their  resurrection  bodies,  shall  there
be  gathered  together,  is  a  matter  of  which  we  have  no  knowledge,
and  in  which  we  need  take  no  interest.  All  we  need  know  is  that
it  is  where  Christ  is  ;  that  it  is  a  place  and  state  in  which  there  is
neither  sin  nor  sorrow,  and  where  the  saints  are  as  exalted  and
happy  as,  in  the  existing  circumstances  of  their  being,  it  is  pos-
sible for  them  to  be.  Whether  any,  in  obedience  to  patristic
usage,  choose  to  call  this  paradise  a  department  of  Hades,  is  a  mat-
ter of  no  concern.  All  that  the  dying  believer  need  know  is  that
he  goes  to  be  with  Christ.     That  to  him  is  heaven.

In  2  Corinthians  v.  2,  the  Apostle  says :  "  We  know,  that  if
our  earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle  were  dissolved,  we  have  a
building  of  God,  an  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the
heavens."  There  are  three  ways  in  which  these  words,  in  con-
nection with  those  which  follow,  are  interpreted.  (1.)  Accord-
ing: to  one  view,  the  house  not  made  with  hands  into  which  the
believer  is  received  at  death,  is  heaven.  (2.)  According  to  an-
other view  the  meaning  of  the  Apostle  is,  that  when  our  present
body  is  dissolved  the  soul  will  not  be  found  naked,  but  will  be
immediately  clothed  with  another  and  more  spiritual  body  suited
to  the  altered  state  of  its  existence.  (3.)  That  the  new  house
or  body  intended  is  the  resurrection  body.  The  second  of  these
interpretations  is  founded  on  a  gratuitous  assumption.    It  assumes


§1.]  PROTESTANT  DOCTRINE.  7"29

that  tlie  soul  is  furnished  with  a  body  of  which  the  Scriptuies
make  no  mention,  and  of  the  existence  of  which  we  have  no  evi-
dence. The  Bible  knows  nothing  of  any  human  body  save  that
which  we  now  have,  and  that  which  we  are  to  have  at  the  resur-
rection ;  the  one  natui-al,  the  other  spiritual.  The  third  interpre-
tation assumes  that  the  Apostles  erred  not  only  in  their  own  con-
victions, but  in  their  teaching.  It  assumes  that  what  they  tauglit
could  be  true  only  on  the  condition  that  the  second  coming  of
Christ  was  to  occur  while  the  men  of  that  generation  Avere  alive.
The  point,  however,  in  which  all  these  views  of  this  passage
agree,  is  the  only  one  which  concerns  the  question  under  consid-
eration. They  all  suppose  that  the  soul  is  received  into  a  state  of
blessedness  immediately  after  death.  This  the  Apostle  clearly
teaches.  As  soon  as  our  earthly  house  is  destroyed,  the  soul,  in-
stead of  being  left  houseless  and  homeless,  is  received  in  that
house  which  is  eternal  in  the  heavens.  "  We  are  always  confi-
dent," he  says,  "  knowing  that,  whilst  we  are  at  home  in  the
body,  we  are  absent  from  the  Lord :  we  are  confident,  I  say,  and
willing  rather  to  be  absent  from  the  body,  and  to  be  present  with
the  Lord."

In  Philippians  i.  23,  he  exjDresses  the  same  confidence :  "  For,"
he  says,  "  I  am  in  a  strait  betwixt  two,  having  a  desire  to  depart,
and  to  be  "with  Christ ;  which  is  far  better  :  nevertheless,  to
abide  in  the  flesh  is  more  needful  for  you."  Two  things  are  here
perfectly  plain  ;  first,  that  Paul  regards  the  state  of  the  soul  after
death  as  more  exalted  than  its  condition  while  in  the  flesh.  This
he  distinctly  asserts.  And,  secondly,  that  this  change  for  the
better  takes  place  immediately  after  death.  He  was  confident
that  as  soon  as  he  departed  he  woiild  be  with  Christ.  Both
these  pomts  are  conceded,  even  by  those  wdio  deny  the  doctrine
which  they  evidently  involve.  Some  say  that  Paul,  finding  that
Christ  did  not  come  as  soon  as  he  expected,  changed  his  opinion,
and  held  that  the  souls  of  believers  were  admitted  at  death  into
heaven,  instead  of  awaiting  the  second  advent  in  the  under-
world. The  fathers  said  that  while  the  great  body  of  believers
at  death  went  into  Hades,  some  few,  especially  the  martyrs,  were
admitted  at  once  into  heaven.  Mr.  Alger  conjectures  that  "  we
may  assume  ....  that  Paul  believed  there  would  be  vouchsafed
to  the  faithful  Christian  during  his  transient  abode  in  tlie  under-
Avorld  a  more  intimate  and  blessed  spiritual  fellowship  with  his
l^Iaster  than  he  could  experience  while  in  the  flesh."  ^    All  this  is

1  Alger,  ut  supra,  p.  290.


780   PART  IV.  Cn.  I. —  STATE  OF  SOUL  AFTER  DEATH.

floundering.  The  simple  fact  is  that  the  inspired  Apostle  confi-
dently anticipated  for  himself,  and  evidently  for  his  fellow-believ-
ers, immediate  admission  at  death  to  the  presence  of  Christ.  The
ancients  regarded  the  "  under-world  "  or  Hades,  as  "  a  gloomy
prison,"  as  Mr.  Alger  himself  calls  it.  That  Paul  should  have
desired  death  in  order  that  he  should  be  thrust  into  a  dungeon,
no  man  can  believe.

The  Scriptures  represent  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  as  being
in  heaven.  The  good,  at  death,  are  carried  by  angels  to  Abra-
ham's bosom.  Moses  and  Elijah  appeared  in  glory  on  the  mount
of  transfiguration,  conversing  mth  Christ.  In  the  Epistle  to  the
Hebrews,  it  is  said,  "  Ye  are  come  unto  Mount  Sion,  and  unto  the
city  of  the  living  God,  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  and  to  an  innu-
merable company  of  angels,  to  the  general  assembly  and  church
of  the  first  born,  which  are  written  in  heaven,  and  to  God  the
Judge  of  all,  and  to  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect,  and  to
Jesus  the  mediator  of  the  new  covenant,  and  to  the  blood  of
sprinkling,  that  speaketh  better  things  than  that  of  Abel."
Nothing  can  be  more  utterly  inconsistent  with  the  nature  of  the
Gospel,  than  the  idea  that  the  fire  of  divine  life  as  it  glows  in  the
hearts  of  God's  elect,  is,  at  death,  to  be  quenched  in  the  damp
darkness  of  an  underground  prison,  until  the  time  of  the  resur-
rection.

§  2.   The  Sleep  of  the  Soul.

The  doctrine  that  the  soul  exists,  during  the  interval  between
death  and  the  resurrection,  in  a  state  of  unconscious  repose,
properly  supposes  the  soul  to  be  a  distinct  substance  from  the
body.  It  is  therefore  to  be  distinguished  from  the  materialistic
theory,  which  assumes  that  as  matter  in  certain  states  and  combi-
nations exhibits  the  phenomena  of  magnetism  or  light,  so  in  other
combinations  it  exhibits  the  phenomena  of  life,  and  in  others  the
phenomena  of  mind,  and  hence  that  vital  and  mental  activity  are
as  much  the  result  or  effect  of  the  molecular  arrangements  of
matter,  as  any  physical  operations  in  the  external  world.  As  in
this  view  it  would  be  absurd  to  speak  of  the  sleep  or  quietude  of
masfnetism  or  light  when  the  conditions  of  their  existence  are
absent,  so  it  would  be  equally  absurd,  on  this  theory,  to  speak  of
the  sleep  of  the  soul  after  the  dissolution  of  the  body.

The  doctrine  of  the  sleep  of  the  soul,  moreover,  is  not  identi-
cal with  that  which  assumes  that,  although  matter  is  in  none  of
its  combinations  the  cause  of  mental  activity,  yet  that  it  is  the
necessary  condition  (so  far  as  man  is  concerned)  of  its  manifesta-


§2.]  THE    SLEEP   OF   THE    SOUL.  731

tion.  The  best  of  scientific  men  teach  with  regai'd  to  life,  or
vital  force,  that  it  is  not  the  result  of  material  combinations,  but
that  such  combination  is  necessary  to  its  manifestation.  "  We
recognize  that  these  [vital]  phenomena,"  says  Professor  Nichol-
son, "  are  never  manifested  except  by  certain  forms  of  matter,  or,
it  may  be,  by  but  a  single  form  of  matter.  We  conclude,  there-
fore, that  there  must  be  an  intimate  connection  between  vital
phenomena  and  the  '  matter  of  life ; '  but  we  can  go  no  further
than  this,  and  the  premises  do  not  in  any  way  warrant  the  asser-
tion that  life  is  the  result  of  living  ma,tter,  or  one  of  its  proper-
ties." "  The  more  philosophical  view  as  to  the  nature  of  the
connection  between  life  and  its  material  basis,  is  the  one  which
regards  vitality  as  something  superadded  and  foreign  to  the  mat-
ter by  which  vital  phenomena  are  manifested.  Protoplasm  is  es-
sential as  the  physical  medium  through  which  vital  action  may
be  manifested  ;  just  as  a  conductor  is  essential  to  the  manifesta-
tion of  electric  phenomena,  or  just  as  a  paint-brush  and  colours
are  essential  to  the  artist.  Because  metal  conducts  the  electric
current,  and  renders  it  perceptible  to  our  senses,  no  one  thinks  of
therefore  asserting  that  electricity  is  one  of  the  inherent  proper-
ties of  a  metal,  any  more  than  one  would  feel  inclined  to  assert
that  the  power  of  painting  was  inherent  in  the  camel's  hair  or  in
the  dead  pigments.  Behind  the  material  substratum,  in  all  cases,
is  the  active  and  living  force ;  and  we  have  no  right  to  assume
that  the  force  ceases  to  exist  when  its  physical  basis  is  removed,
though  it  is  no  longer  perceptible  to  our  senses.  It  is,  on  the
contrary,  quite  conceivable  theoretically  that  the  vital  forces  of
an  organism  should  suffer  no  change  by  the  destruction  of  the
physical  basis,  just  as  electricity  would  continue  to  subsist  in  a
world  composed  universally  of  non-conductors.  In  neither  case
could  the  force  manifest  its  presence,  or  be  brought  into  any
perceptible  relation  with  the  outer  world ;  but  in  neither  case
should  we  have  the  smallest  ground  for  assuming  that  the  power
was  necessarily  non-extant."  ^

This  view  when  transferred  to  the  soul,  or  mental  phenomena,
may  be  applied  in  three  different  forms  to  the  doctrine  of  the
state  of  man  after  death.  First,  God  may  be  regarded  as  the
universal  mind-force  which  manifests  itself  through  the  human
brain  as  electricity  does  through  a  conductor.     When  the  brain  is

1  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  Biology,  by  H.  Alleyne  Nicholson,  M.  D.,  D.  Sc,  Ph.  P.,
F.  R.  S.  E.,  F.  G.  S.,  etc.,  Professor  of  Natural  History  and  Botany  in  University  College,
Toronto,  etc.,  etc.     Edinburgh  and  London,  1872,  pp.  8  and  11.


732       PART  IV.     Ch.   I. -state    OF   SOUL   AFTER   DEATH.     '■

disintegrated,  the  mind-force  remains,  but  not  the  individual  man.
Secondly,  we  may  assume  the  realistic  doctrine  of  generic  human-
ity, manifesting  itself  in  connection  with  proper  corporeal  organ-
izations. Here  again,  it  would  seem  to  follow  that  when  any
individual  human  body  is  dissolved,  the  generic  human  life  re-
mains, but  not  the  man.  This  is  nearly  the  doctrine  of  Olshau-
sen,  before  referred  to.  He  held  that  the  individuality  of  man
depends  on  the  body  ;  so  that  without  a  body  there  can  be  no
soul ;  that  the  only  existence  of  the  soul  of  man  possible  between
death  and  the  resurrection  must  be  the  scattered  dust  of  its  human
frame.  Thirdly,  we  may  take  the  doctrine  of  Swedenborg,  who
taught  that  man  has  two  bodies,  an  exterior  and  interior,  a  mate-
rial and  spiritual,  and  that  it  is  the  former  only  that  dies  ;  the  lat-
ter remains  as  the  organ  of  the  soul.  Or,  as  others  believe,  the
new,  or  spiritual,  or  resurrection  body  is  provided  at  the  moment
of  death,  so  that  the  soul  passes  from  its  earthly  to  its  heavenly
tabernacle  in  a  moment.  In  none  of  these  forms,  however,  is
this  theory  of  the  absolute  dependence  of  the  soul  for  its  power
of  seK-manifestation  properly  applicable  to  the  doctrine  of  the
sleep  of  the  soul  after  death.  It  is  nevertheless  probable  that
those  who  advocated  this  doctrine,  in  different  periods  in  the  his-
tory of  the  Chiirch,  had  some  such  theory  underlying  their
views.

Eusebius  ^  mentions  a  small  sect  of  Christians  in  Arabia  who
held  that  the  soul  remained  unconscious  from  death  to  the  res-
urrection. At  the  time  of  the  Reformation  there  was  such  a
revival  of  that  doctrine  that  Calvin  deemed  it  expedient  to  write
an  essay  devoted  to  its  refutation.  Socinus  also  taught  that  the
soul  after  death  perceived  and  received  nothing  out  of  itself,  al-
though it  remained  self-conscious  and  self-contemplative.  Arch-
bishop Whately  ^  sajs  that,  so  far  as  the  Scriptures  are  concerned,
it  is  an  open  question  whether  the  soul  remains  in  a  conscious
state  after  death  or  not.  In  the  third  lecture  he  gives  reasons
which  favour  the  view  of  continued  consciousness  ;  and  in  the
fourth,  those  which  seem  to  teach  the  opposite  doctrine.  To  the
understanding,  he  says,  there  is  no  difference  between  tlie  two
views ;  although  to  the  imagination,  the  difference  is  great.  In
the  consciousness  of  the  soul  of  the  believer,  in  either  case,  en-
trance into  heaven  would  instantaneously  succeed  death.     An  in-

1  Ecclesiastica  Ilistorin,  vi.  xxxvii.;  edit.  Cambridge,  1720,  p.  299.

2  A  View  of  the  Scripture  Rcveldtions  concerning  a  Future  State,  by  Richard  Whately,
U.  D.,  Archbishop  of  Dubliu.     Philadelphia,  1856.


§  3.]  PATRISTIC   DOCTPJXE.  738

terval  of  which  the  soul  was  unconscious,  would,  for  it,  have  no
existence.  The  archbishop  for  himself  thinks  that  the  arguments
on  the  one  side  are  as  strong  as  those  on  the  other.  The  two
considerations  which  seem  to  him  to  favour  the  doctrine  of  the
sleep  of  the  soul  between  death  and  the  resurrection,  are,  first  the
fact  that  death  is  so  often  called  a  sleep.  The  dead  are  those  who
are  asleep.  (1  Thess.  xiv.  4.)  This  expression  cannot  properly
be  understood  of  the  body.  A  dead  body  can  no  more  be  said  to
sleep  than  a  stone.  The  fair  intimation,  therefore,  is,  as  the
Archbishop  thinks,  that  the  soul  sleeps  when  the  body  dies.  The
second  consideration  is  that  the  New  Testament  clearly  teaches
that  there  is  a  solemn  final  judgment  at  the  last  day,  when  the
destiny  of  each  soul  Avill  be  decided  for  eternity.  But  this  ap-
pears inconsistent  with  the  doctrine  that  the  fate  of  the  soul  is
decided  immediately  after  it  leaves  the  body.  He  admits  that,
according  to  the  Scriptures,  probation  ends  with  this  life,  and
therefore  if  the  righteous  at  death  pass  into  a  state  of  happiness
and  the  mcked  into  a  state  of  misery,  they  are  thereby  judged ;
and  there  is  no  apparent  necessity  for  a  future  judgment.  It  is
obvious  that  these  arguments  have  little  force  against  the  clear
teachings  of  the  Bible,  and  the  faith  of  the  Church  universal,
and  indeed  of  all  mankind.  As  to  the  first  of  the  above  men-
tioned arguments,  it  is  enough  to  say,  that  as  a  dead  body  and
a  body  asleep  are  so  much  alike  in  appearance,  it  is  the  most
natural  thing  in  the  world  to  speak  of  death  as  an  unending
sleep.  This  is  done  continually  by  those  who  are  firm  believers
in  the  continued  conscious  activity  of  the  soul  after  death.  The
other  argument  has,  if  possible,  still  less  weight.  Although  the
fate  of  every  man  should  be  decided  for  himself  and  to  his
knowledge  at  the  moment  of  death,  there  may  be  important  and
numerous  reasons  why  there  should  be  a  public,  solemn  adjudica-
tion at  the  last  day,  when  the  secrets  of  all  hearts  shall  be  made
known,  and  the  justice  of  God  revealed  in  the  presence  of  men
and  angels.

§  3.  Patristic  Doctrine  of  the  Intermediate  State.

Although  the  true  doctrine  concerning  the  state  of  the  dead
was,  as  has  been  shown,  revealed  in  the  Old  Testament,  it  was
more  or  less  perverted  in  the  minds  of  the  people.  The  prevalent
idea  was  that  all  souls  after  death  descended  into  Sheol,  and  there
remained  in  expectation  of  the  coming  of  the  Messiah.  When
He  came  it  was  expected  that  the  Jews,  or  at  least,  the  faithful,


734   PART  IV.  Ch.  L  — state  OF  SOUL  AFTER  DEATH.

would  bo  raised  from  the  dead,  and  made  partakers  of  all  the
glories  and  blessedness  of  the  Messiah's  reign.  The  views  pre-
sented in  the  writings  of  the  Rabbins  of  the  condition  of  the
souls  in  Sheol  are  not  only  diverse  but  inconsistent.  The  com-
mon representation  was  that  Sheol  itself  was  a  gloomy,  subter-
raneous abode,  whose  inhabitants  were  shades,  weak  and  power-
less, existing  in  a  dreamy  state  ;  the  best  of  them  not  in  a  state
of  suffering,  and  yet  with  no  other  enjoyment  than  the  anticipa-
tion of  deliverance  when  the  Messiah  should  come.  At  other
times,  however,  more  life  was  attributed  to  the  souls  of  the  de-
parted ;  and  Sheol  was  represented  as  divided  into  two  depart-
ments. Paradise  and  Gehenna.  In  the  former  were,  according  to
some,  all  Jews,  according  to  others  only  those  who  had  faithfully
observed  the  law  ;  and  in  the  other,  the  Gentiles.  The  common
opinion  was  that  all  the  Jews  wovdd  be  raised  from  the  dead,
when  the  Messiah  came,  and  all  the  Gentiles  left  forever  in  the
abode  of  darkness.  Paradise,  according  to  this  view,  was  a  place
of  positive  enjoyment,  and  Gehenna  a  place  of  positive  suffer-
ing. It  is  evident  that  there  is  no  great  difference  between  this
Jewish  doctrine  in  its  essential  features,  and  the  true  doctrine  as
presented  by  our  Lord  in  the  parable  of  the  rich  man  and  Laz-
arus. Both  are  represented  as  going  into  Sheol  or  Hades.  The
one  was  comforted,  the  other  tormented.  There  was  an  in-
separable barrier  between  the  two.  So  far  both  doctrines  agree.
When  the  Rabbi  Jochanan  was  dying,  he  said,  "  Two  paths  open
before  me,  the  one  leading  to  bliss,  the  other  to  torments ;  and  I
know  not  which  of  them  will  be  my  doom."  ^  "  Paradise  is  sep-
arated from  hell  by  a  distance  no  greater  than  the  width  of  a
thread."  2

According  to  many  modern  interpreters  the  New  Testament
writers  adopted  this  Jemsh  doctrine  not  only  in  substance  but  in
its  details.  (1.)  They  are  represented  as  teaching  that  all  the
people  of  God  who  died  before  the  advent  of  Cln-ist,  were  con-
fined in  Sheol,  or  the  under-world.  Sheol  or  Hades,  as  stated
above,  is  constantly  spoken  of  "  as  the  gloomy  realm  of  shades,
wherein  are  gathered  and  detained  the  souls  of  all  the  dead  gen-
erations." The  soul  at  death  is  said  to  be  dismissed  "naked
into,  the  silent,  dark,  and  dreary  region  of  the  under- world."
(2.)  That  when  Christ  died  upon  the  cross.  He  descended  "  ad
inferos,"  into  Hades,  or  Hell,  for  the  purpose  of  delivering  the

1  Talmud,  Tract.  Bnrachoth ;  (Quoted  by  Al<rev,  p.  167.

*  Eisenmenger,  Entdtchte$  Judenthum,  Konigsberg,  1711 ;  ii.  cap.  v.  p.  315.


§3.]  ■  PATRISTIC  DOCTRINE.  78o

pious  dead  from  their  prison ;  and  that  they  were  the  redeemed
captives  of  whom  the  Apostle  speaks  in  Ephesians  iv.  8-10,  as  led
by  Christ  into  heaven.,  (3.)  That  those  who  die  in  the  Lord
since  his  advent,  instead  of  being  admitted  into  heaven,  pass  into
the  same  place  and  the  same  state  into  which  the  patriarch  passed
at  death  before  his  coming.  (4.)  And  as  the  Old  Testament
saints  remained  in  Sheol  until  the  first  coming  of  the  Messiah,  so
those  who  die  under  the  New  Testament,  are  to  remain  in  Hades,
until  his  second  coming.  Then  they  are  not  only  to  be  delivered
from  Sheol,  but  their  bodies  are  to  be  raised  from  the  dead,  and
soul  and  body,  reunited  and  glorified,  are  to  be  admitted  into
heaven.

Such  is  the  scheme  of  doctrine  said  to  be  taught  in  the  New  Tes-
tament. Our  Lord  is  regarded  as  giving  it  his  sanction  in  the  par-
able concerning  Lazarus.  Paul  is  made  to  teach  it  when  he  sj)eaks
of  Christ  as  descending  to  "  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth,"  which  is
said  to  mean  "  the  parts  lower  than  the  earth,"  that  is,  the  un-
der-world. His  object  in  thus  descending  was,  according  to  the
theory,  to  deliver  the  souls  confined  in  the  gloomy  prison  of
Sheol.  Christ's  triumph  over  principahties  and  powers  is  referred
to  the  same  event,  his  descent  into  Hades.  Mr.  Alger,  repre-
senting a  large  class  of  writers,  says  that  according  to  Paul's
doctrine,  "•  Christ  was  the  first  person  clothed  with  humanity  and
experiencing  death,  admitted  into  heaven.  Of  all  the  hosts  who
had  lived  and  died,  every  one  had  gone  down  into  the  dusky
under-world.  They  were  all  held  in  durance  waiting  for  the
Great  Deliverer."  ^  The  fate  of  those  who  die  since  the  advent
is  no  better,  for  they,  as  Paul  is  made  to  teach,  are  "  all  to  remain
in  the  under-world  "  until  the  second  coming  of  Christ,  "  when
they  and  the  transformed  living  shall  ascend  together  with  the
Lord."  2

St.  Peter  is  made  to  teach  the  same  doctrine  in  still  more  ex-
plicit terms.  In  his  discourse  delivered  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,
he  argued  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ  from  the  fact  that  God  raised
Him  from  the  dead.  That  He  was  thus  raised  he  argued  from
the  sixteenth  Psalm,  where  it  is  written,  "  Thou  wilt  not  leave
my  soul  in  hell,  neither  wilt  thou  suffer  thine  Holy  One  to  see
corruption."  That  these  words  cannot  refer  to  David,  Peter  ar-
gued, because  he  did  see  corruption,  and  his  sepulchre  remained
until  that  day.  The  words  of  the  Psalmist,  therefore,  must  be
understood  of  Christ,  whose  soul  was  not  left  in  hell  (Sheol),
1  Alger,  ut  supra,  p.  284.  2  Jbid,  p.  288.


736  PART  IV.  Ch.  I.  — state  OF  SOUL  AFTER  DEATH.

neither  did  his  flesh  see  corruption.  As  for  David,  he  "  is  not  as-
cended into  heaven."  (Acts  ii.  34.)  Something,  therefore,  hap-
pened to  Christ  that  did  not  happen  to  David  or  to  any  other
man.  Christ  was  not  left  in  hell ;  David  and  all  other  men  were
thus  left.  Christ  did  ascend  to  heaven ;  David  did  not ;  and  if
David  did  not,  then  other  saints  of  his  time  did  not.  Thus  it  is
that  Peter  is  made  to  teach  that  the  souls  of  the  pious  dead  do
not  ascend  to  heaven,  but  descend  to  the  gloomy  abode  of  Slieol,
Hades,  or  Hell,  all  these  terms  being  equivalent.  This  exposition
of  the  Apostle's  teaching  is  plausible,  and  if  consistent  with  other
parts  of  Scripture,  might  be  accepted.  But  as  it  contradicts  what
the  Bible  clearly  teaches  in  many  other  places,  it  must  be  rejected.
Peter's  object  was  to  prove  the  Messiahship  of  Christ  from  the
fact  of  the  resurrection  of  his  body.  The  essential  idea  of  "  rising
from  the  dead  "  was  the  restoration  of  the  body  to  life.  The  soul
does  not  die,  and  is  not  raised.  The  Apostle  proved  that  Clirist's
body  did  not  see  corruption,  but  was  restored  to  life ;  first,  be-
cause it  was  a  historical  fact  of  which  he  and  his  brethren  were
witnesses ;  and  secondly,  from  the  prediction  of  the  Psalmist  that
the  Messiah  was  not  to  remain  in  the  grave.  That  the  sixteenth
Psahn  does  not  refer  to  David,  he  argued,  because  David  died  and
was  buried ;  his  body  did  see  corruption ;  his  sepulchre  remained
among  them  ;  he,  his  body,  he,  as  a  man  composed  of  soul  and
body,  had  not  ascended  to  heaven.  The  whole  argument  concerns
the  body ;  because  it  is  true  only  of  the  body,  that  it  dies,  is
buried,  sees  corruption,  and  does  not  ascend  to  heaven.  The
simple  meaning  of  Psahn  xvi.  10,  is  that  the  person  there  spoken
of  was  not  to  remain  under  the  power  of  death.  He  was  to  rise
from  the  dead  before  his  body  had  time  to  see  corruption.  This
is  all  that  the  passage  teaches.  This  is  true  of  Christ ;  it  was
not  true  of  David  or  of  any  of  the  saints  who  died  before  the  ad-
vent ;  and  it  is  not  true  of  those  who  have  died  since  the  advent.
In  this  respect,  as  in  so  many  others,  Christ  stands  gloriously
alone.

The  difficult  passage  1  Peter  iii.  18,  19,  however  it  may  be  in-
terpreted, proves  nothing  against  the  Protestant  doctrine  that  the
souls  of  believers  do  at  death  immediately  pass  into  glory.  What
happens  to  ordinary  men  happened  to  Christ  when  He  died.  His
cold  and  lifeless  body  was  laid  in  the  tomb.  His  human  soul
passed  into  the  invisible  world.  This  is  all  that  the  creed,  com-
monly called  the  Apostle's,  means,  when  it  says  Christ  was  buried,
and  descended  into  Hell,  or  Hades,  the  miseen  world.     This  is


§3.J  PATRISTIC   DOCTRINE.  737

all  that  the  passage  in  question  clearly  teaches.  Men  may  doubt
and  differ  as  to  what  Christ  did  during  the  three  days  of  his  so-
journ in  the  invisible  world.  They  may  differ  as  to  who  the
spirits  in  prison  were  to  whom  he  preached,  or,  rather,  made
proclamation  {iKi'jfjvUv}  ;  whether  they  were  the  antediluvians  ;  or,
the  souls  of  the  people  of  God  detained  in  Sheol ;  or,  the  mass  of
the  dead  of  all  antecedent  generations  and  of  all  nations,  which  is
the  favorite  hypothesis  of  modern  interpreters.  They  may  differ
also  as  to  what  the  proclamation  was  which  Christ  made  to  those
imprisoned  spirits ;  whether  it  was  the  gospel ;  or  his  own  tri-
umph ;  or  deliverance  from  Sheol ;  or  the  coming  judgment.
However  these  subordinate  questions  may  be  decided,  all  that
remains  certain  is  that  Christ,  after  his  death  upon  the  cross,  en-
tered the  invisible  Avorld,  and  there,  in  some  way,  made  procla-
mation of  what  He  had  done  on  earth.  All  this  is  very  far  from
teaching  the  doctrine  of  a  "  Limbus  Patrum,"  as  taught  by  the
Jews,  the  Fathers,  or  the  Romanists.

It  is  a  great  mistake  m  interpretation  of  the  New  Testament,
to  bring  down  its  teachings  to  the  level  of  Jewish  or  Pagan  ideas.
Because  the  Jews  expected  the  Messiah  to  establish  an  earthly
kingdom,  it  is  inferred  that  the  kingdom  of  God,  as  proclaimed
by  Christ  and  his  Apostles,  was  to  be  realized  in  this  life.  Be-
cause they  expected  that  the  Messiah  was  to  deliver  the  souls  of
their  fathers  from  Sheol,  it  is  assumed  that  this  was  the  work  ac-
tually effected  by  Christ.  Because  the  Jews  regarded  imprison-
ment in  the  under-world  as  the  special  penalty  of  sin,  it  is  inferred
that  deliverance  from  that  imprisonment  was  the  redemption  our
Lord  actually  effected.  This  is  to  interpret  the  Scriptures  by  the
Talmud  and  Cabala,  and  not  Scripture  by  Scripture.  This  is
historical  interpretation  "  en  oiitre."  It  is  true  that  Christ
proclaimed  that  the  kingdom  of  God  was  at  hand ;  but  his
kingdom  was  not  of  this  world.  It  is  true  that  He  came  to  open
the  prison  doors  and  proclaim  liberty  to  the  captives  ;  but  the
prison  was  not  Sheol,  and  the  captives  were  not  the  souls  of  de-
parted patriarchs.  It  is  true  that  He  came  to  redeem  his  people ;
but  the  redemption  which  He  effected  was  from  the  curse  of  God's
violated  law,  and  not  deliverance  from  the  gloomy  land  of  Shades.

We  all  know  that  the  great  evil  with  which  the  Apostles  had
to  contend  in  the  early  Church,  and  the  great  source  of  corruption
in  the  Church  in  after  ages,  was  a  Judaizing  spirit.  Most  of  the
early  Christians  were  Jews,  and  most  of  the  converts  from  the
Gentiles  were  proselytes  imbued  with   Jewish  doctrines.     These

VOL.  m.  47


738  PART  TV.  Ch.  I.  — state  OF  SOUL  AFTER  DEATH.

doctrines,  moreover,  were  congenial  with  what  the  Apostle  calls
"the  carnal  mind."  It  is  not  wonderful,  therefore,  that  they
were  transferred  to  the  Christian  Church,  and  proved  in  it  a  per-
manently corrupting  leaven.  Modern  critics  are  going  back  to
the  beginning,  and  doing  in  our  day  what  the  Judaizers  did  in  the
age  of  the  Apostles.  They  are  eliminating  Christianity  from  the
Gospel,  and  substituting  Judaism,  somewhat  spiritualized,  but  still
essentially  Judaic.

It  is  notorious  that  the  Jewish  doctrines  of  the  merit  of  works  ;
of  the  necessity  and  saving  efficacy  of  external  rites  ;  of  a  visible
kingdom  of  Christ  of  splendour  and  worldly  grandeur  ;  of  an  exter-
nal church  out  of  whose  pale  there  is  no  salvation  ;  of  the  priestly
character  of  the  ministry  ;  and  of  a  church  hierarchy,  soon  began
to  spread  among  Christians,  and  at  last  became  ascendant.  This
being  the  case  it  would  be  strange  if  the  Jewish  doctrine  of  Sheol,
or  of  an  intermediate  state,  had  not  been  adopted  by  many  of  the
fathers,  together  with  the  other  elements  of  the  corrupt  Judaism
of  the  apostolic  age.  We  accordingly  find  that  as  the  Jews,  con-
trary to  the  teaching  of  their  own  Scripture,  held  that  the  souls
of  those  who  died  before  the  commg  of  the  Messiah  descended
into  Sheol,  and  there  awaited  the  advent  of  the  Redeemer,  so  the
Christians  began  to  believe,  contrary  to  the  teaching  of  their
Scriptures,  that  the  souls  of  believers  at  death,  instead  of  passing
into  glory,  are  shut  up  in  Hades,  awaiting  the  second  coming  of
Christ.  It  is  true  there  were  varying  and  inconsistent  notions
entertained  of  the  natm^e  of  this  intermediate  state  ;  and  the  same
is  true  also  with  regard  to  the  views  on  this  subject  which  long
prevailed  in  the  Church.  There  are  two  facts  which  stand  out  so
plainly  in  the  New  Testament  Scriptures  that  they  could  not  be
always  overlooked  or  denied.  The  one  is  that  Christ,  forty  days
after  his  resurrection,  ascended  into  heaven,  and  is  now  seated  at
the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high.  The  other  is  that  the
souls  of  believers  when  absent  from  the  body  are  present  with  the
Lord.  As  many  of  the  Jews,  therefore,  assumed  that  in  Sheol
there  were  two  departments,  Paradise  and  Gehenna,  the  one
the  abode  of  the  righteous,  the  other  of  the  wicked ;  so  the  Chris-
tians, in  many  cases,  made  the  same  distinction  with  regard  to
the  intermediate  state  ;  the  souls  of  behevers  went  to  paradise  ;
the  souls  of  the  wicked  into  hell.  And  they  often  so  exalted  the
blessedness  of  the  former  as  to  make  it  a  mere  dispute  about
words  whether  they  went  to  heaven  or  into  an  intermediate  state.
The  real  controversy,  so  far  as  any  exists,  is  not  as  to  whether


§3.]  PATRISTIC   DOCTRINE.  739

there  is  a  state  intermediate  between  death  and  the  resurrection
in  which  believers  are  less  glorious  and  exalted  than  they  are  to
be  after  the  second  advent  of  Christ,  but  what  is  the  nature  of
that  state.  Are  believers  after  death  with  Christ?  Do  their
souls  immediately  pass  into  glory  ?  or,  are  they  in  a  dreamy,
semi-conscious  state,  neither  happy  nor  miserable,  awaiting  the
resurrection  of  the  body.  That  this  latter  view  was  for  a  long
time  prevalent  in  the  Church  may  be  inferred,  (1.)  From  the
fact  that  this  was  the  view  of  the  intermediate  state  commonly
adopted  by  the  Jews.  (2.)  It  is  the  view  attributed  to  the
writers  of  the  New  Testament.  (3.)  It  is  the  doctrine  avowed
by  many  of  the  patristic  and  mediaeval  writers.  (4.)  There
would  otherwise  be  no  ground  for  the  opposition  manifested  to
the  doctrine  of  Protestants  on  this  subject.  Daille  says,  "The
doctrine  that  heaven  shall  not  be  opened  till  the  second  coming
of  Christ,  —  that  during  that  time  the  souls  of  all  men,  mth  few
exceptions,  ai*e  shut  up  in  the  under-world,  —  was  held  by  Justin
Martyr,  Irenaeus,  Tertullian,  Augustine,  Origen,  Lactantius,
Victorinus,  Ambrose,  Chrysostom,  Theodoret,  CEcomenius,  Are-
tas,  Prudentius,  Theophylact,  Bernard,  and  many  others,  as  is

confessed  by  all This   doctrine  is   literally  held   by  the

whole  Greek  Church  at  the  present  day  ;  nor  did  any  of  the  Lat-
ins expressly  deny  any  part  of  it  until  the  Council  of  Florence,  in
the  year  of  our  Lord  1'439."  ^

Fliigge^  says  in  reference  to  the  early  fathers,  that  they
"  were  not  in  doubt  as  to  the  fate  of  the  soul  when  separated
from  the  body  until  the  resurrection,  because  they  rested  on  the
Jewish  doctrine  on  that  subject."     Justin  Martyr  speaks  in  this

way  :  ^  ['I'r^/At :]  Tas  y-h'  [_4'^X^'''\  ^^  ^^c^/SaJv  ev  KpeiTTOVt  ttol  XiJ^pio  jxivav,  rots
8e  dStKOUi  Kixi  Tvovepas   Iv  )(€ipovL,  Tov    T^s   KpLcreu)^  CKSep^o/xeVas  )(p6vov  tots,

that  is,  "  I  say,  that  the  souls  of  the  pious  dwell  m  some  better
place,  and  ungodly  and  wicked  souls  in  a  worse  place,  thus  await-
ing the  time  of  judgment."

The  fathers  say  but  little  about  Hades.  Hippolytus,  however,
gives  an  account  of  it  which  is  in  substance  as  follows  :  *  Hades,
in  which  the  souls  of  the  righteous  and  unrighteous  are  detained,
was  left  at  the  creation  in  a  state  of  chaos,  to  which  the  light  of

1  De  Usu  Patrum,  ii.  iv.  ;  edit.  Geneva,  1656,  pp.  290,  291.

2  Geschichte  des  Glaubens  an  Unsterblichkeit,  Auferstehung ,  Gericht  und  Vergeltung,
von  W.  FlUgge,  Universitatsprediger  in  Giittingen,  in.  i.  3;  Leipzig,  1799,  vcl.  iii.  part  1,
p.  87.

s  Dialog  us  cum  Trypkone  Judceo,  .5;  edit.  Commelinus,  Heidelberg,  1593,  p.  172,  16-19.
^Against  Plato  on  the  Cause  of  the   Universe,  (iragment) :   Ante-Nicene  Chi-istian  Li-
brary, Edinburgli,  1869,  vol.  ix.  Hippolytus,  vol.  ii.  p.  46  ££.


740  PART  IV.  Ch.  I.— state  OF  SOUL  AFTER  DEATH.

the  sun  never  penetrates,  but  where  perpetual  darkness  reigns.
This  place  is  the  prison  of  souls,  over  which  the  angels  keep
watch.  In  Hades  there  is  a  furnace  of  unquenchable  fire  into
which  no  one  has  yet  been  cast.  It  is  reserved  for  the  banish-
ment of  the  wicked  at  the  end  of  the  world,  when  the  righteous
will  be  made  citizens  of  an  eternal  kingdom.  The  good  and  the
bad,  although  both  in  Hades,  are  not  in  the  same  part  of  it.
They  enter  the  under-world  by  the  same  gate.  When  this  gate
is  passed,  the  guardian  angels  guide  the  souls  of  the  departed
different  ways  ;  the  righteous  are  guided  to  the  right  to  a  region
full  of  hglit ;  the  wicked  are  constrained  to  take  the  left  hand
path,  leading  to  a  region  near  the  unquenchable  fire.  The  good
are  free  from  all  discomfort,  and  rejoice  in  expectation  of  their
admission  into  heaven.  The  wicked  are  miserable  in  constant
anticipation  of  their  coming  doom.  An  impassable  gulf  sepa-
rates the  abode  of  the  righteous  from  that  of  the  wicked.  Here
they  remain  until  the  resurrection,  which  he  goes  on  to  explain
and  defend.

Flligge  admits  that  there  was  no  uniformit}^  of  representation
on  this  subject  in  the  early  Church.  The  same  general  idea,
however,  is  constantly  reproduced ;  the  Latins  agreeing  sub-
stantially with  the  Greeks.  Tertullian  represents  the  under-
world as  the  general  receptacle  of  departed  spirits  who  retain
their  consciousness  and  activity.  In  this  unseen  world  there  are
two  divisions,  both  called  "  Inferi."  "  Nobis  inferi  non  nuda
cavositas,  nee  subdivalis  aliqua  mundi  sentina  creduntur :  sed  in
fossa  terree  et  in  alto  vastitas,  et  in  ipsis  visceribus  ejus  abstrusa
profunditas."  ^  In  this  region  there  are  two  divisions ;  the  one
called  "•  infernum,"  by  way  of  eminence,  or  Gehenna,  "  quae  est
ignis  arcani  subterraneus  ad  pcenam  thesaurus  ;  "  the  other  is
the  bosom  of  Abraham  or  paradise,  "  divinae  amoenitatis  recipien-
dis  sanctorum  spiritibus  destinatum,  materia  [maceria]  quadam
ignete  illius  zon;^  a  notitia  orbis  communis  segregatum."  ^  Ac-
cording to  this  mode  of  representation,  the  intermediate  state  was
itself  a  state  of  reward  and  punishment ;  at  other  times,  how-
ever, this  was  denied  ;  all  retribution  being  reserved  to  the  day
of  judgment.  In  the  early  Greek  Church,  this  latter  view  was
the  more  prevalent ;  ^  but  later  both  the  Greeks  and  Latins
agreed  in  regarding  the  state  of  the  righteous  after  death  as  far
more  favourable  than  that  of  the  wicked.

1  Tertullian,  De  Anima,  55;    Works,  edit.  Basle,  1502,  p.  685.

2  Tertullian,  Apologeticus,  47;  ut  supra,  p.  892.
8  Flligge,  III.  i.  4;  ut  supra,  pp.  215,  216.


§  3.]  PATRISTIC   DOCTRINE.  741

The  common  views  on  this  subject  are  perhaps  fairly  repre-
sented in  the  elaborate  work  of  the  Honourable  Archibald  Camp-
bell, on  "  the  doctrine  of  a  middle  state  between  death  and  the
resurrection."  ^  He  thus  sums  up  the  points  which  he  considers
himself  to  have  proved  to  be  the  doctrine  of  the  Bible,  of  the
Fathei's,  and  of  the  Church  of  England.

'  First.  That  the  souls  of  the  dead  do  remain  in  an  interme-
diate, or  middle  state  between  death  and  the  resurrection."

"  That  the  proper  place  appointed  for  the  abode  of  the  riglit-
eous  during  the  interim  between  death  and  tht?  resurrection,
called  paradise,  or  Abram's  bosom,  is  not  the  highest  heavens
where  alone  God  is  at  present,  fully  to  be  enjoyed,  but  it  is,
however,  a  very  happy  place,  one  of  the  lower  apartments  or
mansions  of  heaven,  a  place  of  purification  and  improvement,
of  rest  and  refreshment,  and  of  divine  contemplation.  A  place
whence  our  Blessed  Lord's  humanity  is  sometimes  to  be  seen,
though  clouded  or  veiled  if  compared  with  the  glory  He  is  to
appear  with,  and  be  seen  in,  at,  and  after  his  second  coming.
Into  which  middle  state  and  blessed  place,  as  they  are  carried  by
the  holy  angels,  whose  happy  fellowship  they  there  enjoy ;  so
afterward  at  the  resurrection,  after  judgment,  they  are  led  into
the  beatific  vision  by  the  captain  of  our  salvation,  Jesus  Christ
Himself,  where  they  shall  see  Him  fully  as  He  is,  and  there  they
shall  enjoy  God  forever  and  ever,  or  sempiternally."

The  souls  of  the  wicked  at  death  do  not  go  into  hell,  but  into
a  middle  state,  "which  state  is  dark,  dismal,  and  uncomfortable,
without  liglit,  rest,  or  any  manner  of  refreshment,  without  any
company  but  that  of  devils  and  such  impure  souls  as  themselves
to  converse  with,  and  where  these  miserable  souls  are  in  dismal
apprehensions  of  the  deserved  wrath  of  God."

"  Secondly,  That  there  is  no  immediate  judgment  after  death
no  trial  on  which  sentence  is  pronounced,  of  neither  the  right-
eous nor  the  wicked,  until  Christ's  second  coming.  And  that,
therefore,  none  of  any  age  or  class  from  the  beginning  of  the
world  to  the  glorious  appearing  of  our  blessed  Saviour  at  his
second  coming,  are  excepted  from  continuing  in  their  proper
middle  state,  from  their  death  until  their  resurrection,  whether
they  be  patriarchs,  prophets.  Apostles,  or  martyrs."

"  Thirdly,  That  the  righteous  in  their  haj^py  middle  state,  do
improve  in  holiness,  and  make  advances  in  perfection,  and  yet

1  The  Doctrines  of  a  Middle  State  between  Death  and  the  Resurrection,  of  Prayers
for  the  Dead,  etc.,  etc.,  by  Honourable  Archibald  Campbell,  London,  1721,  folio,  p.  44.


742   PART  IV.  Ch.L  — STATE  OF  SOUL  AFTER  DEATH.

they  are  not  for  all  that  carried  out  of  that  middle  state  into  glory,
or  into  the  beatific  vision,  until  after  their  resurrection."

"  Fourthly,  That  prayers  for  those  who  are  baptized  according
to  Christ's  appointment,  and  who  die  in  the  pale  and  peace  of  his
Church,  which  the  ancients  called  dying  with  the  sign  of  faith,  I
say  that  prayers  for  such  are  acceptable  to  God  as  being  fruits  of
our  ardent  charity,  and  are  useful  both  to  them  and  to  us,  and
are  too  ancient  to  be  popish."

"  Lastly,  That  this  doctrine  for  an  intermediate  state  between
death  and  the  resurrection,  as  I  have  proved  it,  does  effectually
destroy  the  popish  purgator}^  invocation  of  the  saints  departed,
popish  penances,  commutations  of  those  penances,  their  indul-
gences, and  treasures  of  merits  purchased  by  supererogation."

As  an  example  of  the  prayers  for  the  dead  he  gives  the  follow-
ing extract  from  the  Office  to  be  used  at  the  Burial  of  the  Dead
in  the  first  Liturgy  of  King  Edward  the  Sixth  :  ^  "  O  Lord,  with
whom  do  live  the  spirits  of  them  that  be  dead,  and  in  whom  the
souls  of  them  that  be  elected,  after  they  be  delivered  from  the
burden  of  the  flesh  be  in  joy  and  fehcity  ;  grant  unto  this  thy
servant  that  the  sins  which  he  committed  in  this  world  be  not  im-
puted unto  him,  but  that  he,  escaping  the  gates  of  hell  and  pains
of  eternal  darkness,  may  ever  dwell  in  the  region  of  light,  with
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  in  the  place  where  is  no  weeping,
sorrow,  nor  heaviness  ;  and  when  that  dreadful  day  of  the  general
resurrection  shall  come,  make  him  to  rise  also  with  the  just  and
righteous,  and  receive  this  body  again  to  glory,  then  made  pure
and  incorruptible."

Jeremy  Taylor,  bishop  of  Down  and  Connor,  says :  ^  "  Paradise
is  distinguished  from  the  heaven  of  the  blessed ;  being  itself  a
receptacle  of  holy  souls,  made  illustrous  with  visitation  of  angels,
and  happy  by  being  a  repository  for  such  spirits,  who,  at  the  day
of  judgment,  shall  go  forth  into  eternal  glory."

Again,  he  says  :  ^  "  I  have  now  made  it  as  evident  as  ques-
tions of  this  natiu'e  will  bear,  that  in  the  state  of  separation,  the
spirits  of  good  men  shall  be  blessed  and  happy  souls,  —  they  have
an  antepast  or  taste  of  their  reward ;  but  their  great  reward
itself,  their  crown  of  righteousness,  shall  not  be  yet ;  that  shall
not  be  until  the  day  of  judgment This  is  the  doctrine  of

1  Published  at  London  in  the  year  1549,  folio,  cxlix.  p.  2.

2  Life,  and  Death  of  Jesus  Christ,  iii.  xvi.  ad.  1 ;  3d  edit.  London,  1657,  p.  588.

8  Sermon  at  Funeral  of  Sir  George  Dalston ;  Works,  edit.  London,  1828,  vol.  vi.  pp.
553,  557.


§4.]      DOCTRINE  OF  THE  CHURCH  OF  ROME.      743

the  Greek  Church  unto  this  day,  and  was  the  opinion  of  the
greatest  part  of  the  ancient  Church  both  Latin  and  Greek  ;  and
by  degrees  was,  in  the  west,  eaten  out  by  the  doctrine  of  purga-
tory and  invocation  of  saints ;  and  rejected  a  little  above  two
hundred  years  ago,  in  the  Council  of  Florence."

It  appears,  therefore,  that  there  is  little  difference  between  the
advocates  of  an  intermediate  state  and  those  who  are  regarded  as
rejecting  that  doctrine.  Both  admit,  (1.)  That  the  souls  of  be
lievers  do  at  death  pass  into  a  state  of  blessedness.  (2.)  That
thfty  remain  in  that  state  until  the  resurrection.  (3.)  That  at
the  second  coming  of  Christ,  when  the  souls  of  the  righteous  are
to  be  clothed  with  their  glorified  bodies,  they  will  be  greatly  ex-
alted and  raised  to  a  higher  state  of  being.  Bishop  Hickes  in  his
highly  commendatory  review  of  the  work  of  the  Honourable  Archi-
bald Campbell  just  referred  to,  which  is  appended  to  that  volume,
although  he  lays  great  stress  on  the  doctrine  in  question,  says  that
those  who  call  the  state  into  which  the  righteous  enter,  heaven  ;
and  that  into  which  the  wicked  are  introduced  when  they  die,
hell,  may  continue  to  do  so,  provided  they  mean  by  heaven  a
state  which  is  less  perfect  than  that  which  awaits  them  after  the
coming  of  Christ ;  and  by  hell,  a  condition  less  miserable  than
that  which  will  be  assigned  to  the  wicked.

The  Church  of  England  agrees  with  other  Protestant  churches
in  its  teachings  on  this  subject.  In  the  Liturgy  of  Edward  VI.
just  quoted,  it  is  said,  (1.)  That  the  spirits  of  all  the  dead  live
after  the  dissolution  of  the  body.  (2.)  That  the  righteous  are
with  God  in  a  state  of  joy  and  felicit3^  (3.)  That  they  have  es-
caped the  gates  of  hell  and  the  pains  of  eternal  darkness  into
which,  as  is  necessarily  implied,  the  souls  of  those  who  die  unrec-
onciled to  God  immediately  enter.  All  the  members  of  that
Church  are  taught  to  say  daily  :  "  The  glorious  company  of  the
Apostles  praise  thee.  The  goodly  fellowship  of  the  Prophets
praise  thee.  The  noble  army  of  Martyrs  praise  thee."  These,
therefore,  are  all  with  God,  and  engaged  in  his  service.  In  one
of  the  prayers  appointed  to  be  used  in  the  visitation  of  the  sick,
these  words  occur :  "  O  Almighty  God,  with  whom  do  live  the
souls  of  just  men  made  perfect,  after  they  are  delivered  from  their
earthly  prisons."  The  souls  of  the  just,  therefore,  are  made  per-
fect when  they  are  delivered  from  the  body.

§  4.  Doctrine  of  the   Church  of  Rome.
Although  Romanists  reject  the  doctrine  of    an  intermediate


744  PART  IV.  Ch.  I.  — state  OF  SOUL  AFTER  DEATH.

state  in  the  sense  of  the  ancient  Churcli,  they  nevertheless  divide
the  world  into  which  the  souls  of  men  enter  at  death,  into  many
different  departments.

The  Limhus  Patrum.

They  hold  that  the  souls  of  the  righteous  before  the  coming  of
Christ  descended  into  Sheol,  where  they  remained  in  a  state  of
expectancy  awaiting  the  coming  of  the  Messiah.  When  Christ
came  and  had  accomplished  his  work  of  redemption  by  dying  upon
the  cross,  He  descended  into  Hades,  or  the  under-world,  where
the  souls  of  the  patriarchs  were  confined,  delivered  them  from
their  captivity,  and  carried  them  in  triumph  to  heaven.  In  other
words  they  held  the  common  Jewish  doctrine  as  to  the  state  of
the  dead,  so  far  as  the  saints  of  the  Old  Testament  period  are
concerned.  Their  views  on  that  subject  have  an  intimate  rela-
tion, whether  causal  or  inferential  is  uncertain  and  unimportant,
with  their  doctrine  of  the  sacraments.  Holding,  first,  that  the
sacraments  are  the  only  channels  by  which  the  saving  blessings  of
redemption  are  conveyed  to  men  ;  and,  secondly,  that  the  sacra-
ments of  the  Old  Testament  signified  but  did  not  communicate
grace,  they  could  not  avoid  the  conclusion  that  those  who  died
before  the  coming  of  Christ  were  not  saved.  The  best  that  could
be  hoped  concerning  them  was  that  they  were  not  lost,  but  re-
tained in  a  salvable  state  awaiting  the  coming  deliverer.  Whether
they  inferred  that  the  Old  Testament  saints  were  not  saved  be-
cause they  had  no  grace-bearing  sacraments,  or  concluded  that
their  sacraments  were  ineffectual,  because  those  who  had  no
others  were  not  saved,  it  is  not  easy  to  determine.  The  latter  is
the  more  probable  ;  as  most  naturally  they  received  the  doctrine
of  Sheol  from  the  Jews,  as  they  did  so  many  other  doctrines  ;  and
being  led  to  believe  that  the  patriarchs  were  not  in  heaven,  they
could  not  avoid  the  conclusion  that  circumcision  and  the  passover
were  very  far  inferior  in  efficacy  to  the  Christian  sacraments.

The  Limhus  Infantum.
This  is  the  name  given  to  the  place  and  state  pertaining  to  the
departed  souls  of  unbaptized  infants.  As  this  class  includes,  per-
haps, a  moiety  of  the  whole  human  race,  their  destiny  in  the  fu-
ture world  is  a  matter  of  the  deepest  interest.  The  doctrine  of
the  Church  of  Rome  on  this  subject  is  that  infants  dying  without
baptism  are  not  at  death,  or  ever  after  it,  admitted  into  the  king-
dom of  heaven.     They  never  partake  of  the  benefits  of  redemp-


§4.]  DOCTRINE   OF    THE   CHURCH   OF   ROME.  745

tion.  This  doctrine  is  explicitly  stated  in  the  symbols  of  that
Church,  and  defended  by  its  theologians.  Cardinal  Gousset,  for
example,  says  that  original  sin,  of  which  all  the  children  of  Adam
are  partakers,  is  the  death  of  the  soul.  Its  consequences  m  this
life  are  ignorance  or  obscuration  of  the  understanding,  feebleness
of  the  will  which  can  do  nothing  spiritually  good  without  the  as-
sistance of  divine  grace,  concupiscence  or  revolt  of  our  lower
nature,  infirmities,  sorrow,  and  the  death  of  the  body.  Its  con-
sequences in  the  life  to  come  are  exclusion  from  the  kingdom  of
heaven,  privation  of  life  eternal,  of  the  beatific  vision  ;  "  no  one
can  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God  unless  he  be  born  again  in
Jesus  Christ  by  baptism  ;  '  Except,  a  man  be  born  of  water  and
of  the  Spirit,  he  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God.'  This  is
what  faith  teaches,  but  it  goes  no  further.  The  Church  leaves  to
the  discussions  of  the  schools  the  different  opinions  of  theologians
touching  the  fate  of  those  who  are  excluded  from  the  kingdom  of
heaven  on  account  of  original  sin  ;  infants,  for  example,  who  die
without  having  received  the  sacrament  of  baptism."^

Perrone  speaking  on  this  subject  says,  "  We  must  distinguish
the  certain  from  the  uncertain.  What  is  certain,  yea,  a  matter  of
faith,  we  have  from  the  decisions  of  the  Second  Council  of  Lyons
and  the  Council  of  Florence,  both  of  which  declare  concerning
infants  and  idiots  :  '  Credimus  ....  illorum  animas,  qui  in  mortali
peccato  vel  cum  solo  originali  decedunt,  mox  in  infernum  descen-
dere,  poenis  tamen  disparibus  puniendas.'  Ita  quidem  Florenti-
num  '  in  decreto  Unionis,'  quod  descripsit  verba  Lugdunensis  in
fidei  professione.  De  fide  igitur  est,  (1.)  parvulos  ejusmodi  in  infer-
num descendere  sen  damnationem  incurrere  ;  (2.)  poenis  puniri  dis-
paribus ab  illis  quibus  puniuntur  adulti.  Qufe  proinde  spectant
ad  hunc  inferni  locum,  ad  poenarum  disparitatem,  seu  in  quo  h?ec
disparitas  constituenda  sit,  ad  parvulorum  statum  post  judicii
diem  incerta  sunt  omnia,  nee  fidem  attingunt.  Hinc  varia?  de  his
sunt  patrum  ac  theologorum  sententiie."  ^  Perrone  goes  on  to
show  that  the  Latin  fathers  represent  infants  as  suffering  "  poe-
nam  sensus  ;  "  while  most  of  Greek  fathers >  say  that  they  incur
only  "■  poenam  damni,"  a  sense  of  loss  in  being  deprived  of  the
blessedness  of  heaven.  What  that  involves,  however,  he  says  is
much  disputed  among  theologians.

The  Scriptural  proof  of  this  doctrine,  as  argued  by  Romanists,

1  Theoh(jie.  Dorjmntique,  par  S.   6.  le   Cardinal   Gousset,  Arclieveque  de  Reims,  10th
edit.  Paris,  18GG,  vol.  ii.  pp.  95,  96.
^  Prcekctlones  Theoloyicce,  edit.  Paris,  1861,  vol.  i,  p.  494.


746  PAET  IV.  Ch.  I.— state  OF  SOUL  AFTER  DEATH.

is  principally  twofold  ;  the  first  is  derived  from  the  doctrine  of
ojriginal  sin.  They  admit  that  the  sin  of  Adam  brought  guilt  and
spmtual  death  upon  all  mankind.  Baptism  is  the  only  means
appointed  for  the  deliverance  of  men  from  these  dreadful  evils.
Hence  it  follows  that  the  unbaptized  remain  under  this  guilt  and
pollution.  The  second  great  argument  is  founded  upon  John  iii.
5,  "  Except  a  man  be  born  of  water,  and  of  the  Spirit,  he  cannot
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God."  This  Romanists  understand  as
an  explicit  declaration  that  the  unbaptized  cannot  be  saved.  On
this,  however,  as  on  all  other  subjects,  their  main  dependence  is
upon  the  decision  of  Councils  and  the  testimony  of  the  fathers.
Besides  the  Councils  of  Lyons  and  Florence,  both  regarded  as  ec-
umenical by  Romanists,  appeal  is  made  to  the  canons  of  the  Comi-
cil  of  Trent,  "  Si  quis  parvulos  recentes  ab  uteris  matrum  bap-
tizandos  negat,  etiam  si  a  baptizatis  parentibus  orti ;  aut  dicit  in
remissionem  quidem  peccatorum  eos  baptizari,  sed  nihil  ex  Adam
trahere  originalis  peccati,  quod  regenerationis  lavacro  necesse  sit

expiari  ad  vitam  aiternam  consequendam anathema  sit."  ^

The  Synod  of  Carthage,  A.  D.  416,  is  also  quoted,  which  decided  c^
"  Quicunque  negat,  parvulos  per  baptismum  Christi  a  perditione
liberari,  et  salutem  percipere  posse ;  anathema  sit."  Although
the  councils  declare  that  the  souls  of  unbaptized  infants  descend
immediately  into  hell,  Cardinal  Gousset  remarks,  it  is  to  be  re-
membered that  there  are  many  departments  in  hell.  There  was
one  for  the  impenitent  who  died  before  the  coming  of  Christ,  and
another  for  the  souls  of  the  righteous  who  awaited  the  advent  of
the  Messiah  ;  so  there  is  no  reason  for  denying  that  there  is  still
another  for  the  souls  of  mibaptized  infants.  "  We  repeat,"  he
says,^  "  that  neither  the  Council  of  Florence  nor  that  of  Lyons
pronounces  on  the  nature  of  the  punishment  of  those  who  die
with  only  the  guilt  of  original  sin,  except  to  show  that  they  are
forever  excluded  from  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  We  can,  there-
fore, without  going  counter  to  the  decisions  of  the  Church,  main-
tain the  sentiment  which  exempts  such  unfortunates  from  the
punishment  of  hell,  and  the  rather  because  the  opposite  opinion
is  generally  abandoned,  and  this  abandonment  is  in  accord  with
Pope  Innocent  IIL,  who,  distinguishing  between  the  punishment
of  original  and  of  actual  sin,  makes  the  latter  to  be  the  pain  of

1  Sess.  v.,  canon  4;  Streitwolf,  vol.  i.  pp.  18, 19.

2  Quoted  by  Terrone,  Prcelectiones  Theologicce,  iii.  vi.  599;  edit.  Paris,  1861,  vol.  i.  pp.
196,  497.

*  Gousset,  ut  supra,  p.  96.


§4.]       ^        DOCTRINE    OF  THE    CHURCH    OF   ROME.  747

eternal  fire ;  the  former,  the  simple  loss  of  the  beatific  (or  intui-
tive) vision ;  "  Poena  originalis  peccati  est  carentia  visionis  Dei,
actualis  vero  poena  peccati  est  gehennre  perpetufe  cruciatus."^
On  the  following  page  he  says,  "  We  will  go  still  further,  and  say
with  St.  Thomas,  that  although  unbaptized  infants  are  deprived
forever  of  the  happiness  of  the  saints,  they  suffer  neither  sorrow
nor  sadness  in  consequence  of  that  privation."  It  is  a  matter  of
rejoicing  that  the  doctrine  of  Romanists  on  the  condition  of  un-
baptized infants  in  a  future  life  has  admitted  of  this  amelioration,
although  it  is  hard  to  reconcile  it  with  the  decisions  of  councils
which  declare  that  the  souls  of  such  infants  do  at  death  immedi-
ately descend  into  hell,  if  that  word  be  understood  according  to
the  sense  in  which  it  was  generally  used  when  those  decisions  were
made.  The  current  representations  of  the  theologians  of  the
Latin  Church  are  against  this  modified  form  of  the  doctrine.  The
Council  of  Trent  anathematizes  those  who  say  that  baptism  is  not
necessary  for  the  expiation  of  original  sin ;  as  that  of  Carthage
those  who  affirm  that  it  does  not  save  infants  from  perdition.
Romanists,  however,  of  our  day,  have  the  right  to  state  their  doc-
trine in  their  own  way,  and  should  not  be  charged  with  holding
sentiments  which  they  repudiate.

Hell.

Hell  is  defined  by  Romanists  as  the  place  or  state  in  which  the
fallen  angels  and  men  who  die  in  a  state  of  mortal  sin,  or,  as  it
is  also  expressed,  of  final  impenitence,  suffer  forever  the  punish-
ment of  their  sins.

That  the  punishment  of  the  wicked  is  unending  they  prove
fi'om  the  express  declarations  of  Scripture,  from  the  faith  of  the
Church  universal,  and  from  the  general  belief  of  men.  As  to  the
nature  of  the  sufferings  of  those  who  perish,  they  say  they  are
those  of  loss  ;  they  are  deprived  of  the  favour,  vision,  and  pres-
ence of  God  ;  and  those  "  of  sense,"  or  of  positive  infliction.  To
this  latter  class  are  to  be  referred  such  sufferings  as  arise  from
wicked  passions,  from  remorse  and  despair,  as  well  as  those
which  spring  from  the  external  circumstances  in  which  the  finally
condemned  are  placed.  Whether  the  unquenchable  fire  of  which
the  Bible  speaks,  is  to  be  understood  literally  or  figurativelv,  is  a
question  about  which  Romanists  differ.  Gousset  proposes  the
question,  and  says  that  it  is  one  on  which  the  Church  has  given
no  decisions.     "  It  is  of  faith,"  he  says,  "  that  the  condemned

1  Innocent  III.  Caput  "  Majores  "  de  Baptismo.


748  PART  IV.  Ch.  L  — state  OF  SOUL  AFTER  DEATH.

sliall  be  eternally  deprived  of  tlie  happiness  of  heaven,  and  that
they  shall  be  eternally  tormented  in  hell ;  but  it  is  not  of  faith
that  the  fire  which  causes  their  saffering  is  material.  Many  doc-
tors, whose  opinion  has  not  been  condemned,  think  that  as  '  the
worm  which  never  dies  '  is  a  figurative  expression,  so  also  is
'  the  fire  that  is  never  quenched  ; '  and  that  the  fire  means  a
pain  analogous  to  that  by  fire  rather  than  the  real  pain  produced
by  fire.  Nevertheless  the  idea  that  the  fire  spoken  of  is  real  ma-
terial fire  is  so  general  among  Catholics,  that  we  do  not  venture
to  advance  a  contrary  opinion."  ^

Into  this  place  and  state  of  endless  misery  do  pass,  at  death,
all  who  die  out  of  the  pale  of  the  Catholic  Church  ;  all  the  un-
baptized  (at  least  among  adults)  ;  all  schismatics  ;  all  heretics ;
all  who  die  impenitent,  or  in  a  state  of  mortal  sin,  that  is,  sin
the  penalty  of  which  is  eternal  death,  which  has  not  been  remit-
ted by  priestly  absolution.

Heaven.

Heaven,  on  the  other  hand,  is  the  place  and  state  of  the
blessed,  where  God  is ;  where  Christ  is  enthroned  in  majesty,  and
where  are  the  angels  and  the  spirits  of  the  just  made  perfect.
Those  who  enter  heaven  are  in  possession  of  the  supreme  good.
"  The  happiness  of  the  saints  above  is  complete  ;  they  possess
God,  and  in  that  possession  they  find  perfect  rest,  and  the  enjoy-
ment of  all  good."  Their  blessedness  is  perfect  because  it  is
everlasting.  They  see  God  face  to  face.  They  will  eternally
love  Him  and  be  loved  by  Him.  "  Beatitudo,  quae  etiam  sum-
mum  bonum  aut  ultimus  finis  nuncupatur,  a  Boetio  ^  definitur :
'  status  bonorum  omnium  congregatione  perfectus  ; '  a  S.  Augus-
tino,^  '  Bonorum  omnium  summa  et  cumulus ; '  a  scholasticis
autem  :  '  summum  bonum  appetivus  rationalis  satiativum.'  "  *  It
is,  therefore,  heaven  in  the  highest  sense  of  the  term,  into  which
the  saints  are  said  to  enter.

There  are,  however,  degrees  in  this  blessedness.  "  The  elect,"
savs  Cardinal  Gousset,  "  in  heaven,  see  God  in  a  manner  more  or
less  perfect,  according  as  they  have  more  or  less  of  merit,  '  pro
meritorum  diversitate,'  as  it  is  expressed  by  the  Council  of
Florence,  which  agrees  with  the  words  of  our  Lord,  who  says,
•  In  my  Father's  house  are  many  mansions.'  "^     Into  this  only  a

1  Gousset,  ut  supra,  p.  IGO.

2  Consolatio  PhilosopMcB,  Lib.  iii,  prosa  2;  Lyons,  1671,  p.  107.

8  Enarratio  in  Psalmuin,  ii.  11;    Works,  Paris,  1835,  voL  iv.  p.  8,  c.

<  Perrone,  ut  supra,  vol.  i.  p.  467.  ^  Gousset,  p.  132.


§4-]      DOCTRINE  OF  THE  CHURCH  OF  ROME.       749

few,  however,  even  of  true  believers,  according  to  Romanists,  enter
at  death.  The  advocates  of  the  doctrine  of  an  intermediate  state,
as  has  been  shown,  assert  that  none  of  the  human  family,  whether
patriarch,  prophet.  Apostle,  or  mai'tyr,  is  admitted  to  the  vision
of  God  when  he  leaves  the  body ;  and  that  none  of  the  wicked
goes  into  the  place  of  final  retribution.  Both  the  righteous  and
the  wicked  remain  in  a  middle  state,  awaiting  their  final  doom
and  location  at  the  second  coming  of  Christ.  As  to  both  these
points,  Romanists  are  more  nearly  agreed  with  the  great  body  of
Protestants.

On  this  point  the  Council  of  Florence  says  :  "  Credimus  ....
illorum  animas,  qui  post  baptismum  susceptum  nullam  omnino
peccati  maculam  incurrerunt,  illas  etiam  animas  qum  post  con-
tractam  peccati  maculam  vel  in  suis  corporibus,  vel  eisdem  exutre
corporibus  sunt  purgatse  in  coelum  mox  recipi,  et  intueri  clare
ipsum  Deum  trinum  et  unum  sicuti  est."  This  doctrine  Roman-
ists assert  not  only  in  opposition  to  those  who  teach  that  the  soiil
dies  with  the  body  and  is  revived  at  the  resurrection,  but  also  to
those  who  say  that  the  souls  even  of  the  perfectly  purified  "  in
aliqua  requie  degere,  donee  post  corporum  resurrectionem  adipis-
cantur  leternam  beatitudinem,  quam  interim  expectant."  This
error,  Perrone  says,  widely  disseminated  among  the  Greeks,  was
adopted  by  Luther  and  Calvin.^

Two  classes  of  persons,  therefore,  according  to  this  view,  enter
heaven  before  the  resurrection ;  first,  those  who  are  perfectly
purified  at  tlie  time  of  death ;  and  second,  those  who,  although
not  thus  perfect  when  they  leave  this  world,  have  become  per-
fect in  purgatory.

Purgatory.

According  to  Romanists,  all  those  who  die  in  the  peace  of  the
Church,  but  are  not  perfect,  pass  into  purgatory  ;  with  regard
to  which  the}^  teach,  (1.)  That  it  is  a  state  of  suffering.  The
commonly  received  traditional,  though  not  symbolical,  doctrine  on
this  point  is,  that  the  suffering  is  from  material  fire.  The  design
of  this  suffering  is  both  expiation  and  purification.  (2.)  That
the  duration  and  intensity  of  purgatorial  pains  are  proportioned
to  the  guilt  and  impurity  of  the  sufferers.  (3.)  That  there  is  no
known  or  defined  limit  to  the  continuance  of  the  soul  in  purga-
tory, but  the  day  of  judgment.  The  departed  may  remain  in
this  state  of  suffering  for  a  few  hours  or  for  thousands  of  years.
(4.)  That  souls  in  purgatory  may  be  helped  ;  that  is,  their  suffer-

1  Ut  mpra,  p.  473.


750  PART  IV.  Ch.  I.— state  OF  SOUL  AFTER  DEATH.

ings  alleviated  or  the  duration  of  them  shortened  by  the  prayers
of  the  saints,  and  especially  by  the  sacrifice  of  the  Mass.  (5.)
That  purgatory  is  under  the  power  of  the  keys.  That  is,  it  is  the
prerogative  of  the  authorities  of  the  Church,  at  their  discretion,
to  remit  entirely  or  partially  the  penalty  of  sins  under  which
the  souls  there  detained  are  suffering.

This  doctrine  is  deeply  rooted  in  the  whole  Romish  system.
According  to  that  system,  (1.)  Christ  delivers  us  only  from  the
"•  reatus  culpge,"  and  exposure  to  eternal  death.  (2.)  For  all
sins  committed  after  bttptism  the  offender  must  make  satisfaction
by  penance  or  good  works.  (3.)  This  satisfaction  must  be  com-
plete and  the  soul  purified  from  all  sin,  before  it  can  enter
heaven.  (4.)  This  satisfaction  and  purification,  if  not  effected  in
this  life,  must  be  accomplished  after  death.  (5.)  The  eucharist
is  a  propitiatory  sacrifice  intended  to  secure  the  pardon  of  post-
baptismal  sins,  and  takes  effect  according  to  the  intention  of  the
officiating  priest.  Therefore,  if  he  intends  it  for  the  benefit  of
any  soul  in  purgatory,  it  inures  to  his  advantage.  (6.)  The  pope,
being  the  vicar  of  Christ  on  earth,  has  full  power  to  forgive  sin ;
that  is,  to  exempt  offenders  from  the  obligation  to  make  satisfac-
tion for  their  offences.

Moehler,  and  other  philosophical  defenders  of  Romanism,  soften
down  the  doctrine  by  representing  purgatory  simply  as  a  state  of
gradual  preparation  of  the  imperfectly  sanctified  for  admission
into  heaven,  making  no  mention  of  positive  suffering,  much  less
of  material  fire.  Cai^dinal  Gousset  does  not  go  so  far  as  this,  yet
he  says  :  ^  "  It  is  of  faith,  (1.)  That  the  righteous  who  die  without
having  entirely  satisfied  divine  justice,  must  make  satisfaction
after  this  life  by  temporary  pains,  which  are  called  j)ains  of  pur-
gatory ;  (2.)  That  the  souls  in  purgatory  are  relieved  by  the
prayers  of  the  Church.  This  is  what  the  faith  teaches  ;  but  it
stops  there.  Is  purgatory  a  particular  place  rather  than  a  state,
or  a  state  rather  than  a  particular  place  ?  Are  the  pains  of
purgatory  due  to  fire,  or  are  the  pains  those  which  arise  from  the
consciousness  of  having  offended  God  ?  What  are  the  severity
and  duration  of  those  pains  ?  These  and  other  questions  of  hke
kind,  are  not  included  in  the  domain  of  Catholic  doctrine.  These
are  questions  about  which  there  exists  no  decision  or  judgment  of
the  Church.  Nevertheless  it  should  be  known  that  in  the  opinion
of  the  majority  of  theologians  the  torments  of  purgatory  consist
in  part  in  those  of  fire,  or,  at  least,  in  such  as  are  analogous  to

1  Gousset,  ut  supra,  vol.  ii.  143.


§4.]      DOCTRINE  OF  THE  CHURCH  OF  ROME.      751

the  pain  produced  by  fire.  We  will  add  that,  according  to  Saint
Augustine  and  Saint  Thomas,  whose  opinion  is  generally  adopted
(dont  le  sentiment  est  assez  suivi),  the  pains  of  purgatory  sur-
pass those  of  this  life  :  "  Poena  purgatorii,"  says  the  angelic  Doc-
tor,^ "  quantum  ad  poenara  damni  et  sensus,  excedit  omnem
poenam  istius  vitas."

Cardinal  Wiseman,^  in  his  lecture  on  this  subject,  speaks  in  the
mildest  terms.  He  says  nothing  of  the  pains  of  purgatory  except
that  they  are  pains.  The  satisfaction  for  sin  demanded  by  the
Church  of  Rome,  to  be  rendered  in  this  World,  consists  of  prayers,
fastings,  almsgiving,  and  the  like  ;  and  we  are  told  that  if  this
satisfaction  be  not  made  before  death,  it  must  be  made  after  it.
This  is  all  that  the  Cardinal  ventures  to  say.  He  has  not  courage
to  lift  the  veil  from  the  burning  lake  in  which  the  souls  in  purga-
tory are  represented  as  suffering,  according  to  the  common  faith
of  Romanists.  Although  it  is  true  that  the  Church  of  Rome  has
wisely  abstained  from  any  authoritative  decision  as  to  the  nature
and  intensity  of  purgatorial  sufferings,  it  does  not  thereby  escape
responsibility  on  the  subject.  It  allows  free  circulation  with  ec-
clesiastical sanction,  expressed  or  implied,  of  books  containing  the
most  frightful  exhibitions  of  the  sufferings  of  purgatory  which  the
imagination  of  man  can  conceive.  This  doctrine,  therefore,  how-
ever mildly  it  may  be  presented  in  works  designed  for  Protestant
readers,  is  nevertheless  a  tremendous  engine  of  priesth^  power.
The  feet  of  the  tiger  with  the  claws  withdrawn  are  as  soft  as  vel-
vet ;  when  those  claws  are  extended,  they  are  fearful  instruments
of  laceration  and  death.

Arguments  used  in  favour  of  the  Doctrine.
1.  Romanists  make  comparatively  little  use  of  Scripture  in  de-
fence of  their  peculiar  doctrines.^     Their  main  support  is  tradition

1  See  Aquinas,  Summn,  iii.  xlvi.  6,  3.

2  Lectures  cm  the  Principal  Doctrines  and  Practices  of  the  Catholic  Church.  By  Cardi-
nal Wiseman.  Two  volumes  in  one.  Sixth  American  from  the  last  London  edition.  Re-
vised and  Corrected.     Baltimore,  1870.     Lecture  XL     On  Satisfaction  and  Purgatory.

3  Cardinal  Wiseman  says:  "  I  have  more  than  once  commented  on  the  incorrectness  of
that  method  of  arguing  which  demands  that  we  prove  every  one  of  our  doctrines  individ-
ually from  the  Scriptures.  I  occupied  myself,  during  my  first  course  of  lectures,  in  dem-
onstrating the  Catholic  principle  of  faith  that  the  Church  of  Christ  was  constituted  by  Him
the  depositary  of  liis  truths,  and  that,  although  many  were  recorded  in  his  holy  word,  still
many  were  committed  to  traditional  keeping,  and  that  Christ  Himself  has  faithfully  prom-
ised to  teach  in  his  Church,  and  has  thus  secured  her  from  error."  Lectures,  ut  supra,  xi.
vol.  ii.  p.  45.  This  resolves  all  controversies  with  Romanists  into  two  questions.  First,
what  is  the  prerogative  of  the  Church  as  a  teacher;  and  secondly,  is  the  Church  of  Rome,
or  any  other  external  organized  body,  the  body  of  Christ  to  which  the  prerogatives  and
promises  of  the  Church  belong  ?


732  PART  IV.  Ch.  I  — state  of  SOUL  AFTER  DEATH.

and  the  authority  of  the  Church.  Cardinal  Wiseman  cites  but
two  passages  from  the  New  Testament  in  favour  of  the  doctrine
of  purgatory.  The  first  is  our  Lord's  saying  that  the  sin  against
the  Holy  Ghost  shall  never  be  forgiven  either  in  this  world  or  in
the  world  to  come.  This  is  said  to  imply  that  there  are  sins  which
are  not  forgiven  in  this  life  which  may  be  forgiven  hereafter ;  and
therefore  that  the  dead,  or  at  least  a  part  of  their  number,  are  not
past  forgiveness  when  they  die.  This  is  a  slender  thread  on
which  to  hang  so  great  a  weight.  The  words  of  Christ  contain
no  such  implication.  To  say  that  a  thing  can  never  happen  either
here  or  hereafter,  in  this  world  or  in  the  world  to  come,  is  a  fa-
miliar way  of  saying  that  it  can  never  happen  under  any  circum-
stances. Our  Lord  simply  said  that  blasphemy  of  the  Holy  Ghost
can  never  be  forgiven.  The  other  passage  is  from  Revelation  xxi.
27,  where  it  said  that  nothing  that  defileth  shall  enter  heaven.
But  as  very  few,  if  any  of  the  human  family,  are  perfectly  pure
when  they  die,  it  follows  that,  if  there  be  no  place  or  process  of
purification  after  death,  few  if  any  of  the  sons  of  men  could  be
saved;  or,  as  Cardmal  Wiseman  puts  the  argument,  "Suppose
that  a  Christian  dies  who  had  committed  some  slight  transgression  ;
he  cannot  enter  heaven  in  this  state,  and  yet  we  cannot  suppose
that  he  is  to  be  condemned  forever.  What  alternative,  then,  are
we  to  admit  ?  Why,  that  there  is  some  place  in  which  the  soul
will  be  purged  of  the  sin,  and  qualified  to  enter  into  the  glory  of
God."^  But  does  not  the  blood  of  Christ  cleanse  from  all  sin  ?
Were  not  the  sins  of  Paul  all  forgiven  the  moment  he  believed  ?
Did  the  penitent  thief  enter  purgatory  instead  of  paradise  ?  To
minds  trained  under  the  influence  of  evangelical  doctrine,  such  ar-
guments as  the  above  cannot  have  the  slightest  weight.

2.  Great  stress  is  laid  upon  the  fact  that  the  custom  of  praying
for  the  dead  prevailed  early  and  long  in  the  Church.  Such
prayers  take  for  granted  that  the  dead  need  our  prayers  ;  and  this
supposes  that  they  are  not  in  heaven.  But  if  not  in  heaven
where  can  they  be  except  in  a  preparatory  or  purgatorial  state  ?
To  this  it  may  be  answered,  (1.)  That  praying  for  the  dead
is  a  superstitious  practice,  having  no  support  from  the  Bible.  It
was  one  of  the  corruptions  early  introduced  into  the  Church.
It  will  not  do  to  argue  from  one  corruption  in  support  of  another.
(2.)  Those  who  vindicate  the  propriety  of  praying  for  the  dead
are  often  strenuous  opposers  of  the  doctrine  of  purgatory.  Dr.
Pusey,  for  example,  says  :  "  Since  Rome  has  blended  the  cruel  in-

1  Lectures,  ut  supra,  vol,  ii.  p.  49.


§4.]  DOCTRINE    OF   THE    CHURCH   OF   ROME.  753

veiition  of  purgatory  with  the  primitive  custom  of  praying  for  the
dead,  it  is  not  in  communion  with  her  that  any  can  seek  comfort
from  this  rite."  ^  The  early  Christians  prayed  for  the  souls  of
Apostles  and  martyrs,  whom  they  assuredly  believed  were  already
in  heaven.  It  was  not,  therefore,  for  any  alleviation  of  their  suf-
ferings, as  Dr.  Pusey  argues,  that  such  prayers  were  offered,  but
for  the  augmentation  of  their  happiness,  and  the  consummation  of
their  blessedness  at  the  last  day.

3.  The  argument  of  most  logical  force  to  those  who  believe  the
premises  whence  it  is  derived,  is  drawn  from  the  doctrine  of  satis-
faction. The  Romish  doctrine  on  this  subject  includes  the  follow-
ing principles  :  "  (1.)  That  God,  after  the  remission  of  sin,  retains
a  lesser  chastisement  in  his  power,  to  be  inflicted  on  the  sinner.
(2.)  That  penitential  works,  fasting,  alms-deeds,  contrite  weep-
ing, and  fervent  prayer,  have  the  power  of  averting  that  pun-
ishment. (3.)  That  this  scheme  of  God's  justice  was  not  a  part
of  the  imperfect  law,  but  the  unvarying  ordinance  of  his  dispensa-
tion, anterior  to  the  Mosaic  ritual,  and  amply  confirmed  by  Christ
in  the  gospel.  (4.)  That  it  consequently  becomes  a  part  of  all
true  repentance  to  try  to  satisfy  this  divine  justice  by  the  vol-
untary assumption  of  such  penitential  works  as  his  revealed  truth
assures  have  efficacy  before  Him."  ^  In  connection  with  this  is  to
be  taken  the  doctrine  of  indulgences.  This  doctrine,  we  are  told,
rests  on  the  following  grounds  :  (1.)  "  That  satisfaction  has  to  be
made  to  God  for  sin  remitted,  under  the  authority  and  regulation
of  the  Church.  (2.)  That  the  Church  has  always  considered
herself  possessed  of  the  au.thority  to  mitigate,  by  diminution  or
commutation,  the  penance  which  she  enjoins  ;  and  she  has  always
reckoned  such  a  mitigation  valid  before  God,  who  sanctions  and
accepts  it.  (3.)  That  the  sufferings  of  the  saints,  in  union  with,
and  by  virtue  of  Christ's  merits,  are  considered  available  towards
the  granting  this  mitigation.     (4.)   That  such  mitigations,  when

1  An  earnest  Remonstrance  to  the  author  of  the  "Pope's  Pastoral  Letter  to  Certain
Members  of  the  University  of  Oxford"  London,  1836,  p.  25.  The  Hon.  Archibald  Camp-
bell, whose  work  is  quoted  above,  says  that  all  the  authorities  to  which  he  refers  from
among  the  English  Bishops  and  theologians,  side  with  him  in  defending  prayers  for  the
dead  and  in  denouncing  purgatory.

3  Wiseman,  ut  supra,  vol.  ii.  p.  40.  It  will  be  observed  that  the  Cardinal,  in  detailing  tlie
kind  of  satisfaction  to  be  made,  mentions  fasting,  alms-giving,  and  prayer,  but  says  noth-
ing of  scourgings,  hair  shirts,  spiked  girdles,  and  all  other  means  of  self-torture  so  conimon
and  so  applauded  in  the  Romish  Church.  In  this  way  he  softens  down  and  understates  all
"Catholic  Doctrines  and  Practices,"  to  render  them  less  revolting  to  the  reason  and  con-
science of  his  readers.  Purgatory  with  him  is  a  bed  of  roses  with  here  and  there  a  thorn,
instead  of  tiu;  lake  of  real  five  and  brimstone  which  glares  through  all  Church  history.

VOL    III.  48


I'A     PART  IV.  Ch.  I.  — state  OF  SOUL  AFTER  DEATH.

prudently  and  justly  granted,  are  conducive  toward  the  spiritual
weal  and  profit  of  Christians."^

We  have  thus  a  broad  foundation  laid  for  the  whole  doctrine
of  purgatory.  God  in  the  forgiveness  of  sin  remits  only  the  pen-
alty of  eternal  death.  There  remain  temporal  pains  to  be  en-
dured in  satisfaction  of  divine  justice.  If  such  satisfaction  be  not
made  in  this  world,  it  must  be  rendered  in  the  next.  The  Church
has  the  power  of  regulating  these  satisfactions,  of  directing  what
they  shall  be,  of  mitigating  or  commuting  them  in  this  life,  and
of  lessening  their  severity  or  duration  in  the  life  to  come.  The
infinite  merit  of  Christ,  and  the  superfluous  merits  of  all  the
saints,  gained  by  works  of  supererogation,  form  an  inexhaustible
treasury,  from  which  the  Pope  and  his  subordinates  may  draw  at
discretion  for  the  mitigation,  or  plenary  dispensation,  of  all  the
satisfaction  due  for  sin  in  the  way  of  penance  in  this  life,  or  the
pains  of  purgatory  in  the  life  to  come.  Now  when  it  is  consid-
ered that  the  pains  of  purgatory  are  authoritatively  and  almost
universally  represented  by  Romanists  to  be  intolerably  severe,  it
will  be  seen  that  no  such  engine  of  power,  no  such  means  of  subju-
gating the  people,  or  of  exalting  and  enriching  the  priesthood  has
ever  been  claimed  or  conceded  by  man.  Men  really  invested  with
this  power,  of  necessity,  and  of  right,  are  the  absolute  masters  of
their  fellow  men  ;  and  those  who  wrongfully  claim  it,  who  as-
sume without  possessing  it,  are  the  greatest  impostors  (consciously
or  unconsciously)  and  the  greatest  tyi'ants  the  world  ever  saw.

4.  With  Romanists  themselves  the  greatest  argument  in  favour
of  the  doctrine  of  purgatory  is  tradition.  They  claim  that  it  has
always  been  held  in  the  Church ;  and  in  support  of  that  claim
they  quote  from  the  fathers  all  passages  which  speak  of  purifica-
tion by  fire,  or  of  praying  for  the  dead.  They  usually  begin  with
the  Second  Book  of  Maccabees  xii.  43,  where  it  is  said  that  Judas
Maccabeus  sent  "  2,000  drachmas  of  silver  to  Jerusalem  for  sacri-
fice, to  be  offered  for  the  sins  "  of  the  dead.  They  cite  Tertul-
lian,^  who  advised  a  widow  to  pray  for  her  husband,  and  to  offer
oblations  for  him  on  the  anniversary  of  his  death  ;  Cyprian,^  who
says  that  if  a  man  committed  a  certain  offence,  "  no  oblation  should
be  made  for  him,  nor  sacrifice  offered  for  his  repose  ;  "  Basil,  who
says  of  Isaiah  ix.  19,  "  The  people  shall  be  as  the  fuel  of  the  fire,"

OVK  a(f)avuTfx6i'  aTretAe",  dXAa  rrjv  KaOapaiv  vT7ocf>aLvet,  that  is,  "  it  doeS  not

threaten  extermination,  but  denotes  purification  ;  "  ^  Cyril  of  Je-

1  Ihid.  vol.  ii.  p.  70.  ^  j)^  Monogamia,  10;    Wovhs,  edit.  Basle,  1562,  p.  578,

8  Ep.  xlvi.  p.  114.   (?)

*  In  Esaice,  ix,  19 ;   Works,  edit.  Paris,  1618,  vol.  i.  p.  1039,  d.


§4.]  DOCTRINE    OF   THE    CHURCH   OF   ROME.  755

msalem,  who  says :  "  Deinde  et  pro  defunctis  Sanctis  patribus  et
episcopis,  et  omnibus  generatim,  qui  inter  nos  vita  functi  sunt,
oramus,  maximum  hoc  credentes  adjumentum  illis  animabus  fore,
pro  quibus  oratio  defer tur,  dum  sancta  et  tremenda  coram  jacet
victima  ;  "  ^  that  is,  "  Then  we  pray  for  the  holy  fathers  and  the
bishops  that  are  dead  ;  and,  in  short,  for  all  those  wlio  are  de-
parted this  life  in  our  communion  ;  believing  that  the  souls  of  those
for  whom  the  prayers  are  offered,  receive  very  great  relief  while
this  holy  and  tremendous  victim  lies  upon  the  altar  ;  "  Gregory  of
Nyssa,^  who  says  that  in  this  life  the  sinner  may  "  be  renovated
by  prayers  and  by  the  pursuit  of  wisdom  ;  "  but  when  he  has
quitted  his  bod}^  "  he  cannot  be  admitted  to  approach  the  Divin-
ity till  the  purging  fire  shall  have  expiated  the  stains  with  which
his  soul  was  infected ; "  Ambrose,^  who  thus  comments  upon  1
Corinthians  iii.  15,  "  He  ....  shall  be  saved,  yet  so  as  by  fire."
The  Apostle  says,  "  '  Yet  so  as  by  fire,'  in  order  that  his  salvation
be  not  understood  to  be  without  pain.  He  shows  that  he  shall  be
saved  indeed,  but  he  shall  undergo  the  pain  of  fire,  and  be  thus
purified  ;  not  like  the  unbelieving  and  wicked  man,  who  shall  be
punished  in  everlasting  fire  ;"  Jerome,^  who  says :  "  As  Ave  be-
lieve the  torments  of  the  devil,  and  of  those  wicked  men,  who  said
in  their  hearts,  '  There  is  no  God,'  to  be  eternal ;  so,  in  regard  to
those  sinners,  impious  men,  and  even  Christians,  and  whose  works
will  be  proved  and  purged  by  fire,  we  conclude  that  the  sentence
of  the  judge  will  be  tempered  by  mercy  ;  "  and  Augustine,^  who
says :  "  The  prayers  of  the  Church,  or  of  good  persons,  are  heard

1  Catechesis  Mystago(jica,  v.  8;  Schram,  Analysis  Patrum,  Augsburg,  1787,  vol.  x.  p.
264.

2  Oratio  de  Mortuis  ;  Works,  Paris,  1615,  vol.  ii.  pp.  1006-1068.

8  "Dixit:  'Sic  tamen  quasi  per  ignein,'  ut  salus  hac  non  sine  poena  sit:  ....  ostendit
salvum  ilium  quidem  futurum ;  sed  pttuas  ignis  passurum,  ut  per  ignem  purgatus  flat  salvus,
et  non  sicut  pertidi  Kterno  igne  in  perpetiiuni  torqueatur."  Works,  edit.  Paris,  1661,  vol.
iii.  p.  351,  a.

*  Comment  in  c.  Ixv.  Isa.  Opera,  Paris,  1579,  tome  iv.,  p.  502,  d,  e.

6  "  Nam  pro  defunctis  quibus('.ani,  vel  ipsius  Ecclesiae,  vel  quorumdam  piorum  exauditur
oratio:  sed  pro  his  quorum  in  Christo  regeneratorum  nee  usque  adeo  vita  in  corpore  male
gesta  est  ut  tali  misericordia  judicentur  digni  non  esse,  nee  usque  adeo  bene,  ut  talem  mis-
ericordiam  reperiantur  neccssariani  non  habere.  Sicut  etiam  facta  resurrectioiie  mortuorum
non  dceruiit  quibus  post  pcrnas,  quas  patiuntur  spiritus  niortuonun.  impertiatur  misericor-
dia, ut  in  ignem  non  mittantur  a'ternum.  Neque  enim  de  qiiibusdam  veraciter  diceretur,
quod  non  eis  remittatur  ne<(ue  in  hoc  sa?culo,  neque  in  futuro,  nisi  essent  quibus,  etsi  non
in  isto,  tamen  remittetur  in  futuro."  De  Civifnte  Z)e«,  xxi.  xxiv.  2;  IFo/'Z-s,  2d  Benedic-
tine edition,  Paris,  1838,  vol.  vii.  p.  1028,  c,  d.  "^Edificarent  autem  aurum,  argentum,
lapides  pretiosos,  et  de  utroque  igne  securi  essent;  non  solum  de  illo  aeterno  qui  in  seternum

cruciaturus  est  inipios,  sed  etiam  de  illo  qui  emendabit  eos  qui  per  ignem  salvi  erunt

Et  quia  dicitur,  '  salvus  erit,'  contemnitur  ille  ignis Gravior  tamen  erit  ille  ignis

quani  quidquid  potest  homo  pati  in  hac  vita."  Enarratio  in  Psalmum  xxxvii.  2,  3;
Works,  vol.  iv.  pp.  418,  d,  419,  a.


756  PART  IV.  Ch.  I  — state  OF  SOUL  AFTER  DEATH.

in  favour  of  those  Christians  who  departed  this  life  not  so  bad  as
to  be  deemed  unworthy  of  mercy,  nor  so  good  as  to  be  entitled  to
immediate  happiness.  So,  also,  at  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,
there  will  some  be  found  to  whom  mercy  will  be  imparted,  hav-
ing gone  through  those  pains  to  which  the  spirits  of  the  dead  are
liable.  Otherwise  it  would  not  have  been  said  of  some  mth  truth,
that  their  sin  '  shall  not  be  forgiven,  neither  in  this  world,  nor  in
the  world  to  come,'  unless  some  sins  were  remitted  in  the  next
world."  And  again  :  "  If  they  had  built  '  gold  and  silver,  and
precious  stones,'  they  would  be  secure  from  both  fires  ;  not  only
from  that  in  which  the  wicked  shall  be  punished  forever,  but  like-
wise from  that  fire  that  purifies  those  who  shall  be  saved  by  fire.
But  because  it  is  said  '  shall  be  saved,'  that  fire  is  thought  lightly
of ;  though  the  suffering  will  be  more  grievous  than  anj'thing  man
can  undergo  in  this  life."  "  These  passages,"  says  Cardinal  Wise-
man, "  contain  precisely  the  same  doctrine  as  the  Catholic  Church
teaches  ;"  they  may  be  found  in  great  abundance  in  all  the  stand-
ard works  of  Catholic  theologians.

With  regard  to  this  argument  from  the  fathers,  it  may  be  re-
marked, (1.)  That  if  any  one  should  quote  Dollinger,  Dupan-
loup,  Wiseman,  and  Manning  in  favour  of  any  Christian  doctrine,
it  would  have  more  weight  with  Protestants  than  the  same  num-
ber of  these  early  writers  ;  not  only  because  they  are,  speaking
generally,  men  of  far  more  ability  and  higher  culture,  but  because
they  are  in  more  favourable  circumstances  to  learn  the  truth.  The
fathers  looked  at  everything  through  an  atmosphere  filled  with
the  forms  of  pagan  traditions  and  ideas.  The  modern  leaders  of
the  Church  of  Rome  are  surrounded  by  the  light  of  Protestant
Christianity.  (2.)  All  the  ancient  w^riters,  quoted  in  support  of
the  doctrine  of  purgatory,  held  doctrines  which  no  Romanist  is
now  willing  to  avow.  If  they  discard  the  authority  of  the  fathers
when  teaching  a  Jewish  millennium,  or  sovereign  predestination,
once  the  doctrine  of  the  universal  Church,  they  cannot  reasonably
expect  Protestants  to  bow  to  that  authority  when  urged  in  favour
of  the  pagan  idea  of  a  purification  by  fire.  (3.)  The  witnesses
cited  in  support  of  the  doctrine  of  purgatory  come  very  far  short
of  proving  the  universal  and  constant  belief  of  the  doctrine  in
question.  And,  according  to  Romanists  themselves,  no  doctrine
can  plead  the  support  of  tradition  that  cannot  stand  the  crucial
test,  "  quod  semper,  quod  ubique,  quod  ab  omnibus."  (4.)  That
purgatory  is,  what  Dr.  Pusey  calls  it,  "  a  modern  invention,"  has
been  demonstrated  by  tracing  historically  its  origin,  rise,  and  de-
velopment in  the  Church.


§4.]      DOCTRINE  OF  THE  CHURCH  OF  ROME.       757

Arguments  against  the  Doctrine.

1.  The  first,  most  obvious,  and,  for  Protestants,  the  most  de-
cisive argument  against  the  doctrine  is,  that  it  is  not  taught  in
the  Bible.  This  is  virtually  admitted  by  its  advocates.  The
most  that  is  pi-etended  is,  that  having  adopted  the  doctrine  on
other  grounds,  they  can  find  in  Scripture  here  and  there  a  pas-
sage which  can  be  explained  in  accordance  with  its  teachings.
There  is  no  passage  which  asserts  it.  There  is  no  evidence  that
it  formed  a  part  of  the  instructions  of  Christ  or  his  Apostles.

2.  It  is  not  only  destitute  of  all  support  from  Scripture,  but  it
is  opposed  to  its  clearest  and  most  important  revelations.  If  there
be  anything  plainly  taught  in  the  Bible,  it  is  that  if  any  man  for-
sakes his  sins,  believes  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  the  eternal
Son  of  God,  trusts  simply  and  entirely  to  Him  and  his  work,
and  leads  a  holy  life,  he  shall  certainly  be  saved.  This  the  doc-
trine of  purgatory  denies.  It  rests  avowedly  on  the  assumption
that  notwithstanding  the  infinitely  meritorious  sacrifice  of  Christ,
the  sinner  is  bound  to  make  satisfaction  for  his  own  sins.  This
the  Bible  declares  to  be  impossible.  No  man  does  or  can  per-
fectly keep  the  commandments  of  God,  much  less  can  he  not
only  abstain  from  incurring  new  guilt,  but  also  make  atonement
for  sins  that  are  past.

The  doctrine  moreover  assumes  the  merit  of  good  works.  Here
again  it  is  clearer  than  the  sun  that  the  New  Testament  teaches
that  we  are  saved  by  grace  and  not  by  works  ;  that  to  liim  that
wurketh,  the  reward  is  a  matter  of  debt ;  but  to  him  who  simply
believes,  it  is  a  matter  of  grace ;  and  that  the  two  are  incompati-
ible.  What  is  of  grace  is  not  of  works ;  and  what  is  of  works  is
not  of  grace.  There  is  nothing  more  absolutely  incompatible
with  the  nature  of  the  Gospel  than  the  idea  that  inan  can  "  sat-
isfy divine  justice  "  for  his  sins.  Yet  this  idea  lies  at  the  foun-
dation of  the  doctrine  of  purgatory.  If  there  be  no  satisfaction
of  justice,  on  the  part  of  the  sinner,  there  is  no  purgatory,  for,
according  to  Romanists,  purgatory  is  the  place  and  state  in  which
such  satisfaction  is  rendered.  As  the  renunciation  of  all  depend-
ence upon  our  own  merit,  of  all  purpose,  desire,  or  effort  to  make
satisfaction  for  ourselves,  and  trusting  exclusively  to  the  satisfac-
tion rendered  by  Jesus  Christ,  is  of  the  very  essence  of  Christian
experience,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  doctrine  of  purgatory  is  in
conflict  not  only  with  the  doctrines  of  the  Bible  but  also  with  the
religious  consciousness  of  the  believer.     This  is  not  saying  that


7."8  PART  IV.  Ch.  L  — state  OF  SOUL  AFTER  DF.ATH

no  mail  wlio  believes  in  purgatory  can  be  a  true  Christian.  The
history  of  the  Church  proves  that  Christians  can-  be  very  incon-
sistent; that  the}"  ^'^'''ly  speculatively  adhere  to  doctrines  which
are  inconsistent  Avith  what  their  hearts  know  to  be  true.

It  is,  however,  not  only  the  doctrine  of  satisfaction,  but  also  the
absolutely  preposterous  doctrine  of  supererogation  which  must  be
admitted,  if  we  adopt  the  creed  of  the  Church  of  Rome  in  this
matter.  The  idea  is  that  a  man  may  be  more  than  perfect ;  that
he  may  not  only  do  more  than  the  law  requires  of  him,  but  even
render  satisfaction  to  God's  justice  so  meritorious  as  to  be  more
than  sufficient  for  the  pardon  of  his  own  sins.  This  supei'fluous
merit,  is  the  ground  on  which  the  sins  of  those  suffering  in  pur-
gatory may  be  forgiven.  This  is  a  subject  which  does  not  ad-
mit of  argument.  It  supposes  an  impossibility.  It  supposes  that
a  rational  creature  can  be  better  than  he  ought  to  be  ;  i.  e.^  than
he  is  bound  to  be.  Romanists  moreover  strenuously  deny  the
possibility  that  Christ's  righteousness  can  be  imputed  to  the  be-
liever as  the  ground  of  his  justification  ;  and  yet  they  teach  that
the  merits  of  the  saints  may  be  imputed  to  sinners  in  purgatory
as  the  ground  of  their  forgiveness.

Another  antiscriptural  assumption  involved  in  the  doctrine  is
that  the  pope,  and  his  subordinates,  have  power  over  the  unseen
world  ;  power  to  retain  or  to  remit  the  sins  of  departed  souls  ;  to
deliver  them  from  purgatorial  fire  or  to  allow  them  to  remain  un-
der its  torments.  This  is  a  power  which  could  not  be  trusted  in
the  hands  of  an  ano;el.  Nothincr  short  of  infinite  knowledo-e  and
infinite  rectitude  could  secure  it  from  fatal  abuse.  No  such
power  we  may  be  assured  has  ever  been  committed  to  the  hands
of  sinful  men.

There  are  two  entirely  different  things  involved  in  this  priestly
power  to  forgive  sins.  There  are  two  kinds  of  punishment  de-
nounced against  sin.  The  one  is  the  sentence  of  eternal  death ;
the  other  is  the  temporary  punishment  to  which  the  sinner  re-
mains subject  after  the  eternal  penalty  is  remitted.^    With  regard

1  In  the  passage  quoted  in  part  on  a  preceding  page,  Cardinal  Wiseman  says:  "No  fast-
ing, no  prayers,  no  alms-deeds,  no  works  that  we  can  conceive  to  be  done  by  man,  however
)rotracted,  however  expensive  or  rigorous  they  may  be,  can,  according  to  the  Catliolic  doc-
trine, have  the  most  infinitesimal  weight  for  obtaining  the  remission  of  sin,  or  of  the  eter-
nal punishment  allotted  to  it.  This  constitutes  the  essence  of  forgiveness,  of  justification,
and  in  it  we  hold  that  man  has  no  power.  Now,  let  us  come  to  the  remaining  part  of  the
sacrament  [of  penance].  We  believe  that  upon  this  forgiveness  of  sins,  tliat  is,  after  the
remission  of  that  eternal  debt,  which  God  in  his  justice  awards  to  tran»gressini>s  against
his  ]v.\\\  He  has  been  pleased  to  reserve  a  certain  degree  of  inferior  or  teii'i^orary  punish-
ment n;ipropriate  to  the  guilt  which  had  been  incurred;  and  it  is  on  this  part  of  the  punish-
ment alone,  that,  according  to  the  Catholic  doctrine,  satisfaction  can  be  made  to  God.'
Lectures,  ut  supra,  vol.  ii.  p.  35.


§4.]  DOCTRINE   OF  THE    CHURCH  OF   ROME.  759

to  both  the  priest  interferes.  Neither  can  be  remitted  without
his  intervention.  The  eternal  penalty  is  remitted  in  the  sacra-
ment of  penance.  The  latter  is  exacted,  mitigated,  or  dispensed
with  at  the  discretion  of  the  Church,  or  its  organs.  As  to  the
remission  of  the  eternal  penalty  the  intervention  of  the  priest  is
necessary  because  he  alone  can  administer  the  sacrament  of  pen-
ance, which  includes  contrition,  confession,  and  satisfaction.  All
are  necessary.  It  is  not  enough  that  the  sinner  be  penitent  in
heart  and  truly  turn  from  sin  unto  God ;  he  must  confess  liis  sins
to  the  priest.  The  Church  "  maintains  that  the  sinner  is  bound  to
manifest  his  offences  to  the  pastors  of  his  Church,  or,  rather,  to
one  deputed  and  authorized  by  the  Church  for  that  purpose  ;  to
lay  open  to  him  all  the  secret  offences  of  his  soul,  to  expose  all
its  wounds,  and  in  virtue  of  the  authority  vested  by  our  Blessed
Saviour  in  him,  to  receive  through  his  hands,  on  earth,  the  sen-
tence which  is  ratified  in  heaven,  of  God's  forgiveness."  Christ
also  "  gave  to  the  Church  power  of  retaining  sins,  that  is,  of
withholding  forgiveness,  or  delaying  it  to  more  seasonable  time."^
"  Here  is  a  power,  in  the  first  place,  truly  to  forgive  sin.  For  this
expression  '  to  forgive  sins,'  in  the  New  Testament,  always  signi-
fies to  clear  the  sinner  of  guilt  before  God."  "  The  Apostles,
then,  and  their  successors,  received  this  authority  ;  consequently,
to  them  was  given  a  power  to  absolve,  or  to  cleanse  the  soul  from
its  sins.  There  is  another  power  also  :  that  of  retaining  sins.
What  is  the  meaning  of  this  ?  clearly  the  power  of  refusing  to
forgive  them.  Now,  all  this  clearly  implies  —  for  tlie  promise  is
annexed,  that  what  sins  Christ's  lawful  ministers  retain  on  earth,
are  retained  in  heaven  —  that  there  is  no  other  means  of  obtain-
ing forgiveness,  save  through  them.  For  the  forgiveness  of
heaven  is  made  to  depend  upon  that  which  they  forgive  on  earth ;
and  those  are  not  to  be  pardoned  there,  whose  sins  they  retain."  ^
This  is  suflUciently  explicit.  It  is  to  be  remembered  the  power
of  forgiveness  here  claimed  has  reference,  not  to  the  temporary
punishment  imposed  in  the  way  of  penance  or  satisfaction,  but  to
the  remission  of  "  the  eternal  debt."  Now,  as  to  the  temporary
punishment,  which,  as  we  have  seen,  mnj  last  thousands  of  jeaxs
and  exceed  in  severity  any  sufferings  on  earth,  Romanists  teach,
(1.)  That  "they  are  expiatory  of  past  transgression."'^  (2.)  That
they  are  of  the  same  nature  with  the  penances  imposed  by  the
discipline  of  the  early  Church.  That  discipline  was  naturally,
perhaps   necessarily,  very  severe  ;    the    Church   was    then    sur-

1  Wiseman,  Lectures,  vol.  ii.  p.  15.  2  Jbid.  pp.  19,  20,  3  Jl,{(l_  p.  39.


760  PART  IV.  Ch.  I  — state  OF  SOUL  AFTER  DEATH.

rounded  by  heathenism,  and  many  of  its  members  were  hea-
then converts.  What  tendencies,  and  what  temptations  to  un-
christian conduct,  were  unavoidable  under  such  circumstances,
may  be  learned  from  the  state  of  the  Church  in  Corinth  as  de-
picted in  Paul's  epistles.  The  great  danger  was  that  Christians
should  be  involved,  intentionally  or  unintentionally,  in  the  idol-
atrous services  to  which  they  had  been  accustomed.  As  the
worship  of  idols  in  any  form,  was  a  renunciation  of  the  Gospel,  it
was  against  that  offence  the  discipline  of  the  Church  was  princi-
pally directed.  One  party  contended  that  the  "  lapsed  "  ought
never  to  be  restored  to  Christian  fellowship  ;  another,  which  al-
lowed their  readmission  to  the  Churcli,  insisted  that  they  should
be  restored  only  after  a  long  and  severe  course  of  penance.  Some
were  required  "  to  lay  prostrate  for  a  certain  period  of  months  or
years  before  the  doors  of  the  Church,  after  which  they  were  ad-
mitted to  different  portions  of  the  divine  service ;  while  others
were  often  excluded  through  their  whole  lives  from  the  liturgical
exercises  of  the  faithful,  and  were  not  admitted  to  absolution  until
they  were  at  the  point  of  death."  These  penances  Romanists  pro-
nounce "  meritorious  in  the  sight  of  God,"  they  "  propitiate  his
wrath."  This  is  the  doctrine  of  satisfaction  ;  and  such  satisfac-
tion for  sin  is  the  necessary  condition  of  its  forgiveness.  (3.)  As
these  penances  or  satisfactions  are  imposed  by  the  Church,  they
can  be  mitigated  or  remitted  by  the  Church.  (4.)  As  the  pains
of  purgatory  are  of  the  nature  of  satisfactions,  "  expiatory,"
"meritorious,"  and  "  propitiatory,"  they  are  as  much  under  the
control  of  the  Church,  as  the  penances  to  be  endured  in  this  life.
This  is  the  true,  and  it  may  be  said,  the  virtually  admitted
genesis  of  the  doctrine  of  purgatory  in  the  Church  of  Rome.  It
is  a  perversion  of  the  ecclesiastical  discipline  of  the  early  Chris-
tians. To  be  sure,  the  genesis,  or  birth,  is  spurious  ;  there  is  no
legitimate  connection  between  the  premises  and  the  conclusion.
A-dmitting  the  fact  tliat  the  early  Church  imposed  severe  pen-
ances on  offenders  before  restoring  them  to  fellowship ;  admitting
that  this  was  right  on  the  part  of  the  Church ;  admitting  that
such  penances  were  of  the  nature  of  satisfactions,  so  far  as  they
were  designed  to  satisfy  the  Church  that  the  repentance  of  the
offender  was  sincere ;  and  admitting  tliat  these  penances  being
matters  of  Church  discipline  were  legitimatel)^  under  the  power
of  the  Church,  how  does  all  this  prove  that  they  were  "  expiatory
in  the  sight  of  God,"  that  '-  they  satisfied  divine  justice,"  or  that
they  were  the  necessary  conditions  of    forgiveness  at  his   bar?


§4.]  DOCTRINE    OF   THE   CHURCH   OF  ROME.  TGI

Satisfactory  to  the  Cliurch  as  evidences  of  repentance,  and  satis-
factory to  God's  justice,  are  two  very  different  things,  which
Romanists  have  confounded.  Besides,  how  does  it  follow,  be-
cause the  visible  Church  has  control  of  the  discipline  of  its  mem-
bers, in  this  life,  that  it  has  control  of  the  souls  of  men  in  the
life  to  come  ?     Yet  Romanists  reason  from  the  one  to  the  other.

3.  Another  decisive  argument  against  the  doctrine  of  purgatory
is  drawn  from  the  abuses  to  which  it  has  led,  and  which  are  its
inevitable,  being  its  natural  consequences.  It  is  a  'priori  evident
that  a  power  committed  to  weak  and  sinful  men  which  is  safe  in
no  other  hands  but  those  of  God  Himself,  must  lead  to  the  most
dreadful  abuses.  The  doctrine,  as  we  have  seen,  is,  (1.)  That
the  priest  has  power  to  remit  or  retain,  the  penalty  of  eternal
death  denounced  against  all  sin.  (2.)  That  he  (or  the  appro-
priate organ  of  the  Church)  has  power  to  alleviate,  to  shorten,
or  to  terminate,  the  sufferings  of  souls  in  purgatory.  That  this
power  should  fail  to  be  abused,  in  the  hands  of  the  best  of  men,
is  impossible.  Vested  in  the  hands  of  ordinary  men,  as  must  be
generally  the  case,  or  in  the  hands  of  mercenary  and  wicked  men,
imagination  can  set  no  limit  to  its  abuse ;  and  imagination  can
hardly  exceed  the  historical  facts  in  the  case.  This  is  not  a  matter
of  dispute.  Romanists  themselves  admit  the  fact.  Cardinal  Wise-
man acknowledges  that  "  flagrant  and  too  frequent  abuses,  doubt-
less, occurred  through  the  avarice,  and  rapacity,  and  impiety
of  men ;  especially  when  indulgence  was  granted  to  the  contrib-
utors towards  charitable  or  religious  foundations,  in  the  erection
of  which  private  motives  too  often  mingle."  ^  The  reader  must
be  referred  to  the  pages  of  history  for  details  on  this  subject.
The  evils  which  have  in  fact  flowed  from  this  doctrine  of  purga-
tory and  of  the  priestly  power  of  retaining  or  remitting  sin,  are
such  as  to  render  it  certain  that  no  such  doctrine  can  be  of  God.

4.  Romanists,  however,  confidently  appeal,  in  support  of  their
doctrine,  to  the  express  declaration  of  Christ,  "  Whose  soever
sins  ye  remit,  they  are  remitted  unto  them  ;  and  whose  soever  sins
ye  retain,  they  are  retained."  (John  xx.  23.)  To  the  same
effect  it  is  said,  in  Matthew  xvi.  19,  "  I  will  give  unto  thee  the
keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  :  and  whatsoever  thou  shalt  bind
on  earth,  shall  be  bound  in  heaven :  and  whatsoever  thou  shalt
loose  on  earth,  shall  be  loosed  in  heaven."  The  first  remark -to
be  made  on  these  passages  is,  that  whatever  power  is  granted  in
them  to  the  Apostles,  is  granted  in  Matthew  xviii.  18  to  all  Chris-

1  Lectures,  ut  supra,  xii.;  vol.  ii.  p.  75.


762  PART  IV.  Ch.  I. —  state  OF  SOUL  AFTER  DEATH.

tians,  or,  at  least,  to  every  association  of  Christians  which  consti-
tutes a  Church.  "  If  thy  brother  shall  trespass  against  thee,  go
and  tell  him  his  fa.ult  between  thee  and  him  alone :  if  he  shall
hear  thee,  thou  hast  gained  thy  brother.  But  if  he  will  not  hear
thee,  then  take  with  thee  one  or  two  more,  that  in  the  mouth  of
two  or  three  witnesses  every  word  may  be  established.  And  if
he  neglect  to  hear  them,  tell  it  unto  the  Church  :  but  if  he  neg-
lect to  hear  the  Church,  let  him  be  unto  theo  as  an  heathen  man
and  a  publican.  Verily,  I  say  unto  you,  whatsoever  ye  shall  bind
on  earth,  shall  be  bound  in  heaven :  and  whatsoever  ye  shall  loose
on  earth  shall  be  loosed  in  heaven."  This  power,  therefore,  of
binding  and  loosing,  whatever  it  was,  was  not  vested  exclusively
in  the  Apostles  and  their  successors,  but  in  the  Church.  But  the
true  Church  to  which  the  promises  and  prerogatives  of  the  Church
belong,  consists  of  true  believers.  This  is  not  only  the  doctrine
of  the  Bible  and  of  all  Protestants  at  the  time  of  the  Reforma-
tion, but  would  seem  to  be  a  matter  of  course.  Promises  made
to  the  Apostles  were  made  to  true  apostles,  not  to  those  who
pretended  to  the  office,  and  were  false  apostles.  So  the  promises
made  to  Christians  are  made  not  to  nominal,  pretended,  or  false
Christians,  but  to  those  who  truly  are  what  they  profess  to  be.
If  this  be  clear,  then  it  is  no  less  clear  that  the  power  of  binding
and  loosing,  of  remitting  or  retaining  sin,  was  never  granted  by
Christ  to  unregenerated,  wicked  men,  no  matter  by  what  name
they  may  be  called.  This  is  a  great  point  gained.  The  childi'en
of  God  in  this  world  are  not  under  the  power  of  the  children  of
the  devil,  to  be  forgiven  or  condemned,  saved  or  lost,  at  their
discretion.  Therefore,  when  Luther  was  anathematized  by  the
body  calling  itself  the  Church,  as  Athanasius  had  been  before
him,  it  did  not  hurt  a  hair  of  his  head.

Secondly,  the  power  granted  by  Christ  to  his  Church  of  bind-
ing and  loosing,  of  forgiving  or  retaining  sin,  is  not  absolute,  but
conditional.  The  passages  above  quoted  are  analogous  to  many
others  contained  in  the  Scriptures,  and  are  all  to  be  explained  in
the  same  way.  For  example,  our  Lord  said  to  his  disciples  ;
They  who  hear  you,  hear  me.  That  is,  the  people  were  as  much
bound  to  believe  the  gospel  when  preached  by  the  disciples,  as
though  they  heard  it  from  the  lips  of  Christ  Himself.  Or,  if
these  words  are  to  be  understood  as  addressed  exclusively  to  the
Apostles,  and  to  include  a  promise  of  infallibility  in  teaching,  the
meaning  is  substantially  the  same.  Men  were  as  much  bound  to
receive  the  doctrines  of  the  Apostles,  as  the  teachings  of  Clirist,


§4.]      DOCTRINE  OF  THE  CHURCH  OF  ROME.      763

for  what  they  taught  He  taught.  St.  John,  therefore,  says,  "  He
that  knoTveth  God  heareth  us ;  he  that  is  not  of  God,  heareth  not
us."  (1  John  iv.  6.)  Nevertheless,  although  Christ  required
all  men  to  hear  his  Apostles  as  though  He  himself  were  speaking  ;
yet  no  man  was  bound  to  hear  them  unless  the}''  preached  Christ's
gospel.  Therefore  St.  Paul  said,  "  Though  we,  or  an  angel  from
heaven,  preach  any  other  gospel  unto  you  than  that  which  we  have
preached  unto  you,  let  him  be  accursed."  (Gal.  i.  8.)  If  the
Apostles  taught  anything  contrary  to  the  authenticated  revela-
tion of  God,  they  were  to  be  rejected.  If  they  undertook  to  binrl
or  loose,  to  remit  or  retain  sin  on  any  other  terms  than  those  pre-
scribed by  Christ,  their  action  amounted  to  nothing ;  it  produced
no  effect.  In  teaching  and  in  absolution  their  power  was  simply
declarative.  In  the  one  case,  they,  as  witnesses,  declared  what
were  the  conditions  of  salvation  and  the  rule  of  life  prescribed
in  the  gospel ;  and  in  the  other  case,  they  simply  declared  the
conditions  on  which  God  will  forgive  sin,  and  announced  the
promise  of  God  that  on  those  conditions  He  would  pardon  the
sins  of  men.  A  child,  therefore,  may  remit  sin  just  as  effect-
ually as  the  pope  ;  for  neither  can  do  anything  more  than  declare
the  conditions  of  forgiveness.  It  once  required  the  heroism  of
Luther  to  announce  that  truth  which  emancipated  Europe  ;  now
it  is  an  every-day  truth.

There  is,  of  course,  a  great  difference  between  the  Apostles
and  other  Christian  teachers.  Christ  bore  witness  to  the  correct-
ness of  their  testimony  as  to  his  doctrines,  and  sanctioned  their
declarations,  by  signs,  and  wonders,  and  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
thus  giving  the  seal  of  infallibility  to  their  teachings  as  uttered
by  the  lips  and  as  we  have  them  recorded  in  the  Bible.  And,
there  is  also  a  difference  between  the  official  ministers  of  the  gos-
pel and  other  men,  in  so  far  as  the  former  are  specially  called  to
the  work  of  preaching  the  word.  But  in  all  cases,  in  that  of  the
Apostles,  in  that  of  office-bearers  in  the  Church,  and  in  that  of
laymen,  the  power  is  simply  declaratory.  They  declare  what
God  has  revealed.  What  difference  does  it  make  in  the  author-
ity of  the  message,  whether  the  gospel  be  read  at  the  bed  of  a
dying  sinner,  by  a  child,  or  by  an  archbishop  ?  None  in  the
world.

There  is  another  class  of  passages  analogous  to  those  under
consideration.  When  our  Lord  says.  Ask  and  ye  shall  receive.
Whatsoever  ye  ask  in  my  name  I  will  do  it,  no  one  understands
these  promises  as  unconditional.    No  one  believes  that  any  prayer


764  PART  IV.  Ch.  I  — state  OF  SOUL  AFTER  DEATH.

of  the  Christian  is  ever  heard,  if  it  be  not  for  something  agreea-
ble to  the  will  of  God.  When  then  it  is  said, "  Whose  soever  sins
ye  remit,  they  are  remitted,"  why  should  it  be  inferred  that  no
condition  is  imphed  ?  The  language  is  not  more  explicit  in  the
one  case  than  in  the  other.  As  no  man's  prayers  are  heard  un-
less he  asks  for  things  agreeable  to  the  will  of  God  ;  so  no  man's
sins  are  remitted  unless  he  truly  repents  and  truly  believes  in
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  One  man  has  no  more  power  to  forgive
sins,  than  another.  The  forgiveness  of  sin  is  the  exclusive  pre-
rogative of  God.

Thirdly,  there  is  another  remark  to  be  made  about  this  power
of  binding  and  loosing.  Christ  has  ordained  that  the  terms  of
admission  to  the  Church,  should  be  the  same  as  those  of  admission
into  heaven ;  and  that  the  grounds  of  exclusion  from  the  Church,
should  be  the  same  as  those  of  exclusion  from'  heaven.  He,  there-
fore, virtually  said  to  his  disciples.  Whom  ye  receive  into  the
Church,  I  will  receive  into  heaven  ;  and  whom  ye  exclude  from
the  Church,  I  will  exclude  from  heaven.  But  this,  of  course^
implies  that  they  should  act  according  to  his  directions.  He  did
not  bind  Himself  to  sanction  all  their  errors  in  binding  and  loos-
ing ;  any  more  than  He  was  bound  by  his  promise  to  hear  their
prayers,  to  grant  all  the  foolish  or  wicked  petitions  his  people
might  offer  ;  or  by  his  proinise  in  reference  to  their  teaching,  to
sanction  all  the  false  doctrines  into  which  they  might  be  seduced.
If  we  interpret  Scripture  by  Scripture,  we  escape  a  multitude  of
errors.

Fourthly,  Romanists  rest  their  doctrine  of  absolution  and  of
the  power  of  the  keys  over  souls  in  purgatory,  very  much  upon
the  special  gifts  granted  to  the  Apostles  and  to  their  successors.
In  reference  to  this  agreement  it  may  be  remarked,  —

1.  That  the  Apostles  never  claimed,  never  possessed,  and
never  pretended  to  exercise,  the  power  assumed  by  Romanists,  in
the  remission  of  sins.  They  never  presumed  to  pronounce  the
absolution  of  a  sinner  in  the  sight  of  God.  Christ  could  say
"  Thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee  ;  "  but  we  never  hear  such  language
from  the  lips  of  an  Apostle.  They  never  directed  those  burdened
with  a  sense  of  sin  to  go  to  the  priest  to  make  confession  and  re-
ceive absolution.  They  had  no  authority  in  this  respect  above
that  which  belongs  to  the  ordinary  officers  of  the  Church.  They
could  declare  the  terms  on  which  God  had  promised  to  forgive
sins  ;  and  they  could  suspend  or  excommunicate  members,  for
cause,  from  the  communion  of  the  visible  Church.     In  the  case


§4.]  DOCTRINE    OF   THE   CHURCH  OF   ROME.  765

of  the  incestuous  man  whom  the  Church  in  Corinth  allowed  to
remain  in  its  fellowship,  Paul  determined  to  do  what  he  cen-
sured the  Church  for  not  doing ;  that  is,  in  virtue  of  his  apostolic
jurisdiction  extending  over  all  the  churches,  he  excommunicated
the  offender,  or,  delivered  him  to  Satan,  that  he  might  repent.
(1  Cor.  V.)  When  the  man  did  repent,  the  Apostle  exhorted
the  Corinthians  to  restore  him  to  their  fellowship,  saying,  "  To
whom  ye  forgive  anything,  I  forgive  also."  (2  Cor.  ii.  10.)
He  claimed  for  himself  no  power  which  he  did  not  recognize  as
belonging  to  them.  It  was  a  mere  matter  of  Church  discipline
from  beginning  to  end.  This  power  of  discipline,  which  all
Churches  recognize  and  exercise,  the  Romanists  have  perverted
into  the  priestly  power  of  absolution.

2.  Admitting,  what,  however,  is  not  conceded,  that  the  Apos-
tles had  special  power  to  forgive  sin,  that  power  must  have
rested  on  their  peculiar  gifts  and  qualifications.  They  were  in-
fallible men  ;  not  infalhble  indeed  in  reading  men's  hearts,  or  in
judging  of  their  character,  but  simply  infallible  as  teachers ;  and
they  had  authority  to  organize  the  Church,  and  to  lay  down  laws
for  its  future  government  and  discipline.  These  gifts  and  pre-
rogatives, indeed,  in  no  way  qualified  them  to  sit  in  judgment
on  the  souls  of  men,  to  pardon  or  condemn  them  at  discretion  ;
but,  such  as  they  were,  they  were  personal.  Those  who  claim  to
be  their  ofiicial  successors,  and  arrogate  their  peculiar  preroga-
tives, do  not  pretend  to  possess  their  gifts  ;  they  do  not  pretend
to  personal  infallibility  in  teaching,  nor  do  they  claim  jurisdic-
tion beyond  their  own  dioceses.  As  no  man  can  be  a  prophet
without  the  gifts  of  a  prophet,  so  no  man  can  be  an  Apostle
without  the  gifts  of  an  Apostle.  The  ofiice  is  simply  authority
to  exercise  the  gifts  ;  but  if  the  gifts  are  not  possessed  what  can
the  office  amount  to  ?

But  even  if  the  impossible  be  admitted  ;  let  it  be  conceded
that  the  prelates  have  the  power  of  remitting  and  retaining  sin,
as  claimed  by  Romanists,  in  virtue  of  their  apostleship,  how  is
this  power  granted  to  priests  who  are  not  Apostles  ?  It  will  not
do  to  say  that  they  are  the  representatives  and  delegates  of  the
bishop.  The  bishop  is  said  to  have  this  power  because  he  has
received  the  Holy  Ghost.  If  this  means  anything,  it  means
that  the  Holy  Spirit  dwells  in  him,  and  so  enlightens  his  mind
and  guides  his  judgment,  as  to  render  his  decisions  in  retaining
or  remitting  sm,  virtually  the  decisions  of  God  ;  but  this  divine
illumination  and  guidance  can  no  more  be  delegated  than   the


766  PART  IV.  Ch.  l  — state  of  soul  after  death.

knowledge  of  the  lawyer  or  the  skill  of  the  surgeon.  How  can  a
prophet  delegate  his  power  to  foresee  the  future  to  aiiother  man  ?
It  is  impossible  to  believe  that  God  has  given  men  the  power
of  forgiving  or  retaining  sin,  unless  He  has  given  them  the  power
of  infallible  judgment ;  and  that  such  infallibility  of  judgment
belongs  to  the  Romish  priesthood,  no  man  can  believe.

It  has  already  been  urged  as  valid  arguments  against  the
Romish  doctrine  of  purgatory,  (1.)  That  it  is  destitute  of  all
Scriptural  support.  (2.)  That  it  is  opposed  to  many  of  the  most
clearly  revealed  and  most  important  doctrines  of  the  Bible.
(3.)  That  the  abuses  to  which  it  always  has  led  and  which  are  its
inevitable  consequences,  prove  that  the  doctrine  cannot  be  of  God.
(4.)  That  the  power  to  forgive  sin,  in  the  sense  claimed  by
Romanists,  and  which  is  taken  for  granted  in  their  doctrine  of
purgatoi-y,  finds  no  support  in  the  words  of  Christ,  as  recorded  in
John  XX.  23,  and  Matt.  xvi.  19,  which  are  relied  on  for  that  pur-
pose. (5.)  The  fifth  argument  against  the  doctrine  is  derived
from  its  history,  which  proves  it  to  have  had  a  pagan  origin,  and
to  have  been  developed  by  slow  degrees  into  the  form  in  which
it  is  now  held  by  the  Church  of  Rome.

History  of  the  Doctrine.

The  details  on  tliis  subject  must  be  sought  in  the  common
books  on  the  history  of  doctrine.  Here  only  the  most  meagre
outline  can  be  expected.  A  full  exposition  on  this  subject  would
require  first  an  account  of  the  prevalence  of  the  idea  of  a  purifi-
cation by  fire  among  the  ancients  before  the  coming  of  Christ,
especially  among  the  people  of  central  Asia;  secondly,  an  ac-
count of  the  early  appearance  of  this  idea  in  the  first  three  cen-
turies in  the  Christian  Church,  until  it  reached  a  definite  form  in
the  writings  of  Augustine  ;  and  thirdly,  the  establishment  of  the
doctrine  as  an  article  of  faith  in  the  Latin  Church,  principally
through  the  influence  of  Gregory  the  Great.

Fire  is  the  most  effectual  means  of  purification.  It  is  almost
the  only  means  by  which  the  dross  can  be  separated  from  the
gold.  In  the  Scriptures  it  is  frequently  referred  to,  in  illustra-
tion of  the  painful  process  of  the  sanctification  of  the  human  soul.
In  Zechai'iah  xiii.  0,  it  is  said,  "  I  will  bring  the  third  part
through  the  fire,  and  will  refine  them  as  silver  is  refined,  and
will  try  them  as  gold  is  tried :  they  shall  call 'on  my  name,  and
I  will  hear  them  :  I  will  say.  It  is  my  people  ;  and  they  shall
Bay,  The  Lord  is  my  God."    It  is  in  allusion  to  the  same  familiar


§4.]  DOCTRINE    OF   THE    CHURCH   OF   ROME.  767

fact,  that  afflictions  are  so  often  compared  to  a  furnace,  and  the
trials  of  God's  people  are  said  to  be  by  fire.  "  The  fire,"  says
the  Apostle,  "shall  try  every  man's  work,  of  what  sort  it  is."
With  the  ancient  Persians  fire  was  sacred.  It  became  an  object
of  worship,  as  the  symbol  of  the  divinity ;  and  elemental  fire  was
even  for  the  soul  the  great  means  of  purification.  In  the  Zend-
avesta,  Ormuz  is  made  to  say  to  Zoroaster,  "  Thine  eyes  shall
certainly  see  all  tilings  live  anew.  —  For  the  renovated  earth
shall  yield  bones  and  water,  blood  and  plants,  hair,  fire  and  fife
as  at  the  beginning.  —  The  souls  will  know  their  bodies,  —  Be-
hold my  father !  my  mother  !  my  ^Yiie  !  Then  will  the  inhabi-
tants of  the  universe  appear  on  earth  with  mankind.  Every  one
will  see  his  good  or  evil.  Then  a  great  separation  will  occur.
Everything  corrupt  will  sink  into  the  abyss.  Then  too  through
the  fierceness  of  the  fire  all  mountains  shall  melt ;  and  through
the  flowing  stream  of  fire,  all  men  must  pass.  The  good  will  go
through  as  easily  as  through  flowing  milk.  The  Avicked  find  it  real
fire  ;  but  they  must  pass  through  and  be  purified.  Afterward
the  whole  earth  shall  be  renewed."  ^

With  the  Greek  Stoics  also,  fire  was  the  elementary  principle
and  soul  of  the  world,  and  they  also  taught  a  renovation  of  the
world  through  fire.  With  the  Stoics,  "  The  universe  is  one
whole,  which  comprises  all  things  ;  yet  contains  a  passive  prin-
ciple, matter,  t6  Trdn-xor,  and  an  active  principle,  to  -oioS  ,  which
is  reason,  or  God.  The  soul  of  man  is  part  of  this  divine  nature,
and  will  be  reabsorbed  into  it  and  lose  its  individual  existence.
The  Deity  in  action,  if  we  may  so  speak,  is  a  certain  active
sether,  or  fire,  possessed  of  intelhgence.  This  first  gave  form
to  the  original  chaos,  and,  being  an  essential  part  of  the  universe,
sustains  it  in  order.  The  overruling  jDower,  which  seems  some-
times in  idea  to  have  been  separated  from  the  Absolute  Being,
was  dfxapnarj,  fate,  or  absolute  necessity.  To  this  the  universe  is
subject,  both  in  its  material  and  divine  nature.  Men  return  to
this  life  totally  oblivious  of  the  past,  and  by  the  decrees  of  fate
are  possessed  of  a  renovated  existence,  but  still  in  imperfection
and  subject  to  sorrow  as  before."  ^     This  is   an  inchoate  form  of

1  Kleuker's  Zendavesta  im  Kleinem,  2  Thl.  s.  128.

^  The  Mutual  Influence  of  Christianity  and  the  Stoic  School.  By  James  Henry  Brj'-
ftiit,  B.  D.,  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge,  Incumbent  of  Astley,  Warwickshire.  The
Hulsean  Dissertation  for  the  year  1865.  London  and  Cambridge,  186G,  p.  22.  Sir  Alexan-
der Grant,  in  his  Ethics  of  Aristotle,  Essay  vi.,  The  Ancient  Stoics  (first  an  Oxford  Essay,
1858),  London,  1866,  vol.  i.  p.  246,  remarks:  "If  we  cast  our  eyes  on  a  list  of  the  early
Stoics  and  their  native  places,  we  cannot  avoid  noticing  how  many  of  this  school  appear
to  have  come  of  an  Eastern  and  often  of  a  Semitic  stock."     This  circumstance  in  connec-


768  PART  IV.  Ch.  I. —  state  of  SOUL  AFTER  DEATH.

the  pantheism  of  the  present  day.  The  system  as  stated  is  not
self-consistent ;  as  it  says  that  the  souls  of  men  are  to  be  ab-
sorbed into  the  soul  of  the  world,  and  yet  that  they  are  to  return
to  this  life,  although  obhvious  to  the  past;  which  amounts  to
saying  that  there  will  be  a  new  generation  of  men.

The  idea  of  a  purification  by  fire  after  death  became  familiar
to  the  Greek  mind,  and  was  taken  up  by  Plato,  and  wrought  into
his  philosophy;  he  taught  that  no  one  could  become  perfectly
happy  after  death,  until  he  had  expiated  his  sins ;  and  that  if
they  were  too  great  for  expiation,  his  sufferings  would  have  no
end.^  That  this  doctrine  passed  from  the  Gentiles  to  the  Jews
may  be  inferred  not  only  from  the  fact  ah-eady  mentioned  that
Judas  Maccabeus  sent  money  to  Jerusalem  to  pay  for  sacrifices  to
be  offered  for  the  sins  of  the  dead  ;  but  also  from  the  doctrine  of
the  Rabbins,  that  children,  by  means  of  sin  offerings,  could  alle-
viate the  sufferings  of  their  deceased  parents.^  Some  of  them
also  taught  that  all  souls,  not  perfectly  holy,  must  wash  them-
selves in  the  fire-river  of  Gehenna ;  that  the  just  would  therein
be  soon  cleansed,  but  the  wicked  retained  in  torment  indefinitely.^
It  was  in  this  general  form  of  a  purification  b}^  fire  after  death
that  the  doctrine  was  adopted  by  some  of  the  fathers.  Nothing
more  than  this  can  be  proved  from  the  writings  of  the  first  three
centuries.  Origen  taught  first  that  this  purification  was  to  take
place  after  the  resurrection.  "  Ego  puto,"  he  says,  "  quod  et  post
resurrectionem  ex  mortuis  indigeamus  sacramento  eluente  nos  at-
que  pui'gante  :  nemo  enim  absque  sordibus  resurgere  poterit :  nee
ullam  posse  animam  reperiri  qure  universis  statim  vitiis  careat."  *
And  secondly,  that  in  the  purifying  fire  at  the  end  of  the  world,
all  souls,  and  all  fallen  angels,  and  Satan  himself,  will  ultimately
be  purged  from  sin,  and  restored  to  the  favour  of  God.  In  his
comment  on  Romans  viii.  12,  he  says  :  "  Qui  vero  verbi  Dei  et
doctrine  Evangelicse  purificationem  spreverit,  tristibus  et  poenali-
bus  purificationibus  semetipsum  reservat,  ut  ignis  gehennte  in  cruci-
atibus  purget,  quem  nee  apostolica  doctrina  nee  evangelicus  sermo
purgavit."^    This  doctrine  was  condemned  in  the  Church  ;  but,  as

tioi:  with  affinity  in  doctrine,  goes  to  show  the  eastern  origin  of  the  Stoic  system.  It  in-
cludes the  pantheism  of  the  Orientals  with  some  of  the  elements  peculiar  to  the  religion  of
the  Semitic  race  as  wc  find  them  in  the  Bible.

1  Hoepfner,  De  Ori(jine  Dor/mntis  de  Pui-gatorio,   Halle,  1792-98  ;  quoted  by  Fliigge,  «<
supra,  p.  323.

2  Eisenmenger,  Endecktes  Judenfhum,  ii.  vi. ;  Kcinigsberg,  1711,  pp.  357,  358.
8  Kabbcda  Denudata,  edit.  Frankfort,  1684,  vol.  ii.  part  1,  pp.  108,  109,  113.

*  ffomil.  XV.  in  Luc.  Works,  edit.  Delarue,  Paris,  1740,  vol.  iii.  p.  948,  B,  a.
»  Ibid.  Paris,  1759,  vol.  iv.  p.  640,  B,  b,  c.


§4.]  DOCTRINE    OF   THE   CHURCH   OF   ROME.  769

Fliigge  ^  says  :  "  This  anathema  was  the  less  effective  because  the
eastern  views  on  this  subject  differed  so  much  from  the  western
or  Church  doctrine.  The  former,  or  Origen's  doctrine,  contem-
plated the  purification  of  the  greatest  sinners  and  of  the  devil
himseK ;  the  Latin  Church  thought  only  of  believers  justified  by
the  blood  of  Christ.  The  one  supposed  the  sinner  to  purify  him-
seK from  his  desire  of  evil ;  the  other,  asserted  expiation  by  suf-
fering. According  to  the  former,  the  sinner  was  healed  and
strengthened  ;  according  to  the  latter,  divine  justice  must  be  sat-
isfied." It  is  not  to  be  inferred  from  this,  that  the  Greek  Church
adopted  Origen's  views  as  to  "  the  restoration  of  all  things  ; "
but  it  nevertheless  maintained  until  a  much  later  period  the  views
hj  which  it  was  distinguished  from  the  Latins  on  the  doctrine  of
the  future  state.

It  was,  therefore,  in  the  western  Church  that  the  development
of  the  doctrine  of  pvirgatory  took  place.  Augustine  first  gave  it
a  definite  form,  although  his  views  are  not  always  consistently  or
confidentl)^  expressed.  Thus  he  saj^s :  It  is  doubtful  whether  a
cei'tain  class  of  men  are  to  be  purified  by  fire  after  death,  so  as  to
be  prepared  to  enter  heaven  ;  "  utrum  ita  sit,"  he  says,  "  qu;Bri
potest :  et  aut  inveniri,  aut  latere,  nonnullos  fideles  per  ignem
quemdam  purgatorium  ;  quanto  magis  minusve  bona  pereuntia
dilexerunt,  tanto  tardius  citiusque  salvari."  ^  In  other  places,
however,  he  teaches  the  two  essential  points  in  the  doctrine  of
purgatory,  first,  that  the  souls  of  a  certain  class  of  men  who  are
ultimately  saved,  suffer  after  death ;  and  secondly,  that  they  are
aided  through  the  eucharist,  and  the  alms  and  prayers  of  the
faithful.3

It  was,  however,  Gregory  the  Great  who  consolidated  the
vague  and  conflicting  views  circulating  through  the  Chiu'ch,  and
brought  the  doctrine  into  such  a  shape  and  into  such  connection
with  the  discipline  of  the  Church,  as  to  render  it  the  effective
engine  for  government  and  income,  which  it  has  ever  since  re-
mained. From  this  time  onward  through  all  the  Middle  Ages,
pui'gatory  became  one  of  the  prominent  and  constantl}'^  reiterated
topics  of  public  instruction.  It  took  firm  hold  of  the  popular
mind.  The  clergy  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest,  and  the  differ-
ent orders  of  monks  vied  with  each  other  in  their  zeal  in  its  incul-
cation ;  and  in  the  marvels  which  they  related  of  spiritual  appa-

1  Ut  supra,  p.  327.

2  EnchirhUon  de  Fide,  Spe  et  Charitate,  69;   Worhs,  Paris,  1837,  vol.  vi.  p.  382,  b.

3  De  Cidtnfe  Dei,  xxi.  xiii. :  Ibid.  vol.  vii.  p.  1015,  d.  Enchiridion  de  Fide,  Spe  et
Charitate,  110;  Ibid.  vol.  vi.  p.  403,  b,  c.

VOL,  III.


770     PAKT  IV.     Ch.   L  — state    OF   SOUL   AFTER  DEATH.

ritions,  in  support  of  the  doctrine.  They  contended  fiercely  for
the  honour  of  superior  power  of  redeeming  souls  from  purgatorial
pains.  The  Franciscans  claimed  that  the  head  of  their  order
descended  annually  into  purgatory,  and  delivered  all  the  brother-
hood who  were  there  detained.  The  Carmelites  asserted  that  the
Virgin  Mary  had  promised  that  no  one  who  died  with  the  Car-
melite scapulary  upon  their  shoulders,  should  ever  be  lost.^  The
chisel  and  pencil  of  the  artist  were  employed  in  depicting  the
horrors  of  purgatory,  as  a  means  of  impressing  the  public  mind.
No  class  escaped  the  contagion  of  belief  ;  the  learned  as  well  as
the  ignorant ;  the  high  and  the  low  ;  the  soldier  and  the  recluse  ;
the  skeptic  and  the  believer  were  alike  enslaved.^  From  this
slavery  the  Bible,  not  the  progress  of  science,  has  delivered  all
Protestants.

1  Mosheim,  Eistoria  Ecclesue,  Sseculum  xiii.  pars  ii.  2,  §  29;  edit.  Helmstadt,  1764,  p.
454.

2  All  experience  proves  that  infidelity  is  no  protection  asjainst  superstition.  If  men  will
not  believe  the  rational  and  true,  they  will  believe  the  absurd  and  the  false.  When  the
writer  was  returning  from  Europe,  he  had  as  a  fellow  passenger  a  distinguished  French  di-
plomatist. One  evening  when  admiring  the  moon  shining  in  its  brightness,  that  gentleman
adverted  to  the  idea  of  creation,  and  pronounced  it  absurd,  avowing  himself  an  atheist.
But  he  added  immediately,  "Don't  misunderstand  me.  I  am  a  good  Catholic,  and  mean
to  die  in  the  faith  of  the  Catholic  Church.  You  Protestants  are  all  wrong.  You  tell  every
man  to  think  for  himself.  Ho !  then  I'll  think  what  I  please.  I  want  a  religion  which
tells  me  I  sha'n't  think;  only  submit.  Well!  I  mean  to  submit,  and  be  buried  in  conse-
crated ground."


CHAPTER  II.

THE  EESURRECTION.

§  1.    The  Scriptural  Doctrine.

By  the  resurrection  is  not  meant  the  continued  existence  of  the
soul  after  death.  Tlie  fact  that  the  Sadducees  in  the  time  of
Chi'ist,  against  whom  most  of  the  arguments  found  in  the  New
Testament  in  favour  of  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  were  di-
rected, denied  not  only  that  doctrine,  but  also  that  of  the  con-
tmued  existence  of  the  soul  after  death,  sufficiently  accounts  for
the  sacred  writings  combining  the  two  subjects.  Thus  our  Lord,
in  reasoning  with  the  Sadducees,  said  :  "  As  touching  the  dead,
that  they  rise ;  have  ye  not  read  in  the  book  of  Moses,  how  in
the  bush  God  spake  unto  him,  saymg,  I  am  the  God  of  Abra-
ham, and  the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob  ?  He  is  not
the  God  of  the  dead,  but  the  God  of  the  living."  (Mark  xii.  26.)
All  that  this  passage  directly  proves  is  that  the  dead  continue
alive  after  the  dissolution  of  the  bod5^  But  as  this  is  Christ's
answer  to  a  question  concerning  the  resurrection,  it  has  been  in-
ferred that  the  resurrection  means  nothing  more  than  that  the
soul  does  not  die  with  the  body,  but  rises  to  a  new  and  higher
life.  Thus  also  the  Apostle  in  the  elaborate  argument  contained
in  1  Corinthians  xv.  evidently  regards  the  denial  of  the  resurrec-
tion as  tantamount  with  the  denial  of  the  future  life  of  the  soul.
Hence  many  maintain  that  the  only  resurrection  of  which  the
Bible  speaks  is  the  resurrection  of  the  soul  when  the  body  dies.
The  first  position,  therefore,  to  be  defended,  in  stating  the  Scrip-
tural doctrine  on  this  subject  is,  that  our  bodies  are  the  subjects
of  the  resurrection  spoken  of  in  the  Scriptures.

The  Bodies  of  Men  are  to  rise  again.

This  is  denied,  first,  by  those  who  take  the  word  resurrection
in  a  figurative  sense,  expressing  the  rising  of  the  soul  from  spirit-
ual death  to  spiritual  life.  At  the  grave  of  Lazarus  Martha  said
to  our  Lord,  "  I  know  that  he  shall  rise  again  in  the  resurrection
at  the  last  day."     To  which  our  Lord,  according  to  Mr.  Alger,


772  PART  IV.   Ch.  ii.  —  the  resurrection.

replies  substantially,  "  You  suppose  that  in  the  last  day  the  Mes-
siah will  restore  the  dead  to  live  again  upon  the  earth.  I  am  the
Messiah,  and  the  last  days  have  therefore  ai'rived.  I  am  commis-
sioned by  the  Father  to  bestow  eternal  life  upon  all  who  believe
on  me ;  but  not  in  the  manner  you  have  anticipated.  The  true
resurrection  is  not  calling  the  body  from  the  tomb,  but  opening
the  fountains  of  eternal  life  in  the  soul.  I  am  come  to  open  the
spiritual  world  to  your  faith.  He  that  belie veth  in  me  and  keep-
eth  my  commandments,  has  passed  from  death  unto  life  —  become
conscious  that  though  seemingly  he  passes  into  the  grave,  yet
really  he  shall  live  with  God  forever.  The  true  resurrection  is,
to  come  into  the  experience  of  the  truth  that,  '  God  is  not  the
God  of  the  dead  but  of  the  living  ;  for  all  live  unto  Him.'  Over
the  soul  that  is  filled  with  such  an  experience,  death  has  no
power.  Verily,  I  say  unto  you,  the  hour  is  coming,  and  now  is,
when  the  dead,  the  ignorant  and  guilty,  buried  in  trespasses  and
sins,  shall  lay  hold  of  the  life  thus  offered,  and  be  blessed,"  ^

Secondly,  the  resurrection  of  the  body  is  denied  by  those  who,
with  the  Swedenborgians,  hold  that  man,  in  this  life,  has  two
bodies,  an  external  and  internal,  a  material  and  psychical.^  The
former  dies  and  is  deposited  in  the  grave,  and  there  remains  never
to  rise  again.  The  other  does  not  die,  but  in  union  with  the  soul
passes  into  another  state  of  existence.  The  only  resurrection,
therefore,  which  is  ever  to  occur,  takes  place  at  the  moment  of
death.

Thirdly,  it  is  denied  by  those  who  assume  that  the  soul  as  pure
spirit,  cannot  be  individualized  or  localized  ;  that  it  cannot  have
any  relation  to  space,  or  act  or  be  acted  upon,  without  a  corpo-
reity of  some  kind  ;  and  who,  therefore,  assume  that  it  must  be
furnished  with  a  new,  more  refined,  ethereal  body,  as  soon  as  its
earthly  tabernacle  is  laid  aside.  The  resurrection  body  is  ac-
cording to  this  view  also  furnished  at  the  moment  of  death.

That  the  Scriptures,  however,  teach  a  literal  resurrection  of
the  body  is  proved,  (1.)  From  the  meaning  of  the  word.  Resur-
rection signifies  a  rising  again  ;  a  rising  of  that  which  was  buried  ;
or  a  restoration  of  life  to  that  which  was  dead.  But  the  soul,
according  to  the  Scriptures,  does  not  die  when  the  body  is  dis-
solved.    It,  therefore,  cannot   be   the  subject  of  a  resurrection,

1  Alger,  ut  supra,  p.  324.

2  Bonnet,  PuUngenesie  Philosophiqiie.  Essai  Analytique  sur  I'Ame,  chap,  xxiv.,  part
xxii.,  Neufchatcl,  1783,  vol.  xiv.  p.  205  ff.,  especially  p.  230  ff.,  and  vol.  xvi.  p.  481  ff.
Lange,  Beitriuje  zu  der  Lehre  von  den  letzten  Dincjen,  Meurs,  1841.  Lange's  doctrine,
however,  as  will  appear  in  the  sequel,  is  not  that  of  Swedeuborg.


§1.]  SCRirrUllAL   DOCTRINE.  773

except  in  the  sense  antithetical  to  spiritual  death,  which  is  not
now  in  question.  The  same  is  true  of  the  psychical  body,  if  there
be  such  a  thing.  It  does  not  die,  and,  therefore,  cannot  rise
again.  The  same  may  also  be  said  of  a  new  body  furnished  the
soul  when  its  earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle  is  dissolved.

(2.)  Those  who  are  in  the  dust  of  the  earth  ;  tliose  "  that  are
in  the  graves  "  are  said  to  rise.  But  it  is  only  of  the  body  that  it
can  be  said,  it  is  in  the  grave  ;  and,  therefore,  it  is  of  the  body
the  resurrection  spoken  of,  must  be  understood.

(3.)  It  is  "our  mortal  bodies"  which  are  to  rise  again.  This
form  of  expression  is  decisive  of  the  Apostle's  meaning.  "  He
that  raised  Christ  from  the  dead  shall  also  quicken  your  mortal
bodies,  by  his  Spirit  that  dwelleth  in  you."  (Rom.  viii.  11.)  It
is  "  our  vile  body "  which  is  to  be  fashioned  like  unto  Christ's
glorious  body.     (Phil.  iii.  21.)

(4.)  This  also  is  clearly  the  doctrine  taught  in  the  fifteenth
chapter  of  First  Corinthians.  There  were  certain  errorists  in
Corintli  who  denied  the  fact  and  the  desirableness 'of  the  resur-
rection of  believers.  Paul's  argument  is  directed  to  both  those
points.  As  to  the  fact  that  the  dead  can  rise,  he  refers  to  what
no  Christian  could  deny,  the  rising  of  Christ  from  the  dead.
This,  as  a  historical  fact,  he  supports  by  historical  evidence.  He
then  shows  that  the  denial  of  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  is  the
denial  of  the  whole  Gospel,  which  rests  on  that  fact.  "  If  Christ
be  not  risen,  then  is  our  preaching  vain,  and  your  faith  is  also
vain."  But  if  Christ  rose  from  the  dead,  all  his  people  must.
Christ  rose  as  the  first  fruits  of  them  that  sleep.  There  is  in
Paul's  view,  the  same  divinely  appointed,  and  therefore  necessary
connection  between  the  resurrection  of  Christ  and  that  of  his
people,  as  between  the  death  of  Adam  and  that  of  his  descend-
ants. As  surely  as  all  in  Adam  die,  so  surely  shall  all  in  Christ
be  made  alive.  And  finally,  on  this  point,  the  Apostle  conde-
scends to  argue  from  the  faith  and  practice  of  the  Church.  What
is  the  use,  he  asks,  of  being  baptized  for  the  dead,  if  the  dead
rise  not  ?  The  whole  daily  life  of  the  Christian  is  founded,  he
says,  on  the  hope  of  the  resurrection  ;  not  of  the  continued  exist-
ence of  the  soul  merely,  but  of  the  glorious  existence  of  the  whole
man,  soul  and  body,  with  Christ  in  heaven.  As  to  the  second
point,  the  desirableness  of  the  resurrection  of  the  body,  he  shows
that  all  objections  on  this  score  are  founded  on  the  assumption
that  the  future  is  to  be  like  the  present  body.  He  says  that
the  man  who  makes  that  objection  is  a  fool.     The  two  are  no


774  PART  IV.    Ch.  II.  — the  eesurrection.

more  alike  tliiin  a  seed  and  a  flower,  a  clod  of  earth  and  a  star,
the  earthly  and  the  heavenly.  "  It  [the  bod}^  of  course]  is  sown
in  corrnption.  it  is  raised  in  incorrnption  :  it  is  sown  in  dishonour,
it  is  raised  ill  glory :  it  is  sown  in  weakness,  it  is  raised  in  power  :
it  is  sown  a  natural  bod}^  it  is  raised  a  spiritual  body."  This
whole  discourse,  therefore,  is  about  the  body.  To  the  objection
that  our  present  bodies  are  not  adapted  to  our  future  state  of  ex-
istence, he  answers.  Granted  ;  it  is  true  that  flesh  and  blood
cannot  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God  ;  this  corruptible  must  put
on  incorrnption,  and  this  mortal  must  put  on  immortality-  It
would  seem  that  the  Apostle  in  this  chapter  must  have  had  in
his  eye  a  host  of  writers  in  our  day  who  make  themselves  merry
with  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection,  on  much  the  same  grounds
as  those  relied  upon  by  the  errorists  of  Corinth,  whose  fragments
he  scattered  to  the  winds  eighteen  centuries  ago.

(5.)  Another  argument  on  this  subject  is  drawn  from  the  anal-
ogy constantly  presented,  between  the  resurrection  of  Christ  and
that  of  his  people.  The  sacred  writers,  as  we  have  seen,  argue  the
possibility  and  the  certainty  of  the  resurrection  of  our  bodies,  from
the  fact  of  Christ's  resurrection  ;  and  the  nature  of  our  future
bodies  from  the  nature  of  his  body  in  heaven.  There  would  be
no  force  in  this  argument  if  the  body  were  not  the  thing  which  is
to  rise  again.

(6.)  Finally,  as  Paul  argued  from  the  faith  of  the  Church,  we
cannot  err  in  following  his  example.  The  Bible  is  a  plain  book,
and  the  whole  Christian  world,  in  all  ages,  has  understood  it  to
teach,  not  this  or  that,  but  the  literal  rising  from  the  dead  of  the
body  deposited  in  the  grave.  All  Christians  of  every  denomina-
tion are  taught  to  say,  I  believe  in  "  The  forgiveness  of  sins  ;  The
resurrection  of  the  body  ;  And  the  life  everlasting."

The  Identity  of  the  Future  ivith  our  Present  Body.

There  are  two  distinct  questions  to  be  here  considered.  First,
Do  the  Scriptures  teach  that  the  resurrection  body  is  to  be  the
same  as  that  deposited  in  the  grave  ?  Second,  Wherein  does
that  sameness  or  identity  consist  ?  The  first  of  these  questions
we  may  be  able  to  answer  with  confidence  ;  the  second  we  may
not  be  able  to  answer  at  all.

The  arguments  to  prove  that  we  are  hereafter  to  have  the  same
bodies  that  Ave  have  in  the  present  life,  are  substantially  the  same
as  those  already  adduced.  Indeed,  identity  is  involved  in  the  very
idea  of  a  resurrection ;  for  resurrection  is  a  living  again  of  that


§  1.]  SCRIPTURAL  DOCTRINE.  775

which  was  dead  ;  not  of  something  of  the  same  nature,  but  of  the
very  thing  itself.  And  all  the  passages  already  quoted  as  prov-
ing the  resurrection  of  the  body,  assume  or  declare  that  it  is  the
same  body  that  rises.  It  is  our  present  "  mortal  bodies  ;"  "  our
vile  body  ;  "  it  is  "  this  corruptible,"  "  this  mortal ;  "  it  is  that
which  is  sown,  of  which  the  resurrection  and  transformation  is  pre-
dicted and  promised.  Our  resurrection  is  to  be  analogous  to  that
of  Christ ;  but  in  his  case  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  very
body  which  hung  upon  the  cross,  and  which  laid  in  the  tomb,  rose
again  from  the  dead.  Otherwise  it  would  have  been  no  resurrec-
tion. This  identity  was  the  very  thing  Christ  was  anxious  to
prove  to  his  doubting  disciples.  He  showed  them  his  pierced
hands  and  feet,  and  his  perforated  side.  On  this  subject,  how-
ever, there  is  little  difference  of  opinion.  Wherever  the  resurrec-
tion of  the  body  is  an  article  of  faith  the  identity  of  the  present
and  future  body  has  been  admitted.  The  usual  form  of  Christian
burial,  in  the  case  of  the  faithful,  has  ever  been,  "  We  commit
this  body  to  the  grave  in  the  sure  hope  of  a  blessed  resm-rection."

Whereiii  does  this  Identity  consist?

It  is  obvious  that  identity  in  different  cases  depends  on  very
different  conditions.  First,  in  the  case  of  unorganized  matter,  as
a  clod  of  earth  or  a  stone,  the  identity  depends  on  the  continuity
of  substance  and  of  form.  If  the  stone  be  reduced  to  powder  and
scattered  abroad,  the  same  sidistance  continues,  but  not  in  the  same
combination  ;  and  therefore  the  identitj'-  is  gone.  In  what  sense
is  water  in  a  fjoblet  the  same  from  hour  to  liour,  or  fi-om  dav  to
day  ?  It  is  the  same  substance  resulting  from  the  combination  of
oxygen  and  hydrogen,  and  it  is  the  same  portion  of  that  substance.
If  that  goblet  be  emptied  into  the  ocean,  what  becomes  of  the
identity  of  the  water  which  it  contained  ?  If  you  separate  the
water  into  its  constituent  gases,  the  elementary  substances  con-
tinue, but  they  are  no  longer  water.  You  may  change  its  state
wdthout  destroying  its  identity.  If  frozen  into  ice  and  again
thawed,  it  is  the  same  water.  If  evaporated  into  steam,  and  then
condensed,  it  is  the  same  water  still.  This  sameness,  of  which
continuance  of  the  same  substance  is  the  essential  element,  is  the
lowest  form  of  identity.  In  the  Church  it  has  often  been  assumed
that  sameness  of  substance  is  essential  to  the  identity  between  our
present  and  future  bodies.  This  idea  has  been  pressed  sometimes
to  the  utmost  extreme.  Augustine  seems  to  have  thought  that
all  the  matter  which  at  any  period  entered  into  the  organism  of


776  PART  IV.   ch.  n.  —  the  resurrection.

our  present  bodies,  would  in  some  way  be  restored  in  the  resur-
rection body.  Every  man's  body,  however  dispersed  here,  shall
be  restored  perfect  in  the  resurrection.  Every  body  shall  be  com-
plete in  quantity  and  quality.  As  many  hairs  as  have  beep
shaved  off,  or  nails  cut,  shall  not  return  in  such  vast  quantities  as
to  deform  their  original  places  ;  but  neither  shall  they  perish  ;
they  shall  return  into  the  body  into  that  substance  from  which
they  grew.^  Thomas  Aquinas  was  more  moderate.  He  taught
that  only  those  particles  which  entered  into  the  composition  of  the
body  at  death,  would  enter  into  the  composition  of  the  resurrec-
tion body.  This  idea  seems  to  have  entered  into  the  theology  of
Romanists,  as  some  at  least  of  the  theologians  of  the  Church  of
Rome  labour  to  remove  the  objection  to  this  view  of  the  subject
derived  from  the  fact  that  the  particles  of  the  human  body  after
death  are  not  only  dispersed  far  and  wide  and  mingled  with  the
dust  of  the  earth,  but  also  enter  into  the  composition  of  the
bodies  of  plants,  of  animals,  and  of  men.  To  this  Perrone  an-
swers, "  Difficile  Deo  non  est  moleculas  omnes  ad  corpus  aliquod
spectantes,  etiam  post  innumeros  transitus  ex  uno  in  aliud  coUi-
gere.  Haec  mutatio  sen  transitus  accidentalis  est,  minime  vere  es-
sentialis,  ut  ex  physiologia  ac  zoobiologia  constat  universa."  ^  It
is  true,  as  our  Lord  teaches  us  :  "  With  God  all  things  are  pos-
sible ;  "  and  if  sameness  of  substance  be  essential  to  that  identity
between  our  present  and  future  bodies,  which  the  Bible  asserts,
then  we  should  have  to  submit  to  these  difficulties,  satisfied  that
it  is  within  the  power  of  omniscient  omnipotence  to  do  whatever
God  has  promised  to  effect.

Others  assume  that  it  is  not  necessary  to  the  identity  contended
for  that  all  the  particles  of  the  body  at  death  should  be  included
in  the  resurrection  body.  It  is  enough  that  the  new  body  should
be  formed  exclusively  out  of  particles  belonging  to  the  present
body.  But  as  the  body  after  the  resurrection  is  to  be  refined  and
ethereal,  a  tenth,  a  hundredth,  or  a  ten  thousandth  portion  of
those  particles  would  suffice.  It  would  take  very  little  of  gross
matter  to  make  a  body  of  light.  TertulHan  thought  that  God
had  rendered  the  teeth  indestructible  in  order  to  furnish  material
for  the  future  body.  Many  others  also  suppose  that  there  is  some-
where an  indestructible  germ  in  our  present  body,  which  is  to  be
developed  into  the  body  of  the  future."

1  De  Civitate  Dei,  xxii.,  xix.,  xx.;    WovTcs,  Paris,  1838,  vol.  vii.  pp.  1085-1089.

2  Pnelvctiones,  edit.  Paris,  1861,  vol.  i.  p.  50-3.

8  Sec  Efsny  on  the  Identity  and  General  Resurrection  of  the  Iluman  Body,  bj'  Samuel
Drew,  chapter  vi.  section  7,  Brooklyn,  1811,  p.  315  ff.


§  1.]  SCRIPTURAL   DOCTRINE.  7T7

Secondly,  in  works  of  art  sameness  of  substance  holds  a  vei-y
subordinate  part.  The  Apollo  Belvidere  once  lay  dormant  in  a
block  of  marble.  The  central  portion  of  that  block  containing
every  particle  of  matter  in  the  statue  was  not  the  Apollo  of  the
artist.  Could  every  particle  clipped  off,  be  restored,  the  substance
would  remain,  but  the  statue  would  be  gone.  Here  form,  expres-
sion, the  informing  idea  are  the  main  constituents  of  identity.  If
a  penitentiary  should  be  taken  down,  and  the  materials  be  em-
ployed in  the  construction  of  a  cathedral,  the  substance  would  be
the  same,  but  not  the  building.  When  you  look  into  a  mirror  the
image  reflected  remains  the  same,  but  not  the  substance ;  for  that
is  changed  Avith  every  new  reflection.  And  if  it  were  possible,  or
proved,  that  in  like  manner  the  Madonna  del  Sixti  of  Raphael  had
a  thousand  times  clianged  its  substance,  it  would  remain  the  same
picture  still.  The  soul  here  informs  the  body.  The  character  is
more  or  less  visibly  impressed  upon  the  face.  We  know  the  for-
mer by  looking  at  the  latter.  If  this  be  so,  if  the  soul  have  power
thus  to  illuminate  and  render  intelligent  the  gross  material  of  our
present  frames,  why  may  it  not  hereafter  render  its  ethereal  vest-
ment so  expressive  of  itself  as  to  be  at  once  recognized  by  all  to
whom  it  was  ever  known.  Thus  we  may  at  once  recognize  Isaiah,
Paul,  and  John.  It  is  not  said  that  this  will  be  so  ;  that  herein
lies  the  identity  of  their  heavenly  and  earthly  bodies ;  but  should
it  prove  to  be  true,  we  should  not  stop  to  inquire  or  to  care  how
many  particles  of  the  one  enter  into  the  composition  of  the  other.

Thirdly,  identity  in  living  organisms  is  something  still  higher,
and  more  inscrutable  than  in  works  of  art.  The  acorn  and  the
oak  are  the  same  ;  but  in  what  sense  ?  Not  in  substance,  not  in
form.  The  infant  and  the  man  are  the  same,  through  all  the
stages  of  life  ;  boyhood,  manhood,  and  old  age  ;  the  substance  of
the  body,  however,  is  in  a  state  of  perpetual  change.  It  is  said
this  change  is  complete  once  every  seven  years.  Hence  if  a  man
live  to  be  seventy  years  old,  the  substance  of  his  body  has,  during
that  period,  been  entirely  changed  ten  times.  Here,  then,  is  an
identity  independent  of  sameness  of  substance.  Our  future  bodies,
therefore,  may  be  the  same  as  those  we  now  have,  although  not  a
particle  that  was  in  the  one  should  be  in  the  other.

The  object  of  these  remarks  on  the  different  kinds  of  identity,
is  not  to  explain  anything.  It  is  not  intended  to  teach  wherein
the  identity  of  the  earthly  and  heavenly  consists  ;  whether  it
be  an  identity  of  substance ;  or  of  expression  and  idea,  as  in
works  of  art ;  or  of  the  uninterrupted  continuity  of  the  same  vital


778  PART  IV.     Ch.   II. —  the   resurrection.

force  as  in  the  plant  and  animal  through  their  whole  pi-vOgress  of
growth  and  decay  ;  or  whether  it  is  a  sameness  which  includes  all
these  ;  or  something  different  from  them  all.  Nothing  is  affirmed.
The  subject  is  left  where  the  Bible  leaves  it.  The  object  aimed
at  is  twofold  ;  first,  to  show  that  it  is  perfectly  rational  for  a  man
to  assert  the  identity  between  our  present  and  our  future  bodies,
although  he  is  forced  to  admit  Lnat  he  does  not  know  wherein  that
identity  is  to  consist.  This  is  no  more  than  what  all  men  have
to  admit  concerning  the  continued  sameness  of  our  present  bodies.
And,  secondly,  to  stop  the  mouths  of  gainsayers.  They  ridicule
the  idea  of  a  resurrection  of  the  body ;  asking  if  the  infant  is  to
rise  as  an  infant ;  the  old  man,  wrinkled  and  decrepid ;  the
maimed  as  maimed  ;  the  obese  with  their  cumbrous  load  ;  and  by
such  questions  think  they  have  refuted  a  Scripture  doctrine.  The
Bible  teaches  no  such  absurdities  ;  and  no  Church  goes  beyond  the
Scriptures  in  asserting  two  things,  namely  :  that  the  body  is  to
rise,  and  that  it  is  to  be  the  same  after  the  resurrection  that  it  was
before ;  but  neither  the  Bible  nor  the  Church  determines  wherein
that  sameness  is  to  consist.

With  regard  to  our  present  bodies,  the  fact  of  their  continued
identity  is  not  denied.  According  to  one  view  the  principle  of
this  identity  is  in  the  body  and  perishes,  or,  ceases,  with  it.  Ac-
cording to  another,  although  in  the  body,  it  does  not  perish  with
it,  but  remains  united  to  the  soul,  and  under  appropriate  circum-
stances fashions  for  itself  a  new  body.  According  to  others,  this
vital  principle  is  in  the  soul  itself.  Agassiz,  as  a  zoologist,  teaches
that  with  every  living  germ  there  is  an  immaterial  principle  by
which  one  species  is  distinguished  from  anotlier,  and  which  deter-
mines that  the  germ  of  a  fish  develops  into  a  fish ;  and  that  of  a
bird,  into  a  bird,  although  the  two  germs  are  exactly  the  same  (z.
e.,  alike)  in  substance  and  structure.  When  the  individual  dies,
this  immaterial  principle  ceases  to  exist.  This  is  Agassiz's  doc-
trine. Dr.  Julius  Miiller^  thinks  that  this  vital  organizing  force
continues  in  union  with  the  soul,  but  is  not  operative  between
death  and  the  resurrection.  He  says,  "  it  is  not  the  o-ap;,  the
mass  of  earthly  material,  ....  but  the  o-oj/ja,  the  organic  Avhole,
to  which  the  Scriptures  promise  a  resurrection The  organ-
ism, as  the  living  form  which  appropriates  matter  to  itself,  is  the
true  body,  which  in  its  glorification  becomes  the  o-waa  Triei'/xariKor."
But  he  understands  the  Apostle  in  2  Corinthians  v.  4,  as  clearly
teaching  that  the  soul  during  the  interval  between  death  and  the

1  StudUn  und  Kritiken,  1835,  pp.  777,  785


§  1.]  SCRIPTURAL  DOCTRINE.  779

resiiiTection  remains  unclothed.  Dr.  Lange,  whose  imagination
often  dominates  him,  teaches  that  the  soiil  was  created  to  be  in-
carnate ;  and  therefore  was  endowed  with  forces  and  talents  to
that  end.  In  virtue  of  its  nature,  it  as  certainly  gathers  from  sur-
rounding matter  the  materials  for  a  body,  as  a  seed  gathers  from
the  earth  and  air  the  matter  suited  to  its  necessities.  He  assumes,
therefore,  that  there  is  in  the  soul  "  a  law  or  force,  which  secures
its  forming  for  itself  a  body  suited  to  its  necessities  and  sphere ;
or  more  properly,"  he  adds,  "  the  organic  identity  "  may  be  char-
acterized as  the  "  Schema  des  Leibes,"  which  is  included  in  the
soul,  or,  as  the  "  Incarnationstrieb  des  Geistes  ;  "  a  "nisus  forma-
tivus "  which  belongs  to  the  human  soul.^  The  soul  while  on
earth  forms  for  itself  a  body  out  of  earthly  materials ;  when  it
leaves  the  earth  it  fashions  a  habitation  for  itself  out  of  the  mate-
rials to  be  found  in  the  higher  sphere  to  wliich  it  is  translated ;
and  at  the  end  of  the  world,  wlien  the  grand  palingenesia  is  to
occur,  the  souls  of  men,  according  to  their  nature,  will  fashion
bodies  for  themselves  out  of  the  elements  of  the  dissolving  uni-
verse. "  The  righteous  will  clothe  themselves  with  the  refined
elements  of  the  renovated  earth ;  they  shall  shine  as  the  sun.
The  wicked  shall  be  clothed  with  the  refuse  of  the  earth ;  they
shall  awake  to  shame  and  everlasting  contempt."^

Leaving  out  of  view  what  is  fanciful  in  this  representation,  it
may  be  readily  admitted  by  those  who  adhere  to  the  generally
received  doctrine  that  man  consists  of  soul  and  body  (and  not
of  spirit,  soul,  and  body),  that  the  soul,  besides  its  rational,  vol-
untary, and  moral  faculties,  has  in  it  what  may  be  called  a  prin-
ciple of  animal  life.  That  is,  that  it  has  not  only  faculties  which
fit  it  for  the  higher  exercises  of  a  rational  creature  capable  of
fellowship  with  God,  but  also  faculties  which  fit  it  for  living
in  organic  union  vsdth  a  material  body.  It  may  also  be  admitted
that  the  soul,  in  this  aspect,  is  the  animating  principle  of  the
body,  that  by  which  all  its  functions  are  carried  on.  And  it  may
further  be  admitted  that  the  sonl,  in  this  aspect,  is  that  which
gives  identity  to  the  human  body  through  all  the  changes  of  sub-
stance to  which  it  is  here  subjected.  And  finally  it  may  be  ad-
mitted, such  being  tlie  case,  that  the  body  which  the  soul  is  to
have  at  the  resurrection,  is  as  reall}^  and  truly  identical  with  that
wliich  it  had  on  earth,  as  the  body  of  the  man  of  mature  life  io
the  same  which  he  had  when  he  was  an  infant.  All  this  may
pass  for  what  it  is  worth.     What  stands  sure  is  what  the  Bible

1  Beitrdge  zu  der  Lehre  von  den  Letzten  Dincjen,  Meurs,  1841,  p.  235.      2  lUd,  p.  251.


780  PART  IV.   ch.  n.  —  the  eesurrection.

teaches,  that  our  heavenly  bodies  are  in  some  high,  true,  and  real

sense,  to  be  the  same  as  those  which  we  now  have.

Nature    of  the    Resurrection  Body.

It  is  obvious  that  this  is  a  subject  of  which  we  can  know  noth-
ing, except  from  divine  revehxtion.  We  are  of  necessity  as  pro-
foundly ignorant  of  this  matter,  as  of  the  nature  of  the  inhabi-
tants of  the  planets  or  of  the  sun.  The  speculations  of  men
concerning  the  nature  of  the  future  body  have  been  numerous  ;
some  merely  fanciful,  others,  revolting.

There  are  two  negative  statements  in  the  Bible  on  this  subject,
which  imply  a  great  deal.  One  is  the  declaration  of  Christ,
That  in  the  resurrection  men  neither  marry  nor  are  given  in
marriage,  but  are  as  the  angels  of  God.  The  other  is  the  words
of  Paul  in  1  Corinthians  xv.  50,  "  Flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit
the  kingdom  of  God."  There  seem  to  be  plainly  three  things
implied  or  asserted  in  these  passages.  (1.)  That  the  bodies  of
men  must  be  specially  suited  to  the  state  of  existence  in  which
they  are  to  live  and  act.  (2.)  That  our  present  bodies,  that  is,  our
bodies  as  now  organized,  consisting  as  they  do  of  flesh  and  blood,
are  not  adapted  to  our  future  state  of  being.  And  (3.)  That
everything  in  the  organization  or  constitution  of  our  bodies
designed  to  meet  our  present  necessities,  will  cease  with  the  life
that  now  is.  Nothing  of  that  kind  will  belong  to  the  resurrection
body.  If  blood  be  no  longer  our  life,  we  shall  have  no  need  of
organs  of  respiration  and  nutrition.  So  long  as  we  are  ignorant
of  the  conditions  of  existence  which  await  us  after  the  resurrec-
tion, it  is  vain  to  speculate  on  the  constitution  of  our  future  bod-
ies. It  is  enough  to  know  that  the  glorified  people  of  God  will
not  be  cumbered  with  useless  organs,  or  trammeled  by  the  limi-
tations which  are  imposed  by  our  present  state  of  existence.

The  following  particulars,  however,  may  be  inferred  with  more
or  less  confidence  from  what  the  Bible  has  revealed  on  this  sub-
ject,—

1.  That  our  bodies  after  the  resurrection  T\'ill  retain  the  human
form.  God,  we  are  told,  gave  to  all  his  creatures  on  earth  each
its  own  body  adapted  to  its  nature,  and  necessary  to  attain  the
end  of  its  creation.  Any  essential  change  in  the  nature  of  the
body  would  involve  a  corresponding  change  in  its  internal  consti-
tution. A  bee  in  the  form  of  a  horse  would  cease  to  be  a  bee  ;
and  a  man  in  any  other  than  a  human  form,  would  cease  to  be  a
man.     His  body  is  an  essential  element  in  his  constitution.     Ev


§1.]  SCRIPTURAL   DOCTRINE.  T81

ery  intimation  given  in  Scripture  on  this  subject,  tends  to  sustain
this  conclusion.  Every  time  Christ  appeared  to  his  disciples  not
only  before,  but  also  after  his  ascension,  as  to  Stephen,  Paul,  and
John,  it  was  in  human  form.  Origen  conceited  that,  because  the
circle  is  the  most  perfect  figure,  the  future  body  will  be  globular.
But  a  creature  in  that  form  would  not  be  recognized  either  in
earth  or  heaven  as  a  man.

2.  It  is  probable  that  the  future  body  will  not  only  retain  the
human  form,  but  that  it  will  also  be  a  glorified  likeness  of  what
it  was  on  earth.  We  know  that  every  man  has  here  his  individ-
ual character,  —  peculiarities  mental  and  emotional  which  distin-
guish him  from  every  other  man.  We  know  that  his  body  by
its  expi'ession,  air,  and  carriage  more  or  less  clearly  reveals  his
character.  This  revelation  of  the  inward  by  the  outward  will
probably  be  far  more  exact  and  informing  in  heaven  than  it  can
be  here  on  earth.  How  should  we  know  Peter  or  John  in  heaven,
if  there  were  not  something  in  their  appearance  and  bearing
corresponding  to  the  image  of  themselves  impressed  by  their
writino's  on  the  minds  of  all  their  readers  ?

3.  This  leads  to  the  further  remark  that  we  shall  not  only
recognize  our  friends  in  heaven,  but  also  know,  without  intro-
duction, prophets,  apostles,  confessors,  and  martyrs,  of  whom  we
have  read  or  heard  while  here  on  earth,  (a.)  This  is  altogether
probable  from  the  natu.re  of  the  case.  If  the  future  body  is  to
be  the  same  with  the  present,  why  should  not  that  sameness,
whatever  else  it  may  include,  include  a  certain  sameness  of  ap-
pearance. (S.)  When  Moses  and  Elias  appeared  on  the  mount
with  Christ,  they  were  at  once  known  by  the  disciples.  Their
appearance  corresponded  so  exactly  with  the  conceptions  formed
from  the  Old  Testament  account  of  their  character  and  conduct,
that  no  doubt  was  entertained  on  the  subject,  (c.)  It  is  said
that  we  are  to  sit  down  with  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  in  the
kingdom  of  heaven.  This  implies  that  Abraham,  Isaac,  and
Jacob  will  be  known ;  and  if  they  are  known  surely  others  will
be  known  also,  (c?.)  It  is  promised  that  our  cup  of  happiness
will  then  be  full ;  but  it  could  not  be  full,  unless  we  met  in
heaven  those  whom  we  loved  on  earth.  Man  is  a  social  being
with  a  soul  full  of  social  affections,  and  as  he  is  to  be  a  man  in
heaven,  is  it  not  likely  that  he  will  retain  all  his  social  atfections
there  ?  God  would  hardly  have  put  tliis  pure  j^earning  in  the
hearts  of  his  people  if  it  were  never  to  be  gi-atified.  David  weep-
ing over  his  dead  son,  said,  "  I  shall  go  to  him,  but  he  shall  not


782  PART  IV     Ch.   II— the  RESURRECTION.

return  to  me."  And  this  has  been  the  h^nguage  of  every  be-
reaved heart  from  that  day  to  this,  (g.)  The  Bible  clearly  teaches
that  man  is  to  retain  all  his  faculties  in  the  future  life.  One  of
the  most  important  of  those  faculties  is  memory.  If  this -were
not  retained  there  would  be  a  chasm  in  our  existence.  The  past
for  us  would  cease  to  exist.  We  could  hardl}^,  if  at  all,  be  con-
scious of  our  identity.  We  should  enter  heaven,  as  creatures
newly  created,  Avho  had  no  history.  Then  all  the  songs  of  heaven
would  cease.  There  could  be  no  thanksgiving  for  redemption  ;  no
recognition  of  all  Grod's  dealings  with  us  in  this  world.  Memory,
however,  is  not  only  to  continue,  but  will  doubtless  with  all  our
faculties  be  greatly  exalted,  so  that  the  records  of  the  past  may
be  as  legible  to  us  as  the  events  of  the  present.  If  this  be  so,  if
men  are  to  retain  in  heaven  the  knowledge  of  their  earthly  life ;
this  of  course  involves  the  recollection  of  all  social  relations,  of
all  the  ties  of  respect,  love,  and  gratitude  which  bind  men  in  the
family  and  in  society.  (/.)  The  doctrine  that  in  a  future  life  we
shall  recognize  those  whom  we  knew  and  loved  on  earth,  has  en-
tered into  the  faith  of  all  mankind.  It  is  taken  for  granted  in
the  Bible,  both  in  the  Old  Testament  and  in  the  New.  The  pa-
triarchs always  spoke  of  going  to  their  fathers  when  they  died.
The  Apostle  exhorts  believers  not  to  mourn  for  the  departed  as
those  who  have  no  hope  ;  giving  them  the  assurance  that  they
shall  be  reunited  with  all  those  who  die  in  the  Lord.

4.  We  laiow  certainly  that  the  future  bodies  of  behevers  are
to  be,  —  (a.)  Incorruptible  ;  not  merely  destined  never  to  decay,
but  not  susceptible  of  corruption.  By  the  certain  action  of  phys-
ical laws,  our  present  body,  as  soon  as  deserted  by  the  soul,  is
reduced  to  a  mass  of  corruption,  so  revolting  that  we  hasten  to
bury  our  dead  out  of  our  sight.  The  future  body  will  be  liable
to  no  such  change ;  neither,  as  we  learn  from  Scripture,  will  it  be
subject  to  those  diseases  and  accidents  which  so  often  mar  the
beauty  or  destroy  the  energy  of  the  bodies  in  which  we  now
dwell.  Being  unsusceptible  of  decay,  they  will  be  incapable  of,
or  at  least,  carefully  preserved  from,  suffering,  by  Him  who  has
promised  to  wash  all  tears  from  our  eyes.

(5.)  The  future  body  is  to  be  immortal.  This  is  something  dif-
ferent from,  something  higher  than  incorruptible  ;  the  latter  is
negative,  the  other  positive ;  the  one  implies  immunity  from
decay ;  the  other  not  merely  immunity  from  death,  but  perpetu-
ity of  life.  There  is  to  be  no  decrepitude  of  age  ;  no  decay  of
the  faculties  :  no  loss  of  vitjour  :  but  immortal  youth.


§1.]  SCRIPTURAL  DOCTRmE.  78S

(c.)  The  present  body  is  sown  in  weakness,  it  will  be  raised  in
power.  We  know  very  well  how  weak  we  now  are,  how  little
we  can  effect ;  how  few  are  ovir  senses  ;  how  limited  their  range  ;
but  we  do  not  yet  know  in  what  ways,  or  in  what  measure  our
power  is  to  be  increased.  It  is  probable  that  however  high  may
be  our  expectations  on  this  subject,  they  will  fall  short  of  the
reality  ;  for  it  doth  not  yet  appear,  it  is  not  revealed  in  experi-
ence or  in  hope,  what  we  shall  be.  We  may  have  new  senses,
new  and  greatly  exalted  capabilities  of  taking  cognizance  of  ex-
ternal things,  of  apprehending  their  nature  and  of  deriving
knowledge  and  enjoyment  from  their  wonders  and  their  beauties.
Instead  of  the  slow  and  wearisome  means  of  locomotion  to  which
we  are  now  confined,  we  may  be  able  hereafter  to  pass  with  the
velocity  of  light  or  of  thought  itself  from  one  part  of  the  uni-
verse to  another.  Our  power  of  vision,  instead  of  being  confined
to  the  range  of  a  few  hundred  yards,  may  far  exceed  that  of  the
most  powerful  telescope.  These  expectations  cannot  be  extrava-
gant, for  we  are  assured  that  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,
neither  has  it  entered  into  the  heart  of  man  to  conceive  the
things  which  God  hath  prepared  for  them  that  love  Him.

(c?.)  The  body  is  sown  in  dishonour,  it  shall  be  raised  in  glory.
Glory  is  that  which  excites  wonder,  admiration,  and  delight.
The  bodies  of  the  saints  are  to  be  fashioned  like  unto  Christ's
glorious  body.  We  shall  be  like  Him  when  we  see  Him  as  He
is.  More  than  this  cannot  be  said  ;  what  it  means  we  know  not
now,  but  we  shall  know  hereafter.  We  already  know  that  when
the  body  of  Christ  was  transfigured  upon  the  mount,  the  Apos-
tles fainted  and  became  as  dead  men  in  its  presence ;  and  we
know  that  when  He  shall  come  again  the  second  time  unto  salva-
tion, the  heavens  and  the  earth  shall  flee  away  at  the  sight  of  his
glory.  Let  it  suffice  us  to  know  that  as  we  have  borne  the  image
of  the  earthly,  we  shall  also  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly.
Well  might  the  Apostle  exhort  believers  not  to  mourn  for  the
pious  dead,  whom  they  are  to  see  again,  arrayed  in  a  beauty  and
glo]  y  of  which  we  can  now  have  no  conception.

('(3.)  It  is  sown  a  natural  body,  it  is  raised  a  spiritual  body.
When  words  are  used  thus  antithetically,  the  meaning  of  the  one
enables  us  to  determine  the  meaning  of  the  other.  We  can,
therefore,  in  this  case  learn  what  the  word  "  spiritual  "  means,
from  what  we  know  of  the  meaning  of  the  word  "natural."  The
word  ipvx'Kov,  translated  "natural,"  as  every  one  knows,  is  de-
rived from  i/'vx>?,  which  means  sometimes  the  life ;  sometimes  the


784  PART  IV.     Ch.   IL  — the   RESURRECTION.

principle  of  animal  life  which  men  have  in  common  with  the
brutes ;  and  sometimes  the  soul  in  the  ordinary  and  comprehen-
sive sense  of  the  term ;  the  rational  and  immortal  principle  of  our
nature  ;  that  in  which  our  personality  resides  ;  so  that  to  say
"  My  soul  rejoices,"  or,  "  My  soul  is  exceeding  sorrowful,"  is
equivalent  to  saying,  "  I  rejoice,"  or,  "  I  am  sorrowful."  Such
being  the  signification  of  the  4''"xv-'  it  is  plain  that  o-MiJia  ipvxi-Kov,
the  psychical,  or  natural,  body,  cannot  by  possibility  mean  a  body
made  out  of  the  ^l^vxij-  In  like  manner  it  is  no  less  plain  that
(Tu)iia  irrevfxaTLKov  cannot  by  possibility  mean  a  bod^  made  of  spirit.
ITiat  indeed  would  be  as  much  a  contradiction  in  terms,  as  to
speak  of  a  spirit  made  out  of  matter.  Again,  we  know  that  man
has  an  animal  as  well  as  a  rational  nature  ;  that  is,  his  soul  is  en-
dowed not  only  mth  reason  and  conscience,  but  also  with  sensi-
bilities, or  faculties  which  enable  it  to  take  cognizance  of  the  aj)-
petites  of  the  body,  as  hunger  and  thirst,  and  of  its  sensations  of
pleasure  and  pain.  These  appetites  and  sensations  are  states  of
consciousness  of  the  soul.  The  o-ajfta  i/zuxiKoy,  or  natural  body,
therefore,  is  a  body  adapted  to  the  soul  in  this  aspect  of  its  na-
ture ;  and  the  o-w/xa  Trieu/xaTtKor,  or  spiritual  body,  is  a  body  adapted
to  the  higher  attributes  of  the  soul.  We  know  from  experience
what  the  former  is ;  it  is  an  earthly  body,  made  of  the  dust  of
the  earth.  The  chemist  can  analyze  it,  and  reduce  it  to  its  con-
stituents of  ammonia,  hydrogen,  carbon,  etc.  ;  and  in  the  grave
it  soon  becomes  undistinguishable  from  other  portions  of  the
earth's  surface.  It  is  a  body  which,  while  living,  has  constant
need  of  being  repaired ;  it  must  be  sustained  by  the  oxygen  of
the  air,  and  by  the  chemical  elements  of  its  food.  It  soon  grows
weary,  and  must  be  refreshed  by  rest  and  sleep.  In  a  little  more
than  seventy  years,  it  is  worn  out,  and  drops  into  the  grave.  The
reverse  of  this  is  true  of  the  spiritual  body  ;  it  has  no  such  neces-
sities, and  is  not  subject  to  such  weariness  and  decay.  It  is  no
doubt  involved  in  the  fact,  that  while  our  present  bodies  are
adapted  to  the  lower  faculties  of  our  nature,  and  the  spiritual
body  to  our  higher  faculties,  that  the  latter  must  be  more  refined,
ffitherial,  and,  as  Paul  says,  heavenly,  than  the  other.  Even  now
the  soul,  in  one  sense,  pervades  the  body.  It  is  in  every  part  of
it ;  it  is  sensible  of  all  its  changes  of  state  ;  it  gives  to  it  a  look
and  carriage  which  reveal  man  as  the  lord  of  this  world.  To  a
far  greater  degree  may  the  soul  permeate  the  refined  and  glorified
body  which  it  is  to  receive  at  the  resurrection  of  the  just-;  and
thus  render  it  to  a  degree  now  incomprehensible,  in  its  very  na-


§2.]  HISTORY   OF   THE   DOCTRINE.  785

ture  spiritual.  If  the  face  of  man  formed  out  of  tlie  du-'t  of  the
earth  often  beams  with  intelhgenee  and  glows  with  elevated  emo-
tions, what  may  be  expected  of  a  countenance  made  like  unto
that  of  the  Son  of  God.

If  then  our  future  bodies  are  to  retain  the  human  form  ;  to  be
easily  distinguished  by  those  who  knew  and  loved  us  on  earth  ;  if
they  are  to  be  endued  with  an  unknown  power ;  if  they  are  to
be  incorruptible,  immortal,  and  spiritual ;  if  we  are  to  bear  the
image  of  the  heavenly,  we  may  well  bow  down  with  humble  and
joyful  hearts  and  receive  the  exhortation  of  the  Apostle  :  "  There-
fore, my  beloved  brethren,  be  ye  steadfast,  unmovable,  always
abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord,  forasmuch  as  ye  know  that
your  labour  is  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord."

§  2.  History  of  the  Doctrine.

The  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  of  the  body  is  not  exclusively
a  doctrine  of  the  Bible.  It  is  found,  in  different  forms,  in  many  of
the  ancient  religions  of  the  world.  This  is  the  more  remarkable
as  it  is  in  itself  so  improbable,  and  so  much  out  of  the  analogy
of  nature.  One  generation  of  plants  and  animals  succeeds  an-
other in  vminterrupted  succession  ;  but  the  same  individuals  never
reappear.  The  case  is  the  more  remarkable  when  we  consider
the  difficulties  with  which  the  doctrine  is  beset ;  difficulties  so
great  that  it  is  rejected  and  even  ridiculed  by  all  in  this  genera-
tion who  do  not  recognize  the  sacred  Scriptures  as  an  authority
from  which  the}^  dare  not  dissent.  When  such  doctrines  are
foUnd  not  only  in  the  Bible  but  also  in  the  religions  of  heathen
nations  it  may  be  assumed  that  the  Hebrews  borrowed  them
from  their  heathen  neighbours.  Tliis  is  the  hypothesis  adopted
generally  by  rationalists.  They  urge  in  its  support  that  the  doc-
trine of  Satan,  of  the  resurrection  of  the  body,  and  of  the  de-
struction and  renovation  of  the  earth,  do  not  ajjpear  in  those
portions  of  the  Scriptures  which  were  written  before  the  Babylo-
nish captivity.  To  carry  out  this  argument  they  refer  Job,  Dan
iel,  and  a  large  portion  of  Isaiah  to  a  period  subsequent  to  the
exile,  contrary  to  evidence  both  external  and  internal  in  favour  of
the  greater  antiquity  of  those  books.  Even  if  it  be  conceded
that  the  doctrines  do  not  appear  distinctly  in  any  but  the  later
writings  of  the  Old  Testament,  that  would  not  justify  the  as-
sumption of  their  heathen  origin,  provided  that  their  genesis  can
be  traced  in  the  earlier  books  of  Scripture.  Nothing  is  more  ob
vious,  or  more  generally  admitted  than  the  progressive  character

VOL.  Ill  50


786  PART  IV.     Ch.  IL  — the   RESURRECTION.

of  the  divine  revelations.  Doctrines  at  first  obscurely  intimated,
are  gradually  developed.  This  is  the  case  with  the  doctrines  of
the  Trinity,  of  the  personality  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  of  the  divinity
of  Christ,  of  the  nature  of  his  redemption,  of  the  future  state  ;
and,  as  might  be  expected,  of  the  resurrection  of  the  dead.  It  is
just  as  unreasonable  and  as  unhistorical  to  say  that  the  Church
received  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  of  the  body  from  the
heathen,  as  that  it  received  from  Plato  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity.
There  is  another  consideration  on  this  subject,  which  for  the
Christian  is  decisive.  The  doctrines  which  in  the  New  Testa-
ment are  declared  to  be  part  of  the  revelation  of  God,  are  thereby
declared  not  to  be  of  heathen  origin.  The  heathen  may  have
held  them,  as  they  hold  the  doctrine  of  the  existence  of  God  and
of  the  immortality  of  man  ;  that  does  not  prove  that  such  doc-
trines have  only  a  human  origin  and  human  authority.

These  things  being  premised,  it  is  admitted  as  a  remarkable
fact  that  belief  in  the  resurrection  of  the  body  did  prevail  among
the  ancients  prior  to  the  advent  of  Christ.  Reference  is  some-
times made  to  the  Brahminic  doctrine  of  the  constant  succession
of  cycles  of  countless  ages  in  the  history  of  the  universe,  one  cycle
being  a  reproduction  or  renewal  of  another,  as  having  an  analogy
to  the  Christian  doctrine  of  the  resurrection.  "  The  first  appear-
ance of  this  notion  of  a  bodily  restoration,"  says  Mr.  Alger,^
"  which  occurs  in  the  history  of  opinions,  is  among  the  ancient
Hindus.  With  them  it  appears  as  a  part  of  a  vast  conception,
embracing  the  whole  universe  in  an  endless  series  of  total  growths,
decays,  and  exact  restorations.  In  the  beginning  the  Supreme
Being  is  one  and  alone.  He  thinks  to  himself  '  I  will  become
many '  [This  is  a  figure  of  speech ;  for  according  to  the  Hindu  sys-
tem the  Supreme  Being,  the  Absolute,  cannot  think] .  Straight-
way the  multiform  creation  germinates  forth,  and  all  beings  live.
Then  for  an  inconceivable  period  —  a  length  of  time  commensu-
rate with  the  existence  of  Brahma,  the  Demiurgus  [This  again
is  a  mixture  of  ideas,  for  Brahma  of  the  Hindus  does  not  corre-
spond with  the  Demiurgus  of  the  Greeks]  —  the  successive  gen-
erations flourish  and  sink.  At  the  end  of  this  period  all  forms
of  matter,  all  creatures,  sages,  and  gods,  fall  back  into  the  Uni-
versal Source  whence  they  arose.  Again  the  Supreme  Being  is
one  and  alone.  After  an  interval  the  same  causes  produce  the
same  effects,  and  all  things  recur  exactly  as  they  were  before."  ^

1  Alger,  ut  svpra,  p.  488.

*  Wilson,  Lectures  on  the  Religion  of  the  Hindus,  London.  1862,  vol.  ii.  pp.  91,  95,  100-
103.


§  2.]  HISTORY   OF   THE   DOCTRINE.  787

According  to  the  Hindu  system  men  have  not  to  wait  for  the
conclusion  of  one  of  these  great  cycles  to  be  absorbed  in  the  Su-
preme Being.  By  a  life  strictly  conformed  to  prescribed  rules,
and  by  a  process  of  complete  self-abnegation,  they  attain  a  state
in  which  they  are  lost  in  the  Infinite  as  drops  of  rain  in  the
ocean.  As  individuals  they  can  never  be  reproduced,  any  more
than  the  drops  of  rain  can  be  recovered  from  the  ocean.  The
ocean,  by  evaporation  may  produce  other  clouds  which  shall  fall
in  other  drops  of  rain ;  but  this  is  not  a  reproduction  of  those
which  fell  a  thousand  years  ago.  There  is  therefore  no  analogy
between  this  theory  and  the  Christian  doctrine  of  the  resurrec-
tion.

"  The  same  general  conception,"  continues  Mr.  Alger,^  "in  a
modified  foi'm  was  held  by  the  Stoics  of  later  Greece,  who  doubt-
less borrowed  it  from  the  East,  and  who  carried  it  out  in  greater
detail.  '  God  is  an  artistic  fire,  out  of  which  the  cosmopoeia  is-
sues.' This  fire  proceeds  m  a  certain  fixed  course,  in  obedience  to
a  fixed  law,  passing  through  certain  intermediate  gradations,  and
established  periods,  until  it  returns  into  itself  and  closes  with  a
universal  conflagation The  Stoics  supposed  each  succeed-
ing formation  to  be  perfectly  like  the  preceding.  Every  partic-
ular that  happens  now,  has  happened  exactly  so  a  thousand  times
before,  and  will  happen  a  thousand  times  again.  This  view  they
connected  with  astronomical  calculations  making  the  burning  and
recreating  of  the  world  coincide  with  the  same  position  of  the  stars
as  that  at  which  it  previously  occurred.  This  they  called  the  res-
toration of  all  things.  The  idea  of  these  enormous  revolving:
identical  periods  —  Day  of  Bralim,  Cycle  of  the  Stoics,  or  Great
Year  of  Plato — is  a  physical  fatalism,  effecting  a  universal  res-
urrection of  the  past,  by  reproducing  it  over  and  over  forever."  ^

In  the  first  volume  of  this  work  the  attempt  was  made  to  show
that  the  Brahminical  and  several  Grecian  systems  of  philosophy,
were  only  different  modifications  of  the  pantheistic  theory  of  the
Infinite  by  fixed  and  necessary  laws  manifesting  itself  in  the  finite
in  all  its  endless  diversities  of  forms.  This  endless  succession  of
individuals,  however,  has  no  affinity  with  the  Bible  doctrine  of  the
resurrection  of  the  dead.  The  flora  and  faima  of  this  are  not  a
resurrection  of  the  plants  and  animals  of  the  geologic  periods.

In  the  religion  of  Zoroaster  there  is  a  far  nearer  approach  to
the  doctrines  of  the  Bible. ^     As  the  Scriptures  teach  that  God  at

1  Alger,  ut  supra,  p.  489.

2  Hitter's  Hist,  of  An.  Phil.,  lib.  xi.  cap.  4,

3  See  Ten  Great  Religions  •  an  Essay  in  Comparative  Theology.  By  James  Freeman
Clarke.   Boston,  1872,  cli.  v.,  specially  p.  200.


788  PART  IV.     Ch.   II. —  the   resurrection.

first  created  all  things  good,  and  made  man  after  liis  own  image,
and  jalaced  him  upon  probation  in  Eden  ;  so  Zoroaster  taught  that
Ormuzd  created  all  things  good,  and  that  all  were  sinless  and
happy,  and  fitted  for  immortality.  And  as  the  Bible  teaches  that
through  the  seduction  of  Satan  man  fell  from  his  original  state,
and  became  the  subject  of  sin,  misery,  and  death;  so  in  the  re-
ligion of  the  ancient  Persians  it  is  taught,  that  Ahriman,  the  per-
sonal principle  of  evil,  co-eternal  with  Ormuzd  the  principle  of
good,  effected  the  ruin  of  man  for  this  world  and  the  next.  Such
was  the  origin  of  evil ;  such  was  the  beginning  of  the  conflict
between  good  and  evil,  of  which  our  earth  has  been  the  theatre.
Both  sj^stems  teach  the  ultimate  triumph  of  the  good,  and  the  re-
demption of  man  ;  both  teach  a  future  state,  the  resurrection  of
the  body,  and  the  renewal  of  the  earth,  or,  that  there  are  to  be  a
new  heaven  and  a  new  earth.  It  is  certain  from  the  teachings  of
the  New  Testament  that  the  Hebrews  did  not  derive  these  doc-
trines from  the  Persians ;  it  is,  therefore,  in  the  highest  degree
probable  that  the  Persians  derived  them  from  their  neighbours  of
the  family  of  Sheni,  who  were  the  depositaries  of  the  revelations
of  God.

It  has  already  been  seen  that  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  of
the  body  was  clearly  tauglit  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  in  the
apocryphal  books  of  the  Jews  ;  that  it  was  a  cardinal  article  of
faith  among  the  Jews  when  Christ  came  into  the  world ;  and  that
it  was  emphatically  asserted  by  Christ  and  his  Apostles.  We  have
also  seen  that  the  Bible  teaches  nothing  on  this  subject  beyond
(1.)  Tliat  the  body  is  to  rise  again.  (2.)  That  its  identity  will
be  preserved.  And  (3.)  That  it  is  to  be  so  changed  and  refined
as  to  adapt  it  to  the  high  state  of  existence  to  which  it  is  des-
tined. In  this  simple  form  the  doctrine  has  ever  been  held  by
the  Church,  which  is  not  responsible  for  the  fanciful  theories
adopted  by  many  of  its  members.

'  The  philosophical  theologians  of  the  Alexandrian  school,  in  the
early  Church,  were  disposed  to  spiritualize  all  the  Bible  says  of
the  resurrection  of  the  body,  and  of  its  future  state.  The  Latins,
on  the  other  hand,  adhered  to  a  literal  interpretation  of  Scriptu-
ral langviage,  often  to  the  grossest  extremes.  Augustine,  as  we
have  seen,  thought  the  resurrection  body  was  to  be  composed  of
all  the  matter  that  ever  belonged  to  it  in  this  world,  and  Jerome
asks :  "  If  men  are  not  raised  with  flesh  and  bones,  how  can  the
damned  gnash  their  teeth  in  hell  ?  "  *

^  See  Jerome.  Contra  Joannnem  Hierosolymitanum,  33,  Works,  edit.  Migiie,  vol.  ii>
pp.  384,  38S  [441].


§  2  ]  HISTORY    OF   THE   DOCTRINE.  789

During  the  Middle  Ages,  the  faith  of  the  Church,  on  this  sub-
ject, remained  unchanged.  The  speculations  of  individual  writers
were  diverse,  inconsistent,  and  of  little  interest,  because  of  no
authority.

At  the  time  of  the  Reformation  the  simple  doctrine  of  the
Bible  was  reaffirmed  ;  and  theologians  beyond  those  limits  were
left  to  their  own  guidance.  The  form  in  which  the  doctrine  was
usually  presented  by  the  theologians  of  the  seventeenth  century,
was  :  (1.)  That  the  resurrection  body  is  to  be  numerically,  and
in  substance,  one  with  the  present  body.  (2.)  That  it  is  to  have
the  same  organs  of  sight,  hearing,  etc.,  as  in  this  life.  (3.)  Many
held  that  all  the  peculiarities  of  the  present  body  as  to  size  or
stature,  appearance,  etc.,  are  to  be  restored.  (4.)  As  the  bodies
of  the  righteous  are  to  be  refined  and  glorified,  those  of  the
wicked,  it  was  assumed,  would  be  proportionately  repulsive.  The
later  Protestant  theologians,  as  well  Lutheran  as  Reformed,  con-
fine themselves  more  strictly  mthin  the  limits  of  Scripture.

Rationalism,  as  far  as  it  prevailed,  swept  the  whole  doctrine
away.  Reason  does  not  teach  the  doctrine,  and  cannot  explain
it ;  therefore,  it  has  no  title  to  recognition.  Deistical  rationalists
admitted  that  the  doctrine  was  taught  in  the  Scriptures,  but  this
was  to  them  only  an  additional  reason  for  denying  their  divine
origin.  The  more  moderate  rationalists,  who  admitted  the  Bible
to  be  a  revelation  of  the  truths  of  reason,  or  of  natural  religion,
explained  away  all  that  it  teaches  concerning  the  resurrection,
making  it  refer  to  the  rising  of  the  soul  from  a  state  of  sin  to  a
state  of  holiness  ;  or,  as  relating  not  to  the  resiu'rection  of  the
body,  but  to  the  continued  life  of  the  soul  in  a  future  state.

Of  course  the  modern  speculative,  or  pantheistic  theology,  ig-
nores the  doctrine  of  a  resurrection.  It  does  not  even  admit  of
the  existence  of  the  soul  after  the  dissolution  of  the  body.  The
race  is  immortal,  but  the  individuals  of  which  it  is  composed  are
not.  Scientific  materialism  admits  of  no  other  resurrection  than
the  reappearance  of  the  same  chemical  elements  Avhicli  now  form
our  bodies,  in  the  bodies  of  future  plants,  animals,  or  men.  The
lime  in  our  bones  may  help  to  form  the  bones  of  those  who  come
after  us.  Thus  philosophy  and  science,  when  divorced  from  the
Bible,  lead  us  only  to  negations,  darkness,  and  despair.


CHAPTER  m.

SECOND   ADVENT.

§  1.  Preliminary  Remarks.

This  is  a  very  comprehensive  and  very  difficult  subject.  It  is
intimately  allied  with  all  the  other  great  doctrines  which  fall
under  the  head  of  eschatology.  It  has  excited  so  much  interest
in  all  ages  of  the  Church,  that  the  books  written  upon  it  would
of  themselves  make  a  hbrary.  The  subject  cannot  be  adequately
discussed  without  taking  a  survey  of  all  the  prophetic  teachings
of  the  Scriptures  both  of  the  Old  Testament  and  of  the  New.
This  task  cannot  be  satisfactorily  accomplished  by  any  one  who
has  not  made  the  study  of  the  prophecies  a  specialty.  The  au-
thor, knowing  that  he  has  no  such  qualifications  for  the  work,
purposes  to  confine  himself  in  a  great  measure  to  a  historical  sur-
vey of  the  different  schemes  of  interpreting  the  Scriptural  proph-
ecies relating  to  this  subject.

The  first  point  to  be  considered  is  the  true  design  of  prophecy,
and  how  that  design  is  to  be  ascertained.  Prophecy  is  very  dif-
ferent from  history.  It  is  not  intended  to  give  us  a  knowledge  of
the  future,  analogous  to  that  which  history  gives  us  of  the  past.
This  truth  is  often  overlooked.  We  see  interpreters  undertaking
to  give  detailed  expositions  of  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah,  of  Eze-
kiel,  of  Daniel,  and  of  the  Apocalypse,  relating  to  the  future,  with
the  same  confidence  with  which  they  would  record  the  history  of
the  recent  past.  Such  interpretations  have  always  been  falsified
by  the  event.  But  this  does  not  discourage  a  certain  class  of
minds,  for  whom  the  future  has  a  fascination  and  who  dehght  in
the  solution  of  enigmas,  from  renewing  the  attempt.  In  proph-
ecy, instruction  is  subordinate  to  moral  impression.  The  occur-
rence of  important  events  is  so  predicted  as  to  produce  in  the
minds  of  the  people  of  God  faith  that  they  will  certainh^  come  to
pass.  Enough  is  made  known  of  their  nature,  and  of  the  time
and  mode  of  their  occurrence,  to  awaken  attention,  desire,  or
apprehension,  as  the  case  may  be ;  and  to  secure  prop^T  effort  on
the  part  of  those  concerned  to  be  prepared  for  what  is  to  come  to


§  1.]  PRELIMINARY   REMARKS.  791

pass.  Although  such  predictions  may  be  variously  misinterpre-
ted before  their  fulfilment ;  yet  when  fulfilled,  the  agreement  be-
tween the  prophecy  and  the  event  is  seen  to  be  such  as  to  render
the  divine  origin  of  the  prophecy  a  matter  of  certainty.  Thus
with  regard  to  the  first  advent  of  Christ,  the  Old  Testament
prophecies  rendered  it  certain  that  a  great  Redeemer  was  to  ap-
pear; that  He  was  to  be  a  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King;  that  He
would  deliver  his  people  from  their  sins,  and  from  the  evils  under
which  they  groaned  ;  that  He  was  to  establish  a  kingdom  which
should  ultimately  absorb  all  the  kingdoms  on  earth  ;  and  that  He
would  render  all  his  people  supremely  happy  and  blessed.  These
predictions  had  the  effect  of  turning  the  minds  of  the  whole
Jewish  nation  to  the  future,  in  confident  expectation  that  the
Deliverer  would  come  ;  of  exciting  earnest  desire  for  his  advent ;
and  of  leading  the  pious  portion  of  the  people  to  prayerful  prepa-
ration for  that  event.  Nevertheless,  of  all  the  hundreds  of  thou-
sands to  whom  these  predictions  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  were
made  known,  not  a  single  person,  so  far  as  appears,  interpreted
them  aright ;  yet,  when  fulfilled,  we  can  almost  construct  a  his-
tory of  the  events  from  these  misunderstood  predictions  concern-
ing them.  Christ  was  indeed  a  king,  but  no  such  king  as  the
world  had  ever  seen,  and  such  as  no  man  expected  ;  He  was  a
priest,  but  the  only  priest  that  ever  lived  of  whose  priesthood
he  was  Himself  the  victim  ;  He  did  establish  a  kingdom,  but  it
was  not  of  this  world.  It  was  foretold  that  Elias  should  first
come  and  prepare  the  way  of  the  Lord.  He  did  come ;  but  in
a  way  in  which  no  man  did  or  could  have  anticipated.

It  follows,  from  what  has  been  said,  that  prophecy  makes  a
general  impression  with  regard  to  future  events,  which  is  reliable
and  salutary,  w^hile  the  details  remain  in  obscurity.  The  Jews
were  not  disappointed  in  the  general  impression  made  on  their
minds  by  the  predictions  relating  to  the  Messiah.  It  was  only  in
the  explanation  of  details  that  they  failed.  The  Messiah  was  a
king  ;  He  did  sit  upon  the  throne  of  David,  but  not  in  the  way
in  which  they  expected  ;  He  is  to  subdue  all  nations,  not  by  the
sword,  as  they  supposed,  but  by  truth  and  love  ;  He  was  to  make
his  people  priests  and  kings,  but  not  worldly  princes  and  satraps.
The  utter  failure  of  the  Old  Testament  Church  in  interpreting
the  prophecies  relating  to  the  first  advent  of  Christ,  should  teach
us  to  be  modest  and  diffident  in  explaining  those  which  relate  to
his  second  coming.  We  should  be  satisfied  with  the  great  truths
which  those  prophecies  unfold,  and  leave  the  details  to  be  ex-


792  PART  IV.     Ch.   Ill  — the    second  ADVENT.

plained  by  the  event.     This  the  Church,  as  a  Church,  has  gene-
rally done.

§  2.   The  Common  Church  Doctrine,

The  common  Church  doctrine  is,  first,  that  there  is  to  be  a
second  personal,  visible,  and  glorious  advent  of  the  Son  of  God.
Secondly,  that  the  events  which  are  to  precede  that  advent,  are

1.  The  universal  diffusion  of  the  Gospel ;  or,  as  our  Lord  ex-
presses it,  the  ingathering  of  the  elect ;  this  is  the  vocation  of  the
Christian  Church.

2.  The  conversion  of  the  Jews,  which  is  to  be  national.  As
their  casting  away  was  national,  although  a  remnant  was  saved  ;
so  their  conversion  may  be  national,  although  some  may  remain
obdurate.

3.  The  coming  of  Antichrist.

Thirdly,  that  the  events  which  are  to  attend  the  second  advent
are :  —

1.  The  resurrection  of  the  dead,  of  the  just  and  of  the  unjust.

2.  The  general  judgment.

3.  The  end  of  the  world.     And,

4.  The  consummation  of  Christ's  kingdom.

§  3.   The  Personal  Advent  of  Christ,

It  is  admitted  that  the  words  "  coming  of  the  Lord  "  are  often
used  in  Scripture  for  any  signal  manifestation  of  his  presence
either  for  judgment  or  for  mercy.  When  Jesus  promised  to
manifest  Himself  to  his  disciples,  "  Judas  saith  unto  Him,  not
Iscariot,  Lord,  how  is  it  that  thou  wilt  manifest  thyself  unto  us,
and  not  unto  the  world  ?  Jesus  answered  and  said  unto  him.  If  a
man  love  me  he  Avill  keep  my  words  :  and  my  Father  will  love
him,  and  we  will  come  unto  him,  and  make  oiir  abode  with  him."
(John  xiv.  22,  23.)  There  is  a  coming  of  Clnist,  true  and  real,
which  is  not  outward  and  visible.  Thus  also  in  the  epistle  to  the
Chm-ch  in  Pergamos  it  is  said  :  "  Repent ;  or  else  I  will  come
unto  thee  quickly."  (Rev.  ii.  16.)  This  form  of  expression
is  used  frequently  in  the  Bible.  There  are,  therefore,  many
commentators  who  explain  everything  said  in  the  New  Testament
of  the  second  coming  of  Christ,  of  the  spiritual  manifestation  of
his  power.  Thus  Mr.  Alger,  to  cite  a  single  example  of  this
school,  says  :  "  The  Hebrews  called  any  signal  manifestation  of
power — especially  any  dreadful  calamity  —  a  coming  of  the
Lord.     It  was  a  comins:  of  Jehovah  when  his  vengeance  strewed


§3.]  PERSONAL   ADVENT   OF    CHRIST.  793

the  ground  with  the  corpses  of  Sennacherib's  host ;  when  its
storm  swept  Jerusalem  as  with  fire,  and  bore  Israel  into  bondage  ;
when  its  sword  came  down  upon  Idumea  and  was  bathed  in  blood
upon  Edom.  '  The  day  of  the  Lord  '  is  another  term  of  precisely-
similar  import.  It  occurs  in  the  Old  Testament  about  fifteen
times.  In  every  instance  it  means  some  mighty  manifestation  of
God's  power  in  calamity.  These  occasions  are  pictured  forth
with  the  most  astounding  figures  of  speech."  ^  On"  the  follo>ving
page  lie  says  he  fully  beheves  that  the  evangelists  and  early
Christians  understood  the  lansruaffe  of  Christ  in  reference  to  his
second  coming,  as  predictions  of  a  personal  and  visible  advent,
connected  with  a  resurrection  and  a  general  judgment,  but  he
more  than  doubts  whether  such  was  the  meaning  of  Christ  Him-
self. (1.)  Because  he  says  nothing  of  a  resurrection  of  the  dead.
(2.)  The  figures  which  He  uses  are  precisely  those  which  the
Jewish  prophets  employed  in  predicting  "  great  and  signal  events
on  the  earth."  (3.)  Because  He  "  fixed  the  date  of  the  events
He  referred  to  within  that  generation."  Christ  he  thinks,  meant
to  teach  that  his  "  truths  shall  prevail  and  shall  be  owned  as  the
criteria  of  Divine  judgment.  According  to  them,"  he  understands
Christ  to  say,  "  all  the  righteous  shall  be  distinguished  as  my
subjects,  and  all  the  iniquitous  shall  be  separated  from  my  king-
dom. Some  of  those  standing  here  shall  not  taste  death  till  all
these  things  be  fulfilled.  Then  it  will  be  seen  that  I  am  the
Messiah,  and  that  through  the  eternal  principles  of  truth  which  I
have  proclaimed  I  shall  sit  upon  a  throne  of  glory,  —  not  liter-
ally, in  person,  as  you  thought,  blessing  the  Jews  and  cursmg  the
Gentiles,  but  spiritually,  in  the  truth,  dispensing  joy  to  good  men
and  woe  to  bad  men,  according  to  their  deserts."  It  is  something
to  have  it  admitted  that  the  Apostles  and  early  Christians  be-
lieved in  the  personal  advent  of  Christ.  AVIaat  the  Apostles  be-
lieved we  are  bound  to  believe  ;  for  St.  John  said  "  He  that
knoweth  God,  heareth  us."  That  the  New  Testament  does
teach  a  second,  visible,  and  glorious  appearing  of  the  Son  of  God,
is  plain :  —

1.  From  the  analogy  between  the  first  and  second  advents.
The  rationalistic  Jews  would  have  had  precisely  the  same  reasons
for  believing  in  a  more  spiritual  coming  of  the  Messiah  as  modern
rationalists  have  for  saying  that  his  second  coming  is  to  be  spirit-
ual. The  advent  in  both  cases  is  predicted  in  very  nearly  the
same  terms.     If,  therefore,  his  first  coming  was  in  person  and

1  Alger's  Critical  History  of  the  Doctrine  of  a  Future  Life.  Philadelphia,  18G4,  p.  319.


794  PART  IV.     Ch.   III.  — the   second   ADVENT.

visible,  so  liis  second  coming  must  be.  The  two  advents  are
often  spoken  of  in  connection,  the  one  ilhistrating  the  other.  He
came  the  first  time  as  the  Lamb  of  God  bearing  the  sins  of  the
world ;  He  is  to  come  "  the  second  time,  without  sin,  iinto  salva-
tion." (Heb.  ix.  28.)  God,  said  the  apostle  Peter,  "  shall  send
Jesus  Christ,  which  before  was  preached  unto  you :  whom  the
heaven  must  receive  until  the  times  of  restitution  of  all  things,
which  God  hath  spoken  by  the  mouth  of  all  his  holy  prophets
since  the  world  began."  (Acts  iii.  20,  21.)  Christ  is  now  invisible
to  us,  having  been  received  up  into  heaven.  He  is  to  remain
thus  invisible,  until  God  shall  send  him  at  the  restitution  of  all
things.

2.  In  many  places  it  is  directly  asserted  that  his  appearing  is
to  be  personal  and  visible.  At  the  time  of  his  ascension,  the  an-
gels said  to  his  disciples  :  "Ye  men  of  Galilee,  why  stand  ye  gaz-
ing up  into  heaven  ?  This  same  Jesus,  which  is  taken  up  from
you  into  heaven,  shall  so  come  in  like  manner  as  ye  have  seen
him  go  into  heaven."  (Acts  i.  11.)  His  second  coming  is  to  be  as
visible  as  his  ascension.  They  saw  Him  go  ;  and  they  shall  see
Him  come.  In  Matt.  xxvi.  64,  it  is  said,  "  Hereafter  shall  ye  see
the  Son  of  Man  sitting  on  the  right  hand  of  power,  and  coming
in  the  clouds  of  heaven  ;  "  Matt.  xxiv.  30,  "  Then  shall  all  the
tribes  of  the  earth  mourn,  and  they  shall  see  the  Son  of  Man
coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven  with  power  and  great  glory."
Luke  xxi.  27,  "  Then  shall  they  see  the  Son  of  Man  coming  in  a
cloud."

3.  The  circumstances  attending  the  second  advent  prove  that
it  is  to  be  personal  and  visible.  It  is  to  be  in  the  clouds  ;  with
power  and  great  glory ;  with  the  holy  angels  and  all  the  saints ;
and  it  is  to  be  with  a  shout  and  the  voice  of  the  archangel.

4.  The  effects  ascribed  to  his  advent  prove  the  same  thmg.
All  the  tribes  of  the  earth  shall  mourn  ;  the  dead,  both  small
and  great  are  to  arise  ;  the  wicked  shall  call  on  the  rocks  and
hills  to  cover  them ;  the  saints  are  to  be  caught  up  to  meet  the
Lord  in  the  air ;  and  the  earth  and  the  heavens  are  to  flee  away
at  his  presence.

6.  That  the  Apostles  understood  Christ  to  predict  his  second
coming  in  person  does  not  admit  of  doubt.  Indeed  almost  all  the
rationalistic  commentators  teach  that  the  Apostles  fully  believed
and  even  taught  that  the  second  advent  with  all  its  glorious  con-
sequences would  occur  in  their  day.  Certain  it  is  that  they  be-
lieved that  He  would  come  visibly  and  with  great  glory,  and  that


§  3.]  PERSONAL   ADVENT   OF   CHRIST.  795

they  held  his  coming  as  the  great  object  of  expectation  and  desire.
Indeed  Christians  are  described  as  those  Avho  "  are  waiting  for
the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ"  (1  Cor.  i.  7)  ;  as  those  who
are  "  looking  for  that  blessed  hope,  and  the  glorious  ajjpearing  of
the  great  God  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  "  (Tit.  ii.  13)  (it  is
to  them  who  look  for  Him,  He  is  to  "  appear  the  second  time,
without  sin  unto  salvation,"  Heb.  ix.  28)  ;  as  those  who  are  ex-
pecting and  earnestly  desiring  the  coming  of  the  day  of  God.  (2
Pet.  iii.  12.)  It  is  a  marked  characteristic  of  the  apostolic  writ-
ings that  they  give  such  prominence  to  the  doctrine  of  the  second
advent.  "  Judge  nothing  before  the  time,  until  the  Lord  come."
(1  Cor.  iv.  5.)  "  Christ  the  first-fruits ;  afterwards  they  that  are
Christ's  at  his  coming."  (1  Cor.  xv.  23.)  Ye  are  our  rejoicing  "  in
the  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus."  (2  Cor.  i.  14.)  "He  ...  .  will  per-
form it  until  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ."  (Phil.  i.  6.)  "  That  I
may  rejoice  in  the  day  of  Christ."  (ii.  16.)  "  Our  conversation  is
in  heaven,  from  whence  also  we  look  for  the  Saviour,  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ."  (iii.  20.)  "  When  Christ,  who  is  our  life,  shall  ap-
pear, then  shall  ye  also  appear  with  Him  in  glory."  (Col.  iii.  4.)
"  To  wait  for  his  Son  from  heaven,  whom  he  raised  from  the
dead,  even  Jesus,  which  delivered  us  from  the  wrath  to  come."
(1  Thess.  i.  10.)  "  What  is  our  hope,  ....  are  not  even  ye  in  the
presence  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  at  his  coming  ?  "  (ii.  19.)  "  Un-
blamable in  holiness  ....  at  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ
with  all  his  saints."  (iii.  13.)  "  We  which  are  alive,  and  remain
unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord  ....  shall  be  caught  up  ...  .  in  the
clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air  :  and  so  shall  we  ever  be  with
the  Lord."  (iv.  15-17.)  In  his  second  epistle  he  assures  the  Thes-
salonians  that  they  shall  have  rest,  "  wdien  the  Lord  Jesus  shall
be  revealed  from  heaven."  (2  Thess.  i.  7.)  The  coming  of  Christ,
however,  he  tells  them  was  not  at  hand  ;  there  must  come  a  great
falling  away  first.  Paul  said  to  Timothy,  "  Keep  this  command-
ment without  spot,  unrebukable,  until  the  appearing  of  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ."  (1  Tim.  vi.  14.)  "  There  is  laid  up  for  me  a  crown
of  righteousness,  which  the  Lord,  the  righteous  judge,  shall  give
me  at  that  day :  and  not  to  me  only,  but  unto  all  them  also  that
love  his  appearing."  (2  Tim.  iv.  8.)  The  epistles  of  Peter  afford
the  same  evidence  of  the  deep  hold  which  the  promise  of  Christ's
second  coming  had  taken  on  the  minds  of  the  Apostles  and  of  all
the  early  Christians.  He  tells  his  readers  that  they  "  are  kept
by  the  power  of  God  through  faith  unto  salvation,  ready  to  be
revealed  in  the  last  time  ....  that  the  trial  of  your  faith.  ....


796  PART  IV.    Ch.  III.  — the   second  ADVENT.

might  be  found  unto  praise,  and  honour,  and  glory,  at  the  appear-
ing of  Jesus  Christ."  (1  Pet.  i.  5-7.)  Men  are  to  "  give  account
to  Him  that  is  ready  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead."  (iv.  5.)
''  Rejoice,  ....  that,  when  his  glory  shall  be  revealed,  ye  may  be
glad  also  with  exceeding  joy."  (verse  13.)  "  When  the  chief  Shep-
herd shall  appear,  ye  shall  receive  a  crown  of  glory."  (v.  4.)  "  We
have  not  followed  cunningly  devised  fables,  when  we  made  known
unto .  you  the  power  and  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  but
were  eye-witnesses  of  his  majesty."  (2  Pet.  i.  16).  The  ti'ansfigu-
ration  on  the  mount  was  a  type  and  pledge  of  the  glory  of  the
second  advent.  The  Apostle  warns  the  disciples  that  scoffers
would  come  "  saying.  Where  is  the  promise  of  his  coming  ?  for
since  the  fathers  fell  asleep,  all  things  continue  as  they  were  from
the  beginning  of  the  creation."  In  answer  to  this  objection,  he
reminds  them  that  the  threatened  deluge  was  long  delayed,  but
came  at  last ;  that  time  is  not  with  God  as  it  is  with  us  ;  that
with  Him  a  thousand  years  are  as  one  day,  and  one  day  as  a
thousand  years.  He  repeats  the  assurance  that  "  the  day  of
the  Lord  will  come  as  a  thief  in  the  night ;  in  the  which  the
heavens  shall  pass  away  with  a  great  noise,  and  the  elements
shall  melt  with  fervent  heat ;  the  earth  also  and  the  works  that
are  therein,  shall  be  burned  up."  (2  Peter  iii.  3-10.)

From  aU.  these  passages,  and  from  the  whole  drift  of  the  New
Testament,  it  is  plain,  (1.)  That  the  Apostles  fully  believed  that
there  is  to  be  a  second  coming  of  Christ.  (2.)  That  his  coming
is  to  be  in  person,  visible  and  glorious.  (3.)  That  they  kept  this
great  event  constantly  before  their  own  minds,  and  urged  it  on
the  attention  of  the  people,  as  a  motive  to  patience,  constancy,
joy,  and  holy  living.  (4.)  That  the  Apostles  believed  that  the
second  advent  of  Christ  would  be  attended  by  the  general  res-
urrection, the  final  judgment,  and  the  end  of  the  world.

As  already  intimated,  it  is  objected  to  this  view  of  the  prophe-
cies of  the  New  Testament  referring  to  the  Second  Advent,  —

1.  That  the  first  advent  of  Christ  is  predicted  in  the  Old  Tes-
tament in  nearly  as  glowing  terms  as  his  second  coming  is  set
forth  in  the  New  Testament.  He  was  to  come  in  the  clouds  of
heaven  ;  with  great  pomp  and  power ;  all  nations  were  to  be  sub-
ject to  Him;  all  people  were  to  be  gathered  before  Him  ;  the
stars  were  to  fall  from  heaven  ;  the  sun  was  to  be  darkened,  and
the  moon  to  be  turned  into  blood.  These  descriptions  were  not
realized  by  the  event;  and  are  understood  to  refer  to  the  great
changes  in  the  state  of  the  world  to  be  effected  by  his  coming.


§3.]  PERSONAL   ADVENT  OF   CHRIST.  797

It  is  unreasonable,  therefore,  as  it  is  agreed,  to  expect  anything
like  a  literal  fulfilment  of  these  New  Testament  prophecies.  To
this  it  may  be  answered,  (1.)  That  in  the  Old  Testament  the
Messianic  period  is  described  as  a  whole.  The  fact  that  the
Messiah  was  to  come  and  establish  an  everlasting  kingdom  which
was  to  triumph  over  all  opposition,  and  experience  a  glorious
consummation,  is  clearly  foretold.  All  these  events  were,  so  to
speak,  included  in  the  same  picture  ;  but  the  perspective  was
not  preserved.  The  prophecies  were  not  intended  to  give  the
chronological  order  of  the  events  foretold.  Hence  the  consumma-
tion of  the  Messiah's  kingdom  is  depicted  as  in  immediate  prox-
imity with  his  appearance  in  the  flesh.  This  led  almost  all  the
Jews,  and  even  the  disciples  of  Christ  themselves,  before  the  day
of  Pentecost,  to  look  for  the  immediate  establishment  of  the  Mes-
siah's kingdom  in  its  glory.  Such  being  the  character  of  the
Old  Testament  prophecies,  it,  cannot  be  fairly  inferred  that  they
have  as  yet  received  their  full  accomplishment ;  or  that  they  are
now  being  fulfilled  in  the  silent  progress  of  the  Gospel.  They
include  the  past  and  the  present,  but  much  remains  to  be  accom-
plished in  the  future  more  in  accordance  with  their  literal  mean-
ing. (2.)  The  character  of  the  predictions  in  the  New  Testa-
ment does  not  admit  of  their  being  made  to  refer  to  any  spiritual
coming  of  Christ  or  to  the  constant  progress  of  his  Church.  They
evidently  refer  to  a  single  event ;  to  an  event  in  the  future,  not
now  in  progress  ;  an  event  which  shall  attract  the  attention  of  all
nations,  and  be  attended  by  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  the
complete  salvation  of  the  righteous,  and  the  condemnation  of  the
wicked.  (3.)  A  third  answer  to  the  objection  under  considera-
tion is,  that  the  Apostles,  as  is  conceded,  understood  the  predic-
tions of  Christ  concerning  his  second  coming,  in  the  way  in  which
they  have  been  understood  by  the  Church,  as  a  whole,  from  that
day  to  this.

2.  A  second  objection  to  the  common  Church  view  of  the
eschatology  of  the  New  Testament  is,  that  our  Lord  expressly
says  that  the  events  which  He  foretold  were  to  come  to  pass  dur  -
ing  that  generation.  His  words  are,  "  Verily,  I  say  unto  you.
This  generation  shall  not  pass,  till  all  these  things  be  fulfilled."
This  objection  is  founded  upon  the  pregnant  discourse  of  Christ
recorded  in  the  twenty-fourth  and  twenty-fifth  chapters  of
Matthew.  It  is  to  be  remarked  that  those  chapters  contain  the
answer  svhich  Christ  gave  to  three  questions  addressed  to  Him  by
his  disciples;  first,  when  the  destruction  of  the  temple  and  of


798  PART  IV.     Ch.   III.  — the   second   ADVENT.

Jerusalem  was  to  occur  ;  second,  what  was  to  be  the  sign  of  his
coming  ;  and  third,  when  the  end  of  the  world  was  to  take
place.  The  difficulty  in  interpreting  this  discourse  is,  to  deter-
mine its  relation  to  these  several  questions.  There  are  three
methods  of  interpretation  which  have  been  applied  to  this  pas-
sage. The  first  assumes  that  the  whole  of  our  Lord's  discourse
refers  but  to  one  question,  namely,  When  was  Jerusalem  to  be
destroyed  and  Christ's  kingdom  to  be  inaugurated  ;  the  second
adopts  the  theory  of  what  used  to  be  called  the  double  sense  of
prophecy  ;  that  is,  that  the  same  words  or  prediction  refer  to  one
event  in  one  sense,  and  to  a  different  event  in  a  higher  sense ;  the
third  assumes  that  one  part  of  our  Lord's  predictions  refers  exclu-
sively to  one  of  the  questions  asked,  and  that  other  portions  refer
exclusively  to  the  other  questions.

The  rationalistic  interpreters  adopt  the  first  method  and  refer
everything  to  the  overthrow  of  the  Jewish  polity,  the  destruction
of  Jerusalem,  and  the  inauguration  of  the  Church  which  is  to  do
its  work  of  judgment  in  the  earth.  Some  evangelical  interpreters
also  assume  that  our  Lord  answers  the  three  questions  put  to
Him  as  one,  as  they  constituted  in  fact  but  one  in  the  minds  of
his  disciples,  since  they  believed  that  the  three  events,  the  de-
struction of  Jerusalem,  the  second  coming  of  Christ,  and  the  end
of  the  world,  were  all  to  occui'  together.  Thus  Luthardt  says :
"  There  are  three  questions  according  to  the  words ;  but  only
one  in  the  minds  of  the  disciples,  as  they  did  not  consider  the
three  events,  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  the  second  coming  of
Christ,  and  the  end  of  the  world,  as  separated  chronologically ;
but  as  three  great  acts  in  the  final  drama  of  the  world's  history."  ^
In  this  sense  our  Lord,  he  adds,  answered  their  inquiries.  He
does  not  separate  the  different  subjects,  so  as  to  speak  first  of  one
and  then  of  another  ;  but  he  keeps  all  ever  in  view.  "  It  is  the
method,"  he  says,  "  of  Biblical  prophecy,  which  our  Lord  ob-
serves, always  to  predict  the  one  great  end  and  all  else  and  what
is  preparatory,  only  so  far  as  it  stands  in  connection  with  that
end  and  appears  as  one  of  its  elements."  ^  Although,  therefore,
the  prophecy  of  Christ  extends  to  events  in  the  distant  future,  He
could  say  that  that  generation  should  not  pass  away  until  all  was
fulfilled ;  for  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  was  the  commencement
of  that  work  of  judgment  which  Christ  foretold.

1  Die  Lehre  von  den  letzten  Ditif/en  in  Ahhandlungen  und  Schriftauslegungen  dargestellt
vou  Chr.  Ernst  Luthardt,  der  Theologie  Doktor  und  Professor  zu  Leipzig.  Leipzig,  1861,
p.  87.

a  Ibid.  pp.  87,  88.


§  8.]  PERSONAL   ADVENT    OF   CHRIST.  799

According  to  this  view,  tlie  first  method  of  interpretation  dif-
fers very  little  from  the  second  of  those  above  mentioned.  Both
suppose  that  the  same  words  or  descriptions  are  intended  to  refer  to
two  or  more  events  very  different  in  their  nature  and  in  the  time
of  their  occurrence.  Isaiah's  prediction  of  the  great  deliverance
vfhich  God  was  to  effect  for  his  people,  was  so  framed  as  to  an-
swer both  to  the  redemption  of  the  Jews  from  their  captivity  in
Babylon,  and  to  the  greater  redemption  by  the  Messiah.  It  was
in  fact  and  equally  a  prediction  of  both  events.  The  former  was
the  type,  and  the  first  step  toward  the  accomplishment  of  the
other.  So  also  in  the  fourteenth  chapter  of  Zechariah,  the
prophecy  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  the  spiritual  redemp-
tion, and  the  final  judgment,  are  blended  together.  As,  there-
fore, in  the  Old  Testament  the  Messianic  prophecies  took  in  the
whole  scope  of  God's  dealings  with  his  people,  including  their
deliverance  from  Babylon  and  their  redemption  by  Christ,  so  as
to  make  it  doubtful  what  refers  to  the  former  and  what  to  the
latter  event ;  so  this  discourse  of  Christ  may  be  considered  as
taking  in  the  whole  history  of  his  kingdom,  includmg  his  great
work  of  judgment  in  casting  out  the  Jews  and  calling  the  Gen-
tiles, as  well  as  the  final  consummation  of  his  work.  Thus  every-
thing predicted  of  the  final  judgment  had  its  counterpart  in  what
was  fulfilled  in  that  generation.

The  third  method  of  interpretation  is  greatly  to  be  preferred,
if  it  can  be  successfully  carried  out.  Christ  does  in  fact  answer
the  three  questions  presented  by  his  disciples.  He  told  when  the
temple  and  the  city  were  to  be  destroyed  ;  it  was  when  they
should  see  Jerusalem  compassed  about  with  armies.  He  told
them  that  the  sign  of  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  Man  was  to  be
great  defection  in  the  Church,  dreadful  persecutions,  and  all  but
irresistible  temptations,  and  that  with  his  coming  were  to  be  con-
nected the  final  judgment  and  the  end  of  the  world  ;  but  that
the  time  when  those  events  were  to  occur,  was  not  given  unto
them  to  know,  nor  even  to  the  angels  of  heaven.   (Matt.  xxiv.  36.)

If  this  be  the  method  of  interpreting  these  important  predic-
tions, then  the  declaration  contained  in  Matt.  xxiv.  34,  "  This
generation  shall  not  pass,  till  all  these  things  be  fulfilled,"  must
be  restricted  to  the  "  all  things  "  spoken  of,  referring  to  the  de-
struction of  Jerusalem  and  the  inauguration  of  the  Church  as
Christ's  kingdom  on  earth.  There  is,  hoAvever,  high  authority
for  making  ■>)  yevea  avrq,  here  and  in  the  parallel  passages,  Mark
xiii.  30  and  Luke  xxi.  32,  refer  to  Israel  as  a  people  or  race  ;  in


800  PART  IV.     Ch.   III.  — the    second  ADVENT.

this  case  the  meaning  would  be  that  the  Jews  would  nr/t  cease  to
be  a  distinct  people  until  his  predictions  were  fulfilled.^  There
is  nothing,  therefore,  in  this  discourse  of  Christ's  inconsistent  with
the  common  Church  doctrine  as  to  the  nature  and  concomitants
of  his  Second  Advent.

§  4.    The  Calling  of  the  Grentiles.

The  first  great  event  which  is  to  precede  the  second  coming  of
Christ,  is  the  universal  proclamation  of  the  Gospel.

1.  The  first  argument  in  proof  of  the  position  that  the  Gospel
must  be  preached  to  all  nations  before  the  second  advent,  is
founded  on  the  predictions  of  the  Old  Testament.  It  is  there
distinctly  foretold  that  when  the  Messiah  appeared  the  Spirit
should  be  poured  out  on  all  flesh,  and  that  all  men  should  see  the
salvation  of  God.  The  Messiah  was  to  be  a  lio;ht  to  lighten  the
Gentiles,  as  well  as  the  glory  of  his  people  Israel.  The  feet  of
those  who  brought  the  glad  tidings  and  published  peace,  were  to
be  beautiful  upon  the  mountains.  God  said  in  Hosea  ii.  28,  "  I
wiU  say  to  them  which  were  not  my  people,  Thou  art  my  people  ;
and  they  shall  say.  Thou  art  my  God."  And  in  Isaiah  xlv.  22,
23,  "  Look  unto  me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  :
for  I  am  God,  and  there  is  none  else.  I  have  sworn  by  myself
....  that  unto  me  every  knee  shall  bow,  every  tongue  shall
swear."  That  is,  the  true  religion  shall  prevail  over  the  whole
earth.  Jehovah  shall  everywhere  be  recognized  and  worshipped
as  the  only  true  God.  It  is  to  be  remembered  that  these  and
many  other  passages  of  like  import  are  quoted  and  applied  by  the
Apostle  to  the  Gospel  dispensation.  They  are  enforced  on  the  at-
tention of  those  to  whom  they  "wrote  as  showing  the  Gentiles  that
the  Gospel  was  designed  for  them  as  well  as  for  the  Jews  ;  and  to
impress  upon  the  Church  its  obligation  to  preach  the  Gospel  to
every  creature  under  heaven.

2.  Christ  repeatedly  taught  that  the  Gospel  was  to  be  preached
to  all  nations  before  his  second  coming.  Thus  in  Matt.  xxiv.  14,
it  is  said,  "  This  gospel  of  the  kingdom  shall  be  preached  in  all
the  world  for  a  witness  unto  all  nations  ;  and  then  shall  the  end
come."  (Mark  xiii.  10)  "  The  gospel  must  first  be  published
among  all  nations."

1  Donier.  De  Oratione  Ckristi  Eschatulogica,  Tractatus  Theologicus.  Stuttgart,  1844,
pp.  76-86.

C.  A.  Auberlen,  The  Prophecies  of  Daniel  and  the  Revelations  of  St.  John.  Translated
by  Rev.  Adolph  Saphir,  Edinburgh,  1856,  p.  354.  "The  Lord  Jesus  himself,"  says  Auber-
len, "  prophesied  {^latthew  xxiv.  34),  that  Israel  was  to  be  preserved  during  the  entire
Churcli-historical  period."


§4.]  THE   CALLING   OF   THE    GENTILES.  801

3.  Accordingly  our  Lord  after  his  resurrection,  in  giving  his
commission  to  the  Cliurch,  said :  "  Go  ye  therefore  and  teach  all
nations,  baptizing  them  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the
Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  teacliing  them  to  observe  all  things
whatsoever  I  have  commanded  you  :  and  lo,  I  am  with  yoa  al-
ways, even  unto  the  end  of  the  world."  (Matt,  xxviii.  19,  20.)  In
Mark  xvi.  15,  the  commission  reads  thus :  "  Go  ye  into  all  the
world,  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature."  This  commis-
sion prescribes  the  present  duty  of  the  Church  ;  one  that  is  ir>!:
to  be  deferred  or  languidly  performed  until  a  new  and  move  -'F-
f active  dispensation  be  inaugurated.  The  promise  of  Christ  to
be  with  his  Church,  as  then  commissioned,  to  the  end  of  the
world,  implies  that  its  obligation  to  teach  the  nations  is  to  con
tinue  until  the  final  consummation.

4.  Having  imposed  upon  his  Church  the  duty  to  preach  the
Gospel  to  every  creature  under  heaven.  He  endowed  it  with  all
the  gifts  necessary  for  the  proper  discharge  of  this  duty,  and
promised  to  send  his  Spirit  to  render  their  preaching  effectual.
"  He  gave  some,  Apostles  ;  and  some,  prophets  ;  and  some,  evan-
gelists ;  and  some,  pastors  and  teachers."  Of  these  ofl&cers  some
were  temporary,  their  peculiar  function  being  the  founding  and
organizing  the  Cliurch  ;  some  were  permanent.  Their  common
object  was  the  perfecting  of  the  saints.  Their  mission  and  duties
were  and  are  to  continue  until  "  all  come  in  the  unity  of  the  faith,
and  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Son  of  God,  unto  a  perfect  man,
unto  the  measure  of  the  stature  of  the  fulness  of  Christ."  (Eph.
iv.  11-13.)  The  duties  of  the  ministry,  therefore,  are  to  continue
until  all,  that  is,  all  believers,  the  whole  Church,  or,  as  our  Lord
says,  all  the  elect,  are  gathered  in  and  brought  to  the  stature  of
perfection  in  Christ.

5.  The  Apostles  understood  their  commission  in  this  sense  and
entered  on  their  duties  with  a  clear  view  of  the  task  set  before
them.  Our  Lord,  in  his  high-priestly  prayer  said  concerning
them,  "  As  thou  hast  sent  me  into  the  world,  even  so  have  I  also
sent  them  into  the  world."  He  would  not  leave  them  alone  ;  He
jDromised  to  send  the  Paraclete,  the  Helper,  who  should  bring  all
things  to  their  remembrance  ;  He  would  give  them  a  mouth  and
a  wisdom  which  all  their  adversaries  should  be  unable  to  gainsay
or  resist.  The  Spirit  was  to  abide  with  them  and  dwell  in  them,
so  that  it  would  not  be  they  who  spoke,  bjit  the  Spirit  of  the  Fa
ther  who  spoke  in  them ;  that  Spirit  was  to  convince  the  world
of    sin,  righteousness,  and  judgment ;    He  was   to  render  their

VOL.   III.  51


802  PART  IV.     Ch.   III.  — the   second   ADVENT.

preaching  tlie  wisdom  and  power  of  God  unto  salvation.  Their
simple  duty  was  to  teach  ;  their  commission  was,  "  Go  teach  all
nations."  One  of  the  great  elements  of  the  Papal  apostasy  was
the  idea  derived  from  paganism,  that  the  main  design  of  the
Church  is  "  cultus,"  worship,  and  not  instruction.  The  Apostles,
as  Peter  teaches  (Acts  i.  22),  and  as  is  everywhere  else  taught
in  Scripture,  were  to  be  witnesses  of  Christ ;  to  bear  testimony  to
his  doctrines,  to  the  facts  of  his  life,  to  his  death,  and  especially
to  his  resurrection,  on  which  everything  else  depended.  As,
however,  of  themselves  they  could  do  nothing,  they  were  required
to  attempt  nothing,  but  to  abide  in  Jerusalem,  until  they  were
imbued  with  power  from  on  high.  When  thus  imbued  they
began  at  once  to  declare  the  wonderful  works  of  God  to  "  Par-
thians,  and  Medes,  and  Elamites,  and  the  dwellers  in  Mesopota-
mia, and  in  Judea,  and  Cappadocia,  in  Pontus  and  Asia,  Phry-
gia,  and  Pamphylia,  in  Egypt,  and  in  the  parts  of  Libya  about
Cyrene,  and  strangers  of  Rome,  Jews  and  proselytes,  Cretes  and
Arabians ;  "  thus  making  the  first  proclamation  of  the  Gospel
after  the  resurrection  of  Christ  typical  of  its  design  and  destiny
as  the  religion  of  the  whole  world.

The  Apostles  accordingly  "went  everywhere;"  and  every-
where taught  (1.)  That  God  is  not  the  God  of  the  Jews  only,
but  also  of  the  Gentiles ;  that  He  is  rich  in  mercy  towards  all
who  call  upon  him,  justifying  the  circumcision  by  faith  and  the
uncircumcision  through  faith.  (2.)  That  the  Gospel,  therefore,
was  designed  and  adapted  for  the  whole  wond ;  for  all  classes  of
men ;  not  only  for  Jews  and  Gentiles,  but  also  for  the  learned
and  unlearned,  the  young  and  the  old,  for  the  wicked  and  the
righteous.  It  is  the  power  of  God  to  salvation  to  every  one  that
believeth.  (3.)  Being  thus  suited  to  all  men,  it  should  be
preached  to  all  men.  "  How  shall  they  call  on  Him  in  whom  they
have  not  beheved?  and  how  shall  they  believe  in  Him  of
whom  they  have  not  heard?  and  how  shall  they  hear  without  a
preacher  ?  and  how  shall  they  preach,  except  they  be  sent  ? "
(Rom.  X.  14,  15.)  Paul  glorified  his  office :  he  thanked  God  for
giving  him  the  grace  to  be  the  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles.  He  said
that  he  was  under  obligation  to  preach  the  Gospel  both  to  the
Greeks  and  to  the  Barbarians,  to  the  wise  and  to  the  unwise.
He  devotes  no  small  portion  of  his  Epistle  to  the  Romans  and  the
greater  portion  of  the  doctrinal  part  of  that  to  the  Ephesians,  to
setting  forth  the  purpose  of  God  to  bring  the  Gentiles  into  his
Church,  and  to  make  them  equally  vdth  the  Jews  partakers  of


§4.J  THE   CALLING   OF   THE   GENTILES.  803

the  redemjDtion  of  Christ.  He  teaches  that  the  middle  wall  of
partition  between  the  two  had  been  broken  down,  and  that  the
Geiitiles  were  no  more  "  strangers  and  foreigners,  bat  fellow-
citizens  with  the  saints,  and  of  the  household  of  God."  (Eph.  ii.
19.)  The  great  object  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  is  to  show
that  the  Gospel  is  the  substance  of  which  the  old  dispensation
was  the  shadow ;  that  nothing  more  glorious,  real,  and  effectual
was  to  be,  or  could  be,  so  far  as  the  salvation  of  sinners  is  con-
cerned. The  eternal  Son  of  God,  the  brightness  of  the  Father's
glory,  and  the  express  image  of  his  person,  had  assumed  our  na-
ture to  become  the  Apostle  and  High  Priest  of  our  profession.
There  was  no  hope  for  those  who  neglected  the  great  salvation
which  he  announced,  and  no  more  sacrifice  for  sin  remained  for
those  who  refused  to  be  cleansed  by  his  most  precious  blood.
The  final  revelation  of  God's  truth,  the  offering  of  the  infinitely
meritorious  sacrifice  for  sin,  and  the  cooperation  of  the  everywhere
present  and  almighty  Spirit  of  God  are  all  made  known  in  the
Gospel ;  and  the  Bible  knows  nothing  of  any  other  arrangements
for  the  salvation  of  men.  It  is  evident  that  the  Apostles  consid-
ered the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit  under  which  we  are  now  liv-
ing, as  the  only  one  which  was  to  intervene  between  the  first  ad-
vent of  Chi'ist  and  the  end  of  the  world.

6.  In  2  Corinthians  iii.  the  Apostle  contrasts  the  new  and  old
dispensations,  showing  that  the  former  excels  the  latter,  (1.)  Be-
cause the  one  used  the  ministration  of  the  letter,  the  other  uses
that  of  the  spirit.  (2.)  Because  the  one  was  the  ministration
of  death  and  of  condemnation,  the  other  is  the  ministration  of
the  Spirit  and  of  righteousness ;  and  (3.)  Because  the  one  was
transient  and  the  other  is  permanent.  "If  that  which  is  done
away  was  glorious,  much  more  that  which  remaineth  is  glorious."
(verse  11.)

7.  In  Romans  xi.  25,  Paul  teaches  that  the  national  conver-
sion of  the  Jews  is  not  to  take  place  "  until  the  fulness  of  the  Gen-
tiles be  come  in."  The  Trkiqp^ixa  ru>i'  Wvwr,  is  that  which  makes  the
number  of  the  Gentiles  full;  the  full  complement  which  the
Gentiles  are  to  render  to  make  the  number  of  the  elect  complete.

This  ingathering  of  the  heathen  is  the  special  work  of  the
Church.  It  is  a  missionary  work.  It  was  so  understood  by  the
Apostles.  Their  two  great  duties  were  the  propagation  and  de-
fence of  the  truth.  To  these  they  devoted  themselves.  While
they  laboured  night  and  day,  and  travelled  hither  and  thither
through  all  parts  of  the  Roman  world,  preaching  the  Gospel ;


804  PART  IV.     Ch.   III.  — the   second  ADVENT.

they  laboured  no  less  assiduously  in  its  defence.  All  the  epistles
of  the  New  Testament,  those  of  Paul,  Peter,  John,  and  James,
are  directed  towards  the  correction  of  false  doctrine.  These  two
duties  of  propagating  and  of  defending  the  truth,  the  Apostles
devolved  on  their  successors.  During  the  apostolic  age  and  for
some  time  after  it,  the  former  had  the  ascendancy ;  to  preach  the
Gospel  to  all  nations,  to  bring  all  men  to  the  knowledge  of  the
truth,  was  felt  to  be  the  special  vocation  of  the  Church.  Gradu-
ally, and  especially  after  the  conversion  of  Constantine  and  the
establishment  of  Christianity  as  the  religion  of  the  Roman  em-
pire, the  mind  of  the  Church  was  directed  principally  to  securing
what  had  been  attained ;  in  perfecting  its  organization  and  in
stating  its  creed  and  defending  it  against  the  numerous  forms  of
error  by  which  it  was  assailed.

From  this  time  for  long  centuries  the  Church  found  its  hands
filled  with  its  internal  affairs.  Its  energies  were  expended  mainly
in  three  directions,  in  building  up  a  hierarchy  with  a  supreme
pontiff,  surrounded  by  ecclesiastical  princes,  which  sought  to  con-
centrate in  itself  all  power  over  the  bodies  and  souls  of  men ;  in
founding  numerous  orders  of  monks ;  and  in  the  subtleties  of
metaphysical  discussions.  The  work  of  missions  during  this
period  was  almost  entirely  neglected.

When  the  Reformation  came,  the  Protestants  had  as  much  as
they  could  do  to  live.  They  had  arrayed  against  them  every-
where the  tremendous  power  of  the  Romish  Church,  and  in  most
cases  all  the  power  of  the  State.  They  had  to  defend  their  doc-
trines against  the  prejudices  and  learning  of  the  age ;  to  organize
their  Churches,  and  alas  !  they  were  distracted  among  themselves.
Under  these  circumstances  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  the
command,  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the  gospel  to
every  creature,"  was  almost  forgotten.  It  is  only  within  the  last
fifty  years  that  the  Church  has  been  brought  to  feel  that  its  great
duty  is  the  conversion  of  the  nations.  More,  probably,  has  been
done  in  this  direction  during  the  last  half  century  than  during  the
preceding  five  hundred  years.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  a  new  effu-
sion of  the  Spirit  like  that  of  the  day  of  Pentecost  may  be  granted
to  the  Church  whose  fruits  shall  as  far  exceed  those  of  the  first
effusion  as  the  millions  of  Christians  now  alive  exceed  in  number
the  one  hundred  and  twenty  souls  then  gathered  in  Jerusalem.

That  the  conversion  of  the  Gentile  world  is  the  work  assigned
the  Church  under  the  present  dispensation,  and  that  it  is  not  to
fold  its  hands  and  await  the  second  coming  of  Christ  to  accom-


§5.]  CONVERSION   OF  THE  JEWS.  805

plish  that  work  for  it,  seems  evident  from  what  has  abeady  been
said,  (1.)  This  is  the  work  which  Clirist  commanded  his  Church
to  undertake.  (2.)  He  furnished  it  with  all  the  means  neces-
sary for  its  accomphshment ;  He  revealed  the  truth  which  is
the  power  of  God  unto  salvation  ;  He  instituted  the  ministry  to
be  perpetuated  to  the  end  of  the  world,  and  promised  to  endow
men  from  age  to  age  with  the  gifts  and  graces  necessary  for  the
discharge  of  its  duties,  and  to  grant  them  his  constant  presence
and  assistance.  (3.)  The  Apostles  and  the  Church  of  that  age
so  understood  the  work  assigned  and  addressed  themselves  to  it
with  a  devotion  and  a  success,  which,  had  they  been  continued,
the  work,  humanly  speaking,  had  long  since  been  accomplished.
(4.)  There  is  no  intimation  in  the  New  Testament  that  the
work  of  converting  the  world  is  to  be  effected  by  any  other  means
than  those  now  in  use.  (5.)  It  is  to  dishonour  the  Gospel,  and
the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  suppose  that  they  are  inadequate
to  the  accomplishment  of  this  work.  (6.)  The  wonderful  suc-
cess of  the  work  of  missions  in  our  day  goes  to  prove  the  fact
contended  for.  Barriers  deemed  insurmountable  have  been  re-
moved ;  facilities  of  access  and  intercourse  have  been  increased
a  hundred  fold  ;  hundreds  of  missionary  stations  have  been  estab-
lished in  every  part  of  the  world;  many  thousands  of  converts
have  been  gathered  mto  churches  and  hundreds  of  thousands  of
childi-en  are  under  Christian  instruction  ;  the  foundations  of  an-
cient systems  of  idolatry  have  been  undermined ;  nations  lately
heathen  have  become  Christian,  and  are  taking  part  in  sending
the  Gospel  to  those  still  sitting  in  darkness  ;  and  nothing  seems
wanting  to  secure  the  gathering  in  of  the  Gentiles,  but  a  revival
of  the  missionary  spirit  of  the  apostolic  age  in  the  churches  of
the  nineteenth  century.

§  5.  Conversion  of  the  Jews.

The  second  great  event,  which,  according  to  the  common  faith
of  the  Church,  is  to  precede  the  second  advent  of  Cluist,  is  the
national  conversion  of  the  Jews.

First,  that  there  is  to  be  such  a  national  conversion  may  be
argued,  —

1.    From   the  original   call   and    destination  of   that   people.
God  called  Abraham  and   promised   that   through  him,  and  in
his  seed,  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  should  be  blessed.     He  en
tered  into  a  solemn  covenant  with  him  engagmg  to  be  his  God  and
the  God  of  his  posterity  to  the  latest  generations  ;  and  that  they


806  PART  IV.     Ch.   Ill— the    second   ADVENT.

should  be  his  people.  These  promises  have  been  hitherto  ful-
filled ;  God  preserved  the  Hebrews,  although  comparatively  few
in  numbers  amid  hostile  nations,  from  destruction  or  dispersion
until  tlie  promised  seed  of  Abraham  appeared  and  accomplished
his  redeeming  work.  This  is  an  assurance  that  the  other  prom-
ises relating  to  this  people  shall  be  fully  accomplished.

2.  The  second  argument  is  from  the  general  drift  of  the  Old
Testament  concerning  the  chosen  peoj^le.  Those  prophecies  run
through  a  regular  cycle  often  repeated  in  different  forms.  The
people  are  rebuked  for  their  sins  and  threatened  with  severe  pun-
ishment ;  when  that  punishment  has  been  inflicted,  and  the  na-
tion brought  to  repentance,  there  uniformly  follow  promises  of
restoration  and  favour.  Isaiah  predicted  that  for  their  idolatry  the
people  should  be  carried  into  captivity,  but  that  a  remnant  should
be  restored  to  their  own  land,  and  their  privileges  secured  to
them  again.  Joel  and  Zechariah  predicted  that  for  their  rejection
of  the  Messiah,  they  should  be  scattered  to  the  ends  of  the  earth,
but  that  God  would  bring  them  back,  and  that  his  favour  should
not  be  finally  withdrawn  from  them.  Thus  it  is  with  all  the
prophets.  As  these  general  predictions  are  familiar  to  all  the
readers  of  the  Bible,  they  need  not  be  specified.

3.  There  are  in  the  Old  Testament  express  predictions  of  their
national  conversion  to  faith  in  Him  whom  they  had  rejected
and  crucified.  Thus  in  Zechariah  xii.  it  is  said  ;  "  I  will  pour
upon  the  house  of  David  and  upon  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,
the  spirit  of  grace  and  of  supplications ;  and  they  shall  look  on
me  whom  they  have  pierced,  and  they  shall  mourn  for  him,  as
one  mourneth  for  his  only  son,  and  shall  be  in  bitterness  for  him,
as  one  that  is  in  bitterness  for  his  first-born."  This  is  to  be  a
national  conversion,  for  it  is  said  "  the  land  shall  mourn  "  every
family  apart.

4.  The  most  decisive  passage,  however,  bearing  on  this  subject,
and  one  which  may  be  taken  "  instar  omnium,"  is  the  eleventh  chap-
ter of  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans.  Paul  had  taught,  (1.)  That
God  had  cast  off  the  Jews  as  a  nation  because  they  as  a  nation,
represented  by  the  Sanhedrim,  the  High  Priest,  the  scribes  and  the
Pharisees,  by  their  rulers  of  every  class,  and  by  the  popular  voice,
had  rejected  Christ.  "  He  came  unto  his  own,  and  his  own  re-
ceived him  not."  Therefore,  as  a  nation,  God  rejected  them.
(2.)  This  rejection,  however,  he  here  teac^hes,  was  not  entire.
There  was  "  a  remnant  according  to  the  election  of  grace  "  who  be-
lieved in  Christ  and  were  received  into  his  kingdom.     (3.)  This


§  6.J  CONVERSION   OF   THE   JEWS.  "  807

national  rejection  of  Israel,  as  it  was  not  entire,  so  neither  was
it  to  be  final.  It  was  to  continue  until  the  brinc;ins  in  of  the
Gentiles.  God  had  made  a  covenant  with  Abraham  that  his
posterity  should  be  his  people ;  and  "  the  gifts  and  calling  of
God  are  ^vithout  repentance."  Therefore,-,  although  broken  off
from  the  olive-tree  for'  tlie  present,  they  were  to  be  grafted  in
again.  (4.)  Thus  "all  Israel  shall  be  saved."  Whether  this
means  the  Jews  as  a  nation,  or  the  whole  elect  people  of  God
including  both  Jews  and  Gentiles,  may  be  doubtful.  But  in
either  case  it  is,  in  view  of  the  context,  a  promise  of  the  restora-
tion of  the  Jews  as  a  nation.  There  is,  therefore,  to  be  a  national
conversion  of  the  Jews.

Second,  this  conversion  is  to  take  place  before  the  second  ad-
vent of  Christ.  This  the  Apostle  teaches  when  he  says,  that  the
salvation  of  the  Gentiles  was  designed  to  provoke  the  Jews  to
jealousy,  verse  11 ;  and  that  the  mercy  shown  to  the  Gentiles
was  to  be  the  means  of  the  Jews  obtaining  mercy,  verse  31.  The
rejection  of  the  Jews  was  the  occasion  of  the  conversion  of  the
Gentiles ;  and  the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles  is  to  be  the  occasion
of  the  restoration  of  the  Jews.  On  this  point  Luthardt  says  :
"  As  our  Lord  (Matt,  xxiii.  39)  said  :  '  Ye  shall  not  see  me  hence-
forth, till  ye  shall  say,  Blessed  is  he  that  cometh  in  the  name  of
the  Lord '  —  so  it  is  certain  that,  when  Jesus  comes,  who  will  be
visible  to  all  the  world,  as  the  lightning  which  cometh  out  of  the
east,  and  shineth  even  unto  the  west,  whom  all  eves,  even  of
those  who  pierced  Him  and  all  kindreds  of  the  earth  shall  see
(Rev.  i.  T  ;  Zech.  xii.  10),  —  the  Jews  must  have  been  converted

and  have  become  a  Christian  nation And  further  when

Peter  (Acts  iii.  19-21)  exhorts  to  repentance  and  conversion
until  the  times  of  refreshing  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord  shall
come  ;  so  it  appears  to  be  to  me  beyond  all  doubt  that  the  con-
version of  Israel  is  to  precede  the  Second  Advent  of  Christ."  ^

Are  the  Jeivs  to  he  restored  to  their  own  Land?

According  to  one  view,  the  Jews  after  their  conversion  are  to
be  restored  to  the  land  of  their  fathers  and  there  constituted  a
distinct  nation.  According  to  another,  their  restoration  to  their
OAvn  land  is  to  precede  their  conversion.  And  according  to  a
third  view  there  is  to  be  no  such  restoration,  but  they  are  to  be
amalgamated  with  the  great  body  of  Christians  as  they  were  in
the  times  of  the  Apostles.

i  Lehre  von  den  letzten  Dingen,  pp.  71,  72.


808  PART  IV.     Ch.   III.  — THF-   second   ADVENT.

In  favour  of  a  literal  restoration  it  is  urged,  —

1.  That  it  is  predicted  in  the  Old  Testament  in  the  most  ex-
press terms.  Luthardt  says  a  man  must  "  break"  the  Scriptures
who  denies  such  restoration.  To  him  it  is  certain  and  undeniable
that  the  Jews  are  to  be  brought  back  to  their  own  land  and  re-
established as  a  nation.^

2.  It  is  argued  that  the  promise  of  God  to  Abraham  has  never
yet  been  fully  accomplished.  God  promised  to  give  to  him  and  to
his  seed  after  him  all  the  land  from  the  river  of  Egypt  (under-
stood to  be  the  Nile)  to  the  river  Euphrates.  They  were,  how-
ever, during  all  their  national  history  pent  up  in  the  narrow  strip
between  the  Jordan  and  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  except  for  a
while  when  the  two  and  a  half  tribes  dwelt  on  the  eastern  side
of  Jordan.  As  the  promise  cannot  fail,  the  time  must  yet  come
when  the  whole  region  granted  to  Abraham  shall  be  occupied  by
his  descendants.

3.  A  presumptive  argument  is  drawn  from  the  strange  preser-
vation of  the  Jews  through  so  many  centuries  as  a  distinct  people.
They  have  often  been  compared  to  a  river  flowing  through  the
ocean  without  mingling  with  its  waters.  There  must  be  some
purpose  in  this  wonderful  preservation.  That  people  must  have
a  future  corresponding  to  its  marvellous  past.

4.  Reference  is  also  made  to  the  fact  that  the  land  promised  to
the  Jews  is  now  empty,  as  though  waiting  for  their  return.  It
once  teemed  with  a  population  counted  by  millions  ;  and  there  is
no  reason  why  it  may  not  in  the  future  be  as  densely  inhabited.

The  arguments  against  the  assumed  restoration  of  the  Jews  to
the  Holy  Land  are, —

1.  The  argument  from  the  ancient  prophecies  is  proved  to  be
invalid,  because  it  would  prove  too  much.  If  those  prophecies
foretell  a  literal  restoration,  they  foretell  that  the  temple  is  to  be
rebuilt,  the  priesthood  restored,  sacrifices  again  offered,  and  that
the  whole  Mosaic  ritual  is  to  be  observed  in  all  its  details.  (See
the  prophecies  of  Ezekiel  from  the  thirty-seventh  chapter  on-
ward.) We  know,  however,  from  the  New  Testament  that  the
Old  Testament  service  has  been  finally  abolished  ;  there  is  to  be
no  new  temple  made  with  hands  ;  no  other  priest  but  the  high-
priest  of  our  profession  ;  and  no  other  sacrifice  but  that  already
offered  upon  the  cross.  It  is  utterly  inconsistent  with  the  char-
acter of  the  Gospel  that  there  should  be  a  renewed  inauguration
of  Judaism  within  the  pale  of  the  Christian  Church.    If  it  be  said

1  Lehre  von  den  letzten  Dingen,  p.  71.


§  5.]  CONVERSION   OF   THE  JEWS.  809

that  the  Jews  are  to  return  to  their  own  land  as  Jews,  and  there
restore  their  temple  and  its  service,  and  then  be  converted ;  it
may  be  answered  that  this  is  inconsistent  with  the  prophetic  repre-
sentations. They  are  to  be  brought  to  repentance  and  faith,  and
to  be  restored  to  their  land,  or,  to  use  the  figure  employed  by  the
Apostle,  grafted  again  into  their  own  olive-tree,  because  of  their
repentance.  When  Christ  comes,  "  He  shall  send  his  angels  with
a  great  sound  of  a  trumpet,  and  they  shall  gather  together  his
elect  from  the  four  winds,  from  one  end  of  heaven  to  the  other,"
(Matt.  xxiv.  31.)  But  further  than  this,  in  Zechariah  xiv.,  it  is
predicted  that  after  the  restoration,  all  the  nations  of  the  earth
"  shall  go  up  from  year  to  year  to  worship  the  King,  the  Lord
of  hosts,  and  to  keep  the  feast  of  tabernacles."  In  Isaiah  Ixvi.
22,  23,  it  is  said,  "  As  the  new  hea,vens  and  the  new  earth,  which
I  will  make,  shall  remain  before  me,  saith  the  Lord,  so  shall
3^our  seed  and  your  name  remain.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that
from  one  new  moon  to  another,  and  from  one  Sabbath  to  another,
shall  all  flesh  come  to  worship  before  me,  saith  the  Lord."  The
literal  interpretation  of  the  Old  Testament  prophecies  relating  to
the  restoration  of  Israel  and  the  future  kingdom  of  Christ,  cannot
by  possibility  be  carried  out ;  and  if  abandoned  in  one  point,  it
cannot  be  pressed  in  regard  to  others.

2.  It  is  undeniable  that  the  ancient  prophets  in  predicting  the
events  of  the  Messianic  period  and  the  future  of  Christ's  king-
dom, borrowed  their  language  and  imagery  from  the  Old  Tes-
tament institutions  and  usages.  The  Messiah  is  often  called
David  ;  his  church  is  called  Jerusalem,  and  Zion ,  his  people  are
called  Israel ;  Canaan  Avas  the  land  of  their  inheritance  ;  the  loss
of  God's  favour  was  expressed  by  saying  that  they  forfeited  that
inheritance,  and  restoration  to  his  favour  was  denoted  by  a  return
to  the  promised  land.  This  usage  is  so  pervading  that  the  con-
viction produced  by  it  on  the  minds  of  Christians  is  indehble.  To
them,  Zion  and  Jerusalem  are  the  Church  and  not  the  city  made
with  hands.  To  interpret  all  that  the  ancient  prophets  say  of
Jerusalem  of  an  earthly  city,  and  all  that  is  said  of  Israel  of  the
Jewish  nation,  would  be  to  bring  down  heaven  to  earth,  and  to
transmute  Christianity  into  the  corrupt  Judaism  of  the  apostolic
age.

3.  Accordingly  in  the  New  Testament  it  is  taught,  not  in
poetic  imager}^  but  didactically,  in  simple,  unmistakable  prose,
that  believers  are  the  seed  of  Abraham;  they  are  his  sons;  his
heirs  ;  they  are  the  true  Israel.    (See  especially  Romans  iv.  and  ix.


810  PART  IV.     Cii.   in.  — THE    SECOND   ADVENT.

and  Galatians  iii.)  It  is  not  natural  descent,  tliat  makes  a  man
a  child  of  Abraham.  "  They  Avliich  are  the  children  of  the  flesh,
these  are  not  the  children  of  God  ;  but  the  children  of  the  prom-
ise are  counted  for  the  seed."  (Rom.  ix.  8.)  The  Apostle  asserts
that  the  promises  are  made  not  to  the  Israel  Kara  (Tapna,  but  to  the
Israel  Kara -n-vivfia.  He  says  in  the  name  of  believers,  "  We  are  the
circumcision."  (Phil.  iii.  3.).  "We  are  Abraham's  seed,  and  heirs
according  to  the  promise."  (Gal.  iii.  29.)  The  promise  to  Abra-
ham that  he  should  be  the  father  of  many  nations,  did  not  mean
merely  that  his  natural  descendants  should  be  very  numerous;  but
that  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  should  have  the  right  to  call  him
father  (Rom.  iv.  17)  ;  for  he  is  "  the  father  of  all  them  that  be-
lieve, though  they  be  not  circumcised."  (Rom.  iv.  11.)  It  would
turn  the  Gospel  upside  down  ;  not  only  the  Apostle's  argument
but  his  whole  system  would  collapse,  if  what  the  Bible  says  of
Israel  should  be  understood  of  the  natural  descendants  of  Abra-
ham to  the  exclusion  of  his  spiritual  children.

4.  The  idea  that  the  Jews  are  to  be  restored  to  their  ovni  land
and  there  constituted  a  distinct  nation  in  the  Christian  Church,
is  inconsistent  not  only  with  the  distinct  assertions  of  the  Scrip-
tures, but  also  with  its  plainest  and  most  important  doctrines.
It  is  asserted  over  and  over  again  that  the  middle  wall  of  parti-
tion between  Jew  and  Gentile  has  been  broken  down  ;  that  God
has  made  of  the  two  one  ;  that  Gentile  believers  are  fellow-citizens
of  the  saints  and  members  of  the  household  of  God ;  that  they
are  built  up  together  "with  the  Jews  into  one  temple.  (Eph.  ii.
11-22.)  "  As  many  of  you  as  have  been  baptized  into  Christ
have  put  on  Christ.  There  is  neither  Jew  nor  Greek,  there  is
neither  bond  nor  free,  there  is  neither  male  nor  female  :  for  ye
are  all  one  in  Christ  Jesus.  And  if  ye  be  Christ's,  then  are  ye
Abraham's  seed,  and  heirs  according  to  the  promise."  (Gal.  iii.
27-29.)  There  could  not  be  a  more  distinct  assertion  that  all  dif-
ference between  the  Jew  and  Gentile  has  been  done  away  within
the  pale  of  the  Christian  Church.  This,  however,  is  not  a  mere
matter  of  assertion,  it  is  involved  in  the  very  nature  of  the  Gos-
pel. Nothing  is  plainer  from  the  teachings  of  Scripture  than
that  all  believers  are  one  body  in  Christ,  that  all  are  the  partakers
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  by  virtue  of  their  union  with  Him  are
joint  and  equal  partakers  of  the  benefits  of  his  redemption  ;  that
if  there  be  any  difference  between  them,  it  is  not  in  virtue  of
national  or  social  distinctions,  but  solely  of  individual  character
and  devotion.     That  we  are  all  one  in  Christ  Jesus,  is  a  doctrine


§5]  CONVERSION   OF   THE  JEWS.  811

which  preckides  the  possibility  of  the  preeminence  assigned  to  the
Jews  in  the  theory  of  which  their  restoration  to  their  own  land,
and  their  national  individuality  are  constituent  elements.

5.  The  Apostles  uniformly  acted  on  this  principle.  They  rec-
ognize no  future  for  the  Jews  in  Avliich  the  Gentile  Christians
are  not  to  participate.  As  under  the  old  dispensation  proselytes
from  the  heathen  were  incorporated  with  the  Jewish  people  and
all  distinction  between  them  and  those  who  were  Jews  by  birth,
was  lost,  so  it  was  under  the  Gospel.  Gentiles  and  Jews  were
united  in  undistinguished  and  undistinguishable  membership  in
the  same  Church.  And  so  it  has  continued  to  the  present  day  ;
the  two  streams,  Jewish  and  Gentile,  united  in  the  Apostolic
Church,  have  flowed  on  as  one  great  river  through  all  ages.  As
this  was  by  divine  ordinance,  it  is  not  to  be  believed  that  they
are  to  be  separated  in  the  future.

6.  The  restoration  of  the  Jews  to  their  own  land  and  their
continued  national  individuality,  is  generally  associated  with  the
idea  that  they  are  to  constitute  a  sort  of  peerage  in  the  Church  of
the  future,  exalted  in  prerogative  and  dignity  above  their  fellow
believers  ;  and  this  again  is  more  or  less  intimately  connected
with  the  doctrine  that  what  the  Church  of  the  present  is  to  look
forward  to  is  the  establishment  of  a  kingdom  on  earth  of  great
worldly  splendour  and  prosperity.  For  neither  of  these  is  there
any  authority  in  the  didactic  portions  of  the  New  Testament.
There  is  no  intimation  that  any  one  class  of  Christians,  or  Chris-
tians of  any  one  nation  or  race,  are  to  be  exalted  over  their
brethren  ;  neither  is  there  the  slightest  suggestion  that  the  future
kingdom  of  Christ  is  to  be  of  earthly  splendour.  Not  only  are
these  expectations  without  any  foundation  in  the  teachings  of  the
Apostles,  but  they  are  also  inconsistent  with  the  whole  spirit  of
their  instructions.  They  did  not  exhort  believers  to  look  forward
to  a  reign  of  wealth  and  power,  but  to  long  after  complete  con-
formity to  the  image  of  Christ,  and  to  pray  for  the  coming  of
that  kingdom  which  is  righteousness,  joy,  and  peace  in  the  Holy
Ghost.  Any  Christian  would  rejoice  to  be  a  servant  of  Paul,  or
of  John,  of  a  martyr,  or  of  a  poor  worn-out  missionary ;  but  to
be  servant  to  a  Jew,  merely  because  he  is  a  Jew,  is  a  different
affair ;  unless  indeed  such  should  prove  to  be  the  will  of  Christ ;
then  such  service  would  be  an  honour.  It  is  as  much  opposed
to  the  spirit  of  the  Gospel  that  preeminence  in  Christ's  kingdom
should  be  adjudged  to  any  man  or  set  of  men  on  the  ground  of
natural  descent,  as  on  the  ground  of  superior  stature,  physical
strength,  or  wealth.


812        PART  IV.   ch.  m.  — the  second  advent.

The  Scriptures,  then,  as  they  have  been  generally  understood
in  the  Church,  teach  that  before  the  Second  Advent,  there  is  to  be
the  ingathering  of  the  heathen  ;  that  the  Gospel  must  be  preached
to  all  nations  ;  and  also  that  there  is  to  be  a  national  conversion
of  the  Jews  ;  but  it  is  not  to  be  inferred  from  this  that  either  all
the  heathen  or  all  the  Jews  are  to  become  true  Christians.  In
many  cases  the  conversion  may  be  merely  nominal.  There  Avill
probably  enough  remain  unchanged  in  heart  to  be  the  germ  of  that
persecuting  power  which  shall  bring  about  those  days  of  tribula-
tion which  the  Bible  seems  to  teach  are  to  immediately  precede
the  coming  of  the  Lord.

§  6.    Antichrist.

That  Antichrist  is  to  appear  before  the  second  coming  of  Christ,
is  expressedly  asserted  by  the  Apostle  in  2  Thessalonians  ii.  1-3,
"  We  beseech  you  ....  that  ye  be  not  soon  shaken  in  mind,  or

be  troubled  ....  as  that  the  day  of  Christ  is  at  hand For

that  day  shall  not  come,  except  there  come  a  falling  away  first,
and  that  man  of  sin  be  revealed,  the  son  of  perdition."  This  is
clear  ;  but  as  to  who  or  what  Antichrist  is,  there  is  no  little  diver-
sity of  opinion.

1.  Some  understand  by  that  term  any  antichristian  spirit,  or
power,  or  person.  The  Apostle  John  says,  "  Little  children,  it  is
the  last  time :  and  as  ye  have  heard  that  antichrist  shall  come,
even  now  are  there  many  antichrists  ;  whereby  we  know  that  it
is  the  last  time  ....  Who  is  a  liar  but  he  that  denieth  that
Jesus  is  the  Christ?  He  is  antichrist,  that  denieth  the  Father
and  the  Son."  (1  John  ii.  18  and  22.)  And  again,  "  Every
spirit  that  confesseth  not  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh,
is  not  of  God :  and  this  is  that  spirit  of  antichrist,  whereof  ye
have  heard  that  it  should  come ;  and  even  now  already  is  it
in  the  world."  (iv.  3.)  And  in  2  John  7,  it  is  said,  "  Many  de-
ceivers a.re  entered  into  the  world,  who  confess  not  that  Jesus
Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh.  This  is  a  deceiver  and  an  antichrist
(6  TrAaFos  Kttt  o  avrtxptoTTos,  the  deceiver  and  the  antichrist)."  Thus
om-  Lord  had  predicted,  "  There  shall  arise  false  Christs,  and
false  prophets,  and  shall  show  great  signs  and  wonders  ;  insomuch
that,  if  it  were  possible,  they  shall  deceive  the  very  elect."  (Matt,
xxiv.  24.)  And  the  Apostle  Paul  in  1  Timothy  iv.  1,  saj^s :
'*  The  Spirit  speaketh  expressly,  that  in  the  latter  times  some  shall
depart  from  the  faith,  giving  heed  to  seducing  spirits,  and  doctrines
of  devils."     These  passages  refer  to  a  marked  characteristic  of


§6.J  ANTICHRIST.  813

the  period  between  the  apostolic  age  and  the  second  coming  of
Christ.  There  were  to  be  man}^  antichrists ;  many  manifestations
of  malignant  opposition  to  the  person  and  to  the  work  of  Christ ;
many  attempts  to  cast  off  his  authority  and  to  overthrow  his
kingdom .

2.  Besides  this  general  reference  to  the  antichristian  spirit
which  was  to  manifest  itself  in  different  forms  and  with  different
degrees  of  intensity,  many  believe  that  there  is  yet  to  be  a  per-
son, in  whom  the  power  of  the  world  shall  be  concentrated,  and
wdio  will  exert  all  his  energies  to  overthrow  Christianity,  and  to
usurp  the  place  of  Christ  on  earth.  This  is  the  Antichrist  of
prophecy ;  of  whom  it  is  assumed  that  Daniel,  Paul,  and  St.
John  in  the  Apocalj^pse  speak.  This  is  the  view  generally  adopted
by  Romanists  and  by  many  eminent  evangelical  Protestant  theolo-
gians.

3.  The  common  opinion,  however,  among  Protestants  is,  that
the  prophecies  concerning  Antichrist  have  special  reference  to  the
papac3^  This  conviction  is  founded  principally  on  the  remark-
able prediction  contained  in  Paul's  second  epistle  to  the  Thessa-
lonians.  The  Apostle  knew  that  the  Thessalonians,  in  common
with  other  Christians  of  the  early  Church,  would  be  exposed  to
grievous  persecutions  :  to  comfort  them  under  their  sufferings,  to
give  them  patience  and  to  sustain  their  faith,  he  referred  to  the
promised  second  coming  of  Christ.  When  the  Lord  should  come
all  their  sorrows  would  be  ended ;  those  who  in  the  meantime
had  fallen  asleep,  would  not  lose  their  part  in  the  blessing  of  his
second  advent.  For  "  we  which  are  alive,  and  remain  unto  the
coming  of  the  Lord,  shall  not  prevent  them  which  are  asleep.  For
the  Lord  himself  shall  descend  from  heaven  with  a  shout,  with  the
voice  of  the  archangel,  and  with  the  trump  of  God  :  and  the  dead
in  Christ  shall  rise  first :  then  we  which  are  alive  and  remain
shall  be  caught  up  together  with  them  in  the  clouds,  to  meet  the
Lord  in  the  air:  and  so  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord.  Where-
fore, comfort  one  another  with  these  words."  (1  Tliess.  iv.  15-17.)
These  words  it  seems  had  been  perverted  and  misinterpreted,  by
some  who  were  "  disorderly,  working  not  at  all,  but "  were  "  busy-
bodies  ;"  unsettling  the  minds  of  the  people,  turning  them  off
from  present  duties,  as  though  the  day  of  the  Lord  were  at  hand.
To  correct  this  abuse,  the  Apostle  writes  his  second  epistle.  He
does  not  set  the  doctrine  of  the  second  advent  in  the  background,
or  say  anything  to  weaken  its  power  as  a  source  of  consolation  to
the  suffering  believers.     On  the  contrar}^  he  sets  forth  the  glory


814  PART  IV.     Ch.  III. —  the   second   ADVENT.

of  that  advent  and  the  richness  of  the  blessings  by  which  it  should
be  attended,  in  more  glowing  terms  than  ever  before.  "  We
ourselves,"  he  says,  "  glory  in  you  in  the  churches  of  God,  for
your  patience  and  faith  in  all  your  persecutions  and  tribulations
that  ye  endure  ;  which  is  a  manifest  token  of  the  righteous  judg-
ment of  God,  that  ye  may  be  counted  worthy  of  the  kingdom  of
God.  for  which  ye  also  suffer  ;  seeing  it  is  a  righteous  thing  with
God  to  recompense  tribulation  to  them  that  trouble  you  ;  and  to
you,  Avho  are  troubled,  rest  with  us,  when  the  Lord  Jesus  shall
be  revealed  from  heaven  with  his  mighty  angels,  in  flaming  fii-e
taking  vengeance  on  them  that  know  not  God,  and  that  obey  not
the  Gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ :  .  .  .  .  when  he  shall  come
to  be  glorified  in  his  saints,  and  to  be  admired  in  all  them  that
believe."  (2  Thess.  i.  4-10.)  All  this  stands  true.  Nevertheless
the  Thessaloniaiis  were  not  to  be  deceived.  The  great  day  of  de-
liverance was  not  at  hand.  They  had  much  to  do,  and  much  to  suf-
fer before  that  day  should  come.  The  time  of  the  second  advent
was  not  revealed.  In  his  first  epistle  he  had  said,  "  Of  the  times
and  the  seasons,  brethren,  ye  have  no  need  that  I  write  unto
you.  For  yourselves  know  perfectly  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  so
Cometh  as  a  thief  in  the  night."  (1  Thess.  v.  1,  2.)  Tliat  being
conceded,  they  should  know  that  great  tilings  must  occur  before
that  day  could  come.  First,  there  was  to  be  a  great  apostasy.
As  the  Church  was  then  in  its  infancy,  and  had  just  begun  to
make  progress  among  the  nations,  such  language  naturally  pre-
supposes a  much  more  extended  propagation  of  the  Gospel,  than
had  as  yet  taken  place.  The  second  event  that  was  to  precede
the  second  advent  was  the  coming  of  Antichrist,  or,  in  other
words,  the  man  of  sin  was  to  be  revealed.

The  first  question,  to  be  determined  in  the  interpretation  of  this
prophecy,  is,  Whether  Antichrist  is  a  particular  individual,  or  an
institution,  a  power,  or  a  corporation.  Protestants  generally  adopt
the  latter  view  ;  because  they  do  not  regard  any  one  pope,  but
the  papacy,  as  the  Antichrist  of  Scrij^ture.  In  favour  of  this  view
it  may  be  urged,  (1.)  That  it  is  according  to  the  analogy  of
prophecy  to  speak  of  nations,  institutions,  or  kingdoms,  as  indi-
viduals. In  Daniel,  the  ten  kings  are  ten  kingdoms  or  dynas-
ties ;  the  several  beasts  which  he  saw  in  vision,  were  not  the
symbols  of  particular  men,  but  of  nations.  When  therefore  the
Apostle  speaks  of  Antichrist  as  "  the  man  of  sin,"  and  "  the  son  of
perdition,"  it  is  perfectly  consistent  with  Scriptural  usage  to  un-
derstand him  to  refer  to  an  order  of  men,  or  to  an  institution.


§  6.]  ANTICHRIST.  815

(2.)  The  work  assigned  to  Antichrist  in  prophecy,  extends  over
far  too  long  a  pei'iod  to  be  accompHshed  by  one  man.  (3.)  Those
who  insist  that  the  antichrist  here  predicted,  is  an  individual  man,
are  forced  to  admit  that  what  is  said  in  2  Thessalonians  ii.  7
("  He  who  now  letteth,  will  let,  until  he  be  taken  out  of  the
way  ")  is  to  be  understood  of  a  power.  It  is  generally  under-
stood of  the  Roman  power.  Luthardt  understands  it  of  the  moral
power  which  sustains  the  right,  and  therefore  is  opposed  to  the
reckless  disregard  of  all  law,  which  is  one  of  the  characteristics
of  Anticlu-ist.  It  is  true  that  he  supposes  that  reference  is  also
made  to  one  of  the  guardian  or  protecting  angels  spoken  of  by
the  prophet  Daniel.  But  such  an  angel  is  not  to  be  "  taken  out
of  the  way."  And  there  is  nothing  in  the  context  or  in  Paul's
writings  anywhere  to  justify  the  assumption  that  reference  is  here
had  to  any  angelic  personage.

The  second  question  is,  Whether  the  antichrist  here  described
is  an  ecclesiastical  or  civil  power ;  whether  it  is  to  arise  in  the
Church  or  in  the  world.  The  considerations  which  are  in  favour
of  the  former  of  these  assu^mptions  are,  —

1.  That  the  designations  "  man  of  sin "  and  "  son  of  perdi-
tion "  have  a  religious  import,  and  are  more  appropriate  to  an
ecclesiastical  than  to  a  worldly  power  or  potentate.

2.  Antichrist  was  to  have  the  seat  of  his  power  in  the  "  tem-
ple of  God."  It  is  there  he  sits.  This  seems  clearly  to  indi-
cate that  it  is  an  ecclesiastical  usurping,  tyrannical,  and  per-
secuting power,  that  is  here  depicted.  By  the  temple  of  God
in  this  passage  is  generally  understood  the  Church  which  is  so
often  elsewhere  called,  and  especially  by  Paul,  God's  temple.
Some,  however,  suppose  that  the  reference  is  to  the  literal  tem-
ple in  Jerusalem ;  but  this  supposes,  (a.)  That  the  Jews  are  to
be  restored  to  their  own  land,  (ft.)  That  they  are  to  be  re-
stored as  Jews,  or  unconverted,  and  that  the  temple  is  to  be  there
rebuilt,  (c.)  That  the  Thessalonians  knew  all  this  and  would
understand  the  Apostle  as  referring  to  the  temple  made  with
hands ;  which  is  to  the  last  degree  improbable.

3.  His  coming  is  after  the  working  of  Satan,  with  all  power
and  signs  and  lying  wonders.  This  is  not  the  way  in  which
worldly  potentates  gain  their  power ;  they  rely  on  force.  But
this  is  the  way,  as  though  traced  by  the  pen  of  history  rather
than  by  the  pencil  of  prophecy,  in  which  the  papacy  has  attained
and  maintained  its  fearful  ascendancy  in  the  world.  Its  power
has  been  achieved  mainly  by  fraud,  "  by  the   deceivableness  of


816  PART  IV.     Ch.   III.  — the  second   ADVENT.

unrighteousness  ;  "  by  forged  documents  and  false  pretences  ;  by
claiming  that  Peter  was  made  primate  over  the  whole  Church
and  the  vicar  or  plenipotentiary  of  Christ  on  earth  ;  that  he  was
the  bishop  of  Rome ;  that  his  successors  in  that  office  were  his
successors  in  that  primacy ;  and  that  as  the  vicar  of  Christ  he  was
superior  to  all  earthly  potentates,  not  merely  as  the  spiritual  is
above  the  temporal,  but  as  lord  of  the  conscience,  authorized  to
decide  what  Avas  right  and  what  was  wrong  for  them  to  do  in  all
their  relations  as  men  and  as  rulers ;  which  is  a  claim  of  absolute
dominion.  This,  however,  is  a  small  matter  so  far  as  it  concerns
the  things  of  this  world.  It  was  to  the  mass  of  the  people  of
little  moment  whether  their  absolute  sovereign  was  a  bishop  or
a  prince  ;  whether  he  resided  at  Rome  or  in  Paris,  whether  his
authority  extended  over  one  nation  or  over  all  nations.  It  is  the
false  claim  of  the  papacy  to  have  supreme  autliority  over  the  faith
of  men,  to  decide  for  them  what  they  must  believe  on  the  pain  of
eternal  perdition,  that  is  the  most  fearful  power  ever  assumed  by
sinful  men.  To  this  is  to  be  added  the  false  claim  to  the  power
to  forgive  sin.  This  is,  as  we  have  seen,  a  twofold  power,  an-
swering to  the  twofold  penalty  attached  to  sin,  namely,  the  eternal
penalty  as  a  violation  of  the  divine  law,  and  the  penances  still
due  after  the  remission  of  the  eternal  penalty,  as  satisfactions  to
divine  justice.  The  former  can  be  obtained  only  through  the
intervention  or  absolution  of  the  priest ;  and  the  latter  can  be  im-
posed or  remitted  at  the  discretion  of  the  Church.  This  includes
power  over  purgatory,  the  pains  of  which  are  represented  as
frightful  and  of  indefinite  duration.  These  pains  the  pope  and
his  subordinates  falsely  claim  the  power  to  alleviate  or  remit.
These  claims  have  no  parallel  in  the  history  of  the  world.  If
such  pretensions  as  these  do  not  constitute  the  power  which
makes  them  Antichrist,  then  nothing  more  remains.  Any  future
antichrist  that  may  arise  must  be  a  small  affair  compared  to  the
papacy.

Then  again,  the  Apostle  tells  us,  these  portentous  claims,  these
anrighteous  deceits,  were  to  be  supported  by  "  signs  and  lying
wonders."  These  have  seldom,  if  ever,  been  appealed  to  by
worldly  powers  to  support  their  pretensions.  They  ever  have
been  and  still  are  among  the  chief  supports  of  the  papacy.
There  is  not  a  false  doctrine  which  it  teaches,  or  a  false  assump-
tion which  it  makes,  which  is  not  sustained  by  "  lying  wonders."
Its  whole  history  is  a  history  of  apparitions  of  the  Viigin  Mary
or  of  saints  and   angels;   and  of  miracles  of  every  possible  de--


§  C]  ANTICHRIST.  817

scription  from  the  most  stupendous  to  the  most  absurd.  It  has
ever  acted  on  the  prmciple  "  populus  vult  decipi,"  and  that  it  is
right  to  deceive  them  for  their  own  good,  or,  the  good  of  the
Church.  The  whole  system,  so  far  as  it  is  distinctive,^  is  a  sys-
tem of  falsehood,  or  false  pretensions,  supported  by  deceit.

4.  Antichrist  is  to  be  a  persecuting  power.  Is  not  this  true  of
the  papacy  ?  It  has  been  drunk  with  the  blood  of  the  saints.  It
not  only  persecutes,  but  it  justifies  persecution,  and  avows  to  this
day  its  purpose  to  enforce  its  dominion  by  the  rack  and  the  stake
wherever  it  has  the  power.  This  is  involved  in  its  justification
of  the  past,  and  in  its  making  it  a  duty  to  suppress  every  form
of  religion  but  that  of  Rome.  The  thirty  years'  war  in  German}^ ;
the  persistent  attempts  to  exterminate  the  Piedmontese ;  the
massacres  by  the  Duke  of  Alva  in  the  Netherlands  ;  the  horrors  of
tlie  inquisition  in  Spain  ;  the  dragonnades  and  the  massacre  of  St.
Bartholomew  in  France,  over  which  Te  Deums  were  sung  in
Rome,  show  that  the  people  of  God  can  hardly  have  more  to
suffer  under  any  future  antichrist  than  they  have  already  suffered,
and  perhaps  have  yet  to  suffer,  under  the  papacy.

5.  Antichrist,  according  to  the  Apostle,  was  to  oppose  and  ex-
alt himself  above  all  that  is  called  God  or  is  worshipped  ;  "  so
that  he,  as  God,  sitteth  in  the  temple  of  God,  shewing  himself
that  he  is  God."  This  is  true  of  no  worldly  power.  It  was  not
true  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes,  who  is  regarded  as  the  type  whence
the  prophetic  portrait  of  Antichrist  was  drawn.  It  was  not  true
of  any  of  the  Roman  emperors.  Some  of  them  allowed  them-
selves to  be  enrolled  among  the  thousand  gods  of  the  Pantheon  ;
but  this  falls  very  far  short  of  the  description  here  given.  It  is,
however,  all  true  of  the  papacy,  and  it  is  true  of  no  other  power
which  has  yet  appeared  upon  earth.  Paul  does  not  concern  him-
self with  theories,  but  with  facts.  It  is  not  that  the  popes  openly
profess  to  be  superior  to  God  ;  or,  that  in  theory  they  claim  to
be  more  than  men.  It  is  the  practical  operation  of  the  system
which  he  describes.  The  actual  facts  are  first,  that  the  popes
claim  the  honour  that  is  due  to  God  alone;  secondly,  that  they
assume  the  powers  which  are  his  exclusive  prerogatives ;  and
thirdly,  that  they  supersede  the  authority  of  God,  putting  their
«;wn  in  its  place.     It  is  thus  they  exalt  themselves  above  God.

i  This  qualification  is  necessary.  Papists  of  course  hold  the  truths  of  natural  religion;
and  many  of  the  distinguishing  doctrines  of  the  Gospel.  This  is  to  be  acknowledged.  We
are  not  to  deny  that  truth  is  truth,  because  held  by  Romanists  ;  nor  are  we  to  deny,  that
where  truth  is,  there  may  be  its  fruits.  While  condemning  Papacy,  Protestants  can,  and
do  joyfully  admit  that  there  are  anwng  Romanists  such  godly  men  as  St.  Bernard,  F»5n^lon,
and  Pascal,  and  doubtless  thousands  more  known  only  unto  God.
vou  III.  52


818  PART   IV.     Ch.   III.  — the    second  ADVENT.

They  assume  the  honour  which  belongs  to  God  not  merely  by
claiming  to  be  the  vicars  of  Christ  on  earth,  and  by  allo\ying  them-
selves to  be  addressed  as  Lord  and  God,  but  by  exacting  the  sub-
mission of  the  reason,  the  conscience,  and  the  life,  to  their  author-
ity. This  is  the  highest  tribute  which  a  creature  can  render  the
Creator ;  and  this  the  popes  claim  to  be  their  due  from  all  man-
kind. They  claim  divine  prerogatives  as  infallible  teachers  on  all
questions  of  faith  and  practice,  and  as  having  the  power  to  forgive
sin.  And  they  exalt  their  autliority  above  that  of  God  by  practi-
cally setting  aside  his  word,  and  substituting  their  decrees  and
what  they  put  forth  as  the  teachings  of  the  Church.  It  is  a  sim-
ple and  undeniable  fact  that  in  all  countries  under  the  effective
dominion  of  the  pope,  the  Scriptures  are  inaccessible  to  the  peo-
ple, and  the  faith  of  the  masses  reposes  not  on  what  the  Bible
teaches,  but  on  what  the  Church  declares  to  be  true.

Even  such  a  writer  as  John  Henry  Newman,  in  an  essay  written
before  his  formal  adhesion  to  the  Church  of  Rome,  uses  such  lan-
guage as  the  following  :  The  question  is,  "  Has  Christ,  or  has  He
not,  appointed  a  body  representative  of  Him  in  earth  during  his
absence  ?  "  This  question  he  answers  in  the  affirmative,  and  says,
"  Not  even  the  proof  of  our  Lord's  divinity  is  plainer  tlian  that
of  the  Church's  commission.  Not  even  the  promises  to  David  or
to  Solomon  more  evidently  belong  to  Christ,  than  those  to  Israel,
or  Jerusalem,  or  Sion,  belong  to  the  Church.  Not  even  Daniel's
prophecies  are  more  exact  to  the  letter,  than  those  which  invest
the  Church  with  powers  which  Protestants  consider  Babylonish.
Nay,  holy  Daniel  himself  is  in  no  small  measure  employed  on
this  very  subject.  He  it  is  who  announces  a  fifth  kingdom,  like
'  a  stone  cut  out  without  hands,'  which  '  broke  in  pieces  and  con-
sumed '  all  former  kingdoms,  but  was  itself  to  '  stand  forever.'
and  to  become  '  a  great  mountain,'  and  '  to  fill  the  whole  earth.'
He  it  is  also  who  prophesies  that  '  the  Saints  of  the  most  High
shall  take  the  kingdom  and  possess  the  kingdom  forever.'  He
'  saw  in  the  night  visions  and  behold  one  like  to  the  Son  of  Man
came  with  the  clouds  of  heaven,  and  came  to  the  Ancient  of
Days,  and  there  was  given  Him  dominion  and  glory  and  a  king-
dom, that  all  people,  nations,  and  languages  should  serve  Him.'
Such  too  is  Isaiah's  prophecy,  '  Out  of  Zion  shall  go  forth  the
law,  and  the  word  of  the  Lord  from  Jerusalem,  and  He  shall
judge  among  the  nations  and  rebuke  many  people.'  Now  Christ
Himself  was  to  depart  from  the  earth.  He  could  not  then  in  his
own  person  be  intended  in  these  great  prophecies ;  if  He  acted


§  6.]  ANTICHRIST.  819

it  must  be  by  delegacy."  ^  According  to  the  Romanists,  there-
fore, these  prophecies,  relating  to  Christ  and  his  kingdom,  refer
to  the  papacy.  It  is  the  stone  cut  out  of  the  mountain  without
hands,  which  is  to  break  in  pieces  and  consume  all  other  king-
doms ;  which  is  to  stand  forever ;  which  is  to  fill  the  whole  earth ;
to  which  is  given  dominion,  and  glory,  and  a  kingdom,  that  all
people,  nations,  and  languages  should  serve.  If  this  be  not  to  put
itself  in  the  place  of  God,  it  is  hard  to  see  how  the  prophecies
concerning  Antichrist  can  ever  be  fulfilled.

No  more  conclusive  argument  to  prove  that  the  papacy  is  Anti-
christ, could  be  constructed,  than  that  furnished  by  Dr.  New-
man, himself  a  Romanist.  According  to  him  the  prophecies
respecting  the  glory,  the  exaltation,  the  power,  and  the  universal
dominion  of  Christ,  have  their  fulfilment  in  the  popes.  But  who
is  Antichrist,  but  the  man  that  puts  himself  in  the  place  of  Christ ;
claiming  the  honour  and  the  power  which  belong  to  God  manifest
in  the  flesh,  for  himself  ?  Whoever  does  this  is  Antichrist,  in  the
highest  form  m  which  he  can  appear.

6.  Another  argument  to  prove  that  the  Antichrist  described  by
the  Apostle  is  an  ecclesiastical  power  is  that  his  appearance  is  the
consequence  of  a  great  apostasy.  That  the  apostasy  spoken  of  is  a
defection  from  the  truth  is  plain  from  the  Scriptural  usage  of  the
term  (Acts  xxi.  21),  and  from  the  connection  in  which  it  here
occurs.  When  God  brought  the  heathen  upon  the  people  as  con-
querors, in  punishment  of  their  idolatry,  their  sufferings  were  a
judicial  consequence  of  their  apostasy,  but  it  cannot  be  said  that
the  power  of  Chaldean  or  Egyptian  oppressors  was  the  fruit  of
their  defection  from  the  truth.  In  this  case,  however.  Antichrist
is  represented  as  the  ultimate  development  of  the  predicted  apos-
tasy. If  a  simple  minister  should  claim  to  be  a  priest,  and  then
one  priest  assume  dominion  over  many  priests,  and  then  one  pre-
late over  other  prelates,  and  then  one  over  all,  and  then  that  one
claim  to  be  the  ruler  of  the  whole  world  as  vicar  of  Christ,
clothed  with  his  authority,  so  that  the  prophecy  that  all  peoples,
nations,  and  languages  should  serve  the  Son  of  Man,  is  fulfilled
in  him,  then  indeed  we  shovild  have  a  regular  development,  from
the  first  step  to  the  last.  Bishop  EUicott,  though  believing  Anti-
christ to  be  "  one  single  personal  being,  as  truly  man  as  He
whom  he  impiously  opposes,"  and  that  he  is  to  be  hereafter  re
vealed,  still  admits  that  Antichrist  is  to  be  "the  concluding  and

1  £ssays  Critical  and  Historical.     By  John  Henrv  NTewman,  formerly  Fellow  of  Oriel
College,  Oxford.    London,  1871.     The  Protestant  Idea  of  Antichrist,  vol.  ii.  pp.  173-175.


820        PART  IV.   Ch.  in. —  the  second  advent.

most  appalling  plienomenon  "  of  the  great  apostasy.     But  if  so,
he  ni\ist  be  an  ecclesiastical,  and  not  a  worldly  power.

7.  Again  the  Apostle  says  that  ''the  mystery  of  iniquity  doth
already  work."  That  is,  the  principles  and  spirit  had  already
begun  to  manifest  themselves  in  the  Church,  which  were  to  culmi-
nate m  the  revelation  of  the  Man  of  Sin.  How  could  this  be  said
of  a  person  who  was  to  be  a  worldly  prince,  appearing  outside
of  the  Church,  separated,  not  only  chronologically  by  ages  from
the  apostolic  age,  but  also  logically,  from  all  the  causes  then  in
operation.  If  Antichrist  is  to  be  a  single  person,  concentrating
in  himself  all  worldly  power  as  a  universal  monarch,  to  appear
shortly  before  the  end  of  the  world,  as  is  assumed  by  so  many
expounders  of  prophecy,  it  is  hard  to  see  how  he  was  to  be  the
product  of  the  leaven  already  working  in  the  times  of  the  Apostles.

If  however,  as  Protestants  have  so  generally  believed,  the  pa-
pacy is  the  Antichrist  which  the  Apostle  had  in  his  prophetic  eye,
then  this  passage  is  perfectly  intelligible.  The  two  elements  of
which  the  papacy  is  the  development  are  the  desire  of  preem-
inence or  lust  of  power,  and  the  idea  of  a  priesthood,  that  is,  that
Christian  ministers  are  mediators  whose  intervention  is  neces-
sary to  secure  access  to  God,  and  that  they  are  authorized  to
make  atonement  for  sin  ;  to  which  was  added  the  claim  to  grant
absolution.  Both  these  elements  were  at  work  in  the  apostolic
age.  The  papacy  is  the  product  of  the  transfer  of  Jewish  and
Pagan  ideas  to  the  Christian  system.  The  Jews  had  a  high
priest,  and  all  the  ministers  of  the  sanctuary  were  sacrificing
priests.  The  Romans  had  a  "  Pontifex  Maximus "  and  the
ministers  of  religion  among  them  were  priests.  Nothing  was
more  natural  and  nothing  is  plainer  as  a  historical  fact  than  that
the  assumption  of  a  priestly  character  and  functions  by  the
Christian  ministry,  was  one  of  the  earliest  corruptions  of  the
Church.  And  nothing  is  plainer  than  that  to  this  assumption
the  power  of  the  papacy  is  in  a  large  measure  to  be  attributed.
And  as  to  the  desire  of  preeminence,  we  know  that  there  was,
even  among  the  twelve,  a  contention  who  should  be  the  greatest.
The  Apostle  John  (3  Epistle  9)  speaks  of  Diotrephes,  "  who
loveth  to  have  the  preeminence  ;  "  and  in  all  the  Epistles  there  is
evidence  of  the  struggle  for  ascendancy  on  the  part  of  unworthy
ministers  and  teachers.  The  leaven  of  iniquity,  therefore,  was  at
work  in  the  apostohc  age,  which  concentrated  by  degrees  into
the  portentous  system  of  the  papacy.

8.  According  to  this  view,  the  difficult  passage  in  verses  6  and


^  6.J  ANTICHRIST.  821

7  admits  of  an  easy  interpretation.  The  Apostle  there  says :
"  Now  ye  know  what  withholdeth,  that  he  might  be  revealed  in
his  time.  For  the  mystery  of  iniquity  doth  already  work  :  only
he  who  now  letteth  will  let,  until  he  be  taken  out  of  the  way."
There  was,  therefore,  at  tliat  time  an  obstacle  which  prevented
the  development  of  the  Man  of  Sin,  and  would  continue  to  pre-
vent it,  as  long;  as  it  remained  as  it  then  was.  It  is  to  be  noticed
that  Paul  says,  "  Now  ye  know  what  withholdeth."  How  could
the  Thessalonians  know  to  what  he  referred  ?  only  from  the
Apostle's  instructions,  or  from  the  nature  of  the  case.  The  fact
however  is  that  they  did  know,  and,  therefore,  it  is  probable
that  knowledge  was  communicated  to  others,  and  was  not  likely
to  be  soon  forgotten.  Tliis  consideration  gives  the  more  weight
to  the  almost  unanimous  judgment  of  the  early  fathers  that  the
obstacle  to  the  development  of  Antichrist  was  the  Roman  empire.
While  that  continued  in  its  vigour  it  was  impossible  that  an
ecclesiastic  should  become  the  virtual  sovereign  of  the  world.  It
is  a  historical  fact  that  the  conflict  between  the  Emperors  and
the  Popes  for  the  ascendancy,  was  continued  for  ages,  and  that
as  the  power  of  the  former  decreased  that  of  the  latter  increased.

On  the  assumption  that  the  Antichrist  of  which  Paul  spe;iks
in  his  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians,  is  a  powerful  worldly  monarch
hereafter  to  appear,  these  verses,  the  6th  and  7th,  preseni  the
greatest  difficulty.  The  causes  which  are  to  bring  such  a  mon-
arch into  the  possession  of  his  power  were  not  then  in  operation  ;
there  was  then  no  obstacle  to  his  manifestation  so  obvious  as  to  be
generally  known  to  Christians,  and  the  removal  of  which  was  to
be  followed  at  once  by  his  revelation.  Even  on  the  assumption
that  the  obstacle  of  which  the  Apostle  speaks,  was  not  the  Ro-
man empire,  but  rather  the  regard  to  law  and  order  deeply  fixed  in
the  public  mind,  which  stood  in  the  way  of  the  revelation  of  the
Man  of  Sin,  this  difficulty  is  scarcely  lessened.  How  could  tlie
Thessalonians  have  kno^vn  that  ?  How  foreign  to  their  minds  must
have  been  the  thought  that  a  regard  for  law  must  be  taken  out
the  wa}^  before  the  lawless  one  could  appear.  It  seems  plain  thai
the  early  fathers  were  right  in  their  interpretation  of  the  Apostle's
language  ;  and  that  he  meant  to  say  that  the  appearance  of  eccle
siastical  claimants  to  universal  dominion,  was  not  possible  until
the  Roman  empire  was  effectually  broken.

According  to  Paul's  account,  Antichrist  was  to  arise  in  the
Church.  He  was  to  put  forth  the  most  exorbitant  claims  ;  exalt
himself  above  all  human  authority  ;  assume  to  himself  the  pre-


822  PART  IV.     Ch.  m.-THE   SECOND  ADVENT.

rogatives  of  God,  demanding  a  submission  due  only  to  God,  and
virtually  setting  aside  the  authority  of  God,  and  substituting  his
own  in  its  place.  These  assumptions  were  to  be  sustained  by  all
manner  of  unrighteous  deceits,  by  signs,  and  by  lying  wonders.
This  portrait  suits  the  papacy  so  exactly,  that  Protestants  at  least
have  rarely  doubted  that  it  is  tlie  Antichrist  which  the  Apostle
intended  to  describe.

Dr.  John  Henry  Newman  says,  that  if  Protestants  insist  on
making  the  Church  of  Rome  Antichrist,  they  thereby  make  over
all  Roman  Catholics,  past  and  present,  "  to  utter  and  hopeless
perdition."  ^  This  does  not  follow.  The  Church  of  Rome  is  to
be  viewed  under  different  aspects  ;  as  the  papacy,  an  external
organized  hierarchy,  with  the  pope,  with  all  his  arrogant  claims,
at  its  head  ;  and  also  as  a  body  of  men  professing  certain  re-
ligious doctrines.  Much  may  be  said  of  it  in  the  one  aspect,
which  is  not  true  of  it  in  the  other.  Much  may  be  said  of  Russia
as  an  empire  that  cannot  be  said  of  all  Russians.  At  one  time
the  first  Napoleon  was  regarded  by  many  as  Antichrist ;  that  did
not  involve  the  belief  that  all  Frenchmen  who  acknowledged  him
as  emperor,  or  all  soldiers  who  followed  him  as  their  leader,  were
the  sons  of  perdition.  That  many  Roman  Catholics,  past  and
present,  are  true  Christians,  is  a  palpable  fact.  It  is  a  fact  which
no  man  can  deny  without  committing  a  great  sin.  It  is  a  sin
asrainst  Christ  not  to  acknowledge  as  true  Christians  those  who
bear  his  image,  and  whom  He  recognizes  as  his  brethren.  It  is  a
sin  also  against  ourselves.  We  are  not  born  of  God  unless  we
love  the  children  of  God.  If  we  hate  and  denounce  those  whom
Christ  loves  as  members  of  his  o^vn  body,  what  are  we  ?  It  is
best  to  be  found  on  the  side  of  Christ,  let  what  will  happen.  It
is  perfectly  consistent,  then,  for  a  man  to  denounce  the  papacy
as  the  man  of  sin,  and  yet  rejoice  in  believing,  and  in  openly
acknowledging,  that  there  are,  and  ever  have  been,  many  Roman-
ists who  are  the  true  children  of  God.

Admitting  that  the  Apostle's  predictions  refer  to  the  Roman
pontiffs,  it  does  not  follow  that  the  papacy  is  the  only  anti-
christ. St.  John  says  there  are  many  antichrists.  Our  Lord
says  many  shall  come  in  his  name,  claiming  in  one  form  or
another  his  authority,  and  endeavouring  to  take  liis  place  by  de-
throning him.  The  Apostle  John  tells  us  this  "  is  the  last  time  "
(1  John  ii.  18)  in  which  many  antichrists  are  to  appear.     This

1  The  Protestant  Idea  of  Antichrist,  in  vol.  ii.  of  his  Essays  Critical  and  Historical,
p.  148.


§  6.]  ANTICHRIST.  823

"last  time"  extends  from  the  first  to  tlie  second  advent  of
Christ.  This  long  period  lay  as  one  scene  before  the  minds  of
the  prophets.  And  they  tell  what  was  given  them  to  see,  not  as
though  they  were  writing  a  history,  and  unfolding  events  in  their
historical  order,  but  as  describing  the  figures  which  they  saw,  as
it  were,  represented  on  the  same  canvass.  As  Isaiah  describes
the  redemption  from  Babylon  and  the  redemption  by  the  j\Ies-
siah  as  though  they  were  contemporary  events,  so  Joel,  in  almost
the  same  sentence,  connects  the  effusion  of  the  spirit  which
attended  the  first  advent  of  Christ  with  the  great  elemental
changes  which  are  to  attend  his  second  coming.  How  long  the
period  between  the  first  and  second  advents  of  the  Son  of  God  is
to  be  protracted  is  unrevealed.  It  has  already  lasted  nearly  two
thousand  years,  and,  for  what  we  know,  may  last  two  thousand
more.  As  this  long  period,  crowded  with  great  events,  w^as  pre-
sented as  a  whole  to  the  minds  of  the  prophets,  it  is  not  sur-
prising that,  under  the  guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  one  should
fix  on  one  prominent  feature  in  the  scene,  and  others  upon
another.  Under  the  divine  guidance  granted  to  these  holy  seers,
there  could  be  no  error  aud  no  contradiction,  but  there  could
hardly  fail  to  be  great  variety.  It  would  not,  therefore,  inval-
idate the  account  given  of  Paul's  descrij^tion  of  Antichrist,  if  it
should  be  found  to  differ  in  some  respects  from  the  antichrists  of
Daniel  and  of  the  Apocalypse.

The  Antichrist  of  Daniel.

The  reader  of  the  prophecies  of  Daniel  has,  at  least  in  many
cases,  the  advantage  of  a  divine  interpretation  of  his  predictions.
The  prophet  himself  did  not  understand  the  import  of  his  visions,
and  begged  to  have  them  explained  to  him ;  and  his  request  was,
in  a  measure,  granted.  Thus  in  the  seventh  chapter  we  read :
"  I  saw  in  my  vision  by  night,  and  behold,  ....  four  great
beasts  came  up  from  the  sea,  diverse  one  from  another.  The
first  was  like  a  lion  ;  ....  a  second  like  to  a  bear  ;  another
like  a  leopard  ;  (and)  a  fourth  beast  dreadful  and  terrible,  and
strong  exceedingly,  ....  and  it  had  ten  horns  ....  And
behold  there  came  up  among  them  another  little  horn,  before
■vhom  there  were  three  of  the  first  horns  plucked  up  by  the
roots :  and,  behold,  in  this  horn  were  eyes  like  the  eyes  of  a  man,
and  a  mouth  speaking  great  things."

These  beasts  were,  as  the  explanation  states,  the  symbols  of
four  kingdoms,  the   Babylonish,  the   Medo-Persian,  the  Greek,


824  PART  IV.     Cii.   m.  — THE   SECOND  ADVENT.

and  the  Roman.  This  last  was  to  be  divided  into  ten  kingdonis.
That  kings  in  this  prophecy  mean  kingdoms,  not  individuals,  but
an  organized  community  under  a  king,  is  plain  from  the  natui-e
of  the  predictions  and  from  the  express  declaration  of  the  prophet ;
for  he  says,  in  verse  17,  that  the  four  beasts  are  four  kings;  and
in  verse  28,  that  the  fourth  beast  is  the  fourth  kingdom.  Kino-
and  kingdom,  therefore,  are  interchanged  as  of  the  same  import.
After,  or  in  the  midst  of  these  ten  kingdoms  signified  by  the  ten
horns,  there  was  to  arise  another  kingdom  or  power  symbolized
by  the  little  horn.  Of  this  power  it  is  said  :  (1.)  That  it  was  to
be  of  a  different  kind  from  the  others.  Perhaps,  as  they  were
civil  or  worldly  kingdoms,  this  was  to  be  ecclesiastical.  (2.)  He
was  to  gain  the  ascendancy  over  the  other  powers  ;  at  least  three
of  them  were  to  be  plucked  up  by  the  roots.  (3.)  He  was  to
speak  great  things,  or  be  arrogant  in  his  assumptions.  (4.)  He
was  to  set  himseK  against  God  ;  speaking  "  great  words  against
the  Most  High."  (6.)  He  was  to  persecute  the  saints  ;  prevail
against  them  and  wear  them  out;  and  they  shall  be  given  into
his  hands.  (6.)  This  antichristian  power  was  to  continue  until  the
judgment,  ^.  e.,  "  iintil  the  Ancient  of  Days  came,  and  judgment
was  given  to  the  saints  of  the  Most  High."  (Dan.  vii.  22.)  In
all  these  particulars  the  Antichrist  of  Daniel  answers  to  the
description  given  by  St.  Paul  in  2  Thessalonians.  In  one  point,
however,  they  appear  to  differ.  According  to  Daniel,  the  power
of  Antichrist  was  to  last,  or  at  least  his  persecution  of  the  saints,
only  "a  time  and  times  and  the  dividing  of  a  time;"  that  is,
three  years  and  a  half.  (Compare  Rev.  xiii.  5,  and  xi.  2,  3.)
This  is  the  interpretation  generally  adopted.  Calvin  adopts  the
principle  that  in  the  prophecies  definite  periods  of  time  are  used
for  periods  of  indefinite  duration.  In  his  Commentary  on  Daniel
he  makes  the  little  horn  spoken  of  in  the  seventh  chapter  to  be
Julius  CiL'sar,  and  says  :  "  Qui  annum  putant  hie  notari  per  tem-
pus,  falluntur  meo  judicio  ....  Annus  sumetur  figurate  pro
tempore  aliquo  indeterminato."  ^  He  significantly  says  :  "  In
numeris  non  sum  Pythagoricus."

There  are  two  answers  to  this  difficulty.  The  word  antichrist
may  be  a  generic  term,  as  it  seems  to  have  been  used  by  St.
John,  not  referring  exclusively  to  any  one  individual  person,  or
to  any  one  organization,  but  to  any  and  every  antichristian
power,  having  certain  characteristics.     So  that  there  may  be,  as

1  In  Daniehmvn.  20,  25;   Worhs,  Amsterdam,  1GG7,  vol   v.  pp.  109,  113.

2  In  Danlelem  xii.  12;  Ibid.,  p.  205  b.


§  G.J  ANTICHRIST.  825

the  Apostle  says,  many  Antichrists.  Hence  Daniel  may  describe,
one,  and  Paul  another.  Secondly,  the  same  power,  retaining  all
its  essential  characteristics,  may  change  its  form.  If  repubhcan
France,  during  the  first  revolution,  was  an  antichristian  nation,
it  did  not  necessarily  change  its  character  when  it  became  an
empire ;  and  what  was,  or  might  have  been,  said  of  it  m  prophecy
under  the  one  form,  might  not  have  answered  to  what  it  was
under  the  other  form.  During  the  Middle  Ages,  bishops  were
sometimes  princes  and  warriors.  A  prophetic  description  of
them,  while  giving  their  general  characteristics  suited  to  both
their  ecclesiastical  and  worldly  functions,  might  say  some  things
of  them  as  warlike  princes  which  did  not  belong  to  them  as
bishops.  However,  we  do  not  pretend  to  be  experts  in  matters
of  prophecy  ;  our  object  is  simply  to  state  what  Paul  said  of  the
Antichrist  which  he  had  in  view,  and  what  Daniel  said  of  the
Antichrist  which  he  was  inspired  to  describe.

In  the  eleventh  chapter  of  Daniel,  from  the  36th  verse  to  the
end,  there  is  a  passage  which  is  commonly  understood  of  Anti-
christ, because  what  is  there  said  is  not  true  of  Antiochus
Epiphanes,  to  whom  the  former  part  of  the  chapter  is  referred,
and  is  true  of  Antichrist  as  described  in  other  places  in  the  Scrip-
tures. It  is  not  true  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes  that  he  abandoned
the  gods  of  his  fathers.  On  the  contrary,  his  purpose  was  to
force  all  under  his  control,  the  Jews  included,  to  worship  those
gods.  What  is  said  in  verse  36  is  in  substance  what  Paul  says,  in
2  Thessalonians  ii.  4,  of  the  Man  of  Sin.  Daniel  says  that  "  the
king,"  whom  he  describes,  "  shall  do  according  to  his  will ;  and
he  shall  exalt  himself,  and  magnify  himself  above  every  god,  and
shall  speak  marvellous  things  against  the  God  of  gods,  and  shall
prosper  till  the  indignation  be  accomplished  :  for  that  that  is
determined  shall  be  done."  This  exalting  himself  "  above  all
that  is  called  god  "  is  the  prominent  characteristic  of  Antichrist
as  he  is  elsewhere  presented  in  Scripture.

The  Antichrist  of  the  Apocalypse.

The  Apocalypse  seems  to  be  a  summing  up  and  expansion  of
all  the  eschatological  prophecies  of  the  Old  Testament,  especially
of  those  of  Ezekiel,  Zechariah  and  Daniel.  The  same  symbols,
the  same  forms  of  expression,  the  same  numbers,  the  same  cycle  o?
events,  occur  in  the  New  Testament  predictions,  that  are  found
in  those  of  the  Old.  Every  one  knows  that  commentators  diffei
not  only  in  their  interpretation  of  the  details,  but  even  as  to  the


826  PART  IV.     Ch.   III. —  the    second   ADVENT.

whole  structure  and  design  of  the  book  of  Revelation.  Some
regard  it  as  a  description  in  oriental  imagery  of  contemporaneous
events  ;  others  as  intended  to  set  forth  the  different  phases  of  the
spu-itual  life  of  the  Church ;  others  as  designed  to  unfold  the
leading  events  in  the  history  of  the  Church  and  of  the  world  in
their  chronological  order  ;  others  again  assume  that  it  is  a  series,
figuratively  speaking,  of  circles  ;  each  vision  or  series  of  visions
relating  to  the  same  events  under  different  aspects  ;  the  end,  and
the  preparation  for  the  end,  being  presented  over  and  over  again  ;
the  great  theme  being  the  coming  of  the  Lord,  and  the  triumph
of  his  Church.^

The  most  commonly  accepted  view  of  the  general  contents  of
the  book  by  those  who  adopt  the  chronological  method  is  that  so
clearly  presented  in  the  admirable  little  work  of  Dr.  James  M.
Macdonald  (now  of  Princeton,  New  Jersey ).2  According  to  this
view,  the  introduction  is  contained  in  chapters  i.-iii. ;  part  second
relates  the  Jewish  persecutions,  and  the  destruction  of  that
power,  in  chapters  iv.-xi.  14 ;  part  third  relates  the  Pagan
persecutions,  and  the  end  of  the  Pagan  persecuting  power,  in
chapters  xi.  15-xiii.  10  ;  part  fourth  relates  the  Papal  persecu-
tions and  errors,  and  their  end,  in  chapters  xiii.  11-xix.  ;  and
part  fifth  relates  the  latter  day  of  glory,  the  battle  of  Gog  and
Magog,  the  final  judgment,  and  the  heavenly  state,  in  chapters
xx.-xxii.

Luthardt  may  be  taken  as  a  representative  of  the  advocates  of
the  theory  that  the  historical  sequence  of  events  is  not  designed  to
be  set  forth  in  the  Apocalypse.     The  three  works  of  the  Apostle

1  The  Prophecies  of  Daniel  and  the  Revelations  of  St.  John,  viewed  in  their  3hitual
Relation,  with  an  Exposition  of  the  Principial  Passa(/es.  By  Carl  August  Auberleri,  Dr.
Phil.,  Licentiate  and  Professor  Extraordinarius  of  Theology  in  Basil.  Edinburgh,  1856.
Auberlen  says,  on  page  359:  "The  interpretation  of  the  Apocalypse  may  be  reduced  to
three  grand  groups.  First,  the  church-historical  view  regards  tlie  Revelations  as  a  pro-
phetic compendium  of  Church  history."  This  was  the  early  Church  view.  Its  principal
representative  in  Germany  is  Bengel.  It  is  generally  adopted  b)^  the  British  and  French
interpreters.  To  this  class  belong  Elliot's  Ilorce  Apocahjpticm,  or  a  Commentary  on  the
Apocalypse,  Critical  and  Historical,  second  edition,  London;  1846;  four  volumes;  and  the
work  of  Gaussen  of  Geneva,  entitled  Daniel  le  Prophete.  The  second  class  includes  the
mi;dern  German  interpreters,  who,  denying  any  real  prediction  of  the  future,  confine
the  views  of  Daniel  and  John  to  their  contemporary  history.  To  this  class  belong  Ewald,
De  Wette,  Liicke,  and  others.  The  third  group  includes  those  who  admit  the  divine  inspi-
ration of  the  prophecies  and  acknowledge  the  prediction  of  even  minute  events,  but  deny
that  the  Apocalypse  was  designed  to  be  a  detailed  history  of  the  future.  "Its  object  is  to
represent  the  great  epochs  and  leading  principal  powers  in  the  development  of  the  king-
dom of  God  viewed  in  its  relation  to  the  world-kingdoms."  (p.  361.)  To  this  class
Auberlen  himself  belongs,  and  he  has  carried  out  the  theory  with  singular  clearness  and
ability.    His  work  is  excellently  translated  by  the  Rev.  Adolph  Saphir.

'•^  A  Key  to  the  Book  of  Revelation  ;  ivith  an  Appendix.  By  James  M.  Macdonald,
^linister  of  the  Presbyterian  Church,  Jamaica,  L.  I.     Second  edition.     New  London,  1848.


§  6.]  ANTICHRIST.  827

John  contained  in  the  New  Testament,  the  Gospel,  the  Epistles,
and  the  Apocalypse,  according  to  Luthardt,  form  a  beautiful,  har-
monious whole ;  as  faith,  love,  and  hope  mingle  into  one,  so  do
these  writings  of  St.  John,  though  each  has  its  characteristic  ;
faith  is  prominent  in  the  Gospel,  love  in  the  Epistles,  and  hope
in  the  Apocalypse.  The  theme  of  the  Book  of  Revelation  is,  —
"  Behold,  He  comes."  Luthardt  admits  that  commentators  differ
gx'eatly  as  to  their  views  of  its  meaning,  and  that,  at  first,  it
appears  very  full  of  enigmas  ;  but  he  adds,  ^  "  Whoever  is  familiar
with  the  ancient  prophecies,  and  gives  himself  with  loving  confi-
dence to  this  book,  will  soon  find  the  right  way,  which  will  lead
him  safely  through  all  its  labyrinths."  This  is  the  experience  of
every  commentator  so  far  as  he  himself  is  concerned,  however  he
may  fail  to  satisfy  his  readers  that  his  Avay  is  the  right  one.  The
main  principle  of  Luthardt's  exposition  is,  "  That  the  Revelation
of  John  does  not  contemplate  the  events  of  history,  whether  of
the  Church  or  of  the  world.  It  contemplates  the  end.  We  find
that  the  antagonism  of  the  Church  and  the  world,  and  the  issue
of  the  conflict  are  its  contents  ;  the  coming  of  Christ  is  its  theme.
The  events  of  history  preceding  the  consummation  are  taken  up
only  so  far  as  they  are  connected  with  the  final  issue.  This  con-
summation is  not  chronologically  unfolded,  but  is  ever  taken  up
anew,  in  order  to  lead  us  by  a  new  way  to  the  end."  ^  One  thing  is
certain,  namely,  that  the  Apocalypse  contains  the  series  of  pre-
dictions common  to  all  the  prophets  ;  the  defections  of  the  people
of  God  ;  persecutions  of  their  enemies  ;  direful  judgments  on  the
persecutors  ;  and  the  final  triumph  and  blessedness  of  the  elect.
Under  different  forms,  this  is  the  burden  of  all  the  disclosures
God  has  seen  fit  to  make  of  the  fate  of  Ms  Church  here  on  earth  ;
and  this  is  the  burden  of  the  Apocalypse.  According  to  Lvithardt,
the  first  vision  i.  9-iii.  22,  concerns  the  present  state  of  the
Church ;  the  second  vision,  iv.  1-viii.  1,  concerns  God  and  the
world ;  the  third  vision,  viii.  2-xi.  19,  concerns  the  judgment
of  the  world  and  the  consummation  of  covenant  fellowship  with
God ;  the  fourth  vision,  xii.-xiv.  concerns  the  Church  and  the
antichristian  world  power  ;  this  contains  the  vision  of  the  woman,
which  brought  forth  the  man  child ;  and  in  xii.  18-xiii.  18,
Antichrist  and  the  false  prophet ;  and  in  xiv.  the  Church  of  the
end,  and  the  judgment  of  the  antichristian  world ;  and  the  fifth
vision,  xv.-xxii.  concerns  the  outpouring  of  wrath  upon  the
world  and  the  redemption  of  the  Church.

1  Die  Lehre  von  den  letzten  Dingen,  pp.  165-173 ;  see  page  173.

2  TUd.,  p.  171.


828  TART  IV.     Ch.   III. -the   SECOND  ADVENT.

It  is  characteristic  of  the  Apocalypse  that  it  takes  up  and
expands  the  eschatological  predictions  of  the  earlier  portions  of
Scripture.  What  in  the  Old  Testament  or  in  the  Epistles  of  the
New  Testament,  is  set  forth  under  one  symbol  and  in  the  con-
crete, is  in  the  Apocalypse  presented  under  two  or  more  symbols
representing  the  constituent  elements  of  the  whole.  Thus  the
Antichrist  is  predicted  in  Daniel  under  the  symbol  of  "  the  little
horn,"  and  in  Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians  under  the  title
of  the  Man  of  Sin.  Antichrist,  as  thus  portrayed,  includes  an
ecclesiastical  and  a  worldly  element ;  an  apostate  Church  invested
with  imperial,  worldly  power.  In  the  Apocalypse  these  two  ele-
ments are  represented  as  separate  and  united ;  a  woman  sitting
on  a  beast  with  ten  horns.  The  woman  is  the  apostate  Church  ;
the  beast  is  the  symbol  of  the  world-power  by  which  it  is  sup-
ported. The  destruction  of  the  one,  therefore,  does  not  involve
the  destruction  of  the  other.  According  to  the  prediction  in  the
eighteenth  chapter,  the  kings  of  the  earth,  wearied  with  the  arro-
gance and  assumption  of  the  apostate  Church,  shall  turn  against
it,  waste,  and  consume  it ;  that  is,  despoil  it  of  its  external  power
and  glory.  The  destruction  of  Babylon,  therefore,  here  predicted,
is  understood  by  that  diligent  student  of  prophecy,  Mr.  D.  N.
Lord,  not  as  implying  the  overthrow  of  the  Papacy,  but  its
"  denationalization"  and  spoliation.^

Throughout  the  Scriptures  the  relation  between  God  and  his
people  is  illustrated  by  that  of  a  husband  to  his  wife  ;  apostasy
from  God,  therefore,  is  in  the  ancient  prophets  called  adultery.
In  the  Revelation,  the  Church,  considered  as  faithful,  is  called  the
woman  ;  as  apostate,  the  adulteress  or  harlot ;  and  as  glorified,
the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife.  It  is  in  accordance  with  the  analogy
of  Scripture  that  the  harlot  spoken  of  in  chapters  xvii.  and  xviii.  is
understood  to  be  the  apostate  Church.  Of  this  woman  it  is  said :
(1.)  That  she  sits  on  many  waters.  This  is  explained  in  xvii.  15,
of  her  wide  spread  dominion  :  "  The  waters  which  thou  sawest,
where  the  whore  sitteth,  are  peoples,  and  multitudes,  and  nations,
and  tongues."  (2.)  That  she  seduced  the  nations  into  idolatry  ;
making  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  drunk  with  the  wine  of  her
fornication.  (3.)  That  she  is  sustained  in  her  blasphemous  assump-
tion of  divine  prerogatives  and  powers  by  the  kings  and  princes  of
the  earth.  She  is  seen  sitting  on  a  scarlet-coloured  beast,  full  of
the  names  of  blasphemy,  having  seven  heads  and  ten  horns.  In
verse  12,  these,  ten  horns  are  said  to  be  ten  kings,  i.  e.,  in  the  lan-

^  An  Exposition  of  the  Ajiocalypse.    By  David  N.  Lord.    New  York,  1859,  p.  502.


§  6.]  ANTICHRIST.  829

guage  of  prophecy,  ten  kingdoms.  (4.)  That  she  takes  rank  among
and  above  the  kmgs  and  princes  of  the  earth.  She  is  "  arrayed  in
purple  and  scarlet  colour,  and  decked  with  gold  and  precious
stones  and  pearls."  (5.)  That  her  riches  are  above  estimate.  This
is  dwelt  upon  at  length  in  the  eighteenth  chapter.  (6.)  That  she
is  a  persecuting  power,  "  drunken  with  the  blood  of  the  saints,
and  with  the  blood  of  the  martyrs  of  Jesus."  (7.)  That  the
claims  of  this  persecuting  power,  as  appears  from  Revelation
xiii.  13, 14,  are  to  be  sustained  by  lying  wonders.  "  He  doeth
great  wonders,  so  that  he  maketh  fire  come  down  from  heaven  on
the  earth  in  the  sight  of  men,  and  deceiveth  them  that  dwell  on
the  earth  by  those  miracles  which  he  hath  power  to  do  in  the
sight  of  the  beast."  We  find,  therefore,  in  this  description  all
the  traits  which  in  Daniel  and  the  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians
are  ascribed  to  the  Man  of  Sin,  or,  o  dvTiKei/xevos,  the  Antichrist.  It
matters  not  what  this  power  may  be  called.  "  Wheresoever  the
carcass  is,  there  will  the  eagles  be  gathered  together."  Any
man ;  any  institution ;  any  organized  power  which  answers  to
this  prophetic  description,  comes  within  the  prophetic  denun-
ciations here  recorded.^  Neither  does  it  matter  what  is  to  happen
after  this  judgment  on  the  mystical  Babjdon.  Should  another
Antichrist  arise,  essentially  worldly  in  his  character,  as  so  many
anticipate,  who  shall  attain  universal  dominion,  and  set  himself
against  God  and  his  Christ  with  more  blasphemous  assumptions,
with  a  more  malignant  hatred  of  the  Church,  and  a  more  de-
moniacal spirit  than  any  of  his  predecessors,  this  would  not  at
all  disprove  the  correctness  of  the  interpretation  given  above
of  St.  John's  predictions  concerning  Babylon.  On  this  point,
jNIaitland  says  :  "  The  two  great  powers  whose  names  stand  fore-
most in  prophecy  come  into  historical  contact  at  a  single  point.
Where  Babylon  ends,  Antichrist  begins :  the  same  ten  kings
that  destroy  the  first,   give  their  power  to  the  second.     When

1  Auberlen,  p.  293,  quotes  with  approbation  the  following  passage  from  John  Michael
Hahn  {Brief e  und  Liedtr  iiber  die  Offenbarung.  Works,  vol.  v.  §  6,  Tiibingeu,  1820) :  "  The
harlot  is  not  the  city  of  Kome  alone,  neither  is  it  only  the  Roman  Catiiolic  Church,  to  the
exclusion  of  another,  but  all  churches  and  every  church,  ours  included,  namely,  all  Chris-
tendom that  is  without  the  Spirit  and  life  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  which  calls  itself  Christian,
and  has  neither  Christ's  mind  nor  Spirit."  While  giving  the  prophecy  this  wide  scope,
Auberlen,  nevertheless,  adds,  "The  Roman  Catholic  Church  is  not  only  accidentally  and
'  de  facto,'  but  in  virtue  of  its  very  principle  a  harlot;  she  has  the  lamentable  distinction
of  being  the  harlot  Kar  efoxti^,  the  metropolis  of  whoredom,  the  mother  of  harlots  (Rev.
xvii.  5);  it  is  she,  who,  more  than  others,  boasts  of  herself;  I  sit  a  queen,  and  am  no
widow,  and  shall  see  no  sorrow  (xviii.  7),  whereas  the  evangelical  (Protestant)  Church  is,
according  to  her  principle  and  fundamental  creed,  a  chaste  woman ;  the  Reformation  was
a  protest  of  the  woman  against  the  harlot."


S-iO  PART   IV.     Ch.   III.  — the   second  ADVENT.

the  ten  kings  shall  have  burnt  Rome,  so  complete  will  be  the
ruin,  that  no  sign  of  life  or  habitation  will  again  be  found  in  her.
Here,  then,  is  a  decisive  landmark ;  Rome  is  still  standing,  there-
fore. Antichrist  has  not  yet  come :  we  are  still  in  the  times  of
Babylon,  whether  tasting  or  refusing  her  golden  cup."  In  this
view,  that  is,  in  assuming  that  the  Scriptural  prophecies  respect-
ing Antichrist,  have  not  their  full  accomplishment  in  any  one  anti-
christian  power  or  personage  exclusively,  many  of  the  most  dis-
tmguished  eschatologists,  as  Auberlen  and  Luthardt,  substantially
agree.  The  ancient  prediction  that  Japhet  should  dwell  in  the
tents  of  Shem,  had  its  fulfilment  every  time  the  descendants  of
tiie  latter  participated  in  the  temporal  or  spiritual  heritage  of  the
children  of  the  former ;  and  had  its  final  and  great  accomplish-
ment in  the  sons  of  Japhet  sharing  the  blessings  of  redemption,
which  were  to  be  realized  in  the  line  of  Shem.  In  like  manner
the  predictions  concerning  Antichrist  may  have  had  a  partial  ful-
filment in  Antiochus  Epiphanes,  in  Nero  and  Pagan  Rome,  and  in
the  papacy,  and,  it  may  still  have  a  fulfilment  in  some  great  anti-
christian  power  which  is  yet  to  appear.  So  much,  at  least,  is
clear,  in  the  time  of  Paul  there  was  in  the  future  a  great  apos-
tasy and  an  antichristian,  arrogant  persecuting  power,  which  has
been  realized,  in  all  its  essential  characteristics,  in  the  papacy,
whatever  ma}-  happen  after  Antichrist,  in  that  form,  is  utterly  de-
spoiled and  trodden  under  foot.^

1  The  Apostles^  School  of  Pro2)hetic  Interpi-etation :  with  its  History  down  to  the
Present  Time.  London,  18-19,  p.  41.  Mr.  Jlaitlaud,  on  p.  42,  presents  the  difference  be-
tween Babylon  and  Antichrist  in  the  following  manner:  —

"  Bnhylon  is  Described.  Antichrist  is  Described.

As  a  feminine  power.  As  a  masculine  power.

Seductive     and     abandoned,     prevailing  Ferocious    and    warlike,     enforcing    his

through  her  golden  cup;  claims  by  the  sword.

Is  succeeded  by  ten  antichristian  kings.  A  final  apostasy  provoking  Christ's  second

coming  in  vengeance.

Is  burnt  by  the  ten  kings,  who  afterwards  Destroyed,  together  with  the  kings,  in  the

fight  against  the  Lamb.  great  battle  with  the  Lamb.

Is  bewailed  by  her  accomplices  in  crime.  Leaves  none  to  lament  his  fall.

Contains  some  of  God's  people  even   to  Fatal  to  salvation  of  all  his  followers.

the  end.
Established  on  the  seven  hills.  Reigns  in  Jerusalem."

The  undue  size  which  this  volume  has  already  reached  forbids  a  fuller  discussion  of  this
subject.  The  reader  is  referred  to  the  American  edition  of  Smithes  Dictionary  of  the
Bible,  under  the  word  "Antichrist,"  for  an  elaborate  exhibition  of  the  different  views
v/hich  have  prevailed  in  the  Church,  and  for  an  exiiaustive  statement  of  the  literature  of
the  subject.  Doctor  Willinm  Smith's  Dictionary  of  the  Bible.  Revised  and  edited  by
Professor  H.  B.  Hackett,  D.D.,  with  the  cooperation  of  Ezra  Abbot,  LL.  D.,  Assistant  Li-
brarian of  Harvard  College.    New  York,  1870.


§  6."]  ANTICHRIST.  831

Roman  Catholic  Doctrine  of  Antichrist.

The  general  opinion  in  the  early  Church  was  that  Antichrist
was  a  man  of  Satanic  spirit  endowed  with  Satanic  power  who
should  appear  before  the  second  coming  of  Christ.  Jerome  says,
in  his  Commentary  on  Daniel :  "  Let  us  say  what  all  ecclesiastical
writers  have  handed  down,  namely,  that  at  the  end  of  the  world,
when  the  Roman  empire  is  destroyed,  there  will  be  ten  kings
who  will  divide  the  Roman  Avorld  amongst  them  ;  and  there  will
arise  an  eleventh  little  king,  who  will  subdue  three  of  the  ten
kings,  that  is,  the  king  of  Egypt,  of  Africa,  and  of  Ethiopia,  as  we
shall  hereafter  show.  And  on  these  being  slain  the  seven  others
will  also  srfbmit.  'And  behold,'  he  says,  '  in  the  ram  were  the
eyes  of  a  man.'  This  is  said  that  we  may  not  suppose  him  to  be
a  devil  or  demon,  as  some  have  thought,  but  a  man  in  whom
Satan  will  dwell  utterly  and  bodily.  '  And  a  mouth  speaking
great  things,'  for  he  is  '  the  man  of  sin,  the  son  of  perdition,  who
sitteth  in  the  temple  of  God,  making  himself  as  God.' "  ^

Substantially  the  same  view  prevailed  during  the  Middle  Ages.
Some  however  of  the  theologians  of  the  Latin  Church  saw  that
the  development  of  the  Man  of  Sin  was  to  take  place  in  the
Church  itseK  and  be  connected  with  a  general  apostasy  from  the
faith.  They  were  therefore  sufficiently  bold  to  teach  that  the
Chnrcli  of  Rome  was  to  fall  away,  and  that  the  Papac}^  or  some  in-
dividual pontiff  was  to  become  the  Antichrist  spoken  of  in  Scrip-
ture. The  abbot  Joachim  of  Floris  (died  1202),  a  Franciscan,
put  himself  in  opposition  to  the  Avorldly  spirit  of  the  Church  of
his  time,  and  his  followers,  called  "  Spirituales,"  came  to  de-
nounce the  Church  of  Rome  as  the  mystical  Babylon  of  the
Apocalypse.  This  was  done  with  great  boldness  by  John  Peter
of  Ohva  (died  1297),  whose  works  were  formally  condemned  as
"  blasphemous  and  heretical."  Among  the  passages  thus  con-
demned are  the  following :  ''  The  woman  here  stands  for  the
people  and  empire  of  Rome,  both  as  she  existed  formerly  in  a

1  "Dicamus  quod  omnes  scriptores  ecclesiastici  tradiderunt:  in  consummatione  mun4i,
'liiando  regnum  destruendum  est  Romaiiorum,  decern  futures  reges,  qui  orbein  Romanum
iiitei  s^.  dividant,  et  undecimum  surrecturum  esse  regem  parvulum,  qui  tres  reges  de  decern
regibus  superaturus  sit,  id  est,  ^Egyptiorum  regem,  et  Africse  et  yEthiopire,  sicut  in  con-
sequentibus  manifestius  dicemus.  Quibus  interfectus,  etiara  septem  alii  reges  victor!  colla
submittent.  '  Et  ecce,'  ait,  'oculi  quasi  oculi  hominis  erant  in  cornu  isto.'  Ne  eum  pute-
mus  juxta  quorumdain  opinionem,  vel  diabolum  esse,  vel  daemonem:  sed  unum  de  homini-
bus,  in  quo  totus  satanas  habitaturus  sit  corporaliter.  '  Et  os  loquens  ingentia  {2  Thess.
r. ).'  Est  enim  homo  peecati,  filius  perditionis,  ita  ut  in  templo  Dei  sedere  audeat,  faci-
ens  se  quasi  Deum."  In  Danielem,  vii.  8;  Works,  edit.  Migne,  vol.  v.  p.  531,  a,  b  [667,
668].


832  PART  IV.     Cn.   III.  — THE   SECOND  ADVENT.

state  of  Paganism,  and  as  she  has  since  existed,  holding  the  faith
of  Christ,  though  by  many  crimes  committing  harlotry  with  this
world.  And,  therefore,  she  is  called  a  great  harlot ;  for,  depart-
ing from  the  faithful  worship,  the  true  love  and  delights  of  her
Bridegroom,  even  Christ  her  God,  she  cleaves  to  this  world,  its
riches  and  delights  ;  yea,  for  their  sake  she  cleaves  to  the  devil,
also  to  kings,  nobles,  and  prelates,  and  to  all  other  lovers  of  this
world."  "  She  saith  in  her  heart,  that  is,  in  her  pride,  I  sit  a
queen  :  —  I  am  at  rest ;  I  rule  over  my  kingdom  with  great
dominion  and  glory.  And  I  am  no  widow :  —  I  am  not  destitute
of  glorious  bishops  and  kings."  ^

Not  only  the  poets  Dante  and  Petrarch  denounced  the  corrup-
tions of  the  Church  of  Rome,  but  down  to  the  time  of  the
Reformation  that  Church  was  held  up  by  a  succession  of  theo-
logians or  ecclesiastics,  as  the  Babylon  of  the  Apocalypse  which
was  to  be  overthrown  and  rendered  desolate.

When  the  Reformers  with  one  voice  pronounced  the  same
judgment,  and,  making  little  distinction  between  Babylon  and
Antichrist,  held  up  the  Papacy  as  the  antichristian  power  pre-
dicted by  Daniel,  by  St.  Paul,  and  by  St.  John,  the  Romanists  laid
out  their  strength  in  defending  their  Church  from  this  denunci-
ation. Bellarmin,  the  great  advocate  of  the  cause  of  Romanism,
devotes  an  extended  dissertation  to  the  discussion  of  this  subject,
which  constitutes  the  third  book  of  his  work,  "  De  Romano  Pon-
tifice."  The  points  that  he  assumes  are  :  First,  that  the  word
"Antichrist  "  cannot  mean,  as  some  Protestants  thought,  "  sub-
stitute or  vicar  "  of  Christ,  but  an  opponent  of  Christ.  In  this
all  parties  are  now  agreed.  Second,  that  Antichrist  is  "  unus
homo,"  and  not  "  genus  hominum."  The  Magdeburg  Centuri-
ators^  said:  "  Docent  [Apostoli]  Antichristum  non  fore  unani
aliquam  tantum  personam,  sed  integrum  regnum,  per  falsos  doc-
tores  in  templo  Dei,  hoc  est  in  Ecclesia  Dei  prsesidentes,  in  urba
magna,  quae  habet  regnum  super  reges  terr^e  id  est,  in  Romana
civitate,  et  imperio  Romano,  opera  diaboli,  et  fraude,  et  decep-
tione  comparatum."  This  view  Bellarmin  undertakes  to  refute,
controverting  the  arguments  of  Calvin  and  Beza  in  its  support.
In  this  opinion  also  the  leading  Protestant  interpreters  of  the
present  day,  as  above  stated,  agree.  According  to  the  views
already  advanced,  there  may  be  hereafter  a  great  antichristian

1  Maitland,  The  Apostles^  School  of  Prophetic  fnterpretation,  p.  3-10;  see  also  Guericke,
Kirchcigeschichte,  6th  edit.,  Leipzig,  1340,  vol.  ii.  pp.  22.3-226.

2  De  Antichristo,  cent.  i.  lib.  ii.  cap.  iv. ;  Basle,  1562,  vol.  i.  pp.  43-1,  435,  of  second  sefc


§  6.]  ANTICHRIST.  833

power,  concentrated  In  an  individual  ruler,  who  will  be  utterly
destroyed  at  the  coming  of  the  Lord,  and  at  the  same  time  the
belief  may  be  maintained  that  the  Antichrist  described  by  Daniel
and  St.  Paul  is  not  a  man,  but  an  institution  or  organized  power
such  as  a  kingdom  or  the  papacy.

The  third  position  assumed  by  Bellarmin  is  that  the  Anti-
christ is  still  future.  In  this  way  he  endeavours  to  make  it  plain
that  the  papacy  is  not  Antichrist.  But,  as  just  said,  even  if  an
Antichrist,  and  even  the  Antichrist  Kar  e^-o^r/v,  is  yet  to  come,  that
would  not  prove  that  the  papacy  is  not  the  power  predicted  by
the  Apostle  as  the  Man  of  Sin,  and  the  mystical  Babylon  as  pre-
dicted in  the  Apocalypse.

Bellarmin  says  that  the  Holy  Spirit  gives  us  six  signs  of  Anti-
christ, from  which  it  is  plain  that  he  has  not  yet  appeared.  Two
of  these  signs  precede  his  coming,  the  universal  proclamation  of
the  Gospel,  and  the  utter  destruction  of  the  Roman  Empire  ;  two
are  to  attend  it,  namely,  the  preaching  of  Enoch  and  Elias,  and
persecutions  so  severe  as  to  cause  the  cessation  of  all  public  wor-
ship of  God  ;  and  two  are  to  follow  his  appearance  ;  his  utter
destruction  after  three  years  and  a  half ;  and  the  end  of  the  world.
The  passages  on  which  he  relies  to  prove  that  Enoch  and  Elias
are  to  come  and  oppose  themselves  to  Antichrist,  and  to  preserve
the  elect,  are  Malachi  iv.,  Ecclesiasticus  xliv.  and  xlviii.,  Matthew
xvii.  11  (Jesus  said,  "  Elias  truly  shall  first  come  and  restore  all
things  "),  and  Revelation  xi.  3,  where  the  appearance  of  the  two
vritnesses,  who  were  to  prophesy  two  thousand  two  hundred  and
sixty  days,  is  foretold.  As  modern  evangelical  interpreters  agree
with  Bellarmin  in  so  many  other  points,  so  they  agree  with  him
in  teaching  that  there  is  to  be  a  second  appearance  of  Elias,  before
the  second  advent  of  Christ.  Luthardt  understands  Matthew
xvii.  11  as  predicting  such  reappearance  of  the  Old  Testament
prophet.  He  was  to  be  one,  and  Moses  the  other  of  the  two  wit-
nesses spoken  of  in  Revelation  xi.  3.  Of  course,  says  Luthardt,
Elias  and  Moses  are  to  reappear  in  the  sense  in  which  Elias
appeared  in  the  person  of  John  the  Baptist. ^

Fourthly,  according  to  Bellarmin,  Antichrist  is  to  be  a  Jew,
and  probably  of  the  tribe  of  Dan.  He  is  to  claim  to  be  the  Mes-
siah, and  this  claim  is  to  be  recognized  by  the  Jews.  In  virtue
of  his  Messiahship  he  sets  himself  against  Christ,  and  puts  him-
self in  his  place,  and  arrogates  the  reverence,  the  obedience,  the
universal  dominion  and  the  absolute  authority,  which  rightfully

1  Luthardt,  Lehre  von  den  letzten  Dingen,  p.  46.
VOL.  m.  53


834        PART  IV.   ch.  in. —the  second  advent.

belong  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  seat  of  his  dominion  is  to
be  Jerusalem.  In  the  Temple  restored  in  that  city,  he  is  to  take
his  seat  as  God,  and  exalt  himself  above  all  that  is  called  God.
He  is  called  "  the  little  horn,"  because  the  Jews  are  compara-
tively a  small  nation.  But  he  is  to  subdue  one  kingdom  after
another  until  his  dominion  as  a  worldly  sovereign  becomes  abso-
lutely universal.  The  authority  urged  for  this  view  is  princi-
pally that  of  the  fathers,  many  of  whom  taught  that  Antichrist
was  to  be  a  Jew  of  the  tribe  of  Dan.  Appeal  was  made  by  those
fathers  as  by  their  followers  to  Genesis  xlix.  17,  where  it  is  said,
"  Dan  shall  be  a  serpent  by  the  way,  an  adder  in  the  path,  that
biteth  the  horse-heels,  so  that  his  rider  shall  fall  backward."
And  also  to  Revelation  vii.,  because  in  the  enumeration  of  the
tribes  from  which  the  hundred  and  forty  and  four  thousand  were
sealed,  the  name  of  Dan  is  omitted.  Bellarmin  argues  that  Anti-
christ is  to  be  a  Jew  from  John  v.  4 3  :  "I  am  come  in  my
Father's  name  and  ye  (Jews)  receive  me  not :  if  another  sliall
come  in  his  own  name,  him  ye.  (Jews)  will  receive."  That  is,
will  receive  as  the  Messiah  ;  but  the  Jews,  as  Bellarmin  argues,
would  never  receive  as  the  Messiah  any  one  who  was  not  himself
a  Jew.  The  principal  Scriptural  ground  of  the  opinion  that
Antichrist  is  to  be  a  Jew  is  founded  on  Revelation  xi.  8,  where
the  seat  of  his  dominion  is  said  to  be  the  great  city  "  where  also
our  Lord  Avas  crucified."  In  answer  to  this  argument  it  may  be
said,  first,  that  admitting  that  the  literal  Jerusalem  is  to  be  the
seat  of  the  kingdom  of  Antichrist,  it  does  not  follow  that  either
he  or  his  kingdom  is  to  be  Jewish.  Many  interpreters  hold  that
the  Jews,  instead  of  being  the  supporters  of  Antichrist,  are  to  be
the  principal  objects  of  his  malice,  and  that  it  is  by  persecuting
and  ojDpressing  them  that  he  is  to  get  possession  of  their  holy
city  and  profane  their  temple  far  more  atrociously  than  it  Avas
profaned  by  Antiochus  Epiphanes.  And  secondly,  interpreters
so  diiferent  as  Hengstenberg  and  Mr.  David  N.  Lord,  agree  in
understanding  the  predictions  in  Revelation  xi.  to  refer  not  to
the  literal  Jerusalem  and  its  Temple,  but  to  that  of  which  they
were  the  symbols.  The  New  Jerusalem  is  the  symbol  of  the
purified  and  glorified  Church ;  the  city  where  our  Lord  was
crucified,  the  symbol  of  the  worldly  and  nationalized  Church. ^

1  Mr.  Lord  says:  "The  place  where  Christ  was  crucified,  was  an  open  elevated  space
without  the  walls  of  Jerusalem,  and  on  one  of  the  principal  entrances  to  the  city.  The
street  where  the  dead  body  of  the  witnesses  is  to  be  placed,  represents  parts  therefore  of
the  ten  kingdoms,  bearing  a  relation  of  conspicuity  and  importance  to  the  apostate
hierarchies,  like  that  which  the  great  entrance  to  Jerusalem  that  passed  along  by  thu  t'dot
of  Calvary  bore  to  that  city ;  —  parts  of  those  kingdoms  from  which  those  hierarchies  largely


§  6.]  ANTICHRIST.  835

Fifthly,  as  to  the  doctrhie  of  Antichrist,  everything  follows,
from  the  assumption  that  he  claims  to  be  Christ.  In  claiming  to
be  the  Messiah  predicted  by  the  prophets,  he  is  to  chiini  to  be
the  only  object  of  worship.  That  he  is  to  admit  of  no  other  God,
whether  true  or  false,  nor  of  any  idols,  Bellarmin  infers  from  2
Th  jssalonians  ii.  2,  "  He  opposeth  and  exalteth  himself  above  all
that  is  called  God  or  is  worshipped."  "  Certum  est,"  says  Bellar-
min, "  Antichristi  persecutionem  fore  gravissimam  et  notissimam  ;
ita  ut  cessent  omnes  publicse  religionis  ceremoniaa  et  sacrificia
....  [Daniel  xii.  docet]  Antichristum  interdicturum  onniejn
divinum  cultum,  qui  in  ecclesiis  Christianorum  exercetur."  ^  Thus
also  Stapleton  says  :  "•  Pelh  sane  poterit  in  desertam  ecclesia,  reg-
nante  Antichristi,  et  illo  momento  temporis  in  deserta,  id  est,  in
locis  abitis,  in  speluncis,  in  latibulis  quo  sancti  se  recipient,  non
incommode  quasretur  ecclesia."  ^  During  the  reign  of  Antichrist,
according  to  the  notes  to  the  Romish  version  of  the  New  Testa-
ment on  2  Thessalonians  ii.,  "  The  external  state  of  the  Romish
Church,  and  the  public  intercourse  of  the  faithful  with  it,  may
cease.  Yet  the  due  honour  and  obedience  towards  the  Romtm  see,
and  the  communion  of  heart  with  it,  and  the  secret  practice  of  that
communion,  and  the  open  confession  thereof,  if  the  occasion  re-
quire, shall  not  cease."  Again  on  verse  4th  it  is  said,  "  The  great
Antichrist  who  must  come  towards  the  world's  end,  shall  abolish
all  other  religions,  true  and  false ;  and  put  down  the  blessed
sacrament  of  the  altar,  wherein  consisteth  principally  the  wor-
ship of  the  true  God,  and  also  all  idols  of  the  Gentiles."  "  The
oblation  of  Christ's  blood,"  it  is  said,  "  is  to  be  abolished  among
all  the  nations  and  churches  in  the  world."

Finally,  concerning  the  kingdom  and  wars  of  Antichrist,  the
Roman  cardinal  teaches,  (1.)  That  from  small  beginnings,  he  is
by  fraud  and  deceit,  to  attain  the  kingdom  of  the  Jews.  (2.)  That
he  is  to  subdue  and  take  possession  of  the  three  kingdoms  of
Egypt,  Libya,  and  Ethiopia.  (Dan.  xi.)  (3.)  That  he  is  then  to
reduce  to  subjection  the  other  seven  kingdoms  spoken  of  by  the
prophet;  and  (4.)  That  with  an  innumerable  army,  he  shall
make  for  a  time  successful  war  against  all  Christians  in  every
part  of  the  world,  and  finally  be  overthrown  and  utterly  de-
stroyed, as  described  in  the  tAventieth  chapter  of  Revelation.

Prom  this  review  it  appears  that  the  doctrine  of  the  Romish  the-

derived  their  sustenance,  wealth,  and  worshippers."  An  Exjyosition  of  the  Apocalypse,
p.  297.

1  Bellarmin,  De  Romano  Pontijtce,  ill.  vii.;  Disputationes,  Paris  1608,  vol,  i.  pp.  721  6,
723  c.

'^  Princip.  Doct.  cap.  2.


836         PART  IV.    Ch.  hi. —  the  second  advent.

ologians  concerning  Antichrist,  agrees  mth  that  of  a  large  body
of  modern  Protestant  writers  in  the  following  points :  (1.)  That
he  is  to  be  an  individual,  and  not  a  corporation,  or  "  genus  homi-
num."  (2.)  That  he  is  to  be  a  worldly  potentate.  (3.)  That  he
is  to  attain  universal  dominion.  (4.)  That  he  is  to  be,  in  charac-
ter, godless  and  reckless,  full  of  malignity  against  Christ  and  his
people.  (5.)  That  by  his  seductions  and  persecutions  he  is  to  suc-
ceed for  a  time  in  almost  banishing  true  religion  from  the  world.
(6.)  That  his  reign  is  to  be  brief.

The  principal  difference  between  the  early  Protestants  and
the  modern  evangelical  interpreters,  is,  that  the  former  identify
Babylon  and  Anticln-ist ;  that  is,  they  refer  to  one  and  the  same
power  the  prophecies  of  Daniel  referring  to  the  little  horn ;  the
description  given  by  the  Apostle  in  2  Thessalonians  ii.  ;  and  the
account  of  the  beast  in  chapter  xiii.  of  the  Apocalypse  and  that
given  in  chapter  xvii.  Whereas,  the  moderns  for  the  most  part
distinguish  between  the  two.  The  papacy  they  regard  as  set
forth  under  the  symbol  of  Babylon ;  and  Antichrist,  as  a  worldly
potentate,  under  the  beast  which  came  up  out  of  the  abyss.^

The  great  truth  set  forth  in  these  prophecies  is,  that  there  was
future  in  the  time,  not  only  of  Daniel,  but  also  of  the  Apostles,  a
great  apostasy  in  the  Church  ;  that  this  apostasy  would  be  Anti-
christian  (or  Antichrist),  ally  itself  with  the  world  and  become  a
great  persecuting  power;  and  that  the  two  elements,  the  ecclesi-
astical and  the  worldly,  which  enter  into  this  great  Antichristian
development,  will,  sometimes  the  one  and  sometimes  the  other,
become  the  more  prominent ;  sometimes  acting  in  harmony,  and
sometimes  opposed  one  to  the  other  ;  and,  therefore,  sometimes
spoken  of  as  one,  and  sometimes  as  two  distinct  powers.  Both,
as  united  or  as  separate,  are  to  be  overtaken  with  a  final  destruc-
tion when  the  Lord  comes.  So  much  is  certain,  that  any  and
every  power,  be  it  one  or  more,  which  answers  to  tlie  description
given  in  Daniel  vii.  and  xi.  and  in  2  Thessalonians  ii.  is  Anti-
christ in  the  Scriptural  sense  of  the  term.

According,  then,  to  the  common  faith  of  the  Church,  the  three
great  events  which  are  to  precede  the  second  advent  of  Christ,
are  the  universal  proclamation  of  the  Gospel  or  the  conversion  of
the  Gentile  world  ;  the  national  conversion  of  the  Jews  ;  and  the
appearance  of  Antichrist.

1  Ebrard  says,  "  The  Reformers  and  the  early  theologians,  erred  only  in  this,  that  they
identified  the  beast  tliat  was  to  remain  three  and  one  half  years  mentioned  in  Eev.  xiii.
with  that  mentioned  in  chap.  xvii.  That  is,  they  identified  the  papacy  and  the  Antichris-
tian kingdom."     Christliche  Doymatik,  Kunigsberg,  1852,  vol.  ii.  p.  736.


CHAPTER  IV.

THE   CONCOMITANTS   OF   THE   SECOND  ADVENT.

The  events  which  according  to  the  common  doctrine  of  the
Church  are  to  attend  the  second  coming  of  Christ,  are  first,  the
general  resurrection  of  the  dead;  second,  the  final  judgment;
third,  "  the  end  of  the  world  ;  "  and  fom-th,  the  consummation  of
the  kingdom  of  Christ.

§  1.  The  General  Resurrection.

That  there  is  to  be  a  general  resurrection  of  the  just  and  of
the  unjust,  is  not,  among  Christians,  a  matter  of  doubt.  Already
in  the  book  of  Daniel  xii.  2,  it  is  said,  "  Many  of  them  that  sleep
in  the  dust  of  the  earth  shall  awake,  some  to  everlasting  life,  and
some  to  shame  and  everlasting  contempt.  And  they  that  be
wise  shall  shine  as  the  brightness  of  the  firmament ;  and  they
that  turn  many  to  righteousness,  as  stars  for  ever  and  ever."
This  prediction  our  Lord  repeats  without  any  limitation.  "  Mar-
vel not  at  this  :  for  the  horn-  is  coming,  in  the  which  all  that  are
in  the  graves  shall  hear  his  voice,  and  shall  come  forth  ;  they
that  have  done  good,  unto  the  resurrection  of  life ;  and  they  that
have  done  evil,  unto  the  resurrection  of  damnation."  (John  v.  28,
29.)  Again :  "  When  the  Son  of  man  shall  come  in  his  glory,  and
all  the  holy  angels  with  him,  then  shall  he  sit  upon  the  throne  of
his  glory  :  and  before  him  shall  be  gathered  all  nations."  (Matt.
XXV.  31,  32.)  Paul,  in  his  speech  before  Felix  (Acts  xxiv.  15),
avowed  it  as  his  own  faith  and  that  of  his  fathers  that  "  there  shall
be  a  resurrection  of  the  dead,  both  of  the  just  and  imjust."  John
(Rev.  XX.  12,  13)  says :  "  I  saw  the  dead,  small  and  great,  stand
before  God  ;  and  the  books  were  opened  :  and  another  book  was
opened,  which  is  the  book  of  life  :  and  the  dead  were  judged  out  of
those  things  which  were  written  in  the  books,  alccording  to  their
works.  And  the  sea  gave  up  the  dead  which  were  in  it ;  and
death  and  hell  gave  up  the  dead  which  were  in  them."


838        PART  IV.   Ch.  IV.  — the  second  advent.

The   Time  of  this   General  Resurrection.

The  imiform  representation  of  Scripture  on  this  subject  is  th«,t
this  general  resurrection  is  to  take  place  "at  the  last  day,"  or,  at
the  second  coming  of  Christ.  The  same  form  of  expression  is
used  to  designate  the  time  when  the  people  of  Christ  are  to
rise,  and  the  time  wlien  the  general  resurrection  is  to  occur.  The
Bible,  if  the  doubtful  passage  Revelation  xx.  4—6  be  excepted,
never  speaks  of  any  other  than  one  resurrection.  The  dead,  ac-
cording to  the  Scriptures,  are  to  rise  together,  some  to  everlasting
life,  and  some  to  shame  and  everlasting  contempt.  When  Christ
comes,  all  who  are  in  their  graves  shall  come  forth,  some  to  the
resurrection  of  life,  and  others  to  the  resurrection  of  damnation.
When  in  1  Thessalonians  iv.  16,  it  is  said,  "  The  dead  in  Christ
shall  rise  first,"  it  does  not  mean  that  there  are  to  be  two  resur-
rections, one  of  those  who  are  in  Christ,  and  the  other  of  those
who  are  not  in  Him.  The  Apostle  is  speaking  of  a  different
subject.  He  comforts  the  Thessalonians  with  the  assurance,  that
their  friends  who  sleep  in  Jesus  shall  not  miss  their  part  in  the
gloi'ies  of  the  second  advent.  Those  then  ahve  should  not  pre-
vent, i.  e.,  precede,  those  who  were  asleep ;  but,  the  dead  in
Christ  should  rise  before  those  then  living  should  be  changed  ;
and  then  both  should  be  caught  up  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air.
The  parallel  passage  is  in  1  Corinthians  xv.  51,  52,  "We  shall  not
all  sleep,  but  we  shall  all  be  changed,  in  a  moment,  in  the  t^vink-
ling  of  an  eye,  at  the  last  trump :  for  the  trumpet  shall  sound,  and
the  dead  shall  be  raised  incorruptible,  and  we  shall  be  changed."

In  1  Corinthians  xv.  23,  24,  the  Apostle,  when  speaking  of  the
resurrection,  says :  "  Every  man  in  his  own  order :  Christ  the  first
fruits ;  afterward  they  that  are  Christ's  at  his  coming.  Then
cometh  the  end."  This  passage  is  often  understood  to  teach  that
the  resurrection  takes  place  in  the  following  order :  (1.)  That  of
Christ.  (2.)  That  of  his  people.  (-3.)  Then  that  of  the  rest  of
mankind.  And  as  the  resurrection  of  Christ  and  that  of  his  peo-
ple are  separated  by  a  long  interval ;  so  the  resurrection  of  the
people  of  God  and  the  general  resurrection  may  also  be  separated
by  an  interval  of  greater  or  less  duration.  This  interpretation
supposes  that  the  word  "  end,"  as  here  used,  means  the  end  of
the  resurrection.  To  this,  however,  it  may  be  objected,  (1.)  That
it  is  opposed  to  the  constant  "  usus  loquendi "  of  the  New  Testa-
ment. The  "  end,"  when  thus  used,  always  elsewhere  means  the
end  of  the  world.     In  1  Peter  iv.  7,  it  is  said :  "  The  end  of  all


§1.]  THE  GENERAL  RESURRECTION.  839

things  is  at  hand."  Matthew  xxiv.  6,  "  The  end  is  not  yet ; "
verse  14,  "  Then  shall  the  end  come."  So  in  Mark  xiii.  7,  Luke
xxi.  9.  In  all  these  passages  the  "  end  "  means  the  end  of  the  world.
(2.)  The  equivalent  expressions  serve  to  explain  the  meaning  of
the  term.  The  disciples  asked  our  Lord,  "  What  shall  be  the
sign  of  Thy  coming  and  of  the  end  of  the  world  ?  "  In  answer
to  that  question  Christ  said  that  certain  things  were  to  happen,
but,  "  the  end  is  not  yet ;  "  and  afterwards,  "  tlien  cometli  the
end."  (Matt.  xxiv.  3,  6, 14.)  The  same  expression  occurs  in  the
same  sense,  Matthew  xiii.  39,  xxviii.  20,  and  elsewhere.  (3.)  What
immediately  follows  in  verse  24,  seems  decisive  in  favour  of  this
interpretation.  The  end  spoken  of  is  when  Christ  shall  have  de-
livered up  his  kingdom  ;  that  is,  when  the  whole  work  of  redemp-
tion shall  have  been  consummated.  (4.)  It  is  further  to  be  re-
marked that  in  1  Corinthians  xv.  Paul  does  not  make  the  slisrhtest
reference  to  the  resurrection  of  the  wicked,  from  the  beginning  to
the  end  of  the  chapter.  The  whole  concerns  the  resurrection  of
believers.  That  was  what  the  errorists  in  Corinth  denied ;  and
that  was  what  the  Apostle  undertook  to  prove  to  be  certain  and
desirable.  Christ  certainly  rose  from  the  dead ;  so  all  his  people
shall  rise ;  but  each  in  his  order ;  first,  Christ,  then  they  who  are
Christ's ;  then  comes  the  end  ;  the  end  of  all  things.  To  make
this  refer  to  another  and  general  resurrection,  would  be  to  intro-
duce a  subject  entirely  foreign  to  the  matter  in  hand.

Meyer,  although  he  makes  teAos  in  the  24th  verse  refer  to  the
resurrection,  nevertheless  says  ^  "  That  it  is  the  constant  doctrine
of  the  New  Testament  (leaving  the  Apocaljqxse  out  of  view),  tliat
with  the  coming  of  Christ  the  '  finis  hujus  sseculi '  is  connected,
so  that  the  Second  Advent  is  the  termination  of  the  ante-messi-
anic, and  the  commencement  of  the  future  world-period."

Luthardt  says,^  "  Then,  not  before  the  resurrection,  .  .  .
comes  the  end  ;  the  end,  not  of  the  resurrection,  that  is  the  resur-
rection of  others  than  believers,  biit  the  absolute  end ;  the  end  of
history."  Whether  the  end  of  all  things  is  to  follow  the  resurrec-
tion of  believers  immediately,  or  long  afterwards,  is,  in  his  view,  a
different  question.  He  admits  that  the  common  view  is  tliat  the
coming  of  Christ,  the  general  resurrection  of  the  dead,  the  general
judgment,  the  end  of  the  world,  and  the  new  heavens  and  new
earth,  are  to  occur  contemporaneously.    His  own  view  is  different.

That  the  New  Testament  does  teach  that  the  general  resurrec-
tion is  to  occur  at  the  time  of  the  Second  Advent  appears  :  —

1  Commentar  iiher  das  Neue  Testament.  2d  edit..  Giittingen.  1849,  vol.  v.  p.  323.

2  Lehre  von  den  letzten  Dingen,  Leipzig,  1861,  p.  127.


840  PART  IV.     Ch.   IV.  — the    second   ADVENT.

1.  From  such  passages  as  the  follomng  ;  In  the  passage  in  Daniel,
quoted  above,  it  is  said,  that  the  righteous  and  the  wicked  are  to
rise  together ;  the  one  to  life,  the  other  to  shame  and  everlasting
contempt.  This  passage  our  Lord  reiterates,  saying  that  "  the
hour  is  coming,  in  the  which  all  that  are  in  the  graves  shall  hear
his  voice,  and  shall  come  forth  ;  they  that  have  done  good,  unto
the  resurrection  of  hfe ;  and  they  that  have  done  evil,  unto  the
resurrection  of  damnation."  (John  v.  28,  29.)  In  Matthew  xxv.
31,  32,  it  is  said,  that  when  the  Son  of  Man  shall  appear  in  his
glory  all  nations  shall  stand  before  him.  The  same  is  said  in
Revelations  xx.  12,  13.  In  2  Thessalonians  i.  7-10,  it  is  taught
that  when  the  Lord  Jesus  shall  be  revealed  from  heaven,  it  will
be  to  take  vengeance  on  those  who  obey  not  the  Gospel,  and  to
be  glorified  in  all  them  that  believe.  In  all  these  passages  the
resurrection  of  the  righteous  is  declared  to  be  contemporaneous
with  that  of  the  wicked.

2.  There  is  another  class  of  passages  which  teach  that  the  res-
urrection of  the  righteous  is  to  take  place  at  "  the  last  day,"
and,  therefore,  not  a  thousand  years  before  that  event.  Thus
Martha,  speaking  of  her  brother  Lazarus,  said,  "  I  know  that  he
shall  rise  again  in  the  resurrection  at  the  last  day."  (John  xi.
24.)  Om-  Lord,  in  John  vi.  39,  says  that  it  is  the  Father's  will
"  that  of  all  which  He  hath  given  me,  I  should  lose  nothing,  but
should  raise  it  up  again  at  the  last  day."  This  declaration  is  re-
peated in  verses  40,  44,  54,  comp.  xii.  48 :  "  The  word  that  I
have  spoken,  the  same  shall  judge  him  in  the  last  day."  It  is
true  that  the  expressions  " the  last  time,"  " the  last  day,"  ''the
end  of  days,"  "  the  end  of  the  world,"  are  often  used  very  in-
definitely in  Scripture.  They  often  mean  nothing  more  than
"  hereafter."  But  this  is  not  true  with  the  phrase  ev  rrj  fo-xdrrj
^/xepa  as  used  in  these  passages.  "  In  the  last  day,"  is  a  known
and  definite  period.  It  is  to  be  remembered  also  that  what  is
predicted  to  happen  on  "  the  last  day,"  is  elsewhere  said  to  take
place  when  Christ  shall  appear  in  his  glory.

3.  A  third  class  of  passages  teach  that  the  resurrection  of  the
saints  is  to  take  place  at  the  day  of  judgment  and  in  connection
with  that  event.  According  to  the  common  representations  of
Scripture,  when  Christ  shall  come  the  second  time,  the  dead  are  to
rise,  all  nations  are  to  be  judged,  and  the  present  order  of  things
is  to  cease.  The  heavens  are  to  retain  Clirist,  "  mitil  the  times
of  restitution  of  all  things."  (Acts  iii.  21.)  This  dTroKaracrTao-ts  is
"  die  Wiederherstelluno-  aller  Dincre  in  ihren  friihern  vollkomm-


§1.]  THE  GENERAL  RESURRECTION.  841

nem  Zustancl,"  ^  the  restoration  of  all  things  to  their  original
perfect  condition.  "  This  consummation  may  be  called  a  '  resti-
tution,' in  allusion  to  a  circle  which  returns  into  itself,  or  more
probably  because  it  really  involves  the  healing  of  all  curable
disorder  and  the  restoration  to  communion  with  the  Deity  of  all
that  He  has  chosen  to  be  so  restored.  Till  this  great  cycle  has
achieved  its  revolution,  and  this  great  remedial  process  has  accom-
plished its  design,  the  glorified  body  of  the  risen  and  ascended
Christ  not  only  may,  but  must,  as  an  appointed  means  of  that
accomplishment,  be  resident  in  heaven,  and  not  on  earth."  ^

The  general  resurrection  is  represented  as  connected  with  the
final  judgment,  in  Matthew  xxiv.  30,  31,  and  xxv.  31-46,
2  Thessalonians  i.  7-10,  and  elsewhere.  On  this  point  Dr.
Julius  Miiller  says :  "  It  is  the  plain  doctrine  of  Scripture  that
the  general  resurrection  of  the  dead  contemporaneous  with  the
transfiguration  of  believers  then  living  on  earth  is  to  occur  at  the
end  of  the  world  (or  of  history),  at  the  reappearance  of  Christ

for  judgment  and   for  the  glorification  of  his  kingdom

With  this  consummation  of  Christ's  kingdom,  and  the  therewith

connected    d~oAi;rpwo-ts  tov   croj/xaro?  ?}/J.tov  0.770   rrj<;  SovAetas  rrys   cfiOoj)as^

the  Apostle,  in  the  profound  passage,  Romans  viii.  19-23,  sets
forth,  as  also  connected  with  these  events,  the  renovation  of  the
nature  of  the  earth  and  its  exaltation  to  a  participation  in  the
glory  of  the  children  of  God.  As  the  body  of  man  stands  in
intimate  relation  with  nature,  ....  it  is  scarcely  possible  to
form  any  idea  of  the  resurrection  of  the  body  ....  without
assviming  a  corresponding  exaltation  of  the  external  world  as  the
theatre  of  his  new  life.  This  renovation  of  nature,  the  new
heavens  and  the  new  earth,  takes  for  granted,  according  to  the
Apostle,  the  destruction  of  the  world  as  it  now  is."  ^  With  these
views,  which  accord  with  the  common  doctrine  of  the  Church,
Lange  avows  his  entire  agreement.*

The  only  passage  which  seems  to  teach  that  there  is  to  be  a
first  and  second  resurrection  of  the  body,  the  former  being  con-
fined to  martyrs  and  more  or  fewer  of  the  saints,  and  the  latter
including  "  the  rest  of  the  dead,"  is  Revelation  xx.  4-6.  It  must
be  admitted  that  that  passage,  taken  by  itself,  does  seem  to
teach  the  doctrine  founded  upon  it.     But  —

1  De  Wette,  Exer/etisches  Handbucli  zum  Neuen  Testament,  Leipzig,  1845,  vol.  i.  part  4,
p.  48.

2  The  Acts  of  the  Apostles  Eocplained.     By  Joseph  Addison   Alexander.    New  York,
18.57,  vol.  i.  p.  118.

3  SturJkn  und  Kritiken,  18.35,  pp.  78.3-785.

4  Lekre  viyn  den  letzen  Dingen,  Meurs,  1841,  pp.  246,  247.


842        PART  ly.   ch.  IV.  — the  second  advent.

1.  It  is  a  sound  rule  in  the  interpretation  of  Scripture  that
obscure  passages  should  be  so  explained  as  to  make  them  agree
with  those  that  are  plain.  It  is  unreasonable  to  make  the  sym-
bolic and  figurative  language  of  prophecy  and  poetry  the  rule  by
which  to  explain  the  simple  didactic  prose  language  of  the  Bible.
It  is  no  less  unreasonable  that  a  multitude  of  passages  should  be
taken  out  of  their  natural  sense  to  make  them  accord  with  a  sin-
gle passage  of  doubtful  import.

2.  It  is  conceded  that  the  Apocalypse  is  an  obscure  book.
This  almost  every  reader  knows  from  his  own  experience ;  and
it  is  proved  to  be  true,  the  few  who  imagine  it  to  be  plain  to  the
contrary  notwithstanding,  by  the  endless  diversity  of  interpreta-
tions to  which  it  has  been  subjected.  This  diversity  exists  not
only  between  commentators  of  different  classes,  as  rationalistic
and  orthodox,  but  between  those  of  the  same  class,  and  even  of
the  same  school.  This  remark,  which  applies  to  the  whole  book,
applies  with  special  force  to  the  passage  under  consideration.

3.  The  Bible  speaks  of  a  spiritual,  or  figurative,  as  well  as  of  a
literal  resurrection.  This  figure  is  used  both  in  reference  to  indi-
viduals and  in  reference  to  communities.  The  sinner,  dead  in
trespasses  and  sins,  is  said  to  be  quickened  and  raised  again  in
Christ  Jesus.  (Rom.  vi.  and  Eph.  ii.)  Whole  communities,
when  elevated  from  a  state  of  depression  and  misery,  are  in  pro-
phetic language  said  to  be  raised  from  the  dead.  (Rom.  xi.  15  ;
Is.  xxvi.  19.)  "  Thy  dead  men  shall  live,  together  with  my
dead  body  shall  they  arise.  Awake  and  sing,  ye  that  dwell  in
dust ;  for  thy  dew  is  as  the  dew  of  herbs,  and  the  earth  shall
cast  out  the  dead."  (Ez.  xxxvii.  12.)  "  I  will  open  your
graves,  and  cause  you  to  come  up  out  of  your  graves,  and
bring  you  into  the  land  of  Israel."  More  than  this,  Elias
is  said  to  have  lived  again  in  John  the  Baptist  ;  and,  ac-
cording to  a  common  interpretation,  the  two  witnesses  spoken
of  in  the  Apocalypse  are  Moses  and  Elias,  who  are  to  rise
not  in  person,  but  as  represented  by  men  filled  with  the
same  spirit,  endued  with  similar  gifts,  and  called  to  exercise
the  same  offices.  It  would,  therefore,  not  be  inconsistent  \vith
the  analogy  of  prophecy  if  we  should  understand  the  Apostle  as
here  predicting  that  a  new  race  of  men  were  to  arise  filled  with
the  spirit  of  the  martyrs,  and  were  to  live  and  reign  with  Christ
a  thousand  years.  According  to  Hengstenberg,  the  Apostle  saw
the  souls  of  the  martyrs  in  heaven.  There  they  were  enthroned.
This  was  their  first  resurrection.     "  There  can  be  no  doubt,"  he


§  1.]  THE   G£..\^ERAL   RESURRECTION.  843

says,  "  that  by  the  first   resurrection  we  are  here  primarily  to
understand  that  first  stage  of  blessedness."  ^

4.  John  does  not  say  that  the  bodies  of  the  martyrs  are  to  be
raised  from  the  dead.  He  says  :  "  I  saw  the  souls  of  them  that
were  beheaded  for  the  witness  of  Jesus."  The  resurrection  of
the  dead  is  never  thus  spoken  of  in  Scripture.  There  is  a  sense
in  which  the  martyrs  are  said  to  live  again,  but  nothing  is  said
of  their  rising  again  from  their  graves.  The  first  resurrection
may  be  spiritual,  and  the  second  literal.  There  may  be  a  time
of  great  prosperity  in  the  Church,  in  which  it  will  be  a  great
blessing  to  participate.  It  is  said  that  there  is  no  force  in  tliis
argument,  as  the  Apostle  does  not  speak  of  a  resurrection  of
souls.  He  simply  says  he  saw  the  souls  of  the  martyrs ;  as  in
chapter  vi.  9,  it  is  said  :  "  I  saw  under  the  altar  the  souls  of
them  that  were  slain  for  the  word  of  God."  The  prophet,
according  to  xx.  4,  first  saw  the  martyrs  in  the  state  of  the  dead,
and  then  he  saw  them  alive.  The  argument,  however,  is  not
founded  merely  on  the  use  of  the  word  "  souls,"  but  on  the  fact
that  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  is  never  spoken  of  in  the  Scrip-
tures in  the  way  in  which  the  living  again  of  the  martyrs  is  here
described.

5.  The  common  millenarian  doctrine  is,  that  there  is  to  be  a
literal  resurrection  when  Christ  shall  come  to  reign  in  person
upon  the  earth,  a  thousand  years  before  the  end  of  the  world,
and  that  the  risen  saints  are  to  dwell  here  and  share  with  Christ  in
the  glories  of  his  reign.  But  this  seems  to  be  inconsistent  with
what  is  taught  in  1  Corinthians  xv.  50.  Paul  there  says  :  "  Now
this  I  say,  brethren,  that  flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  king-
dom of  God  ;  neither  doth  corruption  inherit  incorruption."  It
is  here  expressly  asserted  that  our  bodies  as  now  constituted  are
not  adapted  to  the  state  of  things  which  shall  exist  when  the
kingdom  of  God  is  inaugurated.  We  must  all  be  changed.
From  this  it  follows  that  the  spiritual  body  is  not  adapted  to  our
present  mode  of  existence  ;  that  is,  it  is  not  suited  or  designed
for  an  earthly  kingdom.  Luthardt  admits  this.  He  admits  that
the  renovated,  or  transfigured,  body  of  necessity  supposes  a  ren-
ovated earth.  He  admits  also  that  when  the  bodies  of  believei's
are  thus  changed  they  are  to  be  caught  up  from  the  earth,  and
are  to  dwell  with  Christ  in  heaven.  When  Christ  appears,  his
people  are  to  appear  with  Him  in  glory.  Bengel,  and  after  him
others,  endeavour  to  reconcile  these  admissions  with  the  theory  of

1  The  Revelation  of  St.  John  Expounded,  edit.  Edinburgh,  1802,  vol.  ii.  p.  281.


844        PART  IV.    Ch.  IV.  — the  second  advent.

an  earthly  kingdom  of  glory,  by  assuming  that  risen  saints  are
to  rule  this  kingdom,  not  from  the  literal  Jerusalem,  but  from
heaven.  This,  however,  is  to  introduce  an  extra-scriptural  and
conjectural  idea.

6.  It  has  already  been  said,  when  speaking  of  the  restoration
of  the  Jews  to  their  own  land,  that  this  whole  theory  of  a  splen-
did earthly  kingdom  is  a  relic  of  Judaism,  and  out  of  keeping
with  the  spirituality  of  the  Gospel.^

All  this  is  said  with  diffidence  and  submission.  The  inter-
pretation of  unfulfilled  prophecy  experience  teaches  is  exceed-
ingly precarious.  There  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  the  pre-
dictions concerning  the  second  advent  of  Christ,  and  the  events
which  are  to  attend  and  follow  it,  will  disappoint  the  expecta-
tions of  commentators,  as  the  expectations  of  the  Jews  were  dis-
appointed in  the  manner  in  which  the  prophecies  concerning  the
first  advent  were  accomplished.

§  2.    The  Final  Judgment.

The  Scriptures  abound  in  passages  which  set  forth  God  as  the
moral  ruler  of  men ;  which  declare  that  He  will  judge  the  world
in  righteousness.  The  Bible  represents  Him  as  the  judge  of
nations  and  of  individuals  ;  as  the  avenger  of  the  poor  and  the
persecuted.  It  abounds  also  in  promises  and  in  threatenings,
and  in  illustrations  of  the  righteous  judgments  of  God.  Nothing,
therefore,  is  plainer  than  that  men  in  this  world  are  subject  to
the  moral  government  of  God.  Besides  this,  the  Bible  also
teaches  that  there  is  a  future  state  of  reward  and  punishment,  in
which  the  inequalities  and  anomalies  here  permitted  shall  be
adjusted.  According  to  some,  this  is  all  that  the  Bible  teaches
on  the  subject.  What  is  said  of  the  punishment  of  the  wicked
and  of  the  reward  of  the  righteous  is  to  be  understood  in  this
general  way.  This  is  the  doctrine  of  the  common  school  of
Rationalists.^  Bretschneider  ^  admits,  however,  that  reason  has
nothing  to  object  to  the  Church  doctrine  on  this  subject  prop-
erly understood.

1  The  interpretation  of  this  whole  passage  (Rev.  xx.  1-6)  is  thorouglily  discussed  in  the
very  able  work  of  the  Rev.  David  Brown,  of  St.  James'  Free  Church,  Glasgow,  entitled,
Christ's  Second  Coming:  Will  it  be  Pre-Millenial  f  chapter  x.  edit.  New  York,  1851,
p.  218  ff.

'^  J.  A.  L.  Wegscheider,  Institutiones  Theologicm,  iv.  ii.  99;  5th  edit.  Halle,  1826,  p.  614  ff.

8  Dogmatik  der  evangelisch-luthenschtn  Kirche,  §  172,  3d  edit.  Leipzig,  1828;  vol.  ii
p.  445.


§  2.]  THE   FINAL  JUDGMENT.  845

A  second  view  of  the  last  judgment  assumes  it  to  be  a  process
now  in  progress.  In  the  Old  Testament  the  Messianic  period  is
spoken  of  as  the  "  last  day,"  "  the  last  time,"  "  the  end  of  days,"
"  the  end  of  the  world,"  and  is  represented  as  a  time  of  conflict
and  of  judgment.  The  Jews  expected  that  when  the  Messiah
came,  the  severest  judgments  would  fall  upon  the  heathen,  and
that  the  chosen  people  would  be  greatly  exalted  and  blessed.
This  was  the  day  of  judgment.  Those  who  give  substantially
the  same  interpretation  to  the  Old  Testament  prophecies,  hold
that  the  day  of  judgment  covers  the  whole  period  between  the
first  and  second  advents  of  Christ.

A  third  doctrine  is  that  the  world  in  its  progress  works  out  all
possible  manifestations  of  God,  so  that  according  to  the  stereo-
typed dictum  of  Schelling,  Die  Weltgeschichte  ist  das  Welt-
gericht ;  the  history  of  the  world  is  the  judgment  of  the  world.
Premillenarians  use  precisely  the  same  words,  although  not  in  the
same  philosophical  sense.  With  them  "  to  judge  "  is  to  reign  ;
and  when  Christ  comes  to  establish  his  personal  reign  upon  earth,
the  last  judgment  will  begin,  and  "  the  judgment  of  God  is  the
administration  of  the  government  of  God."  ^

A  fourth  theory  may  be  mentioned.  There  are  certain  immut-
able laws,  either  independent,  as  some  say,  of  the  will  of  God,
or  dependent  on  his  voluntary  constitution,  which  secure  that  the
righteous  shall  be  happy  and  the  wicked  miserable ;  and  this  is
all  that  either  reason  or  Scripture,  properly  understood,  teaches
of  rewards  and  punishment.

A  fifth  doctrine  is  that  the  day  of  judgment  is  a  protracted
future  dispensation,  as  just  mentioned,  to  commence  with  the
second  advent  of  Christ,  and  to  continue  during  the  thousand
years  of  his  personal  reign  upon  the  earth.  This  theory  is  con-
nected with  the  doctrine  of  the  pre-millenial  advent  of  Christ.

The   Church  Doctrine.

By  the  Church  doctrine  is  meant  that  doctrine  which  is  held
by  the  Church  universal ;  by  Romanists  and  Protestants  in  the
West,  and  by  the  Greeks  in  the  East.  That  doctrine  includes
the  following  points :  —

1.  The  final  judgment  is  a  definite  future  event  (not  a  pro-
tracted process),  when  the  eternal  destiny  of  men  and  of  angels
shall  be  finally  determined  and  publicly  manifested.  That  this
is  the  doctrine  of  the  Bible,  is  proved  by  such  passages  as  the

I  The  Last  Times,  by  Joseph  A.  Seiss,  D.  D.,  Philadelphia,  18GG,  p.  141.


846  PART  IV.     Ch.  IV.- the   second  ADVENT.

following  :  Matthew  xi.  24,  "  It  shall  be  more  tolerable  for  the
laud  of  Sodom  in  the  day  of  judgment,  than  for  thee  ;  "  Matthew
xiii.  30,  "  Let  both  grow  together  until  the  harvest :  and  in  the
time  of  harvest  I  will  say  to  the  reapers.  Gather  ye  together  first
the  tares,  and  bind  them  in  bundles  to  burn  them  :  but  gather  the
wheat  into  my  barn  ;  "  verse  39,  "  The  harvest  is  the  end  of  the
world,  and  the  reapers  are  the  angels  ;  "  verse  49,  "  So  shall  it  be
at  the  end  of  the  world :  the  angels  shall  come  forth,  and  sever
the  wicked  from  among  the  just ;  "  John  xii.  48,  "  The  word  tliat
I  have  spoken,  the  same  shall  judge  him  in  the  last  day;,"  Acts
xviii.  31,  God  "  hath  appointed  a  day  in  the  which  He  will  judge
the  world  in  righteousness ; "  Romans  ii.  5,  "  The  day  of  wrath  and
revelation  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God  ;  "  and  1  Corinthians
iv.  5,  "  Judge  nothing  before  the  time,  until  the  Lord  come."  It  is
true  that  the  word  "  day "  in  Scripture  is  often  used  for  an
indefinite  period ;  as  "  the  day  of  the  Lord,"  is  the  time  of  the
Lord.  And,  therefore,  it  does  not  follow  from  the  use  of  this
word,  that  the  judgment  is  to  be  commenced  and  ended  in  the
space  of  twenty-four  hours.  Nevertheless,  the  way  in  which  the
word  is  used  in  this  connection,  and  the  circumstances  with  which
the  judgment  is  connected,  show  that  a  definite  and  limited
period,  and  not  a  protracted  dispensation,  is  intended  by  the
term.  The  appearance  of  Christ,  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,
and  the  gathering  of  the  nations,  are  not  events  which  are  to
be  protracted  through  years  or  centuries.

2.  Christ  is  to  be  the  judge.  John  v.  22,  23,  "  The  Father
judgeth  no  man,  but  hath  committed  all  judgment  unto  the  Son ;
that  all  men  should  honour  the  Son,  even  as  they  honour  the
Father ;  "  verse  27,  "  And  hath  given  Him  authoritj^  to  execute
judgment  also,  because  He  is  the  Son  of  Man."  Peter,  in  Acts
X.  34-43,  says  that  God  "  anointed  Jesus  of  Nazareth  with  the
Holy  Ghost  and  with  power  ;  "  had  "  raised  "  Him  from  the  dead
"  and  shewed  Him  openly,"  and  "  commanded  us  to  preach  unto
the  people,  and  to  testify  that  it  is  He  which  was  ordained  of
God  to  be  the  Judge  of  quick  and  dead."  Paul,  in  his  speech  on
Mars'  Hill,  tells  the  Athenians  that  God  "  hath  appointed  a  day,
in  the  which  He  will  judge  the  world  in  righteousness,  by  that
man  whom  He  hath  ordained  ;  whereof  He  hath  given  assurance
unto  all  men,  in  that  He  hath  raised  Him  from  the  dead."  (Acts
xvii.  31.)  And  in  2  Corinthians  v.  10,  he  says,  "  We  must  all  ap-
pear before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ."  Our  Lord  says  that  He
will  say  to  the  wicked,  "  Depart  from  me,  ye  that  work  iniquity."


§2.]  THE   FINAL  JUDGMENT.  8i7

(Matt.  V.  23  ;  Luke  xiii.  27.)  In  all  the  graphic  descriptions  given
in  the  New  Testament  of  the  process  of  the  final  judgment,
Christ  is  represented  as  acting  as  the  judge.  On  this  point  it  is
to  be  observed:  (1.)  That  He  is  set  forth  as  acting  on  his  own
authority ;  and  not  merely  as  the  "  BevoUmiichter,"  or  plenipo-
tentiary of  God.  Everywhere  in  the  New  Testament,  our  re-
sponsibility is  said  to  be  to  Him.  We  are  to  stand  before  his
judgment-seat.  He  will  say,  "  Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed."  It
is  He,  who  is  to  bring  every  secret  thing  into  judgment.  (2.)  He
is  qualified  thus  to  sit  in  judgment  on  men  and  angels ;  because
He  is  omniscient,  and  infinite  in  justice  and  mercy.  (3.)  It  is
especially  appropriate  that  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  God  manifest
in  the  flesh,  should  be  the  judge  of  all  men.  He  has  this  author-
ity committed  to  Him  because  He  is  the  Son  of  man ;  because,
although  in  the  form  of  God,  and  thinking  it  no  robbery  to  be
equal  with  God,  He  humbled  Himself  to  be  found  in  fashion  as  a
man.  This  is  part  of  his  exaltation,  due  to  Him  because  He  con-
sented to  become  obedient  unto  death.  It  is  meet  that  He  who
stood  condemned  at  the  bar  of  Pilate,  should  sit  enthroned  on  the
seat  of  universal  judgment.  It  is  a  joy  and  ground  of  special
confidence  to  all  believers,  that  He  who  loved  them  and  gave
Himself  for  them,  shall  be  their  judge  on  the  last  day.

3.  This  judgment  is  to  take  place  at  the  second  coming  of
Christ  and  at  the  general  resurrection.  Therefore  it  is  not  a  pro-
cess now  in  progress  ;  it  does  not  take  place  at  death ;  it  is  not  a
protracted  period  prior  to  the  general  resurrection.  A  few  of  the
passages  bearing  on  this  point  are  the  following :  In  the  parable
of  the  wheat  and  the  tares  (Matt.  xiii.  37-43),  already  referred  tu,
we  are  taught  that  the  final  separation  between  the  righteous  and
the  wicked  is  to  take  place  at  the  end  of  the  world,  when  the  Son
of  Man  shall  send  forth  liis  angels  to  gather  out  of  his  kingdom
all  things  that  offend.  This  implies  that  the  general  resurrection,
the  second  advent,  and  the  last  judgment,  are  contemporaneous
events.  The  Bible  knows  nothing  of  three  personal  advents  of
Christ :  one  at  the  time  of  the  incarnation ;  a  second  before  the
millennium ;  and  a  third  to  judge  the  world.  He  who  came  in
the  flesh,  is  to  come  a  second  time  without  sin  unto  salvation.
Matthew  xvi.  27,  "  The  Son  of  Man  shall  come  in  the  glory  of  his
Father,  with  his  angels ;  and  then  He  shall  reward  every  man
according  to  liis  works."  Matthew  xxiv.  29-35,  teaches  that  when
the  sign  of  the  Son  of  Man  appears  in  the  heavens,  all  the  tribes
of    the  earth   shall    m-ourn,  and  the  elect  shall  be  gathered  in.


848        PART  IV.   Ch.  IV.  — the  second  advent.

Matthew  xxv.  31-46  sets  forth  the  whole  process  of  the  judgment.
When  the  Son  of  Man  shall  come  in  his  glory,  all  nations  shall  be
gathered  before  Him,  and  He  shall  separate  them  as  a  shepherd
divideth  the  sheep  from  the  goats ;  and  then  shall  He  say  to
those  on  his  right  hand.  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father  ;  and  to
those  on  the  left.  Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed.  1  Corinthians  iv.  5,
"  Judge  nothing  before  the  time,  until  the  Lord  come,  who  both
will  bring  to  light  the  hidden  things  of  darkness,  and  will  make
manifest  the  counsels  of  the  hearts :  and  then  shall  every  man
have  praise  of  God."  When  Christ  comes,  the  general  judgment
is  to  occur.  In  2  Thessalonians  i.  7-10,  it  is  taught  that  when
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  shall  be  revealed  from  heaven,  it  mil  be  for
the  double  piu-pose  of  taking  vengeance  on  them  that  know  not
God,  and  of  being  glorified  in  all  them  that  believe.  In  2  Timothy
iv.  1,  it  is  said :  The  Lord  Jesus  Cluist  "  shall  judge  the  quick
and  the  dead  at  his  appearing,  and  his  kingdom."  In  the  fif-
teenth chapter  of  First  Corinthians,  the  Apostle  expressly  teaches
that  corruption  cannot  inherit  incorruption,  that  our  present  vile
bodies  must  be  changed  before  they  can  enter  the  kingdom  of
God  ;  and  this  change  from  the  natural  to  the  spiritual,  from
mortal  to  immortal,  is  to  take  place  at  the  last  trump  ;  and  in
Philippians  iii.  20,  21,  he  says  it  is  to  occur  when  Christ  comes
from  heaven,  who  shall  fashion  our  bodies  like  unto  his  own
glorious  body.  In  all  these  different  ways  it  is  taught  that
the  general  judgment  is  to  take  place  at  the  second  coming  of
Christ.

4.  The  persons  to  be  judged  are  men  and  angels.  In  several
passages  already  quoted  it  is  said  that  Christ  is  to  come  to  judge
"  the  quick  and  the  dead  ; "  in  others  it  is  said,  "  all  nations  are
to  stand  before  Him ; "  in  others,  that  "  we  must  all  appear
before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ ;"  m  others  again  it  is  said
that  "  He  will  render  to  every  man  according  to  his  works."  This
judgment,  therefore,  is  absolutely  universal ;  it  includes  both
small  and  great ;  and  all  the  generations  of  men.  With  regard
to  the  evil  angels,  it  is  said  that  God  "  delivered  them  into  chains
of  darkness,  to  be  reserved  unto  judgment."  (2  Pet.  ii.  4.)  Satan
is  said  to  be  the  God  of  this  world.  The  conflict  in  which  believers
are  engaged  in  this  life,  is  with  principalities  and  powers  and
spiritual  wickedness  in  heaven,  er  toi?  iTr'.vpayLOL<;.  This  conflict  is
to  continue  until  the  Second  Advent,  when  Satan  and  his  angels
are  to  be  cast  into  the  pit.

The  older  theologians  speculated  on  the  manner  in  which  the


§2.]  THE   FIx\AL  JUDGMENT.  849

judgment  is  to  be  arranged,  so  as  to  admit  of  the  countless  mill-
ions of  human  beings  who  shall  have  lived  from  the  beginning  of
the  world  to  the  final  consummation  beino;  so  cons-regated  as  to
be  all  gathered  before  the  throne  of  the  Son  of  Man.  The  com-
mon answer  to  that  difficulty  was  that  the  throne  is  to  be  so  ex-
alted and  so  glorious  as  to  be  visible,  as  are  the  sun  and  moon,
from  a  large  part  of  the  earth's  surface  at  the  same  time.  These,
however,  are  questions  about  which  we  need  give  ourselves  no
concern ;  these  descriptions  of  the  judgment  are  designed  to  teach
us  moral  truths,  and  not  the  physical  phenomena  by  which  the
solemn  adjudication  on  the  destiny  of  men  is  to  be  attended.

5.  The  ground  or  matter  of  judgment  is  said  to  be  the  "  deeds
done  in  the  body,"  men  are  to  be  judged  "  according  to  their
works  ; "  "  the  secrets  of  the  heart "  are  to  be  brought  to  light.
God's  judgment  will  not  be  founded  on  the  professions,  or  the  re-
lations of  men,  or  on  the  appearance  or  reputation  which  they
sustain  among  their  fellows  ;  but  on  their  real  character  and  on
their  acts,  however  secret  and  covered  from  the  sight  of  men
those  acts  may  have  been.  God  will  not  be  mocked  and  cannot
be  deceived  ;  the  character  of  every  man  will  be  clearly  revealed.
(1.)  In  the  sight  of  God.  (2.)  In  the  sight  of  the  man  himself.
All  self  deception  will  be  banished.  Every  man  will  see  himself
as  he  appears  in  the  sight  of  God.  His  memory  will  probably
prove  an  mdelible  register  of  all  his  sinful  acts  and  thoughts  and
feelings.  His  conscience  will  be  so  enlightened  as  to  recognize
the  justice  of  the  sentence  which  the  righteous  judge  shall  pro-
nounce upon  him.  All  whom  Christ  condemns  will  be  self -con-
demned. (3.)  There  wiU  be  such  a  revelation  of  the  character  of
every  man  to  all  around  him,  or  to  all  who  laiow  him,  as  shall
render  the  justice  of  the  sentence  of  condemnation  or  acquittal
apparent.  Beyond  this  the  representations  of  Scripture  do  not
require  us  to  go.

Besides  these  general  representations  of  Scripture  that  the  char-
acter and  conduct  of  men  is  the  ground  on  which  the  final  sen-
tence is  to  be  pronounced,  there  is  clear  intimation  in  the  Word
of  God,  that,  so  far  as  those  who  hear  the  Gospel  are  concerned,
their  future  destiny  depends  on  the  attitude  which  they  assume
to  Christ.  He  came  to  his  own,  and  his  own  received  Him  not ;
but  to  as  many  as  received  Him,  to  them  gave  He  power  to  be-
come the  sons  of  God.  He  is  God  manifest  in  the  flesh  ;  He
came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners  ;  all  who  receive  Him  as  their
God  and  Saviour,  are  saved  ;  all  who  refuse  to  recognize  and  trust

VOL.  lU.  5-1


850  PART  IV.     Ch.   IV.— the   second   ADVENT.

Him,  perish.  They  are  condemned  abeady,  because  they  have
not  beheved  in  the  name  of  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God.  He
that  beheveth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  life  ;  he  that  belie veth
not  the  Son  shall  not  see  life  ;  but  the  wrath  of  God  abide th  on
him.  Whosoever  shall  coirfess  me  before  men,  him  will  I  also  con-
fess before  my  Father  who  is  in  heaven.  But  whosoever  shall
deny  me  before  men,  liim  will  I  also  deny  before  my  Father  which
is  in  heaven.  When  the  Jews  asked  our  Lord,  What  shall  we
do  that  we  might  work  the  works  of  God  ?  his  answer  was,  "  This
is  the  work  of  God,  that  ye  believe  on  him  whom  He  hath  sent."
In  the  solemn  account  given  of  the  last  judgment  in  Matthew  xxv.
31-46,  the  inquest  concerns  the  conduct  of  men  towards  Christ.
And  the  Apostle  says.  If  any  man  love  not  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ
let  him  be  Anathema  Maranatha.  The  sjjecial  ground  of  condem-
nation, therefore,  under  the  Gospel  is  unbelief  ;  the  refusal  to  re-
ceive Cln-ist  m  the  character  in  which  He  is  presented  for  our
acceptance.

6.  Men  are  to  be  judged  according  to  the  light  which  they  have
severally  enjoyed.  The  servant  that  knew  his  Lord's  will,  and
did  it  not,  shall  be  beaten  with  many  stripes  ;  but  he  that  knew
it  not,  shall  be  beaten  with  few  stripes.  "  For  unto  whomsoever
much  is  given,  of  him  shall  be  much  required."  Our  Lord  says
that  it  shall  be  more  tolerable,  in  the  day  of  judgment,  for  Tyre
and  Sidon,  than  for  the  men  of  his  generation.  Paul  says  that  the
heathen  are  inexcusable,  because  that  when  they  knew  God,  they
glorified  Him  not  as  God  ;  and  he  lays  down  the  principle  that
they  who  sin  wdthout  law,  shall  be  judged  without  law ;  and  that
they  who  have  sinned  in  the  law  shall  be  judged  by  the  law.

7.  At  the  judgment  of  the  last  day  the  destmy  of  the  right-
eous and  of  the  wicked  shall  be  unalterably  determined.  Each
class  shall  be  assigned  to  its  final  abode.  Tliis  is  taught  in  the
solemn  words :  "  These  shall  go  away  mto  everlasting  pmiish-
ment :  but  the  righteous  into  life  eternal."

How  far  the  descriptions  of  the  process  of  the  last  judgment,
given  in  the  Bible,  are  to  be  understood  literally,  it  is  useless  to
inquire.  Two  things  are  remarkable  about  the  prophecies  of
Scriptm-e,  which  have  already  been  accomplished.  The  one  is
that  the  fulfilment  has,  in  many  cases,  been  very  different  from
that  which  a  hteral  mterpretation  led  men  to  anticipate.  The
other  is,  that  in  some  cases  they  have  been  fulfilled  even  to  the
most  minute  details.  These  facts  should  render  us  modest  in  our
interpretation  of  those  predictions  which  remain  to  be  accom-


§r>.]  THE   END   OF   THE   WORLD.  851

plislied  ;  satisfied  that  what  we  know  not  now  we  shall  know

§  3.  The  End  of  the  World.
The  principal  passages  of  Scriptm-es  relating  to  the  final  con-
summation or  the  end  of  the  world,  are  the  following :  Psahn
oil.  25,  26,  "  Of  old  hast  thou  laid  the  foundation  of  the  earth ;
and  the  heavens  are  the  work  of  thy  hands.  They  shall  perish,
but  thou  shalt  endure  ;  yea,  all  of  them  shall  wax  old  as  a  gar-
ment ;  as  a  vesture  shalt  thou  change  them,  and  they  shall  be
changed."  Isaiah  li.  6,  "  Lift  up  your  eyes  to  the  heavens,  and
look  upon  the  earth  beneath  ;  for  the  heavens  shall  vanish  away
like  smoke,  and  the  earth  shall  wax  old  like  a  garment."  Isaiah
Ixv.  17,  "  Behold,  I  create  new  heavens,  and  a  new  earth  :  and
the  former  shall  not  be  remembered  nor  come  into  mind."  Luke
xxi.  33,  "  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away :  but  my  words
shall  not  pass  away."  Romans  viii.  19-21,  *•'  The  earnest  ex-
pectation of  the  creature  (/crt'o-t?,  creation)  waiteth  for  the  mani-
festation of  the  sons  of  God.  For  the  creature  was  made  subject
to  vanity,  not  willingly,  but  by  reason  of  him  who  hath  sub-
jected the  same  in  hope,  because  the  creature  itself  also  shall  be
delivered  from  the  bondage  of  corruption  into  the  glorious  liberty
of  the  children  of  God."  2  Peter  iii.  6-13,  "  The  world  that
then  was,  being  overflowed  with  water,  perished :  but  the  Heavens
and  earth  which  are  now,  by  the  same  word  are  kept  in  store,
reserved  unto  fire  against  the  day  of  judgment  and  perdition  of

ungodly  men The  day  of  the  Lord  will  come  as  a  tliief  in

the  night ;  in  the  which  the  heavens  shall  pass  away  with  a  great
noise,  and  the  elements  shall  melt  with  fervent  heat ;  the  earth

also,  and  the  works  that  are  therein  shall  be  burned  up

Nevertheless  we,  according  to  his  promise,  look  for  new  heavens
and  a  new  earth,  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness."  Revelation
XX.  11,  "  I  saw  a  great  white  throne,  and  Him  that  sat  on  it,
from  whose  face  the  earth  and  the  heaven  fled  away  ;  and  there
was  found  no  place  for  them."  Revelation  xxi.  1,  "  I  saw  a  new
heaven  and  a  new  earth  :  for  the  first  heaven  and  the  first  earth
were  passed  away  ;  and  there  was  no  more  sea."

Remarks.

1.  These  passages  are  not  to  be  understood  as  predicting  great
political  and  moral  revolutions.  It  is  possible  that  some  of  them
might  bear  that  interpretation  :  but  others  are  evidently  intended
to  be  understood  in  a  more  literal  sense.     This  is  especially  the


852  PART   IV.     Ch.  IV.  — the    second   ADVENT.

case  with  2  Peter  iii.  6-13,  in  which  the  Apostle  contrasts  the
destruction  of  the  world  by  the  waters  of  the  deluge  with  the
destruction  by  fire  which  is  still  future.  If  the  fact  be  estab-
lished that  the  Scriptiu'es  anywhere  clearly  predict  the  destruc-
tion of  the  world  at  the  last  day,  that  fact  becomes  a  rule  for  the
interpretation  of  the  more  doubtful  passages.  There  is  nothing
in  this  predicted  destruction  of  our  earth  out  of  analogy  with  the
course  of  nature.  Stars  once  clearly  visible  in  the  firmament,  after
a  brief  period  of  unusual  splendour,  have  disappeared  ;  to  all
appearance  they  have  been  burnt  up.  Scientific  men  tell  us  that
there  is  abundant  evidence  that  the  earth  was  once  in  a  state  of
fusion  ;  and  there  are  causes  in  operation  which  are  adequate  to
reduce  it  to  that  state  again,  whenever  God  sees  fit  to  put  them
into  operation.

2.  The  destruction  here  foretold  is  not  annihilation,  (a.)  The
world  is  to  be  burnt  up  ;  but  combustion  is  not  a  destruction  of
substance.  It  is  merely  a  change  of  state  or  condition.  (^^)  The
destruction  of  the  world  by  water  and  its  destruction  by  fire  are
analogous  events  ;  the  former  was  not  annihilation,  therefore  the
second  is  not.  (c.)  The  destruction  spoken  of  is  elsewhere
called  a  7raA.tyyeieo-ta,  regeneration  (Matt.  xix.  28)  ;  an  u-o/c«-
Tacrracrts,  a  restoration  (Acts  iii.  21)  ;  a  deliverance  from  the
bondage  of  corruption  (Rom.  viii,  21).  The  Apostle  teaches
that  our  vile  bodies  are  to  be  fashioned  like  unto  the  giorious
body  of  Christ,  and  that  a  similar  change  is  to  take  place  in  the
world  we  inhabit.  There  are  to  be  new  heavens  and  a  new
earth,  just  as  we  are  to  have  new  bodies.  Our  bodies  are  not  to
be  annihilated,  but  changed.  ((?.)  There  is  no  evidence,  either
from  Scripture  or  experience,  that  any  substance  has  ever  been
annihilated.  If  force  be  motion,  it  may  cease ;  but  cessation  of
motion  is  not  annihilation,  and  the  common  idea  in  our  da}^,  among
men  of  science,  is  that  no  force  is  ever  lost ;  it  is,  as  they  say,
only  transformed.  However  this  may  be,  it  is  a  purely  gratuitous
assumption  that  any  substance  has  ever  passed  out  of  existence.
In  all  the  endless  and  complicated  changes  which  have  been  going
on,  from  the  beginning,  in  our  earth  and  throughout  the  universe,
nothing,  so  far  as  known,  has  ever  ceased  to  be.  Of  course  He
who  creates  can  destroy ;  the  question,  however,  concerns  the
purpose,  and  not  the  power  of  God  ;  and  He  has  never,  either  in
his  word  or  in  his  works,  revealed  his  purpose  to  destroy  any-
thing He  has  once  created.

Many  of  the  old  theologians,  especially  among  the  Lutherans,


§SJ  THE   END   OF   THE   WORLD.  853

understood  the  Bible  to  teach  the  absohite  annihilation  of  our
world.  Sclimid  ^  states  as  the  Lutheran  doctrine  that  the  world
is  to  be  reduced  to  nothuig  (in  Nichts  sich  auflosen).  He  quotes
Baier,  Hollaz,  and  Quenstedt  in  support  of  this  view.  Quenstedt  '^
says  :  "  Forma  consumniationis  hujus  non  in  nuda  qualitatum
immutatione,  alteratione  seu  innovatione,  sed  in  ipsius  substan-
tias mundi  totali  abolitione  et  in  nihilum  reductione  consistit."
Gerhard  ^  takes  the  same  view  :  "  Formam  consumniationis  dici-
mus  fore  non  nudam  qualitatum  alterationem,  sed  ipsius  substan-
tia? abolitioneni,  adeoque  totalem  annihilationem,  ut  sic  terminus
a  quo  consumniationis  sive  destructionis  sit  '  esse,'  terminus  vero
ad  quem  '  non  esse  '  sive  nihil."  He  admits,  however,  that  many
of  the  fathers  and  Luther  himself  were  on  the  other  side.  He
quotes  Irenaeus,  Cyril  of  Jerusalem,  Jerome,  Augustine,  and
Chrysostom,  as  ui  favour  of  mutation  and  against  aiiniliilation.
Luther  was  wont  to  say  :  "  The  heavens  have  their  work-day
clothes  on  ;  hereafter  they  will  have  on  their  Smiday  garments."
Most  of  the  Reformed  theologians  generally  oppose  the  idea  of
amiihilation.  Turrettin  certamly  does.*  One  of  his  questions  is :
"  Qualis  futuris  sit  mundi  mteritus  ?  An  per  ultimam  conflagra-
tionem  sit  annihilandus,  an  instaurandus  et  renovandus  ?  "  He
argues  throughout  in  favour  of  the  latter.

3.  The  subject  of  the  change  which  is  to  take  place  at  the  last
day  is  not  the  whole  material  universe,  but  our  earth  and  what
pertams  to  it.  (a.)  It  is  true  the  Bible  says  :  "  Heaven  and
earth  are  to  pass  away,"  and  by  heaven  and  earth  the  Scriptures
often  mean  the  imiverse  ;  and  it  would  therefore  be  consistent
with  the  language  of  Scripture  to  hold  that  the  whole  universe  is
to  be  changed  at  the  last  day.  It  was  natural  that  this  inter-
pretation should  be  put  upon  the  language  of  the  Bible  so  long  as
our  earth  was  regarded  as  the  central  body  of  the  universe  and
sun,  moon,  and  stars  as  subordinate  Imninaries,  intended  simply
for  the  benefit  of  the  inhabitants  of  our  world.  "  Wenn  der
Tanz,"  says  Strauss,^  "  zu  Ende  ist,  blast  der  Wirtli  die  Lichter
aus."  The  case  however  assumes  a  different  aspect  when  we
know  that  our  earth  and  even  our  solar  system  is  a  mere  speck  in
the  immensity  of  God's  works.     It  is   one   of  the  unmistakable

1  Die  Dofpnafih  der  evcmgelhch-lutherischen  KircJie,  von  Heinrich  Schmid,  Professor  der
Theologie  in  Erlangen;  Frankfort  and  Erlangen,  1853;  p.  500.
-  Theol(if/ia  Dklactlco-Pulemka,  edit.  Leipzig,  1715.

3  Loci  Theoloyici,  xxx.  v  -37;  Tiibingen,  1779,  vol.  xx.  pp.  51,  52.

4  Institutio,  XX.  v.;  edit.  Edinburgh,  1847,  vol.  iii.  p.  506.
6  Dogmatik,  §  104;  Tubingen,  1841,  vol.  ii.  p.  665.


854        PART  IV.   Ch.  IV.  — the  .second  advent.

evidences  of  the  divine  origin  of  the  Scriptures,  that  they  arc
written  on  such  a  high  level  that  all  the  mutations  of  human
science  take  place  beneath  them  without  ever  coming  into  col-
lision with  their  teachings.  They  could  be  read  by  those  who
believed  that  the  sun  moves  round  the  earth,  without  their  con-
victions being  shocked  b}^  their  statements  ;  and  they  can  be  read
by  us  who  know  that  the  earth  moves  round  the  sun,  with  the
same  satisfaction  and  confidence.  Whether  the  heaven  and  earth
which  are  to  pass  away  are  the  whole  material  universe,  or  only
our  earth  and  its  atmospheric  heavens,  the  language  of  the  Scrip-
ture leaves  rmdecided.  Either  \iew  is  perfectly  consistent  with
the  meaning  of  the  words  employed.  The  choice  between  tlie
tAvo  views  is  to  be  determined  by  other  considerations.  (5.)  The
d  priori  probability  is  overwhelming  in  favour  of  the  more  lim-
ited interpretation.  Anything  so  stupendous  as  the  passing  away
of  the  whole  universe  as  the  last  act  of  the  drama  of  human  liis-
tory  would  be  altogether  out  of  keeping,  (c.)  The  Bible  con-
cerns man.  The  earth  was  cursed  for  his  transgression.  That
curse  is  to  be  removed  when  man's  redemption  is  completed.
The  KTLats  that  was  made  subject  to  vanity  for  man's  sin,  is  our
earth  ;  and  our  earth  is  the  ktio-is  which  is  to  be  delivered  from
the  bondage  of  corruption.  The  change  to  be  effected  is  in  the
dwelling-place  of  man.  (c?.)  According  to  the  Apostle  Peter,  it
is  the  world  which  once  was  destroyed  by  water,  that  is  to  be
consumed  by  fire.  But  although  the  predictions  of  Scripture
concern  only  our  earth,  it  does  not  follow  that  the  material  uni-
verse is  to  last  forever.  As  it  is  not  from  eternity,  it  probably
will  not  last  forever.  It  may  be  only  one  of  the  grand  exhibi-
tions of  the  wonderful  working  of  God  in  the  field  of  infinite
space,  and  in  the  course  of  unending  ages.

4.  The  result  of  this  change  is  said  to  be  the  introduction  of
a  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth.  This  is  set  forth  not  only  in  the
use  of  these  terms,  but  in  calling  the  predicted  change  "  a  regener-
ation," "  a  restoration,"  a  deliverance  from  the  bondage  of  cor-
ruption and  an  introduction  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  Son
of  God.  This  earth,  according  to  the  common  opinion,  that  is,
this  renovated  earth,  is  to  be  the  final  seat  of  Christ's  kingdom.
This  is  the  new  heavens  ;  this  is  the  New  Jerusalem,  the  Mount
Zion  in  which  are  to  be  gathered  the  general  assembly  and  church
of  the  first-born,  which  are  wi'itten  in  heaven  ;  the  spirits  of  just
men  made  perfect ;  this  is  the  heavenly  Jerusalem  ;  the  city  of
tlie  living  God  ;  the  kingdom  prepared  for  his  people  before  the
foundation  of  the  world.


§4.]  THE  KINGDOM   OF   HEAVEN.  855

5.  It  is  of  course,  in  itself,  no  matter  of  interest  what  por-
tion of  space  these  new  heavens  and  new  earth  are  to  occupy,  or
of  what  materials  they  are  to  be  formed.  As  the  resurrection
bodies  of  believers  are  to  be  human  bodies  they  must  have  a  local
habitation,  although  it  be  one  not  made  with  hands  eternal  in  the
heavens.  All  we  know  about  it  is  that  it  will  be  glorious,  and
adapted  to  the  spiritual  bodies  which  those  in  Christ  are  to  re-
ceive when  He  comes  the  second  time  unto  salvation.

§  4.    The  Kingdom  of  Heaven.

In  the  account  given  of  the  final  judgment  in  Matthew  xxv.  31-
46,  we  are  told  that  the  King  shall  "  say  to  those  on  his  right
hand,  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father,  inlierit  the  kingdom  pre
pared  for  you  from  the  foundation  of  the  world."

1.  In  the  Old  Testament  it  was  predicted  that  God  would  set
up  a  kingdom,  which  was  to  be  universal  and  everlasting.

2.  Of  this  kingdom  the  Messiah  was  to  be  the  head.  He  is
everywhere  in  the  Old  Testament  set  forth  as  a  king.  (See
Gen.  xlix.  10 ;  Num.  xxiv.  17  ;  2  Sam.  vii.  16  ;  Is.  ix.  6,  7  ,
xi.  ;  lii.  ;  liii.  ;  Mich.  iv.  ;  and  Psalms  ii.  ;  xlv.  ;  Ixxii.  ;  and  ex.)

3.  It  is  called,  for  obvious  reasons,  in  the  Scriptures,  indiffer-
ently, the  kingdom  of  God,  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  the  kingdom
of  the  Son  of  Man  (Matt.  xiii.  41)  and  the  kingdom  of  heaven.

4.  It  is  described  in  the  prophets  in  the  most  glowing  terms,
in  figures  borrowed  partly  from  the  paradisiacal  state  of  man,
and  partly  from  the  state  of  the  theocracy  during  the  reign  of
Solomon.

5.  This  kingdom  belongs  to  Chi'ist,  not  as  the  Logos,  but  as
the  Son  of  Man,  the  Theanthropos  ;  God  manifest  in  the  flesh.

6.  Its  twofold  foundation,  as  presented  in  the  Bible,  is  the  pos-
session on  the  part  of  Christ  of  all  divine  attributes,  and  his  work
of  redemption.  (Heb.  i.  3;  Phil.  ii.  6-11.)  It  is- because  He
being  equal  with  God,  "  humbled  Himself,  and  became  obedient
iinto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross,"  that  "  God  also  hath
highly  exalted  Him,  and  given  Him  a  name  which  is  above  every
name  :  that  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  should  bow,  of
tilings  in  heaven,  and  things  m  earth,  and  things  under  the  earth  ;
and  that  every  tongue  should  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord,
to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father."  All  power  in  heaven  and
earth  has  been  given  into  his  hands ;  and  all  things,  ra  iravTa,  the
imiverse,  put  under  his  feet.  Even  the  angels  are  his  ministering
spirits,  sent  by  Him  to  minister  to  those  who  shall  be  heirs  of
salvation.


856  PART  IV.     Ch.  IV.— the   second   ADVENT.

7.  This  messianic  or  mediatorial  kingdom  of  Christ,  being  thus
comprehensive,  is  presented  in  different  aspects  in  the  Word  of  God
Viewed  as  extending  over  all  creatures,  it  is  a  kingdom  of  power,
which,  according  to  1  Corinthians  xv.  24,  He  shall  deliver  up  to
God  even  the  Father,  when  his  mediatorial  work  is  accomplished.
Viewed  in  relation  to  his  own  people  on  earth  it  is  the  kingdom  of
grace.  They  all  recognize  Him  as  their  absolute  proprietor  and
sovereign.  They  all  confide  in  his  protection,  and  devote  them-
selves to  his  service.  He  rules  in  them  and  reigns  over  them,
and  subdues  all  their  and  his  enemies.  Viewed  in  relation  to  the
whole  body  of  the  redeemed,  when  the  work  of  redemption  is
consummated,  it  is  the  kmgdom  of  glory,  the  kingdom  of  heaven,
in  the  highest  sense  of  the  words.  In  this  view  his  kingdom  is
everlasting.  His  headship  over  his  people  is  to  continue  forever,
and  his  dominion  over  those  whom  He  has  purchased  with  his
blood  shall  never  end.

8.  As  this  kmgdom  is  thus  manifold,  so  also  it  is,  in  some  of
its  aspects,  progressive.  It  is  represented  in  Scripture  as  passing
through  different  stages.  In  pi-ophecy  it  is  spoken  of  as  a  stone
cut  out  without  hands,  which  became  a  great  mountain  and  filled
the  whole  earth.  In  Daniel  vii.  14,  it  is  said  of  the  Messiah  that
to  Him  "  there  was  given  dominion,  and  glory,  and  a  kingdom,  that
all  people,  nations,  and  languages,  should  serve  Him."  So,  too,  in
Psahu  ii.  8,  it  is  written  of  Him,  "  Ask  of  me,  and  I  shall  give
thee  the  heathen  for  thine  inheritance,  and  the  uttermost  parts  of
the  earth  for  thy  possession ; "  in  Psalm  Ixxu.  11,  "  All  nations
shall  serve  Him  ;  "  verse  17,  "  All  nations  shall  call  Him  blessed  ; "
in  Psalm  Ixxxvi.  9,  "  All  nations  whom  thou  hast  made  shall  come
and  worship  before  thee,  O  Lord ;  and  shall  glorify  thy  name  ;  "  in
Isaiah  xhx.  6,  "  I  will  also  give  thee  for  a  light  to  the  Gentiles,
that  thou  mayest  be  my  salvation  unto  the  end  of  the  earth ; '"  in
Habakkuk  ii.  14,  "  The  earth  shall  be  filled  with  the  knowledge
of  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea ; "  and  in
Malachi  i.  11,  "  From  the  rising  of  the  sun  even  unto  the  going
down  of  the  same,  my  nariie  shall  be  great  among  the  Gentiles."
The  Scriptures  abomid  with  passages  of  similar  import.  It  is
not  only  asserted  that  the  kingdom  of  Christ  is  to  attain  this
universal  extension  by  slow  degrees,  but  its  gradual  progress  is
illustrated  in  various  ways.  Our  Lord  compares  his  kingdom  to
a  grain  of  mustard-seed,  wliicli  is  indeed  the  least  of  all  seeds ;
but  when  it  is  grown  it  is  the  greatest  among  herbs  ;  and  to
leaven  which  a  woman  took,  and  hid  in  three  measures  of  meal,
till  the  whole  was  leavened.


§4.]  THE   KINGDOM    OF   HEAVEN.  857

9.  Although  God  has  always  had  a  kingdom  upon  earth,  yet
the  Idngdom  of  which  the  prophets  speak  began  m  its  messianic
form  when  the  Son  of  God  came  in  the  flesh.  John  the  Baptist,
the  forerunner  of  Christ,  came  preaching  that  the  kingdom  of  God
was  at  hand.  Our  Lord  Himself,  it  is  said,  went  from  village  to
village,  preaching  the  kingdom  of  God.  (Luke  iv.  43 ;  viii.  1.)
When  asked  by  Pilate  whether  He  was  a  king,  he  "  answered,
Thou  sayest  that  I  am  a  king.  To  this  end  was  I  born,  and  for
this  cause  came  I  into  the  world."  (John  xviii.  37).  The  Apos-
tles wherever  they  went  ''■  testified  the  kingdom  of  God."  (Acts
xxviii.  23.)  Their  business  was  to  call  upon  men  to  receive  the
Lord  Jesus  as  the  Christ,  the  anointed  and  predicted  Messiah  or
king  of  his  people,  and  to  worship,  love,  trust  and  obey  Him  as
such.  They  were,  therefore,  accused  of  acting  contrary  to  "  the
decrees  of  Caesar,  saying  that  there  is  another  king,  one  Jesus."
(Acts  xvii.  7.)  Men  are  exhorted  to  seek  first  the  kingdom  of
God,  as  a  present  good.  It  is  compared  to  a  pearl  or  treasure,  for
Avhich  it  were  wise  for  a  man  to  sacrifice  everything.  Every  be-
liever receives  Christ  as  his  king.  Those  who  receive  Him  in  sin-
cerity constitute  his  kingdom,  in  the  sense  in  which  the  loyal
subjects  of  an  earthly  sovereign  constitute  his  kingdom.  Those
who  profess  allegiance  to  Christ  as  king  constitute  his  visible
kingdom  upon  earth.  Nothing,  therefore,  can  be  more  opposed
to  the  plain  teaching  of  the  New  Testament,  than  that  the  king-
dom of  Christ  is  yet  future  and  is  not  to  be  inaugurated  until  his
second  comino;.  This  is  to  confound  its  consummation  with  its
commencement.

10.  As  to  the  nature  of  this  kingdom,  our  Lord  Himself  teaches
us  that  it  is  not  of  this  world.  It  is  not  analogous  to  the  king-
doms which  exist  among  men.  It  is  not  a  kingdom  of  earthly
splendour,  wealth,  or  power.  It  does  not  concern  the  civil  or
political  affairs  of  men,  except  in  their  moral  relations.  Its
rewards  and  enjoyments  are  not  the  good  things  of  this  world.
It  is  said  to  consist  in  "  righteousness,  and  peace,  and  joy  in  the
Holy  Ghost."  (Rom.  xiv.  17.)  Christ  told  his  hearers,  "  The
kingdom  of  God  is  within  you."  The  condition  of  admission
into  that  kingdom  is  regeneration  (John  iii.  5),  conversion  (Matt,
xviii.  3),  hoUness  of  heart  and  life,  for  the  unrighteous  shall  not
inherit  the  kingdom  of  God  ;  nor  thieves,  nor  drunkards,  nor
revilers,  nor  extortioners  (1  Cor.  vi.  9,  10  ;  Gal.  v.  21 ;  Eph.
V.  5).

11.  This  kingdom,  in  the  interval  between  the  first  and  second


858  PART  IV.     Ch.   IV.  — the   second   ADVENT.

advents  of  Christ,  is  said  to  be  like  a  field  in  which  the  ^vheat
and  tares  are  to  grow  together  until  the  harvest,  which  is  the
end  of  the  world.  Then  "  the  Son  of  Man  shall  send  forth  his
angels,  and  they  shall  gather  out  of  his  kingdom  all  things  that
offend,  and  them  which  do  iniquity  ;  and  shall  cast  them  into  a
furnace  of  fire  :  there  shall  be  wailing  and  gnashing  of  teeth.
Then  shall  the  righteous  shine  forth  as  the  sun  in  the  kingdom  of
their  Father."  (Matt.  xiii.  41-43.)  Experience  concui's  with
Scripture  in  teaching  that  the  kingdom  of  Christ  passes  through
many  vicissitudes ;  that  it  has  its  times  of  depression  and  its  sea-
sons of  exaltation  and  prosperity.  About  this  in  the  past,  there
can  be  no  doubt.  Prophecy  sheds  a  sufficiently  clear  light  on
the  future  to  teach  us,  not  only  that  this  alternation  is  to  con-
tinue to  the  end,  but,  more  definitely,  that  before  the  second
coming  of  Christ  there  is  to  be  a  time  of  great  and  long  continued
prosperity,  to  be  followed  by  a  season  of  decay  and  of  suffering,
so  that  when  the  Son  of  Man  comes  he  shall  hardly  find  faith  on
the  earth.  It  appears  from  passages  already  quoted  that  all
nations  are  to  be  converted  ;  that  tlie  Jews  are  to  be  brought  in
and  reingrafted  into  their  own  olive-tree  ;  and  that  their  restora-
tion is  to  be  the  occasion  and  the  cause  of  a  change  from  death
unto  life  ;  that  is,  analogous  to  the  change  of  a  body  mouldering
in  the  grave  to  one  instinct  with  joyous  activity  and  power.  Of
this  period  the  ancient  prophets  speak  in  terms  adapted  to  raise
the  hopes  of  the  Church  to  the  highest  pitch.  It  is  true  it  is  dif-
ficult to  separate,  in  their  descriptions,  what  refers  to  "  this  latter
day  of  glory  "  from  what  relates  to  the  kingdom  of  Christ  as
consummated  in  heaven.  So  also  it  was  difficult  for  the  ancient
people  of  God  to  separate  what,  in  the  declarations  of  their
prophets,  referred  to  the  redemption  of  the  people  from  Babylon
from  what  referred  to  the  greater  redemption  to  be  effected  by
the  Messiah.  In  both  cases  enough  is  plain  to  satisfy  the  Church.
There  was  a  redemption  from  Babylon,  and  there  was  a  redemp-
tion by  Christ ;  and  in  like  manner,  it  is  hoped j  there  is  to  be  a
period  of  millenial  glory  on  earth,  and  a  still  more  glorious  con-
summation of  the  Church  in  heaven.  This  period  is  called  a
millennium  because  in  Revelation  it  is  said  to  last  a  thousand
years,  an  expression  which  is  perhaps  generally  understood  lit-
erally. Some  however  tliink  it  means  a  protracted  season  of
indefinite  duration,  as  when  it  is  said  that  one  day  is  with  the
Lord  as  a  thousand  j^ears.  Others,  assuming  that  in  the  pro-
phetic language  a  day  stands  for  a  year,  assume  that  the  so-called


§4.]  THE  KINGDOM    OF    HEAVEN.  859

Tnilleimium  is  to  last  three  hundred  and  sixty-five  thousand  years.
During  this  period,  be  it  longer  or  shorter,  the  Church  is  to
enjoy  a  season  of  peace,  purity,  and  blessedness  such  as  it  has
never  yet  experienced.

The  principal  reason  for  assuming  that  the  prophets  predict  a
glorious  state  of  the  Church  prior  to  the  second  advent,  is,  that
they  represent  the  Church  as  being  thus  prosperous  and  glorious
on  earth.  But  we  know  that  when  Christ  comes  again  the
heavens  and  earth  are  to  pass  away,  and  that  no  more  place  will
be  found  for  them.  The  seat  of  the  Church,  after  the  second
coming,  is  not  to  be  the  earth,  but  a  new  heavens  and  a  new
earth.  As  therefore  the  Scriptures  teach  that  the  kingdom  of
Christ  is  to  extend  over  all  the  earth  ;  that  all  nations  are  to
serve  Him ;  and  that  all  people  shall  call  Him  blessed  ;  it  is  to
be  inferred  that  these  predictions  refer  to  a  state  of  things  which
is  to  exist  before  the  second  coming  of  Christ.  This  state  is
described  as  one  of  spiritual  prosperity  ;  God  will  pour  out  his
Spirit  upon  all  flesh  ;  knowledge  shall  everywhere  abound  ;  wars
shall  cease  to  the  ends  of  the  earth,  and  there  shall  be  nothing
to  hurt  or  destroy  in  all  my  holy  mountain,  saith  the  Lord.
This  does  not  imply  that  there  is  to  be  neither  sin  nor  sorrow  in
the  world  during  this  long  period,  or  that  all  men  are  to  be  true
Christians.  The  tares  are  to  grow  together  with  the  wheat  until
the  harvest.  The  means  of  grace  will  still  be  needed  ;  conver-
sion and  sanctification  wiU  be  then  what  they  ever  have  been.
It  is  only  a  higher  measure  of  the  good  which  the  Church  has
experienced  in  the  past  that  we  are  taught  to  anticipate  in  the
future.  This  however  is  not  the  end.  After  this  and  after  the
great  apostasy  which  is  to  follow,  comes  the  consummation.

The  Consummation.

12.  When  Christ  comes  again  it  will  be  to  be  admired  in  all
them  that  believe.  Those  who  are  then  alive  \vill  be  changed,
in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye  ;  their  corruptible  shall  put  on  incor-
ruption,  and  their  mortal  shall  put  on  immortality.  Those  who
are  in  the  graves  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  Man  and
come  forth  to  the  resurrection  of  life,  their  bodies  fashioned  like
unto  the  glorious  body  of  the  Son  of  God.  Thus  changed,  both
classes  shall  be  ever  with  the  Lord.

The  place  of  the  final  abode  of  the  righteous  is  sometimes
called  a  house ;  as  when  the  Saviour  said :  "  In  my  Father's
house  are  many  mansions  "  (John  xiv.  2)  ;  sometimes  "  a  city,


860  PART  IV.     Ch.   IV.  — the   second  ADVENT.

which  hath  foiuidations,  whose  builder  and  maker  is  God."  (Heb.
xi.  10.)  Under  this  figure  it  is  called  the  new  or  heavenly  Jeru-
salem, so  gorgeously  described  in  the  twenty-first  chapter  of  the
Apocalypse.  Sometimes  it  is  spoken  of  as  "  a  better  coimtry,  that
is  an  heavenly  "  (Heb.  xi.  16)  ;  a  country  through  which  flows
the  river  of  the  water  of  life,  and  "•  on  either  side  of  the  river
was  there  the  tree  of  life,  which  bare  twelve  manner  of  fruits,
and  yielded  her  fruit  every  month  :  and  the  leaves  of  the  tree
were  for  the  healing  of  the  nations.  And  there  shall  be  no  mortj
ciu'se  :  but  the  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb  shall  be  in  it ;
and  his  servants  shall  serve  Him  :  and  they  shall  see  his  face  ;
and  his  name  shall  be  in  their  foreheads.  And  there  shall  be  no
night  there :  and  they  need  no  candle,  neither  light  of  the  sun ;
for  the  Lord  God  giveth  them  light :  and  they  shall  reign  for
ever  and  ever."  (Rev.  xxii.  2-5.)  Sometimes  the  final  abode
of  the  redeemed  is  called  a  "  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth."
(2  Pet.  iii.  13.)

As  to  the  blessedness  of  this  heavenly  state  we  know  that  it  is
inconceivable  :  "  Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  have
entered  into  the  heart  of  man,  the  things  which  God  hath  pre-
pared for  them  that  love  Him."    (1  Cor.  ii.  9.)

"  We  know  not,  O  we  know  not,
What  joys  await  us  there ;
What  radiancy  of  glory,

What  bliss  beyond  compare."

We  know  however :  (1.)  That  this  mcomprehensible  blessed-
ness of  heaven  shall  arise  from  the  vision  of  God.  This  vision
is  beatific.  It  beatifies.  It  transforms  the  soul  into  the  divine
image  ;  transfusing  into  it  the  divine  Hfe,  so  that  it  is  filled  with
the  fuhiess  of  God.  This  vision  of  God  is  in  the  face  of  Jesus
Christ,  in  whom  dwells  the  plenitude  of  the  divine  glory  bodily.
God  is  seen  in  fashion  as  a  man  ;  and  it  is  this  manifestation  of
God  in  the  person  of  Christ  that  is  inconceivably  and  intolerably
ravishing.  Peter,  James,  and  John  became  as  dead  men  when
they  saw  his  glory,  for  a  moment,  in  the  holy  momit.  (2.)  The
blessedness  of  the  redeemed  will  flow  not  only  from  the  mani-
festation of  the  glory,  but  also  of  the  love  of  God  ;  of  that  love,
mysterious,  unchangeable,  and  infinite,  of  which  the  work  of
redemption  is  the  fruit.  (3.)  Another  element  of  the  future
happiness  of  the  saints  is  the  indefinite  enlargement  of  all  their
faculties.  (4.)  Another  is  their  entire  exemjjtion  from  all  sin
and.  sorrow.     (5.)  Another   is  their  intercourse  and  fellowship


§.0.]  THE   PRE-MILLENNIAL   THEORY.  861

with  the  high  intelligences  of  heaven  ;  with  patriarchs,  prophets,
apostles,  martyrs,  and  all  the  redeemed.  (6.)  Another  is  con-
stant increase  in  knowledge  and  in  the  useful  exercise  of  all  their
powers.  (7.)  Another  is  the  secure  and  everlasting  possession
of  all  possible  good.  And,  (8.)  Doubtless  the  outward  circum-
stances of  their  being  will  be  such  as  to  minister  to  their  in-
creasing blessedness.

§  5.  The  Theory  of  the  Pre-millennial  Advent.
The  common  doctrine  of  the  Church  stated  above,  is  that  the
conversion  of  the  world,  the  restoration  of  the  Jews,  and  the  de-
struction of  Antichrist  are  to  precede  the  second  coming  of  Christ,
which  event  will  be  attended  by  the  general  resurrection  of  the
dead,  the  final  judgment,  the  end  of  the  world,  and  the  consum-
mation of  the  Church.  In  opposition  to  this  view  the  doctrine  of
a  pre-millennial  advent  of  Christ  has  been  extensively  held  from
the  days  of  the  Apostles  to  the  present  time.^  According  to  this
view,  (1.)  The  nations  are  not  to  be  converted,  nor  are  the  Jews
to  be  restored  to  their  standing  in  the  Church,  until  the  second
coming  of  Christ.  (2.)  His  advent  is  to  be  personal  and  glori-
ous. (3.)  He  will  establish  Himself  in  Jerusalem  as  the  head  of
a  visible,  external  kingdom.  (4.)  When  He  comes,  the  martyrs,
as  some  say,  or,  as  others  believe,  all  who  sleep  in  Jesus,  shall  be
raised  from  the  dead  and  associated  with  Him  in  this  earthly
kingdom.     (5.)  The  Jews  are  to  be  converted,  restored  to  their

1  There  recently  appeared  in  the  Presbyterian,  a  series  of  articles  sij^ned  "  Twisse,"
understood  to  be  from  the  pen  of  the  Rev.  Dr.  Duffield  of  Princeton,  New  Jersey,  de-
signed to  sustain  the  doctrine  of  the  pre-niillennial  advent  of  Christ,  and  especially  to
disprove  "  tlie  doctrine  of  a  millennial  era  of  universal  righteousness  and  peace  on  earth
before  "  the  second  coming  of  Christ.  The  arguments  summarily  stated  b}^  the  writer  are
the  following :  "(1.)  Were  the  doctrine  true,  it  would  undoubtedly  be  prominent  in  the
New  Testament,  and  especially  in  the  Apostolical  Epistles.  The  fact  is,  it  is  not  only  not
prominent,  but,  so  far  as  we  are  informed,  the  advocates  of  the  doctrine  do  not  pretend
to  find  in  the  Epistles  the  slightest  allusion  to  it.  (2.)  The  uniform  and  abundant  teaching
of  the  New  Testament  as  to  the  condition  of  the  Church  and  of  the  world  during  the
present  dispensation  —  that  is,  until  the  advent  —  forbid  the  expectation  of  such  a  millen-
nium. (3.)  The  advent  itself,  not  the  millennium,  is  prominently  presented  in  the  New
Testament  as  '  the  blessed  hope '  of  the  Church,  and  is  uniformly  referred  to  as  an  event
near  at  hand,  ever  imminent,  to  be  'looked  for'  with  longing  expectation.  (4.)  The
Saviour's  repeated  command  to  '  watch  '  for  his  coming,  because  we  '  know  not  the  hour,'
is  inconsistent  witli  the  idea  of  a  millennium  intervening.  (5.)  The  New  Testament  teaches
repeatedly  and  unequivocally  that  the  advent  and  the  manifestation  of  the  ^lessianic  king-
dom are  to  be  synchronous  events.  (6.)  The  Apostolic  Church,  under  tlie  instruction  of
those  holy  men  who  spoke  and  ^v^ote  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  was  millen-
narian.  (7.)  The  Church,  for  two  centuries  immediately  succeeding  the  Apostles,  was
millennarian.  (8.)  The  doctrine  of  a  millennium  before  the  advent  is  not  to  be  found  in  the
standards  of  any  of  the  Churches  of  the  Reformation ;  by  several  it  is  expressly  repudiated.
It  is  a  modern  novelty,  suggested  but  one  hundred  and  fifty  years  ago  by  Whitby,  and
avowedly  as  'a  new  hypothesis.'  "


862  PART  IV.     Ch.  IV.  — the   second   ADVENT.

own  land,  invested  with  special  honours  and  prerogatives,  and
made  the  instruments  of  the  conversion  of  the  world.  (6.)  This
kingdom  is  to  be  one  of  great  splendour,  prosperity,  and  blessed-
ness, and  is  to  continue  a  thousand  years ;  which,  however,  as
stated  above,  is  understood  in  different  senses.  (7.)  After  the
expiration  of  the  millennium,  the  general  resurrection  of  the  dead,
the  end  of  the  world,  and  the  final  consummation  of  the  Church
are  to  occur.  Such  are  the  general  features  of  the  scheme  which,
with  many  modifications  as  to  details,  is  known  as  the  pre-millen-
nial  advent  theory.

The  leading  objections  to  this  doctrine  have  been  already  pre-
sented in  the  discussions  of  the  several  topics  included  under  the
general  head  of  eschatology.  They  may  be  summarily  stated  as
follows :  —

1.  It  io  a  Jewish  doctrine.  The  principles  adopted  by  its
advocates  in  the  interpretation  of  prophecy,  are  the  same  as
those  adopted  by  the  Jews  at  the  time  of  Christ ;  and  they
have  led  substantially  to  the  same  conclusions.  The  Jews  ex-
pected that  when  the  Messiah  came  He  would  establish  a  glorious
earthly  kingdom  at  Jerusalem ;  that  those  who  had  died  in  the
faith  should  be  raised  from  the  dead  to  share  in  the  blessings  of
the  Messiah's  reign ;  that  all  nations  and  peoples  on  the  face  of
the  whole  earth  should  be  subject  to  them ;  and  that  any  nation
that  did  not  serve  them  should  be  destroyed.  All  the  riches  and
honours  of  the  world  were  to  be  at  their  disposal.  The  event
disappointed  these  expectations ;  and  the  principles  of  prophetic
interpretation  on  which  those  expectations  were  founded  were
proved  to  be  incorrect.

2.  This  theory  is  inconsistent  with  the  Scriptures,  inasmuch  as
it  teaches  that  believers  only  are  to  rise  from  the  dead  when
Christ  comes ;  whereas  the  Bible  declares  that  when  He  appears
all  who  are  in  the  graves  shall  hear  his  voice,  and  shall  come
forth ;  they  that  have  done  good  unto  the  resurrection  of  life ;
and  they  that  have  done  evil  unto  the  resurrection  of  damnation.

3.  The  Bible  teaches  that  when  Christ  comes  all  nations  shall
appear  at  his  bar  for  judgment.  This  theory  teaches  that  the
final  judgment  will  not  occur  until  after  the  millennium.  It  may
be  said  that  the  judgment  is  to  commence  at  the  second  advent
and  continue  during  the  reign  of  a  thousand  years.  But  the
general  judgment  cannot  occur  before  the  general  resurrection,
and  as  the  general  resurrection,  according  to  this  theory,  is  not  to
take  place  vmtil  after  the  millennium,  so  neither  can  the  general
judgment.


§  5.]  THE   PRE-MILLENNIAL   THEORY.  863

4.  The  Scriptures  teach  that  when  Christ  comes  the'  second
time  without  sin  unto  salvation,  then  the  Church  shall  enter  on  its
everlasting  state  of  exaltation  and  glory.  Those  in  Christ  who
have  departed  this  life  shall  be  raised  from  the  dead  and  be
clothed  with  their  spiritual  bodies,  and  those  who  are  alive  shall
be  changed  in  a  moment,  and  thus  they  shall  be  ever  with  the
Lord.  According  to  this  theory,  instead  of  heaven  awaiting  the
risen  saints,  they  are  to  be  introduced  into  a  mere  worldly
kingdom.^

6.  It  is  inconsistent  with  all  the  representations  given  of  the
glory  and  blessedness  of  departed  saints,  to  assume  that  at  the
resurrection  they  are  to  be  brought  down  to  a  lower  state  of  ex-
istence, degraded  from  heaven  to  earth.  The  millennium  may  be
a  great  advance  on  the  present  state  of  the  Church  ;  but,  exalt  it
as  you  may,  it  is  far  below  heaven.  This  argument  bears,  at
least,  against  the  patristic  doctrine  of  the  millennium.

6.  The  view  presented  by  pre-millennarians  of  the  kingdom  of
Christ  on  earth  is,  in  many  respects,  inconsistent  with  the  Scrip-
tural account  of  its  nature,  (a.)  It  is  to  be  a  worldly  kingdom.
(6.)  Its  blessedness  is  to  consist  largely  in  worldly  prosperity.
Although  the  modern  advocates  of  the  doctrine  have  eliminated
the  grosser  elements  included  in  the  theory  of  many  of  the
fathers  on  this  subject,  nevertheless  the  essential  earthly  character
of  the  kingdom  remains.  Men  are  not  to  be  like  the  angels.
Births  and  deaths  are  to  go  on,  not  only  during  the  millennium,
but  without  end.  Not  that  the  glorified  believers  who  have  been
raised  from  the  dead  are  to  marry  and  be  given  in  marriage,  but
the  race  of  men  is  to  continue  indefinitely  to  increase  in  the
future  as  it  has  increased  in  the  past.'-^     (c.)  The  Bible  teaches

1  It  is  true  that  pre-millennialists  differ  very  much  on  this  yjoiut.  The  common  opinion  in
the  early  Church  was  that  the  risen  saints  are  to  live  and  reign  a  thousand  years  with  Clirist
on  earth  ;  but  some  say  that  tlie  glorified  believers  are  to  be  in  heaven  ;  others,  that  they  are
to  appear  from  time  to  time  on  earth,  as  Christ  did,  during  the  forty  days  which  intervened
between  his  resurrection  and  ascension  ;  and  others  appear  to  teach  that  glorified  saints  are
to  rule  over  iinglorified  humanity  without  being  revealed  to  those  over  whom  they  reign.

2  See  passages  cited  from  distinguished  millennarians  on  this  point  in  Rev.  David  Brown's
Christ's  Sec<^nd  Coniinf/,  pp.  1G7-173.  Mr.  David  N.  Lord  devotes,  to  this  subject  two
chapters  of  his  book  on  The  Cominrj  ami  Reign  of  Chrkt.  New  York,  18.58.  He  says  (p.
1.51).  that  the  Scriptures  teach  that  the  earth  is  "  to  continue  forever,  and  that  mankind  are
forever  to  occupy  it,  and  multiply  in  an  endless  succession  of  generations ;  and  that  it  is  to
be  the  scene  of  Christ's  everlasting  kingdom  and  reign."  He  argues  this  from  the  cove-
nant made  with  Noah ;  from  the  promise  made  to  Abraham  that  his  seed  should  forever
possess  the  land  of  Canaan ;  and  from  the  promise  made  to  David  that  his  seed  should  sit
on  his  throne  and  reign  forever.  This  perpetuity  of  the  human  race  on  the  earth  and  in
the  flesh,  he  considers  one  of  the  most  clearly  revealed  purposes  of  God  concerning  the
family  of  man.  Instead  of  the  number  of  the  redeemed  being  nearly  made  up,  he  holds
that  they  are  to  go  on  multiplying  through  all  eternity.


864  PART   IV.     Ch.  IV.  — the   second   ADVENT.

that  tlie  distinction  between  the  Jews  and  Gentiles  is  abol-
ished in  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  This  theory  teaches  that  after
the  second  advent  that  distinction  is  to  continue  and  to  be  made
greater  than  ever  before.  The  temple  at  Jerusalem  is  to  be  re-
built ;  the  sacrifices  restored ;  and  all  the  details  of  the  Mosaic
ritual,  as  described  in  Ezekiel,  again  introduced,  (c?.)  The  Bible
teaches  that  after  the  end  of  the  world,  as  described  in  2  Peter
iii.  10  and  in  the  Apocalypse,  there  are  to  be  a  new  heavens  and
a  new  earth.  This  theory  teaches  the  "  earth's  eternal  per-
petuity." ^  "  The  dissolving  fires  of  which  Peter  speaks,"  we  are
told,  "  are  for  '  the  perdition  of  ungodly  men  ; '  and  not  for  the

utter  depopulation  and  destruction  of  the  whole  world

Men  and  nations  Avill  survive  them  and  still  continue  to  live  in
the  flesh."  2

7.  This  theory  disparages  the  Gospel.  "  The  more  common
opinion,"  says  Dr.  McNeile,  "  is,  that  this  is  the  final  dispensa-
tion, and  that  by  a  more  copious  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Spirit  it
will  magnify  itself,  and  swell  into  the  universal  blessedness  pre-
dicted by  the  prophets,  carrying  with  it  Jews  and  Gentiles,  even
the  whole  world,  in  one  glorious  flock  under  one  shepherd,  Jesus
Christ  the  Lord.  This  is  reiterated  from  pulpit,  press,  and  plat-
form. It  is  the  usual  climax  of  missionary  exhortation,  or  rather
missionary  prophecy."  ^  "  The  universal  prevalence  of  religion
hereafter  to  be  enjoyed,"  says  Mr.  Brooks,  "  is  not  to  be  effected
by  any  increased  impetus  given  by  the  present  means  of  evangel-
izing the  nations,  but  by  a  stupendous  display  of  Divme  wrath
upon  all  the  apostate  and  ungodly."  *  Wrath,  however,  never
converted  a  smgle  sovil,  and  never  will.  "  The  Scriptures,"  ac-
cording to  Mr.  Tyso,  "  do  state  the  design  of  the  Gospel,  and
what  it  is  to  effect ;  but  they  never  say  it  is  to  convert  the  world.
Its  powers  have  been  tried  for  eighteen  hundred  years,  and  it  has
never  yet  truly  converted  one  nation,  one  city,  one  town,  nor  even
a  sina;le  village."  ^  In  the  work  of  Rev.  David  BroAvn  on  the
Second  Advent,^  abundant  evidence  is  advanced  from  the  writ-
ings of  Mr.  Brooks,  Dr.  McNeile,  and  the  Rev.  Mr.  Bickersteth,
to  show  that  those  gentlemen  teach  that  the  Scriptures  "  are  to  be
superseded  "  in  the  millennium.     Other  means,  probably,  as  they

1  The  Last  Times  and  the  Great  Consuniinatlon.  By  Joseph  A.  Seiss,  D.D.  Philadelphia
and  London,  1866.    p.  73.     On  p.  75,  the  author  says,  "  The  earth  shall  not  pass  away."

2  Seiss,  ut  supra,  p.  211.

8  Lectures  on  the  Prophecies  Relntire  to  the  Jewish  Nntioh,  1st.  edit.,  1830,  p.  72.

4  Elements  of  Prophetic  Inlerpretntion,  pp.  227,  228.

6  Defence  of  the  Personal  Reiyn  of  Christ.     1841.     pp.  41,  42.  6  pp.  311-315.


§5.]  THE   PIIE-MILLENXIAL   THEORY.  865

say,  other  revelations  are  to  be  made  for  the  salvation  of  men.
Any  theory  which  thus  disparages  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God
must  be  false.  Christ's  commission  to  his  Church  was  to  preach
the  Gospel  to  every  creature  under  heaven ;  Paul  says,  the  Gos-
pel is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation  ;  that,  though  a  stumbling-
block  to  the  Jew  and  foolishness  to  the  Greek,  it  is  the  wisdom  of
God  and  the  power  of  God  ;  that  it  has  pleased  God  by  the  fool-
ishness of  preaching  to  save  them  that  believe ;  and  he  plainly
teaches  (Rom.  x.  11-15)  that  there  is  no  other  means  of  salva-
tion. Wrath,  judgments,  displays  of  visible  glory,  and  miracles
are  not  designed  for  the  conversion  of  souls,  nor  are  they  adapted
to  that  end.

8.  Another  objection  to  the  pre-millemiial  theory  is  the  want
of  consistency  in  its  advocates  and  the  conflicting  conclusions  to
which  they  come.  They  profess  to  adopt  the  principle  of  literal
interpretation.  They  interpret  literally  the  prophecies  relating
to  the  return  of  the  Jews  to  their  own  land  ;  which  promise  to
them  as  a  nation  dominion  over  all  the  other  nations  of  the  earth,
the  rebuilding  of  the  Temple  and  the  restoration  of  the  Temple-
service,  the  greatest  worldly  prosperity,  and  even  the  everlasting
perpetuity  of  their  nation  in  the  highest  state  of  blessedness  here
on  earth  and  "in  the  flesh."  Yet  they  are  forced  to  abandon
their  literalism  when  they  come  to  the  interpretation  of  the
prophecies  Avhich  predict  that  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  are  to
go  up  to  Jerusalem  every  month,  and  even  on  every  Sabbath.
And  more  than  this,  they  go  to  the  extreme  of  figurative  or
spiritual  interpretation  m  explaining  the  prophecies  which  refer
to  the  end  of  the  world.  The  Apostle  Peter  says  in  express
terms :  "  The  heavens  shall  pass  away  with  a  great  noise,  and
the  elements  shall  melt  with  fervent  heat,  the  earth  also  and  the
works  that  are  therein  shall  be  burned  up."  This  they  deny.
They  say  that  it  is  only  certain  nations  who  are  to  be  destroyed ;
that  the  earth  is  not  to  be  depopulated  ;  that  the  final  conflagra-
tion will  produce  less  change  or  injury  than  the  deluge  did.^

The  utmost  confusion  also  prevails  in  the  views  of  pre-millenna-
rians  as  to  the  nature  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  Accordmg  to
one  view  Christ  and  his  risen  and  glorified  saints  are  to  dwell
visibly  on  the  earth  and  reign  for  a  thousand  years  ;  according  to
another,  the  risen  saints  are  to  be  in  heaven,  and  not  on  earth
any  more  than  the  angels  now  are  ;  nevertheless  the  subjects  of
the  first  resuri'ection,  although  dwellmg  in  heaven,  are  to  govern

1  The  Last  Times,  J.  A.  Seiss,  D.  D.,  p.  74.
VOL.  Ill  55


866        PART  IV.   ch.  IV.  — the  second  advent.

the  earth  ;  according  to  another  it  is  the  converted  JeAvish  nation
restored  to  their  own  land,  who  are  to  be  the  governors  of  the
world  ;  according  to  another,  the  Bible  divides  men  into  three
classes :  the  Gentiles,  the  Jews,  and  the  Church  of  God.  The
prophecies  relating  to  the  millennium  are  miderstood  to  refer  to
the  relative  condition  of  the  Jews  and  Gentiles  in  this  world,  and
not  to  the  risen  and  glorified  believers.  Another  view  seems  to
be,  that  this  earth,  changed  no  more  by  the  fires  of  the  last  day
than  it  was  by  the  waters  of  the  deluge,  is  to  be  the  only  heaven
of  the  redeemed.  Dr.  Gumming  and  Dr.  Seiss  say  they  wish  no
better  heaven  than  tliis  earth  free  from  the  curse  and  from  sm.
The  latter  says  :  ^  "  My  faith  is,  that  these  very  hiHs  and  valleys
shall  yet  be  made  glad  with  the  songs  of  a  finished  redemption,
and  this  earth  yet  become  the  bright,  blessed,  and  everlasting
homestead  of  men  made  glorious  and  immortal  in  body  and  in
soul."  Still  another  view  is  that  there  are  two  heavens,  one  here
and  one  above ;  two  Jerusalems,  both  to  continue  forever,  the
one  on  earth  and  the  other  in  heaven  ;  the  one  made  with  hands,
the  other  Avithout  hands  ;  both  glorious  and  blessed,  but  the
earthly  far  inferior  to  the  heavenly ;  they  are  like  concentric  cir-
cles, one  within  the  other  ;  both  endless.  Men  will  continue  for-
ever, on  earth,  living  and  dying  ;  happy  but  not  perfect,  needing
regeneration  and  sanctification  ;  and,  when  they  die,  will  be  trans-
lated to  the  kingdom  which  is  above.

It  seems  therefore  that  the  torch  of  the  literalist  is  an  "  ignis
fatuus,"  leading  those  who  follow  it,  they  know  not  whither.  Is
it  not  better  to  abide  by  the  plain  doctrinal  teaching  of  the  Bible,
rather  than  to  trust  to  the  vmcertain  expositions  of  unfulfilled
prophecies  ?  What  almost  all  Christians  believe  is  :  (1.)  That
all  nations  shall  be  converted  mito  God.  Jesus  shall  reign  from
the  rising  to  the  setting  of  the  sun.  (2.)  That  the  Jews  shall  be
reingrafted  into  their  own  olive-tree  and  acknowledge  oiu'  Lord
to  be  their  God  and  Saviour.  (3.)  That  all  Antichristian  powers
shall  be  destroyed.  (4.)  That  Christ  shall  come  again  in  person
and  Avith  great  glory  ;  the  dead  shall  be  raised,  those  Avho  have
done  good  mito  the  resurrection  of  life,  those  Avho  have  done  evil
unto  the  resurrection  of  damnation  ;  and,  (5.)  That  the  righteous
clothed  in  their  glorified  bodies  shall  then  inherit  the  kingdom
prepared  for  them  from  the  foundation  of  the  world ;  and  the
wicked  be  consigned  to  their  final  doom.

1  The  Last  Times,  p.  72.


§5.]  THE   PRE-MILLENNIAL   THEORY.  867

Did  the  Apostles  expect  the  Second  Advent  in  their  Day  ?
The  simple  facts  on  this  subject  are  :  (1.)  That  the  commg  of
the  Messiah  and  the  estabhshment  of  his  kingdom  was  the  gTcat
object  of  expectation  and  desire  for  the  people  of  God  from  the
beginning  of  the  world.  It  was  the  great  subject  of  prophecy
and  promise  under  the  old  dispensation.  The  ancient  saints  are
described  (as  Christians  now  are)  as  those  who  were  constantly
hoping  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  (Eph.  ii.  12  ;  Acts  xxvi.
6,  7.)  The  dying  thief  said  :  "  Lord,  remember  me,  when  thou
comest  into  thy  kingdom."  The  last  question  put  to  our  Lord
by  his  disciples  was  :  "  Lord  wilt  thou  at  this  time  restore  again
the  kingdom  to  Israel."  (2.)  As  the  Messiah  came  at  first  as  a
man  of  sorrows,  to  make  Himself  a  sacrifice  for  sin.  He  promised
to  come  a  second  time  without  sin  unto  salvation,  to  raise  the
dead  and  to  gather  all  his  people  into  his  everlasting  home.  His
second  coming  therefore  was  to  Christians  what  his  first  coming
was  to  the  Old  Testament  samts  ;  the  constant  object  of  exjjecta
tion  and  deshe.  (3.)  As  the  time  of  the  second  advent  was
unrevealed  either  to  men  or  angels,  the  early  Christians  hoped  it
might  occur  in  their  day.  The  Apostles  themselves  no  doubt  at
first  cherished  that  expectation.  (4.)  To  the  Apostle  Paul,  how-
ever, it  was  revealed  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  Avas  not  to  come
tlntil  a  great  apostasy  had  occurred.  (5.)  Nevertheless  as  the
Apostolic  Christians  did  not  know  how  long  that  apostasy  was  to
continue,  their  constant  prayer  was,  O  Lord  come  quickly.  The
Apostles  continued  to  hold  up  the  second  advent  as  an  impending
event,  the  moral  impression  of  which  ought  to  be  to  raise  the
affections  of  the  people  from  the  world  and  fix  them  on  the  things
unseen  and  eternal.  Those  who  urge  the  fact  that  the  New
Testament  writers  speak  of  the  day  of  the  Lord  as  at  hand,  and
exliort  believers  to  watch  and  pray  for  his  advent,  as  a  proof  that
the  Apostles  believed  that  it  might  occur  at  once,  that  no  events
then  future  must  come  to  pass  before  Christ  came,  forget  that
what  inspired  men  said  God  said.  If  God,  who  knew  that  Christ
was  not  to  come  for  at  least  eighteen  centuries  after  his  ascension,
could  say  to  his  people  :  "  The  day  of  the  Lord  is  at  hand."
"  Watch  therefore,  for  ye  know  neither  the  day  nor  the  hour
wherein  the  Son  of  Man  cometh,"  then  that  language  was  appro-
priate even  on  the  assumption  that  those  who  used  it  knew  that
the  second  advent  was  not  to  occur  for  thousands  of  years  ;  for  a
thousand  years  are  with  God  as  one  day,  and  one  day  as  a  thousand


868         PART  IV.    Ch.  IV. —the  sp:cond  advent.

years.     The  Church  waited  four   thousand   years   for   the   first
advent ;  we  may  be  content  to  wait  God's  time  for  the  second.-^

§  6.    Future  Punishment.

Our  Lord  in  his  account  of  the  final  judgment  says,  that  the
wicked  shall  go  away  into  everlasting  punishment  ;  but  the
righteous  into  life  eternal.

The  sufferings  of  the  finally  impenitent,  according  to  the  Scrip-
tures, arise  :  (1.)  From  the  loss  of  all  earthly  good.  (2.)  From
exclusion  from  the  presence  and  favour  of  God,  (3.)  From
utter  reprobation,  or  the  final  withdrawal  from  them  of  the  Holy
Spirit.  (4.)  From  the  consequent  unrestrained  dominion  of  sin
and  sinful  passions.  (5.)  From  the  operations  of  conscience.
(6.)  From  despair.  (7.)  From  their  evil  associates.  (8.)  From
their  external  circumstances ;  that  is,  future  suffering  is  not  ex-
clusively the  natural  consequences  of  sin,  but  also  includes  posi-
tive inflictions.     (9.)  From  their  perpetuity.

There  seems  to  be  no  more  reason  for  supposing  that  the  fire
spoken  of  in  Scripture  is  to  be  literal  fire,  than  that  the  worm
that  never  dies  is  literally  a  worm.  The  devil  and  his  angels
who  are  to  suffer  the  vengeance  of  eternal  fire,  and  whose  doom
the  finally  impenitent  are  to  share,  have  no  material  bodies  to  be
acted  upon  by  elemental  fire.  As  there  are  to  be  degrees  in
the  glory  and  blessedness  of  heaven,  as  our  Lord  teaches  us  m
the  parable  of  the  ten  talents,  so  there  will  be  differences  as  to
degree  in  the  sufferings  of  the  lost :  some  will  be  beaten  with  few
stripes,  some  with  many.

The  Duration  of  Future  Punishment.

On  this  subject  the  follomng  opinions  have  been  held :  —
1.  It  is  assumed  that  the  design  of  punishment  is  reformation,
and  that  it  is  effective  to  that  end.  The  time  will,  therefore,
come  when  all  sinful  creatures,  whether  men  or  angels,  shall  be
purged  from  all  corruption,  and  restored  to  the  image  and  favour
of  God.  .  This  was  the  doctrine  of  Origen  in  the  early  Church.

1  Milleimarians  are  not  consistent  m  urging  the  objection  considered  in  the  text,  as  some
at  least  of  their  own  number  teach  tliat  important  events  yet  future  must  occur  before  the
establishment  of  Christ's  kingdom.  For  example,  Rev.  John  Cox,  ^Minister  of  the  Gospel,
Woohvich,  in  his  Tho-itr/lds  cm  the  Coming  and  Kingdom  of  our  Lord  Jemis  CIn-ist,  devotes
the  third  chapter  of  that  work  to  prove  that  the  entire  destruction  of  the  Papacy,  of
Mohammedanism,  and  of  the  tyrannical  kingdoms  of  the  world,  and  the  restoration  of  the
Jews  to  their  own  land,  must  precede  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  See  The  Litcralist,  vol.  v
p.  26  ff.  The  Literalist  is  a  collection,  in  five  octavo  volumes,  of  the  publications  of  the
leading  English  pre-millcnnarians.    Published  by  Orrin  Rogers,  Philadelphia,  184:0  and  1 S-11.


§6.]  FUTURE   PUNISHMENT.  869

Other  restorationists  rest  their  hope  of  the  ultimate  salvation  of
all  men,  not  on  the  purifying  effect  of  suffering,  but  on  the  effi-
cacy of  the  death  of  Christ.  If  He  died  for  all,  they  mfer,  all  will
be  saved.

2.  Others  hold  that  future  punishment  is  only  hypothetically
everlasting.  That  is,  the  wicked  will  suffer  forever  if  they  con-
tinue to  sin  forever.  But,  if  the  Spirit  continues  to  strive  with
men  in  the  world  to  come,  or,  as  others  believe,  if  plenary  ability
belongs  to  the  very  nature  of  a  rational  creature,  then  we  may
assume  that  some,  perhaps  many,  perhaps  all,  in  the  course  of
ages,  will  repent  and  turn  unto  God  and  live.

3.  Others  agam  teach  that  the  sufferings  of  the  impenitent  are
only  relatively  endless  ;  that  is,  it  wi]l  forever  be  true  that  their
condition  will  be  inferior  to  what  it  would  have  been  had  they
been  better  men.

4.  Others  hold  that  the  life  promised  to  the  righteous  is  im-
mortality, and  that  the  death  threatened  against  the  wicked  is  the
extmction  of  life,  or,  the  cessation  of  conscious  existence.  The
soul  will  die  in  the  future  world,  just  as  the  body  dies  here.  It
ceases  to  act ;  it  ceases  to  feel ;  it  ceases  to  be.  This  death  of  the
soul  is  called  eternal,  because  life  is  never  to  be  restored.  The
punishment  of  the  mcked  is,  therefore,  in  a  sense,  everlasting.
It  is  a  final  and  everlasting  forfeiture  of  all  good.  Thus  Cicero  ^
calls  death  "  sempiternum  malum,"  and  Lucretius  ^  speaks  of  a
"  mors  immortalis."  This  second  death  may  be  very  painful  and
protracted.  The  finally  impenitent,  may,  and  doubtless  will,
suffer  for  a  longer  or  shorter  period,  and  to  a  less  or  greater  de-
gree, before  the  fuial  extinction  of  their  being.  And  thus  there
shall  be  a  future  retribution,  answering  all  the  ends  of  justice.  ^

o.  The  common  doctrine  is,  that  the  conscious  existence  of  the
soul  after  the  death  of  the  body  is  miending  ;  that  there  is  no
repentance  or  reformation  m  the  future  world ;  that  those  who
depart  this  life  mireconciled  to  God,  remain  forever  in  this  state
of  alienation,  and  therefore  are  forever  sinful  and  miserable.  This
is  the  doctrine  of  the  whole  Christian  Church,  of  the  Greeks,  of
the  Latins,  and  of  all  the  great  historical  Protestant  bodies.

1  Tusculanarum  DLymtationum,  I.  xlii.  100;    Works,  edit.  Leipzig,  1850,  p.  1057,  b.

-  See  Lucretius,  Be  Rerum  Natura,  iii.  517-519,  edit.  London,  1712,  p.  144.

3  This  tiieoiy  is  advocated  with,  confidence,  as  well  as  with  ability  and  learning,  by  Henry
Constable,  A.  M.,  Prebendary  of  Cork,  in  his  tract  on  The  Dnrat'wn  and  Nature  oj
Future  Punishment,  Reprinted  from  the  Second  London  Edition,"  New  Haven,  Conn.,  1872.
And  much  more  elaborate!}^  in  Debt  and  Grace  as  related  to  the  Doctrine  of  a  Future  Life,
By  C.  F.  Hudson.     Fifth  Edition.     Boston:  1859.


870  PART   IV.     Ch.   IV.  — the    second  ADVENT.

It  is  obvious  that  this  is  a  question  which  can  be  decided  only
by  divine  revelation.  No  one  can  reasonably  presume  to  decide
how  long  the  wicked  are  to  suffer  for  their  sins  upon  any  general
principles  of  right  and  wrong.  The  conditions  of  tlie  probleni
are  not  within  our  grasp.  What  the  infinitel}^  wise  and  good
God  may  see  fit  to  do  A\atli  his  creatures  ;  or  what  the  exigencie-s
of  a  government  embracing  the  whole  universe  and  continuing
throughout  eternal  ages,  may  demand,  it  is  not  for  such  worms  of
the  dust  as  we  are,  to  determine.  If  we  believe  the  Bible  to  be
the  Word  of  God,  all  we  have  to  do  is  to  ascertain  what  it  teaches
on  this  subject,  and  humbly  submit.

1.  It  is  an  almost  mvincible  presumption  that  the  Bible  does
teach  the  unending  punishment  of  the  finally  impenitent,  that  all
Cluistian  churches  have  so  understood  it.  There  is  no  other  way
in  which  this  unanimity  of  judgment  can  be  accounted  for.  To
refer  it  to  some  philosophical  speculation  which  had  gained  ascend-
ancy in  the  Church,  such  as  the  dualism  of  good  and  evil  as  two
coetenial  and  necessary  principles,  or  the  Platonic  doctrine  of  the
inherent  immortality  and  indestructible  nature  of  the  human  soul,
would  be  to  assign  a  cause  altogether  inadequate  to  the  effect.
Much  less  can  this  general  consent  be  accounted  for  on  the  gr(3und
that  the  doctrine  in  question  is  congenial  to  the  Inmian  mind,  and
is  believed  for  its  own  sake,  without  any  adequate  support  from
Scripture.  The  reverse  is  the  case.  It  is  a  doctrine  which  the
natural  heart  revolts  from  and  struggles  against,  and  to  which  it
submits  only  under  stress  of  authority.  The  Church  believes  the
doctrine  because  it  must  believe  it,  or  renomice  faith  in  the  Bible
and  give  up  all  the  hopes  founded  upon  its  promises.  There  is  no
doctrine  in  support  of  which  this  general  consent  can  be  pleaded,
which  can  be  shown  not  to  be  taught  in  the  Bible.  The  doctrines
of  the  Trinity,  the  divinity  of  Christ,  the  personality  of  the  Holy
Spirit,  the  sinfulness  of  men,  and  others  of  a  lilvc  kind,  are  ad-
mitted to  be  Scriptural  even  by  those  who  do  not  believe  them.
The  argument  now  urged,  does  not  suppose  the  Church  to  be
infallible  ;  nor  that  the  authority  of  the  Church  is  the  gi'ound  of
faith  ;  it  only  assumes  that  what  the  great  body  of  the  competent
readers  of  a  plain  book  take  to  be  its  meaning,  must  be  its
meaning.

It  is  unreasonable  to  account  for  the  general  reception  of  the
doctrine  in  question  on  the  ground  of  church  authority.  It  was
universally  received  before  the  external  Church  arrogated  to  itself
the  right  to  dictate  to  the  people  of  God  what  they  must  believe


§6.]  FUTURE    PUXISIBIENT.  871

and  it  continued  to  be  received  when,  at  the  Reformation,  the
authority  of  the  Church  was  repudiated,  and  the  Scriptures  were
declared  to  be  the  only  mfallible  rule  of  faith  and  practice.  Any
man,  therefore,  assumes  a  fearful  responsibility  who  sets  himself
in  opposition  to  the  faith  of  the  Church  universal.

2.  It  is  admitted  that  the  doctrine  of  the  perpetuity  of  the
future  punishment  of  the  mcked  was  held  by  the  Jews  under  the
old  dispensation,  and  at  the  time  of  Christ.  Neither  our  Lord
nor  his  Apostles  ever  contradicted  that  doctrine.  They  reproved
the  false  teachers  of  their  day  for  doctrinal  errors  on  many  points,
but  they  never  corrected  their  faith  in  this  doctrine.  They  never
teach  anything  inconsistent  with  it.  Their  recorded  instructions
give  no  ground  for  a  belief  either  of  the  final  restoration  of  all
rational  creatures  to  the  favour  of  God,  or  of  the  annihilation  of
the  wicked.  The  passages  which  are  appealed  to  by  Uiiiversalists
in  support  of  their  doctrine  admit  of  a  natural  and  simple  inter-
pretation in  harmony  with  the  general  teaching  of  the  Bible  on
this  subject.  For  example,  in  Ephesians  i.  10,  it  is  said  to  be  the
purpose  of  God  to  bring  into  one  harmonious  whole  (or,  as  it  is
expressed  in  Colossians  i.  20,  to  reconcile  unto  Himself)  all  things,
i.  e.,  all,  who  are  in  heaven  and  who  are  on  earth.  The  question  is,
who,  or  what  are  the  all,  who  are  to  be  reconciled  unto  God  ?
This  question  must  be  answered  by  a  reference  to  the  nature  of
the  thing  spoken  of,  and  to  the  analogy  of  Scripture.  It  cannot
mean  absolutely  "  all  things,"  the  whole  universe,  including  sun,
moon,  and  stars,  for  they  are  not  susceptible  of  reconciliation  to
God.  For  the  same  reason  it  cannot  mean  all  sensitive  creatures,
including  irrational  animals.  Nor  can  it  mean  all  rational  crea-
tures, including  the  holy  angels  ;  for  they  do  not  need  reconcilia-
tion. Nor  can  it  mean  all  fallen  rational  creatures,  for  it  is  ex-
pressly taught,  Hebrews  ii.  16,  that  Christ  did  not  come  to  redeem
fallen  angels.  Nor  can  it  mean  all  men,  for  the  Bible  teaches
elsewhere  that  all  men  are  not  reconciled  to  God ;  and  Scripture
cannot  contradict  Scripture ;  for  that  would  be  for  God  to  contra-
dict Himself.  The  "  all"  intended  is  the  "  all "  spoken  of  in  the
context ;  the  whole  body  of  the  people  of  God  ;  all  the  objects
of  redemption.

Restorationists  appeal  also  to  Romans  v.  18  :  "  As  by  the
offence  of  one  judgment  came  upon  all  men  to  condemnation ;
even  so  by  the  righteousness  of  one  the  free  gift  came  upon  all
men  imto  justification  of  life."  This  is  made  to  mean,  that  as  all
men  are  condemned  for  Adam's  offence,  so  all  men  are  justified


9

872  PART  IV.     Cii.  IV. —  THE   SECOND   ADVENT.

for  the  righteousness  of  Christ.  The  same  interpretation  is  put
upon  the  parallel  passage  in  1  Corinthians  xv.  22 :  "  As  in  Adam
all  die,  even  so  in  Christ  shall  all  be  made  alive."  In  both  those
passages,  however,  the  "  all "  is  necessarily  limited  by  the  context.
It  is  the  all  who  are  in  Adam,  that  die  ;  and  the  all  who  are  in
Christ,  that  are  made  alive.  Restorationists  hmit  the  word  to  all
men,  or  to  all  fallen  creatures,  in  obedience  to  Avhat  they  sup-
pose to  be  the  analogy  of  Scripture  ;  and  this  is  all  that  is  done
by  the  orthodox.  The  only  question  is.  What  do  the  Scriptures
elsewhere  teach  ?  If  they  clearly  teach  that  all  men  and  fallen
angels  are  to  be  saved,  then  these  passages  must  be  interpreted
accordingly  ;  but  if  they  teach  that  all  men  are  not  saved,  then
these  passages  cannot  be  understood  to  assert  the  contrary.  Of
themselves  they  decide  nothuig.  They  may  be  understood  in
two  ways  ;  which  is  then-  real  meaning  depends  on  what  is  taught
elsewhere.

The  same  remark  may  be  made  in  reference  to  other  passages
which  Universalists  rely  upon.  Thus  in  1  Corinthians  xv.  25,  it
is  said  that  Christ  "  must  reign,  until  He  hath  put  all  enemies
under  his  feet."  This  may  mean  that  He  must  reign  until  all  sin
and  misery  are  banished  from  the  universe  ;  but  this  is  not  its
necessary  meaning,  for  Satan  may  be  subdued  without  being
either  converted  or  anniliilated.  In  like  manner,  in  1  Timothy
ii.  4,  it  is  said  God  "  will  have  all  men  to  be  saved ;  "  if  the  word
will,  6'€/\et,  here  means  to  purpose,  then  the  passage  teaches  that  all
men  shall  ultimately  be  certainly  saved.  But  if  the  word  means
here  what  it  does  in  Matthew  xxvii.  43,  to  have  complacency  in,
Qel  OekeL  avrov,')  then  it  teaches  only  what  the  Bible  everywhere
else  teaches,  namely,  that  God  is  love  ;  that  He  delights  not  in
the  death  of  simiers.  It  is  to  pervert,  and  to  misinterpret  the
Word  of  God,  to  make  one  passage  contradict  another  simply
because  the  language  used  admits  of  an  explanation  which  brings
them  into  conflict.  The  question  is  not.  What  certain  words  may
mean  ?  but,  What  were  they  intended  to  mean  as  used  in  certain
connections  ?

If  Christ  and  his  Apostles  did  not  teach  that  all  men  are  to  be
saved,  neither  did  they  teach  that  the  wicked  are  to  be  annihilated.
Mr.  Constable,  in  his  work  above  referred  to,  lays  do^vn  the  prin-
ciple that  the  language  of  the  Scriptm-es,  especially  of  the  New
Testament,  is  to  be  interpreted  according  to  the  "  usus  loquendi "
of  the  Greek  Avriters.  We  are  to  go  to  our  classical  dictionaries
to  learn  the  meaning  of  the  words  they  use.     From  this  principle


§6.J  FUTURE  PUNISHMENT.  873

lie  infers  that  as  tlie  word  C^*/,  life^  in  ordinary  Greek,  means  con-
tinued existence,  and  (9avaTos,  death,  the  cessation  of  existence,
such  is  their  meaning  in  the  Scriptiu'es.  Therefore,  when  in  the
Bible  eternal  life  is  promised  to  the  righteons,  immortality  is
j)romised  to  them  ;  and  when  eternal  death  is  threatened  against
the  wicked,  annihilation  is  declared  to  be  their  doom.  A  Greek-
speaking  people,  he  says,  could  attach  no  other  meaning  to  such
language.  In  like  manner  as  the  words  which  we  translate  to
destroy,  or  cause  to  perish,  mean  to  blot  out  of  existence,  the
inference  is  that  when  the  wicked  are  said  to  be  destroyed,  or  to
perish,  it  can  only  mean  that  they  are  annihilated.

On  this  it  may  be  remarked,  —

1.  That  the  rule  of  interpretation  here  laid  down  is  ob\dously
incorrect,  and  its  application  would  reduce  the  doctrines  of  the
Bible  to  the  level  of  heathenism.  If  Greek  words  as  used  in
Scripture  express  no  higher  ideas  than  on  the  lips  of  Pagans,  then
we  can  have  only  the  thoughts  of  Pagans  in  the  Bible.  On  this
principle,  how  could  the  Gospel  be  preached  to  heathen  ?  to  the
Hindoos,  for  example,  if  they  were  forbidden  to  attach  to  the
Avords  God,  sin,  repentance,  and  a  holy  life,  no  other  ideas  than
those  suggested  by  the  corresponding  terms  of  their  own  lan-
guage ?  The  Bible,  so  far  as  "wi-itten  in  Greek,  must  be  under-
stood as  Greek.  But  the  "  usus  loquendi  "  of  every  language
varies  more  or  less  in  different  ages,  and  as  spoken  by  different
tribes  and  nations.  Every  one  admits  that  Hellenistic  Greek  has
a  usage  distinguishing  it  from  the  language  of  the  classics.  The
language  of  the  Bible  must  explain  the  language  of  the  Bible.
It  has  a  "  usus  loquendi  "  of  its  own.  It  is,  however,  not  true
that  the  words  life  and  death  (C^^y  and  ^ai/aros)  are  in  any  lan-
guage used  only  in  the  limited  sense  which  Mr.  Constable's  argu-
ment Avould  assign  to  them.  When  the  poet  said,  "  dum  vivimus
vivamus,"  he  surely  did  not  mean  to  say,  '  while  we  continue  to
exist,  let  us  continue  to  exist.'  The  Scriptures  written  in  the
language  of  men  use  words  as  men  are  accustomed  to  use  them,
literally  or  figuratively,  and  m  senses  suited  to  the  nature  of  the
subjects  to  which  they  are  applied.  The  word  life  means  one
thing  when  used  of  plants,  another  when  used  of  animals,  and
another  when  spoken  of  in  reference  to  the  soul  of  man.  The
death  of  a  plant  is  one  thing,  the  death  of  an  immortal  soul  is
something  entirely  different.  That  the  words  life  and  death  are
not  confined  to  the  limited  sense  in  which  annihilationists  woidd
take  them,  hardly  needs  to  be  proved.     The  Scriptures  every-


874  PART  IV.     Ch.  IV.  — the    second   ADVENT,

where  recognize  the  distinction,  in  reference  to  men,  between
animal,  intellectual,  and  spiritual  life.  A  man  may  have  the  two
former  and  be  destitute  of  the  latter.  God  quickens  those  dead
in  trespasses  and  sins  ;  that  is,  he  imparts  spiritual  life  to  those
who  are  in  the  full  vigour  of  their  animal  and  intellectual  being.
Therefore  we  are  told  that  the  favour  of  God  is  life  ;  that  to
know  God  is  eternal  life  ;  that  to  be  spiritually  minded  is  life  ;
and  that  to  be  carnally  minded  is  death.  The  Apostle  tells  the
Colossians  :  "  Ye  are  dead,  and  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in
God."  He  says  to  the  Galatians  :  "  I  live  ;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ
liveth  in  me."  Those  who  "  live  in  pleasure  "  are  said  to  be
"'  dead  while  they  live."  No  one  believes  that  the  word  life  in
such  Scriptural  phrases  as  "  the  bread  of  life,"  "  the  water  of
life,"  "  the  tree  of  life,"  "  the  crown  of  life,"  means  only  con-
tinued existence.  The  Avord,  when  used  of  the  soul  of  man,
means  not  only  conscious  being,  but  a  normal  state  of  being  in
the  likeness,  fellowship,  and  enjoyment  of  God.  And  m  like
mamier  the  word  deatli,  when  spoken  of  the  soid,  means  ahena-
tion  or  separation  from  God  ;  and  when  that  separation  is  final  it
is  eternal  death.  This  is  so  plain  that  it  never  has  been  doubted,
except  for  the  purpose  of  supporting  the  doctrine  of  the  annihila-
tion of  the  -wicked.

2.  The  same  remark  applies  to  the  use  of  the  words  destroy
and  perish.  To  destroy  is  to  ruin.  The  nature  of  that  ruin
depends  on  the  nature  of  the  subject  of  which  it  is  predicated.  A
thing  is  ruined  when  it  is  rendered  unfit  for  use  ;  when  it  is  in
such  a  state  that  it  can  no  longer  answer  the  end  for  which  it  was
designed.  A  ship  at  sea,  dismasted,  rudderless,  Avitli  its  sides
battered  in,  is  ruined,-  but  not  annihilated.  It  is  a  ship  still.  A
man  destroys  liimseK  when  he  ruins  his  health,  squanders  his
property,  debases  his  character,  and  renders  himself  u.nfit  to  act
his  imi't  in  life.  A  soul  is  utterly  and  forever  destroyed  when  it
is  reprobated,  alienated  from  God,  rendered  a  fit  companion  only
for  the  devil  and  his  angels.  This  is  a  destruction  a  thousandfold
more  fearful  than  annihilation.  The  earnestness  -with  which  the
doctrine  of  the  unending  punishment  of  the  wicked  is  denomiced
by  those  who  reject  it,  should  convince  them  that  its  truth  is  the
only  rational  solution  of  the  fact  that  Christ  and  his  Apostles  did
not  condemn  it.

3.  But  Christ  and  the  Apostles  not  only  failed  to  correct  the
teachings  of  the  Jews  of  their  day  concerning  the  everlasting
punishment  of  the  wicked,  but  they  themselves  also  taught  that


§6.]  FUTURE   PUNISHMENT.  875

doctrine  in  the  most  explicit  and  solemn  manner.  It  is  asserted
affirmatively  that  future  punishment  is  everlasting ;  in  the  nega-
tive form  that  it  can  never  end  ;  that  there  is  in  the  future  world
an  impassable  gulf  between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked  ;  and
that  there  are  sins  which  can  never  be  forgiven  either  in  this  life
or  in  the  life  to  come.  Thus  if  words  can  teach  this  doctrine  it
is  taught  in  the  Bible  from  the  beginning  to  the  end.  In  the  Old
Testament,  the  prophet  says  (Is.  xxxiii.  14)  :  "  The  sinners  in
Zion  are  afraid ;  fearfulness  hath  surprised  the  hypocrites  ;  who
among  us  shall  dwell  with  the  devouring  fire?  who  among  us
shall  dwell  with  everlasting  burnings."  In  Isaiali  Ixvi.  2-1  it  is
said  of  those  who  should  be  excluded  from  the  new  heavens  and
the  new  earth  which  the  prophet  had  predicted,  "  that  their
worm  shall  not  die,  neither  shall  their  fire  be  quenched."
"  Hell,"  however,  "  is  of  both  worlds,  so  that  in  the  same  essential
sense,  although  in  different  degrees,  it  may  be  said  both  of  him
who  is  still  living  but  accursed,  and  of  him  who  perished  cen-
turies ago,  that  his  worm  dieth  not  and  his  fire  is  not  quenched."  ^
The  prophet  Daniel  (xii.  2)  says  of  the  wicked,  that  they  "  shall
awake  ....  to  shame  and  everlasting  contempt."  In  Luke
iii.  17  it  is  said  that  Christ  shall  "  gather  the  wheat  into  his  gar-
ner ;  but  the  chaff  He  will  burn  with  fire  unquenchable."  In
Mark  ix.  42-48  our  Lord  says  that  it  is  better  "  to  enter  into
life  maimed,  than,  having  two  hands,  to  go  into  hell,  into  the  fire
that  never  shall  be  quenched  :  where  their  worm  dieth  not,  and
the  fire  is  not  quenched."  These  awful  words  fell  three  times,
in  one  discourse,  from  the  lips  of  mercy,  to  give  them  the  greater
effect.  Christ  wept  over  Jerusalem.  Why  did  He  not  avert  its
doom  ?  Simply  because  it  would  not  have  been  right.  So  He
may  weep  over  the  doom  of  the  impenitent  wicked;  and  yet
leave  them  to  their  fate.  It  is  no  more  possible  that  the  cup
should  pass  from  their  lips  than  that  it  should  have  been  taken
from  the  trembling  hand  of  the  Son  of  God  himself.  The  latter
spectacle  was  far  more  appalhng  in  the  eyes  of  angels  than  the
lake  of  fire  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels.

The  Judge  on  the  last  day,  we  are  told,  will  say  to  those  on
the  left  hand:  "Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed,  into  everlasting
fire."  "And  these  shall  go  away  into  everlasting  punishment:
but  the  righteous  into  life  eternal."  The  same  word  is  used  in
both  clauses ;  the  wicked  are  to  go    ek  KoXacnv  alwiLov  ;  and  the

1  The  Prophecies  of  Ism'ah  Translated  and  Explained.    By  Joseph  Addison  Alexander,
New  York.  1865,  vol.  ii.  p.  482.


876  PART   IV.     Cii.   IV. —THE   SECOND   ADVENT.

righteous  ««  ^w^/i-'  atwi'iov ;  it  must  have  the  same  sense  in  both.
(Mutt.  XXV.  41,  46.)  In  John  iii.  36  it  is  said:  "He  that
believeth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  Hfe  :  and  he  that  beheveth
not  tlie  Son,  shall  not  see  life ;  but  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on
him."  Paul  teaches  us  in  2  Thessalonians  i.  9  that  when  Christ
comes  the  wicked  "  shall  be  punished  with  everlasting  destruction
from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  and  from  the  glory  of  his  power."
elude  (verse  6)  says  that  the  angels  which  kept  not  their  first
estate  are  "  reserved  in  everlasting  chains  under  darkness,  unto
the  judgment  of  the  great  day.  Even  as  Sodom  and  Gomorrah
....  are  set  forth  for  an  example,  suffering  the  vengeance  of
eternal  fire."  Of  apostates,  he  says  (verses  12,  13)  there  is
reserved  for  them  "•  the  blackness  of  darkness  forever."  In  Rev-
elation xiv.  9-11,  those  who  worship  the  beast  and  his  image  or
receive  his  mark,  shall  "  be  tormented  with  fire  and  brimstone  in
the  presence  of  the  holy  angels,  and  in  the  presence  of  the  Lamb  :
and  the  smoke  of  their  torment  ascendeth  up  forever  and  ever :
and  they  have  no  rest  day  nor  night."  Nearly  the  same  words
are  repeated  in  chapters  xix.  1-3,  20 ;  xx.  10.

It  is  objected  to  the  argument  founded  on  these  passages
that  the  word  "everlasting"  is  sometimes  used  in  Scripture
of  periods  of  limited  duration.  In  reference  to  this  objection  it
may  be  remarked,  (1.)  That  the  Hebrew  and  Greek  words  ren-
dered in  our  version  eternal,  or  everlasting,  mean  duration  whose
termination  is  unknown.  When  used  in  reference  to  perishable
things,  as  when  the  Bible  speaks  of  "  the  everlasting  hills,"  they
sim})ly  indicate  indefinite  existence,  that  is,  existence  to  which
there  is  no  known  or  assignable  limit.  But  when  used  in  refer-
ence to  that  which  is  either  in  its  own  nature  imperishable,  or  of
which  tlie  unending  existence  is  revealed,  as  the  human  soul,  or
in  reference  to  that  wliicli  we  have  no  authority  from  other
sources  to  assign  a  limit  to,  as  the  future  blessedness  of  the  saints,
then  the  words  are  to  be  taken  in  their  literal  sense.  If,  because
we  sometimes  say  we  give  a  man  a  thing  forever,  Avithout  intend-
ing that  he  is  to  possess  it  to  all  eternity,  it  were  argued  that  the
word  forever  expresses  limited  duration,  every  one  would  see  that
the  inference  was  unfounded.  If  the  Bible  says  that  the  suffer-
ings of  the  lost  are  to  be  everlasting,  they  are  to  endure  forever,
unless  it  can  be  shown  either  that  the  soul  is  not  immortal  or
that  the  Scriptures  elsewhere  teach  that  those  sufferings  are  to
come  to  an  end.  No  one  argues  that  the  blessedness  of  the
righteous  will  cease  after  a  term  of  vears,  because  the  word  ever-


§6.]  FUTURE   PUNISHMENT.  877

lasting  is  sometimes  used  of  things  which  do  not  continue  forever
Our  Lord  teaches  that  the  punishment  of  the  wicked  is  everlasting,
in  the  same  sense  that  the  blessedness  of  the  saints  is  everlasting.
(2.)  It  is  to  be  remembered,  that  admitting  the  word  "  everlast-
ing" to  be  ever  so  ambiguous,  the  Bible  says  that  the  worm
never  dies,  and  the  fire  is  never  quenched.  We  have  therefore
the  direct  assertion  of  the  word  of  God  that  the  sufferings  of  the
lost  are  unending.  All  the  modes  of  expression  used  to  set  forth
the  perpetuity  of  the  salvation  of  believers  and  the  everlasting
duration  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  are  employed  to  teach  the
perpetuity  of  the  future  punishment  of  tlie  wicked.  If  that  doc-
trine, therefore,  be  not  taught  in  the  Scriptures,  it  is  difficult  to
see  how  it  could  be  taught  in  human  language.

4.  A  fourth  argument  on  this  subject  is  drawn  from  passages
in  which  the  doctrine  is  implied,  although  not  directly  asserted.
This  includes  those  passages  which  teach  that  there  is  no  repent-
ance, no  forgiveness,  no  change  of  state  in  the  future  world.
This  is  done,  for  example,  in  our  Lord's  parable  of  the  rich  man
and  Lazarus,  in  which  He  teaches  that  there  is  no  possibility  of
passing  from  hell  to  heaven.  So,  also,  we  are  taught  that  those
who  die  in  sin  remain  sinful  forever.  And  our  Lord  says,  it
would  be  better  for  a  man  had  he  never  been  born,  than  that  he
should  incur  the  guilt  of  offending  any  of  the  little  ones  who
believe  on  Him.  This,  at  least,  is  conclusive  against  the  doctrine
of  universal  salvation ;  for  if,  after  any  period  of  suffering,  an
eternity  of  happiness  awaits  a  man,  his  being  born  is  an  unspeak-
able blessing.

Rationalists  say  that  it  is  very  impolitic  for  Christians  to  rep-
resent the  everlasting  punishment  of  the  %vicked  as  a  doctrine  of
the  Bible.  This  is  undoubtedly  true.  And  so  Paul  felt  that  it
was  very  impolitic  to  preach  the  doctrine  of  the  Cross.  He
knew  that  doctrine  to  be  a  stumbling-block  to  the  Jew  and  fool-
ishness to  the  Greek.  He  knew  that  had  he  preached  the  com-
mon sense  doctrine  of  salvation  by  works,  the  offence  of  the  cross
would  have  ceased.  Nevertheless,  he  knew  that  the  doctrine  of
Christ  crucified  was  the  wisdom  of  God  and  the  power  of  God
unto  salvation.  He  knew  that  it  was  not  his  business  to  make  a
Gospel,  but  to  declare  that  Gospel  which  had  been  taught  Him,
by  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ.  It  would  be  well  if  all  who
call  themselves  Christians,  should  learn  that  it  is  not  their  busi-
ness to  believe  and  teach  what  they  may  think  true  or  right,  but
what  God  in  his  Holy  Word  has  seen  fit  to  reveal.


5T8  PART  IV.     Ch.   IV.  — THE   SECOND   ADVENT.

Objections.
It  is  urged  that  it  cannot  be  consistent  with  the  justice  of  God
to  inflict  a  really  infinite  penalty  on  such  a  creature  as  man.     It
is  very  obvious  to  remark  on  this  subject :  —

1.  That  we  are  incompetent  judges  of  the  penalty  which  sin
deserves.  We  have  no  adequate  apprehension  of  its  inherent  guilt,
of  the  dignity  of  the  person  against  Avhom  it  is  committed,  or  of
the  extent  of  the  evil  which  it  is  suited  to  produce.  The  proper
end  of  punishment  is  retribution  and  prevention.  What  is  neces-
sary'- for  that  end,  God  only  luiows  ;  and,  therefore,  the  penalty
which  He  imposes  on  sin  is  the  only  just  measure  of  its  ill  desert.

2.  If  it  be  inconsistent  with  the  justice  of  God  that  men  should
perish  for  their  sins,  then  redemption  is  not  a  matter  of  grace,  or
undeserved  mercy.  Deliverance  from  an  unjust  penalty,  is  a
matter  of  justice.  Nothing,  however,  is  plainer  from  the  teach-
ing of  Scripture,  and  nothing  is  more  universally  and  joyfully
acknowledged  by  all  Christians,  than  that  the  whole  plan  of  re-
demption, the  mission,  the  incarnation,  and  the  sufferings  and
death  of  the  Son  of  God  for  the  salvation  of  sinners,  is  a  wonder-
ful exhibition  of  the  love  of  God  which  passes  knowledge.  But
if  justice  demand  that  all  men  should  be  saved,  then  salvation  is
a  matter  of  justice  ;  and  then  all  the  songs  of  gratitude  and
praise  from  the  redeemed,  whether  in  heaven  or  on  earth,  must
at  once  cease.

3.  It  is  often  said  that  sin  is  an  infinite  evil  because  committed
[igainst  a  person  of  infinite  dignity,  and  therefore  deserves  an
infinite  penalty.  To  this  it  is  answered,  that  as  sin  is  an  act  or
state  of  a  finite  subject,  it  must  of  necessity  be  itself  finite.  Men
are  apt  to  involve  themselves  in  contradictions  when  they  attempt
to  reason  about  the  infinite.  The  word  is  so  vague  and  so  com-
prehensive, and  our  ideas  of  what  it  is  intended  to  express  are  so
inadequate,  that  we  are  soon  lost  when  we  seek  to  make  it  a  guide
in  forming  our  judgments.  If  the  evil  of  a  single  sin,  and  that
the  smallest,  lasts  forever,  it  is  in  one  sense  an  infinite  evil,  al-
though in  comparison  with  other  sins,  or  with  the  whole  mass  of
sin  ever  committed,  it  may  appear  a  mere  trifle.  The  guilt  of
sin  is  infinite  in  the  sense  that  we  can  set  no  limits  to  its  turpi-
tude or  to  the  evil  which  it  is  adapted  to  produce.

4.  Relief  on  this  subject  is  sought  from  the  consideration  that
as  the  lost  continue  to  sin  forever  they  may  justly  be  punished
forever.     To  this,  however,  it  is  answered  that  the  retributions  of


§  6.]  FUTURE   PUNISHMENT.  879

eternity  are  threatened  for  the  snis  done  in  the  body.  This  is
true  ;  nevertheless',  it  is  also  true,  first,  that  sin  in  its  nature  is
alienation  and  separation  from  God  ;  and  as  God  is  the  source  of
all  holiness  and  happiness,  separation  from  Plim  is  of  necessity
the  forfeiture  of  all  good  ;  secondly,  that  this  separation  is  from
its  nature  final  and  consequently  involves  endless  sinfulness  and
misery.  It  is  thus  final,  unless  on  the  assumption  of  the  unde-
served and  supernatural  intervention  of  God  as  in  the  case  of  the
redemption  of  man- ;  and  thirdly,  it  is  also .  true  that  from  the
nature  of  the  case  "  the  carnal  mind  is  death."  Degradation  and
misery  are  inseparably  connected  with  sin.  As  long  as  rational
creatures  are  sinful,  they  must  be  degraded  and  miserable.  There
is  no  law  of  nature  more  immutable  than  this.  If  men  do  not
expect  God  to  reverse  the  laws  of  nature  to  secure  their  exemp-
tion from  wanton  transgression  of  those  laws,  why  should  they
expect  Him  to  reverse  the  still  more  immutable  laws  of  our  moral
constitution  and  of  his  moral  government  ?  The  doom  of  the
fallen  angels  teaches  us  that  one  act  of  rebellion  against  God  is
fatal,  whetlier  we  say  that  all  they  have  suffered  since,  and  all
they  are  to  suffer  forever,  is  the  penalty  of  that  one  act,  or  the
inevitable  consequence  of  the  condition  into  which  that  one  act
brought  them,  makes  no  difference.

The   Groodriess  of  Grod.

A  still  more  formidable  objection  is  drawn  from  the'^oodness
of  God.  It  is  said  to  be  inconsistent  with  his  benevolence  that
He  should  allow  any  of  his  creatures  to  be  forever  miserable.
The  answer  to  this  is :  —

1.  That  it  is  just  as  impossible  that  God  should  do  a  little
wrong  as  a  great  one.  If  He  has  permitted  such  a  vast  amount
of  sin  and  misery  to  exist  in  the  world,  from  the  fall  of  Adam  to
the  present  time,  how  can  we  say  that  it  is  inconsistent  with  his
goodness,  to  allow  them  to  continue  to  exist  ?  How  do  we  know
that  the  reasons,  so  to  speak,  which  constrained  God  to  allow  his
children  to  be  sinful  and  miserable  for  thousands  of  years,  may
not  constrain  Him  to  permit  some  of  them  to  remain  miserable
forever  ?  If  the  highest  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  the  uni-
verse have  been  promoted  by  the  past  sinfulness  and  misery  of
men,  why  may  not  those  objects  be  promoted  by  what  is  declared
to  be  future  ?

2.  We  have  reason  to  believe,  as  urged  in  the  first  volume  of
tliis  work,  and  as  often  urged  elsewhere,  that  the  number  of  the


B80        PART  IV.   Ch.  IV.  — the  second  advent.

Unally  lost  in  comparison  witli  the  whole  number  of  the  saved
will  be  very  inconsiderable.  Our  blessed  Lord,  when  surrounded
by  the  innumerable  company  of  the  redeemed,  will  be  hailed  as
the  "  Salvator  Hominum,"  the  Saviour  of  Men,  as  the  Lamb
"(hat  bore  the  sins  of  the  world.

3.  It  should  constrain  us  to  humility,  and  to  silence  on  this
subject,  that  the  most  solemn  and  explicit  declarations  of  the
everlasting  misery  of  the  wicked  recorded  in  the  Scriptures,  fell
from  the  lips  of  Him,  Avho,  though  equal  with  God,  was  found  in
fashion  as  a  man,  and  humbled  Himself  unto  death,  even  the
death  of  the  cross,  for  us  men  and  for  our  salvation.
