Systematic Theology, Vol. 1 (Charles Hodge, 1872)
==========================================================
Hodge's 1872 Systematic Theology, volume 1 — Princeton theology's great system: introduction, theology proper, anthropology. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

19L-Sas0A 


MITT LULLUUUILE WI 


SS et Sipe Swen 


i 
y. , 
e. + 
DA 
\ ‘ 
: 
‘ 
‘ 
en 
| ios ee 
a 
é 
. 
a 
‘ 
ne 
i 
a 
—- 
2 n 
ir 
or 
-, 
Ete. 7 
* 
ie 
. 
. 
. 


5 “ 
a te 
~ 
Sate ce A Ral 
¢ uk 
s 4 
Ly aa) 


1 
‘ \ 
a ' 
iy 
i 
ogre an 
] ‘ 
: Ls 
; eres 
ott 
% 
an ae 
i 
ca oe 
. 
v4 . 
‘ 
< a 5 
” 
f en & 3 
“4 7 
é | 
. Mu 
‘ 
* 
/ 
’ vs 
aX 
4 
‘ 
. A 7 
4 ‘ 
* « vr 
Py : 
i i 3 
1 # 
: 
‘, 
‘ + 
oy, 
\ 


SYSTEMATIC 


Die etien ty, © aGy Y=. 


BY 


CHARLES HODGE, D.D., 


PROFESSOR IN THE THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY, PRINCETON, NEW JERSEY. 


WO: 


NEW YORK: 
CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS, 


743 & 745 Broapway. 
LONDON AND EDINBURGH: T. NELSON AND SONS. 


Ratered according to act of Congress, in the year 1871, by 
CHARLES SCRIBNER AND COMPANY, 
tm the Office of the Librarian of Congress at Washingtor. 


RIVERSIDE, CAMBRIDGE: 
OTEREOTYPED AND PRINTED BE 
H. 0. HOUGHTON AND COMPANY. 


CARD. 


The Messrs. Charles Scribner and Co., of New York, have made an 
arrangement with the Messrs. Thomas Nelson and Sons, of Edinburgh, 
Scotland, for the publication of this work in Great Britain. This has 
been done with the cordial approbation of the author, who feels under 
obligation to the Messrs. Nelson for the liberal terms on which they 
haye undertaken the publication. The author also desires to acknowl- 
edge his indebtedness to his accomplished young friend, Mr. Caspar 
René Gregory, licentiate of the Presbytery of Philadelphia, for his 
assistance in carrying the work through the press. 


PrIncETON, June 2, 1871. 


CONTENTS OF THE FIRST VOLUME. 


INTRODUCTION. 
CHAPTER I 


ON METHOD. 


LOT HAUNT HT ne is we ee 
§ 2. Theological Method Pea Fee re 

§ 8. The Speculative Method . . . . “2 «© © eo -» 
eee miyaCe Method EG PO 

§ 5. The Inductive Method 


Theologian to be governed by same Bales as a Man of Science 

§ 6. The Scriptures contain all the Facts of Theology . on ae 

CHAPTER IL. 
THEOLOGY. 

§1.Its Nature. tT seach aie a On See eY eee 
Definitions of Theclerr: : - aw) ay peer nee 
Natural Theology ; See re ah ity ae ga ae 

§ 2. Facts of Nature reveal God : 55 iS) Soe area 


Scriptural Argument for Natural Theology oF ae Sak 
§ 3. Insufficiency of Natural RCOIEY = hott tcc ae i dS es 
§ 4. Christian Theology - 
Theology Proper, Anthropology Soteriology Bachatology, ‘Eoclesi- 


ology . : : . oy at 
CHAPTER III. 
RATIONALISM. 
§ 1. Meaning and Usage of the Word . ; c ames 


§ 2. Deistical Rationalism é 

§ 3. Second Form of Rationalism. — Ths Bonne Refitaton, History 
§ 4. Dogmatism . : : 

§ 5. Proper Office of es in Matters of Beton 


-Reason necessary for the Reception of a Revelation. _ Difference, 


between Knowing and Understanding. — Reason must judge of 
the Credibility of a Revelation. — The Impossible cannot be be- 
lieved. — Reason must judge of the Evidences of a Revelation . 

§ 6. Relation of Philosophy and Revelation 

§ 7. Office of the Senses in Matters of Faith 


1 
monk 


se 
OAH OD 


vi CONTENTS OF THE FIRST VOLUME. 


CHAPTER IV. 


MYSTICISM. 


§ 1. Meaning of the Word bo Se ee 
Philosophical Use of the Word . ; . oF see an ns 
Mysticism as known in Church ae ee ey ee 

§ 2. Mysticism in the Early Church. oe ee ee 
Montanism. — The so-called iceaeca — New Platonism . ‘ 

§ 8, Mysticism during the Middle Ages 3 : 
General Characteristics of that Period. = Disteront Classes of Me- 

dizval Theologians. — Pantheistical Tendencies of Mysticism. — 
Evangelical Mystics : : : : : 

§ 4. Mysticism : at and after the Refagnitsor : 

Effect of the Reformation on the Popular Mind. = Mystiaa among 


the Reformers. — Schwenkfeld ‘ : : é 4 82 
§ 5. Quietism 84 
General Charade: — Testor of ie Movement _ Madame Guyeh, 
Archbishop Fénélon . : 4 . 5 5 5 A 87 
§ 6. The Quakers or Friends . 88 
* Their Origin and Early History: = Thett Dectrints. ws Die- 
trines of the Orthodox Friends. —Heterodox Friends. — Bar- 
clay’s Views . ¢ : : : : : A 93 
§ 7. Objections to the Mystical Théery 5 : . wid 
It has no Foundation in Scripture. —It is pean to Facts of Ex- 
perience. — Productive of Evil 5 . : 103 
CHAPTER V. 
ROMAN CATHOLIC DOCTRINE CONCERNING THE RULE OF FAITH. 
§ 1. Statement of the Doctrine . é eat + 4% 204 
§ 2. Roman Catholic Doctrine concerning ae Sabi proves + = weikiy! 
TIncompleteness of the Scriptures. — Obscurity of the Seripises: — 
i Latin Vulgate : 4 4 < - - 107 
§ 3. Tradition , 5 : A . . : . 5 > LOS 
Tridentine Dockine = c : “ ¢ ontO9 
§ 4. The Office of the Church as a Teaches . - 111 
The Organs of the Church in Teaching.— The Galliang Theory 
— The Transmontane : : 5 : 112 
§ 5. Examination of the Romish Doctrines te) 
§ 6. Examination of the Doctrine of the Church of Rome. on Tradition 113 
Difference between Tradition and the Analogy of Faith.— Com- 
mon Consent. — Tradition and Development. — The State of the 
Question. — Arguments against the Doctrine of Tradition 121 
§ 7. Office of the Church as a Teacher . 129 


Romish Doctrine on the Subject. — Romish Datinitisn of the Chrech 
and its Foundation. — Romish Woctrine of Infallibility founded on 
a Wrong Theory of the Church. — The Doctrine of Infallibility 
Founded on the False Assumption of the Perpetuity of the 
Apostleship. — Modern Prelates not Apostles. — Infallibility 
founded on a False Interpretation of the Promise of Christ. — It 


CONTENTS OF THE FIRST VOLUME. vu 
PAGE 
is contradicted by Facts. — Recognition of an Infallible Church 
incompatible with either Religious or Civil Liberty . Teen 120 
CHAPTER VI. 
THE PROTESTANT RULE OF FAITH. 
§ 1. The Statement of the Doctrine . . . . . . 151 
The Canon. . re ee tas 152 
§ 2. The Scriptures given by Tésptestion: of God ‘ 153 
The Nature of Inspiration. — Inspiration Sepernatusals — Distinc- 
tion between Revelation and Inspiration. — Inspired Men the 
Organs of God. — Proof of the Doctrine. — Argument from the 
Signification and Use of the Word Inspiration. — From the 
Meaning of the Word Prophet. From the Declarations of Scrip- 
ture. — Inspiration extends equally to all Parts of Scripture. — 
Extends to the Words as well as to the Thoughts. — ceznrhe In- 
spiration. — Objections considered . : 168 
§ 3. Adverse Theories : . - 172 
Rationalistic Doctrine. — Bcticiennached s ery: —_ Ohjections 
to that Theory. — Gracious Inspiration. — Partial Inspiration. 181 
§ 4. Completeness of Scripture. . . 182 
§ 5. Perspicuity of Scripture. — Right of Panne iidemeskc 183 
§ 6. Rules of Interpretation « 4 : sapiens s  . 187 
PALLY 1. 
THEOLOGY PROPER. 
CHAPTER I. i 
ORIGIN OF THE IDEA OF GOD. 
§ 1. Knowledge of God as Innate... 191 
What is Meant by Innate Knowledze. - — Proof that ie Raowledee 
of God is Innate . : : 194 
§ 2. The Knowledge of God is not due to a 1 Pecos of Reteoning 5 199 
§ 3. The Knowledge of God is not due exclusively to Tradition 201 
§ 4. Can the Existence of God be proved ? 202 
CHAPTER I. 
THEISM. 
§ 1. Ontological Argument. — As presented by Anselm. — ihe Des Cartes. 204 
— By Dr. Samuel Clarke. — By Cousin . é 206 
§ 2. Cosmological Argument . 207 
Principle of Sufficient Cause. Litter of Causation, — tual 
Conviction of the Necessity of a Cause for every Effect. — The 
World is an Effect. — Hume’s Objection to the Cosmological 
Argument . : : ; : : 212 
§ 8. Teleological ereeaert é 5 : 2 245 
Its Nature. — Evidences of Deron in the World 217 


Vili CONTENTS OF THE FIRST VOLUME. 


PAGE 
§ 4. Objections to the Teleological Argument . . os 224 

Denial of Final Causes. — Objections of Hume aA Kant . 228 
§ 5. The Moral or Anthropological Argument : - 233 


Nature of the Argument. — Argument from the Buisteties of the 

From fig Nature of the Soul. — From the Moral Nature 

of Mn - ‘ ; A 3 3 . ‘ 5 7 7 ome 
CHAPTER III. 


ANTI-THEISTIC THEORIES. 


§ 1. What is Meant by Anti-Theism.— Atheism . =) Ne atlhMeee » 241 
§ 2, Polytheism . ; 5 . : : . . . . . - 248 
§ 3. Hylozoism . : : . . . . . . - 245 
§ 4. Materialism : . . . 246 


Doctrine of picurts _— Maleiaiiena in England during the Fight- 
eenth Century. — Locke. — Hartley. — Priestley. — Materialism 
in France during the Eighteenth Century. — Positivism . » 254 
Scientific Materialism. — Leading Principles . . : eae 2On 
Correlation of Physical and Vital Forces . . - : - 264 
Correlation of Physical and Mental Forces. c . : . 271 
Arguments against Materialism. — 1. Materialism Contradicts the 
Facts of Consciousness . és p 2 A cote cae 286 
2. Contradicts the Truths of Reason . . . . . - 280 
3. Inconsistent with the Facts of Experience . . . - 282 
4. Materialism Atheistic . é : - 284 
5. The Materialistic Argument fae Anategy eth ; > 285 
Direct Argument against the Theory of the Correlation of Physical, 
Vital, and Mental Forces A : 2 5 : . 291 
§ 5. Pantheism. — Its three Principal Forms ‘ = 5 5 . « ~299 
General Principles of the System . Fat nee oe e300 
History of Pantheism . 5 . : 5 : . . = as09 
Brahminical Pantheism . . 309 
Original Religion of the Hindocs ‘Panthelstio. eoRalnien of the 


Hindoo Pantheism to Polytheism. — Its Effect upon ite - 3813 
Tis Effect upon Social Life . : 4 . 815 


Grecian Pantheism. — Ionic School. ice School oe) 
Stoics. — Plato’s Doctrine : 4 ; . a Bee 
Aristotle A A : ; : A 3 4 A 3 826: 
Medizval Pantheism ; . 828 


Neo-Platonists. — John Gootne eigen’ Sundae Panthelam - $80 


CHAPTER IV. 


KNOWLEDGE OF GOD. 
§ 1. Can God be known? . é omen ve « 835 


State of the Question. — God Thooneieeete — God ca 


sible. — Our Knowledge of God partial . 2 : 337 
How do we form the idea of God ? — Proof that this Method i is 
trustworthy : ;: - 339 


§ 2. God cannot be fully ore ‘ 345 
Sir William Hamilton’s Ar cument acalael the Tesnanenaentalists 346 


CONTENTS OF THE FIRST VOLUME. 1x 

PAGR 

$8. Sir William Hamilton’s Doctrine ; . 849 
God an Object of Faith but not of Kngwledge. _ Diseenk Kinds 
of Ignorance. — Proof that Sir William Hamilton denies that 
we can know God.— Arguments Against his Doctrine. —The 

Unthinkable or Impossible cannot be an object of Faith . 853 
Knowledge essential to Faith.— Our Knowledge not regula- 

tive ° ems . 355 

General Didortions & to Hamilton’ sTheory . . 359 
Founded on a Wrong Definition of the Absolute aad Tnfinite: on 
a Wrong Definition of knowledge. meee Ss of a pied 

ural Revelation 6 Ee - $64 

CHAPTER V. 
THE NATURE AND ATTRIBUTES OF GOD. 

weesremnmons al Gol 2 . 366 

§ 2. Divine Attributes : 4 368 
Relation of the Attributes: to the eens of Gad De irhe Divine 

Attributes do not differ merely in our Conceptions . 371 
The Divine Attributes cannot be resolved into mere Gamal: oe 

They differ virtualiter .  . : ° 5 B® 

§ 3. Classification of the Divine Abie beteer - - - 374 

§ 4. Spirituality of God . 376 

Consequences of admitting God to be a Spine 379 

§5. Infinity . ~ . 380 
The “Tdea of Tabaty ace merely negative The Infinite is He 

the All. —Infinitude of God in relation to Space . 383 

§ 6. Eternity 385 
Scriptural Dockine. — Philosophical Xiew ZModérn Philosop 

ical Views . : . f c . 389 

§ 7. Immutability 390 
Philosophical nee — The ae “Attributes of God “te 

inconsistent with Personality . 6 : : . 391 

§ 8. Knowledge 393 
Its Nature. ee oschiltiy of Raeniolae in “God receded by is 
Pantheistic Theory. — — Knowledge and Power are not to be 
confounded. — The Doctrine of the Scriptures on the Subject. 
— The Objects of the Divine Knowledge. — The Actual and the 

Possible. — Scientia Media. — Origin of the Distinction . 399 

The Objections urged by Augustinians. — Foreknowledge 400 

The Wisdom of God. : : : ; - - 5 . 401 

§ 9. The Will of God ; 402 
Meaning of the Term. — Resin of the rine Will.- _— Deeretive 
and Preceptive Will.— Antecedent and Consequent Will. — Ab- 
solute and Conditional Will. — The Will of God as the Ground 

of Moral Obligation . 405 

§ 10. The Power of God 406 
Origin of the Idea of Paver. Pe Ostatneience: oration ‘of 
Power. — Absolute Power.— Potentia Absoluta and Potentia 

Ordinata. — Will and Power not tobe confounded .« . « 410 


x CONTENTS OF THE FIRST VOLUME. 


PAGE 
§ 11. Holiness of God é de. - 413 

Grounds on which Mord Attributes are deriied to God P - 414 
§12. Justice . 5 ; 3 . 416 


Meaning of the Word. _— ~ Jastee in its relation to Sin. Rein 
mation of the Offender not the Primary Object of Punishment. 
— The Prevention of Crime not the Primary Object of Pun- 
ishment.— Proof of the Scriptural Doctrine. — Philosophical 
Views of the Nature of Justice . Le a See ae +, « 424 
§ 13. The Goodness of God . : : - 427 
The Scriptural Doctrine. __: Hétievdleiiee. sete The Exist- 
ence of Evil. — Theories which involve the Denial of Sin. — 
Sin regarded as the Necessary Means of the Greatest Good. — 
The Doctrine that God cannot prevent Sin in a Moral System. 
— Scriptural Doctrine as to the Origin of Evil . . «.  ~ 435 
§ 14. The Truth of God : A : 5 ( . . : . 436 
§ 15. Sovereignty of God ° é oe se, Deg scien ae oe 


CHAPTER VI. 


THE TRINITY. 


§ 1. Preliminary Remarks : < . é 4 A ; - 442 

§ 2. Biblical Form of the Doctrine e . ° 443 
What that Form is. — Scriptural Proof of the Dockine — Pee 
gressive Character of Divine Revelation.— Formula of Bap- 

tism.— Apostolic Benediction . . - 4 . > - 448 

§ 3. The Transition Period . é ‘ : : - 448 
Necessity for a more Definite Statement of the oct the: — Con- 
flict with Error.— Gnostics. — Platonizers. — Origen’s Doctrine. 

— Sabellianism. — Arianism : : - 452 

§ 4. The Church Doctrine as presented by the (canal of Nicos ‘ - 453 
Objects for which that Council was convened. — Difference of 
Opinion among the Members of the Council. — Semi-Arians. 
— Orthodox.— Council of Constantinople. —The Athanasian 

Creed A . . 457 

§ 5. Points decided by the Councils of Nice ae Consiantiagple . - 459 
1. As against Sabellianism.— 2. As against the Arians and the 
Semi-Arians. — 8. The Mutual Relations of the Persons of the 


Trinity 5 . : . : . - 466 

§ 6. Examination of the Nicene Deveine 5 : . . 462 
Subordination. — Eternal Generation. ~~ Bteenal Sonshig ‘ 471 
Objections urged against the Doctrine of Eternal Sonship . 474 


Relation of the Spirit to the other Persons of the Trinity . «| 497 
§ 7. Philosophical Forms of the Doctrine of the Trinity . : . » 478 


CHAPTER VIL. 
THE DIVINITY OF CHRIST. 


§ 1. Testimony of the Old Testament . c - 483 
Protevangelium. — Jehovah and the Angel J aharan: er tance 
contained — 1. In the Book of Genesis ; 2. In the other His- 


CONTENTS OF THE FIRST VOLUME. xi 


PAGE 
torical Books of the Old Testament; 3. The Book of Psalms. 
—4. The Prophetical Books .  . - 492 
§ 2. The General Characteristics of the New Testament Teaching con- 
cerning Christ . ‘ ‘ «ee, 495 
1. The Sense i in which Christ ? is called Lord ‘ ‘ - 495 
2. Christ presented as the Object of our Religious Affeotions . . 497 


8. The Relations which Christ bears to his People and to the 
World. — His ac as as a Teacher.— His Control over all 


Creatures . : “ sere OS ce «Mrs . 501 
4. The Nature of his Promises . " : . : . - 602 
5. His Control over Nature . : - 503 
§ 8. Particular Passages in the New Tebtament which teach the Davin: 
ity of Christ. . . 504 


1. The writings of St. John. _ + Fuhn | ds U4, a Other Pasegee in St. 
John’s Gospel. — Our Lord’s Last Discourse. — 'The Epistles of 
St. John. — The Apocalypse : . 511 
2. The Epistles of St. Paul. — The Epistle to the Romans. — Cor- 
inthians. — Galatians. — Ephesians. — Philippians. — Colossians. 
— Pastoral Epistles of St. Paul.— The Epistle to the Hebrews. 


— Other Sacred Writers of the New Testament : “ . 520 
4 CHAPTER VII. 
THE HOLY SPIRIT. 
§ 1. His Nature : . 522 
His Personality. — Proof of his Personality. a _Divinisy of ihe Holy 
Spirit . 3 . 527 


§ 2. Office of the Holy Belts 1. In Wass 2. In the Wark of Raden: 
tion. — The Revealer of all Divine Truth. _ ByPhes to Men the 
Benefits of the Redemption of Christ : : . 532 

§ 3. History of the Doctrine concerning the Holy Spirit eye a? .&' 582 


CHAPTER IX. 
THE DECREES OF GOD. 

§ 1. The Nature of the Divine Decrees’. . 535 
The Glory of God the Final Cause of his Diagreed _s Decrees re- 
ducible to One Purpose. — The Decrees of God are Immutable. — 
They are Free.— They are certainly Efficacious. — They relate 

to all Events. — Free Acts are foreordained : : : . 548 

§ 2. Objections to the Doctrine of Divine Decrees . : 545 
1. Foreordination inconsistent with Free Agency. — 9, iropbaral- 
nation of Sin inconsistent with Holiness.— 3. The Doctrine of 

Decrees destroys all Motives to Exertion. —4. Itis Fatalism . 548 


CHAPTER X. 
CREATION. 
§ 1. Different Theories concerning the Origin of the Universe. : . 550 
1. The Purely Physical Theory. — 2, The Theories which assume 
Intelligence in Nature itself.— 3. Scriptural Doctrine .  ~ 558 


§2. Mediate and Immediate Creation . é A etemmrys) Fe RT 


xii CONTENTS OF THE FIRST VOLUME. 


PAGE 
§ 8. Proof of the Doctrine of a Creation ex nihilo . c : : - 558 
§ 4. Objections to the Doctrine of a Creation ex nihilo . . 5 562 


§ 5. Design of the Creation . . : . . - 565 
Scriptural Doctrine as to the Dediin of the Creation . 5 . 567 
§ 6. The Mosaic Account of the Creation - . . 568 
Objections to the Mosaic Account of the Creation — Geology and 
the Bijile -.. 3. 7s ay bs ak) ee . 570 
CHAPTER XI. 
PROVIDENCE. 
§ 1. Preservation a < - ‘ : . . 575 


The Nature of Ersvecvation ST preseason is not a Continued 
Creation. — Objections to the Doctrine of a Continuous Crea- 
tion. — Scriptural Doctrine on the Subject . semty 1 7) 58% 


§2. Government . . : . é . 581 
Statement of the Doctrine. = Prod of the Doctrine. 

1. The Evidence of the Operation of Mind everywhere - 583 

2. From our Religious Nature . of ant oi . 584 

8. From Predictions and Promises . c : . . Getler 

4. From Experience . 5 2 : ° . . . 586 


The Scriptural Doctrine . 4 : x ‘ - 586 
The Bible teaches —1. God’s Providence over Nature; 2. Over 

the Animal World; 3. Over Nations; 4. Over Individuals, over 

the Free Acts of Men; 5. God’s Providence in Relation to Sin . 589 


§ 8. Different Theories of the Divine Government . ‘ 591 
1. The Deistical Theory of God’s Relation to the World : DOL 
2. The Theory of Entire Dependence . 5 oP Dee 


8. The Doctrine that there is no Efficiency eae in Mina . - 595 . 

4. The Theory of Preéstablished mesa ° 2 é + 59% 

5. The Doctrine of Concursus : : : . . . 598 

Remarks on the Doctrine of Concursus : : c 603 

§ 4. The Principles involved in the Scriptural Doctrine of Providence) . 605 
The Providence of God over the Material Universe. —1. The 
External World has a real Objective Existence.— 2. Matter is 
active. — The Laws of Nature.— The Uniformity of the Laws 


of Nature consistent with the Doctrine of Providence é - 609 
God’s Providence in Relation to Vital Processes . ‘ 5 610 
The Providence of God over Rational Creatures *. . 613 


Distinction between the Providential Efficiency of God and the 
Influences of the Holy Spirit vlsatetses . 614 


CHAPTER. XII. 


MIRACLES. 

§1 Usage of the Word : om 6 « 617 
Detaiion of a Miracle. — Objections to ihe Definition 5 - 618 
Answer to the above Objections . . . . »  « 620 
The Doctrine of a Higher Law . : ‘ 624 


Objections to the Doctrine of a Higher Law ° ° . ; ° - 622 


CONTENTS OF THE FIRST VOLUME. 


§ 2. Possibility of Miracles ee va 2s 

§ 8. Can a Miracle be known as such? . ea 
Lying Wonders. — Insufficiency of Human Testimony “hat 

§ 4. The Value of Miracles as a Proof of Divine Revelation . : 


CHAPTER XIII. 


ANGELS. 
Fe RE a >. a a a ee 
§ 2. Their State . : : : Ps . ste e 
§ 8. Their Employments . RT ee Se ee 


§ 4. Evil Angels 
Power and Agency of Evil Spirita. — Damoniacal Possessions. 


SYSTEMATIC THEOLOGY, 


INTRODUCTION. 
CHAPTER I. 
ON METHOD. ~ 

§ 1. Theology a Science. 


In every science there are two factors. facts and ideas ; or, facts 
and the mind. Science is more than knowledge. Knowledge is 
the persuasion of what is true on adequate evidence. But the 
facts of astronomy, chemistry, or history do not constitute the 
science of those departments of knowledge. Nor does the mere 
orderly arrangement of facts amount to science. Historical facts 
arranged in chronological order, are mere annals. The philosophy 
of history supposes those facts to be understood in their causal re- 
lations. In every department the man of science is assumed to 
understand the laws by which the facts of experience are deter- 
mined; so that he not only knows the past, but can predict the 

future. The astronomer can foretell the relative position of the 
heavenly bodies for centuries to come. The chemist can tell with 
certainty what will be the effect of certain chemical combinations. 
If, therefore, theology be a science, it must include something 
more than a mere knowledge of facts. It must embrace an ex- 
hibition of the internal relation of those facts, one to another, and 
each to all. It must be able to show that if one be admitted, others 
cannot be denied. 

The Bible is no more a system of theology, than nature is a sys- 
tem of chemistry or of mechanics. We find in nature the facts 
which the chemist or the mechanical philosopher has to examine, 
and from them to ascertain the laws by which they are determined. 
So the Bible contains the truths which the theologian has to collect, 
authenticate, arrange, and exhibit in their internal relation to each 
other. This constitutes the difference between biblical and system- 


atic theology. The office of the former is to ascertain and state 
VOL. I. a 


2 INTRODUCTION. (Cu. I. —Mernon. 


the facts of Scripture. The office of the latter is to take those 
facts, determine their relation to each other and to other cognate 
truths, as well as to vindicate them and show their harmony and 
consistency. This is not an easy task, or one of slight impor- 
tance. 

Necessity for System in Theology. 

It may naturally be asked, why not take the truths as God has 
seen fit to reveal them, and thus save ourselves the trouble of 
showing their relation and harmony ? 

The answer to this question is, in the first place, that it cannot 
be done. Such is the constitution of the human mind that it can- 
not help endeavoring to systematize and reconcile the facts which 
it admits to be true. In no department of knowledge have men 
been satisfied with the possession’ of a mass of undigested facts. 
And the students of the Bible can as little be expected to be thus 
satisfied. There is a necessity, therefore, for the construction of 
systems of theology. Of this the history of the Church affords 
abundant proof. In all ages and among all denominations, such 
systems have been produced. 

Second, A much higher kind of knowledge is thus obtained, than 
by the mere accumulation of isolated facts. It is one thing, for 
example, to know that oceans, continents, islands, mountains, and 
rivers exist on the face of the earth; and a much higher thing to 
know the causes which have determined the distribution of land 
and water on the surface of our globe; the configuration of the 
earth ; the effects of that configuration on climate, on the races of 
plants and animals, on commerce, civilization, and the destiny of 
nations. It is by determining these causes that geography has 
been raised from a collection of facts to a highly important and 
elevated science. In like manner, without the knowledge of the 
laws of attraction and motion, astronomy would be a confused and 
unintelligible collection of facts. What is true of other sciences is 
true of theology. We cannot know what God has revealed in his 
Word unless we understand, at least in some good measure, the 
relation in which the separate truths therein contained stand to 
each other. It cost the Church centuries of study and controversy 
to solve the problem concerning the person of Christ; that is, to 
adjust and bring into harmonious arrangement all the facts which 
the Bible teaches on that subject. 

Third, We have no choice in this matter. If we would dis- 
charge our duty as teachers and defenders of the truth, we must 
endeavor to bring all the facts of revelation into systematic order 


§ 2.) THEOLOGICAL METHOD. 8 


and mutual relation. It is only thus that we can satisfactorily 
exhibit their truth, vindicate them from objections, or bring them 
ts bear in their full foree on the minds of men. 

Fourth, Such is evidently the will of God. He does not teach 
men astronomy or chemistry, but He gives them the facts out of 
which those sciences are constructed. Neither does He teach us 
systematic theology, but He gives us in the Bible the truths 
which, properly understood and arranged, constitute the science 
of theology. As the facts of nature are all related and determined 
by physical laws, so the facts of the Bible are all related and de- 
termined by the nature of God and of his creatures. And as He 
wills that men should study his works and discover their wonderful 
organic relation and harmonious combination, so it is his will that 
we should study his Word, and learn that, like the stars, its truths 
are not isolated points, but systems, cycles, and epicycles, in un 
ending harmony and grandeur. Besides all this, although the 
Scriptures do not contain a system of theology as a whole, we have 
in the Epistles of the New Testament, portions of that system 
wrought out to our hands. These are our authority and guide. 


§ 2. Theological Method. 


Every science has its own method, determined by its peculiar 
nature. This is a matter of so much importance that it has been 
erected into a distinct department. Modern literature abounds in 
works on Methodology, 7. ¢., on the science of method. They are 
designed to determine the principles which should control scientific 
investigations. If a man adopts a false method, he is like one who 
takes a wrong road which will never lead him to his destination. 
The two great comprehensive methods are the @ priori and the @ 
posteriori. The one argues from cause to effect, the other from 
effect to cause. The former was for ages applied even to the in- 
vestigation of nature. Men sought to determine what the facts of 
nature must be from the laws of mind or assumed necessary laws. 
Even in our own day we have had Rational Cosmogonies, which 
undertake to construct a theory of the universe from the nature of 
absolute being and its necessary modes of development. Every one 
huows how much it cost to establish the method of induction on a 
firm basis, and to secure a general recognition of its authority. 
According to this method, we begin with collecting well-established 
facts, and from them infer the general laws which determine their 
occurrence. From the fact that bodies fall toward the centre of 
the earth, has been inferred the ger°~al law of gravitation, which 


4 INTRODUCTION. _ (Cu. I.—Murnop. 


we are authorized to apply far beyond the limits of actual experi- 
ence. This inductive method is founded upon two principles: First, 
That there are laws of nature (forces) which are the proximate 
causes of natural phenomena. Secondly, That those laws are 
uniform; so that we are certain that the same causes, under the 
same circumstances, will produce the same effects. There may 
be diversity of opinion as to the nature of these laws. They 
may be assumed to be forces inherent in matter; or, they may be 
regarded as uniform modes of divine operation ; but in any event 
there must be some cause for the phenomena which we perceive 
around us, and that cause must be uniform and permanent. On 
these principles all the inductive sciences are founded; and by 
them the investigations of natural philosophers are guided. 

The same principle applies to metaphysics as to physics; to psy- 
chology as well as to natural science. Mind has its laws as well as 
matter, and those laws, although of a different kind, are as perma- 
nent as those of the external world. 

The methods which have been applied to the study of theology 
are too numerous to be separately considered. They may, perhaps, 
be reduced to three general classes: First, The Speculative ; Sec- 
ond, The Mystical ; Third, The Inductive. These terms are, in- 
deed, far from being precise. They are used for the want of better 
to designate the three general methods of theological investigation 
which have prevailed in the Church. 


§ 3. The Speculative Method. 


Speculation assumes, in an @ priori manner, certain principles, 
and from them undertakes to determine what is and what must be. 
It decides on all truth, or determines on what is true from the laws 
of the mind, or from axioms involved in the constitution of the 
thinking principle within us. To this head must be referred all 
those systems which are founded on any @ priori philosophical as- 
sumptions. There are three general forms in which this speculative 
method has been applied to theology. 


Deistic and Rationalistie Form. 


1. The first is that which rejects any other source of knowledge 
of divine things than what is found in nature and the constitution 
of the human mind. It assumes certain metaphysical and moral 
axioms, and from them evolves all the truths which it is willing to 
admit. To this class belong the Deistical and strictly Rational. 
istical writers of the past and present generations. 


§ 3] THE SPECULATIVE METHOD. 6 


Dogmatie Form. 


2. The second is the method adopted by those who admit a su- 
pernatural divine revelation, and concede that such a revelation is 
contained in the Christian Scriptures, but who reduce all the doc- 
trines thus revealed to the forms of some philosophical system. 
This was done by many of the fathers who endeavored to exalt 
moris into yvous, t. e., the faith of the common people into philoso- 
phy for the learned. This was also to a greater or less degree the 
method of the schoolmen, and finds an illustration even in the 
“Cur Deus Homo” of Anselm, the father of scholastic theology. 
In later times Wolf applied the philosophy of Leibnitz to the ex- 
planation and demonstration of the doctrines of revelation. He 
says, ‘‘ Scripture serves as an aid to natural theology. It furnishes 
natural theology with propositions which ought to be demonstrated ; 
consequently the philosopher is bound not to invent but to demon- 
strate.”1 This method is still in vogue. Men lay down certain 
principles, called axioms, or first truths of reason, and from them 
deduce the doctrines of religion by a course of argument as rigid 
and remorseless as that of Euclid. This is sometimes done to the 
entire overthrow of the doctrines of the Bible, and of the most in- 
timate moral convictions not only of Christians but of the mass of 
mankind. Conscience is not allowed to mutter in the presence of 
the lordly understanding. It is in the spirit of the same method 
that the old scholastic doctrine of realism is made the basis of the 
Scriptural doctrines of original sin and redemption. To this method 
the somewhat ambiguous term Dogmatism has been applied, be- 
cause it attempts to reconcile the doctrines of Scripture with reason, 
and to rest their authority on rational evidence. The result of 
this method has always been to transmute, as far as it succeeded, 
faith into knowledge, and to attain this end the teachings of the 
Bible have been indefinitely modified. Men are expected to be- 
lieve, not on the authority of God, but on that of reason. 


Transcendentalists. 


8, Thirdly, and preéminently, the modern Transcendentalists are 
addicted to the speculative method. In the wide sense of the word 
they are Rationalists, as they admit of no higher source of truth 
than Reason. But as they make reason to be something very dif- 
ferent from what it is regarded as being by ordinary Rationalists, the 
two classes are practically very far apart. The Transcendentalists 

1 Theol. Nat. Prolegg. § 22; Frankf and Leipz. 1736, vol. i. p. 22. 


6 INTRODUCTION. _[Cu. I. — Mernop. 


also differ essentially from the Dogmatists. The latter admit an ex- 
ternal, supernatural, and authoritative revelation. They acknowl- 
edge that truths not discoverable by human reason are thereby made 
known. But they maintain that those doctrines when known may 
be shown to be true on the principles of reason. They undertake 
to give a demonstration independent of Scripture of the doctrines 
of the Trinity, the Incarnation, Redemption, as well as of the im- 
mortality of the soul and a future state of retribution. Transcen- 
dentalists admit of no authoritative revelation other than that which 
is found in man and in the historical development of the race. All 
truth is to be discovered and established by a process of thought, 
If it be conceded that the Bible contains truth, it is only so far as 
it coincides with the teachings of philosophy. The same concession 
is freely made concerning the writings of the heathen sages. The 
theology of Daub, for example, is nothing more than the philosophy 
of Schelling. That is, it teaches just what that philosophy teaches 
concerning God, man, sin, redemption, and the future state. Mar- 
heinecke and Strauss find Hegelianism in the Bible, and they 
therefore admit that so far the Bible teaches truth. Rosenkranz, a 
philosopher of the same school, says Christianity is the absolute 
religion, because its fundamental principle, namely, the oneness of 
God and man, is the fundamental principle of his philosophy. In 
his ‘« Encyklopadie ” (p.3) he says: ‘* The only religion which con- 
forms to reason is Christianity, because it regards man as the form 
in which God has revealed himself. Its theology is therefore an- 
thropology, and its anthropology is theology. The idea of (Gott- 
menschheit) the godhead of man, is the key of Christianity, in 
which as Lessing says, lies its rationality.” 

These are the principal forms of the speculative method in its 
application to theology. These topics will present themselves for 
fuller consideration in a subsequent chapter. 


§ 4. The Mystical Method. 


Few words have been used with greater latitude of meaning than 
mysticism. It is here to be taken in a sense antithetical to specu- 
lation. Speculation is a process of thought; mysticism is matter 
of feeling. The one assumes that the thinking faculty is that by 
which we attain the knowledge of truth. The other, distrusting 
reason, teaches that the feelings alone are to be relied upon, at least 
in the sphere of religion. Although this method has been unduly 
pressed, and systems of theology have been constructed under its 
guidance, which are either entirely independent of the Scriptures, 


$2] THE MYSTICAL METHOD. 7 


or in which the doctrines of the Bible have been modified and 
perverted, it is not to be denied that great authority is due to our 
moral nature in matters of religion. It has ever been a great evil 
in the Church that men have allowed the logical understanding, or 
what they call their reason, to lead them to conclusions which are 
not only contrary to Scripture, but which do violence to our moral 
nature, It is conceded that nothing contrary to reason can be true. 
But it is no less important to remember that nothing contrary to 
our moral nature can be true. It is also to be admitted that con- 
science is much less liable to err than reason ; and when they come 
into conflict, real or apparent, our moral nature is the stronger, and 
will assert its authority in spite of all we can do. It is rightfully 
supreme in the soul, although, with the reason and the will, it is in 
absolute subjection to God, who is infinite reason and infinite moral 


- excellence. 


Mysticism’ as applied to Theology. 

Mysticism, in its application to theology, has assumed two prin- 
cipal forms, the supernatural and the natural. According to the 
former, God, or the Spirit of God, holds direct communion with 
the soul ; and by the excitement of its religious feelings gives it in- 
tuitions of. truth, and enables it to attain a kind, a degree, and an 


extent of knowledge, unattainable in any other way. This has 


been the common theory of Christian mystics in ancient and mod- 
ern times. If by this were meant merely that the Spirit of God, 
by his illuminating influence, gives believers a knowledge of the 
truths objectively revealed in the Scriptures, which is peculiar, cer- 
tain, and saving, it would be admitted by all evangelical Christians. 
And it is because such Christians do hold to this inward teaching 
of the Spirit, that they are often called Mystics by their opponents. 
This, however, is not what is here meant. The mystical method, 
in its supernatural form, assumes that God by his immediate inter- 
course with the soul, reveals through the feelings and by means, or 
in the way of intuitions, divine truth independently of the outward 
tzaching of his Word; and that it is this inward light, and not the 
Seriptures, which we are to follow. 

Accordirig to the other, or natural form of the mystical method, it 
is not God, but the natural religious consciousness of men, as excited 
and influenced by the circumstances of the individual, which be- 
comes the source of religious knowledge. The deeper and purer 
the religious feelings, the clearer the insight into truth. This illu- 
mination or spiritual intuition is a matter of degree. But as all 
men have a religious nature, they all have more or less clearly the 


8. ’ INTRODUCTION. (Cu. I. —Mernop 


apprehension of religious truth. The religious consciousness of 
men in different ages and nations, has been historically developed 
under diverse influences, and hence we have diverse forms of re- 
ligion, — the Pagan, the Mohammedan, and the Christian. These 
do not stand related as true and false, but as more or less pure. 
The appearance of Christ, his life, his work, his words, his death, 
had a wonderful effect on the minds of men. Their religious feel- 
ings were more deeply stirred, were more purified and elevated 
than ever before. Hence the men of his generation, who gave 
themselves up to his influence, had intuitions of religious truth of a 
far higher order than mankind had before attained. This influ- 
ence continues to the present time. All Christians are its subjects. 
All, therefore, in proportion to the purity and elevation of their 
religious feelings, have intuitions of divine things, such as the 
Apostles and other Christians enjoyed. Perfect holiness would 
secure perfect knowledge. 


Consequences of the Mystical Method. 


It follows from this theory, —(1.) That there are no such things 
as revelation and inspiration, in the established theological meaning 
of those terms. Revelation is the supernatural objective, presenta- 
tion or communication of truth to the mind, by the Spirit of God. 
But according to this theory there is, and can be, no such commu- 
nication of truth. The religious feelings are providentially excited, 
and by reason of that excitement the mind perceives truth more or 
less clearly, or more or less imperfectly. Inspiration, in the Scrip- 
tural sense, is the supernatural guidance of the Spirit, which ren- 
ders its subjects infallible in the communicating truth to others, 
But according to this theory, no man is infallible as a teacher. 
Revelation and inspiration are in different degrees common to all 
men. And there is no reason why they should not be as perfect in 
some believers now as in the days of the Apostles. (2.) The 
Bible has no infallible authority in matters of doctrine. The doc- 
trinal propositions therein contained are not revelations by the 
Spirit. They are only the forms under which men of Jewish cul- 
ture gave expression to their feelings and intuitions. Men of dif- 
ferent culture, and under other circumstances, would have used 
other forms or adopted other doctrinal statements. (8.) Christian- 
ity, therefore, neither consists in a system of doctrines, nor does it 
zontain any such system. It is a life, an influence, a subjective 
state ; or by whatever term it may be expressed or explained, it 
is a power within each individual Christian determining his feelings 


§ 5.) THE INDUCTIVE METHOD. 9 


and his views of divine things. (4.) Consequently the duty of a 
theologian is not to interpret Scripture, but to interpret his own 
Christian consciousness ; to ascertain and exhibit what truths con- 
cerning God are implied in his feelings toward God; what truths 
concerning Christ are involved in his feelings toward Christ ; what 
the feelings teach concerning sin, redemption, eternal life, etc., etc. 

This method found its most distinguished and influential advocate 
in Schleiermacher, whose “ Glaubenslehre”’ is constructed on this 
principle. By Twesten — his successor in the chair of Theology in 
the University of Berlin —it is held in greater subjection to the nor- 
mal authority of Scripture. By others, again, of the same school, 
it has been carried out to its utmost extreme. We are at present, 
however, concerned only with its principle, and neither with the 
details of its application, nor with its refutation. 


§ 5. Lhe Inductive Method. 


It is so called because it agrees in everything essential with the 
inductive method as applied to the natural sciences. 

First, The man of science comes to the study of nature with cer- 
tain assumptions. (1.) He assumes the trustworthiness of his sense 
perceptions. Unless he can rely upon the well-authenticated tes- 
timony of his senses, he is deprived of all means of prosecuting his 
investigations. The facts of nature reveal themselves to our fac- 
ulties of sense, and can be known in no other way. (2.) He must 
also assume the trustworthiness of his mental operations. He must 
take for granted that he can perceive, compare, combine, remember, 
and infer; and that he can safely rely upon these mental faculties in 
their legitimate exercise. (8.) He must also rely on the certainty 
of those truths which are not learned from experience, but which 
are given in the constitution of our nature. That every effect must 
have a cause ; that the same cause under like circumstances, will 
produce like effects ; that a cause is not a mere uniform antecedent, 
but that which contains within itself the reason why the effect 
occurs. 

Second, The student of nature having this ground on which to 
stand, and these tools wherewith to work, proceeds to perceive, 
gather, and combine his facts. These he does not pretend to man~ 
ufacture, nor presume to modify. He must take them as they are. 
He is only careful to be sure that they are real, and that he has 
them all, or, at least all that are necessary to justify any inference 
which he may draw from them, or any theory which he may build 
upon them. 


10 INTRODUCTION. _ [Cu. I.— Meruon. 


Third, From facts thus ascertained and classified, he deduces the 
laws by which they are determined. That a heavy body falls to 
the ground is a familiar fact. Observation shows that it is not an 
isolated fact; but that all matter tends toward all other matter ; 
‘that this tendency or attraction is in proportion to the quantity of 
matter; and its intensity decreases in proportion to the square of 
the distance of the attracting bodies. As all this is found to be 
universally and constantly the case within the field of observation, 
the mind is forced to conclude that there is some reason for it; in 
other words, that it is a law of nature which may be relied upon 
beyond the limits of actual observation. As this law has always 
operated in the past, the man of science is sure that it will operate 
in the future. It is in this way the vast body of modern science 
has been built up, and the laws which determine the motions of the 
heavenly bodies; the chemical changes constantly going on around 
us; the structure, growth, and propagation of plants and animals, 
have, to a greater or less extent, been ascertained and established. 
It is to be observed that these laws or general principles are not 
derived from the mind, and attributed to external objects, but 
derived or deduced from the objects and impressed upon the mind. 


A. The Inductive Method as applied to Theology. 


The Bible is to the theologian what nature is to the man of sci- 
ence. It is his store-house of facts; and his method of ascertaining 
what the Bible teaches, is the same as that which the natural 
philosopher adopts to ascertain what nature teaches. In the first 
place, he comes to his task with all the assumptions above men- 
tioned. He must assume the validity of those laws of belief which 
God has impressed upon our nature. In these laws are included 
some which have no direct application to the natural sciences, 
Such, for example, as the essential distinction between right and 
wrong; that nothing contrary to virtue can be enjoined by God; 
that it cannot be right to do evil that good may come ; that sin 
deserves punishment, and other similar first truths, which God has 
implanted in the constitution of all moral beings, and which no 
objective revelation can possibly contradict. These first princi- 
ples, however, are not to be arbitrarily assumed. No man has a 
right to lay down his own opinions, however firmly held, and call 
them ‘first truths of reason,’ and make them the source or test 
of Christian doctrines. Nothing can rightfully be included under 
the category of first truths, or laws of belief, which cannot stand 
the tests of universality and necessity, to which many add self-evi- 


§ 5, A.J THE INDUCTIVE METHOD. 11 


dence. But self-evidence is included in universality and necessity, 
in so far, that nothing which is not self-evident can be universally 
believed, and what is self-evident forces itself on the mind of every 
intelligent creature. 


“Facts to be collected. 


In the second place, the duty of the Christian theologian is to 
ascertain, collect, and combine ‘all the facts which God has revealed 
concerning himself and our relation to Him. These facts are all 
in the Bible. This is true, because everything revealed in nature, 
and in the constitution of man concerning God and our relation to 
Him, is contained and authenticated in Scripture. It is in this 
sense that ‘“‘the Bible, and the Bible alone, is the religion of Prot- 
estants.” It may be admitted that the truths which the theologian 
has to reduce to a science, or, to speak more humbly, which he has 
to arrange and harmonize, are revealed partly in the external works 
of God, partly in the constitution of our nature, and partly in the 
religious experience of believers; yet lest we should err in our in- 
ferences from the works of God, we have a clearer revelation of all 
that nature reveals, in his word; and lest we should misinterpret 
our. own consciousness and the laws of our nature, everything that 
can be legitimately learned from that source will be found recog- 
nized and authenticated in the Scriptures; and lest we should 
attribute to the teaching of the Spirit the operations of our own 
natural affections, we find in the Bible the norm and standard of 
all genuine religious experience. The Scriptures teach not only 
the truth, but what are the effects of the truth on the heart and 
conscience, when applied with saving power by the Holy Ghost. 


The Theologian to be guided by the same rules as the Man of 
Science. 


In the third place, the theologian must be guided by the same 
rules in the collection of facts, as govern the man of science. 

1. This collection must be made with diligence and care. It is 
not an easy work. There is in every department of investigation 
great liability to error. Almost all false theories in science and false 
doctrines in theology are due in a great degree to mistakes as to 
matters of fact. A distinguished naturalist said he repeated an ex- 
periment a thousand times before he felt authorized to announce 
the result to the scientific world as an established fact. 

2. This collection of facts must not only be carefully conducted, 
but also comprehensive, and if possible, exhaustive. An imperfect 


12 INTRODUCTION. (Cu. I. —Mernop. 


induction of facts led men for ages to believe that the sun moved 
round the earth, and that the earth was an extended plain. In 
theology a partial induction of particulars has led to like serious 
errors. It is a fact that the Scriptures attribute omniscience to 
Christ. From this it was inferred that He could not have had a 
_ finite intelligence, but that the Logos was clothed in Him with a 
human body with its animal life. But it is also a Scriptural fact 
that ignorance and intellectual progress, as well as omniscience, are 
ascribed to our Lord. Both facts, therefore, must be included in 
our doctrine of his person. We must admit that He had a human, 
as well as a divine intelligence. It is a fact that everything that 
can be predicated of a sinless man, is in the Bible, predicated of 
Christ; and it is also a fact that everything that is predicated of 
God is predicated of our Lord; hence it has been inferred that 
there were two Christs, — two persons, — the one human, the other 
divine, and that they dwelt together very much as the Spirit dwells 
in the believer; or, as evil spirits dwelt in demoniacs. But this 
theory overlooked the numerous facts which prove the individual 
personality of Christ. It was the same person who said, “I thirst ;” 
who said, ‘‘ Before Abraham was I am.” The Scriptures teach 
that Christ’s death was designed to reveal the love of God, and to 
secure the reformation of men. Hence Socinus denied that his 
death was an expiation for sin, or satisfaction of justice. The 
latter fact, however, is as clearly revealed as the former; and there- 
fore both must be taken into account in our statement of the doc- 
trine concerning the design of Christ’s death. 


Necessity of a complete Induction. 


Illustrations without end might be given of the necessity of a 
comprehensive induction of facts to justify our doctrinal conclu- 
sions. ‘These facts must not be willfully denied or carelessly over- 
looked, or unfairly appreciated. We must be honest here, as the 
true student of nature is honest in his induction. Even scientific 
men are sometimes led to suppress or to pervert facts which mili- 
tate against their favorite theories ; but the temptation to this form 
of dishonesty is far less in their case, than in that of the theologian. 
The truths of religion are far more important than those of natural 
science. They come home to the heart and conscience. They 
may alarm the fears or threaten the hopes of men, so that they are 
under strong temptation to overlook or pervert them. If, how- 
ever, we really desire to know what God has revealed we must be 
conscientiously diligent and faithful in collecting the facts which He 


§ 5, A.J THE INDUCTIVE METHOD. 13 


has made known, and in giving them their due weight. Ifa geol- 
ogist should find in a deposit of early date implements of human 
workmanship, he is not allowed to say they are natural productions. 
He must either revise his conclusion as to the age of the deposit, 
or carry back to an earlier period the existence of man. There is 
no help for it. Science cannot make facts; it must take them as 
they are. In like manner, if the Bible asserts that Christ’s death 
was a satisfaction to justice, the theologian is not allowed to merge 
justice into benevolence in order to suit his theory of the atone- 
ment. Ifthe Scriptures teach that men are born in sin, we cannot 
change the nature of sin, and make it a tendency to evil and not 
really sin, in order to get rid of difficulty. If it be a Scriptural 
fact that the soul exists in a state of conscious activity between 
death and the resurrection, we must not deny this fact or reduce 
this conscious activity to zero, because our anthropology teaches 
that the soul has no individuality and no activity without a body. 
We must take the facts of the Bible as they are, and construct our 
system so as to embrace them all in their integrity. 


Principles to be deduced from facts. 


In the fourth place, in theology as in natural science, principles 
are derived from facts, and not impressed upon them. ‘The prop- 
erties of matter, the laws of motion, of magnetism, of light, etc., 
are not framed by the mind. They are not laws of thought. They 
are deductions from facts. The investigator sees, or ascertains by 
observation, what are the laws which determine material phenom- 
ena; he does not invent those laws. His speculations on matters 
of science unless sustained by facts, are worthless. It is no less 
unscientific for the theologian to assume a theory as to the nature 
of virtue, of sin, of liberty, of moral obligation, and then explain the 
facts of Scripture in accordance with his theories. His only proper 
course is to derive his theory of virtue, of sin, of liberty, of obliga~ 
tion, from the facts of the Bible. He should remember that his 
business is not to set forth his system of truth (that is of no ace 
count), but to ascertain and exhibit what is God’s system, which 
is a matter of the greatest moment. If he cannot believe what the 
facts of the Bible assume to be true, let him say so. Let the 
sacred writers have their doctrine, while he has his own. To this 
ground a large class of modern exegetes and theologians, after a 
long struggle, have actually come. They give what they regard 
as the doctrines of the Old Testament; then those of the Evan- 
geusts; then those of the Apostles; and then their own. This is 


14 INTRODUCTION. (Cu. I. — Mernop. 


fair. So long, however, as the binding authority of Scripture is 
acknowledged, the temptation is very strong to press the facts of — 
the Bible into accordance with our preconceived theories. If a 

man be persuaded that certainty in acting is inconsistent with lib- 
erty of action; that a free agent can always act contrary to any 
amount of influence (not destructive of his liberty) brought to bear 
upon him, he will inevitably deny that the Scriptures teach the con- 
trary, and thus be forced to explain away all facts which prove the 
absolute control of God over the will and volitions of men. If he 
hold that sinfulness can be predicated only of intelligent, voluntary 
action in contravention of law, he must deny that men are born in 
sin, let the Bible teach what it may. If he believes that ability 
limits obligation, he must believe independently of the Scriptures, 
or in opposition to them, it matters not which, that men are able to 
repent, believe, love God perfectly, to live without sin, at any, and 
all times, without the least assistance from the Spirit of God. If 
he deny that the innocent may justly suffer penal evil for the 
guilty, he must deny that Christ bore our sins. If he deny that the 
merit of one man can be the judicial ground of the pardon and 
salvation of other men, he must reject the Scriptural doctrine of 
justification. It is plain that complete havoc must be made of the 
whole system of revealed truth, unless we consent to derive our 
philosophy from the Bible, instead of explaining the Bible by our 
philosophy. If the Scriptures teach that sin is hereditary, we must 
adopt a theory of sin suited to that fact. If they teach that men 
cannot repent, believe, or do anything spiritually good, without the 
supernatural aid of the Holy Spirit, we must make our theory of 
moral obligation accord with that fact. If the Bible teaches that 
we bear the guilt of Adam’s first sin, that Christ bore our guilt, 
and endured the penalty of the law in our stead, these are facts 
‘ with which we must make our principles agree. It would be easy 
to show that in every department of theology, —in regard to the 
nature of God, his relation to the world, the plan of salvation, the 
person and work of Christ, the nature of sin, the operations of 
divine grace, men, instead of taking the facts of the Bible, and 
seeing what principles they imply, what philosophy underlies them, 
have adopted their philosophy independently of the Bible, to which 
the facts of the Bible are made to bend. This is utterly unphilo- 
sophical. It is the fundamental principle of all sciences, and of the- 
ology among the rest, that theory is to be determined by facts, and 
not facts by theory. As natural science was a chaos until the 
principle of induction was admitted and faithfully carried out, se 


§6.] FACTS OF YHEOLOGY IN THE SCRIPTURES. 16 


theology is a jumble of human speculations, not worth a straw, 


when men refuse to apply the same principle to the study of the 
Word of God. 


$6. The Scriptures contain all the Facts of Theology. 


This is perfectly consistent, on the one hand, with the admission 
of intuitive truths, both intellectual and moral, due to our consti+ 
tution as rational and moral beings; and, on the other hand, with 
the controlling power over our beliefs exercised by the inward 
teachings of the Spirit, or, in other words, by our religious expe- 
rience. And that for two reasons: First, All truth must be con- 
sistent. God cannot contradict himself. He cannot force us by 
the constitution of the nature which He has given us to believe one 
thing, and in his Word command us to believe the opposite. And. 
second, All the truths taught by the constitution of our nature or by 
religious experience, are recognized and authenticated in the Scrip- 
tures. This is a safeguard anda limit. We cannot assume this 
or that principle to be intuitively true, or this or that conclusion to 
be demonstrably certain, and make them a standard to which the 
Bible must conform. What is self-evidently true, must be proved 
to be so, and is always recognized in the Bible as true. Whole 
systems of theologies are founded upon intuitions, so called, and if 
every man is at liberty to exalt his own intuitions, as men are ac- 
customed to call their strong convictions, we should have as many 
theologies in the world as there are thinkers. The same remark is 
applicable to religious experience. . There is no form of conviction 
more intimate and irresistible than that which arises from the inward 
teaching of the Spirit. All saving faith rests on his testimony or 
demonstrations (1 Cor. ii. 4). Believers have an unction from 
the Holy One, and they know the truth, and that no lie (or false 
doctrine) is of the truth. This inward teaching produces a con- 
viction which no sophistries can obscure, and no arguments can 
shake. It is founded on consciousness, and you might as well argue 
a man out of a belief of his existence, as out of confidence that what 
he is thus taught of God is true. Two things, however, are to be 
borne in mind. First, That this inward teaching or demonstration 
of the Spirit is confined to truths objectively revealed in the Scrip- 
tures. It is given, says the Apostle, in order that we may know 
things gratuitously given, 7. ¢., revealed to us by God in his Word 
(1 Cor. ii. 10-16). It is not, therefore, a revelation of new truths, 
but an illumination of the mind, so that it apprehends the truth, 
excellence, and glory of things already revealed. And second 


16 INTRODUCTION. _ (Cu. 1. — Meruop. 


This experience is depicted in the Word of God. The Bible gives 
us not only the facts concerning God, and Christ, ourselves, and 
our relations to our Maker and Redeemer, but also records the 
legitimate effects of those truths on the minds of believers. So 
that we cannot appeal to our own feelings or inward experience, as 
a ground or guide, unless we can show that it agrees with the ex- 
perience of holy men as recorded in the Scriptures. 


The Teaching of the Spirit. 


Although the inward teaching of the Spirit, or religious experi- 
ence, is no substitute for an external revelation, and is no part of 
the rule of faith, it is, nevertheless, an invaluable guide in deter- 
mining what the rule of faith teaches. The distinguishing feature 
of Augustinianism as taught by Augustin himself, and by the purer 
theologians of the Latin Church throughout the Middle Ages, which 
was set forth by the Reformers, and especially by Calvin and the 
Geneva divines, is that the inward teaching of the Spirit is allowed 
its proper place in determining our theology. The question is not 
first and mainly, What is true to the understanding, but what is 
true to the renewed heart? The effort is not to make the asser- 
tions of the Bible harmonize with the speculative reason, but to 
subject our feeble reason to the mind-of God as revealed in his 
Word, and by his Spirit in our inner life. It might be easy to lead 
men to the conclusion that they are responsible only for their volun- 
tary acts, if the appeal is made solely to the understanding... But if 
the appeal be made to every man’s, and especially to every Chris- 
tian’s inward experience, the opposite conclusion is reached. We 
are convinced of the sinfulness of states of mind as well as of vol- 
untary acts, even when those states are not the effect of our own 
agency, and are not subject to the power of the will. We are con- 
scious of being sold under sin ; of being its slaves; of being pos- 
sessed by it as a power or law, immanent, innate, and beyond our 
control. Such is the doctrine of the Bible, and such is the teach- 
ing of our religious consciousness when under the influence of the 
Spirit of God. The true method in theology requires that the facts 
of religious experience should be accepted as facts, and when duly 
authenticated by Scripture, be allowed to interpret the doctrinal 
statements of the Word of God. So legitimate and powerful is this 
inward teaching of the Spirit, that it is no uncommon thing to find 
men having two theologies, — one of the intellect, and another of 
the heart. ‘The one may find expression in creeds and systems of 
divinity, the other in their prayers and hymns. It would be safe 


§6.] | FACTS OF THEOLOGY IN THE SCRIPTURES. 17 


for a man to resolve to admit into his theology nothing which is 
not sustained by the devotional writings of true Christians of every 
denomination. It would be easy to construct from such writings, 
received and sanctioned by Romanists, Lutherans, Reformed, and 
Remonstrants, a system of Pauline or Augustinian theology, such 
as would satisfy any intelligent and devout Calvinist in the world. 

The true method of theology is, therefore, the inductive, which 
assumes that the Bible contains all the facts or truths which form 
the contents of theology, just as the facts of nature are the con- 
tents of the natural sciences. It is also assumed that the relation 
of these Biblical facts to each other, the principles involved in them, 
the laws which determine them, are in the facts themselves, and 
are to be deduced from them, just as the laws of nature are de- 
duced from the facts of nature. In neither case are the principles 
derived from the mind and imposed upon the facts, but equally in 
both departments, the principles or laws are deduced from the facts 
and recognized by the mind. 


voL. L 7s 


CHAPTER II. 
THEOLOGY. 
§1. tts Nature. 


Ir the views presented in the preceding chapter be correct, the 
question, What is Theology ? is already answered. If natural sci- 
ence be concerned with the facts and laws of nature, theology is 
concerned with the facts and the principles of the Bible. If the 
object of the one be to arrange and systematize the facts of the ex- 
ternal world, and to ascertain the laws by which they are deter- 
mined ; the object of the other is to systematize the facts of the 
Bible, and ascertain the principles or general truths which those 
facts involve. And as the order.in which the facts of nature are 
arranged cannot be determined arbitrarily, but by the nature of the 
facts themselves, so it is with the facts of the Bible. The parts of 
any organic whole have a natural relation which cannot with im- 
punity be ignored or changed. The parts of a watch, or of any 
other piece of mechanism, must be normally arranged, or it will be 
in confusion and worthless. All the parts of a plant or animal are 
disposed to answer a given end, and are mutually dependent. We 
cannot put the roots of a tree in the place of the branches, or the 
teeth of an animal in the place of its feet. So the facts of science 
arrange themselves. They are not arranged by the naturalist. 
His business is simply to ascertain what the arrangement given in 
the nature of the facts is. If he mistake, his system is false, and 
to a greater or less degree valueless. The same is obviously true 
with regard to the facts or truths of the Bible. They cannot be 
held in isolation, nor will they admit of any and every arrangement 
the theologian may choose to assign them. They bear a natural 
relation to each other, which cannot be overlooked or perverted 
without the facts themselves being perverted. If the facts of 
Scripture are what Augustinians believe them to be, then the Au- 
gustinian system is the only possible system of theology. If those 
facts be what Romanists or Remonstrants take them to be, then 
their system is the only true one. It is important that the theo- 
logian should know his place. “He is not master of the situation. 
He can no more construct a system of theology to suit his fancy, 


§1] WHAT IS THEOLOGY? 19 


than the astronomer can adjust the mechanism of the heavens 
according to his own good pleasure. As the facts of astronomy 
arrange themselves in a certain order, and will admit of no other, 
so it is with the facts of theology. Theology, therefore, is the ex- 
hibition of the facts of Scripture in their proper order and relation, 
with the principles or general truths involved in the facts them- 
selves, and which pervade and harmonize the whole. 

It follows, also, from this view of the subject, that as the Bible 
contains one class of facts or truths which are not elsewhere re- 
vealed, and another class which, although more clearly made 
known in the Scriptures than anywhere else, are, nevertheless, so 
far revealed in nature as to be deducible therefrom, theology is 
properly distinguished as natural and revealed. The former is 
concerned with the facts of nature so far as they reveal God and 
our relation to him, and the latter with the facts of Scripture. This 
distinction, which, in one view is important, in another, is of little 
consequence, inasmuch as all that nature teaches concerning God 
and our duties, is more fully and more authoritatively revealed in 


his Word. 
Definitions of Theology. 

Other definitions of Theology are often given 

1. Sometimes the word is restricted to its etymological meaning, 
“a discourse concerning God.” Orpheus and Homer were called 
theologians among the Greeks, because their poems treated of the 
nature of the gods. Aristotle classed the sciences under the heads 
of physics, mathematics, and theology, 7. e., those which concern 
nature, number and quantity, and that which concerns God. The 
fathers spoke of the Apostle John as the theologian, because in his 
gospel and epistles the divinity of Christ is rendered so promi- 
nent. The word is still used in this restricted sense when op- 
posed to anthropology, soteriology, ecclesiology, as departments of 
theology in its wider sense. 

2. Theology is sometimes said to be the science of the super- 
natural. But what is the supernatural? The answer to that 
question depends on the meaning assigned to the word nature. ts 
by nature is meant the external world as governed by fixed laws, 
tuen the souls of men and other spiritual beings are not included 
under the term. In this use of the word nature, the supernatural 
is synonymous with the spiritual, and theology, as the science of 
the supernatural, is synonymous with pneumatology. If this view 
be adopted, psychology becomes a branch of theology, and the 
theologian must, as such, teach mental philosophy. 


20 INTRODUCTION.  §[Cu. Il. — Tuxoxoer. 


The word nature is, however, often taken in a wider sense, so as 
to include man. Then we have a natural and a spiritual world. 
And the supernatural is that which transcends nature in this sense, 
so that what is supernatural is of necessity also superhuman. But 
it is not necessarily super-angelic. Again, nature may mean every- 
thing out of God; then the supernatural is the divine, and God is 
the only legitimate subject of theology. In no sense of the word, 
therefore, is theology the science of the supernatural. Hooker? 
says, “ Theology is the science of divine things.” If by divine things, 
or “the things of God,” he meant the things which concern God, 
then theology is restricted to a ‘discourse concerning God ;”’ if 
he meant the things revealed by God, according to the analogy of 
the expression ‘“ things of the Spirit,” as used by the Apostle in 
1 Cor. ii. 14, then the definition amounts to the more definite one 
given above. 

3. A much more common definition of Theology, especially in 
our day, is that it is the science of religion. ‘The word religion, 
however, is ambiguous. Its etymology is doubtful. Cicero? re- 
fers it to relegere, to go over again, to consider. ‘ Religio”’ is 
then consideration, devout observance, especially of what pertains 
to the worship and service of God. ‘ Religens”’ is devout, con- 
scientious. ‘* Religiosus,” in a good sense, is the same as our word 
religious ; in a bad sense, it means scrupulous, superstitious. ‘* Re- 
ligentem esse oportet, religiosum nefas.” 8 Augustin and Lactan- 
tius derive the word from religare, to bind back. Augustin‘ says: 
*‘Tpse Deus enim fons nostra beatudinis, ipse omnis appetitionis 
est finis. Hunc eligentes vel potius religentes amiseramus enim 
negligentes: hunc ergo religentes, unde et religio dicta perhibetur, 
ad eum dilectione tendimus ut perveniendo quiescamus.” And 
Lactantius, “* Vinculo pietatis obstricti, Deo religati sumus, unde 
ipsa religio nomen accepit, non, ut Cicero interpretatus est, a re- 
ligendo.”® According to this religio is the ground of obligation. It 
is that which binds us to God. Subjectively, it is the inward ne- 
cessity of union with God. Commonly the word religion, in its 
objective sense, means ‘‘ Modus Deum colendi,”’ as when we speak 
of the Pagan, the Mohammedan, or the Christian religion. Subjee- 
tively, it expresses a state of mind. What that state characteristi- 
cally is, is very variously stated. Most simply it is said to be the: 
state of mind induced by faith in God, and a due sense of our re 
lation to him. Oras Wegscheider expresses it, ‘ qualis et cop 


1 Eccles. Pol. iii. 8. 2 Nat. Deor. ii. 28. 8 Poet. ap. Gell. iv. 9. 
4 De Ciwitate Dei, x. 8. Edit. of Benedictines, Paris, 1838. 5 Unstt, Div. iv. 28. 


§1.] WHAT IS THEOLOGY? 21 


stans animi affectio, qua homo, necessitudinem suam eandemque 
zeternam, que ei cum summo omnium rerum auctore ac modera- 
tore sanctissimo intercedit, intimo sensu complexus, cogitationes, 
voluntates et actiones suas ad eum referre studet.” Or, as more 
concisely expressed by Bretschneider, “‘ Faith in the reality of 
God, with a state of mind and mode of life in accordance with that 
faith.” Or, more vaguely, “* Recognition of the mutual relation 
between God and the world” (Fischer), or, ‘The recognition 
of a superhuman causality in the human soul and life” (Theile). 
* Faith founded on feeling in the reality of the ideal’? (Jacobi). 
“The feeling of absolute dependence ” (Schleiermacher). ‘ The 
observance of the moral law as a divine institution” (Kant). 
‘Faith in the moral order of the universe”? (Fichte). ‘The 
union of the finite with the infinite or God’s coming to self-con- 
sciousness in the world” (Schelling). } 

This diversity of views as to what religion is, is enough to prove 
how utterly vague and unsatisfactory must be the definition of the- 
ology as “the science of religion.”’ Besides, this definition makes 
theology entirely independent of the Bible. For, as moral phil- 
osophy is the analysis of our moral nature, and the conclusions to 
which that analysis leads, so theology becomes the analysis of our 
religious consciousness, together with the truths which that analy- 
sis evolyes. And even Christian theology is only the analysis of 
the religious consciousness of the Christian; and the Christian 
consciousness is not the natural religious consciousness of men as 
modified and determined by the truths of the Christian Scriptures, 
but it is something different. Some say it is to be referred toa 
new life transmitted from Christ. Others refer everything dis- 
tinctive in the religious state of Christians to the Church, and 
really merge theology into ecclesiology. 

We have, therefore, to restrict theology to its true sphere, as 
the science of the facts of divine revelation so far as those facts 
concern the nature of God and our relation to him, as his creatures, 
as sinners, and as the subjects of redemption. All these facts, as 
just remarked, are in the Bible. But as some of them are revealed 
by the works of God, and by the nature of man, there is so fara 
distinction between natural theology, and theology considered dis- 
tinctively asa Christian science. 

With regard to natural theoiogy, there are two extreme opin- 
ions. The one is that the works of nature make no trustworthy 
revelation of the being and perfections of God; the other, that 

1 See Hase’s Hutterus Redivivus, I. § 2. 


22 INTRODUCTION. — [Cu. IL. — Taroxoey. 


such revelation is so clear and comprehensive as to preclude the 
necessity of any supernatural revelation. 


§2. The Facts of Nature Reveal God. 


Those who deny that natural theology teaches anything reliable 
concerning God, commonly understand by nature the external, 
material universe. They pronounce the ontological and teleologi- 
cal arguments derived from the existence of the world, and from 
the evidences of design which it contains, to be unsatisfactory. The 
fact that the world is, is a proof that it always has been, in the ab- 
sence of all evidence to the contrary. And the argument from 
design, it is said, overlooks the difference between dead mechanism 
and a living organism, between manufacture and growth. That a 
locomotive cannot make itself, is no proof that a tree cannot grow. 
The one is formed ab extra by putting its dead parts together; the 
other is developed by a living principle within. The one necessi- 
tates the assumption of a maker external and anterior to itself, the 
other excludes, as is said, such assumption. Besides, it is urged 
that religious truths do not admit of proof. They belong to the 
same category with esthetic and moral truths. They are the ob- 
jects of intuition. To be perceived at all, they must be perceived 
in their own light. You cannot prove a thing to be beautiful or 
good to the man who does not perceive its beauty or excellence. 
Hence, it is further urged, that proof of religious truth is unneces- 
sary. The good do not need proof; the evil cannot appreciate it. 
All that can be done is to affirm the truth, and let it awaken, if 
possible, the dormant power of perception. 


A. Answer to the above Arguments. 


All this is sophistical. For the arguments in support of the 
truths of natural religion are not drawn exclusively from the ex- 
ternal works of God. Those which are the most obvious and the 
most effective are derived from the constitution of our own nature. 
Man was made in the image of God, and he reveals his parentage 
as unmistakably as any class of inferior animals reveal the source 
from which they sprung. If a horse is born of a horse, the im- 
mortal spirit of man, instinct with its moral and religious convictions 
and aspirations, must be the offspring of the Father of Spirits. 
This is the argument which Paul on Mars’ Hill addressed to the 
eavilling philosophers of Athens. That the sphere of natural the- 
ology is not merely the facts of the material universe is plain from 
the meaning of the word nature, which, as we have seen, has many 


“Pay A.) THE FACTS OF NATURE REVEAL GOD. 28 


legitimate senses. It is not only used to designate the external 
world, but also for the forces active in the material universe, as 
when we speak of the operations and laws of nature, sometimes for 

all that falls into the chain of cause and effect as distinguished from 
the aets of free agents; and, as natura is derived fort nascor, na- 
ture means whatever is produced, and therefore includes every- 
thing out of God, so that God and nature include all that is. 

2. The second objection to natural theology is that its arguments 
are inconclusive. This is a point which no man can decide for 
other men. Every one must judge for himself. An argument 
which is conclusive for one mind may be powerless for other minds, 
That the material universe began to be; that it has not the cause. 
of its existence within itself, and therefore must have had an ex- 
tramundane cause ; and that the infinitely numerous manifestations 
of design which it exhibits show that that cause must be intelli- 
gent, are arguments for the being of God, which have satisfied the 
minds of the great body of intelligent men in all ages of the world. 
They should not, therefore, be dismissed as unsatisfactory, because 
all men do not feel their force. Besides, as just remarked, these 
arguments are only confirmatory of others more direct and power- 
ful derived from our moral and religious nature. 

3. As to the objection that religious truths are the objects of in- 
tuition, and that intuitive truths neither need nor admit of proof, 
it may be answered that in one sense it is true. But self-evident 
truths may be illustrated; and it may be shown that their denial 
involves contradictions and absurdities. All geometry is an illus- 
tration of the axioms of Euclid ;.and if any man denies any of 
those axioms, it may be shown that he must believe impossibilities. 
In like manner, it may be admitted that the existence of a being on 
whom we are dependent, and to whom we are responsible, is a 
matter of intuition; and it may be acknowledged that it is self- 
evident that we can be responsible only to a person, and yet the 
existence of a personal God may be shown to bea necessary hy- 
pothesis to account for the facts of observation and consciousness, 
and that the denial of his existence leaves the problem of the uni- 
verse unsolved and unsolvable. In other words, it may be shown 
that atheism, polytheism, and pantheism involve absolute impossi- 
bilities. This is a valid mode of proving that God is, although it 
be admitted that his existence after all is a self-evident truth. The- 
ism is not the only self-evident truth that men are wont to deny. 


24 INTRODUCTION.  [Cu. Il. — Tuxo1oe¥ 


B. Svriptural Argument for Natural Theology. 


The Scriptures clearly recognize the fact that the works of God 
reveal his being and attributes. This they do not only by frequent 
reference to the works of nature as manifestations of the perfections 
of God, but by direct assertions. ‘‘ The heavens declare the glory 
of God; and the firmament sheweth his handy-work. Day unto 
day uttereth speech, and night unto night sheweth knowledge. 
There is no speech nor language, where their voice is not heard, 
Their line is gone out through all the earth, and their words to the 
end of the world.’ (Ps. xix. 1-4.) ‘The idea of perpetual 
testimony,’ says Dr. Addison Alexander,! “is conveyed by the 
figure of one day and night following another as witnesses in un- 
broken succession. . . . . The absence of articulate language, 
far from weakening the testimony, makes it stronger. Even with- 
out speech or words, the heavens testify of God to all men.” 

The sacred writers in contending with the heathen appeal to the 
evidence which the works of God bear to his perfections: ‘ Un- 
derstand, ye brutish among the people: and ye fools, when will ye 
be wise? He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? He that 
formed the eye, shall he not see? He that chastiseth the heathen, 
shall not he correct ? He that teacheth man knowledge, shall not 
he know?” (Ps. xciv. 8-10.) Paul said to the men of Lystra, 
‘Sirs, why do ye these things? We also are men of like passions 
with you, and preach unto you that ye should turn from these 
vanities unto the living God, which made heaven and earth, and 
the sea, and all things that are therein: Who in times past suf- 
fered all nations to'walk in their own ways. Nevertheless he left 
not himself without witness, in that he did good, and gave us rain 
from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and 
gladness.” (Acts xiv. 15-17.) To the men of Athens he said: 
‘God that made the world and all things therein, seeing that he is 
Lord of heaven and earth, dwelleth not in temples made with 
hands; neither is worshipped with men’s hands, as though he 
needed anything, seeing he giveth to all life and breath, and all 
things; and hath made of one blood all nations of men fur to dwell 
on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before 
appointed, and the bounds of their habitation; that they should 
seek the Lord, if haply they might feel after ies and find him, 
though he be not far from every one of us: for in him we live, 
and move, and have our being; as certain also of your own poets 


1 Comm. on Psalms, in loc. 


$5] INSUFFICIENCY OF NATURAL THEOLOGY. 25 


have said, ‘For we are also his offspring.’ Forasmuch then as 
we are the offspring of God, we ought not to think that the God- 
head is like unto gold, or silver, or stone, graven by art and man’s 
device.” (Acts xvii. 24-29.) 

Not only the fact of this revelation, but its clearness is distinctly 
asserted by the Apostle: ‘That which may be known of God is 
manifest in them; for God hath shewed it unto them. For the in- 
visible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly 
seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eter- 
nal power and Godhead; so that they are without excuse: because 
that when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither 
were thankful.” (Rom. i. 19-21.) 

It cannot, therefore, be reasonably doubted that not only the 
being of God, but also his eternal power and Godhead, are so re- 
vealed in his works, as to lay a stable foundation for natural theol- 
ogy. To the illustration of this subject many important works 
have been devoted, a few of which are the following: ‘‘ Wolf de 
Theologia Naturali,” “The Bridgewater Treatises,” Butler’s 
“ Analogy,” Paley’s “ Natural Theology.” 


§ 3. Insufficiency of Natural Theology. 


The second extreme opinion respecting Natural Theology is, that 
it precludes the necessity of a supernatural revelation. The ques- 
tion whether the knowledge of God derived from his works, be suf- 
ficient to lead fallen men to salvation, is answered affirmatively by 
Rationalists, but negatively by every historical branch of the Chris- 
tian Church. On this point the Greek, the Latin, the Lutheran, 
and the Reformed Churches are unanimous. ‘The two former are 
more exclusive than the two latter. The Greeks and Latins, in 
making the sacraments the only channels of saving grace, deny the 
possibility of the salvation of the unbaptized, whether in heathen or 
Christian lands. This principle is so essential to the Romish sys- 
tem as to be included in the very definition of the Church, as given 
by the authoritative writers of the Papal Church. That definition 
is so framed as to exclude from the hope of salvation not only all 
unbaptized infants and adults, but all, no matter however enlight 
ened in the knowledge of the Scriptures, and however holy in 
heart and life, who do not acknowledge the supremacy of the 
bishop of Rome. gh 

The question as to the sufficiency of natural theology, or of the 
truths of reason, is to be answered on the authority of the Scrip- 
tures. No man can tell d priori what is necessary to salvation, 


’ 


26 INTRODUCTION. [Cu. I. — Taxoxoey. 


Indeed, it is only by supernatural revelation that we know that any 
sinner can be saved. It is from the same source alone, we can 
know what are the conditions of salvation, or who are to be its sub- 
jects. 


Bas What the Scriptures teach as to the Salvation of Men. 
Salvation of Infants. 


What the Scriptures teach on this subject, according to the com- 
mon doctrine of evangelical Protestants is first : — 

1. All who die in infancy are saved. This is inferred from what 
the Bible teaches of the analogy between Adam and Christ. ‘* As 
by the offence of one judgment came upon all men to condemna- 
tion; even so by the righteousness of one the free gift came upon all 
men unto justification of life. For as by one man’s disobedience 
many (of woAAof = rdvres) were made sinners, so by the obedience of 
one shall many (of roAAoi = rdvres) be made righteous.” (Rom. v. 
18,19.) We have no right to put any limit on these general 
terms, except what the Bible itself places upon them. The Scrip- 
tures nowhere exclude any class of infants, baptized or unbaptized, 
born in Christian or in heathen lands, of believing or unbelieving 
parents, from the benefits of the redemption of Christ. All the 
descendants of Adam, except Christ, are under condemnation ; all 
the descendants of Adam, except those of whom it is expressly 
revealed that they cannot inherit the kingdom of God, are saved. 
This appears to be the clear meaning of the Apostle, and therefore 
he does not hesitate to say that where sin abounded, grace has 
much more abounded, that the benefits of redemption far exceed 
the evils of the fall; that the number of the saved far exceeds the 
number of the lost. 

This is not inconsistent with the declaration of our Lord, in Mat- 
thew vii. 14, that only afew enter the gate which leadeth unto life. 
This is to be understood of adults. What the Bible says is in- 
tended for those in all ages, to whom it is addressed. But it is 
addressed to those who can either read or hear. It tells them what 
they are to believe and do. It would be an entire perversion of 
its meaning to make it apply to those to whom and of whom it does 
not speak. When it is said, ‘* He that believeth not the Son shall 
not see life ; but the wrath of God abideth on him” (John iii. 86), 
no one understands this to preclude the possibility of the salvation 
of infants. 

Not only, however, does the comparison, which the Apostle 
makes between Adam and Christ, lead to the conclusion that as al} 


§ 3, B.j INSUFFICIENCY OF NATURAL THEOLOGY. 27 


are condemned for the sin of the one, so all are saved by the right- 
eousness of the other, those only excepted whom the Scriptures 
except ; but the principle assumed throughout the whole discussion 
teaches, the same doctrine. That principle is that it is more con- 
genial with the nature of God to bless than to curse, to save than 
to destroy. If the race fell in Adam, much more shall it be re- 
stored in Christ. If death reigned by one, much more shall grace 
reign by one. This “*much more” is repeated over and over. 
The Bible everywhere teaches that God delighteth not in the 
death of the wicked; that judgment is his strange work. It is, 
therefore, contrary not only to the argument of the Apostle, but 
to the whole spirit of the passage (Romans v. 12-21), to exclude 
infants from ‘the all’ who are made alive in Christ. 

The conduct and language of our Lord in reference to children 
are not to be regarded as matters of sentiment, or simply expressive 
of kindly feeling. He evidently looked upon them as the lambs 
of the flock for which, as the good Shepherd, He laid down his life, 
and of whom He said they shall never perish, and no man could 
pluck them out of his hands. Of such He tells us is the kingdom 
of heaven, as though heaven was, in great measure, composed of 
the souls of redeemed infants. It is, therefore, the general belief 
of Protestants, contrary to the doctrine of Romanists and Roman- 
izers, that all who die in infancy are saved. | 


B. Rule of Judgment for Adults. 


2. Another general fact clearly revealed in Scripture is, that 
men are to be judged according to their works, and according to 
the light which they have severally enjoyed. God “will render 
to every man according to his deeds: to them who, by patient con- 
tinuance in well doing, seek for glory, and honour, and immortality, 
eternal life; but unto them that are contentious, and do not obey 
the truth but obey unrighteousness, indignation, and wrath, tribu- 
Jation and anguish, upon every soul of man that doeth evil; of the 
Jew first, and also of the Gentile ; but glory, honour, and peace to 
every man that worketh good; to the Jew first, and also to the 
Gentile, for there is no respect of persons with God. For as many 
as have sinned without law shall also perish without law, and as 
many as have sinned in the law shall be judged by the law.” 
(Rom. ii. 6-12.) Our Lord teaches that those who sinned with a 
knowledge of God’s will, shall be beaten with many stripes ; and 
that those who sinned without such knowledge shall be beaten with 
few stripes ; and that it will be more tolerable in the day of judg- 


28 INTRODUCTION. [Cn. I. — Tuono. 


ment for the heathen, even for Sodom and Gomorrah, than for 
those who perish under the light of the gospel. (Matt. x. 15; 
xi. 20-24.) The Judge of all the earth will do right. No human 
being will suffer more than he deserves, or more than his own con- 
science shall recognize as just. 


C. All Men under Condemnation. 


3. But the Bible tells us, that- judged according to their works 
and according to the light which they have severally enjoyed, all 
men will be condemned. There is none righteous; no, not one. 
The whole world is guilty before God. This verdict is confirmed 
by every man’s conscience. The consciousness of guilt and of 
moral pollution is absolutely universal. 

Here it is that natural theology utterly fails. It cannot answer 
the question, How can man be just with God? or, How can God 
be just and yet justify the ungodly? Mankind have anxiously 
pondered this question for ages, and have gained no satisfaction. 
The ear has been placed on the bosom of humanity, to catch the 
still, small voice of conscience, and got no answer. It has been 
directed heavenward, and received no response. Reason, con- 
science, tradition, history, unite in saying that sin is death; and, 
therefore, that so far as human wisdom and resources are concerned, 
the salvation of sinners is as impossible as raising the dead. Every 
conceivable method of expiation and purification has been tried 
without success. 

4. The Scriptures, therefore, teach that the heathen are “ with- 
out Christ, being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and 
strangers from the covenants of promise, having no hope, and with- 
out God.” (Eph. ii. 12.) They are declared to be without ex- 
cuse, “‘ Because, that when they knew God, they glorified Him not 
as God, neither were thankful ; but became vain in their imagina- 
tions, and their foolish heart was darkened. Professing themselves 
to be wise, they became fools, and changed the glory of the uncor- 
ruptible God, into an image made like unto corruptible man, and 
to birds, and four-footed beasts, and creeping things. Wherefore 
God also gave them up to uncleanness, through the lusts of their 
own hearts, to dishonour their own bodies between themselves: 
who changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and 
served the creature more than the Creator, who is blessed for ever. 
Amen.” (Rom. i. 21-25.) The Apostle says of the Gentiles that 
they “ walk in the vanity of their mind, having the understanding 
darkened, being alienated from the life of God through the igno- 


§38,C.] INSUFFICIENCY OF NATURAL THEOLOGY. 29 


rance that is in them because of the blindness of their heart: 
who being past feeling have given themselves over unto lasciv« 
lousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness.” (Eph. iv. 
17-19.) 

5. All men being sinners, justly chargeable with inexcusable 
impiety and immorality, they cannot be saved by any effort or 
resource of their own. For we are told that “the unrighteous 
shall not inherit the kingdom of God. Be not deceived ; neither for- 
nicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers 
of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunk- 
ards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of 
God.” (1 Cor. vi. 9.) ‘For this ye know, that no whoremon- 
ger, nor unclean person, nor covetous man, who is an idolater, 
hath any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God.” 
(Eph. v. 5.) More than this, the Bible teaches us that a man 
may be outwardly righteous in the sight of men, and yet be a 
whitened sepulchre, his heart being the seat of pride, envy, or 
malice. In other words, he may be moral in his conduct, and by 
reason of inward evil passions, be in the sight of God the chief of 
sinners, as was the case with Paul himself. And more even than 
this, although a man were free from outward sins, and, were it 
possible, from the sins of the heart, this negative goodness would 
not suffice. Without holiness “‘no man shall see the Lord.” 
(Heb. xii. 14.) ‘ Except a man be born again, he cannot see the 
kingdom of God.” (John iii. 3.) ‘He that loveth not, knoweth 
not God.” (1 John iv. 8.) “If any man love the world, the love 
of the Father is not in him.” (1 John ii. 15.) “ He that loveth 
father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me.” (1 John, 
iv. 8.) Who then can be saved? If the Bible excludes from the 
kingdom of heaven all the immoral; all whose hearts are cor- 
- rupted by pride, envy, malice, or covetousness ; all who love the 
world; all who are not holy; all in whom the love of God is not 
the supreme and controlling principle of action, it is evident that, 
so far as adults are concerned, salvation must be confined to very 
narrow limits. It is also evident that mere natural religion, the 
mere objective power of general religious truth, must be as ineffi- 
cacious in preparing men for the presence of God, as the waters of 
Syria to heal the leprosy. 


. D. The necessary Conditions of Salvation. 


6. Seeing then that the world by wisdom knows not God ; see 
ing that men when left to themselves inevitably die in their sins ; it 


80 INTRODUCTION. [Cu. II. -- TazoLoey. 


has “pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that 
believe.” (4 Cor. i. 21.) God has sent his Son into the world 
to save sinners. Had any other method of salvation been possible, 
Christ is dead in vain. (Gal. ii. 21; iii, 21.) There is, there- 
fore, no other name whereby men can be saved. (Acts iv. 12.) 
The knowledge of Christ and faith in Him are declared to be 
essential to salvation. This is proved: (1.) Because men are 
declared to be guilty before God. .(2.) Because no man can expiate 
his own guilt and restore himself to the image of God. (8.) Be- 
cause it is expressly declared that Christ is the only Saviour of men. 
(4.) Because Christ gave his Church the commission to preach the 
gospel to every creature under heaven, as the appointed means of 
salvation. (5.) Because the Apostles in the execution of this com- 
mission went everywhere preaching the Word, testifying to all men, 
Jews and Gentiles, to the wise and the unwise, that they must 
believe in Christ as the Son of God in order to be saved. Our 
Lord himself teaching through his forerunner said, ‘“‘ He that be- 
lieveth on the Son hath everlasting life: and he that believeth not 
the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth on him.” 
(John iii. 36.) (6.) Because faith without knowledge is declared 
to be impossible. ‘* Whosoever shall call upon the name of the 
Lord shall be saved. How then shall they call on him in whom 
they have not believed ? and how shall they believe in him of whom 
they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher ? 
and how shall they preach, except they be sent?” (Rom. x. 
13-15.) 

It is, therefore, as before stated, the common faith of the Chris- 
tian world, that, so far as adults are concerned, there is no salvation 
without the knowledge of Christ and faith in Him. This has ever 
been regarded as the ground of the obligation which rests upon the 
Church to preach the gospel to every creature. 


E. Objections. 


To the objection that this doctrine is inconsistent with the good- 
ness and justice of God, it may be answered: (1.) That the doc- 
trine only assumes what the objector, if a Theist, must admit, 
namely, that God will deal with men according to their character 
and conduct, and that He will judge them according to the light 
which they have severally enjoyed. It is because the judge of all 
the earth must do right that all sinners receive the wages of sin, 
by an inexorable law, unless saved by the miracle of redemption, 
In teaching, therefore, that there is no salvation for those ignorant 


§ 4.) INSUFFICIENCY OF NATURAL THEOLOGY. 31 


of the gospel, the Bible only teaches that a just God will punish 
sin. (2.) The doctrine of the Church on this subject does not go 
beyond the facts of the case. It only teaches that God will do 
what we see He actually does. He leaves mankind, in a large 
measure, to themselves. He allows them to make themselves sin- 
ful and miserable. It is no more difficult to reconcile the doctrine 
than the undeniable fact with the goodness of our God. (38.) In 
the gift of his Son, the revelation of his Word, the mission.of the 
Spirit, and the institution of the Church, God has made abundant 
provision for the salvation of the world. That the Church has’ 
been so remiss in making known the gospel is her guilt. We must 
not charge the ignorance and consequent perdition of the heathen 
upon God. The guilt rests on us. We have kept to ourselves the 
bread of life, and allowed the nations to perish. 

Some of the older Lutheran divines were disposed to meet the 
objection in question by saying that the plan of salvation was re- 
vealed to all mankind at three distinct epochs. First, immediately 
after the fall, to Adam; second, in the days of Noah; and third, 
during the age of the Apostles. If that knowledge has been 
lost it has been by the culpable ignorance of the heathen them- 
selves. This is carrying the doctrine of imputation to its utmost 
length. It is making the present generation responsible for the 
apostasy of their ancestors. It leaves the difficulty just where it 
was. 

The Wesleyan Arminians and the Friends, admitting the insuffi- 
ciency of the light of nature, hold that God gives sufficient grace, 
or an inward supernatural light, which, if properly cherished and 
followed, will lead men to salvation. But this is merely an amia- 
ble hypothesis. For such universal and sufficient grace there is no 
promise in the Scripture, and no evidence in experience. Besides, 
if admitted it does not help the matter. If this sufficient grace 
does not actually save, if it does not deliver the heathen from those 
sins upon which the judgment of God is denounced, it only aggra- 
vates their condemnation. All we can do is to adhere closely to 
the teachings of the Bible, assured that the Judge of all the earth 
will do right ; that although clouds and darkness are round about 
Hin, and his ways past finding out, justice and judgment are the 
habitation of his throne. 


§ 4. Christian Theology. 


As science, concerned with the facts of nature, has its several 
departments, as Mathematics, Chemistry, Astronomy, etc., so The- 


82 INTRODUCTION.  ([Cu.II.— Taroroey 


ology having the facts of Scripture for its subject, has its distinct 
and natural departments. First — 


Theoloyy Proper, 


Which includes all the Bible teaches of the being and attributes of 

God; of the threefold personality of the Godhead, or, that the 

Father, Son, and Spirit are distinct persons, the same in substance 

and equal in power and glory; the relation of God to the world, 

or, his decrees and his works of Creation and Providence. Sec- 

ond, — 
Anthropology, 


Which includes the origin and nature of man; his original state and 
probation ; his fall; the nature of sin; the effect of Adam’s first 
sin upon himself and upon his posterity. Third, — 


Soteriology, 


Including the purpose or plan of God in reference to the salvation 
of man; the person and work of the Redeemer; the application of 
the redemption of Christ to the people of God, in their regenera- 
tion, justification, and sanctification; and the means of grace. 


Fourth, — 
Eschatology, 


That is, the doctrines which concern the state of the soul after 
death ; the resurrection; the second advent of Christ; the general 
judgment and end of the world; heaven and hell. And fifth, — 


Eeclesiology, 


The idea, or nature of the Church; its attributes ; its prerogatives ; 
its organization. 

It is the suggestive remark of Kliefoth in his ‘* Dogmenge- 
schichte,” that to the Greek mind and to the Greek Church, was 
assigned the task of elaborating the doctrine of the Bible concern- 
ing God, @. e., the doctrines of the Trinity and Person of Christ ; 
to the Latin Church the doctrines concerning man ; that is, of sin 
and grace ; to the German Church, Soteriology, or the doctrine of 
justification. Ecclesiology, he says, is reserved for the future, as” 
the doctrine concerning the Church has not been settled by cecu- 
menical authority as have been the doctrines of Theology and 
Anthropology, and that of justification at least for the Protestant 
world, 

The above classification, although convenient and generally rez 


§4.] CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY. 33 


ceived, is far from being exhaustive. It leaves out of view the law 
(or at least subordinates it unduly), or rule of moral duty. This 
is a department in itself, and under the title of Moral Theology, is 
sometimes, as in the Latin Church, regarded as the most important. 
Among Protestants it is often regarded as a mere department of 
Philosophy. 

It has been assumed that Theology has to do with the facts or 
truths of the Bible; in other words, that the Scriptures of the Old: 
and New Testaments are the only infallible rule of faith and prac- 
tice. This, however, is not a conceded point. Some claim for 
Reason a paramount, or, at least a codrdinate authority in matters 
of religion. Others assume an internal supernatural light to which 
they attribute paramount, or codrdinate authority. Others rely on 
the authority of an infallible church. With Protestants, the Bible 
is the only infallible source of knowledge of divine things. It is 
necessary, therefore, before entering on our work, briefly to exam- 
ine these several systems, namely, Rationalism, Mysticism, and 
Romanism. 


veoL. L 8 


CHAPTER III. 
RATIONALISM. 


§ 1. Meaning and Usage of the Word. | 


By Rationalism is meant the system or theory which assigns un- 
due authority to reason in matters of religion. By reason is not 
to be understood the Logos as revealed in man, as held by some of 
the Fathers, and by Cousin and other modern philosophers, nor the 
intuitional faculty as distinguished from the understanding or the 
discursive faculty. ‘The word is taken in its ordinary sense for 
the cognitive faculty, that which. perceives, compares, judges, and 
infers. 

Rationalism has appeared under different forms. (1.) The 
Deistical, which denies either the possibility or the fact of any su- 
pernatural revelation, and maintains that reason is both the source 
and ground of all religious knowledge and conviction. (2.) That 
which while it admits the possibility and the fact of a supernat- 
ural revelation, and that such a revelation is contained in the Chris- 
tian Scriptures, nevertheless maintains that the truths revealed are 
the truths of reason ; that is, truths which reason can comprehend 
and demonstrate. (3.) The third form of Rationalism has received 
the name of Dogmatism, which admits that many of the truths of 
revelation are undiscoverable by human reason, and that they are 
to be received upon authority. Nevertheless, it maintains that 
those truths when revealed admit of being philosophically ex 
plained and established, and raised from the sphere of faith into 
that of knowledge. 

Rationalism in all its forms proceeds on the ground of Theism, 
that is, the belief of an extramundane personal God. When, 
therefore, Monism, which denies all dualism and affirms the identity 
of God and the world, took possession of the German mind, Ra- 
tionalism, in its old form, disappeared. There was no longer any 
room for the distinction between reason and God, between the nat- 
ural and the supernatural. No class of men, therefore, are more 
contemptuous in their opposition to the Rationalists, than the advo- 


§ 2, A.J DEISTICAL RATIONALISM. 35 


cates of the modern, or, as it perhaps may be more properly desig- 
nated, the modern pantheistic philosophy of Germany. 

Although in a measure banished from its recent home, it con- 
tinues to prevail in all its forms, variously modified, both in Europe 
and America. Mansel, in his “Limits of Religious Thought,” } 
includes under the head of Rationalism every system which makes 
the final test of truth to be “ the direct assent of the human con- 
scivusness, whether in the form of logical deduction, or moral judg- 
ment, or religious intuition, by whatever previous process these 
faculties may have been raised to their assumed dignity as arbitra- 
tors.” This, however, would include systems radically different in 
their nature. 


§ 2. Deistical Rationalism. 


A. Possibility of a Supernatural Revelation. 


The first point to be determined in the controversy with the 
Deistical Rationalists, concerns the possibility of a supernatural 
revelation. This they commonly deny, either on philosophical or 
moral grounds. It is said to be inconsistent with the nature of 
God, and with his relation to the world, to suppose that He inter- 
feres by his direct agency in the course of events. The true the- 
ory of the universe, according to their doctrine, is that God 
having created the world and endowed his creatures with their 
attributes and properties, He has done all that is consistent with his 
nature. He does not interfere by his immediate agency in the 
production of effects. ‘These belong to the efficiency of second 
causes. Or if the metaphysical possibility of such intervention be 
admitted, it is nevertheless morally impossible, because it would 
imply imperfection in God. If his work needs his constant inter- 
ference it must be imperfect, and if imperfect, it must be that God 
is deficient either in wisdom or power. 

That this is a wrong theory of God’s relation to the world is 
manifest. (1.) Because it contradicts the testimony of our moral 
nature. The relation in which we stand to God, as that relation 
reveals itself in our consciousness, implies that we are constantly 
in the presence of a God who takes cognizance of our acts, orders 
our circumstances, and interferes constantly for our correction or 
protection. He is not to us a God afar off, with whom we have no 
immediate concern; but a God who is not far from any one of us, 
in whom we live, move, and have our being, who numbers the 
hairs of our head, and without whose notice a sparrow does not fall 

1 Page 47, edit. Boston, 1859. 


36 INTRODUCTION. [Cu I. — Ration axism. 


to the ground. (2.) Reason itself teaches that the conception of 
God as a ruler of the world, having his creatures in his hands, able 
to control them at pleasure, and to hold communion with them, is 
a far higher conception and more consistent with the idea of infin-— 
ite perfection, than that on which this system of Rationalism is 
founded. (8.) The common consciousness of men is opposed to 
this doctrine, as is plain from the fact that all nations, the most cul- 
tivated and the most barbarous, have been forced to conceive of 
God as a Being able to take cognizance of human affairs, and to 
reveal himself to his creatures. (4.) The argument from Scrip- 
ture, although not admitted by Rationalists, is for Christians con- 
clusive. The Bible reveals a God who is constantly and every- 
where present with his works, and who acts upon them, not only 
mediately, but immediately, when, where, and how He sees fit. 


B. Necessity of a Supernatural Revelation. 

Admitting, however, the metaphysical possibility of a supernat- 
ural revelation, the next question is whether such a revelation is 
necessary. This question must be answered in the affirmative. 
(1.) Because every man feels that he needs it. He knows that 
there are questions concerning the origin, nature, and destiny of 
man ; concerning sin, and the method in which it can be pardoned 
and conquered, which he cannot answer. They are questions, 
however, which must be answered. So long as these problems are 
unsolved, no man can be either good or happy. (2.) He is equally 
certain that no man answers these questions for his fellow-men. 
Every one sees intuitively that they relate to matters beyond the 
reach of human reason. What can reason decide as to the fate of 
the soul after death ? Can he who has been unable to make him- 
self holy or happy here, secure his own well-being in the eternal 
future? Every man, without a supernatural revelation, no matter 
how much of a philosopher, knows that death is the entrance on 
the unknown. It is the gate into darkness. Men must enter that 
gate conscious that they have within them an imperishable life 
combined with all the elements of perdition. Is it not self-evident 
then that immortal sinners need some one to answer with authority 
the question, What must I do to be saved? To convince a man 
that there is no sin, and that sin does not involve misery, is as im- 
possible as to convince a wretch that he is not unhappy. The 
necessity of a divine revelation, therefore, is a simple matter of 
fact, of which every man is in his heart convinced. (8.) Admit- 
ting that philosophers could solve these great problems to their owy 


§2,B. 0] DEISTICAL RATIONALISM. 87 


satisfaction, What is to become of the mass of mankind? Are 
they to be left in darkness and despair? (4.) The experience of 
ages proves that the world by wisdom knows not God. The heathen 
nations, ancient and modern, civilized and savage, have without ex- 
ception, failed by the light of nature to solve any of the great prob- 
lems of humanity. This is the testimony of history as well as of 
Scripture. (5.) Even where the light of revelation is enjoyed, 
it iz found that those who reject its guidance, are led not only to 
the most contradictory conclusions, but to the adoption of princi- 
ples, in most cases, destructive of domestic virtue, social order, 
and individual worth and happiness. The reason of man has led 
the great body of those who know no other guide, into what has 
been well called, «* The Hell of Pantheism.”’ 


C. The Scriptures contain such a Revelation. 


Admitting the possibility and even the necessity of a supernat- 
ural revelation, Has such a revelation been actually made? This 
the Deistical Rationalist denies, and the Christian affirms. He 
confidently refers to the Bible as containing such a revelation, and 
maintains that its claims are authenticated by an amount of evi- 
dence which renders unbelief unreasonable and criminal. 

1. In the first place, its authors claim to be the messengers of 
God, to speak by his authority and in his name, so that what they 
teach is to be received not on the authority of the writers them- 
selves, nor on the ground of the inherent evidence in the nature of 
the truths communicated, but upon the authority of God. It is He 
who affirms what the sacred writers teach. This claim must be 
admitted, or the sacred writers must be regarded as fanatics or im- 
postors. It is absolutely certain that they were neither. It would 
be no more irrational to pronounce Homer and Newton idiots, than 
to set down Isaiah and Paul as either impostors or fanatics. It is 
as certain as any self-evident truth, that they were wise, good, 
sober-minded men. That such men should falsely assume to be 
the authoritative messengers of God, and to be endowed with su- 
pernatural powers in confirmation of their mission, is a contradic- 
tion. It is toaffirm that wise and good men are foolish and wicked. 

2. The Bible contains nothing inconsistent with the claim of its 
authors to divine authority as teachers. It contains nothing impos- 
sible, nothing absurd, nothing immoral, nothing inconsistent with 
any well-authenticated truth. This itself is well-nigh miraculous, 
considering the circumstances under which the different portions of 
the Scriptures were written. 


88 _ INTRODUCTION. [Cau I. —Rastonaxism 


8. More than this, the Bible reveals truths of the highest order, 
not elsewhere made known. ‘Truths which meet the most urgent 
necessities of our nature ; which solve the problems which reason 
has never been able to solve. It recognizes and authenticates all 
the facts of consciousness, all the truths which our moral and relig- 
ious nature involve, and which we recognize as true as soon as they 
are presented. It has the same adaptation to the soul that the at- 
mosphere has to the lungs, or the solar influences to the earth on 
which we live. And what the earth would be without those influ- 
ences, is, in point of fact, what the soul is without knowledge of 
the truths which we derive solely from the Bible. 

4, The several books of which the Scriptures are composed were 
written by some fifty different authors living in the course of fifteen 
hundred years; and yet they are found to be an organic whole, 
the product of one mind. They are as clearly a development as 
the oak from the acorn. The gospels and epistles are but the ex- 
pansion, fulfilment, the culmination of the protevangelium, ‘“ The 
seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent’s head,” as uttered to 
our first parents (Gen. iii. 15). All that intervenes is to the New 
Testament what the roots, stem, branches, and foliage of the tree 
are to the fruit. No one book of Scripture can be understood by 
itself, any more than any one part of a tree or member of the 
body can be understood without reference to the whole of which it 
isa part. ‘Those who from want of attention do not perceive this 
organic relation of the different parts of the Bible, cannot appre- 
ciate the argument thence derived in favor of its divine origin. 
They who do perceive it, cannot resist it. 


Argument from Prophecy. 


5. God bears witness to the divine authority of the Scriptures 
by signs and wonders, and divers miracles, and gifts of the Holy 
Ghost. The leading events recorded in the New Testament were 
predicted in the Old. Of this any man may satisfy himself by a 
comparison of the two. The coincidence between the prophecies 
and the fulfilment admits of no rational solution, except that the 
Bible is the work of God; or, that holy men of old spake as they 
were moved by the Holy Ghost. The miracles recorded in the 
Scriptures are historical events, which are not only entitled to be 
received on the same testimony which authenticates other facts of 
history, but they are so implicated with the whole structure of the 
New Testament, that they cannot be denied without rejecting the 
whole gospel, which rejection involves the denial of the best au- 
thenticated facts in the history of the world. 


§ 3, A.J RATIONALISM PROPER, 89 


Argument from the Effects of the Gospel. 

Besides this external supernatural testimony, the Bible is every- 
where attended by “ the demonstration of the Spirit,” which gives 
to its doctrines the clearness of self-evident truths, and the author- 
ity of the voice of God; analogous to the authority of the moral 
law for the natural conscience. 

6. The Bible ever has been and still is, a power in the world. 
It has determined the course of history. It has overthrown false 
religion wherever it is known. It is the parent of modern civiliza 
tion. It is the only guarantee of social order, of virtue, and of 
human rights and liberty. Its effects cannot be rationally accounted 
for upon any other hypothesis than that it is what it claims to be, 
“ The Word of God.” 

7. It makes known the person, work, the acts, and words of 
Christ, who is the clearest revelation of God ever made to man. 
He is the manifested God. His words were the words of God. 
His acts were the acts of God. His voice is the voice of God, and 
He said, “ The Scripture cannot be broken” (John x. 35). If any 
man refuse to recognize him as the Son of God, as the infallible 
teacher, and only Saviour of men, nothing can be said save what 
the Apostle says, “If our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are 
lost: in whom the God of this world hath blinded the minds of 
them which believe not, lest the light of the glorious gospel of 
Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto them. For 
God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined 
in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of 
God in the face of Jesus Christ.” (2 Cor. iv. 3, 4, 6.) 

Deistical Rationalism is in Germany sometimes called Natural- 
ism, as distinguished from Supernaturalism; as the former denies, 
and the latter affirms, an agency or operation above nature in the 
conduct of events in this world. More commonly, however, by 
Naturalism is meant the theory which denies the existence of any 
higher power than nature, and therefore is only another name for 
atheism. It is, consequently, not a proper designation of a system 
which assunies the existence of a personal God. 


§ 3. The Second Form of Rationalism. 
A. Its Nature. 


The more common form of Rationalism admits that the Scriptures 
contain a supernatural revelation. It teaches, however, that the 


40 INTRODUCTION. [Cu. II. — Ratronarism. 


object of that revelation is to make more generally known, and to 
authenticate for the masses, the truths of reason, or doctrines of 
natural religion. These doctrines are received by cultivated minds 
not on the ground of authority, but of rational evidence. The fun- 
damental principle of this class of Rationalists is, that nothing can 
be rationally believed which is not understood. ‘* Nil credi posse, 
quod a ratione capi et intelligi nequeat.” If asked, Why he be- 
lieves in the immortality of the soul? the Rationalist answers, Be- 
cause the doctrine is reasonable. To his mind, the arguments m 
its favor outweigh those against it. If asked, Why he does not be- 
lieve the doctrine of the Trinity ? he answers, Because it is un- 
reasonable. The philosophical arguments against it outweigh the 
arguments from reason, in its favor. That the sacred writers teach 
the doctrine is not decisive. The Rationalist does not feel bound 
to believe all that the sacred writers teach. The Bible, he admits, 
contains a Divine revelation. But this revelation was made to fal- 
lible men, men under no supernatural guidance in communicating 
the truths revealed. They were men whose mode of thinking, 
and manner of arguing, and of presenting truth, were modified by 
their culture, and by the modes of thought prevailing during the 
age in which they lived. The Scriptures, therefore, abound with 
misapprehensions, with inconclusive arguments, and accommoda- 
tions to Jewish errors, superstitions, and popular beliefs. It is the 
office of reason to sift these incongruous materials, and separate 
the wheat from the chaff. That is wheat which reason apprehends 
in its own light to be true; that is to be rejected as chaff which 
reason cannot: understand, and cannot prove to be true. That is, 
nothing is true to us which we do not see for ourselves to be true. 


B. Refutation. 


It is sufficient to remark on this form of Rationalism, — 

1. That it is founded upon a false principle. It is not necessary 
to the rational exercise of faith that we should understand the 
truth believed. The unknown and the impossible cannot be be- 
lieved ; but every man does, and must believe the incomprehensi- 
ble. Assent to truth is founded on evidence. That evidence may 
be external or intrinsic. Some things we believe on the testimony 
of our senses; other things we believe on the testimony of men. 
Why, then, may we not believe on the testimony of God? A man 
may believe that paper thrown upon fire will burn, although he 
does not understand the process of combustion. All men believe 
that plants grow, and that like begets like ; but no man understands 


§ 8, B.] RATIONALISM PROPER. 41 


the mystery of reproduction. Even the Positivist who would re- 
duce all belief to zero, is obliged to admit the incomprehensible to 
be true. And those who will believe neither in God nor spirit be- 
cause they are invisible and intangible, say that all we know is the 
unknowable, — we know only force, — but of force we know noth- 
ing but that it is, and that it persists. If, therefore, the incompre- 
hensible must be believed in every other department of knowledge, 
no rational ground can be given why it should be banished from 
religion. 

2. Rationalism assumes that the human intelligence is the meas- 
ure of all truth. This is an insane presumption on the part of 
such a creature as man. If a child believes with implicit confi- 
dence what it cannct understand, on the testimony of a parent, 
surely man may believe what he cannot understand, on the testi- 
mony of God. 

38. Rationalism destroys the distinction between faith and knowl- 
edge, which all men and all ages admit. Faith is assent to truth 
founded on testimony, ‘“‘credo quod non video.” Knowledge is 
assent founded on the direct or indirect, the intuitive or discursive, 
apprehension of its object. If there can be no rational faith, if 
we are to receive as true only what we know and understand, 
the whole world is beggared. It loses all that sustains, beautifies, 
and ennobles life. 

4. The poor cannot be Rationalists. If we must understand 
what we believe, even on the principles of the Rationalists, only 
philosophers can be religious. They alone can comprehend the 
rational grounds on which the great truths of even natural religion 
are to be received. Widespread, therefore, as has been the in- 
fluence of a Rationalistic spirit, it has never taken hold of the 
people; it has never controlled the creed of any church; because 
all religion is founded on the incomprehensible and the infinite. 

5. The protest, therefore, which our religious nature makes 
against the narrow, cold, and barren system of Rationalism, is a 
sufficient proof that it cannot be true, because it cannot meet our 
most urgent necessities. The object of worship must be infinite, 
and of necessity incomprehensible. 

6. Faith implies knowledge. And if we must understand in 
order to know, faith and knowledge become alike impossible. The 
principle, therefore, on which Rationalism is founded, leads to 
Nihilism, or universal negation. Even the latest form of philoso- 
phy, taking the lowest possible ground as to religious faith, admits 
that we are surrounded on every side by the incomprehensible. 


42 INTRODUCTION. (Cu. Ill. — Rationarism 


Herbert Spencer, in his “ First Principles of a New Philosophy,” 
asserts, p. 45, “‘ the omnipresence of something which passes com- 
prehension.” He declares that the ultimate truth in which all 
forms of religion agree, and in which religion and science are in 
harmony, is, “‘ That the Power which the universe manifests to us 
is utterly inscrutable.”! The inscrutable, the incomprehensible, 
what we cannot understand, must therefore of necessity be ration- 
ally the object of faith. And consequently reason, rational de- 
monstration, or philosophical proof is not the ground of faith. We 
may rationally believe what we cannot understand. We may be 
assured of truths which are encompassed with objections which we 
cannot satisfactorily answer. 


C. History. 


The modern form of Deistic Rationalism had its rise in England 
during the latter part of the seventeenth, and the first half of the 
eighteenth centuries. Lord Herbert, who died as early as 1648, 
in his work, ‘‘ De Veritate, prout. distinguitur a Revelatione,”’ etc., 
taught that all religion consists in the acknowledgment of the fol- 
lowing truths: 1. The existence of God. 2. The dependence of 
man on God, and his obligation to reverence him. 8. Piety con- 
sists in the harmony of the human faculties. 4. The essential dif- 
ference between good and evil. 5. A future state of rewards and 
punishment. These he held to be intuitive truths, needing no 
proof, and virtually believed by all men. This may be considered 
as the confession of Faith of all Deists, and even of those Ration- 
alists who admit a supernatural revelation ; for such revelation, they 
maintain, can only authenticate what reason itself teaches. Other 
writers quickly followed in the course opened by Lord Herbert ; 
as, Toland in his “ Christianity without Mystery,” 1696, a work 
which excited great attention, and drew out numerous refutations. 
Toland ended by avowing himself a Pantheist. Hobbes was a 
Materialist. Lord Shaftesbury, who died 1773, in his ‘ Char- 
acteristics,” “* Miscellaneous Treatises,”’ and ‘* Moralist,” made ridi- 
cule the test of truth. He declared revelation and inspiration to 
be fanaticism. Collins (died 1729) was a more serious writer. 
His principal works were, “*An Essay on Free-thinking,” and 
‘The Grounds and Reasons of Christianity.” Lord Bolingbroke, 
Secretary of State under Queen Anne, “ Letters on the Study and 
Utility of History.” Matthew Tindal, “ Christianity as Old as the 
Creation.” Tindal, instead of attacking Christianity in detail, at- 

1 First Principles of a New Philosophy, p. 46. 


§ 3, C.J RATIONALISM PROPER. 43 


tempted to construct a regular system of Deism. Ie maintained 
that God could not intend that men should ever be without a re- 
ligion adequate to all their necessities, and therefore that a revela- 
tion can only make known what every man has in his own reason. 
This internal and universal revelation contains the two truths: 1. 
The existence of God. 2. That God created man not for his own 
sake, but for man’s. By far the most able and influential of the 
writers of this class was David Hume. His ‘ Essays” in four vol- 
umes contain his theological views. The most important of these 
are those on the Natural History of Religion, and on Miracles. 
His “Dialogues on Natural Religion” is regarded as the ablest 
work ever written in support of the Deistical, or rather, Atheisti- 
cal system. 

From England the spirit of infidelity extended into France. 
Voltaire, Rousseau, La Mettrie, Holbach, D’Alembert, Diderot, and 
others, succeeded for 4 time in overthrowing all religious faith in 
the governing classes of society. 


Rationalism in Germany. 


In Germany the Rationalistic defection began with such men as 
Baumgarten, Ernesti, and John David Michaelis, who did not deny 
the divine authority of the Scriptures, but explained away their 
doctrines. These were followed by such men as Semler, Morus, 
and Eichhorn, who were thoroughly neological. During the latter 
part of the last, and first part of the present century, most of the 
leading church historians, exegetes, and theologians of Germany, 
were Rationalists. The first serious blow given to their system was 
by Kant. The Rationalists assumed that they were able to demon- 
strate the truths of natural religion on the principles of reason. 
Kant, in his “ Critic of Pure Reason,” undertook to show that 
reason is incompetent to prove any religious truth. The only foun- 
dation for religion he maintained was our moral consciousness. 
That consciousness involved or implied the three great doctrines of 
God, liberty, and immortality. His successors, Fichte and Schel- 
ling, carried out the principles which Kant adopted to prove that 

the outward world is an unknown something, to show that there was 
no such world ; that there was no real distinction between the ego 
and non-éyo, the subjective and objective; that both are modes of 
the manifestation of the absolute. Thus all things were merged into 
one This idealistic Pantheism having displaced Rationalism, has 
already yielded the philosophic throne to a subtle form of Mate- 
rialism. 


44 INTRODUCTION. (Cx. I. — Rarionarism. 


Bretschneider’s “ Entwickelung aller in der Dogmatik vorkom- 
menden Begriffe,” gives a list of fifty-two works on the rationalistic 
controversy in Germany. The English books written against the 
Rationalists or Deists of Great Britain, and on the proper office of 
reason in matters of religion, are scarcely less numerous. Some 
of the more important of these works are the following: “ Boyle 
on Things above Reason,” Butler’s “ Analogy of Religion and 
Nature,” Conybeare’s “Defence of Religion,” ‘ Hulsean Lec- 
tures,” Jackson’s ‘“ Examination,” ‘‘ Jew’s Letters to Voltaire,” 
Lardner’s “Credibility of the Gospel History,” Leland’s “ Advan- 
tage and Necessity of Revelation,” Leslie’s “Short and Easy 
Method with Deists.”” Warburton’s ‘* View of Bolingbroke’s 
Philosophy,” and his ‘* Divine Legation of Moses,” John Wilson’s 
“‘ Dissertation on Christianity,” etc., etc. See Staudlin’s “ Ge- 
schichte des Rationalismus,’”’ and a concise and instructive his-— 
tory of theology during the eighteenth century, by Dr. Tholuck 
in “ Biblical Repertory and Princeton Review” for 1828. Leib- 
nitz’s ‘‘ Discours de la Conformité de la Foi avec la Raison,” in the 
Preface to his “ Théodicée,” and Mansel’s “ Limits of Religious 
Thought,” deserve the careful perusal of the theological student. 
The most recent works on this general subject are Lecky’s ‘* His- 
tory of Rationalism in Europe,” and “ History of Rationalism, 
embracing a survey of the present state of Protestant Theology,” 
by Rev. John F. Hurst, A.M. The latter is the most instructive 
publication in the English language on modern skepticism. 


$4. Dogmatism, or the Third Form of Rationalism. 
A. Meaning of the Term. 


It was a common objection made in the early age of the Church 
against Christianity, by the philosophical Greeks, that its doctrines 
were received upon authority, and not upon rational evidence. 
Many of the Fathers, specially those of the Alexandrian school, 
answered that this was true only of the common people. They 
could not be expected to understand philosophy. They could re- 
ceive the high spiritual truths of religion only on the ground of 
authority. But the educated classes were able and were bound to 
search after the philosophical or rational evidence of the doctrines 
taught in the Bible, and to receive those doctrines on the ground 
of that evidence. They made a distinction, therefore, between 
riots and yvéous, faith and knowledge. The former was for the 
common people, the latter for the cit vated: The objects of faith 


§4, AJ DOGMATISM. 45 


were the doctrinal statements of the Bible in the form in which 
they are there presented. The ground of faith is simply the testi- 
mony of the Scriptures as the Word of God, The objects of. 
knowledge were the speculative or philosophical ideas which under- 
lie the doctrines of the Bible, and the ground on which those ideas 
or truths are received and incorporated in our system of knowl- 
edge, is their own inherent evidence. They are seen to be true 
by the light of reason. Faith is thus elevated into knowledge, 
and Christianity exalted into a philosophy. This method was car« 
ried out by the Platonizing fathers, and continued to prevail to a 
great extent among the schoolmen. During the Middle Ages the 
authority of the Church was paramount, and the freest thinkers 
did not venture openly to impugn the doctrines which the Church 
had sanctioned. For the most part they contented themselves 
with philosophizing about those doctrines, and endeavoring to show 
that they admitted of a philosophical explanation and proof. 


Wolfianism. 


As remarked in the preceding chapter, this method was revived 
and extensively propagated by Wolf (1679-1754, Professor at 
Halle and Marburg). His principal works were “ Theologia Nat- 
uralis,” 1736, “Philos. Practicalis Universalis,” 1738, ‘* Philos, 
Moralis s. Ethica,” 1750, “ Verniinftige Gedanken von Gott, der 
Welt und der Seele des Menschen, auch allen Dingen iiberhaupt,”’ 
1720. Wolf unduly exalted the importance of natural religion. 
Although he admitted that the Scriptures revealed doctrines undis- 
coverable by the unassisted reason of man, he yet insisted that all 
doctrines, in order to be rationally received as true, should be 
capable of demonstration on the principles of reason. ‘‘ He main- 
tained,” says Mr. Rose (in his “ State of Protestantism in Ger- 
many,” p. 89), “that philosophy was indispensable to religion, and 
that, together with Biblical proofs, a mathematical or strictly demon- 
strative dogmatical system, according to the principles of reason, 
was absolutely necessary. His own works carried this theory into 
practice, and after the first clamors had subsided, his opinions 
gained more attention, and it was not long before he had a school 
of vehement admirers, who far outstripped him in the use of his 
own principles. We find some of them not content with apply- 
ing demonstration to the truth of the system, but endeavoring to 
establish each separate dogma, the Trinity, the nature of the Re- 
deemer, the Incarnation, the eternity of punishment, on philosophi 
cal, and strange as it may appear, some of these truths on mathe 


46 INTRODUCTION. [Cu. I. — RaTionaLism 


matical grounds.” The language of Wolf himself on this subject 
has already been quoted on page 5. He expressly states that the 
office of revelation is to supplement natural religion, and to pre- 
sent propositions which the philosopher is bound to demonstrate. 
By demonstration is not meant the adduction of proof that the 
proposition is sustained by the Scriptures, but that the doctrine 
must be admitted as true on the principles of reason. It is philo- 
sophical demonstration that is intended. ‘ Theological Dogma- 
tism,” says Mansel,! “is an application of reason to the support and 
defense of preéxisting statements of Scripture. .... Its end is 
to produce a coincidence between what we believe and what we 
think ; to remove the boundary which separates the comprehensi- 
ble from the incomprehensible.”? It attempts, for example, to 
demonstrate the doctrine of the Trinity from the nature of an in- 
finite being; the doctrine of the Incarnation from the nature of 
man and his relation to God, etc. Its grand design is to trans- 
mute faith into knowledge, to elevate Christianity as a system of 
revealed truth into a system of Philosophy. 


B. Refutation. 


The objections to Dogmatism, as thus understood, are, — 

1. That it is essentially Rationalistic. The Rationalist demands 
philosophical proof of the doctrines which he receives. He is not 
willing to believe on the simple authority of Scripture. He re- 
quires his reason to be satisfied by a demonstration of the truth 
independent of the Bible. This demand the Dogmatist admits to 
be reasonable, and he undertakes to furnish the required proof. In 
this essential point, therefore, in making the reception of Christian 
doctrine to rest on reason and not on authority, the Dogmatist and 
the Rationalist are on common ground. For although the former 
admits a supernatural revelation, and acknowledges that for the 
common people faith must rest on authority, yet he maintains that 
the mysteries of religion admit of rational or philosophical demon- 
stration, and that such demonstration cultivated minds have a right 
to demand. 

2. In thus shifting faith from the foundation of divine testimony, 
and making it rest on rational demonstration, it is removed from 
the Rock of Ages toa quicksand. There is all the difference be- 
tween a conviction founded on the well-authenticated testimony of 
God, and that founded on so-called philosophical demonstration, 
that there is between God and man, the divine and human. Let 

1 Limits of Religious Thought, p. 47. 2 Ibid. p. 50. 


§ 4, BJ DOGMATISM. 47 


any man read the pretended philosophical demonstrations of the 
Trinity, the Incarnation, the resurrection of the body, or any other 
of the great truths of the Bible, and he will feel at liberty to re- 
ceive or to reject it at pleasure. It has no authority or certainty. 
It is the product of a mind like his own, and therefore can have no 
more power than belongs to the fallible human intellect. 

3. Dogmatism is, therefore, in its practical effect, destructive of 
faith. In transmuting Christianity into a philosophy, its whole na- 
ture is changed and its power is lost. It takes its place as one of 
the numberless phases of human speculation, which in the history 
of human thought succeed each other as the waves of the sea, —- no 
one ever abides, 

4. It proceeds on an essentially false principle. It assumes 
the competency of reason to judge of things entirely beyond its 
sphere. God has so constituted our nature, that we are authorized 
and necessitated to confide in the well-authenticated testimony of 
our senses, within their appropriate sphere. And in like manner, 
we are constrained to confide in the operation of our minds and in 
the conclusions to which they lead, within the sphere which God 
has assigned to human reason. But the senses cannot sit in judg- 
ment on rational truths. We cannot study logic with the micro- 
scope or scalpel. It is no less irrational to depend upon reason, or 
demand rational or philosophical demonstration for truths which 
become the objects of knowledge only as they are revealed. From 
the nature of the case the truths concerning the creation, the pro- 
bation, and apostasy of man, the purpose and plan of redemption, 
the person of Christ, the state of the soul in the future world, the 
relation of God to his creatures, etc., not depending on general 
principles of reason, but in great measure on the purposes of an 
intelligent, personal Being, can be known only so far as He chooses 
to reveal them, and must be received simply on his authority. 


The Testimony of the Scriptures against Dogmatism. 


5. The testimony of the Scriptures is decisive on this subject. 
From the beginning to the end of the Bible the sacred writers pre- 
sent themselves in the character of witnesses. They demand faith 
in their teachings and obedience to their commands not on the 
ground of their own superiority in wisdom or excellence ; not on 
the ground of‘rational demonstration of the truth of what they 
taught, but simply as the organs of God, as men appointed by Him 
to reveal his will. Their first and last, and sufficient reason for 
faith is, “« Thus saith the Lord.” The New Testament writers, es- 


48 INTRODUCTION. (Cx. I. — Rationavism. 


pecially, repudiate all claim to the character of philosophers. They 
taught that the Gospel was not a system of truth derived from rea- 
son or sustained by its authority, but by the testimony of God. 
They expressly assert that its doctrines were matters of revelation, 
to be received on divine testimony. ‘‘ Eye hath not seen, nor ear 
heard, neither have entered into the heart of man the things which 
God hath prepared for them that love him. But God hath revealed 
them unto us by his Spirit: for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, 
the Jeep things of God. For what man knoweth the things of a 
man, save the spirit of man which is in him?” (1 Cor. ii. 9-11.) 
Such being the nature of the Gospel, if received at all it must be 
received on authority. It was to be believed or taken on trust, not 
demonstrated as a philosophical system. Nay, the Bible goes still 
further. It teaches that a man must become a fool in order to be 
wise ; he must renounce dependence upon his own reason or wis- 
dom, in order to receive the wisdom of God. Our Lord told his 
disciples that unless they were converted and became as little chil- 
dren, they could not enter into the kingdom of God. And the 
Apostle Paul, in his Epistle to the Corinthians, and in those ad- 
dressed to the Ephesians and Colossians, that is, when writing to 
those imbued with the Greek and with the oriental philosophy, 
made it the indispensable condition of their becoming Christians, 
that they should renounce philosophy as a guide in matters of re- 
ligion, and receive the Gospel cn the testimony of God. Nothing, 
therefore, can be more opposed to the whole teaching and spirit of 
the Bible, than this disposition to insist on philosophical proof of 
the articles of our faith. Our duty, privilege, and security are in 
believing, not in knowing; in trusting God, and not our own un- 
derstanding. They are to be pitied who have no more trustworthy 
teacher than themselves. 

6. The instructions of the Bible on this subject are abundantly 
confirmed by the lessons of experience. From the time of the 
Gnostics, and of the Platonizing fathers, the attempt has been 
made in every age to exalt faith into knowledge, to transmute 
Christianity into philosophy, by demonstrating its doctrines on the 
principles of reason. These attempts have always failed. They 
have all proved ephemeral and worthless, — each successive the- 
orizer viewing with more or less contempt the speculations of his 
predecessors, yet each imagining that he has the gifts for compre- 
hending the Almighty. 

These attempts are not only abortive, they are always evil in 
their effects upon their authors and upon all who are influenced by 


$5, A.) PROPER OFFICE OF REASON. 49 


them. So far as they succeed to the satisfaction of those who make 
them, they change the relation of the soul to the truth, and, of 
course, to God. The reception of the truth is not an act of faith, 
or of trust in God; but of confidence in our ‘own speculations. 
Self is substituted for God as the ground of confidence. The man’s 
whole inward state is thereby changed. History, moreover, proves 
that Dogmatism is the predecessor of Rationalism. The natural 
tendency and the actual consequences of the indulgence of a dis- 
position to demand philosophical demonstration for articles of faith, 
is a state of mind which revolts at authority, and refuses to admit 
as true what it cannot comprehend and prove. And this state of 
mind, as it is incompatible with faith, is the parent of unbelief and 
of all its consequences. There is no safety for us, therefore, but 
to remain within the limits which God has assigned us. Let us 
rely on our senses, within the sphere of our sense perceptions ; on 
our reason within the sphere of rational truths; and on God, and 
God alone, in all that relates to the things of God. He only truly 


knows, who consents with the docility of a child to be taught of 
God. 


§ 5. Proper Office of Reason in Matters of Religion. 
A. Reason Necessary for the Reception of a Revelation. 


Christians, in repudiating Rationalism in all its forms, do not re- 
ject the service of reason in matters of religion. They acknowl- 
edge its high prerogatives, and the responsibility involved in their 
exercise. 

In the first place, reason is necessarily presupposed in every rev- 
elation. Revelation is the communication of truth to the mind. 
But the communication of truth supposes the capacity to receive 
it. Revelations cannot be made to brutes or to idiots. Truths, to 
be received as objects of faith, must be intellectually apprehended. 
A proposition, to which we attach no meaning, however important 
the truth it may contain, cannot be an object of faith. If it be 
affirmed that the soul is immortal, or God is a spirit, unless we know 
the meaning of the words nothing is communicated to the mind, 
and the mind can affirm or deny nothing on the subject. In other 
words, knowledge is essential to faith. In believing we affirm the 
truth of the proposition believed. But we can affirm nothing of 
that of which we know nothing. The first and indispensable office 
of reason, therefore, in matters of faith, is the cognition, or intelli- 
gent apprehension of the truths proposed for our reception. This 

VOL. L 4 ‘ 


50 INTRODUCTION. [Cuz Il. — RaTionatism. 


ts what theologians are accustomed to call the usus OFJANICUs, SEU, 
instrumentalis, rationis. About this there can be no dispute. 


Difference between Knowing and Understanding. 


It is important, however, to bear in mind the difference between 
knowing and understanding, or comprehending. A child knows 
what the words ‘God is a spirit’? mean. No created being can 
comprehend the Almighty unto perfection. We must know the 
plan of salvation; but no one can comprehend its mysteries. This 
distinction is recognized in every department. Men know unspeak- 
ably more than they understand. We know that plants grow; that 
the will controls our voluntary muscles ; that Jesus Christ is God 
and man in two distinct natures, and one person forever; but here 
as everywhere we are surrounded by the incomprehensible. We 
can rationally believe that a thing is, without knowing how or why 
itis. It is enough for the true dignity of man as a rational crea- 
ture, that he is not called upon by his Creator to believe without 
knowledge, to receive as true propositions which convey no mean- 
ing to the mind. This would be not only irrational, but impossible. 


B. Reason must judge of the Credibility of a Revelation. 


In the second place, it is the prerogative of reason to judge of 
the credibility of a revelation. The word ‘ credible ” is sometimes 
popularly used to mean, easy of belief, ¢. e., probable. In its proper 
sense, it is antithetical to incredible. The incredible is that which 
cannot be believed. The credible is that which can be believed. 
Nothing is incredible but the impossible. What may be, may be 
rationally (7%. e., on adequate grounds) believed. 

A thing may be strange, unaccountable, unintelligible, and yet 
perfectly credible. What is strange or unaccountable to one mind, 
may be perfectly familiar and plain to another. For the most lim- 
ited intellect or experience to make ‘itself the standard of the pos- 
sible and true, would be as absurd as a man’s making his visible 
horizon the limit of space. Unless a man is willing to believe the 
incomprehensible, he can believe nothing, and must dwell forever 
in outer darkness. The most skeptical form of modern philoso- 
phy, which reduces faith and knowledge to a minimum, teaches 
that the incomprehensible is all we know, namely, that force is, and 
that it is persistent. It is most unreasonable, therefore, to urge as 
an objection to Christianity that it demands faith in the incompre- 
hensible. 


§5,B- PROPER OFFICE OF REASON. 51 


The Impossible cannot be believed. 

While this is true and plain, it is no less true that the impossible 
is incredible, and therefore cannot be an object.of faith. Chris- 
tians concede to reason the judiciwm contradictionis, that is, the 
prerogative of deciding whether a thing is possible or impossible. 
If it is seen to be impossible, no authority, and no amount or 
kind of evidence can impose the obligation to receive it as true. 
Whether, however, a thing be possible or not, is not to be arbi- 
trarily determined. Men are prone to pronounce everything im- 
possible which contradicts their settled convictions, their preconcep- 
tions or prejudices, or which is repugnant to their feelings. Men 
in former times did not hesitate to say that it is impossible that the 
earth should turn round on its axis and move through space with 
incredible rapidity, and yet we not perceive it. It was pro- 
nounced absolutely impossible that information should be transmit- 
ted thousands of miles in the fraction of a second. Of course it 
would be folly to reject all evidence of such facts as these on the 
ground of their being impossible. It is no less unreasonable for 
men to reject the truths of revelation on the assumption that they 
involve the impossible, when they contradict our previous convic- 
tions, or when we cannot see how they can be. Men say that it is 
impossible that the same person can be both God and man; and 
yet they admit that man is at once material and immaterial, mortal 
and immortal, angel and animal. The impossible cannot be true ; 
but reason in pronouncing a thing impossible must act rationally 
- and not capriciously. Its judgments must be guided by principles 
which commend themselves to the common consciousness of men, 
Such principles are the following : — 


What is Impossible. 


(1.) That is impossible which involves a contradiction ; as, that 
a thing is and is not; that right is wrong, and wrong right. (2.) 
It is impossible that God should do, approve, or command what is 
morally wrong. (38.) It is impossible that He should require us to 
believe what contradicts any of the laws of belief which He has 
impressed upon our nature. (4.) It is impossible that one truth 
should contradict another. It is impossible, therefore, that God 
should reveal anything as true which contradicts any well authen- 
ticated truth, whether of intuition, experience, or previous revela- 
tion. 

Men may abuse this prerogative of reason, as they abuse their 


62 INTRODUCTION. (Cu. I]. — Rationarism. 


free agency. But the prerogative itself is not to be denied. We 
have a right to reject as untrue whatever it is impossible that God 
should require us to believe. He can no more require us to be- 
lieve what is absurd than to do what is wrong. 


Proof of this Prerogative of Reason. 


1. That reason has the prerogative of the judictwm contradic- 
tionis, is plain, in the first place, from the very nature of the case. 
Faith includes an affirmation of the mind that a thing i is true. But 
it is a contradiction to say that the mind can affirm that to be true 
which it sees cannot by possibility be true. This would be to 
affirm and deny, to believe and disbelieve, at the same time. From 
the very constitution of our nature, therefore, we are forbidden to 
believe the impossible. We are, consequently, not only authorized, 
but required to pronounce anathema an apostle or angel from 
heaven, who should call upon us to receive as a revelation from 
God anything absurd, or wicked, or inconsistent with the intellec- 
tual or moral nature with which He has endowed us. The subjec- 
tion of the human intelligence to God is indeed absolute ; but it is 
a subjection to infinite wisdom and goodness. As it is impossible 
that God should contradict himself, so it is impossible that He 
should, by an external revelation, declare that to be true which 
by the laws of our nature He has rendered it impossible we should 
believe. 

2. This prerogative of reason is constantly recognized in Scrip- 
ture. The prophets called upon the people to reject the doctrines 
of the heathen, because they could not be true. They could not 
be true because they involved contradictions and absurdities ; be- 
cause they were in contradiction to our moral nature, and incon- 
sistent with known truths. Moses taught that nothing was to be 
believed, no matter what amount of external evidence should be 
adduced in its support, which contradicted a previous, duly authen- 
ticated revelation from God. Paul does the same thing when he 
calls upon us to pronounce even an angel accursed, who should 
teach another gospel. He recognized the paramount authority of 
the intuitive judgments of the mind. He says that the damna on 
of any man is just who calls upon us to believe that right is wrong, 
or that men should do evil that good may come. 

3. The ultimate ground of faith and knowledge is confidence in 
God. We can neither believe nor know anything unless we con- 
fide in those laws of belief which God has implanted in our nature. 
If we can be required to believe what contradicts those laws, then 


§5, C0.) PROPER OFFICE OF REASON. 58 


the foundations are broken up. All distinction between truth and 
falsehood, between right and wrong, would disappear. All our 
ideas of God and virtue would be confounded, and we should be- 
come the victims of every adroit deceiver, or minister of Satan, 
who, by lying wonders, should ‘call upon us to believe a lie. We 
are to try the spirits. But how can we try them without a stand. 
ard ? and what other standard can there be, except the laws of our 
nature and the authenticated revelations of God. 


C. Reason must judge of the Evidences of a Revelation. 


In the third place, reason must judge of the evidence by which 
a revelation is supported. 

On this point it may be remarked, — 

1. That as faith involves assent, and assent is conviction pro- 
duced by evidence, it follows that faith without evidence is either 
irrational or impossible. 

2. This evidence must be appropriate to the nature of the truth 
believed. Historical truth requires historical evidence ; empirical 
truths the testimony of.experience ; mathematical truth, mathe- 
matical evidence ; moral truth, moral evidence; and “the things 
of the Spirit,” the demonstration of the Spirit. In many cases 
different kinds of evidence concur in the support of the same truth. 
That Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God, for example, 
is sustained by evidence, historical, moral, and spiritual, so abun- 
dant that our Lord says of those who reject it, that the wrath of 
God abideth on them. 

3. Evidence must be not only appropriate, but adequate. That 
is, such as to command assent in every well-constituted mind to 
which it is presented. 

As we cannot believe without evidence, and as that evidence 
must be appropriate and adequate, it is clearly a prerogative of 
reason to judge of these several points. This is plain. 

1. From the nature of faith, which is not a blind, irrational as- 
sent, but an intelligent reception of the truth on adequate grounds. 

2. The Scriptures never demand faith except on the ground of 
adequate evidence. ‘If I had not done among them,” says our 
Lord, ‘the works which none other man did, they had not had 
sin” (John xv. 24); clearly recognizing the principle that faith 
cannot be required without evidence. The Apostle Paul proves 
that the heathen are justly liable to condemnation for their idolatry 
and immorality, because such a revelation of the true God and of 
the moral law had been made to them, as to leave them without 


excuse. 


54 INTRODUCTION.  [Cu. III. — Ratronarism. 


8. The Bible regards unbelief as a sin, and the great sin for 
which men will be condemned at the bar of God. This presumes 
that unbelief cannot arise from the want of appropriate and ade- 
quate evidence, but is to be referred to the wicked rejection of the 
truth notwithstanding the proof by which it is attended. The pop- 
ular misconception that men are not responsible for their faith, 
arises from a confusion of ideas. It is true that men are not blame- 
worthy for not believing in speculative truths, when the cause of 
their unbelief is ignorance of the fact or of its evidence. It is no 
sin not to believe that the earth moves round the sun, if one be ig- 
norant of the fact or of the evidence of its truth. But wherever 
unbelief arises from an evil heart, then it involves all the guilt 
which belongs to the cause whence it springs. If the wicked hate 
the good and believe them to be as wicked as themselves, this is 
only a proof of their wickedness. If a man does not believe in 
the moral law; if he holds that might is right, that the strong 
may rob, murder, or oppress the weak, as some philosophers 
teach, or if he disbelieve in the existence of God, then it is evi- 
dent to men and angels that he has been given up to a reprobate 
mind. There is an evidence of beauty to which nothing but want 
of taste can render one insensible; there is evidence of moral ex- 
cellence to which nothing but an evil heart can render us blind. 
Why did the Jews reject Christ, notwithstanding all the evidence 
presented in his character, in his words, and in his works, that he 
was the Son of God? ‘He that believeth on him is not con- 
demned: but he that believeth not is condemned already, because 
he hath not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God.” 
(John iii. 18.) The fact, however, that unbelief is a great sin, 
and the special ground of the condemnation of men, of necessity 
supposes that it is inexcusable, that it does not arise from ignorance 
or want of evidence. ‘* How shall they believe,” asks the Apos- 
tle, ‘in him of whom they have not heard.” (Rom. x. 14.) And 
our Lord says, ‘“* This is the condemnation, that light is come 
into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light, because 
their deeds were evil.” (John iii. 19.) 

4. Another evidence that the Scriptures recognize the necessity 
of evidence in order to faith, and the right of those to whom a rev- 
elation is addressed to judge of that evidence, is found in the fre- 
quent command to consider, to examine, to try the spirits, 7. e., 
those who claim to be the organs of the Spirit of God. The duty 
of judging is enjoined, and the standard of judgment is given. 
And then men are held responsible for their decision. 


§ 6.) PHILOSOPHY AND REVELATION. 55 


Christians, therefore, concede to reason all the prerogatives it 
can rightfully claim. God requires nothing irrational of his ra- 
tional creatures. He does not require faith without knowledge, or 
faith in the impossible, or faith without evidence: Christianity is 
equally opposed to superstition and Rationalism. The one is faith 
without appropriate evidence, the other refuses to believe what it 
does not understand, in despite of evidence which should command 
belief. The Christian, conscious of his imbecility as a creature, 
and his ignorance and blindness as a sinner, places himself before 
God, in the posture of a child, and receives as true everything 
which a God of infinite intelligence and goodness declares to be 
worthy of confidence. And in thus submitting to be taught, he 
acts on the highest principles of reason. 


§ 6. Relation of Philosophy and Revelation. 


Cicero defines philosophy as ‘“‘ Rerum divinarum et humana- 
rum, causarumque quibus he res continentur, scientia.”” Peemans? 
says, ‘Philosophia est scientia rerum per causas primas, recto 
rationis usu comparata.”” Or, as Ferrier ® more concisely expresses 
it, “ Philosophy is the attainment of truth by the way of reason.” 
These and other definitions are to be found in Fleming’s “ Vo- 
eabulary of Philosophy.” = + 

There is, however, a philosophia prima, or first philosophy, 
which is concerned not so much with what is to be known, as with 
the faculty of knowledge, which examines the. cognitive faculty, 
determines its laws and its limits. It is the philosophy of phil- 
osophy. 

Whether we take the word to mean the knowledge of God and 
* nature attained by reason, or the principles which should guide all 
efforts for the attainment of knowledge, the word is intended to 
cover the whole domain of human intelligence. Popularly, we 
distinguish between philosophy and science; the former having for 
its sphere the spiritual, the latter, the material. Commonly, phi- 
losophy is understood as comprising both departments. Hence we 
speak of natural philosophy as well as of the philosophy of mind. 
Such being the compass of the domain which philosophers claim as 
their own, the proper relation between philosophy and theology 
becomes a question of vital importance. This is, indeed, the great 
question at issue in the Rationalistic controversy ; and therefore, at 
the conclusion of this chapter, all that remains to be done is to 
give a concise statement of familiar principles. 


1 De Officiis, lib. ii, ¢. 2. 2 Introd. ad Philosophiam, sect. 107 
8 Inst. of Metaphys. p- 2. 


56 | INTRODUCTION. [Cu. I. — Ratronatism. 


Philosophy and Theology occupy Common Ground. 

1. Philosophy and Theology occupy common ground. Both as- 
sume to teach what is true concerning God, man, the world, and 
the relation in which God stands to his creatures. 

2. While their objects are so far identical, both striving to at- 
tain a knowledge of the same truths, their methods are. essentially 
different. Philosophy seeks to attain knowledge by speculation 
and induction, or by the exercise of our own intellectual faculties. 
Theology relies upon authority, receiving as truth whatever God 
in his Word has revealed. 

8. Both these methods are legitimate. Christians do not deny 
that our senses and reason are reliable informants ; that they en- 
able us to arrive at certainty as to what lies within their sphere. 

4. God is the author of our nature and the maker of heaven and 
earth, therefore nothing which the laws of our nature or the facts 
of the external world prove to be true, can contradict the teach- 
ing of God’s Word. Neither-can the Scriptures contradict the 
truths of philosophy or science. ; 


Philosophers and Theologians should Strive after Unity. 


5. As these two great sources of knowledge must be consistent 
in their valid teachings, it is the duty of all parties to endeavor to 
exhibit that consistency. Philosophers should not ignore the teach- 
ings of the Bible, and theologians should not ignore the teachings 
of science. Much less should either class needlessly come into 
collision with the other. It is unreasonable and irreligious for 
philosophers to adopt and promulgate theories inconsistent with the 
facts of the Bible, when those theories are sustained by only plausi- 
ble evidence, which does not command the assent even of the body 
of scientific men themselves. On the other hand, it is unwise for 
theologians to insist on an interpretation of Scripture which brings 
it into collision with the facts of science. Both of these mistakes 
are often made. The Bible, for example, clearly teaches the unity 
of the existing races of men, both as to origin and species. Many 
Naturalists, however, insist that they are diverse, some say, both in 
origin and kind, and others, in origin if not in species. This is 
done not only on merely plausible evidence, being one of several 
possible ways of accounting for acknowledged diversities, but in 
opposition to the most decisive proof to the contrary. This proof, 
so far as it is historical and philological, does not fall within the 
sphere of natural science, and therefore the mere Naturalist disre. 


———-" 


$6] PHILOSOPHY AND REVELATION. 57 


gards it. Comparative philologists hold up their hands at the ob- 
tuseness of men of science, who maintain that races have had differ- 
ent origins, whose languages render it clear to demonstration that 
they have been derived from a common stock.’ Considering the 
overwhelming weight of evidence of the divine authority of the 
Scriptures, and the unspeakable importance of that authority being 
maintained over the minds and hearts of men, it evinces fearful 
recklessness on the part of those who wantonly impugn its teach- 
ings. On the other hand, it is unwise in theologians to array 
themselves needlessly against the teachings of science. Romanists 
and Protestants vainly resisted the adoption of the Copernican the- 
ory of our solar system. They interpreted the Bible in a sense cone 
tradictory to that theory. So far as in them lay, they staked the 
authority of the Bible on the correctness of their interpretation. 
The theory proved to be true, and the received interpretation had 
to be given up. The Bible, however, has received no injury, 
although theologians have been taught an important lesson ; that 
is, to let science take its course, assured that the Scriptures will 
accommodate themselves to all well-authenticated scientific facts in 
time to come, as they have in time past. 


The Authority of Facts. 
6. The relation between Revelation and Philosophy (taking the 


word in its restricted sense) is different from that between Reve- 
lation and Science. Or, to express the same idea in different words, 
the relation between revelation and facts is one thing; and the 
relation between revelation and theories another thing. Facts do 
not admit of denial. They are determined by the wisdom and will 
of God. To deny facts, is to deny what God affirms to be true. 
This the Bible cannot do. It cannot contradict God. The theo- 
logian, therefore, acknowledges that the Scriptures must be inter- 
preted in accordance with established facts. He has a right, how- 
- ever, to demand that those facts should be verified beyond the 
‘possibility of doubt. Scientific men in one age or country affirm 
the truth of facts, which others deny or disprove. It would be a 
lamentable spectacle to see the Church changing its doctrines, or 
its interpretation of Scripture, to suit the constantly changing rep- 
resentations of scientific men as to matters of fact. 

While acknowledging their obligation to admit undeniable facts, 
theologians are at liberty to receive or reject the theories deduced 
from those facts. Such theories are human speculations, and can 
have no higher authority than their own inherent probability. 


58 INTRODUCTION.  [Cu. II.— Rationatism. 


The facts of light, electricity, magnetism, are permanent. The 
theories concerning them are céuetantty changing. The facts of 
geology are to be abel Sd the theories of geologists have no 
coercive authority. The facts of physiolog gy and compar ative anat- 
omy may be received; but no man is bound to receive any of the 
various conflicting theories of development. Obvious as this dis- 
tinction between facts and theories is, it is nevertheless often disre- 
garded. Scientific men are disposed to demand for their theories, 
the authority due only to established facts. And theologians, be- 
cause at liberty to reject theories, are sometimes led to assert their 
independence of facts. 


The Authority of the Bible higher than that of Philosophy. 


7. Philosophy, in its widest sense, being the conclusions of the 
human intelligence as to what is true, and the Bible being the 
declaration of God, as to what is true, it is plain that where the 
two contradict each other, philosophy must yield to revelation ; 
man must yield to God. It has been admitted that revelation 
cannot contradict facts; that the Bible must be interpreted in ac- 
cordance witu what God has clearly made known in the constitu- 
tion of our nature and in the outward world. But the great body 
of what passes for philosophy or science, is merely human specula- 
tion. What is the philosophy of the Orientals, of Brahmins and 
Buddhists, of the early Gnostics, of the Platonists, of the Scotists 
in the Middle Ages; of*Leibnitz with his monads and preéstablished 
harmony ; of Des Cartes and his vortices ; of Kant and his catego- 
ries; of Fichte, Schelling, and Hegel, with their different theories 
of idealistic pantheism ? The answer to that question is, that these 
systems of philosophy are so many forms of human speculation; 
and consequently that so far as these speculations agree with the 
Bible they are true; and so far as they differ from it, they are false 
and worthless. This is the ground which every believer, learned 
or unlearned, is authorized and bound to take. If the Bible teaches 
that God is a person, the philosophy that teaches that an infinite | 
being cannot be a person, is false. If the Bible teaches that God 
creates, controls, regenerates, the philosophy that forbids the as- 
sumption that He acts in time, is to be rejected. If the Bible 
teaches that the soul exists after the dissolution of the body, the 
philosophy which teaches that man is only the ephemeral manifes- 
tation of a generic life in connection with a given corporeal organ- 
ization, is to be dismissed without further examination. In shore 
the Bible teaches certain doctrines concerning the nature of God 


§ 7.) THE SENSES IN MATTERS OF FAITH. 59 


and his relation to the world; concerning the origin, nature, and 
destiny of man; concerning the nature of virtue, the ground of 
moral El gations human liber ty and responsibility ; what is the rule 
of duty, what is right and what is wrong in all our relations to God 
and to our fellow creatures. These are subjects on which philoso- 
phy undertakes to speculate and dogmatize ; if in any case these 
speculations come into conflict with what is taught or necessarily 
implied in the Bible, they are thereby refuted, as by a reductio ad 
absurdum. And the disposition which refuses to give up these 
speculations in obedience to the teaching of the Bible, is inconsist- 
ent with Christianity. It is the indispensable condition of salvation 
through the gospel, that we receive as true whatever God has 
revealed in his Word. We must make our choice between the 
wisdom of men and the wisdom of God. The wisdom of men is 
foolishness with God ; and the wisdom of God is foolishness to the 
wise of this world. 

The relation, therefore, between philosophy and revelation, as 
determined by the Scriptures themselves, is what every right- 
minded man must approve. Everything is conceded to philesophy, 
and science, which they can riphtfally demand. It is admitted 
that they have a large and important sphere of investigation. It 
is admitted that within that sphere they are entitled to the greatest 
deference. It is cheerfully conceded that they have accomplished 
much, not only as means of mental discipline, but in the enlarge- 
ment of the sphere of human knowledge, and in promoting the re- 
finement and well-being of men. It is admitted that theologians 
are not infallible, in the interpretation of Scripture. It may, there- 
fore, happen in the future, as it has in the past, that interpreta- 
tions of the Bible, long confidently received, must be modified or 
abandoned, to bring revelation into harmony with what God teaches 
in his works. This change of view as to the true meaning of the 
Bible may be a painful trial to the Church, but it does not in the 
least impair the authority of the Scriptures. They remain infalli- 
ble ; we are merely convicted of having mistaken their meaning. 


§ 7. Office of the Senses in Matters of Faith. 


The question, What authority is due to the senses in matters of 
faith, arose out of the controversy between Romanists and Prot- 
estants. The doctrine of transubstantiation, as taught by the 
Romish Church, contradicts the testimony of our senses of sight, 
taste, and touch. It was natural for Protestants to appeal to this 
contradiction as decisive evidence against the doctrine. Romanists 


60 INTRODUCTION.  [Cu. I.—Ratronarism. 


reply by denying the competency of the senses to bear testimony 
in such cases. 

Protestants maintain the validity of that testimony on the fol- 
lowing grounds: (1.) Confidence in the well-authenticated testi- 
mony of our senses, is one of those laws of belief which God has 
impressed upon our nature ; from the authority of those laws it is 
impossible that we should emancipate ourselves. (2.) Confidence 
in our senses is, therefore, one form of confidence in God. It sup- 
poses him to have placed us under the necessity of error, to assume 
that we cannot safely trust the guides in which, by a law of our 
nature, he constrains us to confide. (8.) All ground of certainty 
in matters either of faith or knowledge, is destroyed, if confidence 
in the laws of our nature be abandoned. Nothing is then pos- 
sible but absolute skepticism. We, in that case, cannot know 
that we ourselves exist, or that the world exists, or that there is a 
God, or a moral Jaw, or any responsibility for character or conduct. 
(4.) All external supernatural revelation is addressed to the senses. 
Those who heard Christ had to trust to their sense of hearing; 
those who read the Bible have to trust to their sense of sight; 
those who receive the testimony of the Church, receive it through 
their senses. It is suicidal, therefore, in the Romanists to say that 
the senses are not to be trusted in matters of faith. 

All the arguments derived from the false judgments of men when 
misled by the senses, are answered by the simple statement of the 
proposition, that the senses are to be trusted only within their legit- 
imate sphere. The eye may indeed deceive us when the condi- 
tions of correct vision are not present; but this does not prove that 
it is not to be trusted within its appropriate lim‘ ts. 


CHAPTER IV. 
MYSTICISM. 


§ 1. Meaning of the Words Enthusiasm and Mysticiem. 


In the popular sense of the word, enthusiasm means a high state 
of mental excitement. In that state all the powers are exalted, 
the thoughts become more comprehensive and vivid, the feelings 
more fervid, and the will more determined. It is in these periods 
of excitement that the greatest works of genius, whether by poets, 
painters, or warriors, have been accomplished. The ancients re- 
ferred this exaltation of the inner man to a divine influence. They 
regarded persons thus excited as possessed, or ‘having a God within 
them. Hence they were called enthusiasts (évOeos). In theology, 
therefore, those who ignore or reject the guidance of the Scriptures, 
and assume to be led by an inward divine influence into the knowl- 
edge and obedience of the truth, are properly called Enthusiasts. 
This term, however, has been in a great measure superseded by 
the word Mystics. 

Few words indeed have been used in such a vague, indefinite 
sense as Mysticism. Its etymology does not determine its mean. 
ing. A porns was one initiated into the knowledge of the Greek 
mysteries, one to whom secret things had been revealed. Hence 
in the wide sense of the word, a Mystic is one who claims to see or 
know what is hidden from other men, whether this knowledge be 
attained by immediate intuition, or by inward revelation. In most 
cases these methods were assumed to be identical, as intuition was 
held to be the immediate vision of God and of divine things. 
Hence, in the wide sense of the word, Mystics are those who 
claim to be under the immediate guidance of God or of his Spirit. 


A. The Philosophical Use of the Word. 


Hence Mysticism, in this sense, includes all those systems of 
philosophy, which teach either the identity of God and the soul, or 
ae immediate intuition of the infinite. The pantheism of the 
Brahmins and Buddhists, the theosophy of the Sufis, the Egyptian, 
and many forms of the Greek philosophy, in this acceptation of the 


62 INTRODUCTION. [Cu. IV. — Mysticism. 


term, are all Mystical. As the same system has been reproduced 
in modern times, the same designation is applied to the philosophy 
of Spinoza, and its various modifications. According to Cousin, 
“Mysticism in philosophy is the belief that God may be known 
face to face, without anything intermediate. It isa yielding to the 
sentiment awakened by the idea of the infinite, and a running up 
of all knowledge and all duty to the contemplation and love of 
Him.” ! 

For the same reason the whole Alexandrian school of theology 
in the early Church has been called Mystical. They character- 
istically depreciated the outward authority of the Scriptures, and 
exalted that of the inward light. It is true they called that light 
reason, but they regarded it as divine. According to the new 
Platonic doctrine, the Adyos, or impersonal reason of God, is Reason 
in man; or as Clemens Alexandrinus said, The Logos was a light 
common to all men. That, therefore, to which supreme authority 
was ascribed in the pursuit of truth, was ‘ God within us.” This 
is the doctrine of niodern Eclecticism as presented by Cousin. 
That philosopher says, ‘* Reason is impersonal in its nature. It is 
not we who make it. Itis so far from being individual, that its 
peculiar characteristics are the opposite of individuality, namely, 
universality and necessity, since it is to Reason we owe the 
knowledge of universal and necessary truths, of principles which 
we all obey, and cannot but obey. . . . . It descends from 
God, and approaches man. It makes its appearance in the con- 
sciousness as a guest, who brings intelligence of an unknown 
world, of which it at once presents the idea and awakens the want. 
If reason were personal, it would have no value, no authority be- 
yond the limits of the individual subject. . . . . Reason is a 
revelation, a necessary and universal revelation which is wanting 
to no man, and which enlightens every man on his coming into the 
world. Reason is the necessary mediator between God and man, 
the Adyos of Pythagoras and Plato, the Word made Flesh, which 
serves as the interpreter of God, and teacher of man, divine and 
human at the same time. It is not indeed the absolute God in his 
majestic individuality, but his manifestation in spirit and in truth. 
It is not the Being of beings, but it is the revealed God of the 
human race.” 2 

Reason, according to this system, is not a faculty of the human 


1 Cours de Hist. de la Phil. Mod. Prem. Sér. Paris, 1846, vol. ii. leg. 9, 10. pp. 95, 120 


2 Specimens of Foreign Standard Literature, edited by George Ripley, vol. i.; Philosoph- 
tcal Miscellanies from Cousin, et al., pp. 125, 149. : : 


$1, B.J MYSTICISM. USAGE OF THE WORD. 63 


soul, but God in man. As electricity and magnetism are (or used 
to be) regarded as forces diffused through the material world, so 
the Adyos, the divine impersonal reason, is diffused through the 
world of mind, and reveals itself more or less potentially in the 
souls of all men. This theory, in one aspect, is a form of Ration- 
alism, as it refers all our higher, and especially our religious knowl- 
edge, to a subjective source, which it designates Reason. It has, 
however, more points of analogy with Mysticism, because, (1.) It 
assumes that the informing principle, the source of knowledge and 
guide in duty, is divine, something which does not belong to our 
nature, but appears as a guest in our consciousness. (2.) The 
office of this inward principle, or light, is the same in both sys- 
tems. It is to reveal truth and duty, to elevate and purify the 
soul. (8.) Its authority is the same; that is, it is paramount if 
not exclusive. (4.) Its very designations are the same. It is 
called by philosophers, God, the Adyos, the Word; by Christians, 
Christ within us, or, the Spirit. Thus systems apparently the 
most diverse (Cousin and George Fox!) run into each other, and 
reveal themselves as reproductions of heathen philosophy, or of 
the heresies of the early Church. 

Although the Alexandrian theologians had these points of agree- 
ment with the Mystics, yet as they were speculative in their whole 
tendency, and strove to transmute Christianity into a philosophy, 
they are not properly to be regarded as Mystics in the generally 
received theological meaning of the term. 


B. The Sense in which Evangelical Christians are called 
Mystics. 

As all Evangelical Christians admit a supernatural influence of 
the Spirit of God upon the soul, and recognize a higher form of 
knowledge, holiness, and fellowship with God, as the effects of that 
influence, they are stigmatized as Mystics, by those who discard 
everything supernatural from Christianity. The definitions of 
Mysticism given by Rationalists are designedly so framed as to in- 
clude what all evangelical Christians hold to be true concerning the 
illumination, teaching, and guidance of the Holy Spirit. Thus 
Wegscheider } says, “* Mysticismus est persuasio de singulari anime 
facultate ad immediatum ipsoque sensu percipiendum cum numine 
aut naturis coelestibus commercium jam in hac vita perveniendi, 
quo mens immediate cognitione rerum divinarum ac beatitate per- 
fruatur.”” And Bretschneider? defines Mysticism as a “ Belief ‘n 

1 Inst. § 5. 2 Systematische Entwickelung, fourth edit. p. 19. 


64 . INTRODUCTION. [Cu. IV.— Mysticism. 


a continuous operation of God on the soul, secured by special re- 
ligious exercise, producing illumination, holiness, and beatitude.” 
Eitangelivsl theologians so far acquiesce in this view, that they say, 
as Lange,! and Nitsch,? “ that every true believer is a Mystic.” The 
latter writer adds, ‘* That the Christian ideas of illumination, reve- 
lation, incarnation, regeneration, the sacraments and the resurrec- 
tion, are essentially Mystical elements. As often as the religious 
and church-life recovers itself from formalism and scholastic bar- 
renness, and is truly revived, it always appears as Mystical, and 
gives rise to the outery that Mysticism is gaining the ascendency.” 
Some writers, indeed, make a distinction between Mystik and Mys- 
ticismus. ‘Die innerliche Lebendigkeit der Religion ist allezeit 
Mystik” (The inward vitality of religion is ever Mystik), says 
Nitsch, but ‘ Mysticismus ist eine einseitige Herrschaft und eine 
Ausartung der mystischen Richtung.” That is, Mysticism is an 
undue and perverted development of the mystical element which 
belongs to true religion. This distinction, between Mystik and 
Mysticismus, is not generally recognized, and cannot be well ex- 
pressed in English. Lange, instead of using different words, speaks 
of a true and false Mysticism. But different things should be desig- 
nated by different words. There has been a religious theory, which 
has more or less extensively prevailed in the Church, which is distin- 
guished from the Scriptural doctrine by unmistakable characteris- 
tics, and which is known in church history as Mysticism, and the 
word should be restricted to that theory. It is the theory, variously 
modified, that the knowledge, purity, and blessedness to be derived 
from communion with God, are not to be attained from the Scrip- 
tures and the use of the ordinary means of grace, but by a super- 
natural and immediate divine influence, which influence (or com- 
munication of God to the soul) is to be secured by passivity, a 
simple yielding the soul without thought or effort to the divine 
influx. 


C. The System which makes the Feelings the Source of 
Knowledge. 


A still wider use of the word Mysticism has to some extent been 
adopted. Any system, whether in philosophy or religion, which as- 
signs more importance to the feelings than to the intellect, is called 
Mystical. Cousin, and after him, Morell, arrange the systems of 
philosophy under the heads of Sensationalism, Idealism, Skepticism, 


1 In Herzog’s Encyklopddie, art. “ Mystik.’ 
2 System dex Chrisilichen Lehre, fifth edit. p. 35. 


§1, CJ MYSTICISM. USAGE OF THE WORD. 65 


and Mysticism. The first makes the senses the exclusive or pre- 
dominant source of our knowledge ; the second, the self, in its 
constitution and laws, as understood and apprehended by the intel- 
lect ; and Mysticism, the feelings. The Mystic assumes that the 
senses and reason are alike untrustworthy and inadequate, as 
sources of knowledge; that nothing can be received with confi- 
dence as truth, at least in the higher departments of knowledge, in 
all that relates to our own nature, to God, and our relation to Him, 
except what is revealed either naturally or supernaturally in the 
feelings. There are two forms of Mysticism, therefore: the one 
which assumes the feelings themselves to be the sources of this 
knowledge ; the other that it is through the feelings that God makes. 
the truth known to the soul Reason is no longer viewed as the 
great organ of truth; its decisions are enstamped as uncertain, 
faulty, and well-nigh valueless, while the inward impulses of our 
sensibility, developing themselves in the form of faith or of inspira- 
tion, are held up as the true and infallible source of human knowl- 
edes, The fundamental process, therefore, of all Mysticism, is to 
reverse the true order of nature, and give the precedence to the 
emotional instead of the intellectual element of the human mind.” ? 
This is declared to be “ the common ground of all Mysticism.” 


Schletermacher’s Theory. 


If this be a correct view of the nature of Mysticism ; if it con- 
sists in giving predominant authority to the feelings in matters of 
religion ; and if their impulses, developing themselves in the form 
of faith, are the true and infallible source of knowledge, then 
Schleiermacher’s system, adopted and expounded by Morell him- 
self in his ‘* Philosophy of Religion,” is the most elaborate system 
of theology ever presented to the Church. It is the fundamental 
principle of Schleiermacher’s theory, that religion resides not in the 
intelligence, or the will or active powers, but-in the sensibility. It 
is a form of feeling, a sense of absolute dependence. Instead of 
being, as we seem to be, individual, separate free agents, origi- 
nating our own acts, we recognize ourselves as a part of a great 
whole, determined in all things by the great whole, of which we 
area part. We find ourselves as finite creatures over against an 
infinite Being, in relation to whom we are as nothing. The Infi- 
nite is everything; and everything is only a manifestation of the 


2 See Cousin’s Cours de I Histoire de la Philosophie, and Morell’s History of Modern Phi- 


tosophy, p. 556 ff. 
2 Morell, p. 560. 


yOL. I. 5 


66 INTRODUCTION. [Ca. IV. — Mysticism. 


Infinite. “ Although man,” says even Morell, “ while in the midst 
of finite objects, always feels himself to a certain extent free and 
independent ; yet in the presence of that which is self-existent, in- 
finite, and eternal, he may feel the sense of freedom utterly pass 
away, and become absorbed in the sense of absolute dependence.” ? 
This is said to be the essential principle of religion in all its forms 
from Fetichism up to Christianity. It depends mainly on the de- 
gree of culture of the individual or community, in what way this 
sense of dependence shall reveal itself : because the more enlight- 
ened and pure the individual is, the more he will be able to ap- 
prehend aright what is involved in this sense of dependence 
upon God. Revelation is not the communication of new truth to 
the understanding, but the providential influences by which the re- 
ligious life is awakened in the soul. Inspiration is not the divine 
influence which controls the mental operations and utterances of 
its subject, so as to render him infallible in the communication of 
the truth revealed, but simply the intuition of eternal verities due 
to the excited state of the religious feelings. Christianity, subjec- 
tively considered, is the intuitions of good men, as occasioned and 
determined by the appearance of Christ. Objectively considered, 
or, in other words, Christian theology, it is the logical analysis, and 
scientific arrangement and elucidation of the truths involved in 
those intuitions. The Scriptures, as a rule of faith, have no au- 
thority. They are of value only as means of awakening in us the 
religious life experienced by the Apostles, and thus enabling us to 
attain like intuitions of divine things. The source of our religious 
life, according to this system, is the feelings, and if this be the char- 
acteristic feature of Mysticism, the Schleiermacher doctrine is purely 
Mystical. 


D. Mysticism as known in Church History. 


This, however, is not what is meant by Mysticism, as it has ap- 
peared in the Christian Church. The Mystics, as already stated, 
are those who claim an immediate communication of divine knowl- 
edge and of divine life from God to the soul, independently of the 
Scriptures and the use of the ordinary means of grace. “ It de- 
spairs,” says Fleming, ‘of the regular process of science ; it be- 
lieves that we may attain directly, without the aid of the senses or 
reason, and by an immediate intuition, the real and absolute prin- 
ciple of all truth, — God.” 2 

Mystics are of two classes; the Theosophists, whose object is 

1 Philosophy of Religion, p. 75. 2 Word “ Mysticism.’ 


— 


31, DJ MYS'ITCISM. USAGE OF THE WORD. 67 


knowledge, und with whom the organ of communication with God, 
is the reason ; and the Mystics proper, whose object is, life, purity, 
and beatitude ; and with whom the organ of communication, or re- 
teptivity, is the feelings. They agree, first, in relying on the im- 
suediate revelation or communication of God to the soul; and sec- 
ondly, that these communications are to be attained, in the neglect 
of outward means, by quiet or passive contemplation. “The The- 
asophist is one who gives a theory of God, or of the works of God, 
which has not reason, but an inspiration of his own for its basis.’’ } 
“The Theosophists, neither contented with the natural light of 
reason, nor with the simple doctrines of Scripture understood in 
their literal sense, have recourse to an internal supernatural light 
superior to all other illuminations, from which they profess to de- 
rive a mysterious and divine philosophy manifested only to the 
chosen favorites of heaven.” 2 


Mysticism not identical with the Doctrine of Spiritual Illumination. 


Mysticism, then, is not to be confounded with the doctrine of 
spiritual illumination as held by all evangelical Christians. The 
Scriptures clearly teach that the mere outward presentation of the 
truth in the Word, does not suffice to the conversion or sanctifica- 
tion of men; that the natural, or unrenewed man, does not receive 
the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him ; 
neither can he know them; that in order to any saving knowledge 
of the truth, 7. ¢., of such knowledge as produces holy affections 
and secures a holy life, there is need of an inward supernatural 
teaching of the Spirit, producing what the Scriptures call “ spirit- 
ual discernment.” This supernatural teaching our Lord promised 
to his disciples when He said that Ile would send them the Spirit 
of truth to dwell in them, and to guide them into the knowledge 
of the truth. For this teaching the sacred writers pray that it may 
be granted not to themselves only, but to all who heard their words 
or read their writings. On this they depended exclusively for 
their success in preaching or teaching. Hence believers were des- 
ignated as zvevparixoi, a Spiritu Dei illuminati, qui reguntur a 
Spiritu. And men of the world, unrenewed men, are described as 
tose who have not the Spirit. God, therefore, does hold immedi- 
ate intercourse with the souls of men. He reveals himself unto his 
people, as He does not unto the world. He gives them the Spirit 
of revelation in the knowledge of himself. (Eph. i.17.) He un- 


1 Vaughan, Hours with the Mystics, vol. i. p. 45. 
2 Taylor, Elements of Thought. See Fleming, word ‘‘ Theosophism.” 


68 INTRODUCTION. Cu. IV.-— Mysticism. 


folds to them his glory, and fills them with a joy which passes un- 
derstanding. All this is admitted; but this is very different fro. 
Mysticism. The two things, namely, spiritual illumination ana 
Mysticism, differ, firstly, as to their object. The object of the 
inward teaching of the Spirit is to enable us to discern the trutk 
and excellence of what is already objectively revealed in the Bible. 
The illumination claimed by the Mystic communicates truth inde- 
pendently of its objective revelation. It is not intended to enable 
us to appreciate what we already know, but to communicate new 
knowledge. It would be one thing to enable a man to discern and 
appreciate the beauty of a work of art placed before his eyes, and 
quite another thing to give him the intuition of all possible forms 
of truth and beauty, independent of everything external. So there 
is a great difference between that influence which enables the soul 
to discern the things “ freely given to us of God ” (1 Cor. ii. 12) in 
his Word, and the immediate revelation to the mind of all the con- 
tents of that word, or of their equivalents. 

The doctrines of spiritual illumination and of Mysticism differ 
not only in the object, but secondly, in the manner in which that 
object is to be attained. The inward teaching of the Spirit is to be 
sought by prayer, and the diligent use of the appointed means ; the 
intuitions of the Mystic are sought in the neglect of all means, 
in the suppression of all activity inward and outward, and in a 
passive waiting for the influx of God into the soul. They differ, 
thirdly, in their effects. The effect of spiritual illumination is, that 
the Word dwells in us “in all wisdom and spiritual understanding” 
(Col. i. 9). What dwells in the mind of the Mystic are his own 
imaginings, the character of which depends on his own subjective 
state ; and whatever they are, they are of man and not of God. 


Jt differs from the Doctrine of the “Leading of the Spirit.” 


Neither is Mysticism to be confounded with the doctrine of 
spiritual guidance. Evangelical Christians admit that the children 
of God are led by the Spirit of God; that their convictions as to 
truth and duty, their inward character and outward conduct, are 
moulded by his influence. They are children unable to guide 
themselves, who are led by an ever-present Father of infinite wis- 
dom and love. This guidance is partly providential, ordering their 
external circumstances; partly through the Word, which is a lamp 
to their feet ; and partly by the inward influence of the Spirit on 
the mind. This last, however, is also through the Word, making 
it intelligible and effectual; bringing it suitably to remembrance. 


§ 2, A.J MYSTICISM IN THE EARLY CHURCH. 69 


God leads his people by the cords of a man, 7. e., in accordance 
with the laws of his nature. This is very different from the doc- 
trine that the soul, by yielding itself passively to God, is filled with 
all truth and goodness ; or, fhat in special emergencies it is con- 
trolled by blind, irrational impulses. 


Lt differs from the Doctrine of ** Common Grace.” 


Finally, Mysticism differs from the doctrine of common grace as 
held by all Augustinians, and that of sufficient grace as held by 
Arminians. All Christians believe that as God is everywhere 
present in the material world, guiding the operation of second 
causes so that they secure the results which He designs; so his 
Spirit is everywhere present with the minds of men, exciting to 
good and restraining from evil, effectually controlling human char- 
acter and conduct, consistently with the laws of rational beings. 
According to the Arminian theory this “‘*common grace”’ is suffi- 
cient, if properly cultured and obeyed, to lead men to salvation, 
whether Pagans, Mohammedans, or Christians. There is little 
analogy, however, between this doctrine of common, or sufficient 
grace, and Mysticism as it has revealed itself in the history of the 
Church. The one assumes an influence of the Spirit on all men 
analogous to the providential efficiency of God in nature, the other 
an influence analogous to that granted to prophets and apostles. 
involving both revelation and inspiration. 


§ 2. Mysticism in the Early Church. 
A. Montanism. 


The Montanists who arose toward the close of the second cen- 
tury had, in one aspect, some affinity to Mysticism. Montanus 
taught that as the ancient prophets predicted the coming of the 
Messiah through whom new revelations were to be made; so Christ 
predicted the coming of the Paraclete through whom further com- 
munications of the mind of God were to be made to his people. 
Tertullian, by whom this system was reduced to order and com- 
mended to the higher class of minds, did indeed maintain that the 
cule of faith was fixed and immutable ; but nevertheless that there 
was need of a continued supernatural revelation of truth, at least as 
to matters of duty and discipline. This supernatural revelation was 
made through the Paraclete ; whether, as was perhaps the general 
idea among the Montanists, by communications granted, from time 
to time, to special individuals, who thereby became Christian proph- 


70 - INTRODUCTION. (Cu. IV.— Mysticism, 


ets; or by an influence common to all believers, which however some 
more than others experienced and improved. The following pas- 
sage from Tertullian! gives clearly the fundamental principle of the 
system, so far as this point is concerned: “ Regula quidem fidei una 
omnino est, sola immobilis et irreformabilis. . . . . Hac lege 
fidei manente, cetera’ jam discipline et conversationis admittunt 
novitatem correctionis; operante scilicet et proficiente usque in 
finem gratiaDei. . . . . Propterea Paracletum misit Dominus, © 
ut, quoniam humana mediocritas omnia semel capere non poterat, 
paulatim dirigeretur et ordinaretur et ad perfectum perduceretur 
disciplina ab illo vicario Domini Spiritu Sancto. Que est ergo 
Paracleti administratio nisi hec, quod disciplina dirigitur, quod 
Scripture revelantur, quod intellectus reformatur, quod ad meliora 
proficitur? . . . . Justitia primo fuit in rudimentis, natura 
Deum metuens; dehinc per legem et prophetas promovit in infan- 
tiam ; dehinc per evangelium efferbuit in juventutem; nunc per 
Paracletum componitur in maturitatem.”’ 

The points of analogy between Montanism and Mysticism are 
that both assume the insufficiency of the Scriptures and the ordi- 
nances of the Church for the full development of the Christian life ; 
and both assert the necessity of a continued, supernatural, revela- 
tion from the Spirit of God. In other respects the two tendencies 
were divergent. Mysticism was directed to the inner life ; Mon- 
tanism to the outward. It concerned itself with the reformation 
of manners and strictness of discipline. It enjoined fasts, and 
other ascetic practices. As it depended on the supernatural and 
continued guidance of the Spirit, it was on the one hand opposed 
to speculation, or the attempt to develop Christianity by philoso- 
phy ; and on the other to the dominant authority of the bishops. 
Its denunciatory and exclusive spirit led to its condemnation as 
heretical. As the Montanists excommunicated the Church, the 
Church excommunicated them.2 _ 


B. The so-called Dionysius, the Areopagite. 


Mysticism, in the common acceptation of the term, is antagonis- 
tic to speculation. And yet they are often united. There have 
been speculative or philosophical Mystics. The father indeed of 
Mysticism in the Christian Church, was a philosopher. About the 


1 De Virgg. Veland. oc. 1.— Edit. Basle, 1562, p. 490. 

2 See Neander’s Dogmengeschichte, vol. i. Schwegler, F. C. (disciple of Baur) Der Mon- 
tanismus und die Chrisiliche Kirche des Zweiten Jahrhunderts, Tub. 1841-48. A concise 
and clear account of Montanism is given in Mosheim’s Commentaries on the Affairs of 
Christians before the Time of Constantine, vol. i. § 66, pp. 497 ff. of Murdock’s edition. 


§ 2, BJ MYSTICISM IN THE EARLY CHURCH. 71 


year A. D. 523, during the Monothelite controversy certain writ- 
ings were quoted as of authority as being the productions of Dionys- 
ius the Areopagite. The total silence respecting them during the 
preceding centuries; the philosophical views which they express ; 
the allusions to the state of the Church with which they abound, 
have produced the conviction, universally entertained, that they 
were the work of some author who lived in the latter part of the 
fifth century. The most learned investigators, however, confess 
their inability to fix with certainty or even with probability on any 
writer to whom they can be referred. Though their authorship 
is unknown, their influence has been confessedly great. The works 
which bear the pseudonym of Dionysius are, “The Celestial 
Hierarchy,” ‘‘ The Terrestrial Hierarchy,” ‘ Mystical Theology,” 
and “Twelve Epistles.’”’ Their contents show that their author 
belonged to the school of the New Platonists, and that his object 
was to propagate the peculiar views of that school in the Christian 
Church. The writer attempts to show that the real, esoteric doc- 
trines of Christianity are identical with those of his own school of 
philosophy. In other words, he taught New Platonism, in the 
terminology of the Church. Christian ideas were entirely ex- 
cluded, while the language of the Bible was retained. Thus in our 
day we have had the philosophy of Schelling and Hegel set forth 
in the formulas of Christian theology. 


New Platonism. 


The New Platonists taught that the original ground and source 
of all things was simple being, without life or consciousness ; of 
which absolutely nothing could be known, beyond that it is. They 
assumed an unknown quantity, of which nothing can be predicated. 
The pseudo-Dionysius called this original ground of all things 
God, and taught that God was mere being without attributes of 
any kind, not only unknowable by man, but of whom there was 
nothing to be known, as absolute being is in the language of the 
modern philosophy, — Nothing; nothing in itself, yet nevertheless 
the dvvapis tov avr. 

The universe proceeds from primal being, not by any exercise 
of conscious power or will, but by a process or emanation. The 
familiar illustration is derived from the flow of light from the sun. 
With this difference, however. That the sun emits light, is a proof 
that it is itself luminous; but the fact that intelligent beings ema- 
nate from the “ ground-being,” is nct admitted as proof that it is 
intelligent. The fact that the air produces cheerfulness, say these 


72 INTRODUCTION. _[Ca. IV. — Mysticism 


philosophers, does not prove that the atmosphere experiences joy. 
We can infer nothing as to the nature of the cause from the nature 
of the effects. : 

These emanations are of different orders; decreasing in dignity 
and excellence as they are distant from the primal source. The 
first of these emanations is mind, vos, intelligence individualized in 
different ranks of spiritual beings. The next, proceeding from the 
first, is soul, which becomes individualized by organic or vital con- 
nection with matter. There is, therefore, an intelligence of intelli- 
gences, and also a soul of souls; hence their generic unity. Evil 
arises from the connection of the spiritual with the corporeal, and 
yet this connection so far as souls are concerned, is necessary to 
their individuality. Every soul, therefore, is an emanation from the 
soul of the world, as that is from God, through the Intelligence. 

As there is no individual soul without a body, and as evil is the 
necessary consequence of union with a body, evil is not only neces- 
sary or unavoidable, it is a good. 

The end of philosophy is the immediate vision of God, which 
gives the soul supreme blessedness and rest. This union with 
God is attained by sinking into ourselves; by passivity. As we 
are a form, or mode of God’s existence, we find God in ourselves, 
and are consciously one with him, when this is really apprehended ;_ 
or, when we suffer God, as it were, to absorb our individuality. 

The primary emanations from the ground of all being, which 
the heathen called gods (as they had gods many and lords many) ; 
the New Platonists, spirits or intelligences; and the Gnostics, 
gons; the pseudo-Dionysius called angels. These he divided 
into three triads: (1.) thrones, cherubim, and seraphim ; (2.) pow- 
ers, lordships, authorities ; (8.) angels, archangels, principalities. 
He classified the ordinances and officers and members of the 
Church into corresponding triads: (1.) The sacraments, — bap- 
tism, communion, anointing, — these were the means of initiation 
or consecration ; (2.) The initiators,— bishops, priests, deacons; 
(8.) The initiated, — monks, the baptized, catechumens. 

The terms God, sin, redemption, are retained in this system, but 
the meaning attached to them was entirely inconsistent with the 
sense they bear in the Bible and in the Christian Church. The 
pseudo-Dionysius was a heathen philosopher in the vestments of a 
Christian minister. The philosophy which he taught he claimed 
to be the true sense of the doctrines of the Church, as that sense 
had been handed down by a secret tradition. Notwithstanding its 
heathen origin and character, its influence in the Church was great 


§8, A.J MYSTICISM DURING THE MIDDLE AGES. 73 


and long continued. The writings of its author were translated, 
annotated and paraphrased, centuries after his death. As there is 
no effect without an adequate cause, there must have been power 
in this system and an adaptation to the cravings of a large class of 
minds. 


Causes of the Influence of the Writings of the pseudo-Dionysius. 


To account for its extensive influence it may be remarked: (1.) 
That it did not openly shock the faith or prejudices of the Church. 
It did not denounce any received doctrine or repudiate any estab- 
lished institution or ordinance. It pretended to be Christian. It 
undertook to give a deeper and more correct insight into the mys- 
teries of religion. (2.) It subordinated the outward to the inward. 
Some men are satisfied with rites, ceremonies, symbols, which may 
mean anything or nothing ; others, with knowledge or clear views 
of truth. To others, the inner life of the soul, intercourse with 
God, is the great thing. To these this system addressed itself. 
It proposed to satisfy this craving after God, not indeed in a legit- 
imate way, or by means of God’s appointment. Nevertheless it 
was the high end of union with him that it proposed, and which 
it professed to secure. (3.) This system was only one form of the 
doctrine which has such a fascination for the human mind, and 
which underlies so many forms of religion in every age of the 
world; the doctrine, namely, that the universe is an efflux of the life 
of God, —all things flowing from him, and back again to him from 
everlasting to everlasting. This doctrine quiets the conscience, as 
it precludes the idea of sin; it gives the peace which flows from 
fatalism ; and it promises the absolute rest of unconsciousness when 
the individual is absorbed in the bosom of the Infinite.? 


§ 3. Mysticism during the Middle Ages. 


A. General Characteristics of this Period. 


The Middle Ages embrace the period from the close of the sixth 
sentury to the Reformation. This period is distinguished by three 
marked characteristics. First, the great development of the Latin 
Church in its hierarchy, its worship, and its formulated doctrines, 
as well as in its superstitions, corruptions, and power. Secondly, 
the extraordinary intellectual activity awakened in the region of 
speculation, as manifested in the multiplication of seats of learning, 


1 See Rixner’s Geschichte der Philosophie, vol. i. §§ 168-172. Ritter’s Geschichte der 
Lhristlichen Philosophie, vol. ii. pp. 115-135. Herzog’s Encyklopddie. 


74 INTRODUCTION. [Cx. IV. — Mysrictsm. 


in the number and celebrity of their teachers, and in the great 
multitude of students by which they were attended, and in the 
interest taken by all classes in the subjects of learned discussion. 
Thirdly, by a widespread and variously manifested movement of, 
so to speak, the inner life of the Church, protesting against the for- 
malism, the corruption, and the tyranny of the external Church. 
This protest was made partly openly by those. whom Protestants 
are wont to call “* Witnesses for the Truth;” and partly within 
the Church itself. The opposition within the Church manifested 
itself partly among the people, in the formation of fellowships or 
societies for benevolent effort and’ spiritual culture, such as the 
Beguines, the Beghards, the Lollards, and afterwards, ‘* ‘The Breth- 
ren of the Common Lot;” and partly in the schools, or by the 
teachings of theologians. 

It was the avowed aim of the theologians of this period to justify 
the doctrines of the Church at the bar of reason; to prove that 
what was received on authority as a matter of faith, was true as a 
matter of philosophy. It was held to be the duty of the theologian 
to exalt faith into knowledge. Or, as Anselm! expresses it: ‘* ra- 
tionabili necessitate intelligere, esse oportere omnia illa, que nobis 
fides catholica de Christo credere precipit.” Richard 4 St. Victore 
still more strongly asserts that we are bound, “‘ quod tenemus ex 
fide, ratione apprehendere et demonstrative certitudinis attestatione 
firmare.” 

The First Class of Medieval Theologians. 

Of these theologians, however, there were three classes. First, 
those who avowedly exalted reason above authority, and refused 
to receive anything on authority which they could not for them- 
selves, on rational grounds, prove to be true. John Scotus Erigena 
(Eringeborne, Irish-born) may be taken as a representative of this 
class. He not only held, that reason and revelation, philosophy 
and religion, are perfectly consistent, but that religion and philos- 
ophy are identical. “ Conficitur,” he says, “‘inde veram philoso- 
phiam esse veram religionem conversimque veram religionem esse 
veram philosophiam.” ? And on the crucial question, Whether faith 
precedes science, or science faith, he decided for the latter. Rea- 
son, with him, was paramount to authority, the latter having no 
force except when sustained by the former. ‘ Auctoritas siqui- 
dem ex vera ratione processit, ratio vero nequaquam ex auctoritate. 
Omnis autem auctoritas, que vera ratione non approbatur, infirma 
videtur esse. Vera autem ratio, quum virtutibus suis rata atque 


1 Cur Deus Homo, lib. i. cap. 25. 
3 De Predest. cap. i. 1, Migne, Patr. vol. cxxui. p. 858, a 


§ 3, A] MYSTICISM DURING THE MIDDLE AGES. 75 


immutabilis munitur, nullius auctoritatis adstipulatione roborari 
indiget.”? His philosophy as developed in his work, ‘ De Divisi- 
one Nature,” is purely pantheistic. There is with him but one 
being, and everything real is thought. His system, therefore, is 
nearly identical with the idealistic pantheism of Hegel; yet he had 
his trinitarianism, his soteriology, and his eschatology, as a theolo- 
gian. 
The Second Class. . 

The second and more numerous class of the mediaval theolo- 
gians took the ground that faith in matters of religion precedes 
science ; that truths are revealed to us supernaturally by the Spirit 
of God, which truths are to be received on the authority of the 
Scriptures and the testimony of the Church. But being believed, 
then we should endeavor to comprehend and to prove them ; so 
that our conviction of their truth should rest on rational grounds. 
It is very evident that everything depends on the spirit with which 
this principle is applied, and on the extent to which it is carried. 
In the hands of many of the schoolmen, as of the Fathers, it was 
merely a form of rationalism. Many taught that while Christian- 
ity was to be received by the people on authority as a matter of 
faith, it was to be received by the cultivated as a matter of knowl- 
edge. The human was substituted for the divine, the authority of 
reason for the testimony of God. With the better class of the 
schoolmen the principle in question -was held with many limitations. 
Anselm, for example, taught: (1.) That holiness of heart is the 
essential condition of true knowledge. It is only so far as the truths 
of religion enter into our personal experience, that we are able 
properly to apprehend them. Faith, therefore, as including spirit- 
ual discernment, must precede all true knowledge. ‘ Qui secun- 
dum carnem vivit, carnalis sive animalis est, de quo dicitur: ani- 
malis homo non percipit ea, que sunt Spiritus Dei... .. Qui 
non crediderit, non intelliget, nam qui non crediderit, non expe- 
rietur, et qui expertus non fuerit, non intelliget.”’? ‘* Neque enim 
quero intelligere, ut credam, sed credo, ut intelligam. Nam et 
hoe credo, quia, nisi credidero, non intelligam.”? (2.) He held 
that rational proof was not needed as a help to faith. It was 
as absurd, he said, for us to presunie to add authority to the testi- 
mony of God by our reasoning, as for a man to prop up Olympus. 
(8.) He taught that there are doctrines of revelation which tran- 
scend our reason, which we cannot rationally pretend to compre- 

1 De Dw. Nat., i. 69 £., Migne, wt supra, p. 518, b. 


2 De Fide Trinitatis, 2; Opera, Paris, 1721, p. 42, B, b, 
8 Proslogium, i.; Ibid. p. 30, B, a. 


76 INTRODUCTION. (Cu. IV.— Mysticism. 


hend or prove, and which are to be received on the simple testi- 
mony of God. ‘Nam Christianus per fidem debet ad intellectum 
proficere, non per intellectum ad fidem accedere, aut si intelligere 
non valet, a fide recedere. Sed cum ad intellectum valet pertin- 
- gere, delectatur, cum vero nequit, quod capere non potest, vene- 
ratur.”’ } 

A third class of the schoolmen, while professing to adhere to the 
doctrines of the Church, consciously or unconsciously, explained 
them away. 

B. Medieval Mystics. 

Mystics were to be found in all these classes, and therefore they 
have been divided, as by Dr. Shedd,? into the heretical, the ortho- 
dox, and an intermediate class, which he designates as latitudina- 
rian. Much to the same effect, Neudecker,? classifies them as The- 
osophist, Evangelical, and Separatist. Ullmann * makes a somewhat 
different classification. The characteristic common to these classes, 
which differed so much from each other, was not that in all there 
was a protest of the heart against the head, of the feelings against 
the intellect, a reaction against the subtleties of the scholastic the- 
ologians, for some of the leading Mystics were among the most 
subtle dialecticians. Nor was it a common adherence to the Platonic 
as opposed to the Aristotelian philosophy, or to realism as op- 
posed to nominalism. But it was the belief, that oneness with 
God was the great end to be desired and pursued, and that that 
union was to be sought, not so much through the truth, or the 
Church, or ordinances, or Christian fellowship; but by introspec- 
tion, meditation, intuition. As very different views were enter- 
tained of the nature of the ‘“ oneness with God,’ which was to be 
sought, so the Mystics differed greatly from each other. Some 
were extreme pantheists ; others were devout theists and Chris- 
tians. From its essential nature, however, the tendency of Mys- 
ticism was to pantheism. And accordingly undisguised pantheism 
was not only taught by some of the most prominent Mystics, but 
prevailed extensively among the peuple. 


Pantheistic tendency of Mysticism. 


It has already been remarked, that the system of the pseudo- 
Dionysius, as presented in his “* Mystical Theology ” and other writ- 
ings, was essentially pantheistic. ‘Those writings were translated 

1 Fpistole, lib. ii. epis. 41; Opera, Paris, 1721, p. 357, B, a. 


2 History of Christian Doctrine, vol. i. p. 79. 
8 Leaicon, art. ‘“‘ Mystik.” 4 Reformers before the Reformation 


§ 3, B.] MYSTICISM DURING THE MIDDLE AGES. IT 


by Scotus Erigena, himself the most pronounced pantheist of the 
Middle Ages. Through the joint influence of these two men, a 
strong tendency to pantheism was developed to a greater or less 
degree among the medieval Mystics. Even the associations among 
the people, such as the Beghards and Lollards, although at first 
exemplary and useful, by adopting a system of mystic pantheism 
became entirely corrupt. Believing themselves to be modes of the 
divine existence, all they did God did, and all they felt inclined to do 
was an impulse from God, and therefore nothing could be wrong, 
In our own day the same principles have led to the same conse- 
quences in one wing of the German school of philosophy. 

It was not only among the people and in these secret fellowships 
that this system was adopted. Men of the highest rank in the 
schools, and personally exemplary in their deportment, became the 
advocates of the theory which lay at the foundation of these prac- 
tical evils. Of these scholastic pantheistical Mystics, the most dis- 
tinguished and influential was Henry Eckart, whom some modern 
writers regard ‘as the deepest thinker of his age, if not of any 
age.” Neither the time nor the place of his birth is known. He 
first appears in Paris as a Dominican monk and teacher. In 1304 
he was Provincial of the Dominicans in Saxony. Soon after he 
was active in Strasburg asa preacher. His doctrines were con- 
demned as heretical, although he denied that he had in any respect 
departed from the doctrines of the Church. From the decision of 
his archbishop and his provincial council, Eckart appealed to the 
Pope, by whom the sentence of condemnation was confirmed. This 
decision, however, was not published until 1329, when Eckart was 
already dead. It is not necessary here to give the details of his 
system. Suffice it to say, that he held that God is the only being ; 
that the universe is the self-manifestation of God; that the high- 
est destiny of man is to come to the consciousness of his identity 
with God; that that end is to be accomplished partly by philo- 
sophical abstraction and partly by ascetic self renunciation. 

* Although union with God is effected mainly by thinking and 
consciousness, still it also requires a corresponding act of the will, 
something practical, such as self-denial and privation, by which 
man rises above all that is finite. Not only must he lay aside all 
created things, the world and earthly good, and mortify desire, but 
more than all he must resign his ‘I,’ reduce himself to nothing, 
and become what he was before he issued forth into this temporal 
state. Nay, man must rise above the chief good, above virtue, 


1 Ullmann, vol. ii. ch. 2. 


78 INTRODUCTION. [Cu. IV. — Mysticism. 


piety, blessedness, and God himself, as things external and supe- 
rior to his spirit, and it is only when he has thus annihilated self, 
and all that is not God within him, that nothing remains except 
the pure and simple divine essence, in which all division is brought 
into absolute unity.” 4 

Another distinguished and influential writer of the same class 
was John Ruysbroek, born 1293, in a village of that name not far 
from Brussels. Having entered the service of the Church he de- 
voted himself to the duties of a secular priest until his sixtieth year, 
when he became prior of a newly instituted monastery. He was 
vctive and faithful, gentle and devout. Whether he was a theist 
or a pantheist is a matter of dispute. His speculative views were 
formed more or less under the influence of the writings of the 
pseudo-Dionysius and of Eckart. Gerson, himself a Mystic, ob- 
jected to his doctrines as pantheistic ; and every one acknowledges 
that there are not only forms of expression but also principles to 
be found in his writings which imply the pantheistic theory. He 
speaks of God as the super-essential being including all beings. 
All creatures, he taught, were in God, as thoughts before their 
creation. ‘ God saw and recognized them in himself, as somehow, 
but not wholly, different from himself, for what is in God, is God.” 
“In the act of self-depletion, the spirit loses itself in the enjoyment 
of love, and imbibes directly the brightness of God, yea, becomes 
the very brightness which it imbibes. All who are raised to the 
sublimity of this contemplative life are one with deifying (deifica) 
brightness, and become one and the same light as that which they 
behold. To such a height is the spirit elevated above itself, and 
made one with God, in respect that in the oneness of that living 
original in which, according to its uncreated being, it possesses 
itself, it enjoys and contemplates boundless treasures in the same 
manner as God himself.” Ullmann, who quotes these and similar 
passages, still maintains that Ruysbroek was a theist, because, as 
he says, Ruysbroek “ distinctly recognizes not only the immanence 
of God, but what no pantheist can do, his transcendence.” More- 
over, he “too frequently and too solicitously avers that, in the 
oneness of the contemplative man with God, he still recognizes a 
difference between the two, to permit us to ascribe to him the doc- 
tiine of ar. absolute solution of the individual into the Divine sub- . 
stance.” A man may aver a difference between the waves and 
the ocean, between the leaves and the tree, and yet in both cases 
assert a substantial unity. It is true that no one can intelligently 

1 Ullmann, Translation in Clark's Library, vol. ii. p. 27. 2 Ibid. p. 47. 


§4,A.] MYSTICISM AT, AND AFTER THE REFORMATION. 79 


affirm the transcendence of God, and still hold the extreme form 
of pantheism which makes the world the existence-form of God, 
his whole intelligence, power, and life. But he may be a Monist. 
He may believe that there is but one Being in the universe, that 
everything i is a form of God, and all life she life of God. Pan- 
theism is Protean. Some moderns speak of a Christian Pantheism. 
But any system which hinders our saying “ Thou,” to God, is fatal 
to religion. 


Evangelical Mystics. 


Bernard of Clairvaux, Hugo and Richard of St. Victor, Gerson, 
Thomas 4 Kempis and others, are commonly referred to the class of 
evangelical Mystics. These eminent and influential men differed’ 
much from each other, but they all held union with God, not in 
the Scriptural, but in the mystical sense of that term, as the great 
object of desire. It was not that they held that “the beatific 
vision of God,” the intuition of his glory, which belongs to heaven, 
is attainable in this world and attainable by abstraction, ecstatic 
apprehension, or passive reception, but that the soul becomes one 
with God, if not in substance, yet in life. These men, however, 
were great blessings to the Church. Their influence was directed 
to the preservation of the inward life of religion in opposition to 
the formality and ritualism which then prevailed in the Church; 
and thus to free the conscience from subjection to human authority. 
The writings of Bernard are still held in high esteem, and “‘ The 
Imitation of Christ,” by Thomas a Kempis, has diffused itself like 
incense through all the aisles and alcoves of the Universal Church.} 


§ 4. Mysticism at, and after the Reformation. 
A. Effect of the Reformation on the Popular Mind. 


Such a great and general movement of the public mind as Oc- 
curred during the sixteenth century, when the old foundations of 
doctrine and order in the Church, were overturned, could hardly 
fail to be attended by irregularities and extravagancies in the 
inward and -outward life of the people. There are two principles 
advanced, both Scriptural and both of the last importance, whach 
are specially liable to abuse in times of popular excitement. 

4 See Tholuck, Sufismus seu Theosophia Persarum Pantheistica. C. Schmidt, Essai sur 
les Mystiques du 14me Siécle. This writer is the author of most of the excellen’ articles in 
Merzog’s Encyklopddie on the Medieval Mystics. Ullmann’s Reformers before the Refor- 


mation. Poiret, Bibliotheca Mysticorum. Vaughan’s Hours with the Mystics. Helfferich’s 
Christliche Mystik. Dorner, Geschichte der Protestantischen Theologie, 48-59. 4 


80 INTRODUCTION. [Cu. IV. — Mysticism. 


The first is, the right of private judgment. This, as understood 
by the Reformers, is the right of every man to decide what a reve- 
lation made by God to him, requires him to believe. It was a pro- 
test against the authority assumed by the Church (7. e. the Bishops), 
of deciding for the people what they were to believe. It was very 
natural that the fanatical, in rejecting the authority of the Church, 
should reject all external authority in matters of religion. They 
understood by the right of private judgment, the right of every 
man to determine what he should believe from the operations of his 
own mind and from his own inward experience, independently of 
the Scriptures. But as it is palpably absurd to expect, on such a 
subject as religion, a certainty either satisfactory to ourselves or 
authoritative for others, from our own reason or feelings, it was 
inevitable that these subjective convictions should be referred to a 
supernatural source. Private revelations, an inward light, the tes- 
timony of the Spirit, came to be exalted over the authority of the 
Bible. 

Secondly, the Reformers taught that religion is a matter of the 
heart, that a man’s acceptance with God does not depend on his 
membership in any external society, on obedience to its officers, and 
on sedulous observance of its rites and ordinances; but on the regen- 
eration of his heart, and his personal faith in the Son of God, man- 
ifesting itself in a holy life. This was a protest against the funda- 
mental principle of Romanism, that all within the external organi- 
zation which Romanists call the Church, are saved, and all out of 
it are lost. It is not a matter of surprise that evil men should wrest 
this principle, as they do all other truths, to their own destruction. 
Because religion does not consist in externals, many rushed to the 
conclusion that externals, — the Church, its ordinances, its officers, 
its worship, — were of no account. These principles were soon 
applied beyond the sphere of religion. Those who regarded them- 
selves ag the organs of God, emancipated from the authority of the 
Bible and exalted above the Church, came to claim exemption from 
the authority of the State. To this outbreak the grievous and 
long-continued oppression of the peasantry greatly contributed, so 
that this spirit of fanaticism and revolt rapidly spread over all Ger- 
many, and into Switzerland and Holland. 


The Popular Disorders not the Effects of the Reformation. 


The extent to which these disorders spread, and the rapidity with 
which they diffused themselves, show that they were not the mere 
outgrowth of the Reformation. The principles avowed by the 


§4,B.] MYSTICISM AT, AND AFTER THE REFORMATION. &1 


Reformers, and the relaxation of papal authority occasioned by the 
Reformation, served but to inflame the elements which had for 
years been slumbering in the minds of the people. The numerous 
associations and fellowships, of which mention was made in the pre- 
ceding section, had leavened the public mind with the principles 
of pantheistic Mysticism, which were the prolific source of evil. 
Men who imagined themselves to be forms in which God existed 
and acted, were not likely to be subject to any authority human or 
divine, nor were they apt to regard anything as sinful which they 
felt inclined to do. 

These men also had been brought up under the Papacy. Ac- 
cording to the papal theory, especially as it prevailed during the 
Middle Ages, the Charch'was a theocracy, whose representatives 
were the subjects of a constant inspiration rendering them infalli- 
ble as teachers and absolute as rulers. All who opposed the Church 
were rebels against God, whom to destroy was a duty both to God 
and man. ‘These ideas Miinzer and his followers applied to them- 
selves. They were the true Church. They were inspired. They 
were entitled to determine what is true in matters of doctrine, 
They were entitled to rule with absolute authority in church and 
state. All who opposed them, opposed God, and ought to be ex- 
terminated. Miinzer died upon the scaffold; thus was fulfilled 
anew our Lord’s declaration, ‘* Those who take the sword, shall 
perish by the sword.” 


B. Mystics among the Reformers. 


Few of the theologians contemporary with Luther took any 
part in this fanatical movement. To a certain extent this however 
was done by Carlstadt (Bodenstein), archdeacon and afterwards 
professor of theology at Wittenberg. At first he codperated zeal- 
ously with the great Reformer, but when Storch and Stiibener 
claiming to be prophets, came to Wittenberg during Luther’s con- 
finement at Wartburg, and denounced learning and Church in- 
stitutions, and taught that all reliance was to be placed on the 
inward light, or supernatural guidance of the Spirit, Carlstadt 
gave them’ his support and exhorted the students to abandon their 
studies and to betake themselves to manual labor. Great disorder 
following these movements, Luther left his place of seclusion, 
appeared upon the scene, and succeeded in allaying the tumult. 
Carlstadt then withdrew from Wittenberg, and ultimately united 
himself with Schwenkfeld, a more influential opponent of Luther, 
and who was equally imbued with the spirit of Mysticism. 

VOL. I. 6 


82 INTRODUCTION.  ([Cu. IV. — Mysricism. 


Schwenkfeld. 

Schwenkfeld, a nobleman born 1490, in the principality of Lig- 
nitz, in Lower Silesia, was a man of great energy and force of 
character, exemplary in his conduct, of extensive learning and 
indefatigable diligence. He at first took an active part in promot- 
ing the Reformation, and was on friendly terms with Luther, Me- 
iancthon, and the other leading Reformers. Being a man not only 
of an independent way of thinking, but pontine and zealous in 
maintaining his peculiar opinions, he soon separated himself from 
other Prvcsauts and passed his whole life in controversy ; con- 
demned by synods and proscribed by the civil authorities, he was 
driven from city to city, until his death, which occurred in 1561. 

That Schwenkfeld differed not only from the Romanists, but 
from Lutherans and Reformed on all the great doctrines then in 
controversy, is to be referred to the fact that he held, in common 
with the great body of the Mystics of the Middle Ages, that union 
or oneness with God, not in nature or character only, but also in 
being or substance, was the one great desideratum and essential 
condition of holiness and felicity. To avoid the pantheistic doc- 
trines into which the majority of the Mystics were led, he held to 
a form of dualism, Creatures exist out of God, and are due to the 
exercise of his power. In them there isenothing of the substance 
of God, and therefore nothing really good. With regard to men, 
they are made good and blessed by communicating to them the 
substance of God. This communication is made through Christ. 
Christ is not, even as to his human nature, a creature. His body 
and soul were formed out of the substance of God. While on 
earth, in his state of humiliation, this substantial unity of his 
humanity with God, was ,undeveloped and unrevealed. Since his 
exaltation it is completely deified, or lost in the divine essence. 
It followed from these principles, First, That the external church, 
with its ordinances and means of grace, was of little importance. 
Especially that the Scriptures are not, even instrumentally, the 
source of the divine life. Faith does not come by hearing, but from 
the Christ within; 2. e. from the living substance of God commu- 
nicated. to the soul. This communication is to be sought by abne- 
gation, renunciation of the creature, by contemplation and prayer. 
Secondly, as to the sacrament of the supper, which then was the 
great subject of controversy, Schwenkfeld stood by himself. Not 
admitting that Christ had any material body or blood, he could not 
admit that the bread and wine were transubstantiated into his body 


 §4,B.] MYSTICISM AT, AND AFTER THE REFORMATION. 88 


and blood, as Romanists teach; nor that his body and blood were 
focally present in the sacrament, in, with, and under the bread and 


_ wine, as Luther held; nor could he admit the dynamic presence of 


Christ’s body, as taught by Calvin; nor that the Lord’s Supper was 
merely a significant and commemorative ordinance, as Zwingle 
taught. He held his own doctrine. He transposed the words of 
Christ. Instead of “ This (bread) is my body,” he said, the true 
meaning and intent of Christ was, ‘‘ My body is bread ;” that is, 
as bread is the staff and source of life to the body, so my body, 
formed of the essence of God, is the life of the soul. 

A third inference from Schwenkfeld’s fundamental principle was 
that the redemption of the soul is purely subjective ; something 
wrought in the soul itself. He denied justification by faith as 
Luther taught that doctrine, and which Luther regarded as the life 
of the Church. He said that we are justified not by what Christ 
has done for us, but by what He does within us. All we need is 
the communication of the life or substance of Christ to the soul. 
With him, as with Mystics generally, the ideas of guilt and expi- 
ation were ignored. 

Later Mystics. 

The succession of mystical writers was kept up by such men as 
Paracelsus, Weigel, Jacob Boehme, and others. The first named 
was a physician and chemist, who combined natural philosophy and 
alchemy with his theosophy. He was born in 1493 and died in 
1541. Weigel, a pastor, was born in Saxony in 1533, and died in 
1588. His views were formed under the influence of Tauler, 
Schwenkfeld, and Paracelsus. He taught, as his predecessors had 
done, that the inner word, and not the Scriptures, was the source 
of true knowledge, that all that God creates is God himself, and 
that all that is good in man is of the substance of God. The most 
remarkable writer of this class was Jacob Boehme, who was born 
near Gorlitz in Silesia, in 1575. His parents were peasants, and he 
himself a shoemaker. That such a man should write books which 
have proved a mine of thoughts to Schelling, Hegel, and Coleridge, 
as well as to a whole class of theologians, is decisive evidence of 
his extraordinary gifts. In character he was mild, gentle, and de- 
yout; and although denounced as a heretic, he constantly professed 
his allegiance to the faith of the Church. He regarded himself as 
having received in answer to prayer, on three different occasions, 
communications of divine light and knowledge which he was im- 
pelled to reveal to others. He did not represent the primordial 
being as without attributes or qualities of which nothing could be 


84 INTRODUCTION. [Cu. 1V.— Mysticism 


predicated, but as the seat of all kinds of forces seeking develop- 
ment. What the Bible teaches of the Trinity, he understood as 
an account of the development of the universe out of God and its 
relation to him. He was a theosophist in one sense, in which 
Vaughan ! defines the term, “‘ One who gives you a theory of God 
or of the works of God, which has not reason, but an inspiration of 
his own for its basis.” “‘ The theosophists,” says Fleming,? “are 
a school of philosophers who mix enthusiasm with observation, 
alchemy with theology, metaphysics with medicine, and clothe the 
whole with a form of mystery and inspiration.” ® 


§ 5. Qutetism. 


A. Its general character. 

Tholuck ¢ says ‘* There is a law of seasons in the spiritual, as well 
as in the physical world, in virtue of which when the time has 
come, without apparent connection, similar phenomena reveal them- 
selves in different places. As towards the end of the fifteenth 
century an ecclesiastical-doctrina]l reformatory movement passed 
over the greater part of Europe, in part without apparent connec- 
tion ; so at the end of the seventeenth a mystical and spiritual’ten- 
dency was almost as extensively manifested. In Germany, it took 
the form of Mysticism and Pietism; in England, of Quakerism ; in 
France, of Jansenism and Mysticism ; and in Spain and Italy, of 
Quietism.”” This movement was in fact what in our day would be 
called a revival of religion. Not indeed in a form free from griev- 
ous errors, but nevertheless it was a return to the religion of the 
heart, as opposed to the religion of forms. The Mystics of this 
period, although they constantly appealed to the medizval Mys- 
tics, even to the Areopagite, and although they often used the 
same forms of expression, yet they adhered much more faithfully 
to Scriptural doctrines and to the faith of the Church. They did 
not fall into Pantheism, or believe in the absorption of the soul into 
the substance of God. They held, however, that the end to be 
attained was union with God. By this was not meant what Chris- 
tians generally understand by that term; congeniality with God, 
delight in his perfections, assurance of his love, submission to his 
will, perfect satisfaction in the enjoyment of his favour. It was 

1 Hours with Mystics, vol. i. p, 45. 2 Vocabulary of Philosophy. 


8 See Baur’s Christliche Gnosis ; Dorner’s History of the Doctrine of the Person of Chrsh 


and his History of Protestant Theology ; Hamberger, Die Lehre des Deutschen Philosophen J 
Boehme, 1844. 


4 Herzog’s Hncyklopddie, art. ‘ Molinos.” 


55, A] , QUIETISM. 85 


something more than all this, something mystical and therefore 
inexplicable; a matter of feeling, not something to be under- 
stood or explained ; a state in which all thought, all activity was 
suspended ; a state of perfect quietude in which the soul is lost in 
God, — an “ écoulement et liquefaction de l’&me en Dieu,” as it is 
expressed by St. Francis de Sales. This state is reached by few. 
It is to be attained not by the use of the means of grace or ordi- 
nances of the Church. The soul should be raised above the need 
of all such aids. It rises even above Christ, insomuch that it is 
not He whom the soul seeks, nor God in him; but God as God; 
the absolute, infinite God. The importance of the Scriptures, of 
prayer, of the sacraments, and of the truth concerning Christ, was 
not denied ; but all these were regarded as belonging to the lower 
stages of the divine life. Nor was this rest and union with God 
to be attained by meditation; for meditation is discursive. It im- 
plies an effort to bring truth before the mind, and fixing the atten- 
tion upon it. All conscious self-activity must be suspended in 
order to this perfect rest in God. It isa state in which the soul 
is out of itself; a state of ecstasy, according to the etymological 
meaning of the word. 

This state is to be reached in the way prescribed by the older 
Mystics ; first, by negation or abstraction ; that is, the abstraction of 
the soul from everything out of God, from the creature, from all 
interest, concern, or impression from sensible objects. Hence the 
connection between Mysticism, in this form, and asceticism. Not 
only must the soul become thus abstracted from the creature, but 
it must be dead to self. All regard to self must be lost. There 
can be no prayer, for prayer is asking something for self; no 
thanksgiving, for thanksgiving implies gratitude for good done to 
self. Self must be lost. There must be no preference for heaven 
over hell. One of the points most strenuously insisted upon was a 
willingness to be damned, if such were the will of God. In the 
controversy between Fénélon and Bossuet, the main question con- 
cerned disinterested love, whether in loving God the soul must be 
raised above all regard to its own holiness and happiness. This 
pure or disinterested love justifies, or renders righteous in the sight 
of God. Although the Mystics of this period were eminently pure 
as well as devout, they nevertheless sometimes laid down princi- 
ples, or at least used expressions, which gave their enemies a pre- 
text for charging them with Antinomianism. It was said, that a 
soul filled with this love, or reduced to this entire negation of self, 
cannot sin; “sin is not in, but outside of him ;” which was made 


86 “INTRODUCTION. [Cu. IV. — Mysricism. 


to mean, that nothing was sin to the perfect. It is an instructive 
psychological fact that when men attempt or pretend to rise above 
the law of God, they sink below it; that Perfectionism has so gen- 
erally led to Antinomianism. 


B. Leaders of this Movement. 


The principal persons engaged in promoting this remarkable re- 
ligious movement were Molinos, Madame Guyon, and Archbishop 
Fénélon. Michael Molinos, born 1640, was a Spanish priest. 
About 1670 he became a resident of Rome, where he gained a 
great reputation for piety and mildness, and great influence from 
his position as confessor to many families of distinction. He en- 
joyed the friendship of the highest authorities in the Church, in- 
cluding several of the cardinals, and the Pope, Innocent XI., him- 
self. Tn 1675 he published his ‘ Spiritual Guide,” in shicl the 
principles above stated were presented. Molinos did not claim orig- 
inality, but professed to rely on the Mystics of the Middle Ages, sev- 
eral of whom had already been canonized by the Church. This, 
however, did not save him from persecution. His first trial indeed 
before the Inquisition resulted in his acquittal. But subsequently, 
through the influence of the Jesuits and of the court of Louis XIV., 
he was, after a year’s imprisonment, condemned. Agreeably to 
his principle of entire subjection to the Church, he retracted his 
errors, but failed to secure the confidence of his judges. He died 
in 1697. His principal work, ‘‘ Manuductio Spiritualis,” or Spirit- 
ual Guide, was translated into different languages, and won for 
him many adherents in every part of the Catholic world. When 
he was imprisoned, it is said, that twenty thousand letters from 
all quarters, and many of them from persons of distinction, were 
found among his papers, assuring him of the sympathy of their 
authors with him in his spirit and views. This is proof that there 
were at that time thousands in the Romish Church who had not 
bowed the knee to the Baal of formalism. 


Madame Gtuyon. 


The most prominent and influential of the Quietists, as they 
were called, was Madame Guyon, born 1648 and died 1717. She 
belonged to a rich and noble family ; was educated in a cloister, 
married at sixteen to a man of rank and wealth and of three times 
her age; faithful and devoted, but unhappy in her domestic rela- 
tions ; adhering zealously to her Church, she passed a life of inces- 
sant labour, and that, too, embittered by persecution. When still 


§ 5, B.] QUIETISM. 87 


in the cloister she came under the influence of the writings of St. 
Francis de Sales, which determined her subsequent course. Ens 
thusiastic in temperament, endowed with extraordinary gifts, she 
soon came to regard herself as the recipient of visions, revelations, 
and inspirations by which she was impelled to write, and, in the 
first instance, to devote herself to the conversion of Protestants, 
Failing in this, she considered it her vocation to become the mother 
of spiritual. children, by bringing them to adopt her views of the 
inner life. To this object she devoted herself with untiring energy 
and great success, ler adherents, secret and avowed, being num- 
bered by thousands, or, as she supposed, by millions. She thus 
drew upon herself, although devoted to the Church, the displeasure 
of the authorities, and was imprisoned for seven years in the Bastile 
and other prisons in France. The latter years of her life she spent 
in retirement in the house of her daughter, burdened with physical 
infirmities, hearing mass every day in her private chapel and com- 
municating every other day. Her principal works were, ‘La 
Bible avec des Explications et Réflexions, qui regardent la Vie In- 
térieure,” “*‘ Moyen court et trés-facile de faire Oraison.” This 
little work excited great attention and great opposition. She was 
obliged to’ defend it in an “* Apologie du Moyen Court,” in 1690, 
and * Justifications ” in 1694, and in 1695 she was forced to retract 
thirty-five propositions selected therefrom. She published an alle- 
gorical poem under the title “Les Torrens.” Her minor poetic 
pieces called * Poésies Spirituelles,” in four volumes, are greatly 
admired for the genius which they display. 

Archbishop Fénélon, one of the greatest lights of the Gallican 
Church, espoused the cause of Madame Guyon, and published, 
1697, ‘“‘ Explication des Maximes des Saints sur la Vie Intérieure.” 
As the title intimates, the principles of this book are derived from 
the earlier Mystics, and specially from the latest of the saints, St. 
Francis de Sales, who was canonized in 1665, only thirty-three 
years after his death. Although Fénélon carefully avoided the ex- 
travagances of the Mystics of his own day, and although he taught 
nothing which men venerated in the Church had not taught before 
him, his book forfeited for him the favour of the court, and was 
finally condemned by the authorities at Rome. To this condem- 
nation he submitted with the greatest docility. He not only made 
no defence, but read the brief of condemnation in his own pulpit, 
and forbade his book being read within his diocese. To this his 
conscience constrained him, although he probably did not change 
his views. As the Pope decided against him he was willing to 


88 INTRODUCTION. [Cxu. IV. —Mysricism 


admit that what he said was wrong, and yet what he intended to 
say he still held to be right. 


§ 6. The Quakers or Friends. 
This widely extended and highly respected body of professing 


Christians constitute the most permanent and best organized repre-. 
sentatives of the principles of Mysticism which have appeared in 
the Church. They have existed as an organized society nearly two 
centuries and a half, and number in Europe and America several 
hundred thousands. . 


A. Their Origin and Early History. 


They took their origin and name from George Fox, who was 
born at Drayton, Leicestershire, England, in 1624. He received 
only the rudiments of an English education, and was by trade a 
shoemaker. From boyhood he was remarkable for his quiet, se- 
cluded habits. He devoted his leisure to the reading of the Scrip- 
tures and meditation. ‘The age in which he lived was one of 
corruption in the Church and agitation in the State. He was so 
impressed by the evils which he saw around him that he lost confi- 
dence in the teachers of religion and in the ordinances of the 
church. At last he felt himself called of God, by direct revelation 
and inspiration, to denounce the existing Church, its organization 
and officers, and to proclaim a new and spiritual dispensation. 
This dispensation was to be new only relatively to what had long 
existed. It was designed as a restoration of the apostolic age, when 
the church was guided and extended by the Spirit, without the 
intervention of the written Word, or, as Fox and his followers 
maintained, of a special order of ministers, but every man and 
every woman spake as the Spirit gave them utterance.} 

They were called Quakers either because they themselves trem- 
bled when under the influence of the Spirit, or because they were 
in the habit of calling on those whom they addressed to quake in 
tear of the ndetient of God. The designation has long ceased to 
be appropriate, as they are characteristically quiet in their worship, 
and gentle toward those who are without. They call themselves 
Friends because opposed to violence, contention, and especially to 
war. At first, however, they were chargeable with many irreguiar- 
ities, which, in connection with their refusing to pay tithes, to take 
oaths, and to perform military service, gave pretext to frequent and 
long continued persecutions. 


1 Qne of the most important works of William Penn bears the title, Primitive Christian 
ily revived in the Faith and Practice of the People called Quakers. 


§ 6, B.J QUAKERS. 89 


The Quakers were at first, as a class, illiterate, but men from 
_ the educated classes soon joined them, and by their influence the 
irregularities connected with the movement were corrected, and the 
society reduced to a regularly organized form. The most promi- 
nent of these men were George Keith, Samuel Fisher, and William 
Penn. The last named, the son of a British admiral, proved his 
sincerity by the sacrifices and sufferings to which his adherence to 
a sent, then despised and persecuted, subjected him. From the in- 
fluence which he possessed, as the friend and favorite of James II., 
he was able to do much for his brethren, and having received a 
grant from the crown, of what is now Pennsylvania, he transported 
a colony of them to this country and founded one of the most im- 
portant States of the American Union. The man, however, who 
did most to reduce the principles of George Fox to order, and to 
commend them to the religious and literary public, was Robert 
Barclay. Barclay was a member of a prominent Scottish family, 
and received the benefit of an extended and varied education. He 
was born in 1648, and died in 1690. His principal work, “* The- 
ologie Christiane Apologia,” is an exposition of fifteen theses 
which he had previously written and printed under the title, 
“ Theses Theologicze omnibus Clericis et preesertim universis Doc- 
toribus, Professoribus et Studiosis Theologie in Academiis Europ 
- versantibus sive Pontificis sive Protestantibus oblate.” 


B. Their Doctrines. 


It is impossible to give a satisfactory view of the doctrines of the 
Quakers. They have no authoritative creed or exposition of doc- 
trine which all who call themselves Quakers acknowledge. Their 
most prominent writers differ in their views on many important 
points. The opinions of no one, nor of several authors, can be 
fairly taken as representing the views of the Society. There are 
in fact three classes of Quakers. . 

First. Those who call themselves orthodox, and who differ very 
little from the great body of evangelical Christians. To this be- 
longs the great majority of the Society both in this country and in 
Great Britain. This appears from the testimonies repeatedly issued 
by the “Yearly Meetings,” the representative bodies of the Soci- 
ety. This is a much more satisfactory witness of the general faith 
of the body than the declarations of individual writers, however | 
eminent, for which the Society is not responsible. A very clear 
and comprehensive summary of the doctrine of Friends is to be 
ound in the “ History of Religious Denominations in the United 


90 _ INTRODUCTION. | [Ca.1V.— Mysticism. 


States,” compiled by I. Daniel Rupp. The articles in this work 
were written by eminent men belonging to the several denomina- 
tions whose views are represented. That which relates to the 
Quakers was written by the late Thomas Evans, a prominent min- 
ister of the Society, and a truly representative man. Without 
referring to the peculiar doctrines of the Society, the following 
extracts show how near the orthodox Quakers (7. ¢., the Society 
itself, as represented in its yearly meetings) come to the common 
faith of Protestant churches. 


Doctrines of the Orthodox Friends. 


1. As to God, it is said; Quakers ‘‘ Believe in one only wise, 
omnipotent, and everlasting God, the creator and upholder of all 
things visible and invisible; and in one Lord Jesus Christ, by 
whom are all things, the mediator between God and man ; and in 
the Holy Spirit which proceedeth from the Father and the Son; 
one God blessed forever. In expressing their views relative to the 
awful and mysterious doctrine of ‘the Three that bear record in 
heaven,” they have carefully avoided the use of unscriptural terms, 
invented to define Him who is undefinable, and have scrupulously 
adhered to the safe and simple language of Holy Scripture, as 
contained in Matt. xxviii. 18, 19.” 

2. As to the person and work of Christ, ‘* They own and believe 
in Jesus Christ, the beloved and only begotten Son of God, who 
was conceived of the Holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary. 
. . . « They believe that He alone is the Redeemer and Saviour 
of man, the captain of salvation, who saves from sin as well as from 
hell and the wrath to come, and destroys the works of the devil. 
He is the seed of the woman that bruises the serpent’s head ; even 
Christ Jesus, the Alpha and Omega, the first and last. He is, as 
the Scriptures of truth say of him, our wisdom, righteousness, 
sanctification, and redemption, neither is there salvation in any 
other, for there is no other name under heaven given among men 
whereby we may be saved.” 

“The Society of Friends have uniformly declared their belief in 
the divinity and manhood of the Lord Jesus: that He was both 
true God and perfect man, and that his sacrifice of himself upon 
the cross was a propitiation and atonement for the sins of the whole 
world, and that the remission of sins which any partake of, is only 
in, and by virtue of, that most satisfactory sacrifice.” 

3. As to the Holy Ghost, “ Friends believe in the Holy Spirit, 
or Comforter, the promise of the Father, whom Christ declared he 


§ 6, B.] QUAKERS. 91 


would send in his name, to lead and guide his followers into all 
truth, to teach them all things, and to bring all things to their re- 
membrance. . . . . They believe that the saving knowledge 
of God and Christ cannot be attained in any other way than by 
the revelation of this Spirit ;— for the Apostle says, ‘ What man 
knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in 
him? Even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit 
of God. Now we have received not the spirit of the world, but 
the Spirit which is of God, that we might know the things which 
are freely given to us of God.’ If, therefore, the things which 
properly appertain to man cannot be discerned by any lower prin 
ciple than the spirit of man; those things which properly relate to 
God and Christ, cannot be known by any power inferior to that of 
the Holy Spirit.” 

4. As to man, “ They believe that man was created in the im- 
age of God, capable of understanding the divine law, and of hold- 
ing communion with his Maker. Through transgression he fell 
from this blessed state, and lost the heavenly image. His posterity 
come into the world in the image of the earthly man; and, until 
renewed by the quickening and regenerating power of the heav- 
enly man, Christ Jesus, manifested in the soul, they are fallen, 
degenerated, and dead to the divine life in which Adam originally 
stood, and are subject to the power, nature, and seed of the ser- 
pent; and not only their words and deeds, but their imaginations, 
are evil perpetually in the sight of God. Man, therefore, in this 
state can know nothing aright concerning God; his thoughts and 
conceptions of spiritual things, until he is disjoined from this evil 
seed and united to the divine light, Christ Jesus, are unprofitable 
to himself and to others.” 

.5. As to the future state, “The Society of Friends believe 
that there will be a resurrection both of the righteous and the 
wicked ; the one to eternal life and blessedness, and the other to 
everlasting misery and torment, agreeably to Matt. xxv. 31-46 ; 
John v. 25-30; 1 Cor. xv. 12-58. That God will judge the world 
by that man whom He hath ordained, even Christ Jesus the Lord, 
who will render unto every man according to his works.” 

6. As to the Scriptures, “The religious Society of Friends has 
always believed that the Holy Scriptures were written by divine in- 
spiration, and contain a declaration of all the fandamental doctrines 
and principles relating to eternal life and salvation, and that what- 
soever doctrine or practice is contrary to them, is to be rejected 
as false and erroneous ; that they are a declaration of the mind and 


92 INTRODUCTION.  [Cu. IV. — Mysticrs. 


will of God, in and to the several ages in which they were written, 
and are obligatory on us, and are to be read, believed, and fulfilled 
by the assistance of divine grace. . . . . It looks upon them 
as the only fit outward judge and test of controversies among 
Christians, and is very willing that all its doctrines and practices 
should be tried by them, freely admitting that whatsoever any do, 
pretending to the Spirit, which is contrary to the Scriptures, be 
condemned as a delusion of the devil.” 

It thus appears that the orthodox Friends are in sympathy, on 
all fundamental doctrines, with the great body of their fellow Chris- 
tians. 

Heterodox Friends. 

Secondly. There is a class calling themselves Friends, and re- 
taining the organization of the Society, and its usages as to dress, 
language, and mode of worship, who are really Deists. They ad- 
mit of no higher authority, in matters of religion, than the natural 
reason and conscience of man, and hold little if anything as true 
beyond the truths of natural religion. This class has been dis- 
owned by the Society in its representative capacity. 

Thirdly. There is a third class which does not constitute an or- 
ganized or separate body, but includes men of very different views. 
As has been already remarked, great diversity of opinion existed 
among the Quakers, especially during the early period of their his- 
tory. This diversity related to the common doctrines of Chris- 
tianity, to the nature of the inward guiding light in which all pro- 
fessed to believe, and to the authority due to the sacred Scriptures.” 
Some explicitly denied the doctrine of the Trinity and the satisfac- 
tion of Christ ; some seemed to ignore the historical Christ alto- 
gether, and to refer everything to the Christ within. Others, while 
admitting the historical verity of the life of Christ, and of his work 
on earth, regarded his redemption as altogether subjective. He 
saves us not by what He has done for us, but exclusively by what 
He does in us. This, as we have seen, is the characteristic ten- 
dency of Mysticism in all its modifications. 


C. The Doctrine of Friends as to the Inward Light given to 
all Men. 


Still greater diversity of views prevailed as to the nature of the 
inward light which constitutes the distinguishing doctrine of the 
Society. The orthodox Quakers on this subject, in the first place, 
carefully distinguish this “light” from the natural reason and con- 
science of men; and also from spiritual discernment, or that in- 


. 6, 0) QUAKERS. 98 


ward work of the Spirit, which all Christians acknowledge, by 
which the soul is enabled to know “the things of the Spirit * as 
they are revealed in the Scriptures, and without which there can 
be no saving faith, and no holiness of heart or life. This spiritual 
illumination is peculiar to the true people of God; the inward light, 
in which the Quakers believe, is common to all men. The design 
and effect of the “inward light” are the communication of new 
truth, or of truth not objectively revealed, as well as the spiritual 
discernment of the truths of Scripture. The design and effect of 
spiritual illumination are the proper apprehension of truth already 
speculatively known. 

Secondly. By the inner light the orthodox Quakers understand 
the supernatural influence of the Holy Spirit, concerning which 
they teach,—(1.) That it is given to all men. (2.) That it not only 
convinces of sin, and enables the soul to apprehend aright the 
truths of Scripture, but also communicates a knowledge of “ the 
mysteries of salvation.” ‘ A manifestation of this Spirit they believe 
is given to every man to profit withal ; that it convicts of sin, and, 
as attended to, gives power to the soul to overcome and forsake it ; 
it opens the mind to the mysteries of salvation, enables it savingly 
to understand the truths recorded in the Holy Scriptures, and gives 
it the living, practical, and heartfelt experience of those things 
which pertain to its everlasting welfare.” ‘‘ He hath communicated 
a measure of the light of his own Son, a measure of the grace of 
the Holy Spirit — by which he invites, calls, exhorts, and strives 
with every man, in order to save him; which light or grace, as it 
is received and not resisted, works the salvation of all, even of those 
who are ignorant of Adam’s fall, and of the death and sufferings 
of Christ; both by bringing them to a sense of their own misery, 
and to be sharers of the sufferings of Christ, inwardly ; and by 
making them partakers of his resurrection, in becoming holy, pure, 
and righteous, and recovered out of their sins.” 4 

Thirdly. The orthodox Friends teach concerning this inward 
light, as has been already shown, that it is subordinate to the Holy 
Scriptures, inasmuch as the Scriptures are the infallible rule of 
faith and practice, and everything contrary thereto is to be rejected 
as false and destructive. 


Barclay’s Views. 


While such are the views of the orthodox Friends, it must be 
admitted that many hold a different doctrine. This is true not 


1 Evans. 


94 INTRODUCTION. [Cu. IV.—Mysticism, 


only of those whom the Society has disowned, but of many men 
most prominent in their history. This difference relates both to 
what this light is, and to its authority. As to the former of these 
points the language employed is so diverse, and so figurative, that it 
is difficult to determine its real meaning. Some of the early Quakers 
spoke as though they adopted the doctrine of the earlier Mystics, 
that this inward principle was God himself, the divine substance. 
Others speak of it as Christ, or even the body of Christ, or his life. 
Others as ‘‘a seed,”’ which is declared to be no part of the nature 
of man; no remains of the image of God in which Adam was cre- 
ated; neither is it the substance of God. Nevertheless, it is de- 
clared to be “a spiritual substance,” in which the Father, Son, and 
Holy Ghost are present. This seed comes from Christ, and is 
communicated to every man. In some it lies as a seed upon a 
rock, which never shows any sign of life. But when the soul re- 
ceives a visitation of the Spirit, if his influence be not resisted, that 
seed is vivified, and develops into holiness of heart and life; by 
which the soul is purified and justified. We are not justified by 
our works. Everything is due to Christ. He is both ‘the giver 
and the gift.” Nevertheless our justification consists in this sub- 
jective change! A distinction is made between a twofold re- 
demption ; the one ‘‘ performed and accomplished by Christ for us 
in his crucified body without us; the other is the redemption 
wrought by Christ in us.” ‘* The first is that whereby a man, as 
he stands in the fall, is put in a capacity of salvation, and hath con- 
veyed unto him a measure of that power, virtue, spirit, life, and 
grace that was in Christ Jesus, which, as the free gift of God, is 
able to counterbalance, overcome, and root out the evil seed, where- 
with we are naturally, as in the fall, leavened. The second is that - 
whereby we witness and know this pure and perfect redemption in 
ourselves, purifying, cleansing, and redeeming us from the power of 
corruption, and bringing us into unity, favour, and friendship with 
God.” # 

With regard to the authority of this inward light, while the 
orthodox make it subordinate to the Scriptures, many of the early 
Friends made the written, subordinate to the inner, word; and 
others, as Barclay himself, make the two codrdinate. Although 
in this matter he is hardly consistent with himself. He ex- 
pressly denies that the Scriptures are to us “the fountain” of 
truth ; that they are “the principal ground of all truth and 
knowledge, or yet the adequate primary rule of faith and man- 

1 See Barclay’s Apology, Philadelphia edition, pp. 152, 153. 2 Ibid., p. 218. 


§ 6, C.] é QUAKERS. 95 - 


ners.” They are, however, “to be esteemed a secondary rule 
subordinate to the Spirit.” Nevertheless, he teaches with equal 
plainness that what * cannot be proved by Scripture, is no neces- 
sary article of faith.” 1 Again, he says: We are “willing to ad- 
‘mit it as a positive and certain maxim, that whatsoever any do, 
pretending to the Spirit, which is contrary to the Scriptures, be 
accounted and reckoned a delusion of the devil.”? He “freely 
subscribes to that saying, Let him that preacheth any other gospel 
than that which hath already been preached by the Apostles, and 
according to the Scriptures, be accursed.” We look on the 
Scriptures, he says, ‘as the only fit outward judge of controver- 
sies among Christians, and that whatsoever doctrine is contrary 
unto their testimony, may therefore justly be rejected as false.” 4 
His whole book, therefore, is an effort to prove from Scripture all 
the peculiar doctrines of Quakerism. 

His theory is, (1.) That all men since the fall are in a state of 
spiritual death from which they are utterly unable to deliver them- 
selves. He is severe in his denunciation of all Pelagian and semi- 
Pelagian doctrine. (2.) That God determined, through his Son 
our Lord Jesus Christ, to make provision for the salvation of all 
men. (3.) The work of Christ secures the opportunity and means 
of salvation for every man. (4.) Through him and for his sake 
“a seed” is given to every man which, under the influence of the 
Spirit, may be developed into righteousness and holiness, restoring 
the soul to the image and fellowship of God. (5.) To every man 
is granted “‘a day of visitation’ in which the Spirit comes to him 
and exerts an influence which, if not resisted, vivifies this divine 
seed, and thus gives the opportunity of being saved. (6.) The 
measure of this divine influence is not the same in all cases. In 
some it is irresistible, in others, not. In some it is as abundant as 
. in the prophets and Apostles, rendering its subjects as authoritative 
as teachers as the original Apostles. (7.) The office of the Spirit 
is to teach and to guide. It is not merely intended to enlighten 
the mind in the knowledge of truths contained in the Scriptures. 
It presents truth objectively to the mind. It does not reveal new 
doctrines, much less doctrines opposed to those revealed in the 
Scriptures; but it makes a new and independent revelation of old 
doctrines. On this point Barclay is very explicit.5 - His discussion 
of his second and third propositions, — the one concerning ‘‘ imme- 
diate revelation,” and the other, ‘“ the Scriptures,” — sets forth this 


1 Barclay’s Apology, p. 106. 2 Ibid., p. 100. 8 Jbid., p. 105. 
4 Jbid., p. 100. 5 See pp. 62-64, 105 


96 INTRODUCTION.  [Ca.IV.— Mysticism, 


doctrine at length. ‘We distinguish,” he says, ‘* between a reve- 
lation of a new gospel and new doctrines, and a new revelation of 
the good old gospel and doctrines ; the last we plead for, but the 
first we utterly deny.” Natural reason reveals certain doctrines, 
but this is not inconsistent with a new revelation of the same doc- 
trines in the Scriptures. So the fact that the gospel is revealed in 
the Scriptures is not inconsistent with its immediate objective reve- 
lation to the soul by the Spirit. 

Besides the great doctrines of salvation, there are many things 
the Christian needs to know which are not contained in the Scrip- 
tures. In these matters he is not left to his own guidance. The 
Spirit “ guides into all truth.” “ Therefore,” says Barclay, “ the 
Spirit of God leadeth, instructeth, and teacheth every true Chris- 
tian whatsoever is needful for him to know.” For example, 
whether he is to preach; and, if called to preach, when, where, 
and what he shall preach; where he is to go, and in any emer- 
gency what he ought todo. So the Spirit teaches us when and 
where we are to pray, and what we are to pray for. As the 
Spirit’s guidance extends to everything, it should be sought and 
obeyed in all things. 

Quakerism ignores the distinction between inspired and unin- 
spired men, except as to the measure of the Spirit’s influence. He 
dwells in all believers, and performs the same office in all. As the 
saints of old, before the giving of the law, were under his instruc- 
tion and guidance, so they continued to enjoy his teaching after 
the law was given. All through the Old Testament dispensation 
the people of God received immediate revelations and directions. 
When Christ came there was a more copious communication of 
this influence. These communications were not confined to either 
sex, or to any class in the Church. They were not peculiar to the 
Apostles, or to ministers, but to every one was given a manifesta- 
tion of the Spirit to profit withal. The state of the Church, as set 
forth in the New Testament as to this matter, continues to the 
present time, except that the gifts bestowed are not of the same 
miraculous character now that they were then. But as to his re- 
vealing, enlightening, teaching, guiding operations, He is as much 
present with believers now as during the apostolic age. Then 
all spake as the Spirit gave them utterance. When Christians 
assembled together every ‘one had his gift: one a psalm, one a 
doctrine, another a revelation, another an interpretation. Every 
one could speak ; but it was to be done decently and in order. If 
anything were revealed to one sitting by, he was to hold his peace 


§7.] OBJECTIONS. 97 


until his time came; for God is not the author of confusion. In 
1 Cor. xiv. we have the Quaker ideal or model of a Christian assem- 
bly. And as the Apostles went hither and thither, not according 
to their own judgment, but supernaturally guided by the Spirit, 
so the Spirit guides all believers in the ordinary affairs of life, if 
they wait for the intimations of his will. 

As this doctrine of the Spirit’s guidance is the fundamental prin- 
ciple of Quakerism, it is the source of all the peculiarities by which 
the Society of Friends has ever been distinguished. If every man 
has within himself an infallible guide as to truth and duty, he does 
not need external teaching. If it be the office of the Spirit to re- 
veal truth objectively to the mind, and to indicate on all occasions 
the path of duty; and if his revealing and guiding influence be 
universal, and immediate, self-evidencing itself as divine, it must of 
necessity supersede all others; just as the Scriptures supersede 
reason in matters of religion. The Quakers, therefore, although, 
as has been shown, acknowledging the divine authority of the 
Scriptures, make far less of them than other denominations of 
evaugelical Christians. They make very little of the Church and 
its ordinances ; of the Sabbath; of a stated ministry; and nothing 
of the sacraments as external ordinances and means of grace. In 
all these respects their influence has been hurtful to the cause of 
Christ, while it is cheerfully admitted that some of the best Chris- 
tians of our age belong to the Society of Friends. 


§ 7. Objections to the Mystical Theory. 


The idea on which Mysticism is founded is Scriptural and true. 
It is true that God has access to the human soul. It is true that 
He can, consistently with his own nature and with the laws of our 
being, supernaturally and immediately reveal truth objectively to 
the mind, and attend that revelation with evidence which produces 
an infallible assurance of its truth and of its divine origin. It is 
also true that such revelations have often been made to the chil- 
dren of men. But these cases of immediate supernatural reve- 
lation belong to the category of miracles. They are rare and are 
to be duly authenticated. 

The common doctrine of the Christian Church is, that God has 
at sundry times and in divers manners spoken to the children of 
men; that what eye hath not seen, or ear heard, what never could 
have entered into the heart of man, God has revealed by ais Spirit 
to those whom He selected to be his spokesmen to their fellow-men ; 
that these revelations were authenticated as divine, by their chars 

VOL, I. 7 


98 INTRODUCTION. [Cu. IV. — Mysricism. 


acter, their effects, and by signs and wonders, and divers miracles 
and gifts of the Holy Ghost; that these holy men of old who 
spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, communicated the 
revelations which they had received not only orally, but in writing, © 
employing not the words which man’s wisdom teacheth, but which 
the Holy Ghost teacheth; so that we have in the sacred Scriptures 
the things of the Spirit recorded in the words of the Spirit ; which 
Scriptures, therefore, are the Word of God, — 7. e., what God says 
to man ; what He declares to be true and obligatory, — and consti- 
tute for his Church the only infallible rule of faith and practice. 

Romanists, while admitting the infallibility of the written Word, 
still contend that it is not sufficient; and hold that God continues in 
a supernatural manner to guide the Church by rendering its bish- 
ops infallible teachers in all matters pertaining to truth and duty. 

Mystics, making the same admission as to the infallibility of 
Scripture, claim that the Spirit is given to every man as an inward 
teacher and guide, whose instructions and influence are the highest 
rule of faith, and sufficient, even without the Scriptures, to secure 
the salvation of the soul. 


Mysticism has no Foundation in the Scriptures. 


The objections to the Romish and Mystical theory are substan- 
tially the same. 

1. There is no foundation for either in Scriptures. As the Scrip- 
tures contain no promise of infallible guidance to bishops, so they 
contain no‘promise of the Spirit as the immediate revealer of truth 
to every man. Under the Old Testament dispensation the Spirit 
did indeed reveal the mind and purposes of God; but it was to 
selected persons chosen to be prophets, authenticated as divine 
messengers, whose instructions the people were bound to receive 
as coming from God. In like manner, under the new dispensation, 
our Lord selected twelve men, endowed them with plenary knowl- 
edge of the Gospel, rendered them infallible as teachers, and re- 
quired all men to receive their instructions as the words of God. 
It is true that during the apostolic age there were occasional com- 
munications made to a class of persons called prophets. But this 
“ gift of prophecy,” that is, the gift of speaking under the inspira- 
tion of the Spirit, was analogous to the gift of miracles. The one 
has as obviously ceased as the other. 

It is true, also, that our Lord promised to send the Spirit, who 
was to abide with the Church, to dwell in his people, to be their 
teacher, and to guide them into the knowledge of all truth. But 


§ 7.) OBJECTIONS. | 99 


what truth? Not historical or scientific truth, but plainly tayenlal 
truth; truth which He himself had taught, or made known by his 
Seihorigad messengers. The Spirit i is indeed a teacher ; and with- 
out his instructions there is no saving knowledge of divine things, 
for the Apostle tells us, “* The natural man receiveth not the things 
of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him; neither can 
he know them, because they are spiritually discerned.” (1 Cor. ii. 
14.) Spiritual discernment, therefore, is the design and effect of 
the Spirit’s teaching. And the things discerned are “ the things 
freely given to us of God,” 7. e., as the context shows, the things 
revealed to the Apostles and clearly made known in the Scrip- 
tures. 

The Apostle John tells his readers, ‘‘ Ye have an unction from 
the Holy One, and ye know all things” (1 John ii. 20), and again, 
ver. 27, “‘ The anointing which ye have received of Him abideth in 
you, and ye need not that any man teach you; but as the same 
anointing teacheth you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie, and 
aven as it hath taught you, ye shall abide in Him.” These passages 
ceach what all evangelical Christians admit. First, that true knowl- 
edge, or spiritual discernment of divine things, is due to the inward 
teaching of the Holy Spirit; and secondly, that true faith, or the 
infallible assurance of the truths revealed, is due in like manner to 
the “demonstration of the Spirit.” (1 Cor. ii. 4.) The Apostle 
John also says: ‘‘He that believeth on the Son of God, hath the 
witness in himself.” (1 John v. 10.) Saving faith does not rest 
on the testimony of the Church, nor on the outward evidence of 
miracles and prophecy, but on the inward testimony of the Spirit 
with and by the truth in our hearts. He who has this inward tes- 
timony needs no other. He does nut need to be told by other men 
what is truth; this same anointing teaches him what is truth, and 
that no lie is of the truth. Christians were not to believe every 
spirit. - They were to try the spirits whether they were of God. 
And the test or criterion of trial was the external, authenticated 
revelation of God, as spiritually discerned and demonstrated by 
the inward operations of the Spirit. So now when errorists come 
and tell the people there is no God, no sin, no retribution, no need 
vf a Saviour, or of expiation, or of faith ; that Jesus of Nazareth is 
not the Son of God, God manifest in the flesh, the true Christian 
has no need to be told that these are what the Apostle calls lies. 
He has an inward witness to the truth of the record which God 
has given of his Son. 

If the Bible gives no support to the Mystical doctrine of the 


100 INTRODUCTION. [Cu. IV. -— Mysticism. 


inward, supernatural, objective revelation of truth made by the 
Spirit to every man, that doctrine is destitute of all foundation, 
for it is only by the testimony of God that any such doctrine can 
be established. 


Mysticism is contrary to the Scriptures. 


2. The doctrine in question is not only destitute of support from 
Scripture, but it contradicts the Scriptures. It is not only opposed 
to isolated declarations of the Word of God, but to the whole re- 
vealed plan of God’s dealing with his people. Everywhere, and 
under all dispensations, the rule of faith and duty has been the ~ 
teaching of authenticated messengers of God. The appeal has 
always been “to the law and testimony.” The’ prophets came 
saying, “* Thus saith the Lord.” Men were required to believe 
and obey what was communicated to them, and not what the 
Spirit revealed to each individual. It was the outward and not the 
inward word to which they were to attend. And under the gos- 
pel the command of Christ to his disciples, was, “* Go ye into all the 
world and preach the gospel to every creature. He that believeth 
and is baptized shall be saved”? (Mar. xvi. 15, 16), — believeth, 
of course, the gospel which they preached. Faith cometh by 


hearing. ‘‘ How,” asks the Apostle, “shall they believe in him — 


of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a 
preacher ?”’ (Rom. x. 14.) God, he tells us, hath determined to — 
save men by the foolishness of preaching. (1 Cor. i. 21.) It is — 
the preaching of the cross he declares to be the power of God. 
(Verse 18.) It is the gospel, the external revelation of the plan 
of salvation through Jesus Christ, he says in Rom. i. 16, which “ is 
the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth, to 
the Jew first, and also to the Greek ; for therein is the righteous- 
ness of God revealed from faith to faith.” This idea runs through 
the whole New Testament. Christ commissioned his disciples to 
preach the gospel. He declared that to be the way in which men 
were to be saved. They accordingly went forth preaching every- 
where. This preaching was to continue to the end of the world, 
Therefore, provision was made for continuing the ministry. Men 
called and qualified by the Spirit, were to be selected and set apart 
to this work by divine command. And it is in this way, so far, 
the world has been converted. In no case do we find the Apostles 
calling upon the people, whether Jews or Gentiles, to look within 
themselves, to listen to the inner Word. They were to listen to 
the outward Word; to believe what they heard, and were to pray 


§7.] OBJECTIONS. 101 


for the Holy Spirit to enable them to understand, receive, and obey 
what was thus externally made known to them. 


Contrary to the Facts of Experience. 


3. The doctrine in question is no less contrary to fact than it is 
to Scripture. The doctrine teaches that by the inward revelation 
of the Spirit saving knowledge of truth and duty is given to every 
man. But all experience shows that without the written Word, 
men everywhere and in all ages, are ignorant of divine things, — 
~ without God, without Christ, and without hope in the world. The 
sun is not more obviously the source of light, than the Bible is the 
source of divine knowledge. The absence of the one is as clearly 
indicated as the absence of the other. It is incredible that an in- 
ward revelation of saving truth is made to every man by the Holy 
Spirit, if the appropriate effects of that revelation are nowhere 
manifested. It is to-be remembered that without the knowledge 
of God, there can be no religion. Without right apprehensions of 
the Supreme Being, there can be no right affections towards him. 
Without the knowledge of Christ, there can be no faith in him. 
Without truth there can be no holiness, any more than there can 
be vision without light. As right apprehensions of God, and holi- 
ness of heart and life, are nowhere found where the Scriptures are 
unknown, it is plain that the Scriptures, and not an inward light 
common to all men, are, by the ordinance of God, the only source 
to us of saving and sanctifying knowledge. 

There is a sense in which, as all evangelical Christians believe, 
the Spirit is given to every man. He is present with every human 
mind exciting to good and restraining from evil. To this the order, 
and what there is of morality in the world, are due. Without 
this ‘common grace,” or general influence of the Spirit, there 
would be no difference between our world and hell; for hell is a 
place or state in which men are finally given up of God. In like 
manner, there is a general providential efficiency of God by which 
He codperates with second causes, in the productions of the won- 
derful phenomena of the external world. Without that codpera- 
tion — the continued guidance of mind — the cosmos would become 
chaos. But the fact that this providential efficiency of God is 
aniversal, is no proof that He everywhere works miracles, that He 
constantly operates without the intervention of second causes. So, 
also, the fact that the Spirit is present with every human mind, and 
constantly enforces the truth present to that mind, is no proof that 
He makes immediate, supernatural revelations to every human 


102 INTRODUCTION.  [Cu. IV. — Mysticism 


being. The fact is, we cannot see without light. We have the 
sun to give us light. It is vain to say that every man has an 
inward light sufficient to guide him without the sun. Facts are 
against the theory. 


‘No Criterion by which to judge of the Source of Inward 
Suggestions. 


4. A fourth objection to the Mystical doctrine is that there is no 
criterion by which a man can test these inward impulses or revelae 
tions, and determine which are from the Spirit of God, and which 
are from his own heart or from Satan, who often appears and acts 
as an angel of light. This objection, Barclay says, ‘“‘ Bespeaketh 
much ignorance in the opposers. . . . . For it is one thing to 
affirm that the true and undoubted revelation of God’s Spirit is 
certain and infallible ; and another thing to affirm that this or that 
particular person or people is led infallibly by this revelation in 
what they speak or write, because they affirm themselves to be so 
led by the inward and immediate revelation of the Spirit.” ! It is 
admitted that there is an inward and infallible testimony of the 
Spirit in the hearts of believers to the truths objectively revealed in 
the Scriptures. It is admitted, also, that there have been immediate 
revelations of truth to the mind, as in the case of the prophets and 
Apostles, and that these revelations authenticate themselves, or are 
attended with an infallible assurance that they come from God. 
But these admissions do not invalidate the objection as above stated. 
Grinted that a man who receives a true revelation knows that it is 
from God; how is the man who receives a false revelation to know 
that it is not from God? Many men honestly believe themselves te 
be inspired, who are under the influence of some evil spirit, — their 
own it may be. The assurance or certainty of conviction may be 
as strong in one case as in the other. In the one it is well founded, 
in the other it is a delusion. Irresistible conviction is not enough. 
It may satisfy the subject of it himself. But it cannot either 
satisfy others, or be a criterion of truth. Thousands have been, 
and still are, fully convinced that the false is true, and that what is 
wrong is right. To tell men, therefore, to look within for an 
authoritative guide, and to trust to their irresistible convictions, is 
to give them a guide which will lead them to destruction. When 
God really makes revelations to the soul, He not only gives an in- 
fallible assurance that the revelation is divine, but accompanies it 
with evidence satisfactory to others as well as to the recipient that 

1 Barclay’s Apology, p. 67. 


§7.] OBJECTIONS. 108 


it is from God. All his revelations have had the seal both of in- 
ternal and external evidence. And when the believer is assured, 
‘by the testimony of the Spirit, of the truths of Scripture, he has 
only a new kind of evidence of what is already authenticated be- 
yond all rational contradiction. Our blessed Lord himself said to 
the Jews, “If I do not the works of my Father, believe’ me not. 
_ But if I do, though ye believe not me, believe the works.” (John 
x. 87, 38.) He even goes so far as to say, “If I had not done 
among them the works which none other man did, they had not 
had sin.” (John xv. 24.) The inward teaching and testimony 
of the Spirit are Scriptural truths, and truths of inestimable value. 
But it is ruinous to put them in the place of the divinely authenti- 
cated written Word. 


The Doctrine productive of Evil. 


5. Our Lord says of men, “ By their fruits ye shall know them.” 
The same rule of judgment applies to doctrines. Mysticism has 
always been productive of evil. It has led to the neglect or under- 
valuing of divine institutions, — of the Church, of the ministry, of 
the sacraments, of the Sabbath, and of the Scriptures. History 
shows that it has also led to the greatest excesses and social evils. 
The Society of Friends has in a good degree escaped these evils: 
but it has been by a happy inconsistency. They have not carried 
out their principle. or, while they teach that the inward revela- 
tions of the Spirit present the “ formal object” of faith; that they 
are clear and certain, forcing “‘ the well-disposed understanding to 
assent, irresistibly moving it thereto;” that they are the primary, 
immediate, and principal source of divine knowledge ; that they 
are not ‘to be subjected to the examination either of the outward 
testimony of the Scriptures, or of the natural reason of man, as to 
a more noble or certain rule or touchstone; ”} yet they also teach 
that nothing not contained in the Scriptures can be an article of 
faith; that we are bound to believe all the Bible teaches; that 
everything contrary to its teaching is to be rejected as “a delusion 
of the devil,” no matter from what source it may come ; and that 
the Scriptures are the judge of controversies among Christians ; 
and thus they, as a society, have been preserved from the excesses 
into which Mystics have generally run. Nevertheless, the Mystical 
principle of immediate, objective revelation of truth to every man, 
as his principal and primary rule of faith and practice, has wrought 
with Friends its legitimate fruit, inasmuch as it has led to compar- 
ative neglect of the Scriptures and of the ordinances of the Church. 


1 Barclay’s Second Proposition. 


CHAPTER V. 
ROMAN CATHOLIC DOCTRINE CONCERNING THE RULE OF FAITH 


§ 1. Statement of the Doctrine. 


1. Romanists reject the doctrine of the Rationalists who make 
human reason either the source or standard of religious truth. It 
is one of their principles, that faith is merely human when either 
its object or ground is human. Faith to be divine must have truth 
supernaturally revealed as its object, and the evidence on which it 
rests must be the supernatural testimony of God. 

2. They reject the Mystical doctrine that divine truth is revealed 
to every man by the Spirit. They admit an objective, supernatural 
revelation. 

3. They maintain, however, that this revelation is partly written — 
and partly unwritten; that is, the rule of faith includes both Scrip- 
ture and tradition. Moreover, as the people cannot certainly know 
what books are of divine origin, and, therefore, entitled to a place 
in the canon ; and as they are incompetent to decide on the 1mvan- 
‘ing of Scripture, or which among the multitude of traditionary 
doctrines and usages are divine, and which are human, God has 
made the Church an infallible teacher by which all these points 
are determined, whose testimony is the proximate and sufficient 
ground of faith to the people. 

So far as the Romish doctrine concerning the Rule of Faith 
differs from that of Protestants, it presents the following points for 
consideration: First, The doctrine of Romanists concerning the 
Scriptures. Second, Their doctrine concerning tradition. Third, 
Their doctrine concerning the office and authority of the Church 
as a teacher. 


§ 2. Roman Catholic Doctrine concerning the Scriptures. 


On this subject Romanists agree with Protestants, (1.) In 
teaching the plenary inspiration and consequent infallible authority 
of the sacred writings. Of these writings the Council of Trent 
says that God is their author, and that they were written by 
the dictation of the Holy Spirit (Spiritu sancto dictante ””) 


§ 2] THE SCRIPTURES. 105 


(2.) They agree with us in receiving into the sacred canon all the 
books which we regard as of divine authority. 

Romanists differ from Protestants in regard to the Scriptures, — 

1. In receiving into the canon certain books which Protestants 
do not admit to be inspired, namely: Tobit, Judith, Sirach, parts 
of Esther, the Wisdom of Solomon, First, Second, and Third Books 
of the Maccabees (the Third Book of Maccabees, however, is not 
included in the Vulgate), Baruch, the Hymn of the Three Chil- 
dren, Susanna, and Bel and the Dragon. These bvoks are not all 
included by name in the list given by the Council of Trent. Several 
of them are parts of the books there enumerated. Thus, the Hymn 
of the Three Children, Susanna, and Bel and the Dragon, appear 
as parts of the book of Daniel. Some modern theologians of the 
Romish Church refer all the apocryphal books to what they call 
**The Second Canon,” and admit that they are not of equal au- 
thority with those belonging to the First Canon.! The Council of 
Trent, however, makes no such distinction. 


Incompleteness of the Scriptures. 


2. A second point of difference is that Romanists deny, and 
Protestants affirm, the completeness of the sacred Scriptures. That 
is, Protestants maintain that all the extant supernatural revelations 
of God, which constitute the rule of faith to his Church, are con- 
tained in his written word. Romanists, on the other hand, hold 
that some doctrines which all Christians are bound to believe, are 
only imperfectly revealed in the Scriptures; that others are only 
obscurely intimated; and that others are not therein contained at 
all. The Preface to the Romish Catechism (Quest. 12) says, 
*¢ Omnis doctrine ratio, que fidelibus tradenda sit, verbo Dei con- 
tinetur, quod in scripturam traditionesque distributum est.” Bel- 
Jarmin 2 says expressly, ‘‘ Nos asserimus, in Scripturis non con- 
tineri expressé totam doctrinam necessariam, sive de fide sive de 
moribus ; et proinde praeter verbum Dei scriptum requiri etiam 
verbum Dei non-scriptum, 7. ¢., divinas et apostolicas traditiones.” 
On. this point the-Romish theologians are of one mind; but what 
she doctrines are, which are thus imperfectly revealed in the Scrip- 
tures, or merely implied, or entirely omitted, has never been 
authoritatively decided by the Church of Rome. The theologians 
of that Church, with more or less unanimity, refer to one or the 


1 See B. Lamy, Apparatus Bibl., lib. ii. c. 5. Jahn’s Linleitung, Th. i. § 29; 2d ed 
Vienna, 1802, p. 132. Mohler’s Symbolk. 
2 De Verbo Dei, iv. 3, tom. i. p. 163, e. edit. Paris, 1608. 


106 INTRODUCTION. [Cu. V.—R. C. R.or Fartn. 


other of these classes the following doctrines: (1.) The canon of 
Scripture. (2.) The inspiration of the sacred writers. (3.) The 
full doctrine of the Trinity. (4.) The personality and divin- 
ity of the Holy Spirit. (5.) Infant baptism. (6.) The obser- 
vance of Sunday as the Christian Sabbath. (7.) The tareefold 
orders of the ministry. (8.) The government of the Church by 
bishops. (9.) The perpetuity of the apostleship. (10.) The 
grave of orders. (11.) The sacrificial nature of the Eucharist.’ 
(12.) The seven sacraments. (13.) Purgatory. It lies in the 
interests of the advocates of tradition to depreciate the Scriptures, 
and to show how much the Church would lose if she had no other 
source of knowledge of divine truth but the written word. On 
this subject the author of No. 85 of the Oxford Tracts, when speak- 
ing even of essential doctrines, says,! “It is a near thing that they 
are in the Scriptures at all. The wonder is that they are all there. 
Humanly judging they would not be there but for God’s interpo- 
sition; and, therefore, since they are there by a sort of accident, 
it is not strange they shall be but latent there, and only indirectly 
producible thence.” ‘The gospel doctrine,” says the same writer, 
“‘is but indirectly and covertly recorded in Scripture under the 
surface.” 

Tradition is always represented by Romanists as not only the 
interpreter, but the complement of the Scriptures. ‘The Bible, 
therefore, is, according to the Church of Rome, incomplete. It 
does not contain all the Church is bound to believe ; nor are the 
doctrines which it does contain, therein fully or clearly made known. 


Obscurity of the Scriptures. 


3. The third point of difference between Romanists and Prot- 
estants relates to the perspicuity of Scripture, and the right of 
private judgment. Protestants hold that the Bible, being addressed 
to the people, is sufficiently perspicuous to be understood Ly them, 
under the guidance of the Holy Spirit ; and that they are entitled 
and bound to search the Scripture, and to judge for themselves what 
is its true meaning. Romanists, on the other hand, teach that the 
Scriptures are so obscure that they need a visible, present, and in- 
fallible interpreter ; and that the people, being incompetent to un- 
derstand them, are bound to believe whatever doctrines the Church, 
through its official organs, declares to be true and divine. On this 
subject the Council of Trent (Sess. 4), says: ** Ad coércenda petu- 
lantia ingenia decernit (Synodus), ut nemo, suze prudentize i innixUs, 

1 Pages 34 and 35. 


§ 2.) THE SCRIPTURES. 107 


in rebus fidei et morum ad edificationem doctrine Christiane 
pertinentium, Sacram Scripturam ad suas sensus contorquens con 
tra eum sensum, quem tenuit et tenet sancta mater Ecclesia, cujus 
est judicare de vero sensu et interpretatione Scripturarum Sancta- 
rum, aut etiam contra unanimem consensum patrum ipsam scrip- 
turam sacram interpretari audeat, etiamsi hujus modi interpre- 
tationes nullo unquam tempore in lucem edendz forent. Qui 
contravenerint, per ordinarios declarentur et pcenis a jure statutis 
puniantur.” Bellarmin! says: ‘Non ignorabat Deus multas in 
Ecclesia exorituras difficultates circa fidem, debuit igitur judicem 
aliquem Ecclesiz providere. At iste judex non potest esse Scrip- 
tura, neque Spiritus revelans privatus, neque princeps secularis, 
igitur princeps ecclesiasticus vel solus vel certe cum consilio et con- 
sensu coepiscoporum.”’ 

From this view of the obscurity of Scripture it follows that the 
use of the sacred volume by the people, is discountenanced by the 
Church of Rome, although its use has never been prohibited by 
any General Council. Such prohibitions, however, have repeat- 
edly been issued by the Popes; as by Gregory VII., Innocent III., 
Clemens XI., and Pius IV., who made the liberty to read any ver- 
nacular version of the Scriptures, dependent on the permission of 
the priest. There have been, however, many Romish prelates and 
theologians who encouraged the general reading of the Bible. The 
spirit of the Latin Church and the effects of its teaching, are pain- 
fully manifested by the fact that the Scriptures are practically in- 
accessible to the mass of the people in strictly Roman Catholic 
countries. . 

The Latin Vulgate. . 

4. The fourth point of difference concerns the authority due to 
the Latin Vulgate. On this subject the Council of Trent (Sess. 
4), says: ‘“Synodus considerans non parum utilitatis accedere 
posse Ecclesiz Dei, si ex omnibus Latinis editionibus que circum- 
ferentur, sacrorum librorum, quenam pro authentica habenda sit, 
innotescat: statuit et declarat, ut hac ipsa vetus et vulgata editio, 
que longo tot seculorum usu in ipsa Ecclesia. probata est, in pub- 
ucis lectionibus, disputationibus, praedicationibus et expositionibus 
pro authentica habeatur et nemo illam rejicere quovis preetextu au- 
deat vel presumat.”” The meaning of this decree is a matter of 
dispute among Romanists themselves. . Some of the more modern 
and liberal of their theologians say that the Council simply in- 
tended to determine which among several Latin versions was to be 

1 De Verbo Dei, iii. 9, tom. i. p. 151, d. ut sup. 


108 INTRODUCTION. [Cu. V.—R.C.R. or Fara. 


used in the service of the Church. They contend that it was not 
meant to forbid appeal to the original Scriptures, or to place the 
Vulgate on a par with them in authority. The earlier and stricter 
Romanists take the ground that the Synod did intend to forbid an 
appeal to the Hebrew and Greek Scriptures, and to make the Vul- 
gate the ultimate authority. The language of the Council seems 
to favor this interpretation. The Vulgate was to be used not only 
for the ordinary purposes of public instruction, but in all theolog- 
«cal discussions, and in all works of exegesis. 


§ 3. Tradition. 


The word tradition (apdSoo1s) means, (1.) The art of deliver- 
ing over from one to another. (2.) The thing delivered or com- 
municated. In the New Testament it is used (a.) For instructions 
delivered from some to others, without reference to the mode of de- 
livery, whether it be orally or by writing; as in 2 Thess. ii. 16, 
‘Hold the traditions which ye have been taught, whether by 
word, or our epistle ;”’ and ii. 6, “ Withdraw yourself from every 
brother that walketh disorderly, and not after the tradition which 
he received of us.” (6.) For the oral instructions of the fathers 
handed down from generation to generation, but not contained in 
the Scriptures, and yet regarded as authoritative. In this sense 
our Lord so frequently speaks of ‘“ the traditions of the Pharisees.” 
(c.) In Gal. i. 14, where Paul speaks of his zeal for the traditions 
of his fathers, it may include both the written and unwritten in- 
structions which he had received. What he was so zealous about, 
was the whole system of Judaism as he had been taught it. 

In the early Church-the word was used in this wide sense. Ap- 
peal was constantly made to “ the traditions,” 7. e., the instruc- 
tions which the churches had received. It was only certain 
churches at first which had any of the written instructions of the 
Apostles. And it was not until the end of the first century that 
the writings of the Evangelists and Apostles were collected, and 
formed into a canon, or rule of faith. And when the books of the 
New Testament had been collected, the fathers spoke of them as 
containing the traditions, 7. e., the instructions derived from Christ 
and his Apostles. They called the Gospels “the evangelical tradi- 
tions,’ and the Hpistles “ the apostolical traditions.’ In that age 
of the Church the distinction between the written and unwritten 
word had not yet been distinctly made. But as controversies 
arose, and disputants on both sides of all questions appealed to 
* tradition,” @. e., to what they had been taught; and when it was 


at | 


a) - 


/ 


§3.] ON TRADITION. 109 


found that these traditions differed, one church saying their teach- 
ers had always taught them one thing, and another that theirs had 
taught them the opposite, it was felt that there should be some com- 
mon and authoritative standard. Hence the wisest and best of the 
fathers insisted on abiding by the written word, and receiving noth 
ing as of divine authority not contained therein. In this, however, 
it must be confessed they were not always consistent. Whenever 
prescription, usage, or conviction founded on unwritten evidence, 
was available against an adversary, they did not hesitate to make 
the most of it. During all the early centuries, therefore, the dis- 
tinction between Scripture and tradition was not so sharply drawn 
as it has been since the controversies between Romanists and Prot 
estants, and especially since the decisions of the Council of Trent. 


Tridentine Doctrine. 


That Council, and the Latin Church as a body, teach on this 
subject, —(1.) That Christ and his Apostles taught many things 
which were not committed to writing, 7. e., not recorded in the 
Sacred Scriptures. (2.) That these instructions have been faith- 
fully transmitted, and preserved in the Church. (8.) That they 
constitute a part of the rule of faith for all believers. 

These particulars are included in the following extracts from the 
acts of the Council: ‘“‘ Synodus— perspiciens hance veritatem et 
disciplinam contineri in libris scriptis et sine scripto traditionibus, 
que ex ipsius Christi ore ab apostolis acceptae, aut ab ipsis apos- 


-tolis, Spiritu Sancto dictante, quasi per manus traditee, ad nos usque 


pervenerunt ; orthodoxorum patrum exempla secuta, omnes libros 
tam Veteris quam Novi Testamenti, cum utriusque unus,Deus sit 
auctor, nec non traditiones ipsas, tum ad fidem tum ad mores per- 
tinentes, tanquam vel ore tenus a Christo, vel a Spiritu Sancto dic- 
tatas, et continua successione in Ecclesia Catholica conservatas, pari 
pietatis affectu et reverentia suscipit et veneratur.”! 
Bellarmin ? divides traditions into three classes: divine, apostol- 
ical, and ecclesiastical. ‘* Divine dicuntur que accept sunt ab 
ipso Christo apostolos docente, et nusquam in divinis literis in 
veniuntur. . . . . Apostolicz traditiones proprie dicuntur 
ill, que ab apostolis institute sunt, non tamen sine assistentia 
Spiritus Sancti et nihilominus non extant scripte in eorum epis- 
tolis. . . . .  Ecclesiastice traditiones proprie dicuntur con- 
suetudines quedam antique vel a prelatis vel a populis inchoate, 
gue paulatim tacito consensu populorum vim legis obtinuerunt. 
1 Trent. Sess. iv. 2 De Verbo Dei, iv. 1. 


110 INTRODUCTION. [Cu. V.—R.C. R. or Farts, 


Et quidem traditiones divine eandem vim habent, quam divina 
precepta sive divina doctrina scripta in Evangeliis. Et similiter 
apostolicee traditiones non scriptee eandem vim habent, quam apos- 
tolicee traditiones scripte. . . . . Ecclesiastice autem tra- 
ditiones eandem vim habent, quam decreta et constitutiones ec- 
clesiasticze scripte.” 

Petrus 4 Soto, quoted by Chemnitz! says, ‘Infallibilis est 
regula et catholica. Quacunque credit, tenet, et servat Romana 
Ecclesia, et in Scripturis non habentur, illa ab apostolis esse tradita ; 
item quarum observationum initium, author et origo ignoretur, vel 
inveniri non potest, illas extra omnem dubitationem ab apostolis_ 
tradita esse.” 

From this it appears, 1. That these traditions are called unwritten 
because not contained in the Scriptures. They are, for the most 
part, now to be found written in the works of the Fathers, decisions 
of councils, ecclesiastical constitutions, and rescripts of the Popes. 

2. The office of tradition is to convey a knowledge of doctrines, 
precepts, and institutions not contained in Scripture ; and also to 
serve asa guide to the proper understanding of what is therein 
written. Tradition, therefore, in the Church of Rome, is both the 
supplement and interpretation of the written word. 

3. The authority due to tradition is the same as that which be- 
longs to the Scriptures. Both are to be received “ pari pietatis 
affectu et reverentia.”” Both are derived from the same source * 
both are received through the same channel ; and both are authen- 
ticated by the same witness. This authority, however, belongs 
properly only to traditions regarded as divine or apostolical. Those 
termed ecclesiastical are of less importance, relating to rites and 
usages. Still for them is claimed an authority virtually divine, as 
they are enjoined by a church which claims to have been endowed 
by Christ with full power to ordain rites and ceremonies. 

4, The criteria by which to distinguish between true and false 
traditions, are either antiquity and catholicity, or the testimony of 
the extant Church. Sometimes the one, and sometimes the other 
is urged. The Council of Trent gives the former; so does Bellar- 
min, and so do the majority of Romish theologians. This is the 
famous rule established by Vincent of Lerins in the fifth century, 
quod semper, quod ubique, quod ab omnibus.” On all occasions, 
howeyer, the ultimate appeal is to the decision of the Church. 
Whatever the Church declares to be a part of: the revelation com- 
mitted to her, is to be received as of divine authority, at the peril 
of salvation. 

1 Examen Concilit Tridentini, p. 85, edit. Frankfort, 1574. 


§ 4.) THE CHURCH AS A TEACHER. 111 


§ 4. The Office of the Church as Teacher. 


1. Romanists define the Church to be the company of men pro- 
fessing the same faith, united in the communion of the same sacra- 
ments, subject to lawful pastors, and specially to the Pope. By 
the first clause they exclude from the Church all infidels and 
heretics ; by the second, all the unbaptized ; by the third, all who 
are not subject to bishops having canonical succession ; and by the 
fourth, all who do not acknowledge the Bishop of Rome to be the 
head of the Church on earth. It is this external, visible society 
thus constituted, that God has made an authoritative and infallible 
teacher. 

2. The Church is qualified for this office: first, by the communi- 
cation of all the revelations of God, written and unwritten; and 
secondly, by the constant presence and guidance of the Holy Spirit 
preserving it from all error in its instructions. On this point the 
* Roman Catechism,” ! says: ‘“* Quemadmodum hee una Ecclesia 
errare non potest in fidei ac morum disciplina tradenda, cum a 
Spiritu Sancto gubernetur; ita ceteras omnes, que sibi ecclesize 
nomen arrogant, ut que Diaboli spiritu ducantur, in doctrine et 
morum perniciosissimis erroribus versari necesse est.”” And Bellar- 
min,” ‘* Nostra sententia est Ecclesiam absolute non posse errare nec 
in rebus absolute necessariis nec in aliis, quae credenda vel facienda 
nobis proponit, sive habeantur expresse in Scripturis, sive non.” 

3. The Qhurch, according to these statements, is infallible only 
as to matters of faith and morals. Its infallibility does not extend 
over the domains of history, philosophy, or science. Some theolo- 
gians would even limit the infallibility of the Church, to essential 
doctrines. But the Church of Rome does not make the distinction, 
recognized by all Protestants, between essential and non-essential 
doctrines. With Romanists, that is essential, or necessary, which 
the Church pronounces to be a part of the revelation of God. Bel- 
larmin — than whom there is no greater authority among Romish 
theologians — says that the Church can err “nec in rebus absolute 
necessariis nec in aliis,” ¢. e., neither in things in their own nature 
necessary, nor in those which become necessary when determined 
and enjoined. It has been disputed among Romanists, whether 
the Church is infallible in matters of fact as well as in matters of 
doctrine. By facts, in this discussion, are not meant facts of his- 
tory or science, but facts involved in doctrinal decisions. When 
the Pope condemned certain propositions taken from the works of 

2 Part I. cap. X. quest. 15. 2 De Ecclesia Militante, c. 14. ; 


112 INTRODUCTION. [Cu. V.—R.C.R. or Farts. 


Jansenius, his disciples had to admit that those propositions were 
erroneous; but they denied that they were contained, in the sense 
condemned, in the writings of their master. To this, the Jesuits 
replied, that the infallibility of the Church extended in such cases 
as much to the fact as to the doctrine. This the Jansenists de- 
nied. 

The Organs of the Church’s Infallibility. 

4. As to the organs of the Church in its infallible teaching, 
there are two theories, the Episcopal and Papal, or, as they are 
designated from their principal advocates, the Gallican and the 
Transmontane. According to the former, the bishops, in their col- 
lective capacity, as the official successors of the Apostles, are infal- 
lible as teachers. Individual bishops may err, the body or college 
of bishops cannot err. Whatever the bishops of any age of the 
Church unite in teaching, is, for that age, the rule of faith. This 
concurrence of judgment need not amount to entire unanimity. 
The greater part, the common judgment of the episcopate, is all 
that is required. To their decision all dissentients are bound to 
submit. This general judgment may be pronounced in a council, 
representing the whole Church, or in any other way in which 
agreement may be satisfactorily indicated. Acquiescence in the 
decisions of even a provincial council, or of the Pope, or the sev- 
eral bishops, each in his own diocese, teaching the same doctrine, 
_ 1s sufficient proof of consent. 


The Transmontane Theory. 


According to the Papal, or Transmontane theory, the Pope is 
the organ through which the infallible judgment of the Church is 
pronounced. He is the vicar of Christ. He is not subject to a 
general council. He is not required to consult other bishops before 
he gives his decision. This infallibility is not personal, but official. 
As a man the Pope may be immoral, heretical, or infidel; as Pope, 
when speaking ex cathedra, he is the organ of the Holy Ghost. 
The High-Priest among the Jews might be erroneous in faith, 
or immoral in conduct, but when consulting God in his official ca- 
pacity, he was the mere organ of divine communication. Such, in 
few words, is the doctrine of Romanists concerning the Rule of 
Faith. 

In the recent Ecumenical Council, held in the Vatican, after a 
protracted struggle, the Transmontane doctrine was sanctioned. 
It is, therefore, now obligatory on all Romanists to believe that the 
Pope, when speaking ez cathedra, is infallible. 


—— 


§8 5, 6, A] EXAMINATION OF TRADITION. 113 


§ 5. Examination of the Romish Doctrine. 

Hundreds of volumes have been written in the discussion of the 
various points included in the theory above stated. Only a most 
cursory view of the controversy can be given in such a work as 
this. So far as Romanists differ from us on the canon of Scripture, 
the examination of their views belongs to the department of Bibli- 
eal literature. What concerns their doctrine of the incompleteness 
and obscurity of the written word, and the consequent necessity of 
an infallible, visible interpreter, can better be said under the head 
of the Protestant doctrine of the Rule of Faith. The two points 
to be now considered are Tradition, and the office of the Church 
asa teacher. These subjects are so related that it is difficult to 
keep them distinct. Tradition is the teaching of the Church, and 
the teaching of the Church is tradition. These subjects are not 
only thus intimately related, but they are generally included under 
the same head in the Catholic Symbols. Nevertheless, they are 
distinct, and involve very different principles. They should, there- 
fore, be considered separately. 


§ 6. Examination of the Doctrine of the Church of Rome on 
Tradition. 


A. Difference between Tradition and the Analogy of Faith. 


1. The Romish doctrine of tradition differs essentially from the 
Protestant doctrine of the analogy of faith. Protestants admit that 
there is a kind of tradition within the limits of the sacred Scrip- 
tures themselves. One generation of sacred writers received the 
whole body of truth taught by those who preceded them. There 
was a tradition of doctrine, a traditionary usus loquendi, tradition- 
ary figures, types, and symbols. The revelation of God in his 
Word begins in a fountain, and flows in a continuous stream ever 
increasing in volume. We are governed by this tradition of truth 
running through the whole sacred volume. All is consistent. One 
part cannot contradict another. Each part must be interpreted so 
as to bring it into harmony with the whole. This is only saying 
that Scripture must explain Scripture. 

2. Again, Protestants admit that as there has been an uninter- 
rupted tradition of truth from the protevangelium to the close of 
the Apocalypse, so there has been a stream of traditionary teach- 
ing flowing through the Christian Church from the day of Pente- 
cost to the present time. This tradition is so far a rule of faith 

VOL. I. 8 


114 INTRODUCTION. [Cu.V.—R.C.R. or Farts. 


that nothing contrary to it can be true. Christians do not stand 
isolated, each holding his own creed. They constitute one body, 
having one common creed. Rejecting that creed, or any of its 
parts, is the rejection of the fellowship of Christians, ‘incompatible 
with the communion of saints, or membership in the body of Christ. 
In other words, Protestants admit that there is a common faith of 
the Church, which no man is at liberty to reject, and which no 
man can reject and be a Christian. They acknowledge the au- 
thority of this common faith for two reasons. First, because what 
all the competent readers of a plain book take to be its meaning, 
must be its meaning. Secondly, because the Holy Spirit is prom- 
ised to guide the people of God into the knowledge of the truth, 
and therefore that which they, under the teachings of the Spirit, 
agree in believing must be true. There are certain fixed doctrines 
among Christians, as there are among Jews and Mohammedans, 
which are no longer open questions. The doctrines of the Trinity, 
of the divinity and incarnation of the eternal Son of God; of the 
personality and divinity of the Holy Spirit ; of the apostasy and 
sinfulness of the human race; the doctrines of the expiation of sin 
through the death of Christ and of salvation through his merits ; 
of regeneration and sanctification by the Holy Ghost; of the for- 
giveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, and of the life ever- 
lasting, have always entered into the faith of every recognized, 
historical church on the face of the earth, and cannot now be legit- 
imately called into question by any pretending to be Christians. 
Some of the more philosophical of the Romish theologians would 
have us believe that this is all they mean by tradition. They in- 
sist, they say, only on the authority of common consent. Thus 
Moehler, Professor of Theology at Munich, in his ‘‘ Symbolik, oder 
Darstellung der Dogmatischen Gegensitze,”’ says, ‘‘ Tradition, in 
the subjective sense of the word, is the common faith, or conscious- 
ness of the Church.” 1 The ever-living word in the hearts of 
believers.” ? It is, he says, what Eusebius means by the éxxAnovao- 
tixov ppovnua; and what Vincent of Lerins intends by the eccle- 
stastica intelligentia, and the Council of Trent by the universus 
ecclesie sensus. ‘In the objective sense of the word,” Moehler 
says that ‘‘ Tradition is the common faith of the Church as pre- 
sented in external, historical witnesses through all centuries.” ‘ In 
this latter sense,” he tells us, “tradition is commonly viewed 
when spoken of as a guide to the interpretation of the rule of 
faith.” ® He admits ee in this sense ‘* Tradition contains nothing 
1 Page 356. 2 Page 357. 8 Page 358. 


§ 6, B.] EXAMINATION OF TRADITION. . 115 


beyond what is taught in Scripture; the two as to their contents 
are one and the same.” ! Nevertheless, he acknowledges that in 
the Church of Rome many things were handed dbea from the 
Apostles which are not contained - in the Scriptures. This fact he 
does not deny. He admits that such additional revelations, or 
such revelations in addition to those contained in the written word, 
are of the highest importance. But he soon dismisses the subject, 
and devotes his strength to the first-mentioned view of the nature 
and office of tradition, and holds that up as the peculiar doctrine 
of Romanism as opposed to the Protestant doctrine. Protestants, 
however, admit the fact and the authority of a common conscious- 
ness, and a common faith, or common sense of the Church, while 
they reject the real and peculiar doctrine of Rome on this subject. 


B. Points of Difference between the Romish Doctrine and that 
of Protestants on Common Consent. 


The points of difference between the Protestant doctrine con 
cerning the common faith of the Church and the Roman Catholie 
doctrine of tradition are :— 

First. When Protestants speak of common consent of Christians, 
they understand by Christians the true people of God. Romanists, 
on the other hand, mean the company of those who profess the true 
faith, and who are subject to the Pope of Rome. There is the 
greatest possible difference between the authority due to the com- 
mon faith of truly regenerated, holy men, the temples of the Holy 
Ghost, and that due to what a society of nominal Christians profess 
to believe, the great majority of whom may be worldly, immoral, 
and irreligious. 

Secondly. The common consent for which Protestants plead 
concerns only essential doctrines; that is, doctrines which enter 
into the very nature of Christianity as a religion, and which are 
necessary to its subjective existence in the heart, or which if they 
do not enter essentially into the religious experience of believers, 
are so connected with vital doctrines as not to admit of separation 
from them. Romanists, on the contrary, plead the authority of 
trvlition for all kinds of doctrines and precepts, for rites and cere- 
monies, and ecclesiastical institutions, which have nothing to do 
with the life of the Church, and are entirely outside of the sphere 
of the promised guidance of the Spirit. Our Lord, in promising 
the Spirit to guide his people into the knowledge of truths neces- 
sary to their salvation, did not promise to preserve them from error 

. 1 Page 373. 


"ar | ae 
. 

7 

‘ 


a 


116 , INTRODUCTION. [Cu. V.—R.C.R. or Farra. 


in subordinate matters, or to give them supernatural knowledge of 
the organization of the Church, the number of the sacraments, or 
the power of bishops. The two theories, therefore, differ not only 
as to the class of persons who are guided by the Spirit, but also as to 
the class of subjects in relation to which that guidance is promised. 

Thirdly. A still more important difference is, that the common 
faith of the Church for which Protestants contend, is faith in doc- 
trines plainly revealed in Scripture. It does not extend heyond 
those doctrines. It owes its whole authority to the fact that it is a 
common understanding of the written word, attained and preserved 
under that teaching of the Spirit, which secures to believers a com- 
petent knowledge of the plan of salvation therein revealed. On 
the other hand, tradition is with the Romanists entirely independ- 
ent of the Scriptures. They plead for a common consent in doc- 
trines not contained in the Word of God, or which cannot be 
proved therefrom. 

Fourthly. Protestants do not regard ‘‘ common consent ”’ either 
as an informant or as a ground of faith. With them the written 
word is the only source of knowledge of what God has revealed for 
our salvation, and his testimony therein is the only ground of our 
faith. - Whereas, with Romanists, tradition is not only an inform- 
ant of what is to be believed, but the witness on whose testimony 
faith is to be yielded. It is one thing to say that the fact that all 
the true people of God, under the guidance of the Spirit, believe 
that certain doctrines are ‘taught in Scripture, is an unanswerable 
argument that they are really taught therein, and quite another 
thing to say that because an external society, composed of all sorts 
of men, to whom no promise of divine guidance has been given, 
agree in holding certain doctrines, therefore we are bound to re- 
ceive those doctrines as part of the revelation of God. 


C. Tradition and Development. 


The Romish doctrine of tradition is not to be confounded with 
the modern doctrine of development. All Protestants admit that 
there has been, in one sense, an uninterrupted development of the- 
ology in the Church, from the apostolic age to the present time. 
All the facts, truths, doctrines, and principles, which enter into 
Christian theology, are in the Bible. They are there as fully and 
as clearly at one time as at another; at the beginning as they are 
now. No addition has been made to their number, and no new 
explanation has been afforded of their nature or relations. The 
same is true of the facts of nature. They are now what they 


§ 6, C.] bXAMINATION OF TRADITION. 117 


have been from the beginning. They are, however, far better 
known, and more clearly understood now than they we:e a thou- 
sand years ago. The mechanism of the heavens was the same in 
the days of Pythagoras as it was in those of La Place ; and yet the 
astronomy of the latter was immeasurably in advance of that of 
the former. The change was effected by a continual and gradual 
progress. The same progress has taken place in theological knowl. 
edge. Every believer is conscious of such progress in his own ex- 
perience. When he was a child, he thought as a child. As he 
grew in years, he grew in knowledge of the Bible. He increased 
not only in the compass, but in the clearness, order, and harmony 
of his knowledge. This is just as true of the Church collectively 
as of the individual Christian. It is, in the first place, natural, if 
not inevitable, that it should be so. The Bible, although so clear 
and simple in its teaching, that he who runs may read and learn 
enough to secure his salvation, is still full of the treasures of the 
wisdom and knowledge of God; full of 7& Bd) rot Geot, the pro- 
foundest truths concerning all the great problems which have taxed 
the intellect of man from the beginning. These truths are not 
systematically stated, but scattered, so to speak, promiscuously over 
the sacred pages, just as the facts of science are scattered over the 
face of nature, or hidden in its depths. Every man knows that 
there is unspeakably more in the Bible than he has _ yet learned, as 
every man of science knows that there is unspeakably more in 
nature than he has yet discovered, or understands. It stands to 
reason that such a book, being the subject of devout and laborious 
study, century after century, by able and faithful men, should come 
to be better and better understood. And as in matters of science, 
although one false theory after another, founded on wrong princi- 
ples or on an imperfect induction of facts, has passed away, yet 
real progress is made, and the ground once gained is never lost, so 
we should naturally expect it to be with the study of the Bible. 
False views, false inferences, misapprehensions, ignoring of some 
facts, and misinterpretations, might be expected to come and go, 
in endless succession, but nevertheless a steady progress in tho 
kn wledge of what the Bible teaches be accomplished. And we 
might Also expect that here, too, the ground once surely gained 
would not again be lost. 

But, in the second place, what is thus natural and reasonable in 
itself is a patent historical fact. The Church has thus advanced in 
theological knowledge. The difference between the confused and 
discordant representations of the early fathers on all subjects con- 


118 INTRODUCTION. [Cu. V.—R. C. R. or Farrn 


nected with the doctrines of the Trinity and of the person of 
Christ, and the clearness, precision, and consistency of the views 
presented after ages of discussion, and the statement of these doc- 
trines by the Councils of Chalcedon and Constantinople, is as great 
almost as between chaos and cosmos. And this ground has never 
been lost. The same is true with regard to the doctrines of sin 
and grace. Before the long-continued discussion of these subjects 
in the Augustinian period, the greatest confusion and contradiction 
prevailed in the teachings of the leaders of the Church ; during 
those discussions the views of the Church became clear and set- 
tled. There is scarcely a principle or doctrine concerning the fall 
of man, the nature of sin and guilt, inability, the necessity of the 
Spirit’s influence, etc., etc., which now enters into the faith of 
evangelical Christians, which was not then clearly stated and au- 
thoritatively sanctioned by the Church. In like manner, before 
the Reformation, similar confusion existed with regard to the great 
doctrine of justification. No clear line of discrimination was 
drawn between it and sanctification. Indeed, during the Middle 
Ages, and among the most devout of the schoolmen, the idea of 
guilt was merged in the general idea of sin, and sin regarded as 
merely moral defilement. The great object was to secure holi- 
ness. Then pardon would come of course. The apostolic, Pauline, 
deeply Scriptural doctrine, that there can be no holiness until sin 
be expiated, that pardon, justification, and reconciliation, must pre- 
cede sanctification, was never clearly apprehended. ‘This was the 
grand lesson which the Church learned at the Reformation, and 
which it has never since forgot. Itis true then, as an historical 
fact, that the Church has advanced. It understands the great doc- 
trines of theology, anthropology, and soteriology, far better now, 
than they were understood in the early post-apostolic age of the 
Church. 
Modern Theory of Development. 

Very distinct from the view above presented is the modern the- 
ory of the organic development of the Church. This modern 
theory is avowedly fonnded on the pantheistic principles of Schel- 
ling and Hegel. With them the universe is the self-manifestation 
and evolution of the absolute Spirit. Dr. Schaff! says, that this 
theory ‘“ has left an impression on German science that can never 
be effaced; and has contributed more than any other influence te 
diffuse a clear conception of the interior organism of history.” In 
his work on the ‘ Principles of Protestantism,” ? Dr. Schaff says 

1 What is Church History? p.75.  ” 2 Page 150. 


$6, C.] EXAMINATION OF TRADITION. 119 


that Schelling and Hegel taught the world to recognize in his- 
tory * the ever opening sense of eternal thoughts, an always ad- 
vancing rational development of the idea of humanity, and its rela- 
tions to God.” This theory of historical development was adopted, 
and partially Christianized by Schleiermacher, from whom it has 
passed over to Dr. Schaff, as set forth in his work above quoted, 
as well as to many other equally devout and excellent men. The 
basis of this modified theory is realism. Humanity is a generic 
life, an intelligent substance. That life became guilty and pol- 
luted in Adam. From him it passed over by a process of natural, 
organic development (the same numerical life and substance) to 
all his posterity, who therefore are guilty and polluted. This 
generic life the Son of God assumed into union with his divine 
nature, and thus healed it and raised it to a higher power or 
order. He becomes a new starting-point. The origin of this new 
form of life in Him is supernatural. The constitution of his person 
was a miracle. But from Him this life is communicated by a natu- 
ral process of development to the Church. Its members are par 

takers of this new generic life. It is, however, a germ. What 

ever lives grows. ‘* Whatever is done is dead.” This new life is 
Christianity. Christianity is not a form of doctrine objectively 
revealed in the Scriptures. Christian theology is not the knowl- 
edge, or systematic exhibition of what the Bible teaches. It is the 
interpretation of this inner life. The intellectual life of a child 
expresses itself in one way, of a boy in another way, and of a man 
in another and higher way. In each stage of his progress the man 
has views, feelings, and modes of thinking, appropriate to that stage. 
It would not do for a man to have the same views and thoughts ag 
the child. Yet the latter are just as true, as right, and as proper, 
for the child, as those of the man for the man. It is thus with the 
Church. It passes through these stages of childhood, youth, and 
manhood, by a regular process. During the first centuries the 
Church had the indistinctness, vagueness, and exaggeration of 
views and doctrines, belonging to a period of infancy. In the Mid- 
dle Ages it had a higher form. At the Reformation it advanced to 
the entrance on another stage. The form assumed by Christianity 
during the medizval period, was for that period the true and 
proper, but not the permanent form. We have not reached that 
form as to doctrine yet. That will be reached in the Church of 
the future. 


120 INTRODUCTION. ([Cu. V.—R. C. RB. or Farrn 


Development as held by some Romanists. 

There is still another and very different form of the doctrine of 
development. It does not assume the Mystical doctrine of the in- 
dwelling of the substance of Christ, in the soul, the development 
of which works out its illumination in the knowledge of the truth, 
and finally its complete redemption. It admits that Christianity is, 
or includes a system of doctrine, and that those doctrines are in the 
Scriptures ; but holds that many of them are there only in their 
rudiments. Under the constant guidance and tuition of the Spirit, 
the Church comes to understand all that these rudiments contain, 
and to expand them in their fulness. ‘Thus the Lord’s Supper has 
been expanded into the doctrine of transubstantiation and the sacri- 
fice of the mass ; anointing the sick, into the sacrament of extreme 
unction ; rules of discipline into the sacrament of penance, of sat- 
isfactions, of indulgences, of purgatory, and masses and prayers for 
the dead; the prominence of Peter, into the supremacy of the 
Pope. The Old Testament contains the germ of all the doctrines 
unfolded in the Néw; and so the New Testament contains the 
germs of all the doctrines unfolded, under the guidance of the 
Spirit, in the theology of the medizval Church. 

Although attempts have been made by some Romanists and 
Anglicans to resolve the doctrine of tradition into one or other of 
these theories of development, they are essentially different. The 
only point of analogy between them is, that in both cases, little 
becomes much. Tradition has made contributions to the faith 
and institutions of the Christian Church; and development Cin the 
two latter forms of the doctrine above mentioned) provides for a 
similar expansion. 

The Real Question. 

The real status questionis, on this subject, as between Romanists 
and Protestants, is not (1) Whether the Spirit of God leads true 
believers into the knowledge of the truth; nor (2) whether true 
Christians agree in all essential matters as to truth and duty; nor 
(8) whether any man can safely or innocently dissent from this 
common faith of the people of God; but (4) whether apart from 
the revelation contained in the Bible, there is another supplemen- 
tary and explanatory revelation, which has been handed down out- 
side of the Scriptures, by tradition. In other words, whether there 
are doctrines, institutions, and ordinances, having no warrant. in 
the Scriptures, which we as Christians are bound to receive and’ 
obey on the authority of what is called common consent. This 
Romanists affirm and Protestants deny. 


a 


r 


- 


§ 6, DJ EXAMINATION OF TRADITION. 121 


D. Arguments against the Doctrine of Tradition. 

The heads of argument against - Romish doctrine on_ this 
subject are the flowing 

1. It involves a ea tmpagaibsliey. It is of course conceded 
that Christ and his Apostles said and did much that is not re- 
corded in the Scriptures; and it is further admitted that if we had 
any certain knowledge of such unrecorded instructions, they would 
be of equal authority with what is written in the Scriptures. But 
Protestants maintain that they were not intended to constitute a 
part of the permanent rule of faith to the Church. They were 
designed for the men of that generation. The showers which fell 
a thousand years ago, watered the earth and rendered it fruitful 
for men then living. They cannot now be gathered up and made 
available for us. They did not constitute a reservoir for the sup- 
ply of future generations. In like manner the unrecorded teach- 
ings of Christ and his Apostles did their work. They were not 
designed for our instruction. It is as impossible to learn what 
they were, as it is to gather up the leaves which adorned and 
enriched the earth when Christ walked in the garden of Geth- 
semane. This impossibility arises out of the limitations of our na- 
ture, as well as its corruption consequent on the fall. Man has not 
the clearness of perception, the retentiveness of memory, or the 
power of presentation, to énable him (without supernatural aid) 
to give a trustworthy account of a discourse once heard, a few 
years or even months after its delivery. And that this should be 
done over and over from month to month for thousands of years, 
is an impossibility. If to this be added the difficulty in the way 
of this oral transmission, arising from the blindness of men to the 
things of the Spirit, which prevents their understanding what they 
hear, and from the disposition to pervert and misrepresent the truth 
to suit their own prejudices and purposes, it must be acknowledged 
that tradition cannot be a reliable source of knowledge of religious 
truth. This is universally acknowledged and acted upon, except 
by Romanists. No one pretends to determine what Luther and 
Calvin, Latimer and Cranmer, taught, except from contemporaneous 
written records. Much less will any sane man pretend to know 
what Moses and the prophets taught except from their own 
writings. 

Romanists admit the force of this objection. They admit that 


- tradition would not be a trustworthy informant of what Christ and 


the Apostles taught, without the supernatural intervention of God. 


122 INTRODUCTION.  [Cu. V.—R. C. R. or Farra, 


Tradition is to be trusted not because it comes down through the 
hands of fallible men, but because it comes through an infallibly 
guided Church. This, however, is giving up the question. It is 
merging the authority of tradition into the authority of the Church. 
There is no need of the former, if the latter be admitted. Ro- 
manists, however, keep. these two things distinct. They say that 
if the Gospels had never been written, they would know by histor- 
ical trad tion the facts of Christ’s life; and that if his discourses 
and the epistles of the Apostles had never been gathered up and 
recorded, they would by the same means know the truths which 
they contain. They admit, however, that this could not be with- 
out a special] divine intervention. 


No Promise of Divine Intervention. 


2. The second objection of Protestants to this theory is, that it 
1s unphilosophical and irreligious to assume a supernatural inter- 
vention on the part of God, without promise and without proof, 
merely to suit a purpose, — Deus ex machina. 

Our Lord promised to preserve his Church from fatal apostasy ; 
He promised to send his Spirit to abide with his people, to teach 
them ; He promised that He would be with them to the end of the 
world. ‘But these promises were not made to any external, visible 
organization of professing Christians, whether Greek or Latin; nor 
did they imply that any such Church should be preserved from all 
error in faith or practice; much less do they imply that instruc- 
tions not recorded by the dictation of the Spirit, should be pre- 
served and transmitted from generation to generation. There is 
no such promise in the Word of God, and as such preservation and 
transmission without divine, supernatural interposition, would be 
impossible, tradition cannot be a trustworthy informant of what 
Christ taught. é 

No Criterion. 

3. Romanists again admit that many false traditions have pre- 
vailed in different ages and in different parts of tne Church. Those 
who receive them are confident of their genuineness, and zealous 
in their support. How shall the line be drawn between the true 
and false ? By what criterion can the one be distinguished from the 
other? Protestants say there is no such criterion, and therefore, 
if the authority of tradition be admitted, the Church is exposed to 
a flood of superstition and error, This is their third argument 
against the Romish doctrine on this subject. Romanists, however, 
gay they have a sure criterion in antiquity and universality. They 


§ 6, D.] EXAMINATION OF TRADITION. 123 


have formulated their rule of judgment in the famous dictum of 
Vincent of Lerins: ‘Quod semper, quod ubique, quod ab om- 
nibus.”’ 

Common Consent not a Criterion. 

To this Protestants reply, — First, That they admit the authority 
of common consent among true Christians as to what is taught in 
the Scriptures. So far as all the true people of God agree in their 
interpretation of the Bible, we acknowledge ourselves bound to 
submit. But this consent is of authority only, (a) So far as it is 
the consent of true believers ; (6) So far as it concerns the mean- 
ing of the written word; and, (¢) So far as it relates to ths prac- 
tical, experimental, or essential doctrines of Christianity. Such 
consent as to matters outside of the Bible, or even supposed to be 
in the Bible, if they do not concern the foundation of our faith, is 
of no decisive weight. The whole Christian world, without one 
dissenting voice, believed for ages that the Bible taught that the 
sun moves round the earth. No man now believes it. 

Secondly, Common consent as to Christian doctrine cannot be 
pleaded except within narrow limits. It is only on the gratuitous 
and monstrous assumption that Romanists are the only Christians, 
that the least plausibility can be given to the claim of common con- 
sent. The argument is really this: The Church of Rome receives 
certain doctrines on the authority of tradition. The Church of 
Rome includes all true Christians. Therefore, the common con- 
sent of all Christians may be claimed in favour of those doctrines. 

But, thirdly, admitting that the Church of Rome is the whole 
Church, and admitting that Church to be unanimous in holding 
certain doctrines, that is no proof that that Church has always held 
them. The rule requires that a doctrine must be held not only ab 
omnibus, but semper. It is, however, a historical fact that all the 
peculiar doctrines of Romanism were not received in the early 
Church as matters of faith. Such doctrines as the supremacy of 
the Bishop of Rome ; the perpetuity of the apostleship ; the grace 
of orders; transubstantiation; the propitiatory sacrifice of the 
Mass ; the power of the priests to forgive sins; the seven sacra- 
ments; purgatory; the immaculate conception of the Virgin 
Mary, etc., etc., can all be historically traced in their origin, grad- 
ual development, and final adoption. As it would be unjust to de- 
termine the theology of Calvin and Beza from the Socinianism of 
modern Geneva; or that of Luther from the theology of the Ger 
mans of our day ; so it is utterly unreasonable to infer that because 
the Latin Church believes all that the Council of Trent pronounced 


124 INTRODUCTION. ([Cu. V.— R. C. BR. or Fate. 


to be true, that such was its faith in the first centuries of its his- 
tory. It is not to be denied that for the first hundred years after 
the Reformation the Church of England was Calvinistic; then 
under Archbishop Laud and the Stuarts it became almost thor- 
oughly Romanized ; then it became to a large extent Rationalistic, 
so that Bishop Burnet said of the men of his day, that Christianity 


seemed to be regarded as a fable ‘“‘among all persons of discern- 


ment.” To this succeeded a general revival of evangelical doc- 
trine and piety ; and that has been followed by a like revival of 
Romanism and Ritualism. Mr. Newman! says of the present 
time: “In the Church of England, we shall hardly find ten or 
twenty neighboring clergymen who agree together ; and that, not 
in non-essentials of religion, but as to what are its elementary and 
necessary doctrines ; or as to the fact whether there are any nec- 
essary doctrines at all, any distinct and definite faith required for 
salvation.” Such is the testimony of history. In no external, 
visible Church, has there been a consent to any form of faith, sem- 
per et ab omnibus. 

The Latin Church is no exception to this remark. It is an un- 
deniable fact of history that Arianism prevailed for years both in 
the East and West; that it received the sanction of the vast ma- 
jority of the bishops, of provincial and ecumenical councils, and 
of the Bishop of Rome. It is no less certain that in the Latin 
Church, Augustinianism, including all the characteristic doctrines 
of what is now called Calvinism, was declared to be the true faith 
by council after council, provincial and general, and by bishops and 
popes. Soon, however, Augustinianism lost its ascendency. For 
seven or eight centuries no one form of doctrine concerning sin, 
grace, and predestination prevailed in the Latin Church. Augus- 
tinianism, Semi-Pelagianism, and Mysticism (equally irreconcilable 
with both), were in constant conflict; and that, too, on questions 
on which the Church had already pronounced its judgment. It was 
not until the beginning of the sixteenth century that the Council 
of Trent, after long conflict within itself, gave its sanction to a 
modified form of Semi-Pelagianism. 

The claim, therefore, for common consent, as understood by Ro- 
manists, is contrary to history. It is inconsistent with undeniable 
facts. This is virtually admitted by Romanists themselves. For 
with them it is common to say, We believe because the fifth cen- 
tury believed. But this is a virtual admission that their peculiar 
faith is not historically traceable beyond the fifth century. This 


1 Lectures on Prophetic Office of the Church, Lond. 1837, pp. 394, 895. 


§6, DJ EXAMINATION OF TRADITION. - 125 


admission of a want of all historical evidence of ‘common con- 
sent ”’ is also involved, as before remarked, in their constant appeal 
to the authority of the Church. What the Church says is a mat- 
ter of faith, we, the traditionists affirm, are bound to believe, has 
always been a matter of faith. The passage from “ Petrus & Soto,” 
quoted above, puts the case very concisely: “* Queecunque credit, 
tenet et servat Romana ecclesia, et in Scripturis non habentur illa 
ab Apostolis esse tradita.” The argument amounts to this. The 
Church believes on the ground of common consent. The proof 
that a thing is a matter of common consent, and always has been, 
is that the Church now believes it. 


Inadequacy of the Evidences of Consent. 


The second objection to the argument of Romanists from com- 
mon consent in support of their traditions, is, that the evidence 
which they adduce of such consent is altogether inadequate. They 
appeal to the ancient creeds. But there was no creed generally 
adopted before the fourth century. No creed adopted before the 
eighth century contains any of the doctrines peculiar to the Church 
of Rome. Protestants all receive the doctrinal statements con- 
tained in what is called the Apostles’ creed, and in those of Chalce- 
don, and of Constantinople, adopted a. p. 681. 

They appeal also to the decisions of councils. To this the same 
reply is made. There were no general councils before the fourth 
century. The first six ecumenical councils gave no doctrinal de- 
cisions from which Protestants dissent. They, therefore, present 
no evidence of consent in those doctrines which are now peculiar to 
the Church of Rome. 

They appeal again to the writings of the fathers. But to this 
Protestants object, — 

First. That the writings of the apostolic fathers are too few to 
be taken as trustworthy representatives of the state of opinion 1p 
the Church for the first three hundred years. Ten or twenty 
writers scattered over such a period cannot reasonably be assumed 
to speak the mind of the whole Church. 

Secondly. The consent of these fathers, or of the half of them, 
cannot be adduced in favour of any doctrine in controversy between 
Protestants and Romanists. 

Thirdly. Almost unanimous consent can be quoted in support of 
doctrines which Romanists and Protestants unite in rejecting. The 
Jewish doctrine of the millennium passed over in its grossest form 
to the early Christian Church. But that doctrine the Church ot 
Rome is sneciallv zealous in denouncing. 


126 | INTRODUCTION. ([Cu. V.—R.C. R. or Farrm 


Fourthly. ‘he consent of the fathers cannot be proved in sup- 
port of doctrines which Protestants and Romanists agree in accept 
ing. Not that these doctrines did not then enter into the faith of 
the Church, but simply that they were not presented. 

Fifthly. Such is the diversity of opinion among the fathers them- 
selves, such the vagueness of their doctrinal statements, and such 
the unsettled wsws loquendi as to important words, that the author- 
ity of the fathers may be quoted on either side of any disputed 
doctrine. There is no view, for example, of the nature of the 
Lord’s supper, which has ever been held in the Church, for which 
the authority of some early father cannot be adduced. And often 
the same father presents one view at one time, and another at a 
different time. 

Sixtlily. The writings of the fathers have been notoriously cor- 
rupted. It was a matter of great complaint in the early Church 
that spurious works were circulated ; and that genuine works were 
recklessly interpolated. Some of the most important works of the 
Greek fathers are extant only in a Latin translation. This is the 
case with the greater part of the works of Irenzeus, translated by 
Rufinus, whom Jerome charges with the most shameless adultera- 
tion. 

Another objection to the argument from consent is, that it is a 
Procrustean bed which may be extended or shortened at pleasure. 
In every Catena Patrum prepared to prove this consent in certain 
doctrines, it will be found that two or more writers in a century 
are cited as evincing the unanimous opinion of that century, while 
double or fourfold the number, of equally important writers, belong- 
ing to the same period, on the other side, are passed over in silence. 
There is no rule to guide in the application of this test, and no 
uniformity in the manner of its use. 

While, therefore, it is admitted that there has been a stream of 
doctrine flowing down uninterruptedly from the days of the Apos- 
tles, it is denied, as a matter of fact, that there has been any unin- 
terrupted or general consent in any doctrine not clearly revealed 
in the Sacred Scriptures ; and not even in reference to such clearly 
revealed doctrines, beyond the narrow limits of essential truths. 
And it is, moreover, denied that in any external, visible, organized 
Church, can the rule, quod semper, quod ab omnibus, be applied 
even to essential doctrines. The argument, therefore, of Roman- 
ists in favor of their peculiar doctrines, derived from general con- 
sent, is utterly untenable and fallacious. This is virtually admitted 
by the most zealous advocates of tradition. ‘Not only,” says Pro- 


§ 6, D.] EXAMINATION OF TRADITION. 127 


fessor Newman,! “is the Church Catholic bound to teach the 
truth, but she is divinely guided to teach it; her witness of the 
Christian faith is a matter of promise as well as of duty ; her dis- 
cernment of it is secured by a heavenly, as well as by a human 
rule. She is indefectible in it; and therefore has not only author- 
ity to enforce it, but is of authority in declaring it. The Church 
not only transmits the faith by human means, but has a supernat- 
ural gift for that purpose; that doctrine which is true, considered 
as an historical fact, is true also because she teaches it.” The 
author of the Oxford Tract, No. 85, after saying, ‘‘ We believe 
mainly because the Church of the fourth and fifth centuries unani- 
mously believed,” ? adds, ‘“* Why should not the Church be divine ? 
The burden of proof surely is on the other side. I will accept her 
doctrines, and her rites, and her Bible —not one, and not the 
other, but all, — till I have clear proof that she is mistaken. It is 
I feel God’s will that I should do so; arid besides, I love these her 
possessions —I love her Bible, her doctrines, and her rites; and 
therefore, I believe.””? The Romanist then believes because the 
Church believes. This is the ultimate reason. The Church be- 
lieves, not because she can historically prove that her doctrines 
have been received from the Apostles, but because she is supernat~ 
urally guided to know the truth. ‘Common consent,” therefore, 
is practically abandoned, and tradition resolves itself into the pres- 
ent faith of the Church. 


Tradition not available by the People. 


4, Protestants object to tradition as part of the rule of faith, be- 
cause it is not adapted to that purpose. A rule of faith to the peo- 
ple must be something which they can apply; a standard by which 
they can judge. But this unwritten revelation is not contained in 
any one volume accessible to the people, and intelligible by them. 
It is scattered through the ecclesiastical records of eighteen cen 
turies. It is absolutely impossible for the people to learn what 
it teaches. How can they tell whether the Church in all ages 
has taught the doctrine of transubstantiation, the sacrifice of. the 
Mass, or any other popish doctrine. They must take all such doc- 
trines upon trust, 7. e., on the faith of the extant Church. But 
this is to deny that to them tradition is a rule of faith. ‘Ihey are 
required to believe, on the peril of their souls, doctrines, the pre- 
tended evidence of which it is impossible for them to ascertain or 
appreciate. 


1 Lectures, ut supra, pp. 225, 226. 2 Ozford Tracts, No. 85, p. 102. 
8 Ibid, p. 115. 


128 INTRODUCTION. [Cu. V.—R. C. R. or Farra, 


5. Romanists argue that such is the obscurity of the Scriptures, 
that not only the people, but the Church itself needs the aid of 
tradition in order to their being properly understood. But if the 
Bible, a comparatively plain book, in one portable volume, needs 
to be thus explained, What is to explain the hundreds of folios in - 
which these traditions are recorded? Surely a guide to the inter- 
pretation of the latter must be far more needed than one for the 
Scriptures. 


Tradition destroys the Authority of the Scriptures. 


6. Making tradition a part of the rule of faith subverts the 
authority of the Scriptures. This follows as a natural and un- 
avoidable consequence. If there be two standards of doctrine of 
equal authority, the one the explanatory, and infallible interpreter 
of the other, it is of necessity the interpretation which determines 
the faith of the people. Instead, therefore, of our faith resting on 
the testimony of God as recorded in his Word, it rests on what poor, 
fallible, often fanciful, prejudiced, benighted men, tell us is the 
meaning of that word. Man and his authority take the place of 
God. As this is the logical consequence of making tradition a rule 
of faith, so it is an historical fact that the Scriptures have been 
made of no account wherever the authority of tradition has been 
admitted. Our Lord said, that the Scribes and Pharisees made the 
word of God of no effect by their traditions ; that they taught for 
doctrines the commandments of men. This is no less historically 
true of the Church of Rome. A great mass of doctrines, rites, 
ordinances, and institutions, of which the Scriptures know nothing, 
has been imposed on the reason, conscience, and life of the people. 
The Roman Catholic religion of our day, with its hierarchy, ritual, 
image and saint worship ; with its absolutions, indulgences, and its 
despotic power over the conscience and the life of the individual, 
is as little like the religion of the New Testament, as the present 
religion of the Hindus with its myriad of deities, its cruelties, and 
abominations, is like the simple religion of their ancient Vedas. In 
both cases similar causes have produced similar effects. In both 
there has been a provision for giving divine authority to the rapidly 
accumulating errors and corruptions of succeeding ages. 

7. Tradition teaches error, and therefore cannot be divinely 
controlled so as to be a rule of faith. The issue is between 
Scripture and tradition. Both cannot be true. The one con- 
tradicts the other. One or the other must be given up. Of this 
at least no true Protestant has any doubt. All the doctrines 


§ 7, A.] INFALLIBILITY OF THE CHURCH. 129 


peculiar to Romanism, and for which Remanists plead the authority 
of Scripture, Protestants believe to be anti-scriptural; and there- 
fore they need no other evidence to prove that tradition is not to 
be trusted either in matters of faith or practice. 


The Scriptures not received on the Authority of Tradition. 


8. Romanists argue that Protestants concede the authority of 
tradition, because it is on that authority they receive the New 
Testament as the word of God. This is not correct. We do not 
believe the New Testament to be divine on the ground of the’ 
testimony of the Church. We receive the books included in the 
canonical Scriptures on the twofold ground of internal and ex- 
ternal evidence. It can be historically proved that those books 
were written by the men whose names they bear; and it can also 
be proved that those men were the duly authenticated organs of 
the Holy Ghost. The historical evidence which determines the 
authorship of the New Testament is not exclusively that of the 
Christian fathers. The testimony of heathen writers is, in some 
respects, of greater weight than that of the fathers themselves. 
We may believe on the testimony of English history, ecclesiastical 
and secular, that the Thirty-Nine Articles were framed by the 
English Reformers, without being traditionists. In like manner 
we may believe that the books of the New Testament were written 
by the men whose names they bear without admitting tradition to 
be a part of the rule of faith. 

Besides, external evidence of any kind isa very subordinate 
part of the ground of a Protestant’s faith in the Scripture. That 
ground is principally the nature of the doctrines therein revealed, 
and the witness of the Spirit, with and by the truth, to the heart 
and conscience. We believe the Scriptures for much the same 
reason that we believe the Decalogue. 

The Church is bound to stand fast in the liberty wherewith 
Christ has made it free, and not to be again entangled with the 
yoke of bondage, —a bondage not only to human doctrines and 
institutions, but to soul-destroying errors and superstitions. 


§ 7. Office of the Church as a Teacher. 
A. The Romish Doctrine on this subject. 


Romanists teach that the Church, as an external, visible society, 
eonsisting of those who profess the Christian religion, united in 


communion of the same sacraments and subjection to lawful pastors, 
VOL. 1. 9 


130 INTRODUCTION. [Cu. V.—R. C. R. or Fairs. 


and especially to the Pope of Rome, is divinely appointed to be the 
infallible teacher of men in all things pertaining to faith and prac- 
tice. It is qualified for this office by the plenary revelation of the 
truth in the written and unwritten word of God, and by the su- 
pernatural guidance of the Holy Spirit vouchsafed to the bishops 
as official successors of the Apostles, or, to the Pope as the successor 
of Peter in his supremacy over the whole Church, and as vicar 
of Christ on earth. 

There is something simple and grand in this theory. It is 
wonderfully adapted: to the tastes and wants of men. It relieves 
them of personal responsibility. Everything is decided for them. 
Their salvation is secured by merely submitting to be saved by an 
infallible, sin-pardoning, and grace-imparting Church. Many may 
be inclined to think that it would have been a great blessing had 
Christ left on earth a visible representative of himself clothed with 
his authority to teach and govern, and an ofder of men dispersed 
through the world endowed with the gifts of the original Apostles, — 
men everywhere accessible, to whom we could resort in all times 
of difficulty and doubt, and whose decisions could be safely received 
as the decisions of Christ himself. God’s thoughts, however, are 
not as our thoughts. We know that when Christ was on earth, 
men did not believe or obey Him. We know that when the 
Apostles were still living, and their authority was still confirmed 
by signs, and wonders, and divers miracles and gifts of the Holy 
Ghost, the Church was nevertheless distracted by heresies and 
schisms. If any in their sluggishness are disposed to think that 
a perpetual body of infallible teachers would be a blessing, all 
must admit that the assumption of infallibility by the ignorant, the 
erring, and the wicked, must be an evil inconceivably great. The 
Romish theory if true might be a blessing; if false it must be an 
awful curse. That it is false may be demonstrated to the satis- 
faction of all who do not wish it to be true, and who, unlike the 
Oxford Tractarian, are not determined to believe it because they 
love it. : 


B. The Romish definition of the Church is derived from what 
the Church of Rome now is. 


Before presenting a brief outline of the argument against this 
theory, it may be well to remark that the Romish definition of the 
Church is purely empirical. It is not derived from the signification 
or usage of the word éxxAyoia in the New Testament; nor from 
what is there taught concerning the Church. It is merely a state- 


ae 


§ 7, B.] INFALLIBILITY OF THE CHURCH. 131 


ment of what the Church of Rome now is. It is a body profess- 
ing the same faith, united in the communion of the same sacra- 
ments, subject to pastors (7%. e., bishops) assumed to be lawful, and 
to the Pope as the vicar of Christ. Now in this definition it is 
gratuitously assumed, — 

1. That the Church to which the promise of divine guidance is 
given, is an external, visible organization ; and not the people of 
God as such in their personal and individual relation to Christ. In 
other words, it is assumed that the Church is a visible society, and 
not a collective term for the people of God; as when it is said of 
Paul that he persecuted the Church ; and of Christ that He loved 
the Church and gave himself for it. Christ certainly did not die 
for any external, visible, organized Society. 

2. The Romish theory assumes, not only that the Church is an 
external organization, but that it must be organized in one definite, 
prescribed form. But this assumption is not only unreasonable, it 
is unscriptural, because no one form is prescribed in Scripture as 
essential to the being of the Church; and because it is contrary to 
the whole spirit and character of the gospel, that forms of govern- 
ment should be necessary to the spiritual life and salvation of men. 
Moreover, this assumption is inconsistent with historical facts, 
The Church in all its parts has never been organized according to 
one plan. 

3. But conceding that the Church is an external society, and 
that it must be organized according to one plan, it is a gratuitous 
and untenable presumption, that that plan must be the episcopal. 
It is a notorious fact that diocesan episcopacy did not exist during 
the apostolic age. It is equally notorious that that plan of govern- 
ment was gradually introduced. And it is no less notorious that a 
large part of the Church in which Christ dwells by his presence, 
and which He in every way acknowledges and honours, has no 
bishops until the present day. The government of the Church by 
bishops, Romanists admit is one of the institutions which rest not 
on Scripture, but on tradition for their authority. 

4, But should everything else be conceded, the assumption 
that subjection to the Pope, as the vicar of Christ, is necessary to 
tle existence of the Church, is utterly unreasonable. This is the 
climax. There is not the slightest evidence in the New Testament 
or in the apostolic age, that Peter had any such primacy among 
the Apostles as Romanists claim. There is not only the absence 
of all evidence that he exercised any jurisdiction over them, but 
there is abundant evidence to the contrary. This is lear from 


182 INTRODUCTION. [Cu. V.—R. C. R. or FarTu. 


Peter, James, and John, being mentioned together as those who 
appeared to be pillars (Gal. ii. 9), and this distinction was due 
not to office, but to character. Itis moreover clear from the full 
equality in gifts and authority which Paul asserted for himself, and 
proved to the satisfaction of the whole Church that he possessed. 
It is clear from the subordinate position occupied by Peter in the 
Council of Jerusalem (Acts xv.), and from the severe reproof he 
received from Paul at Antioch (Gal. ii. 11-21). It is a plain 
historical fact, that Paul and John were the master-spirits of the 
Apostolic Church. But admitting the primacy of Peter in the 
college of Apostles, there is no evidence that such primacy was in- 
tended to be perpetual. There is no command to elect a successor 
to him in that office ; no rules given as to the mode of such election, 
or the persons by whom the choice was to be made ; and no record 
of such election having actually been made. Everything is made _ 
out of the air. But admitting that Peter was constituted the head 
of the whole Church on earth, and that such headship was intended 
to be continued, what evidence is there that the Bishop of Rome 
was to all time entitled to that office? It is very doubtful whether 
Peter ever wasin Rome. The sphere of his labors was in Palestine 
and the East. It is certain he never was Bishop of the Church in 
that city. And even if he were, he was Primate, not as Bishop 
of Rome, but by appointment of Christ. According to the theory, 
he was Primate before he went to Rome, and not because he went 
there. The simple historical fact is, that as Rome was the seat of 
the Roman empire, the Bishop of Rome aspired to be the head of 
the Church, which claim after a long struggle came to'be acknowl- 
edged, at least in'the West. 

It is on the four gratuitous and unreasonable assumptions above 
mentioned, namely, that the Church to which the promise of the 
Spirit was made is an external, visible organization ; that a partic- 
ular mode of organization is essential to its existence; that that 
mode is the episcopal; and that it must be papal, 7¢. e., the whole 
episcopacy be subject to the Bishop of Rome ; — it is on these un- 
tenable assumptions that the whole stupendous system of Romanisin 
rests. If any one of them fail, the whole falls to the ground. 
These assumptions are so entirely destitute of any adequate his- 
torical proof, that no reasonable man can accept them on their 
own evidence. It is only those who have been taught or induced 
to believe the extant Church to be infallible, who can believe 
them. And they believe not because these points can be proved, 
but on the assertion of the Church. The Romish Church says 


§7,C.] INFALLIBILITY OF THE CHURCH. 188 


that Christ constituted the Church on the papal system, and theres 
fore, it is to be believed. The thing to be proved is taken for 
granted, It is a petitio principii from beginning to end. 


C. The Romish Doctrine of Infallibility founded on a Wrong 
Theory of the Church. 


The first great argument of Protestants against Romanism con- 
cerns the theory of the Church. 

God entered into a covenant with Abraham. In that covenant 
there were certain promises which concerned his natural descend- 
ants through Isaac, which promises were suspended on the national 
obedience of the people. That covenant, however, contained the 
promise of redemption through Christ. He was the seed in whom 
all the nations of the earth were to be blessed. The Jews came 
to believe that this promise of redemption, 7. e., of the blessings of 
the Messiah’s reign, was made to them as a nation ; and that it was 
conditioned on membership in that nation. All who were Jews 
either by descent or proselytism, and who were circumcised, and 
adhered to the Law, were saved. Al others would certainly per- 
ish forever. This is the doctrine which our Lord so pointedly con- 
demned, and against which St. Paul so strenuously argued. When 
the Jews claimed that they were the children of God, because they 
were the children of Abraham, Christ told them that they might 
be the children of Abraham, and yet the children of the devil 
(John viii. 33-44) ; as John, his forerunner, had before said, say 
not “We have Abraham to our father; for I say unto you, that 
God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham.” 
(Matt. iii. 9.) It is against this doctrine the epistles to the Ro- 
mans and Galatians are principally directed. The Apostle shows, 
(1.) That the promise of salvation was not confined to the Jews, 
or to the members of any external organization. (2.) And there- 
fore that it was not conditioned on descent from Abraham, nor on 
circumcision, nor on adherence to the Old Testament theocracy. 
(3.) That all believers (oi é ziorews) are the sons, and, therefore, 
the heirs of Abraham. (Gal. iii. 7.) (4.) That a man might be a 
Jey, a Hebrew of the Hebrews, circumcised on the eighth day, 
and touching the righteousness ed is of the law blameless, and 
yet it avail him nding. (Phil. iti, 4-6.) (5.) Because he is 
not a Jew who is one outwardly ; an circumcision is of the heart. 
(Romans ii. 28-29.) (6.) And consequently that God could 
east off the Jews as a nation, without acting inconsistently with his 
covenant with Abraham, because the promise was not made to the 
Israel xara odpxa, but to the Israel xara rvedua. (Rom. ix. 6-8.) 


134 INTRODUCTION. [Cu. V.—R. C. R. or Farra. 


Romanists have transferred the whole Jewish theory to the 
Christian Church; while Protestants adhere to the doctrine of 
Christ and his Apostles. Romanists teach, (1.) That the Church is 
essentially an external, organized community, as the commonwealth 
of Israel. (2.) That to this external society, all the attributes, 
prerogatives, and promises of the true Church belong. (8.) That 
membership in that society is the indispensable condition of salva- 
tion ; as it is only by union with the Church that men are united to 
Christ, and, through its ministrations, become partakers of his re- 
demption. (4.) That all who die in communion with this external 
society, although they may, if not perfect at death, suffer for a 
longer or shorter period in purgatory, shall ultimately be saved. 
(5.) All outside of this external organization perish eternally. 
There is, therefore, not a single element of the Jewish theory 
which is not reproduced in the Romish. 


Protestant Doctrine of the Nature of the Church. 


Protestants, on the other hand, teach on this subject, in exact ac- 
cordance with the doctrine of Christ and the Apostles: (1.) That 
the Church as such, or in its essential nature, is not an external 
organization. (2.) All true believers, in whom the Spirit of God 
dwells, are members of that Church which is the body of Christ, 
no matter with what ecclesiastical organization they may be con- 
nected, and even although they have no such connection. The 
thief on the cross was saved, though he was not a member of any 
external Church. (8.) Therefore, that the attributes, prerogatives, 
and promises of the Church do not belong to any external society 
as such, but to the true people of God collectively considered ; and 
to external societies only so far as they consist of true believers, 
and are controlled by them. This is only saying what every man 
admits to be true, that the attributes, prerogatives, and promises 
pertaining to Christians belong exclusively to true Christians, and 
not to wicked or worldly men who call themselves Christians, 
(4.) That the condition of membership in the true Church is not 
union with any organized society, but faith in Jesus Christ. They 
are the children of God by faith ; they are the sons of Abraham, 
heirs of the promise of redemption made to him by faith ; whether 
they be Jews or Gentiles, bond or free; whether Protestants or 
Romanists, Presbyterians or Episcopalians ; or whether they be so 
widely scattered, that no two or three of them are able to meet 
together for worship. 


Protestants do not deny that there is a visible Church Catholic 


§ 7, C.] INFALLIBILITY OF THE CHURCH. 185 


on earth, consisting of all those who profess the true religion, to- 
gether with their children. But they are not all included in any 
one external society. They also admit that it is the duty of Chris- 
tians to unite for the purpose of worship and mutual watch and 
eare.. They admit that to such associations and societies certain 
prerogatives and promises belong; that they have, or ought to 
have the officers whose qualifications and duties are prescribed in 
the Scriptures ; that there always have been, and probably always 
will be, such Christian organizations, or visible churches. But they 
deny that any one of these societies, or all of them collectively, 
constitute the Church for which Christ died ; in which He dwells by 
his Spirit ; to which He has promised perpetuity, catholicity, unity, 
and divine guidance into the knowledge of the truth. Any one 
of them, or all of them, one after another, may apostatize from the 
faith, and all the promises of God to his Church be fulfilled. The 
Church did not fail, when God reserved to himself only seven thou- 
sand in all Israel who had not bowed the knee unto Baal. 

Almost all the points of difference between Protestants and Ro- 
manists depend on the decision of the question, “*What is the 
Church?” If their theory be correct; if the Church is the exter- 
nal society of professing Christians, subject to apostle-bishops (2. e., 
to bishops who are apostles), and to the Pope as Christ’s vicar on 
earth ; then we are bound to submit to it; and then too beyond the 
pale of that communion there is no salvation. But if every true 
believer is, in virtue of his faith,a member of that Church to which 
Christ promises guidance and salvation, then Romanism falls to the 
ground. 

The Opposing Theories of the Church. 

That the two opposing theories of the Church, the Romish and 
Protestant, are what has been stated above is so generally known 
and so unquestioned, that it is unnecessary to cite authorities on 
either side. It is enough, so far as the doctrine of Romanists is con- 
cerned, to quote the language of Bellarmin,! that the marks of the 
Church are three: ‘* Professio vere fidei, sacramentorum commu- 
nio, et subjectio ad legitimum pastorem, Romanum Pontificem. — 
Atque hoc interest inter sententiam nostram et alias omnes, quod 
omnes aliz requirunt internas virtutes ad constituendum aliquem 
in Ecclesia, et propterea Ecclesiam veram invisibilem faciunt; nos 
autem credimus in Ecclesia invenir' omnes virtutes, —tamen ut 
aliquis aliquo modo dici possit pars vere Ecclesize, — non putamus 
requiri ullam internam virtutem, sed tantum externam professionem 

1 De Ecclesia Militante, II. Disputationes, edit. Paris, 1608, vol. ii. p. 108, d. 


136 INTRODUCTION. [Cu. V.—R. C. R. or Farrn. 


fidei, et sacramentorum communionem, que sensu ipso percipitur. 
Ecclesia enim est coetus hominum ita visibilis et palpabilis, ut est 
ceetus Populi Romani, vel regnum Gallize aut respublica Veneto- 
rum.” The Lutheran Symbols define the Church as, ‘‘ Congre- 
gatio sanctorum.’’! “ Congregatio sanctorum et vere credentium.” # 
“‘Societas fidei et Spiritus Sancti in cordibus.” ® ‘ Congregatio 
sanctorum, qui habent inter se societatem ejusdem evangelii seu 
doctrine, et ejusdem Spiritus Sancti, qui corda eorum renovat, 
sanctificat et gubernat ;” and * “ Populus spiritualis, non civilibus 
ritibus distinctus a gentibus, sed verus populus Dei renatus per 
Spiritum Sanctum.” 5 

The Symbols of the Reformed Churches present the same doc- 
trine.6 The Confessio Helvetica says, ‘‘ Oportet semper fuisse, 
nunc esse et ad finem usque seculi futuram esse Ecclesiam, 2. é., 
e mundo evocatum vel collectum ccetum fidelium, sanctorum in- 
quam omnium communionem, eorum videlicet, qui Deum verum in 
Christo servatore per verbum et Spiritum Sanctum vere cognoscunt 
et rite colunt, denique omnibus bonis per Christum gratuito oblatis 
fide participant.”7 Confessio Gallicana: ‘‘Affirmamus ex Dei 
verbo, Ecclesiam esse fidelium ccetum, qui in verbo Dei sequendo 
et pura religione colenda consentiunt, in qua etiam quotidie profici- 
unt.” 8 Confessio Belgica: ‘“Credimus et confitemur unicam Ec- 
clesiam catholicam seu universalem, que est sancta congregatio seu 
coetus omnium fidelium Christianorum, qui totam suam salutem ab 
uno Jesu Christo exspectant, abluti ipsius sanguine et per Spiritum 
ejus sanctificati atque obsignati. .Heec Ecclesia sancta nullo est aut 
certo loco sita et circumscripta, aut ullis certis personis astricta aut 
alligata: sed per omnem orbem terrarum sparsa atque diffusa est.’ 9 
The same doctrine is found in the answer to the fifty-fourth ques- 
tion in the Heidelberg Catechism. In the Geneva Catechism to the 
question, “* Quid est Ecclesia?” the answer is, ‘* Corpus ac societas 
fidelium, quos Deus ad vitam zternam predestinavit.” 10 

Winer in his “‘ Comparative Darstellung,” “ thus briefly states 
the two theories concerning the Church. Romanists, he says, 
“define the Church on earth, as the community of those bap- 
tized in the name of Christ, united under his Vicar, the Pope, its 
visible head.» Protestants, on the other hand, as the communion 


1 dugsburg Confession, art. 7. 2 Ibid. art. 8. 

8 Apol. A. C.,art 4, pp. 144, 145, Hase. 4 Ibid. p. 146. 

5 See Hase, Libri Symbolici. 6 See Niemeyer, Coll. Confess. 
7 IL. cap. 17, p. 499, Niem. 8 Art. 27, p. 336, ibid, 

9 Art. 27, p. 379, ibid. 10 Page 185, did. 


Page 165. 


2h De INFALLIBILITY OF THE CHURCH. 137 


of saints, that 1s, of those who truly believe on Christ, in which 
the gospel is purely preached and the sacraments properly adminis- 
tered.” 

Proof of the Protestant Doctrine of the Church. 

This is not the place to enter upon a formal vindication of the 
Protestant doctrine of the nature of the Church. That belongs to 
the department of ecclesiology. What follows may suffice for the 
present purpose. 

The question is not whether the word Church is not properly 
used, and in accordance with the Scriptures, for visible, organized 
bodies of professing Christians, or for all such Christians collec- 
tively considered. Nor is it the question, whether we are to regard 
as Christians those who, being free from scandal, profess their faith 
in Christ, or societies of such professors organized for the worship 
of Christ and the administration of his discipline, as being true 
churches. But the question is, whether the Church to which the 
attributes, prerogatives, and promises pertaining to the body of 
Christ belong, is in its nature a visible, organized community ; and 
specially, whether it is a community organized in some one exclu- 
sive form, and most specially on the papal form; or, whether it is a 
spiritual body consisting of true believers. Whether when the 
Bible addresses a body of men as “the called of Jesus Christ,” 
** beloved of God,” “* partakers of the heavenly calling; ” as ‘ the 
children of God, joint heirs with Christ of a heavenly inheritance ;” 
as “elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, 
through sanctification and sprinkling of the blood of Christ ;”’ as 
“« partakers of the like precious faith with the Apostles ;”’ as ‘ those 
who are washed, and sanctified, and justified in the name of the 
Lord Jesus and by the Spirit of our God;” as those who being 
dead in sin, had been “ quickened and raised up and made to sit to- - 
gether in heavenly places with Christ Jesus ;”’ it means the mem- 
bers of an external society as such, and because such, or, the true 
people of God? The question is, whether when to the men thus 
designated and described, Christ promised to be with them to the 
end of the world, to give them his Spirit, to guide them unto the 
knowledge of the truth, to keep them through the power of the 
Spirit, so that the gates of hell should not prevail against them — 
he means his sincere or his nominal disciples, — believers or unbe- 
lievers ? These questions admit of but one answer. The attri- 
butes ascribed to the Church in Scripture belong to true believers 
alone. The promises made to the Church are fulfilled only to 
believers. The relation in which the Church stands to God and 


188 INTRODUCTION. [Cu. V.—R. ©. R. or Farr 


Christ is sustained alone by true believers. They only are the 
children and heirs of God; they only are the body of Christ in 
which He dwells by his Spirit; they only are the temple of God, 
the bride of Christ, the partakers of his glory. The doctrine that. 
a man becomes a child of God and an heir of eternal life by mem-. 
bership in any external society, overturns the very foundations of 
the gospel, and introduces a new method of salvation. Yet this is 
the doctrine on which the whole system of Romanism rests. As, 
therefore, the Apostle shows that the promises made to Israel 
under the Old Testament, the promise of perpetuity, of extension 
over the whole earth, of the favour and fellowship of God, and all 
the blessings of the Messiah’s reign, were not made to the external 
Israel] as such, but to the true people of God; so Protestants con- 
tend that the promises made to the Church as the body and bride 
of Christ are not made to the external body of professed Chris- 
tians, but to those who truly believe on him and obey his gospel. 
The absurdities which flow from the substitution of the visible 
Church for the invisible, from transferring the attributes, preroga- 
tives, and promises which belong to true believers, to an organized 
body of nominal or professed believers, are so great that Roman- 
ists cannot be consistent. They cannot adhere to their own theory. 
They are forced to admit that the wicked are not really members 
of the Church. They are “in it” but not “of it.” Their con- 
nection with it is merely external, as that of the chaff with the : 
wheat. This, however, is the Protestant doctrine. The Romish 
doctrine is precisely the reverse. Romanists teach that the chaff is 
the wheat; that the chaff becomes wheat by external connection 
with the precious grain. Just so certain, therefore, as that chaff is 
not wheat; that nominal Christians, as such, are not true Chris- 
tians; just so certain is it that no external society consisting of 
good and bad, is that Church to which the promise of Chis 
presence and salvation is made. It is as Turrettin says, “ zparov 
Weddos pontificiorum in tota controversia est, ecclesiam metiri velle 
ex societatis civilis modulo, ut ejus essentia in externis tantum et 
in sensus incurrentibus consistat, et sola professio fidei sufficiat ad 
membrum ecclesiz constituendum, nec ipsa fides et pietas interna 
ad id necessario requirantur.” 


D. The Doctrine of Infallibility founded on the False Asswmp- 
tion of the Perpetuity of the Apostleship. 


As the first argument against the doctrine of Romanists as to the 


1 Locus xvuut. ii. 12. 


4 


§7,D.J INFALLIBILITY OF THE CHURCH. 139 


infallibility of the Church is, that it makes the Church of Rome to 
be the body to which the attributes, prerogatives, and promises of 
Christ to true believers belong; the second is that it limits the 
promise of the teaching of the Spirit, to the bishops as successors 
of the Apostles. In other words, Romanists falsely assume the 
perpetuity of the Apostleship. If it be true that the prelates of 
the Church of Rome, or of any other church, are apostles, invested 
with the same authority to teach and to rule as the original messen- 
gers of Christ, then we must be bound to yield the same faith to 
their teaching, and the same obedience to their commands, as are 
due to the inspired writings of the New Testament. And such is 
the doctrine of the Church of Rome. 


Modern Prelates are not Apostles. 


To determine whether modern bishops are apostles, it is neces- 
sary in the first place to determine the nature of the Apostleship, 
and ascertain whether modern prelates have the gifts, qualifications, 
and credentials of the office. Who then were the Apostles? They 
were a definite number of men selected by Christ to be his 
witnesses, to testify to his doctrines, to the facts of his life, to his 
death, ana specially to his resurrection. To qualify them for this 
office of authoritative witnesses, it was necessary, (1.) That they 
should have independent and plenary knowledge of the gospel. 
(2.) That they should have seen Christ after his resurrection. 
(3.) That they should be inspired, 7. e., that they should be individ- 
ually and severally so guided by the Spirit as to be infallible in all 
their instructions. (4.) That they should be authenticated as the 
messengers of Christ, by adherence to the true gospel, by success 
in preaching (Paul said to the Corinthians that they were the seal 
of his apostleship, 1 Cor. ix. 2); and by signs and wonders and 
divers miracles and gifts of the Holy Ghost. Such were the gifts 
and qualifications and credentials of the original Apostles ; and 
those who claimed the office without possessing these gifts and cre- 
dentials, were pronounced false apostles and messengers of Satan. 

When Paul claimed to be an apostle, he felt it necessary to prove, 
(1.) That he had been appointed not by man nor through men, 
but immediately by Jesus Christ. (Gal. i. 1.) (2.) That he 
had not been taught the gospel by others, but received his knowl- 
edge by immediate revelation. (Gal. i. 12.) (8.) That he had 
seen Christ after his resurrection. (1 Cor. ix. 1 and xv. 8.) 
(4.) That he was inspired, or infallible as a teacher, so that men 
were bound to recognize his teachings as the teaching of Christ. 


140 INTRODUCTION. [Cu. V.—R. C. R. or Farts. 


(1 Cor. xiv. 87.) (5.) That the Lord had authenticated his apos- 
tolic mission as fully as he had done that of Peter. (Gal. ii. 8.) 
(6.) “The signs of an apostle,” he tells the Corinthians, “ were 
wrought among you in all patience, in signs, and wonders, and 
mighty deeds.” (2 Cor. xii. 12.) 

Modern prelates do not claim to possess any one of these gifts. 
Nor do they pretend to the credentials which authenticated the 
mission of the Apostles of Christ. They claim no immediate com- 
mission ; no independent knowledge derived from immediate reve- 
lation ; no personal infallibility ; no vision of Christ ; and no gift of 
miracles. That is, they claim the authority of the office, but not 
its reality. It is very plain, therefore, that they are not apostles. 
They cannot have the authority of the office without having the 
gifts on which that authority was founded, and from which it 
emanated. Ifa man cannot be a prophet without the gift of proph- 
ecy; or a miracle-worker without the gift of miracles; or have 
the gift of tongues without the ability to speak other languages 
than his own; no man can rightfully claim to be an apostle without 
possessing the gifts which made the original Apostles what they 
were. The deaf and dumb might as reasonably claim to have the 
gift of tongues. The world has never seen or suffered a greater 
imposture than that weak, ignorant, and often immoral men, should 
claim the same authority to teach and rule that belonged to men 
to whom the truth was supernaturally revealed, who were confess- 
edly infallible in its communication, and to whose divine mission 
God himself bore witness in-signs and wonders, and divers miracles 
and gifts of the Holy Ghost. The office of the Apostles as de- 
scribed in the New Testament, was, therefore, from its nature in- 
capable of being transmitted, and has not in fact been perpetuated. 

There is no command given in the New Testament to keep up 
the succession of the Apostles. When Judas had apostatized, Peter 
said his place must be filled, but the selection was to be confined 
to those, as he said, ‘‘ which have companied with us all the time 
that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us, beginning from the 
baptism of John unto that same day that He was taken up from us.” 
(Acts i. 21, 22.) The reason assigned for this appointment was 
not that the Apostleship might be continued, but that the man 
selected might ‘be “‘ a witness with us of his resurrection.” “ And 
they gave forth their lots; and the lot fell upon Matthias; and he 
was numbered with the eleven Apostles.”” And that was the end. 
We never hear of Matthias afterward. It is very doubtful whether 
this appointment of Matthias had any validity. What is here re 


§ 7, D.) INFALLIBILITY OF THE CHURCH. 141 


corded (Acts, i. 15-26), took place before the Apostles had been 
endued with power from on high (Acts i. 8), and, therefore, be- 
fore they had any authority to act in the premises. Christ in his 
own time and way completed the number of his witnesses by call- 
ing Paul to be an Apostle. But, however this may be, here if ever 
exceptio probat regulam. It proves that the ranks of the Apostles 
could be filled, and the succession continued only from the number 
of those who could bear independent witness of the resurrection 
and doctrines of Christ. 

Besides the fact that there is no command to appoint apostles, 
there is clear evidence that the office was not designed to be per- 
petuated. With regard to all the permanent officers of the Church, 
there is, (1.) Not only a promise to continue the gifts which 
pertained to the office, and the command to appoint suitable persons 
to fill it, but also a specification of the qualifications to be sought 
and demanded ; and (2.) a record of the actual appointment of 
incumbents; and (38.) historical evidence of their continuance in 
the Church from that day to this. With regard to the Apostleship, 
all this is wanting. As we have seen, the gifts of the office have 
not been continued, there is no command to perpetuate the office, 
no directions to guide the Church in the selection of proper persons 
to be apostles, no record of their appointment, and no historical 
evidence of their continuance ; on the contrary, they disappear 
entirely after the death of the original twelve. It might as well 
be asserted that the Pharaohs of Egypt, or the twelve Caesars of 
Rome have been continued, as that the race of apostles has been 
perpetuated. , 

It is true that there are a few passages in which persons other 
than the original twelve seem to be designated as apostles. But 
from the beginning of the Church until of late, no one has ven- 
tured on that account to regard Barnabas, Silas, Timothy, and 
Titus, as apostles, in the official sense of the word. All the 
designations given to the officers of the Church in the New Testa- 
ment, are used in different senses. Thus, “‘ presbyter” or “ elder,” 
means, an old man, a Jewish officer, an officer of the Church. 
The word “deacon,” means, a domestic, sometimes a secular 
officer, sometimes any minister of the Church; sometimes the low- 
est order of church officers. Because Paul and Peter call them- 
selves ‘‘ deacons,” it does not prove that their office was to serve 
tables. In like manner the word “apostle” is sometimes used 
in its etymological sense ‘a messenger,” sometimes in a relig- 
jous sense, as we use‘ the word “missionary ;” and sometimes in 


142 INTRODUCTION. [Cu. V.—R.C. R. or Farrn. 


its strict official sense, in which it is confined to the immediate 
messengers of Christ. Nothing can be plainer from the New Tes- 
tament than that neither Silas nor Timothy, nor any other person, 
is ever spoken of as the official equal of the twelve Apostles. These 
constitute a class by themselves. They stand out in the New 
Testament as they do in all Church history, as the authoritative 
founders of the Christian Church, without peers or colleagues. 

If, then, the Apostleship, from its nature and design, was inca- 
pable of transmission ; if there be this decisive evidence from Scrip- 
ture and history, that it has not been perpetuated, then the whole 
theory of the Romanists concerning the Church falls to the ground. 
That theory is founded on the assumption that prelates are apostles, 
invested with the same authority to teach and rule, as the original 
messengers of Christ. If this assumption is unfounded, then all 
claim to the infallibility of the Church must be given up; for it is 
not pretended that the mass of the people is infallible nor the 
priesthood, but simply the episcopate. And bishops are infallible 
only on the assumption that they are apostles, in the official sense 
of the term. This they certainly are not. The Church may make 
priests, and bishops, and even popes; but Christ alone can make 
an Apostle. For an Apostle was a man endowed with supernatural 
knowledge, and with supernatural power. 


EK. Infallibility founded on a False Interpretation of the Promise 
of Christ. 


The third decisive argument against the infallibility of the Church 
is, that Christ never promised to preserve it from all error. What 
is here meant is that Christ never promised the true Church, that 
is, “ the company of true believers,” that they should not err in 
doctrine. He did promise that they should not fatally apostatize 
from the truth. He did promise that He would grant his true dis- 
ciples such a measure of divine guidance by his Spirit, that they 
should know enough to be saved. He, moreover, promised that 
He would call men into the ministry, and give them the qualifica- 
tions of faithful teachers, such as were the presbyters whom the 
Apostles ordained in every city. But there is no promise of infalli- 
bility either to the Church as a whole, or to any class of men in 
the Church. Christ promised to sanctify his people; but this was 
not a promise to make them perfectly holy in this life. He prom- 
ised to give them joy and peace in believing; but this is nota 
promise to make them perfectly happy in this life,-— that they 
should have no trials or sorrews. Then, why should the promise 


§7, Fj INFALLIBILITY OF THE CHURCH. 143 


to teach be a promise to render infallible. As the Church has gone 
through the world bathed in tears and blood, so has she gone soiled 
with sin and error. It is just as manifest that she has never been 
infallible, as that she has never been perfectly holy. Christ no 
more promised the one than the other. 


F,. The Doctrine contradicted by Facts. 


The fourth argument is that the Romish doctrine of the infalli- 
bility of the Church is contradicted by undeniable historical facts. 
It therefore cannot be true. The Church has often erred, and 
therefore it is not infallible. 

Protestants believe that the Church, under all dispensations, has - 
been the same. It has always had the same God; the same Re- 
deemer ; the same rule of faith and practice (the written Word of 
God, at least from the time of Moses), the same promise of the 
presence and guidance of the Spirit, the same pledge of perpetuity 
and triumph. To them, therefore, the fact that the whole visible 
Church repeatedly apostatized during the old economy —and that, 
not the people only, but all the representatives of the Church, the 
priests, the Levites, and the elders —is a decisive proof that the 
external, visible Church may fatally err in matters of faith. No less 
decisive is the fact that the whole Jewish Church and people, as a 
church and nation, rejected Christ. He came to his own, and his 
own received him not. The vast majority of the people, the chief 
priests, the scribes and the elders, refused to recognize him as the 
Messiah. The Sanhedrim, the great representative body of the 
Church at that time, pronounced him worthy of death, and de- 
manded his crucifixion. This, to Protestants, is overwhelming 
proof that the Church may err. 

Romanists, however, make such a difference between the Church 
before and after the advent of Christ, that they do not admit the 
force of this argument. That the Jewish Church erred, they say, 
is no proof that the Christian Church can err. It will be neces- 
sary, therefore, to show that according to the principles and admis- 
sions of Romanists themselves, the Church has erred. It taught 
at one time what it condemned at another, and what the Church 
of Rome now condemns. To prove this, it will suffice to refer to 
two undeniable examples. 

It is to be borne in mind that by the Church, in this connection, 
Romanists do not mean the true people of God; nor the body of 
professing Christians; nor the majority of priests, or doctors of di- 
vinity, but the episcopate. What the body of bishops of any age 


144 INTRODUCTION. ([Cu. V.—R. C. R. or Farru. 


teach, all Christians are bound to believe, because these bishops are 
so guided by the Spirit as to be infallible in their teaching. 


The Arian Apostasy. 


The first great historical fact inconsistent with this theory is, that 
the great majority of the bishops, both of the Eastern and Western 
Church, including the Pope of Rome, taught Arianism, which the 
whole Church, both before and afterwards, condemned. The de- 
cision of three hundred and eighty bishops at the Council of Nice, 
ratified by the assent of the great majority of those who did not 
attend that Council, is fairly taken as proof that the visible Church 
at that time taught, as Rome now teaches, that the Son is consub- 
stantial with the Father. The fact that some dissented at the time, 
or that more soon joined in that dissent; or, that in a few years, 
in the East, the dissentients were in the majority, is not considered 
as invalidating the decision of that Council as the decision of the 
Church ; because a majority of the bishops, as a body, were still in 
favor of the Nicene doctrine. Then, by parity of reasoning, the 
decisions of the two contemporary councils, one at Seleucia in the 
East, the other at Ariminum in the West, including nearly eight 
hundred bishops, ratified as those decisions were by the great ma- 
jority of the. bishops of the whole Church (including Liberius, the 
bishop of Rome), must be accepted as the teaching of the visible 
Church of that age. But those decisions, according to the pre- 
vious and subsequent judgment of the Church, were heretical. It 
has been urged that the language adopted by the Council of Ari- 
minum admits of an orthodox interpretation. In answer to this, it 
is enough to say, (1.) That it was drawn up, proposed, and urged 
by the avowed opponents of the Nicene Creed. (2.) That it was 
strenuously resisted by the advocates of that creed, and renounced 
as soon as they gained the ascendency. (38.) That Mr. Palmer 
himself admits that the Council repudiated the word * consubstan- 
tial’ as expressing the relation of the Son to the Father. But this 
was the precise point in dispute between the Orthodox and semi- 
Arians. 

Ancients and moderns unite in testifying to the general preva- 
lence of Arianism at that time. Gregory Nazianzen says,! ‘ Nam 
31 perpaucos exceperis, . . . . ommes (pastores) tempori ob- 
secuti sunt: hoc tantum inter eos discriminis fuit, quod alii ritius, 
alii serius in eam fraudem inciderunt, atque, alii impietatis duces 
antistitesque se prebuerunt.” Jerome says: ‘“Ingemuit totus 

1 Orat, xxi. t. i. p. 887, edition Paris, 1609. 


§ 7, FJ INFALLIBILITY OF THE CHURCH. 145 


orbis terrarum, et Arianum se esse miratus est.” He also says: ? 
** Ecclesia non parietibus consistit, sed in dogmatum veritate, Ee- 
clesia ibi est ubi fides vera est. Ceterum ante annos quindecin 
aut viginti parietes omnes hic ecclesiarum heretici (Ariani) pos- 
sidebant, Ecclesia autem vera illic erat, ubi vera fides erat.” It 
is here asserted that the whole world had become Arian ; and that 
all the churches were in the possession of heretics. These state- 
ments must be taken with due allowance. They nevertheless 
prove that the great majority of the bishops had adopted the Arian, 
or semi-Arian Creed. To the same effect Athanasius says: 
“ Que nunc ecclesia libere Christum adorat? Si quidem ea, si 
pia est, periculo subjacet? . ... . Nam si alicubi pii et 
Christi studiosi (sunt autem ubique tales permulti) illi itidem, ut 
Prophet et magnus ille Elias, absconduntur, . . . . et in 
speluncas et cavernas terre sese abstrudunt, aut in solitudine 
aberrantes commorantur.”’ 2 Vincent of Lerins ¢ says: “ Ariano- 
rum venenum non jam portiunculam quamdam, sed pene orbem 
totvm contaminaverat, adeo ut prope cunctis Latini sermonis epis~ 
cops partim vi partim fraude deceptis caligo quedam mentibus ef- 
funderetur.” To these ancient testimonies any number of author- 
ities from modern theologians might be added. We give only the 
testimony of Dr. Jackson, one of the most distinguished theolo- 
gians of the Church of England: “ After this defection of the 
Romish Church in the bishop Liberius, the whole Roman empire 
was overspread with Arianism.” ® 

Whatever doubt may exist as to details, the general fact of this 
apostasy cannot be doubted. Through defection from the truth, 
through the arts of the dominant party, through the influence of 
the emperor, the great majority of the bishops did join in condem- 
nation of. Athanasius, and in subscribing a formula of doctrine 
drawn up in opposition to the Nicene Creed ; a formula afterwards 
renounced and condemned ; a formula which the Bishop of Rome 
was banished for two years for refusing to sign, and restored to his 
see when he consented to subscribe. If, then, we apply to this 
case the same rules which are applied to the decisions of the Ni- 
cene Council, it must be admitted that the external Church aposta- 
tized as truly under Constantius, as it professed the true faith under 
Constantine. If many signed the Eusebian or Arian formula in- 


1 Dialogus contra Luciferanos, 19, vol. ii. p. 172 ¢., edit. Migne, Paris, 1845. 
2 Comment. on Ps. exxxiii., vol. vii. p. 1223 a, edit. Migne. 
8 “ Ad Solitariam Vitam Agentes Epist.,’”’ Works, p. 846, edit. Paris, 1627. 
4 Comm. I. iv. p. 642, vol. 1. Migne, Patrol., Paris, 1846. 
5 On the Church, p. 160. Edited by W. Goode. Philadelphia, 1844. 

VOL. I. 10 


146 INTRODUCTION.  [Cu. V.—R. C. R. or Fata 


sincerely, so did many hypocritically assent to the decrees of Nice. 
If many were overborne by authority and fear in the one case, 80 
they were in the other. If many revoked their assent to Arian- 
ism, quite as many withdrew their consent to the Athanasian doc- 


trine. 


The Romish Evasion of this Argument. 

In dealing with this undeniable fact, Romanists and Romanizers 
are forced to abandon their principle. Their doctrine is that the 
external Church cannot err, that the majority of the bishops living 
at any one time cannot fail to teach the truth. But under the 
reign of the Emperor Constantius, it is undeniable that the vast ma- 
jority, including the Bishop of Rome, did renounce the truth. But, 
says Bellarmin,! the Church continued and was conspicuous in 
Athanasius, Hilary, Eusebius, and others. And Mr. Palmer, of 
Oxford says,? “« The truth was preserved under even Arian bish- 
ops.” But the question is not, whether the truth shall be preserved 
‘and confessed by the true children of God, but, whether any ex- 
ternal, organized body, and specially the Church of Rome, can err 
in its teaching. Romanists cannot be allowed, merely to meet an 
emergency, to avail themselves of the Protestant doctrine that the 
Church may consist of scattered believers. It is true as Jerome 
teaches in the passage above quoted, ‘*¢ Ubi fides vera est, ibi Ec- 
clesia est.”” But that is our doctrine, and not the doctrine of Rome. 
Protestants say with full confidence, ** Ecclesia manet et manebit.” 
But whether in conspicuous glory as in the time of David, or in 
scattered believers as in the days of Elias, is not essential. 


The Church of Rome rejects the Doctrines of Augustine. 


A second case in which the external church (and specially the 
Church of Rome) has departed from what it had itself declared to 
be true, is in the rejection of the doctrines known in history as 
Augustinian. That the peculiar doctrines of Augustine, including 
the doctrine of sinful corruption of nature derived from Adake 
which is spiritual death, and involves entire inability on the part of 
the sinner to convert himself or to codperate in his own regenera- 
tion; the necessity of the certainly efficacious operation of divine 
grace 5 the sovereignty of God in election and reprobation, and the 
certain perseverance of the saints; were sanctioned by the whole 


Church, and specially by the Church of Rome, cannot be disputed. 


The ei ‘ : ee Te 
e eighteenth chapter of Wiggers’ « Augustinianism and Pela- 


. oe ee : : 
gianism,’’ is headed, ‘* The final adoption of the Augustinian system 


1 De Ecclesia, lib. iii. c. 16. 2 On the Church, vol. ii. p. 187 
, vol. ii. ° 


§ 7, GJ INFALLIBILITY OF THE CHURCH. 147 


for all Christendom by the third ecumenical council of” Ephesus, 
A.D. 431.” It is not denied that many of the eastern bishops, per- 
haps the majority of them, were secretly opposed to that system in 
its essential features. All that is insisted upon is that the whole 
Church, through what Romanists recognize as its official organs, gave 
its sanction to Augustine’s peculiar doctrines ; and that so far as the 
Latin Church is concerned this assent was not only for the time 
general but cordial. It is no less certain that the Council of Trent, 
while it condemned Pelagianism, and even the peculiar doctrine of 
semi-Pelagians, who said that man began the work of conversion, 
thus denying the necessity of preventing grace (gratia preveniens), 
nevertheless repudiated the distinguishing doctrines of Augustine 
and’ anathematized all who held them. 


G. The Church of Rome now teaches Error. 


A fifth argument against the infallibility of the Church of Rome, 
is that, that Church now teaches error. Of this there can be no 
reasonable doubt, if the Scriptures be admitted as the standard of 
judgment. 

1. It is a monstrous error, contrary to the Bible, to its letter and 
spirit, and shocking to the common sense of mankind, that the sal- 
vation of men should be suspended on their acknowledging the 
Pope to be the head of the Church in the world, or the vicar of 
Christ. This makes salvation independent of faith and character. 
A man may be sincere and intelligent in his faith in God and 
Christ, and perfectly exemplary in his Christian life, yet if he does 
not acknowledge the Pope, he must perish forever. 

2. It is a grievous error, contrary to the express teachings of 
the Bible, that the sacraments are the only channels of communi- 
cating to men the benefits of redemption. In consequence of this 
false assumption, Romanists teach that all who die unbaptized, even 
infants, are lost. 

3. It is a great error to teach as the Church of Rome does teach, 
that the ministers of the gospel are priests; that the people have 
no access.to God or Christ, and cannot obtain the remission of sins 
or other saving blessings, except through their intervention and by 
their ministrations; that the priests have the power not only of 
declarative, but of judicial and effective absolution, so that those 
and those only whom they absolve stand acquitted at the bar of 
God. This was the grand reason for the Reformation, which was a 
rebellion against this priestly domination ; a demand on the part of 
the people for the liberty wherewith Christ had made them free, — 


148 “INTRODUCTION. ([Cu. V.—-R.C. R. or Farru. 
’ 


the liberty to go immediately to him with their sins and sorrows, 
and find relief without the intervention or permission of any man 
who has no better right of access than themselves. 

4. The doctrine of the merit of good works as taught by Ro- 
manists is another most prolific error. They hold that works done 
after regeneration have real merit (meritum condignt), and that 
they are the ground of the sinner’s justification before God. They 
hold that a man may do more than the law requires of him, and 
perform works of supererogation, and thus obtain more merit than 
is necessary for his own salvation and beatification. That this su- 
perfluous merit goes into the treasury of the Church, and may be 
dispensed for the benefit of others. On this ground indulgences 
are granted or sold, to take effect not only in this life but in the 
life to come. 

5. With this is connected the further error concerning Purga- 
tory. The Church of Rome teaches that those dying in the com- 
munion of the Church, who have not in this’ life made full satisfac- 
tion for their sins, or acquired sufficient merit to entitle them to 
admission into heaven, do at death pass into a state of suffering, 
there to remain until due satisfaction is made and proper purifica- 
tion is effected. There is no necessary termination to this state of 
purgatory but the day of judgment or the end of the world. It may 
last for a thousand or many thousands of years. But Purgatory is 
under the power of the keys. The sufferings of souls in that state 
may be alleviated or shortened by the authorized ministers of the 
Church. There is no limit to the power of men who are believed 
to hold the keys of heaven in their hand, to shut and no man 
opens, and open and no man shuts. Of all incredibilities the most 
incredible is that God would commit such power as this, to weak, 
ignorant, and often wicked men. 

6. The Romish Church teaches grievous error concerning the 
Lord’s Supper. It teaches, (1.) That when consecrated by the 
priest the whole substance of the bread and the whole substance of 
the wine are transmuted into the substance of the body and blood 
of Christ. (2.) That as his body is inseparable from his soul and 
divinity, where the one is there the other must be. The whole 
Christ, therefore, body, soul, and divinity, is present in the conse- 
crated wafer, which is to be worshipped as. Christ himself is wore 
shipped. This is the reason why the Church of England in her 
Homilies pronounces the service of the Mass in the Romish Church 
idolatrous. (8.) That Church further teaches that. the body and 
blood of Christ thus locally and substantially present in the Eu- 


§ 7, H., INFALLIBILITY OF THE CHURCH. 149 


charist are offered as a true propitiatory sacrifice for the forgiveness 
of sin, the application of which is determined by the intention of 
the officiating priests. | a 

7. Idolatry consists not only in the worship of false gods, but in 
the worship of the true God by images. The second Command- 
ment of the Decalogue expressly forbids the bowing down to, or 
serving the likeness of anything in heaven above or in the earth 
beneath. In the Hebrew the words used are, myrmwry and q2y, 
In the Septuagint the words are, od zpooxuiijoes atrois, 0882 pay Aarped= 
oes avrois. In the Vulgate it reads, ‘‘ Non adorabis ea neque coles.” 
The precise thing, therefore, that is forbidden is that which the 
Church of Rome permits and enjoins, namely, the use of images in 
religious worship, prostration before them, and doing them rever- 
ence. 

8. Another great error of the Church of Rome is the worship 
of saints and angels, and especially of the Virgin Mary. It is not 
merely that they are regarded as objects of reverence, but that the 
service rendered them involves the ascription of divine attributes. 
They are assumed to be everywhere present, able to hear and an- 
swer prayer, to help and to save. They become the ground of 
confidence to the people, and the objects of their religious affections. 
They are to them precisely what the gods of the heathen were to 
the Greeks and Romans. 

Such are some of the errors taught by the Church of Rome, and 
they prove that that Church instead of being infallible, is so corrupt 
that it is the duty of the people of God to come out of it and to 
renounce its fellowship. 


H. The Recognition of an Infallible Church incompatible 

with either Religious or Civil Liberty. 

A church which claims to be infallible, ipso facto, claims to be 
the mistress of the world; and those who admit its infallibility, 
thereby admit their entire subjection to its authority. It avails 
nothing to say that this infallibility is limited to matters of faith 
and morals, for under those heads is included the whole life of 
man, religious, moral, domestic, social, and political. 

Acchurch which claims the right to decide what is true in 
doctrine and obligatory in morals, and asserts the power to enforce 
submission to its decisions on the pain of eternal perdition, leaves 
no room for any other authority upon earth. In the presence of 
the authority of God, every other disappears. 

With the claim to infalhbility is inseparably connected the claim 


150 INTRODUCTION.  [Cu. V.--R.C.R. or Farrn. 


to pardon sin. The Church does not assume merely the right to 
declare the conditions on which sin will be forgiven at the bar of 
God, but it asserts that it has the prerogative to grant, or to with- 
hold that forgiveness. ‘Ego te absolvo,” is the formula the 
Church puts into the mouth of its priesthood. Those who receive 
that absolution are saved; those whom the Church refuses to ab- 
solve must bear the penalty of their offences. 

An infallible church is thus the only institute of salvation. 
All within its pale are saved; all without it perish. Those only 
are in the Church who believe what it teaches, who do what it 
commands, and are subject to its officers, and especially its head, 
the Roman pontiff. Any man, therefore, whom the Church ex- 
communicates is thereby shut out of the kingdom of heaven ; any 
nation placed under its ban is not only deprived of the consolations 
of religious services, but of the necessary means of salvation. 

If the Church be infallible, its authority is no less absolute in the 
sphere of social and political life. It is immoral to contract or to 
continue an unlawful marriage, to keep an unlawful oath, to enact 
unjust laws, to obey a sovereign hostile to the Church. “The 
Church, therefore, has the right to dissolve marriages, to free men 
from the obligations of their oaths, and citizens from their alle- 
giance, to abrogate civil laws, and to depose sovereigns. These pre- 
rogatives have not only been claimed, but time and again exercised 
by the Church of Rome. They all of right belong to that Church, 
if it be infallible. As these claims are enforced by penalties in- 
volving the loss of the soul, they cannot be resisted by those who 
admit the Church to be infallible. It is obvious, therefore, that 
where this doctrine is held there can be no liberty of opinion, no 
freedom of conscience, no civil or political freedom. As the recent 
ecumenical Council of the Vatican has decided that this infalli- 
bility is vested in the Pope, it is henceforth a matter of faith with 
Romanists, that the Roman pontiff is the absolute sovereign of the 
world. All men are bound, on the penalty of eternal death, to 


believe what he declares to be true, and to do whatever he decides 
is obligatory 


CHAPTER VI. 


THE PROTESTANT RULE OF FAITH. 


§ 1. Statement of the Doctrine.” 


Att Protestants agree in teaching that “the word of God, as 
contained in the Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments, is the 
only infallible rule of faith and practice.” 

In the Smalcald Articles,! the Lutheran Church says: “ Ex pa- 
trum — verbis et factis non sunt exstruendi articuli fidei — Regu- 
lam autem aliam habemus, ut videlicet verbum Dei condat articulos 
fidei et preeterea nemo, ne angelus quidem.” In the ‘‘ Form of 
Concord,” ? it is said: ** Credimus, confitemur et docemus, unicam 
regulam et normam secundum quam omnia dogmata omnesque 
doctores exstimari et judicari oporteat, nullam omnino aliam esse, 
quam prophetica et apostolica scripta cum V. tum N. Testamenti.” 

The symbols of the Reformed churches teach the same doctrine. 
Confessio Helvetica, II.2 says: ‘In scriptura sancta habet uni- 
versalis Christi Ecclesia plenissime exposita, quaecunque pertinent 
cum ad salvificam fidem, tum ad vitam Deo placentem.* Non alium 
in causa fidei judicem, quam ipsum Deum per Scripturas. sacras 
pronuntiantem, quid verum sit, quid falsum, quid sequendum sit 
quidne fugiendum. Confessio Gallicana:® Quum hac (SS.) sit 
omnis veritatis summa, complectens quidquid ad cultum Dei et 
salutem nostram requiritur, neque hominibus neque ipsis etiam 
angelis fas esse dicimus quicquam ei verbo adjicere vel detrahere 
vel quicquam prorsus in eo immutare.” In the Thirty-Nine Arti- 
cles of the Church of England,° it is said: ‘ Holy Scripture con- 
taineth all things necessary to salvation: so that whatsoever is 
not read -therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required 
of any man, that it should be believed as an article of faith, or be 
thought requisite or necessary to salvation.” The Westminster 
Confession? teaches: ‘ Under the name of Holy Scripture, or 
the Word of God written, are now contained all the books of the 
Old and New Testament, which are these: etc. . . . .. All 


1 Part ii. 2,15; Hase Lib. Sym. p. 308. 2 Page 570, ibid. 
8 C. i. p. 467, ibid. 4 C. ii. p. 479, tbid. 
5 Art. y. p. 330, ibid. 6 Art. 6. 7 Ch. i. § 2. 


152 INTRODUCTION.  [Cu. VI. —P. R. or Farts. 


which are yiven by inspiration of God, to be the rule of faith and 
life. The whole counsel of God concerning all things necessary 
for his own glory, man’s salvation, faith, and life, is either ex- 
pressly set down in Scripture, or by good and necessary conse- 
quence may be deduced from Scripture ; unto which nothing at any 
time is to be added whether by new revelations of the Spirit or 
traditions of men.2. All things in Scripture are not alike plain in 
themselves, nor alike clear unto all; yet those things which are 
necessary to be known, believed, and observed, for salvation, are so 
clearly propounded and opened in some place of Scripture or other, 
that not only the learned, but the unlearned, in a due use of the 
ordinary means, may attain unto a sufficient understanding of 
them.” 

From these statements it appears that Protestants hold, (1.) That 
the Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments are the Word of 
God, written under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, and are 
therefore infallible, and of divine authority in all things pertaining 
to faith and practice, and consequently free from all error whether 
of doctrine, fact, or precept. (2.) That they contain all the 
extant supernatural revelations of God designed to be a rule of 
faith and practice to his Church. (8.) That they are sufficiently 
perspicuous to be understood by the people, in the use of ordinary 
means and by the aid of the Holy Spirit, in all things necessary to 
faith or practice, without the need of any infallible interpreter 


Ps 


The Canon. 


Before entering on the consideration of these points, it is neces- 
sary to answer the question, What books are entitled to a place in 
the canon, or rule of faith and practice? Romanists answer this 
question by saying, that all those which the Church has decided to 
be divine in their origin, and none others, are to be thus received. 
Protestants answer it by saying, so far as the Old Testament is 
concerned, that those books, and those only, which Christ and his 
Apostles recognized as the written Word of God, are entitled to be 
regarded as canonical. This recognition was afforded in a twofold 

‘manner: First, many of the books of the Old Testament are 
quoted as the Word of God, as being given by the Spirit; or the 
Spirit is said to have uttered what is therein recorded. Secondly, 
Christ and his Apostles refer to the sacred writings of the Jews — 
the volume which they regarded as divine —as being whet it 
claimed to be, the Word of God. When we refer to the Bible as 


2 Ibid. § 6. 2 Ibid. § 7. 


~ 


§ 2, A.J INSPIRATION. 153 


of divine authority, we refer to it as a volume and recognize all the 
writings which it contains as given by the inspiration of the Spirit. 
In like manner when Christ or his Apostles quote the “Scriptures,” 
or the “ law and the prophets,” and speak of the volume then so 
called, they give their sanction to the divine authority of all the 
books which that volume contained. All, therefore, that is neces- 
sary to determine for Christians the canon of the Old Testament, 
is to ascertain what books were included in the ‘ Scriptures ” rec- 
ognized by the Jews of that period. This is a point about which 
there is no reasonable doubt. The Jewish canon of the Old Testa- 
ment included all the books and no others, which Protestants now 
recognize as constituting the Old Testament Scriptures. On this 
ground Protestants reject the so-called apocryphal books. They 
were not written in Hebrew and were not included in the canon of 
the Jews. They were, therefore, not recognized by Christ as the 
Word of God, This reason is of itself sufficient. It is however 
confirmed by considerations drawn from the character of the books 
themselves. They abound in errors, and in statements contrary to 
those found in the undoubtedly canonical books. 

The principle on which the canon of the New Testament is de- 
termined is equally simple. ‘Those books, and those only which 
can be proved to have been written by the Apostles, or to have re- 
ceived their sanction, are to be recognized as of divine authority. 
The reason of this rule-is obvious. The Apostles were the duly 
authenticated messengers of Christ, of whom He said, ‘“ He that 
heareth you, heareth me.” 


§ 2. The Scriptures are Infallible, 2. e., given by Inspiration of 
God. 


The infallibility and divine authority of the Scriptures are due 
to the fact that they are the word of God ; and they are the word of 


- God because they were given by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost. 


A. The Nature of Inspiration. Definition. 


The nature of inspiration is to be learnt from the Scriptures ; 
from their didactic statements, and from their phenomena. There 
are certain general facts or principles which underlie the Bible, 
which are assumed in all its teachings, and which therefore must 
be assumed in its interpretation. We must, for example, assume, 
(1.) That God is not the unconscious ground of all things ; nor an 
unintelligent force ; nor a name for the moral order of the uni- 
verse ; nor mere causality ; but a Spirit, —a self-conscious, intel- 


164 INTRODUCTION.  ([Cu. VI.—P. R. or Farra. 


ligent, voluntary agent, possessing all the attributes of our spirits 
without limitation, and to an infinite degree. (2.) That He is the 
creator of the world, and extra-mundane, existing before, and inde- 
pendently of it; not its soul, life, or animating principle ; but its 
maker, preserver, and ruler. (38.) That as a spirit He is every- 
where present, and everywhere active, preserving and governing 
all his creatures and all their actions. (4.) That while both in the 
external world and in the world of mind He generally acts accord- 
ing to fixed laws and through secondary causes, He is free to act, 
and often does act immediately, or without the intervention of such 
causes, as in creation, regeneration, and miracles. (5.) That the 
Bible contains a divine, or supernatural revelation. The present 
question is not, Whether the Bible is what it claims to be; but, 
What does it teach as to the nature and effects of the influence 
under which it was written ? 

On this subject the common doctrine of the Church is, and ever 
has been, that inspiration was an influence of the Holy Spirit on 
the minds of certain select men, which rendered them the organs of 
God for the infallible communication of his mind and will. They 
were in such a sense the organs of God, that what they said God 
said. 

B. Inspiration Supernatural. 

This definition includes several distinct points. First. Inspira- 
tion is a supernatural influence. It is thus distinguished, on the 
one hand, from the providential agency of God, which is every- 
where and always in operation ; and on the other hand, from the 
gracious operations of the Spirit on the hearts of his people. Ac- 
cording to the Scriptures, and the common views of men, a marked 
distinction is to be made between those effects which are due to the 
efficiency of God operating regularly through second causes, and 
those which are produced by his immediate efficiency without the 
intervention of such causes. The one class of effects is natural ; 
the other, supernatural. Inspiration belongs to the latter class. It 
is not a natural effect due to the inward state of its subject, or’ to 
the influence of external circumstances. 

No less obvious is the distinction which the Bible makes between 
the gracious operations of the Spirit and those by which extraor- 
dinary gifts are bestowed upon particular persons. Inspiration, 
therefore, is not to be confounded with spiritual illumination. They 
differ, first, as to their subjects. The subjects of inspiration area 
few selected persons ; the subjects of spiritual illumination are all 
true believers. And, secondly, they differ as to their design. The 


§ 2, C.] INSPIRATION. 155 


design of the former is to render certain men infallible as teachers; 
.the design of the latter is to render men holy ; and of course they 
differ as to their effects. Inspiration in itself:has no sanctifying 
influence. Balaam was inspired. Saul was among the prophets. 
Caiaphas uttered a prediction which “he spake not of himself.” 
(John xi, 51.) In the last day many will be able to say to Christ, 
“ Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? and in thy 
name have cast out devils? and in thy name done many wonders 
ful works ?”” To whom he will say: ‘I never knew you; depart 
from me, ye that work iniquity.” (Matt. vii. 22, 23.) 


C. Distinction between Revelation and Inspiration. 


Second. The above definition assumes a difference between rev: 
elation and inspiration. They differ, first, as to their object. The 
object of revelation is the communication of knowledge. The ob- 
ject or design of inspiration is to secure infallibility in teaching. 
Consequently they differ, secondly, in their effects. The effect of 
revelation was to render its recipient wiser. The effect of inspira- 
tion was to preserve him from error in teaching. These tw gifts 
were often enjoyed by the same person at the same time. That is, 
the Spirit often imparted knowledge, and controlled in its commu- 
nication orally or in writing to others. This was no doubt the case 
with the Psalmists, and often with the Prophets and Apostles. 
Often, however, the revelations were made at one time, and were 
subsequently, under the guidance of the Spirit, committed to writ- 
ing. Thus the Apostle Paul tells us that he received his knowl- 
edge of the gospel not from man, but by revelation from Jesus 
Christ ; and this knowledge he communicated from time to time in 
his discourses and epistles. In many cases these gifts were separ- 
ated. Many of the sacred writers, although inspired, received no 
revelations. This was probably the fact with the authors of the 
historical books of the Old Testament. The evangelist Luke does 
not refer his knowledge of the events which he records to revela- 
tion, but says he derived it from those “* which from the beginning 
were eyewitnesses, and ministers of the Word.” (Luke i. 2.) It is 
immaterial to us where Moses obtained his knowledge of the events 
recorded in the book of Genesis ; whether from early documents, 
from tradition, or from direct revelation. No more causes are to 
be assumed for any effect than are necessary. If the sacred writ- 
ers had sufficient sources of knowledge in themselves, or in those 
about them, there is no need to assume any direct revelation. It 
is enough for us that they were rendered infallible as teachers, 


156 INTRODUCTION.  ([Cu, VI.—P. R. or Farts. 


This distinction between revelation and inspiration is commonly 
made by systematic writers. Thus Quenstedt (1685) ‘says: ‘ Dis- 
tingue inter revelationem et inspirationem. Revelatio vi vocis est 
manifestatio rerum ignotarum et occultarum, et potest fieri multis 
et diversis modis. . . ... Inspiratio .. . . est interna conceptum 
suggestio, seu infusio, sive res concepte jam ante scriptori fuerint 
cognitez, sive occulte. Illa potuit tempore antecedere scriptionem, 
heec cum scriptione semper fuit conjuncta et in ipsam scriptionem 
influebat.”” Often, however, the distinction in question is overs 
looked. In popular language, inspiration is made to include both 
the supernatural communication of truth to the mind, and a super- 
natural control in making known that truth to others. The two 
gifts, however, differ in their nature, and should therefore be dis- 
tinguished. Confounding them has sometimes led to serious error. 
When no revelation was necessary, no inspiration is admitted. 
Thus Grotius says: ‘* Vere dixi non omnes libros qui sunt in He- 
breeo Canone dictatos a Spiritu Sancto. Scriptos esse cum pic 
animi motu, non nego ; et hoc est quod judicavit Synagoga Magna, 
cujus judicid in hac re stant Hebrei. Sed a Spiritu Sancto. dictari 
historias nihil fuit opus: satis fuit scriptorem memoria valere circa 
res spectatas, aut diligentia in describendis veterum commentariis.””? 
It is an illogical conclusion, however, to infer that because a histo- 
rian did not need to have the facts dictated to him, that therefore 
he needed no control to preserve him from error. 


D. Inspired Men the Organs of God. 


A third point included in the Church doctrine of inspiration is, 
that the sacred writers were the organs of God, so that what they 
taught, God taught. It is to be remembered, however, that when 
God uses any of his creatures as his instruments, He uses them 
according to their nature. He uses angels as angels, men as 
men, the elements as elements. Men are intelligent voluntary 
agents; and as such were made the organs of God. The sacred 
writers were not made unconscious or irrational. The spirits of the 
prophets were subject to the prophets. (1 Cor. xiv. 32.) They 
were not like calculating machines which grind out logarithms with 
infallible correctness. The ancients, indeed, were accustomed to 
say, as some theologians have also said, that the sacred writers were 
as pens in the hand of the Spirit; or as harps, from which He drew 
what sounds He pleased. These representations were, however 


1 Theologia, I. rv. ki. qu. iii. éxPeors, 3; edit. Wittenberg, 1685, p. 68, a. 
2 * Votum pro Pace Ecclesiastica.”’ Opera, Londini, 1679, t. iii, p- 672. 


a 
~ 


§2,B.] INSPIRATION. 157 


intended simply to illustrate one point, namely, that the words ut- 
tered or recorded by inspired men were the words of God. The 
Church has never held what has been stigmatized as the mechani- 
eal theory of inspiration. The sacred writers were not machines. 


- Their self-consciousness was not suspended; nor were their intel- 


lectual powers superseded. Holy men spake as they were moved 
by the Holy Ghost. It was men, not machines; not unconscious 
instruments, but living, thinking, willing minds, whom the Spirit 
used as his organs. Moreover, as inspiration did not involve the 
suspension or suppression of the human faculties, so neither did it 
interfere with the free exercise of the distinctive mental character- 
istics of the individual. If a Hebrew was inspired, he spake He- 
brew ; if a Greek, he spake Greek ; if an educated man, he spoke 
as a man of culture; if uneducated, he spoke as such a man is 
wont to speak. If his mind was logical, he reasoned, as Paul did; 
if emotional and contemplative, he wrote as John wrote. All this 
is involved in the fact that God uses his instruments according to 
their nature. The sacred writers impressed their peculiarities on 
their several productions as plainly as though they were the sub- 
jects of no extraordinary influence. This is one of the phenomena 
of the Bible patent to the most cursory reader. It lies in the very 
nature of inspiration that God spake in the language of men ; that 
He uses men as his organs, each according to his peculiar gifts and 
endowments. When He ordains praise out of the mouth of babes, 
they must speak as babes, or the whole power and beauty of the 
tribute will be lost. There is no reason to believe that the opera~ 
tion of the Spirit in inspiration revealed itself any more in the con- 
sciousness of the sacred writers, than his operations in sanctifica- 
tion reveal themselves in the consciousness of the Christian. As 
the believer seems to himself to act, and in fact does act out of his 
own nature; so the inspired penmen wrote out of the fulness of 
their own thoughts and feelings, and employed the language and 
modes of expression which to them were the most natural and appro- 
priate. Nevertheless, and none the less, they spoke as they were 
moved by the Holy Ghost, and their words were his words. 


E. Proof of the Doctrine. 

That this is the Scriptural view of inspiration; that inspired 
men were the organs of God in such a sense that their words are 
to be received not as the words of men, but as they are in truth, 
as the words of God (1 Thess. ii. 13), is proved, — 

1. From the signification and usage of the word. It is, of 


158 INTRODUCTION. [Cu. VL—P. R. or FartH 


course, admitted that words are to be understood in their histor- 
ical sense. If it can be shown what idea the men living in the 
apostolic age attached to the word Oedzvevoros and its equivalents, 
that is the idea which the Apostles intended to express by them. 
All nations have entertained the belief not only that God has access 
to the human mind and can control its operations, but that He at 
times did take such possession of particular persons as to make them 
the organs of his communications. Such persons were called by 
the Greeks Qeoddpo. (those who bore a God within them) ; or, 
%eos (those in whom a God dwelt). In the Septuagint the word 
mvevpatopéopos is used in the same sense. In J osephus,! the idea is 
expressed by the phrase “7@ Geiw mvedpart Kexwypevos;” to which the 
words of Peter (2 Peter i. 21) exactly answer, im6 zvevparos pepdop- 
evo.; and what is written by men under this influence of the Spirit 
is called ypadi) Oedavevoros. (2 Tim. iii. 16.) Gregory of Nyssa,? 
having quoted the words of our Lord in Matt. xxii. 43, “ How then 
doth David in Spirit call him Lord,” adds, obxotv rp Suvdper rod Hvev- 
paros of Ocohopovpevor Trav cyiwv eumveovrat, Kal ba TotTo Taca ypadi Ged- 
mvevotos A€yerat, Sia TO THS Oelas eurvetvews eivar Sidacxadiav, that is, 
‘‘ Hence those of the saints who by the power of the Spirit are full 
of God are inspired, and therefore all Scripture is called Gedrvevoros, 
because the instruction is by divine inspiration.” The idea of in- 
spiration is therefore fixed. It is not to be arbitrarily determined. 
We must not interpret the word or the fact, according to our the- 
ories of the relation of God to the world, but according to the 
usage of antiquity, sacred and profane, and according to the doc- 
trine which the sacred writers and the men of their generation are 
known to have entertained on the subject. According to all antiq- 
uity, an inspired man was one who was the organ of God in what 
he said, so that his words were the words of the god of which he 
was the organ. When, therefore, the sacred writers use the same 
words and forms of expression which the ancients used to convey 
that idea, they must in all honesty be assumed to mean the same 
thing. 
Argument from the Meaning of the Word Prophet. 

2. That this is the Scriptural idea of inspiration is further proved 
from the meaning of the word prophet. The sacred writers divide 
the Scriptures into the “law and the prophets.” As the law was 
written by Moses, and as Moses was the greatest of the prophets, 
it follows that all the Old Testament was written by prophets. If, 
therefore, we can determine the Scriptural idea of a prophet, we 


1 Antiquities iv. 6, 5. 2 Contra Eunomium Orat. vi. t. ii. p. 187; Paris, 1615. 


§ 2, BE. INSPIRATION. 159 


shall thereby determine the character of their writings and the au- 
thority due to them. A prophet, then, in the Scriptural sense of the 
term, is a spokesman, one who speaks for another, in his name, and 
by his authority ; so that it is not the spokesman but the person for 
whom he acts, who is responsible for the truth of what is said. In 
Exodus vii. 1, it is said, ‘See, I have made thee a god to Pha- 
raoh; and Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet,” 7%. e., thy 
spokesman. This is explained by what is said in Exodus iv. 
14-16, “Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother? I know that he 
can speak well. . . . . Thou shalt speak unto him, and put 
words into his mouth; and I will be with thy mouth, and with his 
mouth, and will teach you what ye shall do. And he shall be thy 
spokesman unto the people; and he shall be, even he shall be, to 
thee instead of a mouth, and thou shalt be to him instead of God.” 
(See Jeremiah xxxvi. 17,18.) This determines definitely, what 
a prophet is. He is the mouth of God; one through whom God 
speaks to the people; so that what the prophet says God says. So 
when a prophet was consecrated, it was said, “ Behold, I have put 
my words in thy mouth.” (Jer. i. 9; Is. li. 16.) That this is 
the Scriptural idea of a prophet is moreover evident from the formu- 
las, constantly recurring, which relate to his duties and mission. 
He was the messenger of God; he spoke in the name of God; the 
words, ‘“* Thus saith the Lord,” were continually in his mouth. 
“ The word of the Lord” is said to have come to this prophet and 
on that; ‘*the Spirit came upon,” “the power,” or “ hand” of 
God was upon him; all implying that the prophet was the organ 
of God, that what he said, he said in God’s name and by his author- 
ity. It is true, therefore, as Philo’ says, tpopyrys ydép iduov oddey 
drodbeyyerar GdXOrpia 5€ révra irnxowvTos Er€pov. 

This is precisely what the Apostle Peter teaches when he says 
(2 Peter i. 20, 21), “ No prophecy of the Scripture is of any pri- 
vate interpretation. For the prophecy came not in old time by 
the will of man: but holy men spake as they were moved (epopevoy 
borne along as a ship by the wind) by the Holy Ghost.” Prophecy, 
4. €., what a prophet said, was not human, but divine. It was not 
the prophet’s own interpretation of the mind and will of God. He 
spoke as the organ of the Holy Ghost. 


What the Prophets said God said. 
8. It is another decisive proof that the sacred writers were the 
organs of God in the sense above stated, that whatever they said 
> Opera, t. iv. p. 116, ed. Pfeiff. 


160 INTRODUCTION.  [Cu. VE —P. R. or Farrn. 


the Spirit is declared to have said. Christ himself said that David 

by the Spirit called the Messiah Lord. (Matt. xxil. 43.) David 

in the 95th Psalm said, “To-day if ye will hear his voice, harden 

not your heart;” but the Apostle (Heb. iii. 7), says that these 

were the words of the Holy Ghost. Again, in ch. x. 15, the same~ 
. Apostle says, ‘‘ Whereof the Holy Ghost also is a witness to us: 

for after that he had said before, This is the covenant that I will 

make with them after those days, saith the Lord.” Thus quoting 

the language of Jeremiah xxxi. 83, as the language of the Holy 

Ghost. In Acts iv. 25, the assembled Apostles said, “ with one’ 
accord,” ‘ Lord thou art God. . . . . Who by the mouth of 

thy servant David hast said, Why did the heathen rage?” In 

Acts xxviii. 25, Paul said to the Jews, “‘ Well spake the Holy 
Ghost by Esaias the prophet unto our fathers.” It is in this way. 
that -Christ and his Apostles constantly refer to the Scriptures, 

showing beyond doubt that they believed and taught, that what the 

sacred writers said the Holy Ghost said. 


Inspiration of the New Testament Writers. 


This proof bears specially, it is true, only on the writings of the 
Old Testament. But no Christian puts the inspiration of the Old 
Testament above that of the New. The tendency, and we may 
even say the evidence, is directly the other way. If the Scriptures 
of the old economy were given by inspiration of God, much more 
were those writings which were penned under the dispensation of 
the Spirit. Besides, the inspiration of the Apostles is proved, 
(1.) From the fact that Christ promised them the Holy Spirit, 
who should bring all things to their remembrance, and render 
them infallible in teaching. It is not you, He said, that speak, 
but the Spirit of my Father speaketh in you. He that heareth 
you heareth me. He forbade them to enter upon their office 
as teachers until they were endued with power from on high. 
(2.) This promise was fulfilled on the day of Pentecost, when the 
Spirit descended upon the Apostles as a mighty rushing wind, and 
they were filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak as 
the Spirit gave them utterance (dabat elogut, as the Vulgate more 
literally renders the words). From this moment they were new 
men, with new views, with new spirit, and with new power and 
authority. The change was sudden. It was not a development. 
It was something altogether supernatural; as when God said, Let 
there be light, and there was light. Nothing can be more unrea- 
sonable than to ascribe this sudden transformation of the Apostles 


" 


§ 2, E.] INSPIRATION. 161 


from narrow-minded, bigoted Jews, into enlightened, large-minded, 
catholic Christians, to mere natural causes. Their Jewish prejudices 
had resisted all the instructions and influence of Christ for three 
years, but gave way in a moment when the Spirit came upon them 
from on high. (3.) After the day of Pentecost the Apostles 
claimed to be the infallible organs of God in all their teachings. 


They required men to receive what they taught not as the word 


of man but as the word of God (1 Thess. ii. 18) ; they declared, 
as Paul does (1 Cor. xiv. 37), that the things which they wrote 
were the commandments of the Lord. They made the salvation 
of men to depend on faith in the doctrines which they taught. 
Paul pronounces anathema even an angel from heaven who should 
preach any other gospel than that which he had taught. (Gal. i. 
8.) John says that whoever did not receive the testimony which 
he bore concerning Christ, made God a liar, because John’s testi- 
mony was God’s testimony. (1 Johny. 10.) ‘“ He that knoweth 
God, heareth us; he that is not of God, heareth not us.”’ (iv. 6.) 
This assertion of infallibility, this claim for the divine authority of 
their teaching, is characteristic of the whole Bible. The sacred 
writers all, and everywhere, disclaim personal authority; they 
never rest the obligation to faith in their teachings, on their own 
knowledge or wisdom; they never rest it on the truth of what they 
taught as manifest to reason or as capable of being proved by argu- 
ment. They speak as messengers, as witnesses, as organs. They 
declare that what they said God said, and, therefore, on his author- 
ity it was to be received and obeyed. 


The Testimony of Paul. 


The Corinthians objected to Paul’s preaching that he did not 
attempt any rational or philosophical proof of the doctrines which 
he propounded ; that his language and whole manner of discourse 
were not in accordance with rhetorical rules. He answers these 
objections, — first, by saying that the doctrines which he taught 
were not the truths of reason, were not derived from the wisdom 
cf men, but were matters of divine revelation; that he simply 
tanght what God declared to be true; and secondly, that as to the 
manner of presenting these truths, he was the mere organ of the 
Spirit of God. In 1 Cor. ii. 7-13, he sets forth this whole subject 
in the clearest and most concise‘ manner. The things which he 
taught, which he calls ‘the wisdom of God,” ‘the things of the 
Spirit,” 2. e., the gospel, the system of doctrine taught in the Bible, 
he says, had never entered into the mind of man. God had re- 

VOL. I. ll 


162 INTRODUCTION. (Cu. VI.—P. R. or Farrat 


vealed those truths by his Spirit; for the Spirit is the only com- 
petent source of such knowledge. ‘ For what man knoweth the 
things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? even so, 
the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God.” So 
much for the source of knowledge, and the ground on which the 
doctrines he taught were to be received. As to the second objec- 
tion, which concerned his language and mode of presentation, he 
says, These things of the Spirit, thus revealed, we teach ‘not. in 
the words which man’s wisdom teacheth; but which the Holy 
Ghost teacheth,” rvevparicols rvevparixa ovykpivovres, combining spir- 
itual with spiritual, 7. e., clothing the truths of the Spirit in the 
words of the Spirit. There is neither in the Bible nor in the writ- 
ings of men, a simpler or clearer statement of the doctrines of 
revelation and inspiration. Revelation is the act of communicat- 
ing divine knowledge by the Spirit to the mind. Inspiration is the 
act of the same Spirit, controlling those who make the truth known 
to others. The thoughts, the truths made known, and the words in 
which they are recorded, are declared to be equally from the Spirit. 
This, from first to last, has been the doctrine of the Church, not- 
- withstanding the endless diversity of speculations in which theo- 
logians have indulged on the subject. This then is the ground ~ 
on which the sacred writers rested their claims. They were the 
mere organs of God. They were his messengers. Those who 
heard them, heard God; and those who refused to hear them, 
refused to hear God. (Matt. x. 40; John xiii. 20.) 

4, This claim to infallibility on the part of the Apostles was duly 
authenticated, not only by the nature of the truths which they com- 
municated, and by the power which those truths have ever exerted 
over the minds and hearts of men, but also by the inward witness 
of the Spirit of which St. John speaks, when he says, ‘“‘ He that 
believeth on the Son of God hath the witness in himself” (1 John 
v. 10); ‘an unction from the Holy One.” (1 John ii. 20.) It 
was confirmed also by miraculous gifts. As soon as the Apostles 
were endued with power from on high, they spake in * other 
tongues ;”’ they healed the sick, restored the lame and the blind, 
** God also,” as the Apostle says (Heb. ii. 4), ‘ bearing them wit- 
ness, both with signs, and wonders, and with divers miracles, and 
gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own will.” And Paul 
tells the Corinthians that the signs of an Apostle had been wrought 
among them “in all patience, in signs, and wonders, and mighty 
deeds.” (2 Cor. xii. 12.) The mere working of miracles was not 
an evidence of a divine commission as a teacher. But when a 


§ 2, F.] INSPIRATION. 163 


man claims to be the organ of God, when he says that God speaks 
through him, then his working of miracles is the testimony of God 
to the validity of his claims. And such testimony God gave to the 
infallibility of the Apostles. 

The above considerations are sufficient to show, that according 
to the Scriptures, inspired men were the organs, or mouth of God, 
in the sense that what they said and taught has the sanction and 

authority of God. 


F. Inspiration extends equally to all Parts of Scripture. 


This is the fourth element of the Church doctrine on this sub- 
ject. It means, first} that all the books of Scripture are equally 
inspired. All alike are infallible in what they teach. And sec- 
ondly, that inspiration extends to all the contents of these several 
books. It is not confined to moral and religious truths, but ex- 
tends to the statements of facts, whether scientific, historical, or 
geographical. It is not confined to those facts the importance of 
which is obvious, or which are involved in matters of doctrine. It 
extends to everything which any sacred writer asserts to be true. 

This is proved, (1) Because it is involved in, or follows as a 
necessary consequence from, the proposition that the sacred writ- 
ers were the organs of God. If what they assert, God asserts, 
which, as has been shown, is the Scriptural idea of inspiration, their 
assertions must be free from error. (2.) Because our Lord ex- 
pressly says, “ The Scripture cannot be broken ”’ (John x. 35), 7. ¢., 
it cannot err. (38.) Because Christ and his Apostles refer to all 
parts of the Scriptures, or to the whole volume, as the word of 
God. ‘They make no distinction as to the authority of the Law, 
the Prophets, or the Hagiographa. They quote the Pentateuch, the 
historical books, the Psalms, and the Prophets, as all and equally 
the word of God. (4.) Because Christ and the writers of the 
New Testament refer to all classes of facts recorded in the Old 
Testament as infallibly true. Not only doctrinal facts, such as 
those of the creation and probation of man; his apostasy; the 
covenant with Abraham ; the giving the law upon Mount Sinai ; 
not only great historical facts, as the deluge, the deliverance of the 
people out of Egypt, the passage of the Red Sea, and the like ; 
but incidental circumstances, or facts of apparently minor impor- 
tance, as ¢. g. that Satan tempted our first parents in the form of a 
serpent ; that Moses lifted up a serpent in the wilderness; that 
Elijah healed Naaman, the Syrian, and was sent to the widow in 
Sarepta; that David ate the shew-bread in the temple ; and even 


164 INTRODUCTION. [Cu. VI.—P. BR. or Fairs. 


that great stumbling-block, that Jonah was three days in the whale’s 
_ belly, are all referred to by our Lord and his Apostles with the sub- 
lime simplicity and confidence with which they are received by 
little children. (5.) It lies in the very idea of the Bible, that God 
chose some men to write history; some to indite psalms; some to 
unfold the future ; some to teach doctrines. All were equally his 
organs, and each was infallible in his own sphere. As the princi- 
ple of vegetable life pervades the whole plant, the root, stem, and 
flower; as the life of the body belongs as much to the feet as to the 
head, so the Spirit of God pervades the whole Scripture, and is not 
more in one part than in another. Some members of the body are 
more important than others ; and some books of the Bible could be 
far better spared than others. There may be as great a difference 
between St. John’s Gospel and the Book of Chronicles as between 
a man’s brain and his hair; nevertheless the life of the. 
body is as truly in the hair as in the brain. 


G. The Inspiration of the Scriptures extends to the Words. 


1. This again is included in the infallibility which our Lord as-. 
cribes to the Scriptures. A mere human report or record of a 
divine revelation must of necessity be not only fallible, but more 
or less erroneous. 

2. The thoughts are in the words. The two are inseparable. 
If the words, priest, sacrifice, ransom, expiation, propitiation, puri- 
fication by blood, and the like, have no divine authority, then the 
doctrine which they embody has no such authority. 

3. Christ and his Apostles argue from the very words of Scrip- 
ture. Our Lord says that David by the Spirit called the’ Messiah 
Lord, 7. e., David used that word. It was in the use of a particular 
word, that Christ said (John x. 85), that the Scriptures cannot be 
broken. ‘If he call them gods unto whom the word of God came, 
and the Scripture cannot be broken,” etc. The use of that word, 
therefore, according to Christ’s view of the Scripture, was deter- 
mined by the Spirit of God. Paul, in Gal. iii. 16, lays stress on 
the fact, that in the promise made to Abraham, a word used igs 
singular and not plural, ‘‘ seed,” “as of one,” and not ‘seeds as 
of many.” Constantly it is the very words of Scripture which are 
quoted as of divine authority. 

4. The very form in which the doctrine of inspiration is taught 
in the Bible, assumes that the organs of God in the Gornnuneneten 
of his will were controlled by Him in the words which they used. 
“ T have put my words in thy mouth.” (Jer. i. 9.) “It is not ye 


‘\ 
§ 2, G.] INSPIRATION. 165 


that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh in you.” 
(Matt. x. 20.) They spake “as the Spirit gave them utterance.” 
(Acts i. 4.) ‘* Holy men of God spake as they were moved by 
the Holy Ghost.” (2 Pet. i. 21.) All these, and similar modes 
of expression with which the Scriptures abound, imply that the 
words uttered were the words of God. This, moreover, is the 
very idea of inspiration as understood by the ancient world. The 
words of the oracle were assumed to be the words of the divinity, 
and not those selected by the organ of communication. And this, 
too, as has been shown, was the idea attached to the gift of proph- 
ecy. The words of the prophet were the words of God, or he 
could not be God’s spokesman and mouth. It has also been shown 
that in the most formally didactic passage in the whole Bible on 
this subject (1 Cor. ii. 10-13), the Apostle expressly asserts that the 
truths revealed by the Spirit, he communicated in words taught by 
the Spirit. . 
Plenary Inspiration. 

The view presented above is known as the doctrine of plenary 
inspiration. Plenary is opposed to partial. The Church doctrine 
denies that inspiration is confined to parts of the Bible; and af- 
firms that it applies to all the books of the sacred canon. It denies 
that the sacred writers were merely partially inspired ; it asserts 
that they were fully inspired as to all that they teach, whether of 
doctrine or fact. This of course does not imply that the sacred 
writers were infallible except for the special purpose for which 
they were employed. They were not imbued with plenary knowl- 
edge. As to all matters of science, philosophy, and history, they 
stood on the same level with their contemporaries. They were in- 
fallible only as teachers, and when acting as the spokesmen of God. 
Their inspiration no more made them astronomers than it made 
them agriculturists. Isaiah was infallible in his predictions, although 
he shared with his countrymen the views then prevalent as to the 
mechanism of the universe. Paul could not err in anything he 
taught, although he could not recollect how many persons hé had 
baptized ‘in Corinth. The sacred writers also, doubtless, differed 
as to insight into the truths which they taught. The Apostle Peter 
intimates that the prophets searched diligently into the meaning of 
their own predictions. When David said God had put “all things Es 
under the feet of man, he probably little thought that “ all things” 
meant the whole universe. (Heb. iu. 8.) And Moses, when he 
recorded the promise that childless Abraham was to be the father 
‘of many nations,” little thought that it meant the whole werld. 


166 INTRODUCTION. [Cs VL —P. R. or Farru. 


(Rom. iv 13). Nor does the Scriptural doctrine on this subject 
imply that the sacred writers were free from errors in conduct. 
Their infallibility did not arise from their holiness, nor did inspira- 
tion render them holy. Balaam was inspired, and Saul was among 
the prophets. David committed many crimes, although inspired 
to write psalms. Peter erred in conduct at Antioch; but this 
does not prove that he erred in teaching. The influence which 
preserved him from mistakes in teaching was not designed to pre- 
serve him from mistakes in conduct. 


H. General Considerations in Support of the Doctrine. 

On this point little need be said. If the questions, What is the 
Scriptural doctrine concerning inspiration ? and, What is the true 
doctrine? be considered different, then after showing what the 
Scriptures teach on the subject, it would be necessary to prove that 
what they teach is true. This, however, is not the position, of the , 
Christian theologian. It is his business to set forth what the Bible 
teaches. If the sacred writers assert that they are the organs of 
God; that what they taught He taught through them ; that they 
spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, so that what they 
said the Holy Spirit said, then, if we believe their divine mission, 
we must believe what they teach as to the nature of the influence 
under which they spoke and wrote. This is the reason why in the 
earlier period of the Church there was no separate discussion of 
the doctrine of inspiration. That was regarded as involved in the 
divine origin of the Scriptures. If they are a revelation from God, 
they must be received and obeyed; but they cannot be thus re- 
ceived without attributing to them divine authority, and they can- 
not have such authority without being infallible in all they teach. 

The organic unity of the Scriptures proves them to be the prod- 
uct of one mind. They are not only so united that we cannot 
believe one part without believing the whole; we cannot believe 
the New Testament without believing the Old; we cannot believe 
the Prophets without believing the Law; we cannot believe Christ 
without believing his Apostles; but besides all this they present 
the regular development, carried on through centuries and millen- 
niums, of the great original promise, “The seed of the woman 
shall bruise the serpent’s head.”” This development was conducted 
by some forty independent writers, many of whom understood 
very little of the plan they were unfolding, but each contributed 
his part to the progress and completion of the whole. 

If the Bible be the work of one mind, that mind must be the 


§ 2, HJ INSPIRATION. 167 


mind of God. He only knows the end from the beginning. He 
only could know what the Bible reveals. No one, says the Apos- 
tle, knows the things of God but the Spirit jof God. He only 
could reveal the nature, the thoughts, and purposes of God. He 
only could tell whether sin'can be pardoned. No one knows the 
Son but the Father. The revelation of the person and work of 
Christ is as clearly the work of God as are the heavens in all their 
majesty and glory. 

Besides, we have the witness in ourselves. We find that the 
truths revealed in the Bible have the same adaptation to our souls 
that the atmosphere has to our bodies. The body cannot live 
without air, which it receives and appropriates instinctively, with 
full confidence in its adaptation to the end designed. In like man- 
ner the soul receives and appropriates the truths of Scripture as the 
atmosphere in which alone it can breathe and live. Thus in receiv- 
ing the Bible as true, we necessarily receive it as divine. In believ- 
ing it asa supernatural revelation, we believe its plenary inspiration. 

This doctrine involves nothing out of analogy with the ordinary 
operations of God. We believe that He is everywhere present in 
the material world, and controls the operations of natural causes. 
We know that He causes the grass to grow, and gives rain and 
fruitful seasons. We believe that He exercises a like control over 
the minds of men, turning them as the rivers of water are turned. 
All religion, natural and revealed, is founded on the assumption 
of this providential government of God. Besides this, we believe 
in the gracious operations of his Spirit, by which He works in the 
hearts of his people to will and to do; we believe that faith, re- 
pentance, and holy living are due to the ever-present influence of 
the Holy Spirit. If, then, this wonder-working God everywhere 
operates in nature and in grace, why should it be deemed incred- 
ible that holy men should speak as they were moved by the Holy 
Ghost, so that they should say just what He would have them say, 
so that their words should be his words. 

After all Christ is the great object of the Christian’s faith, We 
believe him and we believe everything else on his authority. He 
hands us the Old Testament and tells us that it is the Word of 
God; that its authors spoke by the Spirit; that the Scriptures 
cannot be broken. And we believe on his testimony. His testi- 
mony to his Apostles is no less explicit, although given in a differ- 
ent way. He promised to give them a mouth and a wisdom which 
their adversaries could not gainsay or resist. He told them to take 


no thought what they should say, “ For the Holy Ghost shall 


168 INTRODUCTION. ([Cu. VI.—P. R. or Fairn. 


teach you in the same hour what ye ought to say.” (Luke xii. 
12.) “It is not ye that speak but the Spirit of your Father which 
speaketh in you.” He said to them ‘he that receiveth you receiv- 
eth me”; and He prayed for those who should believe on Him 
throuch their word. We believe the Scriptures, therefore, because 
Christ declares them to be the Word of God. Heaven and earth 
may pass away, but his word cannot pass away. 


J. Objections. 


A large class of the objections to the doctrine of inspiration, 
which for many minds are the most effective, arise from the rejec- 
tion of one or other of the presumptions specified on a preceding 
page. If a man denies the existence of a personal, extramundane 
God, he must deny the doctrine of inspiration, but it is not neces- 
sary in order to prove that doctrine that we should first prove the 
being of God. If he denies that God exerts any direct efficiency 
in the government of the world, and holds that everything is the 
product of fixed laws, he cannot believe what the Scriptures teach 
of inspiration. If the supernatural be impossible, inspiration is 
impossible. It will be found that most of the objections, especially 
those of recent date, are founded on unscriptural views of the re- 
lation of God to the world, or on the peculiar philosophical views 
of the objectors as to the nature of man or of his free agency. 

A still larger class of objections is founded on misconceptions of 
the doctrine. Such objections are answered by the correct state- 
ment of what the Church believes on the subject. Even a man so 
distinguished for knowledge and ability as Coleridge, speaks with 
contempt of what he regards as the common theory of inspiration, 
when he utterly misunderstands the real doctrine which he opposes. 
He says: “All the miracles which the legends of monk or rabbi 
contain, can scarcely be put in competition, on the score of compli- 
cation, inexplicableness, the absence of all intelligible use or pur- 
pose, and of circuitous self-frustration, with those that must be 
assumed by the maintainers of this doctrine, in order to give effect 
to the series of miracles by which all the nominal composers of the 
Hebrew nation before the time of Ezra, of whom there are any re- 
mains, were successively transformed into automaton compositors,’’! 
etc. But if the Church doctrine of inspiration no more assumes 
that the sacred writers “were transformed into automaton com- 
positors,”’ than that every believer is thus transformed in whom God 
“ works to will and to do,” then all such objections, amount to 


1 “ Confessions of an Inquiring Spirit,” Works, Harpers, N. Y., 1853, vol. v. p. 612. 


5209.4 INSPIRATION. 169 


nothing. If God, without interfering with a man’s free agency, can 
make it infallibly certain that he will repent and believe, He can 
render it certain that he will not err in teaching. It is in vain to 
profess to hold the common doctrine of Theism, and yet assert that 
God cannot control rational creatures without turning them into 
machines. 

Discrepancies and Errors. 

But although the theologian may rightfully dismiss all objections 
founded on the denial of the common principles of natural and re- 
vealed religion, there are others which cannot be thus summarily 
disposed of. The most obvious of these is, that the sacred writers 
contradict each other, and that they teach error. It is, of course, 
useless to contend that the sacred writers were infallible, if in point — 
of fact they err. Our views of inspiration must be determined by 
the phenomena of the Bable as well as from its didactic statements. 
If in fact the sacred writers retain each his own style and mode of 
thought, then we must renounce any theory which assumes that 
inspiration obliterates or suppresses all individual peculiarities. If 
the Scriptures abound in contradictions and errors, then it is vain 
to contend that they were written under an influence which pre- 
eludes all error. The question, therefore, is a question of fact. 
Do the sacred writers contradict each other? Do the Scriptures 
teach what from any source can be proved not to be true? The 
question is not whether the views of the sacred writers were incor- 
rect, but whether they taught error? For example, it is not the 
question Whether they thought that the earth is the centre of our 
system ? but, Did they teach that it is? 

The objection under consideration, namely, that the Bible con- 
tains errors, divides itself into two. The first, that the sacred 
writers contradict themselves, or one the other. The second, that 
the Bible teaches what is inconsistent with the facts of history or 
science. 

As to the former of these objections, it would require, not a vol- 
ume, but volumes to discuss all the cases of alleged discrepancies. 
All that can be expected here is a few general remarks: (1.) These 
apparent discrepancies, although numerous, are for the most part 
trivial ; relating in most cases to numbers or dates. (2.) The 
great majority of them are only apparent, and yield to careful 
examination. (3.) Many of them may fairly be ascribed to errors 
of transcribers. (4.) The marvel and the miracle is that there 
are so few of any real importance. Considering that the differ- 
ent books of the Bible were written not only by different authors, 


170 INTRODUCTION. [Cu. VI. — P. R. or Fartu, 


but by men of all degrees of culture, living in the course of fifteen 
nundred or two thousand years, it is altogether unaccountable that 
they should agree perfectly, on any other hypothesis than that the 
writers were under the guidance of the Spirit of God. In this 
respect, as in all others, the Bible stands alone. It is enough to 
impress any mind with awe, when it contemplates the Sacred 
Scriptures filled with the highest truths, speaking with authority 
in the name of God, and so miraculously free from the soiling 
touch of human fingers. The errors in matters of fact which 
skeptics search out bear no proportion to the whole. No sane man 
would deny that the Parthenon was built of marble, even if here 
and there a speck of sandstone should be detected in its structure. 
Not less unreasonable is it to deny the inspiration of such a book 
as the Bible, because one sacred writer says that on a given occa- 
sion twenty-four thousand, and another says that twenty-three 
thousand, men were slain. Surely a Christian may be allowed to 
tread such objections under his feet. 

Admitting that the Scriptures do contain, in a few instances, dis- 
crepancies which with our present means of knowledge, we are 
unable satisfactorily to explain, they furnish no rational ground for 
denying their infallibility. “The Scripture cannot be broken.” 
(John x. 85.) This is the whole doctrine of plenary inspiration, 
taught by the lips of Christ himself. The universe teems with evi- 
dences of design, so manifold, so diverse, so wonderful, as to over- 
whelm the mind with the conviction that it has had an intelligent 
author. Yet here and there isolated cases of monstrosity appear. 
It is irrational, because we cannot account for such cases, to deny 
that the universe is the product of intelligence. So the Christian 
need not renounce his faith in the plenary inspiration of the Bible, 


although there may be some things about it in its present state 
which he cannot account for. 


Historical and Scientific Objections. 


The second great objection to the plenary inspiration of the 
Scripture is that it teaches what is inconsistent with historical and 
scientific truth. 

Here again it is to be remarked, (1.) That we must distinguish 
between what the sacred writers themselves thought or believed, 
and what they teach. They may have believed that the sun moves 
round the earth, but they do not so teach. (2.) The language of 
the Bible is the language of common life; and the language of 
common life is founded on apparent, and not upon scientific truth. 


i i 


> 


§ 2, 1.] INSPIRATION. 171 


It would be ridiculous to refuse to speak of the sun rising and 
setting, because we know that it is not a satellite of our planet. 
(8.) There is a great distinction between theories and facts. The- 
ories are of men. Facts are of God. The Bible often contradicts 
the former, never the latter. (4.) There is also a distinction to be 
made between the Bible and our interpretation. The latter may 
come into competition with settled facts ; and then it must yield. 
Science has in many things taught the Church how to understand 
the Scriptures. The Bible was for ages understood and explained 
according to the Ptolemaic system of the universe; it is now ex: 
plained without doing the least violence to its language, according 
to the Copernican system. Christians have commonly believed 
that the earth has existed only a few thousands of years. If geolo- 
gists finally prove that it has existed for myriads of ages, it will be 
found that the first chapter of Genesis is in full accord with the facts, 
and that the last results of science are embodied on the first page 
of the Bible. It may cost the Church a severe struggle to give up 
one interpretation and adopt another, as it did in the seventeenth 
eentury, but no real evil need be apprehended. The Bible has 
stood, and still stands in the presence of the whole scientific world 
with its claims unshaken. Men hostile or indifferent to its truths 
may, on insufficient grounds, or because of their personal opinions, 
reject its authority; but, even in the judgment of the greatest 
authorities in science, its teachings cannot fairly be impeached. 
It is impossible duly to estimate the importance of this subject. 
If the Bible be the word of God, all the great questions which 
for ages have agitated the minds of men are settled with infallible 
certainty. Human reason has never been able to answer to its own 
satisfaction, or to the assurance of others, the vital questions, What 
is God? What is man? What lies beyond the grave? If there 
be a future state of being, what is it? and How may future bless- 
edness be secured? Without the Bible, we are, on all these sub- 
jects, in utter darkness. How endless and unsatisfying have been 
the answers to the greatest of all questions, What is God? The 
whole Eastern world answers by saying, “* That He is the uncon- 
scious ground of being.” The Greeks gave the same answer for 
philosophers, and made all nature God for the people. The mod- 
erns have reached no nigher doctrine. Fichte says the subjective 
Ego is God. According to Schelling, God is the eternal move- 
ment of the universe, subject becoming object, object becoming 
subject, the infinite becoming finite, and the finite infinite. Hegel 
says, Thought is God. Cousin combines all the German answers 


172 INTRODUCTION. [Cu. VL. — P. R. or Fara. 


to form his own. Coleridge refers us to Schelling for an answer 
to the question, What is God? Carlyle makes force God. A 
Christian child says: “ God is a Spirit, infinite, eternal, and un- 
changeable in his being, wisdom, power, holiness, justice, good- 
ness, and truth.” Men and angels veil their faces in the presence 
of that answer. It is the highest, greatest, and most fruitful truth 
ever embodied in human language. Without the Bible, we are 
without God and without hope. The present is a burden, and the 
future a dread. 
; § 8. Adverse Theories. 

Although substantial unanimity as to the doctrine of inspiration 
has prevailed among the great historical Churches of Christendom, 
yet there has been no little diversity of opinion among theologians 
and philosophical writers. The theories are too numerous to be 
examined in detail. They may, perhaps, be advantageously re- 
ferred to the following classes. 


A. Naturalistie Doctrine. 

There is a large class of writers who deny any supernatural 
agency in the affairs of men. This general class includes writers 
who differ essentially in their views. 

First. There are those who, although Theists, hold the mechan- 
ical theory of the universe. That is, they hold that God having 
created thé world, including all that it contains, organic and inor- 
ganic, rational and irrational, and having endowed matter with its 
properties and minds with their attributes, leaves it to itself. Just 
as a ship, when launched and equipped, is left to the winds and to 
its crew. This theory precludes the possibility not only of all 
miracles, prophecy, and supernatural revelation, but even of all 
providential government, whether general or special. Those who 
adopt this view of the relation of God to the world, must regard 
the Bible from beginning to end as a purely human production. 
They may rank it as the highest, or as among the lowest of the 
literary works of men; there is no possibility of its being inspired 
in any authorized sense of that word. 

Secondly. There are those who do not so entirely banish God 
from his works. They admit that He is everywhere present, and 
everywhere active ; that his providential efficiency and control are 
exercised in the occurrence of all events. But they maintain that 
He always acts according to fixed laws ; and always in connection 
and codperation with second causes. According to this theory, 
also, all miracles and all prophecy, properly speaking, are excluded, 


§3, A] THEORIES OF INSPIRATION. 178 


A revelation is admitted, or at least, is possible. But it is merely 
providential. It consists in such an ordering of circumstances, and 
such a combination of influences as to secure the elevation of cer- 
tain men toa higher level of religious knowledge than that attained 
by others. They may also, in a sense, be said to be inspired in so 
far as that inward, subjective state is purer, and more devout, as 
well as more intelligent than that of ordinary men. There is nc 
specific difference, however, according to this theory, between in- 
spired and uninspired men. It is only a matter of degrees. One 
is more and another less purified and enlightened. This theory 
also makes the Bible a purely human production. It confines reve- 
lation to the sphere of human knowledge. No possible degree of 
culture or development can get anything more than human out of 
man. According to the Scriptures, and to the faith of the Church, 
the Bible is a revelation of the things of God; of his thoughts and 
purposes. But who knoweth the things of God, asks the Apostle, 
but the Spirit of God? The things which the Bible purports to 
make known, are precisely those things which lie beyond the ken — 
of the human mind. This theory, therefore, for bread gives us a 
stone ; for the thoughts of God, the thoughts of man. 


Schleiermacher’s Theory. 


Thirdly. There is a theory far more pretentious-and philosophi- 
eal, and which of late years has widely prevailed, which in reality 
differs very little from the preceding. It agrees with it in the main 
point in that it denies anything supernatural in the origin or com- 
position of the Bible. Schleiermacher, the author of this theory, 
was addicted to a philosophy which precluded all intervention of 
the immediate efficiency of God in the world. He admits, how- 
ever, of two exceptions: the creation of man, and the constitution 
of the person of Christ. There was a supernatural intervention 
in the origin of our race, and in the manifestation of Christ. All 
else in the history of the world is natural. Of course there -¢ noth- 
ing supernatural in the Bible ; nothing in the Old Testamert which 
the Adamic nature was not adequate to produce; and nothing in 
the New Testament, which Christianity, the life of the Church, a 
life common to all believers, is not sufficient to account for. 

Religion consists in feeling, and specifically in a feeling of abso- 
jute dependence (or an absolute feeling of dependence) 7. ¢., the 
consciousness that the finite is nothing in the presence of the Infi 
nite, — the individual in the presence of the universal. This con- 
sciousness involves the unity of the one and all, of God and man. 


174 INTRODUCTION. [Cx VI.—P. R. or Farru. 


“ This system,” says Dr. Ullmann, one of its more moderate and 
effective advocates, ‘is not absolutely new. We find it in another 
form in ancient Mysticism, especially in the German Mystics of the 
Middle Ages. With them, too, the ground and central point of 
Christianity is the oneness of Deity and humanity effected through 
the incarnation of God, and deification of man.” } 

Christianity, therefore, is not a system of doctrine ; it is not, 
subjectively considered, a form of knowledge. It isa life. It is 
the life of Christ. Ullmann again says explicitly: “ The life of 
Christ is Christianity.” ? God in becoming man did not take upon 
himself, “a true body and a reasonable soul,” but generic humanity ; 
i. e., humanity as a generic life. The effect of the incarnation was 
to unite the human and divine as one life. And this life passes 
over to the Church precisely as the life of Adam passed over to his 
descendants, by a process of natural development. And this life is 
Christianity. Participation of this divine-human life makes a man 
a Christian. 

The Christian revelation consists in the providential dispensa- 
tions connected with the appearance of Christ on the earth. The 
effect of these dispensations and events was the elevation of the 
religious consciousness of the men of that generation, and specially 
of those who came most directly under the influence of Christ. 
This subjective state, this excitement and elevation of their religious 
life, gave them intuitions of religious truths, ‘ eternal verities.’ 
These intuitions were by the logical understanding clothed in the 
form of doctrines. This, however, was a gradual process as it was 
effected only by the Church-life, 7. ¢., by the working of the new 
divine-human life in the body of believers.8 Mr. Morell in expound- 
ing this theory, says:* ‘ The essential germ of the religious life is 
concentrated in the absolute feeling of dependence, —a feeling 
which implies nothing abject, but, on the contrary, a high and hal- 
lowed sense of our being inseparably related to Deity.”’ On the 
preceding page he had said, “ Let the subject become as nothing — 
not, indeed, from its intrinsic insignificance or incapacity of moral 
action, but by virtue of the infinity of the object to which it stands 


1 Studien und Kritiken, 1845, p. 59. 
a Studien und Kritiken, January 1845; translated in The Mystical Presence, by Dr. J. W 
evin. 
: 8 The English reader may find this theory set forth, in Morell’s Philosophy of Religion; 
in Archdeacon Wilberforce’s work on the Incarnation; in Maurice’s Theological Essays; in 
the Mystical Presence, by Dr. John W. Nevin, and in the pages of the Mercersburg 


Quarterly Review, a journal specially devoted to the defence of Schleiermacher’s doctrines 
and of those of the same general character. 


4 Philosophy of Religion, p. 77. 


§ 8, A.J THEORIES OF INSPIRATION. 175 


consciously opposed ; and the feeling of dependence must become 
absolute ; for ali finite power is as nothing in relation to the 
Infinite.” . 

Christianity, as just stated, is the life of Christ, his human life, 
which is also divine, and is communicated to us as the life of Adam 
was communicated to his descendants. Morell, rather more in 
accordance with English modes of thought, says,’ “ Christianity, 
like every other religion, consists essentially in a state of man’s 
inner consciousness, which develops itself into a system of thought 
and activity only in a community of awakened minds; and it was 
inevitable, therefore, that such a state of consciousness should re- 
quire time, and intercourse, and mutual sympathy, before it could 
become moulded into a decided and distinctive form.” He rep- 
resents the Apostles as often meeting together and deliberating on 
essential points, correcting each other’s views; and, after years of 
such fellowship, Christianity was at last brought into form. 

Revelation is declared to be a communication of truth to our 
intuitional consciousness. The outward world is a revelation to 
our sense-intuitions ; beauty is a revelation to our esthetic intuitions ; 
and ‘‘ eternal verities,” when intuitively perceived, are said to be 
revealed ; and this intuition is brought about by whatever purifies 
and exalts our religious feelings. ‘* Revelation,” says Morell, “ is 
a process of the intuitional consciousness, gazing upon eternal 
verities ; while theology is the reflection of the understanding upon 
those vital intuitions, so as to reduce them to a logical and scientific 
expression.” 2 

Inspiration is the inward state of mind which enables us to ap 
prehend the truth. ‘ Revelation and inspiration,” says Morell, 
‘indicate one united process, the result of which upon the human 
mind is, to produce a state of spiritual intuition, whose phenomena 
are so extraordinary, that we at once separate the.agency by which 
they are produced from any of the ordinary principles of human 
development. And yet this agency is applied in perfect consistency 
with the laws and natural operations of our spiritual nature. [a- 
spiration does not imply anything generically new in the actual 
processes of the human mind; it does not involve any form of in- 
telligence essentially different from what we already possess ; “t 
indicates rather the elevation of the religious consciousness, and 
with it, of course, the power of spiritual vision, to a degree of in- 
tensity peculiar to the individuals thus highly favoured of God.” : 
The only difference, therefore, between the Apostles and ordinary 
Christians is as to their relative holiness. 

1 Philosophy of Religion, page 104. 2 Page 141. 8 Page 151. 


176 INTRODUCTION. [Cu. VL.—P. R. or Farr. 


According to this theory there is no specific difference between 
genius and inspiration. The difference is simply in the objects ap- 
prehended and the causes of the inward excitement to which the 
apprehension is due. ‘ Genius,” says Morell, “ consists in the pos- 
session of a remarkable power of intuition with reference to some 
particular object, a power which arises from the inward nature of a 
man being brought, into unusual harmony with that object in 
its reality and its operations.” 1 This is precisely his account of 
inspiration. “Let,” he says, “there be a due purification of the 
moral nature, —a perfect harmony of the spiritual being with the 
mind of God,—a removal of all inward disturbances from the 
heart, and what is to prevent or disturb this immediate intuition of 
divine things.” 2 

This theory of inspiration, while retaining its essential elements, 
is variously modified. With those who believe with Schleiermacher, 
that man “is the form in which God comes to conscious existence 
on our earth,” it has one form. With Realists who define man to 
be “the manifestation of generic humanity in connection with a 
given corporeal organization ;” and who believe that it was generic 
humanity which Christ took and united in one life with his divine 
nature, which life is communicated to the Church as his body, and 
thereby to all its members; it takes a somewhat different form. 
With those again who do not adopt either of these anthropological 
theories, but take the common view as to the constitution of man; 
it takes still a different, and in some respects, a lower, form. In 
all, however, inspiration is the intuition of divine truths due to the 
excitement of the religious nature, whatever that nature may be. 


Objections to Schleiermacher’s Theory. 


To this theory in all its forms it may be objected, — 

1. That it proceeds upon a wrong view of religion in general and 
of Christianity in particular. It assumes that religion is a feeling, 
a life. It denies that it is a form of knowledge, or involves the 
reception of any particular system of doctrine. In the subjective 
sense of the word, all religions (¢. ¢., all religious doctrines) are 
true, as T'westen says,? but all are not equally pure, or equally ad- 
equate expressions of the inward religious principle. According to 
the Scriptures, however, and the common conviction of Christians, 


1 Philosophy of Religion, page 184. 2 Page 186. 
8 Dogmatik, vol. i.p.2. “Das Verhiiltniss des Erkennen zur Religion.”” Hase’s Dogmatik, 
“Jede Religion ais Ergebniss einer Volksbildung ist angemesen oder subj. wahr; wahr 


an sich ist die, welche der vollendeten Ausbildung der Menschheit entspricht.”” See also 
his Hutterus Redivivus. 


§ 3, A.] THEORIES OF INSPIRATION. why 


religion (subjectively considered) is the reception of certain doc- 
trines as true, and a state of heart and course of action in accord- 
ance with those doctrines. The Apostles propounded a certain sys- 
tem of doctrines; they pronounced those to be Christians who 
received those doctrines so as to determine their character and life. 
They pronounced those who rejected those doctrines, who refused 
to receive their testimony, as antichristian ; as having no part or 
lot with the people of God. Christ’s command was to teach; to 
convert the world by teaching. On this principle the Apostles acted 
and the Church has ever acted from that day to this. Those who 
deny Theism as a doctrine, are atheists. Those who reject Chris- 
tianity as a system of doctrine, are unbelievers. They are not 
Christians. The Bible everywhere assumes that without truth 
there can be no holiness; that all conscious exercises of spiritual 
life are in view of truth objectively revealed in the Scriptures. 
And hence the importance everywhere attributed to knowledge, 
to truth, to sound doctrine, in the Word of God. 

2. This theory is inconsistent with the Scriptural doctrine of 
revelation. According to the Bible, God presents truth objectively 
to the mind, whether by audible words, by visions, or by the imme- 
diate operations of his Spirit. According to this theory, revelation 
is merely the providential ordering of circumstances which awaken 
and exalt the religious -feelings, and which thus enable the mind 
intuitively to apprehend the things of God. 

3. It avowedly confines these intuitions, and of course revealed 
truth, to what are called ‘eternal verities.” But the great body 
of truths revealed in Scripture are not ‘ eternal verities.””» The 
fall of man; that all men are sinners; that the Redeemer from sin 
was to be of the seed of Abraham, and of the house of David; 
that He was to be born of a virgin, to be a man of sorrows; that 
He was crucified and buried; that He rose again the third day ; 
that He ascended to heaven ; that He is to come again without sin 
to salvation, although truths on which our salvation depends, are 
not intuitive truths; they are not truths which any exaltation of the 
religious consciousness w ould enable any man to discover of hirr self. 

4. According to this theory the Bible has no normal authority 
as a rule of faith. It contains no doctrines revealed by God, and 
to be received as true on his testimony. It contains only the 
thoughts of holy men ; the forms in which their podersianeS 
SP thioct supernatural aid, clothed the ‘intuitions’ due to their 
religious feelings. ‘The Bible,” says Morell! ‘¢ cannot in strict 


1 Philosophy of Religion, ch. 8, p. 143, London ed. 1849. 
VOL. I. 12 


178 INDRODUCTION.  [Cu. Vi —P R. or Faire. 


accuracy of language be termed a revelation, since a revelation 
always implies an actual process of intelligence in a living mind ; 
but it contains the records in which those minds who enjoyed the 
preliminary training or the first brighter revelation of Christianity, 
have described the scenes which awakened their own religious 
nature to new life, and the high ideas and aspirations to which that 
new life gave origin.” The Old Testament is the product of * the 
religious consciousness” of men who lived under a rude state of 
culture ; and is of no authority for us. The New Testament is 
the product of ‘the religious consciousness” of men who had ex- 
perienced the sanctifying influence of Christ’s presence among 
them. But those men were Jews, they had Jewish modes of think- 
ing. They were familiar with the services of the old dispensation ; 
were accustomed to think of God as approachable only through a 
priesthood; as demanding expiation for sin, and regeneration of 
heart ; and promising certain rewards and forms of blessedness in 
a future state of existence. It was natural for them, therefore, to 
clothe their ‘intuitions’ in these Jewish modes of thought. We, 
in this nineteenth century, may clothe ours in very different forms, 
t.¢.,in very different doctrines, and yet ‘“ the eternal verities’’ be 
the same. 

Different men carry this theory to very difterent lengths. Some 
have such an inward experience that they can find no form for ex- 
pressing what they feel, so suitable as that given in the Bible, and 
therefore they believe all its great doctrines. But. the ground of 
their faith is purely subjective. It is not the testimony of God 
given in his Word, but their own experience. They take what 
suits that, and reject the rest. Others with less Christian expe- 
rience, or with no experience distinctively Christian, reject all the 
distinctive doctrines of Christianity, and adopt a form of religious 
philosophy which they are willing to call Christianity. 

5. That this theory is antiscriptural has already been said. The 
Bible makes revelation as therein contained to be the communica- 
tion of doctrines to the understanding by the Spirit of God. It 
makes those truths or doctrines the immediate source of all right 
feeling. The feelings come from spiritual apprehension of the 
truth, and not the knowledge of truth from the feelings. Knowl- 
edge is necessary to all conscious holy exercises. Hence the Bible 
makes truth of the greatest importance. It pronounces those 
blessed who receive the doctrines which it teaches, and those 
accursed who reject them. It makes the salvation of men to de- 
pend upon their faith. This theory makes the creed of a man or 
of a people of comparatively little consequence. 


§ 3, B.] THEORIES OF INSPIRATION. 179 


In the Church, therefore, Christianity has always been regarded 
as a system of doctrine. Those who believe these doctrines are 
Christians ; those who reject them, are, in the judgment of the 
Church, infidels or heretics. If our faith be formal or speculative, 
so 1s our Christianity ; if it be spiritual and living, so is our religion. 
But no mistake can be greater than to divorce religion from truth, 
and make Christianity a spirit or life distinct from the doctrines . 
which the Scriptures present as the objects of faith. 


B. Gracious Inspiration. 


This theory belongs to the category of natural or supernatural, 
according to the meaning assigned to those terms. By natural 
effects are commonly understood those brought about by natural 
causes under the providential control of God. Then the effects 
produced by the gracious operations of the Spirit, such as repent- 
ance, faith, love, and all other fruits of the Spirit, are supernatural. 
And consequently the theory which refers inspiration to, the gra- 
cious influence of the Spirit, belongs to the class of the supernat- 
ural. But this word is often used in a more limited sense, to des- 
ignate events which are produced by the immediate agency or 
volition of God without the intervention of any second cause. In 
this limited sense, creation, miracles, immediate revelation, regen- 
eration (in the limited sense of that word), are supernatural. As 
the sanctification of men is carried on by the Spirit by the use of 
the means of grace, it is not a supernatural work, in the restricted 
sense of the term. 

There are many theologians who do not adopt either of the 
philosophical theories of the nature of man and of his relation to 
God, aboye mentioned; and who receive the Scriptural doctrine 
as held by the Church universal, that the Holy Spirit renews, 
sanctifies, illuminates, guides, and teaches all the people of God; 
and yet who regard inspiration to be one of the ordinary fruits of 


the Spirit. Inspired and uninspired men are not distinguished by 


any specific difference. The sacred writers were merely holy men 
under the guidance of: the ordinary influence of the Spirit. Some 
of those who adopt this theory extend it to revelation as well as to 
inspiration. Others admit a strictly supernatural revelation, but 
deny that the sacred writers in communicating the truths revealed 
were under any influence not common to ordinary believers. And 
as to those parts of the Bible (as the Hagiographa and Gospels), 
which contain no special revelations, they are to be regarded as the 
devotional writings or historical narratives of devout but fallible 


180 INTRODUCTION. (Cu. VI.—P. R. or Farta. 


men, Thus Coleridge, who refers inspiration to that ‘grace and 
comn.union with the Spirit which the Church, under all circum- 
stances, and every regenerate member of the Church, is permitted 
to hope and instructed to pray for ;” makes an exception in favour 
of “the law and the prophets, no jot or tittle of which can pass 
unfulfilled.””1 The remainder of the Bible, he holds, was written 
under the impulse and guidance of the gracious influence of the 
Spirit given to all Christian men. And his friends and followers, 
Dr. Arnold, Archdeacon Hare, and specially Maurice, ignore this 
distinction and refer the whole Bible ‘‘to an inspiration the same 
as what every believer enjoys.” * Thus Maurice says,® “ We 
must forego the demand which we make on the conscience of young 
men, when we compel them to declare that they regard the inspi- 
ration of the Bible as generically unlike that which God bestows 
on His children in this day.” 


Objections to the Doctrine that Inspiration is common to all 
Believers. 


That this theory is anti-scriptural is obvious. 1. Because the 
Bible makes a marked distinction between those whom God chose 
to be his messengers, his prophets, his spokesmen, and other men. 
This theory ignores that distinction, so far as the people of God is 
concerned, 

2. It is inconsistent with the authority claimed by these special 
messengers of God. They spoke in his name. God spoke through 
them. ‘They said, ‘Thus saith the Lord,” in a sense and way in 
which no ordinary believer dare use those words. It is inconsistent’ 
with the authority not only claimed by the sacred writers, but 
attributed to them by our Lord himself. He declared that the 
Scripture could not be broken ; that it was infallible in all its teach- 
ings. The Apostles declare those anathema who did not receive 
their doctrines. This claim to divine authority in teaching was 
confirmed by God himself in.signs, and wonders, and divers mira- 
cles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost. 

3. It is inconsistent with the whole nature of the Bible, which is 
and professes to be a revelation of truths not only undiscoverable 
by human reason, but which no amount of holiness could enable 
the mind of man to perceive. This is true not only of the strictly 
prophetic revelations relating to the future, but also of all things 


1 “ Confessions of an Inquiring Spirit,” Letter 7, Works, N. Y., 1853, vol. v. p. 619. 
2 See Bannerman, /nspiration of the Scriptures, Edinburg, 1865; pp. 145, 232. 
8 Theological Essays, p. 339, Cambridge, 1853. 


q 


§ 3, C.] THEORIES OF INSPIRATION. 181 


concerning the mind and will of God. The doctrines of the Bible 
are called pvorjpia, things concealed, unknown and unknowable, 
except as revealed to the holy Apostles and prophets by the Spirit. 
(Eph. iii. 4.) 

4. It is inconsistent with the faith of the Church universal, which 
has always made the broadest distinction between the writings of 
the inspired men and those of ordinary believers. Even Romanists, 


_with all their reverence for the fathers, never presumed to place 


their writings on a level with the Scriptures. They do not at- 
tribute to them any authority but as witnesses of what the Apostles 
taught. If the Bible has no more authority than is due to the 
writings of pious men, then our faith is vain and we are yet in our 
sins. We have no sure foundation for our hopes of salvation. 


C. Partial Inspiration. 


Under this head are included several different doctrines. 

1. Many hold that only some parts of Scripture are inspired, 7. e., 
that the writers of some books were supernaturally guided by the 
Spirit, and the writers of others were not. This, as mentioned 
above, was the doctrine of Coleridge, who admitted the inspiration 
of the Law and the Prophets, but denied that of the rest of the 
Bible. Others admit the New Testament to be inspired to an ex- 
tent to which the Old was not. Others again hold the discourses 
of Uhrist to be infallible, but no other part of the sacred volume. 

2. Others limit the inspiration of the sacred writers to their 
doctrinal teaching. The great object of their commission was to 
give a faithful record of the revealed will and purpose of God, to 
be a rule of faith and practice to the Church. In this they were 
under an influence which rendered them infallible as religious and 
moral teachers. But beyond these limits they were as liable to 
error as other men. ‘That there should be scientific, historical, 
geographical mistakes ; errors in the citation of passages, or in other 
anessential matters ; or discrepancies as to matters of fact between 
the sacred writers, leaves their inspiration as religious teachers 
antouched. 

3. Another form of the doctrine of partial, as opposed to plen- 
ary inspiration, limits it to the thoughts, as distinguished from the 
words ot Scnpture. Verbal inspiration is denied. It is assumed 
that the sacred writers selected the words they used without any | 
guidance of tne Spirit, to prevent their adopting improper or in- 
adequate terms in which to express their thoughts. 

4. A fourth form of the doctrine of partial inspiration was early 


182 INTRODUCTION.  [Cu. VI.—P.R. or Farrs, 


introduced and has been widely adopted. Maimonides, the greatest 
" of the Jewish doctors since the time of Christ, taught as early as 
the twelfth century that the sacred writers of the Old Testament 
enjoyed different degrees of divine guidance. He placed the in- 
spiration of the Law much above that of the Prophets ; and that 
of the Prophets higher than that of the Hagiographa. This idea 
of different degrees of inspiration was adopted by many theologians, 
and in England for a long time it was the common mode of repre- 
sentation. The idea was that the writers of Kings and Chronicles 
needed less, and that they received less of the divine assistance 
than Isaiah or St. Jobn.} 

In attempting to prove the doctrine of plenary inspiration the 
arguments which bear against all these forms of partial inspiration 
were given or suggested. The question is not an open one. It is 
not what theory is in itself most reasonable or plausible, but simply, 
What does the Bible teach on the subject? If our Lord and his 
Apostles declare the Old Testament to be the Word of God; that 
its authors spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost; that 
what they said, the Spirit said; if they refer to the facts and to the 
very words of Scripture as of divine authority ; and if the same 
infallible divine guidance was promised to the writers of the New 
Testament, and claimed by themselves; and if their claim was 
authenticated by God himself; then there is no room for, as there — 
is no need of, these theories of partial inspiration. The whole Bible 
was written under such an influence as preserved its human authors 
from all error, and makes it for the @hurch the infallible rule of 
faith and practice. 


§ 4. The Completeness of the Scriptures. 


By the completeness of the Scriptures is meant that they con- 
tain all the extant revelations of God designed to be a rule of faith 
and practice to the Church. It is not denied that God reveals him- 
self, even his eternal power and Godhead, by his works, and has 
done so from the beginning of the world. But all the truths thus 
revealed are clearly made known in his written Word. Nor is it 
denied that there may have been, and probably were, books writ- 
ten by inspired men, which are no longer in existence. Much less 
is it denied that Christ and his Apostles delivered many discourses 

totes pee be GNF Ua 
Ductié dur ond uapiretin of ts Cit oes Neo ceed 
his Commentary. Doddridge, Dissertation on the Inspiration of the New Terthments Hill, 


Lectures on Divinity. Dick, Essay on the Inspirati J i 
C We spiration of the Holy Scriptures. Wilson 
Evidences of Christianity. Henderson, Divine Inspiration. A 


§ 5.] THE COMPLETENESS OF THE SCRIPTURES. 183 


which were not recorded, and which, could they now be known 
and authenticated, would be of equal authority with the books now 
regarded as canonical. All that Protestants insist upon is, that the 
Bible contains all the extant revelations of God, which He designed 
to be the rule of faith and practice for his Church ; so that nothing 
can rightfully be imposed on the consciences of men as truth or 
duty which is not taught directly or by necessary implication in the ’ 
Holy Scriptures. This excludes all unwritten traditions, not only ; 
but also all decrees of the visible Church ; all resolutions of con- 
ventions, or other public bodies, declaring this or that to be right 
or wrong, true or false. The people of God are bound by nothing 
but the Word of God. On this subject little need be said. The 
completeness of Scripture, as a rule of faith, is a corollary of the 
Protestant doctrine concerning tradition. If that be true, the 
former must also be true. This Romanists do not deny. They 
make the Rule of Faith to consist of the written and unwritten 
word of God, 7. e., of Scripture and tradition. If it be proved 
that tradition is untrustworthy, human, and fallible, then the 
Scriptures by common consent stand alone in their authority. As 
the authority of tradition has already been discussed, further dis- 
cussion of the completeness of the Scriptures becomes unnecessary. 

It is well, however, to bear in mind the importance of this doc- 
trine. It is not by Romanists only that it is denied, practically at 
least, if not theoretically. Nothing is more common among Prot- 
estants, especially in our day, than the attempt to coerce the con- 
science of men by public opinion ; to make the opinions of men on 
questions of morals a rule of duty for the people, and even for the 
Church. If we would stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ 
has made us free, we must adhere to the principle that in matters 
of religion and morals the Scriptures alone have authority to bind 
the conscience. 


§ 5. Perspicuity of the Scriptures. The Right of Private Judg- 


ment. 


The Bible is a plain book. It is intelligible by the people. And 
they have the right, and are bound to read and interpret it for 
themselves; so that their faith may rest on the testimony of the 
Scriptures, and not on that of the Church. Such is the doctrine 
of Protestants on this subject. 

It is not denied that the Scriptures contain many things hard to 
be understood ; that they require diligent study ; that all men need 
the guidance of the Holy Spirit in order to right knowledge and 


184 INTRODUCTION. [Cu. VI. —P. R. or Farts. 


true faith. But it is maintained that in all things necessary to sal- 
vation they are sufficiently plain to be understood even by the un- 
learned. 

It is not denied that the people, learned and unlearned, in order 
to the proper understanding of the Scriptures, should not only com- 
pare Scripture with Scripture, and avail themselves of all the 
means in their power to aid them in their search after the truth, 
but they should also pay the greatest deference to the faith of the 
Church. If the Scriptures be a plain book, and the Spirit performs 
the functions of a teacher to all the children of God, it follows in- 
evitably that they must agree in all essential matters in their inter- 
pretation of the Bible. And from that fact it follows that for an 
individual Christian to dissent from the faith of the universal 
Church (i. e., the body of true believers), is tantamount to dissent- 
ing from the Scriptures themselves. 

What Protestants deny on this subject is, that Christ has ap- 
pointed any officer, or class of officers, in his Church to whose in- 
terpretation of the Scriptures the people are bound to submit as of 
final authority. What they affirm is that He has made it obligatory 
upon every man to search the Scriptures for himself, and determine 
on his own discretion what they require him to believe and to do. 

The arguments in support of the former of these positions have 
already been presented in the discussion concerning the infallibility 
of the Church. The most obvious reasons in support of the right 
of private judgment are, — 

1. That the obligations to faith and obedience are personal. 
Every man is responsible for his religious faith and his moral con- 
duct. He cannot transfer that responsibility to others; nor can 
others assume it in his stead. He must answer for himself; and if 
he must answer for himself, he must judge for himself. It will not 
avail him in the day of judgment to say that his parents or his 
Church taught him wrong. ‘ He should have listened to God, and 
obeyed Him rather than men. . 

2. The Scriptures are everywhere addressed to the people, and 
not to the officers of the Church either exclusively, or specially. 
Lhe prophets were sent to the people, and constantly said, ‘‘ Hear, 
O Israel,” “‘ Hearken, O ye people.” Thus, also, the discourses of 
Christ were addressed to the people, and the people heard him 
gladly. All the Epistles of the New Testament are addressed to 
the congregation, to the “called of Jesus Christ ;” ‘to the beloved 
of God;” to those “ called to be saints;” ‘to the sanctified in 
Christ Jesus ;” “ to all who call on the name of Jesus Christ our 


§ 5.] PERSPICUITY OF THE SCRIPTURES. 185 


Lord ;” “to the saints which are in (Ephesus), and to the faith- 
ful in Jesus Christ ;” or to the saints and faithful brethren which 
are in (Colosse) ;’’ and so in every instance. It is the people whe 
are addressed. To them are directed these profound discussions of 
Christian doctrine, and these comprehensive expositions of Chris- 
tian duty. They are everywhere assumed to be competent to un- 
derstand what is written, and are everywhere required to believe 
and obey what thus came from the inspired messengers of Christ. 
They were not referred to any other authority from which they 
were to learn the true import of these inspired instructions. It is, 
therefore, not only to deprive the people of a divine right, to forbid 
the people to read and interpret the Scriptures for themselves ; but 
it is also to interpose between them and God, and to prevent their 
hearing his voice, that they may listen to the words of men. 


The People commanded to search the Scriptures. 


3. The Scriptures are not only addressed to the people, but the 
people were called upon to study them, and to teach them unto their 
children. It was one of the most frequently recurring injunctions 
to parents under the old dispensation, to teach the Law unto their 
children, that they again might teach it unto theirs. The “holy ora- 
cles” were committed to the people, to be taught by the people ; 


and taught immediately out of the Scriptures, that the truth might 


be retained in its purity. Thus our Lord commanded the people 
to search the Scriptures, saying, ‘‘ They are they which testify of 

(John v. 39.) He assumed that they were able to under- 
stand what the Old Testament said of the Messiah, although its 
teachings had been misunderstood by the scribes and elders, and by 
the whole Sanhedrim. Paul rejoiced that Timothy had from his 
youth known the Holy Scriptures, which were able to make him 
wise unto salvation. He said to the Galatians (i. 8, 9), ‘* Though 


‘we, or an angel from heaven, — if any man preach any other gos- 


pel unto you than that ye have received, let him be accursed.” 
This implies two things, — first, that the Galatian Christians, the 
people, had a right to sit in judgment on the teaching of an Apostle, 
or of an angel from heaven ; and secondly, that they ee an infallible 
rule by which that judgment was to be determined, namely, a pre- 
vious authenticated revelation of God. If, then, the Bible recog- 
nizes the right of the people to judge of the teaching of Apostles 
and angels, they are not to be denied the right of judging of the 
doctrines of bishops and priests. The principle laid down by the 
Apostle is precisely that long before given by Moses (Deut. xiii. 


186 INTRODUCTION. [Ca. VI.— P. R. or Farto. 


1-8), who tells the people that if a prophet should arise, although 
he worked wonders, they were not to believe or obey him, if he 
taught them anything contrary to the Word of God. This again 
assumes that the people had the ability and the right to judge, and 
that they had an infallible rule of judgment. It implies, moreover, 
that their salvation depended upon their judging rightly. For if 
they allowed these false teachers, robed in sacred vestments, and 
surrounded by the insignia of authority, to lead them from the 
truth, they would inevitably perish. 

4. It need hardly be remarked that this right of private judg- 
ment is the great safeguard of civil and religious liberty. If the 
Bible be admitted to be the infallible rule of faith and practice in 
accordance with which men are bound on the peril of their souls, 
to frame their creed and conduct; and if there be a set of men who 
have the exclusive right of interpreting the Scripture, and who are 
authorized to impose their interpretations on the people as of divine 
authority, then they may impose on them what conditions of sal- 
vation they see fit. And the men who have the salvation of the 
people in their hands are their absolute masters. Both reason and 
experience fully sustain the dictum of Chillingworth,! when he 
says, ‘* He that would usurp an absolute lordship and tyranny over 
any people, need not put himself to the trouble and difficulty of 
abrogating and disannulling the laws, made to maintain the common 
liberty ; for he may frustrate their intent, and compass his own 
design as well, if he can get the power and authority to interpret 
them as he, pleases, and add to them what he pleases, and to have 
his interpretations and additions stand for laws ; if he can rule his 
people by his laws, and his laws by his lawyers.’’ This is precisely 
what the Church of Rome has done, and thereby established a 
tyranny for which there is no parallel in the history of the world, 
What renders this tyranny the more intolerable, is, that, so far as 
the mass of the people is concerned, it resolves itself into the 
_authority of the parish priest. He is the arbiter of the faith and 

morals of his people. No man can believe unless the ground of 
faith is present to his mind. If the people are to believe that the 
Scriptures teach certain doctrines, then they must have the evi- 
dence that such doctrines are really taught in the Bible. If that 
evidence be that the Church so interprets the sacred writings, then 
the people must know what is the Church, @. e., which of the bodies 
claiming to be the Church, is entitled to be so regarded. How are 
the people, the uneducated masses, to determine that question? The 

1 Works, p. 105. 


§ 6.] RULES OF INTERPRETATION. 187 


priest tells them. If they receive his testimony on that point, then 
how can they tell how the Church interprets the Scriptures? 
Here again they must take the word of the priest. Thus the au- 
thority of the Church as an interpreter, which appears so imposing, 
resolves itself into the testimony of the priest, whe is often wicked, 
and still oftener ignorant. This cannot be the foundation of the 
faith of God’s elect. That foundation is the testimony of God 
himself speaking his word, and authenticated as divine by the 
testimony of the Spirit with and by the truth in the heart of the 
believer. 
§ 6. Rules of Interpretation. 

If every man has the right, and is bound to read the Scriptures, 
and to judge for himself what they teach, he must have’ certain 
rules to guide him in'the exercise of this privilege and duty. These 
rules are not arbitrary. They are not imposed by human authority. 
They have no binding force which does not flow from their own 
intrinsic truth and propriety. They are few and simple. 

1. The words of Scripture are to be taken in-their plain histori- 
eal sense. That is, they must be taken in thé sense attached to 
them in the age and by the people to whom they were addressed. 
This only assumes that the sacred writers were honest, and meant 
to be understood. 

2. If the Scriptures beswhat they claim to be, the word of God, 
they are the work of one mind, and that mind divine. From this 
it follows that Scripture cannot contradict Scripture. God cannot 
teach in one place anything which is inconsistent with what He 
teaches in another. Hence Scripture must explain Scripture. Ifa 
passage admits of different interpretations, that only can be the true 
one which agrees with what the Bible teaches elsewhere on the same 
subject. If the Scriptures teach that the Son is the same in sub- 
stance and equal in power and glory with the Father, then when the 
Son says, ‘ The Father is greater than I,” the superiority must be 
understood in a manner consistent with this equality. It must refer 
either to subordination as to the mode of subsistence and operation, 
or it must:be official. A king’s son may say, ‘“‘ My father is greater 
than I,” although personally his father’s equal. This rule of in- 
terpretation is sometimes called the analogy of Scripture, and 
sometimes the analogy of faith. There is no material difference in 
the meaning of the two expressions. 

8. The Scriptures are to be interpreted under the guidance of 
the Holy Spirit, which guidance is to be humbly and earnestly 
sought. The ground of this rule is twofold: First, the Spirit is 


188 INTRODUCTION.  [Cu. VI. —P. R. or Farrn. 


promised as a guide and teacher. He was to come to lead the 
people of God into the knowledge of the truth. And secondly, the 
Scriptures teach, that “‘the natural man receiveth not the things of 
the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him ; neither can 
he know them, because they are spiritually discerned.” (1 Cor. ii. 
14.) The unrenewed mind is naturally blind to spiritual truth. 
His heart is in opposition to the things of God. Congeniality of 
mind is necessary to the proper apprehension of divine things. As 
only those who have a moral nature can discern moral truth, so 
those only who are spiritually minded can truly receive the things 
of the Spirit. 

The fact that all the true people of God in every age and in 
every part of the Church, in the exercise of their private judgment, 
in accordance with the simple rules above stated, agree as to the 
meaning of Scripture in all things necessary either in faith or prac- 
tice, is a decisive proof of the perspicuity of the Bible, and of the 
safety of allowing the people the enjoyment of the divine right of 
private judgment. 


- 


SYSTEMATIC THEOLOGY. 


PART I. 


THEOLOGY PROPER 


i oA 


wie ee “! 


CHAPTER I. 
ORIGIN OF THE IDEA OF GOD. 


Att men have some knowledge of God. That is, they have the 
conviction that there is a Being on whom they are dependent, and 
to whom they are responsible. What is the source of this convic- 
tion? In other words, what is the origin of the idea of God? To 
this question three answers have been given. First, that it is in- 
nate. Second, that is a deduction of reason ; a conclusion arrived 
at by a process of generalization. Third, that it is to be referred 
to a supernatural revelation, preserved by tradition, 


§ 1. The Knowledge of God is Innate. 
A. What is meant by Innate Knowledge. 


By innate knowledge is meant that which is due to our constitu- 
tion, as sentient, rational, and moral beings. It is opposed to 
knowledge founded on experience; to that obtained by ab extra 
instruction; and to that acquired by a process of research and 
reasoning. 

It cannot be doubted that there is such knowledge, 7. ¢., that the 
soul is so constituted that it sees certain things to be true immedi- 
ately in their own light. They need no proof. Men need not be 
told or taught that the things thus perceived are true. These im- 
mediate perceptions are called intuitions, primary truths, laws of 
belief, innate knowledge, or ideas. Provided we understand what 
is meant, the designation is of minor importance. The doctrine of 
innate knowledge, or intuitive truths, does not imply that the 
child is born with knowledge in conscious exercise in the mind. 
As knowledge is a form or state of the intelligence, and as that is 
a state of consciousness, knowledge, in the sense of the act of 
knowing, must be a matter of consciousness ; and, therefore, it is 
said, cannot be innate. The new-born child has no conscious con- 
viction of the existence of God. But the word knowledge is some- 
times used in a passive sense. A man knows what lies dormant in 
his mind. Most of our knowledge isin that state. All the facts 


192 PART L— THEOLOGY. [Cu. I. — Onia. or Ipza or Gop. 


of history stored in the memory, are out of the domain of conscious- 
ness, until the mind is turned to them. It is not inconceivable, 
therefore, that the soul as it comes into the world may be stored 
with these primary truths which lie dormant in the mind, until 
roused by the due occasion. This, however, is not what is meant by 
innate knowledge. The word innate simply indicates the source 
of the knowledge. That source is our nature; that which is born 
with us. Nor does the doctrine of innate knowledge imply that the 
mind is born with ideas, in the sense of ‘“ patterns, phantasms, or 
notions,’ as Locke calls them; nor that it is furnished by nature 
with a set of abstract principles, or general truths. All that is 
meant is, that the mind is so constituted that it perceives certain 
things to be true without proof and without instruction. 

These intuitive truths belong to the several departments of the 
senses, the understanding, and our moral nature. In the first place, 
all our sense perceptions are intuitions. We apprehend their ob- 
jects immediately, and have an irresistible conviction of their 
reality and truth. We may draw erroneous conclusions from our 
sensations; but our sensations, as far as they go, tell us the truth. 
When a man feels pain, he may refer it to the wrong place, or to 
a wrong cause; but he knows that it is pain. If he sees an object, 
he may be mistaken as to its nature; but he knows that he sees, 
and tlat what he sees is the cause of the sensation which he ex- 
periences. ‘These are intuitions, because they are immediate per- 
ceptions of what is true. The conviction which attends our sensa- 
tions is due not to instruction but to the constitution of our 
nature. ; 

In the second place, there are intuitions of the intellect. That 
is, there are certain truths which the mind perceives to be true 
immediately, without proof or testimony. Such are the axioms of 
geometry. No man needs to have it proved to him that the part 
of a thing is less than the whole; or that a straight line is the 
shortest distance between two given points. It is an intuitive truth 
that “‘ nothing” cannot be a cause; that every effect must have a 
cause. ‘his conviction is not founded on experience, because 
experience is of necessity limited. And the conviction is not merely 
that every effect which we or other men have observed has had 
a cause; but that in the nature of things there can be no effect 
without an adequate cause. This conviction is said to be an innate 
truth, not because the child is born with it so that it is included in. 
its infant consciousness, nor because the abstract principle is laid 
up in the mind, but simply because such is the nature of the mind, 


§1, A.J THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD INNATE. 193 


that it cannot but see these things to be true. As we are born 
with the sense of touch and sight, and take cognizance of their ap- 
propriate objects as soon as they are presented ; so we are born with 
the intellectual faculty of perceiving these primary truths as soon 
as they are presented. 

In the third place, there are moral truths which the mind intu- 
itively recognizes as true. The essential distinction between right 
and wrong; the obligation of virtue ; responsibility for character 
and conduct; that sin deserves punishment; ‘are examples of this 
class of truths. No man needs to be taught them. No one seeks 
for further evidence of their being truths than that which is found 
in their nature. 

There is another remark to be made in reference to the intui- 
tions of the mind. The power of intuitional perception is capable 
of being increased. It is in fact greater in one man than in other 
men. ‘The senses of some persons are far more acute than those 
of others. The senses of hearing and touch are greatly exalted in 
the case of the blind. It is the same with the intellect. What is 
self-evident to one man, has to be proved to another. It is said 
that all the propositions of the First Book of Euclid were as plain 
at first sight to Newton as the axioms. The same is true in our 
moral and religious nature. The more that nature is purified and 
exalted, the clearer is its vision, and the wider the scope of its in- 
tuitions. It is not easy to see, therefore, why Sir William Hamil- 
ton should make simplicity a characteristic of intuitive truths. Ifa 
proposition be capable of resolution into simpler factors, it may still 
to a powerful intellect be seen as self-evidently true. What is seen 
immediately, without the intervention of proof, to be true, is, ac- 
cording to the common mode of expression, said to be seen intu- 
itively. 

It is, however, only of the lower exercises of this power that we 
can avail ourselves in our arguments with our fellow men. Be- 
cause a truth may be self-evident to one mind, it does not follow 
that it must be so to all other minds. But there is a class of truths 
so plain that they never fail to reveal themselves to the human 
mind, and to which the mind cannot refuse its assent. Hence the 
criteria of those truths which are accepted as axioms, and which 
are assumed in all reasoning, and the denial of which renders all 
faith and all knowledge impossible, are universality and necessity. 
What all believe, and what all men must believe, is to be assumed 
as undeniably true. These criteria indeed include each other. If 
a truth be universally admitted, it must be because no man can 

VOL. I. 13 


194 PART L—THEOLOGY. [Ca. I.— Ona. or Ipra or Gop. 


rationally call it to question. And if it be a matter of necessary 
belief, it must be accepted by all who possess the nature out of the 
constitution of which the necessity arises. 


B. Proof that the Knowledge of God is Innate. 


The question now is, Whether the existence of God is an intui- 
tive truth? Is it given in the very constitution of our nature? Is 
it one of those truths which reveal themselves to every human 
mind, and to which the mind is forced to assent? In other words, 
has it the characteristics of universality and necessity? It should 
be remarked that when universality is made a criterion of intuitive 
truths, it is intended to apply to those truths only which have their 
foundation or evidence in the constitution of our nature. As to 
the external world, if ignorance be universal, error may be univer- 
sal. All men, for example, for ages believed that the sun moves 
round the earth; but the universality of that belief was no evi- 
dence of its truth. 

When it is asked, Whether the existence of God is an intuitive 
truth, the question is equivalent to asking, Whether the belief in 
his existence is universal and necessary? If it be true that all 
men do believe there is a God, and that no man can possibly dis- 
believe his existence, then his existence is an intuitive truth. It 
is one of those given in the constitution of our nature; or which, 
our nature being what it is, no man can fail to know and to ac- 
knowledge. 

Such i been the common opinion in all ages. Cicero! says: 
‘* Esse Deos, quoniam insitas eorum, vel potius innatas cognitiones 
habemus.” Tertullian? says of the heathen of his day, that the 
common people had a more correct idea of God than the philoso- 
phers. Calvin® says: “* Hoe quidem recte judicantibus semper 
constabit, insculptum mentibus humanis esse divinitatis sensum, 
qui deleri nunquam potest.” The whole tendency in our day is 
to make the existence of God so purely a matter of intuition as to 
lead to the disparagement of all argument in proof of it. This 
extreme, however, does not justify the denial of a truth so impor- 
tant as that God has not left any human being without a knowledge 
of his existence and authority. 

The word God, however, is used in'a very wide sense. In the 
Christian sense of the word, ‘God is a spirit, infinite, eternal, and 
unchangeable, in his being, wisdom, power, holiness, justice, good- 
ness, and truth.”” This cable idea of God no human mind ever 


1 De Natura Deorum, i. 17. 2 Testimonium Anime. 8 Institutio, 1. iii. 3. 


¢ 


§1, B.] THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD INNATE. 194 


attained either intuitively or discursively, except under the light of 
a supernatural revelation. On the other hand, some philosophers 
dignify motion, force, or the vague idea of the infinite, with the 
name of God. In neither of these senses of the word is the 
knowledge of God said to be innate, or a matter of intuition. It 
is in the general sense of a Being on whom we are dependent, and 
to whom we are responsible, that the idea is asserted to exist uni- 
versally, and of necessity, in every human mind. It is true that 
if this idea is analyzed, it will be found to embrace the conviction 
that God is a person, and that He possesses moral attributes, and 
acts as a moral governor, Nothing is asserted as to how far this 
analysis is ede. by uneducated snail uncivilized men. All that is 
maintained is that this sense of dependence and accountability to a 
being higher than themselves exists in the minds of all men. 


The Knowledge of God is Universal. 


In proof of this doctrine, reference may be made — 

1. To the testimony of Scripture. The Bible asserts that the 
knowledge of God is thus universal. This it does both directly 
and by necessary implication. The Apostle directly asserts in re- 
gard to the heathen as such without limitation, that they have the 
knowledge of God, and such knowledge as to render their impiety 
and immorality inexcusable. ‘* Because that when they knew 
God,” he says, “they glorified him not as God, neither were 
thankful.” (Rom. i. 19-21.) He says of the most depraved of 
men, that they know the righteous judgment of God, that those 
who commit sin are worthy of death. (Rom. i. 82.) The Scrip- 
ture everywhere addresses men as’sinners; it calls upon them to 
repent; it threatens them with punishment in case of disobedi- 
ence; or promises pardon to those who turn from their sins. All 
this is done without any preliminary demonstration of the being of 
God. It assumes that men know that there is a God, and that 
they are subject to his moral government. It is true that the 
Bible at times speaks of the heathen as not knowing God, and 
says that they are without God. But this, as explained by the 
context in which such declarations appear, and by the general 
teaching of the Scriptures, only means that the heathen are with- 
out correct, or saving knowledge of God; that they are without 
his favour, do not belong to the number of his people, and of course 
are not partakers of Bic blessedness of those whose God is the 
Lord. In teaching the universal sinfulness and condemnation of 
men; their in sieereableneds for idolatry and immorality ; and 


196 PART I.— THEOLOGY. ([Cu.I.— Orta. or Ipra or Gop 


in asserting that even the most degraded are conscious of guilt 
and just exposure to the divine judgment, the Bible takes for 
granted that the knowledge of God is universal, that it is written 
on the heart of every man. 

This is still more apparent from what the Bible teaches of the 
law as written on the heart. The Apostle tells us that those who 
have a written revelation, shall be judged by that revelation; that 
those who have no externally revealed law, shall be judged by the 
law written on the heart. That the heathen have such a law, he 
proves first, from the fact that ‘‘they do by nature the things con- 
tained in the law,” 7. ¢., they do under the control of their nature 
the things which the law prescribes ; and secondly, from the opera- 
tions of conscience. When it condemns, it pronounces something 
done, to be contrary to the moral law; and when it approves, it 
pronounces something to be conformed to that law. (Rom. ii. 12- 
16.) The recognition of God, therefore, that is, of a being to 
whom we are epeibey is involved in the very idea of accounta- 
bility. Hence every man carries in the very constitution of his 
being as a moral agent, the evidence of the existence of God. And 
as this sense of sin and responsibility is absolutely universal, so 
must also, according to the Bible, be the knowledge of God. 

2. The second argument in favor of the universality of this 
knowledge, is the historical one. History shows that the religious 
element of our nature is just as universal as the rational or social 
one. Wherever men exist, in all ages and in all parts of the 
world, they have some form of religion. The idea of God is im- 
pressed on every human language. And as language is the prod- 
uct and revelation of human consciousness, if all languages have 
some name for God, it proves that the idea.of God, in some form, 
belongs to every human being, 


Objections to the Assumption that the Knowledge of God is Univer- 
sal. 


There are two objections often urged against the doctrine that the 
knowledge of God results from the very constitution of our nature, 
and is iistathrs universal. The one is, that travellers and mission- 
aries report the existence of some tribes so degraded that they 
could discover in them no traces of this eubwieder Even if the 
fact be admitted that such tribes have no idea of Gon it would not 
be conclusive. Should a tribe of idiots be discovered, it would not 
prove that reason is not an attribute of our nature. If any com 
munity should come to light in which infanticide was universal, it 


a 


§ 1, B.J THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD INNATE. 197 


would not prove that parental love was not one of the instincts of 
humanity. But the probability is that the fact is not as reported. 
It is very difficult for foreigners to get acquainted with the interior 
life of those who differ from themselves so much in their intellec- 
tual and moral condition. And besides, Christians attach such an 
exalted meaning to the word God, that when they see no evidence 
of the presence of that exalted conception in the minds of the 
heathen, they are apt to conclude that .all knowledge of God is 
wanting. Unless such people show that they have no sense of 
right and wrong, no consciousness of responsibility for character 
and conduct, there is no evidence that they have no knowledge of 
such a being as God. 

The other objection is drawn from the case of the deaf and 
dumb, who sometimes say that previous to instruction, the idea of 
God never entered their minds. To this the same answer may be 
given. The knowledge obtained by Christian instruction so much 
surpasses that given by intuition, that the latter seems as nothing. 
It is hardly conceivable that a human soul should exist in any state 
of development, without a sense of responsibility, and this involves 
the idea of God. For the responsibility is felt to be not to self, nor 
to men, but to an invisible Being, higher than self, and higher than 
man. 

The Belief in God Necessary. 

But if it be admitted that the knowledge of God is universal 
among men, is it also a necessary belief? Is it impossible for the 
mind to dispossess itself of the conviction that there is a God? 
Necessity, as remarked above, may be considered as involved in 
universality, at least in such a case as this. There is no satisfactory 
way of accounting for the universal belief in the existence of God, 
except that such belief is founded on the very constitution of our 
nature. Nevertheless, these two criteria of intuitive truths are 
generally distinguished, and are in some aspects distinct. 

The question then is, Is it possible for a sane man to disbelieve 
in the existence of God? This question is commonly answered 
in the negative. It is objected, however, that facts prove the con- 
trary. No man has ever been found, who denies that two and two 
make four, whereas atheists abound in every age and in every part 
of the world. 

There, are, however, different kinds of necessary truths. 

1. Those the opposite of which is absolutely unthinkable. That 
every effect must have a cause, that a part of a given thing Is less 
than the whole, are propositions the opposites of which cannot have 


198 PART L—THEOLOGY. [Cu. I.— Orie. or Inga or Gop. 


any meaning. When a man says that something is nothing, he 
expresses no thought. He denies what he affirms, and therefore 
says nothing. 

2. There are truths concerning external or material things, 
which have a power to constrain belief different from that power 
which pertains to truths concerning the mind. A man cannot deny 
that he has a body ; and he cannot rationally deny that he has a 
will. The impossibility in both cases may be equal, but they are 
of different kinds, and affect the mind differently. 

8. Again, there are truths which cannot be denied without doing 
violence to the laws of our nature. In such cases the denial is 
forced, and can only be temporary. The laws of our nature are 
sure sooner or later to assert themselves, and constrain an opposite 
belief. A pendulum when at rest hangs perpendicularly to the 
horizon. It may by extraneous force be made to hang at any 
degree of inclination. But as soon as such force is removed, it is 
sure to swing back to its normal position. Under the control of a 
metaphysical theory, a man may deny the existence of the external 
world, or the obligation of the moral law; and his disbelief may be 
sincere, and for a time persistent; but the moment the speculative 
reasons for his disbelief are absent from his mind, it of necessity 
reverts to its original and natural convictions. It is also possible 
that a man’s hand may be so hardened or cauterized as to lose the 
sense of touch. But that would not prove that the hand in man is 
not normally the great organ of touch. So it is possible that the 
moral nature of a man may be se disorganized by vice or by a false 
philosophy as to have its testimony for the existence of God effec- 
tually silenced. This, however, would prove nothing as to what 
that testimony really is. Besides this, insensibility and the conse- 
quent unbelief cannot last. Whatever rouses the moral nature, 
whether it be danger, or suffering, or the approach of death, ban- 
ishes unbelief in a moment. Men pass from skepticism to faith, in 
many cases, instantaneously ; not of course by a process of argu- 
ment, but by the existence of a state of consciousness with which 
skepticism is irreconcilable, and in the presence of which it cannot 
exist. This fact is illustrated continually, not only in the case of 
the uneducated and superstitious, but even in the case of men of 
the highest culture. The simple fact of Scripture and experience 
is, that the moral law as written upon the heart is indelible; and 
the moral law in its nature implies a lawgiver, one from whom 
that law emanates, and by whom it will be enforced. And, there- 
fore, so long as men are moral creatures, they will and must believe 


3 2.] KNOWLEDGE OF GOD AS A DEDUCTION OF REASON. 199 


in the existence of a Being on whom they are dependent, and to 
whom they are responsible for their character and their conduct. 
To this extent, and in this sense, therefore, it is to be admitted that 
the knowledge of God is innate and intuitive ; that men no more 
need to be taught that there is a God, than they need to be taught 
there is such a thing as sin. But as men are ignorant of the na- 
ture and extent of sin, while aware of its existence, until instructed 
by the Word of God, and enlightened by his Spirit ; so they greatly 
need the same sources of instruction to give them any adequate 
knowledge of the nature of God, and of their relations to Him. 


§ 2. The Knowledge of God is not due to a Process of Reasoning. 


Those who are unwilling to admit that the idea of God is innate 
as given in the very constitution of man, generally hold that it is a 
necessary, or, at least, a natural deduction of reason. Sometimes 
it is represented as the last and highest generalization of science. 
As the law of gravitation is assumed to account for a lange class of 
the phenomena of the universe, and as it not only does account 
for them, but must be assumed in order to understand them ; so the 
existence of an, intelligent first cause is assumed to account for the 
existence of the universe itself, and for all its phenomena. But as 
such generalizations are possible only for cultivated minds, this the- 
ory of the origin of the idea of God, cannot account for belief in 
his existence in the minds of all men, even the least educated. 

Others, therefore, while regarding this knowledge to be the re- 
sult of a course of reasoning, make the process far more simple. 
There are many things which children and illiterate persons learn, 
and can hardly avoid learning, which need not be referred to the 
constitution of their nature. Thus the existence of God is so ob- 
viously manifested, by everything within and around us, the belief 
in that existence is so natural, so suited to what we see and what 
we need, that it comes to be generally adopted. We are sur- 
rounded by facts which indicate design ; by effects which demand a 
cause. We have a sense of the infinite which is vague and void, 
until filled with God. We have a knowledge of ourselves as spir- 
itual beings, which suggests the idea of God, who is a spirit. We 
have the consciousness of moral qualities, of the distinction between 
good and evil, and this makes us think of God as a being of moral 
perfections. All this may be very true, but it is not an adequate 
account of the facts of the case. It does not give a satisfactory 
reason for the universality and strength of the conviction of the 
existence of God. Our own consciousness teaches us that this is 


200 PART I.— THEOLOGY.  [Cu. I.— Orta. or Ipza or Gop 


not the ground of our own faith. We do not thus reason our- 
selves into the belief that there is a God; and it is very obvious 
that it is not by such a process of ratiocination, simple as it is, that 
the mass of the people are brought to this conclusion. 

Moreover, the process above described does not account for the 
origin of our belief in God, but only gives the method by which 
that belief is confirmed and developed. Very little is given by in- 
tuition in any case, at least to ordinary minds. What is thus dise 
covered needs to be expanded, and its real contents unfolded. If 
this be true with the intuitions of sense and of the understanding, 
why should it not be so of our religious nature ? 

The truth is, that all the faculties and feelings of our minds and 
bodies have their appropriate objects; and the possession of the 
faculties supposes the existence of those objects. The senses sup- 
pose the existence and reality of the objects of sense. The eye, in 
its very structure, supposes that there is such an element as light ; 
the sense of hearing would be unaccountable and inconceivable 
without sound; and the sense of touch would be inconceivable 
were there no tangible objects. The same is true of our social 
affections ; they necessitate the assumption that there are relations 
suited to their exercises. Our moral nature supposes that the dis- 
tinction between right and wrong is not chimerical or imaginary. 
Tn like manner, our religious feelings, our sense of dependence, our 
consciousness of responsibility, our aspirations after fellowship with 
some Being higher than ourselves, and higher than anything which 
the world or nature contains, necessitates the belief in the existence 
of God. It is indeed said that if this belief is intuitive and neces- 
sary, there is no virtue in it. This objection overlooks the fact 
that the moral character of our feelings depends on their nature 
and not on their origin. They may spring from the constitution 
of our nature, and yet be good or evil as the case may be. A 
mother’s love for her child is instinctive ; the absence of the ma- 
ternal affection in a mother is something unnatural and monstrous, 
the object of universal condemnation. The sense of pity, of jus- 
tice, the feelings of benevolence, are instinctive, but none the less 
virtuous. The same is true of our religious feelings, and of the 
belief which they involve. We cannot help feeling that we are re- 
sponsible, and it is right that we should feel so. The man who has 
brought himself to a state of insensibility to all moral obligation, is 
what the Scriptures call a “reprobate.” Adam believed in God 
the moment he was, created, for the same reason that he believed 
in the external world. His religious nature, unclouded and unde- 


§3.] KNOWLEDGE OF GOD DUE TO TRADITION. 201 


filed, apprehended the one with the same confidence that his senses 
apprehended the other. It is of great importance ‘that men should 
know and feel that they are by their very nature bound to believe 
in God; that they cannot emancipate themselves from that belief, 
without derationalizing and demoralizing their whole being. 


§ 8. Knowledge of God not due exclusively to Tradition. 


There are some theologians who are unable to believe that the 
knowledge of God can be referred either to the constitution of. our 
nature, or to any process of reasoning. Not only the exalted 
view of the Divine Being presented in the Bible, but the sim- 
ple and perverted apprehensions of his nature prevailing among 
the heathen, they say must be referred to an original supernatu- 
ral revelation. Such a revelation was made to our first parents, 
and from them passed over to their descendants. When the 
knowledge thus communicated began to die out among men, God 
again revealed himself to Abraham, and made him and his pos- 
terity the depositaries of the truth. Either, therefore, from the 
remains of the primitive revelation, or by radiation from the chosen 
people, all the knowledge of God existing in the world has been 
derived. The attempt is made to show that the more remote any 
people were from the Jews, the less did they know of God; and 
the more any nation enjoyed of intercourse with the people to whom 
God had committed his oracles, the more correct and extended was 
their knowledge. 

This view, although arising from reverence for the Word of God, 
is evidently extreme. It is true that the further we go back in the 
history of the world, the nearer we approach the primal revelation, 
the purer is the knowledge concerning Him. It may also be true, 
as a general rule, that the more any people were brought under the 
influence of the truth as held by the chosen people of God, the 
more enlightened they became. It may further be conceded that 
those who with the Bible in their hands reject its teachings, and 
give themselves up to their own speculations, turn, as the Apostle 
expresses it, ‘* the truth of God into a lie,” losing all knowledge of 
the living and true God. All this, however, does not prove that 
the knowledge of God is not written on the heart. Our intuitive 
perceptions need to be cherished, developed, and interpreted. We 
know from Scripture that the law is written in characters which 
cannot be obliterated, upon the souls of all men, and yet it has 
been perverted, misinterpreted, or disregarded by men in every age 
and in every part of the world. 


202 PART I.—THEOLOGY. [Ca.I.— Orta. or Ipra or Gop. 


§ 4. Can the Existence of God be proved? 

A large class of theologians and philosophers deny that the ex- 
istence of God is susceptible of proof. This is done on different 
grounds. 

First. It is said that the knowledge of God being intuitive, it is 
not a proper subject of proof. This is the position taken by that 
class of theologians who resolve all religion into feeling, and by the 
modern school of speculative philosophers, who make such a wide 
distinction between the reason and the understanding; the former 
being the intuitional, and the latter the discursive faculty. Eternal 
and necessary truths belong to the province of the reason; subor- 
dinate truths to the sphere of the understanding. It is the under- 
standing that argues and concludes. The reason apprehends by 
immediate vision. What relates to God, as the eternal, infinite, 
necessary Being, belongs to the province of reason, and not to that 
of the understanding. Even such theistic writers as Twesten } 
say that the good need no proof that God is, and that the wicked 
are not susceptible of conviction. You cannot prove that a thing 
is beautiful, or that it is good. So neither can you prove that there 
isa God. The fallacy of this statement is obvious. Beauty and 
goodness are qualities which must be discerned by the mind, just as 
the objects of sight are discerned by the eye. As it is true that 
you cannot prove to a blind man that an object is red, so you can- 
not prove to a peasant that the ‘* Paradise Lost” is sublime. But 
the existence of God is an objective fact. It may be shown that 
it is a fact which cannot be rationally denied. Although all men 
have feelings and convictions which necessitate the assumption that 
there is a God; it is, nevertheless, perfectly legitimate to show that 
there are other facts which necessarily lead to the same conclusion. 

Besides, it is to be remembered that theistical arguments are 
designed to prove not only that there is a necessity for the assump- 
sion of an extra-mundane and eternal Being, but mainly, to show 
what that Being is; that He is a personal Being, self-conscious, 
intelligent, moral. All this may lie inclosed in the primary intui- 
tion, but it needs to be brought out and established. 

Secondly. Another class of objections against all theistical argu- 
ments, relates to the arguments themselves. They are pronounced 
fallacious, as involving a petitio principti; or declared to be invalid 
as derived from false premises ; or leading to conclusions other than 
that intended to be established. Of this every man must judge for 


1 Vorlesungen. 


§ 4.) CAN THE EXISTENCE OF GOD BE PROVED. 203 


himself. They have been regarded as sound and conclusive by the 
wisest men, from Socrates to the present day. Of course the ar- 
gument on the principle of causation must be invalid to those who 
deny that there is any such thing as an efficient cause; and the 
argument from design can have no force for those who deny the 
possibility of final causes. 

Most of the objections to the conclusiveness of the arguments in 
question arises from a misapprehension of what they are intended 
to prove. It is often assumed that each argument must prove the 
whole doctrine of Theism ; whereas one argument may prove one 
element of that doctrine ; and other arguments different: elements. 
The cosmological argument may prove the existence of a neces- 
sary and eternal Being; the teleological argument, that that Being 
is intelligent ; the moral argument that He is a person possessing 
moral attributes. The arguments are not designed so much to 
prove the existence of an unknown being, as to demonstrate that 
the Being who reveals himself to man in the very constitution of 
his nature must be all that Theism declares him to be. Such writ- 
ers as Hume, Kant, Coleridge, and the whole school of transcen- 
dental philosophers, have more or less expressly denied the validity 
of the ordinary arguments for the existence of a personal God. 


CHAPTER II. 


THEISM. 


Turtsm is the doctrine of an extra-mundane, personal God, the 
creator, preserver, and governor of the world. The design of all 
arguments on this subject is to show that the facts around us, and 
the facts of consciousness, necessitate the assumption of the exist- 
ence of such a Being. The arguments usually urged on this sub- 
ject are the Ontological, the Cosmological, the Teleological, and 
the Moral. 

§ 1. The Ontological Argument. 

This is a metaphysical @ prior? argument. It is designed to 
show that the real objective existence of God is involved in the 
very idea of such a Being. It is commonly made to include all 
arguments which are not @ posteriori ; that is, which do not pro- 
ceed from effect to cause. It has, therefore, been presented in 
different forms. The principal of which are the following : — 

1. That in which it is presented by Anselm in his ‘+ Monolo- 
gium,” and more fully and definitely in his “ Proslogium.” The 
argument is substantially this. That which exists in re is greater 
than that which exists only in the mind. We have an idea of an 
infinitely perfect Being ; but actual existence is included, in infi- 
nite perfection. Because, if actual existence be a perfection, and 
if God is not actually existent, then we can conceive of a Being 
greater than God. His words! are, “ Et certe id, quo majus cogi- 
tari nequit, non potest esse in intellectu solo. Si enim vel in solo 
intellectu est, potest cogitari esse et in re, quod majus est. . . . . 
Existit ergo procul dubio aliquid, quo majus cogitari non valet, et 
in intellectu et in re.” ‘This argument assumes that existence is 
of the nature of a perfection. It adds, however, nothing to the 
idea. The idea in itself may be complete, although there be no 
objective existence to answer to it. Anselm regarded the negation 
of the existence of God as impossible ; for God is the highest truth, 
the highest being, the highest good, of whom all other truth and 
good are the manifestations. Necessity of existence is included, 
according to this doctrine, in the idea of absolute perfection. In 


1 Proslogium ii. Opera, Paris. 1721, p. 30, b. 


§ 1.) THE ONTOLOGICAL ARGUMENT. 205 
. 


other words, it is included in the idea of God. And as every man 
has the idea of God, he must admit his actual existence ; for what 
is necessary is of course actual. It does not follow from our idea 
of a man, that he actually exists, because man is not necessarily 
existent. But it is absurd to say that a necessarily existing Being, 
does not exist. If this argument has any validity, it is unimpor- 
tant. It is only saying that what must be actually is. If the idea 
of God as it exists in every man’s mind includes that of actual 
existence, then so far as the idea goes, he who has the one has the 
other. But the argument does not show how the ideal implies the 
real.} 
Des Cartes’ Argument. 

2. Des Cartes’ argument was in this form. We have the idea 
of an infinitely perfect Being. As we are finite, that idea could 
not have originated with us. As we are conversant only with the 
finite, it could not have originated from anything around us. It 
must, therefore, have come from God, whose existence is thus a 
necessary assumption. ‘ Habemus ideam Dei, hujusque idez real- 
itas objectiva nec formaliter nec eminenter in nobis continetur, nee 
in ullo alio praeterquam in ipso Deo potest contineri ; ergo hac idea 
Dei, qu in nobis est, requirit Deum pro causa; Deusque proinde 
existit.””2 It is true we have many ideas or conceptions to which 
there is no answering existence. But in such cases the ideas are 
arbitrary, or voluntary creations of our own minds. But the idea 
of God is necessary ; we cannot help having it. And having it, 
there must be a Being who answers to it. Des Cartes illustrates 
his argument by saying, that as it is included in our idea of a tri- 
angle, that its angles are equal to two right angles, it is so in fact. 
The cases, however, are not parallel. It is only saying that a tri- 
angle is what it is, namely, a three-sided figure, whose angles are 
equal to two right angles. But the existence of God as a fact is 
not included in the definition of Him. Kant expresses this in phil- 
osophical language, saying that if the predicate be removed, the 
subject is removed ; because an analytic judgment is a mere anal- 
ysis, or full statement of what is in the subject. The judgment 
that the angles of a triangle are equal to two right angles, is only 
an analysis of the subject. It is a simple statement of what a tri- 
angle is; and therefore, if you take away the equality of the 
angles, you take away the triangle. But in a synthetic judgment, 


1 On this argument see Ritter’s Geschichte der Christlichen Philosophie, vol. iii. pp. 334. 
840. Shedd’s History of Doctrine, i. pp. 229-237. Baur’s Dreieinigheitslehre, ii. 374. 
2 Meditationes de Prima Philosophia, prop. ii. p. 89, edit. Amsterdam, 1685 


‘ 


206 PART I.— THEOLOGY. [Cu. II. — THrrsm. 


* . 
there is a synthesis, a putting together. Something is added in the 
judgment which is not in the subject. In this case that something 
is actual existence. We may infer from the idea of a perfect being, 
that he is wise and good; but not that he actually is; because 
reality is something added to the mere idea. 

The only difference between the argument of Des Cartes and 
that of Anselm, appears to be merely formal. The one infers the 
existence of God, in order to account for the idea; the other 
argues that actual existence is included in the idea. The same illus- 
tration, therefore, is employed by the advocates of both. The 
argument of Anselm is the same as that derived from the defini- 
tion of a triangle. You cannot think of a triangle without think- 
ing of it as having three angles; so you cannot think of God 
without thinking of Him as actually existent; because actual exist- 
ence enters as essentially into the idea of God, as “ triangularity ” 
enters into that of a triangle. There are, doubtless, minds which 
are affected by this kind of reasoning; but it has no power over 
the generality of men. 


Dr. Samuel Clarke’s Argument. 


8. Dr. Samuel Clarke, equally distinguished as a mathematician, 
as a linguist, and as a metaphysician, published in 1705, his cele- 
brated ‘‘ Demonstration of the Being and Attributes of God.” 
So far as the Being of God is concerned his argument is @ priori. 
Nothing, he says, is necessarily existent, the non-existence of which 
is conceivable. We can conceive of the non-existence of the world ; 
therefore the world is not necessarily existing and eternal. We 
cannot, however, conceive of the non-existence of space and dura- 
tion; therefore space and duration are necessary, and infinite, 
Space and duration, however, are not substances ; therefore, there 
must be an eternal and necessary substance (7%. e., God), of which 
they are the accidents. This argument at best gives us only the 
idea of a necessary and infinite something ; which no class of anti- 
theists are disposed to deny. To determine what this eternal sub- 
stance is, what attributes belong to it, reference must be made to 
the phenomenal world, and the argument becomes @ posteriori. It 
has been objected to Dr. Clarke’s argument that it is not properly 
a priort. It infers from the existence of time and space the exist 
ence of a substantial Being. 


$1.) THE COSMOLOGICAL ARGUMENT. 207 


Cousin’s Argument. 

4. Cousin, in his Elements of Psychology,” repeats continually 
the same argument in a somewhat different form. The idea of 
the infinite, he says, is given in that of the finite. We cannot 
have the one without having the other. ‘ These two ideas are 
logical correlatives ; and in the order of their acquisition, that of the 
finite and imperfect precedes the other; but it scarcely precedes it. 
It is not possible for the reason, as soon as consciousness furnishes 
the mind with the idea of the finite and imperfect, not to conceive 
the idea of the infinite and perfect. Now, the infinite and perfect 
is God.” 1 Here again the argument is, that that is real of which 
we have an idea. This is not indeed assumed as a general propo- 
sition. We can imagine, says Cousin, a gorgon, or centaur, and 
we can imagine them not to exist; but it is not in our power, when 
the finite and imperfect are given, not to conceive of the infinite 
and perfect. This is not a chimera, he says, it is the necessary 
product of reason ; and, therefore, it is a legitimate product. The 
idea of the finite and imperfect isa primitive idea, given in the con- 
sciousness; and therefore, the correlative idea of the infinite and 
perfect given by necessity and by the reason, must also be primi- 
tive.2 At other times he presents this subject in a different light. 
He teaches that, as the mind in perception takes cognizance of the 
object as a real existence, distinct from itself, so the reason has an 
apprehension, or immediate cognition of the Infinite, with a neces- 
sary conviction of its reality as distinguished (in one sense) from 
itself. Self, nature, and God are alike and equally involved in the 
intuitive apprehension of the mind; and they are inseparable. 
This is very different from the common doctrine of the knowledge 
of God as innate, or intuitive. The latter doctrine only assumes 
that such is the nature of the human soul that it is intuitively con- 
vinced of its dependence on, and responsibility to a Being other 
than, and higher than itself. The former assumes, with the Ger- 
man philosophers, especially Schelling, the immediate cognition of 
the Infinite by the reason. 

Admitting with Cousin that the ideas of the finite and infinite are 
correlative; that we cannot have the one without having the other; 
and that the mind by a rational necessity is convinced that if there 
be a finite, there must be an infinite; it remains to be asked, 
What that Infinite is? With Cousin, the Infinite is the All. The- 
ism therefore gains nothing from these metaphysical arguments. 


1 Elements of Psychology, p. 875. Translated by Prof. Henry, New York, 1856. 
2 Page 376. 


208 PART I.— THEOLOGY. = [Ca. II. — Tauism. 


§ 2. The Cosmological Argument. 

This is founded on the principle of a sufficient cause. Syllogisti- 
cally stated, the argument stands thus: Every effect must have an 
adequate cause. The world is an effect. Therefore the world 
must have had a cause outside of itself and adequate to account for 
its existence. 

A. Causation. 

The validity and the meaning of this argument, depend on the 
sense given to the words effect and cause. If an effect be correctly 
defined to be an event, or product, not due to anything in itself, 
but produced by something out of itself; and if by cause be under- 
stood, an antecedent to whose efficiency the effect is due; then the 
conclusion is inevitable, that the existence of the world supposes 
the existence of a cause adequate to its production, provided it can 
be proved that the world is an effect, 7. ¢., that it is not self-caused 
or eternal. ; 

It is well known, however, that since Hume propounded his 
theory, all efficient causes have been discarded by a large class of 
philosophers. The senses take cognizance of nothing but the se- 
quence of events. One follows another. That which uniformly 
precedes, we call cause ; that which uniformly follows, we call the 
effect. As sequence is all the senses detect, that is all we have 
any right to assume. The idea that there is anything in the 
antecedent which determines the effect to be as it is and no other- 
wise, is altogether arbitrary. A cause, therefore, is nothing but an 
invariable antecedent, and an effect an invariable consequent. 

Mr. Stuart Mill! modified Hume’s definition of cause as Dr. 
Brown of Edinburgh had done before him. The former says, “ It 
is necessary to our using the word cause, that we should believe 
not only that the antecedent always has been followed by the con- 
sequent, but that, as long as the present constitution of things en- 
dures, it always will be so.” So Dr. Brown? says, “ A cause in 
the fullest definition which it philosophically admits of, may be said 
to be that which immediately precedes any change, and which, 
existing at any time in similar circumstances, has been always, and 
will be always immediately followed by a similar change.” It is 
obvious that this definition is not only arbitrary, but that it is in- 
consistent with the fundamental principles of Hume’s philosophy, 
and that: of his followers, namely, that all our knowledge is founded 
on experience. Experience relates to the past. It cannot guar: 

1 Logic, p. 203. New York, 1855. 2 Inquiry, p. 17. Edinburgh, 1818, 


§ 2, A.J THE COSMOLOGICAL ARGUMENT. 209 


antee the future. If we believe that a given consequent always 
will follow a given antecedent, there must be some other ground 
for that conviction than that it always has done so. Unless there 
be something in the nature of the antecedent to secure the sequence 
of the effect, there is no rational ground for the belief that the 
future must be like the past. 


The Common Doctrine on the Subject. 


The common doctrine on this subject includes the following 
points. (1.) A cause is something. It has.a real existence. It 
is not merely a name for a certain relation. It is a real entity, a 
substance. This is plain because a nonentity cannot act. If that 
which does not exist can be a cause, then nothing can produce 
something, which is a contradiction. (2.) A cause must not only 
be something real, but it must have power or efficiency. There 
must be something in its nature to account for the effects which it 
produces. (8.) This efficiency must be adequate; that is, suf- 
ficient and appropriate to the effect. That this is a true view of 
the nature of a cause is plain. (1.) From our own consciousness. 
_ We are causes. Wecan produce effects. And all three of the 
particulars above mentioned are included in our consciousness of 
ourselves as cause. We are real existences ; we have power; we 
have power adequate to the effects which we produce. (2.) We 
can appeal to the universal consciousness of men. All men attach 
this meaning to the word cause in their ordinary language. All 
men assume that every effect has an antecedent to whose efficiency 
itis due. They never regard mere antecedence, however uniform 
in the past, or however certain in the future, as constituting a causal 
relation. The succession of the seasons has been uniform in the 
past, and we are confident that it will continue uniform in the fu- 
ture ; yet no man says that winter is the cause of summer. Every 
one is conscious that cause expresses an entirely different relation 
from that of mere antecedence. (3.) This view of the nature of 
causation is included in the universal and necessary belief, that every 
effect must have a cause. That belief is not that one thing must 
always go before another thing; but that nothing can occur, that 
no change can be produced, without the exercise of power or effi- 
siency somewhere ; otherwise something could come out of nothing. 

This subject is discussed by all the metaphysicians from Aristotle 
downwards, and especially since the promulgation of the new doc- 
trine adopted by Hume. It is one of the great services rendered 


1 See Reid’s Intelletual Powers; Stewart’s Philosophical Essays; Brown’s Inquiry, and 
VOL. I. 14 


210 PART I.— THEOLOGY. (Cu. I. — THErsm, 


by Dr. McOosh to the cause of truth, that he has defended the 
authority of those primary beliefs which lie at the foundation of all 
knowledge. 


Intuitive Conviction of the Necessity of a Cause. 


But admitting a cause to be not merely an invariable antecedent, 
but that to whose power the effect is due, “‘ Ens quod in se conti- 
net rationem, cur aliud existat,”’ 1 as it is defined by Wolf, it remains 
to be asked, What is the foundation of the universal belief that 
every effect must have a cause? Hume says it is founded on ex- 
perience, and therefore is limited by it. We see that every effect 
within the sphere of our observation is preceded by a cause, and 
we may reasonably expect that the same is true beyond the sphere 
of our observation. But of this we know nothing. It would be 
presumptuous to determine from what takes place on our little 
globe, what must be the law of the universe. The fact that, as far 
as we see, every effect has a cause, gives us no right to assume 
that the universe must have had a cause. Kant says that the law 
of cause and effect is only in our minds. Men view things in that 
relation; but they have no assurance that that relation holds in the 
world outside of themselves. 

The common doctrine of the schools is, that it is an intuitive 
truth, a first, or self-evident principle. That is, that it is some- 
thing which all men do believe, and which all men must believe. 
There are no self-evident, intuitive truths, if the fact that they 
have been denied by one or more speculative philosophers be con- 
sidered proof that they are not matters of universal and necessary 
belief. Personal identity, the real existence of the external world, 
the essential distinction between right and wrong, have all been 
denied. Nevertheless, all men do, and all men must believe these 
truths. The denial of them is forced and temporary. Whenever 
the mind reverts to its normal state, the belief returns. So the 
principle of causation has been denied ; yet every man is forced by 
the constitution of his nature to admit it, and constantly to act 
upon it. A man may believe that the universe is eternal; but that 
it began to be without a cause — that it sprang out of nothing — it 
is impossible to believe. 

We are reduced, therefore, to this alternative. The universe is. 
It therefore either has been from all eternity, or it owes its exist- 
ence to a cause out of itself, adequate to account for its being what 
.itis. The theistical argument is, that the world is an effect; that 


Essay on Cause and Effect Sir William Hamilton’s Works; Dr. McCosh’s Intuitions of the 
Mind. 1 See his Ontologia, 1. iii. 2, § 881. 


§ 2, BJ THE COSMOLOGICAL ARGUMENT. 211 


it has not the cause of existence in itself, that it is not eternal, and 
therefore we are necessitated to assume the existence of a great 
First Cause to whose efficiency the existence of the universe is to be 
referred. 

B. The World is an Effect. 

1. The first argument to prove that the world as a whole is not 
self-existent and eternal, is, that all its parts, everything that enters 
into its composition, is dependent and mutable. A whole cannot 
be essentially different from its constituent parts. An infinite 
number of effects cannot be self-existent. Ifa chain of three 
links cannot support itself, much less can a chain of a million of 
links. Nothing multiplied by infinity is nothing still. If we do 
not find the cause of our existence in ourselves, nor our parents in 
themselves, nor their progenitors in themselves, going back ad in- 
finitum is only adding nothing to nothing. What the mind de- 
mands is a sufficient cause, and no approach to it is made by going 
back indefinitely from one effect to another. We are forced, there- 
fore, by the laws of our rational nature, to assume the existence of 
a self-existent cause, 7. e., a Being endued with power adequate to 
produce this ever-changing phenomenal world. In all ages think- 
ing men have been forced to this conclusion. Plato and Aristotle 
argued from ‘the existence of motion, that there must be an dexivy- 
rov €avrd xwoov, an eternal self-moving power, or primum movens, as 
it was called by the Schoolmen. The validity of this argument is 
acknowledged by almost all classes of philosophers, at least so far 
as to admit that we are forced to assume the existence of an eter- 
nal and necessary Being. The theistical argument is, that if every- 
thing in the world be contingent, this eternal and necessary Being 
must be an extramundane First Cause. 


Historical Argument. 


2. The second argument is the historical one. That is, we have 
historical evidence that the race of man, for example, has existed 
only a few thousand years. That mankind has existed from eter- 
nity is absolutely incredible. Even if we adopt the development 
theory, it affords no relief. It only substitutes millions for thou- 
sands of years. Both are equally insignificant when compared to 
eternity. Darwin’s germ-cell as necessarily demands a self-existing 
cause out of itself, as a fully developed man, or the whole race of 
man, or the universe itself. Weare shut up to the conclusion that 
the universe sprang out of nothing, or that there is a self-existing, 
eternal extramundane Being. 


212 PART I.— THEOLOGY. (Cx. I. — Tuersm. 


Geological Argument. 

8. The geological argument is to the same effect. Geologists as 
a class agree as to the following facts: (1.) That the extant genera 
of plants and animals inhabiting our earth, began to be within a 
comparatively short period in the history of our globe. (2.) That 
neither experience nor science, neither fact nor reason, justify the 
assumption of spontaneous generation. That is, there is no evi- 
dence that any living organism is ever produced by mere physical 
causes. Every such organism.is either immediately created, or is 
derived from some other organism having life, already existing. 
(8.) Genera and species are permanent. One never passes into 
another. A: fish never becomes a bird, nor a bird a quadruped. 
Modern theorists have indeed questioned these facts ;. but they still 
are admitted by the great body of scientific men, and the evidence 
in their favour is overwhelming to the ordinary mind. If these prin- 
ciples be conceded, it follows that all the extant plants and animals 
on the earth began to be. And if they began to be, they were 
created, and therefore there must be a Creator. These considera- 
tions are merely collateral. The main argument is the one first 
mentioned, namely, the absolute impossibility of conceiving either 
of an infinite succession of contingent events, or of the origin of 
the universe out of nothing. 


C. Objections. Hume’s Doctrine. 


There are only two objections to this cosmological argument 
which need be noticed. The one is directed to the principle on 
which it is founded, and the other to the conclusion drawn from it, 
Hume begins his “Treatise on Human Nature,” by laying down 
the principle that the perceptions of the human mind resolve them- 
selves into impressions and ideas. By impressions he means “ all 
our sensations, passions, and emotions, as they make their first ap- 
pearance in the soul.” By ideas is meant ‘“ the faint images of 
these in thinking and reasoning.” ! There can, therefore, be no 
idea which is not derived from some previous impression. This is 
the fundamental principle of his whole system. From this it fol- 
lows that all our knowledge is founded on experience. We have 
certain impressions made by external things, and certain passions 
and emotions ; these are the only sources of our ideas, and there- 
fore of our knowledge. When? he comes to apply this principle 


1 Treatise of Human Nature, Part i. § 1; Works, vol. i. Edinburgh, 1826. 
2 In Part iii. § 14. 


§ 2, C.J THE COSMOLOGICAL ARGUMENT. 213 


to the nature and origin of our idea of causation, he says, all we 
can know on the subject is that one object or event is contiguous and 
antecedent to another. This is all we perceive ; all of which we 
can have an ‘impression.”” We have no impression of power, 
efficacy, energy, force, or whatever equivalent term we may choose 
to use. Therefore, there is no such thing. There is no such thing 
as efficacy or power either in mind or matter. When we use such 
word: we have, he says, “really no distinct meaning.” ! When 
We see events or changes in uniform sequence, we get the habit, or, 
as he says, “‘ we feel the determination,” ? to expect the consequent 
when we see its accustomed antecedent. Necessity, force, power, 
efficacy, therefore, are nothing but “a determination to carry our 
thoughts from one object to another.” ‘ The necessity of power, 
which unites causes and effects, lies in the determination of the 
mind to pass from the one to the other. The efficacy or energy of 
causes is neither placed in the causes themselves, nor in the Deity, 
nor in the concurrence of these two principles ; but belongs entirely 
to the soul, which considers the union of two or more objects in all 
past instances.” * Hume was fully aware of the paradoxical char- 
acter of his view of causation and of its far-reaching consequences, 
although he insisted that his argument in its support was unanswer- 
able. In immediate connection with the preceding quotation, he 
says: “ I am sensible, that of all the paradoxes which I have had, 
or shall hereafter have, occasion to advance in the course of this 
treatise, the present one is the most violent, and that tis merely 
by dint of solid proof and reasoning I can ever hope it will have 
admission, and overcome the inveterate prejudices of mankind.” 5 
What he calls inveterate prejudices, are really laws of belief which 
God has impressed on our nature, and which all the sophistry of 
philosophers can never subvert. 

The conclusions which Hume draws from his doctrine show his 
appreciation of its importance. (1.) It follows, he says, from his 
principle that there is no difference between causes as efficient, 
formal, material, exemplary, or final; nor between cause and occa- 
sion. (2.) “That the common distinction betwixt moral and 
physical necessity is without any foundation in nature.” “ The 
distinction which we often make betwixt power and the exercise of 
it, is equally without foundation.” (8.) “That the necessity of a 
eause to every beginning of existence is not founded on any argu- 
ments either demonstrative or intuitive.’ (4.) “ We can never 


1 Treatise of Human Nature, vol. i. p. 216. 2 Page 219. 8 Page 219. 
4 Page 220. 5 Page 220. 


214 PART I.—THEOLOGY. | [Cu. Il. —Txersm 


have reason to believe that any object exists, of which we cannot 
form an idea.” 1 By this fourth corollary, he has reference to such 
things as substance, from which we receive no impression, and con- 
sequently of which we can have no idea, and therefore cannot 
rationally believe to exist. The same may be said of God. 

In the beginning of the following section,? Hume with a bold- 
ness almost unparalleled says: ‘‘ According to the precedent doc- 
trine, there are no objects which, by the mere survey, without 
consulting experience, we can determine to be the causes of any 
other ; and no objects which we can certainly determine in the 
same manner not to be causes. Anything may produce anything. 
Creation, annihilation, motion, reason, volition, all these may arise 
from one another, or from any other object we can imagine. Nor 
will this appear strange if we compare two principles explained 
above, that the constant conjunction of objects determines their 
causation; and that, properly speaking, no objects are contrary to 
each other but existence and non-existence. Where objects are 
not contrary, nothing hinders them from having that constant con- 
junction on which the relation of cause and effect totally depends.” 

If there be any such argument as the reductio ad absurdum, 
surely this theory of Hume refutes itself. (1.) He admits the 
trustworthiness of consciousness so far as ‘‘impressions”’ are con- 
cerned; then how can he reject the intuitions of sense, reason, and 
conscience? (2.) If we have no knowledge which is not derived 
from impressions, and no right to believe in the existence of any- 
thing of which we have not an idea derived from an impression, 
then we cannot believe in substance, soul, or God. (8.) For the 
same reason we cannot believe that there is any such thing as 
power or efficiency, or any difference between efficient and final 
causes, 7. é., between the expansive force of steam and the inten- 
tion of the mechanist who makes a steam-engine. (4.) In like 
manner, we must believe that something can come out of nothing, 
that there is no reason that what begins to be should have a cies 
even an pnionedonhs and, therefore,, that “ anything can produce 
anything,” e. g., a aa volition, the universe. (5.) He cannot 
even state his theory without contradicting himself. He speaks of 
one thing “‘ producing”’ another. But according to his doctrine 
there is no such thing as production, because he denies that there 
is any such thing as power or efficiency. 

It is universally admitted that we have no foundation for knowl- 
edge or faith, but the veracity of consciousness. This principle 

L Treatise of Human Nature, vol. i. pp. 226-228. 2 § 15. 


§ 3, A.J THE TELEOLOGICAL ARGUMENT 215 


must be kept constantly in view, and must be often reiterated. Any 
doctrine, therefore, which contradicts the facts of consciousness, or 
the laws of belief which God has impressed on our nature, must be 
false. If, therefore, it can be shown that there are certain truths 
which men are constrained by the constitution of their nature to 
believe, those truths are to be retained in despite of all the arts of 
sophistry. If, therefore, it be a fact of consciousness that we our- 
selves are something, an ens, a substance, and that we have power, 
that we can produce effects, then it is certain that there is such a 
thing as power, and efficient cause. If, moreover, it be an intui- 
tive and necessary truth that every effect must have a cause, that 
ex nihilo nihil fit, then it is absolutely certain that if the world 
began to be, it had an adequate cause of its existence out of itself, 
And, therefore, if the arguments to prove that the world is not 
self-existing and eternal be sound, the cosmological argument is 
valid and conclusive. 
The Second Objection. 

The other form of objection is directed not against the premises 
on which the cosmological argument is founded, but against the 
conclusion which Theists draw from them. It is admitted that 
something now exists; that nonentity cannot be the cause of real 
existence; therefore, something must have existed from eternity. 
It is also admitted that a regressus ad infinitum, or an eternal series 
of effects, is impossible. There must, therefore, be an eternal, 
self-existing Being. This is all the cosmological argument fairly 
proves. It does not prove that this necessary Being is extramun- 
dane, much less that it is a personal God. It may be an eternal 
substance of which things mutable are the phenomena.! 

The cosmological argument is not intended to prove all that The- 
ists hold to be true concerning God. It is enough that it proves 
that we must admit the existence of an eternal and necessary 
Being. Other arguments prove that that Being is self-conscious 
and intelligent. The argument, moreover, fairly proves that this 
Being is extramundane; for the principle of causation is that 
everything contingent must have the cause of its existence out of 


itself. 
§ 3. The Teleological Argument. 
A. Its Nature. 


This argument also admits of being stated in a syllogistic form. 
Design supposes a designer. The world everywhere exhibits marks 
1 See Strauss’s Dogmaiik, vol. i. p. 382. 


216 PART L—THEOLOGY. = (Cu. I. — Tuetsm. 


of design. Therefore the world owes its existence to an intelligent 
author. 

By design is intended,—(1.) The selection of an end to be 
attained. (2.) The choice of suitable means for its attainment. 
(8.) The actual application of those means for the accomplishment 
of the proposed end. 

Such being the nature of design, it is a self-evident truth, or, 
even an identical proposition, that design is indicative of intelli- 
gence, will, and power. It is simply saying that intelligence in the 
effect implies intelligence in the cause. 

It is moreover true that the intelligence indicated by design is 
not in the thing designed. It must be in an external agent. The 
mind indicated in a book is not in the book itself, but in the author 
and printer. The intelligence revealed by a calculating machine, 
or any similar work of art, is not in the material employed, but in 
the inventor and artist. Neither is the mind indicated in the 
structure of the bodies of plants and animals, in them, but in Him 
who made them. And in like manner the mind indicated in the 
world at large must be in an extramundane Being. There is, in- 
deed, this obvious difference between the works of God and the 
works of man. In every product of human art dead materials are 
fashioned and united to accomplish a given end; but the organized 
works of nature are animated by a living principle. They are 
fashioned as it were from within outward. In other words, they 
grow ; they are not constructed. In this respect there is a great 
difference between a house and a tree or the human body. But, 
nevertheless, in both cases, the mind is external to the thing pro- 
duced; because the end, the thought, is prior to the product. As 
the thought or idea of a machine must be in the mind of the mech- 
anist, before the machine is made; so the idea or thought of the 
eye must be anterior to its formation. ‘It is a simple and pregnant 
conclusion,” says Trendelenburg, “ that so far as design is realized 
in the world, thought as its ground has preceded it.” And this 
thought, he goes on to say, is not dead, as a figure or model, it is 
connected with will and power. It is, therefore, in the mind of a. 
person who has the ability and purpose to carry it out. He further 
says, ‘‘ tiefsinnige Zweckmiassigkeit bewustlos und blind,” cannot 
be imagined, @. e., a blind and unconscious adaptation of means to 
an end is inconceivable. 

As the conviction that design implies an intelligent agent is in- 
tuitive and necessary, it is not limited to the narrow sphere of our 

1 Log. Untersuchungen, 2d edit. Leipzig, 1862, vol. ii. p. 28. 


§ 3, B.] THE TELEOLOGICAL ARGUMENT. 217 


experience. The argument is not, Every house, ship, telescope, or 
other instrument or machine, we ever saw had an intelligent maker, 
therefore we may take it for granted that any similar work of art 
was not formed by chance or by the operation of blind, unconscious 
forces. The argument rather is, Such is the nature of design, that 
it of necessity implies an intelligent agent ; and, therefore, where- 
ever, or whenever we see evidence of design we are convinced 
that it is to be referred to the operation of mind. On this ground 
we are not only authorized, but compelled to apply the argument 
from design far*beyond the limits of experience, and to say: It is 
just as evident that the world had an intelligent creator, as that a 
book had an author. If a man can believe that a book was written 
by chance, or by blind, unconscious force, then, and not otherwise, 
ean he rationally deny the validity of the argument from design in 
proof of the existence of a personal God. 


B. Lvidences of Design wm the World. 


This is a boundless subject. One of the most important and 
valuable of the ‘ Bridgewater Treatises,” the volume by Dr. 
Charles Bell, is devoted to ‘* The Hand, its mechanism and vital 
endowments as evincing design.” Hundreds of volumes would not 
be sufficient to exhibit the evidence of the intelligent adaptation of 
means to an end, which the world everywhere affords. In the few 
pages now at command all that can be attempted, is an. indication 
of the nature of this evidence.? 


Design in Single Organs. 


1. No work of human art can compare with the nicety and com- 
pleteness of the separate organs of organized bodies for the pur- 
pose for which they are designed. In the eye, for example, there 


1 It may be well to give the titles of the valuable series of the Bridgewater Treatises de- 
voted to this subject, besides the work of Dr. Bell mentioned in the text. The volumes are, 
The Adaptation of External Nature to the Moral and Intellectual Constitution of Man, by Dr. 
Thomas Chalmers; On the Adaptation of External Nature to the Physical Constitution of Man, 
by John Kidd; Astronomy and General Physics treated in Reference to Natural Theology, by 
William Whewell; Animal and Vegetable Physiology considered in Reference to Natural The- 
ology, by Peter Mark Roget; Geology and Mineralogy considered in Reference to Natural 
Theology, by William Buckland; The Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of God as manifested in 
the Creation of Animals, by William Kirby; Chemistry, Meteorology, and the Function of Di- 
gestion considered in Reference to Natural Theology, by William Prout. The Ninth Bridge- 
water Treatise, by C. Babbage; Footprints of the Creator, by Hugh Miller; Théoloyie dela 
Nuture, by H. Durkheim (1852, 3 vols. 8vo.); Butler’s Analogy of Religion and Nature ; 
Paley’s Natural Theology; Dr. MeCosh’s Typical Forms and Special Ends in Creation; Dr. 
James Buchanan’s Faith in God and Modern Atheism compared, 2 vols. 8vo; and Dr. 
John Tulloch’s (Principal of St.,Mary’s College, St. Andrew’s) T'heism ; The Witness of 
Reason and Nature to an All-Wise and Beneficent Creator, may also be mentioned. 


218 PART IL—THEOLOGY. [Cu I. — Tuersm 


is the most perfect optical instrument constructed in accordance 
with the hidden laws of light. We find there the only nerve in 
the body susceptible of the impressions of light and color. That 
nerve is spread out on the retina. The light is admitted through 
an orifice in the ball, which opening by the most delicate arrange- 
ment of muscles is enlarged or contracted, according to the degree 
of light which falls on the retina, which enlargement or contraction 
is not dependent on the will, but on the stimulus of the light itself. 
Light, however, merely passing through an orifice would make no 
image of the object from which it was reflected.~ It is, therefore, 
made to pass through lenses perfect in form so to refract the rays 
as to bring them to a proper focus on the retina. If the inner 
chamber of the eye were white, it would so reflect the rays enter- 
ing the pupil at every angle as to render vision impossible. That 
chamber, and that alone, is lined with a black pigment. By a del- 
icate muscular arrangement the eye is enabled to adapt itself to 
the distance of external objects so that the proper focus may be 
preserved. These are a small part of the wonders exhibited by 
this single organ of the body. This organ was fashioned in the 
darkness of the womb, with a self-evident reference to the nature 
and properties of light, of which the creature for whose use it was 
fashioned had neither knowledge or experience. If the eye, there- 
fore, does not indicate the intelligent adaptation of means to an 
end, no such adaptation can be found in any work ot human in- 
genuity. 

The same remarks apply to the ear. In its cavity lies the audi- 
tory nerve. A tortuous passage is formed in the bony structure of 
the skull. The orifice of that passage is covered by a membrane 
to receive the vibration of the air; on the centre of that membrane 
zests the termination of a small bone so connected as to convey 
those vibrations to the only nerve capable of receiving or interpret- 
ing them, or of transmitting them to the brain. It is by this organ, 
constructed according to the recondite principles of acoustics, that 
our intercourse with our fellow-men is principally kept up; through 
which the marvels of speech, all the charms of music and eloquence 
become possible for man. 

We cannot live without a constant supply of oxygen, which inust 
every moment be brought to act upon the blood, to vitalize it, and 
by combining with the carbon it contains fit it for renewed use. The 
infant, therefore, comes into the world with an apparatus prepared 
for that purpose. In its formative state, it did not breathe. Yet it 
had lungs. They were given for a foreseen necessity. Nothing can 


7 


§ 3, B.] THE TELEOLOGICAL ARGUMENT. 219 


exceed the intricacy, complication, or beauty of the organ or sys- 
tem of organs thus prepared, for the absolutely necessary and con- 
tinuous purification of the blood, and for its distribution in an unin- 
terrupted flux and reflux to every part of the body. This process 
goes on without our supervision. It is as regular during sleep as 
during our waking hours. 

Food is as necessary for our support as air. The unborn infant 
needs no food. It is included in the circulation of its mother. In 
the state on which it is soon to enter food will be a necessity. Full 
provision is made beforehand for its reception and use. Teeth are 
embedded in the jaw for its mastication; salivary glands to furnish 
the fluid for its chemical preparation for the stomach; an cesophas 
gus to convey it to the stomach, where it meets with a fluid found 
nowhere else, capable of dissolving and digesting it. It then comes 
into contact with a set of absorbent vessels which select from it the 
elements suited for the wants of the body and reject all the rest. 
The valuable portion is poured into the blood by which it is dis- 
tributed, each constituent going to its own place and answering its 
predestined purpose ; carbon to be consumed to keep up the vital 
heat, lime to the bones, fibrine to the muscles, phosphorus to the 
brain and nerves. 

The child before birth has no need of organs for locomotion or 
for apprehending external objects. But it was foreseen that it 
would need them, and therefore they are prepared beforehand. 
The bones are grooved for the reception of muscles, and have 
projections for points of support ; joints of all kinds, hinge and ball 
and socket, for the flexure of the limbs; the instruments for motion, 
the contractile fibres, arranged and attached, according to the strict 
laws of mechanics, so as best to secure the two ends of symmetry 
and power. Thus the body is a perfect marvel of mechanical con- 
trivances. “The several organs, therefore, of the animal frame, 
viewed separately, present the most incontestible evidence of fore- 
sight, intelligence, and wisdom. This, however, is only a small 
part of the evidence of design furnished even by the body. 


Design in the Relation of one Organ to Another. 


2. Every animal is a complete whole. Each part has a designed 
and predetermined reference to every other part. The organs of 
sight, hearing, breathing, nutrition, locomotion, etc., are so arranged 
and adjusted as to answer.a common purpose to the best advantage. 
Besides, these organs, although common to all animals (at least to 
all above the lowest), are modified in each genus and species to 


220 PART L.—THEOLOGY. (Ca. I. —Tueism 


meet its peculiar necessities. If the animal is to live on the land 
all its organs are adapted to that condition. If it is to live in the 
water or move through the air, all is prepared beforehand for that 
destination. And more than this, if one organ be designed for 
some special use, all the rest are modified in accordance with that 
purpose. If the stomach is suited for the digestion of flesh, then 
the teeth, the limbs, the claws, are all adapted to secure and pre- 
pare the proper aliment. So complete is the adaptation that the 
anatomist can determine from a single bone the genus or species to 
which the animal belonged. Birdy which wade in the water have 
long legs and long necks. ‘Those which ‘float on the surface, have 
web feet, and feathers impenetrable by water; two things which 
have causal relation, and which are united by a kind of intelligence 
external to the animal itself. Birds which fly in the air are fitted 
for their destiny by hollow bones, wide-spread wings, and great 
accumulation of muscles on the breast. Those which climb trees 
have feet and tail adapted for that purpose, and, as in the case of 
the wood-pecker, a sharp bill for boring the tree and a barbed 
tongue to seize its food. These modifications of animal structure 
are endless, all showing an external intelligence cognizant of the 
necessities of every distinct species. 


The Adaptation of the Organs to the Instinct of Animals. 


3. There is a correspondence between the organs of every animal 
and the instincts by which it is endowed. Beasts and birds of prey 
having the instinct to feed on flesh have all the organs requisite to 
satisfy this inward craving. Those having an instinct for vegeta- 
ble food, have teeth and stomachs adapted for that purpose. The 
bee whose body secretes wax, has the instinct to build cells; the 
spider furnished with the peculiar viscid matter, and apparatus for 
spinning it, makes a web and watches for its prey. So it is through- 
out all animated nature. Here then are two very distinct things: 
instinct and corporeal organs; the instinct cazimot account for the 
organs nor the organs for the instinct; and yet they are never 
found the one without the other. They of necessity, therefore, 
imply an intelligence which implants the instinct and furnishes the 
appropriate organs. 


Argument from Prevision. 


4. There cannot be a more decisive proof of intelligence than 
prevision ; preparation for an event in the future. The world is 
full of evidence of such prevision. It is seen not only in the prep- 


§ 3, B.] THE TELEOLOGICAL ARGUMENT. 221 


aration of the organs of sight, hearing, breathing, nutrition, ete. 
for necessities still future; but still more strikingly in the provision 
made for the support of young animals as soon as they are born. 
In the mammalia before the birth of the offspring, the breast or 
udder begins to swell ; it commences the secretion of milk, so that 
the moment the young animal enters the world he finds prepared 
the most nutritious and suitable food the world contains. The egg 
furnishes a still more instructive illustration. It consists of albu- 
men and the yolk. To the yolk is attached a minute germ or cell. 
When by heat the germ begins to develop, if nourishment were 
not provided and at hand, it would of necessity perish. But the 
yolk is there to supply the needed material out of which the future 
animal is fashioned. If this does not indicate a foreseeing mind 
and a providing power, then the most skilful productions of human 
skill and kindness do not prove the intelligence of man. Where 
then is this intelligence ? Not in the parent bird, for it understands 
nothing about it. Not in mere blind forces of nature. There may 
possibly be room for question where to place it; but to deny that 
these provisions indicate an intelligent agency somewhere, is alto- 
gether irrational. 


Vegetable Organisms. 


5. The vegetable kingdom is-as full of the indications of benev- 
olent design as the animal. Plants have their organism and their 
physiology. Their structure, in their organs for growth and repro- 
duction, is quite as marvellous as that of most species of the animal 
kingdom. They constitute an essential part in the great system of 
nature, without which there could be no sentient life on our globe. 
Animals cannot live on inorganic matter. It is the province of the 
plant to reduce this matter into such a state as to be fit for the sup- 
port of animal life. If it were not therefore for the functions of 
the leaf which transmutes the inorganic into the organic, there 
could be no sentient life on our earth. Is there no design here? 
Is there no intelligent adaptation of one part of the great system 
of nature to another ? 


From the Adaptations of Nature. 


6. This leads to another department of the subject. The evi- 
dences of design are not confined to the separate organs of the 
plant or animal; nor to the relations of these organs to each other; 
nor, in the case of animals, to the instinct which impels to the 
proper use of those organs ; they are to be found just as abundantly 


222 PART L—THEOLOGY. — [Cu. I. — Tuersm. 


in the adaptation of external nature to the necessities of animal 
and vegetable life. Neither plants nor animals could exist without 
light, air, heat, water, and soil, to produce the common food of all 
living things. Who created the light and heat and diffuses them 
over the whole earth? Who made the sun from which they radi- 
ate? Who constituted the atmosphere with its chemical adjust- 
ments, precisely what is necessary for the support of life, every- 
where and always the same, and poured it round our globe? How 
is it that water at a certain temperature evaporates, rises in mist, 
is gathered into clouds, is carried everywhere by the winds, and 
falls in rain to fertilize the earth? The eye supposes light, as the 
lungs suppose air; the appetite of hunger supposes food, and the 
power of digestion. Food supposes soil, light, heat, and water. 
Surely this is one great system. There is unity and mutual rela- 
tion in all its parts. It must have had one author, and He must 
be infinite in intelligence and goodness. 


All living Creatures on the Earth have Organie Relations. 


7. The design indicated in nature is, however, not confined to 
the individual organisms and to their relations to the world around 
them, but it has in the progress of sciénce been discovered, that 
the whole vegetable and animal world has been constructed on 
one comprehensive plan. As there is a relation of one organ of a 
given plant or animal to all others and to the whole, so thé whole 
race of plants, and the whole race of animals are related. There 
are certain typical forms of which all the infinite variety of plants 
are modifications; and certain other types of which the innumera- 
ble genera, species, and varieties of animals are only modifications ; 
and these modifications are precisely of the kind to suit each spe- 
cies for its end, and for the circumstances in which it is to live. 
So obviously is this the case that Professor Agassiz’s ‘* Essay on 
Classification,” is, to say the least, as strong an argument for the 
being of God as any of the “ Bridgewater Treatises.” And it is 
so regarded by its illustrious author. On page 10 of his ‘ Con- 
tributions to the Natural History of the United States,” he says, 
“‘T know those who hold it to be very unscientific to believe that 
thinking is not something inherent in matter, and that there is an 
essential difference between inorganic and living and thinking 
beings. I shall not be prevented by any such pretensions of a false 
philosophy from expressing my conviction that as long as it cannot 
be shown that matter or ate forces do actually reason, I shall 
consider any manifestation of thought as evidence of the existence 


§ 3, B.] THE TELEOLOGICAL ARGUMENT. 223 


of a thinking Being as the author of such thought, and shall look 
upon an intelligent and intelligible connection between the facts of 
nature as direct proof of the existence of a thinking God, as cer- 
tainly as man exhibits the power of thinking, when he recognizes 
their natural relation.” 


Evidence that the Earth was designed for Man. 


8. It is not only, however, the living organisms inhabiting our 
earth, which exhibit such evidence of an intelligent creator, but 
also the earth itself. Ifa father, who when he provides a home for 
his children, fits it up with all the necessities and all the luxuries 
which they can possibly need, gives indisputable evidence of intel- 
ligence and love, then are those attributes to be ascribed to Him 
who fitted up this world to be the home of his creatures. This is 
seen, as already intimated, in the constitution of the atmosphere, 
in the distribution of light and heat, of electricity and magnetism, 
in the establishment of those laws which secure the regular suc- - 
cession of the seasons, in the preparation of soil by the disintegra- 
tion of rocks, the falling of rain, the deposition of dew which falls 
gently with life-giving power on the thirsty earth; in innumerable 
other provisions and dispositions of the forces of nature without 
which neither vegetable nor animal life could be sustained. There 
are many special provisions of this kind which fill the mind with 
gratitude and wonder. It is a general law that bodies contract as 
they become colder. Water, however, when it freezes expands 
and becomes lighter. If it were not for this benevolent exception 
to the general law, not only would the inhabitants of all our rivers 
perish, but the greater part of the temperate zone would be unin- 
habitable. It is no answer to this argument to say that there are 
a few other exceptions to this law. We may not know the final 
cause why bismuth should expand on cooling; but this does not 
prevent our knowing why ice is made lighter than water. Our 
not understanding one sentence in a book, does not prove that it 
has no meaning, nor that we cannot understand another sentence. 

The whole configuration of the earth, its position in relation to 
the sun, and the inclination of its axis, are obviously intended to 
render it a suitable residence for the creatures by which it is inhab- 
ited. Their well-being depends on the distribution of land and 
water on its surface; on the elevation of its mountain ranges and 
plateaus, and on the ocean currents which are determined by the 
configuration of its coasts. If North and South America were not 
connected by the narrow Isthmus of Darien, Great Britain and the 


224 PART I.—THEOLOGY.  [Cu. II. — Tuersm. 


northwestern portions of Europe would be uninhabitable. They 
owe the moderate temperature which they enjoy to the immense 
body of warm water, which is prevented by that Isthmus from 
flowing into the Pacific, being floated in a northeasterly direction 
across ithe Atlantic. When we see such benevolent arrangements 
among men, we refer them instinctively and by a rational necessity 
to a benevolent and intelligent agent. No rational ground exists 
for refusing to ascribe like arrangements in nature to a similar 
source, is it any more an atidenes of prudent or benevolent. fore- 
sight that a man should store away abundant fuel for himself or 
others, knowing that winter is approaching, than that God has laid 
up inexhaustible stores of coal in the bowels of the earth, for the 
use of his children on the earth ? 


Cosmical Arrangements. 


9. The argument for design founded on cosmical arrangements 
is so vast a subject that it seems absurd even to refer to it, ina 
single paragraph. The simple facts are, that our globe is one of 
eight primary planets which revolve round the sun. The most 
distant of these planets is some three thousand millions of miles 
from the central luminary. These planets all move in the same 
direction, in nearly circular orbits, in nearly the same plane, and 
with su equable a motion that each performs its revolutions in the 
proper time. The stability of the system depends on these circum- 
stances. ‘To secure these results matter must attract matter ac- 
cording to its quantity and the square of its distance. The central 
body must be of such mass as to hold the planets in their course. 
The centrifugal and centripetal forces must be exactly balanced, 
to prevent the planets from flying off into space, or falling into the 
sun. Each planet must have been projected with a precise definite 
velocity to secure its orbit being nearly a circle, rather than any 
other curve. The central body alone, in accordance with the evi- 
dent plan, is luminous and heat-producing. All the others are 
opaque and cold. These are facts, which Sir Isaac Newton says 
he is ‘‘ forced to ascribe to the counsel and contrivance of a volun- 
tary agent.”’1 Since the time of Newton, indeed, it has been the 
commonly received theory that the planets were at one time fluid, 
highly heated, and luminous; and that they have become opaque 
in the process of cooling. But this only puts the argument one 
step back. The fact is that a most wonderful and beneficent ree 
sult has been accomplished. The question How? is of minor im- 

? Newton’s First Letier to Bentley, quoted by Tulloch, Theism, edit. N. Y. 1855, p. 109. 


be 


§ 3, BJ THE TELEOLOGICAL ARGUMENT. 225 


portance. It is the beneficence of the result which indicates mind, 
and this indication of mind implies a “ voluntary agent.” 

Our solar system itself, therefore, is vast, varied, and well 
ordered. Our system, however, is one of probably hundreds of 
millions. At least astronomers assert their knowledge of a hundred 
million of suns, some of which are incaleulably larger’ than ours.. 
Sirius is calculated to shine with a light equal to two hundred and 
fifty of our suns; Alcyone with that of twelve thousand suns. The 
nearest of these stars is separated from the outer planet of our 
system twenty-one billions of miles. These millions of stars are not 
scattered equally through space, but are gathered into groups, the 
members of which bear an obvious relation to each other. 

Besides these systems in which planets are assumed to revolve 
around suns, there are others in which suns revolve around suns, 
at distances proportioned to their magnitude. The light emanating 
from these great luminaries is of different colors, white, red, blue. 

Then more distant in‘ space float the unresolved nebula. 
W hether these nebulez are vast continents of stars too distant to be 
distinguishable, or cosmical matter in a formative state, is still an 
open question with astronomers. Two thousand have been counted 
in the northern hemisphere, and one thousand in the southern. 
They assume every variety of form ; some are spherical, some fan- 
shaped, some spiral, some in circular rmgs. It is estimated that 
the light of some of the stars has been many thousand years in 
reaching our earth, although travelling at the rate of more than 
ten millions of miles a minute. 

Throughout this vast universe order reigns. In the midst of 
endless variety, there is unity. The same laws of gravitation, of 
light, and of heat everywhere prevail. Confusion and disorder are 
the uniform result of chance or blindly operating forces. Order is 
the sure indication of mind. What mind! what wisdom! what 
power! what beneficence! does this all but infinite universe dis- 
play! 

“The result of our whole experience,” said Sir Gilbert Eliot, 
writing to Hume himself, ‘‘ seems to amount to this : — There are 
but two ways in which we have ever observed the different parcels 
of matter to be thrown together, — either at random, or with design 
and purpose. By the first, we have never seen produced a regular 
complicated effect, corresponding to a certain end; by the second, 
we uniformly have. If, then, the works of nature and the pro- 
ductions of men resemble each other in this one general character- 

VOL. I. : 15 


226 PART L—THEOLOGY . [Cu. Il. — Tuxism. 


istic, will not even experience sufficiently warrant us to ascribe to 
both a similar, though proportionable, cause.” } 

This argument from design is constantly urged in the Old Testa- 
ment, which appeals to the heavens and the earth as revealing the 
being and perfections of God. The Apostle Paul says that the 
living God, who made heaven and earth, and the sea and all that 
is therein, hath not left himself without a witness. (Acts xiv. 15- 
17.) He demonstrated to the Athenians the nature of God from 
his works and from our relation to him as his offspring. (Acts xvi, 
23-81.) To the Romans he said that the eternal power and God- 
head of the Supreme Being, are clearly seen, being understood by 
the things that are made. (Rom. i. 20.) The ancient philosophers 
drew the same conclusion from the same premises. Anaxagoras 
argued that vods, mind, must be admitted as controlling everything 
in the world, because everything indicates design. Socrates con- 
stantly dwells on this as the great proof of the being of God. 
Cicero? says that it is as impossible that an ordered world could be 
formed by the fortuitous concurrence of atoms, as that a book should 
be composed by the throwing about letters at random. Trendelen- 
burg,’ after referring to that passage, says: “It is perhaps more 
difficult to assume, that by the blind combination of chemical and 
physical elements and forces, any one even of the organs of the 
body should be formed, —the eye, for example, so clear, sharp, 
and. all-seeing, — much less the harmonious union of organs which 
make up the body, than that a book should be made by chance, by 
throwing types about.” 

Philo presents the argument in its simplest syllogistic form. 
‘No work of art is self-made. The world is the most perfect work 
of art. Therefore, the world was made by a good and most perfect 
Author. Thus we have the knowledge of the existence of God.” 4 
All the Christian fathers and subsequent theologians have reasoned 
in the same way. Even Kant, although denying its conclusive- 
ness, says that the teleological argument should always be treated 
with respect. It is, he says, the oldest, the clearest, and the best 
adapted to the human mind. 

os Buchanan’s Analogy a Guide to Truth and an Aid to Faith, edit. Edinburgh, 1864, 
p. 414. 


2 De Natura Deorum, ii. 37. 8 Logische Untersuchungen, vol. ii. p. 64 
4 De Monar'chia, i. § 4, edit. Leipsig, 1828, vol. iv. p. 290. 


=F 


§ 4, A.J _ THE TELEOLOGICAL ARGUMENT. 227 


§ 4. Objections to the Argument from Design. 


A. The Denial of Final Causes. 

The doctrine of final causes in nature must stand or fall with the 
doctrine of a personal God. The one cannot be denied without 
denying the other. And the admission of the one involves the 
admission of the other. By final cause is not meant a mere tend- 
ency, or the end to which events either actually or apparently 
tend; but the end contemplated in the use of means adapted to 
attain it. The contemplation of an end, is a mental act. The 
selection and use of means adapted to attain such end, are both 
intelligent and voluntary acts. But an intelligent voluntary agent 
is a person.t In other words, the use of means to accomplish a 
contemplated end is a function of personality, or at least of intelli- 
gent agency. 

Such being the nature of final causes, they are of course denied, 
(1.) By the positivist, who believes nothing but facts of which the 
senses take cognizance ; and who admits of no other causation than 
regularity of sequence. As efficiency, intention, and mind are not 
perceived by the senses, they are not, and cannot be philosophically 
admitted. (2.) By those who, while they admit such a thing as 
force, and, therefore, in that sense, a cause, allow of no distinction 
between physical, vital, and mental causes, or forces; and who 
maintain that the one can be resolved into either of the others. 
The advocates of this theory make thought a product of the brain; 
and have as their watch-word, ‘Ohne Phosphor kein Gedanke.” 
Of course phosphorus must be before thought, and therefore there 
can be no final cause in the production of phosphorus, or of anything 
else. (3.) Final causes are denied by those who regard the uni- 
verse as the development of the infinite Being under the operation 
of necessary law. Of that Being no intelligence, consciousness, or 
will can be predicated. Consequently there can be no preconceived 
design to be accomplished, either by the universe as a whole, or by 
any of its parts. According to Spinoza, therefore, final causes are 
«humana figmenta et deliria.” 

‘If you should ask a peasant, where a tree or the body of an ani- 
mal came from, he would probably answer, “ Why, it grew.” 
That for him is the final fact. And so it is for all the advocates 
of the above-named theories. Thus it is that extremes (the peas- 
ant’s thought and the savant’s theory) meet. What more, what 


1 This is in accordance with the accepted theological definition of a person as a ‘snppo 
situm intelligens.” 


228 PART I.— THEOLOGY. ~  [Cu. I. —Tuerrsm 


deeper thought is found in the words of Stuart Mill than in the 
peasant’s answer, when the logician says: ‘Sequences entirely phys- 
ical and material, as soon as they had become sufficiently familiar 
to the human mirid, came to be thought perfectly natural, and were 
regarded not only as needing no explanation themselves, but as 
being capable of affording it to others, and even of serving as the 
ultimate explanation of things in general.” } 


B. Objections of Hume and Kant. 


Hume’s answer to the argument from design, or final causes, is, 
that our knowledge is limited by experience. We have often seen 
houses, ships, engines, and other machines made, and therefore, 
when we see similar products of human skill we are authorized to 
infer that they too were constructed by an intelligent author. But 
the world belongs to an entirely different category ; we have never 
seen a world made; and therefore we have no rational ground for 
assuming that this world had a maker. ‘ When two species of 
objects,” says Hume,” “ have always been observed to be conjoined 
together, I can infer, by custom, the existence of one whenever I 
see the existence of the other, and this I call an argument from 
experience. But how this argument can have place, where the 
objects, as in the present case, are single, individual, without par- 
allel, or specific resemblance, may be difficult to explain. And will 
any man tell me with a serious countenance, that an orderly uni- 
verse must arise from some thought and art, like the human, be- 
cause we have experience of it? To ascertain this reasoning, it 
were requisite that we had experience of the origin of worlds ; and 
it is not sufficient surely that we have seen ships and cities arise 
from human art and contrivance.” What experience teaches is 
that design implies intelligence ; 7. e., that we never see the adapta- 
tion of means to an end without having evidence that such adap- 
tation is the work of an intelligent agent. And, therefore, even 
under the guidance of experience we infer that wherever we see 
design, whether in nature or in art, there must be an intelligent 
agent. But experience is not the ground or limit of this convic- 
tion. It is an intuitive truth, self-evident from its nature, that 
design cannot be accounted for on the ground of chance or neces- 
sity. Let any man try to persuade himself that a watch is the 
product of chance, and he will see how futile is the attempt. 

Kant presents substantially the same objection as Hume when 


1 Logic, edit. London, 1851, vol. i. p. 366. 
2 “ Dialogues on Natural Religion,” Works, edit. Edinburgh, 1826, vol. ii. p. 449. 


$4, B.] THE TELEOLOGICAL ARGUMENT. 229 


he says that the concatenation of cause and effect is confined to the 
external world, and therefore that it is illogical to apply the princi- 
ple of causation to account for the existence of the external world 
itself. He further objects that the evidences of design in nature 
would prove only a demiurgus, or world-builder, and not an extra- 
mundane God. It is further urged against the sufficiency of the 
teleological argument, that even if it proved the author of the 
world to be distinct from it, it would not prove him to be infinite, 
because the world is finite, and we cannot infer an infinite cause 
from a finite effect. 


Answer to the Objections. 


In answer to these objections it may be remarked that what the 
argument from design is intended to prove, and what it does prove, 
is, (1.) That the Author of the universe is an intelligent and vol-_ 
untary agent. (2.) That He is extramundane and not merely the 
life, or soul of the world, for the design is shown not simply or 
chiefly by the moulding of organized bodies by a principle acting 
from within outward; but by the adaptation of things external to 
such organisms, to their various necessities ; and by the disposition 
and orderly arrangement of immense bodies of matter, separated 
oy millions, or even billions of miles. (8.) The immensity of the 
universe through the whole of which design is manifest, proves that 
its cause must be adequate to the production of such an effect ; and 
if the effect be, as it is to us, incomprehensibly great, the cause 
must be so also. And incomprehensibly great and infinitely great, 
are practically equivalent. But besides, the cosmological argument 
proves that God is not only maker, but creator. And creation im- 
plies the possession of infinite power. Not only because the dif 
ference between existence and non-existence is infinite, but because 
in Scripture creation is always represented as the peculiar work of 
the infinite God. So far as we know all creature power is limited 
to self-action, or to the more or less limited control of what already 
exists. 

What has already been said may be a sufficient answer to the ob- 
jection that while design does indeed prove intelligence, yet that in- 
telligence may be in matter itself, or in nature (a vis insita), as in 
the soul of the world. These points, as they are generally presented, 
concern more properly the relation of God to the world, than his 
existence. They involve the admission of the existence of an in- 
tellizence somewhere, adequate to account for all the phenomena of 
the universe. They involve consequently the denial that these 


230 PART I. —THEOLOGY. — [Cu. I. — Tuxrsm. 


phenomena are to be referred either to chance, or the action of 
mere physical laws. Where that intelligence is placed, is not the 
question. Wherever placed it must be a person ; and not merely 
an unintelligent force acting according to necessary law. For the 
evidence of voluntary action and of benevolence is as clear as that 
of intelligence. And the considerations already urged prove that 
this voluntary, intelligent Being must be extramundane ; a conclu- 
sion which is rendered still more evident from our relation to Him 
as responsible and dependent. 


C. Miscellaneous Objections. 


1. It is objected that both in the vegetable and animal kingdoms 
there are malformations, abnormal productions, which are incon- 
sistent with the idea of the control of an infinite intelligence. 
This is at best merely an argument from our ignorance. Admitting 
that there are in nature some things which we cannot account for, 
this does not invalidate the argument drawn from the innumerable 
cases of benevolent design. If Mr. Babbage’s calculating machine 
should once in many million of times present the wrong number, 
this would not prove that there was no intelligence manifested in 
its construction. It is not necessary even to assume that such 
apparently irregular action is to be referred to the imperfection of 
the machine. For what we know, its maker may have a reason 
for such action, which we-cannot discover. In every extended 
piece of music, discords here and there occur, which pain the ear, 
and which those unskilled in music cannot account for, but which 
the competently instructed perceive are taken up and resolved into 
a higher harmony. If a prince should give us a chest containing 
millions in coin and jewels, we should not question his kind inten- 
tion, even should we find among them a spurious dime for whose 
presence we could not account. It would be insane to reject the 
Bible with all its sublime and saving truths, because there may be 
in it a few passages which we cannot understand, and which in 
themselves seem inconsistent with the perfection of its author. No 
man refuses to believe in the sun and to rejoice in its light because 
there are dark spots on its surface for which he cannot account. 
Ignorance is a very healthful condition of our present state of being. 


Useless Organs. 


2. A second objection of much the same kind is founded on the 
fact that we find members in organized bodies for which they have 
no use. For example, men have mamme; the whale has teeth 


=e 


§ 4, C.J THE TELEOLOGICAL ARGUMENT. 231 


which are never developed and which the animal does not need; 
animals have bones which they never use; birds and crocodiles 
have their skulls formed of separate bones aswell as viviparous 
animals, although in their case there seems to be no utility in such 
arrangement. “Eiteh Professor Owen urges this objection. In his 
work on “ Limbs,’ he says, ‘I think it fell be obvious that the 
principle of final adaptation fails to satisfy all the conditions of the 
problem. That every segment and almost every bone which is 
present in the human hand and arm should exist in-the fin of the 
whale,” where they are not needed, does not appear consistent with 
the principle. Again, in another place, he says,? “ The cranium of 
the bird, which is composed in the adult of a single bone, is ossified 
from the same number of points as in the human embryo, without 
the possibility of a similar purpose being subserved thereby, in the 
extrication of the chick from the fractured egg-shell . . . . 
These, and a hundred such facts force upon the contemplative an- 
atomist the inadequacy of the teleological hypothesis.”’ 

On this it may be remarked: (1.) That the objection bears only 
on the individual organism of plants or animals, whereas the evi- 
dences of design are scattered over the whole universe. (2.) This 
objection also is founded on our ignorance. The argument is that 
because we cannot see the reason for a certain arrangement, no 
such reason exists. (38.) It takes the lowest view of utility, namely, 
that which contemplates the immediate wants of the individual 
organism. Things which are not needed for its necessities may 
answer a much higher end. In a great building use is not the only 
end contemplated; there are symmetry and unity, esthetic ends 
of as much value as mere comfort or convenience. Scientific men 
have demonstrated that all animals are in their structure only modi- 
fications of four typical forms. These forms are preserved in all the 
genera and species included under these general classes. The pres- 
ence, therefore, of these characteristic features of the type, even 
where not needed for the individual, serve to indicate the unity of 
the plan on which the whole animal kingdom is constructed. We 
must remember that what we do not see, cannot disprove the real- 
ity of what we do see. 

Instinct. 

3. A third objection is sometimes derived from the operations of 
instinct. Instinct, according to Dr. Reid, is “a natural blind im- 
pulse to certain actions, without having any end in view, without 
deliberation, and very often without any conception of what we 

1 Page 39. 2 Homologies, p. 73. 


232 PART J.— THEOLOGY. = [Cu. I. — Tuxtsm. 


do.” 1 Dr. Whately also says: “ An instinct is a blind tendency 
to a mode of action independent of any consideration on the part 
of the agent, of the end to which the action leads.” Paley defines 
it to be ‘‘a propensity prior to experience and independent of in- 
struction.’2 The argument is that as “a blind impulse” contem 
plating no end, effects all the marvellous contrivances which we 
see in the works of irrational animals, similar contrivances in 
nature cannot prove intelligence in the author of nature. The 
answer to this argument is: — 

1. That it is founded on a wrong definition of instinct. It is nut 
a blind impulse. It is that measure of intelligence given to animals 
which enables them to sustain their lives, to continue their race, 
and to answer the necessities of their being. . Within certain lim- 
its this form of intelligence, both in man and in irrational animals, 
acts blindly. The impulse which leads the young of all animals to 
seek their nourishment in the appropriate way and in the proper 
place, is no doubt blind. The same is also probably true of the 
impulse which leads many animals to make provision in summer 
for the necessities of winter. Neither can it be supposed that the 
bee has always and everywhere constructed its cell according to 
the nicest mathematical principles, under the guidance of an intel- 
ligent apprehension of those principles. These operations which 
are performed without instructions, and always from age to age in 
the same way, indicate a guidance which may be called blind in so 
far that those under its influence do not devise the plan on which 
they act, although they may know the end they have in view. But 
the intelligence of animals goes far beyond these narrow limits. 
Not only does the beaver construct his dam according to the nature 
of the locality and the force of the stream on which he fixes his 
habitations, but we constantly see it, as well as other animals, 
varying its mode of operation to suit special emergencies. In- 
stinct, therefore, as designating the principle which controls the 
action of irrational animals, is not blind, but intelligent. It admits 
of the contemplation of an end, and of the selection and applica- 
tion of means appropriate for its accomplishment. Even admitting, 
therefore, that the intelligence manifested in nature is of the same 
kind as that manifested by animals, yet the difference in degree is 
infinite. 

2. No measure, however, of intellect of the grade or character 
of instinct is sufficient to account for the phenomena of the uni- 


1 Active Powers, 111. i. 2, vol. iv. p. 48: edit. Charlestown, 1815, 
2 Natural Theology, chap. xviii. 


§5, AJ THE TELEOLOGICAL ARGUMENT. 233 


verse. Instinct is concerned with the wants of individual organ- 
ism. But who adapts the organs of an animal to its instincts ? 
Who adapts external nature, air, lighty heat, water, food, etc., etc., 
to its necessities? What relation has instinct to the stellar uni- 
verse ? 

3. Moreover, these instincts themselves are among the phenom- 
ena to be accounted for. If they are blind impulses, can they be 
accounted for, in all their variety and in all their accommodation 
to the nature and wants of animals, by a blind impulse pervading 
all things? The fact is that the adaptation of external nature to 
the instincts of the different classes of animals, and of their instincts 
to external nature, affords one of the most convincing proofs of an 
intellect exterior to both, and ordering the one in relation to the 
other. i 

4, It is to be remembered, although the topic of a separate argu- 
ment, that the soul of man with all its wonderful powers and 
capacities, intellectual, moral, and religious, is one of the facts to 
be accounted for. To trace the existence of the soul of man to “a 
blind impulse,” is to assume that the effect immeasurably tran- 
scends its cause, which is assuming an effect without a cause. 

5. All these objections take for granted the eternal existence of 
matter, and the eternity of physical forces. As these are, they 
must have existed from eternity, or have begun to be. If they 
began to be they must have had a cause outside of themselves. 
That cause cannot be nonentity. It must be a self-existing, eternal 
substance, having the intelligence, power, will, and benevolence 
adequate to account for the universe and all that it contains. That 
is, the cause of the universe must be a personal God. 


§ 5. The Moral, or Anthropological Argument. 
A. Nature of the Argument. 


As the image of the sun reflected from a mirror, or the smooth 
surface of a lake, reveals to us that the sun is, and what it is; so 
the soul of man, just as clearly, and just as certainiy, reveals tnat 
God is and what He is. The reflection of the sun does not teach 
us everything that is true concerning that luminary ; it does not 
reveal its internal constitution, nor tell us how its light and heat 
are maintained from age to age. In like manner the soul, as the 
image of God, does not reveal all that God is. In both cases, and 
equally in both cases, what is revealed is true, that is, trustworthy, 

It answers to the objective reality. As we know that the sun 


234 PART I.—THEOLOGY. | [Cu. ll. — Tuutsm. 


really is what its reflection represents him as being, so we know 
that God is what the nature of the human soul declares Him to be. 
Doubt in the one case is just as unreasonable, and we may say, 
just as impossible as in the other. 

It has been shown in the preceding chapter that every man has 
in his own nature the evidence of the existence of God, an evi-' 
dence which never can be obliterated, and which will force convic- 
tion on the most unwilling. It is no less true that every man has 
in himself the same irresistible evidence that God is an extramun- 
dane personal Being; that He is intelligent, voluntary, and moral ; 
that He knows; that He has the right to command; and that He 
can punish and can save. 

It may naturally be asked, If this be so; if every man has in his 
own nature a witness whose competency he cannot question, and 
whose testimony he cannot ignore, What is the use of arguing about 
the matter? For three reasons, first, because even self-evident truths 
are often denied; and secondly, because men, in their present 
moral state, are under a strong temptation to deny the existence of 
a holy and just God; and thirdly, because efforts are constantly 
made to pervert or contradict the testimony of our nature to the 
existence and nature of God. 


B. Argument from the Existence of the Mind. 


Every man has in his own consciousness the evidence of the 
existence of mind. He knows that he is an intelligent, personal 
being. He knows that his personality does not reside in his body, 
but in his soul. It is included in the facts of consciousness that 
the soul and body are distinct, that they are different substances 
having not only different but incompatible attributes. That such is 
the general conviction of men is plain from all languages recogniz- 
ing the distinction ; and from the fact that it is never denied ex- 
cept by speculative or theoretical writers. The common conscious- 
ness of men as revealed by their forms of speech, and by their 
avowals, and by the universal belief, in some form, of a state of 
conscious existence after death, bears witness to the truth that the 
soul is something different from, and far superior to the body. How 
is the existence of this immaterial, thinking, immortal substance 
which we eall self, to be accounted for? That it has not always 
existed is undeniable. If it began to be, it must have the cause of 
its existence out of itself. That cause cannot be the soul of the 
parent, for that also is an effect. It began to be. And it is univer- 
sally admitted that an infinite series of effects is unthinkable. If 


§ 5, C.] THE TELEOLOGICAL ARGUMENT. 235 


the soul cannot be accounted for by derivation in unending series of 
steps from those who preceded us, neither can it be conceived of as 
a product of the body, or of physical forces and combinations. It 
would seem to be a self-evident proposition, that the effect cannot 
contain in it more than is in its cause; that intelligence cannot be 
the product of what is unintelligent. This also is confirmed by all 
experience. 

We are conversant in our present state, first, with matter, with 
its properties and laws or forces; secondly, with vegetable life ; 
thirdly, with animal life ; and fourthly, with mind, endowed with a 
life of a much higher order. These different elements, or kinds of 
existence, although marvellously combined and intermingled, are 
distinct. As a fact of experience, mere matter with its physical 
forces never originates vegetable life ; vegetable life of itself never 
originates or passes over into animal life; and animal life never 
originates, and is never developed into intellectual or spiritual life. 
There is an impassable gulf between these several departments of 
being. As soon as the principle of life leaves a plant or animal, 
the physical forces belonging to matter work its dissolution. These 


are facts indelibly impressed on the convictions of the mass of © 


mankind. They are conclusions to which universal experience has 
led the minds of all men. They are indeed denied by certain sci- 
entific men; but the theory on which that denial is founded in- 
volves the denial of so many intuitive and necessary truths; it does 
such violence to the laws of belief impressed upon our nature, and 
on the validity of which all knowledge depends, that it can never 
be more than a precarious and temporary belief on the part of 
those who adopt it, and can never have control over the minds of 
men. This is not the place to enter upon the discussion of the 
theory of materialism. We have a right to appeal to the general 
conviction of mankind that mind cannot be the product of matter. 
Tf this be so, as our minds are not self-existent and eternal, it must 
be true, as even the heathen believed, that our spirits owe their 
existence to Him who is the Father of spirits. 


C. From the Nature of the Soul. 


There are two taws, or general facts, which seem to characterize 
all the works of nature. By nature is here meant all things out 
of God. The first of these laws is, that whatever capacities, ne- 
eessities, or desires exist, or are found in any organism, adequate 
provision is made to meet and satisfy them all. This is obviously 


true with regard to the vegetable world. Plants have organs for — 


236 PART I.— THEOLOGY. [Cu. II. — THeism. 


the selection of the materials necessary for their growth and ma- 
turity, from the soil ; organs for the absorption of carbon from the 
atmosphere ; the capacity of being appropriately affected by light 
and heat; organs of propagation designed for the continuance of 
each after its kind. All these necessities are met. Soil, atmos- 
phere, light, heat, and water, are all provided. The same is no less 
true with regard to the animal world in all its endless variety of 
forms. Food, light, heat, air, and water, are suited to their several 
necessities ; to their organs, and to their instincts. If they have 
the appetite of hunger, they have organs for the appropriation of 
their food, and for its digestion; the instinct for its selection, and 
food suited to each, is ever at hand. So of all the other necessities 
of their nature. 

The second law, or general fact is, that all these living organisms 
reach perfection, and fully accomplish the end of their being. That 
is, they become all they are capable of being. All that belongs to 
their nature is fully developed. All their capacities are fully exer- 
cised, and all their wants fully satisfied. 

These two things are true of every living creature within the 
compass of human knowledge, except Man. So far as his body is 
concerned, they are true in regard to him also. His physical ne- 
cessities are all met by the present circumstances of his being. His 
body becomes all that it is capable of being, in this stage of exist- 
ence. But these things are not true with regard to his soul. It 
has capacities which are not fully developed in this world, and 
never can be. It has desires, aspirations, and necessities for which 
the world does not furnish the appropriate objects. It is, there- 
fore, as evidently designed and adapted for a higher and spirit- 
ual state of existence, as his body is adapted to the present order 
of things. The soul of man has, in the first place, intellectual 
powers capable of indefinite expansion; which in this world never 
reach their utmost limit. With these is connected a desire of 
knowledge which is never satisfied. In the second place, the soul 
of man has a capacity for happiness which nothing in the world, 
nor the whole world could it be attained, can by possibility fill. 
The animal is satisfied. Its capacity for happiness is here fully 
provided for. In the third place, the soul has aspirations’ to which 
nothing in this life corresponds. It longs for fellowship with what 
is far above itself; what is boundless, and eternal. In the fourth 
place, with all these powers, desires, and aspirations, it is conscious 
of its weakness, insufficiency, and dependence. It must have an 
object to worship, to love, to trust; a Being who can satisfy all its 


§ 5, D.J THE TELEOLOGICAL ARGUMENT. 237 


necessities, and under whose guardianship it can be safe from those 
powers of evil to which it knows that it is on all sides and at all 
times exposed; a Being whose existence, and whose relation to it- 
self, can explain all the mysteries of its own being, and secure its 
felicity in the future, on which it knows it must soon enter. Just 
as certainly as hunger in the animal supposes that there is food 
adapted to still its cravings, so certainly does this hunger of the 
soul suppose that there is some Being in the universe to satisfy its 
necessities. In both cases the craving is natural, universal, and 
imperative. 


It comp be that man is an exception to the laws above-men- 
tioned ; that he alone, of all that lives, has capacities, desires, ne- 
at for which no provision has been made. * God is the cg 
ative of ae in the sense that the existence of suchas 
man necessitates the assumption of such a Being 


D. From the Moral Nat 


The familiar facts of consciousnes 
1. That we have, by the consg 
right and wrong; we perceive 
and others to be wrong. Th, 
reason perceives some ‘thing 


ent 


the senses take immediate 
so the soul takes immedig 
The 


alike infallible within 


feelings and acts. 


those limits. 
Our moral perg 
have their peculiar, 
of our states of co 
true, the proper, 
are from our sens 
do and to approv; 
and to disappro 
“‘ought,”’ is a 
only by those w 
nothing else. 
3. These mc 
the control of 


238 PART I.— THEOLOGY. [Cu. Il. — Tueism. 


that to be right which his conscience tells him to be wrong; nor 
can he argue himself into the conviction that he has done right, 
when his conscience tells him he has done wrong. 

4. Our moral judgments, or, in other words, the conscience, has 
an authority from which we cannot emancipate ourselves. We can 
neither deny nor ignore it. It has a lordship. It commands, and 
it forbids. And we are bound to obey. It has power also to en- 
force its decisions. It can reward and punish. Its rewards are 
among the greatest blessings we can enjoy. Its punishments are 
the most intolerable agony the human soul can endure. 

5. Our moral judgments involve the idea of law, 7. e., of a rule 
or standard to which we are bound to be conformed. When we 
a thing to be right, we judge it to be conformed to the 
en we judge it to be wrong, we judge that is not 


thority which it does not derive from us. 
som a sense of propriety, or perception 
: imposed upon us, and to which we 
n authority out of ourselves. 

srefore, a sense of responsibility. 
1 for what we do. This re- 
pciety, nor to being in gen- 
» a Being who knows what 
to be and do; who ap- 
yrong ; and who has the 
n us according to our 
ture, as it reveals it- 
ense of pollution, or 
-» 4a conviction that 
vished, and, there- 


lain that we are 
n extramundane, 
> whom we are 
e conviction of 
d among men. 
e, or being 
ing, cultivated 
® in the world 
‘ither been as 
we ourselves 
rh men, there- 


§ 5, D.] THE TELEOLOGICAL ARGUMENT. 239 


fore, as Kant, and Sir William Hamilton, while denying the valid- 
ity of all other arguments for the existence of God, admit that our 
nature forces us to believe that He is, and that He is a persor 


Our Moral Feelings not due to Education. 


It is indeed objected that these phenomena of our moral nature 
are due to education or to superstition. To this it is answered, first, 
that moral truths have a self-evidencing light. They can no more 
be denied than the intuitions of sense and reason. It may even be 
said that our moral judgments have greater certainty than any 
other of our convictions. Men believe absurdities. They believe 
what contradicts the evidence of their senses. But no man ever 
has, or ever can believe that malignity is a virtue. In the second 
place, what is universal cannot be accounted for by peculiarities of 
culture. All men are moral beings; all have this sense of moral 
obligation, and of responsibility ; and no man can free himself from 
these convictions. The Apostle, therefore, speaking out of the 
common consciousness of men, as well as under the guidance of 
the Holy Spirit, speaks of sinners as “‘ knowing the judgment of 
God” (Rom. i. 52) ; that is,a sense of sin involves the knowledge 
of a righteous God. 

We then are placed in the midst of a vast universe, of which 
we constitute a part. We are forced not merely by the desire of 
knowledge, but from the necessities of our nature, to ask, How did 
this universe originate? How is it sustained? To what does it 
tend? What are we? Whence did we come? Whither are we 
going? These questions must be answered. This complicated 
problem must be solved. To refer everything to chance, is no so- 
lution. It is a frivolous denial that any solution is necessary, that 
such questions need any answer. To refer everything to necessity, 
is to say that the existence of things as they are is the ultimate 
fact. The universe is, and always has been, and always must be. 
It is the evolution of necessary being by necessary laws. This is 
all we can know, and all that need be known. This, however, is 
no solution. It is merely the denial that any solution is possible. 
Could this theory be accepted with regard to the outward world, it 
leaves all the phenomena of man’s nature — intellectual, moral, 
and religious — unaccounted for. Theism is a solution. It as- 
sumes the existence of an eternal and necessary Being; a Spirit, 
_and therefore intelligent, voluntary, self-conscious, and endowed 
with moral perfections. This hypothesis accounts for the origin of 
the universe. ‘In the beginning God created the heaven and 


240 PART I.— THEOLOGY. [Cu. II. — TaEism. 


the earth.” This is a satisfactory answer to the first question. It 
accounts for all the universe is, its immensity, its variety, its order, 
its numberless organisms, the adaptation of external nature to the 
wants of all living things. It accounts for the nature of man. It 
gives what that nature demands, — an infinite object of love, con- 
fidence, and adoration. It reveals who it is to whom we are re- 
sponsible, and on whom we are dependent. We know that this so- 
lution is true, because it is a solution. It meets all the facts of the 
case. And it so meets them that it cannot fail to be accepted as 
true, either intelligently or blindly. The God whom all men igno- 
rantly worship, the Scriptures reveal, not only in the certainty of 
his existence, but in the plenitude of his perfections. 


CHAPTER II. 


ANTI-THEISTIC THEORIES. 
§ 1. What is meant by Anti-Theism. 


As Theism is the doctrine of an extramundane, personal God, 
the creator, preserver, and governor of all things, any doctrine 
which denies the existence of such a Being is anti-theistic. Not | 
only avowed Atheism, therefore, but Polytheism, Hylozoism, Ma- 
terialism, and Pantheism, belong to the class of anti-theistic theories. 


Atheism. 


Atheism does not call for any separate discussion. It is in itself 
purely negative. It affirms nothing. It simply denies what The- 
ism asserts. The proof of Theism is, therefore, the refutation of 
Atheism. Atheist is, however, a term of reproach. Few men are 
willing to call themselves, or to allow others to call them by that 
name. Hume, we know, resented it. Hence those who are really 
atheists, according to the etymological and commonly received mean- 
ing of the word, repudiate the term. They claim to be believers 
in God, «lthough they assign to that word a meaning which is 
entirely unauthorized by usage. Thus Helvetius! says, ‘* There 
is no man of understanding who does not admit an active principle 
in nature; therefore there is no atheist. He is not an atheist who 
says that motion is God ; because in fact motion is incomprehensi- 
ble, as we have no clear idea of it, because it only manifests itself 
by its effects, and by it all things are performed in the universe.” 
Cousin? says, “ Atheism is impossible, because the existence of 
‘God is implied in every affirmation. If a man believes that he 
exists, he must believe in the power of thought, and that is God.” 
In like manner Herbert Spencer claims to be religious. He does 
not oppose religion, but dogmas. He acknowledges inscrutable 
power. He reduces all our knowledge to the two facts, “ That 
force is,” and ‘ Force is persistent.” Force, however, is perfectly 
inscrutable and incomprehensible. On this principle he attempts 

1 “De Homme,” Works, edit. Paris, 1793, vol. iii. p. 221, note. 


2 Introduction to the General History of Philosophy, vol. i. p. 169. 
VoL. 1 16 


242 PART I.—THEOLOGY.  [Cu. Il. — Anri-Tuetsm. 


to reconcile religion and science. The ultimate principle of religion, 
that in which all religions agree, is that there is an inscrutable power 
which is the cause of all things. This also is the ultimate principle 
of science. They have therefore a common ground. Nothing can 
be predicated of this cause ; not consciousness; not intelligence ; 
not will; only that it is a force. This is all the God the new phil- 
osophy leaves us." 

Language, however, has its rights. The meaning of words 
cannot be changed at the pleasure of individuals. The word God, 
and its equivalents in other languages, have a definite meaning, 
from which no man is at liberty to depart. If any one says he 
believes in God, he says he believes in the existence of a personal, 
self-conscious being. He does not believe in God, if he only be- 
lieves in “ motion,”’ in ‘force,”’ in ‘* thought,” in ‘moral order,” 
in “the incomprehensible,” or in any other abstraction. 

Theists also have their rights. Theism is a definite form of 
belief. For the expression of that belief, the word Theism is the 
established and universally recognized term. We have the right 
to retain it; and we have the right to designate as Atheism, all 
forms of doctrine which involve the denial of what is universally 
understood by Theism. 


Is Atheism possible ? 


The question has often been discussed, Whether Atheism is pos- 
sible? The answer to the question depends on the meaning of the 
term. If the question be, Whether a man can emancipate him- 
self from the conviction that there is a personal Being to whom he 
is responsible for his character and conduct, and who will punish 
him for his sins? it must be answered in the negative. For that 
would be to emancipate himself from the moral law, which is im- 
possible. If, however, the question means, Whether a man may, 
by speculation or otherwise, bring himself into such a state as to 
lose the consciousness of the belief of God as written in his heart, 
and free himself, for a time, from its power? it must be answered 
affirmatively. A man may, in this sense, deny his individuality or 
identity ; the real, objective existence of soul or body, mind or 
matter ; the distinction between right and wrong. But this is un- ’ 
natural, and cannot last. It is like deflecting a spring by force. 
The moment the force is removed, the spring returns to its. normal 
position. Men, therefore, often pass in a moment from a state of 
entire skepticism to a state of unquestioning faith; not of course 

1 See First Principles of a New System of Philosophy, by Herbert Spencer. 


§ 2.] POLY'THEISM, 248 


by a process of argument, but by a change in their inward state. 
This transition from unbelief to faith, though thus sudden, and 
although not produced by an intellectual process, is perfectly ra- 
tional. The feelings which rise in the mind contain evidence of the 
truth which the understanding cannot resist. It is also a familiar 
psychological fact, that skepticism and faith may, in a certain 
sense, coexist in the mind. An idealist while abiding by his theory, 
has nevertheless an inward conviction of the reality of the exter- 
nal world. So the speculative atheist lives with the abiding con- 
viction that there is a God to whom he must render an account. 


§ 2. Polytheism. 


As the word implies, Polytheism is the theory which assumes 
the existence of many gods. Monotheism was the original religion | 
of our race. This is evident not only from the teachings of the 
Scriptures, but also from the fact that the earliest historical form of 
religious belief is monotheistic. There are monotheistic hymns in 
the Vedas, the most ancient writings now extant, unless the Penta- 
teuch be an exception. 

The first departure from monotheism seems to have been nature 
worship. As men lost the knowledge of God as creator, they were 
led to reverence the physical elements with which they were in 
contact, whose power they witnessed, and whose beneficent in- 
fluence they constantly experienced. Hence not only the sun, 
moon, and stars, the great representatives of nature, but fire, air, 
and water, became the objects of popular worship. We accordingly 
find that the Vedas consist largely of hymns addressed to these 
natural elements. 

These powers were personified, and soon it came to be generally 
believed that a personal being presided over each. And these im- 
aginary beings were the objects of popular worship. 

While the mass of the people really believed in beings that were 
“called gods” (1 Cor. viii. 5), many of the more enlightened were 
monotheists, and more were pantheists. The early introduction 
and wide dissemination of pantheism are proved from the fact 
that it lies at the foundation of Brahminism and Buddhism, the 
religions of the larger part of the human race for thousands of 
years. 

There can be little doubt that when the Aryan tribes entered 
India, fifteen hundred or two thousand years before Christ, panthe- 
ism was their established belief. The unknown, and “ uncondi- 
tioned” infinite Being, reveals itself according to the Hindu system, 


244 PART I.— THEOLOGY. (Cu. I. — Anti-THEISM. 


as Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva,—that is, as Creator, Preserver, 
and Restorer. These were not persons, but modes of manifesta- 
tion. It was in this form that the idea of an endless process of 
development of the infinite into the finite, and of the return of the 
finite into the infinite, was expressed. It was from this pantheistic 
principle that the endless polytheism of the Hindus naturally Je- 
veloped itself; and this determined the character of their whole 
religion. As all that is, is only a manifestation of God, everything 
remarkable, and especially the appearance of any remarkable man, 
was regarded as an “avatar,” or incarnation of God, in one or 
other of his modes of manifestation, as Brahma, Vishnu, or Shiva. 
And as evil is as actual as good, the one is as much a manifestation, 
or, modus existendi, of the infinite Being as the other. And hence 
there are evil gods as well as good. In no part of the world has 
pantheism had such a field for development as in India, and no- 
where has it brought forth its legitimate effects in such a portentous 
amount of evil. Nowhere has polytheism been carried to such 
revolting extremes. ' 

Among the Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans polytheism assumed 
a form determined by the character of the people. The Greeks 
rendered it bright, beautiful, and sensual; the Romans were more 
decorous and sedate. Among barbarous nations it has assumed 
forms much more simple, and in many cases more rational. 

In the Bible the gods of the heathen are declared to be ‘ van- 
ity,’ and “ nothing,” mere imaginary beings, without power either 
to hurt or to save. (Jer. ii. 28; Isa. xli. 295 xlii: 17; Ps. evi. 
28.) They are also represented as dayudvuz (1 Cor. x. 20). This 
word may express either an imaginary, or a real existence. The 
objects of heathen worship are called gods, even when declared to 
be nonentities. So they may be called ‘“‘ demons,” without in- 
tending to teach that they are “spirits.” As the word, however, 
generally in. the New Testament, does mean “evil spirits,” it is 
perhaps better to take it in that sense when it refers to the objects 
of heathen worship. This is not inconsistent with the doctrine that 
the gods of the heathen are “vanities and lies.” They are not 
what men take them to be. They have no divine power. Paul 
says of the heathen before their conversion, “ éovActoare rots picer 
pa odor Oeots” (Gal. iv. 8). The prevalence and persistency of 
Polytheism show that it must have a strong affinity with fallen 
human nature. Although, except in pantheism, it has no philo- 
sophical basis, it constitutes a formidable obstacle to the progress 
of true religion in the world. 


§ 8.) HYLOZOISM. 245 


§ 3. Hylozotsm. 

Hylozoism, from oy, matter, and wi, life, is properly the doctrine 
that matter is endued with life. And this is the form in which the 
doctrine was held by many of its advocates. All matter, and every 
particle of matter, besides its physical properties, has a principle of 
life in itself, which precludes the necessity of assuming any other 
cause for the phenomena of life exhibited in the world. In this 
form Hylozoism does not differ from Materialism. 

Most commonly, however, the term is used to designate a system 
which admits a distinction between mind and matter, but considers 
them as intimately and inseparably united, as the soul and body in 
man. God, according to this view, is the soul of the world; an 
intelligent power everywhere present, to which are to be referred 
all the manifestations of design in the external world, and all the 
activity of the human soul. The relation, however, of the soul to 
the body, is a very imperfect illustration of the relation of God to 
the world according to the hylozoistic system. The soul is really 
exterior to the body, and independent of it, at least for its existence 
and activity. It is not the life of the body. It neither fashions nor 
preserves it. It is not even conscious of the vital activity by which 
the body is developed and sustained. Whereas according to the 
hylozoistic theory, the soul of the world is its plastic principle, the 
inward source of all its organizations and of-all its activities. : 

The leading principles of this theory as developed by the Stoics 
are, (1.) There are two constituent principles of the universe, one 
active, the other passive. The passive principle is matter, without 
form and without properties, ¢. ¢.,inert. The active principle is 
mind, dwelling in matter its organizing formative power, 7. é, 
God. (2.) The universe is therefore to be viewed under three as- 
pects: (a.) As the all-forming power ; the natura naturans, or, 7 
pious texvixy. (b.) The world as formed by this living, inward 
principle. The living «éopos, or natura naturata. (¢.) The iden- 
tity of the two, as they form one whole. It is only by an act of 
the mind that the one is distinguished from the other. Therefore 
the world, as including both, or as the identity of both, is formed 
with the greatest wisdom, and by a necessary process, for the laws 
of nature are the laws of reason. Cicero,! expounding this system, 
says, ‘* Natura, non artificiosa solum, sed plane artifex ab eodem 
Zenone dicitur ; consultrix, et provida utilitatum opportunitatumque 
omnium. Censet [Zeno] enim artis maxime proprium est creare 
et gignere, quodque in operibus nostrarum artium manus officiet, 
id multo artificiosius naturam officere.”’ 

1 De Natura Deorum, ii. 22, p. 1116, edit. Leipzig, 1850. 


246 PART I.—THEOLOGY. (Cu. I. — Anr1-TueisM. 


(8.) The universe, therefore (The All-one), of which God is the 
soul and Nature the body, is living, immortal, rational, and perfect 
(Gov &Odvarov, Aoytdv, téAevov). God, as the controlling, operative 
principle in all things, acts according to necessary, although rational 
laws. (4.) The souls of men are of the same nature with the soul 
of the world, but as individual existences, passing away when the 
life of the body ceases. (5.) The highest end of life is virtue ; and 
virtue is living according to reason.1 ; 

This system in one of its forms is nearly identical with Material- 
ism, and in the other with Pantheism. There is no personal God 
to whom we are responsible, no freedom of the will; therefore, no 
sin, and no conscious existence after death. 


§ 4. Materialism. 


Materialism is that system which ignores the distinction between 
matter and mind, and refers all the phenomena of the world, 
whether physical, vital, or mental, to the functions of matter. 


A. The Doctrine of Epicurus. 


Epicurus taught, (1.) That as ex nihilo nihil fit, the universe 
has always existed, and must continue to exist forever. (2.) That 
space, and the number of bodies which it contains, are infinite. 
(8.) These bodies are of two kinds, simple and compound. The 
simple bodies are atoms possessing form, magnitude, and weight. 
They are indivisible, unalterable, and indestructible. This is also 
the doctrine of modern science. Faraday? says, “ A particle of oxy- 
gen is ever a particle of oxygen, — nothing can in the least wear it. 
If it enters into combination, and disappears as oxygen; if it pass 
through a thousand combinations, animal, vegetable, and mineral — 
if it lie hid for a thousand years, and. then be evolved, it is oxygen 
with its first qualities, neither more nor less. It has all its original 
force, and only that; the amount of force which it disengaged 
when hiding itself, has again to be employed in a reverse direction 
when it is set at liberty.” (4.) These atoms have their peculiar 
forces, distinct from their mere gravity. This, too, is the doctrine 
of modern science. It is included in what Faraday says in the 
passage just quoted. ‘* Molecules,” say the scientific men of our 
day, ‘“‘have been endowed with forces which give rise to various 
chemical qualities, and these never change either in their nature or 


1 See Rixner’s Geschichte der Philosophie, vol. i. sect. 120. 
2 See Youmans’ Conservation and Correlation of Forces, p. 872. 


§ 4, A.j MATERIALISM IN ENGLAND 247 


in their amount.” 1 (5.) Epicurus taught that the quantity of mat~ 
ter, and of course the amount of force in the world, is always the 
same. Neither can be increased or diminished.: (6.) The atoms, 
of which the number is infinite, move through space with incred- 
ible velocity under the guidance of necessary physical laws. 
(7.) By the combination of these atoms under the influence of gray- 
ity and other physical forces, the universe was formed, and became 
acosmos. This is very nearly the nebular hypothesis. (8.) The 
soul is material ; or, in other words, all mental phenomena are due 
to the properties of matter. This, also, is proclaimed as the last 
result of modern science. (9.) The soul, of course, ceases to exist 
when the body dies ; ¢. e., as death is the cessation of the vital, so 
it is also of the intellectual functions of the individual. The atoms 
of which the man is composed, with the forces which belong to 
them, continue to exist, and may enter into the composition of other 
men. But the man, as an individual, ceases to exist. This, almost 
in so many words, is the avowed doctrine of many physicists of the 
present day. (10.) Sensation is for us the only source of knowl- 
edge. By remembering former sensations, we form ideas, and by 
the combination of ideas we form judgments. Almost the very 
words of Hume, and the doctrine of the whole school of which he 
is the representative. (11.) As Epicurus held that nothing is in- 
corporeal except a vacuum, he of necessity includes all the forms 
of existence under the head of matter. As there is no mind or 
spirit, there is no God, and no moral law. Virtue is only a pru- 
dent regard to happiness. In a certain sense he admitted the ex- 
istence of Gods, but they were corporeal beings having no concern 
with the affairs of men.? 

A recent German writer,’ in Herzog’s “‘ Encyklopadie,” under the 
head of Materialismus, says that notwithstanding the great progress 
of modern science, the Materialists of our day have not advanced 
a step upon the system of Epicurus. That system, probably owing 
to the dominant influence of the higher philosophy of Plato and 
Aristotle, did not exert much influence on the ancient mind, or on 
the progress of human thought. It was not until modern times 
that Materialism gained any great power as a philosophical theory. 


1 Groonian Lectures on Matter and Force. Given at the Royal College of Physicians, in 
.868. By Henry Bruce Jones, A. M., M. D., F. R..S., London, 1868, p. 17. ; 
2 Rixner’s Geschichte der Philosophie, i. 303-318. Ritter’s History of Philosophy, trans< 


. sated by A. J. W. Morrison, iii. 399-447. 


8 F, Fabri. 


248 PART I.— THEOLOGY.  [Cu. I. — Anri-Turism. 


B. Materialism in England during the Eighteenth Century. 

Hobbes (1588-1679) anticipated the movement towards Mate- 
rialism which manifested itself in England during the last century. 
‘“‘ He made sensation the real basis of every mental operation, the 
sole originator of our ideas, the sole medium and test of truth. 
As, therefore, we can perceive through sensation only what is ma- 
terial, he concluded that matter is the only reality, and that what- 
ever exists to us must accordingly be a part of the material 
universe. The whole process of scientific investigation was thus 
reduced to the doctrine of bodies, beyond which, he maintained, 
there can be no knowledge whatever accessible to the human 
mind. This knowledge, however, does not refer simply to the ex- 
istence of bodies, but also to their changes, of all which changes 
the ultimate principle is motion. The doctrine of bodies, there- 
fore, includes the knowledge of all phenomena in relation to their 
probable causes; and of all possible causes as known from their 
observed effects. . . . . The mind itself he viewed as wholly 
material, the phenomena of consciousness being the direct result 
of our organization. The one great and fundamental fact of mind 
is sensation, which is nothing more or less than the. effect of mate- 
rial objects around us, exerted by means of pressure or impact upon 
that material organization which we term the mind.”? Thus it 
appears that Hobbes anticipated the great result of modern science, 
that all force may be resolved into motion. 


Locke (1682-1704). 


The introduction of Materialism into England during the last 
century is generally attributed to the influence of Locke’s philoso- 
phy. Locke himself was far from being a Materialist, and the ad- 
vocates of his system strenuously insist that his principles have no 
legitimate tendency to obliterate the distinction between matter 
and mind. Locke, however, in combating the doctrine of ‘ innate 
ideas,”’ in the sense of abstract truths, seemed to deny that the 
mind was so constituted as to apprehend truth intuitively, and be- 
yond the range of experience. He compared the mind to a ‘+ tab- 
ula rasa.” This figure suggests that all our knowledge is from 
without, as the slate contributes nothing to the matter written 
upon it. He defined ideas to be “anything with which the mind 
is immediately occupied when we think.” The origin of these 

1 Leviathan, chap. i. 
4 Morell’s History of Modern Philosophy, New York, 1848, pp. Tl, 72. 


§ 4, A.J MATERIALISM IN ENGLAND. 249 


ideas, he said, was sensation and reflection. If by reflection he 
meant the observation of the phenomena of the mind, his theory 
is one thing. If it mean the process of recalling, combining, ana- 
lyzing, and otherwise elaborating the impressions upon us from 
without, his theory is another. Probably Locke himself, and cer- 
tainly many of his followers, took it in the latter sense; and thus 
the two sources of ideas, or of knowledge, are reduced to one, and 
that one is sensation. But as sensation can give us the knowl- 
edge only of what is external and material, the theory in this form 
seemed to leave no room for the higher ideas of eternal and neces- 
sary truths. Locke attempts to account for our ideas, of time, space, 
infinity, cause, and even of right and wrong, from observation, 7. e., 
from observation of what is without, or from impressions made 
upon our senses. It is a common criticism upon Locke’s great 
work, that in it he does not distinguish between the occasion and 
the source of our ideas. Our experience furnishes the occasion, 
and it may be the necessary condition, of waking the mind to 
the perception not only of the fact experienced, but also of the in- 
tuitive apprehension of the universal and necessary truth which the 
fact involves. If we did not see effects produced around us, and 
did not ourselves exercise efficiency, we might never have the idea 
of causation; but the conviction that every effect must have a 
cause is an intuitive judgment, which experience can neither pro- 
duce nor limit. It is not from the observed tendency of some acts 
to produce happiness, and of others to produce misery, that we get 
the idea of the essential distinction between right and wrong; but 
from the constitution of the mind. Although Locke, and many of 
his disciples, were satisfied with his method of accounting for our 
ideas of God, of spirit, and of moral and religious truths, yet it is 
also certain that many of his followers felt justified on his princi- 
ples to discard them. 


Hartley (1705-1757). 

Hartley was a physician and a physiologist. “Physiology and psy- 
chology. have intimate relations. It is perhaps natural that those 
who devote themselves sp2cially to the former, should make little 
of the latter. It is the marked characteristic of our age, so far as 
physicists are concerned, that it tries to merge psychology entirely 
into physiology. Hartley adopted the principles of Locke, and 
endeavored to show how it is that external things produce sensa- 
tion and thought. This he did by his theory of vibrations. ‘“* The 
objects of the external world affect in some manner the extreme 


250 PART I.— THEOLOGY.  [Ca. I. — Anti-Turism. 


ends of the nerves, which spread from the brain as centre to every 
part of the body. This affection produces a vibration, which is 
continued along the nerve by the agency of an elastic ether, until 
it reaches the brain, where it constitutes the phenomenon we term 
sensation. When a sensation has been experienced several times, 
the vibratory movement from which it arises acquires the tendency 
to repeat itself spontaneously, even when the external object is not 
present. These repetitions or relics of sensations are ideas, which 


in their turn possess the property of recalling each other by virtue | 


of mutual association among themselves.” 1 This doctrine of asso- 
ciation of ideas is the most important part of his system. He in- 
sists principally on the following law: “¢ An idea is sometimes asso- 
ciated with another through the medium of a third; but in process 
of time this intermediate idea may be disregarded, and yet the con- 
nection between the first and third may, notwithstanding, remain. 
Thus the idea of pleasure, which is so indissolubly connected with 
money, arises from the conveniences which it is able to procure, 
while in the mind of the miser the conveniences are lost sight of, 
and the very possession of the money itself is regarded as containing 
the whole enjoyment. In this way Hartley accounts for almost all 
the emotions and passions of the human mind. The domestic affec- 
tions, for instance, arise from the transference of the pleasure de- 
rived from parental kindness to the parent itself; the social and pat- 
riotic affections from transferring the pleasures of society to the 
country which affords them ; in like manner, also, the moral and re- 
ligious affections, the love of virtue and the love of God, arise from 
the pleasures connected with virtuous and pious conduct, being 
transferred to the law of action, or to the supreme Lawgiver, from 
whom these pleasures have emanated.” 2 The connection of this 
theory with Materialism is obvious. If vibrations of the brain con- 
stitute sensation, and if the relics, or spontaneous repetitions of these 
vibrations constitute thought and feeling, then all mental and moral 
acts are mere affections of our material organism. It is also obvious 
that, according to this theory, there is no more freedom in volition 
than in sensation. The former is a mode, or relic of the latter. 
Although this tendency of his system was undeniable, and although 
his successors drew these conclusions from his principles, Hartley 
himself was not a Materialist. He was a very religious man. It 
is not at all uncommon for a man to hold a speculative theory in- 
consistent with his faith. 

Morell? quotes the following criticism of Hartley’s doctrine from 


1 Observations on Man, chap. i. sect. 2, and Morell, p. 98. 


2 Morel , p. 99. 
8 Pago 97. Ee 


o 


1 


§ 4, B.] MATERIALISM IN ENGLAND. 251 


the ‘‘ Edinburgh Review”: ‘“*There may be,” says the reviewer, 
“ little shakings in the brain, for anything we know, and there may 
even be shakings of a different kind accompanying every act of 
thought or perception ; — but that the shakings themselves are the 
thought or perception, we are so far from admitting, that we find it 
absolutely impossible to comprehend what is meant by the asser- 
tion. The shakings are certain throbbings, vibrations, or stirrings, 
in a whitish, half-fluid substance like custard, which we might see 
perhaps, or feel, if we had eyes and fingers sufficiently small or 
fine for the office. But what should we see or feel, upon the sup- 
position that we could detect by our senses, everything that actu- 
ally took place in the brain? We should see the particles of this 
substance change their place a little, move a little up or down, to 
the right or the left, round about or zigzag, or in some other 
course or direction. This is all that we could see, if Dr. Hart- 
ley’s conjecture were proved by actual observation ; because this 
is all that exists.in motion, according to our conception of it, and 
all that we mean when we say that there is motion in any sub- 
stance. s it intelligible, then, to say, that this motion, the whole 
of which we see and comprehend, is thought and feeling, and 
that thought and feeling will exist, wherever we can excite a simi- 
lar motion in a similar substance ?— In our humble apprehension 
the proposition is not so much false, as utterly unmeaning and in- 
comprehensible.”’ 4 

If history repeats itself, so does philosophy. What the “ Edin- 
burgh Review ” said of Hartley nearly seventy years ago, Profes- 
sor Tyndall says of the Materialists of our day. ‘The passage 
from the physics of the brain to the corresponding facts of conscious- 
ness is unthinkable. Granted that a definite thought and a definite 
molecular action in the brain occur simultaneously ; we do not pos- 
sess the intellectual organ, nor apparently any rudiment of the 
organ, which would enable us to pass, by a process of reasoning, 
from the one phenomenon to the other. They appear together, but 
we do not know why. Were our minds and senses so expanded, 
strengthened, and illuminated, as to enable us to see and feel the 
very molecules of the brain; were we capable of following all 
their motions, all their grouping, all their electric discharges, if 
such there be; and were we intimately acquainted with the cor- 
responding states of thought and feeling, we should probably be as 
far as ever from the solution of the problem, How are these phys- 
ical processes connected with the facts of consciousness? The 

1 Edinburgh Review, Oct. 1806, p. 157. 


252 PART I.—THEOLOGY.  [Cua. I. — Anri-Tuetsm. 


chasm between the two classes of phenomena would still remain — 
intellectually impassable. Let the consciousness of love, for exam- 
ple, be associated with a right-handed spiral motion of the mole- 
cules of the brain, and the consciousness of hate with a left-handed 
spiral motion. We should then know when we love that the mo- 
tion is in one direction, and when we hate that the motion is in the 
other, but the ‘ Why ?’ would still remain unanswered. In affirm- 
ing that the growth of the body is mechanical, and that thought, 
as exercised by us, has its correlative in the physics of the brain, 
I think the position of the ‘Materialist’ is stated as far as that 
position is a tenable one. I think the Materialist will be able finally 
to maintain this position against all attacks; but I do not think, as 
the human mind is at present constituted, that he can pass beyond 
it. I do not think he is entitled to say that his molecular groupmg 
and his molecular motions explain everything. In reality they ex- 
plain nothing.” + 


Priestley (1733-1804). 


Priestley owes his permanent reputation to his important discov- 
eries in the department of physical science. He was, however, 
prominent during his life for the part he took in philosophical and 
theological controversies. Devoted to science, the senses were for 
him the great sources of knowledge ; all others, except supernatural 
revelation which he admitted, he distrusted. He adopted with en- 
thusiasm the theory of Hartley which resolved thought and feeling 
into vibrations of the brain. Hartley, he said, had done more for 
the doctrine of mind than Newton accomplished for the theory of 
the material universe. He did not hesitate to avow himself a Ma- 
terialist. ‘* Priestley,” says Morell,? “rested the truth of Mate- 
rialism upon two deductions. The first was, that thought and 
sensation are essentially the same thiag — that the whole variety of 
our ideas, however abstract and refined they may become, are, 
nevertheless, but modifications of the sensational faculty. ware 
The second deduction was, that all sensation, and, consequently, 
all thought, arises from the affections of our material organization, 
and therefore consists entirely in the motion of the material parti- 
cles of which the nerves and brain are composed.” He was a ne- 
eessitarian, and in morals a utilitarian. Believing, however, in 
God and in divine revelation, he ad:nitted a future state of exist« 
ence. As the Bible teaches the doctrine of the resurrection of the 


1 “Address before British Association,” Atheneum, for August 29, 1868. Quoted in 
Perowne’s Hulsean Lectures, for 1863; Appendix, Note A. 
2 Page 102. 


§ 4, C.] MATERIALISM IN FRANCE. 258 


body, Priestley believed that man would be restored to conscious 
existence when that event occurred. His principal works bearing 
on this subject are: “ Examination of Reid, Beattie, and Oswald,” 
** Doctrine of Philosophical Necessity Explained,” ‘ Disquisitions 
relating to Matter and Spirit,” and ‘“ Hartley’s Theory of the 
Human Mind, with Essays relating to the subject of it.” 

Hume is regarded as their master by the most advanced phys- 
icists of the modern scientific school, so far as their general princi- 
ples and method of philosophizing are concerned. He was neither 
a Materialist nor an Idealist, but rather a Nihilist, as his great object 
was to show that no certainty could be attained in any department 
of knowledge. He affirmed nothing and denied everything. Such 
knowledge as we have comes from sensation, therefore, he main- 
tained that as we have no sensation of efficiency, we can have no 
idea of it, and no evidence of its reality. A cause is not that 
which produces an effect, but simply that which uniformly precedes 
it. Consequently, anything can be the cause of anything. Again, 
as we have no perception by the senses of substance, there can be 
no such thing. This applies to mind as well as matter. Nothing 
exists to us but our thoughts and feelings. We are “ nothing but 
a bundle or collection of different perceptions, which succeed each 
other with an inconceivable rapidity, and are in perpetual flux and 
movement.” , 


C. Materialism in France during the Eighteenth Century. 


The sensational philosophy, as it is called, found a much more 
congenial soil in France than in England. Locke’s “ Essay ’’ was 
translated into the language of that country and made the subject 
of comments and lectures. His leading principles were adopted 
without the limitations and qualifications with which he had pre- 
sented them, and conclusions drawn from them which Locke would 
have been the first to repudiate. 

Condillac, one of the first and most influential of the disciples of 
Locke, in his first work, ‘ Essai sur |’Origine des Connaissances Hu- 
maines,” differed comparatively little from the English philosopher. 
But in his “ Traité des Sensations,” he virtually discarded “ reflec- 
tion” as a source of our ideas, and regarded all thoughts, feelings, 
and volitions as “ transformed sensations.” ‘ While he answered 
the question concerning the relation between the soul and body, 
by assuming their‘identity, he took theistic ground in accounting 
for the origin of the world. This middle ground was occupied also, 
at least ostensibly, by Diderot and D’Alembert in the French 


254 PART I.—THEOLOGY. [Ca. IL —- Anti-Turtsm. 


“ Encyclopédie,” who, notwithstanding their sensational theory as to 
the source of our knowledge, and their making happiness the ground 
of morals and end of life, not only maintained theistic principles, 
but insisted on the necessity of a divine revelation. This, however, 
was probably more a matter of prudence than of conviction.” * 
These, however, were only the first steps. The extreme of 
materialistic atheism was soon reached and avowed. La Mettrie 
published his ‘“ L’Histoire Naturelle de Ame ” in 1746, his 
‘T’Homme Machine,” the same year, and his “ L’Homme Planté”’ 
in 1749. Helvetius published his work ‘De Esprit” in 1758. 
His book entitled ‘‘ De l’Homme ” was published after his death. 
The climax was reached by Baron d’Holbach in his ‘ Systéme de 
la Nature,” in which Materialism, fatalism, and atheism were 
openly avowed. According to this system matter and motion are 
eternal; thought is an agitation of the nerves; the soul the result. 
of our corporeal organization; the will the strongest sensation ; the 
ground of morals a regard to our own happiness. There is no 
freedom, no morality, no future existence, no God. When these 
principles got hold of the popular mind, then came the end. 


D. Positivism. 


Comte, the author of the ‘ Positive Philosophy,”’ was born in 


1798, and died in 1859. The greater part of his life was passed 
in poverty and neglect. His only occupation was teaching. Ten 
years were devoted to the preparation of a course of lectures on 
philosophy which secured him wealth and fame. He called his 
system ‘“‘ Philosophie Positive,” because it purported “to assume 
nothing beyond the content of observed facts.” 

The fundamental principle of the “ Positive Philosophy” is the 
one so often referred to, namely, that the senses are the only source 
of our knowledge, hence nothing exists but matter. There is no 
mind distinct from matter ; no such thing as efficiency ; no causes, 
whether first or final; no God; no future state of existence for 
man. Theology and psychology are, therefore, banished from the 
domain of science. Science is solely occupied in the observation 
of facts, and in deducing from them the laws by which they are 
determined. These laws, however, are not forces operating in a 
uniform manner, but simply statements of the actual order in the 
sequence of events. This sequence is not only uniform but neces- 
sary. Our business is simply to ascertain what it is. The only 
method by which this can be done is observation. This task is 


1 ¥, Fabri in Herzog’s Real-Encyclopdidie, art. “* Materialismus.” 


§4, Dj MATERIALISM. POSITIVISM. 255 


much easier in some departments than in others; for in some the 
facts to be observed are less numerous and less complicated. In 
mathematics and astronomy the facts are all of one kind; whereas 
in physiology and sociology they are of very different kinds, and 
vastly more complicated. The same rule, however, applies to all 
departments. In all, the sequence of events is uniform and neces- 
sary ; and if we can only, by a sufficient induction of facts, ascer- \ 
tain what the law of sequence is, we shall be able to predict the 
future as certainly in one department as in another. The astrono- 
omer can tell what will be the position of the stars and planets a 
century hence. The Positivist will be able to foretell with equal 
certainty how a man will act in any given circumstances, and what 
will be the progress and state of society in time to come. 

It foliows, therefore, according to the Positive Philosophy, .— 
(1.) That all our knowledge is confined to physical phenomena. 
(2.) That all we can know of such phenomena is, that they are, 
and the relations in which they stand to each other. (38.) That 
these relations are all included under the heads of sequence and 
resemblance. (4.) These relations constitute the laws of nature, 
and are invariable. (5.) As everything that exists is material, 
these laws, or ‘‘ invariable relations of succession and resemblance,” 
control all the phenomena of mind, as we call it, and of social life 
and of history, as well as those of nature, in the common sense of 
that word. (6.) As everything is included in the department of 
physics, everything is controlled by physical laws, and there is no 
more freedom in human acts than in the motions of the stars; and, 
therefore, the one can be predicted with the same certainty as the 
other. 

The following quotations from the ‘Philosophie Positive,” 
“‘ freely translated and condensed by Harriet Martineau,” ? include 
all the points above mentioned. 

“The first characteristic of the Positive Philosophy is that it 
regards all phenomena as subjected to invariable natural laws. 
Our business is, — seeing how vain is any research into what are 
called causes, whether first or final, — to pursue an accurate dis- 
covery of these laws, with a view to reducing them to the smallest 
possible number.”’? ‘Our positive method of connecting phenom- 
ena is by one or other of two relations, — that of similitude or that 
of succession, —the mere fact of such resemblance or succession 
being all that we can pretend to know; and all that we need to 
know ; for this perception comprehends all knowledge which con- 

1 New York, 1855. 2 Vol. i. p- 5. 


\ 


256 PART .— THEOLOGY. (Cu. I. — Anri-TurtsM. 


sists in elucidating something by something else, —in now explain- 
ing, and now foreseeing certain phenomena, by means of the 
resemblance or sequence of other phenomena.” 1 “If we regard 
these functions [of the mind] under their statical aspect, —that is, 
if we consider the conditions under which they exist, — we must 
determine the organic circumstances of the case, which inquiry 
involves it with anatomy and physiology. If we look at the 
dynamic aspect, we have to study simply the exercise and results 
of the intellectual powers of the human race, which is neither more 
nor less than the general object of the Positive Philosophy.” ? 

Comte is obliged to use the word “ power,” and to speak of its 
exercise, yet all his philosophy denies the existence of any such 
thing as efficiency. The laws which determine events are nothing 
more than facts of uniform sequence. According to the passage 
just quoted, one department of psychology (the statical) belongs to 
anatomy and physiology ; the other (the dynamic) to the observed 
sequence of certain facts called intellectual. The sequence is inva- 
riable. The intervention of will is necessarily excluded, because 
philosophy, at least Positivism, is nothing unless it secures the 
power of prevision. But free acts cannot be foreseen by man. 
Hence Comte says, “ The arbitrary can never be excluded while 
political phenomena are referred to will, divine or human, instead 
of being connected with invariable natural laws.”® “If social 
events were always exposed to disturbance by the accidental inter- 
vention of the legislator, human or divine, no scientific prevision 
of them would be possible.”’ 4 

Intellectual exercises being regarded as a function of the brain, 
Comte says, ‘‘ The positive theory of the intellectual and affective 
functions is therefore henceforth unchangeably regarded as consist- 
ing in the study, both rational and experimental, of the various 
phenomena of internal sensibility, which are proper to the cerebral 
ganglia, apart from their external apparatus. It is, therefore, sim- 
ply a prolongation of animal physiology, properly so called, when 
this is extended so as to include the fundamental and ultimate at- 
tributes.”’ 5 

Comte, being an ardent phrenologist, founded one of the argu- 
ments for his system on the organization of the brain; but his 
great dependence was upon the law of human development. He 
admitted no essential difference between man and irrational ani- 
mals. The superiority of man is only in the degree of his intelli« 


1 Philosophie Positive, vol. ii. p. 515. 2 Vol. i. p. 11. 8 Vol. ii. p. 47 
4 Ibid. p. 73. 5 See Prof. Porter’s Human Intellect, p- 54 


an 


§4, D.] MATERIALISM. POSITIVISM. 257 


gence, which is due to his better physical organization. According 
to Comte, the whole human race, and every individual man, passes 
through three distinct stages, which he calls the theological, the met- 
aphysical, and the positive. During the first stage all events are 
referred to supernatural causes. In the first part of this stage of 
their progress, men were fetich-worshippers; then they gradually 
became polytheists, and monotheists. This he endeavors to prove 
historically in regard to the Greeks, the Romans, and the inhabi- 
tants of western Europe. As men outgrew the fetich age, so they 
outgrew the polytheistic and monotheistic forms of belief. That is, 
they ceased to refer phenomena to the agency of supernatural 
beings. 

During the metaphysical stage, phenomena are referred to un- 
seen causes, to occult powers, or forces, that is, to something which 
the senses cannot detect. This also has passed away, and men 
have come to recognize the great fact that there are no spiritual 
agencies in the universe, no efficient causes, nothing but events to 
be arranged according to the laws of sequence and resemblance. 
The order of events is invariable and necessary. What it has been 
in the past, it will be in the future. As this is the law of the de- 
velopment of the race collectively, so it is of the individual man. 
Every one, in his progress from infancy to manhood, passes through 
these several stages, the theological, the metaphysical, and the pos- 
itive. We first believe in supernatural agencies (witches, ghosts, 
souls, angels, etc.) ; then in occult causes; then only in facts dis- 
cerned by the senses. The history of the race and the experience 
of the individual man are thus made the broad and sure foundation 
of the Positive Philosophy. 


Remarks. 


1. Considering that the advocates of this philosophy are a mere 
handful; considering that nine hundred and ninety-nine millions 
of the thousand millions of our race still believe in God, it is a 
rather violent assumption that mankind have reached the stage of 
Positivism. It may be readily admitted that the progress of science 
and of Christianity has banished alchemy, astrology, witchcraft, and 
necromancy from enlightened portions of our race, but it has had 
a scarcely discernible effect in banishing belief in mind as distinct 
from matter, or in efficient causes. or in God. Admitting, there- 
fore, the principle of the argument to be correct, the conclusion 
arrived at is contradicted by facts. 

2. The principle itself, however, is a groundless assumption. 

VoL. L 17 


258 PART I.—THEOLOGY. (Cu. IJ. — Ant1-Tuetsm. 


There has been no such development of the race, and there is no 
such development of the individual man, as the argument supposes. 
Much less is it true, as Comte maintains, that these several meth- 
ods of dealing with phenomena are antagonistic and mutually ex- 
clusive ; that if we believe in spiritual agents, we cannot believe in 
unseen, metaphysical causes; and that if we believe in the latter we 
cannot believe in the former. The fact is, the great mass of man- 
kind, educated and uneducated, believe in both. They believe in 
God and mind, as well as in occult causes, such as electricity, 
magnetism, and other physical forces; which, in, Comte’s sense 
of the word, are metaphysical. 

With regard to this assumed law of progress, Prof. Huxley, who. 
is as completely emancipated from the trammels of authority as 
any man of science now living, says, in the first place, that Comte 
contradicts himself as to this fundamental principle. In proof he 
quotes a long passage from the ‘‘ Philosophie Positive,” in which 
Comte teaches, —“(a) Asa matter of fact, the human intellect has 
not been invariably subjected to the law of the three states, and, 
therefore, the necessity of the law cannot be demonstrable @ priort. 
(6.) Much of our knowledge of all kinds has no¢ passed through the 
three states, and more particularly, as M. Comte is careful to point 
out, not through the first. (¢.) The positive state has more or 
less coexisted with the theological, from the dawn of human intel- 
ligence. And, by way of completing the series of contradictions, 
the assertion that the three states are ‘essentially different and 
even radically opposed,’ is met a little lower on the same page by 
the declaration that ‘the metaphysical ‘state is, at bottom, nothing 
but a simple general modification of the first.’” ‘* Men of science,” 
he adds, “are not in the habit of paying much attention to ‘laws’ 
stated in this fashion.” 4 

After showing that the individual man does not pass through 
these several states, Prof. Huxley says, ‘‘ What is true of the indi- 
vidual is, mutatis mutandis, true of the intellectual development 
of the species. It is absurd to say of men in a state of primitive 
savagory, that all their conceptions are in a theological state. Nine 
tenths of them are eminently realistic, and as ‘ positive’ as igno- 
rance and narrowness can make them.” 2 

Besides, it is not true that the race of men now existing on the 
earth, were in their primitive state fetich-worshippers, or that they 


1 Lay Sermons, pp. 174, 175. 
2 Huxley's Lay Sermons, Addresses, etc., London, 1870, No. VIII. “ The Scienti 
of Positivism,” p. 178. 5 Maes ae 


§ 4, D.] MATERIALISM. POSITIVISM. 259 


gradually rose to polytheism and monotheism. The reverse is 
true. Not only revelation, but all history and tradition, go to show 
that the primitive state of our race was its highest state, at least 
so far as religion is concerned. Monotheism was the earliest form 
of religion among men. To that succeeded nature-worship and 
pantheism, and to that polytheism. It is a historical fact that 
monotheism was not reached by a process of development. Mono- 
theism was first ; it gradually perished from among men, except as 
miraculously preserved among the Hebrews, and from them diffused 
through the medium of, or rather, in the form of, Christianity. It 
extends nowhere beyond the influence, direct or indirect, of the 
supernatural revelation contained in the Bible. This is a fact which 
scientific men should not overlook in their deductions. 
3. Comte was guilty of the unfairness of confining his survey to 
a small portion of the nations of the earth; and that the portion 
too which had been brought under the influence of Christianity. 
If the law which he sought to establish be universal and necessary, 
it must have operated from the beginning in India and China as 
well as in Europe. The millions of those regions have not reached 
the monotheistic, much less the metaphysical, and still less the 
positive stage of development. India especially furnishes a striking 
refutation of this theory. The Hindus are a highly intellectual 
race. Their language and literature are on a par with those of 
Greece and Rome. Their philosophers, nearly three thousand 
years ago, anticipated the highest results reached by the Schellings 
and Hegels of our day. Yet of all the nations of the earth the 
Hindus are the least materialistic, or positive, in their views of 
nature. With them the supernatural or spiritual is alone real. 
The Hindus, therefore, cannot be subject to that universal and 
necessary law of development which is assumed as the foundation 
of the Positive Philosophy. 

4, It is of course presumptuous and idle to attempt to reason 
men out of their senses, or to convince them that what their very 
nature teaches them is true, is utterly false and untrustworthy. 
This, however, Comte not only attempts, but his whole system is 
founded on the assumption that our nature is a delusion and a lie. 
That is, it is founded on the assumption that intuitive truths are 
false. It is intuitively true that we are free agents. This Comte 
denies. It is intuitively true that there is a specific and essential 
difference between right and wrong. This is denied. It is intu- 
itively true that every effect has an efficient cause. This too is 
denied. It is intuitively true that there is a God to whom men 


260 PART I.— THEOLOGY. ([Cu. I. — Ant1-THErsM. 


are responsible for their character and conduct. This also is denied. 
Had all the intellect and all the knowledge ever possessed by men 
and angels been concentrated in the person of Comte, it had still 
been folly in him to attempt to found a system involving the denial 
of such truths as these. The Christian is not afraid to say one thing 
more, It is intuitively true, to all who have eyes to see, that Jesus 
Christ is the Son uf God, and that his gospel is the wisdom of God 
and the power of God unto salvation, and that it is absolutely im- 
possible that any theory which is opposed to these divine intuitions 
can be true. 

Another illustration of the presumptuous character of this phi- 
losophy is found in what it teaches concerning Sociology. Scientific 
men of all countries have long been laboriously engaged in making 
meteorological observations, and yet such are the number and com- 
plexity of the causes which determine the state of the weather, 
that no man is able to predict how the wind will blow forty-eight 
hours, much less, a year, in advance. The causes which determins 
human action in the individual and in society, are far more com- 
plex and inscrutable than those which determine the state of ths 
weather. Yet Comte assumes to have reduced Sociology to a 
science, vying with mathematics in’ certainty. ‘I will venture te 
say,” is his confident assertion, ‘‘ that Sociological science, though 
only established by this book, already rivals mathematical science 
itself, not in precision and fecundity, but in positivity and ration- 
ality.”’} 

Practical Applications of Positivism. 

The practical applications of this philosophy are very serious. 
Positivism claims the right of absolute and universal control over 
all human affairs ; over education, politics, social organization, and 
religion. As the progress of science has banished all liberty of 
opinion or of action from the departments of mathematics and astron- 
omy, so it must banish it from every other department of human 
thought and activity. Speaking of liberty of conscience, Comte 
says: ‘¢ Negative as we now see this dogma to be, signifying re- 
lease from old authority, while waiting for the necessity of positive 
science, the absolute character supposed to reside in it gave it 
energy to fulfil its revolutionary destination. .... This dogma 
can never be an organic principle ; and, moreover, it constitutes an 
obstacle to reorganization, now that its activity is no louger ab- 
sorbed by the demolition of the old political order... .. Oan it 
be supposed,” he asks, ‘ that the most important and the most deli- 

1 Philosophie Positive, vol. ii. p. 516. 


$4, D.] MATERIALISM. POSITIVISM. 261 


cate conceptions, and those which by their complexity are accessi- 
ble to only a small number of highly prepared understandings, are 
to be abandoned to the arbitrary and variable decisions of the least 
| competent minds.” ! This argument is conclusive. If social life, 
the acts of men, are as much and as certainly determined by phys- 
{ ical laws as material changes, those who have ascertained these 
F laws are entitled to control all other men. As it would be prepos- 
terous to allow men to build our houses or navigate our ships whe 
r would not obey the laws of nature, so it would be absurd, on this 
hypothesis, to allow those ignorant of social laws to govern society. 
: Comte avows his admiration, not of popish doctrine, but of the 
: papal organization, which in the new order of things he proposes 
to continue. ‘ Papal infallibility,” he says,? ‘‘ was a great intellec- 
tual and social advance.” Prof. Huxley pithily characterizes Posi- 
tivism, in this regard, as “ Catholicism minus Christianity.” 
Religion is not excepted from this absolute subjection. The 
1 Positive Philosophy, as it denies the existence of the soul and the 
being of God, would seem to leave no place for religion. Comte 
____ placed on the title-page of his “ Discours sur l’Ensemble du Posi- 
tivisme,” the announcement that his design was to reorganize soci- 
ety “sans Dieu ni Roi.” Nevertheless, as men must:have, as they 
always have had, some religion, a philosophy which aspired to ab- 
solute dominion over all the departments of human life, must make 
some provision for this universal, although imaginary, necessity of 
our nature. Comte, therefore, published a catechism of religious 
belief, and a ritual of religious worship. The object of worship 
was to be the aggregate of humanity formed by the absorption of 
the successive generations of men. Every great man has two forms 
of existence: one conscious before death; the other after death, 
unconscious, in the hearts and intellects of other men. The God 
of the Positive Philosophy is, therefore, the aggregate of the mem- 
ories of great men. ‘‘ Undoubtedly,” says Huxley, “ ‘ Dieu’ dis- 
appeared, but the ‘ Noveau Grand-Etre Supréme,’ a gigantic fetich, 
turned out bran-new by M. Comte’s own hands, reigned in his 
stead. ‘Roi’ also was not heard of; but in his place I found a 
minutely-defined social organization, which, if it ever came into 
practice, would exert a despotic authority such as no sultan has 
rivalled, and no Puritan presbytery in its palmiest days could hope 
to excel. While, as for the ‘ culte systématique de VPhumanité,’ I, 
in my blindness, could not distinguish it from sheer Popery, with 


1 Philosophie Positive, vol. ii. pp. 14, 15. 2 Ibid. vol. ii. p. 268 


262 PART IL—THEOLOGY. ([Ca. Il. — Anr1-THxism. 


M. Comte in the chair of St. Peter, and the names of most of the 
saints changed.”’ 1 

There are, however, to be two forms of worship, the one private, 
the other public. The special object of the former is woman, be- 
cause she is the most perfect representative of humanity. As 
‘“ Mother, she excites veneration ; as wife, affection ; and as daugh 
ter, kindness.”” To excite these sentiments, ideal woman is to be 
worshipped. Humanity, or the memory of great men, is the ob- 
ject for public worship, regarding which minute details are given. 
The new religion is to have ten sacraments, a peculiar architecture, 
and an extended hierarchy, under the control of one absolute High 
Priest. Such is the system which Comte was allowed to believe 
would supersede the gospel of Jesus Christ. It has already al- 
most passed away. Among the advanced men of science in Eng- 
land there is scarcely one so poor as to do it reverence.” 


E. Scientific Materialism. 
Leading Principles. 


The leading principles of the modern scientific form of Materal- 
ism are embraced, by some at least, who do not consider them 
selves Materialists. They, however, adopt the language of the 
system, and avow principles which, in their generally accepted 
meaning, constitute what in the history of human thought is known 
as Materialism. ; 

The most important of these principles are the following, many 
of which, however, are not peculiar to the system. 

1. Matter and force are inseparable. Wherever there is matter 
there is force, and wherever there is force there is matter. This 


proposition, at least in the first instance, is to be understood only 
of physical force. 


1 Lay Sermons, etc., p. 164. 

2 Professor Huxley says: ‘‘ For these sixteen years, it has been a periodical source of 
irritation to me to find M. Comte put forward as a representative of scientific thought; and 
to observe that writers whose philosophy had its legitimate parent in Hume, or in them- 
selves, were labelled ‘Comtists,’ or ‘ Positivists,’ by public writers, even in spite of vehe- 
ment protests to the contrary. It has cost Mr. Mill hard rubbings to get that label off; and 
I watch Mr. Spencer, as one regards a good man struggling with adversity, still engaged in 
eluding its adhesiveness, and ready to tear away skin and all, rather than let it stick. My 
own turn might come next; and, therefore, when an eminent prelate the other day gave 
currency and authority to the popular confusion, I took an opportunity of incidentally re- 
vindicating Hume’s property in the so-called ‘New Philosophy ' and at the same time of 
repudiating Comtism on my own behalf.” — Ut supra, p. 165. ‘Lhe mistake complained of 
is a very natural one, ag Comte and Hume have so much in common. Professor Huxley’s 
quotation from Faust is in point here: — 

“‘ Ungefihr sagt das der Pfarrer auch 
Nur mit ein bischen andern Worten.” 


— a oe — 


§ 4, EB.) MATERIALISM. ITS SCIENTIFIC FORM. 268 


2. All physical forces, such as light, heat, chemical affinities, 
electricity, magnetism, etc., etc., are convertible. Light may be 
converted into heat, and heat into light ; either into electricity, and 
electricity into either; and so through the whole range. ‘This is 
what is called the correlation of forces. Count Rumford, in a com- 
munication to the Royal Society of London, in 1798, satisfied that 
the heat generated in boring cannon could not be otherwise ac- 
counted for, advanced the doctrine that heat is a peculiar mode of 
motion. Since then the doctrine has been generalized, and it is 
now the commonly received opinion that all the physical forces are 
resolvable into motion. This generalization, however, is not ac- 
cepted by all scientific men. They find it impossible to conceive 
how gravitation, which acts instantaneously at all distances, can be 
motion. It is simply a force which tends to produce motion. 

3. This motion, however, is not of a fluid, or ether, or any other 
imponderable substance peculiar to each particdlar kind of force. 
As sound consists in, or rather, is produced by. the vibrations of 
the atmosphere, it was natural to assume that light was the undu- 
lation of one medium, heat of another, electricity of another. 
This theory is discarded. The motion intended is motion in the 
molecules of the matter affected. When iron is heated, nothing is 
added to it. There is no imponderable substance called caloric. 
All that occurs is, that the molecules of the iron are agitated in a 
particular way. If the iron be magnetized, it is only a different 
kind of motion imparted to its constituent atoms. So of all other 
kinds of force. When, however, light or heat is radiated from a 
distant object, the motion which constitutes these forces must be 
transmitted through some medium. For where there is’ motion, 
there must be something that moves. And, therefore, if heat be 
motion in the molecules of the sun, that heat could not reach us 
unless there was some material medium between us and the sun. 

4, The physical forces are not only convertible one into any of 
the others, but they are quantitively equivalent ; that is, a given 
amount of heat will produce an amount of light or of electricity, or 
of any other force, which, if it could be utilized, would reproduce 
precisely that amount of heat. A cannon-ball, when it impinges on 
a target, produces heat enough to give it the velocity which it had 
at the moment of contact. A certain amount of light and heat 
derived from the sun is expended in the formation of a certain 
amount of wood or coal; that amount of wood or coal will furnish 
precisely the amount of light and heat which was expended in its 
production. Count Rumford experimented to determine the quan- 


264 PART 1.—THEOLOGY.  [Cu. I.— Antr-Tarism 


titive relation between motion and heat, and arrived at very nearly 
the same conclusion as that reached by Dr. Joule of Manchester, 
England, who found that one pound of matter, falling seven hun- 
dred and seventy-two feet, will produce heat enough to raise the 
temperature of a pound of water one degree of Fahrenheit. This is 
now received as the unit of force. 

5. Force is indestructible. It is never increased or diminished. 
What is lost in one form is taken upin another. Forces are, there- 
fore, indestructible, convertible, and imponderable agents. This 
correlation and conservation of forces is declared by Dr. Carpenter, 
the eminent physiologist, to be “ now amongst the best established 
generalizations of physical science,” and the greatest scientific 
triumph of the age; ‘ thanks,” as he says, ‘“ to the labors of Fara- 
day, Grove, Joule, Thomson, and Tyndall, to say nothing of those 
of Helmholtz and other distinguished continental savans.”’ ? 


Correlation of the Physical and Vital Forces. 


So long as this doctrine of the correlation of forces is confined to 
the department of physics, it is a purely scientific question, in which 
the theologian has no special interest. Unhappily it has not been 
thus confined. Dr. Carpenter, in the paper just quoted, says, 
“‘ Every thoughtful physiologist must desire to see the same course 
of inquiry thoroughly pursued in regard to the phenomena of living 
bodies.”? The first step in that direction, he adds, was taken by 
Dr. Mayer of Germany, in his remarkable treatise on “ Organic 
Movement in its Relation to Material Changes.” 

There appear to be three forms of opinion among scientific men, 
of the ‘advanced ”’ school, as to the relation between vital and 
physical forces. First, there are some, of whom Dr. Carpenter is 
one, who hold that the forces by which vital processes are carried 
on, are light, heat, electricity, and so forth, but that these are 
directed or controlled by a force of a different kind, called “a 
directing agency.” . 


Dr. Carpenter’s Theory. 


Dr. Carpenter denies that there is any such thing as vitality, or 
vital force, or nisus formativus, or Bildungstrieb. Two germs 
may be selected between which neither the microscope nor chem- 
ical analysis can detect the slightest difference ; yet one develops 


1 See Correlation and Conservation of Forces. A collection of papers by distinguished 
scientific men. By Edward L. Youmans, M. D. New York, 1865, p. 405. 
2 Ibid. p. 405. 


—- 


§4,E.] MATERIALISM. ITS SCIENTIFIC FORM. 26 


into a fish, another into a bird. Why is this? Dr. Carpenter 
answers because of a “directing agency” residing in the germ. 
His language is: ‘The prevalent opinion has until lately been, 
that this power is inherent in the germ; which has been supposed 
to Jerive from its parent not merely its material substance, but a 
nisus formativus, Bildungstrieb, or germ-force, in virtue of which 
it builds itself up into the likeness of its parent, and maintains itself 
in that likeness until the force is exhausted, and at the same time 
imparting a fraction of it to each of its progeny.”! This opinion 
he rejects ; but adds, “‘ When we look carefully into the question, 
we find that what the germ really supplies, is not the force, but the 
directive agency ; thus rather resembling the control exercised by 
the superintendent builder, who is charged with working out the 
design of the architect, than the bodily force of the workmen who 
labor under his guidance in the construction of the fabric.” ? 
The conclusion at which he arrives is “that the correlation be- 
tween heat and the organizing force of plants is not less intimate 
than that which exists between heat and motion. The special 
attribute of the vegetable germ is its power of utilizing, after its 
own peculiar fashion, the heat which it receives, and of applying a 
constructive power to the building up of its fabric after its charac- 
teristic type.” 

On this doctrine of Carpenter it may be remarked, (1.) That it 
seems to be self-contradictory. He denies to the germ a nisus for- 
mativus, or, Bildungstrieb, and attributes to it ‘‘a constructive 
power.”’ What is the difference ? The English phrase is a literal 
translation of the German word. (2.) He says that “heat and 
the organizing force of plants’ are correlated, 7. ¢., they are con- 
vertible one into the other and are quantitively equivalent; and 
yet the relation between them is analogous to that between a su- 
perintending builder and the strength of the workmen. According 
to this, the physical strength of the hod-man is convertible into the 
intellect of the builder and is its quantitive equivalent. We do not 
see how this contradiction is to be avoided, unless he uses the 
phrases -‘‘ constructive force,” “ organizing force,” sometimes for 
the “directing agency” in the germ, and sometimes, for the phys- 
ical forces which that agency controls. But if he distinguishes 
between the “ directing agency.” and “the organizing force,” then 
there is no correlation between the physical force and “ the vital 
activity of the germ.” 


1 See Correlation and Conservation of Forces, p. 411. 2 Ibid. p. 412, 
8 Ibid. p. 119. Also, New Quarterly Journal of Science for 1864. 


266 PART L—THEOLOGY.  [Cu. II]. — Antr-Tamioos 


8. According not only to the common, but to the latest, opinion 
of physiologists, the germ supplies something more than ‘a direct- 
ing agency ” (which must itself be a force). It not only directs, 
but it effects, or produces changes. It is an operative force, acting 
not by, but against physical forces or chemical affinities ; counter- 
acting them as long as it continues. As soon as the germ or plant 
or tissue dies, the physical forces obtain ascendency and disintegra- 
tion takes place. This Dr. Carpenter himself admits. The most 
marked characteristic, he says, which distinguishes “ vital from 
every kind of physical activity,” is, ‘‘ the fact that a germ endowed 
with life, develops itself into-an organism of a type resembling 
that of its parent; that this organism is the subject of incessant 
changes, which all tend, in the first place, to the evolution of its 
typical form; and subsequently to its maintenance in that form, 
notwithstanding the antagonism of chemical and physical agencies, 
which are continually tending to produce its disintegration ; but 
that, as its term of existence is prolonged, its conservative power 
declines so as to become less and less able to resist these disinte- 
grating forces, to which it finally succumbs, leaving the organism 
to be resolved by their agency into the components from which its 
materials were originally drawn.”! This does not mean that 
chemical agencies have no part to act in the growth and develop- 
ment of plants and animals, but it certainly does mean that the 
vital force or life is an agency or power different from any kind of 
physical force. Life and physical force, therefore, are not iden- 
tical. They are not correlated. The former is not a mere form of 
the latter. 

One of the most eminent of living physiologists is Dr. John Mar- 
shall, and he, although far from belonging to the old school, dis- 
tinctly takes the ground that there is a vital force which cannot be 
resolved. into any of the physical forces operative in the external, 
organic world. He says:* “ All the strictly physical processes 
within the body, whether chemical, mechanical, thermic, electric, 
or photic, are performed by modifications of the common force 
which produces similar phenomena in the inorganic world around 
us. There exists, however, in the living animal, as in the living 
vegetable organism, a special formative or organizing energy, 
evolving the perfect animal or plant from the primitive ovum or 
ovule, developing its various tissues and organs, and conserviug 
them from the commencement to the termination of its individual 


1 Youmans, p. 407. 
2 Outlines of Physiology, Smith’s Philadelphia edition, 1868, p. 982. 


ee 


i Me © 


—_——weo 


§ 4, E.] MATERIALISM. ITS SCIENTIFIC FORM. . 267 


existence. The influence of this force, moreover, extends from 
the parent to the offspring, generation after generation.” This is 
the commonly received doctrine, that physical phenomena are to 
be referred to physical forces; vital phenomena to vital force; and 
mental phenomena to mind. The new doctrine, however, is that 
all phenomena are to be referred to physical forces, no other forces 
being either known or knowable. 


The more advanced Opinions. 


The second view adopted in reference to the relation of physical 
to vital force, is, that if there be any difference it cannot be known. 
Physical forces are known. They can be measured. They can not 
only be converted one into another, but can be proved to be quan- 
titively equivalent. If any other kind of force be assumed to 
account for vital phenomena, the assumption is gratuitous. It is 
taking for granted that something exists of which we know, and 
can know nothing. It must, therefore, lie beyond the sphere of 
science and is of no importance. Even Dr. Carpenter uses such 
language as this: “ Another class of reasoners have cut the knot 
which they could not untie, by attributing all the actions of living 
bodies for which physics and chemistry cannot account, to a hypo- 
thetical ‘ vital principle ;’ a shadowy agency that does everything 
in its own way, but refuses to be made the subject of scientific ex- 
amination ; like the ‘ od-force,’ or the ‘spiritual power” to which the 
lovers of the marvellous are so fond of attributing the mysterious 
movements of turning and tilting tables.” 1+ ‘If a man asks me,” 
says Prof. Huxley, “‘ what the politics of the inhabitants of the 
moon are, and I reply, that I do not know; that neither I, nor any 
one else, have any means of knowing; and that, under these cir- 
cumstances, I decline to trouble myself about the subject at all, I 
do not think he has any right to call me a skeptic.”? It is thus 
he banishes vitality from the sphere of science, because everything, 
except matter and its functions, belongs to the region of the un- 
known and the unknowable. Prof. Tyndall and Herbert Spencer 
take, at times, the same ground. 

But, although such writers as Dr. Carpenter, in apparent con- 
tradiction to their own admissions, acknowledge the existence of 
“a directing agency” in the living germ, the majority of the 
writers of this school refuse to recognize any such agency or force 
as a scientific truth. The only difference between the second and 


1 Youmans, p. 402. 
2 “Physical Basis of Life” in his Lay Sermons, p. 158. 


268 FART L.— THEOLOGY. Cu. I. — Anri-Tarsm. 


third views on this general subject, above referred to, is, that ac- 
cording to the one, the assumption of vital as distinct from physical 
force, is regarded as gratuitous and unnecessary ; according to the 
other, any snch assumption is declared to be unphilosophical, and’ 
to be utterly discarded. The same writer sometimes takes one, 
and sometimes the other of these grounds. 


The Argument for the Correlation of Physical and Vital Forces. 


Thus Prof. Huxley, although a few years since a firm advocate 
of vital, as distinct from physical force, in his discourse on the 
*‘ Physical Basis of Life,” takes the opposite ground. ‘The argu- 
ment is this: the elements furnished by the mineral kingdom are 
taken up by the plant, and, under the influence of light and heat, 
transformed into organized matter. The products of vegetation, 
starch, sugar, fibrine, etc., are purely material. This is true even 
of protoplasm, or living matter, or the physical basis of life, as it is 
called, which is elaborated by the plant out of the lifeless materials 
furnished by the soil and the atmosphere. There is indeed a great 
difference between the products of vegetation and the lifeless ele- 
ments out of which they are formed. But so there is between the 
elements of water and water itself. If an electric spark be passed 
through a volume of oxygen and hydrogen gas, it becomes water, 
which weighs precisely as much as the volume of the two gases of 
which it is composed. It is oxygen and hydrogen in combination, 
and nothing more. Yet the properties of the water are entirely 
different from those of the oxygen and hydrogen. In like manner 
there is a great difference between the properties of the carbonic 
acid, the water, and the ammonia, of which the plant is composed, 
and the living plant itself. But as it would be unphilosophical to 
assume the existence of an unknown something called aquosity to 
account for the difference between water and its elements, it is no 
less unphilosophical to assume the existence of an unknown some- 
thing called vitality to account for the difference between it and the 
lifeless materials of which living matter is composed. 


. Animal Lnfe. 

In like manner all the phenomena of animal life are referred to 
the physical forces inseparable from the matter which composes the 
animal structure. It is true the functions of matter in the animal 
tissues are higher than in those of the plant. But the advocates 
of the theory under consideration, endeavor to reduce the differ- 
ence between animal and vegetable life toa minimum. It 1s only 


§ 4, E.] MATERIALISM. ITS SCIENTIFIC FORM. 269 


the upper surface of the leaf which is susceptible of the peculiar 
effects of light. So it is only the optic nerve that is affected in a 
way which is necessary to vision. The sensitive plant contracts 
when touched ; and so does the animal muscle when the proper 
stimulus, nervous or electric, is applied. In short, as all the opera- 
tions of vegetable life are due to physical forces, so all the phenom- 
ena of animal life are due to the same causes. 

On this subject Prof. Huxley says: “* The matter of life is com- 
posed of ordinary matter, differing from it only in the manner in 
which its atoms are aggregated. It is built up of ordinary matter, 
and again resolved into ordinary matter when its work is done.” 1 
By protoplasm, or matter of life, he sometimes means matter which 
exhibits the phenomena of life; and sometimes, matter which hav- 
ing been elaborated by the plant or animal, is capable of support- 
ing life. Hence he calls boiled mutton protoplasm. 

The only difference between inorganic, lifeless matter, and liv- 
ing plants or animals, is in the manner in which their atoms are 
ageregated. “Carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen, are all 
lifeless bodies. Of these, carbon and oxygen unite, in certain pro- 
portions, and under certain conditions, to give rise to carbonic acid; 
hydrogen and oxygen produce water; nitrogen and hydrogen give 
rise to ammonia. These new compounds, like the elementary 
bodies of which they are composed, are lifeless. But when they are 
brought together, under certain conditions they give rise to the 
still more complex body, protoplasm, and this protoplasm exhibits 
the phenomena of life. I see no break in this series of steps in 
molecular complication, and I am unable to understand why the 
language which is applicable to any one term of the series may not 
be used to any of the others. .... When hydrogen and oxy- 
gen are mixed in a certain proportion, and an electric spark is 
passed through them, they disappear, and a quantity of water, equal 
in weight to the sum of their weights, appears in their place. 
There is not the slightest parity between the passive and active 
powers of the water and those of the oxygen and hydrogen which 
have given rise to it.” ‘* What justification is there, then, for the 
assumption of the existence in the living matter of a something 
which has no representative, or correlative, in the not living mat- 
ter which gave rise to it? What better philosophical status has 
‘ vitality’ than ‘ aquosity?’ And why should ‘ vitality ’ hope for 
a better: fate than the other ‘itys’ which have disappeared since 
Martinus Scriblerus accounted for the operation of the meat-jack 


1 Lay Sermons, p. 144. 2 Ibid, p. 149. 


270 PART Il.— THEOLOGY. [(Cu. I. — Ant1-Tuzism. 


by its inherent ‘ meat-roasting quality,’ and scorned the material- 
ism of those who explained the turning of the spit by a certain mech- 
anism worked by the draught of the chimney? .. . . If the prop- 
erties of water may be properly said to result from the nature and 
disposition of its component molecules, I can find no intelligible 
ground for refusing to say that the properties of protoplasm result 
from the nature and disposition of its molecules.” 1 

The doctrine, therefore, is, that carbonic acid, water, and am- 
monia, lifeless bodies, under certain conditions, become living mat- 
ter, not in virtue of any new force or principle communicated to 
them, but solely in virtue of a different arrangement of their mole- 
cules. Of this living matter all plants and animals are composed, 
and to the properties or physical forces inherent in the matter of 
which they are composed, all the phenomena of vegetable and ani-" 
mal life are to be referred. ‘ Protoplasm,” says Prof. Huxley, “ is 
the clay of the potter: which, bake it and paint it as he will, re- 
mains clay, separated by artifice and not by nature, from the com- 
monest brick or sun-dried clod.”’ 2 As the brick, no matter what 
its shape or color, can have no properties not inherent in the clay, 
so vegetable or animal organisms can have no properties which do 
not belong to protoplasm, which, in the last analysis, is nothing but 
carbonic acid, water, and ammonia. 

Professor Huxley is not only a distinguished naturalist, but a~ 
popular lecturer and preacher of “ Lay Sermons,” and thus has 
become a representative man among the advocates of this new form 
of Materialism. He is, however, very far from standing alone. 
“Some of the most distinguished living physicists, chemists, and 
naturalists,” says Dr. Beale, ‘‘ have accepted this physical theory 
of life. They have taught that life is but a mode of ordinary force, 
and that the living thing differs from the non-living thing, not in 
quality, or essence, or kind, but merely in degree.” 8 ‘So long,” 
says the same writer, ‘as the advocates of the physical doctrine 
of life contented themselves with ridiculing ‘vitality’ as a fiction 
and a myth, because it could not be made evident to the senses, 
measured or weighed, or proved scientifically to exist, their posi- 
tion was not easily assailed ; but now when they assert dogmati- 
cally that vital force is only a form or mode of ordinary motion, 
they are bound to show that the assertion rests upon evidence, or 
it will be regarded by thoughtful men as one of a large number 
of fanciful hypotheses, advocated only by those who desire to swell 


1 Lay Sermons, p. 151. 2 Ibid. p. 142. 


8 Protoplasm; or Life, Matier, and Mind, by Lionel 8. Beale, M. B., F. R. 8. Second 
edition, London, 1870, p. 3. 


§ 4, E.] MATERIALISM. ITS SCIENTIFIC FORM. 271 


the ranks of the teachers and expounders of dogmatic science, 
which, although pretentious and authoritative, must ever be in- 
erent and unprogressive.”’ ! 


Mental Phenomena. 


Not only are the operations of vegetable and animal life, accord- 
ing to the new doctrine, due to physical forces, but the same is true 
of all mental operations. If the argument from analogy is valid 
in the one case, it is valid in the other. If we must believe that 
the properties of protoplasm, or living matter, are to be referred to 
the mode in which its molecules are aggregated, because the prop- 
erties of water are due to the peculiar aggregation of the atoms 
of which its elements, hydrogen and oxygen, are composed ; then 
we must believe that all thought and feeling are due to the molee- 
ular composition and movements of the brain atoms. Accord- 
ingly, Professor Huxley, after saying that “ vitality” has no better 
philosophical standing than “ aquosity,’’ warns his readers that they 
cannot stop with that admission. ‘I bid you beware,” he says, 
“that in accepting these conclusions, you are placing your feet on 
the first rung of a ladder, which in most people’s estimation is the 
reverse of Jacob’s, and leads to the antipodes of heaven. It may 
seem asmall thing to admit that the dull vital actions of a fungus or 
a foraminifer are the properties of their protoplasm, and are the di- 
rect results of the nature of the matter of which they are composed. 
But if, as I have endeavored to prove to you, their protoplasm is 
essentially identical with, and most readily converted into, that of 
any animal, I can discover no logical halting-place, between the 
admission that such is the case, and the further concession that all 
vital action may with equal propriety be said to be the result of 
the molecular forces of the protoplasm which displays it. And if 
so, it must be true, in the same sense and to the same extent, that 
the thoughts to which I am now giving utterance, and your 
thoughts regarding them, are the expression of molecular changes 
in that matter of life which is the source of our other vital phe- 
nomena.” ‘Further,’’ he says, “I take it to be demonstrable 
that it is utterly impossible to prove that anything whatever may 
not be the effect of a material and necessary cause, and that 
human logic is equally incompetent to prove that any act is really 
spontaneous. A really spontaneous act is one which, by the as- 
sumption, has no cause [i. e. no material cause, for he admits no 
other]; and the attempt to prove such a negative as this is, on the 

1 Protoplasm, p 4. 2 Lay Sermons, pp. 151, 152. 


272 PART I.— THEOLOGY. [Cu. II. — Anr1-Tuxism. 


face of the matter, absurd. And while it is thus a philosophical 
impossibility to demonstrate that any given phenomenon is not the. 
effect of a material cause, any one who is acquainted with the 
history of science will admit that its progress has in all ages meant, 
and now more than ever means, the extension of the province of 
what we call matter and causation, and the concomitant gradual 
banishment from all regions of human thought of what we call 
spirit and spontaneity.” 1 ‘ After all, what do we know of this 
terrible ‘ matter,’ except as a name for the unknown and hypothet- 
ical cause of states of our own consciousness? And what do we 
know of that ‘spirit’ over whose threatened extinction by matter 
a great 1amentation is arising, . . . . except that it is also a name 
for an unknown and hypothetical cause or condition of states of 
consciousness? In other words, matter and spirit are but names 
for the imaginary substrata of groups of natural phenomena.” 2 
*‘ As surely as every future grows out of past and present, so will 
the physiology of the future gradually extend the realm of matter 
and law until it is co-extensive with knowledge, with feeling, and 
with action.? He cites the often-quoted exhortation of Hume, and 
enforces “‘ the most wise advice” which it contains. “If we take 
in our hand,” says Hume, “any volume of divinity or school-met- 
aphysics, for instance ; let us ask, does it contain any abstract rea- 
soniuy concerning quantity or number? No. Does it contain any 
experimental reasoning concerning matter of fact or existence ? 
No. Commit it, then, to the flames ; for it can contain nothing but 
sophistry and illusion.” 4 : 

The history of human speculation does not furnish a more ex- 
plicit avowal of Materialism than that contained in the above quo- 
tations. All known effects are ascribed to material causes. Spirit 
is declared to have only an imaginary existence. Spontaneity is 
pronounced an absurdity. Necessity is affirmed to be inexorable 
and universal. Yet Huxley says he is no Materialist. . This in a 
sense is true. He is not a Materialist, because he believes in neither 
matter nor spirit. He avows himself a disciple of Hume, who 
taught that we know nothing but impressions and ideas. Sub- 
stance, whether material or spiritual, efficiency, and God, are ban- 
ished from the sphere of knowledge to that of « sophistry and 
illusion.” He avows his fellowship with Herbert Spencer, the 
fundamental principle of whose “ New Philosophy ” is, that all we 
know, or can know, is, that force is and that it is persistent, while 


1 Lay Sermons, pp. 155, 156. 2 Ibid. p. 157. 8 Ibid. p. 1 
4 Hume, Works, edit. Edinburgh, 1826, iy. p. 193. Bao 


§ 4, EB] MATERIALISM. ITS SCIENTIFIC FORM. 278 


force itself is absolutely inscrutable. This blots the soul and God 
out of existence, except as those words indicate an unknown force. 
But as he also holds that all forces are convertible, the distinction 
between material and meittal forces, whether human or divine, is 
obliterated. He avails himself of the common assumption that his 
theory does not degrade spirit, but exalts matter. It-is the verdict 
of history, however, as Julius Miiller truly says, “ That every at- 
tempt to spiritualize matter ends in materializing spirit.” On this 
subject Spencer says: “* Men who have not risen above that vul- 
gar conception which unites with matter the contemptuous epithets 
‘gross’ and ‘brute,’ may naturally feel dismay at the proposal to 
reduce the phenomena of life, of mind, and of society, to a level 
with those which they think so degraded. ... . The course pro- 
posed does not imply a degradation of the so-called higher, but an 
elevation of the so-called lower.” 1 This at least is an avowal that 
the phenomena of life, mind, and society are to be referred to 
material or physical causes. This, indeed, he repeatedly asserts. 
After insisting on the transformation of physical forces into chemi- 
eal, and these into vital, he adds, “ Many will be alarmed by the 
assertion that the forces which we distinguish as mental, come 
within the same generalization. Yet there is no alternative but to 
make this concession.2. ... Any hesitation to admit that be- 
tween the physical forces and the sensations there exists a correla- 
tion like that between the physical forces themselves, must disap- 
pear on remembering how the one correlation like the other, is not 
qualitive only, but quantitive.” ® “Various classes of facts unite 
to prove that the law of metamorphosis, which holds among the 
physical forces, holds equally between them and the mental forces. 
. . . - How this metamorphosis takes place — how a force exist« 
ing as motion, light, or heat, can become a mode of consciousness,” 
is mysterious ; but he adds, it is not a greater mystery ‘than the 
transformations of physical forces into each other.” 4 

Dr. Maudsley, a distinguished writer of the same school,® says, 
“Few, if any, will now be found to deny that with each display 
of mental power there are correlative changes in the material sub- 
stratum ; that every phenomenon of mind is the result, as manifest 
energy, of some change, molecular, chemical, or vital, in the ner- 
vous elements of the brain.” Again, he says,® “* With regard to 
the manifold phenomena of mind; by observation of them, and 
abstraction from the particular, we get the general conception, or 

1 First Principles, New York, 1869, p. 556. 2 Ibid. p. 211. 8 Ibid. p. 212. 


4 Ibid. p. 217. 5 Physiology and Pathology of Mind, Lond. 1868, p. 42,  §& Ibid. p. 43. 
VOL. IL. 18 


274 PART 1.—THEOLOGY. — [Ca. I. — Anti-Tuxism. 


the essential idea of mind, an idea which has no more existence 
out of the mind, than any other abstract idea or general term. In 
virtue, however, of that powerful tendency in the human mind to 
make the reality conformable to the idea, a tendency which has 
been at the bottom of so much confusion in philosophy, this gen- 
eral conception has been converted into an objective entity, and 
allowed to tyrannize over the understanding. A metaphysical ab- 
straction has been made into a spiritual entity and a complete bar- 
rier thereby interposed in the way of positive investigation.” 

The passages quoted above are a fair specimen of the kind of 
reasoning in which scientific men frequently indulge. In the first 
quotation, there are two clauses presented as equivalent, which 
are in fact essentially different; and substituting the one for the 
other is just a silent and subtle begging of the question. The 
first says that every mental act is attended by a molecular change 
in the brain. The other in effect says, the molecular change is 
the mental act. These two propositions are as different as day 
and night. The theory is that a certain kind of molecular motion 
in iron 7s heat; and a certain kind of molecular motion in the 
brain 7s thought. And all the proof, as far as the latter is con- 
cerned, is that the one attends the other. But the formation of 
an image on the retina attends sight, and yet does not prove that 
the image is our consciousness when we see. 

Again, in the second passage, Dr. Maudsley says that ‘‘ mind is 
an abstract idea,’ which has no existence outside “ of the mind,” 
tz. é€., outside of itself. An abstract idea has an abstract idea, 
which it makes into an objective entity. Men who deny the ob- 
jective existence of mind, can no more think, speak, or write with- 
out recognizing its existence, than an idealist can act without 
recognizing the existence of the external world. Any theory which 
involves a denial of the laws of our nature is of necessity absurd. 


The German Physicists. 


As might be expected, the scientific men of the continent are 
more outspoken in their Materialism than those of England. A 
late German writer, Th. Otto Berger, Oberlehrer fiir Mathematik 
und Physik,’ says: Materialism is the philosophy of the five 
senses, it admits nothing but on the testimony of sensation, and 
therefore denies the existence of the soul, of God, and of every- 
thing supersensuous. In its modern form, it teaches that as the 
material is alone true and real, it is uncreated and eternal. It 

1 Evangelischer Glaube, romischer Irrglaube, und weltlicher Unglaube, Gotha, 1870. 


a 


§ 4, F.] MATERIALISM. ITS SCIENTIFIC FORM. 275 


always has been and always will be. It is indestructible, and, in 
its elements, unchangeable. Force is inseparable from matter. 
According to the theory no matter is without force, and no force is 
without matter. No force exists of itself; and, therefore, there is 
none to which the creation of matter is to be referred. The uni- 
verse as it now is, is due to the gradual evolution of the two ele- 
ments, matter and force; which evolution proceeds under the opera- 
tion of fixed laws. The lower organisms are first formed; then the 
higher, until man appears. All life, whether animal, vegetable, or 
spiritual, is due to the working of physical and chemical forces in 
matter. As no power exists but in matter, there can be no divine 
Being with creative power nor any created human soul. Berger 
quotes Virchow as saying, “ The scientific naturalist knows only 
bodies and the properties of bodies.” All that is beyond them he 
pronounces ‘ transcendental, and the transcendental is the chimeri- 
eal.” He also quotes B. C. Vogt, as saying, “‘ We admit of no 
creator, either in the beginning, or in the course of the world’s 
history; and regard the idea of a self-conscious, extramundane 
ereator as ridiculous.” Man, according to these writers, consists 
only of a material body ; all mental acts and states are of the brain. 
When the body dies, the man ceases to exist. ‘The only immor- 
tality,” says Moleschott, ‘is, that when the body is disintegrated, 
its ammonia, carbonic acid, and ‘lime, serve to enrich the earth, 
and to nourish plants, which feed other generations of men.”’} 


F. Refutation. 


As Materialism, in its modern form, in all that is essential to the 
‘theory, is the same that it was a thousand years ago, the old argu- 
ments against it are as available now as they ever were. Its fun- 
damental affirmation is, that all the phenomena of the universe, 
physical, vital, and mental, are to be referred to unintelligent physi- 
cal forces; and its fundamental negation is, that there is no such 
objective entity as mind or spirit. If, therefore, it can be shown 
that unintelligent force cannot account for all the phenomena of the 
universe ; and that there is such an objective entity or substance, 
as mind, the theory is refuted. There are two methods of con- 
bating any given theory. ‘The one is the scientific, which calls in 
question the accuracy or the completeness of the data on which it 
is founded, or the validity of the inferences deduced from them. 
The other is the shorter and easier method of the reductio ad 
absurdum. ‘The latter is just as legitimate -and valid as the 

1 See Berger, 1. iii. 5; part i. pp. 264 to 271. 


276 PART I.— THEOLOGY. (Cu. I. — Anti1-THEIsM 


former. It is to be remembered that every theory includes two 
factors ; facts and principles; or, facts and ‘inferences drawn from 
them. ‘The facts may be admitted, when the principles or infer- 
ences may be denied. Thus the facts on which Materialists insist 
may, for the most part at least, be acknowledged ; while the sweep- 
ing inferences which they draw from them, in the eye of reason 
may not be worth a straw. All such inferences must be rejected 
whenever they conflict with any well-established truth, whether 
of intuition, experience, or of divine revelation. 

Three general theories have been proposed to solve the great 
problem of the universe: the Materialistic, the Pantheistic, and the 
Theistic. According to the first all the phenomena of the universe 
are due to matter and its forces; according to the second, in its 
most rational form, all power, activity, and life, are the power, activ- 
ity, and life of the one universal mind. The third, or Theistic the- 
ory, assumes the existence of an infinite, extramundane God, who 
created matter, endowed with forces, and finite minds gifted with 
‘intelligence and will; and that all the ordinary phenomena of the 
universe are proximately due to these physical and mental forces 
as constantly upheld and controlled by the omnipresent wisdom and 
power of God. It may be doubted whether any amount of argu- 
ment can deepen the conviction that the Theistic solution of this 
great problem is the true one. It is seen to be true, because it is 
seen to be a solution. It satisfactorily accounts for all the facts of 
consciousness and observation. It satisfies the reason, the heart, 
and the conscience. It is in fact self-evidently true, in the sense 
that no man to whom it has been once proposed, can ever perma- 
nently shake off the conviction of its truth. The other theories are 
not solutions. They may account for some classes of facts, but not 
for others. Our present concern, however, is with Materialism. 


Materialism contradicts the Facts of Consciousness. 


1. The primary principle of all knowledge is the knowledge of 
self. This must be assumed. Unless we are we cannot know. 
This knowledge of self is a knowledge that we are something; a 
real existence ; not merely a state or mode of something else ; but 
that the self is a substance, a real, objective entity. It is, more- 
over, a knowledge not only that we are a substance, but also that 
we are an individual subsistence, which thinks, feels, and wills. 
Here, then, is mind, 7. e., an individual, intelligent, voluntary 
agent, necessarily included in the first, and the most essential of 
all truths. If this be denied, then Hume is right, and we can 


$4, FJ MATERIALISM. ITS REFUTATION. 2TT 


know nothing. It is, moreover, included in this knowledge of the 
Self, that the body is not the Ego. Although the body is inti- 
mately, and even vitally united to the substance in which our per- 
sonality resides, it is nevertheless objective to it. It is the organ 
which the Self uses, and by which it holds communion with the 
external world. That these are really facts of consciousness, and 
not merely dicta, or arbitrary assumptions, is clear because they 
are universally and of necessity recognizede They are imbedded 
in all human languages ; they are involved in all expressions of 
human thought; they are of necessity assumed by those who the- 
oretically deny them. The Materialist cannot think, or speak, or 
write, without assuming the existence of mind as distinct from mat- 
ter, any more than the Idealist can live and act without assuming 
the existence of the external world. 

Our knowledge of mind, therefore, as a thinking substance, is 
the first, and most certain, and the most indestructible of all forms 


_ of knowledge ; because it is involved in self-knowledge, or self-con- 


sciousness, which is the indispensable condition of all knowledge. 
That which knows is, in the order of nature, before that which is 
known. It is impossible, therefore, that the Materialist can have 
any higher evidence of the existence of matter, or of force, than 
that which every man has, in his own consciousness, of the exist- 
ence of mind. To deny the one is as unreasonable as to deny the 
other. Neither can be denied, except theoretically. Asa matter 
of fact, every man believes in matter, and every man believes in 
mind. What are our sensations which are relied upon so confi- 
dently to give us knowledge of physical phenomena, but states of 
consciousness ? If consciousness is to be trusted in reporting the 
testimony of the senses, why is it not to be trusted when it reports 
the facts of our interior life ? If it is believed when it says there 
is something visible and tangible without us, why should it not be 
believed when it says there is something which thinks and wills 
within us? If unreliable in the one case, it is unreliable in the 
other; and if unreliable in either, the whole foundation of knowl- 
edge and of all faith is swept away. , Confidence in the veracity 
of consciousness is our only security from the wildest, the most ir- 
rational, and the most degrading skepticism. 

It may be said, however, that the Materialist does not deny that 
there is something within us that thinks and wills. He only says 
that that something is the brain. This, however, is to ignore one 
half. of the testimony which consciousness really bears. It testi- 
fies not only that there are such sensations as those of sight and 


278 PART I.—THEOLOGY.  ([Cu. HI. — Anri-Turism 


touch, but that there is a real objective substance which is tangible 
and visible. That is to say, we believe in virtue of the constitu- 
tion of our nature, and therefore of necessity, when we see or 
touch, that the objects of our sense-perceptions have a real, objec- 
tive existence. This every man believes, and cannot help believ- 
ing. And in like manner, when he thinks, feels, or wills, he be- 
lieves, in virtue of the constitution of his nature, and therefore 
by a like necessity, that he himself is an intelligent, feeling, and 
voluntary substance. That is, he believes that the Self is mind, or 
spirit, to which the body is objective, and therefore different from 
the Self. The belief in mind, therefore, is involved in the belief 
of self-existence. Consciousness gives us the assurance that the 
Self is an intelligent, voluntary agent, or spirit. 

2. Another fact of consciousness which Materialism denies, 
either avowedly or by necessary implication, is the fact of free 
agency. This, indeed, is involved in what has already been said. 
Nevertheless there are those who admit the existence of mind 
who deny that man is a free agent. It needs no proof that con- 
sciousness attests that men have the power of self-determination. 
Every man knows this to be true with regard to himself. Every 
man recognizes the fact with regard to his fellow-men. This again 
is a conviction which no obduracy of the conscience, and no soph- 
istry of argument can permanently obliterate from the human 
mind. This, however, Materialism denies. Physical forces act 
necessarily and uniformly. In referring all mental action to phys- 
ical forces, Materialism cannot but exclude all freedom of action. 
There is no spontaneity in chemical affinity, in light, heat, or elec- 
tricity ; yet to these forces all vital and mental phenomena are re- 
ferred. If thought be a certain kind of molecular motion of the 
brain, it is no more free than that other kind of molecular motion 
called heat. And this is the more obviously true, if they are cor- 
relative, the one being changed into the other. Accordingly Ma- 
terialists, as a general thing, are avowed necessitarians. This is 
not only true of the Positivists, but the doctrine that human action 
is determined by necessary laws, is the foundation of their whole 
system of Social Science. And Professor Huxley, as we have 
seen, pronounces a spontaneous act, from the nature of the case, 
an absurdity. It is for him a causeless effect. Every man, there- 
fore, who knows that he is a free agent, knows that Materialism 
cannot be true. 

8. Materialism contradicts the facts of our moral and religjous 
consciousness. Our moral perceptions are the clearest, the most 


=~ se. 


§4, F.] MATERIALISM. ITS REFUTATION. 279 


certain, and the most authoritative of all of our cognitions, If a 
man is shut up to deny either the testimony of his senses or the 
truths of reason, on the one hand, or the testimony of his moral 
nature on the other, all experience shows that he will give up 
sense and reason, and bow to the authority of conscience. He 
cannot help it. No man can free himself from the sense of sin, or 
of accountability. These moral convictions involve in them, or, at 
least, necessitate the belief in a God to whom we must give an ac- 
count. But Materialism, in banishing all mind in man, leaves 
nothing to be accountable ; and in banishing all mind from the uni- 
verse, leaves no Being to whom an account can be rendered. To 
substitute for an intelligent, extramundane, personal God, mere 
inscrutable force,”’ is a mockery, an insult. Our whole moral and 
religious nature declares any such theory to be false. It cannot be 
true unless our whole nature be a lie. And our nature cannot be 
a lie, unless, as Sir William Hamilton says, the whole universe be 
“a dream of adream.”’ To call upon men to worship gravitation, 
and sing hallelujahs to the whirlwind, is to call upon them to dera- 
tionalize themselves. The attempt is as idle as it is foolish and 
wicked. 

This argument from the facts of consciousness against Material- 
ism, is met by the assertion that consciousness is not to be trusted. 
Dr. Maudsley devotes the greater part of the first chapter of his 
book on the “‘ Physiology of the Mind,” to the establishment of 
this point. He argues that self-consciousness is unreliable in the 
information which it does give, and incompetent to give any ac- 
count of a large part of our mental activity. It gives no account 
of the mental phenomena of the infant, of the uncultivated adult, 
and of the insane; no account of the bodily conditions which un- 
derlie every mental manifestation; no account of the large field 
of unconscious mental action exhibited, not only in the unconscious 
assimilation of impressions, but in the registrations of ideas and of 
their associations, in their latent existence and influence when not 
active, and their recall into activity ; and no account of the influ- 
ence organically exerted on the brain by other organs of the body. 
That is, consciousness does not tell us all things, and sometimes 
tells us wrong. Cannot the same be said of the senses? Can they 
inform us of everything which goes on in the body? Do they not 
often deceive us? Are not the sensations of the delirious and the 
maniac altogether untrustworthy ? Does it follow from this that 
oul, senses are never to be relied upon ? What then becomes of 
the physical sciences, which are founded on the trustworthiness of 


280 PART I.—THEOLOGY. [Ca Il. — Anti-Tazism. 


the senses. The fact is that if the testimony of consciousness is 
not to be received as to our mental operations, it cannot be re- 
ceived as to our sensations. If we have no trustworthy evidence 
of the existence of mind, we have no valid evidence of the exist- 
ence of matter; and there is no universe, no God. All is noth- 
ing. 

Happily men cannot emancipate themselves from the laws of 
their nature. They cannot help believing the well-attested testi- 
mony of their senses, and they cannot help believing the testimony 
of consciousness as to their personal identity, and as to the real, 
objective existence of the soul as the subject of their thoughts, feel- 
ings, and volitions. As no man can refuse to believe that he has 
a body, so no man can refuse to believe that he has a soul, and that 
the two are distinct as the Self and the Not-Self. 


Materialism contradicts the Truths of Reason. 


1. It is intuitively true that every effect must have a cause. 
This does not mean merely that every effect must have an antece- 
dent ; or, as Hume says, that anything may be the cause of any- 
thing. Nor does it mean merely that every effect must have an 
efficient cause. But it means that the antecedent or cause of every 
effect must have that kind and degree of efficiency which will 
rationally account for the effect. 

There are two general classes of effects with which we are famil- 
iar, and which are specifically different, and therefore must have 
specifically different causes. The one class consists of effects 
which do not, the other of those which do indicate design. In the 
latter we see evidence of a purpose, of foresight, of provision for 
the future, of adaptation, of choice, of spontaneity, as well as of 
power. In the former all these indications are absent. We see 
around us innumerable effects belonging to each of these classes. 
We see water constantly flowing from a higher to a lower level ; 
vapor constantly ascending from the sea; heat producing expan- 
sion, cold contraction, water extinguishing fire, alkalies correcting 
acidity, etc., ete. On the other hand, the world is crowded with 
works of human intelligence ; with statues, pictures, houses, ships, 
complicated machines for different purposes, with books, libraries, 
hospitals prepared for the wants of the sick, with institutions of 
learning, etc., ete. No man can help believing that these classes 
of effects are specifically different, nor can he help believing that 
they are due to causes specifically different. In other words, # is 
self-evident that an unintelligent cause cannot produce an intelli 


§ 4, F.] MATERIALISM. ITS REFUTATION. 281 


gent effect; it cannot purpose, foresee, organize, or choose. Pro- 
fessor Joule may determine through what space a weight must fall 
to produce a given amount of heat; but can he tell how far it 


‘must fall to write a poem, or produce a Madonna? Such a cause 


has no tendency to produce such an effect. And to suppose it to 
operate from eternity, is only to, multiply eternally, nothing by 
nothing, it is nothing still. 

If every man recognizes the absurdity of referring all the works 
of human ingenuity and intellect to unintelligent, physical force, 
how much greater is the absurdity of referring to blind force the 
immeasurably more stupendous, complicated, and ordered works of 
God, everywhere indicative of purpose, foresight, and choice. Of 
this absurdity Materialism is guilty. It teaches, in its modern form, 
that to carbonic acid, water, and ammonia, with the molecular 
forces they contain, is the causal efficiency to which all organisms 
from the fungus to man, and all vital and mental phenomena, are 
to be referred. This is the doctrine elaborately proposed and de- 
fended in Professor Huxley’s paper on the ‘ Physical Basis of 
Life.” That paper is devoted to establishing two propositions. 
The first is, ‘‘ That all animal and vegetable organisms are essen- 
tially alike in power, in form, and in substance; and the second, 
That all vital and intellectual functions are the properties of the 
molecular dispositions and changes of the material basis (proto- 
plasm) of which the various animals and vegetables consist.”"!_ He 
even intimates, after referring to a clock which marks the time, and 
the phases of the moon, as an illustration of the vital and intellec- 
tual phenomena of the universe, as produced by molecular motions 
and combinations, “that the existing world lay potentially in the 
cosmic vapor; and that a sufficient intelligence could, from a 
knowledge of the properties of the molecules of that vapor, have 
predicted, say the state of the Fauna of Britain in 1869, with as 
much certainty as one can say what will happen to the vapor of 
the breath in a cold winter’s day.” 2. On this it is obvious to re- 
mark, in the first place, that it is not one whit in advance of the 
theory of Epicurus propounded more than two thousand years ago. 
As the whole mass of thinking men have turned their backs on 
that theory from that day to this, it is not probable that the reas- 
sertion of it, however confidently made, will have much effect upon 

1 As regards Protoplasm in relation to Professor Hualey's Essay on the Physical Basis of 
Life, by James Hutchison Stirling, F. R. C. S., LL. D. Edit. New Haven, p. 15. 

2 See Life, Matter, and Mind, by Lionel S. Beale, M. B., F. R. S., London, 1870, p. 17 


Ds. Beale quotes from a paper by Professor Huxley in the first number of the Academy, p, 
LB. 


282 PART I.—THEOLOGY.  ([Ca. Il. — Anti-Torism. 


men who have either heads or hearts. In the second place, it gives 
no rational account of the origin of the universe, and of the won- 
ders which it contains. It violates the fundamental intuitive truth 
that every effect must have an adequate cause, inasmuch as it re- 
fers intelligent effects to unintelligent causes ; all the libraries in 
the world, for example, to “ the properties of the molecules,” of 
carbonic acid, water, and ammonia. 

2. A second truth of Reason which Materialism contradicts is 
that an infinite succession of effects is as unthinkable as a self-sup- 
porting chain of an infinite number of links. The modern doc- 
trine is that lifeless matter never becomes living except when 
brought into contact with previous living matter. It is the office 
of the living plant to take up the dead elements of the inorganic 
world and imbue them with life. The plant, therefore, must either 
precede protoplasm, which is impossible, as it is composed of pro- 
toplasm ; or the protoplasm must precede the plant, which is 
equally impossible, because the plant alone, in the -first imstance, 
can make protoplasm ;- or there must be an infinite succession. 
That is, an infinite number of causeless effects, which is no less 
impossible. The doctrine of spontaneous generation, or of life 
originating out of dead matter, is repudiated by the most advanced 
advocates of the modern form of Materialism. Professor Huxley 
has done the cause of truth good service by his able refutation of 
that doctrine! Whatever may be the ultimate decision of the 
question as to the origin of life, it is enough for the present that 
the modern advocates of Materialism admit that living matter can 
only come from matter already alive. This admission, it is now 
urged, is fatal to their theory, as it necessitates the assumption of 
an eternal effect. If dead matter can only be made alive by pre- 
vious living matter, there must be a source of life outside of mat- 
ter, or life never could have begun. 


Materialism inconsistent with the Facts of Experience. 


It is generally admitted that in nature, 7. ¢., in the external 
world, there are four distinct spheres, or, as they are sometimes 
called, planes of existence. First, the common chemical com- 
pounds, which constitute the mineral kingdom ; second, the vege- 
table kingdom; third, the irrational animal world ; and fourth, 
Man. It is admitted that all the resources of science are incompes 


1 See his Address as President of the British Association, reported in the London Athe- 
neum, September 17th, 1870. The little that is necessary to say on the subject of sponta- 


neous generation in such a work as this, is reserved until the question concerning the origin 
of man comes up for consideration. 


_ 


§ 4, F.] MATERIALISM. ITS REFUTATION. 283 


tent to raise matter from one of these planes to another. The 
plant contains ingredients derived from the mineral kingdom, with 
something specifically different. The animal contains all that is in 
the plant, with something specifically different. Man contains all 
that enters into the constitution of the plant and animal, with some- 
thing specifically different. The lifeless elements of the mineral 
kingdom, under “ the influence of preéxistent living matter,” and 
not otherwise, become living and life-supporting matter in the 
plant. The products of vegetable life, in like manner, become the ° 
matter of animal tissues and organs, but only under the influence 
of preéxisting living animal tissues. So, also, the products of the 
vegetable and animal kingdoms are received into the human sys- 
tem, and become connected with the functions and phenomena of 
the intellectual and moral life of man, but never otherwise than in 
the person of a man. This outstanding fact, vouched for by the 
whole history of our globe, proves that there is something in the 
plant which is not in lifeless matter; something in the animal 
which is not in the plant, and something in man which is not in the 
animal. To assume, with the Materialist, that the organizing life 
of the plant comes out of lifeless matter; that the sensitive and 
voluntary life of the animal comes out of the insensible and invol- 
untary life of the plant; or that the rational, moral, and spiritual 
life of Man comes out of the constituents of the animal, is to as- 
sume as a fact something which all experience contradicts. We are 
not forgetful of the theories which refer these different grades or 
orders of existence to some process of natural development. We 
here, however, refer only to the outstanding fact of history, that, 
in the sphere of human experience, lifeless matter does not become 
organizing and living, in virtue of its own physical forces; nor the 
plant an animal; nor the animal a man from anything in the plant 
or animal, but only in virtue of an ad eztra vital influence. It is 
indeed said that as the same chemical elements combined in one 
way, have certain properties ; and when combined in another way, 
have other properties; so the same elements combined in one 
way in lifeless matter and in other ways, in plants, animals, and 
man, may account for all their distinctive characteristics. But it 
is to be remembered that the properties of chemical compounds, 
however varied, are chemical, and nothing more ; whereas, in vital 
organisms the properties or phenomena are specifically different 
from mere chemical effects. They have no relation to each other, 
any more than gravity to beauty ; and, therefore, the one cannot 
account for the other. 


284 PART I.—THEOLOGY. [Ca I]. — Anti-Tuesem. 


Materialism is Atheistic. 

Atheism is the denial of an extramundane personal God. In 
saying that Materialism is Atheism, it is not meant that all Materi- 
alists are atheists. Some, as for example, Dr. Priestley, confine the 
application of their principles to the existing order of things. They 
admit the being of God to whom they refer the creation of the 
world. The number, however, of such illogical Materialists is 
‘small. Leaving out of view these exceptional cases, the philoso- 
phers of this school may be divided into three classes, — 

(1.) Avowed atheists. To this class belong the Epicureans; the 
French skeptics of the last century ; the Positivists ; and a large. 
part of the physicists of the present generation, especially in Europe. 
(2.) Those who repudiate the charge of atheism, because they admit 
the necessary existence of an inscrutable force. But inscrutable 
force is not God. In rejecting the doctrine of an extramundane 
Spirit, self-conscious, intelligent, and voluntary, the First Cause of 
all things, they reject Theism ; and the denial of Theism is Athe- 
ism. (38.) Those whose principles involve the denial of an extra- 
mundane God. To this class belong all those who deny the distinc- 
tion between matter and mind; who deny the ‘“ supersensual,” 
and “supernatural,” who affirm that physical force is the only kind 
of force of which we have any knowledge; and who maintain that 
thought is in such a sense a product of the brain, that where there 
is no brain there can be no thought. Biichner, who although an 
avowed atheist, is, as to this point, a fair representative of the 
whole school, says that the fundamental principle (der oberste 
Grundsatz) of our philosophy is, ‘* No matter without force ; and no 
force without matter.” “A spirit without a body,’’ he adds, ‘is 
as unthinkable as electricity or magnetism without the matter of 
which they are affections.”! This he makes the ground of his 
argument to prove the impossibility of the existence of the soul 
after death. The principle, if admitted, is equally conclusive against 
the existence of God. As Materialism leaves us no God to rever- 
ence and trust, no Being to whom we are responsible ; and as it de- 
nies any conscious existence after death, it can be adopted only on 
the sacrifice of the higher attributes of our nature; and its whole 
tendency must be to demoralize and degrade. 


The Correlation of Physical and Vital and Mental Forces. | 


Besides the considerations urged above against Materialism as a 
general theory, it may be proper to say a few words in reference 
1 Kraft und Stoff, Zehnte Auflage, Leipzig, 1869, p. 209. 


§ 4, F.] MATERIALISM. ITS REFUTATION. 285 


to its modern scientific form. It is admitted that it is the province 
of scientific men to discuss scientific questions ; and that much in- 
jury to the cause of truth has followed the attempts of men not 
devoted to such pursuits, undertaking to adjudicate in such cases. 
Physicists are wont to take high ground on this subject, and to 
warn off as intruders all metaphysicians and theologians, all who 
are devoted to the study of the supersensuous and the supernatural. 
They are not allowed to be heard on questions of science. The 
rule must work both ways. If metaphysicians and theologians 
must be silent on matters of science, then scientific men devoted to . 
the study of the sensuous, are not entitled to be dictatorial in what 

. regards the supersensuous. A man may be so habituated to deal 
with quantity and number, as to become incapable of appreciating 
beauty or moral truth. In like manner a man may be so devoted 
to the examination of what his senses reveal, as to come to believe 
‘that the sensible alone is true and real. The senses have their 
rights, and so have reason and conscience; and the votaries of 
sense are not entitled to claim the whole domain of knowledge as 
exclusively their own. 

While, therefore, it is conceded that it belongs specially to scien- 
tific men to deal with scientific subjects, yet other classes have 
some rights which are not to be denied. They have the right to 
judge for themselves on the validity of the arguments of scientific 
men ; and they have the right to appeal from one scientific man to 
another, and from the few to the many. So far as the correlation 
of physical and vital forces is concerned, it is not only a new doc- 
trine, but as yet is adopted only by “advanced thinkers,” as they 
are called, and call themselves. Dr. H. B. Jones, F. R.S., one 
of the more modest advocates of the doctrine,! says, “We are only 
just entering upon the inquiry how far our ideas of conservation 
and correlation of energy can be extended to the biological sci- 
ences.” And certain it is that the leading men of science, beth in 
Europe and America, are firm believers in vital and mental forces, 
as distinct in kind, from all physical forces operative in the inor- 
ganic world. 


The Arguments for such Correlation are Invalid. 
The Argument from Analogy. 
It has already been stated on the authority of the advocates of 
the theory, that their first and most important argument in its 
support is from analogy. The physical forces are all correlated ; 


1 Croonian Lectures, p. 66. 


286 PART I.— THEOLOGY. — [Cu. I. — Antr-Tuism. 


one is convertible into either of the others; all may be resolved 
into motion. This creates, as it is said, a strong presumption, that 
all force, whatever its phenomena, is essentially the same thing. 
If one kind of motion is heat, another electricity, another light, it 
is fair to infer that vitality is only another kind of motion, and 
thought and feeling another. As there is no reason for assuming 
a specific force for light, and another for heat, therefore it is un- 
necessary, and unphilosophical, to assume a specific kind of force 
to account for vital or mental phenomena. Prof. Barker of Yale 
College, says,! “‘To-day, as truly as seventy-five years ago when 
Humboldt wrote, the mysterious and awful phenomena of life, 
are commonly attributed to some controlling agent residing in, 
the organism — to some independent presiding deity, holding it in 
absolute subjection.” This presiding agent is called ‘ vital fluid,” 
“materia vite diffusa,” “ vital force.” ‘All these names,” he 
adds, ‘‘ assume the existence of a material or immaterial something, 
more or less separable from the material body, and more or less 
identical with the mind or soul, which is the cause of the phenom- 
ena of living beings. But as science moved irresistibly onward, 
and it became evident that the forces of inorganic nature were 
neither deities nor imponderable fluids, separable from matter, but 
were simple affections of it, analogy demanded a like concession in 
behalf of vital force. From the notion that the effects of heat were 
due to an imponderable fluid called caloric, discovery passed to the 
conviction that heat was but a motion of material particles, and 
hence inseparable from matter; toa like assumption concerning 
vitality [namely, that it also is but a motion of material particles], it 
was now but a step. The more advanced thinkers in science of 
to-day, therefore, look upon the life of the living form as insepara- 
ble from its substance, and believe that the former is purely phe- 
nomenal, and only a manifestation of the latter. Denying the 
existence of a special vital force as such, they retain the term only 
to express the sum of the phenomena of living beings.” 

The argument from analogy is presented, as we have seen, in 
another form, by Huxley and others. The properties of water are 
very different from those of the hydrogen and oxygen of which it 
is composed. Yet no one supposes that those properties are due to 
anything else than the material composition of the water itself. So 
also the phenomena of living matter, and of the human brain, are 
very different from those of the elements which enter into their 
constitution ; but this affords no presumption that there is any 

1 Correlation of Vital and Physical Forces, p. 5. 


: 
’ 
| 


§ 4, F.] MATERIALISM. ITS REFUTATION. 287 


** vital force’ or “ mind *? to account for this difference, any more 
than the peculiar properties of water justify the assumption of the 
existence of anything distinct from its material.element. Vitality 
and mind, we are told, have no better philosophical status than 
aquosity. é 

Dr. Stirling? states the case thus: “If it is by its mere chemi- 
eal and physical structure that water exhibits certain properties 
called aqueous, it is also by its mere chemical and physical struc- 
ture that protoplasm exhibits certain properties called vital. All 
that is necessary in either case is, ‘under certain conditions,’ to 
bring the chemical constituents together. If water is a molecular 
complication, protoplasm is equally a molecular complication, and 
for the description of the one or the other, there is no change of 
language required. A new substance with new qualities results 
in precisely the same way here, as a new substance with new 
qualities there ; and the derivative qualities are not more different 
from the primitive qualities in the one instance, than the derivative 
qualities are different from the primitive qualities in the other. 
Lastly, the modus operandi of preéxistent protoplasm is not more 
unintelligible than that of the electric spark. The conclusion is 
irresistible, then, that all protoplasm being reciprocally convertible, 
and consequently identical, the properties it displays, vitality and 
intellect included, are as much the result of molecular constitution, 
as those of water itself.” This analogy is two-fold ; having refer- 
ence to chemical composition on the one hand, and to the anteced- 
ent stimulus which determines it on the other. ‘As regards 
chemical composition, we are asked, by virtue of the analogy 
obtaining, to identify, as equally simple instances of it, protoplasm 
here and water there; and, as it regards the stimulus in question, 
we are asked to admit the action of the electric spark in the one 
ease to be quite analogous to the action of preéxisting protoplasm 
in the other.” 

In answer to this argument Dr. Stirling goes on to show that 
the analogy holds only as to chemical and physical properties. 
‘‘ One step farther and we see not only that protoplasm has, like 
water, a chemical and physical structure; but that, unlike water, 
it has also an organized or organic structure. Now this, on the 
part of protoplasm, is a possession in excess; and with relation to 
that excess there can be no grounds for analogy.” ‘* Living pro- 


1 As Regards Protoplasm in Relation to Professor Huzley’s Essay on the Physical Basis of 
Life, by James Hutchison Stirling, F. R. C. S., LL. D. Edinburgh, Blackwood & Sons. 
Republished as one of the Yale University series, p. 39. This is considered to be the best 
refutation of the theory of the correlation of physical and vital force. 


288 PART I.— THEOLOGY. [Cu. II. — Anti-THe1sm. 


toplasm, namely, is identical with dead protoplasm,” says Dr. Stir- 
ling, ‘‘ only so far as ‘its chemistry is concerned Gf even so much 
as that); and it is quite evident, consequently, that difference be- 
tween the two cannot depend on that in which they are identical— 
cannot depend on the chemistry. Life, then, is nq affair of chem- 
ical and physical structure, and must find its explanation in some- 
thing else. It is thus that, lifted high enough, the light of the 
analogy between water and protoplasm is seen to go out.”’? Water 
and its elements, hydrogen and oxygen, are as to the kind of 
power which they exhibit on a level. ‘ But not so protoplasm, 
where, with preservation of the chemical and physical likeness 
there is the addition of the unlikeness of life, of organization, and . 
of ideas. But the addition is a new world—a new and higher 
world, the world of a self-realizing thought, the world: of an en- 
telechy.”* ‘There are certainly different states of water, as ice 
and steam; but the relation of the solid to the liquid, or of either 
to the vapor, surely offers no analogy to the relation of protoplasm 
dead to protoplasm alive. That relation is not an analogy but 
an antithesis, the antithesis of antitheses. In it, in fact, we are in 
the presence of the one incommunicable gulf—the gulf of all 
gulfs — that gulf which Mr. Huxley’s protoplasm is as powerless to 
efface as any other material expedient that has ever been suggested 
since the eyes of men first looked into it— the mighty gulf be- 
tween death and life.’’ 3 

“The differences alluded to (they are, in order, organization 
and life, the objective idea—design, and the subjective idea — 
thought), it may be remarked, are admitted by those very Ger- 
mans to whom protoplasm, name and thing, is due. They, the - 
most advanced and innovating of them, directly avow that there is 
present in the cell ‘ an architectonic principle that has not yet been 
detected.’ In pronouncing protoplasm capable of active or vital 
movements, they do by that refer, they admit also, to an immate- 
rial force, and they ascribe the processes exhibited by protoplasm —- 
in so many words —not to the molecules, but to organization and 
life.”’ 4 

‘Was it molecular powers that invented a respiration — that 
perforated the posterior ear to give a balance of air; that compen- 
sated the fenestra ovalis by a fenestra rotunda; that placed in 
the auricular sacs those otolithes, those express stones for hearing ? 
Such machinery! The chorde tendinew are, to the valves of the 
heart, exactly adjusted check-strings; and the contractile columnes 


1 As Regards Protoplasm, ete., pp. 41,42. 2 Ibid. p.42. 8 Ibid. p. 42. 4 Jbid. p. 43. 


! 


$4, F.] MATERIALISM. ITS REFUTATION. 289 


carne are set in, under contraction and expansion, to equalize 
their length to their office. . . . . Are we to conceive such ma- 
chinery, such apparatus, such contrivances, .merely molecular ? 
Are molecules adequate to such things — molecules in their blind 
passivity, and dead, dull, insensibility? . . . . Surely in the 
presence of these manifest ideas, it is impossible to attribute the 
single peculiar feature of protoplasm — its vitality, namely — to 
mere molecular chemistry. Protoplasm, it is true, breaks up into 
carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen, as water does into hydro- 
gen and oxygen; but the watch breaks similarly up into mere 
brass, and steel, and glass. The loose materials of the watch — 
even its chemical material if you will — replace its weight, quite as 
accurately as the constituents, carbon, etc., replace the weight of 
the protoplasm. But neither these nor those replace the vanished 
idea, which was alone the important element.” ! There is, there- 
fore, something in protoplasm which cannot be weighed or other- 
wise measured, and to which the vital phenomena are to be re- 
ferred. 

If then the argument from analogy fails in its application to 
vital phenomena, there can be no pretence that it is valid in its 
application to the phenomena of mind. If we refuse to take the 
first step, even Professor Huxley cannot require us to take those 
which follow. ; 


Further Arguments of the Materialists. 


Besides the analogical argument, Materialists insist that there is 
direct evidence of the correlation of physical, with vital, and men- 
tal force. Let it be remembered what this means. Correlated 
forces are such as may be converted, the one into the other, and 
which are consequently in their nature identical. The thing, 
therefore, in this case, to be proved is that light, heat, etc., can 
be changed into life and thought, and that the latter are identical 
with the former, both classes being resolvable into motion of the 
molecules of matter. 

The proof is substantially this. The animal body generates 
heat by the combustion of the carbon of the food which it receives, 
precisely as heat is produced by the combustion of carbon out 
of the body. And it has been experimentally proved that the 
quantity of heat produced in the body, is precisely the same, due 
allowances being made, as the same amount of carbon would pro- 
duce if burnt out of the body. Vital heat, therefore, is identical 
with physical heat. 


1 As regards Protoplasm, etc., pp. 47, 48. 
19 


296 PART I1.—THEOLOGY. [Cu. IIL — Anri-Tueism. 


Again, muscular force is produced precisely in the same way as 
physical force. The potential energy of the fuel moves the steam- 
engine. Its work or power is measured and determined by the 
amount of power stored in the wood or coal consumed in its pro- 
duction. The source and measure of muscular power, are in like 
manner to be found in the food we eat. Its potential energy, 
derived from the sun as is the case with the potential energy of 
wood and coal, when liberated, produces its due amount, so much 
and no more, of muscular power. Muscular power, therefore, is 
as purely physical, produced in the same way, and measured by 
the same standard, as the power of the steam-engine. 

In like manner, “‘ nervous energy, or that form of force, which, 
on the one hand, stimulates a muscle to contract, and on the other, 
appears in forms called mental,” is merely physical. It comes from 
the food we eat. It moves. The rate of its motion is deter- 
mined to be ninety-seven feet ina second. Its effects are analogous 
to those of electricity. It is, therefore, for these and similar rea- 
sons, inferred that ‘“‘ nerve-force is a transmuted potential energy.” 
This is no less true of nerve-force when manifested in the form of 
thought and feeling. Every external manifestation of thought- 
force, argues Professor Huxley, is a muscular one, and therefore 
analogous to other forces producing similar effects. Besides, it has 
been proved that every exercise of thought or feeling is attended 
by an evolution of heat, which shows that thought is resolved into 
heat. ‘‘Can we longer doubt, then, that the brain, too, is a ma- 
chine for the conversion of energy? Can we longer refuse to 
believe that even thought is, in some mysterious way, correlated to 
the other natural forces? and this, even in face of the fact that it 
has never yet been measured ?” 1 

To unscientific men of ordinary intelligence, to men not devoted 
to the study of the sensuous, it is a matter of astonishment that 
such arguments should be regarded as valid. Admitting all the 
above facts, what do they prove? Admitting that animal heat is 
the same in source and nature with heat outside the body ; admit- 
ting that muscular power is physical in its nature and mode of 
production ; admitting that nerve-force is also physical; what 
then? Do these facts give any solution of the mysteries of life, 
of organization, alimentation, or reproduction? Do they in any 
measure account for the formation of the eye or ear; for the 
mutual relations and interdependence of the organs of the body ? 


1 See Professor Barker's Lecture, above referred to, for a summary of these arguments, 
page 24. 


— -_ 


$4, F] MATERIALISM. ITS REFUTATION.  ' 291 


Admitting these forces to be physical ; who or what uses them? 
What Geate their operation so as to answer a preconceived design ? 
Admitting muscular power to be physical, what calls it into exer- 
cise at one time *and not at another; beginning, continuing, or 
suspending it, at pleasure? It is plain that the facts adduced, are 
no solution either of vital or of voluntary phenomena. And when 
we come to thought, admitting that mental action is attended by 
a development of Sait, does that prove that thought and heat are 
identical ?. When ashamed we blush, when afraid we become pale ; 
do these facts prove that shame and fear and their bodily effects 
are one and the same thing? Does concomitancy prove identity ? 
In proving the former, do you establish the latter? Do the facts 
adduced prove that shame is heat and heat shame, and that the 
one may be converted into the other? All the world knows that 
sorrow produces tears ; but no one infers from this coincidence that 
sorrow and salt water are identical. Even Professor Tyndall, one 
of “ the advanced thinkers,” tells the Materialists, that when they 
have proved everything they claim to prove, they have proved 
nothing. They leave the connection between mind and body pre- 
cisely where it was before.? 


Direct Arguments against the Theory of the Correlation of Phys- 
ical, and Vital, and Mental Forces. 


1. They are heterogeneous. All physical forces are alike. 
They all tend to produce motion. They all tend to equilibrium. 
They are all measurable, by weight, or velocity, or by their sensi- 
ble effects. They are all unintelligent. They act by necessity, 
without choice, without reference to an end. In all these respects 
mental forces are directly the reverse. They do not produce mo- 
tion, they only guide and controlit. They resist a state of equi- 
librium. They counteract physical force. As soon as vitality is 
gone, the chemical forces come into play and the plant or animal 
decays. They cannot be measured. Forces which do not admit 
of measurement, do not admit of correlation, for correlation in- 
volves sameness in quantity. ‘¢ Thought,” says President Bar- 
nard, “cannot be a physical force, because thought admits of no 
measure. I think it will be conceded without controversy that 
there is no form of material substance, and no known force of a 
physical nature (and there are no other forces), of which we can- 
not in some form definitely express the quantity, by reference to 
1 Atheneum for August 29, 1868, quoted in Hulsean Lectures for 1868; Appendix, Note A. 


292 PART I.—THEOLOGY. (Ca. UL —Anti-Tueism. 


some conventional measuring unit. . . . . No such means of 
measuring mental action has been suggested. No such means can 
be conceived. . . . . Now,I maintain that a thing which is 
unsusceptible of measure cannot be a quantity ; and that a thing 
that is not even a quantity, cannot be a force.” } 

Again, vital and mental force act with intelligence, with fore- 
thought, with freedom, and with design. Wherever the intelli- 
gence may reside, it is perfectly evident that all vital operations are 
carried on in execution of a purpose. Heat and electricity can no 
more fashion an eye than brass and steel can make a watch, or pen 
and paper write a book. Intelligent force, therefore, differs in kind 
from unintelligent force. They are not only different, but contra- 
dictory ; the affirmation of the one is the negation of the other. 


Professor Joseph Henry. 


Prof. Joseph Henry, of the Smithsonian Institute, is admitted 
to be one of the most eminent naturalists of the age ; distinguished 
not only for the thoroughness of his researches, but for soundness 
of judgment, and for the rare gift of being able to appreciate dif- 
ferent kinds of evidence. He admits the correlation of physical 
forces, but protests against the obliteration of the distinction be- 
tween them and vitality and mind. ‘The body,” he says, “ has 
been called ‘the house we live in,’ but it may be more truly de- 
nominated the machine we employ, which, furnished with power, 
and all the appliances for its use, enables us to execute the inten- 
tions of our intelligence, to gratify our moral natures, and to com- 
mune with our fellow beings. This view of the nature of the body 
is the furthest removed possible from Materialism ; it requires a 
separate thinking principle. To illustrate this, let us suppose a 
locomotive engine equipped with steam, water, fuel, — in short, 
with the potential energy necessary to the exhibition of immense 
mechanical power; the whole remains in a state of dynamic equi- 
librium, without motion, or signs of life or intelligence. Let the 
engineer now open a valve which is’so poised as to move with the 
slightest touch, and almost with a volition, to let on the power to 
the piston; the machine now awakes, as it were, into life. It 
rushes forward with tremendous power; it stops instantly, it returns 
again, it may be, at the command of the master of the train; in 
short, it exhibits signs of life and intelligence. Its power is now 


1 The Recent Progress of Science, with an Examination of the asserted identity of the 
Mental Powers with Physical Forces. An Address before the American Association for the 
Advancement of Science. August, 1868. By Frederick A. P. Barnard, 8. T. D., LL. D 
pp. 41, 42. 


o] 


= =" 


a i a i i i 
- 


§ 4, F.] MATERIALISM. ITS REFUTATION. 293 


controlled by mind, — it has, as it were, a soul within it.’1 This 
illustration holds just so far as it}was intended to hold. The intel- 
lect which controls the engine is not in it, nor is it affected by its 
changes. Nevertheless, in the body, as well as in the engine, the 
controlling intellect is equally distinct from the physical force, 
which both so wonderfully exhibit. 

In more direct reference to vitality, Professor Henry says : “ Vi- 
tality gives startling evidence of the immediate presence of a di- 
rect, divine, and spiritual essence, operating with the ordinary forces 
of nature, but being in itself entirely distinct from them. This 
view of the subject is absolutely necessary in carrying out the me- 
chanical theory of the equivalency of heat and the correlation of 
the ordinary physical forces. Among the latter vitality has no 
place, and knows no subjection to the laws by which they are gov- 
erned.”’ 2 

Dr. Beale. 

Dr. Beale ° is equally explicit. He constantly insists that what 
acts voluntarily, with choice to accomplish an end, cannot be phys- 
ical ; and that in vital and mental operations there is unquestion- 
able evidence of such voluntary action. He says, “I regard 
‘vitality’ as a power of a peculiar kind, exhibiting no analogy 
whatever to any known forces. It cannot be a property of matter, 
because it is in all respects essentially different in its actions from 
all acknowledged properties of matter. The vital property belongs 
to a different category altogether.” * He argues also to prove that 
organization cannot be referred to physical force. ‘It cannot be 
maintained that the atoms arrange themselves, and devise what po- 
sitions each is to take up, —and it would be yet more extravagant 
to attribute to ordinary force or energy, atomic rule and directive 
agency. We might as well try to make ourselves believe that the 
laboratory fire made and lighted itself, that the chemical com- 
pounds put themselves into the crucible, and the solutions betook 
themselves to the beakers in the proper order, and in the exact pro- 
portions required to form certain definite compounds. But while 
all will agree that it is absurd to ignore the chemist in the labora- 
tory, many insist upon ignoring the presence of anything repre- 
ser.ting the chemist in the living matter which they call the ‘ cell- 
Eiri.” In the one case the chemist works and guides, but in 

1 Paper in the Agricultural Report, 1854-1855, p. 448. 2 Page 441. 
3 Protoplasm ; or Life, Matter, and Mind. By Lionel 8. Beale, M. B., F. R. S. Second 
Edition. London, J. Churchill & Sons, 1870. Dr. Beale is an authority in the department 


of Physiology. His book, How to work with the Microscope, has reached a fourth edition. 
4 Page 103. 


294 PART I.— THEOLOGY. [Cu I.— Anri-Tuetsm. 


the other, it is maintained, the lifeless molecules of matter are 
themselves the active agents in developing vital phenomena. . . . 
No one has proved, and no one can prove, that mind and life are 
in any way related to chemistry and mechanics. . . . . Neither 
can it be said that life works with physical and chemical forces, for 
there is no evidence that this is so. On the other hand it is quite 
certain that life overcomes, in some very remarkable and unknown 
manner, the influence of physical forces and chemical affinities,” } 
On a former page he had said, “ In order to convince people that 
the actions of living beings are not due to any mysterious vitality 
or vital force or power, but are in fact physical and chemical in 
their nature, Professor Huxley gives to matter which is alive, to 
matter which is dead, and to matter which is completely changed 
by roasting or boiling, the very same name. ‘The matter of sheep 
and mutton and man and lobster and egg is the same, and, accord- 
ing to Huxley, one may be transubstantiated into the other. But 
how? By ‘subtle influences,’ and ‘ under sundry circumstances,’ 
answers this authority. And all these things alive, or dead, or 
roasted, he tells us are made of protoplasm, and this protoplasm is 
the physical basis of life, or the basis of physical life. But can this 
discoverer of ‘ subtle influences’ afford to sneer at the fiction of 
vitality ? By calling things which differ from one another in many 
qualities by the same name, Huxley seems to think he can annihi- 
late distinctions, enforce identity, and sweep away the difficulties 
which have impeded the progress of previous philosophers in their 
search after unity. Plants, and worms, and men are all proto- 
plasm, and protoplasm is albuminous matter, and albuminous mat- 
ter consists of four elements, and these four elements possess cer- 
tain properties, by which properties all differences between plants, 
and worms, and men, are to be accounted for. Although Huxley 
would probably admit that a worm ‘was not a man, he would tell 
us that by ‘subtle influences’ the one thing might be easily con- 
verted into the other, and not by such nonsensical fictions as ‘ vi- 
tality,’ which can neither be weighed, measured, nor conceived.” 2 

In the latter portion of his book Dr. Beale shows that the brain 
is not a gland to secrete thought as the liver does bile; nor is 
thought a function of the brain, nor the result of mechanical or 
chemical action; nor is the brain a voltaic battery giving shocks 
of thought, as Stuart Mill conjectures; but it is the organ of the 
mind, not for generating, but for expressing thought. 


1 Protoplasm, etc., pp. 116, 117. 2 Ibid. p. 16. 


§4,F} MATERIALISM. ITS REFUTATION. 295 


‘ 


Mr. Wallace. 

To quote only one more authority, we refer to the eminent nat- 
uralist Wallace, the friend and associate of Darwin, and the zeal 
ous defender of his theory. “If,” says he, “a material element, 
or a combination of a thousand material elements in a molecule, 
are alike unconscious, it is impossible for us to believe, that the 
mere addition of one, two, or a thousand other material elements 
to form a more complex molecule, could in any way tend to pro- 
duce a self-conscious existence. To say that mind is a product or 
function of protoplasm, or of its molecular changes, is to use words 
to which we can attach no clear conception. You cannot have, in 
the whole, what does not exist in any of the parts; ... . either 
all matter is conscious, or consciousness is something distinct from 
matter ; and in the latter case, its presence in material forms is a 
proof of the existence of conscious beings, outside of, and inde- 
pendent of, what we term matter.” 1 


Vital and Physical Forces not Convertible. 


2. A second argument against the doctrine of the correlation of 
vital and physical forces is that in fact they are not convertible, 
Motion and heat are said to be correlated, because one can be 
changed into the other, measure for measure. But no one has 
ever changed death into life, dead matter into living matter. This 
Professor Huxley admits. If the simplest living cell once dies, 
all the science in the world cannot make it alive. What is dead 
can be made alive only by being taken uf and assimilated by that 
which is still living. The life, therefore, is not due to the chemi- 
cal properties of that which is dead. So far as chemistry is con- 
cerned, there is no known difference between protoplasm dead and 
protoplasm alive ; and yet there is all the difference between them 
of life and death. That difference, therefore, is not chemical. 
Until scientific men can actually change heat and electricity into 
life, and go about raising the dead, men will be slow to believe that 
heat and life are identical ; and until they can transmute physical 
force into intelligence and will, pce cannot convert “thinkers” 
into Materialists. 

3. Another argument against this theory is the inadequacy of 
the cause to the assumed aieee The doctrine is that the relation 


1 Contributions to the Theory of Natural Selection. A series of Essays. By Alfred Rus- 
sel Wallace, author of The Malay Archipelago, etc., etc. McMillan & Co., Loudon, 1870, 


p- 365. 


296 PART I.— THEOLOGY.  [Cu. I.— Anri-Tueism. 


between correlated forces is quantitive ; so much of the one will 
produce so much of the other. But we know that great mental 
agitation may be produced by the mere sight of certain objects, and 
that these mental states may call into action violent muscular force. 
According to the hypothesis, the impression on the nerves of sight 
or hearing is first transformed into mental force, and that again 
into muscular and molar energy. This, President Barnard, who 
presents this argument, pronounces to be absurd, “since it makes 
a small force equivalent to a large one.” 4 ; 

President Barnard further argues against this theory from the 
fact that the mental states produced by impressions on the senses 
are, at least in many cases, obviously due not to the physical im- 
pression, but to the idea therewith connected. If you insult a 
Frenchman in English, it produces no effect; if the insult be ex- 
pressed in his own language, it rouses him to fury. The meaning 
of the words is not a physical force, and yet it is to the meaning 
the effect is due. Dr. Barnard says, ‘‘ when it is demanded of us 
to pronounce as physicists that spiritual existence is an absurdity 
and religion a dream, it seems to me that no choice is left us but 
to proclaim our dissent, or to be understood by our silence to ac- 
cept the doctrine as our own. When such is the alternative, for 
one I feel bound to speak, and to declare my conviction that as 
physicists we have nothing to do with mental philosophy ; and that 
in endeavouring to reduce the phenomena of mind under the laws 
of matter, we wander beyond our depth, we establish nothing cer- 
tain, we bring ridicule upon the name of positive science, and 
achieve but a single undeniable result, that of unsettling in the 
minds of multitudes convictions which form the basis of their chief 
happiness.” ? 

4, Physicists cannot carry out their own theory. Even those 
least susceptible of the force of the supersensuous, are compelled to 
admit that there is more in mental and vital action than blind phys- 
ical force can account for. Dr. Carpenter, as we have seen, as- 
sumes the presence of “a directive agency ;” the Germans of an 
“architectonic principle” unknown, and uncorrelated, in living 
matter, to explain undeniable facts for which physical force fur- 
nishes no solution. Others, whose spiritual nature is not so en- 
tirely subjected to the sensible, break down entirely. Thus Pro- 
fessor Barker, of Yale College, after devoting his whole lecture to 
prove that vital foree and even thought “are correlated to other 
natural forces” (@. e., identical with them), cemes at the end to 

1 Barnard’s Address, p. 45. 2 Ibid p. 49. 


$4, F.] MATERIALISM. ITS REFUTATION. 297 


ask: “Ts it only this? Is there not behind this material substance, 
a higher than molecular power in the thoughts which are immor- 
talized in the poetry of a Milton or a Shakespeare, the art crea- 
tions of a Michael Angelo or a Titian, the harmonies of a Mozart 
or a Beethoven? Is there really no immortal portion separable 
from this brain-tissue, though yet mysteriously united to it? Ina 
word, does this curiously fashioned body inclose a soul, God-given, 
and to God returning? Here science veils her face, and bows in 
reverence before the Almighty. We have passed the boundaries 
by which physical science is inclosed. No crucible, no subtle mag- 
netic needle can answer now our questions. No word but His who 
formed us can break the awful silence. In the presence of such a 
revelation science is dumb, and faith comes in joyfully to accept 
that higher truth which can never be the object of physical demon- 
stration.””} 

It thus appears, after all, that there is in man a soul; that the 
soul is not the body, nor a function of it; that it is the subject and 
agent of our thoughts, feelings, and volitions. But this is pre- 
cisely the thing which the lecture is devoted to disproving. Thus 
Professor Barker’s science gives up the ghost at the feet of his re- 
ligion. It quenches its torch in the fountain of an order of truths 
higher than those which admit of “ physical demonstration.” The 
mprov Weddos of the whole theory is, that nothing is true which can- 
not be physically demonstrated; that is, which cannot be felt, 
weighed, or otherwise measured. 


Wallace, the Naturalist. 


A still more striking illustration of the insufficiency of material- 
istic principles is prehed by the distinguished naturalist, Alfred 
Russel Wallace, above quoted. After irene his whole book to 
the defence of the doctrine of natural selection, which refers the ori- 
gin of all species and genera of plants and animals to the blind ope- 
ration of physical forces, he comes to the conclusion that there are 
no such forces ; that all is “‘ Mind.” Matter has no existence. Mat- 
ter is force, and force is mind; so that ** the whole universe is not 
merely dependent on, but actually 2s the wir. of higher intelli- 
gences, or one Supreme Intelligence.” 2. He holds that instead of 
admitting the existence of an ranknawh something called matter, 
and that Pea is ‘another thing, either a Gestace of this matter 
and its supposed inherent forces, or distinct from, and co-existent 


1 Barker’s Lecture, pp. 26, 27. 
2 Contributions to the Theory of Natural Selection, p. 368. 


298 PART I.—THEOLOGY.  [Cu. I. — Anti-Tueism. 


with it;” .... it isa ‘far simpler and more consistent belief, 
that matter, as an entity distinct from force, does not exist; and 
that force is a product of Mryp. Philosophy,” he adds, * had long 
demonstrated our incapacity to prove the existence of matter, as 
usually conceived, while it admitted the demonstration to each of 
us of our own self-conscious, ideal existence. Science has now 
worked its way up to the same result, and this agreement between 
them should give us some confidence in their combined teaching.” a 
Thus, by one step, the gulf between Materialism and idealistic pan- 
theism is passed. This, at least, is a concession that physical forces 
cannot account for the phenomena of life and mind; and that is 
conceding that Materialism as a theory is false. 

The great mistake of Materialists is that they begin at the wrong 
end. They begin with blind, lifeless matter ; and endeavor to de- 
duce from it and its molecular changes, all the infinite marvels of 
organization, life, and intelligence which the universe exhibits. 
This isan attempt to make everything out of nothing. The human 
mind, in its normal state, always begins with God; who, as the 
Bible teaches us, is an Infinite Spirit, and therefore self-conscious, 
intelligent, and voluntary ; the creator of all things ; of matter with 
its properties, and of finite minds with their powers; and who con- 
trols all things by his ever present wisdom and might; so that all 
the intelligence indicated in unintelligent forces is only one form 
of the infinite intelligence of God. This is the solution of the 
problem of the universe given in the Scriptures ; a solution which 
satisfies our whole nature, rational, moral, and religious. 

All works on Psychology, and on the history of Philosophy, con- 
tain discussions on the principles of Materialism. Chapter iv. of 
Dr. Buchanan’s able work, ‘¢ Faith in God and Modern Atheism 
Compared,” is devoted to the history and examination of that 
theory. See also chapter ii. of the Introduction to Professor Por- 
ter’s elaborate work, ‘“* The Human Intellect.” Professor Porter 
gives, on page 40, a copious account of the literature of the sub- 
ject. In Herzog’s “Real-Encyklopadie,” article Materialismus, an 
account is given of the principal recent German works against the 
modern form of the doctrine. 

Among the most important works on this subject, besides the 
writings of Comte and his English disciples, J. Stuart Mill, and H. 
G. Lewes, are Herbert Spencer’s “ First Principles of a New Sys- 
tem of Philosophy,” and his “ Biology” in two volumes; Mauds- 
ley’s ““ Physiology and Pathology of Mind;” Laycock (Professor 

1 Contributions to the Theory of Natural Selection, p. 369. 


4 


bee 


.. i hie 


§ 5, Aj PANTHEISM. 299 


in the University of Edinburgh), “ Mind and Brain;” Huxley’s 
“Discourse on the Physical Basis of Life;” his “Evidence of 
Man’s Place in Nature ;” and “ Introduction to the Classification 
of Animals;” and his “ Lay Sermons and Essays ;”’ Professor 
Tyndall’s “* Essay on Heat ;” “ The Correlation and Conservation 
of Forces: A Series of Expositions, by Professor Grove, Professor 
Helmholtz, Dr. Mayer, Dr. Faraday, Professor Liebig, and Dr. 
Carpenter ; with an Introduction by Edward L. Youmans, M. D.;” 
Alexander Bain (Professor of Logic in the University of Aber- 
deen), “* The Senses and the Intellect ;” ** The Emotions and the 
Will;” ‘“‘ Mental and Moral Science ;” ‘ Kraft und Stoff, von 
Ludwig Biichner, Zehnte Auflage. Leipzig, 1869.” By the same 
author, ‘“* Die Stellung des Menschen in der Natur in Vergangen- 
heit, Gegenwart und Zukunft. Oder Woher kommen wir? Wer 
sind wir? Wohin- gehen wir? Leipzig, 1869.” Also, ‘*Sechs 
Vorlesungen uber die Darwin’sche Theorie von der Verwandlung 
der Arten und die erste Entstehung der Organismenwelt. Leipzig, 


1868.” 
§ 5. Pantheism. 
A. What Pantheism is. 


If the etymology of the word Pantheism be allowed to determine 
its meaning, the answer to the question, What is Pantheism ? is 
easy. The universe is God, and God is the universe, Td wav @eds 
gor. This is not only the signification of the word and the popular 
idea usually attached to it, but it is the formal definition often given 
of the term. Thus Wegscheider says, ‘“‘ Pantheismus [est] ea sen- 
tentia, qua mundum non secretum a numine ac disparatum, sed 
ad ipsam Dei essentiam pertinere quidam opinati sunt.”! This, 
however, is pronounced by the advocates of the doctrine to be 
a gross misrepresentation. The idea that the universe, as the 
aggregate of individual things, is God, is, they say, a form of 
thought, which the earliest philosophy of the East had surmounted. 
It might as well be said that the contents of a man’s consciousness, 
at any one time, were the man himself; or that the waves of the 
ocean were the ocean itself. It is because so many Pantheists 
take the word in the sense above indicated, that they deny that 
they are Pantheists, and affirm their belief in the being of God. 
As the system which is properly designated Pantheism, does ex- 
clude the popular view of the subject, derived from the etymology 
of the word; and as it has been held in very different forms, it is 

1 Institutiones Theologic, fifth edit., Halle, 1826, p. 215. 


800 : PART I.— THEOLOGY. [Cu. I.— Antr-TueisM. 


not easy to give a concise and satisfactory answer to the question, 
What is Pantheism? The three principal forms in which the 
doctrine has been presented, are, (1.) That which ascribes to the 
Infinite and Universal Being, the attributes (to a certain extent 
at least) of both mind and matter, namely, thought and extension. 
(2.) That which ascribes to it only the attributes of matter, Mate- 
rialistic Pantheism. (3.) That which ascribes to it only the 
attributes of spirit, Idealistic Pantheism. 


General Principles of the System. 


For the purpose of theological instruction it is sufficient to state 
what these several systems unite in denying, and what they sub- 
stantially agree in affirming. 

1. They deny all dualism in the universe. The essential distine- 
tion between matter and mind, between soul and body, between 
God and the world, between the Infinite and the Finite is repudi- 
ated. There is but one substance, but one real Being. Hence 
the doctrine is called Monism, or, the All One doctrine. ‘* The 
idea,” says Cousin,! ‘of the finite, of the infinite, and of their 
necessary connection as cause and effect, meet in every act of in- 
telligence, nor is it possible to separate them from each other ; 
though distinct, they are bound together, and constitute at once a 
triplicity and unity.” ‘“ The first term (the infinite), though abso- 
lute, exists not absolutely in itself, but as an absolute cause which 
must pass into action, and manifest itself in the second (the finite). 
The finite cannot exist without the infinite, and the infinite can 
only be realized by developing itself in the finite.” 

All philosophy is founded, he says, on the ideas of ‘unity and 
multiplicity,” ‘‘ of substance and phenomenon.” “ Behold,” he 
says, ‘all the propositions which we had enumerated reduced to a 
single one, as vast as reason and the possible, to the opposition of 
unity and plurality, of substance and phenomenon, of being and ap- 
pearance, of identity and difference.’’?? All men, he says, believe, 
‘as it were, in a combination of phenomena which would cease to 
be at the moment in which the eternal substance should cease to 
sustain them ; they believe, as it were, in the visible manifestation 
of a concealed principle which speaks to them under this cover, and 
which they adore in nature and in consciousness.” 2 “As God is 
made known only in so far as he is absolute cause, on this account, 


1 Psychology, by Henry, first edition, p. xviii. 


2 History of Philosophy, translated by Wight, N. Y. 1852, p. 78. 
8 Ibid. p. 121. Sawant te 


_. 6 


—. UT 


§5, A] PANTHEISM. 801 


in my opinion, he cannot but produce, so that the creation ceases 
to be unintelligible, and God is no more without a world than a 
world without God.” ! It is one of the most familiar aphorisms of 
the German philosophers, ** Ohne Welt kein Gott; und ohne Gott 
keine Welt.” 

Renan in his “ Vie de Jésus,” understands by Pantheism, ma- 
terialism, or the denial of a living God. This would exclude all 
the forms of the doctrines held by idealistic pantheists in all aves. 
Dr. Calderwood pronounces Sir William Hamilton’s doctrine of 
creation pantheistic, because it denies that the sum of existence can 
either be increased or diminished. Sir William Hamilton teaches 
that when we say God created the world out of nothing, we can 
only mean that “ He evolves existence out of Himself.” ‘Although 
all the forms of Pantheism are monistic, except Hylozoism, wish 
is properly dualistic, yet the mere doctrine of the unity of substance 
does not constitute Pantheism. However objectionable the doc- 
trine may be that everything that exists, even unorganized matter, 
is of the substance of God, it has been held by many Christian 
Theists. This does not necessarily involve the denial of the essen- 
tial distinction between matter and mind. 

2. However they differ as to the nature of the Infinite as such, 
whether it be matter or spirit; or that of which both thought and 
extension (potentially) can be predicated; or, whether it be 
thought itself, or force, or cause, or nothing, ¢. e., that of which 
nothing can be affirmed or denied; a simple unknown quantity ; 
they all agree that it has no existence either before or out of the 
world. The world is, therefore, not only consubstantial, but co- 
eternal with God. 

3. This of course precludes the idea of creation; except as an 
eternal and necessary process. 

4. They deny that the Infinite and Absolute Being in itself has 
either intelligence, consciousness, or will. The Infinite comes into 
existence in the Finite. The whole life, consciousness, intelligence, 
and knowledge, at any time, of the former, is the life, conscious- 
ness, intelligence, and knowledge of the latter, ¢. ¢., of the world. 
“‘ Omnes (mentes),” says Spinoza, “simul Dei zternum et infini- 
tum intellectum constituunt.” 2 ‘* God alone is, and out of Him is 
nothing.” ‘+ Seine Existenz als Wesen ist unser Denken yon ihm ; 
aber seine reale Existenz ist die Natur, zu welcher das einzelne 
Denkende als moment gehdrt.”’ # 


1 Psychology, fourth edition, N. Y. 1856, p. 447. 

2 Ethices, v. xl. schol., edit. Jena, 1803, p. 297. 

8 Fichte, Von seligen Leben, p. 143, edit. Berlin, 1806. 
4 Strauss, Dogmatik, i. p. 517. 


2 


802 PART L—THEOLOGY. [Cu I. — Anrt-Tuxism, 


5. Pantheism denies the personality of God. Personality as well 
as consciousness implies a distinction between the Self and the Not 
Self; and such distinction is a limitation inconsistent with the nature 
of the Infinite. God, therefore, is not a person who can say I, and 
who can be addressed as Thou. As He comes into existence, in- 
telligence, and consciousness only in the world, He is a person only 
so far as He comprehends all personalities, and the consciousness 
of the sum of finite creatures constitutes the consciousness of God. 
“ The true doctrine of Hegel on this subject,” says Michelet,! ‘is 
not that God is a person as distinguished from other persons; neither 
is He simply the universal or absolute substance. He is the move- 
ment of the Absolute ever making itself subjective ; and in the 
subjective first comes to objectivity or to true existence.” ‘ God,” 
he adds, ‘according to Hegel, is the only true personal Being.” 
*« As God is eternal personality, so He eternally produces his other 
self, namely, Nature, in order to come to’self-consciousness.”’ 

It follows of necessity from the doctrine, that God is the substance 
of which the universe is the phenomenon; that God has no exist- 
ence but in the world; that the aggregate consciousness and life of 
the Finite is, for the time being, the whole consciousness and life 
of the Infinite ; that the Infinite cannot be a person distinct from 
the world, to whom we can say, Thou. On this point Cousin says, 
“ Take away my faculties, and the consciousness that attests them 
to me, and I am not for myself. It is the same with God; take 
away nature, and the soul, and every sign of God disappears.” 2 
What the soul would be without faculties and without conscious- 
ness, that is God without the universe. An unconscious God, with- 
out life, of whom nothing can be predicated but simple being, is 
not only not a person, but he is, for us, nothing. 

6. Man is not an individual subsistence. He is but a moment 
in the life of God; a wave on the surface of the sea; a leaf which 
falls and is renewed year after year. 

7. When the body, which makes the distinction of persons among 
men, perishes, personality ceases with it. There is no conscious ex- 
istence for man after death. Schleiermacher, in his ‘‘ Discourses,” 
says, the piety in which he was nurtured in his youth, ‘remained 
with me when the God and immortality of my childhood disappeared 
from my doubting sight.” On this avowal, Mr. Hunt, curate of 
St. Ives, Hunts, comments: “ The ‘God and immortality ’ of his 


1 Geschichte der letzen Systeme der Philosophie in Deutschland, vol. ii. p. 647. 
2 Lectures on the True, the Beautiful, and the Good, trans. Wight, N. Y. 1854, p. 365. 
8 Hunt’s Lssay on Pantheism, London, 1866, p. 812. 


§ 5, A.] PANTHEISM. 803 


childhood disappeared. The personal God whom the Moravians 
worshipped was exchanged for the impersonal Divinity of philos- 
ophy. Nor did this theology seem impious. .No, it was the very 
essence of true religion.” There is good reason to believe that 
with regard to the personal existence of the soul after death, 
Schleiermacher sacrificed his philosophy, as he certainly did in 
other points, to his religion. This, however, only the more clearly 
shows how inconsistent the pantheistic view of the nature of God 
is with the doctrine of conscious existence after death. The ab- 
sorption of the soul in God, of the Finite into the Infinite, is the 
highest destiny that Pantheism can acknowledge for man. 

8. As man is only a mode of God’s existence, his acts are the 
acts of God, and as the acts,of God are necessary, it follows that 
there can be no freedom of the will in man. Spinoza says,! “ Hine 
sequitur mentem humanam partem esse infiniti intellectus Dei: ac 
proinde cum dicimus, mentem humanam hoc vel illud percipere, 
nihil aliud dicimus, quam quod Deus, non quatenus infinitus est, 
sed quatenus per naturam humane mentis explicatur, sive quatenus 
humane mentis essentiam constituit, hanc vel illam habeat ideam.” 
*¢ In mente nulla est absoluta sive libera voluntas. Mens certus et 
determinatus modus cogitandi est adeoque suarum actionum non. 
potest esse causa libera.”’? ‘ Hodem hoc modo demonstratur, in 
mente nullam dari facultatem absolutam intelligendi, cupiendi, 
amandi, etc.” ® 

Cousin says, ‘‘ We are thus arrived then in the analysis of the 
me, by the way of psychology still, at a new aspect of ontology, 
at a substantial activity, anterior and superior to all phenomenal 
activity, which produces all the phenomena of activity, survives 
them all, and renews them all, immortal and inexhaustible, in the 
destruction of its temporary manifestations.’ * Thus our activity 
is only a temporary manifestation of the activity of God. All our 
acts are his acts.® 

Mr. Hunt, analyzing Spinoza’s system, and using mainly his 
language on this point, says, ‘Spinoza ascribed to God a kind 
of freedom: a free necessity. But to created existences even this 
kind of freedom is denied. ‘There is nothing contingent in the 
nature of beings ; all things on the contrary are determined by the 
necessity of the Divine nature, to exist and to act, after a certain 
fashion.’ ‘Nature produced’ is determined by ‘nature produ- 


1 Ethices, part ii. prop. xi. coroll., vol. ii. p. 87, edit. Jena, 1803. , 

2 Ibid. prop. xlviii. Demon. vol. ii. p. 121. 8 Ibid. Scholium. 
4 Elements of Psychology, translated by Henry, N. Y. 1856, p. 429. 

& Princeton Review, 1856, p. 368. 


804 PART I.—THEOLOGY.  ([Cu.1U.— Anri-Tuetsm. 


cing. It does not act, it is acted upon. The soul of man is a 
Spiritual automaton. . . . . There can be nothing arbitrary 
‘in the necessary developments of the Divine essence.” ? 

As Pantheism makes creation an eternal, necessary, and continu- 
ous evolution of the Infinite Being, all liberty of second causes is 
of necessity excluded. A dimineron may be made between the 
necessity by which a stone falls to the ground, and the necessity by 
which a mind thinks; but the necessity is as absolute in the one 
case as in the other. Liberty in man is rational self-determination, 
that is, spontaneity determined by reason. But reason in man is 
impersonal, according to Pantheism, It is God as explicated in us. 
All the acts of the human mind are the acts of God as determined 
by the necessity of his nature. The same doctrine of fatalism is 
involved in the idea that history is merely the self-evolution of God. 
One idea, or phase of the Infinite Being, is exhibited by one age or 
nation, and a different one by another. But the whole is as much 
a necessary process of evolution as the growth of a plant. 

Sir William Hamilton, therefore, says that Cousin destroys lib- 
erty by divorcing it from intelligence, and that his doctrine is incon- 
sistent not only with Theism but with morality, which cannot be 
founded “on a liberty which at best only escapes necessity by 
taking refuge with chance.”’? And Morell, a eulogist of Cousin, 
says, that according to Cousin: ‘¢ God is the ocean, we are but the 
waves ; the ocean may be one individuality, and each wave another ; 


but still they are essentially one and the same. We see not how 


Cousin’s Theism can possibly be consistent with any idea of moral 
evil; neither do we see how, starting from such a dogma, he can 
ever vindicate and uphold his own theory of human liberty. On 
such Theistic principles, all sin must be simply defect, and all defect 
must be absolutely fatuitous.”’ 8 

9. Pantheism in making man a mode of God’s existence, and in 
denying all freedom of the will, and in teaching that all “ phenom- 
enal activity’’ is “a transient manifestation” of the activity of 
God, precludes the possibility of sin. This does not mean that there 
is in man no sentiment of approbation or disapprobation, no sub- 
jective difference between right and wrong. This would be as 
absurd as to say that there is no difference between pleasure and 
pain. But if God be at once God, nature, and humanity; if reason 


in us be God’s reason ; his intelligence our intelligence, his activity. 


our activity ; if God be the substance of which the world is the 


1 Essay on Pantheism, p. 231. 2 Hamilton’s Discussions, p. 43. 
History of Modern Philosophy, N. Y. 1848, p- 660. 


ee ee ee a ee 


§ 5, AL PANTHEISM. 805 


phenomenon ; if we are only moments in the life of God, then there 
can be nothing in us which is not in God. Evil is only limitation, 
or undeveloped good. One tree is larger and finer than another ; 
one mind is more vigorous than another; one mode of action more 
pleasurable than another; but all alike are modes of God’s activity. 
Water is water, whether in the puddle or in the ocean; and God 
is God, in Nero or St. John. Hegel says that sin is something un- 
speakably higher than the law-abiding motion of the planets, or the 
innocence of plants. That is, it is a higher manifestation of the 
life of God. 

Spinoza teaches that ‘sin is nothing positive. It exists for us 
but not for God. The same things which appear hateful in men 
are regarded with admiration in animals. . . . . It follows 
then that sin, which only expresses an imperfection, cannot consist 
in anything which expresses a reality. We speak improperly, ap- 
plying human language to what is above human language, when 
we say that we sin against God, or that men offend God.”’? 

It is the necessary consequence of the doctrine that God is the 
universal Being, that the more of being the more of God, and there- 
fore the more of good. And consequently the less of being, the less 
of good. All limitation, therefore, is evil; and evil is simply limita- 
tion of being. Spinoza” says, ‘* Quo magis unusquisque — suum 
esse conservare conatur et potest, eo magis virtute preeditus est; 
contra quatenus unusquisque — suum esse conservare negligit, eate- 
nus est impotens.” In the demonstration of this proposition, he 
says, ‘‘ Virtus est ipsa humana potentia,” ® making power and good- 
ness identical. Professor Baur of Tiibingen,* says: ‘Evil is what 
is finite ; for the finite is negative; the negation of the infinite.” 

_ It is only, as just said, another form of this doctrine that power, 
or strength, is in man the only good. This does not mean the 
strength to submit to injury; the strength of self-sacrifice; the 
strength to be humble and to resist evil passion; but the power to 
carry out our own purposes in opposition to the will, interests, or 
happiness of others. That is, that might is right. ‘The victor is 
always right, the vanquished is always wrong. This is only one 
manifestation of God, suppressing or superseding a less perfect 
manifestation. Spinoza’s doctrine is, ‘To the pursuit of what is 
agreeable, and the hatred of the contrary, man is compelled by his 
nature, for every one desires or rejects by necessity, according to 
the laws of his nature, that which he judges good or bad.’ To 


1 Hunt, p. 231. 2 Ethices, iv. prop. xx., vol. ii. p. 217, edit. Jena, 1803. 
8 ibid. 4 In the Tiibingen Zeitschrift, 1834, Drittes Heft, p. 238. 
VOL. 1. 20 


806 PART 1.—THROLOGY. [Cu II. — Antr-Toeism. 


follow this impulse is not only a necessity but it is the right and the 
duty of every man, and every one should be reckoned an enemy 
who wishes to hinder another in the gratification of the impulses 
of his nature. The measure of every one’s right is his power. 
The best right is that of the strongest ; and as the wise man has 
an absolute right to do all which reason dictates, or the right 
of living according to the laws of reason, so also the ignorant 
and foolish man has a right to live according to the laws of ap- 
petite.’ A more immoral and demoralizing principle was never 
expressed in human language. To say that it is the duty of every 
man to seek his own gratification, to satisfy the impulses of his 
nature ; that he is an enemy who attempts to hinder that gratifica- 
tion; that the only limit to such gratification is our power ; that 
men have the right, if so inclined, to live according to the laws of 
appetite, is to say that there is no such thing as moral obligation ; 
no such thing as right or wrong. 

Cousin repeats ad nauseam the doctrine that might is right; 
that the strongest is always the best. ‘* We usually see in success,” 
he says, ‘“‘ only a triumph of force, . . . . Ihope I have shown 
that, inasmuch as there always must be a vanquished party, and in 
asmuch as the vanquished party is always that which ought to be 
vanquished, to accuse the vanquisher and to take part against vic- 
tory, is to take part against humanity, and to complain of the prog- 
ress of civilization. It is necessary to go further; it is necessary 
to prove that the vanquished party deserves to be vanquished ; 
that the vanquishing party not only serves the cause of civilization, 
but that it is better, and more moral than the vanquished party.” 
‘Virtue and prosperity, misfortune and vice, are in necessary har- 
mony.” ‘¢ Feebleness is a vice, and, therefore, it is always punished 
and beaten.” ‘It is time,” he says, ‘that philosophy of history 
put beneath its feet the declamations of philanthropy.”2 It must, 
of course, be true, if God is the life of the world, all power his 
power, every act his act, not only that there can be no sin, but 
that the most powerful are always morally Gf that word has any 
meaning) the best; and that might is right. This is the theory 
on which hero worship is founded, ‘not only among the heathen, 
but among Christians, so called, of our day. 

10. Pantheism is self deification. If God comes to existence 
only in the world, and if everything that is, is a manifestation of 
God, it follows that (so far as this earth is concerned, and so far as 


1 Hunt, p. 233. 


2 Cousin’s History of Modern Philosophy, translated by Wight, New York, 1852, vol. i. Pp. 
186, 187, 189. 


§ 5, A] PANTHEISM. 807 


pantheists allow or acknowledge) the soul of man is the highest 
form of the existence of God. As the souls of men differ very 
much one from another, one being much superior to others, the 
greater the man the more divine he is, 7. e., the more does he rep- 
resent God; the more of the divine essence does he reveal. ‘The 
highest step of development is reached only by those who come to 
the consciousness of their identity with God. This is the precise 
doctrine of the Hindus, who teach that when a man is able to say, 
“T am Brahm,” the moment of his absorption into the infinite 
Being has arrived. This is the ground on which the pantheistic 
philosophers rest their claim of preéminence ; and the ground on 
which they concede the preéminence of Christ. He, more than 
any other man, saw into the depths of his own nature. He was 
able to say as no other man could say, “I and the Father are one.” 
But the difference between Christ and other men is only one of 
degree. The human race is the incarnation of God, which is a 
process from eternity to eternity. ‘ Mankind,” says Strauss, “ is 
the Godman ; the key of a true Christology is, that the predicates 
which the Church gives to Christ, as an individual, belong to an 
idea, a generic whole.” + 

11. There is only one step further, and that is, the deification of 
evil. That step Pantheists do not hesitate to take; so far as evil 
exists it is as truly a manifestation of God as good. The wicked 
are only one form of the self-manifestation of God; sin is only one 
form of the activity of God. This dreadful doctrine is explicitly 
avowed. 

Rosenkranz says,? ‘‘ Die dritte Consequenz endlich ist die, dass 
Gott der Sohn auch als identisch gesetzt. ist mit dem Subject, in 
welchem die religidse Vorstellung den Ursprung des Bésen an- 
schaut, mit dem Satan, Phosphoros, Lucifer, Diese Verschmelzung 
begriindet sich darin, dass der Sohn innerhalb Gottes das Moment 
der Unterscheidung ist, in dem Unterschied aber die Méglichkeit 
der Entgegensetzung und Entzweiung angelegt ist. Der Sohn ist 
der selbstbewusste Gott.” Such a sentence as the foregoing has 
never been written in English, and, we trust, never will be. The 
conclusion it avows, however, is unavoidable. If God be every- 
thing, and if there be a Satan, God must be Satan. Rosenkranz 
says, that the mind is horrified at such language, only because it 
does not recognize the intimate connection between good and evil ; 
that evil is in good, and good in evil. Without evil there can be 
no good. 

1 Dogmatik, ii. p. 215. 2 Encyklopadie, p. 51. 


308 PART I.—THEOLOGY. [Cu III. — Ant1-Tnersm. 


It is because of this deification of evil, that a recent Germar 
writer! said that this system should be called Pandiabolism instead 
of Pantheism. He, if we mistake not, is the author of the article 
in Hengstenberg’s “ Kirchen-Zeitung,”? in which it is said, “ this 
is the true positive blasphemy of God — this veiled blasphemy — 
this diabolism of the deceitful angel of light — this speaking of 
reckless words, with which the man of sin sets himself in the tem- 
ple of God, showing himself that he is God. The Atheist cannot 
blaspheme with such power as this; his blasphemy is merely nega- 
tive. He merely says: ‘There is no God.’ It is only out of 
Pantheism that a blasphemy can proceed, so wild, of such inspired 
mockery, so devoutly godless, so desperate in its love of the world, 
—a blasphemy so seductive, and so offensive that it may well call 
for the destruction of the world.” 

Pantheism, however, becomes all things to all men. To the 
pure it gives scope for a sentimental religious feeling which sees 
God in every thing and every thing in God. ‘To the proud it is 
the source of intolerable arrogance and self-conceit. To the sen- 
sual it gives authority for every form of indulgence. The body 
being a mode of God’s extension, according to Spinoza’s theory, 
as the mind is a mode of the divine intelligence, the body has its 
divine rights as well as the soul. Even some of the most reputable 
of the Pantheistic school, do not hesitate to say in reference to the 
trammels of morality: “It is well that the rights of our sensual 
nature should, from time to time, be boldly asserted.” ® This 
system, therefore, as even the moderate Tholuck says, ‘‘ comes to 
the same result with the materialism of French encyclopedists, 
who mourned over mankind for having sacrificed the real pleasures 
of time for the imaginary pleasures of eternity, and the protracted 
enjoyments of life, for the momentary happiness of a peaceful 
death.” 

Pantheism, therefore, merges everything into God. The uni- 
verse is the existence-form of God; that is, the universe is his 
existence. All reason is his reason ; all activity is his activity ; the 
consciousness of creatures, is all the consciousness God has of him- 
self; good and evil, pain and pleasure, are phenomena of God ; 
modes in which God reveals himself, the way in which He passes 
from Being into Existence. He is not, therefore, a person whom 
we can worship and in whom we can trust. He is only the sub- 
stance of which the universe and all that it contains are the ever 


1 Leo, the historian, we believe. 2 1836, p. 575. 
8 Bischer, quoted in Hvangelische Kirchen-Zeitung, 1889, p. 81. 


§ 5, B.] PANTHEISM. 809 


changing manifestation. Pantheism admits of no freedom, no re- 
sponsibility, no conscious life after death. Cousin sums up the 
doctrine in this comprehensive paragraph: “The God of con- 
sciousness is not an abstract God, a solitary monarch exiled beyond 
the limits of creation, upon the desert throne of a silent eternity, 
and of an absolute existence which resembles even the negation of 
existence. He is a God at once true and real, at once substance 
and cause, always substance and always cause, being substance 
only in so far as He is cause,‘and cause only so far as He is sub- 
stance, that is to say, being absolute cause, one and many, eternity 
and time, space and number, essence and life, indivisibility and 
totality, principle, end, and centre, at the summit of Being and at 
its lowest degree, infinite and finite together, triple, in a word, that 
is to say, at the same time God, nature, and humanity. In fact, 
if God be not everything, He is nothing.” 4 


History of Pantheism. 


Pantheism has proved itself to be the most persistent as well 
as the most wide-spread form of human thought relative to the ori- 
gin and nature of the universe, and its relation to the Infinite 
Being, whose existence in some form seems to be a universal and 
necessary assumption. Pantheistic ideas underlie almost all the 
forms of religion which have existed in the world. Polytheism, 
which has been almost universal, has its origin in nature worship ; 
and nature-worship rests on the assumption that Nature is God, 
or, the manifestation, or existence form of the infinite unknown. 
Of course it is only the briefest outline of the different forms of 
this portentous system of error, that can be given in these pages. 


B. Brahminical Pantheism. 


Ethnographically the Hindus belong to the same race as the 
Greeks, Romans, and other great European nations. In prehis- 
toric periods one division of the great Aryan family spread itself 
westward over the territory which now constitutes Europe. An- 
other division extended south and east and entered India, displa- 
cing almost entirely the original inhabitants of that large, diversi- 
fied, and fertile region. 

Long before Greece or Rome became cultivated communities, 
and when Europe was the home only of uncivilized barbarians, 
India was covered with rich and populous cities; the arts had 


1 Philosophical Fragments, Preface to First Edition. See History of Modern Philosophy, 
translated by Wight, N. Y. 1852, vol. i. pp. 112, 118. 


810 PART I.—THEOLOGY. ([Ca. I.— Anti-Tarism. 


reached the highest state of development; a literature and lan- 
guage which, in the judgment of scholars, rival those of Greece 
and Rome, had been produced, and systems of philosophy as pro- 
found, as subtle, and as diversified as the human mind ever elab- 
orated, were already taught in her schools. 

The Hindus number nearly two hundred millions of souls. They 
are now, in the essential principles of their philosophy, their relig- 
ion, and their social organization, what they were a thousand years 
before the birth of Christ. Never in the history of the world has 
a form of religious philosophy been so extensively embraced, so 
persistently adhered to, or so effective in moulding the character 
and determining the destiny of a people. 

Few questions of the kind, therefore, are of deeper interest than 
what the true character of the Hindu religion actually is. The — 
decision of that question is not free from difficulty; and it has, 
therefore, received very different answers. The difficulty in this 
case arises from various sources. 

1. The religious books of the Hindus are not only written in 
Sanskrit, a language unintelligible, except to a small class of 
learned men, but they are exceedingly voluminous. The Vedas, 
the most ancient and authoritative, fill fourteen volumes folio. 
The Institutes of Menu, the Puranas, and the sacred poems, 
“Ramayana” and ‘¢ Mahabhrata,” are equally extensive. The 
former of these poems consists of a hundred thousand verses, and 
the latter of four hundred thousand, while the ineid has only 
twelve thousand, and the Iliad twenty-four thousand. Sir William 
Jones said that the student of the Hindu literature and religion, 
found himself in the presence of infinity. 

2. It is not only, however, the voluminousness of the authorita- 
tive sacred books, but the character of their contents, which cre- 
ates the difficulty of getting a clearidea of the system which they 
teach. The Vedas consist mainly of hymns of various ages, inter- 
spersed with brief, obscure, philosophical or theological explana- 
tions and comments. The Puranas are filled with extravagant 
legends ; which are to be interpreted historically, and which myth- 
ically, it is difficult to decide. 

3. The spirit of exaggeration is so characteristic of the Hindu 
mind that statements meant to be understood literally shock the 
mind by their extravagance. Thus their books make the earth a 
circular plane one hundred and seventy millions of miles in diame- 
ter; they speak of mountains sixty miles high, and of periods of 
four thousand millions of millions of years. 


§ 5, B.] HISTORY OF PANTHEISM. 31l 


\ 


The Religion of the Hindus not originally Monotheistic. 


It is a common opinion that the Hindu religion was originally 
and for centuries monotheistic ; that out of monotheism gradually 
rose the present complicated and monstrous polytheism, and that 
contemporaneously among the philosophical class, were developed 
the different forms of Pantheism. But this is contrary to well es- 
tablished facts, and is altogether unsatisfactory as a solution of the 
great problem of Hindu life. 

It is indeed true, as we know from the Bible, that monotheism 
was the earliest form of religion among men. And it is also true 
in all probability that the Vedas, which are collections of ancient 
hymns, contain some which belong to the monotheistic period. Most 
of those, however, which appear to assume the existence of one 
God, are to be understood in a pantheistic and not in a theistic 
sense. These recognize one divine Being, but that one includes 
all the other forms of being. The history of religion shows that 
when monotheism failed among men because “ they did not like to 
retain God in their knowledge,” it was replaced by the worship of 
nature. This nature-worship assumed two forms. The different 
elements, as fire, air, and water, were personified, endowed with 
personal attributes and divine powers, giving rise to polytheism. 
Or nature as a whole was the object of worship, giving rise to Pan- 
theism. 

It is evident that among the highly intellectual Aryans who 
settled in India, between one and two thousand years before 
Christ, the pantheistic view had obtained the ascendency, not as a 
philosophical theory merely, but as a religious doctrine. It be- 
came, and has continued until this day, the foundation of the relig- 
ious, civil, and social life of the Hindu. It is this which gives it 
its paramount importance. It stands alone in history. In no other 
case, among no other people, has Pantheism become the controlling 
form of religious belief among the people, so as to determine their 
institutions and to mould their character. The Hindus, therefore, 
have an interest for Christians and for the religious philosopher 
which attaches to no other heathen nation. They show, and were 
doubtless intended to show, what are the legitimate effects of Pan- 
theism. That doctrine has had dominant control for millenniums, 
over a highly cultivated and intelligent people, and in their char- 
acter and state we see its proper fruits. 


812 PART I.—THEOLOGY. [Cu I. — Anri-Tuxrem. 


Tt was Pantheistie. 


That the religion of the Hindus is fundamentally pantheistic, is 
evident — : 

1. From what their sacred writings teach of the Supreme Being. 
It is designated by a word in the neuter gender, Brahm. It is 
never addressed as a person. It is never worshipped. It has no 
attributes but such as may be predicated of space. It is said to. be 
eternal, infinite, immutable. It is said to have continued for un- 
told ages in the state of unintelligent, unconscious being. It comes 
to existence, to consciousness, and life, in the world. It unfolds 
itself through countless ages in all the forms of finite existence ; 
and then by a like gradual process all things are resolved into 
unconscious being. The illustrations of the origin of the world 
commonly employed are sparks issuing from a burning mass; or, 
better, vapour rising from the ocean, condensing and falling back to 
the source whence it came. Being as such, or the Infinite, is, 
therefore, viewed in three aspects: as coming to existence, as de- 
veloping itself in the world, as receiving everything back into the 
abyss of simple being. These different aspects are expressed by 
the words, Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva, to which our terms, Cre- 
ator, Preserver, and Destroyer, answer very imperfectly. 

We have here the constantly recurring pantheistic formula, 
Thesis, Analysis, Synthesis; Being, Development, Restoration. 
The Infinite, the Finite, and their Identity. The principal differ- 
ence between the Brahminical system and the theories of the later 
pantheists, is that the latter make the universe co-eternal with 
God. The Infinite from eternity to eternity develops itself in the 
Finite. Whereas, according to the former, there was an incon- 
ceivably long period of repose antecedent to the process of devel- 
opment, and that process after millions of millions of ages, is to be 
followed by a like period of unconsciousness and rest. 


Relation of Infinite Being to the World. 


2. The relation of God to the world, or rather of the Infinite to 
the Finite, is the same in the Brahminical, as in other pantheistic 
systems. That relation has been already intimated. It is that of 
identity. The world is the existence-form of God. God is every 
thing, good and evil ; and everything is God. But in very differ- 
ent degrees. There is more of Being (¢.e.,of God) in a plant 
than in unorganized matter ; more in an animal than in the plant; 


more in man than in either; more in one man, or race of men, 
than in another. 


§ 5, B.] HISTORY OF PANTHEISM. 818 


Relation of Pantheism to Polytheism. 


3. The vast polytheistic system of the Hindus is founded on 
Pantheism and is its logical consequence. In the first place, as 
just remarked, Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva, commonly called the 
Hindu Trinity, are not persons, but personifications, or different 
aspects under which Infinite Being is to be regarded. In the 
second place, as the Infinite Being manifests itself in different de- 
grees in different persons and things, anything extraordinary in 
nature, any remarkable man, is regarded as a special manifestation 
or embodiment of God. Hence the frequent avatars or incarna- 
tions of the Hindu mythology. In this way the gods may be, 
and have been indefinitely multiplied. Any person or thing, or 
quality, may be deified as a manifestation of infinite Being. In 
the third place, this accounts for the facts that the Hindu gods are 
regarded as destitute of moral excellence, and that even evil, as 
under the name of Kali, the goddess of cruelty and patroness of 
murderers, may be the special object of reverence. In the fourth 
place, no god, not even Brahma or Vishnu, is, according to the 
Hindu system, immortal. All gods and goddesses are at length to 
be merged in the abyss of infinite, unconscious Being. 


Effect of Pantheism on Religion. 


4, Pantheism, as it makes being, God, as it recognizes no attri- 
bute but power in the objects of worship, divorces morality from 
religion. It is not in the power of any system, however sincerely 
embraced, to reverse the laws of our nature. And, therefore, in 
despite of the prevalence of a doctrine which denies the possibility 
of either sin or virtue, and makes everything dependent on fate, or 
the power of arbitrary being, the people in various ways recognize 
the obligation of the moral law and the excellence of virtue. But 
this has nothing to do with their religion. The great object of all 
religious observances was final absorption in God; their proximate 
object was to propitiate some power by which the worshipper would 
be raised one or more steps toward the state in which that absorp- 
tion is possible. On this point Professor Wilson says:} ‘“ Entire 
dependence upon Krishna, or any other favorite deity, not only 
obviates the necessity of virtue, but it sanctifies vice. Conduct is 
wholly immaterial. It matters not how atrocious a sinner a man 
may be, if he paints his face, his breast, his arms with certain sec- 


1 Essays and Lectures chiefly on the Religion of the Hindus, vo) ii. p. 75; edit. London, 
1862. : 


814 PART I.— THEOLOGY. [Cuz III. — Anr1-Tuersm. 


tarial marks ; or, which is better, if he brands his skin permanently 
with them with a hot iron stamp; if he is constantly chanting 
hymns in honor of Vishnu, or, what is equally efficacious, if he 
spends hours in the simple reiteration of his name or names 5 if he 
die with the word Hari, or Rama, or Krishna on his lips, and the 
thought of him in his mind, he may have lived a monster of in- 
iquity, —he is certain of heaven.” ‘Certain of heaven,” iga 
Christian form of expression, and conveys an idea foreign to the 
Hindu mind. What such a worshipper hopes and expects is that 
when next born into the world it may be in a higher state and 
so much the nearer his final absorption. As Professor Wilson is: 
not only moderate, but almost apologetic in the account which he 
gives of the religion of the Hindus, the above quoted statement 
cannot be suspected of unfairness or exaggeration. 


Character of the Hindu Worship. 


The two leading characteristics of the Hindu worship are cruelty 
‘and indecency. And these are sufficiently accounted for by the 
Pantheism which underlies the whole system. Pantheism denies 
the distinction between virtue and vice ; it recognizes no attribute 
but power; it deifies evil; it ‘* sanctifies vice ;”’ passion, sensual 
or malignant, is as much a mode of divine manifestation as the 
most heroic virtue. Indeed, there is no room for the idea of moral 
excellence. Hence the prescriptions of religion have reference al- 
most exclusively to rites and ceremonies. The Brahmin when he 
rises must bathe in a certain way, stand in a certain posture, ex- 
tend his fingers in a prescribed manner; he must salute the rising 
sun, resting on one foot; he must repeat certain words. When he 
eats, the dish must be placed according: to rule; he must make 
prescribed motions with his hands, and so on through the whole 
day. Every act is prescribed, everything is religious; everything 
either defiles or purifies, ceremonially, but of moral defilement o1 
purity there seems to be in their religion no recognition. 


The Anthropology of the Hindus. 


5, The anthropology of the Hindus proves the pantheistic char- 
acter of their whole system. Man is only a part of God, a mode 
of his existence. He is compared to a portion of sea-water in- 
closed in a bottle and thrown into the ocean. The water in the 
bottle is the same in nature as that without. As soon as the bottle 
is broken the water within it is lost in the surrounding ocean. 
Another illustration of the destiny of the soul is that of a lump of 


a 


§ 5, B.] HISTORY OF PANTHEISM. 815 


salt thrown into the ocean, which immediately disappears. Its in- 
dividuality is lost. This absorption of the soul is the highest beati- 
fication which Pantheism offers to its votaries. But this, in the 
case of the vast majority of men, can be attained only after a long 
process of transmigrations extending, it may be, through millions 
of years. If a man be faithful and punctilious in his religious ob- 
servances, he comes into the world after death in a higher state. 
Thus, a Soudra may become a Brahmin. But if unfaithful, he 
will be born in a lower form, it may be, in that of a reptile. It is 
thus, by these alternations, that the wished for absorption in Brahm 
is ultimately attained.. With regard to the sacred, or Brahminical 
caste, the process may be shorter. A Brahmin’s life is divided, ac- 
cording to the Institutes of Menu, into four periods: childhood ; 
student life ; life as householder ; and finally, the ascetic period. As 
soon as a Brahmin feels the approach of old age, he is directed to 
retire from the world; to live as a hermit; to subsist only on 
herbs ; to deny himself all business and enjoyment, that by con- 
tinued self-negation he may not only destroy the power of the 
body, and free himself from the influence of the things seen and 
temporal, but also lose the consciousness of his individuality, and 
be able at last to say, “I am Brahm,” and then he is lost in the 
infinite. 

The Hindu life is dominated by this doctrine of absorption in 
God after a long series of transmigrations, and by the .division of 
the people into castes, which has in like manner its foundation in 
their theory of the relation of God to the world, or, of the Infi- 
nite to_the Finite. The Brahminical, or sacred class, is a higher 
manifestation of God than the military class ; the military, than the 
mercantile ; the mercantile, than the servile. This is popularly 
expressed by saying that the first proceeds from the head, the sec- 
ond from the arms, the third from the body, and the fourth from 
the feet of Brahm. The member of one of the lower castes can- 
not pass into either of those above him, except that by merit (vit- 
ual observances) he may on his next birth into the world be ad- 
vanced to a higher grade; and one of a higher caste, by neglect 
of the prescribed rule of living, may at his next birth find himself 
degraded into a lower caste, or even into a beast or a reptile. 
Hence the-horror of losing caste, which places a man out of the 
line of advancement, and consigns him to an almost endless state 
of degradation. 


816 PART IL—THEOLOGY.  ([Ca. I.— Anri-Tuxt1sM. 


The Effect of Pantheism on the Social Life of the Hindus. 

6. The whole religious and social life of the Hindu is controlled 
by the radical principle that all things are God, or modes of his 
existence, and all destined to return to Him again. To a Hindu 
his individual existence is a burden. It is a fall from God. Hence 
to get back, to be lost in the Infinite, is the one great object of 
desire and effort. As this end is not to be attained by virtue, but 
by asceticism, by propitiation of the gods, their religion is simply 
a round of unmeaning ceremonies, or acts of self-denial, or self- 
torture. Their religion, therefore, tends to destroy all interest in 
the present life, which is regarded as a burden and degradation. 
It cuts the nerves of exertion. It presents no incentive to virtue. 
It promotes'vice. It has all the effects of fatalism. The influence 
of the worship of deities without moral excellence, some of them 
monsters of iniquity ; the belief that cruelty and obscenity are ac- 
ceptable to these deities, and secure their favor, cannot be other- 
wise than debasing. The world, therefore, sees in India the prac- 
tical working of Pantheism. The system has been in unrestricted 
operation, not as a philosophy, but asa practical religious belief, for 
thousands of years, and among a people belonging to the most 
favored of the various races of men, and the result is before our 
eyes. 

“Greece and India,” says Max Miiller, ‘are, indeed, the two 
opposite poles in the historical development of the Aryan man. 
To the Greek, existence is full of life and reality ; to the Hindu it 
is a dream, an illusion. . . . . The Hindu enters this world as a 
stranger ; all his thoughts are directed to another world ; he takes 
no part even where he is driven to act; and when he sacrifices his 
life, it is but to be delivered from it. No wonder that a nation like 
the Indian cared so little for history; no wonder that social and 
political virtues were little cultivated, and the ideas of the useful 
and the beautiful scarcely known to them. With all this, how- 
ever, they had what the Greek was as little capable of imagining 
as they were of realizing the elements of Grecian life. They shut 
their eyes to this world of outward seeming and activity, to open 
them full on the world of thought and rest. Their life was a 
yearning after eternity ; their activity a struggle to return into that 
dlivine essence from which this life seemed to have severed them. 
Believing as they did in a divine and really existing eternal Being 


1 A History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, so far as it illustrates the Primitive Religion 
of the Brahmans, pp. 18, 19. 


$5, B.] HISTORY OF PANTHEISM. 817 


(78 vrs dv), they could not believe in the existence of this passing 
world. If the one existed, the other could only seem to exist; if 
they lived in the one, they could not live in the other. Their ex- 
istence on earth was to them a problem, their eternal life a cer- 
tainty. The highest object of their religion was to restore that 
bond by which their own self (Atman) was linked to the eternal 
Self (paramftman) ; to recover that unity which had been clouded 
and obscured by the’ magical illusions of reality, by the so-called 
Maya of creation.” 

In order to show ‘* How largely this idea of the Atman, as the 
Divine Spirit, entered into the early religious and philosophical 
speculations of the Indians,” he quotes from one of the Vedas a 
Dialogue in which, among other things, one of the speakers says: 
** Whosoever looks for this world, for the gods, for all beings, for 
this universe, elsewhere than in the Divine Spirit, should be aban- 
doned by them all. This Brahmahood, this kshatra-power, this 
world, these gods, these beings, this universe, all is the Divine 
Spirit.” ? The illustrations used by the speaker to show the relation 
of the phenomenal universe to God, are derived from the sounds 
issuing from a drum or a lute, smoke rising from a fire, vapour from 
. the sea. He adds, “‘ It is with us, when we enter into the Divine 
Spirit, as if a lump of salt was thrown into the sea; it becomes 
dissolved into the water (from which it was produced), and is not 
to be taken out again. But wherever you take the water and 
taste it, it is salt. Thus is this great, endless, and boundless Being 
but one mass of knowledge. As the water becomes salt, and the 
salt becomes water again, thus has the Divine Spirit appeared from 
out the elements and disappears again into them. When we have 
passed away, there is no longer any name.” 2 

There can therefore be no reasonable doubt that Pantheism lies 
at the foundation of all the religion of India. There is, indeed, the 
same difference between the present complex and corrupt polythe- 
ism of the Hindus and the teachings of the Vedas, that there is 
between the Roman Catholicism of our day and primitive Christian- 
ity. There is, however, this important distinction between the two 
cases. Popery is a perversion of Christianity by the introduction 
of incongruous elements derived from J ewish and heathen sources, 
whereas the religion of modern India is the legitimate and logical 
result of the principles of the earliest and purest of the Hindu 
sacred writings. 

The most accessible sources of information on the literature and 


1 History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, etc., p. 23. 2 Ibid. p. 24. 


318 PART I.— THEOLOGY.  [Cua.10.— Anti-Tuxtsm. 


religion of India, are the writings of Sir William Jones; the writ- 
ings of Colebrooke ; the Journal of the Asiatic Society; the works 
of Prof. Wilson of Oxford, specially his ‘‘ Essays and Lectures on 
the Religion of the Hindus”; Max Miiller’s work just quoted. 
Dr. Duff’s ‘India and Indian Missions, ”and the histories of India, 
by Macaulay, Elphinstone, et al. 


C. Grecian Pantheism. 

The remark of Max Miiller, that ‘‘ Greece and India are the two 
opposite poles of the development of the Aryan man,”’ is strikingly 
correct. The Greek believed in, and lived for the present and the 
visible ; the Indian believed in, and lived for the invisible and the 
future. Nevertheless there was a tendency in the higher minds 
among the Greeks to adopt the same speculative views as to God 
and the universe, the Infinite and the Finite, as prevailed in India. 
With the Greek, however, it was a matter of speculation ; with the 
Hindu, it was a practical religious belief. 

Speaking in general terms, the different forms of Grecian philos- 
ophy are characterized by the effort to reduce all the forms of: ex- 
istence to unity; to discover some one substance, principle, or 
power, to which all modes of manifestation of being could be re- 
ferred. Sometimes this one substance was assumed to be material ; 
sometimes spiritual; sometimes the obvious incompatibility between 
the phenomena of mind and those of matter, forced the admission 
of two eternal principles: the one active, the other passive; the 
one spiritual, the other material. The fundamental principle or 
idea, therefore, of the Grecian philosophy was pantheistic, either 
in its materialistic, spiritualistic, or hylozoistic form. 


The Lonie School. 


The earliest school among the Greeks was the Ionic, represented 
by Thales the Milesian, Anaximander and Anaximenes also of 
Miletus, and Heraclitus of Ephesus. These philosophers flourished 
from about 600 to 500 8. c. They were all materialistic in their 
theories. With Thales the one primal universal substance was 
water; with Anaximenes it was air; with Heraclitus it was fire. 
“It was the endeavour of this oldest of the Ionic philosophies, to 
deduce the origin of all things from one simple radical cause, a cos- 
mical substance, in itself unchangeable, but entering into the change 
of phenomena; and this was why these philosophers had no room 
in their doctrine for gods, or transmundane beings, fashioning and 


—_ 


§5, C.] HISTORY OF PANTHEISM. 819 


ruling things at will; and, in fact, Aristotle also remarked of the 
old physiologists, that they had not distinguished the moving cause 
from matter.”! Of Heraclitus, Déllinger, in his able work ‘“ The 
Gentile and the Jew in the Courts of the Temple of Christ,” says 
he “ meant by his ‘ fire,’ an ethereal substance as primal matter, the 
all-pervading and animating soul of the universe; a matter which 
he conceived to be not merely actual fire, but caloric, and this 
being at the same time the only power at work in the world, all- 
creative and destructive in turns, was, to speak generally, the one 
real and veritable existence among all things. For everything had 
its origin only in the constant modification of this eternal and pri- 
mal fire: the entire world was a fire dying out and rekindling itself 
in a fixed succession, while the other elements are but fire con- 
verted by condensation or rarefaction into a variety of forms. Thus 
the idea of a permanent being is a delusion; everything is ina 
state of perpetual fiux, an eternal-going to be (Werden), and in 
this stream spirit is hurried along as well as body, swallowed up 
and born afresh, . . . . Heraclitus, as any thorough-going 
Pantheist would, called the common soul of the world, the all-com- 
prehending primal fire, Zeus; and the flux of perpetual change 
and tendency to be, into which it enters, he termed poetically 
Zeus playing by himself.” ? 

Cousin says, ‘‘For the Ionic school in both its stages, there was 
no other God than nature. Pantheism is inherent in its system. 
What is Pantheism? It is the conception of the universe, 76 wav, 
as alone existing, as self-sufficient, and having its explanation in 
itself. All nascent philosophy is a philosophy of nature, and thus 
is inclined to Pantheism. The sensationalism of the Ionians of 
necessity took that form; and, to speak honestly, Pantheism is 
nothing but atheism.” ® 

Cousin frames the definition of Pantheism so as to exclude his 
own system. With him the material universe alone is not God. 
He believes in “God, nature, and humanity.” But these three 
are one. “If God,” he says, “be not everything, He is nothing.” 
This, however, is as truly Pantheism (although in a more philo 
sophical form), as the Materialism of the Ionians. 


The Eleatie School. 


The Eleatic or Italian school, of which Xenophanes, Parmenides, 
and Zeno, are the principal representatives, was inclined to the 


1 Dollinger, The Gentile and the Jew, translated by Darnell, London, 1862, vol. i. p- 250. 
2 Ibid. vol. i. p. 252. 8 Histoie Generale de la Philosophie, Paris, 1863, vol. i. p. 107. 


820 PART I.—THEOLOGY.  [Cu, Il. — Anri-Tueism. 


other extreme of denying the very existence of matter. Of these 
philosophers, Cousin says, ‘ They reduced everything to an ex- 
istence absolute, which approached nearly to Nihilism, or the denial 
of all existence.” Of Xenophanes, born in Colophon 617 B. ¢., 
Dollinger? says, “ With all his assertions of monotheistic sound, he 
was still a Pantheist, and, indeed, a material Pantheist, and is uni- 
versally understood to be such by the ancients. Certainly there 
was present to his mind the idea of a being, one and spiritual, em- 
bracing the whole complement of existence and thought within 
himself; yet this being was in his view but the general nature- 
power; the unity of God was to him identical with the unity of 
the world, and this again but the manifestation of the invisible 
being, called God, and therefore also he explained it to be uncreate, 
everlasting, and imperishable.” It is hard to see how this differs 
from the modern pantheistic doctrine, that God is the substance 
of which the world is the phenomenon ; or why Xenophanes should 
be regarded as a materialist more than Schelling or Cousin. 

Parmenides of Elea about 500 B. c. was more of an idealist. 
He attained to the idea of a pure and simple being in opposition to 
the material principle of the Ionic school. This ‘ being,” how- 
ever, was not a “ pure metaphysical idea, for,’ says Dodllinger, 
‘‘ he so expressed himself as to seem to represent it at one time as 
corporeal, and extended in space, at another as thinking. ‘To 
think, and the object of which the thought is, are one and the 
same,’ was a saying of his. . . . . There was no bridge for 
Parmenides that had led from this pure simple ‘being’ to the world 
‘of phenomena, of the manifold, and of motion; and therefore he 
denied the reality of all we see; the whole world of sense owed its 
existence only to the illusions of sense and the empty notions of 
mortal men built thereon.” ® Thus Parmenides anticipated Schell- 
ing in teaching the identity of subjéct and object. 


The Stoies. 


The Stoics take their origin from Zeno of Cittium, in Cyprus 
(840-260 B. c.). Their doctrine has already been noticed under 
the head of Hylozoism. Dollinger, indeed, says, “‘ The Stoic sys- 
tem is utter Materialism, built upon Heraclitic doctrine. It adopted 
corporeal causes only, and is only acquainted with two principles — 
matter, and an activity resident in matter, from eternity, as power, 
and giving it form. Everything real is body; there are no incor- 


1 Histoire Generale de la Philosophie, Paris, 1867, vol. i. p. 116; edit. 1863, p. 111. 
2 The Gentile and the Jew, vol. i; p. 260. : 8 bid. vol. i. p. 261 


a a 


§ 0, 0.5 HISTORY OF PANTHEISM. 321 


poreal things, as our abstractions, space, time, etc., have merely 
an existence in our thoughts; so all that really exists can only be 
known through the senses.” ! This judgment, however, is modified 
by what he says elsewhere. It is very plain that the later Stoics, 
especially among the Latins, as Seneca and Marcus Aurelius, re- 
garded the general principle which animated matter as having all 
the attributes of mind. On this point Déllinger says, “The two 
principles, matter and power, are to the Stoics but oue and the 
same thing viewed in different relations. Matter required for its 
existence a principle of unity to give it form and keep it together ; 
and this, the active element, is inconceivable without matter, as a 
subject in and on which it exists and dwells, and in which it works 
and moves. ‘Thus, the positive element is matter; yet conceived 
without properties; the active one, running through and quicken- 
ing all, is God in matter. But in truth, God and matter are iden- 
tical; in other words, the Stoic doctrine is hylozoic Pantheism.” 
** God is, therefore, the world-soul, and the world itself no aggre- 
gate of independent elements, but an organized, living being, whose 
complement and life is a single soul, or primal fire, exhibiting divers 
degrees of expansion and heat. . . . . God, then, in his physi- 
eal aspect, is the world-fire, or vital heat, all-penetrating, the one 
only cause of all life and all motion, and, at the same time, the 
necessity that rules in the world: but, on the other side, as the 
universal cause can only be a soul full of intelligence and wisdom, 
he is the world-intelligence, a blest being, and the author of the 
moral law, who is ever occupied with the government of the world, 
although he is precisely this world itself”? “The one substance 
is God and nature together, of which all that comes into being, 
and ceases to be, all generation and dissolution, are mere modifica- 
tions. Seneca explains Zeus or God’s being at once the world and 
the world’s soul by pointing to man, who feels himself to be a 
single being and yet again as one consisting of two substances, 
body and.soul.”’ 3 

The Stoics adopted the Hindu doctrine of the dissolution of 
all things, and the redevelopment of God in the world, after 
long successive periods. ‘In the great conflagration which takes 
place after the expiration of a world period or great year,” all 
organized beings will be destroyed, all multiplicity and differ- 
ence be lost in God’s unity ; which means, all will become ether 
again. But forthwith, like the pheenix recovering life from his 
own ashes, the formation of the world begins afresh ; God trans- 


1 The Gentile and the Jew, vol. i. p. 849. 2 Ibid. pp. 349-350. 8 Ibid. p. 350. 
VOU. I. 21 


B22 PART I.—THEOLOGY. Cu, I. —Tuxism. 


forms himself once more by a general renovation into a world, 
in which the same events, under similar circumstances, are again to 
be repeated down to the minutest detail. Many of these great 
catastrophes have already happened, and the process of burning 
by fire will follow again upon this regeneration, and so on ad 
infinitum.+ 

This system as well as every other form of Pantheism, excludes 
all moral freedom ; everything is under the law of absolute neces- 
sity. It therefore precludes the idea of sin. ‘ Acts of vice, 
Chrysippus said, are movements of universal nature, and in con- 
formity with the divine intelligence. In the economy of the great 
world, evil is like chaff falling, as unavoidable and worthless. 
Evil also was said by this school to do the service of making the 
good known, and yet at last all must resolve itself into God.” ? 

Thus the Ionic, the Eleatic, and the Stoic forms of Grecian phi- 
losophy were in their fundamental principles pantheistic. The two 
great philosophic minds of Greece, and of the world, however, 
were Plato and Aristotle, the one the philosopher of the ideal 
world, and the other of the natural. The latter was the disciple 
of the former, although in most points of doctrine, or at least of 
method, his antagonist. It is only with the views of these mind- 
controlling men, concerning the nature of the supreme Being, and 
of his relation to the phenomenal world, that the theologian as such 
has anything to do. And this, unfortunately, with regard to both, 
is the point in regard to which their teachings are the most obscure. 


Plato. 


Plato united in his comprehensive intellect, and endeavoured to 
harmonize the elements of the different doctrines of his predeces- 
sors in the field of speculation. ‘‘ The Socratic doctrine of the 
absolute good and beautiful, and of the Deity revealing himself to 
man as a kind Providence, formed the basis on which he started. 
As channels for the Heraclitic doctrine of the perpetual coming 
into being and flux of all things, together with the Eleatic one of 
the eternal immutability of the one and only Being, the dogma of 
Anaxagoras of a world-ruling spirit was serviceable to him, and 
with it he had the skill to connect the Pythagorean view of the 
universe, as an animated intelligent whole, in a spiritualizea 
form.”® These are sufficiently incongruous materials. An intelli- 
gent Deity exercising a providential control over the world; the 
Heraclitic doctrine which involved the denial of all reality and re- 

1 The Gentile and the Jew, vol. i. p. 351. 2 Ibid. p. 351. 8 ibid. p. 307. 


§ 5, C.] HISTORY OF PANTHEISM. 823 


solved everything into a perpetual flow of phenomena; the Eleatic 
doctrine of a one and only Being; and the Pythagorean idea of 
the universe as an animated anid intelligent whole. It was not 
possible but that first one, and then ee kier ‘of these elements 
should be made the more prominent, and consequently that the 
great philosopher should speak sometimes as a Theist and some- 
times as a Pantheist. Neither was it possible that these incon- 
gruous elements should be moulded into a consistent system. It is 
not, therefore, a matter of surprise that Déllinger, one of the 
greatest admirers of Plato and one of the ablest expounders of his 
writings, should immediately add to the passage above quoted. 
‘** Plato never arrived at a finished system, rounded off and per- 
fect in itself; nevertheless there is unmistakable evidence in his 
works of a continual progress, an effort after an increasing depth 
of foundation, and a stronger internal articulation, joined to a won- 
derful exuberance of ideas, often excessively bold.” 1 

Plato was not a Theist, in the ordinary and Christian sense of 
that word. He did not recognize the existence of an extramun- 
dane God, the creator, preserver, and governor of the world, on 
whom we are dependent and to whom we are responsible. With 
him God is not a person. As Anselm and the Realists generally 
admitted the existence of “rationality” as distinct from rational 
beings ; a general principle which became individual and personal 
in angels and men; so Plato admitted the existence of an universal 
intelligence, or vods, which becomes individualized in the different 
orders of intelligent beings, gods, demons, and men. God with 
him was an Idea; the Idea of the Good ; which comprehended 
and gave unity to all other ideas. 


Ideas. 


_ What then were ideas in Plato’s sense of the term? They 
were not mere thoughts, but the only real entities, of which the 
phenomenal and sensible are the representations or shadows. He 
illustrated their nature by supposing a man in a dark cave entirely 
ignorant of the external world, with a bright light shining behind 
him, while between him and the light there continually passes a 
procession of men, animals, trees, etc. The moving shadows of 
these things would be projected on the wall of the cavern, and the 
man would necessarily suppose that the shadows were the realities. 
These ideas are immutable and eternal, constituting the essence or 
real being of all phenomenal existence. ‘ Plato teaches that for as 

1 The Gentile and the Jew, p. 307. 


324 PART I.— THEOLOGY. (Cu. II. -— AnT1I-THEISM. 


many general signs of our conceptions as we have, there are so 
many really existing things, or Ideas, in the intelligible world cor- 
responding : to man these are the only solid and worthy objects of 
thought and knowledge ; for they are eternal and immutable, ex- 
isting only in themselves, but separate from all things and individ- 
ual, while their manifold copies, the things perceptible by sense, are 
ever fluctuating and transitory. Independent of time and space, 
as well as of our intellect and its conceptions, Ideas belong to a 
world of their own, of another sphere, transcending sense.’ They 
are not the thoughts of God, but the objects of his thought ; and, 
according to them, He created the world in matter. They only and 
God are really existing beings ; and therefore earthly things have 
but the shadow of an existence, and that only derived from a cer- 
tain participation in the Ideas, their types.” 4 


The Relation of Ideas, in Plato’s Philosophy, to God. 


What is the relation of these ideas to God? This is the deci- 
sive question so far as the theology of Plato is concerned. Unfortu- 
nately it is not a question easily answered. It is a point about 
which the commentators differ ; some saying that Plato leaves the 
matter undecided, sometimes identifying ideas with God, and at 
others representing them as distinct; others say that he clearly 
identifies ideas with God, or includes them in the divine essence ; 
while others again understand him as making a marked distinction 
between God and the ideas after which the universe was moulded. 
It is not easy to reconcile what Déllinger says on this subject. In 
the passage above quoted he says that ideas are not the thoughts 
of God, but the objects of his thought. But on the same page? he 
says, *“‘ These Ideas are not to be conceived as beside and external 
to God. They are founded in God, and God is the all com- 
prehensive Idea, embracing all partial archetypes in an unity.” 
He had before said, that with Plato Ideas and God are the only 
‘“‘ really existing beings.”’ If this be so, and if God is “the all- 
comprehensive idea, embracing all others in unity,’”’ then God is 
the only really existing Being; and we have pure Pantheism. 
According to Cousin, Plato not only gave ideas a real and proper 
existence, but, “en derniére analyse il les place dans la raison 
divine: c’est la qu’ elles existent substantiellement.” ® Déllinger, in 
commenting on a passage in the Timeeus, in which “ God is styled 
the Father, who has begotten the world like a son, as an image of 


1 The Gentile and the Jew, vol. i. pp. 308 and 309. 2 Ibid. p. 309. 
8 Histoire Générale de la Philosophie, Paris, 1863, p. 122. 


§ 5, C.] HISTORY OF PANTHEISM. 825 


the eternal gods, ¢. ¢.,ideas;” says, ‘Had Plato really intended 
here to explain the idea of procreation as a communication of 
essence, he would have been a pure Pantheist.”1 Plato, how- 
ever, he says? “is no Pantheist ; matter is, with him, entirely dis- 
tinct from God ; still he has a pantheistieal bias in his system ; for 
all that there is of intelligence in the world, down even to man, 
belongs, in his view, to the divine substance.” Plato, therefore, 
escapes Pantheism only by admitting the eternity of matter; but 
this eternal matter is as near nothing as possible. It is not cor 
poreal. It is “something not yet entity.” 

As Plato made ideas eternal and immutable ; as they were all 
included in the idea of God, ¢. e.,in God; and as they constitute 
the only really existing beings, all that is phenomenal or that 
affects the senses being mere shadows of the real, it can hardly be 
denied that his system in its essential character is really pantheisti- 
cal. It is, however, an ideal Pantheism. It does not admit that 
matter or evil is a manifestation of God, or mode of his existence. 
Only what is good, is God ; but all that really is, is good. 


The Cosmogony of Plato. 


Plato’s cosmogony and anthropology confirm this view of his 
theology. Nothing has ever been created. All that is, is eternal; 
not indeed in form, but in substance. Matter, something material, 
has always existed. This in itself is lifeless, but it has “a soul,” 
an unintelligent force by which chaotic or disorderly agitation or 
motion is produced. ‘This unintelligent force God endowed with a 
portion of his own intelligence or vois, and it becomes the world- 
soul, 7. ¢., the Demiurgus, the formative principle of the world. 
God is not therefore himself even the framer of the world. This 
is the work of the Demiurgus. This world-soul pervades the visi- 
ble universe, and constitutes one living, animated whole. This 
“‘ world-soul ” is individualized in star-gods, demons, and human 
souls. Thus Plato’s system makes room for polytheism. 


The Nature of the Soul. 


The soul, according to this theory, consists of intelligence which 
is of the substance of God, and of elements derived from the 
world-soul as distinguished from the vots which did not originally 
belong to it. All evil arises from the connection of the divine ele- 
ment in man with matter. The object of life is to counteract this 
evil influence by contemplation and communion with the ideal 

1 The Gentile and the Jew, vol. i. p. 329. 2 Ibid. p. 312. 


- 826 PART I. — THEOLOGY. [Cu. I. — Anti-Tnrism. 


world. Plato taught the preéxistence as well as the immortality 
of the soul. Its state in the present stage of existence being de- 
termined by its course in its previous forms of being. It is, how- 
ever, according to his common mode of representation, strictly 
_ immortal. ‘ Plato’s monotheistic conception of God,” says Dél- 
linger, “is one of the most refined to which ante-Christian specu- 
lation attained ; yet he contributed nothing whatever to the knowl- 
edge of the perfect, living, personality of God, and its absolute and 
unconditional liberty.” His monotheism, it would seem, consisted 
in the acknowledgment of a universal intelligence which manifested 
itself as reason in all rational beings. 


Aristotle. 


Aristotle, although the disciple, was the great opponent of Plato 
and his philosophy. He rejected Plato’s doctrine of ideas as chi- 
merical, as a hypothesis which was unnecessary and without evi- 
dence. In like manner he denied the existence of preéxistent mat- 
ter out of which the world was fashioned. He believed the world 
to be eternal both in matter and form. It is, and there is no reason 
to doubt that it always has been and always will be. He admitted 
the existence of mind in man; and, therefore, assumed that there 
is an infinite intelligence, of which reason in man is a manifesta- 
tion. But this infinite intelligence, which he called God, was pure 
intelligence, destitute of power and of will; neither the creator 
nor the framer of the world; unconscious, indeed, that the world 
exists ; as it is occupied exclusively in thought of which it is itself 
the object. The world and God are coeternal ; and yet, in a cer- 
tain sense, God is the cause of the world. As a magnet acts on 
matter, or as the mere presence of a friend stirs the mind, so God 
unconsciously operates on matter, and awakens its dormant powers. 
As the universe is a cosmos, an ordered system; and as innumera- 
ble organized beings, vegetable and animal, exist in the world, 
Aristotle assumed that there are “‘ forms” inherent in matter, which 
determine the nature of all such organizations. This is very much 
what in modern language would be called “vital force,” ‘ vitality,” 
“ws formativa,” “ Bildungstrieb,” or Agassiz’s “immaterial prin- 
ciple,” which is different in every distinct species, and which con- 
stitutes the difference between one species and another. .The soul 
is the “forma” of the man. ‘It is the principle that gives form, 
motion, and development to the body, the entelecheia of it; 2. e., 
that substance, which only manifests itself in the body which is 
formed and penetrated by it, and continues energizing in it as the 

1 The Gentile and the Jew, p. 829. 


‘ 


§ 5, C.} HISTORY OF PANTHEISM. 827 


principle of life, determining and mastering matter. Thus, the 
body is nothing of itself; it is what it is, only through the soul, 
the nature and being of which it expresses, to which it stands in 
the relation of a medium in which the object, the soul, is realized ; 
and so it cannot be imagined without the body, nor the body with- 
out it ; one must be produced contemporaneously with the other.” } 
Of course there can be no immortality of the soul. As no plant is 
immortal, as the vital principle does not exist separately from the 
plant, so the soul has no existence separate from the body. The 
two begin and end together. ‘“ The really human in the soul, that 
which has come into being, must also pass away, the understand- 
ing even ; only the divine reason is immortal; but, as the memory 
belongs to the sensitive soul, and individual thought depends on the 
understanding or passive nous only, all self-consciousness must 
cease with death.” 2 ‘ Thus, then, Aristotle’s doctrine of the soul 
shows that his defect, as well as that of Plato, and indeed of all 
antiquity, was his imperfect acquaintance with the idea of person- 
ality ; and on that head he cannot be acquitted of a pantheistic ten- 
dency.” ‘His God is not a really personal one, or is only an 
imperfect personality.” * ‘The nous, or reason, allows souls, with 
their bodies, to sink back into nothingness, from which they sev- 
erally issued. It alone exists on, ever the same and unalterable ; 
for it is no other than the divine mows in individual existence, the 
divine intelligence enlightening the night of human understanding, 
and must be conceived just as much the prime mover of human 
discursive thought and knowledge, as of his will.” ® 

This brief review of the Grecian philosophy in its relation to 
theology, shows that in all its forms it was more or less pantheistic. 
This remark will not be recognized as correct by those, who with 
Cousin, limit the use of the word Pantheism to designate either the 
doctrine which makes the material universe God; or that which 
denies the existence of anything but matter and physical force, 
which is atheism; nor by those who take the word strictly as 
meaning the theory which admits of only one substance, which is 
the substance of God; and which consequently makes matter as 
much a mode of God’s existence as mind. Its correctness, how- 
ever, will be admitted by those who mean by Pantheism the doc- 
trine which makes all the intelligence in the world the intelligence 
of God, and all intellectual activity modes of the activity of God, 
and which necessarily precludes the possibility of human liberty 
and responsibility. 


1 The Gentile and the Jew, p. 338. 4 Ibid. p. 339. 8 Ibid. p. 340. 
4 Ibid. p. 336. 5 Ibid. p. 339. 


828 PART L.—THEOLOGY.  [Cu. I. — Anti-Taersm. 


The authorities on this subject are, so far as Plato and Aristotle 
are concerned, of course their own writings ; with regard to those 
philosophers whose works are not preserved, or of which only 
fragments are extant, their systems are more or less fully detailed 
by the ancient writers, as Plutarch and Cicero. The general 
reader will find the information he needs in one or more of the 
numerous histories of philosophy; as those of Brucker, Ritter, 
Tenneman, and Cousin; among the latest and best of which is 
Déllinger’s “« The Gentile and the Jew in the Courts of the Tem. 
ple of Christ,” London, 1862. 


D. Medieval Pantheism. 


The Neo-Platonists. 


Pantheism, as it appeared in the Middle Ages, took its form and 
character from Neo-Platonism. This was an eclectic system in 
which the Eleatic doctrine of the unity of all being was combined 
with the Platonic doctrine concerning the phenomenal universe. 
The philosophers recognized as the representatives of this school are 
Plotinus (a. D. 205-270), Porphyry (born a. p. 233), Jambli- 
chus in the fourth century, and Proclus in the fifth. Neo-Pla- 
tonism was monism. It admitted of only one universal Being. 
This Being considered in itself was inconceivable and indescriba- 
ble. It was revealed, or self-manifested in the world-soul, and 
world-reason, which constituted a trinity ; one substance in dif- 
ferent aspects or modes of manifestation. The world is therefore 
*¢ the affluence of God,” as fire emits heat. The soul of man isa 
mode of God’s existence, a portion of his substance. Its destiny 
is absorption in the infinite Being. This was not to be attained by 
thought, or by meditation, but by ecstasy. This constituted the 
peculiar feature of the Neo-Platonic school. ‘* Union with God” 
was to be attained by “a mystical self-destruction of the individual 
person (Ichheit)” in God.! Schwegler 2 says: ‘ From the intro- 
duction of Christianity monism has been the character and the 
fundamental tendency of the whole modern philosophy.” This re- 
mark, coming from an advocate of that theory, must be taken with 
no small amount of allowance. It is, however, true that almost all 
the great departures from the simplicity of the truth as revealed in 
the sacred Scriptures, have assumed more or less distinctly a pan- 
theistic tendency. 


1 History of Philosophy. Translated from the German by Julius H. Seel 
ens y Julius H. Seelye, p. 157. 


$5, DJ _ HISTORY OF PANTHEISM. 829 


John Scotus Erigena. 

The most pronounced Pantheist among the schoolmen was John 
Scotus Erigena. Little is known of his origin or history. From 
his name Scotus and designation Erigena (son of Erin), it has 
been generally assumed that he was an Irishman. It is known 
that he enjoyed the protection and patronage of Charles the Bald 
of France, and that he taught in Paris and perhaps in England. 

His principal work is that ‘“ De Divisione Nature.”’ By nature 
he means all being. The fourfold divisions which he makes of 
nature, are only so many manifestations or aspects under which 
the one Being is revealed or is to be contemplated. Those divisions 
are: (1.) That which creates and is not created. (2.) That 
which creates and is created. (3.) That which does not create 
but is created. (4.) That which neither creates nor is created. 
“This division of nature,” says Ritter, ‘is made simply to show 
that all is God, since the four natures are only revelations of God.” 

Scotus agreed with most philosophers in making philosophy and 
religion identical, and in admitting no higher source of knowledge 
than human reason. ‘“ Conficitur,” he says, ‘‘ veram esse philo- 
sophiam veram religionem, conversimque veram religionem esse 
veram philosophiam.” 2 ‘ 

The leading principles of his philosophy are the following: 
(1.) The distinction with him between being and not-being, is 
not that between something and nothing, between substantial ex- 
istence and non-existence, but between affirmation and negation. 
Whatever may be affirmed 7s ; whatever is denied 7s not. (2.) All 
being consists in thought. Nothing is but as it exists in the mind 
and consciousness. (3.) With God, being, thought, and creating 
are identical. God’s being consists in thinking, and his thoughts 
are things. In other words, the thought of God is the real being 
of all that is. (4.) Consequently the world is eternal. God and 
the world are identical. He is the ** totum omnium.” 

His system is, therefore, a form of idealistic Pantheism. Ritter 
devotes the ninth book of his ‘* Geschichte der Christlichen Philo- 
sophie,” ® to the exposition of the philosophy of Scotus. The few 
following passages from the ‘“‘ De Divisione Nature,” are sufficient 
to show the correctness of the above statement of his principles. 

“Tntellectus enim omnium in Deo essentia omnium est. Siqui- 
dem id ipsum est Deo cognoscere, priusquam fiunt, que facit, et 


1 Geschichte der Christlichen Philosophie, vol. iii. p. 224, sf 
2 De Predest. cap. i. 1, Migne, Patr. vol. exxii. p. 358, a. 8 Vol. iii. pp. 206-296. 


330 PART L—THEOLOGY.  [Cu. Il. — Anti-Teaism, 


facere, qu cognoscit. Cognoscere ergo et facere Dei unum est. 
“ Maximus ait: Quodcunque intellectus comprehendere potuerit, id 
ipsum fit.” 2 ‘ Intellectus enim rerum veraciter ipsee res sunt, di- 
cente Sancto Dionysio, ‘ Cognitio eorum, que sunt, ea, que sunt, 
est.’”’3 “Homo est notio quadam intellectualis in mente divina 
eternaliter facta. Verissima et probatissima definitio hominis est 
ista: et non solum hominis, verum etiam omnium que in divina 
sapientia facta sunt.” 4 Omnis visibilis et invisibilis creatura ‘Theo- 
phania, 7. e., divina apparitio potest appelari.® ‘* Num negabis cre- 
atorem et creaturam unum esse?” ® ‘Creation [with Erigena] is 
nothing else than the Lord of creation; God in some ineffable 
manner created in the creation.” 7 

Scotus translated the works of the so-called St. Dionysius, the 
Areopagite, and in so doing prepared the way for that form of mys- 
tical Pantheism which prevailed through the Church down to the 
period of the Reformation. The pseudo-Dionysius was a Neo- 
Platonist. His object was to give the doctrine of Plotinus a Chris- 
tian aspect. He adopted the principle of the unity of all being. 
All creatures are of the essence of God. But instead of placing 
the self-manifestation of God in nature, in the world-soul, he placed 
it principally in the hierarchy of rational being, — cherubim, ser- 
aphim, thrones, principalities, and powers, and souls of men. The 
destiny of all rational creatures, is reunion with God; and this 
reunion, as the Neo-Platonists taught, was to be attained by ecstasy 
and the negation of Self. It was this system, which, in common 
with all other forms of Pantheism, precluded the idea of sin, which 
was reproduced by the leading mystics of the Middle Ages, and 
which, when it found its way among the people as it did with the 
Beghards and Brethren of the Free Spirit, produced, as substan- 
tially the same system has done in India, its legitimate fruits of 
evil. Of the mystical Pantheism of. the Middle Ages, however, 
enough has already been said in the Introduction, in the chapter 
on Mysticism. ; 


Lee 


E. Modern Pantheism. 
Spinoza. 

The revival of Pantheism since the Reformation is principally 
due to Spinoza; he was born at Amsterdam in 1634, and died at 
Ghent in the forty-fourth year of his age. He was descended from 
a wealthy Jewish Portuguese family, and enjoyed the advantage of 

1 De Divisione Nature, 1. 20; edit. Westphalia, 1838, p. 118. 


2 Ibid. 1.9, p. 9. 3 Ibid, 11. 8, p. 95. 4 Jvid. Iv. 7, p. 380. 
5 Jbid. m1. 19, p. 240. § Ibid. 11. 2, p. 88. 7 Ritter, vol. iii. p. 284 


§ 5, E.] HISTORY OF PANTHEISM. 331 


a highly finished education. He early devoted himself to the study 
of philosophy, and was at first a disciple of Des Cartes. Leibnitz 
characterizes the system of Spinoza as Cartesianism run wild. Des 
Cartes distrusted the testimony of the senses. His starting-point 
was the consciousness of existence, “I think.” In that proposition 
the existence of a thinking substance is necessarily included. The 
outward world produces impressions on this thinking substance. 
But after all, these sensations thus produced, are only states of 
self-consciousness. Self, therefore, and its varying states, are all of 
which we have direct knowledge. It is not all, however, that Des 
Cartes believed actually existed. He was a sincere Catholic, and 
died in communion with the Church. He acknowledged not only 
the existence of mind, but also of God and of matter. Our knowl- 
edge, however, of God and of matter as substances distinct from 
our minds, was arrived at by a process of reasoning. The validity 
of that process Spinoza denied. He admitted the existence of only 
one substance, and gave such a definition of the word as precluded 
the possibility of there being more substances than one. With him 
substance is that which exists of itself, of necessity, and is abso- 
lutely independent. There is, therefore, but one substance possi- 
ble. We come, however, everywhere into contact with two classes 
of phenomena: those of thought and those of extension. Thought 
and extension, therefore, are the two attributes of the one infinite 
substance. Individual things are the modes under which the in- 
finite substance is constantly manifested. In Spinoza’s system 
there are the three radical ideas of substance, attribute, and mode. 
Of these that of substance alone has any reality. The other two are 
mere appearances. If we look at anything through a glass colored 
red the object will appear red; if the glass be blue, the object will 
appear blue; but the color is not really an attribute of the object. 
Thus substance (the one) appears to us under one aspect as 
thought and under another as extension. ‘The difference is appar- 
ent and not real. The finite has therefore no real existence. The 
universe is sunk into the Infinite; and the Infinite is a substance 
of which nothing can be affirmed. Of the Infinite nothing can be 
denied, and therefore nothing can be affirmed for ‘‘ omnis deter- 
minatio est negatio.”” The Infinite, therefore, is practically nothing. 

A sufficient account of modern Pantheism in its general features, 
as represented by Fichte, Schelling, and Hegel, and their succes- 
sors and disciples, has been given already at the commencement of 
this chapter. More detailed information may be found in the 
numerous recent histories of philosophy, as those of Morell, Schweg- 


! 


332 PART I.—THEOLOGY. [Cu I. — Anri-Tuetem. 


ler, Michelet, and Rosenkranz, and in Hunt’s “ History of Pan- 
theism.” ; 
F. Conclusion. 

The fact that Pantheism has so extensively prevailed in every 
age and in every part of the world, is a proof of its fascination and 
power. Apart from a divine revelation, it seems to have been 
regarded as the most probable solution of the great problem of the 
universe. Nevertheless it is so unsatisfactory, and does such vio- 
lence to the laws of our nature, that it has never to any extent 
. taken hold on the hearts of the people. India may be regarded as 

furnishing an exception to this remark. But even there, although 
Pantheism was the ground form of the popular religion, it had to 
resolve itself into polytheism in order to meet the necessities of 
the people. Men must have a personal god whom they can wor- 
ship and to whom they can pray. 

The most obvious remark to be made of the whole system is 
that it is a hypothesis. From its very nature it is incapable of 
proof. It is a mere theory assumed to account for the phenomena 
of the universe. If it did satisfactorily account for them, and did 
not contradict the teachings of the Bible, it might be safely admit- 

.ted. But it is not only inconsistent with all that the Scriptures 
reveal concerning the nature of God and his relation to the world, 
but it contradicts the laws of belief which God has impressed on 
our nature, subverts the very foundation of religion and morality, 
and involves even the deification of sin. 

Had we no divine revelation on the subject, Theism merely as a 
theory could not fail to secure the assent of every devout mind in 
preference to Pantheism. Theism supposes the existence of a 
personal, extramundane God, the creator and preserver of the 
universe ; everywhere present in his wisdom and power, directing 
all events to the accomplishment of his infinitely wise designs. It 
supposes the material universe to be distinct from God, dependent 
on his will, upheld by his power, and pregnant with physical forces 
ever active under his control. It supposes that man is the creature 
of God, owing his existence to the will of God, created after his 
image, a free, rational, moral, and accountable agent, capable of 
knowing, loving, and worshipping God as a Spirit infinite in his 
being and perfections. Although this theory may have, for the 
reason, some problems, such as the origin and prevalence of evil, 
without a satisfactory solution, yet as it meets and satisfies all the 
demands of our nature, and solves the problem as to the origin and 
nature of the universe, it commends itself to the reason, the heart, 


: 


c § 5, F.] HISTORY OF PANTHEISM. 833 


and the conscience with a force which no sophistry of speculation 
can resist. 

Pantheism, on the other hand, does violence to our nature, and 
contradicts the intuitive convictions of consciousness. 

1. We are conscious that we are free agents. This is a truth 
which no man can deny with regard to himself, and which every 
man assumes with regard to others. This truth Pantheism denies. 
It makes our activity only a form of the activity of God, and 
assumes that his acts are determined by necessity as much as the 
development of a plant or animal. 

2. It is intuitively certain that there is a real distinction between 
moral good and evil: that the one is that to which man is bound 
to be conformed, and the other that which he is bound to hate and 
to avoid; that the one deserves approbation, and that the other de- 
serves disapprobation, and merits punishment. These are convic- 
tions which belong tu the rational nature of man ; and they cannot 
be destroyed without destroying his rationality. Pantheism, how- 
ever, pronounces these convictions delusions ; that there is no such 
thing as sin, in the sense above stated; that what we call sin is 
mere weakness ; imperfect development, as unavoidable as feeble- 
ness in an infant. It goes further: it pronounces evil good. It 
makes the sinful acts and passions of men as much the acts and 
states of God as holy acts and holy feelings. There is no good but 
being ; and the men of power are the men of being; and, there- 
fore, the strongest are the best; the weak are to be despised; they. 
deserved ‘to be conquered and trodden under foot. Hence where 
Pantheism has become a religion the deities’ who represent evil 
are the most honoured and worshipped. 

3. Pantheism not only destroys the foundation of morals, but it 
renders all rational religion impossible. Religion supposes a per- 
sonal Being endowed not only with intelligence and power, but 
with moral excellence ; and to be rational, that Being must be in- 
finite in all his perfections. Pantheism, however, denies that an 
infinite Being can be a person; that it is intelligent, self-con- 
scious, or possessed of moral attributes. It is just as impossible to 
worship such a Being as it is to worship the atmosphere, or the law 
of gravitation, or the axioms of Euclid. 

4, It is no extravagance to say that Pantheism is the worst form 
of atheism. For mere atheism is negative. It neither deifies man 
nor evil. But Pantheism teaches that man, the human soul, is the 
highest form in which God exists; and that evil is as much a man- 
ifestation of God as good; Satan as the ever-blessed and adorable 


834 PART I.—THEOLOGY. [Cu I. — Anti-Tuertsm. 


Redeemer. Beyond this it is impossible for the insanity of wick- 
edness to go. 

5. Man, according to this system, is no more immortal than the 
leaves of the forest, or the waves of the sea. We are transient 
forms of universal Being. 

Our nature is indestructible ; as it is impossible that we should 
not believe in our own individual existence, in our free agency, in 
our moral obligations; in our dependence and responsibility to a 
Being capable of knowing what we are and what we do, and of 
rewarding and punishing as He sees fit, so it is impossible that 
Pantheism should ever be more than a philosophical speculation, 
where the moral nature of man has once been developed by the 
knowledge of the living and true God. 


y CHAPTER IV. 


THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD. 


Havine considered the arguments in favor of the doctrine that 
_ God is, and also the various systems opposed to Theism, we come 
now to consider the question, Can God be known? and if so, 
How? that is, How does the mind proceed in forming its idea of 
God, and, How do we know that God really is what we believe 
Him to be? 

§ 1. God can be known. 

It is the clear doctrine of the Scriptures that God can be known. 
Our Lord teaches that eternal life consists in the knowledge of 
God and of Jesus Christ, whom He hath sent. The Psalmist . 
says, “In Judah is God known” (Ps. Ixxvi. 1). Isaiah predicts, 
that ‘the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord” (Is. xi. 
9). Paul says even of the heathen, that they knew God, but did 
not like to retain that knowledge (Rom. i. 19, 20, 21, 28). 


A. State of the Question. 


It is, however, important distinctly to understand what is meant 
when it is said, God can be known. 

1. This does not mean that we can know all that is true con- 
cerning God. There were some among the ancient philosophers 
who taught that the nature of God can be as fully understood and 
determined as any other object of knowledge. The modern spec- 
ulative school teaches the same doctrine. Among the propositions 
laid down by Spinoza, we find the following: “ Cognitio seternz et 
infinite essentize Dei, quam unaqueeque idea involvit, est adeequata 
et perfecta.” Hegel says, that God is, only so far as He is known. 
The sin against the Holy Ghost, according to Hegel, is to deny that 
He can be known.? Cousin holds the same doctrine. ‘‘ God in 
fact,’’ he says, ‘exists to us only in so far as He is known.” ® 

According to Schelling, God is known in his own nature by 


1 Hthices, ii. prop. xlvi. edit. Jena, 1803, vol. ii. p. 119. 

2 See Mansel’s Limits of Religious Thought, Boston, 1859, p. 301. : 

8 Sir William Hamilton’s Discussions, p. 16. Princeton Review on Cousin’s Philosaphy, 
1856. 


836 PART I.—THEOLOGY. [Cu. IV.—Can Gop BE KNOWN? 


direct intuition of the higher reason. He assumes that there is in 
man a power which transcends the limits of the ordinary conscious- 
ness (an Anschauungs Vermégen), which takes immediate cogni- 


zance of the Infinite. Hegel says that ‘‘ Man knows God only so | 


far as God knows Himself in man; this knowledge is God’s self- 
consciousness, but likewise a knowledge of the same by man, and 
this knowledge of God by man is the knowledge of man by God.” 4 
Cousin finds this knowledge in the common consciousness of men. 
That consciousness includes the knowledge of the Infinite as well 
as of the finite. We know the one just as we know the other, and 
we cannot know the one without knowing the other. These philos- 
ophers all admit that we could not thus know God unless we were 
ourselves God. Self-knowledge, with them, is the knowledge of 
God. Reason in man, according to Cousin, does not belong to his 
‘ individuality. It is infinite, impersonal, and divine. Our knowl- 
edge of God, therefore, is only God knowing Himself. Of course 
it is in no such sense as this that the Scriptures and the Church 
teach that God can be known. 


God Inconceivable. 


2. It is not held that God, properly speaking, can be conceived 
of; that is, we cannot form a mental image of God. ‘ All con- 
ception, says Mr. Mansel,? ‘implies imagination.” To have a 
valid conception of a horse, he adds, we must be able “to com- 
bine” the attributes which form “the definition of the animal ” 
into ‘¢a representative image.” Conception is defined by Taylor 
in the same manner, as “the forming or bringing an image or idea 
into the mind by an effort of the will.” In this sense of the word 
it must be admitted that the Infinite is not an object of knowledge. 
We cannot form an image of infinite space, or of infinite duration, 
or of an infinite whole. To form an image is to limit, to circum- 
scribe. But the infinite is that which is incapable of limitation. 
It is admitted, therefore, that the infinite God is inconceivable. 
We can form no representative image of Him in our minds. The 
word, however, is often, and perhaps commonly, used in a less 
restricted sense. To conceive is to think. <A conception is 
therefore a thought, and not necessarily an image. To say, 
therefore, that God is conceivable, in common language, is merely 
to say that He is thinkable. That is, that the thought (or idea) 
of God involves no contradiction or impossibility. We cannot 


1 Werke, xii. p. 496, edit. Berlin, 1840. 
2 Prolegomena Logica, edit. Boston, 1860, p. 34. 


§1, A.J GOD.AS AN OBJECT OF KNOWLEDGE. 337 


think of a round square, or that a part is equal to the whole. 
But we can think that God is infinite and eternal. 


God Incomprehensible. 


‘8. When it is said that God can be known, it is not meant that 
He can be comprehended. To comprehend is to have a complete 
and exhaustive knowledge of an object. It is to understand its na- 
ture and its relations. We cannot comprehend force, and specially 
vital force. We see its effect, but we cannot understand its nature 
or the mode in which it acts. It would be strange that we should 


know more of God than of ourselves, or of the most familiar objects 


of sense. God is past finding out. We cannot understand the 
Almighty unto perfection. To comprehend is (1.) To know the 
essence as well as the attributes of an object. (2.) It is to know 
not some only, but all of its attributes. (8.) To know the relation 
in which these attributes stand to each other and to the substance 
to which they belong. (4.) To know the relation in which the 
object known stands to all other objects. Such knowledge is 
clearly impossible in a creature, either of itself or of anything out 
of itself. It is, however, substantially thus that the transcenden- 
talists claim to know God. 


Our Knowledge of God Partial. 


4. It is included in what has been said, that our knowledge of 
God is partial and inadequate. There is infinitely more in God 
than we have any idea of; and what we do know, we know im- 
perfectly. We know that God knows; but there is much in his 
mode of knowing, and in its relation to its objects, which we cannot 
understand. We know that He acts; but we do not know how 
He acts, or the relation which his activity bears to time, or things 
out of Himself. We know that He feels ; that He loves, pities, is 
merciful, is gracious ; that He hates sin. But this emotional ele- 
ment of the divine nature is covered with an obscurity as great, 
but no greater, than that which rests over his thoughts or purpuses. 
Here again our ignorance, or rather, the limitation of our knowledge 
concerning God, finds a parallel in our ignorance of ourself. ‘thers 
are potentialities in our nature of which, in our present state of 
existence, we have no idea. And even as to what we are now, we 
know but little. We know that we perceive, think, and act; we 
do not know how. It is perfectly inscrutable to us how the mind 
takes cognizance of matter; how the soul acts on the body, or the 


body on the mind. But because our knowledge of ourselves is 
VOL. L 22 


ie 


838 PART L—THEOLOGY. [Cx.IV.—Can Gop BE KNOWN? 


thus partial and imperfect, no sane man would assert that we have 
no self-knowledge. 

The common doctrine on this subject is clearly expressed by 
Des Cartes:1 “Sciri potest, Deum esse infinitum et omnipotentem, 
quanquam anima nostra, utpote finita, id nequeat comprehendere 
sive concipere ; eodem nimirum modo, quo montem manibus tan- 
gere possumus, sed non ut arborem, aut aliam quampiam rem bra- 
chiis nostris non majorem amplecti: comprehendere enim est cogi- 
tatione complecti; ad hoc autem, ut sciamus aliquid, sufficit, ut 
illud cogitatione attingamus.” 

Even Spinoza? says: “ Ad questionem tuam, an de Deo tam 
claram, quam de triangulo habeam ideam, respondeo affirmando. 
Non dico, me Deum omnino cognoscere; sed me quedam ejus 
attributa, non autem omnia, neque maximam intelligere partem, et 
certum est, plurimorum ignorantiam, quorundam eorum habere 
notitiam, non impedire. Quum Euclidis elementa addiscerem, 
primo tres trianguli angulos duobus rectis squari intelligebam ; 
hancque trianguli proprietatem clare percipiebam, licet multarum 
aliarum ignarus essem.”’ 

While, therefore, it is admitted not only that the infinite God 
is incomprehensible, and that our knowledge of Him is both par- 
tial and imperfect; that there is much in God which we do not 
know at all, and that what we do know, we know very imperfectly ; 
nevertheless our knowledge, as far as it goes, is true knowledge. 
God really is what we believe Him to be, so far as our idea of Him 
is determined by the revelation which He has made of Himself in 
his works, in the constitution of our nature, in his word, and in the 
person of his Son. To know is simply to have such apprehensions 
of an object as conform to what that object really is. We know 
what the word Spirit means. We know what the words infinite, 
eternal, and immutable, mean. And, therefore, the sublime prop- 
osition, pregnant with more truth than was ever compressed in 
any other sentence, “ God is a Spirit, infinite, eternal, and immu- 
table,” conveys to the mind as distinct an idea, and as true (i. e., 
trustworthy) knowledge, as the proposition ‘* The human soul is a 
finite spirit.’” In this sense God is an object of knowledge. He 
is not the unknown God, because He is infinite. Knowledge in 
Him does not cease to be knowledge because it is omniscience « 
power does not cease to be power because it is omnipotence; any 
more than space ceases to be space because it is infinite, 


1 Epistole, 1., cx., edit. Amsterdam, 1682. 
2 Epistola Ix. vol. i. p. 659, edit. Jena, 1802. 


§1,B,C1 GOD AS AN OBJECT OF KNOWLEDGE. 339 


B. How do we know God ? 


How does the mind proceed in forming its idea of God? The 
older theologians answered this question by saying that it is by 
the way of negation, by the way of eminence, and by the way of 
causality. That is, we deny to God any limitation; we ascribe to 
Him every excellence in the highest degree ; and we refer to Him 
as the great First Cause every attribute manifested in his works. 
Weare the children of God, and, therefore, we are like Him. We 
are, therefore, authorized to ascribe to Him all the attributes of our 
own nature as rational creatures, without limitation, and to an infi- 
nite degree. If we are like God, God is like us. This is the fun- 
damental principle of all religion. This is the principle which Paul 
assumed in his address to the Athenians (Acts xvii. 29): ‘ For- 
asmuch then as we are the offspring of God, we ought not to think 
that the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or stone, graven by 
art and man’s device.” For the same reason we ought not to 
think that He is simple being, or a mere abstraction, a name for 
the moral order of the universe, or the unknown and unknowable 
cause of all things, — mere inscrutable force. If we are his chil- 
dren, He is our Father, whose image we bear, and of whose nature 
we partake. This, in the proper sense of the word, is Anthropomor- 
phism, a word much abused, and often used in a bad sense to ex- 
press the idea that God is altogether such a one as ourselves, a 
being of like limitations and passions. In the sense, however, just 
explained, it expresses the doctrine of the Church and of the great 
mass of mankind. Jacobi! well says: “* We confess, therefore, to 
an Anthropomorphism inseparable from the conviction that man 
bears the image of God ; and maintain that besides this Anthropo- 
morphism, which has always been called Theism, is nothing but 
atheism or fetichism.”’ 


9°. Proof that this Method is Trustworthy. 

That this method of forming an idea of God is trustworthy, is 
proved, — 

1. Because it is a law of nature. Even in the lowest form of 
fetichism the life of the worshipper is assumed to belong to the 
object which he worships. The power dreaded is assumed to pos- 
sess attributes like our own. In like manner under all the forms of 
polytheism, the gods of the people have been intelligent personal 
agents. It is only in the schools of philosophy that we find a differ- 

1 “Von den gottlichen Dingen,” Werke, iii. pp. 422, 423, edit. Leipzig, 1816. 


840 PART I.— THEOLOGY. [Cu. IV. —.Can Gop BE KNOWN ? 


ent method of forming an idea of the Godhead. They have sub- 
stituted 10 dv for 6 dv, 76 Oetov for 6 Ocds, 7d dyabdy for 6 dyabds. It is 
here as with regard to the knowledge of the external world. The 
mass of mankind believe that things are what they perceive them 
to be. This philosophers deny. They affirm that we do not per- 
ceive the things themselves, but certain ideas, species, or images 
of the things; that we have, and can have, no knowledge of what 
the things themselves really are. So they say we can have no 
knowledge of what God is; we only know that we are led to think 
of Him in a certain way, but we are not only not authorized to be- 
lieve that our idea corresponds to the reality, but, say they, it is cer- 
tain that God is not what we take Him to be. As the people are 
right in the one case, so are they in the other. In other words, our 
conviction that God is what He has revealed Himself to be, rests 
on the same foundation as our conviction that the external world 
is what we take it to be. That foundation is the veracity of con- 
sciousness, or the trustworthiness of the laws of belief which God 
has impressed upon our nature. ‘ Invincibility of belief,’’ accord- 
ing to Sir William Hamilton, “is convertible with the truth of 
belief,” } although, unhappily, on this subject, he did not adhere to 
his own principle, ‘‘ That what is by nature necessarily believed 
to be, truly is.’ No man has more nobly or more earnestly vin- 
dicated this doctrine, which is the foundation of all science and of 
all faith. ‘* Consciousness,” he says, ‘¢ once convicted of falsehood, 
an unconditioned scepticism, in regard to the character of our 
intellectual being, is the melancholy but only rational result. Any 
conclusion may now with impunity be drawn against the hopes and 
the dignity of human nature. Our personality, our immateriality, 
our moral liberty, have no longer an argument for their defence. 
‘Man is the dream of a shadow.’ God is the dream of that 
dream.’’? The only question, therefore, is, Are we invincibly led 
to think of God as possessing the attributes of our rational nature ? 
This cannot be denied; for universality proves invincibility of 
belief. And it is a historical fact that men have universally thus 
thought of God. Even Mr. Mansel‘ exclaims against the trans- 
cendentalists, ** Fools, to dream that man can escape from himself, 
that human reason can draw aught but a human portrait of God.” 
True, he denies the correctness of that portrait; or, at least, he 
asserts that we cannot know whether it is correct or not. But this 


1 Philosophy, edit. Wight, New York, 1854, p. 233. 2 Ibid. p. 226. 
8 [bid. p. 234. 


4 Limits of Religious Thought, edit. Boston, 1859, pp. 56, 57. 


§1, C.J GOD AS AN OBJECT OF KNOWLEDGE. 841 


is not now the question. He admits that we are forced by the con- 
stitution of our nature thus to think of God. And by the funda- 
mental principle of all true philosophy, what we are forced to 
believe must be true. It is true, therefore, that God really is 
what we take Him to be, when we ascribe to Him the perfections 
of our own nature, without limitation, and to an infinite degree. 


Our Moral Nature demands this Idea of Gtod. 


2. It has already been shown, when speaking of the moral ar- 
gument for the existence of God, that all men are conscious of 
their accountability to a being superior to themselves, who knows 
what they are and what they do, and who has the will and purpose 
to reward or punish men according to their works. The God, 
therefore, who is revealed to us in our nature, isa God who knows, 
and wills, and acts; who rewards and punishes. That is, He isa 
person ; an intelligent, voluntary agent, endowed with moral attri- 
butes. This revelation of God must be true. It must make 
known to us what God really is, or our nature is a lie. All this 
Mr. Magsel, who holds that God cannot be known, admits. He 
admits that a sense of dependence on a superior power is “ a fact 
of the inner consciousness ;” that this superior power is ‘not an 


- inexorable fate, or immutable law, but a Being having at least so 


far the attributes of personality, that He can show favour or sever- 
ity to those dependent upon Him, and can be regarded by them 
with the feelings of hope, and fear, and reverence, and gratitude.” ! 
No man, however, is, or can be grateful to the sun, or to the at- 
mosphere, or to unintelligent force. Gratitude is a tribute of a 
person to a person. Again, the same author admits that “ the 
moral reason, or will, or conscience of man, call it by what name 
we please, can have no authority save as implanted in him by some 
higher spiritual Being, as a law emanating from a law-giver.’? 
‘We are thus compelled,” he says, ‘by the consciousness of 
moral obligation, to assume the existence of a moral [and of course 
of a personal] Deity, and to regard the absolute standard of right 
and wrong as constituted by the nature of that Deity.” ? Our ar- 
gument from these facts is, that if our moral nature compels us to 
believe that God is a person, He must be a person, and conse- 
quently that we arrive at a true knowledge of God by attributing 
to Him the perfections of our own nature. 


1 Limits of Religious Thought, etc., p. 120. 2 Ibid. p. 121 
3 Ibid. p. 122. 


a 


342 PART I.— THEOLOGY. [Cu. IV.—Can Gop BE KNowN? 


Our Religious Nature makes the same Demand. 


8. The argument from our religious, as distinct from our moral 
nature, is essentially the same. Morality is not all of religion. 
The one is as much a law and necessity of our nature as the other. 
To worship, in the religious sense of the word, is to ascribe infinite 
perfection to its object. It is to express to that object our acknowl- 
edgments for the blessings we enjoy, and to seek their continuance ; 
it is to confess, and praise, and pray, and to adore. We cannot 
worship the law of gravity, or unconscious force, or the mere 
order of the universe. Our religious nature, in demanding an ob- 
ject of supreme reverence, love, and confidence, demands a per- 
sonal God, a God clothed with the attributes of a nature like our 
own; who can hear our confessions, praises, and prayers; who 
can love, and be loved; who can supply our wants, and fill all our 
capacities for good. Thus again it appears that unless our whole 
nature is a contradiction and a falsehood, we arrive at a true knowl- 
edge of God when we ascribe to Him the perfections of our own 
nature. ° 

Mr. Mansel admits that our nature does demand a personal and 
moral Deity; but, he says, ‘“‘ the very conception of a moral na- 


ture is in itself the conception of a limit, for morality is the . 


compliance with a law; and a law, whether imposed from within 
or from without, can only be conceived to operate by limiting the 
range of possible actions.”* In like manner he says, *“‘ The only 
human conception of personality is that of limitation.” Therefore, 

if God be infinite, he can neither be a person, nor possess moral 
attributes. This is the argument of Strauss, and of all other pan- 
theists, against the doctrine of a personal God. Mr. Mansel ad- 
mits the force of the argument, and says we must renounce all 
hope of knowing what God is, and. be content with “ regulative 
knowledge,” which teaches not what God really is, but what He 
wills us to think Him to be. We are thus forbidden to trust to 
our necessary beliefs. We must not regard as true what God by 
the constitution of our nature forces us to believe. This is to sub- 
vert all philosophy and all religion, and to destroy the difference 
between the rational and the irrational. Why is this contradiction 
between reason and conscience, between our rational and moral 
nature, assumed to exist? Simply because philosophers choose to 
give such a definition of morality and personality that neither can 
be predicated of an infinite Being. It is not true that either 

1 Limits of Religious Thought, etc., p. 127. 


= 


§1,C.] GOD AS AN OBJECT OF KNOWLEDGE. 348 


morality or personality imply any limitation inconsistent with abso- 
lute perfection. We do not limit God when we say He cannot be 
. irrational as well as rational, unconscious as well as conscious, finite 
as well as infinite, evil as well as good. The only limitation ad- 
‘mitted is the negation of imperfection. Reason is not limited when 
we say it cannot be unreason ; or spirit, when we say that it is not 
matter; or light, when we say it is not darkness; or space, when 
we say it is not time. We do not, therefore, limit the Infinite, 
when we exalt Him in our conceptions from the unconscious to the 
conscious, from the unintelligent to the intelligent, from an imper- 
sonal something to the absolutely perfect personal Jehovah. All 
these difficulties arise from confounding the ideas of infinite and all, 
4. The fourth argument on this subject is, that if we are not jus- 
tified in referring to God the attributes of our own nature, then we 
have no God. The only alternative is anthropomorphism (in this 
sense) or Atheism. An unknown God, a God of whose nature 
and of whose relation to us we know nothing, to us is nothing. It 
is a historical fact that those who reject this method of forming our 
idea of God, who deny that we are to refer to Him the perfections 
of our own nature, have become atheists. They take the word 
“spirit,” and strip from it consciousness, intelligence, will, and 
“morality ; and the residue, which is blank nothing, they call God. 
Hamilton and Mansel take refuge from this dreadful conclusion in 
faith. They say that reason forbids the ascription of these, or of 
any other attributes, to the Infinite and Absolute, but that faith 
protests against this conclusion of the reason. Such protest, how- 
ever, is of no account, unless it be rational. When Kant proved 
that there was no rational evidence of the existence of God, and 
fell back from the speculative to the practical reason (7. e., from 
reason to faith), his followers universally gave up all faith in a per- 
sonal God. No man can believe in the impossible. And if reason 
pronounces that it is impossible that the Infinite should be a person, 
faith in His personality is an impossibility. This Mr. Mansel does 
not admit. For while he says that it is a contradiction to affirm the 
Infinite to'be a person, or to possess moral attributes, he neverthe- 
less says that, “¢ Anthropomorphism is the indispensable condition 
of all human theology ; + and he quotes from Kant? this passage: 
** We may confidently challenge all natural theology to name a 
single distinctive attribute of the Deity, whether denoting intelli- 
gence or will, which, apart from anthropomorphism, is anything 


1 Limits of Religious Thought, etc., p. 261. 
2“ Kritik der Praktischen Vernunft.”” Works, edit. Rosenkzanz, vol. viii. p. 282 


844 PART I.— THEOLOGY. [Cu.IV.— Can Gop BE KNOWN? 


more than a mere word, to which not the slightest notion can be 
attached, which can serve to extend our theoretical knowledge.” It 
is greatly to be lamented that men should teach that the only way 
in which it is possible for us to form an idea of God, leads to no 
true knowledge. It does not teach us what God is, but what we 
are forced against reason to think He is. 


Argument from the Revelation of God in Nature. 


5. A fifth argument is from the fact that the works of God 
manifest a nature like our own. It is a sound principle that we 
must refer to a cause the attributes necessary to account for its 
effects. If the effects manifest intelligence, will, power, and moral 
excellence, these attributes must belong to the cause. As, therefore, 
the works of God are a revelation of all these attributes on a most 
stupendous scale, they must belong to God in an infinite degree. 
This is only saying that the revelation made of God in the exter- 
nal world agrees with the revelation which He has made of himself 
in the constitution of our own nature. In other words, it proves 
that the image of himself which He has enstamped on our nature is 
a. true likeness. 

Argument from Scripture. 

6. The Scriptures declare God to be just what we are led to 
think He is, when we ascribe to Him the perfections of our own 
nature in an infinite degree. We are self-conscious, so is God. 
We are spirits, so is He. We are voluntary agents, so is God. 
We have a moral nature, miserably defaced indeed, God has moral 
excellence in infinite perfection. We are persons, so is God. All 
this the Scriptures declare to be true. The great primal revelation 
of God is as the ‘I am,” the personal God. All the names and 
titles given to Him; all the attributes ascribed to Him; all the 
works attributed to Him, are revelations of what He truly is. He 
is the Elohim, the Mighty One, the Holy One, the Omnipresent 
Spirit; He is the creator, the preserver, the governor of all 
things. He is our Father. He is the hearer of prayer; the giver 
of all good. He feeds the young ravens. He clothes the flowers 
of the field. He is Love. He so loved the world as to give his only 
begotten Son, that whosoever believeth on Him might not perish 
but have everlasting life. He is merciful, long-suffering, abundant 
in goodness and truth. He is a present help in-every time of 
need; a refuge, a high tower, an exceeding great reward..- The 
relations in which, acéording to the Scriptures, we stand to God, 
are such ag we can sustain only to a being who is like ourselves. He 


§ 2.] GOD AS AN OBJECT OF KNOWLEDGE. 345 


is our ruler, and father, with whom we can commune. His favour is 
our life, his loving-kindness better than life. This sublime revela- 
tion of God in his own nature and in his relation to us is not a 
delusion. It is not mere regulative truth, or it would be a deceit 
and mockery. It makes God known to us as He really is. We 
therefore know God, although no creature can understand the 
Almighty unto perfection. 


Argument from the Manifestation of God in Christ. 


T. Finally, God has revealed Himself in the person of his Son. 
No man knoweth the Father but the Son; and he to whom the 
Son shall reveal Him. Jesus Christ is the true God. The revela- 
tion which He made of Himself was the manifestation of God. He 
and the Father are one. The words of Christ were the words of 
God. The works of Christ were the works of God. The love, 
mercy, tenderness, the forgiving grace, as well as the holiness, the 
severity and power manifested by Christ, were all manifestations 
of what God truly is. We see, therefore, as with our own eyes, 
what God is. We know that although infinite and absolute, He 
ean think, act, and will; that He can love and hate; that He can 
hear prayer and forgive sin; that we can have fellowship with 
Him, as one person can commune with another. Philosophy must 
veil her face in the presence of Jesus Christ, as God manifest in 
the flesh. She may not presume in that presence to say that God is 
not, and is not known to be, what Christ himself most clearly was. 
This doctrine that God is the object of certain and true knowledge 
lies at the foundation of all religion, and therefore must never be 
given up. 

§ 2. God cannot be fully known. 

The modern German philosophers take the ground that all sci- 
ence, all true philosophy, must be founded on the knowledge of 
being, and not of phenomena. They reject the authority of the 
senses and of consciousness, and teach that it is only by the imme- 
diate cognition of the Absolute that we arrive at any true or cer- 
tain knowledge. God, or rather, the Infinite, can be as thoroughly 
known and comprehended as the simplest object of sense or of 
consciousness; He is, only so far as He is known. 

It would seem impossible that the presumption of men should be 
so extreme that such a creature as man should pretend to under- 
stand the Almighty to perfection, when in fact he cannot under- 
stand himself or the simplest objects with which he is in daily 
contact. The assumption is that being, as such, Infinite and Abs 


346 PART I.— THEOLOGY. [Cu. IV.— Can Gop BE KNOWN? 


solute Being, can be known; that is, that we can determine what 
it is, and the necessary laws by which it is developed into the phe- 
nomenal world. This knowledge is attained @ priori ; not by any 
induction or deduction from our own nature or the facts of experi- 
ence, but by an immediate act of cognition, which transcends all 
consciousness. The great service rendered by Sir William Ham- 
ilton and Mr. Mansel to the cause of truth was to demonstrate the 
utter futility of this pretended philosophy of the Infinite, on the 
principles of its advocates. ‘To the common mind it needed no 
refutation, being intuitively seen to be impossible and absurd. 


Sir William Hamilton’s Argument. 


Hamilton shows, in the first place, that the immediate intuition 
of Schelling, which Hegel ridiculed as a mere imagination, the 
dialectics of Hegel, which Schelling pronounced a mere play of 
words, and the impersonal reason of Cousin which enters into our 
consciousness but not into our personality, utterly fail to give us a 
knowledge of the Infinite. ‘ Existence,” he says, ‘is revealed to 
us only under specific modifications, and these are known only 
under the conditions of our faculties of knowledge. Things in 
themselves, matter, mind, God, all in short that is not finite, 
relative, and phenomenal, as bearing no analogy to our faculties, is 
beyond the verge of our knowledge.”! In what sense Hamilton 
places God “* beyond the verge of our knowledge ” will be seen in 


the sequel. It is, however, self-evident that our knowledge must: 


be limited by our faculties of knowing. Other animals may have 
senses which we do not possess, It is utterly impossible that we 
should have the kind of knowledge due to the exercise of those 
senses. It is probable that there are faculties dormant in our nature 
which are not called into activity in our present state of being. It 
is clear that we cannot now attain the knowledge which those fac- 
ulties may hereafter enable us to attain. It is just as plain that 
we cannot cognize the Infinite, in the sense of these philosophers, 
as that we cannot see a spirit, or guide ourselves in space, as does 
the carrier-pigeon or the migrating salmon. 


Only the Infinite can know the Infinite. 


2. In the second place, it is admitted that none but the Infinite 
can know the Infinite, and to know God in this sense, it is admit- 
ted that we must be God. “ Schelling claimed for the mind of man, 
what Kant had demonstrated to be impossible, a faculty of intel- 


1 Discussions, p. 23. 


= 


$2] | GOD AS AN OBJECT OF KNOWLEDGE. 847 


/ 


lectual intuition which is apart from sense, above consciousness, and 
released from the laws of the understanding, and which compre- 
hends the absolute by becoming the absolute, and thus knows God 
by being God.”! This assumption that man’ is God, shocks the 
reason and common sense of men as well as outrages their relig- 
ious and moral convictions. 

3. In the third place, Hamilton and Mansel demonstrate that, 
assuming the definitions of the Absolute and Infinite given by the 
transcendentalists, the most contradictory conclusions may logi- 
cally be deduced from them. ‘ There are three terms familiar as 
household words in the vocabulary of philosophy, which must be — 
taken into account in every system of metaphysical theology. To 
conceive the Deity as He is, we must conceive him as First Cause, 
as absolute, and as infinite. By First Cause, is meant that which 
produces all things, and is itself produced of none. By the Abso- 
lute, is meant that which exists in and by itself, having no neces- 
sary relation to any other being. By the Infinite, is meant that 
which is free from all possible limitation ; that than which a greater 
is inconceivable, and which, consequently, can receive no additional 
attribute or mode of existence which it had not from all eternity.”’ ? 

According to these definitions, in the sense in which they are 
intended to be taken, it follows : — 

1. That the Infinite and Absolute must include the sum of all 
being. For ‘that which is conceived as absolute and infinite must 
be conceived as containing within itself the sum, not only of all 
actual, but of all possible modes of being. For if any actual mode 
ean be denied of it, it is related to that mode and limited by it; 
and if any possible mode can ‘be denied of it, it is capable of be- 
coming more than it now is, and such a capability is a limitation.’’® 

2. If the Absolute and Infinite be as above defined, it cannot 
be the object of knowledge. To know is to limit. It is to distin- 
guish the object of knowledge from other objects. We cannot 
conceive, says Hamilton, of an absolute whole ; 7. e., of a whole 
so great that we cannot conceive of it as a part of a greater whole. 
We cannot conceive of an infinite line, or of infinite space, or of 
infinite duration. We may as well think without thought, as to 
assign any limit beyond which there can be no extension, no space, 
no duration, ‘+ Goad imagination to the utmost, it still sinks para- 
lyzed within the bounds of time.” * It follows, therefore, from the 
very nature of knowledge, according to Hamilton, that the Infinite 
and Absolute cannot be known. 


1 Progress of Philosophy, by S. Tyler, LL.D., p. 200. 2 Mansel, p. 75. 
8 Mansel, p. 76. 4 Hamilton’s Discussions, p. 35 


848 PART I.—THEOLOGY. ([Cu.IV.—Can Gop BE KNOWN? 


The Infinite cannot Know. : 

8. It also follows from these premises, that the Infinite cannot 
know. All knowledge is limitation and difference. It supposes a 
distinction between subject and object, between the knower and 
what is known, inconsistent with the idea of the Absolute. 

4, It follows also that the Absolute cannot be conscious, for con- 
sciousness involves a distinction between the self and the not-self. 
It is knowledge of ourselves as distinct from what is not ourselves. 
Even if conscious only of itself, there is the same distinction be- 
‘ tween subject and object ; the self as subject and a mode of the 
self as the object of consciousness. ‘ The almost unanimous 
voice of philosophy,” says Mansel, “‘in pronouncing that the Ab- 
solute is both one and simple must be accepted as the voice of rea- 
son also, so far as reason has any voice in the matter.” ‘The 
conception of an absolute and infinite consciousness contradicts 
itself.”’ 1 

The Absolute cannot be Cause. 

5. It is equally clear that the Absolute and Infinite cannot be 
cause. Causation implies relation; the relation of efficiency to 
the effect. It also implies change ; change from inaction to activ- 
ity. It moreover implies succession, and succession implies ex- 
istence in time. ‘A thing existing absolutely (¢. e., not under 
relation), says Hamilton, ‘and a thing existing absolutely as a 
cause, are contradictory.”’, He quotes Schelling ?as saying, ‘* He 
would deviate wide as the poles from the idea of the Absolute, 
who would think of defining its nature by the notion of activity.” 
** But he who would define the Absolute by the notion of a cause,’ 
he adds, ‘would deviate still more widely from its nature, inas- 
much as the notion of a cause involves not only the notion of a 
determination to activity, but of a. determination to a particular, 
nay a dependent, kind of activity.”3 ‘The three conceptions, 
the Cause, the Absolute, the Infinite, all equally indispensable, do 
they not,” asks Mr. Mansel,‘ “imply contradiction to each other, 
when viewed in conjunction, as attributes of one and the same 
Being? A cause cannot, as such, be absolute: the Absolute can- 
not, as such, be cause.” ‘ 

6. According to the laws of our reason and consciousness, there 
ean be no duration without succession, but succession as implying 
change cannot be predicated of the Absolute and Infinite, and yet 
without succession there can be no thought or consciousness ; and, 


' Mansel, pp. 78, 79. 2 Bruno, p. 171. 8 Discussions, p. 40. 4 Mansel, p. 77 


§ 8, A.J GOD AS AN OBJECT OF KNOWLEDGE. 349 


therefore, to say that God is eternal is to deny that He has either 
thought or consciousness, 

T. Again, “ Benevolence, holiness, justice, wisdom,” says Man- 
sel, ‘can be conceived by us only as existing in a benevolent and 
holy and just and wise being, who is not identical with any one of 
his attributes, but the common subject of them all; in one word, in 
a person. But personality, as we conceive it, is essentially a limi- 
tation and a relation. — To speak of an absolute and infinite person, 
is simply to use language to which, however true it may be ina 
superhuman sense, no mode of human thought can possibly attach 
itself.”” 1 


The Conclusion to which Hamilton’s Argument leads. 


What then is the result of the whole matter? It is, that if the 
definitions of the Absolute and Infinite adopted by transcenden- 
talists be admitted, the laws of reason lead us into a labyrinth of 
contradictions. If their idea of an infinite and absolute Being be 
correct, then it must include all being actual and possible ; it can 
neither know nor be the object of knowledge; it cannot be con- 
scious, or cause, or a person, or the subject of any moral attribute. 
Hamilton infers from all this, that a philosophy of the Absolute is 
a sheer impossibility ; that the Absolute, from its nature and from 
the necessary limits of human thought, is unknowable, and conse- 
quently that the stupendous systems of pantheistic atheism which 
had been erected on the contrary assumption, must fall to the 
ground. Those systems have indeed already fallen by their own 
weight. Although only a few years ago they claimed the homage 
of the intellectual world and boasted of immutability, they have at 
the present time scarcely a living advocate. 

Unhappily, however, Hamilton, like Samson, is involved in the 
ruin which he created. In overthrowing pantheism he overthrows 
Theism. All that he says of the Absolute as unknowable, he 
affirms to be true of God. All the contradictions which attend the 
assumption of an absolute and infinite being as the ground of philos- 
ophy, he says attend the assumption of an infinite God. 


§ 3. Hamilton’s Doctrine. 
A. God an Object of Faith, but not of Knowledge. 


The sense in which Hamilton and his followers represent God 
as unknowable, has been a matter of dispute. When he says that 
we can know that God is, but not what He is, he says only what 

1 Mansel, pp. 102, 103. 


850 PART I.—THEOLOGY. [Cu.IV.— Can Gop BE KNOWN? 


had been said a hundred times before. Plato had said that the 
search after God was difficult, and that when He is found, it is im- 
possible to declare his nature. Philo still more explicitly teaches 
that the divine essence is without qualities or attributes, and as we 
know nothing of any essence but by its distinguishing attributes, 
God in his own nature is altogether unknowable.!_ This is repeated 
continually by the Greek and Latin fathers ; who, however, in most 
cases at least, meant nothing more than that God is incomprehen- 
sible. Others again, in asserting the incapacity of man to know 
God, refer to his spiritual blindness occasioned by sin. Therefore, 
while they deny that God can be known by the unregenerate, they 
affirm that He is known by those to whom the Son has revealed 
Him. In like manner although the Apostle asserts that even the 
heathen know God, he elsewhere speaks of a kind of knowledge 
due to the saving illumination of the Holy Spirit. It is in the 
sense that God is past finding out that the devout Pascal says,? 
‘“‘ We know there is an infinite, but we are ignorant of its nature. 
. . . . We may well know that there is a God, without know- 
ing what He is.” And even John Owen’ says, ‘“ All the rational 
conceptions of the minds of men are swallowed up and lost, when 
they would exercise themselves directly on that which is absolute, 
immense, eternal, and infinite. When we say it is so, we know 
not what we say, but only that it is not otherwise. What we deny 
of God we know in some measure — but what we affirm we know 
not; only we declare what we believe and adore.” ? - Professor 
Tyler adds, that while the philosophy of Hamilton “ confines our 
knowledge to the conditioned [the finite], it leaves faith free about 
the unconditioned [the infinite] ; indeed constrains us to believe 
in it by the highest law of our intelligence.” 

Although Hamilton often uses the same language when speaking 
of God as unknowable, as that employed by others, his meaning is 
very different. He really teaches an ignorance of God destructive 
of all rational religion, because inconsistent with the possibility of 
faith. 

Different Kinds of Ignorance. 

There are different kinds of ignorance. First, there is the igno- 
rance of the idiot, which is blank vacuity. In him the statement 
of a proposition awakens no mental action whatever. Secondly, 
there is the ignorance of a blind man, of colour. He does not know 
what colour is; but he knows there is something which answers te 


1 Strauss, Dogmatik, i. p. 527. 2 Pensées, partie 1. art. iii. 5. 
8 Tyler’s Progress of Philosophy, second edit. p. 147. oo - 


§ 3, A] GOD AS AN OBJECT OF KNOWLEDGE. 851 


that word and which produces a certain effect on the eyes of those 
who see. He may even understand the laws by which the produc- 
tion of colour is determined. A blind man has written a treatise on 
optics. Thirdly, there is the ignorance under which the mind 
labors when it can prove contradictory propositions concerning the 
same object, as that the same figure is both square and round. 
And fourthly, there is the ignorance of imperfect knowledge. 
Paul speaks of knowing what passes knowledge. 

Our ignorance of God, according to Hamilton, is neither the 
ignorance of the idiot nor of imperfect knowledge, but it is analo- 
gous to the ignorance of a blind man of colours, and more definitely, 
the ignorance we labor under with regard to any object of which 
we can prove contradictions. 


' 


Proof that Hamilton Denies that we can Know God. 


That this view of his doctrine is correct is proved, (1.) Be- 
cause he asserts in such broad terms that God cannot be known ; 
that He is not only inconceivable, but incogitable. (2.) Because, 
he says, that we know that God is not, and cannot be, what we think 
He is. It is not merely that we cannot determine with certainty 
that our idea of God is correct, but we know that it is not correct. 
“To think that God is, as we can think Him to be,” he says, “is 
blasphemy. The last and highest consecration of all true religion, 
must be an altar, “Ayvéore Ged, * To the unknown and unknowable 
God.’”1 (3.) Because both he and Mansel continually assert 
that the Infinite cannot be a person; cannot know; cannot be 
cause; cannot be conscious; cannot be the subject of any moral 
attributes. To think of God as infinite, and to think of Him asa 
person is an impossibility. (4.) The illustrations which these writ- 
ers employ determine clearly their meaning. Our ignorance of 
God is compared to our incapacity to conceive of two straight lines 
inclosing a portion of space ; or to think “a circular parallelogram.” 
It is not merely that we cannot understand such a figure, but we 
see that, in the nature of things, any such figure is impossible. So 
we not only cannot understand how God can be absolute and yet a 
person, but we see that an absolute person is as much a contradic- 
tion as a square circle. (5.) Accordingly Herbert Spencer and 
others, in carrying out Hamilton’s principles, come to the conclu- 
sion not only that we cannot know God, but that it is impossible 
that a personal God should exist. There can be no such being. 

1 Discussions, p. 22. 


B52 PART I.— THEOLOGY.  [Cuz. IV.—Can Gov'sz xNown? 


' 


Hamilton’s Doctrine of God as an object of Faith. 

Hamilton and Mansel, however, are not only Theists, but Chris- 
tians. They believe in God, and they believe in the Scriptures as 
a divine revelation. They endeavor to avoid what seem to be the 
inevitable consequences of their doctrine, by adopting two princi- 
ples: first, that the unthinkable is possible, and, therefore, may be 
believed. By the unthinkable is meant that which the laws of 
reason force us to regard as self-contradictory. On this subject 
Mansel says: “It is our duty to think of God as personal, and it © 
is our duty to believe that He is infinite. It is true that we cannot 
reconcile these two representations with each other; as our con- 
ception of personality involves attributes apparently contradictory 
to the notion of infinity. But it does not follow that this contra- 
diction exists anywhere but in our own minds: it does not follow 
that it implies any impossibility in the absolute nature of God. 

. . . It proves that there are limits to man’s power of thought ; 
and it proves no more.”! The conclusion is, that as whatever is 
possible is credible, therefore, as it is possible that God though in- 
finite may be a person, his personality may be rationally believed. 


The Unthinkable, or Impossible, cannot be an object of Faith. 


On this it may be remarked, — 

1. That there is a great difference between the irreconcilable 
and the self-contradictory. In the one case the difficulty arises, or 
may arise, out of our ignorance or mental weakness; in the other, 
it arises out of the nature of the things themselves. Many things 
are irreconcilable to a child which are not so to aman. Many 
things are irreconcilable to one man and not to another; to men 
and not to angels. But the self-contradictory is impossible, and is 
seen to be so by all orders of mind. That two and two should 
make twenty, or that the same figure should be a square and a 
circle, is just as irreconcilable to an angel as to a child. What is 
self-contradictory cannot possibly be true. Now, according to 
Hamilton and Mansel, infinity and personality are not only irrec- 
oncilable, but contradictory. The one affirms what the other de- 
nies, According to their doctrine the Infinite cannot be a person, 
and a person cannot be infinite, any more than the Infinite can be 
finite, or the finite infinite. The one of necessity excludes ‘the 
other. If you affirm the one, you deny the other. There is a 
great difference between not seeing how a thing is, and clearly 


1 Limits of Religious Thought, p. 106. 


§ 3, A) GOD AS AN OBJECT OF KNOWLEDGE. 858 


seeing that it cannot be. Hamilton and Mansel constantly assert 
that an absolute person is a contradiction in terms. And s0 it is, 
if their definition of the absolute be correct ; and if a contradiction, 
it is impossible. 

2. If to our reason the personality of an infinite God be a con- 
tradiction, then it is impossible rationally to believe that He isa 
person. It is in vain to say that the contradiction is only in our 
mind. So is faith in our mind. It is impossible for one and the 
same mind to see a thing to be false, and believe it to be true. For 
the reason to see that a thing is a contradiction, is to see it to be 
false ; and to see it to be false, and to believe it to be true, is a 
contradiction in terms. Even if to other and higher minds the 
contradiction does not exist, so long as it exists in the view of any 
particular mind, for that mind faith in its truth is an impossibility. 

It may be said that a man’s reason may convince him that the 
external world does not really exist, while his senses force him to 
believe in its reality. So reason may pronounce the personality of 
God a contradiction, and conscience force us to believe .that He is 
a person. This is to confound consecutive with contemporaneous 
states of mind. It is possible for a man to be an idealist in his 
study, and a realist out of doors. But he cannot be an idealist and 
a realist at one and the same time. The mind isa unit. A man’s 
reason is the man himself; so is his conscience, and so are all his 
other faculties. It is the one substantive self that thinks and be- 
lieves. To assume, therefore, that by necessity he must think one 
way and believe another ; that the laws of his reason force him to 
regard as false what his conscience or senses force him to regard as 
true, is to destroy his rationality. It is also to impugn the wisdom 
and goodness of our Creator, for it supposes Him to have put one 
part of our constitution in conflict with another; to have placed 

us under guides who alternately force us to move in opposite direc- 
tions. It even places this contradiction in God himself. For what 
reason, in its legitimate exercise, says, God says; and what con- 
science, in its legitimate exercise, says, God says. If, therefore, 
reason says that Gods is not a person, and conscience says that He 
is, then — with reverence be it spoken — God contradicts Himself. 


Knowledge essential to Faith. 


It is one of the distinguishing doctrines of Protestants that 
knowledge is essential to faith. This is clearly the doctrine of 
Scripture. How can they believe on Him of whom they have not 


neard ? is the pertinent and instructive query of the Apostle. Faith 
VOL, i. 23 


854 PART I.— THEOLOGY. Cu. IV. — Can Gop BE KNOWN? 


includes the affirmation of the mind that a thing is true and trust- 
worthy. But it is impossible for the mind to affirm anything of 
that of which it knows nothing. Romanists indeed say that if a man 
believes that the Church teaches the truth, then he believes all the 
Church teaches, although ignorant of its doctrines. It might as 
well be said that because a child has confidence in his father, there- 
fore he knows all his father knows. Truth must be communicated 
to the mind, and seen to be possible, before, on any evidence, it 
can be believed. If, therefore, we cannot know God, we cannot 
believe in Him. 
B. Regulative Knowledge. 

The second principle which Hamilton and Mansel adopt to save 
themselves from scepticism is that of regulative knowledge. We 
are bound to believe that God is what the Scriptures and our moral 
nature declare Him to be. This revelation, however, does not 
teach us what God really is, but merely what He wills us to believe 
concerning Him. Our senses, they say, tell us that things around 
us are, but not what they are. We can, however, safely act on 
the assumption that they really are what they appear to be. Our 
senses, therefore, give only regulative knowledge; 7. e., knowledge 
sufficient to regulate our active life. So we do not, and cannot, 
know what God really is; but the representations contained in the 
Scriptures are sufficient to regulate our moral and religious life. 
We can safely act on the assumption that He really is what we are 
thus led to think Him to be, although we know that such is not the 
fact. 

We must be ‘‘ content,” says Mansel,! ‘‘ with those regulative 
ideas of the Deity, which are sufficient to guide our practice, but 
not to satisfy our intellect, — which tell us not what God is ir 
Himself, but how He wills that we should think of Him.” 
** Though this kind of knowledge,” says Hampden,? “is abundantly 
instructive to us in point of sentiment and action ; teaches us, that 
is, both how to feel, and how to act towards God ;— for it is the 
language that we understand, the language formed by our own ex- 
perience and practice ;— it is altogether inadequate in point of 
science.” Regulative knowledge, therefore, is that which is de 
signed to regulate our character and practice. It need not be 
true. Nay, it may be, and is demonstrably false; for Hamilton 
says it is blasphemy to think that God really is what we take Him 
to be. 


1 Limits of Religious Thought, p. 132. 
2 Bampton Lectures, 1882, p. 54. 


§ 3, B.] GOD AS AN OBJECT OF KNOWLEDGE. 855 


Objections to the Doctrine of Regulative Knowledge. 


1. The first remark on this doctrine of regulative knowledge is, 

that it is self-contradictory. Regulative truth is truth designed to 
accomplish a given end. Design, however, is the intelligent and 
voluntary adaptation of means to an end; and the intelligent adap- 
tation of means to an end, is a personal act. Unless, therefore, 
God be really a person, there can be no such thing as regulative 
knowledge. Mr. Mansel says, we cannot know what God is in 
Himself, ** but only how He wills that we should think of Him.” 
Here “ will” is attributed to God ; and the personal pronouns are 
used, and must be used in the very statement of the doctrine. 
That is, we must assume that God is really (and not merely in our 
subjective apprehensions) a person, in order to believe in regula- 
tive knowledge, which form of knowledge supposes that He is not, 
or may not bea person. This is a contradiction. 
_ 2. Regulative knowledge is, from the nature of the case, power- 
less, unless its subjects regard it as well founded. Some parents 
educate their children in the use of fictions and fairy tales; but 
belief in the truth of these is essential to their effect. So long as 
the world believed in ghosts and witches, the belief had power. 
As soon as men were satisfied that there were no such real exist- 
ences, their power was gone. Had the philosophers convinced the 
Greeks that their gods were not real persons, there would have 
been an end to their mythology. And if Hamilton and his disci- 
ples can convince the world that the Infinite cannot be a person, 
the regulative influence of Theism is gone. Men cannot be influ- 
enced by representations which they know are not conformed to 
the truth. 

3. This theory is highly derogatory to God. It supposes Him 
to propose to influence his creatures by false representations ; re- 
vealing Himself as Father, Governor, and Judge, when there is no 
objective truth to answer to these representations. And worse than 
this, as remarked above, it supposes Him to have so constituted our 
nature as to force us to believe what is not true. We are con- 
strained by the laws of our rational and moral being to think of God 
as having a nature like our own, and yet we are told it is blasphemy 
so to regard Him. The theory supposes a conflict between reason 
and conscience, — between our rational and moral nature. The 
latter forcing us to believe that God is a person, and the former 
declaring personality and deity to be contradictory ideas. We do 
not forget that Mr. Mansel says that the incogitable may be real, 


7 


/ 


856 PART I.—THEOLOGY. [Cu. IV.— Can Gop bz KNOWN? 


that the contradiction is in our own minds, and not necessarily in 
the nature of things. But this amounts to nothing; for he says 
continually that Bis Absolute cannot be a person, cannot be a cause, 
cannot be conscious, cannot either know or be known. He says, 
“© A thing —an object —an attribute —a person — or any other | 
term signifying one out of many possible objects of consciousness, 
is by that very relation necessarily declared to be finite.” 1, That 
is, if God be a person, He is of necessity finite. Here the person- 
ality of God is said not only to be incogitable, or inconceivable, but 
impossible. And this is the real doctrine of his book. It must be 
so. It is intuitively true that the whole cannot be a part of itself; 
and if the Infinite be “the All,’ then it cannot be one out of 
many. If men adopt the principles of pantheists, they cannot 
consistently avoid their conclusions. Hamilton teaches not merely 
that God may not be what we think Him to be, but that He can- 
' not so be; that we are ignorant what He is; that He is to us an 
unknown God. If God, by the laws of our reason, thus forces us 
to deny his personality, and by the laws of our moral nature makes 
it not only a duty, but a necessity to believe in his personality, 
then our nature is chaotic. Man, in that case, is not the noble 
creature that was formed in the image of God. 

4, This doctrine of regulative knowledge destroys the authority 
of the Scriptures. If all that the Bible teaches concerning the na- 
ture of God and concerning his relation to the world, reveals no 
objective truth, gives us no knowledge of what God really is, then 
what it teaches concerning the person, offices, and work of Christ, 
may all be unreal, and there may be no such person and no such 
Saviour. | 

C. Objections to the whole Theory. 

1. The first and most obvious fallacy in the theory of Hamilton 
and Mansel, as it appears to us, lies in their definition of the Abso- 
lute and Infinite, or in the language of Hamilton, the Uncondi- 
tioned. By the Absolute they mean that which exists in and of 
itself, and out of all relation. The Infinite is that, than which 
nothing greater can be conceived or is possible ; which includes all 
actual and all possible modes of being. Mansel subscribes to the 
dictum of Hegel that the Absolute must include all modes of being, 
good as well as evil. In like manner the Infinite must be All. For 
if any other being exists, the Infinite must of necessity be limited, 
and, therefore, is no longer infinite. 

These definitions devbensinis everything. Ifthe Absolute be that 

Limits of Religious Thought, p. 107. 


§ 3, C.] GOD AS AN OBJECT OF KNOWLEDGE. 357 


which is incapable of all relation, then it must be alone; nothing 
but the Absolute can be actual or possible. Then it can neither 
know nor be known. And if the Infinite be all, then again there 
can be no finite. Then it is just as certain that the Absolute and 


‘Infinite cannot be cause, or conscious, or a person, as that a square 


cannot be a circle, or the whole a part of itself. When a defini- 
tion leads to contradictions and absurdities, when it leads to con- 
clusions which are inconsistent with the laws of our nature, and 
when it subverts all that consciousness, common sense, and the 
Bible declare to be true, the only rational inference is that the 
definition is wrong. This inference we have the right to draw in 
the present case. The very fact that the definitions of the Abso- 
lute and Infinite which Hamilton and Mansel have adopted from 
the transcendentalists, lead to all the fearful conclusions which 
they draw from them, is proof enough that they must be wrong. 
They are founded upon purely speculative @ priori grounds. They 
can have no authority. For if, as these philosophers say, the Ab- 
solute and Infinite cannot be known, how can it be defined? Nei- 
ther the etymology nor the usage of the words in question justifies 
the above given definitions of them. Absolute (ab and solvo) means, 
free, unrestrained, independent; as when we speak of an absolute 
monarch or absolute promise ; or, unlimited, as when we speak of 
absolute space. The word is also used in the sense of finished, or 
perfect. An absolute being is one that is free, unlimited, inde- 
pendent, and perfect. God is absolute, because He is not depend- 
ent for his existence, nature, attributes, or acts, on any other being. 
He is unlimited, by anything out of Himself or independent of his 
will. But this does not imply that He is the only being; nor that 
in order to be absolute He must be dead, unconscious, or without 
thought or will. Much less does the word infinite, as applied to 
God, imply that He must include all forms of being. Space may 
be infinite without being duration, and duration may be infinite 
without being space. An infinite spirit does not include material 
forms of existence, any more than an infinite line is an infinite sur- 
face or an infinite solid. When it is said that anything is infinite, 
all that is properly meant is that no limit is assignable or possible 
to it as such. An infinite line is that to which no limit can be 
assigned as a line; infinite space is that to which no limit can be 
assigned as space; an infinite spirit is a spirit which is unlimited in 
all the attributes of a spirit. It isa great mistake to assume that 
the infinite must be all. Infinite power is not all power, but 
simply power to whose efficiency no limitation can be assigned ; 


858 PART I.— THEOLOGY. [Cu.IV.— Can Gop BE known? 


and infinite knowledge is not all knowledge, but simply knowledge 
to the extent of which no limit is possible. So too an infinite sub- 
stance is not all substance, but a substance which is not excluded 
from any portion of space by other substances, or limited in the 
manifestation of any of its attributes or functions by anything out | 
of itself. God, therefore, may be a Spirit infinite, eternal, and im- 
mutable in his being and perfections, without being matter, and 
sin, and misery. 

It may be said that as infinite space must include all space, so 
an infinite being must of necessity include all modes of being. 
This, however, is a mere play on words. Infinite is sometimes 
inclusive of all, not from the meaning of the word, but from the 
nature of the subject of which infinitude is predicated. Infinite 
space must include all space, because space is in its nature one. 
But an infinite line does not include all lines, because there may be 
any number of lines; and an infinite being is not all being, because 
there may be any number of beings. 

It must excite the wonder and indignation of ordinary men to 
see the fundamental truths of religion and morality endangered or 
subverted out of deference to the assumption that the Absolute 
must be unrelated. 


Wrong Definition of Knowledge. 


2. The second fallacy involved in Hamilton’s theory concerns his 
idea of knowledge. When it is said that God is unknowable, 
everything depends on what is meant by knowledge. With him 
to know is to understand, to have a distinct conception, or mental 
image. This is evident from his using interchangeably the words 
unthinkable, unknowable, and inconceivable. Thus on a single 
page ! Mansel uses the phrases that of which ** we do not and can- 
not think,” that ‘“ which we cannot conceive,” and ‘ that which 
we are unable to comprehend,” as meaning one and the same 
thing. This is also proved from the manner in which other words 
and phrases are employed ; for example, the Infinite, the Absolute, 
an absolute beginning, an absolute whole, an absolute part, any 
increase or diminution of the complement of being. The only sense, 
however, in which these things are unthinkable, is, that we cannot 
form a mental image of them. A distinguished German professor, 
when anything was said to which he could not assent, was accus- 
tomed to spread out his hands and close his eyes and say, “Ich 
kann gar keine Anschauung davon machen.” J cannot see tt with 

l Page 110. 


§ 3, C.] GOD AS AN OBJECT OF KNOWLEDGE. 359 


my mind’s eye, I cannot make an image of it. This seems to be a 
materialistic way of looking at things. The same may be said of 
cause, substance, and soul, of none of which can we frame a mentat 
image ; yet they are not unthinkable. A thing is unthinkable only 
when it is seen to be impossible, or when we can attach no mean- 
ing to the words, or proposition, in which it is stated. This impos- 
sibility of intelligent thought may arise from our weakness. The 
problems of the higher mathematics are unthinkable to a child. 
Or, the impossibility may arise from the nature of the thing itself. 
That a triangle should have four sides, or a circle be a square, is 
absolutely unthinkable. But in neither of these senses is the Infi- 
nite unthinkable. It is not impossible, for Hamilton and Mansel 
both admit that God is in fact infinite; nor is that proposition un- 
intelligible. It conveys a perfectly clear and distinct idea to the 
mind. When the mind affirms to itself that space is infinite, ¢. e., 
that it cannot be limited, it knows what it means just as well as 
when it says that two and two are four. Neither is an absolute 
beginning unthinkable. If, indeed, by absolute beginning is meant 
uncaused beginning, the coming into existence of something out of 
nothing, and produced by nothing, then it is impossible and there- 
fore incogitable. But the dictum is applied to a-creation ex nihilo, 
which is declared to be unthinkable. This, however, is denied. 
We will to move a limb, and it moves. God said, Let there be 
light, and light was. The one event is just as intelligible as the 
other. In neither case can we comprehend the nexus between the 
antecedent and the consequent, between the volition and the effect; 
but as facts they are equally thinkable and knowable. 

It is not possible to give the evidence scattered through the 
writings of Hamiltonand Mansel, that they use the word “to 
know ” in the sense of comprehending, or, forming a mental image 
of the object known. Mansel? quotes the following sentence from 
Dr. McCosh’s work on the ‘* Method of the Divine Govern- 
ment,” namely, ‘“‘ The mind seeks in vain to embrace the infinite 
in a positive image, but is constrained to believe, when its efforts 
fail, that there is a something to which no limits can be put.” This 
sentence Mansel says may be accepted ‘“ by the most uncompro- 
mising adherent” of Sir W. Hamilton’s doctrine, that the infinite is 
unthinkable and unknowable. To know, therefore, according to 
Hamilton and Mansel, is to form a mental image of ; and as we 
cannot form such an image of God, God cannot be known. Man- 
sel is disposed to think that this reduces the controversy to a 

1 Page 280. 


860 PART L.— THEOLOGY. [Cu.IV.— Can Gop BE KNuwN? 


matter of words. And Dr. Tyler, in his able exposition of Hamil- 
ton’s philosophy, says,! ‘So it be admitted, as it must, that all our 
intelligence of God is by analogy, it matters but little, practically, 
whether the conviction be called knowledge, belief, or faith.” It 
is, however, very far from being a dispute about words. For 
Hamilton constantly asserts that God is not, and cannot be, what 
we think He is. Then we have no God. For what is God as 
infinite, if as Mansel says, ‘‘ The Infinite, if it is to be conceived 
at all, must be conceived as potentially everything and actually 
nothing.” ? 
What is meant by Knowledge. 

Knowledge is the perception of truth. Whatever the mind per- 
ceives, whether intuitively or discursively, to be true, that it knows. 
We have immediate knowledge of all the facts of consciousness ; 
and with regard to other matters, some we can demonstrate, some 
we can prove analogically, some we must admit or involve ourselves 
in contradictions and absurdities. Whatever process the mind may 
institute, if it arrives at a clear perception that a thing is, then that 
thing is an object of knowledge. It is thus we know the objects 
with which heaven and earth are crowded. It is thus we know 
our fellow men. With regard to anything without us, when our 
ideas, or convictions concerning it, correspond to what the thing 
really is, then we know it. How do we know that our nearest 
friend has a soul, and that that soul has intelligence, moral excel- 
lence, and power? We cannot see or feel it. We cannot form s 
mental image of it. It is mysterious and incomprehensible. Yet 
we know that it is, and what it is, just as certainly as we know that 
we ourselves are, and what we are. In the same way we know 
that God is, and what He is. We know that He is a spirit, that 
He has intelligence, moral excellence, and power to an infinite de- 
gree. We know that He can love, pity, and pardon; that He can 
hear and answer prayer. We know God inthe same sense and 
just as certainly as we know our father or mother. And no man 
can take this knowledge from us, or persuade us that it is not 
knowledge, but a mere irrational belief. 


Hamilton's Doctrine Leads to Scepticism. 
8. The principles on which Hamilton and Mansel deny that 
God can be known, logically lead to scepticism. Hamilton has 
indeed rendered invaluable service to the cause of truth by his 


1 See Progress of Philosophy, by Samuel Tyler, LL.D., p. 207. 
2 Limits of Religious Thought, p. 94. 


§ 3, C.J GOD AS AN OBJECT OF KNOWLEDGE. 361 


defence of what is, perhaps, infelicitously called the ‘“ Philosophy 
of Common Sense.” The principles of that philosophy are: 
C1.) That what is given in consciousness is undoubtedly true. 
(2.) That whatever the laws of our nature force us to believe, 
must be accepted as true. (3.) That this principle applies to all 
the elements of our nature, to the senses, the reason, and the con- 
science. We cannot rationally or consistently with our allegiance 
to God, deny what our senses, reason, or conscience pronounce to 
be true. (4.) Neither the individual man, nor the cause of truth, 
however, is to be left to the mercy of what any one may choose to 
say reason or conscience teaches. Nothing is to be accepted as 
the authoritative judgment of either reason or conscience, which 
does not bear the criteria of universality and necessity, 

Hamilton has drawn from the stores of his erudition, in this de. 
partment perhaps unexampled, proof that these principles have 
been recognized by the leading philosophic minds in all ages. He 
himself sustains them with earnestness as the safeguards of truth. 
He impressively asserts that if consciousness once be convicted of 
falsehood, all is lost; we have then no resting place for either sci- 
ence or religion; that absolute scepticism follows, if it be denied 
that necessity and universality of belief are not decisive proof of 
the truth of what is thus believed. Even Stuart Mill admits that 
‘“* whatever is known to us by conscidusness, is known beyond pos- 
sibility of question.” 1 Mr. Mansel tells us that it is from con- 
sciousness we get our idea of substance, of personality, of cause, of 
right and wrong, in short of everything which lies at the founda- 
tion of knowledge and ‘religion; and therefore if consciousness 
deceive us we have nothing to depend upon. Mansel thus ex- 
pounds the famous aphorism of Des Cartes, ‘‘ Cogito ergo sum,” 
z. e., * I, who see, and hear, and think, and feel, am the one con- 
tinuous self, whose existence gives unity and connection to the 
whole. Personality comprises all that we know of that which 
exists ; relation to personality comprises all that we know of that 
which seems to exist.” 2 ‘* Consciousness,” he says, ‘‘ gives us the 
knowledge of substance. We are a substantive existence.”3 “TI 
exist as I am conscious of existing ; and conscious self is itself the 
Ding an sich, the standard by which all representations of person- 
ality must be judged, and from which our notion of reality, as dis- 
tinguished from appearance, is originally derived.” * Hamilton 


1 Logic, Introduction, p. 4, edit. N. Y. 1846. 
2 Limits of Religious Thought, p. 105. 
8 Ibid. p. 288.. 4 Ibid. p. 291. 


862 PART I.—THEOLOGY. [Cu. IV.—Can Gop Bx KNowN? 


and Mansel therefore teach that the veracity of consciousness is 
the foundation of all knowledge, .and that the denial of that ve- 
racity inevitably leads to absolute scepticism. Nevertheless they 
teach that our senses deceive us; that reason deceives us; that 
conscience deceives us; that is, that our sensuous, rational, and 
moral consciousness are alike deceptive and unreliable. 

Our senses give us the knowledge of the external world. They 
teach us that things are, and what they are. It is admitted that 
the universal and irresistible belief of men, as that belief is deter- 
mined by their sense and consciousness, is that things really are 
what to our senses they appear to be. Philosophers tell us this is 
a delusion. Kant says that they certainly are not what we take 
them to be. Mansel says this is going rather too far. We cannot 
know, indeed, what they are, but it is possible that they are in fact 
what they appear to be. In either case they are to us an unknown 
quantity, and the senses deceive us. They assume to teach more 
than they have a right to teach, and we are bound to believe them. 

Kant teaches that our reason, that the necessary laws of thought 
which govern our mental operations, lead to absolute contradic- 
tions. In this Hamilton and Mansel fully agree with him. They 
tell us that reason teaches that the Absolute must be all things 
actual and possible; that there cannot be an absolute or infinite 
person, or cause; that being’ and not-being are identical; that the 
infinite is ‘potentially all things and actually nothing.” These 
and similar contradictions are said to be inevitable results of all 
attempts to know God as an Absolute and Infinite Being. ‘“ The 
conception of the Absolute and Infinite, from whatever side we 
view it, appears encompassed with contradictions. There is a con- 
tradiction in supposing such an object to exist, whether alone or in 
conjunction with others ; and there is a contradiction in supposing 
it not to exist. There is a contradiction in conceiving it as one, 
and there is a contradiction in conceiving it as many. There 
is a contradiction in conceiving it as personal; and there is a con- 
tradiction in conceiving it as impersonal. It cannot without con- 
tradiction be represented as active; nor, without equal contra- 
diction, be represented as inactive. It cannot be conceived as 
the sum of all existence; nor yet can it be conceived of as a part 
only of that sum.” ? Yet all this we are called upon to believe ; 
for it is our duty, he says, to believe that God is infinite and abso- 
lute. That is, we are bound to believe what our rational consciouss 
ness pronounces to be contradictory and impossible. 

1 Limits of Religious Thought, p. 85. 


§ 3, C.] GOD AS AN OBJECT OF KNOWLEDGE. 363 


Conscience, or our moral consciousness, is no Jess deceptive. Mr. 
Mansel admits that we are conscious of dependence and of moral 
obligation ; that this involves what he calls “the consciousness of 
God,” 7. e., that we stand in the relation to God of one spirit to 
another spirit, of one person to another person; a person so supe- 
rior to us as to have rightfully supreme authority over us, and who 
has all the power and all the moral perfections which enter into our 
idea of God. But all this is a delusion. It is a delusion, because ° 
what our moral consciousness thus teaches involves all the con- 
tradictions and absurdities above mentioned; because it is said to 
teach not what God is, but only what it is desirable that we should 
think He is; and because we are told that it is blasphemy to think 
that He is what we take Him to be. 

The theory, therefore, of Hamilton and Mansel as to a knowl- 
edge of God is suicidal. It is inconsistent with the veracity of 
consciousness, which is the fundamental principle of their philos- 
ophy. The theory is an incongruous combination of sceptical 
principles with orthodox faith, the anti-theistic principles of Kant 
with Theism. One or the other must be given up. We cannot 
believe in a personal God, if an infinite person be a contradiction 
and absurdity. 

God has not so constituted our nature as to make it of necessity 
deceptive. The senses, reason, and conscience, within their appro- 
priate spheres, and in their normal exercise, are trustworthy guides, 
They teach us real, and not merely apparent or regulative truth. 
Their combined spheres comprehend all the relations in which we, 
as rational creatures, stand to the external world, to our fellow- 
men, and to God. Were it not for the disturbing element of sin, 
we know not that man, in full communion with his Maker, whose 
favour is light and life, would have needed any other guides. But 
man is not in his original and normal state. In apostatizing from 
God, man fell into a state of darkness and confusion. Reason and 
conscience are no longer adequate guides as to “the things of 
God.” Of fallen men, the Apostle says: ** That when they knew 
God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful, but 
became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was dark- 
ened. Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools; and 
changed the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image made 
like to corruptible man, and to birds, and four-footed beasts, and 
ereeping things ” (Rom. i. 21-23) ; or, worse yet, into an absolute 
and infinite being, without consciousness, intelligence, or moral 
character; a being which is potentially all things, and actually 


864 PART I.— THEOLOGY. [Cu. IV.— Can Gop BE KNOWN? 


nothing. It is true, therefore, as the same Apostle tells us, that - 
the would by wisdom knows not God. It is true in a still higher 
sense, as the Lord himself says, that no man “ knoweth the Father, 
save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him.” 


(Matt. xi. 27.) 


Necessity of a Supernatural Revelation. 


We need, therefore, a divine supernatural revelation. Of this 
revelation, it is to be remarked, first, that it gives us real knowledge. 
It teaches us what God really is; what sin is; what the law is; 
what Christ and the plan of salvation through Him are ; and what 
is to be the state of the soul after death. The knowledge thus com- 
nunicated is real, in the sense that the ideas which we are thus led 
to form of the things revealed conform to what those things really 
are. God and Christ, holiness and sin, heaven and hell, really are 
what the Bible declares them to be. Sir William Hamilton! di- 
vides the objects of knowledge into two classes: those derived from 
within, from the intelligence; and those derived from experience. 
The latter are of two kinds: what we know from our own expe- 
rience, and what we know from the experience of others, authen- 
ticated to us by adequate testimony. In the generally received 
sense of the word this is true knowledge. No man hesitates to 
say that he knows that there was such a man as Washington, or 
such an event as the American Revolution. If the testimony of 
men can give us clear and certain knowledge of facts beyond our _ 
experience, surely the testimony of God is greater. What He re- 
veals is made known. We apprehend it as it truly is. The con- 
viction that what God reveals is made known in its true nature, 
is the very essence of faith in the divine testimony. We are cer- 
tain, therefore, that our ideas of God, founded on the testimony of 
his Word, correspond to what He really is, and constitute true 
knowledge. It is also to be remembered that while the testimony 
of men is to the mind, the testimony of God is not only to, but 
also within the mind. It illuminates and informs; so that the tes- 
timony of God is called the demonstration of the Spirit. 

The second remark concerning the revelation contained in the 
Scriptures is, that while it makes known truths far above the reach 
of sense or reason, it reveals nothing which contradicts either. It 
harmonizes with our whole nature. It supplements all our other 
knowledge, and authenticates itself by harmonizing the testimony 
of enlightened consciousness with the testimony of God in his 


Word. 


1 Lectures on Logic. Lecture 32d. 


§3,C.] GOD AS AN OBJECT OF KNOWLEDGE 865 


The conclusion, therefore, of the whole matter is, that we know 
God in the same sense in which we know ourselves and things out 
of ourselves. We have the same conviction that God is, Sad that 
He is, in Himself, and independently of our thought of Him, what 
we take Him to be. Our subjective idea cor responds to the ob- 
jective reality. This knowledge of God is the foundation of all 
religion ; and therefore to deny that God can be known, is really 
to deny that rational religion is possible. In other words, it makes 
religion a mere sentiment, or blind feeling, instead of its being what 
the ‘Afiostle declares it to be, a Aoyexi) Resch, a rational service ; the 
homage of the reason as well as of the heart and life. Our 
knowledge of God,” says Hase, ** developed and enlightened by 
the Scriptures, answers to what God really is, for He cannot de- 
ceive us as to his own nature.”’! 

1 See on this subject, Sir William Hamilton’s Discussions on Philosophy and Literature ; 
Hamilton’s Lectures on Metaphysics and Logic, edited by Rev. Henry L. Mansel and John 
Veitch, M. A.; Philosophy of Sir William Hamilton, arranged and edited by O. W. Wight, 
translator of Cousin’s History of Modern Philosophy; The Limits of Religious Thought, 
eight lectures on the Bampton Foundation, by Henry Longueville Mansel, B. D.; Calder- 
wood’s Philosophy of the Infinite; Dr. MeCosh’s works on the Method of the Divine Gov-' 
ernment ; The Intuitions of the Mind; Defence of Fundamental Truths; Princeton Review, 
April, 1862, Philosophy of the Absolute, an article by Dr. Charles W. Shields; October, 
1861, Review of Dr. Hickok’s Rational Psychology, by Dr. Stephen Alexander; and A Phil- 
osophical Confession of Faith, by the same writer, a very able and concise statement of fun- 
damental principles, in the number for July, 1867, of the same journal. See also Mill’s 


Review of Hamilton's Philosophy, and the admirable work of Professor Noah Porter, of New 
Haven, on the Human Intellect, part fourth, chap. viii. 


CHAPTER V. 


NATURE AND ATTRIBUTES OF GOD. 


§ 1. Definitions of God. 


Tux question whether God can be defined, depends for its 
answer on what is meant by definition. Cicero? says, ‘‘ Est defi- 
nitio, earum rerum, que sunt ejus rei proprie, quam definire vol- 
umus, brevis et circumscripta quedam explicatio.” In this sense 
God cannot be defined. No creature, much less man, can know 
all that is proper to God; and, therefore, no creature can give an 
exhaustive statement of all that God is. 

To define, however, is simply to bound, to separate, or distin- 
guish; so that the thing defined may be discriminated from all 
other things. This may be done (1.) By stating its characteris- 
tics. (2.) By stating its genus and its specific difference. (8.) By 
analyzing the idea as it lies in our minds. (4.) By an explanation 
of the term or name by which it is denoted. All these methods 
amount to much the same thing. When we say we can define 
God, all that is meant is, that we can analyze the idea of God as 
it lies in our mind; or, that we can state the class of beings to 
which He belongs, and the attributes by which He is distinguished 
from all other beings. Thus, in the simple definition, God is ens 
perfectissimum, the word ens designates Him as a being, not an 
idea, but as that which has.real, objective existence ; and absolute 
perfection distinguishes Him from all other beings. The objection 
to this and most other definitions of God is, that they do not bring 
out with sufficient fulness the contents of the idea. This objection 
bears against such definitions as the following: Ens absolutum, the 
self-existent, independent being; and that by Calovius, “ Deus est 
essentia spiritualis infinita;”? and Reinhard’s? “ Deus est, Natura 
necessaria, a mundo diversa, summas complexa perfectiones et ipsius 
mundi causa ;”’ or Baumgarten’s “ Spiritus perfectissimus, rationem 
sui ipsius rerumque contingentium omnium seu mundi continens; ” 
or, that of Morus, “ Spiritus perfectissimus, conditor, conservator, 


1 De Oratore, i. 42, 189, edit. Leipzig, 1850, p. 84. 
2 Dogmatik, p..92. 


@ wee Biewtetien) 


§1.] NATURE AND ATTRIBUTES OF GOD. 367 


et gubernator mundi.”’ Probably the best definition of God ever 
penned by man, is that given in the ‘“* Westminster Catechism” : 
**God is a Spirit, infinite, eternal, and unchangeable, in his being, 
wisdom, power, holiness, justice, goodness, and ‘truth. This is a 
true definition ; for it states the class of beings to which God is to 
be referred. He is a Spirit; and He is distinguished from all other 
spirits in that He is infinite, eternal, and unchangeable in his being 
and perfections. It is also a complete definition, in so far as it is 
an exhaustive statement of the contents of our idea of God. 

In what sense, however, are these terms used? What is meant 
by the words “being,” and “perfections,” or “attributes” of 
God? In what relation do his attributes stand to his essence and 
to each other? These are questions on which theologians, espe- 
cially during the scholastic period, expended much time and labor. 


Being of God. 

By being is here meant that which has a real, substantive exist- 
ence. It is equivalent to substance, or essence. It is opposed to 
what is merely thought, and toa mere force or power. We get 
this idea, in the first place, from consciousness. We are conscious 
of self as the subject of the thoughts, feelings, and volitions, which 
are its varying states and acts. This consciousness of substance is 
involved in that of personal identity. In the second place, a law 
of our reason constrains us to believe that there is something which 
underlies the phenomena of matter and mind, of which those phe- 
nomena are the manifestation. It is impossible for us to think of 
thought and feeling, unless there be something that thinks and 
feels. It is no less impossible to think of action, unless there be 
something that acts; or of motion, unless there be something that 
moves. To assume, therefore, that mind is only a series of acts 
and states, and that matter is nothing but force, is to assume that 
nothing (nonentity) can produce effects. 

God, therefore, is in his nature a substance, or essence, which 
is infinite, eternal, and unchangeable; the common subject of all 
divine perfections, and the common agent of all divine acts. This 
is as far as we can go, or need to go. We have no definite idea of 
substance, whether of matter or mind, as distinct from its attributes. 
The two are inseparable. In knowing the one we know the other. 
We cannot know hardness except as we know something hard. 
We have, therefore, the same knowledge of the essence of God, as 
we have of the substance of the soul. All we have to do in refer- 
ence to the divine essence, as a Spirit, is to deny of it, as we do 


868 PART L—THEOLOGY. (Cu. V.—Drvive Arreipores. 


of our own spiritual essence, what belongs to material substances 3 
and to affirm of it, that in itself and its attributes it is infinite, eter- 
nal, and unchangeable. When, therefore, we say there is a God, 
we do not assert merely that there is in our minds the idea of an 
infinite Spirit; but that, entirely independent of our idea of Him, 
such a Being really exists. Augustine says, ‘* Deus est queedam 
substantia; nam quod nulla substantia est, nihil omnino est. Sub 
stantia ergo aliquid esse est.” 

If, therefore, a divine essence, infinite, eternal, and unchange- 
able, exists, this essence existed before and independent of the world. 
It follows also that the essence of God is distinct from the world. 
The Scriptural doctrine of God is consequently opposed to the 
several forms of error already mentioned; to Hylozoism, which 
assumes that God, like man, is a composite being, the world being 
to Him what the body is to us; to Materialism, which denies the 
existence of any spiritual substance, and affirms that the material 
alone is real; to extreme Idealism, which denies not only the 
reality of the internal world, but all real objective existence, and 
affirms that the subjective alone is real; to Pantheism, which either 
makes the world the existence form of God, or, denying the reality 
of the world, makes God the only real existence. That is, it either 
makes nature God, or, denying nature, makes God everything. 


§ 2. Divine Attributes. 


To the divine essence, which in itself is infinite, eternal, and 
unchangeable, belong certain perfections revealed to us in the 
constitution of our nature and in the word of God. These divine 
perfections are called attributes as essential to the nature of a 


' divine Being, and necessarily involved in our idea of God. The- 


older theologians distinguished the attributes of God, (1.) From 
predicates which refer to God in ‘the concrete, and indicate his 
relation to his creatures, as creator, preserver, .ruler, etc. 
(2.) From properties, which are technically the distinguishing 
characteristics of the several persons of the Trinity. There are 
certain acts or relations peculiar or proper to the Father, others to 
the Son, and others to the Spirit. And (8.) From accidents or 
qualities which may or may not belong to a substance, which may 
be acquired or lost. Thus holiness was not an attribute of the 
nature of Adam, but an accident, something which he might lose 
and still remain a man; whereas intelligence was’ an attribute, 
because the loss of intelligence involves the loss of humanity. 


1 Enarratio in Psalmum, \xviii. 1. 5, edit. Benedictines, vol iv. p. 988 c. 


§ 2.7 DIVINE ATTRIBUTES. 869 


The perfections of God, therefore, are attributes, without which 
He would cease to be God. 


Lelation of the Attributes to the Essence of God. 


In attempting to explain the relation in which the attributes of 
God stand to his essence and to each other, there are two extremes 
to be avoided. First, we must not represent God as a composite 
being, composed of different elements ; and, secondly, we must not 
confound the attributes, making them all mean the same thing, 
which is equivalent to denying them all together. The Realists of 
the Middle Ages tended to the former of these extremes, and the 
Nominalists to the other. Realists held that general terms ex- 
press not merely thoughts, or abstract conceptions in our minds, 
but real or substantive, objective existence. And hence they were 
disposed to represent the divine attributes as differing from each 
other realiter, as one res or thing differs from another. The 
Nominalists, on the other hand, said general terms are mere words 
answering to abstractions formed by the mind. And consequently 
when we speak of different attributes in God, we only use different 
words for one and the same thing. Occam, Biel, and other Nomi- 
nalists, therefore, taught that ‘ Attributa divina nec rei, nec ra- 
tionis distinctione, inter se aut ab essentia divina distingui; sed 
omnem distinctionem esse solum in nominibus.” The Lutheran 
and Reformed theologians tended much more to the latter of these 
extremes than to the former. They generally taught, in the first 
place, that the unity and simplicity of the divine essence precludes 
not only all physical composition of constituent elements, or of 
matter and form, or of subject and accidents; but also all meta- 
physical distinction as of act and power, essence and existence, 
nature and personality; and even of logical difference, as genus 
and specific difference. 

In the second place, the theologians were accustomed to say that 
the attributes of God differ from his essence non re, sed ratione. 
This is explained by saying that things differ ex natura ret, when 
they are essentially different as soul and body ; while a difference 
ex ratione is merely a difference in us, ?, é., in our conceptions, 2. e., 
“ quod distincte solum concipitur, cum in re ipsa distinctum non sit.” 
Hence the divine attributes are defined as *‘ conceptus essentiz divi- 
nz inadequate, ex parte rei ipsam essentiam involventes, eandemque 
intrinsice denominantes. Aquinas says, ‘‘ Deus est unus re et plures 
ratione, quia intellectus noster ita multipliciter apprehendit Deum, 
sicuti res multipliciter ipsum representant.” The language of the 

VOL. 1. 24 


870 PART I.— THEOLOGY.  [Cu. V. — Divine ATTRIBUTES. 


Lutheran theologian Quenstedt! exhibits the usual mode of repre- 
senting this abject : «Si proprie et accurate loqui velimus, Deus 
nullas “habet proprietates, sed mera et simplicissima est essentia 
que nec realem differentiam nec ullam vel rerum vel modorum 
admittit compositionem. Quia vero simplicissimam Dei essentiam 
uno adequato conceptu adequate concipere non possumus, ideo 
inadequatis et distinctis conceptibus, inadequate essentiam divinam 
representantibus, eam apprehendimus, quos inadequatos conceptus, 
qui a parte rei essentize divine identificantur, et a nobis per modum 
affectionum apprehenduntur, attributa vocamus.” And again, 
“‘ Attributa divina a parte rei et in se non multa sunt, sed ut ipsa 
essentia divina, ita et attributa, que cum illa identificantur, simpli- 
cissima unitas sunt; multa vero dicuntur (1.) ovyxatoBarixés, ad 
nestrum concipiendi modum, ... . (2.) évepyyrixés, in ordine ad 
effecta.’’? The favorite illustration to explain what was meant by 
this unity of the divine attributes, was drawn from the sun. His 
ray, by one and the same power (as was then assumed) illuminates, 
warms, and produces chemical changes, not from any diversity in it, 
but from diversity in the nature of the objects on which it operates. 
The force is the same; the effects are different. The meaning of 
these theologians is further determined by their denying that the 
relation of attribute and essence in God is analogous to the relation 
of intelligence and will to the essence of the Seale in man; and 
also by the frequently recurring declaration, borrowed from the 
schoolmen, that God is actus purus. Schleiermacher goes still 
further in the same direction. With him the divine attributes are 
mere Beziehungen, or relations of God to us. He commonly re- 
solves them into mere causality. Thus he defines the holiness of 
God to be that causality in Him which produces conscience in us. 


Divine Attributes. 


A third and less objectionable way of representing the matter 
is adopted by those who say with Hollazius: “ Attributa divina 
ab essentia divina et a se invicem, distinguuntur non nominaliter 
neque realiter sed formaliter, secundum nostrum concipiendi mo- 
dum, non sine certo distinctionis fundamento.”® This is very 
different from saying that they differ ratione tantum. Turrettin 
says the attributes are to be distinguished not realiter, but virtwali- 
ter; that is, there is a real foundation in the divine nature for the 
several attributes ascribed to Him. 

1 Theologia, part 1. cap. viii. § 2, edit. Leipzig, 1715, p. 426. 
2 Ibid. 11. cap. viii. § 2, p. 426. 
8 Kzamen Theologicum, edit. Leipzig, 1763, p. 235. 


Zi 


§ 2.) DIVINE ATTRIBUTES. 371 


It is evident that this question of the relation of the divine 
attributes to the divine essence merges itself into the general ques- 
tion of the relation between attributes and aes It is also 
evident that this is a subject about which one man knows jnst as 
wnuch as another; because all that can be known about it is given 
immediately in consciousness. 

This subject has already been referred to. We are conscious of 
ourselves as a thinking substance. That is, we are conscious that 
that which is ourselves has identity, continuance, and power. We 

- are further conscious that the substance self thinks, wills, and feels. 
Intelligence, will, and sensibility, are its functions, or attributes, 
and consequently the attributes of a spirit. These are the ways 
in which a spirit acts. Anything which does not thus act, which 
has not these functions or attributes, is not a spirit. If you take 
from a spirit its intelligence, will, and sensibility, nothing remains ; 
its substance is gone; at least it ceases to be a spirit. Substance 
and attributes are inseparable. The one is known in the other. 
A substance without attributes is nothing, 7. e., no real existence. 
What is true of spiritual substances is true of matter. Matter, 
without the essential properties of matter, is a contradiction. 

We know, therefore, from consciousness, as far as it can be 
known, the relation between substance and its attributes. And all 
that can be done, or need be done, is to deny or correct the false 
representations which are so often made on the subject. 


The Divine Attributes do not differ merely in our Conceptions. 


To say, as the schoolmen, and so many even of Protestant theo- 
logians, ancient and modern, were accustomed to say, that the 
divine attributes differ only in name, or in our conceptions, or in 
their effects, is to destroy all true knowledge of God. Thus even 
Augustine confounds knowledge and power, when he says,! “ Nos 
ista, que fecisti videmus quia sunt: tu autem quia vides ea, sunt.” 
So Scotus Erigena? says, “ Non aliud est ei videre, aliud facere ; 
sed visio illius voluntas ejus est, et voluntas operatio.” Thomas 
Aquinas ® says the same thing: ‘* Deus per intellectum suum causat 
res, cum suum esse sit suum intelligere.” And again, “ pone 
(Dei) causat res; nostra vero causatur rebus et dependat ab eis.” 
Even Mr. Mansel,‘ to aggravate our ignorance of God, speaks of 
Him as “an intellect whose thought creates its own object.” It is 


1 Confessiones, XIII, Xxxviii. 53, edit. Benedictines, vol. i. p. 410 b. 
2 De Divisione Nature, iii. 29, edit. Westphalia, 1838, p. 264. 
8 Summa, I. xiv. 8, edit. Cologne, 1640, p. 380. 4 Limits, p. 195. 


372 , PART I.— THEOLOGY.  [Ca. V.— Divine Arrripurss. 


obvious that, according to this view, God is simply a force of which 
we know nothing but its effects. If in God eternity is identical 
with knowledge, knowledge with power, power with ubiquity, and 
ubiquity with holiness, we are using words without meaning when 
we attribute any perfection to God. We must, therefore, either 
give up the attempt to determine the divine attributes from our 
speculative idea of an infinite essence, or renounce all knowledge 
of God, and all faith in the revelation of Himself, which He has 
made in the constitution of our nature, in the external world, and 
in his Word. Knowledge is no more identical with power in God 
than it is in us. Thought in Him is no more creative than is 
thought in us. Otherwise creation is eternal, and God creates 
everything — all the thoughts, feelings, and volitions of his crea- 
tures, good and evil; and God is the only real agent, and the only 
real being in the universe. According to this doctrine, also, there 
can be no difference between the actual and the possible, for the 
one as well as the other is always present to the divine mind. It 
would also follow that the creation must be infinite, or God finite. 
For if knowledge is causative, God creates all He knows, and you 
must limit his knowledge if you limit creation. It need hardly be 
remarked that this doctrine is derogatory to God. It is not only 
a much higher idea, but one essential to personality, that there 
should be a real distinction between the divine attributes. That 
which from its nature and by necessity does all that it can do, is 
a force, and not a person. It can have no will. The doctrine in 
question, therefore, is essentially pantheistic. ‘* However much,” 
says Martensen, ‘‘ we must guard our idea of God from being de- 
graded by anything that is merely human, from all false Anthro- 
pomorphism, yet we can find in Nominalism only the denial of God 
as He is revealed in the Scriptures. It is the denial of the very 
essence of faith, if it is only in our thoughts that God is holy and 
righteous, and not in his own nature; if it is we who so address Him, 
and not He who so reveals Himself. We teach, therefore, with 
the Realists (of one class), that the attributes of God are object- 
ively true as revealed, and therefore have their ground in the di- 
vine essence.” There is a kind of Realism, as Martensen admits, 
which is as destructive of the true idea of God as the Nominalism 
which makes his attributes differ only in name. It grants, indeed, 
objective reality to our ideas; but these ideas, according to it, have 
no real subject. “The idea of omnipotence, righteousness, and 
holiness,” he says, “‘is a mere blind thought, if there be not an 
omnipotent, righteous, and holy One.” } 
1 Dogmatik, p. 118. 


$2, DIVINE ATTRIBUTES. 378 


The Divine Attributes not to be resolved into Causality. 


It amounts to much the same doctrine, to resolve all the attri- 
butes of God into causality. It was a principle with some of the 
schoolmen, ** Affectus in Deo denotat effectum.’’ This was so ap- 
plied as to limit our knowledge of God to the fact that God is the 
cause of certain effects. Thus, when we say God is just, we mean 
nothing more than that He causes misery to follow sin; when we 
say He is holy, it only means that He is the cause of conscience 
in us. Asa tree is not sweet, because its fruit is luscious, so God 
is not holy, He is only the cause of holiness. Against this appli- 
cation of the principle, Aquinas himself protested, declaring, “‘ Cum 
igitur dicitur, Deus est bonus; non est sensus, Deus est causa 
bonitatis ; vel Deus non est malus. Sed est sensus: Id, quod boni- 
tatem dicimus in creaturis, preexistit in Deo; et hoc quidem se- 
cundum modum altiorem. Unde ex hoc non sequitur, quod Deo 
competat esse bonum, in quantum causat bonitatem ; sed potius e 
converso, quia est bonus, bonitatem rebus diffundit.”’! And the 
Lutheran theologian, Quenstedt, says, ‘‘ Dicunt nonnulli, ideo 
Deum dici justum, sanctum, misericordem, veracem, etc., non quod 
revera sit talis, sed quod duntaxat sanctitatis, justiti, misericor- 
diz, veritatis, etc., causa sit et auctor in aliis. Sed si Deus non 
est vere misericors, neque vere perfectus, vere sanctus, etc., sed 
causa tantum misericordiz et sanctitatis in aliis, ita etiam et nos 
pariter juberemur esse non vere misericordes, non vere perfecti, 
etc., sed sanctitatis saltem et misericordiz in aliis auctores.”’ 2 


The Divine Attributes differ Virtualiter. 


Theologians, to avoid the blank ignorance of God which must 
follow from the extreme view of the simplicity of his essence, 
which requires us to assume that the divine attributes differ only 
in our conceptions, or as expressing the diverse effects of the ac- 
tivity of God, made a distinction between the ratio rationantis and 
the ratio rationate. That is, the reason as determining, and the 
reason as determined. The attributes,-they say, differ not re, but 
ratione ; not in our subjective reason only; but there is in God a 
reason why we think of Him as possessing these diverse perfec- 
tions. This idea, as before stated, was often expressed by saying 
that the divine attributes differ neither realiter, nor nominaliter, 
but virtualiter. If this be understood to mean that the divine per- 
fections are really what the Bible declares them to be; that God truly 

1 Summa, 1. xiii. 2, edit. Cologne, 1640, p. 28. 2 Theologia, t. viii. § ii. 2, p. 481. 


874 PART L.— THEOLOGY.  [Cx. V.— Divine Arrrmutes, 


thinks, feels, and acts; that He is truly wise, just, and good ; that 


He is truly omnipotent, and voluntary, acting or not acting, as He 
sees fit; that He can hear and answer prayer; it may be admitted. 
But we are not to give up the conviction that God is really in 
Himself what He reveals Himself to be, to satisfy any metaphysi- 
cal speculations as to the difference between essence and attribute 
in an infinite Being. The attributes of God, therefore, are not 
merely different conceptions in our minds, but different modes in 
which God reveals Himself to his creatures (or to Himself) ; just 
as our several faculties are different modes in which the inscruta- 
ble substance self reveals itself in our consciousness and acts. It 
is an old saying, ‘¢ Qualis homo, talis Deus.” And Clemens Alex- 
andrinus ! says, “If any one knows himself, he will know God.” 
And Leibnitz expresses the same great truth when he says,” “ The 
perfections of God are those of our own souls, but He possesses 
them without limit. He is an ocean of which we have only re- 
ceived a few drops. There is in us something of power, something 
of knowledge, something of goodness ; but these attributes are in 
entireness in Him.” ‘There is indeed danger in either extreme ; 
danger of degrading God in our thoughts, by reducing Him to the 
standard of our nature, and danger of denying Him as He is re- 
vealed. In our day, and among educated men, and especially 
among students of philosophy, the latter danger is by far the 
greater of the two. We should remember that we lose God, 
when we lose our confidence in saying Thou ! to Him, with the as- 
surance of being heard and helped. 


§ 3. Classification of the Divine Attributes. 


On few subjects have greater thought and labor been expended 
than on this. Perhaps, however, the benefit has not been com- 
mensurate with the labor. The object of classification is order, 
and the object of order is clearness. So far as this end is secured, 
it isa good. But the great diversity of the methods which have 
been proposed, is evidence that no one method of arrangement has 
such advantages as to secure for it general recognition. 

1. Some, as has been seen, preclude all necessity of a classifica- 
tion of the attributes, by reducing them all to unity, or regarding 
them as different phases under which we contemplate the Supreme 
Being as the ground of all things. With them the whole discus- 
sion of the divine attributes is an analysis of the idea of the Infi- 
nite and Absolute. 


1 Pedagogus, 111. i. edit. Cologne, 1688, p. 214 a. 
2 “ Théodicée,” Preface, Works, p. 469, edit. Berlin, 1840 


>-~/ 


eo 


= 


§3.] CLASSIFICATION OF THE DIVINE ATTRIBUTES. 875 


2. Others arrange the attributes according to the mode in which 
we arrive at the knowledge of them. We form our idea of God, 
it is said, (1.) By the way of causation ; that is, by referring to 
Him as the great first cause every virtue manifested by the effects 
which He produces. (2.) By the way of negation ; that is, by de- 
nying to Him the limitations and imperfections which belong to 
his creatures. (3.) By the way of eminence, in exalting to an in- 
finite degree or without limit the perfections which belong to an 
infinite Being. If this is so, the attributes conceived of by one of 
these methods belong to one class, and those conceived of, or of 
which we attain the knowledge by another method, belong to an- 
other class. This principle of classification is perhaps the one most 
generally adopted. It gives rise, however, really but to two 
classes, namely, the positive and negative, 7. ¢., those in which 
something is affirmed, and those in which something is denied con- 
cerning God. To the negative class are commonly referred sim- 
plicity, infinity, eternity, immutability ; to the positive class, power, 
knowledge, holiness, justice, goodness, and truth. Instead of call- 
ing the one class negative and the other positive, they are often 
distinguished as absolute and relative. By an absolute attribute is 
meant one which belongs to God, considered in Himself, and which 
implies no relation to other beings ; by a relative attribute is meant 
one which implies relation to an object. They are also distinguished 
as immanent and transient, as communicable and incommunicable. 
These terms are used interchangeably. They do not express dif- 
ferent modes of classification, but are different modes of designating 
the same classification. Negative, absolute, immanent, and incom- 
municable, are designations of one class; and positive, relative, 
transitive, and communicable, are designations of the other class. 

3. A third principle of classification is derived from the consti- 
tution of our own nature. In man there is the substance or es- 
sence of the soul, the intellect, and the will. Hence, it is said, 
we can most naturally arrange the attributes of God under three 
heads. First, those pertaining to his essence; second, those refer- 
ring to his intellect; and third, those referring to his will, the 
word “will’’ being taken in its most comprehensive sense. 

4, Others again seek the principle of classification in the nature 
of the attributes themselves. Some include the idea of moral ex- 
cellence, and others do not. Hence they are distinguished as nat- 
ural and moral. The word natural, however, is ambiguous. Tak- 
ing it in the sense of what constitutes or pertains to the nature, 
the holiness and justice of God are as much natural as his power 


876 PART I.—THEOLOGY.  [Cu. V.— Divine ArrTRIBurEs. 


or knowledge. And on the other hand, God is infinite and 
eternal in his moral perfections, although infinity and eternity are 
not distinctively moral’ perfections. In the common and familiar 
sense of the word natural, the terms natural and moral express a 
real distinction. 

5. Schleiermacher’s method is, of course, peculiar. It is based 
on the characteristic principle of his system, that all religion is 
founded on a sense of dependence, and all theology consists in 
what that sense of dependence teaches us. He does not treat of 
the divine attributes in any one place, but here and there, as they 
come up according to his plan. Our sense of dependence does not 
awaken in our consciousness a feeling of opposition to God’s eter- 
nity, omnipotence, omnipresence, or omniscience. These, there- 
fore, are treated of in one place. But we, as dependent creatures, 
are conscious of opposition to God’s holiness and righteousness. 
These, therefore, belong to another head. And as this opposition 
is removed through Christ, we are brought into relation to God’s 
grace or love, and to his wisdom. These form a third class. 

That so many different principles of classification have been 
adopted, and that each of those principles is.carried out in so many 
different ways, shows the uncertainty and difficulty attending the 
whole subject. It is proposed in what follows to accept the guid- 
ance of the answer given in the ‘“ Westminster Catechism,” to — 
the question, What is God? It is assumed in that answer that 
God is a self-existent and necessary Being; and it is affirmed of 
Him, I. That He is a Spirit. II. That as such He is infinite, 
eternal, and immutable. III. That He is infinite, eternal, and im- 
mutable, (1.) In his being. (2.) In all that belongs to his in- 
telligence, namely, in his knowledge and wisdom. (8.) In all 
that belongs to his will, namely, his power, holiness, justice, good- 
ness, and truth. Whatever speculative objections may be made 
to this plan, it has the advantage of being simple and familiar. 


§ 4. Spirituality of God. 
A. The Meaning of the Word “ Spirit.” 


The fundamental principle of interpretation of all writings, 
sacred or profane, is that words are to be understood in their his- 
torical sense ; that is, in the sense in which it can be historically 
proved that they were used by their authors and intended to be 
understood by those to whom they were addressed. The object 
of language is the communication of thought. Unless words are 


§4, A] SPIRITUALITY OF GOD. 877 


taken in the sense in which those who employ them know they 
will be understood, they fail of their design. The sacred writings 
being the words of God to man, we are bound to take them in the 
sense in which those to whom they were originally addressed must 
inevitably have taken them. What is the meaning of the word 
‘spirit ?”’ or rather, What is the wsas Le aiaoa ofithe Hebrew and 
Greek words to which our word “spirit” corresponds? In answer- 
ing this question, we learn what our Lord meant when he said God 
isa Spirit. Originally the words m7 and zved.a meant the mov- 
ing air, especially the breath, as in the phrase zvedya Biov; then anv 
invisible power ; then the human soul. In saying, therefore, that 
God is a Spirit, our Lord authorizes us to believe that whatever is 
essential to the idea of a spirit, as learned from our own conscious- 
ness, is to be referred to God as determining his nature. On this 
subject consciousness teaches, and has taught all men, — 

1. That the soul is a substance ; that our thoughts and feelings 
have’a common ground, of which they are the varying states or 
acts. Substance is that which has an objective existence, and has 
permanence and power. Even Kant says: ‘* Wo. Handlung, 
mithin Thatigkeit und Kraft ist, da ist auch Substanz,” where oper- 
ation, and consequently activity and power are, there is substance.! 
This is not only the common conviction of men, but it is admitted 
by the vast majority of philosophers. As before remarked, that 
there should be action without something acting, is as unthinkable 
as that there should be motion without something moving. 

2. Consciousness teaches that the soul is an individual subsist- 
ence. This is included in the consciousness of the unity, identity, 
and permanence of the soul. It is not that we are conscious sim- 
ply of certain states of the soul, from which we infer its substance 
and subsistence ; but that such are the contents of the knowledge 
given to us in the consciousness of self. Des Cartes’ famous aphor- 
ism, Cogito ergo sum, is not a $yllogism. It does not mean that 
existence is inferred from the consciousness of thought; but that 
the consciousness of thought involves the consciousness of exist- 
ence. Des Cartes himself so understood the matter, for he says: 
“Cum advertimus nos esse res cogitantes, prima quzedam notio est 
que ex nullo syllogismo concluditur; neque etiam cum quis dicit 
‘ Ego cogito, ergo sum, sive existo,’ existentiam ex cogitatione per 
syllogismum deducit, sed tanquam rem per se notam simplici men- 
tis intuitu agnoscit.” 2 Mansel says: ‘‘ Whatever may be the va- 

1 Werke, edit. Leipzig, 1838, vol. ii. p. 173. 


2 Meditationes de Prima Philosophia, Responsio ad Secundas Objectiones, III., edit, Amstere 
dam, 1685, p- 74. 


r 
« 


278 PART I.— THEOLOGY. [Cu. V.—Drvinu ATTRIBUTES, 


riety of the phenomena of consciousness, sensations by this or that 
organ, volitions, thoughts, imaginations, of all we are immediately 
conscious as affections of one and the same self. It is not by any 
after-effort of reflection that I combine together sight and hearing, 
thought and volition, into a factitious unity or compounded whole : 
in each case I am immediately conscious of myself seeing and hear- 
ing, willing and thinking. This self-personality, like all other simple 
and immediate presentations, is indefinable; but it is so because 
it is superior to definition.” 1 This individual subsistence is thus 
involved in the consciousness of self, because in self-consciousness 
we distinguish ourselves from all that is not ourselves. 

8. As power of some kind belongs to every substance, the power 
which belongs to spirit, to the substance self, is that of thought, 
feeling, and volition. All this is given in the simplest form of con- 
sciousness. We are not more certain that we exist, than that we 
think, feel, and will. We know ourselves only as thus thinking, 
feeling, and willing, and we therefore are sure that these powers 4 
or faculties are the essential attributes of a spirit, and must belong 
to every spirit. 

4. Consciousness also informs us of the unity or simplicity of 
the soul. It is not compounded of different elements. It is com- 7 
posed of substance and form. It is a simple substance endowed 
with certain attributes. It is incapable of separation or division. 

5. In being conscious of our individual subsistence, we are con- 

scious of personality. Every individual subsistence is not a person. 
But every individual subsistence which thinks and feels, and has 
the power of self-determination, is a person; and, therefore, the 
consciousness of our subsistence, and of the powers of thought and 
volition, is the consciousness of personality. 

6. We are also conscious of being moral agents, susceptible of 
moral character, and the subjects of moral obligation. 

T. It need not be added that eyery spirit must possess self-con- 
sciousness. ‘This is involved in all that has been said. Without 
self-consciousness we should be a mere power in nature. This is 
the very ground of our being, and is necessarily involved in the 
idea of self as a real existence. 

It is impossible, therefore, to overestimate the importance of the 
truth contained in the simple proposition, God is a Spirit. It is in- 
volved in that proposition that God is immaterial. None of the prop- 
erties of matter can be predicated of Him. He is not extended 
or divisible, or compounded, or visible, or tangible. He has neither 


a Peelegene Logica, Boston, 1860, p. 128. See also Dr. McCosh’s Tntuitions of the Mind 
p- 148. 


—. = ee 


Aa 


ae 


, 


§4,B] SPIRITUALITY OF GOD. 379 


bulk nor form. The Bible everywhere recognizes as true the 
intuitive convictions of men. One of those convictions is that 
spirit is not matter, or matter spirit ; that different and incompati- 
ble attributes cannot belong to the same substance. In revealing, 
therefore, to us that God is a Spirit, it reveals to us that no attri- 
bute of matter can be predicated of the divine essence. The real- 
istic dualism which lies at the bottom of all human convictions, 
underlies also all the revelations of the Bible. 


B. Consequences of the Spirituality of God. 


If God be a spirit, it follows of necessity that He is a person — 
a self-conscious, intelligent, voluntary agent. As all this is in- 
volved in our consciousness of ourselves as spirit, it must all be 
true of God, or God is of a lower order of being than man. 

It follows also that God is a simple Being, not only as not com- 
posed of different elements, but also as not admitting of the dis- 
tinction between substance and accidents. Nothing can either be 
added to, or taken from God. In this view the simplicity, as well 
as the other attributes of God, are of a higher order than the cor- 
responding attributes of our spiritual nature. The soul of man is 
a simple substance; but it is subject to change. It can gain and 
lose knowledge, holiness, and power. ‘These are in this view acci- 
dents in our substance. But in God they are attributes, essential 
and immutable. 

Finally, it follows from God’s being a spirit, that He-is a 
moral as well as an intelligent Being. It is involved in the 
very nature of rational voluntary being, that it should be con- 
formed to the rule of right, which in the case of God is his own 
mfinite reason. These are primary truths, which are not to be 
sacrificed to any speculative objections. It is vain to tell us that 
an infinite spirit cannot be a person, because personality implies 
self-consciousness, and self-consciousness implies the distinction 
between the self and the not-self, and this is a limitation. It is 
equally vain to say that God cannot have moral excellence, because 
moral goodness implies conformity to law, and conformity to law 
again is inconsistent with the idea of an absolute Being. These 
are empty speculations ; and even if incapable of a satisfactory solu- 
tion, would afford no rational ground for rejecting the intuitive 
truths of reason and conscience. There are mysteries enough in 
our nature, and yet no sane man denies his own personal existence 
and moral accountability. And he is worse than insane who is 
beguiled by such sophistries into renouncing his faith in God as a 
personal spirit and a loving Father. 


“a 


880 PART L—THEOLOGY.  [Cu. V. — Divine ATTRIBUTES, 


The Scriptures confirm these Views. 


It need hardly be remarked that the Scriptures everywhere rep- | 


resent God as possessing all the above-mentioned attributes of a 
spirit. On this foundation all religion rests; all intercourse with 
God, all worship, all prayer, all confidence in God as preserver, 
benefactor, and redeemer. The God of the Bible is a person. He 
spoke to Adam. He revealed himself to Noah. He entered into 
covenant with Abraham. He conversed with Moses, as a friend 
with friend. He everywhere uses the personal pronouns. He says, 
“Tam,” that “‘is my name.” I am the Lord your God. I am 
merciful ‘and gracious. Call upon me, and IJ will answer you. Like 


as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear ~ 


Him. O thou that hearest prayer, to thee shall all flesh come. Our 
Lord has put into our lips words which reveal that God is a spirit, 
and all that being a spirit implies, when He teaches us to say: ‘Our 
Father who art in heaven. Hallowed be thy name. Thy king- 
dom come. Thy will be done.” Everywhere the God of the Bible 
is contrasted with the gods of the heathen, as a God who sees, 
hears, and loves. These are not regulative, they are real truths. 
God does not mock us when He thus presents Himself to us as a 
personal Being with whom we can have intercourse, aud who is 
everywhere present to help and save. ‘To human reason,” says 
Mansel, “the personal and the infinite stand out in apparently 
irreconcilable antagonism ; and the recognition of the one in a re- 
ligious system almost inevitably involves the sacrifice of the other.” 1 
This cannot be so. According to the Bible, and according to the 
dictates of our own nature, of reason as well as of conscience, God 
is a spirit, and being a spirit is of necessity a person; a Being who 
can say I, and to whom we can say Thou. 


§ 5. Infinity. 

Although God reveals Himself as a personal Being capable of 
fellowship with man, whom we can worship and love, and to whom 
we can pray with the assurance of being heard and answered; 
nevertheless He fills heaven and earth; He is exalted above all we 
can know or think. He is infinite in his being and perfections. 
The ideas with which we are most familiar are often those of which 


we are the least able to give an intelligent account. Space, time, — 


and infinity, are among the most difficult problems of human 

thought. What is space? is a question which has never been sat- 

isfactorily answered. Some say it is nothing; where nothing is, 
1 Limits, p. 148. 


§ 5.] INFINITY. 881 


space is not; it is ‘negation defined by boundary lines ;” others, 
with Kant and Hamilton, say that it is ‘a condition of thought,” 
**the subjective condition of sensibility ;” others that it is an 
attribute or accident of God; others that it is that in which real ex- 
istences can act and move. Notwithstanding these conflicting state- 
ments of philosophers, and the real obscurity of the subject, every 
man knows clearly and definitely what the word “space” means, 
although no man may be able to define it satisfactorily. It is much 
the same with the idea of infinity. If men would be content to 
leave the word in its integrity, as simply expressing what does not 
admit of limitation, there would be no danger in speculating about 
its nature. But in all ages wrong views of what the infinite is, 
have led to fatal errors in philosophy and religion. Without 
attempting to detail the speculations of philosophers on this subject, 
we shall simply endeavor to state what is meant when it is said that 
God is infinite in his being and perfections. 


The Idea of Infinity not merely Negative. 


Being, in this connection, is that which is or exists. The being 
of God is his essence or substance, of which his perfections are the 
essential attributes or modes of manifestation. When it is said that 
God is infinite as to his being, what is meant is, that no limitation 
can be assigned to his essence. It is often said that our idea of the 
infinite is merely negative. There is a sense in which this may be 
true, but there is a sense in which it is not true. It is true that 
the form of the proposition is negative when we say that no limit 
can be assigned to space, or possible duration, or to the being of 
God. But it implies the affirmation that the object of which infin- 
ity is predicated is illimitable. It is as much a positive idea which 
we express when we say a thing is infinite as when we say that it 
is finite. We cannot, indeed, form a conception or mental image 
of an infinite object, but the word nevertheless expresses a positive 
judgment of the mind. Sir William Hamilton and others, when 
they say that the infinite is a mere negation, mean that it implies a 
negation of all thought. That is, we mean nothing when we say 
that a thing is infinite. As we know nothing of the inhabitants 
of the other planets of our system, if such there be, or of the mode 
in which angels and disembodied spirits take cognizance of material 
objects, our ideas on such subjects are purely negative, or blank 
ignorance. ‘ The infinite,” Mansel says, “is not a positive object 
of human thought.’’! Every man, however, knows that the 
propositions “Space is infinite,” and “Space is finite,” express 

1 Prolegomena Logica, Boston, 1860, p. 52. 


382 PART I.— THEOLOGY.  ([Cu. V.—Drvine Arrrisurss. 


different and equally definite thoughts. When, therefore, we say 
that God is infinite, we mean something; we express a great and 
positive truth. 

A. The Infinite not the All. 

The infinite, although illimitable and incapable of increase, is not 
necessarily all. An infinite body must include all bodies, infinite 
space all portions of space, and infinite duration all periods of du- 
ration. Hence Mr. Mansel says that an infinite being must of 
necessity include within itself all actual and all possible forms or 
modes of being, So said Spinoza, many of the schoolmen, and 
even many Christian theologians. The sense in which Spinoza 
and Mansel make this assertion is the fundamental principle of 
Pantheism. Mr. Mansel, as we have seen, escapes that conclusion 
by appealing to faith, and teaching that we are constrained to 
believe what reason pronounces to be impossible, which itself is an 
impossibility. The sense in which theologians teach that an infi- 
nite being must comprehend within it all being, is, that in the 
infinite is the cause or ground of all that is actual or possible. Thus 
Howe! says, ‘‘ Necessary being must include all being.” But 
he immediately adds, not in the same way, “‘ It comprehends all 
being, besides what itself is, as having had, within the compass of 
its productive power, whatsoever hath actually sprung from it; and 
having within the compass of the same power, whatsoever is still 
possible to be produced.” This, however, is not the proper mean- 
ing of the words, nor is it the sense in which they are generally 
used. What the words mean, and what they are generally intended 
to mean by those who use them is, that there is only one being in 
the universe; that the finite is merely the modus ewxistendi, or 
manifestation of the Infinite. Thus Cousin says, God must be 
“infinite and finite together, . . . . at the summit of being and 
at its humblest degree . . . . ; at once God, nature, and human- 
ity.”? Even some of the Remonstrants regard this as the neces- 
sary consequence of the doctrine of the infinitude of the divine 
essence. Hpiscopius ® says, “Si essentia Dei sic immensa est, tum 
intelligi non potest quomodo et ubi aliqua creata essentia esse possit. 
Essentia enim creata non est essentia divina; ergo aut est extra 
essentiam divinam, aut, si non est extra eam, est ipsa essentia illa, 
et sic omnia sunt Deus et divina essentia.” ‘God is infinite,” says 
Jacob Bohme, “for God is all.” This, says Strauss, is exactly the 
doctrine of the modern philosophy. 

1 “Living Temple,” Works, London, 1724, vol. i. p. 70. 

2 History of Modern Philosophy, translated by Wight. New York, 1852, vel. i. p. 113. 


8 Institutiones Theologice, rv. ii. 13, edit. Amsterdam, 1550, vol. i. p. 294. 
4 Dogmatik, vol. i. p. 556. 


* 
4 
; 


§ 5, BJ INFINITY. 383 


It has already been remarked in a previous chapter, in reference 
to this mode of reasoning, that it proceeds on a wrong idea of the 
infinite. A thing may be infinite in its own nature without pre- 
eluding the possibility of the existence of things of a different na- 
ture. An infinite spirit does not forbid the assumption of the ex- 
istence of matter. There may even be many infinites of the same 
kind, as we can imagine any number of infinite lines. The infinite, 
therefore, is not all. An infinite spirit is a spirit to whose attri- 
butes as a spirit no limits can be set. It no more precludes the exe 
istence of other spirits than infinite goodness precludes the existence 
of finite goodness, or infinite power the existence of finite power. 
God is infinite in being because no limit can be assigned to his 
perfections, and because He is present in all portions of space. A 
being is said to be present wherever it perceives and acts. As God 
perceives and acts everywhere, He is everywhere present. . This, 
however, does not preclude the presence of other beings. A mul- 
titude of men even may perceive and act at the same time and place. 
Besides, we have very little knowledge of the relation which spirit 
bears to space. We know that bodies occupy portions of space to 
the exclusion of other bodies; but we do not know that spirits may 
not coexist in the same portion of space. A legion of demons 
dwelt in one man. 


B. Infinitude of God in relation to Space. 


The infinitude of God, so far as space is concerned, includes his im- 
mensity and his omnipresence. These are not different attributes, 
but one and the same attribute, viewed under different aspects. 
His immensity. is the infinitude of his being, viewed as belonging to 
his nature from eternity. He fills immensity with his presence. 
His omnipresence is the infinitude of his being, viewed in relation 
to his creatures. He is equally present with all his creatures, at all 
times, and in all places. He is not far from any one of us. “The 
Lord is in this place,’ may be said with equal truth and confidence, 
everywhere. Theologians are accustomed to distinguish three 
modes of presence in space. Bodies are in space circumscriptively 
They are bounded by it. Spirits are in space definitively. They 
have an whi. They are not everywhere, but only somewhere. 
God is in space repletively. He fills all space. In other words, the 
limitations of space have no reference to Him. He is not absent 
from any portion of space, nor more present in one portion than 
in another. This of course is not to be understood of extension or 
diffusion. Extension is a property of matter, and cannot be predi- 


384 PART I.— THEOLOGY. [Cu. V. — Divine ATTRIBUTES, 


eated of God. If extended, He would be capable of division and — 


separation ; ; and part of God would be here, and part elsewhere. 
Nor is this omnipresence to be understood as a mere presence in 
knowledge and power. It is an omnipresence of the divine essence. 
Otherwite the essence of God would be limited. The doctrine, 
therefore, taught by the older Socinians that the essence of God is 
confined to heaven (wherever that may be), and that He is else- 
where only as to his knowledge and efficiency, is inconsistent with 
the divine perfections and with the representations of Scripture. 
As God acts everywhere, He is present everywhere ; for, as the 
theologians say, a being can no more act where he is not than 
when he is not. 

The older and later theologians agree in this view of the divine 
immensity and omnipresence. Augustine! says God is not to be 
regarded as everywhere diffused, as the air or the light: “Sed in 
solo ccelo totus, et in sola terra totus, et in ccelo et in terra totus, et 
nullo contentus loco, sed in seipso ubique totus.”” Thomas Aqui- 
nas says,” Deus ‘+ est in omnibus per potentiam, in quantum omnia 
ejus potestati subduntur ; est per preesentiam in omnibus, in quan- 
tum omnia nuda sunt et aperta oculis ejus. Est in omnibus per 
essentiam in quantum adest omnibus ut causa essendi sicut dictum 
est.” Quenstedt says,®? ‘Est Deus ubique illocaliter, impartibili- 
ter, eflicaciter ; non definitive ut spiritus, non circumscriptive ut 
corpora, sed repletive citra sui multiplicationem, extensionem, divi- 
sionem, inclusionem, aut commixtionem more modoque divino in- 
comprehensibili.”” The Bible teaches the infinitude of God, as 
involving his immensity and omnipresence, in the clearest terms. 
He is said to fill all in all, ¢. ¢., the universe in all its parts. (Eph. i. 
23.) ‘“*AmI a God at hand, saith the Lord, and not a God afar off? 
Can any hide himself in secret places that I shall not see him? saith 
the Lord. Do not I fill heaven and earth? saith the Lord.” (Jer. 
xxii, 23, 24.) ‘“ Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? or whither 
shall I flee from thy presence? If I ascend up into heaven, thou 
art there: if | make my bed in hell, behold, thou art there. If I 
take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of 
the sea; even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand 
‘shall hold me.” (Ps. exxxix. 7-12.) It is “in Him we (7. e., all 
creatures) live, and move, and have our being.” (Acts xvii. 28.) 
Everywhere in the Old and in the New Testament, God is repre- 


1 De Presentia Dei seu Epistola ouxxxyi. iv. 14, edit. Benedictines, vol. ii. p. 1028, d. 
2 Summa, I. viii. 3, edit. Cologne, 1640, p. 16. 
8 Theologia, 1. viii. § 1, p. 418. 


—— ee ee ee ee 


oe ee a? Se ee ey 


§ 6, A.] ETERNITY, 885 


sented as a spiritual Being, without form, invisible, whom no man 
hath seen or can see; dwelling in the light which no man can 
approach unto, and full of glory; as not only the creator, and pre- 
server, but as the governor of all things ; as everywhere present, and 
everywhere imparting life, and securing order; present in every 
blade of grass, yet guiding Arcturus in his course, marshalling the 
stars as a host, calling them by their names; present also in every 
human soul, giving it understanding, endowing it with’ gifts, work- 
ing in it both to will and to do. The human heart is in his hands ; 
and He turneth it even as the rivers of water are turned. Where- 
ever, throughout the universe, there is evidence of mind in mate- 
rial causes, there, according to the Scriptures, is God, controlling 
and guiding those causes to the accomplishment of his wise designs. 
He is in all, and over all things ; yet essentially different from all, 
being over all, independent, and infinitely exalted. This immen- 
sity and omnipresence of God, therefore, is the ubiquity of the 
divine essence, and consequently of the divine power, wisdom, and 
goodness. As the birds in the air and the fish in the sea, so also 
are we always surrounded and sustained by God. It is thus that 
He is infinite in his being, without absorbing all created beings 
into his own essence, but sustaining all in their individual subsist- 
ence, and in the exercise of their own powers. 


§ 6. Eternity. 


A. Scriptural Doctrine. 

The infinitude of God relatively to space, is his immensity or 
omnipresence ; relatively to duration, it is his eternity. As He is 
free from all the limitations of space, so He is exalted above all 
the limitations of time. As He is not more in one place than in an- 
other, but is everywhere equally present, so He does not exist dur- 
ing one period of duration more than another. With Him there 
is no distinction’ between the present, past, and future; but all 
things are equally and always present to Him. With Him dura- 
tion is an eternal now. This is the popular and the Scriptural. 
view of God’s eternity. ‘Before the mountains were Lrought 
forth, or ever thou hadst formed the earth and the world, even 
from everlasting to everlasting thou art God.” (Ps. xc. 2.) “ Of 
old hast thou laid the foundation of the earth: and the heavens are 
the work of thy hands. They shall perish, but thou shalt endure : 
yea, all of them shall wax old like a garment; as a vesture shalt 


thou change them, and they shall be changed: but thou art the 
VOL. I. 25 


\ 


886 PART I.—THEOLOGY = [Cu. V. — Divine Arrripures. 


same, and thy years shall have no end.” (Ps. cii. 25-27.) He is 
“ The high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity.” (Is. lvii. 15.) 
“Tam the first and I am the last; and besides me there is no 
God.” (Is. xliv. 6.) ‘A thousand years in thy sight are but as 
yesterday when it is past.” (Ps. xc. 4.) “One day is with the 
Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day.” 
(2 Pet. iii. 8.) He is “the same yesterday, and to-day, and for- 
ever.” (Heb. xiii. 8.) God is He “ which is [ever is], and which 
was, and which is to come.” (Rev. i. 4.) Throughout the Bible 
He is called the eternal or everlasting God; who only hath im- 
mortality. The primal revelation of Himself to his covenant people 
was as the “J am.” 


What is taught in these and similar passages, is, first, that God _ 


is without beginning of years or end of days. He is, and always 
has been, and always will be; and secondly, that to Him there is 
neither past nor future; that the past and the future are always 
and equally present to Him. 


B. Philosophical View. 


These are Scriptural facts, and necessarily follow from the nature 
of God as self-existent, infinite, and immutable. With these rep- 
resentations the teaching of theologians for the most part agrees. 
Thus Augustine says: ‘‘Fuisse et futurum esse non est in ea [scil. 
vita divina], sed esse solum, quoniam eterna est: nam fuisse et fu- 
turum esse non est zeternum.” 1 “Nec tu tempore tempora pra- 
cedis, alioquin’non omnia tempora preecederes sed preecedis omnia 
preeterita celsitudine semper preesentis zeternitatis ; et superas omnia 
futura, quia illa futura sunt et cum venerint preterita erunt; tu 
autem idem ipse es, et anni tui non deficiunt.’’? Aquinas, to the 
same effect says, ‘‘ Aiternitas est tota simul.’ Or, as the school- 
men generally were accustomed to say, “ In eeternitate est unicum 
instans semper presens et persistens ;” or, as they otherwise ex- 
pressed it, ‘“* Eternitas est interminabilis vite simul et perfecta 
possessio.”” The same view'of this attribute is given by the later 
theologians. Thus Quenstedt says, ‘‘ Aternitas Dei est duratio 
vel permanentia essentie divine interminabilis, sine principio et fine 
earens, et indivisibilis, omnem omnino successionem excludens.” 4 

The only thing open to question in these statements is, the de- 
nial of all succession in the divine consciousness. Our idea of 


1 Confessiones, 1x. x. 24, edit. Benedictines, vol. i. p. 283, c. 


3 Ibid. xi. xiii. 16, p. 338, a. % Summa, I. x. 4, edit. Cologne, 1 16. 
€ Theologia, i. viii. § 1. xvii. ip. 413. ‘ mas 22 


os 


«et OC moe & 


: 


§ 6, B.] ETERNITY. 387 


eternity is arrived at from our idea of time. We are conscious of 
existence in space, and we are conscious of protracted or continu- 
ous existence. The ideas of space and duration are necessarily 
given in the consciousness of continuous existence. We see also that 
events succeed each other, that their occurrence is separated by a 
longer or shorter period of duration, just as bodies are separated by 
a greater or less interval in space. We therefore know, from con- 
sciousness or from experience, of no kind of duration which is not 
successive. Instead of saying, as is commonly done, that time is du- 
ration measured by succession, which supposes that duration is ante- 
cedent to that by which it is measured, and independent of it, it is 
maintained by some that duration without succession is inconceiva- 
ble and impossible. As space is defined to be “ negation betwixt the 
boundary-lines of form,” so time is said to be ‘“‘ the negation betwixt 
the boundary-points of motion.” Or, in other words, time is ‘ the 
interval which a body in motion marks in its transit from one point 
of space toanother.”! Hence, if there be no bodies having form, 
there is no space ; and if there is no motion, there is no time. “If 
all things were annihilated, time as well as space must be annihilated ; 
for time is dependent on space. If all things were annihilated, there 
could be no transition, no succession of one object with respect to 
another ; for there would be no object in being, — all would be 
perfect emptiness, nothingness, non-being-ness. Under an entire 
annihilation, there could be neither space nor time.” ? The same 
writer * elsewhere says, ‘‘ Were the earth, as well as the other 
globes of space, annihilated, much more would time be annihilated 
therewith.” + All this, however, is to be understood, it is said, 
of “objective time, that is, of time as dependent upon created 
material conditions.” As objective timelessness follows from the 
annihilation of material existences, so timelessness as regards 
thinking personalities is conceivable only on the destruction of 
thought. ‘ We have seen that there can be a state of timeless- 
ness for material creation, only by destroying its operation, that is, 
its attribute of motion: precisely in analogy therewith, there can 
be a state of timelessness for intellectual creation, only by destroy- 
ing the laws of intellect, that is, its operation of thinking.” ® If, 
therefore, God be a person, or a thinking Being, He cannot be 


1 Jamieson, p. 199. 2 Ibid. p. 163. 

8 Rey George Jamieson, M. A., one of the ministers of the parish of Old Machar, Aber- 
deen. The Essentials of Philosophy, wherein its constituent Principles are traced throughout 
the various Departments of Science with analytical Strictures on the Views of some of our 
leading Philosophers. 

4 Ibid. p. 200. 5 Ibid. 6 Ibid. 


388 PART I.— THEOLOGY. [Cu. V.— Divine ATTRIBUTES. 


timeless ; there must be succession ; one thought or state must fol- 
low another. To deny this, it is said, is to deny the personality of 
God. The dictum, therefore, of the schoolmen, and of ,the theo- 
logians, that eternity precludes succession — that it is a persistent, 
unmoving Now —is according to this repudiated. 

There are, however, two senses in which succession is denied to 
God. The first has reference to external events. They are ever 
present to the mind of God. He views them in all their relations, 
whether causal or chronological. He sees how they succeed each 
other in time, as we see a passing pageant, all of which we may 
take in in one view. In this there is perhaps nothing which abso- 
lutely transcends our comprehension. The second aspect of the 
subject concerns the relation of succession to the thoughts and acts 


of God. When we are ignorant, it is wise to be silent. We | 


have no right to affirm or deny, when we cannot know what our 
affirmation or denial may involve or imply. We know that God 
is constantly producing new effects, effects which succeed each 
other in time ; but we do not know that these effects are due to 
successive exercises of the divine efficiency. It is, indeed, incom- 
prehensible to us how it should be otherwise. The miracles of 


Christ were due to the immediate exercise of the divine efficiency. ' 


We utter words to which we can attach no meaning, when we say 
that these effects were due, not to a contemporaneous act or voli- 
tion of the divine mind, but to an eternal act, if such a phrase be 
not a solecism. In like manner we are confounded when we are 
told that our prayers are not heard and answered in time — that 
God is timeless — that what He does in hearing and answering 
prayer, and in his daily providence, He does from eternity. It is 
certain that God is subject to all the limitations of personality, if 
there be any. But as such limitations are the conditions of his 
being a person and not a mere involuntary force, they are the con- 
ditions of his infinite perfection. As constant thought and activ- 
ity are involved in the very nature of a spirit, these must belong 
to God; and so far as thinking and acting involve succession, 
succession must belong to God. There are mysteries connected 
with, chronological succession, in our nature, which we cannot 
explain. We know that in dreams months may be compressed 
into moments, and moments extended to months, so far as our con- 


sciousness is concerned. We know that it often happens to those | 


near death, that all the past becomes instantly present. Had God 
so constituted us that memory was as vivid as present conscious- 
ness, there would to us be no past, so far as our personal exist- 


§ 6, B.] ETERNITY. 389 


ence is concerned. It is not impossible that, hereafter, memory 
may become a consciousness of the past; that all we ever thought, 
felt, or did, may be ever present to the mind; that everything writ- 
ten on that tablet is indelible. Persons who, by long residence 
in foreign countries, have entirely lost all knowledge of their na- 
tive language, have been known to speak it fluently, and under- 
stand it perfectly, when they came to die. Still more wonderful is 
the fact that uneducated persons, hearing passages read in an un- 
known language (Greek or Hebrew, for example), have, years 
after, when in an abnormal, nervous state, repeated those passages 
correctly, without understanding their meaning. If unable to com- 
prehend ourselves, we should not pretend to be able to comprehend 
God. Whether we can understand how there can be succession in 
the thoughts of Him who inhabits eternity or not, we are not to 
deny that God is an intelligent Being, that He actually thinks and 
feels, in order to get over the difficulty. God is a person, and all 
that personality implies must be true of Him. 


Modern Philosophical Views. 


The modern philosophy teaches that ‘* Die Ewigkeit ist die Ein- 
heit in dem Unterschiede der Zeitmomente — Ewigkeit und Zeit 
verhalten sich wie die Substanz und deren Accidentien.”! That 
is, Eternity is the unity underlying the successive moments of 
time, as substance is the unity underlying the accidents which 
are its manifestations. Schleiermacher’s illustration is borrowed 
from our consciousness. We are conscious of an abiding, unchang- 
ing self, which is the subject of our ever changing thoughts and 
feelings. By the eternity of God, therefore, is meant nothing 
more than that He is the ground-being of which the universe is 
the ever changing phenomenon. ‘The eternity of God is only one 
phase of his universal causality. ‘“ Unter der Ewigkeit Gottes 
verstehen wir die mit allem Zeitlichen auch die Zeit selbst beding- 
ende schlechthin zeitlose Ursachlichkeit Gottes.” 2 To attain this 
philosophical view of eternity, we must accept the philosophical 
view of the nature of God upon which it is founded, namely, 
that God is merely the designation of that unknown and unknow- 
able something of which all other things are the manifestations. 
To give up the living, personal God of the Bible and of the heart, 
is an awful sacrifice to specious, logical consistency. We believe 
what we cannot understand. We believe what the Bible teaches as 


1 Strauss, Dogmatik, i. p. 561. Z 
2 Chrisiliche Glaube, 1. § 52, Werke, edit. Berlin, 1842, vol. iii. p. 268. 


890 PART I.—THEOLOGY. [Cu V. — Divive ATTRIBUTES, 


facts; that God always is, was, and ever will be, immutably the 
same ; that all things are ever present to his view ; that with Him 
there is neither past nor future ; but nevertheless that He is nota 
stagnant ocean, but ever living, ever thinking, ever acting, and ever 
suiting his action to the exigencies of his creatures, and to the ac- 
complishment of his infinitely wise designs. Whether we can har- 
monize these facts or not, is a matter of minor importance. We are 


constantly called upon to believe that things are, without being able — 


to tell how they are, or even how they can be. 


§ 7. Immutability. 


The immutability of God is intimately connected with his im- 
mensity and eternity, and is frequently included with them in the 
Scriptural statements concerning his nature. Thus, when it is said, 
He is the First and the Last; the Alpha and Omega, the same 
yesterday, to-day, and forever; or when in contrast with the ever 
changing and perishing world, it is said: ‘* They shall be changed, 
but thou art the same ;”’ it is not his eternity more than his immu- 
tability that is brought into view. As an infinite and absolute 
Being, self-existent and absolutely independent, God is exalted 
above all the carses of and even above the possibility of change. 
Infinite space and infinite duration cannot change. They must 
ever be what they are. So God is absolutely immutable in his 
essence and attributes. He can neither increase nor decrease. 
He is subject to no process of development, or of self-evolution. 
His knowledge and power can never be greater or less. He can 
never be wiser or holier, or more righteous or more merciful than 
He ever has been and ever must be. He is no less immutable in 
his plans and purposes. Infinite in wisdom, there can be no error in 
their conception ; infinite in power, there can be no failure in their 
accomplishment. He is “the Father of lights, with whom is no 
variableness, neither shadow of turning.” (James i. 17.) ‘ God is 
not a man that He should lie; neither the son of man that He 


should repent; hath He said and shall He not do it? or hath He 


spoken, and shall He not make it good?” (Num. xxiii. 19.) “I 
am the Lorn, I change not.’ (Mal. iii. 6.) ‘ The counsel of the 
Lorp standeth forever; the thoughts of his heart to all genera- 
tions.” (Ps. xxxiii. 11.) “There are many devices in a man’s 
heart ; nevertheless, the counsel of the Lorp, that shall stand.” 
(Prov. xix. 21.) ‘The Lorp of Hosts hath sworn, saying, Surely 
as I have thought, so shall it come to pass; and as I have purposed, 
so shall it stand.” (Is. xiv. 24.) Iam God, and there is none 


$7] . IMMUTABILITY. 891 


like. me, declaring the end from the beginning, and from ancient 
times the things that are not yet done, saying, My counsel shall 
stand, and I will do all my pleasure.” (Is. xlvi. 9,10.) Those 
passages of Scripture in which God is said to repent, are to be in- 
terpreted on the same principle as those in which He is said to ride 
upon the wings of the:wind, or to walk through the earth. These 
ereate no difficulty. 
Philosophical Statement. 

Theologians, in their attempts to state, in philosophical language, 
the doctrine of the Bible on the unchangeableness of God, are apt 
to confound immutability with immobility. In denying that God 
can change, they seem to deny that He can act. Augustine says, on 
this subject: ‘‘ Non invenies in Deo aliquid mutabilitatis; non 
aliquid, quod aliter nunc sit, aliter paulo ante fuerit. Nam ubi 
invenis aliter et aliter, facta est ibi quedam mors: mors enim est, 
non esse quod fuit.”"! Quenstedt uses language still more open to 
objection, when he says that the immutability of God is “* Perpetua 
essentiz divine et omnium ejus perfectionum identitas, negans 
omnem omnino motum cum physicum, tum ethicum.”? Turrettin 
is more cautious, and yet perhaps goes too far. He says: ‘“ Po- 
testas variandi actus suos, non est principium mutabilitatis in se, 
sed tantum in objectis suis; nisi intelligatur de variatione interno- 
rum suorum actwum, quos voluntas perfecta non variat, sed imper- 
fecta tantum.’”® The clause italicized in the above quotation 
assumes a knowledge of the nature of God to which man has no 
legitimate claim. It is in vain for us to presume to understand the 
Almighty to perfection. We know that God is immutable in his 
being, his perfections, and his purposes; and we know that He is 
perpetually active. And, therefore, activity and immutability 
must be compatible ; and no explanation of the latter inconsistent 
with the former ought to be admitted. 


The Absolute Attributes of God not inconsistent with Personality. 


These attributes of infinity, eternity, and immutability, are freely 
admitted by the modern philosophy to belong to the absolute 
Being. But it is maintained that such a Being cannot be a person. 
Personality implies self-consciousness. Self-consciousness necessa- 
rily implies limitation, a distinction between the self and the not- 
self. Ohne Du kein Ich,—unless there be something objective 


1 In Joannis Evangelium Tractatus, xxiii. 9, edit. Benedictines, vol. iii. p. 1952, b, c. 
2 Theologia, i. viii. § 1. xx. p. 414. 
8 Locus 111. xi. 9, edit. Edinburgh, 1847, vol. i. p. 186. 


892 PART L—THEOLOGY. ([Ca. V.—Divine ATTRIBUTES. 


and independent to which we stand opposed, as subject and object, 
there can be no consciousness of self. But nothing can be thus 
objective and independent in relation to the Absolute ; and, there- 
fore, the Absolute cannot have any consciousness of self, and con- 
sequently cannot be a personal Being. We have already seen 
(chap. iv.) that this objection is founded on an arbitrary definition 
of the Infinite and Absolute. It assumes that the Infinite must be 
all, and that the Absolute must be alone, without relation to any- 
thing out of itself. It is here only necessary to remark, in refer- 
ence to the objection, (1.) That it may be admitted as a fact that 
the slumbering consciousness of self in the human soul is awakened 
and developed by contact with what is not only external to itself 
but also independent of it. But God is not subject to that law. 
He is eternally perfect and immutable; having in Himself the 
plenitude of life. There is, therefore, no analogy between the 
cases, and no ground for inferring in this case that what is true in 
us, who begin life as an undeveloped germ, must be true in relation 
to God. (2.) In the second place, we have no right to assume 
that even with regard to a finite intelligence created in the perfec- 
tion of its being, self-consciousness is dependent on what is inde- 
pendent of itself. Such a being would of necessity be conscious of 


its own thoughts and feelings ; for thought is a state of conscious- 


ness in an intelligent being. If God, therefore, can make an 
intelligent being in the perfection of its limited nature, it would be 
self-conscious even were it left alone in the universe. (38.) Admit- 
ting it to be true that ‘‘ without a Thou there can be no I,” we 
know that, according to the Scriptures and the faith of the Church 
universal, there are in the unity of the Godhead three distinct 
persons, the Father, the Son, and the Spirit; so that from eternity 
the Father can say I, and the Son Thou. 

We must abide by the teachings of Scripture, and refuse to 
subordinate their authority and the intuitive convictions of our 
moral and religious nature to the arbitrary definitions of any philo- 
sophical system. The Bible everywhere teaches that God is an 
absolute Being, in the sense of being self-existent, necessary, inde- 
pendent, immutable, eternal, and without limitation or necessary 


relation to anything out of Himself. It teaches moreover that He 


is infinite ; not in the sense of including all being, all power, all 


knowledge in Himself, to the exclusion of all other intelligent 


agents ; but in the sense that no limit can be assigned to his being 
or perfections, other than that which arises out of his own perfec- 
tion itself. He would cease to be infinite could He be unwise or 


Arm - 
me 


ay 


Wem iia 


= 


. eo 


tee. 


§ 8, A] KNOWLEDGE. 893 


untrue. It is to be remembered that God is infinite and absolute 
as a spirit, and a spirit from its nature is living, active, intelligent, 
self-conscious, and personal. 


§ 8. Knowledge. 


A. Its Nature. 


By knowledge is meant the intellectual apprehension of truth. 
It supposes a subject and object ; an intelligent subject that appre- 
hends, and something true that is apprehended. 

So far as we are concerned, knowledge is either intuitive or dis- 
cursive. Our senses give us immediate knowledge of their appro- 
priate objects; the understanding perceives intuitively primary 
truths; our moral and esthetic nature gives us the immediate 
cognition of things right or wrong, and beautiful or deformed. 
Most of our knowledge, however, is derived ad eatra, by instruction, 
observation, comparison, deduction, ete. In all cases there is the 
distinction between the mind which perceives and the object which 
is perceived. 

Such being the nature of knowledge, can there be knowledge in 
God? Can there be this distinction between subject and object in 
an absolute and infinite Being? Not only are the wicked and the 
worldly disposed to think that God cannot know; that either He 
is too exalted to take cognizance of earthly things; or that it is 
impossible even for an infinite mind to embrace the universe and 
all its perpetual changes in his mental vision; but the possibility 
of knowledge, in the ordinary and proper sense of the word, is 
expressly denied to God by a large class of philosophers, and 
virtually even by many theologians of the highest rank in the 
nistory of the Church. 


The Pantheistic Theory precludes the possibility of Knowledge 
in God. 


1. As, according to the pantheistic theory, the universe is the 
existence form of God, as the infinite comes to intelligent conscious- 
ness and life only in the finite, there is and can be no knowledge 
in the infinite as distinguished from the finite. God lives only so 
far as finite beings live; He thinks and knows only so far as they 
think and know. Omniscience is only the sum or aggregate of 
the intelligence of the transient forms of finite beings. All this, as 
even Hamilton and Mansel admit, necessarily flows from the idea 


of an absolute Being which precludes the possibility uf any such 


894 PART L—THEOLOGY. ([Cu. V.— Divine ATTRIBUTES, 


conditions or relations as are involved in consciousness or intelli- 
gence. Strauss therefore says:? “Not in Himself, but in finite 
intelligences is God omniscient, which together constitute the ful- 
ness or completeness of all the possible forms or degrees of knowl- 
edge.” And Spinoza says:? ‘Intellectus et voluntas, qui Dei 
essentiam constituerent, a nostro intellectu et voluntate toto ceelo 
differe deberent, nec in ulla re, preetterquam in nomine, convenire . 
possent; non aliter scilicet, quam inter se conveniunt canis, signum y 
coeleste, et canis, animal latrans.” This subject was considered in 
the chapter on Pantheism. 


Knowledge and Power not to be confounded. 
2. The possibility of knowledge in God is virtually denied by 


those who deny any distinction between knowledge and power. 
Knowledge, which is power, ceases to be knowledge ; and there- 
fore if omniscience is only a different name for omnipotence, it 
ceases to be a distinct attribute of God. It makes little difference 
whether we expressly deny a given perfection to God, or whether 
we so determine it as to make it mean nothing distinctive. It is 
deeply to be regretted that not only the Fathers, but also the 
Lutheran and Reformed theologians, after renouncing the author- 
ity of the schoolmen, almost immediately yielded themselves to 
their speculations. Instead of determining the nature of the divine 
attributes from the representations of Scripture and from the con- 
stitution of man as the image of God, and from the necessities of 
our moral and religious nature, they allowed themselves to be 
controlled by @ priori speculations as to the nature of the infinite 
and absolute. Even Augustine, as before stated, says: ‘* Nos ista, 
que fecisti videmus, quia sunt: tu autem quia vides ea, sunt.” 8 
And Scotus Erigena says,‘ ‘‘ Voluntas illius et visio et essentia 
unum est.”5 . . . . “ Visio Dei totius universitatis est conditio. 
Non enim aliud est ei videre, aliud facere; sed visio illius voluntas 
ejus est, et voluntas operatio.” Thomas Aquinas also says,® ‘ Deus 
per intellectum suum causat res, cum suum esse sit suum intel- 
ligere. Unde necesse est, quod sua scientia sit causa rerum.” 

The Lutheran and Reformed theologians represent God as sim- 
plicissima simplicitas, admitting of no distinction between faculty 
and act, or between one attribute and another. Thus Gerhard 

1 Dogmatik, i. p. 575. 
2 Kthices, i. xvii. Scholium, edit. Jena, 1803, vol. 1i. p- 53. 


8 Confessiones, X11. Xxxviii. 53, edit. Benedictines, vol. i. p. 410, b. 
4 De Divisione Nature, 11. 17, p. 235. 


5 Ibid. 29, p. 264. 6 Summa, 1. xiv. 8, edit. Cclogne, 1640, p. 36. 


$3, A] | KNOWLEDGE. 896 


says: ‘Deus est ipsum esse subsistens, omnibus modis indetermi- 
natum.”? “Solus Deus summe simplex est, ut nec actus et poten- 
ti, nec esse et essentixe compositio ipsi competat.”? ‘ Essentia, 

- bonitas, potentia, sapientia, justitia, et reliqua attributa omnia sunt 
in Deo realiter unum.’ He also says: “In Deo idem est esse et 
intelligere et velle.” In like manner the Reformed theologian 
Heidegger * says: “* Voluntas ab intellectu non differt, quia intelli- 
gendo vult et volendo intelligit. Intelligere et velle ejus idemque 
perpetuus indivisus actus.” This does not mean simply that in an 
intelligent being, every act of the will is an intelligent act. He 
knows while he wills, and knows what he wills. The meaning is, 
that knowledge and power in God are identical. To know a thing 
is, and to will it, are the same undivided and perpetual act. From 
this it would seem to follow, that as God knows from eternity He 
creates from eternity ; and that ‘all He knows, is.” We are thus 
led, by these speculations, into pantheistical views of the nature 
of God and of his relation to the world. 

This mode of representation is carried still further by the mod- 
ern philosophical theologians. With Schleiermacher, all the attri- 
butes of God are virtually merged into the idea of causality. With 
him God is ens summum prima causa.5 He says that God’s think- 
ing and willing are the same, and that his omnipotence and om- 
niscience are identical. When we say that He is omnipotent, we 
only mean that He is the cause of all that is. And when we say 
that He is omniscient, we only mean that He is an intelligent 
cause. His power and knowledge are limited to the actual. The 
possible is nothing; it is the object neither of knowledge nor of 
power. + “ Gott,” says Schleiermacher, ‘‘ weiss Alles was ist; und 
Alles ist, was Gott weiss und dieses beides ist nicht zweierlei son- 
dern einerlei, weil sein Wissen und sein allmichtiges Wollen eines 
und dasselbe ist,”’ 7. e., God knows all that is, and all is that God 
knows. God, therefore, is limited to the world, which is the phe- 
nomenon of which He is the substance. 

Another philosophical view of this subject, adopted even by 
those who repudiate the pantheistic system and maintain that God 
and the world are distinct, is, that as God is immanent in the 
world, there is in Him no difference between self-consciousness and 
world-consciousness, as they express it, 7. e., between God’s knowl- 
edge of Himself and his knowledge of the world. They therefore 


1 Tom. i. loc. iii. cap. vi. § 48, p. 106, edit. Tiibingen, 1762. 

2 Ibid. cap. x. § 80, p. 119. 8 Jbid. chap. vii. § 47, p. 108. 
4 Corpus Theologie Christiane, Tiguri, 1732. 

5 Christliche Glaube, i. § 55, Werke, edit. Berlin. 1842, vol. iii. p. 295. 


7 


896 PART I.—THEOLOGY. (Cu. V. —Drvine ArTRipures. 


define omniscience by saying, ‘‘ Insofern Gott gedacht wird als die 
Welt mit seinem Bewusstseyn umfassend, nennen wir ihn den 
Allwissenden.” 1 That is, ‘So far as we conceive of God as em- 
bracing the world in his consciousness, we call him omniscient.” 
Whatever such language may mean to those who use it, to the 
ordinary mind it conveys the revolting idea that all the sins of men 
enter into the consciousness of God. 


The Doctrine of the Scriptures on this Subject. 


The Scriptural view of this subject, which distinguishes the at- 
tributes in God as distinct, and assumes that knowledge in Him, in 
its essential nature, is what knowledge is in us, does not conflict 
with the unity and simplicity of God as a spiritual being. There 
is a sense in which knowledge and power, intellect and will, may 
be said to be identical in man. They are not different substances. 
They are different modes in which the life or activity of the soul 
-manifests itself. So in God when we conceive of Him as a spirit, 
we do not think of Him as a compound being, but as manifesting 
his infinite life and activity, in knowing, willing, and doing. What, 
therefore, we must hold fast to, if we would hold fast to God, is, 
that knowledge in God is knowledge, and not power or eternity ; 
that it is what knowledge is in us, not indeed in its modes and ob- 
jects, but in its essential nature. We must remove from our con- 
ceptions of the divine attributes all the limitations and imperfections 
which belong to the corresponding attributes in us; but we are not 
to destroy their nature. And in determining what is, and what is 
not, consistent with the nature of God as an infinitely perfect 
being, we are to be controlled by the teachings of the Scriptures, 
and by the necessities (or laws) of our moral and religious nature, 
and not by our speculative notions of the Infinite and Absolute. 
God, therefore, does and can know in the ordinary and proper 
sense of that word. He is an ever present eye, to which all things 
are perfectly revealed. ‘All things,” says the Apostle, “are 
naked and opened unto the eyes of Him with whom we have to 
do.” (Heb. iv. 18.) “The darkness and the light are both alike ” 
to Him. (Ps. cxxxix. 12.) “He that planted the ear, shall he 
not hear? He that formed the eye, shall he not see?” (Ps. xciv. 
9.) ‘O Lord thou hast searched me, and known me. Thou 
knowest my down-sitting and my up-rising, thou understandest 
my thought afar off.’ (Ps. cxxxix. 1,2.) ‘The eyes of the 
Lorp are in every place, beholding the evil and the good.” 

1 Bruch, Die Lehre von den géttlichen Rigenschafien, p. 162. 


§ 8, B] KNOWLEDGE. BOT 4 


(Proy. xv. 8.) ‘Hell and destruction are before the Lord: how 
much more then the hearts of the children of men?” (Prov. xv. 
11.) ‘Great is our Lord and of great power: his understanding 
ig infinite.” (Ps. cxlvii. 5.) ‘“O house of Israel, - . . . I 
know the things that come into your mind, every one of them.” 
(Ezek. xi. 5.) “ Known unto God are all his works from the be- 
ginning of the world.” (Acts. xv. 18.) ‘The very hairs of 
your head are all numbered.” (Matt. x. 30.) 

This knowledge of God is not only all-comprehending, but it is 
intuitive and immutable. He knows all things as they are, being 
as being, phenomena as phenomena, the possible as possible, the 
actual as actual, the necessary as necessary, the free as free, the 
past as past, the present as present, the future as future. Although 
all things are ever present in his view, yet He sees them as suc- 
cessive in time. The vast procession of events, thoughts, feelings, 
and acts, stands open to his view. 

This infinite knowledge of God is not only clearly and constantly 
asserted in Scripture, but is also obviously included in the idea of 
an absolutely perfect being. Such a being cannot be ignorant of 
anything; his knowledge can neither be increased nor diminished. 
The omniscience of God follows also from his omnipresence. As 
God fills heaven and earth, all things are transacted in his presence. 
He knows our thoughts far better than they are known to our- 
selves. This plenitude of divine knowledge is taken for granted 
in all acts of worship. We pray to a God who, we believe, knows 
our state and wants, who hears what we say, and who is able to 
meet all our necessities. Unless God were thus omniscient, He 
could not judge the world in righteousness. Faith in this attri- 
bute in its integrity is, therefore, essential even to natural religion. 


B. The Objects of Divine Knowledge. 


Various distinctions are made by theologians as to the objects of 
the divine knowledge. 

1. God is said to know Himself and all things out of Himself. 
This is the foundation of the distinction between the scetentia neces- 
saria and the seientia libera. God knows Himself by the necessity 
of his nature; but as everything out of Himself depends for its 
existence or occurrence upon his will, his knowledge of each thing 
as an actual occurrence is suspended on his will, and in that sense 
is free. Creation not being necessary, it depended on the will of 
God whether the universe as an object of knowledge should exist 
or not. This distinction is not of much importance. And it is 


398 PART J.— THEOLOGY.  [Cua. V.— Divine ATTRIBUTES 


liable to the objection that it makes the knowledge of God depend- 
ent. Being the cause of all things, God knows everything by 
knowing Himself; all things possible, by the knowledge of his 
power, and all things actual, by the knowledge of his own purposes. 
2. This distinction between the possible and actual, is the foun- 
dation of the distinction between the knowledge of simple intelli- 
gence and the knowledge of vision. The former is founded on 
God’s power, and the latter upon his will. This only means that, 
in virtue of his oniniscient intelligence, He knows whatever infinite 
power can effect ; and that from the consciousness of his own pur- 
poses, He knows what He has determined to effect or to permit to 
occur. ‘This is a distinction which the modern philosophical theo- 
logians ignore. Nothing, according to their philosophy is possible, 
but the actual. All that can be, either is, or is to be. This follows 
. from the idea of God as mere cause. He produces all that can be 5 
and there is in Him no causality for what does not exist. 


The Actual and the Possible. 


It seems to be an inconsistency in those orthodox theologians 
who deny the distinction in God between knowledge and power, 
to admit, as they all do, the distinction between the actual and 
possible. For if God creates by thinking or knowing, if in Him, 
as they say, intelligere et facere idem est, then all He knows must 
be, and must be as soon as He knows or thinks it, 7. e., from eter- 
nity. If, however, we retain the Scriptural idea of God as a spirit, 
who can do more than He does; if we ascribe to Him what we 
know to be a perfection in ourselves, namely, that our power 
exceeds our acts, that a faculty and the exercise of that faculty are 
not identical, then we can understand how God can know the pos- 
sible as well as the actual. God is not limited to the universe, which 
of necessity is finite. God has not exhausted Himself in determin- 
ing to cause the present order of things to be. 


C. Scientia Media. 


Intermediate between things possible and actual, some theolo- 
gians assume a third class of events, namely, the conditionally fu- 
ture. They do not actually occur, but they would occur provided 
something else should occur. ‘Had Christ come a thousand years 
sooner than the date of his actual advent, the whole history of the 
world would have been different. This is a popular mode of re- 
garding the concatenation of events. It is constantly said, that if 
Cromwell had been permitted to leave England ; or, if Napoleon 


§8,C.) | KNOWLEDGE. 899 


had failed to escape from Elba, the state of Europe would have 
been very different from what it is at present. God, it is assumed, 
knows what would have been the sequence of events on any or 
every possible hypothesis. It is therefore said that there must be 
in God, besides the knowledge of simple intelligence by which He 
knows the possible, and the knowledge of vision by which He 
knows the actual, a scientia media, by which He knows the con- 
ditionally future. Illustrations of this form of knowledge, it is 
thought, are found in Scripture. In 1 Samuel xxiii. 11, it is said 
that David inguired of the Lord whether the men of Keilah would 
deliver him, should he remain among them, into the hands of Saul ; 
and was answered that they would. Here, it is argued, the event 
was not merely possible, but conditionally certain. If David 
remained in Keilah, he certainly would have been delivered up. 
Thus our Lord said, that if his mighty works had been done in 
Tyre and Sidon, the people of those cities would have repented. 
Here again is declared what would have happened, if something 
else had happened. 


The Origin of this Distinction. 


This distirtction was introduced into theology by the Jesuit the- 
ologians Fonseca and Molina ; by the latter in his work ‘* De Con- 
cordia Providentie et Gratie Divine cum Libero Arbitrio Hom- 
inis.” Their object was to reconcile the foreordination of God 
with the freedom of man, and to explain the reason why some, and 
not others, were elected to eternal life. God foresaw who would 
repent and believe, if they received the knowledge of the Gospel 
and the gift of the Spirit, and these He elected to salvation. This 
theory of a scientia media was, for a like purpose, adopted by the 
Lutheran and Remonstrant theologians, but was strenuously op- 
posed by the Reformed or Augustinians. (1.) Because all events 
are included under the categories of the actual and possible; and, 
therefore, there is no room for such a class as events conditionally 
future. It is only possible, and not certain, how men would act 
under certain conditions, if their conduct be not predetermined, 
either by the purpose of God, or by their own decision already 
formed. Besides, it is the fundamental principle of the theclo- 
gians who adopt this theory, or at least of many of them, that a 
free act must from its nature be uncertain as to its occurrence. A 
free agent, it is said, can always act contrary to any amount of in- 
fluence brought to bear upon him, consistent with his free agency. 
But if free acts must be uncertain, they cannot be foreseen as cer~ 


400 PART I.—THEOLOGY. [Ca. V.— Divine ArrRripores. 


tain under any conditions. (2.) The futurition of events, accord- 
ing to the Scriptures, depends on the foreordination of God, whe 
foreordains whatever comes to pass. There is no certainty, there- 
fore, which does not depend on the divine purpose. (8.) The 


kind of knowledge which this theory supposes cannot belong to_ 


God, because it is inferential. It is deduced from a consideration 
of second causes and their influence, and therefore is inconsistent 
with the perfection of God, whose knowledge is not discursive, but 
independent and intuitive. (4.) This theory is inconsistent with 


the Scriptural doctrine of God’s providential government, as it as- ” 


sumes that the free acts of men are not under his control. (6.) 
It is contrary to the Scriptural doctrine, inasmuch as it supposes 
that election to salvation depends on the foresight of faith and 
repentance, whereas it depends on the good pleasure of God. 
(6.) The examples quoted from the Bible do not prove that there 
is a scientia media in God. The answer of God to David, about 
the men of Keilah, was simply a revelation of the purpose which 
they had already formed. Our Lord’s declaration concerning Tyre 
and Sidon was only a figurative mode of stating the fact that the 
men of his generation were more hardened than the inhabitants of 
those ancient cities. It is not denied that God knows’all events in 
all possible combinations and connections, but as nothing is certain 
but what He ordains to effect or permit, there can be no class of 
events conditionally future, and therefore there can be no sczentia 
media. By conditionally future is meant what is suspended on a 
condition undetermined by God. 


D. Foreknowledge. 


Among the objects of the divine knowledge are the free acts of 
men. The Scriptures abundantly teach that such acts are fore- 
known. Such knowledge is involved in the prediction of events 
which either concern the free acts of men, or are dependent on 
them. If God be ignorant of how free agents will act, his knowl- 
edge must be limited, and it must be constantly increasing, which 
is altogether inconsistent with the true idea of his nature. His 
government of the world also, in that case, must be precarious, 
dependent, as it would then be on the unforeseen conduct of men. 
The Church, therefore, in obedience to the Scriptures, has, almost 
with one voice, professed faith in God’s foreknowledge of the free 
acts of his creatures. 

The Socinians, however, and some of the Remonstrants, unable 
to reconcile this foreknowledge with human liberty, deny that free 


( 


§ 8, E.) KNOWLEDGE. 401 


acts can be foreknown. As the omnipotence of God is his abil- 
ity to do whatever is possible, so his omniscience is his knowledge 
of everything knowable. But as free acts are in their nature 
uncertain, as they may or may not be, they cannot be known be- 
fore they occur. Such is the argument of Socinus. This whole 
difficulty arises out of the assumption that contingency is essential 
to free agency. If an act may be certain as to its occurrence, and 
yet free as to the mode of its occurrence, the difficulty vanishes. 
That free acts may be absolutely certain, is plain, because they have 
in a multitude of cases been predicted. It was certain that the acts 
of Christ would be holy, yet they were free. The continued holi- 
ness of the saints in heaven is certain, and yet they are perfectly 
free. The foreknowledge of God is inconsistent with a false theory 
of free agency, but not with the true doctrine on that subject. 

After Augustine, the common way of meeting the difficulty of 
reconciling foreknowledge with liberty, was to represent it as 
merely subjective. The distinction between knowledge and fore- 
knowledge is only in us. There is no such difference in God. 
* Quid est prescientia,”’ asks Augustine, “ nisi scientia futurorum ? 
Quid autem futurum est Deo, qui omnia supergreditur tempora ? 
Si enim scientia Dei res ipsas habet, non sunt ei future, sed pree- 
sentes, ac per hoc non jam prescientia, sed tantum scientia dici 
potest.” } 

E. The Wisdom of God. 

Wisdom and knowledge are intimately related. The former is 
manifested in the selection of proper ends, and of proper means for 
the accomplishment of those ends. As there is abundant evidence 
of design in the works of nature, so all the works of God declare 
‘his wisdom. They show, from the most minute to the greatest, 
the most wonderful adaptation of means to accomplish the high end 
of the good of his creatures and the manifestation of his own glory. 
So also, in the whole course of history, we see evidence of the 
controlling power of God making all things work together for the 
best interests of his people, and the promotion of his kingdom upon 
earth. It is, however, in the work of redemption that this divine 
attribute is specially revealed. It is by the Church, that God has 
determined to manifest, through all ages, to principalities and pow- 
ers, his manifold wisdom. 

Of course those. who deny final causes deny that there is any 
such attribute as wisdom in God. It is also said that the use of 

1 De Diversis Questionibus ad Simplicianum, U1. ii. 2, edit. Benedictines, vol. vi. p. 195, a. 


Compare also what he says on this subject, De Civitate Dei, x1. xxi.; Ibid. vol. vii. p. 461. 
VOL. I. 26 


402 PART L—THEOLOGY.  [Cu. V. — Divine Arrrrsures. 


means to attain an end is a manifestation of weakness. It is further 
urged that it is derogatory to God, as it supposes that He needs or 
desires what He does not possess. Even Schleiermacher says: 
“Bei Gott is Allwissenheit und Weisheit so ganzlich einerlei, dass 
die Unterscheidung keinen Werth hat, die Weisheit ware nichts 
als auch wider absolute Lebendigkeit der Allmacht, also Alwissen- 
heit.””. Wisdom is omniscience, omniscience is omnipotence, omnip- 
otence is simply causality of all that is. Thus God sinks into the 
mere cause or ground of all things. It is not thus the Scriptures 
speak. We are called on to worship, ‘‘ The only wise God.” 
**OQ Lorp, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom hast Thou 
made them all,” is the devout exclamation of the Psalmist. (Ps. 
civ. 24.) And in contemplation of the work of redemption the 
Apostle exclaims, “*O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom 
and knowledge of God!”’ (Rom. xi. 33.) 


§ 9. The Will of God. 
A. The Meaning of the Term. 


If God is a spirit He must possess all the essential attributes of 
a spirit. Those attributes, according to the classification adopted 
by the older philosophers and theologians, fall under the heads of 
intelligence and will. To the former, are referred knowledge and 
wisdom ; to the latter, the power of self-determination, efficiency 
Cin the case of God, omnipotence), and all moral attributes. In 
this wide sense of the word, the will of God includes: (1.) The 
will in the narrow sense of the word. (2.) His power. (38.) His 
love and all his moral perfections. In our day, generally but not 
always, the word “ will”’ is limited to the faculty of self-determi- 
nation. And even the older theologians in treating of the will of 


God treat only of his decrees or purposes. In their definitions, : 


however, they take the word in its wide sense. Thus Calovius! 
says, ‘‘ Voluntas Dei est, qua Deus tendit in bonum ab intellectu 
cognitum.” And Quenstedt defines it as ‘ipsa Dei essentia cum 
connotatione inclinationis ad bonum concepta.”2 Turrettin says, 
the object of the intellect is the true; the object of the will, the 
good. Hence it is said, that God wills Himself necessarily, and 
all things out of Himself freely. Although the word seems to be 
taken in different senses in the same sentence, God’s willing Him- 
self means that He takes complacency in his own infinite excel- 
‘ence ; his willing things out of Himself, means his purpose that 


1 Systema Locorum Theologicorum, tom. ii. cap. 9; Wittenberg, 1655, p. 439. 
2 Theologia, i. viii. § 1, xxvii. p, 418. 


Ayashi fg’ 


- 


§ 9, B, C.] THE WILL OF GOD. 403 


they should exist. Although the theologians start with the wide 
definition of the word, yet in the prosecution of the subject they 
regard the will as simply the faculty of self-determination, and the 
determinations themselves. That is, the power to will, and voli- 
tions or purposes. It is altogether better to confine the word to 
this its proper meaning, and not make it include all the forms of 
feeling involving approbation or delight. 

God then as a spirit is a voluntary agent. We are authorized 
to ascribe to Him the power of self-determination. This the Bible 
everywhere does. From the beginning to the end, it speaks of 
the will of God, of his decrees, purposes, counsels, and commands. 
The will is not only an essential attribute of our spiritual being, 
but it is the necessary condition of our personality. Without the 
power of rational self-determination we should be as much a mere 
force as electricity, or magnetism, or the principle of vegetable life. 
It is, therefore, to degrade God below the sphere of being which 
we ourselves occupy, as rational creatures, to deny to Him the 
power of self-determination ; of acting or not acting, according to 
his own good pleasure. 


B. The Freedom of the Divine Will. 


The will of God is free in the highest sense of the word. An 
agent is said to be free, (1.) When he is at liberty to act or not to 
act, according to his good pleasure. This is liberty in acting. 
(2.) He is free as to his volitions, when they are determined by 
his own sense of what is wise, right, or desirable. 

Freedom is more than spontaneity. The affections are sponta- 
neous, but are not free. Loving and hating, delighting in and 
abhorring, do not depend upon the will. 

God is free in acting, as in creating and preserving, because 
these acts do not arise from the necessity of his nature. He was 
free to create or not create ; to continue the universe in existence 
or to cause it to cease to be. He is free also in keeping his prom- 
ises, because his purpose so to do is determined by his own infinite 
goodness. It is indeed inconceivable that God should violate his 
word. But this only proves that moral certainty may be as inex- 
orable as necessity. 


C. The Decretive and Preceptive Will of Grod. 


The decretive will of God concerns his purposes, and relates to 
the futurition of events. The preceptive will relates to the rule of 
duty for his rational creatures. He decrees whatever he purposes to 


404 PART L—THEOLOGY. [Cu. V.— Divine ATTRIBUTES. 


effect or to permit. He prescribes, according to his own will, what 


his creatures should do, or abstain from doing. The decretive and 


preceptive will of God can never be in conflict. God never decrees: 


to do, or to cause others to do, what He forbids. He may, as we 


see He does, decree to permit what He forbids. He permits men 


to sin, although sin is forbidden. This is more scholastically 
expressed by the theologians by saying, A positive decretive will 
cannot consist with a negative preceptive will; 7. e., God cannot 
decree to make men sin. But a negative decretive will may con- 
sist with an affirmative preceptive will; e. g.. God may command 
men to repent and believe, and yet, for wise reasons, abstain from 
giving them repentance. 

The distinction between voluntas beneplaciti et signi, as those 
terms are commonly used, is the same as that between the decre- 
tive and preceptive will of God. The one referring to his decrees, 
founded on his good pleasure ; the other to his commands, founded 
on what He approves or disapproves. 

By the secret will of God, is meant his purposes, as still hidden 
in his own mind; by his revealed will, his precepts and his pur- 
poses, as far as they are made known to his creatures. 


D. Antecedent and Consequent Will. 


These terms, as used by Augustinians, have reference to the 
relation of the decrees to each other. In the order of nature the 
end precedes the means, and the purpose of the former is antece- 
dent to the purpose of the latter. Thus it is said, that God by 
an antecedent will, determined on the manifestation of his glory ; 
and by a consequent will, determined on the creation of the world 
as a means to that end. 

By Lutherans and Remonstrants these terms are used in a 
very different sense. According to their views, God by an ante- 
cedent will determined to save all men; but, foreseeing that all 
would not repent and believe, by a subsequent will He determined 
to save those who he foresaw would believe. That is, He first 
purposed one thing and then another. 


K. Absolute and Conditional Will. 


These terms, when employed by Augustinians, have reference not 
so much to the purposes of God, us to the events which are decreed. 
The event, but not the purpose of God, is conditional. A man 
reaps, if he sows. He is saved, if he believes. His reaping and 
salvation are conditional events. But the purpose of God is abso- 


-_ 


$9, F.] THE WILL OF GOD. 405 


lute. If He purposes that a man shall reap, He purposes that he 
shall sow ; if He purposes that he shall be saved, He purposes that 
he shall believe. Anti-Augustinians, on the other hand, regard 
the purposes of God as conditional. He purposes the salvation of 
a man, if he believes. But whether he believes or not, is left 
undetermined ; so that the purpose of God is suspended on a con- 
dition not under his control, or, at least, undecided. A father may 
purpose to give an estate to his son, if he be obedient; but whether 
the son will fulfil the condition is undetermined, and therefore the 
purpose of the father is undecided. It is, however, manifestly 
inconsistent with the perfection of God, that He should first will 
one thing and then another; nor can his purposes be dependent 
on the uncertainty of human conduct or events. These are ques- 
tions, however, which belong to the consideration of the doctrine 
of decrees. They are mentioned here because these distinctions 
occur in all discussions concerning the Divine Will, with which the 
student of theology should be familiar. 

In this place it is sufficient to remark, that the Greek word 
GA, and the corresponding English verb, to will, sometimes ex- 
press feeling, and sometimes a purpose. Thus in Matt. xxvii. 48, 
the words <i @éAc airév are correctly rendered, “if he delight in 
him.” Comp. Ps. xxii. 8. It is in this sense the word is used, 
when it is said that God wills all men to be saved. He cannot be 
said to purpose or determine upon any event which is not to come 
to pass. A judge may will the happiness of a man whom he sen- 
tences to death. He may will him not to suffer when he wills him 
to suffer. The infelicity in such forms of expression is that the 
word “will” is used in different senses. In one part of the sentence 
it means desire, and in the other purpose. It is perfectly consist- 
ent, therefore, that God, as a benevolent Being, should desire the 
happiness of all men, while he purposes to save only his own 


people. 


F. The Will of God as the Ground of Moral Obligation. 


The question on this subject is, Whether things are right or 
wrong, simply because God commands or forbids them? Or, does 
He command or forbid them, because they are right or wrong for 
some other reason than his will? According to some, the only 
reason that a thing is right, and therefore obligatory, is, that it tends 
to promote the greatest happiness, or the greatest good of the 
universe. According to others, a thing is right which tends to 
promote our own happiness ; and for that reason, and for that rea- 


406 PART I.—THEOLOGY. (Cu. V.— Divine ATTRIBUTES. 


son alone, it is obligatory. If vice would make us happier than 
virtue, we should be bound to be vicious. It is a more decorous 
mode of expressing substantially the same theory, to say that the 
ground of moral obligation is a regard to the dignity of our own 
nature. It makes little difference whether it be our own dignity, 
or our own happiness, which we are bound to regard. It is self, 
in either case, to whom our whole allegiance is due. Others, 
again, place the ground of moral obligation in the fitness of things, 
which they exalt above God. There is, they affirm, an eternal and 
necessary difference between right and wrong, to which God, it is 
said, is as much bound to be conformed as are his rational 
creatures. 

The common doctrine of Christians on this subject is, that the 
will of God is the ultimate ground of moral obligation to all rational 
creatures. No higher reason can be assigned why anything is 
right than that God commands it. This means, (1.) That the 
divine will is the only rule for deciding what is right and what is 
wrong. (2.) That his will is that which binds us, or that to 
which we are bound to be conformed. By the word “ will” is not 
meant any arbitrary purpose, so that it were conceivable that God 
should will right to be wrong, or wrong right. The will of God is 
the expression or revelation of his nature, or is determined by it; 
so that his will, as revealed, makes known to us what infinite wis- 
dom and goodness demand. Sometimes things are right simply 
because God has commanded them; as circumcision, and other 
ritual institutions were to the Jews. Other things are right be- 
cause of the present constitution of things which God has ordained ; 
such as the duties relating to property, and the permanent relations 
of society. Others, again, are right because they are demanded 
by the immutable excellence of God. In all cases, however, so far 
as we are concerned, it is his will.that binds us, and constitutes the 
difference between right and wrong ; his will, that is, as the ex- 
pression of his infinite perfection. So that the ultimate foundation 
of moral obligation is the nature of God. 


§ 10. The Power of God. 
A. The Nature of Power, or, The Origin of the Idea. 


We get the idea of power from our own consciousness. That 
is, we are conscious of the ability of producing effects. Power in 
man is confined within very narrow limits. We can change the 
current of our thoughts, or fix our attention on a particular object, 


- 


§ 10, Bl THE POWER OF GOD. 407 


and we can move the voluntary muscles of our body. Beyond this 
our direct power does not extend. - It is from this small measure 
of efficiency that all the stores of human knowledge and all the 
wonders of human art are derived. It is only our thoughts, voli- 
tions, and purposes, together with certain acts of the body, that are 
immediately subject to the will. For all other effects we must 
avail ourselves of the use of means. We cannot will a book, a 
picture, or a house into existence. The production of such effects 
requires protracted labor and the use of diverse appliances. 


B. Omnipotence. 


It is by removing all the limitations of power, as it exists in us, 
that we rise to the idea of the omnipotence of God. We do not 
thus, however, lose the idea itself. Almighty power does not cease 
to be power. We can do very little. God can do whatever He 
wills. We, beyond very narrow limits, must use means to accom- 
plish our ends. With God means are unnecessary. He wills, and 
it is done. He said, Let there be light ; and there was light. He, 
by a volition created the heavens and the earth. At the volition 
of Christ, the winds ceased, and there was a great calm. By an 
act of the will He healed the sick, opened the eyes of the blind, 
and raised the dead. This simple idea of the omnipotence of God, 
that He can do without effort, and by a volition, whatever He 
wills, is the highest conceivable idea of power, and is that which 
is clearly presented in the Scriptures. In Gen. xvii. 1, it is said, 
“Tam the Almighty God.” The prophet Jeremiah exclaims, 
* Ah Lord God! behold thou hast made the heavens and the earth 
by thy great power, and stretched out arm; and there is nothing 
too hard for thee.” (Jer. xxxii. 17.) God is said to have created 
all things by the breath of his mouth, and to uphold the universe 
by a word. Our Lord says, “ With God all things are possible.” 
(Matt. xix. 26.) The Psalmist long before had said, “« Our God 
is in the heavens; He hath done whatsoever He pleased.” (Ps. 
exy. 3.) And again, ‘“‘ Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did He 
in heaven, and in earth, in the seas, and all deep places.” (Ps. 
vuxxxv. 6.) The Lord God omnipotent reigneth, and doeth his 
pleasure among the armies of heaven and the inhabitants of the 
earth, is the tribute of adoration which the Scriptures everywhere 
render unto God, and the truth which they everywhere present as 
the ground of confidence to his people. This is all we know, and 
all we need to know on this subject ; and here we might rest satis- 
fied, were it not for the vain attempts of theologians to reconcile 


408 PART I.—THEOLOGY. = [Cu. V.— Divine ArrripurEs. 


these simple and sublime truths of the Bible with their philosophi- 
cal speculations. 


C. The Negation of Power. 


The sensuous school of philosophers deny that there is any real 
efficiency or power in existence. Their principle is, that all knowl- 
edge is derived from the senses ; and consequently, that, as we can- 
not know anything of which the senses do not take cognizance, it is 
unphilosophical or unreasonable to admit the existence of anything ~ 
else. Our senses, however, do not take cognizance of efficiency. 
It cannot be felt, or seen, or heard, or tasted. Therefore it does 
not exist. A cause is not that to which an effect is due, but simply 
that which uniformly precedes it. All we can know, and all we 
can rationally believe, is the facts which affect our senses, and the 
order of their sequence ; which order, being uniform and necessary, 
has the character of law. This is the doctrine of causation pro- 
posed by Hume, Kant, Brown, Mill, and virtually by Sir Wiliam 
Hamilton ; and it is this principle which lies at the foundation of 
the Positive Philosophy of Comte. Of course, if there be no such 
thing as power, there is no such attribute in God as omnipotence. 

_ It is sufficient to say,in this connection, in reference to this 
theory, 1.) That it is contrary to every man’s consciousness. We 
are conscious of power, 7. e., of the ability to produce effects. And 
consciousness has the same authority, to say the least, when it con- 
cerns what is within, as when it concerns what affects the senses. 
We are not more certain that our hand moves, than we are that 
we have the power to move, or not to move it, at pleasure. 
(2.) This theory contradicts the intuitive and indestructible con- 
victions of the human mind. No man believes, or can believe 
really and permanently, that any change or effect can occur with- 
out an efficient cause. The fact*that one event follows another, is 
not the ultimate fact. It is intuitively certain that there must be 
an adequate reason for that sequence. Such is the universal judg- 
ment of mankind. (8.) The argument, if valid against the re- — 
ality of power, is valid against the existence of substance, of mind, 
and of God. This is admitted by the consistent advocates of the 
principle in question. Substance, mind, and God, are as little 
under the cognizance of the senses as power; and, therefore, if 
nothing is to be admitted but on the testimony of the senses, the 
existence of substance, mind, and God, must be denied. This prin- 
ciple, therefore, cannot be admitted without doing violence to out 
whole rational, moral, and religious nature. In other words, it 


$10, D.] THE POWER OF GOD. 409 


cannot be admitted at all; for men cannot, permanently, either be- 
lieve or act contrary to the laws of their nature. 


D. Absolute Power. 


By absolute power, as understood by the schoolmen and some of 
the later philosophers, is meant power free from all the restraints 
of reason and morality. According to this doctrine, contradictions, 
absurdities, and immoralities, are all within the compass of the di- 
vine power. Nay, it is said that God can annihilate Himself. On 
this subject Des Cartes says, Deus “non voluit tres angulos trian- 
guli equales esse duobus rectis, quia cognovit aliter fieri non posse. 
Sed contra . . . . quia voluit tres angulos trianguli necessario 
eequales esse duobus rectis, idcireo jam hoc verum est, et fieri ali- 
ter non potest, atque ita de reliquis.” + This ‘summa indifferen- 
tia,” he says, ‘‘in Deo, summum est ejus omnipotentiz argumen- 
tum.” 2 

It is, however, involved in the very idea of power, that it has 
reference to the production of possible effects. It is no more a 
limitation of power that it cannot effect the impossible, than it is of 
reason that it cannot comprehend the absurd, or of infinite goodness 
that it cannot do wrong. It is contrary to its nature. Instead of 
exalting, it degrades God, to suppose that He can be other than 
He is, or that He can act contrary to infinite wisdom and love. 
When, therefore, it is said that God is omnipotent because He can 
do whatever He wills, it is to be remembered that his will is deter- 


-mined by his nature. It is certainly no limitation to perfection to 


say that it cannot be imperfect. 

In this view of the omnipotence of God, the great body of the 
theologians, especially among the Reformed, agree. Thus Zwin- 
gle says : ‘Summa potentia non est nisi omnia possit, quantum ad 
legitimum posse attinet : nam malum facere aut se ipsum deponere 
aut in se converti hostiliter aut sibi ipsi contrarium esse posse im- 
potentia est, non potentia.” Musculus,* ‘ Deus omnipotens, quia 
potest que vult, queeque ejus veritati, justitiz conveniunt.” Keck- 
ermann,® ‘Absolute possibilia sunt, que nec Dei nature, nec alia- 
rum rerum extra Deum essentie contradicunt.” This scholastic 
doctrine of absolute power Calvin ® stigmatizes as profane, “ quod 
» . +. merito detestabile nobis esse debet.” 


1 Meditationes. Responsiones Sexte, vi. edit. Amsterdam, 1685, p. 160. 2 bid. p 16L 
8 De Providentia Dei, Epilogus. Opera, edit. Turici, 1841, vol. iv. p. 188, 
4 See Loci Communes T'heologici, edit. Basle, 1573, pp. 402-408. 
5 Systema Theologia, lib. 1. cap. v. 4; edit. Hanovie, 1603, p. 107. 
Institutio, 11. xxiii. 2, edit. Berlin, 1834, part ii. p. 148. 


410 PART I.— THEOLOGY.  [Cu. V.—Drvixz ATTRIBUTES. 


Potentia Absoluta and Potentia Ordinata. 

There is a sense of the terms in which absolute power is gen- 
erally recognized among theologians. A distinction is commonly 
made between the potentia absoluta and the potentia ordinata of 
God. By the latter is meant the efficiency of God, as exercised 
uniformly in the ordered operation of second causes ; by the former, 
his efficiency, as exercised without the intervention of second 
causes. Creation, miracles, immediate revelation, inspiration, and 
regeneration, are, to be referred to the potentia absoluta of God; 
all his works of providence to his potentia ordinata. This distinc- 
tion is important, as it draws the line between the natural and su- 
pernatural, between what is due to the operation of natural causes, 
sustained and guided by the providential efficiency of God, and 
what is due to the immediate exercise of his power. ‘This distinc- 
tion, indeed, is rejected by the modern philosophy. God in cre- 
ating and sustaining the world, does it as a whole. Nothing is iso- 
lated. There is no individual act, but only a general efficiency on 
the part of God; and, consequently, no particular event can be 
referred to his absolute power or immediate agency. Everything 
is natural. There can be no miracle, and no special providence. 


. 
; 
; 


E. Confounding Will and Power. 


Another perversion of the Scriptural doctrine on this subject is, 
that which denies any distinction between will and power, or fac- 
ulty and act, in God. It is said that it is unphilosophical to say 
that God can do anything. We use the word ‘‘can” only in 
reference to difficulty to be overcome. When nothing stands in 
the way, when all opposition is precluded, then we no longer say, 
we can. It is, therefore, inconsistent with the nature of an abso- 
lute Being to say that He is able to do this or that.2_ It is further 
denied that willing can be ascribed to God, if any difference be 
assumed between willing and doing. The ordinary definition of 
omnipotence, Potest quod vult, is to be rejected. It is admitted, 
that the distinction between will and power is unavoidable, if we 
determine the nature of God from the analogy of our constitution. 
As will and power are distinct in us, we are disposed to think they 
are distinct in Him. But this method of determining the attri- 
butes of God leads to the destruction of the true idea of an absolute 
being. In such a being, no such distinction can be admitted; and 


ht? puted standin, aad 


1 Strauss, i. p. 592. Schleiermacher, x. § 54. Werke, edit. Berlin, 1842, vot. iu. p. 285, 
2 Bruch, p. 155. 


§ 10, E. THE POWER OF GOD. 411 


therefore, in relation to God there can be no distinction b.tween the 
actual and the possible. Nothing is possible but the actual; and 
all that is possible becomes actual. Strauss! says, after Schleierma- 
cher,? that by the omnipotence of God is to be understood ‘ not 
only that all that is has its causality in God, but that everything 
is and occurs for which any causality in God exists.” Bruch ® 
says, that by the omnipotence of God is meant nothing more than 
that He is the original ground and cause of all things. He quotes 
Nitsch# as saying, that ‘* The idea of omnipotence is the repetition 
and application of the idea of God as creator of heaven and earth.” 
Nitsch, however, does not understand the passage in the sense put 
upon it; for he adds, in his note commenting on the dictum of 
Abelard, “ Deus non potest facere aliquid preter ea que facit,”’ 
that, if this means that the actual exhausts the resources of God, it 
is to be rejected. The words of Abelard, nevertheless, correctly 
express the doctrine of the modern German school of theologians 
on this subject. Schleiermacher’s language on this point is explicit 
and comprehensive. ‘Alles ist ganz durch die géttliche Allmacht 
und ganz durch. den Naturzusammenhang, nicht aber darf die 
erstere als Erginzung der letztern angesehen werden. Die Ges- 
ammtheit des endlichen Seins ist als vollkommene Darstellung der 
Allmacht zu denken, so dass alles wirklich ist und geschieht, wozu 
eine Productivitat in Gott ist. Damit fallt weg die Differenz des 
Wirklichen und Méglichen, des absoluten und hypothetischen 
Wollens oder Kénnens Gottes ; denn dies fithrt auf einen wirksam- 
en und unwirksamen Willen und letzterer kann bei Gott unmég- 
lich statt finden; so wenig als K6nnen und Wollen getrennt sein 
kénnen.” That is, “ Everything is entirely through the divine 
omnipotence, and everything is through the course of nature. The 
former, however, must not be regarded as supplementary to the 
latter. The aggregate of finite things is the complete revelation 
of God’s omnipotence, so that everything is and occurs for which 
there is a productivity in God. Thus the difference between the 
actual and the possible, between the absolute and hypothetical 
willing and power of God, disappears, because this implies an oper- 
ative and inoperative will, but the latter is impossible in God ; just 
as little as willing and power can be separated.” ® This passage is 
yuoted by Schweizer,® who adopts the views which it presents. 


1 Dogmatik, vol. i. p. 587. 2 Glaubenslehre, 1. § 54. 
8 Die Lehre von den gittlichen Eigenschaften, p. 154. 

4 Christliche Lehre, p. 160. 

5 Gess, UVebersicht iiber das System Schletermacher’s, p. 88. 

6 Glaubenslehre, 1. p. 268. 


412 PART I.—THEOLOGY.  [Cu. V.— Drvine ATTRIBUTES. 


This Doctrine Destroys our Knowledge of God. 

In reference to this doctrine, it may be remarked, — 

1. That it utterly confounds all our ideas of God. It renders 
all knowledge of Him impossible. If will and power are identical, 
then those words lose for us their meaning. We cannot know 
what God is, if this doctrine be true; and if we know not what He 
is, we cannot rationally worship, love, or trust Him. 

2. The doctrine effectually destroys the personality of God. A 
person is a self-conscious, self-determining being. But in denying 
will to God, self-determination, and consequently personality, is 
denied to Him. This consequence is admitted by the advocates of 
this doctrine. ‘If in God,” says Strauss, “ willing and power are 
identical, then there can be no freedom of the will in God, in the 
sense of the Church theologians, who hold that it was possible for 
God not to create the world, or to have created it other than it is. 
Tf there be no ability in God to do what He does not do, there can 
be no freedom of will or power of choice.” ‘* Mit diesem Konnen 
fillt auch die Freiheit im Sinne eines Wahlvermégens hinweg.”’? 
This, however, it is said, is not the doctrine of fate; for fate sup- 
poses an ab extra necessity to which God is subject. If it does not 
teach fate, it at least teaches inexorable necessity. Spinoza says, 
‘“‘ Ka res libera dicetur, quee ex sola suze nature necessitate existit 
et a se sola ad agendum determinatur. Necessaria autem, vel 
potius coacta que ab alio determinatur ad existendum et operan- 
dum certa ac determinata ratione.”? And again,’ “Deum nullo 
modo fato subjicio, sed omnia inevitabili necessitate ex Dei natura 
sequi concipio.”’ In this sense the sun is free in shining. It shines 
from the necessity of its nature. We think from a like necessity 5 
but we can think of one thing or another, changing the current of 
our thoughts at pleasure. And thus we are free in exercising the 
power of thought. ‘This freedom is denied to God. He can think 
only in one way. And all his thoughts are creative. He does, 
therefore, what He does, from a necessity of his nature, and does 
all He is able to do. God, according to this doctrine, is not a per- 
sonal Being. 

3. The Scriptures constantly represent God as able to do what- 
ever He wills. They recognize the distinction between the actual 
and the possible; between ability and act; between what God 


1 Dogmatik, vol. i. p. 587. 
2 Ethices, i. def. vii. edit. Jena, 1803 vol. ii. p. 86. 
8 Epistola xxiii. Ibid. vol. i. 518. 


—— =. 


— - 


§11.] HOLINESS. 413 


does, and what He is able todo. With Him all things are pos- 
sible. He is able of stones to raise up children unto Abraham. 
He can send me, says our Lord, twelve legions of angels. 

4. As this is the doctrine of the Bible, it is the instinctive judg- 
ment of the human mind. It is a perfection in us, that we can do 
far more than we actually accomplish. With us the actual is not 
the measure of the possible. 

5. It is, therefore, a limitation of God, a denial of his omnipo- 
tence, to say that He can do only what He actually brings to pass. 
There is infinitely more in God than simple causality of the actual. 

It is consequently an erroneous definition of omnipotence to call 
it All-power, meaning thereby that all the efficiency in the universe 
is the efficiency of God; which is not only a pantheistic doctrine, 
but it makes the finite the measure of the infinite. 


§ 11. Holiness of God. 


This is a general term for the moral excellence of God. In 1 
Sam. ii. 2, it is said, ‘‘ There is none holy as the Lorp ;” no other 
Being absolutely pure, and free from all limitation in his moral 
perfection. ‘Thou Holy One of Israel,” is the form of address 
which the Spirit puts into the lips of the people of God. “ Exalt 
the Lorp our God, and worship at his holy hill; for the Lorp our 
God is Holy.” (Ps. xcix. 9.) ‘ Holy and reverend is his name.” 
(Ps. exi. 9.) “Thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil, and 
canst not look on iniquity.”. (Hab. i. 18.) ‘“* Who shall not fear 
thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name? for Thou only art Holy.” 
(Rey. xv. 4.) Holiness, on the one hand, implies entire freedom 
from moral evil; and, upon the other, absolute moral perfection. 
Freedom from impurity is the primary idea of the word. To sanc- 
tify is to cleanse ; to be holy, is to be clean. Infinite purity, even 
more than infinite knowledge or infinite power, is the object of 
reverence. Hence the Hebrew word wisqp, as used in Scripture, 
is often equivalent to venerandus. “The Holy One of Israel,” is 
He who is to be feared and adored. Seraphim round about the 
throne who cry day and night, Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord of 
hosts, give expression to the feelings of all unfallen rational crea- 
tures in view of the infinite purity of God. They are the repre- 
sentatives of the whole universe, in offering this perpetual homage 
to the divine holiness. It is because of his holiness, that God is a 
consuming fire. And it was a view of his holiness which led the 
prophet to exclaim, ‘‘ Woe is me! for I am undone; because I am 
a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of un- 


414 PART I.—THEOLOGY.  [Cu. V. — Drvinz ATTRIBUTES. 


clean lips: for mine eyes have seen the king, the Lorp of hosts.” 
Cs. vi. 5.) 

It is in their application to the moral attributes of God, that the 
two methods of determining his nature come most directly into 
conflict. If we allow ourselves to be determined in answering the 
question, What is God? by the teachings of his Word, and the con- 
stitution of our own nature ; if we refer to Him, in an infinite degree, 
every good we find in ourselves, then we can have no hesitation in 
believing that He is holy, just, and good. But if the philosophical 
notion of the absolute and infinite is to decide every question con- 
cerning the divine nature, then we must give up all confidence in 
our apprehensions of God, as an object of knowledge. This 
Strauss, the most candid of the recent philosophical theologians, 
frankly admits. He says: ‘* The ideas of the absolute and of the 
holy are incompatible. He who holds to the former must give up 
the latter, since holiness implies relation; and, on the other hand, 
he who holds fast the idea of God as holy, must renounce the 
idea of his being absolute; for the idea of absolute is inconsistent 
with the slightest possibility of its being other than it is. The im- 
possibility of referring moral attributes to God had been admitted 
by some of the fathers of the Church.” } 


The Reasons urged for denying Moral Attributes to God. 


The grounds on which it is denied that moral attributes can be 
predicated of God, are such as these : — 

1. To assume that God can delight in good, and hate evil, takes 
for granted that He is susceptible of impression ab extra, which is 
inconsistent with his nature. 

2. It is said that moral excellence implies subjection to a moral 
law. . But an absolute and infinite Being cannot be thus subject to 
law. It is true that God is not subject to any law out of Him- 
self. He is ealex, absolutely independent. He is a law unto 
Himself. The conformity of his will to reason is no subjection. 
(t is only the harmony of his nature. God’s being holy, im- 
plies nothing more than that He is not in conflict with Himself. 
On this point even the rationalistic theologian Wegscheider says : 
“ Minime Deus cogitandus est tanquam pendens ex lege ethica 

1 “So wollen also die Begriffe des Absoluten und des Heiligen nicht zusammengehen: 
sondern wer das Absolute festhilt, der lést die Heiligkeit auf, welche nur an einem in Rela- 
tion gestellten Wesen etwas ist; und wer es umgekehrt mit der Heiligkeit ernstlich nimmt, 
der tritt der Idee der Absolutheit zu nahe, welche durch den leisesten Schatten der Mog- 
lichkeit, anders zu sein als sie ist, verunreinigt wird. Diese Einsicht in die Unanwendbar- 


keit moralischer Attribute auf Gott hatten schon einzelne Kirchenviiter . . . . erkannte.’ 
— Dogmatik, vol. i. p. 595. 


_ 


§11.] HOLINESS. 41E 


vel eidem subjectus tanquam potestati cuidam alienew ; sed Deus 
sanctus ipsa ea lex est, natura quidam hypostatica indutus.” } 

8. It is said that moral excellence must be free. A moral agent, 
to be holy, must voluntarily do right. But this implies that he is 
able to do wrong. There must, therefore, be at least a metaphys- 
ical possibility of God’s being evil, or He cannot’be good. But all 
possibility of the Absolute being other than it is, is inconsistent 
with its nature. To this it may be answered that the ideas of lib- 
erty and necessity are indeed antagonistic; but that liberty and 
absolute certainty are perfectly compatible. That an infinitely 
wise Being will not act irrationally, is as absolutely certain as that 
the self-contradictory cannot be true. The one is as inconceivable 
as the other. It is just as impossible that an infinitely holy Being 
should be unholy as that light should be darkness. The impossi- 
bility, however, is of a different kind. The former is what Augus- 
tine calls the felzx necessitas boni, which is the highest idea of free- 
dom. 

4. Strauss says that those who attribute moral perfections to 
God, forget that a purely spiritual Being can have nothing of what 
we call reason, wisdom, goodness, wrath, righteousness, ete. 
“ Strictly speaking,” he adds “ the ascription of moral attributes to 
God supposes that He is material ; and the most abstract theological 
ideas on the subject are really founded on Materialism.” This is 
founded on the assumption that spirit is impersonal, a generic force, 
which becomes individual and personal only by union with a mate- 
rial organization, just as the Realists define man to be generic hu- 
manity, individualized and rendered personal by union with a given 
corporeal organization. 

It is surely most unreasonable to sacrifice to such speculations 
all religion, and all confidence in the intuitive judgments of the 
human mind, as well as all faith in God and in the Bible. 

It is scarcely less destructive of the true doctrine, to define holi- 
ness in God as the causality of conscience in us. That we are 
moral beings is not admitted to be a proof that God has moral attri- 
butes. That the sun produces cheerfulness in us is no proof that 
the sun is cheerful. But if we know nothing of God except that 
He is the cause of all things, He is to us only an inscrutable force, 
and not a Father, and not a God. 

1 Institutiones, p. 273s 


416 PART L—THEOLOGY. [Cu. V.— Divine ATTRIBUTES. 


§ 12. Justice. 
A. Meaning of the Word. 


The word justice, or righteousness, is used in Scripture somes 
times in a wider and sometimes in a more restricted sense. In 
theology, it is often distinguished as justitia interna, or moral 
excellence, and justitia externa, or rectitude of conduct. In 
Hebrew p»7z means, in a physical sense, straight ; and in a moral 
sense, right, what is as it should be. And mp1 means rightness, 
that which satisfies the demands of rectitude or law. The Greek 
word Sékawos has the physical sense of equal; and the moral sense 
of, conformed to what is right; and dKavootvy is either that which 
divides equally, 2. e., equity in the moral sense, or that which sat- 
isfies the demands of right. The Latin justus and justitia are 
commonly used in the wide sense for what is right, or as it should 
be. Cicero?! defines justitia as “animi affectio suum cuique tri- 
buens.” This definition he elsewhere amplifies, saying: ‘ Justitia 
erga Deos religio, erga parentas pietas, creditis in rebus fides, in 


moderatione animadvertendi lenitas, amicitia in benevolentia nomi-. 


natur.”’? 


When we regard God as the author of our moral nature, we 
conceive of Him as holy ; when we regard Him in his dealings with 
his rational creatures, we conceive of Him as righteous. He is a 
righteous ruler; all his laws are holy, just, and good. In his 
moral government He faithfully adheres to those laws. He is im- 
partial and uniform in their execution. Asa judge he renders unto 
every man according to his works. He neither condemns the in- 
nocent, nor clears the guilty ; neither does He ever punish with 
undue severity. Hence the justice of God is distinguished as 
rectoral, or that which is concerned in the imposition of righteous 
laws and in their impartial execution; and distributive, or that 
which is manifested in the righteous distribution of rewards and 
punishment. The Bible constantly represents God as a righteous 
ruler and a just judge. These two aspects of his character, or of 
our relation to Him, are not carefully distinguished. We have the 
assurance which runs through the Scriptures, that “The judge of 
all the earth” must “do right.” (Gen. xviii. 25.) “God is a 
righteous judge.” (Ps. vii. 11, marginal reading.) “He shal: 
judge the world with righteousness.” (Ps. xevi. 18.) “ Clouds 


1 De Finibus, v. 23, 65, edit. Leipzig, 1850, p- 1042. 
2 Partitiones Oratoric, 22, 78, edit. ut sup. p. 194. 


ee ee ee 


—_. 


§ 12, B,C.) JUSTICE. 417 


and darkness are round about Him: righteousness and judgment 
are the habitation of his throne.” (Ps. xevii. 2.) Notwithstand- 
ing all the apparent inequalities in the distribution of his favours; 
notwithstanding the prosperity of the wicked and the afflictions of 
the righteous, the conviction is everywhere expressed that God is 
just; that somehow and somewhere He will vindicate his deal- 
ings with men, and show that He is righteous in all his ways and 


holy in all his works. 


B. Justice in its Relation to Sin. 


As the sense of guilt is universal among men, and as the mani- 
festations of sin are so constant and pervading, it is mainly in its 
relation to sin that the justice of God is revealed. Hence many 
theologians define the justice of God as that attribute of his nature 
which is manifested in the punishment of sin. Goodness, it is said, 
is manifested in bestowing good, and justice in the infliction of 
punishment. Sclleirilixchar says, ‘Justice is that causality in 
God which connects suffering with actual sin.”! Schweizer says, 
* We know God as just only through the punishment of sin.” 
Hegel says, ‘‘ The manifestation of the nothingness of the finite as 
power, is justice.’ This is the philosophical statement of the 
principle that ‘“* Might is Right,” a principle which underlies the 
morals and religion of the modern philosophy. 


C. The Reformation of the Offender is not the Primary Object 
of Punishment. 


As the justice of God is specially manifested in the punishment 
of sin, it is of primary importance to determine why sin is punished. 

One prevalent theory on this subject is, that the only legitimate 
end of punishment is the reformation of the offender. 

It is of course to be admitted, that the good of the offender is 
‘ often the ground or reason why evil is inflicted. A father chastises 
a child in love, and for its good. And God, our heavenly Father, 
brings suffering upon his children ‘for their edification. But evil 
inflicted for the benefit of the sufferer, is chastisement, and not pun- 
ishment. Punishment, properly speaking, is evil inflicted in satis- 
faction of justice. 

That the good of the sufferer is not the primary end of the in- 
fliction of punishment, is proved : — 

1. Because the punishment of the wicked is always, in the 
Scriptures, referred to the anger of God, and the chastisement of 


1 Christliche Glaube, § 84, Works Berlin, 1843, vol. iv. p. 465. 
VOL, I. 27 


418 PART I.—THEOLOGY. (Ca. V. — Divine ArrRipuTes. 


his people to his love. The cases, therefore, are not analogous. 
This difference of representation is designed to teach us that the 
wicked and the good do not stand in the same relation to God, as 
objects of benevolence ; but that the one He punishes to testify 
his disapprobation and satisfy his justice, and the other He chastises 
to bring them nearer to Himself. 

2. In many cases the nature of the punishment precludes tae 
possibility of the good of the offender being the ground of its in- 
fliction. The deluge, the destruction of the cities of the plain, and 
the overthrow of Jerusalem, were certainly not designed for the 
benefit of the men who suffered from those desolating inflictions. 
Much less can it be assumed that the punishment of the fallen an- 
gels, and of the finally impenitent, is intended to be reformatory. 

3. Scripture and experience both teach that suffering, when of 
the nature of punishment, has no tendency to reform. When suf- 
fering is seen to come from a father’s hand, and to be a manifesta~ 
tion of love, it has a sanctifying power; but when it comes from 
the hand of God, as a judge and an avenger, and is the expression 
of displeasure and a proof of our alienation from God, its tendency 
is to harden and to exasperate. Hence the Apostle says, that so 
long as men are under condemnation, they bring forth fruit unto 
sin; and that, only when reconciled to God and assured of his love, 
do they bring forth fruit unto God. The great New Testament 
prophet, in his vision of the world of woe, represents the lost as 
gnawing their tongues with pain and blaspheming God. The 
denunciation of punishment is addressed to fear, but fear is not 
the principle of genuine obedience. 

4, On this subject, appeal may be fairly made to the common 
consciousness of men. Such is our moral hebetude that it is only 
glaring offences which awaken our moral sensibilities, and reveal 
their true nature. When any great crime is committed, there is an 
instinctive and universal demand for the punishment of the crim- 
inal. No man can pretend that the desire for his reformation is the 
feeling which prompts that demand. That is not so much as 
thought of. It is the instinctive judgment of the mind that he ought 


to suffer. It is not benevolence towards him which calls for the 
infliction of punishment. 


D. The Prevention of Crime is not the Primary End of Pun- 
ishment. 


The doctrine that the only legitimate end of punishment is tne 
prevention of crime, has had great prevalence in the Church and 


_ 


§12,D] JUSTICE. 419 


the world. It is the common doctrine of jurists. It is, of course, 
to be conceded that the good of society and of the moral govern- 
ment of God, is one important end of punishment in all govern- 
ments, human or divine. It is, however, rather an important col- 
lateral effect of the administration of justice, than its immediate 
design. The doctrine in question merges justice into benevolence. 
According to this way of thinking, it is only because God has a 
view to the happiness of his rational creatures, that He visits sin 
with punishment. This doctrine was adopted by some of the early 
fathers. In answer to the objection that the Bible represented 
God as a vindictive being, because it speaks of his anger and of 
his determination to punish, they said that He punished only out 
of benevolence. Thus Clemens Alexandrinus! says, ‘‘ Men ask 
how God can be good and kind if He is angry and punishes? 
They should remember that punishment is for the good of the 
offender and for the prevention of evil.’ And Tertullian? says: 
*‘Omne hoc justitize opus procuratio bonitatis est.” Origen,® also 
to the same effect, says: ‘* Ex quibus omnibus constat, unum eun- 
demque esse justum et bonum legis et evangeliorum Deum, et 
benefacere cum justitia et cum bonitate punire.” 

Many later theologians take the same view. Leibnitz defines 
justice to be benevolence guided by wisdom. Wolf, who modified 
the whole system of theology in accordance with the philosophy of 
Leibnitz, adopted the same view. So did Stapfer,* who says: 
* Quando Deus ejusmodi malum triste ex peccato necessario se 
quens creature accidere sinit, . . . . dicitur peccatorem punire, 
et hoc sensu ipsi tribuitur justitia vindicativa. In justitia punitiva 
bonitas cum sapientia administratur.6 Notio justitie resolvitur in 
notionem sapientiz et bonitatis.” Grotius, the jurist, makes this 
idea of justice the fundamental principle of his great work, ‘‘ De 
Satisfactione Christi.” 


The Optimist Theory. 


In this country the same view has been extensively adopted, 
and made, as it must of necessity be, the controlling principle of 
those systems of theology in which it is incorporated. It is as- 
sumed that happiness is the greatest good ; and hence that the pur- 


t Pedagogus, I. viii.; edit. Cologne, 1688, p. 114, c. and p. 115. 

2 Adversus Marcionem, II. 10; edit. Basel, 1562, p. 179, seu II. 18; edit. Leipzig, 1841, iii, 
p. 90. Bibliotheca, Gersdorf, vol. vi. 

& De Principiis, Il. v. 8; edit. Paris, 1783, vol. i. p. 88, a. 

« Institutiones, i. 153; edit. Tiguri, 1743, p. 154. 

§ Ibid. i. 154. 


420 PART I.— THEOLOGY. ([Cu. V.— Divine ATTRIBUTES. 


pose and desire to promote happiness is the sum of all virtue. From 
this it follows, that this world, the work of a God of infinite be- 
nevolence, wisdom, and power, must be the best possible world for 
the production of happiness; and, therefore, the permission of sin, 
and its punishment, must be referred to the benevolence of God. 
They are the necessary means for securing the greatest amount of 
happiness. If happiness be not the greatest good; if holiness be 
a higher end than happiness; if expediency be not the ground and 
measure of moral obligation, it is obvious that this whole structure 
collapses. 
Proof of the Scriptural Doctrine. 

It is admitted that happiness is promoted by justice, and therefore 
that it is contrary to a wise benevolence that men should be allowed 
to sin with impunity. But justice cannot properly be merged into 
benevolence. And that the promotion of happiness by the preven- 
tion of crime is not the primary end of the infliction of punishment, 
is evident, — 

1. From the testimony of every man’s consciousness. Every 
man knows that benevolence and justice, as revealed in his own 
consciousness, are different sentiments. ‘The one prompts to the 
promotion of happiness, the other involves the instinctive judgment, 
that a criminal ought to suffer for his crime. We do not stop to 
ask, or to think, what may be the collateral effect on others of the 
infliction of punishment. Anterior to such reflection, and indepen- 
dent of it, is the intuitive perception, that sin should be punished, 
for its own sake, or on account of its inherent ill-desert. These 
instinctive moral judgments are as clear and as trustworthy revela- 
tions of the nature of God as can possibly be made. They force 
conviction in spite of all speculative sophistries. Every man knows 
the righteous judgment of God, that those who sin are worthy of 
death. If justice and benevolence are distinct in us, they are dis- 
tinct in God. If we, in obedience to the nature which He has 
given us, intuitively perceive or judge that sin ought to be pun- 
ished for its own sake, and irrespective of the good effect punish- 
ment may have on others, then such also is the judgment of God. 
This is the principle which underlies and determines all our ideas 
of the Supreme Being. If moral perfection be not in Him what 
it is in us, then He is to us an unknown something, and wé use 


words without meaning when we speak of Him as holy, just, and _ 


good. 


ww" 


§ 12, D.] JUSTICE, 421 


Argument from the Religious Experience of Believers. 

2. This sense of justice, which is indestructible in the nature of 
man, and which, in common with reason and conscience, has sur- 
vived the Fall, is not only revealed in the ordinary experience of 
men, but still more distinctly in their religious consciousness. 
What is commonly called “ conviction of sin,” is only a modifica- 
tion, and higher form, of those inward experiences which are com- 
mon to all men. All men know that they are sinners. They all 
know that sin, as related to the justice of God, is guilt, that which 
ought to be punished ; and that, as related to his holiness, it ren- 
ders us polluted and offensive in his sight. They also know, intu- 
itively, that God is just as well as holy; and, therefore, that his 
moral perfection calls for the punishment of sin, by the same neces- 
sity by which He disapproves of and hates it. Under the pressure 
of these convictions, and the consciousness of their utter inability 
either to satisfy divine justice, or to free themselves from the defile- 
ment and power of sin, men either tremble in the constant looking 
for of judgment, or they look out of themselves for help. When, 
under either the common or saving operations of the Spirit of God, 
these sentiments are deepened, then their nature is more clearly 
revealed. A man, when thus convinced of sin, sees that not only 
would it be right that he should be punished, but that the justice, 
or moral excellence of God, demands his punishment. It is not that 
he ought to suffer for the good of others, or to sustain the moral 
government of God, but that he, as a sinner and for his sins, ought 
to suffer. Were he the only creature in the universe, this convic- 
tion would be the same, both in nature and degree. Such is the 
experience of men under the conviction of sin, as recorded in the 
Scriptures and in the history of the Church. In many cases crim- 
inals under the pressure of these feelings have delivered themselves 
to the officers of justice to be punished. More frequently they 
resort to self-inflicted tortures to satisfy the clamors of conscience. 
We have, therefore, an inward revelation, which can neither be 
suppressed nor perverted, that justice is not benevolence. 


The Sense of Justice not due to Christian Culture. 


8. That this sense of justice is not due to Christian culture, or 
to the influence of peculiar forfns of doctrine, but belongs to the 
common consciousness of men, is plain. (a.) Because it is im- 
pressed upon all human languages as far as known or cultivated. 
All languages have different words for justice and benevolence. 


422 PART I. — THEOLOGY. (Cu. V. — Drvine ATTRIBUTES. 


There could not be this difference in the words, if the sentiments 
themselves were not different. Every one knows that when we 
say a man is just, we mean one thing ; and when we say he is 
benevolent, we mean another thing. (6.) All history as it records 
the workings of human nature, reveals this innate sense of justice. 
We everywhere hear men calling for the punishment of offenders, 
or denouncing those who allow them to escape with impunity. No 
mass of men ever witness a flagrant act of cruelty or wrong with- 
out an irrepressible manifestation of indignation. The voice of 
nature, which in such cases is the voice of God, demands the 
punishment’ of the wrong-doer. (¢.) In all religions which reveal 
the inward convictions of men, there are expiatory rites. Every 
sacrifice for sin, the smoke from every altar, which has been going 
up through all ages and from every part of the world, are so many 
attestations to the truth of reason and of Scripture, that there is 
such an attribute as justice in God, distinct from his benevolence. 


Argument from the Holiness of God. 


4. The truth of this doctrine may also be inferred from the holi- 
ness of God. If He is infinitely pure, his nature must be opposed to 
all sin; and as his acts are determined by his nature, his disappro- 
bation of sin must manifest itself in his acts. But the disfavour of 
God, the manifestation of his disapprobation, is death, as his favour 
is life. It cannot be that this essential opposition between holiness 
and sin should be dependent for its manifestation on the mere ab 
eatra consideration that evil would result from sin being allowed to 
go unpunished. It might as well be said that we should feel no 
aversion to pain, unless aware that it weakened our constitution. 
We do not approve of holiness simply because it tends to produce 
happiness ; neither do we disapprove of sin simply because it tends 
to produce misery. It is inevitable, therefore, that the perfection 
of the infinitely holy God should manifest its opposition to sin, 
without waiting to judge of the consequences of the expression of 
this divine repugnance. 

5. The doctrine that the prevention of crime is the only legiti- 
uate end of punishment, or that there is no such attribute in God 
as justice, as distinguished from benevolence, rests on the assump- 
tion, before remarked upon, that all virtue consists in benevolence ; 
which again rests on the assumpffon that happiness is the highest 
good; which makes expediency the ground of moral obligation, and 
the rule of moral conduct. It is indeed a solecism to use the word 
moral in such connections, for, on this theory, the word has no 


+ 


§ 12, D.] JUSTICE. 428 


meaning. A thing may be wise or unwise, expedient or inexpedi- 
ent, but in no other sense right or wrong. Wrong becomes right, 
and right becomes wrong, as the greater amount of happiness flows 
from the one or from the other. As this utilitarian theory of mor- 
als has been banished from the schools of philosophy, it should be 
banished from systems of theology. 


Argument from the Connection between Sin and Misery. 


6. The inseparable connection between sin and misery is a reve- 
lation of the justice of God. That holiness promotes happiness is 
a revelation of the relation in which God stands to holiness ; and 
that sin produces misery is no less a revelation of the relation in 
which He stands to moral evil. This constitution of things depend- 
ing on the nature and will of God, proves that sin is evil in its own» 
nature, and is punished for its own sake. The law of God which 
includes a penalty as well as precepts, is in both a revelation of the 
nature of God. If the precepts manifest his holiness, the penalty 
as clearly manifests his justice. Ifthe one is immutable, so also is 
the other. The wages of sin is death. Death is what is due to it 
in justice, and what without injustice cannot be withheld from it. 
If the prevention of crime were the primary end of punishment, 
then if the punishment of the innocent, the execution, for example, 
of the wife and children of a murderer, would have a greater 
restraining influence than the punishment of the guilty murderer, 
their execution would be just. But this would shock the moral 
sense of men. 


Argument from the Scriptural Doctrines of Satisfaction and Jus- 
tification. 


7. The Scriptural doctrines of satisfaction and justification rest 
on the principle that God is immutably just, @ ¢., that his moral 
excellence, in the case of sin, demands punishment, or expiation. 
The Bible clearly teaches the necessity of satisfaction to justice in 
order to the forgiveness of sin. Christ was set forth as a propitia- 
tion, in order that God might be just in justifying the ungodly. 
This assumes that it would be unjust, 7. e., contrary to moral recti- 
tude, to pardon the guilty without such a propitiation. This neces- 
sity for a satisfaction is never referred to expediency or to govern- 
mental considerations. If sin could have been pardoned, without a 
satisfaction, the Apostle says, Christ is dead in vain. (Gal. ii. 
21.) If there could have been a law which could have given life, 
salvation would have been by the law. (Gal. iii. 21.) 


424 PART I1.—THEOLOGY. [Cu. V.— Divine ATTRIBUTES. 


Moreover, if there is no such attribute in God as justice, as 
distinguished from benevolence, then there can be no such thing 
as justification. There may be pardon, as the act of a sovereign 
remitting a penalty and restoring an offender to favour ; but no such 
thing as justification, as an act of a judge proceeding according to 
law and pronouncing the demands of justice satisfied. The Scrip- 
tures, however, according to the almost unanimous judgment of the 
Church, pronounce that justification is more than an act of execu- 
tive clemency. Conscience is not satisfied with mere forgiveness. 
It is essential to peace with God, that the soul should see that 
justice is satisfied. This is the reason why the death of Christ, why 
his blood, is so inexpressibly precious in the eyes of his people, Al) 
the experience of the saints is a protest against the principle that 
expiation is unnecessary, that sin can be pardoned without a satis- 
faction of justice. 

Paul’s Argument. 

The whole argument of the Apostle in his Epistle to the Ro- 
mans is founded on the principle that justice is a divine attribute 
distinct from benevolence. His argument is: God is just. AJ 
men are sinners. All, therefore, are guilty, 2. e., under condem- 
nation. ‘Therefore no man can be justified, 7. e., pronounced not 
guilty, on the ground of his character or conduct. Sinners cannot 
satisfy justice. But what they could not do, Christ, the Eternal 
Son of God, clothed in our nature, has done for them. He has 
brought in everlasting righteousness, which meets all the demands 
of the law. All those who renounce their own righteousness, and 
trust to the righteousness of Christ, God justifies and saves. This 
is the gospel as preached by Paul. It all rests on the assumption 
that God is just. 

The doctrine of the vindicatory justice, which has this clear 
evidence of its truth, in the moral nature of man, in the religious 
experience of believers, and in the teaching and doctrines of the 
Scriptures, has ever been considered as a turning point in theology. 


K. Philosophical Views of the Nature of Justice. 


The teachings of the Scriptures, and the faith of the Church, 
so far as the divine attributes are concerned, are founded on the 
assumption that God is a personal Being. It is involved in that 
assumption, not only that He possesses intelligence and moral 
character, but that he thinks, feels, wills, and acts. It is, Moreover, 
involved in the idea of personality, that thinking, feeling, willing, 
and acting in God, are, in all that is essential, analogous to what 


- © 


pian ** JUSTICE. 425 


those terms signify in us. The modern philosophy, however, 
teaches that, if God be an absolute Being, thinking, feeling, will- 
ing, and acting are inconsistent with his nature. Hence, — 

1. Some teach that God is only the original ground of being, 
having in Himself no distinctive attributes. What we call the 
attributes of God are only the attributes of finite creatures having 
the ground of their being in God. That they are intelligent, 
moral, voluntary agents, is no proof that the same is true of God. 
That the sun produces the sensation of heat in us is no proof that 
it experiences the same sensation. The attributes of God, there- 
fore, are only different aspects of the causality in Him which pro- 
duces different effects. Justice, then, is not an attribute of God; 
it is only the causality to which the connection between sin and 
suffering is to be referred. 

2. Others, while insisting that personality, and all that it in- 
volves, are incompatible with the idea of an absolute Being, still 
maintain that we are constrained, and bound, to believe in the 
personality of God, on the authority of the Bible and of our own 
moral nature. But the Bible reveals, it is said, not absolute, but 
only regulative truth; not what He is, but what it is expedient for 
us to think He is. Justice in God, then, is for us what generosity 
in a fairy is for nursery children. 

3. Others again, while they admit personality in God, make it 
a personality which precludes all willing, and all acting, except in 
the form of law, or general, uniform efficiency. Justice in God, 
therefore, is only a name for one form, or one mode, of the mani- 
festation of the power of God. As it is to be referred to his ordi- 
nation, or to his nature, that fire burns and acids corrode, so it is 
to be referred to his general efficiency that sin produces misery. 
There is no special intervention of God, when fire burns; and 
there is no special decision, or judgment on his part, when a sinner 
is punished. Punishment is not the execution of a sentence pro- 
nounced by an intelligent being on the merits of the case, but the 
operation of a general law. Bruch (Professor of Theology in the 
Theological Seminary in Strasbourg) is a representative of this 
mode of thinkmg. He professes Theism, or faith in a personal 
God, but he teaches that the attributes of God are nothing else 
(als die Modalitiiten seiner ewigen Wirksamkeit) ‘than the modes 
of his constant efficiency.” Since among men justice is exercised 
in a succession of special acts, it is erroneously inferred that there 
is a like succession of acts of the will of God by which He approves 
or condemns. The great difficulty, he says, arises from judging 


426 PART L— THEOLOGY. ([Cu. V.— Divine ATTRIBUTES. 


of God after the analogy of our own nature. He admits that the 
Bible does this; that it constantly speaks of God as a righteous 
judge, administering justice according to his will. In this case, 
however, he adds, it is important to separate the real truth from 
the imperfection of its Scriptural form. Penalties are not evils 
inflicted by a special act of the divine will, but the natural conse- 
quences of sin, which cannot fail to manifest themselves. There 
is an organic connection between sin and evil. All the activity or 
agency of God is in the form of laws having their foundation in 
his nature. Thus justice is simply that law, or uniform mode of 
divine operation, by which sin is made its own punishment 
Hence there is no distinction between natural and positive inflic- 
tions; the deluge was either no punishment, or it was the natural 
consequence of the sins of the antediluvians. Hence, there is no 
such thing as forgiveness. The only possible way to remove the | 
‘suffering is to remove the sin. But how is the sin of theft or 
murder to be removed? We can understand how pride or envy 
may be subdued and the suffering they occasion be escaped: but 
how can a past act be removed? A man hardened in sin suffers 
little or nothing for a special offence; the morally refined suffer 
indescribably. Thus, according to this theory, the better a man 
is, the more severely he is punished for his sin. Strauss is con- 
sistent enough to carry the principle out, and discard altogether 
the ideas of reward and punishment, as belonging to a low form 
of thought. He quotes and adopts the dictum of Spinoza: ‘ Beati- 
tudo non est virtutis premium, sed ipsa virtus.” 

4, Scarcely distinguished from the doctrine last mentioned, is 
that presented by Dr. John Young.? His doctrine is that there 
are certain eternal and immutable laws arising out of the nature 
of things, independent of the will or nature of God, to which He is 
as much subject as his creatures. One of these laws is, that virtue 
produces happiness, and vice misery. The one is, therefore, re- 
warded, and the other punished, by the necessary and immutable 
operation of that law, and not by the will of God. God, therefore, 
ceases to be the ruler of the world. He is Himself subordinate to 
eternal and necessary laws. That this doctrine is at variance 

‘with the whole tenor of the Bible cannot be doubted. It is no less 
opposed to the dictates of our own moral and religious nature. It 
is revealed in that nature that we are subject, not to necessary and 


1 See the section on the “Gerechtigkeit Gottes”” in Bruch’s Lehre von den Gittlichen 
Higenschaften, pp. 275-296. 
2 Light and Life of Men, 


§ 13, A.J GOODNESS. 427 


self-acting laws, but to an intelligent, personal God, to whom we 
are accountable for our character and conduct, and who rewards 
and punishes his creatures according to their works. 

_ Asa philosophical theory, this doctrine is much below the stand- 
ard of the German theologians. For they, as far as they are Theists, 
admit that these immutable laws are determined by the nature of 
God, and are the uniform modes of his operation. Indeed, as God 
and his creatures exhaust the whole category of being, the “ nature 
of things,” apart from the nature of God and of his creatures, 
seems to be a phrase without meaning. It is tantamount to the 
“ nature of nonentity.” 


§ 18. The Goodness of God. 
A. The Scriptural Doctrine. 


Goodness, in the Scriptural sense of the term, includes benevo- 
lence, love, mercy, and grace. By benevolence is meant the dispo 
sition to promote happiness ; all sensitive creatures are its objects. 
Love includes complacency, desire, and delight, and has rational 
beings for its objects. Mercy is kindness exercised towards the 
miserable, and includes pity, compassion, forbearance, and gentle- 
ness, which the Scriptures so abundantly ascribe to God. Grace 
is love exercised towards the unworthy. The love of a holy God 
to sinners is the most mysterious attribute of the divine nature. 
The manifestation of this attribute for the admiration and beatifi- 
cation of all intelligent creatures, is declared to be the special 
design of redemption. God saves sinners, we are told, “ That in 
the ages to coma He might show the exceeding riches of his grace 
in his kindness toward us, through Christ Jesus.” (Eph. ii. 7.) 
This is the burden of that Epistle. 

As all the modifications of goodness above mentioned are found 
even in our dilapidated nature, and commend themselves to our 
moral approbation, we know they must exist in God without 
measure and without end. In him they are infinite, eternal, and 


immutable. 
Benevolence. 

The goodness of God in the form of benevolence is revealed in 
the whole constitution of nature. As the universe teems with life, 
it teems also with enjoyment. There are no devices in nature 
for the promotion of pain for its own sake; whereas the mani- 
festations of design for the production of happiness are beyond 
computation. The manifestation of the goodness of God in the 


428 PART L.—THEOLOGY.  [Cu. V.—Drvrve Arreipures. 


form of love, and specially of love to the undeserving, is, as just 
stated, the great end of the work of redemption. ‘* God so loved 
the world, that He gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever 
believeth in Him should not perish, but have everlasting life.” 
(John iii. 16.) ‘“ Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that 
He loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins.” 
(1 John iv. 10.) The Apostle prays that believers might be able 
to comprehend the height and depth, the length and breadth, of 
that love which passes knowledge. (Eph. iii. 19.) 


Love. 


Love in us includes complacency and delight in its object, with 
the desire of possession and communion. The schoolmen, and 
often the philosophical ‘theologians, tell us that there is no feeling 
in God. This, they say, would imply passivity, or susceptibility of 
impression from without, which it is assumed is incompatible with 
the nature of God. “ We must exclude,” says Bruch,! “ passivity 
from the idea of love, as it exists in God. For God cannot be the 
subject of passivity in any form. Besides, if God experienced com- 
placency in. intelligent beings, He would be dependent on them ; 
which is inconsistent with his nature as an Absolute Being.” 
Love, therefore, he defines as that attribute of God which secures 
the development of the rational universe; or, as Schleiermacher 
expresses it, “It is that attribute in virtue of which God communi- 
cates Himself.” According to the philosophers, the Infinite de- 
velops itself in the finite ; this fact, in theological language, is due 
to love. The only point of analogy between love in us and love 
in the Absolute and Infinite, is selfcommunication. Love in us 
leads to self-revelation and communion; in point of fact the In- 
finite is revealed and developed in the universe, and specially in 
humanity. Bruch admits that this doctrine is in real contradiction 
to the representations of God in the Old Testament, and in appar- 
ent contradiction to those of the New Testament. If love in God 
is only a name for that which accounts for the rational universe ; 
if God is love, simply because He develops himself in thinking and 
conscious beings, then the word has for us no definite meaning ; it 
reveals to us nothing concerning the real nature of God. Here 
again we have to choose between a mere philosophical speculation 
and the clear testimony of the Bible, and of our own moral 
and religious nature. Love of necessity involves feeling, and if 


1 Figenschaften, page 240. 
9 Chrisiliche Glaube, §166; Works, Berlin, 1848, vol. iv. p. 518 


HS at ia 


§ 13, B.] GOODNESS. 429 


there be no feeling in God, there can be no love. That He pro- 
duces happiness is no proof of love. The earth does that uncon- 
sciously and without design. Men often render others happy from 
vanity, from fear, or from caprice. Unless the production of hap- 
piness can be referred, not only to a conscious intention, but to a 
purpose dictated by kind feeling, it is no proof of benevolence. 
And unless the children of God are the objects of his complacency 
and delight, they are not the objects of his love. He may be cold, 
insensible, indifferent, or even unconscious ; He ceases to be God 
in the sense of the Bible, and in the sense in which we need a 
God, unless He can love as well as know and act. The philo- 
sophical objection against ascribing feeling to God, bears, as we 
have seen, with equal foree against the ascription to Him of 
knowledge or will. If that objection be valid, He becomes to us 
simply an unknown cause, what men of science call force ; that to 
which all phenomena are to be’ referred, but of which we know 
nothing. We must adhere to the truth in its Scriptural form, or 
we lose it altogether. We must believe that God is love in the 
sense in which that word comes home to every human heart. 
The Scriptures do not mock us when they say, ‘* Like as a father 
pitieth his children, so the Lorp pitieth them that fear Him.” 
(Ps. ciii. 13.) He meant what He said when He proclaimed 
Himself as “* The Lorp, the Lorp God, merciful. and gracious, 
long-suffering and abundant in goodness and truth.” (Ex. xxxiv. 
6.) ‘“ Beloved,” says the Apostle, “let us love one another: for 
love is of God; and every one that loveth is born of God, and 
knoweth God. He that loveth not, knoweth not God; for God 
is love. In this was manifested the love of God toward us, 
because that God sent his only-begotten Son into the world, that 
we might live through Him. Herein is love, not that we loved 
God, but that He loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation 
for our sins. Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love 
one another.” (1 Johniv. 7-11.) The word love has the same 
sense throughout this passage. God is love; and love in Him is, 
in all that is essential to its nature, what love isin us. Herein we 
do rejoice, yea, and will rejoice. 


B. The Existence of Evil. 


How can the existence of evil, physical and moral, be reconciled 
with the benevolence and holiness of a God infinite in his wisdom 
and power? This is the question which has exercised the reason 
and tried the faith of men in all ages of the world. Such is the 


430 PART L—THEOLOGY.  [Cu. V.—Drvinz Arrrisures 


distance between God and man, such the feebleness of our powers, 
and such the limited range of our vision, it might seem reasonable 
to leave this question to be answered by God himself. If a child 
cannot rationally sit in judgment on the conduct of his parents, nor 
a peasant comprehend the affairs of an empire, we certainly are 
not competent to call God to account, or to ask of Him the reason 
of his ways. We might rest satisfied with the assurance that 
the Judge of all the earth must do right. These considerations, 
however, have not availed to prevent speculation on this subject. 
The existence of evil is constantly brought forward by sceptics as 
an argument against religion ; and it is constantly in the minds of 
believers as a difficulty and a doubt. While it is our duty to obey 
the injunction, “ Be still and know that I am God,” it is no less 
our duty to protest against those solutions of this great problem 
which either destroy the nature of sin or the nature of God. 


Theories which involve the Denial of Sin. 


Most of the theories proposed to account for the existence of 
evil, come under one or the other of the three following classes : 
First, those which really or virtually deny the existence of evil 
in the world. What we call evil is distinguished as physical and 
moral, pain and sin. There is some plausibility in the argument 
to prove that pain is not necessarily an evil. It is necessary to the 
safety of sentient creatures. But pain exists far beyond the bounds 
of this necessity. Such is the amount and variety of suffering in 
the world, of the just and of the unjust, of infants and of adults, 
that no philosophy can smother the conviction that the misery 
which weighs so heavily on the children of men, is an appalling 
evil. There is no such trial to our faith, as to see an infant suffer- 
ing excruciating pain. If, however, pain could be removed from 
the category of evil, sin is not so easily disposed of. The world 
lies in wickedness. The history of man is, to a large degree, the 
history of sin. If God be holy, wise, and omnipotent, how can we 
account for this widely extended and long-continued prevalence of 
sin ? 

One solution is sought in the denial that sin is an evil. In other 
words, it is denied that there is any such thing as sin. What we 
so regard is, as some maintain, nothing more than limitation of 
being. To be free from sin, we must be free from limitation, 4. o. 
infinite. It is not an evil that one tree is smaller, less beautiful, or 
less valuable than others ; or that a plant has not the sensitive life 
of an animal; or that all animals have not the rational powers of 


a a 


§ 13, B.] GOODNESS 481 


man. As in a forest, we see trees of every shape and size, per- 
fectly and imperfectly developed, and this diversity is itself a good ; 
se among men there are some more, and some less conformed to the 


ideal standard of reason and right, but this is not an evil. It is 


only diversity of development ; the manifold forms of an endless 
life. 

Others say that what we call sin is the necessary condition of 
virtue. There can be no action without reaction; no strength 
without obstacles to be overcome ; no pleasure without pain ; and 
no virtue without vice. Moral goodness is mastery over moral 
evil. There cannot be one without the other. All would be 
dead and motionless, a stagnant sea, were it not for this antag- 
onism. 

Others again say that sin has only a subjective reality. It is 
analogous to pain. Some things affect us agreeably, others dis- 
agreeably ; some excite self-approbation, some disapprobation. But 
that is simply our own concern. God no more participates in our 
judgments than He does in our sensations. 

Others do not so expressly deny the existence of sin. They admit 
that it is not only evil to us, but that it involves guilt in the sight 
of God, and therefore should be punished. Nevertheless, they rep- 
resent it as arising necessarily out of the constitution of our nature. 
All creatures are subject to the law of development — to a ‘* Wer- 
den.” Perfection is a goal to be reached by a gradual process. 
This law controls every sphere of life, vegetable, animal, intellect- 
ual, and moral. Every plant is developed from a seed. Our 
bodies begin in a germ; infancy is feeble and suffering. Our minds 
are subject to the same law. They are, of necessity, open to error. 
Our moral life is not an exception to this rule. Moral beings, at 
least those constituted as we are, cannot ‘avoid sin. It is incident 
to their nature and condition. It is to be outlived and overcome. 
If the world be so constituted and so directed that there is a con- 
tinued progress toward perfection ; if all evil, and especially all 
sin, be eliminated by this progress, the wisdom, goodness, and 
holiness of God will be thereby vindicated. Bruch ! asks, “ Why 
has God (der heilige Urgeist) brought men into the world with 
only the potentiality of freedom (which with him includes perfec- 
tion), and not with the actuality, but left that perfection to be at- 
tained by a long process of development? The only answer to 
that question,” he says, is, ‘‘ that development lies in the very na- 
ture of the finite. It must strive toward perfection by an endless 

1 Ligenschaften, p. 266. 


432 PART I.— THEOLOGY. [Cu. V.— Drvine ATTRIBUTES, 


process, without ever reaching it in its fulness. We might as well 
ask why God has ordained that the tree should be developed from 
a germ? or why the earth itself has passed through so many 
periods of change, ever from a lower to a higher state? or why 
the universe is made up of things finite, and is itself finite?” He 
adds the further consideration, ‘‘ that God, with the possibility of 
sin, has provided redemption by which it is to be overcome, ban- 
ished, and swallowed up.” ‘The annihilation of sin is the design 
of the whole work of redemption. ‘ The Son of Man is come that 
He might destroy the works of the devil.’ (1 John iii. 8.) Sin, 
however, will disappear only when not the individual alone, but 
when the whole race of man has reached the goal of its destina- 
tion, — and when,” he asks, ‘ will this happen ?””+ That question 
he leaves unanswered. On a following page, however, he quotes 
Klaiber 2 as saying: ‘ Divine revelation gives the only possible 
and satisfactory answer to the question, how the existence of sin 
van be reconciled with the holiness of God, an answer which satis- 
fies not only our pious feelings, but our anthropological and theo- 
logical speculations, in that it makes known the truth that God 
determined on the creation of beings, who, as free agents, were 
subject to the possibility of sin, and who were through their own 
fault sunk in evil, in connection with redemption; so that sin is 
only « transient, vanishing phenomenon in the development of 
finite beings. This is the great idea which pervades the whole of 
revelation ; yea, which is its essence and its goal.” 

It is obvious that all theories which make sin a necessary evil, 
destroy its nature as revealed in Scripture, and in our own con- 
sciousness. 


Sin considered as the Necessary Means of the Greatest Good. 


A much more plausible theory, belonging to the class of those 
which virtually, although not professedly, destroy the nature of 
sin, is that which regards it as the necessary means of the greatest 
good. Sin, in itself, is an evil; relatively, it isa good. The uni- 
verse is better with it than without it. In itself, it is an eval that 
the smaller animals should be devoured by the larger ; but as this 
is necessary to prevent the undue development of animal life, and 
as it ministers to the higher forms thereof, it becomes a benevolent 
arrangement. The amputation of a limb is an evil; but if neces- 
sary to save life, it is a good. Wars are dreadful evils, yet the 


1 Kigenschaften, pp. 269, 270. 


2 Von der Stinde und Erlosung, p. %1, Stud. der Ev. Getstl. Wiirtembergs, vol. ii. part 2 
Stuttgart, 1835. 


‘joo oon 


§ 18, B.) GOODNESS. 438 


world is indebted to wars for the preservation of civil and religious 
liberty, for which they are a small price. Better have war than 
lose the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free. Thus, if sin 
_be the necessary means of the greatest good, it ceases to be an 
evil, on the whole, and it is perfectly consistent with the benevo- 
lence of God to permit its occurrence. This has been a favorite 
method of solving the problem of evil in all ages. This is the 
idea which Leibnitz wrought out so elaborately in his “* Théodicée.” 
It has been adopted by many theologians who do not carry it on 
to its legitimate consequences. Thus Twesten! says: “If the 
world be absolutely dependent on the most perfect Being ; if it be 
the work of the highest love, power, and wisdom ; and if it be con- 
stantly controlled and governed by God, it must be absolutely per- 
fect.” Hence even sin, although like pain an evil in itself, must 
on the whole be a good. It is a necessary element in a perfect 
world. Twesten, therefore, says,? “If the world, with the sin 
and misery which it contains, produces a greater amount of good, 
an reveals the divine power and love more fully than could other- 
wise be possible, then the consistency of the existence of evil with 
the universal causality (or government) of God is thereby vindi- 
cated.” The word good in this connection, according to the com- 
mon doctrine of optimists, does not mean moral good, but happi- 
ness. The principle on which this theory is founded was propounded. 
in a posthumous treatise of President Edwards, in which he taught 
that virtue consists in the love of being. This principle was 
adopted and carried out by Drs. Hopkins and Emmons in their 
systems of theology, which for many years had great influence in 
this country. 
Objections to this Theory. 

Plausible as this theory is, it is liable to many objections. 

1. In the first place, we have no right to limit the infinite God. 
To say that this is the best possible world, is to say that God can 
make nothing greater or better; which, unless the world be infi- 
nite, is to say that God is finite. It is enough for us to believe 
that the world with its finite results, is what God in his wisdom saw 
fit to call into existence ; but that it is the best He could make, is 
a gratuitous and derogatory assumption. 

2. It is unscriptural, and contrary to our moral reason, to make 
happiness the end of creation. The Bible declares the glory of 
God, an infinitely higher end, to be the final cause for which all 
things exist. It is the instinctive judgment of men, that holiness 


1 Dogmatk, ii. p. 121. 2 Ibid. p. 180. 
VOL. I. 28 


434 PART I.— THEOLOGY. (Cu. V.— Drvine ATTRIBUTES. 


or moral excellence is a greater good than happiness. But, on this 
theory, holiness has no value except as a means of producing hap- 
piness. This cannot be believed, except under a protest from our 
moral nature. The theory in question, therefore, solves the prob- 
lem of evil by denying its existence. Nothing is an evil which 
tends to the greatest happiness. Sin is the necessary means of the 
greatest good, and therefore is not an evil. 


The Doctrine that God cannot prevent Sin in a Moral System. 


The second general method of reconciling the existence of sin 
with the benevolence and holiness of God, is, not to deny that sin, 
even all things considered, is an evil; but to affirm that God can- 
not prevent all sin, or even the present amount of sin, in a moral 
system. It assumes that certainty is inconsistent with free agency. 
Any kind or degree of influence which renders it certain how a free 
agent will act, destroys his liberty in acting. He must always be 
able to act contrary to any degree of influence brought to bear 
upon him, or he ceases to be free. God, therefore, of necessity 
limits Himself when He creates free agents. They are beyond his 
absolute control. He may argue and persuade, but He cannot 
govern. 

This doctrine that God cannot effectually control the acts of free 
agents without destroying their liberty, is so contrary to the Scrip- 
tures, that it has never been adopted by any organized portion of 
the Christian Church. Some theologians avail themselves of it for 
an emergency, when treating of this subject, although it is utterly 
at variance with their general scheme. Twesten, for example, who, 
as we have seen, in one place teaches that God voluntarily permits 
sin as the necessary means of the greatest good, in another place } 
says that He cannot prevent it in a moral system. “ Mit der 
Freiheit,” he says, “war die Méglichkeit des Misbrauchs gege- 
ben; ohne jene zu vernichten, konnte Gott diesen nicht verhin- 
dern.” That is, without destroying liberty, God cannot prevent its 
abuse. If this be so, then God cannot govern free agents. He 
cannot secure the accomplishment of his purposes, or ihe fulfilment 
of his promises. There is no security for the triumph of good in 
the universe. Angels and saints in heaven may all sin, and evil 
become dominant and universal. On this theory, all prayer that 
God would change our own hearts, or the hearts of others, becomes 
irrational. All this is so contrary to the teaching of the Bible, 
which everywhere asserts the sovereignty and supremacy of God, 

1 Dogmatik, ii. p. 187. 


§ 13, B.) GOODNESS. 435 


declaring that the hearts of men are in his hand, and that He turns 
them as the rivers of water; that He makes his people willing in 
the day of his power, working in them to will and to do, according 
to his good’pleasure ; it is so inconsistent with the promise to give 
repentance and faith, with the assertion of his power to change the 
heart ; it is so incompatible with the hopes and confidence of the 
believer, that God can keep him from falling; and so subversive 
of the idea of God as presented in the Bible and revealed in our 
nature, that the Church has, almost with one accord, preferred to 
leave the mystery of evil unexplained, rather than to seek its solu- 
tion in a principle which undermines the foundation of all religion. 


The Scriptural Doctrine. 


The third method of dealing with this question is to rest satis- 
‘fied with the simple statements of the Bible. The Scriptures 
teach, (1.) That the glory of God is the end to which the promo- 
tion of holiness, and the production of happiness, and all other 
ends are subordinate. (2.) That, therefore, the self-manifestation 
of God, the revelation of his infinite perfection, being the highest 
conceivable, or possible ‘good, is the ultimate end of all his works 
in creation, providence, and redemption. (8.) As sentient creatures 
are necessary for the manifestation of God’s benevolence, so there 
could be no manifestation of his mercy without misery, or of his 
grace and justice, if there were no sin. As the heavens declare 
the glory of God, so Ie has devised the plan of redemption, “To 
the intent that now unto the principalities and powers in heavenly 
places, might be known by the Church the manifold wisdom of 
God.” (Eph. iii. 10.) The knowledge of God is eternal life. It 
is for creatures the highest good. And the promotion of that 
knowledge, the manifestation of the manifold perfections of the 
infinite God, is the highest end’of all his works. This is declared 
by the Apostle to be the end contemplated, both in the punishment 
of sinners and in the salvation of believers. It is an end to which, 
he says, no man can rationally object. ‘* What if God, willing to 
shew -his wrath (or justice), and to make his power known, en- 
dured with much long suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to de- 
struction: and that He might make known the riches of his glory 
on the vessele of mercy, which He had afore prepared unto glory.” 
(Rom. ix 22, 23.) Sin, therefore, according the Scriptures, is 
permitted, that the justice of God may be known in its punish- 
mep‘, and his grace in its forgiveness. And the universe, without 
the knowledge of these attributes, would be like the earth without 


the light of the sun. 


436 PART L—THEOLOGY.  [Cu. V.—Drvmz ArrrieutEs. 


The glory of God being the great end of all things, we are not 
obliged to assume that this is the best possible world for the pro- 
duction of happiness, or even for securing the greatest degree of 
holiness among rational creatures. It is wisely adapted for the 
end for which it was designed, namely, the manifestation of the 
manifold perfections of God. That God, in revealing Himself, 
does promote the highest good of his creatures, consistent with the 
promotion of his own glory, may be admitted. But to reverse this 
order, to make the good of the creature the highest end, is to per- 
vert and subvert the whole scheme ; it is to put the means for the 
end, to subordinate God to the universe, the Infinite to the finite. 
This putting the creature in the place of the Creator, disturbs our 
moral and religious sentiments and convictions, as well as our intel- 
lectual apprehensions of God, and of his relation to the universe. 

The older theologians almost unanimously make the glory of 
God the ultimate, and the good of the creature the subordinate end 
of all things. Twesten, indeed, says! it makes no difference 
whether we say God proposes his own glory as the ultimate end, 
and, for that purpose, determined to produce the highest degree of 
good; or that He purposed the highest good of his creatures, 
whence the manifestation of his glory flows as a consequence. — It, 
however, makes all the difference in the world, whether the Cre- 
ator be subordinate to the creature, or the creature to the Creator ; 
whether the end be the means, or the means the end. There isa 
great difference whether the earth or the sun be assumed as the 
centre of our solar system. If we make the earth the centre, our 
astronomy will be in confusion. And if we make the creature, 
and not God, the end of all things, our theology and religion will 
in like manner be perverted. It may, in conclusion, be safely 
asserted that a universe constructed for the purpose of making 
God known, is a far better universe than one designed for the pro- 
duction of happiness. 


$14. The Truth of God. 


Truth, is a word of frequent, occurrence and of wide significa 
tion in the Bible. The primary meaning of the Greek word © 
adnGea (from é and 74) is openness ; what is not concealed. But 
in the Hebrew, and therefore in the Bible, the primary idea of 
truth is, that which sustains, which does not fail, or disappoint our 
expectations. The true, therefore, is, (1.) That which is real, 
as opposed to that which is fictitious or imaginary. Jehovah is 


1 Dogmatik, vol. ii. p. 89. 


§ 14.] _ TRUTH. 487 


the true God, because He is really God, while the gods of the 
heathen are vanity and nothing, mere imaginary beings, having 
neither existence nor attributes. (2.) The true is that which 
completely comes up to its idea, or to what it purports to be. A 
true man is a man in whom the idea of manhood is fully realized. 
The true God is He in whom is found all that Godhead imports. 
(8.) The true is that in which the reality exactly corresponds to the 
manifestation. God is true, because He really is what He declares 
Himself to be ; because He is what He commands us to believe Him 
to be ; and because all his declarations correspond to what really 
is. (4.) The true is that which can be depended upon, which 
does not fail, or change, or disappoint. In this sense also God is 
true as He is immutable and faithful. His promise cannot fail ; 
his word never disappoints. His word abideth forever. When 
our Lord says, ‘‘ Thy word is truth,”’ He says that all that God has 
revealed may be confided in as exactly corresponding to what 
really is, or is to be. His word gan never fail, though heaven and 
earth pass away. 

The truth of God, therefore, is the foundation of all religion. It 
is the ground of our assurance, that what He has revealed of Him- 
self and of his will, in his works and in the Scriptures, may be 
relied upon. He certainly is, and wills, and will do, whatever He 
has thus made known. It is no less the foundation of all knowl 
edge. That our senses do not deceive us; that consciousness is 
trustworthy in what it teaches; that anything is what it appears 
to us to be; that our existence is not a delusive dream, has no 
other foundation than the truth of God. In this sense, all knowl- 
edge is founded on faith, 7. e., the belief that God is true. 

The theologians are accustomed to say: (1.) “ Veritas Dei in 
essentia, est convenientia omnium eorum, que ad naturam perfec- 
tissimi pertinent eamque totam constituunt ; qua ratione Deus verus 
opponitur fictis ét commentitiis.” (Jer. x. 8, 10, 11; John v. 20, 
21.) (2.) “ Veritas Dei in intellectu, est convenientia cogitationum 
cum objecto.” .... (Job xi. 7; Acts xv. 18.) (8.) “ Veritas 
Dei ‘in voluntate est convenientia decreti ac propositi efficacis 
cujusque cum rationibus in intellectu probe cognitis et judicatis.” 
(Rom. xi. 33.) (4.) “ Veritas Dei in factis, est convenientia ac 
tionum cum proposito.” (Ps. xxv. 10,....) (.) ‘“ Veritas 
Dei in dictis, quee singulatim vocari solet veracitas, est convenien- 
tia verborum omnium cum recta cogitatione animique sententia, et 
efficaci voluntatis proposito.” (Num. xxiii. 19; 1 Sam. xv. 29; 
Tit. i. 2; Heb. vi. 18.) ‘ Hee cernitur (a), in doctrin’s (Is. xvi. 


438 PART L—THEOLOGY: © [Cu. V.—Drvive ArrersuTEs. 


17) ; (0), in preedictionibus, promissionibus, ut et comminationibus. 
(Num. xxiii. 19.) ”? 

To the same effect the Reformed theologian Endemann, says, 
“ Veracitas Deo duplici sensu recte adscribitur, (1.) Quatenus 
nunquam errat, quia est omniscius, nunquam errorem aliis significat, 
quia id repugnat bonitati ejus. .... (2.) Quatenus Deus ea 
actu sentit, que verbis vel factis entibus intelligentibus significat. 
Deus actionibus et sermonibus suis eum intendit finem, ut sibi 
homines credant, confidant, etc., quem finem everteret si semel a 
veritate discederet. Scriptura docet idem scl. quod Deus... . 
[est] verax, immunis ab omni errore et mendacio. . . . . Fidelis 
est Deus, quatenus ingenue aliquid promittit ; atque promissum 
certissimo complet. ... . Severitatem Deo tribuimus quatenus 
comminationes suas implet.” 2 

The philosophical theologians virtually deny that there is any 
such attribute in God.as truth. They say that what is intended 
by that term is only the uniformity of law. The efficiency of God 
is always exercised in such a way that we may confide in the regu- 
lar sequence of events. In this respect it may be said that God is 
true. Bruch® admits “‘ That this idea arises necessarily out of our 
religious consciousness, inasmuch as we embrace with full confi- 
dence what we regard as a divine revelation, and are persuaded 
that God in due time will fulfil whatever He has purposed, prom- 
ised, or threatened. This confidence is in the strongest terms often 
expressed in the sacred writings, and is the source of the firm faith 
by which the Christian receives the revelation made in Christ ; and 
of the unshaken confidence with which he anticipates the fulfil- 
ment of the divine promises.” Nevertheless, although this idea of 
the truth of God has its foundation in our own nature, and is so 
clearly recognized in Scripture, and although it enters so deeply 
into the religious experience and hopes of the believer, it is a delu- 
sion. There is no such attribute in God. It is unphilosophical, 
and therefore impossible that there should be the distinction, which 
must then be assumed, between purpose and act in the divine mind. 
The ascription of truth or veracity to God rests, says Bruch, “ on 
the assumption of a distinction in Him between thought and its 
manifestation, between his promises and threatenings, and their 
accomplishment, which not only destroys the unity of the divine 
essence, but reduces Him to the limitations and changes of time. 


1 Hollaz, Examen Theologicum, edit. Leipzig, 1763, pp. 248, 244. 


2 Compendium Theologicum, I. § 33; edit. Hanovie, 1777, pp. 97, 99. 
8 Kigenschatten, p. 250. 


§ 14] TRUTH. 489 


- . . . As the ascription of veracity to God arises out of what we 
observe in ourselves, it bears the impress of anthropomorphism, 
and has no claim to scientific recognition.” ! .He further objects to 
the ascription of truth to God, in the ordinary sense of that term, 
because God works uniformly according to law, and therefore, 
‘properly speaking, there can be no such thing as promises of 
threatenings with Him.’’? The idea is, that as God has established 
certain physical laws, and if men comply with them they are well, 
if they violate them, they suffer for it; so there are laws which 
determine the well-being of rational creatures: if we observe those 
laws, we are happy; if we disregard them, we are miserable. God 
has nothing to do with it, except as He established those laws and 
carries them out. The philosophical idea, therefore, of the truth 
of God, is the immutability of law, physical and moral. This view 
is still more definitely presented by Schweizer.2 God from the 
beginning to the end of the world is one and the same causality ; 
this, in reference to the moral world, is his truth, veracitas, fidel- 
itas, in so far as the later revelations, or manifestations of this cau- 
sality, correspond to what the earlier manifestations would lead us 
to expect. God, according to this view, is not so much a person, 
as a name for the moral order of the universe. There is, of course, 
some truth in this mode of representation. The laws of God, by 
which He governs his creatures, rational and irrational, are uni- 
form. It is true that a man reaps what he sows; that he receives 
here and hereafter the natural consequences of his conduct. If 
he sows to the flesh, he reaps corruption; if he sows to the spirit, 
he reaps life everlasting. But these laws are administered by a 
personal God, who, as He controls physical laws so as to produce 
plenty or famine, health or pestilence, as to Him seems fit, so also 
He controls all the laws which determine the well-being of the 
souls of men, so as to accomplish his designs and to secure the 
fulfilment of his promises and threatenings. The laws of a well- 
ordered human government are uniform and impartial, but that is 
not inconsistent with their human administration. 

It is a great mercy that, at least in some cases, those whose 
philosophy forbids their believing in the personality of God, believe 
in the personality of Christ, whom they regard as a man invested 
with all the attributes of the Godhead, and whom they love and 
worship accordingly. 


1 Eigenschaften, p.'250. 2 Ibid. p. 2b2. 
8 Glaubenslehre, vol. i. p. 443. 


440 PART I.—THEOLOGY. (Cu. V.—Drvine ATTRIBUTES. 


§ 15. Sovereignty. 

Sovereignty is not a property of the divine nature, but a prerog- 
ative arising out of the perfections of the Supreme Being. If God 
be a Spirit, and therefore a person, infinite, eternal, and immuta- 
ble in his being and perfections, the Creator and Preserver of the 
universe, He is of right its absolute sovereign. Infinite wisdom, 
goodness, and power, with the right of possession, which belongs to 
God in all his creatures, are the immutable foundation of his do- 
minion. ‘Our God is in the heavens; He hath done whatsoever 
He pleased.” (Ps. cxv. 3.) ‘All the inhabitants of the earth 
are reputed as nothing: and He doeth according to his will in the 
army of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth: and none 
can stay his hand, or say unto him, What doest thou?” (Dan. iv. 
35.) “All that is in the heaven and in the earth is thine.” 
Chron. xxix. 11.) ‘The earth is the Lorp’s, and the fulness 
thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein.” (Ps. xxiv. 1.) 
“Thine is the kingdom, O Lorp, and thou art exalted as head 
above all.””, (1 Chron. xxix. 11.) “Behold, all souls are mine ; 
as the soul of the father, so also the soul of the son is mine.” (Ez. 
xviii. 4.) ‘Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker! Let the 
potsherd strive with the potsherds of the earth. Shall the clay say 
to him that fashioned it, What makest thou? or thy work, He hath 
no hands?” (Is. xlv. 9.) “Is it not Jawful for me to do what 
T will with mine own?” (Matt. xx. 15.) He “ worketh all things 
after the counsel of his own will.” (Eph. i. 11.) “ Of Him, and 
through Him, and to Him are all things: to whom be glory forever. 
Amen.” (Rom. xi. 36.) 

From these and similar passages of Scriptures it is plain, 
(1.) That the sovereignty of God is universal. It extends over 
all his creatures from the highest to the lowest. (2.) That it is 
absolute. There is no limit to be placed to his authority. He 
doeth his pleasure in the armies of heaven and among the inhabitants 
of the earth. (8.) It is immutable. It can neither be ignored 
nor rejected. It binds all creatures, as inexorably as physical laws 
bind the material universe. 

This sovereignty is exercised, (1.) In establishing the laws, 
physical and moral, by which all creatures are to be governed. 
(2.) In determining the nature and powers of the different orders 
of created beings, and in assigning each its appropriate sphere. 
(3.) In appointing to each individual his position and lot. It is 
the Lord who fixes the bounds of our habitation. Our times are 


§ 15.] SOVEREIGNTY. 441 


in his hands. He determines when, where, and under what cir- 
cumstances each individual of our race is to be born, live, and die. 
Nations, no less than individuals, are thus-in the hands of God, 
who assigns them their heritage in the earth, and coutrols their 
destiny. (4.) God is no less sovereign in the distribution of his 
favours. He does what He wills with his own. He gives to some 
riches, to others, honour ; to others, health ; while others are poor, 
unknown, or the victims of disease. To some, the light of the gos- 
pel is sent; others are left in darkness. Some are brought through 
faith unto salvation; others perish in unbelief. To the question, 
Why is this ? the only answer is that given by our Lord. “ Even 
so, Father, for so it seemeth good in thy sight.” 

Although this sovereignty is thus universal and absolute, it is 
Jhe sovereignty of wisdom, holiness, and love. The authority of 
God is limited by nothing out of Himself, but it is controlled, in all 
its manifestations, by his infinite perfections. If a man is free and 
exalted, in proportion as he is governed by enlightened reason 
and a pure conscience, so is he supremely blessed who cheerfully 
submits to be governed by the infinite reason and holiness of God, 
This sovereignty of God is the ground of peace and confidence te 
all his people. ‘They rejoice that the Lord God omnipotent reign- 
eth; that neither necessity, nor chance, nor the folly of man, nor 
the malice of Satan controls the sequence of events and all their 
issues. Infinite wisdom, love, and power, belong to Him, our great 
God and Saviour, into whose hands all power in heaven and earth 
has been committed. 


CHAPTER VI. 
THE TRINITY. 


§ 1. Preliminary Remarks. 


Tue doctrine of the Trinity is peculiar to the religion of the 
Bible. The Triad of the ancient world is only a philosophical 
statement of the pantheistic theory which underlies all the religions 
of antiquity. With the Hindus, simple, undeveloped, primal being, 
without. consciousness or attributes, is called Brahm. This being, 
as unfolding itself in the actual world, is Vishnu; as returning into 
the abyss of unconscious being, it is Shiva. In Buddhism we find 
essentially the same ideas, in a more dualistic form. Buddhism 
makes more of a distinction between God, or the spiritual principle 
of all things, and nature. The soul of man is a part, or an exist- 
ence-form, of this spiritual essence, whose destiny is, that it may be 
freed from nature and lost in the infinite unknown. In Platonism, 
also, we find a notional Trinity, Simple being (76 6v) has its Adyos, 
the complex of its ideas, the reality in all that is phenomenal and 
changing. In all these systems, whether ancient or modern, there 
is a Thesis, Antithesis, and Synthesis ; the Infinite becomes finite, 
and the finite returns to the Infinite. It is obvious, therefore, that 
these trinitarian formulas have no analogy with the Scriptural doc- 
trine of the Trinity, and serve neither to explain nor to confirm it. 

The design of all the revelations contained in the Word of God 
is the salvation of men. ‘Truth is in order to holiness. God does 
not make known his being and attributes to teach men science, but 
to bring them to the saving knowledge of Himself. The doctrines 
of the Bible are, therefore, intimately connected with religion, or 
the life of God in the soul. They determine the religious experi- 
ence of believers, and are presupposed in that experience. This is 
specially true of the doctrine of the Trinity. It is a great mistake 
to regard that doctrine as a mere speculative or abstract truth, 
concerning the constitution of the Godhead, with which we have 
no practical concern, or which we are required to believe simply 
because it is revealed. On the contrary, it underlies the whole 
plan of salvation, and determines the character of the religion (in 


ahs 


§2, AJ BIBLICAL FORM OF THE DOCTRINE. 443 


the subjective sense of that word) of all true Christians. It is the 
unconscious, or unformed faith, even of those of God’s people who 
are unable to understand the term by which it is expressed. They 
all believe in God, the Creator and Preserver against whom they 
have sinned, whose justice they know they cannot satisfy, and 
whose image they cannot restore to their apostate nature. They, 
therefore, as of necessity, believe in a divine Redeemer and a divine 
Sanctifier. They have, as it were, the factors of the doctrine of the 
Trinity in their own religious convictions. No mere speculative 
doctrine, especially no doctrine so mysterious and so out of analogy 
with all other objects of human knowledge, as that of the Trinity, 
could ever have held the abiding control over the faith of the 
Church, which this doctrine has maintained. It is not, therefore, by 
any arbitrary decision, nor from any bigoted adherence to hereditary 
beliefs, that the Church has always refused to recognize as Christians 
those who reject this doctrine. This judgment is only the expres 
sion of the deep conviction that Antitrinitarians must adopt a radi- 
eally and practically different system of religion from that on which 
the Church builds her hopes. It is not too much to say with 
Meyer,} that “‘ the Trinity is the point in which all Christian ideas 
and interests unite; at once the beginning and the end of all insight 
into Christianity.” 

This great article of the Christian faith may be regarded under 
three different aspects: (1.) The Biblical form of the doctrine. 
(2.) The ecclesiastical form, or the mode in which the statements 
of the Bible have been explained in the symbols of the Church 
and the writings of theologians. (38.) Its philosophical form, or 
the attempts which have been made to illustrate, or to prove, the 
doctrine on philosophical principles. It is only the doctrine as 
presented in the Bible, which binds the faith and conscience of the 
people of God. 


§ 2. Biblical Form of the Doctrine. 


A. What that Form is. 


The form in which this doctrine lies in the Bible, and in which 
it enters into the faith of the Church universal, includes substan- 
tially the following particulars. 

1. There is one only living and true God, or divine Being. The 
religion of the Bible stands opposed not only to Atheism, but to 
all forms of polytheism. The Scriptures everywhere assert that 

1 Lehre von der Trinitdt, vol. i. p. 42. 


444 PART L—THEOLOGY. [Ca. Vi —Tax Trinity 


Jehovah alone is God. (Deut. vi. 4.) “ The Lord our God is one 
Lord.” “Iam the first, and I am the last; and besides me there 
is no God.” (Is. xliv. 6.) ‘Thou believest that there is one 


God; thou doest well.” (James ii. 19.) The Decalogue, which — 


is the foundation of the moral and religious code of Christianity, 
as well as of Judaism, has as its first and greatest commandment, 
“Thou shalt have no other God before me.” No doctrine, there- 
fore, can possibly be true which contradicts this primary truth of 
natural as well as of revealed religion. 

2. In the Bible all divine titles and attributes are ascribed 
equally to the Father, Son, and Spirit. The same divine worship 
is rendered to them. The one is as much the object of adoration, 
love, confidence, and devotion as the other. It is not more evi- 
dent that the Father is God, than that the Son is God; nor is the 
deity of the Father and Son more clearly revealed than that-of the 
Spirit. 

3. The terms Father, Son, and Spirit do not express differ- 
ent relations of God to his creatures. They are not analogous 
to the terms Creator, Preserver, and Benefactor, which do express 
such relations. The Scriptural facts are, (a.) The Father says 
I; the Son says I; the Spirit says I. (6.) The Father says Thou 
to the Son, and the Son says Thou to the Father; and in like 
manner tlie Father and the Son use the pronouns He and Him in 
reference to the Spirit. (¢.) The Father loves the Son; the Son 
loves the Father; the Spirit testifies of the Son. The Father, 
Son, and Spirit are severally subject and object. They act and 
are acted upon, or are the objects of action. Nothing is added 
to these facts when it is said that the Father, Son, and Spirit are 
distinct persons; for a person is an intelligent subject who can 
say I, who can be addressed as Thou, and who can act and can be 
the object of action. The summation of the above facts is expressed 
in the proposition, The one divine Being subsists in three persons, 
Father, Son, and Spirit. This proposition adds nothing to the 
facts themselves ; for the facts are, (1.) That there is one divine 
Being. (2.) The Father, Son, and Spirit are divine. (8.) The 
Father, Son, and Spirit are, in the sense just stated, distinct 
persons. (4.) Attributes being inseparable from substance, 
the Scriptures, in saying that the Father, Son, and Spirit possess 
the same attributes, say they are the same in substance; and, if 
the same in substance, they are equal in power and glory. 

4. Notwithstanding that the Father, Son, and Spirit are the 
same in substance, and equal in power and glory, it is no less true, 


§2, A] BIBLICAL FORM OF THE DOCTRINE. 445 


according to the Scriptures, (a.) That the Father is first, the Son 
second, and the Spirit third. (0.) The Son is of the Father 
(é« Geod, the Adyos, etkoy, aravyacja, Tod Ae00) ; and the Spirit is of the 
Father and of the Son. (¢.) The Father sends the Son, and the 
Father and Soy send the Spirit. (d.) The Father operates through 
the Son, and the Father and Son operate through the Spirit. The 
converse of these statements is never found. The Son is never 
said to send the Father, nor to operate through Him; nor is the 
Spirit ever said to send the Father, or the Son, or to operate” 
through them. The facts contained in this paragraph are summed 
up in the proposition: In the Holy Trinity there is a subordination 
of the Persons as to the mode of subsistence and operation. This 
proposition again adds nothing to the facts themselves. 

5. According to the Scriptures, the Father created the world, 
the Son created the world, and the Spirit created the world. The 
Father preserves all things; the Son upholds all things; and the 
Spirit is the source of all life. These facts are expressed by saying 
that the persons of the Trinity concur in all acts ad eatra. Nev- 
ertheless there are some acts which are predominantly referred to 
the Father, others to the Son, and others to the Spirit. The Fa- 
ther creates, elects, and calls; the Son redeems; and the Spirit 
sanctifies. And, on the other hand, there are certain acts, or 
conditions, predicated of one person of the Trinity, which are 
never predicated of either of the others. Thus, generation belongs 
exclusively to the Father, filiation to the Son, and procession to 
the Spirit. This is the form in which the doctrine of the Trinity 
lies in the Bible. The above statement involves no philosophical 
element. It is simply an arrangement of the clearly revealed 
facts bearing on this subject. This is the form in which the doc- 
trine has always entered into the faith of the Church, as a part of 
its religious convictions and experience. 

To say that this doctrine is incomprehensible, is to say nothing 
more than must be admitted of any other great truth, whether of 
revelation or of science. To say that it is impossible that the one 
divine substance can subsist in three distinct persons, is certainly 
unreasonable, when, according to that form of philosophy which 
has been the most widely diffused, and the most persistent, every- 
thing that exists is only one of the innumerable forms in which 
one and the same infinite substance subsists ; and when, according 
to the Realists, who once controlled the thinking world, all men 
are the individualized forms of the numerically same substance 
called generic humanity. 


446 PART I.—THEOLOGY. [Cu. VJ.—Tue ‘Trinit¥ 


B. Scriptural Proof of the Doctrine. 


No such doctrine as that of the Trinity can be adequately 
proved by any citation of Scriptural passages. Its constituent ele- 
ments are brought into view, some in one place, and some in an- 
other. The unity of the Divine Being; the true and equal divinity 
of the Father, Son, and Spirit ; their distinct personality ; the rela- 
tion in which they stand one to the other, and to the Church and 
-the world, are not presented in a doctrinal formula in the Word of 
God, but the several constituent elements of the doctrine are as- 
serted, or assumed, over and over, from the beginning to the end 
of the Bible. It is, therefore, by proving these elements separately, 
that the whole doctrine can be most satisfactorily established. All 
that is here necessary is, a reference to the general teachings of 
Scripture on the subject, and to some few passages in which every- 
thing essential to the doctrine is included. 


The Progressive Character of Divine Revelation. 


1. The progressive character of divine revelation is recognized 
in relation to all the great doctrines of the Bible. One of the 
strongest arguments for the divine origin of the Scriptures is the 
organic relation of its several parts. They comprise more than 
sixty books written by different men in different ages, and yet they 
form one whole; not by mere external historical relations, nor in 
virtue of the general identity of the subjects of which they treat, 
but by their internal organic development. All that is in a full- 
grown tree was potentially in the seed. All that we find unfolded 
in the fulness of the gospel lies in a rudimental form in the earliest 
books of the Bible. What at first is only obscurely intimated is 
gradually unfolded in subsequent parts of the:sacred volume, until 
the truth is revealed in its fulness. This is true of the doctrines 
of redemption ; of the person and work of the Messiah, the prom. 
ised seed of the woman; of the nature and office of the Holy Spirit ; 
and of a future state beyond the grave. And this is specially true 
of the doctrine of the Trinity. Even in the book of Genesis there 
are intimations of the doctrine which receive their true interpreta- 
tion in later revelations. That the names of God are in the plural 
form ; that the personal pronouns are often in the first person 
plural (‘Let us make man in our image”); that the form of 
benediction is threefold, and other facts of like nature, may be 
explained in different ways, But when it becomes plain, from the 
progress of the revelation, that there are three persons in the God 


§2, BJ BIBLICAL FORM OF THE DOCTRINE. 447 


head, then such forms of expression can hardly fail to be recognized 
as having their foundation in that great truth. 

2. Much more important, however, is the fact, that not only in 
Genesis, but also in all the early books of Scripture, we find a 
distinction made between Jehovah and the angel of Jehovah, who 
himself is God, to whom all divine titles are given, and divine 
worship is rendered. As the revelation is unfolded, such distinc- 
tion becomes more and more manifest. This messenger of God is 
called the word, the wisdom, the Son of God. His personality 
and divinity are clearly revealed. He is of old, even from ever- 
lasting, the Mighty God, the Adonai, the Lord of David, Jehovah 
our Righteousness, who was to be born of a virgin, and bear the 
sins of many. 

3. In like manner, even in the first chapter of Genesis, the Spirit 
of God is represented as the source of all intelligence, order, and 
life in the created universe ; and in the following books of the Old 
Testament He is represented as inspiring the prophets, giving 
wisdom, strength, and goodness to statesmen and warriors, and 
to the people of God. This Spirit is not an agency, but an agent, 
who teaches and selects ; who can be sinned against and grieved ; 
and who, in the New Testament, is unmistakably revealed as a 
distinct person. When John the Baptist appeared, we find him 
speaking of the Holy Spirit as of a person with whom his country- 
men were familiar, as an object of divine worship and the giver of 
saving blessings. Our divine Lord also takes this truth for granted, 
and promised to send the Spirit, as a Paraclete, to take his place ; 
to instruct, comfort, and strengthen them; whom they were to 
receive and obey. Thus, without any violent transition, the ear- 
liest revelations of this mystery were gradually unfolded, until the 
Triune God, Father, Son, and Spirit, appears in the New Testa- 
ment as the universally recognized God of all believers. 


The Formula of Baptism. 


4, In the formulas of Baptism and of the Apostolic Benedic- 
tion, provision was made to keep this doctrine constantly before the 
minds of the people, as a cardinal article of the Christian faith. 
Every Christian is baptized in the name of the Father, of the Son, 
and of the Holy Ghost. The personality, the divinity, and con- 
sequently the equality of these three subjects, are here taken for 
granted. The association of the Son and Spirit with the Father ; 
the identity of relation, so far as dependence and obedience are 
concerned, which we sustain to the Father, Son, and Spirit’ re- 


448 . PART I.—THEOLOGY. [Cu. VI.-- Tue Trmity 


spectively ; the confession and profession involved in the ordi- 
nances; all forbid any other interpretation of this formula than 
that which it has always received in the Church. If the expres- 
sion, “ In the name of the Father,” implies the personality of the 
Father, the same, implication is involved when it is used in refer- 
ence to the Son and Spirit. If we acknowledge our subjection 
anil allegiance to the one, we acknowledge the same subjection and 
allegiance to the other divine persons here named. 


The Apostolic Benediction. 


In the apostolic benediction a prayer is addressed te Christ for 
his grace, to the Father for his love, and to the Spirit for his fel- 
lowship. The personality and divinity of each are therefore 
solemnly recognized every time that this benediction is pronounced 
and received. 

5. In the record of our Lord’s baptism, the Father addresses the 
Son, and the Spirit descends in the form of a dove. In the dis- 
course of Christ, recorded in the 14th, 15th, and 16th chapters of 
John’s Gospel, our Lord speaks to and of the Father, and prom- 
ises to send the Spirit to teach, guide, and comfort his disciples. In 
that discourse the personality and divinity of the Father, Son, and 
Spirit are recognized with equal clearness. In 1 Cor. xii. 4—6, the 
Apostle speaks of diversity of gifts, but the same Spirit; of diver-. 
sity of administration, but the same Lord; and of diversities of 
operations, but the same God. 

It is not to be forgotten, however, that the faith of the Church 
in the doctrine of the Trinity, does not rest exclusively or princi- 
pally on such arguments as those mentioned above. The great 
foundation of that faith is what is taught everywhere in the Bible 
of the unity of the Divine Being ; of the personality and divinity 
of the Father, Son, and Spirit ; and of their mutual relations. 


§ 3. The Transition Period. 


A. The Necessity for a more Definite Statement of the Doctrine. 


The Biblical form of the doctrine of the Trinity, as given above, 
includes everything that is essential to the integrity of the doc- 
trine, and all that is embraced in the faith of ordinary Christians. 
It, is not all, however, that is included in the creeds of the Church. 
It is characteristic of the Scriptures, that the truths therein pre- 
sented are exhibited in the form in which they address themselves 
to our religious consciousness. To this feature of the Word of 


§ 3, B.] BIBLICAL FORM OF THE DOCTRINE. 449 


God, its adaptation to general use is to be attributed. A truth often 
lies in the mind of the Church as an object of faith, long before it 
is wrought out in its doctrinal form; that is, before it is analyzed, 
its contents clearly ascertained, and its elements stated in due rela- 
tion to each other. When a doctrine so complex as that of the 
Trinity is presented as an object of faith, the mind is forced to re- 
flect upon it, to endeavour to ascertain what it includes, and how its 
several parts are to be stated, so as to avoid confusion or contradice 
tion. Besides this internal necessity for a definite statement of 
the doctrine, such statement was forced upon the Church from 
without. Even among those who honestly intended to receive 
what the Scriptures taught upon the subject, it was inevitable that 
there should arise diversity in the mode of statement, and confu- 
sion and contradiction in the use of terms. As the Church is one, 
not externally merely, but really and inwardly, this diversity and 
confusion are as much an evil, a pain, and an embarrassment, troub- 
ling its inward peace, as the like inconsistency and confusion would 
be in an individual mind. There was, therefore, an inward and 
outward necessity, in the Church itself, for a clear, comprehensive, 
and consistent statement of the various elements of this complex 
doctrine of Christian faith. 


B. Conflict with Error. 


Besides this necessity for such a statement of the doctrine as 
would satisfy the minds of those who received it, there was a fur- 
ther necessity of guarding the truth from the evil influence of false 
or erroneous exhibitions of it. The conviction was deeply settled 
in the minds of all Christians that Christ is a divine person. The 
glory which He displayed, the authority which He assumed, the 
power which He exhibited, the benefits which He conferred, neces- 
sitated the recognition of Him as the true God. No less strong, 
however, was the conviction that there is only one God. The dif- 
ficulty was, to reconcile these two fundamental articles of the 
Christian faith. The mode of solving this difficulty, by rejecting 
one of these articles to save the other, was repudiated by common 
consent. There were those who denied the divinity of Christ, and 
endeavoured to satisfy the minds of believers by representing Him 
as the best of men; as filled with the Spirit of God; as the Son 
of God, because miraculously begotten ; or as animated and con- 
trolled by the power of God; but, nevertheless, merely a man. 
This view of the person of Christ was so universally rejected in 
the early Church, as hardly to occasion controversy. The errors 

VOL. I. 29 


450 PART I.—THEOLOGY.  [Cu. VI. — Tux Trinrry. 


with which the advocates of the doctrine of the Trinity had to 
contend were of a higher order. It was of course unavoidable 
that both parties, the advocates and the opponents of the doctrine, 
availed themselves of the current philosophies of the age. Con- 
sciously or unconsciously, all men are more or less controlled in 
their modes of thinking on divine subjects by the metaphysical 
spinions which prevail around them, and in which they have been 
educated. We accordingly find that Gnosticism and Platonism 
coloured the views of both the advocates and the opponents of the 
doctrine of the Trinity during the Ante-Nicene period. 


The Gnostics. 


The Gnostics held that there was a series of emanations from 
the primal Being, of different orders or ranks. It was natural that 
those addicted to this system, and who professed to be Christians, 
should represent Christ as one of the highest of these emanations, 
or Eons. This view of his person admitted of his being regarded 
as consubstantial with God, as divine, as the creator of the world, 
as a distinct person, and of his having at least an apparent or do- 
cetic union with humanity. It therefore suited some of the condi- 
tions of the complicated problem to be solved. It, however, rep- 
resented Christ as one of a series of emanations, and reduced Him 
to the category of dependent beings, exalted above others of the 
same class in rank, but not in nature. It moreover involved the 
denial of his true humanity, which was as essential to the faith of 
the Church, and as dear to his people as his divinity. All expla- 
nations of the Trinity, therefore, founded on the Gnostic philosophy 
were rejected as unsatisfactory and heretical. 


The Platonizers. 


The Platonic system as modified by Philo, and applied by him 
to the philosophical explanation of the theology of the Old Testa- 
ment, had far more influence on the speculations of the early Fa- 
thers than Gnosticism. According to Plato, God formed, or had 
in the divine reason, the ideas, types, or models of all things, which 
ideas became the living, formative principles of all actual exist- 
ences. The divine reason, with its contents, was the Logos. 
Philo, therefore, in explaining creation, represents the Logos as the 
sum of all these types or ideas, which make up the xécpos voyrés, 
or ideal world. In this view the Logos was designated as évdidOeros 
(mente conceptus). In creation, or the self-manifestation of God 
in nature, this divine reason or Logos is born, sent forth, or pro- 
jected, becoming the Adyos zpopopixds, giving life and form to all 


§ 3, B.] BIBLICAL FORM OF THE DOCTRINE. 451 


things. God, as thus manifested in the world, Philo called not 
only Adyos, but also vids, cixdv, vids povoyertjs, mpordyovos, oxia, mapddevy- 
pa, dda, ervoriun, Geod, and Sevrepos Meds, In the application of this 
philosophy to the doctrine of Christ, it was easy to make him the 
Adyos mpodopixds, to assume and assert his personality, and to repre- 
sent him as specially manifested or incarnate in Jesus of Nazareth. 
This attempt was made by Justin Martyr, Tatian, and Theophilus. 
It succeeded so far as it exalted Christ above all creatures ; it made 
him the creator and preserver of all things, the light and life of the 
world. It did not satisfy the consciousness of the Church, because 
it represented the divinity of Christ as essentially subordinate ; it 
made his generation antemundane, but not eternal ; and especially 
because the philosophy, from which this theory of the Logos was 
borrowed, was utterly opposed to the Christian system. The Logos 
of Plato and Philo was only a collective term for the ideal world, 
the ida rév ideGv ; and therefore the real distinction between God 
and the Logos, was that between God as-hidden and God as re- 
vealed. God in himself was 6 6eés ; God in nature was the Logos. 
This is, after all, the old heathen, pantheistic doctrine, which 
makes the universe the manifestation, or existence form of God. 


Origen’s Doctrine. 


Origen presented the Platonic doctrine of the generation and 
nature of the Logos in a higher form than that in which it had 
been exhibited in the speculations of others among the fathers. 
He not only insisted, in opposition to the Monarchians or Unita- 
rians, upon the distinct personality of the Son, but also upon his 
eternal, as opposed to his antemundane, generation. Nevertheless, 
he referred this generation to the will of the Father. The Son 
was thus reduced to the category of creatures, for according to 
Origen, creation is from eternity. Another unsatisfactory feature 
of all these speculations on the Logos-theory was, that it made no 
provision for the Holy Spirit. The Logos was the Word, or Son 
of God, begotten before creation in order to create, or, according 
to Origen, begotten from eternity ; but what was the Holy Spirit ? 
He appears in the baptismal service and in the apostolic benedic- 
tion as a distinct person, but the Logos-theory provided only for a 
Dyad, and not a Triad. Hence the greatest confusion appears in 
the utterances of this class of writers concerning the Holy Ghost. 
Sometimes, He is identified with the Logos ; sometimes, He is rep- 
resented as the substance common to the Father and the Son; 
sometimes, as the mere power or efficiency of God; sometimes, as 
a distinct person subordinate to the Logos, and a creature. 


452 PART L—THEOLOGY. [Cu. VL—Tue Truiry. 


The Sabellian Theory. 

Another method of solving this great problem and of satisfy- 
ing the religious convictions of the Church, was that adopted by 
the Monarchians, Patripassians, or Unitarians, as they were in- 
differently called. They admitted a modal trinity. They acknowl- 
edged the true divinity of Christ, but denied any personal distinc- 
tions in the Godhead. The same person is at once Father, Son, 
and Holy Spirit ; these terms expressing the different relations in 
which God reveals Himself in the world and in the Church. 
Praxeas, of Asia Minor, who taught this doctrine in Rome, A. D. 
200; Noetus, of Smyrna, a. p. 230; Beryll, bishop of Bostra, in 
Arabia, a. p. 250; and especially Sabellius, a presbyter of Ptole- 
mais, A. D. 250, after whom this doctrine was called Sabellianism, 
were the principal advocates of this theory. The only point as to 
which this doctrine satisfied the religious convictions of Christians, 
was the true divinity of our Lord. But as it denied the distinct 
personality of the Father and of the Spirit, to whom every believer 
felt himself to stand in a personal relation, to whom worship and 
prayers were addressed, it could not be received by the people of 
God. Its opposition to Scripture was apparent. In the Bible the 
Father is represented as constantly addressing the Son as ‘“* Thou,” 
as loving Him, as sending Him, as rewarding and exalting Him; 
and the Son as constantly addresses the Father and refers every- 
thing to his will, so that their distinct personality is one of the most 
clearly revealed doctrines of the Word of God. Sabellianism was, 
therefore, soon almost universally rejected. 


Arianism. 


Although Origen had insisted on, the distinct personality of the 
Son, and upon his eternal generation, and although he freely called 
him God, nevertheless he would not admit his equality with God. 
The Father, alone, according to him was 6 6eds, the Son -was sim- 
ply 6cés. The Son was @cds é& Oeod and not dvro-Geds. And this 
subordination was not simply as to the mode of subsistence and 
operation, but as to nature; for Origen taught that the Son was of 
a different essence from the Father, érepos kar’ otciav, and owed his 
existence to the will of the Father. His disciples carried out his 
doctrine and avowedly made Christ a creature. This was done by 
Dionysius of Alexandria, a scholar of Origen, who spoke of the 
Son as roijpa and kriopa, a mode of representation, however, which 
he subsequently retracted or explained away. It is plain, however, 


§ 4, A.J CHURCH FORM OF THE DOCTRINE. 458 


that the principles of Origen were inconsistent with the true divin- 
ity of Christ. It was not long, therefore, before Arius, another 
presbyter of Alexandria, openly maintained that the Son was not 
eternal, but was posterior to the Father ; that He was created not 
from the substance of God, but é od« évrav, and therefore was not 
dpnoovoros with the Father. He admitted that the Son existed before 
any other creature, and that it was by Him God created the world. 

It is to be constantly remembered that these speculations were 
the business of the theologians. They neither expressed nor af- 
fected to express the mind of the Church. The great body of the 
people drew their faith, then, as now, immediately from the Scrip- 
tures and from the services of the sanctuary. They were baptized 
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. 
They addressed themselves to the Father as the creator of heaven 
and earth, and as their reconciled God and Father, and to Jesus 
Christ as their Redeemer, and to the Holy Ghost as their sanctifier 
and comforter. They loved, worshipped, and trusted the one as 
they did the others. This was the religious belief of the Church, 
which remained undisturbed by the speculations and controversies 
of the theologians, in their attempts to vindicate and explain the 
common faith. This state of confusion was, however, a great evil, 
and in order to bring the Church to an agreement as to the man- 
ner in which this fundamental doctrine of Christianity should be 
stated, the Emperor Constantine summoned the First Ecumenical 
Souncil, to meet at Nice, in Nicomedia, a. p. 325. 


§ 4. The Church Doctrine as presented by the Council of Nice. 
A. The Objects for which that Council was convened. 


The object for which the Council was called together was three- 
fold. (1.) To remedy the confusion which prevailed in the use of 
several important words employed in discussions on the doctrine of 
the Trinity. (2.) To condemn errors which had been adopted in 
different parts of the Church. (8.) To frame such a statement 
of the doctrine as would include all its Scriptural elements, and 
satisfy the religious convictions of the mass of believers. This was 
an exceedingly difficult task. 

1. Because the usus loqguendi of certain important terms was not 
then determined. The word irdoracis, for example, was used in 
two opposite senses. It was often taken, in its etymological sense, 
for substance, and is used by the Council itself as synonymous with 
otcia. But it had already begun to be used in the sense of person. 


454 PART L—THEOLOGY. [Cu, VI. — Tue Trot 


As it expresses reality, as opposed to what is phenomenal or ap- 
parent, or mode of manifestation, it came to be universally used in 
the Greek Church, in the latter sense, as a safeguard against the 
idea of a mere modal Trinity. It will be admitted that great con- 
fusion must prevail, if one man should say there is only one iréo= 
racis in the Godhead, and another affirm that there are three, when 
both meant the same thing, the one using the word in the sense of 
substance, and the other in that of person. 

In the Latin Church the same difficulty was experienced in the 
use of the words substantia and subsistentia. These words were 
often interchanged as equivalent, and both were used, sometimes 
in the sense of substance, and sometimes in that of suppositum. 
Usage finally determined the former to mean substance or essence, 
and the latter a mode in which substance exists, 7. ¢., suppositum. 
According to established usage, therefore, there is one substance, 
and there are three subsistences in the Godhead. 

To express the idea of a suppositwm intelligens, or self-conscious 
agent, the Greeks first used the word zpécwrov, But as that word 
properly means the face, the aspect, and as it was used by the 
Sabellians to express their doctrine of the threefold aspect under 
which the Godhead was revealed, it was rejected, and the word 
tréoraors adopted. The Latin word persona (from per and sono) 
properly means a mask worn by an actor and through which he 
spoke; and then the role or character which the actor sustained. 
On this account the word had a struggle before it was adopted in 
the terminology of theology. 

The celebrated term 6poover0s, so long the subject of controversy, 
was not free from ambiguity. It expressed plainly enough same- 
ness of substance, but whether that sameness was specific or numer- 
ical, the usage of the word left undecided. Porphyry is quoted as 
saying, that the souls of men and of irrational animals are éoodc101, 
and Aristotle as saying that the stars are dmoovo.1, and men and 
brutes are said to be é0ovc1 as to their bodies ; and in like man- 
ner angels, demons, and human souls, are said to be all dn00bc101. In 
this sense, Peter, James, and John are én00dcv01, as having the same 
nature in kind. On this account the use of the word was objected 
to, as admitting of a Tritheistic interpretation. The Council, how- 
ever, determined the sense in which it was to be understood in 
their decisions, by saying that the Son was begotten é« rijs obcias 
tov matpos, and by denying that He was created. As God is a 
spirit, and as we are spirits, we are said, in Scripture, to be like 
Him, and to be his children, to be of the same nature. But with 


§ 4, A.J CHURCH FORM OF THE DOCTRINE. 455 


regard to the Son it was declared that He was of the same numerical 
essence with the Father; He is truly God, possessing the same at 
tributes and entitled to the same homage. Thus explained, the 
word became an insuperable barrier against the adoption of the 


Nicene Creed by any who denied the true divinity of the Son of 
God. 


Difference of Opinion among the Members of the Council. 


2. A second difficulty with which the Council had to contend, 
was diversity of opinion among its own members. All the conflict- 
ing views which had agitated the Church were there represented. 
The principal parties were, first, the Arians, who held, (1.) That 
the Son owed his existence to the will of the Father. (2.) That 
He was not eternal; but that there was a time when He was not. 
(8.) That He was created é€ ot« évrdv, out of nothing, and was 
therefore xricpa kai woinua. (4.) That He was not immutable, but 
tpexros dice. (5.) That his preéminence consisted in the fact 
that He alone was created immediately by God, whereas all other 
creatures were created by the Son. (6.) He was not God of Him- 
self, but was made God, écorouj$n; that is, on account of his ex- 
alted nature, and the relation in which He stands to all other crea- 
tures, as Creator and Governor, He was entitled to divine worship. 

One of the passages of Scripture on which the Arians principally 
relied was Prov. viii. 22, which in the Septuagint is rendered: 
éxrié pe Gpxiv 6dev abrod (He created me in the beginning of his 
ways). As Wisdom, there spoken of, was universally understood 
to be the Logos, and as the Septuagint was regarded as authorita- 
tive, this passage seemed to prove, beyond dispute, that the Logos 
or Son was created. The Orthodox were forced to explain away 
this passage by saying that xrifew was here to be taken in the sense 
of yevvav, the word elsewhere used to express the relation between 
the Father and the Son. Ignorance, or neglect of the Hebrew, 
prevented their answering the argument of the Arians by showing 
that the word mp here rendered by the Septuagint érie, means 
not only to establish, but to possess. The Vulgate, therefore, 
correctly renders the passage, “ Dominus possidet me ;”” and the 
English version also reads, ‘“‘The Lord possessed me.” The 
Arians proper constituted a small minority of the Council. 


The Semi-Arians. 


The second party included the Semi-Arians and the discijlles of 
Origen. These held with the Arians, (1.) That the Son owed 


456 PART I.—THEOLOGY. [Ca. VI. — Tur Triry. 


his existence to the will of the Father. (2.) That He was not of 
the same essence, but érepos xar’ otoiav. They seemed to hold that 
there was an essence intermediate between the divine substance 
and created substances. It was in reference to this form of opin- 
ion that Augustine afterwards said,! ‘ Unde liquido apparet ipsum 
factum non esse per quem facta sunt omnia. Et si factus non est, 
creatura non est: si autem creatura non est, ejusdem cum Patre 
substantize est. Omnis enim substantia que Deus non est, crea- 
tura est; et que creatura non est, Deus est.” 

(3.) The Son was, therefore, subordinate to the Father, not 
merely in rank or mode of subsistence, but in nature. He be- 
longed to a different order of beings. He was not avrddeos, 6 @eds, 
or, 6 dAnOuwds Oeds; but simply Ges, a term which, according to Ori- 
gen, could be properly applied to the higher orders of intelligent 
creatures. 

(4.) The Son, although thus inferior to the Father, having life 
in Himself, was the source of life, 7. e., the Creator. 

(4.), The Holy Spirit, according to most of the Arians and to 
Origen, was created by the Son,—the first and highest of the 
creatures called into being by his power. 


The Orthodox. 


The third party in the Council were the Orthodox, who consti- 
tuted the great majority. All Christians were the worshippers of 
Christ. He was to them the object of supreme love and the 
ground of their confidence ; to Him they were subject in heart and 
life. They looked to Him for everything. He was their God in the 
highest sense of the word. He was, moreover, in their apprehen- 
sion, a distinct person, and not merely another name for the Father. 
But as the conviction was no less deeply rooted in the minds of 
Christians, that there is only one God or divine Being, the problem 
which the Council had to solve was to harmonize these apparently 
incompatible convictions, namely, that there is only one God, and 
yet that the Father is God, and the Son, asa distinct person, is 
God, the same in substance and equal in power and glory. The 
only thing to be done was, to preserve the essential elements of 
the doctrine, and yet not make the statement of it self-contradic- 
tory. ‘To meet these conditions, the Council framed the following 
Creed, namely, ‘‘ We believe in one God, the Father almighty, the 
maker of all things visible and invisible; and in one Lord Jesus 
Christ, the Son of God, only begotten, begotten of the Father, that 


1 De Trinitate, 1. vi. 9, edit. Benedictines, vol. viii. p. 1161, ¢. 


§ 4, B.] CHURCH FORM OF THE DOCTRINE. 45T 


is, of the essence of the Father, God of God, Light of Light, very 
God of very God, begotten and not made, consubstantial with the 
Father, by whom all things were made whether in heaven or on 
earth ; who for us men and our salvation came down from heaven; 
and was incarnate and became man, suffered and rose again on the 
third day ; ascended into heaven, and will come to judge the living 
and the dead. And we believe in the Holy Ghost. But those 
who say, that there was a time when He (the Son) was not, that 
He was not before He was made, or was made out of nothing, or 
of another or different essence or substance, that He was a creature, 
or mutable, or susceptible of change, the Holy Catholic Church 
anathematizes.” 


B. Council of Constantinople. The so-called Athanasian Creed. 


The most obvious deficiency in the Nicene Creed is the omission 
of any definite statement concerning the Holy Spirit. This is to be 
accounted for by the fact that the doctrine concerning the Son, and 
his relation to the Father, was then the absorbing subject of con- 
troversy. Athanasius, however, and other expounders and defend- 
ers of the Nicene Creed, insisted that the Spirit is consubstantial 
with the Father and the Son, and that such was the mind of the 
Council. As this, however, was disputed, it was distinctly asserted 
in several provincial Councils, as in that of Alexandria, a. p. 362, 
and that of Rome, a. p. 875. It was opposition to this doctrine 
which led to the calling of the Second Ecumenical Council, which 
met in Constantinople, a. D. 381. In the modification of the Ni- 
cene Creed, as issued by that Council, the following words were 
added to the clause, ‘‘ We believe in the Holy Ghost,” namely : 
“Who is the Lord and giver of life, who proceedeth from the 
Father, who with the Father and the Son together is worshipped 
and glorified, who spoke by the prophets.” Some of the Greek 
and the great body of the Latin fathers held that the Spirit pro- 
ceeded from the Son as well as from the Father, and by the Synod 
of Toledo, a. p. 589, the words filioqgue were added to the creed. 
This addition was one of the causes which led to the separation of 
the Eastern and Western Churches. 


The Athanasian Creed. 


After the Council of Constantinople, a. p. 381, the controversies 
which agitated the Church had reference to the constitution of the 
person of Christ. Before the questions involved in those contro- 
yersies were authoritatively decided, the so-called Athanasian 


458 PART J,—THEOLOGY. [Cu. VI.— Tux Trinity 


Creed, an amplification of those of Nice and of Constantinople, 
came to be generally adopted, at least, among the Western 
Churches. That creed was in these words, namely: ‘* Whoever 
would be saved, must first of alf take care that he hold the Catholic 
faith, which, except a man preserve whole and inviolate, he shall 
without doubt perish eternally. But this is the Catholic faith, that 
we worship one God in trinity, and trinity in unity. Neither con- 
founding the persons nor dividing the substance. For the person 
of the Father is one; of the Son, another; of the Holy Spirit, 
another. But the divinity of the Father, and of the Son, and of 
the Holy Spirit, is one, the glory equal, the majesty equal. Such 
as is the Father, such also is the Son, and such the Holy Spirit. 
The Father is uncreated, the Son is uncreated, the Holy Spirit is 
uncreated. The Father is infinite, the Son is infinite, the Holy 
Spirit is infinite. The Father is eternal, the Son is eternal, the 
Holy Spirit is eternal. And yet there are not three eternal Beings, 
but one eternal Being. As also there are not three uncreated 
Beings, nor three infinite Beings, but one uncreated and one infi- 
nite Being. In like manner, the Father is omnipotent, the Son is 
omnipotent, and the Holy Spirit is omnipotent. And yet, there are 
not three omnipotent Beings, but one omnipotent Being. Thus 
the Father is God, the Son, God, and the Holy Spirit,God. And 
yet there are not three Gods, but one God only. The Father is 
Lord, the Son, Lord, and the Holy Spirit, Lord.. And yet there 
are not three Lords, but one Lord only. For as we are compelled 
by Christian truth to confess each person distinctively to be both 
God and Lord, we are prohibited by the Catholic religion to say 
that there are three Gods, or three Lords. The Father is made by 
none, nor created, nor begotten. The Son is from the Father 
alone, not made, not created, but begotten. The Holy Spirit is 
not created by the Father and the Son, nor begotten, but proceeds. 
Therefore, there is one Father, not three Fathers; one Son, not 
three Sons ; one Holy Spirit, not three Holy Spirits. And in this 
Trinity there is nothing prior or posterior, nothing greater or less, 
but all three persons are coeternal, and coequal to themselves. 
So that through all, as was said above, both unity in trinity, and 
trinity in unity is to be adored. Whoever would be saved, let him 
thus think concerning the Trinity.” 

It is universally agreed that Athanasius was not the author of 
this creed. It appears only in the Latin language in its original 
form; and it has modes of expression borrowed from the writings 
of Augustine, and of Vincent of Lerins, 4. D. 434. As it also cons 


§ 5, A, B.] CHURCH FORM OF THE DOCTRINE. 459 


tains allusions to subsequent controversies concerning the person 
of Christ, it is naturally referred to some period between the mid- 
dle of the fifth and the middle of the sixth centuries. Although 
not issued with the authority of any Council, it was soon univer- 
sally admitted in the West, and subsequently in the East, and was 
everywhere regarded as an ecumenical symbol. 

The Doctrine of the Trinity as set forth in these three ancient 
ereeds, — the Nicene, the Constantinopolitan, and Athanasian (so- 
called), — is the Church Form of that fundamental article of the 
Christian faith. There is no difference, except as to amplification, 
between these several formulas. 


§ 5. Points decided by these Councils. 
A. Against Sabellianism. 

These Councils decided that the terms Father, Son, and Spirit, 
were not expressive merely of relations ad extra, analogous to the 
terms, Creator, Preserver, and Benefactor. This was the doctrine 
known as Sabellianism, which assumed that the Supreme Being is 
not only one in essence, but one in person. The Church doctrine 
asserts that Father, Son, and Spirit express internal, necessary, 
and eternal relations in the Godhead ; that they are personal des- 
ignations, so that the Father is one person, the Son another person, 
and the Spirit another person. They differ not as dAXo kal dAXo, 
but as GAXos cai dAXos; each says I, and each says Thou, to either 
of the others. The word used in the Greek Church to express 
this fact was first zpécw7ov, and afterwards, and by general con- 
sent, irdoraots ; in the Latin Church, “ persona,” and in English, 
person. The idea expressed by the word in its application to the 
distinctions in the Godhead, is just as clear and definite as in its. 
application to men. 


B. Against the Arians and Semi-Arians. 


The Councils held that the Father, Son, and Spirit are the same 
in substance, and equal in power and glory. Whatever divine 
perfection, whether eternity, immutability, infinity, omnipotence, 
or holiness, justice, goodness, or truth, can be predicated of 
the one, can in the same sense and measure be predicated of the 
others. These attributes belonging to the divine essence, and that 
essence being common to the three persons, the attributes or per- 
fections are in like manner common to each. It is not the Father 
as such, nor the Son as such, who is self-existent, infinite, and eter- 
nal, but the Godhead, or divine essence, which subsists in the 


460 PART 1.— THEOLOGY. ([Ca. VI. — Tux Trmity 


three persons. The Greek words used to express that which was 
common to the three persons of the Trinity were, as we have seen, 
oicla, dvors, and at first, $rdoracis; to which correspond the Latin 
words substantia, or essentia, and natura; and the English, sub- 
stance, essence, and nature. The word selected by the Nicene 
fathers to express the idea of community of substance, was, 6p00v- 
ows. But this word, as we have already seen, may express either 
specific sameness, or numerical identity. In the former sense, all 
spirits, whether God, angels, or men, are dpoovo.w, They are - 
similar in essence, @. e., they are rational intelligences. That the 
Council intended the word to be taken in the latter sense, as ex- 
pressing numerical identity, is plain, (1.) Because in its wider 
sense dpooveros does not differ from éno.0ve10s, which word the Coun- 
cil refused to adopt. The Arians were willing to admit that the 
Father, Son, and Spirit were dépovtorx, but refused to admit that 
they were dpoovo11. This proves that the words were used in 
radically different senses. (2.) Because this Council declares 
that the Son was eternal; that He was not created or made, but 
begotten é« ris otcias rot warpds, “ of the very essence of the Fa- 
ther.” (8.) This is implied in the explanation of “ eternal gen- 
eration” universally adopted by the Nicene fathers, as ‘the eter- 
nal communication of the same numerical essence whole and entire, 
from the Father to the Son.” (4.) If the term dépoovcows be taken 
in the sense of specific sameness, then the Nicene Creed teaches 
Tritheism. The Father, Son, and Spirit are three Gods in the 
same sense that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are three men, for all 
men in that sense of the term are dpuooto1. It is the clear doc- 
trine of these Councils that the same numerical, infinite, indivisi- 
ble essence subsists in the three persons of the Trinity. This is 
still further evident from the inadequate illustrations of this great 
mystery which the early fathers sought for in nature; as of the 
light, heat, and splendor of the sun; the fountain and its streams ; 
and especially from memory, intelligence, and will in man. In all 
these illustrations, however inadequate, the point of analogy was 
unity (numerical identity) of essence with triplicity. 


C. The Mutual Relation of the Persons of the Trinaty. 

On this subject the Nicene:doctrine includes, — 

1. The principle of the subordination of the Son to the Father, 
and of the Spirit to the Father and the Son. But this subordina- 
tion does not imply inferiority. For as the same divine essence 
with all its infinite perfections is common to the Father, Son, and 


§5,C.] CHURCH FORM OF THE DOCTRINE. 461 


Spirit, there can be no inferiority of one person to the other in the 
Trinity. Neither does it imply posteriority ; for the divine essence 
common to the several persons is self-existent and eternal. The 
subordination intended is only that which concerns the mode of 
subsistence and operation, implied in the Scriptural facts that the 
Son is of the Father, and the Spirit is of the Father and the Son, 
and that the Father operates through the Son, and the Father 
and the Son through the Spirit. 

2. The several persons of the Trinity are distinguished by a cer- 
tain “‘ property,” as it is called, or characteristic. That character- 
istic is expressed by their distinctive appellations. The first person 
is characterized as Father, in his relation to the second person; the 
second is characterized as Son, in relation to the first person ; and 
the third as Spirit, in relation to the first and second persons. Pa- 
ternity, therefore, is the distinguishing property of the Father ; 
filiation of the Son; and procession of the Spirit. It will be ob- 
served that no attempt at explanation of these relations is given in 
these ecumenical creeds, namely, the Nicene, that of Constantino- 
ple, and the Athanasian. The mere facts as revealed in Scripture 
are affirmed. 

3. The third point decided concerning the relation of the per- 
sons of the Trinity, one to the other; relates to their union. As 
the essence of the Godhead is common to the several persons, they 
have a common intelligence, will, and power. There are not in 
God three intelligences, three wills, three efficiencies. The Three 
are one God, and therefore have one mind and will. This inti- 
mate union was expressed in the Greek Church by the word 
repixopnots, which the Latin words inezistentia, inhabitatio, and in- 
tercommunio, were used to explain. These terms were intended 
to express the Scriptural facts that the Son is in the Father, and 
the Father in the Son; that where the Father is, there the Son 
and Spirit are; that what the one does the others do (the Father 
creates, the Son creates, the Spirit creates), or, as our Lord ex- 
presses it, “ What things soever”’ the Father “ doeth, these also 
doeth the Son likewise.” (John v.19.) So also what the one 
knows, the others know. “ The Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the 
deep things of God. For what man knoweth the things of a man, 
save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God 
knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God.” (1 Cor. ii. 10, 11.) A 
common knowledge implies a common consciousness. In man the 
soul and body are distinct, yet, while united, they have a common 
life. We distinguish between acts of the intellect, and acts of the 


462 PART I.— THEOLOGY. [Cu. VI. — Tux Trmiry 


will, and yet in every act of the will there is an exercise of the in- 
telligence ; as in every act of the affections there is a joint action 
of the intelligence and will. These are not illustrations of the re- 
- lations of the persons of the Trinity, which are ineffable, but of 
the fact that in other: and entirely different spheres there is this 
community of life in different subsistences, — different subsis- 
tences, at least so far as the body and soul are concerned. 

This fact of the intimate union, communion, and inhabita- 
tion of the persons of the Trinity — is the reason why everywhere 
in Scripture, and instinctively by all Christians, God as God is ad- 
dressed as a person, in perfect consistency with the Tripersonality 
of the Godhead. We can, and do pray to each of the Persons 
separately ; and we pray to God as God; for the three persons 
are one God; one not only in substance, but in knowledge, will, 
and power. To expect that we, who cannot understand any- 
thing, not even ourselves, should understand these mysteries of 
the Godhead, is to the last degree unreasonable. But as in every 
other sphere we must believe what we cannot understand; so 
we may believe all that God has revealed in his Word concern- 
ing Himself, although we cannot understand the Almighty unto 
perfection. ; 


§ 6. Examination of the Nicene Doctrine. 
A. Subordination. 


A distinction must be made between the Nicene Creed (as am- 
plified in that of Constantinople) and the doctrine of the Nicene 
fathers. The creeds are nothing more than a well-ordered ar- 
rangement of the facts of Scripture which concern the doctrine of 
the Trinity. They assert the distinct personality of the Father, 
Son, and Spirit; their mutual relation as expressed by those terms; 
their absolute unity as to substance or essence, and their conse- 
quent perfect equality ; and the subordination of the Son to the 
Father, and of the Spirit to the Father and the Son, as to the 
mode of subsistence and operation. These are Scriptural facts, to 
which the creeds in question add nothing; and it is in this sense 
they have been accepted by the Church universal. 

But the Nicene fathers did undertake, to a greater or less degree, 
to explain these facts. These explanations relate principally to 
the subordination of the Son and Spirit to the Father, and to 
what is meant by generation, or the relation between the Father 
and the Son. These two points are so intimately related that they 
cannot be considered separately. Yet as ‘he former is more coms 


§ 6, A.] CHURCH FORM OF THE DOCTRINE. 462 


prehensive than the latter, it may be expedient to speak of them in 
order, although what belongs to the one head, in a goo degree 
belongs also to the other. 

The ambiguity of the word éooves has already been remarked 
upon. As ovofa may mean generic nature common to many indi- 
viduals, not unum in numero, but ens unum in multis, so dpootcs 
(consubstantial) may mean nothing more than sameness of species 
or kind. It is therefore said, that “the term homoousion, in its 
strict grammatical sense differs from monoousion or toutoousion, as 
well as from heteroousion, and signifies not numerical identity, but 
equality of essence or community of nature among several beings.’ ? 
“The Nicene Creed,” Dr. Schaff adds, “does not expressly assert 
the singleness or numerical unity of the divine essence (unless it 
be in the first article: ‘we believe in one God’), and the main 
point with the Nicene fathers was to urge against Arianism the 
strict divinity and essential equality of the Son and Holy Ghost 
with the Father. If we press the difference of homoousion from 
monoousion, and overlook the many passages in which they assert 
with equal emphasis the monarehia or numerical unity of the God- 
head, we must charge them with tritheism.” 

Gieseler goes much further, and denies that the Nicene fathers 
held the numerical identity of essence in the persons of the Trinity. 
The Father, Son, and Spirit were the same in substance as having 
the same nature, or same kind of substance. This he infers was 
their doctrine not only from the general style of their teaching, 
and from special declarations, but from the illustrations which they 
habitually employed. The Father and the Son are the same in 
substance as among men father and son have the same nature; or 
as Basil says, Father and Son differ in rank, as do the angels, 
although they are the same in nature. Gieseler says that the 
numerical sameness of nature in the three divine persons, was first 
asserted by Augustine. It was he, according to Gieseler, who first 
excluded all idea of subordination in the Trinity.? “ Athanasius and 
Hilary understood the proposition, ‘There is one God’ of the 
Father. Basil the Great and the two Gregories understood by 
the word God a generic idea (Gattungsbegriff ), belonging equally 
to the Father and the Son. Basil in the ‘ Apologia ad Cacancu 
Bes,’ says, jycis eva Fedor, ob 7O appa, GAA TH Pion dpcroyodpuer, and 
endeavours to show that there can be no question of number in 
reference to God, as numerical difference pertains only to material 


1 Schaff’s History of the Christian Church, vol. iii. p. 672. 
2 Kirchengeschichic, vol. vi. § 60, p. 823. Bonn, 1855. 


464 PART I.—THEOLOGY. [Cx. VI. —Tux Tammy 


things. Augustine on the contrary expressly excludes the idea of 
generic unity,! and understands the proposition ‘ there is one God’ 
not of the Father alone, but of the whole Trinity,” and, therefore, 
taught that there is one God in three persons.” This, however, 
is the precise doctrine of the Nicene Creed itself, which affirms 
faith “in one God,” and not in three. Basil in the place quoted 
is refuting the charge of~Tritheism. His words are, mpos 5é rovs 
érnpedLovras iypiv 7d rpiOeov, éxeivo AcyécOw Sturep Hyets eva Oedv, ete.2 On 
page 460 reasons have already been given for assuming that the 
sameness of substance taught by the Nicene fathers was not simply 
generic but numerical. On this subject Pearson, a thorough ad- 
vocate of the Nicene Creed, says, “As it (the divine nature) is 
absolutely immaterial and incorporeal, it is also indivisible ; Christ 
cannot have any part of it only communicated unto Him, but the 
whole, by which He must be acknowledged co-essential, of the same 
substance with the Father; as the Council of Nice determined, 
and the ancient fathers before them taught.”* If the whole divine 
essence belongs equally to the several persons of the Trinity, there 
is an end to the question, whether the sameness be specific or 
numerical. Accordingly the Bishop says: ‘The Divine essence 
being by reason of its simplicity not subject to division, and in 
respect of its infinity uncapable of multiplication, is so communi- 
cated us not to be multiplied ; insomuch that He which proceedeth 
by that communication hath not only the same nature, but is also 
the same God. The Father God, and the Word God; Abraham 
man, and Isaac man: but Abraham one man, Isaac another man ; 
not so the Father one God, and the Word another, but the Father 
and the Word both the same God.” 5 

Gieseler says that Augustine effectually excluded all idea of sub- 
ordination in the Trinity by teaching the numerical sameness of es- 
ence in the persons of the Godhead. This does indeed preclude all 
priority and all superiority as to being and perfection. But it does 
not preclude subordination as to the mode of subsistence and opera- 
tion, This is distinctly recognized in Scripture, and was as fully 
taught by Augustine as by any of the Greek fathers, and is even 
more distinctly affirmed in the so-called Athanasian Creed, repre- 
senting the school of Augustine, than in the Creed of the Council 
of Nice. There is, therefore, no just ground of objection to the 


1 De Trinitate, vit. vi. edit. Benedictines, vol. viii. p. 1814, d. 

2 Epistola coxxxvull. iii. 18, vol. ii. p. 1304, a. 

8 Epistola vir. edit. Migne, vol. iii. p. 115, e. 

* Pearson, On Creed, seventh edition, 1701, p. 135. ' 6 Pearson, p. 138. 


§ 6, A.] , CHURCH FORM OF THE DOCTRINE. 465 


Nicene Creed for what it teaches on that subject. It does not go 
beyond the facts of Scripture. But the fathers who framed that 
creed, and those by whom it was defended, did go beyond those 
facts. They endeavoured to explain what was the nature of that 
subordination. While denying to the Father any priority or su- 
periority to the other persons of the Trinity, as to being or perfec- 
tion, they still spoke of the Father as the Monas, as having in 
order of thought the whole Godhead in Himself; so that He alone 
was God of Himself (airééeos, in that sense of the word), that He 
was the fountain, the cause, the root, fons, origo, principium, of 
the divinity as subsisting in the Son and Spirit; that He was 
greater than the other divine persons. They understood many 
passages which speak of the inferiority of the Son to the Father, 
of the Logos as such; and not of the historical Son of God clothed 
in our nature. Thus Waterland?! says of these fathers, ‘ The title 
of 6 @cds, being understood in the same sense with abrdHeos, was, as 
it ought to be, generally reserved to the Father, as the distinguish- 
ing personal character of the first person of the Holy Trinity. 
Aud this amounts to no more than the acknowledgement of the 
Father’s prerogative as Father. But as it might also signify any 
Person who is truly and essentially God, it might properly be ap- 
plied to the Son too: and it is so applied sometimes, though not so 
often as it is to the Father.” 

Hilary of Poictiers expresses the general idea of the Nicene 
fathers on this point, when he says: ‘‘ Et quis non Patrem potio- 
rem confitebitur, ut ingenitum a genito, ut patrem a filio, ut eum 
qui miserit ab eo qui missus est, ut volentem ab ipso qui obediat ? 
Et ipse nobis erit testis: Pater major me est. Hee ita ut sunt, 
intelligenda sunt, sed cavendum est, ne apud imperitos gloriam 
Filii honor Patris infirmet.”’ ? 

Bishop Pearson® says the preéminence of the Father “ unde- 
niably consisteth in this: that He is God not of any other but of 
Himself, and that there is no other person who is God, but is God 
of Hiraself. It is no diminution to the Son, to say He is from 
another, for his very name imports as much; but it were a dimi- 
nution to the Father to speak so of Him; and there must be some 
preéminence, where there is place for derogation. What the 
Father is, He is from none ; what the Son is, He is from Him ; what 

1 Works, vol. i. p. 315. 

2 De Trinitate, 111., Works, Paris, 1631, p. 23, a. See on this point Schaff’s History of 
the Christian Church, vol. iii. § 130. Gieseler’s Kirchengeschichte, vol. vi. § 60. Pearson 
On the Creed, and especially, Bull’s Defence of the Nicene Creed, fourth section. 


& Page 35. 
VOL. I. 30 


~e 


466 PART I.—THEOLOGY. [Cu. VI. —Tax Triity 


the first is, He giveth ; what the second is, He receiveth. The First 
is Father indeed by reason of his Son, but He is not God by reason 
of Him; whereas the Son is not so only in regard of the Father, 
but also God by reason of the same.” Among the patristical 
authorities quoted by Pearson, are the following from Augustine :} 
‘Pater de nullo patre, Filius de Deo Patre. Pater quod est, a 
nullo est: quod autem Pater est, propter Filium est. Filius vero” 
et quod Filius est, propter Patrem est; et quod est, a Patre est.” 
*¢ Filius non hoc tantum habet nascendo, ut Filius sit, sed omnino 
ut sit... .. Filius non tantum ut sit Filius, quod relative dici- 
tur, sed omnino ut sit, ipsam substantiam nascendo habet.” ? 

The Reformers themselves were little inclined to enter into these 
speculations. They were specially repugnant to such a mind as 
Luther’s. He insisted on taking the Scriptural facts as they were, 
without any attempt at explanation. He says: ‘“‘ We should, like 
the little children, stammer out what the Scriptures teach: that 
Christ is truly God, that the Holy Ghost is truly God, and yet 
that there are not three Gods, or three Beings, as there are three 
Men, three Angels, three Suns, or three Windows. No, God is 
not thus divided in his essence ; but there is one only divine Being 
or substance. Therefore, although there are three persons, God 
the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, yet the Being 
is not divided or distinguished ; since there is.but one God in one 
single, undivided, divine substance.” § 

Calvin also was opposed to going beyond the simple statement 
of the Scriptures.* After saying that Augustine devotes the fifth 
book on the Trinity to the explanation of the relation between the 
Father and the Son, he adds: “ Longe vero tutius est in ea quam 
tradit relatione subsistere, quam subtilius penetrando ad sublime 
mysterium, per multas evanidas speculationes evagari. Ergo quibus 
cordi erit sobrietas et qui fidei mensura contenti erunt, breviter 
quod utile est cognitu accipiant: nempe quum profitemur nos cre- 
dere in unum Deum, sub Dei nomine intelligi unicam et simplicem 
essentiam, in qua comprehendimus tres personas vel hypostaseis : 
ideoque quoties Dei nomen indefinite ponitur, non minus Filium 
et Spiritum, quam Patrem designari: ubi autem adjungitur Filius 
Patri, tunc in medium venit relatio: atque ita distinguimus inter per- 
sonas. Quia vero proprietates in personis ordinem secum ferunt, 


1 In Joannis Evangelium Tractatus, xix. 13, edit. Benedictines, vol. iii. p. 1903, a. 

2 De Trinitate, v. xv. 16, vol. viii. p. 1286, c, d. 

38 Die Dritte Predigt a. Tage d. heil. Dreifaltigk, 5; Works, ed. Walch, vol. xiii. p. 1516 
4 Institutto, 1. xiii. 19, 20, edit. Berlin, 1834, part i. pp. 100, 101. 


§ 6, AJ CHURCH FORM OF THE DOCTRINE. 467 


ut in Patre sit principium et origo: quoties mentio sit Patris et 
Filii simul, vel Spiritus, nomen Dei peculiariter Patri tribuitur. 
Hoc modo retinetur unitas essentiz et habetur ratio ordinis, que 
tamen ex Filii et Spiritus deitate nihil minuit: et certe quum ante 
visum fuerit Apostolos asserere Filium Dei illum esse, quem Moses 
et Prophetz testati sunt esse Jehovam, semper ad unitatem essentiz 
venire necesse est.’”” We have here the three esscutial facts 
involved in the doctrine of the Trinity, namely, unity of essence, 
distinction of persons, and subordination without any attempt at 
explanation. 

Calvin was accused by some of his contemporaries of teaching 
the incompatible doctrines of Sabellianism and Arianism. Ina 
letter to his friend Simon Grynée, rector of the Academy of Basle, 
dated May, 1537, he says the ground on which the charge of 
Sabellianism rested, was his having said that Christ was “ that 
Jehovah, who of Himself alone was always self-existent, which 
charge,” he says, “I was quite ready to meet.” His answer is: 
“Tf the distinction between the Father and the Word be atten- 
tively considered, we shall say that the one is from the other. If, 
however, the essential quality of the Word be considered, in so 
far as He is one God with the Father, whatever can be said con- 
cerning God may also be applied to Him the Second Person in the 
glorious Trinity. Now, what is the meaning of the name Jeho- 
vah? What did that answer imply which was spoken to Moses ? 
Iam TtHsatI am. Paul makes Christ the author of this saying.” } 
This argument is conclusive. If Christ be Jehovah, and if the 
name Jehovah implies self-existence, then Christ is self-existent. 
In other words, self-existence and necessary existence, as well as 
omnipotence and all other divine attributes, belong to the divine 
essence common to all the persons of the Trinity, and therefore it 
is the Triune God who is self-existent, and not one person in 
distinction from the other persons. That is, self-existence is not 
to be predicated of the divine essence only, nor of the Father only, 
but of the Trinity, or of the Godhead as subsisting in three persons, 
And, therefore, as Calvin says, when the word God is used in- 
definitely it means the Triune God, and not the Father in dis« 
tinction from the Son and Spirit. 

1 Calvin's Letters, vol. i. pp. 55 56, edit, Presbyterian Board, Philadelphia 


463 PART l.—THEOLOGY. (Cu. VI.—Tue Trinity 


B. Eternal Generation. 

As in reference to the subordination of the Son and Spirit to the 
Father, as asserted in the ancient creeds, it is not to the fact that 
exception is taken, but to the explanation of that fact, as given by 
the Nicene fathers, the same is true with regard to the doctrine 
of Eternal Generation. It is no doubt a Scriptural fact that the 
relation between the First and Second persons of the Trinity is 
expressed by the relative terms Father and Son. It is also said 
that the Son is begotten of the Father; He is declared to be the 
only begotten Son of God. The relation, therefore, of the Second 
Person to the First is that of filiation or sonship. But what is meant 
by the term, neither the Bible nor the ancient creeds explain. It 
may be sameness of nature; as a son is of the same nature as 
his father. It may be likeness, and the term Son be equivalent to 
cixdv, dravyacpa, xapaxryp, or Adyos, or revealer. It may be deriva- 
tion of essence, as a son, in one sense, is derived from his father. 
Or, it may be something altogether inscrutable and to us incom- 
prehensible. 

The Nicene fathers, instead of leaving the matter where the 
Scriptures leave it, undertake to explain what is meant by sonship, 
and teach that it means derivation of essence. The First Person 
of the Trinity is Father, because He communicates the essence 
of the Godhead to the Second Person ; and the Second Person is 
Son, because He derives that essence from the First Person. This 
is what they mean by Eternal Generation, Concerning which it 
was taught, — 

1. That it was the person not the essence of the Son that was 
generated. The essence is self-existent and eternal, but the person 
of the Son is generated (7. e., He becomes a person) by the commu- 
nication to Him of the divine essence. This point continued to be 
insisted upon through the later periods of the Church. Thus Tur- 
rettin? says, *¢ Licet Filius sit a Patre, non minus tamen adrdOeos 
dicitur, non ratione Person, sed ratione Essentize; non relate qua 
Filius, sic enim est a Patre, sed absolute qua Deus, quatenus habet 
Essentiam divinam a se existentem, et non divisam vel productam 
ab alia essentia, non vero qua habens essentiam illam a seipso. Sic 
Filius est Deus a seipso, licet non sit a seipso Filius.” 

Again,? ‘Persona bene dicitur generare Personam, quia actiones 
sunt suppositorum; sed non Essentia Essentiam, quia quod gignit 
et gignitur necessario multiplicatur, et sic via sterneretur ad Tri- 


1 Locus m1. xxviii. 40, edit. Edinburgh, 1847, vol. i. p. 260. 
2 Ibid. xxix. 6, p. 262. 


§ 6, B.) _ CHURCH FORM OF THE DOCTRINE. 469 


theismum. Essentia quidem generando communicatur; sed gener- 
atio, ut a Persona fit originaliter, ita ad Personam terminatur.” 
This is the common mode of representation. 

2. This-generation is said to be eternal. “It is an eternal 
movement in the divine essence.” 

3. It is by necessity of nature, and not by the will of the Father. 

4. It does not involve any separation or division, as it is not a 
part, but the whole and complete essence of the Father that is 
communicated from the Father to the Son. 

5. It is without change. 

The principal grounds urged in support of this representation, 
are the nature of sonship among men, and the passage in John v. 
26, where it is said, ‘“* As the Father hath life in Himself, so hath 
He given to the Son to have life in Himself.” 

It is admitted that the relation between the First and Second 
persons in the Trinity is expressed by the words Father and Son, 
and therefore while everything in this relation as it exists among 
men, implying imperfection or change, must be eliminated, yet 
the essential idea of paternity must be retained. That essential 
idea is assumed to be the communication of the essence of the par- 
ent to his child; and, therefore, it is maintained that there must 
be a communication of the essence of the Godhead from the Father 
to the Son in the Holy Trinity. But, in the first place, it is a 
gratuitous assumption that, so far as the soul is concerned, there 
is even among men any communication of the essence of the parent 
to the child. Traducianism has never been the general doctrine 
‘of the Christian Church. As, therefore, it is, to say the least, 
doubtful, whether there is any communication of the essence of 
the soul in human paternity, it is unreasonable to assume that such 
communication is essential to the relation of Father and Son in 
the Trinity. 

In the second place, while it is admitted that the terms Father 
and Son are used to give us some idea of the mutual relation of 
the First and Second persons of the Trinity, yet they do not defi- 
nitely determine what that relation is. It may be equality and 
likeness. Among men Father and Son belong to the same order 
of beings. The one is not inferior in nature, although he may be 
inrank, to the other. And the son is like his father. In the same 
manner in the Holy Trinity the Second Person is said to be the 
cixwv, the dzatyacpa, the xapaxtyp, the Aoyos, the Word or Revealer 
of the Father, so that he who hears the Son hears the Father, he 
who hath seen the one has seen the other. Or the relation may 


470 PART I.— THEOLOGY.  ([Ca. VI.— Tar Triiry. 


be that of affection. The reciprocal love of father and son is 
peculiar. It is, so to speak, necessary ; it is unchangeable, it is 
unfathomable; it leads, or has led, to every kind and degree of 
self-sacrifice, It is not necessary to assume*in reference to the 
Trinity that these relations are all that the relative terms Father 
and Son are intended to reveal. These may be included, but 
much more may be implied which we are not now able to compre- 
hend. All that is contended for is, that we are not shut up to the 
admission that derivation of essence is essential to sonship. 

As to the passage in John y. 26, where it is said the Father hath 
given to the Son to have life in Himself, everything depends on the 
sense in which the word Son is to be taken. That word is sometimes 
used as a designation of the Adyos, the Second Person of the Trinity, 
to indicate his eternal relation to the First Person as the Father. 
It is, however, very often used as a designation of the incarnate 
Adyos, the Word made flesh. Many things are in Scripture pred- 
icated of the Godman, which cannot be predicated of the Sec- 
ond Person of the Trinity as such. If in this passage the Son 
means the Logos, then it does teach that the First Person of the 
Trinity communicated life, and therefore the essence in which that 
life inheres, to the Second Person. But if Son here designates 
the Theanthropos, then the passage teaches no such doctrine. 
That it is the historical person, Jesus of Nazareth here spoken of, 
may be argued not only from the fact that He is elsewhere so fre- 
quently called the Son of God, as in the comprehensive confession 
required of every Christian in the apostolic age, ‘I believe that 
Jesus is the Son of God;” but also from the context. Our Lord 
had healed an impotent man on the Sabbath. For this the Jews 
accused Him of breaking the Sabbath. He vindicated Himself by 
saying that He had the same right to work on the Sabbath that 
God had, because He was the Son of God, and therefore equal 
with God. That He had power not only to heal but to give life, 
for as the Father had life in Himself, so had He given to the Son 
to have life in Himself. He had also given Him authority to 
execute judgment. He was to be the judge of the quick and 
dead, because He is the Son of man, ¢. e., because He had become 
man for us and for our salvation. His accusers need not be sur- 
prised at what He said, because the hour was coming when all 
who are in the grave shall hear his voice, and shall come forth, 
they who have done good, unto the resurrection of life, and they 
who had done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation. The 
subject of discourse, therefore, in the context, is the historical 


§ 6, C.} CHURCH FORM OF THE DOCTRINE. 471 


person who had healed the impotent man, and who with equal pro- 
priety could be called God or man, because He was both God and 
man. “What the passage teaches, therefore, concerns the consti- 
tution of Christ’s person as He appeared on earth, and not the 
nature of the relation of the Father and Son in the Godhead. 


C. Eternal Sonship. 


There is, therefore, a distinction between the speculations of the 
Nicene fathers, and the decisions of the Nicene Council. The 
latter have been accepted by the Church universal, but not the 
former. The Council declared that our Lord is the Eternal Son 
of God, 7%. e., that He is from eternity the Son of God. This 
of course involves the denial that He became the Son of God 
in time ; and, consequently, that the primary and essential rea- 
son for his being called Son is not his miraculous birth, nor his 
incarnation, nor his resurrection, nor his exaltation to the right 
hand of God. The Council decided that the word Son as ap- 
plied to Christ, is not a term of office but of nature; that it 
expresses the relation which the Second Person in the Trinity from 
eternity bears to the First Person, and that the relation thus indi- 
cated is sameness of nature, so that sonship, in the case of Christ, 
includes equality with God. In other words, God was in such a 
sense his Father that He was equal with God. And consequently 
every time the Scriptures call Jesus the Son of God, they assert 
his true and proper divinity. This does not imply that every time 
Christ is called the Son of God, what is said of Him is to be un- 
derstood of his divine nature. The fact is patent, and is admitted 
that the person of our Lord may be designated from either na- 
ture. He may be called the Son of David and the Son of God. 
And his person may be designated from one nature when what is 
predicated of Him is true only of the other nature. Thus, on 
the one hand, the Lord of Glory was crucified; God purchased the 
Church with his blood; and the Son is said to be ignorant; and, 
on the other hand, the Son of Man is said to be in heaven when He 
was on earth. This being admitted it remains true that Christ is 
called the Son of God as to his divine nature. The Logos, the 
Second Person of the Trinity as such and because of his relation 
to the First Person, is the Son of God. Such is the doctrine of 
the Nicene Council, and that it is no less the doctrine of the Scrip- 
tures, is plain from the following considerations : — 

1. The terms Father, Son, and Spirit, as applied to the persons 
of the Trinity, are relative terms. The relations which they ex- 


472 PART 1.—THEOLOGY.  [Cu. VI.— Tue Troity 


press are mutual relations, 7. e., relations in which the different 
persons stand one to another. The First Person is called Father, 
not because of his relation to his creatures, but because of ‘his re- 
lation to the Second Person. The Second Person is called Son, 
not because of any relation assumed in time, but because of his 
eternal relation to the First Person. And the Third Person is 
called Spirit because of his relation to the First and Second. 

2. If, as the whole Christian Church believes, the doctrine of the 
Trinity is a Scriptural doctrine, and if, as is also admitted by all 
the parties to this discussion, it was the purpose of God to reveal 
that doctrine to the knowledge and faith of his people, there is a 
necessity for the use of terms by which the persons of the Trinity 
should be designated and revealed. But if the terms Father, Son, 
and Spirit do not apply to the persons of the Trinity as such, and 
express their mutual relations, there are no such distinctive terms 
in the Bible by which they can be known and designated. 

8. There are numerous passages in the Scriptures which clearly 
prove that our Lord is called Son, not merely because He is the 
image of God, or because He is the object of peculiar affection, 
nor because of his miraculous conception only ; nor because of his 
exaltation, but because of the eternal relation which He sustains to 
the First Person of the Trinity. These passages are of two kinds. 
First, those in which the Logos is called Son, orin which Christ 
as to his divine nature and before his incarnation is declared to be 
the Son of God; and secondly, those in which the application of 
the term Son to Christ involves the ascription of divinity to Him. 
He is declared to be the Son of God in such a sense as implies 
equality with God. To the former of these classes belong such 
passages as the following: Rom. i. 8, 4, where Christ is declared 
to be xara odpxa, the Son of David, and xara rvetpua aytootvys, the 
Son of God. That rvedpa éyoovvys does not here mean the Holy 
Spirit, much less a pneumatic state, but the higher or divine nature 
of Christ, is evident from the antithesis. As to his human nature, 
He is the Son of David; as to his divine nature, He is the Son of 
God. As to his humanity, He is consubstantial with man; as to 
his divinity, He is consubstantial with God. If his being the Son 
of David proves He was a man, his being the Son of God proves 
that He is God. Hence Christ was called Son before his incarna- 
tion, as in Gal. iv. 4, ** God sent forth his Son, made of a woman.” 
It was the Logos that was sent, and the Logos was Son. Thus in 
John i. 1-14, we are taught that the Logos was in the beginning 
with God, that He was God, that He made all things, that He was 


§ 6, C.) CHURCH FORM OF THE DOCTRINE. 478 


the light and life of men, and that He became flesh, and revealed his 
glory as the Son of God. Here it is plain that the Logos or Word 
is declared to be the Son. And in the eighteenth verse of that 
chapter it is said, ‘* No man hath seen God at any time ; the only 
begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father (6 dv és rév Kdd- 
mov rod watpds), He hath declared Him.” Here the present tense, 
6 Gy, expresses permanent being ; He who is, was, and ever shall be, 
in the bosom of the Father, 7. e., most intimately united with Him, - 
so as to know Him, as He knows Himself, is the Son. According 
to Chrysostom, this language implies the ovyyéveta kai Evdrys rijs obolag 
of the Father and the Son, which were not interrupted by his 
manifestation in the flesh. To the latter class belong such passages 
as the following: John v. 18-25, where Christ calls God his 
Father in a sense which implied equality with God. If sonship 
implies equality with God, it implies participation of the divine 
essence. It was for claiming to be the Son of God in this sense, 
that the Jews took up stones to stone Him. Our Lord defended 
Himself by saying that He had the same power God had, the same 
authority, the same life-giving energy, and therefore was entitled to 
the same honour. In John x. 30-38 there is a similar passage, in 
which Christ says that God is his Father in such a sense that He 
and the Father are one. In the first chapter of the Epistle to the 
Hebrews, it is argued that Christ does not belong to the category 
of creatures; that all angels (7. e., all intelligent creatures higher 
than man) are subject to Him, and are required to worship Him 
because He is the Son of God. As Son He is the brightness of 
the Father’s glory, the express image of his person, upholding all 
things by the word of his power. Because He is the Son of God, 
He is the God who in the beginning laid the foundations of the 
earth, and the heavens are the work of his hands. They are muta- 
ble, but He is unchangeable and eternal. 

There can, therefore, be no reasonable doubt that according to 
the Scriptures, the term Son as applied to Christ expresses the 
relation of the Second to the First Person in the adorable Trinity. 
In other words, it is not merely an official title, but designates the 
Logos and not exclusively the Theanthropos. 

4, Another argument in proof of this doctrine is derived from the 
fact that Christ is declared to be “the only-begotten Son of God,” 
“his own Son,” z. ¢., his Son iv a peculiar and proper sense. 
Angels and men are called the sons of God, because He is the 
Father of all spirits. Holy. men are his sons because partakers of 
his moral nature, as wicked men are called children of the devil. 


474 PART I.— THEOLOGY.  [Cu. VI. — Tux Trinity, 


God’s people are his sons and daughters by regeneration and 
adoption. It is in opposition to all these kinds of sonship that 
Christ is declared to be God’s only Son, the only person in the 
universe to whom the word can be applied in its full sense as ex- 
pressing sameness of essence. 


Objections to the Doctrine. 


The speculative objections to this doctrine of eternal sonship 
have already been considered. If Christ is Son, if He is God of 
God, it is said He is not self-existent and independent. But self 
existence, independence, etc., are attributes of the divine essence, 
and not of one person in distinction from the others. It is the 
Triune God who is self-existent and independent. Subordination 
as to the mode of subsistence and operation, is a Scriptural fact ; 
and so also is the perfect and equal Godhead of the Father and 
the Son, and therefore these facts must be consistent. In the 
consubstantial identity of the human soul there is a subordination 
of one faculty to another, and so, however incomprehensible to 
us, there may be a subordination in the Trinity consistent with the 
identity of essence in the Godhead. : 


Psalm wi. 7. 


More plausible objections are founded on certain passages of the 
Scriptures. In Ps. ii. 7, it is said, “Thou art my Son; this day 
have I begotten thee.” From this it is argued that Christ or the 
Messiah was constituted or made the Son of God in time, and 
therefore was not the Son of God from eternity. To this it may 
be answered, — 

1. That the term Son, as used in the Scriptures, expresses differ- 
ent relations, and therefore may be applied to the’same person for 
different reasons ; or, have one meaning, 7. e., express one relation 
in one place, and a different one in another. It may refer or be ap- 
plied to the Logos, or to the Theanthropos. One ground for the 
use of the designation does not exclude all the others. God com- 
manded Moses to say unto Pharaoh, ‘“ Israel is my son, even my 
first-born.” (Hix. iv. 22.) And He said of Solomon, “I will be 
his father and he shall be my son.” (2 Sam. vii 14.) The word 
son here expresses the idea of adoption, the selection of one people 
or of one man out of many to stand to God in w peculiar relation 
of intimacy, affection, honour, and dignity. If for these reasons the 
theocratic people, or a theocratic king, may be called the Son of 
God, for the same reasons, and preéminently, the Messiah may be 


§ 6, C.] CHURCH FORM OF THE DOCTRINE. 475 


so designated. But this is no argument to prove that the Logos 
may not in a far higher sense be called the Son, of God. 

2. The passage in question, however, need not be understood of 
an event which occurred in time. Its essential meaning is, “* Thou 
art my Son, now art thou my Son.” The occasion referred to by 
the words “this day’ was the time when the Sonship of the king 
of Zion should be fully manifested. ‘That time, as we learn from 
Rom. i. 4, was the day of his resurrection. By his rising again 
from the dead, He was clearly manifested to be all that He claimed 
to be, — the Son of God and the Saviour of the world. 

3. There is another interpretation of the passage which is essen- 
tially the same as that given by many of the fathers, and is thus 
presented by Dr. Addison Alexander in his commentary on Acts 
xiii. 33, “The expression in the Psalm, ‘I have begotten thee,’ 
means, I am He who has begotten thee, 7. e., I am thy father. 
‘To-day ’ refers to the date of the decree itself (Jehovah said, To- 
day, etc.) ; but this, as a divine act, was eternal, and so must be 


the Sonship which it affirms.” 


: - Acts xitt. 32, 33. 


It may be urged, however, that in Acts xiii. 32, 33, this passage 
is quoted in the proof of the resurrection of Christ, which shows 
that the Apostle understood the passage to teach that Christ was 
begotten or made the Son of God when He rose from the dead. 
The passage in Acts reads thus in our version: ‘* We declare unto 
you glad tidings, how that the promise which was made unto the 
fathers, God hath fulfilled the same unto us their children, in that 
He hath raised up Jesus again (dvacrjoas) ; as it is also written in 
the second psalm, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten 
thee.” Here there is no reference to the resurrection. The glad 
tidings which the Apostle announced was not the resurrection, but 
the advent of the Messiah. That was the promise made to the 
fathers, which God had fulfilled by raising up, ¢. e., bringing into 
the world the promised deliverer. Compare Acts ii. 30; iii. 22, 
26 ; vii. 37, in all which passages where the same word is used, 
the “raising up” refers to the advent of Christ ; as when it issaid, 
“‘ A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your 
brethren, like unto me.” The word is never used absolutely in 
reference to the resurrection unless, as in Acts ii. 82, where the 
resurrection is spoken of in the context. Our translators. have 
obscured the meaning by rendering dvacrjoas “ having raised up 
again,” instead of simply “ having raised up,” as they render it 


‘elsewhere. 


476 PART I.—THEOLOGY.  [Cu. VI. — Tue Trinity, 


That this is the true meaning of the passage is clear from the 
succeeding verses. , Paul having said that God had fulfilled his 
promise to the fathers by raising up Christ, agreeably to Psalm ii. 
7, immediately adds as an additional fact, ‘ And as concerning that 
He raised Him up from the dead, now no more to return to cor 
ruption, He said on this wise, I will give you the sure mercies of 
David. Wherefore he saith also in another psalm, Thou shalt 
not suffer thine Holy One to see corruption.” (Acts xiii. 84, 35.) 
The Apostle, therefore, does not teach that Christ was made the 
Son of God by his resurrection. But even, as just remarked, if 
He did teach that the Theanthropos was in one sense made the 
Son of God, that would not prove that the Logos was not Son in 
another and higher sense. 


Inke 7. 35. 


The same remark is applicable to Luke i. 85: ‘The Holy 
Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall 
overshadow thee ; therefore also that holy thing which shall be 
born of thee, shall be called the Son of God.” Bishop Pearson, 
one of the most strenuous defenders of ‘ eternal genération,” and 
of all the peculiarities of the Nicene doctrine of the Trinity, gives 
four reasons why the Theanthropos or Godman is called the Son 
of God. (1.) His miraculous conception. (2.) The high office 
to which he was designated. (John x. 34, 85, 36.) (8.) His 
resurrection, according to one interpretation of Acts xiii. 38. 
‘The grave,” he says, ‘‘is as the womb of the earth; Christ, who 
is raised from thence, is as it were begotten to another life, and 
God, who raised him, is his Father.”! (4.) Because after his 
resurrection He was made the heir of all things. (Heb. i. 2-5.) 
Having assigned these reasons why the Godman is called Son, he 
goes on to show why the Logos is called Son. There is nothing, 
therefore, in the passages cited inconsistent with the Church doc- 
trine of the eternal Sonship of our Lord. The language of the 
angel addressed to the Virgin Mary, may, however, mean no more 
than this, namely, that the assumption of humanity by the eternal 
Son of God was the reason why He should be recognized as a divine 
person. It was no ordinary child who was to be born of Mary, but 
one who was, in the language of the prophets, to be the Wonder- 
ful, the Counsellor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the 
Son of the Highest. It was because the Eternal Son was made of 


a woman, that that Holy Thing born of the virgin was to be called 
the Son of God. 


1 Pearson on Creed, p. 106. 


§ 6, D.] CHURCH FORM OF THE DOCTRINE. ATT 


Tt need hardly be remarked that no valid objection to the doc- 
trine of the eternal Sonship of Christ, or, that, He is Son as to his 
divine nature, can be drawn from such passages as speak of the Son 
as being less than the Father, or subject to Him, or even ignorant. 
If Christ can be called the Lord of glory, or God, when his death 
is spoken of, He may be called Son, when other limitations are 
ascribed to Him. As He is both God and man, everything that is 
true either of his humanity or of his divinity, may be predicated of 
Him as a person ; and his person may be denominated from one 
nature, when the predicate belongs to the other nature. He is 
called the Son of Man when He is said to be omnipresent ; and He 
is called God when He is said to have purchased the Church with 


his blood. 
D. The Relation of the Spirit to the other Persons of the Trinity. 


As the councils of Nice and Constantinople were fully justified 
by Scripture in teaching the eternal Sonship of Christ, so what they 
- taught of the relation of the Spirit to the Father and the Son, has 
an adequate Scriptural foundation. 

That relation is expressed by the word procession, with regard 
to which the common Church doctrine is, (1.) That it is incom- 
prehensible, and therefore inexplicable. (2.) That it is eternal. 
(8.) That it is equally from the Father and the Son. At least 
such is the doctrine of the Latin and all other Western churches. 
(4.) That this procession concerns the personality and operations 
of the Spirit, and not his essence. 

The Scriptural grounds for expressing this relation by the term 
procession, are (1.) The signification of the word spirit. It means 
breath, that which proceeds from, and which gives expression and 
effect to our thoughts. Since Father and Son, as applied to the 
First and Second persons of the Trinity, are relative terms, it is to 
be assumed that the word Spirit as the designation of the Third 
Person, is also relative. (2.) This is firther: indicated by the use 
of the genitive case in the expressions mveipa tod warpos, TOD vlOd, 
which is explained by the use of the preposition é«, as tveDua ex tot 
matpés. The revealed fact is that the Spirit is of the Father, and 
the Church in ealling the relation, thus indicated, a procession, 
does not attempt to explain it. (3.) In John xv. 26, where the 
Spirit is promised by Christ, He is said to proceed from the Father. 

That the Latin and Protestant churches, in opposition to the 
Greek Church, are authorized in teaching that the Spirit proceeds 
not from the Father only, but from the Father and the Son, is evi 


478 PART L—THEOLOGY.  ([Cu. VIl.—Tux Trinity 


dent, because whatever is said in Scripture of the relation of the 
Spirit to the Father, is also said of his relation to the Son. He is 
said to be the “Spirit of the Father,” and ‘“ Spirit of the Son;” 
He is given or sent by the Son as well as by the Father ; the Son 
is said to operate through the Spirit. The Spirit is no more said to 
send or to operate through the Son, than to send or operate through 
the Father. The relation, so far as revealed, is the same in the 
one case as in the other. 

When we consider the incomprehensible nature of the Godhead, 
the mysterious character of the doctrine of the Trinity, the ex- 
ceeding complexity and difficulty of the problem which the Church 
had to solve in presenting the doctrine that there are three persons 
and one God, in such a manner as to meet the requirements of 
Scripture and the convictions of believers, and yet avoid all contra- 
diction, we can hardly fail to refer the Church creeds on this sub- 
ject, which have for ages secured assent and consent, not to inspi- 
ration, strictly speaking, but to the special guidance of the Holy 
Spirit. 


§ 7. Philosophical Form of the Doctrine of the Trinity. 


The philosophical statements of the doctrine of the Trinity have 
been intended by their authors either to prove it, or to illustrate 
it, or to explain it away and substitute some speculative theory as 
to the constitution of the universe for the Scriptural doctrine of 
the Triune God. The two former of these classes, those designed 
for proof, and those designed for illustration, need not be discrimi- 
nated. It may be remarked in reference to them all that they are 
of little value. They do not serve to make the inconceivable intel- 
ligible. The most they can do, is to show that in other spheres 
and in relation to other subjects, we find a somewhat analogous 
triplicity in unity. In most cases, however, these illustrations pro- 
ceed on the assumption that there are mysteries in the Godhead 
which have no counterpart in the constitution of our nature, or in 
anything around us in the present state of our existence. 

We have already seen that the fathers were accustomed to refer 
to the union of light, heat, and radiance in the one substance of the 
sun; to a fountain and its streams; to the root, stem, and flower 
of a plant; to the intellect, will, and affections in the soul; as ex- 
amples of at least a certain kind of triplicity in unity, elsewhere than 
in the Godhead. The last-mentioned analogy, especially, was fre- 
quently presented, and that in different forms. Augustine said, 
that as man was made in the image of the Triune God, we have 


§7.] PHILOSOPHICAL FORM OF THE DOCTRINE. 479 


reason to expect something in the constitution of our nature answer- 
ing to the Trinity in the Godhead. He refers to the memory, 
intelligence, and will, as co-existing in one mind, so that the opera- 
tions of the one are involved in the operations of the others. Greg- 
ory of Nyssa refers for his illustration to the soul, the reason, and 
the living power, united in one spiritual substance in man. It was 
admitted, however, that these analogies did not hold as to the main 
point, for these different powers in man are not different sub- 
sistences, but different modes of activity of one and the same per: 
sonal essence, so that these illustrations lead rather to the Sabellian, 
than to the Scriptural view of the doctrine of the Trinity. 

By far the most common illustration was borrowed from the 
operations of our consciousness. We conceive of ourselves as 
objective to ourselves, and are conscious of the identity of the sub- 
ject and object. We have thus the subjective Ego, the objective 
Ego, and the identity of the two; the desired Thesis, Analysis, 
and Synthesis. In one form or another, this illustration has come 
down from the fathers, through the schoolmen and reformers, to 
theologians of our own day. Augustine? says, ‘* Est quedam imago 
Trinitatis, ipsa mens, et notitia ejus, quod est proles ejus ac de seipsa 
verbum ejus, et amor tertius, et heec tria unum atque una substan- 
tia.” Again,” “* Hee —tria, memoria, intelligentia, voluntas, quo- 
niam non sunt tres vite, sed una vita; nec tres mentes, sed una 
mens: consequenter utique nec tres substantiz sunt, sed una sub- 
stantia.”” - And,? “Mens igitur quando cogitatione se conspicit, 
intelligit se et recognoscit: gignit ergo hunc intellectum et cog- 
nitionem suam..... Hec autem duo, gignens et genitum, 
dilectione tertia copuJantur, que nihil est aliud quam voluntas fru- 
endum aliquid appetens vel tenens.”” Anselm‘ has the same idea: 
“ Habet mens rationalis, quum se cogitando intelligit, secum im- 
aginem suam ex se natam, id est cogitationem sui ad suam simili- 
tudinem, quasi sua impressione formatam, quamvis ipsa se a sua 
imagine, non nisi ratione sola, separare possit, qua imago ejus 
verbum ejus est. Hoc itaque modo, quis neget, summam sapien- 
tem, quum se dicendo intelligit, gignere consubstantialem sibi simil- 
itudinem suam, id est Verbum suum.” Melancthon adopts and 
carries out the same idea: “ Filius dicitur imago et Adyos: est igitur 

1 De Trinitaie, rx. xii. 18, edit. Benedictines, Paris, 1837, vol. viii. p. 1852, b. 
2 Ibid. x. xi. 18, p. 1366, a. 


8 Ibid. xiv. vi. 8, pp. 1443, d, 1444, a. ; 
4 Monologium, xxxiii., edit. Migne, p. 188, b. See also Thomas Aquinas, 1. xxvii. 3 edit. 


Cologne, 1640, p. 56. 
& Loci Communes, De Filio, edit. Erlangen, 1828, vol. i, pp. 19, 21. 


480 PART J. —THEOLOGY. (Cu. VI. — Tux Trinrry, 


imago cogitatione Patris genita; quod ut aliquo modo considerari 
possit, a nostra mente exempla capiamus. Voluit enim Deus in 
homine conspici vestigia sua. . . . - Mens humana cogitando 
mox pingit imaginem rei cogitate, sed nos non transfundimus nos- 
tram essentiam in illas imagines, suntque cogitationes ill subite 
et evanescentes actiones. At Pater sternus sese intuens gignit 
cogitationem sui, que est imago ipsius, non evanescens, sed sub- 
sistens, communicata ipsi essentia. Heec igitur imago est secunda 
persona. . . . . Ut autem Filius nascitur cogitatione, ita Spiri- 
tus Sanctus procedit a voluntate Patris et Fili; voluntatis enim 
est agitare, diligere, sicut et cor humanam non imagines, sed 
spiritus seu halitus gignit.” Leibnitz,) says “Je ne trouve rien 
dans les créatures de plus propre A illustrer ce sujet, que la réflex- 
ion des esprits, lorsqu’un méme esprit est son propre objet imme- 
diat, et agit sur soi-méme en pensant 4 soi-méme et @ ce qu’il fait. 
Car le redoublement donne une image ou ombre de deux substances 
respectives dans une méme substance absolue, savoir de celle qui 
entend, et de celle qui est entendue; |’un et l’autre de ces €tres est 
substantiel, l’un et l’autre est un concret individu, et ils différent 
par des rélations mutuelles, mais ils ne sont qu’une seule et méme 
substance individuelle absolue.”’ 

Of the theologians of the seventeenth century belonging to the 
Reformed Church, Keckermann was the most disposed to present 
the doctrines of the Bible in a philosophical form. We find, there- 
fore, with him a similar attempt to make the mystery of the Trinity 
intelligible. He regards the existence of God as consisting in self- 
conscious thought. As thought is eternal, it must have an eternal 
absolute, and perfect object. That object must, therefore, itself be 
God. The unity of the divine essence demands that this object 
should be in God himself, and therefore, it eternally returns to 
Him.? 

The modern theologians of Germany, who profess allegiance to 
the Scriptures, have, in many cases, taken the ground that abso- 
lute unity in the divine essence would be inconsistent with self- 
consciousness. We become self-conscious by distinguishing our- 
selves from what is not ourselves, and especially from other persons 
of like nature with ourselves. If, therefore, there were no person 
objective to God, to whom He could say Thou, He could not say I. 
Thus Martensen ? says : Although the creature can have no ade- 
quate comprehension of the divine nature, we have a semblance 


1 Remarque sur le Livre d'un Antitrinitaire Anglois, edit. Geneva, 1768, vol. i. p. 27. 


2 Onc ra, edit. Cologne, 1614, vol. ii. Systema Theologue (tract. at end of vol.), p. 72, the 
last of three pages marked 72, 3 Dogmatik, pp. 129, 180. 


g7.) PHILOSOPHICAL FORM OF THE DOCTRINE. 481 


of the Trinity in ourselves ; as we are formed in the image of God, 
we have the right to conceive of God according to the analogy of 
our own nature. As distinction of persons is necessary to self- 
consciousness in us, so also in God. Therefore, if God be not a 
Trinity, He cannot be a person. How, he asks, can God from 
eternity be conscious of Himself as Father, without distinguishing 
Himself from Himself as Son? In other words, how can Ged ba 
eternally self-conscious, without being eternally objective to Him- 
self? That with us the objective Ego i is merely ideal and nota 
different person from the subjective Ego, arises from our nature as 
creatures. With God, thinking and being are the same. In think- 
ing Himself his thought of Himself is Himself in a distinct hypos- 
tasis. Dr. Shedd! has given a similar exposition, “in proof that 
the necessary conditions of self-consciousness in the finite spirit, 
furnish an analogue to the doctrine of the Trinity, and go to prove 
that trinity in unity is necessary to self-consciousness in the God- 


head.” 


Pantheistic Trinitarianism. 


In all that precedes, reference has been made to those who have 
had for their object to vindicate the doctrine of the Trinity, by 
showing that it is not out of analogy with other objects of human 
thought. There are, however, many modern systems which pro- 
fess to be Trinitarian, which are in fact mere substitutions of the 
formulas of speculation for the doctrine of the Bible. Men spcak 
of the Trinity, of the Father, Son, and Spirit, when they mean by 
those terms something which has not the least analogy with the 
doctrine of the Christian Church. Many by the Trinity do not 
mean a Trinity of persons in the Godhead, but either three radical 
forces, as it were, in the divine nature, which manifest themselves 
in different ways; or three different relations of the same subject ; 
or three different states or stages of existence. ‘Thus with some, 
the absolute power or efficiency of the Supreme Being considered 
as creating, upholding, and governing the world, is the Father ; as 
illuminating rational creatures, is the Son; and, as morally educat- 
ing them, is the Spirit. According to Kant, God as creator is the 
Father; as the preserver and governor of men, He is the Son; and 
as the administrator of law, as judge and rewarder, He is the Spirit. 
With DeWette, God in Himself is the Father; as manifested in the 
world, the Son; and as operating in nature, the Spirit. Schleierma- 
cher says, God in Himself is the Father ; God in Christ is the Son ; 
God in the Church, is the Holy Spirit. The avowed Pantheists 


1 History of Christian Doctrine, yol. i. p. 366. 
VOL. I. 31 


‘ 


482 PART L—THEOLOGY. [Cu. VI.— Tue Trmury, 


also use the language of Trinitarianism. God as the infinite and 
absolute Being is the Father ; as coming to consciousness and ex- 
istence in the world, He is the Son; as returning to Himself, the 
Spirit. Weisse attempts to unite Theism and Pantheism. He 
pronounces the Nicene doctrine of the Trinity the highest form of 
philosophical thought. He professes to adopt that doctrine ex 
animo in its commonly admitted sense. There is a threefold per- 
sonality (Ichheit) in God necessary to the constitution of his na- 
ture. When the world was created the sécond of these persons 
became its life, merging his personality in the world and became 
impersonal, in order to raise the world into union and identity with 
God. When the curriculum of the world is accomplished, the 
Son resumes his personality.? 

1C. H. Weisse, Idee der Gottheit ; Dresden, 1833, pp. 257 ff , 273. 

The Literature of the doctrine of the Trinity would fill a volume. Bull’s Defence of the 
Nicene Creed, Pearson On the Creed, Waterland On the Trinity, Meier’s Geschichte der 
Lehre von der Trinitdt, Baur’s Geschichte der Lehre von der Trinitdét, Dorner’s History 
of the Person of Christ, in five volumes, one of the series of Clark’s Foreign Theological 
Library, a very valuable collection of important modern works, Shedd’s History of Christian 


Doctrine, and the other historical works on the doctrines of the Church, open the whole field 
for the theological student. 


CHAPTER VII. 
THE DIVINITY OF CHRIST. 


§ 1. Testimony of the Old Testament. 


Tue doctrine of redemption is the distinguishing doctrine of 
the Bible. The person and work of the Redeemer is therefore the 
great theme of the sacred writers. From the nature of the work 
which He was to accomplish, it was necessary that He should be at 
once God and man. He must participate in the nature of those 
whom He came to redeem ; and have power to subdue all evil, and 
dignity to give value to his obedience and sufferings. From the 
beginning to the end, therefore, of the sacred volume, from Gen- 
esis to Revelation, a Godman Redeemer is held up as the object 
of supreme reverence, love, and confidence to the perishing chil- 
dren of men. It is absolutely impossible to present a tithe of the 
evidence which the Scriptures contain of the truth of this doctrine. 
It is to the Bible what the soul is to the body — its living and all- 
pervading principle, without which the Scriptures are a cold, life- 
less system of history and moral precepts. It seems, therefore, to 
be a work of supererogation to prove to Christians the divinity of 
their Redeemer. It is like proving the sun to be the source of 
light and heat to the system of which it is the centre. Still as 
there are men, professing to be Christians, who deny this doctrine, 
as there have been, and still are men, who make the sun a mere 
satellite of the earth, it is necessary that a part at least of the 
evidence by which this great truth is proved should be presented, 
and should be at command to resist the gainsayers. 


The Protevangelium. 


{mmediately after the apostasy of our first parents it was an- 
nounced that the seed of the woman should bruise the serpent’s 
head. The meaning of this promise and prediction is to be deter- 
mined by subsequent revelations. When interpreted in the light 
of the Scriptures themselves, it is manifest that the seed of the 
woman means the Redeemer, and that bruising the serpent’s head 
means his final triumph over the powers of darkness. In this pro- 


484 PART 1L—THEOLOGY.  ([Ca. VI.—Drviiry or Curist 


tevangelium, as it has ever been called, we have the dawning 
revelation of the humanity and divinity of the great deliverer. 
As seed of the woman his humanity is distinctly asserted, and the 
nature of the triumph which he was to effect, in the subjugation 
of Satan, proves that he was to be a divine person. In the great 
conflict between good and evil, between the kingdom of light and 
the kingdom of darkness, between Christ and Belial, between God 
and Satan, he that triumphs over Satan, is, and can be nothing less 
than divine. In the earliest books of Scripture, even in Genesis, 
we have therefore clear intimations of two great truths; first, that 
there is a plurality of persons in the Godhead ; and secondly, that 
one of those persons is specially concerned in the salvation of men, 
—in their guidance, government, instruction, and ultimate de- 
liverance from all the evils of their apostasy. The language em- 
ployed in the record of the creation of man, ‘ Let us make man, 
in our image, after our likeness,” admits of no satisfactory explana- 
tion other than that furnished by the doctrine of the Trinity. 


Jehovah and the Angel Jehovah. 


On this primary and fundamental revelation of this great 
truth all the subsequent revelations of Scripture are founded. As 
there is more than one person in the Godhead, we find at once the 
distinction between Jehovah as the messenger, a mediator, and 
Jehovah as He who sends, between the Father and the Son, as co- 
equal, co-eternal persons, which runs through the Bible, with ever- 
increasing clearness. This is not an arbitrary or unauthorized in- 
terpretation of the Old Testament scriptures. In Luke xxiv. 27, 
it is said of our Lord, that ‘*beginning at Moses, and all the 
prophets, He expounded unto them in all the Scriptures the things 
concerning Himself.” Moses therefore did testify of Christ; and we 
have a sure ground on which to rest in interpreting the passages 
of the Old Testament, which set forth the person and work of the 
great dcliverer, as referring to Christ. 

He who was promised to Adam as the seed of the woman, it 
was next declared should be the seed of Abraham. That this does 
not refer to his descendants collectively, but to Christ individually, 
we know from the direct assertion of the Apostle (Gal. iii. 16), and 
from the fulfilment of the promise. It is not through the children 
of Abraham as a nation, but through Christ, that all the nations of 
the earth are blessed. And the blessing referred to, the promise 
to Abraham, which, as the Apostle says, has come upon us, is the 
promise of redemption. Abraham therefore saw the day of Christ 


§1, AJ THE DIVINITY OF CHRIST. 485 


and was glad, and as our Lord said, Before Abraham was I am. 
This proves that the person addisted as the seed of the woman 
and as the seed of Abraham, through whom redemption was to be 
effected, was to be both God and man. He could not be the seed 
of Abraham unless a man, and he could not be the Saviour of men 
unless God. 

We accordingly find throughout the Old Testament constant 
mention made of a person distinct from Jehovah, as a person, to 
whom nevertheless the titles, attributes, and works of Jehovah are 
ascribed. This person is called the irae) TN, mn Ts'29, ITH, 
miny, oyidy. He claims divine authority, exercises divine prerog- 
atives, and receives divine homage. If this were a casual matter, 
if in one or two instances the’messenger spoke in the name of him 
who sent him, we might assume that the person thus designated 
was an ordinary angel or minister of God. But when this is a 
pervading representation of the Bible; when we find that these 
terms are applied, not first to one, and then to another angel indis- 
criminately, but to one particular angel ; that the person so desig- 
nated is also called the Son of God, the Mighty God; that the 
work attributed to him is elsewhere attributed to God himself; and 
that in the New Testament, this manifested Jehovah, who led his 
people under the Old Testament economy, is declared to be the Son 
of God, the Adyos, who was manifested in the flesh, it becomes cer- 
tain that by the angel of Jehovah in the early books of Scripture, 
we are to understand a divine person, distinct from the Father. 


A. The Book of Genesis. 


Thus as early as Gen. xvi. 7, the angel of Jehovah appears to 
Hagar and says, “I will multiply thy seed exceedingly, that it 
shall not be numbered for multitude.” And Hagar, it is said, 
* called the name of Jehovah that spake unto her [Attah el Rot] 
Thou God seest me’ ” (ver. 13). This angel therefore is declared 
to be Jehovah, and promises what God only. could perform. Again, 
in Gen. xvili. 1, it is said, Jehovah appeared to Abraham in the 
plains of Mamre, who promised to him the birth of Isaac. In ver. 
13, he is again called Jehovah. Jehovah said, “Is anything too 
hard for Jehovah? At the time appointed I will return unto 
thee . . . . and Sarah shall have a son.” As the angels turned 
toward Sodom, one of them, called Jehovah, said, ‘Shall I hide 
from Abraham that thing which I do?” and, “ Jehovah said, Be- 
cause the cry of Sodom.and Gomorrah is great, and because their 


486 PART I.— THEOLOGY.  [Cu. VI.—Drvimiry or Carist 


sin is very grievous, I will go down now and see,” etc., and 
Abraham, it is added, stood before Jehovah. Through the whole 
of Abraham’s intercession in behalf of the cities of the plain, the 
angel is addressed as Adonai, a title given only to the true God, 
and speaks as Jehovah, and assumes the authority of God, to 
pardon or punish as to him seems fit. When the execution of the 
sentence pronounced on Sodom is mentioned, it is said, “ Jchovah 
rained . . . . brimstone and fire from Jehovah out of heaven.” 
With regard to this and similar remarkable expressions, the ques- 
tion is not, What may they mean? but, What do they mean? Taken 
by themselves they may be explained away, but taken in the light 
of the connected revelations of God on the subject, it becomes ap- 
parent that Jehovah is distinguished as a person from Jehovah ; 
and therefore that in the Godhead there is more than one person to 
whom the name Jehovah belongs. In this case, the words “ brim- 
stone and fire”? may be connected with the words ‘from Jehovah,” 
in the sense of “fire of God”’ as a figurative expression for the 
lightning. The passage would then mean simply, “ Jehovah rained 
lightning on Sodom and Gomorrah.” But this is not only against 
the authorized punctuation of the passage as indicated by the 
accents, but also against the analogy of Scripture. That is, it is 
an unnatural interpretation, and brings this passage into conflict 
with those in which the distinction between the angel of Jehovah 
and Jehovah, 7. ¢., between the persons of the Godhead, is clearly 
indicated. 

In Gen. xxii. 2, God commands Abraham to offer up Isaac as a 
sacrifice. The angel of Jehovah arrests his hand at the moment 
of immolation, and says (ver. 12), “‘ Now I know that thou fearest 
God, seeing thou hast not withheld thy son, thine only son, from 
me.’ And in ver. 16, the angel of the Lord said, « By myself 
have I sworn, saith Jehovah .... that in blessing I will bless 
thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed.” And Abraham 
called the name of that place “ Jehovah-jireh.” Here God, the 
angel of Jehovah, and Jehovah are names given to the same per- 
son, who swears by Himself and promises the blessing of a numer- 
ous posterity to Abraham. The angel of Jehovah must therefore 
be a divine person. 

In J acob’s vision, recorded Gen. xxviii. 11-22, he saw a ladder 
reaching to heaven, “and behold Jehovah stood above it, and said, 
T am the Lorp God of Abraham thy father, and the God of Isaac: 
the land whereon thou liest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed. 
And thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth.” Here the person 


§1, B.) THE DIVINITY OF CHRIST.” 487 


elsewhere called the angel of Jehovah, and who had given the 
same promise to Abraham, is called the Lord God of Abraliam and 
the God of Israel. In Gen. xxxii. 24-32, Jacob is said to have 
wrestled with an angel, who blessed him, and in seeing whom 
Jacob said, ** I have seen God face to face.” The prophet Hosea, 
xii. 4, in referring to this event, says, “‘ Jacob had power over the 
angel, and prevailed: he wept, and made supplication unto him: 
he found him in Beth-el, and there he spake with us; even Jehovah 
God of Hosts ; Jehovah is his memorial.” The angel with whom 
Jacob wrestled, was the Lord God of Hosts. 


B. The other Historical Books of the Old Testament. 


In Exodus iii. we have the account of the revelation of God 
to Moses on Mount Horeb. ‘The angel of the Lorp,” it is 
said, ‘appeared unto him in a flame of fire out of the midst of a 
bush.” And Moses turned to see this great sight, ‘¢and when 
Jehovah saw that he turned aside to see, God called unto him, 
out of the midst of the bush . . . . and said, Draw not nigh 
hither: put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon 
thou standest is holy ground. Moreover he said, I am the God of 
thy father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God 
of Jacob. And Moses hid his face; for he was afraid to look 
upon God.” Here the angel of Jehovah is identical with Jeho- 
vah, and is declared to be the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. 
The personal distinction between Jehovah and the angel of Je- 
hovah (%. e., between the Father and the Son, as these persons are 
elsewhere, and usually in the later Scriptures, designated), is 
clearly presented in Ex. xxiii. 20, where it is said, “* Behold, I 
send an angel before thee, to keep thee in the way, and to bring 
thee into the place which I have prepared. Beware of him, and 
obey his voice, provoke him not; for he will not pardon your 
transgressions: for my name is in him.” The last phrase is equiv- 
alent to, ‘I am in him.” By the name of God, is often meant 
God himself as manifested. Thus it is said of the temple, 1 Kings 
viii. 29, “My name shall be there,” 7. ¢., * There will I dwell.” 
As in the New Testament the Father is said to send the Son, and 
to be in Him; so here Jehovah is said to send the angel of Jehovah 
and to be in him. And as the Son of Man had power on earth to 
forgive sin, so the angel of Jehovah had authority to forgive or 
punish at his pleasure. Michaelis, in his marginal annotations to 
his edition of the Hebrew Bible, says in reference to this passage 
(Bx. xxiii. 20): “ Bechai ex Kabbala docet, hune angelum non 


488 PART I.— THEOLOGY.  [Cu. VII. — Divinity or Carist 


esse ex numero creatorum existentium extra Dei essentiam, sed ex 
emanationibus, que intra Dei essentiam subsistunt, sic in Tan- 
chuma explicari, quod sit Metatron, Princeps faciei, J ohn vi. 46.” 
That the angel of Jehovah is a divine person, is further manifest 
from the account given in Exodus xxxii. and xxxili. of what God 
said to Moses after the people had sinned in worshipping the golden 
calf. In punishment of that offence God threatened no longer per- 
sonally to attend the people. In consequence of this manifestation 
of the divine displeasure the whole congregation were assembled 
before the door of the Tabernacle, and humbled themselves be- 
fore God. And Jehovah descended and spake unto Moses face 
to face as a man speaketh unto his friend. And Moses inter- 
ceded for the people and said, If thy presence go not with us 
carry us not up hence. And Jehovah said, My presence (4. e., I 
myself) shall go with thee and I will give thee rest. This shows 
that a divine person, Jehovah, had previously guided the people, 
and that on their repentance, He promised to continue with them. 
This person, called the angel of Jehovah, Jehovah himself, is in 
Is. xiii. 9, called “‘the angel of the face of Jehovah,” 7, é., the 
angel or the messenger, who is the image of God. It can hardly 
be doubted, therefore, that this angel was the Son of God, sent by 
Him and therefore called his angel; who in Is. Ixiii. is designated 
as the Saviour of Israel and the Redeemer of Jacob; who came 
to reveal God, as He was the brightness of his glory and the ex- 
press image of his person, in whom was his name, or, as it is 
expressed in the New Testament, the fulness of the Godhead; 
who in the fulness of time, for us men and for our salvation, 
became flesh, and revealed his glory as the only begotten Son full 
of grace and truth. 

In subsequent periods of the history of God’s people this same 
divine person appears as the leader and God of Israel. He mani- 
fested himself to Joshua (v. 14) as “Prince of the host of the 
Lord”; to Gideon (Judges vi. 11), as the angel of Jehovah, and 
spake to him, saying, 7. e., Jehovah said to him, Go in this thy 
might and thou shalt save Israel from the hand of the Midianites. 
In verse 16 it is again said, ‘* Jehovah said unto him surely I. will 
be with thee, and thou shalt smite the Midianites as one man.” 
When Gideon became aware who it was that spoke to him he ex- 
claimed, “* Alas, O Lord God, for because I have seen the angel 
of Jehovah face to face. And Jehovah said unto him, Peace be 
unto thee; fear not: thou shalt not die.” The same angel ap- 
peared to Manoah and promised him a son, and revealed himself 


§1,C.] THE DIVINITY OF CHRIST. 489 


as he had done to Gideon by causing fire to issue from a rock and 
consume the sacrifice which had been placed upon it. When 
Manoah knew that it was the angel of Jehovah, he said unto his 
wife, “* We shall surely die, because we have seen God.” 


C. Different Modes of explaining these Passages: 


There are only three methods on which these and similar pas- 
sages in the Old Testament can with any regard to the divine au- 
thority of the Scriptures be explained. The one is that the angel 
of Jehovah is a created angel, one of the spirits who wait continu- 
ally on God and do his will. The fact that he assumes divine 
titles, claims divine prerogatives, and accepts divine homage, is 
explained on the principle, that the representative has a right to the 
titles and honours of the Being, or person whom he represents. He 
speaks as God because God speaks through him. This hypothesis, 
which was early and extensively adopted, might be admitted if the 
eases of the kind were few in number, and if the person designated 
as the angel of Jehovah did not so obviously claim to be himself 
Jehovah. And what is a more decisive objection to this mode of 
interpretation, is the authority of the subsequent parts of the Word 
of God. These passages do not stand alone. The Church might 
well hesitate on the ground of these early revelations to admit the 
doctrine of a plurality of persons in the Godhead. If everywhere 
else in Scripture God were revealed as only one person, almost any 
degree of violence of interpretation might be allowed to bring 
these passages into harmony with that revelation. But as the re- 
verse is true; as with ever increasing clearness the existence of 
three persons in the Godhead is made known in Scripture, it 
becomes in the highest degree unnatural to explain these passages 
otherwise than in accordance with that doctrine. Besides this we 
have the express testimony of the inspired writers of the New 
Testament, that the angel of the Lord, the manifested Jehovah who 
led the Israelites through the wilderness, and who dwelt in the 
temple, was Christ ; that is, was the Adyos, or Eternal Son of God, 
who became flesh and fulfilled the work which it was predicted the 
Messiah should accomplish. The Apostles do not hesitate to apply 
to Christ the language of the Old Testament used to set forth the 
majesty, the works, or the kingdom of the Jehovah of the Hebrew 
Scriptures. (John xii. 41; Rom. xiv. 11; 1 Cor. x. 4; Heb. i. 
10-13, and often elsewhere.) The New Testament, therefore, 
clearly identifies the Logos or Son of God with the Angel of Je- 
hovah, or Messenger of the Covenant, of the Old Testament. 


490 PART I1.—THEOLOGY.  [Cu. VII.—Drvmiry or Carist 


The second hypothesis on which these passages have been ex 
plained, admits that the angel of the Lord is a really divine per-. 
son, but denies that he is personally distinguished from Jehovah. 
It was one and the same person who sent and was sent, was the 
speaker and the one spoken to. But this assumption does such 
violence to all just rules of interpretation, and is so inconsistent 
with the subsequent revelations of the Word of God, that it has 
found little favour in the Church. We are, therefore, shut up to 
the only other mode of explaining the passages in question, which 
has been almost universally adopted in the Church, at least since 
the Reformation. This assumes the progressive character of divine 
revelation, and interprets the obscure intimations of the early 
Scriptures by the clearer light of subsequent communications. The 
angel, who appeared to Hagar, to Abraham, to Moses, to Joshua, 
to Gideon, and to Manoah, who was called Jehovah and worshipped 
as Adonai, who claimed divine homage and exercised divine power, 
whom the psalmists and prophets set forth as the Son of God, as 
the Counsellor, the Prince of Peace, the mighty God, and whom 
they predicted was to be born of a virgin, and to whom every knee 
should bow and every tongue confess, of things in heaven and 
things on earth, and things under the earth, is none other than He 
whom we now recognize and worship as our God and Saviour Jesus 
Christ. It was the Adyos doapxos whom the Israelites worshipped 
and obeyed ; and it is the Aédyos &capxos whom we acknowledge as 
our Lord and God. 

It is universally admitted that the Old Testament does predict a 
Messiah, one who was to appear in the fulness of time to effect 
the redemption of his people, and through whom the knowledge of 
the true religion was to be extended throughout the world. While 
it is clearly revealed that this Redeemer was to be the seed of the 
woman, the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Judah, and of the 
house of David, it was no less clearly revealed that He was to be a 
divine person. He is presented under the different aspects of a 
triumphant king, a suffering martyr, and a divine person. Some- 
times these representations are all combined in the descriptions 
given of the coming Deliverer; sometimes the one, and sometimes 
the other view of his character is held up either exclusively or most 
prominently in the ‘prophetic writings. They, however, ae all 
exhibited in the Hebrew Scriptures, as they all combine and har- 
monize in the person and work of our Lord and Saviour. 


$1, D.] THE DIVINITY OF CHRIST. 491 


D. The Psalms. 

In the second Psalm, the heathen are represented as combining 
against the Messiah, verses 1-8. God derides their efforts, verses 
4,5. He declares his purpose to constitute the Messiah king in 
Zion. That this Messiah is a divine person is plain: (1.) Because 
He is called the Son of God, which, as has been shown, implies 
equality with God. (2.) He is invested with universal and abso- 
lute dominion. (8.) He is the Jehovah whom the people are 
commanded in verse 11 to worship. (4.) Because all are required 
to acknowledge his authority and do Him homage. (5.) Be- 
cause those are pronounced blessed who put their trust in Him, 
whereas the Scriptures declared them to be cursed who put their 
trust in princes. 

In the twenty-second Psalm, a sufferer is described whose words 
our Lord upon the cross appropriates to Himself, verses 1-19. He 
prays for deliverance, verses 19-21. .The consequences of that 
deliverance are such as prove that the subject of the psalm must 
be a divine person. His sufferings render it certain, (1.) That 
all good men will fear and love God because He rescued this suf- 
ferer from his enemies. (2.) That provision will be made for 
the wants of all men. (38.) That all nations will be converted 
unto God. (4.) That the blessings which He secures will last 
forever. 

In the forty-fifth Psalm a king is described who must be a 
divine person. (1.) Because his perfect excellence is the ground 
of the praise rendered to Him. (2.) Because his kingdom is de- 
clared to be righteous and everlasting. (8.) He is addressed as 
God, ‘‘ Thy throne O God is for ever and ever,” which is quoted 
Heb. i. 8, and applied to Christ for the very purpose of proving 
that He is entitled to the worship of all intelligent creatures. 
(4.) The Church is declared to be his bride, which implies that 
He is to his people the object of supreme love and confidence. 

The seventy-second Psalm contains a description of an exalted 
king, and of the blessings of his reign. These blessings are of 
such a nature as to prove that the subject of the psalm must be a 
divine person. (1.) His kingdom is to be everlasting. (2.) Uni- 
versal. (3.) It secures perfect peace with God and good-will 
among men. (4.) All men are to be brought to submit to Him 
through love. (5.) In Him all the nations of the earth are to be 
blessed , 7. ¢., as we are distinctly taught in Gal. iii. 16, it is in 
Him. that all the blessings of redemption are to come upon the 


492 PART I.—THEOLOGY.  [Cu. VIL. — Divinity or Cunist, 


world. The subject of this psalm, is therefore, the Redeemer of 
the world. , 

The hundred and tenth Psalm is repeatedly quoted and ex- 
pounded in the:-New Testament, and applied to Christ to set forth 
the dignity of his person and the nature of his work. (1.) He is 
David’s Lord. But if David’s Lord, how ean He be David’s Son? 
This was the question which Christ put to the Pharisees, in or der 
to convince them that their ideas of the Messiah fell far below the 
doctrine of their own Scriptures. He was indeed to be David’s 
Son, as they expected, but at the same time He was to be possessed 
of a nature which made Him David’s Lord. (2.) In virtue of 
this divine nature He was to sit at God’s right hand ; that is, to be 
associated with Him on terms of equality as to glory and dominion. 
Such is the Apostle’s exposition of this passage in Heb. i. 18. To 
no angel, 7. ¢., to no creature, has God ever said, “Sit on my right 
hand.” The subject of this psalm is no creature; and if not a 
creature, He is the Creator. (8.) This person, who is at once 
David’s Son and David’s Lord, is eternally both priest and king. 
This again is referred to in Heb. vii. 17, to prove that He must be 
a divine person. It is only because He is possessed of ‘‘an endless 
life,” or, as it is elsewhere said, because He has life in Himself 
even as the Father has life in Himself, that it is possible for Him 
to be a perpetual priest and king. (4.) In verse 5, He is declared 
to be the supreme Lord, for He is called Adonai, a title never given 
to any but the true God. 


E. The Prophetical Books. 


In Isaiah iv. 2, the appearance of the Branch of Jehovah is pre- 
dicted, to whose advent such effects are ascribed as prove Him to 
be a divine person. Those effects are purification, the pardon of 
sin, and perfect security. 

Chapter vi. contains an account of the prophet’s vision of Je- 
hovah in his holy temple, surrounded by the hosts of adoring angels, 
who worship Him day and night. -The person thus declared to be 
dehovah, os object of eneelia worship, the Apostle John tells us, 
xii. 41, was none other than Christ, whom all Christians and all 
angels now worship. 

In chapters vii.—ix. the birth of a child whose mother was a vir- 
gin, is predicted. That this child was the eternal Son of God, 
equal with the Father, is proved, (1.) From his name Immanuel, 
which means God with us, ¢. e., God in our nature. (2.) The 


land of Israe! is said to be his land. (8.) He is called Wonder- 


§1, E.] THE DIVINITY OF CHRIST. 493 


ful, Counsellor, the Mighty God, Father of Eternity, and Prince 
of Peace. (4.) His kingdom is everlasting and universal. (5.) The 
consequences of his advent and dominion are such as flow only 
vom the dominion of God. In the eleventh chapter we have an- 
other description of the perfection of his person and of his king- 
dom, which is applicable only to the person and kingdom of 
God. It is only where God reigns that the peace, heliness, and 
blessedness which attend the coming of the predicted deliverer, 
are ever found. The same argument may be drawn from the pro- 
phetic account of the Messiah and of his kingdom contained in the 
latter part of Isaiah, from the fortieth chapter to the sixty-sixth. 
This Messiah was to effect the redemption of his people, not merely 
from the Babylonish captivity, but from all evil; to secure for 
them the pardon of sin, and reconciliation with God; the preva- 
lence of true religion to the ends of the earth; and, finally, the 
complete triumph of the kingdom of light over the kingdom of 
darkness. This is a work which none other than a divine person 
could effect. 

The prophet Micah (v. 1-5) predicted that one was to be born 
in Bethlehem, who was to be, (1.) The Ruler of Israel, 7. ¢., of all 
the people of God. (2.) Although to be born in time and made 
of a woman, his “ goings forth have been from of old, from ever- 
lasting.” (8.) He shall rule in the exercise of the strength and 
majesty of God, 7. e., manifest in his government the possession 
of divine attributes and glory. (4.) His dominion shall be uni- 
versal; and (5.) Its effects peace ; 7. e., perfect harmony, order, 
and blessedness. 

The prophet Joel does not bring distinctly into view the person 
of the Redeemer, unless it be in the doubtful passage in 11. 23. He 
goes through the usual round of Messianic predictions ; foretells 
the apostasy of the people, reproves them for their sins, threatens 
divine judgments, and then promises deliverance through a 
“teacher of righteousness ” (according to one interpretation of i, 
23), and then the effusion of the Holy Spirit upon all flesh. The 
gift of the Holy Ghost is everywhere represented as the charac- 
teristic blessing of the Messianic period, because secured by the 
merit of the Redeemer’s death. That He thus gives the Holy 
Spirit is the highest evidence of his being truly God. 

In Jeremiah xxiii., the restoration or redemption of God’s 
people is foretold. This redemption was to be effected by one who 
is declared to be, (1.) A descendant of David. (2.) He is called 
the Branch, a designation which connects this prophecy with those 


494 PART l.— THEOLOGY. [Cx. VI.—Drvorry or Carist 


of Isaiah in which the Messiah receives the same title. (3.) He 
was to be a king. (4.) His reign was to be prosperous, Judah 
and Israel were to be again united; @. e., perfect harmony and 
peace were to be secured. (5.) This deliverer is called Jehovah, 
our Righteousness. In the thirty-third chapter, the same deliver- 
ance is predicted, and the same name is here given to Jerusalem 
which in the former passage was given to the Messiah. In the 
one case it is symbolical, in the other significant. 

In Daniel ii. 44, it is foretold that the kingdom of the Messiah 
is to be everlasting, and is destined to supersede. and absorb all 
other kingdoms. In vii. 9-14, it is said that one like unto the Son 
of Man was brought unto the Ancient of Days; and a dominion, 
glory, and kingdom given unto Him; that all people, nations, and 
languages should serve Him ; his dominion is to be an everlasting 
dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which 
shall not be destroyed. In ix. 24-27, is recorded the prediction 
concerning the seventy weeks, and the coming and work of the 
Messiah, which work is truly divine. 

The first six chapters of the prophecies of Zechariah are a 
series of visions, foreshadowing the return of the Jews from Baby- 
lon, the restoration of the city, and the rebuilding of the temple; 
the subsequent apostasy of the people; the advent of the Mes- 
siah ; the establishment of his kingdom, and the dispersion of the 
Jews. From the ninth chapter to the end of the book, the same 
events are predicted in ordinary prophetic language. Jerusalem 
is called upon to rejoice at the advent of her king. He was to be 
meek and lowly, unostentatious and peaceful, and his dominion 
universal. In chapter xi. He is represented as a shepherd who 
makes a last attempt to gather his flock. He is to be rejected by 
those whom He came to save, and sold for thirty pieces of silver, 
For this enormity the people are to be given up to long desolation ; 
but at last God will pour upon them the Spirit of grace and sup- 
plication, and they shall look upon me, saith Jehovah, whom they 
have pierced, and mourn. This shepherd is declared to be God’s 
fellow, associate, or equal. His kingdom shall triumph, shall be- 
come universal, and holiness shall everywhere prevail. * 

In Malachi ili. 1-4, it is predicted (1.) That a messenger 
should appear to prepare the way of the Lord. (2.) That the 
Lord, 7. e., Jehovah, the messenger of the covenant, 7. e., the Mes- 
siah, should come to his temple. (8.) At his advent the wicked 
shall be destroyed, and the Church saved. 


1 On this subject see Hengstenberg’s Christology; Smith’s Messiah; Allix’ 
of the Jewish Church. a ; ies 


§ 2, A.) THE DIVINITY OF CHRIST. 495 


It is plain, even from this cursory review, that the Old Testa- 
ment clearly predicts the advent of a divine person clothed in our 
nature, who was to be the Saviour of the world. He was to be 
the seed of the woman, the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of 
Judah, of the house of David; born of a virgin; a man of sor- 
rows; and to make “his soul an offering for sin.” He is, how- 
ever, no less clearly declared to be the Angel of Jehovah, Jehovah, 
Elohim, Adonai, the Mighty God, exercising all divine preroga- 
tives, and entitled to divine worship from men and angels. Such 

_is the doctrine of the Old Testament as to what the Messiah was 
to be; and this is the doctrine of the New Testament, as to what 
Jesus of Nazareth in fact is. 


§ 2. General Characteristics of the New Testament Teaching 
concerning Christ. 


A. The Sense in which Christ is called Lord. 


The first argument from the New Testament in proof of the 
divinity of Christ, is derived from the fact that He is everywhere 
called Lord; the Lord; our Lord. It is admitted that the Greek 
word xvpwos means owner; and one who has the authority of an 
owner, whether of men or things. The Lord of a vineyard is the 
owner of the vineyard, and the Lord of slaves is the owner of 
slaves. It is also admitted that the word is used with all the lati- 
tude of the Latin word Dominus, or the English Master or Mister. 
It is applied as a title of respect, not only to magistrates and 
princes, but to those who are not invested with any official author- 
ity. It is, therefore, not merely the fact that Jesus is called Lord, 
that proves that He is also God; but that He is called Lord in such 
a sense and in such a way as is consistent with no other hypothe- 
sis. In the first place, Christ is called Lord in the New Testa- 
ment with the same constancy and with the same preéminence 
that Jehovah is called Lord in the Old Testament. This was the 
word which all the readers, whether of the Hebrew or Greek 
Scriptures, under the old economy were accustomed to use to ex- 
press their relation to God. They recognized Him as their owner, 
as their Supreme Sovereign, and as their protector. He was in 
that sense their Lord. The Lord is on our side. The Lord be 
with you. The Lord He is God. Blessed is the nation whose 
God is the Lord. Thou Lord art good. Thou Lord art most 
high forever. O Lord, there is none like unto thee. I will praise 
the Lord. Have mercy upon me, O Lord. O Lord, thou art 
my God. The religious ear of the people was educated in the use 


496 PART L—THEOLOGY. ([Ca. VIL —Diviniry or Cunist. 


of this language from their infancy. The Lord was their God. 
They worshipped and praised Him, and invoked his aid in calling 
him Lord. 'The same feelings of reverence, adoration, and love, 
the same sense of dependence and desire of protection are ex- 
pressed throughout the New Testament in calling Jesus Lord. 
Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean. Lord, save me. 
Joy of thy Lord. Lord, when saw we thee a hungered? He 
that judgeth me is the Lord. If the Lord will. To be present 
with the Lord. Them that call on the Lord. Which the Lord 
shall give me in the last day. Blessed are the dead who die in the 
Lord. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honour. 

Jesus Christ, therefore, is Lord to Christians in the same sense 
that Jehovah was Lord to the Hebrews. The usage referred to is 
altogether peculiar; no man—not Moses, nor Abraham, nor 
David, nor any of the prophets or Apostles, is ever thus prevail- 
ingly addressed or invoked as Lord. We have but one Lord; and 
Jesus Christ is Lord. This is an argument which addresses itself 
to the inward experience, rather than to the mere understanding. 
Every believer knows in what sense he calls Jesus Lord; and he 
knows that in thus recognizing Him as his owner, as his absolute 
sovereign, to whom the allegiance of his soul, and not merely of 
his outward life, is due; and as his protector and Saviour, he is in 
communion with the Apostles and martyrs. He knows that it is 
from the New Testament he has been taught to worship Christ in 
calling him Lord. 

But in the second place, Jesus Christ is not only thus called 
Lord by way of eminence, but He is declared to be the Lord of 
lords ; to be the Lord of glory ; the Lord of all; the Lord of the 
living and the dead; the Lord of all who are in heaven and on 
earth, and under the earth. All creatures, from the highest to the 
lowest, must bow the knee to Him, and acknowledge his absolute 
dominion. He is in such a sense Lord as that no man can truly 
call Him Lord but by the Holy Ghost. If his Lordship were 
merely the supremacy which one creature can exercise over other 
creatures, there would be no necessity for a divine illumination to 
enable us to recognize his authority. But if He is Lord in the ab- 
solute sense in which God alone is Lord; if He has a right in us, 
and an authority over us, which belong only to our Maker and 
Redeemer, then it is necessary that the Holy Spirit should so re-. 
veal to us the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, as to lead 
us to prostrate ourselves before Him as our Lord and our God. 

In the third place, Christ is called Lord, when that word is used 


— 


pny THE DIVINITY OF CHRIST. 497 


for the incommunicable divine names and titles Jehovah and 
Adonai. It is well known that the Jews from an early period 
had a superstitious reverence, which prevented their prevouncing 
the word Jehovah. They therefore, in their Hebrew Scriptures, 
gave it the vowel points belonging to the word Adonai, and so pro- 
nounced it whenever they read ths sacred volume. When they 
translated their Scriptures into Greek, they uniformly substituted 
kipios, which answers to Adon, for Jehovah. In like manner, 
under the influence of the LXX., the Latin Christians in their 
version used Dominus ; and constrained by the same wide spread 
and long-continued usage, the English translators have, as a gen- 
eral thing, put Lord (in small capitals) where the Hebrew Hae Je- 
hovah. In very many cases we find passages applied to Christ as 
the Messiah, in which He is called Lord, when Zord should be 
Jehovah or Adonai. In Luke i. 76, it is said of John the Baptist, 
the forerunner of Christ, that he should go before the face of the 
Lord; but in Malachi i. 1, of which this passage declares the ful- 
filment, the person speaking is Jehovah. The day of Christ, in 
the New Testament, is called “the day of the Lord;” in the Old 
Testament it is called “the day of‘ Jehovah, the great day.” 
Dyan nim oh. Romans x. 13, quotes Joel ii. 32, wach speaks 
of ohorah. and applies it to Christ, saying, “ Wihscotee shall 
call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved.” Rom xiv. 10, 11, 
quotes Isaiah xlv. 23, ‘“* We shall all stand before the judgment 
seat of Christ. For it is written, As I live, saith the Lord (Jeho- 
yah), every knee shall bow to me,” ete. This is common through- 
out the New Testament, and therefore Christ is there set forth as 
Lord in the same sense in which the Supreme God is Lord. The 
meaning of the word as applied to Christ being thus established, it 
shows os constant and familiar is the recognition of his divinity 
by the sacred writers. They acknowledge Him to be God every 
time they call Him Lord. 


B. Christ presented as the Object of our Religious Affections. 


Another general feature of the New Testament, intimately con- 
nected with the one just mentioned, and consequent upon it, is, 
that Christ is everywhere recognized as the proper object of all the 
religious affections. As He is our Lord, in the sense of being our 
absolute proprietor, our maker, preserver, and redeemer, and our 
sovereign, having the right to do with us as seems good in his sight, 
we are called upon to make Him the supreme object of our love, 
his will the highest rule of duty, and his glory the great end of our 

VOL. I. 82 


498 PART J.— THEOLOGY. (Cu. VIL — Divinity or Curist. 


being. We are to exercise the same faith and confidence m Him 
that we do in God; yield Him the same obedience, devotion, and 
homage. We find, therefore, that such is the case from the begin- 
ning to the end of the New Testament writings. Christ is the God 
of the Apostles and early Christians, in the sense that “He is the 
object of all their religious affections. They regarded Him as the 
person to whom they specially belonged; to whom they were 
responsible for their moral conduct ; to whom they had to account 
for their sins; for the use of their time and talents; who was ever 
present with them, dwelling in them, controlling their inward, as 
well as their outward life ; whose love was the animating principle 
of their being; in whom they rejoiced as their present joy and as 
their everlasting portion. This recognition of their relation to 
Christ as their God, is constant and pervading, so that the evidence 
of it cannot be gathered up and stated in a polemic or didactic form. 
But every reader of the New Testament .to whom Christ is a mere 
creature, however exalted, must feel himself to be out of communion 
with the Apostles and apostolic Christians, who avowed themselves 
and were universally recognized by others as being the worshippers 
of Christ. They knew that they were to stand before his judgment 
seat; that every act, thought, and word of theirs, and of every man 
who shall ever live, was to lie open to his omniscient eye ; and that 
on his decision the destiny of every human soul was to depend. 
_Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, they persuaded men. 
They enforced every moral duty, not merely on the grounds of 
moral obligation, but by considerations drawn from the relation of 
the soul to Christ. Children are to obey their parents, wives 
their husbands, servants their masters, not as pleasing men, but as 
doing the will of Christ. True religion in their view consists not 
in the love or reverence of God, merely as the infinite Spirit, the 
creator and preserver of all things, but in the knowledge and love 
of Christ. Whoever believes that Jesus is the Son of God, 7. e, 
whoever believes that Jesus of Nazareth is God manifested in the 
flesh, and loves and obeys Him as such, is declared to be born of 
God. Any one who denies that truth, is declared to be antichrist, 
denying both the Father and the Son, for the denial of the one is 
the denial of the other. The same truth is expressed by another 
Apostle, who says, “If our gospel be hid it is hid to them that are 
lost, in whom the god of this world hath blinded the minds of them 
which believe not, lest they should see the glory of God as it shines 
in the face of Jesus Christ.” They are lost, according to this 
Apostle, who do not see, as well as believe, Jesus to be God dwell- 


§ 2, C.] THE DIVINITY OF CHRIST. 499 


ing in the flesh. Hence such effects are ascribed to the knowledge 
of Christ, and to faith in Him ; such hopes are entertained of the 
glory and blessedness of being with Him, as would be impossible or 
irrational if Christ were not the true God. He is our life. He 
that hath the Son hath life. He that believes on Him shall live 
forever. It is not we that live, but Christ that liveth in us. Our 
life is hid with Christ in God. We are complete in Him, wanting 
nothing. Though we have not seen Him, yet believing in Him, we 
rejoice in Him with joy unspeakable. It is because Christ is God, 
because He is possessed of all divine perfections, and because He 
loved us and gave Himself for us, and hath redeemed us and made 
us kings and priests unto God, that the Spirit of God says, “ If any 
man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be anathema maran- 
atha.” The denial of the divinity of the Son of God, the refusal to 
receive, love, trust, worship, and serve Him as such, is the ground 
of the hopeless condemnation of all who hear and reject the gospel. 
And to the justice of this condemnation all rational creatures, holy 
and unholy, justified or condemned, will say, Amen. The divinity of 
Christ is too plain a fact, and too momentous a truth, to be innocently 
rejected. Those are saved who truly believe it, and those are 
already lost who have not eyes to see it. He that believeth not 
is condemned already, because he hath not believed in the name 
of the only begotten Son of God. He that believeth on the Son 
hath everlasting life; and he that believeth not the Son shall not 
see life, but the wrath of God abideth on him. It is the doctrine 
of the New Testament, therefore, that the spiritual apprehension 
and the sincere recognition of the Godhead of the Redeemer con- 
stitutes the life of the soul. It is in its own nature eternal life; 
and the absence or want of this faith and knowledge is spiritual 
and eternal death. Christ is our life; and therefore he that hath 
not the Son hath not life. 


C. The Relations which Christ bears to his People and to the 
World. : 


As the relation which believers consciously bear to Christ is 
that we can sustain to God only, so the relation which He assumes 
te us, which He claims as belonging to him in virtue of his nature 
as well as of his work, is that which God only can sustain to 
rational creatures. 

His Authority as a Teacher. 

This is plain as to the authority He assumes as a teacher both of 

truth and duty. Everything which He declared to be true, all 


500 PART I.—THEOLOGY.  [Cu. VIL. — Divinrry or Curist. 


Christians have ever felt bound to believe, without examination ; 
and all that He commanded them to do or to avoid, they have ever 
regarded as binding the conscience. His authority is the ultimate 
and highest ground of faith and moral obligation. As the infinite 
and absolute reason dwelt in Him bodily, his words were the words 
of God. He declared himself to be the Truth, and therefore to 
question what He said was to reject the truth ; to disobey Him was 
to disobey the truth. He was announced as the Aéyos, the personal 
and manifested Reason, which was and is the light of the world, — 
the source of all reason and of all knowledge to rational creatures. 
Hence He spake as never man spake. He taught with authority. 
He did not do as Moses and the prophets did, speak in the name 
of God, and say, Thus saith the Lord, referring to an authority out 
of themselves. But He spoke in his own name, and the Apostles 
in the name of Christ. He was the ultimate authority. He uni- 
formly places Himself in the relation of God to his people. Ye 
shall be saved ‘*if ye do whatsoever I command you.” He that 
heareth me heareth God. I and the Father are one; He in me 
and Tin Him. Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words 
shall never pass away. Moses said unto you thus and so, but I say 
unto you. He did not deny the divine mission of Moses, but He 
assumed the right to modify or repeal the laws which God had > 
given to his people under the old economy. The whole of revealed 
truth in the Oldas well asin the New Testament is referred to Him 
as its source. For the ancient prophets taught nothing but what 
“the Spirit of Christ which was in them did signify,” which is 
equivalent to saying that they spake ‘as they were moved by the 
Holy Ghost ;” or “that all Scripture is given by inspiration of 
God.” And the Apostles presented themselves simply as witnesses 
of what Christ had taught. Paul declared that he received all 
his knowledge “ by the revelation of Jesus Christ.”? And in his 
Epistle to the Corinthians he expresses the same truth by saying 
negatively, that his knowledge was not derived from human 
reason (the spirit that is in men), but from the Spirit of God. 
Nothing is more obvious to the reader of the New Testament than 
this divine authority as a teacher everywhere claimed by Christ 
and for Him. To disbelieve Him is to disbelieve God ; and to 
disobey Him is to disobey God. This is entirely different from the 
authority claimed by the prophets and Apostles. They assumed 
nothing for themselves. Paul disclaimed all authority over the 
faith of God’s people, except on the ground of the proof which he 
gave that it was “Christ speaking in” him. (2 Cor. xiii. 3.) 


§ 2, C.] THE DIVINITY OF CHRIST. 601 


His Control over all Creatures. 

The divine authority of Christ is manifest in the control which 
He claimed over all his people and over all creatures. All power 
was and is in his hands. His ministers are under his direction ; He 
sends one here and another there. All Paul’s labors and journey- 
ings were performed under his continued guidance. This is but an 
illustration of the universal and absolute control which He-constantly 
exercises over the whole universe. The angels in heaven are his 
messengers, and the course of human history, as well as the cir- 
cumstances of every individual man, is determined by Him. So 
also is the eternal destiny of all men in his hands. I will reward 
every man, He says, according to his works. (Matt. xvi. 27, 
and Rey. xxii. 12.) ** Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, 
have we-not prophesied in thy name? and in thy name have cast 
out devils? and in thy name done many wonderful works? And 
then will I profess unto them, I never knew you: depart from me, 
ye that work iniquity.” (Matt. vii. 22, 23.) In the last day, at 
the “time of harvest, I will say to the reapers, Gather ye together 
first the tares, and bind them in bundles to burn them: but gather 
the wheat into my barn.” (Matt. xiii. 30.) Andin ver. 41, “ The 
Son of Man shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather out 
of his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniq- 
uity ; and shall cast them into a furnace of fire: there shall be 
wailing and gnashing of teeth.” The king in that day will say, 
“Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for the 
devil and his angels: for I was a hungered, and ye gave me no 
meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink:”’ for ‘“ inasmuch 
as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not unto me.” 
It is the attitude, therefore, in which men stand to Christ (provided 
they have heard his name), which is to determine their destiny in 
the last day. Sinning against Christ, denying or rejecting Him, is 
denying or rejecting God. Our Lord therefore uniformly places 
Himself in the relation of God to the souls of men, claiming the 
same authority over them, the same right to decide their destiny, 
and representing all sin as committed against Himself. Thus also 
He says, that it were better for a man to have a millstone hung 
about his neck, and he cast into the midst of the sea, than to offend 
one of the little ones who believe on Him. ‘“* Whosoever shall confess 
me before men, him shall the Son of Man also confess before the 
angels of God: but he that denieth me before men, shall be denied 
before the angels of God.’ (Luke xii. 8, 9.) ‘He that loveth 


502 PART L—THEOLOGY. [Cu. VI.— Drvimrry or Carist. 


father or mother, . . . . son or daughter more than me is not worthy 
of me.” Such supreme love is due to God alone, and Christ in 
claiming this love from us, places Himself before us as God. 


D. The Nature of his Promises. 


The same is plain from the nature of his promises. Christ 
promises to his people blessings which none but God has either the 
right or the power to bestow. He promises to forgive sin. It is 
intuitively certain that God only can forgive sin ; He is our moral 
governor ; it is against Him that all sin is committed, and He only 
has the right to remit its penalty. When therefore Christ says to 
the soul, Thy sins are forgiven, He exercises a divine prerogative. 
Even the Man of Sin, who sitteth in the temple of God and exalteth 
himself above all that is called God, claims no more than the judi- 
cial authority of deciding when the conditions of pardon at the bar 
of God have been fulfilled. He assumes, in relation to the divine 
law, the relation which a human judge sustains to the law of the 
land. A judge does not acquit or condemn on his own authority. 
The authority is in the state or sovereign power. The judge 
merely determines whether the grounds of condemnation are pres- 
ent or not. But as the sovereign against whom sin is committed, 
Christ has the right to pardon or to punish. Again, He promises 
the Holy Spirit. John the Baptist announced his approach as one 
who was to baptize the people with fire and with the Holy Ghost. 
And accordingly it is recorded that He did send down on his 
disciples, especially on the day of Pentecost, power from on high. 
It had been predicted that God would pour out his Spirit on all flesh ; 
and that prophecy the Apostle Peter teaches was fulfilled when 
Christ, exalted at the right hand of God, shed forth his gifts on 
his waiting disciples. In his farewell discourse to the Apostles, He 
said, I will send you another Comforter, even the Spirit of truth, 
who shall abide with you forever. All the sanctifying influences, 
as well as all the gifts of teaching and of miracles which the Church 
has ever enjoyed, come from the Lord Jesus Christ. He gives the 
Spirit to every one severally as He will. Unto every one of us,” 
says Paul, “is given grace according to the measure of the gift of 
Christ.” (Eph. iv. 7.) He promises to hear and answer the’ 
prayers of his people in all ages and in all parts of the world. 
‘“‘ Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, I will do it.” “ Wherever 
two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the 
midst of them.” ‘Lo I am with you alway, even unto the end 
of the world.” He thus promises his continued presence to his dis 


§ 2, E.j THE DIVINITY OF CHRIST. 5038 


ciples wherever they may be. He also promises to all who believe 
on Him, eternal life. He has power to quicken or to give life to as 
manyas He will. “My sheep follow me, and I give unto them 
eternal life.” “T will raise them up at the last day.” ‘To him 
that overcometh will I give to eat of the tree of life.” ‘Be thou 
faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life.” “A 
crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall 
give me in that day.” “Peace I leave with you, my peace I give 
unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you.” “ Ye be- 
lieve in God, believe also in me.” ‘TI go to prepare a place for 
you.” “I will come again and receive you unto myself; that 
where I am, there ye may be also.” ‘Come unto me, all ye that 
labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.” Itis obvious 
that the infinite God himself can neither promise nor give anything 
greater or higher than Christ gives his people. To Him they are 
taught to look as the source of all blessings, the giver of every 
good and every perfect gift. There is no more comprehensive 
prayer in the New Testament than that with which Paul closes 
his Epistle to the Galatians: ‘‘ The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ 
be with your spirit.” His favour is our life, which it could not be 
if He were not our God. 


E. His Control over Nature. 


A fourth general feature of the New Testament teaching con- 
cerning Christ, relates to the control attributed to Him over the 
external world. The laws of nature are ordained by God. They 
ean be changed or suspended by Him alone. A miracle, therefore, 
or any event which involves such change or suspension, is an evi- 
dence of the immediate operation of divine power. The efficient 
agent, therefore, in working a miracle, must possess divine power. 
When Moses, the prophets, or the Apostles wrought miracles, they 
expressly disclaimed the idea that it was by their own efficiency. 
Why look ye on us, says the Apostle Peter, as though by our own 
power we had made this man whole? When Moses divided the 
Red Sea, the efficiency by which that effect was produced was no 
more in him than in the rod with which he smote the waters. 
Christ, however, wrought miracles by his own inherent power ; 
and it was to his efficiency the Apostles attributed the miracles 
wrought through them. It was his name, or faith in Him, as Peter 
taught the people, which effected the mstantaneous healing of the 
lame man. Christ never referred this miraculous power to any 
source out of Himself; He claimed it as his own prerogative ; and 


4 


504 PART I.—THEOLOGY.  [Ca. VI. — Drvinrry or Cupist. 


He conferred the power upon others. He said of Himself that He 
had power to lay down his life and power to take it again ; that He 
had life in Himself and could give life to as many as He pleased ; 
I will give you, He said to his disciples; power to tread on serpents 
and scorpions, and over all the power of the adversary. Every 
miracle of Christ, therefore, was a visible manifestation of his divin- 
ity. When He healed the sick, opened the eyes of the blind, 
restored the lame, raised the dead, fed thousands with a few loaves 
of bread, and calmed the raging of the sea, it was by a word, by 
the effortless exercise of his will. He thus manifested forth his 
glory, giving ocular demonstration to those who had eyes to see, 
that He was God in fashion as a man. He therefore appealed 
directly to his works, “Though ye believe not me, believe the 
works; that ye may know, and believe, that the Father is in me, 
and I in Him.” ‘If I do not the works of my Father, believe me 
not.” (John x. 87, 88.) ‘If I had not done among them the 
works which none other man did, they had not had sin: but now 
have they both seen and hated both me and my Father.”” (John 
xv. 24.) 

It is only a small part of the evidence of the divinity of our Lord 
that can thus be gathered up from the general teaching of the New 
Testament. It is important to bear in mind that faith in this doc- 
trine rests not on this or that passage, or on this or that mode of 
representation, but upon the whole revelation of God concerning 
his Son. The divinity of the Lord Jesus Christ is wrought into 
the texture of the Scriptures, and is everywhere asserted or as- 
sumed. ‘There are, however, many passages in which the doctrine 
is so clearly presented, that they should not be passed by in any 
formal discussion of this subject. 


§ 8. Particular Passages which Teach the Divinity of Christ. . 
A. The Writings of St. John. 


John i.1-14. Why the higher nature of Christ is called 6 Adyos, 
and why John used that designation, are different questions. Ag 
the word Adyos does not occur in Scripture in the sense of reason, 
it should be taken in its ordinary meaning. The question why the 
Son is called ‘The Word” may be answered by saying that the 
term expresses both his nature and his office. The word is that 
which reveals. The Son is the cixdéy and dratyacua of God, and 
therefore his word. It is his office to make God known to his 
creatures. No man hath seen God at any time; the only begotten 


§ 8, AJ THE DIVINITY OF CHRIST. 505 


Son who is in the bosom of the Father, He hath declared Him. The 
Son, therefore, as the revealer of God,is the Word. The reason 
why John selected this designation of the divine nature of Christ, 
is not so easy to determine. It may indeed be said that there is 
ground for the use of the term in the usage of the Old Testament 
and of the Jews who were contemporaries with the Apostle. In 
the Hebrew Scriptures the manifested Jehovah is called the Word 
of God, and to Him individual subsistence and divine perfections 
are ascribed. (Ps. xxxiii. 6; cxix. 89; Is..xl.8; Ps. cvii. 20; 
exlvii. 18.) This is more frequently done in the apocryphal books 
and in the Targums. It was not therefore an unusual or unknown 
term introduced by the Apostle John. Still as he only, of the New 
Testament writers, thus employs the word, there must have been 
some special reason for his doing so. That reason may have been 
to counteract the erroneous views concerning the nature of God 
and his Word, which had begun to prevail, and which had some 
support from the doctrines of Philo and other Alexandrian Jews. 
It is, however, of less importance to determine why John calls the 
Son Adyos, than to ascertain what he teaches concerning Him. 
He does teach (1.) That He is eternal. He was in the beginning; 
i. e., was before the creation; before the foundation of the world; 
before the world was. Compare Prov. viii. 23; John xvii. 5, 24; 
Eph. i. 4. These are all Scriptural forms of expressing the idea 
of eternity. The Word then was (jv), He did not begin to be but 
already was. The jv of ver. 1 stands opposed to éyévero ver. 14. 
“ He was the Word, and became flesh.” (2.) The eternal Word ex- 
isted in intimate union with God. ‘ The Word was with God;”’ as 
Wisdom is said to have been with Him in the beginning. (Prov. 
viii. 30; Johni. 18.) (8.) He was God. The word 6¢és is clearly 
the predicate, as it is without the article (compare John iv. 24, 
rvedua 6 Geds, God is a Spirit), and because Adyos is the subject in 
the whole context. That 6«ds is neither to be taken for 6etos, nor 
rendered a God, is plain from what is immediately said of the Adyos 
in the fdllowing verses, and from the analogy of Scripture, which 
proves that the Adyos is beds in the highest sense of the word. In 
this connection 6 ds Av 6 Adyos would be equivalent to saying, “* The 
Son is the Father.” cds without the article occurs frequently in 
the New Testament when it refers to the supreme God. (4.) The 
\éyos is the creator of all things. All things were made by Him, 
8’ atrod. The 6 here does not necessarily express subordinate 
instrumentality. All things are said to be 8:4 cod as well as ¢&k eos. 


The Father operates through the Son and the Son through the 


506 PART I.— THEOLOGY.  [Cu. VII. — Divinity or Curist 


Spirit. All that the preposition indicates is subordination as to the 
mode of operation, which is elsewhere taught in relation to the per- 
sons of the Trinity. That all creatures owe their being to the Word, 
is made the more prominent by saying, “‘ Without him was not 
anything made that was made ;” wv 6 yéyovey is through Him. He 
therefore cannot be a creature. He was not only before all crea- 
tures, but everything created was by Him caused to be. (5.) The 
Aéyos is self-existent. He is underived. ‘In him was life.” This 
is true only of God. The Godhead subsisting in the Father, Word, 
and Spirit, alone is self-existent, having life in itself. (6.) The life 
of the Word “is the light of men.” Having life in Himself, the 
Word is the source of life in all that lives, and especially of the intel- 
lectual and spiritual life of man; and therefore He is said to be the 
light of men; ¢. ¢., the source of intellectual life and knowledge in 
all their forms. (T.) The Adyos, as the true or real light, shineth in 
darkness (év 79 oxorig. = év tots éoxoricpévors) in the midst of a world 
alienated from God. The men of the world, the children of dark- 
ness, do not comprehend the light; they do not recognize the Word 
as God, the creator of all things, and the source of life and knowl- 
edge. To those who do thus recognize Him, He gives power to 
become the sons of God, that is, He raises them to the dignity and 
blessedness of God’s children. (8.) This Word became flesh 
that is, became aman. This use of the word flesh is explained by 
such passages as 1 Tim. ii. 16; Heb. ii. 14; Rom. viii. 3, in con- 
nection with Luke i. 85; Gal. iv. 4; Phil. ii.7. As to the glory 
of the incarnate Adyos, the Apostle says of himself and of his fellow 
disciples, ‘‘ We beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten 
of the Father” ; such as could belong to none other than to Him 
who is the eternal Son of God, consubstantial with the Father. 


Other Passages in St. John’s Gospel. 


This introduction, which thus unmistakably sets forth the divine 
nature of Christ, is the key-note of John’s Gospel, and of all his 
other writings. His main object is to convince men that Jesus is 
God manifest in the flesh, and that the acknowledement of Him as 
such is necessary to salvation. This Apostle was, therefore, in the 
early Church called the @coAdyos, because he taught so clearly and 
earnestly that the Adyos is God. In verse 18 of this chapter he says 
that the Son alone has the knowledge of God, and is the source of 
that knowledge to others. He showed Nathanael that He knew his 
character, being the searcher of hearts, In his discourse with Nico- 
demus, He spoke with divine authority; revealing the things of 


§ 3, A.) THE DIVINITY OF CHRIST. . 507 


heaven, because He came from heaven and was even then in 
heaven. His coming into the world was the highest evidence of 
divine love, and the salvation of all men depends on faith in Him ; 
that is, on their believing that He is what He declared Himself to 
be, and trusting Him and obeying Him accordingly. When the 
Jews censured Him for healing a lame man on the Sabbath, He de- 
fended Himself by saying that God worked on the Sabbath ; that He 
and the Father were one; that He did whatever God did; that He 
could give life to whom He willed; that all judgment was committed 
to Him, and that He was entitled to the same honour as the Father. 
In the sixth chapter He sets Himself forth as the source of life, 
first under the figure of bread, and then under that of a sacrifice. 
In the eighth chapter He declares Himself to be the light of the 
world. “ He that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but 
shall have the light of life.” He alone could give true freedom, 
freedom from the condemnation and power of sin. He had been 
the only Saviour from the beginning as He was the object of faith 
to Abraham, who saw his day, and rejoiced, for he says, “ Before 
Abraham was I am,” thereby asserting not only his preéxistence, 
but his eternity, as He declares himself to be the ‘I am,” that is, 
the self-existing and immutable Jehovah. 

In chapter x., under the character of a shepherd, He represents 
Himself as the head of all God’s people, whose voice they hear, 
whose steps they follow, and in whose care they trust. For them 
He lays down his life, and takes it again. To them He gives eter- 
nal life, and their salvation is certain, for no one is able to pluck 
them out of his hands; and He and the Father are one. The elev- 
enth chapter contains the history of the resurrection of Lazarus, on 
which it may be remarked, (1.) That his disciples had full confi- 
dence that Christ could deliver from death whom He pleased. 
(2.) That He claims to be the resurrection and the life. To all 
that believe on Him He is the source of spiritual life to the soul, and 
of a resurrection to the body. (38.) In iliustration and proof of 
his divine power, He called Lazarus from the grave. 


Our Lord’s Last Discourse. 


The discourse recorded in the 14th, 15th, and 16th, and the 
prayer recorded in the 17th chapter, are the words of God to men. 
No created being could speak as Christ here speaks. He begins by 
exhorting his disciples to have the same faith in Him which they 
had in God. He went to prepare heaven for them, and would 
return and take them to Himself. The knowledge of Him is the 


508 PART l.— THEOLOGY.  [Ca. VIL — Divinity or Carist 


knowledge of God. He who had seen Him had seen the Father 
also; for He and the Father are one. He promised to send them 
the Holy Ghost to abide with them permanently; and that He 
would manifest Himself to them as God manifests Himself to the 
saints, revealing to them his glory and love, and making them sen- 
sible of his presence. He would continue to be to his Church the 
source of life; union with Him is as necessary as the union of a 
branch to the vine. The Holy Spirit sent by Him would reveal the 
things of Christ, rendering the Apostles infallible as teachers, and 
giving divine illumination to all believers. It was necessary that 
He should leave them in order to send the Spirit, who would con- 
vince the world of the sin of not believing Him to be all He claimed 
to be; of the righteousness of his assumption to be the Son of God 
and Saviour of the world, of which his going to the Father (1. e., 
resurrection) was the decisive proof; and also of the certainty of a 
future judgment, inasmuch as the prince of this world was already 
judged. The Spirit was to glorify Christ, 7. e., to reveal Him as 
possessing all divine perfections, for whatsoever the Father hath 
the Son hath likewise. His intercessory prayer could proceed from 
the lips of none but a divine person. ' He speaks as one who had 
power over all flesh, and who could give eternal life to all whom 
God the Father had given Him. Eternal life consists in the knowl- 
edge of God, and of Him whom God had sent. He prays that He, 
clothed in our nature, might be glorified with the glory which He 
had before the foundation of the world; that his people might be 
sanctified ; that they might be one by his dwelling in them, and 
that they might be made partakers of his glory. 

He was condemned by the Jews for claiming to be the Son of 
God, and by Pilate for claiming to be a king. When He was cru- 
cified the heavens were darkened, the earth trembled, the dead 
arose, and the vail of the temple was rent. By his resurrection 
his claim to be the Son of God and Saviour of men was authénti- 
cated. Thomas, not being present at the first interview between 
Christ and his disciples, doubted the fact of his resurrection ; but 
when he saw Him he was fully convinced, and owned Him as his 
Lord and God. (John gs 28.) That 6 xvpids prov Kal 6 beds pov is 
an address to Christ, and not an exclamation, is evident, (1.) From 
the words dzexpi0n kal etrev, he responded and said, which would be 
out of place before an exclamation. They introduce a reply to 
what Christ had said. Thomas answered that he was fully satis- 
fied and firmly convinced that Christ was Lord and God. The 
word «imety never means to exclaim. (2.) Such an exclamation 


§ 3, A.) THE DIVINITY OF CHRIST. 509 


would be abhorrent to a Jew, who had even a superstitious rever- 
ence for the name of God, especially for the name Jehovah, and 


6 wipwos 6 Oeds is equivalent to OYTAS MIM). (3.) The repetition of 


the pronoun 0d also requires the passage to be considered as an 
address to Christ. 


The Epistles of St. John. 


In his epistles the Apostle John presents the divinity of Christ 
with equal prominence. The great design of those epistles was to 
establish the faith of believers in the midst of the errors which had 
begun to prevail. The chief of those errors was denial, in some 
fornt, of the incarnation of the Son of God. Hence the Apostle 
not only insists so strenuously on the acknowledgment that Jesus 
Christ had come in the flesh, but makes that the one great funda- 
mental doctrine ef the gospel. ‘ Whosoever shall confess that 
Jesus is the Son of God, God dwelleth in him, and he in God.” 
He begins his epistles by reminding his readers that the Apostles 
had enjoyed the clearest possible evidence that the Adyos ris wis 
(He who has life and gives life) was manifest in the flesh. They 
had seen, looked upon, and handled Him. John gave believers this 
assurance in order that they might have fellowship with God and 
with his Son Jesus Christ. Many had already apostatized and 
denied the doctrine of the incarnation. To deny that doctrine, 
however, was to deny God ; for whosoever denies the Son, rejects 
the Father also. He exhorts them, therefore, to abide in the Son 
as the only means of abiding in God and attaining eternal life. 
The tests by which they were to try those who professed to be 
inspired teachers, were, (1.) Whether they acknowledged the doc- 
trine of the incarnation, 7. ¢., of the true divinity and humanity of 
Christ. (iv. 2, 8, 15.) (2.) Conformity of doctrine with the 
teachings of the Apostles. (8.) Love to God, founded on his 
redeeming love to us, and love to the brethren, springing from this 
love toGod. In chapter v. he tells his readers that the great truth 
to be believed is that Jesus is the Son of God. This is the faith 
which overcomes the world. This great truth is established by the 
testimony of God, both external and internal, for he that believeth 
on the Son of God hath the witness in himself; he that believeth 
not this testimony makes God a liar, because he believeth not the 
record which God has given of his Son. In Him is eternal life, so 
that he that hath the Son, hath life. He closes his epistle by say- 
ing: ‘“‘ We know that the Son of God is come, and hath given us 
an understanding, that we may know Him that is true (7. e., that 


510 PART I.—THEOLOGY.  [Cx. VI. — Divinity or Carts, 


we may know the true God); and we are in Him that is true (2. ¢., 
the true God), even in his Son Jesus Christ. This (4. e., this 
person Jesus Christ) is the true God and eternal life.” That this 
passage is to be referred to Christ, is plain. (1.) Because He is 
the subject of discourse in the context, and throughout the epistle. 
The great design of the Apostle is to tell us who and what Christ is. 
(2.) In the immediately preceding clauses he had called Him the 
true, ‘“* we are in Him that is true,” even in Jesus Christ. ‘* The 
true” and “the true God,” are used as convertible expressions. 
(8.) Christ is repeatedly called ‘eternal life,” by this Apostle, 
and ‘eternal life” is said to be in Him, which language is not used _ 
of God as such, nor of the Father. (4.) Xpuorés is the natural 
antecedent of otros, not only because the nearest, but because it is 
the prominent subject. (5.) This has been the received interpre- 
tation in the Church, at least since the Arian controversy ; and the 
objections urged against it are mainly theological, rather than ex- 
egetical. It is to be remarked that Christ is here called not merely 
eds but 6 Geds, as in John xx. 28. 


The Apocalypse. 


The Book of Revelation is one continued hymn of praise to 
Christ, setting forth the glory of his person and the triumph of his 
kingdom; representing Him as the ground of confidence to his 
people, and the object of worship to all the inhabitants of heaven. 
He is declared to be the ruler of the kings of the earth. He has 
made us kings and priests unto God. He is the First and the Last, 
language never used but of God, and true of Him alone. Compare 
Is. xliv. 6. In the epistles to the seven churches, Christ assumes 
the titles and prerogatives of God. He calls Himself, He who holds 
the seven stars in his right hand; the First and the Last; He who 
has the sharp sword and eyes of fire, from which nothing can be 
hid. He has the seven spirits. He is the Holy and the True. 
He has the keys of David; He opens and no man shuts, and shuts 
and no man opens; his decision on the destiny of men admits 
of no appeal. He is the supreme arbiter; the faithful and true 
witness ; the dp xi rijs xrivews 70d Ocod, the principle, 7. e., both the 
head and source, of the whole creation. He reproves the churches 
for their sins, or praises them for their fidelity, as their moral ruler 
against whom sin is committed and to whom obedience is rendered. 
He threatens punishments and promises blessings which God alone 
can inflict or bestow. In chapter v. the Apostle represents all the 
inhabitants of heaven as prostrate at the feet of Christ, ascribing 


§ 3, B.] THE DIVINITY OF CHRIST. 611 


- blessings and honour and glory and power to Him that sitteth upon 
the throne and unto the Lamb forever and ever. The New Jeru- 
salem is the seat of his kingdom. He is its light, glory, and bless- 
edness. He again and again declares himself to be the Alpha and 
Omega, the First and the Last (2. e., the immutable and eternal), 
the Beginning and the End, for whose second coming the whole 
Church is in earnest expectation. 


B. The Epistles of St. Paul. 


In the epistles of Paul, the same exalted exhibition is made of 
the person and work of Christ. In the Epistle to the Romans, 
Christ is declared to be the Son of God, the object of faith, the 
judge of the world, the God of providence, the giver of the Holy 
Spirit, and what in the Old Testament is said of Jehovah, the 
Apostle applies to Christ. In chapter ix. 5, He is expressly de- 
clared to be ‘‘over all, God blessed forever.” The text here is 
beyond dispute. The only method to avoid the force of the passage 
is by changing the punctuation. Erasmus, who has been followed 
by many modern interpreters, placed a full stop after xara odpxa, or 
after zdévrov. Inthe former case the passage would read, ‘‘ Of 
whom is Christ concerning the flesh. The God who is over all be 
blessed forever ;”’ in the latter, ‘‘ Of whom Christ came concern- 
ing the flesh, who is above all,” ¢. e., higher than the patriarchs. 
It is frankly admitted by the advocates of these interpretations that 
the reason for adopting them is to avoid making the Apostle assert 
that Christ is God over all. As they do not admit that doctrine, 
they are unwilling to admit that the Apostle teaches it. It was 
universally referred to Christ in the ancient Church, by all the 
Reformers, by all the older theologians, and by almost all of. the 
modern interpreters who believe in the divinity of Christ. This 
uniformity of assent is itself a decisive proof that the common in- 
terpretation is the natural one. We are bound to take every pas- 
sage of Scripture in its obvious and natural sense, unless the plainer 
declarations of the Word of God show that a less obvious meaning 
must be the true one. That the common interpretation of this 
passage is correct is plain, — 

1. Because Christ is the subject of discourse ; God is not men- 
tioned in the context. The Apostle is mentioning the distinguish- 
ing blessings of the Jewish nation. To them were given the law, 
the glory, the covenant, and the promises, and above all, from them 
as concerning the flesh (7. e., as far as his humanity is concerned), 
Christ came, who is over all, God blessed forever.” Here every- 


512 PART I.—THEOLOGY.  [Cu. VII.—Drviniry or Curist 


thing is natural and to the point. It shows how preéminent was 
the distinction of the Jews that from them the Messiah, God man- 
ifest in the flesh, should be born. Compared to this all the other 
prerogatives of their nation sink into insignificance. 

2. The words «ard odpxa demand an antithesis. There would be 
no reason for saying that Christ, as far as He was a man, was de- 
scended from the Jews, if He was not more than man, and if there 
were not a sense in which He was not descended from them. As 
in Rom. i. 8, 4, it is said that xara. c¢pxa He was the Son of David, 
but «ard rvedua the Son of God; so here it is said, that xara odpxa 
He was descended from the patriarchs, but that in his higher na- 
ture He is God over all, blessed forever. 

3. The usage of the language demands the common interpreta- 
tion. In all exclamations and benedictions, in distinction from 
mere narration, the predicate uniformly stands before the subject, 
if the copula «iva: be omitted. This usage is strictly observed in 
the Septuagint, in the Apocrypha, and in the New Testament. 
We therefore always read in such doxologies «Aoyyrés 6 beds, and 
never 6 eds eihoyyros. In the Hebrew Scriptures, 9372 occurs forty 
times in doxologies and formulas of praise before the subject. It 
is always “‘ Blessed be God,” and never ‘* God be blessed.” In the 
Septuagint, Psalm Ixvii. 20 (19), xvpios 6 Geds eddAoynrds is the only 
apparcut exception to this rule. And there the Hebrew adheres 
to the common form, and the Greek version is a rhetorical para- 
phrase of the original. The Hebrew is simply »pny 372, for which 
the LXX. have, Kupios 6 Geds ebAoyyrds, edAoyyTds Kvptos. Every con- 
sideration, therefore, is in favour of the interpretation which has 
been accepted by the Church as giving the true meaning of this 
passage. Christ is God over all, blessed forever. 


The Epistles to the Corinthians. 


In the Epistles to the Corinthians, Christ is represented, (1.) 
As the proper object of religious homage. All believers are rep- 
resented as his worshippers. (1 Cor.i. 2.) (2.) As the source 
of spiritual life. (1 Cor. i, 4-9, 30, 31.) (8.) As the Lord of 
all Christians and the Lord of glory. (1 Cor. ii. 8.) (4) As: 
creator of the universe (1 Cor. viii. 6), 8¢ 0b 7a mévra. (5.) As 
the Jehovah of the Old Testament, who led the Israelites through 
the wilderness. (1 Cor. x. 1-18.) (6.) As the giver of spiritual 
gifts. (1 Cor. xii.) (7.) As the Lord from heaven to whom the 
universe (rd rdvra) is subject. (1 Cor. xv. 25.) (8.) A life-giv 


§ 8, B.] THE DIVINITY OF CHRIST. 618 


ing Spirit (avedua fworootr), ¢. e., a Spirit having life in Himself, 
and a source of life to others. (1 Cor. xv. 45.) (9.) The proper 
object of supreme love, whom not to love, justly subjects the soul 
to eternal death. (1 Cor. xvi. 22.) (10.) The object of prayer 
C1 Cor. xvi. 23), from whom grace is to be sought. (11.) He 
gives success in preaching the gospel, causing his ministers to tri- 
umph. (2 Cor. ii. 14.) (42.) The vision of his glory transforms 
the soul into his likeness. (2 Oor. iii, 17, 18.) —(48.) In his 
face is the glory of God, to which those only are blind who are 
lost. (2 Cor. iv. 3-6.) (44.) His presence, or being with Him, 
constitutes the believer’s heaven. (2 Cor. v. 1-8.) (15.) Before 
his judgment-seat all men are to be arraigned. (2 Cor. v. 10.) 


(16.) His love is the highest motive to action. (2 Cor. v. 14.) 


Galatians. 


(1.) Paul says that he was an Apostle not by the will of man, 
but by Jesus Christ. (. 1.) (2.) The conversion of the soul 
is effected by the knowledge of Christ as the Son of God. 
Gi. 16.) (8.) Spiritual life is maintained by faith of which Christ 
is the object. i. 20, 21.) (4.) Christ lives in us, as God is 
said to dwell in his people. (i. 20.) (5.) He was the object 
of Abraham’s faith. (iii. 6-9.) (6.) He was Abraham’s seed in 
whom all nations are blessed. (iii. 16.) (7.) By faith in Him 
we become the sons of God. (iii. 26.) (8.) The Holy Ghost is 
the Spirit of Christ. (iv. 6.) (9.) His will is our law. (wi. 2.) 
(10.) His grace or favour the source of all good. ' (vi. 18.) 


Ephesians. 


(1.) In Christ and under Him all the objects of God’s redeeming 
love are to be united in one harmonious whole. G.10.) (2.) In 
Him we have eternal life, or are made the heirs of God. (a. 11-14.) 
(3.) He is exalted above all principality, and power, and might, 
and dominion, a. @., above all rational creatures. (i. 21.) (4.) In 
Him we are quickened, or raised from the death of sin, made par- 
takers of spiritual life, and exalted to heaven. (ii. 1-6.) (6.) In 
iii. 9, God is said to have created all things by Jesus Christ. (The 
text, however, in that passage is somewhat doubtful.) (6.) He 
fills the universe. (i. 23, and iv. 10.) (7.) He is the head of 
the Church, from whom it derives its life. (iv. 16.) (8.) He 


‘sanctifies the Church. (v. 26.) 9.) The discharge of all social 


duties is enforced by the consideration of the authority of Christ. 


We are to serve men as doing service to Him. (vi. 1-9.) 
VOL. I. 33 


614 PART I.— THEOLOGY.  [Cu. VU. — Drviniry or Carist 


Philippians. 

In Philippians, besides the usual recognition of Christ as the 
source and giver of grace and peace, which comprehend all spirit- 
ual blessings, and the acknowledgment of Him as the end of our 
being (i. 21, 22), we have in ii. 6-11 the clearest declaration 
of the divinity of Christ. It is said, (1.) That He ‘ was (or ex- 
isted, drdpxwv) in the form of God,” z.e., was God both as to nature 
and manifestation. He could not be the one without being the 
other. The word »op¢? may mean either the mode of manifesta- 
tion, that which appears, as when it is said ‘the king of heaven 
appeared on earth év poppp dévOpHrov;” or the nature or essence 
(d¥ars or odcia) itself. The latter view is adopted by most of the 
fathers. The former, however, is more in accordance with the 
common usage of the word, and with the immediate context. He 
who existed in the form of God, took upon Him the form of a ser- 
vant (uoppyv Sovdov), 7. e., the real condition of a servant. (2.) He 
is declared to be equal with God. The toa ctvar 66 he did not, 
consider as an dpraypdv, % e., an act of robbery, or an unjust 
assumption. He was fully entitled to claim equality with God. 
(3.) This truly divine person assumed the fashion of a man, 
which is explained by saying He was found ‘in the likeness of 
men.” He appeared in form, carriage, language, mode of think- 
ing, speaking, feeling, and acting, like other men. He was not. 
purus putus homo, a mere man, but “ God incarnate,’’ God mani- 
fest in the flesh. (4.) This divine person, clothed in man’s nature, 
humbled Himself even unto death, even to the death of the cross. 
(5.) Therefore He (not God, or the divine nature in Christ, but 
the Theanthropos), is exalted above every name that is named, 
“that at the name of Jesus (7. e., the name of the Theanthropos, 
as it is He as a divine person clothed in the nature of man, who is 
the object of worship), every knee should bow, of things in heaven, 
and things in earth, and things under the earth.” This is an ex- 
haustive amplification. It includes the whole rational creation, 
from the highest archangel to the weakest saint ; all, all that have 
life acknowledge Christ to be what God alone can be, their supreme 
and absolute Lord. It is because Christ is and has done what is 
represented, that the Apostle says, in the following chapter, that 
He counted all things as nothing for the knowledge of Christ, and 
that his only desire was to be found in Him and clothed in his 
righteousness. This divine Redeemer is to come again, and “ shall 
change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glori- 


— —" 
¢ 4 


§3, Bj | ‘THE DIVINITY OF CHRIST. 515 


ous body, according to the working whereby He is able even to 
subdue all things unto Himself. (iii. 21.) 


Colossians. 


- Colossians i. 15-20, is expressly designed to set forth the true 
Godhead of Christ in opposition to the errors springing from the 
emanation theory, which had already begun to prevail in the 
churches of Asia Minor. This passage sets forth the relation of 
Christ, first to God, and secondly to the universe, and thirdly to 
the Church. Here, as in so many other places of Scripture, the 
predicates of the Adycs doapxos and of the Adyos &voapkos, are min- 
gled together. As in Heb. i. 2, 3, the Son is said to have created 
all things, and to be the brightness of the Father’s glory, and also to 
have made purification for sin; so here part of what is said belongs 
to the Logos as existing from eternity, and part belongs to Him as 
clothed in our nature. It was the Adyos dcapxos who is declared to 
be the image of the invisible God and creator of all things; and it 
is the Adyos éveapxos who is declared to be the head of the Church. 
The relation of Christ to God, in this passage is expressed, (1.) By 
the words just quoted, “He is the image of the invisible God.” 
He is so related to God that He reveals what God is, so that those 
who see Him, see God, those who know Him, know God, and those 
who hear Him, hear God. He is the brightness of God’s glory, and 
his express image. (2.) His relation to God is also expressed by 
saying that He is begotten from eternity, or the only begotten 
Son. The words zpwrdroxos réoys xticews are indeed variously ex- 
plained. By Socinians they are made to mean that He was the 
head of the new dispensation; by Arians that He was the first 
created of all rational creatures; by many orthodox interpreters 
mpwrdroxos is taken in its secondary sense, of head or chief. They 
therefore understand the Apostle to say that Christ is the ruler or 
head over the whole creation. All these interpretations, however, 
are inconsistent with the proper meaning of the words, with the 
context, and with the analogy of Scripture. Ipwréroxos means 
born before. What Christ is said to have been born before, is ex- 
pressed by dons xricews, He was born (or begotten) before any 
or every creature, 7. ¢., before creation, or from eternity. All the 
arguments adduced in a preceding chapter in proof of the eternal 
generation of the Son, are arguments in favour of this interpreta- 
tion. Besides, the Arian interpretation is inconsistent with the 
meaning of the words. That interpretation assumes that the gen- 
itive tdéoys xricews is to be taken partitively, so that Christ is said to 


1 


a 


516 PART L—THEOLOGY.  [Ca. VIL— Drvimrry or Canis 


be a part of the creation, the first of creatures, as He is said to be 
the first of those who rose from the dead, when He is called zpore- 
Tokos Tov vexpov. But aca xriois does not mean the whole creation, 
as indicating the class or category to which Christ belongs, but 
every creature, as indicating a relation or comparison ; Christ is the 
first begotten as to every creature, 7. ¢., begotten before any crea- 
ture (i. e., eternally, according to the constant usage of Scripture, 
for what is before creation is eternal.) - Besides, the connection re- 
quires this interpretation. The Apostle proves that Christ is the 
image of the invisible God, and the zporéroKos mdons xricews by an 
argument which proves that He cannot be a creature ; and therefore 
the birth of which he speaks must be before time. Secondly, the re- 
lation of Christ to the universe is expressed in this passage by say- 
ing, (1.) That He is the Creator of all things. This is amplified, 
as the all things are declared to include all that are in heaven and 
earth, visible and invisible, rational and irrational, however exalted, 
even thrones, dominions, principalities, and powers; that is, the 
whole hierarchy of the spiritual world. (2.) He is not only the 
author but the end of the creation, for all things were not only 
created by Him, but for Him. (8.) He upholds all things; by 
Him all things consist, 2. e., are preserved in being, life, and order. 
Thirdly, Christ is the head of the Church, the source of life and 
grace to all its members. For in Him ‘all fulness,” the plenitude 
of divine blessings dwells. In chapter ii. 8, all the treasures of 
wisdom and knowledge (é. e., all knowledge or omniscience) are 
said to dwell in Christ; and in ii. 9, that He is filled with “the 
fulness of the Godhead.” This is very different from the 7Ajpopa 
mentioned in i. 19, where the Apostle is speaking of what Beza 
calls ‘‘cumulatissima omnium divinarum rerum copia, ex qua, tan- 
quam inexhausto fonte, omnes gratis in corpus pro cujusque mem- 
bri modulo deriventur;”’! but here the reference is to the divine 
being, nature, or essence itself, 7d wAjpwopa ris Oedrytos. The word 
Gedrns is abstract of Geds as Oeudrys is of Ocios ; the former means God- 
head, that which makes God, God; the latter means divinity, that 
which renders divine. The entire plenitude of the divine essence 
(not a mere emanation of that essence as the rising sect of the 
Gnostics taught), dwells (xarouwe? permanently abides, it is no tran- 
sient manifestation) in Him bodily, cwparikis, invested with a 
body. The Godhead in its fulness is incarnate in Christ. He is, 
therefore, not merely veds but 6 Oeds in the highest sense. More 
than Paul says cannot be said. 


1 In loc. edit. Geneva, 1565, p. 428. 


§ 8, B.] THE DIVINITY OF CHRIST. 51T 


The Pastoral Hpistles. 


In Paul’s pastoral epistles to Timothy and Titus, besides the 
ordinary recognition of the divinity of Christ found in almost every 
page of the New Testament,.there are four passages in which, at 
least according to the common text and the most natural interpre- 
tation, he is directly called God. Even 1 Tim. i. 1, car’ émrayjv 
cod cwripos jpav Kar Kvpiov Inoot Xpiorod, may be naturally rendered, 
“according to the command of God our Savicur, even our Lord 
Jesus Christ.” This is in accordance with the parallel passages in 
Titus i. 3, “according to the commandment of God our Saviour ;” 
and Titus ii. 18, “of the great God our Saviour Jesus Christ.”’ In 
this latter passage there is no reason, as Winer and De Wette ac- 
knowledge, for questioning that Christ is called the great God, 
except what they regard as the Christology of the New Testa- 
ment. They donot admit that Christ is the great God according 
to the doctrine of Paul, and therefore they are unwilling to admit 
that this passage contains that declaration. But if, as we have 
seen, and as the whole Church believes, not only Paul but all the 
Apostles and prophets, abundantly teach that the Messiah is truly 
God as well as truly man, there is no force in this objection. Vio- 
lence must be done to the ordinary rules of language if rod peyddou 
Geod kal cwrfpos are not referred to the same subject; inasmuch as 
Geot has the article and cwrjpos is without it. The fair meaning of 
the words is, ‘* The Great God who is our Saviour Jesus Christ.” 
This interpretation is also demanded, (1.) By the context. Jesus 
Christ is the subject of discourse. Of Him it is said that He is the 
great God our Saviour, who gave Himself for us. (2.) Because the 
exipaveia, appearance (here in reference to the second advent), is 
repeatedly used in the New Testament of Christ, but never of 
God as such, or of God the Father. See 2 Tim. i. 10; 2 Thess. ii. 
8; 1 Tim. vi. 14; 2 Tim. iv. 1, 8. (8.) The position of the words 
gwripos iuav before Incot Xpwrot, If “God” and “Saviour” re- 
ferred to different persons the natural order of the words would be, 
‘© The appearance of the great God and Jesus Christ our Saviour ;” 
and not as it is, ‘‘ The appearance of the great God and our Saviour 
Jesus Christ.” Great God and Saviour obviously belong to the 
same person in 1 Tim.i. 1. ‘The command of God our Saviour,” 
and in Titus i. 8, “ God our Saviour;” and in this place (Tit. ii. 
13) that God and Saviour is declared to be Jesus Christ. 

The most important passage, however, in these pastoral epistles, 
is 1 Tim. iii. 16. With regard to that passage it may be remarked, 


518 PART L—THEOLOGY.  [Ca. VI.— Diviniry or Curisr. 


(1.) That it admits of two interpretations. According to the one, 
the Church is declared to be the pillar and ground of truth ; ac- 
cording to the other, the pillar and ground of truth is the great 
mystery of godliness, The latter is greatly to be preferred as 
equally consistent with the grammatical structure of the passage, 
and as far more in harmony with the analogy of Scripture. The 
pillar and ground of truth, the great fundamental doctrine of the 
Gospel, is often elsewhere declared to be the doctrine of the man- 
ifestation of God in the flesh. On this doctrine all our hopes of 
salvation rest. (2.) Whatever reading be adopted, whether Geds, 
és, or 6, all of which appear in different manuscripts, the passage 
must refer to Christ. He it was who was manifest in the flesh, 
justified by the Spirit, and received up into glory. (8.) Whatever 
reading be adopted, the passage assumes or asserts the divinity of 
our Lord. With the apostolic writers, the doctrine of the incarna- 
tion is expressed by saying, that the Adyos ** became flesh ” (John 
i. 14); or, ‘Christ is come in the flesh” (1 John iv. 2) ; or, “ He 
who is the brightness of God’s glory ‘ took part of flesh and blood ” 
(Heb. ii. 14); or, He that was “ equal with God” was “ found in 
fashion as a man.” (Phil. ii. 8.) The same truth, therefore, is 
expressed, whether we say, ‘‘ God was manifest in the flesh;” or, 
*¢He who was manifest in the flesh;” or, that ‘the mystery of 
godliness was manifest in the flesh.” (4.) The external authori- 
ties are so divided that the most competent editors and critics differ 
as to what is the original text. For 6eds we find the great body of 
the cursive Greek manuscripts and almost all the Greek Fathers, 
The authority of the Cédex Alexandrinus is claimed on both sides. 
The question there is, whether the letter is © or O ; some say they 
see distinct traces of the line in the Theta, others say they do not. 
For 6s C, F, G, of the uncial manuscripts, only two of the cursive 
manuscripts, and the Coptic and Sahidic versions, are quoted. To 
this must be added the testimony of the very ancient manuscript 
recently discovered by Tischendorf, the text of which has been 
published under his auspices at St. Petersburg. For 6 the uncial 
manuscript D, the Latin Vulgate and the Latin Fathers are the 
witnesses. In view of this state of the question, Wetstein, Gries- 
bach, Lachmann, Tischendorf, and Tregelles, among the editors, 
decide for 6s. Mill, Matthies, as well as the older editors Eras- 
mus, Beza, the Complutensian, and the later ones, as Knapp and 
Hahn, retain 0és4_ (5.) The internal evidence, so far as the per- 


1 Dr. Henderson has ably vindicated the reading Océs in his Critical Examination of the 
Various Readings in 1 Tim. iit. 16. 


§a;B} THE DIVINITY OF CHRIST. 519 


spicuity of the passage and the analogy of Scripture are concerned, 
are decidedly in favour of the common text. There is something 
remarkable in the passage ; it is brought in apparently as a quota- 
tion from a hymn, as some think, or from a confession of faith, as 
others suppose, at least, as a familiar formula in which the leading 
truths concerning the manifestation of Christ are concisely stated. 
C1.) He is God. (2.) He was manifest in the flesh, or became 
man. (3.) He was justified, 7. ¢., his claims to be regarded as 
God manifest in the flesh were proved to be just, by the Spirit 
(2. e., either by the Holy Ghost, or by the zvedya or divine nature 
revealing itself in Him. Comp. Johni. 14). (4.) He was seen 
of angels. They recognized and served Him. (5.) He was 
preached unto the Gentiles, as He came to be the Saviour of all 
men, and not of the Jews only. (6.) He was believed upon 
as God and Saviour; and (7.) He was received up into glory, 
where He now lives, reigns, and intercedes. 


Epistle to the Hebrews. 


The doctrines of the Bible are generally stated with authority ; 
announced as facts to be received on the testimony of God. It is 
seldom that the sacred writers undertake to prove what they teach. 
The first chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews is an exception to 
this general rule. The divinity of Christ is here formally proved. 
As the design of the Apostle was to persuade the Hebrew Chris- 
tians to adhere to the gospel, and to guard them from the fatal 
sin of apostatizing to Judaism, he sets before them the immeasura- 
ble superiority of the gospel to the Mosaic economy. The first 
point of that superiority, and that on which all the others depend, 
is the superior dignity of Christ as a divine person, to Moses and 
all the prophets. To set forth that superiority, he first asserts that 
Christ, the Son of God, is the possessor of all things; that through 
Him God made the world; that He is the brightness of God’s glory, 
the express image of his nature, upholding all things by the word of 
his power; and that because He has by Himself made purification 
for sin; He is now, as the Theanthropos, set down at the right hand 
of the majesty on high. The true divinity of Christ being thus 
asserted, the Apostle proceeds to prove that this is the doctrine of 
the Scriptures. (1.) Because He is in the Bible called the Son of 
God, a title which cannot be given in its true sense to any creature. 
Christ, therefore, is higher than the angels; and as the word angels 
in the Bible includes all intelligent creatures higher than man, 
Christ is higher than all creatures, and therefore cannot Himself be 


520 PART I.—THEOLOGY.  [Cu. VI. — Divinity or Curisr. 


a creature. He belongs to a different category of being. (2.) All 
angels (7. ¢., all the higher intelligences) are commanded to wor- _ 
ship Him (i. e., to prostrate themselves before Him). (8.) While 
the angels are addressed as mere instruments by which God 
effects his purposes, the Son is addressed as God. “Thy throne 
O God is for ever and ever.” (4.) He laid the foundations of 
the earth, and the heavens are the work of his hands. (5.) They 
are mutable, but He is immutable and eternal. (6.) He is associ- 
ated with God in glory and dominion. On this great truth, thus 
established, the Apostle grounds all the duties and doctrines which 
he urges on the faith and obedience of his readers. It is on this 
ground that there is no escape for those who reject the salvation 
which He has provided. (ii. 1-5.) It is on this ground also that 
He has a dominion never granted to angels, all things being made 
subject to Him. (ii. 5-10.) As it was a divine person, the eter- 
nal Son of God, who assumed our nature, and became a high priest 
for us, his sacrifice is efficacious, and need not be repeated; and He 
is a perpetual priest, higher than the heavens, who can save to the 
uttermost all who come unto God by Him. This Saviour is the 
same yesterday, to-day, and forever. Faith in Him will enable us 
to overcome the world, as faith in the promises concerning Christ 
enabled the ancient worthies to witness a good confession under 
the greatest trials and sufferings. 


The other Sacred Writers of the New Testament. 


The same testimony to the divinity of our Lord is borne by the 
Apostles James and Peter. The former calls Him the Lord of 
glory, the latter in his First Epistle represents Him as the proper 
object of supreme love. Faith in Him secures salvation. His 
spirit dwelt in the ancient prophets. He is the foundation of the 
Church. (ii. 6.) Having suffered the just for the unjust to bring 
us unto God, He is now exalted at the right hand of God, the 
whole universe of intelligent creatures being subject to Him. (iii. 
18.) In his Second Epistle he speaks of the knowledge of Christ 
as the source of grace and peace (i. 2.), and of holiness (ver. 8). 
At death believers enter into his everlasting kingdom (ver. 11). 
Peter was an eyewitness of his divine majesty when he was with 
Him in the holy mount. Lord and Saviour, equivalent in the lips 
of a Jew, to Jehovah Saviour, is his common designation of Christ. 
True religion, according to this Apostle, consists in the knowledge 
¥ Christ as the Son of God, to whom, therefore, he ascribes eterna) , 
glory. 


§ 3, B.] THE DIVINITY OF CHRIST. 521 


Imperfect and unsatisfactory as this survey necessarily is, it is 
enough to prove not only that the Scriptures teach the divinity of 
Christ, but that Christianity as a religion consists in the love, wor- 
ship, and service of the Lord Jesus, whose creatures we are, and 
to whom we belong by the still dearer relation of those whom He 
hath purchased with his own precious blood. 


CHAPTER VIII. 
THE HOLY SPIRIT. 


§ 1. His Nature. 

THE words m7 and zredza are used in different senses, both lit- 
eral and figurative, in the sacred Scriptures. They properly mean 
wind, as when our Lord says, “The zvetya bloweth where it 
listeth ;” then any invisible power; then immaterial, invisible 
agents, as the soul and angels; then God himself, who is said to 
be a Spirit, to express his nature as an immaterial, intelligent being ; 
and finally, the Third Person of the Trinity is called “ The Spirit” 
by way of eminence, probably, for two reasons. First, because 
He is the power or efficiency of God, ¢. e., the person through 
whom the efficiency of God is directly exercised ; and secondly, to 
express his relation to the other persons of the Trinity. As Father 
and Son are terms expressive of relation, it is natural to infer that 
the word Spirit is to be understood in the same way. The Son is 
called the Word, as the revealer or image of God, and the Third 
Person is called Spirit as his breath or power. He is also predom- 
inantly called the Holy Spirit, to indicate both his nature and op- 
erations. H* is absolutely holy in his own nature, and the cause 
of holiness in all creatures. For the same reason He is called the 
Spirit of Truth, the Spirit of Wisdom, of Peace, of Love, and of 
Glory. 

A. His Personality. 

The two points to be considered in reference to this subject, are, 
first the nature, and second the office or work of the Holy Spirit. 
With regard to his nature, is He a person or a mere power? and 
if a person, is He created or divine, finite or infinite? The person- 
ality of the Spirit has been the faith of the Church from the begin- 
ning. It had few opponents even in the chaotic period of theology ; 
and in modern times has been denied by none but Socinians, Ari- 
ans, and Sabellians. Before considering the direct proof of the 
Church doctrine that the Holy Spirit is a person, it may be well to 
remark, that the terms “ The Spirit,” “* The Spirit of God,” “ The 
Holy Spirit,” and when God speaks, “ My Spirit,” or, when God is 


7! 


* §1, A] THE HOLY SPIRIT. 528 


spoken of “ His Spirit,” occur in all parts of Scripture from Gen- 
esis to Revelation. These and equivalent terms are evidently to be 
understood in the same sense throughout the Scriptures. If the 
Spirit of God which moved on the face of the waters, which strove 
with the antediluvians, which came upon Moses, which gave skill to 
artisans, and which inspired the prophets, is the power of God; then 
the Spirit which came upon the Apostles, which Christ promised 
to send as a comforter and advocate, and to which the instruction, 
sanctification, and guidance of the people of God are referred, must 
also be the power of God. But if the Spirit is clearly revealed to 
be a person in the later parts of Scripture, it is plain that the ear- 
lier portions must be understood in the same way. One part of 
the Bible, and much less one or a few passages must not be taken 
by themselves, and receive any interpretation which the isolated 
words may bear, but Scripture must interpret Scripture. Another 
obyious remark on this subject is, that the Spirit of God is equally 
prominent in all parts of the word of God. His intervention does 
not occur on rare occasions, as the appearance of angels, or the The- 
ophanies, of which mention is made here and there in the sacred 
volume ; but He is represented as everywhere present and every- 
where operative. We might as well strike from the Bible the 
name and doctrine of God, as the name and office of the Spirit. 
In the New Testament alone He is mentioned not far from three 
hundred times. It is not only, however, merely the frequency with 
which the Spirit is mentioned, and the prominence given to his 
person and work, but the multiplied and interesting relations in 
which He is represented as standing to the people of God, the im- 
portance and number of his gifts, and the absolute dependence of the 
believer and of the Church upon Him for spiritual and eternal life, 
which render the doctrine of the Holy Ghost absolutely fundamen- 
tal to the gospel. The work of the Spirit in applying the redemp- 
tion of Christ is represented to be as essential as that redemption 
itself. It is therefore indispensable that we should know what the 
Bible teaches concerning the Holy Ghost, both as to his nature 
and office. 
Proof of his Personality. 

The Scriptures clearly teach that He is a person. Personality 
includes intelligence, will, and individual subsistence. If, there- 
fore, it can be proved that all these are attributed to the Spirit, it 
is thereby proved that He is a person. It will not be necessary or 
advisable to separate the proofs of these several points, and cite 
passages which ascribe to Him intelligence ; and then others, 


524 PART L—THEOLUGY. [Ca VI. — Tue Hory Sri. 


which attribute to Him will; and still others to prove his individual 
subsistence, because all these are often included in one and the 
same passage; and arguments which prove the one, in many cases 
prove also the others. 

1. The first argument for the personality of the Holy Spirit is 
derived from the use of the personal pronouns in relation to Him. 
A person is that which, when speaking, says I; when addressed, is 
called thou ; and when spoken of, is called he, or him. It is indeed 
admitted that there is such a rhetorical figure as personification ; 
that inanimate or irrational beings, or sentiments, or attributes, may 
be introduced as speaking, or addressed as persons. But this cre- 
ates no difficulty. The cases of personification are such as do not, 
except in rare instances, admit of any doubt. The fact that men 
sometimes apostrophize the heavens, or the elements, gives no pre- 
text for explaining as personification all the passages in which God 
or Christ is introduced as a person. So also with regard to the 
Holy Spirit. He is introduced as a person so often, not merely in 
poetic or excited discourse, but in simple narrative, and in didactic 
instructions ; and his personality is sustained by so many collateral 
proofs, that to explain the use of the personal pronouns in relation 
to Him on the principle of personification, is to do violence to all 
the rules of interpretation. Thus in Acts xiii. 2, “‘The Holy 
Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul, for the work where- 
unto I have called them.’” Our Lord says (John xv. 26), “ When 
the Comforter (6 rapdxhyros) is come whom I will send unto you 
from the Father, even the Spirit of truth (76 rvetua ris addnbetas) 
which (6) proceedeth from the Father, He (ékeivos) shall testify 
of me.” The use of the masculine pronoun He instead of it, 
shows that the Spirit is a person. It may indeed be said that as 
mapdxAyros is masculine, the pronoun referring to it must of course 
be in the same gender. But as the explanatory words 76 zvedya in- 
tervene, to which the neuter 6 refers, the following pronoun would. 
naturally be in the neuter, if the subject spoken of, the zvedya, 
were not a person. In the following chapter (John xvi. 18, 14) 
there is no ground for this objection. It is there said, “ When 
He (éxcivos), the Spirit of truth, is come, He will guide you into all 
truth: for He shall not speak of Himself ; but whatsoever He shall 
hear, that shall He speak, and He will show you things to come. 
He shall glorify me (ékeivos éue Sofdce.): for He shall receive of 
mine, and shall show it unto you.” Here there is no possibility of 
accounting for the use of the personal pronoun He (éxeivos) on any 
other ground than the personality of the Spirit. 


— "=. =. 


qa7 Asp vo! THE HOLY SPIRIT. 525 


2. We stand in relations to the Holy Spirit which we can sus- 
tain only to a person. He is the object of our faith. We believe 
on the Holy Ghost. This faith we profess:in baptism. We are 
baptized not only in the name of the Father and of the Son, but 
also of the Holy Ghost. The very association of the Spirit in 
such a connection, with the Father and the Son, as they are ad- 
mitted to be distinct persons, proves that the Spirit also is a person. 
Besides the use of the word éis 75 dvope, wnto the name, admits of 
no other explanation. By baptism we profess to acknowledge the 
Spirit as we acknowledge the Father and the Son, and we bind 
ourselves to the one as well as to the others. If when the Apos- 
tle tells the Corinthians that they were not baptized «is 7d dvoya 
IlatAov, and when he says that the Hebrews were baptized unto 
Moses, he means that the Corinthians were not, and that the He- 
brews were made the disciples, the one of Paul and the others of 
Moses ; then when we are baptized unto the name of the Spirit, 
the meaning is that in baptism we profess to be his disciples; we 
bind ourselves to receive his instructions, and to submit to his con- 
trol. We stand in the same relation to Him as to the Father and 
to the Son; we acknowledge Him to be a person as distinctly as we 
acknowledge the personality of the Son, or of the Father. Chris- 
tians not only profess to believe on the Holy Ghost, but they are 
also the recipients of his gifts. He is to them an object of prayer. 
In the apostolic benediction, the grace of Christ, the love of the 
Father, and the fellowship of the Holy Ghost, are solemnly in- 
voked. We pray to the Spirit for the communication of Himself 
to us, that He may, according to the promise of our Lord, dwell 
in us, as we pray to Christ that we may be the objects of his un- 
merited love. Accordingly we are exhorted not “to sin against,” 
“not to resist,” not “to grieve” the Holy Spirit. He is repre- 
sented, therefore, as a person who can be the object of our acts 5 
whom we may please or offend; with whom we may have com- 
munion, 7. e., personal intercourse ; who can love and be loved; 
who can say “ thou” to us ; and whom we can invoke in every time 
of need. 

3. The Spirit also sustains relations to us, and performs offices 
which none but a person can sustain or perform. He is our 
teacher, sanctifier, comforter, and guide. He governs every be 
liever who is led by the Spirit, and the whole Church. He calls, 
as He called Barnabas and Saul, to the work of the ministry, or 
to some special field of labour. Pastors or bishops are made over- 


seers by the Holy Ghost. 


526 PART I.—THEOLOGY. (Cu. VIII.— Tux Hory Sprrrr. 


4, In the exercise of these and other functions, personal acts are 
constantly attributed to the Spirit in the Bible; that is, such acts 
as imply intelligence, will, and activity or power. The Spirit 
searches, selects, reveals, and reproves. We often read that “ The 
Spirit said.” (Acts xiii. 2; xxi. 11; 1 Tim. iv.1, ete., ete.) This 
is so constantly done, that the Spirit appears as a personal agent 
from one end of the Scriptures to the other, so that his personality 
is beyond dispute. The only possible question is whether He is a 
distinct person from the Father. But of this there can be no rea- 
sonable doubt, as He is said to be the Spirit of God and the Spirit 
which is of God (é« 60d) ; as He is distinguished from the Father 
in the forms of baptism and benediction ; as He proceeds from the 
Father; and as He is promised, sent, and given by the Father. 
So that to confound the Holy Spirit with God would be to render 
the Scriptures unintelligible. 

5. All the elements of personality, namely, intelligence, will, 
and individual subsistence, are not only involved in all that is thus 
revealed concerning the relation in which the Spirit stands to us 
and that which we sustain to Him, but they are all distinctly at- 
tributed to Him. The Spirit is said to know, to will, and to act. 
He searches, or knows all things, even the deep things of God. No 
man knoweth the things of God, but the Spirit of God. (1 Cor. 
ii. 10, 12.) He distributes ‘to every man severally as he will.” 
(1 Cor. xii, 11.) His individual subsistence is involved in his being 
an agent, and in his being the object on which the activity of 
others terminates. If He can be loved, reverenced, and obeyed, 
or offended and sinned against, He must be a person. 

6. The personal manifestations of the Spirit, when He descended 
on Christ after his baptism, and upon the Apostles at the day of 
Pentecost, of necessity involve his personal subsistence. It was 
not any attribute of God, nor his mere efficiency, but God himself, 
that was manifested in the burning bush, in the fire and clouds on 
Mount Sinai, in the pillar which guided the Israelites through the 
wilderness, and in the glory which dwelt in the Tabernacle and 
in the Temple. 

7. The people of God have always regarded the Holy Spirit 
asa person. They have looked to Him for instruction, sanctifica- 
tion, direction, and comfort. This is part of their religion. Chris- 
tianity (subjectively considered) would not be what it is without 
this sense of dependence on the Spirit, and this love and reverence 
for his person. All the liturgies, prayers, and praises of the 


Church, are filled with appeals and addresses to the Holy Ghost, 


; 
; 
‘ 
j 


— = 


§ 1, B.] THE HOLY .SPIRIT. 527 


This is a fact which admits of no rational solution if the Scrip- 
tures do not really teach that the Spirit is a distinct person. The 
rule Quod semper, quod ubique, quod ab omnibus, is held by Prot- 
estants as well as by Romanists. It is not to the authority of 
general consent as an evidence of truth, that Protestants object, 
but to the applications made of it by the Papal Church, and to the . 
principle on which that authority is made to rest. All Protestants 
admit that true believers in every age and country have one faith, 
as well as one God and one Lord. 


B. Divinity of the Holy Spirit. 

On this subject there has been little dispute in the Church. The 
Spirit is so prominently presented in the Bible as possessing divine 
attributes, and exercising divine prerogatives, that since the fourth 
century his true divinity has never been denied by those who admit 
his personality. 

1. In the Old Testament, all that is said of Jehovah is said of 
the Spirit of Jehovah ; and therefore, if the latter is not a mere 
periphrase for the former, he must of necessity be divine. The 
expressions, Jehovah said, and, the Spirit said, are constantly in- 
terchanged ; and the acts of the Spirit are said to be acts of God. 

2. In the New Testament, the language of Jehovah is quoted 
as the language of the Spirit. In Is. vi. 9, it is written, Jehovah 
said, ‘*Go and tell this people,” etc. This passage is thus quoted 
by Paul, Acts xxviii. 25, “ Well spake the Holy Ghost by Esaias 
the prophet,” etc., In Jeremiah xxxi. 31, 33, 84, it is said, 
* Behold the days come, saith Jehovah, that I will make a new 
covenant with the house of Israel ;” which is quoted by the Apos- 
tle in Heb. x. 15, saying, “ Whereof the Holy Ghost also is a wit- 
ness to us: for after that He had said before, This is the covenant 
that I will make with them after those days, saith the Lord ; I will 
put my laws into their hearts,” etc. Thus constantly the language 
of God is quoted as the language of the Holy Ghost. The proph- 
ets were the messengers of God; they uttered his words, delivered 
his commands, pronounced his threatenings, and announced his 
promises, because they spake as they were moved by the Holy 
Ghost. They were the organs of God, because they were the 
organs of the Spirit. The Spirit, therefore, must be God. 

3. In the New Testament the same mode of representation is 
continued. Believers are the temple of God, because the Spirit 
dwells in them. Eph. ii. 22: Ye are “a habitation of God 
through the Spirit.” 1 Cor. vi. 19: “Know ye not that your 


528 PART I.— THEOLOGY. (Cu. VII. — Tux Hoty Srmir 


body is the temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you, which ye 
have of God?” In Rom. viii. 9,10, the indwelling of Christ is 
said to be the indwelling of the Spirit of Christ, and that is said to 
be the indwelling of the Spirit of God. In Acts v. 1-4, Ananias is 
said to have lied unto God because he lied against the Holy Ghost, 

4. Our Lord and his Apostles constantly speak of the Holy 
Spirit as possessing all divine perfections. Christ says, “ All 
manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men: but the 
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men.” 
(Matt. xii. 831.) The unpardonable sin, then, is speaking against 
the Holy Ghost. This could not be unless the Holy Ghost were 
God. The Apostle, in 1 Cor. ii. 10, 11, says that the Spirit knows 
all things, even the deep things (the most secret purposes) of 
God. His knowledge is commensurate with the knowledge of 
God. He knows the things of God as the spirit of a man knows 
the things of aman. The consciousness of God is the conscious- 
ness of the Spirit. The Psalmist teaches us that the Spirit is 
omnipresent and everywhere efficient. ‘ Whither,” he asks, 
“ shall I go from thy Spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy pres- 
ence?” (Ps. cxxxix. 7.) The presence of the Spirit is the 
presence of God. The same idea is expressed by the prophet when 
he says, ‘‘ Can any hide himself in secret places that I shall not see 
him? saith Jehovah. Do not I fill heaven and earth? saith 
Jehovah.” (Jer. xxiii. 24.) 

5. The works of the Spirit are the works of God. He fashioned 
the world. (Gen. i. 2.) He regenerates the soul: to be born of 
the Spirit is to be born of God. He is the source of all knowledge ; 
the giver of inspiration ; the teacher, the guide, the sanctifier, and 
the comforter of the Church:in all ages. He fashions our bodies ; He 
formed the body of Christ, as a fit habitation for the fulness of the 
Godhead; and He is to quicken our mortal bodies. (Rom. viii. 11.) 

6, He is therefore presented in the Scriptures as the proper 
object of worship, not only in the formula of baptism and in the 
apostolic benediction, which bring the doctrine of the Trinity into 
constant remembrance as the fundamental truth of our religion, but 
also in the constant requirement that we look to Him and depend 
upon Him for all spiritual good, and reverence and obey Him as 
our divine teacher and sanctifier. 


Relation of the Spirit to the Father and to the Son. 


The relation of the Spirit to the other persons of the Trinity has 
Leen stated before. (1.) He is the same in substance and equa. 


a 


§ 2,.A.] OFFICE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 529 


in power and glory. (2.) He is subordinate to the Father and 
Son, as to his mode of subsistence and operation, as He is said to 
be of the Father and of the Son; He is sent by them, and they 
operate through Him. (3.) He bears the same relation to the 
Father as to the Son; as He is said to be of the one as well as of 
the other, and He is given by the Son as well as by the Father. 
(4.) His eternal relation to the other persons of the Trinity is indi- 
cated by the word Spirit, and by its being said that he is ék roi 
Geov, out of God, z. e., God is the source whence the Spirit is said 
to proceed. 


§ 2. The Office of the Holy Spirit. 
A. In Nature. 


The general doctrine of the Scriptures on this subject is that the 
Spirit is the executive of the Godhead. Whatever God does, He 
does by the Spirit. Hence in the creed of Constantinople, adopted 
by the Church universal, He is said to be 73 Uvedpa, 75 xvprov, 75 
fworodv. He is the immediate source of all life. Even in the 
external world the Spirit is everywhere present and everywhere 
active. Matter is not intelligent. It has its peculiar properties, 
which act blindly according to established laws. The intelligence, 
therefore, manifested in vegetable and animal structures, is not to 
be referred to matter, but to the omnipresent Spirit of God. It was 
He who brooded over the waters and reduced chaos into erder. It 
was He who garnished the heavens. It is He that causes the grass 
to grow. The Psalmist says of all living creatures, ‘* Thou hidest 
thy face, they are troubled: thou takest away their breath, they die, 
and return to their dust. Thou sendest forth thy Spirit, they are 
created: and thou renewest the face of the earth.”” (Ps. civ. 29, 
30.) Compare Is. xxxii. 14,15. Job, speaking of his corporeal 
frame, says, ‘“ The Spirit of God hath made me.” (Job xxxiii. 4.) 
And the Psalmist, after describing the omnipresence of the Spirit, 
refers to his agency the wonderful mechanism of the human body. 
“T am fearfully and wonderfully made . . . . my substance was 
not hid from thee, when I was made in secret, and curiously 
wrought in the lowest parts of the earth. Thine eyes did see my 
substance, yet being unperfect ; and in thy book all my members 
were written, which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet 
there was none of them.” (Ps cxxxix. 14-16.) Cyprian (or 
the author of the Tract “De Spiritu Sancto,” included in his 
works) says, “Hic Spiritus Sanctus ab ipso mundi initio aquis 
legitur superfusus; non materialibus aquis quasi vehiculo egens, 

VOL. I. 34 


530 PART I. —THEOLOGY. ([Cu. VII — Tue Hory Sprert. 


quas potius ipse ferebat et complectentibus firmamentum dabat con- 
gruum motum et limitem preefinitum. . . . [Hic est] spiritus vite 
cujus vivificus calor animat omnia et fovet et provehit et foecundat. 
Hic Spiritus Sanctus omnium viventium anima, ita largitate sua se 
omnibus abundanter infundit, ut habeant omnia rationabilia et irra- 
tionabilia secundum genus suum ex eo quod sunt et quod in suo or- 
dine su natures competentia agunt. Non quod ipse sit substantialis 
anima singulis, sed in se singulariter manens, de plenitudine sua 
distributor magnificus proprias efficientias singulis dividit et largi- 
tur; et quasi sol omnia calefaciens, subjecta omnia nutrit, et absque 
ulla sui diminutione, integritatem suam de inexhausta abundantia, 
quod satis est, et sufficit omnibus, commodat et impartit.” ? 


. The Spirit the Source of all Intellectual Life. 


The Spirit is also represented as the source of all intellectual life. 
When man was created it is said God “ breathed into his nostrils 
the breath of life; and man became (mr w»53) a living soul.” 
(Gen. ii.'7.) Job xxxii. 8, says, The inspiration of the Almighty 
giveth men understanding, 7. e., a rational nature, for it is explained 
by saying, He ‘‘teacheth us more than the beasts of the earth, and 
maketh us wiser than the fowls of heaven.” (Job xxxy.11.) The 
Scriptures ascribe in like manner to Him all special or extraordinary 
gifts. Thus it is said of Bezaleel, ‘I have called” him, ‘and I have 
filled him with the Spirit of God, in wisdom, in understanding, and 
in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship, to devise cunning 
works, to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass.” (Ex. xxxi. 2, 
3,4.) By his Spirit God gave Moses the wisdom requisite for his 
high duties, and when he was commanded to devolve part of’ his 
burden upon the seventy elders, it was said, ‘I will take of the 
Spirit which is upon thee, and will put it upon them.” (Num. xi. 
17.) Joshua was appointed to succeed Moses, because in him was 
the Spirit. (Num. xxvii. 18.) In like manner the Judges, who 
from time to time were raised up, as emergency demanded, were 
qualified by the Spirit for their peculiar work, whether as rulers or 
as warriors. Of Othniel it is said, “The Spirit of the Lord came 
upon him, and he judged Israel and went out to war.” (Judges iii. 
10.) So the Spirit of the Lord is said to have come upon Gideon 
and on Jephthah and on Samson. When Saul offended God, the 
Spirit of the Lord is said to have departed from him. (1 Sam. xvi. 
14.) When Samuel anointed David, “The Spirit of the Lorp came 
upon” him “ from that day forward.” (41 Sam. xvi. 13.) In like 

1 Works, edit. Breme, 1690, on p. 61 of the second set in the Opuscula. 


§ 2, B. OFFICE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 531 


manner under the new dispensation the Spirit is represented as not 
only the author of miraculous gifts, but also as the giver of the 
qualifications to teach and rule in the Church. All these opera-- 
tions are independent of the sanctifying influences of the Spirit. 
When the Spirit came on Samson or upon Saul, it was not to 
render them holy, but to endue them with extraordinary physical 
and intellectual power ; and when He is said to have departed from 
them, it means that those extraordinary endowments were with- 
drawn. 


B. The Spirit’s Office in the Work of Redemption. 


With regard to the office of the Spirit in the work of redemption, 
the Scriptures teach, — 

1. That He fashioned the body, and endued the human soul 
of Christ with every qualification for his work. To the Virgin 
Mary it was said, “* The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and 
the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee: therefore also 
that holy thing which shall be born of thee, shall be called the 
Son of God.” (Luke i. 35.) The prophet Isaiah predicted that 
the Messiah should be replenished with all spiritual gifts. ‘ Be- 
hold my servant whom I uphold; mine elect in whom my soul 
delighteth; I have put my Spirit upon him: he shall bring 
forth judgment to the Gentiles.” (1s. xlii. 1.) ‘There shall 
come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch shall grow 
out of his roots: and the Spirit of the Lorp shall rest upon him, 
the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and 
might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lorp.”’ (ls. 
xi. 1, 2.) When our Lord appeared on earth, it is said that the 
Spirit without measure was given unto Him. (John iii. 34.) “ And 
John bare record, saying, I saw the Spirit descending from heaven 
like a dove, and it abode upon him.” (John i. 32.) He was, 
therefore, said to have been full of the Holy Ghost. 

2. That the Spirit is the revealer of all divine truth. The doc- 
trines of the Bible are called the things of the Spirit. With regard 
to the writers of the Old Testament, it is said they spake as they 
were moved by the Holy Ghost. The language of Micah is appli- 
cable to all the prophets, “Truly I am full of power by the Spirit 
of the Lorn, and of judgment, and of might, to declare unto Jacob 
his transgression and to Israel his sin.” (Micah iii. 8.) What 
David said, the Holy Ghost is declared to have said. The New 
Testament writers were in like manner the organs of the Spirit. 
The doctrines which Paul preached he did not receive from men, 


ee: 


582 PART I.— THEOLOGY.  ([Cu. VHI.— Tux Hoty Sprain 


“but God,” he says, ‘hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit.” 
(1 Cor. ii. 10.) The Spirit also guided the utterance of those 
truths ; for he adds, “* Which things also we speak, not in the 
words which man’s wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost 
teacheth ; communicating the things of the Spirit in the words of 
the Spirit af (avevparukois TVEVLATLKG, ovyxpivovres), The whole Bible, 
therefore, is to be referred to the Spirit as its author. 

3. The Spirit not only thus reveals divine truth, having guided 
infallibly holy men of old in recording it, but He everywhere at- 
tends it by his power. All truth is enforced on the heart and con- 
science with more or less power by the Holy Spirit, wherever that 
truth is known. To this all-pervading influence we are indebted 
for all there is of morality and order in the world. But besides 
this general influence, which is usually called common grace, the 
Spirit specially illuminates the minds of the children of God, that 
they may knew the things freely given (or revealed to them) by 
God. The natural man does not receive them, neither can he 
know them, because they are spiritually discerned. All believers 
are therefore called (zvevparcxot) spiritual, because thus enlightened 
and cuided by the Spirit. 

4, It is the special office of the Spirit to convince the world of 
sin; to reveal Christ, to regenerate the soul, to lead men to the 
exercise of faith and repentance ; to dwell in those whom He thus 
renews, as a principle of a new and divine life. By this indwelling 
of the Spirit, believers are united to Christ, and to one another, so 
that they form one body. This is the foundation of the communion 
of saints, making them one in faith, one in love, one in their inward 
life, and one in their hopes and final destiny. 

5. The Spirit also calls men to office in the Church, and endows 
them with the qualifications necessary for the successful discharge 
of its duties. The office of the Church, in this matter, is simply 
to ascertain and authenticate the call of the Spirit. Thus the 
Holy Ghost is the immediate author of all truth, of all holiness, of 
all consolation, of all authority, and of all efficiency in the children 
of God individually, and in the Church collectively. 


§ 8. History of the Doctrine concerning the Holy Spirit. 


During the Ante-Nicene period, the Church believed concerning 
the Holy Ghost what was revealed on the surface of Scripture, and 
what was involved in the religious experience of all Christians. 
There is to them one God, the Father, whose favour they had for- 
feited by sin, and to whom they must be reconciled; one Lord 


J 
: 
J 


§3.] THE HOLY SPIRIT. 588 


Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God, through whom this 
reconciliation is effected ; and one Holy Spirit, by whom they are, 
through Christ, brought near to God. This all Christians believed, 
as they professed in their baptism, and in repeating and receiving 


the apostolic benediction. With this simple faith underlying and 


sustaining the life of the Church, there coexisted among theologians 
great obscurity, indistinctness, and inconsistency of statement, 
especially in reference to the nature and office of the Holy Ghost. 
This ought not to be a matter of surprise, because in the Scriptures 
themselves the same work is often ascribed to God and to the Spirit 
of God, which led some at times to assume that these terms ex- 
pressed one and the same thing; as the spirit of a man is the man 
himself. In the Scriptures, also, the terms Word and Breath (or 
Spirit) are often interchanged ; and what ‘in one place is said to 
be done by the Word, in another is said to be done by the Spirit. 
The Adyos is represented as the life of the world and the source of 
all knowledge, and yet the same is said of the Spirit. Paul declares 
in one place (Gal. i. 12) that he received the doctrines which he 
taught, by the revelation of Jesus Christ; in another (1 Cor. ii. 
10), that he was taught them by the Spirit. Misled by such repre- 
sentation, some of the fathers identified tlfe Son and Spirit. Even 
Tertullian, in one place says, “‘ Spiritus substantia est Sermonis, et 
Sermo operatio Spiritus, et duo unum sunt.”! Finally, as it is 
plain from the Scripture that the Spirit is of the Son, as the Son 
is of the Father (the difference between generation and procession 
being perfectly inscrutable), all the Arians and semi-Arians who 
taught that the Son was created by the Father, held that the Spirit 
was created by the Son. ‘This rotised so much controversy and 
agitation, that first the Council of Nice, a, D, 825, and then that of 
Constantinople, a. D. 381, were called to frame a satisfactory state- 
ment of the Scriptural doctrine on this subject. In the Creed of the 
Apostles, as it is called, which is so ancient that Rufinus and Am- 
brose referred it to the Apostles themselves, it is simply said, ‘“ I 
believe on the Holy Ghost.” The same words without addition 
are repeated in the Nicene Creed, but in the Creed of Constan- 
tinople it is added, “I believe in the Holy Ghost, the divine (76 
xépov), the life-giving, who proceedeth from the Father, who is to 
be worshipped and glorified with the Father and the Son, and who 
spake through the prophets.” In the Athanasian Creed (so-called), 
it is said that the Spirit is consubstantial with the Father and 
the Son; that He is uncreated, eternal, and omnipotent, equal in 
1 Adversus Praxean, 15, Works, edit. Basle, 1562, p. 426. 


534 PART I.— THEOLOGY. ([Ca. VUI. — Tux Hoty Spirit 


majesty and glory, and that He proceeds from the Father and the 
Son. These creeds are Catholic, adopted by the whole Church. 
Since they were framed there has been no diversity of faith on this 
subject among those recognized as Christians. 
Those who, since the Council of Constantinople have denied the 
common Church doctrine, whether Socinians, Arians, or Sabellians, 
‘regard the Holy Spirit not as a creature, but as the power of God, 
t. e., the manifested divine efficiency. The modern philosophical 
theologians of Germany do not differ essentially from this view. De 
Wette, for example, says, that the Spirit is God as revealed and 
operative in nature; Schleiermacher says the term designates God 
as operative in the Church, 7. e., “der Gemeingeist der Kirche.” 
This, however, is only a name. God with Schleiermacher is only 
the unity of the causality manifested in the world. That causality 
viewed in Christ we may call Son, and viewed in the Church we 
may call the Spirit. God is merely cause, and man a fleeting effect. 
Happily Schleiermacher’s theology and Schleiermacher’s religion 
were as different as the speculations and the every day faith of the 
idealist. 


CHAPTER IX. 
THE DECREES OF GOD. 
§ 1. The Nature of the Decrees. 
Ir must be remembered that theology is not philosophy. It does 


4 


not assume to discover truth, or to reconcile what it teaches as true 
with all other truths. Its province is simply to state what God has 
revealed in his Word, and to vindicate those statements as far as 
possible from misconceptions and objections. This limited and 
humble office of theology it is especially necessary to bear in mind, 
when we come to speak of the acts and purposes of God. ‘ The 
things of God knoweth no man; but the Spirit of God.”” (1 Cor. 
ii. 11.) In treating, therefore, of the decrees of God, all that is 
proposed is simply to state what the Spirit has seen fit to reveal on 
that subject. 

“The decrees of God are his eternal purpose, according to the 
counsel of his will, whereby for his own glory He hath fore- 
ordained whatsoever comes to pass.”! Agreeably to this statement: 
(1.) The end or final cause contemplated in all God’s decrees, is 
his own glory. (2.) They are all reducible to one eternal pur- 
pose. (38.) They are free and sovereign, determined by the coun- 
sel of his own will. (4.) They comprehend all events. 


A. The Glory of God the Final “Cause of all his Decrees. 


The final cause of all God’s purposes is his own glory. This is 
frequently declared to be the end of all things. ‘ Thou art wor- 
thy,” say the heavenly worshippers, ‘‘O Lord, to receive glory, 
and honour, and power: for thou hast created all things, and for thy 
pleasure they are and were created.” (Rev.iv.11.) All things are © 
said to be not only of God and through Him, but for Him. He is 
the beginning and the end. The heavens declare his glory ; that 
is the purpose for which they were made. God frequently an- 
nounces his determination to make his glory known. ‘“ As truly 
as I live, all the earth shall be filled with the glory of the Lorn.” 
(Num. xiv. 21.) This is said to be the end of all the dispensations 
of his providence, whether beneficent or punitive. ‘‘ For mine own 


1 Westminster Shorter Catechism, 7. 


536 PART I.— THEOLOGY.  ([Cua.1X.— Tus Decrexs 


sake, even for mine own sake, will I do it; for how should my name 
be polluted? and I will not give my glory unto another.” (Is. 
xlviii. 11.) ‘I wrought for my name’s sake, that it should not be 
polluted before the heathen.” (Ezek. xx. 9.) In like manner the 
whole plan of redemption and the dispensations of his grace, are 
declared to be designed to reveal the glory of God. (1 Cor. i. 26- 
31; Eph. ii. 8-10.) This is the end which our Lord proposed to 
Himself. He did everything for the glory of God; and for this 
end all his followers are required to live and act. As God is infi- 
nite, and all creatures are as nothing in comparison with Him, it is 
plain that the revelation of his nature and perfections must be the 
highest conceivable end of all things, and the most conducive to 
secure all other good subordinate ends. Order and truth, however, 
depend on things being put in their right relations. If we make 
the good of the creature the ultimate object of all God’s works, 
then we subordinate God to the creature, and endless confusion 
and unavoidable error are the consequence. It is characteristic of 
the Bible that it places God first, and the good of the creation 
second. This also is the characteristic feature of Augustinianism 
as distinguished from all other forms of doctrine. And when the 
Protestants were divided at the time of the Reformation, it was 
mainly on this point. The Lutheran and Reformed churches are 
distinguished in all that characterizes their theological systems, by 
the fact that the latter allow the supremacy and sovereignty of 
God in the workings of his providence and grace to determine 
everything for his own glory, while the former lean more or less 
to the error of restraining God’s liberty of action by the assumed 
powers and prerogatives of yan. The Bible, Augustine, and the 
Reformed, give one answer to all such questions as the following : 
Why did God create the world? Why did He permit the occur- 
rence of sin? Why was salvation provided for men and not for 
angels? Why was the knowledge of that salvation so long confined 
to one people? Why among those who hear the gospel, do some 
receive, and others reject it? To all these, and similar questions, 
the answer is, not because the happiness of creatures would be 
secured in a higher degree by the admission of sin and misery, than 
by their entire exclusion ; some men are saved and others perish 
not because some of their own will believe and others do not 
believe, but simply because, Thus it seemed good in the eyes of 
God. Whatever He does or permits to be done, is done or per- 
mitted for the more perfect revelation of his nature and per- 
fections. As the knowledge of God is the ground and sum of all 


§ 1, B.] THE DECREES OF GOD. 5387 


good, it of course follows that the more perfectly God is known, the 
more fully the highest good (not merely nor necessarily the high- 
est happiness) of the intelligent universe is promoted. But this is 
a subordinate effect, and not the chief end. It is therefore in ac- 
cordance with the whole spirit and teachings of the Bible, and with 
the essential character of Augustinianism, that our standards make 


the glory of God the’ end of all his decrees. 
B. The Decrees Reducible to one Purpose. 


The second point included in this doctrine is, that the decrees of 
God are all reducible to one purpose. By this is meant that from 
the indefinite number of systems, or series of possible events, 
present to the divine mind, God determined on the futurition or 
actual occurrence of the existing order of things, with all its 
changes, minute as well as great, from the beginning of time to all 
eternity. The reason, therefore, why any event occurs, or, that it 
passes from the category of the possible into that of the actual, is 
that God has so decreed. The decrees of God, therefore, are not 
many, but one purpose. They are not successively formed as the 
emergency arises, but are all parts of one all-comprehending plan. 
This view of the subject is rendered necessary by the nature of an 
infinitely perfect Being. -It is inconsistent with the idea of ab- 
solute perfection, that the purposes of God are successive, or that 
He ever purposes what He did not originally intend; or that one 
part of his plan is independent of other parts. It is one scheme, 
and therefore one purpose. As, however, this one purpose includes 
an indefinite number of events, and as those events are mutually 
related, we therefore speak of the decrees of God as many, and as 
having a certain order. The Scriptures consequently speak of the 
judgments, counsels, or purposes of God, in the plural number, and 
also of his determining one event because of another. When we 
look at an extensive building, or a complicated machine, we per- 
ceive at once the multiplicity of their parts, and their mutual rela- 
tions. Our conception of the building or of the machine is one, 
and yet it comprehends many distinct perceptions, and the appre- 
hension of their relations. So also in the mind of the architect or 
mechanist, the whole is one idea, though he intends many things, 
and one in reference to another. We can, therefore, in a measure, 
understand how the vast scheme of creation, providence, and re- 
demption, lies in the divine mind as one simple purpose, although 
including an infinite multiplicity of causes and effects. 


538 PART I.—THEOLOGY.  [Cu. IX.—Tux Decrezs. 


C. The Decrees of God are Eternal. 


That the decrees of God are eternal, necessarily follows from the 
perfection of the divine Being. He cannot be supposed to have at one 
time plans or purposes which He had not at another. He sees the 
end from the beginning; the distinctions of time have no reference 
to Him who inhabits eternity. The Scriptures therefore always 
speak of events in time as revelations of a purpose formed in eter- 
nity. The salvation of men, for example, is said to be “ according 
to the eternal purpose which He purposed in Christ Jesus.” (Eph. 
iii. 11.) What is revealed in time was hidden for ages, 7. e., from 
eternity in the mind of God. (Eph. iii. 9.) Believers were cho- 
sen in Christ before the foundation of the world. (Eph. i. 4.) 
“‘Who hath saved us, and called us . . . . according to his own 
purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus, zp xpdvev 
aiwviwy, before eternal ages.” (2 Tim.i. 9.) Christ as a sacrifice 
was “foreordained before the foundation of the world, but was 
manifest in these last times for you, who by Him do believe in 
God.” (1 Pet. i. 20, 21; Rom. xi. 88-86; Acts ii. 28.) This is 
the constant representation of Scripture. History in all its details, 
even the most minute, is but the evolution of the eternal purposes 
of God. It is no objection to this doctrine that the Scriptures often 
represent one purpose of God as consequent upon another, or that 
they speak of his purposes as determined by the conduct of men. 
The language of Scripture is founded on apparent truth; they 
speak, as men always do, as things appear, not as they themselves 
know or believe them to be. We speak of the concave heavens, or 
of the firm foundation of the heavens, although we know that it is 
not concave, and that it does not rest on any foundation. So the 
Bible speaks of the decrees of God as they appear to us in their 
successive revelation and in their mutual relations, and not as they 
exist from eternity in the divine mind. Neither is there any force 
in the objection that the agent must be before his acts. The sun 
is not before his brightness, nor the mind before thought, nor life 
before consciousness, nor God before his purposes. These objec- 
tions are founded on the assumption that God is subject to the lim- 
itations of time. To Him there is neither past nor future, neither 
before nor after. 


D. The Decrees of God are Immutable. 


Change of purpose arises either from the want of wisdom or from 
the want of power. As God is infinite in wisdom and power, there 


§1,E.] THE DECREES OF GOD. 58¥ 


can be with Him no unforeseen emergency and no inadequacy of 
means, and nothing can resist the execution of his original inten- 
tion. To Him, therefore, the causes of change have no existence, 
With God there is, as the Scriptures teach ‘‘no variableness, 
neither shadow of turning.” (James i. 17.) ‘The counsel of the 
Lorp standeth for ever, the thoughts of his heart to all generations.” 
(Ps. xxxiii. 11.) “The Lorp of hosts hath sworn, saying, Surely 
as I have thought, so shall it come to pass; and as I have purposed, 
so shall it stand.” (ds. xiv. 24.) “Iam God... . declaring 
the end from the beginning, and from ancient times the things that 
are not yet done, saying, My counsel shall stand, and I will do all 
my pleasure.” (Is. xlvi. 9,10.) The uniformity of the laws of 
nature is a constant revelation of the immutability of God. They 
are now what they were at the beginning of time, and they are the 
same in every part of the universe. No less stable are the laws 
which regulate the operations of the reason and conscience. The 
whole government of God, as the God of nature and as moral gov- 
ernor, rests on the immutability of his counsels. 


E. The Decrees of God are Free. 


This includes three ideas, — 

1. They are rational determinations, founded on sufficient rea- 
sons. This is opposed to the doctrine of necessity, which assumes 
that God acts by a mere necessity of nature, and that all that oc- 
curs is due to the law of development or of self-manifestation of 
the divine being. This reduces God to a mere natura naturans, 
or vis formativa, which acts without design. The true doctrine is 
opposed also to the idea that the only cause of events is an intel- 
lectual force analogous to the instincts of irrational animals. The 
acts performed under the guidance of instinct are not free acts, for 
liberty is a libentia rationalis, spontaneity determined by reason, 
It is therefore involved in the idea of God as a rational and per- 
sonal being that his decrees are free. He was free to create or not 
to create ; to create such a world as now is, or one entirely different. 
He is free to act or not act, and when He purposes, it is not from 
any blind necessity, but according to the counsel of his own will. 

2. Our purposes are free, even when formed under the influence 
of other minds. We may be argued or persuaded into certain 
courses of action, or induced to form our designs out of regard to 
the wishes or interests of others. God is Pebnitely exalted above 
all ab extra influence. “ Who hath known the mind of the Lord ? 
or who hath been his counsellor?”’ (Rom. xi. 84.) “ Behold, 


540 PART I.—THEOLOGY.  [Cu. IX. — Tue Decree. 


God exalteth by his power: who teacheth like Him? Who hath 
enjoined Him his way?” (Job xxxvi. 22, 23.) “Who hath — 
directed the Spirit of the Lord? or being his counsellor hath 
taught Him? With whom took He counsel, and who instructed 
Him, and taught Him in the path of judgment ?’’» CIs. xl. 18, 14.) 
‘Who hath known the mind of the Lord, that he may instruct 
Him?” (1 Cor. ii. 16.) God adopted the plan of the universe 
on the ground of his own good pleasure, for his own glory, and 
every subordinate part of it in reference to the whole. His de- 
crees are free, therefore, in a far higher sense than that in which 
the ordinary purposes of men are free. They were formed purely 
on the counsel of his own will. He purposes and does what 
seemeth good in his sight. 

3. The decrees of God are free in the sense of being absolute 
or sovereign. The meaning of this proposition is expressed nega- 
tively by saying that the decrees of God are in no case conditional. 
The event decreed is suspended on a condition, but the purpose of 
God is not. It is inconsistent with the nature of God to assume sus- 
pense or indecision on his part. If He has not absolutely determined 
on what is to occur, but waits until an undetermined condition is or 
is not fulfilled, then his decrees can neither be eternal nor immuta- 
ble. He purposes one thing if the condition be fulfilled, and another 
if it be not fulfilled, and thus everything must be uncertain not 
only in the divine mind, but also in the event. The Scriptures, 
therefore, teach that He doeth whatsoever He pleaseth. (Ps. exy. 
3.) He doeth his pleasure in the army of heaven, and among the 
inhabitants of the earth. (Dan. iv. 35; Ps. exxxv. 6.) Of Him, 
and through Him, and to Him are all things. .(Rom. xi. 86.) 16 
is expressly taught that the purposes of God, even as to the future 
destiny of men, are founded on his own good pleasure. As all 
have sinned and come short of the glory of God, He has mercy 
upon whom He will have mercy. It is not according to our works, 
but of his grace that He saves us. It is of Him that we are in 
Christ Jesus, that those who glory should glory in the Lord. 
(Matt. xi. 26; Rom. viii. 29, 30; ix. 15-18; Eph. i. 5, ete., etc.) 


F. The Decrees of God are certainly Efficacious. 


The decrees of God are certainly efficacious, that, is, they ren- 
der certain the occurrence of what He decrees. Whatever God 
foreordains, must certainly come to pass. The distinction between 
the efficient (or efficacious) and the permissive decrees of God, 
although important, has no relation to the certainty of events. All 


§1, F.] THE DECREES OF GOD. 541 


events embraced in the purpose of God are equally certain, whether 
He has determined to bring them to pass by his own power, or 
simply to permit their occurrence through the agency of his crea- 
tures. It was no less certain from eternity that Satan would tempt 
our first parents, and that they would fall, than that God would 
send his Son to die for sinners. The distinction in question has 
reference only to the relation which events bear to the efficiency 
of God. Some things He purposes to do, others He decrees to 
permit to be done. He effects good, He permits evil. He is the 
author of the one, but not of the other. With this explanation, 
the proposition that the decrees of God are certainly efficacious, or 
render certain all events to which they refer, stands good. This is 
proved, — 

1. .From the perfection of God, which forbids the ascription to 
Him of purposes uncertain as to their accomplishment. No man 
fails to execute what he purposes, except through the want of wis- 
dom or power to secure the end proposed, or through some vacilla- 
tion in his own mind. It would be to reduce God to the level of 
his creatures, to assume that what He decrees, should fail to come 
to pass. 

2. From the unity of God’s plan. If that plan comprehends all 
events, all events stand in mutual relation and dependence. If 
one part fails, the whole may fail or be thrown into confusioi. 

3. From the evident concatenation of events in the progress of 
history, which proves that all things are intimately connected, the 
most important events often depending on the most trivial, which 
shows that all must be comprehended in the plan of God. 

4, From the providential and moral government of God. There 
could be no certainty in either if the decrees of God were not 
efficacious. There could be no assurance that any divine prophecy, 
promise, or threatening, would be accomplished. All ground of 
confidence in God would thus be lost, and chance and not God 
would become the arbiter of all events. The Scriptures vari- 
ously and constantly teach this doctrine, (a.) By all those pas- 
sages which assert the immutability and sovereignty of the di- 
vine decrees. (b.) By those which affirm that He fixes the 
bounds of our habitations, that our days are all numbered, and 
that even a hair from our heads cannot perish without his notice. 
(c.) By those which declare that nothing can counteract his de- 
signs. ‘ The Lorp of hosts,” says the prophet, ‘hath purposed, 
who shall disannul it? And his hand is stretched out, and who 
shall turn it back.” (Is. xiv. 27.) “I will work, and who shall 


542 PART I. — THEOLOGY. [Cu. IX.— Tux Decrens. 


let it?” (xliii, 18.) (d.) By those which teach doctrines that 

necessarily assume the certainty of all God’s decrees. ‘The whole 
plan of redemption rests on that foundation. It is inconceivable 
that God should devise such a scheme, and not secure its execution, 
and that He should send his Son into the world, and leave the 
consequences of that infinite condescension undetermined. It is, 
therefore, the doctrine of reason as well as of Scripture, that God 
has a plan or end for which the universe was created, that the 
execution of that plan is not left contingent, and that whatever 
is embraced in the decrees of God must certainly come to pass. 


G. The Decrees of God relate to all Events. 


God foreordains whatsoever comes to pass. Some events are 
necessary, that is, are brought about by the action of necessary 
causes; others are contingent or free, or are acts of free agents ; 
some are morally good, others are sinful. The doctrine of the 
Bible is, that all events, whether necessary or contingent, good or 
sinful, are included in the purpose of God, and that their futuri- 
tion or actual occurrence is rendered absolutely certain. This is 
evident, — 

1. From the unity of the divine purposes. That unity supposes 
that the whole scheme of creation, providence, and redemption, 
was fixed by the divine decree. It was formed from ages in the 
divine mind, and is gradually unfolded by the course of events. it 
is therefore inconsistent with this sublime and Scriptural repre- 
sentation, to suppose that any class of actual events, and especially 
that class which is most influential and important, should be omit- 
ted from the divine purpose. He who purposes a machine, pur- 
poses all its parts. The general who plans a campaign, includes alk 
the movements of every corps, division, and brigade in his army, 
and if his foresight were perfect, and his control of events absolute, 
his foreordination would extend to every act of every soldier. 
Whatever is wanting in his foreordination is due to the limitation 
of human power. As God is infinite in knowledge and resources, 
his purpose must include all events. 

2. It is therefore inconsistent with the perfection of God to sup- 
pose either that He could not form a plan comprehending al) 
events, or that He could not carry it into execution, without doing 
violence to the nature'of his creatures. ; 

3. The universality of the decree follows from the universal do- 
minion of God. Whatever He does, He certainly purposed to do 
Whatever He permits to occur, He certainly purposed to permit, 


§ 1, G.] THE DECREES OF GOD. 548 


Nothing can occur that was not foreseen, and if foreseen it must 
have been intended. As the Scriptures teach that the providential 
control of God extends to all events, even the most minute, they 
do thereby teach that his decrees are equally comprehensive. 

4. Another argument is derived from the certainty of the divine 
government. As all events are more or less intimately connected, 
and as God works by means, if God does not determine the means 
as well as the event, all certainty as to the event itself would be 
destroyed. In determining the redemption of man, He thereby 
determined on the mission, incarnation, sufferings, death, and resur- 
rection of his Son, on the gift of the Spirit, upon the faith, repent- 
ance, and perseverance of all his people. The prediction of future 
events, which often depend on the most fortuitous occurrences, or 
which include those that appear to us of no account, proves that 
the certainty of the divine administration rests on the foreordina- 
tion of God extending to all events both great and small. 

The Scriptures in various ways teach that God foreordains 
whatever comes to pass. 

1. They teach that God works all things according to the coun- 
sel of his will. There is nothing to limit the words “all things,” 
and therefore they must be taken in the fullest extent. 

2. It is expressly declared that fortuitous events, that is, events 
which depend on causes so subtle and so rapid in their operation 
as to elude our observation, are predetermined ; as the falling of 
the lot, the flight of an arrow, the falling of a sparrow, the num- 


ber of the hairs of our heads. 


Free Acts are Foreordained. 


3. The Bible especially declares that the free acts of men are 
decreed beforehand. This is involved in the doctrine of prophecy, 
which assumes that events involving the free acts of a multitude of 
men are foreseen and foreordained. God promises to give faith, a 
new heart, to write his law upon the minds of his people, to work 
in them to will and to do, to convert the Gentiles, to fill the world 
with thé true worshippers of Christ, to whom every knee is gladly 
to bow. If God has promised these things, He must of course 
purpose them, but they all involve the free acts of men. 

4, The Scriptures teach that sinful acts, as well as such as 
are holy, are foreordained. In Acts ii. 23, it is said, “ Him, being 
delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, 
ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain ; v 
iv. 27, “For of a truth against thy holy child Jesus, whom thou 


544 PART I. — THEOLOGY. (Cu. IX.— Tur Decrens, 


hast anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles 
and the people of Israel were gathered together, for to do whatso- 
ever thy hand and thy counsel determined before to be done.” 
“ Truly the Son of Man goeth as it was determined ; but woe unto 
that man by whom He is betrayed.” (Luke xxii. 22.) It was fore- 
ordained that He should be betrayed ; but woe to him who fulfilled 
the decree. Here foreordination and responsibility are by our Lord 
Himself declared to coexist and to be consistent. In Rey. xvii. 
17, it is said, ‘God hath put in their hearts to fulfil his will, and 
to agree, and give their kingdom unto the beast, until the words of 
God shall be fulfilled.” The crucifixion of Christ was beyond 
doubt foreordained of God. It was, however, the greatest crime 
ever committed. It is therefore beyond all doubt the doctrine of 
the Bible that sin is foreordained. 

5. Besides this, the conquests of Nebuchadnezzar, the destruc- 
tion of Jerusalem, and many other similar events, were predicted, 
and therefore predetermined, but they included the commission of 
innumerable sins, without which the predictions, and consequently 
the revealed purposes of God, could not have been accomplished. 

6. The whole course of history is represented as the develop- 
ment of the plan and purposes of God; and yet human history is 
little else than the history of sin. No one can read the simple nar- 
rative concerning Joseph, as given in the book of Genesis, without 
seeing that everything in his history occurred in execution of a 
preconceived purpose of God. The envy of his brethren, their sell- 
ing him into Egypt, and his unjust imprisonment, were all embraced 
in God’s plan. “God,” -as Joseph himself said to his brethren, 
‘sent me before you, to preserve you a posterity in the earth, and 
to save your lives by a great deliverance. So now it was not you 
that sent me hither, but God.” (Gen. xlv. 7, 8.) This is but an 
illustration. What is true of the history of Joseph, is true of all 
history. It is the development of the plan of God. God is in 
history, and although we cannot trace his path step by step, yet it 
is plain in the general survey of events, through long periods, that | 
they are ordered by God to the accomplishment of his divine pur- 
poses. This is obvious enough in the history of the Jewish nation, 
as recorded in the Scripture, but it is no less true in regard to all 
history. The acts of the wicked in persecuting the early Church, 
were ordained of God as the means for the wider and more speedy 
proclamation of the Gospel. The sufferings of the martyrs were 
the means not only of extending but of purifying the Church. The 
apostasy of the man of sin being predicted, was predetermined. The 


§ 2, A.J THE DECREES OF GOD. 645 


destruction of the Huguenots in France, the persecution of the Pu- 
ritans in England, laid the foundation for the planting of North 
America with a race of godly and energetic men, who were to 
make this land the land of refuge for the nations, the home of lib- 
erty, civil and religious. It would destroy the confidence of God’s 
people could they be persuaded that God does not foreordain what- 
soever comes to pass. It is because the Lord reigns, and doeth his 
pleasure in heaven and on earth, that they repose in perfect secu- 
rity under his guidance and protection. 


§ 2. Objections to the Doctrine of Divine Decrees. 


A. Foreordination inconsistent with Free Agency. 


It is urged that the foreordination of all events is inconsistent 
with the free agency of man. The force of this objection depends 
on what is meant by a free act. To decide whether two things 
are inconsistent, the nature of each must be determined. By the 
decrees of God are to be understood the purpose of God render- 
ing certain the occurrence of future events. By a free act is 
meant an act of rational self-determination by an intelligent person. 
If such an act is from its very nature contingent, or uncertain, 
then it is clear that foreordination is inconsistent with free agency. 
This theory of liberty has been adopted by a large body of philoso- 
phers and theologians, and is for them an insuperable objection to 
the doctrine of the divine decrees. In answer to the objection, it 
may be remarked, (1.) That it bears with equal force against fore- 
knowledge. What is foreknown must be certain, as much as what 
is foreordained. If the one, therefore, be inconsistent with liberty, 
so also is the other. This is sometimes candidly admitted. Soci- 
nus argues that the knowledge of God embraces all that is know- 
able. Future free actions being uncertain, are not the objects of 
knowledge, and therefore it is no impeachment of the divine om- 
niscience to say that they cannot be known. But then they cannot 
be predicted. We find, however, that the Scriptures are filled with 
such predictions. It is, therefore, evident that the sacred writers 
fully believed that free acts are foreknown by the divine mind, and 
therefore are certain as to their occurrence. Besides, if God can- 
not foreknow how free agents will act, He must be ignorant of the 
future, and be constantly increasing in knowledge. This is so incom- 
patible with all proper ideas of the infinite mind, that it has been. 
almost universally rejected, both by philosophers and by Christian 


theologians. A still weaker evasion is that proposed by some Ar. 
VOL. I. 35 


546 PART I.— THEOLOGY. (Cu. 1X.— Tu Decrers 


minian writers, who admit that God’s knowledge is not limited by 
anything out of Himself, but hold that it may be limited by his own 
will. In creating free agents, He willed not to foreknow how 
they would act, in order to leave their freedom unimpaired. But 
this is to suppose that God wills not to be God; that the Infinite 
wills to be finite. Knowledge with God is not founded on his will, 
except so far as the knowledge of vision is concerned, 7. é., his 
knowledge of his own purposes, or of what He has decreed shall 
come to pass. If not founded on his will, it cannot be limited by it. 
Infinite knowledge must know all things, actual or possible. It may, 
however, be said that there is a difference between foreknowledge 
and foreordination, in so far that the former merely assumes the 
certainty of future events, whereas the latter causes their futuri- 
tion. But as the certainty of occurrence is the same in both cases, 
it makes no difference as to the matter in hand. The decree only 
renders the event certain ; and therefore if certainty be not incon- 
sistent with liberty, then foreordination is not. That an event may 
be free and yet certain, may be easily proved. (1.) It is a mat- 
ter of consciousness. We are often absolutely certain how we 
shall act, so far as we are free to act at all, and conscious that we 
act freely. A parent may be certain that he will succor a child in 
distress, and be conscious that his free agency is not thereby im- 
_ paired. The more certain, in many cases, the more perfectly are 
we self-controlled. (2.) Free acts have been predicted, and 
therefore their occurrence was certain. (8.) Nothing was more 
certain than that our Lord would continue holy, harmless, and un- 
defiled, yet his acts were all free. (4.) It is certain that the peo- 
ple of God will repent, believe, and persevere in holiness forever 
in heaven, yet they do not cease to be free agents. The decrees 
of God, therefore, which only secure the certainty of events, are 
not inconsistent with liberty as to the mode of their occurrence. 
Although his purpose comprehends all things, and is immutable, 
yet thereby ‘no violence is offered to the will of the creatures, 
nor is the liberty or contingency of second causes taken away, but 
rather established.” 


B. Foreordination of Sin inconsistent with Holiness. 


It is further objected that it is inconsistent with the holiness of 
God that He should foreordain sin. There are two methods of 
dealing with this and all similar objections. The one may be 
called the Scriptural method, as it is the one often adopted by the 
sacred writers. It consists in showing that the objection bears 


H 
; 


§ 2, B.] THE DECREES OF GOD. 547 


against the plain declarations of Scripture, or against the facts of 
experience. In either case, it is for us sufficiently answered. It 
is vain to argue that a holy and benevolent God cannot permit sin 
and misery, if sin and misery actually exist. It is vain to say that 
his impartiality forbids that there should be any diversity in the en- 
dewments, advantages, or happiness of his rational creatures. It 
is vain to insist that a holy God cannot permit children to suffer 
for the sins of their parents, when we constantly see that they do 
thus suffer. So it is utterly irrational to contend that God cannot 
foreordain sin, if He foreordained (as no Christian doubts) the 
erucifixion of Christ. The occurrence of sin in the plan adopted 
by God, is a palpable fact; the consistency, therefore, of fore- 
ordination with the holiness of God cannot rationally be denied. 
The second method of dealing with such objections is to show that 
the principle on which they are founded is unsound. The princi- 
ple on which the objection under consideration rests, is that an 
agent is responsible for all the necessary or certain consequences 
of his acts. The objection is, that a holy God cannot decree the 
occurrence of sin, because his decree renders that occurrence cer- 
tain. That is, an agent is responsible for whatever his act renders 
certain. That principle, however, is utterly untenable. A right- 
eous judge, in pronouncing sentence on a criminal, may be sure 
that he will cause wicked and bitter feelings in the criminal’s mind, 
or in the hearts of his friends, and yet the judge be guiltless. A 
father, in excluding a reprobate son from his family, may see that the 
inevitable consequence of such exclusion will be his greater wick- 
edness, and yet the father may do right. It is the certain conse- 
quence of God’s leaving the fallen angels and the finally impeni- 
tent to themselves, that they will continue in sin, and yet the holi- 
ness of God remain untarnished. The Bibie clearly teaches that 
God judicially abandons men to their sins, giving them up to a rep- 
robate mind, and He therein is most just and holy. It is not true, 
therefore, that an agent is responsible for all the certain conse- 
quences of his acts. It may be, and doubtless is, infinitely wise and 
just in God to permit the occurrence of sin, and to adopt a plan 
of which sin is a certain consequence or element; yet as he 
neither cates sin, nor tempts men to its commission, He is neither 
its author nor approver. He sees and knows that higher ends will 
be accomplished by its admission than by its exclusion, that a per- 
fect exhibition of his infinite perfections will be thereby effected, 
and therefore for the highest reason decrees that it shall occur 
through the fre2 choice of responsible agents. Our great ground 


548 PART I.—THEOLOGY.. [Cx. IX.— Tux Decress. 


of confidence, however, is the assurance that the judge of all the 
earth must do right. Sin is, and God is; therefore the occurrence 
of sin must be consistent with his nature; and as its occurrence 
cannot have been unforeseen or undesigned, God’s purpose or de- 
cree that it should occur must be consistent with his holiness. 


C. The Doctrine of Decrees destroys all Motive to Hvertion. 


A third objection is, that the doctrine of foreordination, which 
supposes the certainty of all events, tends to the neglect of all use 
of means. If everything will happen just as God has predeter- 
mined, we need give ourselves no concern, and need make no 
effort. (1.) This objection supposes that God has determined the 
end without reference to the means. The reverse, however, is true 
The event is determined in connection with the means. If the 
latter fail, so will the former. God has decreed that men shall live 
by food. If any man refuses to eat, he will die. He has ordained 
that men shall be saved through faith. Ifa man refuses to believe, 
he will perish. If God has purposed that a man shall live, He has 
also purposed to preserve him from the suicidal folly of refusing to 
eat. (2.) There is another fallacy included in this objection. It 
supposes that the certainty that an event will happen, acts as a mo- 
tive to neglect the means of its attainment. This is not according 
to reason or experience. The stronger the hope of success, the 
greater the motive to exertion. If sure of success in the use of 
the appropriate means, the incentive to effort becomes as strong as 
it can be. On the other hand, the less hope, the less disposition 
there is to exert ourselves; and where there is no hope, there will 
be no exertion. The rational and Scriptural foundation for the use 
of means, and the proper motives to avail ourselves of them, are, 
(1.) The command of God. (2.) Their adaptation to produce the 
effect. (3.) The divine ordination which makes the means neces- 
sary to the attainment of the end. And (4.) The promise of God 
to give his blessing to those who obediently avail themselves of 
the means of his appointment. 


D. It ts Fatalism. 


- It is objected, in the fourth place, that the doctrine of decrees 
amounts to the heathen doctrine of fate. There is only one point 
of agreement between these doctrines. They both assume abso- 
lute certainty in the sequence of all events.’ They differ, how- 
ever, not only as to the ground of that certainty, the nature of the 
influence by which it is secured, and the ends therein contem- 


§2,D THE DECREES OF GOD. 549 


plated, but also in their natural effects on the reason and conscience 
of men. 
The word Fatalism has been applied to different systems, some 
of which admit, while others deny or ignore the existence of a su- 
preme intelligence. But in common usage it designates the doctrine 
that all events come to pass under the operation of a blind neces- 
sity. This system differs from, the Scriptural doctrine of foreordi- 
nation, (1.) In that it excludes the idea of final causes. There is 
no end to which all things tend, and for the accomplishment of 


which they exist. According to the Scriptural doctrine, all things 


are ordained and controlled to accomplish the highest conceivable 
or possible good. (2.) In that according to Fatalism the sequence 
of events is determined by an tinintelligent concatenation of causes 
and effects. According to the doctrine of decrees, that sequence 
is determined by infinite wisdom and goodness. (8.) Fatalism ad- 
mits of no distinction between necessary and free causes. The 
acts of rational agents are as much determined by a necessity out 
of themselves as the operations of nature. According to the Scrip- 
tures, the freedom and responsibility of man are fully preserved. 
The two systems differ, therefore, as much asa machine differs 
from a man; or as the actions of infinite intelligence, power, and 
love differ from the law of gravitation. (4.) The one system, 
therefore, leads to the denial of all moral distinctions, and to stolid 
insensibility or despair. The other to a sedulous regard to the will 
of an infinitely wise and good ruler, all whose acts are determined 
by a sufficient reason ; and to filial confidence and submission. 


CHAPTER X. 
CREATION. 


§ 1. Different Theories concerning the Origin of the Universe. 


THE question concerning the origin of the universe has forced 
itself on the minds of men in alf ages. That the mutable cannot 
be eternal, would seem to be self-evident. As everything within 
the sphere of human observation is constantly changing, men-have 
been constrained to believe that the world as it now is had a 
beginning. But if it began to be, whence did it come? With- 
out the light of a divine revelation, this question is unanswerable. 
The data for the solution of the problem do not lie within the 
sphere either of experience or of reason. All human theories on 
this subject are nothing more than conjectures more or less in- 
genious. 

Apart from the pantheistic doctrine which makes the universe 
the existence form, or, as Goethe calls it, ‘das lebendige Kleid ” 
(the living garment) of God, the most prevalent views on this 
subject are, First, those theories which exclude mind from the cau- 
sative origin of the world; Secondly, those which admit of mind, 
but only as connected with matter; and. Thirdly, the Scriptural 
doctrine which assumes the existence of an infinite extramundane 
mind to whose power and will the existence of all things out of 
God is to be referred. 

It is a self-evident truth that existence cannot spring spontane- 
ously from non-existence. In this sense ex nthilo nihil fit is an 
universally admitted axiom. Those, therefore, who deny the ex- 
istence of an extramundane mind, are forced to admit that as the 
universe now is, it must have always been. But as it is in a state 
of perpetual change it has not always been as it now is. There 
was a primordial state out of which the present order of things has 
arisen. The question is, How? 


The purely Physical Theory. 


According to the first hypothesis just mentioned, the primordial 
condition of the universe was that of universally diffused matter in 


§1.] THEORIES AS TO ORIGIN OF THE UNIVERSE. 551 


a highly attenuated state. This matter had the properties, or 
forces, which it now everywhere exhibits ; and under the opera- 
tion of these forces and in accordance with the laws of heat, mo- 
tion, etc., not only the great cosmical bodies were formed and 
arranged themselves in their present harmonious relations, but 
also all the organisms, vegetable and animal, on this globe and 
elsewhere, were fashioned and sustained. Every man knows 
enough of physical laws to be able to predict with certainty that 
on a cold day in the open air the moisture of his breath will be 
condensed ; so, according to Professor Huxley, on this hypothesis, 
with adequate knowledge of those laws, it would have been easy 
from the beginning to predict, not only the mechanism of the heav- 
ens, but the fauna and flora of our globe in all the states and stages 
of its existence. 

The Nebular hypothesis, as first proposed by La Place, was the 
application of this theory to the explanation of the origin and 
order of the heavenly bodies. This hypothesis may be thus stated, 
“Suppose that the matter composing the entire solar system once 
existed in the condition of a single nebulous mass, extending be- 
yond the orbit of the most remote planet. Suppose that this neb- 
ula has a slow rotation upon an axis, and that by radiation it 
gradually cools, thereby contracting in its dimensions. As it con- 
tracts in its dimensions, its velocity of rotation, according to the 
principles of Mechanics, must necessarily increase, and the centrif- 
ugal force thus generated in the exterior portion of the nebula 
would at length become equal to the attraction of the central 
mass. This exterior portion would thus become detached, and 
revolve independently as an immense zone or ring. As the cen- 
tral mass continued to cool and contract in its dimensions, other 
zones would in the same manner become detached, while the cen- 
tral mass continually decreases in size and increases in density. 
The zones thus successively detached would generally break up 
into separate masses revolving independently about the sun; and if 
their velocities were slightly unequal, the matter of each zone 
would ultimately collect in a single planetary, but still gaseous, 
mass, having a spheroidal form, and also a motion of rotation 
about an axis. As each of these planetary masses became still 
farther cooled, it would pass through a succession of changes sim- 
ilar to those of the first solar nebula; rings of matter would be 
formed surrounding the planetary nucleus, and these rings, if they 
broke up into separate masses, would ultimately form satellites re- 
volving about their primaries.” ! We thus have an ordered uni- 


1 Loomis, Treatise on Astronomy, New York. 1865 » 214 


552 PART IL.—THEOLOGY. [Cu. X.—Cruation. 


verse without the intervention of mind. Every one knows, how- 
ever, that there is a form in which the nebular hypothesis is held 
by many Christian theists. 


Theories which assume Intelligence in Nature itself. 


The obvious impossibility of blind causes acting intelligently, or 
of necessary causes being elective in their operation, has led many 
who deny the existence of an extramundane Mind to hold, that 
life and intelligence pertain to matter itself in some at least of its 
combinations. A plant lives. There is something ‘in the seed 
which secures its development,’each after its kind. There is, 
therefore, something in the plant, which according to this theory is 
not external to the plant itself, which does the work of mind. 
That is, it selects or chooses from the earth and air the elements 
needed for its support and growth. It moulds these elements into 
organic forms, intended to answer a purpose, and adapted with 
wonderful skill to accomplish a given object. With regard to this 
principle of life, this vital force, it is to be remarked that it is in 
the plant; that it is never manifested, never acts, except in union 
with the matter of which the plant is composed; when the plant 
dies, its vitality is extinguished. It ceases to exist in the same 
sense in which light ceases when darkness takes its place. 

What is true of the vegetable, is no less true of the animal 
world. Every animal starts in an almost imperceptible germ. 
But that germ has something in it which determines with certainty 
the genus, species, and variety of the animal. It fashions all his 
organs ; prepares the eye for the light yet to be seen; the ear for 
sounds yet to be heard; the lungs for air yet to be breathed. 
Nothing more wonderful than this is furnished by the universe in 
any of its phenomena. 

If, therefore, vegetable and animal life work all these wonders, 
what need have we to assume an extramundane mind to account 
for any of the phenomena of the universe? All that is necessary 
is, that nature, natura naturans, the vis in rebus insita, should 
act just as we see that the vital principle does act in plants and 
animals. This is Hylozoism; the doctrine that matter is imbued 
with a principle of life. 

Another form ofthis theory is more dualistic. It admits the 
existence of mind and matter as distinct substances, but always ex- 
isting in combination, as soul and body in man in our present stage 
of being. The advocates of this doctrine, therefore, instead of 
speaking of nature as the organizing force, speak of the soul of 
the world; the anima mundi, ete. 


i Dt 5 i ei i ee a i, 


§1.)} THEORIES AS TO ORIGIN OF THE UNIVERSE. 5538 


It is enough to remark concerning these theories, (1.) That they 
leave the origin of things unaccounted for. Whence came the mat- 
ter, which the theory in one form assumes? Whence came its physt- 
cal properties, to which all organization is referred? And as to the 
other doctrine, it may be asked, Whence came the living germs of 
plants and animals? To assume that mattér in a state of chaos is 
eternal; or that there has been an endless sucéession of living 
germs ; or that there has been an eternal succession of cycles in the 
history of the universe, chaos unfolding itself into cosmos, during 
immeasurable ages, are all assumptions which shock the reason, 
and must of necessity be destitute of proof. 

(2.) These theories are atheistic. They deny the existence of 
a personal Being to whom we stand in the relation of creatures 
and children. The existence of such a Being is an innate, intui- 
tive truth. It cannot be’permanently disbelieved. And, therefore, 
any theory which denies the existence of God must be not only 
false but short-lived. 


The Scriptural Doctrine. 


The Scriptural doctrine on this subject is expressed in the first 
words of the Bible: “In the beginning God created the heaven 
and the earth.” The heavens and the earth include all things out 
of God. Of which things the Scriptures teach that they owe their 
existence to the will and power of God. The Scriptural doctrine 
therefore is, (1.) That the universe is not eternal. It began to be. 
(2.) It was not formed out of any preéxistence or substance ; but 
was created ex nihilo. (8.) That creation was not necessary. It 
was free to God to create or not to create, to create the universe 
as it is, or any other order and system of things, according to the 
good pleasure of his will. 

The doctrine of an eternal creation has been held in various 
forms. Origen, although he referred the existence of the universe 
to the will of God, still held that it was eternal. We speak of the 
divine decrees as free and yet as from everlasting. So Origen held 
that this was not the first world God made; that there never was 
a first, and never will be a last. ‘Quid ante faciebat Deus,” he 
asks, “quam mundus inciperet? Otiosam enim et immobilem 
dicere naturam Dei, impium est simul et absurdum, vel putare, 
quod bonitas aliquando bene non fecerit, et omnipotentia aliquando 
non egerit potentatum. Hoc nobis objicere solent dicentibus mun- 
dum hunc ex certo tempore ccepisse, et secundum scripture fidem 
annos quoque <etatis ipsius numerantibus. . . . . Nos vero conse- 


554 PART I.— THEOLOGY. ~ [Cu. %.— Creation. 


quenter respondimus observantes regulam pietatis, quoniam non 
tunc primum cum visibilem istum mundum fecit Deus, coepit op- 
erari, sed sicut post corruptionem hujus erit alius mundus, ita et 
antequam hic esset, fuisse alios credimus.” ? 

Of course those of the schoolmen who made the thoughts of 
God creative, or identified purpose with act, or who said with 
Scotus Erigena, “Non aliud Deo esse et velle et facere,” must 
regard the universe as coeternal with God. This was done by 
Scotus in a pantheistic sense, but others who regarded the universe 
as distinct from God and dependent upon Him, still held that the 
world is eternal. The influence of the modern Monistic philoso- 
phy, even upon theologians who believe in an extramundane per- 
sonal God, has been such as to lead many of them to assume that 
the relation between God and the world is such that it must have 
always existed. The common doctrine of the Church has ever 
been, in accordance with the simple teaching of the Bible, that 
the world began to be. 

The second point included in the Scriptural doctrine of creation 
is, that the universe was not formed out of any preéxistent mat- 
ter, nor out of the substance of God. The assumption that any 
thing existed out of God and independent of his will, has ever 
been rejected as inconsistent with the perfection and absolute su- 
premacy of God. The other idea, however, namely, that God 
fashioned the world out of his own substance, has found advocates, 
more or less numerous, in every age of the Church. Augustine, 
referring to this opinion, says, “* Fecisti coeelum et terram; non de 
te: nam esset equale unigenito tuo, ac per hoc et tibi, .... et 
aliud preeter te non erat, unde faceres ea; . . . . et ideo de nihilo 
fecisti ccelum et terram.” 2 

Not only those of the schoolmen and of the modern theologians 
who are inclined to the Monistic theory, made all things to be 
modifications of the substance of God, but many Theistic and 
even Evangelical writers of our day hold the same doctrine? 
Sir Wiliam Hamilton also held that it is impossible to conceive 
the complement of existence being either increased or diminished. 
When anything new appears we are forced to regard it as some- 
thing which had previously existed in another form. “We are un- 
able, on the one hand, to conceive nothing becoming something; or, 

1 De Principiis, m1. v. 3. Works, edit. Paris, 1733, vol. i. p. 149, c, d. 

2 Confessiones, x11.7. Works, edit. Benedictines, Paris, 1836, vol. i. p- 356, ¢, d. 

8 The writer was dining one day with Tholuck and five or six of his students, when he 


took up a knife from the table, and asked, “Is this knife of the substance of God?” and 
they all answered, ‘“ Yes,” 


$1] THE SCRIPTURAL DOCTRINE. 555 


on the other, something becoming nothing. When God is said to 
create out of nothing, we construe this to thought by supposing 
that He evolves existence out of Himself; we view the Creator as 


_ the cause of the Universe. ‘ Ev nihilo nihil, in nihilum nil posse 


reverti,’ expresses, in its purest form, the whole intellectual 
phenomenon of causality.” To this he elsewhere adds, “In 
like manner, we conceive annihilation, only by conceiving the 
Creator to withdraw his creation from actuality into power. . . . 
The mind is thus compelled to recognize an absolute identity of 
existence in the effect and in the complement of its causes — be- 
tween the causatum and the causa,” ? and therefore, ‘an absolute 
identity of existence ” between God and the world. This doctrine 
the fathers, and the Church generally, strenuously resisted as in- 
consistent with the nature of God. It supposes that the substance 
of God admits of partition or division; that the attributes of God 
can be separated from his substance ; and that the divine substance 
can become degraded and polluted. 

The third point included in the Scriptural doctrine of creation 
is, that it was an act of God’s free will. He was free to create or 
not tocreate. This is opposed to the doctrine of necessary creation, 
which has been set forth in different forms. Some regard the phe- 
nomenal universe as a mere evolution of absolute being by a neces- 
sary process, as a plant is developed from a seed. Others, regarding 
God as a Spirit, make life and thought essential and coeternal with 
Him, and this life and power are of necessity creative. God’s 
“essence,” says Cousin, ‘consists precisely in his creative power.”’8 
Again, he says,* “*He cannot but produce; so that the creation 
ceases to be unintelligible; and God is no more without a world 
than a world without God.” As, however, thought is spontaneous, 
Cousin, when called to account for such utterances, maintained that 
he did not deny that creation was free. 

Some who do not admit that God is under any natural or meta- 
physical necessity to give existence to the universe, still assert a 
moral necessity for the creation of sensitive and rational creatures. 
God, it-is said, is love; but it is the nature of love to long to com- 
municate itself, and to hold fellowship with others than itself. 
Therefore God’s nature impels Him to call into existence creatures 
in whom and over whom He can rejoice. Others say, that God is 


1 Lectures on Metaphysics. Boston, edit. 1859, lecture xxxix. p. 533. 

2 Discussions on Philosophy and Literature, etc. By Sir William Hamilton. New York, 
edit. 1853, p. 575. 

8 Cousin’s Psychology, New York, edit. 1856, p. 443. 4 Ibid. p. 447." 


656 PART I.— THEOLOGY. [Cu. X.— Creation. 


benevolence, and therefore is under a moral necessity of creating 
beings whom He can render happy. Thus Leibnitz says: ‘* Dieu 
n’est point nécessité, métaphysiquement parlant, a la création de ce 
monde. . . . . Cependant Dieu est obligé, par une nécessité mo- 
rale, & faire les boat en sorte qu'il ne se puisse rien de mieux.” ? 

According to the Scriptures God is self-sufficient. He needs 
nothing out “of Himself for his own well- -being or happiness. He is 
in ever ry respect independent of his creatures ; and the creation of 
the universe was the act of the free will of that God of whom the 
Apostle says in Rom. xi. 36, “ Of Him, and through Him, and to 
Him are all things.” 

The common faith of the Church on this subject is‘clearly and 
beautifully expressed by Melancthon:? “Quod autem res ex 
nihilo conditz sint, docet heec sententia: ipse dixit et facta sunt ; 
ipse mandavit, et creata sunt, id est dicente seu jubente Deo, res 
exorte sunt: non igitur ex materia priore exstructe sunt, sed Deo 
dicente, cum res non essent, esse ccoeperunt; et cum Joannes in- 
quit: Omnia per ipsum facta esse, refutat Stoicam imaginationem, 
quee fingit materiam non esse factam.” 


§ 2. Mediate and Immediate Creation. 


But while it has ever been the doctrine of the Church that God 
created the universe out of nothing by the word of his power, 
which creation was instantaneous and immediate, 7. e., without the 
intervention of any second causes; yet it has Hendrie been ad- 
mitted that this is to be understood only of the original call of matter 
into existence. Theologians have, therefore, deinpecned between 
a first and second, or immediate and mediate creation. The one 
was instantaneous, the other gradual; the one precludes the idea 
of any preéxisting substance, and of codperation, the other admits 
and implies both. There is evident ground for this distinction in 
the Mosaic account of the creation. God, we are told, “ created 
the heaven and the earth. And the earth was without form and 


void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep. And the . 


Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.” Here it is 
clearly intimated that the universe, when first created, was in a 
state of chaos, and that by the life-giving, organizing power of the 
Spirit of God, it was gradually moulded into the wonderful cosmos 
which we now behold. The whole of the first chapter of Genesis, 
after the first verse, is an account of the progress of creation; the 


1 Théodicée, 11. 201; Works, Berlin, 1840, p- 566. 
2 Loci Communes. de "Or eatione, edit. Erlangen, 1828, p. 48. 


a 


§ 2.] MEDIATE AND IMMEDIATE CREATION. 557 


production of light ; the formation of an atmosphere ; the separa- 
tion of land and water; the vegetable productions of the earth; 
the animals of the sea and air; then the living creatures of the 
earth ; and, last of all, man. In Gen. i. 27, it is said that God 
created man male and female; in chapter ii. 7, it is said, that * the 
Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground.” It thus appears 
that forming out of preéxisting material comes within the Scriptural 
idea of creating. We all recognize God as the author of our being, 
as our Creator, as well as our Preserver. He is our Creator, not 
merely because He is the maker of heaven and earth, and because ~ 
all they contain owe their origin to his will and power, but also 
because, as the Psalmist teaches us, He fashions our bodies in 


| secret. ‘* Thine eyes,” says the sacred writer, “did see my sub- 
stance, yet being unperfect ; and in thy book all my members were 
written, which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there 
; was none of them.” (Ps. exxxix. 16.) And the Bible constantly 
j speaks of God as causing the grass to grow, and as being the real 


| author or maker of all that the earth, air, or water produces. 
There is, therefore, according to the Scriptures, not only an imme- 
j diate, instantaneous creation ex nihilo by the simple word of God, 
but a mediate, progressive creation ; the power of God working in 

4 union with second causes. ~ 
1 Augustine clearly recognizes this idea. ‘ Sicut in ipso grano in- 
visibiliter erant omnia simul quee per tempora in arborem surgerent; 
ita ipse mundus cogitandus est, cum Deus simul omnia creavit, 
habuisse simul omnia que in illo et cum illo facta sunt quando 
factus est dies: non solum ccelum cum sole et luna et sideribus, 
quorum species manet motu rotabili, et terram et abyssos, que 
s velut inconstantes motus patiuntur, atque inferius adjuncta partem 
alteram mundo conferunt; sed etiam illa que aqua et terra pro- 
duxit potentialiter atque causaliter, priusquam per temporum moras 
ita exorirentur, quomodo nobis jam nota sunt in eis operibus, quae 

Deus usque nunc operatur.”’? 

Thus far there is little room for diversity of opinion. But when 
the question is asked, How long was the universe in passing from 
its chaotic to its ordered state? such diversity is at once manifested. 
According to the more obvious interpretation of the first chapter 
of Genesis, this work was accomplished in six days. This there- 
fore has been the common belief of Christians. It is a belief founded 
on a given interpretation of the Mosaic record, which interpreta- 


1 De Genesi ad Literam, vy. 45; Works, edit. Benedictines, Paris, 1836, vol. iii. pp. 821 d, 
$22 2. 


558 PART I.— THEOLOGY. [Cx. X.— Creation 


tion, however, must be controlled not only by the laws of language, 
but by facts. This is at present an open question. The facts 
necessary for its decision have not yet been duly authenticated. 
The believer may calmly await the result. . 

The theistical advocates of the Nebular Hypothesis assume that 
the universe was an indefinitely long period in coming to its present 
state. God, intending to produce just such a universe as we see 
around us, instead of by a fiat calling the sun, moon, and stars, with 
all their marshalled hosts, into existence, created simply nebulous 
matter diffused through space ; invested it with certain properties 
or forces; gave it a rotatory motion, and then allowed these physi- 
cal laws under his guidance to work out the harmonious system of © 
the heavens. As He is as truly the maker of the oak evolved from 
the acorn, according to the laws of vegetable life, as though He had 
called it into existence in its maturity by a word; so, it is main- 
tained, He is as truly the creator of heaven and earth, on the neb- 
ular hypothesis, as on the assumption of instantaneous creation. 
This, however, is merely a hypothesis which has never commanded 
general assent among scientific men. It is, therefore, of no authority 
as a norm for the interpretation of Scripture. 

The same theory of gradual, or mediate creation, has been ap- 
plied to account for all the phenomena of the vegetable and animal 
kingdoms. This has been done in different forms. According to 
all these theories there must be something to begin with. There 
must be matter and its forces. There must even be life, and living 
organisms. ‘To account for these we are forced to accept of the 
Scriptural doctrine of an immediate creation ex nihilo by the power 
of God. 

§ 3. Proof of the Doctrine. 

The proof of the doctrine of a creation ez nihilo does not rest on 
the usage of the words 872 or «rifew, which are interchanged with 
MWY and rovetv. God is said to have created the world, and also 
to be the maker of the heavens and the earth. Plants and animals 
are said to be created, although formed out of the dust of the earth. 
That, however, the Scriptures do teach this great doctrine of natu- 
ral and revealed religion, is plain, — 

1, From the fact that no mention is ever made of any preéxist- 
ing substance out of which the world was made. The original 
creation is never represented as a moulding of matter into form and 
imbuing it with life. Nor do the Scriptures ever represent the 
world as an emanation from God, proceeding from Him by a 
necessity of his nature. Much less does the Bible ever identify 


=e Se 


—— i ee lle 


§ 3.] PROOF OF THE DOCTRINE. 55% 


Ged and the world. In thus ignoring all other doctrines, the 
Scriptures leave us under the necessity of believing that God cre- 
ated the world out of nothing. 

2. The descriptions of the work of creation given in the Bible, 
preclude the idea of emanation or mere formation. God said, 
** Let there be light, and there was light.” In Ps, xxxiii. 6, it is 
said, “‘ By the word of the Lorp were the heavens made ; and all 
the host of them by the breath of his mouth.” And in verse 9: 
‘** He spake and it was done; he commanded and it stood fast.” 
It was, therefore, in the words of Melancthon, already quoted, 
Dicente seu jubente Deo, that the universe was called into exist- 
ence. ‘ Nam quid est aliud tota creatura,” Luther asks, “‘ quam 
verbum Dei a Deo prolatum, seu productum foras?.... Mun- 
dum et omnia creayit facillimo opere, dicendo scilicet, ut non plus 
negotii Deo sit in creatione, quam nobis in appellatione.”’ 4 

3. The same doctrine is involved in the absolute dependence of 
all things on God, and in his absolute sovereignty over them. 
“Thou, even thou, art Jehovah alone; thou hast made heaven, 
the heaven of heavens, with all their host, the earth, and all things 
that are therein, the seas, and all that is therein, and thou pre- 
servest them all.” (Neh. ix. 6.) ‘By Him were all things cre- 
ated, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invis- 
ible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or 
powers: all things were created by Him, and for Him: and He is 
before all things, and by Him all things consist.” (Col. i. 16, 17.) 
“ Thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and 
were created.” (Rev. iv. 11.) The all things spoken of in these 
passages is made to include everything out of God. There can, 
therefore, be no preéxisting matter, existing independently of his 
will. Everything out of God is said to owe its existence to his will. 

4. The same doctrine is included in the Scripture doctrine that 
the universe (ra wdvra) is éx Oecd, of God; that He is its source, 
not in the Gnostic sense, but in the sense consistent with other 
representations of the Bible, which refer the existence of all things 
to the command of God. ‘The universe, therefore, is ‘‘ of Him” 
as its efficient cause. 

5. The Apostle in Heb. xi. 8, begins his illustration of the 
nature and power of faith by referring to the creation as the great 
fundamental truth of all religion. If there be no creation, there is 
no God. If the universe was called into being out of nothing, then 
there must be an extramundane Being to whom it owes its exist- 

1 Genesis, i.5; Works, Wittenberg edit. 1555 (Latin), vol. vi. leaf 5, p. 2. 


, 


560 PART I.—THEOLOGY. [Cu. X.— Creation. 


ence. ‘he creation is a fact which we know only by revelation. 
What the sacred writer here asserts is, First, that the worlds 
(aidves, all contained in time and space) were created, set in order, 
and established, by the simple word or command of God. Com- 
pare Ps, Ixxiv. (Ixxiii.) 16, in the Septuagint, ob carnpricw HAvov Kar 
cehjvqv. Secondly, this being the case, it follows that the universe 
was not formed out of any preéxisting substance. Thirdly, God is 
not a mere former, but the creator of the ordered universe. The 
difference among commentators in the interpretation of this passage 
does not affect its general sense. The words are «is 70 pa ex dawo- 
pevov To Prerdpeva, yeyovévae. The first question is whether ¢és 76 ex- 
presses the design, or simply the consequence. In the former case, 
the meaning is that God created the worlds by a word im order 
that; 7. e., in order that men might know that the things seen 
were not made of what already existed. In the latter, it is simply 
stated as a fact, that as creation was by a word, it was not out of 
any preéxisting substance. The other doubtful point in the passage 
is the construction of the negative particle »y. It may be con- 
nected with ¢awouévor. This passage is then parallel with 2 Mace. 
vii. 28, e ovk dvtwv éroinoey atta 6 Geds; in the Latin, ** Peto, nate, 
ut aspicias ad ccelum, et terram, et ad omnia, que in eis sunt; et 
intelligas, quia ex nihilo fecit illa Deus, et hominum genus.” 
Delitzsch, in his commentary on this Epistle, shows that neither the 
position of the negative before the preposition, nor the use of 7 in- 
stead of od is any valid objection to this interpretation. Others, 
however, prefer to connect the pj with yeyovévat, 2. e., “the worlds 
were not made out of the phenomenal.” The sense in either case 
is substantially the same. But the question arises, What is the 
implied antithesis to the phenomenal? Some say the real, the 
ideal, the thoughts of God. Delitzsch says we must supply to “7 
ex pawwopéevav, GAN ex voyntav, ** and these voyra are the eternal invisi- 
ble types, out of which, as their ideal ground and source, visible 
things by the fiat of God have proceeded.” This is Platonism, and 
foreign to the Scriptural mode of thinking and teaching. What- 
ever is real is phenomenal; that is, every substance, everything 
which really exists manifests itself somewhere and somehow. The 
proper antithesis, therefore, to dawouévwn is odk dvrwv. The worlds 
were not made out of anything which reveals itself as existing even 
in the sight of God, but out of nothing.” 

In Rom. iv. 17, God is described as He “who quickeneth the 
dead, and calleth those things which be not, as though they were.’ 
Lo call may here be taken in the sense of commanding, controlling 


§ 3.) PROOF OF THE DOCTRINE. 561 


by a word. The passage then expresses the highest idea of omnip- 
otence. The actual and the possible are equally subject to his 
will; the non-existing, the merely possible, is as much obedient to 
Him as the actually existing. Or to call may as elsewhere mean, 
as De Wette explains it, to call into existence. ‘Der das Nicht- 
seiende als Seiendes hervorruft.” Who calls the non-existing into 
existence;” the ds dvra being for as éodpueva or for es 76 elvan ds Svras 
On this text Bengel says, “Cogita frequens illud 7 Gen. i. ex- 
primitur transitus a non esse ad esse, qui sit vocante Deo. Conf. Ez. 
xxxvi. 29.” 1 

6. The Scriptural doctrine on this subject is confirmed by all 
those passages which ascribe a beginning to the world. By the 
world is not meant the xéopos as distinguished from chaos, the form 
as distinguished from the substance, but both together. According 
to the Bible there is nothing eternal but God. He, and He alone 
is The Eternal. This is his distinguishing title, — He who is and 
was and ever shall be. As the world therefore began to be, and 
as the world includes everything out of God, there was nothing of 
which the world could be made. It was therefore created ex nthilo. 
This is taught in the first chapter of Genesis, ‘In the beginning 
(before anything was) God created the heaven and the earth.” 
In many other parts of Scripture a beginning is ascribed to the 
world, as in Ps. xe. 2, ** Before the mountains were brought forth, 
or ever thou hadst formed the earth and the world, even from ever 
lasting to everlasting, thou art God.” Ps. cil. 25, “Of old hast 
thou laid the foundation of the earth.” In John xvii. 5, our Lord 
speaks.of the glory which he had with the Father before the world 
was. The foundation of the world is an epoch. Then time began. 
What was before the foundation of the world is eternal. The 
world, therefore, is not eternal, and if not eternal it must have had 
a beginning, and if all things had a beginning, then there must have 
been a creation ex nihilo. 

7. The doctrine of creation flows from the infinite perfection of 
God. There can be but one infinite being. If anything exists 
independent of his will, God is thereby limited. The idea of the 
absolute dependence of all things on God pervades the Scripture 
and is involved in our religious consciousness. The God of the 
Bible is an extramundane God, existing out of, and before the 
world, absolutely independent of it, its creator, preserver, and gov- 
ernor. So that the doctrine of creation is a necessary consequence 
of Theism. If we deny that the world owes its existence to the 


1 Gnomon, edit. Tubingen, 1759, p. 614. 
VOL. I. 36 


562 PART L—THEOLOGY. [Cx. X.—Crzarion. 


will of God, then Atheism, Hylozoism, or Pantheism would seem 
to be the logical consequence. Hence, on the one hand, the Scrip- 
tures make that doctrine so prominent, presenting it on the first 
page of the Bible as the foundation of all subsequent revelations 
concerning the nature of God and his relation to the world, and 
appointing from the beginning one day in seven to be a perpetual 
commemoration of the fact that God created the heaven and earth. 
And, on the other, the advocates of Atheism or Pantheism contend 
against the doctrine of creation as the primary error of all false 
philosophy and religion. ‘Die Annahme einer Schépfung ist der 
Grund-Irrthum aller falschen Metaphysik und Religionslehre, und 
insbesondere das Ur-Princip des Juden- und Heidenthums.” 4 


§ 4. Objections to the Doctrine. 


1. It has in all ages been urged as an objection to the doctrine 
of creation that it is inconsistent with an axiom, ex nihilo nihil fit. 
That aphorism may, however, have two meanings. It may mean 
that no effect can be without a cause, — that nothing can produce 
nothing. In that sense it expresses a self-evident truth with which 
the doctrine of creation is perfectly consistent. That doctrine does 
not suppose that the world exists without a cause, or comes from 
nothing. It assigns a perfectly adequate cause for its existence in 
the will of an Almighty intelligent Being. In the other sense of 
the phrase it means that a creation ex nihilo is impossible, that God 
cannot cause matter, or anything else, to begin to be. In this sense 
it is not a self-evident truth, but an arbitrary assumption, and con- 
sequently without force or authority. It is indeed inconceivable; 
but so also are the ordinary operations of the human will incon- 
ceivable. Noman can understand how mind acts on matter. As 
the world actually exists, we must admit either that it began to be, 
or that it is eternal. But the difficulties connected with this last 
assumption are, as we saw when arguing for the existence of God, 
far greater than those which attend the admission of a creation ex 
nihilo. It was partly the difficulty of conceiving of the non-exist- 
ing passing into existence, and partly the need for a solution of the 
question concerning the origin of evil, that led Plato and other 
Greek philosophers to adopt the theory of the eternity of matter, 
which they regarded as the source of evil; a theory which passed 
over to Philo and to the Platonizing fathers. The Scriptural the- 
ory, or rather doctrine of the origin of evil, refers it to the free 
agency of rational creatures, and dispenses with the preéxistence 
of anything independent of God. ; 


1 Fichte, v. sel. Leben, p. 160- 


a a 


$4.) OBJECTIONS TO THE DOCTRINE. 563 


2. A more formidable objection, at least one which has had far 
more power, is that the doctrine of a creation in time is inconsistent 
with the true idea of God. This objection is presented in two 
forms. First, it is said, that the doctrine of creation supposes a 
distinction between will and power, or efficiency and purpose in 
the divine mind. Scotus Erigena! says, ‘ Non aliud est Deo esse 
et facere, sed ei esse id ipsum est et facere. Cozternum igitur est 
Deo suum facere et coessentiale.”” This was the common doctrine 
of the scholastic theology which defined God to be actus purus, 
and denied any distinction in Him between essence and attributes, 
power and act. If this view of the nature of God be correct, then 
the doctrine that supposes that God’s eternal purpose did not take 
effect from eternity, must be false. If God creates by thinking, 
He formed the world when He purposed it. Secondly, it is said 
that the doctrine of creation is inconsistent with the nature of God, 
inasmuch as it assumes a change in Him from inaction to activity. 
What was God doing, it is asked, from eternity before He created 
the world? If He is Creator and Lord, He must always have been 
such, and hence there must always have been a universe over 
which He ruled. These difficulties have led to different theories 
designed to avoid them. Origen, as before mentioned, taught that 
there has been an eternal succession of worlds. Others say that 
creation is eternal, although due to the will of God. He did from 
the beginning what the Scriptures say He did in the beginning. A 
foot from eternity standing in the dust, or a seal from eternity im- 
pressed upon wax, would be the cause of the impression, although 
the impression would be coeternal with the foot or seal. Pantheists 
make the world essential to God. He ewists only in the world. 
“Das gottgleiche All ist nicht allein das ausgesprochene Wort 
Gottes (natura naturata) sondern selbst das sprechende (natura 
naturans) ; nicht das erschaffene, sondern das selbst schaffende und 
sich selbst offenbarende auf unendliche Weise.”2 That is, ‘*‘ The 
universe is not merely the outspoken word of God, but also that 
which speaks ; not the created, but the self-creating and self-reveal- 
ing in unending forms.” 


Answer to the above Objections. 
With regard to the objections above mentioned, it may be re- 
marked, — 
1. That they are drawn from a region which is entirely beyond 


1 De Divisione Natura, i. 74. 
2 Schelling, by Strauss, Dogmatik, vol. i. p. 658. 


“a4 


* 
* 


564 PART I.—THEOLOGY. [Cu. X.— Creation 


our comprehension. They assume that we can understand the 

Almighty unto perfection and search out all his ways ;- whereas 
it is obvious that with regard to a Being who is eternal and not 

subject to the limitations of time, we are using words without 

meaning when we speak of successive duration in reference to Him. + 
If with God there is no past or future, it is vain to ask what He 

was doing before creation. It was stated, when treating of the 

attributes of God, that there are two methods of determining out 

conceptions of the+divine nature and operations. The one is to 

start with the idea of the Absolute and Infinite and make that idea 

the touchstone ; affirming or denying what is assumed to be con- 

sistent or inconsistent therewith. Those who adopt this method, 

refuse to submit to the teachings of their moral nature or the reve- 

lations of the Word of God, and make Him either an absolutely 

unknown cause, or deny to Him all the attributes of a person. 

The other method is to start with the revelation which God has 

made of Himself in the constitution of our own nature and in his 

holy Word. This method leads to the conclusion that God can 

think and act, that in Him essence and attributes are not identical, 

that power and wisdom, will and working in Him, are not one and 

the same, and that the distinction between potentia (inherent 

power) and act applies to Him as well as to us. In other words, 
that God is infinitely more than pure activity, and consequently 

that it is not inconsistent with his nature that He should do at one 

time what He does not do at another. 

2. A second remark to be made on these objections is that they 
prove too much. If valid against a creation in time, they are valid 
against all exercise of God’s power in time. Then there is no 
such thing as providential government, or gracious operations of the 
Spirit, or answering prayer. If whatever God does He does from 
eternity, then, so far as we are concerned, He does nothing. If we 
exalt the speculative ideas of the understanding above our moral 
and religious nature, and above the authority of the Scriptures, we 
give up all ground both of faith and knowledge, and have nothing 
before us but absolute’ skepticism or atheism. These objections, 
therefore, are simply of our own making. We form an idea of 
the Absolute Being out of our own heads, and then reject whatever 
does not agree with it. They have, consequently, no force except 
for the man who makes them. 

3. The scholastic theologians, who themselves were in the tram- 
mels of such philosophical speculations, were accustomed to answer 
these cavils by counter subtleties. Even Augustine says that God 


a aa 


§ 5.) DESIGN OF THE CREATION. 565 


did not create the world in time, because before creation time was 
not. ‘Si liters sacra’ maximeque veraces ita dicunt, in principio 
fecisse Deum cceelum et terram, ut nihil antea fecisse intelligatur, quia 
hoc potius in principio fecisse diceretur, si quid fecisset ante coetera 
cuncta que fecit ; procul dubio non est mundus factus in tempore, sed 
cum tempore.”? Thisis true enough. If time be duration measured 
by motion or succession, it is plain that before succession there can 
be no time. It is hard, however, to see how this relieves the matter. 
The fact remains that the world is not eternal, and therefore, in our 
mode of conception, there were infinite ages during which the world 
was not. Still the difficulty is purely subjective, arising from the 
limitations of our nature, which forbid our comprehending God, or 
our understanding the relation of his activity to the effects produced 
in time. All we know is that God does work and act, and that 
the effects of his activity take place successively in time. 

4, As to the objection that the doctrine of creation supposes a 
change in God, the theologians answer that it does not suppose 
any change in his will or purpose, for he purposed from eternity to 
create. On this point Augustine? says, “ Una eademque sempi- 
terna et immutabili voluntate res quas condidit et ut prius non 
essent egit, quamdiu non fuerunt, et ut posterius essent, quando 
esse cceperunt.” In other words, God did not purpose to create 
from eternity ; but from eternity he had the purpose to create. As 
there is no change of purpose involved in creation, so there is no 
change from inaction to activity involved in the doctrine. God is 
essentially active. But it does not follow that his activity is always 
the same, z. ¢., that it must always produce the same effects. The 
eternal purpose takes effect just as was intended from the begin- 
ning. These objections, however, are mere cobwebs; but they 
are cobwebs in the eye; the eye of our feeble understanding. 
They are best got rid of by closing that eye, and opening what 
the Scriptures call “ the eyes of the heart.” That is, instead of 
submitting ourselves to the guidance of the speculative under- 
standing, we should consent to be led by the Spirit as He reveals 
the things of God in his Word, and in our own moral and religious 
nature. 

§ 5. Design of the Creation. 

Men have long endeavoured to find a satisfactory answer to the 
question, Why God created the world? What end was it designed 
to accomplish? Answers to this question have been sought from 


1 De Civitate Dei, x1. 6, edit. Benedictines, vol. vii. p. 444, c, d. 
2 De Civitate Dei, x1. 17, edit. Benedictines, vol. sii. p. 508, b 


566 PART I.—THEOLOGY.  [Cx. X.—Crzarton 


the following sources, — (1.) The nature of God himself. (2.) From 
the nature of his works and the course of history. (8.) From the 
declarations of the Scriptures. As to the first source, it is to be 
remarked that the systems which preclude the admission of final 
causes, as Materialism and Pantheism in all their forms, of course 
preclude any question as to the design of the creation. The world 
is the evolution of an unconscious, unintelligent force, which has no 
design out of itself. To ask what is the design of the world is, in 
these systems, equivalent to asking what is the design of the being 
of God; for God is the world and the world is God. Those who 
admit the existence of an intelligent extramundane God, and who 
endeavour from,his nature to determine the end for which He 
created the world, have pursued different courses and come to dif- 
ferent conclusions. From the absolute self-sufficiency of God it 
follows that the creation was not designed to meet or satisfy any 
necessity on his part. He is neither more perfect nor more happy 
because of the creation. Again it follows from the nature of an 
infinite Being that the ground (@. e., both the motive and the end) 
of the creation must be in Himself. As all things are from Him and 
through Him, so also they are for Him. Some infer from his holi- 
ness that the purpose to create arose, so to speak, from the desire 
to have a field for the development of moral excellence in rational 
creatures. By far the most common opinion from the beginning 
has been that the creation is to be referred to the bonitas, good- 
ness, benevolence, or, as the modern Germans at least generally 
express it, the love of God. As God is love, and the nature of 
love is to communicate itself, as it must have an object to be 
enjoyed and rendered blessed, so God created the world that He 
might rejoice in it and render it blessed. From the time of Leib- 
nitz, who made this idea the foundation of his “ 'Théodicée,”’ this 
theory has assumed a more contracted form. He reduced love to 
mere benevolence, or the desire to promote happiness. Hence the 
end of the creation was assumed to be the production of happiness. 
And as God is infinite, not only in benevolence, but also in wis- 
dom and power, this world is necessarily the best possible world 
for the production of happiness. This theory is very fruitful of 
consequences. (1.) As all virtue consists in benevolence, happi- 
ness must be the highest good. Holiness is good only because it 
tends to happiness. It has no virtue of its own. (2.) Whatever 
tends to promote happiness is right. There is no such thing as sin. 
What we call sin, if a necessary means of the greatest good, becomes 
virtue. It is evil only so far as it has a contrary tendency. And 


a 


a ee eee lel eee eee ee 


a on | 


$5.] DESIGN OF THE CREATION. 567 


as under the government of God all sin, past or present, does se- 
cure:a greater amount of happiness than would otherwise be possi- 
ble, there is really no sin in the universe. (3.) This is generalized 
into the principle that it is right to do evil that good may come. 
This is the principle on which God acts, according to this theory, 
and it is the principle on which men are entitled and bound to 
act; and on which in point of fact they do act. The question 
which on every occasion their doctrine presents for decision is 
necessarily, What will be the consequence of a certain act or course 
of conduct? Will it promote happiness or the reverse? and the 
answer decides the course to be pursued. The Jesuits have worked 
out this theory into a science, and are enabled to determine before- 
hand when murder, perjury, and blasphemy become virtues. As 
this doctrine revolts the moral sense, its adoption is necessarily 
degrading. Few principles, therefore, have been so productive of 
false doctrine and immorality as the principle that all virtue con- 
sists in benevolence, that happiness is the highest good, and that 
whatever promotes happiness is right. 


The Scriptural Doctrine as to the Design of Creation. 


It is obviously in vain for man to attempt to determine the 
design of the creation from the nature of God’s works and from 
the course of his providence. That would require a knowledge of 
the whole universe and of its history to its consummation. The only 
satisfactory method of determining the question is by appealing to 
the Scriptures. There it is explicitly taught that the glory of God, 
the manifestation of his perfections, is the last end of all his works. 
This is, (1.) The highest possible end. The knowledge of God is 
eternal life. It is the source of all holiness and all blessedness to 
rational creatures. (2.) This in the Bible is declared to be the 
end of the universe as a whole; of the external world or works of 


‘nature ; of the plan of redemption ; of the whole course of history ; 


of the mode in which God administers his providence and dispenses 


_his grace ; and of particular events, such as the choice of the Israel- 


ites and all the dealings of God with them as a nation. It is the 
end which all rational creatures are commanded to keep constantly 
in view; and it comprehends and secures all other right ends. The 
common objection, that this doctrine represents God as self-seeking, 
has already been answered. God, as infinitely wise and good, seeks 
the highest end; and as all creatures are as the dust of the balance 
compared to Him, it follows that his glory is an infinitely higher 
end than anything that concerns them exclusively. Fora creature 


668 PART I.—THEOLOGY. [Cu X. — Craton. 


to seek his own glory or happiness in preference to that of God, is 
folly and sin, because he is utterly insignificant. He prefers a trifle 
to what is of infinite importance. He sacrifices, or endeavours to 
sacrifice, an end which involves the highest excellence of all crea- 
tures, to hisown advantage. He serves the creature more than the 
Creator. He prefers himself to God. Many theologians endeavour 
to combine these different views as to the design of the creation. 
They say that the highest end is the glory of God, and the subor- 
dinate end the good of his creatures. Or, they say that the two 
are the same. God purposes to glorify Himself in the happiness of 
his creatures; or to promote the happiness of his creatures as a 
means of manifesting his glory. But this is only to confuse and 
confound the matter. The end is one thing; the consequences 
another. The end is the glory of God; the consequences of the 
attainment of that end are undoubtedly the highest good (not 
necessarily the greatest amount of happiness), and that highest 
good. may include much sin and much misery so far as individuals 
are concerned. But the highest good is that God should be known. 


§ 6. The Mosaic Account of the Creation. 


There are three methods of interpreting this portion of the Bible. 
(1.) The historical. (2.) The allegorical. (8.) The mythical. 
The first assumes it to be a veritable history. The second has two 
forms. Many of the Fathers who allegorized the whole of the Old 
Testament without denying its historical verity, allegorized in like 
manner the history of the creation. That is, they sought for a 
hidden moral or spiritual sense under all historical facts. Others 
regarded it as purely an allegory without any historical basis, any 
more than the parables of our Lord. The mythical theory, as 
the name imports, regards the record of the creation as a mere 
fable, or fabulous cosmogony, designed to express a theory as to . 
the origin of the universe, of man, and of evil, of no more value 
than the similar cosmogonies which are found in the early literature 
of all nations. In favour of the historical character of the record 
are the following considerations, —(1.) It purports to bea veritable 
history.. (2.) It is the appropriate and necessary introduction ot 
an acknowledged history. (8.) It is referred to and quoted in 
other parts of the Bible as the true account of the creation of the 
world; especially in the fourth commandment, where, as well as 
in other parts of Scripture, it is made the foundation of the 
institution of the Sabbath. (4.) The facts here recorded, including 
as they do the creation and probation of man, lie at the foundation 


a 


§ 6.) OBJECTIONS TO THE MOSAIC ACCOUNT. 569 


of the whole revealed plan of redemption. The whole Bible, there- 
fore, rests upon the record here given of the work of creation, and 
consequently all the evidence which goes to support the divine 
authority of the Bible, tends to sustain the historical verity of that 
record. ; 
Objections to the Mosaie Account of the Creation. 

The principal objections to the Mosaic account of the creation 
are either critical, astronomical, or geological. Under the first 
head it is objected that the account is inconsistent with itself, espe- 
cially in what is said of the creation of man ; and that it is evidently 
composed of independent documents, in one of which God is called 
ovziby, and in the other mijn, The former of these objections is 
answered by showing that the two accounts of the creation are not 
inconsistent ; the one is a concise statement of the fact, the other 
a fuller account ‘of the manner of its occurrence. As to the second 
objection, it is enough to say that, admitting the fact on which it is 
founded, it creates no difficulty in the way of acknowledging the 
historical character of the record. It is of no importance to us 
whence Moses derived his information, whether from one or more 
historical documents, from tradition, or from direct revelation. We 
receive the account on his authority and on the authority of the 
Book of which it is a recognized and authentic portion. 

The astronomical objections are, (1.) That the whole account 
evidently assumes that our earth is the centre of the universe, and 
that the sun, moon, and stars are its satellites. (2.) That light is 
said to have been created and the alternation between day and 
night established before the creation of the sun; and (8.) That 
the visible heavens are represented as a solid expanse. The first 
of these objections bears with as much force against all the repre- 
sentations of the Bible and the language of common life. Men 
instinctively form ‘their language according to apparent, and not 
absolute or scientific truth. They speak of the sun as rising and 
setting ; of its running its course through the heavens, although 
they know that this is only apparently and not really true. The 
language of the Bible on this, as well as on all other subjects, is 
framed in accordance with the common usage of men. The 
second objection is founded on the assumption that the fourteenth 
verse speaks of the creation of the sun and other heavenly bodies. 
This is not its necessary meaning. The sense may be that God 


then appointed the sun and moon to the service of measuring and 


regulating times and seasons. But even if the other interpretation 
be adopted, there need be no conflict between the record and the 


570 PART J.—THEOLOGY.  [Cn. X.— Creation, 


astroncmical fact that the sun is now the source of light to the 
world. The narrative makes a distinction between the cosmicai 
light mentioned in the earlier part of the chapter, and the light 
emanating from the sun, specially designed for our globe. The 
third objection is met by the remark already made. If we speak 
of the concave heavens, why might not the Hebrews speak of the 
solid heavens? The word firmament applied to the visible heavens 
is as familiar to us as it was to them. Calvin well remarks, 
“Moses vulgi ruditati se accommodans, non alia Dei opera com- 
memorat in historia creationis, nisi que oculis nostris occurrunt.” 4 


‘Geology and the Bible. 


The geological objections to the Mosaic record are apparently 
the most serious. According to the commonly received chronology, 
our globe has existed only a few thousand years. According to 
geologists, it must have existed for countless ages. And again, 
according to the generally received interpretation of the first 
chapter of Genesis, the process of creation was completed in six 
days, whereas geology teaches that it must have been in progress 
through periods of time which cannot be computed. 

Admitting the facts to be as geologists would have us to believe, 
two methods of reconciling the Mosaic account with those facts 
have been adopted. First, some understand the first verse to refer 
to the original creation of the matter of the universe in the in- 
definite past, and what follows to refer to the last reorganizing 
change in the state of our earth to fit it for the habitation of man. 
Second, the word day as used throughout the chapter is understood 
of geological periods of indefinite duration. 

In favour of this latter view it is urged that the word day is 
used in Scripture in many different senses ; sometimes for the time 
the sun is above the horizon; sometimes for a period of twenty- 
four hours; sometimes for a year, as in Lev. xxv. 29, Judges 
xvii. 10, and often elsewhere; sometimes for an indefinite period, 
as in the phrases, “the day of your calamity,” “the day of sal- 
vation,” “the day of the Lord,” “the day of judgment.” And 
in this account of the creation it is used for the period of light in 
antithesis to night; for the separate periods in the progress of 
creation ; and then, ch. ii. 4, for the whole period: ‘In the day 
that the Lorp God made the earth and the heavens.”’ 

It is of course admitted that, taking this account by itself, it 
would be most natural to understand the word in its ordinary 

1 Jnstitutio, 1. xiv. 3, edit. Berlin, 1884, p. 112. 


§ 6.) OBJECTIONS TO THE MOSAIC ACCOUNT. 571 


sense ; but if that sense brings the Mosaic account into conflict 
with facts, and another sense avoids such conflict, then it is obliga- 
tory on us to adopt that other. Now it is urged that if the word 
‘day ” be taken in the sense of “an indefinite. period of time,” a 
sense which it undoubtedly has in other parts of Scripture, there is 
not only no discrepancy between the Mosaic account of the crea- 
tion and the assumed facts of geology, but there is a most marvel- 
lous coincidence between them. 

The cosmogony of modern science teaches that the universe, 
**the heaven and the earth,” was first in a chaotic or gaseous 
state. The process of its development included the following 
steps: (1.) “* Activity begun, —light an immediate result. (2.) 
The earth made an independent sphere. (8.) Outlining of the 
land and water, determining the earth’s general configuration. 
(4.) The idea of life in the lowest plants, and afterwards, if not 
contemporaneously, in the lowest or systemless animals, or Proto- 
zoans. (0.) The energizing light of the sun shining on the earth 
—an essential preliminary to the display of the systems of life. 
(6.) Introduction of the systems of life. (7.) Introduction of 
mammals — the highest order of the vertebrates, —the class after 
wards to be dignified by including a being of moral and intel- 
lectual nature. (8.) Introduction of* man.” } 

Professor Dana further says, ‘‘ The order of events in the Scrip- 
ture cosmogony corresponds essentially with that which has been 
given. There was first a void and formless earth: this was lit- 
erally true of the ‘heavens and the earth,’ if they were in the 
condition of a gaseous fluid. The succession is as follows : — 

“1. Light. 

“2, The dividing of the waters below Aa the waters above 
the earth (the sae 9 translated waters may mean fluid). 

‘3. The dividing of the land and water on the earth. 

“4, Vegetation; which Moses, appreciating the philosophical 
characteristic of the new creation distinguishing it from previous 
inorganic substances, defines as that ‘ which had seed in itself.’ 

«©5,. The sun, moon, and stars. 

“6. The lower animals, those that swarm in the waters, and 
the creeping and flying species of the land. 

‘7. Beasts of prey (‘ creeping’ here meaning prowling). 

«8, Man. 


1 Manual of Geology. By James D. Dana, M. A., LL. D., Silliman Professor of Geology 
and Natural History in Yale College, p. 743. 


572 PART 1.— THEOLOGY. [Cu. X.— Creation 


“In this succession, we observe not merely an order of events, 
like that deduced from science ; there is a system in the arrange- 
ment, and a far-reaching prophecy, to which philosophy could not 
have attained, however instructed. 

“The account: recognizes in creation two great eras of three 
days each, —an Inorganic and an Organic. Tach of these eras 
opens with the appearance of light; the first, light cosmical ; the 
second, light from the sun for the special uses of the earth. 

“Hach era ends in ‘a day’ of two great works — the two shown 
to be distinct by being severally pronounced ‘ good.’ On the third 
day, that closing the Inorganic Era, there was first the dividing of 
the land from the waters, and afterwards the creation of vegeta- 
tion, or the institution of a kingdom of life —a work widely diverse 
from all that preceded it in the era. So on the sixth day, termi- 
nating the Organic Era, there was first the creation of mammals, 
and then a second far greater work, totally new in its grandest 
element, the creation of Man. 

“The arrangement is, then, as follows : — 


“J. The Inorganic Era. 


“1st Day. — Lieut cosmical. 
“¢ 2d Day. — The earth divided from the fluid around it, or in- 
dividualized. 
8d Day. — i Outlining of the land and water. 
2. Creation of vegetation. 


“II. The Organie Bra. 


‘“‘ 4th Day. — Lieut from the sun. 
“5th Day. — Creation of the lower order of animals. 
1. Creation of mammals 
“ 6th Day. — 
ay 2. Creation of man.” 


‘The record in the Bible,” adds Professor Dana,! “ is therefore 
profoundly philosophical in the scheme of creation which it presents. 
It is both true and divine. It is a declaration of authorship, both 
of creation and the Bible, on the first page of the sacred volume.” 
To the same effect he elsewhere says: “ The first thought that 
strikes the scientific reader [of the Mosaic account of the creation ] 
is the evidence of divinity, not merely in the first verse of the 
record, and the successive fiats, but in the whole order of creation. 

1 Page 745. 2 Page 746. 


- 


§6.] OBJECTIONS TO THE MOSAIC ACCOUNT. 573 


There is so much that the most recent readings of science have for 
the first time explained, that the idea of man as the author becomes 
utterly incomprehensible. By proving the record’ true, science 
pronounces it divine ; for who could have correctly narrated the 
secrets of eternity but God himself?” 4 

The views given in his “ Manual of Geology” are more fully 
elaborated by Professor Dana in two admirable articles in the 
* Bibliotheca Sacra” (January and July, 1856). He says, in the 
former of those articles, “ The best views we have met with on the 
harmony between science and the Bible, are those of Professor 
Arnold Guyot, a philosopher of enlarged comprehension of nature 
and a truly Christian spirit; and the following interpretations of 
the sacred record are, in the main, such as we have gathered from 
personal intercourse with him.” 2 

Professor Dana of Yale and Professor Guyot of Princeton, be- 
long to the first rank of scientific naturalists; and the friends of 
the Bible owe them a debt of gratitude for their able vindication 
of the sacred record. 

As the Bible is of God, it is certain that there can be no conflict 
between the teachings of the Scriptures and the facts of science. 
It is not with facts, but with theories, believers have to contend. 
Many such theories have, from time to time, been presented, ap- 
parently or really inconsistent with the Bible. But these theories 
have either proved to be false, or to harmonize with the Word of 
God, properly interpreted. The Church has been forced more than 
once to alter her interpretation of the Bible to accommodate the 
discoveries of science. But this has been done without doing any 
violence to the Scriptures or in any degree impairing their author- 
ity. Such change, however, cannot be effected without a struggle. 
It is impossible that our mode of understanding the Bible should not 
be determined by our views of the subjects of which it treats. So 
long as men believed that the earth was the centre of our system, 
the sun its satellite, and the stars its ornamentation, they of neces- 
sity understood the Bible in accordance with that hypothesis. But 
when it was discovered that the earth was only one of the smaller 
satellites of the sun, and that the stars were worlds, then faith, 
although at first staggered, soon grew strong enough to take it all 
in, and rejoice to find that the Bible, and the Bible alone of all 
ancient books, was in full accord with these stupendous revelations 


1 Bibliotheca Sacra for January, 1856, p. 110. 
2 The views of Professor Guyot are presented at some length by the Rev. J. O. Means, in 


the numbers of the Bibliotheca Sacra for January and April, 1855. 


574 PART L—THEOLOGY. —[Cu. X.— Crearion. 


of science. And so if it should be proved that the creation was a 
process continued through countless ages, and that the Bible alone 
of all the books of antiquity recognized that fact, then, as Professor 
Dana says, the idea of its being of human origin would become 
“utterly incomprehensible.” 


j 
j 
: 
4 
‘ 
, 
, 
: 


CHAPTER XI. 
PROVIDENCE. 


§ 1. Preservation. 
Gop’s works of providence are his most holy, wise, and powerful 


. preserving and governing all his creatures and all their actions. 


Providence, therefore, includes preservation and government. By 
preservation is meant that all things out of God owe the continu- 
ance of their existence, with all their properties and powers, to the 
will of God. This is clearly the doctrine of the Scriptures. The 
passages relating to this subject are very numerous. They are of 
different kinds. First, some assert in general terms that God does 
sustain all things by the word of his power, as Heb. i. 3; Col. i. 
17, where it is said, ‘* By Him all things consist,” or continue to 
be. In Nehem. ix. 6, “ Thou, even thou art Lord alone; thou 
hast made heaven, the heaven of heavens, with all their hosts, the 
earth, and all things that are therein, the seas, and all that is there- 
in, and thou preservest them all.” Secondly, those which refer to 
the regular operations or powers of nature, which are declared to 
be preserved in their efficiency by the power of God. See Psalms 
civ. and cxlviii. throughout, and many similar passages. Thirdly, 
those which relate to irrational animals. And Fourthly, those 
which relate to rational creatures, who are said to live, move, and 
to have their being in God. These passages clearly teach, (1.) That 
the universe as a whole does not continue in being of itself. It 
would cease to exist if unsupported by his power. (2.) That all 


_ creatures, whether plants or animals, in their several genera, spe- 


cies, and individuals, are continued in existence not by any inher- 
ent principle of life, but by the will of God. (8.) That this 
preservation extends not only to the substance but also to the 
form; not only to the essence, but also to the qualities, properties, 
and powers of all created things. 


The Nature of Preservation. 


This doctrine, thus clearly taught in the Scriptures, is so conso- 
uant to reason and to the rcligious nature of man, that it is not de- 


576 PART L—-THEOLOGY.  [Cu. XI.—Provipencz. 


nied among Christians. The only question is as to the nature of 
the divine efficiency to which the continued existence of all things 
is to be referred. On this subject there are three general opinions. 

First, That of those who assume that everything is to be referred 
to the original purpose of God. He created all things and deter- 
mined that they should continue in being according to the laws 
which He impressed upon them at the beginning. There is no 
need, it is said, of supposing his continued intervention for their 
preservation. It is enough that He does not will that they should 
cease to be. This is the theory adopted by the Remonstrants and 
generally by the Deists of modern times. According to this view, 
God is seated on his throne in the heavens, a mere spectator of the 
world and of its operations, exerting no direct efficiency in sustain- 
ing the things which He has made. Thus Limborch?! describes — 
preservation, as held by many, to be merely an “ actus negativus 

. . . [quo Deus] essentias, vires ac facultates rerum creatarum 
non vult destruere ; sed eas vigori suo per creationem indito, quoad 
usque ille perdurare potest relinquere.” To this view it is to be 
objected, — 

1. That it is obviously opposed to the representations of the — 
Bible. According to the uniform and pervading teaching of the 
Scriptures, God is not merely a God afar off. He is not a mere 
spectator of the universe which He has made, but is everywhere 
present in his essence, knowledge, and power. To his sustaining 
hand the continuance of all things is constantly referred ; and if 
He withdraws his presence they cease to be. This is so plainly the 
doctrine of the Bible that it is admitted so to be by many whose 
philosophical views constrain them to reject the doctrine for them- 
selves. . 

2. It is inconsistent with the absolute dependence of all things 
on God. It supposes creatures to have within themselves a prin- 
ciple of life, derived originally, indeed, from God, but capable of 
zontinued being and power without his aid. The God of the Bible 
is everywhere declared to be the all-sustaining ground of all that 
is, so that if not upheld by the word of his power, they would cease 
tobe. The Scriptures expressly distinguish the power by which 
things were created from that by which they are continued. All 
things were not only created by Him, says the Apostle, but by 
Him all things consist. (Col. i. 17.) This language clearly 
teaches that the almighty power of God is as much concerned in 
the continued existence, as in the original creation of all things. 


1 Theologia Christiana, m1. xxy. 7, edit. Amsterdam, 1700, p. 134. 


§1.] PRESERVATION. 577 


3. This doctrine does violence to the instinctive religious convic- 
tions of all men. Even those the least enlightened live and act 
under the conviction of absolute dependence. They recognize 
God as everywhere present and everywhere active. If they do 
not love and trust Him, they at least fear Him and instinctively 
deprecate his wrath. They cannot, without doing violence to the 
constitution of their nature, look upon God as a being who is a 
mere spectator of the creatures who owe their existence to his will. 


Preservation not a Continued Creation. 


A second view of the nature of preservation goes to the oppo- 
site extreme of confounding creation and preservation. This opin- 
ion has been held in different forms, — 

1. It is sometimes said that preservation and creation are to be 
referred to one and the same divine act. So far, therefore, as God 
is concerned, the two are identical. This ground is taken by many 
who admit the reality of the world and the efficiency of second 
causes. They intend by this mode of representation to deny any 
succession in the acts of God. He cannot be viewed as acting in 
time, or as doing in time what He has not done from eternity. 

2. Others who represent preservation as a continued creation, 
only mean that the divine efficiency is as really active in the one 
case as in the other. They wish to deny that anything out of God 
has the cause of the continuance of its existence in itself; and that 
its properties or powers are in any such sense inherent as that they 
preserve their efficiency without the continued agency of God. 
This is the sense in which most of the Reformed theologians are to 
be understood when they speak of preservation as a continuous 
creation. Thus Heidegger! says, ‘ Conservatio continuata creatio 
Dei activa est. Sienim creatio et conservatio duz actiones distinct 
forent, creatio primo cessaret, ac tum conservatio vel eodem, quo 
creatio cessavit, vel sequenti momento inciperet.” This only 
means that the world owes its continued existence to the uninter- 
rupted exercise of the divine power. He therefore elsewhere 
says, ‘Conservationi annihilatio opponitur. Cessante actione con- 
servante res in nihilum collabitur.” In like manner Alsted? says, 
*‘ Conservatio est queedam continuatio.” Quemadmodum creatio est 
prima productio rei ex nihilo, ita est conservatio rei continuatio, ne 
in nihilum recidat. Deus mundum sustinet.”’ Ryssenius (whose 
work is principally from Turrettin),? says “ Providentia bene altera 


1 Heidegger, Corpus Theologia, loc. vii. 22, Tiguri, 1732, p. 251. i : 
2 Alsted, Theol. Didac!. Hanovie, 1627, p. 283. 3 Summa Theologica, 1. 209; Ibid, 


VOL. I. 37 


578 PART I.—THEOLOGY. [Cu. XI.— ProvipENnce 


creatio, dicitur. Nam eadem voluntate, qua Deus omnia creavit, 
omnia conservat, et creatio a conservatione in eo tantum differt, 
quod quando voluntatem Dei sequitur rerum existentia, dicitur 
creatio; quando res eadem per eandem voluntatem durat, dicitur 
conservatio.” This amounts only to saying that as God created all 
things by the word of his power, so also He upholds all things by 
the word of his power. 

8. There is, however, a third form in which this doctrine is held. 
By continued creation is meant that all efficiency is in God ; that 
all effects are to be referred to his agency. As there was no co- 
dperation in calling the world out of nothing, so there is no coéper- 
ation of second causes in its continuance and operations. God 
creates, as it were, de novo at each instant the universe, as at that 
moment it actually is. 


Objections to the Doctrine of a Continuous Creation. 


All these modes of representation, however, are objectionable. 
Creation, preservation, and government are in fact different, and to 
identify them leads not only to confusion but to error. Creation 


and preservation differ, first, as the former is the calling into exist- - 


ence what before did not exist; and the latter is continuing, or 
causing to continue what already has a being; and secondly, in 
creation there is and can be no co@peration, but. in preservation 
there is a concursus of the first, with second causes. In the Bible, 
therefore, the two things are never confounded. God created all 
things, and by Him all things consist. As to the first mentioned 
of the three forms of the doctrine of a continued creation, it is 
enough to remark that it rests on the @ priort idea of an absolute 
Being. It is not only a gratuitous, but an unscriptural assumption 
which denies all difference between will and efficiency, or between 
power and act in God. And as to the idea that God’s acts are not 
successive ; that He never does in time what He does not do from 
eternity, it is obvious that such language has for us no meaning. 
We cannot comprehend the relation which the efficiency of God 
has to the effects produced successively. We know, however, 
that God acts; that He does produce successive effects; and that, 
so far as we are concerned, and so far as the representations of 
Scripture are concerned, our relation to God and the relation of 
the world to Him, are precisely what they would be if his acts were 
really successive. It is the height of presumption in man, on the 
mere ground of our speculative ideas, to depart from the plain 
vepresentations of Scriptures, and so to conceive of the relation of 


$1.5 PRESERVATION. 579 


God to the world as effectually to make Him an unknown Being, 
merging all his perfections into the general idea of cause. 

The objection to the second form of the doctrine is not to the 
idea meant to be expressed. It is true that the preservation of 
the world is as much due to the immediate power of God as its 
creation, but this does not prove that preservation is creation. 
Creation is the production of something out of nothing. Preser- 
vation is the upholding in existence what already is. This form 
of the doctrine is therefore a false use of terms. A more serious 
objection, however, is that this mode of expression tends to error. 
The natural sense of the words is what those who use them admit 
to be false, and not only false but dangerous. 

To the real doctrine of a continuous creation the objections are 
far more serious,— 

1. It destroys all continuity of existence. If God creates any 
given thing every moment out of nothing, it ceases to be the same 
thing. It is something new, however similar to what existed be- 
fore. It is as much disconnected from what preceded it as the 
world itself when it arose out of nothing, was disconnected from 
the previous nothingness. 

2. This doctrine effectually destroys all evidence of the exist- 
ence of an external world. What we so regard, the impressions 
on our senses which we refer to things out of ourselves, are merely 
inward states of consciousness produced momentarily by the creat- 
ing energy of God. Idealism is, therefore, the logical, as it has 
been the historical consequenge of the theory in question. If all 
necessity for the existence of an external world is done away with, 
that existence must be discarded as an unphilosophical assump- 
; tion. 

: 3. This theory of course denies the existence of second causes. 
. 
: 


God becomes the sole agent and the sole cause in the universe. 
The heavens and earth with all their changes and with all they 
~contain, are but the pulsations of the universal life of God. If pres- 
ervation be a continued production out of nothing, of everything 


. that exists, then every material existence, all properties of matter 
- so called, every human soul, and every human thought and feeling, 
: is as much the direct product of divine ‘omnipotence as the original 
creation. There cannot, therefore, be any causation out of God, 


or any codperation of any kind any more than when He said, Let 
there be light, and there was light. In the same manner He con- 
4 stantly now says, Let men exist with all the thoughts, purposes, 
and feelings, which constitute their nature and character for the 
time being, and they are. 


_— 


580 PART I.— THEOLOGY. [Cu. XI. -- ProvipEnce, 


4, On this theory there can be no responsibility, no sin and no 
holiness. If sin exist, it must be referred to God as much as holi- 
ness, for all is due to his creating energy. 

5. Between this system and Pantheism there is scarcely a divid- 
ing line. Pantheism merges the universe in God, but not more 
effectually than the doctrine of a continuous creation. God in the 
one case as truly as in the other, is all that lives. There is no 
power, no cause, no real existence but the efficiency and causality 
of God. This is obvious, and is generally admitted. Hagenbach ? 
says, ‘Creation out of nothing rests on Theism. It becomes deistic 
if creation and preservation are violently separated and placed in 
direct opposition to each other; and pantheistic if creation be made 
a mere moment in preservation.” ‘In creation,” says Strauss, 
‘¢ God works all, the creature which is thus first produced, noth- 
ing.”’ If, therefore, preservation is only the continuance of the same 
relation between God and the creature, it follows that God still 
effects everything and the creature nothing ; hence out of God, or 
other than God, there are no causes, not even occasional. Leib- 
nitz,” quotes Bayle as saying, “Il me semble, qu’il en faut conclure, 
que Dieu fait tout, et qu’il n’y a point dans toutes les créatures de 
causes premiéres, ni secondes, ni méme occasionelles.” And again, 
**On ne peut dire que Dieu me crée premiérement, et qu’ étant 
crée, il produise avec moi mes mouvemens et mes déterminations. 
Cela est insoutenable pour deux raisons: la premiére est, que 
quand Dieu me crée ou me conserve & cet instant, il ne me con- 
serve pas comme un étre sans forme, comme une espéce ou quelque 
autre des universaux de logique. Je suis un individu; il me crée 
et conserve comme tel, étant tuut ce que je suis dans cet instant 
avec toutes mes dépendances.” To make preservation, there- 
fore, a continued creation, leads to conclusions opposed to the 
essential truths of religion, and at variance with our necessary 
beliefs. We are forced by the constitution of our nature to be- 
lieve in the external world and in the reality of second causes. We 
know from consciousness that we are the responsible authors of 
our own acts, and that we continue identically the same substance, 
and consequently are not created out of nothing from moment to 
moment. 

This subject will come up again when treating of President 


Edwards’ theory of identity, and its application to the relation be- 
tween Adam and his race. 


1 Dogmengeschichte, 11. Zweite Hiilfte, p. 288, edit. Leipzig, 1841. 
2 Théodicée, 111. 386; Opera, edit. Berlin, 1840, p. 615. 


eS Se ee ee 


§ 2.) GOVERNMENT. | 681 


Scriptural Doctrine on the Subject. 
Between the two extremes of representing preservation as a 


mere negative act, a not willing to destroy, which denies any con- 


tinued efficiency of God in the world; and the theory which re- 
solves everything into the immediate agency of God, denying the 
reality of all second causes, is the plain doctrine of the Scriptures, 
which teaches that the continuance of the world in existence, the 
preservation of its substance, properties, and forms, is to be referred 
to the omnipresent power of God. He upholds as He creates all 
things, by the word of his power. How He does this it is vain to 
inquire. So long as we cannot tell how we move our lips, or how 
mind can operate on matter, or in what way the soul is present and 
operative in the whole body, it requires little humility to suppress 
the craving curiosity to know how God sustains the universe with 
all its hosts in being and activity. The theologians of the seven- 
teenth century endeavoured to explain this by a general concursus, 
or, as they called it, influx of God into all his creatures. It is said 
to be an “ Actus positivus et directus, quo Deus in genere in causas 
efficientes rerum conservandas influxu vero et reali influit, ut in 
natura, proprietatibus et viribus suis persistant ac permaneant.” } 
But what do we gain by saying that the soul by “a true and real 
influx’ operates in every part of the body. The fact is clearly 
revealed that God’s agency is always and everywhere exercised in 
the preservation of his creatures, but the mode in which his effi- 
ciency is exerted, further than that it is consistent with the nature 
of the creatures themselves and with the holiness and goodness of 
God, is unrevealed and inscrutable. It is best, therefore, to rest 
satisfied with the simple statement that preservation is that om- 
nipotent energy of God by which all created things, animate and 
inanimate, are upheld in existence, with all the properties and 
powers with which He has endowed them. 


§ 2. Government. 
Statement of the Doctrine. 

Providence includes not only preservation, but government. 
The latter includes the ideas of design and control. It supposes 
an end to be attained, and the disposition and direction of means 
for its accomplishment. If God governs the universe He has some 
great end, including an indefinite number of subordinate ends, 
towards which it is directed, and He must control the secuence of 

1 Hollaz, Hxamen Theologicum, edit. Leipzig 1768, p. 441. 


582 PART I.—THEOLOGY. — [Cua. XI. — Provipence 


all events, so as to render certain the accomplishment of all his 
purposes. Of this providential government the Scriptures teach, 

(1.) That it is universal, including all the creatures of God, and 

all their actions. The external world, rational and irrational crea- 
tures, things great and small, ordinary and extraordinary, are 

equally and always under the control of God. The doctrine of 

providence excludes both necessity and chance from the universe, 

substituting for them the intelligent and universal control of an in- 

finite, omnipresent God. (2.) The Scriptures also teach that this 
government of God is powerful. It is the universal sway of om- 
nipotence which renders certain the accomplishment of his designs, 

which embrace in their compass everything that occurs. (8.) That 

it is wise ; which means not only that the ends which God has in 

view are consistent with his infinite wisdom, and that the means 

employed are wisely adapted to their respective objects, but also 

that his control is suited to the nature of the creatures over which 

it is exercised. He governs the material world according to fixed 

laws which He himself has established; irrational animals by 

their instincts, and rational creatures agreeably to their nature. 

(4.) God’s providence is holy. That is, there is nothing in the 

ends proposed, the means adopted, or the agency employed, incon- 

sistent with his infinite holiness, or which the highest moral excel- 

lence does not demand. This is all that the Scriptures reveal on 

this most important and difficult subject. And here it were well 

could the subject be allowed to rest. It is enough for us to 
know that God does govern all his creatures and all their actions, 

and that his government while absolutely efficacious is infinitely 
wise and good, directed to secure the highest ends, and perfectly 
consistent with his own perfections and with the nature of his crea- 
tures. But men have insisted upon answering the questions, How 

does God govern the world? What is the relation between his 
agency and the efficiency of second causes? and especially, How 

can God’s absolute control be reconciled with the liberty of ra- 
tional agents? These are questions which never can be solved. 

But as philosophers insist upon answering them, it becomes neces- 
sary for theologians to consider those answers, and to show their 
fallacy when they conflict with the established facts of revelation 
and experience. Before considering the more important of the 
theories which have been advanced to explain the nature of God’s 
providential government, and his relation to the world, it will be 
proper to present a brief outline of the argument, in support of 

the truth of th doctrine as stated above. 


I ————— OO —<—— Oe Cl 
\ 


So ~- = 


$2, A.J GOVERNMENT. 588 


A. Proof of the Doctrine. 


This doctrine necessarily flows from the Scriptural idea of God. 
He is declared to be a personal being, infinite in wisdom, goodness, 
and power ; to be the Father of Spirits. From this it follows not 
only that He acts intelligently, ¢. e., with a view to an end, and on 
sufficient reasons, but that He must be concerned for the good of 
creatures rational and irrational, great and small. The idea that 
God would create this vast universe teeming with life in all its 
forms, and exercise no control over its to secure it from destruction 
or from working out nothing but evil, is utterly inconsistent with 
the nature of God. And to suppose that anything is too great to 
be comprehended in his control, or anything so minute as to escape 
his notice ; or that the infinitude of particulars can distract his at- 
tention, is to forget that God is infinite. It cannot require any 
effort in Him, the omnipresent and infinite intelligence, to compre- 
hend and to direct all things however complicated, numerous, or mi- 
nute. The sun diffuses its light through all space as easily as upon 
any one point. God is as much present everywhere, and with 
everything, as though He were only in one place, and had but one 
object of attention. The common objection to the doctrine of a uni- 
versal providence, founded on the idea that it is incompatible with 
the dignity and majesty of the divine Being to suppose that He con- 
cerns himself about trifles, assumes that God is a limited being ; 
that because we can attend to only one thing at a time, it must be 
so with God. The more exalted are our conceptions of the divine 
Being, the less shall we be troubled with difficulties of this kind. 


Proof from the Evidence of the Operation of Mind everywhere. 


The whole universe, so far as it can be subjected to our observa- 
tion, exhibits evidence of God’s omnipresent intelligence and con- 
trol. Mind is everywhere active. There is everywhere manifest 
the intelligent adaptation of means to an end; as well in the or- 
ganization of the animalcule which it requires the microscope to 
reveal, as in the order of the heavenly bodies. This mind is not 
in matter. Itis not a blind vis nature. It is, and must be the 
intelligence of an infinite, omnipresent Being. It is just as much 
beyond the power of a creature to form an insect, as it is to create 
the universe. And it is as unreasonable to assume that the organ- 
ized forms of the vegetable and animal worlds are due to the laws 
of nature, as it would be to assume that a printing-press could be 
constructed to compose a poem. There is no adaptation or relaticn 


584 PART 1.— THEOLOGY. [Cu. XI. — Provipence. 


between the means and the end. Wherever there is the intelligent 
adaptation of means to an end, there is evidence of the presence 
of mind. And as such evidence of mental activity is found in~ 
every part of the universe, we see God ever active and everywhere 
present in all his works. 


Argument from our Religious Nature. 


The Scriptural doctrine of a universal providence is demanded 
by the religious nature of man. It is therefore an instinctive and 
necessary belief. It is banished from the mind, or overruled only 
by persistent effort. In the first place, we cannot but regard it as 
a limitation of God to suppose Him absent either as to knowledge 
or power from any part of his creation. In the second place, our 
sense of dependence involves the conviction not only that we owe 
our existence to his will, but that it is in Him that we and all his 
creatures live, move, and have our being. In the third place, our 
sense of responsibility implies that God is cognizant of all our 
thoughts, words, and actions, and that He controls all our circum- 
stances and our destiny both in this life and in the life to come. 
This conviction is instinctive and universal. It is found in men of 
all ages, and under all forms of religion, and in all states of civili- 
zation. Men universally believe in the moral government of God; 
and they universally believe that that moral government is admin- 
istered at least in part, in this world. They see that God often 
restrains or punishes the wicked. Did this man sin, or his parents, 
that he was born blind? was the utterance of a natural feeling ; 
the expression, although erroneous as to its form, of the irrepressi- 
ble conviction that everything is ordered by God. In the fourth 
place, our religious nature demands intercourse with God. He 
must be to us the object of prayer, and the ground of confidence. 
We must look to Him in trouble and danger; we cannot refrain 
from calling upon Him for help, or thanking Him for our mercies. 
Unless the doctrine of a universal providence be true, all this is a 
delusion. Such, however, is the relation in which the Scriptures 
and the constitution of our nature assume that we stand to God, 
and in which He stands to the world. He is ever present, all- 
controlling, the hearer and answerer of prayer, giving us our daily 
mercies, and guiding us in all our ways. This doctrine of provi- 
dence, therefore, is the foundation of all practical religion, and the 
denial of it is practically atheism, for we are then without God in 
the world. It may be said that these religious feelings are due te 
our education; that men educated in the belief of witches and 


OE aS Se 


§2, A] GOVERNMENT. 585 


fairies, or supernatural agencies of any kind, refer events actually 
due to the operations of nature to the intervention of spiritual 
beings. To this it may be answered, First, that the sense of de- 
pendence, of responsibility, of obligation for mercies received, and 
of the control of outward events by the power of God, is too uni- 
versal to be accounted for by any peculiar form of education. These 
are the generic, or fundamental convictions of the human mind, 
which are manifested in more or less suitable forms, according to 
the degree of knowledge which different men possess. And sec- 


_ ondly, it is to be considered that the argument is founded on the 


truth and justness of these feelings, and not on their origin. It is 
in this case as itis with our moral convictions. Because our knowl- 
edge of what is right or wrong, and the opinions of men on that 
point, may be modified by education and circumstances, this does 
not prove that our moral nature is due to education; nor does it 
shake the convictions we entertain of the correctness of our moral 
judgments. It may be, and doubtless is true that we owe to the 
Scriptures most of our knowledge of the moral law, but this does 
not impair our confidence in the authority and truth of our views 
of duty, and of moral obligation. These religious feelings have 
a self-evidencing as well as an informing light. We know that 
théy are right, and we know that the doctrine which accords with 
them and produces them, must be true. It is, therefore, a valid 
argument for the doctrine of a universal providence that it meets 
the demands of our moral and religious nature. 


Argument from Predictions and Promises. 


A fourth general argument on this subject is derived from the 
predictions, promises, and threatenings recorded in the Word of 
God. Those predictions are not mere general declarations of the 
probable or natural consequences of certain courses of action, but 
specific revelations of the occurrence of events in the future, the 
futurition of which cannot be secured except in the exercise of an 
absolutely certain control over causes and agents both natural and 
moral. God promises to give health, long life, and prosperous sea- 
sons; or He threatens to inflict severe judgments, the desolations 
of war, famine, drought, and pestilence. Such promises and 
threatenings suppose a universal providence, a control over all the 
creatures of God, and over all their actions. As such promises 
and threatenings abound in the Word of God; as his people, and 
as all nations recognize such benefits or calamities as divine dispen- 
sations, it is evident that the doctrine of Providence underlies all 
religion, both natural and revealed. 


586 PART 1.—THEOLOGY. [Cu XI. — Provipencz. 


Argument from Experience. 

We may refer confidently on this subject to all experience. 
Every man can see that his life has been ordered by an intelligence 
and will not his own. His whole history has been determined by 
events over which he had no control, events often in themselves 
apparently fortuitous, so that he must either assume that the most 
important events are determined by chance, or admit that the 
providence of God extends to all events, even the most minute. 
What is true of individuals is true of nations. The Old Testa- 
ment is a record of God’s providential dealings with the Hebrew 
people. The calling of Abraham, the history of the patriarchs, 
of Joseph, of the sojourn of the Israelites in Egypt, of their deliv- 
erance and journey through the wilderness, of their conquest of 
the land of Canaan, and their whole subsequent history, is a con- 
tinuous record of the control of God over all their circumstances, 
—a control which is represented as extending to all events. In 
like manner the history of the world reveals to an intelligent eye 
the all-pervading providence of God, as clearly as the heavens de- 
clare his majesty and power. 


B. The Scriptures teach God’s Providence over Nature. * 


We find that the Bible asserts that the providential agency of 
God is exercised over all the operations of nature. This is asserted 
with regard to the ordinary operations of physical laws: the motion 
of the heavenly bodies, the succession of the seasons, the growth 
and decay of the productions of the earth ; and the falling of the 
rain, hail, and snow. It is He who guides Arcturus in his course, 
who makes the sun to rise, and the grass to grow. These events 
are represented as due to the omnipresent agency of God and are 
determined, not by chance, nor by necessity, but by his will. Paul 
says (Acts xiv. 17), that God * left not himself without witness ” 
even among the heathen, “in that He did good, and gave us rain 
from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and 
gladness.” Our Lord says (Matt. v. 45), God “ maketh his sun to 
rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and 
on the unjust.” He clothes “the grass of the field, which to-day 
is, and to-morrow is cast into the oven.” (Matt. vi. 30.) In like 
manner the more unusual and striking operations of natural laws, 
earthquakes, tempests, and pestilences, are said to be sent, gov- 
erned, and determined by Him, so that all the effects which they 
produce are referred to his purpose. He makes the winds his 


OC  —  ———— — 


SSO 


§ 2, B.] GOVERNMENT. 587 


messengers, and the lightnings are his ministering spirits. Even 
apparently fortuitous events, such as are determined by causes so 
rapid or so inappreciable as to elude our notice, the falling of the 
lot ; the flight of an arrow ; the number of the hairs of our heads, 
are all controlled by the omnipresent God. “ Are not two spar- 
rows sold for a farthing? and one of them shall not fall on the 
ground without your Father.” (Matt. x. 29.) 


Providence extends over the Animal World. 


The Scriptures teach that irrational animals are the objects of 
God’s providential care. He fashions their bodies, He calls them 
into the world, sustains them in being, and supplies their wants. 
In his hand is the life of every living thing. (Job xii. 10.) The 
Psalmist says (civ. 21), “* The young lions roar after their prey, 
and seek their meat from God.” Verses 27, 28, ‘“* These wait all 
upon thee; that thou mayest give them their meat in due season. 
That thou givest them, they gather: thou openest thy hand, they 
are filled with good.” Matt. vi. 26, ‘ Behold the fowls of the 
air: for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns; 
yet your heavenly Father feedeth them.” Acts xvii. 25, “ He 


giveth to all life and breath, and all things.”” Such representations 


are not to be explained away as poetical modes of expressing the 
idea that the laws of nature, as ordained of God, are so arrunged as 
to meet the necessities of the animal creation, without any special 
intervention of his providence. It is not the fact, merely, that the 
world, as created by God, is adapted to meet the wants of his 
creatures, that is asserted in the Scriptures, but that his creatures 
depend on the constant exercise of his care. He gives or withholds 
what they need according to his good pleasure. When our Lord 
put in the lips of his disciples the petition, ‘ Give us this day our 
daily bread,” He recognized the fact that all living creatures de- 
pend on the constant intervention of God for the supply of their 
daily wants. 
Over Nations. 

The Bible teaches that the providential government of God ex- 
tends over nations and communities of men. Ps. Ixvi. 7, ‘He 
ruleth by his power forever ; his eyes behold the nations: let not 
the rebellious exalt themselves.”’ Dan. iv. 35, ‘*‘ He doeth accord- 
ing to his-will in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants 
of the earth.” Dan. ii. 21, “* He changeth the times and the 
seasons ; He removeth kings and setteth up kings.” Dan. iv. 


25, * The Most High ruleth in the kingdom of men and giveth it 


588 PART L—THEOLOGY. [Cu XI. — Provence. 


to whomsoever He will.” Is. x. 5, 6, ““O Assyrian, the rod of mine 
anger, and the staff in their hand is my indignation, I will send 
him against an hypocritical nation.” Verse 7, ‘ Howbeit he 
meaneth not so, neither doth his heart think so.’’ Verse 15, “Shall 
the axe boast itself against him that heweth therewith? or shall 
the saw magnify itself against him that shaketh it? as if the rod 
should shake itself against them that lift it up, or as if the staff 
should lift up itself as though it were not wood.”” The Scriptures 
are full of this doctrine. God uses the nations with the absolute 
control that a man uses a rod or a staff. They are in his hands, 
and He employs them to accomplish his purposes. He breaks them 
in pieces as a potter’s vessel, or He exalts them to greatness, ac- 
cording to his good pleasure. 


Over Individuals. 


The providence of God extends not only over nations, but also 
over individuals. The circumstances of every man’s birth, life, 
and death, are ordered by God. Whether we are born in a 
heathen or in a Christian land, in the Church or out of it; whether 
weak or strong; with many, or with few talents; whether we are 
prosperous or afflicted ; whether we live a longer or a shorter time, 
are not matters determined by chance, or by the unintelligent 
sequence of events, but by the will of God. 1 Sam. ii. 6, 7, 
“The Lorp killeth and maketh alive: He bringeth down to the 
grave, and bringeth up. The Lorp maketh poor and maketh 
rich, He bringeth low and lifteth up.” Is. xlv. 5, “I am 
the Lorp (the absolute ruler), and there is none else; there is 
no God besides me: I girded thee, though thou hast not known 
me.” Prov. xvi. 9, “*A man’s heart deviseth his way: but 
the Lorp directeth his steps.” Ps. Ixxv. 6, 7, ‘“‘ Promotion 
cometh neither from the east, nor from the west, nor from the 
south. But God is the judge (ruler): he putteth down one, and 
setteth up another.” Ps. xxxi. 15, ‘* My times (the vicissitudes 
of life) are in thy hands.” Acts xvii. 26, God “hath made of 
one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the 
earth, and hath determined the times before appointed (i. e., the 
turning points in history) and the bounds of their habitation.” 


God’s Providence in relation to Free Acts. 


The Bible no less clearly teaches that God exercises a control- 
ling power over the free acts of men, as well as over their external 
circumstances. This is true of all their acts, good and evil. It is 


§ 2, B.] GOVERNMENT. 589 


asserted in general terms, that his dominion extends over their 
whole inward life, and especially over their good acts. Prov. 
xvi. 1, “ The preparations of the heart in man and the answer 
of the tongue, is from the Lorp.” Prov. xxi. 1, “The king’s 
heart is in the hand of the Lorp, as the rivers of water: He 
turneth it whithersoever He will.” Ezra vii. 27, ‘Blessed be 
the Lorp God of -our fathers, which hath put such a thing as this 
in the king’s heart, to beautify the house of the Lorp.” Ex. iii. 
21, “I will give this people favour in the sight of the Egyptians.” 
Ps. cxix. 36, “Incline my heart unto thy testimonies.” Ps. exiv. 
4, “Incline not my heart to any evil thing.” A large part of 
the predictions, promises, and threatenings of the word of God are 
founded on the assumption of this absolute control over the free 
acts of his creatures. Without this there can be no government 
of the world and no certainty as to its issue. The Bible is filled 
with prayers founded on this same assumption. All Christians be- 
lieve that the hearts of men are in the hand of God; that He 
works in them both to will and to do according to his good 
pleasure. 


The Relation of God’s Providence to Sin. 


With regard to the sinful acts of men, the Scriptures teach, 
(1.) That they are so under the control of God that they can 
occur only by his permission and in execution of his purposes. 
He so guides them in the exercise of their wickedness that the 
particular forms of its manifestation are determined by his will. 
In 1 Chron. x. 4-14 it is said that Saul slew himself, but it is 
elsewhere said that the Lord slew him and turned the kingdom 
unto David. So also it is said, that he hardened the heart of Pha- 
raoh ; that He hardened «the spirit of Sihon the king of Hesh- 
bon ; that He turned the hearts of the heathen to hate his people ; 
that He blinds the eyes of men, and sends them strong delusion 
that they may believe a lie; that He stirs up the nations to war. 
“ God,” it is said, in Rev. xvii. 17, “hath put in their hearts to 
fulfil his will, and to agree, and give their kingdom unto the beast, 
until the words of God shall be fulfilled.” (2.) The Scriptures 
teach that the wickedness of men is restrained within prescribed 
gounds. Ps. Ixxvi. 10, “Surely the wrath of man shall praise 
thee: the remainder of wrath shalt thou restrain.” 2 Kings xix. 
28, “‘ Because thy rage against me, and thy tumult is come up into 
mine ears, therefore I will put my hook in thy nose, and my bridle 


in thy lips, and I will turn thee back by the way by which thou 


590 PART L—THEOLOGY.  [Cn. XI. — Provipence 


camest.” (3.) Wicked actions are overruled for good. The 
wicked conduct of Joseph’s brethren, the obstinacy and disobedi- 
ence of Pharaoh, the lust of conquest and thirst for plunder by 
which the heathen rulers were controlled in their invasions of 
the Holy Land; above all, the crucifixion of Christ, the persecu- 
tions of the Church, the revolutions and wars among the nations, 
have been all so overruled by Him who sitteth as ruler in the heav- 
ens, as to fulfil his wise and merciful designs. (4.) The Scriptures 
teach that God’s providence in relation to the sins of men, is 
such that the sinfulness thereof proceedeth only from the creature 
and not from God; who neither is nor can be the author or ap- 
prover of sin. 1 John ii. 16, “ All that is in the world, the lust 
of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not 
of the Father (not from Him as its source or author), but is of 
the world.” James i. 13, “Let no man say when he is tempted, 
I am tempted of God: for God cannot be tempted with evil, nei- 
ther tempteth he any man.” Jer. vii. 9, ‘* Will ye steal, murder, 
and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and burn incense unto 
Baal, and walk after other gods whom ye know not; and come 
and stand before me in this house, which is called by my name, 
and say, We are delivered to do all these abominations ? ” 

Thus the fact that God does govern all his creatures and all 
their actions, is clearly revealed in the Scriptures. And that fact 
is the foundation of all religion. It is the ground of the consola- 
tion of his people in all ages; and it may be said to be the in- 
tuitive conviction of all men, however inconsistent it may be with 
their philosophical theories, or with their professions. The fact of 
this universal providence of God is all the Bible teaches. It 
nowhere attempts to inform us how it is that God governs all things, 
or how his effectual control is to be reconciled with the efficiency 
of second causes. All the attempts of philosophers and theolo- 
gians to explain that point, may be pronounced failures, and worse 
than failures, for they not only raise more difficulties than they 
solve, but in almost all instances they include principles or lead to 
conclusions inconsistent with the plain teachings of the word of 
God. These theories are all founded on some @ priori principle 
which is assumed on no higher authority than human reason. 


y8, A.) GOVERNMENT. 59t 


§ 8. Different Theories of the Divine Government. 


A. The Deistical Theory of God’s Relation to the World. 


The first of the general views of God’s relation to the world is 
that which has ever been widely adopted by Rationalists, Deists, 
and men of the world. It is founded on the assumption that the 
Supreme Being is too exalted to concern Himself with the trifling 
concerns of his creatures here on earth. He made the world and 
impressed upon it certain laws ; endowing matter with its proper- 
ties, and rational beings with the powers of free agency, and hav- 
ing done this, he leaves the world to the guidance of these general 
laws. According to this view, the relation which God bears to the 
universe is that of a mechanist to a machine. When an artist has 
made a watch it goes of itself, without his intervention. He is 
never called to interfere with its operation, except to remedy some 
defect. But as no such defect can be assumed in the works of 
God, there is no call for his intervention, and He does not interfere. 
All things come to pass in virtue of the operation of causes which 
He created and set in motion at the beginning. According to this 
view God in no wise determines the effects of natural causes, nor 
controls the acts of free agents. The reason that one season is 
propitious and the earth produces her fruits in abundance, and that 
another is the reverse ; that one year pestilence sweeps over the 
land, and another year is exempted from such desolation ; that of 
two ships sailing from the same port, the one is wrecked and the 
other has a prosperous voyage; that the Spanish Armada was dis- 
persed by a storm and Protestant England saved from papal dom- 
ination; that Cromwell and his companions were arrested and 
prevented from sailing for America, which decided the fate of 
religious liberty in Great Britain, —that all such events are as they 
are, must, according to this theory, be referred to chance, or the 
blind operation of natural causes. God has nothing to do with 
them. He has abandoned the world to the government of physical 
laws and the affairs of men to their own control. This view of 
God’s relation to the world is so thoroughly anti-Scriptural and 
irreligious that it never has been, and never can be adopted by any 
Christian church. So long as even the simple words of our Lord 
are remembered and believed, so long must this doctrine be rejected 
with indignation. ‘Consider the ravens ; for they neither sow nor 
reap; which neither have storehouse nor barn; and God feedeth 
them: how much more are ye better than the fowls?” ‘ Your 


592 PART I.—THEOLOGY. [Cu XI. — Provence, 


Father knoweth that ye have need of these things. But rather 
seek ye the kingdom of God; and all these things shall -be added 
unto you.” Our Lord, therefore, teaches us to confide in the 
universal providence of God which supplies the wants and controls 
the destiny of all his creatures, so that a hair does not fall from our 
heads without his notice. 


B. Theory of Entire Dependence. 


Another theory, the very opposite of the one just mentioned, is 
founded on the principle that absolute dependence includes the 
idea that God is the only cause. This principle has been widely 
adopted, even in the Church. It has been strenuously advocated 
by many theists, not only among the schoolmen, but by some of 
the Reformers, and by a large class of modern theologians. There 
was a class of the scholastic divines who were virtually pantheistic 
in their philosophical views. John Scotus Erigena had taught, 
in the ninth century, that ‘omnis visibilis et invisibilis creatura 
theophania, 7. e., divina apparitio recte potest appellari.”” He had 


his followers, even in the thirteenth century.2, Those. who did not 


go the length of asserting that ‘“* Deus est essentia omnium crea- 
turarum et esse omnium,” still maintained that He so operated in 
all as to be the only efficient cause. According to Thomas Aquinas, 
they argued, ‘“ Nulla insufficientia est Deo attribuenda. Si igitur 
Deus operatur in omni operante, sufficienter in quolibet operatur. 
Superfluum igitur esset quod agens creatum, aliquid operaretur.” 
Again, “Quod Deum operari in quolibet operante, aliqui sic in- 
tellexerunt, quod nulla virtus creata aliquid operaretur in rebus, 
sed solus Deus immediate omnia operaretur: puta quod ignis non 
calefaceret, sed Deus in igne. Et similiter de omnibus aliis.”? Of 
all the Reformers, Zwingle was the most inclined to this extreme 
view of the dependence of the creature on God. ‘ Omnis virtus,”’ 
he says,* ‘‘numinis virtus est, nec enim quicquam est quod non ex 
illo, in illo et per illud sit, imo illud ipsum sit —creata inquam 
virtus dicitur, eo quod in novo subjecto et nova specie, universalis 
aut generalis ista virtus exhibetur. Deus est causa rerum universa- 
rum, reliqua omnia non sunt vere causze.> Constat causas secundas 
non rite causas vocari. . . . . Essentiam, virtutem, et operationem 
_habent non suam sed numinis. Instrumenta igitur sunt. Vici- 


1 De Divisione Nature, lib. iii. 19, edit. Monast. Guestphal. 1838, p. 240. 

2 See Rixner’s Geschichte der Philosophie, vol. ii. § 40, p. 72. 

8 Summa Theologic, part 1., quest. cv., art. 5, edit. Cologne, 1640, pp. 192, 193, 
4 De Providentia Dei; Works, edit. Turici, 1832, vol. iy. p. 85. 

5 Ibid. Page 95. ’ 6 Ibid. Page 96. 


7 


ee 


§ 3, B.) GOVERNMENT, ; 593 


niora ista, quibus causarum nomen damus, non jure causas esse sed 
manus et organa, quibus eterna mens operatur.”! Calvin did 
not go so far, although he uses such language as the following, 
when speaking of inanimate things, “Sunt nihil aliud quam instru- 
menta, quibus Deus assidue instillat quantum vult efficacie et pro 
suo arbitrio ad hance vel illam actionem flectit et convertit.”2 He 
admits, however, that matter has its own properties, and second 
causes a real efficiency. The whole tendency of the Cartesian 
philosophy, which came into vogue in the seventeenth century, was 
to merge second causes into the first cause, and it thus led the way 
to idealism and pantheism. Malebranche admitted, on the testi- 
mony of Scripture, which declares that God created the heaven and 
the earth, that the external world has a real existence. But he 
denied that it could produce any effects, or that the soul could in 
any way act upou matter. We see all things in God. That is, 
when we perceive anything out of ourselves, the perception is nut 
due to the impression made by the external object, but to the im- 
mediate agency of God. And the activity of our own minds is 
only a form of the activity of God. The first fruit of this system 
was avowed idealism, as all evidence of the existence of an exter- 
nal world was destroyed; and the second was the pantheism of 
Spinoza, which Leibnitz calls Cartesianism en outre. It must be 
admitted that the devout desire of the Reformed theologians to 
vindicate the sovereignty and supremacy of God, in opposition to 
all forms of Pelagian and semi-Pelagian doctrine, led many of them 
to go to an extreme in depreciating the efficiency of second causes, 
and in unduly exalting the omnipresent efficiency of God. Schwei- 
zer® represents the great body of the Reformed theologians as 
teaching that the dependence of creatures on the Creator super- 
sedes all efficiency of second causes. ‘ Die schlechthinige Abhan- 
gigkeit des Bestehens und Verlaufes der Welt gestattet keinerlei 
andere Ursichlichkeiten als nur die gottliche, so dass Zwischenur- 
sachen nur seine Instrumente und Organe sind, er die durch ihre 
Gesammtheit wie durch alle einzelnen Zwischenursachen allein 
hindurchwirkende Causalitat. Dieses ist er vermége der presentia 
essentialis numinis oder doch divine virtutis, welche das Sein alles 
Seins, die Bewegung aller Bewegungen ist.”” This is Schweizer’s 
own doctrine, as it is that of the whole school of Schleiermacher, 
to which he belongs; but that it is not the doctrine of the Reformed . 


1 Zwingle, iv. 97. 
2 Institutio, 1. xvi. 2, edit. Berlin, 1834, vol. i. p. 185. 
8 Glaubenslehre der Reformirten Kirche, p. 318. 


VOL. I. 38 


594. . PART L—THEOLOGY. [Cu. XI. — Provip=ncz. 


theologians is plain from their all teaching the doctrine of concursus, 
which Schweizer admits to be inconsistent with the assumption 
that God is the sole cause of all things. It was this false assumption 
that no creature can act; that dependence on God is absolute ; and 
that all power however manifested is the power of God, which led 
to the doctrine of a continued creation, as stated when speaking of 
the efficiency of God in the preservation of the world. It led also 
to the doctrine of occasional causes; that 1s, to the theory that 
what we call second causes have no real efficiency, but are only 
the occasions on which God manifests his power in a particular 
way. The world of matter and mind exists indeed, but it is per- 
fectly inert. It is only the instrument or means by which the 
manifold and everywhere. present efficiency of God is manifested. 
‘‘Consideremus,” says Leibnitz, “‘eorum sententiam, qui rebus 
creatis veram, et propriam actionem adimunt, . .. . qui putant 
non res agere, sed Deum ad rerum presentiam, et secundum rerum 
aptitudem; adeoque res occasiones esse, non causas, et recipere, 
non efficere aut elicere.”” 1 The*same views of the dependence of 
creatures on God lies at the foundation of the whole system of 
Dr. Emmons. He held that if any creature were endowed with 
activity or power to act, it would be independent of God. ‘ We 
cannot conceive,” he says, “* that even Omnipotence itself is able to 
form independent agents, because this would be to endow them 
with divinity. And since all men are dependent agents, all their 
motions, exercises, or actions must originate in a divine efficiency.” 
This is not to be understood as simply asserting the necessity of 
a divine concwrsus in order to the operation of second causes, for 
Emmons expressly teaches that God creates all the volitions of the 
soul, and effects by his almighty power all changes in the material 
world. 
Objections to this Doctrine of Dependence. 

To this whole doctrine, which thus denies the existence of second 
causes, and refers all action both in the material and spiritual world 
to God, it is to be objected, (1.) That it is founded on an arbi- 
trary assumption. It starts with the @ priort idea of an abso- 
lute and infinite being, and rejects everything inconsistent with 
that idea. It cannot be proved that it is inconsistent with the 
nature of God that He should call into existence creatures capa- 
ble of originating action. It is enough that such creatures 
should derive all their powers from God, and be subject to his 
control in all their exercises. (2.) This doctrine contradicts the 

1 De ipsa Natura, 10 ; Works, edit. Berlin, 1840, p. 157. 


§ 8, C.] GOVERNMENT. 595 


consciousness of every man. We know, as certainly as we know 
anything, that we are free agents, and that free agency is the 
power of self-determination, or of originating our own acts. It 
contradicts not only our self-consciousness, but the laws of belief 
which God has impressed upon our nature. It is one of those laws 
that we should believe in the reality of the objects of our senses ; 
and that belief involves the conviction not only that they really 
are, but also that they are the causes of the impressions which they 
mak> on our sensibility. It is to put philosophy in conflict with 
common sense, and with the universal convictions of men, to teach 
that all this is a delusion; that when we see a tree we are mis- 
taken, that God immediately creates that impression in our mind; 
or that when we will to move the power is not in us, that it is not 
we that move, but God that moves us; or when we think, that it is 
God creates the thought. (3.) As has been before remarked, this 
system naturally leads, and has led to idealism and pantheism, and 
therefore is utterly inconsistent with all liberty and responsibility, 
and destroys the possibility of moral distinctions. 


C. The Doctrine that there is no Efficiency except in Mind. 


According to this view, there are no such things as physical 
forces. The mind of man is endowed with the power of producing 
effects ; but apart from mind, divine or created, there is no efficiency 
in the universe. This doctrine finds its way into many theological, 
as well as philosophical disquisitions. Thus Prmcipal Tulloch says, 
a cause is “coincident with an agent.” It “therefore implies 
mind. More definitely, and in its full conception, it implies a 
rational will.” ! Physical causes are therefore regarded as the ever 
operating will of God. ‘The idea of causation,” he says, “ we 
found to resolve itself into that of the operation of a rational mind 
or will in nature.”2 Providence is nothing else than a “ continued 
forth-putting of that [originally creative] efficiency.” ? Dr. Tulloch 
very correctly assumes that a cause is that which has power to 
produce effects ; and that we get our idea of power, and therefore 
of the nature of causation, from our own consciousness of efficiency. 
He hence infers that, as mind is the only cause of which we have 
immediate knowledge, therefore it is the only one that exists. But 
this is a non-sequitur. That mind is a cause, is no proof that elec- 
tricity may not be a cause. The facts, as understood by the mass 


1 Theism; The Witness of Reason and Nature to an All-Wise and Beneficent Creator, 
By the Rev. John Tulloch, D. D., Principal and Primarius Professor of Theology, St. Mary’s 
College, St. Andrews, edit. New York, 1855, p. 43. 

2 Ibid. p. 47. ; 8 Ibid. p. 93. 


596 PART I.— THEOLOGY.  [Cu. XI.— ProvipEncr 


of men are, First, we are conscious of efficiency, or the power 
to produce effects. Second, the exercise of this power awakens, 
or gives occasion to the intuition of the universal and necessary 
truth that every effect must have an appropriate cause. ‘Thirdly, 
as we see around us effects of different kinds, it is a law of reason 
that they should be referred to causes of different kinds. The 
evidence that this is a Jaw of reason, is the fact that men every 
where assume physical causes to account for physical effects, as 
uniformly as they assume mind for intelligent effects. The theory, 
however, which resolves all forcés into the everywhere operative 
will of God has great attractions. It makes a way of escape from 
many of the difficulties which beset the question of God’s relation 
to the world. Even men devoted to the study of nature get so 
puzzled by such questions, as, What is matter? or What is force ? 
that they are disposed, in many cases, to merge all things into 
God. The Duke of Argyle says, “‘ Science, in the modern doc- 
trine of Conservation of Energy and the Convertibility of Forces, is 
already getting something like a firm hold of the idea that all kinds 
of Force are but forms or manifestations of some one Central Force 
issuing from some one Fountain-head of Power. Sir John Herschel 
has not hesitated to say, that ‘it is but reasonable to regard the — 
Force of Gravitation as the direct or indirect result of a conscious- 
ness or a will existing somewhere.’ And even if we cannot cer- 
tainly identify Force in all its forms with the direct energies of the 
One Omnipresent ahd all-pervading Will, it is at least in the high- 
est degree unphilosophical to assume the contrary, — to speak or to 
think as if the Forces of Nature were either independent of, o1 
even separate from, the Creator’s Power.” } 

It was remarked on a previous page that Wallace still more 
decidedly adopts the same view. «In his book on “ Natural Selec- 
tion,” after he had defended Darwin’s theory on the origin of spe- 
cies (except in its application to man), he comes in the end to 
start the question, What is matter? This question he answers by 
saying, ‘* Matter is essentially force, and nothing but force. Mat- 
ter, as popularly understood, does not exist, and is, in fact, philo- 
sophicaily inconceivable.” ? The next question is, What is force ? 
The ultimate answer to this is, that it is the will of God. « If,” 
says Mr. Wallace, ‘ we have traced one force, however minute, to 
an origin in our own Writ1, while we have no knowledge of any 
other primary cause of force, it does not seem an improbable con- 


1 Reign of Law, 5th ed. London, 1867, p. 128. 
2 Natural Selection, pp. 365, 366. 


§ 8, D.) GOVERNMENT. 597 


clusion that all force may be will force; and thus the whole uni- 
verse is not merely dependent on, but actually 2s, the Wii1 of 
higher intelligences or of one Supreme Intelligence.” ! 

This theory is substantially the same as that previously men- 
tioned. They differ only as to the extent of their application. 
According to the doctrine of ** Absolute Dependence,” God is the 
only agent in the universe ; according to the doctrine just stated, 
He is the only agent, or his will is the only energy in the material 
world. Matter is nothing. ‘It does not exist.” It is nothing 
but force, and force is God; therefore the external world is God. 
In other words, all the impressions and sensations made upon us, 
as we suppose, by things without us, are in fact made by the im- 
mediate power of God: there is no earth; there are no stars; no 
men or women; no fathers or mothers. Men cannot believe this. 
By the constitution of our nature, which no man can alter, we are 
forced to believe in the reality of the external world; that matter 
is, and that it is the proximate cause of the effects which we attrib- 
ute to its agency. 


D. Theory of Preéstablished Harmony. 


Another assumption made by philosophers is, that one substance 
cannot act upon another substance of a different kind; what is ex- 
tended cannot act upon what is not extended ; matter cannot act on 
mind, nor mind on matter. It is, however, a fact of consciousness 
and of daily observation, that, apparently at least, material objects 
by which we are surrounded are the causes of certain sensations 
and perceptions, that is, they act upon our minds; and it is no less 
a matter of consciousness that our minds do act, at least so it seems, 
upon our bodies. We can move, we can control the action of all 
our voluntary muscles. This, however, must be a delusion if 
matter cannot act on mind nor mind on matter. To account for 
the relation in which mind and matter stand to each other in this 
world, and for the apparent action of the one on the other, Leibnitz 
adopted the theory of a preéstablished harmony. God created two 
independent worlds, the one of matter, the other of mind; each has 
its own nature and its own principle of activity. All the changes 
in matter, all the actions of our bodies, are determined from a 
source within the matter and within our bodies, and would occur 
in the same order in which they actually take place if no created 
mind were in existence. In like manner, all the varying states of 


1 Contribution to the Theory of Natural Selection, by Alired Russel Wallace. London, 
1870, p. 368. 


598 PART I.—THEOLOGY.  [Cu. XI.— Provence 


the human mind, all its sensations, perceptions, and volitions are 
determined from within, and would be just what they are though 
the external world had no existence. We should see the same 
sights, hear the same sounds, have the same volitions to move this 
or that muscle, though there were nothing to see, hear, or move. 
These two worlds, thus automatically moved, coexist, and are made 
to act in harmony by a prearrangement divinely ordered. Hence 
the sensation of burning arises in the mind, not because fire acts on 
the body and the body on the mind, but because, by this preéstab- 
lished harmony, these events are made to coincide in time and 
space. From eternity it was determined that I should have a 
volition to move my arm at a certain time; and from eternity it 
was determined that the arm should move at that time. The two 
events therefore concur as immediate antecedent and consequent, 
but the volition stands in no causal relation to the motion. The voli- 
tion would have been formed had there been no arm to move ; and 
the arm would have moved, although the volition had never been 
formed. Leibnitz’s hand would have written all his wonderful books, 
mathematical and philosophical, and conducted all his controversies 
with Bayle, Clarke, and Newton, though his soul had never been 
created. 
E. Doctrine of Concursus. 

A far more widely adopted and permanently influential princi- 
ple is that no second cause can act until acted upon. Nothing 
created can originate action. This principle, carried to a greater 
or less extent, was adopted by Augustine, by the schoolmen, by 
‘the Thomists and Dominicans in the Latin Church, and by Protes- 
tants, whether Lutherans, Reformed, or Remonstrants. It was as- 
sumed as a philosophical axiom, to which all theological doctrines 
should be conformed. “Ad gubernationem concursus pertinet, 
quo Deus non solum dat vim agendi causis secundis et eam conser- 
vat, sed et easdem movet et applicat ad agendum. Precursus 
etiam dicitur, nam causz secunds non movent nisi mote.”2  Pri- 
ma causa,” says Turrettin, “‘ est primum movens in omni actione, 
ideo causa secunda non potest movere, nisi moveatur, nec agere, 
nisi acta a prima; alioqui erit principium sui motus, et sic non 
amplius esset causa secunda, sed prima.”3 In the production of 
every effect, therefore, there is the efficiency of two causes, the 
rrst and second. But this is not to be considered as involving two 


1 See his Systeme Nouveau de la Nature; Works, edit. Berlin, 1840, p- 124. 
2 Mares, Collegium Theologicum, loc. iv. 29; Groéningen, 1659, p. 42, b. 
8 Locus Vi. questio, v. 7, edit. Edinburgh, 1847, vol. i. p. 455. 


38, Ej GOVERNMENT. . 599 


operations, as when two horses are attached to the same vehicle, 
which is drawn partly by the one and partly by the other. The 
efficiency of the first cause is in the second, and not merely with it. 
Deus ‘immediate influit in actionem et effectum creature, ita ut 
idem effectus non a solo Deo, nec a sola creatura, nec partim a 
Deo, partim a creatura, sed una eademque efficientia totali simul a 
Deo et creatura producatur, a Deo videlicet ut causa universali et 
prima, a creatura ut particulari et secunda.”! ‘Non est re ipsa 
alia actio influxus Dei, alia operatio creaturee, sed una et indivisi- 
bilis actio, utrumque respiciens et ab utroque pendens, a Deo ut 
causa universali, a creatura ut particulari.”’ ? 

This concursus is represented, first, as general ; an influence of 
the omnipresent power of God not only sustaining creatures and 
their properties and powers, but exciting each to act according to 
its nature. It is analogous to the general influence of the sun 
which affects different objects in different ways. The same solar | 
ray softens wax and hardens clay. It calls the germinating force 
of all seeds into action, but does not determine the nature of that 
action. All seeds are thus quickened; but one develops as wheat, 
another as barley, not because of the solar force, but because of its 
own peculiar nature. This is all that the Franciscans and Jesuits 
among the Romanists, and the Remonstrants among the Protes- 
tants allow. The Thomists and Dominicans among the former, 
and the Augustinian theologians generally, insist that, besides this 
general concursus, there is also a previous, simultaneous, and deter- 
mining concourse of the first, in all second causes, both in the 
cause and in the effect; that is, not only exciting to action, but 
sustaining, guiding, and determining the act ; so that its being as 
it is, and not otherwise, is to be referred to the first, and not to the 
second cause in every case. On this point, however, the Reformed 
theologians are not agreed, as Turrettin admits. ‘ Ex nostris,” he 
says, “ quidam concursum tantum previum volunt quoad bona opera 
gratize, sed in aliis omnibus simultaneum sufficere existimant.” 8 By 
previous. concursus is meant, he says, ** Actio Dei, qua in causas 
earumque principia influendo, creaturas excitat, et agendum pre- 
movet, et ad hoc potius quam ad illud agendum applicat. Stmul- 
faneus vero est per quam Deus actionem creature, quoad suam en- 
titatem, vel substantiam producit ; quo una cum creaturis in earum 
actiones et effectus influere ponitur, non vero in creaturas ipsas.” 


1 Quenstedt, Theologia, cap. xu. i. 15, edit. Leipzig, 1715, vol. i. p. 760. 
2 Ibid. cap. X11. ii. 3, vol. i. p. 782. 8 Locus vr. quest. v. 6 
4 Locus vi. quest, v. 5. 


. 


600 PART [.—THEOLUGY.  [Cu. XI. — ProvipENcE. 


It is admitted that these do not differ really, “ quia concursus si- 
multaneus, nihil aliud est, quam concursus preevius continuatus.” 
This previous concursus is also called predetermining. ‘“ Id ipsum 

etiam nomine Predeterminationis, seu Premotionis solet designari, 
— qua Deus ciet et applicat causam secundam ad agendum, adeoque 
antecedenter ad omnem operationem creature, seu prius natura et 
ratione quam creatura operetur, eam realiter et efficaciter mcxet ad 
agendum in singulis actionibus, adeo ut sine hac preemotione causa 
secunda operari non possit, ea vero posita impossibile sit in sensu 
composito causam secundam non illud idem agere ad quod a prima 
causa preemovetur.”’ } 

Concursus, therefore, assumes, (1.) That God gives to second 
causes the power of acting. (2.) That He preserves them in being 
and vigour. (3.) That He excites and determines second causes 
to act. (4.) That He directs and governs them to the predeter- 
mined end. All this, however, was so understood that — 

1. The effect produced or the act performed is to be referred to 
the second, and not to the first cause. When the fire burns, it is 
to the fire, and not to God that the effect is to be attributed. When 
a man speaks, it is the man, and not God who utters the words. 
When the moon raises the tidal wave, and the wave dashes a ves- 
sel on the shore, the effect is to be attributed, not to the moon, but 
to the momentum of the wave. The force of gravity acts uni- 
formly on all ponderable matter, and yet that foree may be indefi- 
nitely varied in the effects which are produced by intervening 
causes, whether necessary or free. 

2. The doctrine of coneursus does not deny the efficiency of sec- 
ond causes. They are real causes, having a principium agendi in 
themselves. 

3. The agency of God neither supersedes, nor in any way inter- 
feres with the efficiency of second causes. ‘+ Ad providentiam di- 
vinam non pertinet, naturam rerum corrumpere, sed servare : unde 
omnia movet secundum eorum conditionem: ita quod ex causis 
necessariis per motionem divinam consequuntur effectus ex neces- 
sitate ; ex causis autem contingentibus sequuntur effectus contin- 
gentes. Quia igitur voluntas est activum principium non deter- 
minatum ad unum, sed indifferenter se habens ad multa, sic Deus 
ipsam movet, quod non ex necessitate ad unum determinat, sed 
remanet motus ejus contingens et non necessarius, nisi in his ad 
qu naturaliter movetur.” 2“ Concurrit Deus cum naturalibus ad 


1 Turrettin, locus vi. quest. v. 6. 
2 Aquinas, Summa, part u. i. quest. x. art 4, edit. Cologne, 1640, p. 22 of second set. 


§3, E.] _ G@OVERNMENT. 601 


modum caus® naturalis, cum causis liberis per modum cause lis 
bere.” 1} “Duo sunt causarum genera, alize definite et generales, 
que eodem modo semper agunt, ut ignis qui urit, sol qui lucet ; 
alize indefinite et liber, que possunt agere vel non agere, hoc vel 
illo modo agere: ita Deus naturam earum conservat, et cum illis 
jaxta eam in agendo concurrit; cum definitis, ut ipse eas deter- 
minet sine determinatione propria ; cum indefinitis vero et liberis, 
ut ips quoque se determinent proprio rationis judicio, et Libera vo- 
luntatis dispositione, quam Deus non aufert homini, quia sic opus 
suum destrueret, sed relinquit et confirmat.” 2 To the same effect 
the ‘“* Westminster Confession” 8 says: God ordereth events “ to 
fall out according to the nature of second causes, either necessa- 
rily, freely, or contingently.” 

4. From this it follows that the efficiency or agency of God is 
not the same in relation to all kinds of events. It is one thing in 
codperating with material causes, another in codperating with free 
agents. Itis one thing in relation to good acts, and another in 
relation to evil actions; one thing in nature, and another in grace. 

5. The divine coneursus is not inconsistent with the liberty of 
free agents. ‘* Moveri voluntarie est moveri ex se, id est, a prin- 
cipio intrinseco. Sed illud principium intrinsecum potest esse ab 
alio principio extrinseco. Et sic moveri ex se, non repugnat ei, 
quod movetur ab alio. —Illud quod movetur ab altero, dicitur cogi, 
si moveatur contra inclinationem propriam: sed si moveatur ab alio 
quod sibi dat propriam inclinationem, non dicitur cogi. Sic igitur 
Deus movendo voluntatem, non cogit ipsam: quia dat ei ejus pro- 
priam inclinationem.”* This is undoubtedly true. Nothing is 
more certain from Scripture than that God is the author of faith 
and repentance. They are his gifts. They are blessings for 
which we pray, and which He promises. Yet nothing is more cer- 
tain from consciousness, than that faith and repentance are our own 
free acts. Therefore moveri ab alio is not inconsistent with movert 
ex se. On this point Turrettin ® says: ‘‘*Cum providentia non 
concurrat cum voluntate humana, vel per coactionem, cogendo vo- 
luntatem invitam, vel determinando physice, ut rem brutam et 
recam absque ullo judicio, sed rationaliter, flectendo voluntatem 
inodo ipsi convenienti, ut seipsam determinet, ut causa proxima ac- 
tionum suarum proprio rationis judicio, et spontanea voluntatis 


1 Quenstedt, cap. xu. i. 15, vol. i. p. 761. 

2 Turrettin, locus vi. quest. vi. 6, edit. Edinburgh, 1847, vol. i. p. 460. 

8 Chap. v. sect. 2. 

4 Aquinas, Summa, part I. quest. cy. art. 4, edit. Cologne, 1640, p. 192 
& Locus vi. questio v’. 7. 


602 PART I.—THEOLOGY. [Cu XI. — ProvipEnom, 


electione ; eam libertati nostra nullam vim inferre, sed illam potius 
amice fovere.” 

6. All the advocates of the doctrine of concursus admit that the 
great difficulty attending it is in reference to sin. The difficulty 
here is not so much in relation to the responsibility of the sinner, 
If sin be his own act, and if the divine concursus does not interfere 
with his freedom, it does not interfere with his responsibility. 
When God by his grace determines the will of his people to holy 
acts, the holiness is theirs. It constitutes their character. When 
God gives a man beauty, he is beautiful. And if his codperation 
in the sins of men leaves their freedom in sinning unimpaired, they 
are as truly sinful as though no such codperation existed. This is 
not the difficulty. "The real question is, how can God’s codperation 
in sin be reconciled with his own holiness? We can easily see how 
God can codperate in good acts, and rejoice in the goodness which 
is his gift ; but how can He so concur in sinful acts as not only to 
preserve the sinner in the exercise of his ability to act, but also to 
excite to action, and determine his act to be what it is, and not 
otherwise? This difficulty was, as has been remarked, freely ac- 
knowledged. It was met by defining sin as mere defect. It isa 
want of conformity to the moral law. As such it requires not an 
efficient, but only a deficient cause. God is the source immedi- 
ately or remotely of all efficiency, but is not the source of mere 
deficiency. In every sinful act, therefore, there was distinguished 
the act as an act requiring an efficient cause ; and the moral qual- 
ity of that act, or its want of conformity to law, a mere relation, 
which is not an ens, and therefore is in no way to be referred to 
God. This is the answer to this objection given by Augustine, 
and repeated from his day to this. Aquinas! says: ‘* Quicquid est 
entitatis et actionis in actione mala, reducitur in Deum sicut in 
causam: sed quod est ibi defectus non causatur a Deo, sed ex 
causa secunda deficiente.” Quenstedt 2 says: ‘+ Distinguendum 
inter effectum et defectum, inter actionem et actionis dragiav. Ef- 
fectus et actio est a Deo, non vero defectus et dragia sive inordinatio 
et exorbitatio actionis. Ad effectum Deus concurrit, vitium non 
causat, non enim in agendo deficit aut errat, sed causa secunda,” 
Bucan * says: ‘* Malorum opera quoque decernit et regit. Tamen 
non est autor mali, quia mali sic aguntur a Deo, ut sponte, libere 
et sine coactione et impulsu violento agant. Deinde non infundit 


1 Summa, part 1. quest. xlix. art. 2, edit. Cologne, 1640, p. 95. ” 
2 Theologia, cap. x11. i. 15, vol. i. p. 761. 
8 Bucan, Institutiones Theologici, edit. Geneva, 1625, p. 143. 


ES 


$3, B] - @OVERNMENT. 608 


malitiam sicut bonitatem, nec impellit aut allicit ad peccandum.” 
To the same effect Turrettin } says: Cum actus qua talis semper 
bonus sit quoad entitatem suam, Deus ad illum concurrit effective, 
et physice. . . . (quoad malitiam) Deus nec causa physica potest 
ejus dici, quia nec illam inspirat aut infundit, nec facit; nec ethica, 
qui nee imperat, aut approbat et suadet, sed severissime prohibet 
et punit.” As the same solar influence quickens into life all kinds 
of plants, whether nutritious or poisonous ; as the same current of 
water may be guided in one channel or another ; as the same vital 
force animates the limbs of the sound man and of the cripple; as 
the same hand may sweep the keys of an instrument when in tune 
and when out of tune: so it is urged that the same divine effi- 
ciency sustains and animates all free agents. That they act at all 
is due to the divine efficiency, but the particular nature of their 
acts (at least when evil) is to be referred, not to that all-pervading 
efficiency of God, but to the nature or character of each particular 
agent. That God controls and governs wicked men, determines 
their wickedness to take one form, and not another, and guides it 
to manifestations which will promote good rather than evil, is not 
inconsistent with the holiness of God. He did not infuse envy and 
hatred into the hearts of Joseph’s brethren, but He guided the ex- 
ercise of those evil passions, so as to secure the preservation of 
Jacob and the chosen seed from destruction. 


Remarks on the Doctrine of Concursus. 


The above statement of the doctrine of concursus is designed 
merely to give the views generally entertained by Augustinians, as 
to the nature of God’s providential government. Whether those 
views are correct or not, it is important that they should be under- 
stood. It is very evident that there is a broad distinction between 
this theory of concursus and the theory which resolves all events, 
whether necessary or free, into the immediate agency of God. The 
points of difference between the two theories are, (1.) That the 
one admits and the other denies the reality and efficiency of second 
causes. (2.) The one makes no distinction between free and 
necessary events, attributing them equally to the almighty and 
creative energy of God; the other admits the validity and un- 
speakable importance of this distinction. (3.) The one asserts 
and the other denies that the agency of God is the same in sinful 
acts that it is in good acts. (4.) The one admits that God is the 
author of sin, the other repudiates that doctrine with abhorrence. 

1 Yocus Vr. questio vii. 8, 4, edit. Edinburgh, 1847, vol. i. p. 462. 


604 PART I.— THEOLOGY.  [Ca. XI.— ProvipENce. 


The Reformed theologians protested against. the aspersion freely 
made by Romanists, and afterwards by the Remonstrants, that 
the Augustinian doctrine led by any fair process of reasoning to 
the conclusion that God is the cause of sin. They quote from 
their opponents admissions which involve all that they themselves 
teach in reference to the agency of God in the wicked acts of men. 
Thus Bellarmin, who freely brings this objection against the Prot- 
estants, himself says, ! ‘‘Deus non solum permittit impios agere 
multa mala, nec solum deserit pios ut cogantur pati que ab impiis 
inferuntur ; sed etiam presidet ipsis voluntatibus malis, easque 
regit et gubernat, torquet ac flectit in eis invisibiliter operando, ut 
licet vitio proprio male sint, tamen a divina providentia ad unum 
potius malum, quam ad aliud, non positive sed permissive ordinen- 
tur.” As to this passage, Turrettin says, “ Quibus verbis nihil 
durius apud nostros occurrit.” Bellarmin also quotes ? and adopts 
the language of Aquinas when he says, “ Deum non solum incli- 
nare voluntates malas ad unum potius, quam ad aliud permittendo, 
ut ferantur in unum, et non permittendo, ut ferantur in aliud, ut 
Hugo recte docuit, sed etiam positive inclinando in unum et aver- 
tendo ab alio.” It is of importance, not only as a matter of histor- 
ical truth, but also for its moral influence, that the fact should be 
distinctly known and recognized that the Reformed theologians, with 
all Augustinians before and after the Reformation, earnestly re- 
jected the doctrine that God is the author or the efficient cause of sin. 
The objection to the doctrine of coneursus is not that it inten- 
tionally or really destroys the free agency of man; or that it 
makes God the author of sin, but (1.) That it is founded on an 
arbitrary and false assumption. It denies that any creature can 
originate action. This does not admit of proof. It is an inference 
from the assumed nature of the dependence of the creature upon 
the creator; or from the assumed necessity of the principle in 
question, in order to secure the absolute control of God over cre- 
ated beings. It however contradicts the consciousness of men. 
That we are free agents means that we have the power to act 
freely ; and to act freely implies that we originate our own acts. 
This does not mean that it is inconsistent with our liberty that we 
should be moved and induced to exert our ability to act by consid- 
erations addressed to our reason or inclinations, or by the grace of 
God; but it does mean that we have the power to act. The 
power of spontaneous action is essential to the nature of a spirit ; 
and God, in creating us in his own nature as spirits, endowed us 
1 De Amissione Gratie et Statu Peccati, 11. xiii. edit. Paris, 1608, p. 132. 2 Ibid. 


§4, A] GOVERNMENT. 605 


with the power to originate our own acts. (2.) A second objec- 
tion to the doctrine is that it is an attempt to. explain the inexpli- 
cable. Not content with the simple and certain declaration of the 
Bible, that God does govern all his creatures and all their actions, 
it undertakes to explain how this is done. From the nature of the 
case this is impossible. We see that material causes act, but we 
cannot tell how they act. We are conscious of the power to guide 
our own thoughts, and to determine our own wills ; but how it is 
we exercise this efficiency, passes our comprehension. We know 
that the will has power over certain muscles of the body ; but the 
point ef connection, the nexus between volition and muscular ac- 
tion, is altogether inscrutable. Why then should we attempt to 
explain how it is that the efficiency of God controls the efficiency 
of second causes? The fact is plain, and the fact alone is impor- 
tant ; but the mode of God’s action we cannot possibly understand. 
(8.) A third objection is that this doctrine multiplies difficulties. 
By attempting to teach how God governs free agents, that He first 
excites them to act; sustains them in action; determines them to 
act so, and not otherwise; that He effectually concurs in the en- 
tity, but not necessarily in the moral quality of the act, we raise at 
every step the most subtle and perplexing metaphysical questions, 
which no man is able to solve. And even admitting the theory of 
concursus, as expounded by the schoolmen and scholastic theolo- 
gians, to be true, what does it amount to? What real knowledge 
does it communicate ? All we know, and all we need to know, is, 
(1.) That God does govern all his creatures; and (2.) That his 
control over them is consistent with their nature, and with his own 
infinite purity and excellence. 

As this doctrine of Providence involves the question of God’s 
relation to the world, it is confessedly the most comprehensive and 
difficult in the compass either of theology or of philosophy. As 
the world, meaning thereby the universe of created beings, in- 
cludes the world of matter and the world of mind, the doctrine of 
providence concerns, first, the relation of God to the external or 
material universe ; and secondly, his.relation to the world of mind, 
or to his rational creatures. 


§ 4. Principles involved in the Scriptural Doctrine of Providence. 
A. The Providence of God over the Material Universe. 

So far as concerns the relation of God to the external world, the 

following facts appear to be either assumed, or clearly taught in the 


Bible. 


606 PART L—THEOLOGY.  [Cx. XI. — ProvipEence. 


1. There is an external world, or material universe. What we 
call the world is not a phantom, a delusive show. It is not our- 
selves, our own varying states, however produced. But matter is 
a real existence. It is a substance ; that which is, and continues, 
and has identity in all its varying states. This is of course op- 
posed to pantheism, which makes the external world an existence 
form of God; to idealism; and to the dynamic theory which 
teaches that matter is merely force. This latter doctrine is intelli- 
gible, if by force be understood the constantly acting will of God, 
for that is the energy of the divine substance. But in the way in 
which the doctrine is commonly presented, force is taken as the ul- 
timate fact. Matter is force, it is not a substance, but simply ac- 
tivity, power. But it is self-evident that nothing cannot act, or 
cannot produce motion, which force does. It is just as plain that 
there cannot be action without something acting, as that there 
cannot be motion without something moving, as has been so often 
said. Force, therefore, does not exist of itself. It of necessity 
implies a substance of which it is an affection, or manifestation, or 
property. The real existence of the external world is one of those 
common sense and Scriptural facts, vouched for by the very con- 
stitution of our nature, and which it is utterly useless to deny. 


Matter is Active. 


2. The second fact or principle recognized by Scripture, is that 
matter is active. It has properties or forces, which are the proxi- 
mate causes of the physical changes which we constantly see and 
experience. This is considered by scientific men almost an axio- 
matic truth. ‘*No force without matter, and no matter without 
force,” This is also the general conviction of men. When they 
take a heavy body in their hand, they attribute its weight to the 
nature of the body and its relation to the earth. When one: sub- 
stance produces the sensation of sweetness, and another the sensa- 
tion of acidity, they instinctively refer the difference to the sub- 
stances themselves. So ofall other physical effects ; they are always 
and everywhere referred to physical causes. Such is a law of 
our nature ; and therefore the theory which denies that any physical 
causes exist, and refers all natural effects or changes to the imme- 
diate operation of the divine will, contradicts our nature, and cannot 
he true. Besides, as we have already seen, that theory logically 
leads to idealism and pantheism. It merges the universe into God. 

These physjcal forces act of necessity, blindly, and uniformly, 
They are everywhere and always the same. The law of gravitas 


§ 4, A.J GOVERNMENT. . 607 


tion is in the remotest regions of space what it is here on our earth. 
It acts always, and always in the same way. ‘The same is true of 
all other physical forces. Light, heat, electricity, and chemical af- 
finities are everywhere the same in their mode of operations. 


Laws of Nature. 


The ambiguity of the words, law and nature, has already been 


‘remarked upon. The phrase “Laws of Nature” is, however, 


generally used in one or the other of two senses. It either means 
an observed regular sequence of events, without any reference to 
the cause by which that regularity of sequence is determined ; or 
it means a uniformly acting force in nature. In this last sense we 
speak of the laws of gravitation, light, heat, electricity, etc. That 
there are such laws, or such physical forces, acting uniformly, 
which are not to be resolved into “‘ uniform modes of divine opera- 
tion,” is, as we have seen, an important Scriptural fact. 

The chief question is, In what relation does God stand to these 
laws? The answer to that question, as drawn from the Bible, is, 
First, that He is their author. He endowed matter with these 
forces, and ordained that they should be uniform. Secondly, He 
is independent of them. He can change, annihilate, or suspend 
them at pleasure. He can operate with them or without them. 
“The Reign of Law ”’ must not be made to extend over Him who 
made the laws. Thirdly, As the stability of the universe, and the 
welfare, and even the existence of organized creatures, depend on 
the uniformity of the laws of nature, God never does disregard 
them except for the accomplishment of some high purpose. He, in 
the ordinary operations of his Providence, operates with and 
through the laws which He has ordained. He governs the mate- 
rial, as well as the moral world by law. 

The relation, therefore, in which God stands to the laws of na- 
ture, is, in one important aspect, analogous to that in which we our- 
selves stand to them. We employ them. Man can do nothing 
outside of himself without them; yet what marvels of ingenuity, 
beauty, and utility, has he not accomplished. Dr. Beale, as we 
have seen, illustrates God’s relation to physical forces by a refer- 
ence toa chemist in his laboratory. The chemicals do not put 
themselves in the retorts in due proportions, and subject themselves 
first to one and then to another operation. As mere blind, phys- 
ical forces, they can accomplish nothing; at least nothing implying 
purpose or design. The chemical properties of the materials em- 
ployed have their functions, and the chemist has his, evidently not 


608 PART I.—THEOLOGY. ([Ca. XI.— ProvipENncr. 


only different, but diverse; 7. e., of a different kind. Professor 
Henry’s illustration was drawn from the relation of the engineer 
to the engine. The complicated structure of the machine, the 
composition and combustion of the fuel ; the evaporation of the 
water, are all external to the engineer, and he to them. The loco- 
motive, although instinct with power, stands perfectly still. At a 
touch of the engineer it starts into life, and yet with all its tre- 
mendous energy is perfectly obedient to his will. 

These, and any possible illustration, are of necessity very inad- 
equate. The powers of nature of which man avails himself, are 
not dependent on him, and are only to a very limited extent under 
his control. He is entirely external to his works. God, however, 
fills heaven and earth. He is immanent in the world; intimately 
and always present with every particle of matter. And this pres- 
ence is not of being only, but also of knowledge and power. It is 
manifestly inconsistent with the idea of an infinite God, that any 
part of his works should be absent from Him, out of his view, or 
independent of his control. Though everywhere thus efficiently 
present, his efficiency does not supersede that of his creatures. It 
is by a natural law, or physical force, that vapour arises from the 
surface of the ocean, is formed into clouds, and condenses and falls 
in showers upon the earth, yet God so controls the operation of the 
laws producing these effects, that He sends rain when and where 
He pleases. The same is true of all the operations of nature, and 
of all events in the external world. They are due to the efficiency 
of physical forces; but those forces, which are combined, adjusted, 
and made to codperate or to counteract each other, in the greatest 
complexity, are all under the constant guidance of God, and are 
made to accomplish his purpose. It is perfectly rational, therefore, 
in a world where blind, natural forces are the proximate cause of 
everything that occurs, to pray for health, for protection, for suc- 
cess, for fruitful seasons, and for the peace and prosperity of na- 
tions, since all these events are determined by the intelligent agency 
of God. 

The providence of God is thus seen to be universal and extend- 
ing to all his creatures and all their actions. The distinction usu- 
ally and properly made between the general, special, and extraor- 
dinary providence of God, has reference to the effects produced, 
and not to his agency in their production; for this is the same in 
all cases. But if the object to be accomplished be a general one, 
such as the orderly motion of the heavenly bodies, or the support 
and regular operation of the laws of nature, then the providence of 


a 
[ 


§4, Aj GOVERNMENT. 609 


God is spoken of as general. Many men are willing to admit of 
this general superintendence of the world on-the part of God, who 
deny his intervention in the production of definite effects. The 
Bible, however, clearly teaches, and all men instinctively believe 
in a special providence. That is, that God uses his contro! over 
the laws of nature, to bring about special effects. Men in sickness, 
in danger, or in any distress, pray to God for help. This is not 
irrational. It supposes God’s relation to the world to be precisely 
what it is declared to be in the Bible. It does not suppose that 
God sets aside or counteracts the laws of nature ; but simply that 
He controls them and causes them to produce whatever effects He 
sees fit. The Scriptures and the history of the world, and almost 
every man’s experience, bedr abundant evidence to such divine in- 
terpositions. We should be as helpless orphans were it not for this 
constant oversight and protection of our heavenly Father. Some- 
times the circumstances attending these divine interventions are so 
unusual, and the evidences which they afford of divine control are 
so clear, that men cannot refuse ‘to recognize the hand of God. 
There is, however, nothing extraordinary in the agency of God. 
It is only that we witness on these occasions more impressive man- 
ifestations of the absolute control, which He constantly exercises 
over the laws which He has ordained. 


The Uniformity of the Laws of Nature consistent with the Doe- 
trine of Providence. 


It is obvious that the Scriptural doctrine of providence is not 
inconsistent with the ‘* Reign of Law” in any proper sense of the 
words. The Scriptures recognize the fact that the laws of nature 
are immutable; that they are the ordinances of God; that they are 
uniform in their operation; and that they cannot be disregarded 
with impunity. But as man within his sphere can use these fixed 
laws to accomplish the most diversified purposes, so God in his 
unlimited sphere has them always and everywhere under his abso- 
lute control, so that, without suspending or violating them, they are 
ever subservient to his will. Certain philosophers do not admit 
this. To them the control of mind and the reign of law are incom- 
patible ; one or the other must be denied. ‘The fundamental 
character of all theological philosophy,” says Lewes, ‘is the con- 
ceiving of phenomena as subjected to supernatural volition, and 
consequently as eminently and irregularly variable. Now, these 
theological conceptions can only be subverted finally by means of 


these two general processes, whose popular success is infallible in 
VOL. I. 39 


610 PART 1.—THEOLOGY. = [Cu. XI. — ProvipEncx. 


the long run. (1.) The exact and rational prevision of phenomena; _ 
and (2.) The possibility of modifying them, so as to promote our 
own ends and advantages. , The former immediately dispels all 
idea of any ‘ directing volition ;’ and the latter leads to the same 
result, under another point of view, by making us regard this power 
as subordinated to our own.””! If the fact that men can use the 
laws of nature to their ‘own ends and advantages” is compatible 
with the uniformity of those laws, the control of God over them 
for the accomplishment of his purposes cannot be inconsistent with 
their stability as laws. God rules the creation in accordance with 
the laws which He himself has ordained. 


God’s Providence in Relation to Vital Processes. 


Life has ever been regarded as one.of the most inscrutable of 
mysteries. However hard it may be to answer the question, What 
is life ? or however diverse and unsatisfactory may be the answers 
given to that question, or the explanations proposed of its phenom- 
ena, there is little difference as to the facts of the case. (1.) It is 
admitted that there is a great difference between life and death — 
between the living and the dead. No one who has ever looked 
upon a dead body has failed to be impressed with the fearful change 
involved in passing from life to death. (2.) It is very evident that 
the difference does not consist in anything which can be weighed 
or measured, or detected by the microscope or by chemical analy- 
sis. (8.) Certain processes go on where life is present, and are 
never seen when it is absent. These processes are organization, 
growth, and reproduction. (4.) These processes imply the per- 
ception of an end; a purpose or will to secure that end; and the 
intelligent choice and application of means for its attainment. This 
is the work of mind. If blind physical force can fashion the eye or 
the ear, and build up the whole animal body, with all its wonderful 
interdependencies and relations of parts and organs, and its de- 
signed adaptations for what is external and future, then there is no 
evidence of mind in heaven or earth; then all the works of art and 
of genius with which the world is crowded, may be the productions 
of dead matter, or of physical forces. 

But if life be mind, or, rather, if vital force be mental force, as 
indicated by the mode in which it acts, where does that mind 
reside? In the infinitesimally small germ of the plant or animal ? 
or in something exterior to that germ? These are questions which 
have ever been demanding an answer, and to which different replies 

1 Comte’s Philosophy of the Sciences, by Lewes, London, 1853, pp. 102, 103. 


OL SS Se eee 


§ 4, A.) GOVERNMENT. 611 


have been made. First, some say that nature itself is intelligent. 
By nature they do not mean the material world, but the vis in 
rebus insita. The forces which are active in the world, are con- 
ceived of as belonging to a substance or animating principle, or 
anima mundi. Some who believe in an extramundane personal 
God, believe that He has created and rendered immanent in the 
world this natura naturans, which they hold to be the seat of all 
the intelligence manifested in the works of nature. This is the 
only God some scientific men are willing to admit. Material na- 
ture, it is said, gives no evidence of the existence of a personal 
Being. We see in nature a mind, a universal mind, but still a 
mind which only operates and expresses itself by law. ‘+ Nature 
only does and only can inform us of mind im nature, the partner 
and correlative of organized matter.”! Baden Powell, in his 
“ Order of Nature,” says, that the elevated views of a Deity as a 
personal God, and Omnipotent Creator, etc., are conceptions which 
**can originate only from some other source than physical philoso- 
phy.” 3 

Secondly, some assume that there is in the germ of every plant 
or animal what Agassiz calls ‘“‘an immaterial principle,” to which 
its organizing power is to be referred. Some connect this with 
the Platonic doctrine of ideas, as spiritual entities, which are the 
life and reality of all material organisms. 

‘Thirdly, others refer the intelligence manifested in vital pro- 
cesses to God; not immediately, but remotely. Men can construct 
machines to do intellectual work, without the machines themselves 
being intelligent. We have orreries, and calculating and type- 
setting machines, which, apparently at least, do the work of mind. 
If man can make a watch or locomotive engine, why may not God 
make watches and engines with the power of reproduction? The 
analogy, however, between the products of human ingenuity and 
living organism is very imperfect. No product of human art can 
think or choose. A type-setting machine may be made, when the 
proper key is touched, to move an arm in the right direction and to 
the proper distance to reach the required letter; but it cannot be 
made of itself to select from a confused mass of type the letters 
one after another, and arrange them so as to form words and sen- 
tences. In other words, matter cannot be made to do the work 
vt mind, It is admitted that everything is possible with God, but 
the contradictory is not an object of power. It is a contradiction 


_ 1 See this doctrine discussed in the Bampton Lectures for 1865, by Rev. J. B. Mozley 


. 96. 
2 Edit. London, 1859, p. 249. 


612 PART I.—THEOLOGY.  [Cu. XI. — Provipencz. 


that the extended should be unextended, that the irrational should 
be rational. It is, therefore, inconceivable that matter with its 
blind physical forces should perform the mental work exhibited in 
the processes of organization and growth. 

Fourthly, the intelligence required to account for the processes 
of vegetable and animal life is assumed to be in the everywhere 
present and everywhere active mind of God himself. This does 
not imply that physical or second causes have no efficiency, or that 
those causes are merged into the efficiency of God. It simply 
means that God uses the chemical, electric, photic, and other forces 
of nature, in carrying on organization and other vital processes in 
the vegetable and animal worlds. In such processes there is a 
combination of two specifically different forces ; physical and men- 
tal. The physical are in the matter used; the mental in God who 
uses the matter and its forces. Examples of this combination of 
mental and physical force are familiar. All voluntary motion, on 
the part of animals, all the works of men, are due to such combina- 
tion. Walking, speaking, and writing, are possible only so far as 
mind controls our material organization. In writing, for example, 
the vital functions are going on in the hand, on which its mobility 
and susceptibility of nervous impression depend; and the numer- 
ous voluntary muscles are called into action; but the guiding power 
isin the mind. It is the mind that determines what letters and 
sentences the fingers shall form, and what ideas shall be expressed. 
In like manner, it is the ever-present mind of God that guides the 
action of physical causes in the processes of animal and vegetable 
life. And as it would be unreasonable to refer to the physical 
forces called into activity, when we speak or write, the intelligence 
indicated in what is uttered or written, so it is unreasonable to 
refer to the forces of matter the intelligence indicated in the pro- 
cesses of life. 

It is because we cannot raise our minds to any proper apprehen- 
sion of the infinity of God, that we find it so difficult to think of 
Him as thus everywhere present and everywhere intelligently 
active. This, however, ceases to be incredible, when we think of 
the marvellous codperation of the mind and body which takes place | 
in rapid talking, or, more wonderfully still, in a child before a piano, 
taking in at a glance the whole score, noticing the power and posi- 
tion of every note, striking eight keys of the instrument at the same 
time, and moving fifty or sixty voluntary muscles with the rapidity 
of lightning, and each at the right time, and with the right force. 
If the mere spark of intelligence in a child can do such wonders, 


: 


§ 4, A.) GOVERNMENT. 618 
why should it be thought incredible that the Infinite Mind should 


pervade and govern the universe ? 

In support of the view here given, that the intelligence displayed 
in all vital processes is the intelligence of the everywhere present 
and everywhere active mind of God, it may be urged, in the first 
place, that the principle involved in this doctrine is assumed in the 
simplest truths of natural religion. If God be not thus everywhere 
present, and everywhere active in the control of secondary causes, 
there is no propriety or use in prayer, and no ground of confidence 
in divine protection. In the second place, it seems to be the only 
way to account for the facts of the case. That the processes of 
life in vegetables and animals do manifest intelligence cannot be 
denied. They manifest foresight, purpose, choice, and controlling 
power. This intelligence cannot be referred to matter, or to 
physical forces. The most advanced scientific Materialism does 
not make mind an attribute, or function, or product of all matter, 
but only of the highly organized matter of the brain. But there 
is no brain in the vegetable or animal germ. Brain is as mucha 
product of life (and therefore of mind) as sinew or bone. 

In the third place, the authority of Scripture may be claimed in 
support of the doctrine in question. The Bible teaches the omni- 
presence of God; 7. ¢., the omnipresence of mind. The phrase 
“God fills heaven and earth,” means that mind pervades heaven 
and earth, that there is no portion of space in which mind is not 
present and active. The Scriptures also teach that all things, even 
the most minute, as the number of the hairs of our head, the fall- 
ing of a sparrow, the flight of an arrow, are all under the control 
of God. He also is said to cause the grass to grow, which means not 
only that He so orders physical causes that vegetation is the result, 
but also, as appears from other representations, that the organization 

sand growth of the plant are determined by his agency. This seems 
to be clearly taught with regard to the bodies of men in Psalm 
exxxix. 15, 16, “My substance was not hid from thee, when I was 
made in secret, and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the 
earth. Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being unperfect ; and 
in thy book all my members were written, which in continuance 
were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them.” However 
doubtful may be the interpretation of the 16th verse in the orig- 
inal, the general meaning of the passage cannot be mistaken. It 
clearly teaches that the human body is fashioned in the womb by 
the intelligence of God, and not by undirected physical causes, act~ 
ing blindly. ) 


614 PART I.—THEOLOGY. [Cu. XI — ProvipEnce. 


B. The Providence of God over Rational Creatures. 


God’s providence, however, extends over the world of mind, 7. é, 
over rational free agents, as well as over the material universe. 
The principles involved in the Scriptural doctrine concerning God’s 
providential government of rational creatures are, — 

1. That mind is essentially active. It originates its own acts. 
This is a matter of consciousness. It is essential to liberty and 
responsibility. It is clearly the doctrine of the Bible which calls 
on men to act, and regards them as the authors of their own acts. 
This principle, as we have seen, stands opposed, (a.) To the doc- 
trine of a continued creation. (6.) To the doctrine which denies 
the efficiency of second causes and merges all power into the imme- 
diate power of God; and (c.) To the doctrine that free agents are 
so dependent that they cannot act unless acted upon, or move un- 
less they are moved ab eztra. 

2. But although free agents have the power to act, and originate 
their own acts, they are not only upheld in being and efficiency by 
the power of God, but He controls the use which they make of their 
ability. (a.) He can, and often does, hinder their action. (6.) He 
determines their action to be in one way and not in another; so 
that it is rational to pray that God would incline the hearts cf men 
to show us favour; that He would change the dispositions and pur- 
poses of wicked men ; and that He would work in us to will as well 
as todo. No creature, therefore, is independent of God in the ex- 
ercise of the powers with which He has endowed it. The hearts 
of men are in his hands, and He controls their action as effectually 
as He controls the operations of nature. But his agency in the 
world of spirits no more interferes with the laws of mind, than his 


agency in the external world interferes with the efficiency of mate- 
rial causes. 


Distinction between the Providential Efficiency of God, and the 
Influences of the Holy Spirit. 

3. The providential agency of God in the government of free 
agents is not to be confounded with the operations of his grace. 
These two things are constantly represented in the Bible as dis- 
tinct. The one is natural, the other supernatural. In the one 
God acts according to uniform laws, or by his potentia ordinata, in 
the other, according to the good pleasure of his will, or by his 
potentia absoluta. The control which God exercises over the 
ordinary acts of men, and especially over the wicked, is analogous 


§ 4, B.] GOVERNMENT. 615 


to that which He exercises in the guidance of material causes ; 
whereas his agency in the operations of his grace is more analo- 
gous to his mode of action in prophecy, inspiration, and miracles. 
In the former, or in his providential agency over minds, nothing is 
effected which transcends the efficiency of second causes. In the 
latter the effects are such as second causes are utterly inadequate 
to accomplish. The most obvious points of difference between the 
two cases are, (1.) In the ordinary operations or acts of. free 
agents, the ability to perform them belongs to the agent and arises 
out of his nature as a rational creature, and is inseparable from it ; 
whereas the acts of faith, repentance, and other holy affections do 
not flow from the ability of men in the present condition of their 
nature, but from a new principle of life supernaturally communi- 
cated and maintained. (2.) The ordinary acts of men, and espe- 
cially their wicked acts, are determined by their own natural incli- 
nations and feelings. God does not awaken, or infuse those feelings 
or dispositions in order to determine sinners to act wickedly. On 
the other hand, all gracious or holy affections are thus infused or 
excited by the Spirit of God, (8.) The providential government 
of God over free agents is exercised as much in accordance with 
the laws of mind, as his providential government over the material 
world is in accordance with the established laws of matter. Both 
belong to the potentia ordinata, or ordered efficiency of God. This 
is not the case in the operations of his grace. Holy affections and 
exercises are not due to the mere moral power of the truth, or its 
control over our natural affections, but to the indwelling of the 
Spirit of God. So that it is not we that live, but Christ that liveth 
in us. It is indeed our life, but it is a life divine in its origin, and 
sustained and guided in all its exercises by a higher influence than 
the laws of mind, or an influence which operates merely through 
them, and according to their natural operations. This distinction 
between nature and grace, between the providential efficiency of 
God and the workings of his Spirit in the hearts of his people is one 
of the most important in all theology. It makes all the difference 
between Augustinianism and Pelagianism, between Rationalism 
and supernatural, evangelical religion. 


Conclusion. 


Such are the general principles involved in this most difficult 
doctrine of Divine Providence. We should be equally on our 
guard against the extreme which merges all efficiency in God, and 
which, in denying all second causes, destroys human liberty and 


616 PART I.— THEOLOGY. [Cu. XI. — Provence, 


responsibility, and makes God not only the author of sin, but in 
reality the only Being in the universe ; and the opposite extreme 
which banishes God from the world which He has made, and which, 
by denying that He governs all his creatures and all their actions, 
destroys the foundation of all religion, and dries up the fountains 
of piety. If this latter view be correct, there is no God to whom 
we can look for the supply of our wants, or for protection from evil ; 
whose favour we can seek, or whose displeasure we need dread. 
We, and all things else, are in the hands of blindly operating causes. 
Between these equally fatal extremes lies the Scriptural doctrine 
that God governs all his creatures and all their actions. This doc- 
trine admits the reality and efficiency of second causes, both mate- 
rial and mental, but denies that they are independent of the Crea- 
tor and Preserver of the universe. It teaches that an infinitely 
wise, good, and powerful God is everywhere present, controlling all 
events great and small, necessary and free, in a way perfectly con- 
sistent with the nature of his creatures and with his own infinite 
excellence, so that everything is ordered by his will and is made to 
subserve his wise and benevolent designs. 


CHAPTER XII. 
MIRACLES. 


§ 1. Their Nature. Meaning and Usage of the Word. 


Tue word miracle is derived from miror, to wonder, and there- 
fore signifies that which excites wonder. In this etymological sense 
of the word it may be used to designate any extraordinary event 
adapted to excite surprise and rouse attention. The words used in 
the Bible in reference to miraculous events do not inform us of 
their nature. The most common of these are, (1.) HDD, something 
separated, or singular. (2.) 5s, signum, portentum, something 
designed to confirm. (3.) N= (of uncertain derivation), used in 
the sense of rvvos, of persons and things held up as a warning, 
and for remarkable events confirming the authority of prophets. 
(4.) 17923, power, used for any extraordinary manifestation of 
divine power. (5.) ‘* Works of the Lord.’ Iv most cases these 
terms express the design, rather than the nature of the events to 
which they are applied. 

Such being the indefinite meaning of these Scriptural terms, it 
is not surprising that the word miracle was used in the Church in 
a very loose sense. Anything wonderful, anything for which the 
proximate cause could not be discovered, and anything in which 
divine agency was specially indicated was called a miracle. ‘Thus 
Luther says, “Conversion is the greatest of all miracles.” ‘Every 
day,” he says, ‘‘ witnesses miracle after miracle ; that any village 
adheres to the Gospel when a hundred thousand devils are arrayed 
against it, or that the truth is maintained in this wicked w vid, is 
a continued miracle to which healing the sick or raising the dead 
isa mere trifle.” As neither the etymology nor the usage of the 
word leads to a. definite idea of the nature of a miracle, we can 
attain that idea only by the examination of some confessedly mirac- 


ulous event. 


Definition of a Miracle. 


According to the “‘ Westminster Confession,” ‘God, in ordinary 
srovidence making use of means, yet is free to work without, above, 


618 PART I.— THEOLOGY. [Cu. XI. — Mrractes. 


or against them at pleasure.” In the first place, there are events 
therefore due to the ordinary operations of second causes, as upheld 
and guided by God. To this class belong the common processes 
of nature ; the growth of plants and animals, the orderly move- 
ments of the heavenly bodies ; and the more unusual occurrences, _ 
earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, and violent agitations and revolu- 
tions in human societies. In the second place, there are events 
due to the influences of the Holy Spirit upon the hearts of men, 
such as regeneration, sanctification, spiritual illumination, ete. 
Thirdly, there are events which belong to neither of these classes, 
and whose distinguishing characteristics are, First, that they take 
place in the external world, 7. ¢., in the sphere of the observation 
of the senses ; and Secondly, that they are produced or caused by 
the simple volition of God, without the intervention of any subor- 
dinate cause. To this class belongs the original act of creation, in 
which all codperation of second causes was impossible. To the 
same class belong all events truly miraculous. A miracle, there- 
fore, may be defined to be an event, in the external world, brought 
about by the immediate efficiency, or simple volition of God. 

An examination of any of the great miracles recorded in Scrip- 
ture will establish the correctness of this definition. The raising 
of Lazarus from the dead may be taken as an example. This was 
an event which occurred in the outward world ; one which could be 
seen and verified by the testimony of the senses. It was not brought 
about either in whole or in part by the efficiency of natural causes. 
It was due to the simple word, or volition, or immediate agency 
of God. The same may be said of the restoration to life of the 
daughter of the ruler of the synagogue, on Christ’s pronouncing 
the words, Talitha cwmi; and of his healing the lepers by a word. 
So when Christ walked upon the sea, when He multiplied the 
loaves and fishes, when He calmed the winds and the waves by a 
command ; any codperation of physical causes is not only ignored, 
but, by clearest intimation, denied. 


Objections to this Definition of a Miracle. 


It is objected to this definition of a miracle that it assumes that. 
the laws of nature may be violated or set aside. To this many 
theologians and men of science object, and declare that it is im- 
possible. If the law of nature be the will of God, that of course 
cannot be set aside, much less directly violated. This is Augustine’s 
objection, who asks, “* Quomodo est contra naturam, quod Dei fit 
voluntate cum voluntas tanti utique conditoris condite rei cujus- 


§1.] MIRACLES. — THEIR NATURE, 619 


que natura sit? Portentum ergo fit, non contra naturam, sed con- 
tra quam est nota natura.” ! Baden Powell, in behalf of men of 
science, protests against being called upon to believe in anything 
“at variance with nature and law.’ “The enlarged critical and 
inductive study of the natural world,’’ he says, cannot but tend 
powerfully to evince the inconceivableness of imagined interrup- 
tions of natural order or supposed suspensions of the laws of mat- 
ter, and of that vast series of dependent causation which con- 
stitutes the legitimate field for the investigation of science, whose 
constancy is the sole warrant for its generalizations, while it forms 
the substantial basis for the grand conclusions of natural theol- 
ogy.” 2 The question of miracles, he says,® is not one ‘“ which can 
be decided by a few trite and commonplace generalities as to the 
moral government of the world and the belief in the Divine Om- 
nipotence, or as to the validity of human testimony or the limits of 
human experience. It involves, and is essentially built upon, 
those grander conceptions of the order of nature, those compre- 
hensive primary elements of all physical knowledge, those ulti- 
mate ideas of universal causation, which can only be familiar te 
those versed in cosmical philosophy in its widest sense.” ‘It is 
for the most part hazardous ground for any general moral reasoner 
to take, to discuss subjects of evidence which essentially involve 
that higher appreciation of physical truth which can be attained 
only from an accurate and comprehensive acquaintance with the 
connected series of the physical and mathematical sciences. Thus, 
for example, the simple but grand truth of the law of conservation, 
and the stability of the heavenly motions, now well understood by 
all sound cosmical philosophers, is but a type of the universal self- 
sustaining and self-evolving powers which peryade all nature.’ 4 
Professor Powell’s conclusion is, ‘‘if miracles were, in the estima- 
tion of a former age, among the chief supports of Christianity, they 
are at present among the main difficulties and hinderances to its 
acceptance.” 5 His whole argument is this, miracles, as usually 
defined, involve a suspension, or alteration, or violation of the 
laws of nature; but those laws are absolutely immutable, there- 
fore that definition must be incorrect, or, in other words, miracles 
in that sense must be impossible. 

- De Civitate Nei, xxi. 8, edit. Benedictines, vol. vii. p. 1006, a. 

2 Recent Inquiries in Theology, or Essays and Reviews. By Eminent English Clergymen 
Boston, 1860, p. 124 


8 Ibid. p. 150. 
4 Ibid. p. 151. 5 Ibid, p. 158. 


620 PART I.— THEOLOGY.  [Cu. XI. — Mimactzs. 


. 


Answer to the above Objection. 

The form in which the objection is presented by those who make 
nature the will of God, is answered by saying that nature is not 
the will of God in any other sense than that He ordained the 
sequence of natural events, and established the laws or physical 
causes by which that regular sequence is secured. ‘This relation 
between God and the world, assumes that nature and its laws are 
subject to Him, and therefore liable at any time to be suspended or 
counteracted, at his good pleasure. 

As to the other form of the objection, which assumes that the 
laws of nature are in themselves immutable, and therefore that 
they cannot be suspended, it is enough to say, (1.) That this abso- 
lute immutability of natural laws is a gratuitous assumption. That 
a thing has been is no proof that it must always be. There is no 
absolute certainty, because no necessity, that the sun will rise 
to-morrow. We assume with confidence that it will thus rise, but 
on what ground? What impossibility is there that this night the 
voice of the angel should be heard, swearing, “ That time shall 
be no longer?” If time began, time may end. If nature began 
to be, it may cease to be, and all about it must be liable to change. 
Scientific men have no right to assume that because physical laws 
are, and, within the limits of our experience, ever have been, 
regular in their operation, that they are, as Professor Powell says, 
“ self-sustaining and self-evolving.” It is a great mistake to sup- 
pose that uniformity is inconsistent with voluntary control; that 
because law reigns, God does not reign. The laws of nature are 
uniform only because He so wills, and their uniformity continues 
only so long as He wills. 

(2.) It is utterly derogatory to the character of God to assume 
that He is subject to law, and especially to the laws of matter. If 
theism be once admitted, then it must be admitted that the whole 
universe, with all that it contains and all the laws by which it is 
controlled, must be subject to the will of God. Professor Powell 
indeed says, that many theists deny the possibility of the sus- 
pension or violation of the laws of nature, but then he says that 
there are many degrees of theism, and he includes under that 
term theories which others regard as inconsistent with the doctrine 
of a personal God. It is certain that the objection to the defini- 
tion of a miracle given above, now under consideration, depends 
for its validity on the assumption, that God is subject to nature 
that He cannot control its laws. J. Miiller well says, “ Etiamsi 


§1.] MIRACLES. — LHEIR NATURE. 621 


nullus alius miraculorum esset usus, nisi ut absolutam illam divine 
voluntatis libertatem demonstrent, humanamque. arrogantiam, im- 
modice legis naturalis admirationi junctam, compescant, miracula 
haud temere essent edita.’’ 1 

(3.) The authority of Scripture is for Christians decisive on this 
point. The Bible everywhere not only asserts the absolute inde- 
pendence of God of all his works, and his absolute control over 
them, but is also filled with examples of the actual exercise of this 
control. Every miracle recorded in the Scriptures is such an 
example. When Christ called Lazarus from the grave, the chem- 
ical forces which were working the dissolution of his body ceased 
to operate. When He said to the winds, Be still, the physical 
causes which produced the storm were arrested in their operation ; 
when He walked on the sea the law of gravitation was counter- 
acted by a stronger force — even the divine will. In 2 Kings vi. 
5, 6, we are told that an “axe head fell into the water,” and that 
the man of God cut a stick and cast it into the water, “and the 
iron did swim.” Here an effect, was produced which all known 
physical laws would tend to prevent. The Scriptures, therefore, 
by word and deed, teach that God can act, not only with physical 
causes, but without and against them. 

(4.) After all, the suspension or violation of the laws of nature 
involved in miracles is nothing more than is constantly taking place 
around us. One force counteracts another; vital force keeps the 
chemical laws of matter in abeyance ; and muscular force can con- 
trol the action of physical force. When a man raises a weight 
from the ground, the law of gravity is neither suspended nor vio- 
lated, but counteracted by a stronger force. The same is true as 
to the walking of Christ on the water, and the swimming of the 
iron at the command of the prophet. The simple and grand truth 
that the universe is not under the exclusive control of physical 
forces, but that everywhere and always there is above, separate 
from, and superior to all else, an infinite personal will, not super- 
seding, but directing and controlling all physical causes, acting 
with or without them. The truth on this subject was beautifully 
expressed by Sir Isaac Newton, when he said, “* Deum esse ens 
summe perfectum concedunt omnes. Entis autem summe perfecti 
Idea est ut sit substantia una, simplex, indivisibilis, viva et vivifica, 
ubique semper necessaric existens, summe intelligens omnia, libere 
yolens bona, voluntate efficiens possibilia, effectibus nobilioribus 
similitudinem propriam quantum fieri potest, communicans, om- 

1 De Miracul. J. C. Nat. et Necess. Marburg, 1839, par. i. pp. 41, 42. 


622 PART L—THEOLOGY.  ([Cu. XI.— Mmacres. 


nia in se continens, tanquam eorum principium et locus, omnia per 
presentiam substantialem cernens et regens, et cum rebus omni- 
bus, secundum leges accuratas ut nature totius fundamentum et 
causa constanter codperans, nisi ubi aliter agere bonum est.’”? 
God is the author of nature: He has ordained its laws: He is 
everywhere present in his works: He governs all things by 
codperating and using the laws which He has ordained, NisI UBI 
ALITER AGERE BoNUM EST. He has left Himself free. 

Higher Laws. 

A second objection to the usual definition of miracles, is that 
they should be referred to some higher, occult law of nature and 
not to the immediate agency of God. This objection is urged by 
two very different classes of writers.. First, those who adopt the 
mechanical theory of the universe assume that God has given it 
up to the government of natural laws, and no more interferes with 
its natural operations than a ship-builder with the navigation of the 
ships he has constructed. This is the view presented by Babbage 
in his “‘ Ninth Bridgewater Treatise.” He supposes a man placed 
before his calculating machine, which for millions and millions of 
times produces square numbers; then for once produces a cube 
number; and then only squares until the machine wears out. 
There are two ways of accounting for the extraordinary cube 
number. The one is that the maker of the machine directly 
interfered for its production. The other is that he provided for 
its appearance in the original construction of the machine. The 
latter explanation gives a far higher idea of the skill and wisdom 
of the mechanist ; and so, Mr. Babbage argues, it is “more con- 
sistent with the attributes of the Deity to look upon miracles not 
as deviations from the laws assigned by the Almighty for the gov- 
ernment of matter and of mind; but as the exact fulfilment of 
much more extensive laws than those we suppose to exist.”2 In 
like manner Professor Baden Powell, contends that every physical 
effect must have a physical cause, and therefore that miracles, con- 
sidered as physical events, must be ‘referred to physical causes, 
possibly to known causes ; but, at all events, to some higher cause 
or law, if at present unknown,” 8 ; 

Secondly, this same ground is taken by many who do not thus 
banish God from his works. They admit that He is everywhere 


3 Sir David Brewster's Life of Newton, vol. ii. p. 154, edit. Edinburgh, 1855. 
3 The Ninth Bridgewater Treatise. By Charles Babbage, Esq. London, 1888, p- 92. 
8 Essays and Reviews; or Recent Inquiries in Theology, p. 160. Boston, 1860. 


= 


§1.] MIRACLES. — THEIR NATURE. 628 


present, and everywhere acting, controlling physical laws so as to 
accomplish his purposes ; but they insist that He never operates 
tmmediately, but always acts through the established laws of 
nature. Thus the Duke of Argyle, whose excellent work on the 
* Reign of Law” is thoroughly religious, says :! “ There is nothing 
in religion incompatible with the belief that all exercises of God’s 
power, whether ordinary or extraordinary, are effected through the 
instrumentality of means — that is to say, by the instrumentality 
of natural laws brought out, as it were, and used for a divine pur- 
pose.” He begins his book with quotations from M. Guizot’s 
work, “ L’Eglise et la Société Chrétienne en 1861,” to the effect 
that belief in the supernatural is the special difficulty of our time ; 
that the denial of it is the form taken by all modern assaults on 
Christian faith ; and that acceptance of it lies at the root, not only 
of Christianity, but of all positive religion whatever. By the 
supernatural, he understood Guizot to mean, what the word does 
properly and commonly mean, namely, what transcends nature ; 
and by nature is meant all things out of God. A supernatural 
event, therefore, in this sense, which is Guizot’s sense of the word, 
is an event which transcends the power of nature, and which is 
due to the immediate agency of God. M. Guizot is undoubtedly 
correct in saying that the belief in the supernatural, thus explained, 
is the great difficulty of the age. The tendency, not only of 
science, but of speculation in all departments, is, at least for the 
time being, to merge everything into nature and to admit of no 
other causes. 

Although the Duke of Argyle is a theist, and admits of the con- 
stant operation of the Divine will in nature, he is still urgent in 
insisting that the power of God in nature is always exercised ac- 
cording to law, and in connection with physical causes. Miracles, 
therefore, differ from ordinary events only in so far as the law 
according to which they come to pass, or the physical forces acting 
in their production are unknown. He quotes with approbation 
from Locke, the following most unsatisfactory definition: “A 
miracle, then, I take to be a sensible operation, which, being above 
the comprehension of the spectator, and, én his opinion, contrary 
to the established course of nature, 7s taken by him to be divine.” 4 
This is the precise view held by Baden Powell, who in the essay 
repeatedly referred to above, makes a miracle a mere matter of 
opinion. It is not a matter of fact to be determined by testimony, 


1 Reign of Law. By the Dnke of Argyle. Fifth edition, London, p. 22. 
2 Reign of Law, pp. 24, 25. 


624 PARI L—THEOLOGY. ([Cu. XI.— Miracrzs. 


but a matter of opinion as to the cause of that fact. The fact 
may be admitted, and one man may say it is due to natural law, 
known or unknown; and then it is no miracle. Another man says 
it is due to the immediate power of God. In that case it is a mira- 
cle. Which of the two is correct, cannot be decided by testimony. 

It must be decided by the general views of nature and of God’s 

relation to the world, which men entertain. The doctrine that 
God works in the external world only through physical force, and 
even that He can act only in that way, leads, of necessity, to the 
conclusion that miracles are events in the external world brought 
about by unknown physical causes. They prove only “ the pres- 
ence of superhuman knowledge and the working of superhuman 
power.” } ; 


Objections to the Doctrine of a Higher Law. 


(1.): With regard to this theory, it may be remarked in the first 
place, that it is a perfectly gratuitous hypothesis. It assumes the 
existence of laws of nature without necessity and without evi- 
dence. By laws, in such connections, is usually meant either the 
ordered sequence of events, or the power by which that sequence 
is secured. In either case there is this ordered sequence. But 
where is the evidence that anywhere in the universe the living of 
the dead, the recovery of the sick, the stilling of the storm, and 
the swimming of iron, follow as matters of course on a command ? 
The Church doctrine on miracles gives a simple, rational, and 
satisfactory account of their occurrence, which renders all assump- 
tion of unknown laws unnecessary and unjustifiable. It is utterly 
impossible to prove, as this theory assumes, that every physical 
effect must havea physical cause. Our own wills are causes in the 
sphere of nature; and the Bare ees will of God is not tied to 
any one mode of operation. 

(2.) This hypothesis is not only unnecessary, but it is unsatis- 
factory. There are miracles which transcend not only all known, 
but all possible laws of nature. Nature cannot create. It cannot 
originate life; otherwise it would be God, and nothing beyond 
nature would be necessary to account for the universe and for all 
that it contains. As, therefore, there are miracles which cannot be 
accounted for by ‘¢a higher law of nature,” it is clear that they are 
to be referred to the finriediate power of God, and not to some un- 
known physical force. All theists are obliged to acknowledge this 


1 Reign of Law, p. 16, note. 


§1.] MIRACLES. — THEIR NATURE. 625 


immediate agency of God in the original act of creation. Then 
there were no laws or forces through which his efficiency could be 
exercised. The fact, therefore,on which the Church doctrine on 
this subject rests must be admitted. 

(3.) The Scriptures not only are silent about any higher law as 
the cause of miraculous events, but they always refer them to the 
immediate power of God. Christ said He cast out devils by the 
finger of God. He never referred to anything but his own will as 
the efficient antecedent of the effect produced, “*I will, be thou 
clean.” He healed by a touch—by a word. When he gave 
miraculous powers to the Apostles, He did not make them alche- 
mists. They did not claim knowledge of occult laws. Peter, 
when called to account for the healing of the lame man in the 
temple, said that it was the name of Christ, faith in his name that 
had made the man every whit whole. It is moreover plain that, 
on this theory, miracles must lose their value as proofs of a divine 
commission. If the Apostles did the wonders which they per- 
formed by the knowledge of, or through the efficiency of natural 
laws, then they are on the level of the experimenter who makes 
water freeze in a red hot spoon. If God be not the author of the 
miracle, it does not prove a divine message. 

(4.) There. is force also in what the Rev. J. B. Mozley says: 
“To say that the material fact which takes place in a miracle 
admits of being referred to an unknown natural cause, is not to 
say that the miracle itself does. A miracle is the material fact as 
coinciding with an express announcement or with express super- 
natural pretensions in the agent. It is this correspondence of two 
facts which constitutes a miracle. If a person says to a blind man, 
‘See,’ and he sees, it is not the sudden return of sight alone that 
we have to account for, but its return at that particular moment. 
For it is morally impossible that this exact agreement of an event 
with a command or notification could have been by mere chance, 
or, as we should say, been an extraordinary coincidence, especially 
if it is repeated in other cases.”1 It is very certain that no one 
who saw Lazarus rise from the grave, when Jesus said, ‘ Lazarus, 
come forth,” ever thought of any physical law as the cause of that 


event. 
Miracles and Extraordinary Providences. 


A third objection urged against the definition above given is, 
that it is not sufficiently comprehensive. It does not cover a large 


1 Kight Lectures on Miracles; by J. B. Mozley, B.D. Bampton Lectures for 1865. 


London, 1865, p. 148. 
VOL. I. 40 


626 PART I.—THEOLOGY. [Ca XII. — Mrracuxs. 


class of miracles recorded in the Scriptures. In the sudden rising 
of a fog which conceals an army and thus saves it from destruction ; 
ina storm which disperses a hostile fleet and thus saves a nation, — 
in any such providential intervention, it is said, we have all the 
elements includéd in many of the miracles recorded in the Bible. 
The events occur in the external world; they are not due to mere 
physical causes, but to such causes guided by the immediate agency 
of God, and directed to the accomplishment of a particular end. 
This is all that can be said of many of the plagues inflicted on the 
Egyptians ; of the flight of quails to supply the wants of the He- 
brews in the desert; and of the draught of fishes recorded in the 
Gospels. 

It is true that the strict definition of a miracle does not include 
events of the kind just mentioned. Such events, therefore, are 
called by Trench “providential,” as distinguished from ‘ absolute 
miracles.” This want of comprehensiveness, however, does not 
seem to be a sufficient reason for rejecting the common definition 
of a miracle. Because there certainly is a class of events to which 
that definition strictly applies; and it is important that those events 
on which such stress is laid in Scripture, should have a designation 
peculiar to themselves, and which expresses their true nature. 
The importance of what are called providential miracles, is not 
lessened by their being thrown into a class by themselves. They 
continue to be clear evidence of divine intervention. As Mr. 
Mozley says, it is not exclusively on the nature of the event that 
its value as evidence depends, but on the attending circumstances. 
_ The flocks of locusts, or of the quails, would not, of themselves, 
have been proof of any special divine intervention ; but taken in 
connection with Moses’ threat in the one case, and promise in the 
other, those events proved as conclusively as the most absolute 
miracle could have done, that he was the messenger of Him who 


could control the laws of nature and constrain them to execute his 
will. 


§ 2. The Possibility of Miracles. 


This is of course denied by all those who do not make any dis- 
tinction between God and nature. This is done by Spinoza and 
all his modern disciples. ‘* Existimant,” says Spinoza, “ Deum 
tamdiu nihil agere, quamdiu natura solito ordine agit; et contra, 
potentiam nature: et causas naturales tamdiu esse otiosas, quam diu 
Deus agit; duas itaque potentias numero ab invicem distinctas im- 
aginantur, scilicet, potentiam Dei et potentiam rerum naturalium, a 


a 


§2.] THD POSSIBILITY OF MIRACLES. 627 


Deo tamen certo modo determinatam.”! As he denies that there 
is any distinction between the power of God and the power of na- 
ture, he of course denies that there is any ground for the distinction 
between natural and supernatural events. Leges nature un 
versales,” he says, ‘mera esse decreta Dei, que ex necessitate et 
perfectione nature divine sequuntur. Si quid igitur in natura con- 
tingeret, quod ejus universalibus legibus repugnaret, id decreto et 
intellectui et nature divine necessario etiam repugnaret ; aut si 
quis statueret, Deum aliquid contra leges nature agere, is simul 
etiam cogeretur statuere, Deum contra suam naturam agere, quo 
nihil absurdius.” . . .. Ex his—sequitur, nomen miraculi non 
nisi respective ad hominum opiniones posse intelligi, et nihil aliud 
significare quam opus, cujus causam naturalem exemplo alterius rei 
solitae explicare non possumus.? . . . . Per Dei directionem intel- 
ligo fixum illum et immutabilem nature ordinem, sive rerum natu- 
ralium concatenationem.— Sive igitur dicamus, omnia secundum 
leges nature fieri, sive ex Dei decreto et directione ordinari, idem 
dicimus.”* The Pantheistic theory, therefore, which teaches 
“that the government of the world is not the determination of 
events by an extramundane intelligence, but by reason as immanent 
in the cosmical forces themselves and in their relations,” ® precludes 
the possibility of a miracle. 

It is only a modification of the same general view when it is 
said that although the worlds material and mental have a real 
existence, there is no causality out of God. Second causes are only 
the occasions or the modes in which the divine efficiency is exerted. 
This doctrine effectually excludes all distinction between the natu- 
ral and the supernatural, between what is due to the immediate 
power of God and what is due to the efficiency of second causes. 
The operations of God, when uniform, we call laws, says Bret- 
schneider; when rare or isolated, we call them miracles. The 
only difference is in our mode of viewing them. A third objec- 
tion of the same general character is that miracles suppose separate, 
individual acts of the divine will, which is inconsistent with the 
nature of an absolute Being. ‘A God who performs individual 
acts, it is very clear, may be a person, but cannot be absolute. In 
turning Himself from one act to another, or now putting forth a 
certain kind of efficiency (the extraordinary), and then resting 


1 De Miracuilis, Tractatus Theologico-politicus, cap. vi.; Opera, edit. Jena, 1802, vol. i p 
233. ; 

2 Ibid. p. 235. 8 Ibid. p. 236. 

4 Tyactatus Theologico-politicus, cap. iii. ut supra, p. 192. 

§ Strauss, Dogmatik, vol. ii. p. 384. 


628 PART I.—THEOLOGY. ([Cn. XII. — Miracues. 


again, He does and is at one moment what He does not and is not 
at another, and thus falls into the category of the changeable, the 
temporary, and the finite. If we continue to regard Him as abso- 
lute, his working is to be conceived as’ an eternal act, simple and 
uniform in its nature as it proceeds from God, and only in the 
phenomenal world revealing its fulness in a series of various and 
changing divine operations,” } 

This is an objection which has already been repeatedly consid- 
ered. All that need be said in answer to it at present, is that it 
proves too much. If valid against miracles, it is valid against the 
doctrine of a creation ex nihilo, against providence, against revela- 
tion, against prophecies, against hearing of prayer, and against all 
the operations of grace. In all these cases.as much as in miracles, 
there is an assumption of direct agency on the part of God. And 
if such immediate agency implies separate acts of the divine will 
in one of these cases, it must in all the rest. So that if the objec- 
tion be valid against miracles it is valid against the doctrine of a 
personal God, and the whole system of natural and revealed relig- 
ion. Whatever evidence, therefore, we have for the being of God 
and for the reality of religion, we have also to prove that this ob- 
jection is sophistical, founded on our ignorance of the mode in 
which the infinite Being reveals and manifests Himself in the 
finite. Nothing is more certain than that God does act everywhere 
and always, and nothing is more inscrutable than the mode of his 
action. 

A fourth objection to miracles is founded on the deistical theory 
that the relation of God to the world is analogous to that of a 
mechanist to a machine. A mechanist has no occasion to interfere 
in the working of an engine which he has made, except to correct 
its irregularities ; so if God interferes in the natural order of events 
as produced by the secondary causes which He has ordained, it can 
only be because of the imperfection of his work. As this cannot 
be rationally admitted, neither can the doctrine of miracles, which 
supposes such special interference, be admitted. This objection is 
answered by showing that the relation of God to the world is not 
that of a mechanist to a machine, but of an every where-present, all- 
controiling, intelligent will. The doctrine of miracles, therefore, is 
founded on the doctrine of theism, that is, of an extramundane 
personal God, who, being distinct from the world, upholds and 
governs it according to his own will. It assumes, moreover, that 
second causes have a real efficiency to which ordinary events are 

1 Strauss, Dogmatik, vol. i. p. 59. 


§ 8.) CAN MIRACLES BE KNOWN? 629 


proximately due; that the divine efficiency does not supersede 
those causes, but upholds and guides them in their operations. 
But at the same time this almighty and omnipresent Being is free 
to act with or without or against those causes, as he sees fit; so that 
it is just as consistent with his nature and with his relation to the 
world that the effects of his power should be immediate, ¢. e., with- 
out the intervention of natural causes, as through their instrumen- 
tality. That this is the true Scriptural doctrine concerning God 
and his relation to the world cannot be disputed. It is admitted 
even by those who deny the truth of the doctrine. ‘Die ganze 
christliche Anschauung von dem Verhiltniss Gottes zur Welt, von 
Schépfung, Vorsehung und Wunder bezeugt diess (namely, that 
the Absolute is a person). Der Persdénlichkeit ist freier Wille 
wesentlich ; die Freiheit verwirklicht sich in einzelnen beliebigen 
Willensacten: durch einen solchen hat Gott die Welt geschaffen, 
durch eine Reihe von solchen regiert er sie, durch solche Acte 
greift er auch ausser der Ordnung seiner continuirlichen weltlen- 
kenden Thitigkeit in die Weltordnung ein.” } 


§ 3. Can a Miracle be known as such ? 


This is denied on various grounds. 

1. It is said, if a miracle be an event which transcends the effi- 
ciency of second causes we must have a perfect knowledge of the 
power of such causes, before we can decide that a particular event 
is miraculous. But as such perfect knowledge is impossible, it 
must be impossible for us to decide whether it is a miracle or not. 
It must be admitted that in many cases the mere nature of an event 
does not afford a certain criterion of its character as natural or 
supernatural. To savages many effects which to us are easily 
accountable as the product of natural causes, appear to be miracu- 
lous. An adept in the arts of legerdemain, or a man of science, 
may do many things entirely unaccountable by the uninitiated, 
which they therefore cannot distinguish from miracles by any- 
thing in the mere nature of the effects themselves. But this ob- 
jection applies only to a certain class of rffiracles. There are some 
events which so evidently transcend the power of nature that there 
ean be no rational doubt as to their supernatural origin. No crea- 
ture can create or originate life, or work without the intervention 
of means. A large class of the miracles recorded in Scripture im- 
ply the exercise of a power which can belong to God alone. The 
multiplying a few loaves and fishes so as to satisfy the hunger of 

1 Strauss, Dogmatik, vol. i. p. 58. 


630 PART I.— THEOLOGY. ([Cu. XIJ.— Mrracwxs. 


thousands of men, raising the dead, and giving sight to the blind 
and hearing to the deaf, not by the appliances of art, but by a com- 
mand, are clearly effects which imply the exercise of almighty 
power. Besides, it is to be considered that the nature of the 
event is not the only criterion by which we are to determine its 
character. To prove an event in the external world to be mirac- 
ulous, we have only to prove that it is not the effect of any natural 
cause, and that it is to be referred to the immediate agency of God. 
To produce this conviction moral evidence is quite as effective as 
any other. Such an event may be, as far as we can see, super- 
natural, either in its nature or in the mode of its occurrence, but 
that alone would not justify us in referring it to God. Much de- 
pends on the character of the agent and the design for which the 
wonder is wrought. If these be evidently bad, we cannot be con- 
vinced that God has wrought a miracle. But if both the char- 
acter of the agent and the design of his work are good, then we are 
easily and rationally convinced that the wonder is really a miracle. 


Lying Wonders. 


2. This remark applies equally to another ground on which it is 
denied that we can certainly determine any event to be miraculous. 
An effect may transcend all the powers of all material causes and 
the power of man, and nevertheless be within the compass of the 
ability of superhuman intelligences. There are rational creatures 
superior to man, endowed with far higher capacities. These ex- 
alted intelligences have access to our world; they do exercise their 
powers in producing effects in the realm of nature; and therefore, 
it is said, we cannot tell whether an event, admitted to be super- 
natural (in the limited sense of that word), is to be referred to God 
or to these spiritual beings. Such is the latitude with which the 
words “signs and wonders” are used in the Scriptures, that they 
apply not only to works due to God’s immediate agency, but to 
those effected by the power of evil spirits. On this account many 
theologians regard the latter as true miracles. They are called 
‘‘lying wonders,” says Gerhard,! not as to their form (or nature), 
but as to their end, 7. e., because designed to promote error. 
Trench takes the same view; he says it is not a matter of doubt 
to him that the Scriptures attribute real wonders to Satan. The 
question is not, Whether the works of the Egyptian Magicians and 
the predicted wonders of Antichrist are to be regarded as tricks 
and juggleries. It may be admitted that they were, or are to be, 

1 Loci Theologici, loc. xxiii. cap. ii. § 274, edit. Tubingen, 1774, vol. xii. p. 102. 


§ 8.) . CAN MIRACLES BE KNOWN? 631 


the works of Satan and his angels. But the question is, Are they 
to be regarded as true miracles? The answer to this question 
depends on the meaning of the word. If by a miracle we mean 
any event transcending the efficiency of physical causes and the 
power of man, then they are miracles. But if we adhere to the 
definition above given, which requires that the event be produced 
by the immediate power of God, they of course are not miracles. 
They are “lying wonders,’ not only because intended to sustain 
the kingdom of lies, but because they falsely profess to be what 
they are not. Thus Thomas Aquinas says:1 “ Demones possunt 
facere miracula: que scilicet homines mirantur, in quantum eorum 
facultatem et cognitionem excedunt.” They are only wonders in 
the sight of men. 

The difficulty of discriminating between miracles and these lying 
wonders, z. e., between the works of God and the works of Satan, 
has been anticipated and provided for by the sacred writers them- 
selves. In Deut. xiii. 1-8, Moses says, “If there arise among you 
a prophet . . . . and giveth thee a sign or a wonder, and the sign 
or the wonder come to pass, whereof he spake unto thee, saying, 
Let us go after other gods, . . . . thou shalt not hearken unto the 
words of that prophet.” In Matt. vii. 22, 23, our Lord says, 
** Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not proph- 
esied in thy name? and in thy name have cast out devils? and in 
thy name done many wonderful works? And then will I profess 
unto them, I never knew you: depart from me, ye that work in- 
iquity.” Matt. xxiv. 24, “There shall arise false Christs, and 
false prophets, and shall shew great signs and wonders; insomuch 
that, if it were possible, they shall deceive the very elect.” In 2 
Thess. ii. 9, the Apostle teaches us that the coming of the man of 
sin shall be “after the working of Satan, with all power and signs 
and lying wonders.” These passages teach that supernatural 
events, 7. e., events transcending the power of material causes and 
the ability of man, may be brought about by the agency of higher 
intelligences ; and that no such supernatural events are to be re- 
garded as of any authority if produced by wicked agents, or for a 
wicked purpose. It was on this principle our Lord answered the 
Pharisees who accused Him of casting out devils by Beelzebub the 
prince of devils. He appealed to the design for which his miracles 
were wrought to prove that they could not be referred to a Satanic 
influence. Satan will not codperate to confirm the truth or to pro- 
mote good. God cannot cvéperate to confirm what is false or to 

1 Summa, part I. quest. exiv. art. 4, edit. Cologne, 1640, p. 208. 


632 PART I.—IHEOLOGY.  [Cu. XII.— Mrracrzs. 


promote evil. So that the character of the agent and the design 
for which a supernatural event is brought about determine whether 
it is truly a miracle, or whether it is one of the- lying wonders of 
the devil. From the Scriptures this criterion of miracles was 
adopted by the Church. Luther says, “‘ Against authenticated 
doctrines, no signs or wonders, however great or numerous, are to 
be admitted; for we have the command of God, who said from 
heaven, ‘ Hear him,’ to listen only unto Christ.” Chemnitz? says, 
“‘ Miracula non debent preeferri doctrine .... neque enim contra 
doctrinam a Deo revelatam ulla miracula valere debent.” Gerhard? 
says, ‘ Miracula, si non habeant doctrinze veritatem conjunctam 
nihil probant.” Brochmann also says,? ‘Ut opus aliquod sit verum 
miraculum duo requiruntur. Unum, est veritas rei; alterum, 
veritas finis.”’ 

To this it may be objected, that it is reasoning in a circle to prove 
the truth of the doctrine from the miracle, and then the truth of 
the miracle from thé doctrine. We answer, however, (1.) That 
this moral criterion is needed only in the doubtful class of miracles. 
There are certain events which from their nature can have no 
other author than God. They transcend not only the powers of 
matter and of man, but all created power. The efficiency of crea- 
tures has known limits, determined, if not by reason, at least by the 
Word of God. (2.) It is not unusual nor unreasonable that two 
kinds of evidence should be dependent and yet mutually confirma- 
tory. In the case of a historian, we may believe his authorities 
to be what he says they are, on account of his character; and we 
may believe his statements on account of his authorities. So we 
may believe a good man, when he says that the wonders which he 
performs are not tricks, or effects produced by the codperation of 
evil spirits, but by the power of God, and we may believe his 
teachings to be divine because of the wonders. The Bible assumes 
that men have an intuitive perception of what is good; and it 
assumes that God is on the side of goodness and Satan on the side 
of evil. If a wonder, therefore, be wrought in favour of what is 
good, it is from God; if in support of what is evil, it is from Satan. 
This is one of the grounds on which Protestants give themselves so 
little concern about the pretended miracles of the Romish church. 
They do not feel it to be necessary to disprove them by a critical 
examination of their nature, or of the circumstances under which 

L Loci Theologici, m1. edit. Frankfort and Wittenberg, 1653, p. 121. 


2% Jbid. loc. xxiii. cap. 11, § 276, edit. Tubingen, 1774, vol. ii. p- 107. 
8 Theol. Syst. ; de Eccles. 1. vii, dub. 12, Ulm and Frankf., 1658, vol. ii. p. 276, b. 


§38.] CAN MIRACLES BE KNOWN? 633 


they were performed, or of the evidence by which they are sup- 
ported. Not one in a thousand of them could stand the test of 
such an examination ; most of them, indeed, are barefaced impos- 
tures openly justified by the authorities on the ground of pious 
frauds. It is a sufficient reason for repudiating, prior to any 
examination, all such pretended miracles, that they are wrought 
in support of an antichristian system, that they are part of a com- 
plicated mass of deceit and evil. 


Insufficiency of Human Testimony. 


There is still another ground on which the possibility of a mira- 
cle’s being known or proved has been denied. It is said that no 
evidence is adequate to establish the occurrence of a miraculous 
event. Our faith in miracles must rest on historical testimony. 
Historical testimony is only the testimony of men liable to be de- 
ceived. All confidence in such testimony is founded on experi- 
ence. Experience, however, teaches that human testimony is not 
always reliable; whereas our experience, that the course of nature 
is uniform, is without exception. It will, therefore, always be 
more probable that the witnesses were mistaken than that the 
course of nature has been violated. This is Hume’s famous argu- 
ment, of which Babbage says that it, ‘divested of its less impor- 
tant adjuncts, never has and never will be refuted.”! He evi- 
dently means that it cannot be refuted except mathematically, 
through the doctrine of probabilities. For he says on a subsequent 
page, that those who support the prejudice against*mathematical 
pursuits, ‘must now be compelled to admit that they have en- 
deavoured to discredit a science which alone can furnish an exact 
refutation of one of the most celebrated arguments against revela- 
tion.” 2 He endeavours to prove the reverse of Hume’s proposi- 
tion; that is, that on the doctrine of probabilities, it is unspeakably 
more probable that there should be a violation of the laws of na- 
ture (e. g., that a dead man should come to life) than that six 
independent witnesses should concur in testifying to the same 
falsehood. The argument may be valid in the view of mathema- 
ticians ; but to ordinary men it seems to be a wrong application of 
the principles of that venerable science. As we cannot determine 
by the law of probabilities a question in esthetics or morals, neither 
can God’s relation to the world, and the use of his power, as in- 
volved in the doctrine of miracles, be thus determined. It does 
not depend on the validity of human testimony. However uncer- 


1 Ninth Bridgewater Treatise, p. 121. 2 Ibid. 132. 


634 PART I.—THEOLOGY.  ([Cu. XI.— Miracuzs. 


tain or unreliable such testimony may be, such events as miracles 
may happen, if consistent with the nature of God, and may be 
rationally believed. There may be proofs of their reality which 
no man can disregard. It is, however, as just remarked, a false 
assumption that human testimony is inadequate to produce absolute 
certainty. Men do not hesitate on the testimony of even two men 
to consign a fellow-man to death. In order that human testimony 
should command assent it must, (1.) Be given in proof of a pos- 
sible event. The impossible cannot be proved by any kind of 
evidence. Professor Powell asks, How much testimony would be 
required to prove that two and two had, on a given occasion, 
made five? As no amount of testimony could prove such an im- 
possibility, the argument is that no amount of evidence can prove 
a miracle. If miracles be impossible, that is an end of the matter. 
No man is so foolish as to pretend that the impossible can be 
proved. (2.) The second condition of the credibility of testimony 
is that the event admit of easy verification. If a man testify that 
he saw a ghost, it may be true that he saw something which hé 
took to be a ghost; but the fact cannot be verified. The resur- 
rection of Christ, for example, the miracle on the truth of which 
our salvation depends, was an event which could be authenticated. 
The identity between the dead and living Jesus could be estab- 
lished beyond the possibility of any reasonable doubt. (8.) The 
witnesses must have satisfactory knowledge or evidence of the 
truth of the facts to which they testify. Had the Apostles seen 
Christ after his resurrection only on one occasion, at a great dis- 
tance, in an obscure light, and only for a fleeting moment, the 
value of their testimony would be greatly impaired. But as they 
saw Him repeatedly during forty days, conversed with Him, ate 
with Him, and handled Him, it is out of the question that they 
should have been mistaken. (4.) The witnesses themselves should 
be sober-minded, intelligent men. (6.) They should be good men. 
The testimony of other men, under these conditions, may be as 
coercive as that of our own senses. And it may be so confirmed 
by collateral evidence, natural and supernatural, by the nature of 
effects produced, and by signs and wonders and gifts of the Holy 
Ghost, as to render unbelief a miracle of folly and wickedness. 
The fallacy of Hume’s argument has often been pointed vut. 
In the first place, it rests on the false assumption that confidence 
in human testimony is founded on experience, whereas it is founded 
on a law of our nature. We cannot help confiding in good men. 
We know that deceit is inconsistent with goodness; and therefore 


§ 4.) THE VALUE OF MIRACLES. 635 


know and are forced to believe, that good men will not intention- 
ally deceive ; and, therefore, by a law of our nature we are com- 
pelled to receive their testimony as to facts within their personal 
knowledge. Experience, instead of being the foundation of belief 
in testimony, corrects our credulity by teaching us the conditions 
under which alone human testimony can be safely trusted. In the 
second place, Hume assumes that there is a violent antecedent 
improbability against the occurrence of a miracle, which only a 
“miraculous”? amount of evidence could counterbalance. It is 
indeed not only incredible, but inconceivable, that a miracle should 
be wrought without an adequate reason. But that God, on great 
occasions and for the highest ends, should intervene with the 
immediate exercise of his power in the course of events, is what 
might be confidently anticipated. Theism being granted, the diffi- 
culty about miracles disappears; but by theism is not meant the 
mere admission that something is God, whether nature, force, 
motion, or moral order ; but the doctrine of a personal extramun 
dane Being, the Creator and Governor of all things, who does 
according to his own will in the army of heaven and among the 
inhabitants of the earth; a God who is untrammelled by cosmical 
influences or laws. j 

In the third place, Hume’s argument assumes that our faith in 
miracles rests exclusively on human testimony. This is not the 
fact. The miracles recorded in the Scriptures are a competent 
part of the great system of truth therein revealed. The whole 
stands or falls together. Our faith in miracles, therefore, is sus- 
tained by all the evidence which authenticates the gospel of Christ. 
And that evidence is not to be even touched by a balance of prob- 
abilities. 


§ 4. The Value of Miracles as a Proof of a Divine Revelation. 


On this subject extreme opinions have been held. On the one 
hand, it has been maintained that miracles are the only satisfactory 
evidence of a divine revelation ; on the other, that they are neither 
necessary nor available. It is argued by some that, as faith must be 
founded on the apprehension of truth as truth, it is impossible that 
any amount of external evidence can produce faith, or enable us to 
see that to be true which we could not so apprehend without it. 
How can a miracle enable us to see a proposition of Euclid to be 
true, or a landscape to be beautiful? Such reasoning is fallacious. 
It overlooks the nature of faith as a conviction of things not seen, 
on adequate testimony. What the Bible teaches on this subject is 


636 PART L.—- THEOLOGY. [Ca. XII.— Mrracres. 


(1.) That the evidence of miracles is important and decisive. 
(2.) That it is, nevertheless, subordinate and inferior to that of 
the truth itself. Both of these points are abundantly evident from 
the language of the Bible and from the facts therein contained. 
(1.) That God has confirmed his revelations, whether made by 
prophets or Apostles, by these manifestations of his power, is of 
itself a sufficient proof of their validity and importance as seals of 
a divine mission. (2.) The sacred writers under both dispensa- 
tions appealed to these wonders as proofs that they were the mes- 
sengers of God. In the New Testament it is said that God con- 
firmed the testimony of his Apostles by signs and wonders and 
divers miracles and gifts of the Holy Ghost. Even our Lord him- 
self, in whom the fulness of the Godhead dwelt bodily, was ap- 
proved by miracles, signs, and wonders which God did by Him. 
(Acts ii. 22.) (8.) Christ constantly appealed to his miracles as 
a decisive proof of his divine mission. ‘ The works,” he says, 
‘‘which the Father hath given me to finish, the same works that 
I do, bear witness of me, that the Father hath sent me.” (John 
v. 20, 836.) And John x. 25, “The works that I do in my Fa- 
ther’s name, they bear witness of me ;” and in verse 38, “ Though 
ye believe not me, believe the works.” John vii. 17, “If any 
man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be 
of God, or whether I speak of myself.” Undoubtedly the highest 
evidence of the truth is the truth itself; as the highest evidence 
of goodness is goodness itself. Christ is his own witness. His 
glory reveals Him, as the Son of God, to all whose eyes the God 
of this world has not blinded. The point which miracles are de- 
signed to prove is not so much the truth of the doctrines taught as 
the divine mission of the teacher. The latter{ indeed, is in order 
to the former. What a man teaches may be true, although not 
divine as to its origin. But when a man presents himself as a 
messenger of God, whether he is to be received as such or not 
depends first on the doctrines which he teaches, and, secondly, 
upon the works which he performs. If he not only teaches doc- 
trines conformed to the nature of God and consistent with the laws 
of our own constitution, but also performs wcerks which evince 
divine power, then we know not only that the doctrines are true, 
but also that the teacher is sent of God. 


CHAPTER XIII. 
ANGELS. 


So much is said in the Scriptures of good and evil angels, and 
such important functions are ascribed to them both in the provi- 
dence of God over the world, and especially in the experience of 
his people and of his Church, that the doctrine of the Bible con- 
cerning them should not be overlooked. That there are intelligent 
creatures higher than man, has been a general belief. It is so con- 
sonant with the analogy of nature as to be in the highest degree 
probable, apart from any direct revelation on the subject. In all 
departments of nature there is a regular gradation from the lower 
to the higher forms of life; from the almost invisible vegetable 
fungus in plants to the cedar of Lebanon; from the minutest ani- 
malcule to the gigantic mammoth. In man we meet with the first, 
and to all appearances the lowest of rational creatures. That he 
should be the only creature of his order is, @ priort, as improbable 
as that insects should be the only class of irrational animals. There 
is every reason to presume that the scale of being among rational 
creatures is as extensive as that in the animal world. The modern 
philosophy which deifies man leaves no room for any order of 
beings above him. But if the distance between God and man be 
infinite, all analogy would prove that the orders of rational crea- 
tures between us and God must be inconceivably numerous. As 
this is in itself probable, it is clearly revealed in the Bible to be 
true. ; 

§ 1. Their Nature. 

As to the nature of angels, they are described, (1.) As pure 
spirits, 2. ¢., immaterial and incorporeal beings. The Scriptures 
do not attribute bodies of any kind to them. On the assumption 
that spirit unconnected with matter cannot act out of itself, that it 
can neither communicate with other spirits nor operate on the 
external world, it was maintained by many, agd so decided in the 
council held at Nice, a. p. 784, that angels had bodies composed of 
ether or light; an opinion which was thought to be favoured by 
such passages as Matt. xxviii. 3, Luke ii. 9, and other passages in 


688 PART I.—THEOLOGY.  ([Cu. XIII.— Anczzs, 


which their luminous appearance and the glory attending their 
presence are spoken of, The Council of Lateran, a. p. 1215, 
decided that they were incorporeal, and this has been the common 
opinion in the Church. They are declared to be substantize 
spirituales, omnis corporez molis expertes.” As such, therefore, 
they are invisible, incorruptible, and immortal, Their relation to 
space is described as an dlocalitas ; not ubiquity or omnipresence, 
as they are always somewhere and not everywhere at any given 
moment, but they are not confined to space circumscriptively as 
budies are, and can move from one portion of space to another. As 
spirits they are possessed of intelligence, will, and power. With 
regard to their knowledge, whether as to its modes or objects, 
nothing special is revealed. All that is clear is that in their intel- 
lectual faculties and in the extent of their knowledge they are far 
superior to man. Their power also is very great, and extends 
over mind and matter. They have the power to communicate one 
with another and with other minds, and to produce effects in the 
natural world. The greatness of their power is manifest, (a.) From 
the names and titles given to them, as principalities, powers, do- 
minions, and world-rulers. (6.) From the direct assertions of Scrip- 
ture, as .they are said to ‘excel in strength;”’ and (¢.) From the 
effects attributed to their agency. However great their power may 
be, it is nevertheless subject to all the limitations which belong to 
creatures. Angels, therefore, cannot create, they cannot change 
substances, they cannot alter the laws of nature, they cannot per- 
form miracles, they cannot act without means, and they cannot 
search the heart; for all these are, in Scripture, declared to be 
prerogatives peculiar to God. The power of angels is, therefore, 
(1.) Dependent and derived. (2.) It must be exercised in accord- 
ance with the laws of the material and spiritual world. (8.) Their 
intervention is not optional, but permitted or commanded by God, 
and at his pleasure, and, so far as the external world is concerned, 
it would seem to be only occasional and exceptional. These limi- 
tations are of the greatest practical importance. We are not to 
regard angels as intervening between us and God, or to attribute 


to them the effects which the Bible everywhere refers to the provi- 
dential agency of God. 


Wrong Views on the Subject. 


This Scriptural doctrine, universally received in the Church, 
stands opposed, (1.) To the theory that they were transient emana- 
tions from the Deity. (2.) To the Gnostic view that they were 


§§ 2,3.) ANGELS.— THEIR STATE AND EMPLOYMENTS. 639 


permanent emanations or eons; and (8.) To the rationalistic view, 
which denies them any real existence, and’ refers the Scriptural 
statements either to popular superstitions adopted by the sacred 
writers in accommodation to the opinions of the age, or to poetical 
personifications of the powers of nature. The grounds on which 
the modern philosophy denies the existence of angels have no force 
in opposition to the explicit statements of the Bible, which cannot 
be rejected without rejecting the authority of Scripture altogether, 
or adopting such principles of interpretation as destroys its value as 
a rule of faith. 
§ 2. Their State. 

As to the state of the angels, it is clearly taught that they were 
all originally holy. It is also plainly to be inferred from the state- 
ments of the Bible that they were subjected to a period of proba- 
tion, and that some kept and some did not keep their first estate. 
Those who maintained their integrity are represented as confirmed 
in a state of holiness and glory. This condition, although one of 
complete security, is one of perfect liberty ; for the most absolute 
freedom in action is, according to the Bible, consistent with abso- 
lute certainty as to the character of that action. These holy angels 
are evidently not all of the same rank. This appears from the 
terms by which they are designated; terms which imply diversity 
of order and authority. Some are princes, others potentates, oth- 
ers rulers of the world. Beyond this the Scriptures reveal nothing, 
and the speculations of schoolmen and theologians as to the hier- 
archy of the angelic hosts, have neither authority nor value. 


§ 3. Their Employments. 


The Scriptures teach that the holy angels are employed, (1.) In 
the worship of God. (2.) In executing the will.of God. (8.) And 
especially in ministering to the heirs of salvation. They are rep- 
resented as surrounding Christ, and as ever ready to perform any 
service in the advancement of his kingdom that may be assigned to 
them. “Under the Old Testament they repeatedly appeared to the 
servants of God to reveal to them his will. They smote the Egyp- 
tians; were employed in the giving of the law at Mount Sinai; 
attended the Israelites during their journey ; destroyed their ene- 
mies; and encamped around the people of God as a defence in 
hours of danger. They predicted and celebrated the birth of 
Christ (Matt. i. 20; Luke i. 11); they ministered to Him in his 
temptation and sufferings (Matt. iv. 11; Luke xxii. 43) 5 and they 
announced his resurrection and ascension (Matt. xxviii. 2; John 


640 PART L—THEOLOGY. [Cu. XIII.— Anczzs. 


xx. 12; Acts i. 10,11). They are still ministering spirits to be- 
lievers (Heb. i. 14) ; they delivered Peter from prison ; they watch 
over children (Matt. xviii. 10) ; they bear the souls of the departed 
to Abraham’s bosom (Luke xvi. 22) ; they are to attend Christ at 
his second coming, and gather his people into his kingdom (Matt. 
xiii. 89; xvi. 27; xxiv. 31). Such are the general statements of 
the Scriptures on this subject, and with these we should be con- 
tent. We know that they are the messengers of God; that they 
are now and ever have been employed in executing his commis- 
sions, but further than this nothing is positively revealed. Whether 
each individual believer has a guardian angel is not declared with 
any clearness in the Bible. The expression used in Matt. xviil. 
10, in reference to the little children, ‘“‘ whose angels” are said to 
behold the face of God in heaven, is understood by many to favour 
thisassumption. So also is the passage in Acts xii. 7, where Peter’s 
angel is spoken of (verse 15). This latter passage, however, no 
more proves that Peter had a guardian angel than if the servant 
maid had said it was Peter’s ghost it would prove the popular 
superstition on that subject. The language recorded is not of an 
inspired person, but of an uneducated servant, and can have no 
didactic authority. It only goes to prove that the Jews of that 
day believed in spiritual apparitions. The passage in Matthew 
has more pertinency. It does teach that children have guardian 
angels; that is, that angels watch over their welfare. But it does 
not prove that each child, or each believer, has his own guardian 
angel. In Daniel, ch. x., mention is made of the Prince of Persia, 
the Prince of Grecia, and, speaking to the Hebrews, of Michael 
your Prince, in such a way as to lead the great majority of com- 
mentators and theologians in all ages of the Church to adopt the 
opinion that certain angels are intrusted with the special oversight 
of particular kingdoms. As Michael, who is called the Prince of 
the Hebrews, was not the uncreated angel of the covenant, nor a 
human prince, but an archangel, the inference seems natural that 
the Prince of Persia and the Prince of Grecia were also angels. 
This opinion, however, has been controverted on various grounds. 
(1.) On the silence of Scripture elsewhere on the subject. Neither 
in the Old nor in the New Testament do we find any intimation 
that the heathen nations have or had either a guardian angel or an 
evil spirit set over them. (2.) In verse 18 of the tenth chapter of 
Daniel the powers who were arrayed against Michael the angel 
who appeared to the prophet, are called “the kings of Persia;” 
at least, according to one interpretation of that passage. (8.) In 


§3.] ANGELS. — THEIR EMPLOYMENTS. 641 


the following chapter earthly sovereigns are introduced in such a 
way as to show that they, and not angels good or bad, are the con- 
tending powers indicated by the prophet.1 It is certainly unad- 
visable to adopt on the authority of a doubtful passage in a single 
book of Scripture a doctrine unsupported by other parts of the 
Word of God. While this must be admitted, yet it is neverthe- 
less true that the ordinary interpretation of the language of the 
prophet is altogether the most natural one; and that there is 
nothing in the doctrine thus taught out of analogy with the clear 
teaching of the Scriptures. It is plain from what is elsewhere 
taught that spiritual beings higher than man, both good and evil, 
do exist; that they are exceedingly numerous; that they are very 
powerful; that they have access to our world, and are occupied 
in its affairs; that they are of different ranks or orders; and that 
their names and titles indicate that they exercise dominion and act 
as rulers. This is true of evil, as well as of good angels; and, be- 
ing true, there is nothing in the opinion that one particular angel 
should have special control over one nation, and another over 
another nation, that is in conflict with the analogy of Scripture. 

So far, however, as the good angels are concerned, it is clear, — 

1. That they can and do produce effects in the natural or ex- 
ternal world. The Scriptures everywhere assume that matter and 
mind are two distinct substances, and that the one can act upon 
the other. We know that our minds act upon our bodies, and that 
our minds are acted upon by material causes. There is nothing, 
therefore, beyond even the teaching of experience, in the doctrine 
that spirits may act on the material world. The extent of their 
agency is limited by the principles above stated; and yet from 
their exalted nature the effects which they are able to produce may 
far exceed our comprehension. An angel slew all the first-borr 
of the Egyptians in a single night ; the thunder and lightning at- 
tending the giving of the law on Mount Sinai were produced by 
angelic agency. The ancient theologians, in many cases, drew 
from the admitted fact that angels do thus operate in the external 
world, the conclusion that all natural effects were produced by 
their agency, and that the stars were moved in their courses by 
the power of angels. But this is in violation of two obvious and 
important principles: First, that no cause for an effect should be 
assumed without evidence; and Second, that no more causes 
should be assumed than are necessary to account for the effect. 
We are not authorized, therefore, to attribute any event to angelic 

1 See Hivernick on Daniel x. 13. 
voL I. 41 


642 PART I.—THEOLOGY.  [Cu. XIII. — ANGELS. 


interference except on the authority of Scripture, nor when other 
causes are adequate to account for it. 

2, The angels not only execute the will of God in the natural 
world, but they also act on the minds of men. They have access 
to our minds and can influence them for good m accordance with 
the laws of our nature and in the use of appropriate means. They 
do not act by that direct operation, which is the peculiar preroga- 
tive of God and his Spirit, but by the suggestion of truth and 
guidance of thought and feeling, much as one man may act upon 
another. If the angels may communicate one with another, there 
is no reason why they may not, in like manner, communicate with 
our spirits. In the Scriptures, therefore, the angels are represented 
as not only affording general guidance and protection, but also as 
giving inward strength and consolation. If an angel strengthened 
our Lord himself after his agony in the garden, his people also 
may experience the support of angels; and if evil angels tempt to 
sin, good angels may allure to holiness. Certain it is that a wide 
influence and operation are attributed to them in Scripture in fur- 
thering the welfare of the children of God, and in protecting them 
from evil and defending them from their enemies. The use which 
our Lord makes of the promise, ‘‘ He shall give his angels charge 
over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. ‘They shall bear thee up 
in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone” (Ps. xci. 
11, 12), shows that it is not to be taken as a mere poetic form of 
promising divine protection. They watch over infants (Matt. 
xvill. 10); they aid those of mature age (Ps. xxxiv. 7), and are 
present with the dying (Luke xvi. 22). 

3. A special agency is also attributed to them as the servants 
of Christ in the advancement of his Church. As the law was 
given through their ministry, as they had charge of the theo- 
cratic people under the old economy, so they are spoken of. as 
being still present in the assembly of the saints (1 Cor. xi. 10), 
and as constantly warring against the dragon and his angels. 

This Scriptural doctrine of the ministry of angels is full of con- 
' solation for the people of God. They may rejoice in the assurance 
that these holy beings encamp round about them; defending them 
day and night from unseen enemies and unapprehended dangers. 
At the same time they must not come between us and God. We 
are not to look to them nor to invoke their aid. They are in the 
hands of God and exercise his will; He uses them as He does the 
winds and the lightning (Heb. i. 7), and we are not to look to the 
instruments in the one case more than in the other. 


§4.] EVIL ANGELS. 643 


§ 4. Hvil Angels. 

The Scriptures inform us that certain of the angels kept not 
their first estate. They are spoken of as the angels that sinned. 
They are called evil, or unclean spirits ; principalities ; powers ; 
rulers of this world; and spiritual wickednesses (7. e., wicked spirits) 
‘in high places. The most common designation given to them is 
Saiuoves, or more commonly dayuéva, which our translators unfortu- 
nately render devils) The Scriptures make a distinction between 
Sid Boros and datuwv, which is not observed in the English version. 
In the spiritual world there is only one SiéBoros (devil), but there 
are many Sauda (demons). These evil spirits are represented as 
belonging to the same order of beings as the good angels. All the 
names and titles, expressive of their nature and powers, given to 
the one are also given to the others. Their original condition was 
holy. When they fell or what was the nature of their sin is not 
revealed. The general opinion is that it was pride, founded on 
1 Tim. iii. 6. A bishop, the Apostle says, must not be “a novice, 
lest being lifted up with pride he fall into the condemnation of the 
devil ;’? which is commonly understood to mean the condemnation 
which the devil incurred for the same sin. Some have conjectured 
that Satan was moved to rebel against God and to seduce our race 
from its allegiance, by the desire to rule over our globe and the 
race of man. Of this, however, there is no intimation in Scrip- 
ture. His first appearance in the sacred history is in the character 
of an apostate angel. That there is one fallen angel exalted in 
rank and power above all his associates is clearly taught in the 
Bible. He is called Satan (the adversary), Si Boros, the traducer, 
6 zovnpds, the evil one; the prince of the power of the air; the | 
prince of darkness ; the God of this world ; Beelzebub ; Belial ; 
the tempter; the old serpent; and the dragon. These, and sim- 
ilar titles set him forth as the great enemy of God and man, the 
opposer of all that is good and the promoter of all that is evil. He 
is so constantly represented as a personal being, that the rational- 
istic notion that. he is only a personification of evil, is irreconcila- 
ble with the authority of Scripture and inconsistent with the faith 
of the Church. The opinion that the doctrine of Satan was in- 
troduced among the Hebrews after the Exile, and from a heathen 
source, is no less contrary to the plain teachings of the Bible. 
He is represented as the tempter of our first parents, and is dis- 
tinctly ‘mentioned in the book of Job written long before the 
Babylonish captivity. Besides this representation of Satan in 


644 PART J.— THEOLOGY. [Cu. XII. — Anarts. 


general terms as the enemy of God, he is specially set forth in 
Scripture, as the head of the kingdom of darkness, which em- 
braces all evil beings. Man by his apostasy fell under the dominion 
of Satan, and his salvation consists in his being translated from 
Satan’s kingdom into the kingdom of God’s dear Son. That the 
Saiudvea. who are represented as subject to Satan, are not the spirits 
of wicked men who have departed this life, as some have main- 
tained, is clear. (1.) Because they are distinguished from the 
elect angels. (2.) From its being said that they kept not their 
first state (Jude 6). (8.) From the language of 2 Pet. i. 4, 
where it is said God spared not the angels that sinned. (4.) 
From the application to them of the titles ‘ principalities” and 
“powers,” which are appropriate only to beings belonging to the 
order of angels. 


Power and Agency of Evil Spirits. 


As to the power and agency of these evil spirits, they are repre- 
sented as being exceedingly numerous, as everywhere efficient, as 
having access to our world, and as operating in nature and in the 
minds of men. The same limitations, of course, belong to their 
agency as belong to that of the holy angels. (1.) They are 
dependent on God, and can act only under his control and by his 
permission. (2.) Their operations must be according to the laws 
of nature, and, (8.) They cannot interfere with the freedom and 
responsibility of men. Augustine says of Satan: ‘* Consentientes 
tenet, non invitos cogit.” Nevertheless, his power is very great. 
Men are said to be led captive by him; evil spirits are said to 
work in the hearts of the disobedient. Christfans are warned 
against their devices, and called upon to resist them, not in their 
own strength, but in the strength of the Lord and armed with the 
whole panoply of God. 

Great evils, however, have arisen from exaggerated views of the 
agency of evil spirits. To them have been referred, not only all 
natural calamities, as storms, conflagrations, pestilences, etc., but 
what was far more lamentable, they have been regarded as entering 
into covenant with men. It was thought that any person could 
enter into a contract with Satan and be invested for a season with 
supernatural power upon condition that the person thus endowed 
yielded his soul to perdition. On this foundation rested the numer- 
ous prosecutions for witchcraft and sorcery which disgraced the 
annals of all Christian nations during the seventeenth and eight- 
eenth centuries. The most enlightened men of Europe yielded 


$4.) EVIL ANGELS. 645 


themselves to this delusion, under which thousands of men and 
women, and even children, were put to the most cruel deaths. It 
-is not necessary to go to the opposite extreme and deny all agency 
of evil spirits in nature or over the bodies and minds of men, in 
order to free ourselves from such evils. It is enough to adhere to 
the plain teaching of the Bible. These spirits can only act, as 
before stated, in accordance with the laws of nature and the free 
agency of man ; and their influence and operations can no more be | 
detected and judicially proved than the influence and operations of 
holy angels for good. Both classes are efficient; we are to be 
thankful to God for the unseen and unknowable ministry of the 
angels of light, and be on our guard and seek divine protection 
from the machinations of the spirits of evil. But of neither are we 
directly conscious, and to the agency of neither can we with cer- 
tainty refer any specific effect, if its occurrence admits of any 
other explanation. 


Demoniacal Possessions. 


The most marked exhibition of the power of evil spirits over the 
bodies and minds of men, is afforded by the demoniacs so often 
mentioned in the evangelical history. These demoniacal posses- 
sions were of two kinds. First, those in which the soul alone was 
the subject of the diabolic influence, as in the case of the “ damsel 
possessed with a spirit of divination,” mentioned in Acts xvi. 16. 
Perhaps in some instances false prophets and magicians were exam- 
ples of the same kind of possession. Secondly, those in which the 
bodies alone, or as was more frequently the case, both the body and 
mind were the subjects of this spiritual influence. By possession 
is meant the inhabitation of an evil spirit in such relation to the 
body and soul as to exert a controlling influence, producing violent 
agitations and great suffering, both mental and corporeal. That 
the demoniacs mentioned in the New Testament were not mere 
lunatics or the subjects of epilepsy or other analogous diseases, but 
cases of real possession, is plain, First, because this was the prevail- 
ing belief of the Jews at that time; and secondly, because Christ 
and his Apostles evidently adopted and sanctioned that belief. 
They not only called those thus affected demoniacs, but addressed 
the spirits as persons, commanded them, disposed of them, and in 
every way spoke and acted as they would have done had the popu- 
lar belief been well founded. It is certain that all who heard 
Christ thus speak would and did conclude that he regarded the 
demoniacs as really possessed by evil spirits. This conclusion he 


646 PART I.—THEOLOGY.  [Cu. XII.— AncELs. 


nowhere contradicts ; but on the contrary, in his most private con- 
ferences with the disciples abundantly confirmed. He promised to 
give them power to cast out demons ; and referred to his possession 
of this power, and his ability to delegate its exercise to his disci- 
ples as one of the most convincing proofs of his Messiahship and 
divinity. He came to destroy the works of the devil; and that 
He did thus triumph over him and his angels, proved that He was 
what He claimed to be, the promised almighty king and conqueror, 
who was to found that kingdom of God of which there is to be no 
end. To explain all this on the principle of accommodation would 
destroy the authority of Scripture. On the same principle the doc- 
trine of atonement, inspiration, divine influence, and every other 
distinctive doctrine of the Bible, may be, and has been explained 
away. We must take the Scriptures in their plain historical sense 
— in that sense in which they were designed to be understood by 
those to whom they were addressed, or we do thereby reject them 
as a rule of faith. 

There is no special improbability in the doctrine of demoniacal 
possessions. Evil spirits do exist. They have access to the minds 
and bodies of men. Why should we refuse to believe, on the au- 
thority of Christ, that they were allowed to have special power 
over some men? The world, since the apostasy, belongs to the 
kingdom of Satan; and to redeem it from his dominion was the 
special object of the mission of the Son of God. It is not surpris- 
ing, therefore, that the time of his advent, was Satan’s hour; the 
time when, to a greater degree than before or after, he manifested 
his power, thus making the fact of his overthrow the more conspic- 
uous and glorious. 

The objections to the common doctrine on this subject are, — 

1. That calling certain persons demoniacs no more proves that 
they were possessed by evil spirits, than calling others lunatics, 
proves that they were under the influence of the moon. This is 
true; and if the argument rested only on the use of the word de- 
moniac, it would be altogether insufficient to establish the doctrine. 
But this is only a collateral and subordinate argument, without 
force in itself, but deriving force from other sources. If the sacred 
writers, besides designating the deranged as lunatics, had spoken 
of the moon as the source of their derangement, and had referred 
to its different phases as increasing or lessening the force of their 
mental disorder, there would be some analogy between the cases. 
It is readily admitted that the use of a word is often very different 
from its primary signification, and therefore that its meaning can 


§ 4.) EVIL ANGELS. 647 


not always be determined by its etymology. But when its signifi- 
cation is the same with its usage ; when those called demoniacs 
-are said to be possessed with evil spirits; when those spirits are 
addressed as persons, and commanded to depart; and when this 
power over them is appealed to as proof of Christ’s power over 
Satan, the prince of these fallen angels ; then it is unreasonable to 
deny that the word is to be understood in its literal and proper 
sense, 

A second objection is that the phenomena exhibited by those 
called demoniacs are those of known bodily or mental diseases, and 
therefore that no other cause can rationally be assumed to account 
for them. It is not, however, true that all the phenomena in ques- 
tion can be thus accounted for. Some of the symptoms are those 
of lunacy and epilepsy, but others are of a different character. 
These demoniacs often exhibited supernatural power or knowl- 
edge. Besides this, the Scriptures teach that evil spirits have 
power to produce bodily disease. And therefore the presence of 
such disease is no proof that the agency of evil spirits was not 
active in its production and its consequences. 

3. It is further objected that such cases do not now occur. This 
is by no means certain. The evil spirits do now work in the chil- 
dren of disobedience, and for what we know they may now work 
in some men as effectually as in the ancient demoniacs. But ad- 
mitting the fact to be as assumed, it would prove nothing to the 
point. There may have been special reasons for allowing such dis- 
plays of Satanic power when Christ was on earth, which no longer 
exist. That miracles are not wrought in the Church now, is no 
proof that they were not wrought during the apostolic age. 

We are not to deny what are plainly recorded in the Scriptures 
as facts on this subject; we have no right to assert that Satan and 
his angels do not now in any cases produce similar effects ; but we 
should abstain from asserting the fact of Satanic or demoniacal in- 
fluence or possession in any case where the phenomena can be | 
otherwise accounted for. The difference between believing what- 
ever is possible, and believing only what is certain is strikingly il- 
lustrated in the case of Luther and Calvin. The former was dis 
posed to refer all evil to the spirits of* darkness; the latter referred 
nothing to their agency that could not be proved to be actually 
their work. Luther! says: ‘“ Die Heiden wissen nicht, woher das 
Ungliick so plétzlich kommt ; aber wir wissen es, dass es eitel 
Teufels Arbeit ist, der hat solche Helleparten, Bleikugeln und 

1 Werke, edit. Walch, vol. xiii. p. 2850. (?) 


648 PART I.—THEOLOGY. ([Cu. XII. — AneczEts, 


Biichsen, solche Spiesse und Schwerter, damit er unter uns 
schiesst, wirft und sticht, wenn Gott es ihm erlaubt. Darum zweifle 
nur Niemand dran, wo ein Feuer aufgehet, dass ein Dorf oder ein 
Haus abbrennet, da sitzt allewege ein Teufelein dabei, das blaset 
immer in das Feuer, dass es soll grosser werden.” ‘ Ein Christ 
soll das wissen, dass er mitten unter den Teufeln sitze, und dass 
ihm der Teufel naher sei denn sein Rock oder Hemde, ja naher 
denn seine eigene Haut, dass er rings um uns her sei, und wir also 
stets mit ihm zu Haare liegen und uns mit ihm schlagen miissen.” } 
“The heathen know not whence evil so suddenly comes. But we 
know. It is the pure work of the devil; who has fire-brands, bul- 
lets, torches, spears, and swords, with which he shoots, casts, or 
pierces, when God permits. Therefore let no man doubt when a 
fire breaks out which consumes a village or a house, that a little 
devil is sitting there blowing the fire to make it greater.” Again, 
‘“‘ Let a Christian know that he sits among devils: that the devil 
is nearer to him than his coat or his shirt, or even his skin; that 
he is all about us, and that we must always grapple with and fight 
him.” Calvin’s view of the subject is,” “ Que de diabolis Scrip- 
tura tradit, eo fere tendunt omnia, ut solliciti simus ad precaven- 
das eorum insidias et molitiones: tum iis armis nos instruamus, 
que ad propulsandos potentissimos hostes satis firma sint ac valida.” 
And he asks,® “* Quid nostra refert vel plura, vel in alium finem de 
diabolis scire ? ” 


1 Edit. Walch, vol. x p. 1284; edit. Erlangen, 1828, vol. xvii. p. 178. 
2 Institviio, 1. xii. 18. 8 Ibid. 16. 


+ 
7 
att ae 


2 


itin'> Ss Tega 
Sena 3 g 
sass 


Niet 


. se 
Iisa 


ees 
vaya parece 
ae 


Thee 
eee 


raat oor 
ee reere ere 
Serer 
ES aia ate ee 


Ss 
rh ae 
hie se 
fat 


re 
i 

F. 
Sti 


#3 
ey 


mS 


Stans ys Peachey a 
“ i we Rin AR +t ‘ i aaa a 
SRN SEES 


*. 


t 
oy 
SSR 


see 


pent 
Wasa 
i 
Sek x anata! e 
er eet 


“Y 


* \ 
Sue a 

ety BS) 
x 


q 


‘ 


_
