Weird Tales (E. T. A. Hoffmann, 1885)
==========================================================
The founding collection of the literary fantastic; Hoffmann invented the uncanny tale. Public domain. Source note: Internet Archive scan (weirdtales03bealgoog).

Google 


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 


^fft'Ti. .ic if(|) 


iBartart Colltgt libratp 

THE BEQ' 
\ 


s 


WEIRD TALES. 


3 


E. T. W. Hoffmann 


WEIRD TALES 


BY 


E. T. W. HOFFMANN 


A NEW TRANSLATION PROU THE QERUAN 

iwilth n Ktoflrnrbtcnl /Iftcmotr 
By J. T. BEALBY, B.A. 

FORMERLY SCHOLAR OF CORPUS CHRISTI COLLEGE, CAMBRI1X» 


CDitt Cletien Ctctingg b|? 20. JltUa^e 


IN TWO VOLUMES 


VOL. L 


LONDON 

JOHN C Nli\[M(> 
14, KING WILLIAM STREET, STRAND, W.C. 

1885 


HARVARD COLLEGE LIBRARY 
BeO'JEST OF 
WINWAftO PRESCOn 
JANUARY 27, 1933 


V 


CONTENTS OF VOL. I. 

Q— 

fAGK 

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE Ix 

THE CREMONA VIOLIN i 

THE FERMATA 33 

SIGNOR FORMICA 60 

THE SAND.MAN 173 

THE ENTAIL 223 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 

VOL. I. 

PORTRAIT OF THE AUTHOR Fnmti^Uie 

THE CREMONA VIOLIN Paff i 

THE FERMATA 3a 

SIGNOR FORMICA 60 

THE SAND-MAN 17a 

THE ENTAILED ESTATE 333 


PUBUSHER'S NOTICE. 

One thousand copUi 0/ this Edition have been printed and 
the type distributed. No more will be publisked. 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE.^ 


-M- 


LiKE many others whose pens have been employed i^ 
authorship, the subject of this notice, Ernst Theodor Wil- 
helm ^ Hoffmann, led a very chequered life, the various facts 
and incidents of which throw a good deal of light upon his 
writings. 

Hoffmann was born at Konigsberg in Prussia on the 24th 
January 1776.^ His parents were very ill-assorted, and Jed 
such an unhappy life that they parted in young Ernst^s third 
year. His father, who was in the legal profession, was a 
man of considerable talent and of acute intellect, but 
irregular and wild in his habits and given to reprehensible 
practices. His mother, on the contrary, the daughter of 
Consistorialrath Dorffer, had been trained up on the strictest 
moral principles, and to habits of orderliness and propriety ; 
and to her regard for outward conformity to old-established 

^ The chief sources for this biographical notice have been E. T. A. 
Hoffmantis Ltben und Nacklass, van y, G. Hitzig^ heratisg. van Mickt' 
line Hoffmann^ geb. Rarer ^ 5 vols., Stuttgart, 1839 ; Erinnerungen aus 
meinem Leben^ von Z. Funck (C. Kunz], Leipsic, 1836 ; and various 
minor essays and papers. 

* Later in life he adopted the name of "Amadeus" instead of 
"Wilhelm," out of admiration for Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, the 
great musician (see Erinng.^ pp. 77-80). 

' Another account (see H. Boring's article "Hoffmann," in Ersch 
und Gruber's Allgem, Encyk,) states 21st Jan. 1778. The date in the 
text is the one, however, that is generally accepted, and now without 
question ; it is the one confirmed by Hoffmann himself (cf. Letter 15 in 
LebtnY 

VOL. I. b 


X BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. 

forms and conyentional routine was added a weak and ail- 
ing condition of body, which made her for the most part 
a confirmed invalid. When, in 1782, the elder Hoffmann 
was promoted to the dignity of judge and transferred to a 
criminal court at Insterburg (Prussia), Ernst was taken into 
the house of his maternal grandmother ; and his father 
appears never to have troubled himself further either about 
him or his elder brother, who afterwards took to evil ways. 
The brothers in all probability never met again, though 
an unfinished letter, dated loth July 181 7, found amongst 
Hoffmann's papers after his death, was evidently written to 
his brother in reply to one received from him requesting 
pecuniary assistance. 

In his grandmother's house young Hoffmann spent his 
boyhood and youth. The members of the household were 
four, the grandmother, her son, her two daughters, of whom 
one was the boy's invalid mother. The old lady, owing to 
her great age, was also virtually an invalid ; so that both she 
and her daughter scarcely ever left their room, and hence 
their influence upon young Ernst's education and training 
was practically nil. His uncle, however, after an abortive 
attempt to follow the law, had settled down to a quiet 
vegetative sort of existence, which he regulated strictly 
according to fixed rules and methodical procedure; and 
\hese he imposed more or less upon the household. Justiz- 
rath Otto (or Ottchen, as his mother continued to call hina 
to her life's end), though acting as a dead weight upon his 
high-spirited, quick-witted nephew's intellectual develop- 
ment, by his efforts to mould him to his own course of life 
and his own unpliant habits of thought, nevertheless planted 
certain seeds in the boy's mind which proved of permanent 
service to him throughout all his subsequent career. To 
this precise and order-loving uncle he owed his first thorough 
grounding in the elements of music, and also his persevering 
industry and sense of method and precision. As uncle and 
nephew shared the same sitting-room and the same sleeping- 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. xi 

chamber, and as the fonner would never suffer any depar- 
ture from the established routine of things, the boy Ernst 
b^an not only to look forward to the one afternoon a week 
when Otto went out to make his calls, but also to study 
narrowly his uncle's habits, and to play upon his weaknesses 
and turn them to his own advantage, so that by the time he 
was twelve years old he was quite an adept at mystifying 
the staid old gentleman. His aunt, an unmarried lady, was 
cheerful, witty, and full of pleasant gaiety; she was the 
only one who understood and appreciated her clever 
nephew ; indeed she was so fond of him, and humoured him 
to such an extent, that she is said to have spoiled him. It 
was to her he poured out all his childish troubles and all 
his boyish confidences and weaknesses. Her love he re- 
paid with faithful affection, and he has memorialised it in a 
touching way in the character of " Tante Fusschen " in JCater 
Murr (PL I.), where also other biographical details of this 
period may be read. Of his poor mother, feeble in body 
and in mind aUke, Hoffmann only spoke unwillingly, but 
always with deep respect mingled with sadness. 

Two others persons must be mentioned as having exercised 
a lasting influence upon his early life. One of these was 
an old great-uncle, Justizrath Vothory, brother of both his 
grandmothers, and a gentleman of Hungarian origin. This 
excellent man was retired from all business, with the ex- 
ception that he continued to act as justiciary for the estates 
of certain well-tried friends. He used to visit the various 
properties at stated seasons of the year, and was always a 
welcome guest ; for this " hero of olden times in dressing- 
gown and slippers," as Wilibald Alexis called him, was the 
V — who figures so genially in Bos Majorat (" The Entail "). 
The old gentleman once took his great-nephew with him on 
one of these trips, and to it we are indebted for this master- 
piece of Hoffmann. The other person who gave a bent to 
young Ernst's mind was Dr. Wannowski, the head of the 
German Reformed School in Konigsberg, where the boy 


xii BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. 

was sent in his sixth or seventh year. Wannowski, who 
possessed the faculty of awakening slumbering talent in his 
pupils, and attracting them to himself, enjoyed the friend- 
ship and intercourse of Kant, Hippel (the elder), Scheffner, 
Hamann, and others, and might perhaps lay claim to be 
called a Prussian Dr. Arnold, owing to the many illustrious 
pupils he turned out 

During the . first seven years of his school-days young 
Hoffmann was in nowise distinguished above his school- 
fellows either for industry or for quickness of parts. But 
when he reached his thirteenth or fourteenth year, his taste 
for both music and painting was awakened. His liking for 
these two arts was so genuine and sincere, and conse- 
quently his progress in them so rapid, that he came to be 
looked upon as a child-wonder. He would sit down at a 
piano and play improvisations and other compositions of 
his own creation, to the astonishment of all who heard him ; 
for his performances, though somewhat fantastic, were not 
wanting in talent and originality, and his diminutive stature 
made him appear some years younger than he really was. 
In drawing he early showed a decided inclination for cari- 
cature, and in this his quickness of perception and accuracy 
in reproduction proved of permanent service to him. Later 
he endeavoured to improve himself both in theory and in prac- 
tice in higher styles also : in the former by diligent study of 
Winckelmann, and in the latter by copying the models of the 
art treasures of Herculaneum preserved in the Royal Library. 

In his eleventh year Hoffmann made the acquaintance of 
Theodor von Hippel, nephew of T. G. Hippel, author of 
Die Lebmsldufe in aufsteigender Linie^ a boy one month 
older than himself. The acquaintance ripened into a warm 
fast friendship when the two boys recognised each other 
again at the same sdhool, and they continued faithful 
devoted friends until the day of Hoffmann's death. What 
tended principally to knit them together was the similarity 
and yet difference in their bringing up and family relations. 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. xiii 

Both grew up without the society of brothers or sisters or 
playfellows ; but whilst Hoffmann was a son of the town, 
Hippel's early days had been spent in the country. In 
anotlier respect, too, they presented a striking contrast in 
behaviour; Hoffmann's chief delight was to mystify and 
tease his uncle Otto, but Hippel was most scrupulous in 
paying to all the proper meed of respect which he conceived 
he owed them. Once when Hippel reproached his friend 
about his behaviour towards his uncle, young Hoffmann 
replied, " But think what relatives fate has blessed me with ! 
If I only had a father and an uncle like yours 'such things 
would never come into my head." This saying is significant 
for the understanding of the early stages of Hoffman's 
intellectual development 

The bonds of inclination and natural liking were drawn 
still closer by an idea of uncle Otto's. It was arranged that 
young Hippel should spend the Wednesday afternoons (when 
the Justizrath went out to make his round of visits amongst 
his acquaintances), along with his friend in studying to- 
gether, principally the classics. And Saturday afternoons 
were also to be devoted to the same duties whenever prac- 
ticable. But, as might very well be expected, the classics 
soon gave way to other books, such as Rousseau's Confessions 
and Wiegleb's Naturliche Magic ; ^ and these in turn were 
forced to yield to such pastimes as music, drawing, mum- 
meries, boyish games, masquerades, and even more preten- 
tious adventures out in the garden, such as mimic chivalric 
contests, construction of underground passages, &c. The 

* These two books, together with Schubert's Symbolik da Traums^ 
were favourites with him throughout life. In his youth he was a 
most diligent student of the new literature of his native country : 
English he also read to a large extent, Shakespearian quotations being 
▼cry frequent in his letters ; and we find the names of Sterne, Swift, 
Smollett, &C. Later in life he hardly read anything unless it were 
exceptionally good, and then only when recommended to do so by his 
friends. Pohtical papers he never read, and scarcely ever criticisms on 
his own works. 


xiv BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. 

boys also discovered common ground in their desire to culti- 
vate their minds by poetry and other reading. The last two 
years at school were most beneficial and productive in shap- 
ing Hoffman's mind ; he acquired a taste for classics and 
excited the attention of his teachers by his artistic talents, 
his graphic powers of representation being noticeable even 
at this early age. During this time also he cultivated the 
acquaintance of the pafnter Matuszewski, whom he intro- 
duces by name in his tale J?fr A rfusAo/ {^' Aithur's Hall")' 

When sixteen or seventeen years old Hoffmann conceived 
his first boyish affection, which only deserves mention as 
giving occasion to a frequent utterance of his at this time, 
that illustrates one of the most striking sides of his character. 
It appears that the young lady who was the object of his 
fancied passion either refused to notice his homage or else 
laughed it to scorn, for he remarked to his friend with great 
warmth of feeling, "Since I can't interest her with a pleasing 
exterior, I wish I were a perfect image of ugliness, so that I 
might strike her attention, and so make her at least look at 
me. 

The beginning of Hoffman's university career — he ma- 
triculated at Konigsberg on 27th March 1792 — offers no- 
thing of special interest He decided to study jurisprudence. 
In making this decision he was doubtless influenced by the 
family connections and the traditional calling of the male 
members of the family. As already remarked, his father, 
his uncle, and his great-uncle had all followed the profession 
of law, and he had another uncle Dorffer in the same pro- 
fession, who occupied a position of some influence at Glogau 
in Silesia. But it is also certain that he was determined to 
this decision — ^it cannot be called choice — from the desire 
to make himself independent of the family in Konigsberg as 
soon as he could contrive to do so, in order that he might 
free himself from the shackles and galling unpleasantness 
of the untoward relations in life to which he was there sub- 
ject. But he was devoted heart and soul to art — to music 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. xv 

and painting. As the studies of the two friends, Hoflinann 
and Hippel, were different, they necessarily did not see so 
much of each other as previously ; but once a week during 
the winter months they devoted a night to mutual out- 
pourings of the things that were in them — the aspirations, 
hopes, dreams, and plans for the future, &c., such as ima- 
ginative youths are wont to cherish and indulge in. These 
meetings were strictly confined to their two selves ; no third 
was admitted. Their rules were one bottle of wine for the 
whole evening, and the conversation to be carried on in 
rhymed verses ; and Hoffmann we find looking back upon 
these hours with glad remembrance even in the full flush 
of his manhood and fame : even on his last sad birthday, 
a few months before his death, he dwells upon them with 
fond delight 

Whilst, however, devoting himself enthusiastically to the 
pursuit of art, he did not neglect his more serious studies. 
He made good and steady progress in the knowledge of 
law; and he also gave lessons in music. It was whilst 
officiating in this latter capacity that his heart was stirred by 
its first serious passion — a passion which left an indelible 
impress upon all his future life. He fell in love with a 
charming ghl, who had a fine taste and true sentiment in 
art matters, but who was separated from her admirer by an 
impassable barrier of rank ; but although her social position 
was far above Hoffmann's, yet she returned warmly his 
pure and ardent affection. Hoffmann, however, never 
disguised from himself the hopelessness of his love; and 
the fact that it was so hopeless embittered all the rest of his 
lime in Konigsberg, until he left it in June l^g6, for a legal 
appointment at Great Glogau in Silesia. 

As these years seem to have been mainly instrumental in 
forming his character and shaping its outlines and giving 
depth and strength to its chief features, it is desirable to 
dwell for a moment upon the principal currents which at 
this time poured their influences upon him. By nature of 


xvi BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. 

a genial and gay temperament, gifted with an acute percep- 
tion, which he had further trained in sharpness and accuracy, 
endowed with no small share of talent and with an ardent 
love for art, ambitious, vain in some respects, full of high 
spirits, and with a keen sense of humour, and not devoid of 
originality, he was daily chafed and galled in the depressing 
atmosphere of his home relations. He felt how illogical 
was the rigid methodicity, how unreasonable the arbitrary 
routine, how absurd the restrictions and restraints of his 
uncle's household regulations ; he was eager to be quit of 
them, to turn his back upon them ; he was anxious to find 
a congenial field for his powers — a field where he could 
turn his accomplishments and genius to good account The 
only way in which he could hope to do so at present, at 
least for some years to come, was by pursuing a legal career, 
and law he had no inclination for. He says, in a letter to 
Hippel, dated 25th Nov. 1795, " ^^ i^ depended upon myself 
alone I should be a musical composer, and I have hopes 
that I could do something great in that line ; as for the one 
I have now chosen, I shall be a bungler in it as long as 
I live." He gradually came to live upon a strained and 
barely tolerable footing with his uncle, since as he grew 
older his tricks and ironical behaviour towards little Otto 
assumed a more pronounced character, and stirred up in 
the old gentleman's mind feelings of suspicion against his 
unmanageable nephew. In these circumstances we may 
easily discern the germs of a dissatisfaction not only with 
his lot in life but also with himself. 

Next came the fact of his hopeless love which has just 
been mentioned. And another and no less potent cause 
which tended to deepen and intensify this spirit of inward 
dissatisfaction was the delay that occurred between his 
passing his entrance examination into the legal profession in 
July 1795 and his appointment to a definite post of active 
duty in June 1796. To be compelled to wear out his inde- 
pendent, ambitious heart in forced inactivity must have been 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. xvii 

galling in the extreme, especially when it is remembered 
how eagerly he was longing to shake himself free from the 
relations amidst which he had grown up, and his no less 
earnest desire to get beyond the reach of the passion, or at 
any rate the object of the passion, that was gnawing at his 
very heart-strings. To an energetic spirit, longing for a 
useful sphere of activity, hardly anything can be more fruit- 
ful as a source of unhappiness than enforced idleness. And 
this sentiment Hoffmann gives frequent utterance to in his 
letters at this period. 

During these same months he cultivated his mind by the 
perusal of the works of such writers as Jean Paul, Schiller, 
and Goethe, the intellectual giants upon whom the eyes of 
Germany were at that time fixed in wonder. But this course 
of reading, instead of counteracting, rather encouraged a 
native leaning towards poetic dreaming and sentimentality. 
In a letter to Hippel, dated loth Jan. 1796, he even says, 
" I cannot possibly demand that she [the lady he loved] 
should love me to the same unmeasured extent of passionate 
devotion that has turned my head — and this torments 
me. ... I can never leave her ; she might weep for me 
for twenty-four hours and then forget me — I should nez'er 
forget ^r." There was yet another cause or series of causes 
which co-operated with those mentioned above to increase 
the distracted and agitated condition of his heart It has 
been already stated more than once that he was a diligent 
student of music and painting. These formed his recreation 
from the severe and dry study of law-books ; but to these 
two arts he now added the fascination of literary composi- 
tion, and wrote two novels, which he entitled Comaro and 
Der Gehcimnissvolle, The former was rejected by a publisher, 
who had at first held out some hopes of being able to accept 
it, on the ground that its author was unknown. Besides 
this, the productions of his brush failed to sell. Hence 
fresh sources of disappointment and vexation. 

Through all this, however, even in his darkest moods and 


xviii BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. 

most desperate moments, he was upheld by the feelings 
and sentiments associated with his friendship for his un- 
shaken friend Hippel To him he poured out all his 
troubles in a series of letters,^ which gave a most graphic 
account of his mental condition at this period. He led a 
very retired life, hardly seeing anybody; he calls himself 
an anchorite, and states he was living apart from all the 
world, seeking to find food for contemplation and reflection 
in his own self He also fostered, perhaps unconscious to 
himself, high poetic aspirations, and also those extravs^iant 
dreams of friendship which were so fashionable in the days 
of "Posa" and "Werther" and Wieland; "his heart was 
never more susceptible to what is good," and " his bosom 
never swelled with nobler thoughts," he says in one of his 
letters. Then he goes on to describe the " fiat, stale, and 
unprofitable " surroundings in the midst of which he was 
confined. "Round about me here it is icy cold, as in 
Nova Zembla, whilst I am burning and being consumed by 
the fiery breath within me," he says in another place. 
The violence of his inner conflict, of his heart-torture and 
unhappiness, finds vent in a wild burst in the letter before 
quoted of loth Jan. 1796 (and also in others). He says:— 

" Many a time I think it's all over with me, and if it were not for 
my uncle's little musical evenings, I don't know what really woald 
become of me. . . . Let me stay here and eat my heart out. . . . No- 
thing can be made of me, that you will see quite well. ... I am 
ruined for everything ; I have been cheated in everything, and in a most 
exasperating way." . . . Again, '* If I thought it possible that this frantic 
imp, my fancy, at which I laugh right sardonically in my calmer mo- 
ments, could ever strain the fibres of my brain or could touch the feelers 
of my emotional power, I should wish to cry with Shakespeare's Falstafi^ 
' I would it were bedtime, and all well ;'"... and '' I am accused by 
the Santa Hermandad of my own conscience." And in another letter 
he unbares the root of all his troubles in the exclamation, " Oh ! that 
I had a mother like you." 

^ That is, after Hippel had completed his academic career and left 
Konigsberg. 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. x\x 

Tearing himself away firom his lady-love with a violent 
wrench, Hofltnaon left Konigsberg in a sort of " dazed or 
intoxicated state," his heart bleeding with the anguish of 
parting. He arrived at Glogau on 15th June, and met with 
a very ftiendly reception from his uncle and his uncle's 
family, which consisted of his wife and a son and two 
daughters. But though they appear to have exerted them- 
selves to made the unhappy youth comfortable, his heart and 
mind were too much occupied with the dear one he had 
left behind for him to derive full benefit from their Idnd 
and well-meant attentions. In the first letter he wrote to 
his ftiend from his new home he says, " As Hamlet advised 
his mother, I have thrown away the worser part of my heart 
to live the purer with the other half. . . . Am I happy, you 
ask ? I was never more unhappy." In other letters, written 
some months later, he writes, " I am tired of railing against 
Destiny and myself. . . . There are moments in which I 
despair of all that is good, in which I feel it has been en- 
joined upon me to worlc against everything that makes a 
vaunt of specious happiness." But he took no manful and 
resolute steps to battle against his unhappy state ; he con- 
tinued to correspond with the lady of his affections, to gaze 
upon her portrait, to write to his friend about her, and to 
dwell upon the past, the hours he had spent in her society. 
Hb relatives, though treating him with all kindness, would 
seem to have endeavoured to reason him out of his passion, 
since after he had been some months in Glogau, he com- 
plains that those who had at first been all love and sympathy 
were now cold and reserved towards him ; he was mis- 
understood ; he was tormented with enttui, and looked with 
contempt (partly amused and partly bitter) upon the childish 
follies and fopperies, the trifling and dandling with serious 
feelings and affections, of the folks amongst whom he lived, 
who spent their time in " hunting after flies and 6o»mats." 
During these months, tiowever, and during the course of 
the two years he spent in Silesia, he penetrated deeper into 


XX BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. 

the secret constitution of his own nature than he ever did 
before or after : we find him confessing to his hot passionate 
disposition and his quickness to take ofifence, and making 
mention of the change that had taken place in him since 
the days of his early friendship with Hippel — ^he was become 
hypochondriacal, dissatisfied with himself, ready to kick 
against Destiny, and prone to assume a defiant attitude 
towards her and to blame her and call her to account for 
her treatment of him ; then again he was melancholy and 
sad and sentimental, using in his letters expressions built 
up after Jean PauFs style, and indulging in gushing protesta- 
tions of unalterable friendship. But then this was the age 
of exaggerated friendships. His humour and joviality did 
not, however, altogether desert him ; he made himself a 
welcome guest of an evening, and carried out amusing pranks 
with his merry cousins. 

In the spring of 1 797 Hoffmann accompanied his uncle on 
a journey to Konigsberg, where he again saw the young giri 
he loved, but only to open up again all the anguish of the 
wounds that had never yet fully healed. On his retxmi to 
Glogau things continued much as they were previous to his 
visit to his native town. 

Of his two favourite arts, painting seems to have occupied 
him more than music just at this period. Probably this was 
due to the influence of the painter Molinari, whose acquaint- 
ance he made before he had been six months in Glogau ; 
and besides this man, whom he styles a " child of misfor- 
tune " like himself, he also enjoyed the society of Holbein, 
dramatic poet and actor ; of Julius von Voss, a well-known 
writer ; and of the Countess Lichtenau, formerly favourite 
of Frederick William II. of Prussia, but at that time a sort 
of prisoner in the garrison at Glogau.^ The serious study 
of law he also prosecuted most assiduously, and to such good 
purpose that in June 1798 he was able to surmount success- 

^ That is, after the king's death in 1797. She afterwards married the 
Holbein here mentioned. 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. xxi 

Uy his second or "referendary" examination. But for 
is earnest and persevering labour there was a special 
citement, — a particular cause. However contradictory it 
ay sound, he was already engaged in another love affair ; 
is time with the lady who afterwards became his wife, 
[aria Thekla Michaelina Rorer, of Polish extraction. The 
ginning of his intimacy with her dates, strange to say, 
om the early part of the year 1797, just previous to his 
•umey to Konigsberg with his uncle. Soon after passing 
is "referendary" examination, he was moved to the 
Lipreme Court at Berlin, as a consequence of the pro- 
lOtion of his uncle to be geheimer Oberiribunalsrath in the 
ipital. But before proceeding to Berlin to take up his 
:sidence there, Hoffmann made a tour through the Silesian 
lOuntains, partly with an eccentric friend of his uncle's and 
irtly alone, finishing up the trip by an inspection of the art 
easures of Dresden, where he was specially struck with 
orks by Correggio and Battoni (mentioned in Dcr Sand- 
ann, &c.) and Raphael. One very remarkable incident 
hich happened to him during this trip must not be passed 
r'er in silence. He was induced to play at faro at a certain 
ace where he stopped, and though- he was perfectly un- 
lilled in the game, yet he had such an extraordinary run 
* good luck, that he rose from the table with what was for 
m a small fortune. Next morning the event made so deep 
id powerful an impression upon his excitable tempera- 
ent — his mind was so awed by the magnitude of his 
innings — that he vowed never to touch a card again so long 
, he lived ; and this vow he faithfully kept. In the tale 
tiehrgliick (" Gambler's Luck ") we find the incident re- 
)rded in the experiences of Baron Siegfried ; and in the 
ird volume of the Serapionsbruder (Part VI.) he relates 
>me of the very amusing eccentricities of his travelling 
>mpanion, which are too long to be given here. 
We next find Hoffmann in Berlin, where, whilst the im- 
ressions which he had brought back with him from his 


y 


xxii BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. 

excursion were still fresh upon his mind, he began to revel 
in the enjoyment of the picture-galleries and other oppor- 
tunities for cultivating his taste in art Here he saw really 
how litlle his own skill in painting was developed ; he threw 
away colours, and took up drawing again like a beginner. 
His position in a professional regard now took a more 
favourable turn, Freiherr Von Schlebitz, the first president 
of the court to which Hoffmann was attached, was a fiieud 
of Hippel's ; and both he and the genial good-hearted second 
president Von Kircheisen noticed and encouraged his talents. 
In consequence, he laboured at his duties and studies with 
such zeal that he succeeded in passing his third and last 
examination, the so-called examtn rigorosum, and so quali^ 
ing for the position of judge in the highest courts of Prussia, 
in the summer of 1 799. He was recommended for aa ap- 
pointment as councillor in a provincial supreme court; but 
before proceeding to the dignity of councillor it was obliga- 
tory upon him to serve a probationary year as assesutr. He 
was accordingly sent down to the newly-acquired Polish 
provinces (South Prussia, as they were called), to the town of 
Poscn, where work was plentiful, and talented and energetic 
workers were in demand. Before leaving the capital hehad 
the pleasure of seeing his friend Hippel, who speot two 
happy months whh him, living the past over again, visiting 
Potsdam, Dessau, Leipsic, Dresden, &c, and discussingthe 
journey to Italy, which through all his life Hoffmann con- 
tinued to dream of as an ideal plan to be some dme con- 
summated, but which unfortunately never was consummated. 
Hippel accompanied his friend to Posen. 

The Polish provinces were fraught with great danger Git 
any young man who was not possessed of exceptional firm- 
ness and sound moral principles. For a young lawyer die 
work was severe and exacting, but the emoluments were 
large. Time, however, fiiiled to allow of cultivating the 
higher sources of enjoyment ; hence all hastened to make 
the most of it by throwing themselves into the knRb 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. xxiii 

Drinking was a habit of the country ; and the drink that 
was drunk was of the strongest kinds, the fiery wines of 
Hungary and strong liquors. There reigned also a deplor- 
able laxity of morals ; and the graceful Polish women were 
▼ery seductive. That Hoffmann followed the example of his 
colleagues, and plunged into the giddy whirlpool of miscalled 
pleasure, will perhaps appear natural when we take into con- 
sideration the sources of discontent that had for some time 
been fermenting in his spirit Having been submitted to 
the trammels of unreasonable constraint, it need not be 
wondered at that his passionate restless nature should be 
enticed by the temptations to which he was now so suddenly 
and unreservedly exposed, that he forgot all his higher 
strivings and cast his better purposes to the winds, and 
drank greedily of the pleasures of life which his newly-won 
freedom brought in so easy and seductive a form within his 
reach. He candidly states, " for some months a conflict of 
feelings, principles, &c., which are directly contradictory the 
one to the other, has been raging within me ; I wished to 
stifle all recollections, and become what schoolmasters, 
preachers, uncles, and aunts call profligate." There was 
none in the circles which he frequented to encourage him 
in his desire to reach out after better things, to live himself 
into " the poetry of life," as Hitzig expresses it ; and hence 
he fell into the mire of demoralisation, and his fall was the 
greater since he set about it with deliberate intent. 

He was at length so far carried away by the delirious 
whirl into which he had been caught as to engage in a piece 
of wanton folly that threw him back upon his career by 
some years, just as he was about to plant his foot securely 
upon the path leading to the summits of his profession. 
Beguiled by his striking talent for caricature, he designed 
and executed a series of sketches, satirising in an exquisitely 
witty and humorous style various situations and characters 
and well-known relations of Posen society. The inscriptions 
appended to the caricatures were not less skilfully done 


xxiv BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. 

than were the caricatures themselves. No rank of society 
was spared, and hardly any person of consequence in the 
town. One of his friends, who afterwards became his 
brother-in-law, distributed the leaves at a masked ball in 
the disguise of an Italian hawker of pictures, cleverly 
contriving to place each individual sketch in the hands of 
the person to whom it would most likely be most welcome. 
Hence for several minutes universal glee at the excellent jest ! 
But when they came to compare notes, /.^. the presents 
they had received, the merriment gave way to hot indigna- 
tion. The author of the outrage was very speedily guessed 
at, since there was only one person in Posen with proved 
ability enough to wield the pencil so as to produce such 
striking likenesses — unfortunate Hoffmann ! That very same 
night it is said that a man of high rank. General von Zastrow, 
deeply incensed at several of the pieces in which he himself 
played a ridiculous rSle, sent off an express courier to Berlin 
with a report of the whole affair. The consequence of the 
thoughtless trick was that Hoffmann's patent as councillor 
to the government at Posen, which lay all ready for signing, 
was exchanged for one appointing him to the town of Plock 
(on the R. Vistula). Thither he went early in 1802, accom- 
panied by his wife, whose maiden name was " Rorer, or 
rather Trzczynska, a Poless by birth, daughter of the former 
town-councillor T. of Posen, twenty-two years old, of 
medium stature and good figure, with dark-brown hair and 
dark blue eyes," as he himself describes her. He had taken 
the step of marriage in face of the earnest dissuasion of 
his uncle Otto, in the last months of his residence in Posea 
But previous to this, late in the autumn of 180 1, he had 
paid another visit to Konigsberg, meeting on his return 
journey his friend Hippel ; and together they saw Elbing 
and Dantzic. To this latter visit we owe the story of Z>^ 
ArtusAqf {'' Arthur's Hall"), published in 18 17. Hippel, 
be it remarked, was disagreeably struck by the change in 
his friend: Hoffmann gave himself up to an unhealthy 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. xxv 

degree, to wild and extravagant gaiety, and disclosed a liking 
for what was low and lewd. 

In Plock Hoffmann spent two years. This was a quiet, 
stagnant place, where, according to his own account, he 
" was buried alive," and " walked in a morass covered with 
low thorny shrubs which lacerated his feet ; " he " thought 
of Yorick and the imprisoned starling ; '' and he should 
have given way to despair had not the bitter experiences 
which he was made to drain to the lees been sweetened by 
the affection of his dear good wife, who gave him strength 
for the present and encouraged him to hope for the future. 
Owing to the external circumstances in the midst of which 
he was fixed, he again turned his attention seriously to 
music and painting, and also to authorship. He vrrote 
short essays, composed masses, vespers, and sonatas, and 
translated Italian canzonets, &c Scherz^ List, und Rache, a 
Singspiel of Goethe's, he had already set to music in Posen. 
During these two years he led a more strictly domestic life, 
and spent more of his time out of the hours of official duty 
in his own house, than he ever did afterwards. Here also, 
as almost everywhere throughout his life, he was zealous and 
industrious in discharging the duties of his position. At 
length, just as he was beginning to settle down and feel 
contented with his lot in Plock, his friends in Berlin 
succeeded in securing his removal (1804) to a better and 
more congenial sphere of activity in Warsaw. After once 
more visiting Konigsberg in February 1804, and then spend- 
ing several days with Hippel on his estate at Leistenau (pro- 
vince Marienwerder, East Prussia), he eventually proceeded 
to his new post in Poland in the spring of that same year. 

One illustrative and very characteristic anecdote of this 
period deserves mention. In a letter to Hippel, dated 
" Plock, 3rd October 1803," Hoffmann writes, " My uncle 
in Berlin will never do much more to recommend me, for 
he has become * a grave man,' as Mercutio says in Shake- 

VOL. I. c 


xxvi BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. 

speare ; ^ he died on the night of 24-25th September of 
inflammation of the lungs." But in his diary of October i, 
he writes, in allusion to the same sad event, "My tears 
did not flow, nor did fear and grief draw from me any loud 
lamentations ; but the image of the man whom I loved and 
honoured is constantly before my eyes ; it never leaves me. 
The whole day through my mind has been in a tumult ; 
my nerves are so excited that the least little noise makes me 
start." Thus he could jest in the midst of pain ; and it is 
a type of the man's character. 

Warsaw, in notable contrast to other places in the Polish 
provinces, possessed many things calculated to excite and 
engage the attention of an active mind, of a mind so eager 
for knowledge and so keenly alive to all that was especially 
interesting and extraordinary as was Hoffmann's. The new 
scene of his labours cannot be better described than in the 
words of Hitzig and of Hoffmann himself The former says 
the city had 

"Streets of magnificent breadth, consisting of palaces in the finest 
Italian style and of wooden huts which threaten every moment to 
tumble together about the ears of their indwellers ; in these edifices 
Asiatic sumptuousness most closely mingled with Greenland filth; a 
populace incessantly on the stir, forming, as in a procession of maskers, 
the most startling contrasts — long-bearded Jews, and monks clad in 
the garb of every order, closely veiled nuns of the strictest rules and 
unapproachable reserve, and troops of young Polesses dressed in the 
gayest-coloured silk mantles conversing to each other across the spacious 
squares, venerable old Polish gentlemen with moustaches, caftan, pdss 
(girdle), sabre, and yellow or red boots, the coming generation in the 
most matchless of Parisian fashions, Turks and Greeks, Russians, 
Italians, and Frenchmen in a constantly varying crowd ; besides this 
an almost inconceivably tolerant police, who never interfered to prevent 
any popular enjoyment, so that the streets and squares were always 
swarming with ' punch- and -judy * shows, dancing-bears, camels, and 
apes, whilst the occupants of the most elegant equipage equally with 
the common porter stopped to stare at them open-mouthed ; fiirther, 


Romeo andjuliety iii. 2. 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. xxvu 

a tlieatre conducted in the national language, a thoroughly good 
French troape, an Italian opera, German comedians, who were at least 
ready to undertake almost anything, 'routs' of a quite original but 
extremely attractive kind, and resorts of pilgrims in the immediate 
▼idnity of the town — was there not something for an eye like Hoff> 
mann's to see and for a hand like Hoffman's to sketch ? '' ^ 

Thus far Hitzig. Hoffmann writes on May 14, 1804 : — 

"Yesterday ... I resolved to enjoy myself; I threw away my 
deeds and sat down to the piano to compose a sonata, but soon found 
myself in the situation of Hogarth's Musicitn enragi (Wrathful Musi- 
cian). Inmiediately underneath my window there arose certain differ- 
ences between three women selling meal, two wheelbarrow-men, and 
one sailor ; each of the parties pleaded its cause with a good deal of 
violent demonstration before the tribunal of the hunchback, who stands 
with a stall under the doorway below. Whilst this was going on, the 
bells of the parish church of the Bennonites, and of the Dominican 
church (all close to me) began to clang ; in the churchyard of the last 
named (right opposite to me) the hopeful catechumens were hammering 
away on two old kettledrums, with which all the dogs of tlie neighbour- 
hood, spurred by the strong powers of instinct, joined with a chorus of 
barkings and bowlings — at that moment too Wambach and his musical 
band of Janissaries trotted gaily past to the merry strains of their own 
music — meeting them out of [another] street came a herd of swine. 
A tremendous friction in the middle of the street — seven swine were 
ridden over 1 Terrific squealing ! — Oh ! — oh ! a tuiti invented for the 
torture of the damned ! Here I threw aside my pen and paper, 
palled on my top-boots, and ran away out of the wild mad tumult 
through the Cracow suburb — through the * new world ' — down the 
hill. A sacred grove received me in its shade ; I was in Lazienki.* 
Ay, truly, the pleasant palace swims upon the mirror-like lake like a 
virgin swan. Zephyrs came wafted through the blossoming trees 
loaded with voluptuous delight How pleasant to stroll through the 
thickly foliaged walks I That is the place for an amiable Epicurean 
10 live in. What ! why, this man with the white nose galloping ' along 
here through the dark-leaved trees must be the * Commendatore * in 
Donjtian. Ah I John Sobieski ! Pink fecit — male fecit. Oh ! what 
a state of things I He is riding over writhing prostrate slaves, who 

^ Lebettf iii. pp. 231-233. 

' A suburb or park of Warsaw, beneath the tall beeches of which 
Hoffmann loved to lie dreaming, or sketch from Nature. 
' An equestrian statue of John Sobieski, the deliverer of Vienna from 


xxviii BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. 

are stretching up their withered arms to the rearing horse — an ugly 
sight ! What ! is it possible ? Great Sobieski — as a Roman with zvtmfi^ 
has girt a Polish sabre about his waist, and it is made— of wood — 
ridiculous! . . . You ask me, my dear friend, how I like Warsaw. 
A motley world ! — too noisy — too wild — too harum-scarum — every- 
thing topsy-turvy ! Where can I find time to write, to sketch, to 
compose music ? The king ought to give up Lazienki to me ; /Aere 
one could live nicely, if you like ! " ^ 

The first few months of his residence in this "new 
world," as it appeared to immigrants from the " old land " 
of Prussia, Hoffmann spent in familiarising himself with 
the novelty and strangeness of the place, in wondering at 
and admiring the motley scenes which daily met his view ; 
and doubtless his acute perceptive faculties gleaned a 
valuable harvest of notes for use on future occasions, both 
for his pencil and his pen. About the end of June he 
formed the acquaintance of J. E. Hitzig, who came down 
to Warsaw with the rank of assessor in the administrative 
college in which Hoffmann held that of councillor. The 
crust of formal courtesy and commonplaces was broken 
through by Hitzig's pithy answer to a question asking his 
opinion about some newly-arrived colleague, that he was 
"a man in buckram." The borrowed words of Falstaff 
banished Hoffmann's reserve, and caused his sombre face 
to light up with joy and his tongue to pour out a brilliant 
gush of talk. This new-made friend, who had previously 
(1800, 1 801) lived in Warsaw, where he began his career, 
introduced Hoffmann into a pleasant and intellectual set 
of men, amongst whom was Zacharias Werner, author of 
Sd7ine des ThaleSy Das Kreuz an der Ostsee^ &c Hitzig had 

* Polish for ** moustaches." 

* Leben, iiu pp. 251-254. 

* A very comic incident, of which Hoffmann himself was the hero, 
took place on the occasion of Werner's reading his new tragedy Dcu 
Kreut an der Ostsee to a select ' circle of friends. Unfortunately it 
cannot be compressed into sufficiently short space to be quoted here. 
Hoffmann relates it in Die Serapionsbriider^ vol. iv., after Signer 
Formica 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. xxix 

spent the interval from 1801 in Berlin, where he had kept 
fully abreast of the newest productions in literature and 
art, whilst Hoffmann had been living, partly a rude and 
riotous life, and partly a solitary and monkish one, at Posen 
and Plock. Hence the one had plenty to communicate 
and the other great eagerness to listen, especially as the 
little he had begun to hear roused anew his slumbering 
better feelings, and whetted with a keen edge his native 
desire for self-improvement through art and literature. 

In the following year, 1805, one of the Prussian ad- 
ministrative officials, an enthusiast in music, conceived the 
idea of establishing a club or society for the purpose of 
amusement and mutual instruction in his favourite art, and 
for the purpose also of training singers of both sexes. Hoff- 
mann's interest was enlisted in the scheme ; and things pro- 
ceeded at an energetic rate, the first concert being successful 
beyond expectation. With this encouragement the society 
was induced to go to work on a larger and more pretentious 
scale. The Mniszeki Palace, injured by fire, was bought for 
the seat of the new academy ; and then Hoffman threw 
himself into the plans of the society with all his soul, work- 
ing indefatigably in preparing architectural designs, and later 
in decorating the halls and corridors. During all the mild 
days of the spring of 1806 he was never to be met with at 
home. If not in the government office, he was invariably to 
be found perched up on a high scaffolding in the new musical 
Ressource, painter's jacket on and surrounded by a crowd of 
colour-pots, amongst which was sure to be a bottle of Hun- 
garian or Italian wine; there he painted and thence he 
conversed with his friends below. If, on occasion, parties 
requiring the services of Councillor Hoffmann came to 
look for him at the new Ressource, whither they had been 
directed from his own house, they were greatly surprised to 
see him drop nimbly to the floor from before an elaborate 
wall-painting of ancient Egyptian gods, mixed up with 
caricature figures and animal-like fragments of moderns 


XXX BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. 

(his friends with tails, wings, etc), hastily wash his hands, trot 
along in front of them to his place of business, and in a 
brief space of time turn out some complicated legal instru- 
ment with which it would defy the sharpest critic to find 
anything amiss. 

So absorbed was he in this work, and in that of direct- 
ing at the evening performances and composing music for 
them, that he hardly knew anything of the dark thunder- 
cloud of war that was gathering in the West until the news 
of the fateful battle of Jena came ; but upon these music 
enthusiasts in Warsaw even this intelligence made no per- 
ceptible impression. Their concerts and practisings and 
meetings went on uninterruptedly just as before, until one 
fine day the advanced guard of the Russian army rode into 
the streets of the former Polish capital. Soon after the 
Russian general had taken up his quarters in Praga, close to 
Warsaw, there appeared on the other side of the town the 
pioneers of the great army of Napoleon. The Prussians 
and Russians withdrew from the town. Milhaud arrived 
with the main body of Murat's forces ; in Napoleon's name 
the Prussian Government was dissolved, and its officials 
were superseded by native Poles. Hence Hofifmann was 
left without employment. He and his colleagues divided 
i\\e contents of the treasury between them to prevent its 
falling into the hands of the French ; this secured them 
from want for the present Careless about the future, and 
revelling in the luxury of untrammelled freedom, Hofimann 
was now perfectly happy. The excitement was like rich 
wine to his brilliant fancy ; he never had enough of it. He 
spent all the livelong day in running about seeing and hear- 
ing the many remarkable things to be both seen and heard 
And the little, restless, energetic man was like quicksilver ; 
he was everywhere. He specially loved to frequent the 
theatres, where, before the curtain rose, conversations might 
be heard carried on in ten or a dozen living tongues at once. 
Pushing his way through the motley throng, he penetrated 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. xxxi 

to every part of the house, busy gathering all sorts of rich 
observations, and storing up a most varied assortment of 
experiences ; and nothing escaped his falcon eye or remained 
unnoticed by his keen perception. Many and exquisite 
were the humorous anecdotes he picked up, the gestures he 
copied, the tricks and eccentricities he caught, the extra- 
ordinary characters he understood and fathomed at a glance; 
and these experiences he afterwards retailed to his friends, 
to their unbounded delight 

But amid all the tumult of the French occupation of the 
city, the evenings at the Musical Ressource still went on 
the same as ever. Hoffmann indeed, in order to escape 
the burdens of billeting as well as from motives of economy, 
took up his residence in one of the attics of the Ressource, 
where, though somewhat straitened for accommodation 
(for he had his wife, a niece aged about twelve, and a little 
baby daughter with him), he was as happy and contented 
as he well could be. He had the rich library of the 
Ressource at command, and his own piano stood in one of 
its rooms ; and " that was all he wanted to make him forget 
the French and the future." Early in 1807, he took ad- 
vantage of a favourable opportunity and sent his wife and 
the two children to her friends in Posen ; Hitzig also, and 
his family, and most other friends, left Warsaw in March 
of that year : thus Hoffmann was left almost alone. Soon 
afterwards he was attacked by a grave nervous disorder, but 
successfully nursed through it by the one or two friends 
who still remained in the city. On recovering, he wished 
to go to Vienna, with the view of beginning an artistic 
career, and was only prevented from carrying out his design 
by want of money to defray the expenses of the journey. 
He was in great distress, and even began to despond, 
until finally in the summer he contrived to get to Posen, 
and thence to Berlin, where he arrived some time in 

July. 

In Berlin, however, his prospects did not improve. He 


xxxii BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. 

failed to find employment for his talents : nobody could be 
got to purchase his sketches or sit to him for a portrait ; an 
attempt to interest Iffland, the actor and dramatist, in him 
failed ; and no publisher could be found for his musical 
productions. Everything he was willing to do came to 
nothing. Then came other misfortunes. His ready-money, 
consisting of six Louis tPor, was stolen from him; news 
reached him of the death of his dearly-loved daughter 
Cecily when two years old, and of the illness of his wife. 
He was on the point of despair, when it suddenly occurred 
to him to advertise for the post of musical director in a 
theatre. This had the desired effect of eventually securing 
him the post he wished, in the theatre at Bamberg which 
was conducted under the auspices of Count von Soden ; 
but the engagement was not to commence until October 
1 808. The intervening months were months of hard struggle 
for Hoffmann ; he says he was almost in the extremities of 
want, and should have lacked the bare necessaries of life 
had he not succeeded in disposing of some minor produc- 
tions in music and painting for a couple of Zouis d*or re- 
ceived in advance. In the summer of 1808, he at last 
fetched his wife from Posen, and then repaired to Bamberg 
(ist September). 

To these years in Warsaw and Berlin belong three operas 
and other minor musical pieces (including music for 
Werner's tragedy Das Kreuz an der Ostsee\ several pro- 
ductions of his pencil and brush, but no literary works. 
Here at the end of what may be termed the first act in 
E. T. W. Hoffmann's chequered life we may pause a 
moment. And the pause we may turn to account by 
quoting a description of his personal appearance and some 
peculiarities of habit. 

" Hoffman was very short of stature, of yellowish complexion ; and 
he had dark, almost black hair, growing down low upon his forehead, 
grey eyes which had nothing remarkable about them when they were 
at rest, but which assumed an uncommonly humorous and cunning 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. xxxiii 

expression when he blinked them, as he often did. His nose was thin 
and of the Roman type, and his mouth tightly closed. 

"Notwithstanding his agility, his body seemed to be capable of 
endmance, for in contrast with his size bis breast was high and his 
shonlders broad. 

"During the earlier part of his life his dress was sufficiently elegant, 
without falling into foppery. The only thing he set great and especial 
store by was his whiskers, which he carefully cut so as to form a point 
against the comers of his mouth. . . . 

" What particularly struck the eye in his exterior was his extraordinary 
madty of movement, which rose to the highest pitch when he began 
to narrate anything. His manners at receiving and parting from 
people — repeated quick short bendings of the neck without moving the 
head — had a good deal that appeared to partake of the nature of cari- 
cature, and might very readily have been taken for irony had not the 
impression made by his singular gestures on such occasions been 
softened by his cordial warmth of manner. 

"He spoke with incredible quickness and in a somewhat hoarse voice, 
so that he was always very difficult to understand, especially during the 
last years of his life, when he had lost some of his front teeth. When 
relating he always spoke in quite short sentences ; but when the con- 
versation turned upon art matters and he got enthusiastic — against 
which, however, he seemed to guard himself — he employed long and 
finely rounded periods. If he were reading any of his own compositions 
aloud — whether literary or official — he hurried over the unimportant 
parts at such a rate that his listeners had hard work to follow him ; but 
those places which are called 'strong touches* in a picture he em- 
phasised with almost comic pathos ; he screwed up his mouth as he 
read, and looked round to sec if his listeners caught the points, so that he 
often upset both his own and their equilibrium. Owing to this habit 
he was conscious that he did not read well, and was always uncom- 
monly pleased if anybody else would relieve him of the task ; this, 
however, was a ticklish thing to do, especially, in the case of MSS. 
copy, for every word read falsely or every hesitating glance upon a 
word to make sure what it was went like a knife to his heart, and this 
effect he could not conceal. As a singer he was a fine powerful tenor."^ 

To Bamberg HofTmann went with high hopes of being 
able to realise the dreams of his life ; but his fond expecta- 
tions were doomed to the bitterest disappointment. His 

^ LebeHf v. pp. i8-20; cf. also' Ertnn^rungm, p. i, &c., where Kunz 
details the circumstances under which he was introduced to Hoffmann. 


xxxiv BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. 

post he barely retained two months. The theatre circum- 
stances were on an exact par with those described in Wilkelm 
Mcister {videaiur the name Melina, &c.) Hoffmann's style 
of directing gave offence to the Bamberg public on the very 
first evening; Count von Soden had placed the manage- 
ment of the theatre in the hands of a certain Cuno, whose 
affairs were so embarrassed that he never, or only seldom, 
paid his officials, and finally became insolvent in February 
1809. The disappointed director, embittered against the 
public by his failure to recommend himself to them, sup- 
ported himself and his wife by composing the incidental 
music for the various pieces given at the theatre, at a small 
monthly salary (of which he received but little), and by 
giving music lessons in many of the best families of the 
town. But the war approaching that district of Germany 
caused many of these families to leave the place ; and 
Hoffmann began to be in embarrassed circumstances. Then 
he wrote an extremely droll letter to Rochlitz, the editor of 
the Musicalisshe Zeitung2X Leipsic, was taken on as a contri- 
butor, and continued to work for this magazine all the time 
he was in Bamberg — producing mostly reviews and criticisms 
of musical works, and writing fugitive pieces of musical 
interest. He also composed several pieces of music of 
various descriptions independently of those which he wrote 
for the theatre. Nor was his brush idle, for he received 
several commissions for large family pictures. Thus things 
went on until the summer of 1809, when a brighter cloud 
dawned upon him for a time. One fine summer evening he 
made the acquaintance, of Kunz, a bookseller, publisher, and 
wine-dealer, at the pleasure-resort of Bug (close to Bam- 
berg) in a characteristic manner. Kunz, an honest, jovial, 
good-natured giant, not lacking humour and gifted with a 
remarkable talent for mimicry and imitation, became little 
Hoffmann's fast friend — nay, his only real friend — during 
the whole of the time the latter remained in Bamberg. 
They were almost inseparable, associated in all amusements 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. xxxv 

and diversions: they spent many long winter evenings 
together in pouring out their hearts and experiences to each 
other in mutual confidences, and many long summer even- 
ings at the '* Rose," where according to German custom a 
throng of visitors gathered to spend the hours between 
closing business and going to bed In July i8io, Holbein, 
Hofimann's Glogau friend, came to undertake the manage- 
ment of the Bamberg theatre. This, of course, could not 
£ail to be of advantage to Hoffmann, who, though he did not 
resume his post of musical director, yet received a permanent 
engagement to act in a multitude of departments : he was 
musical composer, architect, scene-painter, part comptroller 
of the financial arrangements, and director of the repertoire, 
&a Under Holbein's management the theatre rose to a 
flourishing level; classic operas and good plays ^ were 
introduced with success, to which the versatile talents of 
Hoffmann largely contributed. In the evenings the choice 
spirits of Bamberg, mostly of theatrical and artistic connec- 
tion, used to assemble in the " Rose," where Hoffmann was 
the soul of the party, his genius, wit, irony, and drollery 
being inexhaustible. Whilst sending out flashes of sarcastic 
wit or gleams of exquisite humour, he would clench a droll 
or clever description by quickly embodying his thoughts 
and words in impromptu sketches, which were handed round 
to the company. Music and singing, often by the actors 
and actresses, also added to the entertainment of the even- 
ing. Mine host of the " Rose " saw his company increased 
by some scores of visitors when it was known that the in- 
imitable sharp-eyed little music-director was going to be 
present ; and he used to send across (Hoffmann lived the 
other side of the street only) during the day to inquire if 
he intended being there in the evening. But on the whole, 
Hoffmann was more generally feared than loved, or even 

^ Several of Calderon's, mainly at Hoffmann's suggestion and by his 
assistance ; the " Worship of the Cross " was particularly successful in 
the Catholic town of Bamberg. 


xxxvi BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. 

respected, by the main body of the townsfolk. His vanity 
was openly displayed ; he must lead the conversation, and 
everybody else must fall in with his humour and his whim, 
or they might expect some marked rudeness from his bitter 
tongue ; and the fellow had a confoundedly sharp tongue, 
and no less sharp a pen and pencil. The most wonderful 
things were said about him in the town, and to those not 
intimate with him or who did not know him personally, he 
was a man to be gazed at from a distance ; it was hardly 
safe to seek his acquaintance, although his talk was said to 
be something extraordinary, and his gestures and grimaces 
irresistibly diverting, yet he could also launch stinging barbs 
and on occasion utter insulting sarcasms. In fact the out- 
side public were wont to regard him as invested with a 
nimbus of wonder, or even as a sort of daemonic being. 
Though these evenings were beyond all conception gay and 
festive, Hoffmann seldom drank to excess. Of course he 
drank a good deal : he had acquired the habit, as remarked, 
at Posen, but he was not a common drinker, who drinks for 
the drink's sake. It was the exhilaration it gave to his 
spirits and the fire it gave to his mind and brilliant parts 
that he found attractive in the habit. ^ Excursions were also 
made into the country, particularly to Bug ; and here, as at 
Warsaw, the restless " quicksilver " man was everywhere. 

In March 1811 he was fortunate to be introduced to Von 
Weber the musician, whose regard for his musical talents 
continued undiminished until his death ; and in the same 
month Hoffmann paid a visit to Jean Paul at Bayreuth, and 
had from him a fairly cordial reception. Towards the end 
of the year came the intelligence that his uncle Otto Dorffer 
of Konigsberg had died, leaving him heir to his property. 
But the sum Hoffmann received barely sufficed, if indeed it 

^ Kunz tells us how they used to go down into the cellar, sit astride 
of the cask, and drink, and sicA des heitem Lebens freuen with genial 
and sprightly sallies ; and his picture has no faint smack of Auerbach's 
Keller {^Faust), See Lebcn^ v. p. 1 77, note. 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. xxxvii 

did suffice, to pay his debts. These had been accumulated, 
first, by Hoffmann's own want of prudence — when he had 
money in his purse he spent it merrily without a thought 
about the morrow — and secondly, by the frequent illness of 
his wife, the simple, homely, unassuming, good-natured 
creature with whom he always lived on happy terms in spite 
of his own unpardonable vagaries. Curiously enough, he 
used to labour under the odd delusion that she was gifted 
with keen critical taste and was an intellectual woman, though 
this was far from being the truth, according to the express 
evidence of his bosom-friend Kunz. 

Amongst Hoffmann's pupils was a young girl of sixteen, 

Julia M ; this was his favourite pupil. For her he came 

to conceive an overmastering passion ; but whether it was 
more of the imagination or of the heart it would appear 
difficult to decide with absolute certainty. He did not know 
himself ; "he preferred to remain a riddle to himself, a riddle 
which he always dreaded to have solved ; " and he demanded 
from his friend Kunz that he should look upon him as a 
"sacred inexplicable hieroglyph." The girl, who was pretty 
and amiable, of good understanding, and of child-like de- 
portment towards her music-master, never for a single 
moment dreamt of such a thing as his passion for her, and 
so of course she never consciously encouraged it in any 
way. She did not even show any sign's of possessing a 
dreamy or poetic temperament, or seem to be inclined to 
sentimentality, so that Hoffmann's extraordinary infatuation 
can only be explained as a "fixed insanity." At any rate, 
it powerfully affected his mind, and left an indelible trace 
up>on him almost down to his dying day. The day on which 
her betrothal to a stupid, weak-minded man, a man in all 
respects unworthy of her, was celebrated at the pleasure- 
resort of Pommersfelden (four hours from Bamberg), was 
one which shook Hoffmann's storm-tossed soul to its pro- 
foundest depths. He had hated himself for his weakness, 
and yet could not or would not manfully resolve to break 


xxxviii BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. 

through it Now he was compelled to do so, and in a way 
that was galling to the utmost degree. Her marriage turned 
out an unhappy one ; and eight years later, that is, two years 
before his death, hearing she was in great trouble, he sent 
many kind messages to her through a mutual friend. These 
relations are detailed with striking truth and fidelity in the 
Nachricht von den ncuesten Schicksalen des Hundts Ber- 
ganzOy published in the FantasiestUcke in Callofs Manier 
(i 8 14-15). Perhaps, if we sufficiently compare the descrip- 
tions which he gives of various heroines in his tales ^ (all of 
which were written after this time), and bear in mind the 
common characteristic running through them all, namely, 
that he puts them before us more as individual pictures 
than as developments of character, giving us purely objec- 
tive sketches of them after the manner of a painter — ^if we 
compare these descriptions with what we know of Hoff- 
mann's mind and character, his restless, brilliant imagination, 
and the taint of sensuousness that helped to mar its purity, 
his keen eye for beauty in form and colour, his strong talent 
for seeing the things with which he came in contact through 
an unmistakable veil of either love or hatred, we may per- 
haps hazard the opinion, without risk of going far wrong, 
that it was his imagination — the imagination that made up 
such a large part of the man — that was principally concerned 
in this remarkable passion ; if his heart was also touched, 
as it would undoubtedly appear to have been, the road to 
it must no less undoubtedly have been found through his 
imagination. 

Early in 18 12 Hoffmann was invited to a banquet at the 
monastery of the Capuchins ; and the visit made an extra- 
ordinary impression upon him. All during dinner he could 
not keep his eyes off a grey-haired old monk with a fine 
antique head, genuine Italian face, strong-marked features, 
and long snow-white beard. On being introduced to Father 

^ Compare Nanni in Meister Wackt, Clara in Der Sandmanm, Rose 
in Meister MarHftt Cecily in Bergamo, &c 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. xxxix 

Cyrillus he asked him innumerable questions about the 
secrets of monastic life, especially about those things of 
which "we profane have only dim guesses, no clear con- 
ceptions." They got into a poetic and exalted frame of 
mind, and rose just as it was getting dusk to inspect the 
chapel and crypt, and other objects of interest. In the 
crypt Hoffmann was powerfully agitated: he reverently 
doffed his hat, his wine-heated face became terribly pale, 
and he visibly showed that he was held in the thraldom of 
supernatural awe. When Father Cyrillus went on to point 
out the spot where his own mortal remains should rest, and 
to indulge in certain pious exhortations to them (Hoffmann 
and Kunz) to shed a tear upon his grave if they should 
come there again in after years, Hoffmann lost control of 
himself; he stood like a marble pillar, his face and eyes set, 
his hair standing on end, unable to utter a word.^ Then 
making a gesture upwards he hurried out of the crypt with 
hasty uncertain steps. The impressions made upon him by 
this visit, and the observations he gathered, he employed in 
the ElixUrcdes Teufels zxidi. Kai^ Murr {i^i, II.), the meeting 
between Kapellmeister Kreisler and Father Hilarius, as well 
as the description of the monastery and its situation in the 
latter, being invested with a fine poetic flavour. 

The scene in the crypt points to another side of Hoff- 
mann's character, or rather personality, which hitherto has 
not been alluded to. In fact, it does not seem, as far as 
can be gathered from the biograpliical sources, that it began 
to be strongly developed until the Bamberg period. We 
have seen how that early in life he conceived a decided 
antipathy to the prosaic and the commonplace, and his 
career up to this point furnishes abundant evidence that he 
hated with a genuine hatred to keep in the ruts of custom 
and conventionality, as if bound to do so because such was 
prescribed by custom and conventionality. His sentiments he 

^ See Erinnerungen^ pp. 60 sq. 


xl BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. 

never concealed, and his actions harmonised, almost without 
exception, strictly with his sentiments ; for one of his most 
striking and instructive characteristics was the remarkable 
fearlessness which he displayed no less in his actual conduct 
than in his habits of thought. Affectation was far from him; 
thorough genuineness was stamped upon all he did, showing 
unmistakably that it came direct from the man himselfl In 
fact it might be said, with special significance, that his inner 
and his outer life — the in other cases invisible life of the 
soul and the visible life in action — were perfectly correlated, 
if not one and indivisibly the same. Being then thus honest 
with himself,^ and detesting as he did all that was common- 
place and wearying, flat and stale and dull, it is no wonder 
that he should tend to fall into the opposite extreme, and 
should delight in the unusual, the singular, the extraordinary. 
Further, when we remember his fine imaginative powers, 
his inimitable humour, his vanity, his poetic cast of mind, 
his bitterness against the public for not appreciating his 
musical talents, and his consequent fits of fierce defiance 
and satiric gloom, there is still less cause for wonder when 
we find this propensity for seeking the uncommon and the 
marvellous deepening and developing in time into an im- 
conquerable penchant for what was grotesque and eccentric, 
for what was fantastic, unnatural, ghostly, and horrible. He 
loved to occupy his fancy most with the extremes of human 
action, and to dive down into the most secret and unex- 
plored recesses of human nature to bring back thence some 
wild startling trait that scarce any other imagination save 
his own would have discovered. If he ever studied human 
nature at all, it was along the border-lands of rationality; 
those misty shadowy states, such as insanity, monomania, 
and hypochondriacal somnambulism, where the soul hardly 
knows itself and loses touch of reality and almost of self- 
consciousness. These and the like mysterious states of 

^ See Lehen^ iv. p. 95, v. p. 27 ; Erinnerungerty pp. 28-31. 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. xli 

• 

cercised a strange fascination upon his spirit He 
istantly pursued by the idea that some secret and 
1 calamity would happen to him, and his mind was 
lunted by images of awful form and by ** doubles " of 

and others. He even believed he saw visions, with 
1 bodily eyes, and no expostulations of his friends 
rive this belief out of his head. Not only when he 
;aged in writing, but even in the midst of an ordinary 
ation, at supper, or whilst drinking a social glass of 
r rum, he would suddenly exclaim, " See there — 
that ugly little pigmy — see what capers he cuts, 
on't incommode yourself, my little man. You are 
ty to listen to us as much as you please. Will you 
proach nearer? You are welcome." (Here, and 
nally, he would accompany his words with violent 
ar contortions of the face.) " Pray what will you 

Oh ! don't go, my good little fellow." All this, 
lar disconnected phrases, he used to utter with his 
:ed and riveted upon the place where he affirmed he 
* vision; and if his word was doubted or he was 
i at as a stupid foolish man, he would knit his brows 
:h great earnestness reiterate his assertions and appeal 
vife to support him, saying, " I often see them, don't 
:ha " (Misza, Mischa, short form for the Polish name 
ilina) ? 

side of Hoffmann's individuality is not only one of 
»st characteristic of him, it is necessary to grasp it 
IT to understand his written works. These remarks 
so serve to make more intelligible the sensation 
i in Hoffmann the evening he was at the Capuchin 
ery. It is in the Elixiere des Teufcls that these 
rthy traits find in most respects their fullest ex- 
n. 

etum to the historical narrative. The story Meister 
\ and the unfinished Der Feind owe their origin to 
which Hoffmann paid to Erlangen and Nuremberg 

L d 


xlii BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. 

in March 1812. In the same year he also devoted some 
attention to sport, and learned to use' a sportsman's rifle; 
but his imagination was always swifter than his rifleK:harge. 
A sitting sparrow he did at length contrive to hit, but a 
flying one, or a hare, or even a deer, he never could succeed 
in knocking over, that is to say, the real animals. Clods of 
earth and tufts of grass which his imagination conjured 
into game he could sometimes hit, but no living animal 
would ever be likely to approach near him, for his quick 
restless movements and mercurial gestures were a standing 
impediment to any game ever coming within shot of him 
unless actually driven close past his " stand," and then his 
excitement either made him fire too soon or else miss. 
Nevertheless, he enjoyed these sporting excursions, in his 
own eccentric fashion, immensely.^ 

During the summer Hofifmann took up his residence for 
four weeks in the picturesque ruins of the castle of Altenburg, 
in the immediate neighbourhood of Bamberg, where, whilst 
living a hermit's life in company with his spouse, he painted 
one of the towers with frescoes illustrative of incidents in 
the life of Count Adalbert von Babenberg, whose residence 
the castle had formerly been. But he also occupied himself 
with literary schemes ; it was in this retreat that he wrote 
certain sketches designed to form parts of a work which 
long occupied his mind, but which never came to anything, 
namely, the Lichte Stunden eines wahnsinnigen Musiken 
(Rational Intervals of a Crack-brained Musician). In this 
he purposed to develop his opinions on the thepry of 
music and the principles of harmony. The fragments were 
afterwards revised and appeared as the Kreisleriana in the 
Fantasicstiicke, 

In the next month, July, his star of adversity was again 
to be in the ascendant Holbein severed his connection 
with the theatre, and Hoffmann lost his fixed income. 

^ These adventures are described in one of the most hamoions 
chapters (iv.) of the Erinnerungen, 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. xliu 

grew darker and darker for him, until he was almost 
I to actual want ; at any rate he came to be in very 
issed circumstances. Singular to say, however, 
ill this cloud of adversity he maintained a shining 
id a light heart behind it. This was peculiar to 
Lochlitz says '* he belonged to the large class of men 
a bear ill fortune better than good fortune." During 
ne of distress, which was a repetition of his dark 
Berlin in 1807-8, he displayed a remarkable activity 
usual pursuits. His criticism of Don /uan, an 
ion of the problem of Mozart's great opera, for 
Hoffmann cherished a profound and almost extra- 
admiration, owes its origin to this period.^ An 
te in relation to this will also illustrate his true 
ate admiration of art. Kunz lost a child, for which 
:ved sadly ; two days afterwards Hoffmann advised 
go with him to see Don Juan at night, declaring it 
issuage his grief and soothe and comfort his heart, 
irse Kunz looked upon the idea as preposterous, 
heless Hoffmann would not be denied ; he exerted 
arts of persuasion to induce his friend to go. At 
unz did go; on the way to the theatre Hoffmann 
rsed of the opera in such a sensible, acute, and 
ig way, and so poetically and with especial reference 
friend's loss, and afterwards in the theatre he ex- 
1 his sympathy in such kind and delicate lines, 
tears of genuine feeling stood in his eyes, that his 
was obliged to admit, " This music of the spheres, 
I had heard at least a dozen times before, exerted 
:er power over me than all the dictates of reason or 
[isolations of friends." 

"ebruary 18 13, the struggling ex-director received an 
;her unexpected letter from Joseph Seconda, offering 

5 treated of in Don Juan and in Die Fremdtnloge^ in the Fan- 
:ke, A recent critic has declared that tliis essay will alw&ys 
lae in connection with the sta^^e-representation of the problem 
Juan (cf. Die Gegenwart, 24th May 1884). 


xliv BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. 

him the post of music-director to his opera company at 
Dresden; and on April 21, 18 13, Hoffmann's residence 
in Bamberg, which may be regarded as the turning-point in 
his life, came to an end. Four days later he arrived at 
his destination without encountering any very serious 
adventure on the road, although it swarmed most 
of the way with scouting Bashkirs, Cossacks, Prussian 
hussars, and Russian dragoons, and was thickly lined with 
heavy guns and munition-waggons, — massing for the battle 
of Liitzen (May 2). On arriving at Dresden Hoffmann 
found quite unexpectedly his friend Hippel, and with him 
spent several right happy days. Then he was summoned 
by Scconda to join him at Leipsic, for Seconda seems to 
have spent his time between this town and Dresden. 
But the journey was postponed until May 20th, owing 
to the proximity of the contending forces and the conse- 
quent unsettled state of the country. In the interval several 
sharp skirmishes between the Russians and French took 
place in and close around Dresden. As might be expected, 
Hoffmann could not check his irrepressible desire to be in 
the thick of the excitement ; on May 9th he was standing 
close beside one of the town gates when a ball struck against 
a wall near him and in the rebound hit him on the shin ; 
he quietly stooped down and picked up the flattened 
" coin," and preserved it as a memento, ** being quite satis- 
fied with that one memento, unselfishly not asking for any 
more," as he wrote. Even during these troubled restless 
days he worked at the Fantasiestucke. On the way to 
Leipsic happened a startling occurrence, which probably 
served as the prototype for the catastrophe at the end of 
Das Majorat (The .Entail). The coach was upset and a 
newly married Countess was taken up dead ; Hoffmann's 
own wife also received a severe wound on the head. 
Seconda*s troupe only remained in Leipsic a few weeks 
longer; permission was given him to play in the Couit 
theatre at Dresden ; hence on 24th June we find Hoffmann 


) 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. xlv 

on his way back to Dresden, and deriving in his character- 
istic Cashion much amusement from a waggon heavily laden 
with theatrical appurtenances, living and non-living, some- 
thing in the style of the carriage scene in ZH'g Fermate. 

The return, however, was a return into the very hottest 
scene of the struggle between the Allies and Napoleon. On 
August 26th and 27 th the fight raged furiously around the 
walls of Dresden ; the quarter in which Hoffmann was 
living was shelled; the people in the house "bivouaced" 
under the stone stairs, trembling with fear and anxiety. 
Hoflfmann, however, could not bear to hide away, so he 
slipped out by a back door and went to join one of his 
theatrical friends. Looking out of his window they watched 
the damage done by the shells, and saw one burst in the 
market-place below, crushing a soldier's head, tearing open 
the body of a passing citizen, and seriously wounding three 
other people not far away. Keller the actor, in his start of 
apprehension, let his glass fall out of his hand ; " I," says 
Hoffmann, "drank mine empty and cried, *What is life? 
Not able to bear a little bit of hot iron ? Poor weak human 
nature ! God give me calmness and courage in the midst 
of danger ! We can get over it all better so.' " Then he 
returned to the. anxious party under the steps, taking them 
wine and rum — the latter was Hoffmann's favourite drink. 
His presence brought the unfailing good spirits and humour 
which hardly ever deserted him, even under the darkest 
cloud of adversity. On the 29th he visited the battle-field 
and saw its cruel sights and its horrors. But other horrors 
were in store for the inhabitants of the city ; for the next 
few weeks Dresden was besieged, and her citizens suffered 
from famine and pestilence and all the other usual terrible 
concomitants of a siege. 

Hoffmann's literary activity through all these weeks of 
turmoil was something astonishing. Whilst the thunders of 
cannon were making "the ground to tremble and the windows 
to shake," and the shells were bursting around him and the 


xlvi BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. 

« 

sharp crack and dull ping of bullets were incessantly striking 
upon his ear, this extraordinary man sat unconcerned amidst 
it all, absorbed in literary or musical composition, either 
writing his Goldencr Top/ (or Der DichUr und der Componist 
or Der Magnetiscur) or working out his opera Undine^ which 
was begun in Bamberg in 1812. Even when suffering from 
the dysentery which raged in the place, his intellectual 
activity went on without being impaired. In a letter to 
Kunz of date Sept 8th of this year he writes, " I am, as you 
will observe, unwearied in cultivating the fine arts, and if 
to-morrow or the day after I am not blown into the air by a 
Prussian or Russian or Austrian shell, you will find me fat 
and well-favoured from art enjoyments of every sort" 

It was through Kunz's intervention that the Introduction 
prefixed to the FantasUstucke was obtained from Jean 
Paul, and that against Hoffmann's own wish, for all intro- 
ductions except those which stand 2iS prolegomena before a 
scientific work he hated — when a well-known writer prefixed 
an introduction before the work of an unknown as a sort 
of attestation, it seemed to him like ** an incendiary letter 
which the young author takes into his hand in order to go 
and beg for applause with if Another short passage from 
one of his letters to Kunz of this same summer may here 
be quoted as illustrating a trait in his character : — 

'^ So far about business ; and now the earnest request that you will 
keep in mind and constantly before your eyes who and what I am, and 
let our business even be inspired with that spirit of cheerfulness and 
good-humour which always marked our intercourse with each other, 
and even in money matters prevented the dead, stiff, frosty mercantile 
style from coming to the surface. I am sure it was quite foreign to 
both of us, and could only excite in us such fear as we feel when set 
upon by an angry ' wauwau/ at which afterwards we can only laugh 
to each other. 

This unwillingness, nay almost repugnance, to look at 
things from their serious side, was quite characteristic of hint 
"But these are odiosa^* was a frequent phrase in his mouth. 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. xlvii 

On 9th December Seconda and his opera company once 
more repaired to Leipsic, and Hofiinann of course along with 
them. There on New Year's Day he was struck down by a 
severe attack of inflammation in the chest, aggravated by 
gout, in consequence of a violent cold caught in the theatre ; 
the case was so severe and grave that his life was at times 
in danger. " Podagrists are generally visited by an especial 
humour — ^brilliant fancies ; this comforts me ; I experience 
the truth of it, since often when I feel the sharpest pangs I 
write €0H amare^ he states in a letter to Kunz (24th March). 
And during his illness one of his friends "found him in one of 
the meanest rooms in one of the meanest inns, sitting on a 
wretched bed, but ill protected against the cold, and with 
his feet drawn up by gout A board was lying in front of 
him, and he appeared to be busy doing something upon it 
' God bless me ! ' exclaimed his friend, * whatever are you 
doing?' 'Making caricatures,' replied Hoffmann, laugh- 
ing — * caricatures of the cursed Frenchman; I am invent- 
ing them, drawing them, and colouring them." He also 
wrote about this time the Vision auf dem Schlachtfelde 
bd Dresden and others pieces, and finished his Undine ; 
further, whilst in this distressing condition, he began the 
Elixiere des Teufels^ the first volume of which was com- 
pleted in less than a month. This work he intended to be 
an illustration, or illustrative exposition of his own notions, 
of " a man who even at his birth was an object of conten- 
tion between the powers divine and demoniacal, and. his 
tortuous wonderful life was intended to exhibit in a clear 
and distinct light those secret and mysterious combinations 
between the human spirit and all those Higher Principles 
which are concealed in all Nature, and only flash out now 
and again — and these flashes we call chance." That he suc- 
ceeded in his purpose cannot be maintained His own 
individuality was too strong for him ; he failed to handle 
his subject from a sufficiently independent standpoint. He 
was not the artist creating a work that was quite outside 


xlviii BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. 

himself; he was rather the silk- worm spinning his entangling 
threads round about himselfl The book can scarcely be 
read without shuddering ; the dark maze of human emotion 
and human weakness — a mingling of poetry, sentimentality, 
rollicking humour, wild remorse, stern gloom, blind delu- 
sion, dark insanity, over all which is thrown a veil steeped 
in the fantastic and the horrible — ^all this detracts from the 
artisic merits of the work, but invests it with a correspond- 
ing proportion of interest as a revealer of some. of the 
deepest secrets and hidden phases of the human soul, if 
one only has the courage to wade through it The dreamy 
mystifications and the wild insanity and mystic passion of 
Brother Medardus are not unrelieved by scenes and char- 
acters which bear the stamp of bright poetic beauty and 
rich comic humour (e.g., the character of the Abbess of 
the Cistercian convent, the jdger, the description of the 
monastery, the scenes with Mr. Ewson and Belcampo alias 
Schonfeld). 

For some reason which cannot be quite made out for 
certain, either in consequence of his continued illness or 
because of a quarrel with Seconda, Hoffmann found himself 
once more adrift in the world without an anchor to hold 
fast by in February 1814. In striking contrast with his 
treatment by the Bamberg public, his talents as director 
whilst with Seconda's company were fully and adequately 
appreciated, both by the artistes and the orchestra, as well 
as by the general public. This may have been due to two 
causes ; first, the actors and actresses were not embarrassed 
by his directing from the pianoforte instead of with the 
violin as those in Bamberg were, and in the second place 
his criticisms and essays on musical subjects in Rochlitz's 
Musicalische Zeitung had gained him a certain reputation as 
an authority in musical matters. After having refused the 
offer of a post as music-director in his native city of 
Konigsberg in February (;8i4), he was agreeably surprised 
by HippeFs promise to secure his return into official life. 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. xlix 

:ordingly towards the end of September in that same 
r he set out for Berlin. 

lere ends what may be termed the second act of this 
f unsettled, eventful life. That this wandering aside 
n the career he first started upon — viz., that of law and 
>lic life — to tread the thorny precarious path of art was 
ight with greater consequences than can be estimated 
)n the unfortunate man's character, will be Qvident from 
at has been already stated. These dark years were those 
inly instrumental in stifling the good germs that had once 
m in him, and yet more did they result in encouraging 
i bringing out prominently all his less praiseworthy 
ilities. As his works and his life are so intimately inter- 
ven, and as his works were nearly all written subsequent 
this disastrous period, it seemed desirable to dwell some- 
at upon the events and circumstances of the earlier part 
his life. With the view of showing that Hoffmann him- 
f fully understood the nature and tendency of his exist- 
:e in Bamberg, the following passages are quoted from a 
:er written to Dr. Speyer in that town in July 1813 : — 

' I felt in my own mind perfectly convinced that I must get out of 
nberg as soon as possible if I was not to be ruined alto;^ether. Call 
idly to mind what my life in Bamberg was from the first moment of 

arrival, and you will allow that everything co-operated like an 
tile demoniacal power to thrust me forcibly from the path I had 
sen, or rather from art, to which I had devoted my entire existence, 

very self with all my activities and energies. My position under 
ao, and even all those unbargained-for duties which were thrown 
m me by Holbein, notwithstanding their many seductive attractions, 

above all those scenes with — which I shall never forget and never 
Tcome, the old man's miserable stupid platitudes, which yet in 
»ther respect had a pernicious influence, those wretched, terrible 

nes with — and last of all with , whom I always thought a parvenu 

bred imp, — in a word, everything that went against all effort and 
ng and work in the higher life, in which a man raises himself on 
rt wing above the stinking morass of his miserable crust-begging 
, engendered within me an inward dissension — an inward strife, which 
ch sooner than any external commotion around me would have 


1 BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. 

unsed me to perish. Every hB.nh and luideserved iDdignilj I bid to 
suffer only increased my secret rancoui, and whilst B.ccustomiDg myaelf 
more and more to nine as a stimulant and so stirring up the fire to 
malte it burn more merrily, I heeded not that this was [he onJy way 
by which good could come out of the ruinous evil. In these few words, 
in tbis brief statement, I hope you will find the key lo many things 
which may have appeared to you contradictory, if not eaigmattcal. 
But tnsHieant cum ce/erii. " ' 

Again, it can scarcely be doubted that we have a descrip- 
tion of his own state when he writes in- the ElixUre (Part 
II.), "I am what I appear to be, and do not appear at 
what I really am ; to myself an unsolvable riddle, I am at 
variance with my own self." 

The change of residence to Berlin did little to improre 
Hoffmann's circumstances. During the first ten months 
he was, according to the conditions imposed, labouring to 
make himself acquainted with the changes that had taken 
place in legal procedure, and to fit himself for entering the 
service of the state again and resuming his interrupted 
career; but he received no compensation for his paim; 
he had to support himself as best he could by the fruits of 
his pen. On July i, 1815, he was appointed to a clerk- 
ship in the department of the Minister of Justice, which 
post he exchanged on ist May 1816 for that of Councilloi 
in the Supreme Court, being also restored to all his rights 
of seniority as though no break had ever taken place in his 
official career. The duties attaching to this office he con- 
tinued to discharge with his accustomed diligence and skill 
until promoted in the autumn of iSai to be a member of 
the Senate of Higher Appeal in the same court Notwift- 
standing his sad and disappointing experiences, and tiK 
tempestuous times of his "martyr years" at Bambei^ he 
was not yet disgusted with the life of an artist His bopei 
were not yet alienated from the calling that hovered 
before his mind as an ideal for so many years. Whilst 
, with somewhat less of reckless high spirits and 
' LebtM, Tol. iv. pp. 58, 59. 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. li 

humour, against the embarrassments and pecuniary diffi- 
culties which he had to encounter during these ten months, 
he was also dreaming of an appointment as Kapellmeister 
(orchestral director) or as musical composer to a theatre. 
He says upon this point in a letter to Hippel, of date March 
i«, 1815, "I cannot anyhow cease to interest myself in 
art ; and had I not to care for a dearly beloved wife, and 
were it not my duty to try and procure her a comfortable 
life after what she has gone through with me, I would 
rather become a music schoolmaster again than let myself 
be stamped in the juristic fulling-mill.^ '* After more than 
one disappointment in his efforts to secure permanent and 
remunerative employment, in which efforts he was assisted 
by his influential friend Hippel, he became a clerk, as 
already stated, in the department of the Minister of Justice. 
In his social relations Hoffmann was more fortunate. 
He now enjoyed the close companionship of Hitzig again, 
and through Hitzig was introduced into a select circle which 
counted amongst its members such men as Fouqu^ (author 
of Undine\ Chamisso (of Pder Schlemihl fame), Contessa, 
Koreff, Tieck, Bernhardi, Devrient, and others. The 
harassing tumultuous days he had passed through during 
the last eight years had now begun to make him gentler 
and more modest ; his character was more tempered, and 
his behaviour more subdued. His good-nature too took 
such a prominent place in the qualities he displayed that 
Hitzig's children were quite delighted with their father's 
newly arrived friend ; for them Hoffmann wrote the pleasant 
little fairy tale Nussknacker und Mdusekonig (Nutcracker 
and the King of the Mice). Before the end of 1815 he 
had finished the second part of the Elixiere des Teufe/s, to 
which he himself attached no value, since its connection 
with the first part was broken ; its author's ideas had got 
into another track ; feelings and circumstances were changed. 
Still less than Schiller with Don Carlos^ did Hoffmann suc- 

* Leben^ vol. iv. p. 140. 


lii BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. 

ceed in making an artificial junction between the two parts 
of his work atone for its breach of artistic unity; he 
even said later of the first part, " I ought not to have had 
it printed." Besides this second part of the Elixtere^ he 
also wrote the concluding pieces of the Fanttisiestucke^ 
namely, Die Abenteuer der Sylvestemacht, which owes its 
existence to Chamisso's PeUr Schkmihl and to Chamisso 
himself, who is portrayed in the work ; and also Die Cor- 
respondenz des Kapellmeisters Kreisler mit dem Baron 
Wallbortiy that is Hoffmann himself and Baron von Fouqu6 
With the latter Hoffmann spent a happy fortnight in 1815 
at his seat of Nennhausen near Rathenow ; Hitzig was also 
of the party. In August of the following year the opera 
Undine was put upon the stage. Though Fouqu^'s libretto 
did not pass without some adverse criticism, all voices were 
unanimous in praise of the music. Von Weber the musi- 
cian especially expressed himself warmly in admiration of 
it, affirming that it was " one of the most talented produc- 
tions of recent times ; " and he especially singled out for 
attention its truth, its smooth-flowing melodies, and its in- 
strumentation ; it was " in truth one gush " of music. The 
oper^ was repeated more than a score of times, when 
unfortunately the theatre was burnt down, and Hoffmann, 
who lived immediately adjoining it, was almost burnt out 
of house and home at the same time. 

Through the success of this opera as well as through that 
of his Fantasiestiickey Hoffmann, found himself celebrated. 
He was invited as the hero of the evening to the fashion- 
able tea circles of Berlin, where ignorant or half-educated 
dilettanti affected an interest in art matters, that was over- 
strained and wanting in sincerity when it was not ridiculous. 
For what was there the man could not do ? He wrote books 
about which all Germany was talking, he could improvise 
on the pianoforte, compose operas, sketch caricatures, and 
streams of wit gushed from him so soon as he opened 
his^ mouth. The homage showered upon him at these 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. liii 

gatherings flattered Hofifmann's vanity for a time, but he 
soon saw the motives for which he was asked to be present 
— to amuse the guests with his wit, to accompany the 
daughter or lady of the house on the piano, to discuss art 
matters in a becoming way, now with an old grandmother, 
now with a great professor, to tell diverting anecdotes, to 
tickle the lazy minds of those who listened with some spicy 
satire upon their enemies — in fact to be made a useful show 
of. Quickly fathoming these motives, Hoffmann proved him- 
self readily equal to the occasion : as soon as he began to 
get bored, which very frequently was the case, he made the 
most hideous grimaces, and when he saw the company were 
preparing to draw something from him by ^ay of criticism 
which they could carry further and perhaps repeat again as 
springing from their own acute judgment, he began to talk 
the most arrant nonsense he could think of, or to fire off 
some of his stinging sarcasms steeped in the bitterness of 
gall, till there were none but blank and embarrassed faces 
around him — everybody thinking the man was mad ; but he 
went away delighted at the consternation he had been instru- 
mental in causing. The givers of fashionable teas soon ceased 
to invite Hoffmann to their entertainments, but they had 
already sufficiently sown the seeds of fresh mischief in him. 
To have more money in his pockets than he just required 
for the immediate wants of the moment was always fatal to 
him, and no less so was the excitement attendant upon the 
giddy whirl of pleasure and social popularity, or what stood 
for such. These were rocks of danger upon which he always 
struck. The former led him to indulge in his reprehen- 
sible habit of drinking, and the latter soon made him upset 
all the systems of order and regulation. Day he turned into 
night and night into day. He shunned for the most part 
the society of Hitzig and his circle of friends, with their 
stimulating discussions that cultivated the mind whilst un- 
folding and developing the feelings, and frequented a low 
wine-shop and the common coarse company that was to be 


liv BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. 

met with there. Hence during nearly all the rest of bis life, 
that is, from 1816 to 1831, he spent his tnomings in the 
discharge of his official duties at the Supreme Court (two 
mornings a week, Monday and Thursday), or in writing; 
the afternoons he generally slept, or in summer took a walk } 
and the evenings and nights always found him in the wine- 
shop of his choice; and he never liked to leave it until 
morning came, nor did any other engagements prevent him 
from putting in an appearance at his habitual haunt, even 
though it were past midnight before he were free. As al- 
ready remarked, however, it was not to sit and drink like a 
sot that he gave way to this degrading habit, but to get him- 
self "exalted" as he called it, and then when he was duly 
"exalted" came the firework display of wit and glowing 
fancy, going on hour after hour without rest or interruption 
for the space of five or six hours at once. If his tongue 
was not the medium through which he discharged the 
creations of his teeming imagination, his eagle eye was 
spying out all that was ridiculous or strikingly extraor- 
dinary, or even what was possessed of a touch of pathos or 
deep feeling, or he employed his hand in sketching and draw- 
ing inimitable caricatures. He never sat idle and silent, 
and drank steadily and stolidly as so many confirmed 
drinkers do. Hitzig, who was deeply grieved at this down- 
ward course of his friend and at the estrangement it had 
brought about between them, contrived to draw him away 
from his demoralising companions of the wine-shop for at 
least one night a week. On that evening there was a small 
gathering at Hoffmann's house, moderation being strictly 
enjoined as one of the chief regulations of the meeting. 
This small circle, which consisted of Hoffmann, Hitug, 
Contessa, and Korelf,' and an occasional friend or two 
whom one of them introduced, called itself " The Serapion 
Brethren," this title being adopted from the fact that the 
' Contessa and Koreff are slrikingl/portmyedin the Str^iMuhiUtr 
(toL \[.), tbefonner u "Sylvester," the latter u "Vinceni." 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. Iv 

first meeting was held on the night of the anniversary of 
that saint, according to Frau Hofimann's Polish almanac 
It is interesting to remark that amongst these occasional 
guests figures the great Danish poet Oehlenschlager in the 
year i8i6. Iii a letter written to Hofiraann on March 26thy 
1821, recommending a young fellow-countryman to him, 
Oehlenschlager says, '^Dip him also a little in the magic 
sea of your humour, respected friend, and teach him how a 
man can be a philosopher and seer of the world under the 
ironical mantle of the jnad-house, and what is more an 
amiable roan as well;" and he subscribes himself, ''A. 
Oehlenschlager, Serapion Brother." 

In 181 7 was published the collection of tales called Die 
Nachtstiicke^ embracing Der Sandmann (The Sand-man) 
and Das Majorat (The Entail), which reproduce personages 
and experiences belonging to the years in Konigsberg ; DU 
Jesuitenkircht and Das stcineme Herz^ going back to his 
life in Glogau ; Das Geliibde^ built upon a story related by 
his wife as connected with her native town of Posen \ Das 
Sandus, which was suggested by an incident in Berlin soon 
after Hoflfmann's arrival there ; and Das ode Haus, this last 
due to the way in which he was incessantly haunted by 
the appearance of a closed house in the Untcr den Linden. 
These were mostly written in 18 16 and 181 7 ; and to them 
he added Ignaz Denner, which possesses some merit, but 
is of too gloomy and darkly unpleasant a cast to be attractive 
to English readers ; it was written during the first days in 
Dresden, just after his emancipation from the Bamberg 
thraldom. Whilst in it he gives free rein to sombre melan- 
choly, and dips his pen in "midnight blackness," in 
Berganza^ written about the same time, he has poured out 
the cynical bitterness and scathing scorn which was then 
undoubtedly gnawing at his heart. Der Sandmann, though 
embodying reminiscences of its author's youth, also contains 
material derived from an incident which took place during 
a visit of Hoffmann's to Fouqu^'s country-seat near Ratenow, 


Ivi BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. 

and Nathaniel was recognised by Fouqu^ as meant for 
himselC X>as Majorat is, as already stated, a lasting 
nienaorial to his old great-uncle, Vothory ; the moral back- 
bone of the story — the evil destiny attaching to the succes- 
sors of a man whose ambition aimed at founding a powerful 
family by an act of injustice to his youngest son — reminds 
the reader forcibly of the purpose that runs through Haw- 
thorne's House ivith the Seven Gables. Of the in many 
respects admirable story Das Gelubde—\\, is to be regretted 
that it is marred by the dangerous jiature of the subject ; ^ it 
is else poetically treated and invested with a spirit of weird 
mysticism that would have made it rank higher than what 
it does. The others in the collection are of lesser merit. 

The next year 1818 saw no important work from Hoff- 
mann's pen; but in iZi^ a.^^a,K^ Die seltsame Leiden eines 
Theater-direkiors, a book written in the form of a dialogue, 
which was due to the example of his favourite, Diderot's 
"Rameau's Nephew" (by Goethe), and which conveys a 
tolerably faithful account of Hoffmann's experiences in the 
capacity indicated whilst in the town on the Regnitr, and 
indeed is useful as illustrating the condition of the German 
stage generally at that period. This was followed by a 
kind of fairy tale, Klein Zaches genannt Zinnober ; as this 
book was generally believed to be a local satire upon persons 
and circumstances well known, it entailed many severe 
strictures and much unpleasantness upon its writer. The 
truth about it seems to be this : the idea — that of a sort of 
ugly kobold of the Handy Andy type — was suggested by a 
sudden fancy during an attack of fever, and in a moment of 
serai-delirium. On recovering his health again, Hoffmann 
set to work in his impetuous and hasty way, and worked 
out the idea in probably less than a fortnight Similarly his 
Meister Floh, one of the last and weakest caricatures he 
wrote, was likely to have entailed disagreeable consequences 

' The leiual relations are handled in a mystical, fiCDSuouairaf ; some- 
Ihing of the tame kind of tieatment occurs again in Dot EiemtmtttrpM- 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. Ivii 

upon him, had not his last illness come before any authori- 
tative steps could be taken. For he had made use of incidents 
which came to his knowledge in the official discharge of 
his duties, and which were of such a character that they 
ought to have been guarded as inviolable secrets ; and he 
further employed certain phrases which he took from con- 
fidential papers that likewise came into his hands in con- 
sequence of his public position. In extenuation of his fault, 
or perhaps in explanation of it, be it remarked that his 
conduct does not appear to have been actuated by pre- 
meditated or deliberate malice, but to have sprung solely 
from his recklessness and want of prudence : the ridiculous 
appealed to his sense of humour so irresistibly that nothing 
was sacred against it, and so nothing was safe from it. 

In the summer of 1819 Hoffmann was ordered by his 
physician to visit the Silesian baths ; and he derived excel- 
lent benefit from the prescription, coming home stronger and 
in a more healthful frame of mind than his friends had seen 
him for a long time. Soon after his return he was appointed 
on the commission selected to inquire into those secret 
societies and other suspicious political organisations which 
were particularly active about this time {Burschcnschaften^ 
Landsmannscliaftcn in their political aspect). Towards the 
end of the year he published the first two volumes of the 
Strapionsbriidery the third volume following in 1820, and 
the fourth in 182 1. These volumes contain all his tales 
that had appeared in various magazines and serial publica- 
tions, together with others now first published, and are 
linked together by a running commentary, or rather they are 
set into it as into a framework ; the Serapion Society are 
represented as meeting at stated intervals, when one or more 
of the members relate a tale. The discussions which pre- 
cede and follow the tales are full of sage remarks about 
art and art-matters and other ripe practical wisdom, and 
contain perhaps more matured thought than anything else 
that proceeded from Hoffmann's pen. Of these numerous 

VOL. L e 


Iviii BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. 

stories the best have been selected for translation in these 
two volumes, namely, Der Arfushof (Arthur's Hall), DU 
Fermate (The Fermata), Doge und Dogaresse (Doge and 
Dogess), Meister Martin dcr Kufrur und seine Geselkn 
(Master Martin the Cooper and his Journeymen), Das 
Frdulein von Scuderi (Mademoiselle de Scud^ri), Spieler 
GlUck (Gambler's Luck), and Signor Formica. The re- 
maining twelve tales call for no special mention, except per- 
haps Nussknacker^ which has been already alluded to, Deu 
fremde Kindy a curious mixture of reality and fairyland, and 
Der Zusammenhang der Dinge^ which is not devoid of in- 
terest Several of the things in this collection suggest 
comparison with Poe's writings for weirdness and bizarre 
imaginative power, though of course there are wide differ- 
ences between the styles of the two writers. 

In March 1820 came a letter of good wishes from Beet- 
hoven, whose music Hoffmann greatly admired \ hence the 
letter was a source of much real pleasure to him. Spontini, 
the well-known writer of operas, came to Berlin in the 
summer of the same year and was received by Hoffmann 
with every mark of respect It was indeed maintained 
that the composer of Undine showed an unworthy servility in 
the way in which he publicly acknowledged Spontini's talent 
Whether this is true would appear doubtful; servility was 
not one of the author's failings, though vanity was. By 
Spontini's ministering to his vanity Hoffmann may have 
been provoked to return him the compliment in his own 
coin, but it is hardly likely that he went so far as to flatter 
against his own conviction or against his better judgment 
Of his longer and more ambitious works the one which 
he ranked highest in merit was Lebensansichten des Katers 
Murr, nehst Biographie des Kapellmeisters Johannes Kreisler^ 
the first volume of which appeared in 1820 and the second 
in 1822. In respect of literary form and execution, as well 
as of artistic worth, this is undoubtedly Hoffmann's most 
finished production {ie. of his longer works). It contains a 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. lix 

good deal of genial, keen, and subtle satire, conveyed in the 
doings of Murr the tom-cat ; and it is also a useful source 
for early biographical details, both of facts and of mental 
development and opinions, contained in the " waste-paper 
leaves " (treating of Kreisler), inserted at frequent intervals 
between those which carry on the life and adventures of 
Murr. The third volume, which was all ready and com- 
pleted in the author's head, and only wanted writing down, 
never came to the birth. The first two volumes present 
to us a personification of Hoffmann's humoristic self, and 
the third was to culminate in Kreisler's insanity, a result 
brought about by the disappointments and bafiling experi- 
ences he encountered in life — Hoffmann's own career, that 
is ; and the whole was to conclude with the LichU Stunden 
^fus wahnsinnigen Musikers^ — a work which had been 
occupying his mind ever since he was in Bamberg, and 
"^i^hich had not yet been executed. In 182 1 was published 
^)ne of his weakest things, a fairy tale, Prinzessin Brambiilay 
"^hich IS greatly wanting in cle^ness of conception, though 
le himself ranked it highly. 

The excesses in which Hoffmann had for so long indulged 
l)rought at last, as may easily be conceived, their own in- 
evitable retribution. The first herald of the approaching 
physical troubles was the death (November 30, 182 1) of 
the sagacious cat who was the real hero of Kater Murr, 
Hoffmann was much cut up by the death of his favourite, 
which he described to Hitzig with truly touching pathos.^ 
Soon after this he was suddenly stricken down by disease — 
tabes darsalis; his body gradually died, beginning at the 
feet and moving up to the brain, a process which lasted 
several weeks. But from the autumn of 182 1 to April 1822 
he was cheered by the daily visits of the beloved friend of his 
youth, Hippel, who had come up to Berlin for that space 
of time. Hoffmann celebrated his 46th birthday with this 
true friend, and with Hitzig and others hardly less dear. 

^ Lebtn^ vol. iv. pp. 1 18-120. 


Ix BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. 

Hoffmann and Hippel were dwelling fondly upon the days 
of their youth and reviving old recollections, when mention 
was made of death and dying. Hitzig remarked in sub- 
stance that " life was not the highest of all goods ; " this 
caused the suffering Hoffmann to reply with passionate 
emphasis, such as he did not give way to on any other 
occasion during the course of the evening, " No, no — let 
me live,. live — let me only live, no matter in what condi- 
tion." " There was something awful," says Hitzig, " in the 
way in which these words burst from his lips." And his 
wish was fulfilled in terrible wise ; one limb after the other 
failed to perform its office ; his feet and hands and certain 
parts of his inner organism became quite dead. On the day 
before he died he was virtually a corpse as far as his neck ; 
and so he was full of hope that he should soon be well 
again, since he " felt no more pain then." Even in this truly 
pitiable and helpless condition his imagination continued 
to pour forth a stream of the most whimsical and humo- 
rous fancies, and his cheerfulness was even greater than 
in the days of sound health. Hippel's departure in April 
was a hard blow to him. About four weeks before his 
death he underwent the sharp operation of being burned 
on each side of the spine with red-hot irons. When 
Hitzig entered the room after the terrible operation was 
over, Hoffmann cried, " Can you smell the flavour of roast 
meat ? " and he said that whilst the doctors were burning 
him, the thought entered his mind that the " Minister of 
Police was having him leaded lest he should slip out as con- 
traband ; " — he was shrivelled up to a mummy almost, so 
that, owing to his small size as well, a woman could carry 
him in her arms. Though his body was thus a perfect 
wreck, his mental powers were as brilliant and keen as 
ever; and when his hands proved useless to him, he 
engaged the services of an amanuensis and went on dictat- 
ing until almost the very hour of his death. In fact, the 
last thing he spoke about was a direction for his writer to 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. Ixi 

read to him the passages where he had broken off in Do' 
Feind ; then he turned his face to the wall ; the fatal rattle 
was heard in his throat ; and all Hoffmann's earthly troubles 
were over (June 25, 1822). * 

It is very remarkable that the works dictated by this 
extraordinary man on his deathbed show an almost total 
departure from the style of most of his previous tales. He 
no longer records his own experiences, — the events and 
occurrences, the sentiments and thoughts, that were pecu- 
liarly his own, — but he writes from a purely objective stand- 
point, and creates. Of most of his other works it may be 
said that they are he ; but of these it can only be said they 
are his in the sense that they owed their origin to him. 
MeisUr Johannes Wacht^ one of these, is translated in 
Vol II. The scene is laid in Bamberg, and the char- 
acters of the story were also said to be faithful portraits of 
actual people in Bamberg ; yet we look in vain to find any- 
thing like Hoffmann himself in it Des Vetters Eckfensier^ 
though hardly a tale, is yet one of the best things Hoffmann 
has written. Those who know fimile Souvestre's Ufi Fhilo- ^ 
sophe sous les Toits would find in this thing of Hoffmann's 
dying days something to their taste ; it is a running com- 
mentary on personages seen in the market from the writer's 
own vrindow, and each little scene brings before us a true 
and life-like character in a few weighty and well-chosen 
words. Die Genesung^ a mere sketch, arose out of the 
dying man's pathetic longing to see the green of the woods 
and the meadows. Der Feind, a fragment full of promise, 
is a tale of old Nuremberg of the days of Albrecht Diirer, 
who figures in it. Before being deprived of the use of his 
hands he had written several other short tales, amongst 
which may be mentioned Die Doppeltgdriger, as being a 
favourite theme with Hoffmann, and Der Elernentargeist^ a 
weird, entrancing story. In Die Rduber he gives us a 
weak version of Schiller's celebrated work. 

In Hoffmann we have an instance of a man who nearly 


Ixii BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. 

all his life long failed to get himself placed amid the cir- 
cumstances in the midst of which it was his one burning 
wish to be placed. He never found his right calling. He 
is a man ruined by circumstances (zerfakreii). He was not 
wanting in warm natural feeling, as is proved by his close 
and faithful friendships with Hippel, Hitzig, and Kunz; 
and more than one instance of spontaneous kindness and 
of winning amiability are preserved by his biographer.^ 
In youth his mind and heart were full of noble thoughts 
and aspirations, and he was sincerely desirous to educate 
himself up to better things. We see it in " May it never 
happen to me that my heart is not readily receptive of every 
communication from without, as well as for every feeling 
within, for the head must never injure the heart, nor must 
the heart ever run away with the head, that is my idea of 
culture," and "an excitable heart and a restless nature 
will never let us be quite happy, but will have a beneficial 
influence upon our education, upon our striving after 
greater perfection." His poetic temperament, and such 
like poetic tendencies, found no responsive sympathy 
amongst his relatives. Being thrust back upon himself and 
then having his feelings centred, when at length they did 
meet with sympathetic appreciation, in such a way as could 
only bring disappointment and unhappiness, he was early 
made a fit instrument for circumstances to play upon, and 
sorely was he bufTeted by them through all the years from 
going to Posen right down until the day of his death. But 
this result must also be traced partly to the want of a 
parent's loving, watchful eye. In those years which* are the 
most important for moulding a boy's character he was 
practically left to go his own way. True, his uncle Otto 
held him down to habits of industry and order ; but he did 
nothing to encourage the bo/s better and higher nature, or 
guide it sympathetically along the paths where it was striv- 

* Lcbtn^ iii. pp. 120-123 ; iv. p. 60. 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. Ixiii 

ing to find its own way. Hoffmann had nahigh idea of the 
moral dignity of man, and at times even seemed to have 
bat little conception of it The relations upon which he 
lived with his uncle Otto and the history of his own father 
prevented this sense of moral worth from being planted in 
iis mind. The germ which bore fruit in his love for ex- 
tremes, for what was extraordinary and quite out of the 
common beaten track of life, was probably engendered in the 
following way. Not finding the sympathy he needed in 
iis efforts after a better life, he turned in upon himself and 
})egjaLn to despise the petty details of everyday existence ; 
and several passages in his letters clearly go to show that 
his unhappiness and discontent were largely due to the fact 
of his overlooking the real enjoyment to be derived from 
the small occurrences and events of every day, which rightly 
viewed are capable of afifording such a large fund of real 
contentment. In a letter to Hippel early in 1815, he him- 
self states, " For my shattered life I have really only myself 
to blame ; I ought to have shown more resolution and less 
levity in my earlier years. When a youth, when a boy, I 
ought to have devoted myself entirely to Art and never to 
have thought of anything else. But of course something 
also was due to perverse education." It must not be sup- 
posed, however, from the above that he was deficient in 
firmness or strength of will. The perseverance with which 
he worked through his early examinations, as well as the 
energy and zeal he brought to bear upon his official duties, 
contradict such supposition. Specific instances might also 
be quoted did space permit ; it will be enough to recal) his 
resolve never to gamble. It is stated that he avowed 
his intention to amend his ways if he recovered from his 
last fatal illness. The real key to his wayward character 
lies in the fact just alluded to, that he had no conception of 
the supreme importance of moral worth. This was the 
backbone wanting in his character ; and for this reason we 
fail to detect any steady sterling course of action through 


ixiv inOGRAPIIICAL XOTICE. 

all the vicissitudes of his life. If he had a ruling motive it 
was capricious humour; at any rate it swayed him more 
than an)rthing else. On one day he would laugh at what 
had annoyed him on the day preceding, or be delighted 
to-day at what he had greeted yesterday with irony. No- 
body knew better than himself how he was tyrannised over 
by his changeable moods. " My capricious humour {Lautu) 
is the first weather-prophet I know, and if I had the good- 
will and were bored I could make an almanac,'' is one of 
his expressions; and another runs, "You know that my 
capricious humour is often Mattre de Flaisir.** Besides 
being thus the creature of caprice, he was also impulsive, 
impetuous, and wont to act with impassioned haste. These 
qualities were revealed in his restless vivacious eyes, in his 
movements and gestures, and even broke out in extra- 
ordinary grimaces, as already remarked. And just in the 
same fervid eager way he often seized upon an idea or a 
pleasing fancy, till it took complete possession of him ; he 
could not rid himself of it. With this was combined his 
remarkable quickness of perception and comprehension ; a 
single gesture or phrase was often sufficient to enable him 
to grasp a character. What he hated above all things was 
dulness — ennui; this never failed to provoke his keenest 
irony and bitterest sarcasms. In his last years he even 
became cynical and rugged and vulgar, in which we may of 
course trace the influence of his tavern associates. It is to 
his credit that he did not sink into Byronic misanthropy 
and bitter self-lacerating scorn, or even into Heine's irrever- 
ence and persiflage. 

An old German poet says, " Seht das Loos der Mensch- 
heit — Heute Freude, Morgen Leid ; " ^ but with Hofimann 
joy and pain were frequently more closely allied than this 
even : whilst the jest was on his lips the sting would be ir 

^ " Behold the lot of mankind — joy to-day, to-morrow grief/* Waltl' 
von Esclienbach's Parzival^ ii. 103, 11. 23, 24. 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. Ixv 

bis beart In this, as well as in several other features of his 
stonny career, he did indeed resemble his countryman Heine. 
One of the necessities of his nature was human society — 
not simply society, however, but people who could appre- 
ciate him, who could fall in with his moods, and either follow 
intelligently when he led, or lend him a stimulating and 
helping hand to keep the ball of wit and jollity rolling. An 
illustration of this is found in the fact that he " did not 
b?e the society of women. If he could not mystify them, 
or draw them into the circle of his fantasies, or discover in 
them any decided talent for comicality, he preferred the 
society of men." Amongst women, however, after those of 
the class just named, he was most interested in young and 
pretty girls, being attracted by the charm of their fresh 
beauty, not by the charm of their mind. Learned women he 
hated. 

Hoffmann was, as already observed, the child of extremes. 
These were revealed not only in his life and action, but 
also in his writings ; for his writings are the man. Indeed 
German critics have said that his works, particularly the 
FaniasiestuckCi are "lyrics in prose.'* What they mean by 
this phrase is chiefly that the things he wrote exhibit sub- 
jective phases of his nature, and are disconnected, or rather 
not connected, not balanced parts of a systematic whole. 
This is true so far as it is true that Hoffmann never did 
complete a long work, except the Elixiere^ and this work, 
as there has been occasion to point out, consists of two dis- 
jointed parts. One of the things that strike us most in 
reading his books is the peculiar mixture of the real and 
the unreal, of matters appertaining to actual life and of 
fantasies bom only of the imaginatioiL Very often the 
imagination would be called by most people a diseased 
imagination; but it is not always so, sometimes it is the 
poefs imagination. Hence, from this blending or close 
alternation of reality with what is not of the earth — hence 
came his love for fairy tales, tales in which we meet with 


Ixvi BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. 

kobolds, imps, witches, little monsters of all kinds — the 
spirits and apparitions in fact which used to haunt his excited 
fancy in such a strange way. Several of these are poetic 
creatures whom he handles in 3 light, graceful, and pleas- 
ing style {Goldener Top/, Nussknacker, Das fremde Kind, 
&c.) ; others, on the other hand, are drawn in horrible and 
unearthly colours and awaken the sentiments of awe and 
dread What he loved especially to dwell upon was the 
"night side of natural science," the puzzling relations between 
the psychic and the physical principles both in man and in 
Nature. Hence such states as somnambulism, magnetism, 
dreams, dark forebodings of the terrible, inhuman passions, 
and such tilings as automata and vampyres, had for him an 
insuperable attraction. Insanity wasa mystery that haunted 
his thoughts for years : it figures largely in Die Elixiere 
and Der Sandmann ; and in the third part of Kater Afurr 
it was his intention to represent Kreisler's battle with 
adverse circumstances as culminating in insanity. Handling 
these, and states and situations equally hideous, fantastic, 
and grotesque, with extraordinary clearness and precision 
both of thought and of language, considering the often misty 
nature of the subjects be treats of, and pouring upon the 
vivid pictures he conjures up the brightness of his wit and ' 
the exuberant gaiety and grace of his fancy, he succeeds in 
creating scenes, situations, and characters which seem veriljr 
instinct with real life. This end was attained principally by 
the true genius he displayed in perception, apprehension, and 
description. His graphic descriptive power is that which 
mainly procured him his wide-reaching fame during his own 
lifetime, not only in Germany but also in France, and is that 
which principally gives to his works whatever permanent 
value they may possess. With a painter's eye he grasps a 
character or a scene by a few of its more prominent and 
essential features, and with a painter's hand and eye be 
sketches them in a few telling strokes, The reader must 
not look to find in Hoffmann any clever or subde analysis 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. Ixvii 

o( the deeper motives that work towards the development 

of character ; all that Hoffmann can give him will be 

taiented pictures. He himself lays down his canon of 

literaiy spirit in the introduction to the first volume of the 

Serapionsbruder — 

" Vain are an author's efforts to bring us to believe in what he does 
not believe in himself, in what he cannot believe in, since he has not 
made it his own by seeing it {erschauen). What else are the characters 
of such an author, who, to borrow the old phrase, is no true seer, but 
deceitful marionettes, painfully glued together out of alien materials ? 
... At least let each one of us [the Brethren] strive earnestly and truly 
to grasp the image that has arisen in his mind in all its features, its 
colours, its lights and its shades, and then when he feels himself really 
enkindled by them let him proceed to embody them in an external 
description." 

Hoffmann has mostly succeeded in acting up to his canon 
and has written in its spirit ; and in so far true genius can- 
not be denied him. And he possessed in no less eminent 
a degree the true art of the born story-teller. The interest 
seldom if ever flags; and the curious anomalies of men 
and of men-creatures {Afensch-Thiere\ whom he mingles 
amongst his winning heroines and his delightful satiric 
characters, oftener than not quite enthral the mind or 
afford it true enjoyment as the case may be, and this they 
do in spite of the fact that, owing to their own nature, they 
frequently stand outside the ordinary sphere of human 
sympathies. Of course it may readily be conceived that 
the danger which he was liable to fall into was want of clear- 
ness in conception and sentiment, but he has avoided this 
rock for the most part with wonderful skill. One of his 
latest productions, Frinzessin Bramhilla^ is the one where 
this fault is most markedly conspicuous ; nor is the Elixiere 
free from it 

German critics have not failed to notice the sweet grace 
and winning loveliness which hover about the characters of 
most of his heroines. They are nearly all presented in 


Ixviii BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. 

colours impregnated with real poetic beauty ; see, for in- 
stance, Seraphina {Das Majorat), Annunciata {Doge), Mad- 
elon and Mdlle. de Scud^ry {Scudkri), Rose {Master 
Martin), Cecily {Berganza), and others. 

Carlyle, whose brief and for the most part truthful essay 
upon Hoffmann (in vol. ii. of his German Romance, 1829} 
appears to have been based largely upon others' opinions 
rather than upon first-hand acquaintance with his author, 
says that in him "there are the materials of a glorious 
poet, but no poet has been fashioned out of them." And 
when we seek for poetic elements in Hoffmann's works, we 
are not altogether disappointed. We have just stated that 
his heroines are creations of a poet's fancy ; and in the scene 
between Father Hilarius and Kreisler in Kater Murr, and 
in the passages and characters already alluded to in Die 
Elixiere, in the sunny cheerful Mdrchen — Der goldene Topf 
(which Hoffmann calls his " poetic masterpiece "), in Das 
Gelubde, Nussknacker, &c., we enter the world of higher 
imagination. Again, whilst in Doge und Dogaresse we are 
arrested by the poetic charm of the island life of the Lagune 
in the golden days of Venice's splendour, in Meister Martin 
we are no less, perhaps still more, impressed by the rich 
romantic beauty of life in the old mediaeval town of Nurem- 
berg. In Die Scudiri we are made acquainted with the cold 
glittering court of Louis XIV. through the lovable character 
of Mdlle. de Scuddry ; and whilst on the one hand follow- 
ing with deep interest the fate of Brusson and his love, on 
the other we are led to contrast the subtilty of the plot with 
the fine analytic power of Poe in The Murders in the Rue 
Morgue, When visiting with Hoffmann the weird castle of 
Das Majorat, we are made to hear the cold shrill blasts of the 
Baltic whistling past our ears, and to feel the storm and the 
sea-spray dashing in our faces. These four tales are unques- 
tionably the best that Hoffmann has written ; to them must 
be added Meister Wacht, on account of its excellent char- 
acterisation of the hero. In striking contrast with the 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. Ixix 

majority of the things he has written, these five tales show 
him when he is most objective ; in them he has wielded 
his powers with more wise restraint than in any of the others, 
and introduced less of his strange fantastic caricatures. 
Next after these tales must be named, though on a lower 
levely and simply because they best illustrate his peculiar 
genius, the two books of Xater Afurr, the fairy tale Z>€r 
goldenc Tap/ and Des Vctters EckfonsUr, In the works 
here named we have the best fruits' of Ho£fmann's pen. 
And if instead of asking in the mistaken spirit of competi- 
tion which is now so much in vogue, What is Hoffmann's 
position in literature ? we ask rather, Has he written any- 
thing that deserves to be read ? we shall have already had 
our answer. The works here singled out are worthy of 
being preserved and read ; and of them Bas Majorat and 
Mcister Martin are perhaps entitled to be called the best, 
though some German critics have mentioned Meister Wacht 
along with the former as having a claim to the first rank. 

It is now time to take a glance at Hoflfmann's satiric 
power. This was launched principally against two classes 
of society ; the one is that of which his uncle Otto was a 
type, the man who is unreasonably obstinate in defence of 
the conventionalities of life, and no less so in their steady 
observance : the second class was that whose representa- 
tives aroused Hoflfmann's ire so greatly at Bamberg and 
Berlin " tea-circles," or " tea-sings " — those who coquetted 
with art in an unworthy or frivolous manner. Against this 
latter class his irony and satiric wrath were especially fierce, 
as may be read in Berganza^ Die Irrungen^ the Krdsleriana, 
Kater Murr, Signer Formica^ &c. Perhaps the most 
amusing, for quiet humour, of the former class is the Die 
BrautwahL The force of his satiric power lay in the 
skilful use of sudden contrast. Hence it plays more fre- 
quently upon or near the surface, and lacks the depth and 
pathos of true humour ; but it is idle to expect from a man 
what he hasn't got 


Ixx BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. 

In so far as this author had any serious philosophical 
belief, it would appear to have been that man was a slave of 
Chance, or Fate, or Destiny, or whatever it may be called 
Sometimes he is the plaything of circumstances ; sometimes 
a defenceless victim under " Fate's brazen hand," or of 
"that Eternal Power which rules over us." The real 
significance of life is summed up in the statement that it is 
a struggle between contending powers of good and evil, 
against both of which man is equally helpless. He believed 
that whenever any good fell to a man's lot there was always 
some evil lurking in ambush behind it, or, to borrow his 
own expressive phrase, " the Devil must put his tail upon 
everything." His further views are here quoted from Der 
Magnetiseur : — 

"We are knitted with all things without us, with all Nature, in 
such close ties, both psychic and physical, that the severance from 
them would, if it were indeed possible, destroy our own existence. 
Our so-called intensive life is conditioned by the extensive ; the former 
is only a reflex of the latter, in which the flgures and images received, 
as if reflected in a concave mirror, often appear in changed relations 
that are wonderful and singularly strange, notwithstanding that these 
caricatures again find their real originals in life. I boldly maintain, 
that no man has ever thought or dreamt anything the elements of which 
were not to be found in Nature ; nohow can he get out of her.'* 

Was this the cause or the result of the visions he used 
to see ? 

From his conception of strife between good and evil as 
interpreting the significance of existence arose that dis- 
sonance which lies at the root of nearly all his most 
characteristic works — that sense of want, that failure to find 
final satisfaction which may be only too readily detected. 
For the conflict within himself he knew no real mediatory ; 
he was baffled to discover a higher category in which to unite 
the conflicting principles. Religion he never willingly 
talked about ; hence it could not give him the satisfaction 
he lacked. He thought he found it in Art, however ; since 


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. Ixxi 

for Art he battled with all the strength of his genius, and in 
the sacred mission of Art he believed with all his soul. He 
has many enthusiastic bursts on the subject, agreeing in 
some respects with the views laid down by Schiller in his 
Aesthetische Erziehung des MenscJun : — 

'' They alone are true artists who devote themselves with undivided 
love and enthusiasm to their goddess ; to them alone is true Art re- 
pealed. . . . There is no Art wliich is not sacred. . . . The sacred 
purpose of all Art is apprehension of Nature in that deepest sense of 
the wofd which enkindles in the soul an ardent striving after the higher 
life. ... I do not ask about the artist's life ; but his work must be 
pore^ in the highest degree respectable, and if possible religious. It 
has no need» therefore, to have any so-called moral tendency ; nay, it 
ought not to have such. The truly beautiful is itself moral, only in 
another form. . . . Art is eternally clear. The mists of ignorance are 
as inimical to her as the life-destroying carbonic acid gas of immorality. 
Art is the highest perfection of human power. Heart and Understand- 
ing are her common parents.'' 

Music was his favourite art. It first taught him to feel ; 
and not only was it his unfailing solace in hours of trouble, 
but it brought him messages of deeper import : it disclosed 
to him glimpses of another world — it was the " language^of 
heaven.*' Here again a passage from his own works ex- 
presses his opinions upon this point better than any other 
pen can express them : — 

" No art, I believe, affords such strong evidence of the spiritual in 
man as music, and there is no art that requires so exclusively means 
that are purely intellectual and setherial. The intuition of what is 
Highest and Holiest — of the Intelligent Power which enkindles the 
spark of life in all Nature — is audibly expressed in musical sound ; 
hence music and song are the utterance of the fullest perfection of 
existence — praise of the Creator I Agreeably to its real essential 
nature, therefore, music is religious cultus ; and its origin is to be sought 
for and found, simply and solely, in religion, in the Church." ^ 

Treating of Hoflfmann's position with respect to music, 

^ StrapionsbrudiTi vol iL, Introduction to part iv. J 


Ixxii BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE. 

Wilibald Alexis says, "We do not know any other man 
who has expressed in words such a real true enthusiasm for 
an art [as Hoffmann for music] ; and specialists assure us 
that few have thoroughly grasped the nature of music so 
admirably." 

As far as a foreigner may presume to judge of Hoffmann's 
language and literary style, it would appear to be chiefly 
distinguished by strong grace, ease, naturalness, and nervous 
vigour. German critics acknowledge its charm, calling it a 
model of clearness and masterly skill and elegance. Per- 
haps its beauties are best seen, that is in a more chastened 
form, in ICafer Murr, Repetitions, however, and exaggera- 
tions in description of sentiment tend, at times, to mar the 
reader's pleasure. Signs of haste, too, are not wanting, as 
Carlyle pointed out This was chiefly due to the very large 
number of commissions he received from publishers and 
others, who keenly competed for the productions of his pen. 
At the date of his death he had as many commissions on 
hand as would, if he accepted them all, have kept him 
fully employed for several years. 

To those who love a good story, well told, the five 
specially mentioned may be recommended ; and for those 
who desire to explore the dark by-paths {Irrwege) of the 
human spirit, to penetrate to some of its rarest corners, 
and to know all its ins and outs, as well as for those who 
aim at studying German literatiure, Hoffmann is a writer 
who ought to be read at greater length. 

THE TRANSLATOR. 


THK CREMONA VIOLIN 


THE CREMONA VIOLIN. 

Councillor Krespel was one of the strangest^ oddest 
men I ever met with in my life. When I went to live 
in H for a time the whole town was full of talk 

about him^ as he happened to be just then in the midst 
of one of the very craziest of his schemes. ' Krespel had 
the reputation of being both a clever, learned lawyer 
and a skilful diplomatist. One of the reigning princes 
of Grermany— not, however, one of the most powerful 
— had appealed to him for assistance in drawing up a 
memorial, which he was desirous of presenting at the 
Imperial Court with the view of furthering his legiti- 
mate claims upon a certain strip of territory. The 
project was crowned with the happiest success ; and as 
Krespel had once complained that he could never find 
a dwelling sufficiently comfortable to suit him, the 
prince, to reward him for the memorial, undertook to 
defray the cost of building a house which Krespel might 
erect just as he pleased. Moreover, the prince was 
willing to purchase any site that he should fancy. 
This offer, however, the Councillor would not accept ; 
he insisted that the house should be built in his garden, 
situated in a very beautiful neighbourhood outside the 
town-walls. So he bought all kinds of materials and 
had them carted out. Then he might have been seen 
day after day, attired in his curious garments (which he 
had made himself according to certain fixed rules of his 

VOL. I. A 


2 THE CREMONA VIOLIN. 

own)^ slacking the lime^ riddling the sand^ packing up the 
bricks and stones in regular heaps^ and so on. All this 
he did without once consulting an architect or thinking 
about a plan. One fine day, however, he went to an 
experienced builder of the town and requested him to 
be in his garden at daybreak the next morning, with all 
his journeymen and apprentices, and a large body of 
labourers, &c., to build him his house. Naturally the 
builder asked for the architect's plan, and was not a 
little astonished when Krespel replied that none was 
needed, and that things would turn out all right in the 
end, just as he wanted them. Next morning, when the 
builder and his men came to the place,, they found a 
trench drawn out in the shape of an exact square ; and 
Krespel said, " Here's where you must lay the founda- 
tions ; then carry up the walls until I say they are high 
enough/' '^ Without windows and doors, and without 
partition walls ? ^' broke in the builder, as if alarmed 
at KrespePs mad folly. " Do what I tell you, my dear 
sir," replied the Councillor quite calmly; "leave the rest 
to me ; it will be all right." It was only the promise of 
high pay that could induce the builder to proceed with 
the ridiculous building ; but none has ever been erected 
under merrier circumstances. As there was an abun- 
dant supply of food and drink, the workmen never left: 
their work ; and amidst their continuous laughter the 
four walls were run up with incredible quickness, until 
one day Krespel cried, " Stop I *' Then the workmen, 
laying down trowel and hammer, came down from the 
scaffoldings and gathered round Krespel in a circle, 
whilst every laughing face was asking, " Well, and what 
now ? " " Make way !/* cried Krespel ; and then run- 
ning to one end of the garden, he strode slowly towards 
the square of brick-work. When he came close to the 


THE CREMONA VIOLIN. 3 

wall he shook his head in a dissatisfied manner^ ran to 
the other end of the garden, again strode slowly towards 
the brick-work square^ and proceeded to act as before. 
These tactics he pursued several times^ until at lengthy 
running his sharp nose hard against the wall^ he cried^ 
" Come here, come here, men! break me a door in here ! 
Here's where I want a door made ! '* He gave the 
exact dimensions in feet and inches, and they did as he 
bid them. Then he stepped inside the structure, and 
smiled with satisfaction as the builder remarked that 
the walls were just the height of a good two-storeyed 
house. Krespel walked thoughtfully backwards and 
forwards across the space within, the bricklayers behind 
him with hammers and picks, and wherever he cried, 
"Make a window here, six feet high by four feet 
broad ! '' " There a little window, three feet by two I " 
a hole was made in a trice. 
It was at this stage of the proceedings that I came to 

H ; and it was highly amusing to see how hundreds 

of people stood round about the garden and raised a 
loud shout whenever the stones flew out and a new 
window appeared where nobody had for a moment ex- 
pected it. And in the same manner Krespel proceeded 
with the buildings and fittings of the rest of the house, 
and with all the work necessary to that end ; everything 
had to be done on the spot in accordance with the in- 
structions which the Councillor gave from time to time. 
However, the absurdity of the whole business, the grow- 
ing conviction that things would in the end turn out 
better than might have been expected, but above all, 
Krespel's generosity — which indeed cost him nothing — 
kept them all in good-humour. Thus were the diffi- 
culties overcome which necessarily arose out of this 
eccentric way of building, and in a short time there 


iri- X r-inrr.crM- rriXTr*: iiruae. hi outside^ indeed, 
J'''^=^^'-^ir i irusc ti Tii rnairr xroparmcc, no two 
wuiui: T-^ i:.. :tin:r i^i. nr: ;c ris oihcr hand the 
3irin:r ir-:i:riri!2rt2Zr ssai^sc-d a peculiar feeling of 
r-mi5:f:i JL: v : : zsztrstL rre acc2se bore witness to 
tre rr;ci :c r:^ i-:c Z r-:i: 5i:«rii:ic«d it mvself when 
I fcisi ::tii:i ji :^' JL-^r?ctit ifrfr I Lid become more 
rnrjrari ¥.C2 i.:n. T:c ii±i;rT:- I Lii not exchanged 
X •vr-^ \.zi r:^ ^-rr^rrmc zlj:i ; his buildincr had 
-vc* -M:*^ r^n >: "mi:.! rikii be Lii not eren once been 

r-' r>:c;^s?s.v M ? r: ,:r:.iKr. i< be was in the habit 

Cifp.v-:^ -c 7^<»^a.^^ I3^i^i, in reply to a special 
i:r«*-tir.;c. re «^i -wrri rLt: bs should not set foot 
CT-r :**; t^-r»^CkC l:iif:« th-? ho --sfe-warming of his 
r:v:» :*-l:\:. r^ :,xi r.-i-r:^ A" hi? friends and acquaint- 
jLr.c:js. :^<."^::c::. c-rcfiicr'T ">is>i forward to a great 
'rjLr.c-'i:; h.: Kr^r^I inrireu nobody except the 
nrjLsCirs. • ,' -im^-i nin, irrrxtnricitSw and labourers who 
hid r-i : :h.i hvrcss:. He eaien^ned them with the 
ch.*iv-;:<: Tiir.ds: brlckliVi/s appn^ntices devoured par- 
trldpr rii* r;rcAr"d!c5* of con«quences ; young joiners 
po*.;<hiv: o£ rojLs: rhejtsjLnts with the greatest success; 
wh:'>t hun^y laS^urer? helped themselves for once to 
the choice: morsels of trajfcs/ricass^. In the even- 
ins: their wives and daughters came, and there was a 
great ball. After waltzing a short while with the wives 
of the masters, Krespel sat down amongst the town- 
musicians, took a violin in his hand^ and directed the 
orchestra until daylight. 

On the Tuesday after this festival, which exhibited 
Councillor Krespel in the character of a friend of the 
people, I at length saw him appear, to my no little jov, 

at Professor M ^'s. Anything more strange and 

fantastic than Krespel's behaviour it would be impossible 


THE CREMONA VIOLIN. 5 

to find. He was so stiff and awkward in his move- 
ments^ that he looked every moment as if he would 
run up against something or do some damage. But 
he did not ; and the lady of the house seemed to be 
well aware that he would not, for she did not grow a 
shade paler when he rushed with heavy steps round 
a table crowded with beautiful cups, or when he 
manoeuvred near a large mirror that reached down to 
the floor, or even when he seized a flower-pot of beauti- 
fully painted porcelain and swung it round in the air as if 
desirous of making its colours play. Moreover, before 
dinner he subjected everything in the Professor's room 
to a most minute examination ; he also took down a 
picture from the wall and hung it up again, standing 
on one of the cushioned chairs to do so. At the same 
time he talked a good deal and vehemently; at one 
time his thoughts kept leaping, as it were, from one 
subject to another (this was most conspicuous during 
dinner) ; at another, he was unable to have done with 
an idea; seizing upon it again and again, he gave it 
all sorts of wonderful twists and turns, and couldn't 
get back into the ordinary track until something else 
took hold of his fancv. Sometimes his voice was 
rough and harsh and screeching, and sometimes it was 
low and drawling and singing; but at no time did it 
harmonise with what he was talking about. Music 
was the subject of conversation ; the praises of a new 
composer were being sung, when Krespel, smiling, said 
in his low singing tones, " I wish the devil with his 
pitchfork would hurl that atrocious garbler of music 
millions of fathoms down to the bottomless pit of 
hellP' Then he burst out passionately and wildly, 
*' She is an angel of heaven, nothing but pure God- 
given music! — the paragon and queen of song!'^ — 


6 THE CREMONA VIOLIN. 

and tears stood in his eyes. To understand this, we 
bad to go back to a celebrated artiste^ who had been 
the subject of conversation an hour before. 

Just at this time a roast hare was on the table ; I 
noticed that Krespel carefully removed every particle 
of meat from the bones on his plate, and was most 
particular in his inquiries after the hare's feet; these 
the Professor's little five-year-old daughter now brought 
to him with a very pretty smile. Besides, the children 
had cast many friendly glances towards Krespel during 
dinner; now they rose and drew nearer to him, but 
not without signs of timorous awe. What's the mean- 
ing of that ? thought I to myself. Dessert was brought 
in; then the Councillor took a little box from his 
pocket, in which he had a miniature lathe of steel. 
This he immediately screwed fast to the table, and 
turning the bones with incredible skill and rapidity, he 
made all sorts of little fancy boxes and balls, which the 
children received with cries of delight. Just as we 
were rising from table; the Professor's niece asked, 
"And what is our Antonia doing?" KrespePs face 
was like that of one who has bitten of a sour orange 
and wants to look as if it were a sweet one; but this 
expression soon changed into the likeness of a hideous 
mask, whilst he laughed behind it with downright 
bitter, fierce, and as it seemed to me, satanic scorn. 
**()ur Antonia? our dear Antonia?'* he asked in his 
drawling, disagreeable singing way. The Professor 
hustenetl to intervene; in the reproving glance which 
he gave his niece I read that she had touched a point 
likely to stir up unpleasant memories in KrespePs heart. 
" How litv you getting on with your violins?*' inter- 
ponal the IVofes«or in a jovial manner, taking the 
Councillor by both hands. Then Krespel's counte- 


THE CREMONA VIOLIN. 7 

nance cleared up^ and with a firm voice he replied^ 
"Capitally, Professor; you recollect my telling you of 
the lucky chance which threw that splendid Amati ^ 
into my hands. Well, I've only cut it open to-day — 
not before to-day. I hope Antonia has carefully taken 
the rest of it to pieces." '* Antonia is a good child," 
remarked the Professor. "Yes, indeed, that she is," 
cried the Councillor, whisking himself round; then 
seizing his hat and stick, he hastily rushed out of the 
room. I saw in the mirror how. that tears were stand- 
ing in his eyes. 

As soon as the Councillor was gone, I at once urged 
the Professor to explain to nie what Krespel had to do 
with violins, and particularly with Antonia. '^ Well," 
replied the Professor, "not only is the Councillor a 
remarkably eccentric fellow altogether, but he practises 
▼iolin-making in his own crack-brained way.'' " Violin- 
making ! '^ I exclaimed, perfectly astonished. " Yes," 
continued the Professor, "according to the judgment 
of men who understand the thing, Krespel makes the 
very best violins that can be found nowadays; formerly 
he would frequently let other people play on those in 
^'hich he had been especially successful, but that's l)een 
all over and done with now for a long time. As soon 
as he has finished a violin he plays on it himself for 
one or two hours, with very remarkable power and 
with the most exquisite expression, then he hangs it 
up beside the rest, and never touches it again or suffers 
anybody else to touch it. If a violin by any of the 
eminent old masters is hunted up anywhere, the Coun- 

^ The Amati were a celebrated family of violin-makers of the 
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, beionging to Cremona in Italy. 
They form the connecting-link between the Brescian school of makers, 
tad the greatest of all makers, Straduarios and Guamerius. 


I THE CREMOSA VIOLIN. 

dZ:c bcrs it immediately, no matter what the price 
pet =pc:x it. But he plays it as he docs his own violins, 
ooly cnce : then he takes it to pieces in order to examine 
clctfe> its inner stnzctnre, and should he fancy he hasn't 
foiini exactly what he sought for, he in a pet throws 
the ptios into a big chest, which is already full of the 
reniiirB c£ broken Tiolin*/' ^'But who and what 
k Aintonia ? *' I inquired, hastily and impetuously. 
'• Wei", CO ar. that,*' continued the Professor, " that is 
a thirr »h:ch might very well make me conceive an 
•wiiccnqu^rab'e aversion to the Councillor, were I not 
ccnvinci^i that there i* some peculiar secret behind it, 
for he i< >uch a gooc-natured fellow at bottom as to 
bsr 5c:r:ei:a:es C-i*^y of weakness. When he came to 

H ^. seven: years ago^ he led the life of an anchorite, 

alor.g w::h an o'd housekeeper, in Street. Soon, 

by hb osiiiries, he excited the curiosity of his neigh- 
bour? ; and ix. mediately he became aware of this, he 
sought and made acquaintances. Not only in my 
house but everywhere we became so accustomed to 
him that he grew to be indispensable. In spite of his 
nxde exterior, even the children liked him, without ever 
proving a nuisance to him; for notwithstanding all 
their friendly passages together, they always retained 
a certain timorous awe of him, which secured him 
against all over-familiarity. You have to-day had an 
example of the way in which he wins their hearts by 
his readv skill in various things. We all took him at first 
for a crustv old bachelor, and he never contradicted us. 
After he had been living here some time, he went away, 
nobody knew where, and returned at the end of some 
months. The evening following his return his windows 
were lit up to an unusual extent ; this alone was suffi- 
t to arouse his neighbours' attention, and they 


THE CREMONA VIOLIN. 9 

soon heard the surpassingly beautiful voice of a female 
singing to the accompaniment of a piano. Then the 
music of a violin was heard chiming in and entering 
upon a keen ardent contest with the voice. They 
knew at once that the player was the Councillor. I 
myself mixed in the large crowd which had gathered 
in front of his house, to listen to this extraordinary 
concert ; and I roust confess that^ beside this voice and 
the peculiar^ deep^ soul-stirring impression which the 
execution made upon me^ the singing of the most cele- 
brated artistes whom I had ever heard seemed to me 
feeble and void of expression. Until then I had had 
no conception of such long-sustained notes^ of such 
nightingale trills, of such undulations of musical sound, 
of such swelling up to the strength of organ-notes, of 
such dying away to the faintest whisper. There was 
not one whom the sweet witchery did not enthral ; 
and when the singer ceased, nothing but soft sighs 
broke the impressive silence. Somewhere about mid- 
night the Councillor was heard talking violently, and 
another male voice seemed, to judge from the tones, 
to be reproaching him, whilst at intervals the broken 
words of a sobbing girl could be detected. The Coun- 
cillor continued to shout with increasing violence, 
until he fell into that drawling, singing way that you 
know. He was interrupted by a loud scream from the 
girl, and then all was as still as death. Suddenly a 
loud racket was heard on the stairs; a young man 
rushed out sobbing, threw himself into a post-chaise 
which stood below, and drove rapidly away. The 
next day the Councillor was very cheerful, and nobody 
had the courage to question him about the events 
of the previous night. But on inquiring of the house- 
keeper, we gathered that the Councillor had brought 


lo THE CREMONA VIOLIN. 

home with him an extraordinarily pretty young lady 
whom be called Antonia, and she it was who had 
«ung so beautifully. A young man also had come 
along with them ; he had treated Antonia very tenderly, 
and must evidently have been her betrothed. But he, 
since the Councillor peremptorily insisted on it, had 
had to go away again in a hurry. What the relations 
between Antonia and the Councillor are has remained 
until now a secret, but this much is certain, that he 
tyrannises over the poor girl in the most hateful fashion. 
He watches her as Doctor Bartholo watches his ward 
in the Barber of Seville ; she hardly dare show herself 
at the window; and if, yielding now and again to her 
earnest entreaties, he takes her into society, he follows 
her with Argus' eyes, and will on no account suffer a 
musical note to be sounded, far less let Antonia sing — 
indeed, she is not permitted to sing in his own house. 
Antonia singing on that memorable night has, there- 
fore, come to be regarded by the townspeople in the 
light of a tradition of some marvellous wonder that 
suffices to stir the heart and the fancy ; and even those 
who did not hear it often exclaim, whenever any other 
singer attempts to display her powers in the place, 
* What sort of a wretched squeaking do you call that ? . 
Nobody but Antonia knows how to sing.' " 

Having a singular weakness for such like fanastic his- 
tories, I found it necessary, as may easily be imagined, 
to make Antonia's acquaintance. I had myself often 
enough heard the popular sayings about her singing, 
but had never imagined that that exquisite artiste was 
living in the place, held a captive in the bonds of this 
eccentric Krespel like the victim of a tyrannous sor- 
cerer. Naturally enough I heard in my dreams on the 
following night Antonia's marvellous voice, and as she 


THE CREMONA VIOLIN. ii 

besought me in the most touching manner in a glorious 
adagio movement (very ridiculously it seemed to me^ as 
if I had composed it myself) to save her^ I soon resolved, 
like a second Astolpho/ to penetrate into Krespel's 
house^ as if into another Alcina's magic castle, and de- 
liver the queen of song from her ignominious fetters. 

It all came about in a different way from what I had 
expected ; I had seen the Councillor scarcely more than 
two or three times^ and eagerly discussed with him the 
best method of constructing violins^ when he invited me 
to call and see him. I did so ; and he showed me his 
treasures of violins. There were fully thirty of them 
hanging up in a closet ; one amongst them bore con- 
spicuously all the marks of great antiquity (a carved lion's 
bead^ &c.), and, hung up higher than the rest and sur- 
mounted by a crown of flowers, it seemed to exercise a 
queenly supremacy over them. ^'This violin," said 
Krespel, on my making some inquiry relative to it, " this 
violin is a very remarkable and curious specimen of the 
work of some unknown master, probably of Tartini's^ 
age. I am perfectly convinced that there is something 
especially exceptional in its inner construction, and that, 
if I took it to pieces, a secret would be revealed to me 
which I have long been seeking to discover, but — laugh 
at me if you like — this senseless thing which only gives 
signs of life and sound as I make it, often speaks to me 

^ A reference to Ariosto*s Orlando Furioso, Astolpho, an English 
cousin of Orlando, was a great boaster, but generous, courteous, gay, 
and remarkably handsome ; he was carried to Alcina*s island on the 
back of a whale. 

' Giuseppe Tartini, bom in 1692, died in 1770; was one of the most 
celebrated violinists of the eighteenth century, and the discoverer (in 
1714) of ** resultant tones," or " Tartini*s tones*' as they are frequently 
called. Most of his life was spent at Padua. He did much to advance 
the art of the violinist, both by his compositions for that instrument as 
well as by his treatise on its capabilities. 


12 THE CREMONA VIOLIN. 

in a strange way of itself. The first time I played upon 
it I somehow fancied that I was only the magnetiser 
who has the power of moving his subject to reveal of 
his own accord in words the visions of his inner nature. 
Don't go away with the belief that I am such a fool 
as to attach even the slightest importance to such fan- 
tastic notions, and yet it's certainly strange that I could 
never prevail upon myself to cut open that dumb life- 
lesB thing there. I am very pleased now that I have 
not cut it open, for since Antonia has been with me 1 
sometimes play to her upon this violin. For Antonia 
is fond of it — very fond of it." Ae the Councillor 
uttered these words with visible signs of emotion, T felt 
encouraged to hazard the question, " Will you not play 
it to me. Councillor? " Krespel made a wry face, and 
falling into his drawling, singing way, said, "No, my 
good sir ! " and that was an end of the matter. Then 
I had to look at all sorts of rare curiosities, the greater 
part of them childish trifles; at last thrusting his arm 
into a chest, he brought out a folded piece of paper, 
which he pressed into my hand, adding solemnly, 
" You are a lover of art ; take this present as a priceless 
- memento, which you must value at all times above 
everything else." Therewith he took me by the shoul- 
ders and gently pushed me towards the door, embracing 
me on the threshold. That is to say, I was in a sym- 
bolical manner virtually kicked out of doors. Unfold- 
ing the paper, I found a piece of a first string of a violin 
about an eighth of an inch in length, with the words, 
"A piece uf the treble string with which the deceased 
Stamitz^ strung his violin for the last concert at which 
he ever played." 

^^ _ ' This was the name o( a well-knowD musical family from 


THE CREMONA VIOLIN. 15 

This summary dismissal at mention of Antonia's 
name led mc to infer that I should never see her ; but 
I was mistaken^ for on my second visit to the Council- 
lor's I found her in his room, assisting him to put a 
violin together. At first sight Antonia did not make a 
strong impression ; but soon I found it impossible to 
tear myself away from her blue eyes, her sweet rosy 
lips^ her uncommonly graceful, lovely form. She was 
very pale ; but a shrewd remark or a merry sally would 
call up a winning smile on her face and suffuse her 
cheeks with a deep burning flush, which, however, soon 
faded away to a faint rosy glow. My conversation 
with her was quite unconstrained, and yet I saw nothing 
whatever of the Argus-like watchings on Krcspel's part 
which the Professor had imputed to him; on the con- 
trary, his behaviour moved along the customary lines, 
nay, he even seemed to approve of my conversation 
with Antonia. So I often stepped in to see the Coun- 
cillor; and as we became accustomed to each other's 
society, a singular feeling of homeliness, taking posses- 
sion of our little circle of three, filled our hearts with 
inward happiness. I still continued to derive exquisite 
enjoyment from the Councillor's strange crotchets and 
oddities; but it was of course Antonia's irresistible 
charms alone which attracted me, and led me to put up 
with a good deal which I should otherwise, in the frame 
of mind in which I then was, have impatiently shunned. 
For it only too often happened that in the Councillor's 
characteristic extravagance there was mingled much 
that was dull and tiresome; and it was in a special 
degree irritating to me that, as often as I turned the 
conversation upon music, and particularly upon singing, 

Karl Stamitz is the one here possibly meant, since he died about eighteen 
or twenty years previous to the publication of this tale. 


14 THE CREMONA VIOLIN. 

he was sure to interrupt me, with that sardonic smile 
upon his face and those repulsive singing tones of 
his, by some remark of a quite opposite tendency, very 
often of a commonplace character. From the great 
distress which at such times Antonia's glances betrayed, 
I perceived that he only did it to deprive me of a 
pretext for calling upon her for a song. But I didn't 
relinquish my design. The hindrances which the 
Councillor threw in my way only strengthened my 
resolution to overcome them ; I mtist hear Antonia sing 
if I was not to pine away in reveries and dim aspira- 
tions for want of hearing her. 

One evening Krespel was in an uncommonly good 
humour; he had been taking an old Cremona violin 
to pieces, and had discovered that the sound-post was 
fixed half a line more obliquely than usual — an im- 
portant [discovery ! one of incalculable advantage in 
the practical work of making violins ! I succeeded in 
setting him off at full speed on his hobby of the true 
art of violin-playing. Mention of the way in which 
the old masters picked up their dexterity in execution 
from really great singers (which was what Krespel 
happened just then to be expatiating upon), naturally 
paved the way for the remark that now the practice 
was the exact opposite of this, the vocal score errone- 
ously following the affected and abrupt transitions and 
rapid scaling of the instrumentalists. " What is more 
nonsensical,'* I cried, leaping from my chair, running 
to the piano, and opening it quickly, " what is more 
nonsensical than such an execrable style as this, which, 
far from being music, is much more like the noise of 
peas rolling across the floor ? '* At the same time I 
sang several of the modem fermatas, which rush up 
and down and hum like a well-spun peg-top, striking 


THE CREMONA VIOLIN. 15 

a few villainous chords by way of accompaniment. 
Krespel laughed outrageously and screamed^ '^Ha! 
bal methinks I hear our German-Italians or our 
Italian-Germans struggling with an aria from Pucitta/ 
or Portogallo,* or some other Maestro di capella, or 
rather .schiavo d?un primo uomoP * Now, thought I, 
bow's the time; so turning to Antonia^ I remarked, 
^Antonia knows nothing of such singing as that, I 
believe?^' At the same time I struck up one of old Leon- 
ardo Leo's ^ beautiful soul-stirring songs. Then An- 
tonia's cheeks glowed ; heavenly radiance sparkled in 
her eyes, which grew full of reawakened inspiration ; 
she hastened to the piano ; she opened her lips ; but 
at that very moment Krespel pushed her away, grasped 
me by the shoulders, and with a shriek that rose up 
to a tenor pitch, cried, ^' My son — my son — my son ! ** 
And then he immediately went on, singing very softly, 
and grasping my hand with a bow that was the pink 
of politeness, *' In very truth my esteemed and honour- 
able student-friend, in very truth it would be a viola- 
tion of the codes of social intercourse, as well as of all 
good manners, were I to express aloud and in a stirring 
way my wish that here, on this very spot, the devil 

* Vincenzo Pucitta ( 1 77&-1861 ) was an Italian opera composer, whose 
music "show's great facility, but no invention." He also wrote several 
songs. 

' U Portogallo was the Italian sobriquet of a Portuguese musician 
named Mark Anthony Simao ( 1 763-1829). He lived alternately in Italy 
and Portugal, and wrote several operas. 

• Literally, " the slave of a primo uomo" primo uomo being the 
masculine form corresponding to prima donnay that is, a singer of hero*s 
parts in operatic music At one time also female parts were sung and 
acted by men or boys. 

^ Leonardo Leo, the chief Neapolitan representative of Italian music 
in the first part of the eighteenth century, and author of more than 
forty operas and nearly one hundred compositions for the Church. 


i6 " THE CREMONA VIOLIN. 

from hell would softly break your neck with his burn- 
ing claws, and so in a sense make short work of you ; 
but, setting that aside, you must acknowledge, my 
dearest friend, that it is rapidly growing dark, and 
there are no lamps burning to-night, so that, even 
though I did not kick you downstairs at once, your 
darling limU might still run a risk of sufTering damage. 
Go home by all means; and cherish a kind remem- 
brance of your faithful friend, if it should happen that 
you never, — pray, understand me, — if you should never 
see him in his own house again," Therewith he em- 
braced me, and, still keeping fast hold of me, turned 
with me slowly towards the door, so that I could not 
get another single look at Antonia. Of course it is 
plain enough that in my position I couldn't thrash 
the Councillor, though that is what he really deserved. 
The Professor enjoyed a good laugh at my expense, 
and assured me that I had ruined for ever all hopes 
of retaining the Councillor's friendship. Antonia was 
too dear to me, I might say too holy, for me to go and 
play the part of the languishing lover and stand gazing 
up at her window, or to fill the rSle of the love-sick 
adventurer. Completely upset, I went away from 

H ; but, as is usual in such cases, the brilliant 

colours of the picture of my fancy faded, and 
the recollection of Antonia, as well as of Antonia's 
singing (which I had never heard), often fell upon my 
heart like a soft faint trembling light, comforting me. 
Two years afterwards I received an appointment in 

B , and set out on a journey to the south of 

Germany. The towers of H rose before me in 

the red vaporous glow of the evening; the nearer I 
came the more was I oppressed by an indescribable 
fceliog of the most agonising distress; it lay upon me 


THE CREMONA VIOLIN. 17 

like a heavy burden ; I could not breathe ; I was 
obliged to get out of my carriage into the open air. 
But my anguish continued to increase until it became 
actual physical pain. Soon I seemed to hear the 
strains of a solemn chorale floating in the air; the 
sounds continued to grow more distinct; I realised 
the fact that they were men's voices chanting a church 
chorale. "What's that? what's that?" I cried, a 
burning stab darting as it were through my breast. 
"Don't you see?" replied the coachman, who was 
driving along beside me, " why, don't you see ? they're 
burying somebody up yonder in yon churchyard.'^ 
And indeed we were near the churchyard; I saw a 
circle of men clothed in black standing round a grave, 
which was on the point of being closed. Tears started 
to my eyes; I somehow fancied they were burying 
there all the joy and all the happiness of life. Moving 
on rapidly down the hill, I was no longer able to see 
into the churchyard ; the chorale came to an end, and 
I perceived not far distant from the gate some of the 
mourners returning from the funeral. The Professor, 
with his niece on his arm, both in deep mourning, 
went close past me without noticing me. The young 
lady had her handkerchief pressed close to her eyes, and 
was weeping bitterly. In the frame of mind in which 
I then was I could not possibly go into the town, so I 
sent on my servant with the carriage to the hotel where 
I usually put up, whilst I took a turn in the familiar 
neighbourhood, to get rid of a mood that was possibly 
only due to physical causes, such as heating on the 
journey, 8cc. On arriving at a well-known avenue, 
which leads to a pleasure-resort, I came upon a most 
extraordinary spectacle. Councillor Krespel was being 
conducted by two mourners, from whom he appeared 

VOL. I. B 


1 8 THE CREMONA VIOLIN. 

to be endeavouring to make his escape by all sorts of 
strange twists and turns. As usual^ he was dressed in 
his own curious home-made grey coat ; but from his 
little cocked-hat, which he wore perched over one ear 
in military fashion, a long narrow ribbon -of black 
crape fluttered backwards and forwards in the wind. 
Around his waist he had buckled a black sword-belt; 
but instead of a sword he had stuck a long fiddle-bow 
into it. A creepy shudder ran through my limbs: 
^' He's insane," thought I, as I slowly followed them. 
The Councillor's companions led him as far as his 
house, where he embraced them, laughing loudly. 
They left him ; and then his glance fell upon me, 
for I now stood near him. He stared at me fixedly 
for some time; then he cried in a hollow voice, 
"Welcome, my student-friend I you also understand 
it ! " Therewith he took me by the arm and pulled me 
into the house, up the steps, into the room where the 
violins hung. They were all draped in black crape; 
the violin of the old master was missing ; in its place 
was a cypress wreath. I knew what had happened. 
" Antonia ! Antonia ! '' I cried in inconsolable grief. 
The Councillor, with his arms crossed on his breast, 
stood beside me, as if turned into stone. I pointed to 
the cypress wreath. "When she died," said he in a 
very hoarse solemn voice, "when she died, the sound- 
post of that violin brake into pieces with a ringing 
crack, and the sound-board was split from end to end. 
The faithful instrument could only live with her and 
in her; it lies beside her in the coflin, it has beea 
buried with her." Deeply agitated, I sank down upon 
a chair, whilst the Councillor began to sing a gay song 
in a husky voice; it was truly horrible to see him 
hopping about on one foot, and the crape strings (he 


THE CREMONA VIOLIN. 19 

still had his hat on) flying about the room and up to 
the violins hanging on the walls. Indeed^ I could not 
repress a loud cry that rose to my lips when, on the 
Councillor making an abrupt turn, the crape came ail 
over me ; I fancied he wanted to envelop me in it and 
drag me down into the horrible dark depths of insanity. 
Suddenly he stood still and addressed me in his singing 
way, "My son ! my son ! why do you call out? Have 
you espied the angel of death ? That always precedes 
the ceremony." Stepping into the middle of the 
room^ he took the violin-bow out of his sword-belt, 
and, holding it over his head with both hands, broke 
it into a thousand pieces. Then, with a loud laugh, he 
cried, " Now you imagine my sentence is pronounced, 
don't you, my son ? but it's nothing of the kind — not 
at all ! not at all ! Now Fm free — free — free — 
hurrah ! Pm free ! Now I shall make no more violins 
— no more violins — hurrah ! no more violins ! " This 
he sang to a horrible mirthful tunc, again spinning 
round on one foot. Perfectly aghast, I was making 
the best of my way to the door, when he held mc fast, 
saying quite calmly, ''Stay, my student friend, pray 
don^t think from this outbreak of grief, which is tor- 
turing me as if with the agonies of death, that I am 
insane ; I only do it because a short time ago I made 
mvself a dressing-gown in which I wanted to look like 
Fate or like God ! '* The Councillor then went on with 
a medley of silly and awful rubbish, until he fell down 
utterly exhausted; I called up the old housekeeper, 
and was very pleased to find myself in the open air 
again. 

I never doubted for a moment that Krespel had be- 
come insane ; the Professor, however, asserted the con- 
trary. "There are men,'' he remarked, ^'from whom 


20 THE CREMONA VIOLIN. 

nature or a special destiny has taken away the cover 
behind which the mad folly of the rest of us runs its 
course unobserved. They are like thin-skinned insects^ 
which, as we watch the restless play of their muscles, 
seem to be misshapen, while nevertheless everything 
soon comes back into its proper form again. AH that 
with us remains thought, passes over with Krespel into 
action. That bitter scorn which the spirit that is 
wrapped up in the doings and dealings of the earth 
often has at hand, Krespel gives vent to in outrageous 
gestures and agile caprioles. But these are his light- 
ning conductor. What comes up out of the earth he 
gives again to the earth, but what is divine, that he 
keeps ; and so I believe that his inner consciousness, in 
spite of the apparent madness which springs from it to 
the surface, is as right as a trivet. To be sure, Antonia's 
sudden death grieves him sore, but I warrant that to- 
morrow will see him going along in his old jog-trot way 
as usual." And the Professor's prediction was almost 
literally fulfilled. Next day the Councillor appeared 
to be just as he formerly was, only he averred that he 
would never make another violin, nor yet ever play on 
another. And, as I learned later, he kept his word. 

Hints which the Professor let fall confirmed my own 
private conviction that the so carefully guarded secret 
of the Councillor's relations to Antonia, nay, that even 
her death, was a crime which must weigh heavily upon 
him, a crime that could not be atoned for. I deter- 
mined that I would not leave H without taxing him 

with the offence which I conceived him to be guilty of; 
I determined to shake his heart down to its very roots, 
and so compel him to make open confession of the 
terrible deed. The more I reflected upon the matter 
the clearer it grew in my own mind that Krespel must 


THE CREMONA VIOLIN. 21 

be a villain^ and in the same proportion did my in- 
tended reproach^ which assumed of itself the form of a 
real rhetorical masterpiece^ wax more fiery and more 
impressive. Thus equipped and mightily incensed^ I 
hurried to his house. I found him with a calm smiling 
countenance making playthings. " How can peace/' 
I burst out^ ^^ how can peace find lodgment even for a 
single moment in your breast^ so long as the memory of 
your horrible deed preys, like a serpent upon you ? " He 
gazed at me in amazement^ and laid his chisel aside. 
" What do you mean^ my dear sir ? '* he asked ; " pray 
take a seat.'' But my indignation chafing me more 
and more^ I went on to accuse him directly of having 
murdered Antonia, and to threaten him with the ven- 
geance of the Eternal. 

Further, as a newly full-fledged lawyer, full of my 
profession, I went so far as to give him to understand 
that I would leave no stone unturned to get a clue to the 
business, and so deliver him here in this world into the 
hands of an earthly judge. I must confess that I was 
considerably disconcerted when, at the conclusion of my 
violent and pompous harangue, the Councillor, without 
answering so much as a single word, calmly fixed his 
eyes upon me as though expecting me to go on again. 
And this I did indeed attempt to do, but it sounded so 
ill-founded and so stupid as well that I soon grew silent 
again. Krespel gloated over my embarrassment, whilst 
a malicious ironical smile flitted across his face. Then 
he grew very grave, and addressed me in solemn tones. 
''Young man, no doubt you think I am foolish, insane; 
that I can pardon you, since we are both confined in the 
same madhouse; and you only blame me for deluding 
myself with the idea that I am God the Father because 
you imagine yourself to be God the Son. But how do 


22 THE CREMONA VIOLIN. 

you dare desire to insinuate yourself into the secrets 
and lay bare the hidden motives of a life that is strange 
to you and that must continue so ? She has gone and 
the mystery is solved.'^ He ceased speakings rose, and 
traversed the room backwards and forwards several 
times. I ventured to ask for an explanation ; he fixed 
his eyes upon me^ grasped me by the hand, and led me 
to the window, which he threw wide open. Propping 
himself upon his arms, he leaned out, and, looking 
down into the garden, told me the history of his life. 
When he finished I left him, touched and ashamed. 

In a few words, his relations with Antonia rose in the 
following way. Twenty years before, the Councillor 
had been led into Italy by his favourite engrossing pas- 
sion of hunting up and buying the best violins of the 
old masters. At that time he had not yet begun to make 
them himself, and so of course he had not begun to take 
to pieces those which he bought. In Venice he heard 

the celebrated singer Angela i, who at that time 

was playing with splendid success as prima donna at St. 
Benedict's Theatre. His enthusiasm was awakened, 
not only in her art — which Signora Angela had indeed 
brought to a high pitch of perfection — but in her 
angelic beauty as well. He sought her acquaintance ; 
and in spite of all his rugged manners he succeeded in 
winning her heart, principally through his bold and yet 
at the same time masterly violin-playing. Close inti- 
macy led in a few weeks to marriage, which, however, 
was kept a secret, because Angela was unwilling to 
sever her connection with the theatre, neither did she 
wish to part with her professional name, that by which 
she was celebrated, nor to add to it the cacophonous 
"Krespel." With the most extravagant irony he 
escribed to me what a strange life of worry and tor- 


THE CREMONA VIOLIN. 23 

ture Angela led him as soon as she became his wife. 
Krespel was of opinion that more capriciousness and 
waywardness were concentrated in Angela's little per- 
son than in all the rest of the prima donnas in the 
world put together. If he now and again presumed to 
stand up in his own defence^ she let loose a whole army 
of abbots^ musical composers, and students upon him, 
who, ignorant of his true connection with Angela, 
soundly rated him as a most intolerable, ungallant 
lover for not submitting to all the Signora's caprices. 
It was just after one of these stormy scenes that Krespel 
fled to Angela's country seat to try and forget in play- 
ing fantasias on his Cremona violin the annoyances of 
the day. But he had not been there long before the 
Signora, who had followed hard after upon him, stepped 
into the room. She was in an affectionate humour ; she 
embraced her husband, overwhelmed him with sweet 
and languishing glances, and rested her pretty head on 
his shoulder. But Krespel, carried away into the world 
of music, continued to play on until the walls echoed 
again ; thus he chanced to touch the Signora somewhat 
ungently with his arm and the fiddle-bow. She leapt 
back full of fury, shrieking that he was a '^ German 
brute," snatched the violin from his hands, and dashed 
it on 'the marble table into a thousand pieces. Krespel 
stood like a statue of stone before her ; but then, as 
if awakening out of a dream, he seized her with the 
strength of a giant and threw her out of the window 
of her own house, and, without troubling himself about 
anything more, fled back to Venice — to Germany. It 
was not, however, until some time had elapsed that he 
bad a clear recollection of what he had done ; although 
he knew that the window was scarcely five feet from 
the ground, and although he was fully cognisant of 


34 THE CREMONA VIOLIN. 

the necessity, under the above-mentioned circumstances, 
of throwing the Signora out of the window, he yet felt 
troubled by a sense of painful uneasiness, and the more 
so since she had imparted to him in no ambiguous 
terms an interesting secret as to her condition. He 
hardly dared to make inquiries ; and he was not a little 
surprised about eight months afterwards at receiving a 
tender letter from his beloved wife, in which she made 
not the slightest allusion to what had taken place in 
her country house, only adding to the intelligence that 
she had been safely delivered of a sweet little daughter 
the heartfelt prayer that her dear husband and now 
a happy father would come at once to Venice, That 
however Krespel did not do ; rather he appealed to a 
confidential friend for a more circumstantial account 
of the details, and learned that the Signora had alighted 
upon the soft grass as lightly as a bird, and that the sole 
consequences of the fall or shock had been psychic. 
That is to say, after Krespel'a heroic deed she had be- 
come completely altered ; she never showed a trace of 
caprice, of her former freaks, or of her teasing habits ; 
and the composer who wrote for the next carnival was 
the happiest fellow under the sun, since the Signora 
was willing to sing his music without the scores and 
hundreds of changes which she at other times had in- 
sisted upon. "To be sure," added his friend, "there was 
every reason for preserving the secret of Angela's cure, 
else every day would see lady singers flying through 
windows." The Councillor was not a little excited at 
this news ; he engaged horses ; he took his seat in the 
carriage. " Stop ! " he cried suddenly. " Why, (here's 
not a shadow of doubt," he murmured to himself, 
"that as soon as Angela seta eyes upon me again the 
evil spirit will recover his power and once more 


THE CREMONA VIOLIN. 25 

take possession of her. And since I have already 
thrown her out of the window, what could I do if a 
similar case were to occur again ? What would there 
be left for me to do ? '^ He got out of the carriage, 
and wrote an affectionate letter to his wife, making 
graceful allusion to her tenderness in especially dwell- 
ing upon the fact that his tiny daughter had like him 
a little mole behind the ear, and — remained in Ger- 
many. Now ensued an active correspondence between 
them. Assurances of unchanged affection — invitations 
— laments over the absence of the beloved one — 
thwarted wishes — hopes, &c. — flew backwards and for- 
wards from Venice to H , from H to Venice. 

At length Angela came to Germany, and, as is well 
know, sang with brilliant success as prima donna at 

the great theatre in F . Despite the fact that she 

was no longer young, she won all hearts by the irresis- 
tible charm of her wonderfully splendid singing. At 
that time she had not lost her voice in th6 least degree. 
Meanwhile, Antonia had been growing up ; and her 
mother never tired of writing to tell her father how 
that a singer of the first rank was developing in her. 
Krespel's friends in F also confirmed this intelli- 
gence, and urged him to come for once to F to see 

and admire this uncommon sight of two such glorious 
singers. They had not the slightest suspicion of the 
close relations in which Krespel stood to the pair. 
Willingly would he have seen with his own eyes the 
daughter who occupied so large a place in his heart, 
and who moreover often appeared to him in his dreams ; 
but as often as he thought upon his wife he felt very 
uncomfortable, and so he remained at home amongst his 
broken violins. 

There was a certain promising young composer. 


36 THE CREMONA VIOLIN. 

B of F , who was found to have suddenly 

disappeared, nobody knew where. This young man 
fell 80 deeply in love with Antonia that, as she re- 
turned his love, he earnestly besought her mother to 
consent to aa immediate union, sanctilied as it would 
further be by art. Angela had nothing to urge 
against his suit; and the Councillor the more readily - 
gave his consent that the young composer's produc- 
tions had found favour before his rigorous critical 
judgment. Krespel was expecting to hear of the con- 
summation of the marriage, when he received instead 
a black-sealed envelope addressed in a strange hand. 

Doctor R— conveyed to the Councillor the sad 

intelligence that Angela had fallen seriously ill in 
consequence of a cold caught at the theatre, and that 
during the night immediately preceding what was to 
have been Antonia's wedding-day, she had died. To 
him, the Doctor, Angela had disclosed the fact that 
she was Krespd's wife, and that Antonia was his 
daughter; he, Krespel, had better hasten therefore to 
take charge of the orphan. Notwithstanding that 
the Councillor was a good deal upset by this news of 
Angela's death, he soon began to feel that an anti- 
pathetic, disturbing influence had departed out of his 
life, and that now for the first time he could begin to 
breathe freely. The very same day he set out for 
F - You could not credit bow heartrending was 

the Councillor's description of the moment when be 
first saw Antonia. Even in the fantastic oddities of 
his expression there was such a marvellous power of 
description that I am unable to give even so much as 
a faint indication of it. Antonia inherited all her 
mother's amiability and all her mother's charms, but 
not the repellent reverse of the medal. There was no 


THE CREMONA VIOLIN. rf 

chronic moral ulcer^ which might break out from time 
to time. Antonia's betrothed put in an appearance^ 
whilst Antonia herself^ fathoming with happy instinct 
the deeper-lying character of her wonderful father, 
sang one of old Padre Martini's^ motets, which, she 
knew^ Krespel in the heyday of his courtship had 
never grown tired of hearing her mother sing. The 
tears ran in streams down KrespePs cheeks; even 
Angela he had never heard sing like that. Antonia's 
voice was of a very remarkable and altogether peculiar 
timbre, at one time it was like the sighing of an 
.£olian harp, at another like the warbled gush of the 
nightingale. It seemed as if there was not room for 
such notes in the human breast. Antonia, blushing 
with joy and happiness, sang on and on — all her most 

beautiful songs, B playing between whiles as only 

enthusiasm that is intoxicated with delight can play. 
Krespel was at first transported with rapture, then he 
grew thoughtful — still — absorbed in reflection. At 
length he leapt to his feet, pressed Antonia to his 
heart, and begged her in a low husky voice, *^ Sing no 
more if you love me — my heart is bursting — I fear — I 
fear — don^t sing again. ^^ 

" No ! ^^ remarked the Councillor next day to Doctor 

R , *'when, as she sang her blushes gathered into 

two dark red spots on her pale checks, I knew it had 
nothing to do with your nonsensical family likenesses, 
I knew it was what I dreaded." The Doctor, whose 

^ Giambattista Martini, more commonly called Padre Martini, of 
Bologna, formed an influential school of music there in the latter half 
of the eighteenth century. lie wrote vocal and instrumental pieces 
both for the church and for the theatre. He was also a learned his- 
torian of music. He has the merit of having discerned and encouraged 
the genius of Mozart when, a boy of fourteen, he visited Bologna 
in 177a 


a8 THE CREMONA VIOLIN. 

countenance had shown signs of deep distress from the 
very beginning of the conversation, replied, "Whether 
it arises from a too early taxing of her powers of song, 
or whether the fault is Nature's — enough, Antonia 
labours under an organic failure in the chest, while 
it is from it too that her voice derives its wonderful 
power and its singular timbre, which I might almost 
say transcend the limits of human capabilities of song. 
But it bears the announcement of her early death ; 
for, if she continues to sing, I wouldn't give her at the 
most more than six months longer to live." Krespel's 
heart was lacerated as if by the stabs of hundreds of 
stinging knives. It was as though his life had been 
for the first time overshadowed by a beautiful tree full 
of the most magnificent blossoms, and now it was to 
be sawn to pieces at the roots, so that it could not 
grow green and blossom any more. His resolution was 
taken. He told Antonia all ; he put the alternatives 
before her — whether [she would follow her betrothed 
and yield to his and the world's seductions, but with 
the certainty of dying early, or whether she would 
spread round her father in his old days that joy and 
peace which had hitherto been unknown to him, and 
so secure a long life. She threw herself sobbing into 
his arms, and he, knowing the heartrending trial that 
was before her, did not press for a more explicit decla- 
ration. He talked the matter over with her betrothed ; 
but, notwithstanding that the latter averred that no 
note should ever cross Antonia's lips, the Councillor 
was only two well aware that even B could not 

resist the temptation of hearing her sing, at any rate 
arias of his own composition. And the world, the 
musical public, even though acquainted with the 
nature of the singer's affliction, would certainly not 


THB CREMONA VIOLIN. 29 

relinquish its claims to hear her, for in cases where 
pleasure is concerned people of this class are very 
selfish and cruel. The Councillor disappeared from 

F r- along with Antonia, and came to H . B 

was in despair when he learnt that they had gone. He 
set out on their track, overtook them, and arrived at 

H at the same time that they did. " Let me see 

him only once, and then die!'' entreated Antonia. 
'' Die ! die ! '^ cried Krespel, wild with anger, an icy 
shudder running through him. His daughter, the 
only creature in the wide world who had awakened 
in him the springs of unknown joy, who alone had 
reconciled him to life, tore herself away from his heart, 
and he — he suffered the terrible trial to take place. 

B sat down to the piano : Antonia sang ; Krespel 

fiddled away merrily, until the two red spots showed 
themselves on Antonia's cheeks. Then he bade her 

stop ; and as B was taking leave of his betrothed, 

she suddenly fell to the floor with a loud scream. " I 
thought,'' continued Krespel in his narration, " I 
thought that she was, as I had anticipated, really 
dead ; but as I had prepared myself for the worst, my 
calmness did not leave me, nor my self-command desert 

me. I grasped B , who stood like a silly sheep in his 

dismay, by the shoulders, and said (here the Councillor 
fellinto his singing tone), ^ Now that you, my estimable 
pianoforte-player, have, as you wished and desired, really 
murdered your betrothed, you may quietly take your 
departure ; at least have the goodness to make yourself 
scarce before I run my bright hanger through your 
heart. My daughter, who, as you see, is rather pale, 
could very well do with some colour from your pre- 
cious blood. Make haste and run, for I might also 
hurl a nimble knife or two after you.' I must, I 


30 THE CREMONA VIOLIN. 

suppose, have looked rather formidable as I uttered 
these words, for, with a cry of the greatest terror, 

B tore himself loose from my grasp, rushed out 

of the room, and down the steps." Directly after 

B was gone, when the Councillor tried to lift up 

his daughter, who lay unconscious on the floor, she 
opened her eyes with a deep sigh^ but soon closed them 
again as if about to die. Then Krespel's grief found 
vent aloud, and would not be comforted. The Doctor, 
whom the old housekeeper had called in, pronounced 
Antonia's case a somewhat serious but by no means 
dangerous attack ; and she did indeed recover more 
quickly than her father had dared to hope. She now 
clung to him with the most confiding childlike aflec- 
tion ; she entered into his favourite hobbies — into his 
mad schemes and whims. She helped him take old 
violins to pieces and glue new ones together. " I 
won't sing again any more, but live for you," she 
often said, sweetly smiling upon hina, after she had 
been asked to sing and had refused. Such appeals 
however the Councillor was anxious to spare her as 
much as possible; therefore it was that he was un- 
willing to take her into society, and solicitously shunned 
all music. He well understood how painful it must 
be for her to forego altogether the exercise of that art 
which she had brought to such a pitch of perfection. 
When the Councillor bought the wonderful violin 
that he had buried with Antonia, and was about to 
take it to pieces, she met him with such sadness in 
her face and softly breathed the petition, "What! 
this as well ? " By some power, which he could not 
explain, he felt impelled to leave this particular instru- 
ment unbroken, and to play upon it. Scarcely had he 
drawn the first few notes from it than Antonia cried 


THE CREMONA VIOLIN. 31 

• 

aloud with joy, " Why, that's me ! — now I shall sing 
again/' And, in truth, there was something remark- 
ably striking about the clear, silvery bell-like tones of 
the violin ; they seemed to have been engendered in 
the human soul. KrespePs heart was deeply moved ; 
be played, too, better than ever. As he ran up and 
down the scale, playing bold passages with consummate 
power and expression^ she clapped her hands together 
and cried with delight, '^ I did that well I I did that 
well ! '' 

From this time onwards her life was filled with 
peace and cheerfulness. She often said to the Council- 
lor, " I should like to sing something, father.*' Then 
Krespel would take his violin down from the wall and 
play her most beautiful songs, and her heart was right 

glad and happy. Shortly before my arrival in H , 

the Councillor fancied one night that he heard some- 
body playing the piano in the adjoining room, and he 

soon made out distinctly that B was flourishing 

on the instrument in his usual style. He wished to 
get up, but felt himself held down as if by a dead 
weight, and lying as if fettered in iron bonds ; he was 
utterly unable to move an inch. Then Antonia's 
voice was heard singing low and soft ; soon, however, 
it began to rise and rise in volume until it became an 
ear-splitting ybr/wiirwo ; and at length she passed over 

into a powerfully impressive song which B had 

once composed for her in the devotional style of the 
old masters. Krespel described his condition as being 
incomprehensible, for terrible anguish was mingled 
with a delight he had never experienced before. All 
at once he was surrounded by a dazzling brightness, 

in which he beheld B and Antonia locked in a 

close embrace, and gazing at each other in a rapture of 


33 THE CREMONA VIOUN. 

ecstasy. The music of the song and of the pianoforte 
accompanying it went on without any visible signs 
that Antonia sang or that B touched the instru- 
ment. Then the Councillor fell into a sort of dead 
faint, whilst the images vanished away. On awaken- 
ing he still felt the terrible anguish of his dream. He 
rushed into Antonia's room. She lay on the sofa, 
her eyes closed, a sweet angelic smile on her face, her 
hands devoutly folded, and looking as if asleep and 
dreaming of the joys and raptures of heaven. But she 
was — dead. 


( 33 ) 


THE PERM AT A. 

Hummel's^ amusing, vivacious picture, ^^ Company 
in an Italian Inn,'* became known by the Art Exhibi- 
tion at Berlin in the autumn of 1814, where it ap- 
peared, to the delight of all who saw and studied it. 
An arbour almost hidden in foliage — a table covered 
with wine-flasks and fruits — two Italian ladies sitting 
at it opposite each other, one singing, the other playing 
a guitar; between them, more in the background, 
stands an abbot, acting as music-director. With his 
baton raised, he is awaiting the moment when the 
Signora shall end, in a long trill, the cadence which, 
with her eyes directed heavenwards, she is just in the 
midst of; then down will come his hand, whilst the 
guitarist gaily dashes off the dominant chord. The 
abbot is filled with admiration — with exquisite delight 
— and at the same time his attention is painfully on 
the stretch. He wouldn't miss the proper downward 
beat for the world. He hardlv dare breathe. He 
would like to stop the mouth and wings of every 
buzzing bee and midge. So much the more therefore 
is he annoyed at the bustling host, who must needs 

^ Johann Erdmann Hummel, bom 1769, died 1852, a German 
painter, studied in Italy, painted various kinds of pieces, and also 
wrote treatises on perspective and kindred subjects. The picture here 
referred to became perhaps almost as much celebrated from the fact of 
its having suggested this amusing sketch to Hoffmann as for its intrinsic 
merits as a work of art. 

VOL. I. C 


34 THE PERM AT A. 

come and bring the wine just at this supreme, delicious 
moment. An outlook upon an avenue, patterned by 
brilliant strips of light ! There a horseman has pulled ' 
up, and a glass of something refreshing to drink is 
being handed up to him on horseback. 

Before this picture stood the two friends Edward 
and Theodore. "The more I look at this singer," 
said Edward, "in her gay attire, who, though rather 
oldish, is yet full of the true inspiration of her art, and 
the more I am delighted with the grave but genuine 
Roman profile and lovely form of the guitarist, and 
the more my estimable friend the abbot amuses me, 
the more does the whole picture seem to me instinct 
with free, strong, vital power. It is plainly a carica- 
ture in the higher sense of the term, but rich in grace 
and vivacity, I should just like to step into that 
arbour and open one of those dainty little flasks 
which are ogling me from the table. I tell you what, 
I fancy I can already smell something of the sweet 
fragrance of the noble wine. Come, it were a sin for 
this solicitation to be wasted on the cold senseless 
atmosphere that is about us here. Let us go and 
drain a flask of Italian wine in honour of this fine 
picture, of art, and of merry Italy, where Hfe is exhila- 
rating and given for pleasure." 

Whilst Edward was running on thus in disconnected 
sentences, Theodore stood silent and deeply absorbed 
in reflection. "Ay, that we will, come along," he 
said, starting up as if awakening out of a dream; but 
nevertheless he had some difficulty in tearing himself 
away from the picture, and as he mechanically followed 
his friend, he had to stop at the door to ca^t another 
longing lingering look back upon the singer and 
guitarist and abbot. Edward's proposal easily sd- 


THE PERM AT A. 35 

mitted of being carried into execution. They crossed 
the street diagonally^ and very soon a flask exactly 
like those in the picture stood before them in Sala 
Tarone*s^ little blue room. "It seems to me," said 
Edward^ as Theodore still continued very silent and 
thoughtful, even after several glasses had been drunk, 
" it seems to me that the picture has made a deeper 
impression upon you than upon me, and not such an 
agreeable impression either.^* " I assure you," replied 
Theodore, " that I lost nothing of the brightness and 
grace of that animated composition ; yet it is very singu- 
lar, — ^it is a faithful representation of a scene out of my 
own life, reproducing the portraits of the parties con- 
cerned in it in a manner startlingly lifelike. You will, 
however, agree with me that diverting memories also 
have the power of strangely moving the mind when they 
suddenly spring up in this extraordinary and unexpected 
way, as if awakened by the wave of a magician^s wand. 
That^sthecase with me just now." " What ! ascene out 
of your own life ! " exclaimed Edward, quite astonished. 
*' Do you mean to say the picture represents an episode 
in your own life? I saw at once that the two ladies 
and the priest were eminently successful portraits, but I 
never for a moment dreamed that you had ever come 
across them in the course of your life. Come now, 
tell me all about it, how it all came about ; we are 
quite alone, nobody else will come at this time o' day." 
*' Willingly," answered Theodore, "but unfortunately 
I must go a long way back — to my early youth in 
fact." " Never mind ; fire away," rejoined Edward ; 
" I don't know over much about your early days. If 
it lasts a good while, nothing worse will happen than 

^ The keeper of a well-known tavern in Berlin, at about the time 
when this tale was wriuen, 181 7 to 182a 


36 THE PERMA TA. 

that we shall have to empty a bottle more than we at 
firat bargained for ; and to that nobody will have any 
objection, neither we, nor Mr, Tarone." 

"Thai, throwing everything else aside, I at length 
devoted myself entirely to the noble art of music," 
began Theodore, " need excite nobody's astonishment, 
for whilst still a boy I would hardly do anything else 
but play, and spent hours and hours strumming on my 
uncle's old creaking, jarring piano. The little town 
was very badly provided for music; there was nobody 
who could give me instruction except an old opinion- 
ated organist; he, however, was merely a dry arith- 
metician, and plagued me to death with obscure, un- 
melodious toccatas and fugues. But I held on bravely, 
without letting myself be daunted. The old fellow 
was crabby, and often found a good deal of fault, but 
be bad only to play a good piece in his own powerful 
style, and I was at once reconciled both with him and 
with his art. I was then often in a curious state of 
mind ; many pieces particularly of old Sebastian Bach 
were almost like a fearful ghost-story, and I yielded 
myself up to that feeling of pleasurable awe to which 
we are so prone in the days of our fantastic youth. 
But I entered into a veritable Eden when, as sometimes 
happened in winter, the bandmaster of the town and his 
colleagues, supported by a few other moderate dilettante 
players, gave a concert, and I, owing to the strict time 
I always kept,, was permitted to play the kettle-drum 
in the symphony. It was not until later that I per- 
ceived bow ridiculous and extravagant these concerts 
were. My teacher generally played two concertos on 
the piano by Wolff or Emanuel Bach,^ a member of 

' ThethirdumortheSebistian Bach— /A^ Bach— juEtmeDlionedaboTe. 
Bs called " the Berlin Bach," or " ihe Hanho^ Bacb." 


THE PERM AT A. 37 

the town band struggled with Stamitz,* while the re- 
ceiver of excise duties worked away hard at the flute, 
and took in such an immense supply of breath that he 
blew out both lights on his music-stand, and always 
had to have them relighted again. Singing wasn't 
thought about; my uncle, a great friend and patron 
of music, always disparaged the local talent in this 
line. He still dwelt with exuberant delight upon the 
days gone by, when the four choristers of the four 
churches of the town agreed together to give Lottchen 
am Hofe?^ Above all, he was wont to extol the tolera- 
tion which united the singers in the production of this 
work of art, for not only the Catholic and the Evan-r 
gelical but also the reformed community was split into 
two bodies — those speaking German and those speaking 
French. The French chorister was not daunted by 
the Lottchen, but, as my uncle maintained, sang his 
part, spectacles on nose, in the finest falsetto that ever 
proceeded forth from a human breast. Now there was 
amongst us (I mean in the town) a spinster named 
Meibel, aged about fifty-five, who subsisted upon the 
scanty pension which she received as a retired court 
singer of the metropolis, and my uncle was rightly of 
opinion that Miss Meibel might still do something for 
her money in the concert hall. She assumed airs of 
importance, required a good deal of coaxing, but at 
last consented, so that we came to have hravuras in 
our concerts. She was a singular creature this Miss 
Meibel. I still retain a livelv recollection of her lean 
little figure. Dressed in a many-coloured gown, she 

^ See note, p. 12 above. 

^ This was one of a species of musical composition called SingspuU, 
a development of the simple song or Litd^ by Johann Adam Hiller, 
(properly Hiiller), bom 172S, died 1S04. 


38 THE PERU AT A. 

was wont to step forward witb her roll of music in her 
hand, looking very grave and solemn, and to acknow- 
ledge the audience with a slight inclination of the 
upper part of her body. Her head-dress was a most 
remarkable head dress. In front was fastened a nose- 
gay of Italian flowers of porcelain, which kept up a 
strange trembling and tottering as she sang. At the 
end, after the audience had greeted her with no stinted 
measure of applause, she proudly handed the music- 
roll to my uncle, and permitted him to dip his thumb 
and finger into a little porcelain snufT-box, fashioned in 
the shape of a pug dog, out of which she took a pinch 
herself with evident relish. She had a horrible squeaky 
voice, indulged in all sorts of ludicrous flourishes and 
roulades, and bo you may imagine what an effect all this, 
combined with her ridiculous manners and style of dress, 
could not fail to have upon me. My uncle overflowed 
with panegyrics ; that I could not understand, and so 
turned the more readily to my organist, who, looking 
with contempt upon vocal efforts in general, delighted 
me down to the ground as in his hypochondriac mali- 
cious way he parodied the ludicrous old spinster. 

" The more decidedly I came to share with my master 
his contempt for singing, the higher did he rate my 
musical genius. He took a great and zealous interest 
in instructing me in counterpoint, so that I soon came 
to write the most ingenious toccatas and fugues. I 
was once playing one of these ingenious specimens of 
my skill to my uncle on my birthday (I was nineteeen 
years old), when the waiter of our first hotel stepped 
into the room to announce the visit of two foreign 
ladies who had just arrived in the town. Before my 
uncle could throw oflf his dressing-gown — it was of a 
large flower pattern — and don his coat and vest, his 


THE PERM ATA. 39 

visitors were already in the room. You know what an 
electric eflfect every strange event has upon those who 
are brought up in the narrow seclusion of a small 
country town ; this in particular^ which crossed my 
path so unexpectedly^ was pre-eminently fitted to work 
a complete revolution within me. Picture to your- 
self two tall^ slender Italian ladies^ dressed fantastically 
and in bright colours^ quite up to the latest fashion^ 
meeting my uncle with the feeedom of professional 
artistes, and yet with considerable charms of manner^ 
and addressing him in firm and sonorous voices. What 
the deuce of a strange tongue they speak ! Only now. 
and then does it sound at all like German. My uncle 
doesn't understand a word; embarrassed, mute as a 
maggot, he steps back and points to the sofa. They 
sit down, talk together — it sounds like music itself. At 
length they succeed in making my good uncle compre- 
hend that they are singers on a tour ; they would like 
to give a concert in the place, and have come to him, 
as he* is the man to conduct such musical negotiations. 
'' Whilst they were talking together I picked up their 
Christian names, and I fancied that I could now more 
easily and more distinctly distinguish the one from the 
other, for their both making their appearance together 
had at first confused me. Lauretta, apparently the elder 
of the two, looked about her with sparkling eyes, and 
talked away at my embarrassed old uncle with gushing 
vivacity and with demonstrative gestures. She was not 
too tall, and of a voluptuous build, so that my eyes wand- 
ered amid many charms that hitherto had been strangers 
to them. Teresina, taller, more slender, with a long 
grave face, spoke but seldom, but what she did say was 
more intelligible. Now and then a peculiar smile flitted 
across her features ; it almost seemed asif she werehighly 


40 THE PERM ATA. 

amused at my good uncle, who had withdrawn into his 
silken dressing-gown like a snail into its shell, and was 
vainly endeavouring to push out of sight a treacherous 
yellow string, with which he fastened his night-jacket 
together, and which would keep tumbling out of his 
bosom yards and yards long. At length they rose 
to depart; my uncle promised to arrange everything 
for the concert for the third day following ; then the 
sisters gave him and me, whom he introduced to them 
as a young musician, a most polite invitation to take 
chocolate with them in the afternoon. 

" We mounted the steps with a solemn air and awk- 
ward gait; we both felt very peculiar, as if we were 
going to meet some adventure to which we were not 
equal. In consequence of due previous preparation my 
uncle had a good many fine things to say about art, 
which nobody understood, neither he himself nor any 
of the rest of us. This done, and after I had thrice 
burned my tongue with the scalding hot chocolate, 
but with the stoical fortitude of a Scsevola had smiled 
under the fiery infliction, Lauretta at length said that 
she would sing to us. Teresina took her guitar, tuned 
it, and struck a few full chords. It was the first time 
I had heard the instrument, and the characteristic 
mysterious sounds of the trembling strings made a deep 
and wonderful impression upon me. t.auretta began 
very softly and held on, the note rising toforCissimo, and 
then quickly broke into a crisp complicated run through 
an octave and a half. I can still remember the words 
of the beginning, 'Sento I'amica speme.' My heart 
was oppressed ; I had never had an idea of anything of 
the kind. But as Lauretta continued to soar in bolder 
and higher flights, and as the musical notes poured 
upon me like sparkling rays thicker and thicker, then 


THE PERM AT A. 41 

was the music that had so long Iain mute and lifeless 
within me enkindled, rising up in strongs grand flames. 
Ah ! I had never heard what music was in my life 
before ! Then the sisters sang one of those grand im- 
pressive duets of Abbot Steffani^ which confine them- 
selves to notes of a low register. My soul was stirred 
at the sound of Teresina's alto, it was so sonorous, and 
as pure as silver bells. I couldn't for the life of me 
restrain my emotion ; tears started to my eyes. My 
uncle coughed warningly, and cast angry glances upon 
me; it was all of no use, I was really quite beside 
myself. This seemed to please the sisters ; they began 
to inquire into the nature and extent of my musical 
studies ; I was ashamed of my performances in that 
line, and with the hardihood born of enthusiastic 
admiration, I bluntly declared that that day was the 
first time I had ever heard music. ^ The dear good 
boy ! ' lisped Lauretta, so sweetly and bewitchingly. 

" On reaching home again, I was seized with a sort of 
fury : I pounced upon all the toccatas and fugues that 
I had hammered out, as well as a beautiful copy of 
forty-five variations of a canonical theme that the 
organist had written and done me the honour of pre- 
senting to me, — all these I threw into the fire, and 
laughed with spiteful glee as the double counterpoint 
smoked and crackled. Then I sat down at the piano 
and tried first to imitate the tones of the guitar, then 
to play the sisters' melodies, and finished by attempting 
to sing them. At length about midnight my uncle 
emerged from his bedroom and greeted me with, ' My 
boy, you'd better just stop that screeching and troop 

^ Agostino StefTani, an Italian by birth (1655), spent nearly all his 
life in Germany at the courts of Munich and Hanover. He wrote 
several operas, and was renowned for his duets, motets, &c. 


43 THB PERU ATA. 

off to bed ; ' and he put out both candles and went 
back to his own room. I had no other alternative but 
to obey. The mysterious power of song came to me in 
my dreams — at least I thought so — for I sang ' Seato 
I'amica speme' in excellent style, 

" The next morning my uncle had hunted up every- 
body who could fiddle and blow for the rehearsal. He 
was proud to show what good musicians the town 
possessed; but everything seemed to go perversely 
wrong. Lauretta set to work at a fine scena ; but very 
soon in the recitative the orchestra was all at sixes and 
sevens, not one of them had any idea of accompaniment. 
Lauretta screamed — raved — wept with impatience and 
anger. The organist was presiding at the piano ; she 
attacked him with the bitterest reproaches. He got up 
and in silent obduracy, marched out of the hall. The 
bandmaster of the town, whom Lauretta had dubbed a 
' German ass ! ' took his violin under hia arm, and, 
banging his hat on his head with an air of defiance, 
likewise made for the door. The members of his 
company, sticking their bows under the strings of their 
violins, and unscrewing the mouthpieces of their brass 
instruments, followed him. There was nobody but 
the dilettanti left, and they gazed about them with 
disconsolate looks, whilst the receiver of excise duties 
exclaimed, with a tragic air, 'O heaven I how mortified 
I feel ! ' All my diffidence was gone, — I threw myself in 
the bandmaster's way, I begged, I prayed, in my distress 
I promised him six new minuets with double trios for 
the annual ball. I succeeded in appeasing him. He 
went back to hi* place, his companions followed suit, 
and soon the orchestra was reconstituted, except that 
the organist was wanting. He was slowly making his 
way across the market-place, no shouting or beckoning 


THB PERM ATA. 43 

could make him turn back. Teresina had looked on at 
the whole scene with smothered laughter, while Lauretta 
was now as full of glee as before she had been of anger. 
She was unstinted in her praise of my efforts ; she 
asked me if I played the piano, and ere I knew what 
I was about, I sat in the organist's place with the music 
before me. Never before had I accompanied a singer, 
still less directed an orchestra. Teresina sat down be- 
side me at the piano and'praised me every time; Lauretta 
encouraged me with repeated ' Bravos ! ' the orchestra 
proved manageable, and things continued to improve. 
Everything was worked out successfully at the second 
rehearsal ; and the effect of the sisters' singing at the 
concert is not to be described. 

" The sovereign's return to his capital was to be cele- 
brated there with several festive demonstrations ; the 
sisters were summoned to sing in the theatre and at con- 
certs. Until the time that their presence was required 
thev resolved to remain in our little town, and thus it 
came to pass that they gave us a few more concerts. 
The admiration of the public rose to a kind of madness. 
Old Miss Meibel, however, took with a deliberate air a 
pinch of snuff out of her porcelain pug and gave her 
opinion that 'such impudent caterwauling was not 
singing ; singing should be low and melodious.^ My 
friend, the organist, never showed himself again, and, 
in truth, I did not miss him in the least. I was the 
happiest fellow in the world. The whole day long I 
spent with the sisters, copying out the vocal scores of 
what they were to sing in the capital. Lauretta was 
my ideal; her vile caprices, her terribly passionate 
violence, the torments she inflicted upon me at the 
piano — all these I bore with patience. She alone had 
unsealed for me the springs of true music. I began to 


44 THE PERU AT A. 

study Italian, and try my hand at a few canzonets. In 
what heavenly rapture was I plunged when Lauretta 
sang my compositions, or even praised them. Often it 
seemed to me as if it was not I who had thought out 
and set what she sang, but that the thought first shone 
forth iu her singing of it. With Teresina I could not 
somehow get on familiar terms; she sang but seldom, 
and didn't seem to make much account of all that I 
was doing, and sometimes I even fancied that she was 
laughing at me behind my back. At length the time 
came for them to leave the town. And now I felt for 
the first time how dear Lauretta had become to me, 
and how impossible it would be for me to separate from 
her. Often, when she was in a tender, playful mood, she 
had caressed me, although always in a perfectly artless 
fashion ; nevertheless, my blood was excited, and it was 
nothing but the strange coolness with which she was 
more usually wont to treat me that restrained me from 
giving reins to my ardour and clasping her in my arms 
in a delirium of passion. I possessed a tolerably good 
tenor voice, which, however, I had never practised, but 
now I began to cultivate it assiduously. I frequently 
sang with Lauretta one of those tender Italian duets of 
which there exists such an endless number. We were 
just singing one of these pieces, the hour of departure 
was close at hand — ' Senxa di te hen mio, vivere nan 
pass" to' (' Without thee, my own, I cannot live!') 
Who could resist that? I threw myself at her feet — 
I was in despair. She raised me up — ' But, my friend, 
need we then part?' I pricked up my ears with 
amazement. She proposed that I should accompany 
her and ,^Teresina to the capital, for if I intended to 
devote myself wholly to music I must leave this 
wretched little town some time or other. -Picture to 


THE FBRMATA, 4S 

yourself one struggling in the dark depths of boundless 
despair, who has given up &\\ hopes of life, and who, in 
the moment in which he expects to receive the blow 
that is to crush him for ever, suddenly finds himself 
sitting in a glorious bright arbour of roses, where hun- 
dreds of unseen but loving voices whisper, ' You are 
still alive, dear, — still alive ' — and you will know how 
I felt then. Along with them to the capital 1 that had 
seized upon my heart as an ineradicable resolution. 
But I won't tire you with the details of how I set to work 
to convince my uncle that I ought now by all means 
to go to the capital, which, moreover, was not very far 
away. He at length gave his consent, and announced 
his intention of going with me. Here was a tricksy 
stroke of fortune! I dare not give utterance to my 
purpose of travelling in company with [the sisters. A 
violent cold, which my uncle caught, proved my saviour. 
" [ left the town by the stage-coach, but only went as 
far as the first stopping-station, where I awaited my 
divinity. A well-lined purse enabled me to make all 
due and fitting preparations. I was seized with the 
romantic idea of accompanying the ladies in the char- 
acter of a protecting paladin — on horseback; I secured 
a horse, which, though not particularly handsome, 
was, its owner assured me, quiet, and I rode back at the 
appointed time to meet the two fair singers. I soon 
saw the little carriage, which had two seats, coming to- 
wards me. L.auretta and Teresina sat on the principal 
seat, whilst on the other, with her back to the driver, 
sat their maid, the fat little Gianna, a brown-cheeked 
Neapolitan. Besides this living freight, the carriage 
was packed full of boxes, satchels, and baskets of all 
sizes and shapes, such as invariably accompany ladies 
when they travel. Two little pug-dogs which Gianna 


46 THE PERU AT A. 

was nursing in her lap began to bark when I gaily 
saluted the company. 

''All was going on very nicely ; we were traversing 
the last stage of the journey, when my steed all at 
once conceived the idea that it was high time to be 
returning homewards. Being aware that stern mea- 
sures were not always blessed with a remarkable degree 
of success in such cases, I felt advised to have recourse 
to milder means of persuasion; but the obstinate 
brute remained insensible to all my well-meant ex- 
hortations. I wanted to go forwards, he backwards, 
and all the advantage that my efforts gave me over 
him was that instead of taking to his heels for home, 
he continued to run round in circles. Teresina leaned 
forward out of the carriage and had a hearty laugh ; 
Lauretta, holding her hands before her face, screamed 
out as if I were in imminent danger. This gave me 
the courage of despair, I drove the spurs into the 
brute's ribs, but that very same moment I was roughly 
hurled off and found myself sprawling on the ground. 
The horse stood perfectly still, and, stretching out his 
long neck, regarded me with what I took to be 
nothing else than derision. I was not able to rise to my 
feet; the driver had to come and help me; Lauretta 
had jumped out and was weeping and lamenting; 
Teresina did nothing but laugh without ceasing. I 
had sprained my foot, and couldn't possibly mount 
again. How was I to get on ? My steed was fastened 
to the carriage, whilst I crept into it. Just picture us 
all — two rather robust females, a fat servant-girl, two 
pug-dogs, a dozen boxes, satchels, and baskets, and me 
as well, all packed into a little carriage. Picture 
Lauretta's complaints at the un comfortableness of 
her seat, the howling of the pugs, the chattering of 


THE PERM ATA. 47 

the Neapolitan^ Tersina^s sulks^ the unspeakable pain 
I felt in my foot, and you will have some idea of my 
enviable situation ! Teresina* averred that she could 
not endure it any longer. We stopped ; in a trice 
she was out of the carriage, had untied my horse, and 
was up in the saddle, prancing and curveting around 
us. I must indeed admit that she cut a fine figure. 
The dignity and elegance which marked her carriage 
and bearing were still more prominent on horseback. 
She asked for her guitar, then dropping the reins on 
her arm, she began to sing proud Spanish ballads with 
a full-toned accompaniment. Her light silk dress 
fluttered in the wind, its folds and creases giving rise 
to a sheeny play of light, whilst the white feathers of 
her hat quivered and shook, like the prattling spirits 
of the air which we heard in her voice. Altogether 
she made such a romantic figure that I could not keep 
my eyes off her, notwithstanding that Lauretta re- 
proached her for making herself such a fantastic 
simpleton, and predicted that she would suffer for her 
audacity. But no accident happened; either the 
horse had lost all his stubbornness or he liked the fair 
singer better than the paladin ; at any rate, Teresina 
did not creep back into the carriage again until we 
had almost reached the gates of the town. 

'^ If you had seen me then at concerts, and operas, if 
you had seen me revelling in all sorts of music, and as 
a diligent accompanist studying arias, duets, and I 
don^t know what besides at the piano, you would have 
perceived, by the complete change in my behaviour, 
that I was filled with a new and wonderful spirit I 
had cast ofTall my rustic shyness, and sat at the piano- 
forte with my score before me like an experienced 
professional, directing the performances of my prima 


48 THE PERM AT A. 

donna. All my mind — all my thoughts— were sweet 
melodies. Utterly regardless of all the rules of counter- 
point, I composed all sorts of canzonets and arias, 
which Lauretta sang, though only in her own room. 
Why would she never sing any of my pieces at a con- 
cert? I could not understand it. Teresina also arose 
before my imagination curveting on her proud steed 
with the lute in her hands, like Art herself disguised 
in romance. Without thinking of it consciously, I 
wrote several songs of a high and serious nature. Lau- 
retta, it is true, played with her notes like a capricious 
fairy queen. There was nothing upon which she ven- 
tured in which she had not success. But never did 
a roulade cross Teresina's lips; nothing mure than a 
simple interpolated note, at most a mordent; but her 
long-sustained tones gleamed like meteors through the 
darkness of night, awakening strange spirits, who came 
and gazed with earnest eyes into the depths of my heart. 
I know not how I remained ignorant of them so long ! 
"The sisters were granted a benefit concert; I sang 
with Lauretta a long scena from Anfossi.* As usual I 
presided at the piano. We came to the last yijrmafo, 
Lauretta exerted all her skill and art; she warbled trill 
after trill like a nightingale, executed sustained notes, 
then long elaborate roulades — a whole solfeggio. In 
fact, I thought she was almost carrying the thing too 
far this tinie ; I felt a soft breath on my cheek ; Tere- 
sina stood behind me. At this moment Lauretta took 
a good start with the intention of swelling up to a 
' harmonic shake,' and so passing back into a tempo. 
The devil entered into me ; I jammed down the keys 

' Pasquate Anfoisi, an Italian operatic composei of the eifhleenth 
centuiy. He wax for a lime the fashion of the dajr at Rome, but occnpies 
now ooif a inbordinale rank amongst niuiciaDs. 


THE PERM AT A. A9 

with both hands; the orchestra followed suit; and it 
was all over with Lauretta's trill, just at the supreme 
moment when she was to excite everybody's astonish- 
ment. Almost annihilating me with a look of fury, 
she crushed her roll of music together, tore it up, and 
hurled it at my head, so that the pieces flew all over 
me. Then she rushed like a madwoman through the 
orchestra into the adjoining room ; as soon as we had 
concluded the piece, I followed her. She wept; she 
raved. 'Out of my sight, villain,' she screamed as 
soon as she saw me, ' You devil, you've completely 
ruined me — my fame, my honour — and oh ! my trill. 
Out of my sight, you devil's own !' She made a rush 
at me; I escaped through the door. Whilst some one 
else was performing, Teresina and the music-director at 
length succeeded in so far pacifying her rage, that she 
resolved to appear again; but I was not to be allowed 
to touch the piano. In the last duet that the sisters 
sang, Lauretta did contrive to introduce the swelling 
' harmonic shake,' was rewarded with a storm of 
applause, and settled down into the best of humours. 

" But I could not get over the vile treatment which I 
had received at her hands in the presence of so many 
people, and I was firmly resolved to set off home next 
morning for my native town. I was actually engaged 
in packing my things together when Teresina came 
into my room. Observing what I was about, she ex- 
claimed, astonished, 'Arc you going to leave us?' I 
gave her to understand that after the affront which 
had been put upon me by Lauretta I could not think 
of remaining any longer in her society. 'And so,' 
replied Teresina, ' you're going to let yourself be driven 
away by the extravagant conduct of a little fool, who 
is now heartily sorry for what she has done add said. 

VOL. 1. D 


so THE PERM ATA. 

Where else can you better live in your art than with 
us ? Let me tell you, it only depends upon youraelf 
and your own behaviour to keep her from such pranks 
as this. You are too compliant, too tender, too gentle. 
Besides, you rate her powers too highly. Her voice 
is indeed not bad, and it has a wide compass ; but 
what else are all these fantastic warblings and flourishes, 
these preposterous runs, these never-ending shakes, but 
delusive artiHces of style, which people admire in the 
same way that they admire the foolhardy agility of a 
rope-dancer ? Do you imagine that such things can 
make any deep impression upon us and 8tir the heart ? 
The 'harmonic shake' which you spoilt I cannot 
tolerate; I always feel anxious and pained when she 
attempts it. And then this scaling up into the region 
of the third line above the stave, what is it but a 
violent straining of the natural voice, which after all 
is the only thing that really moves the heart? I like 
the middle notes and the low notes. A sound that 
penetrates to the heart, a real quiet, easy transition 
from note to note, are what I love above all things. No 
useless ornamentation — a firm, clear^ strong note — a 
definite expression, which carries away the mind acid 
soul — that's real true singing, and that's how I sing. 
If you can't be reconciled to Lauretta again, then 
think of Teresina, who indeed likes you so much that 
you shall in your own way be her musical composer. 
Don't be cross, — but all your elegant canzonets and 

arias can't be matched with this single ,' she sang 

in her sonorous way a simple devotional sort of canzona 
which I had set a few days before. I had never 
dreamed that it could sound like that. I felt the 
power of the music going through and through me; 
tears of joy and rapture stood in my eyes } I seized 


THE FBRMATA. 51 

Teresina'a hand, and pressing it to tny lips a thousand 
times, swore I would never leave her. 

" Lauretta looked upon my intimacy with her sister 
with envious but suppressed vexation, and she could 
not do without me, for, in spite of her skill, she was 
unable to study a new piece without help ; she read 
badly, and was rather uncertain in her time. Teresina, 
on the contrary, sang everything at sight, and her ear 
for time was unparalleled. Never did Lauretta give 
such free rdn to her caprice and violence as when her 
accompaniments were being practised. They were never 
right for her ; she looked upon them as a necessary evil ; 
the piano ought not to be heard at all, it should always 
be pianissimo; so there was nothing but giving way to 
her again and again, and altering the time just as the 
whim happened to come into her head at the moment. 
But now 1 took a firm stand against her; I combated 
her impertinences; I taught her that an accompani- 
ment devoid of energy was not conceivable, and that 
there was a marked difference between supporting and 
carrying along the song and letting it run to riot, 
without form and without time. Teresina faithfully 
lent me her assistance. I composed nothing but pieces 
for the Church, writing all the solos for a voice of low 
register, Teresina, too, tyrannised over me not a little, 
to which I submitted with a good grace, since she had 
more knowledge of, and (so at least I thought) more 
appreciation for, German seriousness than her sister. 

"We were touring in South Germany. In a little 
town we met an Italian tenor who was making his way 
from Milan to Serlin. My fair companions went in 
ecstasies over their countryman; he stuck close to 
them, cultivating in particular Teresina's acquaintance, 
80 that to my great vexation I soon came to play rather 


S2 THE FERMATA. 

a secondary part. Once, just as I was about to enter 
the room with a roll of music under my arm, the 
voices of my cotnpanions and the tenor, engaged in an 
animated conversation, fell upon my ear. My name 
was mentioned ; I pricked up my ears ; I listened. I 
now understood Italian so well that not a word escaped 
me. Lauretta was describing the tragical occurrence 
of the concert when I cut short her trill by prematurely 
striking down the concluding notes of the bar. 'A 
German ass 1 ' exclaimed the tenor. I felt as if I must 
rush in and hurl the flighty hero of the boards out of 
the window, but I restrained myself. She then went on " 
to say that she had been minded to send me about my 
business at once, but, moved by my clamorous entrea- 
ties, she had so far had compassion upon me as to 
tolerate me some time longer, since I was studying 
singing under her. This, to my utter amazement, 
Teresina confirmed. 'Yes, he's a good child,' she 
added; 'he's in love with me now and sets everything 
for the alto. He is not withoiit talent, but he must 
rub otr that stiffness and awkwardness which is so 
characteristic of the Germans. I hope to make a 
good composer out of him ; then he shall write me 
some good things — for there's very little written as 
yet for the alto voice — and afterwards I shall let him 
go his own way. He's very tiresome with his billing 
and cooing and love-sick sighing, and he worries me 
too much with his wearisome compositions, which 
have been but poor stuff up to the present.' 'I at 
least have now got rid of him,' interrupted Lauretta ; 
'and Teresina, how the fellow pestered me with his 
arias and duets you know very well.' And now she 
b^n to sing a duet of my composing, which formerly 
she bad praised very highly. The other sister took up 


THE FBRMATA. S3 

the second voice, and they parodied me both in vmce 
and in execution in the most shameful manner. The 
tenor laughed till the walls rang again. My limbs 
froze; at once I formed an irrevocable resolve. I 
quietly slipped away from the door back into my own 
room, the windows of which looked upon a side Street. 
Opposite was the post-office ; the post-coach for Bam- 
berg had just driven up to take in the mails and pas- 
sengers. The latter were all standing ready waiting in 
the gateway, but I had still an hour to spare. Hastily 
packing up my things, I generously paid the whole of 
' the bill at the hotel, and hurried across to the post- 
oflice. As I crossed the broad street I saw the fair sisters 
and the Italian still standing at the window, and look- 
ing out to catch the sound of the post-horn. I leaned 
back ill the corner, and dwelt with a good deal of satis- 
faction upon the crushing effect of the bitter scathing 
letter that I had left behind for them in the hotel." 

With evident gratification Theodore tossed off" the rest 
of the fiery Aleatico^ that Edward had poured into 
his glass. The latter, opening a new flask and skilfully 
shaking off" the drops of oil * which swam at the top, 
remarked, " 1 should not have deemed Teresina capable 
of such falseness and artfulness. I cannot banish from 
my mind the recollection of what a charming figure she 
made as she sat on horseback singing Spanish ballads, 
whilst the horse pranced along in graceful curvets." 
"That was her culminating point," interrupted Theo- 
dore ; " I still remember the strange impression which 
the scene made upon me. I forgot my pain; she 

> A led, aromatii:, sweet Italian wine, made chiefly >t Florence. 

* The wine was presamabl; ia flasks of the usual Italian kind, 
boilles encased in itraw or teed, ic, with oil on the top of tht wine 
instesid of « coik in the neck of the botile. 


54 THE PERU ATA. 

seemed to me like a creature of a higher race. It is 
indeed very true that such momenta are turning-points 
in one's life, and that in them many images arise which 
time does not av^l to dim. Whenever I have suc- 
ceeded with any fine romance, it has always been when 
Tercsina's image has stepped forth from the trea- 
sure-house of my mind in clear bright colours at the 
moment of writing it." 

" But," said Edward, " hut let us not foi^t the 
artistic Lauretta; and, scattering all rancour to the 
winds, let us drink to the health of the two sisters." 
They did so. " Oh," exclaimed Theodore, " how the 
fragrant breezes of Italy arise out of this wine and 
fan my cheeks,— my blood rolls with quickened energy 
in my veins. Oh! why must I so soon leave that 
glorious land again !" "As yet," interrupted Edward, 
"as yet in all that you have told nie I can see no 
connection with the beautiful picture, and so I believe 
that you still have something more to tell me about 
the sisters. Of course I perceive plainly that the 
ladies in the picture are none other than Lauretta and 
Teresina themselves." '* You are right, they are," re- 
plied Theodore; "and my ejaculations and sighs, and 
my longings after the glorious land of Italy, will form 
a fitting introduction to what I still have to say. A 
short time ago, perhaps about two years since, just 
before leaving Kome, I made a little excursion on 
horseback. Before an inn stood a charming giri; the 
idea struck me how nice it would be to receive a cup 
of wine at the hands of the pretty child. I pulled up 
before the door, in a walk so thickly planted on each side 
with shrubs that the sunlight could only make its way 
through in patches. In the distance I heard sounds of 
singing and the tinkling of a guitar. I pricked up my 


THE PBRMATA. SS 

can and listened, for the two female voices afTected me 
somehow in a singular fashion ; strangely enough dim 
recollections began to stir within my mind, but they 
refused to take definite shape. I dismounted and 
slowly drew near to the vine-clad arbour whence the 
music seemed to proceed, eagerly catching up^ every 
sound in the meantime. The second voice had ceased 
to sing. The first sang a canzonet alone. As I came 
nearer and nearer that which had at first seemed 
familiar to me, and which had at first attracted my 
attention, gradually faded away. The singer was now 
. in the midst of a florid, elaborate fermata. Up and 
down she warbled, up and down ; at length she stopped, 
holding a note on for some time. But all at once a 
female voice began to let off a torrent of abuse, male- 
dictions, curses, vituperations! A man protested; a 
second laughed. The other female voice took part in 
the altercation. The quarrel continued to wax louder 
and more violent, with true Italian fury. At length 
I stood immediately in front of the arbour; an abbot 
rushes out and almost runs over me; he turns his 
head to look at me ; I recognise my good friend Sig- 
ner Lodovico, my musical news-monger from Rome. 
'What in the name of wonder*' I exclaim. 

' Oh, sir ! sir ! ' he screams, ' save me, protect me 
from this mad fury, from this crocodile, this tiger, 
this hyaena, this devil of a woman. Yes, I did, I 
did ; I was beating time to Anfossi's canzonet, and 
brought down my baton too soon whilst she was in the 
midst of the /eTwwf a ; I cut short her trill; but why 
did I meet her eyes, the devilish divinity ! The deuce 
take all fermatas, I say ! ' In a most curious state of 
mind I hastened into the arbour along with the priest, 
and recognised at the first glance the sisters L.auretta 


56 THE PERUATA. 

and Teresina. The former was still shrieking and 
raging, and her sister still seriously remonstrating with 
her. Mine host, his bare arms crossed over his chest, 
was looking on laughing, whilst a girl was placing 
fresh flasks on the table. No sooner did the sisters 
catch sight of me than they threw themselves upon 
me exclaiming, ' Ah ! Signor Teodoro ! ' and covered 
me with caresses. The quarrel was foi^tten. ' Here 
you have a composer,' said Lauretta to the abbot, 
'as charming as an Italian and as strong as a Ger- 
man.' Both sisters, continually interrupting each 
Other, began to recount the happy days we had spent 
together, to speak of my musical abilities whilst still a 
youth, of our practisings together, of the excellence of 
my compositions; never did they like singing anything 
else but what I had set. Teresina at length informed 
me that a manager had engaged her as his drst singer 
in tragic casta for the next carnival ; but she would 
give him to understand that she would only sing on 
condition that the composition of at least one tragic 
opera was intrusted to me. The tragic was above all 
others my special department, and so on, and so on. 
X.auretta on her part maintained that it would be a 
pity if I did not follow my bent for the light and the 
graceful, in a word, for opera buffa. She had been 
engaged as first lady singer for this species of composi- 
tion; and that nobody but I should write the piece 
in which she was to appear was simply a matter of 
course. You may fancy what my feelings were as I 
stood between the two. In a word, you perceive that 
the company which I had joined was the same as that 
which Hummel painted, and that just at the moment 
when the priest is on the point of cutting short 
lAiUttt^i fermata." "But did they not make any 


._^^iJffli 


THE PERM ATA. 57 

allusion," asked Edward, " to your departure from 
them, or to the scathing letter ? " " Not with a 
single syllable," answered Theodore, "and you may 
be sure I didn't, for I had long before banished all 
animosity from my heart, and come to look back upon 
my adventure with the sisters as a merry prank. I 
did, however, so far revert to the subject that I related 
to the priest how that, several years before, exactly 
the same sort |of mischance befell me in one of 
Anfossi's arias as had just befallen him. I painted 
the period of my connection with the sisters in tragi- 
comical colours, and, distributing many a keen side- 
blow, I let them feel the superiority which the ripe 
experiences, both of life and of art, of the years that 
had elapsed in the interval had given me over them. 
'And a good thing it was,' I concluded, 'that I did 
cut short thsx fermala, for it was evidently meant to 
last through eternity, and I am firmly of opinion that 
if I bad left the singer alone, I should be sitting at 
the piano now.' 'But, signor,* replied the priest, 
'what director is there who would dare to prescribe 
laws to the prima donna? Your offence was much 
more heinous than mine, you in the concert hall, and 
I here in the leafy arbour. Besides, I was only 
director in imagination ; nobody need attach any 
importance to that, and if the sweet fiery glances of 
these heavenly eyes had not fascinated me, I should 
not have made an ass of myself." The priest's last 
words proved tranquillising, for, although Lauretta's 
eyes had begun to flash with anger as the priest spoke, 
before he had finished she was quite appeased. 

" We spent the evening together. Many changes 
take place in fourteen years, which was the interval 
that bad passed since I had seen my fair friends. 


58 THE FBRMATA. 

Lauretta, although looking somewhat older, was still ' 
not devoid of charms, Teresina had worn better, with- 
out losing her graceful form. Both were dressed in 
rather gay colours, and their manners were just the 
same as before, that is, fourteen years younger than the 
ladies themselves. At my request Teresina sang some 
of the serious songs that had once so deeply affected 
me, but I fancied that they sounded differently from 
what they did when I first heard them ; and I.auretta'B 
singing too, although her voice had not appreciably 
lost anything, either in power or in compass, seemed to 
me to be quite different from my recollection of it of 
former times. The sisters' behaviour towards me, their 
feigned ecstasies, their rude admiration, which, how- 
ever, took the shape of gracious patronage, had done 
much to put me in a bad humour, and now the obtru- 
siveness of this comparison between the images in my 
mind and the not over and above pleasing reality, 
tended to put me in a still worse. The droll priest, 
who in all the sweetest words you can imagine was 
playing the amoroso to both sisters at once, as well as 
frequent applications to the good wine, at length 
restored me to good humour, so that we spent a very 
pleasant evening in perfect concord and gaiety. The 
sisters were most pressing in their invitations to me to 
go home with them, that we might at once talk over 
the parts which I was to set for them and so concert 
measures accordingly. I left Rome without taking 
any further steps to find out their place of abode." 

"And yet, after all," said Edward, " it is to them 
that you owe the awakening of your genius for music." 
" That I admit," replied Theodore, " I owed them that 
and a host of good melodies besides, and that is just 
the reason why I did not want to see them again. 


THE PERM ATA. 59 

Every composer can recall certain impresBions which 
time does not obliterate. The.spirit of mitsic spake, 
and hia voice was the creative word which suddenly 
awakened the kindred spirit slumbering in the breast 
of the artist ; then the latter rose like a sun which can 
nevermore set. Thus it is unquestionably true that all 
melodies which, stirred up in this way, proceed from 
the depths of the composer's being, seem to us to belong 
to the singer alone who fanned the first spark within us. 
We hear her voice and record only what she has sung. 
It is, however, the inheritance of us weak mortals that, 
clinging to the clods, we are only too fain to draw 
down what is above the earth into the miserable nar- 
rowness characteristic of things of the earth. Thus it 
comes to pass that the singer becomes our lover — or 
even our wife. The spell is broken, and the melody of 
her nature, which formerly revealed glorious things, is 
now prostituted to complaints about broken soup-plates 
or ink-stains in new linen. Happy is the composer 
who never again so long as he lives sets eyes upon the 
woman who by virtue of some mysterious power en- 
kindled in him the flame of music. Even though the 
young artist's heart may be rent by pain and despair 
when the moment comes for parting from his lovely 
enchantress, nevertheless her form will costinue to exist 
as a divinely beautiful strain which lives on and on in 
the pride of youth and beauty, engendering melodies 
in which time after time he perceives the lady of his 
love. But what is she else if not the Highest Ideal 
which, working its way from within outwards, is at 
length reflected in the external independent form? " 

"A strange theory, but yet plausible," was Edward's 
comment, as the two friends, arm in arm, passed out 
from Sala Tarone's into the street. 


SIGN OR FORMICA."- 


Tht ctUbrated painter SalveUor Rosa comes to Rome, and is 
attacked by a dangerous illness. IVhat be/alls him tM this 

Celebrated people commonly have many ill things 
said of them, whether well-founded or not. And no 
exception was made in the case of that admirable 
painter Salvator Rosa, ^rhoae living pictures cannot 
fail to impart a keen and characteristic delight to 
those who look upon them. 

At the time that Salvator's fame was ringing through 
Naples, Rome, and Tuscany — nay, through all Italy, 
and painters who were desirous of gaining applause 
were striving to imitate his peculiar and unique style, 
his malicious and envious rivals were labouring to 
spread abroad all sorts of eviJ reports intended to sully 
with ugly black stains the glorious splendour of his 
artistic fame. They adirmed that he had at a former 
period of his life belonged to a company of banditti,^ 

' This tale was wiilten for the Leipsic Taichenbueh tum geselligen 
VergniigtH for (he year i8lo. 

* Respecting the facts of Salvator Rosa's life th«e exbts more than 
one disputed statement ; and of these perhaps the most disputed is his 
share of complicity (if any) in the evil doings of Cakbrian banditti. 
Pool, and of a wild and self-willed disposition, but with a strong and 
independent character, he was unable (o find a suitable master in 
Naples to, at (be a£e of eighteen, he set out to study the lineaments 


SIOHOR ffORHICA 


SIGNOR FORMICA 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 6i 

and that it was to his experiences during thia lawless 
time that he owed all the wild, fierce, fantastically- 
attired figures which he introduced into his pictures, 
just as the gloomy fearful wildernesses of his landscapes 
— the selve selvagge (savage woods) — to use Dante's 
e:tpression, were faithful representations of the haunts 
where they lay hidden. What was worse slill, they 
openly charged him with having been concerned in 
the atrocious and bloody revolt which had been set on 
foot by the notorious Masaniello^ in Naples. They 
even described the share he had taken in it, down to 
the minutest details. 

The rumour ran that Aniello Falcone,' the painter 
of battle-pieces, one of the best of Salvator's masters, 
had been stung into fury and filled with bloodthirsty 
vengeance because the Spanish soldiers had slain one 
of his relatives in a hand-lo-hand encounter. With- 
out delay he leagued together a band of daring spirits, 

of nature face to (ace, and spent some time amidst the grand and savage 
acenery of Calabria. Here it is certain that he came inlo contact with 
the banditti who haunted those wild regions. He is alleged to have 
been taken prisoner by a band, and to have become a member of the 
troop. Accepling this as true, we may perhaps charilably believe that 
he was prompted not so much by a regard for his own safely, as by 
the wish to secure a rare opportunity for studying his art unhindered, 
and also charitably hope that the accusations of his enemies, that 
be actively participated in the deeds of his companions, are unfounded, 
or, at any tate, eia^era lions. It may be remarked ibat the "Life 
and Times of Salvator Rosa," by Lady Morgan (1824), is admittedly a 
romance rather than an accurate and faithful biography. 

' Masaniello, a poor fisherman of Naples, vas for a week in July 
1647 absolute king of his native city. At that time Naples was subject 
to the crown of Spain. The people, provoked by the exasperating 
rapacity and extortion of the Viceroy of the King of Spain, rose in 
rebellion, choosing Masaniello as their captain and leader. 

' Aniello Falcone (1600-65), teacher of Salvator Rosa and founder 
of the Campagnia della Mvrtt, painted battle-pieces which bear a hlgb 
tepnlstioD. Hii worki ate said to be Korce and mnch (ought after. 


62 SIGNOR FORMICA. 

mostly young painters, put arms into their hands, and 
gave them the name of the "Company of Death," 
And in truth this band inspired all the fear and con- 
sternation suggested by its terrible name. At all hours 
of the day they traversed the streets of Naples in little 
companies, and cut down without mercy every Spaniard 
whom they met. They did more — they forced their 
way into the holy sanctuaries, and relentlessly murdered 
their unfortunate foes whom terror had driven to seek 
refuge there. At night they gathered round their 
chief, the bloody-minded madman Masaniello,' and 
painted him by torchlight, bo that in a short time 
there were hundreds of these little pictures ' circulating 
in Naples and the neighbourhood. 

This is the ferocious band of which Salvator Rosa 
was alleged to have been a member, working hard 
at butchering his fellow-men by day, and by night 
working just as hard at painting. The truth about 
him has however been stated by a celebrated art-critic, 
Taillasson,^ I believe. His works are characterised 
by defiant originality, and by fantastic energy both 
of conception and of execution. He delighted to study 
Nature, not in the lovely attractiveness of green 
meadows, flourishing fields, sweet-smelling groves, 
murmuring springs, but in the sublime as seen in 


' At first the ;oung fisherman adminiitered stem bnt impartial 
justice ; bul ifiernards his mind seems to have reeled under the intense 
excitement snd strain o( his position, and he began to act the part of 
an arbitrary and cruel tyrant Several hundreds of person* an nid 
to have been put to death by his order during the feir dayi he held 

* Amongst them more than one by Salvator himselT. 
■ A French painter and writer on painting ; was bom near Bordeans 
in 1746, and died at Paris in 1S09. Betides other worki he wrote 
- ObstrvaiUm mr qtulqtui graadt pnntrit <l8o7). 


SICNOR FORMICA. 63 

towering masses of rock, in the wild sea-shore, in 
sarage inhospitable forests; and the voices that he 
loved to hear were not the whisperings of the evening 
breeze or the musical rustle of leaves, but the roaring 
of the hurricane and the thunder of the cataract. To 
one viewing his desolate landscapes, with the strange 
savage figures stealthily moving about in them, here 
singly, there in troops, the uncomfortable thoughts 
arise unbidden, "Here's where a fearful murder took 
place, there's where the bloody corpse was hurled into 
the ravine," &c. 

Admitting all this, and even that Taillasson is further 
right when he maintains that Salvator's "Plato," nay, 
that even his "Holy St, John proclaiming the Advent 
of the Saviour in the Wilderness," look just a little 
like highway robbers — admitting this, I say, it is never- 
theless unjust to argue from the character of the works 
to the character of the artist himself, and to assume 
that he, who represents with lifelike fidelity what is 
savage and terrible, must himself have been a savage, 
terrible man. He who prates most about the sword 
is often he who wields it the worst; he who feels in 
the depths of his soul all the horrors of a bloody deed, 
so that, taking the palette or the pencil or the pen in 
his hand, he is able to give living form to his feelings, 
is often the one least capable of practising similar 
deeds. Enough! I don't believe a single word of all 
those evil reports, by which men sought to brand the 
excellent Salvator an abandoned murderer and robber, 
and I hope that you, kindly reader, will share mv 
opinion. Otherwise, I see grounds for fearing that 
you might perhaps entertain some doubts respecting 
what I am about to tell you of this artist ; the Salvator 
I wish to put before you in this tale — that is, according 


64 SIGNOR FORMICA. 

to my conception of him — is a man bubbling over 
with the exuberance of life and fiery energy, but at 
the same time a man endowed with the noblest and 
most loyal character — a character, which, Hke that of 
all men who think and feel deeply, is able even to con- 
trol that bitter irony which arises from a clear view 
of the significance of life. I need scarcely add that 
Salvator was no less renowned as a poet and musician 
than as a painter. His genius was revealed in magnifi- 
cent refractions. I repeat again, I do not believe that 
Salvator had any share in Masaniello's bloody deeds ; 
on the contrary, I think it was the horrors of that 
fearful time which drove him from Naples to Rome, 
where he arrived a poor poverty-stricken fugitive, just 
at the time that Masanidlo fell. 

Not over well dressed, and with a scanty purse con- 
taining not more than a few bright sequins* in his 
pocket, he crept through the gate just after nightfall. 
Somehow or other, he didn't exactly know how, he 
wandered as far as the Piazza Navona. In better 
times he had once lived there in a large house near 
the Pamfili Palace. With an ill-tempered growl, he 
gazed up at the large plate-glass windows glistening 
and glimmering in the moonlight. "Hm!" he ex- 
claimed peevishly, "it'll cost me dozens of yards of 
coloured canvas before I can open my studio up there 
again." But all at once he felt as if paralysed in every 
limb, and at the same moment more weak and feeble 
than he had ever felt in his life before. "But shall I," 
he murmured between his teeth as he sank down upon 
the stone steps leading up to the house door, "shall I 
really be able to finish canvas enough in the way tbefools 

' The sequin was a gold coin of Venice and Tuscanf, woith about 
9s. 3d. It ii somelimes used as equiTalent to ducat (see note p. lOO). 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 6$ 

want it done ? Hm ! I have a notion that that will be 
the end of it ! " 

A cold cutting night wind hiew down the street. 
Salvator recognised the necessity of seeking a shelter. 
Rising with difficulty, he staggered on into the Corso,^ 
and then turned into the Via Bergognona. At length 
be stopped before a little house with only a couple of 
windows, inhabited by a poor widow and her two 
daughters. This woman had taken him in for little 
pay the first time he came to Rome, an unknown 
stranger noticed of nobody; and so he hoped again 
to find a lodging with her, such as would he best 
suited to the sad condition in which he then was. 

He knocked confidently at the door, and several 
times called out his name aloud. At last he heard the 
old woman slowly and reluctantly wakening up out of 
her Bleep, She shuffled to the window in her slippers, 
and began to rain down a shower of abuse upon the 
knave who was come to worry her in this way in the 
middle of the night; her house was not a wine-shop, 
Sec, &c. Then there ensued a good deal of cross- 
questioning before she recognised her former lodger's 
voice; but on Salvator's complaining that he had fled 
from Naples and was unable to find a shelter in Rome, 
the old dame cried, "By all the blessed saints of 
Heaven! Is that you, Signor Salvator? Well now, 
your little room up above, that looks on to the court, 
is still standing empty, and the old fig-tree has pushed 
its branches right through the window and into the 
room, so that you can sit and work like as if you was 

' The Corso is a wide ihoroughfare ninning almost north and south 
from the Piizza del Popolo, a square on the north side of RoDoe, to the 
centre of the citf. It is in the Corso [hat the hoise-iaces Died to take 
place during the Camiril. 

VOL. I. B, 


66 SIGNOS FORMICA. 

in a beautiful cool arbour. Ay, and how pleased my 
girls will be that you have come back again, Signer 
Salvator. But, d'ye know, my Margarita's grown a 
big girl and fine-looking? You won't give her any 
more rides on your knee now. And — and your little 
pussy, just fancy, three months ago she choked herself 
with a fish-bone. Ah well, we all shall come to the 
grave at last. But, d'ye know, my fat neighbour, who 
you BO often laughed at and so often painted in such 
funny ways — d'ye know, she did marry that young 
fellow, Signor Luigi, after all. Ah well ! noxxe < 
magislrati sono da dio deslinali (marriages and magis- 
trates are made in heaven) they say." 

"But," cried Salvator, interrupting the old woman, 
"but, Signora Caterina, I entreat you by the blessed 
saints, do, pray, let me in, and then tell me all about 
your fig-tree and your daughters, your cat and your 
fat neighbour — I am perishing of weariness and cold." 

" Bless me, how impatient we are," rejoined the old 
dame ; " Chi va piano va sano, chi va presto more lesto 
(more haste less speed, take things cool and live longer), 
I tell you. But you are tired, you are cold ; where are 
the keys? quick with the keys!" 

But the old woman still had to wake up her daughters 
and kindle a fire — but oh ! she was such a long time 
about it — such a long, long time. At last she opened 
the door and let poor Salvator in j but scarcely had he 
crossed the threshold than, overcome by fatigue and 
illness, he dropped on the floor as if dead. Happily 
the widow's son, who generally lived at Tivoli, chanced 
to be at his mother's that night. He was at once turned 
out of his bed to make room for the sick guest, which 
he willingly submitted to. 

The old woman was very fond of Salvator, putting 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 67 

him, as far as his artistic powers went, above all the 
painters in the world; and in everything that he did 
she also took the greatest pleasure. She was therefore 
quite beside herself to see him in this lamentable condi- 
tion, and wanted to run off to the neighbouring monas- 
tery to fetch her father confessor, that he might come 
and fight against the adverse power of the disease with 
consecrated candles or some powerful amulet or other. 
On the other hand, her son thought it would be almost 
better to see about getting an experienced physician at 
once, and off he ran there and then to the Spanish 
Square, where he knew the distinguished Doctor Splen- 
diano Accoramboni dwelt. No sooner did the doctor 
learn that the painter Salvator Rosa lay ill in the Via 
Bergognona than he at once declared himself ready to 
call early and see the patient. 

Salvator lay unconscious, struck down by a most 
severe attack of fever. The old dame had hung up 
two or three pictures of saints above his bed, and was 
praying fervently. The girls, though bathed in tears, 
exerted themselves from time to time to get the sick 
man to swallow a few drops of the cooling lemonade 
which they had made, whilst their brother, who had 
taken his place at the head of the bed, wiped the cold 
sweat from his brow. And so morning found them, 
when with a loud creak the door opened, and the distin- 
guished Doctor Splendiano Accoramboni entered the 
room. 

If Salvator had not been so seriously ill that the two 
girls' hearts were melted in grief, they would, I think, 
for they were in general frolicsome and saucy, have 
enjoyed a hearty laugh at the Doctor's extraordinary 
appearance, instead of retiring shyty, as they did, into 
the comer, greatly alarmed. It will indeed be worth 


68 SIGNOR FORMICA. 

while to describe the outward appearance of the little 
man who presented himself at Dame Catertna's in the 
Via Bergognona in the grey of the morning. In spite 
of all his excellent capabilities for growth. Doctor 
Splendiano Accoramboni had not been able to advance 
beyond the respectable stature of four feet. Moreover, 
in the days of his youth, he had been distinguished for 
his elegant figure, so that, before his head, always indeed 
somewhat ill-shaped, and his big cheeks, and h'n stately 
double chin had put on too much fat, before his nose 
had grown bulky and spread owing to overmuch indul- 
gence in Spanish snulT, and before his little belly had 
assumed the shape of a wine-tub from too much fatten- 
ing on macaroni, the priestly cut of garments, which he 
at that time had affected, had suited him down to the 
ground. He was then in truth a pretty little man, and 
accordingly the Roman ladies had styled him their 
caro puppazelto (sweet little pet). 

That however was now a thing of the past. A Ger- 
man painter, seeing Doctor Splendiano walking across 
the Spanish Square, said — and he was perhaps not far 
wrong — that it looked as if some strapping fellow of 
six feet or so had walked away from his own head, 
which had fallen on the shoulders of a little marionette 
clown, who now had to carry it about as his own. 
This curious little figure walked about in patchwork — 
an immense quantity of pieces of Venetian damask of 
a large flower pattern that had been cut up in making 
a dressing-gown ; high up round his waist he had 
buckled a broad leather belt, from which an excessively 
long rapier hung; whilst his snow-white wig was sur- 
mounted by a high conical cap, not unlike the obelisk 
in St. Peter's Square. Since the said wig, like a piece 
of texture all tumbled and tangled, spread out thick 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 69 

and wide all over his back, it might very well be taken 
for the cocoon out of which the line silk-worm had 
crept 

The worthy Splendiano Accoramboni stared 
through his big, bright spectacles, with his eyes wide 
open, first at his patient, then at Dame Caterina. 
Calling her aside, he croaked with bated breath, "There 
lies our talented painter Salvator Rosa, and he's lost 
if my skill doesn't save him. Dame Caterina. Pray 
tell me when he came tu lodge with you ? Did he 
bring many beautiful large pictures with him ? " 

" Ah ! my dear Doctor," replied Dame Caterina, 
"the poor fellow only came last night. And as for 
pictures — why, I don't know nothing about them ; but 
there's a big box below, and Salvator begged me to 
take very good care of it, before he became senseless 
like what he now is. I daresay there's a fine picture 
packed in it, as he painted in Naples." 

What Dame Caterina said was, however, a false- 
hood ; but we shall soon see that she had good reasons 
for imposing upon the Doctor in this way. 

"Good! Very good!" said the Doctor, simpering 
and stroking his beard; then, with as much solemnity 
as bis long rapier, which kept catching in all the chairs 
and tables he came near, would allow, he approached 
the sick man and fell his pulse, snorting and wheezing, 
so that it had a most curious effect in the midst of the 
reverential silence which had fallen upon all the rest. 
Then he ran over in Greek and Latin the names of a 
hundred and twenty diseases that Salvator had not, 
then almost as many which he might have had, and 
concluded by saying that un the spur of the moment 
he didn't recollect the name of his disease, but that he 
would within a short time find a suitable one for it. 


70 SIGNOR FORMICA. 

and along therewith^ the proper remedies as well. 
Then he took his departure with the same solemnity 
with which he had entered, leaving them all full of 
trouble and anxiety. 

At the bottom of the steps the Doctor requested to 
see Salvator's box ; Dame Caterina showed him one — 
in which were two or three of her deceased husband's 
cloaks now laid asidcj and some old worn-out shoes. 
The Doctor smilingly tapped the box, on this side 
and on that, and remarked in a tone of satisfaction, 
"We shall see! we shall see!" Some hours later he 
returned with a very beautiful name for his patient's 
disease, and brought with him some big bottles of an 
evil-smelling potion, which he directed to be given to 
the patient constantly. This was a work of no little 
trouble, for Sal vator showed the greatest aversion for — 
utter loathing of the stuff, which looked, and smelt, 
and tasted, as if it had been concocted from Acheron 
itself. Whether it was that the disease, since it had 
now received a name, and in consequence really signi- 
fied something, had only just begun to put forth its 
virulence, or whether it was that Splendiano's potion 
made too much of a disturbance inside the patient — it 
is at any rate certain that the poor painter grew weaker 
and weaker from day to day, from hour to hour. And 
notwithstanding Doctor Splendiano Accoramboni's 
assurance that, after the vital process had reached a 
state of perfect equilibrium, he would give it a new 
start like the pendulum of a clock, they were all very 
doubtful as to Salvator's recovery, and thought that 
the Doctor had perhaps already given the pendulum 
such a violent start that the mechanism was quite 
impaired. 

Now it happened one day that when Salvator seemed 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 71 

scarcely able to move a finger he was suddenly seized 
with the paroxysm of fever ; in a momentary accession 
of fictitious strength he leapt out of bed, seized the 
full medicine bottles, and hurled them fiercely out of 
the window. Just at this moment Doctor Splendiano 
Accoramboni was entering the house, when two or 
three bottles came bang upon his head, smashing all 
to pieces, whilst the brown liquid ran in streams all 
down his face, and wig, and ruff. Hastily rushing 
into the house, he screamed like a madman, "Signor 
Salvator has gone out of his mind, he's become insane; 
no skill can save him now, he'll be dead in ten minutes. 
Give me the picture. Dame Caterina, give me the 
picture — it's mine, the scanty reward of all my trouble. 
Give me the picture, I say." 

But when Dame Caterina opened the box, and 
Doctor Splendiano saw nothing but the old cloaks 
and torn shnes, his eyes spun round in his head like a 
pair of fire-wheels ; he gnashed his teeth ; be stamped ; 
he consigned poor Salvator, the widow, and all the 
family to the devil; then he rushed out of the house 
like an arrow from a bow, or as if he had been shot 
from a cannon. 

After the violence of the paroxysm had spent itself, 
Salvator again relapsed into a death-like condition. 
Dame Caterina was fully persuaded that his end was 
really come, and away she sped as fast as she could to 
the monastery to fetch Father Boniface, that he might 
come and administer the sacrament to the dying man. 
Father Boniface came and looked at the sick man; he 
said he was well acquainted with the peculiar signs 
which approaching death is wont to stamp upon the 
human countenance, but that for the present there 
were no indications of them on the face of the in- 


72 SIGSOR FORMICA. 

sensible Salvator. Something might still be done, and 
he would procure help at once, only Doctor Splendiano 
Accoramboni with his Greek names and infernal medi- 
cines was not to be allowed to cross the threshold 
again. The good Father set out at once, and we shall 
see later that he kept his word about sending the 
promised help. 

Salvator recovered consciousness again ; he fancied 
he was lying in a beautiful flower-scented arbour, for 
green boughs and leaves were interlacing above his 
head. He felt a salutary warmth glowing in his veins, 
but it seemed to him as if somehow his left arm was 
bound fast. "Where am I?" be asked in a faint 
voice. Then a handsome young man, who had stood 
at his bedside, but whom he had not noticed until just 
now, threw himself upon bis knees, and grasping 
Salvator's right hand, kissed it and bathed it with 
tears, as he cried again and again, " Oh ! my dear sir ! 
my noble master 1 now it's all right; you are saved, 
you'll get better." 

"But do tell me" — began Salvator, when the young 
man begged him not to exert himself, for he was too 
weak to talk ; he would tell him all that had happened. 
" You see, my esteemed and excellent sir," began the 
young man, " you see, you were very ill when you came 
from Naples, but your condition was not, I warrant, 
hy any means so dangerous but that a few simple 
remedies would soon have set you, with your strong 
constitution, on your legs again, had you not through 
Carlos's well-intentioned blunder in running off for 
the nearest physician fallen into the hands of the 
redoubtable Pyramid Doctor, who was making all pre- 
parations for bringing you to your grave." 

" What do you say ? " exclaimed Salvator, laughing 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 73 

heartily, notwithstanding the feeble state he was in. 
"What do you say? — the Pyramid Doctor? Ay, ay, 
although I was very ill, I saw that the little knave in 
damask patchwork, who condemned me to drink his 
horrid, loathsome devil's hrew, wore on his head the 
obelisk from St. Peter's Square — and so that's why you 
call him the Pyramid Doctor? " 

"Why, good heavens!" Eaid the young man, like- 
wise laughing, "why. Doctor Splendiano Accoramboni 
must have come to see you in his ominous conical night- 
cap; and, do you know, you may see it flashing every 
morning from his window in the Spanish Square like a 
portentous meteor. But it's not by any means owing 
to this cap that he's called the Pyramid Doctor; for 
that there's quite another reason. Doctor Splendiano 
is a great lover of pictures, and possesses in truth quite 
a choice collection, which he has gained by a practice 
of a peculiar nature. With eager cunning he tics in 
wait for painters and their illnesses. More especially 
he loves to'get foreign artists into his toils; let them 
but eat an ounce or two of macaroni loo much, or 
drink a glass more Syracuse than is altogether good 
for them, he will afflict them with first one and then 
the other disease, designating it by a formidable name, 
and proceeding at once to cure them of it. He 
generally bargains for a picture as the price of his 
attendance; and as it is only specially obstinate con- 
stitutions which are able to withstand his powerful 
remedies, it generally happens that he gels his picture 
out of the chattels left by the poor foreigner, who 
meanwhile has been carried to the Pyramid of Ccstius, 
and buried there. It need hardly be said that Signor 
Splendiano always picks out the best of the pictures 
the painter has finished, and also does not forget to 


74 SIGNOR FORMICA. 

bid the men take several others along with it. The 
cemetery near the Pyramid of Cestius is Doctor Splen- 
diano Accoramboni's corn-field, which he diligently 
cultirates, and for that reason he is called the Pyramid 
Doctor. Dame Caterina had taken great pains, of 
course with the best intentions, to make the Doctor 
believe that you had brought a fine picture with you ; 
you may imagine therefore with what eagerness he 
concocted his potions for you. It was a fortunate 
thing that in the paroxysm of fever you threw the 
Doctor's bottles at his head, it was also a fortunate 
thing that he left you in anger, and no less fortunate 
was it that Dame Caterina, who believed you were in 
the agonies of death, fetched Father Boniface to come 
and administer to you the sacrament. Father Boni- 
face understands something of the art of healing ; he 
formed a correct diagnosis of your condition and fetched 
me" 

"Then you also are a doctor i " asked Salvator in a 
faint whining tone. 

" No," replied the young man, a deep blush mantling 
his cheeks, " no, my estimable and worthy sir, I am not 
in the least a doctor like Signor Splendiano Accoram- 
boni ; I am however a chirurgeon. I felt as if I should 
sink into the earth with fear — with joy — when Father 
Boniface came and told me that Salvator Rosa lay sick 
unto death in the Via Bergognona, and required my 
help. I hastened here, opened a vein in your left artn, 
and you were saved. Then we brought you up into 
this coo) airy room that you formerly occupied. I^ook, 
there's the easel which you left behind you ; yonder 
are a few sketches which Dame Caterina has treasured 
up as if they were relics. The virulence of your disease 
is subdued ; simple remedies such as Father Boniface 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 75 

can prepare is all that you want, except good nursing, 
to bring back your strength again. And now per- 
mit me once more to kisa this hand — this creative 
hand that charms from Nature her deepest secrets and 
clothes them in living form. Permit poor Antonio 
Scacciati to pour out all the gratitude and immeasur- 
able joy of hia heart that Heaven has granted him to save 
the life of our great and noble painter, Salvator Rosa." 
Therewith the young surgeon threw himself on hia 
knees again, and, seizing Salvator's hand, kissed it and 
bathed it in tears as before. 

" I don't understand," said the artist, raising him- 
self up a little, though with considerable difficulty, " I 
don't understand, my dear Antonio, what it is thai is so 
especially urging you to show me all this respect. You 
are, you say, a chirurgeon, and we don't in a general 
way find this trade going hand in hand with art" 

" As soon," replied the young man, casting down his 
eyes, "as soon as you have picked up your strength 
again, my dear sir, I have a good deal to tell you that 
now lies heavy on my heart." 

"Do so," said Salvator ; "you may have every con- 
fidence in me — that you may, for I don't know that 
any man's face has made a more direct appeal to my 
heart than yours. The more I look at you the more 
plainly I seem to trace in your features a resemblance 
to that incomparable young painter — I mean Sanzio."' 
Antonio's eyes were lit up with a proud, radiant light 
— he vainly struggled for words with which to express 
his feelings. 

At this moment Dame Caterina appeared, followed 

by Father Boniface, who brought Salvator a medicine 

which he had mixed scientifically according to pre- 

* The great paiatei Saniio Raphael 


76 SIGNOR FORMICA. 

scription, and which the patient swallowed with more 
relish and felt to have a more beneficial effect upon him 
than the Acheronian waters of the Pyramid Doctor 
Splendiano Accoramboni. 


II. 

[By Salvator Rot^s inlervtntten Antonio SeacHati attains to a 
high honour, Antonio discloses the cause of his persistent 
trouble to Salvator, "who consoles him and promises to help 
hsm.'\ 

And Antonio's words proved true. The simple but 
salutary remedies of Father Boniface, the careful nurs- 
ing of good Dame Caterina and her daughters, the 
warmer weather which now came — all co-operated so 
well together with Salvator's naturally robust constitu- 
tion that he soon felt sufGcicntly well to think about 
work again ; first of all he designed a few sketches which 
he thought of working out afterwards, 

Antonio scarcely ever left Salvator's room ; he was 
ail eyes when the painter drew out his sketches; whilst 
his judgment in respect to many points showed that he 
must have been initiated into the secrets of art. 

"See here," said Salvator to him one day, " see here, 
Antonio, you understand art matters 80 well that I 
believe you have not merely cultivated your excellent 
judgment as a critic, but must have wielded the brush 
as well," 

"You will remember," rejoined Antonio, "how I 
told you, my dear sir, when you were just about com- 
ing to yourself again after your long unconsciousness, 
that I had several things to tell you which lay heavy 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 7? 

on my mind. Now is the time for me to unfold all 
my heart to you. You must know then, that though 
I am called Antonio Scacciati, the chirurgeon, who 
opened the vein in your arm for you, I belong also en- . 
tirely to art — to the art which, after bidding eternal 
farewell to my hateful trade, I intend to devote myself 
for once and for all." 

" Ho ! ho ! ", e;(claimed Salvator, " Ho I ho ! Anto- 
nio, weigh well what you are about to do. Ybu are a 
clever chirurgeon, and perhaps will never be anything 
more than a bungling painter all your life long; for, 
with your permission, as young as you are, you are 
decidedly too old to begin to use the charcoal now. 
Believe me, a man's whole lifetime is scarce long 
enough to acquire a knowledge of the True — still less 
the practical ability to represent it." 

"Ah! but, my dear sir," replied Antonio, smiling 
blandly, "don't imagine that I should now have come 
to entertain the foolish idea of taking up the difficult 
art of painting had I not practised it already on every 
possible occasion from my very childhood. In spite of 
the fact that my father obstinately kept me away from 
everything connected with art, yet Heaven was graci- 
ously pleased to throw me in the way of some celebrated 
artists. I must tell you that the great Annibal ' in- 

' Annabale Caraccii a paintei of Bologna of the latter half of the six- 
teenth century. HU most celebiated work is a series of frescoes on 
mythological subjects in the Farnese Palace at Rome. Along with his 
cousin Lodovico and his brother Agoslino he founded the so-called 
Eclectic School of Painting ; their maxim was that " accurate observa- 
tioti of Nature should be combined with judicious imitation of the best 
masters." The Caracci enjoyed the highest reputation amongst their 
contemporaries as teachers of their an. Annibale died in 1609 ; 
Masaoieilo's revolt occurred, as already mentioned, in 1647 j Antonio 
must therefore have been at least fifty years of age. This however is not 
the only anachronism that HofTouuin is guilEy of. 


78 SIGNOR FORMICA. 

terested himself in the orphan boy, and also that I ma) 
with justice call myBcIf Guido Reni's* pupil," 

"Well then," said Salvator somewhat sharply, a 
way of speaking he sometimes had, " well then, my 
good Antonio, you have indeed had great masters, and 
so it cannot fail but that, without detriment to your 
surgical practice, you must have been a great pupil. 
Only I don't understand how you, a faithful disciple 
of the gentle, elegant Guido, whom you perhaps outdo 
in elegance in your own pictures — for pupils do do 
those sort of things in their enthusiasm — how you can 
find any pleasure in my productions, and can really 
regard me as a master in the Art." 

At these words, which indeed sounded a good deal 
like derisive mockery, the hot Wood rushed into the 
young man's face. 

" Oh, let me lay aside all the diffidence which gene- 
rally keeps my lips closed," he said, " and let me 
frankly lay bare the thoughts I have in my mind. I 
tell you, Salvator, I have never honoured any master 
from the depths of my soul as I do you. What I am 
amazed at in your works is the sublime greatness 
of conception which is often revealed. You grasp 
the deepest secrets of Nature: you comprehend the 
mysterious hieroglyphics of her rocks, of her trees, 
and of her waterfalls, you hear her sacred voice, you 
understand her language, and possess the power to 
write down what she has said to you. Verily I can 
call your bold free style of painting nothing else than 
writing down. Man alone and his doiugs does not 
suffice you ; you behold him only in the midst of 
Nature, and in so far as his essential character is con- 

' The well-knowQ paintet Guido, bom in 1575 uid died in 1642. 
He early exciied the envy of Annibale Caracci. 


SIG^OR PORUICA. 79 

ditiooed by natural phenoraena; and in these facts I 
see the reason why you are only truly great in land- 
scapes, Salvator, with their wonderful figures. His- 
torical painting confines you within limits which cl(^ 
your imagination to the detriment of your genius for 
reproducing your higher intuitions of Nature." 

"That's talk you've picked up from envious his- 
torical painters," said Salvator, interrupting his young 
companion ; " like them, Antonio, you throw me the 
choice bone of landscape- painting that I may gnaw 
away at it, and so spare their own good flesh. Per- 
haps I do understand the human figure and all that is 
dependent upon it. But this senseless repetition of 
others' words " 

"Don't be angry," continued Antonio, "don't be 
angry, my good sir; I am not blindly repeating any- 
body's words, and I should not for a moment think of 
trusting to the judgment of our painters here in Rome 
at any rate. Who can help greatly admiring the bold 
draughtsmanship, the powerful expression, but above 
all the living movement of your figures ? It's plain to 
see that you don't work from a stiff, inflexible model, 
or even from a dead skeleton form ; it is evident that 
you yourself are your own breathing, living model, and 
that when you sketch or paint, you have the figure 
you want to put on your canvas reflected in a great 
mirror opposite to you." 

"The devil! Antonio," exclaimed Salvator, laugh- 
ing, " I believe you must often have had a peep into 
my studio when I was not aware of it, since you have 
such an accurate knowledge of what goes on within." 

" Perhaps I may," replied Antonio ; " but let me go 
on. I am not by a long way so anxious to classify 
the pictures which your powerful mind suggest to you 


to SIONOR FORMICA. 

as are thoac pedantic critics who take such great pains 
ill this line. In fact, I think that the word 'land- 
scape,' as generally employed, has but an indifferent 
application to your productions ; I should prefer to call 
them historical representations in the highest sense of 
the word. If we fancy that this or the other rock or 
this or the other tree is gazing at us like a gigantic 
being with thoughtful earnest eyes, so again, on the 
other hand, this or the other group of fantastically 
attired men resembles some remarkable stone which 
has been endowed with life ; all Nature, breathing and 
moving in harmonious unity, lends accents to the 
sublime thought which leapt into existence in your 
mind. This is the spirit in which I have studied your 
pictures, and so in this way it is, my grand and nobie 
master, that I owe to you my truer perception in 
matters of art. But pray don't imagine that I have 
tiillen into childish imitation. However much I would 
like to possess the free bold pencil that you possess, I 
do not attempt to conceal the fact that Nature's 
colours appear to me different from what I see them 
in your pictures. Although it is useful, I think, for 
the sake of acquiring technique, for the pupil to imi- 
tate the style of this or that master, yet, so soon as he 
comes to stand in any sense on his own feet, he ought 
to aim at representing Nature as he himself sees her. 
Nothing but this true method of perception, this 
unity with oneself, can give rise to character and truth. 
Guido shared these sentiments; and that fiery man 
Preti,' who, as you are aware, is called // Calabrese — 
' Maltia Preti, known as // Cavalien Calatreie, from his having been 
born in Calabria. He was a painter of ihe Neapolilnn school and ■ 
pupil of Lanfranco, and lived during the greolei part of ihe seventeenth 
century. Owing to \m many disputes and quarrel* be was more than 
oDce compelled to flee for his life. 


SIGSOR FORMICA. 8r 

a painter who certainly, more than any other man, 
has reflected upon his art — also warned me against all 
imitation. Now you know, Salvator, why I so much 
respect you, without imitating you. 

Whilst the young man had been speaking, Salvator 
had kept his eyes fixed unchangeably upon him ; he 
now clasped him tumultuously to his heart. 

" Antonio," he then said, " what you have just now 
said are wise and thoughtful words. Young as you 
are, you are nevertheless, so far as the true perception 
of art is concerned, a long way ahead of many of our 
old and much vaunted masters, who have a good deal 
of stupid foolish twaddle about their painting, but 
never get at the true root of the matter. Body alive, 
man! When you were talking about my pictures, I 
then began to understand myself for the first time, I 
believe ; and because you do not imitate my style, — do 
not, like a good many others, take a tube of black 
paint in your hand, or dab on a. few glaring colours, 
or even make two or three crippled figures with repul- 
sive faces look up from the midst of filth and dirt, 
and then say, 'There's a Salvator for you ! ' — ^just for 
these very reasons I think a good deal of yon. I tell 
you, my lad, you'll not find a more faithful friend than 
I am — that 1 can promise you with all my heart and 
soul." 

Antonio was beside himself with joy at the kind 
way in which the great painter thus testified to his 
interest in him. Salvator expressed an earnest desire 
to see his pictures. Antonio took him there and then 
to his studio. 

Salvator had in truth expected to find something 
fairly good from the young man who spoke so in- 
telligently about art, and who, it appeared, had a good 

VOL. I. p 


8i SIGNOR FORMICA. 

deal in him ; but nevertheless he was greatly surprised 
at the sight of Antonio's fine pictures. Everywhere 
he found boldness in conception, and correctness in 
drawing ; and the freshness of the colouring, the good 
taste in the arrangement of the drapery, the uncommon 
delicacy of the extremities, the exquisite grace of the 
heads, were all so many evidences that he was no un- 
worthy pupil of the great Reni. But Antonio had 
avoided this master's besetting sin of an endeavour, 
only too conspicuous, to sacrifice expression to beauty. 
It was plain that Antonio was aiming to reach Anni- 
bal's strength, without having as yet succeeded. 

Salvator spent some considerable time of thoughtful 
silence in the examination of each of the pictures. 
Then he said, "Listen, Antonio: it is indeed undeni- 
able that you were born to follow the noble art of 
painting. For not only has Nature endowed you with 
the creative spirit from which the finest thoughts pour 
forth in an inexhaustible stream, but she has also 
granted you the rare ability to surmount in a short 
space of time the difficulties of technique. It would 
only be false flattery if I were to tell you that you 
had yet advanced to the level of your masters, that 
you are yet equal to Guido's exquisite grace or to 
Annibal's strength ; but certain I am that you excel 
by a long way all the painters who hold up their heads 
so proudly in the Academy of St Luke ^ here — Tiarini,* 
Gessi,' Sementa/ and all the rest of them, not even 

' The Aecademia di San Luci, a. school of art, founded at Rome 
about 1595. Fedcrigo Zucciro being its liist director. 
' Alessandro Tiarini (1577-166S} of Bologna, wai ■ pupil of the 

■ Giovanni Francesco Gcssi [1588-1649), sometimes called "llie 
second Guido," was a pupil of Guido. 
< Semenli or SemeiiM (15S0-163SJ, also « pupil of Guido. 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 83 

excepting Lanfranco,' himself, for he only understands 
fresco- pain ting. And yet, Antonio, and yet, if 1 were 
in your place, I should deliberate awhile before 
throwing away the lancet altogether, and con^ning 
myself entirely to the pencil. That sounds rather 
strange, but listen to me. Art seems to be having a 
bad time of it just now, or rather the devil seems to he 
very busy amongst our painters now-a-days, bravely 
setting them together by the ears. If you cannot 
make up your mind to put up with all sorts of 
annoyances, to endure more and more scorn and con- 
tumely in proportion as you advance in art, and as 
your fame spreads to meet with malicious scoundrels 
everywhere, who with a friendly face will force them- 
selves upon you in order to ruin you the more surely 
afterwards, — if you cannot, I say, make up your 
mind to endure all this — let painting alone. Think 
of the fate of your teacher, the great Annibal, whom 
a rascally band of rivals malignantly persecuted in 
Naples, so that he did not receive one single com- 
mission for a great work, being everywhere rejected 
with contempt; and this is said to have been instru- 
mental in bringing about his early death. Think of 
what happened to Domenichino* when he was painting 

' Giovanni Lanfranco (1581-1647), studied first under Agoslino 
Caiacci. He was the first to encourage the enlj genius a! Salvator 
Rosa. 

■ Zampieri Domenichlno (1581-1641) was a pupil of the Caracci. 
The work here referred to ii a series of frescoes, which he did not live 
to quite finish, representing the events of the life of St. Januarius, in 
the chapel of the Ttsare of the cathedral at Naples, which he began in 
1630. 

The malicious spile which the leit attributes to the rivals of Donieni- 
chino is not at all exaggerated. There, did reallj' exist a so-called 
" Cahal of Naples," eotisisting chiefl; of the painters Corenzio, Kibera, 
and Cuacdolo, who leagned leather to shat out all coinpeiition froiiL 


84 SIGNOR FORMICA. 

the dome of the chapel of St. Jaauarius. Didn't the 
villains of painters — I won't mention a single name^ 
not even the rascals Belisario* and Ribera* — didn't 
they bribe Dotnenichino's servant to strew ashes in the 
lime ) So the plaster wouldn't stick fast on the walls, 
and the painting had no stability. Think of all that, 
and examine yourself well whether your spirit is strong 
vnmigh to endure things like that, for if not, your 
lirtiotic power will be broken, and along with the 
rcHolute courage for work you will also lose your 
iihitity. 

" Hut, Sftlvator," replied Antonio, "it would hardly 
lie piiwible for me to have more scorn and contumely 
to mulnn-, supposing I took up painting entirely 
ttnd rsvlusivcly, than I have already endured whilst 
int^ri'ty ii chirurgeon. You have been pleased with my 

oihtT KriJsiB ; and theii persecution of ihe Bologncse Domenichino 
ll well known. Often on reluming to his woik in ihe morning he 
fiiunil that some one hud obliterated whit he bad done on the previous 

Not only have we a faithful picture of the Italian artist's life in the 
middle of the seventeenth century depicted in (his tale, but the actual 
facts of the lives of Salvator Rosa, of Preti, of the Carucci, as well as 
the existence of Falcone's Campagnia dttla Marie, furnish ample mate- 
rials and illustrations of the wild lives the; did lead, of their jealousies 
and heartburnings, of their quarrelsomeness and revengcfulness. Tbej 
seem to have been read; on all occasions to exchange the brush for Che 
•word. They were filled to overflowing with restless energy. The 
atmosphere of the age they live in was highly charged with vigour of 
thought and an irrepressible vitality for artistic production. Under the 
conditions which these things suppose the artists of that age could not 
well have been otherwise than what they were. 

' Belisario Corenzio, a Greek (1558-1643). "Envious, jealous, 
cunning, treacherous, quarrelsome, he looked upon all other painters 
as bis enemies." 

* Giuseppe Ribera, called //J^fnuAjVn, a Spaniard by birth (15S9), 
wai a painter of the Neapolitan school, and delighted in honibk and 
gloomy subject*. He died in 165& 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 8; 

pictures, you have indeed ! and at the same time 
declared from inner conviction that I am capable of 
doing better things than several of our painters of the 
Academy, But these are just the men who turn up 
their noses at all that I have industriously produced, 
and say contemptuougly, 'Do look, here's our chirur- 
geon wants to be a painter!' And for this very 
reason my resolve is only the more unshaken ; I will 
sever myself from a trade that grows with every day 
more hateful. Upon you, my honoured master, I now 
stake all my hopes. Your word is powerful ; if you 
would speak a good word for nie, you might overthrow 
my envious persecutors at a single blow, and put me 
in the place where I ought to be." 

"Yoii repose great confidence in me," rejoined Sal- 
vator, "But now that we thoroughly understand 
each other's views on painting, and I have seen your 
works, I don't really know that there is anybody for 
whom I would rather take up the cudgels than for 
you." 

Salvator once more inspected Antonio's pictures, 
and stopped before one representing a "Magdalene at 
the Saviour's Feet," which he especially praised. 

"In this Magdalene," he said, "you have deviated 
fromthe usual mode of representation. Your Magdalene 
is not a thoughtful virgin, but a lovely artless child 
rather, and yet she is such a marvellous child that hardly 
anybody else but Guido could have painted her. There 
is a unique charm in her dainty figure ; you must have 
painted with inspiration; and, if I mistake not, the 
original of this Magdalene is alive and to be found in 
Rome. Come, confess, Antonio, you are in love ! " 

Antonio's eyes sought the ground, whilst he said in 
a low shy voice, "Nothing escapes your penetration, 


86 SIGNOR FORMICA. 

my dear ar ; perhaps it is as you say, but do not btame 
me for it. That picture I set the highest store by, 
and hitherto I hare guarded it as a holy secret Trom 
all men's eyes." 

" What do you say ? " interrupted Salvator. " None 
of the painters here have seen your picture ? " 

" No, not one," was Antonio's reply. 

"All right then, Antonio," continued Salvator, his 
eyes sparkling with delight. "Very well then, you 
may rely upon it, I will overwhelm your envious over- 
weening persecutors, and get you the honour you 
deserve. Intrust your picture to me ; bring it to my 
studio secretly by night, and then leave all the rest to 
mc. Will you do bo ? " 

"Gladly, with all my heart," replied Antonio. 
"And now 1 should very much like to talk to you 
about my love-troubles as well ; but I feel as if I 
ought not to do so to-day, after we have opened our 
minds to each other on the subject of art. I also 
entreat you to grant me your assistance both in word 
and deed later on in this matter of my love." 

" I am at your service," said Salvator, " for both, 
both when and where you require me." Then as be 
was going away, be once more turned round and said, 
smiling, "See here, Antonio, when you disclosed to 
me the fact that you were a painter, I was very sorry 
that I had spoken about your resemblance to Sanzio. 
I took it for granted that you were as silly as most of 
our young folk, who, if they bear but the slightest 
resemblance in the face to any great master, at once 
trim their beard or hair as be does, and from this 
cause fancy it is their business to imitate the style of 
the master in their art achievemenu, even though it is 
a manifest violation of their natural taleots to do so. 


SIGSOR FORMICA. 87 

Neither of us has mentioned Raphael's name, but I 
assure you that I bare discerned in your pictures clear 
indications that you have grasped the full significance 
of the inimitable thoughts which are reflected in the 
works of this the greatest of the painters of the age. 
You understand Raphael, and would give me a difiereat 
answer from what Velasquez' did when I asked him 
not long ago what he thought of Sanzio. 'Titian,' he re- 
plied, ' is the greatest painter ; Raphael knows nothing 
about carnation.' This Spaniard, methinks, under- 
stands flesh hut not criticism ; and yet these men in 
St. Luke elevate him to the clouds because he once 
painted cherries which the sparrows picked at."' 

It happened not many days afterwards that the 
Academicians of St. Luke met together in their church 
to prove the works which had been ^announced for 
exhibition. There too Salvator had sent Scacciati's 
fine picture. In spite of themselves the painters were 
greatly struck with its grace and power; and from 
all lips there was heard nothing hut the most extrava- 
gant praise when Salvator informed them that he had 
brought the picture with him from Naples, as the 
legacy of a young painter who had been cut off in the 
pride of his days. 

It was not along before all Rome was crowding to 
see and admire the picture of the young unknown 
painter who had died so yuung; it was unanimously 
agreed that no such work had been done since Guido 

' Don Diego Velazquez de Sitva, the great Spanish painter, bom in 
1599, died in i66o> He twice visited Italy and Naples, in 1629-31 
and in 164S-51, and was for a time intimate with Ribera. 

' This auggesis the legend of Quentin Massys of Antwerp and the 
fly, 01 tbe still older, but perhaps not more historical sloiy of the Greek 
painters, Zeuxis and the bunch of grapes, which the birds came to peck 
at, and Panhasiui, whoK curtain deceived even Zeuiii himselC 


88 SIGNOR FORMICA. 

Rent's time; some even went so far in their just en- 
thusiasm as to place this exquisitely lovely Magdalene 
before Guido's creations of a eimilar kind. Amongst 
the crowd of people who were always gathered round 
Scacciati's picture, SaJvator one day observed a man 
who, besides presenting a most extraordinary appear- 
ance, behaved as if he were crazy. Well advanced in 
years, he was tall, thin as a spindle, with a pale face, 
a long sharp nose, a chin equally as long, ending more- 
over in a little pointed beard, and with grey gleaming 
eyes. On the top of his light sand-coloured wig he 
had set a high hat with a magnificent feather; he wore 
a short dark red mantle or cape with many bright 
buttons, a sky-blue doublet slashed in the Spanish 
style, immense leather gauntlets with silver fringes, a 
long rapier at his side, light grey stockings drawn up 
above his bony knees and gartered with yellow ribbons, 
whilst he had bows of the same sort of yellow ribbon 
on his shoes. 

This remarkable figurewas standing before the picture 
like one enraptured : he raised himself on tiptoe; he 
stooped down till he became quite small ; then he 
jumped up with both feet at once, heaved deep sighs, 
groaned, nipped his eyes so close together that the tears 
began to trickle down his checks, opened them wide 
again, Rxed his gaze immovably upon the charming 
Magdalene, sighed again, lisped in a thin, querulou:', 
mulitated voice, "j4k! carissima — betiedettissimaf Ah! 
Mananna — Mariannina — hellissima," &c. {" Oh ! 
dearest — most adored! Ah! Marianna — sweet Mari- 
anna! my most beautiful !") Salvator, whohada mad 
fancy for such oddities, drew near to the old fellow, in- 
tending to engage him in conversation about Scacciati's 
work, which seemed to afford him so much exquisite 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 89 

delight. Without paying any particular heed to Salva- 
tor, the old gentleman stood cursing his poverty, because 
he could not give a million sequins for the picture, and 
place it under lock and key where nobody could set 
their infernal eyes upon it. Then, hopping up and 
down again, he blessed the Virgin and all the holy 
saints that the reprobate artist who had painted the 
heavenly picture which was driving him to despair and 
madness was dead. 

Salvator concluded that the man either was out 
of his mind, or was an Academician of St. Luke with 
whom he was unacquainted. 

All Rome was full of Scacciati's wonderful picture ; 
people could scarcely talk about anything else, and 
this of course was convincing proof of the excellence 
of the work. And when the painters were again 
assembled in the church of St. Luke, to decide about 
the admission of certain other pictures which had been 
announced for exhibition, Salvator Rosa all at once 
asked, whether the painter of the " Magdalene at the 
Saviour's Feet " was not worthy of being admitted a 
member of the Academy. They all with one accord, 
including even that hairsplitter in criticism. Baron 
Joscpin,' declared that such a great artist would have 
been an ornament to the Academy, and expressed their 
sorrow at his death in the choicest phrases, although, 
like the crazy old man, they were praising Heaven in 
their hearts that he was dead. Still more, they were 
so far carried away by their enthusiasm that they 

' Giuseppe Cesati, ca.lleil Joscpin or the Chevalier d'Atpin, a painler 
of the Raman school, born in 1560 01 156S, died in 164O. He posed 
as an artistic critic in Kome during the later years of his life, and his 
judgment was claimed by his friends to be authoritative and final in ail 
matters connected with art. 


90 SI G NOR FORMICA. 

passed a resolution to the eflfect that the admirable 
young pdinter whom death had snatched away from 
art so early should be nominated a member of the 
Academy in his grave, and that masses should be read 
for the benefit of his soul in the church of St. Luke. 
They therefore begged Salvator to inform them what 
was the full name of the deceased, the date of his 
birth, the place where he was born, &c. 

Then Salvator rose and said in a loud voice, ^' Signors, 
the honour you are anxious to render to a dead man 
you can more easily bestow upon a living man who 
walks in your midst. Learn that the ^ Magdalene at 
the Saviour's Feet' — the picture which you so justly 
exalt above all other artistic productions that the last 
few years have given us, is not the work of a dead 
Neapolitan painter as I pretended (this I did simply 
to get an unbiassed judgment from you) ; that painting, 
that masterpiece, which all Rome is admiring, is from 
the hand of Signor Antonio Scacciati, the chirur- 
geon." 

The painters sat staring at Salvator as if suddenly 
thunderstruck, incapable of either moving or uttering 
a single sound. He, however, after quietly exulting 
over their embarrassment for some minutes, continued, 
'^ Well now, signors, you would not tolerate the worthy 
Antonio amongst you because he is a chirurgeon ; but 
I think that the illustrious Academy of St. Luke has 
great need of a surgeon to set the limbs of the many 
crippled figures which emerge from the studios of a 
good many amongst your number. But of course you 
will no longer scruple to do what you ought to have 
done long ago, namely, elect that excellent painter 
Antonio Scacciati a member of the Academy." 

The Academicians, swallowing Salvator's bitter pill. 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 91 

feigned to be highly delighted that Antonto bad in 
tbis way given Bucb incontestable prooft of bis talent, 
and with all due ceremony nominated him a member 
of the Academy. 

As soon as it became known in Rome that Antonio 
was the author of the wonderful picture be was over- 
wbelmed with congratulations, and even with com- 
missions for great works, which poured in upon him 
from all sides. Thus by Salvator's shrewd and cunning 
stratagem the young man emerged all at once out of 
his obscurity, and with the first real step he took on 
his artistic career rose to great honour. 

Antonio ravelled in ecstasies of delight. So much 
the more therefore did Salvator wonder to see him, 
some days later, appear with his face pale and distorted, 
utterly miserable and woebegone. "Ah! Salvator!" 
said Antonio, " what advantage has it been to me that 
you have helped me to rise to a level far beyond my 
expectations, that I am now overwhelmed with praise 
and honour, that the prospect of a most successful 
artistic career is opening out before me? Oh! I am 
utterly miserable, for the picture to which, next to 
you, my dear sir, I owe my great triumph, has proved 
the source of my lasting misfortune." 

"Stop!" replied Salvator, "don't sin against either 
your art or your picture. I don't believe a word about 
the terrible misfortune which, you say, has befallen 
you. You are in love, and I presume you can't get 
all your wishes gratified at once, on the spur of the 
moment; that's all it is. Lovers are like children; 
they scream and cry if anybody only just touches their 
dull. Have done, I pray you, wJtb that lamentation, 
for I tell you 1 can't do with it. Come now, sit your- 
self down there and quietly tell me all about your bir 


92 SIGNOR FORMICA. 

Magdalene, and give me the history of your love 
affair, and let me know what are the stones of offence 
that we have to remove, for I promise you my help 
beforehand. The more adventurous the schemes are 
which we shall have to undertake, the more I shall like 
them. In fact, my blood is coursing hotly in my veins 
again, and my regimen requires that I engage in a few 
wild pranks. But go on with your story, Antonio, 
and as I said, let's have it quietly without any sighs 
and lamentations, without anv Ohs! and Ahs!*' 

Antonio took his seat on the stool which Salvator 
had pushed up to the easel at which he was working, 
and began as follows : — 

"There is a high house in the Via Ripetta,^ with a 
balcony which projects far over the street so as at once 
to strike the eye of any one entering through the Porta 
del Popolo, and there dwells perhaps the most whimsical 
oddity in all Rome, — an old bachelor, with every fault 
that belongs to that class of persons — avaricious, vain, 
anxious to appear young, amorous, foppish. He is tall, 
as thin as a switch, wears a gay Spanish costume, a 
sandy wig, a conical hat, leather gauntlets, a rapier at 
his side " 

"Stop, stop!*' cried Salvator, interrupting him, 
"excuse me a minute or two, Antonio." Then, 
turning about the picture at which he was painting, 
he seized his charcoal and in a few free bold strokes 

^ In a previous note it was stated that the Via del Corso ran from the 
Piazza del Popolo southwards to the centre of the city of Rome. Be- 
sides this street there are two others which run from the same square in 
almost the same direction, the Via di Ripetta and the Via del Babuino, 
the former being to the west of the Via del Corso and the latter to the 
east, and each gradually gets more distant from the Via del Corso the 
farther it recedes from the Square. On the opposite side of the Piazza 
del Popolo is the Porta del Popolo. 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 93 

sketched on the back side of the canvas the eccentric 
old gentleman whom he had seen behaving like a crazed 
man in front of Antonio's picture. 

" By all the saints ! " cried Antonio, as he leapt to 
his feet, and, forgetful of his unhappiness, burst out 
into a loud laugh, " by all the saints ! that's he ! That's 
Signor Pasquale Capuzzi, whom I was just describing, 
that's he to the very T." 

"So you see," said Salvator calmly, "that I am 
already acquainted with the worthy gentleman who 
most probably is your bitter enemy. But go on." 

" Signor Pasquale Capuzzi," continued Antonio, " is 
as rich as Crcesus, but at the same time, as I Just told 
you, a sordid miser and an incurable coxcomb. The 
best thing about him is that he loves art, particularly 
music and painting; but he mixes up so much folly 
with it all that even in these things there's no getting 
on with him. He considers himself the greatest ipusical 
composer in the world, and that there's not a singer in 
the Papal choir who can at all approach him. Accord- 
ingly he looks down upon our old Frescobaldi' with 
contempt; and when the Romans talk about the 
wonderful charm of Ceccarelli's voice, he informs them 
that Ceccarelli knows as much about singing as a pair 
of top-boots, and that he, Capuzzi, knows which is the 
right way to_fascinate the public. But as the first singer 
of the Pope bears the proud name of Signor Odoardo 
Ceccarelli di|Meraiiia,90 our Capuzzi is greatly delighted 
when anybody calls him Signor Pasquale Capuzzi di 
Senlgaglia; for it was in Senigaglia^ that he was born, 

' Giiolamo Fiescobaldi, ihe most distiogubhed organist of th« sevea- 
teenlh centuty, born about 1587 or 1588. He early won a reputation 
both as 1 singer and as ao oi^ianiit. 

* Senigaglia or Senigallia, a town on the Adriatic, in the province 
of Ancona. 


94 SIGNOR FORMICA, 

and the popular rumour goes that his mother, being 
startled at sight of a sea-dog (seal) suddenly rising to 
the surface, gave birth to him in a fisherman's boat, 
and that accounts, it is said, for a good deal of the sea- 
cur in his nature. Several years ago he brought out 
an opera on the stage, which was fearfully hissed ; but 
that hasn't cured him of his mania for writing 
execrable music. Indeed, when he heard Francesco 
Cavalli's ^ opera Le Nozze di Feti e di Peleo, he swore 
that the composer had filched the sublimist of the 
thoughts from his own immortal works, for which he 
was near being thrashed and even stabbed. He still has 
a craze for singing arias, and accompanies his hideous 
squalling on a wretched jarring, jangling guitar, all out 
of tune. His faithful Py lades is an ill-bred dwarfish 
eunuch, whom the Romans call Pitichinaccio. There 
is a third member of the company — guess who it is ? — 
Why, none other than the Pyramid Doctor, who kicks 
up a noise like a melancholy ass and yet fancies he's 
singing an excellent bass, quite as good as Martinelli 
of the Papal choir. Now these three estimable people 
are in the habit of meeting in the evening on the bal- 
cony of Capuzzi^s house, where they sing Carissimi's* 
motets, until all the dogs and cats in the neighbourhood 
round break out into dirges of miawing and howling, 
and all their neighbours heartily wish the devil would 
run away with all the blessed three. 

^ Pietro Francesco Cavalli, whose real name was Caletti-Bruni. He 
was organist at St. Mark's at Venice for about thirty-six years (1640- 
1676). He composed both for the Church and for the stage. 

' Giacomo Carissimi, attached during the greater part of his life to 
the church of San Apollinaris at Rome. He died in 1674. He did 
much for musical art, i>erfecting recitative and advancing the develop- 
ment of the sacred cantata. His accompaniments are generally distin- 
guished for ** lightness and variety.'' 


SIGNOR FORMICA. ■ 55 

" With this whimsical old fellow. Signer Pasqualc 
Capuzzi, of whom my description will have enabled 
you to form a tolerably adequate idea, my father lived 
on terms of intimacy, since he trimmed his wig and 
beard. When my father died, I undertook this busi- 
ness; and Capuzzi was in the highest degree satisfied 
with me, because, as he once affirmed, I knew.better 
than anybody else how to give his moustaches a hold 
upward twirl j but the real reason was because I was 
satisfied with the few pence with which he rewarded 
me for my pains. But he firmly believed that he more 
than richly indemnified me, since, whilst I was trim- 
ming his beard, he always closed his eyes and croaked 
through an aria from his own compositions, which, 
however, almost split my ears ; and yet the old fellow's 
crazy gestures afforded me a good deal of amusement, 
so that I continued to attend him. One day when I 
went, I quietly ascended the stairs, knocked at the 
door, and opened it, when lo, there was a girl — an 
angel of light, who came to meet me. You know my 
Magdalene ; it was she. I stood stock still, rooted to 
the spot. No, Salvator, you shall have no Ohs! and 
Ahs! Well, the first sight of this, the most lovely 
maiden of her sex, enkindled in me the most ardent 
passionate love. The old man informed me with a 
smirk that the young lady was the daughter of his 
brother Pietro who had died at Senigaglia, that her 
name was Marianna, and that she was quite an ophan; 
being her uncle and guardian, he had taken her into 
his house. You can easily imagine that henceforward 
Capuzzi's house was my Paradise. But no matter 
what devices I had recourse to, I could never succeed 
in getting a Ute-d-ttie with Marianna, even for a single 
moment. Her glances, however, and many a stolen 


96 SIGN OR FORMICA. 

sigh^ and many a soft pressure of the hand, resolved all 
doubts as to my good fortune. The old man divined 
what I was after, — which was not a very difficult thing 
for him to do. He informed me that my behaviour 
towards his niece was not such as to please him alto- 
gether, and he asked me what was the real purport of my 
attentions. Then I frankly confessed that I loved 
Marianna with all my heart, and that the greatest 
earthly happiness I could conceive was a union with 
her. Whereupon Capuzzi, after measuring me from 
top to toe, burst out in a guffaw of contempt, and 
declared that he never had any idea that such lofty 
thoughts could haunt the brain of a paltry barber. I 
was almost boiling with rage ; I said he knew very well 
that I was no paltry barber but rather a good surgeon, 
and, moreover, in so far as concerned the noble art of 
painting, a faithful pupil of the great Annibal Caracci 
and of the unrivalled Guido Reni. But the infamous 
Capuzzi only replied by a still louder guffaw of laughter, 
and in his horrible falsetto squeaked, *See here, my 
sweet Signor barber, my excellent Signor surgeon, my 
honoured Annibal Caracci, my beloved Guido Reni, 
be off to the devil, and don't ever show yourself here 
again, if you don't want your4egs broken.' Therewith 
the crankv, knock-kneed old fool laid hold of me with 
no less an intention than to kick me out of the room, 
and hurl me down the stairs. But that, you know, was 
past everything. With ungovernable fury I seized the 
old fellow and tripped him up, so that his legs stuck 
uppermost in the air; and there I left him screaming 
aloud whilst I ran down the stairs, and out of the 
house-door; which, I need hardly say, has been closed 
to me ever since. 
"And that's how matters stood when you came to 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 97 

Rome and when Heaven inspired Father Boniface with 
the happy idea of bringing me to you. Then bo soon 
as your clever trick had brought me the success for 
which I had so long been vainly striving, that is, 
when I was accepted by the Academy of St. Luke, 
and all Rome was heaping up praise and honour upon 
me to a lavish extent, I went straightway to the old 
gentleman and suddenly presented myself before him in 
his own room, like a threatening apparition. Such at 
least he must have thought me, for he grew as pale as 
a corpse, and retreated behind a great table, trembling 
in every limb. And in a firm and earnest way I re- 
presented to him that Jt was not now a paltry barber 
or a surgeon, but a celebrated painter and Academician 
of St. Luke, Antonio Scacciati, to whom he would not, 
I hoped, refuse the hand of his niece Marianna. You 
should have seen into what a passion the old fellow flew. 
He screamed ; he flourished his arms about like one 
possessed of devils ; heyelled that I, a ruffianly murderer, 
was seeking his life, that I had stolen his Marianna 
from him since I had portrayed her in my picture, and 
it was driving him mad, driving him to despair, for all 
the world, all the world, were fixing their covetous, 
lustful eyes upon his M&rianna, his life, his hope, his 
all ; but I had better take care, be would bum my 
house over my head, and me and my picture in it. 
And therewith he kicked up such a din, shouting, ' Fire ! 
Murder I Thieves! Help!' that I was perfectly con- 
founded, and only thought of making the best of my 
way out of the house. 

" The crackbrained old fool is over head and ears in 
love with his niece ; he keeps her under lock and key ; 
and as soon as he succeeds tn getting dispensation from 

VOL, I. G 


98 SIGNOR FORMICA. 

the Pope^ he will compel her to a shameful alliance 
with himself. All hope for me is lost ! '^ 

'' Nay, nay, not quite/^ said Salvator, laughing, '' I 
am of opinion that things could not be in a better form 
for you. Marianna loves you, of that you are con- 
vinced ; and all we have to do is to get her out of the 
power of that fantastic old gentleman, Signor Pasquale 
Capuzzi. I should like to know what there is to hinder 
a couple of stout enterprising fellows like you and 
me from accomplishing this. Pluck up your courage, 
Antonio. Instead of bewailing, and sighing, and faint- 
ing, like a lovesick swain, it would be better to set 
to work to think out some plan for rescuing your 
Marianna. You just wait and see, Antonio, how finely 
we'll circumvent the old dotard ; in such like emprises, 
the wildest extravagance hardly seems to me wild 
enough. Pll set about it at once, and learn what I 
can about the old man, and about his usual habits of 
life. But you must not be seen in this affair, Antonio. 
Go away quietly home, and come back to me early 
to-morrow morning, then we'll consider our first plan 
of attack.'^ 

Herewith Salvator' shook the paint out of his brush, 
threw on his mantle, and hurried to the Corso, whilst 
Antonio betook himself home as Salvator had bidden 
him — his heart comforted and full of lusty hope 
again. 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 


Signor Poiqutde Capuxti turns up at Salvator Rcsiis studio. 
What takes ^ace there. The cunning scheme which Reia 
and Scacciati carty out, and the consequences of the same. 

Next morning Salvator, having in the meantime 
inquired into Capuzzl'B habits of life, very greatly sur- 
prised Antonio by a description of them, even down 
to the minutest details. 

" Poor Marianna," said SalvatOr, " leads a sad life of 
it with the crazy old fellow. There he sits sighing 
and ogling the whole day long, and, what is worse 
still, in order to soften her heart towards him, he sings 
her all and sundry love ditties that he has ever com- 
posed or intends to compose. At the same time he is 
so monstrously jealous that he will not even permit 
the poor young girl to have the usual female attend- 
ance, for fear of intrigues and amours, which the maid 
might be induced to engage in. Instead, a hideous 
little apparition with hollow eyes and pale flabby 
cheeks appears every morning and evening to perform 
for sweet Marianna the services of a tiring-maid. 
And this little apparition is nobody else but that tiny 
Tom Thumb of a Pitichinaccio, who has to don female 
attire, Capuzzi, whenever he leaves home, carefully 
locks and bolts every door; besideswhich there is always 
a confounded fellow keeping watch below, who was 
formerly a bravo, and then a gendarme, and now lives 
under Capuzzi's rooms. It seems, therefore, a matter 
almost impossible to effect an entrance into his house, 
but nevertheless I promise you, Antonio, that this very 


loo SIGNOR FORMICA. 

night you shall be in Capuzzi's own room and shall 
see your Marianna^ though this time it will only be in 
Capuzzi's presence/' 

*' What do you say ? *' cried Antonio, quite excited ; 
^'what do you say? We shall manage it to-night? 
I thought it was impossible/' 

''There, there/' continued Salvator, "keep still, 
Antonio, and let us quietly consider how we may 
with safety carry out the plan which 1 have conceived. 
But in the first place I must tell you that I have 
already scraped an acquaintance with Signor Pasquale 
Capuzzi without knowing it. That wretched spinet, 
which stands in the comer there, belongs to the old 
fellow, and he wants me to pay him the preposterous 
sum of ten ducats ^ for it. When I was convalescent 
I longed for some music, which always comforts me 
and does me a deal of good, so I begged my landlady 
to get me some such an instrument as that. Dame 
Caterina soon ascertained that there was an old gentle- 
man living in the Via Ripetta who had a fine spinet 
to sell. I got the instrument brought here. I did 
not trouble myself either about the price or about the 
owner. It was only yesterday evening that I learned 
quite by chance that the gentleman who intended to 
cheat me with this rickety old thing was Signor 

^ The first silver ducat is believed to have been struck in 1 140 by 
Roger II., Norman King of Sicily ; and ducats have been struck con- 
stantly since the twelfth century, especially at Venice (see Merchant of 
Venice), They have varied considerably both in weight and fineness, and 
consequently in value, at different times and places. Ducats have been 
struck in both gold and silver. The early Venetian silver ducat was 
worth about five shillings. The name is said, according to one account 
to have been derived from the last word of the Latin legend found on 
the earliest Venetian gold coins : — Sit tidi, Christe, datus^ quern tu regis^ 
ducatus (duchy); according to another account it is taken from '*f7 
ducato" the name generally applied to the duchy of Apulia. 


SIGNOR FORMICA. loi 

Pasquale Capuzzi. Dame Caterina had enliBted the 
services of an acquaintance living in the same house, 
and indeed on the same floor as Capuzzi, — and now 
you can easily guess whence I have got all my budget 
of news." 

" Yes," replied Antonio, " then the way to get in is 
found ; your landlady " ■ 

" I know very well, Antonio," said Salvator, cutting 
him short, " I know what you're going to say. You 
think you can find a way to your Marianna through 
Dame Caterina. But you'll find that we can't do 
anything of that sorts the good dame is far too 
talkative ; she can't keep the least secret, and so we 
can't for a single moment think of employing her in 
this business. Now just quietly listen to me. Every 
evening when it's dark Signor Pasquale, although its 
very hard work for him owing to his being knock- 
kneed, carries his little friend the eunuch home in his 
arms, as soon as he has finished his duties as maid. 
Nothing in the world could induce the timid Piti- 
chinaccio to set foot on the pavement at that time of 
night. So that when " 

At this moment somebody knocked at Salvator'g 
door, and to the consternation of both, Signor Pasquale 
stepped in in all the splendour of his gala attire. On 
catching sight of Scacciati he stood stock still as if 
paralysed ; and then, opening his eyes wide, he gasped 
for air as though he had some difHculty in breathing. 
But Salvator hastily ran to meet him, and took him by 
both hands, saying, "My dear Signor Pasquale, your 
presence in my bumble dwelling ia, I feel, a very great 
honour. May I presume that it is your love for art 
which brings you to me ? You wish to see the newest 
things .1 have done, perchance to give me a commission 


102 SIGNOR FORMICA. 

for some work. Pray in what, my dear Slgnor Pas- 
quale, can I serve you ? " 

"I have a word or two to say to you, my dear 
Slgnor Salvator,'^ stammered Capuzzi painfully, " but 
— alone — ^when you are alone. With your leave I will 
withdraw and come again at a more seasonable time.^' 

''By no means/* said Salvator, holding the old 
gentleman fast, '* by no means, my dear sir. You 
need not stir a step ; you could not have come at a 
more seasonable time, for, since you are a great ad- 
mirer of the noble art of painting, and the patron of 
all good painters, I am sure you will be greatly pleased 
for me to introduce to you Antonio Scacciati here, 
the first painter of our time, whose glorious work — the 
wonderful 'Magdalene at the Saviour^s Feet* — has 
excited throughout all Rome the most enthusiastic 
admiration. You too, I need hardly say, have also 
formed a high opinipn of the work, and must be very 
anxious to know the great artist himself." 

The old man was seized with a violent trembling; 
he shook as if he had a shivering fit of the ague, and 
shot fiery wrathful looks at poor Antonio. He how- 
ever approached the old gentleman, and, bowing with 
polished courtesy, assured him that he esteemed him- 
self happy at meeting in such an unexpected way with 
Signor Pasquale Capuzzi, whose great learning in music 
as well as in painting was a theme for wonder not only 
in Rome but throughout all Italy, and he concluded 
by requesting the honour of his patronage. 

This behaviour of Antonio, in pretending to meet the 
old gentleman for the first time in his life, and in 
addressing him in such flattering phrases, soon brought 
him round again. He forced his features into a sim- 
pering smile, and, as Salvator now let his bands loose. 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 103 

ave his moustache an elegant upward cur), at the 

me time stammering out a few unintelligible words. 

en, turning to Salvator, he requested payment of 

ten ducats for the spinet he had sold him. 
*'Oh ! that trifling little matter we can settle after- 
"^lirmrds, my good sir/' was Salvator^s answer. " First 
liave the goodness to look at this sketch of a picture ' 
which I have drawn^ and drink a glass of good Syracuse 
-wbikt you do so/' Salvator meanwhile placed his 
■\ sketch on the easel and moved up a chair for the old 
''I gentleman, and then, when he had taken his seat, he 
f presented him with a large and handsome wine-cup 
; full of good Syracuse — the little pearl-like bubbles 
rising gaily to the top. 

Signor Pasquale was very fond of a glass of good 
wine — when he had nothing to pay for it ; and now he 
ought to have been in an especially happy frame of 
mind, for, besides nourishing his heart with the hope 
of getting ten ducats for a rotten, worn-out spinet, he 
was sitting before a splendid, boldly-designed picture, 
the rare beauty of which he was quite capable of 
estimating at its full worth. And that he was in this 
happy frame of mind he evidenced in divers ways ; he 
simpered most charmingly ; he half closed his little 
eyes ; he assiduously stroked his chin and moustache ; 
and lisped time after time, ^' Splendid ! delicious ! " but 
they did not know to which he was referring, the pic- 
ture or the wine. 

When he had thus worked himself round into a 
quite cheerful humour, Salvator suddenly began — 
''They tell me, my dear sir, that you have a most 
beautiful and amiable niece, named Marianna — is it 
so ? • All the young men of the city are so smitten 
with love that they stupidly do nothing but run up 


104. SIGNOR FORMICA. 

and down the Via Ripetta, almost dislocating thdr 
necks in their edbrts to look up at your balcony for a 
sight of your sweet Marianna, to snatch a single glance 
from her heavenly eyes." 

Suddenly all the charming sinipers, all the good 
humour which had been called up into the old gentle- 
man's face by the good wine, were gone. Looking 
gloomily before him, he said sharply, "Ah! that's an 
instance of the corruption of our abandoned young 
men. They fix their infernal eyes, the reprobate 
seducers, upon mere children. For I tell you, my 
good sir, that my niece Marianna is quite a child, 
quite a child, only just outgrown her nurse's care." 

Salvator turned the conversation upon something 
else; the old gentleman recovered himself. But just 
as he, his face again radiant with sunshine, was on the 
point of putting the full wine-cup to his lips, Salvator 
began anew. " But pray tell me, my dear sir, if it is 
indeed true that your niece, with her sixteen summers, 
really has such beautiful auburn hair, and eyes so full 
of heaven's own loveliness and joy, as has Antonio's 
'Magdalene?' It iBgenerallymaintained that she has." 

" I don't know," replied the old gentleman, still 
more sharply than before, " I don't know. But let ua 
leave my niece in peace ; rather let us exchange a few 
instructive words on the noble subject of art, as your 
fine picture here of itself invites me to do." 

Always when Capuzzi raised the wine-cup to his lips 
to take a good draught, Salvator began anew to talk 
about the beautiful Marianna, so that at last the old 
gentleman leapt from his chair in a perfect passion, 
banged the cup down upon the table and almost broke 
it, screaming in a high shrill voice, " By the infernal 
pit of Pluto ! by all the furies ! you will turn my wine 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 105 

into poison — into poison I tell you. But I see through 
you, you and your fine friend Signor Antonio, you 
think to make sport of me. But you'll find yourselves 
deceived. Pay me the ten ducats you owe me immedi- 
ately, and then I will leave you and your associate, 
that barber-fellow Antonio, to make your way to the 
devil." 

Salvator shouted, as if mastered by the most violent 
rage, " What ! you have the audacity to treat me in 
this way in my own house! Do you think I'm going 
to pay you ten ducats for that rotten box; the wood- 
worms have long ago eaten all the goodness and all 
the music out of it! Not ten — not five — not three — 
not one ducat shall you have for it, it's scarcely worth 
a farthing. Away with the tumbledown thing!" 
and he kicked over the little instrument again and 
again, till the strings were all jarring and jangling 
together. 

" Ha !" screeched Capuzzi, "justice is still to be had 
in Rome; I will have you arrested, sir, — arrested and 
cast into the deepest dungeon there is," and off he was 
rushing out of the room, blustering like a hailstorm. 
But Salvator took fast hold of him with both hands, and 
drew him down into the chair again, softly murmur- 
ing in his ear, "My dear Signor Pasquale, don't you 
preceive that I was only jesting with you? You shall 
have for your spinet, not ten, but thirty ducats cash 
down." And he went on repeating, " thirty bright 
ducats in ready money," until Capuzzi said in a faint 
and feeble voice, " What do you say, my dear sir ? 
Thirty ducatg for the spinet without its being repaired ? " 
Then Salvator released his hold of the old gentleman, 
and asserted on his honour that within an hour the 
instrument should be worth thirty — nay, forty ducats. 


io6 SIGNOR FORMICA, 

and that Signor Pasquale should receive as much 
for it. 

Taking in a fresh supply of breathy and sighing deeply^ 
the old gentleman murmured, *' Thirty — forty ducats ! *' 
Then he began, " But you have greatly offended me, 

Signor Salvator '* ^^ Thirty ducats/* repeated Sal- 

vator. Capuzzi simpered, but then began again, 
"But you have grossly wounded my feelings, Signor 

Salvator" "Thirty ducats," exclaimed Salvator, 

cutting him short ; and he continued to repeat, 
" Thirty ducats ! thirty ducats ! '* as long as the old 
gentleman continued to sulk — till at length Capuzzi 
said, radiant with delight, " If you will give me 
thirty — I mean forty ducats for the spinet, all shall be 
forgiven and forgotten, my dear sir." 

" But," began Salvator, " before I can fulfil my 
promise, I still have one little condition to make, which 
you, my honoured Signor Pasquale Capuzzi di Seni- 
gaglia, can easily grant. You are the first musical 
composer in all Italy, besides being the foremost singer 
of the day. When I heard in the opera Le Nozze 
di Teti e Peleo the great scene which that shameless 
Francesco Cavalli has thievishly taken from your 
works, I was enraptured. If you would only sing me 
that aria whilst I put the spinet to rights you would 
confer upon me a pleasure than which I can conceive 
of none more enjoyable." 

Puckering up his mouth into the most winning of 
smiles, and blinking his little grey eyes, the old gentle- 
man replied, " I perceive, my good sir, that you are 
yourself a clever musician, for you possess taste and 
know how to value the deserving better than these 
ungrateful Romans. Listen — listen to the aria of 
all arias.*' 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 107 

Therewith he rose to his feet, and, stretching him- 
self up to his full height, spread out his arms and 
closed both eyes, so that he looked like a cock prepar- 
ing to crow ; and he at once began to Bcreech in such 
a way that the walls rang again, and Dame Caterina 
and her two daughters soon came running in, fully 
under the impression that such lamentable sounds 
must betoken some accident or other. At eight of the 
crowing old gentleman they stopped on the threshold 
utterly astonished ; and thus they formed tht audience 
of the incomparable musician Capuzzi, 

Meanwhile Salvator, having picked up the spinet 
and thrown back the lid, had taken his pMiIette in hand, 
and in bold firm strokes had began on the lid of the 
instrument the most remarkable piece of painting that 
ever was seen. The central idea was a scene from 
Cavalli's opera Le Nozze di Teli, but there was a 
multitude of other personages mixed up with it in the 
most fantastic way. Amongst them were the recog- ■ 
nisable features of Capuzzi, Antonio, Marianna (faith- 
fully reproduced from Antonio's picture), Salvator 
himself, Dame Caterina and her two daughters, — and 
even the Pyramid Doctor was not wanting, — and all 
grouped so intelligently, judiciously, and ingeniously, 
that Antonio could not conceal his astonishment, both 
at the artist's intellectual power as well as at his 
technique. 

Meanwhile old Capuzzi had not been content with 
the aria which Salvator had requested him to give, 
but, carried away by his musical madness, he went on 
singing or rather screeching without intermission, 
working his way through the most awful recitatives 
frum one execrable scene to another. He must have 
been going on for - nearly two hours when he sank 


io8 SIGNOR FORMICA. 

back in his chair^ breathless, and with his face as red 
as a cherry. And just at this same time also Salvator 
had so far worked out his sketch that the figures began 
to wear a look of vitality, and the whole, viewed at a 
little distance, had the appearance of a finished work. 

'* I have kept my word with respect to the 8pinet> 
my dear Signor Pasquale,'* breathed Salvator in the 
old man's ear. He started up as if awakening out of 
a deep sleep. Immediately his glance fell upon the 
painted instrument, which stood directly opposite him. 
Then, opening his eyes wide as if he saw a miracle, 
and jauntily throwing bis conical hat on the top of 
his wig, he took his crutch-stick under bis arm, made 
one bound to the spinet, tore the lid off the hinges, 
and holding it above his bead, ran like a madman out 
of the room, down the stairs, and away, away out of 
the house altogether, followed by the hearty laughter 
of Dame Caterina and both her daughters. 

" The old miser," said Salvator, " knows very well 
that he has only to take yon painted lid to Count 
Colonna or to my friend Rossi and he will at once 
get forty ducats for it, or even more.'' 

Salvator and Antonio then both deliberated how 
they should carry out the plan of attack which was to 
be made when night came. We shall soon see what 
the two adventurers resolved upon, and what success 
they had in their adventure. 

As soon as it was dark, Signor Pasquale, after lock- 
ing and bolting the door of his house, carried the little 
monster of an eunuch home as usual. I'he whole wav 
the little wretch was whining and growling, complain- 
ing that not only did he sing Capuzzi's arias till he 
got catarrh in the throat and burn his fingers cooking 
the macaroni, but tie had now to lend himself to 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 109 

duties which brought him nothing but sharp boxes of 
the ear and rough kicks, which Marianna lavishly 
distributed to him as soon as ever he came near her. 
Old Capuzzi consoled him as well as he could, pro- 
mising to provide him an ampler supply of sweetmeats 
than he had hitherto done ; indeed, as the little man 
would nohow cease his growling and querulous com- 
plaining, Pasquale even laid himself under the obliga- 
tion to get a natty abbot's coat made for the little 
torment out of an old black plush waistcoat which he 
(the dwarf) had often set covetous eyes upon. He 
demanded a wig and a sword as well. Parleying upon 
these points they arrived at the Via Bergognona, for 
that was where Pitichinaccio dwelt, only four doors 
from Salvator. 

The old man set the dwarf cautiously down and 
opened the street door; and then, the dwarf on in 
front, they both began to climb up the narrow stairs, 
which were more like a rickety ladder for hens and 
chickens than steps for respectable people. But they 
had hardly mounted half way up when a terrible 
racket began up above, and the coarse voice of some 
wild drunken fellow was heard cursing and swear- 
ing, and demanding to be shown the way out of the 
damned house. Pitichinaccio squeezed himself close 
to the wall, and entreated Capuzzi, in the name of all 
the saints, to go on first. But before Capuzzi had 
ascended two steps, the fellow who was up above 
came tumbling headlong downstairs, caught hold of the 
old man, and whisked him away like a whirlwind out 
through the open door below into the middle of the 
street. There they both lay, — Capuzzi at bottom and 
the drunken brute like a heavy sack on top of him. 
The old gentleman screamed piteously for help ; two 


no SIGNOR FORMICA. 

men came up at once and with considerable difficulty 
freed him from the heavy weight lying upon him ; the 
other fellow^ as soon as he was lifted up^ reeled away 
cursing. 

" Good God ! what's happened to you, Signor 
Pasquale ? What are you doing here at this time of 
night? What big quarrel have you been getting 
mixed up in in that house there ? ** thus asked Sal- 
vator and Antonio, for that is who the two men 
were. 

^^Oh, I shall die!^' groaned Capuzzi; "that son 
of the devil has crushed all my limbs; I can't 


move." 


" Let me look," said Antonio, feeling all over the 
old gentleman's body, and suddenly he pinched his 
right leg so sharply that Capuzzi screamed out aloud. 

'^ By all the saints ! " cried Antonio in consterna- 
tion, " by all the saints ! my dear Signor Pasquale, 
you've broken your right leg in the most dangerous 
place. If you don't g6t speedy help you will within a 
short time be a dead man, or at any rate be lame all 
your life long." 

A terrible scream escaped the old man s breast. 
'^Calm yourself, my dear sir," continued Antonio, 
" although I'm now a painter, I haven't altogether for- 
gotten my surgical practice. We will carry you to 
Salvator's house and I will at once bind up" 

"My dear Signor Antonio," whined Capuzzi, "you 
nourish hostile feelings towards me, I know." " But," 
broke in Salvator, " this is now no longer the time to 
talk about enmity ; you are in danger, and that is 
enough for honest Antonio to exert all his skill on 
your behalf. Lay hold, friend Antonio." 

Gently and cautiously they lifted up the old man 


SIGNOR FORMICA. in 

betweeo them, him screaming with the unspeakable 
pain caused by his broken leg, and earned him to 
Sal valor's dwelling. 

Dame Caterina said that she had had a foreboding 
that something was going to happen, and so she had 
not gone to bed. As sooii as she caught sight of the 
old gentleman and heard what had befallen him, she 
began to heap reproaches upon him for his bad con- 
duct. "I know," she said, " I know very well, Signer 
Pasquale, who you've been taking home again. Now 
that you've got your beautiful niece Marianna in the 
house with you, you think you've no further call to 
have women-folk about you, and you treat that poor 
Pitichinaccio most shameful and infamous, putting 
him in petticoats. But look to it. Ogni came ha it 
sua osso (Every house has its skeleton). Why if you 
have a girl about you, don't you need women-folk? 
Fate il passo secondo la gamha (Cut your clothes accord- 
ing to your cloth), and don't you require anything either 
more or less from your Marianna than what is right. 
Don't lock her up as if she were a prisoner, nor make 
your house a dungeon. Asino punlo convien eke Irotti 
(If you are in the stream, you had better swim with 
it); you have a beautiful niece and you must alter 
your ways to suit her, that is, you must only do what 
she wants you to do. But you are an ungallant and 
hard-hearted man, ay, and even in love, and jealous 
as well, they say, which T hope at your years is not 
true. Your pardon for telling you it all straight out, 
but cki ha nel petto Jiele non puo sputar miele (when 
there's bile in the heart there can't be honey in the 
mouth). So now, if you don't die of your broken leg, 
which at your great age is not at all unlikely, let this 
be a warning to you ; and leave your niece free to do 


112 SIGNOR FORMICA. 

what she likes^ and let her marry the fine young 
gentleman as I know very well." 

And so the stream went on uninterruptedly^ whilst 
Salvator and Antonio cautiously undressed the old 
gentleman and put him to bed. Dame Caterina's 
words were like knives cutting deeply into his breast ; 
but whenever he attempted to intervene, Antonio 
signed to him that all speaking was dangerous, and so 
he had to swallow his bitter gall. At length Salva- 
tor sent Dame Caterina away, to fetch some ice-cold 
water that Antonio wanted. 

Salvator and Antonio satisfied themselves that the 
fellow who had been sent to Pitichinaccio's house had 
done his duty well. Notwithstanding the apparently 
terrible fall, Capuzzi had not received the slightest 
damage beyond a slight bruise or two. Antonio put 
the old gentleman's right foot in splints and bandaged 
it up so tight that he could not move. Then they 
wrapped him up in cloths that had been soaked in ice- 
cold water, as a precaution, they alleged, against in- 
flammation, so that the old gentleman shook as if with 
the ague. 

"My good Signor Antonio,*' he groaned feebly, 
" tell me if it is all over with me. Must I die ? *' 

" Compose yourself," replied Antonio.*' ^' If you will 
only compose yourself, Signor Pasquale ! As you have 
come through the first dressing with so much nerve 
and without fainting, I think we may say that the 
danger is past ; but you will require the most attentive 
nursing. At present we mustn't let you out of the 
doctor's sight." 

" Oh ! Antonio," whined the old gentleman, ^' you 
know how I like you, how highly I esteem your 
talents. Don't leave me. Give me your dear hand — 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 113 

80 ! You won't leave me, will you, my dear good 
Antonio ? " 

"Although I am now no longer a surgeon," said 
Antonio, "although I've quite given up that hated 
trade, yet I will in your case, Signor Pasquale, make 
an exception, and will undertake to attend you, for 
which I shaJl ask nothing except that you give me 
your friendship, your confidence again. You were a 
little hard upon me" 

"Say no more," lisped the old gentleman, "not 
another word, my dear Antonio " 

" Your niece will be half dead with anxiety," said 
Antonio again, "at your not returning home. You 
are, considering your condition, brisk and strong 
enough, and so as soon as day dawns we'll carry you 
home to your own house. There I will again look at 
your bandage, and arrange your bed as it ought to be, 
and give your niece her instructions, so that you may 
soon get well again." 

The old gentleman heaved a deep sigh and 'closed 
his eyes, remaining some minutes without speaking. 
Then, stretching out his hand towards Antonio, he 
drew him down close beside him, and whispered, "It 
was only a jest that you had with Marianna, was it not, 
my dear sir? — one of those merry conceits that young 
folks have"— — 

"Think no more about that, Signor Pasquale," 
replied Antonio, "Your niece did, it is true, strike 
my fancy ; but I have now quite different things 
in my head, and — to confess honestly to it — I am 
very pleased that you did return a sharp answer to 
my foolish suit. I thought I was in love with your 
Marianna, but what I really saw in her was only a 
fine model for my 'Magdalene.' And this probably 

VOL. I. K 


it 


114 SIGNOR FORMICA. 

explains how it is that, now that my picture is finished, 
I feel quite indifferent towards her." 

Antonio/' cried the old man, in a strong voice, 
Antonio, you glorious fellow 1 What comfort you 
give me — what help — what consolation! Now that 
you don't love Marianna I feel as if all my pain had 
gone/' 

" Why, I declare, Signor Pasquale,'* said Salvator, 
" if we didn't know you to be a grave and sensible man, 
with a true conception of -what is becoming to your 
years, we might easily believe that you were yourself 
by some infatuation in love with your niece of sixteen 
summers." 

Again the old gentleman closed his eyes, and 
groaned and moaned at the horrible pain, which now 
returned with redoubled violence. 

The first red streaks of morning came shining in 
through the window. Antonio announced to the old 
gentleman that it was now time to take him to his own 
house in the Via Ripetta. Signor Pasquale's reply was 
a deep and piteous sigh. Salvator and Antonio lifted 
him out of bed and wrapped him in a wide mantle 
which had belonged to Dame Caterina's husband, and 
which she lent them for this purpose. The old gentle- 
man implored them by all the saints to take off the 
villainous cold bandages in which his bald head was 
swathed, and to give him his wig and plumed hat. 
And also, if it were possible, Antonio was to put his 
moustache a little in order, that Marianna might not 
be too much frightened at sight of him. 

Two porters with a litter were standing all ready 
before the door. Dame Caterina, still storming at the 
old man, and mixing a great many proverbs in her 
abuse, carried down the bed, in which they then care- 


SIGNOR FORMICA. Iij 

fully packed him; and so, accompanied by Salvator 
and Antonio^ he was taken home to his own house. 

No sooner did Marianna see her uncle in this 
wretched plight than she. began to scream, whilst a 
torrent of tears gushed from her eyes ; without notic- 
ing her lover, who had come along with him, she 
grasped the old man's hands and pressed them to her 
lips, bewailing the terrible accident that had befallen 
him — BO much pity had the good child for the old 
man who plagued and tormented her with his amorous 
folly. Yet at this same moment the inherent nature 
of woman asserted itself in her ; for it only rec^uired a 
few signilicant glances from Salvator to put her in full 
possession of all the facts of the case. Now, for the 
Rrst time, she stole a glance at the happy Antonio, 
blushing hotly as she did so ; and a pretty sight it was 
to see how a roguish smile gradually routed and broke 
through her tears. Salvator, at any rate, despite the 
" Magdalene," had not expected to find the little 
maiden half so charming, or so sweetly pretty as he 
now really discovered her to 1«; and whilst almost 
feeling inclined to envy Antonio his good fortune, he 
felt that it was all the more necessary to get poor 
Marianna away from her hateful uncle, let the cost be 
what it might 

Signor Pasquale forgot his trouble in being received 
so affectionately by his lovely niece, which was indeed 
more than he deserved. He simpered and pursed up 
his lips so that his moustache was all of a totter, and 
groaned and whined, not with pain, but simply and 
solely with amorous longing. 

Antonio arranged his bed professionally, and, after 
Capuzzi had been laid on it, tightened the bandage 
still more, at the same time so muffling up bis left leg 


ii6 SIGNOR FORMICA. 

as well that he had to lay there motionless like a log 
of wood. Salvator withdrew and left the lovers alone 
with their happiness. 

The old gentleman lay buried in cushions; more- 
over, as an extra precaution, Antonio had bound a 
thick piece of cloth well steeped in water round bis 
head, so that he might not hear the lovers whispering 
together. This was the first time they unburdened all 
their hearts to each other, swearing eternal fidelity in 
the midst of tears and rapturous kisses. The old 
gentleman could have no idea of what was going on, 
for Marianna ceased not, frequently from time to time, 
to ask him how he felt, and even permitted him to 
press her little white hand to his lips. 

When the morning began to be well advanced, 
Antonio hastened away to procure, as he said, all the 
things that the old gentleman required, but in reality 
to invent some means for putting him, at any rate for 
some hours, in a still more helpless condition, as well 
as to consult with Salvator what further steps were 
then to be taken. 


IV. 

0/^/ie new attack made by Salvator Rosa and Antonio Scacciaii 
upon Signer Pasquale Capuzzi and upon his company^ 
and of what further happens in consequence. 

Next morning Antonio came to Salvator, melan- 
choly and dejected. 

'^Well, what's the matter?" cried Salvator when 
he saw him coming, " what are you hanging your head 
about? What's happened to you now, you happy 
dog ? can you not see your mistress every day, and kiss 
her and press her to your heart ? " 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 117 

" Oh ! Salvator, it's all over with my happtoess, 
it's gone for ever," cried Antonio. "The devil is 
making sport of me. Our stratagem has failed, and 
we now stand on a footing of open enmity with that 
cursed Capuzzi," 

"So much the hetter," said Salvator; "so much 
the better. But come, Antonio, tell me what's hap- 
pened," 

"Just imagine, Salvator," began Antonio, " yester- 
day when I went hack to the Via Ripetta after an 
absence of at the most two hours, with all sorts of 
medicines, whom should I see hut the old gentleman 
standing in his own doorway fully dressed. Behind 
him was the Pyramid Doctor and the deuced ex-gen- 
darme, whilst a confused something was bobbing about 
round their legs. It was, I believe, that little monster 
Pitichinaccio. No sooner did the old man get sight 
of me than he shook his fist at me, and began to heap 
the most fearful curses and imprecations upon me, 
swearing that if I did but approach his door he would 
have all my bones broken. 'Be off to the devil, you 
infamous barber-fellow,' he shrieked; 'you think to 
outwit me with your lying and knavery. Like the 
very devil himself, you He in wait for my poor inno- 
cent Marianna, and fancy you arc going to get her 
into your toils — but stop a moment I I will spend 
my last ducat to have the vital spark stamped out of 
vou, ere you're aware of it. And your fine patron, 
Signor Salvator, the murderer — bandit — who's escaped 
the halter — he shall be sent to join his captain Mas- 
aniello in hell — I'll have him out of Rome ; that won't 
cost me much trouble.' 

"Thus the old fellow raged, and as the damned ex- 
gendarme, incited by the Pyramid Doctor, was making 


.118 SIGNOR FORMICA . 

preparatioTiB to bear down upon me, and a crowd of 
curious onlookers began to assemble, what could I do 
but quit the field with all speed ? I didn't like to come 
to you in my great trouble, for I know you would only 
have laughed at me and my inconsolable complaints. 
Why, you can hardly keep back your laughter now," 

As Antonio ceased speaking, Salvator did indeed 
burst out laughing heartily. 

" Now," he cried, " now the thing is beginning to be 
rather interesting. And now, my worthy Antonio, I 
will tell you in detail all that took place at Capuzzi's 
after you had gone. You had hardly left the house 
when Signor Splendiano Accoramboni, who had learned 
—God knows in what way — that his bosom-friend, 
Capuzzi, had broken his right leg in the night, drew 
near in all solemnity, with a surgeon. Your bandage 
and the entire method of treatment you had adopted 
with Signor Fasquale could not fail to excite suspicion. 
The surgeon removed the splints and bandages, and 
they discovered, what we both very well know, that 
there was not even so much as an ossicle of the worthy 
Capuzzi's right foot dislocated, still less broken. It 
didn't require any uncommon sagacity to understand 
all the rest." 

"But," said Antonio, utteriy astonished, " but, my 
dear, good sir, do tell me how you have learned all that; 
tell me how you get into Capuzzi's house and know 
everything that takes place there." 

" I have already told you," replied Salvator, " that 
an acquaintance of Dame Caterina lives in the same 
house, and moreover, on the same floor as Capuzzi. 
This acquaintance, the widow nf a wine-dealer, has a 
daughter whom my little Margaret often goes to see. 
Now girls have a special instinct for finding out theii 


SIGNOR FORMICA. I19 

fellows, and so it came about that Rose — that's the 
name of the wine-dealer's daughter — and Margaret soon 
discovered in the living-room a small vent-hole, leading 
into a dark closet that adjoins Mananna's apartment. 
Marianna bad been by no means inattentive to the whis- 
pering and murmuring of the two girls, nor had she 
failed to notice the vent-hole, and so the way to a mutual 
exchange of communications was soon opened and made 
use of. Whenever old Capuzzi takes his aftemoon 
nap the girls gossip away to their hearts' content. 
You will have observed that little Margaret, Dame 
Caterioa's and my favourite, is not so serious and re- 
served as her elder sister, Anna, but is an arch, frolic- 
some, droll little thing. Without expressly making 
mention of your love-affair I have instructed her to get 
Marianna to tell her everything that takes place in 
Capuzzi's house. She has proved a very apt pupil in 
the matter ; and if I laughed at your pain and despon- 
dency just now it was because I knew what would com- 
fort you, knew I could prove to you that the affair has 
now taken a most favourable turn. I have quite a 
big budget full of excellent news for you." 

"Salvator!" cried Antonio, his eyes sparkling with 
joy, " how you cause my hopes to rise ! Heaven be 
praised for the vent-hole. I will write to Marianna; 
Margaret shall take the letter with her " 

"Nay, nay, we can have none of that, Antonio," 
replied Salvator. "Margaret can be useful to us with- 
out being your love- messenger exactly. Besides, acci- 
dent, which often plays many fine tricks, might carry 
your amorous confessions into old Capuzzi's hands, 
and so bring an endless amount of fresh trouble upon 
Marianna, just at the very moment when she is on 
the point of getting the lovesick old fool under her 


I20 SIGNOR FORMICA. 

thumb. For listen to what then happened. The way 
in which Marianna received the old fellow when we 
took him home has quite reformed him. He is fully 
convinced that she no longer loves you, but that she 
has given him at least one half of her heart, and that 
all he has to do is to win the other half. And 
Marianna, since she imbibed the poison of your kisses, 
has advanced three years in shrewdness, artfulness, and 
experience. She has convinced the old man, not only 
that she had no share in our trick, but that she hates 
our goings-on, and will meet with scorn every device 
on your part to approach her. In his excessive delight 
the old man was too hasty, and swore that if he could 
do anything to please his adored Marianna, he would 
do it immediately, she had only to give utterance to 
her wish. Whereupon Marianna modestly asked for 
nothing except that her zio carissimo (dearest uncle) 
would take her to see Signor Formica in the theatre 
outside the Porta del Popolo. This rather posed 
Capuzzi ; there were consultations with the Pyramid 
Doctor and with Pitichinaccio ; at last Signor Pasquale 
and Signor Splendiano came to the resolution that they 
really would take Marianna to this theatre to-morrow. 
Pitichinaccio, it was resolved, should accompany them 
in the disguise of a handmaiden, to which he only gave 
his consent on condition that Signor Pasquale would 
make him a present, not only of the plush waistcoat, 
but also of a wig, and at night would, alternately with 
the Pyramid Doctor, carry him home. That bargain 
they finally made ; and so the curious leash will cer- 
tainly go along with pretty Marianna to see Signor 
Formica to-morrow, in the theatre outside the Porta 
del Popolo.** 

It is now necessary to say who Signor Formica was. 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 121 

and what he had to do with the theatre outside the 
Porta del Popolo. 

At the time of the Carnival in Rome, nothing is 
more sad than when the theatre-managers have been 
unlucky in their choice of a musical composer, or 
when the first tenor at the Argentina theatre has lost 
his voice on the way, or when the male prima donna ^ 
of the Valle theatre is laid up with a cold, — in hrief, 
when the chief source of recreation which the Romans 
were hoping to find proves abortive, and then comes 
Holy Thursday and all at once cuts ofT all the hopes 
which might perhaps have been realised. It was just 
after one of these unlucky Carnivals — almost before 
the strict fast -days were past, when a certain Nicole 
Musso opened a theatre outside the Porta del Popolo, 
where he stated his intention of putting nothing but 
light impromptu comic sketches on the boards. The 
advertisement was drawn up in an ingenious and witty 
Style, and consequently the Romans formed a favour- 
able preconception of Musso's enterprise ; but inde- 
pendently of this they would in their longing to still 
their dramatic hunger have greedily snatched at any 
the poorest pabulum of this description. The interior 
arrangements of the theatre, or rather of the small 
booth, did not say much for the pecuniary resources 
of the enterprising manager. There was no orchestra, 
nor were there boxes. Instead, a gallery was put up 
at the back, where the arms of the house of Colonna 
were conspicuous — ^a sign that Count Colonna had 
taken Musso and his theatre under his especial pro- 

' Femnle pads continued to be played bj boys in England down lo 
the Restoration (i6£o). The practice of women playing in female parts 
waa introduced tometrlut euUer in Italy, bnt only in certain kinds of 
p.rtot, 


122 SIGNOR FORMICA. 

tectioD. A platform of sKght elevation, covered with 
caq>ets and hung round with curtains, which, accord- 
ing to the requirements of the piece, had to represent 
a wood or a room or a street — this was the stage. 
Add to this that the spectators had to content them- 
selves with hard uncomfortable wooden benches, and 
it was no wonder that Signor Musso's patrons on first 
entering were pretty loud in their grumblings at him 
for calling a paltry wooden booth a theatre* But uo 
sooner had the first two actors who appeared exchanged 
a few words together than the attention of the audience 
was arrested ; as the piece proceeded their interest took 
the form of applause, their applause grew to adroira- 
li«)n, their admiration to the wildest pitch of enthusi- 
rtnlic excitement, which found vent in loud and con- 
liiutou!! laughter, clapping of hands, and screams of 
•• hravol l^ravol" 

Ami indeed it would not have been very easy to 
find anytlnng more perfect than these extemporised 
representations of Nicolo Musso; they overflowed 
with wit, humour, and genius^ and lashed the follies 
of the day with an unsparing scourge. The audience 
wen; quite carried away by the incomparable charac- 
terination which distinguished all the actors, but par- 
ticuliirlv by the inimitable mimicry of Pasquarello,^ 
by liiN marvellously natural imitations of the voice. 

' Thli Wind is undoubtedly connected with Pasquillo (a satire), or 
Willi J\t.\tfumOf a Roman cobbler of the fifteenth century, whose shop 
iiood i\cur the IJraschi Palace, near the Piazza Navona. He lashed the 
follies of his day, particularly the vices of the clergy, with caustic satire, 
scalhinj; wit, and bitter stinging irony. After his death his name was 
transferred to a mutilated statue, upon which such satiric effiisions 
continued to be fastened. 

Pasquarello would thus combine the characteristics of the English 
clown with those of the Roman Pasquino. 


SIGNOR PORUICA. 133 

gait, and postures of well-known personages. By hia 
inexhaustible humour, and the point and appoaiteness 
of his impromptus, he quite carried his audience away. 
The man who played the rSle of Pasquarello, and who 
called himself Signor Formica, seemed to be animated 
by a spirit of singular originality ; often there was 
something go strange in either tone or gesture, that the 
audience, even in the midst of the most unrestrained 
burst of laughter, felt a cold shiver run through them. 
He was excellently supported by Doctor Graliano,^ 
who in pantomimic action, in voice, and in his talent 
for saying the most delightful things mixed up with 
apparently the most extravagant nonsense, had per- 
haps no equal in the world. This rdle was played by 
an old Bolognese named Maria Agli. Thus in a short 
time all educated Rome was seen hastening in a con- 
tinuous stream to Nicolo Musso's little theatre outside 
the Porta del Popolo, whilst Formica's name was on 
everybody's lips, and people shouted with wild en- 
thusiasm, "Oh/ Formica! Formica henedelto ! Ok! 
Formicissimo ! " — not only in the theatre but also in the 
streets. They regarded him as a supernatural visitant, 
and many an old lady who had split her sides with 
laughing in the theatre, would suddenly look grave and 
say solemnly, " Sckerza coifanti e lascia star santi " (Jest 
with children, but let the saints alone), if anybody ven- 
tured to say the least thing in disparagement of For- 
mica's acting. This arose from the fact that outside 
the theatre Signor Formica was an inscrutable mystery. 
Never was he seen anywhere, and all efforts to discover 

' Doctor Giatiano, a character id the popular Italian theatre called 
CBmmrdia delP Arit, was represented as a Bolognese doctor, and wore 
a mask with black nose and forehead, and red cheeki. His rSU was 
that of a "pedantic and tediott* poser." 


124 SIGNOR FORMICA. 

traces of him were vain^ whilst Nicolo Musso on bis 
part maintained an inexorable silence respecting his 
retreat. 

And this was the theatre that Marianna was anxious 
to go to. 

" Let us make a decisive onslaught upon our foes/* 
said Salvator; ^^we couldn't have a finer opportunity 
than when they're returning home from the theatre." 
Then he imparted to Antonio the details of a plan, 
which, though appearing adventurous and daring, 
Antonio nevertheless embraced with joy, since it held 
out to him a prospect that he should be able to carry 
off his Marianna from the hated old Capuzzi. He 
also heard with approbation that Salvator was especially 
concerned to chastise the Pyramid Doctor. 

When night came, Salvator and Antonio each took 
a guitar and went to the Via Ripetta, where, with the 
express view of causing old Capuzzi annoyance, they 
complimented lovely Marianna with the finest serenade 
that ever was heard. For Salvator played and sang in 
masterly style, whilst Antonio, as far as the capabilities 
of his fine tenor would allow him, almost rivalled Odo- 
ardo Ceccarelli. Although Signor Pasquale appeared on 
the balcony and tried to silence the singers with abuse, 
his neighbours, attracted to their windows by the good 
singing, shouted to him that he and his companions 
howled and screamed like so many cats and dogs, and 
yet he wouldn't listen to good music when it did come 
into the street; he might just go inside and stop up his 
ears if he didn't want to listen to good singing. And 
so Signor Pasquale had to bear nearly all night long 
the torture of hearing Salvator and Antonio sing songs 
which at one time were the sweetest of love-songs and 
at another mocked at the folly of amorous old fools. 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 125 

They plainly saw Marianna standing at the window^ 
notwithstanding that Signor Pasquale besought her in 
the sweetest phrases and protestations not to expose 
herself to the noxious night air. 

Next evening the most remarkable company that 
ever was seen proceeded down the Via Ripetta towards 
the Porta del Popolo. All eyes were turned upon 
them^ and people asked each other if these were 
maskers left from the Carnival. Signor Pasquale 
Capuzzi^ spruce and smug^ all elegance and politeness, 
wearing his gay Spanish suit well brushed, parading a 
new yellow feather in his conical hat, and stepping 
along in shoes too little for him, as if he were walking 
amongst eggs, was leading pretty Marianna on his 
arm; her slender figure could not be seen, still less her 
face, since she was smothered up to an unusual extent 
in her veil and wraps. On the other side marched 
Doctor Splendiano Accoramboni in his gr^at wig, 
which covered the whole of his back, so that to look 
at him from behind there appeared to be a huge head 
walking along on two little legs. Close behind Mari- 
anna, and almost clinging to her, waddled the little 
monster Pitichinaccio, dressed in fiery red petticoats, 
and having his head covered all over in hideous fashion 
with bright-coloured flowers. 

This evening Signor Formica outdid himself even, 
and, what he had never done before, introduced short 
songs into his performance, burlesquing the style of 
certain well-known singers. Old Capuzzi's passion 
for the stage, which in his youth had almost amounted 
to infatuation, was now stirred up in him anew. In 
a rapture of delight he kissed Marianna's hand time 
after time, and protested that he would not miss an 
evening visiting Nicolo Musso's theatre with her. ^ 


126 SIGNOR FORMICA. 

Signor Formica he extolled to the very skies, and joined 
hand and foot in the boisterous applause of the rest of 
the spectators. Signor Splendiano was less satisfied, 
and kept continually admonishing Signor Capuzzi and 
lovely Marian na not to laugh so immoderately. In a 
single breath he ran over the names of twenty or more 
diseases which might arise from splitting the sides with 
laughing. But neither Marianna nor Capuzzi heeded 
him in the least. As for Pitichinaccio, he felt verv 
uncomfortable. He had been obliged to sit behind 
the Pyramid Doctor, whose great wig completely over- 
shadowed him. Not a single thing could he see on 
the stage, nor any of the actors, and was, moreover, 
repeatedly bothered and annoyed by two forward 
women who had placed themselves near him. They 
called him a dear, comely little lady, and asked him if 
he was married, though to be sure, he was very young, 
and whether he had any children, who they dare be 
bound were sweet little creatures, and so forth. The 
cold sweat stood in beads on poor Pitichinaccio's brow ; 
he whined and whimpered, and cursed the day he was 
born. 

After the conclusion of the performance, Signor 
Pasquale waited until the spectators had withdrawn 
from the theatre. The last light was extinguished just 
as Signor Splendiano had lit a small piece of a wax 
torch at it ; and then Capuzzi, with his worthy friends 
and Marianna, slowly and circumspectly set out on 
their return journey. 

Pitichinaccio wept and screamed; Capuzzi, greatly 
to his vexation, had to take him on his left arm, whilst 
with the right he led Marianna. Doctor Splendiano 
showed the way with his miserable little bit of torch, 
which only burned with difficulty, and even then in 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 127 

SL feeble sort of way, so that the wretched light it cast 
merely served to reveal to them the thick darkness of 
the night. 

Whilst they were still a good distance from the 
Porta del Popolo they all at once saw themselves sur- 
rounded by several tall figures closely enveloped in 
mantles. At this moment the torch was knocked out 
of the Doctor's hand, and went out on the ground. 
Capuzzi, as well as the Doctor^ stood still without 
uttering a sound. Then, without their knowing where 
it came from, a pale reddish light fell upon the muffled 
figures, and four grisly skulls riveted their hollow 
ghastly eyes upon the Pyramid Doctor. " Woe — woe 
— woe betide thee, Splendiano Accoramboni ! ** thus 
the terrible spectres shrieked in deep, sepulchral tones. 
Then one of them wailed, '^ Do you know me ? do you 
know me, Splendiano? I am Cordier, the French 
painter, who was buried last week, and whom your 
medicaments brought to his grave." Then the second, 
" Do you know me, Splendiano ? I am Kiifner, the 
German painter, whom you poisoned with your in- 
fernal electuary." Then the third, "Do you know 
me, Splendiano ? I am Liers, the Fleming, whom you 
killed with your pills, and whose brother you defrauded 
of a picture." Then the fourth, "Do you know me, 
Splendiano? I am Ghigi, the Neapolitan painter, 
whom you despatched with your powders.*' And 
lastly all four together, '^ Woe — woe — woe upon thee, 
Splendiano Accoramboni, cursed Pyramid Doctor ! We 
bid you come — come down to us beneath the earth. 
Away — away — away with you ! Hallo ! hallo ! " and 
so saying they threw themselves upon the unfortunate 
Doctor, and, raising him up in their arms, whisked 
him away like a whirlwind. 


128 SIGNOR FORMICA. 

How, although Signor Pasquale was a good deal 
overcome by terror, yet it is surprising with what 
remarkable promptitude he recovered courage so soon 
as he saw that it was only his friend Accoramboni 
with whom the spectres were concerned. Pitichinaccio 
had stuck his head, with the flower-bed that was on it, 
under Capuzzi's mantle, and clung so fast round his 
neck that all eflForts to shake him off proved futile, 

"Pluck up your spirits," Capuzzi exhorted Mari- 
anna, when nothing more was to be seen of the spectres 
or of the Pyramid Doctor ; '' pluck up your spirits, and 
come to me, my sweet little ducky bird I As for my 
worthy friend Splendiano, it's all over with him. May 
St. Bernard, who also was an able physician and gave 
many a man a lift on the road to happiness, may he 
help him, if the revengeful painters whom he hastened 
to get to his Pyramid break his neck ! But who'll sing 
the bass of my canzonas now ? And this booby, Piti- 
chinaccio, is squeezing my throat so, that, adding in 
the fright caused by Splendiano's abduction, I fear I 
shall not be able to produce a pure note for perhaps 
six weeks to come. Don^t be alarmed, my Marianna, 
my darling ! It's all over now." 

She assured him that she had quite recovered from 
her alarm, and begged him to let her walk alone with- 
out support, so that he could free himself from his 
troublesome pet. But Signor Pasquale only took faster 
hold of her, saying that he wouldn't suffer her to leave 
his side a yard in that pitch darkness for anything in 
the world. 

In the very same moment as Signor Pasquale, now 
at his ease again, was about to proceed on his road, 
four frightful fiend-like figures rose up just in front of 
him as if out of the earth ; they wore short flaring red 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 129 

mantles and fixed their keen glittering eyes upon him, 
at the same time making horrible noises — yelling and 
whistling. " Ugh ! ugh ! Pasquale Capuzzi ! You 
cursed fool ! You amorous old devil ! We belong to 
your fraternity ; we are the evil spirits of love, and have 
come to carry you off to hell — to hell-fire — you and 
your crony Pitichinaccio." Thus screaming, the Satanic 
figures fell upon the old man. Capuzzi fell heavily to 
the ground and Pitichinaccio along with him, both 
raising a shrill piercing cry of distress and fear, like 
that of a whole troop of cudgelled asses. 

Marian na had meanwhile torn herself away from the 
old man and leapt aside. Then one of the devils clasped 
her softly in his arms, whispering the sweet glad words, 
*' O Marianna ! my Marianna ! At last we've managed 
it ! My friends will carry the old man a long, long 
way from here, whilst we seek a better place of safety." 
" O my Antonio!'' whispered Marianna softly. 

But suddenly the scene was illuminated by the light 
of several torches, and Antonio felt a stab in his 
shoulder. Quick as lightning he turned round, drew 
his sword, and attacked the fellow, who with his 
stiletto upraised was just preparing to aim a second 
blow. He perceived that his three companions were 
defending themselves against a superior number of 
gendarmes. He managed to beat off the fellow who 
had attacked him, and joined his friends. Although 
they were maintaining their ground bravely, the con- 
test was yet too unequal ; the gendarmes would infal- 
libly have proved victorious had not two others suddenly 
ranged themselves with a shout on the side of the young 
men, one of them immediately cutting down the fellow 
who was pressing Antonio the hardest. 

In a few minutes more the contest was decided 

VOL. I. I 


I30 SIGN OR FORMICA. 

against the police. Several lay stretched on the 
ground seriously wounded; the rest fled with loud 
shouts towards the Porta del Popolo. 

Salvator Rosa (for he it was who had hastened to 
Antonio's assistance and cut down his opponent) wanted 
to take Antonio and the young painters who were dis- 
guised in the devils' masks and there and then pursue 
the gendarmes into the city. 

Maria Agli, however, who had come along with him, 
and, notwithstanding his advanced age, had tackled 
the police as stoutly as any of the rest, urged that this 
would be imprudent, for the guard at the Porta del 
Popolo would be certain to have intelligence of the 
affair and would arrest them. So they all betook 
themselves to Nicolo Musso, who gladly received them 
into his narrow little house not far from the theatre. 
The artists took off their devils' masks and laid aside 
their mantles, which had been rubbed over with phos- 
phorus, whilst Antonio, who, beyond the insignificant 
scratch on his shoulder, was not wounded at all, exer- 
cised his surgical skill in binding up the wounds of 
the rest — Salvator, Agli, and his young comrades — for 
they had none of them got off without being wounded, 
though none of them in the least degree dangerously. 

The adventure, notwithstanding its wildness and 
audacity, would undoubtedly have been successful, had 
not Salvator and Antonio overlooked one person, who 
upset everything. The ci-devant bravo and gen- 
darme Michele, who dwelt below in Capuzzi's house, 
and was in a certain sort his general servant, had, in 
accordance with Capuzzi's directions, followed them 
to the theatre, but at some distance off, for the old 
gentleman was ashamed of the tattered reprobate. In 
the same way Michele was following them home- 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 131 

wards. And when the spectres appeared^ Micbele, who, 
be it remarked, feared neither death nor devil, suspect- 
ing that something was wrong, hurried back as fast as 
he could run in the darkness to the Porta del Popolo, 
raised an alarm, and returned with all the gendarmes 
he could find, just at the moment when, as we know, 
the devils fell upon Signor Pasquale, and were about to 
carry him off as the dead men had the Pyramid Doctor. 

In the very hottest moment of the fight, one of the 
young painters observed distinctly how one of the 
fellows, taking Marianna in his arms (for she had 
fainted), made off to the gate, whilst Signor Pasquale 
ran after him with incredible swiftness, as if he had 
got quicksilver in his legs. At the same time, by the 
light of the torches, he caught a glimpse of something 
gleaming, clinging to his mantle and whimpering ; no 
doubt it was Pitichinaccio. 

Next morning Doctor Splendiano was found near 
the Pyramid of Cestius, fast asleep, doubled up like a 
ball and squeezed into his wig, as if into a warm soft 
nest. When he was awakened, he rambled in his talk, 
and there was some difficulty in convincing him that 
he was still on the surface of the earth, and in Rome 
to boot. And when at length he reached his own 
house, he returned thanks to the Virgin and all the 
saints for his rescue, threw all his tinctures, essences, 
electuaries, and powders out of the window, burnt his 
prescriptions, and vowed to heal his patients in the 
future by no other means than by anointing and lay- 
ing on of hands, as some celebrated physician of 
former ages, who was at the same time a saint (his 
name I cannot recall just at this moment), had with 
great success done before him. For his patients died 
as well as the patients of other people, and then they 


132 SIGNOR FORMICA. 

already saw the gates of heaven open before them ere 
they died^ and in fact everything else that the saint 
wanted them to see. 

^^ I can't tell you," said Antonio next day to Sal- 
vator, " how my heart boils with rage since my blood 
has been spilled. Death and destruction overtake 
that villain Capuzzi 1 I tell you, Salvator, that I am 
determined to force my way into his house. I will cut 
him down if he opposes me and carry off Marianna.'* 

''An excellent plan!" replied Salvator, laughing. 
" An excellent plan ! Splendidly contrived 1 Of course 
I presume you have also found some means for trans- 
porting Marianna through the air to the Spanish 
Square, so that they shall not seize you and hang you 
before you can reach that place of refuge. No, my 
dear Antonio, violence can do nothing for you this 
time. You may lay your life on it too that Signer 
Pasquale will now take steps to guard against any 
open attack. ' Moreover, our adventure has made a 
good deal of noise, and the irrepressible laughter of 
the people at the absurd way in which we have read 
a lesson to Splendiano and Capuzzi has roused the 
police out of their light slumber, and they, you may 
be sure, will now exert all their feeble efforts to entrap 
us. No, Antonio, let us have recourse to craft. Con 
arte e con inganno si vive mezzo Uanno, con inganno e 
con arte si vive lalira parte (If cunning and scheming 
will help us six months through, scheming and cunning 
will help us the other six too), says Dame Caterina, 
nor is she far wrong. Besides, I can^t help laughing to 
see how we've gone and acted for all the world like 
thoughtless boys, and I shall have to bear most of the 
blame, for I am a good bit older than you. Tell me 
now, Antonio, supposing our scheme had been success- 


SI G NOR FORMICA. 133 

ful^ and you had actually carried off Marianna from 
the old man, where would you have fled to, where 
would you have hidden her, and how would you have 
managed to get united to her by the priest before the 
old man could interfere to prevent it? You shall, 
however, in a few days really and truly run away with 
your Marianna. I have let Nicolo Musso as well as 
Signor Formica into all the secret, and in common 
with them devised a plan which can scarcely fail. So 
cheer up, Antonio ; Signor Formica will help you." 

" Signor Formica ! " replied Antonio in a tone of in- 
difference whichalmost amounted tocontempt. "Signor 
Formica ! In what way can that buffoon help me? *^ 

"Ho! ho!" laughed Salvator. "Please to bear in 
mind, I beg you, that Signor Formica is worthy of your 
respect. Don't you know that he is a sort of magician 
who in secret is master of the most mysterious arts ? I 
tell you, Signor Formica will help you. Old Maria 
Agli, the clever Bolognese Doctor Gratiano, is also 
a sharer in the plot, and will, moreover, have an im- 
portant part to play in it. You shall abduct your 
Marianna, Antonio, from Musso*s theatre." 

" You are flattering me with false hopes, Salvator," 
said Antonio. "You have just now said yourself that 
Signor Pasquale will take care to avoid all open attacks. 
How can you suppose then, after his recent unpleasant 
experience, that he can possibly make up his mind to 
visit Musso's theatre again ? " 

" It will not be such a diflicult thing as you imagine 
to entice the old man there," replied Salvator. " What 
will be more diflicult to effect, will be, to get him in 
the theatre without his satellites. But, be that as it 
may, what you have now got to do, Antonio, is to 
have everything prepared and arranged with Marianna, 


134 SIGNOR FORMICA. 

so as to flee from Rome the moment the farourable 
opportunity tomes. You must go to Florence ; your 
skill as a painter will, after your arrival, in itself re- 
commend you there; and you shall have no lack of 
acquaintances, nor of honourable patronage and assist- 
ance — that you may leave to me to provide for. After 
we have had a few days' rest, we will then see what is 
to be done further. Once more, Antonio— live in 
hope; Formica will help you." 


0/ tht nev> mishap ivhich befalls Signor PasquaU Cafiusti. 
Antonio Scacciati successfully csa-ries out his plan in Nicole 
Musst^s theatre, and flees to Florence. 

Signor Pasquale was only too well aware who had 
been at the bottom of the mischief that had happened 
to him and the poor Pyramid Doctor near the Porta 
del Popolo, and so it may be imagined how enraged he 
was against Antonio, and against Salvator Rosa, whom 
he rightly judged to be the ringleader in it all. He 
was untiring in his efl~ort3 to comfort poor Marianna, 
who was <]uite ill from fear, — so she said ; but in reality 
she was mortified that the scoundrel Michele with 
his gendarmes had come up, and torn her from her 
Antonio's arms. Meanwhile Margaret was very active 
in bringing her tidings of her lover; and she based all 
her hopes upon the enterprising mind of Salvator. 
With impatience she waited from day to day for 
something fresh to happen, and by a thousand petty 
tormenting ways let the old gentleman feel the efiects 
of this impatience; but though she thus tamed hit 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 135 

m 

amorous folly^ and made him humble enough, she 
failed to reach the evil spirit of love that haunted his 
heart. After she had made him experience to the full 
all the tricksy humours of the most wayward girl, and 
then suffered him just once to press his withered lips 
upon her tiny hand, he would swear in his excessive 
delight that he would never cease fervently kissing 
the Pope's toe until he had obtained dispensation to 
wed his niece, the paragon of beauty and amiability. 
Mariauna was particularly careful not to interrupt 
him in these outbreaks of passion, for by encouraging 
these gleams of hope in the old man's breast she fanned 
the flame of hope in her own, for the more he could be 
' lulled into the belief that he held her fast in the indis- 
soluble chains of love, the more easy it would be for 
her to escape him. 

Some time passed, when one day at noon Michele 
came stamping upstairs, and, after he had had to knock 
a good many times to induce Signor Pasquale to open 
the door, announced with considerable prolixity that 
there was a gentleman below who urgently requested 
to see Signor Pasquale Capuzzi, who he knew lived 
there. 

"Bv all the blessed saints of Heaven!" cried the 
old gentleman, exasperated j 'Moesn't the knave know 
that on no account do I receive strangers in my own 
house ? " 

''But the gentleman was of very respectable appear- 
ance,'* reported Michele, " rather oldish, talked well, and 
called himself Nicolo Musso/* 

"Nicolo Musso," murmured Capuzzi reflectively; 
^'Nicolo Musso, who owns the theatre beyond the 
Porta del Popolo ; what can he want with me ? " 
Whereupon^ carefully locking and bolting the door, he 


136 SIGN OR FORMICA. 

went downstairs with Michele, in order to conv^eree 
with Nicolo in the street before the house. 

"My dear Signor Pasquale," began Nicolo, ap- 
proaching to meet him, and bowing with polished ease, 
"that you deign to honour me with your acquaint- 
ance affords me great pleasure. You lay me under a 
very great obligation. Since the Romans saw you in 
my theatre — you, a man of the most approved taste, 
of the soundest knowledge, and a master in art, not 
only has my fame increased, but my receipts have 
doubled. I am therefore all the more deeply pained 
to learn that certain wicked wanton boys made a 
murderous attack upon you and your friends as you 
were returning from my theatre at night. But I pray 
you, Signor Pasquale, by all the saints, don't cherish 
any grudge against me or my theatre on account of 
this outrage, which shall be severely punished. Don't 
deprive me of the honour of your company at my 
performances ! '' 

" My dear Signor Nicolo," replied the old man, sim- 
pering, " be assured that I never enjoyed myself more 
than I did when I visited your theatre. Your Formica 
and your Agli — why, they are actors who cannot be 
matched anywhere. But the fright almost killed my 
friend Signor Splendiano Accoramboni, nay, it almost 
proved the death of me — no, it was too great; and 
though it has not made me averse from your theatre, 
it certainly has from the road there. If you will put up 
your theatre in the Piazza del Popolo, or in the Via 
Babuina, or in the Via Ripetta, I certainly will not 
fail to visit you a single evening ; but there's no power 
on earth shall ever get me outside the Porta del Popolo 
at night-time again.'' 

Nicolo sighed deeply, as if greatly troubled. "That 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 137 

is very hard upon me/* said he then, "harder perhaps 
than you will believe, Signor Pasquale. For unfortu- 
nately — I had based all my hopes upon you. I came 
to solicit your assistance/' 

*' My assistance ? '* asked the old gentleman in asto- 
nishment. " My assistance^ Signor Nicolo ? In what 
way could it profit you ? ** 

"My dear Signor Pasquale/' replied Nicolo, drawing 
his handkerchief across his eyes, as if brushing away 
the trickling tears, "my most excellent Signor Pas- 
quale, you will remember that my actors are in the 
habit of interspersing songs through their performances. 
This practice I was thinking of extending imper- 
ceptibly more and more, then to get together an 
orchestra, and, in a word, at last, eluding all prohi- 
bitions to the contrary, to establish an opera-house. 
You, Signor Capuzzi, are the first composer in all 
Italy; and we can attribute it to nothing but the 
inconceivable frivolity of the Romans and the mali- 
cious envy of your rivals that we hear anything else 
but your pieces exclusively at all the theatres. Signor 
Pasquale, I came to request you on my bended knees 
to allow me to put your immortal works, as far as 
circumstances will admit, on my humble stage." 

*' My dear Signor Nicolo," said the old gentleman, 
his face all sunshine, "what are we about to be 
talking here in the public street ? Pray deign to have 
the goodness to climb up one or two rather steep 
flights of stairs. Come along with me up to my poor 
dwelling." 

Almost before Niiolo got into the room, the old 
gentleman brought forward a great pile of dusty 
music manuscript, opened it, and, taking his guitar 
in his hands, began to deliver himself of a series of 


138 SIGNOR FORMICA. 

frightful high-pitched screams which he denominated 
singing. 

Nicolo behaved like one in raptures. He sighed; 
he uttered extravagant expressions of approval ; he 
exclaimed at intervals, ^^ Bravo! Bravissimof Bene- 
dettissimo Capuzzi ! ^* until at last he threw himself at 
the old man's feet as if utterly beside himself with 
ecstatic delight, and grasped his knees. But he nipped 
them so hard that the old gentleman jumped off his 
seat, calling out with pain, and saying to Nicolo, 
''By the Saints! Let me go, Signor Nicolo; you'll 
kill me." 

"Nay,'* replied Nicolo, "nay, Signor Pasqualc, I 
will not rise until you have promised that Formica 
may sing in my theatre the day after to-morrow the 
divine arias which you have just executed.** 

" You are a man of taste,** groaned Pasquale, — " a 
man of deep insight. To whom could I better intrust 
my compositions than to you? You shall take all 
my arias with you. Only let me go. But, good God ! 
I shall not hear them — my divine masterpieces! Oh! 
let me go, Signor Nicolo.'* 

" No,*' cried Nicolo, still on his knees and tightly 
pressing the old gentleman's thin spindle-shanks to- 
gether, "no, Signor Pasquale, I will not let you go 
until you give me your word that you will be present 
in my theatre the night after to-morrow. You need 
not fear any new attack I Why, don't you think that 
the Romans, once they have heard your work, will 
bring you home in triumph by the light of hundreds 
of torches? But in case that does not happen, I 
myself and my faithful comrades will take our arms 
and accompany you home ourselves.** 

"You yourself will accompany me home, with your 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 139 

comrades?^' asked Pasquale; ^'and how many may 
that be ? " 

"Eight or ten persons will be at your command^ 
Signor Pasquale. Do yield to my intercession and 
resolve to come/' 

'* Formica has a fine voice/' lisped Pasquale. " How 
finely he will execute my arias/' 

"Do come, oh! do come!" exhorted Nicolo again^ 
giving the old gentleman's knees an extra grip. 

"You will pledge yourself that I shall reach my 
own house without being molested?" asked the old 
gentleman. 

" I pledge my honour and my life/' was Nicole's 
reply, as he gave the knees a still sharper grip. 

" Agreed ! " cried the old gentleman ; " I will be in 
your theatre the day after to-morrow." 

Then Nicolo leapt to his feet and pressed Pasquale 
in so close an embrace that he gasped and panted 
quite out of breath. 

At this moment Marianna entered the room. Signor 
Pasquale tried to frighten her away again by the look 
of resentment which he hurled at her; she, however, 
took not the slightest notice of it, but going straight 
up to Musso, addressed him as if in anger, — " It is in 
vain for you, Signor Nicolo, to attempt to entice my 
dear uncle to go to your theatre. You are forgetting 
that the infamous trick lately played by some repro- 
bate seducers, who were lying in wait for me, almost 
cost the life of my dearly beloved uncle, and of his 
worthy friend Splendiano ; nay, that it almost cost my 
life too. Never will I give my consent to my uncle's 
again exposing himself to such danger. Desist from 
your entreaties, Nicolo. And you, my dearest uncle, 
you will stay quietly at home^ will you not, and not 


I40 SIGNOR FORMICA. 

venture out beyond the Porta del Popolo again at 
night-time, which is a friend to nobody ? " 

Signor Pasquale was thunderstruck. He opened 
his eyes wide and stared at his niece. Then he re- 
warded her with the sweetest endearments, and set 
forth at considerable length how that Signor Nicolo 
had pledged himself bo to arrange matters as to avoid 
every danger on the return home. 

" None the less," said Marianna, " 1 stick to my 
word, and beg you most earnestly, my dearest uncle, 
not to go to the theatre outside the Porta del Popolo. 
I ask your pardon, Signor Nicolo, for speaking out 
frankly in your presence the dark suspicion that lurks 
in my mind. You are, I know, acquainted with Sal- 
vator Rosa and also with Antonio Scacciati. What 
if you are acting in concert with our enemies ? What 
if you are only trying with evil intent to entice my 
dear uncle into your theatre in order that they may 
the more safely carry out some fresh villainous scheme, 
for I know that my uncle will not go without me ? " 

"What a suspicion!" cried Nicolo, quite alarmed. 
"What a terrible suspicion, Signora! Have yon such 
a bad opinion of me? Have I such an ill reputation 
that you conceive I could be guilty of this the basest 
treachery? But if you think so unfavourably of me, 
if you mistrust the assistance I have promised you, 
why then let Michele, who I know rescued you out of 
the hands of the robbers — let Michele accompany you, 
and let him take a large body of gendarmes with him, 
who can wait for you outside the theatre, for you can- 
not of course expect me to fill my auditorium with 
police." 

Marianna fixed her eyes steadily upon Nicolo's, and 
then said, earnestly and gravely, " What do you say? 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 141 

That Michele and gendarmes shall accompany us? 
Now I see plainly, Signor Nicolo, that you mean 
honestly by us, and that my nasty suspicion is un- 
founded. Pray forgive me my thoughtless words. 
And yet I cannot banish my nervousness and anxiety 
about my dear uncle ; I must still beg him not to take 
this dangerous step." 

Signor Pasquale had listened to all this conversation 
with such curious looks as plainly served to indicate 
the nature of the struggle that was going on within 
him. But now he could no longer contain himself; 
he threw himself on his knees before his beautiful 
niece, seized her hands, kissed them, bathed them with 
the tears which ran down his cheeks, exclaiming as if 
beside himself, ''My adored, my angelic Marianna! 
Fierce and devouring are the flames of the passion 
which burns at my heart. Oh ! this nervousness, this 
anxiety — it is indeed the sweetest confession that you 
love me." And then he besought her not to give way 
to fear, but to go and listen in the theatre to the finest 
arias which the most divine of composers had ever 
written. 

Nicolo too abated not in his entreaties, plainly 
showing his disappointment, until Marianna permitted 
her scruples to be overcome ; and she promised to lay 
all fear aside and accompany the best and dearest of 
uncles to the theatre outside the Porta del Popolo. 
Signor Pasquale was in ecstasies, was in the seventh 
heaven of delight. He was convinced that Marianna 
loved him ; and he now might hope to hear his music 
on the stage, and win the laurel wreath which had so 
long been the vain object of his desires; he was on 
the point of seeing his dearest dreams fulfilled. No>a 
he would let his light shine in perfect glory before his 


143 SIGNOR FORMICA. 

true and faithful friends, for he never thought for a 
moment but that Sigiior Splendiano and little Piti- 
chinaccio would go with him as on the first occasion. 

The night that Signor Splendiano had slept in hit 
wig near the Pyramid of Cestius he had had, beside* 
the spectres who ran away with him, all sorts of sinister 
apparitions to visit him. The whole cemetery was 
alive, and hundreds of corpses had stretched out tbeir 
skeleton arms towards him, moaning and wailing that 
even in their graves they could not get over the torture 
caused by his essences and electuaries. Accordingly 
the Pyramid Doctor, although he could not contradict 
Signer Pasquale that it was only a wild freakish trick 
played upon him by a parcel of godless boys, grew 
melancholy ; and, albeit not ordinarily superstitiously 
inclined, he yet now saw spectres everywhere, and was 
tormented by forebodings and bad dreams. 

As for Pitichinaecio, he could not be convinced that 
they were not real devils come straight from the dames 
of hell who had fallen upon Signor Pasquale and upon 
himself, and the bare mention of that dreadful night 
was enough to make him scream. All the asseverations 
of Signor Pasquale that there had been nobody behind 
the masks but Antonio Scacciati and SaJvator Rosa 
were of none effect, for Pitichinaecio wept and swore 
that in spite of his terror and apprehension he had 
clearly recognised both the voice and the behaviour of 
the devil Fanfarelli in the one who had pinched his 
bclty black and blue. 

It may therefore be imagined what an almost end- 
less amount of trouble it cost Signor Pasquale to per- 
suade the two to go with him once more to Nicolo 
Musso's theatre. Splendiano was the first to make 
the resolve to^o, — after he had procured from a monk 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 143 

of St. Bernard's order a small consecrated bag of musk^ 
the perfume of which neither dead man nor devil could 
endure; with this he intended to arm himself against 
all assaults. Pitichinaccio could not resist the temp- 
tation of a promised box of candied grapes^ but Signor 
Pasquale had besides expressly to give his consent that 
he might wear his new abbot's coat^ instead of his 
petticoats, which he affirmed had proved an immediate 
source of attraction to the devil. 

What Salvator feared seemed therefore as if it would 
really take place; and yet his plan depended entirely, 
he continued to repeat, upon Signor Pasquale's being 
in Nicolo's theatre alone with Marianna, without his 
faithful satellites. Both Antonio and Salvator greatly 
racked their brains how they should prevent Splen- 
diano and Pitichinaccio from going along with Signor 
Pasquale. Every scheme that occurred to them for 
the accomplishment of this desideratum had to be 
given up owing to want of time, for the principal plan 
in Nicolo's theatre had to be carried out on the even- 
ing of the following day. 

But Providence, which often employs the most 
unlikely instruments for the chastisement of fools, 
interposed on behalf of the distressed lovers, and put it 
into Michele's head to practise some of his blundering, 
thus accomplishing what Salvator and Antonio's craft 
was unable to accomplish. 

That same night there was heard in the Via Ripetta 
before Signor Pasquale's house such a chorus of fearful 
screams and of cursing and raving and abuse that all 
the neighbours were startled up out of their sleep, and 
a body of gendarmes, who had been pursuing a mur- 
derer as far as the Spanish Square, hastened up with 
torches, supposing that some fresh deed of violence 


144 SI G NOR FORMICA. 

was being committed. But when they^ and a crowd 
of other people whom the noise had attracted, came 
upon the anticipated scene of murder, they found poor 
little Pitichinaccio lying as if dead on the ground, 
whilst Michele was thrashing the Pyramid Doctor with 
a formidable bludgeon. And they saw the Doctor 
reel to the floor just at the moment that Signor Pas- 
quale painfully scrambled to his feet, drew his rapier, 
and furiously attacked Michele. Round about were 
lying pieces of broken guitars. Had not several people 
grasped the old man's arm he would assuredly have 
run Michele right through the heart. The ex-bravo, on 
now becoming aware by the light of the torches whom 
he had been molesting, stood as if petrified, his eyes 
almost starting out of his head, '^ a painted desperado, 
on the balance between will and power," as it is said 
somewhere. Then uttering a fearful scream, he tore 
his hair and begged for pardon and mercy. Neither 
the Pyramid Doctor nor Pitichinaccio was seriously 
injured, but they had been so soundly cudgelled that 
they could neither move nor stir, and had to be carried 
home. 

Signor Pasquale had himself brought this mishap 
upon his own shoulders. 

We know that Salvator and Antonio complimented 
Marianna with the finest serenade that could be heard ; 
but I have forgotten to say that to the old gentleman's 
very exceeding indignation they repeated it during 
several successive nights. At length Signor Pasquale, 
whose rage was kept in check by his neighbours, was 
foolish enough to have recourse to the authorities of 
the city, urging them to forbid the two painters to 
sing in the Via Ripetta, The authorities, however, 
replied that it would be a thing unheard of in Rome 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 145 

to prevent anybody from singing and playing the 
guitar where he pleased^ and it was irrational to ask 
such a thing. So Signor Pasquale determined to put 
an end to the nuisance himself^ and promised Michele 
a large reward if he seized the first opportunity to fall 
upon the singers and give them a good sound drub- 
bing. Michele at once procured a stout bludgeon, 
and lay in wait every night behind the door. But it 
happened that Salvator and Antonio judged it prudent 
to omit their serenading in the Via Ripetta for some 
nights preceding the carrying into execution of their 
plan, so as not to remind the old gentleman of his 
adversaries. Marianna remarked quite innocently that 
though she hated Antonio and Salvator, yet she had 
liked their singing, for nothing was so nice as to hear 
music floating upwards in the night air. 

This Signor Pasquale made a mental note of, and as 
the essence of gallantry purposed to surprise his love 
with a serenade on his part, which he had himself 
composed and carefully practised up with his faithful 
friends. On the very night preceding that in which 
he was hoping to celebrate his greatest triumph in 
Nicolo Musso's theatre, he stealthily slipped out of 
the house and went and fetched his associates, with 
whom he had previously arranged matters. But no 
sooner had they sounded the first few notes on their 
guitars than Michele, whom Signor Pasquale had 
thoughtlessly forgotten to apprise of his design, burst 
forth from behind the door, highly delighted at finding 
that the opportunity which was to bring him in the 
promised reward had at last come, and began to 
cudgel the musicians most unmercifully, with the 
results of which we are already acquainted. Of course 
there was no further mention made of either Splendiano 

VOL. I. K 


146 SIGNOR FORMICA. 

or Pitichlnaccio's accompanying Signor Pasquale to 
Nicolo's theatre, for they were both confined to their 
bed beplastered all over. Signor Pasquale, however^ 
was unable to stay away^ although his back and 
shoulders were smarting not a little from the drubbing 
he had himself received ; every note in his arias was a 
cord which drew him thither with irresistible power. 

" Well now/' said Salvator to Antonio, ^' since the 
obstacle which we took to be insurmountable has 
been removed out of our way of itself, it all depends 
now entirely upon your address not to let the favour- 
able moment slip for carrying off your Marianna from 
Nicolo's theatre. But I needn't talk, you'll not fail; 
I will greet you now as the betrothed of Capuzzi's 
lovely niece, who in a few days will be your wife. I 
wish you happiness, Antonio, and yet I feel a shiver 
run through me when I think upon your marriage." 

" What do you mean, Salvator ? " asked Antonio, 
utterly astounded. 

'* Call it a crotchet, call it a foolish fancy, or what 
you will, Antonio," rejoined Salvator, — " at any rate I 
love the fair sex ; but there is not one, not even she on 
whom I foolishly dote, for whom I would gladly die, 
but what excites in my heart, so soon as I think of a 
union with her such as marriage is, a suspicion that 
makes me tremble with a most unpleasant feeling of 
awe. That which is inscrutable in the nature of 
woman mocks all the weapons of man. She whom 
we believe to have surrendered herself to us entirelv, 
heart and soul, whom we believe to have unfolded all 
her character to us, is the first to deceive us, and along 
with the sweetest of her kisses we imbibe the most 
pernicious of poisons." 

^' And my Marianna? " asked Antonio, amazed. 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 147 

''Pardon me, Antonio," continued Salvator, "even 
your Marianna, who is loveliness and grace personified, 
has given me a fresh proof of how dangerous the 
mysterious nature of woman is to us. Just call to 
mind what was the behaviour of that innocent, inexperi- 
enced child when we carried her uncle home, how at a 
single glance from me she divined everything — every- 
thing, I tell you, and, as you yourself admitted, pro- 
ceeded to play her part with the utmost sagacity. But 
that is not to be at all compared with what took place 
on the occasion of Musso's visit to the old gentleman. 
The most practised address, the most impenetrable 
cunning, — in short, all the inventive arts of the most 
experienced woman of the world could not have done 
more than little Marianna did, in order to deceive the 
old gentleman with perfect success. She could not 
have acted in any better way to prepare the road for us 
for any kind of enterprise. Our feud with the cranky 
old fool — any sort of cunning scheme seems justified, 
but — come, my dear Antonio, never mind my fanciful 
crotchets, but be happy with your Marianna ; as happy 
as vou can." 

If a monk had taken his place beside Signor Pas- 
quale when he set out along with his niece to go to 
Nicolo Musso's theatre, everybody would have thought 
that the strange pair were being led to execution. 
First went valiant Michele, repulsive in appearance, 
and armed to the teeth } then came Signor Pasquale 
and Marianna, followed by fully twenty gendarmes. 

Nicolo received the old gentleman and his lady with 
every mark of respect at the entrance to the theatre, 
and conducted them to the seats which had been 
reserved for them, immediately in front of the stage. 
Signor Pasquale felt highly flattered by this mark of 


148 SIGNOR FORMICA. 

honour, and gazed about him with proud and sparkling 
eyes, whilst his pleasure, his joy, was greatly enhanced 
to find that all the seats near and behind Marianna 
were occupied by women alone. A couple of violins 
and a bass-fiddle were being tuned behind the curtains 
of the stage ; the old gentleman's heart beat with ex- 
pectation ; and when all at once the orchestra struck 
up the ritornello ai his work, he felt an electric thrill 
tingling in every nerve. 

Formica came forward in the character of Pasquar- 
ello, and sang — sang in Capuzzi's own voice, and with 
all his characteristic gestures, the most hopeless aria 
that ever was heard. The theatre shook with the loud 
and boisterous laughter of the audience. They shouted; 
they screamed wildly, "O Pasquale Capuzzi ! Our 
most illustrious composer and artist! Bravo! Bra«s- 
simo ! " The old gentleman, not perceiving the ridicule 
and irony of the laughter, was in raptures of delight. 
The aria came to an end, and the people cried "Shi 
sh!" for Doctor Gratiano, played on this occasion by 
Nicolo Musso himself, appeared on the stage, holding 
his hands over his ears and shouting to Pasquarello for 
goodness' sake to stop his ridiculous screeching. 

Then the Doctor asked Pasquarello how long he had 
taken to the confounded habit of singing, and where 
he had got that execrable piece from. 

Whereupon Pasquarello replied, that he didn't know 
what the Doctor would have; he was like the Romans, 
and had no taste for real music, since he failed to 
recognise the most talented of musicians. The aria 
had been written by the greatest of living composers, 
in whose service he had the good fortune to be, re- 
ceiving instruction in both music and singing from 
the master himseif. 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 149 

Gratiano then began guessing^ and mentioned the 
names of a great number of well-known composers and 
musicians, but at every distinguished name Pasquarello 
only shook his head contemptuously. 

At length Pasquarello said that the doctor was only 
exposing gross ignorance, since he did not know the 
name of the greatest composer of the time. It was no 
other than Signor Pasquale Capuzzi, who had done 
him the honour of taking him into his service. Could 
he not see that he was the friend and servant of Signor 
Pasquale ? 

Then the Doctor broke out into a loud long roar 
of laughter, and cried. What ! Had he (Pasquarello), 
after running away from him (the Doctor), with whom, 
besides getting his wages and food, he had had his 
palm tickled with many a copper, had he gone and 
taken service with the biggest and most inveterate old 
coxcomb who ever stuffed himself with macaroni, to 
the patched Carnival fool who strutted about like a 
satisfied old hen after a shower of rain, to the snarling 
skinflint, the love-sick old poltroon, who infected the 
air of the Via Ripetta with the disgusting bleating 
which he called singing ? &c. &c. 

To which Pasquarello, quite incensed, made reply that 
it was nothing but envy which spoke in the Doctor's 
words; he (Pasquarello) was of course speaking with 
his heart in his mouth (parla col chore in mano) ; the 
Doctor was not at all the man to pass an opinion upon 
Signor Pasquale Capuzzi di Senigaglia ; he was speak- 
ing with his heart in his mouth. The Doctor himself 
bad a strong tang of all that he blamed in the excellent 
Signor Pasquale ; but be was speaking with his heart 
in his mouth; he (Pasquarello) had himself often heard 
fully six hundred people at once laugh most heartily 


ISO SIGNOR FORMICA. 

at Doctor Gratiano^ and so forth. Then Pasquarello 
spoke a long panegyric upon his new roaster^ Signor 
Pasquale^ attributing to him all the virtues under the 
sun ; and he concluded with a description of bis 
character, which he portrayed as being the very essence 
of amiability and grace. 

" Heaven bless you, Formica ! '* lisped Signor 
Capuzzi to himself; *' Heaven bless you, Formica! I 
perceive you have designed to make my triumph 
perfect, since you are upbraiding the Romans for all 
their envious and ungrateful persecution of me, and 
are letting them know who I really am.*' 

"Ha! here comes my master himself," cried Pas- 
quarello at this moment, and there entered on the stage 
— Signor Pasquale Capuzzi himself, just as he breathed 
and walked, his very clothes, face, gestures, gait, pos- 
tures, in fact so perfectly like Signor Capuzzi in the 
auditorium, that the latter, quite aghast, let go Mari- 
anna's hand, which hitherto he had held fast in his 
own, and tapped himself, his nose, his wig, in order to 
discover whether he was not dreaming or seeing double, 
whether he was really sitting in Nicolo Musso's theatre 
and dare credit the miracle. 

Capuzzi on the stage embraced Doctor Gratiano 
with great kindness, and asked how he was. The 
Doctor replied that he had a good appetite, and slept 
soundly, at his service {per servirlo) ; and as for his 
purse — well, it was suffering from a galloping con- 
sumption. Only yesterday he had spent his last 
ducat for a pair of rosemary-coloured stockings for 
his sweetheart, and was just going to walk round 
to one or two bankers to see if he could borrow thirty 
ducats'' 

" But how can you pass over your best friends ? " 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 151 

said Capuzzi. " Here, my dear sir, here are fifty 
ducats^ come take them." 

'^Pasquale, what are you about ?^^ said the real 
Capuzzi in an undertone. 

Doctor Gratiano began to talk about a bond and 
about interest : but Signor Capuzzi declared that he 
could not think of asking for either from such a friend 
as the Doctor was. 

" Pasquale, have you gone out of your senses ? " 
exclaimed the real Capuzzi a little louder. 

After many grateful embraces Doctor Gratiano took 
his leave. Now Pasquarello drew near with a good 
many bows^ and extolled Signor Capuzzi to the skies^ 
adding, however, that his purse was suflFering from the 
same complaint as Gratiano's, and he begged for some 
of the same excellent medicine that had cured his. 
Capuzzi on the stage laughed^ and said he was pleased 
to find that Pasquarello knew how to turn his good 
humour to advantage, and threw him several glittering 
ducats. 

'' Pasquale, you must be mad, possessed of the devil,'* 
cried the real Capuzzi aloud. He was bidden be still. 

Pasquarello went still further in his eulogy of 
Capuzzi^ and came at last to speak of the aria which 
he (Capuzzi) had composed, and with which he 
(Pasquarello) hoped to enchant everybody. The ficti- 
tious Capuzzi clapped Pasquarello heartily on the back, 
and went on to say that he might venture to tell him 
(Pasquarello), his faithful servant, in confidence, that 
in reality he knew nothing whatever of the science of 
music, and in respect to the aria of which he had just 
spoken, as well as all pieces that he had ever com- 
posed, why, he had stolen them out of Frescobaldi's 
canzonas and Carissimi^s motets. 


iSa SIGNOR FORMICA. 

"I teli you you're lying in your throat, you knave," 
shouted the Capuzzi off the stage, rising from bis seat. 
Again he was hidden keep still, and the woman who 
sat next him drew him down on the bench. 

" It's now time to think about other and more im- 
portant matters," continued Capuzzi on the stage. 
He was going to give a grand banquet the next day, 
and Pasquarello must look alive and have everything 
that was necessary prepared. Then he produced and 
read over a list of all the rarest and most expensive 
dishes, making Pasquarello tell him how much each 
would cost, and at the same time giving him the money 
for them. 

"Pasquale! You're insane! You've gone mad I You 
good-for-nothing scamp! You spendthrift!" shouted 
the real Capuzzi at intervals, growing more and more 
enraged the higher the cost of this the most nonsensical 
of dinners rose. 

At length, when the list was finished, Pasquarello 
asked what had induced him to give such a splendid 
banquet. 

"To-morrow will be the happiest and most joyous 
day of my life," replied the fictitious Capuzzi. " For 
know, my good Pasquarello, that I am going to cele- 
brate to-morrow the auspicious marriage of my dear 
niece Marianna. I am going to give her hand to that 
brave young fellow, the best of all artists, Scacciati." 

Hardly had the words fallen from his lips when the 
real Capuzzi leapt to his feet, utterly beside himself, 
quite out of his mind, his Face all aflame with the most 
fiendish rage, and doubling his tists and shaking them 
at his counterpart on the stage, he yelled at the top of 
bis voice, " No, you won't, no, you won't, you rascal I 
you scoundrel, you, — Pasquale 1 Do you mean to cheat 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 153 

yourself out of your Marianna^ you hound ? Are you 
going to throw her in the arms of that scoundrel, — 
sweet Marianna, thy life, thy hope, thy all ? Ah ! look 
to it ! Look to it ! you infatuated fool. Just remem- 
ber what sort of a reception you will meet with from 
yourself. You shall beat yourself black and blue with 
your own hands, so that you will have no relish to 
think about banquets and weddings !'' 

But the Capuzzi on the stage doubled his fists like 
the Capuzzi below, and shouted in exactly the same 
furious way, and in the same high-pitched voice, '* May 
all the spirits of hell sit at your heart, you abominable, 
nonsensical Pasquale, you atrocious skinflint — you love- 
sick old fool — you gaudy tricked-out ass with the cap 
and bells dangling about your ears. Take care lest I 
snuflFout the candle of your life, and so at length put 
an end to the infamous tricks which you try to foist 
upon the good, honest, modest Pasquale Capuzzi." 

Amidst the most fearful cursing and swearing of the 
real Capuzzi, the one on the stage dished up one fine 
anecdote after the other about him. 

" YouM better attempt,'' shouted at last the fictitious 
Capuzzi, "you only dare, Pasquale, you amorous old 
ape, 'to interfere with the happiness of these two young 
people, whom Heaven has destined for each other." 

At this moment there appeared at the back of the 
stage Antonio Scacciati and Marianna locked in each 
other's arms. Albeit the old gentleman was at other 
times somewhat feeble on his legs, yet now fury gave 
him strength and agility. With a single bound he was 
on the stage, had drawn his sword, and was charging 
upon the pretended Antonio. He found, however, that 
he was held fast behind. An officer of the Papal guard 
had stopped him, and said in a serious voice, " Recollect 


154 SIGNOR FORMICA. 

where you are, Signer Pasquale; you are in Nicolo 
Musso's theatre. Without intending it, you have to- 
day played a most ridiculous rSle. You will not find 
either Antonio or Marianna here/' The two persons 
whom Capuzzi had taken for his niece and her lover 
now drew near, along with the rest of the actors. The 
faces were all completely strange to him. His rapier 
escaped from his trembling hand ; he took a deep 
breath as if awakening out of a bad dream ; he grasped 
his brow with both hands ; he opened his eyes wide. 
The presentiment of what had happened suddenly 
struck him, and he shouted ^^ Marianna !'' in such a 
stentorian voice that the walls rang again. 

But she was beyond reach of his shouts. Antonio 


had taken advantage of the opportunity whilst Pasquale, 
oblivious of all about him and even of himself, was 
quarrelling with his double, to make his way to Mari- 
anna, and back with her through the audience, and 
out at a side door, where a carriage stood ready wait- 
ing ; and away they went as fast as their horses could 
gallop towards Florence. 

" Marianna ! '' screamed the old man again, '* Mari- 
anna ! she is gone. She has fled. That knave Antonio 
has stolen her from me. Away ! after them ! Have 
pity on me, good people, and take torches and help me 
to look for my little darling. Oh ! you serpent !^* 

And he tried to make for the door. But the officer 
held him fast, saying, *' Do you mean that pretty young 
lady who sat beside you ? I believe I saw her slip out 
with a young man — I think Antonio Scacciati — a long 
time ago, when you began your idle quarrel with one 
of the actors who wore a mask like your face. You 
needn't make a trouble of it; every inquiry shall at 
once be set on foot, and Marianna shall be brought 


SIGN OR FORMICA. 155 

back to you as soon as she is found. But as for your- 
self, Signor Pasquale, your behaviour here and your 
murderous attempt upon the life of that actor com- 
pel me to arrest you/' 

Signor Pasquale^ his face as pale as death, incapable 
of uttering a single word or even a sounds was led away 
by the very same gendarmes who were to have pro- 
tected him against masked devils and spectres. Thus 
it came to pass that on the selfsame night on which 
he had hoped to celebrate his triumph^ he was plunged 
into the midst of trouble and of all the frantic despon- 
dency which amorous old fools feel when they are 
deceived. 


VI. 

Salvator Rosa leaves Rome and goes to Florence. Conclusion 

of the history. 

Ever)'thing here below beneath the sun is subject 
to continual change; and perhaps there is nothing 
which can be called more inconstant than human 
opinion^ which turns round in an everlasting circle 
like the wheel of fortune. He who reaps great praise 
to-day is overwhelmed with biting censure to-morrow ; 
to-day we trample under foot the man who to-morrow 
will be raised far above us. 

Of all those who in Rome had ridiculed and mocked 
at old Pasquale Capuzzi^ with his sordid avarice, his 
foolish amorousness, his insane jealousy, who did not 
wish poor tormented Marianna her liberty ? But now 
that Antonio had successfully carried oflPhis mistress, all 
their ridicule and mockery was suddenly changed into 
pity for the old fool, whom they saw wandering about 


156 SIGNOR FORMICA. 

the streets of Rome with his head hanging on his 
breast, utterly disconsolate. Misfortunes seldom conie 
singly ; and so it happened that Signor Pasquale, soon 
after Marianna had been taken from him, lost his best 
bosom-friends also. Little Pitichinaccio choked him- 
self in foolishly trying to swallow an almond-kernel in 
the middle of a cadenza ; but a sudden stop was put 
to the life of the illustrious Pyramid Doctor Signor 
Splendiano Accoramboni by a slip of the pen, for 
which he had only himself to blame. Michele's drub- 
bing made such work with him that he fell into a fever. 
He determined to make use of a remedy which he 
claimed to have discovered, so, calling for pen and ink, 
he wrote down a prescription in which, by employing 
a wrong sign, he increased the quantity of a power- 
ful substance to a dangerous extent. But scarcely had 
he swallowed the medicine than he sank back on the 
pillows and died, establishing, however, by his own 
death in the most splendid and satisfactory manner the 
efficacy of the last tincture which he ever prescribed. 

As already remarked, all those whose laughter had 
been the loudest, and who had repeatedly wished 
Antonio success in his schemes, had now nothing but 
pity for the old gentleman ; and the bitterest blame 
was heaped, not so much upon Antonio, as upon 
Salvator Rosa, whom, to be sure, they regarded as the 
instigator of the whole plan. 

Salvator^s enemies, of whom he had a goodly 
number, exerted all their efforts to fan the flame. 
"See you,'' they said, "he was one of Masaniello's 
doughty partisans, and is ready to turn his hand to 
any deed of mischief, to any disreputable enterprise; 
we shall be the next to suffer from his presence in the 
city ; he is a dangerous man.'^ 


SIGN OR FORMICA. 157 

And the jealous faction who had leagued together 
against Salvator did actually succeed in stemming the 
tide of his prosperous career. He sent forth from his 
studio one picture after the other^ all bold in con- 
ception^ and splendidly executed; but the so-called 
critics shrugged their shoulders^ now pointing out that 
the hills were too blue, the trees too green, the figures 
now too long, now too broad, finding fault everywhere 
where there was no fault to be found, and seeking to 
detract from his hard-earned reputation in all the ways 
they could think of. Especially bitter in their perse- 
cution of him were the Academicians of St. Luke, who 
could not forget how he took them in about the 
surgeon; they even went beyond the limits of their 
own profession, and decried the clever stanzas which 
Salvator at that time wrote, hinting very plainly that 
he did not cultivate his fruit on his own garden soil, 
but plundered that of his neighbours. For these 
reasons, therefore, Salvator could not manage to 
surround himself with the splendour which he had 
lived amidst formerly in Rome. Instead of being 
visited by the most eminent of the Romans in a large 
studio, he had to remain with Dame Caterina and his 
green fig-tree; but amid these poor surroundings he 
frequently found both consolation and tranquillity of 
mind. 

Salvator took the malicious machinations of his 
enemies to heart more than he ought to have done ; 
he even began to feel that an insidious disease, result- 
ing from chagrin and dejection, was gnawing at his 
vitals. In this unhappy frame of Snind he designed 
and executed two large pictures wtlicii excited ^uite 
an uproar in Rome. Of these one represented the 
transitoriness of all earthly things, and in the principal 


158 SIGNOR FORMICA. 

figure^ that of a wanton female bearing all the indica- 
tions of her degrading calling about her, was recognised 
the mistress of one of the cardinals; the other por- 
trayed the Goddess of Fortune dispensing her rich gifts. 
But cardinals' hats, bishops' mitres, gold medals, deco- 
rations of orders, were falling upon bleating sheep, 
braying asses, and other such like contemptible 
animals, whilst well-made men in ragged clothes were 
vainly-straining their eyes upwards to get even 
the smallest gift. Salvator had given free rein to his 
embittered mood, and the animals' heads bore the 
closest resemblance to the features of various eminent 
persons. It is easy to imagine, therefore, how the 
tide of hatred against him rose, and that he was more 
bitterly persecuted than ever. 

Dame Caterina warned him, with tears in her eyes, 
that as soon as it began to be dark she had observed 
suspicious characters lurking about the house and 
apparently dogging his every footstep. Salvator saw 
that it was time to leave Rome; and Dame Caterina 
and her[beloved daughters were the only people to whom 
it caused him pain to part from. In response to the re- 
peated invitations of the Duke of Tuscany,^ he went to 
Florence; and here at length he was richly indemnified 
for all the mortification and worry which he had had 
to struggle against in Rome, and here all the honour 
and all the fame which he so truly deserved were freely 
conferred upon him. The Duke's presents and the 
high prices which he received for his pictures soon 
enabled him to remove into a large house and to fur- 
nish it in the most magnificent style. There he was 

^ This was Ferdinand II., a member of the illostrioos Floi^ntine 
family of the Medici. He upheld the family tradition by his liberal 
patronage of science and letters. 


SIGN OR FORMICA. 159 

wont to gather round him the most illustrious authors 
and scholars of the day^ amongst whom it will be 
sufficient to mention Evangelista Toricelli/ Valerio 
Chimentelli^ Battista Ricciardi, Andrea Cavalcanti^ 
Pietro Salvati^ Filippo Apolloni^ Volumnio Bandelli, 
Francesco Rovai. They formed an association for the 
prosecution of artistic and scientific pursuits^ whilst 
Salvator was able to contribute an element of whim- 
sicality to the meetings^ which had a singular effect 
in animating and enlivening the mind. The ban- 
queting-hall was like a beautiful grove with fragrant 
bushes and flowers and splashing fountains; and the 
dishes even, which were served up by pages in eccentric 
costumes, were very wonderful to look at, as if they 
came from some distant land of magic. These meet- 
ings of writers and savans in Salvator Rosa's house 
were called at that time the Accademia de' Percossi. 

Though Salvator's mind was in this way devoted to 
science and art, yet his real true nature came to life 
again when he was with his friend Antonio Scacciati, 
who, along with his lovely Marianna, led the pleasant 
sans souci life of an artist. They often recalled poor 
old Signor Pasquale whom they had deceived, and all 
that had taken place in Nicolo Musso's theatre. 
Antonio asked Salvator how he had contrived to enlist 
in his cause the active interest not only of Musso but 
of the excellent Formica, and of Agli too. Salvator 
replied that it had been very easy, for Formica was his 

^ Evangelista Toricelli, the successor of the great Galileo in the 
chair of philosophy and mathematics at Florence, is inseparably asso- 
ciated with the discovery that water in a suction-pump will only rise 
to the height of about thirty-two feet. This paved the way to his 
invention of the barometer in 1643. 

Other members of the Accademia de' Percossi were Dati, Lippi, 
Viviani, Bandioelli, &c. 


• rm «j w ■ 


i6o SIGNOR FORMICA. 

most intimate friend in Rome, so that it had been a 
work of both pleasure and love to him to arrange 
everything on the stage in accordance with the in- 
structions Salvator gave him. Antonio protested that^ 
though still he could not help laughing over the scene 
which had paved the way to his happiness, he yet 
wished with all his heart to be reconciled to the old 
gentleman, even if he should never touch a penny 
of Marianna's fortune, which the old gentleman had 
confiscated ; the practice of his art brought him in a 
sufficient income. Marianna too was often unable to 
restrain her tears when she thought that her father's 
brother might go down to his grave without having 
forgiven her the trick which she had played upon him ; 
and so Pasquale's hatred overshadowed like a dark 
cloud the brightness of their happiness. Salvator 
comforted them both — ^Antonio and Marianna — by 
saying that time had adjusted still worse difficulties, 
and that chance would perhaps bring the old gentle- 
man near them in some less dangerous way than if 
they had remained in Rome, or were to return there 
now. 

We shall see that a prophetic spirit spoke in 
Salvator. 

A considerable time elapsed, when one day Antonio 
burst into Salvator's studio breathless and pale as 
death. ''Salvator!'* he cried, ^'Salvator, my friend! 
my protector! I am lost if you do not help me. 
Pasquale Capuzzi is here ; he has procured a warrant 
for mv arrest for the seduction of his niece." 

'*But what can Signor Pasquale do against you 
now ? '* asked Salvator. '' Have you not been united 
to Marianna by the Church ? " 

^^Oh!" replied Awtouio, ?,vviug way completely to 


SIGNOR FORMICA. i6i 

despair^ ^^ the blessing of the Church herself cannot 
save me from ruin. Heaven knows by what means 
the old man has been able to approach the Pope's 
nephew.^ At any rate the Pope's nephew has taken 
the old man under his protection^ and has infused into 
him the hope that the Holy Father will declare my 
marriage with Marianna to be null and void; nay^ 
yet further, that he will grant him (the old man) dis- 
pensation to marry his niece/' 

" Stop 1 '' cried Salvator, " now I see it all ; now I 
see it all. What threatens to be your ruin, Antonio, 
is this man's hatred against me. For I must tell you 
that this nephew of the Pope's, a proud, coarse, boorish 
clown, was amongst the animals in my picture to 
whom the Goddess of Fortune is dispensing her gifts. 
That it was I who helped you to win your Marianna, 
though indirectly, is well known, not only to this man, 
but to all Rome, — which is quite reason enough to 
persecute you since they cannot do anything to me. 
And so, Antonio, having brought this misfortune upon 
you, I must make every effort to assist you, and all 
the more that you are my dearest and most intimate 
friend. But, by the saints 1 I don't see in what way I 
can frustrate your enemies' little game '' 

Therewith Salvator, who had continued to paint 
at a picture all the time, laid aside brush, palette, and 
maul-stick, and, rising up from his easel, began to pace 
the room backwards and forwards, his arms crossed 
over his breast, Antonio meanwhile being quite wrapt 
up in his own thoughts, and with his eyes fixed un- 
changeably upon the floor. 

At length Salvator paused before him and said with 

^ An allasion to the well-known nepotism of the "Popes. TXve IEL^xi 
here mentioned is one of the Barberini, nephew of Pope \3ibaxiN\W. 

VOL. /. 1, 


i62 SIGN OR FORMICA. 

a smile^ ^' See here^ Antonio, I cannot do anything 
myself against your powerful enemies, but I know one 
who can help you, and who will help you, and that is 
— Signor Formica." 

" Oh ! " said Antonio, " don't jest with an unhappy 
man, whom nothing can save." 

" What ! you are despairing again ? " exclaimed 
Salvator, who was now all at once in the merriest 
humour, and he laughed aloud. "I tell you, Antonio, 
my friend Formica shall help you in Florence as he 
helped you in Rome. Go away quietly home and 
comfort your Marianna, and calmly wait and see how 
things will turn out. I trust you will be ready at the 
shortest notice to do what Signor Formica, who is 
really here in Florence at the present time, shall require 
of you.*' This Antonio promised most faithfully, and 
hope revived in him again, and confidence. 

Signor Pasqualc Capuzzi was not a little astonished 
at receiving a formal invitation from the Accademia 
de' Percossi. " Ah ! '' he exclaimed, " Florence is the 
place then where a man's merits are recognised, where 
Pasquale Capuzzi di Senigaglia, a man gifted with the 
most excellent talents, is known and valued.'* Thus 
the thought of his knowledge and his art, and the 
honour that was shown him on their account, over- 
came the repugnance which he would o.therwise have 
felt against a society at the head of which stood Sal- 
vator Rosa. His Spanish gala-dress was more carefully 
brushed than ever; his conical hat was equipped 
with a new feather ; his shoes were provided with new 
ribbons; and so Signor Pasquale appeared at Sal- 
vator's as brilliant as a rose-chafer,^ and his face all 

' Cetonia auraia^ L,, called also the gold-chafer; it is coloured 
green and gold. 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 163 

sunshine. The magnificence which he saw on all 
sides of him^ even Salvator himself, who had received 
him dressed in the richest apparel^ inspired him with 
deep respect^ and^ after the manner of little souls, who, 
though at first proud and puffed up, at once grovel in 
the dust whenever they come into contact with what 
they feel to be superior to themselves, Pasquale's 
behaviour towards Salvator, whom he would gladly 
have done a mischief to in Rome, was nothing but 
humility and submissive deference. 

So much attention was paid to Signor Pasquale 
from all sides, his judgment was appealed to so un- 
conditionally, and so much was said about his services 
to art, that he felt new life infused into his veins; 
and an unusual spirit was awakened within him, so 
that his utterances on many points were more sen- 
sible than might have been expected. If it be added 
that never in his life before had he been so splendidly 
entertained, and never had he drunk such inspiriting 
wine, it will readily be conceived that his pleasure 
was intensified from moment to moment, and that 
he forgot all the wrong which had been done him at 
Rome as well as the unpleasant business which had 
brought him to Florence. " Often after their banquets 
the Academicians were wont to amuse themselves 
with short impromptu dramatic representations, and 
so this evening the distinguished playwright and poet 
Filippo Apolloni called upon those who generally 
took part in them to bring the festivities to a fitting 
conclusion with one of their usual performances. 
Salvator at once withdrew to make all the necessary 
preparations. 

Not long afterwards the bushes at the fatlViex ^wftk. 
of the banqueting-haJl began to move, the \)iaxiOcis& 


1 64 SI G NOR FORMICA. 

with their foHagc were parted, and a little theatre 
provided with seats for the spectators became visible. 

"By the saints!" exclaimed Pasquale Capuzzi, 
terrified, " where am I ? Surely that's Nicolo Musso's 
theatre." 

Without heeding his exclamation, Evangelista Tori- 
celli and Andrea Cavalcanti — both of them grave, 
respectable, venerable men — took him by the arm and 
led him to a seat immediately in front of the stage^ 
taking their places on each side of him. 

This was no sooner done than there appeared on the 
boards — Formica in the character of Pasquarello. 

" You reprobate, Formica ! " shouted Pasquale, leap- 
ing to his feet and shaking his double fist at the stage. 
Toricelli and Cavalcanti's stern, reproving glances bade 
him sit still and keep quiet. 

Pasquarello wept and sobbed^ and cursed his destiny, 
which brought him nothing but grief and heart- 
breaking, declared he didn't know how he should 
ever set about it if he wanted to laugh again, and 
concluded by saying that if he could look upon blood 
without fainting, he should certainly cut his throat, or 
should throw himself in the Tiber if he could only let 
that cursed swimming alone when he got into the 
water. 

Doctor Gratiano now joined him, and inquired what 
was the cause of his trouble. 

Whereupon Pasquarello asked him whether he did 
not know anything about what had taken place in the 
house of his master, Signor Pasquale Capuzzi di Seni- 
gaglia, whether he did not know that an infamous 
scoundrel had carried off pretty Marianna, his master's 
niece ? 

'^Ah!" murmured Capuzzi, ''I see you want to make 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 165 

your excuses to me, Formica ; you wish for my pardon 
— well, we shall see.'* 

Doctor Gratiano expressed his sympathy, and ob- 
served that the scoundrel must have gone to work very 
cunningly to have eluded all the inquiries which had 
been instituted by Capuzzi. 

"Ho! ho!** rejoined Pasquarello. The Doctor need 
not imagine that the scoundrel, Antonio Scacciati^ had 
succeeded in escaping the sharpness of Signor Pasquale 
Capuzzi, supported as he was, moreover, by powerful 
friends. Antonio had been arrested, his marriage with 
Marianna annulled, and Marianna herself had again 
come into Capuzzi's power. 

" Has he got her again ? " shouted Capuzzi, beside 
himself; " has he got her again, good Pasquale ? Has 
he got his little darling, his Marianna? Is the knave 
Antonio arrested ? Heaven bless you, Formica ! ** 

" You take a too keen interest in the play, Signor 
Pasquale," said Cavalcanti, quite seriously. "Pray 
permit the actors to proceed with their parts without 
interrupting them in this disturbing fashion.*' 

Ashamed of himself, Signor Pasquale resumed his 
seat, for he had again risen to his feet. 

Doctor Gratiano asked what had taken place 
then. 

'^A wedding,** continued Pasquarello, "a wedding 
had taken place. Marianna had repented of what she 
had done ; Signor Pasquale had obtained the desired 
dispensation from the Holy Father, and had married 
his niece.*' 

" Yes, yes,** murmured Pasquale Capuzzi to himself, 
whilst his eyes sparkled with delight, "yes, yes, my 
dear, good Formica ; he will marry his sweet Marianna, 
the happy Pasquale. He knew that the dear little 


i66 SIGNOR FORMICA. 

darling had always loved him, and that it was only 
Satan who had led her astray." 

'^Why then, everything is all right/* said Doctor 
Gratiano, " and there's no cause for lamentation/' 

Pasquarello began, however, to weep and sob more 
violently than before, till at length, as if overcome by 
the terrible nature of his pain, he fainted away. Doc- 
tor Gratiano ran backwards and forwards in great dis- 
tress, was so sorry he had no smelling-bottle with him, 
felt in all his pockets, and at last produced a roasted 
chestnut, and put it under the insensible Pasquarello's 
nose. He at once recovered, sneezing violently, and beg- 
ging him to attribute his faintness to his weak nerves, 
he related how that, immediately after the marriage, 
Marianna had been afflicted with the saddest melan- 
choly, continually calling upon Antonio, and treating 
the old gentleman with contempt and aversion. But 
the old fellow, quite infatuated by his passion and 
jealousy, had not ceased to torment the poor girl with 
his folly in the most abominable way. And here 
Pasquarello mentioned a host of mad tricks which 
Pasquale had done, and which were really current in 
Rome about him. Signor Capuzzi sat on thorns ; he 
murmured at intervals, " Curse you, Formica I You 
are lying ! What evil spirit is in you ? " He was only 
prevented from bursting out into a violent passion by 
Toricelli and Cavalcanti, who sat watching him with 
an earnest gaze. 

Pasquarello concluded his narration by telling that 
Marianna had at length succumbed to her unsatisfied 
longing for her lover, her great distress of mind^ and 
the innumerable tortures which were inflicted upon 
her by the execrable old fellow, and had died in the 
flower of her vouth. 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 167 

At this moment was heard a mournful De profundis 
sung by hollow, husky voices^ and men clad in long 
black robes appeared on the stage, bearing an open 
coffin, within which was seen the corpse of lovely 
Marianna wrapped in white shrouds. Behind it came 
Signor Pasquale Capuzzi in the deepest, mourning, 
feebly staggering along and wailing aloud, beating his 
breast, and crying in a voice of despair, "0 Marianna! 
Marianna ! " 

So soon as the real Capuzzi caught sight of his 
niece's corpse he broke out into loud lamentations, 
and both Capuzzis, the one on the stage and the one 
off, gave vent to their grief in the most heartrending 
wails and groans, " O Marianna ! O Marianna ! O 
unhappy me ! Alas ! Alas for me ! '* 

Let the reader picture to himself the open coffin 
with the corpse of the lovely child, surrounded by the 
hired mourners singing their dismal De profundis in 
hoarse voices, and then the comical masks of Pasquar- 
ello and Doctor Gratiano, who were expressing their 
grief in the most ridiculous gestures, and lastly the two 
Capuzzis, wailing and screeching in despair. Indeed, 
all who were witnesses of the extraordinary spectacle 
could not help feeling, even in the midst of the unre- 
strained laughter they had burst out into at sight of 
the wonderful old gentleman, that their hearts were 
chilled by a most uncomfortable feeling of awe. 

Now the stage grew dark, and it thundered and 
lightened, and there rose up from below a pale ghostly 
figure, which bore most unmistakably the features of 
Capuzzi's dead brother, Pietro of Senigaglia, Mari- 
an na's father. 

" O you infamous brother, Pasquale ! what have you 
done with my daughter? what have you done with my 


i68 SIGNOR FORMICA. 

daughter ? " wailed the figure, in a dreadful and hollow 
voice. '^ Despair^ you atrocious murderer of my child. 
You shall find your reward in hell.'* 

Capuzzi on the stage dropped on the floor as if 
struck by lightning, and at the same moment the 
real Capuzzi reeled from his seat unconscious. The 
bushes rustled together again^ and the stage was gone, 
and also Marianna and Capuzzi and the ghastly spectre 
Pietro. Signor Pasquale Capuzzi lay in such a dead 
faint that it cost a good deal of trouble to revive him. 

At length he came to himself with a deep sigh, and 
stretching out both hands before him as if to ward off 
the horror that had seized him, he cried in a husky 
voice, '^ Leave me alone, Pietro/' Then a torrent of 
tears ran down his cheeks, and he sobbed and cried, 
" Oh ! Marianna, my darling child — my — my Mari- 
anna." "But recollect yourself," said now Caval- 
canti, '^ recollect yourself, Signor Pasquale, it was only 
on the stage that you saw your niece dead. She is 
alive ; she is here to crave pardon for the thoughtless 
step which love and also your own inconsiderate con- 
duct drove her to take." 

And Marianna, and behind her Antonio Scacciati, 
now ran forward from the back part of the hall and 
threw themselves at the old gentleman's feet, — for he 
had meanwhile been placed in an easy-chair. Mari- 
anna, looking most charming and beautiful, kissed his 
hands and bathed them with scalding tears, beseeching 
him to pardon both her and Antonio, to whom she 
had been united by the blessing of the Church. 

Suddenly the hot blood surged into the old man's 
pallid face, fury flashed from his eyes, and he cried in 
a half-choked voice, " Oh ! you abominable scoundrel ! 
You poisonous serpent whom I nourished in my 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 169 

bosom ! " Then old Toricelli, with grave and thoughtful 
dignity, put himself in front of Capuzzi, and told him 
that he (Capuzzi) had seen a representation of the fate 
that would inevitably and irremediably overtake him if 
he had the hardihood to carry out his wicked purpose 
against Antonio and Marianna's peace and happiness. 
He depicted in startling colours the folly and madness 
of amorous old men, who call down upon their own 
heads the most ruinous mischief which Heaven can 
inflict upon a man, since all the love which might 
have fallen to their share is lost, and instead hatred 
and contempt shoot their fatal darts at them from 
everv side. 

At intervals lovely Marianna cried in a tone that 
went to everybody's heart, " O my uncle, I will love 
and honour you as my own father; you will kill me 
by a cruel death if you rob me of Antonio." And 
all the eminent men by whom the old gentleman was 
surrounded cried with one accord that it would not be 
possible for a man like Signor Pasquale Capuzzi di 
Senigaglia, a patron of art and himself an artist, not 
to forgive the young people, and assume the part of 
father to the most lovely of ladies, not possible that 
he could refuse to accept with joy as his son-in-law 
such an artist as Antonio Scacciati, who was highly 
esteemed throughout all Italy and richly crowned with 
fame and honour. 

Then it was patent to see that a violent struggle 
went on within the old gentleman. He sighed, 
moaned, clasped his hands before his face, and, whilst 
Toricelli was continuing to speak in a most impressive 
manner, and Marianna was appealing to him in the 
most touching accents, and the rest were extolling 
Antonio all they knew how, he kept looking down — 


I70 SIGNOR FORMICA. . 

now upon his niece, now upon Antonio^ whose splendid 
clothes and rich chains of honour bore testimony to 
the truth of what was said about the artistic fame he 
had earned. 

Gone was all rage out of Capuzzi's countenance ; he 
sprang up with radiant eyes, and pressed Marianna 
to his heart, saying, " Yes, I forgive you, my dear 
child ; I forgive you, Antonio. Far be it from me to 
disturb your happiness. You are right, my worthy 
Signor Toricelli ; Formica has shown me in the tab- 
leau on the stage all the mischief and ruin that would 
have befallen me had I carried out my insane design. 
I am cured, quite cured of my folly. But where is 
Signor Formica, where is my good physician ? let me 
thank him a thousand times for my cure; it is he alone 
who has accomplished it. The terror that he has 
caused me to feel has brought about a complete 
revolution within me." 

Pasquarello stepped forward. Antonio threw him- 
self upon his neck, crying, " O Signor Formica, you to 
whom I owe my life, my all — oh I take oflF this dis- 
figuring mask, that I may see your face, that Formica 
may not be any longer a mystery to me." 

Pasquarello took off his cap and his artificial mask, 
which looked like a natural face, sinde it offered not 
the slightest hindrance to the play of countenance, 
and this Formica, this Pasquarello, was transformed 
into — Salvator Rosa.^ 

^ The painter Salvator Rosa did really play at Rome the rSU of Pas- 
quarello here attributed to him ; but it was on the occasion of his second 
visit to the Eternal City about 1639. On the other hand, it was after 
1647 (the year of Masaniello's revolt at Naples) that Salvator again 
came to Rome (the third visit), where he stayed until he was obliged 
to flee farther, namely, to Florence, in consequence of the two pictures 
already mentioned. It seems evident therefore that Hofibuuui has not 


SIGNOR FORMICA. 171 

" Salvator ! " ejcclaimed Marianna, Antonio^ and 
Capuzzi^ utterly astounded. 

"Yes," said that wonderful man^ "it is Salvator 
Rosa^ whom the Romans would not recognise as 
painter and. poet, but who in the character of Formica 
drew from them, without their being aware of it, 
almost every evening for more than a year, in Nicolo 
Musso's wretched little theatre, the most noisy and 
most demonstrative storms of applause, from whose 
mouth they willingly took all the scorn, and all the 
satiric mockery of what is bad, which they would on 
no account listen to and see in Salvator^s poems and 
pictures. It is Salvator Formica who has helped you, 
dear Antonio." 

"Salvator,** began old Capuzzi, "Salvator Rosa, 
albeit I have always regarded you as my worst enemy, 
yet I have always prized your artistic skill very highly, 
and now I love you as the worthiest friend I have, and 
beg you to accept my friendship in return." 

" Tell me," replied Salvator, " tell me, my worthy 
Signor Pasquale, what service I can render you, and 
accept my assurances beforehand, that I will leave no 
stone unturned to accomplish whatever you may ask 
of me." 

And now the genial smile which had not been seen 
upon Capuzzi's face since Marian na had been carried 
off, began to steal back again. Taking Salvator^s hand, 
he lisped in a low voice, " My dear Signor Salvator, 
you possess an unlimited influence over good Antonio; 
beseech him in my name to permit me to spend the 
short rest of my days with him, and my dear daughter 

troubled himself about his dates, or strict historical fidelity, but seems 
rather to have combined the incidents of the painter's two visits to 
Rome — f./., his second and his third visit. 


172 SIGNOR FORMICA. 

Marianna^ and [to accept at my hands the inheritance 
left her by her mother^ as well as the good dowry which 
I was thinking of adding to it. And he must not look 
jealous if I occasionally kiss the dear sweet child's little 
white hand ; and ask him — every Sunday at least when 
I go to Mass^ to trim up my rough moustache, for 
there^s nobody in all the wide world understands it so 
well as he does/^ 

It cost Salvator an effort to repress his laughter at 
the strange old man ; but before he could make any 
reply, Antonio and Marianna, embracing the old 
gentleman, assured him that they should not believe 
he was fully reconciled to them, and should not be 
really happy, until he came to live with them as their 
dear father, never toj leave them again. Antonio 
added that not only on Sunday, but every other day, 
he would trim Capuzzi's moustache as elegantly as 
he knew how, and accordingly the old gentleman was 
perfectly radiant with delight. Meanwhile a splendid 
supper had been prepared, to which the entire company 
now turned in the best of spirits. 

In taking my leave of you, beloved reader, I wish 
with all my heart that, whilst you have been reading 
the story of the wonderful Signor Formica, you have 
derived as much pure pleasure from it as Salvator and 
all his friends felt on sitting down to their supper. 


T 


■mi» 


. '4 


i- 


.ft 


«■• 


• '^^^ 


■ ." 


"* •' 


•^■; 


..-■-i? 


.» 


M. 


p 


>; 


■ • 


.i:i' 


. M _ 


«.* 


, 


- .^inKOR FORMICA. 


I 


) 


THE SAND-MAN 


( 173 ) 


THE SAND'MAN} 

NATHANAEL TO LOTHAIR, 

I KNOW you are all very uneasy because I have not 
written for such a long, long time. Mother, to be 
sure, is angry, and Clara, I daresay, believes I am living 
here in riot and revelry, and quite forgetting my sweet 
angel, whose image is so deeply engraved upon my 
heart and mind. But that is not so ; daily and hourly 
do I think of you all, and my lovely Clara^s form 
comes to gladden me in my dreams^ and smiles upon 
me with her bright eyes, as graciously as she used to do 
in the days when I went in and out amongst you. 
Oh ! how could I write to you in the distracted state 
of mind in which I have been, and which, until now, 
has quite bewildered me ! A terrible thing has hap- 
pened to me. Dark forebodings of some awful fate 
threatening me are spreading themselves out over my 
head like black clouds, impenetrable to every friendly 
ray of sunlight. I must now tell you what has taken 
place ; I must, that I see well enough, but only to think 
upon it makes the wild laughter burst from my lips. 
Oh ! my dear, dear Lothair, what shall I say to make 
you feel, if only in an inadequate way, that that 
which happened to me a few days ago could thus 

^ <'The Sand-man " forms the first of a series of tales called « The 
Night-pieces," and was published in 1817. 


iM THE SAND-MAN. 

rtallv exercise such a hostile and disturbinix intluence 
upon my life ? Oh that you were here to see for your- 
self ! but now you will, I suppose, take me for a super- 
stitious ghost-seer. In a word, the terrible thing which 
I have experienced, the fatal effect of which I in vain 
exert every effort to shake off*, is simply that some days 
ago, namely, on the 30th October, at twelve o'clock at 
noon, a dealer in weather-glasses came into my room 
and wanted to sell me one of his wares. I bought 
nothing, and threatened to kick him downstairs, 
whereupon he went away of his own accord. 

You will conclude that it can only be very peculiar 
relations — relations intimately intertwined with my 
life — that can give significance to this event, and that 
it must be the person of this unfortunate hawker 
which has had such a very inimical effect upon . me. 
And 80 it really is. I will summon up all my faculties 
in order to narrate to you calmly and patiently as 
much of the early days of my youth as will suffice to 
put matters before you in such a way that your keen 
sharp intellect may grasp everything clearly and dis- 
tinctly, in bright and living pictures. Just as I am 
beginning, I hear you laugh and Clara say, '^What's 
all this childish nonsense about ? ** Well, laugh at me, 
laugh heartily at me, pray do. But, good Gk)d I my 
hair is standing on end, and I seem to be entreating 
you to laugh at me in the same sort of frantic despair 
in which Franz Moor entreated Daniel to laugh him 
to scorn.^ But to my story. 

Except at dinner we, i.e., I and my brothers and 

^ See Schiller's Rduber^ Act V., Scene i. Franz Moor, seeing that 
the failure of all his villainous schemes is inevitable, and that his own 
ruin is close upon him, is at length overwhelmed with the mflHn«>JMB of 
despair, and unburdens the terrors of his conscience to the Ml servant 
Daniel, bidding him laugh him to scorn. 


THE SAND-Mi.N. 175 

sisters, saw but little of our father all day long. His 
business no doubt took up most of his time. After 
our evening meal, which, in accordance with an old 
custom, was served at seven o'clock, we all went, 
mother with us, into father's room, and took our places 
around a round table. My father smoked his pipe, 
drinking a large glass of beer to it. Often he told us 
many wonderful stories, and got so excited over them 
that his pipe always went out ; I used then to light it 
for him with a spill, and this formed my chief amuse- 
ment. Often, again, he would give us picture-books to 
look at, whilst he sat silent and motionless in his easv- 
chair, puffing out such dense clouds of smoke that we 
were all as it were enveloped in mist. On such even- 
ings mother was very sad ; and directly it struck nine 
she said, ^' Come, children I off to bed ! Come 1 The 
* Sand-man ' is come I see.'' And I always did seem 
to hear something trampling upstairs with slow heavy 
steps ; that must be the Saud-man. Once in particular 
I was very much frightened at this dull trampling and 
knocking ; as mother was leading us out of the room 
I asked her, " O mamma 1 but who is this nasty Sand- 
man who always sends us away from papa? What 
does he look like ? " " There is no Sand-man, my dear 
child," mother answered ; " when I say the Sand-man is 
come, I only mean that you are sleepy and can't keep 
your eyes open, as if somebody had put sand in them." 
This answer of mother's did not satisfy me ; nay, in 
my childish mind the thought clearly unfolded itself 
that mother denied there was a Sand-man only to pre- 
vent us being afraid, — why, I always heard him come 
upstairs. Full of curiosity to learn something more 
about this Sand-man and what he had to do with us 
children, I at length asked the old woman who acted 


176 TIiE SAND'MAN. 


/ 


! 


as iiiv voiinixcst sister's attendant, what sort of a man 
he was — the Sand-man? " Why, 'thanael, darling, don't 
you know?*' she replied. ''Oh! he's a wicked man, 
who comes to little children when they won^t go t. 
bed and throws handfuls of sand in their eyes, so that 
they jump out of their heads all bloody ; and he puts 
them into a bag and takes them to the half-moon as 
food for his little ones ; and they sit there in the nest 
and have hooked beaks like owls, and they pick naughty 
little boys' and girls* eyes out with them/* After this 
I formed in my own mind a horrible picture of the 
cruel Sand-man. When anything came blundering 
upstairs at night I trembled with fear aind dismay ; and 
all that my mother could get out of me were the stam- 
mered words " The Sand-man ! the Sand-man ! ** whilst 
the tears coursed down my cheeks. .Then I ran into 
my bedroom, and the whole night through tormented 
myself with the terrible apparition of the Sand-man. I 
was quite old enough to perceive that the old woman's 
tale about the Sand-man and his little ones' nest in the 
half-moon couldn't be altogether true ; nevertheless the 
Sand-man continued to be for me a fearful incubus, 
and I was always seized with terror — my blood always 
ran cold, not only when I heard anybody come up the 
stairs, but when I heard anybody noisily open my 
father's room door and go in. Often he stayed away 
for a long season altogether; then he would come 
several times in close succession. 

This went on for years, without my being able to 
accustom myself to this fearful apparition^ without the 
image of the horrible Sand-man growing any fainter 
in my imagination. His intercourse with my father 
began to occupy my fancy ever more and more ; I was 
restrained from asking my father about him by an 


THE SAND-MAN. 177 

unconquerable shyness; but as the years went on 
the desire waxed stronger and stronger within me to 
fathom the mystery myself and to see the fabulous 
Sand-man. He had been the means of disclosing to 
me the path of the wonderful and the adventurous, 
which so easily find lodgment in the mind of the child. 
I liked nothing better than to hear or read horrible 
stories of goblins, witches, Tom Thumbs, and so on ; 
but always at the head of them all stood the Sand-man^ 
whose picture I scribbled in the most extraordinary 
and repulsive forms with both chalk and coal every- 
where, on the tables, and cupboard doors^ and walls. 
When I was ten years old my mother removed me from 
the nursery into a little chamber off the corridor not 
far from my father's room. We still had to withdraw 
hastily whenever, on the stroke of nine, the mysterious 
unknown was heard in the house. As I lay in my 
little chamber I could hear him go into father's room 
and soon afterwards I fancied there was a fine and 
peculiar smelling steam spreading itself through the 
house. As my curiosity waxed stronger, my resolve 
to make somehow or other the Sand-man*s acquaint- 
ance took deeper root. Often when my mother had 
gone past, I slipped quickly out of my room into the 
corridor, but I could never see anything, for always 
before I could reach the place where I could get sight 
of him, the Sand-man was well inside the door. At 
last, unable to resist the impulse any longer,! determined 
to conceal myself in father's room and there wait for 
the Sand-man. 

One evening I perceived from my father's silence 
and mother's sadness that the Sand-man would come ; 
accordingly, pleading that I was excessively tired, I left 
the room before nine o'clock and concealed myself in a 

VOL. I. M 


r 


178 THE SAND'MAN. 


hiding-place close beside the door. The street door 
creaked^ and slow^ heavy^ echoing steps crossed the 
passage towards the stairs. Mother hurried past me 
with my brothers and sisters. Softly — softly — I opened 
father's room door. He sat as usual^ silent and motion- 
less^ with his back towards it; he did not hear me; 
and in a moment I was in and behind a curtain 
drawn before my father's open wardrobe, which stood 
just inside the room. Nearer and nearer and nearer 
came the echoing footsteps. There was a strange 
coughing and shuffling and mumbling outside. My 
heart beat with expectation and fear. A quick step 
now close, close beside the door, a noisy rattle of the 
handle, and the door flies open with a bang. Recover- 
ing my courage with an eifort, I take a cautious 
peep out. In the middle of the room in front of my 
father stands the Sand-man, the bright light of the 
lamp falling full upon his face. The Sand-man, the 
terrible Sand-man, is the old advocate Coppelitis who 
often comes to dine with us. 

But the most hideous figure could not have awakened 
greater trepidation in my heart than this Coppelius 
did. Picture to yourself a large broad-shouldered man, 
with an immensely big head, a face the colour of yellow- 
ochre, grey bushy eyebrows, from beneath which two 
piercing, greenish, cat-like eyes glittered, and a pro- 
minent Roman nose hanging over his upper lip. His 
distorted mouth was often screwed up into a malicious 
smile ; then two dark-red spots appeared on his cheeks, 
and a strange hissing noise proceeded from between his 
tightly clenched teeth. He always wore an ash-grey 
coat of an old-fashioned cut, a waistcoat of the same, 
and nether extremities to match, but black stockings 
and buckles 3et with stones on his shoes. His little 


THE SAND-MAN. 179 

wig scarcely extended beyond the crown of his head^ 
his hair was curled round high up above his big red 
ears^ and plastered to his temples with cosmetic^ and a 
broad closed hair-bag stood out prominently from his 
neck, so that you could see the silver buckle that 
fastened his folded neck-cloth. Altogether he was a 
most disagreeable and horribly ugly figure ; but what 
we children detested most of all was his big coarse 
hairy hands; we could never fancy anything that he 
had once touched. This he hkd noticed ; and so, when- 
ever our good mother quietly placed a piece of cake 
or a sweet fruit on our plates, he delighted to touch it 
under some pretext or other, until the bright tears 
stood in our eyes, and from disgust and loathing we lost 
the enjoyment of the tit-bit that was intended to please 
us. And he did just the same thing when father gave 
us a glass of sweet wine on holidays. Then he would 
quickly pass his hand over it, or even sometimes raise 
the glass to his blue lips, and he laughed quite sardoni- 
cally when all we dared do was to express our vexation 
in stifled sobs. He habitually called us the "little 
brutes ; " and when he was present we might not utter 
a sound; and we cursed the ugly spiteful man who 
deliberately and intentionally spoilt all our little plea- 
sures. Mother seemed to dislike this hateful Coppelius 
as much as we did ; for as soon as he appeared her 
cheerfulness and bright and natural manner were trans- 
formed into sad, gloomy seriousness. Father treated 
him as if he were a being of some higher race, whose 
ill-manners were to be tolerated, whilst no efforts 
ought to be spared to keep him in good-humour. He 
had only to give a slight hint, and his favourite dishes 
were cooked for him and rare wine uncorked. 

As soon as I saw this Coppelius, therefore, the fear- 


i8o THE SAND-MAN. 

ful and hideous thought arose in my mind that he^ 
and he alone^ must be the Sand-man; but I no longer 
conceived of the Sand-man as the bugbear in the old 
nurse's fable, who fetched children's eves and took 
them to the half-moon as food for his little ones — 
no ! but as an ugly spectre-like fiend bringing trouble 
and misery and ruin, both temporal and everlasting, 
everywhere wherever he appeared. 

I was spell-bound on the spot. At the risk of 
being discovered, and, as I well enough knew, of being 
severely punished, I remained as I was, with my head 
thrust through the curtains listening. My father re- 
ceived Coppelius in a ceremonious manner. '' Come, 
to work ! " cried the latter, in a hoarse snarling voice, 
throwing off his coat. Gloomily and silently my father 
took off his dressing-gown, and both put on long black 
smock-frocks. Where they took them from I forgot to 
notice. Father opened the folding-doors of a cupboard 
in the wall ; but I saw that what I had so long taken 
* to be a cupboard was really a dark recess, in which 
was a little hearth. Coppelius approached it, and a 
blue flame crackled upwards from it. Round about 
were all kinds of strange utensils. Good God ! as my 
old father bent down over the fire how different he 
looked ! His gentle and venerable features seemed to 
be drawn up by some dreadful convulsive pain into 
an ugly, repulsive Satanic mask. He looked like Cop- 
pelius. Coppelius plied the red-hot tongs and drew 
bright glowing masses out of the thick smoke and 
began assiduously to hammer them. I fancied that 
there were men's faces visible round about, but with- 
out eyes, having ghastly deep black holes where the 
eyes should have been. "Eyes herel Eyes here!" 
cried Coppelius, in a hollow sepulchral voice. My 


THE SAND'MAN. i8i 

blood ran cold with horror ;' I screamed and tumbled 
out of my hiding-place into the floor. Coppelius im- 
mediately seized upon me, " You little brute ! You 
little brute!" he bleated, grinding his teeth. Then, 
snatching me up, he threw me on the hearth, so that 
the flames began to singe my hair. " Now we've got 
eyes — eyes — a beautiful pair of children's eyes," he 
whispered, and, thrusting his hands into the flames 
he took out some red-hot grains and was about to 
strew them into my eyes. Then my father clasped his 
hands and entreated him, saying, "Master, master, 
let my Nathanael keep his eyes — oh ! do let him keep 
them." Coppelius laughed shrilly and replied, "Well 
then, the boy may keep his eyes and whine and pule 
his way through the world ; but we will now at any 
rate observe the mechanism of the hand and the foot." 
And therewith he roughly laid hold upon me, so that 
my joints cracked, and twisted my hands and my feet, 
pulling them now this way, and now that, "That's 
not quite right altogether ! It's better as it was . — the 
old fellow knew what he was about." Thus lisped 
and hissed Coppelius ; but all around me grew black 
and dark ; a sudden convulsive pain shot through all 
my nerves and bones; I knew nothing more. 

I felt a soft warm breath fanning my cheek; I 
awakened as if out of the sleep of death ; my mother 
was bending over me. " Is the Sand-man still there ?" 
I stammered. "No, my dear child; he's been gone 
a long, long time ; he'll not hurt you." Thus spoke 
my mother, as she kissed her recovered darling and 
pressed him to her heart. But why should I tire you, 
my dear Lothair? why do I dwell at such length on 
these details, when there's so much remains to be said? 
Enough — I was detected in my eavesdropping, and 


i82 THE SAND-MAN. 

roughly handled by Coppelius. Fear and terror had 
brought on a violent fever, of which I lay ill several 
weeks. " Is the Sand-man still there ? " these were 
the first words I uttered on coming to myself again, 
the first sign of my recovery, of my safety. Thus, you 
see, I have only to relate to you the roost terrible 
moment of my youth for you to thoroughly under- 
stand that it must not be ascribed to the weakness of 
my eyesight if all that I see is colourless, but to the 
fact that a mysterious destiny has hung a dark veil of 
clouds about my life, which I shall perhaps only break 
through when I die. 

Coppelius did not show himself again ; it was re- 
ported he had left the town. 

It was about a year later when, in pursuance of the 
old unchanged custom, we sat around the round table 
in the evening. Father was in very good spirits, and 
was telling us amusing tales about his youthful travels. 
As it was striking nine we all at once heard the street 
door creak on its hinges, and slow ponderous steps 
echoed across the passage and up the stairs. " That 
is Coppelius," said my mother, turning pale. '^ Yes, 
it is Coppelius," replied my father in a faint broken 
voice. The tears started from my mother's eyes. 
"But, father, father," she cried, *^must it be so?" 
"This is the last time," he replied; "this is the last 
time he will come to me, I promise you. Go now. 
go and take the children. Go, go to bed — good-night.' 

As for me, I felt as if I were converted into cole 
heavy stone ; I could not get my breath. As I stoc 
there immovable my mother seized me by the an 
" Come, Nathanael ! do come along ! " I suffer 
myself to be led away; I went into my room. "B( 
good boy and keep (\u\tl" rcvotKer called after n 


THE SAND-MAN, 183 

''get into bed and go to sleep/' But, tortured by 
indescribable fear and uneasiness^ I could not close 
my eyes. That hateful, hideous Coppelius stood 
before me with his glittering eyes, smiling maliciously 
down upon me; in vain did I strive to banish the 
image. Somewhere about midnight there was a ter- 
rific crack, as if a cannon were being fired off. The 
whole house shook; something went rustling and 
clattering past my door; the house-door was pulled 
to with a bang. ''That is Coppelius/' I cried, terror- 
struck, and leapt out of bed. Then I heard a wild 
heartrending scream ; I rushed into my father's room ; 
the door stood open, and clouds of suffocating smoke 
came rolling towards me. The servant-maid shouted, 

• 

'* Oh ! my master ! my master ! " On the floor in 
front of the smoking hearth lay my father, dead, his 
face burned black and fearfully distorted, my sisters 
weeping and moaning around him, and my mother 
lying near them in a swoon. " Coppelius, you 
atrocious fiend, you've killed my father," I shouted. 
My senses left me. Two days later, when my father 
was placed in his coffin, his features were mild and 
gentle again as they had been when he was alive. 1 
found great consolation in the thought that his 
association with the diabolical Coppelius could not have 
ended in his everlasting ruin. 

Our neighbours had been awakened by the explosion; 
the affair got talked about, and came before the magis- 
terial authorities, who wished to cite Coppelius to clear 
himself. But he had disappeared from the place, 
leaving no traces behind him. 

Now when I tell you, my dear friend, that the 
weather-glass hawker I spoke of was the villain Cop- 
pelius, you will not blame me for aeeiivg^ vak^^^\X\w^ 


-/ •-'O-JI 


184 THE SAND-MAN. 

mischief in his inauspicious reappearance. He was 
diflerently dressed ; but Coppelius's figure and features 
are too deeply impressed upon my mind for me to be 
capable of making a mistake in the matter. Moreover^ 
he has not even changed his name. He proclaims 
himself here, I learn, to be a Piedmontese mechanician, 
and styles himself Giuseppe Coppola. 

I am resolved to enter the lists against him and re- 
venge my father's death, let the consequences be what 
they may. 

Don't say a word to mother about the reappearance 
of this odious monster. Give my love to my darling 
Clara; I will write to her when I am in a somewhat 
calmer friame of mind. Adieu, &c. 


Clara to Nathanael. 

You are right, you have not written to me for a very 
long: time, but nevertheless I believe that I still retain 
a place in your mind and thoughts. It is a proof that 
you were thinking a good deal about me when you 
were sending off your last letter to brother Lothair, 
for instead of directing it to him you directed it to 
me. With joy I tore open the envelope, and did not 
perceive the mistake until I read the words, " Oh ! 
my dear, dear Lothair." Now I know I ought not to 
have read any more of the letter, but ought to have 
given it to my brother. But as you have so often in 
innocent raillery made it a sort of reproach against me 
that I possessed such a calm, and, for a woman, cool- 
headed temperament that I should be like the woman we 
read of — if the house was threatening to tumble down. 


THE SAND-MAN. 185 

I should, before hastily fleeing, stop to smooth down 
a crumple in the window-curtains — I need hardly tell 
you that the beginning of your letter quite upset me. I 
could scarcely breathe ; there was a bright mist before 
my eyes. Oh ! my darling Nathanael ! what could this 
terrible thing be that had happened ? Separation from 
you — never to see you again, the thought was like a 
sharp knife in my heart. I read on and on. Your de- 
scription of that horrid Coppelius made my flesh creep. 
I now learnt for the first time what a terrible and vio- 
lent death your good old father died. Brother Lothair, 
to whom I handed over his property, sought to comfort 
me, but with little success. That horrid weather-glass 
hawker Giuseppe Coppola followed me everywhere ; and 
I am almost ashamed to confess it, but he was able to 
disturb my sound and in general calm sleep with all 
sorts of wonderful dream-shapes. But soon — the next 
day — I saw everything in a different light. Oh ! do 
not be ^ngry with me, my best-beloved, if, despite your 
strange presentiment that Coppelius will do you some 
mischief, Lothair tells you I am in quite as good spirits, 
and just the same as ever. 

I will frankly confess, it seems to me that all that 
was fearsome and terrible of which you speak, existed 
only in your own self, and that the real true outer 
world had but little to do with it. I can quite admit 
that old Coppelius may have been highly obnoxious to 
you children, but your real detestation of him arose 
from the fact that he hated children. 

Naturally enough the gruesome Sand-man of the old 
nursc^s story was associated in your childish mind with 
old Coppelius, who, even though you had not believed 
in the Sand-man, would have been to you a ghostly 
bugbear, especially dangerous to children. His myste- 


^ ^ ■ «L 


1 86 THE SAND-MAN. 

nous labours along with your father at night-time 
were, I daresay, nothing more than secret experiments 
in alchemy, with which your mother could not be over 
well pleased, owing to the large sums of money that 
most likely were thrown away upon them ; and 
besides, your father, his mind full of the deceptive 
striving after higher knowledge, may probably have 
become rather indifferent to his family, as so often 
happens in the case of such experimentalists. So 
also it is equally probable that your father brought 
about his death by his own imprudence, and that 
Coppelius is not to blame for it. I must tell you 
that yesterday I asked our experienced neighbour, the 
chemist, whether in experiments of this kind an explo- 
sion could take place which would have a momen- 
tarily fatal effect. He said, ^^Oh, certainly!'' and 
described to me in his prolix and circumstantial way 
how it could be occasioned, mentioning at the same 
time so many strange and funny words that I could 
not remember them at all. Now I know you will be 
angry at your Clara, and will say, ^' Of the Mysterious 
which often clasps man in its invisible arms there's not 
a ray can find its way into this cold heart. She sees 
only the varied surface of the things of the world, and, 
like the little child, is pleased with the golden glittering 
fruit, at the kernel of which lies the fatal poison.'* 

Oh ! my beloved Nathanael, do you believe then 
that the intuitive prescience of a dark power working 
within us to our own ruin cannot exist also in minds 
which are cheerful, natural, free from care ? But 
please forgive me that I, a simple girl, presume in any 
way to indicate to you what I really think of such an 
inward strife. After all, I should not find the proper 
words, and you would only laugh at roe, not because 


THE SAND-MAN. 187 

my thoughts were stupid, but because I was so foolish 
as to attempt to tell them to you. 

If there is a dark and hostile power which traitor- 
ously fixes a thread in our hearts in order that, laying 
hold of it and drawing us by means of it along a 
dangerous road to ruin, which otherwise we should 
not have trod — if, I say, there is such a power, it must 
assume within us a form like ourselves, nay, it must be 
ourselves ; for only in that way can we believe in it, 
and only so understood do we yield to it so far that it 
is able to accomplish its secret purpose. So long as 
we have sufficient firmness, fortified by cheerfulness, to 
always acknowledge foreign hostile influences for what 
they really are, whilst we quietly pursue the path 
pointed out to us by both inclination and calling, then 
this mysterious power perishes in its futile struggles 
to attain the form which is to be the reflected image 
of ourselves. It is also certain, Lothair adds, that if 
we have once voluntarily given ourselves up to this 
dark physical power, it often reproduces within us 
the strange forms which the outer world throws in our 
way, so that thus it is we ourselves who engender 
within ourselves the spirit which by some remarkable 
delusion we imagine to speak in that outer form. It 
is the phantom of our own self whose intimate rela- 
tionship with, and whose powerful influence upon our 
soul either plunges us into hell or elevates us to heaven. 
Thus you will see, my beloved Nathanael, that I and 
brother Lothair have well talked over the subject of 
dark powers and forces; and now, after I have with 
some difficulty written down the principal results of 
our discussion, they seem to me to contain many 
really profound thoughts. Lothair's last words, how- 
ever, I don^t quite understand altogether ; I only dimly 


i88 THE SAND-MAN. 

guess what he means; and yet I cannot help thinking 
it is all very true. I beg you, dear, strive to forget the 
ugly advocate Coppelius as well as the weather-glass 
hawker Giuseppe Coppola. Try and convince your- 
self that these foreign influences can have no power 
over you, that it is only the belief in their hostile power 
which can in reality make them dangerous to you. If 
every line of your letter did not betray the violent 
excitement of your mind, and if I did not sympathise 
with your condition from the bottom of my heart, I 
could in truth jest about the advocate Sand-man and 
weather-glass hawker Coppelius. Pluck up your spirits' 
Be cheerful ! I have resolved to appear to you as your 
guardian-angel if that ugly man Coppolo should dare 
take it into his head to bother you in your dreams, and 
drive him away with a good hearty laugh, I'm not 
afraid of him and his nasty hands, not the least little 
bit ; I won't let him either as advocate spoil any dainty 
tit-bit I've taken, or as Sand-man rob me of my eyes. 
My darling, darling Nathanael, 
Eternally your, 8cc. &tc. 


Nathanael to Lothair. 

I am very sorry that Clara opened and read my last 
letter to you ; of course the mistake is to be attributed 
to my own absence of mind. She has written me a 
very deep philosophicaljettcr, proving conclusively that 
Coppelius and Coppola only exist in my own mind 
and are phantoms of my own self, which will at once 
be dissipated, as soon as I look upon them in that 
light. In very truth one can hardly believe that the 


THE SAND'MAN. 189 

mind which so often sparkles in those bright, beauti- 
fully smiling, childlike eyes of hers like a sweet lovely 
dream could draw such subtle and scholastic distinc- 
tions. She also mentions your name. You have been 
talking about me. I suppose you have been giving her 
lectures, since she sifts and refines everything so acutely. 
But enough of this ! I must now tell you it is most cer- 
tain that the weather-glass hawker Giuseppe Coppola 
is not the advocate Coppelius. I am attending the 
lectures of our recently appointed Professor of Physics, 
who, like the distinguished naturalist,^ is called Spal- 
anzani, and is of Italian origin. He has known Cop- 
pola for many years ; and it is also easy to tell from 
his accent that he really is a Piedmontese. Coppelius 
was a German, though no honest German, I fancy. 
Nevertheless I am not quite satisfied. You and Clara 
will perhaps take me for a gloomy dreamer, but nohow 
can I get rid of the impression which Coppelius's cursed 
face made upon me. I am glad to learn from Spal- 
•anzani that he has left the town. This Professor Spal- 
anzani is a very queer fish. He is a little fat man, with 
prominent cheek-bones, thin nose, projecting lips, and 
small piercing eyes. You cannot get a better picture 
of him than by turning over one of the Berlin pocket- 
almanacs ^ and looking at Cagliostro's ^ portrait en- 

^ Lazaro Spalanzani, a celebrated anatomist and naturalist (1729- 
1799), filled for several years the chair of Natural History at Pavia, 
and travelled extensively for scientific purposes in Italy, Turkey, Sicily, 
Switzerland, &c. 

' Or Almanacs of the Muses, as they were also sometimes called, 
were periodical, mostly yearly publications, containing all kinds of 
literary effusions ; mostly, however, lyrical. They originated in the 
eighteenth century. Schiller, A. W. and F. Schlegel, Tieck, and Cha- 
misso, amongst others, conducted undertakings of this nature. 

' Joseph Balsamo, a Sicilian by birth, calling himself Count Cagli- 
ostro, one of the greatest impostors of modem times, lived during the 


I90 THB SAND'MAN. 

graved by Chodowiecki ; ^ Spalanzani looks just like 
him. 

Once lately, as I went up the steps to his house, 
I perceived that beside the curtain which generally 
covered a glass door there was a small chink. What 
it was that excited my curiosity I cannot explain; but 
I looked through. In the room I saw a female, tall, 
very slender, but of perfect proportions, and splendidly 
dressed, sitting at a little tabic, on which she had 
placed both her arms, her hands being folded together. 
She sat opposite the door, so that J could easily sec 
her angelically beautiful face. She did not appear to 
notice me, and there was moreover a strangely fixed 
look about her eyes, I might almost say they appeared 
as if they had no power of vision ; I thought she was 
sleeping with her eyes open. I felt quite uncomfort- 
able, and 80 I slipped away quietly into the Professor's 
lecture-room, which was close at hand. Afterwards I 
learnt that the figure which I had seen was Spalanzani's 
daughter, Olimpia, whom he keeps locked in in a most 
wicked and unaccountable wav, and no man is ever 
allowed to come near her. Perhaps, however, there is 
after all something peculiar about her; perhaps she's 
an idiot or something of that sort. But why am I 
telling you all this? I could have told you it all 
better and more in detail when I see you. For in a 
fortnight I shall be amongst you. I must see my dear 
sweet angel, my Clara, again. Then the little bit of 

latter part of the eighteenth century. See Carlyle's " Miscellanies ** for 
an account of his life and character. 

^ Daniel Nikolas Chodowiecki, painter and engraver, of Polish de- 
scent, was born at Dantzic in 1726. For some years he was so popular 
an artist that few books were publbhed in Prussia without plates or 
vignettes by him. The catalogue of his works is said to include 3000 
items. 


THE SAND'MAN. 191 

ill-temper which, I must confess, took possession of 
me after her fearfully sensible letter, will be blown 
away. And that is the reason why I am not writing 
to her as well to-day. With all best wishes, &c. 


Nothing more strange and extraordinary can be 
imagined, gracious reader, than what happened to my 
poor friend, the young student Nathanael, and which 
I have undertaken to relate to you. Have you ever 
lived to experience anything that completely took pos- 
session of your heart and mind and thoughts to the 
utter exclusion of everything else ? All was seething 
and boiling within you; your blood, heated to fever 
pitch, leapt through your veins and inflamed your 
cheeks. Your gaze was so peculiar, as if seeking to 
grasp in empty space forms not seen of any other eye, 
and all your words ended in sighs betokening some 
mystery. Then your friends asked you, "What is the 
matter with you, my dear friend ? What do you see ?" 
And, wishing to describe the inner pictures in all their 
vivid colours, with their lights and their shades, you 
in vain struggled to find words with which to express 
yourself. But you felt as if you must gather up all 
the events that had happened, wonderful, splendid, 
terrible, jocose, and awful in the very first word, so 
that the whole might be revealed by a single electric dis- 
charge, 80 to speak. Yet every word and all that partook 
of the nature of communication by intelligible sounds 
seemed to be colourless, cold, and dead. Then you 
try and try again, and stutter and stammer, whilst 
your friends' prosy questions strike like icy winds upon 
your heart's hot fire until they extinguish it. But if. 


192 THE SAND'MAN. 

like a bold painter, you had first sketched in a few 
audacious strokes the outline of the picture you had 
in your soul, you would then easily have been able to 
deepen and intensify the colours one after the other, 
until the varied throng of living figures carried your 
friends away, and they, like you, saw themselves in 
the midst of the scene that had proceeded out of your 
own soul. 

Strictly speaking, indulgent reader, I must indeed 
confess to you, nobody has asked me for the history 
of young Nathanael ; but you are very well aware 
that I belong to that remarkable class of authors who, 
when they are bearing anything about in their minds 
in the manner I have just described, feel as if every- 
body who comes near them, and also the whole world 
to boot, were asking, "Oh! what is it? Oh! do tell 
us, my good sir I " Hence I was most powerfully im- 
pelled to narrate to you Nathanael's ominous life. My 
soul was full of the elements of wonder and extra- 
ordinary peculiarity in it; but, for this very reason, 
and because it was necessary in the very beginning to 
dispose you, indulgent reader, to bear with what is 
fantastic — and that is not a little thing — I racked my 
brain to find a way of commencing the story in a 
significant and original manner, calculated to arrest 
your attention. To begin with '^ Once upon a time,'* 
the best beginning for a story, seemed to me too tame ; 
with '^ In the small country town S — ; — lived,'^ rather 
better, at any rate allowing plenty of room to work 
up to the climax ; or to plunge at once in tnedias 
res, " * Go to the devil ! ' cried the student Nathanael, 
his eyes blazing wildly with rage and fear, when 
the weather-glass hawker Guiseppe Coppola" — well, 
that is what I really had written, when I thought I 


THE SAND'MAN. 193 

detected something of the ridiculous in NathanaePs 
wild glance ; and the history is anything but laughable. 
I could not find any words which seemed fitted to 

m 

reflect in even the feeblest degree the brightness of the 
colours of my mental vision. I determined not to 
begin at all. So I pray you, gracious reader, accept 
the three letters which my friend Lothair has been so 
kind as to communicate to me as the outline of the 
picture, into which I will endeavour to introduce more 
and more colour as I proceed with my narrative. 
Perhaps, like a good portrait-painter, I may succeed 
in depicting more than one figure in such wise that 
you will recognise it as a good likeness without being 
acquainted with the original, and feel as if you had 
very often seen the original with your own bodily 
eyes. Perhaps, too, you.will then believe that nothing 
is more wonderful, nothing more fantastic than real 
life, and that all that a writer can do is to present it 
as a dark reflection from a dim cut mirror. 

In order to make the very commencement more 
intelligible, it is necessary to add to the letters that, 
soon after the death of Nathanael's father, Clara and 
Lothair, the children of a distant relative, who had 
likewise died, leaving them orphans, were taken by 
Nathanael's mother into her own house. Clara and 
Nathanael conceived a warm aflection for each other, 
against which not the slightest objection in the world 
could be urged. When therefore Nathanael left home 

to prosecute his studies in G , they were betrothed. 

It is from G that his last letter is written, where 

he is attending the lecture* of Spalanzani, the distin- 
guished Professor of Physics. 

I might now proceed comfortably with my narration, 
did not at this moment Clara's image rise up so vividly 

VOL. I. " N 


194 THE SAND-MAN. 

before my eyes that I cannot turn them away from it, 
just as I never could when she looked upon me and 
smiled so sweetly. Nowhere would she have passed for 
beautiful ; that was the unanimous opinion of all who 
professed to have any technical knowledge of beauty. 
But whilst architects praised the pure proportions of her 
figure and form^ painters averred that her neck^ shoul- 
ders^ and bosom were almost too chastely modelled^ and 
yet, on the other hand, one and all were in love with 
her glorious Magdalene hair, and talked a good deal of 
nonsense about Battoni-like ^ colouring. One of them, 
a veritable romanticist, strangely enough likened her 
eyes to a lake by Ruisdael,^ in ^ which is reflected the 
pure azure of the cloudless sky, the beauty of woods 
and flowers, and all the bright and varied life of a 
living landscape. Poets and musicians went still fur- 
ther and said, ^^ What's all this talk about seas and 
reflections? How can we look upon the girl without 
feeling that wonderful heavenly songs and melodies 
beam upon us from her eyes, penetrating deep down 
into our hearts, till all becomes awake and throbbing 
with emotion ? And if we cannot sing anything at all 
passable then, why, wc are not worth much ; and this 
we can also plainly read in the rare smile which flits 
around her lips when we have the hardihood to squeak 
out something in her presence which we pretend to 
call singing, in spite of the fact that it is nothing more 
than a few single notes confusedly linked together." 
And it really was so. Clara had the powerful fancy 

^ Pompeo Girolamo Batoni, an Italian painter of the eighteenth cen- 
tury, whose works were at one time greatly over-estimated. 

2 Jakob Ruysdael (r. 1 625-1682), a painter of Haarlem, in Holland. 
His favourite subjects were remote farms, lonely stagnant water, deep- 
shaded woods with marshy paths, the sea-coast — subjects of a dark 
melancholy kind. His sea-pieces are greatly admired. 


THE SAND'MAN. 195 

of a bright, innocent, unaffected child, a wonian's deep 
and sympathetic heart, and an understanding clear, 
sharp, and discriminating. Dreamers and visionaries 
had but a bad time of it with her ; for without saying 
very much — she was not by nature of a talkative dis- 
position — she. plainly asked, by her calm steady look, 
and rare ironical smile, "How can you imagine, my 
dear friends, that I can take these fleeting shadowy 
images for true living and breathing forms?" For 
this reason many found fault with her as being cold, 
prosaic, and devoid of feeling; others, however, who 
had reached a clearer and deeper conception of life, 
were extremely fond of the intelligent, childlike, large- 
hearted girl. But none had such an affection for her 
as Nathanael, who was a zealous and cheerful cultivator 
of the fields of science and art. Clara clung to her 
lover with all her heart ; the first clouds she encountered • 
in life were when he had to separate from her. With 
what delight did she fly into his arms when, as he had 
promised in his last letter to Lothair, he really came 
back to his nativ^ i:own and entered his mother's room ! 
And as Nathanael had foreseen, the moment he saw 
Clara again he no longer thought about either the 
advocate Coppelius or her sensible letter; his ill- 
humour had quite disappeared. 

Nevertheless Nathanael was right when he told his 
friend Lothair that the repulsive vendor of weather- 
glasses, Coppola, had exercised a fatal and disturbing 
influence upon his life. It was quite patent to all ; for 
even during the first few days he showed that he was 
completely and entirely changed. He gave himself up 
to gloomy reveries, and moreover acted so strangely ; 
they had never observed anything at all like it in him 
before. Everything, even his own life, was to him but 


196 THE SAXD MAN. 

dreams and presentiments. His constant theme was 
that every man who delusively imagined himself to be 
free was merely the plaything of the cruel sport of mys- 
terious powers, (and it was vain for man to resist them; 
he must humbly iubmit to whatever destiny had decreed 
for him. He went so far as to maintain that it was 
foolish to believe that a man could do anything in 
art or science of his own accord ; for the inspiration in 
which alone any true artistic work could be done did not 
proceed from the spirit within outwards, but was the 
result of the operation directed inwards of some Higher 
Principle existing without and beyond ourselves. 

This mystic extravagance was in the highest degree 
repugnant to Clara's clear intelligent mind, but it 
seemed vain to enter upon any attempt at refutation. 
Yet when Nathanael went on to prove that Coppelius 
was the Evil Principle which had entered into him 
and taken possession of him at the time he was listen- 
ing behind the curtain, and that this hateful demon 
would in some terrible way ruin their happiness, then 
Clara grew grave and said, "Yes, Nathanael. You 
are right; Coppelius is an Evil Principle; he can do 
dreadful things, as bad as could a Satanic power which 
should assume a living physical form, but only — only 
if vou do not banish him from vour mind and thoufirhts. 
So long as you believe in him he exists and is at 
work ; your belief in him is his only power.'* Where- 
upon Nathanael, quite angry because Clara would 
only grant the existence of the demon in his own 
mind, began to dilate at large upon the whole mystic 
doctrine of devils and awful powers, but Clara ab- 
ruptly broke off the theme by making, to Nathanael's 
very great disgust, some quite commonplace remark. 
Such deep mysteries are sealed books to cold, unsus- 


THE SAND'MAN. 197 

m 

ceptible characters, he thought, without being clearly 
conscious to himself that he counted Clara amongst 
these inferior natures, and accordingly he did not 
remit his efforts to initiate her into these mysteries. 
In the morning, when she was helping to prepare 
breakfast, he would take his stand beside her, and 
read all sorts of mystic books to her, until she begged 
him — "But, my dear Nathanael, I shall have to scold 
you as the Evil Principle which exercises a fatal 
influence upon my coffee. For if I do as you wish, 
and let things go their own way, and look into your 
eyes whilst you read, the coffee will all boil over into 
the fire, and you will none of you get any breakfast." 
Then Nathanael hastily banged the book to and ran 
away in great displeasure to his own room. 

Formerly he had possessed a peculiar talent for 
writing pleasing, sparking tales, which Clara took the 
greatest delight in listening to ; but now his pro- 
ductions were gloomy, unintelligible, and wanting 
in form, so that, although Clara out of forbearance 
towards him did not say so, he nevertheless felt 
how very little interest she took in them. There was 
nothing that Clara disliked so much as what was 
tedious ; at such times her intellectual sleepiness was 
not to be overcome: it was betraved both in her 
glances and in her words. NathanaePs effusions were, 
in truth, exceedingly tedious. His ill-humour at 
Clara's cold prosaic temperament continued to in- 
crease ; Clara could not conceal her distaste of his 
dark, gloomy, wearying mysticism ; and thus both 
began to be more and more estranged from each other 
without exactly being aware of it themselves. The 
image of the ugly Coppelius had, as Nathanael was 
obliged to confess to himself, faded considerably ia 


iqS the SAND-MAN. 

his fancy, and it oit^n cost him great pains to present 
him in vivid colours in his literary eflforts, in which he 
played the part of the ghoul of Destiny. At length 
it entered into his head to make his dismal presenti- 
ment that Coppelius would ruin his happiness the 
subject of a poem. He made himself and Clara, 
united by true love, the central figures, but represented 
a black hand as being from time to time thrust into 
their life and plucking out a joy that had blossomed 
for them. At length, as they were standing at the 
altar, the terrible Coppelius appeared and touched 
Clara's lovely eyes, which leapt into Nathanael's own 
bosom, burning and hissing like bloody sparks. Then 
Coppelius laid hold upon him, and hurled him into a 
blazing circle of fire, which spun round with the speed 
of a whirlwind, and, storming and blustering, dashed 
away with him. The fearful noise it made was like a 
furious hurricane lashing the foaming sea- waves until 
they rise up like black, white-headed giants in the 
midst of the raging struggle. But through the midst of 
the savage fury of the tempest he heard CIara*s voice 
calling, " Can you not see me, dear ? Coppelius has 
deceived you ; they were not my eyes which burned 
so in your bosom ; they were fiery drops of your own 
heart's blood. Look at mc, I have got my own eyes 
still." Nathanael thought, " Yes, that is Clara, and I 
am hers for ever. Then this thought laid a power- 
ful grasp upon the fiery circle so that it stood still, 
and the riotous turmoil died away rumbling down a 
dark abyss. Nathanael looked into Clara's eyes ; but 
it was death whose gaze rested so kindly upon him. 

Whilst Nathanael was writing this work he was 
very quiet and sober-minded: he filed and polished 
every line, and as he had chosen to submit himself to 


THE SAND-MAN. 199 

the limitations of metre, he did not rest until all was 
pure and musical. When, however, he had at length 
finished it and read it aloud to himself he was seized 
with horror and awful dread, and he screamed, '^ Whose 
hideous voice is this ? ^' But he soon came to see in it 
again nothing beyond a very successful poem, and he 
confidently believed it would enkindle Clara's cold 
temperament, though to what end she should be thus 
aroused was not quite clear to his own mind, nor yet 
what would be the real purpose served by tormenting 
her with these dreadful pictures, which prophesied a 
terrible and ruinous end to her affection. 

Nathanael and Clara sat in his mother's little 
garden. Clara was bright and cheerful, since for 
three entire days her lover, who had been busy writing 
his poem, had not teased her with his dreams or fore- 
bodings. Nathanael, too, spoke in a gay and vivacious 
way of things of merry import, as he formerly used 
to do, so that Clara said, " Ah ! now I have you again. 
We have driven away that ugly Coppelius, you see.*' 
Then it suddenly occurred to him that he had got the 
poem in his pocket which he wished to read to her. 
He at once took out the manuscript and began to 
read. Clara, anticipating something tedious as usual, 
prepared to submit to the infliction, and calmly re- 
sumed her knitting. But as the sombre clouds rose 
up darker and darker she let her knitting fall on her 
lap and sat with her eyes fixed in a set stare upon 
Nathanael's face. He was quite carried away by his 
own work, the fire of enthusiasm coloured his cheeks 
a deep red, and tears started from his eyes. At length 
he concluded, groaning and showing great lassitude ; 
grasping Clara's hand, he sighed as if he were being 
utterly melted in inconsolable grief, '^Oh! Clara I 


200 THE SAND'MAN. 

Clara ! " She drew him softly to her heart and said iu 
a low but very grave and impressive tone, "Nathanael, 
my darling Nathanael, throw that foolish, senseless, 
stupid thing into the fire." Then Nathanael leapt in- 
dignantly to his feet, crying, as he pushed Clara from 
him, ^^You damned lifeless automaton!" and rushed 
away. Clara was cut to the heart, and wept bitterly. 
'^ Oh ! he has never loved me, for he does not under- 
stand me," she sobbed. 

Lothair entered the arbour. Clara was obliged to 
tell him all that had taken place. He was passionately 
fond of his sister; and every word of her complaint 
fell like a spark upon his heart, so that the displeasure 
which he had long entertained against his dreamy 
friend Nathanael was kindled into furious anger. He 
hastened to find Nathanael, and upbraided him in 
harsh words for his irrational behaviour towards his 
beloved sister. The fiery Nathanael answered him iu 
the same style. "A fantastic, crack-brained fool/' 
was retaliated with, *^ A miserable, common, everyday 
sort of fellow." A meeting was the inevitable con- 
sequence. They agreed to meet on the following 
morning behind the garden-wall, and fight, according 
to the custom of the students of the place, with sharp 
rapiers. They went about silent and gloomy; Clara 
had both heard and seen the violent quarrel, and also 
observed the fencing-master bring the rapiers in the 
dusk of the evening. She had a presentiment of what 
was to happen. They both appeared at the appointed 
place wrapped up in the same gloomy silence, and 
threw off their coats. Their eyes flaming with the 
bloodthirsty light of pugnacity, they were about to 
begin their contest when Clara burst through the 
garden door. Sobbing, she screamed, ^'You savage. 


THE SAND-MAN. 201 

terrible men ! Cut me down before you attack each 
other ; for how can I live when my lover has slain my 
brother, or my brother slain my lover ? " Lothair let 
his weapon fall and gazed silently upon the ground^ 
whilst Nathanael's heart was rent with sorrow, and all 
the affection which he had felt for his lovelv Clara in the 
happiest days of her golden youth was awakened within 
him. His murderous weapon, too, fell from his hand ; 
he threw himself at Clara's feet. *' Oh I can you ever 
forgive me, my only, my dearly loved Clara ? Can 
you, my dear brother Lothair, also forgive me?" 
Lothair was touched by his friend's great distress ; the 
three young people embraced each other amidst endless 
tears, and swore never again to break their bond of 
love and fidelitv. 

Nathanael felt as if a heavy burden that had been 
weighing him down to the earth' was now rolled from 
off him, nay, as if by offering resistance to the dark 
power which had possessed him, he had rescued his own 
self from the ruin which had threatened him. Three 
happy days he now spent amidst the loved ones, and 

then returned to G , where he had still a year to 

stay before settling down in his native town for life. 

Everything having reference to Coppelius had been 
concealed from the mother, for they knew she could 
not think of him without horror, since she as well as 
Nathanael believed him to be guilty of causing her 
husband's death. 

• ••••• 

When Nathanael came to the house where he lived 
he was greatly astonished to find it burnt down to the 
ground, so that nothing but the bare outer walls were 
left standing amidst a heap of ruins. Although the 
fire had broken out in the laboratory of the chemist 


202 THE SAND'MAN. 

who lived on the ground-floor, and had therefore spread 
upwards, some of Nathanael's bold, active friends, had 
succeeded in time in forcing a way into his room in 
the upper storey and saving his books and manuscripts 
and instruments. They had carried them all uninjured 
into another house, where they engaged a room for 
him ; this he now at once took possession of. That 
he lived opposite Professor Spalanzani did not strike 
him particularly, nor did it occur to him as anything 
more singular that he could, as he observed, by looking 
out of his window, see straight into the room where 
Olimpia often sat alone. Her figure he could plainly 
distinguish, although her features were uncertain and 
confused. It did at length occur to him, however, that 
she remained for hours together in the same position 
in which he had first discovered her through the glass 
door, sitting at a little table without any occupation 
whatever, and it was evident that she was constantly 
gazing across in his direction. He could not but con- 
fess to himself that he had never seen a finer figure. 
However, with Clara mistress of his heart, he remained 
perfectly unaffected by Olimpia's stiffness and apathy ; 
and it was only occasionally that he sent a fugitive 
glance over his compendium across to her — that was all. 
He was writing to Clara; a light tap came at the 
door. At his summons to "Come in," Coppola's 
repulsive face appeared peeping in. Nathanael felt 
his heart beat with trepidation ; but, recollecting what 
Spalanzani had told him about his fellow-countryman 
Coppola, and what he had himself so faithfully pro- 
mised his beloved in respect to the Sand-man Cop- 
pelius, he was ashamed at himself for this childish fear 
of spectres. Accordingly, he controlled himself with 
an effort, and said, as quietly and as calmly as he pos- 


THE SAND-MAN. 203 

sibly could, '^ I don't want to buy any weather-glasses, 
my good friend ; you had better go elsewhere.'^ Then 
Coppola came right into the room, and said in a hoarse 
voice^ screwing up his wide mouth into a hideous smile, 
whilst his little eyes flashed keenly from beneath his 
long grey eyelashes, '' What 1 Nee weather-gless ? Nee 
weather-glesp ? *ve got foine oyes as well — foine oyes ! " 
Affrighted, Nathanael cried, "You stupid man, how 
can you have eyes ? — eyes — ^cyes ? " But Coppola, lay- 
ing aside his weather-glasses, thrust his hands into his 
big coat-pockets and brought out several spy-glasses 
and spectacles, and put them on the table. "Theer! 
Theer ! Spectacles ! Spectacles to put 'n nose! Them's 
my oyes — foine oyes/' And he continued to produce 
more and more spectacles from his pockets until the 
table began to gleam and flash all over. Thousands of 
eyes were looking and blinking convulsively, and star- 
ing up at Nathanael ; he could not avert his gaze from 
the table. Coppola went on heaping up his spectacles, 
whilst wilder and ever wilder burning flashes crossed 
through and through each other and darted their blood- 
red rays into Nathanael's breast. Quite overcome, 
and frantic with terror, he shouted, " Stop ! stop ! you 
terrible man ! " and he seized Coppola by the arm, 
which he had again thrust into his pocket in order 
to bring out still more spectacles, although the whole 
table was covered all over with them. With a harsh 
disagreeable laugh Coppola gently freed himself; and 
with the words " So ! went none ! Well, here foine 
gless!" he swept all his spectacles together, and put 
them back into his coat- pockets, whilst from a breast- 
pocket he produced a great number of larger and 
smaller perspectives. As soon as the spectacles were 
gone Nathanael recovered his equanimity again ; and. 


204 THE SAND-MAN. 

bending his thoughts upon Clara^ he clearly discerned 
that the gruesome incubus had proceeded only from 
himself, as also that Coppola was a right honest 
mechanician and optician, and far from being Coppe- 
lius's dreaded double and crhost. And then, besides, 
none of the glasses which Coppola now placed on the 
table had anything at all singular about them, at least 
nothing so weird as the spectacles; so, in order to 
square accounts with himself, Nathanael now really 
determined to buy something of the man. He took 
up a small, very beautifully cut pocket perspective, and 
by way of proving it looked through the window. 
Never before in his life had he had a glass in his hands 
that brought out things so clearly and sharply and dis- 
tinctly. Involuntarily he directed the glass upon Spal- 
anzani's room ; Olimpia sat at the little table as usual, 
her arms laid upon it and her hands folded. Now he 
saw for the first time the regular and exquisite beauty 
of her features. The eyes, however, seemed to him to 
have a singular look of fixity and lifelessness. But as 
he continued to look closer and more carefully through 
the glass he fancied a light like humid moonbeams came 
into them. It seemed as if their power of vision was 
now being enkindled ; their glances shone with ever- 
increasing vivacity. Nathanael remained standing at 
the window as if glued to the spot by a wizard's spell, 
his gaze riveted unchangeably upon the divinely beau- 
tiful Olimpia. A coughing and shuflSing of the feet 
awakened him out of his enchaining dream, as it were. 
Coppola stood behind him, '* Tre zechini " (three 
ducats). Nathanael had completely forgotten the 
optician; he hastily paid the sum demanded. ''Ain't *t ? 
Foine gless ? foine gless ? " asked Coppola in his harsh 
unpleasant voice, smiling sardonically. " Yes, yes. 


THE SAND'MAN. 205 

yes/' rejoined Nathanacl impatiently; "adieu, my 
good friend." ' But Coppola did not leave the room 
without casting many peculiar side-glances upon Natha- 
nael ; and the young student heard him laughing 
loudly on the stairs. "Ah well!" thought he, "he's 
laughing at me because I've paid him too much for 
this little perspective — because Pve given him too 
much money — that's it." As he softly murmured these 
words he fancied he detected a gasping sigh as of a 
dying man stealing awfully through the room; his 
heart stopped beating with fear. But to be sure he 
had heaved a deep sigh himself; it was quite plain. 
" Clara is quite right," said he to himself, " in holding 
me to be an incurable ghost-seer; and yet it^s very 
ridiculous — ay, more than ridiculous, that the stupid 
thought of having paid Coppola too much for his glass 
should cause me this strange anxiety ; I can't see any 
reason for it." 

Now he sat down to finish his letter to Clara ; but 
a glance through the window showed him Olimpia 
still in her former posture. Urged by an irresistible 
impulse, he jumped up and seized Coppola's perspec- 
tive; nor could he tear himself away from the fasci- 
nating Olimpia until his friend and brother Siegmund 
called for him to go to Professor Spalanzani's lecture. 
The curtains before the door of the all-important room 
were closely drawn, so that he could not see Olimpia. 
Nor could he even see her from his own room during 
the two following days, notwithstanding that he 
scarcely ever left his window, and maintained a scarce 
interrupted watch through Coppola's perspective upon 
her room. On the third day curtains even were drawn 
across the window. Plunged into the depths of despair, 
— goaded by longing and ardent desire, he hurried 


2o6 THE SAND-MAN. 

outside the walls of the town. Olimpia's image 
hovered about his path in the air and stepped forth 
out of the bushes^ and peeped up at him with large 
and lustrous eyes from the bright surface of the brook. 
Clara's image was completely faded from his mind ; 
he had no thoughts except for Olimpia. He uttered 
his love-plaints aloud and in a lachrymose tone, '^ Oh ! 
my glorious, noble star of love, have you only risen to 
vanish again, and leave me in the darkness and hope- 
lessness of night ? " 

Returning home, he became aware that there was 
a good deal of noisy bustle going on in Spalanzani's 
house. All the doors stood wide open; men were 
taking in all kinds of gear and furniture ; the windows 
of the first floor were all lifted off their hinges; busy 
maid-servants with immense hair-brooms were driving 
backwards arfd forwards dusting and sweeping, whilst 
within could be heard the knocking and hammering 
of carpenters and upholsterers. Utterly astonished, 
Nathanael stood still in the street; then Siegmund 
joined him, laughing, and said, "Well, what do you 
say to our old Spalanzani? '* Nathanael assured him 
that he could not say anything, since he knew not 
what it all meant ; to his great astonishment, he could 
hear, however, that they were turning the quiet gloomy 
house almost inside out with their dusting and cleaning 
and making of alterations. Then he learned from 
Siegmund that Spalanzani intended giving a great 
concert and ball on the following day, and that half 
the university was invited. It was generally reported 
that Spalanzani was going to let his daughter Olimpia, 
whom he had so long so jealously guarded from every 
eye, make her first appearance. 

Nathanael received an invitation. At the appointed 


THE SAND-MAN. 207 

hour, when the carriages were rolling up and the lights 
were gleaming brightly in the decorated halls, he went 
across to the Professor's, his heart beating high with 
expectation. The company was both numerous and 
brilliant. Olimpia was richly and tastefully dressed. 
One could not but admire her figure and the regular 
beauty of her features. The striking inward curve of 
her back, as well as the wasp-like small ness of her 
waist, appeared to be the result of too-tight lacing. 
There was something stiff and measured in her gait 
and bearing that made an unfavourable impression 
upon many ; it was ascribed to the constraint impose^ 
upon her by the company. The concert began. 
Olimpia played on the piano with great skill ; and 
sang as skilfully an aria di bravura^ in a voice which 
was, if anything, almost too sharp, but clear as glass 
bells. Nathanael was transported with delight; he 
stood in the background farthest from her, and owing 
to the blinding lights could not quite distinguish 
her features. So, without being observed, he took 
Coppola^s glass out of his pocket, and directed it upon 
the beautiful Olimpia. Oh! then he perceived how 
her yearning eyes sought him, how every note only 
reached its full purity in the loving glance which 
penetrated to and inflamed his heart Her artificial 
roulades seemed to him to be the exultant cry towards 
heaven of the soul refined by love ; and when at last, 
after the cadenza^ the long trill rang shrilly and loudly 
through the hall, he felt as if he were suddenly grasped 
by burning arms and could no longer control himself, 
— he could not help shouting aloud in his mingled 
pain and delight, '* Olimpia!" All eyes were turned 
upon him; many people laughed. The face of the 
cathedral organist wore a still more gloomy look 


2o8 THE SAND-MAN. 

than it had done before, but all he said was, " Very 

well!" 

The concert came to an end, and the ball began. 
Oh ! to dance with her — with her — that was now the 
aim of all NathanaePs wishes, of all his desires. But 
how should he have courage to request her, the queen 
of the ball, to grant him the honour of a dance ? And 
yet he couldn't tell how it came about, just as the 
dance began, he found himself standing close beside 
her, nobody having as yet asked her to be his partner; 
so, with some difficulty stammering out a few words, 
he grasped her hand. It was cold as ice ; he shook with 
an awful, frosty shiver. But, fixing his eyes upon her 
face, he saw that her glance was beaming upon him 
with love and longing, and at the same moment he 
thought that the pulse began to beat in her cold hand, 
and the warm life-blood to course through her veins. 
And passion burned more intensely in his own heart 
also ; he threw his arm round her beautiful waist and 
whirled her round the hall. He had always thought 
that he kept good and accurate time in dancing, but 
from the perfectly rhythmical evenness with which 
Olimpia danced, and which frequently put him quite 
out, he perceived how very faulty his own time really 
was. Notwithstanding, he would not dance with any 
other lady ; and everybody else who approached Olim- 
pia to call upon her for a dance, he would have liked 
to kill on the spot. This, however, only happerted 
twice; to his astonishment Olimpia remained after 
this without a partner, and he failed not on each 
occasion to take her out again. If Nathanael had 
been able to see anything else except the beautiful 
Olimpia, there would inevitably have been a good deal 
of unpleasant quarrelling and strife ; for it was evident 


THE SAND-MAN. 209 

that Olimpia was the object of the smothered laughter, 
only with difficulty Euppressed, which was heard in 
various corners amongst the young people; and they 
followed her with very curious looks, but nobody knew 
for what reason. Nathanael, excited by dancing and 
the plentiful supply of wine he had consumed, had laid 
aside the shyness which at other times characterised 
him. He sat beside Olimpia, her hand in his own, 
and declared his love enthusiastically and passionately 
in words which neither of. them understood, neither he 
nor Olimpia. And yet she perhaps did, for she sat 
with her eyes fixed unchangeably upon his, sighing 
repeatedly, "Ach I Ach! Ach!" Upon this Nathanael 
would answer, " Oh, you glorious heavenly lady I You 
ray from the promised paradise of love ! Oh 1 what a 
profound soul you have! my whole being is mirrored 
in it ! " and a good deal more in the same strain. But 
Olimpia only continued to sigh " Ach ! Ach ! " again 
and again. 

Professor Spalanzani passed by the two happy lovers 
once or twice, and smiled with a look of peculiar satis- 
faction. All at once it seemed to Nathanael, albeit he 
was far away in a different world, as if it were growing 
perceptibly darker down below at Professor Spalanzani' 3. 
He looked about him, and to his very great alarm be- 
came aware that there were only two lights left burning 
in the hall, and they were on the point of going out. 
The music and dancing had long ago ceased. "We 
must part — part!" he cried wildly and despairingly; 
he kissed Olimpia's hand ; he bent down to her mouth, 
but ice-cold lips met his burning ones. As he touched 
her cold hand, he felt his heart thrilled with awe; the 
legend of "The Dead Bride"* shot suddenly through 
' Phlegon, the freedman of Hadnao, relates that a jaaag maideo, 
VOL. L Q 


2IO THE SAND'MAN. 

his mind. But Olimpia had drawn him closer to her, 
and the kiss appeared to warm her lips into vitality. 
Professor Spalanzani strode slowly through the empty 
apartment, his footsteps giving a hollow echo ; and his 
figure had, as the flickering shadows played about him, 
a ghostly awful appearance. "Do you love me? Do 
you love me, Olimpia? Only one little word — Do you 
love me?'^ whispered Nathanael, but she only sighed, 
" Ach ! Ach ! '^ as she rose to her feet, " Yes, you 
are my lovely, glorious star of love," said Nathanael, 
"and'will shine for ever, purifying and ennobling my 
heart." " Ach I Ach !" replied Olimpia, as she moved 
along. Nathanael followed her; they stood before 
the Professor. " You have had an extraordinarilv 
animated conversation with my daughter," said he, 
smiling ; " well, well, my dear Mr. Nathanael, if you 
find pleasure in talking to the stupid girl, I am sure I 
shall be glad for you to come and do so.'' Nathanael 
took his leave, his heart singing and leaping in a perfect 
delirium of happiness. 

During the next few days Spalanzani's ball was the 
general topic of conversation. Although the Pro- 
fessor had done everything to make the thing a 
splendid success, yet certain gay spirits related more 
than one thing that had occurred which was quite 

Philcmium, the daughter of Philostratus and Charitas, became deeply 
enamoured of a young man, napied Machates, a guest in the house of 
her father. This did not meet with the approbation of her parents, 
and they turned Machates away. The young maiden took this so 
much to heart that she pined away and died. Some time afterwards 
Machates returned to his old lodgings, when he was visited at night by 
his beloved, who came from the grave to see him again. The story 
may be read in Hey wood's (Thos. ) " Hierarchie of Blessed Angels," 
book vii., p. 479 (London, 1637). Goethe has made this story the 
foundation of his beautiful poem Die Braut von Kcrinth^ with which 
form of it Hoffmann was most likely familiar. 


THE SAND'MAN. 211 

irregular and out of order. They were especially keen 
in pulling Olimpia to pieces for her taciturnity and 
rigid stiffness; in spite of her beautiful form they 
alleged that she was hopelessly stupid, and in this fact 
they discerned the reason why Spalanzani had so long 
kept her concealed from publicity. Nathanael hearxl 
all this with inward wrath, but nevertheless he held 
his tongue ; for, thought he, would it indeed be worth 
while to prove to these fellows that it is their own 
stupidity which prevents them from appreciating 
Olimpia^s profound and brilliant parts? One day 
Siegmund said to him, " Pray, brother, have the kind- 
ness to tell me how you, a sensible fellow, came to 
lose your head over that Miss Wax-face — that wooden 
doll across there ? '^ Nathanael was about to fly into 
a rage, but he recollected himself and replied, " Tell 
me, Siegmund, how came it that Olimpia's divine 
charms could escape your eye, so keenly alive as it 
always is to beauty, and your acute perception as 
well? But Heaven be thanked for it, otherwise I 
should have had you for a rival, and then the blood of 
one of us would have had to be spilled/' Siegmund, 
perceiving how matters stood with his friend, skilfully 
interposed and said, after remarking that all argument 
with one in love about the object of his affections was 
out of place, " Yet it's very strange that several of us 
have formed pretty much the same opinion about 
Olimpia. We think she is — you won't take it ill, 
brother ? — that she is singularly statuesque and soulless. 
Her figure is regular, and so are her features, that 
can't be gainsaid ; and if her eyes were not so utterly 
devoid of life, I may say, of the power of vision, she 
might pass for a beauty. She is strangely measured 
in her movements, they all seem as if they were 


212 THE SAND-MAN. 

dependent upon some wound-up clock-work. Her 
playing and singing has the disagreeably perfect^ but 
insensitive time of a singing machine, and her dancing 
is the same. We felt quite afraid of this Olimpia, and 
did not like to have anything to do with her; she 
seemed to us to be only acting like a living creature, 
and as if there was some secret at the bottom of it 
all.'^ Nathanael did not give way to the bitter feelings 
which threatened to master him at these words of 
Siegmund's; he fought down and got the better of 
his displeasure, and merely said, very earnestly, " You 
cold prosaic fellows may very well be afraid of her. 
It is only to its like that the poetically organised 
spirit unfolds itself. Upon me alone did her loving 
glances fall, and through my mind and thoughts alone 
did they radiate; and only in her love can I find my 
own self again. Perhaps, however, she doesn't do 
quite right not to jabber a lot of nonsense and stupid 
talk like other shallow people. It is true, she speaks 
but few words ; but the few words she docs speak are 
genuine hieroglyphs of the inner world of Love and of 
the higher cognition of the intellectual life revealed in 
the intuition of the Eternal beyond the grave. But 
you have no understanding for all these things, and I 
am only wasting words." '^ God be with you, brother," 
said Siegmund*'ery gently, almost sadly, "but it seems 
to me that you are in a very bad way. You may 
rely upon me, if all — No, I can't say any more." It 
all at once dawned upon Nathanael that his cold 
prosaic friend Siegmund really and sincerely wished 
him well, and so he warmly shook his proffered hand. 

Nathanael had completely forgotten that there was 
a Clara in the world, whom he had once loved — and 
his mother and Lothair. They had all vanished from 


THE SAND'MAN. 213 

his mind ; he lived for Olimpia alone. He sat beside 
her every day for hours together, rhapsodising about 
his love and sympathy enkindled into life, and about 
psychic elective affinity ^ — all of which Olimpia listened 
to with great reverence. He fished up from the 
very bottom of his desk all the things that he had 
ever written — poems, fancy sketches, visions, romances, 
tales, and the heap was increased daily with all kinds 
of aimless sonnets, stanzas, canzonets. All these he 
read to Olimpia hour after hour without growing 
tired ; but then he had never had such an exemplary 
listener. She neither embroidered, nor knitted ; she 
did not look out of the window, or feed a bird, or play 
with a little pet dog or a favourite cat, neither did she 
twist a piece of paper or anything of that kind round 
her finger; she did not forcibly convert a yawn into 
a low affected cough — in short, she sat hour after hour 
with her eyes bent unchangeably upon her lover's face, 
without moving or altering her position, and her gaze 
grew more ardent and more ardent still. And it was 
only when at last Nathanael rose and kissed her lips 
or her hand that she said, " Ach ! Ach ! " and then 
'* Goodnight, dear." Arrived in his own room, 
Nathanael would break out with, '^Oh! what a bril- 
liant — what a profound mind ! Only you — you alone 
understand me." And his heart trembled with rapture 
when he reflected upon the wondrous harmony which 
daily revealed itself between his own and his Olimpia's 
character; for he fancied that she had expressed in 
respect to his works and his poetic genius the identical 
sentiments which he himself cherished deep down in 
his own heart in respect to the same, and even as if 

' This phrase (Die Wahlverwandschaft in German) has been made 
celebrated as the title of one of Goethe's works. 


214 THE SAND'MAN. 

it was his own heart's voice speaking to him. And it 
must indeed have been so ; for Olimpia never uttered 
any other words than those already mentioned. And 
when Nathanael himself in his clear and sober 
moments^ as^ for instance^ directly after waking in a 
morning, thought about her utter passivity and taci- 
turnity, he only said, "What arewords— but^wiJrds ? 
The glance of her heavenly eyes says more than any 
tongue of earth. And how can, anyway, a child of 
heaven accustom herself to the narrow circle which 
the exigencies of a wretched mundane life demand ? " 
Professor Spalanzani appeared to be greatly pleased 
at the intimacy that had sprung up between his 
daughter Olimpia and Nathanael, and showed the 
young man many unmistakable proofs of his good 
feeling towards him ; and when Nathanael ventured 
at length to hint very delicately at an alliance with 
Olimpia, the Professor smiled all over his face at once, 
and said he should allow his daughter to make a 
perfectly free choice. Encouraged by these words, 
and with the fire of desire burning in his heart, 
Nathanael resolved the very next day to implore 
Olimpia to tell him frankly, in plain words, what he 
had long read in her sweet loving glances, — that she 
would be his for ever. He looked for the ring which 
his mother had given him at parting; he would present 
it to Olimpia as a symbol of his devotion, and of the 
happy life he was to lead with her from that time 
onwards. Whilst looking for it he came across his 
letters from Clara and Lothair ; he threw them care- 
lessly aside, found the ring, put it in his pocket, and 
ran across to Olimpia. Whilst still on the stairs, 
in the entrance-passage, he heard an extraordinary 
hubbub ; the noise seemed to proceed from Spalanzani's 


THE SAND'MAN. 215 

study. There was a stamping — a rattling — pushing — 
knocking against the door^ with curses and oaths 
intermingled. " Leave hold — leave hold — you monster 
— you rascal — staked your life and honour upon it ? — 
Ha! ha! ha! ha! — That was not our wager — F, I 
made the eyes — I the clock-work. — Go to the devil 
with your clock-work — you damned dog of a watch- 
maker — be off — Satan — stop — you paltry turner — you 
infernal beast ! — stop — begone — let me go.*' The 
voices which were thus making all this racket and 
rumpus were those of Spalanzani and the fearsome 
Coppelius. Nathanael rushed in, impelled by some 
nameless dread. The Professor was grasping a female 
figure by the shoulders, the Italian Coppola held her 
by the feet ; and they were pulling and dragging each 
other backwards and forwards, fighting furiously to 
get possession of her. Nathanael recoiled with horror 
on recognising that the figure was Olimpia. Boiling 
with rage, he was about to tear his beloved from the 
grasp of the madmen, when Coppola by an extra- 
ordinary exertion of strength twisted the figure out of 
the Professor's hands and gave him such a terrible 
blow with her, that he reeled backwards and fell over 
the table all amongst the phials and retorts, the bottles 
and glass cylinders, which covered it : all these things 
were smashed into a thousand pieces. Bnt Coppola 
threw the figure across his shoulder, and, laughing 
shrilly and horribly, ran hastily down the stairs, the 
figure's ugly feet hanging down and banging and 
rattling like wood against the steps. Nathanael was 
stupefied ; — he had seen only too distinctly that in 
01impia*s pallid waxen face there were no eyes, merely 
black holes in their atpadj^^p wag gn inanima|f> 

j>)iDpet Spalanzani was rolling on the floor; the 


2i6 THE SAND'MAN. 

pieces of glass had cut his head and breast and arm ; 
the blood was escaping from him in streams. But he 
gathered his strength together by an effort. "After 
him — after him ! What do you stand staring there 
for? Coppelius — Coppelius — he's stolen my best 
ajMi^Sjatfli^^at which Pve worked for twenty years — 
staked my life upon it — the clock-work — speech — 
movement — mine — your eyes — stolen your eyes — damn 
him — curse him — after him — fetch me back Olimpia 
— there are the eves." And now Nathanael saw a 
pair of bloody eyes lying on the floor, staring at him ; 
Spalanzani seized them with his uninjured hand and 
threw t^)€m .atrJmn^. s.o jhat th eyjjit his hreasf, - Then 
madness dug her burning talons into him and swept 
down into his heart, rending his mind and thoughts 
to shreds. '^ Aha ! aha ! aha 1 Fire-wheel — fire-wheel ! 
Spin round, fire-wheel ! merrily, merrily ! Aha ! 
wooden doll! spin round, pretty wooden doll!*' and 
he threw himself upon the Professor, clutching him 
fast by the throat. He would certainly have strangled 
him had not several people, attracted by the noise, 
rushed in and torn away the madman; and so they 
saved the Professor, whose wounds were immediatelv 
dressed. Siegmund, with all his strength, was not able 
to subdue the frantic lunatic, who continued to scream 
in a dreadful way, *^ Spin round, wooden doll! '' and 
to strike out right and left with his doubled fists. At 
length the united strength of several succeeded in 
overpowering him by throwing him on the floor and 
binding him. His cries passed into a brutish bellow 
that was awful to hear ; and thus raging with the 
harrowing violence of madness, he was taken away to 
the madhouse. 

Before continuing my narration of what happened 


THE SAND-MAN. 217 

further to the unfortunate Nathanael, I will tell you, 
indulgent reader, in case you take any interest in that 
skilful mechanician and fabricator of automata, Spal- 
anzani, that he recovered completely from his wounds. 
He had, however, to leave the university, for Natha- 
nael's fate had created a great sensation; and the 
opinion was pretty generally expressed that it was an 
imposture altogether unpardonable to have smuggled 
a wooden puppet instead of a living person into in- 
telligent tea-circles, — for Olimpia had been present at 
several with success. Lawyers called it a cunning 
piece of knavery, and all the harder to punish since it 
was directed against the public ; and it had been so 
craftily contrived that it had escaped unobserved by all 
except a few preternaturally acute students, although 
everybody was very wise now and remembered to 
have thought of several facts which occurred to them 
as suspicious. But these latter could not succeed in 
making out any sort of a consistent tale. For was it, 
for instance, a thing likely to occur to any one as sus- 
picious that, according to the declaration of an elegant 
beau of these tea-parties, Olimpia had, contrary to all 
good manners, sneezed oftener than she had yawned? 
The former must have been, in the opinion of this 
elegant gentleman, the winding up of the concealed 
clock-work; it had always been accompanied by an 
observable creaking, and so on. The Professor of 
Poetry and Eloquence took a pinch of snuff, and, slap- 
ping the lid to and clearing his throat, said solemnly, 
'^ My most honourable ladies and gentlemen, don't 
you see then where the rub is ? The whole thing in 
an allegory, a conti puous jnetaph or. You understand 
me ? Sapienti sat.'^ But several most honourable 
gentlemen did not rest satisfied with this explanation ; 


2i8 THE SAND' MAN. 

the history of this automaton had sunk deeply into 
their souls, and an__ab8urijxM«tnral-xjfJm^^ 

an to prevail. Several lovers, in order to be fully 
convmcedThat they were not paying court to a wooden 
puppet, required that their mistress should sing and 
dance a little out of time^ should embroider or knit or 
play with her little pug, &c., when being read to, but 
above all things else that she should do something 
more than merely listen — that she should frequently 
speak in such a way as to really show that her words 
presupposed as a condition some thinking and feeling. 
The bonds of love were in many cases drawn closer in 
consequence, and so of course became more engaging ; 
in other instances they gradually relaxed and fell away. 
*' I cannot really be made responsible for it,'* was the 
remark of more than one young gallant. At the tea- 
gatherings everybody, in order to ward off suspicion, 
yawned to an incredible extent and never sneezed. 
Spalanzani was obliged, as has been said, to leave the 
place in order to escape a criminal charge of having 
fraudulently imposed an automaton upon human 
society. Coppola, too, had also disappeared. 

When Nathanael awoke he felt as if he had been 
oppressed by a terrible nightmare'; he opened his eyes 
and experienced an indescribable sensation of mental 
comfort, whilst a soft and most beautiful sensation 
of warmth prevaded his body. He lay on his own 
bed in his own room at home ; Clara was bending 
over him, and at a little distance stood his mother 
and Lothair. " At last, at last, O my darling Natha- 
nael ; now we have you again ; now you are cured 
of your grievous illness, now you are mine again." 
And Clara's words came from the depths of her 
heart ; and she clasped him in her arms. The' bright 


THE SAND-MAN. 219 

scalding tears streamed from his eyes, he was so 
overcome with mingled feelings of sorrow and delight ; 
and he gasped forth, "My Clara, my Clara!'' Sieg- 
mund, who had staunchly stood by his friend in his 
hour of need, now came into the room. Nathanael 
gave him his hand — "My faithful brother, you have 
not deserted me/* Every trace of insanity had left 
him, and in the tender hands of his mother and his 
beloved, and his friends, he quickly recovered his 
strength again. Good fortune had in the meantime 
visited the house , a niggardly old uncle, from whom 
they had never expected to get anything, had died, and 
left Nathanael's mother not only a considerable for- 
tune, but also a small estate, pleasantly situated not 
far from the town. There they resolved to go and 
live, Nathanael and his mother, and Clara, to whom 
he was now to be married, and Lothair. Nathanaen 
was become gentler and more childlike than he had I 
ever been before, and now began really to understancj/ 
Clara's supremely pure and noble character. None 
of them ever reminded him, even in the remotest 
degree, of the past. But when Siegmud took leave 
of him, he said, " By heaven, brother ! I was in a bad 
way, but an angel came just at the right moment 
and led me back upon the path of light. Yes, 
it was Clara.*' Siegmund would not let him speak 
further, fearing lest the painful recollections of the 
past might arise too vividly and too intensely in his 
mind. 

The time came for the four happy people to move 
to their little property. At noon they were going 
through the streets. After making several purchases 
they found that the lofty tower of the town-house was 
throwing its giant shadows across the market-place. 


220 THE SAND'MANi 

" Come," said Clara, ^' let us go up to the top once 
more and have a look at the distant hills/' No 
sooner said than done. Both of them, Nathanael and 
Clara, went up the tower ; their mother, however, went 
on with the servant-girl to her new home, and Lothair, 
not feeling inclined to climb up all the many steps, 
waited below. There the two lovers stood arm-in- 
arm on the topmost gallery of the tower, and gazed 
out into the sweet-scented wooded landscape, beyond 
which the blue hills rose up like a giant's city. 

*' Oh ! do look at that strange little grey bush, it looks 
as if it were actual Iv walkins: towards us,*' said Clara. 
Mechanically he put his hand into his side-pocket; he 
found Coppola's perspective and looked for the bush ; 
Clara stood in front of the glass. Then a convulsive 
thrill shot through his pulse and veins ; pale as a corpse, 
he fixed his staring eyes upon her; but soon they 
began to roll, and a fiery current flashed and sparkled 
in them, and he yelled fearfully, like a hunted animal. 
Leaping up high in the air and laughing horribly at 
the same time, he began to shout, in a piercing voice, 
" Spin round, wooden doll ! Spin round, wooden 
doll ! '' With the strength of a giant he laid hold 
upon Clara and tried to hurl her over, but in an agony 
of despair she clutched fast hold of the railing that 
went round the gallery. Lothair heard the madman 
raging and Clara's scream of terror : a fearful presenti- 
ment flashed across his mind. He ran up the steps ; 
the door of the second flight was locked. Clara's 
scream for help rang out more loudly. Mad with rage 
and fear, he threw himself against the door, which at 
length gave way. Clara s cries were growing fainter 
and fainter, — "Help! save me! save me!'' and her 
voice died away in the air. " She is killed — murdered 


THE SAND'MAN. 221 

by that madman,'' shouted Lothair. The door to the 
gallery was also locked. Despair gave him the strength 
of a giant; he burst the door off its hinges. Good 
God ! there was Clara in the grasp of the madman 
Nathanael, hanging over the gallery in the air; she 
only held to the iron bar with one hand. Quick as 
lightning Lothair seized his sister and pulled her back, 
at the same time dealing the madman a blow in the 
face with his doubled fist, which sent him reeling back- 
wards, forcing him to let go his victim. 

Lothair ran down with his insensible sister in" his 
arms. She was saved. But Nathanael ran round and 
round the gallery, leaping up in the air and shouting, 
"Spin round, fire-wheel! Spin round, fire-wheel!" 
The people heard the wild shouting, and a crowd began 
to gather. In the midst of them towered the advocate 
Coppelius, like a giant: he had only just arrived in 
the town and had gone straight to the market-place. 
Some were going up to overpower and take charge of 
the madman, but Coppelius laughed and said '* Ha I 
ha ! wait a bit ; he'll come down of his own accord ; " 
and he stood gazing upwards along with the rest. All 
at once Nathanael stopped as if spell-bound ; he bent 
down over the railing, and perceived Coppelius. With 
a piercing scream, " Ha ! foine oyes ! foine oyes ! " 
he leapt over. 

Wheii^ath^paeMajTon-the stone pavement with a 
broken heaiB/Gopprfhis had. disappeared in the crush 
and-€onfusion. 

Several years afterwards it was reported that, outside 
the door of a pretty country house in a remote district, 
Clara had been seen sitting hand in hand with a plea- 
sant gentleman, whilst two bright boys were playing at 


222 


THE SAND'MAN. 


her feet. From this it may be concluded that she 
eventually found that quiet domestic happiness which 
her cheerful, blithesome character required^ and which 
Nathanael, with his tempest-tossed soul, could never 
have been able to give her. 


/ 


^ . 222 


fr*** ^ 


/ 


« 


THt: ENTAlLtJD ESTATE 


( 223 ) 


THE ENTAIL. 

Not far from the shore of the Baltic Sea is situated 

the ancestral castle of the noble family Von R , 

called R — sitten. It is a wild and desolate neigh- 
bourhood, hardly anything more than a single blade of 
grass shooting up here and there from the bottomless 
drift-sand ; and instead of the garden that generally 
ornaments a baronial residence, the bare walls are 
approached on the landward side by a thin forest of 
firs, that with their never-changing vesture of gloom 
despise the bright garniture of Spring, and where, 
instead of the joyous carolling of little birds awakened 
anew to gladness, nothing is heard but the ominous 
croak of the raven and the whirring scream of the 
storm-boding sea-gull. A quarter of a mile distant 
Nature suddenly changes. As if by the wave of a 
magician's wand you are transported into the midst of 
thriving fields, fertile arable land, and meadows. You 
see, too, the large and prosperous village, with the land- 
steward^s spacious dwelling-house ; and at the angle of 
a pleasant thicket of alders you may observe the foun- 
dations of a large castle, which one of the former 
proprietors had intended to erect. His successors^ how- 
ever, living on their property in Courland^ left the 
building in its unfinished state; nor would Freiherr^ 


^ FreiheiT= Baron, though not exactly jn the pment 
the term in Gennany. A Freiheir beloogi to the " 


224 THE ENTAIL. 

Roderick von R proceed with the structure when he 

again took up his residence on the ancestral estate^ since 
the lonely old castle was more suitable to his tempera- 

^ ment, which was morose and averse to human society. 

^ He had its ruinous walls repaired as well as circum- 

\ stances would admit, and then shut himself up within 

\ them along with a cross-grained house-steward and a 

\ slender establishment of servants. 

He was seldom seen in the village, but on the other 
hand he often walked and rode along the sea-beach; 
and people claimed to have heard him^ from a distance, 
talking to the waves and listening to the rolling and 
hissing of the surf, as though he could hear the answer- 
ing voice of the spirit of the sea. Upon the topmost 
summit of the watch-tower he had a sort of studv 
fitted up and supplied with telescopes — with a complete 
set of astronomical apparatus, in fact. Thence during 
the daytime he frequently watched the ships sailing 
past on the distant horizon like white-winged sea-gulls ; 
and there he spent the starlight nights engaged in astro- 
nomical, or, as some professed to know, with astro- 
logical labours, in which the old house-steward assisted 
him. At any rate the rumour was current during his 
own lifetime that he was devoted to the occult sciences 
or the so-called Black Art, and that he had been driven 
out of Courland in consequence of the failure of an 
experiment by which an august princely house had 
been most seriously offended. The slightest allusion 
to his residence in Courland filled him with horror; 

and is a Baron of the older nobility of the Middle Ages ; and he 
ranks immediately after a Count (Graf). The title Baron is now 
restricted to comparatively newer creations, and its bearer belongs 
to the ** lower nobility." In this tale "Freiherr" and "Baron "arc 
used indifferently. 


THE ENTAIL. 225 

but for all the troubles which had there unhinged the 
tenor of his life he held his predecessors entirely to 
blame, in that they had wickedly deserted the home 
of their ancestors. In order to fetter, for the future, 
at least the head of the family to the ancestral castle, 
he converted it into a property of entail. The sove- 
reign was the more willing to ratify this arrangement 
since by its means he would secure for his country 
a family distinguished for all chivalrous virtues, and 
which had already begun to ramify into foreign 
countries. 

Neither Roderick's sou Hubert, nor the next Rode- 
rick, who was so called after his grandfather, would 
live in their ancestral castle ; both preferred Courland. 
It is conceivable, too, that, being more cheerful and 
fond of life than the gloomy astrologer, they were 
repelled by the grim loneliness of the place. Freiherr 
Roderick had granted shelter and subsistence on the 
property to two old maids, sisters of his father, who 
were living in indigence, having been but niggardly 
provided for. They, together with an aged serving- 
woman, occupied the small warm rooms of one of the 
wings; besides them and the cook, who had a large 
apartment on the ground floor adjoining the kitchen, 
the only other person was a worn-out chasseur, who 
tottered about through the lofty rooms and halls of 
the main building, and discharged the duties of cas- 
tellan. The rest of the servants lived in the village 
with the land-steward. The only time at which the 
desolated and deserted castle became the scene of life 
and activity was late in autumn, when the snow first 
began to fall and the season for wolf-hunting and boar- 
hunting arrived. Then came Freiherr Roderick with 
his wife, attended by relatives and friends and a 

VOL. I. p 


226 THE ENTAIL. 

numerous retinue, from Courland. The neighbour- 
ing nobility, and even amateur lovers of the chase who 
lived in the town hard by, came down in such numbers 
that the main building, together with the wings, 
barely sufficed to hold the crowd of guests. Well- 
served fires roared in all the stoves and fireplaces, 
while the spits were creaking from early dawn until 
late at night, and hundreds of light-hearted people, 
masters and servants, were running up and down 
stairs; here was heard the jingling and rattling of 
drinking glasses and jovial hunting choruses, there the 
footsteps of those dancing to the sound of the shrill 
music, — everywhere loud mirth and jollity ; so that for 
four or five weeks together the castle was more like a 
first-rate hostelry situated on a main highroad than 
the abode of a country gentleman. This time Frciherr 
Roderick devoted, as well as he was able, to serious 
business, for, withdrawing from the revelry of his guests, 
he discharged the duties attached to his position as lord 
of the entail. He not only had a complete statement 
of the revenues laid before him, but he listened to every 
proposal for improvement and to even the least com- 
plaint of his tenants, endeavouring to establish order 
in everything, and check all wrong-doing and injustice 
as far as lay in his power. 

In these matters of business he was honestly assisted 

by the old advocate V , who had been law agent 

of .the R family and Justitiarius ^ of their estates 

in P from father to son for many years ; ac- 
cordingly, V was wont to set out for the estate at 

^ The JustUiarius acted as justiciary in the seignorial courts of 
justice, which were amongst the privileges accorded to the nobility of 
certain ranks, in certain cases, by the feudal institutions of the Middle 
Ages. This privilege the R family is represented as exercising. 


THE ENTAIL. 227 

least a week before the day fixed for the arrival of the 
Freiherr. In the year 179- the time came round 

again when old V was to start on bis journey for 

R — sitten. However strong and healthy the old man, 
now seventy years of age, might feel, he was yet quite 
assured that a helping hand would prove beneficial to 
him in his business. So he said to me one day as if 
in jest, "Cousin.!" (I was his great-nephew, but he 
called me ''cousin," owing to the fact that his own 
Christian name and mine were both the same) — 
" Cousin, I was thinking it would not be amiss if you 
went along with mc to R — sitten and felt the sea- 
breezes blow about your ears a bit. Besides giving 
me good help in nvy often laborious work, you may 
for once in a while siee how you like the rollicking life 
of a hunter, and how, after drawing up a neatly- 
written protocol one morning, you will frame the 
next when you come to look in the glaring eyes of 
such a sturdy brute as a grim shaggy wolf or a wild ,' 
boar gnashing his teeth, and whether you know how / 
to bring him down with a well-aimed shot" Of \ 
course I could not have heard such strange accounts 
of the merry hunting parties at R — sitten, or entertain 
such a true heartfelt affection for mv excellent old 
great uncle as I did, without being highly delighted 
that he wanted to take me with him this time. As I 
was already pretty well skilled in the sort of business 
he had to transact, I promised to work with unwearied 
industry, so as to relieve him of all care and trouble. 

Next; day we sat in the carriage on our way to 
R — sitten, well wrapped, up in good fur coats, driving 
through a thick snowstorm, the first harbinger of the 
coming winter. On the journey the old gentleman 
told me many remarkable stories about the Freiherr 


228 THE ENTAIL. 

Roderick^ who had established the estate-tail and 

appointed him (V ), in spite of his youth, to be 

his Justitiarius and executor. He spoke of the harsh 
and violent character of the old nobleman, which 
seemed to be inherited by all the family, since even 
the present master of the estate, whom he had known 
as a mild-tempered and almost effeminate youth, ac- 
quired more and more as the years went by the same 
disposition. He therefore recommended me strongly 
to behave with as much resolute self-reliance and as 
little embarrassment as possible, if I desired to possess 
any consideration in the Freiherr's eyes; and at length 
he began to describe the apartments in the castle 
which he had selected to be his own once for all, 
since they were warm and comfortable, and so con- 
veniently retired that we could withdraw from the 
noisy convivialities of the hilarious company whenever 
we pleased. The rooms, namely, which were on every 
visit reserved for him, were two small ones, hung with 
warm tapestry, close beside the large hall of justice, in 
the wing opposite that in which the two old maids 
resided. 

At last, after a rapid but wearying journey, we 
arrived at R — sitten, late at night. We drove through 
the village ; it was Sunday, and from the alehouse 
proceeded the sounds of music, and dancing, and 
merrymaking; the steward's house was lit up from 
basement to garret, and music and song were there too. 
All the more striking therefore was the inhospitable 
desolation into which we now drove. The sea-wind 
howled in sharp cutting dirges as it were about us, 
whilst the sombre firs, as if they had been roused by 
the wind from a deep magic trance, groaned hoarsely 
in a responsive chorus. The bare black walls of the 


THE ENTAIL. 229 

castle towered above the snow-covered ground; we 
drew up at the gates, which were fast locked. But 
no shouting or cracking of whips, no knocking or 
hammering, was of any avail ; the whole castle seemed 
to be dead ; not a single light was visible at any of the 
windows. The old gentleman shouted in his strong 
stentorian voice, " Francis, Francis, where the deuce 
are you ? In the deviPs name rouse yourself; we are 
all freezing here outside the gates. The snow is 
cutting our faces till they bleed. Why the devil 
don't you stir yourself ? " Then a watch-dog began 
to whine, and a wandering light was visible on the 
ground floor. There was a rattling of keys, and soon 
the ponderous wings of the gate creaked back on their 
hinges. '^ Ha ! a hearty welcome, a hearty welcome, 
Herr Justitiarius. Ugh ! it's rough weather ! '' cried 
old Francis, holding the lantern above his head, so 
that the light fell full upon his withered face, which 
was drawn up into a curious grimace, that was meant 
for a friendly smile. The carriage drove into the 
court, and we got out ; then I obtained a full view of 
the old servant's extraordinary figure, almost hidden 
in his wide old-fashion6d chasseur livery, with its 
many extraordinary lace decorations. Whilst there 
were only a few grey locks on his broad white fore- 
head, the lower part of his face wore the ruddy hue 
of health ; and, notwithstanding that the cramped 
muscles of his ffice gave it something of the appear- 
ance of a whimsical mask, yet the rather stupid good- 
nature which beamed from his eyes and played about 
his mouth compensated for all the rest. 

'^ Now, old Francis,'' began my great-uncle, knock- 
ing the snow from his fur coat in the entrance hall, 
" now, old man, is everything prepared ? Have you 


23© THE ENTAIL. 

had the hangings in my room well dusted, and the 
beds carried in ? and have you had a big roaring fire 
both yesterday and to-day ? '' ** No/' replied Francis, 
quite calmly, ''no, my worshipful Herr Justitiarius, 
we've got none of that done/' '' Good heavens I '' 
burst out my great-uncle, " I wrote to you in proper 
time ; you know that I always come at the time I 
fix. Here's a fine piece of stupid carelessness ! I shall 
have to sleep in rooms as cold as ice." *' But you 
see, worshipful Herr Justitiarius," continued Francis, 
most carefully clipping a burning thief from the wick 
of the candle with the snufiers and stamping it out 
with his foot, " but, you see, sir, all that would not 
have been of- much good, especially the fires, for the 
wind and the snow have taken up their quarters too 
much in the rooms, driving in through the broken 

windows, and then " '' What t " cried my uncle, 

interrupting him as he spread out his fur coat and 
placing his arms akimbo, ''do you mean to tell me 
the windows are broken, and you, the castellan of the 
house, have done nothing to get them mended ? " 
"But, worshipful Herr Justitiarius," resumed the old 
servant calmly and composedly, " but we can't very 
well get at them owing to the great masses of stones 
and rubbish lying all over the room." "Damn it 
all, how come there to be stones and rubbish in my 
room ? " cried my uncle. " Your lasting health and 
good luck, young gentleman!" said the old man, 
bowing politely to me, as I happened to sneeze ; ^ but 
he immediately added, " They are the stones and 
plaster of the partition wall which fell in at the great 

^ At the present time the Germans say Frost// under like circum- 
stances. This of course reminds one of the Greek custom of regarding 
sneezing as an auspicious omen. 


THE ENTAIL. 231 

shock/' ''Have you had an earthquake?" blazed 
up my uncle, now fairly in a rage. '•' No, not an 
earthquake, worshipful Herr Justitiarius," replied the 
old man, grinning all over his face, '' but three days 
ago the heavy wainscot ceiling of the justice-hall fell 

in with a tremendous crash." " Then may the " 

My uncle was about to rip out a terrific oath in his 
violent passionate manner, but jerking up his right 
arm above his head and taking off his fox-skin cap 
with his left, he suddenly checked himself; and turn- 
ing to me, he said with a hearty laugh, *' By my troth, 
cousin, we must hold our tongues; we mustn't ask 
any more questions, or else we shall hear of some still 
worse misfortune, or have the whole castle tumbling to 
pieces about our ears." " But," he continued, wheel- 
ing round again to the old servant, " but, bless me, 
Francis, could you not have had the common sense to 
get me another room cleaned and warmed ? Could 
you not have quickly fitted up a room in the main 
building for the court-day ? " '' All that has been 
already done," said the old man, pointing to the stair- 
case with a gesture that invited us to follow him, and at 
once beginning to ascend them. ** Now there's a most 
curious noodle for you 1 " exclaimed my uncle as we 
followed old Francis. 

The way led through long lofty vaulted corridors, in 
the dense darkness of which Francis's flickering light 
threw a strange reflection. The pillars, capitals, and 
vari-coloured arches seemed as if they were floating 
before us in the air ; our own shadows stalked along 
beside us in gigantic shape, and the grotesque paint- 
ings on the walls over which they glided seemed all of 
a tremble and shake ; whilst their voices, we could 
imagine, were whispering in the sound of our echoing 


232 THE ENTAIL. 

footsteps, '' Wake us not, oh ! wake us not — us whim* 
sical spirits who sleep here in these old stones/' At 
last, after we had traversed a long suite of cold and 
gloomy apartments, Francis opened the door of a hall 
in which a fire blazing brightly in the grate offered 
us as it were a home-like welcome with its pleasant 
crackling. I felt quite comfortable the moment I 
entered, but my uncle, standing still in the middle of 
the hall, looked round him and said in a tone which 
was so very grave as to be almost solemn, "And so 
this is to be the justice-hall ! " Francis held his candle 
above his head, so that my eye fell upon a light spot 
in the wide dark wall about the size of a door ; then 
he said in a pained and muffled voice, " Justice has 
been already dealt out here." "What possesses you, 
old man ? " asked my uncle, quickly throwing aside 
his fur coat and drawing near to the fire. " It slipped 
over my lips, I couldn't help it," said Francis ; then 
he lit the great candles and opened the door of the 
adjoining room, which was very snugly fitted up for 
our reception. In a short time a table was spread 
for us before the fire, and the old man served us with 
several well-dressed dishes, which were followed by a 
brimming bowl of punch, prepared in true Northern 
style, — a very acceptable sight to two wearied travellers 
like my uncle and myself. My uncle then, tired with 
his journey, went to bed as soon as he had finished 
supper; but my spirits were too much excited by the 
novelty and strangeness of the place, as well as by the 
punch, for me to think of sleep. Meanwhile, Francis 
cleared the table, stirred up the fire, and bowing and 
scraping politely, left me to myself. 

Now I sat alone in the lofty spacious Rittersaal or 
Knights* Hall. The snow-flakes had ceased to beat 


THE ENTAIL. 233 

aeainst the lattice, and the storm had ceased to 
whistle ; the sky was clear, and the bright full moon 
shone in through the wide oriel-windows, illuminating 
with magical effect all the dark corners of the curious 
room into which the dim light of my candles and the 
fire could not penetrate. As one often finds in old 
castles, the walls and ceiling of the hall were orna- 
mented in a peculiar antique fashion, the former with 
fantastic paintings and carvings, gilded and coloured 
in gorgeous tints, the latter with heavy wainscoting. 
Standing out conspicuously from the great pictures, 
which represented for the most part wild bloody scenes, 
in bear-hunts and wolf-hunts, were the heads of men 
and animals carved in wood and joined on to the 
painted bodies, so that the whole, especially in the 
flickering light of the fire and the soft beams of the 
moon, had an effect as if all were alive and instinct 
with terrible reality. Between these pictures reliefs 
of knights had been inserted, of life size, walking 
along in hunting costume; probably they were the 
ancestors of the family who had delighted in the chase. 
Everything, both in the paintings and in the carved 
work, bore the dingy hue of extreme old age; so much 
the more conspicuous therefore was the bright bare 
place on that one of the walls through which were two 
doors leading into adjoining apartments. I soon con- 
cluded that there too there must have been a door, 
that had been bricked up later ; and hence it was that 
this new part of the wall, which had neither been 
painted like the rest, nor yet ornamented with carvings, 
formed such a striking contrast with the others. Who 
does not know with what mysterious power the mind 
is enthralled in the midst of unusual and singularly 
strange circumstances ? Even the dullest imagination 


234 THE ENTAIL. 

is aroused when it comes into a valley girt around 
by fantastic rocks^ or within the gloomy walls of a 
church or an abbey, and it begins to have glimpses 
of things it has never yet experienced. When I add 
that I was twenty years of age, and had drunk 
several glasses of strong punch, it will easily be con- 
ceived that as I sat thus in the Rittersaal I was in a 
more exceptional frame of mind than I had ever been 
before. Let the reader picture to himself the stillness 
of the night within, and without the rumbling roar 
of the sea — the peculiar piping of the wind, which 
rang upon my ears like the tones of a mighty organ 
played upon by spectral hands — the passing scudding 
clouds which, shining bright and white, often seemed 
to peep in through the rattling oriel-windows like 
giants sailing past — in very truth, I felt, from the 
slight shudder which shook me, that possibly a new 
sphere of existences might now be revealed to me 
visibly and perceptibly. But this feeling was like the 
shivery sensations that one has on hearing a graphi- 
cally narrated ghost story, such as we all like. At 
this moment it occurred to me that I should never 
be in a more seasonable mood for reading the book 
which, in common with every one who had the least 
leaning [towards the romantic, I at that time carried 
about in my pocket, — I mean Schiller's " Ghost-seer.'* 
I read and read, and my imagination grew ever more 
and more excited. \ came to the marvellously en- 
thralling description of the wedding feast at Count 

von V 's. Just as I was reading of the entrance 

of Jeronimo's bloody figure,^ the door leading from 

* This refers to an episode in Schiller's work, related by a Sicilian. 
The story is of a familiar type. Two brothers, Jeronymo and Lorenzo, 
fall in love with the same Lady Antonia ; the elder brother is secretly 


THE ENTAIL. 335 

the gallery into the antechamber flew open with a 
tremendous bang. I started to my feet in terror; the 
book fell from my hands. In the very same moment, 
however, all was still again, and I began to be ashamed 
of my childish fears. The door must have been burst 
open by a strong gust of wind or in some other natural 
manner. It is nothing ; my over-strained fancy con- 
verts every ordinary occurrence into the supernatural. 
Having thus calmed my fears, I picked up my book from 
the ground, and again threw myself in the arm-chair ; 
but there came a sound of soft, slow, measured foot- 
steps moving diagonally across the hall, whilst there was 
a sighing and moaning at intervals, and in this sighing 
and moaning there was expressed the deepest trouble, 
the most hopeless grief, that a human being can know. 
'^ Ha ! it must be some sick animal locked up some- 
where in the basement storey. Such acoustic decep- 
tions at night time, making distant sounds appear close 
at hand, are well known to everybody. Who will 
suffer himself to be terrified at such a thing as that ? " 
Thus I calmed my fears again. But now there was 
a scratching at the new portion of the wall, whilst 
louder and deeper sighs were audible, as if gasped out 
by some one in the last throes of mortal anguish. 
^'Yes, yes; it is some poor animal locked up some- 
where j I will shout as loudly as I can, I will stamp 
violently on the floor, then all will be still, or else the 
animal below will make itself heard more distinctly, 
and in its natural cries,^' I thought. But the blood 
ran cold in my veins; the cQ)d sweat, too, stood upon 

killed by the younger. Bat on the marriage day of the murderer 
the murdered man appears in the disguise of a monk, and proceeds 
to reveal himself in his bloody habiliments and show his ghastly 
wounds. 


236 THE ENTAIL. 

my forehead^ and I remained sitting in my chair as if 
transfixed^ quite unable to rise^ still less to cry out. 
At length the abominable scratching ceased^ and I 
again heard the footsteps. Life and motion seemed 
to be awakened in me ; I leapt to my feet, and went 
two or three steps forward. But then there came an 
ice-cold draught of wind through the hall, whilst at 
the same moment the moon cast her bright light upon 
the statue of a grave if not almost ternble-Iooking 
man; and then, as though his warning voice rang 
through the louder thunders of the waves and the 
shriller piping of the wind, I heard distinctly, '^ No 
further, no further ! or you will sink beneath all the 
fearful horrors of the world of spectres/' Then the 
door was slammed too with the same violent bang as 
before, and I plainly heard the footsteps in the ante- 
room, then going down the stairs. The main door of 
the castle was opened with a creaking noise, and after- 
wards closed again. Then it seemed as if a horse 
were brought out of the stable, and after a while taken 
back again, and finally all was still. 

At that same moment my attention was attracted 
to my old uncle in the adjoining room ; he was groan- 
ing and moaning painfully. This brought me fully to 
consciousness again ; I seized the candles and hurried 
into the room to him. He appeared to be struggling 
with an ugly, unpleasant dream. "Wake up, wake 
up ! ^^ I cried loudly, taking him gently by the hand, and 
letting the full glare of the light fall upon his face. 
He started up with a stifled shout, and then, looking 
kindly at me, said, "Ay, you have done quite right 
— that you have, cousin, to wake me. I have had a 
very ugly dream, and it's all solely owing to this room 
and that baW, lot \.\vt.^ tcv^.^^ xcv^ \^\\^ ^\ \«L^\.\.\mea 


THE ENTAIL. 237 

and many wonderful things that have happened here. 
But now let us turn to and have a good sound sleep.'' 
Therewith the old gentleman rolled himself in the 
bed-covering and appeared to fall asleep at once. But 
when I had extinguished the candles and likewise 
crept into bed, I heard him praying in a low tone to 
himself. 

Next morning we begun work in earnest ; the land- 
steward brought his account-books, and various other 
people came, some to get a dispute settled', some to 
get arrangements made about other matters. At 
noon my uncle took me with him to the wing where 
the two old Baronesses lived, that we might pay our 
respects to them with all due form. Francis having 
announced us, we had to wait some time before a 
little old dame, bent with the weight of her sixty years, 
and attired in gay-coloured silks, who styled herself 
the noble ladies' lady-in-waiting, appeared and led us 
into the sanctuary. There we were received with 
comical ceremony by the old ladies, whose curious 
style of dress had gone out of fashion years and years 
before. I especially was an object of astonishment 
to them when my uncle, with considerable humour, 
introduced me as a young lawyer who had come to 
assist him in his business. Their countenances plainly 
indicated their belief that, owing to my youth, the 
welfare of the tenants of R — sitten was placed in 
jeopardy. Although there was a good deal that was 
truly ridiculous during the whole of this interview with 
the old ladies, I was nevertheless still shivering from , 
the terror of the preceding night ; I felt as if I had 
come in contact with an unknown power, or rather 
as if I had grazed against the outer edge of a circle, 
one step across which would be enough to plunge me 


238 THE ENTAIL. 

irretrievably into destruction, as though it were only 
by the exertion of all the power of my will that I 
should be able to guard myself against that awful 
dread which never slackens its hold upon you until it 
ends in incurable insanity. Hence it was that the 
old Baronesses, with their remarkable towering head- 
dresses, and their peculiar stuff gowns, tricked off with 
gay flowers and ribbons, instead of striking me as 
merely ridiculous, had an appearance that was both 
ghostly and awe-inspiring. My fancy seemed to 
glean from their yellow withered faces and blinking 
eyes, ocular proof of the fact that they had succeeded 
in establishing themselves on at least a good footing 
with the ghosts who haunted the castle, as it derived 
auricular confirmation of the same fact from the 
wretched French which they croaked, partly between 
their tightly-closed blue lips and partly through their 
long thin noses, and also that they themselves pos- 
sessed the power of setting trouble and dire mischief 
at work. My uncle, who always had a keen eye for 
a bit of fun, entangled the old dames in his ironical 
way in such a mish-mash of nonsensical rubbish that, 
had I been in any other mood, I should not have 
known how to swallow down my immoderate laugh- 
ter; but, as I have just said, the Baronesses and their 
twaddle were, and continued* to be, in my regard, 
ghostly, so that my old uncle, who was aiming at 
aflTording me an especial diversion, glanced across at me 
time after time utterly astonished. So after dinner, 
when we were alone together in our room, he burst 
out, ^^But in Heaven's name, cousin, tell me what 
is the matter with you ? You don't laugh ; you don't 
talk ; you don't eat ; and you don't drink. Are you 
ill, or is anything else the matter with you?'* I 


THE ENTAIL. 239 

now hesitated not a moment to tell him circum- 
stantially all my terrible, awful experiences of the pre- 
vious night. I did not conceal anything, and above 
all I did not conceal that I had drunk a good deal 
of punch, and had been reading Schiller's " Ghost- 
seer." '^This I must confess to/^ I added, *^for only 
so can I credibly explain how it was that my over- 
strained and active imagination could create all those 
ghostly spirits, which only exist within the sphere of 
my own brain.*' I fully expected that my uncle 
would now pepper me well with the stinging pellets 
of his wit for this my fanciful ghost-seeing; but, on the 
contrary, he grew very grave, and his eyes became 
riveted in a set stare upon the floor, until he jerked 
up his head and said, fixing me with his keen fiery 
eyes, '^ Your book I am not acquainted with, cousin ; 
but your ghostly visitants were due neither to it nor 
to the fumes of the punch. I must tell you that I 
dreamt exactly the same things that you saw and 
heard. Like you, I sat in the easy-chair beside the fire 
(at least I dreamt so) ; but what was only revealed to 
you as slight noises I saw and distinctly comprehended 
with the eye of my mind. Yes, I beheld that foul 
fiend come in, stealthily and feebly step across to the 
bricked-up door, and scratch at the wall in hopeless 
despair until the blood gushed out from beneath his 
torn finger-nails ; then he went downstairs, took a 
horse out of the stable, and finally put him back again. 
Did you also hear the cock crowing in a distant farm- 
yard up at the village? You came and awoke me, 
and I soon resisted the baneful ghost of that terrible 
man, who is still able to disturb in this fearful way 
the quiet lives of the living." The old gentleman 
stopped; and I did not like to ask him further que«- 


240 THE ENTAIL. 

tions, being well aware that he would explain every- 
thing to me when he deemed that the proper time 
was come for doing so. After sitting for a while, 
deeply absorbed in his own thoughts, he went on, 
'' Cousin, do you think you have courage enough to 
encounter the ghost again now that you know all that 
happens, — that is to say, along with me ? " Of course 
I declared that I now felt quite strong enough, and 
ready for what he wished. "Then let us watch 
together during the coming night,'* the old gentleman 
went on to say. " There is a voice within me telling 
me that this evil spirit must fly, not so much before 
the power of my will as before my courage, which 
rests upon a basis of firm conviction. I feel that 
it is not at all presumption in me, but rather a good 
and pious deed, if I venture life and limb to exor- 
cise this foul fiend that is banishing the sons from 
the old castle of their ancestors. But what am I 
thinking about? There can be no risk in the case 
at all, for with such a firm, honest mind and pious 
trust that I feel I possess, I and everybody cannot fail 
to be, now and always, victorious over such ghostly 
antagonists. And yet if, after all, it should be Grod's 
will that this evil power be enabled to work me 
mischief, then you must bear witness, cousin, that I 
fell in honest Christian fight against the spirit of hell 
which was here busy about its fiendish work. As for 
yourself, keep at a distance ; no harm will happen to 
you then.*' 

Our attention was busily engaged with divers kinds 
of business until evening came. As on the day before, 
Francis had cleared away the remains of the supper, 
and brought us our punch. The full moon shone 
brightly through the gleaming clouds, the sea-waves 


THE ENTAIL, 241 

roared^ and the night-wind howled and shook the oriel 
window till the panes rattled. Although inwardly 
excited, we forced ourselves to converse on indifferent 
topics. The old gentleman had placed his striking 
watch on the table; it struck twelve. Then the door 
flew open with a terrific bang, and, just as on the pre- 
ceding night, soft slow footsteps moved stealthily 
across the hall in a diagonal direction, whilst there 
were the same sounds of sighing and moaning. My 
uncle turned pale, but his eyes shone with an unusual 
brilliance. He rose from his arm-chair, stretching his 
tall figure up to its full height, so that as he stood 
there with his left arm propped against his side and 
with his right stretched out towards the middle of the 
hall, he had the appearance of a hero issuing his 
commands. But the sighing and moaning were grow- 
ing every moment louder and more perceptible, and 
then the scratching at the wall began more horribly 
even than on the previous night. My uncle strode 
forwards straight towards the walled-up door, and his 
steps were so firm that they echoed along the floor. 
He stopped immediately in front of the place, where 
the scratching noise continued to grow worse and 
worse, and said in a strong solemn voice, such as I 
had never before heard from his lips, " Daniel, Daniel ! 
what are you doing here at this hour? *' Then there 
was a horrible unearthly scream, followed by a dull 
thud as if a heavy weight had fallen to the ground. 
*'Seek for pardon and mercy at the throne of the 
Almighty ; that is your place. Away with you from 
the scenes of this life, in which you can nevermore 
have part.*' And as the old gentleman uttered these 
words in a tone still stronger than before, a feeble 
wail seemed to pass through the air and die away in 
VOL. I. a 


243 THE ENTAIL. 

the blustering of the storm, which was juat beginning 
to rage. Crossing over to the door, the old gentlemaa 
slammed it to, so that the echo rang loudly through 
the empty anteroom. There was something so super- 
natural almost in both his language and his gestures 
that I was deeply struck with awe. On resuming hii 
seat in his arm-chair his face was as if transfigured; 
he folded his hands and prayed inwardly. In this 
way several minutes passed, when he asked me in 
that gentle tone which always wept right to my 
heart, and which he always had so completely at his 
command, " Well, cousin i " Agitated and shaken 
by awe, terror, fear, and pious respect and love, I 
threw myself upon my knees and rained down my 
warm tears upon the hand he offered me. He clasped 
me in his arms, and pressing me fervently to his heart 
said very tenderly, " Now we will go and have a 
good quift sleep, good cousin;" and we did so. And 
as nothing of an unusual nature occurred on the 
following night, we soiin recovered our former cheer- 
fulness, to the prejudice of the old Baronesses; for 
though there did still continue to be something 
ghostly about them and their odd manners, yet it 
emanated from a diverting ghost which the old gen- 
tleman knew how to call up in a droll fashion. 

At length, after the lapse of several days, the Baron 
put in his appearance, along with his wife and a 
numerous train of servants for the hunting; the 
guests who had been invited also arrived, and the 
castle, now suddenly awakened to animation, became 
the scene of the noisy life and revelry which have 
been before described. When the Baron came into 
our hal\ soon after his arrival, he seemed to be dis- 
agreeably sut^itVsei a.\. \l&t Oi\^k\'^^ vo. q\sk ojiarters.. 


THE ENTAIL. '243 

Casting an ill-tempered glance towards the bricked-up 
door, he turned abruptly round and passed his hand 
across his forehead, as if desirous of banishing some 
disagreeable recollection. My great-uncle mentioned 
the damage done to the justice-hall and the adjoining 
apartments ; but the Baron found fault with Francis 
for not accommodating us with better lodgings, and he 
good-naturedly requested the old gentleman to order 
anything he might want to make his new room com- 
fortable : for it was much less satisfactory in this re- 
spect than that which he had usually occupied. On 
the whole, the Baron^s bearing towards my old uncle 
was not merely cordial, but largely coloured by a 
certain deferential respect, as if the relation in which 
he stood towards him was that of a younger relative. 
But this was the sole trait that could in any way 
reconcile me to his harsh, imperious character, which 
was now developed more and more every day. As 
for me, he seemed to notice me but little ; if he did 
notice me at all, he saw in me nothing more than 
the usual secretary or clerk. On the occasion of the 
very first important memorandum that I drew up, he 
began to point out mistakes, as he conceived, in the 
wording. My blood boiled, and I was about to make 
a caustic reply, when my uncle interposed, informing 
him briefly that I did my work exactly in the way 
he wished, and that in leeal matters of this kind he 
alone was responsible. . When we were left alone, I 
complained bitterly of the Baron, who would, I said, 
always inspire me with growing aversion. " I assure 
you, cousin,*' replied the old gentleman, "that the 
Baron, notwithstanding his unpleasant manner, is 
really one of the most excellent and kind-hearted 
men in the world. As I have already told you, he 


244 ^H£ ENTAIL. 

(lid not assume these manners until the time he be- 
came lord of the entail ; previous to then he was a 
modest, gentle youth. Besides, he is not, after all, so 
bad as you make him out to be ; and further, I should 
like to know why you are so averse to him/* As my 
uncle said these words he smiled mockingly, and the 
blood rushed hotly and furiously into my face, I 
could not pretend to hide from myself — I saw it only 
too clearly, and felt it too unmistakably — ^that my 
peculiar antipathy to the Baron sprang out of the 
fact that I loved, even to madness, a being who ap- 
peared to me to be the loveliest and most fascinating 
of her sex who had ever trod the earth. This ladv 
was none other than the Baroness herself. Her ap- 
pearance exercised a powerful and irresistible charm 
upon mc at the very moment of her arrival, when I 
saw her traversing the apartments in her Russian 
sable cloak, which fitted close to the exquisite sym- 
metry of her shape, and with a rich veil wrapped 
about her head. Moreover the circumstance that 
the two old aunts, with still more extraordinary 
gowns and be-ribboned head-dresses than I had vet seen 
them wear, were sweeping along one on each side of 
her and cackling their welcomes in French, whilst 
the Baroness was looking about her in a wav so 
gentle as to baffle all description, nodding graciously 
first to. one and then to another, and then adding in 
her flute-like voice a few German words in the pure 
sonorous dialect of Courland — all this formed a 
truly remarkable and unusual picture, and my ima- 
gination iuvoluntarily connected it with the ghostly 
midnight visitant, — the Baroness being the angel of 
light who was to break the ban of the spectral powers 
of evil. TV\\a vjotvOixovx^n \onOvn \aA^ ^^xj^v^^ l^tth in 


THE ENTAIL. 245 

startling reality before my mind's eye. At that time 
she could hardly be nineteen years of age, and her 
face, as delicately beautiful as her form, bore the 
impression of the most angelic good-nature ; but what 
I especially noticed was the indescribable fascination 
of her dark eyes, for a soft melancholy gleam of 
aspiration shone in them like dewy moonshine, 
whilst a perfect elysium of rapture and delight was 
revealed in her sweet and beautiful smile. She often 
seemed completely lost in her own thoughts, and at 
such moments her lovely face was swept by dark and 
fleeting shadows. Many observers would have con- 
cluded that she was affected by some distressing pain ; 
but it rather seemed to me that she was struggling 
with gloomy apprehensions of a future pregnant with 
dark misfortunes; and with these, strangely enough, 
I connected the apparition of the castle, though I 
could not give the least explanation of why I did so. 

On the morning following the Baron's arrival, 
when the company assembled to breakfast, my old 
uncle introduced me to the Baroness ; and, as usually 
happens with people in the frame of mind in which 
I then was, I behaved with indescribable absurdity. 
In answer to the beautiful lady's simple inquiries how 
I liked the castle, &c., I entangled myself in the most 
extraordinary and nonsensical phrases, so that the old 
aunts ascribed my embarrassment simply and solely 
to my profound respect for the noble lady, and thought 
they were called upon condescendingly to take my 
part, which they did by praising me in French as a 
very nice and clever young man, as a gargon trhjoli 
(handsome lad). This vexed me; so suddenly reco- 
vering my self-possession, I threw out a lonmot in 
better French than the old dames were mistresses of; 


246 THE ENTAIL. 

whereupon they opened their eyes wide in astonish- 
ment^ and pampered their long thin noses with a 
liberal supply of snufF. ,^ From the Baroness's turning 
from me with a more serious air to talk to some 
other lady, I perceived that my lonmot bordered 
closely upon folly ; this vexed me still more, and I 
wished the two old ladies to the devil. My old 
uncle's irony had long before brought me through 
the stage of the languishing love-sick swain, who in 
childish infatuation coddles his love-troubles; but I 
knew very well that the Baroness had made a deeper 
and more powerful impression upon my heart than 
any other woman had hitherto done. I saw and 
heard nothing but her ; nevertheless I had a most 
explicit and unequivocal consciousness that it would 
be not only absurd, but even utter madness, to dream 
of an amour, albeit I perceived no less clearly the 
impossibility of gazing and adoring at a distance like 
a love-lorn boy. Of such conduct I should have been 
perfectly ashamed. But what I could do, and what 
I resolved to do, was to become more intimate with 
this beautiful girl without allowing her to get any 
glimpse of my real feelings, to drink the sweet poison 
of her looks and words, and then, when far away from 
her, to bear her image in my heart for many, many 
days, perhaps for ever. I was excited by this roman- 
tic and chivalric attachment to such a degree, that, 
as I pondered over it during sleepless nights, I was 
childish enough to address myself in pathetic mono- 
logues, and even to sigh lugubriously, '^Seraphina! 
O Seraphina!" till at last my old uncle woke up 
and cried, " Cousin, cousin 1 I believe you are dream- 
ing aloud. Do it by daytime, if you can possibly 
contrive it^ but at night have the goodness to let me 


THE ENTAIL. 247 

sleep.'* I was very much afraid that the old gentle- 
man, who had not failed to remark my excitemen: 
on the Baroness's arrival^ had heard the name, and 
would overwhelm me with his sarcastic wit. But next 
morning all he said, as we went into the justice-hall, 
was, "God grant every man the proper amount of 
common sense, and sufficient watchfulness to keep it 
well under hand. It's a bad look-out when a man 
becomes converted into a fantastic coxcomb without 
so much as a word of warning/* Then he took his 
seat at the great table and added, " Write neatly and 
distinctly, good cousin, that I may be able to read it 
without any trouble." 

The respect, nay, the almost filial veneration which 
the Baron entertained towards my uncle, was mani- 
fested on all occasions. Thus, at the dinner-table he 
had to occupy the seat — which many envied him — 
beside the Baroness; as for me, chance threw me 
first in one place and then in another \ but for the 
most part, two or three officers from the neighbouring 
capital were wont to attach me to them, in order that 
they might empty to their own satisfaction their 
budget of news and amusing anecdotes, whilst dili- 
gently passing the wine about. Thus it happened 
that for several davs in succession I sat at the bottom 
of the table at a great distance from the Baroness. 
At length, however, chance brought me nearer to her. 
Just as the doors of the dining-hall were thrown open 
for the assembled company, I happened to be in the ' 
midst of a conversation with the Baroness's companion 
and confidante, — a lady no longer in the bloom of 
youth, but by no means ill-looking, and not without 
intelligence, — and she seemed to take some interest in 
my remarks. According to etiquette, it was my duty 


248 THE ENTAIL. 

to ofler her my ann, and I was not a little pleased 
when she took her place quite close to the Baroness, 
who gave her a friendly nod. It may be readily ima- 
gined that all that I now said was intended not 
only for my fair neighbour, but also mainly for the 
Baroness. Whether it was that the inward tension 
of my feelings imparted an especial animation to all I 
said, at any rate my companion's attention became more 
riveted with every succeeding moment ; in fact, she was 
at last entirely absorbed in the visions of the kaleido- 
scopic world which I unfolded to her gaze. As re- 
marked, she was not without intelligence, and it soon 
came to pass that our conversation, completely inde- 
pendent of the multitude of words spoken by the other 
guests (which rambled about first to this subject and 
then to that), maintained its own free course, launching 
an effective word now and again whither I wanted it. 
For I did not fail to observe that my companion shot 
a significant glance or two across to the Baroness, and 
that the latter took pains to listen to us. And this 
was particularly the case when the conversation turned 
upon music and I began to speak with enthusiasm of 
this glorious and sacred art ; nor did I conceal that, 
despite the fact of my having devoted myself to the 
dry tedious study of the law, I possessed tolerable 
skill on the harpsichord, could sing, and had even set 
several songs to music. 

The majority of the company had gone into another 
room to take coffee and liqueurs ; but, unawares, with- 
out knowing how it came about, I found myself near 
the Baroness, who was talking with her confidante. 
She at once addressed me, repeating in a still more 
cordial manner and in the tone in which one talks to 
an acquaintance, her inquiries as to how I liked living 


THE EXTAIL. 249 

in the castle^ &c. I assured her that for the first few 
davs, not onlv the drearv desolation of the situation. 
but the ancient castle itself, had affected me strangely, 
but even in this mood I had found much of deep 
interest, and that now mv onlv wish was to be ex- 
cused from the stirring scenes of the bunt, for I had 
not been accustomed to them. The Baroness smiled 
and said^ '^ I can readily believe that this wild life in 
our fir forests cannot be very congenial to you. You 
are a musician, and, unless I am utterly mistaken, a 
poet as well. I am passionately fond of both arts. I 
can ^Iso play the harp a little, but I have to do with- 
out it here in R — sitten, for my husband does not 
like me to bring it with me. Its soft strains would 
harmonise but ill with the wild shouts of the hunters 
and the ringing blare of their bugles, which are the 
only sounds that ought to be heard here. And O 
heaven ! how I should like to hear a little music ! '^ I 
protested that I would exert all the skill I had at my 
command to fulfil her wish, for there must surelv 
without doubt be an instrument of some kind in the 
castle, even though it were only an old harpsichord. 
Then the Lady Adelheid (the Baroness's confidante) 
burst out into a silvery laugh and asked, did I not 
know that within the memory of man no other instru- 
ment had ever been heard in the castle except cracked 
trumpets, and hunting-horns which in the midst of 
joy would only sound lugubrious notes, and the twang- 
ing fiddles, untuned violoncellos, and braying oboes of 
itinerant musicians. The Baroness reiterated her wish 
that she should like to have some music, and especially 
should like to hear me; and both she and Adelheid 
racked their brains all to no purpose to devise sonic 
scheme by which they could get a decent pianoforte 


250 THE ENTAIL. 

brought to the castle. At this moment old Francis 
crossed the room. "Here's the man who always can 
give the best advice, and can procure everything, even 
things before unheard of and unseen/^ With these 
words the Lady Adelheid called him to her, and as 
she endeavoured to make him comprehend what it 
was that was wanted, the Baroness listened with her 
hands clasped and her head bent forward, looking 
upon the old man's face with a gentle smile. She 
made a most attractive picture, like some lovely, win- 
some child that is all eagerness to have a wished-for 
toy in its hands. Francis, after having adduced in 
his prolix manner several reasons why it would be 
downright impossible to procure such a wonderful 
instrument in such a big hurry, finally stroked his 
beard with an air of self-flattery and said, "But the 
land-steward's lady up at the village performs on the 
manichord, or whatever is the outlandish name thev 
now call it, with uncommon skill, and sings to it so 
fine and mournful-like that it makes your eyes red, 
just like onions do, and makes you feel as if you would 
like to dance with both legs at once." " And you 
say she has a pianoforte ? " interposed Lady Adelheid. 
"Aye, to be sure," continued the old man ; ^^it comed 
straight from Dresden; a" — ("Oh, that^s fine !" in- 
terrupted the Baroness) — " a beautiful instrument," 
went on the old man, "but a little weakly; for not 
long ago, when the organist began to play on it the 
hymn * In all Thy works,' ^ he broke it all to pieces, 
so that" — ("Good gracious!" exclaimed both the 
Baroness and Lady Adelheid) — "so that," went on 
the old man again, " it had to be taken to R to 

* By Paul Fleming (1609-1640) ; one of the pious but gloomy reli- 
gious songs of this leading spirit of the ** first Silesian schooL" 


THE ENTAIL. 251 

be mended, and cost a lot of money." "But has it 
come back again?" asked Lady Adelheid impatiently. 
*' Aye, to be sure, my lady, and the steward^s lady will 
reckon it a high honour — ^^ At this moment the 
Baron chanced to past. He looked across at our 
group rather astonished, and whispered with a sarcastic 
smile to the Baroness, *' So you have to take counsel 
of Francis again, I see ? '* The Baroness cast down 
her eyes blushing, whilst old Francis, breaking off 
terrified, suddenly threw himself into military posture, 
his head erect, and his arms close and straight down 
his side. The old aunts came sailing down upon us 
in their stuff gowns and carried off the Baroness. 
Ladv Adelheid followed her, and I was left alone as 
if spell-bound. A struggle began to rage within me 
between my rapturous anticipations of now being able 
to be near her whom I adored, who completely swayed 
all my thoughts and feelings, and my sulky ill-humour 
and annoyance at the Baron, whom I regarded as 
a barbarous tyrant. If he were not, would the grey- 
haired old servant have assumed such a slavish atti- 
tude ? 

*' Do you hear ? Can you see, I say ? " cried my 
great-uncle, tapping me on the shoulder; — we were 
going upstairs to our own apartments. *' Don't force 
yourself so on the Baroness's attention," he said when 
we reached the room. " What good can come of it ? 
Leave that to the young fops who like to pay court to 
ladies; there are plenty of them to do it.'* I related 
how it had all come about, and challenged him to say 
if I had deserved his reproof. His only reply to this, 
however, was, '^ Humph I humph!" as he drew on his 
dressing-gown. Then, having lit his pipe, he took his 
seat in his easy-chair and began to talk about the 


252 THE ENTAIL. 

adventures of the hunt on the preceding day, banter- 
ing me on my bad shots. All was quiet in the castle; 
all the visitors, both gentlemen and ladies, were busy 
in their own rooms dressing for the evening. For the 
musicians with the twanging fiddles, untuned violon- 
cellos, and braying oboes, of whom Lady Adelheid had 
spoken, were come, and a merrymaking of no less 
importance than a ball, to be given in the best possible 
style, was in anticipation. My old uncle, preferring a 
quiet sleep to such foolish pastimes, stayed in his 
chamber. I, however, had just finished dressing, when 
there came a light tap at our door, and Francis entered. 
Smiling in his self-satisfied way, he announced to me, 
that the manichord had just arrived from the land- 
steward's lady in a sledge, and had been carried into 
the Baroness's apartments. Lady Adelheid sent her 
compliments and would I go over at once. It may be 
conceived how my pulse beat, and also with what a 
delicious tremor at heart I opened the door of the 
room in which I was to find her. Ladv Adelheid 
came to meet me with a joyful smile. The Baroness, 
already in full dress for the ball, was sitting in a medi- 
tative attitude beside the mysterious case or box, in 
which slumbered the music that I was called upon to 
awaken. When she rose, her beauty shone upon me 
with such glorious splendour that I stood staring at 
her unable to utter a word, "Come, Theodore" — (for, 
accordins: to the kindlv custom of the North, which 
is found attain farther south, she addressed everv- 
body by his or her Christian name) — "Come, Theo- 
dore,'* she said pleasantly, " here's the instrument 
come. Heaven grant it be not altogether unworthy 
of your skill !" As I opened the lid I was greeted by 
the rattling of a score of broken strings, and when I 


THE ENTAIL. 253 

attempted to strike a chord, the effect was hideous and 
abominable, for all the strings which were not broken 
were completely out of tune. '* I doubt not our friend 
the organist has been putting his delicate little hands 
upon it again/' said Lady Adelheid, laughing; but the 
Baroness was very much annoyed and said, ^* Oh, it 
really is a slice of bad luck I I am doomed, I see, 
never to have any pleasure here." I searched in the 
case of the instrument, and fortunately found some 
coils of strings, but no tuning-key anywhere. Hence 
fresh laments. "Any key will do if the ward will 
fit on the pegs," I explained ; then both Lady Adcl- 
heid and the Baroness ran backwards and forwards 
in gay spirits, and before long a whole magazine of 
bright keys lay before me on the sounding-board. 

Then I set to work diligently, and both the ladies 
assisted me all they could, trying first one peg and 
then another. At length one of the tiresome keys 
fitted, and they exclaimed joyfully, "This will do! it 
will do ! " But when I had drawn the first creaking 
string up to just proper pitch, it suddenly snapped, 
and the ladies recoiled in alarm. The Baroness, 
handling the brittle wires with her delicate little 
fingers, gave me the numbers as I wanted them, 
and carefully held the coil whilst I unrolled it. 
Suddenly one of them coiled itself up again with a 
whirr,"making the Baroness utter an impatient " Oh ! " 
Lady Adelheid enjoyed a hearty laugh, whilst I pur- 
sued the tangled coil to the corner of the room. 
After we had all united our efforts to extract a per- 
fectly straight string from it, and had tried it again, 
to our mortification it again broke; but at last — at 
last we found some good coils ; the strings began to 
hold^ and gradually the discordant jangling gave place 


254 THE ENTAIL, 

to pure melodious chords. ^^Ha! it will go! it will 
go ! The instrument is getting in tune ! " exclaimed the 
Baroness, looking at me with her lovely smile. How 
quickly did this common interest banish all the strange- 
ness and shyness which the artificial manners of social 
intercourse impose. A kind of confidential familiarity 
arose between us, which, burning through me like an 
electric current, consumed the timorous nervousness 
and constraint which had lain like ice upon my heart. 
That peculiar mood of diffused melting sadness which 
is engendered of such love as mine was had quite left 
me ; and accordingly, when the pianoforte was brought 
into something like tune, instead of interpreting my 
deeper feelings in dreamy improvisations, as I had 
intended, I began with those sweet and charming 
canzonets which have reached us from the South. 
During this or the other Senza di te (Without thee), 
or Sentimi, idol mio (Hear me, my darling), or jilmen 
se non possio (At least if I cannot), with numberless 
Morir mi sentos (I feel I am dying), and Addios (Fare- 
well), and dios ! (O Heaven I), a brighter and 
brighter brilliancy shone in Seraphina's eyes. She 
had seated herself close beside me at the instrument; 
I felt her breath fanning my cheek; and as she placed 
her arm behind me on the chair-back, a white ribbon, 
getting disengaged from her beautiful ball-dress, fell 
across my shoulder, where by my singing and Sera- 
phina's soft sighs it was kept in a continual flutter 
backwards and forwards, like a true love-messenger. 
It is a wonder how I kept from losing my head. 

As I was running my fingers aimlessly over the keys, 
thinking of a new song, Lady Adelheid, who had been 
sitting in one of the corners of the room, ran across to 
us, and, kneeling down before the Baroness, begged 


THE ENTAIL. 255 

her^ as she took both her hands and clasped them to 
her bosom^ '^Oh^ dear Baroness! darling Seraphina! 
now you must sing too/* To this she replied, "What- 
ever are you thinking about^ Adelheid ? How could 
I dream of letting our virtuoso friend hear such poor 
singing as mine ? *' And she looked so lovely, as, like 
a shy good child, she cast down her eyes and blushed, 
timidly contending with the desire to sing. That I 
too added my entreaties can easily be imagined ; nor, 
upon her making mention of some little Courland 
Volkslieder or popular songs, did I desist from my 
entreaties until she stretched out her left hand towards 
the instrument and tried a few notes by way of 
introduction. I rose to make way for her at the 
piano, but she would not permit me to do so, assert- 
ing that she could not play a single chord, and for that 
reason, since she would have to sing without accom- 
paniment, her performance would be poor and un- 
certain. She began in a sweet voice, pure as a bell, 
that came straight from her heart, and sang a song 
whose simple melody bore all the characteristics of 
those Volkslieder which proceed from the lips with 
such a lustrous brightness, so to speak, that we cannot 
help perceiving in the glad light which surrounds us 
our own higher poetic nature. There lies a mysterious 
charm in the insignificant words of the text which 
converts them into a- hieroglyphic scroll representative 
of the unutterable emotions which throng our hearts. 
Who does not know that Spanish canzonet the sub- 
stance of which is in words little more than, " With 
my maiden I embarked on the sea ; a storm came on, 
and my timid maiden was tossed up and down : nay, I 
will never again embark on the sea with my maiden ? ^* 
And the Baroness's little song contained nothing more 


256 THE ENTAIL. 

than, '^ Lately I was dancing with my sweetheart at a 
wedding ; a flower fell out of my hair ; he picked it up 
and gave it me, and said, ^When, sweetheart mine, 
shall we go to a wedding again ? ' " When, on her 
beginning the second verse of the song, I played an 
arpeggio accompaniment, and further when, in the 
inspiration which now took possession of me, I at 
once stole from the Baronesses own lips the melodies 
of the other songs she sang, I doubtless appeared in 
her eyes, and in those of the Lady Adelheid, to be 
one of the greatest of masters in the art of music, for 
they overwhelmed me with enthusiastic praise. The 
lights and illuminations from the ball-room, situated 
in one of the wings of the castle, now shone across 
into the Baroness's chamber, whilst a discordant bleat- 
ing of trumpets and French horns announced that it 
was time to gather for the ball. " Oh, now I must 
go," said the Baroness. I started up from the piano- 
forte. " You have afforded me a delightful hour ; these 
have been the plcasantest moments I have ever spent 
in R — sitten,'' she added, offering me her hand ; and 
as in the extreme intoxication of delight I pressed it 
to my lips, I felt her fingers close upon my hand with 
a sudden convulsive tremor. I do not know how I 
managed to reach my uncle's chamber, and still less 
how I got into the ball-room. There was a certain 
Gascon who was afraid to go into battle since he was 
all heart, and every wound would be fatal to him^ I 
might be compared to him ; and so might everybody 
else who is in the same mood that I was in; everv 
touch was then fatal. The Baronesses hand — her 
tremulous fingers — had affected me like a poisoned 
arrow; my blood was burning in my veins. 

On the following morning my old uncle, without 


THE ENTAIL. 257 

asking any direct questions^ had soon drawn from me 
a full account of the hour I had spent in the Baro- 
ness's societv, and I was not a little abashed when 
the smile vanished from his lips and the jocular note 
from his words, and he grew serious all at once, saying, 
"Cousin, I beg you will resist this folly which is 
taking such a powerful hold upon you. Let me tell 
you that your present conduct, as harmless as it now 
appears, may lead to the most terrible consequences. 
In your thoughtless fatuity you are standing on a thin 
crust of ice, which may break under you ere you are 
aware of it, and let you in with a plunge. I shall 
take good care not to hold you fast by the coat-tails, 
for I know you will scramble out again pretty quick, 
and then, when you are lying sick unto death, you will 
say, ' I got this little bit of a cold in a dream.' But 
I warn you that a malignant fever will gnaw at your 
vitals, and years will pass before you recover yourself, 
and are a man again. The deuce take your music if 
you can put it to no better use than to cozen senti- 
mental young women out of their quiet peace of 
mind.'' ^^But," I began, interrupting the old gentle- 
man, " but have I ever thought of insinuating myself 
as the Baroness's lover ?'^ "You puppy!" cried the 
old gentleman, "if I thought so I would pitch you 
out of this window.^' At this juncture the Baron 
entered, and put an end to the painful conversation ; 
and the business to which I now had to turn mv 
attention brought me back from my love-sick reve- 
ries, in which I saw and thought of nothing but 
Seraphina. 

In general society the Baroness only occasionally 
interchanged a few friendly words with me; but 
hardly an evening passed in which a secret message 

VOL. I. R 


258 THE ENTAIL. 

was not brought to me from Lady Adelheid^ sum- 
moning me to Seraphina. It soon came to pass that 
our music alternated with conversations on divers 
topics. Whenever I and Seraphina began to get too 
absorbed in sentimental dreams and vague aspirations, 
the Lady Adelheid, though now hardly young enough 
to be so naive and droll as she once was^ yet inter- 
vened with all sorts of merry and somewhat chaotic 
nonsense. From several hints she let fall, I soon 
discovered that the Baroness really had something 
preying upon her mind, even as I thought I had read 
in her eyes the very first moment I saw her ; and I 
clearly discerned the hostile influence of the apparition 
of the castle. Something terrible had happened or 
was to happen. Although I was often strongly im- 
pelled to tell Seraphina in what way I had come in 
contact with the invisible enemy, and how my old 
uncle had banished him, undoubtedly for ever, I vet 
felt my tongue fettered by a hesitation which was 
inexplicable to myself even, whenever I opened my 
mouth to speak. 

One day the Baroness failed to appear at the dinner 
table; it was said that she was a little unwell, and 
could not leave her room. Sympathetic inquiries were 
addressed to the Baron as to whether her illness was 
of a grave nature. He smiled in a very disagreeable 
way, in fact, it was almost like bitter irony, and said, 
^^ Nothing more than a slight catarrh, which she 
has got from our blustering sea-breezes. They can't 
tolerate any sweet voices; the only sounds they will 
endure are the hoarse ^Halloos' of the chase." At 
these words the Baron hurled a keen searching look 
at me across the table, for I sat obliquely opposite to 
him. He had not spoken to his neighbour, but to me. 


THE ENTAIL. 259 

Lady Adelbeid^ who sat beside me, blushed a scarlet 
red. Fixing her eyes upon the plate in front of 
her^ and scribbling about on it with her fork, she 
whispered, " And yet you must see Seraphina to-day ; 
your sweet songs shall to-day also bring soothing and 
comfort to her poor heart." Adelheid addressed these 
words to me; but at this moment it struck me that I 
was almost apparently entangled in a base and for- 
bidden intrigue with the Baroness, which could only 
end in some terrible crime. My old uncle's warning 
fell heavily upon my heart. What should I do ? Not 
see her again? That was impossible so long as I 
remained in the castle ; and even if I might leave the 
castle and return to K — = — , I had not the will to do 
it. Oh ! I felt only too deeply that I was not strong 
enough to shake myself out of this dream, which was 
mocking one with delusive hopes of happiness. Adel- 
heid I almost regarded in the light of a common go- 
between ; I would despite her, and yet, upon second 
thoughts, I could not help being ashamed of my folly. 
Had anything ever happened during those blissful 
evening hours which could in the least degree lead to 
any nearer relation with Seraphina than was permis- 
sible by propriety and morality ? How dare I let the 
thought enter my mind that the Baroness would ever 
entertain any warm feeling for me ? And yet I was 
convinc'ed of the danger of my situation. 

We broke up from dinner earlier than usual, in 
order to go again after some wolves which had been 
seen in the fir-wood close by the castle. A little 
hunting was just the thing I wanted in the excited 
frame of mind in which I then was. I expressed to 
my uncle my resolve to accompany the party; he 
gave me an approving smile and said, " That's right ; 


26o THE ENTAIL, 

I am glad you are going out with them for once. I 
shall stay at home, so you can take my firelock with 
you, and buckle my whinger round your waist; in 
case of need it is a good and trusty weapon, if you 
only keep your presence of mind.*' That part of the 
wood in which the wolves were supposed to lie was 
surrounded by the huntsmen. It was bitterly cold; 
the wind howled through the firs, and drove the light 
snow-flakes right in my face, so that when at length 
it came on to be dusk I could scarcely see six paces 
before me. Quite benumbed by the cold, I left the 
place that had been assigned to me and sought shelter 
deeper in the wood. There, leaning against a tree, 
with my firelock under my arm, I forgot the wolf- 
hunt entirely; my thoughts had travelled back to 
Seraphina's cosy room. After a time shots were 
heard in the far distance; but at the same moment 
there was a rustling in the reed-bank, and I saw not 
ten paces from me a huge wolf about to run past me. 
I took aim, and fired, but missed. The brute sprang 
towards me with glaring eyes; I should have been 
lost had I not had sufficient presence of mind to draw 
my hunting-knife, and, just as the brute was flying at 
me, to drive it deep into his throat, so that the blood 
spurted out over my hand and' arm. One of the 
Barents keepers, who had stood not far from me, 
came running up with a loud shout, and at his re- 
peated " Halloo ! " all the rest soon gathered round us. 
The Baron hastened up to me, saying, " For God's 
sake, you are bleeding — you are bleeding. Are you 
wounded ? *' I assured him that I was not. Then 
he turned to the keeper who had stood nearest to me, 
and overwhelmed him with reproaches for not having 
shot after me when I missed. And notwithstanding 


THE ENTAIL. 261 

that the man maintained this to have been perfectly 
impossible^ since in the very same moment the wolf 
had rushed upon me^ and any shout would have been at 
the risk of hitting me, the Baron persisted in saying 
that he ought to have taken especial care of me as a 
less experienced hunter. Meanwhile the keepers had 
lifted up the dead animal ; it was one of the largest 
that had been seen for a long time; and everybody 
admired my courage and resolution, although to my- 
self what I had done appeared quite natural. I had 
not for a moment thought of the danger I had run. 
The Baron in particular seemed to take very great 
interest in the matter; I thought he would never be 
done asking me whether, though I was not wounded 
by the brute, I did not fear the ill effects that would 
follow from the fright. As we went back to the 
castle, the Baron took me by the arm like a friend, 
and I had to give my firelock to a keeper to carry. 
He still continued to talk about my heroic deed, so 
that eventually I came to believe in my own heroism, 
and lost all my constraint and embarrassment, and 
felt that I had established myself in the Baron's eyes 
as a man of courage and uncommon resolution. The 
schoolboy had passed his examination successfully, was 
now no longer a schoolboy, and all the submissive 
nervousness of the schoolboy had left him. I now 
conceived I had earned a right to try and gain Sera- 
phina's favour. Everybody knows of course what 
ridiculous combinations the fancy of a love-sick youth 
is capable of. In the castle, over the smoking punch- 
bowl, by the fireside, I was the hero of the hour. 
Besides myself the Baron was the only one of the 
party who had killed a wolf — also a formidable one; 
the rest had to be content with ascribing their bad 
shots to the weather and the darkness, and with 


262 THE ENTAIL, 

relating thrilling stories of their former exploits in hunt- 
ing and the dangers they had escaped. I thought, too, 
that I might reap an especial share of praise and admi- 
ration from my old uncle as well ; and so^ with a view 
to this end, I related to him my adventure at pretty 
considerable length, nor did I forget to paint the 
savage brute's wild and bloodthirsty appearance in 
very startling colours. The old gentleman, however, 
only laughed in my face and said, " God is powerful 
even in the weak." 

Tired of drinking and of the company, I was going 
quietly along the corridor towards the justice-hall 
when I saw a figure with a light slip in before me. On 
entering the hall I saw it was Lady Adelheid. '^ This 
is the way we have to wander about like ghosts or 
night-walkers in order to catch you, my brave slayer 
of wolves," she whispered, taking my arm. The words 
"ghosts" and "sleep-walkers," pronounced in the 
place where wc were, fell like lead upon my heart ; they 
immediately brought to my recollection the ghostly 
apparitions of those two awful nights. As then, so 
now, the wind came howling in from the sea in deep 
organ-like cadences, rattling the oriel windows again 
and again and whistling fearfully through them, whilst 
the moon cast her pale gleams exactly upon the 
mysterious part of the wall where the scratching had 
been heard. I fancied I discerned stains of blood 
upon it. Doubtless Lady Adelheid, who still had hold 
of my hand, must have felt the cold icy shiver which 
ran through me. "What's the matter with you?*' 
she whispered softly ; " what's the matter with you ? 
You are as cold as marble. Come, I will call you 
back into \\fe. Do ^ov\ kuow how very impatient the 
JBaroness is to see '^ou'l K^<i w\nX:\ "i^^ \<^^% ^r^^^^vx 
she will not beWev^ tYiat t\v^ v^^^ ^^^^ \ns^ xv^x. ^«3^h 


THE ENTAIL, 263 

bitten you. She is in a terrible state of anxiety about 
you. Why, my friend,-^oh ! how have you awakened 
this interest in little Seraphina? I have never seen 
her like this. Ah ! — so now the pulse is beginning to 
prickle ; see how quickly the dead man comes to life ! 
Well, come along — but softly, still 1 Come, we must 
go to the little Baroness.^' I suflFcred myself to be led 
away in silence. The way in which Adelheid spoke 
of the Baroness seemed to me undignified, and the 
innuendo of an understanding between us positively 
shameful. When I entered the room along with 
Adelheid, Seraphina, with a low-breathed *' Oh ! " ad- 
vanced three or four paces quickly to meet me ; but 
then, as if recollecting herself, she stood still in the 
middle of the room. I ventured to take her hand and 
press it to my lips. Allowing it to rest in mine, she 
asked, "But, for Heaven's sake! is it your business to 
meddle with wolves ? Don't you know that the fabu- 
lous days of Orpheus and Amphion arc long past, and 
that wild beasts have quite lost all respect for even 
the most admirable of singers?" By this graceful 
turn, by which the Baroness at once effectually guarded 
against all misinterpretation of her warm interest in 
me, I was put immediately into the proper key and 
the proper mood. Why I did not take my usual 
place at the pianoforte I cannot explain, even to my- 
self, nor why I sat down beside the Baroness on the 
sofa. Her question, "And what were you doing then 
to get into danger?'^ was an indication of our tacit 
agreement that conversation, not music, was to engage 
our attention for that evening. After I had narrated 
my adventure in the wood, and mentioned the warm 
interest which the Baron had taken in it, delicately 
hinting that I had not thought him capable of so 


264 ^^^ ENTAIL, 

much feeling, the Baroness began in a tender and 
almost melancholy tone, " Oh 1 how violent and rude 
you must think the Baron; but I assure you it is only 
whilst we are living within those gloomy, ghostly walls, 
and during the time there is hunting going on in the 
dismal fir-forests, that his character completely changes, 
at least his outward behaviour does. What principally 
disquiets him in this unpleasant way is the thought, 
which constantly haunts him, that something terrible 
will happen here. And that undoubtedly accounts for 
the fact of his being so greatly agitated by your ad- 
venture, which fortunately has had no ill consequences. 
He won^t have the meanest of his servants exposed to 
danger, if he knows it, still less a new-won friend 
whom he has come to like ; and I am perfectly certain 
that Gottlieb, whom he blames for having left you in 
the lurch, will be punished ; even if he escapes being 
locked up in a dungeon, he will yet have to suffer the 
punishment, so mortifying to a hunter, of going out 
the next time there is a hunt with only a club in his 
hand instead of a rifle. The circumstance that hunts 
like those which are held here are always attended 
with danger, and the fact that the Baron, though 
always fearing some sad accident, is yet so fond of hunt- 
ing that he cannot desist from provoking the demon 
of mischief, make his existence here a kind of con- 
flict, the ill effects of which I also have to feel. Many 
queer stories are current about his ancestor who estab- 
lished the entail; and I know myself that there is 
some dark family secret locked within these walls like 
a horrible ghost which drives away the owners, and 
makes it impossible for them to bear with it longer 
than a few weeks at a time — and that only amid a 
tumult of jovial guests. But I — Oh ! how lonely I 


THE ENTAIL. 265 

am in the midst of this noisy, merry company I And 
how the ghostly influences which breathe upon me 
from the walls stir and excite my very heart I You, 
my dear friend, have given me, through your musical 
skill, the first cheerful moments I have spent here. 
How can I thank you sufficiently for your kindness ! " 
I kissed the hand she offered to me, saying, that even 
on the very first day, or rather during the very first 
night, I had experienced the ghostliness of the place 
in all its horrors. The Baroness fixed her staring eyes 
upon my face, as I went on to describe the ghostly 
character of the building, discernible everywhere 
throughout the castle, particularly in the decorations 
of the justice-hall, and to speak of the roaring of the 
wind from the sea, &c. Possibly my voice and my 
expressions indicated that I had something more in 
my mind than what I said ; at any rate when I con- 
cluded, the Baroness cried vehemently, ''No, no; 
something dreadful has happened to you in that hall, 
which I never enter without shuddering. I beg you — 
pray, pray, tell me all.*^ 

Seraphina's face had grown deadly pale; and I saw 
plainly that it would be more advisable to give her a 
faithful account of all that I had experienced than to 
leave her excited imagination to conjure up some 
apparition that might perhaps, in a way I could not 
foresee, be far more horrible than what I had actuallv 
encountered. As she listened to me her fear and 
strained anxiety increased from moment to moment; 
and when I mentioned the scratching on the wall she 
screamed, " It's horrible ! Yes, yes, it's in that wall 
that the awful secret is concealed ! " But as I went on 
to describe with what spiritual power and superiority 
of will my old uncle had banished the ghost, she sighed 


266 THE ENTAIL. 

deeply, as though she had shaken off a heavy burden 
that had weighed oppressively upon her. She leaned 
back in the sofa and held her hands before her face. 
Now I first noticed that Adclheid had left us. A 
considerable pause ensued, and as Seraphina still con- 
tinued silent, I softly rose, and going to the pianoforte, 
endeavoured in swelling chords to invoke the bright 
spirits of consolation to come and deliver Seraphina 
from the dark influence to which my narration had 
subjected her. Then I soon began to sing as softly as 
I was able one of the Abb^ Steffani's ^ canzonas. The 
melancholy strains of the Ochi, per chi plan get e (O eyes, 
why weep you ?) roused Seraphina out of her reverie, 
and she listened to me with a gentle smile upon her 
face, and bright pearl-like tears in her eyes. How am 
I to account for it that I kneeled down before her, 
that she bent over towards me, that I threw my arms 
about her, that a long ardent kiss was imprinted on 
my lips? How am I to account for it that I did not 
lose my senses when she drew me softly towards her, 
how that I tore myself from her arms, and quickly 
rising to my feet, hurried to the pianoforte } Turning 
from me, the Baroness took a few steps towards the 
window, then she turned round again and approached 
me with an air of almost proud dignity, which was 
not at all usual with her. Looking me straight in 
the face, she said, "Your uncle is the most worthy 
old man I know; he is the guardian angel of our 
family. May he include me in his pious prayers!" 
1 was unable to utter a word ; the subtle poison that 
I had imbibed with her kiss burned and, boiled in 
every pulse and nerve. Lady Adelheid came in. The 
violence of my inward conflict burst out at length in 

^ See note, p. 41, vol. i. 


THE ENTAIL. 267 

a passionate flood of tears^ which I was unable to 
repress. Adelheid looked at me with wonder and 
smiled dubiously ; — I could have murdered her. The 
Baroness gave me her hand, and said with inexpressible 
gentleness, " Farewell, my dear friend. Fare you right 
well ; and remember that nobody perhaps has ever 
understood your music better than I have. Oh ! these 
notes! they will echo long, long in my heart.*' I 
forced myself to utter a few stupid, disconnected words, 
and hurried up to my uncle's room. The old gentle- 
man had already gone to bed. I stayed in the hall, 
and falling upon my knees, I wept aloud ; I called upon 
my beloved by name, I gave myself up completely 
and regardlessly to all the absurd folly of a love-sick 
lunatic, until at last the extravagant noise I made 
awoke my uncle. But his loud call, " Cousin, I be- 
lieve you have gone cranky, or else you're having 
another tussle with a wolf. Be off to bed with you if 
you will be so very kind" — these words compelled 
me to enter his room, where I got into bed with the 
fixed resolve to dream only of Seraphina. 

It would be somewhere past midnight when I 
thought I heard distant voices, a running backwards 
and forwards, and an opening and banging of doors — 
for I had not yet fallen asleep. I listened attentively ; 
I heard footsteps approaching the corridor: the hall 
door was opened, and soon there came a knock at our 
door. '' Who is there ? " I cried. A voice from with- 
out answered, " Herr Justitiarius, Herr Justitiarius, 
wake up, wake up!" I recognised Francis's voice, 
and as I asked, *' Is the castle on fire ? " the old 
gentleman woke up in his turn and asked, " Where 
— where is there a fire ? Is it that cursed apparition 
again? where is it?" "Oh! please get up, Herr 


268 THE ENTAIL. 

Justitiarius/' said Francis. " Please get up ; the Baron 
wants you/' ''What does the Baron want me for?*' 
inquired my uncle further ; " what does he want me 
for at this time of night ? does he not know that all 
law business goes to bed along with the lawyer, and 
sleeps as soundly as he does ? '^ " Oh ! '^ cried Francis, 
now anxiously ; '^ please, Herr Justitiarius, good sir, 
please get up. My lady the Baroness is dying." I 
started up with a cry of dismay. " Open the door 
for Francis," said the old gentleman to me. I stumbled 
about the room almost distracted, and could find 
neither door nor lock ; my uncle had to come and help 
me. Francis came in, his face pale and troubled, and 
lit the candles. We had scarcely thrown on our clothes 
when we heard the Baron calling in the hall, " Can 1 

speak to you, good V ?" "But what have you 

dressed for, cousin ? the Baron only wanted me," asked 
the old gentleman, on the point of going out. " I must 
go down — I must see her and then die," I replied tragi- 
cally, and as if my heart were rent by hopeless grief. 
" Ay, just so ; your are right, cousin," he said, bang- 
ing the door to in my face, so that the hinges creaked, 
and locking it on the outside. At the first moment, 
deeply incensed at this restraint, I thought of bursting 
the door open ; but quickly reflecting that this would 
entail the disagreeable consequences of a piece of out- 
rageous insanity, I resolved to await the old gentle- 
man's return ; then, however, let the cost be what it 
might, I would escape his watchfulness. I heard him 
talking vehemently with the Baron, and several times 
distinguished my own name, but could not make out 
anything further. Every moment my position grew 
more intolerable. At length I heard that some one 
brought a message to the Baron, who immediately 


THE ENTAIL. 269 

hurried off. My old uncle entered the room again. 
*'She is dead !" I cried, running towards him. ''And 
you are a stupid fool," he interrupted coolly ; then he 
laid hold upon me and forced me into a chair. " I 
must go down/' I cried, " I must go down and see 
her, even though it cost me my life.'^ '' Do so, good 
cousin," said he, locking the door, taking out the key, 
and putting it in his pocket. I now flew into a per- 
fectly frantic rage; stretching out my hand towards 
the rifle, I screamed, " If you don't instantly open the 
door I will send this bullet through my brains." Then 
the old gentleman planted himself immediately in front 
of me, and fixing his keen piercing eyes upon me said, 
" Boy, do you think you can frighten me with your 
idle threats ? Do you think I should set much value 
on your life if you can go and throw it away in 
childish folly like a broken plaything? What have 
you to do with the Baron's wife ? who has given you 
the right to insinuate yourself, like a tiresome puppy, 
where you have no claim to be, and where you are not 
wanted? do you wish to go and act the love-sick 
swain at the solemn hour of death ? " I sank back in 
my chair utterly confounded. After a while the old 
gentleman went on more gently, '' And now let me 
tell you that this pretended illness of the Baroness is 
in all probability nothing. Lady Adelheid always 
loses her head at the least little thing. If a rain-drop 
falls upon her nose, she screams, ' What fearful weather 
it is ! ' Unfortunately the noise penetrated to the old 
aunts, and they, in the midst of unseasonable floods 
of tears, put in an appearance armed with an entire 
arsenal of strengthening drops, elixirs of life, and the 

deuce knows what. A sharp fainting-fit " The 

old gentleman checked himself; doubtless he observed 


270 THE ENTAIL. 

the struggle that was going on within me. He took 
a few turns through the room ; then again planting 
himself in front of me, he had a good hearty laugh and 
said, *' Cousin, cousin, what nonsensical folly have you 
now got in your head ? Ah well ! I suppose it can't 
be helped; the devil is to play his pretty games here 
in divers sorts of ways. You have tumbled very nicely 
into his clutches, and now he's making you dance to a 
sweet tune/* He again took a few turns up and down, 
and again went on, " It's no use to think of sleep now ; 
and it occurred to me that we might have a pipe, and 
so spend the few hours that are left of the darkness 
and the night/* With these words he took a clay 
pipe from the cupboard, and proceeded to fill it slowly 
and carefully, humming a song to himself; then he 
rummaged about amongst a heap of papers, until he 
found a sheet, which he picked out and rolled into a 
spill and lighted. Blowing the tobacco-smoke from him 
in thick clouds, he said, speaking between his teeth, 
*^ Well, cousin, what was that story about the wolf? " 
I know not how it was, but this calm, quiet be- 
haviour of the old gentleman operated strangely upon 
me, I seemed to be no longer in R — sitten, and 
the Baroness was so far, far distant from me, that I 
could only reach her on the wings of thought. The 
old gentleman's last question, however, annoyed me. 
"But do you find my hunting exploit so amusing?" 
I broke in, — "so well fitted for banter?'* "Bv no 
means,** he rejoined, " by no means, cousin mine; but 
you've no idea what a comical face such a whipper- 
snapper as you cuts, and how ludicrously he acts as 
well, when Providence for once in a while honours 
him by putting him in the way to meet with some- 
thing out of the usual run of things. I once had a 


THE ENTAIL. 271 

college friend who was a quiet, sober fellow, and always 
on good terms with himself. By accident he became 
entangled in an afiair of honour, — I say by accident, 
because he himself was never in any way aggressive ; 
and although most of the fellows looked upon him as 
a poor thing, as a poltroon, he yet showed so much 
firm and resolute courage in this affair as greatly to 
excite everybody's admiration. But from that time 
onwards he was also completely changed. The sober 
and industrious youth became a bragging, insufferable 
bully. He was always drinking and rioting, and fight- 
ing about all sorts of childish trifles, until he was run 
through in a duel by the Senior^ of an exclusive corps. 
I merely tell you the story, cousin ; you are at liberty 
to think what you please about it. But to return to the 

Baroness and her illness'* At this moment light 

footsteps were heard in the hall ; I fancied, too, there 
was an unearthly moaning in the air. " She is dead !'* 
the thought shot through me like a fatal flash of light- 
ning. The old gentleman quickly rose to his feet and 
called out, '^Francis, Francis!" "Yes, my good Herr 
Justitiarius," he replied from without. *' Francis,'* 
went on my uncle, " rake the fire together a bit in the 
grate, and if you can manage it, you had better make 
us a good cup or two of tea." " It is devilish cold," 
and he turned to me, " and I think we had better go 
and sit round the fire and talk a little." He opened 
the door, and I followed him mechanically. *'How 
are things going on below ? " he asked. " Oh ! " re- 
plied Francis ; " there was not much the matter. The 
Lady Baroness is all right again, and ascribes her bit 

^ The reference is to a Lxindsmannschaft, These were associations, 
at a ttniversity, of students from the same state or country, bound to 
the obsenrance of ceitain traditional customs, &c., and under the cou- 
trol of certain self-elected officers (the Sen or being one). 


272 THE ENTAIL, 

of a fainting-fit to a bad dream." I was going to 
break out into an extravagant manifestation of joy 
and gladness^ but a stern glance from my uncle kept 
me quiet. "And yet, after all, I think it would be 
better if we lay down for an hour or two. You need 
not mind about the tea, Francis.'* "As you think 
well, Herr Justitiarius," replied Francis, and he left 
the room with the wish that we might have a good 
night's rest, albeit the cocks were already crowing. 
" See here, cousin," said the old gentleman, knocking 
the ashes out of his pipe on the grate, " I think, cousin, 
that it's a very good thing no harm has happened to 
you either from wolves or from loaded rifles." I now 
saw things in the right light, and was ashamed at 
myself to have thus given the old gentleman good 
grounds for treating me like'a spoiled child. 

Next morning he said to me, "Be so good as to 
step down, good cousin, and inquire how the Baroness 
is. You need only ask for Ladv Adelheid ; she will 
supply you with a full budget, I have no doubt." You 
may imagine how eagerly I hastened downstairs. But 
just as I was about to give a gentle knock at the door 
of the Baroness's anteroom, the Baron came hurriedlv 
out of the same. He stood still in astonishment, and 
scrutinised me with a gloomy searching look. " What 
do you want here ? " burst from his lips. Notwith- 
standing]^ that mv heart beat, I controlled myself and 
replied in a firm tone, "To inquire on my uncle's 
behalf how my lady, the Baroness, is ? " " Oh ! it was 
nothing — one of her usual nervous attacks. She is 
now having a quiet sleep, and will, I am sure, make 
her appearance at the dinner-table quite well and 
cheerful. Tell him that — tell him that." This the 
Baron said with a certain degree of passionate vehe- 


THE ENTAIL. 273 

• 

mence, which seemed to me to imply that he was more 
concerned about the Baroness than he was willing to 
show. I turned to go back to my uncle, when the 
Baron suddenly seized my arm and said, whilst his 
eyes flashed fire, '^ I have a word or two to say to you, 
young man." Here I saw the deeply injured husband 
before me, and feared there would be a scene which 
would perhaps end ignominiously for me. I was un- 
armed ; but at that moment I remembered I had in mv 
pocket the ingeniously-made hunting-knife which my 
uncle had presented to me after we got to R — sitten. 
I now followed the Baron, who led the way rapidly, 
with the determination not even to spare his life if I 
ran any risk of being treated dishonourably. 

We entered the Baron's own room, the door of 
which he locked behind him. Now he began to pace 
restlessly backwards and forwards, with his arms 
folded one over the other; then he stopped in front 
of me and repeated, '^ I have a word or two to say to 
you, young man." I had wound myself up to a pitch 
of most daring courage, and I replied, raising my voice, 
" I hope they will be words which I may hear without 
resentment." He stared hard at me in- astonishment, 
as though he had failed to understand me. Then, 
fixing his eyes gloomily upon the floor, he threw his 
arms behind his back, and again began to stride up 
and down the room. He took down a rifle and put the 
ramrod down the barrel to see whether it were loaded 
or not. My blood boiled in my veins; grasping my 
knife, I stepped close up to him, so as to make it 
impossible for him to take aim at me. *' That's a 
handsome weapon," he said, replacing the rifle in the 
corner. I retired a few paces, the Baron following 

me. Slapping me on the shoulder, perhaps a little 
VOL. I. s 


274 T^^^ ENTAIL. 

more violently than was necessary, he said, '' I daresay 
I seem to you, Theodore, to be excited and irritable; 
and I really am so, owing to the anxieties of a sleepless 
night. My wife's nervous attack was not in the least 
dangerous; that I now see plainly. But here — here 
in this castle, which is haunted by an evil spirit, I 
always dread something terrible happening; and then 
it's the first time she has been ill here. And you — 
vou alone were to blame for it'' ''How that can 
possibly be I have not the slightest conception/' I 
replied calmly. "I wish," continued the Baron, *'I 
wish that damned piece of mischief, my steward's 
wife's instrument, were chopped up into a thousand 
pieces, and that you — but no, no ; it was to be so, it 
was inevitably to be so, and I alone am to blame for 
all. I ought to have told you, the moment you began 
to play music in my wife's room, of the whole state 
of the case, and to have informed you of my wife's 
temper of mind." I was about to speak; "Let me 
go on," said the Baron, " I must prevent your forming 
any rash judgment. You probably regard me as an 
uncultivated fellow, averse to the arts; but I am not 
so by any means. There is a particular consideration, 
however, based upon deep conviction, wliich constrains 
me to forbid the introduction here as far as possible 
of such music as can powerfully affect any person's 
mind, and to this I of course am no exception. Know 
that my wife suffers from a morbid excitability, which 
will finally destroy all the happiness of her life. 
Within these strange walls she is never quit of that 
strained over-excited condition, which at other times 
occurs but temporarily, and then generally as the 
forerunner of a serious illness. You will ask me, and 
quite rea80T\ab\^ loo, ^\\^ \ ^o Yvax. ^^^\^ \s\>^ delicate 
wife the necessYt^ o^ c.oxova^ vo \sn^ vo. n^\^ ^^vl\ 


THE ENTAIL. 275 

castle^ and mix amongst the wild confusion of a 
hunting-party. Well, call it weakness — be it so; in 
a word, I cannot bring myself to leave her behind. I 
should be tortured by a thousand fears, and quite 
incapable of any serious business, for I am perfectly 
sure that I should be haunted everywhere, in the 
justice-hall as well as in the forest, by the most horrid 
ideas of all kinds of fatal mischief happening to her. 
And, on the other hand, I believe that the sort of life 
led here cannot fail to operate upon the weakly 
woman like strengthening chalybeate waters. By 
my soul, the sea-breezes, sweeping keenly after their 
peculiar fashion through the fir-trees, and the deep 
baying of the hounds, and the merry ringing notes 
of our hunting-horns, must get the better of all your 
sickly languishing sentimentalisings at the piano, 
which no man ought to play in that way. I tell you, 
you are deliberately torturing my wife to death.*' 
These words he uttered with great emphasis, whilst his 
eyes flashed with a restless fire. The blood mounted 
to my head; I made a violent gesture against the 
Baron with my hand ; I was about to speak, but he 
cut me short. '^ I know what you are going to say/* 
he began, " I know what you are going to say, and I 
repeat that you arc going the right road to kill my 
wife. But that you intended this I cannot of course 
for a moment maintain ; . and yet you will understand 
that I must put a stop to the thing. In short, by your 
playing and singing you work her up to a high pitch of 
excitement, and then, when she drifts without anchor 
and rudder on the boundless sea of dreams and visions 
and vague aspirations which your music, like some vile 
charm, has summoned into existence, you plunge her 
down into the depths of horror with a tale about a fear- 


276 THE ENTAIL. 

ful apparition which you say came and played pranks 
with you up in the justice-hall. Your great-uncle has 
told nie everything; but, pray, repeat to me all you 
saw, or did not see, heard, felt, divined by instinct. 

I embraced myself up and narrated calmly how every- 
thing had happened from beginning to end, the Baron 
merely interposing at intervals a few words expressive 
of his astonishment. When I came to the part where 
my old uncle had met the ghost with trustful courage 
and had exorcised him with a few powerful words, the 
Baron clasped his hands, raised them folded towards 
Heaven, and said with deep emotion, " Yes, he is the 
guardian-angel of the family. His mortal remains 
shall rest in the vault of my ancestors.*' When I 
finished my narration, the Baron murmured to him- 
self " Daniel, Daniel, what are you doing here at this 
hour?" as he folded his arms and strode up and down 
the room. "And was that all, Herr Baron ? 'M asked, 
making a movement as though I would retire. Start- 
ing up as if out of a dream, the Baron took me kindly 
by the hand and said, "Yes, my good friend, my wife, 
whom you have dealt so hardlv bv without intending: 
it — you must cure her again ; you alone can do so." 
I felt I was blushing, and had I stood opposite a 
mirror should undoubtedly have seen in it a verv 
blank and absurd face. The Baron seemed to exult 
in my embarrassment ; he kept his eyes fixed intently 
upon my face, smiling with perfectly galling ironv. 
" How in the world can I cure her ? *' I manasced to 
stammer out at length with an effort. "Well," he 
said, interrupting me, " you have no-dangerous patient 
to deal with, at any rate. I now make an express 
claim upon your skill. 'Since the Baroness has been 
drawn into the enchanted circle of your music, it 


THE ENTAIL. 277 

would be both foolish and cruel to drag her out of it 
all of a sudden. Go on with your music therefore. 
You will always be welcome during the evening hours 
in my wife's apartments. But gradually select a more 
energetic kind of music, and effect a clever alternation 
of the cheerful sort with the serious; and above all 
things, repeat your story of the fearful ghost very very 
often. The Baroness will grow familiar with it; she 
will forget that a ghost haunts this castle ; and the story 
will have no stronger effect upon her than any other 
tale of enchantment which is put before her in a romance 
or a ghost-story book. Pray, do this, my good friend." 
With these words the Baron left me. I went away. 
I felt as if I were annihilated, to be thus humiliated 
to the level of a foolish and insignificant child. Fool 
that I was to suppose that jealousy was stirring his 
heart! He himself sends me to Seraphina; he sees in 
me only the blind instrument which, after he has made 
use of it, he can throw away if he thinks well. A few 
minutes previously I had really feared the Baron ; 
deep down within my heart lurked the consciousness 
of guilt ; but it was a consciousness which allowed mc 
to feel distinctly the beauty of the higher life for which 
I was ripe. Now all had disappeared in the blackness 
of night ; and I saw only the stupid boy who in childish 
obstinacy had persisted in taking the paper crown which 
he had put on his hot temples for a real golden one. 
I hurried away to my uncle, who was waiting for me. 
'^Well, cousin, why have you been so long? Where 
have you been staying ? ^' he cried as soon as he saw 
me. ^' I have been having some words with the 
Baron!" I quickly replied, carelessly and in a low 
voice, without being able to look at the old gentle- 
man. '' Gbd damn it all," said he, feigning astonish- 


278 THE ENTAIL. 

merit. "Good gracious, boy! that's- just what I 
thought. I suppose the Baron has challenged you, 
cousin ? " The ringing peal of laughter which the 
old gentleman immediately afterwards broke out into 
taught me that this time too, as always, he had seen 
me through and through. I bit my lip, and durst not 
speak a word, for I knew very well that it would only 
be the signal for the old gentleman to overwhelm me 
beneath the torrent of teasing which was already 
hovering on the tip of his tongue. 

The Baroness appeared at the dinner-table in an 
elegant morning-robe, the dazzling whiteness of which 
exceeded that of fresh-fallen snow. She looked worn 
and low-spirited ; but she began to speak in her soft 
and melodious accents, and on raising her dark eyes 
there shone a sweet and yearning look full of aspira- 
tion in their voluptuous glow, and a fugitive blush 
flitted across her lily-white cheeks. She was more 
beautiful than ever. But who can fathom the follies 
of a young man who has got too hot blood in his head 
and heart? The bitter pique which the Baron had 
stirred up within me I transferred to the Baroness. 
The entire business seemed to me like a foul mystifica- 
tion ; and I would now show that I was possessed of 
alarmingly good com'mon-sense and also of extraordi- 
nary sagacity. Like a petulant child, I shunned the 
Baroness and escaped Adelheid when she pursued me, 
and found a place where I wished, right at the bottom 
end of the table between the two officers, with whom I 
began to carouse right merrily. We kept our glasses 
going gaily during dessert, and I was, as so frequently 
is the case in moods like mine, extremely noisy and 
loud in my joviality. A servant brought me a plate 
with some bonbons on it, with the words, "From Lady 


THE ENTAIL. 279 

Adelheid/* I took them ; and observed on one of 
them, scribbled in pencil, " and Seraphina." My blood 
(joursed tumultuously in my veins. I sent a glance in 
Adelheid's direction, which she met with a most sly 
and archly cunning look ; and taking her glass in her 
hand, she gave me a slight nod. Almost mechanically 
I murmured to myself, ^^ Seraphina ! '* then taking up 
my glass in my turn, I drained it at a single draught. 
My glance fell across in her direction ; I perceived that 
she also had drunk at the very same moment and was 
setting down her glass. Our eyes met, and a malig- 
nant demon whispered in my ear, " Unhappy wretch, 
she does love you ! '* One of the guests now rose, and 
in conformity with the custom of the North, proposed 
the health of the lady of the house. Our glasses rang 
in the midst of a tumult of joy. My heart was torn 
with rapture and despair; the wine burned like fire 
within me ; everything spun round in circles ; I felt 
as if I must hasten and throw myself at her feet and 
there sigh out my life. "What's the matter with 
you, my friend ? " asked my neighbour, thus recalling 
me to myself; but Seraphina had left the hall. We 
rose from the table. I was making for the door, but 
Adelheid held me fast, and began to talk about divers 
matters; I neither heard nor understood a single word. 
She grasped both my hands and, laughing, shouted 
something in my ear. I remained dumb and motion- 
less, as though affected by catalepsy. All I remember 
is that I finally took a glass of liqueur out of Adelheid's 
hand in a mechanical way and drank it off, and then 
I recollect being alone in a window, and after that I 
rushed out of the hall, down the stairs, and ran out 
into the wood. The snow was falling in thick flakes ; 
the fir-trees were moaning as they waved to and fro 


28o THE ENTAIL. 

in the wind. Like a maniac I ran round and round 
in wide circles, laughing and screaming loudly, " Look, 
look and see. Aha ! Aha 1 The devil is having a fine 
dance with the boy who thought he would taste of 
strictly forbidden fruit ! *' Who can tell what would 
have been the end of my mad prank if I had not heard 
my name called loudly from the outside of the wood ? 
The storm had abated ; the moon shone out brightly 
through the broken clouds ; I heard dogs barking, and 
perceived a dark figure approaching me. It was the 
old man Francis. ^* Why, why, my good Herr Theo- 
dore,'* he began, " you have quite lost your way in the 
rough snow-storm. The Herr Justitiarius is awaiting 
you with much impatience." I followed the old man 
in silence. I found my great-uncle working in the 
justice-hall. '^ You have done well,'' he cried on see- 
ing me, ^^ you have done a very wise thing to go out 
in the open air a little and get cool. But don't drink 
quite so much wine; you are far too young, and it's 
not good for you.'' I did not utter a word in reply, 
and also took my place at the table in silence. *'But 
now tell me, good cousin, what it was the Baron really 
wanted you for?" I told him all, and concluded by 
stating that I would not lend myself for the doubtful 
cure which the Baron had proposed. *^ And it would 
not be practicable," the old gentleman interrupted, " for 
to-morrow morning early we set off home, cousin." 
And so it was that I never saw Seraphina again. 

As soon as we arrived in K my old uncle com- 
plained that he felt the effects of the wearying journey 
this time more than ever. His moody silence, broken 
only by violent outbreaks of the worst possible ill-hum- 
our, announced lUe return of his attacks of gout. One 
day I was suddewX^ ca\\e^ vjv\ \'^^^i^^^^ "^^ ^^ ^^55^^ 


THE ENTAIL. 281 

man confined to his bed and unable to speak, suffering 
from a paralytic stroke. He held a letter in his hand, 
which he had crumpled up tightly in a spasmodic fit. 
I recognised the handwriting of the land-steward of 
R — sitten ; but, quite upset by my trouble, I did not 
venture to take the letter out of the old gentleman's 
hand. I did not doubt that his end was near. But his 
pulse began to beat again, even before the physician 
arrived ; the old gentleman's remarkably tough con- 
stitution resisted the mortal attack, although he was 
in his seventieth year. That selfsame day the doctor 
pronounced him out of danger. 

We had a more severe winter than usual ; this was 
followed by a rough and stormy spring; and hence it 
was more the gout^-a consequence of the inclemency 
of the season — than his previous accident which kept 
him for a long time confined to his bed. During this 
period he made up his mind to retire altogether from 
all kinds of business. He transferred his office of 
Justitiarius to others; and so I was cut off from all 
hope of ever again going to R — sitten. The old 
gentleman would allow no one to attend him but me ; 
and it was to me alone that he looked for all amuse- 
ment and every cheerful diversion. And though, in 
the hours when he was free from pain, his good spirits 
returned, and he had no lack of broad jests, even 
making mention of hunting exploits, so that I fully 
expected every minute to hear him make a butt of my 
heroic deed, when I had killed the wolf with my 
whinger, yet never once did he allude to our visit 
to R — sitten, and as may well be imagined, I was 
very careful, from natural shyness, not to lead him 
directly up to the subject My harassing anxiety and 
continual attendance upon the old gentleman had 
thrust Seraphina's image into the background. But 


282 THE ENTAIL. 

as soon as his sickness abated somewhat^ my thoughts 
returned with more liveliness to that moment in the 
Baroness's room, which I now looked upon as a star — 
a bright star — that had set, for me at least, for ever. 
An occurrence which now happened^ by making me 
shudder with an ice-cold thrill as at sight of a visitant 
from the world of spirits, revived all the pain I had 
formerly felt. One evening, as 1 was opening the 
pocket-book which I had carried whilst at R — sitten, 
there fell out of the papers I was unfolding a dark 
curl, wrapped about with a white ribbon; I imme- 
diately recognised it as Seraphina's hair. But, on 
examining the ribbon more closely, I distinctly per- 
ceived the mark of a spot of blood on it ! Perhaps 
Adelheid had skilfullv contrived to secrete it about me 
during the moments of conscious insanity by which 
I had been affected during the last days of our visit ; 
but why was the spot of blood there? It excited 
forebodings of something terrible in my mind, and 
almost converted this too pastoral love-token into an 
awful admonition, pointing to a passion which might 
entail the expenditure of precious blood. It was the 
same white ribbon that had fluttered about me in 
light wanton sportiveness as it were the first time I 
sat near Seraphina, and which Mysterious Night had 
stamped as an emblem of mortal injury. Boys ought 
not to play with weapons with the dangerous pro- 
perties of which they are not familiar. 

At last the storms of spring had ceased to bluster, 
and summer asserted her rights ; and if the cold had 
formerly been unbearable, so now too was the heat 
when July came in. The old gentleman visibly 
gathered strength, and following his usual custom, 
went out to a garden in the suburbs. One still, warm 


THE ENTAIL. 283 

evening, as we sat in the sweet-smelling jasmine arbour, 
he was in unusually good spirits, and not, as was gene- 
rally the case, overflowing with sarcasm and irony, 
but in a gentle and almost soft and melting mood. 
" Cousin," he began, *' I don't know how it is, 
but I feel so nice and warm and comfortable all 
over to-day ; I have not felt like it for many years. I 
believe it is an augury that I shall die soon/* I 
exerted myself to drive these gloomy thoughts from 
his mind. "Never mind, cousin,*' he said, "in any 
case Pm not long for this world ; and so I will now 
discharge a debt I owe you. Do you still remember 
our autumn in R — sitten?" This question thrilled 
through me like a lightning-flash, so before I was able 
to make any reply he continued, " It was Heaven's will 
that your entrance into that castle should be signalised 
by memorable circumstances, and that you should be- 
come involved against your own will in the deepest 
secrets of the house. The time has now come when 
you must learn ^11. We have often enough talked about 
things which you, cousin, rather dimly 'guessed at 
than really understood. In the alternation of the 
seasons nature represents symbolically the cycle of 
human life. That is a trite remark; but I interpret 
it differently from everybody else. The dews of spring 
fall, summer's vapours fade away, and it is the pure 
atmosphere of autumn which clearly reveals the dis- 
tant landscape, and then finally earthly existence is 
swallowed in the night of winter. I mean that the 
government of the Power Inscrutable is more plainly 
revealed in the clear-sightedness of old age. It is 
granted glimpses of the promised land, the pilgrimage 
to which begins with the death on earth. How 
clearly do I see at this moment the dark destiny 


284 THE ENTAIL. 

of that house, to which I am knit by firmer ties than 
blood relationship can weave 1 Everything lies dis- 
closed to the eyes of my spirit. And yet the things 
which I now see, in the form in which I see them— 
the essential substance of them, that is — this I cannot 
tell you in words ; for no man's tongue is able to do 
so. But listen, my son, I will tell you as well as I am 
able, and do you think it is some remarkable story 
that might really happen ; and lay up carefully in 
your soul the knowledge that the mysterious relations 
into which you ventured to enter, not perhaps without 
being summoned, might have ended in your destruc- 
tion — but — that's all over now." 

The history of the R entail, which my old uncle 

told me, I retain so faithfully in my memory even 
now that I can almost repeat it in his own words (he 
spoke of himself in the third person). 

One stormy night in the autumn of 1760 the 
servants of R — sittcn were startled out of the midst 
of their sleep by a terrific crash, as if the whole of the 
spacious castle had tumbled into a thousand pieces. 
In a moment everybody was on his legs; lights were 
lit ; the house-steward, his face deadly pale with 
fright and terror, came up panting with his keys; 
but as they proceeded through the passages and halls 
and rooms, suite after suite, and found all safe, and 
heard in the appalling silence nothing except the creak- 
ing rattle of the locks, which occasioned some diffi- 
culty in opening, and the ghost-like echo of their own 
footsteps, they began one and all to be utterly astounded. 
Nowhere was there the least trace of damage. The old 
house-steward was impressed by an ominous feeling 
of apprehension. He went up into the great Knight's 
Hall, which had a small cabinet adjoining where 


THE ENTAIL, 285 

Freiherr Roderick von R used to sleep when en- 
gaged in making his astronomical observations. Be- 
tween the door of this cabinet and that of a second 
was a postern^ leading through a narrow passage im- 
mediately into the astronomical tower. But directly 
Daniel (that was the house-steward's name) opened 
this postern, the storm, blustering and howling terrifi- 
cally, drove a heap of rubbish and broken pieces of 
stones all over him, which made him recoil in terror; 
and, dropping the candles, which went out with a hiss 
on the floor, he screamed, ^' O God ! O God ! The 
Baron! he's miserably dashed to pieces!" At the 
same moment he heard sounds of lamentation pro- 
ceeding from the Freiherr's sleeping-cabinet, and on 
entering it he saw the servants gathered around their 
master's corpse. They had found him fully dressed 
and more magnificently than on any previous occa- 
sion, and with a calm earnest look upon his unchanged 
countenance, sitting in his large and richly-decorated 
arm-chair as though resting after severe study. But 
his rest was the rest of death. When dav dawned it 
was seen that the crowning turret of the tower had 
fallen in. The huge square stones had broken through 
the ceiling and floor of the observatory-room, and 
then, carrying down in front of them a powerful 
beam that ran across the tower, they had dashed 
in with redoubled impetus the lower vaulted roof, and 
dragged down a portion of the castle walls and of the 
narrow connecting-passage. Not a single step could 
be taken beyond the postern threshold without risk of 
falling at least eighty feet into a deep chasm. 

The old Freiherr had foreseen the very hour of his 
death, and had sent intelligence of it to his sons. 
Hence it happened that the very next day saw the 


286 THE ENTAIL. 

^v arrival of Wplfjgang, Freiherr von R ^ eldest son 

of the deceased^ and now lord of the entail. Relying 
confidently upon the probable truth of the old man's 
foreboding, he had left Vienna, which city he chanced 
to have reached in his travels, immediately he received 
the ominous letter, and hastened to R-— sitten as 
fast as he could travel. The house-steward had draped 
the great hall in black, and had had the old Freiherr 
laid out in the clothes in which he had been found, on 
a magnificent state-bed^ and this he had surrounded 
with tall silver candlesticks with burning wax-candles. 

y Wolfgang ascended the stairs, entered the hall, and 
approached close to his father's corpse, without speak- 
ing a word. There he stood with his arms folded on 
his chest, gazing with a fixed and gloomy look and 
with knitted brows, into his father's pale countenance. 
He was like a statue ; not a tear came from his eyes. 
At length, with an almost convulsive movement of the 
right arm towards the corpse, he murmured hoarsely, 
" Did the stars compel you to make the son whom you 
loved miserable ? " Throwing his hands behind his 
back and stepping a short pace backwards, the Baron 
raised his eyes upwards and said in a low and well-nigh 
broken voice, " Poor, infatuated old man ! Your car- 
nival farce with its shallow delusions is now over. 
Now you no doubt see that the possessions which are 
so niggardly dealt out to us here on earth have nothing 
in common with Hereafter beyond the stars. What 
will — what power can reach over beyond the grave ? " 
The Baron was silent again for some seconds, then 
he cried passionately, " No, your perversity shall not 
rob me of a grain of my earthly happiness, which you 
strove so hard to destroy," and therewith he took a 
folded paper ouVol Vvs* >^o^^\.^\A\Ns\i.\\.vi^ between 


THE ENTAIL, 287 

two fingers to one of the burning candles that stood 
close beside the corpse. The paper was caught by 
the flame and blazed up high; and as the reflection 
flickered and played upon the face of the corpse, it 
was as though its muscles moved and as though the 
old man uttered toneless words, so that the servants 
who stood some distance off were filled with great 
horror and awe. The Baron calmlv finished what he 
was doing by carefully stamping out with his foot the 
last fragment of paper that fell on the floor blazing. 
Then, casting yet another moody glance upon his 
father, he hurriedly left the hall. 

On the following day Daniel reported to the Freiherr 
the damage that had been done to the tower, and 
described at gre^lt length all that had taken place on 
the night when their dear dead master died; and he 
concluded by saying that it would be a very wise thing 
to have the tower repaired at once, for,' if a further fall 
were to take place, there would be some danger of the 
whole castle — well, if not tumbling down, at any rate 
suffering serious damage. 

"Repair the tower?" the Freiherr interrupted the 
old servant curtly, whilst his eyes flashed with anger, 
" Repair the tower ? Never, never I Don't you see, 
old man," he went on more calmly, *^ don't you see 
that the tower could not fall in this way without some 
special cause ? How if it was my fathers own wish 
that the place where he carried on his unhallowed 
astrological labours should be destroyed — how if he 
had himself made certain preparations by which he 
was enabled to bring down the turret whenever he 
pleased and so occasion the ruin of the interior of the 
tower! But be that as it mav. And if the whole 
castle tumbles down, I shan't care; I shall be glad. 


288 THE ENTAIL. 

Do you imagine I am going to dwell in this weird owl's 
nest ? No : mv wise ancestor who had the foundations 
of a new castle laid in the heautiful valley yonder — he 
has begun a work which I intend to finish.'^ Daniel 
said crestfallen, " Then will all your faithful old servants 
have to take up their bundles and go?'' "That I am 
not going to be waited upon by helpless, weak-kneed 
old fellows like you is quite certain ; but for all that 
I shall turn none away. You may all enjoy the bread 
of charity without working for it." "And am I," 
cried the old man, greatly hurt, "am I, the house- 
steward, to be forced to lead such a life of inactivity ? " 
Then the Freiherr, who had turned his back upon the 
old man and was about to leave the room, wheeled 
suddenly round, his face perfectly ablaze with passion, 
strode up to the old man as he stretched out his doubled 
fist towards him, and shouted in a thundering voice, 
" You, you hypocritical old villain, it's you who helped 
my old father in his unearthly- practices up vonder; 
you lay upon his heart like a vampire; and perhaps it 
was you who basely took advantage of the old man's 
mad folly to plant in his mind those diabolical ideas 
which brought me to the brink of ruin. I ought, I 
tell you, to kick you out like a mangy cur." The old 
man was so terrified at these harsh terrible words that he 
threw himself upon his knees beside the Freiherr ; but 
the Baron, as he spoke these last words, threw forw-ard 
his right foot, perhaps quite unintentionally (as is 
frequently the case in anger, when the bodv mechani- 
cally obeys the mind, and what is in the thought is 
imitatively realised in action) and hit the old man so 
hard on the chest that he rolled over with a stifled 
scream. Rising painfully to his feet and uttering a 
most singuW &owwdi, W^ \^^ \v^^\\\\s»^ ^biva^r of an 


THE ENTAIL. 289 

animal wounded to death, he looked the Freiherr 
through and through with a look that glared with 
mingled rage and despair. The purse of money which 
the Freiherr threw down as he went out of the room, 
the old man left lying on the floor where it fell. 

Meanwhile all the nearest relatives of the family 
who lived in the neighbourhood had arrived, and the 
old Freiherr was interred with much pomp in the 
family vault in the church at R — sitten ; and now, 
after the invited guests had departed, the new lord of 
the entail appeared to shake off his gloomy mood, and 
to be prepared to duly enjoy the property that had 

fallen to him. Alone: with V , the old Freiherr's 

Justitiarius, who won his full confidence in the very 
first interview they had, and who was at once con- 
firmed in his office, the Baron made an exact calcula- 
tion of his sources of income, and considered how large 
a part he could devote to making improvements and 

how large a part to building a new castle. V 

was of opinion that the old Freiherr could not possibly 
have spent all his income every year, and that there 
must certainly be money concealed somewhere, since 
he had found nothing amongst his papers except one 
or two bank-notes for insignificant sums, and the 
ready-money in the iron safe was but very little more 
than a thousand thalers, or about j^i5o. Who would 
be so likely to know anything about it as Daniel, 
who in his obstinate self-willed way was perhaps only 
waiting to be asked about it? The Baron was now 
not a little concerned at the thought that Daniel, 
whom he had so grossly insulted, might let large sums 
moulder somewhere sooner than discover them to 
him, not so much, of course, from any motives of self- 
interest, — for of what use could even the largest sum 

VOL. I. T 


290 THE ENTAIL. 

• 

of money be to him, a childless old man, whose only 
wish was to end his days in the castle of R — sitten ? — 
as from a desire to take vengeance for the affront put 

upon him. He gave V a circumstantial account 

of the entire scene with Daniel, and concluded bv 
saying that from several items of information com- 
municated to him he had learned that it jivas Daniel 
alone who had contrived to nourish in the old 
Freiherr's mind such an inexplicable aversion to ever 
seeing his sons in R — sitten. The Justitiarius declared 
that this information was perfectly false, since there 
was not a human creature on the face of the earth 
\\ho would have been able to guide the Freiherr's 
thoughts in any way, far less determine them for him ; 
and he undertook finallv to draw from Daniel the 
secret, if he had one, as to the place in which they 
would be likely to find money concealed. His task 
proved far easier than he had anticipated, for no 
sooner did he begin, "But how comes it, Daniel, that 
your old master has jeft so little ready money ? " than 
Daniel replied, with a repulsive smile, " Do you mean 
the few trifling thalers, Herr Justitiarius, which you 
found in the little strong box ? Oh ! the rest is lying 
in the vault beside our gracious master's sleeping- 
cabinet. But the best,^^ he went on to say, whilst his 
smiled passed over into an abominable grin, and his 
eves flashed with malicious fire, '^but the best of all — 
several thousand gold pieces — lies buried at the bottom 
of the chasm beneath the ruins." The Justitiarius at 
once summoned the Freiherr ; they proceeded there, 
and then into the sleeping-cabinet, where Daniel 
pushed aside the wainscot in one of the corners, and 
a small lock became visible. Whilst the Freiherr was 
Jcrarding the polished lock with covetous eyes, and 


THE EST AIL, 


291 


making preparations to try and unlock it with the 
keys of the great bunch which he dragged with some 
difficulty out of his pocket, Daniel drew himself up to 
his full height^ and looked down with almost malig- 
nant pride upon his master, who had now stooped 
down in order to see the lock better. Daniel's face 
was deadly pale, and he said, his voice trembling, ''If 
I am a dog, my lord Freiherr, I have also at least a 
dog's fidelity." Therewith he held out a bright steel 
key to his master, who greedily snatched it out of his 
hand, and with it he easily succeeded in opening the 
door. They stepped into a small and low-vaulted 
apartment, in which stood a large iron coffer witb the 
lid open, containing many money-bags, upon which 
lay a strip of parchment, written in the old Freiherr's 
familiar handwriting, large and. old-fashioned. 

One hundred and fifty thousand Imperial thalers 
in old Fredericks cCor} monev saved from the 
revenues of the estate-tail of R — sitten ; this sum 
has been set aside for the building of the castle. 
Further, the lord of the entail who succeeds me 
in the possession of this money shall, upon the 
highest hill situated eastward from the old tower 
of the castle (which he will find in ruins), erect a 
high beacon-tower for the benefit of mariners, 
and cause a fire to be kindled on it every 
. night. R — sitten, on Michaelmas Eve of the year 
1760. 

Roderick, Freiherr von R. 


^ Imperial thalers varied in value at difierent 
their value at three fhillingi, the snin liMV 
equivalent to aboat ;f 23,500. A 
five thalers. 


292 THE ENTAIL. 

The Freiherr lifted up the bags one after the other 
and let them fall again into the coffer, delighted at the 
ringing clink of so much gold coin ; then he turned 
round abruptly to the old house-steward, thanked him 
for the fidelity he had shown, and assured him that 
they were only vile tattling calumnies which had 
induced him to treat him so harshly in the first 
instance. He should not only remain in the castle, 
but should also continue to discharge his duties, un- 
curtailed in any way, as house-steward, and at double 
the wages he was then having. '' I owe you a large 
compensation; if you will take money, help yourself 
to one of these bags.'* As he concluded with these 
words, the Baron stood before the old man, with his 
eyes bent upon the ground, and pointed to the coffer; 
then, approaching it again, he once more ran his eyes 
over the bags. A burning flush suddenly mounted 
into the old house-steward's cheeks, and he uttered 
that awful howling whimper — a noise as of an animal 
wounded to death, according to the Freiherr's previous 
description of it to the Justitiarius. The latter 
shuddered, for the words which the old man murmured 
between his teeth sounded like, *' Blood for gold." 
Of all this the Freiherr, absorbed in the contemplation 
of the treasure before him, had heard not the least. 
Daniel tottered in everv limb, as if shaken bv an asrue 
fit; approaching the Freiherr with bowed head in a 
humble attitude, he kissed his hand, and drawing his 
handkerchief across his eyes under the pretence of 
wiping away his tears, said in a whining voice, '* Alas ! 
my good and gracious master, what am I, a poor child- 
less old man, to do with money ? But the doubled 
wa^es 1 acevi^t. vjith. ^laduess^ and will continue to do 
my" duty ^a\t\\^u\\^ axv^x^^ciw^N"'' 


THE ENTAIL. 293 

The Freiherr, who had paid no particular heed to 
the old man's words, now let the heavy lid of the cofFer 
fall to with a bang, so that the whole room shook and 
cracked, and then, locking the coffer and carefully 
withdrawing the key, he said carelessly, "Very well, 
very well, old man.'* But after they entered the hall 
he went on talking to Daniel, "But you said something 
about a quantity of gold pieces buried underneath the 
ruins of the tower?" Silently the old man stepped 
towards the postern, and after some difficulty unlocked 
it. But so soon as he threw it open the storm drove a 
thick mass of snow-flakes into the hall; a raven was 
disturbed and flew in croaking and screaming and 
dashed with its black wings against the window, but 
regaining the open postern it disappeared downwards 
into the chasm. The Freiherr stepped out into the 
corridor; but one single glance downwards, and he 
started back trembling. "A fearful sight! — I'm 
giddy!" he stammered as he sank almost fainting 
into the Justitiarius' arms. But quickly recovering 
himself by an effort, he fixed a sharp look upon the 
old man and asked, " Down there, you say ? " Mean- 
while the old man had been locking the postern, and 
was now leaning against it with all his bodily strength, 
and was gasping and grunting to get the great key out 
of the rusty lock. This at last accomplished, he turned 
round to the Baron, and, changing, the huge key about 
backwards and forwards in his hands, replied with a 
peculiar smile, " Yes, there are thousands and thousands 
down there — all my dear dead master's beautiful instru- 
ments — telescopes, quadrants, globes, dark mirrors, they 
all lie smashed to atoms underneath the ruins between 
the stones and the big balk," "But money — coined 
money," interrupted the Baron, " you spoke of gold 


294 THE ENTAIL. 

pieces, old man ? " "I only meant things which had 
cost several thousand gold pieces," he replied ; and not 
another word could be got out of him. 

The Baron appeared highly delighted to have all at 
9nce come into possession of all the means requisite 
for carrying out his favourite plan, namely, that of 
building a new and magnificent castle. The Justitiarius 
indeed stated it as his opinion that, according to the 
will of the deceased, the motley could only be applied 
to the repair and complete finishing of the interior of 
the old castle, and further, any new erection would 
hardly succeed in equalling the commanding size and 
the severe and simple character of the old ancestral 
castle. The Freiherr, however, persisted in his inten- 
tion, and maintained that in the disposal of property 
respecting which nothing was stated in the deeds of the 
entail the irregular will of the deceased could have no 

validity. He at the same time led V to understand 

that he should conceive it to be his dutv to embellish 
R — sitten as far as the climate, soil, and environs 
would permit, for it was his intention to bring home 
shortly as his dearly loved wife a lady who was in every 
respect worthy of the greatest sacrifices. 

The air of mystery with which the Freiherr spoke 
of this alliance, which possibly had been already con- 
summated in secret, cut short all further questions 
from the side of the Justitiarius. Nevertheless he 
found in it to some extent a redeeming feature, for 
the Freiherr*s eager grasping after riches now appeared 
to be due not so much to avarice strictly speaking as 
to the desire to make one dear to him forget the more 
beautiful country she was relinquishing for his sake. 
Otherwise he could not acquit the Baron of being 
avaricious, or at any rate insufferably close-fisted, 


THE ENTAIL. 295 

seeing that, even though rolling in money and even 
when gloating over the old Fredericks d'or, he could 
not help bursting out with the peevish grumble, " I 
know the old rascal has concealed from us the greatest 
part of his wealth, but next spring* I will have the ruins 
of the tower turned over under my own eyes." 

The Freiherr had architects come, and discussed 
with them at great length what would be the most 
convenient way to proceed with his castle-building. 
He rejected one drawing after another; in none of 
them was the style of architecture sufficiently rich and 
grandiose. He now began to draw plans himself, and, 
inspirited by this employment, which constantly placed 
before his eyes a sunny picture of the happiest future, 
brought himself into such a genial humour that it 
often bordered on wild exuberance of spirits, and even 
communicated itself to all about .him. His gene- 
rosity and profuse hospitality belied all imputations of 
avarice at any rate. Daniel also seemed to have now 
forgotten the insult that had been put upon him. 
Towards the Freiherr, although often followed by him 
with mistrustful eyes on account of the treasure buried 
in the chasm, his bearing was both quiet and humble. 
But what struck everybody as extraordinary was that 
the old man appeared to grow younger from day to 
day. Possibly this might be, because he had begun to 
forget his grief for his old master, which had stricken 
him sore, and possibly also because he had not now, 
as he once had, to spend the cold nights in the Tower 
without sleep, and got better food and good wine such 
as he liked : but whatever the cause might be, the old 
greybeard seemed to be growing into a vigorous man 
with red checks and well-nourished bodv, who could 


296 THE ENTAIL. 

walk firmly and laugh loudly whenever he heard a jest 
to laugh at. 

The pleasant tenor of life at R — sitten was disturbed 
by the arrival of a man whom one would have judged 
>/. to be quite in his element there. This was Wolfgang's 
younger brother Hubert, at the sight of whom Wolf- 
gang had screamed out, with his face as pale as a 
corpse's, " Unhappy wretch, what do you want here ? " 
Hubert threw himself into his brother's arms, but 
f Wolfgang took him and led him away up to a retired 
room, where he locked himself in with him. They 
remained closeted 'several hours, at the end of 
which time Hubert came down, greatly agitated, and 
called for his horses. The Justitiarius intercepted 

him 'y Hubert tried to pass him ; but V , inspired 

by the hope that he might perhaps stifle in the bud 
what might else end in a bitter life-long quarrel 
between the brothers, besought him to stay, at least a 
few hours, and at the same moment the Freiherr came 
down calling, ^^ Stay here, Hubert ! you will think 
better of it." Hubert's countenance cleared up ; he 
assumed an air of composure, and quickly pulling off 
his costly fur coat, and throwing it to a servant behind 

him, he grasped V 's hand and went with him 

into the room, saying with a scornful smile, "So the 
lord of the entail will tolerate my presence here, it 
seems." V thought that the unfortunate mis- 
understanding would assuredly be smoothed awav 
noU', for it was only separation and existence apart 
from each other that would, he conceived, be able to 
foster it. Hubert took up the steel tongs which stood 
near the fire-grate, and as he proceeded to break up 
a knotty \jiece of wood that would only sweal, not 
burn, and to laV^ \!cv^ ^t^ vci^\^^\\5R.\.\sx^\\^ ^d to 


THE ENTAIL. 297 

V y '^You see what a good-natured fellow I am, 

HeiT Justitiarius, and that I am skilful in all domestic 
matters. But Wolfgang- is full of the most extra- 
ordinary prejudices, and — a bit of a miser/' V 

did not deem it advisable to attempt to fathom further 
the relations between the brothers, especially as Wolf- 
gang's face and conduct and voice plainly showed that 
he was shaken to the very depths of his nature by 
diverse violent passions. 

Late in the evening V had occasion to go up to 

the Freiherr*s room, in order to learn his decision about 
some matter or other connected with the estate-tail. 
He found him pacing up and down the room with 
long strides, his arms crossed on his back, and much 
perturbation in his manner. On perceiving the Jus- 
titiarius he stood still, and then, taking him by both 
hands and looking him gloomily in the face, he said 
in a broken voice, *'My brother is come. I know 
what you are going to say/^ he proceeded almost before 
V had opened his mouth to put a question. " Un- 
fortunately you know nothing. You don't know that 
my unfortunate brother — yes, I will not call him any- 
thing worse than unfortunate — that, like a spirit of 
evil, he crosses my path everywhere, ruining my 
peace of mind. It is not his fault that I have not 
been made unspeakably miserable; he did his best to 
make me 60, but Heaven willed it otherwise. Ever 
since he has known of the conversion of the property 
into an entail, he has persecuted me with deadly hatred. 
He envies me this property, which in his hands would 
only be scattered like chaff. He is the wildest spend- 
thrift I ever heard of. His load of debt exceeds by a 
long way the half of the unentailed property in Cour- 
land that fell to him, and now, pursued by his creditors. 


298 THE ENTAIL. 

who fail not to worry him for payment, he hurries here 
to me to beg for money/' " And you, his brother, re- 
fuse to give him any ? " V was about to interrupt 

him ; but the Freiherr, letting V 's hands fall, and 

taking a long step backwards, went on in a loud and 
vehement tone. " Stop ! yes ; I refuse. I neither can 
nor will give away a single thaler of the revenues of 
the entail. But listen, and I will tell you what was 
the proposal which I made the insane fellow a few 
hours ago, and made in vain, and then pass judgment 
upon the feelings of duty by which I am actuated. 
Our unentailed possessions in Courland are^ as you 
are aware, considerable; the half that falls to me I 
am willing to renounce, but in favour of his family. 
For Hubert has married, in Courland, a beautiful lady, 
but poor. She and the children she has borne him 
are starving. The estates should be put under trust ; 
sufficient should be set aside out of the revenues to 
support him, and his creditors be paid by arrangement. 
But what does he care for a quiet life — a life free of 
anxiety? — what does he care for wife and child? 
Money, ready-money, and large quantities, is what he 
will have, that he may squander it in infamous folly. 
Some demon has made him acquainted with the secret 
of the hundred and fifty thousand thalers, half of which 
he in his mad way demands, maintaining that this 
money is movable* property and quite apart from the 
entailed portion. This, however, I must and will refuse 
him, but the feeling haunts me that he is plotting 
my destruction in his heart." 

No matter how great the efforts which V made 

to persuade the Freiherr out of this suspicion against his 
brother, in which, of course, not being initiated into 
the mote cucutiv^x^aLYvu^i^. ^^\2c\% oJl ^^ ^^s^j^e.ement, 


THE ENTAIL. 299 

he could only appeal to broad and somewhat super- 
ficial moral principles^ he yet could not boast of the 
smallest success. The Freiherr commissioned him to 
treat with his hostile and avaricious brother Hubert. 

V proceeded to do so with all the circumspection 

he was master of^ and was not a little gratified when 
Hubert at length declared, "Be it so then; I will 
accept my brother's proposals, but upon condition that 
he will now, since I am on the point of losing both 
my honour and my good name for ever through the 
severity of my creditors, make me an advance of a 
thousand Fredericks dor in hard cash, and further 
grant that in time to come I may take up my residence, 
at least for a short time occasionally, in our beautiful 
R — sitten, along with my good brother.'^ "Never, 

never !'^ exclaimed the Freiherr violently, when V 

laid his brother's amended counter-proposals before 
him. " I will never consent that Hubert stay in my 
house even a single minute after I have brought home 
my wife. Go, my good friend, tell this mar-peace that 
he shall have two thousand Fredericks d'or^ not as an 
advance, but as a gift — only, bid him go, bid him go/^ 

V now learned at one and the same time that the 

ground of the quarrel between the two brothers must 
be sought for in this marriage. Hubert listened to the 
Justitiarius proudly and calmly, and when he finished 
speaking replied in a hoarse and hollow tone, " I will 
think it over; but for the present I shall stay a few 
days in the castle." V exerted himself to prove to 

the discontented Hubert that the Freiherr, by making 
over his share of their unentailed property, was really 
doing all he possibly could do to indemnify him, and 
that on the whole he had no cause for complaint 
against his brother, although at the same time he ad- 


300 THE ENTAIL. 

mitted that all institutions of the nature of primogeni- 
ture^ which vested such preponderant advantages in 
the eldest-born to the prejudice of the remaining chil- 
dren, were in many respects hateful. Hubert tore his 
waistcoat open from top to bottom like a man whose 
breast was cramped and he wanted to relieve it by 
fresh air. Thrusting one hand into his open shirt-frill 
and planting the other in his side^ he spun round on 
one foot in a quick piroutte and cried in a sharp voice, 
" Pshaw ! What is hateful is born of hatred." Then 
bursting out into a shrill fit of laughter, he said^ 
" What condescension my lord of the entail shows in 
being thus willing to throw his gold pieces to the poor 
beggar!'' V saw plainly that all idea of a com- 
plete reconciliation between the brothers was quite out 
of the question. 

To the Freiherr^s annoyance, Hubert established 
himself in the rooms that had been appointed for 
him in one of ^the side wings of the castle as if w^ith 
the view to a very long stay. He was observed to 
hold frequent and long conversations with the house- 
steward ; nay, the latter was sometimes even seen to 
accompany him when he went out wolf-hunting. 
Otherwise he was very little seen, and studiously 
avoided meeting his brother alone, at which the latter 
was very glad. V felt how strained and unplea- 
sant this state of things was, and was obliged to confess 
to himself that the peculiar uneasiness which marked 
all that Hubert both said and did was such as to 
destroy intentionally and effectually all the pleasure 
of the place. He now perfectly understood why the 
Freiherr had manifested so much alarm on seeing his 
brother. 

One (ia^ a^ N ^^^ '^vxxvw^ \ix^ N\YCfta.^lC in the 


THE ENTAIL. 301 

justice-room amongst his law-papers, Hubert came 
in with a grave and more composed manner than 
usual, and said in a voice that bordered upon melan- 
choly, " I will accept my brother's last proposals. If 
you will contrive that I have the two thousand Frede- 
ricks dHor to-day, I will leave the castle this very night 
— on horseback — alone." "With the money?'' asked 

V . "You are right,'* replied Hubert; "I know 

what you would say — the weight ! Give it me in bills on 

Isaac Lazarus of K . For to K I am going 

this very night. Something is driving me away from 
this place. The old fellow has bewitched it with evil 
spirits." " Do you mean your father, Herr Baron ? " 

asked V sternly. Hubert's lips trembled ; he had 

to cling to the chair to keep from falling ; but then 
suddenly recovering himself, he cried, "To-day then, 
please, Herr Justitiarius," and staggered to the door, 
not, however, without some exertion. '* He now sees 
that no deceptions are any longer of avail, that he can 
do nothing against my firm will," said the Freiherr 

whilst drawing up the bills on Isaac Lazarus in K . 

A burden was lifted off his heart by the departure of 
his inimical brother; and for a long time he had not 
been in such cheerful spirits as he was at supper. 
Hubert had sent his excuses; and there was not one 
who regretted his absence. 

The room which V occupied was somewhat re- 
tired, and its windows looked upon the castle-yard. In 
the night he was suddenly startled up out of his sleep, 
and was under the impression that he had been awak- 
ened by a distant and pitiable moan. But listen as he 
would, all remained still as the grave, and so he was 
obliged to conclude that the sound which had fallen 
upon his ears was the delusion of a dream. But at the 


302 THE ENTAIL. 

same time he was seized with such a peculiar feeling 
of breathless anxiety and terror that he could not stay 
in bed. He got up and approached the window. It 
was not long, however, before the castle door was 
opened, and a figure with a blazing torch came out 

of the castle and went across the court-yard. V 

recognised the figure as that of old Daniel^ and saw 
him open the stable-door and go in^ and soon afterwards 
bring out a saddled horse. Now a second figure came 
into view out of the darkness, well wrapped in furs, and 

with a fox-skin cap on his head. V perceived 

that it was Hubert; but after he had spoken excitedly 
with Daniel for some minutes, he returned into the 
castle. Daniel led back the horse into the stable and 
locked the door, and also that of the castle, after be 
had returned across the court-yard in the same wav in 
which he crossed it before. It was evident Hubert 
had intended to go away on horseback, but had 
suddenly changed his mind; and no less evident was 
it that there was a dangerous understanding of some 
sort between Hubert and the old house-steward. 

V looked forward to the morning with burning 

impatience ; he would acquaint the Freiherr with the 
occurrences of the night. Really it was now time to 
take precautionary measures against the attacks of 

Hubert's malice, which, V was now convinced, 

had been betrayed in his agitated behaviour of the 
day before. 

Next morning, at the hour when the Freiherr was in 
the habit of rising, V heard people running back- 
wards and forwards, doors opened and slammed to, and 
a tumultuous confusion of voices talking and shouting. 
On going, out oi! Vv\s room he met servants everywhere, 
who, without \\ee^vc^^^^^'^>'^^^ ^^a^.^\\sv^^^^^.^^tlv 


THE ENTAIL. 303 

pale faces, upstairs^ downstairs^ in and out the rooms. 
At length he ascertained that the Freiherr was missings 
and that they had been looking for him for hours in ^ 
vain. As he had gone to bed in the presence of his 
personal attendant^ he must have afterwards got up 
and gone away somewhere in his dressing-gown and 
slippers, taking the large candlestick with him, for 
these articles were also missed. V—-, his mind 
agitated with dark forebodings, ran up to the ill-fated 
yC hall, the cabinet adjoining which Wolfgang had 
chosen, like his father, for his own bedroom. The pos- 
tern leading to the tower stood wide open, with a cry 

of horror V shouted, " There — he lies dashed to 

pieces at the bottom of the ravine." And it was so. 
There had been a fall of snow, so that all they could 
distinctly make out from above was the rigid arm of 
the unfortunate man protruding from between the 
stones. Many hours passed before the workmen suc- 
ceeded, at great risk of life, in descending by means of 
I ladders bound together, and drawing up the corpse by 
the aid of ropes. In the last agonies of death the 
Baron had kept a tight hold upon the silver candle- 
stick; the hand in which it was clenched was the 
only uninjured part of his whole body, which had 
been shattered in the most hideous way by rebounding 
on the sharp stones. 

Just as the corpse was drawn up and carried into 
the hall, and laid upon the very same spot on the 
large table where a few weeks before old Roderick 
had lain dead, Hubert burst in, his face distorted by 
the frenzy of despair. Quite overpowered by the 
fearful sight he wailed, "Brother! O my poor 
brother 1 No ; this I never prayed for from the 
demons who had entered into me.'' This suspicious 


\ 


304 THE ENTAIL. 

self-exculpation made V tremble ; he felt impelled 

to proceed against Hubert as the murderer of his 
brother. Hubert, However, had fallen on the floor 
senseless; they carried him to bed; but on taking 
strong restoratives he soon recovered. Then he ap- 
peared in V 's room, pale and sorrow-stricken, and 

with his eyes half clouded with grief; and unable to 
stand owing to his weakness, he slowly sank down 
into an easy-chair, saying, "I have wished for my 
brother's death, because my father had made over to 
him the best part of the property through the foolish 
conversion of it into an entail. He has now found a 
fearful death, I am now lord of the estate-tail, but 
my heart is rent with pain — I can — I shall never be 
happy. I confirm you in your office; you shall be 
invested with the most extensive powers in respect to 
the management of the estate, upon which I cannot 
bear to live." Hubert left the room, and in two or 

three hours was on his way to K . 

, It appeared that the unfortunate Wolfgang had got 
up in the night, probably with the intention of going 
into the other cabinet where there was a library. In 
the stupor of sleep he had mistaken the door, and 
had opened the postern, taken a step out, and plunged 
headlong down. But after all had been said, there 
was nevertheless a good deal that was strained and 
unlikely in this explanation. If the Baron was un- 
able to sleep and wanted to get a book out of the 
library, this of itself excluded all idea of sleep-stupor; 
but this condition alone could account for anv mis- 
taking of the postern for the door of the cabinet. 
Then again, the former was fast locked, and required 
a good dea\ o{ ^^ertion to unlock it. These improba- 
bilities V ?LCeO^^VC\^N \.\VX. \i^Vi\^ N!feR. ^'5iWVft&tic8, 


THE ENTAIL. 305 

who had gathered round him^ and at length the 
Freiherr's body-servant, Francis by name, said, " Nay, 
nay, my good Herr Justitiarius \ it couldn't have 
happened in that way.'* "Well, how then?" asked 

V abruptly and sharply. But Francis, a faithful, 

honest fellow, who could have followed his master 
into his grave, was unwilling to speak out before the 
rest ; he stipulated that what he had to say about the 
event should be confided to the Justitiarius alone in 

private. V now learned that the Freiherr used 

often to talk to Francis about the vast treasure which 
he believed lay buried beneath the ruins of the Tower, 
and also that frequently at night, as if goaded by 
some malicious fiend, he would open the postern, the 
key of which Daniel had been obliged to give him, 
and would gaze with longing eyes down into the 
chasm where the supposed riches lay. There was now 
no doubt about it ; on that ill-omened night the 
Freiherr, after his servant had left him, must have 
taken one of his usual walks to the postern, where he 
bad been most likely suddenly seized with dizziness, 
and had fallen over. Daniel, who also seemed much 
upset by the Freiherr's terrible end, thought it would 
be a good thing to have the dangerous postern walled 
up ; and this was at once done. 

Freiherr Hubert von R , who had then suc- 
ceeded to the entail, went back to Courland without 

once showing himself at R — sitten again. V was 

invested with full powers for the absolute management 
of the property. The building of the new castle was 
not proceeded with ; but on the other hand the old 
structure was put in as good a state of repair as 
possible. Several years passed before Hubert came 

again to R — sitten, late in the autumn, but after he 
VOL. I. u 


3o6 THE ENTAIL. 

had remained shut up in his room with V for 

several days, he went back to Courland. Passing on 

his way through K , he deposited his will with the 

government authorities there. 

The Freiherr, whose character appeared to have un- 
dergone a complete revolution^ spoke more than once 
during his stay at R — sitten of presentiments of his 
approaching death. And these apprehensions were 
really not unfounded, for he died in the very next 
year. His son, named, like the deceased Baron, Hubert, 
soon came over from Courland to take possession of 
the rich inheritance ; and was followed by his mother 
and his sister. The youth seemed to unite in his own 
person all the bad qualities of his ancestors : he proved 
himself to be proud, arrogant, impetuous, avaricious, in 
the very first moments after his arrival at R — sitten. 
He wanted to have several things which did not suit 
his notions of what was right and proper altered there 
and then : the cook he kicked out of doors ; and he 
attempted to thrash the coachman, in which, however, 
he did not succeed, for the big brawny fellow had the 
impudence not to submit to it. In fact, he was on the 
high road to assuming the rSle of a harsh and severe 

lord of the entail, when V interposed in his firm, 

earnest manner, declaring most explicitly that not a 
single chair should be moved, that not even a cat should 
leave the house if she liked to stay in it, until after the 
will had been opened. " You have the presumption to 
tell me, the lord of the entail,*^ began the Baron. 

V , however, cut short the young man, who was 

foaming with rage, and said, whilst he measured him 
with a keen searching glance, ^^Don^t be in too great a 
hurry, Herr Barou. At all events, you have no right to 
exercise autVvotit^ \\^i^ w\\<A ^R\.^\ n^^ ^^^sl-wsxnsi^^C \^'our 


THE ENTAIL. 307 

father's will. It is I — I alone — who am now master 
here ; and I shall know how to meet violence with 
violent measures. Please to recollect that by virtue of 
my powers as executor of your father's will^ as well as 
by virtue of the arrangements which have been made by 
the court, I am empowered to forbid your remaining 
in R — sitten if I think fit to do so ; and so, if you wish 
to spare me this disagreeable step, I would advise you 
to go away quietly to K ." The lawyer's earnest- 
ness, and the resolute tone in which he spoke, lent the 
proper emphasis to his words. Hence the young Baron, 
who was charging with far two sharp-pointed horns, 
felt the weakness of his weapons against the firm 
bulwark, and found it convenient to cover the shame 
of his retreat with a burst of scornful laughter. 

Three months passed and the day was come on which, 
in accordance with the expressed wish of the deceased, 

his will was to be opened at K , where it had been 

deposited. In the chambers, there was besides the officers 

of the court, the Baron, and V , a young man of 

noble appearance, whom V- had brought with him, 

and who was taken to be V 's clerk, since he had 

a parchment deed sticking out from the breast of his 
buttoned-up coat. Him the Baron treated as he did 
nearly all the rest, with scornful contempt; and he de- 
manded with noisy impetuosity that they should make 
haste and get done with all their tiresome needless cere- 
monies as quickly as possible and without over many 
words and scribblings. He couldn't for the life of him 
make out why any will should be wanted at all with 
respect to the inheritance, and especially in the case 
of entailed property ; and no matter what provisions 
were made in the will, it would depend entirely upon 
his decision as to whether they should be observed or not. 


3o8 THE ENTAIL. 

After casting a hasty and surly glance at the hand- 
writing and the seal, the Baron acknowledged them to 
be those of his dead father. Upon the clerk of the court 
preparing to read the will aloud, the young Baron, 
throwing his right arm carelessly over the back of his 
chair and leaning his left on the table, whilst he drummed 
with his fingers on its green cover, sat staring with an 
air of indifference out of the window. After a short pre- 
amble the deceased Freiherr Hubert von R declared 

that he had never possessed the estate-tail as its lawful 
owner, but that he had only managed it in the name of 

the deceased Freiherr Wolfgang von R 's only son, 

called Roderick after his grandfather ; and he it was 
to whom, according to the rights of family priority, 
the estate had fallen on his father's death. Amongst 
Hubert's papers would be found an exact account of 
all revenues and expenditure, as well as of existing 
movable property, Sec. The will went on to relate that 

C^o'fg^^g von R had, during his travels, made the 

acquaintance of Mdlle, Julia de St. Val in Geneva, 
and had fallen so deeply in love with her that he 
resolved never to leave her side again. She was verv 
poor ; and her family, although noble and of good 
repute, did not, however, rank amongst the most 
illustrious, for which reason Wolfgang dared not 
expect to receive the consent of old Roderick to a 
union with her, for the old Freiherr's aim and ambition 
was to promote by all possible means the establishment 
of a powerful family. Nevertheless he ventured to 
write from Paris to his father, acquainting him with 
the fact that his affections were engaged. But what 
he had foreseen was actually realised ; the old Baron 
declared caUgot.callY that he had himself chosen the 
future mistttsa ol X.\\^ ^\\Vaj\^ ^.w^ n!x\^\^^\^ "Ci^^x^ ^<iiild 


THE ENTAIL. 309 

never be any mention made of any other. Wolfgang, 
instead of crossing the Channel into England, as he was 
to have done, returned to Geneva under the assumed 
name of Born, and married Julia, who after the lapse 
of a year bore him a son, and this son became on 
Wolfgang's death the real lord of the entail. In ex- 
planation of the facts why Hubert, though acquainted 
with all this, had kept silent so long and had repre- 
sented himself as lord of the entail, various reasons 
were assigned, based upon agreements formerly made 
with Wolfgang, but they seemed for the most part 
insufficient and devoid of real foundation. 

The Baron sat staring at the clerk of the court as if 
thunderstruck, whilst the latter went on proclaiming 
ail this bad news in a provokingly monotonous and 

jarring tone. When he finished, V rose, and 

taking the young man whom he had brought with 
him by the hand, said, as he bowed to the assembled 
company, " Here I have the honour to present to you, 

gentlemen, Freiherr Roderick von R , lord of the 

entail of R — sitten." Baron Hubert looked at the 
youth, who had, as it were, fallen from the clouds to 
deprive him of the rich inheritance together with half 
the unentailed Courland estates, with suppressed fury 
in his gleaming eyes ; then, threatening him with his 
doubled fist, he ran out of the court without uttering 
a word. Baron Roderick, on being challenged by the 
court-officers, produced the documents by which he 
was to establish his identity as the person whom he 
represented himself to be. He handed in an attested 
extract from the register of the church where his father 
was married, which certified that on such and such a 

day Wolfgang Born, merchant,- born in K , had 

been united in marriage with the blessing of the Church 


3IO THE ENTAIL. 

to Mdlle. Julia de St. Val, in the presence of certain 
witnesses, who were named. Further, he produced his 
own baptismal certificate (he had been baptized in 
Geneva as the son of the merchant Born and his wife 
Julia, n^e De St. Val, begotten in lawful wedlock), and 
various letters from his father to his mother, who was 
long since dead, but they none of them had any other 
signature than W. 

V looked through all these papers with a cloud 

upon his face ; and as he put them together again, he 
said, somewhat troubled, " Ah well ! God will help us !" 

The very next morning Freiherr Hubert von R 

presented, through an advocate whose services he had 
succeeded in enlisting in his cause, a statement of pro- 
test to the government authorities in K , actually 

calling upon them to effectuate the immediate surrender 
to him of the entail of R — sitten. It was incontest- 
able, maintained the advocate, that the deceased Frei- 
herr Hubert von R had not had the power to dis- 
pose of entailed property either by testament or in any 
other way. The testament in question, therefore, was 
nothing more than an evidential statement, written 
down and deposited with the court, to the effect that 

Freiherr Wolfgang von R had bequeathed the 

estate-tail to a, son who was at that time still living ; 
and accordingly it had as evidence no greater weight 
than that of any other witness, and so could not by any 
possibility legitimately establish the claims of the person 
who had announced himself to be Freiherr Roderick 

von R . Hence it was rather the duty of this new 

claimant to prove by action at law his alleged rights 
of inheritance, which were hereby expressly disputed 
and denied, atvd ^o 2lUo to take proper steps to main- 
tain his c\a\vn X.o\.Vvt ^^v^v^-x.^^^^^v^xv^^^'^^^'^i.'^xd^^ 


THE ENTAIL. 311 

to the laws of succession, fell to Baron Hubert von 

R . By the father's death the property came at 

once immediately into the hands of the son. There 
was no need for any formal declaration to be made 
of his entering into possession of the inheritance^ since 
the succession could not be alienated ; at any rate^ the 
present owner of the estate was not going to be dis- 
turbed in his possession by claims which were perfectly 
groundless. Whatever reasons the deceased might have* 
had for bringing forward another heir of entail were 
quite irrelevant. And it might be remarked that he 
had himself had an intrigue in Switzerland, as could be 
proved if necessary from the papers he had left behind 
him ; and it was quite possible that the person whom 
he alleged to be his brother's son was his own son, the 
fruit of an unlawful love, for whom in a momentary 
6t of remorse he had wished to secure the entail. 

However great was the balance of probability in 
favour of the truth of the circumstances as stated in 
the will, and however revolted the judges were, par- 
ticularly by the last clauses of the protest, in which 
the son felt no compunction at accusing his dead father 
of a crime, vet the views of the case there stated were 

after all the right ones ; and it was only due to V 's 

restless exertions, and his explicit and solemn assurance 
that the proofs which were necessary to establish legiti- 
mately the identity of Freiherr Roderick von R 

should be produced in a very short time, that the sur- 
render of the estate to the young Baron was deferred, 
and the contrivance of the administration of it in trust 
agreed to, until after the case should be settled. 

V was only too well aware how difficult it would 

be for him to keep his promise. He had turned over 
all old Roderick's papers without finding the slightest 


312 THE ENTAIL. 

trace of a letter or any kind of a statement bearing 
upon Wolfgang's relation to Mdlle. de St. Val. He 
was sitting wrapt in thought in old Roderick's 
sleeping-cabinet, every hole and corner of which he 
had searched, and was working at a long statement of 
the case that he intended despatching to a certain 
notary in Geneva, who had been recommended to him 
as a shrewd and energetic man, to request him to 
procure and forward certain documents which would 
establish the young Freiherr's cause on firm ground. 
It was midnight ; the full moon shone in through the 
windows of the adjoining hall, the door of which stood 

open. Then V fancied he heard a noise as of some 

one coming slowly and heavily up the stairs, and also 
at the same time a jingling and rattling of keys. His 
attention was arrested ; he rose to his feet and went 
into the hall, where he plainly made out that there 
was some one crossing the ante-room and approaching 
the door of the hall where he was. Soon afterwards 
the door was opened and a man came slowly in, dressed 
in night-clothes, his face ghastly pale and distorted; 
in the one hand he bore a candlestick with the candles 

burning, and in the other a huge bunch of keys. V 

at once recognised the house-steward, and was on the 
point of addressing him and enquiring what he wanted 
so late at night, when he was arrested by an icy shiver; 
there was something so unearthly and ghost-like in 
the old man's manner and bearing as well as in his set, 
pallid face. He perceived that he was in presence of 
a somnambulist. Crossing the hall obliquely with 
measured strides, the old man went straight to tLe 
walled-up postern that had formerly led to the Tower. 
He came to a halt immediately in front of it, and 
uttered a wailing sound that seemed to come from the 


THE ENTAIL. 313 

bottom of bis beart^ and was so awful and so loud 

that tbe wbole apartment rang again, making V 

tremble witb dread. Tben, setting tbe candlestick 
down on tbe floor and banging bis keys on his belt, 
Daniel began to scratch at tbe wall with both bands, 
so that tbe blood soon burst out from beneath bis 
finger-nails, and all tbe while be was moaning and 
groaning as if tortured by nameless agony. After 
placing his ear against the wall in a listening attitude, 
he waved his hand as if hushing some one, stooped down 
and picked up the candlestick, and finally stole back to 

the door with soft measured footsteps. V took his 

own candle in bis band and cautiously followed him. 
They both went downstairs ; the old man unlocked tbe 

great main door of the castle, V slipped cleverly 

through. Then they went to the stable, where old Daniel, 

to V ^*8 perfect astonishment, placed bis candlestick 

so skilfully that the entire interior of tbe building was 
sufficiently lighted without the least danger. Having 
fetched a saddle and bridle, be put them on one of the 
horses which be had loosed from the manger, carefully 
tightening the girth and taking up the stirrup-straps. 
Pulling the tuft of hair on tbe horse's forehead outside 
the front strap, he took him by tbe bridle and led him 
out of tbe stable, clicking witb his tongue and patting 
bis neck with one hand. On getting outside in the 
court-yard be stood several seconds in the attitude of 
one receiving commands, which he promised by sundry 
nods to carry out. Then he led tbe horse back into 
tbe stable, unsaddled him, and tied him to the manger. 
This done, be took his candlestick, locked the stable, and 
returned to tbe castle, finally disappearing in bis own 

room, tbe door of which be carefully bolted. V 

was deeply agitated by this scene; tbe presentiment 


314 THE ENTAIL. 

of some fearful deed rose up before him like a black 
and fiendish spectre, and refused to leave him. Being 
so keenly alive as he was to the precarious position of 
his prot^g^f he felt that it would at least be his duty to 
turn what he had seen to his account. 

Next day, just as it was beginning to be dusk, 
Daniel came into the Justitiarius's room to receive 
some iustructions relating to his department of the 

household. V took him by the arms, and forcing 

him into a chair, in a confidential way began, " See 
you here, my old friend Daniel, I have long been 
wishing to ask you what you think of all this confused 
mess into which Hubert's peculiar will has tumbled 
us. Do you really think that the young man is 
Wolfgang's son, begotten in lawful marriage ? " The 
old man, leaning over the arm of his chair, and avoid- 
ing V 's eyes, for V was watching him most 

intently, replied doggedly, "Bah! Maybe he is; 
maybe he is not. What does it matter to me ? It's 
all the same to me who's master here now." " But I 

believe," went on V , moving nearer to the old 

man and placing his hand on his shoulder, " but I 
believed you possessed the old Freiherr's full con- 
fidence, and in that case he assuredly would not 
conceal from you the real state of affairs with regard 
to his sons. He told you, I dare say, about the mar- 
riage which Wolfgang had made against his will, did 
he not? " " I don't remember to have ever heard him 
say anything of that sort," replied the old man, yawn- 
ing with the most ill-mannered loudness. " You are 

sleepy, old man," said V ; '^perhaps you have 

had a restless night?" "Not that I am aware," he 
rejoined coldly, "but I must go and order supper." 
Whereupon V\e tos^ \\^^nA>j l\Qk\x\ \\V5» 0^"?5>x "aKA \N\hhed 


THE ENTAIL. 315 

his bent back^ yawning again^ and that still more 
loudly than before. " Stay a little while, old man," 

cried V , taking hold of his hand and endeavouring 

to force him to resume his seat ; but Daniel preferred 
to stand in front of the study-table ; propping himself 
upon it with both hands, and leaning across towards 

V y he asked sullenly, " Well, what do you want ? 

What have I to do with the will ? What do I care 
about the quarrel over the estate?'* "Well, well," 

interposed V , " we'll say no more about that now. 

Let us turn to some other topic, Daniel. You are 
out of humour and yawning, and all that is a sign of 
great weariness, and I am almost inclined to believe 

that it really was you last night, who" "Well, 

what did I do last night?" asked the old man without 

changing his position. V went on, " Last night, 

when I was sitting up above in your old master's 
sleeping-cabinet next the great hall, you came in at 
the door, your face pale and rigid; and you went 
'across to the bricked-up postern and scratched at the 
wall with both your hands, groaning as if in very 
great pain. Do you walk in your sleep, Daniel ? " 
The old man dropped back into the chair which 

V quickly managed to place for him ; but not a 

sound escaped his lips. His face could not be seen, 

owing to the gathering dusk of the evening ; V 

only noticed that he took his breath short and that his 

teeth \yere rattling together. " Yes," continued V 

after a short pause, " there is one thing that is very 
strange about sleep-walkers. On the day after they 
have- been in this peculiar state in which they have 
acted as if they were perfectly wide awake, they don't 
remember the least thing that they did." Daniel did 
not move. " I have come across something like what 


3i6 THE ENTAIL. 

your condition was yesterday once before in the course 

of my experience," proceeded V . '^ I had a friend 

who regularly began to wander about at night as you 
do whenever it was full moon, — nay, he often sat down 
and wrote letters. But what was most extraordinary 
was that if I began to whisper softly in his ear I could 
soon manage to make him speak ; and he would 
answer correctly all the questions I put to him ; and 
even things that he would most jealously have con- 
cealed when awake now fell from his lips unbidden, 
as though he were unable to offer any resistance to 
the power that was exerting its influence over him. 
Deuce take it ! I really believe that, if a man who's 
given to walking in his sleep had ever committed any 
crime, and hoarded it up as a secret ever so long, it 
could be extracted from him by questioning when he 
was in this peculiar state, Happy are they who have 
a clean conscience like you and me, Daniel ! We may 
walk as much as we like in our sleep ; there's no fear 
of anybody extorting the confession of a crime from 
us. But come now, Daniel ! when you scratch so 
hideously at the bricked-up postern, you want, I dare 
say, to go up the astronomical tower, don't you ? I 
suppose you want to go and experiment like old 
Roderick — eh ? Well, next time you come, I shall ask 

you what you want to do," Whilst V was 

speaking, the old man was shaken with continually 
increasing agitation ; but now his whole frame seemed 
to heave and rock convulsively past all hope of cure, 
and in a shrill voice he began to utter a string of 

unmeaning gibberish. V rang for the servants. 

They brought lights; but as the old man's fit did not 
abate, they lifted him up as though he had been a 
mere automaton, not possessed of the power of volun- 


THE ENTAIL, 317 

tary movement, and carried him to bed. After con- 
tinuing in this frightful state for about an hour, he 
fell into a profound sleep resembling a dead faint. 
When he awoke he asked for wine ; and, after he had 
got what he wanted, he sent away the man who was 
going to sit with him, and locked himself in his room 
as usual. 

V had indeed really resolved to make the attempt 

he spoke of to Daniel, although at the same time he 
could not forget two facts. In the first place, Daniel, 
having now been made aware of his propensity to walk 
in his sleep, would probably adopt every measure of 
precaution to avoid him ; and on the other hand, con- 
fessions made whilst in this condition would not be 
exactly fitted to serve as a basis for further proceed- 
ings. In spite of this, however, he repaired to the hall 
on the approach of midnight, hoping that Daniel, as fre- 
quently happens to those afflicted in this way, would be 
constrained to act involuntarily. About midnight there 

arose a great noise in the court-yard. V plainly 

heard a window broken in ; then he went downstairs, 
and as he traversed the passages he was met by rolling 
clouds of suffocating smoke, which, he soon perceived, 
were pouring out of the open door of the house- 
steward's room. The steward himself was just being 
carried out, to all appearance dead, in order to be 
taken and put to bed in another room. The servants 
related that about midnight one of the under-grooms 
had been awakened by a strange hollow knocking ; he 
thought something had befallen the old man, and 
was preparing to get up and go and see if he could 
help him, when the night watchman in the court 
shouted, "Fire! Fire! The Herr House-Steward's 
room is all of a bright blaze ! '^ At this outcry several 


3i8 THE ENTAIL. 

servants at once appeared on the scene ; but all their 
eflTorts to burst open the room door were unavailing. 
Whereupon they hurried out into the court, but the 
resolute watchman had already broken into the window, 
for the room was low and on the basement storey, had 
torn down the burning curtains^ and by pouring a few 
buckets of water on them had at once extinguished the 
fire. The house-steward they found lying on the floor 
in the middle of the room in a swoon. In his hand he 
still held the candlestick tightly clenched, the burning 
candles of which had caught the curtains, and so occa- 
sioned the fire. Some of the blazing rags had fallen upon 
the old man, burning his eyebrows and a large portion 
of the hair of his head. If the watchman had not seen 
the fire the old man must have been helplessly burned 
to death. The servants, moreover, to their no little 
astonishment found the room door secured on the inside 
by two quite new bolts, which had been fastened on 
since the previous evening, for they had not been there 

then. V perceived that the old man had wished 

to make it impossible for him to get out of his room ; 
for the blind impulse which urged him to wander in 
his sleep he could not resist. The old man became 
seriously ill ; he did not speak ; he took but little 
nourishment; and lay staring before him with the 
reflection of death in his set eyes, just as if he were 
clasped in the vice-like grip of some hideous thought. 

V believed he would never rise from his bed again. 

V had done all that could be done for his client; 

and he could now only await the result in patience ; 

and so he resolved to return to K . His departure 

was fixed for the following morning. As he was packin^^ 
his papers together late at night, he happened to lay his 
hand upon a little sealed packet with Freiherr Hubert 


THE ENTAIL. 319 

von R had given him, bearing the inscription, " To 

be read after my will has been opened/^ and which 
by some unaccountable means bad hitherto escaped 
his notice. He was on the point of breaking the seal 
when the door opened and Daniel came in with still, 
ghost-like step. Placing upon the table a black portfolio 
which he carried under his arm, he sank upon his knees 

with a deep groan, and grasping V ^'s hands with 

a convulsive clutch he said, in a voice so hollow and 
hoarse that it seemed to come from the bottom of 
a grave, *' I should not like to die on the scaffold ! 
There is One above who judges !'' Then, rising with 
some trouble and with many painful gasps, he left the 
room as he had come. 

V spent the whole of the night in reading what 

the black portfolio and Hubert's packet contained. Both 
agreed in all circumstantial particulars, and suggested 
naturally what further steps were to be taken. On 

arriving at K , V immediately repaired to 

Freiherr Hubert von R , who received him with ill- 
mannered pride. But the remarkable result of the inter- 
view, which began at noon and lasted on without inter- 
ruption until late at night, was that the next day the 
Freiherr made a declaration before the court to the effect 
that he acknowledged the claimant to be, agreeably to 

his father's will, the son of Wolfgang von R , eldest 

son of Freiherr Roderick von R , and begotten 

in lawful wedlock with Mdlle. Julia de St. Val, and 
furthermore acknowledged him as rightful and legiti- 
mate heir to the entail. On leaving the court he found 
his carriage, with post-horses, standing before the door ; 
he stepped in and was driven off at a rapid rate, leav- 
ing his mother and his sister behind him. They would 
perhaps never see him again, he wrote, along with 


320 THE ENTAIL, 

other perplexing statements. Roderick's astonishment 
at this unexpected turn which the case had taken was 

very great ; he pressed V to explain to him how 

this wonder had been brought about, what mysterious 

power was at work in the matter. V , however, 

evaded his questions by giving him hopes of telling him 
all at some future time, and when he should have come 
into possession of the estate. For the surrender of the 
entail to him could not be effected immediately, since 
the court, not content with Hubert's declaration, re- 
quired that Roderick should also first prove his own 

identity to their satisfaction. V proposed to the 

Baron that he should go and live at R — sitten, adding 
that Hubert's mother and sister, momentarily embar- 
rassed by his sudden departure, would prefer to go and 
live quietly on the ancestral property rather than stay in 
the dear and noisy town. The glad delight with which 
Roderick welcomed the prospect of dwelling, at least 
for a time, under the same roof with the Baroness and 
her daughter, betrayed the deep impression which the 
lovely and graceful Seraphina had made upon him. 
In fact, the Freiherr made such good use of his time 
in R — sitten that, at the end of a few weeks, he had 
won Seraphina's love as well as her mother's cordial 
approval of her marriage with him. All this was for 

V rather too quick work, since Roderick's claims 

to be lord of the entail still continued to be rather 
doubtful. The life of idyllic happiness at the castle w'as 
interrupted by letters from Courland. Hubert had 
not shown himself at all at the estates, but had travelled 
direct to Petersburg, where he had taken military 
service and was now in the field against the Persians, 
with whom Russia happened to be just then waging 
war. This obliged the Baroness and her daughter to 


THE ENTAIL. 321 

set oflf immediately for their Courland estates^ where 
everything was in confusion and disorder. Roderick^ 
who regarded himself in the light of an accepted son- 
in-law, insisted upon accompanying his beloved ; and 

hence, since V likewise returned to K ^ the 

castle was left in its previous loneliness. The house- 
steward's malignant complaint grew worse and worse, so 
that he gave up all hopes of ever getting about again ; 
and his office was conferred upon an old chasseur, 
Francis by name, Wolfgang's faithful servant. 

At last, after long waiting, V received from Swit- 
zerland information of the most favourable character. 
The priest who had married Roderick was long since 
dead ; but there was found in the church register a 
memorandum in his handwriting, to the effect that the 
man of the name of Born, whom he had joined in the 
bonds of wedlock with Mdlle. Julia de St. Val, had 
established completely to his satisfaction his identity as 

Freiherr Wolfgang von R , eldest son of Freiherr 

Roderick von R of R — sitten. Besides this, two 

witnesses of the marriage had been discovered, a mer- 
chant of Geneva and an old French captain, who had 
moved to Lyons; to them also Wolfgang had in con- 
fidence stated his real name ; and their affidavits con- 
firmed the priest's notice in the church register. With 
these memoranda in his hands, drawn up with proper 

legal formalities, V now succeeded in securing hi^ 

client in the complete possession of his rights; and as 
there was now no longer any hindrance to the sur- 
render to him of the entail, it was to be put into his 
hands in the ensuing autumn. Hubert had fallen in 
his very first engagement, thus sharing the fate of his 
younger brother, who had likewise been slain in battle 
a year before his father's death. Thus the Courland 

VOL. I. X 


322 THE ENTAIL. 

estates fell to Baroness Seraphina von R , and 

made a handsome dowry for her to take to the too 
happy Roderick. 

November had already come in when the Baroness, 
along with Roderick and his betrothed^ arrived at 
R — ^sitten. The formal surrender of the estate-tail 
to the young Baron took place, and then his marriage 
with Seraphina was solemnised. Many weeks passed 
amid a continual whirl of pleasure; but at length the 
wearied guests began gradually to depart from the 

castle, to V ^s great satisfaction, for he had made 

up his mind not to take his leave of R — sitten until he 
had initiated the young lord of the entail in all the 
relations and duties connected with his new position 
down to the minutest particulars. Roderick's uncle 
had kept an account of all revenues and disbursements 
with the most detailed accuracy ; hence, since Hubert 
had only retained a small sum annually for his own 
support, the surplus revenues had all gone to swell the 
capital left by the old Freiherr, till the total now 
amounted to a considerable sum. Hubert had onlv 
employed the income of the entail for his own purposes 
during the first three years, but to cover this he had 
given a mortgage on the security of his share of the 
Courland property. 

From the time when old Daniel had revealed him- 
self to V as a somnambulist, V had chosen old 

Roderick's bed-room for his own sitting-room, in order 
that he might the more securely gather from the old 
man what he afterwards voluntarily disclosed. Hence 
it was in this room and in the adjoining great hall that 

the Freiherr transacted business with V . Once they 

were both sitting at the great table by the bright blazing 
fire; V had his pen in his hand, and was noting 


THE ENTAIL. 323 

down various totals and calculating the riches of the 
lord of the entail^ whilst the latter^ leaning his head on 
his hand, was blinking at the open account-books and 
formidable-looking documents. Neither of them heard 
the hollow roar of the sea, nor the anxious cries of the 
sea-gulls as they dashed against the window-panes, 
flapping their wings and flying backwards and forwards, 
announcing the oncoming storm. Neither of them 
heeded the storm, which arose about midnight, and 
was now roaring and raging with wild fury round 
the castle walls, so that all the sounds of ill omen in 
the fire-grates and narrow passages awoke, and began 
to whistle and shriek in a weird, unearthly way. At 
length, after a terrific blast, which made the whole 
castle shake, the hall was completely lit up by the 

murky glare of the full moon, and V exclaimed, 

*' Awful weather ! *' The Freiherr, quite absorbed in the 
consideration of the wealth which had fallen to him, 
replied indifferently, as he turned over a page of the 
receipt-book with a satisfied smile, '^ It is indeed ; very 
stormy!" But, as if clutched by the icy hand of 
Dread, he started to his feet as the door of the hall flew 
open and a pale spectral figure became visible, striding 
in with the stamp of death upon its face. It was 
Daniel, who, lying helpless under the power of disease, 

was deemed in the opinion of V as of everybody 

else incapable of the ability to move a single limb; 
but, again coming under the influence of his propensity 
to wander in his sleep at full moon, he had, it appeared, 
been unable to resist it. The Freiherr stared at 
the old man without uttering a sound ; and when 
Daniel began to scratch at the wall, and moan as 
though in the painful agonies of death, Roderick's 
heart was filled with horrible dread. With his face 


324 THE ENTAIL. 

ashy pale and his hair standing straight on end^ he 
leapt to his feet and strode towards the old man in a 
threatening attitude and cried in a loud firm voice, so 
that the hall rang again^ '' Daniel^ Daniel, what are you 
doing here at this hour ? " Then the old man uttered 
that same unearthly howling whimper, like the death- 
cry of a wounded animal, which he had uttered when 
Wolfgang had offered to reward his fidelity with gold ; 

and he fell down on the floor. V summoned the 

servants ; they raised the old man up ; but all attempts 
to restore animation proved fruitless. Then the 
Freiherr cried, almost beside himself, "Good God! 
Good God ! Now I remember to have heard that a 
sleep-walker may die on the spot if anybody calls him 
bv his name. Oh ! oh ! unfortunate wretch that I 
am 1 I have killed the poor old man ! I shall never 
more have a peaceful moment so long as I live." 
When the servants had carried the corpse away and 

the hall was again empty, V took the Freiherr, 

who was still continuing his self-reproaches, by the 
hand and led him in impressive silence to the walled- 
up postern, and said, '^ The man who fell down dead 
at your feet, Freiherr Roderick, was the atrocious 
murderer of your father." The Freiherr fixed his 

staring eyes upon V as though he saw the foul 

fiends of hell. But V went on, "The time has 

come now for me to reveal to vou the hideous secret 
which, weighing upon the conscience of this monster 
and burthening him with curses, compelled him to roam 
abroad in his sleep. The Eternal Power has seen fit 
to make the son take vengeance upon the murderer of 
his father. The words which you thundered in the 
ears of that fearful night-walker were the last words 
which your unhappy father spoke." V sat down in 


THE ENTAIL. 325 

front of the fire, and the Freiherr, trembling and un- 
able to utter a word, took his seat beside him. V 

began to tell bim the contents of the document which 
Hubert had left behind him, and the seal of which he 

(V ) was not to break until after the opening of 

the will. Hubert lamented, in expressions testifying to 
the deepest remorse, the implacable hatred against his 
elder brother which took root in him from the moment 
that old Roderick established the entail. He was 
deprived of all weapons; for, even if he succeeded in 
maliciously setting the son at variance with the father, 
it would serve no purpose, since even Roderick himself 
had not the power to deprive his eldest son of his birth- 
right, nor would he on principle have ever done so, no 
matter how his affectiuns had been alienated from bim. 
It was only when Wolfgang formed his connection 
with Julia de St. Val in Geneva that Hubert saw his 
way to effecting his brother's ruin. And that was the 
time when he came to an understanding with Daniel, 
to provoke the old man hy villainous devices to take 
measures which should drive his son to despair. 

He was well aware of old Roderick's opinion that 
the only way to ensure an illustrious future for the 
family to all subsequent time was by means of an alli- 
ance with one of the oldest families of the country. 
The old man had read this alliance in the stars, and 
any pernicious derangement of the constellation would 
only entail destruction upon the family he had founded. 
In this way it was that Wolfgang's union with Julia 
seemed to the old man tike a sinful crime, committed 
against the ordinances of the Power which had stood 
by him in all his worldly undertakings; and any 
means that might be employed for Julia's ruin he 
would hare regarded as justiHed for the same reason. 


336 THE ENTAIL. 

for Julia bad, he conceived, ranged herself againtt him 
like some demoniacal principle, Hubert knew that 
his brother loved Julia passionately, almost to madness 
in fact, and that the loss of her would infallibly make 
htm miserable, perhaps kill him. And Hubert was 
all the more ready to assist the old man in his plans 
as he had himself conceived an unlawful affection for 
Julia, and hoped to win her for himself. It was, how- 
ever, determined by a special dispensation of Providence 
that all attacks, even the most virulent, were to be 
thwarted by Wolfgang's resoluteness; nay, that he 
should contrive to deceive his brother: the fact that 
his marriage was actually solemnised and that of the 
birth of a son were kept secret from Hubert. In 
Roderick's mind also there occurred, along with the 
presentiment of his approaching death, the idea that 
Wolfgang had really married the Julia who was so 
hostile to him. In the letter which commanded his 
son to appear at R — sitten on a given day to take 
possession of the entail, he cursed him if he did not 
sever his connection with her. This was the letter 
that Wolfgang burnt beside his father's corpse. 

To Hubert the old man wrote, saying that Wolf- 
gang had married Julia, but that he would part from 
her. This Hubert took to be a fancy of his visionar)' 
father's; accordingly he was not a little dismayed 
when on reaching R — sitten Wolfgang with perfect 
frankness not only confirmed the old man's supposi- 
tion, but also went on to add that Julia had borne 
him a son, and that he hoped in a short time to 
surprise her with the pleasant intelligence of his high 
rank and great wealth, for she had hitherto taken him 

for Born, a meicWntltowv^ . He intended going 

to Geneva \\im6eU to ^cXsltv V\* \^w^ •»iV.. 'i^-^ 


THE ENTAIL. 327 

before he could carry out this plan he was overtaken 
by death. Hubert carefully concealed what he knew 
about the existence of a son born to Wolfgang in 
lawful wedlock with Julia, and so usurped the property 
that really belonged to his nephew. But only a few 
years passed before he became a prey to bitter remorse. 
He was reminded of his guilt in terrible wise by destiny, 
in the hatred which grew up and developed more and 
more between his two sons. " You are a poor starving 
beggar ! " said the elder, a boy of twelve, to the 
vouncer, "but I shall be lord of R — sitten when 
father dies, and then you will have to be humble and 
kiss my hand when you want me to give you money to 
buy a new coat.^^ The younger, goaded to ungovern- 
able fury by his brother*s proud and scornful words, 
threw the knife at him which he happened to have in 
his hand, and almost killed him. Hubert, for fear 
of some dire misfortune, sent the younger away to 
St. Petersburg; and he served afterwards as officer 
under Suwaroff, and fell fighting against the French. 
Hubert was prevented revealing to the world the 
dishonest and deceitful way in which he had acquired 
possession of the estate-tail by the shame and disgrace 
which would have come upon him ; but he would not 
rob the rightful owner of a single penny more. He 
caused enquiries to be set on foot in Geneva, and 
learned that Madame Born had died of grief at the 
incomprehensible disappearance of her husband, but 
that young Roderick Born was being brought up by 
a worthy man who had adopted him. Hubert then 
caused himself to be introduced under an assumed 
name as a relative of Born the merchant, who had 
perished at sea, and he forwarded at given times suflli- 
cient sums of money to give the young heir of entail 


328 THE ENTAIL. 

a good and respectable education. How he carefully 
treasured up the surplus revenues from the estate^ and 
how he drew up the terms of his will, we already 
know. Respecting his brother's death, Hubert spoke 
in strangely obscure terms, but they allowed this much 
to be inferred, that there must be some mystery about 
it, and that he had taken part, indirectly, at least, in 
some heinous crime. 

The contents of the black portfolio made everything 
clear. Along with Hubert's traitorous correspondence 
with Daniel was a sheet of paper written and signed by 

Daniel. V read a confession at which his verv 

soul trembled, appalled. It was at DaniePs instigation 
that Hubert had come to R — sitten ; and it was Daniel 
again who had written and told him about the one 
hundred and fifty thousand thalers that had been found. 
It has been already described how Hubert was received 
by his brother, and how, deceived in all his hopes and 
wishes, he was about to go off when he was prevented 

by V . Daniel's heart was tortured by an insatiable 

thirst for vengeance, which he was determined to take 
on the young man who had proposed to kick him out 
like a mangy cur. He it was who relentlessly and 
incessantly fanned the flame of passion by which 
Hubert's desperate heart was consumed. Whilst in 
the fir forests haunting wolves, out in the midst of a 
blinding snowstorm, they agreed to effect his destruc- 
tion. "Make away with him!" murmured Hubert, 
looking askance and taking aim with his rifle. " Yes, 
make away with him,'* snarled Daniel, "but not in 
tliat ivay, not in that way !^^ And he made the most 
solemn asseverations that he would murder the Freiherr 
and not a soul in the world should be the wiser. When, 
however, Hubert had got his money, he repented of the 


THE ENTAIL. 329 

plot; he determined to go away in order to shun all 
further temptation. Daniel himself saddled his horse 
and brought it out of the stable; but as the Baron 
was about to mount^ Daniel said to him in a sharp^ 
strained voice, "I thought you would stay on the 
entail, Freiherr Hubert, now that it has just fallen to 
you, for the proud lord of the entail lies dashed to 
pieces at the bottom of the ravine, below the Tower." 
The steward had observed that Wolfgang, tormented 
by his thirst for gold, often used to rise in the night, 
go to the postern which formerly led to the Tower, and 
stand gazing with longing eyes down into the chasm, 
where, according to his (DaniePs) testimony, vast 
treasures lay buried. Relying upon this habit, Daniel 
waited near the hall-door on that ill-omened night ; 
and as soon as he heard the Freiherr open the postern 
leading to the Tower, he entered the hall and pro- 
ceeded to where the Freiherr was standing, close by 
the brink of the chasm. On becoming aware of the 
presence of his villainous servant, in whose eyes the 
gleam of murder shone, the Freiherr turned round and 
said with a cry of terror, " Daniel, Daniel, what are 
you doing here at this hour ? " But then Daniel 
shrieked wildly, '' Down with you, you mangy cur ! '^ 
and with a powerful push of his foot he hurled the 
unhappy man over into the deep chasm. 

Terribly agitated by this awful deed, Freiherr Rode- 
rick found no peace in the castle where his father had 
been murdered. He went to his Courland estates, 
and only visited R — sitten once a year, in autumn. 
Francis — old Francis — who had strong suspicions as 
to DaniePs guilt, maintained that he often haunted 
the place at full moon, and described the nature of the 
apparition much as V afterwards experienced it for 


330 THE BSTAJL. 

himself when he exorcised it. It was the disclosure of 
these circumstances, alio, which stamped his father's 
memory with dishonour, that had driven young Frei- 
herr Hubert out into the world. 

This was my old great-uncle's story. Now he took 
my hand, and whilst his eyes filled with tears, he said, 
in a broken voice, " Cousin, cousin ! And she too— 
the beautiful lady — has fallen a victim to the dark 
destiny, the grim, mysterious power which has estab- 
lished itself in that old ancestral castle. Two days 
after we left R — sitten the Freiberr arranged an 
t:xcurBion on sledges as the concluding event of the 
visit. He drove his wife himself; but as they were 
going down the valley the horses, for some unexplained 
reason, suddenly taking fright, began to snort and kick 
and plunge most savagely. 'The old man! The old 
man is after us 1 ' screamed the Baroness in a shrill, 
terrified voice. At this same moment the sledge was 
overturned with a violent jerk, and the Baroness was 
hurled to a considerable distance. They picked her up 
lifeless — she was quite dead. The Freiberr is perfectly 
inconsolable, and has settled down into a state of 
passivity that wilt kill him. We shall never go to 
R — sitten again, cousin!" 

Here my uncle paused. As I left him my heart 
was rent by emotion; and nothing but the all-sooth- 
ing hand of Time could assuage the deep pain which 
1 feared would cost me my life. 

Years passed. V ~ was resting in his grave, and 1 

had left my native country. Then I was driven north- 
wards, as far as St. Petersburg, by the devastating war 
which was sweeping over all Germany. On my return 

journey, not iat Itovn Y.. ,\'«wi 4™vng one dark 

summer nig'ht a.\o«% tVc iJnwe. tA ■Csa. '^i&ttt, Vwos, 


THE ENTAIL. 331 

I perceived in the sky before me a remarkably large 
bright star. On coming nearer I saw by the red 
flickering flame that what I had taken for a star must 
be a large fire, but could not understand how it could 
be so high up in the air. *' Postillion, what fire is that 
before us yonder ? '' I asked the man who was driving 
me. '^ Oh ! why, that's not a fire ; it's the beacon 
tower of R — sitten." "R — sitten!" Directly the 
postillion mentioned the name all the experiences of 
the eventful autumn days which I had spent there 
recurred to my mind with lifelike reality. I saw the 
Baron — Seraphina — ^and also the remarkably eccentric 
old aunts — myself as well, with my bare milk-white 
face, my hair elegantly curled and powdered, and 
wearing a delicate sky-blue coat — nay, I saw myself 
in my love-sick folly, sighing like a furnace, and mak- 
ing lugubrious odes on my mistress's eyebrows. The 
sombre, melancholy mood into which these memories 
plunged me was relieved by the bright recollection of 

V *s genial jokes, shooting up like flashes of 

coloured light, and I found them now still more enter- 
taining than they had been so long ago. Thus agitated 
by pain mingled with much peculiar pleasure, I reached 
R — sitten early in the morning and got out of the 
coach in front of the post-house, where it had stopped. 
I recognised the house as that of the land-steward ; I 
inquired after him. "Begging your pardon,^' said the 
clerk of the post-house, taking his pipe from his 
mouth and giving his night-cap a tilt, " begging your 
pardon, there is no land-steward here ; this is a Royal 
Government office, and the Herr Administrator is still 
asleep. On making further inquiries I learned that 
Freiherr Roderick von R y the last lord of the en- 
tail, had died sixteen years before without descendants^ 


■',•>■ i 


«^ t 


THE BORROWER WILL BE CHARGED 
AN OVERDUE FEE IF THIS BOOK IS 
NOT RETURNED TO THE LIBRARY ON 
OR BEFORE THE LAST DATE STAMPED 
BELOW. NON-RECEIPT OF OVERDUE 
NOTICES DOES NOT EXEMPT THE 
BORROWER FROM OVERDUE FEES. 

Harvard College WIdener Library 
Cambridge, MA 021 38 (61 7) 495-241 3
