The Long-Lost Friend (John George Hohman, 1850)
==========================================================
Hohman's collection of Pennsylvania Dutch pow-wow charms and remedies; the foundational text of American folk magic. Public domain. Digitized from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/b33030467).

me P Dank


oF


%


REG


ye - @ ae = : ‘ . ba 3 a ae


: OR


\Fatthful & Christian Instructions


CONTAINING


WONDEROUS AND WELL-TRIED


s ‘ FOR oS
|MAN AS WELL AS ANIMALS, |


WITH MANY PROOFS


Of their virtue and efficacy in healing diseases, &c. the greater :
part of which was never published until they appeared in
print for the first time in the U. 8. in the year 1820.


~~


LITERALLY TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN WORK OF


JOHN GEORGE HOHMAN,
\| Near Reading, Alsace Township, Berks County, Penn.


Ss


HARRISBURG, PA.—1850.


PREFACE.


TO THE FIRST EDITION OF THIS LITTLE BOOK.


THE author should have preferred writing no preface
whatever to this little book, were it not indispensably neces-
sary, in order to meet the erroneous views some men enter-
tain in regard to works of this character. The majority,
undoubtedly, approve of the publication and sale of such
books, yet some are always found who will persist in de-
nouncing them as something wrong. This latter class I
cannot help but pity for being so far led astray; and I
earnestly pray every one who might find it in his power, to
bring them from off their ways of error. It is true, whoso-
ever taketh the name of Jesus in vain, committeth a great
sin.’ Yet is it not expressly written in the 50th Psalm,
according to Luther’s translation: **Call upon me in the
day of trouble: I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify
me.”’? In the Catholic translation, the same passage 1s
found in the 49th Psalm, reading thus: ‘* Call upon me in
the day of thy trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou
shalt glorify me.”

Where is the doctor who has ever banished the panting or
palpitation of the heart and hideboundeness ? Where is the
doctor who ever banished a wheal? Where is the doctor
whoever banished the mother-fits? Where is the doctor
who can cure mortification when it once seizes a member
of the body ? All these cures, and a great many more mis-
terious things are contained in this book ; and its author
could take an oath at any time upon the fact of his having
successfully applied many of the prescriptions on its pages.


4


I say: Any and every man who knowingly neglects using
this book in saving the eye, or the leg, or any other limb of
his fellow-man, is guilty of the loss of such limb, and thus
committing a sin, he may forfeit to himself all hope of
heaven. Such men refuse to call upon the Lord in their
trouble, although he especially commands it. If men were
not allowed to use sympathetic words, nor the name of the
Most High, it would certainly not have been revealed to
them ; and what is more, the Lord would not help where
they are made use of. God can in no manner be forced to
intercede where it is not his divine pleasure. Another
thing I have to notice here: there are men who will say, if
one has used sympathetic words in vain, the medicines of
doctors could not avail any, because the words did not ef-
fect acure. This is only the excuse of physicians ; because
whatever cannot be cured by sympathetic words can much
less be cured by any doctor’s craft or cunning. I could
name at any time that catholic priest whose horse was cured
with mere words; and I could also give the name of the
man who done it. I knew the priest well; he formerly re-
sided in Westmoreland county. If it was desired, I could
also name a reformed preacher, who cured several persons
of the fever, merely by writing them some tickets for that
purpose ; and even the names of those persons I could men-
tion. ‘This preacher formerly resided in Berks county. —
If men but use out of this book what they actually need,
they surely commit no sin; yet wo unto those who are
guilty that any one loses his life in consequence of mortifi-
cation, or loses a limb, or the sight of the eye! Wo unto
those who misconstrue these things at the moment of dan-
ger, or who follow the ill advise of any preacher who might
teach them not to mind what the Lord says in the 50th
Psalm: ‘¢Call upon me in the day of trouble: I will deliver
thee, and thou shalt glorify me.”—-Wo unto those who in
obeying the directions of a preacher, neglect using any
means offered by this book against mortification, or inflam-


mation, or the wheal. Iam willing to follow the preacher |
in all reasonable things, yet when I am in danger and he ©


advises me not to use any prescriptions found in this book,
in such a case I shall not obey him. And wo also unto


5)


those who use the name of the Lord in vain and for trifling
purposes. oe a

I have given many proofs of the usefulness of this book,
and I could yet doitat any time. I sell my books publicly,
and not secretly, as other mystical works are sold. I am
willing that my books should be seen by every body, and I
shall not secrete or hide myself from any preacher. I,
Hohman, too, have some knowledge of the scriptures, and
I know when to call and pray unto the Lord for assistance.
The publication of books (provided they are useful and
morally right,) is not prohibited in the United States, as is
the case in other countries where kings and despots hold
tyrannical sway over the people. I place myself upon the
broad platform of the liberty of the press and of conscience,
in regard to this useful book, and it shall ever be my most
heartfelt desire that all men might have an opportunity of
using it to their good, in the name of Jesus. | :


Given at Rosenthal, near Reading, Berks county, Penn.
on the 31st day of July, in the year of our Lord 1819.


JOHN GEORGE HOHMAN,
Author and original publisher of this book.


NOTE.


There are many in America who believe neither in’a
hell nor in heaven ; but in Germany there are not so many
of these persons found. I, Hohman, ask : Who can imme-
diately banish the wheal, or mortification ? I reply, and I,
Hohman, say: All this is done by the Lord.—Therefore a
hell and a heaven must exist ; and I think very little of any
one who dares to deny it.


TESTIMONIALS,


Which go to show at any time, that I, Hohman, have Suc
cessfully applied the prescriptions of this book.


SPA PPADL DIG GG PLCC comin


Benjamin Stoudt, the son of a Lutheran school-master,
at Reading, suffered dreadfully from a wheal in the eye.—
In a little more than 24 hours, this eye was as sound as the
other one, by the aid I rendered him with the help of God,
in the year 1817.


Henry Jorger, residing at Reading, brought to me a boy,
who suffered extreme pain, caused by wheal in the eye, in
the year 1814. Ina little more than 24 hours, I, with the
help of God, have healed him.


John Bayer, son of Jacob Bayer, now living near Read-
ing, had an ulcer on the leg, which gave him great pain. I
attended him, and in a short time the leg was well. This
was in the year 1818.

Landlin Gottwald, formerly residing in Reading, had a
severe painin his one arm. In about twenty-four hours I
cured his arm.


Catharine Meck, at that time in Alsace township, suffered
very much from a wheal in the eye. In a little more than
twenty-four hours the eye was healed.


Mr. Silvis, of Reading, came to my house while engaged
at the brewery of my neighbor. He felt great pain in the
eye, caused by a wheal. I cured his eye in a little more
than 24 hours.


Anna Snyder, of Alsace township, had a severe pain in
one of her fingers. In a little more than 24 hours she felt
relieved.


7


Michael Hartmann, jr. living in Alsace township, had a
child with a very sore mouth. I attended it, and in a little
more than 24 hours it was well again.


John Bingemann, at Ruscombmanor, Berks county, had
a boy who burnt himself dreadfully. My wife came to that
place in the fall of the year 1812. Mortification had already
set in—my wife used sympathy for it, and in a short time
the mortification was banished. The boy was soon after
pelfectly cured, and became well again.—It was about the
same time that my wife cured John Bingemann’s wife of the
wild fire, which she had on a sore leg. 3


Susanna Gomber, had a severe pain in the head. Ina
short time I relieved her.

The wife of David Brecht, also felt a severe pain in the
head, and was relieved by me in a short time.


John Junkins’ daughter and daughter-in-law both suffered

very much from pain in the head; and his wife too, had a
sore cheek, on which the wild fire had broken out severely. —
The head-ache of the daughter and the daughter-in-law was
banished by me ; and the wild fire of the wife was cured in
some 7 or 9 hours—the swelled cheek burst open and heal-
ed very fast. [he woman had been laid up several days
already on account of it. The family of Junkins lives at
Nackenmixen, but Brecht and Gomber reside in and near
Reading. Nackenmixen is in Bucks county. The four last
mentioned were cured in the year 1819.
+ The daughter of John Arnold scalded herself with boiling
coffee—the handle of the pot broke off while she was pour-
ing out coffee, and the coffee run over the arm and burnt it
severely. I was present and witnessed the accident. I
banished the burning—the arm did not get sore at all, and
healed in a short time. ‘This was in the year 1815. Mr.
Arnold lived near Lebanon, Lebanon county, Penna.

Jacob Stouffer, at Heckak, Bucks county, had a little
child who was subject to convulsions every hour. I sold
him a book containing the 25 letters ; and he was persuaded
by his neighbor Henry Frankenfeld, to try these 25 letters.


8


The result was that the child was instantaneously free from
convulsions, and perfectly well. ‘These letters are also to
be found in this book.
gc? If any one of the above named witnesses, who have
been cured by me and my wife, through the help of God,
dares to call me a liar, and deny having been relieved by
us, although they have confessed that they had been cured
by us—I shall, if it is at all possible, compel them to re-
peat their confession before a justice of the peace.
__A letter to cure rheumatism sold at from one to two dol-
lars, and did not even give directions how to make use of its
these depending on verbal communications. John Allgaier
of Reading, had a very sore finger. I used sympathy to
banish the wild fire and to cure the finger. The very next
morning the wild fire was gone, he scarcely felt any pain,
and the finger began to heal very fast. This was in 1819.


_ pc This Book is partly derived from a work published
by a Gipsey, and partly from secret writings, and collected
with much pain and trouble, from all parts of the world,
at different periods, by the author, John George Hohman.
I did not wish to publish it ; my wife, also, was opposed to
its publication ; but my compassion for my suffering fellow-
men was too strong, for I had seen many a one lose his en-
tire sight by a wheal, and his life or limb by mortification.
And how dreadfully has many a woman suffered from moth-
er-fits! And I therefore ask thee again, oh friend, male or
female, is it not to my everlasting praise, that I have had
such books printed? Do I not deserve the rewards of God
for it? Where else is the physician that could cure these
diseases P Besides that, I am a poor man, in needy circum-
stances, and it is a help to me if I can make a little money
with the sale of my books. .

The Lord bless the beginning and the end of this little
work, and be with us, that we may not misuse it, and thus
commit a heavy sin!—The word misuse, means as much as
to use it for anything unnecessary. God bless us! Amen.
—The word amen means as much as that the Lord might
bring to pass in reality what had been asked for in prayer.

HOHMAN.


ARTS & REMEDIES.
=o B Biwes


4 good Remedy for Hysterics, (or Mother-Fits, ) to be used
three times.

Put that joint of the thumb which sits in the palm of the
hand on the bare skin covering the small bone which stands
out above the pit of the heart, and speak the following at
the same time :


Matrix, patrix, lay thyself right and safe,
Or thou or I shall on the third day fill the grave. t+ t+ f


Another remedy for Hysterics, and for Colds.


This must be strictly attented to every evening, that is:
whenever you pull off your shoes or stockings, run your
finger in between all the toes, and smell it. This will cer-
tainly effect a cure. 3 =


1 certain remedy to stop Bleeding—which cures, no matter
how far a person be away, if only his first name is rightly
pronounced while using it.


Jesus Christ, dearest blood !
That stoppeth the pain, and stoppeth the blood.


In this help you, (first name) God the Father, God the
Son, God the Holy Ghost. Amen.


A remedy to be used when any one is falling away, and
which has cured many persons.


Let the person in perfect soberness and without having
conversed with any one, make water in a pot before sun-
rise ; boil an egg in this-urine, bore three small holes in this
egg with a needle, and carry it to an ant-hill made by big


10


ants ; and the person will feel relieved as soon as the egg
is devoured.


Another remedy to be applied when any one is sick; which
has effected many a cure where doctors could not help.


Let the sick person, without having conversed with any
one, make water in a bottle before sun-rise, close it up
tight, and put it immediately in some box or chest, lock it
and stop up the key-hole; the key must be carried in one
of the pockets for three days, as nobody dare have it ex-
cepting the person who puts the bottle with urine in the
chest or box.


A good remedy for Worms, to be used for men as well as
for cattle.


Mary, God’s Mother, traversed the land,
Holding three worms close in her hand ;
One was white, the other was black, the third was red.


This must be repeated three times, at the same time
stroking the person or animal with the hand; and at the
end of each application strike the back of the person or the
animal, to wit: at the first application once, at the second
application twice, and at the third application three times ;
and then set the worms a certain time, but not less than 3
minutes.


A good remedy against Calumniation or Slander.


If you are calumniated or slandered to your very skin,
to your very flesh, to wes very bones, cast it back upon
the false tongues. et

Take off your shirt, ae turn it wrong side out, and then
run your two thumbs ‘along your body, close wnder the ribs,
starting at the pit of the heart down to the thighs.


4 good remedy for the Fever.


Good morning, dear Thursday! ‘Take away from (name)
the 77-fold fevers! Oh! thou dear Lord Jesus Christ, take
them away from him! foe ee oe a


j oo


it


This must be used on Thursday for the first time, on
Friday for the second time, and on Saturday for the third
time ; and each time thrice. The prayer of faith has also
to be said each time, and not a word dare be spoken to any
one until the sun has risen. Neither dare the sick person
speak to any one till after sunrise ; nor eat pork, nor drink
milk, nor cross a running water, for nine days. ;


A good remedy for the Colic.


I warn ye, ye colic fiends! There is one sitting in judg-
ment, who speaketh: just or unjust. Therefore beware,
ye colic fiends! ee aes


To attach a Dog to a person, provided nothing else was
used before to effect it.


Try to draw some of your blood, and let the dog eat it
along with his food, and he will stay with you. Or scrape
the four corners of your table while you are eating, and _
continue to eat with the same knife after having scraped
the corners of the table. Let the dog eat those scrapings,
and he will stay with you. 3 ‘ie


To make a Wand for searching for Iron, Ore, or Water.


On the first night of Christmas, between 11 & 12 o’clock,
break off from any tree a young twig of one year’s growth,
in the three highest names, (Father, Son and Holy Ghost,)


at the same time facing towards sunrise. Whenever you ~


apply this wand in searching. for anything, apply it three
times. The twig must be forked, and each end of the fork
must be held in one hand, so that ythe third and thickest
part of it stands up, but do not hold it too tight. Strike
the ground with the thickest end, and that which you de-
sire will appear immediately, if there is any in the ground
where you strike. The words to be spoken when the wand
is thus applied, are as follows :


__ Archangel Gabriel, I conjure thee in the name of God,


the Almighty, to tell me, is there any water here or not?


do tell me! 5 Oey ee 3 hte:


12


‘Tf you search for iron or ore, you have to say the same,
only ‘mention the name of what you are searching for.
A very good jenidly for Palpitation of the Heart, and for
persons who are Hide-bound.


Palpitation and hide-bound, be off (name) ribs,
Since Christ, our Lord, spoke truth with his lips.


Al Precaution against Injuries.
‘Whoever carries the right eye of a wolf fastened inside
_ of his right Peers remains free from all injuries.


| Nau: to obtain things which are desired.


If you call upon another to ask for a favor, take care to
carry a little of the firefinger-grass with you, and you shall


- certainly obtain that aes desired.


+ Al sure way of catching Fish.


Take rose seed and mustard seed, and the foot of a wea-
sel, and hang these in a net, and the fish will certainly


collect there.


A safe remedy for various ulcers, biles, and other defects.


Take the root of iron-weed, and tie it around the neck ;
~~ it cures running ulcers ; Gt also serves against obstructions

~ in the bladder (stranguary,) and cures: the piles, if the roots
are boiled in water with honey, and drank; it cleans and
heals the lungs and effects a good: t breath. “If this root is
planted among grape veins or fruit trees, it promotes the
growth very much. Children who carry it, are educated
without any difficulty ; they become fond of all useful arts
and sciences, and grow up joyiully:: and gti z a


A very good remedy for Mortification: ane Inflammation. '


Sanctus Itorius res, call the rest. Here the Mother
God came to his assistance, reaching out her snow-whi
hand, against the si and cold brand. =F TT)


eee |


13


Make three crosses with the thumb. Every thing which
is applied in words, must be applied three times, and an in-
terval of several hours must intervene each time, and for
the third time it is to be applied the next day, unless where
it is otherwise directed.


To prevent wicked or malicious persons from doing you an
imjury—against whom it is of great power.
-Dullix, ix, ux. Yea, you can’t come over Pontio; Pon-
tio is above Pilato. es ois a


A very good remedy to destroy Bots or Worms in Horses.


You must mention the name of the horse, and say: ‘If
-you have any worms, I will catch you by the forehead. If
they be white, brown, or red, they shall and must now all
be dead.”? You must shake the head of the horse three
times, and pass your hand over his back three times to and


fro. ti Tf


To cure the Pollevil in Horses, in two or three applica


4
Lt y


Break off 3 twigs from a cherry tree ; one towards morn-
ing, one towards evening, and one towards midnight. Cut
three small pieces off the hind part of your shirt, and wra
each of those twigs in one of these pieces ; then clean the
pollevil with the twigs, and lay them under the eaves. The
ends of the twigs which had been in. the wound must be
turned towards the north ; after which you must do your
business on them, that is to say, you must s—t on them ;
then cover it, leaving the rags around the twigs. After all
this the wound must again be stirred with the three twigs,
in one or two days, and the twigs placed as before. ,


2. . : good remedy for bad Wounds and Burns. :
4 "Phe word of God, the milk of Jesus’ Mother, and Christ’s


blood, is for all wounds and burnings good. ae ae 2
it is the safest way in all these cases to make the crosses.


v ith the hand or thumb three times over the affected parts?


| * ea


ad


14


that is to say, over all those things to which the three cross-
es are attached. ce


A very good remedy for n Wild. re.
Wild-fire and the dragon, flew over a wagon,
The wild- fire abated, and the dragon skated.


To ‘stop pains or smarting in a wound.


‘Cut three small twigs from a tree—each to be cut off in
one cut—rub one end of each twig in the wound, and wrap
them separately in a piece of white paper, and put 3 in
a warm one dry place. |


To destroy Warts.


‘Barat Chicken-feet and rub the warts with them, then
bury them under the eaves.


To banish the Hooping Cough.
Cut three small bunches of hair from the crown of the~-


head of a child that has never seen its father ; sew this hair


up im an unbleached rag and hang it around the neck of the
aving the hooping cough, “The thread with which the
is sewed must also be unbleached.


Another remedy for the Hooping Cough, which has cured
the majority of those who have applied it. ;


Thrust the child having the hooping- -cough three times
through a black-berry bush, without speaking or saying any-
thing. The bush, however, must be grown fast at the two —
ends, and the child must be thrust through three times in
the same manner, that is to say, from the same side it was
thrust through in the first place.


A good remeda y to stop Bleeding. . <0
This is the day on which the i injury happened. Blood, —


thou must stop, until the Virgin Mary beng forth another —


n.—Repeat these words oereg | times. 4


15


To banish Convulsive Fevers.


Write the following letters on a piece of white paper,
sew it in a piece of linen or muslin, and hang it around the
neck until the fever leaves you :


Ab a-xea Cat aba x
Av pa xa CG a t a boa x
SA ba Sa Ca tab a
Abaea €-2 tad
Aba x@@ ata
AbaxaCat
AbaxaCa

“A baxacC

‘A ba a:

A ba x=

Aba

Ab

A


A good remedy for the Tooth-ache.


Stir the sore tooth with a needle until it draws blood ;
then take a thread and soak it with this blood. Then take
vinegar and flower, mix them well so as to form a pa:
and spread it on a rag, then wrap this rag around th


root,
of an apple tree, and tie it very close with the above thread,


after which the root must be well covered with ground.


How to banish the Fever.


Write the following words upon a paper and wrap it itp
in knot-grass, (breiten Wegrid),) and then tie it upon the
~ navel of the person who has the fever :


Potmat sineat,
Potmat sineat,
Potmat. aaa,


a


How to walk and step securely in all cases.


__ Jesus walketh with [name]. He is my head; I am his
_ limb. Therefore walketh Jesus with [name]. + sa


16
A very good remedy for the Colic.


Take half a gill of good old rye whiskey, and a pipe full
of tobacco; put the whiskey in a bottle, then smoke the to-
bacco and blow the smoke into the bottle, shake it up well
and drink it. This has cured the author of this book, and
many others.—Or take a white clay pipe which has turned
blackish from smoking, pound it to a fine powder, and take
it. This will have the same effect.


A very good Plaster.


I doubt very much whether any physician in the United
States can make a plaster equal to this. It heals the white
swelling, and has cured the sore leg of a woman who for
18 years had used the prescriptions of doctors in vain.

Take two quarts of cider, one pound of bees-wax, one
pound of sheep-tallow, and one pound of tobacco ; boil the
tobacco in the cider till the strength is out, and then strain
it and add the other articles to the liquid, stir it over a gen-
tle fire till all is dissolved. :


7


To make a good Eye Water.


Take four cents worth of white vitriol, four cents worth
of prepared spicewort, (calamus root,) four cents worth of
cloves, a gill of good whiskey, and a gill of water. Make
the calamus fine, and mix all together; then use it after it
has stood a few hours.


A very good remedy for the White- Swelling.


Take a quart of unslaked lime, and pour two quarts of
water on its stir it well and let it stand over night.. The
scum that collects on the lime water must be taken off, and
a pint of flax-seed oil poured in, after which it must be
stirred until it becomes somewhat consistent ; then put it
in a pot or pan, and add a little lard and wax, melt it well,
and make a plaster, and apply it to the parts affected—the
plaster should be renewed every day, or at least every other
day until the swelling is gone.


Pi ae
”


17


my at for Epilepsy, provided the subject had never fallen —
_ into fire or water.


Write Brersedl or backwards upon a piece of paper:
“IT IS ALL OVER!” This is to-be written but once
upon the paper, then put it in a scarlet-red cloth, and then
wrap it in a piece of unbleached linen, and hang it around
the neck, on the first Friday of the new moon. The thread
with which it is tied must also be unbleached. + + +


Remedy for Burns.


*¢ Burn, I blow on thee!?"—It must be blown on three
times in the same breath, like the fire by the sun. fT +


To stop Bleeding.


Count backwards from fifty inclusive till you come down
to three. As soon as you arrive at three, you will be done
bleeding. ae


A remedy to relieve Pain.


Take a rag high was tied over a wound for the first
time, and put. it in water together with some copperas ; but
do not venture to stir the copperas until you are certain of
the pain having left you.


A good remedy for the Tooth-ache.


Cut out a piece of greensword (sod) in the morning before
sunrise, quite unbeshrewedly, from any place, breathe three
times upon it, and put it down upon the same place from
which it was taken.


To remove Bruises and Pains.


Bruise, thou shalt not heat ;
Bruise, thou shalt not sweat ;
_ Bruise, thou shalt not run,
No more than Virgin Mary shall bring forth
another son. 5 ey aa
ox


18


2 remarkable passage from the book of Albertus Magnus.


It says: If you burn a large frog to ashes and mix the
ashes with water, you will obtain an ointment that will, if
put on any place covered with hair, destroy the hair and
prevent it from growing again.


=a


Another passage from the work of Alburtus Magnus.


If you find the stone which a vulture has in his knees,
and which you may find by looking sharp, and put it in the
vituals of two persons who hate each other, it causes them
to make up and be good friends.


To cure Fits or Convulsions.


You must go upon another person’s land, and repeat the
following words: ‘‘I go before another court—I tie up my
77-fold fits.°? Then cut three small twigs off any tree on
the land, in each twig you must make a knot. This must
be done on a Friday morning before sunrise, in the decrease
of the moon, unbeshrewedly. + + + Then over your body
where you feel the fits you make the crosses. —And thus
they must be made in all cases where they are applied.


Cure for the Head-ache.


‘Tame thou flesh and bone, like Christ in Paradise ; and
who will assist thee, this I tell thee, (name,) for your re-
pentance-sake. ft + { ‘This you must say three times,
each time pausing for three minutes, and your head-ache
will soon cease. But if your head-ache is caused by strong
drink, or otherwise will not leave you soon, then you must
repeat those words every minute. This, however, is not
often necessary in regard to head-ache.


To mend Broken Glass.

Take common cheese and wash it well, unslaked lime
and the white of eggs, rub all these well together until it
becomes one mass, and then use it, If it is made right, it
will certainly held.


18


How to make Cattle return to the same place.


Pull out three small bunches of hair, one between the
horns, one from the middle of the back, and one near the
tail, and make your cattle eat it in their feed.


——


Another method ef making Cattle return home.


Take a handful of salt, go upon your fields and make
your cattle walk three times around the same stump or
stone, each time keeping the same direction, that is to say,
you must three times arrive at the same end of the stump
or stone at which your started from, and then let your cat-
tle lick the salt from the stump or stone.


To prevent the Hessian Fly from Injuring the Wheat.


Take pulverised charcoal, make ley of it, and soak the
seed-wheat in it ; take it out of the ley, and on every bushel
of wheat sprinkie a quart of urine ; stir it well, then spread
it out to dry.


To prevent Cherries from ripening before Martinmas.


Engraft the twigs upon a mulberry tree, and your desire
is accomplished.


Stinging Nettle—good for banishing fears and fancies, and —
to cause fish to collect.


Whenever you hold this weed in your hand together with
Millifolia, you are safe from all fears and fancies that fre-
quently deceive-men. If you mix it with a decoction of the
hemlock, and rub your hands with it, and put the rest in
water that contains fish, you will find the fish to collect
around your hands. Whenever you pull your hands out of
_ the water, the fish disappear by returning to their former

places.


Helvotrope, (sun-flower)—a means to prevent Calumniation.

The virtues of this plant is miraculous, if it be collected
in the sign of the lion, in the month of August, and wrapped
up in a laurel leaf, together with the tooth of a wolf. Who-


20


ever carries this about hint, will never be addressed harshly
by any one, but all will speak to him kindly and peaceably.
And if any thing has been stolen from you, put this under
your head during the night, and you will surely see the
whole figure of the thief. This has been found true.


To heal a Sore Mouth.
If you have the scurvy, or quinsey too,,
I breathe my breath three times into you.
| ie ek.
~ Swallow-wort,


A means to overcome and end all fighting and anger, and
to cause a sick man to weep when his health is restored, or


to sing with a cheerful voice when on his death-bed ; also a


very good remedy for dim eyes, or shining of the eyes. —
This weed grows at the time when the swallows built their
nests, or eagles breed. If a man carries this about him, |


together with the heart of a mole, he shall overcome all


fighting and anger. If these things are put ypon the head
of a sick man, he shall weep at the restoration of his


health, and sing with a cheerful voice when he comes to


die. When the swallow-wort blooms, the flowers must be
pounded up and boiled, and then the water must be poured
off into another vessel, and again be placed to the fire and
carefully skimmed ; then it must be filtered through a cloth
and preserved, and whosoever has dim eyes, or shining
eyes, may bathe his eyes with it, and they will become
clear and sound. — oe


Al good remedy for Consumption.
Consumption, | order thee out of the bones into the flesh,


out of the flesh upon the skin, out of the skin into the wilds


of the forest. pe


—_


For the Hollow Horn in Cows.


Bore a small hole in the hollow horn, milk the same cow, ~
and squirt her milk in the horn; this is the best cure. Use
a syringe to squirt the milk into the horn. GL.


> ae


21


A very good and certain means of destroying the Wheal in
the Eye.


Take a dirty plate, if you have none, you can easily dir-
ty one, and the person for whom you are using sympathy
shall in a few minutes find the pain much relieved. You
must hold that side of the plate or dish, which is used in
eating, towards the eye. While you hold the plate before
your eye, you must say: :


Dirty plate I press thee,
Wheal in the eye do flee.


(ey Oe:


To make Chickens lay many Eggs.

Take the dung of rabbits, pound it to powder, mix it
with bran, wet the mixture till it forms lumps, and feed
your chickens with it, and they will keep on laying a great
many eggs.


Words to be spoken while making Divinatory Wands.

In making divinatory wands, they must be broken as be-
fore directed, and while breaking and before using them,
the following words must be spoken :

Divining wand, do thou keep that power, |
Which God gave unto thee at the very first hour.


How to destroy a Tape Worm.

Worm, I oes thee by the living God, that thou shalt

flee this blood and this flesh, like as God the Lord will flee

that judge who judges unjustly, although he might have
judged aright. (ee as


=


A good remedy for the Bots in Horses.


Every time you use this, you must stroke the horse dol
with the hand three times, and lead it about three times,
holding its head towards the sun, saying: **’The Holy One
sayeth : Joseph passed over a field and there he found three
small worms; the one being black, another being brown,
and the third being red ; thus thou shalt die and be dead. ”?


va


22


| How to cure a Burn.
Three holy men went out walking,
They did bless the heat and the burning ;
They blessed that it might not increase ; |
They blessed that it might quickly cease !
sia eS ee


To cure the Bite of a Snake. r
God has created all things, and they were good ;
Thou only, serpent, art damned,

Cursed be thou and thy sting.
| eee


Eee : Bee
Aing, zing, zing!


Security against Mad Dogs.
Dog, hold thy nose to the ground,
God has made me and thee, hound!
i aa
This you must repeat in the direction of the dog ; and the
three crosses you must make towards the dog, and the
words must be spoken before he sees you.


To remove Pain and heal up Wounds with Three Switches.
With this switch and Christ’s dear blood,
I banish your pain and do you good!
TT |


Mind it well: you must in one cut, sever from a tree,
a young branch pointing towards sunrise, and then make
three pieces of it, which you successively put in the wound.
Holding them in your hand, you take the one towards your
right side first.—Every thing prescribed in this book must


be used three times, even if the three crosses should not be


affixed. Words are always to have an interval of half an


hour, and between the second and third time should pass a _—
whole night, except where it is otherwise directed. The


above three sticks, after the end of each has been put into


the wound as before directed, must be put in a piece of


white paper, and placed where they will be warm and dry.


23
Remedy for Fever, Worms, and the Colic.


Jerusalem, thou Jewish city,

In which Christ, our Lord, was born,

‘Thou shalt turn into water and blood,

Because it is for (name, ) fever, worms, and colic
good. ss 5 Bh 2


—Se


4


How to cure Weakness of the Limbs.


Take the buds of the birch tree, or the inner bark of the
root of the tree at the time of the budding of the birch, and
make a tea of it, and drink it occasionally through the day.
Yet after having used it for two weeks, it must be discon-
. tinued for a while, before it is resorted to again; and during
the two weeks of its use, it is well at times to use water for
a day, instead of the tea.


Another remedy for Weakness.


Take Bittany and St. John*s-wort, and put them in good
old rye whiskey. To drink some of this in the morning
before having taken any thing else, is very wholesome and
good. A tea made of the acorns of the white oak is also
very good for weakness of the limbs.


_ ff good method of destroying Rats and Mice.

Every time you bring grain into your barn, you must, in
putting down the three first sheaves, repeat the following
words: ‘* Rats and mice, these three sheaves I give to you,
in order that you may not destroy any of my wheat.”? The

name of the kind of grain must always be mentioned.


» make Horses that refuse their Feed to eat again—espe
cially applicable when they are afflicted in this manner on
the public roads, : |
Open the jaws of the horse, which refuses his feed, and
knock three times on his palate. This will certainly cause
_ the horse to eat again without hesitation, and to go along


willingly,


24


To cure any Excrescence or Wen on a Horse.

Take any bone which you accidently find, for you dare
not be looking for it, and rub the wen of the horse with it ;
always bearing in mind that it must be done in the decreas-
ing moon, and the wen will certainly disappear. ‘The bone,
however, must be replaced as it was laying before.


How to prepare a good Eye-Water.


Take one ounce of white vitriol and one ounce of sugar of
lead, dissolve them in oil of rosemary, and put it in a quart
bottle, which you fill up with rose water. Bathe the eyes
with it night and morning.


How to cause male or female thieves to stand still, without
being able to move backward or forward.


In using any prescriptions of this book in regard to mak-
ing others stand still, it is best to be walking about; and
repeat the following three times :

‘¢Qh Peter, oh Peter, borrow the power from God : what
{ shall bind with the bands of a christian hand, shall be


bound ; all male or female thieves, be they great or small, -


young or old, shall be spell-bound by the power of God, and
not be able to walk forward or backward, until I see them
with my eyes, and give them leave with my tongue, except
it be that they count for me all the stones that may be be-


tween heaven and earth, all rain-drops, all the leaves and ~


all the grass in the world. . This I pray for the repentance
of my enemies.” + + + Repeat your articles of faith and
the Lord’s prayer.

If the thieves are to remain alive, the sun dare not shine
upon them before their release. There are two ways of re-
leasing them, which will be particularly stated: The first
is this, that you tell him in the name of St. John to leave:
the other is as follows: ‘*The words which have bound
thee, shall give thee free. ”? t i¢


To cure the Sweeney in Horses.


Take a piece of old bacon, and cut it into small pieces,


?


put them in a pan and roast them well, put in a handful of


25


fish-worms, a gill of oats, and three spoonsful of salt into it
roast the whole of this until it turns black, and then filter
it through a cloth; after which you put a gill of soft soap,
half a gill of rye whiskey, half a gill of vinegar, and half a
gill of the urine of a boy to it; mix it well, and smear it
over the part affected with sweeney, on the third, the sixth,
and the ninth day of the new moon, and warm it with an
oaken board.


How to make Molasses.

Take pumpkins, boil them, press the juice out of them,
and boil the juice to a proper consistence. There is noth-
ing else necessary. The author of this book, John George
Hohman, has tasted this molasses, thinking it was the gen-
uine kind, until the people of the house told him what it
was.


To make good Beer.


Take a handful of hops, five or six gallons of water, about
three table-spoonsful of ginger, half a gallon of molasses ;
filter the water, hops and ginger into a tub containing the
molasses. a


Cure for the Epilepsy.
Take a turtle-dove, cut its throat, and let the person
afflicted with epilepsy drink the blood. —


Another way to make Cattle return home.


Feed your cattle out of a pot or kettle used in preparing
your dinner, and they will always return to your stable.


A very good remedy to cure Sores.


Boil the bulbs (roots) of the white lilly in cream, and
put it on the sore in form of a plaster. Southernwort has
the same effect,


Al good cure for Wounds.


Take the bones of a calf, and burn them until they turn
to power, and then strew it into the wound. This powder
3 ; :


26


prevents the flesh from putrifying, and is therefore of great
importance in healing the wound. Te


To make an Oil out of Paper, which Se good for = eyes.


A man from Germany informed me, that to burn two
‘sheets of white paper would produce about three drops of
oil or water, which would heal all sores in or about the eye
if rubbed with it. Any affection of the eyes can be cured
in this way, as long as the cue of the eye is sound.


To heneng: Crab- Lice.


‘Take capuchin powder, mix it with hog’s lard, and smear
yourself with it. Or, boil cammock, and wash the place
where the lice keep themselves.


Lo prevent the worst kind of paper from blotting.


Dissolve alum in water, and put it on the paper, and I,
Hohman, would like to see who cannot write on it, after it
1s dried. .


very good remedy for the Gravel.

The author of this book, John George Hohman, applied
this remedy, and soon felt relieved. I knew a man who
could find no relief from the medicine of any doctor ; he
then used the following remedy, to wit : he eat every morn-
ing seven peach stones before tasting anything else, which
relieved him very much ; but as he had the gravel very bad,
he was obliged to use it constantly. I, Hohman, have used
it for several weeks. I still feel a touch of it now and then,
yet I had it so badly that I cried out aloud every time I
had to make water. I owe a thousand thanks to God and
the person who told me of this remedy.
good remedy for those who cannot keep their water.
~ Burn a hog’s bladder to ponder and take it inwardly.


To destroy Field-Mice and Moles. |
Put unslaked hing in their holes, and they will disappear


a6


To remove a Wen during the crescent moon,


Look over the wen directly towards the moon, and say:
e Whatever grows, does grow 3 and what diminishes, does
diminish. ”” *Dhis must be said three times in the same
breath.


i remove a iS cais or Skin from the Eye.


Before sunrise on St. Bartholomew’s day, you must dig
up four or five roots of the dandelion weed, taking good care
to get the ends of the roots; then you must procure a rag
and a thread that have never been in the water ; the thread,
which dare not have a single knot in it, is used in sewing
up the roots into the rag, and the whole is then to be hanged
before the eye until the scum disappears. The tape by
which it it is fastened, must never have been in the water.


For deafness, roaring or buzzing in the ear, & for tooth-ache,


_ A few drops of refined camphor-oil put upon cotton, and
thus applied to the aching tooth, relieves very much. When
put in the ear, it strengthens thé hearing, and removes the
roaring and whizzing in the same.


44 good way to cause children to cut their teeth without pain.


Boil the brain of a rabbit, and rub the gums of the chil-
dren with it, and their teeth will grow without any pain to
them.


——


For Vomiting and Diarrhea.


Take pulverised cloves and eat them together with bread
soaked in red wine, and you will soon find relief. The
cloves may be put upon the bread. 7


To Heal Burns.


Pound or press the juice out of male fern, and put it on
the burnt spots, and they will heal very fast. Better yet,
however, if you smear the above juice upon a rag, and put
that on like a plaster. |


28
4 very good cure for weakness of the limbs, for the purifica-


tion of the blood, for the invigoration of the head § heart, —
and to remove giddiness, Sc. &c.


Take two drops of the oil of cloves in a table-spoonful of
white wine, early in the morning, and before eating any-
_ thing else. This is also good for the mother-pains, and the
colic. The oil of cloves which you buy in the drug stores
will answer the purpose. These remedies are also applica-
ble to cure the cold when it settles in the bowels, and to
stop vomiting, A few drops of this oil poured upon cotton
and applied to the aching teeth, relieves the pain.


For Dysentery and Diarrhea.


Take the moss off of trees, and boil it in red wine, and
let those that are affected with these diseases, drink it.


Cure for the Tooth-JAche.


Hohman, the author of this book, has cured the severest
tooth-ache more than sixty times, with this remedy; and
out of the sixty times he applied it, it failed but once in af-
fecting a cure. Take blue vitriol and put a small piece of
it in the hollow tooth, yet not too much ; spit out the water
that collects in the mouth, and be careful to swallow none.
I do not know whether it is good for teeth that are not hol-
low, but I should judge it would cure any kind of toothache.


Advise to Pregnant Women.


Pregnant women must be very careful not to use any
camphor; and no camphor should be administered to those
women who have the mother-fits.


Cure for the Bite of a Mad Dog.


A certain Mr. Valentine Kettering, of Dauphin County,
has communicated to the Senate of Pennsylvania, a sure
remedy for the bite of any kind of mad animals. He says
that his ancestors had already used it in Germany 250 years
ago, and that he had always found it to answer the purpose,
during a residence of fifty years in the United States. He


29


only published it from motives of humanity. This remedy
consists in the weed called Chick-weed. It is a summer.
plant, known to the Germans and Swiss by the names of
Gauchneil, Rother Meyer, or Rother Huehnerdarm. In En-
gland itis called Red Pimpernel; and its botanical name is
Angelica Phonicea. It must be gathered in June, when in
full bloom, and dried in the shade, and then pulverized.—
The dose of this for a grown person, is a small table-spoon-
ful, or in weight a drachm and a scruple, at once, in beer
or water. For children the dose is the same, yet it must
be administered at three different times. In applying it to
animals, it must be used green, cut to pieces, and mixed

with bran or other feed. For hogs, the pulverised weed is

made into little balls by mixing it with flower and water.

It can also be put on bread and butter, or in honey, molasses,

&c.—The Rev. Henry Muhlenberg says, that in Germany

30 grains of the powder ot this weed are given four times a
day, the first day, then one dose a day for a whole week ;

while, at the same time, the wound is washed out with a de-
coction of the weed, and then the powder strewed in it.—
Mr. Kettering says that he in all instances administered

but one dose, with the most happy results. ‘This is said to

be the same remedy through which the late Doctor William

Stoy effected so many cures.


———


A very good means to increase the growth of Wool on Sheep,
~ and to prevent disease among them.


William Ellis, in his excellent work on the English man-
ner of raising sheep, relates the following: I knewa tenant
who had a flock of sheep that produced an unusual quantity
of wool. He informed me, that he was in the habit of
washing his sheep with butter-milk just after shearing them,
which was the cause of the unusual growth of wool ; because
it is a known fact that buttermilk does not only improve the
growth of sheep’s wool, but also of the hair of other ani-
mals. ‘Those who have no butter-milk may substitute com-
mon milk, mixed with salt and water, which will answer
nearly as well to wash the sheep just sheared. And I
garantee that by rightly applying this means, you will not
oye =


30


only have a great increase of wool, but the sheep-lice and
their entire brood will be destroyed. It also cures all
manner of scab and itch, and prevents the sheep from catch-
ing cold.


}


 well-tried Plaster to remove Mortification.


Take six hen eggs and boil them in hot ashes until they
are right hard, then take the yellow of the eggs and fry them
in a gill of lard until, they are quite black, then put a hand-
ful of rue with it, and afterwards filter it through a cloth.
When this is done, add a gill of sweet oil toit. It will
take most effect where the plaster for a female is prepared
by a male, and the plaster for a male prepared by a female.


A good remedy for the Poll-Evil in Horses.


Take white turpentine, rub it over the poll-evil with your
hand, and then melt it with a hot iron so that it runs into
the wound. After this, take neatsfoot oil or goose grease,
and rub it into the wound in the same manner, and for three
days in succession, commencing on the last Friday of the
last quarter of the moon.


For the Scurvy and Sore Throat.


Speak the following, and it will certainly help you: Job
went through the land, holding his staff close in the hand,
when God the Lord did meet him, and said to him: Job,
what art thou grieved at? Job said: Oh God, why should
I not be sad? My throat and my mouth are rotting away.
Then said the Lord to Job: In yonder valley there is a
well, which will cure thee, [name] and thy mouth, and thy
throat, in the name of God the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost. Amen. |

This must be spoken three times in the morning, and
three times in the evening ; and where it reads * which will
cure,’’ you must blow three times in the child’s mouth.


A very good Plaster. ,
Take wormwood, rue, medels, sheepripwort, pointy plan-
tain, in equal proportions, a larger proportion of beeswax


ol


and tallow, and some spirits of turpentine, put it together
in a pot, boil it well, and then strain it, and you have a
very good plaster.
To stop Bleeding.
I walk through a green forest; _
There I find three wells, cool and cold ;
The first is called courage,
The second is called good, ©
And the third is called, step the blood.
Ls


JInother way to stop Bleeding, and to heal Wounds, in man
as well as animals.


On Christ’s grave there grows three roses; the first is
kind, the second is valued among the rulers, and the third
says: blood thou must stop, and wound thou must heal.—
Every thing prescribed for man in this book, is also appli-
cable to animals.


For gaining a Lawful Suit.

It reads, if any one has to settle any just claim by way
of a law suit, let him take some of the largest kind of sage
and write the names of the 12 apostles. on the leaves, and
put them in his shoes before entering the courthouse, and
he shall certainly gain the suit.


. For the Swelling of Cattle.
To Desh break no Flesh, but to Desh! While saying this
run your hand along the back of the animal. eo


Nore—The hand must be put upon the bare skin in all
cases of using sympathetic words.


An easy method of Catching Fish.


In a vessel of white glass must be put: 8 grains of civit,
(musk) and as much castorium; 2 ounces of eel-fat, and 4
ounces of unsalted butter; after which the vessel must be
well closed, and putin some place where it will keep mod-


32


erately warm, for nine or ten days, and then the composition
must be well stirred with a stick until it is perfectly mixed.


Appiicarion.—1. Jn using the hooks—W orms or insects
used for baiting the hooks, rere first be moistened with this
composition, and then put in a bladder or box, which may be
carried in the pocket. |

2. In using the net-—Small balls. formed af the soft part
of fresh bread must be dipped in this composition, and then
by means of thread fastened inside of the net before throw-
ing it into the water.

8. Catching fish with the hand—Besmear your legs or
boots with this composition before entering the water, at the
place where the fish are expected, and d they will collect in
great numbers around you.


4 very good and safe Remedy for Rheumatism.


From one to two dollars have often been paid for this re-
cipe alone, it being the best and surest remedy to cure the
rheumatism. Let it be known therefore: Take a piece of
cloth, some tape and thread, neither of which must ever
have been in water; the thread must not have a single knot
init, and the cloth ‘and tape must have been spun by a child
not quite or at least not more than seven years ofage. The
letter given below must be carefully sowed in the piece of
cloth, and tied around the neck, unbeshrewedly, on the first
Friday in the decreasing moon 3 and immediately after hang-
ing it around the neck, “the Lord’s s prayer and the articles of
faith must be repeated. What now follows must be written
in the before mentioned letter :


‘¢May God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost grant it,
Amen. Seek immediately, and seek ; thus commandeth the
Lord thy God, through the first man whom God did love
upon earth. Seek immediately, and seek ; thus command-
eth the Lord thy God, through Luke, the Evangelist, and
through Paul, the Apostle. Seek immediately, and seek ;
thus te EES the. Lord thy God, through the heave
messengers. Seek immediately, and seek: thus command-
eth the Lord thy God, by the first man, that God might be
loved. Seek immediately, and convulse; thus command- |


30


eth the Lord thy God, through the Holy Fathers, who have
been made by divine and holy writ. Seek immediately,
and convulse; thus commandeth the Lord thy God, through
the dear and holy angels, and through his paternal and di-
vine Omnipotence, and his heavenly confidence and endur-
ance. Seek immediately, and convulse ; thus commandeth
the Lord thy God, through the burning oven which was
preserved by the blessing of God. Seek immediately, and
convulse ; thus commandeth the Lord thy God, through all
power and might, through the prophet Jonah who was pre-
served in the belly of the whale for three days and three
nights, by the blessing of God. Seek immediately, and
convulse ; thus commandeth the Lord thy God, through all
the power and might which proceed from divine humility,
and in all eternity ; whereby no harm be done unto + N f
nor unto any part of his body, be they the raving convul-
sions, or the yellow convulsions, or the white convulsions,
or the red convulsions, or the black convulsions, or by
whatever name convulsions may be called ; these all shall
do no harm unto thee + N + nor to any part of thy body,
nor to thy head, nor to thy neck, nor to thy heart, nor to
thy stomach, nor to any of thy reins, nor to thy arms, nor
to thy legs, nor to thy eyes, nor to thy tongue, nor to any
part or parcel of thy body. This I write for thee +} N + in
these words, and in the name of God the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost, Amen.—God bless it. Athen.” —

Note.—If any-one writes such a letter for another, the
Christian name of the person must be mentioned in it; as
you will observe, where the N stands singly in the above
letter, there must be the name.


1 good way to destroy Worms in Bee-Hives.

With very little trouble and at an expense of a quarter
dollar, you can certainly free your bee-hives from worms
for a whole year. Get from an apothecary store the pow-
der called Pensses Blum, which will not injure the bees in
the least. The application of it is as follows: For one bee-
hive you take as much of this powder, as the point of your
knife will hold, mix it with one ounce of good whiskey, and
put it in a common vial, then make a hole in the bee-hive


a4


and pour 44 in thus mixed with the whiskey, which is suffi-
cient for one hive at once. Make the hole so that it can be
easily poured in. As said before, a quarter dollar’ s | worth
of this powders is enough for one hive.


Recipe for making a paste to prevent gun Zanrele from rust-
ing, whether iron or steel.


Take one ounce of bear’s fat, half an ounce of badger-
grease, half an ounce of snake’: s fat, one ounce of almond
oil, and a quarter of an ounce of pulverized indigo, and
melt it all together in a new vessel over a fire, stir it well,
and putit afterwards into some vessel. In using it, a lump
as large as a common nut must be put upon a piece of
woolen cloth and then rubbed on the barrel and lock of the
gun, and it will keep the barrel from rusting. ©


To make a Wick which is never conned,


Take an ounce of asbestos and boil it in a quart of strong
ley for two hours ; then pour off the ley and clarify what re--
- mains by pouring rain water on it three or four times, after
which you can form a wick from it which will never be con-
sumed by the fire.


A Morning Prayer, to be spoken before starting on a jour-
ney, which will save the person from all mishaps.


I, [here the name is to be pronounced,} will go on a
- journey to-day; I will walk upon God’s way, and’ walk
where God himself did walk, and our dear Lord Jesus
Christ, and our dearest Virgin with her dear little babe,
with her seven rings and her true things. Oh thou! my
dear Lord Jesus Christ, I am thine own, that no dog may
1 me, no wolf bite me, and no murderer sentenly approach

: Save me, oh my God, from sudden death! I am in
God’s hands, and there I wll bind myself. In God’s hands
I am by our Lord Jesus’ five wounds, that any gun or other
arms may not do me any more harm than the virginity of
our Holy Virgin Mary was injured by the favour of her be-
loved Jésus.—After this say three Lord’s prayer, the Ava
Maria, and the articles of faith,


30


Al safe and approved means to be applied in tinies of His
and Pestilence.


Wellcome! thou firey fiend! do not extend further shit
thou already hast. This I count unto thee asa repentant
act, in the name of God the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost. ©

I command unto thee, fire, by the power of God, which
createth and worketh every thing, that thou now do cease,
and not extend any further; as certainly as Christ was
standing on the Jordan’s stormy banks being vapteed by
John, the holy man.

This I count unto thee as a repentant act, in the name of
the holy Trinity. ‘;
I command unto thee, fire, by the power of God, now to
abate thy flames ; as certainly as Mary retained her virgin-
ity before all ladies who retained theirs, so chaste and pure ;

therefore, fire, cease thy wrath.

This I count unto thee, fire, as a repentant act, in the —
name of the most holy trinity.

I command unto thee, fire, to abate thy heat, by the pre- -
cious blood of Jesus Christ, which he has shea for us, and
our sins and transgressions.

This I count unto thee, fire, as a repentant act, in the
name of God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

Jesus of Nazareth, a king of the Jews, help us from this
dangerous fire, and ouard this land and its bounds from all
epidemic disease and Chics om


REMARKS. %


This has been discovered by a christian Gipsey King of
Egypt —Anno 1740, on the 10th of June, six Gipsies were
executed on the gallows in the Kingdom of Prussia. The
seventh of their party was. a man of eighty years of age, and
was to be executed by the sword, on the 16th of the same
month. But fortunately for him, quite unexpectedly a con-
flagration broke out, and the old Gipsey was taken to the
fire to try his arts ; which he successfully done to the great
surprise of all present, by bespeaking the conflagration in a
manner that it wholely and entirely ceased and disappeared


36


in less than ten minutes. Upon this, the proof having been
given in day time, he received pardon and was set at liberty.
This was confirmed and attested by the government of the
King of Prussia, and the General Superintendent at
Koenigsberg, and given to the public in print. It was first
published at Koenigsberg in Prussia, by Alexander Baus- ©
man, anno 1745.

Whoever has this epistle in his house, will be safe from
all danger of fire, as well as from lightning. If a pregnant
woman carries this letter about her, neither enchantment or
evil spirits can injure her or her child. Further, if any
body has this letter in his house, or carries it about his per-
‘son, he will be safe from the injuries of pestilence.

While saying these sentences one must pass three times
around the fire. ‘This has availed in all instances.


To prevent Conflagration.


_ Take a black chicken in the morning or evening, cut its
head off and throw it upon the ground ; cut its stomach out,
yet leave it all together; then try to get a piece of a shirt
which was worn by a chaste virgin during her terms, and
cut out a piece as large as a common dish from that part
which is bloodiest. These two things wrap up together,
then try to get an egg which was laid on maunday Thursday.
These three things put together in wax; then put them in a
pot holding eight quarts, and bury it under the threshhold
of your house, with the aid of God, and as long as there
~ remains a single stick of your house together, no conflagra-
tion will happen.—If your house should happen to be on fire
already in front and behind, the fire will, nevertheless, do
no injury to you, nor to your children. This is done by the
power of God, and is quite certain and infallible.—If fire
should break out unexpectedly, then try to get a whole shirt
in which your servant maid had her terms, or a sheet on
which a child was born, and throw it into the fire, wrapped
up in a bundle, and without saying anything. This will
certainly stop it.


od
>
To prevent Witches from bewitehing Cattle, to be written
and placed in the stable; and against Bad Men and Evil
Spirits, which nightly torment old and young people, to
be written and placed on the bedstead.


‘¢ Trotter Head, I forbid thee my house and premises, I
forbid thee my horse and cow stable, I forbid thee my bed-
stead, that thou mayest not breathe upon me: breathe into
some other house, until thou hast ascended every hill, until
thou hast counted every fence post, and until thou hast
crossed every water—And thus dear day may come again
into my house, in the name of God the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost. Amen.”’ | ae ,

This will certainly protect and free all persons and ani-
mals from witchcraft..


To. prevent bad people from getting about the Cattle.


Take wormwood, gith, five-finger weed, and assafcedita ;
three cents worth of each; the straw of horse-beans, some


dirt swept together behind the door of the stable, and alit-
tle salt. Tie these all up together with a tape, and put the


bundle ina hole about the threshold over which your cattle
pass in and out, and cover it well with lignum vite wood.
This will certainly be of use. —


To Extinguish Fire without Water.


Write the following letters upon each side of a plate, and
throw .¢ into the fire, and it will be extinguished forthwith:


oA TOR ,


“AOR BoP 6O
TE oR BOY
OP HOR A
ROT AS


‘ Another Method of stopping Fire.

Our Dear Sarah journeyeth through the land, having a
firy, hot brand in her hand. The firy brand heats; the firy
brand sweats. Firy brand stop your heat; firy brand stop
your sweat. :

4


How to Fasten or Spell-bind anything.

You say: ‘Christ’s cross and Christ’s crown, Christ
Jesus’ coloured blood, be thou every hour good. : God, the
Father, is before me; God, the Son, is beside me; God, the
Holy Ghost, is behind me. Whoever now is stronger than
these three persors, may come by day or night, to attack
me.” ft + + Then say the Lord’s prayer three times.


Another way of Fastening or Spell-binding. —
After repeating the above, you speak: ‘‘At every step
may Jesus walk with [name]. He is my head, I am his
limb ; therefore Jesus be with [name ]. |


| A Benediction to prevent Fire.

‘¢ The bitter sorrows and the death of our dear Lord Je-
sus Christ shall prevail. Fire,-and wind, and great heat,
and all that is within the power of these elements, I com-
mand thee through the Lord Jesus Christ, who has spoken
to the winds and the waters, and they obeyed him. By
these powerful words spoken by Jesus, [ command, threat-
en, and inform thee, fire, flame, and heat, and your powers
as elements, to flee forthwith. The holy, rosy blood of our
dear Lord Jesus Christ, may rule it. ‘Thou, fire and wind,
and great heat, | command thee, as the Lord did by his ho-
ly angels command the great heat in the firy oven when
those three holy men, Sadrach and his companions, Mesach
and Obed Rego, to leave them untouched, as was done ac-
cordingly. Thus they shalt abate, thou fire, flame, and
great heat, the Almighty God having spoken in creating the
four elements, together with heaven and earth: Fiat, Fiat,
Fiat! that is: It shall be, in the name of God, the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Amen.”


How to Relieve Persons or Animals after being Bewitched.


Three false tongues have bound thee, three holy tongties —
have spoken for thee. The first is God, the father, the se-
cond is God, the son, and the third is God, the holy ghost.
They will give you blood and flesh, peace and comfort.—_
Flesh and blood are grown upon thee, born on thee, and :


39


lost on thee. If any man trample on thee with his horse,
God will bless thee, and the holy Ciprian ; has any woman —
trampled on thee, God and the body of Mary shall bless |
thee ; if eee servant has given you trouble, I bless thee
through God and the laws of heavens; if any servant maid
or woman has led you astray, God and the heavenly con-
stellations shall bless thee. Heaven is above thee, the earth
is beneath thee, and thou art between. I bless thee against _
all tramplings by horses. . Our dear Lord Jesus Christ
walked about in his bitter afflictions and death ; and all the
Jews that had spoken and promised, trembled in their false-
hoods and mockery. Look, now trembleth the Son of God,
as if he had the itch, said the Jews. And then spake Jesus:
I have not the itch, and no one shall have it. Whoever
will assist me to carry the cross, him [I will free from the
itch, in the name of God, the father, the son, and the holy
ghost. Amen. | |


To protect houses and premises against Sickness §& Theft.


Tio, alo Massa Dandi Bando, III. Amen.
J. BR: N.- RI.


Our Lord Jesus Christ stepped into the hall, and the
Jews searched him everywhere. Thus shall those who now
speak evil of me with their false tongues, and contend a-
gainst me, one day bear sorrows, be silenced, dumbstruck,
intimidated, and abused, for ever and ever, by the glory of
God. The glory of God shall assist me in this, Do thou
aid me J. J. J. for ever and ever. Amen.


Against Mishaps and Dangers in the house.


Sanct Matheus, Sanct Marcus, Sanct Lucas,
Sanct Johannis.


_ A Direction for a Gipsy-Sentence, to be carried about the
| person, as a protection under all circumstances.


Like unto the prophet Jonas, as a type of Christ, who
was guarded for three days and three nights in the belly of


40


a whale, thus shall the Almighty God, as a father, guard
and protect me from all evil. J.J. J.


Hee Evil Spirits aH all manner of Witcheraft.
ee ee
SANCTUS ie SPIRITUS.
NER.
=


All this be guarded, here in tine, and there in eternity.
Amen.

You must write all the shore on a piece of white paper,
and carry it about you.—The characters or letters above,
signify : **God bless me here in time, and there ae Za


Against Swellings.


‘Three pure Virgins went out on a journey, to inspect a
swelling and sickness. The first one said: It is hoarse.
- The second said: It is not... The third said: If it is not,
then will our Lord Jesus Christ come.’?. This must be spok-
en in the name of the Holy EPintty:


Against Adversities and all manner a Contentions. |
Power, hero, Prince of Peace, J. J. J.


Against Danger and Death, to be carried about the person.


I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that he will call
me from the grave, &c. te


How to Treat a Cow after the Milk is taken from her.

Give to the cow three spoonsful of her last milk, and say
to the spirits in her blood : ‘* Ninny has done it, and I have
swallowed her in the name ‘of God, the father, the so mn; and &
the holy ghost. Amen. es what you ‘choose at the same
time.


4i


/inother method of treating a Sick Cow.


J. The cross of Jesus Christ poured out milk
J. The cross of Jesus Christ poured out water ;
J. The cross of Jesus Christ has poured them out.


These lines must be written on three pieces of white pa-
per, then take the milk of the sick cow and these three
pieces of paper, put them in a pot, and scrape a little of the
scull of a criminal on them; close it well, and put it over
a hot fire, and the witch will have to die.—If you take the
three pieces of paper, with the writing on them, in your
mouth, and go out before your house, speak three times, and
then give them to your cattle, you shall not only see all the
witches, but your cattle will also get well again.


Against the Fever.

Pray early m the morning, and then turn your shirt a-
round the left sleeve, and say: ‘¢turn thou, shirt, and thou,
fever, do likewise, turn. [Do not forget to mention the
name of the person having the fever.] This I tell thee,
for thy repentance sake, in the name of God, the father,
the son, and the holy ghost. Amen.—lIf you repeat this for
three successive mornings, the fever will disappear.


To Spell-bind a Thief so that he cannot stir.

This benediction must be spoken a Thursday morning,
before sunrise, and in the open air:

‘* Thus shall rule it God, the father, the son, and the ho-
ly ghost, Amen. Thirty-three Angels speak to each other,
coming to administer in company with Mary. Then spoke
dear Daniel, the holy one: ‘Trust, my dear woman, I see
some thieves coming who intend stealing your dear babe ;
this I cannot conceal from you. Then spake our dear lady
to Saint Peter: I have bound witha band, through Christ’s
hand ; therefore my thieves are bound even by the hand of
Christ, if they wish to steal mine own, im the house, in the
_ chest, upon the meadow or fields, in the woods, in the or-
_ chard, in the vineyard, or in the garden, or wherever they -
intend to steal. Our dear lady said: Whoever chooses may
steal ; yet if any one dogs steal, he shall stand like qa buck,


42


be shall stand like a stake, and shall count all the stones
- upon the earth, and all the stars in the heavens. Thus I
give thee leave, and command every spirit to be master over
every thief, by the guardianship of Saint Daniel, and by
the burden of this world’s goods. And the countenance
shall be unto thee, that thou canst not move from the spot,
as long as my tongue in the flesh shall not give thee leave.
This I command thee by the holy virgin Mary, the Mother
_ of God, by the power and might by which he has created
heaven and earth, by the host of all the angels, and by all
the Saints of God, the father, the son, and the holy ghost,
Amen.”’—If you wish to set the thief free, you must tell
him to leave in the name of Saint John.


Another way to Still-bind Thieves.


Ye thieves, I conjure you, to be obedient like Jesus
Christ, who obeyed his heavenly father unto the cross, and
to stand without moving out bf ay sight, in the name of
the Trinity. I command you by the power of God and the
incarnation of Jesus Christ, not to move out of my sight,
+ t t like Jesus Christ was standing on Jordan’s stormy
banks to be baptized by John. And furthermore, I conjure
you, horse and rider, to stand still and not to move out of |
my sight, like Jesus Christ did stand when he was about to
be nailed to the cross to release the fathers of the church
from the bonds of hell. Ye thieves, I bind you with the
game bonds with which Jesus our Lord has bound hell; and
thus ye shall be bound ; + + + and the same words that bind
you, shall also release you.


To effect the same in less time.


Thou horseman and. footman, you are coming under your —
hats ; you are scattered! With the blood of Jesus Christ, |
with his five holy wounds, thy barrel, thy gun, and thy pis- —
tol are bounds; sabre, sword, and knife, are enchanted and
‘bound, in the name of God, the father, the son, and the

holy ghost. Amen.


This must be spoken three times.


43


To Release Spell-bound Persons.

You horseman and footman, whom I here conjured at this
time, you may pass on in the name of Jesus Christ, through
the word of God and the will of Christ ; ride ye on now and
pass.


To Compel a Thief to return Stolen Goods. :


Early in the morning before sunrise, you must go toa
pear tree, and take with you three nails out of a coffin, or
three horse-shoe nails that were never used, and holding
these towards the rising sun, you must say :

‘¢Oh thief, I bind thee by the first nail, which I drive
into thy scull and thy brain, to return the goods thou hast
stolen, to their former place ; thou shalt feel as sick and as
anxious to see men, and to see the place you stole from, as
felt the desciple Judas after betraying Jerusalem. I bind
thee by the other nail, which I drive into your lungs and
liver, to return the stolen goods to their former place ; thou
shalt feel as sick and as anxious to see men, and to see the
place you have stolen from, as did Pilate in the fires of hell.
The third nail I shall drive into thy foot, oh thief, in order
that thou shalt return the stolen goods to the very same
place from which thou hast stolen them.- Oh thief, I bind
thee, and compel thee, by the three holy nails which were
driven through the hands and feet of Jesus Christ, to re-
turn the stolen goods to the very same place from which
thou hast stolen them.” + ++ The three nails, however,
must be greased with the grease from an excuted criminal
or other sinful person.


A Benediction for all purposes.

Jesus, I will arise; Jesus, do thou accompany me; Jesus
do thou lock my heart into thine, and let my body and my
soul be commended unto thee. The Lord is crucified. May
God guard my senses that evil spirits may not overcome
me, in the name of God, the father, the son, and the holy
ghost. Amen.


To Win every Game one engages in.
Tie the heart of a bat with a red silken string to the right
arm, and you will win every game at cards you play.


44


: Against Burns.

Our dear Lord Jesus Christ going. on a journey, saw a
fire-brand burning: it was Saint Lorenzo stretched out on
a roast. He rendered him assistance and consolation; he
lifted his divine hand, and blessed the brand ; he stopped it
from spreading deeper and wider. ‘Thus may the burning
be blessed in the name of God, the father, the son, and the
holy ghost. Amen.


Another Remedy for Burns.


Clear out brand, but never in; be thou cold or hot, thou

must cease to burn. May God guard -thy blood and thy
flesh, thy marrow and thy bones, and every artery great or
small—they all shall be guarded and protected in the name
of God, against inflammation and mortification, in the name
of God the father, the son, and the holy ghost. Amen.


To be given to Cattle, against Witchcraft.


BUA PO 8
AR = Po
T Ew ee
OPERA
RO ft 4S


This must be written on paper and the cattle made to
swallow it in their feed..


How to tie up and heal Wounds.


Speak the following: ‘This wound I tie up in three
names, in order that thou mayest take from it, heat, water,
falling off of the flesh, swelling, and all that may be injur-
ious about the swelling, in the name of the holy trinity.’?—
This must be spoken three times ; then draw a string three
times around the wound, and put it under the corner of the
house towards the east, and say: ‘*I put thee there, + f +
in order that thou mayest take unto thyself the gathered
water, the swelling, and the running, and all that may be
injurious about the wound. Amen.”—Then repeat the .
Lord’s prayer and some good hymn. i

4


45


To take the Pain out of a Fresh Wound. :
Our dear Lord Jesus Christ had a great many biles and
wounds, and yet he never had them dressed. ‘They did
not grow old, they were not cut, nor were they ever found
running. Jonas was blind, and I spoke to the heavenly
child, as true as the five holy wounds were inflicted.


A Benediction against Worms.


Peter and Jesus went out upon the fields ; they ploughed
three furrows, and ploughed up three worms. The one
was white, the other was black, and the third one was red. -
Now all the worms are dead, in the name fj f ¢- Repeat
these words three times.


Against every Evil Influence.
Lord Jesus, thy wounds, so red, will guard me against
death. |


=


ee eee


To retain the Right in Court and Council.


Jesus Nazarenus, Rex Judeorum.

First carry these characters with you, written on paper,
and then repeat the following words: ‘*I, (name) appear
before the house of the judge. Three dead men look out of
the window; one having no tongue, the other having no
lungs, and the third was sick, blind and dumb.’’—This is
intended to be used when you are standing before a court
in your right, and the judge not being favorably disposed
towards you. While on your way to the court, you must
repeat the benediction already given above.

To stop Bleeding at any time.

As soon as you cut yourself, you must say: ‘Blessed
wound, blessed hour, blessed be the day on which Jesus
_ Christ was born, in the name + ++ Amen.


Another way to Stop blood.
_ Write the name of the four principle waters of the whole
world, flowing out of Paradise, on a paper, namely: Pison,


46


Gihon, Hedekiel, and Pheat, and pe iton the wound. In
the first book of Moses, the secon chapter, verses 11, 12,
13, you will find them. You will find this effective.


Another similar Prescription.
Breathe three times upon the patient, and say the Lord’s
prayer three times until the words, “upon the earth,” and
the bleeding will be stoped.


Another stiil more certain way to slop Bleeding.

If the bleeding will not stop, or if a vein has been cut,
then lay the following on it, and it will stop that hour. Yet
if any one does not believe this, let him write the letters
upon a knife and stab an irrational animal, and he will not
_be able to draw blood. And whosoever carries this about
him, will be safe against all his enemies :.


Lime I K. I. BLL P. a. x. v. ss. Ss. vas
I. P. O. unay Lit. Dom. mper vobism.
And whenever a woman is going to give birth toa child,


or is otherwise afflicted, let her have this letter about bat
person ; it will certainly be of avail.


—


A peculiar sign to keep back men and animals.


Whenever you. are in danger of being attacked, then car-
ry this sign with you: * In the name of God I make the
attack. May it please my Redeemer to assist me. Upon
the holy assistance of God I depend entirely ; upon the ho-
ly assistance of God and my gun I rely very truly. God
alone be with us. Blessed be Jesus.


Protection of one’s House and Hearth.


Beneath thy guardianship, I am safe against all tempests.
and all enemies, J. J. J


These three J’s signify Jouus three times.


A Charm—to be carried about the person. ;
Carry these words about you, and nothing can hit Jo - d


47


Annania, Azaria, and Misael, blessed be the Lord ; for ne
has redeemed us from hell, and has saved us from death,
and he has redeemed us out of the firy furnace, and has pre-
served us even in the midst of the fire; in the same manner
may it please him, the Lord, that there be no fire : .


r
N. I. R.
dee


To Charm Enemies, Robbers and Murderers.


God be with you, brethern; stop, ye thieves, robbers,
murderers, horsemen, and soldiers, in all humility, for we~
have tasted the rosy blood of Jesus. Your rifles and guns
will be stopped up with the holy blood of Jesus ; and all
swords and arms are made harmless by the five holy wounds
of Jesus. ‘There are three roses upon the heart of God:
the first is beneficent, the other is omnipotent, and the
third is his holy will. You, thieves, must therefore stand
under it, standing still as long as I will. In the name of
God the father, son, and holy ghost, you are cénjured and
made to stand,


Protection against all kinds of Weapons.


Jesus, God and man, do thou protect me against all man-
ner of guns, fire arms, long or short, of any kind of metal.
Keep thou thine fire, like the Virgin Mary, who kept her
fire both before and after her birth. May Christ bind up
all fire arms after the manner of his having bound up him-
self in humility, while in the flesh. Jesus, do thou render
harmless all arms and weapons, like unto the husband of
Mary the mother of God, he having been harmless. likewise.
Furthermore, do thou guard the three holy drops of blood
which Christ sweated on the Mount of Olives. Jesus Christ!
_ do thou protect me against being killed, and against burn-
ing fires. Jesus, do thou not suffer me to be killed, much
_ less to be damned, without having received the Lord’s sup-
per. May God the father, son, and holy ghost, assist me
in this. Amen. |


2


48


- & Charm against Fire-arms. | |


Jesus passed over the Red Sea, and looked upon the land ;
and thus must break all ropes and bands, and thus must
break all manner of fire-arms, rifles, guns, or pistols, and
all false tougues be silenced. May the benediction of God
on creating the first man, always be upon me ; the benedic-
tion spoken by God, when he ordered in a dream that Jo-
seph and Mary together with Jesus should flee into Egypt,
_ be upon me always, and may the holy + be ever lovely and
beloved in my right hand. .I journey through the country
at large where no one is robbed, killed, or murdered,—
where no one can do me any injury, and where not even a
dog could bite me, or any other animal tear me to pieces.
In all things let me be protected, as also my flesh and blood,
against sins and false tongues which reach from the earth
up to heaven, by the power of the four Evangelists, in the
name of God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy
Ghost, Amen.


Another for the same.


I, [name,]| conjure ye guns, swords, and knives, as well
as all other kinds of arms, by the spear that pierced the
side of God, and opened it so that blood and water could
flow out, that ye do not injure me, a servant of God, in the
ttt. I conjure ye by Saint Stephan, who was stoned by
the virgin, that ye cannot injure me who am a servant of —
God, in the name of ¢{7.. Amen. .


Al Charm against shooting, cutting or thrusting.


In the name of J. J. J. Amen. I, [name,] Jesus Christ
is the true salvation; Jesus Christ governs, reigns, defeats
and conquers every enemy, visible or invisible ; Jesus, be
thou with me at all times, for ever and ever, upon all roads
and ways, upon the water and the land, on the mountain —
and in the valley, in the house and in the yard, in the ©
whole world wherever I am, stand, run, ride or drive ;_
whether I sleep or wake, eat or drink, there be thou also, —
Lord Jesus Christ, at all times, late and early, every hour, —
every moment; and in all my goings in or goings out.


|


49


Those five holy red wounds, oh Lord Jesus Christ, may
they guard me against all fire-arms, be they secret or pub-
lic, that they cannot injure me, or do me any harm whatever,
in the name of {{y~- May Jesus Christ with his guardian-
ship and protection shield me, (name), always from daily
commission of sins, worldly injuries and injustice, from con-
tempt, from pestilence and other diseases, from fear, tor-
ture and great suffering, from all evil intentions, from false
tongues and old clatter brains ; and that no kind of fire-
arms can inflict any injury to my body, do thou take care
of me | + j. And that no band of thieves, nor Gipsies,
highway robbers, incendiaries, witches and other evil spir-
its may secretly enter my house or premises, nor break in 3
may the dear Virgin Mary, and all children who are in
heaven with God in eternal joys, protect and guard me a-
gainst them ; and the glory of God the Father shall strength-
en me, the wisdom of God the Son shall enlighten me, and
the grace of God the Holy Ghost shall empower me from
this hour unto all eternity. Amen.


Lo Charm Guns and other Arms.


The blessing which came from heaven at the birth of
Christ, be with me (name). The blessing of God at the
creation of the first man, be with me; the blessing of Christ
on being imprisoned, bound, lashed, crowned so dreadfully
and beaten, and dieing on the cross, be with me; the bless-
ing which the Priest spoke over the tender, joyful corpse of
our Lord Jesus Christ, be with me; the constancy of. the
holy Mary and all the Saints of God, of the three holy
kings, Casper, Melchior, and Balthasar, be with me; the
holy four Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, be
with mes; the Archangels St. Michael, St. Gabriel, St.
Raphael, and St. Uriel, be with me; the twelve holy mes-
sengers of the Patriarchs and all the Hosts of Heaven, be
with me ; and the imexpressible number of all the Saints,
be with me. Amen. ~ |


Papa, KR. tarn, Tetregammaten Angen.
Jesus Nazarenus, Rex Judeorum.


¥y


Zo prevent being Cheated, Charmed, or Bewitched, and to
be at all times blessed.

Like unto the cup, and the wine, and the holy supper,
which our dear Lord Jesus Christ gave unto his dear disci-
ples on Maunday Thursday, may the Lord Jesus guard
me in day time and at night, that no dog may bite me, no
wild beast tear me to pieces, no tree fall on me, no water
rise against me, no fire-arms injure me, no weapons, no
steel, no iron cut me, no fire burn me, no false sentence
fall upon me, no falsé tongue injure me, no rogue enrage
me, and that no fiends, no witchcraft and enchantment can
harm me. Amen

Different Directions to effect the same.

The Holy Trinity guard me, and be and remain with me
on the water and upon the land, in the water or in the
fields, in cities or villages, in the whole world wherever I
am. The Lord Jesus Christ protect me against all my ene-
mies, secret or public ; and may the Eternal Godhead also
- guard me, through the bitter sufferings of Jesus Christ: his

holy rosy blood, shed on the cross, assist me, J. J. Jesus
has been crucified, tortured, and died. "These are true
words ; and in the same way must all words be efficacious
which are here put down, and spoken in prayer by me.
This shall assist me that I shall net be imprisoned, bound,
er overcome by any one. Before me all guns and other
weapons shall be of no use or power. Fire-arms, hold your —
fire in the almighty hand of God. ‘Thus all fire-arms shall
be charmed. }}+ When the right hand of the Lord Jesus
Christ was fastened to the tree of the cross; like unto the —
son of the heavenly father who was obedient unto death,
may the eternal Godhead protect me by the rosy blood, by ~
the five holy wounds on the tree of the cross 3; and thus must —
I be blessed and well protected, like the cup and the wine, ~
and the genuine true bread, which Jesus Christ gave to his —
desciples on the evening of Maunday Thursday. J.J.J.


Another Similar Direction.
The grace of God and his benevolence, be with me (N.) —


51


[ shall now ride or walk out ; and I will gird about my Joins
with a sure ring. So it pleases God, the heavenly father,
he will protect me, my flesh and blood, and all my arteries
and limbs, during this day and night which I have before
me; and however numerous my enemies might be, théy
must be dumbstruck, and all become like a dead man, white
as snow, so that no one will be able to shoot, cut, or throw
at me, nor to overcome me, although he may hold rifle or
er steel against whosoever else evil weapons and arms
might be called, in his hand. My rifle shall go off like the
lightning from heaven, and my swordeshall cut like a razor.
Then went our dear lady Mary upon a very high mountain $
she looked down into a very dusky valley, and beheld her
dear child standing amidst the Jews, harsh, very harsh, be-
cause he was bound so harsh, because he was bound so hard 3 .
and therefore may the dear Lord Jesus Christ save me
from all that is injurious to me. ¢}+ Amen.


Another Similar Direction.


There walk out during this day and night, that thou may-
est not let any of my enemies, or thieves, approach me, if
they do not intend to bring me what was spent from the
holy alter. Because God, the Lord Jesus Christ, is ascen-
ded into heaven in his living body. O Lord, this is good
for me this day and night. }j7— Amen.


Another one like it.


In the name of God I walk out. God the father be with
me, and God the holy ghost be by my side. Whoever is
stronger than these three persons, may approach my body ©
and my life ; yet whoso is not stronger than these three,
would much better let me be. J. J. J.


Al very Safe and reliable Charm.


The peace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with me. [name]
Oh shot, stand still! in the name of the mighty prophets
Agtion and Elias, and do not kill me! oh shot, step short!
I conjure you by heaven and earth, and by the last judg-
ment, that you do no harm unto me, a child of God. ttt


52


Another one like st.

I conjure thee, sword, sabre, or knife, that ishiest's in-
jure or harm me, by the ‘priest of all prayers, who had gone
into the temple at Jerusalem, and said: an edged sword


shall pierce your soul that you may not injure me; ead am.
a child of God. | 3


A Very Effective Charm:
I, (name,) conjure thee, sword or. knife, as well as all
- other weapons, by that spear which pierced Jesus’ side and
opened it to the gushing out of blood and water, that he
keep me from injury as one of the servants of — God. TTT
Amen.


4 Good Charm against Thieves.

There are three lilies standing upon the grave of the
Lord our God : the first one is the courage of God, the oth-
er is the blood of God, and the third one is the will of God.
Stand still, thief! No more than Jesus Christ stepped down
from the cross, no more shalt thou move from this spot :—
this I command thee, by the four evangelists and elements
of heaven, there in the river, or in the shot, or in the judg-
ment, orin sight. ‘Thus I conjure you by the last judgment
to Baud still “and not to move, until I see all the stars in
heaven, and the sun rises again. Thus I stop thy running
and jumping, and command it in the name of +}}. Amen.

This must be repeated three times.


How to Recover Stolen Goods. |


Take good care to notice through which door the thief
passed out, and cut off three small chips from the posts of
that door, ‘then take these three chips to a wagon, unbe-
schrewedly however, take off one of the wheels ane put the
three chips into the stock of the wheel, in the three highest
names, then tarn the wheel backwards aiid say: Thief, thief,
thief! Turn back with the stolen goods ; thou art forced to
do it by the Almighty power of God: t+; God the father
calls thee back, God the son turns thee back so that thou
must return, atid God the holy ghost leads thee back until


oo


O38


thou arrive at the place from which thou hast stolen. By
the almighty power of God the father thou must come, by
the wisdom of God the son thou hast niether peace nor quiet
until thou hast returned the stolen goods to their former
place, by the grace of God the holy ghost thou must run and
jump and canst find no peace or rest until thou arrivest at
the place from which thou hast stolen. God the father binds
thee, God the son forces thee, and God the holy ghost turns
thee back.—(You must not turn the wheel too fast.) Thief,
thou must come, ttt thief, thou must come ttt thief, thou
must come, +¢t. If thou art more almighty, thief, thief,
thief, if thou art more almighty than God himself, then you
may remain where you are. ‘The ten commandments force —
thee, thou shalt not steal, and therefore thou must come. ttt
Amen.


A well-tried Charm.


Three holy drops of blood have passed down the holy
cheeks of the Lord God, and these three holy drops of
blood are placed before the touch-hole. As surely as our
dear lady was pure from all men, as surely shall no fire
or smoke pass out of this barrel. Barrel, do thou give
neither fire, nor flame, nor heat. Now I will walk out, be-
cause the Lord God goeth before me, God the son is with
me, and God the holy ghost is about me forever.


Another well-tried Charm against Fire-Arms.


Blessed is the hour in which Jesus Christ was born ; bless-
ed is the hour in which Jesus Christ was born; blessed is —
the hour in which Jesus Christ has arisen from the dead ; —
blessed are these three hours over thy gun, that no shot or
ball shall fly toward me, and neither my skin, nor my hair,
nor my blood, nor my flesh, be injured by them, and that
no kind of weapon or metal shall do me any harm, so sure-
ly as the Mother of God shall not bring forth another son.
tit. Amen.


od


4 Charm to gain advantage of a man of superior strength.

I, [name,] breathe upon thee. Three drops of blood I
take from thee ; the first out of thy heart, the other out of
thy liver, and the third out of thy vital powers; and in this
I deprive thee of thy strength and manliness.


‘“Hbbi Massa danti Lantien. J. I. I.


Al Recipe for destroying Spring-Tails or Ground Fleas.


Take the chaff upon which children have been laying in
their cradles, or take the dung of horses, and put that upon
the field, and the spring-tails or ground-fleas will no longer
do you any injury.


A Benediction for and against all Enemies.


The cross of Christ be with me ; the cross of Christ over-
comes all water and every fire; the cross of Christ over-
comes all weapons ; the cross of Christ is a perfect sign and
blessing to my soul. May Christ be with me and my body
during all my life, at day and at night. Now I pray, I,
[mame, ] pray God the father for the soul’s sake, and I pray
God the son for the father’s sake, and I pray God the holy
ghost for the Father’s and the Son’s sake, that the holy
corpse of God may bless me against all evil things, words,
and works. ‘Thecross of Christ open unto me future bliss 5
the cross of Christ banish all evil from mes; the cross of
Christ be with me, above me, befere me, behind me, beneath
me, aside of me, and everywhere, and before all my ene-
mies, visible and invisible ; these all flee from me as soon
as they but know or hear. Enoch and Elias, the two pro-
phets, were never imprisoned, nor bound, nor beaten, and
came never out of their power: thus no one of my enemies
must be able to injure or attack me in my body or my life,
in the name of God the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost. Amen.


A Benediction against Enemies, Sickness and Misfortunes.


The blessing which came from heaven, from God the
father, when the true living Son was born, be with me at


53


all times; the blessing which God spoke over the whole hu-
man race, be with me always. The holy cross of God, as
long and as broad, as the one upon which God suffered his
blessed, bitter tortures, bless me to-day and forever. The
three holy nails which were driven through the holy hands
and feet of Jesus Christ, shall bless me to-day and forever.
The bitter crown of thorns which was forced upon the holy
head of Christ, shall bless me to-day and forever. The
spear by which the holy side of Jesus was opened, shall
bless me to-day and forever. The rosy blood protect me
from all my enemies, and from every thing which might be
injurious to my body or soul, or my worldly goods. Bless
me, oh ye five holy wounds, in order that all my enemies
may be driven away and bound, while God has encompass-
ed all Christendom. In this shall assist me God the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Amen.—Thus must I, (N.)
be blessed as well and as valid as the cup and the wine, and
the true, living bread which Jesus gave his desciples on the
evening of Maunday Thursday. All those that hate you,
must be silent before me; their hearts are dead in regard to
me; and their tongues are mute, so that they are not at all
able to inflict the least injury upon me, or my house, or my
premises: And likewise, all those who intend attacking
' and wounding me with their arms and weapons, shall be
defenceless, weak, and conquered before me. In this shall
assist me the holy power of God, which can make all arms
or weapons of no avail. All this in the name of God the
father, the son, and the holy ghost. Amen.


THE TALISMAN.

It is said that any one going out hunting and carrying it
in his game bag, cannot but shoot something worth while,
and bring it home.

An old hermit once found an old, lame huntsman in a
forest, laying beside the road, and weeping. The hermit
_ asked him the cause of his dejection. Ah me, thou man of
God, I am a poor unfortunate being ; I must annually fur-
nish my lord with as many deer, and hares, and partridges,
as a young and healthy huntsman could hunt up, or eize I


36


will be discharged from my office s now I am old and Jame,
besides game is getting scarce, and I cannot follow it up
any longer as I ought to ; and I know not what will become
of me.—Here the old man’s feelings overcome him, and he
could not utter another word. ‘The hermit, upon this, took
out a small piece of paper, upon which he wrote some words
with a pencil, and handing it to the huntsman, he said:
there, old friend, put this in your game-bag whenever you.
go out hunting, and you shall certainly shoot something
worth while, and bring it home too ; yet be careful to shoot
no more than you necessarily need, nor to communicate it
to any one that might misuse it, on account of the high
meaning contained in these words. ‘The hermit then went
on his journey, and after a little the huntsman also arose,
and without thinking of any thing particular, he went into
the woods, and had scarcely advanced a hundred yards,
when he shot as fine a roe-buck as he ever saw in his life.

This huntsman was afterwards and during his whole life-
time lucky in his hunting, so much so that he was consider-
ed one of the best hunters in that whole country. The fol-
lowing is what the hermit wrote on the paper :


Ut nemo in sense tentat, descendere nemo.


we


At precedenti spectatur mantica tergo.
The best argument is to try it.


To prevent any one from Killing Game.
Pronounce the name, as for instance Jacob Wohlgemuth,
shoot whatever you please ; shoot but hair and feathers with
and what you give to poor people. {{{ Amen.


To Compel a Thief to Return Stolen Goods.


Walk out early in the morning, before sunrise, to a Juni-
per tree, and bend it with the left hand towards the rising
sun, while you are saying: Juniper tree, I shall bend and

: 5


Oo”


squeeze thee, until the thief has returned the stolen goods
to the place from which he took them.—Then you must take
a stone and put it on the bush, and under the bush and
the stone vou must place the scull ofa malefactor. + t T
Yet you must be careful in case the thief return the stolen
goods, to unloose the bush and replace the stone where it
was before. : :
_A Charm against Powder and Ball.

_ The heavenly and hely trumpet blow every ball and mis-
fortune away from me. I seek refuge beneath the tree of
life which bears twelvefold fruits. I stand behind the holy
altar of the christian church. I commend myself to the
holy trinity. I, [name, | hide myself beneath the holy corpse
of Jesus Christ. I commend myself unto the wounds of
Jesus Christ, that the hand of no man might be able to sieze
me, or to bind me, or to cut me, or to throw me, or to beat me
or to overcome me in any way whatever, so help me, [N.]

g-= Wheever carries this book with him, is safe from all
his enemies, visible or invisible ; and whoever has this book
with him, cannot die without the holy corpse of Jesus
Christ, nor drownd in any water, nor burn up in any fire,
nor can an unjust sentence be passed upon him. So help


me. +4
UNLUCKY DAYS,
To be found in each Month.
January 12346 1112, July 17 21.


February 1 17 18. August 20 21.
March 14 16. September 10 18.
April 20-17 48. October 6.

May 7 8. November 6 10.
June 17. | December 6 11 15.


Whoever is born upon one of these days, is unfortunate
and suffers from poverty ; and whoever takes sick on one of
these days, seldom recovers health ; and those who engage
or marry on these days, become very poor and miserable.
Neither is it advisable to move from one house to another,


58


nor to travel, nor to bargain, nor to engage in a law-suit,
on one of these days. |

The Signs of the Zodiac must be observed by the course
of the moon, as they are daily given in common almanacs.

If a cow calves in the sign of the Virgin, the calf will
not live one year ; if it happens in the Scorpion, it will die
much sooner; therefore no one should be weened off in
these signs, nor in the sign of the Capricorn or Aquarius,
and they will be in less danger from mortal inflammation.

This is the only piece extracted from a centennial alma-
nac imported from Germany, and there are many who be-
reve init. - ~ :


- HOHMAN.


In conclusion the following Morning Prayer is given, which
is to be spoken before entering upon a Journey. It pro-
tects against all manner of bad luck. as
Oh Jesus of Nazereth, King of the Jews, yea, a King over |

the whole world, protect me, (name, ) during this day and —

night, protect me at all times by thy five holy wounds, that

I may not be siezed and bound. The holy trinity guard

me, that no gun, fire-arm, ball, or lead, shall touch my bo-

dy; and that they shall be weak like the tears and the
bloody sweat of Jesus Christ, in the name of God the fath-

er, the son, and the holy ghost. Amen. 7


APPENDIX.
eo


The following Remedy for Epilepsy was published in the
Lancaster, (Pa.) papers, in the year 1828.


TO SUFFERING HUMANITY.

We ourselves know of many unfortunate beings who are
afflicted with Epilepsy—yet how many more may be in the
country who have perhaps already spent their fortunes in
seeking aid in this disease, without gaining relief. We
have now been informed of a remedy which is said to be
infallible, and which has been adopted by the most distin-
guished physicians in Europe, and has so well stood the test
of repeated trials, that it is now generally applied in Ku-
rope. It directs a bedroom for the sick person to be fitted
up over the cow stable, where the patient must sleep at
night, and should spend the greater part of his time during
the day init. This is easily done by building a regular
room over the stable. Then care is to be taken to leave an
opening in the ceiling of the stable, in such a manner that
the. evaporation from the same can pass into the room,
while, at the same time, the cow may inhale the perspira-
tion of the sick person. In this way the animal will grad-
ually attract the whole disease, and be affected with arthri-
tic attacks, and when the patient has entirely lost them,
the cow will fall dead to the ground. The stable must not
be cleaned during the operation, though fresh straw or hay
_ may be put in; and, of course, the milk of the cow, as long
as she gives any, must be thrown away as useless.

| [Lancaster Lagle.


60


4 Salve to Heal up Wounds.


Take tobacco, green or dry ; if green, a a good handful ; if
dry, 2 ounces; together with this take a good handful of
elder leaves, fry them well in. butter, press it through
a cloth, and you may use it as a salve. ‘This will heal up
a wound in a short time.

Or go to a white oak tree that stands pretty much isola-
ted, and scrape off the rough bark from the eastern side of
the tree, then cut off the thinner bark, break it into small
pieces, and boil it until all the str ength i is drawn out, strain
it through a piece of linnen, and boil it again, until it be-
comes as thick as tar; then take out as much as you need,
and put to it an equal proportion of sheep tallow, rosin and
wax, and work them together until they form a salve. This
salve you put on a piece of linnen, very thinly spread, and —
lay it on the wound, renewing it occasionally till the wound
is healed up.

Or take a handful of parseley, pound it fine, and work it
to a salve with an equal proportion of fresh butter. This
salve prevents mortification and heals very fast.


PEACHES.


The flowers of the peach tree, prepared like dilad opens
the bowels, and is of use in the dropsy. Six or seven peal-
ed kernels of the peach stone, eaten daily, will ease the ©
gravel; they are also said to prevent drunkenness, when
eaten before meals.

Whoever loses his hair, should pound up peach kernels,
mix them with vinegar, and put them on the bald place.

The water distilled from peach flowers, opens the bowels
of infants, and deer their worms.


SWEET OIL.


‘Sweet oil possesses a great many valuable properties, and
it is therefore adviseable for every head of a family to have
it at all times about the house, in order that it may be ap-
plied i in cases of necessity. Here follow some of its chief
virtues :


61


It is a sure remedy, internally as well as externally, in
all cases of inflammation, in men and animals.

Internally, it is given to allay the burning in the stom-
‘ach, caused by strong drink or by purging too severely, or
by poisonous medicines. Even if pure poison has been
swallowed, vomiting may be easily produced by one or two
wine glasses of sweet oil, and thus the poison will be carried
off, provided it has not already been too long in the bowels ;
and after the vomiting, a spoonful of the oil should be taken
every hour until the burning caused by the poison, is en-
tirely allayed.

Whoever is bit by a snake, or by any other poisonous an-
imal, or by a mad dog, and immediately takes warmed
sweet oil, and washes the wound with it, and then puts a
rag, three or four times doubled up, and well soaked with
oil, on the wound every three or four hours, and drinks a
couple of spoonsful of the oil, every four hours, for some


days, will surely find out what peculiar virtues the sweet |


oil possesses in regard to poisons.

In Dysentery, sweet oil is likewise a very useful remedy,
when the stomach has first been cleansed by Rheubarb or
some other suitable purgative, and then a few spoonsful of
sweet oil should be taken every three hours. For this pur-
pose, however, the sweet oil should have been well boiled
and a very little hartshorn be mixed with it. This boiled


sweet oil is also serviceable in all sorts of bowel complaints .


and in colics; or when any one receives internal injury as
from a fall, a few spoonsful of it should be taken every two
hours: for it allays the pain, scatters the coadjulated blood,
prevents all inflammation, and heals gently.

Externally, it is applicable in all manner of swellings ;
it softens, allays the pain, and prevents inflammation.


Sweet oil and white lead ground together, makes a very.


good salve, which is applicable in burns or scalds. This
salve is also excellent against infection from poisonous
weeds or waters, if it is put on the infected part as soon as
it is noticed.

If sweet oil is put in a large glass, so as to fill it about
one half full, and the glass is then filled up with the flowers
of the St. Johnswort, and well covered and placed in the

6


62


sun for about four weeks, the-oil proves then, when distill-
ed, such a valuable remedy for all fresh wounds in men and
animals, that no one can imagine its medicinal powers who
has not tried it. “This should at all times be found in a well
conducted household. In a similar manner, an oil may be
made of white lilies, which is likewise very useful to soften
hardened swellings and burns, and to cure the sore breasts
of women. :


CURE FOR DROPSY.


Drepsy is a disease derived from a cold humidity, which —
passes through the different limbs to such a degree that it
either swells the whole or a portion of them. The usual
symptoms and precursers of every case of dropsy, are the |
swelling of the feet and thighs, and then of the face; be-
sides this the change of the natural colour of the flesh into
a dull white, with great thirst, loss of appetite, costiveness, —
sweating, throwing up of slimy substances, but little urine,
laziness and aversion to exercise.

Physicians know three different kinds of dropsy, which —
they name:

1. Anasarca, when the water penetrates between the
skin and the flesh over the whole body, and all the limbs,
and even about the face, and swells them.

2. Ascites, when the belly and thighs swell, while the
upper extremities dry up. | ;

3. Tympanites, caused rather by wind than water. The
belly swells up very hard, the navel is forced out very far,
and the other members fall away. ~The belly becomes so
much inflated, that knocking against it causes a sound like
that of a large drum, and from this circumstance its name
is derived. fis

The chief thing in curing dropsy, rests upon three points,
namely: <
1. To reduce the hardness of the swelling which may be
in the bowels or other parts.

2. To endeavor to scatter the humours, ‘

3. To endeavor to pass them off either through the stool

or through the urine.


63


The best cure therefore must chiefly consist.in this: To
avoid as much as possible all drinking, and use only dry
vituals ; to take moderate exercise, and to sweat and purge
the body considerably. < |

If any one feels symptoms of dropsy, or while it is yet
in its first stages, let him make free use of the sugar of the
herb called Fumatory, as this purifies the blood ; and the
Euphrasy sugar to open the bowels.


A CURE FOR DROPSY.—(Suaid to be Infallible. )


Take a jug of stone or earthen ware, and put four quarts
of strong healthy cider into its take two handsful of parse-
ly roots and tops, cut it fine; a handful of scraped horse-
raddish, two table-spoonsful of bruised mustard seed, half
an ounce of squills, and half an ounce of juniper berries 5


ae put all these in the jug, and place it near the fire for 24


hours, so as to keep the cider warm, and shake it up often $
then strain it through a cloth and keep it for use.

To a grown person give half a wine glass full three times
a day, on an empty stomach. But if necessary you may
increase the dose, although it must decrease again as soon
as the water is carried off; and, as stated before, use dry
vituals and exercise gently. |

This remedy has cured a great many persons, and among
others a woman of 70 years of age, who had the dropsy so
badly, that she was afraid to get out of bed,. for fear her
skin might burst, and whom it was thought could not live
but a few days. She used this remedy according to the
directions given, and in less than a week the water had
passed off her, the swelling of her stomach fell, and in a
few weeks afterwards she again enjoyed perfect health.


Or: Drink for a few days very strong Bohea tea, and eat
the leaves of it. This simple means is said to have carried
away the water from some persons in three or four days,
and freed them from the swelling, although the disease had
reached the highest pitch. |


Or: Take three spoonsful of rape seed, and half an nines
of clean gum myrrh, put these together in a quart of good


64


old wine, and let it stand over night in the room, keeping
it well covered. Aged persons are to take 2 spoonsful of
this an hour after supper, and the same before going to bed 3
younger persons must diminish the quantity according to
their age, and continue the use of it as long as necessary.


Or: Take young branches of spruce pine, cut them into
small pieces, pour water on them and let them boil a while,
then pour it into a large tub, take off your clothes, and sit
down over it, covering yourself and the tub with a sheet or
blanket, to prevent the vapour from escaping. _ When the
water begins to cool, let some one put in hot bricks ; and


when you have thus been sweating for a while, wrap the —


sheet or blanket close around you and go to bed with it. A
repetition of this for several days will free the system from
all water. |


The following Valuable Recipes, not in the original


work of Hohman, are added by the publishers. _


CURE FOR DROPSY. |


°% FC


Take of the broom-corn seed, well powdered and sifted, one


drachm. Let it steep twelve hours in a wine glass and a
half of good rich wine, and take it in the morning fasting,
having first shaken it so that the whole may be swallowed.
Let the patient walk after it, af able, or let him use what ex-
ercise he can without fatigue, for an hour and a half; after
which let him take 2 oz. of olive oils and not eat or drink


any thing in less that half an hour afterwards. Let this be .


repeated every day, or once in three days, and neé oftener, —


till a cure is effected ; and do not let biood, or use any other
remedy during the course. |

Nothing can be more gentle and safe than the operation of
this remedy. Jf the dropsy ts in the body, wt discharges it by
urine, without any inconvenience: if it is between the skin
and flesh, if causes blisters to rise on the legs, by which it
will run off; but this does not happen to more than one in
thirty: and in this case no plasters must be used, but apply
red cabbage leaves. It cures dropsy in pregnant women,


65


without injury to the mother or child. It also alleviates
asthma, consumption, and disorders of the liver.


REMEDY FOR THE LOCK JAW.


We are informed by a friend that a sure preventive against
this terrible disease, is, to take some soft soap, and mix it
with a sufficient quantity of pulverized chalk, so as to make
it of the consistency of buckwheat batter; keep the chalk
moistened with a fresh supply of soap until the wound begins
to discharge, and the patient finds relief. Our friend stated
to us that explicit confidence may be placed in what he says,
that he has known several cases where this remedy has been
— successfully applied. So simple and so valuable a remedy,
within the reach of every person, ought to be generally known.

[N. ¥. Evening Post.


FOR THE STING OF A WASP OR BEE.
4 Liverpool paper states as follows :—*< A few days ago


happening to be in the country, we witnessed the efficacy of


the remedy for the sting of a wasp mentioned in one of our
late papers. A little boy was stung severely and was in
great torture, until an onion was applied to the part affected,
when the cure was instantaneous. This important and sim-
ple remedy cannot be too generally known, and we pledge
ourselves to the fact above stated.?’


HEN GD IE OX ¢:)


TO THE


Arts & Remedies contained in this Book.


Prerace, to the first edition of this little book,
TEstimonia.ts, of cures performed by the author,
Posrscrirr AND Prayer, by the author.


ARTS AND REMEDIES.


A good remedy for hysterics,

Another remedy for hysterics,

A certain remedy to stop bleeding,

A remedy to prevent falling away,

Another remedy to be applied when any one is sick,
A good remedy for worms,

A good remedy against slander,

A good remedy for the fever,

A good remedy for the colic,

To attach a dog to a person,

To make a wand for searching for iron or water,
A very good remedy for palpitation of the heart,
A precaution against injuries, |

How to obtain things desired,

A sure way of catching fish,

A safe remedy for various ulcers, &c.

A good semedy for mortification and inflammation,
To prevent malicious persons from doing injury,


68


To destroy bots or worms in horses,

To cure the pollevil in horses,

A good remedy for wounds and, burns,
A. good remedy for the wild -fire,

To stop pains or smarting i in a wound,
To destroy warts,

To banish the hooping cough,

Another remedy for hooping ‘cough,

A good remedy to stop bleeding,

To banish convulsive fevers,

A good remedy for the tooth-ache,

Gow to banish the fever,

How to walk and step securely in all cases,
A very good remedy for the colic,

A very good plaster,

To make a good eye water,

Remedy for the white swelling,

Remedy for epilepsy,

Remedy for burns,

To stop bleeding,

. Remedy to relieve pain,

Remedy for the tooth-ache,

To remove bruises and pains,

A remarkable passage from the book Albertus Magnus,
Another passage from the same,

To cure fits or convulsions,

Cure for the head-ache,

To mend broken glass,

To make cattle return to the same place,


~~ Another method of making cattle return,


To prevent the hessian fly from injuring wheat,

To prevent cherries from ripening before Martinmas,

‘Stinging nettle—good for banishing fear and fancies,
and to cause fish to collect, —

Heliotrope, a means to preva calumniation,

- 'To heal a sore mouth,

Swallow-wort, its properties,

A good remedy for comsumpiny ,

For the hollow horn, — oben é

-'To destroy the wheal in the eye, 4


69


To make hens lay many eggs,

Words to be spoken while making divinatory wands,
How to destroy a tape worm,

A good remedy for the bots in horses,

How to cure a burn,

To cure the bite of a snake,

Security against mad dogs,

To remove pain and heal wounds with three switches,
- Remedy for fever, worms, and the colic,

_ How to cure weakness of the limbs,

Another remedy for weakness,

A good method of destroying rats and mice,

To make horses that refuse their feed to eat again,
To cure any excressence or wen on a horse,

How to prepare a good eye water,

How to cause thieves to stand still,

To cure the sweeney in horses,

How to make molasses,

To make good beer,

Cure for the Epilepsy,

Another way to make cattle return home,

A very good remedy to cure sores,


A good cure for weunds,


-~ ‘To make oil out of paper, good for sore eyes,
_ Yo destroy crab-lice,

‘To prevent the worst kind of paper from blotting,
A very good remedy for the gravel,


A good remedy for those who cannot keep their water, |


To destroy field-mice and moles,
To remove a wen during the crescent moon,
To remove a scum or skin from the eye,
For deafness, buzzing in the ear, &c.
To cause children to cut their teeth without pain,
For vomiting and diarrhea,
To heal burns,
A very good cure for weakness of the limbs, &c.
For dysentery and diarrhea,
Cure'for the tooth-ache,
Advise to pregnant women,
_ Cure for the bite of a mad dog, —


10


A very good means to increase the growth of wool on
sheep, and to prevent disease among them,

A well-tried plaster to remove mortification,

A good remedy for the poll-evil in horses,

For the scurvy and sore throat, |

A very good plaster,

To stop bleeding,

Another way to stop bleeding, and to heal wounds,

For gaining a lawful suit,

For the swelling of cattle,

An easy method of catching fish,

A very good and safe remedy for rheumatism,

A good way to destroy worms in bee-hives,


For making a paste to prevent gun barrels from rusting, 34


To make a wick which is never consumed,

A morning prayer, before entering upon a journey,

A safe and approved means to be applied in time of
fire and pestilence, |

To prevent conflagration,


To prevent witches from bewitching cattle, and a 8


gainst bad men and evil spirits, —


To prevent bad people from getting among the cattle, — 37


To extinguish fire without water,
Another method of stopping fire,
How to fasten or spell-bind any thing,
Another way to spell-bind, —
A benediction to prevent fire, ;
How to relieve persons or animals that are bewitched,
To protect houses & premises against sickness & theft,
Against mishaps and dangers in the house,
A direction for a gipsy sentence, &c.
Against evil spirits and all manner of witchcraft,
_ Against swellings, 7 :
Against adversaries, &c. :
Against danger and death, =
How to treat a cow after the milk is taken from her,
Another method of treating a sick cow,
Against fevers,
To spell-bind a thief, =—
Another way to spell-bind thieves,


ag ‘ gid.


Ge To effect the same in less time,.
_ To release spell-bound persons,
To compel a thief to return stolen goods,
A benediction for all purposes,
To win every game you engage in at cards,
Against burns,
Another remedy for burns,
To protect cattle against witchcraft,
How to tie up and heal wounds,
To take the pain out of fresh’ wounds,
benediction against worms, |
gainst every evil influence,
To retain the right in a court of justice,
o stop bleeding at any time,
nother way to stop bleeding,
nother similar prescription,
Another still more certain way, —
A sign to keep back men and animals,
Protection to house and hearth,
A charm, to be carried about the person,
0 Garin enemies, robbers, and murderers,
Protection against weapons,
_ A charm against fire-arms,
_ Another for the same,
_ A charm against shooting, &c.
To charm guns and other arms,
To prevent being cheated, charmed, or bewitched,
- Another to effect the same,
_ Another similar direction,
- Another similar direction,
“Another one like it,
oA very safe and reliable charm,
_ Another one like it,
A very effective charm,
A good charm against thieves,
How to recover stolen goods,
A well-tried charm,
_ Another against fire-arms,
a _Acharm to gain advantage over stronger persons,
To destroy spring-tails or ground fleas,


peat


oC it


A benediction for and deatoek ah enemies,


- Another against sickness and thialortages,


i The Talisman,


event any one from killing game, _
Fo compel a thief to return stolen goods,
A charm against powder and ball,
Unlucky days, :
Concluding prayer,

APPENDIX. .


A certain cure for elilepsy, ~~


A salve to heal up wounds, — ae se


Peaches, their medical Binet ace


ou the Jropsy, :
ure for the Dropsy, said to be infallible


“Apprriowat,—Cure for Dropsy, effectual,
Remedy for the Lock Jaw,
For the sting of a wasp or bee, —
