1k. CAMBRIDGE 


* +»: Printed by Fobn - 
= — theVniveritieo 


— — — 
CY 82 - U 

—_— 

* = 


7177 A IN 2 
Wire >RAFT: —— 
. EEE | 
n 


operation . 
1 a0 — — 74 
2 Faber of ede der r 


minable, 
laters, and all arts ſhall haue their 
— ep — 1 


att, Printer to 
159 


p - £ # 
o - — 
- ; 9 l 
— , + — P - , - A 
1 * - — 
* 9 * 4 % — 
—_ - ue = 
* . . .,- 
= — — 0 K © o 
p " 2 * — = - , * 
- - 2 — _ 
N 2 4, L * * — 4 - * 
- _ * =P ” 4 4 — 
* 
* N * — & 
a- - — f a 12 # 
* . —* ww * 
- . 
5 2 _ , - 
- 
— v >< — 2 : © G © " 
% = 
% © 
. 
* k 3 , A. 
© % = PREY "4 * 9 ” 
| Wt 4 _— - a " — — vo Po 
% - 4 - 
J . hs. "4 
- PR" ” ” = - 
. - 4 
= = m - — . 
_- 0 4 be 1 
of = — * - — — ® 
_ : o—- © = * 
* _ 
-_ * - 
© : ” K — p 1 
— Py - 
-- a — " < * . _—_— ” : 
- . — = - 
- * * . 
mung d — ” - - ” , -® * 
N a = : - ” . 
= ® 4, wy - , 
hy — * E - 4 - - . 
- * wy py ” . 
ww k - * — -< 
" * 2 - — - wx 
C " n 
© # — - w e — 
- * __ * 7 1 - - 2 ” - 
% N — " 
* "4 — — * * = d - m ” * 
— * = 
: 9 1 — - i 
-- * 1 > = - . 
— - " — 5 * 
- * ” — * 
„ LEY = 2 _ * 
8 — ©” — -- * 
- _ * 
— — 6 . 
— - 2 
. - © 
= a * 
98 9 — — 
— - * — 4 . 
+ v ” -- w<4 - 1 
5 8 0 N 
— — ao * — 
© , — _— '< [5] no 9 > : ” 
— . — * — — 2 uh - > 
* 1 - hes. = _ * 1 
FP * = - - 
* — 8 — By , * 
* - 4 = 7 2 bl . ” 
2 A, * d = : 2 122 
— » þ . _ 4 N - _ : . 
- . — I 8 * 
- * * of * — * : 
> AY 4 — * ” - . - ; 
— 9 08 — 0 * 
7 
1 — =_— w S * * * 9 . 
-. uf =- 
| 1— — " A x > © _ - 9 
r — 832 2 
- * — — 
* 7 . _- - — 
. * 
= 


= — 
3 Re eas. £Alvtvwcc., ..+. _—_ = P * 
b —  —— — OD.” Br Co oe —— ] 


Hino 
15 0 
-! 4480\ 1 hat 277 . 2 ee ons 


10 TIE RI 


HON OV RABL En 


1154 Aung cn) 
Robert" Dauer, Ent of . * 


EW E, vicount oſ Here ſond and Bouzchier, Lord Ferrers © 
of Chartley, Bottrchiet'#nd Eovairic, Maſter of the 
Queenes Maieſties Hotfe, and Knight ofthe moſt 
Honourable order of the Sar. H. H. wiſheth 
— — — from God the Fu ber by 
1 al vertues, and con- 
: — the Goſpell 


; tothe ende. 


HE Scriptures of God Honourable) in ſundrie 
places,doe moſt 3 
ſpirituall ki es in this world, which haue conti - 

Tis 7 nual hatt ed & bloody wars, without hope of truce for 

XN] 0 euer The Lord and king of the one, is our Lord leſus, 
| : of the other, is Sathan. Again, 

(clea þ caught, that all men luing 

rerue ſubiects of the one, 


f 
S2 # 
F % >, 

* 


or _ vnto — 


they may indifferenthe 
uer approch _ 2 9255 
dece iued: fort 
. | Da in ne mouth en e 
in them lyeth, the kingdome Cizie and batter downe the holdes » fc 
of Sathan, muſt be numbred wich t 4. an enemies of our Lord Chriſt, 
when the warrefare ſhalbe ended. T of Chriſt haue euer beene 
many, ſome open, cruell, foes without: ſubtill, cloſe conſpirators with- 
in the houſe of God, moſt vnde rminers of the Citie of God, if 


they be not diſcoucred, Inthis , albeir Sathan haue many 
Champions, and artes, mille artes, mille nocendi modes: there is no 
arte more effeuall and dreadful! immy , then thoſe his wic- 
ked facukies in Wirchcrafte, I baue indeauoured (right Honourable) 


in this (mall Treatiſe, according to my poore ſtrength , to ſhewe the 
A. 3. princi- 


— 


1 5 THR BPISTLE DEDICATORIE, 
. . A 4 ————— © r 
. 22 Cl aint all the patrones of all ſuch vile 
* 4 onely _ me,bur othe . — — 
| .* be willing allo, to — deliems and of Sathans in- 
ventions. Nobilitie without and vertueſas your Honour well know 
f as a learned man but 1 Mosa without bones 
3 er e 


7 0 . Tow Lets tories 
| W 22 
Hen. Holland, ; 


— - 


„ 18 _ 


TO THE CHRISTIE E 


AN READ E R. GRACE, 
MERCIE AND PEACE BE 
multiplied in Ieſus Chriſt, 


.. HE l, labouring *% 77 h he dis | 8 
8 ae , —— > *3,CortoF; 
Ja of the Gofpel, ſheweth ov that a man muſt be, as | 
Aer ; befare he doe yeelde fins "Pat, 


thereby 


rere and ſound obedience wnto { hriſt. Andcerten 


I 


—— 
wminde, and ſundrie fearefull ſiuuos inlife. In this queſtion of Witch= 


ame haue preferred the wicked folly of ma, the holy wiſdom 
| _ 6. —— to credit —— " — Diſcouery. ic 
of Cornelius Agrippa, Iohn Wyenus, Nero, Iu- bocł p.478. 
lan and ſuch like: Their experience, to ſay no more, was 
moſt wicked and deteſtable. Let vs then humble our ſelues 
[dome of God, and ſee what direttian wee haue in this con- 


Deut 18.10, 1 1 


the Apaſtle comprehendet 

xia,Wuchcraft? Secondly examples of the 
prattitioners of this en vnto vi, as the in- 
chaunters of Egypt, the Wuch of © Endor, the witches of Perſſa, Si- * Exod.17, 


mon Magus of Samaria, Elymas* the ſorcererat P , the Pytho- m. 
wiſh tar 7 pp Sc. Ti Gf med the — = _— 
laves againſt thus ſinne, as may be ſeene, Exod. 22.18, Lev. 20. 27. f Add. 13 6. 
Deut. 1 8, 10, 1 1, For this is a Maxime in Law, as Danæus ſaith,and * Ad. 16. 16. 
the lawyers graunt it ,De ysrebus quz non ſunt, leges non promul- Dialog. c. 2. 
gantur, There are no lawes made of — haue no being: 7.3% 
If this be true of the lawes of men, hom much more of the bleſſed Lawes 
of God, wherein we muſt not imagine 4 *. or ſuperfiuitie; and there- 

3. fore 


. 


5 


| | 
| To the Chriſtian Reader. | 
De ſuperſtiof, fore Hemingius ſaith, Sapientiſsimus Deus non poteſt leges ferre, 
2 de rebus quæ vel non ſunt, vel eſſe non poſſunt: The mofte wife 
God can not geue lawes of things which haue no beeingot can 
haue no becing. ¶ Therefore [conclude that witchcraft is @ finne, & 
fili hie works of the fleſh,(as Paul peakgth) and i here for an abomina- 
lohn. 3. 8. ble worte of thedevill, a; Tohn® ſaith and conſequently, not ſo lightly 
( it 15 made of ſome)to be regarded. The adverſaries here are glad to 

erake theſelnes to this firſt refuge: Witchcraft is burxcgoaent 
poiſening arte, practiſed by humane induftrie, whefeuntd: a 
communicates noreall confetence,or.communicarton. It 

_—_— out of the booke of God, a arnſt this boid il 


2577 
Pharaos convmrers bn the court Fegipr, & Nebne e T me 
in Babylon, but coozemers ani poiſeners? poiſeners of allother haut no 


place nor free acceſſe yntoprintes, and coc rt are moſt vnfft to be 
their counſellers, ſo as al theſe Egiptian and Babulontan witches = 
as lerome writeth: Habui Beem omnemq; Chaldzam i 
HR cantatorum,&c. ſtudium, & c. Danielis Prophetæ robaty 
N qui ad eorum conſilia, cuncta reges Babilonios feciſſe com 
rat: The kings of Babilon,8&c.(laith he) did all things after the ad- 
uiſe and councely : inchanters, Agame,what was the Pygho- 
miſt at Phulippi ano ſhee a rrall conference with Sathan?for ſhe gor 
her maſter great aduamtage wither continuall) aliſe of drowiation? 
7 To be ſhort, I can not ſee l ut hee that can doe the greater, may doerbe 
c mos lee Non mirumeſt (ſab P. r) ſi exteriores hominum ocu- 
ky King. 42.82. los perſtringat, cum antea oceupauit oculos mentis. It is no mar- 
Eph. a. 2. ueile, that he hold faſt ſhut the eyes of the body,which fſoblindeth Y 
Angelus pol. the eyes ofthe niinde; He that canworke ſo mightely by ſiggeſtion "on. 
pan. cpiſt. p. fh children of d\ſobedzence may alſo haue both areal alls 1b, e. 
1088 ap. Nea. conference with the, Leſtly, met muſt not ſo fondly conſcma dabolicull 
ma. t. I. 11. c. 1. 8 naturallma tobe, 4 o many learned men in al ages bane cleare- 
Czlius Rho- {y diſtinguiſh Thu ſrfe 2 vnc ouered. they ſhelter them 
dignuus. I 9. c. ſelues vnder aſecomdrefage which is th: The witches of our time 
2 can work at no hand, fo asthe witches mentoned in the Seriprure ! 
— „ haue done. Apainſt ibu concluſion, we may reaſon onthis manner, If 


Diſcov. p. 473+ 


Act. 16. f 6. 


Diſcov. p. 317. 

x 60, our Muc hes, ( vniurert, &c. can not work the libe as Tannes & Tambres 

162, did, the witch of Ender &c. the defect muſt be eyther in Sathan, or the 

163. wich, or bot.: firſt for Sat han, bee wants at t is day, neither will _ 
t1 might, 


. 


To the Chriſtian Reader. 


ben ee Furſt vo will, for he ſeerlus ki will not laſt 
therefore now towards the end of the werld, he is, and will ke 
— more — rc. as a all the wonders that - 
wer he can, to blinde infidels, 2. Theſ. 2.9. n it mere 
poſſible, the very eloct, as our Saniour bath forewarnedvs, Secomily, uo 
frrength: he is elder mideede but not weaker. The Co, the princes, d E., 1j. 
gouernourt of this world, with whome we vreſtle, max not weaker ume . 
doe ver the red dragan wol ſ not ceaſe to make warrewith the Sat. 
2 the world endureth, eAgaine, he is rat her morewiſe in exper 
of all —— canſes, and therefore more 12 in 
1 then euer he hath beene. And wherefore then Sat ban for bis 
part, will not, or cannot prattiſe thoſe former artet, it is impoſſible tobe 
prooned, and doe not we know,that Sat han bath rather they 
ſhortened the number of his artes? for we read and onderſtandthat be- See Bodin. de 
fore and ſince the Goſpel was publiſhed, he hath had great varietie in Dzmonoani. 
all * * of falſe arte N prattiſeg of his ſciences. Secondly, fur nia. J. 2. c. 1. A. 
t hewitch, Mean or Woman, I would learne what wants; Cicero dedi- 
* pong pralge day, mort then in former times, that by Sathans vicar ih. 
help, they can not produce the hke lying waonders, I am ſure the 
alſointhe north, and the repr = tomardes . wax 
worſe and worſe, and therefore * any wiſe e Matth. T3. 43. 
more fitte for thi frame, for the more vncleane.* 4, the more apt Diſcov.rz. 
i he for Sathans ſernice, But they obie N book. p. 305. 
day, ſuch knowledge in naturall cauſes as Iannes and Iambreg P. 
had, &c. / anſwer, that yarn... not. character, figures, 
wordes 4, Cr. ſe doet „ + Fra e, to make 
1 . ons woonders, vnleſſe it be for 2 — end, to mY 
oo 5 deluſions, as ſundrie Satbamcall _— m Chal. 
de and Egipt bane done. eAndin very truth there are in this age, as 
akin beanledes of all tongues, Philoſaphie, liberall artes, Cc. ( as the 
learned know) fince the Goſpel was preached, as ener na in any age 
in Chrifterd»me. Wherefore if there was by meanes of natwr all 
knowledge, and humane i 4 Sathanicall operation in witch 
craft in elder times / ſay, there may 1he the like at this day and wnto the 


worldrs end. Thelaſt;and moſt — refuge is this. Our witches, —— to , 


are not once mẽtioned in Scripture: out 


ſtrigæ, lamiæ, our witches 
A. 4 old 


— 


- , —_ wr 
* * * l | 


Tothe Chriſtian Reader. 

P. ro. old woman, &c, you ſhall not teade in the Bible of any ſuch Wit- 
ches. Thic if if they could haue mon _ = worde mig ht not 
E-21 fight — them, they e for the 
weapons of God are ſe mg bie. to c — wy 3 no arte 

mor power of Sat han, or inuention of mam, may nichſtand the but where 

they ſtrike, downe muſt all high proude N 2 N reaſon of may, 

Co. to. 5, Sathan * bimſelfe and al his kimgdome. the Scripture giueth vs 


6. no ſuch hiſtoricall relations of the witches of our time: get are they 
23: LW. mentioned there bothingenerall and — general, where 


ve OO hs 


rE(.47.2.%21. 
28 all the ſinnes of idalatrie and 
| 9 8 where the like ſinnes are named, Cicerod: difpmreth in 2 
4 Divination, of the being of the old Auguries —— alldrumations 


of his time:where after he bath diſtinguiſhed them — rv 
turall, andartificiall: (Vuto the — 1 belong all thoſe drvinations 
whichwe may call meere diabolicall,as comin ations and al the prathiſe 
of Pythoniſtes, which haue an expreſſe league und confederarie with 
Sathan: vnto the artificial appertaine all thoſe artes which th 
| hee) haue learned by long obſeruation, Aſtralogie, Palmiſtrie, and ſuch |. 
| like: theſe we ſay are mixt diabolicall, andbelong vnto the ſecret roue- 


nant and confederacie, which Sathan hath with witches.) Inthe ende 
he concludeth on this mawner : uid eſt igitur cur dubitandum fir, 


| De Pivin. Lr. quin ſint ea quæ ui veriſſima, ſi ratio mecum facit, ſi even- 
ta, ſi inationes, fi græci ſi barbati, fi maiores etiam noſtri, fi 
deniqʒ — ſummiphiloſophi, ſi poetæ, fi 
9 ſapientiſſumi viti, qui tes public as conſtituerunt, qui vtbes condide- 
ſ runt?an dum beſtię loquantur mus,hominum conſentiente 
| authoritate contenti non ſumus? If this — could confirme by 
ſuch reaſons this concluſion, how much more boldly may wee doe the 
| ſame, hauing not ottely all theſe his arguments with vs: 1s: but affe the 


oy Oracles s, 2 the 


1 


od, — , the lawes, the example 

ab in Gods worde, Said againſt theſe ſinner, which the 

855 cripture bath recorded for . Wherefore I conclude with 

Com.in Deut. Maſter Calvine, Certe ſactilega eſſet Audacia negare ynquamin 

18, vſu fuiſſe artes magicas, quia hoc modo Deus incogitantiæ argue- 
retur, ac ſi legem tuliſſet de rebus quæ nullæ ſunt. Surely it were 
— boldnes, to denie that the antes of magic ke haue euer 

cene practiſed, for ſo Godmight be argued to want judgement, | 
as if he had giuen a Lay of things which haue no beeing. Nowe 


l 0 
io 


Ts the Chillin feadee; 


4 concerning this treatiſe which here Jeffer thee (good Roa. 
— cannot teach thee, as I mo 


— and roanoide the 
Sathanicall deluſions of witcheraft aft: ſo 2 endo ſe 
cret ——— yet that — — which] 
oor only ur hr ſoener I hans writtes, — 2 
ble ſubmiſſion, I offer it to the Cenſure wire and men of all the godly 
. wry 2 8 [ wai the NE Af 
conrſe, for t written to any purpoſe any thing , which 

light in t ument, in the enghſh tongue,maſter Geo 
dez e whom we — in the Lords. 
nc aſe z 


wooned nc 1 the continuall trafficke — 
795 For hke as tbe old beat hen 

2 Tull ſaeth) 

aut ab Hammone, aut à Dodona 


ry maiorib. ſem 
teſt affaires ſought alwaies after 
mom affaires bid them Common Te 2 
ſtiant, they baue ther 2 baſe witc 


— that ss, in their grea- Lib.i. 
e maſter witches: andm com- 
likewiſe ou block:ſh Chri- 

„ and their maſter contin 


rer, vnto oem they goe in all their neede, ſome mentie, ſome 
- thirtie, ſome wet, au wr e lawion able, ſuch is i bei 
brutiſh 1gnoranee, rang Keane for them ſo to doe, 
— — [dee here alſo — al thoſe, whom — 
eee Te, hoes 


to vncouer them. The wither o F Chrift muſt beth in dels and 
Conner ſation oppeſe themſelnes vnto | the mini ers of Antichriſt . The 
drftrine of the — jw at contrarie (we knovy) 
vnto all the ef paperee: ander ſation alſo be vnto 
2 —_ — 
account 
profeſſion o WT: e ſcrences: and of waſh them 
. them att +50. x crys by theſe rk wha as 
lveſter the 2. Benedictus the 8, Geegorie the ſeventh, loan, 20,21. 4 
— the 6. if we may ea dar _ 
_ Our enimies then worſhipping t as © and bearing 
: theſe brandes of ſorcery, *voutchcraft , idolatrie, and of 
ther handes and forebeads : let vs with all might aveide them, for 
3. 2. wit bout 


25 7 


aut delphis oraculum, De Divina, 


ir ovone Platima and others, p.65. 


ie in Rev. 21.8. 


--- - - 
— — — — 


— 


To che Chtiſtian teadet. * 
WT withautntpentover the hath drink 
| . \ ofthe wine of 5 of God, which is into the 
of his 
| 


_ 


wrath, and ſhall bee tormented in fire 
cal! abrimſtonewbich is the ſecond death. Ac- 
| cept what ¶ haus written (good reader) or 
: TY OS. of ih axrteſe gine in free paſſage 
> v no others. \ 2 
©... I. FAREWEL. 


Thine in Chriſt Ieſus. 
. HENRT HOLLAND. 


"= * 1 F. 4 Ti - ' . > 
* - * = 
CLIN EULER ET Io 
: 1 ” * % 1 : 


. " = 4 
mhere 6s, 13 .# —X . 
1 


Ofibe witches mentianedin Seripture 


monſtrations , bow they bad con fedlerac wi 
eren they GE — eee 


1 #- #$ 
S: Yall 


; — rt 


VER 
74 

60 
1 on co 
20 e rite 


/ Coyere, oe een 

of wie ted men, = 

1 imagin 
is 

weh ſtrou 22 8 


many bookes, bu Ak 
vainely and wicke — 2 det 


theScrip ware er! 11 


moſſ ea ie th 
men, which have written pai ofch 

without difference era ov and 4 22 7 5 
vile manner, Theit beſß prog Pom their ou. 
moſt wicked e t lore wiſc men (ade oo be- 
lecue them. 
Ahſßedenon, SurelyTh 
wadedrhit the com 
euill, or haue ah 
din b & others del 
7 victh deuilifh artes to attcine that bert purpoſeth, & cap L.cap Js 

2, 


pere 


Abi leb not my ſelſe be anie way 
fi forte of © our a bes worke 


K with him , for ſo I remember Bol 6 Dams: 
tobeone that witcingly & willing · nomania. lib. 


«Dif .p.110. 


e.Tim.3.16, 
17. 


>. Theſ. 2. 


" 


A mh 6 ATISE. AGAINST. 


no they baue no ſuch artes, alacks 
15 — c but raiber poore ſeduced ſoules. 
n you haue read ouer ſome of their 
pretely bemone our old witches? true 
— mani of the common —— 4 beleeue well) are not right 
witches indeed, noewithftandin vi (al guiltie of other mott 
Wer, and moſt worthie of d 
ſemen. As bot other ſinnes, as cooſnage, 1 
ſuch like, I will not couer them, our witches are full of ſuch pra- 
Riſes, bur chat theſe ſeely women, haue anie artes to coniure the 
deuill, or to e him intoa bone (as they ſay) to raiſerem- 
peſts, to kill and ma e We, 1 Ithinke all cheſe are bur yaine ſur- 
miſes oferedulous and fool ple, 
Theoph, Satan is full 2 and fillech the mindes, eles, 
and cares of ſuch as the Lorde bath iuſtbe given over vnto his 
achen forthe contempt ofthe ttuch to beleeue lies, he is a flying 
Abd not ſo narrowly incloſed, albeit hee perfwadethhig 
ſuch vaine ae leaſt (wanting lis preſence) they 
Wand bee diſcouraged in his ſeruice. But let vs come vnto the 
purpoſe, wt ork reve are, and may be ſuch Sathanicall 
witches, which Wr wonders by the help and mi- 
niltrie. of Satan. 
Aalen. Thndwe n riot \ bete to turne mee in this con- 
rroderfie, for they oy the ſcripture bath not anſwered this que- 
ſtion amet no ſeriptore ag 4inſt aur v vic hes or which can diſco- 


2 . 

oph, Ifibe ſeriptire will not ſuffice andſerue vs for this 

pil, tet Vs impute pute that to e not to the want 
tmoſt perfect booke « of God, which is ſaid to be ſo ſufficient 
thatit eee Gode abſolute, And hath not the 
Scripture propheſied of the chaunge of Empyres, ofthe variable 
Rate ofthe Church before and after Chriſtes inc incarnation, of An- 
tichriſt his comming, his miracles, & c. And doe we not finde all 
thoſe diuine and propheticall ek Gong true? Shall wee then i- 
magine that there are ſome, ſinnes crept into the worlde which 


the Lord did not foreſee, or hath not ſore warned vs of no, no, 


let tan turne his coate as often as hee liſt, yet will that bleſſed 


worde beyraye him and his practiſes. The Apofile telleth — 


ANC a 
wo © * * AI COB a Key vie. — —— — 


WITCH CRAFT. 
that what ſoemer is written is written 4 Lord ther · Rn. 1j 4. 
fore hauing ſo manifeſtly taught vs and is will, & what | 
is neceſlarie to bee knowen in this argument, let vs bee content 
with his word, and ſuffer our ſelues to be taught by it. ' 
Myſo-demon, I remember one learned manflaith ſo: And pnanweu in 
ſurely it behooueth ysChriſtians to reſt our ſelues ypon the words Dialog, 
of Chriſt : but Ithinke, I heophilus, thou canſt not finde tbiſ 
ſpoken of mall the g new Teſtament, -  ©qDiſprx 
Theoph, Yearruely: for it is numbred among thoſe workes 
ofthefleſh, which (without repentance ) ſeclude vs from the 
kingdome of heauen, Gal.5.20. vpon which place h Ierome ſaich þ terom. com. 
thus: Ne forfitan veneficia, ifice artet non viderentur in No. in Gal. j. 
vo probuhut e teſt amento. ipſe quog, int er carnis ojera numerantur : 
Leaſt pet adventure witchcraft, and other magicallartes (mentio- 
ned in the olde Teſtament) ſhould not ſeeme to be forbidden in the 
N Teltament,they are alſo counted among the workes of the 
e 
Miſe demon, But our witches are properly thoſe whom the 
Poets call ſage, Theſſale, Mage, Lamia :I ſay this then, and that 
boldly. chat theſe 5 words are not once found, neither in the New i Diſpraf, 
nor Olde Teſtament - 1 pray you ſne me any of them ifyou can. 
Theo. The ſcripture hath no ſuch words inthe original tongue 
for it is Hebrew & Grecke, and theſe words are poeticall Latine 
wordes. Againe one thing may haue _ diuersi 
names. Sathan him ſelfe is ſometime calleda kh god, ſometimes a & 2 c. 4 
Prince, ſo netimes an Angel, a gouemour, a dragon, a ſerpent, &c. epheſ. a. a. 
and yet is be in vetie trueth. but a wickedlying ſpirite, the execu- ng. 
tioner of Gods iuſtice vpon the children of diſobedience: the © * * 
witches are ſometimes in Poets improperlie alſo called Theſſale, Horac. 
Theſſalian witches, Sagz,Wilſe women, Mage, Perſian witches, Ovid. 
Lamie, Ladies of Se Oy Seriges, Hegges: and yet a witch is 
but a wicked man or womanthat worketh with the deuill. But 
as for the matter it ſelfe, which by thoſe borrowed wordes the 
Poets and other authours meant, the Scripture is moſt rich and 
plentiful for our inſtruction : Let vs then attend with reuerence 
hat the Lorde faith, and not doate on that manner about queſti- 
ons and ſtriſe of wordes : for thus the Apoſtle writeth: / /f any 
man conſent not tothe —— of aur Lord ſeſus Chriſt ,and 
| 3 to 


fac. 


— ”- > — — 1 


3 N — — —— — E - — —— — — 


ung DRgT ana er, 


* Or,froward. 


— 


— * 


A TREATISE AGAINST 


to the doctrine which is according togodlmes, he is puft vp andknowerh 
nothing but doteth about queſtions and ſtrife of wordes, whereof com- 
meth envie,ſtrife,racling  euill ſurmuſing 1, * vaine diſ put atiaus of men 
of corrupt mimde i, and deſtuute of trueth : how ſaieſt thou now A4. 
ſo- demon, is ĩt not belt counſelltoleane ypon the Scriptures? 
Ah ſe- demon. Truelie the Apoſtles wordes are molt certen, 
for theſe ſinnes haue ouenaken ſome men that haue written of 
this argument, as may be ſcene in their works: let me heare then 
firſt Theophilus, hat thou canſt ſay of thoſe witches which are 
mentioned in ſcripture. ,-. | 
. Ful this] ay, that the Lord in Scripture hath cleare- 
lie nyrabred and diſtinguiſhed 7, ot 8, ſpeciall artes of the deuill, 
praiſed by wicked men and women, Deut. 1 8.10, 1 f. v. for albe- 
it moſt agree inthe interpretation, yet ſome varie in the number, 
The place is commonlie tranſlated on this manner: Let none be 
found among you that maketh his ſonne or his bter to gothrough 
the fire, or that vſethwitchcraſt, or aregarder of times, or a marker 0 f 
the flying of faule 5,07 a ſorcever, or a charmer, or that counſellethwit 
puri i, or a ſaothſayer,or that acketh connſell as the dead. 
Alyſo-demon, What was the occaſion of this great charge of 


Aipſe-de 
God vnto his people, and where had theſe artes then beginning? 


Admonit. 
de ſuperſt. 


magic. 


Merhodius, 


* Ludov. Viu, 
Tom. 2. p.. 


Cicer.de di- 
vinat. 


Theoph. Hemingius wtiteth on this manner: Like as Satfian 
vcd the ſetpent in the beginning to ſeduce dur firſt parents from 
the obedience of Gods worde vnto his ſervice: ſo it is not to be 
doubtedthat aſtex that fall, he vſed man him ſelfe his inſtrument 
by magicall arts to withdraw men fr6 faich in the promiſe of their 
redemption by Chriſt, Met hadius ſaith thus; In tbe 3 40. yeere of 
lered,there aroſe ſome of the poſtetitie of Can, inventers of euill 
artes, as Iobeth & Thaluſcal che ſonneso blind Lamech,whoycal- 
ding chemſelues tothe dominion of the deuill, became racer, 
of all magicall ſciences. After the flood, Zeroaſtres in the dayes 
of Ninus King of Babylon, and is thought to be that curled Cham, 
the ſonue of Noabzthis wicked man, as molt writers affirme, pra» 
ctiſed alſo all theſe artes, and commended them to his polteritie ; 
tor Aiſtaim was his ſonne, of home came the Egiptians, Babylo- 
mani, Perfaans u hich nations of al others were moſt famous in the 
world for theſe Sathranical ſciences. Hereby it may moſt manifeſt- 
ly appeare, fot What cauſe the Lord giueth this great charge vnto 


his 


', WITCHCRAFT, 


his people, concerning theſcanes,that they might not be found a- 
mong them. Firſt, fot thatthey were lately come from that Idola- nt 545. 
trous nation, where this horti ble inipietie was continually profeſ- ,-,, 
ſed, practiſed, & maintained Secondly,leaſt afterward they ſhguld 
learne theſe exerciſes of other nations round about them, or of Panic a. 
the Babylonians and Perſians (among whom alſothey ſhould ſo- 
journe for atime) by wicked a:quaintance and converſation, 

Myſo-dem, Now teach me briefely what thoſe artes were, ſo 
diſtinctly nũbred in that place, & let me ſee where any examples 
ofcheir practiſe is mentioned, that ſo we maythe better vnder- 
Rande whether they were practiſed by man onely, or by Sathan 
him ſelfe by the miniſtetie ofman. 

Theeph. Let vs then begin with that kind firſt whereof the la | 
is giuen, exo. 2 2.1 8.for vnder this faith M.Calvin & Gallafmygrall G | 
thereſtarg vnderſtoode in that place: the witch there naniedis rag z. 
Mecaſap bath, in Hebrue: Treml. & Pagnin, tranſlate it r aſfigiatri- „ Dialog p. ij. 
cem. a Witch working diueliſn deluſions. Heming, Danauu, & Bo- De demo. 
din pdothe ſame, q Luther turneth the word maleficam, but in the 9 Anvor. in 
fame ſence, andtothe ſame purpoſe, * 

Myſ. Yea, but I remember Andreas Maſſius the r moſt famons v Dil. p. 109. 
hebritian in the world, ſaich this word fignificth a poiſoner, becauſe 
the Greeke deptuaginttranſlate it paparc, and therefore this la 
is giuen directly 4 ar poyſoners. 

h. The Gree ke tranſlators might well name a witch by that 

name, for all writers agree that their greateſt practiſe is by poiſon 
& powders, xhich the deuil teachech them to hurt withall, Boden 
ſaith, Pars magori maxima madicos ſalet ch exorerftaragere;the molt 
part of witches play the phiſicias & areexorcifts, And it is known 1 Db Dem. p. 
true by common experience. Dana ſaith, t Alis venena confetta "Dialc As 
& parataprebet,alios docet novaconficere c miſcere : The deml mi. p. 55. 
niſtreth unto ſome witches poy ſonreadie made, & he teacheth athera to 
ecnfelt c compoyna new, Aga in, the Apolile vſeth the greek word, 
4 notfor polſoning, but fox al magic al artes, as both /erom lerom. & Moſ- 
& AMAuſculus teſliſie in their Comment. vpon chis piace: the ſame ul in Gab. 5. 
words vſed in the ſame ſenſe Rev. 22.15. & 21. 8.9. 21. And ſure- 
ly it appearesplainlie , this kinde of ch cas not one that dealt 
with poiſon, Dan. 2. 8, 3, Fr Nene 


ways x dnezzcr calleth far. 
theſe Mecaſephim to interpret dis dreams. And Hieronefaieth,s Com.in Ela. 
w Reges Babtlonios feciſſe cunc la ad eorum conſilia, They were 57- 

then 


— — 


A TREATISE AGAINST 


then belike the Kings wiſe counſellers, and therefore no poyſo- 
ners or coozeners. The cauſe why the Lawe is giuen of a woman 
witch, is (laich Bodw) becauſe women commonlie practiſe theſe 
artes, according tothe Hebre we prouerbe, Qs plus malierum co 
du magorum eſt, The more women the more witches. The lame 
xCom.in faith CM.Catvin,Borrabus, x Gellaſns,and others, 
Exod.2, Myſo-demon, Nowe tell me, are there anie examples which 
haue practiſed this kind of witchcraft mentioned inthe ſcripture? 
Ther That there are: for the witches of Egypt, Exod.7. 
11. and the witches of Babylon, Dan.2.2. are called by theſe 
names wecaſephim, and chartummims. 
Ayſe- demon. And what can you finde inthe een 7 Egipt, 
D. ya. more theninglinglegerdemaine conzenage naturall y magic he, & c. 
(Shen Theoph. — ofthat fore, and al — 
ſay plaineliethey wrought by the deuill. For the Scripture Exod, 
7. ſaith plainlie they wrought their wonders in the preſence of 
Pharaoh and his nobles: v. 10. and before Moſes and Aaron: If 
theſe witches then could haue ſhewed but the feares ofnaturall 
magicke,&c. they had bene ſoone diſcouered, Pharaoh himſelſe 
_—_ verelie they wrought the ſatne waic that Moſes & A. 
Jacob. Ziegle. aron did: forthus one ſaith, Pharaoh arbirrabatur iſt ud inter vtroſ- 
dom in. cap. 3. ue ds : quod hi ampling illis im magicu artibus profeciſſent : Pha- 
raoh thought this was the difference eene both, that the one 
had more profited in the artes of magicke then the other. and 
not in iugling, cooſenage, naturall magicke, & c. And ſurely Hre- 
rome and others thinke they were in great reputation with their 
Kings both in Egipr and Babylon, and therefore it is like they pro- 
feſſed a more deepe ſcience, then anie rude facultie of coozenage, 
& practiſed greater matters then the iollie feats ofleget· demaine. 
And that thou maieft vnderſtand, Myſo-demon, Sa others al- 
ſo are of the ſame iudgement concerning theſe magicians; one 
ſaith of them, a Has machinas apponit Diabalus, & c. It is the deuill 
- — — that vſeth theſe engines: meaning that Temes & Iambres did vie 
E go n diabolicall artesagainſt Moſes & Aaron. M. Calvin writerh thus: 
þ Calvin.com. b QE ex genmmaphiloſophiaprolapſi eſſent gi Egypry yetinem ſa- 
in Exod.7, prenimnmnomen vr ſidem illuſion us acquirerent : when the m giti- 
ans of Egipt had fallen from 7828 iloſophic (whereby he 


meanettinaturall philoſophic arid naturall magicke) they would 


- ”_ TT T Ry V7 oO EET 


WITCHCRAF T. 
Rill be called wiſe men, to u in credit to their deluſions & then he 
addeth,eft borribule exemplum laxatas magis babenas:this is a horti- 
ble example, that magitians ſhould haue this libertie, Againe, he 
faith, Deum c arti ſue hoſtem opponunt:they oppoſe God as an ene- „ 
mie to their atte: by theſe few words it may ſoone be ynderfiood, g See. 
what magitiãstheſe were, in this learned mans iudgement. Bren- . 
tius d ſaith, Adtracula Egiptiorum erant ludibria Sathane : TheEgip- 4 Com. mn Ex- 


tians miracles were the deluſions of Sathan. Gellaſiuse writeth on — ſs 
: | Lind e Com. in Ex- 
— poenen e & . 46 AURAL omen mo- —— 
nem demomm, & c. adiunxerat. Theſe Egiptians added to their 
aſtrologie andnatural f hiloſophie, magicke and divination, inuo- 
cation of deuils, & c. Muſculus, Com. in Geneſ. 4 l. &. ſaith plainely, 
theſe had their artes of Sathan. All cheſe (as thou ſeeſt My ſodæ- 
mon) teſtiſie, that the magitians of Egipt, wrought by the deviill, 
- My/oedemon. Now let me heare what is the ſecond kinde of 
PE Scripture. 
 Theoph. - The witches ot the ſecond kinde, are called in the o- 
. riginalltongue, Aob, Aobot by this word, the holy Choſt vnder- 
ſtandeth certaine familiar ſpirites, which whitper with their wit - 
ches, at it were, out of a tubbe or bottle, ſaieth Danæus, Heming, 
Calv Luch. Bodin, and others: for the worde properly fignificth a 
bottle; as /ob. 3 2.19. Ceoboth cadeſhim,as new boules, Fur whate 
ſocuer is the cauſe of that borrowed name, for this witches deuill, 
this muſt be obſerued diligently, chat this witch & her ſpirit, are al . 
waies clearely diſtinguiſhed. For the witch, i. Sam. 28. v. 5, 7. is not 
called Ab, but Bagnalath,mariedto Ab, fot ſo the word ſignifieth. 
Aol, or poſſeſſing Aob. Predua pythone, ſaith Tremel. & Shoel Aob, 
Deu. 8. 10. one which enquireth or ſaluteth praieth, &intreateth 
Aob, ittherfore here be but cooſenage, there muſt be two cooſe - 
ners at the leſt, ſo thete are, & the witch is one, the deuil an other. 
Againe, Lev. 20.27. (vy huch babem Aob, if Aab, chat is, the deuill, 
be in them. 
Myſadamon. If this Aub, was but a pythoniſt, as Tremel. and 
others ſay, then I prooue it to be but cooſenage, on this manner. 
- Apollothe pythoniſt, and the oracles at Delphos were ofthis kind, 
& were molt famous indeede, yet but meere cooſenage, & therfore 
| this wasthelike, I prooue mine Antecedent, a Gregor: Neoceſari. Diſp.uzy 


enſu, ſojourung with Apollos prieſt * night after his ——_— 138, 


E = x 0 — . 1 —— Ee CC—— 


— 


A TREATISE AGAINST 


the oracle ceaſed: the prieſt ſought afterhim and requeſted him 
not to hinder his wontedreuelations: a Gregotie yeilded and ſaid 
to the oracle, permittotibi redire in locum tunm & agere que conſue- 

„I permit thee toreturne tothyplace, and doe as thou waſt moont. 
If there had bene a deuil there it is not like this holy man would 
haue giuen him that libertie. Euſeb. hach this ſtorie in his 7. booke 


chap. 25. 
1. b laſſure thee CMyſodemon, I can find no ſuch thing in 
*Zee Grinzus all that hiſtorie. See Grinaus laſt edition, and Chriſtopherſons,and 
Laſt edition & Grinaus marginall note vpon « tranſlation. I dunke this 
be but ſome legends fable, fur it ſauouts much like ſuch ſtuffe: as 
38 1i.4.ca, for the Gregories, h Socrates faith ther were foure of them in num- 
22. ber: one was Origent ſchollet, & that was this Neoceſarienſis, the 
2. was Baſfils brother, the 3. was Gregor, Nazianzen , the 4. was 
| Gregor. Alexandru. as for this Gregor, Neoceſar. he was a 
eLib.6, Ca.29. Fairhfull paſtor ofa Churchin Pontus Bach. c writeth,Grego= 
* rius & Athenodorus fratres, pareciarum que in Ponto ſumt paſtores, 
Gregorie and Athenodore brethren, were paſtors of pariſhes in Pontus. 
It is not like then that this man ( being ſo = . for * 
and godlines as Socrates reporteth him to be in the fotename 
place) would permit the deuils oracle that libertie, if he could re- 
ſtraine it. Wherefore Myſodzmon , I thinke thou groundeſt thy 
reaſon ypon a fable. And as for this oracle of if ir were but 
couſenage, wherefore did this couſenage ceaſe when the goſpell 
ſhined, forcouſening hypocrites are inthe Church, and will bee 
foreuer wherethe goſpell is preached. And wherefore muſt the 
deuill in Conſtantines time creepe (as it were) into ſome hollow 
Caues,was . couſenage creeps in corners? for Euſeb. ſaith, 
d De vita Apollinem aut em id temporis, ex antro quodam & tenebricoſo rereſſu, 
Conſt. lib. 2. non ex ſacerdotis — oraculum ædidiſſe ferunt. — 
. Ayſodemon. Well I am content to yeild, I knowe not what 
ſtrength my reaſon hath, ifthat ſtorie bee not there to be found, 
What haue you anie examples which hath practiſed this kind of 
witchcraft? | ; 

Theoph. The witch of Endor is ſaide to be one ofthis ſort: for 
ſhe is called 1. Sam. 28, v. 7. Bagnalah eAob, married to Aob , or 
poſſeſſing Aob, or (as the common tranſlationis) hauing Aob, 
that is, a — And here Myſodæmon, beſore I do any os 


WITCHCRAFT, 


ther anſwer thee, note what obſeruations that place of (cri — 
offereth vnto vs, in this queſtion of v itcheraft fot our inſttuction. 
Firſt obſerue there, the great feare this vile kind of witches ate in, 
for ſhe was very loth, leaſt her practiſe ſhould be publikely noted, 
eſpied, & known. v. 9. 10.Secondly,how the deuil petſwades wit= 
ches,he muſt be coniured out of hell, & out of the earth frõ among 
the dead, by characters, figures, e S that his vaſſals e Heming. de 
might be the more ſtudious to ſerue him on that maner, that me ſuperſt. mag. 
might haue bis ite hes for their art in the more eſtimatiõ. v. ii. 12.4. 

irdly how Satan can trans forme himſelf before his witch as he 
pleaſe: for v.1 3. ſhe ſaith [ſaw gods, or an excellent perſon, which 
the appeareth forthwith in * 2 ofold Samuel himſelf Fourth 
ly, whar Satan defireth moſt ofhis witches & ſuch as cofifule wth 
them: namely to adore him as a God, as Saul did thedewll inthe 
preſence of the witch, v.i . Laſtly how bold Satan is ſomtitnes in 

ictions, either when he hath ſome watrant of gods word, or 

is ſent of God to execute his iuſtice vpon infidels . For this deuill 


ſpeakingthus boldly. ofSaules death, it is like he knew godspure 


poſe concerning him: for where hee wanteth knowledge, hee is 
commonly —. doubtfull in his propheſies, as thoſe latine times 
of Apollos oracle can teach vs. | ; 
' Miſodemon, Bur Eccleſiaſticus ſaith, it was very Samnel himſelfe = 
which did re m that place. Chap. 46. v. 19. 20. Dip. 3c. 


Theoph. So doth g loſephus alſo in his antiquities, for the moſt g Anciq, libs; 
Ie vs of thoſe times did imaginther might be had ſome conferẽce p. j. 
with ſpirits and ſoules of men: but both * in this point. 
Myſo-demon, It 1s moſt vnlibeiy of all that God would anſwer Saul ; Di ' 
by oa - op ders by — . 
- Theo, Not ſo Myſodzmon, I can returne this weapon ypon 
thine own head. For therefore was it more like to be Satan, He 
Gad bad denied to anſwers him by dreams, by Vrim, & by the Prophets, , 
1. Sam. 28. 6. againe Saul was now faſt bound in Satans ſnares for Gig 
his diſobedience againſtthe # word of God: therefore nomaruell *?' 


though Satan was bold to viſit him on that maner. 
| Myſedemon. When Saul had told her that he would haue Samuel 
2 vp, ſper departed from his preſence into her cloſet , k wyhere & Dil. pa. 146, 
leſſe ſhe had ber familiar p, tow, ſme lewdcraftueprieft: 
ergo, all thatplay was but a prieſtly couſenage, | 
Ca, Theoyh, 


— 6 


{Diſ.p.149. 


* True Samu- 

Al would not 
hauc done 
this, 


as Diſp. 151. 


Dialog. 44 · 
p-78,7 2,80. 
81. 

Mira non 
miracula. 


#Brentius in 
I. 5am. 28. 


_— - 
A TREATISE AGAINST 
Theoph, Itel the truly Ady ſadamon, this doubtleſſe of thecraftie 


755 e amagicallgloſcoucofthineowne braine, and clean be- 


ſide the text. "V5 -- 4 
bhunſell l ginen to Saule, by that S amuel, great- 


y diſagreeth fre hans nature and purpoſe. 
T 


chis text, you ſhall ſoone eſpie that all that Samuels counſels and 
words were wicked & diueliſh, & tended moſt to perſwade Saul & 
his companie to dolatte, and for the confirmation of dſſe artes. 
Againe it is certen, the deuill can ſpeake ſugred words, and mean 
Sathanically,as the deuill in the Goſpel, che Pychoniſt at Philippi, 
at Epheſus, and els where. 

Myſoxdemon.' This is ſtraunge The ophilus, and yet for allthou 
canſt tay of this place, there are ſome (as I heare ) that challenge 
mm all the learned men in the world, vpon the adventure of their liuet, to 
proone cyther here in this witch or m any other, one piece of a miracle, 
ſuch as Chriſt did. 

T beoph. There challenge, is but a bold, vndiſcreete, and wit - 
= hn as for witches miracles, Danæus » and others ſaie 
right well : that they may more properly be called, Sathanicall 
* woonders,which the deuill can with greater facility effect( ſaich 
he)rhenthe cunningeſt man, becauſe he excelleth in nature, in 
ſwwiftnes of motion, and in knowledge, Of cheſe wicked wonders, 
the Scripture ſpeaketh, 2. Theſſ. a. g. Revel.i 6.14. Sathans woon- 
ders are produced of natural cauſes, & not ſupernatural, as Chriſts 
were. 1 

AMyſo-demon. Nou, doe burſhew me the iudgement of ſome 
learned Authors, which will teſtifie alſo, chat this witch hath a te- 
all conference with Sathan himſelfe, and ſhalbe ſatisfied and te- 
ſolued in one point, whetein Theophilus | haue a long time greats 
ly doubted. 46.4 

Theoph. 1. Brentins oon this manner,uriteth vpon this place: 
Aperte ſignificat Scriptura, quod Sat han nd per ſe tautũ, verumetiang 
—— ſua, quæ OO ores, — —— t. 
The Script ure ſpeaketbplamly that Sat han dor not only hurt himſelfe, 
but worketh alſo by his inſtruments, ſuch as inc haunters and witc her 
are, And then he addeth:( olldquium ipſum cum Saule, per ſpicmè teſta- 
tur, non fuiſſe verum Samuelem, ſed Sathanam efſigie Samuels appa- 


renten. 


u will aduiſedly conſider all the cireumſtances of ll 


WITCHCRAFT. 


rentem. The conference which Saule plamely reſbifieth, that this was 
not the true Samuel, but Sathan himſ-lfe who appeared in Sammelt 
lkenes. | | 85 
2 Another ſaith thus. p Saule conſulit venificam ſeupithoniſſam, ↄ vid or Sti + + 
manes ex orco educentem. i. confugit ad Diabolum, Saule ached coun gel. 
ſell of awitch, which conixred ſpirits ont of bell, that i, he fled for helge 
. da neg hon Aer are 
To be {hort,andthat one may ipeake for many, Peter Mar- Marty com 
te that place, hauing ſhewed many Bend, > key ad- 15 * 
J in che * his owne, and ſaith manifeſtly it was a deuill, Then 
he concldeth in theſe wordes} Scio iſtas ratrones non ades fir mas 
eſſe, v1 poſſint per ſuadere, hominipertinaci, I Hm (ſaiih he) theſe an- 
1 ere not ſo ftrong, that they cas per ſwade a ſtubborn mit. fuperft 
* Hemingius @ , ; | 
- 8 N is ofthe ſame iudgement, 8 „ Dialog, 
6 Tremellius writeth of this kinde thus: Lev. 20. 27. Pytho- | 
nes diabolicis artibus reliquos 4 det cultu & ſul ſancti ſicatiame ave- 
cart. Pythoniſts ſeduce — by Sathanicall artec. 
ſodemon, I p eee you euet heard, reade, ox euer 
ſcene any one example, of this kinde in theſe time? 
Theoph. Tread and heare of many: but / come not yet to ſpeak 
ofthe witchcraftin our time: notwithſtanding to ſatisſie thy xe- 
queſt, Myſodæmon. I will ſhew the one example, which / finde in 
a learned credible writer of this bs oh * Ludgvicus Calius Rhodi- Lectionum 
ius writing of Pyrhoniſtes, hee addeih this which followeth, for ib gc nm. 
confirmation ofhis purpoſe. Id equi vt fabuloſum, 4 4 ereipen- 
dum puret, teſtatum volumu, tempeſt ate hac, imo vero hec prodente 
nne, fuiſſe in patria mea, mulierculam humili loco, Tocobam nonitne, ex 
cuiuſdeutre immunds I piritus vecem, pra tenuem quidem, ſed tamen 
vbi vellet deartic ulatam, & prorſau intelligibilem, andtvi ipſe: verum 
G unnumeri aly, non Rhodigij modo, ſed in tota fere Italia: quando fu- 
turi avida potentum ment, ſepe accerſitam ventriloquam, ac omni 
exut am amictus ne quid frauds occultæ lateret, inſpectare ac audire co- 
cupiuit, ¶ Incinnatulus demoni nomen erat, hac ille appellatione geſti- 
ent, ac clamants ſubinde reſpondebat. Si de preteritis aut de preſents- 
bus ſciſcitareris que reconditiſimma forent reſponſa dabat ſapè miriſi- 
ca, ſi de futuris ſemper mendaci ſiimus. 7d & inſcitiam ſuam nonnun- 
quam murmure incerto, vel bombo veriùſ guorabili retegebut. . 
3 . 


ag 


A TREATISE ACAINST 


aj ſpould account this (meaning what hee had written of pytho- 
niftes)as fabulous, we will adde this confirmation. There was at this 
time,enen when I was a writing hereof, a poore woman in my conntrie 
named [aroba, out of whoſe belle, [ my ſelfe, heard the vence of an vn- 
clean ſpirit, It was but ſmall indeed, but yet as oft as it liſted, it was both 
a diſt inft voce and very intelligible. others alſo heard the ſame 
e rin er h out all Italic. For no- 
ble men affetting pr editions greatly deſired to beare, and to behold this 
preboniſt, whome therefore they ſent for often, andſtript her of all ber 
pparell, that no ſceret fraud mig hr ge hidden. The devils name was 
* Marke here , mcinnatulus,- be delighted much to be thus named, and gaue anſwer 
— . p itherwhiles to him that ſo called vnto him, If aman did ache him of the 
8 — moſt ſecret tunꝑrpaft or preſent, he anſwered oft times moſt (Prawn ge- 
much in your {y,but concernmg future venta, h alwaies erred, He couered alſo his 
vide excre- jpnorance with a ſecret muttering or to ſpealę more plainly with an 6b. 
ments, the de- ſeure kinde of bux xing. | 
8 Alyſodemon. And vrhat is the third kinde of witches mentio 
ned i the Seriptu s OE {44 
Theophilus, The third ſorrof witches are they, which in He- 
brue are called koſemim of keſam, divinours or ſoothſayers, as all 
writers agree. Theſe witches, ſaith f Dauau, would faine ſeeme to 
worke by ſome inſpitation, and inſtinct of Gods ſpirit, andthere- 
fore they are more ſubtile, ſecret, and cloſe in their workes, then all 
ſAcming. q. the reſt. This kinde is cunningin prædictions, faith / Hemingine, 
de Divmat. becauſe God permitteth their deuill often to inſect the aiet, wa- 
mag. ter, earth fruites, Nc. and to worke mightely in the children of dif 
obedience. They ate alſo well ſcene in naturall cauſes, and there- 
fore haue a great foreſight in naturall events. Againe, he ſaith, that 
in prædictions they are ſometimes holpen alſo by the wrigs word. 
of God, herein they haue great knowledge. By all theſe meanes 
they perſwadetheir miniſters that they are : gods, & there vaſſals 
f. dam 8.13. likewiſe perſwade infidels, that they forſooth, are wiſe men, and 
worthie of great honoux and eſtimation as may be ſeene by theſe 


a 
- 


examples which practiſed this kinde of ſorcerie. A 
Myſodemon, Haue we any examples then of this kinde in 

Scriprure? ., 0 | 4 
3 Vea truely: for Balaum chat famous falſe prophet, 
is called by this name, Jeſb. 1 z-yerl. 22. Bilgnam ben beg — 
ſem. 


Chap. x. p. 17. 


WITCHCRAFT, ; 


ſem, Billham the ſanne of Beor thediviner. tab | 

Myſodemon, Shal wethinke tliat Balaam wrouglitmagical- 
ly,or {28 he was prompred (as they lay) of the devill, when Balak « Num. 23.5. 
ent meſſengers with « giſts vnto him? ſurely the ſtoty ſeemeth 
altogether to ſay the contrarie, for God is ſaid to haue mettè him, 
and hre is ſaide to bleſſe and not to curſe the people of 
God. . | ; ' 

Theoph 


ils. It is moſt apparant by many places of Scripture, 
that he was the deuils prophet, — Lord made him | — 
what he would not at that time, as he did Caphas at the death of | | 
Chriſt, for the text thete ſaith, that hee bad the s Pay alt 77.8. 14 
wght,ver.8.tharbe might goc whiſper in the nighttime, and ſceke 
ſome magicall reyclations. For ſo it is written of him, Chap. 24. 1. 
His cuſtome was to goe, lilath nechaſhim, to fetch inchauntmenti. 
Againe, how fayne he would haue wrought the deuils will ap- 
peares init, albeit God had farbidden him to goe to Balak, ver. 
12. yet hee purpoſed ſtill in hart to goe, and went indeede. A- 
gaine, hauing his tongue tied from curſing, yet fot lucre and vaine 

lories ſake, he invented and taught in what ſort he might 
ben annoy the Iſraelites, and that was by cauſing them to com- 
mit whore dome and idolatrie. Which wicked counſell had alſo 
that effect which he foreſhewed : for as ſoone as occaſion was of. 
fered, the children of Iſrael fell into thoſe impieties, w 
there dyed in x a plague ſoute and twentie thouſand. Saint Jude | 
alſo, verſ. 11, ſpeaketh of the deceit of Balaum wages: and Saint * N25. 
Ioln ſaith, that this was the doctrine of Balaam, Hee taught to 
* ſtumbling blocke before the children of Iſrael, that they 

deat of things ſacrificed to idols and commit whoredome. 

To be ſhort, it is to be ſeene in his one wordes, what little 
hope he hath of Gods fauour and grace (for all magitians haue Danæ. Dial. 
renouncedy God and there ſaluation) beeing totmented in con- 
ſcience, hee burſteth out into this exclamation : Oh that I mig he 
die the death of the righteons , and that n laſt ende might be bikg Num. a3. 10. 
his, And the Lotde telleth vs afterwardes, that his vengeance 
failed not to ouertake this witch, for his wicked doctrine & coun- 
ſell againſt the Church of yod,for he was lain alſo by the /ſraclites 
in che great ſlaughterof the Moabires, By all theſe places of the Ja.. 


| C 4 | Sctip- 


A TREATISE' AGAINST 
Scripture and circumſtances of chat ſtorie, it is to be thought none 
otherwiſe, but that this divinor, wrought by the deuill. 
Wicp ase Aſedemon. But where finde you areal prompting, ⁊ the real 
con &c.of a deuill in Scripture, + | 
Theophilus, What was the Pythoniſt at Philippi, had not ſhee 
a reall conference wih Sarhan? for doethᷣ not the dcnpture ſpeake 
plainely that ſbee was poſſeſſed a of 4 dewrll, and the Apolile Sd 
4 AG. 16.16, hum come out of ber, and ſhe ſpake thoſe holy words, theſe arethe 
Fo ſernant: of the maſt high God, which ſhew vnto vs the way of (aluati= 
| | on, by ameere diabolic all reuelation. And leaſte wee ſhouid any 
x way doubt in this matter, S. Loke ſaich mani that ſhe ptacti- 
(ed Sathanic all divination, ſor he addeth, 7 h Pyrboniſt gate her 
maſters mach aduantagemith drumming, And had not Sathen alſo a 
reall communication with Eve & many others? To bg ſhort, l can 
not ſee, but he that can doe the greater, may doe the leſſe: Now mi- 
f Com. in:. , ſaith H. Martyr) b ſjexteriores homimum oculos perſtrin- 
Sam 28, Cen antea orcupentt ocules mentss: [tis no marueile that bet bold 
faſt ſbut the cyei of the badis which ſoblanderh the eyes of the mile. He | 
en TAY 3 \ oy . rein |- 
ei. King. 22.22. pting c of Achabs prophers) and pteuaile wſc 
2 Godgiue 8. leaue, l can — ſee, but that hee may haue a reall 
of chem, when God permitteth, and conneneges with 
them. | zt! 


| Myſodemon. By what wordes ofthe ſtorie, and other teſtimo- 
nies c an that be ſhewed, that hee vſed any deueliſn artes? 
Thbecplulu. This witch faith thus of himſelfe and his artes, 
Num. 23. 27. Lo nachaſb beiagnakob ve lo beſem : Noinchamment or 
ſoothſaying can prenaile againſt jacob. Vpon which words, Tremelli- 
us ſait 75 7 ſuns faſcinis & incantatiombus mihnl illss nocere poterat> 
He confeſſeih (faith Tremellius) that hee could nor hurt them by his 
witcherafts and imchantments. Again, it is ſaid, Chap. 24. 1. Hewent 
certaine tunes before Lalrath nec hoſbum 10 fet inc hani mt tu:by which 
wordes, I doubt not, but the holy Ghoſt meaneth to ſhew vs that 
he was the deuils miniſter indeede. Maſſer Calvine writeth- of 
this witch, ſaying, Figmenta hinc inde mut nat us eſſ, que diaboli tan- 
ent: Heborowed here and there certeine forgerres, | 


Tum reſt 10145 
wha — 1ou' of che demls illuſions. And then he addeth: Des 
us omnem cum demonibus ſocietatem deteſtat ur. God abkorreth all ſo» 


cictie 


„... 


WITCHCRAFT. 


eretiewith dewils. Tremel., be ſaith plainelie that Balaam wrought 
by the deuill: for vpon theſe wordes, Chr. 24. 22. hen ren g hi⁶ as 
an nicorne, he ſaith, nec plus valent duc ſus cum artet dabolicæ, 
quam venena contra moxocerotem, Balaams Sathanicall artes can | | 
burt the people of God, no mere then porſon can hurt the Juucor ne, Cha. | 
22.6. curſe me 144 people, chat is, auk he. faſcmacum vt mute perect, 
ten uch them that ihey may peri(, Sec morcot him 2. F/. 6. rem, 
Annot,loh Fr. Perus Mrrand, u mech of big chus: primi gener is ha- 
bini eſt Balaam, cus dommua dil. tur fuiſſe lorutins, quanquam Pro- 
phecia eſſet amm & ar tolus. Balaum was one of be fwſt kind, onto Lib. 4. de pres 
whome che Lords ſard to haus fpokgngalbent he were the do rophet, not. c.. 
anda ſeol lager. IT what, IS | 
- , tAbſodsmer,.. Nowe let vs heate what may bee found of the 
fourth kinde of witches mentioned in the Sc riptu rere. 
ee The waches gfihe Hunk e in iem 
nonim, from what tote it is not certenly knowne: Maſter Cal- „g. 
vine, Danæus, apdathets here vndetſtand, iudiciall aftrologers, C. 1. p. it. 
and. deuilih mathematicians, which yader colour of falle artes 
f * inany euils by meanes of datan, that inſttucteth and prom- 
eih them. | 
_ Myſedemon, And haue wee anie examplesor pra ctiſioners of 
this kiade of witcheraftinScripture, ee | 
I heoph. We haue examples alſo of this kinde, Dan.2 2, for this a 
ſott is mentioned in that counſell which was gathered for Nebu * * 
chadnezzars conſultation. Theſe therefore were no doubt of no wiuch word 
lefle eſtunation, then Mecaſephim and Chartummim were, For the beit He- 
theſe profeſſed great knowledge in predictions by the poſition bricia trank ; 
of — — &c. as may be ſeene, Ela, 47. where 97 e | 
it is apparant how theſe witches vſed to publiſh their piophe ſies e 
and prognoltications concerning the proſperitie ↄf that king- 
dome: yet were they deceiued, for the Perſians ſoone after ſpoiled 
Babylon and enioyed all that Empire, ſothat the deuill ofien be- 
_ wrates himſelſe and his prophets in precictions, for the Lord hi- 
deth.from Satan moſte commonly the knowledge of future e- 
uents. Notwuhftanding the Babyloyians (as may be ſcene in 
that chapter, verſe 22. 13. 14.) had theſe men in an eſpeciall 


There they 


reputation. Wherefore I conclude, if the former magitians 1c called lle 
wrought by Satay, as by probable and credible reaſons * haue bros ſamayme 
IV D.. cfore 


A TREATISE AGAINST 
before ſhewed, certenly theſe iollie companions alſo muſt not 
come one foot hehind thẽ: albeit we finde not their couenant with 
the diuel ſo manifeſtly expreſſed, as in the former practiſes, for this 
kind of wizards and ſome which follow haue many ſhadowes to 
yale —_ 9 co ie with Satan. of 

Hyſodemon, And by what other argument can you ſhewe 
the abomination ofthis kinde of vitchcraft. 4 

Theoph. Howe deteſtable and deuiliſh this kinde alſo is, ma 
appeare bythe fearfull i ents and wrath of God, which 
— Tide iſe of this ſorcetie: — Lene 04 
| « Ior X15 aide: thou haſt forſaken thy people, t 
bHere hat Vene of Tacob, Cale dots onim, becauſe —_Yy 
very word is v- the eaſt may ners and aftrologers ai t Philiſtims , and abound wit 
ſed. ſtrange Cold ren, We muſt not imagine it then a light couſenage 
—— er · that cauſe th the Lord foto ſake his people. And this was one 
cheſs. of c Ma naſſes witches, which cauſed deſtructiõ vpõ his kingdom. 

/ My ſod mom. What was the 5. witch named in Scripture? | 

1 'T — The 5. the Hebrewes calle®ober 


-1-*-roote Chabar, to ioyne together, to binde together, or to aſſoci- 
- 0; od ate, ſay the interpreters, And ſo doeth * Maſter Caluine, e Bodin, 


lib.r.c.6.p.3g, f Danzustake it, becauſe(as moſt thinke) theſe haue often fami- 
Dialog. cd. Haritie and ſocietie with the deuill. Trem. Pſal. 5 S. verſ. 6. Faſcina - 
* toresiſti hebræa appellatione , nominantwr , conſocrantes ſocietatem, 
quia diaboli ſocictarem ad artes ſuas adhibent: that ts, this bebrewe 
name is giuen them becauſe of their familiaritie with Satan in the vſe 
of their artes. This kinde we commonly call a charmer and afor- 
cerer, oſthe rude Latine worde ortiarins, which is come in vſe by 
cuſtome (faith Danzus) and hach che place ofa better worde ſor- 

tileom. 1441 i O17 | tv 1 12 
* Haue we any example in Scripture ofcharmes ot charmers. 
. Of both: for theſe are named alſo among the Babilo- 
nian witches, Eſ. 4.7. where it is ſuide, that this kinde of ſorceres 
ſwarmed in all that nation, for they were far more common be- 
like then as they be now )then the great maſter witches,thehigh- | 

eſt doctors ofthe deuils diuinitie. And that they did ſo abound 

then, the Prophets own words do teſtifie: for he ſaith, v. 9. that the 
Chaldeans and the babilomans had Gnatſmath chobarei meod that 
is, 4 vonder full multitude, ot as it were à ſtrong armie of enchan- 
by My ſedemon. 


c hoburim, of the 


com 


: Palme. yer.6, where it is thus written aſber to ſi 


WITCHCRAFT. 


ters or charmers,or (as we commonly ſay)ſorcerers, 5 


' Myſedemon, 1thinke the deuil would not de baſe him ſelfe , or 
youchſafe ro communicate hispreſence and conference with this 


vile ſort of witches? 


Thee, Vea moſtofall: for this linde hathmoli need of his pre. 
ſence and help, becauſe ofthe great wants this ragged ſortot wi- 


zards haue in the world, | 
Myfodemon, Bur theſe wretchesc gaine him no credit, nor 


adde one inch of eſlimation vnto him or his artes. 


blind, and beſot the common fort of infidels, like as his greater 


maſters, ſerue in high places. And what theſe can worke 
the doating mulrirude of infidels, 


ons had filled that people full of carnall ſecuritie, pride, andrebel- 
lion againſt Cod, and his poote Church. And the ſame ſinnes ac- 
panie this witchcraft tothis day, 

My. Is there mention alſo made of charmes in Scri 
lu. There is a charme of ſerpents ment 


? 
lecol mela- 
— —.— chabarim mec hencam, that is, whic ee 

voice of charmers, albeit he be moſt expert in muttering char- 
mes. For Lachaſb doth ſignifie a ſecret muttering of charmes: by 


Theophilws, Theſe common ſorte may ſerue well to delude, 


may bee well obſerued alſo in xc, , 
that Chapter: for it is there ſaid that this ſorcerie and diuinati- h y $,9,10; 


which wordes we may well obſerue, that the ſorcerers alſo of our ne Demon 


time varie not much 


din ſaith) are mumbling to themſelues ſome holy wordes, full of 
prayers, eroſſing — ateach worde, &c. 

Myſodemon, But — — Imuſt by your good leaue 
diſſent from you ſomewhat . This place muſt bee expounded by 


Jeremy. Chapter 8. verſe 18. and then this Pſalme (whereup- 
againſt . xponnderh th but by and 
againſt you, for Tremell. e th this place 4 ſhifte, 

others by Onid and Virgil: but Ieremie ſaith plainlie that ferpents can 


with good writers, 


not be charmed. 


Theoph, Lou art ouer bold now Ay 


and I could ſome what beare withthis boldnes, but take heed left 
you be found inſolent alſo againſt God in the abuſe of his bleſſed 
worde, fot that kinde of pride is moſte daungerous, I will anſwere 
D. 2. to 


m the old charmers, for they euerſ as. Bo- 2. c. i. 


ground ſo much fot charming, ſhall make moſt ea 


250. 


q 


we'l ſaide for 


ſua eſſe micl- yet doe they not expound Scriprure 
Sbicanꝗ xpount | 
— — he ah 


ferens &-4.noſ- durem in virampue ab a 


A TREATISE AGAINST 


to all your doubtes in otder. But firſt marke here where Maſter | 
N Calvine writech vpon that place. S: une | eſſent incantationes 
58.6. | f , 
*Zut rhey re- Puerile & abſurdum foret, quod hic dicrrur e if there were no charmes 
member what 0” ſrcerie this were but a chudiſb and ab ſurdthimg which is here ſpo- 


Auguſt. hath * And againe in the ſame place: Certe ſi nulle eſſent tnoantationes 


— yuſtra lege Dei prohibite ac dammat e eſſent. Surely if there were no 
us point) charmes then were they vainelie forbidden, and condemned in the love 
ruſque chan lis. f God. And as for other authors vſing the helpe of Poets, Ian 
nu eft dommi ſwer, albeit they deſpiſe not the good experience of wittie poets, 
| by — 2 as for Trem. 
eth not this place by 4 ſhift nor ie, bu: ſhee 
Lou 25 vpon als e wardes: 
ari , alteram in terram defigends, al- 
cens ena in li- teram extrema ſui parte cuntege ds , atque occludends, teſtes ſunt in 
— [acr 4,06. þ aye locum, Ieronimus, Augustinus. Caſidorne, & alh, I he aſpe ſbus- 
e doct. Chr. | 
Lib.z. cap. 1 8. tet h bath har eaves by laying the one ſide cloſe tothe ground , and by co« 
m rem. in Pſ. ering and ftoppt the other eare with her hmder partes, folſauth le- 
58.6, rome, Augwſture e died ethers and this was Tremell, ſhift, 
Nowe let vs come vnto the Scripture , and ſee briefelie how you 
vſe or rather abuſe the holy worde of God. For = found he 
Prophets words thus: will; ſend 5 can not 
charmed. The — be charmed. And 
Tremell. better, contra quot nulla prodeſt muſſit atis. CMaſſing be- 
ke hath taughtyou Myſodæmon, (to pleaſe your owne vaine 
fantaſie) to ſaythat ſerpents can nube charmed, and to ſound the 
words as if ſerpent i could not be charmed. And wherers the wordes 
are borrowed, and by ſerpents there are ment the Babilonians 
home the Eorde aſſimmeth ſhall, ſo come vponthe Iewes for 
a. Ng. 17. 17. their ſinnes, as no ſugred words or charmes ſhall be able to skare 
them away: your maſters vſe them as if they were ſpoken in pro- 
per and naturall ſignification. 
Myſodemon, And what was the ſixt kind of witches ſpoken. 


tatem quam c- 1th three learned mens 


- of in the Scripture? 


Theoph. The witches of * ſixt kind arè called Menacheſhim 


racters, roddes, obſeruations of daies and houres, ſay ſome He- 
brewes, and ſo ſay » Danzus and o Bodin alſo. 

AAyſodemon. Haue we any examples of this kinde of witches 

inthe ſcripture? Theoph. 


of Nac haſd, which fignifiethto coniectute by ſundry figures, Cha- 


— $44 . 
* 6 o » * #4 * | 


WITCHCRAFT. 


| Theophilus, The witches which Aanaſſes fauoured and cauſed 
| to multiplie in his time, were named by this name. 2. King. 21. 6. 
| and ſurely theſe were not inferiour in practiſe of Sathanicall artes, 
| vnto the reſt before named, for we finde Gods wrath wonderfully 
kindled againſt both the kingdomes of Iſrael & /udah, for ſeeking 
aſter this kinde, & that other of diuination, which is before named 
in che third place: The words of God ate 2. King. 17. 17. vanbeſuin 
he ſamim,vamacheſhy, they draineddininations, and vſed toconietture 
ndrie meanes: therefore the Lord was wroth, & put them out 
of his ſight. Againe, 2. King. 2 1.6. Manaſſes vſed vegnoven, aſtrolo- 
gie. & venicheſb, magical cdnecturingi. Then the iudgements which 
ollowed, are added, Chap. 24. 12 dame was deſtroied for the 

finnet of Manaſſes, according to all that be did: or rather as Tremelli- 
n ſaith: Propter peccata ſamelia ij que fecerat Manaſche, tot ſinnes 
like vnto thoſe which Manaſſes committed, that is, the aforena- 
med artes ofthe deuill. This kinde of witchcraft then hauing ſuch 
1 to pull downe the wrath of God alſo vpon that 
noble kingdome, where the Church of God had ongly her viſible 
aboade here on earth at that time, muſt not be thought to be a 
light cooſenage, ot an experienced knowledge in natural magick, 
| neither muſt it be colouredor conveyed vnderany other ſuch like 
vaile of witeheraſt The popiſh reliques of this kinde are left a- 
mongſt vs, for menfor want of faith in Godsprouidence,are too 
credulous and readie moſt vainely and wickedly, to depend vpon 
the flying, crooking and chattering of each birde, obſetuation 
alſo of ſundrie daies, houres, and times, & c. The Lordilluminate grentius in 
his Saints with the true knowledge of his prouidence, and tothis Lev. 19. 
ende grauntthem in al places a true miniſterie, that ſuch Sathani- 
call and popiſhdelufions may be packing. 


0 TS we _— —_— LAM —_— 


P Myſ. But who wil ſay withyou,that Manaſſes artes were ſa- 
thanicall,or that he conſulted with Sathan, when he ſought after 
* and fauoured theſe witches? 


Theophilus. Joh. Wolph. faith plainely thus: CAManaſſes rehifto oh. Woloh. 
Deo confugit ad malos fprritns: Manaſſes forſooke Gad, ani ſi ought af- com 2 N 
ter eil pi. And leaſt thou ſhouldeſt deeme Myſethat Sathan 1 x 


4 can haue no ſuch artes, by ſuch obſeruations of thechattering & 
flying of birdes, &c. Marke here what an other ſaith: Operationes * Precop. in 
4 Demonum quibus nos ludificantur & decipiunt ſe quoque extendunt Lev. ig. 


A TREATISE AGAINST 


in aves, The workes of the deuill whereby they delude and 
deceiue vs, are extended alſo to the obleruation of birdes, 


Myſodemon, Nowe let vs heare ſomething of the ſeuenth 
kinde. 

Theophilus. The witches of the 7. kind, are in Hebrew called 
Iidgnomm of a common vſuall roote # : which ſignifieth to 
know, to vnderſtand. Danæus p ſaith, that Palmiſters are here yn» 
P —.— derſtood, and ſuch magitians as did diuine by the entrals of beaſts, 
28 &c. Badin ꝗ differeth not much in iudgement. Maſter C alvin cal 

them cegnitoret, gnoſte; and wee may name them not ynfitly, wiſe 
men ot wi 
MAyſ. And what example haue we in Scripture, which practi- 
ſed this kind of l 3 * 
Tbeoph. This kind alſo is one of the foure diabolicall ſciences, 
which Manaſſes fauoured and ſet vp in his time, and multiplyed 
in the land, vntill the noble King Ioſiah came, who is ſaid to haue 
found among the dunghill gods, (/erchoreos deer, faith Tremel.) 
theſe two kind of witches, pythones, pythoniſts and 1dgnonim, wiſe 
n King.13.24 Hen, & he cauſed their braines to be beaten out with ſtones, r ac- 
Lev.20.27, cordingto the wordes ofthelaw of God. | 
Gen.4t 8. Myſ. And what, Theoph. doe you thinke thattheſe witches 
had any fightin the ſecret myſteries of Sathans.ſciences? Palmi- 
ſters & expounders of dreames are but poore ſimple fellowes, our 
common Egyptian vagabonds (as we call them) cantellys ſome 
py of this profeſſion. Surely then thoſe witches were hke tobe 
ut plaine cooſeners. | 
Theoph. That theſe witches & ſome alſo ofthe former praiſed 
more then common cooſenage, &c. Ican ſhew it by ſufficient 
Note the Proofe ont of theScriptureonthis manner. . All ſinnes which the 
ese Scripture calleth abhominations, are greater and more dreadfull 
Arg. & applie pri : , . W 
them to all then any ſleights of iugling, or cõmon cooſenage: but this kindis 
thoſe kinde of ſo named, a. King. 2 3. 24 therfore this ſinne is not cooſenage, &c. 


withcrafts 2. That ſinne againſt ö which the holy Ghoſt ſheweth like, or 
—_ — reatet deteſtation, then againſithe vileſt idolatrie, iifatre more 
& lofiah pu- dreadfull & more wicked then common cooſenage &c. Ihe Lord 
nitheth with ſhe wech ſuch deteſtation againſt this ſinne in that place. Ergo. 2 
death. That ſinne which is one great cauſe of the deſtruction ofa whole 


kin g- 


* 


WITCHCRAFT, 


kingdome, is a molt dreadfull impietie. This kind of witchcraft 

Was one ofthe foure which Manaiſesliked and ſfauoured, & for 

the which that kingdom : was deſtroied: there fore it is one moſt /. King. 21. 6. 
dreadfull ſinne. 4 That kinde of witchcraft which the law of God * King. 14.3. 
ſo abhorreth, & againſt the xhich it pronounceth death without 

mercie,is no doubt, a moſt deueliſn and as Sathanic all a practiſe, 

as all the reſt: but the law of ſtoning to death (which was the cru- 

elleſt death amõg the lewes) was Hire giuen againſt this kind, 

3 or woman be pytho,or ydgnoni, a wife man, they ſhall die the IL ev. 20.27. & 

ath,they ſhall fone them to death,there blood ſhall be pon them, 5. v.6.&chap.1 9. 

That finne which the noble prince Zofiab,by the aduiſe of his wile 31. 

Iudges and Magiſtrates,&c. directed by the law of God, ſo ſha 
ly puniſbed, and ſought after ſo dilligently, that his Church mi 
be clean purged, &c. muſt not he ht alight impietie, but ra- 

ther the contrarie : and that 7ofiah did ſo, agai e witches and 

others, itis x recorded by the holy Ghoſt for his euerlaſting praiſe. 
God put into the hates of our Honourable Iudges to doe the like ig 23a. 
in theſe times, where and when occaſion is And to this 
end, Strilegius writeth againſt theſe witches, and to the commen- 


dation of /ofias on this manner. His ſeneriſſimis mandatis Iofias ob Vitor Seri. 


remperans non tantum exſcindit, ſedetiamevellit omnes vates & i. 
—— rurſiu fruticentur: eandem ſeveritatem om- — 2 
nei magiſtrat us ſequantur in tollendis e medio mag is, cc. & alis qui ſe 
mmiſtros diabolorum prebent. Ioſiah obeying the moſt ſenere rules of 
Gods law (Lev. 20. 27.) didnot onely cut downe,but rooted vp all divi- 
ner tand deneliſhenchanters , leaſt they ſhould bud or ſeede any more: 
let all magiſtrates (faith he) v ſe the like ſoveritie, to tahe away 
witcher, and all ſuch as gine them ſelues to the miniſterie of 
Sathan. . 
HMyſodemon. And what was the laſt kinde of witches named 
in that place of Deut. i 8. v.11. 
Th. The laſt words there are, doreſb el hammui him, one that en- 

uireth or ſeeketh counſel at the dead, but it is to be doubred whe- 
ther the Lord meaneth in theſe words an other ſpecial kind, ox ta- 
ther ſheweth by the, by what meanes ſom of the reſt thete nũbred _ 28, 
praiſed theſe artes, namly, bycõſultation with the ſpirits of dead ag 


m&E{as was thought) but with devils indeed,howbeitſome affirm, 
| D 4 - that 


- „ — 


4 Annot. in 
5 Deut. 18. 
1 


Lag. 16.23. 


Jo. Fr. p. mĩ- 
randula de 
præ. lib. 4. c. 
FF. 


— 


A TREATISE. AGAINST 


that Vecromancre, another and ſpeciall kinde of witchcraft, is here 
to be vnderſtoode: but Samuel & Eſay lay plainely chat Aobooth, 
pribomiſtes,and idgnamim wir ards, practiſed this Necromanſic: for 
Eſay ſaith, that ſuch as conſult with Aobooth and » n, goe 
fromthe liuing ei h ummut hum, that is, to ask counſel of dead ſoules 
(as ſome ſuppoſed) but of the deuills indeed, Maiſter Luth, ſaith, 
that Vecromant ici ſpiritus notturnos & obambulantes con ſulunt. Ne- 
cromancers cõſult with night walking ſpitits, &c. ot as Eſay ſaith, 
They lye and remaine among the A h0g.22 5. 4. Howlocuer 
it be, whether theſe words conteiue another ſpeciall kind, or no, 


Iknow notꝭ but one thing we are ſure of, that theſe witches alſo 


had there matchandize with Sachan him ſelfe: for the ſpirit of the 
righteous retu roGod that gaue them, Eccleſ. 1 2.7.and the 
ſoules of the vntighteous, ate( as our Sauiour Chriſt ſaith) in hell 
torments, Wherefore they mult be Sathanicall ſpirits , and not 
ſoules departed, which come to conference and to cafficke with 
witches here earth, But ſome intending * rofinde an eſſenti- 
all difference, haue thought it beſt to call that pages ene. 
niſtes, Sciomantia to diſcern itfrom this laſt kinde of witchcraft,as 
if there did appeare but ſhadowes onely in che one, but reall bo- 
dies in the other. Wherefore this difference is butto ſmal purpoſe, 
in my iudgement. | 


CHAPTER IL 


Of the witches of our time, and of their barg aines, ſocietie, and 
A cquaintance with Sat han. 


Theophilus Ayſademon. 
> 24! Vrely, Theophilus,l loue not ſophiſtically to 
F cavill inthis controuetſie, but ſobetly to come 
(if God ſo plcaſe)vnto che knowledge ofthe 
| tructh. Seeing that the light of Gods wards 
2-1 io maniſeſt, that theſe magical attes mentio- 
ned inthe Scripture, were ſuch horrible impi- 
"= > 4 ctics, abhominations, &c. and ſo dereſtable 
before almightie God, that they cauſed his wrath to be kindled 
in ſuch manner againſt his people, forfauouring, following, and 
practiſing 


— r= — — n= _— —_ _—_— —_— 


4 


tre notaſhamedtò ſay indeede,fairh Hemingins, that there is great 


WITCHCRAFT, 

practiſing them: I muſt and will willingly ſubſcribe, Theophilus, 
chat theſe artes were moreibdeed chen cooſenage, poiſoning, na- 
turall magike, or any other ſuch like invention, onely practiſed by 
humane induſtrie. | 

Theophila, Neuer doubt of it, they were Sathanicivenefici, 
& Sathamici magi, Sathanicall magitians and Sathanicall poiſo- 
ners indede: and fo call them, Myſodemon, as 4 learned men haue 4 Dan. c. i. 
done and thus I cruſt thou ſeeſt what the witches were Which are P. 20. 


mentioned in Scriprure. | 

Myſ. Tdoe o, Theophilus, thankeyou:But hall weimagine 
that ourpoore doating old women (which are commonly called 
witches )at this day, are like in any point vntothoſe 7. which are 
mentioned in Scripture.Surely I haue no light of reaſon, or Sctip- 
ture, as yet wherefore we ſhould ſo thinke, | 
— Theophilus, Thou art here alſo caried away with ſome fabu- 
lous volumes of withcraft, orthou markeſt the follie of the multi- 
tude,or both. For what, My ſodemon? ſhall Sathan in this age be 
leffe cruell, or infidels more holy then they haue beene? ſome 


difference betweene heatheniſn and Chriſtian magike. Illi damo- 2 
net, hi ſanctot invocant, illi prophamis, hi ſacris verbis vtuntur, illi cha- — "P* 
racteres ignotos, hi ulum cruc is c ſurpant. The heathens called a 
ypon deuils, the Chtiſtians pray vnto Saints, they vſed prophane | 
terms, but theſe vſe holy words, they practiſed vnknowen chara- N 
ers, but theſe are full of croſſes in there witchcraft. There fore the 
witches in the Church are more wicked then the Heathen 
Witches, for theſe abuſe the Worde and Sacramentes of 


ie | 


„„ ts —_— = 


 "Atyſ Iſay not ſo, but I reaſon thus: Myracles c are ceaſed: Ergo: De. ige. 


All the miraculous works of witchcraft are ceaſed, & conſequent- 
y. I ſay that our witches c an in no wiſe worke fo as thoſe witches 
mentioned in Scripture haue done. 
Tbeophilu. I anſwer thee fitſt: For thine argument, the conſe- 
uent followeth nine myles behinde the Antecedent. For as thou 
haſt hard partly before, the witches ſpokẽ of in Scripture wroughr | 
no miracles, but, as the Scripture ſaith, lying wonders, For all al bros 
true miracles haue — cauſes, and ſo haue not the deceit- — 


full deluſions ofthe dell, 18.79.80, 


E x ahd. 


& 
* 
1 LC IIS DHS TSS ee eee 
wu 7 - © $ +.+ = ” s 5 
. 


* =." — 
24 = CY 4 
e 


Diſ.p.160. 


Rom. 8.x. 


is prepared for the deuill and his angels. And wherefore he 


ſtantinet time, and before when, the 


A TREATISE AGAINST 
Aly ſedemou. You haue not heard all that I can ſay, for Itell 


you, my reaſon ſtands vpon good ground, and hath great ſtrength, 


d Oracles(as you know) are ccaſed, and no doubt whatſoener hath af. 


finitie withſuch miraculous ac lions, as witchcraft, coninration, & c. it 


is knocked onthe head, and nayled on the croſſewith Chriſt , who hath 
broken the power of the dexills, What ſay you to this, Theophi- 


Theophilus. Surcly I can but wonder, CH/odemor, that any 
ſhouldteachyou by ſpeach or by writing, ſuch blacke diuinitie in 
this bright ſhining light ofthe Goſpel. For babes in Chriſtianitie, 
vnderſtande that Thtiſt on his croſſe, hath ſo farrefoorth bro- 
ken the power of ſinne, as that it ſhall neuer haue ſtrength to the 
condemnation * ofhis ele. But hee neuer ment ſo totake away 
ſinne, as that it ſhould haue no beeing in the world, much leſſe to 
knocke in the head( as thine Author ſaith) the finnes of Sathan & 
reprobates, for they are predeſtinate al to burne in that lake H 


not reaſon thus. Smme is braynedand naylad on the croſſe with ¶ hriſt: 
Ergerwitcheraft, murder, theft, & c. is ceaſed, It is becauſe theg his at- 
gument ſhould appeare before the ſonne, to be a moſt impious & 
Anabaptiſticall reaſon, as itis indeede, howſocuer hee coloureth 
it. 


Ah ſademon. Whetefore then haue Oracles ceaſed, as Pla- 
tarch, and Euſebius, and others write, and it is kno wen true by cx» 
perience, for there temples are fallen, and there is no more menti - 
on made ofthem. 

Theophilus. True it is indeede, Enſebixs faith they fell in Con> 
ſpel began to be publiſh» 
ed, and the word of God had free paſſage among the Gentiles, but 
thinke not albcit atthis day,theſe Oracles are not he heſe 
artes ſo publiquely d and maintained, as among the old 
Gentiles they haue beene: that therefore Sathan is Keder ] 
wonders ceaſed: but the rather thus we are to iudge, becauſe Sa- 
than can not haue ſuch Temples nowe for his ſetuice, 


ſince the Goſpell came vnto the Gentiles, that he is more beſtut· 


ring him ſelfe in another more ſecret manner, whereſocuer 
light ofChrilt is wanting, for ſo he doeth indeede, as afterwardes 


ſhalbe ſhewed, 
ſe 


L will cauſe. 


WITCHCRAFT. 
1 Againe, Theophilus, I pray you giue me leaue 
peake 


to {| what I can for our old women, tor Iam greatly agree- 
ued to ſee the rude multitude ſo cruell againſt them, and ſome 
Iudges ſo mercileſſe, as to pur theſe poore innocents to death, 
I reaſon thus by law againſt this vniuſt crueltie: I ſay bee is int 
riowſhe dealt wit hall if ſbee Ze the denills e inſirument, im prattiſing e Dil. in epiſt. 
his will, my reaſons are. 1. Shee 1 put todeath for an others offence. 
2. Attions are not mdged by inſtrumental cauſes : and therefore 
I conclude theſe olde women may not dye for Witcheraſt. 
This is Lawyers Logicke /tell you, Theophilus, What can you fRoſtech. 

to this ? diſp. prop. as. 

Theophilus, Fuſt , as for the ignorant people, they are ca- 
ried 'away in deede with many fonde opinions concerning 
witches, the Lorde graunt his Saintes his Worde and Spirit, 
that 1 truely diſceme the deluſions of Sathan, and 
avoide them: and as for thine argument, if it be lawyers in- 
ventions, / tell the truelie, th bad aduocates in an e- 

They reaſon as if 4 would haue the Honou- 

- rable Judges to hang the deuill, and to ſuffer the witches to 
_ ſame reaſon may ſerue anabaptiſticallie appli- 
ed for a libertie vnto all finne, for why may not the Thiefe 
and the Adulterour ſay the like : the Witch therefore 
muſte dye as acceſſarie to the cauſe, for the Judges can 
not apprehende the head maſter of this euill, the flying ſer- 

nt ? 
” Myſodemon, I will ſee what may be ſaide in their behalfe, 
before wee intreate any further of them: what if I reaſon thus: 
Chriſt did g clearely remit Peter, though his offence were commit- 5 — — 
ted bor h againſt his dinine and humane * Perſon: yet aftermardes hee 500 
did put him in truſt to frede his ſheepe, ce. and therefore wee ſeenot * Diuine and 
but wee may ſbeme compaſſion vpon theſe poore ſouler, if they humane na- 
ſhewe them ſelues ſorowfull for their miſconceites andwicked imagi- — he would 

WA aue ſaid. 

* Theophilus, This reaſon is vnſufficĩent and very anabapti- 
ſticall, for it wrings out of the civill Magiſtrates bande all his 
power. and iuriſdiction. Shall every penitent malefactour be 
deliucred from a temporall puniſhment, farewell then all 
execution of juſtice. Bur ON here, * 

2 . 


— 


A TREATISE AGAINST 


* that where God temitteth his ſecret iuſtice, & pardoneth ſinnes 
5 in Chriſt, there muſt not the ciuill Magiſtrate be remiſſe in bodily 
I puniſhment andiuſtice, except he haue an extraordinary warrant 
| and reuclation from God, for his direction. The la we is, [how ſhalt 
not ſuffer a witch to line, vnleſſe the iudge haue warranttorepeale [ 
this law from Ieſus Chriſt (as Peter had) all witches lawfully con- 
victed muſt haue their puniſhments anſwerable to their demerits. 
. Againe, thou doſt not well to call our witchcraft miſconceite & 
| | wicked imagination, for / rellthee, it is more. But thou art ouer 
haſtie to wh, as yet, ſuch apologies for witches,for theſe pointes 
ſhould be diſcuſſed inthe end ot ourconference, But goe on, de- 
5 maund chat thou wilt, and / will anſwer thee as I can. 
Myſodemon, Pardon ing this diſorder, Theophilus, / will be as 
* bC.ro87 briefe as I can, l pray you anfwer me but a few queſtions. y Danz- 
* I 1 us, Bodin, ( Hemingius, and others, would haue witches puniſh» 
oc lupeſt, — evidence againſt them for ſorcerie be not maniſeſt) for 
mag. their known idolatry, blaſphemie, apoſtaſie, ſeducing ofothers, &cc. 
Iſay the Magiſtrates ought not to yeeld to this counſell. 
Theophilus, Wherefore Myſodæmon. 2 
Ay ſade mon. Firſt, I prooue they are no idolators, for this is a 
{D.p.70. true definition of idolatrie: They are idolators which doe externall 
worſhip to idols or ſtraunge gods, Now the witches haue no ſuch vi- 
ſible fight of Sathan that — can ſo adore him. | 
Theophilus. No rather, Myſodemon,he is an idolater alſo which 
worſhippeth God otherwiſe inwardly or outwardly, then God 
m Dan.g.c.p. hath reuciled in his holy word that he ſhould be worſhipped: a- 
55.017, » . not ſo, My ſodemon, but that Sathan can ſhew him- 
ſel 


— hog fein a viſible forme, faire or foule, w(as many places of —_ 
— 4 _ ture can teſtifie) and ſo offer him ſelfe viſiblie to be adored, A 


verum,vel fal is not Sauls /dolatric ſo manifeſt, as none but a ſtubborne witte 
ſos, vel eorum (as P. Martyr ſaith)can denie ic ? 


vireutes rebræ ( Nſyſode mon. Let me heare then what you can ſay to my ſe- 
man ne cf teaſon:they are no Apoſtates, becauſe they want found judge- 
trio fine Dei ment, fot they haue but a poote deale of any re ion, and mollor 
mandatofa- them ſeem to wit very ſenſe. What Apoltacie the can fuch haue? 
cx. Theophilus, I anſ wet, indeede the more graces men receiue, 
7 8 5 R if they fall from grace, the greater is there Apoſtac ie, as in Julian 
bene aud ochets: but count you their ba ptiſme, wherein'they haue of- 


| fered 


| 
: 


hominis arbi- 


CCC 


* 
0 
T » 
_ 


WITCHCRAFT. 


fered vnto them all the benefits of their redemption , their viſible 
incorporation into the ſocietie of the Saints: their outward pro- 
ſeſſion in che face of the Church nothing?and to renounce Pack ab- 
iure all theſe giſts and graces, and to betroth them ſelues with Sa- 
Jchan, is all this no Apoſtacie? 
Myſodemon, But all theſe things want proofe as yet. 
7 bei, Thou ſhalt ſee thele points proved, & ſome more 
which ſeeme ſo incredible yntothee,whenthy doubtes are anſwe- 
red:haſtthou any more to ſay? 

Myſodemon, Againe, / can not ſee how they can be ſeducers,for 
they k 4 

e. 


we no Rhetorich,, nor any ſuch arts, to ſeduce men by am cooſe- 


Theophilui, Albeit, Myſedemon, they neuer read Tullic nor 
Quintillians Rhetotick, yet are they deueliſh deceiuers,forSimon 
the ſorcerer had but a ſmall ſight, I thinke, in theſe artes, yet could 
he ſeduce thꝭ people of Samaria for many yeeres, vntill they re- 
ceiued o the Goſpel, and then he fled to Roome and ſeduced ma- o. 40.8.8, 5,10 
ny others, as Euſeb.wvtiteth. So could Elimas his companion, who 
wy haue likewiſe ſeduced andy turned Sergius Paulus from 5.48. 1395. 8. 

Myſodemon. But what ſay you, if our witches are but carried 
away in their fond practiſes, with the humors of melancholic?raay 
they not then poore fooles be pardoned? 

Theophilus . As for this figge leafe, Bodin bloweth it aWay » Confurar: 
with * one breath. | Wyeri. p. 431; 

Myſodemon, Well, I reſt my ſelfe, Theophilus, vntil I ſee what 432-433. 
you can ſpeake of our witches. Let me hearethen brieflie what 

you can ſay. There ate many things which are ſaid to be in the wit- 
ches of our time, which were neuer heard of in theſe old witches, 
mentioned in Scripture, as namely theſe points: there tranſporta- 
tions, there bargaine with the Deuill, there Sathanicall ſabaoths, 
there oynrments ofthe fatte of young children, theirtranſformati- 
ons, and ſuch like myracles ot wonders (as you ſay, Theophilus.) 
now prooue all theſe, ot any of theſe points true in our witches, b 
Scripture, or any good reaſon, or authoritie, and I wil beleeue that 
we haue alſo in our time tight diabolicall witches indeede, 

Theophilus, I will aſſay to prooue them true, aske of them in 
order as thou haſt euen now propounded them, 

E 3 Myſe- 


| : 1 


— 


A TREATISE AGAINST 


Ay ſalemon. What ſay youthen totranſportations? for out 
witches are ſaid to flie in the ayer, and in the night ſeaſon to be ca» 
ried to places farre diſtant, to meete with Herodias, Diana, 
and Ainerva, and the ſame night to returne againe: incredible 
wonders. I | 

Theophilus, I will not denie, Myſedemon,but the deuill may de- | 
lude his witches many waies in theſe tranſportations &that man 

| 1 fabulous pamphelets are publiſhed , which giue little light aff 
FM runken AY ; 
5 Dunſtan, leſſe proofe vnto this point in controuetſie. This ſirſt ynder- 
$1 art. & in p. tand, that whatſoeuer is ſaide of tranſportations, contrarie 
2 156. to the nature of our bodies, as to ride on the moone to meete 
7 Herodias, &c. all ſuch thinges are indeede but mcere deluſi- 
ons: but this that learned men afhrme of the tranſportations 
of witches by Sathan, it hath no ſuch impoſſibilitie in nature, 
ql.ccli. but that it may be performed, Peter Martyr q wiiteth thus, 
c. oa. Cumque tants ſint demonum vires , quantas antes deſcripſumnus, 
nihil obſtat quin_ hamines interdum tollere peſſiut, atque auferre 
in nemora. Sceing the Denills haue ſuch ſtrength as wyee 
haue before ſhewed, Lanes hi let them, to take vp, and carrie 
men ſometrmes into vvoddes, Then hee addeth Simon Ma- 
gus example, who was ſo famous for ſuch flying in the aer, & 
y Eccleſhiſt, other magicall trickes, that hee was adored (as Euſebrus r wri- 
2.1.b.c.13.14. reth) in Samaria and at Roome alſo, and his picture was ſet 
; vp with this title, Simoni deo ſancto, To. Simon the holy god. 
Art. dein P34 But Euſebius addeth, that the Goſpell did diſcouer him and 
[Lib.2.c.4.de wrought his diſcredit in all places. Bodin / ſaith, De expor- 
Dzmon. -patione autem poſi vuilionem tranſvehi magos legimw, wel 
ſme wnitione ſape, hirco, pegeſo, ſcapa, baculo, wel fine bacula 
& iumento vllo. And as for tranſportation (ſaith he) we reade that - 
after their annointing, they are carried away, and ſometimes wit h- 
out oyntments, vpon 4 goate, or winged ef or a broame,or a ſtaffe, 
and ſometimes without a ſtaſfe or any beaite. And we muſt not 
imagine that all are but fables, v. hich learned Authors in elder 
times alſo haue written, as Platarchof Romulus, Phileſtrates of 


N 1 

: : 

. * 

= 

174 
4 

4 

* 


# # 
* * 


# Appolonizs Tyanera and others of Pythagoras tranſportations. 
+ Nether muſt wee reieR all the late /nquifitors, which by the 
1 accuſations, confeſſions, condemnations and executions of 
'F innumerable magitians , haue learacd and gotten ſome cre- 


dible 


WITCHCKAFT. 


dible experience of the crueth of tranſportations. # Bodin , 1 bb... 

and » Danzus haue alſo ſundrie late examples, When thou haſt 2 Dial c.. 

opportunitie, CMy/odemon, thou mailt read them. 

Myſedemen, But [can not ſo like, Theophilus, of all theſe, as 

of one probable argument ot Scripture, 

| Theophilics, What ſaieſt thou, Ayſodemon, to the tranſpotta 

tion of our Sauour mentioned, Math. 4. S. Luk. 4. 9. If Sathan durſt 
touch ſo pute and ſo bleſſed a bodie, as our Lord Chriſt nadie 
God gaue him le aue) whereon he had no dominion, by reaſon of 
finne: if chat he could alſo take vp and carrie Chriſt through the 
aierynto the pinacle ofthe Temple; no doubt, that bould cham- 

" pionfeareth not to handle, and to catie theſe vncleane and vnſa- 
uerie bodies of ſorcerers and witches, for that he knoweth before 
that both their ſoules and bodies belong vnto him. If God hath gi- 
uen Sathan power ouer the ſoules of ſorcerers to ſeduce them 
from the faith: it is much more like that he giueth him leaue both 
to touch & to beare their bodies:for God giver? him leſſe authori- 

a 1 tie and domigionouer mens ſoules, then he doth ouermens bo- 
dies: as may be ſeene in /obs example, Chap. 2. v. 6. a 

AMyſademon. But [remember (M. alvin x ſaith, this trani per- x D. p. tog. 
tation of Chriſt was in aviſion onely. 194. 
Theoph, As I can in no wiſe abide theabuſe of holy Scripture, 
ſo can / not beare with any, which forte good writers to — 0 
that whichthey would not. For M. Calvin doth not ſay teſolute- 
ly. chat the tranſlation of our Sauiour was ina viſion only: his own 
mo are, In re dubia & quam abſ[q, peri „ 9 

cinm ſuſpendere quam cont ent ioſi prebere litigandi anſam.Inadoubt- 

full matter wherein I may be — | ———.— Ibad rather 

ſuſpend my indgement, then offer any occaſion vnto contentions men of 

Arife. And then he addeth, that other incerpretors affine boldly 

that itwas a reall tranſportation. And ſo much for the firſt point 

of our witches wonders, | 
Myſodamon. I dare notreieQallthe authorities, Theophilus, 

albeit / am not througly reſolued. And what can you ſay for their 

bargaine with the del or there Sathanicall ſabbaoth, forwe ne- 
uerread of ſuch things mentionedin Scripture ? 
Theophilus, I will not be long in the confirmation of theſe 
pointes, fot chat other writers 7 written much of this 
FS 4 mat- 


- 
P ALAS CHAI en 0 - 


1 A TREATISE AGAINST 
+ 1 matter. Firſt, forthe witches bargaine and obligatiodi wich the de- 
7 The witches uill, anſwer me a few queſtions, Myſodemon: arc you reſolued that 
25 — a there were euer any witches in the world? 
1 . Myſodemon, That / am, thoſe mentioned in the Scripture, 
6 and peraduenture ſome other beſide. + 
e And canſt thou imagine that Sathan would binde 
him ſelfe to any ofthem(as the witch of Endor ſor example) to be 
2 preſent w ey would, and to miniſter vnto their neceſsities, aa 
2 - we read he did, before ſuch time as the witch alſo for her part do: 
r. Sam. ad. Fenounce God & all religion, & adore him as her God: yea and 
binde her ſelfe in ſome euident manner, to perſiſt in this profeſ- 
ſion, and continually to petfotme theſe pointes, and all other 
articles conteined in his obligation. 

Ats ſodamon. If there be ſuch a — —. deuil,no doubt, 
wilbe ſure enough for his part: and I think he wil not greatly bind 
him ſelfe before the witch alſo doe the ſame. 

Theophilus.” It is moſt like to be true, Myſodamon, for ſome- 
* Lib..c.s, dimes there*obligations are found written with their'own blood, 
as Bodin reporteth of one, Theophilus, to haue done, 
| ſod em. I will not heare, / tell you, neither of Nadin: 
Diſinthe * bables, nor Sprengeus fables: I pray you ſhew me one example 
/ preface. outof Come ck diele Aurchour, if you can. 
[hs Thpophilas. "Maſter Fox in the ſtorie of M. Luther, hath one 


. 2 
— * 


— 7 
* 


- 
* 
* 
3 
"*S. 


fingulat example for this purpoſe. There was (faith he)a yourg man 
pri. — e bare and — by 2 wa- 
rempted by way of ſorcerte, to bargaine with the Denill, or a familiar 
(as they calthim):oyeetd him ſelfe hodie ard fonte into the denils pow- 
er, vponcondition"to haue his wiſh fats: fie with money: fo that vpox 
the ſame, an obligation was male by the young man, written with bi 
owne blood, and giuen to the dewill.This cafe you fee how horrible it was, 


pl and how damnable: now heare what follywed, pon this ſodaine wealth 
| f and alteration of this young man, the matter firſt Peeing noted, began 


afterwardes more and more to be ſuif Bird, and at length after long & 
great kdmiration, was brought tot Nl. Luther to be examined, The 
young man whether for ſhame or feare long denied to con faſſe, andwould 
be bnowen of nothing. Yet G al o wrought beein ſtronger then the de- 2 
will.tharthe hover er T the whole ſubſtance of the caſe, as well 
touc hung the money 41 rhe obligation, Luther underſtanding the mat- 


ter, 


8 8 
. 


ter, and pittying the lamentable ſtate of the mam, willed then hole con- 
gregation to pray : and he lumſelfe ceaſed not withprayers tolabour, 1 ; 
that the deuid was compelled at the laſt to throw in his eb(igation at the 
window,and bad lum taks it againe vn o bim. Thus farte Maſter Lu- 
ther, 
CMyſedemon, Surely this is a notable example: and it may be 
this is not ſo incredible a matter, as ſome haue marueilous boldly 
and confidently auouched: but where make they ſuch bar- 
gaines? 

- Theophilus, At their common meetings, which they cal their 
ſabboth, for there the deuill hath many vitneſſes, and there theſe 


obligations are autentically ſcaled. thou muſt vnderſtande, Sathanical 


Mijodæmon, that as thou kuowelt Sathans purpoſe is euer molt to 
rebell againſt God: ſo his driſt in all the artes of magike principal- 
lie is, o vie all the mockerie that euer he can inuent againſt God, 
and his Word and all the partes of true religion. And to this end, he 
hath ordained his ſabbothes for his ſeruice. In theſe horrible mee- 


4 tings, Sathan bimſelfe appeares ſometime in one forme, ſometime 


in another: (for io he can as the Scripture teſtiſieth) ſot ſomtimes 


his miniſters behould him in the likenes of a man, but moſt com- Cor. 1. 


monly of a foule ſtinking goate. There they haue ſundrie ſuites 
vnto him: and hee minittreth and teacheth them to confect poy- 
ſons and pouders, and many things for the deſtruction of man and 
beaſt, and in the end he addeth (when his congregation is to be 
diſmiſſed) with a terrible thundring voice, this ſpeech, or ſome- 
thing to the like effect. / lcrſcrmm vos, ant mortem oppetetu. Re- 
venge your ſelnes,or elſe die the death. 

'AMyſodemon, Well, Theophilus, theſe things may be true, 


yet ſome haue doubted how there can be any firme bargaine a be- Diſp.45. 


tmeene a carnal bodie and a ſpurituall. , 
Theophilus, The Scripture telleth vs plainely that he can tranſ- 
forme him ſelſe into many ſhapes; the Apoſtle ſaith, he can chãge 


himſelfe into an 6 angell of light. 51. Cor. t. 13. 


Myſodemor. But [cannot heare, I 
honeſt man tell vs any thing which batk beene bimſelfe cyt her a partie, 
er awineſſe of ſuch horrible bargaines, 

Theophilus, There is no man, / thinke, of learning or godly. 
nee, that would require this teſtimonic at an honeſt mans handes, 

F to 


heopbilus, am wiſe man, c or c Dil.p.45. 


"_— 


————x © 
_ 


<<... - 
bh Yr — 


7 > — -— 
8 — 


—— — 


— — 


2 AT... =, 


1 
5 As 
- 


— — — 1 +. as 


ek 


= — — — — — — 


A TREATISE AGAINST 

to be an eye witneſſe of ſuch dreadfull abhominations:thou ſpea- 
keſt therefore, Myſedemon, of a thing impoſſible: for honeſt men 
haue no ſuch conuenticles; notwithſtanding to ſatisſie in ſome 
ſort thy deſire, fee | pray thee, the examinations, confeſſions, and 
pta ctiie of M. A of Barking, and M. B. of Rocheſter, confirmed by 
ſufficient eaten Ann. 15 84. And to endchis queſtion 

dDialog.z, Of cheſe Sachanicall bargaines: Danzus 4 and other graue authors 
chap.p.45. lay, That it is the uniforms conſent of the witches of all nantons and of 
times: for there confeſſions all agree, and haue many hundreth yeres 

2 Ale _—_— Quee fuiſſe affirmantur ab omnih 14, ea non fuiſe qui con- 

nodon . l. l. C. a. 4 , calum iat ur. | 

Myſadamon. It may be ſome of our Maſter witches fre 
ſuchpublique aſſemblies, and haue ſome open bargaine and con- 
fedetacie with Sathan: but it is not lite that al deale ſo openly with 
him, for many of them with one conſent conſtantly afficme in 
their death, that they neuer ſaw the deuilkgh their liues. 41 
Theophilus, Therefore ſome learned men haue diſtinguiſhed 
theſe Sathanicall couenants into their « ſorts:for ſome haue an o- 


4 Loh. Er. P. 
pen, expteſſe, and euident league 
— yy ſome a more hid and ſecrets ſome a mint and meane betweene 


Bodin.1b.z.de both, Vnto the open and expreſſe confederacie, hoo ma- 

Demonom. c. nifeſt coniurationꝭ and practiſes of Pythoniſtes: vnto the ſecret 

13 kinde all cloſe and ſecret — — Sathan, in diuining, aſtro- 
logie, palmiſtrie, and ſuch nto the third kinde, apperteme all 
the practiſes of ious magicke in all ſorc eries w hatſoeuer. 
And following this diftinQion of diabolic all confederacies : we 
may not vnfitly diſtinguiſh alſotheir artes, for the better manife- 

þ Feneri The- ſtation of the trueth on this manner, Some be b meere diabolical, 

olog Li. p. ai. ſome mixt diabolicall: meere diabolicall as of Pythoniſts,and all 
ſuch as are of the open league: mint, as all other which vſe any o- 
ther meanes appointed by Sathan for their practiſe, and are of the 
ſecond and third kinde of confederaciee. 

Myſode mon. 1 pray you then vnto which league belong 
the common ſort of our witches, which ſeeme indeede to worke 
by the deuill(ſo wicked are their liuẽs, ſodeucliſſi are their inuen- 
tions, and ſuch dieadfull euents follow them) and yet haue no 
manifeſt operation by Sathan to their owne knowledge, as ae? 

e et n 


and confederacie with Sathan: 


i 
"2" „ , 6 5 & 46 
l 


WITCH CRAFT, 


of them ſay inthe very houre ofdeath. + + 

Theophilus, They doe belong therefore, no doubt, to the ſe- 
cond or third = of 2 and they worke ſecretly 
by che deuill, c Q nangquarm hac ipſi ron adt ertant & norint, Aibeit 
r ——————— 

Myſodemon, But you haue not one ſyllatia in all the Scrip-c. f. 
tures of God, to ptooue any ſuch league or couenant betweene 
Sathan and witches, | 

T heophilws, We haue not indeede any ſuch wordes or phra- 
ſes, and yet may we truely conclude, that there are ſuch thinges, 
by Scripture; for the Scripture -—_ vs the great readines and 
acquaintance of Sathan, with the enchaunters of Egypt, the Py- 
thoniſt of Endor and Philippi: doe therein ſignificantly giue vs 
to vnderſtande, that there was ſome precontract and confede· 
racie berweene them: for Sathan will neuer worke in ſuch 
manner, but with whome hee hath ſome league and acquain- 
tance, rt 
* * Ayſedemon. And what can you ſay of our witches oynt - Wirchesoyne: 
|. ments, for /remember /oh.Bep.Neap.did prooue by his owne ex- ments, 
perience,thatthis was but meere cooſenage and a fable in witch- 
craft, as we may tead in his little booke of naturall magic ke, lib. a. 


cap. 26. | 

Nba. Firſt, as for the ſtrength of any oyntmentes to 
worke any magic all inuentions, I ant wer, My ſodæmon, it is none 
at all. For oyntments can mooue Sathan, no more — — 
eroſſes, circles, periaptes, the ſuperſtitious mutterings of hol 
wordes, and ſuch like abhominations. Secondly, that they haue 
notwithſtanding ſuch ſtuffe in their practiſe, / am induced to be- 
lecue, for that Sathan wants not in his ſeruice (as is before ſaide) 
all the apiſh imitations of Gods religion, that can be deuiſed 5 
by new found and forged ſacraments. Againe, HMyſodemon, 2 
if this making of oyntementes, of the fatte of young chil- ;,Graem ilam 
dren, ſeeme fo ſtraunge vnto thee, vnderſtande this, that Iudeorum imi- 
albeit the devill little regardeth ſuch oyntementes, yet is hee fa ef? 
right glad to behould and ſee the — and bl <q r 
of young infantes: for wherefore elſe did the Heathen ki " 
and ſactifice their children vnto Moloche ? and that thou 
maieſt vndetſtande alſo, what that abhominable practiſe was, 

F 2 David | 


A TREATISE AGAINST 


David ſheweth that, complaining becauſe"this horrible idolarrie ; 
into the Church : fol he Gai, They offered their ſonnes and 
dawghters vnto deuilli. And that the deuill ſtirteth Sathanicall ma- 
N itians, to offer theſe bloody ſacrifices vnto him, the eccleſiaſticall 
ories of Ma xentius and Julian, and others, c an teſtiſie vnto vs. For 
eMaxenr. Eu · Of e the one, it is ſaid, Contuli ſe magicis ſtuds ad inc ant atiomem C- 
ſeb. eccleſ hiſt. iam mulieres pregnantes diſcidit, iam — recen nat orum viſe = 
lb 8. c. 5. & cera inguiſiuit, & arcano quod am modo es advocautt. He gaue 
- 17:99 * himſelfe to the ſtudie — magick for inchantment, andthen he ripe 
163% women with child, and ſought diuiations in the entrals of young 
infants, and called or coniuted deuils ſecretly. And ofthe F other 


— it is wricten: Antiochia vero aiunt mult as arc as in reg ia, refurtas ha- 
mus capitibus, inventas eſſe, multiſ j; in puteis jc 2s; « 


25, 


There were found at Antioche(asthey lay) many cheſtes full of 
mens ſculles, and many dead corſes were found in wells and a little 
before his death inthe Perſian warre, it is ſaid in the ſame place, 
that he ript an other woman with child to practiſe vpon her his di- 
uinations, and then he hung her by the heare, purpoſing to learne 
more by liet dead bodie 2 teturne, but therein he fayled, albeit. 
his deuils told him the contrarie. Againe, Plinie writing of Vero 
and his magicke,faiththus of him, Homines etiam immolare gratiſ 
fimum ei fun: He was moſt delightedto ſacrifi:e men unto demills, A- 
pollo taught his witches to ſacrifice a noble Virgin, to ſtay the 
Plague among the Lacedemonians. Po/yxena Priamus daughter, 
and [phigenia Agamemnons, were both ſacrificed to Sathan in 
Tertullian in like manner. The witches of Scithia offered men in ſacrifice vnto 
ſuoScorpiaco. Diana: The witches of Fraunce ynto Mercurie : The witches of 
Africa vnto Saturne, And what was Diana,Mercurie, & Saturne, 
but Sathan and hisfellowes, which coloured and ſhrowded the 
*D ſelues vnder ſuch names andtitles{as ¶irandula * faith rightwell 
Frænot. among the blinde and prophane Gentiles? The Romane witches 
taught the old Romanes to ſacrifice two men yeerely, to appeaſe 
the Gods, and to caſt them into Tyber. In Cyprus alſo, they ſacri- 
ficed a man vnto Apollo. To conclude, Baals witches ſhew plain- 
ly how greatly Sathan delighteth himſelf to ſee mens blood ſhed 
in his ſeruice, for it is written of them, They cryed loud, and cut them 
ſeluet, as the manner was, with knines and launc et, till the blood guſhed 


out vpon them. And this hath, is, and euet will be che ende of all 
| ſpiricuall 


1. Xing. 18. 28. 


| ſpirituall whore n 


| 


* WTECHCRAEFT. 
with Sathan in witchctaſt. The like effects Read of the 
could | ſhew by examples of corporall whoredome alſo: for theſe toric of yong 
two kinds of pollutions, as they haue great affinitie in nature, and W oa 7 
in filthie practiſes accompanie one tha other : ſo for this ende in ion abbey, & 
murder and bloodſhedding they haue not much varied, but euer found in the 
in all ages offered Sathan theſe bloodie ſacrifices vaderſundrie 8. yete of Q. 
and diuetſe pretenſes, as it is by the continuall obſeruationof wile 8 
men truly teſtified vnto vs. | wr _ 
Myſodemon, No doubt, Theophilus, if Sathan haue that What facriß- 
bloodie purpoſe in witches oyntments, he will vſe all the meanes ces,wirchcraft 
he can, to worke his wonders by ſuch oyntments indeede: forthe & whordowe, 


ſcripewecelleth vs, that he is aroaring lyon ſeeking without reſt whom the two eldeſt 
be ure and deſtroy both e! — leaſt / wearie — op Yr 
7 2ophilus,in theſe things wherein / know you be not great - euer offered 
delighted: / pray you let me heare in a word what can be ſaide vnto Sathan. 
of lycanthropeia, tranſformation of men and women into wolfes 
and cattes, &c.for theſe things arecleanecontrarie againſt nature, 
and muſt be meere — if the trueth be tryed, 
Theophilus, Ttuely my greateſt delight in this conference, 
2 to helpe thee what / can to come vnto the know- 
ledge ofthe trueth, & to make thee more able to auoyde( if God ſo 
—— the daungers of theſe Sathanicall deluſions: for / may 
ake truely as another * doeth, for mine owne part: Equidem de. Pinus 
olis eorumg, miniſtris ſortiarys lubenter diſputare non ſoles, cc. Dial. 
eatenus mihi nota ſunt eorun ſiudiacy artes quatenus de ths verbo Dei | 
ſacroſancto omnes edocemur, Surely [liſt not willingly to diſpute of de- 
wills and there miniſters the witches, cc. and I am ſo furre acquainted 
with their tudiet, as we are all tawght by the word of God. And as for 
tranſformations, A warned thee beforetolooke for no ſupernatu- 
rall works in witchcraft, / anſwer thee therefore this queſtion, 
with Danæus alſo: g Q ware illa et iam falſiſſima cenſenda ſunt quæ de eC:3.p.49. 
He aut hropis quibuſdam nar antur: Theſe things are tobe thought m eſt 
fabulous, which are reported of transformations. Content thy ſelfe, 
My ſodemon, I pray thee with this anſwer, for thele things * not 


the great grounds of witchcraft, Howbeirt Idenie not, but witches 
may haue alſo. ſundrie ſuch Sathanicall deluſions in many, 


* 1. Fernelius 
de partium 


which abounde in melancholy, but noreall cransformationsin- molbis& (ms 
deede. | ptomatis. 5. c. 2 


F 3 My- 


7 


A TREATISE AGAINST 


h 5 CHMy ſo-demon. But before we end our conference, Theophilus, 
4 Imuſt be bold to aske you yet a fewe more « $; Whereinl 
: would moſt gladly be teſolued, both for mine owne inſtruction, 
| and the bencfire ofſome of my friendes. 
Theophilu, If thy queſtions be needfull and neceſſarie for | 
s thy ſelte or any friend to know, I wil anſwere them: but as for h foo- 
b. Tim. 2.3. 1G, andunlearned gueftions (the Apolile hath forewarned ys) they | 
doe but ingender ſtrife. | 
Myſo-demon, Iptomiſe you, Theophilus, / wil nomore cum- | 
ber you, but onely witha few points which ſhalbe good for the vſe 
of cdifying Firſt, / would knowe hat your iudgement is of ſome 
bigge volumes of witchcraft, which (as farre as / can ſee) con- 
teme ſundric intollerable — — and wicked Treatiſes and 
formes of idle and vaine inglings and blaſphemous coniura- 
dions. | | 2 i 
Theophilus, Surely this I thinke, Nyſo- demon, all the godly 
learned men, who tenderly regard the good (tate ofthe Saintes of 
God, arc no doubt agrieued in hart to ſee ſuch honible impieties 
ſuffered to be broched in the open face of the Churchof God for 
young wits are more apt to practiſe theſe wares of Sathan which 
are thus put to ſale, chen to ſearch for anie good purpoſe in them, 
which is moſt hard to be founde. Againe, this in a worde I adde, 
chat the Lawyers tell vs ſuch authouts are ouertaken by Lawe: for 
the Lawe ſaith: Libros magic æ artis apud ſe nemim habere licet, et 
The Diſ.muſt peres quoſc un que reperti ſunt honis ademptu ambuſtiſq; is poblicc, in 
be commen- in ſulam deportantur, humiltorer capuc pumumt ur. It is la vfull for no 
ded to Vul- man to haue the bookes of Magicke, and with whome ſoeuer 
IN they are founde, their goodes confiſcate, and their bookes o- 
penly burnt, they are baniſhed, and the poorer ſort are puniſhed 
with death. Avoide therefore, yſo-demon,luch dreadfull impie- 
ties, I warne thee. 
AMſo-demon. Well then, I will (if God aſſiſt me) followe 
your counſell, & redeeme alſo the time (if /can in better ſtudies, 
which I haue ſo vainely and wickedly loft. my next queſtion is, 
whether there may be in verie trueth at ckis daye ſuch comu- 
ration, and calling vp of deuilles ( which they call Necroman- 
cie ) ſo as the witch of Endor did ? for albeit it bee not vn- 
like but that Sathan practiſeth with witches in theſe dayes 


a  % _ mp = R as 


— . . — . —— — 


WITCHCRAPT., 
as in former times, as you haue partly ſhewed: yet in iy iudge- 
ment it is a ching impoſſible to call vp, or to conjure: devils 
by any arte out of hell: for cho i, Saripture ſauh that all paſſages jD.p.431. 
are ſtopt wok the egreſſe aut of hell, in the 16, (hap, of Saint 
Lukes Goipell, | ru ben x 

T heephulus. I counſell thee , Myſordemon, neuer to credite 
any more ſuch magicall gloſſes ypon holy Scripture: for albeit the 
reprobates departed-ate-rormented fot euer wich devils in hell: 
yet the prince, the god, and the gouernours of this worlde 2. Cor. 44. 
are inthe ayer alſo, rounde about vs, and may be coniured Afy- Eph. 2.2. 
fo-demon, as well from aboue as from belowe: for the Apoſtle h. C. 3, 14. 
{ayeth, They are not in hell onely, bus in high places alſo. 


HAF. III. 
What a dreadfull and fearefull ſame it is 


to conſult at any time or neede, with witches and 
ſorcerert. * 
* Myſod mon. Theophilus, 

4 NE $ Woulde gladly. be reſolued in another 
doubt, 7 las: moſt men are wont 

24 2 to ſeeke aſter theſe wiſe men, and cunning 

VA women, ſuch as they cal witches, in ſicke- 

- „N neſſe, in — 08 in all = what 

122 thinke this, Theaphilusꝰ 

SI ZE Thea blu, lam aflured, Myſodamom, 

A that ſuch miſerable Fo commit a moſt 


hornible & dreadful ſinne, that they are iuſtly brought into Sathis 
fnares,for the contempt of God & his word, that they ſeeke helpe 
of the ſame ſetpent that ſtung them, that againſt the knowen — 
ciple ofthe Goſpel they would haue Sathan to drive out Sathan: 
and to be ſhort, that they are in very trueth, but ineere Gentiles, & 
Pagans in religion blind in their mindes, hardened in their harts, 
ſtrangers from the liſe of God, and that if God giue them not ſpee- 
die repentance, they will become paltfecling by cuſtome & con- 
tinuance in their ſinnes. | 


— -” 


r alt ad ad 
— —5 


A TREATISE AGAINST 7 
Myſodemon, What reaſon haue youto prooue this cuſtome 
—— and ſo — 2 to be: for 
thoſe ſianes which God would haue vs moſt to dread, to feare, & 
to auoide, he warneth vs of them many waies, by his Worde, by 
examples, and by his iud ements from heauen againſtthem. 
* ow It is well obſerued, Ay ſodemon, and ſurely God 
0 vs alltheſe wales of the greatnes of this ſinne; wherefore 
it is no doubt, a moſt dreadfull abhomi nation. 
Myſodemon. How, Firſt by his Word? 5 | 
T lus, Firſt, thou knoweſt, Myſode mon, how the Lorde 
in his Word chargeth vs to renounce the workes of the Gentiles: 
the Apoſtle faith, Thrs a [ſay and teſtiſie in the Lord, that you hence« 
« Eph.4.18. forth walkg not as other Gentiles walks in vanity of their mindexthink 
— isa, not that hencefbotth tuery thing is lav full vnto them hat the reſt 
8 4.1,z, of tlie Nations(which are wirhout God in the world) thinke it not 
vnlawfull for them to doe. The ſame charge Moſes giueth often. 
bGen. 41.8, No chis practiſe was moſttife among all thoſe i us Gen- 
Exod.7.& tiles: for the h Egyptians in all theit neede called for their wiſe 
8.chap. men: ſodidthe e Moibites,ſo did the Petſians, and i Babylonians. 
c Num. 22.23. So did the Romanes, as there hiftoriesrecord, euen there Empe - 
75 8 rours, Romulus, Nero, Maxentius, lulian, and others: and 22 
Eſd.47.12, 13, Chame of Tartary and the Perſians (as eDanzus ſaith) ſeeke af · 
2014 "—— helpes of the deuill in all cheir neceſſities, euen to this 
P-. 89 ay. | 112 | we 
eo ſodemon, What manifeſt and cleareteſtimonies of Scrip- 
ture haue you agaiuſt this praQtiſe ? 
Theophiſms, There is nothing cleare and manifeſt, — 
Floh. a. 14. on, vnto thoſe in F whome the word of God abudeth not, aud which 
haus not ouercome that wicked one, which us the deuill: for Sathan ſo 
amar eth them, that they are more ready to reele into euery ſinne, 
though it be neuer ſo monſtrous, then to ſee the greateſt light 
that God offereth them. Are not thoſe prohibitions of God in 
his Law and inhis Prophets ſo plaine and ſo evident, that (as the 
Prophet ſaith) he that tunneth may teade and vnderſtand them? 
the Law of God ĩs this, g Tow ſhtllnot vegard i lem that worte with 
„ ſpirits, neither foothſayers, yeaſpalnot ſethe then: to be defiledbythem, 
Lcu.18.10,1s {49 the Lord the God. Againe, anon after,to make the grearnes 
of this ſinne the better to appeare, be repeateth the ſame wordes 
in 


* | I 


* 
. .,# © Aa _ 


. w 4c << * © = ito i*& 


a wi a = Xx Ra \_T 4&4 wes 


 {WITCHCRAPT;, 7 


2 


E.. 8.18. 


4 . entiapuriends,, & c. 


corperibus, Hereby it is manifeſt; hat hurtfull magitians and 
witches which kill and hurt mens and goods, arconelyto 


beauoyded, and ſo they doe amongſt ys, but ſuch of theſe 

ctiioners, as can and will cure che ſicke, kale ages ade 
haue a good necre geſſe in ptædictions, are not in any wiſe to 
be blamed, ſaieth this Lawe, and therefore theſe are often 
ſought after in neceſſities ynto this day, and they ſeeme to 
doe no man harme, but much good, and they ſpeake -the 
very trueth oſten, and men will doe much, ilus, in ex- 


ccemmies. 1 or.. b. 3£ 4306 1 Ir 

Theophilze. Firſt for that Lawe, it is a moſte wicked and 
prophane law, and if i be one of Conſtantines conſtiumions, it 
was publiſhed, no doubt, before his conuetſion to the faith: and 
as for the that miſerable men teceiue of the ſorcerers, 
aſſure thy ſelfe, Ayſedewon, the more they ſeeme to benefite 
mens bodies, the more harme they doe boch ſoule and bo- 
dic: for who would receiuegold at an enemies hande without 
feare, and good aſſurance for his ſafetie? and is not Sathan 


the bloodieſt enemie that man _ living? and laſtly, where 
| I as 


: 
- 
«17 
* 922 &. P ü f 
. *% A. *% N * by : a = : 
wy 2 A * * ” 


16.& 17.17. which God layerh before 


A TREATISE AGAINST 


asthey would be credited for their tructh- one counſellerh ys in 
theſe wordes. S/ wire dixerins won ideo credendum cu, 
„ — quamvis voci- 
tæent ipſum fili —— and 
then , —— — —— 
(faith he) who — — when they wemed bum often 
the very Somme of God. And becauſe wee be impatient in extre- 
mities : he addeth. S. non ilkcs ſentis aur dim, 


— ur pie e God 2 e 


Tage Andhov doeth Cd ame fcb fe by 
examp 


Theophiba, Thou maieſt finde a multitude of 


vs in the Scripture, *-by 
ro reclaime vs from this fine, ber 7 will here name bur 


fdr firſt, hee had rei 
— 22 — t. Sam. 
23 Againe, hee was a very murderer, ITT 
hee to murder David, and reſted not till hee had — a; 
number of the moſte religious and innocent Prieſtes 
lande. 1. Sam. 22. 18. And hee was alſo a verie hypo- 
etite in 1. Sam. 26. 27. Vato all theſe ſimmes, 
hee added this! fearcfull contem R Chron: 
0. 13. Hee: asked counſel familiar ſpirite, and in 
the ende in great deſperation he murdered him "ſee 1. Sam. 

1. 

? Soe. | Butthinke you chat al cheſt ſinners, are as Ne 
ked,or any thing like that deſperate Saule? 

Theophilus, vill not fay that the meaſure of their ſinnet 
is growne to that height thee his was, but that they be moſt 
blinde in their mindes, and wicked in their liues , experience 
dailicrellethys, For who but Papiſtes and rebellious Athiſtes ride 


and 


\ 


teach all men wih vyhat 


. r r © TWm_s A JJ, mw — - \ © 4 a 


tber founerand 


 5WITCHCRAFT. 
and gor dailie to this market ? „ 


—— deluſions, that belceuelyes, tha 
— — cot ah 


fac pleaſure in 
Mfſod emo. che-grearer part of dem which make 


this trafficke with: witches, haue in deede but a ſmall deale 


of any good religion : bur theſe were Gentiles, and there. 


fore were wonthelie-plagued for infinire more finnes-t let 


me heure howe on . — . 


ple. 


Theophilna, Farre more & + for Whereas the Lotde 
loued them abour all nations vndet : this ſinme was one 
of che principall: — — — Froury was 
betweene him and that Prophet faiths d Swrely A EC x. sg 
thou 9 laceb, becauſe —— EIS. 21.33. 
of the Eaſt manners and are ſorcerer E. Philiſbines , and 


with ſtrange children, 7 deſtruction ofboch the ki 


ol Iirael and Judah. 1. Of Iſrael, — x7. Thy mad 
vſedwitchi 


and inchauntments, &c. therefore 
ad pus them out of bus ſ bl. 2. Of ludah, 2. 
ly the commaundement of ns — pon 
might put them out of his 
cer Ai. For ſinnes — — + png 
mitted, and hi —— 2. King: g. 21. 6. He caiſea but 
to paſſe through the fire, us ſelfe 
den * had — dr were ſoothſayers, cr. As 
— _ e of Gods word, but ſought after the 
2. King. 1 3:16. — in like 
— — conſulted with his witches be- 


— the vnhappiclulian, and they had 
both an vnhappie end. 
Myſodemen. Surely the Lord, I ſee, hath given ys in theſe 


daiesmoteteſtimonies of his hatred — this ſinne, then hee 


did the old Church, for all theſe ex & iudge ments are writ- 
ten (as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh) 1 carning: & cher fore ſuch in 
| 2 theſe 


the 9 wroth with Iſrael, 


ne hon nh 


te 11 


2. The l. 11. 


32, 


R 
Rot. 5.4, 


3Xing x, 16, 22282 


A TREATISE AGAINST 


theſe times as eolnmit ſpirituall whoredom withSathan; are wor · 


7 Ablare diinke ne of the cup of the Lords wrath. _ 

2 That they ate: ths the gerate offered men doe 
reic ater i rs condemnation,':- / -i - 
— ueth me withioke, howtheſe 
an. 57.3 — — Progher calleth thew)ofcur une he. 
£ — They —— — Godhathgi 

T erte cau men 
chem ouer in his iuſtice for the contempt of bis — 
conſider but heir aſſes, — & other vayles 
of witches proſeſſion: x6 ſo dd Saule, looked vpon the wo- 
man, and was catied away with a ſtrong imagination and liking' 
of her artes, he vewed Samuels old mantle, — 


9 A yet it is ſaid the Lorde 
e.Chr.t0.13. ſlem him for this ſane. — — 


ſame drift and purpoſe. wich Saule, that is, with full ſayle 


after Sathan ifhe may — — 
condemnation. 


_ 
flame, And may norte May * — pint . 


his cuill? 
Almightie Godchargeth him ſorodoe, Deu. 


. Theophilms, The | 
I . Lex. 20. 6,27. for theſe firnerare ſaid to goe amber 


and fall into — ee 
the: — haue — —.—. — Larter | 


petit: t is, 
Ph may ts Hy — 7 AY Yr that 565 


V. are bthialikegwiltve of ne W 


80 the Jens . 


' 
* 
3 o * 4 5 


— 114 53 of 7 oC. 3 , | * C 
, , 0 4 
- * " » 
” * of . & 4 o o „ . 4 
4. 17 : s © C3 * 3 * I - 0 - - 14 4 * 
* ” - - * * 

. . 4 . of , . 

. of , . "IS 3 ” 4 - 1 * 42 l a 
- 


oi . 
* 
7 » 
« 5 
ag 


I 


* 
* 


WITCHCRAFT: : 
"CHAP. IIII. 
Wherefore the Lorde doerh permit the 


* fines of witchcraft in our time : who are in mo#t 
thereby, and what are the moſt ſoneraigne preſervatines a- 
gainffwitcheraft? ; 


. 


HE e fay, Theophilus, that witches can 

kill he iue whome they pleaſe: Where · 

fore doeth Almightic God ſuffer. witches to 
| man and beaſt on this man- 

er vey I thinke they can doe much in- 
eeder. 


| power 
_ but the trueth is, it is nothing ſo. for, as I taught thee be. 

e, they ate bur Sathans inſtruments, and peer 
wenders without him, and as for Satharis poet alſo, itis limited 
bythe Lord. for he can do n dut Where,ahd when the Lord 
ſends him: whentherefote he is ſent fot the execution of Gods iu» 
ſtice he perſwades his witches, that he ran drive heauen and carth 
together at his pleaſure, and they eee the wicked worlde, | 
that they cin likewiſe worke wonders, whereas neither they, not 
Sathan him ſelfe by them cantake away the leaſt haire from the 

eſt finner ypon eatth, but when God permits them : for as 
he Lord by his a ſpeciall e oa ayes «beer wh doeth em- aPfal147.17, 
brace feu A idence and mer - 19, 20. 8 
cie / ſaiththe Prophet) bis 6uer all his workes. Thus much in ef · 5 Pal. 4. 
fecthath M. Bea written the laſt yeere in hi colnmentarieypon 20. n lob. 
Ie, in theſe wordes: Caterum oftendit etiam hic locus imparos illos — 16. 
ſpirits non temere ab e Apoſtolo vocari aeris priucipei ſicuti ſummum 
illum lovem horum demonum principem,Greci & Latinimultss prop- 
terea epithetis cegnominarunt, yequoryapiriw, ie fulgurato- 
rem, lonantem vocantes: qu tamen vel minimum quiddam in eclo, 
G 3 vel 


mar mes have bur wall nean of rhe pu 


A TREATISE AGAINST 
vel in terra movere niſi Deo concedente non poſſunt ſed Domini quid. 


dem illorum opera,quoties wi lebuitgin i excitandg tempeſt a- 
tibus viiipſos vero rus 6. 7s 199 acre & in alis mute 
di par rerum canfuſione, 


arum ſunme peritos, quam facillime & quam libentiſime, Deo con- 
— . vel — , ſam in _ operam preſtare con- 
ſtat, ſagarum etiam & magorum omnis generts adhibits interventn, 
And = he addeth a confirmation of his aſſertion conceming 
witches, and a great complaint againſt neg Magiſtrates on 
this manner. re clam tam aper tam mules, tamcertus & a- 
crarũ literarum teftimony:, c mmm ſconlorum apud cm gente; 


biſtorys coftet iris eſt acpent incredibile adbuc inter <= 
ſertim magiitratus ac Indices invemri & futilia bac aſſe am- 
vis exiſtement, Which thing (faith he, {peaking of wit icez 


ing that it is ſo apparantly knowen;by ſo many and ſo c maine te- 
Rimoniesofboly eee ere ere 
all nations: it is to be wondered, and in a manner j 

as yet there are found a ( 


. * 


- * Ic Ic | 
- f 1 | : 
e many ii but / will commend vnto thee fours 


Tbeephuluu. The eulll artes and workes of Sathan by witch» 
eraft, are for a ſigne ofthe contempt and fall of men Sen 


red or maintained, we ſee and knowe by daily experience, 
kool ol mc 


ee profeſſion of religion, whereſoeuer they be ether: 


place. | CO ITT LEN i] 

HMyſodemon, This is to be ſcene molt true in popetie, where 
all ſuperſtition and magicall artes are bred, profeſſed, and main» 
raine endete! ad en | 


- 


© Theopbilm, The ſeconge cauſe why God ſuffereth Sathan 


thus 


. that 


n VVhat then is the firſt cauſe ef this permiſ/ 


WITCHCRAFT. 


thus to triumph by his artes, and to rule ouer infidels, is, that he | 
might fatherly forewarne his Saintes to e peſſe their dwelling 
| here in feare — with all ,toavoyde the contagion of Pet. 17. 


the wicked; with whomethey haue ave any converſation. . 
Mſod emer. And'whar is the third? 

a. The third cauſe of chis permiſſoon is char hy theſe 

delufions ofthe deuill, God might in iuſt ice puniſſi them "which 


would not receiue his trueth: for the Apoſtle ſaith, that they which 
will not d beleeue the truth: — firong delu Aula, that 4 . Theſſ. . 21 
they may beleene lyet. 


It is moſt true we ſee: forſuch as hunt after 
our doating witches are moſt ſottiſn idiottes of all the people, 
who when they bee ſtung by Sathan, runne foorthwith to be cu- 


im: Key res, the fourth cauſe? - 
h. The of Gods Saintes: for. G O D per- 
mitteth all hereſies ions to ſpring in his Church, 


f 
that thoſe that are his, might be knowen, as the Lorde teacheth 


7s. ei. Cor. 11. 19 


Myſo-demor, Howe farre then may Sathans power reach, 4.1.89. 
r him, or ſendeth him forthe execution of 
e? 

— * = God doeth vſe Satan for to worke 
his ſi udgements inthe heauens, in the ayer, and in the 
| en to execute his juſtice vpon all the chil a of diſobe- f 
Henes: yea and to afffict his Saintes, as often as the Lord kno w- 
dient for his glorie, and theit ſaluation. For the Scrip- 
— at he can drive downe lightnings and 
fire from heauen, to hurt the creatures ypon earth, / lob. r. 4 
he can inſect and 2 and water with 
— when God ſendes him, — 
of Egypt; which were wrought by the miniſterie of Sathan 
is —.— caſt foorth his * 1 and 1 
them in all thoſe „g By ſending ont exi 
He can deſtroy Uo Theor Lara. Iu and wy. hin Te, ; 
h fyers, by windes and tempeſtes, when he is let looſe 


em. 


fame of 


Pſal.78.45. 
n — 

udg. 9. 23. 
Eſd. 19. — 


yſo-demon, The witches boaſt indecde chat Sathan 1 
G 4 can. 


7 
. 


* 


A TREATISE AGAINST 


can do much, and they like wiſe by their acquaintance with him 
but ſome thinle chat all this is but to fray men, & manymen often 
hurt chemſeluęs and others by fond imaginations. . 

» Theophilus. As forSathans might, it is but weake: ifthe Lorde 
graunt him not ſtrengrh to execute his will, he cannot doe it: and 
whereas ſome ſuppoſe that all theſe artes are but ſtrong phanta- 
ſies, they be — deceiued. for albeit that ſome doe hurt them- 

ſelues with euill imaginations, &c. yet let a witch ot any other 

imagine what he will againſt thee, his imagination can neither kill 
thee, My ſo-demen:nortake away one haire from thy bead, but we 
knowe and ſee, that Sathan by witches can doe both, and this is the 
confeſſion ofthe witches ofall times, nations and people, euen at 
the very point ofdeath. 

AMyſo-demor, If Sathan can hurt the bodies and ſoules of 

4 men, l will neuer doubt he may ſoone hurt the other creatures, tell 

[ me therefore firſt, what can he doe to infidels and wicked pro- 

$81) phane people? | | 


rx Sathanis theirGod.r.Cor.4.q - 
2 Sathanis their father, Ioh. S- 44 act. 
113.10. | 
3 Sathan haththe vſe of os. 
4 their 4 0 2.43 

8 4 Satan workes his one 51. Ioh. 3. 8. 
As for the wicked!“ = 1 — 
5 Sathan ö i 2. r. 
minds, and makes them W 
fooles in vndetſtanding. Cr. Cor.. 14 
6 Sathan robs them of the good vſe of 


| 


b fret ainſt it. Prou.14.1 6. 
Now then ſeeing that Sathan hath this dominion ouer the ſoules, 
| which are farre more precious then their bodies, he may no doubt 
dal G often toſſe bodies, when God permits him, at his 
pleaſure. | 
. 'Mſo-demon, My hear trembles andquakes, Theophilus, when 
Iynderſtand by the holy Scripture,how al prophane and wicked 
| men 


. WITCHCRAFT. 
men in the Church cuen among vs, are thus faſtbeund in Sathang 
ſnares and chaines;andwhatis more miſerable, ihey ate ſo blind, 
they know it not. N N 
Theophilus,” Yea, and what is moſt dreadfull in theſe daies, 
Cod hath giuen over ſundry men(forthe contemprothis word)fo 
fatre into dathans power, and into a reprobate ſenſe, hat men re- 
iect ihe very natural / couſe ofc iuil liſe chat men ſpott themſelues 13 
in doeing wickedly, that men worke all vncleannes, euen with prov. 11 5 g 
ines. And ſuch is the impudent boldnes, and giouth of ſinne 1 Eph. 4. 19. 
intheſe times, that if any one n an teſraine from euill, he is a mon- 
ſter among men. a gazing ſlocke, and as the / Prophet ſaith, ma- IFC. 
heth hun ſolfe a prey. S. ( yprian complaineth of his time, Eſſe iam Cypr. La. ep. a. 
inter nocentes innoxium cramen eff, males quiſquis non imitat ur offen- 
dit. And the Qiileſſans prouetbe was, men thinke there oughtto 
be no placefor any honeſt man among them. 
y. The Lord defend vs from them, and graunt vs that wee 
may ſo liue by them, that we be not hurt of them: but may not Sa» 
thah and his witches hinder and hurt the Saints of God alſo? 
- Theophilbes, No doubt they may: for Sathan ſought to win- 
now,cuen the very w Apoſtles, and preuailed ſome what, and hin- Luk. 23. 235 
dred them often in the courſe of their miniſterie. 1. cheſa. 8. 
eee, How ſheve you khr Salben can hut her 
| tes? 9 ltr. #144445 £11 | 
_ © TTheoph; The chadthetweſſengerof Satan v to buffet 5 
hirn, e as for Iob, Sathan ſo poiſoned his bodie allouer, that there *. Cor. 12. 7. 
was no part of him whole, from the crowne of his head to the ſole 8 
of his foot: yea & —— NE — be ſeene b 
Mugdalens example, that permit) he may not one 
bodies ofthe Saldn But . grace — wn of 
them. Again our continual warfareisagainſt him, & if we want a- 
ny part of ourarmourdefctibed;Eph.6.he may ſoone hurt vs. 
Teach me two things more, Theophilus, and then 1 
ceaſe to moleſt you. Firſt, how I may be cured, if witches do hurt 
me: andſecondly; how I may beſt auoid them: for / ſee wel we be 
* nd | 
Fheoph, Firſt, as forthe cure of any man, poiſoned by Sathan, | 
itis knowen by the expenence e phiſitions, athing e * 
| hi 
I 


moſt difficule:tereaſon is, ſathan yſerh poiſons that haue hidden, cus, 
* H - "+3... vaknowne, 


FT 
= 
* 
» 
| 
hg 


De vita Ne 
tonis. 


Mach. 12.43. 


ly v 
ps hands or he faith, The p Lord lnawerb the daies of ypright men, 


full and ſtraunge apparitions: Swetonine 4 ſaith, Sap confeſſwgxd» 


A TREATISE AGAINST 
vnknowne,and ſtraunge operations inthe bodies ofmeriffot he is 
an Empiricke of many yeeres experience; notwithſtanding wee 
ought to vſe all good meanes that Phiſicke offereth vs,continually 
intreating the Lord ſo to bleſlethe, as they may be for our health, 
if it ſhall ſeeme expedient for his glorie and our ſaluation: and if 
by theſe meanes we can not receiue health, we muſt wait patient · 
God, commit and commend our bodies and ſoules vnto 


and their inheritance ſhalbe perpetuall, mo man i not Lord oer 
the ſpirit to reteine the ſpirit, neuer bath he power in the day of death 


nor deliuerance in the battaile, neither (ball wickgaves deliner the poſe 


ſeſſors thereof. 4 | W Nene 
Myſodamon. I heare often that many great mens houſes are 
troubled with viſions: What thinke you, Theophilus,are 


theſe yncleane ſpirits,and how may ſuch euils be auoided? 
Theoph, It is well you ſpeake of great mens houſes : for there 
commonly are the greater ſinnes. Nero could hardly reſt for fearey 


tadlis a 
the ſlories ef Brutas, Fyfffrmue, and others. The greater 
ſinnes defile any place, che greater libertic is giuen Sathan, & the 


mote it is ſ ſept and garniſhedfor his continuall habitation. To 


; 1 mat erna ſpecie, verberibus furiarum,ac t edis ardentibuu. The 


11 all ſuch euills,cheſerulesfollowingin all ſuch families muſt 
expell all ſuc cheſe rules pure ob UN - 


be carefully practiſed. r. The lords, m 
lies, muſt draw nere vnto God themſclues by vnfained repentance, 
chat their owne bodies and ſoules may be truly ſanctified: ſo muſt 
che ſtrong man be firſt conquered, Luk. 11. 21,22. 2. Ther fa- 
2 —— purged, Oen. 3 5. a. Pi. 101.7 
i | n.18.19-1.C07.14+-3443 $-V t 
6.4. Tim 3:15. 4. They muſt tlagobeber, mddurd their 
houſholdin praier & thankeſgiuing, when they be preſent: Io. 6, 
2 10e 127. 1. Tim. 4. . that the ſervants may doe thelike, 


when ent: Cen. 24.12,1.3.withoutin Pet. 
ey muſt dwell Kh their wiues as men o kno wedge, 


3 7. 5 x 
r. pet. g. i not bitter yato them, Col. 3. 1g. contract wich che 


* onely, Gen. 6. a, 3. in the Lord, i. Cor. 7. 39. the marriage bed 


nde wackeren 1. Tim 4.3.4: viedto bridleand affwage, & 
natto feed & ſlitte vp luſt, Ro. 3.1 4 abſtaining it atcerten tunes 


Ss. - _ zz OI  e£aa 4 a as 


A 


WITCHCRAFT. 
appointed for faſting & praier,r.Cor.7.5. & inthe tin of women! 
ſeperatron,Ezec.18.6.8& 22. 10. Lev. 20.1 8. 6. The wifes ſubiect 
to theit husbands, Col. 3. 19. in pure conuerſation which is with 
ſeare, t. Pet. 3. 1,2. 7. Ihe children brought vp in the informati- 
donofthe 1 in al things their parents, Col. 3. 
„ , — e — o that which is 
quall to ſeruants, 1. without threatnings, Eph. 6. 9. 
9. The —— auoide eye Arbe, do their dueties — 
as vntothe Lord, Col. 3. 21, 23. with feare & trembling. Eph. 6.5. | 
10, They muſt alſo direct, & command their familie to a pri | 
faſt, when publique or priuate calamitie,or ſuch — 
fron ſo requireth. Heſt. 4 16. Neh. 1. 4. Act. 10. 30. 11. Conduct 7 
them to the publique miniſterie where it may be found, Amos 8. 


1 1.1 2. 2. King. 4. 23. Act. 20.28. Heb. 13. 7. i 7. & by priuate con- 
ference, Mal. * &. 17. 1. ſee how they 2 — theit 
familie at certen times ——— o. 24. Neh. f. 1.5. 
12. A godly domeſtic all diſcipline muſt be vſed: 1. i 

Math.18.15,19. 2. 1 
committed, lighter for the leſſe, Prov. 23. 1 3,14. ſharper for the 


greater, E piſt. to Phil. 3. and if neede require, the Church muſt he 
—.— 18.17. 4. the laſt refuge is, the civill Magiſtrate, Deut. 
21.18, 21. 


Ah Theſe rules! t are ti indeed, & the practi 
—— Reeg be — to ſpeak — . 
Theophilus, ſuch families as you require, are as hard to be found, as | 
blacke ſwans, ot the families of Eutopia. 

Theoph, Not ſo, Myſyour eyes beto dimme, I know my ſelfe 
where be blefſed)lome ſuch may be found in our land: and 
yetif a bee eee e menthat will the 
digers which haue bin before mẽtioned, carefully obſerue this or- 
derpreſcribed of Cod, & ſay wich Ioſhua: Alb ut ot hora yea all the 19-14-13 
world,chooſe the gods of the Amormenyet ] and my houſe will ſerue the 
Lord. No fab the 2.point,how a man may beſt be preſerued frõ 
the poiſon of witchcraft, Twill ſhewerhee, Miſcdemen, oncly by 
Iobs example, ho thou maicft beſt bepreſerued. 

Myſ. I lovegreatlyto view oſten the examples of the holy fa= 
thers:fornodout they are Gods glaſſes for ourinſtruction, & I re- 


member we are charged not to be flothfull, but followers of then 
H 2 | which 


2 *. . * — 
„ ya 4 
v7 


— 


i 2 wah 2 — * 
n 


* * 
Ae Ve. 
* - A m3 


IT 
* 5 


8 
, +3: 3 


r 


— 


5 
— 


* - 
< Iu + 4s — 
2 
* 33 
* 2 


+ Gd . 22 
r — - 
"2 < 


A TREATISE AGAINST 


Learne here which through faith andpatience inherit the promiſes, Heb. G. 12. But 
all Fathers & / pray you, What preſetuatiues had lob, for we read all fayled him, 
may wn and Sathan brought him vnto a wonderfull miſerie? 
urge your Theyphilus, His preſeruatiues were moſt ſoueraigne, and they 
les, & how failed him not, albeit he fainted often, beeing long wearicd in that 
to attaine the cotflict with Sathan: his pretious preſeruatiues were theſe. Firſt, 
beſt preſerua- faith, 2. prayer, 3. arighteous life, 4. the word of God, 3. repen- 
— tance, and ſixtlie the continuall moſt gratious prouidence of God 
ouer him. | 
AMyſodemon. How did faith preſerue him? 
Theophilus. S. Iohn ſaith, thatfaith is the victorie q that owercome 
7 t. loh. . 4. meth the worid:and S. Peter chargech vs to reſiſt the deuil, feadfaſt 
. bet. q. . in faith. and S. Paule biddeth vs aboue all things (to auoide the fies 
Eph.6.16. tie dartes of Sathan)to rake the ſhield of faith. By theſe few placeat 
appeareth, thatfaith is a moſt ſureſhield againſt Sathan. Nowe 
n 49 Iobhadfaith, many rare vertues in him doe teſtiſie: his in- 
nocent life, his feare and reuetence of God, his godly repentance 
lam gi. and ſingular patience, r which can neuer be without fach, for pa- 
_ 9:36 tienceis a quiet wayting and exſpectation ofthe promiſes, which 
* faith aſſureth vs ſhalbe performed. His owne wordes are in his 
moſt bitter temptations:Ilob.1 3.1 5. wares hee ſlay me yet will [ 
truſt in him, and I will reprooue my waies in hs fig ht. Wherefore, Ai. 
ſodeman, if thou wilt follow Iob, call vpon Godearneſtly forrhis 
[lob.61 precious / gi of faith, andthou ſhalt haue one moſt ſtrong target 
Eph.a.8. do auoide ſafely all Sathanicall dartsof witchcraft. 
Myſoedemon, And what is che ſecond preſeruatiue? 
Tapia obs ſecond preſemiatiue was Prayer - of this the 
Apoſtle — ww when — on N 
Eph. 6.1 8. mour againſt Sathan, yet can not * 
+ 4  abvay. fob had this, for 12 written that Job offered bane 
offerings, early in the motning for him ſelfe and all his chil, 
z lame.5.16, dren:anditis added, uw Thus did lob every day. Prayer is a com- 
fortable conference and ralke with the Lord, and is moſt ſtrong if 
it be feruent, and beeing offered by a righteous. man, ſuch as lob 
was, it is aſweeteſacrifice vnto God. Wherefore vie alſo, Mc 
Cyp. l. x epi. a. demon, this preſeruatiue and thou ſhalt be free from many euils: ſit 
11bi veloratio aſſidua, vel lectio, nunc cum Deo loquere, nunc Deus te- 
cum: Et her read or pray alway one while talke thou with God, * 
G6 * ile 


I WIICH CRAFT. 


while let odt with tec. 8 | 
e, 80 I will, and purpoſe Thes iu ſor we are often 


charged ſo to do: what was the third pteſervatiue? | 

Theophilus. A righteous, ſober, and ypright converſation 
is a molt ſure breſtplate againſt Sathan: for when he findeth our 
faith and profeſſiontqhaue the ſcale of a righteous life, he wil fleg 
from ys: as appeareth notably in Iobs exãple, for he being an x vpr * 1ob.1.8,9, 
right and inſt man, one that feared God and eſchewed euill, Sathan . 
might well ſpurne at him, but could not annoy him, nor iuſtly ac- 
_ him before his God of any euill. 

AMyſo-demon, And whatis the fourth preſervatiue? 

Theophilu, The worde of God: and that mightie worde is a 
moſt ſtrong two edged y ſworde, and notably pte lerueth vs from y Heb 4 11. 
Sathan if we can wiſely handle it, as our Sauiour hath taught vs by 4 45” 45g 
his owne example, As for Iobs time, it is yndoubtedly to be 
thought that he lued before the Lawe, becauſe of his long life, 
Chap.42.16, Plal.go.10.and ſacrifices in a ſtraunge land, which 
by the Lawe were commanded to be done before the Arke, ot in 
the tabernacle of God. Somethinke that he was about the time 
the Church wasin Egypt. All thePatriarkes andholy fathers of 
that time and before, 


ces. The penitent hath two good properties : One is, he feareth 

God rruely, and ſo is bumbled: theotheris,hereſterhypon God | , 

z faithfully, and ſo is ſtrengthened. The Lord « greatly delightedin Bol — 

them that feare him, & attend vpon his mere ie, but if any proude re- , fal. 22. 1,3, 

bellious ſinnes haue ſnared them, the Lord leaueth them as naked, 77. 10, 6%. 

and as it were in Sathans iuriſdiction, as 4 Dauid often, and bo- Cant. 5.6. 

thers. And as for Iob, he walkede moſt circumſpectly within the — 
42.6 

| H 3 boundes 


A TREATISE AGAINST 
re eee 
Mt ca ely ypon $ great 0: 
— no Ayo red erent 95 berp 

aero, Aigle dene. And what was his'6.andlaſt preſeruative? 


pl. 
tabernacle: for be ſpall gine his «Angels charge 
— water they Palbeare r K Nap 1 re 
wrt , 4 ſhone: thou ſhalt walke the lyon and aſpe, t 
2 thou tread tr Ne cher 


lob was moſt ſafe vnder this ſhelter and could not be anoied by 

Satan, the deuill confeſſeth it himſelfe. For he ſaieth, he cannot 

come neere him by reaſon ofa cetten hedge here with he and all 

his were com about: the wordes are theſe: Then Satan ſaide, 
Jeb.1.9,to, doth lob feare God brd haf thou not made an hedge abont hum 
and about bis houſe, and about al that he bath one ? And thus 
thou ſeeſt, CM ſedemon, how Iob was preſerue Satan and 
all his artes: wherefore ifthou canſt purchaſe theſe preſervatives 
for any price, ot by any meanes come by them, I will aſſure thee 
ſor thy lafety in all dangers of bodie and ſoule. 

Myſe- demon. But I ſee not yet how hee was preſerued: for 
the deuill ouercame him, & molt fearefully conſumed him and al 
his goods. | 

Rand The deuill ouercame him not, nor couldnot work 
his wil & purpoſe vpon him. For Satans chiefe purpoſe againſt Iob 
was to cauſe him to blaſpheme God, to renounce God and religi- 
on, to fall from the faith, fromre e, and ſtom the grace of 
God. And to this end hen the Lord gaue him entrance, he de- 
ſtroĩed his goods with ſtrange fire and theeues, he murdered his 
Cha. children with a tempeſt, he conſumed his bodie with byles, and 

ee alſo his friends and hisowne wife to _ and to — 
Ch. 1.22. him and his profeſſion. Notwithſtanding all theſe engines of Sa- 
tan, Iobs preſeruatiues were ſo good ink cious, that the deuill 
was vttetly ynable to bring any of choſe euils he moſt deſited pon 


. not, nor charged God 


WITCHCRAFT. 23 


waere des ſayi ng, In all this os 7 

21 
[extremities 1 could nei alheir his 
it failed him notes forhe continued fall alob.7.15.& 
{crave end. And thus haue 1 13.1. 
/ldmon, whae things thought expedient for # lob 42-5,6 


—. bt bade wor bat £11647: 
na unicate 


em no teſt, 
50 —— 
eee argumcne. Farewell 
now leaue thee; * IN | 
N yoo — Aadede babe 
hank” 


bai 10% Sede Abit . 2 5 


I will ſtirre vp all the Nea de ge re) tõ im part 
vs their knowledge and in theſe points. 


. Theophilm, TUE Chu, Aue do ſo. 


* n: . 0 W.. Nen 


FINIS. 


faulted him with 
faith «fainted , yet 


repentance b and 
taughtthee, CM 


nd ol wn 
nyo our fri 

uſe them by 
theit knowledge 
. [mul 


D ACO RN YEN. 
AND PRINCIPAL MEANES OR 


deined of God to dſconer, expell, and to con- - 
228 found all the Sathanicall inventions wo 
of witchcraft and Sorcertg, — 1 


A + 


What communion hath light with darkeneſſe? and hs 
concord hath Chriſt with Beliall, 2. Cor. 6. 14,1 5, 


CH A RE 0 — 2 
THAT THE MINISTE- 


RIE OF GODS, WORDE IS THE | 
moſt certen and 5 all r | 
for the di ie andconfuſion __ 
Tee 


Looke what meanes the Lord principallie 

tommendeth unto vs, for thediſcoutrie and confuſion of Sathan 

and his artes, that may beſt effect hi diſtonerie , and ought moſt 

to be practiſed. | 

Godhat — TRE fer this purpoſe, the miniſterie of 

* Therefore this miniſterie may beſt diſcouer Sathan and bis artes, 
Ag of vi moſt to be practi | 


1. Propoſitionor Major. 


I cauſe the Worlde ſeckerh many valwwfull 
bs q meanesto diſcouer and auoide the cuill arts & 
* Aharmes of Sathan, after the brayne of man, and 
1 the invention of the deuill him ſelfe: therefore 


it comes to paſſe, that ſuchmen be more and 

more blinded in their mindes, benummed in 
their ſinnes, be ſotted of Sathan: yea, tumbled and toſſed in the 
world at his pleaſure, the Lord in his iuſtice becauſe of the contẽpt 
of his glorious Maieſtie, & will revealed in his word, giuing them 
ouer to their owne ignorance and hardnes of heart, Therfore haue 
men vſed to ſcare away the deuils, and arts of magic k, in the thick 
miſt of poperie, with holy water,certen nũber of maſſes, halowed 


bels, conſultation with wizards, and ſaith a Bodin : Ne quem cir- , De Dzmo- | 


cumueniant magi ipſorum carmina abundant 
That none be creumvented wth he or witchcraft their charmes c. i. 
are full eſ god prayers, pſalmes, often the name of leſng, and 
| I 1 


of 


pulchris orationth 


: nomania. 2. 


Llacob.We- 
ker.dc Secret, 
lub. 1 5. c. 16. 


Verſ. 5. 13. 


of the boly Trinitte,t e 7 
—— fthe re e | 
£244 t Dominum A inferi,credo wider bona Domini, ec. ſo 
rene age 8 alſp cxorciſts ſemtclungę & many o- 
ther ——— ob = ns for it is moſt certen, that ſo ſee- 
king to ſe aw ee his artes fem their bodies and 
be goods ie war greater ho and poſſeſſion of their ſoules: for + 
ſo doinguhey poomedbis raſſalsthemſelues, and inſtruments for 
the execution of his owne will and plr aſure. 
2. Propoſtionor Minor. 

Mat the boly miniſterie of Gods word isordained of Godfor 
this wee may ſee it, if aduiſedly we conſider the Lordes 
words: Deut. 1 8. 10,1 1,1 g, Kc. Let none be among you that maketh 
bit ſonne or his daughter to go through the fire,cc,(&the he adderh) 
the Lord God will raiſe thee vp a Prophet likg vnto me, from among you, 
euen of thy brethren, vnto — ſhallzee hearken : veil. 19. Whoſoener 
will not bearkgn vatomy wordes which hee ſhall ffeaks nme, I 
will require it of — Here, I ſay, the Lord hach appointed a teme - 


Luth. annot . in die for the ſinnes of witch and ſorcerie, the ordinarie mini- 


Deut. 18. 


« Cic. de Di- 
uinat. lib. 1. 
Eſay. 19.3. 
Dan. . 2. 
Pſal. 47.1 2. 


Chap. 3.19. 
20. 


ſteric of Gods worde publiſhed by his Prophets, whereunto as 
many as did heacken, that is, receiued it with true faith and obedi- 
ad they were ſreed from thoſe Sathanicall nucutions, named 
:forSathansrortenmiſt isſo ſcattered and diſcoucred 
bythe i t beamos and glotious lighrof Gods word), that hee 
cann lucke or abide thelight of that place; and therefor 
we read that in — where his arts were profeſſed, 
there did inhabite the moſtidolatronsnations of al the aGentiles, 
as the Egiptiats,Chaldeans/Indians,Perſjans,Can anires, as pro- 
phane hiſtories together with the booke” of God, ,plentifatly doe 
teſtifie and record vnto vs. 

2 Efay maketh the miniſteneoſ Gods watt; ofSathansarts 
two ptofeſſions, ſo oppoſite that he thatforſaketh the one and lea- 
_ gas th bee fore God, embraceththe deuill, RE 

the dead,reietertvthelaw Bc teſtimonie of 
athafiical inuẽtion hath nolight in 
wa ah eld arknes: his words aretheſe/#hen they ſhal ſay vnto you, 
enquire at we that haue a ſpiru of dinination, and at the —.— 


n hic aper & mur mure, ſuould uus «people enquire at k * 


— — — ————————————————— — 


ä ——— the teme, (orraihet as dH Tremel, 
— other ſaith againſt Mem ma mb wh 
ding 


b us becauſe there in no Ig bi in them.” e 2 ON 
1. Tb Lede promiſeth his Church by the Prophet Z- . 
Aae e as the glotious miniſterie of the 
ſhine forth among men he wold therby dripel che 


ſheuld 


| e N 

ſo depart ont of the land. And that this was performed 

allplaces, whereſoever the po werfull miniſtetie of the gloriot 

Golpel ly recaiued, Eecleſiaſticall biſtories doereſtific 

for — y_ common experience can prooue fot time te- 

ſear, as afterward ſhalbe ſhe w ed. N 

2. Ar; gument. f 

| 66 2 een out of natu- 

. e Ten, Ws « Math,12.43 
— — — ne IAN 

. 

Ergo, the SN 7 

2. P+ 

He Apoſtle c 


3 rs 


man,worketl Ae 


— 
Falſerachersi in 2 to be plorious, 


the efficient cauſetherof, which was Godhimielſe. 2. — the ef⸗ 


denn 


fect thereof, which were cheſe. Fi Firlt, for that it was able to cat 


c bullen meaning allche munitions of Sathan and carnall i 225 2 


all carnall — 3. all iugh thinges that are cxaled ainft Ful ecclel. 
the knowledge of God, 4: for chat tis able to bring b into ee hiſt. l.. 14. 
euety th to che obedience of Chit,” 5. andlaftly, om a 
vengeancethat is an ordinarie conſequent ſot euer, vnto the con- 

tempt oſ ihat miniſterie. Ifthat miniſferie be ſo powerfulltherfore 
tocaſt out dathan aut of naturall men, and to worke'in them the 

greateſt worke ynderheauengheworkof regerierztion bythe im- 

monull 4 leederhatir fowertvabroadints mensheares: iris molt 

certenthar it may all artes und deluſions ofdeuills in all ci. Pet. i. ij. 


ſoits of men, but ſome will not beleeue what the Scripture ſpea- 

keth molt clearely, that Sathan ſo poſſefſeth end dd 

wan in thaw, AS) ä let ach lere c Eph... 
lien 


* 


4 
liſten what an auncient learned man ſpeaketh of this point, on 
this manner. Demonibus eſt ſuper f omnia generatormentorum , C 
fOrig. Num. ſuper omnes panas, i quem Vvideant verbo Dei operam dare, ſcientians 
Homaz7. dinine legis  myſteria Scripturarum intentis ſtudys perquirentem, 
in hoc cor um omni flamma eſt, in hoc vruntur inc endio, poſſident enim 
anmmes qui v — Unto the dewills it is atorment a- 
bout « ef tormenti, and a paine aboue all paines, if 

me reading the worde of Cod. — Audi — 

bherein 


8 of Gods lame and the myſteries and ſecrets of Seriptures, 
mented: for they are ſeaſed | poſſeſſed of all them that remaine in ig- 


* 
1 
: * 
7 
k K , 
s © 
. „ 
3 
- ; 
* 
3 
Fo 
"I 
F * 


1 
1 


h all the flame of the dewills, in this fire they are tor- 
mordance., * 


. 3- Argument, | 
5 That thing which Sau han moſt dreadeth, moſt repugneth, moſt 
17 ſecuteth with all bis artes — i; we 
i bis ouerthrom, diſconerie and confuſion in all this woride. 
r L 
andperſecutedall the miniſters and profeſſors thereofwith all bis 
ehe, Ke. dy; 
Therefore this is an efpeciall meanes and gift of God, ſor to diſc o- 
der hus artes, to caſt downe bis kingdom, and to confound lum c- 
al opraflifere os 
w 3. Propſition or Alſumiptii, 


I Vie 22.31, 32. Our Sauicur ſaich to his Apoſtles , before his 
| HPallion, Satbar deſireth towinnow you a4 wheat : this he did be- 
cauſe he ſawthey were calledandordained forthe great work of 
8 ouerthrow of his kingdome, and the enlarging of 

Chtiſtes kingdome. mam 
. 1. Theſſ. 2. 18. Ye mould haue —— once 
or twiſe)but Sathan hindred vs, Wherefore did Sathan hinder 

Paule, Syluanus, and Tymotheus from comming to Theſſaloni- 
ca, bythe Iewes his Limmes, and thoſe wicked g yagabonds of 


34.17. that citie? becauſe hee feared by their mi ſome ouer- 
throwe of his kingdome, and ſome grouth of Chriftes 

Church... 
3 And whercfore doeth Sathan ſuffer naturall men to be 


ſo . 


5 
{fo wiſe in naturall cauſes and holdeth the blind in matters ofre- 
igion? The Apoſtle anſwereth: h becauſe he would not that Gad: 
Loſpell ſhould bine vnto them: for then he ſhould be diſco- b . Corin. 4.4. 


uered. 
Acts the 13. 8 mention is made of one oftheſe Sathanicall wi- 

zards whome Satan vſed as bis inſtrument, to hinder the worke 4* 

ofthe miniſterie of Paul and Barnabas in che conuerſion of the 


deputie Sergius Paulus a prudent man. For thus it is written, that 
great man — the worde of God, but Elimas that ſorcerer 
* is ſought to turne awaie the deputie from the faith: ii. Theſſ. 3.5, 


forby the — ſucha man, Sathans kingdome ſhoulde read che 9.10, 
haue beene ſore weakned. * 
Sathan hath his ſynagogue wherein his miniſters continuallie 
fight againſtthis holy miniſterieof Chriſt, Revelat, 2.9. & 3. 9. 
& 2.15. 
In Theodoſia the Emperours time, the yeare of our L. 396. the 6. 
young Valentinian Emperour of Rome was ſtrangled, and one 
Eng enim an to Chriſtian religion ſought the Empire, who 
2 — thereunto by one oftheſe prophets: for 
— PE y by a great profeſſor of theſe artes, that Sono. 
lhe tig et thevittorieag ,andextinguith c 2 


religion: — tædictions rooued 0 wy 
falſe to 155 confuſion. : . 


But Satan ſometimes would preach the goſpell him ſelfe, and 
Ke ſeemeth to loue it, and to delight to heare it ſounding : elſe 
wherefore would his wicked exorciſtes, and coniurers ſo often 
chatter it vnto him: And by the maid which had the ſpirit of diui · 
nation at i, he ot made her ſpeake: theſe men are the Act. 16.15. 
| s of the moſt high Godwhich ſhewe unto vs the way of k ſalva- 
tion: An in the Coſpell it is written they doe moſt honourably 
ſpeake of Chriſt; how art Chriſt the very ſore of Gad. 

1 — thoſe wicked exorciſts 2 coniurers delight Satan 1%. 
much in abuſing with their prophane lippes, the holy worde of 
God: for the truth is, he nothing te gardeth the out warde letter of 
the worde, no more then their — ſignes, croſſes, figures, 

&c. but this he will haue them doe, the more to blinde them and 
others, and to keepe men in the external lippe ſeruice, leaſt men 


ſhoulde vndetſtand the powerfull working vertue of that holie 
L3. worde 


* 2 5 
. _ 


Euang. 


De Dxm- 30, 
cap. I. pa 233, 


in 


—— the oftrue religi IT — reno bas the 
Apoltlein the ace, well his 
— to keepe — — ht or —— 
that campe which is ordained of God, to whe and beatdowne 
all che houldes and corners of his kingdome. 

The deuill in the oracle of Apollo would giue Julian the Apo- 
ſlata no anſwere, when he ſacriticed vnto him, vntill he had gi 
him occaſion to e the chriſtians: and do abuſe the fepul- 
chres ofthe Saintes and martyrs. Ruff. 1. booke.cha.z5. ofthe fall 


De prrparit. of this oracle, theſe verſes were thus written. 


He, ve, mibetripedes lugete peri- Apollor . * 
Pergt quoniam ardens mii vim — 

And Euſcbius the Hiftori er wentionerh alike cauſe; for 

he writerh that many ſaylers asthey paſſed by the Iſles called E- 
chmad:s , heard a voice inthe ayer crying often, Themans, Tha- 
mans, {this was the pilots name) and ſay beer him, chat when 
be did paſſe by Peladus he — theſe wordes the great Pan 
10 dead: the words being ſo ſpoken in that cre 
followed a hideous noiſe without the viſible appeatance dt any 
thin 2 Theſame ſtorię is in Plutarch. Now what thatceleſte numen, 
that is, agnus Pan did fignific , diverſe men haue diuetſſie conie- 
Etured: Cicero likewiſe, as all heathen writers) ſpeaketh great and 


| glorious wordes in the commendation of this — bur is vt- 


terly ignorant what ſhould bee the cauſe of that filence which it 
came vnto in his time. He coniectureth only with Plutarch, — 
thoſe exhalations — was hought Apo pollo infpiredh 

prieſtes and oracle, were by age conſu Foteſt autem — 
terræ que mentem pyt hiæ dune afſlatu concit aba veruſtate, 
But the holy Prophet Zacharie will teach vs tho rue cauſe ol che b 
confuſion oftheſe oracles as bree er 


Bodm thecioiliawſe cein aki — goſpell ubliche and prea- 
ched after Cluiſtes inſtitut ion, hath this ſtiemg arme and continu- 
all night againſt Sathan and all his inuentions; writeth on this 
manner: quamsbrem vt mala hac vuarrpeſſint,tegem Dei, ſape opor- 
tet prædicart, wet um en; ſummic, medys , inſimis inc ulc ars, & ante 
omnia fidem m cum imprims I hu refore ( ſairb he) to avord theſe eulli 


(meaning Sathanicall artes ofmagick and wic heraft) the /awe of 
God 


7 

God muſt be oſten preac had, & the feare of god beattn into men / mind), 
of high, mean, and ſome eſtate, andabone all things they muſt haue 
faith in good wrought m them. Again in the ſame page he commen- 
deth this good meanes intheſe wordes: Hic maximus hc pulcher- 
rms , hic fac illimus ommino modus eyciendie rep, magos, artes m. 
tic us, maleſicia, & mal. gos ſpiritas: tantiſper enim dum huc blaſphe- 
14 , magat, peſtem, bella 1 - that is, his ts the g rea- 
reſt (ſpeaking of the preaching ofthe goſpell)tbe faeſt, the eafieſÞ 
meaneitioc 

irits out of the common wealth , for as long as blaſphemic and A. 
— er bere and there, there br fu to drive away cual 
ſpirits, commrers, plagues, warre and famine ont of the lad. 


. Arps. 

That good meanes . God Souls the ſubuerſion of the 
temples and all the demilt artet at Epheſus. Actes Chap. 19. verſe 20. 
26, at Corinthuu, the 1. Corinth. Chap. 1 o. verſ. 20. and elſe where, 
in the beſt meanes left vs alſo for the ſame end and , namely the 
of Sat hanic all mem, and rbe d;ſconerie of their abmbomi- 
. 
Butt c nſt $48 s mimiſters (fe. was 
the Lordes — th 0, 

The Aſſumption. 

1 miniſterie of the goſpell gaue the deuill and his oracles 

a great fall in Diocleſius time, and therefore Satan ſtirred that 
tyrant by all meanes to perſecute the Chriſtians : This writerth 
Euſcbius m The oracle of Apollo in Diocleſia tiene gaue anſwere 
out of a hollow caue, and not out of any temple by the miniſtrie 
ofhis prieſtes after the old wonted manner: forthe deuill ſaid that 
iuſti homines in terris, certen iuſt men om the earth were ſuch lets vn- 
to him, that he eoulde not ſpeakeas in former times. Then began 
this tyrantto enquire ho thoſe men were, and his prieſtes an- 
ſwering that they were the Chtiſtians, he ſought after them with 
all his perſecutions: much like to this was the perſecution of He · 
trus Fliſtedius, and e Adolphus, and Larebacbuu, by the popiſn di- 
uines of Colen to ſtay the ſweating ſickneſſe. Attes and mon. 


- 885. 
. | 14 The 


out magitians, the artes of magicbe, ſorceriet andeuill 


Cont. 49. & 


The Perſians were full of profeſſed magitians and coniurers, 


who fearing the ouerthrowe of their kingdome, by Marmthus a 
godly B. ot Meſopotamia , who was ſent indeed to Perſia for that 
»Lib.7.cap.8, purpoſe from the Emperour of Rome, as writeth» Socrates, I 
Hou the ma *laboured with all their artes agaiaſt the preaching of the gol- 
itians were pell, perſwading their king //&gerdes not to receiue the Chrilti 
e archene- religion, & the faith which waspreached yntohim. Notwithſtan« 
ofoclin Per. ding the goſpell conſumed them and beat downe theirkingdom 
| 9.29" a&. & in that kings daies. And therefore in the next kings * raigne they 
m. 20, perſeq. were ſo enuious againſt the profeſſors ofthe goſpell, that (as ſai 
p98, the ſame o author )they murdered the Chriſtias with al the Perſian 
Bartanes or torments thatcould bee deuiſed. They continued alſothe ſame 
Varranes, hy . 
oChas. fury againſt the Chriſtians in that land inp Sapors time another 
p Soſom, king ofthat kingdome, who was in like maner prouoked ynto his 


Cb. . ſauadge and furious crueltie by theſame vile enemies of the goſ- 


pet 6. eArg. experience. 

Looks by what meanes the magicke,the witcheraft of elder time, the 
dininations the ſorcerie, the faries, the goblins, the heg ges, &c. which 
came vnto the Church with the rotten miſt of 272 Fas * 
and put to flight fromramong ſt v1, not care paſt:by the ſame 
— — 9 — of theſe dabolical deluſions be — 
& cut off, at this time preſent, 

But it is knowne by the good experience of all countries round about 
© where the beames of the goſpell haue ſhinedin this latter age, togi- 
therwith our owne, that this glorious mimiſterie of God, the publiſhing 
and preaching , I ſay, of the goſpel of leſus Chriſt hath ſcatteredthat 
vnſauerie miſte of Sathan , wherein he couered all his deluſions , © c. 
therefore the concluſion followeth, 


ion. 

Euſebius for elder times CO Simon magus the ſorce- 
rerof Samaria was a great aduerſatie to the faith, and withſtoode 
the Apoſtles and their doctrine, and how that he was diſcouered 
with his artes & confounded by the miniſterie of Gods worde. 


© Euſch, eccleſ. For he ſaith, Yerumdinina & ſupra caleſtis gratia miniſtris ſuis o- 


hiſt. lib. a. c. 14. pem ferens , per illorum apparitionem ac preſentiam, accenſam mali 
umam confeitim extinxit , humiliata per eos ac deturbata quavis 

ſublimitate, que ſe contra ſcientia.n Dei extollebat , quapropter nec 

Simonis 


— nee alteriuu corum, qui tune pred bart 
8 1 lus — — — lendor ac 
diuimuss ille ſermo qui hominb 
terra obtinebat, & in Apoſtolts ſuis agebat, curttavincebat ac ſuper- 
abat. But the divine and celeſtiall grace gane ſtrength vnto his mm 
ſters,and by their andpreſence, quenc hed that flame ſa wit = 
kedly kindlea, them were breng ht lawe and caſt downe all high 
thmgs which did ft vp themſclues againſt the knowleage of Ged. Ther- 
fore neither Simon rebellion, nor an y other which did appeare in theſe 
Apoſtolicall times, could fand: for the brightnes 0 7 the truet h, & that 
diuine wordwhich not before had ſhined from eauen, G raledop- 
on earth and wrought in his Apoſtles, conquered & ſubdued wrns, 

2 Vadis ſaith forhisexpericnce,onthis manner: Sed 
vine atiovires Satbane — Cn 
—— diu infideles, —— 25 — 
rant infeſtati a fpiriribus, malignis, & 4." 22 iy, die. We tr phe 
vt fit in =. ran „Finlandia mand 8 * 3 , ad Bo- 
ream ſit is. The publyhing of G werae ( e) bat 
— power, and what — an. — 
delitie, or ſo remamme 4s vet, they haue beene & aregrienonſly vexed — 
vill ſpirits,as it ts to be ſeene in Norway, Finland, Lapenland, and 
regions nhich ave in the North parts. 

Hleming ius for his countrey of Denmarke, can teſtiſie ſufficient · 
ly,whowriteth of his e alſo on this wiſe: (wm primuns 
ante anno;plus ming, 40. dottrina Evangely cepit tn hoc regro per 
pios miniſtros dei repar gari, & @ tenchris — vindicari, ceſſau- 
re omnes iſtæ diabolica 
ſoma luce, tenebra ſuperſtitionum evanuerunt 
verbi caleſtis ene ſw omnes ſuperſtitiomes difÞulit & diſcuſſit, non 
ſeeus atg, ſol oriens in Horizonte oſtro tenebraa noctis depelii: that 
is: hen firſt heretofore,qo. yeerespaſt or there —.— — be- 

odly miniſters of God,to be diligently freed & reſto. 
red ry deny 22. — —— = ed ceged : for 


. Lacente etenim Evangely clariſ= 
luxilla 


* 
chaſeth away . of thenight. And then leſt any ſhould 
Rs: yet _— of this finne in that king · 


I dome, 


ns divinitns lluxerat ing, 1. Cor. lo. 


De Demo 


in our Horizon, © 


- 
+ — 


3 


* - ” 1:2 8 


———e—df nM. 
22 


+ - "x" Poy 
an 


S \ n ſl ＋ ci „ * 
e 2 py yo | — 3 44'S * * 7 234 2” 42” 
*% „* * : ».4 © hs — * * 


— * 2 = wy 
© 1 Pu . a 7 \ p * * 7 + 4 0 CY „ way 6 Py 3 4 i ms * ry 
. * 44 a N 4 * *. bh 
. * > a - "405 n * n 
* — 
2 N hn & 4 I. 4 12. = 


In iudic.y.in 


9 


ſuit vt evaneſceremt: 


0 
dome, as there doeth alſo remaine ſome reliques of the oc. ,_ 
mongſt vs in England:he addeth preſently de anſwereth, that be- 
cauſe men contemne & refuſe the miniſterie of Gods word, 


| — — 


— is: —— — as — ſe 

| — — themſelues to — 

— vs — that we haue gint vnto vga moſſ ſure 

—— ce. 22 
P. Martyra worthie writer, ſpeaketh — knowledge and ex- 


ieee n on this manner. Nota bm verum Deum 


explodere ſolere commentitios : vnde ſiatim cum eſſet natus Chriſtug, 
omnia — oracula cot icuer un, quæ amt ea fuerant celeberima:ete- 
nim cum lux ipſa qui eſt ( briſtus, veniſſet in mundum, t ene br a nec qſſe 
that is · Let vs obſerne,how thetrue God chaſeth 
2 Chriſt was borne, all. ler of 
which were in former timer maſt ſumous. For when that 

ee f came into i he wor lde, muſh of neceſſitis 
— aq. And then reiecting Platerchs reaſons of the ſi- 
tence ofthoſe otacles, q difliking them, he ſaith: eff igitur huus e- 
ventialiacanſu,quam Pluterchus vndere wor potait, numirum aduere 
ſeriu poteſtatesd ¶ briſto fr enatas/(that is) there i therfore of this e. 
went another canſe, which Plutarch conld not ſee: that us, that the ad- 
wer ſavie powers were Chrj/t: then he addeth his ownexpe- 
rience,in theſe words. Q etiam hodie videws —— 
dentibus Ev i enenire vbi non tantum Idalolatria, fo. 
nationes  filta miracula ſtatins faceſſunt: We ſee alſo( faith hee ahi 
to come to paſſe in thoſe countrierwhichreceine the Gofpell, here net 
onely Idolatrie, but all dininations alſo or enchawniments , and fayned 
— — are preſently pac 
Aretius alſo, that learned divine of Berne, hee writeth thus after 


his knowledge and experience. \Nmwltbr enim efficatizes bic i piri. 


IE 


tus erroris dominatur, ps bi fidem non reperit, vbicarent bomi- 
nes Cbriſti veruc ſeptentrionales pepulos. quod cer- 
ti mum ef} argument um Ch D—_ * ir 


cr 
| | * 5 
fimdliter liert ex doctis nemo reperiatur: tamen in plebe, & inter medi 
cos nom rara ſunt qua ar guumnt 1 firmner eas Chriſto credere. J- 
— 
minus vt t q and et ſeſia ſua. T his i peri 
of errour (ſaith — ef mage and —— 
rule no where with greater eſſicacie, then where he findethno fauth, and 
where men want — Chrift, a among the peaple of 
po A — a roma argument, that Chrifliamtie us enerie 
where corrupted in mag and ſorcerers are 
found —— —— poo — none 
ſuch, — the people and of the Phiſitians, there are not a few, which 
17 4 tre token that they beleene not irnely in Chrift. The hg may be 
ſaid of thoſe men alſs which conſult with ſuch drumeri,c. wee muſt 
therefore earneſt lycallupon Godto roote aut in time ſuch ſcandals out 


— | Concluſion, | 

Conclude then of all the former premiſſes,chat ſeeing God hath 

ſo ordained his holy miniſterie as our beſt againſt theſe 
euills: ſo oppoſite to Sathans arts, and tobe of 
ſtrength vnder the — — dam, 
fable enormities: The promiſe alſo performed in the great fall of 
Sathans temples, & oracles by this holy worke of God:Againe,for 
that natural men are thus purged & freed from Sathan, & reſtored 
to grace in Chriſt, & that the deuil hath euermore reſiſted this ho- 
ly ordinance with all his might: & laſtly that the common expe» 
rience of the reformed Churches round about vs teſtifie the ſames 
Iconchude, therfore,] ſay, that Gods 1 is one princi- 
pall meanes, & good gift of Cod, for the diſcouerie, confuſion, and 
extirpation of the moſt horrible and deteſtable ſinnes of witch 
traſt and ſorceric. a 


HAP. II. 


How care di he mmiſt he Goſpel 6 
— ——— 
uncberaft andihe converſion of ſuch frarefull ſmners,if God gius 
v. — cont R 18 7 E 


* 
— A © 
* * „. ant —Y * 


11 


F the kingdom of Sathi beſomightie, as the ho word 
Lern ynto vs in ſundrie places: then it ſtands — 
which vndertake to warfare againſt him, that they be welproui- 
a2.Cor.4.3, ded of armout, wiſdom, courage, experience, & many good graces. 
6 * 131. of Gods ſpirit. And as for Sathans ſtrẽgth, ſirſt what reaſons may 
« Eph.6.12. better perſwade vs therof, then forthat the lord calleth him ſome- 


_—_ ©.41, times the god ofthis a world, the prince 6 of this world, the princes 
T lob. i. io. c of the darłnes of this world, him & his miniſtets che prince athat 
Slam.: 15. ruleth in the ayer, angels e gouemours, &c. for certenly hee wants 
Ald rod, nomight, courage, ot wil, to deſtroy any thing in this world, when 
me nil ul, the hedge fof God his prouidence is broken beforc him. Second- 
le nocendi ar. ly his knowledge is woonderfull,as the name dunn importeth 
75. Vnto ys for he hath now 5000. yeeresexperience & more. Againe, 
4 — heis ſcene into the canſes of moſt naturall things, his miniſters are 

2 moſt ſwift, & can in a moment deſery things farre diſtant, & hee is 


: 5 2 58 placed in the ayer, whence hee hath a free ee. 
d by the earth. moſt thin s here vpon earth. Again, he is — — een in the hi- 
eby the dead. ſtorie g elche holy dcripture. Laſtly hee is often called for the exe- 
* — cution of Gods iuſtice;whereforeitis certen, that this old ſerpent 
gbyacocke. - moſt ſtrong alſo in reſpect of his knowledge. as for his arts * they 
bby a twibble ong pe : 

oran axe, ate infinite in number haue varied in alla of this worlde, as 
iby aring. they mightbeſt ſerue his purpoſe: as theſe which follow, a Pyro- 
J Iſe. | mantiam h aetomantiame hydromantiam, d geomantiam, e ne- 
— by aftone, cromantiam coſcinomantiamę alectryomantiam, h axinoman- 
"by a lawrell, tiam, : daQuliomantiam,b pagomantiam, /alphitomantiã, alenro- 
oby an aſſes mantiamym lithomantiã daphnomantiam, »kephaleonomantiã, 
heade, pkipnomanti,qtabdomantiamy,y xulomantiam, ſlekanomantia, _ 
P — 1 giſtrbmantiam, omimanteĩia, & ſuch hke 2 among the Egypti- 
7 by peeces of ans, Chaldees, Babilonians, Archadians, Indians,&c. of lateyeres, 
wood. they commonly leaue the moſt of the former ſpecials, and practiſe 
Foy abaſen of their Chriſtolomantiã, by chriſtall, & Catoptromantiam by glaſ- 
. ſes & ſuch like inuentions. If Sathan then beſo mighty, ſoſtrong, ſo 


mil 
bebe "efſcls full of knowledge, ſofull ofartes, then haue the miniſters of Gods 


ofglafſe full word that will encounter with him, great need of many good gra- 
of water. ces & great ſtrength of Gods ſpirit, if they will worke the confu- 
«by rubbing fon of Sathan, the diſcouetie of his artes, and the conuetſion of ſuch 
eh nay les, ners vnto true repentance. My poore aduiſe & counſell, accor- 

: ding to Gods word, I humbly offer yntothem onthismanner. 


1 


* 13 

na that in cheir paſtorall charge ami Church aß Godbhey be 
moſt diligent to publiſſ and preach te word of Cod as the A- 
poſtle teacheth, 2. Tim 4.2.) for this is that lighethat this enimie 
molt dreadeth, as is before ſhewed: anſtructug ami b patiente,and , im. 1. 1, 
prooning if God will at any time giur uhu (vile kinde of men alſo) re- 6. 
that then may knowihe truth), andibac they mar came rn 
amendment out of the ſnare of the dewll, which are taken of him at has 
Will. WTF 1 | 5 167 „444 


Secondly, they muſt take — that the 2 e e _ 
Chriſt, and holy Spirit (whoſe gracesthey labour tominiſter an 
giue vento — —— bthemſelues. For he! Ihr 
that hath experience of his one ion can beſt tell, what 
ching are moſt needfull forthe conuerſion of others. 

Thirdly: they mult becarefullic bent, to beautifie and adorne | 
their profeſſion with a godly, ſober, and innocent life, and heed- 
fullie warch that they fall not into any preſumptuous finnes of diſs 
— mars — men Satan _ c —_— — c Eph. a. a. 

be f d of Sathan themſelues in or or both, T 
— but ſmall ſtrẽ gth to caſt forth the 4 vnclean ſpitits 3 
out of others. Here may that ſweete of God M. Tindall, 
giue vs a moſt worthie for ourimitacion: for thatteligi- 
ous and holy man of God; with his preſence, diſcoueted and 
confounded afamous magitian in pe in his time there: M. | 
Foxe hath recordedir as — There was at on 4 1 
time, amongſt a companie of marchants, as they were at , 4 cer- of M. Tindall. 
tame Iugler, which thr 275 diabolicall — —— . 
gicall, would fetch all kindes of viands and wine from any place they ” 
would. and ſet it vpon the table incontiment before them with many o- 
ther ſuch like things: the of his Joggler we much ratked , it 

beardefir, be de 


chanced that as A. ertaine of the mar- 
chants that he might bealſo preſent at ſupper to ſee himplay his partes: 
to be breefe, the * ted — ar Tyndall 
were there preſent i Then the [nggler bein required toplay bn; fearey 
andto ſhewe his after his wonted boldnes , began tu ui ter all 
that he could dor, but 


41 in vame, at the laſt with his labour ſaea- 
ting and roplmg , when he ſaw tha! nothing worl1go forward, 


but that 

all his inchantmentt were voide, he was compelled openly to confeſſe 

tht there was ſme mas preſent, which whe ad lured ll bir 
a K 3. Mgr. , 


10 
doings, Sofie MaſtotBaxe: + TOES ECTS 
;choymuſtallabefuchmenascan ſpeake wah e 
4 mightely, and talke familiarlie (as men well e acquainted with 
lob. 48.2. God) in cheir ier is an eſpeciall meanes 
—— of Chriſt for this f purpoſe. And . Iames ſaith that the prayer of a 
lam. 5. 16. grighteons man ſuch as the. miniſtet of god mult be aue mach 
— if it be feruent. By praiet Aſtirixs a noble Chriſtian at Cæſatea Phi- 
but. 7. ca. 16. lippi bewraied — mn with allhis enn 
einen aan vo rrtn ron &rufetepeire 
And tothe ier ma e more e 
5 — — and effectuall fut 
this purpoſe, our dauiour commandeth to ioyne uue —— vnto 
2 Mat. 1 7. a t. the ſame ſay the A ede mention 
ain our conflict with Satan ; and S. Pa miniſters by os. 
— example, that they beat i —— 


Pet. 5.8. 
3 1.Cor.g. 27: Bron eee. 


| 


6 "holy ſacraments of lefis Chriſt;according toour Lords own moſt 
boly inſtitution: & here they muſt not without choiſe or regard, 

hand auer head ſuffer i nt knowne ſinnets to 
be pactakers with the ſamts of God of miſſerie. 

- M Cabrin teacheth this intheſa words: :foritis molt true faith 
Inft.qic.r2.{.5. he)that he to whome the diſtribution of it — the holy up- 
hom. in Mat. 3 pet) is committedrit he wittinglie and willingly admit an vnwor- 
Ezcch.4.13. tie man, home he might lau fullie put — is as guiltie of ſa» 
% criledge;asifhedidgiueabroadrhe Lords bodie todogs. Where - 
fore —— again(tthoſe Paſtors, which 

while they ſeate the poet of great — debarre no man: 
The blood, faicth hee, ſhall bee bandes: if yee 
feare man ye ſhall — — ye feare God, yee 

ſhall be reuereneed alſo among men: let eee nor 

purple, nor ccovtnes : Me haue here a greater 

\ In puxing back offenders, they muſt rihediflioQion 
8 berweenepublique and private ſinnes: publique are thoſe that 
Inſt.4.c-12.\.6. raue not onely one ot two witneſſes, but are committed openly, 
and wnh the offence ofthe whole Church: ptiuate or ſecret ate 
1 hidden from men, as the ſinnes of 


hipocrites 


„1 
hipocrites, fortheſe come not into the judy 
— ofthe meane kind, which — witneſles 
In this dutifull vigilancie and examination, if he find out in his g 
Church or congregation anie of the forenamed finners, witches, 
wizardes,ſorcerers,orfauourers of ſuch abomination, ortharſcek 
helpe at ſuch intheirneceſſnies, he is rodeale mott circum 
and faithfully, moſt warily and wiſely, leaſt he admit any 
prophane the holie table and ſupper ofour Lord leſus Chriſt. 
And among this ſort of ſinners hee muſt alſo wiſely diftinguiſh 10 
firſt bet weene ſuch as are onely ſuſpected to be ſuch finners, and 
thoſe which are m knowne practiſioners of ſuch arts and 
ſciences. 2. bet weene thole which practiſe there artes for the be · 
nefit and good of othert, as they pretend, and thoſe which vſe Heming. Ad- 
their inc hantments for the hurt and dammage of others, as they on. 
profeſſe and confeſle, Ae | 
Ihe woaker fort and the firſt kind, the Paſtors muſt labour wih 1 
all exhortations, prayers &c. for their conuerſion; and for that 
they pretend loue, they muſt vnderſtand that this is an Apoſtoli- 
call canon: we muſſ not doe euill, that good may come of it : and that 
no action that Wanteth the warrant of Gods worde can haue anie 
godlines or gob daes in it, and that hothing cat profite the bodie 
that killeth or deſttoieth the ſoule, ſo as all theſe execrable artes 
doe: and they muſt be tolde alſo what a horrible abhomination 
their ſinne is before god, what a prophanation ofhis bleſſed name, 
what an Apoltacie from God, and how they haue vtterly tenoun- 
ced God and betaken themſelues flaues and vaſſals to the deuil, 
how! ſoeuer they doe regatd it. 
Ik Lk be ſoryand — — 12 
tance, which either haue vnto, ot practiſed any ſorcerie, or · xv. 9. 20,21. 
the worſhip ofdeuils fas Iohn ſaith, they muſt be wiſely infor- Y 
med and comforted. ſot that leſus Chriſt can and will caſt forth Ma 
the vneleane # ſpitit, if in trueth of heart with ing, ſaſting, & 1 f 
mourning, he be ſought vnto, ce. Andſuch mult bee 
alſo by the vigilant paſtor warc ouerſcene : for if he fall a+ 
gaine to his olde vomite, let him remember the wordes of 


neof the Church, 
,and 


h to 


our Lord Iæſus, the ende of rhat man is worſe then the beginning. j Mat. 14 
Aud of the bole 1 they haue Nen en For 
4 ons. L 


4x * = 
_— ——  —— - 


5 *. A * 
* * 3 3 — * 
Fo HE I 
e ne 


| fromtbe fil hinos of theworld, ren thee fi Lord, and 
of the Saua leſus ( briſh; are yet — therein, and oner = 
Come, the latter end u worſe with them then the beginning. 
13 And as for the other open practiſioners of theſe Sathanic all lei 
* ences, aſſoone as the good miniſter, by his godly and watchful 
diligence , and by — holy miniſterie of Gods worde & ſacta 
ments hath detected, deſctied, and diſcoueredthem: he muſt vſe 
no leſſe care and labour chat his congregation may be purged of 
ſuch impes of Satan, and that his miniſtrie be not hindred, his your 
ple infected, 8c. to bring them tothe publique cenſures of the 


Church _— to the ciuill © — — men 
with torments o pleaſe come to te- 
— 5 that ſothey may be ſaued. Thus and la 
41 Tim — in — function: ſuch godly Paſtors 
e Neglig . ſhall d — — the Apoſtle commãdeth 


ſors, non re- — ſrene that they profit among all men, and contmuing e in 
hidents,blinde 25 bleſſed ſtate, ſhall fadang, bath ſane thrmſelues, and them that 
guides , Sc. re them, And ſo much for the diſcoucric and confutation of 


een wucheraſt by theainiſteric ofthe goſpell. 
ro ree an 
N CHAP. III. 


Oftbe Chriſtian Mt. agiſtrare, the 2. good meanes ordained of 
God forthe tat. and confuſion of witchcraft. 


HE godlic Kinge $, Princes, Iudges, and all 
FEET STS PALEY ittrates frat God of the olde Church 
before Chriſt and the Chriſtianprinces &c.vn- 

der the goſpell, were moſt carefull at all times 
pet i{hthis finne out of their kingdomes & 
3 r — are5%y wa And like as they were 
molle diligent in this point; fo the wicked 
nt kings,1 princes, & c. in all countries and nations & c. were bent to 
the contratie practiſe, as tonourith, to prouide, aud to maintaine 
as it were ſeminaries for ſuch practiſed the artes and 
inventions ofthe devill. I will ſhewe nnbactantg examples 

and reaſons out ofthe holy booke of God on this manner. 


Moſes (a moſte wiſe and godly magiſtrate, a ngulerprefdeve 
x r 


* 


17 


for all others) was molt ſharpely inſt this ſinne, © 9d 

ſcene by his conflict with this vile ſort of men in Egypt, Exod. 7. 

& 8. for it is thought theſe werethoſe Iannes and lambres which 

withſtood him, 2. Tim, 3.8.& God by him gaue moſt ſharp lawes | 
4again(t cheſe ſinnes, and that holy man, no doubt, practiſed them . Deut. 16. 10. 
in his time moſt catefullie. 11. 

2 Saul, as long as he followed the word of God by the miniſte- Exod. 12.18. 
tie of damuel, was 3 ſo eractiy & L<v-20-37- 
diligently ſearched and ſought out by his Iudges and Magiſtrates 
thele witches and wizards, that he left few or none in all his land: 
as may be ſeen by the words ofthe witch her ſelfe vnto him, when 
he came vnto her after his fall from God, 1. Sam. 28. g. the wordes 
are theſe. The woman ſaid pe hold, thos knoweſt what Saule bath done, 
how he deſtroiedthe ſorcerers and ſoot h: ſauert, aut of the 
then ſeckeſt thou to tate me ina ſuare, to canſe met 
may ſee, 1. how that the wicked Saule was arde during 
the time ofhis good miniſtetie, to execute Gods will againſt this 
ſinne: & 2.howthat as ſoone as the light of Gods word was dark- 
ned, the holy prieſts & prophets murdered,theſc horrible abhomi- 
nations began to ſpring vp, & to creepe into the Church againe. 

3 David was the next King, and carefully prouided fot a good 
miniſterie: in his time prophecied Nathan 4 & Cad, & his religious 418 
prieſts Zadocke & Abjathar · and many others, no doubt, godly 1 J.. 


0 
e? Where wee 


prieſts and prophets, by whoſe good miniſterie together with the ,,Chr.29.35. - 
induftric and diligence ofhis — & Magiſtrates in the ex · — 
ecution of iuſtice, cus ſinne a d not greatly in his kingdome 


during his tirne: for we read nothingof this ſinne (that I can temẽ- 
ber) in that long hiſtoric which the holy Ghoſt hath commended 
"4 Hezekiah —— d 

* was a ri ous prince, an i 
cioullic prouided — miniſterĩe: hee — | 
which hadcreptintotheChurchin Vriah, lotham, & Achas daics: 
for as for Idolatrie(wherofthe ſinne of witchetaft is an inſepetable 
companion,as the wiſe & learned haue obſetued) it is ſaide, 
Fe brake the images, fcut 
places & the altars Beniamm, in Ephraim alſo o 
Aanaſſeh vntill be had made an ende. It is certen therefore that hee a 
Rr a IL: & * | 
F240 T 


— — the high f a.Chr.zt.z, /- 


| 1 

u wuſſe ludges ſhouldproceedein iuſtice againſtthe ſame: for in 
his time prophecied the holy Prophets, Eſay, Hoſea, Micah: who 
1754777. preached moſt yehemently ogainſttheſe cuills, as maybe ſecnem 

Mich. 5. i 1. ms Prophecies. 74 Hh ; | 
5 Ioſiah was a very teligi ly, & zealous Prince, & diligent- 
y ouidedalſo for wiſe Magiſttates & Minifters,by whoſe pain- 
induſtry & godly wiſe pollicie, hepurged his Church as of all 
Idolatrie, ſo likewiſe ofthis great abhominatiõfot in his time pro- 
phecied leremiah, Zephaniah,and others, who no doubt ſtirred vp 
the king & all his magiſtrates, to root out theſe Sathanicall inuen- 
bz King.:3.24 tions, for itis written that Iofiah ſo did. [oſicb aſſo rooke h away rhems 
that had familiar Prins the ſoothſayers, and the images, andthe I. 
dali, and all the ions that were el piad in the land of Indah and 

in Jeruſalem, to the word of the lam, &c. 
6 Of the Emperours, Kings, Prinees, cc. vnder the Goſpell, Bedin 
wiiteth on chis manner. /tag, ſertulegi, cum ſortilegys ſuerunt dam- 
Dzmono.p, tir indicys infeſti, primum Tiberio imperante,vt apud Tacit em lee 
224. gitar: poſt Domituano lee acrin,þ dilygentina quaſtionem & c.tum 
etiam Diocletiano: Sed onunifi ſenerifſime cum mper atores fidei Chri- 
Hi ſeſe adumrerumt. tune enim euerſa ſunt templa & oracula,ſecrificia 
um, totag, aruſpicima ilicitapronunciata, & anguralis ſcientia, 
07 — t ſau, indictas in ces mor tis pena, deportati- 
ane tin cos qui angures & auruſpires conſulerent, Sorceries (ſaith he) 
beg an to be ght after vnder the bear hem Emperours, Tiberius, Do- 
miar, and Diocleſuwr: But aſſoone as the Emperonr: which followed, 
profeeltbe fab of Cri hy ddr ſexe ſerch out heſt 
fiſes of Sarhan.For then ther Temples were caſt down avid their ord- 
cles, heatheniſh ſaoriſices, & all the arts of magic h were proclaimed vnt 
lam full, & the vſe ef ibem was forbidden, & death mas ordained for the 
puniſhment of ſorcerie, and baniſhment for all thoſe which conſulted 
with ſoothſaiers,ſercerer1, & the reſt of t hat Sathanicall order. And 
thus farre of good magiſtrates. The contratie practiſe ofevil Prin- 
ces and ludges followeth. | | 

- Fnſt, to begin wich Pharao and that auncient Idolatry and ma- 
gicke of Egypt: The falſe prieſis & magicians ofthat land, wanted 
no prouiſion for the fuſtaining of their deuiliſh profeſſion. for it ĩs 
wricten that they had an ordinatie of Pharo andthey did eat their 
ordinatie which Pharob gaue them, fo chat in che famine time 


chey 


they» were not conſtrained to all tbeirlandey others Were.z Gen.47.29. 
In this — — Ml erkers of hiſlo- Exod 7. . 
ries haue teſtified, Hence came that famous Nectanebus, x ho by 
his inchauntments ſo bewitched Olympias, the Queene of Ma- 
cedonie, that he begat on her Alexander the great Monarch,ma=- 
king Phillip the King and the worlde to beleeue, that Alexander 
manly ers ſonne,as Curtius and others haue tecorded. Such Q. Curtius. 
0e chi helliſh profeſſion there was, no doubt, aoinallo- | 
bo kingdomes ——. countries, where theſe artificers were foſte- f 
red,as in Chaldei,Archadia,[ndia, and in Perſia, as I haue before 7 
1 ed out ofthe Eccleſaflical ſtories of Socrates and Sozome Cic.de Dinin ' 
Lib. r. 
22 the kingdome of /{rael fell from the true God, frombis 8 
word,ſeruice,and religion, it i (aid, they contemned allthe good 
Prophets andthe y miniſerie. For e Lord ſaith, they made , 
them Prieſts which were —— very: dregges and rag get, or loweſt or 8 * 12.37, 
feſt of the people. When the miniſſerie was thus polluted, and the | 
worde of God put vnder a buſhell and contemned, immedi "1 } 
Sathan thruſt into the kingdome idolatrie and witchcraft, whic a | 
continued in that land vnto Hoſheas time, ynder whome theſe 
ſiages bre ht deſtruction vnto the kin of /ſracl: as it is | 
written, 2, King, 17. whete the holy Ghoſt l finnes 
of ſeroboam 1 joſheas time, and ſhew | 
the juſt cauſes ofthe deſtruction of that kingdome, 3 1 
on this manner. 1. Finally they left al the commanndement; of the 12.Hoſ.t7.v, 
A their Ged. 2. they made them molten images, enen twocalueg, i hu. 
and made grone, and worſhipped all the beſt of heanen, and ſorncd 
22 made their ſounes and 2 paſſe through the fire 
witchcraft r yea ſould them ſelves to dee o- 
Fer 7 25 Lord to 
The ſame cuills came lle manner vpon the kingdome of 
Judah for the contempt of Gods word, his religion. his Prophets, 9 
and his miniſterie, as nder Manaſſch, of home it is (aide, mw hee mA Kin. 21. 3 
went Hache, that is, from all good thinges which his facher did, by ©; 
and then followerh this ſinne, verſ. 6. Hee cauſed bis ſonnes | 
ta paſſe through fire, and gaue him ſelfe to mite heraſte and 
ſforeerie, hee wſed them 9 bad familiar panes, and 


* 


N 


120 

were ſoothſuiers, & did much exill := the ſight of the Lord io him. 
And the lord aſſureth vs that theſe — this — af 

ofthe deſtruction alſo ofthis kingdom of ludah: for thus it is writ- 

„Ming. a4 3- ten. a Surely by the commandement of the Lord came vpon this 
Jer 19.815. Iudah, chat he might put them out of his ſight for the ſinnes * of 


7. eres aft Maneſſerb according toall that hee did, 
r hi dach. And thus like as we haue ſeene that when good kings, Tudges, 
and Magiſtrates gouerned the Churth ofthe lewes, & were care- 
full to pteſerue a pure miniſterie, pure religion, & the ſacred Scrip- 
tures them: theſe Sathanical attes of magic k, ſorcerie, and 
ſuch like inations, were ſoone baniſhed that lande, ſo like- 
-wiſe in all Chriſtendom, both before popetie began to darken the 
face of Gods Church, & after that rotten miſt in ſundrieplaces had 
vaniſhed,& was ſcattered by the beams of the — Satha- 
nicall kinigdome was caft don, his miniſters confounded, & his 
——— Fl diſcouered. Wherfore 12 e we thus 
224. de De with Beatus oft populus cus ſapientes atores, boni ma- 
— . iſtratus, cx boni paſtorer p- aſant, qui bent inſtitunnt ipſum:non ſunt in 
co malign pita dus habitur: ſadem. Bleſſed is that people oner whons 
Wiſe gauernouri, good magiſtrateis, and godly paſtors are placed, which 
doe well inſtruct andgourrne them:exill firs are not lige to haue ary 

long aboad or comtmnance ww that place. 


HAF. ME. > 


hin the Chriſtian Indget and Magiſtrates bane denegandmey dc 
for the diſcoueris and extirpation of Witchcraft, — 


1 Irſt, if any man — that I purpoſe in this place, to 
frame any ſpeech, c ounſell, or direction, for the Honourable 

<= wiſe Iudges and Magiſtrates ofthe land, how to proceede in 

juſtice againſſ theſe abhominations : let ſuch vnderſtand, thatT[ 

meane no ſuchching:fortheir Honours, & c. are wiſe, I know right 

well, to ſee into theſe euills, & willing with all diligence to diſco- 
i ver them, & God I truſt will more andmoreinflametheir hearts, 
4 with ſueh meaſure of the loue of his glorie and the ſaluation ofhis 
15 Saints. that they will moſt carefully redreſſe chem, where & when 

i they finde them. Againe, 1 confeſſe my ſelfe to be moſte ,yn- 
1 | | expert. 


| 31 - 
ert and vnacquainted with their profeſſion. Notwithſtanding 
— be in ſome ſott lawfull for me, and moſt expedient ſor this 
cauſe in hãd, to teach others in ſober maner(rudely as Ican) what 
magiſtrates are, & wherefore ordained of God, & how they haue 
done & may do to preuent, diſcouet & confound theſe abominati- 
ons: wherfore I hope I ſhal giue no iuſt eauſe of offence vnto any, 
but an occaſion rather vnto ſome to remember in What place the 
Lord hath ſet ouer vs theſe honourable iudges and magiſtrates, 
to batter and beat downe our common enemy his The aan, 
all his inuentions and munition, which he daily practiſeth for the 
deſtruction of our bodies & ſoules: and therefore ] offer to al men 
good cauſe to cõmend thẽ to God, moſt earneſtly in their praiers. 
The — ( ſaich the Lord) ma a be — 2 men 2 
fearin ad, men dealing truly mẽ hating conetonſnes:. u «Exod 18.21, 
— * Gods — cy | — 
are often called Gods c — a name of great importãce & ſ 
Fathers & Paſtors in the Prophets in ſundry places. And Solomon — — 
ſaich, d that when kings taigne, & counſellers decree righteouſlie, 4 prov. 8.150 
| . ity dc the iudges of the earth execute 
zudgement: it is will, his own worke & good pleaſure, 
Andfor this cauſe Moſes & I ſaid to the iudges ( whom e Deut. i. i 6. 
they appointed in euery ſeuerall city) chat they e ſhoulde ſicin i · Chro 646. 
judgement not for man tone : Fa 
Againe all authours eccleſiaſticall & ane. with 
wordafGod affirmin that theirofficeis — the ta- f 
bles of the law: & wolf eccleſiaſticall writers call them cuſtoder v- 5 45 — 
rin, e, preſerners & keepers of hot h the tables of Gods law : & iſ G's: 
the very heathens (for nulla gent ſine lege, ſme rege, ſine Deoꝛall nati= laſt . ch. a 
eur haue their bing, their lam, & their God) the ſay, in ma · (a. 
c lawes, they haue alway at religion and the ip of 
& ſo proceed topoliticklawes,and laſtly commend all thei 
wesand religion to the care and cuſtody of their Princes, Iud« 
ges, magiſtrates and gouernours. | 
Andthe good gouerners, kings, princes, & magiſtrates inthe 
Church of God,haue euer hadtheir firſt & principal care to main- 
- eaine & defend the laws ofthe firſt table of God: that is the religiõ, 
the ſeruice, the word, the honor & glorie of God : for ſo God c- 
mandeth, & the forenamed holy n A” | 


3- 


his maieſtie, & t e b lnſt. . a0. ch. 


22 
and ochets haue ſo done as we haue partly 
ſhewed: for they accounted themſelues Gods vic here 
on earth, and thereefore they were moſt mindfull of hi F 
5 N che firſttable there is none more hor- 
tible, more ſeartull, that more diſhonoureth God, & impareth his 
2 deteſtable ſins of magike and ſorcerſe, her- 
re I may conclude that it is the duty of al Chriſtian iud- 
ges and magiſtrates to bend all the hepowens often oftheir mindes moſt 
religiouſlic and carefully, forthe | 
— — Geog —— pry Shania 3 
N 1 | 
6 Such — che honourable; 
&c. to intermeddle ot comber themſelues in the behalfe of Gods 
the good (tate of Gods Church, inthe diſcouerie of theſe 
liſhpraQiiſes of Satan and his miniſters:they do as much as in 
them lyeth teſiſt Gods gloty, prophane his ſeruice, ſet yp Satan tor 
their God, his arts for Gods word, & would haue Athiſme to come 
in place of pure religion. Wherfore if they erte o >, mm 
erredangerouſly againſt the very foundation of Chriſtianreligi- 
on, if theyerre of malice, they ate the veryimps & limmes of Sa 
tan: and ſeeing that they ſeeine to turne ſuch honourable perſo- 
nages from faith and religion, and from tue obedience vnto the 
worde of the Lord, as Elimas the ſorceret ſought to turne Sergius 
Paulus that man (when he de — 
from the faith; let them vnderſt and jou 
iuſtly againſt them proſeſſing Chriſtianity in the Ch urc 
$ Act. 15. 0. againſt that vile Pagan ſorcerer in tbismaner:O g fal 
- "nia all miſchiefegthechuldof the denill and ner rg 
| — — the Lorat + 
The dand the motherof all good lawes is the law of god, 
2. andallotherlawesdo giue attendance therupon, and haue their, 
_ to this end, to keep and preſerue the holy — — , 
— — want this ſcope (as the leamed ſay)t 
the Church orcommon wealth, The lawes = | 
— — this ſinne, and puniſh it with death (as all 
I tz moſte — — table were puniſhed) the words of the — 
fe aredul death are theſe, Exod. 20. 18, Thau ſbalt not ſuffer a witch to le. Again 
* wa « Lev. 20.27. & tf a man or 4 woman hau a iFirit of diuimatias o 90 ſoo 
EIN ſaying i in them they ſhall dye the aeath they ſpall ftone them io ath, 


before 


Ebel, Jehoſaphat 


3 


thei» blood ſpall be vpin them, Agamne, Deut. 18.105 T. many kinds 
ofmagitians are ker ww ro} Lorde firaight vga eth 
ſhould not be left to liue in the land. Theſe lawes of God did the 
forenamed godly kings, their iudges, rulers, and magiſtrates moſt 
religiouſllc and zealouſlic obey and put in practiſe, and whertore - 
Uniſtian princes, 7 not with prea 
reale & religion, do the ſame vndet the goſpel: no man liuing (hal 14 6. 
euer be able with any ſenſible reaſon to prooue vnto vs. Wherfote 

ſueh * as are ſo ſharp ſighted in the lighter finnes of the 2, 


table, and as it were blind inthe diſobedience of the firſt, are (as Mi. 


Beza Danæus, h & Bodin / ſay truly) great contners of God thẽ-· Oe ſorti c. i. 


ſelues:& therefore the greater account ſnall they make. Bodin cõ- . Lib. Ac. i. 
plaineth in theſe wordes: 1 miratas ſum, cur 4 multi- 
pricipib. queſtiones in ſtitute, & mdices extra ordmem dati gelegatrg, 
flerent, in furot, queſtores a M0 viark we 
tamen turpiſſima, & ſumme. mp r ſalla man- 5 
— — — wad adratibe clone — 
of ſome countries, where he th the iudges and magiſtrates M. Bea. com 
are very ſharp againſt theeuet, robbers, vſurers, and ſuch like com · in lob c. i. v. 
mon finnes, but to paſſe ouer the moſt horrible ſinnes of ſorceri 
vnpuniſhed. M. Bea alſo complaineth againſt this negligence in 
iſtrates, as we haue before | 31 
to make la wes doth belong & appertain to 
kings & princesnotwithſtanding he wiſheth(albext la wes might 
wãting) that the honourable iudges & 6, & c. 


puniſh magitians & ſorcerers for ſundry other ſorts iof fin, i C. 5. 
hichthey doimpiouſly commit. Bodin ch their ſinnes in 
this order. Firſt they renounce + God and all true religion. 3. they 4 Deut. 13. f. 


blaſpheme / & prouoke his diuine maieſty with vnſpeakable con- Lev. 414. 
nels: 3. they beleeue in the deuill, — & mfacrificeynto rg mu 
him.g.they offer their children a vnto deuils. 3. they ſweare ynto 2 Deur.18.r0. 
Satan & promiſe to bring eas many as they can vnto his ſeruice & o Deut. 3. 5. 
5.6. they inuocate Satan in theirpraiers,& ſ — de p ler.$.7.8 

name. y they commit inceſtuous adukeries, for Satant the 1 

chat none can proue a perfect magitian or ſorcerer, but ſuch a one 
as is of the father & the daughter, or the mother & the ſon:yhete 

Catullus wrote theſe verſes. 


Wang C vato pig natur oportet,. 


e matre 


Si vera eſt Perſarum, impia religis. 


ter care, loue, Com, in 10h. 


. 


- Ts. in cubos 
— mu the witches(asthemſclues confeſſe)cõmit abominatics & filthines | 


2. — 


Egbert os fee, 


13 _  Sath Perſian CE Er RE | 
1 — — — infants. p. al ſorcerers 
for the moſt part exerciſe poiſon, with poiſon is far more 


De civ, r eth gramiau eff oc- 
cidere vdenemo quam ferro: baden. & laſtly 


birus c. hoc r rr 
impu- to demie this — 2 
clle cuschelelid. death, as can be deuiſed: for 
| Videarurs — TI WER VY EP RITA Ty 
ofdeathwasa moſt dreadful death among the Ie vs. And ſurely ĩt 
is wellknownby common experience that al profeſſed ſorcerers, 
&c. cient y moſt monſtrous impieties · & forthis cauſe 
che law ſaithfimply, Mechaſ h.Lotichieth, let not awitch line: 
vntovs how it is chat iuſtice be ſpeedily cxer- 


3 


ery of the moſt horrible and 
; notfor that terne would reach 
| their duties in this 

we NK 
in elder times a- 
ſhine of the goſpel, a — 222 
dunne more e, c in 
theſe duties to God and his Church: png ſay per. 
to come to farre behind thoſe noble noble prefidente, in che loue 
tred ol fine, andbehinde (I feare) 2 ſhall wee 
ef heauen. To conclude therefore all as 
| ———ůů— ig] 
to illuminate our ſupcriours, the wiſe and honour af 
our godly learned miniſters, with his holy CENA 
enflame thei heacs with holy ſpire, 
che ſame in practiſe, as 


\ nave & — of theſe moſt horri 
fa ar — e ns thar ſo God may be purely wor · 


ſaints re ate ſt enemies either conuetted to their 

ed wich their — their ent en 

. So be k. 2 
* 


Vnto the K immer, meſhes Gol woe 
| AN ems Amen, & 


