Finno-Ugric, Siberian Mythology (Uno Holmberg, 1927)
===============================
The Mythology of All Races volume on Finno-Ugric and Siberian religion — the standard English survey of northern Eurasian shamanic cosmology. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.188450).

THE MYTHOLOGY OF ALL RACES


Volume IV

FINNO-UGRIC

SIBERIAN


Volume I. Greek and Roman

Wnmii Sherwood Fox, Ph.D., Princeton University.

Volume II. Eddie
Axel Olrik, Ph.D., University of Copenhagen.

Volume III. CelHcj Slavic
Canon John A. MacCuixoch, D.D., Bridge of Allan, Scotland.

Jan MXcbal, Ph.D., Bohemian University, Prague.

Volume IV. Finno-Ugric, Siberian
Uno Holmberg, Ph.D., University of Finland, Helsingfors.

Volume V. Scmiiic

R. Campbell Thompson, M.A., F.S.A., F.R.G.S., Oxford.

Volume VI. Indian, Iranian
A. Berriedale Keith, D.C.L., Edinburgh University.

Albert J. Carnoy, Ph.D., University of Louvain.

Volume VII. Armenian, African
Mardiros Ananixzan, B.D., Kennedy School of Missions, Hart-
ford, Connecticut.

Alice Werner, L.L.A. (St. Andrews); School of Oriental Studies, London

Volume VIII. Chinese, Japanese

John Calvin Ferguson, Ph.D.,

{Adviser to the President of the Republic of China)

Masaharu Anesaki, Litt.D., University of Tokyo.

{Japanese Exchange Professor at Barvard Vniversity, igis-igis)

Volume DC. Oceanic

Roland Burragb Dkon, Ph.D., Harvard University.

Volume X. American {North of M exico)

Hartley Burr Alexander, Ph.D., University of Nebraska.

Volume XI. American {Latin)

Hartley Burr Alexander, Ph.D., University of Nebraska.

Volume XII. Egyptian, Indo-Chinese
W. Max Muller, Ph.D., University of Pennsylvania.

Sir James George Scott, K.C.I,E., London^

Volume XIII. Index


PLATE I


Grave-Houses in Russian Karelia
(See page 32.)

Water-colour by V. Soldan-Brofeldt.


THE MYTHOLOGY
OF ALL RACES

IN THIRTEEN VOLUMES

CANON JOHN ARNOTT MacCULLOCH, D.D., Editor

GEORGE FOOT MOORE, A.M., D.D., LL.D., Consulting Editor


FINNO-UGRIC, SIBERIAN

BY

UNO HOLMBERG, PH.D.

DOCENT OF THE UNIVERSITY OF FINLAND, HELSINGFORS


VOLUME IV


ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE OF AMERICA
MARSHALL JONES COMPANY • BOSTON
MDCCCC XXVII



Copyrighted in Great Britain
All fights reserved
Printed January, 1927


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA BY
THE PLIMPTON PRESS • NORWOOD • MASSACHUSETTS
BOUND BY THE BOSTON BOOKBINDING COMPANY


EDITOR’S NOTE


I N place of a preface, Dr. Holmberg has asked me to say
that much in his account of Finno-Ugric and Siberian
Mythology is the result of personal acquaintance with various
tribes. In the summer of 1911 he lived among the heathen
Votiaks. In the summer of 1912 he travelled in Siberia (Dis-
trict Turuchansk) among the Siberian Arctic peoples. And in
the summer of 1913 he lived among the Cheremias.

J. A. MacCULLOCH

Editor


CONTENTS

FINNO-UGRIC PAGE

Editor’s Note v

Introduction xv

Chapter I The Belief in Souls 3

II Death and Burial 17

III Memorial Feasts for a Particular Dead

Person 37

IV General Memorial Feasts 60

V The Life Beyond 72

VI Animal Worship 83

VII The Seides of the Lapps 100

VIII Family Gods 113

IX Heroes 139

X Household Spirits 159

XI Forest Spirits 175

XII Water Spirits 191

XIII Gods of Sky and Air 217

XIV Fire 235

XV Deities of the Earth and Vegetation ... 239

XVI Deities of Birth 252

XVII Sacrifices to Nature Gods among the Volga

Finns 262

XVIII The Shaman 282

SIBERIAN

Introduction 299

Chapter I World Pictures 306

II The Origin of the Earth 313

III The Pillar of the World 333

IV The World Mountain 341


CONTENTS


PAGE


Vlll


V The Tree of Life 349

VI Destruction of the World 361

VII The Creation of Man 371

VIII The Fall of Man 381

IX The Origin of the Mosquito 386

X The Heaven God 390

XI The Sons of God 402

XII The Great Mother 413

XIII The Stars 417

XIV Thunder 439

XV Fire 449

XVI The Wind 457

XVII The Earth 459

XVIII The “Masters” of Nature 463

XIX Dreams, Sickness and Death 472

XX The Realm of the Dead 483

XXI Shamanism and Totemism 496

Notes, Finno-Ugric 527

Notes, Siberian 545

Bibliography, Finno-Ugric 563

Bibliography, Siberian 581


ILLUSTRATIONS


FULL PAGE ILLUSTRATIONS

LATE FACING PAGE

I Grave-houses in Russian Karelia — Coloured . . Frontispiece

II A Karsikko or Memorial Tree 26

III I. Lapp Grave 36

2. Graves of the Northern Ostiaks Erected over the

- Ground 36

IV At the Grave. Ingermanland 56

V Sacrificial Tree of the Dead among the Eastern Votiaks

— Coloured 58

VI Bear Worship of the Voguls 84.

VII Masker’s Frolic at the Vogul Bear Feast 96

VIII The Holy Rastekaise Mountain in Utsjoki — Coloured 104

IX I. Lapp Seides Made of Tree-stumps or Posts, roughly

Carved in Human Form no

2. The Rastekaise Mountain with two Sacred Stones no

X I. Samoyed Stone Family-god Clothed and Lifted on a

Tree Trunk 114

2. Family Gods of the Ostiaks 114

XI Votiak Kuala or Sanctuary of the Family-gods .... 118

XII I. Votiak Case for the Vorsud or “ Luck-protector ” . 122

2. Votiak Village or Great Kuala 122

XIII Vorsud Case Venerated by the Votiaks — Coloured . . 126

XIV I. Remains of an old Votiak Sacrificial Kuala .... 130

2. Vorsud Case of the Votiaks, with other Sacrificial

Apparatus 130

XV. I. The Little Kudo or Dwelling of the Kudo-spirit

within a Cheremiss Hut or “ Great Kudo ” . . 136

2. Cheremiss Kudo 136

XVI I. Ostiak Holy Place with Images of Gods or Spirits 140

2. Ostiak Place of Sacrifice 140

XVII I. Votiak Sacred Grove or Lud with Surrounding Fence

and Gate 146

2. Storehouse of the Ostiak Idols near Vasyagan ... 146


X


ILLUSTRATIONS


FACING PAGE


PLATE

XVIII I. Votfak Lud-kuala, formerly a Storeplace for

Offerings, Sacrificial Vessels, etc 150

2. Votiak Lud-kuala, Birsk District 150

XIX I. The Image of the Samoyed “ Master of the For-
est”, Carved on a Tree-trunk 156

2. Cheremiss Horse-sacrifice to the Keremet-spirit

in Time of Sickness 156

XX The Aino Episode in Kalevala — Coloured . . . 192

XXI I. Votiak Sacrifice to the River Buj after the Break-
ing-up of the Ice 200

2. Votiak Sacrifice to the River Buj after the Break-
ing-up of the Ice 200

XXII The Eastern Votiaks Sacrifice a White Goose to the

Heaven God 204

XXIII Ostiak Sacrifice of a White Animal to the Heaven-

god 208

XXIV The “World-pillar” of the Lapps 212

XXV Sacrificial Meal among the Russian Karelians . . 216

XXVI Old Sacrificial Grotto of the Thunder-god among

the Finnish Lapps 220

XXVII Drawings on a Lapp Drum 224

XXVIII Drawings on a Torne-Lapp Drum 228

XXIX Ostiak Sacrifice 232

XXX Cheremiss Sacrifice to the Field-gods 242

XXXI The “Feeding” of the Sickle among the Chere-
miss — Coloured 248

XXXII The Sacrifice-grove among the Cheremiss — Col-
oured 262

XXXIII Cheremiss Sacrificial Loaves, Bowls and Coins at

the Festival to Nature-gods 268

XXXIV Cheremiss Sacrificial Prayer 272

XXXV A Cheremiss Priest Praying to the Accompaniment

of a Stringed Instrument — Coloured ... 276

XXXVI Cheremiss Priests at the Festival to Nature-gods . . 280

XXXVII I. Lapp Shaman’s Bowl-drum. Front, Back and

Side Views 284

2, Lapp Shaman’s Sieve-drum. Front, Back and

Side Views 284

XXXVIII The Living Sacrifice-tree Bound with the Sacrifice

Girdle — Coloured 288


ILLUSTRATIONS


xi

PLATE FACING PAGE

XXXIX Samoyed Shaman 294

XL An old Turkish Image and Memorial Stone in

North Mongolia 302

XLI Boat-gods and Boats of the Yenisei Ostiaks ... 308

XLII Tortoise-shell Shaped Stone Representing the

World-bearing Tortoise 338

XLIII Old Turkish Memorial Image and Landscape in

North Mongolia 352

XLIV Old Turkish Memorial Image in North Mongolia 372

XLV Phallus before a Mongol Monastery 396

XL VI I. Dolgan Shaman Pillars Representing the Nine

Storeys of Heaven 400

2. Yakut Trees Representing the Storeys of Heaven 400

XLVII Hides of Buriat Offerings 410

XLVIII Shaman Drums from the Minusinsk District . . . 432

XLIX Shaman Drums from the Minusinsk District . . . 444

L Mongol Shaman with his Drum 452

LI Mongol Stone Heap (obo) 458

LII Dress and Drum of a Mongol Shaman 462

LIII Shattered Tomb of a Yakut Shaman 466

LIV Mongol Seer Prophesying from a Shoulder-blade . 470

LV Yenisei Ostiak Shaman with Drum. Front and

Back Views 476

LVI Buriat Shaman-tomb and Ongons 482

LVII I. Buriat Shaman with his Hobby-horses .... 488

2. Hides of Buriat Shaman-animals 488

LVIII Dress of a Yakut Shaman. Back View 494

LIX I. Breast Cloth of a Yakut Shaman 504

2. Lebed-Tatar Shaman 504

3. Drum of a Lebed-Tatar Shaman 504

LX I. Dress of a Yakut Shaman (Bird Type). Front

View 508

2. Dress of a Yakut Shaman (Bird Type). Back

View 508

LXI Dress of a Tungus Shaman (Bird T5^pe). Front

and Back Views 512

LXII Dress of a Yenisei Ostiak Shaman (Animal Type).

Back View 518

LXIII Drum of a Yakut Shaman, Showing Inner and

Outer Sides 522


ILLUSTRATIONS


xii

ILLUSTRATIONS IN THE TEXT

FIGURE PAGE

1 Ostiak Grave-house with Coffin of the Deceased .... 31

2 Graveyard in Russian Karelia 33

3 Lapp Christmas Custom 67

4 Lapp Seide-stone loi

5 Lapp Sacrificial Posts 108

6 Sun Ring 225

7 Moon Ring 227

8 Lapp Sacrificial Board of the Thunder God 230

9 Drawing of Heaven on Shaman Drums ‘ . 250

10 Sacrificial Bread . 267

11 Sacrificial Accessories 274

12 Shaman Hammer 289

13 Dolgan Shaman-pillars with Figures of Birds 334

14 Two-headed Birds of Iron which Hang on the Dress and

Drum of the Yenisei-Ostiak Shaman 335

1 5 A Kalmuck World-picture 347

16 Signs of a Twelve-di visioned Period 437

17 The Tungus Thunder-bird 439

18 North-Siberian Tombs 480

19 Koori and Bucu, Spirit-birds of a Golde Shaman .... 509

20 Dolgan Shaman-attributes and the World-tree with the

Two-headed Lord of the World 511

21 Head-dress of a Yenisei-Ostiak Shaman (Reindeer or Stag

Type) 513

22 Head-dress of the Soyot Shaman (Bird Type) 513

23 Tungus Shaman-boot (Bird Type) 513

24 Tatar Shaman (Bird Type) in Minusinsk District .... 515

25 Left Boot of Yenisei-Ostiak Shaman (Bear Type) with all

the Bones of the Bear’s Left Legs 517

26 Shaman Drum with Bird-shaped Hand-grip 520

27 Hobby-horse of a Buriat Shaman 521

28 Relics of a Buriat Shaman Found in the Earth 521

MAP

FACING PAGE

Finno-Ugrians, Siberians 2


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

BY

UNO HOLMBERG

PH.D.

DOCENT OF THE UNIVERSITY OF FINLAND, HELSINGFORS


INTRODUCTION

I N THE course of thousands of years the Finno-Ugric race,
which once possessed a common home and a single lan-
guage, was divided, for reasons which we no longer know, into
a number of smaller peoples j and these, intermingled with
alien stocks, and influenced by divergent civilizations, are found
as widely separated from each other as are the Baltic and the
River Ob, or as the Arctic Ocean and the Danube.

The nearest to the Finns, both in linguistic and in geographi-
cal aspects, are the Esthonians (about 1,250,000 in number),
who live south of the Gulf of Finland^ the Livonians, an
almost extinct people who dwell on the northernmost point of
Courland and give Livonia its namej the Votes (about 1000)
and the Vepses (about 26,000), the former of whom inhabit
western Ingermanland (now part of the Russian Government
of Petrograd) in the vicinity of the dty of Narva, while the
latter are to be found south-west of Lake Onega. Among the
Finns themselves, who number about 3,500,000, various lin-
guistic groups are distinguishable: Tavastlanders in the west,
Karelians in the east and along the Finno-Russian boundary,
between Lake Ladoga and the White Sea, the Russian Kare-
lians, the most northerly of whom seem to be mentioned in the
old Norse sagas under the name of Bjarmar; the Ingrians of
Ingermanland are also included among the Karelian stocks.
In the seventeenth century Finnish Karelian families migrated
as far as the Russian Governments of Novgorod and Tverj
and some of the Finns are found in Scandinavia. At the
beginning of our era all the peoples mentioned above — i.e.,
the so-called Baltic Finns — may still have spoken appros-
mately the same language.


xvi INTRODUCTION

From many borrowed words we may infer that at an early
period Finnish influence prevailed among the Lapps, who,
about 30,000 in number, inhabit a wide region which extends
from Trondhjem in Norway to the White Sea in the east, and
who thus belong to Norway, Sweden, Finland, and Russia.
Anthropologically, however, the Lapps appear to belong to a
race different from the Finnish, although their language is
held to be Finno-Ugric. Of the remaining Finno-Ugric
peoples, those most nearly related to the Baltic Finns are the
Mordvins, who number about 1,400,000, and whose language
falls into two distinct dialects — Moksha and Erzya. The
Mordvins are divided into a multitude of small clans through-
out the vast region in inner and eastern Russia south of the
great curve of the Volga, and along that river and its tribu-
taries in the Governments of Tambov, Nizhniy-Novgorod,
Pensa, Simbirsk, Saratov, Kazan, Samara, Ufa, and Orenburg.
At an earlier date, however, the Mordvins appear to have in-
habited a more uniform region, and one which was so far to
the west that they were in contact with the Lithuanian peoples,
as is shown by the Lithuanian loan-words in their language.

Next to the Mordvins, the nearest kindred of the Finns
are the Cheremiss, who number about 400,000 and dwell for
the most part along the central Volga in the Governments of
Vyatka, Kazan, Nizhniy-Novgorod, and Kostroma. From
the character of the regions which they inhabit, the Russians
usually designate those living to the left of the Volga as
Meadow Cheremiss,” and those to its right as “Hill
Cheremiss.” During the last century a portion of the Chere-
,miss also colonized a large district to the east on the Kama in
the Governments of Ufa and Permj and these are generally
termed “Eastern Cheremiss.”

Near to the Volga Finns is the dwelling-place of the Votiaks
(about 450,000 in number), who, with their kinsfolk, the
Siryans (to the number of about 300,000), constitute the so-
called Permian linguistic stock. The former live chiefly in


INTRODUCTION xvii

the Governments of Vyatka and Kazan, but have in part later
migrated across the Kama into the Governments of Perm, Ufa
and Samara. The latter dwell north of the Votiaks in the
vast expanse along the rivers and streams of north-eastern
Russia.

All the peoples whom we have thus far mentioned form a
single great linguistic group, from which the so-called Ugrian
stock seems to have separated at an early date. To them
belong the Voguls (about 5000 in number) on both sides of
the Ural in the Governments of Perm and Tobolsk, and also
the Ostiaks (of whom there are about 19,000) on the Ob and
its tributaries. Their nearest congeners are the Hungarians,
or Magyars, who number about 10,500,000, and who, break-
ing off from the parent stock in the migrations of the peoples,
wandered to their present land of Hungary toward the close
of the ninth century.

Of all these Finno-Ugric peoples only the Hungarians, the
Finns, and the Esthonians have been in a position to attain a
superior degree of civilization. Some — especially the Lapps,
the Ostiaks, and the Voguls — who live principally by fishing
and the chase, or else are nomads wholly dependent on the
reindeer for food and raiment, stand on the humble level of
primitive folk. The same statement holds true of the Samo-
yeds, whose vast territory lies on the tundras along the Arctic
Ocean, stretching from the region of Archangel in the west to
Cape Chelyuskin, the northern-most promontory of Siberia, in
the east. As their language clearly shows, they have been in
closest relation to the Finno-Ugric peoples. In conformity
with their principal dialects, several groups of Samoyeds are
usually distinguished, the most numerous being the Yuraks, of
whom there are about 12,000, and who dwell furthest to the
west, between Archangel and the mouth of the Yenisei. East
of them are the Yenisei Samoyeds and the Awam Samoyeds,
who are but few in number and are a dying race. The tundras
between the Ob and the Yenisei, as well as the forest regions


INTRODUCTION


xvili

in the northern part of the Government of Tomsk and the ad-
joining portions of the Governments of Tobolsk and Yenisei,
are the home of the so-called Ostiak Samoyeds, of whom there
are about 40005 and the northern slopes of the lofty Sayan
Mountains are the habitat of the scanty remnants of the Ka-
mass stock, which, though once so numerous, is gradually be-
coming either extinct or Tatarized.

Of the remaining Finno-Ugric peoples only the northern
Siryans are nomads relying upon the reindeer for support 5
for all the others agriculture constitutes the principal means
of livelihood, even though it is very primitive in many places.

In different regions and at various periods the Finno-Ugric
stocks have been subject to heterogeneous civilizing influences,
as is shown, among other evidences, by their language. The
eastern branches have long lived in contact with the Turco-
Tatars, the chief focus of civilization in the east having ap-
parently been the Bolgar kingdom on the Volga, for the
Turkish people which established itself on the central por-
tion of that river about 600 a.d. sustained far-reaching con-
nexions with all the nations that dwelt about it. Their de-
scendants are the Chuvashes, the greater part of whom inhabit
the Governments of Kazan, Simbirsk, Ufa, Saratov, etc. 5 and
among them the investigator may find traces of the relatively
high pagan civilization of the Volga Bolgars, as well as of
their ancient religious concepts and customs. In 922 the Bol-
gars embraced Islam 5 but in 1236 the Tatars put an end to
their power and for a time remained the ruling race in eastern
Russia. Through this people Arabo-Muhammadan civiliza-
tion made its way in some measure among the eastern Finno-
Ugric stocks; but despite this, the ancient paganism of the
Bolgars has left deep traces, particularly as regards the reli-
gious concepts and customs of the Cheremiss. At a later
period Russian folk-belief also penetrated ever5rwhere side
by side with Russian colonization.

The Baltic Finns and Lapps, on the other hand, received


INTRODUCTION


xix


their deepest impress from the Teutonic race 5 and the Scan-
dinavian Lapps, in particular, borrowed from their neighbours
a host of religious beliefs and usages which actually cast light
on the ancient Scandinavian religion as well. The Baltic
Finns, moreover, came in close contact with the Lithuanians,
traces of whose language, as already noted, are likewise found
among the Mordvins; and these latter, at a time subsequent
to that of their separation from the Baltic Finns, were influ-
enced by some Indo-European people from whom they actu-
ally received their name for “ God ” (Pas, Pavas; cf, Sanskrit
Bhagas,.01d Persian Baga, Old Church Slavic Bogu). The
ancestors of the Finno-Ugric peoples, however, were in con-
tact with the forefathers of the Indo-European stocks at a very
remote period, as is shown also by certain mythological desig-
nations; while numerous borrowed words demonstrate that
the Magyars have been subjected to Turco-Tatar, Slavic, and
(later) Teutonic influences.

Though all the Finno-Ugric peoples have now come into
contact with Christianity, this religion is held only superficially
in many places among the stocks that live in Russia. The an-
dent sacrificial customs still survive, despite the fact that in
some localities the saints’ days of the Christian Church are
substituted for the pagan days of sacrifice. Occasionally —
as among the Siryans, the Russian Karelians, and the Orthodox
Esthonians — certain saints have begun to take the place of
andent gods in receiving propitiation by means of sacrificial
gifts. A like custom prevailed among the Finns during the
Roman Catholic period, and even later. At a very early date
the Magyars, the Baltic Finns, and the Siryans were led to ac-
cept the Christian faith; but among the Volga Finns mission-
ary activity did not begin until after the fall of Kazan in 155a,
and first began to bear visible fruit in the eighteenth century.
Even at the present day there are some thousands of unbap-
tized Cheremiss and Votiaks, part of whom (at least among
the former) ding with great tenacity to the beliefs and cus-


XX INTRODUCTION

toms which they have inherited from their fathers. Baptism
of the Ostiaks, Voguls and Samoyeds began in the eighteenth
century. Though only a small number of unbaptized are still
to be found among the Ugrians, nevertheless the sacrificial
rites of paganism survive in many placesj and it was not until
the eighteenth century that Christianity gained firm footing
among the Lapps.

Simultaneously with missionary labours, interest was awak-
ened in recording and describing the ancient heathen beliefs
and customs of the people. Of these accounts the least com-
plete are those which deal with the religions of the peoples
that were earliest converted to Christianity. Such is the state
of affairs, for example, with the Magyars, who began to sur-
render their ancient faith about the year loooj whereas the
Ostiaks and the Voguls of the present day may throw light
upon the early religion of the Ugric stock. One of the most
important of the oldest sources is G. Novitskiy’s A Brief De-
scriftion of the Ostyak Peofle, written in 1715, but not pub-
lished till 1 8 84. The foremost collectors and Investigators in
this domain have been the Finn M. A. Castren and the Hun-
garians A. Reguly and B. Munkacsi, who have published large
works in Hungarian and German; the German O. Finsch, the
Russians N. L. Gondatti and S. Patkanov, and the Finns K. F.
Karjalainen and A. Kannisto, who lived for several years
among the Ostiaks and the Voguls respectively, engaged in
linguistic studies. Castren also collected data for the elucida-.
tion of Samoyed religion; a little older source is a description
of the Yuraks by the Russian Archimandrite Veniamin, pub-
lished in 1850. Concerning the latter a young Finnish lin-
guist, T. V. Lehtisalo, has gathered new material. In similar
fashion another Finn, K. Donner, has undertaken the task of
investigating the language, customs, etc., of the eastern
Samoyeds.

The oldest accounts of the religion of the Siryans are con-
tained in the biography of their apostle, St. Stephen, who died


INTRODUCTION


XXI


in 1396, the chief importance of this lying in the fact that for
many subsequent centuries no one made any notes whatever
regarding their religion during a period when the Siryans were
adopting Orthodox doctrine and Russian folk-beliefs in ever
increasing measure. Here also the collecting of the ancient
beliefs is still in progress, the foremost name in this connex-
ion being that of the indefatigable Siryan scholar, V. Nalimov,
who has sought to gather together such scanty remnants as
may yet be obtained in obscure districts.

We possess far more knowledge of the ancient faith of the
Votiaks, the kinsfolk of the Siryans, although the earliest
sources date only from the eighteenth century. During re-
cent decades the literature on this subject has become rela-
tively abundant. The most valuable authorities are the Finns
T. G. AminofiF and Yrjo Wichmann, the Russians N. Per-
vuchin, B. G. Gavrilov, G. Verescagin, P. Bogayevskij and
J. Vasil jev, the work of the scholar last named having also
appeared in German, the language in which Max Buch wrote
his ethnographical account of the Votiaks.

Records of the Cheremiss religion were gathered by A.
Olearius during his travels in 1636, and of the numerous
studies which have been subsequently made in various districts
the most valuable is from the pen of the Cheremiss G. Jakov-
lev and V. M. Vasiljev.

The ancient faith of the Mordvins fell for the most part
into oblivion until modern scholarship discovered it. As early
as 1740 and the following years the Mordvins adopted
Orthodoxy, but it was not until the middle of the nineteenth
century that valuable and trustworthy accounts of the vanish-
ing remnants of their paganism began to appear. This reli-
gion has been described by the Russians P. Melnikov, V.
Mainov and others} Mainov’s work, which was also published
in French, has been used by scholars, although it is unreli-
able to the highest degree. By awakening interest among the
people themselves, the Finnish linguist H. Paasonen has en-


XXll


INTRODUCTION


deavoured to do all that is still possible by way, of collecting
material and elucidating the ancient Mordvinian religion} nor
should we forget the Russian scholar I. N. Smirnov, who, in
his great ethnographical treatises on the Cheremiss, Votiaks,
Siryans and Mordvins, has sought to gather whatever was
then known regarding their religious life.

The character and the development of the ancient faith of
the Volga Finns receive some measure of elucidation from the
religious beliefs, customs, and usages of the Chuvashes, hence
a knowledge of their religion is of great moment in Finno-
Ugric studies. The most valuable account of their religious
life is afForded in the works of the Russian V. Magnitskij and
of the Hungarian G. Meszaros.

The Lapps being the last of the western stocks to adopt
Christianity, we possess relatively voluminous accounts of their
paganism. The most important contribution was collected by
missionaries in the Norwegian and Swedish Lapp districts
toward the close of the seventeenth and the beginning of the
eighteenth century} and during recent years all the chief
sources have been published by K. B. Viklund, J. Qvigstad,
E. Reuterskiold and I. Fellmann. Certain earlier investiga-
tors, however, had already gathered accounts of this heathen
faith for their descriptions, the first being J. ScheflFerus’s La^p-
fonm (1672), which was translated into several languages}
while somewhat later E. J. Jessen (1767) and Knud Leem
(1767) issued their well-known delineations. The abundance
of material has been still further enriched in our own time,
and has induced a niunber of scholars to describe the ancient
religion of the Lapps, notably J. A. Friis, G. von DUben, J.
Fritzner, Axel Olrik, E. Reuterskiold, etc.

The oldest records of the early faith of the Esthonians and
Livonians are preserved in the Chronicle of Henry the Lett,
written at the commencement of the thirteenth century} and
the chief later sources are J. Gustlaff’s description of the sanc-
tuary at Wohanda (1644) and Joh. Forselius’ collection of


INTRODUCTION


XXIII


the ancient beliefs, customs, and usages of the Esthonians,
published in German by J. W. Boeder (1685), the language
in which F. J. Wiedemann issued a general survey of Estho-
nian religion. Very recently a voluminous and important col-
lection of folklore has been made by J. Hurt, M. 1 . Eisen,
O, Kallas, and others.

The very oldest reports of the ancient religion of the Finns
are extremely brief. In an Old Norse saga recounting the
expedition of certain Vikings to conquer the land of the B jar-
mar along the White Sea in 1026 we find the first occurrence
of the word Jomali, which is plainly identical with the Finnish
Jumala (“ God ”) j but the earliest record of real value con-
cerning the Finnish heathen pantheon dates only from the be-
ginning of modern times. To his translation of the Psalter
(1551) Bishop Agricola prefixed a versified introduction which
included a short list of the old gods of the Tavastlanders and
Kareliansj and for a long period this catalogue constituted the
sole source until, in the seventeenth century, the historian
H. G. Porthan began to seek illustration of the ancient civil-
ization and religion of the Finns from Finnish magic songs,
in which he believed that he might find trustworthy survivals
of Finnish paganism. With the help of these songs, C. E.
Lencqvist wrote his De suferstUlone veterum Fennorvm theo-
retica et fractica (1782), and Christfrid Ganander his Mytho-
logia Fennica (1789), which long remained the most impor-
tant and the most utilized source for investigation along these
lines. An interest in comparative study was already aroused
in Ganander, who gave consideration to the Lapp religion,
which, he was convinced, would also elucidate the Finnish, and
for certain names of deities he even sought to find analogues
in Scandinavian mythology.

Real depth of interest in all Old Finnish investigation was,
however, first awakened by Elias Lonnrot’s publication of the
Finnish epic of the Kalevala (in 1836 and 1849); elucida-
tion of the ancient religion of the Finns was the task of the


XXIV


INTRODUCTION


famous linguist, Castren. Before the completion of the work
which he had planned, Castren had travelled extensively
among the Lapps, Samoyeds, and Siberians} and during this
time it became clear to him that a correct comprehension of
the religious beliefs and customs of the ancient Finns re-
quired a knowledge of the religions and the cults of the other
stocks belonging to this family. His work on Finnish myth-
ology appeared first after his death in 1853, and the chief
merit of the contribution is that it constitutes the earliest at-
tempt at a comparative study of Finno-Ugric religion.

Castren’s presentation of Finnish mythology is based chiefly
on the Kdevahy which is compiled from Finnish folk-songs.
With all the caution with which its collector, Elias Lonnrot,
endeavoured to proceed, it is plain that the popular songs
which he employed, and which were later recorded in count-
less variants, must themselves form the basis of all investiga-
tion. Yet even in the study of this purely popular material
due account must be taken of the manner in which it devel-
oped during its centuries of migration and extension, whether
from western Finland or from Esthonia (by way of Ingerman-
land) to eastern Finland and the Government of Archangel,
where we find the most highly evolved and the most com-
posite variants. In the utilization of this material the geo-
graphical method, which was discovered by Julius Krohn, and
which was later applied by Finnish scholars to the study of
the national sagas as well, must be applied. We must also
note that most of the Finnish magic songs and a large part of
the epic poems in the Kalevala arose in the Middle Ages, dur-
ing the Roman Catholic period, hence they can be used for
the interpretation of pagan times only under the restrictions
of a vigilant and critical caution.

Some of the names of heroes in the Kalevda were con-
strued by Castren as having been originally appellations of
divinities, and his view long prevailed. More recently, how-
ever, the historical explanation has again been adopted. For


INTRODUCTION


XXV


example, the old bard Vainamoinen has been interpreted as
a sage or hero whose appellation, like the names of other
heroes mentioned in the Kdevala, may also be used to desig-
nate a giant or a divine being j and in like manner the smith
Ilmarinen presents a contamination of the name of the Finno-
Ugric air-god, Ilmari (Votiak Inmar), with the name of the
hero Ismaroinen, who figures in the folk-songs of Ingerman-
land as the maker of the Golden Maid.

With the aid of newer and richer sources Julius Krohn
planned the preparation of a comparative presentation of all
the beliefs and usages of the Finno-Ugric race; but at his
premature death only four chapters had been completed, these
being published in Finnish in 1894 by his son, Kaarle Krohn,
under the title The Pagan Worship of the Finnish Stock.
This already antiquated work has been translated into Hun-
garian, with some additional material, by the Magyar scholar
A. Ban. Among later comparative presentations mention
should be made of M. Varonen’s Ancestor-Worship among the
Ancient Finns, published only in Finnish, H. Paasonen^s tjber
die ursprUnglichen Seelenvorstellnngen hei den finnisch-ugri-
schen Volkern und die Benenmmg der Seele in ihren Sprachen,
and the present writer’s Die Wassergottheiten der finnisch-
ugrischen Volker.

During the last few years, the publication of complete de-
scriptions of the religions of the different Finnish stocks has
begun at the initiative of Kaarle Krohn. Under the collabora-
tion of several specialists, the following volumes have already
appeared in Finnish: Kaarle Krohn’s Religion of the Finnish
Songs (19 14-15), the present writer’s Religion of the Per-
rrmns (1914), Religion of the Cheremiss (1914), and Reli-
gion of the Lapps (1915), and K. F. Karjalainen’s Religion
of the Ugrians (1918).


FINNO-UGRIC

MYTHOLOGY


CHAPTER I

THE BELIEF IN SOULS

T he belief of the Finno-Ugric people regarding the
soul presents a very primitive concept. According to
the Lapps, life does not cease altogether at death, but in some
form continues as long as the skeleton remans, an example
of this conviction being afforded, for instance, by their bear-
feast j and in like manner they hold that the gods let new
flesh grow on the sacrificial victim^s bones, all of which are
preserved with great care.^ If we may draw inferences from
the sacrificial ceremonies, this belief was formerly general
throughout the Finno-Ugric stock. As an instance of the con-
cept which holds that the soul vanishes when the body is an-
nihilated we may dte the Vogul custom whereby, lest the
bear should do grave harm to any one, the injured man,
instead of worshipping the animal, endeavours to free him-
self from it by completely destroying all parts of its body.
Charuzin, who describes this usage, remarks that by it they
purpose “ to Idll the victim’s soul together with its body.” ®
This concept is likewise found in the cult of the dead. In
his account of the burial rites of the Pite Lapps the missionary
Graan records that for several years after the death of any of
their number they crumbled barley bread into small bits and
strewed it on the graves “until the sinking of the grave-
mound showed that the body had decayed.” ® Among the
Ostiaks, in like manner, the belief has been found that after


4


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


the body has decayed the dead no longer survive.* Even at
a very late period the Ingermanland Finns were wont to go
to the burial places to weep and to carry food to the graves
of their tribesmen so long as it was conceivable that the bodies
had not yet crumbled} for after that they believed that “the
soul itself ceases to exist.” ' If the deceased is supposed to
be dangerous, the corpse is cut in pieces or even burned to
ashes } and in a village in the Circle of Birsk the Votiaks pur-
sued a like course after the lapse of several years in the case
of a death which the sorcerers declared to have given rise to
a severe epidemic. To this day the Ostiak Samoyeds fear
certain corpses which are believed to go about at night and
injure the living, though they become powerless as soon as
the sun rises. A whole host of stories tells of contests be-
tween such corpses and living menj but they may be prevented
from rising out of their graves by being pierced with a stake
and pinned fast to the ground.®

Side by side with this belief in a soul inseparably connected
with the body, the Finno-Ugrians seem to have held that
each limb and organ likewise had its separate soul. Accord-
ingly, at a sacrifice a small portion of all the parts of the vic-
tim’s body was taken and dedicated, together with the bones,
to the deity. Souls or (more properly) soul-powers are hid-
den especially in the most important organs, such as the heart,
the liver, and the blood; and the circulation of the blood has
obviously given rise to the Cheremiss belief that the “ soul ”
or the “ life ” {tson) can wander about within the body. If
a blow which reaches some part of the body proves to be
mortal, the “ soul,” according to this view, has been in that
portion just at the fatal instant; but even though a man’s skull
were fractured, the Cheremiss maintain that death would not
ensue if the “ soul ” chanced not to be in the head at the
moment.'^ The concept of the material character of the quali-
ties of the soul is also evidenced by the belief that one may
acquire them for his own by devouring the organs containing


THE BELIEF IN SOULS 5

the soul-qualities of another. Gondatti states that the ancient
Vogul heroes ate the hearts and livers of their slain enemies
“ that their strength might be transferred to their own bodies
and that the foe might never again be able to rise from the
dead.” ® Beliefs regarding the potencies hidden in the heart
recur in a Chronicle of 889, which states that the Hungarians
cut the captives’ hearts in pieces and ate them as some sort
of remedyj and to this day the sacrificial priest of the Cher-
emiss prays God to protect men against “ those who cut out
the heart and the liver.” The same belief was doubtless held
by the forefathers of the Finns, for among their Esthonian
kinsmen it was still flourishing in the thirteenth century, since
the Sakkala peasants are said to have torn the heart from the
breast of a living Danish Crusader, and after roasting it, to
have divided it among themselves and eaten it “ in order to
be brave against the Christians.” By drinking another man’s
blood the Voguls and others believe that soul-powers pass
from one body into another.® Even in such insignificant parts
of the body as the hair, nails, and teeth a soul (or soul-power)
is believed to lie concealed. How else could the means of
guarding the soul against falling into evil hands be explained?
Novitskiy expressly relates that a Vogul sacrificial priest
warned his people against the Russian missionaries in the fol-
lowing words: “Take care, my friends . . . when they start
to cut your hair, they cut off your souls.” In this connection,
it may be mentioned that the Ostiaks believed that by scalping
an enemy they could prevent his ghost from walking.’® Even
those objects which have been in contact with a man sustain a
certain relation to the soul. Among causes of illness the Lapps
recognize the power of a dweller in the underworld to take
to himself some article of attire which has been in contact
with the sick, such as cap, gloves, or boots} “ and from this
is deduced the magical theory of -pars P'0 toto which finds
application likewise in rites of sacrifice.

In close relation to the remains of the deceased stands his


6


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


shape, or shadow, which can occasionally free itself from the
body even during life. Of a man who is unconscious the
Cheremiss says that his “ shape ” or “ shadow ” (dri) has left
himj and in like manner, if any one gives him a severe fright,
he declares: “ Thou drivest mine art away.” If a Cheremiss
dreams of a city, he is convinced that his ort has wandered
thither by night} otherwise, he argues, he could not have seen
the city exactly as it is. Dreaming is also called “the art’s
wandering”} and when the man awakes, his ort returns to his
body.”

The ort of the Cheremiss corresponds to the urt of the
Vptiaks. If the urt does not succeed in coming back to its
abode before the man wakes, he falls ill, is pale, and begins
to pine away, so that a sleeper must not be aroused suddenly.^®
In general the disappearance of the soul is regarded as a cause
of grave illness, and in such a contingency it is advisable to
have recourse to a magician or shaman in order that he may
seek the lost soul and bring it back to the body. Sometimes
it happens that the “ soul ” of the dying goes to the nether
world, but returns after a while} and then the man recovers.
Thus an Ostiak song tells of a hero who, in battle, received
a sword-stroke on his head and lost consciousness. For a time
his “ shadow ” ascended to heaven, only to return when his
dead brother’s “shadow” informed him that his hour was
not yet come.” A very wide-spread belief holds that the
shaman’s “shadow” can go to the underworld to seek aid
there.

The closeness of the connexion between a man’s body and
his “shadow” is shown by an account of Lapp shamanism
which dates from the thirteenth century. This states, among
other matters, that during a shaman’s journey in the nether
world a hostile “shadow” struck out the stomach of his
“shadow,” the mishap being clearly visible in the magician’s
real body, which was lying in the tent} “ and several similar
instances will be cited in a subsequent chapter on the shamans.


THE BELIEF IN SOULS


7

Death does not in the least sever the bond of union between
the “ soul ” and the corpse. When asked why the bones of
the sacrificial victim are not broken, the Finnish Lapps
answered: “On certain nights the victims which we have
offered wander as ‘ shadows ’ from burial-place to burial-place
together with the folk of the underworld.” The general
concept is that after death the “ shadow ” takes up its abode
where the body has been buried.

In Finno-Ugric belief man has also another soul which can
release itself from the body, and which is called “breath.”
The source of this concept is to be found in the last expiration
of the dying. At death the Ostiak lily Vogul liliy Hungarian
lekeky Siryan loly Votiak lul (“expiration,” “soul”), and the
Esthonian leil (“ expiration,” “ soul,” “ steam,” cf. Finnish
loylyy “ bath-vapour ”) leaves its abode through the mouth
or nostrils; and “ the breath’s departure ” is a common synonym
for death. Obviously the “ breath ” was originally under-
stood to be simply a vital function which revealed itself as
respiration or vapour; and Nalimov states that, in Siryan
belief, at death the lol evaporates in the air like vapour.

The Finnish stocks are convinced that when the soul
liberates itself from the body, it can appear not only in a
quasi-human shape — which is the form which it most fre-
quently takes — but may also assume some other guise, often
that of an animal. Nalimov has noted a Siryan tradition
which tells how, while a woman slept, her lol came forth
from its abode and in the form of a little mouse danced about
on her breast. For a time her mouth was hidden by the cover-
let; but the soul again transformed itself into vapour and thus
re-entered the body, so that the sleeper could wake up.’' The
Votiaks believe that one of the forms in which the soul appears
during sleep is that of the bat; and an old Votiak declared
that the reason why these creatures are never seen by day is
because men are then awake; they appear only at night, when
men are asleep. If a bat approaches any one, it is a sign


8 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

that it is in reality the soul of some kinsman or acquaintance}
and the old man just mentioned even related a tradition that
the bat is, as a matter of fact, a soul-bird. “ A man went to
rest, but his companions sat up in the yard. They saw how a
bat flew round certain places} and when the sleeper awoke,
they asked him what he had dreamed. The man declared
that in his slumber he had wandered to the very places where
the bat had flown, and from this his comrades inferred that
the bat which they had seen was the soul of the sleeping
man.” Sometimes the soul also appears in the form of a little
grey butterfly. In the Circle of Birsk the present writer
heard it said that when the urt leaves a man’s body because
of severe fright, the services of a witch are sought, and she
begins to spy after it with a white cloth in her hand. After
she has hunted everywhere, she finally notices a little grey
butterfly, and when she has caught it in her cloth, she takes
it into the room and at night binds both cloth and butterfly
about the sufferer’s neck. On the following morning observa-
tion of the shapes assumed by molten tin dropped into water
determines whether the captive soul-butterfly is really the
sick man’s wrt.

In like manner the soul of a sleeping man moves about as
a butterfly in a tradition recorded by the present writer from
the Circle of Mamadysh. “ Two men went to the forest to
cut down trees, and at midday, while they were resting, one
of them fell asleep, whereupon his comrade saw the lul issue
from his mouth in the form of a butterfly and go to a pail
of water which they had with them in the woods. From
the water it flew to a cavity in a linden, thence back to the
water-vessel, and from there to the sleeper’s mouth. Waking
from his slumber, he said to his companion: ‘ I was asleep
and dreamed that I floated over a river on whose farther
shore was a tree in which was a hollow containing many pieces
of gold.’ After finishing their work the men returned home,
but a little later the comrade, who had seen where the sleeper’s


THE BELIEF IN SOULS 9

soul moved about the tree, went by night to the forest, sought
out the tree, and there found a number of coins.”

The “ souls ” of the dead have power of motion like those
of the living. When a little grey butterfly was seen to come
in by the .window during the memorial feast in honour of a
Votiak child’s father, its mother said to it: “His soul has
come in the form of a butterfly.” It is also believed that the
souls of the departed may find concealment in the guise of
other sorts of insects, this explaining the Cheremiss custom
that whenever many caterpillars begin to appear in the grain-
fields, sacrifice is made to such of the departed as have died
without leaving kinsfolk. A belief in soul-mice among this
same people is implied by a similar offering which is given if
many mice begin to be found in the yard.’® According to
the Ostiaks, the deceased transforms himself into a beetle and
is thus revealed to the living} and a like idea seems to have
been known to the Finns, as is evident from a peculiar custom.
Maidens are wont to take beetles in their hands and ask them
whither they go to wed, hither or thither or “in the swart
earth’s bosom.” If then the beetle flies to the churchyard, it
is an omen of death. Similar beliefs occur among other
European peoples.

Certain Finno-Ugric peoples are also convinced that the
departed appear as birds, and the Lapps tell how a dead man
who had been buried on a small island and who haunted it
by day flew across the water in the form of a great bird.®®
Like wicked men the dead may likewise manifest themselves
as wolves } and when the Votiaks drive away spirits which
roam about at Easter, one of their cries is: “ Go, wolves, go! ”

“ Souls ” may also be seen in other guise than that of ani-
mals, and the belief is very general that a man’s soul may
wander around as a whirlwind. In the Circle of Birsk the
present writer heard the Cheremiss tell how a wayfarer hurled
his knife into such an eddy, which, with the knife, immedi-
ately vanished. The man continued on his journey till evening


10 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

came, when he was about to pass the night in a hut along the
road. There, to his amazement, an old man sat with a knife
in his cheek; whereupon the traveller forthwith recognized
his own knife and perceived that the master of the bothie
was the old man who had wandered about as an eddy of wind.
The soul of the living as well as of the dead can likewise fly
around as a “ fire-serpent,” in other words, as a meteor. Ac-
cording to the Cheremiss its course can be stayed by tearing
ofF the wristband of one’s shirt or the band of one’s lime-
bark shoes, or by splitting a wooden pitch-fork, together with
which the meteor falls to the ground and is changed back
into the man who flew about as the “ fire-snake.” In Siryan
belief the soul (ort) of the departed may even manifest itself
as a blue flame burning on the ground (ort-bi, “ ort^s fire ”).

Shadow-souls may sometimes lose their original meaning
by being transformed into the Doffel-ganger or tutelary
genius of the person in question. Thus the Siryan ort^ in the
form in which the popular mind now most usually conceives
it, recalls the guardian spirit of the man rather than the real
shadow-soul. Every one has an on which constantly dwells
near its protege, acting as a guardian-spirit; it appears in
dreams, generally in the shape of the person in question, and
occasionally pinches blue spots in one’s skin. In some places
its abode is believed to be wholly separate from the man,
whence the assertion is made, for example, that it has its home
in birds. Yet one of the proofs that the on was originally
nothing else than the man’s “ shadow ” is found in the belief
that, after his death, his soul is blended with his ort^ so that
both form one and the same being. It is further believed that
the on of the deceased reveals itself in the form of the
departed for forty days after death, and then vanishes.**^ As
a portent of someone’s death the ort manifests itself chiefly in
the shape of a bird; and the same belief is found among the
Voguls: “ The urt lives in the forest. When a human being
must die, his wrt cries out; when a little child comes to his


THE BELIEF IN SOULS ii

last hour, the urt speaks with a child’s voice; if an adult
passes away, the urt^s voice is that of an adult. Its exterior
is parti-coloured, and its wings resemble those of a bat.”
Shamans can always see it near them. Should any one hear
its call, he turns to it with the words: “ If one of my kins-
folk is to die, draw thou nigh to me.” If some relative is
actually the person in question, the urt approaches the inquirer;
but otherwise it withdraws from him. According to Friis,
the Norse Lapps called such a bird, heard by night lamenting
with a human voice, a Suoje-lodde (“ Suoj e-bird ”), the
word Sueje being used in the Swedish Lapmark to denote
the shaman’s “ tutelary genius,” the appellation having
apparently meant primarily “ shadow.” The spectres of
shamans are especially liable to metamorphosis.®^

The tutelary genius of a man is called Haltia (“ Ruler ”)
by the Finns; and each individual has his own, which pre-
cedes him. A man might be blessed with such a potent
Haltia that, for example, it would reach home a little earlier
than the man himself, whose approach it announced with
clamour and crash. A man’s Varjohaltia (“ Shadow-ruler ”)
could inform him beforehand of coming events, as, e.g.,
whether he would reap a good or a bad harvest. It was be-
lieved in some districts that a child made its own Haltia when
it was three days old; before the expiration of that time it
was dangerous to leave the infant alone, for a changeling
might be substituted in its stead. That the Haltia manifested
itself in the form of the culprit is obvious from such phrases
as “ it was not he, but his Haltia,” or “ the dead themselves
do not walk, it is their Haltias which appear as ghosts.”

The Saattaja (“ guide ”) — an expression which is com-
paratively rare — and the Onni (“ fortune ”) seem to denote
precisely the same being as the Haltia; and a man’s “ fortune,”
which might be propitious or the reverse, never left him till
death. Like the Haltia the “ fortune ” precedes the man and
announces his coming. When any mischance happened on


12 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

the road, the “fortune” warned its owner as he returned
homeward, his ears beginning to ring, or his eyes or nose to
itch, etc. The Haltia of the Finns has its analogue in the
Radare or Ra (“ruler”) of the Swedes, and their Saattaja
finds its counterpart in the Fylgja of the Scandinavians.^®

The word employed by the Finno-Ugrians and peoples
influenced by them to denote “ shadow-soul ” often means
originally “ shadow,” “ appearance,” and “ image.” When
the Yurak Samoyeds make images of the sun, moon, or human
beings, they call them “shadows ”; and the Vogul term for
a man’s “ soul ” (is, Finnish itse, “ self ”) is also employed
when they speak, for instance, of the “ shadow ” of a tree or
of a house. The Ostlaks call their “ earthly gods ” and the
wooden figures of these deities by a name (tongk) which
originally meant “ shadow ”} and the word haamu, which
signifies “ shadow-soul ” in Finnish, means “ form,” “ figure ”
in Lappish and “countenance” in Mordvinian j while in
Cheremiss the Tatar loan-word tys is occasionally employed
to denote the “shadow-soul,” though properly it signifies
“ countenance ” or “ image,” as when it is applied, for ex-
ample, to the leaden figure representing the sacrificial animal,
as we shall see later. The Mordvinian word for “ soul ”
(tso'patsa) is also applied to the image of a god.

If “ soul ” or “ image ” were thus an identical concept, it
would be natural to infer that the prototype would be inti-
mately affected by whatever happened to the image. Orig-
inally the Finno-Ugric peoples were extremely cautious in
regard to the delineation of themselves, and to this day many
of them are most reluctant to permit themselves to be photo-
graphed or otherwise pictured. A certain anxiety also lurks
in the words which a Cheremiss girl repeats when she sees
herself in a mirror: “Take not from me my appearance or
image ”} and this fear is especially associated with showing a
mirror to a small child. By inj tiring their enemy’s image the
Lapps believed that they could cause their foe himself to


THE BELIEF IN SOULS


13

feel pain. In the notes of the missionary Randuif we read
the following account: “ When the Lapp wishes to injure a
man with whom he is angry, whether he dwells close by or
far away, he employs for this purpose a little bow made of
reindeer horn, together with the arrows belonging to it, one
blunt and one pointed. If he desires to make his enemy’s
hand, foot, or other member useless, he shoots the blunt
arrow into the corresponding part of the body of an image
supposed to represent the person in question; but if his inten-
tion is rather to cause an open wound or a constant subcutane-
ous pain, he shoots the sharp arrow into the relevant portion
of the effigy.”

Generally speaking, persons of superior importance, such
as primal ancestors, shamans, and heroes, survive their bodies
in images or “ shadows ” which are made after them.

Just as men speak of the “ shadow ” or “ soul ” of a human
being or of an animal, so various things are supposed to
possess a “soul,” which can free itself from the object to
which it belongs. Thus, for example, everything which grows
has its “ soul.” According to the Votiaks, the “ soul ” (urt)
of the corn can assume the form of a little butterfly, pre-
cisely like the soul of a man; and the Cheremiss speak,
furthermore, of the “soul” (ort) of the earth, fire, water,
etc. When “ souls ” vanish out of the earth, it can no longer
produce vegetation; if the “ soul ” of the water disappears,
it begins to sicken and is turbid and nauseous to the taste; and
if a man drinks of such water, he falls ill. Even the bothie
or hut has its “ soul,” which flees if men are noisy and quar-
relsome in the room. “ You are driving the ‘ soul ’ of my
bothie away,” cries the Cheremiss if any one commits a breach
of the peace in his home. When the “ soul ” has fled, the
bothie is no longer “happy,” and “life is heavy there”;
while no “ soul ” is found in a deserted, uninhabited house.
In the fantasy of the Cheremiss the “ bothie-soul (port-ort')
cannot assume any shape whatsoever. When asked what he


14 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

means by the “ soul ” of the bothie, he answers that it is not
any distinct entity, but the “luck,” “joy,” or “health” of
the hut. Both farm-yard and threshing-floor have their
“ souls.” When the former possesses it, “ the cow-yard re-
joices} the cattle thrive and multiply.” Of the latter it is
said that “ where the ‘ soul ’ flourishes, even small quantities
of seed yield a blessing} but if it leaves the place, great heaps
of seed whcJly lack their proper usefulness.” If no seed is
found on the threshing-floor, neither is any “soul” dis-
coverable there.

According to the belief of the Finno-Ugrians, the very
smallest things have a “ soul.” This explains the custom of
breaking objects intended for the dead, such as wooden spoons
and bowls, clay pots, and the like, “ so that the departed may
take them with him to the invisible world.” Doubtless this
reflects the concept that even things have an invisible part
which is separated from the visible by being broken} in other
words, an object must be deprived of its life in order that its
“ soul ” may leave it. Or, as in Mordvinian usage, the ob-
ject which is given to the dead may simply be scraped with a
knife, its “ soul ” being thus released. At the offerings in
their groves the Cheremiss violently shake the objects em-
ployed for the occasion} and when we recollect that the
sacrificial victim which shivers, like the man who is frightened,
loses its “ shadow,” we understand what beliefs are connected
with this peculiar custom. Just as there is a “ tutelary genius ”
of a man’s “ shadow,” so there is a “ nature god ” of a “ nature
soul ”} and water, earth, forest, tree, house, and the like
possess a Haltia, just as we have seen the Finns apply the
term to the Doppel-ganger of a man.

The name must also be reckoned in the category of belief
in souls, and this explains, among other matters, why the
Votiaks call the rite of choosing a name “ the seeking of the
soul” {un When a child cries a great deal or falls


THE BELIEF IN SOULS 15

ill, or when a “ mark ” caused by the dead rises on its skin,
this is interpreted to mean that it has chanced to receive a
wrong name. To remedy this, sundry magic ceremonies are
employed to determine what new name the child should re-
ceive in order that it may thrive and recover. From the
names which are enumerated during these rites, and which
have usually been borne by departed forefathers, the inference
may be drawn that the “ soul ” or “ spirit ” which is sought
for the child is the soul of some ancestor. That this was
actually true in the beginning is shown by the corresponding
beliefs and ceremonies of the Lapps. They held that a preg-
nant woman could indicate, either in dreams or through
shamans, which of the kindred dead was willing to live anew
in the child. The name w'as given by an old woman, who
baptized (a later custom) the child, saying; “ I baptize thee
with the name of such and such a departed one. Mayest
thou have the same fortune and happiness that he (or she)
had in this world.” In addition they believed that, with the
name, the child received the “ guardian spirit ” which had
once belonged to the former bearer of the name. “ Guardian
spirits ” could also appear in visible form, as in that of a fish.
Sacrifice should be ofFered to the dead whose name was given
to the child. If the right name was not immediately found,
the appellation of the child might afterwards, in case of sick-
ness, be changed several times.®® According to the Northern
Ostiaks, after a number of years the spirit of the deceased
could be born again to earthly life in a child belonging to his
kindred j and then the name of the dead man must be fovuid
in order that the child might thrive and be strong.®® Side by
side with this custom another is met with among the Eastern
Finno-Ugrian peoples, according to which a name was given
to a child from the first object or phenomenon to attract the
attention of the parents or the midwife at its birth.®*

That the giving of the name was a custom of immemorial


1 6 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

antiquity among the Finno-Ugric peoples is shown by the
fact that the word for “name” is common to them all, so
that the Finnish term mmi, is actually used also in Samoyed
(nim). Probably it is the same word which also occurs in the
Indo-European languages {naman, 6vo/j,a, nomsn, name, etc.).


CHAPTER II

DEATH AND BURIAL

A mong all the Finno-Ugric peoples, the customs and
beliefs connected with death, though varying locally,
will be found to possess certain general affinities.

The most significant ceremonies arise out of a desire to do
everything possible for the departed on their last journey,
and from precautionary measures by the living against the
dead, as these are believed to seek companions with whom to
enter the other world.

Immediately the “ breath had departed,” the Finns opened
the smoke-outlets, in Russian Karelia the boards forming the
roof of their chimneyless houses even being lifted three
times, so that the soul might quicker fly away. The Estho-
nian custom was to open the doors. If a wind arose while
someone lay dying, it was called “ the wind of the dead.”
The Permian peoples believed that on the death of a shaman,
a storm was sure to arise.®

When a death occurs, the relatives of the deceased gather
round the body. Forgiveness is implored of the dead one.
The Cheremiss say: “ Forgive me, be not angry with me if
I have used hard words against thee.”® Probably after a
Russian custom, the Mordvins and the Ingrians, etc., im-
mediately life has departed, place a bowl of water on the
window-sill, “so that the soul can cleanse itself.”'* More
general is the custom of cutting the throat of a hen when
death occurs. When this is done by the Chuvash, they say:
“ soul for soul and body for body” or also “ this hen shall
lead thy soul.” The Eastern Cheremiss slaughter the fowl
first at the gate, as they follow the dead to its grave, and they


i8 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

observe whether the hen remains within the courtyard or flies
headless out into the road. The former is accounted a sign
that a new death will soon occur in the house. At the spot
where the hen is killed, it is believed that the deceased meets
with the spirits of his departed relatives, which come forth to
meet the new arrival. The reason for the actual act of
slaughtering has been interpreted in different ways. Some
say that the hen gathers together in the other world the
nails of the departed, which have been scattered about in this.
In other places, it is the custom to say to the dead at the
slaughtering: “ Save with this blood thine own blood from
death! ” With the first drops of the hen’s blood, the Chere-
miss paint the eyebrows of the dead. The fowl is not pre-
pared for food, but is left lying on the road for dogs to feast
on.° A later custom is the preparing of the flesh of the
fowl, slaughtered at the moment of death, for the funeral
repast. A relic of the hen-sacrifice is found among the Finns
in Savolax, who, when the coffin is being borne away, cast a
living hen on to it, to prevent the dead from taking the
“ poultry-luck ” away with it.®

The dead must be escorted as soon as possible to the peace
of the grave. The first service consists of the washing of the
body of the dead, a practice followed by all the tribes, though
it cannot be regarded as a purely Finno-Ugric custom. The
person carrying out the washing is often chosen during the
lifetime of the deceased. In some places, the left hand only
is used during the performance. If any one of the persons
engaged in the washing is displeasing to the deceased, the
latter holds himself stiffly, clenches his fists, etc. Where the
body remdns soft and plastic, the washers are all agreeable
to the dead. The corpse must be clad in clean garments, even
down to its underclothing. The Volga Finns, like the Baltic
Finns, accoutre their dead as for a long journey. A hat is
placed on the head of the corpse of a male, and clean foot-
wrappings are wrapped round its feet, which are fitted with


DEATH AND BURIAL


19

lime- or birch-bark shoes j other clothes are placed with it
also. The Votiak wife lays a clean suit of undergarments
by her dead husband to enable him to change when necessary.
The husband gathers into his wife’s coffin kerchiefs for the
head, towels, and trinkets worn on the breast. Many gar-
ments and kerchiefs of all descriptions are placed in the
coffin of a young girl, “ as the men who have died unmarried
are thought to be quicker in proposing marriage to girls with
a bountiful marriage portion.” A staff is placed in the hand
of an old man. Naturally, all the tribes fit out their dead
according to their scale of living, means and opportunities.
The more northern peoples appear to have used very simple
wrappings in which to swathe their dead. To conclude from
remains dug up, the Lapps, in olden days, used only wrappings
of birch-bark. In certain districts, both Lapps and the North-
ern Ostiaks were accustomed to swathe their dead also in rein-
deer- or bear-skins.

In addition to clothing or protective swathings, the dead
had to be supplied with provisions for the journey, and with
money, weapons, and all kinds of implements and household
articles. Among the objects laid with the dead may be men-
tioned fire-tools, bow and arrows, an axe, a knife, fishing-
gear, skis, a sickle, pots, dishes, wooden spoons, boats and
vehicles, etc. The corpse was supplied with everything it was
supposed to need. With women, distaffs, pieces of cloth,
scissors and needles were laidj with children, toys. The lame
received their crutches, a shaman his drum, a hunter his dog
and his spear. Above all, the Volga Finns never forget to
give the dead for their last journey the tools needed for the
making of bast shoes. Smaller objects were laid in the coffin
of the dead, larger ones were placed around the grave. In
some places among the Cheremiss it was further deemed
necessary to place a rod in each hand of the corpse, so that in
the underworld it could protect itself against attacking hounds,
serpents, or evil spirits.


20


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


Among the articles and coins laid in the dead man’s coffin
by the Ostiaks were also some which were sent along with the
deceased to some relative who had died earlier. It is said of
the Cheremiss, that some of them poured nuts into the pocket
of the dead man, saying while this was being done: “ Greet
.our kinsmen when you arrive j we send sweets to their chil-
dren} when you meet them, divide the sweets amongst
them.” ^

A noteworthy custom among all the Finno-Ugric peoples
is the breaking-up of all the objects which the dead receive
with them. That a like usage was followed in Finland, ap-
pears from a report from Savolax, according to which, on the
placing of the corpse on the sleigh, some object from among
the most valuable in the house had to be dashed in pieces,
with the remark: “ This you may have, but nothing else.”
In this way the spirit of the dead was prevented from return-
ing after the burial with any demands for his property.
Similarly, in Ingria, when the master or mistress of the house
was borne out, the spoon of the deceased was carried three
times round the coffin, after which the spoon was broken and
the pieces thrown after the coffin, with the words: “There
hast thou thy portion, more thou shalt not receive.” This
was done that the dead might not appear afterwards and de-
mand more at the division of the inheritance.® Apparently
it was believed that by “killing” an article, its “soul” or
“ shadow ” was released to follow the deceased into the world
of shadows.

An important part in the burial ceremonies is played by all
kinds of protective measures, performed by the survivors ob-
viously with a view to protecting themselves against dangers
which the dead are believed to be able to cause. The belief
of the Lapps that the dead wishes to take along with him
“ his family, his children, and his dependants ” is common to
all the Finno-Ugric peoples.® A very widespread measure of
protection is to cover, immediately death occurs, the eyes and


DEATH AND BURIAL 21

mouth of the deceased. To prevent the dead from doing
harm to its own with its glance during the time the corpse lies
in the house, the Samoyeds cover its eyes with copper-coins or
with small stones. The Ostiaks cover the face of the deceased
with a cloth, in addition to covering the eyes, nose, and mouth
with silver or copper coins, or with brass buttons.^® The
Cheremiss close the eyes and mouth of their dead, and cover
the eyes, ears, and nostrils with little bunches of thread. The
Chuvash act in the same way, saying: “ If the dead over there
ask of thee if there are others to come after thee, answer
them: ‘ My ears heard none, my eyes saw nothing, my nostrils
knew no scent.’ ” ” Missionaries relate that when the Lapps
covered up their dead in shrouds, they were very careful to
cover up the body completely.^® This was most likely done
for fear that the soul of the deceased, which was supposed to
dwell in the body even after death, would otherwise leave its
dwelling-place and come to frighten those left at home.

The Cheremiss are so cautious that as soon as signs of im-
minent death are forthcoming, they remove the sick from
their beds to a litter of straw. According to the Hill-
Cheremiss the person dying on a bolster of down must reckon
up the number of feathers in the coming life, and similarly,
those dying on hair-mats must count the hairs of the same.’®
Obviously, the removal of the sick to the litter of straw has
its origin in the fear that death contaminated a bed.

As a means of protection articles made of metal have been
used widely. The Finns cast a copper coin in the water in
which the corpse is washed. It was believed in some places,
that unless one gave a copper coin to the person who washed
the corpse, his hand would become diseased.’* Among the
Scandinavian Lapps, the one washing and covering up the
dead had to bear, on his right arm, a ring of brass, given to
him by some relative of the deceased “ so that no evil could
befall him.” In Russian Lapmark the cofiin and the grave
of the deceased are prepared by such men whose womenfolk


22 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

are not pregnant, or have ceased to suckle their children}
otherwise, the child might be smitten with a mortal illness."
A further very widely spread custom was that no one, often
not even the neighbours, might go about his ordinary occupa-
tions while the corpse was still in the village, but that every-
one had to be prepared, if necessary, to serve the dead.
According to the Samoyedic idea, it is extremely reprehen-
sible to go hunting or fishing during a similar period} they
forbid even the crossing of a stream." Among the Estho-
nians it is strictly forbidden to chop wood, to heat the bath-
house, to wash clothes, to sweep the floor, and to comb
one’s hair while the body is in the house. Neither is it suit-
able to visit friends or to receive visitors. Even to sell, or
give away anything from the house is forbidden during this
period."

If the corpse is kept over night in the house, no one may
undress, but must, instead, watch by the body, as “ if one were
to lie down and sleep, it would be easier for the deceased to
take one’s soul along with him to the kingdom of the dead.”
Singing and shouting are also forbidden while the dead is in
the house. The Cheremiss declare that the relatives and
neighbours of the dead must sit silently watching by the dead,
in order to see if the spirit of the deceased should return to its
dwelling-place. If there is a mirror in the room, it must be
turned round or covered, in order that the dead may not, by
means of the mirror, look out a comrade for itself among
those present."

To prevent the dead from visiting their old home, many
means of leading them astray are used. The Lapps and the
Samoyeds do not bear out their dead through the door, but
directly out under the canvas tent from the spot where they
were stricken by death} in order that the dead and the living
may not come in each other’s way. The Lapps declare that
were they to bear out their dead through the door, a new death
might be expected soon after." The Ostiaks removed their


DEATH AND BURIAL


23

dead through the windows.®^ The Votiaks attempt to deceive
their dead by removing the door through which the corpse is
carried from its hinges and passing it through an opening on
the side of the hinges/® The Volga Finns were in the habit
of placing the coffin on the end of a log and spinning it round
three times in a contrary direction to that of the sun. Often
the footmarks of the funeral procession are swept away.®®
The most general protective or cleansing measure is the strew-
ing of ashes: thus both the Lapps and the Baltic Finns used
to throw ashes and fire after those following the hearse.®*
In some places, all tables, benches, etc., in the house were
thrown down on their sides at the removal of the coffin.®®
Against infection from death, articles of steel, axes and knives,
or heated stones, glowing cinders, ashes, salt, flour, etc., were
placed on the spot where death had stricken its victim.®® A
custom of the Baltic Finns is to hammer in a nail in the place
where death occurred, or where the corpse was washed, often,
also, into the threshold over which the coffin was borne. The
people say, that if a nail has been driven in where a death has
taken place, no sickness need be feared if one happened to
receive a shock there.®’^

The Russian Lapps leave their homes open and empty
after the death of a member of the family. In earlier times,
the nomad families would remove altogether to some other
place. A mark, such as for example, a stone, would be left
to mark the place of death.®® A more prevalent custom is to
smoke a room, or to beat the walls with branches. When the
Voguls smoke out their homes, they create a din at the same
time, shriek, jingle sleighbells, and pound in every corner to
drive away death. Among the Ostiaks the fire may not be
allowed to go out for five nights when a male dies, and four
nights when a female.®* The dread felt for death is increased
by the belief that the relatives of the dead man who have died
earlier come to take him away. The Lapps declare that they
have actually seen these with their own eyes in the twilight.


24


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


Generally, however, these spirits of dead relatives are in-
visible to human beings, but animals can see them.*®

When the Lapps transport their dead for burial the corpse
is always placed in the last sled,®^ and among the Ostiaks at
Tremyugan the escort never goes after the coffin, but before.®®
The escort may not in any circumstances look behind it.
Neither may the other inhabitants of the village look at the
funeral procession through their windows. The Cheremiss go
so far as to hide their windows with coverings in order “ not
to follow the dead one.”

Measures of protection are carried out also on the return
from the burial. To prevent the dead from following the
trail of the escort, all footprints are swept over at the burial
mound.®* According to Lehtisalo, the Yuraks, on their return
from a burying, are in the habit of going three times round
the grave in widening circles. In addition, a gateway is erected
“towards the night,” or towards the north, with the saying:
“ Here is thy way, wander thine own way.” Returning from
a burial, one may not look back. To cleanse oneself utterly
from the contact with the body, a gateway of two sticks is
erected before the door of the tent. Through this the rela-
tives of the dead must pass, taking with them all their
belongings.®® The Votiaks strike at one another at the
cemetery gate with branches of fir, saying to the dead: “ Go
to thy home, do not remain with us.” Or a branch of juniper
is waved with the cry: “Come not with us, go to your
home! ” ®® In some places, a channel is cut by dragging an
axe or some other sharp instrument across the way or round
the escort of the dead. When the house is reached again, a
fire is usually made, over which one must jump, or the hands
are rubbed with ashes, or a bath is taken. In Finland the
coffin was sometimes carried to the cemetery between two
fires of straw “ so that the soul should not return home to
disturb the sleep of the living.”

The sleigh, or carriage, in which the corpse is transported.


DEATH AND BURIAL 25

is either left at the cemetery, or must stand for at least three
days in the village street before it can be used again.®*

The Eastern Cheremiss have a custom, according to which
they fell a tree on their return from a burial, leaving a
stump about a yard high. This is generally done about
half-way between the cemetery and the village, “so that
the dead, when looking around, may notice the stump, and
realize that his old home is still far away, and so return to
his grave.” **

About half-way between the cemetery and a village, one
sees very often among the Volga Finns, a place by the way-
side where all kinds of objects, clothes, etc., have been placed
on the ground or hung up in the trees. To this place the
clothes worn by the deceased at his death, the bark-sponge
used in washing him, the shavings from his coffin, and ob-
jects regarded as having become infected with death have been
carried. The Cheremiss say that were one to burn up the
shavings gathered after the making of the coffin the deceased
would break out in blisters or an eruption on his face. At
these widely-feared places, the Votiaks sacrifice at times of
serious illness. Also after certain memorial-feasts held at
home, the bones of the sacrificed animal are taken to the above-
mentioned place, where they are hung up in the trees. Thus,
in some districts, sacrificial gifts have been laid down at this
place instead of at the cemetery, where they really should be,
and in many places even to this day, are laid. In the District
of Mamadysh the Votiaks have erected little posts with a
pmqll table in front, to the memory of such dead as have died
in strange places, “so that their souls may return to their
native village.” On the table, sacrificial food is placed on
the anniversary of such deaths.**

Among the Finns in Savolax and Karelia, a tree, the
karsikko^ on the road leading to the cemetery, was stripped of
its lowermost branches as a memorial of the dead. Often, a
cross would be carved on the tree together with the initials of


26


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


the dead, and sometimes also the year of death. Or these
might be cut on a piece of board which was then fastened to
the tree. The practice of carving a cross for each corpse
borne by was carried out with the intention of preventing the
dead from coming any nearer to their former home. Offer-
ings were also made, or at least, everyone had to drink spirits
to the memory of the dead. Strips of clothing, bindings,
etc., were also often hung here.^^

A similar custom prevailed amongst the Esthonians. In
some districts the crown of a young tree was chopped off, in
others a cross was carved in a tree by the way, or a nail
hammered in, so that the soul of the dead should not
approach any nearer home from the cemetery.*®

It is said to have been the custom in Savolax for a settler
to mark out near his home a suitable thicket of firs to the
memory of the dead. In a thicket of this description, which
was called karsikko^ a tree was denuded of its branches at
each death of a dependant of the house, whether an adult or
a child. Immediately such a tree was found in the thicket,
offerings were made there to the dead. This statement, the
origin of which is to be found only in K. H. Hornborg’s de-
scription, is not supported by actual folk-custom. Hornborg
seems to have confused the karsikko of the dead with the
so-called elattipm (Swedish vardtrad), a tree planted in the
vicinity of the house when first built, and to which sacrifices
of first-fruits were offered, and every autumn that of a sheep.
From this tree no branches were ever cut.*® A growing fir
or pine in Finland has its branches removed so that only the
top remains in honour of one who for the first time is about to
begin a long journey or some more important enterprise, such
as hunting or fishing j and in Russian Karelia this is done also
in honour of a bride. But to this karsikko-tttt no sacrifices
were offered.

Some kind of protective measure is probably also at the
root of many customs, regarded nowadays merely as signs


DEATH AND BURIAL


27

of mourning. The Ostiaks regard it as not correct for the
relatives to go barefooted during the first week after a death.
According to another report, Ostiak women wear their linen and
head-kerchiefs inside out for five months (or fifty days) if
the deceased is a man, and four months (or forty days) if a
woman.^^

A custom now regarded as a mark of mourning is the
Ostiak’s refusal to gird his belt around him for five or four
days, the time depending on the sex of the deceased. In
some districts this is done “ so that the dead shall feel itself
lighter and freer.” The Lapps have the same custom during
the trance of the shaman and child-birth. Probably, the
thought behind this Ostiak custom is that the journey of the
dead to the other world will be unhindered by knot or band.
For a similar reason, perhaps, the Samoyed and Ugrian
women allow their hair to fall unbound during a burial.'*®

A method of expressing sorrow among the Ostiaks was to
scratch wounds that bled on one’s own face. Novitskiy writes
of this (1715) : “ When anyone’s father or mother, a husband
or a wife, or any other member of a family dies, the .relatives
following the corpse to the grave seek to express their sorrow
by tearing their hair, and, as far as is in their power, scratch-
ing wounds on their faces j the bleeding locks of hair are
thrown by them on to the corpse.” Among the Mordvins
also the wounding of one’s face was regarded as a means of
expressing sorrow.^’ These last, like the Orthodox Finns and
the Siryans had the custom of singing “weeping-songs” to
the memory of the dead. In the villages were often to be
found women who made a profession of weeping at graves.
The singing of special weeping-songs seems with these to be
derived from the Russians, amongst whom the custom is
general. The “weeping” at the grave is, however, ap-
parently of older origin. In an old source it is written of
the Voguls: “They wail and cry greatly after the dead.”
The Ostiaks customarily use the relatives of the dead as


28 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

“weepers.” The dead man is praised very greatly at the
same time, and his works are admired.^*®

A strange custom of inquiring from the dead, who shall
be the next to die, is often connected with the burial cere-
monies. When the coffin has been borne out of the house
into the yard, the Cheremiss place on it a bunch of pieces of
thread of varying lengths, from which each of the partici-
pants in the ceremony draws out a thread, saying: “ Although
thou perhaps didst die too early, do not take me with thee,
see how long my thread is, let my life be equally long.”^®
After burning the straw on which the dead has departed this
life, the Esthonians look among the ashes for footmarks from
which to make out whether a human being or an animal will
be the next to die from the same farm.*® The Finns kept an
eye on the horse that drew the hearse } if it lifted its left foot
first, it was a sign that someone from the village would soon
follow the dead.“^ The Ostiaks attempt to obtain answers
from the corpse to certain questions, by lifting the lid of the
coffin in which the dead lies. Before they transport the dead
to the graveyard, they tie a rope round the coffin at the place
where the head of the corpse should be, and by the grip thus
formed one of the persons present tries to lift the coffin, each
time he does so directing a question at the deceased, for ex-
ample: “ Was it a spirit, that took thee? ” or “ Shall we all
live to the next year? ” and should the answer to this last
question be in the negative: “ Tell me, who will be the
next to die? ” after which the names of all present are called
out at each attempt to lift the coffin. Should the coffin appear
to be heavy, it is regarded as an answer in the negative} if
the contrary, as assent.'®

It is, fxirther, the duty of the survivors to take care of the
dwelling-place of the dead. According to the most wide-
spread custom now, the dead are buried in a coffin in the
ground. The cofiin, called the “ house ” of the dead, is made
of boards} at each side the Karelians, Volga Finns, etc,, make


DEATH AND BURIAL


29

a little square hole, the “window,” “through which light
reaches to the house of the dead,” and “through which they
can observe what happens around them.” When the Chere-
miss makes the coffin, he says: “ Now do I make thee a
house, be not angry if it please thee not.”

When the Cheremiss lift the corpse into the coffin, they
speak a few words to the memory of the deceased and wish
him a happy, destination: “ Farewell (with the name of the
deceased)! Over there may you enjoy a light, happy, good
and warm existence. Leave us not, but come and inform us
in our dreams, how joyful and pleasing thy life beyond the
grave has become! ” Other wishes are also expressed: “ Let
us not die too early, return not to us, make friends for thyself
among the other dead!

To an unmarried young man the parents say: “ In this
life we had not time to give thee away in marriage} choose for
thyself a good wife over there.” In certain districts the un-
married dead are escorted to the cemetery with the ceremony
attaching to a wedding. The horses are harnessed in gleam-
ing harness, a large bell is fixed to the bent bow of wood over
the horses’ necks, all the comrades and friends of the youth-
ful dead follow them to the graveside. When a yoxmg
virgin dies, the Cheremiss lay away with her, her needlework
and decorations, and in addition a charpan, the headgear of a
married woman, “so that the deceased, when she celebrates
her wedding beyond the grave, will be able to array herself
as a married woman.” While the relatives fit her out, they
say with tears in their eyes: “Here you had not time to be
wedded, marry an honourable man over there! ” “

In some Districts (Urzhum, etc.,) a thread is snatched
from the garments of the deceased, or they merely take hold
of the cofiin, with the remark: “Take not the hoiise, the
cattle, the seed, the fortune with theej leave thy luck with
us! ” The Eastern Votiaks have a custom according to
which one of the relatives of the dead tears a white cloth.


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


30

which he has brought with him to the cemetery, into two
pieces} the part remaining in the left hand, he leaves on the
breast of the dead, the piece in the right hand is taken home
and bound fast to one of the rafters or attached to the wall,
in which places it is allowed to hang a year. With the act
of tearing, they say: “In the same way as a part of this
cloth remains here while the other part goes home with us,
mayst thou not altogether depart from us.®^

A custom of the Volga Finns, met with also among the
Ostiaks, is that when the face and the whole body of the dead
have been covered with cloths brought by the friends of the
deceased, a thread, of the length of the deceased’s body, is
laid from its head to its feet, or at times, even three threads
of different colours, “ along which the dead can climb up to
heaven.” By some, this is called the “ swing ” of the dead.
Sometimes a thread of the length of an adult is laid by a
child} “ so that it may in the other world grow to the length
of the thread.”

The Cheremiss regard it as essential that the persons watch-
ing by the body through the night should also follow it to
the grave. On the way to the cemetery all who meet the
procession must wish the dead a happy existence, warmth
and light. While the body is being lowered into the grave,
the coffin is lifted up three times, with the saying: “Fear
not! ” The grave is thereafter filled in again, during which
process the relatives of the dead in turn wish it a happy ex-
istence and a calm dwelling-place, and beg that it will not
frighten those near to it, but will protect its former home,
its family, and its herds. In a Karelian “ weeping-song ” for
the graveside, the wish of the dead is expressed, that when
the grave is filled in, a tiny crack, like the way of a mole,
will be left for the soul to move through.®* When the Volga
Finns return from the graveside each one present sweeps a
little more earth on to the grave from its sides, saying:
“May the earth be light over thee! ” In both ends of the


DEATH AND BURIAL


31

grave a little branch is stuck into the earth, and threads for
the dead are bound to these. For young girls kerchiefs are
bound to a pole planted in the grave, or to the surrounding
trees. A three-branched candle is lit on the grave.®®

The coffin in which the dead is borne to the grave is, how-
ever, of comparatively late origin. The Eastern Votiaks and
Cheremiss prepare the dwelling-house of the dead first at
the grave, to which the dead is escorted in full panoply, on a
sleigh in the winter, and on a carriage in the summer.
During the journey the widow of the dead sits or lies along-
side it. At the cemetery a low grave is dug, twigs of fir or
birch-leaves being strewn at the bottom} at the sides and ends
a couple of stout boards are then placed, between which the
dead is intended to be laid on its back. As a roof to this
“house,” in one side-wall of which a window is introduced,
two boards are used.®^ Formerly and in many places at the
present time, especially dur-
ing the winter, the Sam-
oyeds and the most North-
ern Ostiaks had a custom
according to which the dead
were not buried in the
earth, but in a dwelling-
place erected over the
ground. Among the Os-
tiaks and Voguls a tomb of
this description built over
the ground resembles a
little low house. The roof, sloping on both sides, is made
of birch-bark and narrow logs} often this house of the dead is
furnished with a window.®'* Among the Lapps burial-houses
are also found, the roofs of which rise above the groimd}
the dead being bedded in them on a layer of moss, reindeer-
hair, etc.®®

A further relic of the times when the above-mentioned cus-


Fig. I. OsTiAK Grave-house with
Coffin of the Deceased


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


32

tom of burial over the ground was prevalent among the Finno-
Ugric peoples, is the custom, met with among the Finns in Ka-
relia, of building, even after the dead had begun to be buried
in the earth, a little house of thin, round logs, carpentered
together, and furnished with a roof and windows. This
building would seem to have little actual meaning for the
dead, since these are buried in the earth, and it must there-
fore be connected with the old method of disposing of the
dead. Perfectly clear examples show how the method of
burial has gradually passed from the erection over the ground
to burial within itj an intermediate form being the low grave
which is not filled in again, but only covered with boards and
birch-bark.®*

The development of the dwelling-place of the dead to the
coffin is shown also by the old burial customs of the Finns.
In his work on the Iron Age in Karelia, Schwindt mentions
regarding the ancient burial-places examined by him, that an
erection resembling a house over the ground, joined together
with wood, with jutting-out corners, was lowered into the
grave j it was at times even fitted with a floor of boards, over
which skins were spread. The dead were laid in this building
clad in festive costume, covered most often with birch-bark
and supplied with all kinds of necessary articles. The build-
ing was covered with a roof of boards. A grave of this
description was filled in and covered with one or two layers
of stones.®' Noteworthy also is the Volga Finns’ custom,
mentioned earlier, of furnishing their coffins with a win-
dow.

Of early origin would seem to be a custom, preserved
among the Ugrians and the Karelian Finns, of burying their
dead bedded in a boat or punt. Even at the present time the
coffin is called the “ punt ” {ruuhi) in some parts of Karelia.
Munkacsi has assumed, that the Ugrian custom of using an
oaken punt as a coffin, is a direct outcome of the belief which
they held regarding the world of the dead, and especially of


DEATH AND BURIAL


33

the journey there over water. It is argued against this by
Karjalainen, that the belief in a land of the dead to be reached
over water is not an original belief of the Ugrians. According
to this last investigator, the custom of supplying the dead with
a boat for their last journey, depends solely on the fact that
the dead were regarded as needing a boat in the world beyond,
with which to procure their means of existence.®® In Russian
Karelia, remains of boats have been found which had not
been used as coffins for the dead, but lie capsized, often
shattered into two parts, over the grave.®^


Fig. 2. Graveyard in Russian Karelia
According to Blomstedt


In the same way as the Ugrians buried their dead in boats,
Lapp sleighs were used by the Lapps as coffins. In more
remote districts the Lapps, even to the present time, continue
to bury their dead in this way: laying sods of earth and
stumps of trees around them, as a protection against beasts of
prey. It is even related that the dead, on occasion, have been


34 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

buried in a sitting position in a sleigh to which a reindeer was
harnessed.®*

A very old custom, which seems to have been general in
earlier times and of which traces can be found among most of
the Finno-Ugric stocks, is the use of a coffin made by hollow-
ing out the trunk of a tree, or a trough, as the protective
covering of the dead. Most of the dead were buried between
two hollowed logs, of which the lower formed the coffin and
the upper one the lid.°® Among the Siberians such a coffin is
erected over the ground upon two or four pillars.

The oldest method of burial of the Finno-Ugrians is also
made clear by a word, meaning in Samoyed “ corpse ” {halmer,
kamelo, etc.), in Mordvin “grave” {kalmoy kalma), and in
Finnish “ grave ” (Jkalma) and also “ death ” and “ the scent
of death.” In an explanation of this word Setala says: “ On
the grounds of the meaning of the word both in Finnish and
in Samoyed, we can assume that its original meaning was
‘ corpse,’ ‘ the dead one.’ The oldest method of burial un-
doubtedly consisted merely in the laying-out of a body, a
habit prevalent, and followed even now, among many peoples,
which habit would explain why the same word can have the
two meanings ‘ corpse ’ and ‘ grave.’ ”

Reliable reports on the burning of bodies are to be found
solely among the Baltic Finns. In certain ancient remains in
Finland, burnt bones have been found in graves. Henry the
Lett relates in his Chronicle how the Esthonians, when they
returned to their old beliefs during the unsettled period of
the Crusades, “ took back their wives, whom they had forsaken
during the time they stood under the influence of Christianity,
exhumed their dead, whom they had buried in cemeteries, and
burned them in their old heathen way.” The other Finno-
Ugric peoples seem to have burned bodies only when the
dead were supposed to be dangerous to those surviving. We
may concur fully with Varonen, who says: “ As, therefore,
no reliable proofs exist concerning the cremation of the dead


DEATH AND BURIAL


35

among the Finno-Ugric stocks, except in those branches, which
continuously, and for the longest period, have been under
Germanic influence, we may conclude that the burning of
the dead did not originally form part of the burial-customs
of the Finno-Ugrians, and, where it may occasionally be found
among them, is merely in the nature of a temporary loan from
other peoples.”

The Finno-Ugric peoples bury their dead in certain burial-
areas, which, among the agricultural tribes, are often fenced
in. Every village has its own cemetery, or several villages
lying closely together may have a common one. This comes
from the fact that from the original mother-village, newer
ones have been formed in the course of time, the inhabitants
of which continue to use the burial-area of the original village.
In the same way as the old villages were family-villages, the
old cemeteries were family-cemeteries. That it was not the
custom to bury strangers in them is shown, among other proofs,
by the custom of the Votiaks, who besides their village-
cemetery, sometimes have a special one, often situated by the
main road, for the burial of wandering strangers, stricken by
death during their sojourn in the village.”

Usually, the cemetery is a consecrated thicket or wood,
where possible, of firs (Finnish, kuusikko), where the Votiaks
and the Cheremiss hang up on the trees all kinds of garments,
cloths, kerchiefs, etc., presented to the dead, “ so that they
should not, lying on the ground, be turned to earth.” At
times, even the solitary graves are ringed round. According
to Rytschkov this was done “so that the dead should not
leave their dwelling-place and trample down the surrounding
fields.” The Eastern Cheremiss have, further, a custom of
placing on their graves a cuckoo made of wood, and fastened
to the end of a long pole.” What the meaning attached to
this bird may originally have been, the present generation no
longer knows. Some say the cuckoo sounds its note for the
edification of the dead. Certain Siberian tribes have also a


36 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

custom of setting up figures of birds on the graves of their
dead.

Whether the use of special cemeteries had its origin already
in Finno-Ugric times is doubtful. According to tradition, the
Lapps, in their earlier periods, did not possess special burial-
places, because their dead were buried at any spot. In the
summer, when it is extremely difficult, and even, at times,
impossible, to transport the corpses to the remote burial-
places, the Lapps have to our day buried their dead in the
forests and on the uplands, wherever they happened to be
dwelling, and then with the arrival of winter removed them
to the churchyard. ''


CHAPTER III


MEMORIAL FEASTS FOR A PARTICULAR
DEAD PERSON

T he duties of the living with regard to the dead do not
cease when the latter have been carried to the grave
with all honours. The dead continue to need the help and care
of the living. If a dead man is not given his rights, he may
resent it and, coming back, disturb the peace of his survivors.
Such of the dead as haunt their old homes are called by the
Esthonians “home-visitors” (Kodukaiat). Generally, they
are masters and mistresses who in their life-time were par-
ticularly order-loving, economical and strict. They are, of
course, seldom seen, but every now and then they are heard
making noises to remind their family of their duties, or they
may even attack their children if these have not arranged the
memorial-feast due to them.’’

Memorial feasts may be either general ones, celebrated in
memory of all deceased relations, or special, in which case a
certain deceased relative is the object of remembrance. Of
these, the latter seem to be of older origin.

The first memorial feast celebrated in remembrance of a
member of the family, takes place on the actual burial-day,
so that this first feast is at the same time a burial feast.

Lundius, the missionary, relates of the Swedish Lapps, that
when their dead were buried, they drank “funeral beer.”
When the liquor was handed round, the Lapps first dipped
their fingers into it and smeared their faces. Having become
intoxicated, they began to praise the dead man, saying that he
was shrewd’ and strong, that he was an able forester, that he


38 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

understood well his wife and children, that he was a mighty
shaman, etc.' This wetting of the fingers and smearing of
the face can be traced to a corresponding custom among the
Norwegian Lapps of whom Randulf, the missionary, relates,
that before going to the Lord’s Supper, they used to take a
glass of beer or gin, if they had any, and dipping three fingers
into the drink, make the sign of the cross on their foreheads.
At other times they made, with fingers dipped into the drink,
three dots on the breast, one with each finger. This was done
by the Lapps in order to get their dead relations to protect
them.' The memorial drink, as well as the three finger-
marks, is with the Lapps a later Scandinavian custom.

The custom, however, of killing the reindeer that dragged
the dead man to his grave, seems to be an original Lapponian
usage. This sacrifice performance is described by Rheen, the
missionary, in the following way: — “Three days after the
funeral of the dead man, the Lapps take the reindeer which
conveyed him to the cemetery, kill it in his honour, and con-
sume it in company with their relations and dependants.
They collect all the bones, and having made a chest, put them
into it, burying the chest in the earth. They then make an
image of wood which is placed on the chest, the image being
large or small, according to the size of the dead man.” * Ac-
cording to Graan, three rods besmeared with blood, on which
were placed pieces of the heart and lungs of the reindeer, were
also buried with the bones.®

Even after the funeral feast, the deceased was remembered
by taking some tobacco, or anything else he may have been
fond of, to his grave. Rheen mentions that if the deceased
was a rich man, reindeer were killed in his honour one, two or
even three years after his death. Here also the slaughtered
animal’s bones had to be hidden in the earth. A black piece
of thread had to be sewn into the ear of the reindeer chosen
for the sacrifice.®

If sacrifices were not made to the dead man, the Lapps


MEMORIAL FEASTS


39

believed that they would be punished with poverty. Accord-
ing to Lundius, the Lapps believe that their reindeer, be they
many or few in number, “ will die after their master, as they
stand or walk, like grass.” ^

If, after the death of the deceased, he was given some
charge, e.g., as reindeer-herd, they were obliged to sacrifice
to him yearly during that time. J. Kildal relates how the
Lapp was able, by means of sacrifice, to make his father or
some other near relation from the lower regions guard his
reindeer for one, two or three years. After that time he
would go back to the dead.®

The deceased are also remembered at ordinary feasts.
Randulf says that when a Lapp drinks the health of anyone
he always pours one part of the liquor, before drinking, on
the ground, in honour of the spirits, but in particular of the
deceased.® Lundius relates that at their feasts, they sacrifice
cheese, meat, fish, fat, marrow and other food, which they
put into a little trough and bury in the earth together with
an image.^®

Like the Lapps, the Samoyeds have no fixed memorial days
or annual feasts in honour of the dead. The reindeer which
dragged the deceased to his grave, is here also sacrificed.
Most frequently it is impaled on the grave, a meal being
sometimes prepared from the meat.^^ Muller says that the
Samoyeds tie up a reindeer or two, if the deceased has had
any, on the grave, where the poor beasts are left to starve to
death. In some districts they believe that the dead need the
care of their relatives until the shaman has taken their
“ shadows ” to the world of the dead. When, for some acci-
dental reason, e.g., during illness, they sacrifice a reindeer or
a dog to the deceased, the sacrifice is performed after sunset,
behind the tent. The head of the sacrificial beast must then
be directed to the west.“

According to Pallas, the Ugrians of the North take to the
graveyard three of the best reindeer of the deceased on the


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


40

sleighs which follow that on which the corpse lies. Having
placed the body in the grave, they tie a strap to each of a
reindeer’s hindlegs, two men seize the straps and four others
pierce the animal with sharpened poles from different direc-
tions. In this way one reindeer at a time is killed. When a
rich man is buried, several reindeer are killed; a noose is
placed round their necks and legs, and thus tied, they are
beaten along their backs with poles until they cease to breathe.
An animal killed in honour of the deceased is left on the
grave; the straps are placed on a stand fixed above the grave
and the sleighs are overturned against it. Near the grave the
funeral meal is cooked, and when they have eaten dnough,
the burial guests take the rest home.” According to later
custom the best-beloved reindeer of the deceased is killed, the
meat being eaten, and the bones and horns, together with the
sleigh and harness, are placed on the grave.^*

The funeral feast of the North Voguls is described by Gon-
datti. Immediately after burying the dead, they cook some
kind of cereal or meat-dish, which they then pour out against
the coffin. The bottom of the pan is knocked out, after which
it is left by the grave. If the deceased has been conveyed by
reindeer, the latter are strangled by the grave, the meat being
boiled and eaten on the spot, the hide buried, and the bones
placed by the dead man.^®

Like the Lapps, the Ugrians frequently remember their
dead, especially during the first period of their life in Hades.
In most districts, however, they have no fixed memorial days,
but settle these according to agreement with relations. Kar-
jalainen says that the Northern Ugrians celebrate memorial
feasts in honour of a dead man for fifty days, and of a dead
woman, for forty. The ceremonies are very simple: — they
cook some food, and, having kept it at the grave for a while,
they eat it at home. At Tremyugan the dead are remeinbered
after one or two months, a half-year, or a whole one, by
“ setting forth a dish or a trough made of birch-bark.” Fish


MEMORIAL FEASTS


41


and meat are cooked and, together with other eatables, placed
in vessels either on the ground by the house against the door
on the side of the hinges, or taken to the cemetery, where
they are put on the ground above the head of the deceased or
below the window of the grave-house, if there is one. On
the ground tea, gravy, gin, and, finally, some cold water are
poured, whence the term “ water-pouring ” is derived.^®
According to Munkacsi, the Northern Voguls celebrate
memorial feasts on the third day after death, then, at the end
of “ the holy week,” and, after that time, thrice a year. They
make a fire by the grave and cook a dish, a small part of which
is placed in a vessel by the grave with the saying: “ Do not
remember us, thinking evil thoughts.” Where outside in-
fluence can be traced, the memorial feasts are celebrated on
carefully fixed days. With the Southern Ugrians, such days
are the ninth, the sixteenth, and thirty-sixth, and a half-year
or a whole year after death.“

A strange custom among the Northern Ugrians is the
making of a memorial doll of the deceased, of which Novit-
skiy says: “ A curious irrational and shameless custom is that
which is observed by their women after the death of their
husbands. The widow carves a wooden doll, resembling a
human being, to represent her dead husband, takes some of
her husband’s clothes, dresses the doll in them and provides
it with ornaments worn by the deceased, and putting it in the
place where her husband used to sit, cooks for this lifeless
block of wood all the dishes that used to please the deceased.
When they sit down in the place of honour to eat, she places
the image beside her, embracing and kissing the doll as if it
were a living being, fully believing that the deceased sees all
this and that his soul enters this image at times. She keeps
the doll for some time, going on with this nonsense for a
year or even longer, and then buries it with its clothes on in
the earth, exhibiting her sorrow by weeping and wailing.”

Castren and Pallas relate that memorial dolls of this descrip-


42 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

tion were made to represent persons who had been in some
way important. The image was kept in the tent of the de-
ceased and was shown the same honours as its precursor. It
was fed at every meal, dressed in the morning and undressed
in the evening, and a widow, who had loved her husband,
even went so far as to place it beside her in bed. According
to Castren the image was worshipped in this way for three
years, after which it was buried. They supposed that the
body of the deceased had disintegrated during these three
years.®® In some places the image was kept for five years, if
the deceased was a man, and for four, if a woman. In our
days the image is burned after the course of the said time.
Yet the old idea also remains that the doll should be buried in
the grave of the deceased. Where they are in the habit of
building the so-called grave-houses, the doll is placed in these.
During the time when Finsch was travelling among the
Ugrians, he saw, among the most Northern, small buildings
on their graves of the size of kennels, provided with a door,
and within them a doll, dressed in Ugrian garments. These
dolls noticed by Finsch were plainly such as had been taken
to the graveyard at the end of the memorial-time and placed
in the grave-house.®^

The memorial doll is also to be found among some Sa-
moyed tribes, though the custom of making images of shamans
seems here to be more widely spread. According to Lehtisalo,
the Yuraks make a wooden image of the “shadow” of the
shaman, which resembles a reindeer-bull. This image is kept
by the wife or son of the deceased in a case, consisting of the
whole-flayed skin of a young calf.®® The fact that the
“ shadow ” of the shaman is thus represented, springs from
the idea of the Samoyeds that the soul of the shaman, when
leaving his body, takes on the shape of a reindeer-bull.®*

Karjalainen suggests that the custom of the Northern
Ugrians of making an image of the deceased has developed
from a usage retained among the Southern Ostiaks and Voguls.


MEMORIAL FEASTS


43

Among the latter, the linen and bed-clothes of the deceased
are kept unwashed in his bed, among the former generally
under his pillow. These clothes are brought out at the me-
morial feast and placed in the middle of the bed. A spoon is
then placed in the dishes with its handle directed towards the
clothes. In some places a widow even keeps her late hus-
band’s clothes beside her when going to bed. Karjalainen
thinks that this method of representing the deceased has de-
veloped into the Northern Ugrians’ custom of making a par-
ticular image of the dead.“* Yet it must be remembered that
the Lapps, who were not in the habit of worshipping the
clothes of the deceased, also used an image every time they
sacrificed to them. This image, which does not seem to have
been an object for worship at home, but was made only for
the occasion of the sacrifice, was not clothed.““ Among most
of the Finno-Ugrian races the clothes of the dead man are
nowadays considered as visible representations of himself.
This is true of all the Volga peoples. Images are not seen
among them nowadays, but according to the most ancient
sources, the Mordvins seem to have had memorial dolls, which
were worshipped at the memorial feasts. A very common
usage is, further, to choose as the representative of the de-
ceased a living man who resembles him in appearance and
who dresses himself for the feast in the deceased’s clothes.
The fact that even the name of the deceased was later made
into a visible object of remembrance to the survivors, has been
mentioned already when speaking of the karsikko of the
Finns. The name karsikko was also given in North Savolax
to a piece of white paper on which were written the name of
the deceased and the year of his birth and death, this paper
being placed for the funeral day on a cloth spread on the back
wall of the hut.®*

Like the Chuvashes, the Volga Finns celebrate memorial
feasts in honour of some particular person on the ftmeral
day, and also on the third, the seventh and the fortieth day


44 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

after death. In some districts, the anniversary is also cele-
brated. These memorial feasts are often celebrated late at
night, and the time for them is calculated by the Volga Finns
not according to days but according to the number of nights.
For this reason they call the memorial feast of the third day,
the third night,” that of the seventh, “ the seventh night,”
and that of the fortieth, “ the fortieth night.” According to an
old custom, some animal, a hen at the very least, must be
killed during each memorial feast, for without bloodshed, as
the Votiaks say, a memorial feast cannot be celebrated.*’^

The Votiaks begin their preparations for the first memorial
feast before the deceased is taken to the burial-ground. As
soon as the dead man is washed and dressed, he is placed on a
bench j the eldest female member of the family puts down
two bowls by the body and makes meat pies. The eldest male
member of the family then takes a pie and breaks three pieces
from it, placing these into one of the bowls 5 into the other he
pours some gin, saying: “ In this life you lived well, live
well also there. Do not torment and worry us. Protect our
cattle well. Protect our children well. Gather the dead
round you. Protect our good cattle from floods and preci-
pices. More I cannot say to you; do not be angry. Live well
in the life over there; do not take hold of us in front or from
behind; do not persecute us.” The eldest member of the
family having finished, the others do and say the same.**
These ceremonies diflFer somewhat in different places. In
the district of Sarapul, where they believe that the relatives of
the deceased who died earlier have arrived to meet the new-
comer, they are believed to take part in the feast together
with the deceased. In honour of the latest deceased and of
the others, the men make wax-tapers and the women cook a
hen, if the deceased is a woman, and a cock, if it be a man.
At the door near the fireplace, a trough is placed on which,
as on the head of the bed, little wax-tapers are fixed. Into
the trough pieces of meat are thrown and some gravy poured


MEMORIAL FEASTS


A-5

when the names of the dead are mentioned, with an appeal to
them to eat and drink and to receive the lately deceased with
a contented mind into their company.*® Such customs are
common to all the Volga Finns.

When the Esthonians are ready to take their dead to the
grave, they cook beans or peas (which fare among the Baltic
Finns seems to be a general memorial dish), and pour ladle-
fuls of these on to the coffin, on which they also place some
other food, white bread, etc. In some places they are in the
habit of pouring out beer or gin on the ground by the gate
while the deceased is being taken away, lest he should suffer
from thirst in the life to come.*®

Most frequently the Volga Finns, however, prepare the
funeral meal only when they have returned from the grave-
yard. Generally no one is invited to such a feast, but it is
everyone’s duty to know for himself that he must come and
honour the deceased. For the feast, everyone brings food
with him, no one coming empty-handed, and the attention of
the dead is generally called to what each has brought. For
the newly-buried a dish is placed on the table at the spot where
he is supposed to sit among his own people, but for those who
died earlier, a trough is placed by the door. For all the dead,
for the nearest relations and also for more distant ones, whose
memory still lives in the minds of the survivors, a wax taper
is lighted. Even the ruler of the kingdom of the dead and
that of the graveyard are remembered. The first cup and the
first morsels of food belong to the dead. If anything happens
to fall on the floor under the table, no one is allowed to take
it up. The food sacrificed to the deceased is afterwards taken
into the yard for the dogs. If the latter scorn the food, it is
believed that the dead are not satisfied with the feast} should
the dogs fight while eating it is considered to be a sign that
the dead do not agree among themselves.

For the earlier deceased relations, who have arrived to meet
the newly deceased, there has thus been placed a dish of food


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


46

near the door. This custom is very common, as it is believed
that the place by the door is the place of residence of the
dead who arrive at the memorial feast.

Even to the graveyard all kinds of food are taken, and
there crumbled over the grave of the deceased. In some
places, they dig a pit above the head of the dead man, into
which they pour gin, a honey-drink or water. When doing
this, the Siryans say: “ Drink, drink.”

Nowadays, the Volga Finns seldom kill larger domestic
animals than poultry for the memorial feasts. Formerly, cir-
cumstances seem to have been different. Olearius relates that
during the first half of the sixteenth century, the Cheremiss,
when burying a rich man, killed his best horse, the surviving
friends eating the meat of the animal.^® A hundred years
later Muller reports likewise: “ When some important person
dies, the Chuvash and Cheremiss put up two sticks in the yard,
between which they stretch a thick thread. On this thread
they place a ring. The young people then shoot at it with
bows and arrows at a distance of ten paces, and he who first
makes the ring fall, mounts the horse that the deceased used
to drive, but in case of the deceased being a woman, any
horse he may choose, galloping three times to the grave of the
deceased and back. The horse is then killed — the Cheremiss
carrying out this in the yard and the Chuvash in the graveyard
— the meat being boiled and eaten in memory of the
deceased.”

Numerous examples show that the Baltic Finns were also
in former times in the habit of killing a large domestic animal
in honour of the dead. Even in our days they believe, in
some places, that if a cow is not killed for the funeral of the
host or hostess, it will die in any case. A remainder of the
said funeral sacrifice is found in a custom among the Finns,
as well as among the Esthonians, of making the clergyman a
present of a cow after the death of the host or hostess, as a
fee for the burial ceremony. The Esthonians were in the


MEMORIAL FEASTS


47

habit of taking an ox to the clergyman after the death of the
host, and a cow after that of the hostess. Sometimes the
clergyman was expected to prepare a meal of these for the fu-
neral guests. In North Karelia the people were in the habit
of tying the cow due to the clergyman to a tree in the grave-
yard for some time, the clergyman having to take it from
there.®^

The different memorial days are celebrated by the Volga
Finns in varying ways, some of them being more solemn than
others. Thus, Georgi relates of the Votiaks, that at the first
memorial feast, which is celebrated on the third day, the
friends of the house of mourning are assembled only to eat
pancakes and drink beer, some of which is also poured out in
the yard for the dead, but on the seventh day a sheep is killed,
and on the fortieth, a cow or a horse.®®

The memorial feast of the third day among the Siryans
(District of Orlov) is desaibed by Dobrotvorskiy. When the
guests have arrived, wax-tapers are lighted in the window
and on either side of the threshold. The door is opened for
a while, when the guests are sitting down at table, to invite
the soul {lot) of the deceased to the feast. In the farther-
most corner, a hat or a kerchief is placed, depending on the sex
of the deceased. On the place where the hat has been set
down, no one seats himself. On the table beside it, they
place a bowl filled with pancakes, porridge, milk and gin.
Every guest considers it his duty to put into the bowl of the
deceased some of the food displayed on the table.®®

The memorial feast of the seventh day is, in most places,
like that of the third day. Some one of the relatives of the
deceased goes to the grave to remember him. At home, they
light a candle on the brim of the vessel of food offered to the
deceased. When the first pieces of food are dropped into this
vessel, everyone utters a few words of remembrance, pointing
out that it is now the seventh day of the memorial feast. In
other places the seventh day is kept almost as solemnly as


48 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

the fortieth. The participants in the ceremony go to the grave
with two horses to invite the deceased} they kill a hen for
him, sometimes even a sheep} in the evening they go to the
bath-house with him} all night he is regaled} and not until
dawn is he taken back to his new home."

According to a general idea of the Volga Finns and of many
other East European peoples, the deceased remains during the
course of forty days in a very near relationship to his old home.
The Votiaks say that the “ soul ” of the dead lives at home
for forty days after death. It is therefore the duty of his
people to show kindness and hospitality to the deceased, par-
ticularly during that time. In some places, it is customary,
during these forty days, to put down a bowl for the deceased
every time the family and servants sit down to take a meal.®*
The Siryans believe that after the funeral, the deceased
returns with the funeral guests to his old home and remains
there for the above-named time. For that time, therefore,
it has been customary to hang up a towel in some fixed place
in the hut, so that the deceased may wipe his face every time
he washes himself. No living soul may touch it, as death
might be the immediate consequence.®®

The Mordvins say that the deceased passes over to the
realm of the dead forty days or six weeks after his death."
The same idea is found also among the Baltic Finns who have
been under Russian influence. According to Groundstroem
the Votes dared not speak ill of the dead for six weeks, for
they believed that the soul of the deceased stayed for that time
in his home, mostly under the table. They were careful also
not to stretch their legs under the table, as they might easily
trample on the deceased." Like the Siryans, the Karelians in
the Government of Tver were in the habit of hanging a towel
for six weeks on the back wall of the hut, so that the deceased
when coming home, might wipe himself." A similar custom
is found among the Russians, from whom the Finnish tribes
seem to have borrowed it.


MEMORIAL FEASTS


4-9

As the forty-days’ memorial feast is at the same time a fare-
well feast, it has attained a particular significance and is cele-
brated more solemnly than the others. Among all the Volga
Finns, the ceremonies observed on this occasion were very
much alike. The following description was taken down by
the author among the Cheremiss in the District of Urzhum,
where, on the fortieth day, they kill a sheep, or at times even a
bigger animal, all the relations, neighbours and friends of the
deceased gathering together. The deceased himself is fetched,
with particular ceremonies, from the graveyard, members of
his own family being chosen to do this. When the sun is
highest in the heavens, the latter put the best horses before a
waggon, take meat and drink with them and drive with great
speed and tinkling of bells to the burial-ground. The cere-
monies had to be as solemn as at a wedding, and all the dead
were to know that they were now coming with two horses to
fetch “so-and-so” to the “great feast.” The horses stop
by the grave, where honey, meat, gin and beer, and also bread,
cheese and pancakes are placed on a white cloth. Uncovering
their heads, those who have come to fetch the deceased now
remind him, kneeling, of the great day that has arrived: “ Get
up (the name of the deceased is mentioned), see what we
have brought thee — honey, mead, gin, beer, bread, butter and
pancakes, get up and eat! The ‘ fortieth night ’ is nearing,
come with us to the village. At home they have killed a
sheep for thee, thy widow and children await thee, thy rela-
tions want to meet thee. We have not come to thee for
nothing, we have come to take thee to the great feast.” They
then pour out drink on the grave, placing also some food on
it and repeating the words usual at memorial-feasts: “ May
this be thy portion! ” The deceased is called on to bring with
him the relations who died earlier, all the dead fathers and
mothers of the family; even the ruler of the lower world is
invited to the feast. When about to start, they place a soft
cushion in the waggon for the deceased to rit on. Idaving


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


50

regaled the dead man in every way and tasted of the food
themselves, they ask him to get into the waggon. The de-
ceased may seem shy, or puzzled, so they assure him: “ Thou
knowest us, and thy waggon thou knowest, thine own are the
horses too.” Having shaken up the cushions, the one who
gets into the waggon says: “ Sit down beside me, we will drive
together, we are going home.” Though the seat is empty,
the Cheremiss believes that the shade of the deceased is there.
He often turns to it during the drive and speaks to it. If
several persons have arrived to invite the deceased, the horse
by which he is taken is at the head of the procession. In some
places they drive three times round the grave before returning
to the village.

At the homestead, the widow comes to meet the deceased,
and kneels with her children by the steps. Before them stands
a solemn functionary with bared head, holding bread, cheese
and drink in his hands. He speaks kindly to the dead man,
calls him by name and asks him politely to step into the hut.
The widow and children look at the arri\dng guests with tears
in their eyes. When the deceased is supposed to have stepped
out of the waggon, the cushion is taken into the hut to a fixed
place where the deceased is asked to sit down. None of
the living people seat themselves on that place, and near it
all his clothes, even his bast-shoes, are hung on the beams.
Pointing to them, the widow says: “ Look, here are thy clothes,
no one has used them, nothing of them have we lost.” They
place meat and drink before the deceased, and when they
suppose him to have eaten enough, the men take him to see
the cattle, the corn-stacks and the farm implements, and it
is even customary to take him to the bath-house to have a
bath. Some of the relations living a long way off have already
arrived, but the feast proper does not begin until the sun goes
down.

Then all the relations and friends of the dead man arrive
at the yard. A common usage is for every family to bring


MEMORIAL FEASTS


51

with them meat and drink of every kind. The member of
the family who receives the guests, says to the deceased: “ See,
thy friend (the name is mentioned) has brought thee this.”
Besides bringing meat and drink every guest takes also a
small wax-taper with him. The festival mood is heightened
above all by the numerous wax-tapers which are placed near
the back wall on a stand made for the purpose. In the middle
burns a thick wax-taper, one metre in length, twisted out of
three ordinary tapers. To the right of it stands a row of
smaller ones, one for each of the dead man’s relations who
have departed earlier, and to the left each guest places his
taper in honour of the deceased. When they are burnt out
fresh ones are lighted. The “ great taper ” that burns until
dawn has also been lighted for the actual guest of the day.

It is this last who is the object of everyone’s attention.
All eyes are directed towards the cushion on the bench in
the interior of the room below the tapers, where they believe
that the dead man is sitting. The women vie in carrying meat
and drink there j everything cooked is intended for the de-
ceased. Yet the living also get their share. The memorial
feast in honour of the dead man is no real festivity unless
everyone eats and drinks on this occasion. The Cheremiss be-
lieves, just as the Votiak does, that the more sated the guests
are, the more so is the deceased. For this last separate vessels
are set forth} a separate trough for meat, bread, pancakes,
pies and eggs, and a large round stoop made of birch-bark for
gin and mead. Every one going up to taste of the meat and
drink kneels by the seat of the deceased and throws or pours
a little into his vessel, inviting him to eat. A small piece of
each part of the slaughtered sheep is also placed in his trough.
Old men remain long kneeling before the deceased imploring
him to protect the family, and also the cattle from falling
down precipices or being tom to pieces by wild animals} asking
him, further, to make the corn grow, to ward ofiF insects from
the fields, mice from the store-house, etc.


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


52

At midnight the living, at least, begin to feel that they have
had enough. They are all in good humour, the gin-goblets
have been emptied every now and then, and also the “ stoop ”
of the deceased has gradually filled. The bag pipe which
until now has lain mute, tucked into the shirt-front of its
owner, is now brought out, and one and another invite the
“ shade ” of the deceased to come and dance. No one keeps
in his seat, all swing and whirl around. The tired hands can
hardly longer make fresh tapers and put them up. Even
the widow and children have for a while forgotten their grief.
Many old men move now only mechanically, and some of
them have already gone to sleep in the corners.

But there are people among them who have strength enough
to watch. The dancing and the murmur of the people cease
for a moment. Curiosity increases, when some one near the
door exclaims: “The dead man is coming,” upon which a
person, looking very dignified, steps into the hut and takes the
seat of the deceased. The widow hastens to embrace him,
calling him her husband, the old men press his hand, calling
him by the name of the deceased. The Cheremiss choose
some one resembling the dead man in size and appearance,
and for the night this substitute is dressed in the dead man’s
clothes. He is called “ the representative of the deceased,”
and every politeness and kindness is consequently shown him.
Every one wishes to regale him in the best possible way with
meat and drink, especially drink. The “dead man” relates
his observations on life beyond the grave and advises his re-
lations to remember him, to live in harmony and avoid quarrel-
ling, to work and to be economical. The survivors, for their
part, ask for the protection of the dead man.

The tapers gradually begin one after the other to go out,
only the biggest of them is still burning, when one of the
old men, coming in, wakes up the sleeping people, saying:
“The day is dawning, the dead man wants his rest.” The
languid people then bestir themselves, as before stuirise the


MEMORIAL FEASTS


53

dead man must be conveyed with all honours to the peace of
the grave. But first a prayer is said, all kneeling and turning
their faces in the direction of the seat of the deceased. He
is told that it is now time for him to depart for his home
among the other dead. They wish him a pleasant time, advise
him to make friends with the “ old Cheremiss,” by which
name they mean those who have departed before. The latter,
who are considered to be present, are also addressed with good
wishes: “ May you have bread and salt over there in abun-
dance, do not go away from us hungry and thirsty, be rich
and happy, walk in light, help us too, to live, do not frighten
us, do not forget our cattle and do not disperse our family.”
Then one of them takes the taper-stand, another the food-
trough, a third the drinking-vessel, and the others, with the
widow at their head, carry the dead man’s clothes, and thus
they go out into the yard, the “ representative ” being the
foremost. From the yard they step out into the village
street, wending their way to the burial-place. The women
weep aloud. They do not, however, walk all the way there,
but the procession stops at a hill situated outside the village,
where the rest of the burning tapers and the food and drinks
are thrown down. Even here, they remember the deceased,
wishing him a happy existence and exhorting him to live in
comfort in the society of those already there, and asking him
not to come home, at least not as an uninvited guest. Besides
giving him meat and drink, he is presented, on his departure,
with a wooden spoon and cup, which are shattered on the spot,
for otherwise — so say the Cheremiss — the dead man does
not get them.

It is usual among the Hill Cheremiss to kill a horse for the
memorial feast of the fortieth day, if the deceased is a man,
and a cow, if a woman. During the feast all the meat must
be consumed, as it is not right to reserve festival food for the
next day. The vessels and tapers of the deceased are here
placed by the threshold. When sacrificing to the deceased,


54 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

his own people say; “ In thy memory have we prepared meat
and drink} we, thy relations and neighbours, have all as-
sembled. Do not take it amiss if we have not entertained thee
enough, forgive us if we have hurt thee in thy lifetime, do
not be angry with us, and do not punish us by sending us
diseases and other misfortunes. Together with our friends
and comrades, we wish you, all ye dead ones, to be satisfied
with our feast} now go back to your dwelling, sated, singing
and dancing.” The deceased is then conveyed with music
and singing to a fixed place, where they put up in his honour
a little table with one foot. On this table, which is called
“ the table of the deceased,” they place a vessel for food and
three spoons. In some parts it is customary to lay a long pole
across chasms or rivulets, should any such be in the neighbour-
hood, so that the dead man may be able to cross them. The
pole is called the “ bridge of the deceased.” This seems to be
a symbol of the “bridge of the realm of the dead,” across
which, according to an idea descending from Iran, the de-
ceased had to wander to the other life.^*

Among the Eastern Cheremiss in the District of Birsk it is
also customary, in some places, to go to bed on the fortieth
night. After the music, the dancing, and the entertainment
are over, the widow takes to her the cushion on which the
deceased is supposed to have been sitting during the feast and
says: “ Still for the last night will we sleep together.” Early
next morning the dead man is ceremoniously conveyed with
two horses back to the burial-ground.**

In the province of Perm the Cheremiss are in the habit
of making one of the dead man’s relatives ride on horseback
to the burial-ground to invite the deceased. Having fulfilled
his task, the rider returns to the village at full gallop, crying:
“He is coming, he is coming.” At the same moment, the
waiting crowd rush at the panting horse with knives in their
hands, slaughtering it at once. The meat of the horse is then


MEMORIAL FEASTS


55

boiled and eaten, but the hide is hung over the grave of the
dead man/®

Similar ideas and customs are observed also among the
Mordvins. The dead man is fetched from the graveyard by
the horse promised him for sacrifice. The one who has dressed
himself in the clothes of the deceased relates his experiences
and describes the work of the dead, saying, among other things,
that such and such a person has fine horses, another walks in
the forest, this one has lost his property, that one has married,
such a one keeps bees, etc. Among other curious customs
occurring at funeral festivities, it may be mentioned here
that the Mordvins even make the “ dead man ” fell trees, if
he wishes it. They place the man who has dressed himself
in the clothes of the deceased on a chair provided with a
cushion, put a big knife into his hand and then carry him
sitting on the chair out of the hut to the drying-kiln, where,
beforehand, they have stuck a twig into the ground. The
dead man begins to chop it down with all his might. The
“ tree ” having been felled, the deceased is carried back to
the hut, taking the “ tree ” with him. At dawn the repre-
sentative of the dead man is taken to the graveyard, where
he is carried from the waggon on the cushion on which he has
been sitting, and seated on the grave of the deceased with his
back to the east. At his feet the others lay pancakes, mutton,
etc., asking the dead man to eat together with them for the
last time. Then, having eaten, they say good-bye to the de-
ceased, asking him to come again at harvest-time, when also
his portion is to be reaped. The deputy bows and hastily
steps from the grave.**

Of the Siryans it is related that at the memorial feast of a
deceased female a woman appears as the principal guest of
the feast, and, at that of a male, a man, who, at the close
of the feast is the first to go out of the hut, attended by the
others with candles in their hands, for, according to their


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


5 ^

ideas, the deceased withdraws from the hut in the person of
his deputy. In some places the latter is accompanied as far
as the first cross-road.*^

In Ingria the people used to go with food to the grave at
the “ six weeks ” festival, in order to invite the deceased to
the feast. Having returned home, they put the food on the
table with a spoon in it, which no one was allowed to touch.
Moreover, the eldest member of the family scattered some
salt, peas and slices of egg on the table for the benefit of the
dead. During the repast, a woman in the entrance sang a
“ weeping-song,” in which the deceased were implored to join
the circle of relations. After the repast these went, in the
order in which they left the table, out of the door into the
village street, turning their faces in the direction of the grave-
yard. At the same time each one stuck a fire-stick or a twig
into the ground, as a walking-stick for the dead man.*®

In Russian Karelia it was customary, when the relations
were going to the graveyard to invite the deceased to the feast,
to take with them, besides the other horses, one that was with-
out a driver and harnessed to an empty sleigh over which
was spread a white cloth, for the purpose of conveying the
deceased to his former home.*®

In some districts, among the Siryans and the Volga races,
there seems to have been the custom to celebrate also the
anniversary with a farewell feast.

According to the Eastern Votiaks the deceased then first
leaves his own people, among whom his “ soul ” (mt) has
up to that time lived and thriven. To accompany the deceased
all the relations arrive; a sheep or a cow is killed for the feast,
and some of the food is taken to the grave. The white piece
of cloth which on the funeral day had been fixed to a rafter,
is also taken there and solemnly buried in the grave. After
that day the clothes of the dead man, which up to then had
been carefully kept and only produced on the occasion of
great memorial feasts, could be given away to the poor.®*


MEMORIAL FEASTS


57

According to one report the Votiaks believe that i£ they do
not celebrate a memorial feast then, the dead will not give the
new-comer a place, in their community, but will make him
continue to wander about the village, as the deceased had done
in the course of the year.®^

The anniversary is celebrated by the Eastern Cheremiss,
in the District of Birsk, in such a manner that all the clothes
of the deceased are hung upon his favourite horse, which is
then taken to the grave and led three times round it. They
light a three-branched candle on the grave, saying at the same
time to the dead man that the anniversary has arrived and
promising to kill the horse in his honour. Having arrived at
the homestead, the horse is killed at once and a memorial
meal prepared of its flesh. While sacrificing, the relations
say to the deceased: “ Eat what we have prepared for theej
we have not harnessed thy horse, we have not used it, now
take it with thee.” At the end of the feast, the bones of the
horse are taken to the graveyard, where they are hung in a
tree, but the hide is sold for the benefit of the poor and the
fatherless.'®

In honour of particular persons the Votiaks further cele-
brate a remarkable memorial feast, which, however, does not
take place at a specially fixed time, but sometimes a year or
several years after death.

This festivity, which is generally celebrated late in autumn,
is called by the Votiaks a “ horse-wedding ” or “ the wedding
of the dead,” these names being derived from the fact that
it is, above all, a cheerful feast with wedding-songs and wed-
ding-presents. The sacrificial animal, which is generally
killed in the yard, must be a horse, if the deceased in question
is a man, but a cow, if a woman. In some places where the
memorial feast is celebrated the first year after death, the
animal which the deceased liked best and w'hich he used in his
lifetime, is generally sacrificed to him. All his relations are
invited, these alone partaking of the sacrificial meal, as it is


58 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

against custom to invite strangers. The most important per-
formance consists of the taking of the animal’s bones in the
evening, by candle-light, with music and singing, to the grave-
yard, where they are hung upon a tree.”**

A curious custom among the Mordvins is the “ harvest of
the dead.” Already when sowing in spring they pray to the
Lord to let the corn grow for the welfare of the living and
the dead. During the harvest-festival the relatives of the
deceased also reap the portion of the dead man, each of them
cutting only a few straws. The chief part is played by the
widow, who all day wears a belt of straw made by herself.
Cattle are slaughtered for this feast.®* Among the Siryans,
traces of a memorial feast in the harvest-field have also been
found.®®

Besides feasts decided on beforehand, particular memorial
feasts are occasionally celebrated for some special reason. Ac-
cording to a general idea, the dead may remind the living in
in a dream, or by all kinds of signs, of their wishes. Memorial
feasts are chiefly celebrated in such cases of illness as have
been declared by a wise man to originate from some one among
the dead. Among the Mordvins, the patient must then creep
on all fours to the grave of the deceased to ask his forgive-
ness.®® Should an animal — a horse or a cow — disappear
from the pasture-land, or go astray in the forest, one of the
dead relations, according to the Votiaks, has hidden away
the animal. Wax-tapers are then lighted, and just as at the
memorial feasts, food is sacrificed to the dead, in the hope that
they will not keep the animal, but drive it home. Even little
adversities, such as a failure in distilling brandy, or the loosen-
ing of a wheel on a journey, the restlessness of a baby, etc.,
may become reasons for preparing a memorial feast.®’^ A
widow, at least, must always be on the lookout. If the
Cheremiss woman’s back aches, she believes that her deceased
husband has had sexual connexion with her during the night.
Then she must light a wax-taper and sacrifice to the dead


MEMORIAL FEASTS


59

man, saying: “ Make me well again. Here are pancakes and
a candle, eat and do not touch me any more.” The customs
of Finnish widows are described by Agricola in the following
words: “The deceased (Manninkaiset) also received their
offerings when widows re-married.”


CHAPTER IV

GENERAL MEMORIAL FEASTS

B esides memorial feasts in honour of some particular
person, general ones are also celebrated, on which occa-
sion all the deceased belonging to the family are remembered.
Such feasts are called by the Cheremiss “ taper-feasts,” be-
cause then, as at memorial feasts in general, a number of wax-
tapers are lighted. The Volga Finns seem to have two sepa-
rate memorial feasts each year, namely, one in spring at
Easter-time, and another in autumn, at the end of field-labour.

General memorial feasts are here celebrated either in such
manner that every family circle remembers its own dead by
itself, or that related families assemble at the house of the
head of a greater family, to celebrate in common the memory
of their mutual dead relations. At times even the whole village,
which in that case is a so-called family-village, will celebrate
in common the memory of its dead. Nowadays the first-
named way would seem to be most in use, but in many places,
even up to our days, remainders of the last-named also have
survived.

The ceremonies observed at the general memorial feasts
recall very much those of the special ones. To every relation
kept in memory a wax-taper is lit, meat and drink being also
sacrificed. To those no longer remembered a mutual taper
is also lighted. When crumbling bread and pouring gin into
the trough of the dead the Votiaks say: “Ye long ago de-
ceased, may this food we are sacrificing to you reach you.”
In some places a farewell feast is still celebrated on the morn-
ing of the next day.


GENERAL MEMORIAL FEASTS 6x

When the memorial feast lasts a day and night, the family
must see that the dead are not bored in any way and that
they do not go away hungry from the feast. In order to
amuse their dead relations, the Votiaks, among other things,
take them for a walk. They believe that near to every par-
ticipant in the feast there is a dead person of the same age,
who in his life-time was more intimate with him than with
anybody else, and it is therefore the duty of every participant
to amuse and regale the soul in his vicinity. According to the
belief of the Votiaks the deceased does everything that his
living relation of equal age doesj the more cheerful the par-
ticipant is, the more cheerful is his dead friend} the more
sated he is, the fuller is the deceased. From this it follows
that, at the memorial feast, people eat and drink as much as
possible, so that the dead need not go away hungry. For the
same reason, it is not proper to work on this occasion, so as
not to vex the deceased by not only not amusing him, but by
actually compelling him to work. Therefore, also, people
do not go to bed during a memorial feast, as the deceased
who has been in company with the sleeping, might easily
sleep too long and thus remain among the living when the
other dead are taken to the burial ground.^

The most remarkable of all the Volga peoples’ memorial
feasts is the one celebrated during Easter-week. The night
before Maundy Thursday is called “ the wandering-night of
the dead ” by the Votiaks. They believe that all the dead
then move about. On the night before, after sunset, these
rise from their graves and make for the villages. At night
one can even see them, if one turns one’s clothes inside out,
and, putting a horse-collar round one’s neck, goes up on the
roof of the house. But during this time the Votiaks take many
precautions. Thus, they do not work, nor do they heat the
oven, nor may they bring anything to the house, or take any-
thing away from it. In many places, they do not even feed
the cattle, at least not with their hands, the food being pushed


62 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

before the animals with their feet. In some parts the young
people are warned not to take even a stick or a distaff into
their hands, as the one who does this will be bitten by a snake
the following summer. In the night-time everything must be
still. Food must be set forth on every table, and it is even
carried to the bath-house, where the dead go to have baths.
During the feast, they place on a bench by the door pancakes,
pies, bread, cheese, eggs, etc., for the dead, and, in addition two
empty vessels, on whose brim they fix a little home-made wax-
taper for each of the dead relations retained in memory. On
the bench spoons are also placed for the invisible hands of
the spirits. When throwing food and pouring drink into the
vessels set forth for the dead, the Cheremiss say: “Dead
people, eat, drink, give us health, peace, success and wealth}
multiply our cattle, make our corn grow, give us a good wind
for cleaning the corn, and protect us from destruction by fire,
water and evil spirits! ” In other places the door is opened,
and food is thrown over the threshold, with the saying: “ Ye
deceased, eat and drink, do not be angry, do not go away
hungry, may ye live in light in the other world, may the
earth on your graves feel light, do not torment us, the sur-
vivors, with illnesses, do not attack our cattle and do not worry
us with other calamities!” The names of all the relations
retained in memory are mentioned at the feast. At the same
time the ruler of the graveyard is remembered. Even to the
dead that have no surviving relations they light a mutual
taper and throw some morsels of food. When the ceremonies
are over, the food of the dead is carried out into the yard,
where it is eaten by the dogs.*

With this feast are frequently connected all kinds of pro-
tective ceremonies. Pervuchin relates of the Votiaks that on this
occasion they collect all sorts of weapons and go to the nearest
forest, shooting and shouting, in order to chase away wolves
and other beasts of prey. Having returned, they take a scythe,
a shovel or a spade, and some ashes from the hearth and draw


GENERAL MEMORIAL FEASTS 63

a ring round their houses to protect them from evil spirits,
who at this time are abroad everywhere. When going to bed,
they burn juniper in the hut, and shut the windows, the smoke-
hole and the openings under the floor, lest the spirits should
get in. In some places the young men sit armed all night on
the roof of the hut or the store-house to watch for these.
The spirits generally appear in the shape of a cat or a dog,
sometimes even in that of a wolf. Next morning, in the
yard, a fire of straw is made, over which the members of the
family jump one after another, to purify themselves.^

The idea that the spirits of the dead walk about early in
spring is a common one among the Slavic and other East
European peoples. During the Christian era the above festival
coincided with the Easter festivities, but, in some parts, the
Cheremiss have retained for it a more original time, namely,
the first new moon in the month of March.*

From the Russians, the above ideas reached the Orthodox
Esthonians, who were in the habit of celebrating a similar
memorial feast on Easter morning. The hostess spread a
clean table-cloth in the yard near the gate, and placing on it
every kind of food, milk, cheese, butter, meat, pies, etc., she
began calling the dead relations, saying: “ Come, (the names
are mentioned), come yourselves and bring your children with
you, come and partake of our food and our drink! I invite
you in hospitable mood, with a tender heart 5 I serve you first,
and help myself afterwards.” Having kept silence for a
while, in order to give the dead people time to eat and drink,
she then began counselling them to return: “ Go away, let
it be enough of eating and drinking, go where ye were taken,
each to his place; lead the children by the hand, go away!”
The food of which the deceased had had their portion, was
taken back to the hut and placed on the table, round which
the family sat down to eat."

According to a general belief among the Baltic Finns, the
dead move about in autumn. The month of October is called


64 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

by the Esthonians “ the time of the spirits ” (Hingede aeg)
or “the month of the spirits” (Hingekuu). Occasionally,
this time lasts until November, which not infrequently is
called “ the month of the dead ” (Kooljakuu). The Catholic
festivities of All Saints’ Day and All Souls’ Day were more
especially devoted to the dead. During these days it was
not permitted to shout or make a noise, huts were cleaned,
and food was set forth at night for the dead. The festivity
coinciding with the Catholic All Saints’ Day was called by the
Finns, Kekri, of which Agricola says: “Kekri multiplied the
cattle.”

The oldest description of the Kekri-feast is to be found in
E. Castren’s narration about the neighbourhood of Kajana in
1754. He says that the Kekri-feast or All Saints’ Day was
celebrated in two difiFerent ways: partly in the pagan manner
in honour of the ancient Finnish god Kekri, partly in the
Catholic way, in honour of all the saints. According to the
heathen custom, a half-year-old sheep was killed either in
the evening before the feast-day or very early the next morn-
ing. The sheep was boiled, the bones being kept intact, and
it was not allowed to be tasted, not even to try its saltness,
before the carcase had been served whole on the table. Then
it had to be eaten until the last morsel had gone and no re-
mains were left. By Kekri other spirits also were meant, for
whom all sorts of eatables and drinkables were prepared on
the evening before the feast day, some in the cow-house for
the welfare of the cattle, others in the stable for luck with
horses, others under big trees and by huge stones in the fields
or in the forest, and yet others in all these places at once.
According to the Catholic way, the host received the saints
outside in the yard, in the darkness of the evening before the
feast, taking them to the bath-house, which had been particu-
larly cleaned and heated for their use and provided with cold
and hot water and “ bath-brooms.” A table with meat and
diink had also been placed there. The host waited on these


GENERAL MEMORIAL FEASTS 65

guests at certain fixed times, and finally, on the evening of
the following day. All Souls’ Day, late and in the dark, with
bared head, and pouring on the groimd some beer and brandy,
he took his guests out of the yard. If, after the baths of the
“ saints,” there were straws in the water, it was the sign of a
good harvest, but if there were instead chips of wood or bits
of coal, it was a presage of famine.®

To the celebration of the Kekri-feast belonged, further,
the custom of disguising oneself in curious costumes. Masks
for the face were made of birch-bark, paper, etc. People,
masked in this way, were called Kekritar. The latter wandered
unknown from house to house, from village to village, threat-
ening to pull down the ovens of the house, should these un-
common guests not be abundantly regaled and entertained.
During All Saints’ time it was also customary to regale beggars
with food.

As at the New Year’s festivities, the people tried to make
the spirits reveal coming events. The custom of casting tin,
and foreseeing events from the figure formed when the molten
tin was poured into water was of this character. Or, on the
night before Kekri, they walked under the windows to listen
to what was being talked about in the hut, and, from the con-
versation going on there, to infer what would happen during
the following year. Further, in the evening, they would
count the sticks in the oven, and if they were all there in the
morning, no one needed to trouble himself about possible
deaths in the following year, but otherwise there would be as
many deaths at the house as the number of the absent sticks
indicated. When making bread they took from the straw
as many ears of corn (rye) as there were members in the
family and pressed them into the bread. The one whose ear
was burnt up during the baking, would die before the next
Kekri-feast. When the loaves were taken out of the oven,
the master of the house cut a piece from one and let it
fall on the table. If the piece happened to fall with the


66 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

crust downwards, life would go well during the year; other-
wise some disaster was to be expected. In some neighbour-
hoods it was, moreover, customary, on the evening before All
Saints’ Day, to place on the window-sill one grain of salt for
each member of the family. He whose grain of salt melted
during the night, was to die. It was also customary to burn
Kekri-fires, most probably for the purpose of driving away
spirits. The fire was burnt on some hill and was made of
oakum mixed with straw.’

A corresponding feast is known also among the Esthonians
and seems to be common among the Baltic Finns, though the
wandering-time of the dead has later been influenced by the
Catholics, who, since 835, have celebrated the first of Novem-
ber as All Saints’ Day and, since 998, the second of November
as All Souls’ Day. The name kekri or keyri seems further
to be known among the Russian Lapps {kevrey kovre^ “ a
sacrifice”).®

In Western Finland the belief prevails that the spirits
walk at Christmas. Even in our days young people are
in the habit of dressing up and masking themselves at Christ-
mas and going about the farms, where they are called
“ Christmas Mothers.” This custom together with the idea
behind it is borrowed from Scandinavia. Like the Scandi-
navians, the Lapps also believed that at Christmas the dead
left their underground dwelling and set out to wander through
the woods and fells. For this reason, the children had to keep
still during that time; if they made a noise, ghosts would
appear. When, on Christmas night, the shamans sat at the
entrance of their dwelling, they felt the spirits climbing over
their legs into the tent. Food, and particularly some water,
had to be set out when the spirits came. In order to protect
their wells from being destroyed by the spirits, the Lapps used
to throw pieces of metal into the water on “ the most danger-
ous evening,” If they did not treat the underground people
well, these might take a cruel revenge, e.g., suck out the brain


GENERAL MEMORIAL FEASTS


from a man’s head. These spirits, walking about at Christmas,
were called by the Lapps, “ the Christmas people.” *

The keeping of Christmas by the Swedish Lapps in heathen
times is described by the missionary Graan, who says that the
Lapps then collected morsels from all the dishes prepared
for the feast and put them into a small trough of birch-bark,
shaped like a little sailing-boat with masts, sails and oars.
They then searched out the tallest pine-tree near the tent,
and into the tree nearest the pine they put the boat as high
up as their hands would reach, but in the trunk of the pine
they cut round figures on four sides. Into each
of these, every man in the village who had put
food into the trough, had to throw three spoon- k

fuls of fat with his left hand. According to
Graan they also used to set up a tree, four yards 3-

high, with twigs set half-way. up it. This tree Christmas

was smeared with blood from a slaughtered Custom
reindeer on Christmas Eve, and on its branches were put mor-
sels of the animal’s lungs, heart, tongue and lips.’°

Mallmer relates that at Christmas they made boats of fir,
three-quarters of a yard long, with masts, which were then
dedicated to “ the Christmas Master.” The boat with its
masts was smeared with reindeer-blood and here and there the


sign of the cross was drawn on it.^’ Hogstrom adds that the
sailing-boats were placed in tall trees, not in a hanging posi-
tion, but resting on branches. Even the pine was marked with
the sign of the cross and was smeared a good way upwards
from its root with reindeer blood. Moreover, it had been
customary, he says, to hang up a trough of birch-bark in tali
trees which were carved on two sides and marked with the


sign of the cross. Into the trough Christmas food, fish, cheese
and milk were laid. On its rim were stuck two spade-like
sticks, one foot long (most probably, as oars). This sacrifice
was made to a spirit called Ruotta, “ to prevent it from pierc-
ing the womb of the women.”


68


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


This sailing-boat sacrifice among the customs of the Lapps,
cannot fail to attract attention, as the Lapps themselves did
not use sailing-boats. With reason does Fritzner therefore
compare the “ Christmas people ” of the Lapps, who are fur-
thermore worshipped in connection with a foreign feast, with
the Icelanders’ Jolasveinar, who were also believed to move
about at Christmas.’^ Remains of this belief are met with still
in our days everywhere in Scandinavia. In Lapland the above-
named custom of sacrificing is limited to the Lapps of Scan-
dinavia.

A common feast in honour of the deceased, celebrated at a
time agreed upon by the relations, has been retained in East
Karelia. This feast was arranged by the owner of a farm
agreed on beforehand. Many animals were killed, and the
invited relations and friends brought with them food in abun-
dance. For the deceased a cloth was spread in a separate
room on a separate table, on which something, a spoon or a
dish, had to be laid every day for nine weeks. Into the walls
of the room many nails were driven, for the deceased to hang
their clothes on. The day before the feast the food was put
on the table, round which empty chairs were placed. The
windows were opened, after which all the family went to the
burial-ground to invite the deceased to the feast. Everyone
invited his kinsfolk, the women weeping aloud: “ Come and
bring with you your relations unto the ninth generation! Kins-
folk, bring all your acquaintances with you!” “

According to the oldest sources, the Mordvins were earlier
m the habit of celebrating from time to time, after a longer
period, e.g., fifty years or so, a great common feast for a
large family, in honour of the deceased.’'

. It is customary among the Cheremiss to celebrate a memorial
feast also in honour of the unknown deceased who have no
relations in life. Such deceased are called Utumo. Nowadays
these feasts are customary only among the Eastern Cheremiss.
The feast is celebrated in the village community in summer


GENERAL MEMORIAL FEASTS 69

when many insects and larvae have appeared in the fields,
hindering the growth of the crops. The guests put on their
holiday attire, and the ceremonies, w’hich resemble those at a
wedding, are led by a host, who is called the “ head of the
wedding,” The “ wedding-women ” also appear, wearing
round their shoulders beautiful shawls embroidered with silk,
and also the “ wedding-dancers,” who are commanded by a
leader with a whip to which a bell is fixed. Further par-
ticipants in the festivity are a drummer and a bagpiper. As
in a wedding-procession — only without a bride and bride-
groom — the villagers, carrying with them pancakes, bread,
beer and brandy, with the functionaries and pipers at their
head, go to the corn-field, round which they drive or walk
three times, following the sun. Every now and then the
procession stops, a wax-taper is lighted and the festival food
is tasted, part of which is also sacrificed to the dead. All the
time music is played and wedding-songs sung. In the mean-
time the old people have started for the burial-ground, where
a black ox is to be sacrificed to the Utumo. The killing, the
cooking of the sacrifice-meat, and the eating of it take place
by the burial-ground, outside its enclosure. Having marched
or driven round all the corn-fields of the village, the wedding-
procession also arrives at the graveyard. Thinking of the
UtumQ, everyone places a wax-taper on the fence. A prayer
noted down by the author in the District of Birsk runs thus:
“Utum man, Utum woman, protect our fields from larvae,
from butterflies! A large ox has been killed, come with your
family and eat. Do not touch the corn!” After the meal
the ox-hide is cut into one narrow strip, long enough to sur-
round the whole of the burial-ground. The bones of the ox
and certain parts of the meat are buried in the earth. The
sacrifice is, however, not often performed immediately} fre-
quently it is enough to make only a promise, which is done
in this way: — a bast-rope is wound by the old people of the
village round the tree dedicated to the UtumS in the grave-


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


70

yard. If the rope is wound one, three, five or seven times
round the tree, this means that the sacrifice will be per-
formed after so many years. The number must always be an
odd one. The old promise-rope is not burnt till the sacrifice
is performed. On account of its similarity with the wedding-
ceremonies, this memorial feast is called “ Utum-wedding.”

At times a single family must also perform an Utum-sacri-
fice. If there are many mice in the store-house, it is, accord-
ing to the Cheremiss, a sign that the Utumo claim a memorial
feast. It Is generally not celebrated at once, but the father
of the family goes to the forest and hunts up as large a piece
of lime-bark as possible, which he then twists into a rope and
winds nine times round the aforesaid tree. Thus they need
not perform the sacrifice till nine years later. In the wedding
ceremonies only the members of the family participate. This
time they do not go to the corn-field, but instead wander three
times round the farm-yard, going into the store-house, the
larder and the cow-house. The sacrifice, which also now
consists of a black ox, is performed, cooked and eaten at the
burial-place.^®

Only a few of the innumerable dead can, in the long run,
avoid the fate of the Utumo, the identity of which becomes in
time quite effaced from the memory of the living. Castren
says of the Samoyeds that only their shamans remain “ im-
mortal.” However, some other remarkable persons, such as
famous ancestors, princes, heroes, etc., may be retained for a
longer time in the memory of their survivors and be wor-
shipped as household-gods and heroes.

The importance of ancestor worship in the social life of
the Finno-Ugric races will be further seen from their belief
that their deceased ancestors did not only create their customs
and found their religion, but even now protect and watch
over them. The Votiaks say that if the present people beg^n
to neglect the customs and usages of their ancestors, they will
be punished with diseases and years of famine.


GENERAL MEMORIAL FEASTS li

The near connexion between the worship o£ ancestors and
an instinctive nationalistic feeling, is very vividly described
by the Norwegian missionary Isaac Olsen (f 173°)
account of the Lapp’s belief in his underground spirits, whose
dwellings, clothes and language are perfectly similar to those
of the Lapps living above ground. The underground people
exhort the Lapps to “have just such dwellings, ceremonies
and customs, clothes and language and other things as the
living have seen among the dead, impressing this especially
upon the shamans, whose duty it is to instruct the others and
educate them by a wise discipline. They speak the Lapp
tongue with them, as this language is the best of all, and warn
them not to speak any other language than that spoken by
their gods, which was created by their first shamans, the spirit-
folk, and other ancient beings. This they must do, if they
wish to live long and happily, to have success in their trades,
and to keep themselves and their cattle in good health.”


CHAPTER V

THE LIFE BEYOND


T he manner in which life beyond the grave was
regarded appears plainly from the burial ceremonies.
The Lapps say that they fit out the dead with provisions and
various implements “ so that these may satisfy their hunger,
go fishing, or chop wood, as they did before, while alive.” ^
The “ ancient Cheremiss ” till and sow their fields over there,
practise cattle-raising, hunt, fish, keep bees, marry and go
visiting each other. As in their former life, the dead can
suflFer from cold and hunger.^ To help protect them from
cold, the Voguls, when they have warmed themselves in the
open at a fire of logs, leave a few pieces of wood behind in
order that the dead may also be able to warm themselves.’
The dead may even find themselves in situations of mortal
danger in the life beyond. The Mordvins and Cheremiss
believed that the dead, having lived for a certain period in the
underworld, could die a second time.*

A general belief is that the life beyond is lived under the
earth. The passage occurs in a Vogul song: “The dead
people go to the land below ”} also, in Ostiak folk-poetry we
read: “We arrive at the sea belonging to the man living in
the underworld.” ® In its nature this underworld resembles
the world we live in in everything, with the exception that,
seen with our eyes, everything there would appear inside out
or upside down. The Lapps believe that the dead walk
there with the soles of their feet against ours. According to
the Samoyeds the same rivers and streams exist there, but
flow in opposite directions. The tops of trees there grow


THE LIFE BEYOND


73

downward} the sun rises in the west and sets in the east. The
life of those over there runs also contrary to ours} they be-
come younger and grow smaller with the years, until they
disappear and become nothing or are born into the family
again as children. In this way, the “ shade ” lives as long in
the underworld as its predecessor on the earth.* The Ostiaks
say that the dead dwindle in the end to a little beetle.*^

The belief that everything is topsy-turvy in the under-
world, appears also in the worship of the dead. From this
springs the custom of washing the dead, or sacrificing to them,
with the left hand. When the Mordvins reap the portion
of the dead, they hold the sickle by the blade, throwing it
backwards over their heads.* To sacrifice backwards, contrary
to the sun’s motion, with clothes inside-out, or to place the
ofFering upside-down on graves, is characteristic of the Finno-
Ugrian cult of the departed. The idea of an inverted world
seems to have been derived from the reflection seen in the
water.

Just as the villages were formerly family- villages and the
graveyards contained only members of the same family in
their ground, it is believed that the dead live together in
villages, the cofBn of each of their inhabitants forming their
private “ houses,” The Volga Finns call the first one to be
buried “ the graveyard ruler ”} he is supposed to keep order
in the graveyard-community, and at commemoration feasts
a special candle is lit for him and food is sacrificed. That
discipline is actually upheld in the underground village is
shown by the Votiaks’ belief that the dead receive very un-
willingly into their ranks newcomers who have been noted
in life for evil ways and quarrelsomeness.® To meet with
death in a strange district is regarded as a great calamity, be-
cause the “ shade ” of the dead one, according to a prevalent
belief, is forced to dwell where the body lies, or at any rate
in its immediate neighbourhood, and is therefore prevented
from joining its relatives. When such a death occurs, certain


74 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

tribes, including the Voguls, perform a mock burial to entice
the dead to the burial-place of its home.^®

The Finns called the “world beyond” under the earth
Manala (orig. ==“ underground ” ) or Tuonela

(“the home of Tuoni” ). Tuoni, which occurs also in the
language of the Norwegian Lapps as Duodna, means “the
dead one,” later, also “ death ” and the “ life beyond,” and is
probably a Scandinavian loan-word (cf. Swedish dana-arf, “ an
inheritance falling to the State” ). In Tuonela everyone has
his own “ house,” as pictured by a Finnish folk-song in the
following words: “ Of the finest turf the roof, of fine sand
the floor is made, a fathom long is each side-wall, the hinder
one a yard in length.” That this “ house ” in Tuonela is the
grave itself appears plainly from lines in which the “ house ”
is described as being “ carpeted with women’s hair, supported
by men’s bones.” In an Ingrian weeping song “ Manalan
vanhimmat ” (“ the elders of the underworld ” ) are men-
tioned, which “ elders ” appear to hold some governing rank,
as they were not always inclined to permit the dead to pay visits
to the world of the living.”

In folk-poetry Tuonela seems to be regarded as a common
underworld for all. On the way there, one had to cross the
“ black river ” of Tuonela, on which neither sun nor moon
shines and over which leads “ a bridge ” (Tuonen or Manalan
silta). These beliefs, probably of later origin, remind one
of the Scandinavian river of death, over which one also crossed
by means of a bridge. It is probable that they are part of the
mediaeval views met with also in the literature of the time.
Gregory the Great relates how a person being near to death,
saw a bridge under which a gloomy, black stream flowed.
On this bridge a judgment took place; should any of the un-
righteous attempt to pass over it, they fell down Into the
dark evil-smelling waters. Besides the Christian peoples, the
Mohammedans also are acquainted with this originally Persian
idea; from these it has reached the Volga Finns. The Chere-


THE LIFE BEYOND


75

miss believe that the poor dead, in order to reach “ the place
of light,” must travel slowly along a narrow pole over “ the
place of darkness,” also called the “ resin-cauldron,” as there
the souls of the wicked are tortured in burning resin. Only
the righteous come luckily over with the help of the “ Prince
of Death,” Kiyamat-tora (Arabic kiamat, “ the resurrection of
the dead”j tora, “judge”) or Tamek-vui (Turco-Tatar
tamyk, “ the world beyond ” j Cheremiss vui, “ head ”) and his
assistant Kiyamat-saus.^“

A more widely-spread idea in Finnish folk-poetry is, how-
ever, that the dead are transported over the river of Tuonela
in a boat. In one song, it is related that, when Wainamoinen
was on his way to the underworld, the daughter of Tuoni came
with a boat and ferried him over the river. Among the folk-
beliefs the view is expressed that the evil one makes a boat
out of finger-nails clipped on Sundays, in which he carries
the dead oflF with him to his own place. An identical boat
was called the “ corpse-boat ” by the Icelanders. Doubtless
all these beliefs about the crossing of a river of death in a
boat are derived from Greek mythology. The furiously-
barking Manalan-rakki (“ the underworld’s hound ”) re-
minds one of the Greek Cerberos. To the mediaeval ideas
belong also Tuonen-portti (“ the underworld’s gate ”) which
corresponds to the Helgrindr in Icelandic poetry.

The common dwelling-place of the dead is called Yabme-
aimo (“ the home of the dead ”) by the Scandinavian Lapps,
and is governed by Yabme-akka (“ Old woman of the dead ”).
The Lapps sacrifice to her, and to the dead in general, black
animals, which must be buried alive in the earth. The most
common are said to have been black cats or cockerels. During
the Christian period they believed that the dead, according
to their deeds, could come from Yabme-aimo to God in
Heaven (Radien-aimo, the “ Ruler’s home ”) or to the
“ gloomy ” Rut-aimo or Ruta-aimo, where the evil Rutu or
Rota tortured the dead. This Rutu was not originally re-


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


76

garded as a devil, as it was often the custom to make offerings
to him, especially during epidemics. The sacrificial animal
itself, a slaughtered horse, buried entire within the earth or in a
fissure among the rocks, points to a borrowing from the
Scandinavian. According to Randulf, Rutu appeared some-
times to the Lapps as a man dressed in blue. The wolf was
called “ Rutu’s hound.” Originally Rota or Rutu (from Old
Scandinavian throte^ “ an ulcer ”) may have been the spirit
of the plague.^’’

A mutual belief of both Scandinavians and the Lapps living
as their neighbours is, further, the idea that the dead dwelt in
certain “holy mountains,”^* where, according to the Lapps,
they existed happily, living in tents, keeping themselves in
the same way and speaking the same language as the Lapps.
They describe the inhabitants of the mountain, who seem to
have composed a closed family, and paid visits to one another,
riding from mountain to mountain with reindeer, which were
sacrificed to them by the Lapps. These “ mountain spirits ”
were the protectors of the living} the Lapps having often
many such mountains to which they came when in need.
Forbus says that these mountains were not equal in regard
to the assistance they could give, “ one holy mountain might
be of greater help than another, its inhabitants more ready to
listen and quicker to act than those of the other.” “ The
Lapps inherited these tutelary spirits from their forefathers,
or came into possession of them through marriage, and could
even raise them themselves by offerings, becoming the more
powerful and respected as the number of their “ spirits ” grew.
These spirits would sometimes attempt to take life} by calling
the “ soul ” of a Lapp to themselves before his time had come,
they caused sicknesses that could be cured only by the shaman
appeasing the “ spirits,” and leading the sick one’s “ soul ”
back to his body again. Leem relates that while a shaman lay
in a fit, those present tried to guess which “ holy mountain ”
his soul was at the moment visiting.’* After death, the Lapps


THE LIFE BEYOND


77

hoped they would be received into the mountain, the inmates
of which had protected them most during life. “ There they
became spirits themselves, and could keep death away from
their relatives and friends for some time.” In the more
southern districts, these “ mountain spirits,” there called
“ Saivo man ” and “ Saivo maiden ” (originally a loan-word
from Old Scandinavian j/o)» have borrowed their character-
istics from the Huldre-folk of their southern neighbours.’®

In West Finland, also, traces of a belief in “ mountains of
the dead ” may be found. In certain districts the people tell
how the gods have borne away the dead man from the grave
to an adjacent forest-hill, in which he must reside as a penance
for some crime committed during his life. This belief is found
lurking in some Finnish magic-songs, in which the name hiisi
(originally “ forest ” and “ hiU ”) appears with apparently
the same meaning, for example: “ I call for help from hiisi,
I seek for folk from the hill.” Hiiden vaki (“ Hiisi’s folk ”)
means often the same as the Swedish Huldre-folk.

The night being the time chosen by most spirits for moving
about in, the thought arises easily, that the underground world
of the dead lies towards the sunset, or towards the dark north.
In these directions ofiFerings are generally made to the dead.
The Northern Ostiaks and the Voguls are of the opinion, like
many other North Siberian tribes, that the land of the dead
lies hidden somewhere in the Northern Arctic Ocean. Accord-
ing to the Voguls, the land of the dead is under the earth, but
the entrance to it lies far away in the north, where the waters
of the River Ob fl,ow into the sea. Arrived at the entrance,
the road divides itself into three branches, at the mouth of
each of which are signposts, telling which way, according to
the deeds done in life, each soul must take. The ruler of
the land of the dead, who is greatly feared, is called Khul-
ater (“ the Ruler of the dead ”). In the same place is situ-
ated the underworld of the Northern Ostiaks, in which there
are three storeys; in the lowest, said to be of the height of a


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


78

dog’s tail, live those who have sinned most. The journey
to the “ world of the dead” appears to be across water j songs
relate how the dead are placed sitting in the boat of Khin-ort’s
(“Prince of sickness”) son. In the sagas, a world of the
dead is also mentioned, from which the Prince sends his
assistants to bring over the dead on a boat. Although the
view that the dead are treated in the underworld according
to their deeds in life, is unquestionably of later origin, it is
still probable that the Ob itself, with its “ downward-running ”
waters, has suggested the idea of a chasm in the dark, mys-
terious north, where the waters of the river are swallowed
up and the underworld opens its gloomy portals. The journey
there in a boat receives in these circumstances its natural ex-
planation.’*

As among the Scandinavians, where the road to Hel led
“ downward and northward,” Finnish poetry tells of Pohjola
(“ northern home ”) as being the home of the dead. A cor-
responding idea to it is the Norrhem of Swedish magic-songs.
Where this “ gloomy ” and “ dark ” place, as such called
Pimentola {fimea = “ dark ”) was supposed to be situated,
is made dear by another name, Sarajas (from which Sarantola,
etc.), meaning originally “ sea ” and denoting the Northern
Arctic Ocean. The Esthonians called it Maksameri (=the
Lebermeer of the mediaeval German sagas) and believed it
to be a gathering-place for sorcerers, witches, etc. As in
Tuonela, so also, according to Finnish folk-poetry, in Pohjola
flowed a gloomy river j both names occurring in the same song,
and meaning, obviously, one and the same place. This death-
river is also envisaged as a turbulent rapid, and is then gen-
erally called Rutja’s or Turja’s rapids, the name of the place
denoting a mystic neighbourhood far away in the north. From
the songs themselves it would appear that this “ awful stream,”
that “ swallows up all waters,” where “ the trees sink down-
ward their crowns,” and where “ the reeds fall downward,”
being therefore of the nature of a vortex, has its origin in


THE LIFE BEYO^^D


79


the idea of the Maelstrom. Sometimes these “ rapids ” are
said to be a “flaming whirlpool,” a name perhaps connected
closely with the Aurora Borealis, explained by the Finns as
being “ the Fire of the Arctic Ocean.” Pohjola, to which a
“gate” gives entrance, is described in the magic songs as a
place breeding sickness and death, or “ the man-eating village ”
where the evil Pohjan-akka or -emanta (“mistress”} cf.
Lapp Jabme-akka) ruled.“

Mingled with beliefs from Greek mythology, the paradise
of the eastern lands, through the medium of the Russian
Orthodox Church, has crept into the views of the Russian
Karelians concerning the life beyond. In a “ death-song ”
taken down in the Olonetz Government, and sung the moment
the “ soul has flown,” the journey of the dead to the other
world is described in detail. In the opening lines the dead is
asked: “Who were they who took thy soul.? Were they the
Archangels Michael and Gabriel with their angels and apostles?
Did they meet thee bearing candies of white wax? Did the
chief apostles, Peter and Paul, meet thee bearing golden plates
and golden eggs? Did Abraham and Isaac meet thee bearing
the keys from Abraham’s time with which to open the doors
of that distant time? Hadst thou during life (by good deeds)
redeemed for thyself the guides to that world? Did they
escort thy soul over lands rich with berries, over highly beauti-
ful heaths? Couldst thou with thine own hands pluck the
berries? Surely they refreshed thy soul with them, wert thou
not over reluctant to give away of thine own berries to others
during life? ” The song goes on to tell that the way to the
other world leads over roaring rapids and swiftly-moving
streams: “Did an escort come to take thee over these with
oaken boats and oars of gold? Did they come without thy
calling, or hadst thou to shout with thy tired voice to them? ”
Over the river a dense forest grows: “ Hadst thou during life
redeemed the services of ‘ the woodcutters, the roadmakers’? ”
After that come very, wide bubbling marshes: “Hadst thou


8o


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


during life redeemed ‘ the guide over the marsh ’ ? ” In the
marsh creep the ever-watchful serpents: “ Hadst thou during
life caused them to sleep? ” From the edge of the marsh three
pathways lead: “ Hadst thou during life redeemed the right to
the one on the utmost right? ” On that road the soul comes
to the blue bridge with parapets of reed, at the end of which
is a spring of water with a golden ladle for the cleansing
of the besmirched soul. There is also “ the bed of fishbone ”
in which to rest the weary limbs: Hadst thou redeemed
also those during the days of thy life? ” “ After these,
very great stretches of lush grass and wide fields open out
before thee. On the grass a table is decked from ‘ the air to
the edge of the air.’ On the table many foods of which thou
needst not even eat, only to breathe in their direction to satisfy
thy stomach. Along the table run ‘ rivers of niilk ’ and at
the place of each soul, a tree has grown giving fruits sweet
as honey. At the eastern end of the table is a balance, in which
the events of thy life are weighed. Didst thou in life redeem
the weighers in thy favour?

Here we thus meet, in the same song, ideas already known
to the ancients. The honey-tree and the “rivers of milk”
have prototypes in the tree and rivers of life in paradise.

During the pagan period, separate worlds for the good and
the bad dead were unknown. But, already at that time, there
seem to have been views that the dead attained to different
worlds, not on account of their deeds during life, but accord-
ing to that which had been the cause of their death. Those
who died in battle or as the result of some accident did not
go to the underworld but peopled another world up in the
heavens. The Cheremiss say that “those who die in battle
or are killed by lightning go to heaven.” ** In an old ac-
coimt of the Ostiaks’ religion, we read the following words:
“ If the beasts of the forest tear one asunder, or he is shot
in battle, his soul goes upward, but the souls of those dying a
natural death at home go downward.” In the same manner,


THE LIFE BEYOND 8i

Strahlenberg relates: “ those who meet with a violent death or
are killed in a fight with the bear, go immediately to heaven,
but those dying a natural death in their beds or elsewhere
must worship for a long time a stern god imder the earth,
before they can go up to heaven.” Similar ideas are met
with in the folk-poetry of the Ostiaks. In a song from the
Irtysh it is told how the soul of a hero who, in the clash of
battle, has received a blow on the head rendering him un-
conscious, leaves the body to climb by a narrow stairway to
heaven, and how he is met by three red-legged squirrels who
say to him: “ This is our word: we eat our food in the midst
of human blood, we drink our drink in the midst of human
blood, go back!” When the soul of the hero returned, con-
sciousness returned also to him. In another story a hero in
heaven is accorded permission by the Heaven god to return
to earth to help his comrades who are in a great difficulty.*’*
According to the Finnish Lapps the Aurora Borealis is “ the
dead in battle, who, as spirits, still continue battling with one
another in the air.” The Russian Lapps also declare the Au-
rora Borealis to be “ the spirits of the murdered.” These live
in a house, in which at times they gather together and begin
stabbing one another to death, covering the floor with blood.
“ They are afraid of the sun, hiding themselves from its
rays.” The Aurora Borealis appears “ when the souls of the
murdered begin their slaughter.” Hence the Lapps fear it.*®
The Esthonians also see in the Northern Lights a heavenly
war, “ Virmalised taplevad” (“Virmalised fight”). On the
island of Osel they say that during the holy nights when the
heavens open, one may see two armed fighting-men, eager
to give battle to one another, but God will not allow it, and
separates them.** Most probably the Finns also possessed a
similar belief j in certain Kiarelian magic songs Pohjola is
sometimes mentioned as the residence of those who “were
killed without sickness ” and where the inhabitants are
said to have “blood-dripping garments.”** In a variation


82


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


on the “ song of the Great Oak ” that grows so high that
neither the sun nor the moon could shine on the earth, and
was therefore chopped down “with its crown towards the
south and its trunk towards the north,” it is further re-
lated that the giant tree fell “ straight across Pohjola’s
river ” as “ an everlasting bridge ” for those “ killed without
sickness.” The author is inclined to believe that in this last
we meet again the idea of the Milky Way, regarded by some
Arctic tribes as being the trunk of a great tree, along which
those killed in battle wander. To the same folk-belief may
ultimately be traced the Scandinavian belief in Valhall, where
the souls of the dead in battle dwell, and, according to Gyl-
faginningy “ take on their accoutrements, go out into the yard
and fight and kill one another.” Other Arctic peoples also
have had similar ideas of the Aurora Borealis. The Chukchee
in the north-east corner of Asia believe that “the Northern
Lights is a dwelling chiefly for those who have died a violent
death,” and even the Tlingits in North America, according
to Veniaminov, the Russian missionary, believe that the souls
of the dead dwell, not only in the “ underworld ” far away
in the north, but also up in the sky, where only the souls of
those killed in battle may go, and where, as the flames of the
Northern Lights, they battle with one another, predicting
bloodshed on the earth.®®

All the dead, however, do not attain to the Life Beyond,
wherever this may be regarded as being situated. The souls,
especially, of little children, killed and hidden by their
mothers, remain as ghosts in the worlds of the living. The
Lapps called these Apparas (Finnish afara, “ bastard ”) and
the Ostiaks Vylep or Patshak. The Finnish Liekkio (“ the
flaming one ”) was probably originally a similar spirit, who,
according to Agricola, “ruled over grass, roots and trees.”
All those lost in forests or drowned in the water, and who
were therefore denied the opportunity of resting peacefully
in a grave, became similar homeless, restless spirits.


CHAPTER VI
ANIMAL WORSHIP


L ike many other primitive peoples the Finno-Ugric
stocks regard the fruits of the chase and of fishing as
holy. While engaged in either of these two occupations their
actions, having a significance beyond those needed in ordinary
tasks, follow closely certain rules. Their words for game are
used with meanings differing from those in everyday use.
The bear, especially, has many secret names. The Lapps call
him “ master of the forest,” “ the old man of the mountains,”
“ the wise man,” “ the holy animal,” “ the dog of God.”
The Ostiaks have names such as “ the fur man,” “ the dweller
in the wilds,” for himj the Finns speak of him as “honey-
paw,” “ great forest,” etc. They believe that were the actual
name of the prey to be used, it might hear it and become
angry. On hunting trips and at bear feasts even the different
parts of the bear and the hunting gear are given special names.
Similarly, on fishing expeditions, a special language is used.
The Livonians, for example, when out at sea, retain even to
this day the habit of speaking of their fishing gear in strange,
mysterious terms.

Cleanliness was essential in both hunting and fishing. Of
this, traces can be observed even to-day amongst all the Finno-
Ugric peoples. The most general methods of purification,
used both for people and for the implements of the hunter
or fisher, were smoking over a fire, jumping over fire, washing
in water, or being besprinkled with water. The opinion of
the Siryans that hunting is a “ pure ” occupation, animals lov-
ing only “ pure ” people,^ is common to all the Finno-Ugric


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


84

stocks. The Ostiaks regard it as improper even for those who
stay at home to engage in any dirty work, such as scrubbing
floors, or washing clothes, on the day when they know that
the hunters have reached the lair of the bear.* The Samoyeds
do not hunt or fish or even cross the stream when there is a
corpse in the village} they also avoid intercourse with women
at hunting or fishing times.*

In earlier times, when the hunters or fishers among the
Lapps set out on an expedition, they did not use the ordinary
outlet when leaving their tents, but instead, a special opening
in the back of the tent that was regarded as holy and was
never used by womenfolk. This opening was called varr-ly-ps
(“the bloody backdoor”) by the Russian Lapps, the name
originating from the fact that the bleeding corpses of the
prey were always brought in by it.^ Missionaries relate that
the Lapps threw in by this opening “both the gifts of the
forest, viz, birds and animals, and of the sea, viz, fish.” ®
Traces of this custom can be observed among the Ostiaks, who,
on returning from the forest, carry in the head of the bear
through the window and, after the feast-night, carry it out
the same way to the storehouse.® Of similar origin is likewise
a custom among the Finns, whose hunters, when going out in
pursuit of a bear, lift the door from its bottom hinges and
pass through the opening between the door and the door-
post on the side where the hinges are.'' One had also to set
forth with due secrecy on hunting or fishing trips and without
meeting anyone, women in particular. A very old custom
decrees that no woman may take part in hunting trips, but
instead must prepare to meet the returning hunters with spe-
cial ceremonies, obviously in order thus to avoid dangerous
contact. This was especially necessary when the prey was
some large animal. When the Lapp brought in the meat of
some fallen wild reindeer through the “ holy ” backdoor, his
wife had to have in readiness a liquid prepared from alder-
bark, with which the Lapp washed his face while being be-


#


ANIMAL WORSHIP 85

sprinkled by his wife, believing that by this ceremony he
could assure himself of better luck among the wild reindeer.*
Besides the special animals caught in or near the “holy”
places, a woman, according to the Lapps, was not allowed to
eat of every part of even birds, squirrels, hares, wild reindeer,
bears, in short, of any forest animal.* It is also to be noted
that slaughtering and the cooking of the meat were always
left to the men. The more northern stocks, the Lapps and
Samoyeds, do their slaughtering for the home-sacrifices also,
behind the back of the tent, where women are not allowed to
tread.“

The bear has always been regarded among the Finno-Ugric
peoples as being the most holy of all wild animals. At least
the Lapps, Finns, Ostiaks and Voguls held feasts in its honour.
Among the Volga peoples, relics of these feasts are no longer
found, though many of the beliefs appertaining to the
bear are still general among them all. The bear is more in-
telligent and stronger than a man, say the Votiaks. It under-
stands the speech of men though it cannot talkj when they
meet “ the old man ” in the forest they bare their heads, as
is fit and proper, before the master of the forest. Sometimes
they bow to it, go down on their knees, etc., as they believe
that if one shows due respect to a bear, it will not do them any
harm. Enemies are recognized by the bear even after its
death, and persecuted by him. For this reason it is unwise
to laugh near the body of a bear.

In the life of the community, among the more northern
peoples, the bear would seem also to have had some part.
The Samoyeds, Ostiaks and Voguls swore their oaths by the
bear. A delinquent would bite the hair of the animal, or its
nose, claws or teeth, saying: “ If I am wrong, so bite me as
I now bite thee.”

The festival ceremonies of the “ holy animal ” have been
preserved in their most original form among the Lapps j Pehr
Fjellstrom and another imknown author having left us com-


86 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

plete accounts.^^ Both descriptions date from the eighteenth
century, and were made in the Swedish Lapp territory.

In the autumn the Lapps track the bears and seek their
hiding-places for the winter. When they have discovered one
of these spots they leave the bear there in peace until it has
snowed so much that it is difficult for the animal to move
freely. Often the bear is not awakened until March or April,
when the Lapp invites his nearest relations and friends to a
bear-killing. This is not, however, proceeded with at once,
the magic drum having first to be consulted as to whether
the hunt will succeed or not. When this matter is clear the
hunters arrange themselves in a fighting-line, and march one
after the other in a certain order to the winter-quarters of
the bear. As first man, marches the one who tracked the bear.
To the end of a pole which he bears in his hands a brass ring
must without fail be attached. After him comes the inter-
preter of the message of the magic drum, who in turn is
followed by the bravest of the company, their duty being to
fell the bear, and lastly the crowd according to rank. Each
of them has his own fixed duties in the bear feast ceremonies,
one having to cook the flesh, another to carry water, a third
to make the fire, and so on. When this procession finally
arrives at the lair, the bear is attacked with spear and gun, and
having been killed, is dragged out of its hiding-place. To
the accompaniment of much merry singing, it is then begged
for forgiveness that its sleep was disturbed, and thanked for
the little trouble it gave the hunters and that none of the
staves or spears was broken.

In all this, the Lapps follow many curious customs handed
down from their ancestors. They whip the bear with slender
twigs as soon as it has been dragged from its lair, or they lay
their skis against it as a token of their victory. It is also cus-
tomary to weave a ring of fir-twigs round the lower jaw of
the animal, to which ring the highest in rank among the crowd
fastens his belt and, accompanied by the merry singing of


ANIMAL WORSHIP 87

the others, drags the fallen bear a little way from its place.
The Lapps also indicate their bravery by swinging their spears
threateningly against the dead enemy as though it were still
alive. After this play the carcass is covered with branches of
fir and left lying there until the next day.

When the hunters approach their home after a successful
hunt, they indicate their success by a merry traditional singing
at the first sound of which the W’omen in the tent begin to array
themselves in festive garments, answering meanw'hile the sing-
ing of the heroes by a similar singing. According to Fjell-
strom the leader of the crowd usually plaits a twig of fir
(soive-rise), at the end of which he forms a little ring.
With this twig he strikes three times at the backdoor of the
tent, saying: “ Soive-olmai,” if the prey be a male animal,
and “ Soive-neida ” if it be a female. The same name was
afterwards given to the hunter and his wife. From another
source we learn that the wife of the hunter or some other
person gives him a twig of birch, plaited solely for this occa-
sion, to which the womenfolk have to fasten copper rings.
According to Randulf, the slayer of the bear informs those at
home of his arrival by pushing an alder-branch under the wall
of the tent. When the wife notices this, she tries to take
hold of the branch, but the man draws it out again, repeating
this manoeuvre three times, from which the wife understands
that “ the holy hound of God ” has been felled. Before the
hunters enter the tent they sing for a while outside, until the
women are ready to receive them.'^

The women, who on no account may go near the bear, or
take part in its slaughtering, have now, as the men enter
through the sacred backdoor, to cover their faces with a cloth.
Should they wish it, they are allowed to cast a glance through
a copper ring at those entering} but at the same time, according
to an old custom, they must spit the juice of chewed alder-
bark in the faces of the hunters, from which the men’s faces
become quite red. The same thing is done to the dogs which


88


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


have taken part in the hunt. Sometimes both men and women
paint their bodies with alder-bark juice — a ring round the
arms, lines on the breast and a cross on the forehead. The
women also sometimes paint their faces red.^° It is further
the custom for women to decorate their husbands with brass
rings and chains, which are hung on the neck and, under the
garments, round one hand and foot. The twig described above
is now given into the care of the bear-killer’s wife; she wraps
it in a piece of linen and keeps it until the tail of the bear has
been cooked and eaten. The news of the killing of the bear
having thus been spread, the Lapps feast in honour of the
day on all the delicacies they can command, men and women,
however, eating in separate groups. Nothing else is even at-
tempted to be done on this day. Everyone goes to sleep in
the evening in the finery which has during the day fallen to
their lot, the husbands forsaking their usual couches with their
wives and sleeping, like the women, with their own sex only.

The next day measures are taken for the transport of the
bear. All the men do not go out for this purpose, some of
the hunters remaining behind to prepare a temporaiy dwelling-
place for the bear. This is formed of hewn boards and is
covered with branches of fir. Rooms of this description for
the cutting-up and cooking of the bear are built where the
bear, as, for example, at Jockmock, is not carried to the holy
back-compartment of the tent.’® Most of the men, however,
go out to bring in the bear, all of them being, like the reindeer
detailed for the work, decorated with rings and chains of brass,
those of the reindeer being hung round its neck. It is also
usual to draw a ring with alder-bark juice on the neck of the
reindeer and a cross on its forehead, sometimes also other
figures. On the way the men sing merrily, and pray to the
bear not to send bad weather to inconvenience them. During
the whole time care must be taken not to cross over the track
of any woman. Neither is it advisable for a woman, for the
period, at least, of the ceremonies, to pass over the track left


ANIMAL WORSHIP


89

behind by the bear, and even the use of the reindeer which
has dragged in the bear is forbidden to women for a whole
year.

As the brave men near their home with their burden they
sing arrogantly: “Here come men from Sweden, Germany,
England and from all lands ”5 to which the women reply:
“ Welcome, ye noble men from Sweden, Germany, England
and all lands, ye who have felled the bear.”

The bear, brought thus ceremoniously from the forest, is
now placed in the cutting-up tent, generally built a stone’s
throw from the holy backdoor of the dwelling-tent, and often
decorated with garlands of hay in honour of the event. Here
the carcass is laid down outstretched, alder-bark juice is
sprinkled on it, and a small receptacle made of bark and filled
with this liquid is set before the bear’s nose. The knives are
decorated with rings of brass, which, like alder-bark, are used
on these occasions for magic protective purposes. Similarly,
all vessels used in the ceremonies are decorated. Round the
neck of the “ holy ” animal itself brass rings and chains are
bound. The children, who are allowed to be present on these
occasions, run frequently into the house to tell the women what
they have seen and heard.

During the whole time of the cutting-up the men sing their
varying moods, trying to guess the home district of the bear,
thanking it for its fur, or pointing out how great an honour
has fallen to its part. Further, they beg the bear to tell the
other bears of the honour shown it, so that these may more
willingly surrender themselves to their hunters. In songs
the men also try to guess what the women are doing in the
tent, and should they guess correctly, which can easily be
ascertained from the children running between the two tents,
this is regarded as a good omen.

When the animal has been skinned, the flesh is cut up very
carefully lest even the smallest bone should be damaged, or
some artery or muscle be broken. The whole of the flesh is


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


90

cooked at once, the women’s part separately. The blood is
cooked first and mixed with fat} this is devoured at once as
the greatest delicacy. With the blood of the bear, which is
believed by the Lapps to possess magical qualities, the hunters
also sometimes besmear their bodies, and in some districts they
even smear their wives and children and the door and the logs
bearing up the tent. The head of the animal with the wind-
pipe and all the entrails hanging from it is left untouched
until all the flesh has been cooked. It is skinned last, at which
operation the thin, hairless region of the mouth is cut out}
the person skinning the head is permitted the honour of bear-
ing this skin before his face for a time. The head is cooked,
with all its hanging burden of entrails, which are perfunctorily
cleaned but not detached from the skull.

While the flesh is being cooked the hunters sit on each side
of the fire according to their rank and position. First sits the
one who tracked the bear, then the interpreter of the magic
drum, the bear-killers, etc., all according to the importance of
the duty which they have had to do during the kill. The
vessel in which the flesh is cooked must be of brass, or at the
very least, ornamented with brass rings. It must be carefully
watched during the cooking, as the running-over of the tiniest
trifle of gravy into the fire is regarded as a very bad omen.
Should the gravy commence to boil too violently it is not
regulated by adding water or thinning out the fire, but one
of the men must go to the tent to see whether any of the
women has caused the trouble by unsuitable behaviour.
Should nothing blameworthy be found there, the chief person
of the gathering tries to stop the gravy from boiling over by
the customary singing.

When the preparation, which may not be seasoned with salt,
is finally ready, the chief person deals out to each his share of
the meat, which the men sitting in their places begin to de-
vour} the women’s share is taken over to the dwelling-tent.
In the division of the meat certain rules are followed. Thus,


ANIMAL WORSHIP


91

women may not partake of the fore part of the bear, this
belonging to the men, and the oldest man of the party must
eat from the hind part of the bear the three or four last joints
of the backbone.^® It is also forbidden for women to eat the
more noble organs, in especial, the heart, “ the holy flesh,”
which the men devour greedily as the greatest delicacy. The
kidneys also are of great merit, not only as delicacies, but as
awakeners of love. Some suck in the gall of the bear to harden
their natures. It is not, however, advisable to besmear one’s
boots with fat from the bear, as the latter might thus find
out who it was who killed him.“ When eating bear’s-meat,
knives or other metal aids may not be used, only the fingers
or pieces of wood being allowable. Neither may one save
anything for another occasion, but the whole of the meat must
be eaten at one sitting.^®

The men who carry over the women’s share to the dwelling-
tent are received by the women with showers of alder-bark
juice in the face and with glances through a brass ring. This
is also done by the women to the children coming from the
cutting-up place, their festival-portion undergoing the same
treatment. The first bite is taken through a ring of brass,
or the ring is at least held before the mouth while eating it.
Sticks of wood must all the time be used by the women during
the meal, as women may not touch bear’s-meat with their hands
at all.®^ Lastly the bear’s tail, which has been cooked unskinned
in a little lard, is brought into the tent. The twig mentioned
earlier is brought from its hiding-place, and all the women and
children present bind brass rings to it as ornaments.” When
everything eatable has been chewed off the tail and the last
speck of lard sucked from among the hair, the tail is tied to the
branch and returned to the men. The women then cover their
faces and are kissed and thanked by the men for not having in
any way disturbed the bear feast.

In the notes of the unknown author of the eighteenth century
we find many of the songs sung at the bear feasts. From them


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


92


it would appear that the Lapps, like the Voguls and Ostiaks, had
some kind of dramatic ceremonies at these feasts, in which the
bear also is regarded as appearing. In the name of the bear
the Lapps sing: “ Now come I from great wide forests, where
I lived, to thickly-peopled districts,” or: “I thought of re-
turning to my old place, but these young men hindered my
journey.”

As mentioned earlier, the Lapps do not break the smallest
bone of the bear, but prepare a resting-place in a hole dug in
the ground of about the size of the animal, on the bottom of
which twigs form a soft bed. The bones are all placed in this
grave in the order which they occupy in the bear. Should a
dog have happened to devour or take away any of the bones,
the missing bone or bones are taken from the dog.®^ The skin
of the nose, borne hitherto by the flayer of the head, is now put
back in its place, likewise the sexual organs and the tail. The
rings hung on this last by the women are taken off, being used
afterwards, e.g., for decorating the magic drumj or the one who


tracked the bear may sometimes receive them as reward for the
bearVmeat to which he has invited the others. The final fate
of the plaited birch-twig mentioned earlier, kept wrapped in a
cloth on account of its supreme holiness, and to the ring in the
end of which the tail was bound, is not given. It would appear,
however, from the notes left by the Lapp Spirri Nils that
“ when they have cooked the flesh of the bear they gather
together all the joints of the backbone, threading them on a
twig in their natural order, later fastening also the head to
it.” In this way the tail attached to the twig would fall
naturally into its place. A vessel made of birch-bark and filled
with alder-bark juice is also placed before the nose of the bear.
The significance of this vessel is unknown. The custom of


the Ostiaks and Voguls of placing food in a vessel before the
nose of a fallen bear might be compared with the above.
Sometimes, other objects also were laid in the grave of a bear
— skis, a plane, a knife, etc.®*


ANIMAL WORSHIP


93

After having, as above, ceremoniously buried the bear, the
Lapps speak in a friendly manner to it, begging it to run about
and relate to the other bears the great honour that befell it,
so that these may not be afraid and show resistance when being
captured. The grave is then covered carefully with logs and
branches of fir to prevent dogs or beasts of prey from seizing or
disturbing the dead one. In some districts it is the custom to
set up a little wooden spear on the bear’s grave as a monument.

AU the Lapps do not make the graves alike} some make
them smaller but deeper, and place the bones upright in them.
At the bottom they place the hind-legs, on these in their right
order the other bones, and finally the head, by which they place
the bark-vessel with its contents of alder-bark juice. Accord-
ing to other reports, the Lapps also tied together the bones of
the bear and hung them up in trees at the spot where the bear
was killed.®’^

During the whole of the meal-time the bear’s skin, which,
especially at the head, had been decorated with all kinds of
brass ornaments and rings and sprinkled over with alder-bark
juice, has been hidden away under branches of fir. It is now
taken from its hiding-place and spread out on a snowdrift or
against a tree near the tent. And now comes the last of the
bear feast games. The women are led veiled from the tent
and a bow or a twig of alder is placed in their hands with which
they must, following the directions of the men, take aim at the
bearskin. Lucky the one who hits the skin, as this is regarded
as a sign that her husband will be the next to kill a bear.
Should she be unmarried, she can live cheerfully in the certain
hope of being one day the wife of a celebrated bear-hunter.®*
The honour of sewing crosses with metal wire on pieces of
cloth, which are then hung round the neck of every man who
has taken part in the bear hunt, falls also to her lot. Even the
reindeer used for dragging the bear is given one of these orna-
ments. The veils are then taken oflF the women and they are
allowed to look at the magnificent skin of the bear, but even


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


94

now, only through a ring of brass. The brass ornaments on
the skin are not taken away at this conclusion to the festival,
but are left on until the skin has dried and is ready for use.

When the bear feast is ended, the men do not at once go into
the dwelling-tent, but delay some time still in the cutting-up
tent. It is not seemly, according to the Lapps, for a hunter to
approach his wife for three days after the killing of a bear.
The leader of the expedition must abstain from his wife for
five days. They must also purify themselves by peculiar cere-
monies, carried out after sunset on the third day after the kill.
All who have taken part in the hunt wash themselves with a
solution of birch-ash in water and afterwards run three times
round the cutting-up tent, jump into the dwelling-tent through
the door and immediately out again, in again and out through
the holy backdoor of the tent. While running they imitate
the growling of the bear. Finally the wife of the bear-killer
catches hold of them and asks when the next bear feast is to be.
On these occasions she is said always to have mittens on her
hands. According to Rheen the purification takes place in such
a manner that the men run singing round the fire a few times
and then jump one after the other through the door, an old
woman throwing hot ashes after each as they do so. After this
the men take off their brass ornaments and may without danger
return to their wives.“® To the memory of each bear killed,
the Lapps hammered a copper nail in their spears, their gun or
the magic drum, the felling of a bear having always been re-
garded as a great honour.®®

Like the bear of the forests, the polar bear is also an object
of worship among the Lapps. When the drift-ice sometimes
brings with it in the spring a polar bear to the shores of the
Kola Peninsula, the Lapps quickly capture it. Having suc-
ceeded in killing it, they are merry and play like children, e.g.,
they creep over the bear roaring as it used to do, extolling at
the same time their own bravery. They then make a log-fire
round which they sit long and sing. Now and then they rise


ANIMAL WORSHIP


95

and bow to the bear. Finally they place a piece of salt fish in
the mouth of the animal and say: “ Thou shalt not tell at home
that thou paidst a visit to us and received nothing, the others
may come also, them also shall we feed.” Their last words
express a pious hope that the bear will tell all its relations
what brave men the Lapps are.®^

The bear feast ceremonies of the other peoples mentioned
correspond in their main points with those related here. A
very common custom is to place the bear or its head or its
skin for the period of the feasting in the sacred back part of
the dwelling-place, where women are not allowed to go.
Somewhat resembling the magic protective use of alder-bark
by the Lapps is the Finnish custom of chewing a piece of alder-
wood before the skin of the bear is brought into the house
“ so that the forest shall not infect anything.” Thus,
among the Ostiaks it is the fashion when the huntsmen re-
turn to the village with the bear-skin for the men and women
of the village to go out to meet them, some bearing a dish of
water and a “ smoke ” in their hands. The bear-skin is smoked,
and sprinkled three times with water. Very general is the
use of metal objects as means of protection. More difficult
to derive is the Ostiak custom of cutting a picture of the bear
on a flat surface chopped out of a tree-trunk and cutting over
this as many lines as there were hunters in the kill. While
the picture is being made, one of the men strokes the bear’s
head with dry branches, “ waking ” it to let it know that they
have arrived at the village. A means of protection used often
at burial feasts — the covering of the nose and mouth of the
dead — is met with among the Ostiaks and Voguls. Round
pieces of birch-bark are sewn on to the eyes of the bear, or
these are covered with silver or copper coins, and the nose
is covered with a piece of tin-plate which is fastened from its
sides by threads behind the ears. Thus arrayed, the bearskin
is placed in the sacred back part on a low table with the head
resting on the forepaws. A many-coloured cloth is spread


96 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

over the back. In some districts a hat was placed on the head
of a male animal and a muffler round its neck, while a female
a nimal was decorated with a small shawl round its head and
a pearl necklace round its neck. Women and children slip
brass rings on to its claws “ so that it should not scare them
during berrying time in the summer.” On the table all kinds
of victuals and drink are placed before the bear, even the
neighbours bringing these. The skin is allowed to remain for
three or four days in the house, during which time festivals
are held each evening, banquets are eaten and much merriment
made in honour of the bear. The participants must arrive
“ purified,” and are sprinkled with water as they enter. The
festivals generally begin in the afternoons. Included in the
programme are bear songs in which the birth of the bear, its
adventures with the hunters, and its life after death are de-
scribed} dances are performed, the dancers wearing bearskins
turned inside out; the bear and its actions are imitated by pe-
culiar movements.*® Among the Voguls these bear-feast games
have developed into a kind of drama in which masked men ap-
pear. The masks are made of birch-bark, generally with huge
noses, and are painted over with charcoal and red earth. Some-
times a beard is affixed to them made of a piece of hairy rein-
deer-hide or oakum. The purpose of the masks is said to be
to hide the actors from the bear so that should the latter be
offended by the play he will not recognize them. For the
same reason the performers alter their voices, talking chiefly
in a shrill falsetto. Everyone tries to make the bear believe
they are not from the village in question, but travellers from
a long way off. Without doubt the ori^n of the masks is to
be found in the fear that the bear might recognize its killers
after death and avenge itself. To the most original cere-
monies, i.e., those picturing the life and hunting of the bear,
others have been added later, some of these borrowing their
form from sucfi modern sources as the Russian baptism cere-
monies.**


ANIMAL WORSHIP


97

At sunrise after the last feast night the skin is borne out
through the window to the warehouse-shed where the dish
first placed on the table before it in the house is placed in
front of it. After two or three days the hunters gather together
again in the house and then go into the shed, where each takes
a morsel of food from the dish and eats it “ for luck.”

From the prayers and wishes made by the Ostiaks to the
dead bear, it appears plainly that in doing honour to it they
wish to honour the whole race of bears. As an example of
this the words of the Ostiak woman as she places a ring in
the bear’s claw may be cited: “When I go to gather berries,
go thou round one tree, round two trees.” When they set
food before the bear-skin they say: “ Do not touch my horse
or my cow, I placed the dish before thee.”

The Finns called the bear feast “ the wedding.” The
house had to be cleaned and everyone clad in his or her best.
A young man was arrayed as a bridegroom and a young girl
as a bride, or one only of these was chosen: a bridegroom if
the bear was a female, and a bride if a male. The head of
the bear was placed highest on the table and the rest of the
meat in its natural order. In the place of honour sat the
bridegroom and bride. The singing of runes in honour of
the bear was customary among the Finns, certain of these be-
ing sung while the bear was carried to the house. In these the
hunters endeavoured to show themselves innocent of the kill-
ing of the bear, declaring that the bear had wounded itself
or that they had taken its life by accident. Arrived at the
house-door the hunters asked singing whether the floor had
been scrubbed and the room cleaned, or also singing urged
the womenfolk to get out of the way and to beware of the
holy bear.®^

That the object of the ceremonies with the Finns was to
ensure good bear-luck in hunting, appears from the oldest
account of their bear feast ceremonies. Bishop Rothovius, in
his speech at the inauguration of the University of Abo in


98 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

1640, relates the following concerning the customs of the
Finns; “ When they capture a bear, they must hold a feast in
the dark, drinking the health of the bear from its skull, act-
ing and growling like the bear, procuring in this way further
success.”

The skull of the bear had to be left overnight on the table
and taken the following morning, ceremoniously as at a wed-
ding, to a certain tree. First went the “bridegroom” and
“bride” side by side, after these a man carrying beer in a
vessel, after him a singer, then the one who carried the skull,
and lastly the rest of the people.

The Samoyeds, who like the Finns specially preserve the
skull, hang it up in a tree or place it on the end of a long pole,
generally near a road.’®

Like the bear, other wild animals had also to be treated
with honour. More particularly the wild reindeer and other
scarce and valuable animals had to be received with special
ceremonies. The Ostiaks, when they kill a stag or an otter,
often cut pictures of these in a pine near the village as they
do with the bear.’®

An important question is the original purpose behind the
Lapps’ method of carefully preserving all the bones of beasts
of prey. That this care was not only expended on the bones
of the bear is shown by an account from the year 1724: “ The
bones of the bear, the hare, and the wild-cat must be buried in
dry sand-hillocks or clefts between rocks where neither dog
nor other prowling animal can reach them. This is because
these animals lived on dry landj the bones of those living in
in the water are hidden in springs.” Even today the Lapps
in some districts have a custom of throwing the bones of the
fish caught by them, as far as possible complete, into the water
again." Sometimes the skeletons of wolves were hung up in
trees.*® Similar accounts are preserved of the Samoyeds.
These also do not give the bones of forest animals to the dogs,
but, as far as possible, preserve them. The Yuraks, for


ANIMAL WORSHIP


99

example, hang up the bones of the fox and the skulls of many
other animals in trees/® In the slaughtering of domestic
animals similar ceremonies were also observed. The Lapps
exercised the same care for the bones of the reindeer, which
also they buried carefully in the ground.^*

Similar usages throwing light on these customs are found
among many other primitive peoples. Thus, for example,
we know that the American Indians arranged the bones of
the bison which they had killed in their natural order on the
prairies, with the intention that the animal might come to
life again for the next hunting season. The Eskimos throw
the bones of seals into the water in order to be able to catch
them afresh. In some mysterious way, life is held to exist
while the skeleton is in existence. That this belief was not
alien to the Finno-Ugric stocks is shown by the words of an
old Lapp who, when asked why he placed the head, the legs
and the wings of a capercailzie on a rock, explained that “ from
them new birds would grow which he could shoot again.”
The same belief has caused the preservation of the bones of
the bear. The unknown author, whose account has already
been cited, remarks in his description of a Lapp bear feast:
“ They believe that the bear will arise again and allow itself
to be shot.”

In these circumstances the preservation of those parts of
the bodies of useful animals which were supposed to contain
the soul or the soul-force cannot originally have been a sacri-
ficial act, but had behind it purely practical motives. Not until
the original conception had paled could these actions have be-
come incorporated in a cult. Then in the throwing of fish
bones by the fisherman into the water, it was easy to see an
act of sacrifice to the Water god, and in the burial of animal
bones in the forest, a saaifice to the Forest god.


CHAPTER VII


THE SEIDES OF THE LAPPS

A lready in the sixteenth century the stone gods of the
Lapps are mentioned in literature. Such gods of stone
were kept by the Fell Lapps on the mountains, by the Fisher
Lapps on the shores of the fiords, on capes reaching into the
sea, on islands, or near rivers and rapids. These stones, called
“ Seides ” by the Lapps, were to be found everywhere in
Lapland.

According to accounts by missionaries these Seides had not
been fashioned by human hands, but were natural stones,
often hollowed out by water, having, as such, often a peculiar
form, resembling human beings or animals. Those regarded
as the most valuable were the stones resembling human beings.
In some places, many Seide stones were placed together in the
same saaed place and were then believed to represent a family.
Even immovable rocks were at times regarded as Seides. As
late as the summer of 1908, a holy place was discovered at
Lulea (Vidjakuoika), containing several small mounds about
a foot in height, and around these ten Seide stones. When
the stones had been put back in their places, it was seen that
each mound had had one larger stone on it and several smaller
ones around it. These small ones were sometimes not more
than two decimetres in height.^ The Seides of the Fisher
Lapps might, at times, be stones altogether surrounded by
water.®

The Lapps gave a devoted attention to these sacred stones.
Wherever possible they were placed on green ground, where
the grass grew thick and lush in the summer-time. In addition.


THE SEIDES OF THE LAPPS


lOI


;/■ ;‘i


the place where the Seide stood was decorated in the summer
with birch-leaves and in the winter with branches of fir. The
foundation on which the Seide was placed had always to be
kept green, and whenever the leaves
or pine-needles withered, they had to
be renewed.® '

When the Lapp wished to ask for
something from his stone god, or to
inquire into the future, he went to the
holy place, and baring his head, took
the god in his hand and spoke to it.

While he was relating all kinds of ^

wishes, he would keep on attempting — • —
to lift the stone. If this proved im-

possible, and the stone grew steadily heavier, it was regarded
as an answer in the negative. Even the very smallest stone,
said the Lapps, became heavy when the god was not willing to
give a positive answer. When the Lapp received what he had
wished for, he made an offering as a sign of thankfulness to
the stone, the nature of the oflFering being inquired after also
in the above-mentioned manner.^


This method of turning to the gods was, however, not pos-
sible when the Seide was a great rock or a stone embedded in
the earth. Consulting these, the Lapp laid his hand on the
rock and began his questions in the unshakable belief that
his hand would stick to it and not be loosened until he chanced
to hit on the exact event that would happen to him.®

The place where the Seide stood and its nearest surround-
ings were “holy” {passe) to the Lapps. The mountain on
which the stone gods were placed, was called in general “ the
Holy Mountain ” (Passe-vara). In the same way, the Fisher
Lapps called the rivers and lakes by which their Seides stood,
“ the Holy River ” or “ the Holy Lake.” Names such as
these are met with in Lapmark even today.

The fear felt for these holy places forced the Lapps to


102


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


observe great caution. According to Leem, they only ap-
proached them clad in their festival clothes, beginning to make
genuflections at a distance, as they walked. Every year they
journeyed to them, and if it was impossible to make new
offerings, the bones of former offerings had, at least, to be
moved. Dwellings were erected very unwillingly near these
places, for fear of disturbing the gods by the crying of chil-
dren or other noises. When they travelled by a holy moun-
tain they dared not fall asleep as that was regarded as a sign
of irreverence. Neither would they speak loudly or shoot
birds or any other game within their precincts. If they were
wearing anything blue in colour, they would remove this as
they approached a holy place. Women had to hide their faces
or turn their heads in passing them. Even men were not
allowed to wear any garment that had been at some time worn
by a woman, not even foot-wear that had lain in the same
soaking-vessel as the women’s moccasins." Hogstrom adds
that it was dangerous for a woman, even at a distance, to go
round a holy place. If during any journey she had passed to
the right of one of these places, she had, on returning, to
pass by on the same side, though it might mean a detour of sev-
eral leagues.’’ Mallmer relates further, that when a Lapp went
aside to make an offering, he tied up all his dogs very care-
fully, as should one of these cross his track, misfortune might
befall himj the wolves, for example, might worry his reindeer
to death. When coming out of or going into his tent on
these errands, the Lapps never used their ordinary doors,
but crept in through a little backdoor which was regarded as
so holy that no woman might either leave or enter through it.®
Even today these beliefs persist in the more remote dis-
tricts. In Kola Lapmark there is a holy place, situated near
the Finnish frontier and composed of the narrow and steep
spur of a mountain, which is the object of the Lapps’ super-
stitious reverence. When rowing past the place in the sum-
mer-time, one must be careful to make as little noise as possible,


THE SEIDES OF THE LAPPS


103

wetting the rowlocks lest these should creak. In the winter
one drives by, step by step. One may not glance aside,
but must look straight ahead. Having reached a spot about
three hundred yards past the place, one must get up out of
the sleigh, and — at least when passing that way for the first
time — drink spirits in the god’s honour j earlier, one should
also have spilt a little on the ice as an offering. Not until
then may one let one’s reindeer run. Should one neglect
these precautions or in any other way insult the god, he would
cause a fateful blizzard to arise as a punishment, or, as has
sometimes happened, bind the culprit with his reindeer and
everything to the place so that he was unable to stir from the
spot.*

By the Mutenia River in the Finnish Lapmark there is
also a Seide, of which the people relate that in earlier times,
when passing this holy stone, women were not allowed to sit
in the boats, but must travel by it along the shore on foot.
Near the stone they had in addition to dress themselves in
trousers.’* The Russian Lapps believed, that women on near-
ing the holy places invariably were stricken with “ a certain
illness ” by means of which, even in strange districts, they
could tell the nearness of such places.”

One of the best known holy mountains in Finnish Lapmark
is the Rastekaise in Utsjoki, on the top of which there are two
large stones, and which even today is regarded by the super-
stitious people with awe. When a storm arises on the moun-
tain they regard it as a sign of the wrath of the god.’* Travel-
lers relate that the Lapps say this mountain will not willingly
show itself to strangers, hiding itself instead in mists.

The Lapp turns to his Seides in all his different needs, for
good luck on his journeys, to obtain plentiful fish or game, to
ensure the health and increase of his reindeer, but especially
when sickness or other misfortunes befall him. At first prom-
ises are made of offerings, the promises being then redeemed
when the sick become well again. If, in addition, one re-


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


104

members that the Seides had the power of raising storms, one
can understand how powerful and many sided these spirits
were.

Whence arose the power of these dumb Seide stones, spread-
ing as it did a reflection of awe even over the ground on which
they stood? The Lapps themselves hardly longer knew at
the close of their pagan period. Signs are to be found, how-
ever, that the Seide-cult has its root in the worship of ancestors.
A significant feature is that the Seide is the protecting spirit
of a certain family or clan. A report made use of by Schefferus
says that “ every family and clan has in the land wherein it
moves and dwells,” its own Seide. A Seide worshipped by
a larger clan seems to have been mightier than the Seide of
a separate family. Hogstrom relates concerning this, that
“the power of these stones is adjudged according to the
number worshipping and offering up to them.” In another
place, he tells of a Seide that had “ long been worshipped by
a whole village.” Family worship — for the Lapp-villages
were family-villages — is also pointed to in an account by the
missionary Tornaeus: “So many households, one can almost
say so many as there were Lapps, so many gods were there to be
found, situated in different places by the sea. But one was
always the highest and mightiest, and this alone was wor-
shipped by the whole population of a village. It was situated
on some hill, or other high place, so that it could be well seen
of all, and honoured j but other house and family gods were
placed in lower places.” The duty of making offerings was
bequeathed by father to son. The missionary S. Kildal says,
that “ when the parents died, the children inherited the holy
. mountains and the mountain gods.”

Among the Scandinavian Lapps, this Seide-cult is connected
with their beliefs in holy mountains with underground in-
habitants, as described in another chapter. Jessen says ex-
pressly that sacrifices to the Saivo spirits were made near a
stone.^^ But these spirits were originally the ancestors wor-


THE SEIDES OF THE LAPPS


105

shipped by the Lapp families or clans as guardian-spirits.
That also in the Swedish Lapmark a dim idea of the origin
of the Seide-cult has remained behind, is shown by the follow-
ing words of the missionary Rheen: “ These stones were set
up on the mountains, in clefts between the rocks, or by rivers
and seas, on places where they at some time or other had heard
ghostly noises.” The Finnish Lapps have also preserved
certain interesting knowledge. A man, who happened to sleep
the night near a holy place, saw in his dreams “ all kinds of
ghosts, animals and human beings.” It is also worth mention-
ing, that near these places one must never speak ill of the
dead, as otherwise those underground become angry.^®

The Lapps believe also that the Seide can appear to its
worshipper in human form. In the account of a sacrifice in
the eighteenth century, it is stated : “ Then a being in human
form, like a great ruler, extremely good to look at, dressed in
expensive garments and trinkets, appears and sits down to take
part in their meal, speaks with them and teaches them new arts,
and says that he lives in the stone or mountain to which they
sacrifice.” To the Lule Lapps the Seide appeared in the
form of a well-built, tall man, dressed in black like a gentle-
man, with a gun in his hand.®’' Also among the Finnish
Lapps Fellman heard a story about a man who was about to
destroy his Seide because of his poor luck at fishing, but de-
sisted when it appeared before him in human form.®®

The matter is still further illustrated by the belief that the
Seide is a human being turned to stone.®® , The following
account was written down in Russian Lapmark. Near the
Puljarvi Lake lived an old woman, whose husband, after his
death, would visit her in the night. The old woman, who
would have nothing to do with the dead, locked her door
and smoked out her house, but got no peace from the deceased
in spite of these precautions. She related her troubles to a
shaman who happened to visit her house. He tried to soothe
her, promising to remain overnight. In the evening he tidied


io6 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

the bothie, placing all the woman’s belongings on one side
and sweeping the other side clean j in the corner he placed a
few fish-bones. Soon, both heard the deceased examining the
fishing-net outside, after which he came into the bothie, plac-
ing himself on the place that had been swept clean, where he
commenced to gnaw at the fish-bones. Then the shaman got
up and taking the dead by the hand, led him into the yard.
Having remained for some time outside, the shaman came
back, telling the woman that the deceased would no longer
trouble her. “Look up at the sky tomorrow morning,” he
said when he had finished, and went away. When the woman
went out into the yard the next day, she saw something black
moving in the sky, and sinking down to the opposite shore of
the Puljarvi Lake. The visits of the deceased ceased from
that day, but at a slight distance from Puljarvi a Seide had
appeared.’‘‘

The Russian Lapps have generally speaking had the same
views of their Seides as of their dead. According to their
ideas, they live a similar life to the Lapps, keeping reindeer
and dogs, building houses, preparing sleighs, etc. The Lapps
say they have heard how the Seide spirits hunt, how their
dogs bark and how the snow creaks as they travel on their
Lapp sleighs. They believe that the Seides are born and die,
and even, at times, celebrate weddings.®® They are invisible
spirits, but have the power, like the dead, of appearing in
animal form, especially as birds. Thus, they relate how a
Seide often flew up out of a chasm in the mountains in the
shape of a raven. With this view of the Russian Lapps may
be compared the similar one of the Swedish Lapps that the
Seide is a bird, turned into stone as it sank down out of the
airj on this account one could often make out the general
outlines of a bird in these stones.®*

If we, finally, remember that many of these Seides might
be found together, forming a family, we need not be at all
uncertain as to the origin of this ancient cult. It is possible


THE SEIDES OF THE LAPPS


107

that some of these Seide places were former dwelling or
burial places, but that this is not always the case appears, for
example, from the following account from the Swedish Lap-
mark: “ They believe that the Seide spirits live in some places,
to which on account of the height of the mountain they can-
not reach} they, therefore, smear a stone with the blood of the
reindeer sacrificed in honour of the Seide and throw the stone
high up on the mountain, where the Seide spirit dwells.”

How closely connected were the “ spirit ” and the stone,
one may see from the belief of the Lapps, that the Seide
stone could move about and that it was dangerous for a human
being to pass over the “wander-path” of the holy stone.
The stone was also supposed to be impressionable and capable
of feeling} when necessary it could be punished by striking it
or by hammering out pieces from it. If it began to be re-
garded as a dangerous neighbour, the Lapps would destroy
it altogether by shattering, burning, or throwing it into the
water. This was the death of the Seide.®®

According to an inherited tradition, the Lapps near the
Sompio Lake were “so modest and easily satisfied in the
choice of their gods, that they worshipped that which first met
their glance on going out from the tent — a stone, or the
stump of a tree. The next morning the Lapp would have a
new god should his first glance in the morning happen to fall
on some other object.” According to this report, the only
one of its kind, the Lapps thus also worshipped the so-called
“ accidental gods,” which certain investigators believe that they
have found among a few primitive peoples.

Besides the Seides of stone, the Lapps had also wooden
ones. They were either tree-stumps embedded in the ground,
or posts driven into it. The wooden Seides do not appear to
have possessed any definite shape. It is stated, however,
that on an island in the foaming Darra rapids in the Tame
River certain posts resembling human beings have been
found. They stood in a line one after another, the firfet of the


io8 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

height of a man, the other four somewhat smaller} each had
something resembling a hat on its head.^“ Among the Finnish
Lapps the method of preparing Seides of wood has been pre-
served. A growing tree was chopped off about a yard or two
yards from the ground} the upper end was then shaped into
the resemblance of a funnel, and covered with a slab of stone}
in this way the tree was prevented from rotting. Pillars of
this description are said to have been formed by the Lapps
“ to the honour of the water,” near waters rich in fish.®^


Fig. 5. Lapp Sacrificial Posts
According- to Appelgren


The “ sacrifice-stumps ” of the Swedish Lapps were from
two to three yards high. They were shaped roughly to re-
semble a human being, with “head and neck,” which were
then smeared over with blood. The “ sacrifice-stump ” was
used only once, but “ in spite of this, it was never destroyed.”
For this reason, a missionary might at one and the same place
see “ a legion of wooden gods.” The relations between these
and the stone gods is made clear In a note by Hogstrom; “ Un-
doubtedly, they make some definite difference between the
times of sacrifice to the different gods} but this I have not
been able to ascertain. However, as far as I do know, they


THE SEIDES OF THE LAPPS


109

worship the stone gods when in the neighbourhood of these,
but otherwise gods of wood.” It would appear, therefore,
that the wooden pillars were set up only as occasion arose,
perhaps to represent some spirit dwelling in a more distant
place. The stone Seides were regarded by the Lapps, accord-
ing to Hogstrom, as being much more holy than those of
wood.®’ These wooden Seides are not, however, to be con-
founded with the wooden images fashioned to represent
Nature gods.

Sacrifices to the Seides were naturally not offered up in pre-
cisely the same manner over the whole of the wide Lapland
area, but one may observe general main forms of an archaic
kind among them.

One of the very best accounts of a sacrifice, which has been
preserved for posterity, dates from the seventeenth century
and is from the Lule Lapps. When these had decided to
make an offering, they bound fast the sacrificial animal behind
the tent, thrust a knife into its heart and carefully gathered its
heart’s blood. The horns and the bones from the head and
neck, together with the hoofs, were carried to the holy place
in which their Seide stood. When the Lapp had come to the
Seide, he took off his hat, bowed low to the idol and smeared
it with blood and fat from the sacrifice. The horns were
piled in a great pyramid behind the stone, the pile being called
the “horn-yard” and containing sometimes as many as a
thousand horns. Of the meat of the sacrifice which was eaten
by those making the offering themselves, a small piece was
cut from every quarter, threaded on to a switch of birch and
hung on to the front of the horns. At times the slaughtering
might take place at the holy place, the meat being then pre-
pared and eaten there. Besides the bones, the hide of the
reindeer was also left on the holy mountain} the head was
hung on a tree, where such were to be found in the vicinity
of the idol.®*

The Kemi Lapps had a custom of cutting down a tree near


no FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

the Seide stone, calling it the luete-muor (“ sacrifice tree ”).
Before the sacrifice the god was asked, by lifting him, what
he wished in return for giving assistance in some matter or
other. The animal chosen for the offering was bound fast to
the tree and slaughtered “after a long speech.” Both the
stone and the tree were besmeared with blood, and when the
meat was prepared, small strips were cut out of it, threaded
on to a ring made of young pliable branches and hung up in
the sacrifice tree. After which, the sacrificial meal was begun.
Should anything be left over, it could not be taken home but
must be left at the place together with the animal’s hide and
horns.”

The Norwegian Lapps, before the slaughtering, cut a small
piece out of each ear and the tail of the animal and placed
them before the god as a preliminary taste. The sacrificial
animal was killed by stabbing, and flayed in such a manner
that the horns and the hoofs remained fast to the hide. There-
after, several small sticks were prepared, lines and figures
being cut in them. The sticks were called “ the sacrifice tree ”
and were placed smeared with blood near the godj their func-
tion was to represent “ wax candles.” We see from this that
the Lapps at that time tried to ape Scandinavian customs. When
the meat was carved, a piece from every quarter was cut out
for the idol. The fire was made in a fixed spot, near which
there had to be, where possible, a spring or brook j the whole
of the flesh of the sacrifice was cooked at once. With the fat
that rose in the cauldron and with the blood, the sacrificial
priest smeared certain curiously-shaped stones, placing them
afterwards near the god. Then, with his followers, he finished
off the whole of the carcase, taking due care not to spread the
bones about, but to leave all on the place of offering, where
the hide also was left. During the performance of the sacri-
fice, the Lapps sang their songs, which they call luete {= Fin-
nish luote, “magic song,” Scandinavian bUty “offering”).*®

Slightly differing from the foregoing was the sacrificial


THE SEIDES OF THE LAPPS


III


custom of the Russian Lapps, as described by Genetz. Cer-
tain features of the performance seem to point to a sacrifice
in honour of Nature gods. The sacrifice had to be begun
early in the morning and the gods prayed to with the face
turned towards the east. After the flesh had been devoured,
the hide with horns and hoofs attached was built up with
branches of birch and fixed to a pole in a position resembling
that of a live reindeer.®^ Up to a few score years ago these
Lapps sacrificed as many as twenty-four reindeer at a time.
A great sacrificial feast of this description was not, however,
celebrated every year, nor were the reindeer killed all at once,
but during the space of several days, a few at a time. All
the participants in the feast had to cleanse themselves and
put on clean garments. The sacrificial food was regarded as
being so holy, that one might not spill any even on one’s
garments. During the ceremony the shaman stood alone, at
one side, with his face turned to the east. The reindeer hides
that were stuffed with birch-twigs were also placed with their
heads to the east. After the ceremonies the priests had to
cleanse themselves again.®®

Besides reindeer, the proper time for sacrificing which was
in the autumn, the Lapps also slaughtered other animals in
honour of their Seides, such as birds and other game, occa-
sionally also strange domestic animals procured from their
neighbours. Sometimes a dog might be offered up entire to
the Seide, or living animals, which were imprisoned in chasms
in the mountain or grottoes, or were left alive on some solitary
island as a gift to the gods. There are even reports of chil-
dren being sacrificed.®®

In like manner as the Mountain Lapps sacrificed their rein-
deer, the Fisher Lapps fed their Seides on fish. When a
fisherman went out to fish, he generally went first to the stone,
kissed it three times and said: “ If I now succeed in catching
fish in the sea or the river, I promise thee their intestines and
livers.” After making a catch, the promise was fulfilled.


1 12 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

Even as late as the middle of the last century, the Norwegian
Lapps are said to have sometimes smeared their stones in secret.
As sacrifices to the Seides in later periods, there are reports
of money being offered up, both in Finnish and Russian Lap-
mark} also rings of brass, tobacco, etc., all of which objects
were placed in small hollows in the stones.^®

If we follow the development of religious beliefs and cus-
toms among other related peoples, we can observe that the
Seides worshipped by the Lapps under the naked sky, contain
two different classes of spirits, of which the one, the so-called
house or family gods, little by little, are generally moved into
the dwelling-house of the worshipper} while to the other, to
whom might be given the Greek name “ heroes,” many people
began to build special small bothies.


CHAPTER VIII
FAMILY GODS


T he term family gods is here meant to express such
tutelary genii as are worshipped by each separate family
and whose images are kept at home, or in the vicinity of the
home, and which the family carry along with them when re-
moving from one place to another. As already stated in an
earlier chapter, Tornaeus relates about the Seides of the Lapps
by the Tome Lake that among “ many gods ” there was always
one which was the highest and foremost, the principal god,
which alone was worshipped by the whole village. It was
set up in an elevated place, in order to be seen and honoured
by everybody, but those which were merely “ family gods,”
stood in lower places. Whether the Lapps carried their family
gods with them during their rovings, is uncertain, and also
whether they used to keep them in their tents.

The family gods of the Samoyeds are made of wood or
consist of stones only, the latter often of a peculiar form.
The father of the family may have as many as fifteen dif-
ferent “ dolls,” generally dressed in reindeer-skins or in
gowns of cloth. These clothes may not be sewn, but are
wrapped or tied around the god. When travelling, the gods
are conveyed in sleighs made specially for them, and during
the journey the “ sleigh of the gods ” must be the last in the
caravan. These images are well keptj they get new clothes
every year, and sacrifices are made to them from time to
time, though these are, indeed, very often of little value.
On the occasion of sacrificing, they are taken out of their
sleigh, which is outside the holy back of the tent, and set up


114 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

on a dais made solely for the occasion, or are carried into the
tent and placed in its sacred background. When sacrificing
reindeer to them, the Samoyeds besmear the mouths of the
images with blood and lard. When they make images of
their family gods, the shaman must conjure up a spirit to
live in them. Sometimes the gods have, in their vicinity,
small arms and tools made of lead, and, for company and
help, images of the spirits of animals.^

Like the Samoyeds the Northern Ostiaks also preserve and
carry their family gods with them in a special sleigh. A more
common custom among the Ostiaks and also the Voguls,
seems to be the harbouring of them in the dwelling-house
itself near the back part of the tent, in a chest or case. Later
they have begun to keep them also in a barn, or in the attic.
The family gods may be made of wood, metal, hides, etc.
Besides all sorts of victuals, such as meat, fish, gin, they re-
ceive for clothing, ofiterings of hides, kerchiefs, pieces of cloth,
etc. The feeding of the family gods takes place, among the
above-named races, at hours that are not fixed beforehand.®
Traces of the social signification of the family gods among
the Finno-Ugric peoples, have, however, been best preserved
among the Votiaks, who live a settled existence. By acquaint-
ing oneself with their beliefs and customs, one can clearly
discern that these family gods are really the late forefathers
of the family, who are worshipped from generation to genera-
tion as the tutelary genii of the family. In their capacity of
protectors of the family prosperity, a small building is devoted
to them on the Votiak farm. Its name kuala or km is of
Finno-Ugric origin and corresponds to the Finnish kota.

The kmla is a barn-like, square building of timber, without
a basement. It has neither windows nor ceiling, and the floor
consists of hard-stamped earth. In the middle of the floor
there is a fireplace bordered with stones, and on this a large
iron cavildron is kept, restmg either on the stones or attached to


FAMILY GODS


115

an iron chain hanging down from the rafters. From the fire-
place the smoke goes out through an opening in the wooden
roof. The low door was formerly situated on the south side.
Sometimes we find the kuala divided into two parts, or an
extra building erected behind it. The inner part is generally
held sacred, and women are not allowed to enter it. At the
present time, the Votiaks use the kmla only as a depository
for household utensils, but in olden times, before their archi-
tecture had developed into its present form, the kuala was the
only dwelling-house of the Votiak family.

A reminiscence of these distant times, of which the Votiaks
still speak in their tales, is the custom in some districts of still
using the kuala, not only as a storehouse, but also as a room
for cooking and eating by the family, especially during the
warm season. In this case, it is generally fitted up like a
dwelling-house} along the walls run solid benches of red-
wood, and in the corner nearest the door there is a table round
which, in summer, the family assemble to take their meals.
At times there will be found, near the door, a cupboard for
holding household utensils. The most notable and remarkable
object is, however, a shelf of wood in the cupboard, dark with
age and situated at the height of a man, on which may be seen
in some districts even in our days, a little case with a lid. This
little case is the most sacred object of the Votiaks, for in its
vicinity the living believe they can approach departed genera-
tions. As a sanctuary, the kuala has been retained in its former
condition, though the Votiaks, now that agriculture has become
their principal means of existence, have begun to build more
modern dwelling-houses for themselves.

The resemblance of the kuala cult to the worship of the
spirits of the dead is seen in the fact that the kuala sacrifices
must always be performed within the particular family. A
person belonging to one family will never enter the sanctuary
of another family in order to perform a sacrifice. How par-


ii6 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

ticular the Votiaks are in this respect is shown by the fact that
if the family has a foster-son of another family, he must,
during the kuala sacrifice, go to the praying-^««/« of his
own family, even though the latter be situated in another
village. Further, the alien position of a married woman in
her husband’s family is shown by the usage of the Votiaks
of calling her by the name of her kuala-i 2 JxxAy as a distinction
from the family which she entered by her marriage. In the
beginning of her married life, she is even for a time obliged to
frequent her own family kuahy in order to sacrifice there,
when sickness or other troubles occur. From the above the
signification of the kmla cult in the social life of the Votiaks
will be clearly seen. As an uninterrupted tie of union between
those belonging to the same family or tribe, and not only be-
tween the living but also between the living and the departed,
this cult unites the present with the dark primeval time. Every
Votiak considers it his holiest duty to know his origin, even
after removing to a strange neighbourhood. This is, indeed,
not very difficult, as every Votiak family has a particular de-
nomination of its own. These family names are words, the
meaning of which has been generally forgotten, such as moigay
utsay etc. By the family name kinsfolk may know each other
even in a strange place. This fact is of all the more importance
as the Votiaks consider it a crime to marry within the same
kuala family, obstacles to marriage being confined not only
to the nearest of kin but extended over a comparatively large
circle.

Originally, the Votiak villages were family villages} hence
a village and a family living in it often bear the same name}
at times, a newly built village is called by the name of the
home village. If, in such a village, there are several families,
the viUage generally takes the name of the oldest family
living in it. Certain instances from the District Sarapul will
show that the Votiaks really have a natural tendency to keep
together almost as one family. Some time ago, in a village


FAMILY GODS


ri7

called Norja, sixteen fathers of families still lived in such
economic nearness, that in spite of their inhabiting diflFerent
houses, they took their meals in common. In another village,
twenty men, living separately, were subordinate to one com-
mon head.®

Besides by means of the family name, the Votiaks are united
by the stamp with which they mark their property. This
mark is generally the picture of some object, such as a goose-
foot, an axe, etc. (The Ostiaks at an earlier time used also
pictures of animals.)

The mark of the father is left to the eldest son, who lives on
in his father’s cottage. The other male members of the same
family, must therefore, when removing from the paternal
home, procure a new mark for themselves, which is generally
done by making a trifling addition to or slightly changing the
mark of their former home. Having received their own,
they do not, however, forget the mark of their fathers, which,
at the same time, belongs to the kuala sanctuary still in exist-
ence in their former home. Left thus as an inheritance by the
father to the eldest son, a mark may sometimes be very old.
As in the case of the family name, blood relations may also,
by means of the mark, know each other in strange parts.

As a family inheritance, the eldest son, after the death of
the father, besides the homestead, the mark and the kuaUf
also receives the office of “ kuala guardian,” whose duty it is
to perform family sacrifices. Should there be no male heir,
the office of kuala guardian ” is inherited by the brother of
the deceased or by some other of the nearest male relations.

Besides worshipping in the kuala sanctuary of the family,
which by its master is used at the same time as a storehouse
and a kitchen, and in which only the family in question wor-
ships, the Votiaks take part in the sacrifices also in the kuala
whose guardian is, if possible, a lineal descendant of the
founder of the village family. Compared with the latter
the family sanctuary is called “ the little kuala.*^ Of little


ii8 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

kudas there are many to be found in a village, not so many,
however, as there are families, for every kuala is not a sano-
tuary. This springs from the fact that every Votiak who has
founded a family and home of his own does not mark a sanc-
tuary for himself at once, but continues to worship in his
father’s kmla, and should he have none, in the kuda of his
grandfather, the guardian of which is a lineal descendant of
the latter, and, where possible, an eldest son. Thus we find
here another suggestion that the Votiak family was formerly
larger than at the present time, comprising several sub-fam-
ilies, who most likely lived in the same complex of houses,
obeying the same head.

Of “ great kudas ” there is, on the other hand, only one,
if the village is a family village, as are most of the old Votiak
villages. If, as often happens when founding a new village,
people descended from diflFerent families are included in the
population, there will be as many kualas in the village as there
are families. Every “ great kuala ” is called after its respec-
tive family: mozga kuala, utsa kuala, etc. The worshippers of
the kuala are likewise called after their family: mozga fijos
{“mozga sons”), utsa fijos, etc. From the number of the
great kualas one can thus easily find out how many families
there are in a village. Especially among the Eastern Votiaks,
there are villages formed of several different families which
have moved to strange parts as settlers. Where there are
several great kualas in a village, these are generally to be
found in the houses of their guardians} they differ in no way
from a private kuala and are also used like the last named as
store-rooms for household utensils. Should, however, the
village be inhabited by one family only, there being conse-
quently only one “ great kuala}* the latter attains an entirely
different position from the other kualas. In its capacity of
the common property of the village, the “great kuala** or
“Village kuala** is generally situated in the garden of its
guardian, or in a particular enclosure either in the village or


FAMILY GODS


II9

near it. As a village sanctuary, the huala has attained an ex-
clusively religious significance, being sometimes considered so
sacred that, for instance, no women are allowed to enter it.
Thus, among the Votiaks, it has generally developed into a
kind of temple, which development, in the southern parts, at
least, has evidently been influenced by the Mohammedan
prayer-houses of the Tatar villages.

In the family kuala, as in the village kuala, the sacrifice
shelf is generally situated on the back wall, most often in the
left-hand corner there. On holy days, offerings are placed
on the shelf, but, generally, it is for the most part empty,
when not occupied by articles necessary for the sacrifices.
In some instances, there is, under the sacrifice shelf, a cup-
board about a yard high, in which are kept, besides the sacrifice
utensils, smaller offerings. The Votiaks believe that the
“Luck-protector,” Vor§ud, lives near the sacrifice shelf.
Formerly, there was, on the sacrifice shelf, a little case with a
lid to it made of linden bark, which is still to be found in some
parts, e.g., in the Government of Kazan. The size and form
of the sacrifice case vary somewhat in different places. For
the most part, they are round, but very often we also find
oblong and square ones. A sacrifice case may sometimes be
found to be very old and darkened by the smoke in the knalay
having been handed down as a sacred heirloom from father
to son for generations.

In our time, the Vorsud case, in both family and village
kmlasy is generally empty. But can it be possible that a re-
ceptacle regarded with such superstitious awe, forbidden to
women and strangers to approach, was always thus empty?
Several authorities, for the most part among the very oldest,
relate that they have seen many different objects in these
cases: ancient coins, the bones of birds, gaily coloured feathers,
squirrel skins, sheep’s wool, etc. But again, could these trifles,
possessing obviously more the nature of sacrifices than of ob-
jects of worship, have been venerated by the Votiaks? When


120 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

one compares the sacred background of the kmla with the
corner of the bothies regarded as holy by both the Ostiaks and
the Voguls, and the sacrifice case with the god-chest of the
latter, which is not empty, but among these more primitive
peoples contains images of their tutelary genii, is it not more
likely that the Votiaks’ sacrifice case was also in former days
a similar home for their family gods? In our days, there are
certainly no images to be found among them. Even in the
oldest sources we find it written that the Votiaks possess
neither pictured nor carven images. But the memory of gods
who formerly dwelt in these cases has not altogether died out,
and the Christian Votiaks place even today a picture of a
saint on the same shelf that, earlier, held their spirit offerings.

The scanty traditions, however, give no clear idea of the
images of the Votiak family spirits. Assuming that the sacri-
fice cases, the circumference of which is, on an average, about
one hundred and twenty centimeters, and the height about
thirty centimeters, have not become very much altered in the
course of time, we may conclude that the images were not
very large. Most likely they were just such clumsy, dressed
wooden dolls as the Votiaks still make for themselves during
severe illnesses, in order to remove the illness from the patient
to the doll. Such would also seem to have been the images
of the Siryans, judging from the fact that in the life of St.
Stephen, their apostle, it is stated that their images resembled
human beings, had noses, mouths and even feet, and that they
were either carved, or hollowed out. As they were made of
wood, St. Stephen was able to chop them into pieces with an
axe and bum them. There was a great number of them “ both
in the villages and dwelling houses.” *

When beginning their saaifice, the Votiaks place fresh
green twigs on the comer shelf of the kmla, under the sacri-
fice case. In autumn or in spring, or, generally during the
time when the trees are leafless, they use, when sacrificing,
tmgs of the silver pine {Bmus fichta or sibmca), but in the,


FAMILY GODS


lai


summer birch twigs. The use of green twigs certainly origi-
nates from very ancient times, for this custom has also been
observed among the Lapps, of whom missionaries relate rhgt
they placed birch twigs under their images in the summer,
and fir twigs in the winter.

This custom of laying green twigs on the sacrifice shelf,
which, together with the sacrificing, belongs to the most im-
portant duties of the kmla guardians, has, curiously enough,
been kept up even in parts where the sacrifice cases, not to
speak of images, are no longer to be found. This is particu-
larly the case among the Eastern Votiaks. Among these we
seldom find sacrifice cases, but on the other hand we may see,
even in our days, on every sacrifice shelf, whether there be
sacrifice vessels there or not, twigs more or less faded, accord-
ing to the time that has passed since the sacrifice. In several
places, these twigs, which originally were of quite a secondary
importance compared with the images, are regarded with the
same superstitious awe as the latter. Only the ofiiciating
priest, who on holy days burns the old twigs and places fresh
ones in their stead, is allowed to touch them. Certain investi-
gators have supposed that these same twigs have been objects
of worship.® This is, however, a mistake, though the twigs
have at times had the high honour of being removed from
their place under the “ case ” to the “ case ” itself, and in
this way the original idea became confused. That the kuala
cult is concentrated around the sacrifice shelf and the “ case,”
is proved, above all, by the custom of the sacrificing priest’s
stand in g, while praying, with his face turned towards the
sacrifice shelf.

We have stated earlier that not every Votiak kmla is used
as a sanctuary. This it may become only by means of particu-
lar inaugural ceremonies, generally performed in the summer.
On a day fixed beforehand, the person who intends to obtain
for himself a Vorsud of his own, invites a few guests, gen-
erally two men and two women. The guests having arrived.


122 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

the young master and mistress, with their guests, proceed to
the head of the family who is at the same time the guardian
of the Vorsud kmla, taking bread and gin with them.
On arriving, they begin to feast in the house of the chief.
The latter invites one of his neighbours and his wife, and these
officiate as host and hostess, the host of the feast entertaining
the men, and the hostess the women. When the guests have
been sufficiently entertained, the host and his wife begin
singing wedding songs, in which those present also join.
Lastly, the guests go to their neighbours for more hospitality
and return to the kmla guardian in the evening. On their
return, porridge is cooked by the guardian of the family kmla.
The one who intends to secure a Vorsud for himself, now
goes to the kmla, takes some ashes from the fireplace, and
wraps them in a clean white cloth, saying: “ I take the smaller
and leave the greater.” He then places the bundle of ashes
on the shelf of the kmla and sits down to the sacrificial por-
ridge together with the other guests. After the meal he goes
back to the kmla^ takes the ashes from the shelf, and sets
out for home with his guests. During the journey home, the
escort of the Vorsud play and sing, the mistress of the new
kmla meanwhile keeping a copper coin in her mouth until they
arrive at the homestead. When starting out into the street,
on the way home, and on arrival, she dances to the music of a
stringed instrument. The ashes conveyed in this manner are
now placed on the shelf of the new kmla^ the master saying:
“I, thy master, have brought thee here with reverential
ceremonies, be not angry therefore, and when we pray to thee,
hear our prayers.”

In some places, the feast is held, according to an older cus-
tom, in the kmla itself, where a functionary, with a loaf
received from the guardian of the old kmla^ turns to the
Vorsud with the following words: “VorSud, come with us to
another place j do not take offence, old ones, deceased ones.”
Later, he does the same thing with a loaf from the son,


FAMILY GODS


123

afterwards handing the father’s loaf to the son, and the son’s
to the father. When the son who has separated from the
home of his father, has received the bread, he reverently
carves a chip from the pot hanger of wood suspended from the
ceiling. He takes, further, ashes from the hearth, and conveys
these with the chip to the newly foxmded kmla of his new
home.®

A curious statement is that he who carries the Vorsud must
not put his foot on the bare ground, but must walk all the time
on planks laid on the ground.

Many circumstances in the above descriptions recall the
customs followed at a Votiak wedding. The very tunes
played on this occasion are wedding tunes. In some places,
it is further customary to distribute presents at the kmla
feast, as at a wedding. In the District of Mamadysh a custom
recalling a wedding is connected with the above mentioned
ceremonies, namely, that the Vorsud is taken to the new home
like a bride in a sleigh with two horses and tinkling bells, the
women being dressed in wedding costume. That the Votiaks
themselves consider the Vorsud feast to be a wedding festivity
is seen from the name of this feast, mudor suan Q* mudor
wedding ”). Among the Votiaks, certain ceremonies recalling
those of the mudor wedding are now observed at the inaugura-
tion of the modern huts used in these days. They also call
this festivity " hut wedding ” (korka simi)t on which occasion
as at a wedding a “ host ” itoro) officiates. As the Indo-Euro-
pean races observe similar customs, we may assume that the
Volga Finns acquired theirs through a foreign culture. The
fact, however, that the above named ceremonies refer to a
time when the Votiaks were still living in the old kmla^ in-
dicates that they date from a comparatively distant time.

The very word mudor , which phonetically corresponds to
the Finnish mantere (“ earth foundation ”), recalls a different
kind of removing- ceremony, described by Aminoff. “ When
leaving his father’s home to found a household of his own,


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


124

the son descends under the floor of the hut, takes a little earth
from there, and also fire from the hearth of the hut and then
prays to the son of the family spirit to accompany him to the
new home.” ' A similar custom, when removing, seems to
have been known also among the Siryans in former times.
This appears from the following statement by Nalimov: “ Even
in our days, everyone, on leaving home for a long journey,
takes with him a handful of earth from under the earth foun-
dation of his home. This earth protects him from accidents
and nostalgia.” “ Similar beliefs are to be found among the
Baltic Finns. Among the Ingrians a custom has been found of
giving to a bride who is going to a strange neighbourhood, a
bundle containing earth from the earth foundation under the
floor of her native hut, to protect her from nostalgia. Like-
wise, they believe that a domestic animal removed to another
farm, will not miss its former home, if, when removing it,
some earth is also brought from the outhouse where the animal
was kept before.®

In the earliest times, the founder of a new family, when
parting from the home of his fathers, seems to have received
one or several images of his family spirits, to take with him,
the Lapps believing these to descend as an inheritance from
father to son, like any other property. On account of the fact
that the Votiaks have not, for a long time, used images, no
exact statements concerning this custom are to be found. Only
a few traditions and customs point back to this distant time.
Wichmann relates about the District Urzhum, that on leaving
his father’s home, a son was given also a part of the contents
of the sacrifice case.’® Another writer mentions that the
sacrifice case of the new kmla must be made in the old kmla,
and before being removed, it must have lain for some time on
the sacrifice shelf of the old This may be the origin

of the words in the above mentioned custom among the Votiaks
when removing the Vorsud; “ I take the smaller and leave
the greater.” To receive a Vorsud from his native home is


FAMILY GODS


125

of such great importance to the son that if for one reason or
another the father quarrels with his son and refuses to give
him a Vorsud, the son must procure it by robbery. If the son
who is angry with his father says, when taking the Vorsud:
“ I leave the smaller, I take the greater,” the consequence,
according to the interpretation of the magicians, is that the
son gets the older Vorsud, and, in a religious sense, stands
higher than his father. If, after this, any of his yoxmger
brothers is in want of a Vorsud, he must apply to his brother
with his request and not to his father.^

After the mnidor wedding, the hualA is a sanctuaryj the
Vorsud lives in it, and from that day, worship is carried out
there. To keep up this is the sacred duty not only of that
generation, but also of the following, for according to the
beliefs of the Votiaks, the sacrifices in a building consecrated
as a sanctuary must never be interrupted. He who does not
observe this rule, will meet with some great accident. The
people tell with terror how such persons have lost their prop-
erty, have gone mad, etc. If, for instance at the change of
guardians, the kuala should be removed from one place to
another, the building is pulled down, and the timber of the
walls is placed in the same order when built anew. The
ashes of the hearth, the stones, and the Vorsud case are taken
with ceremony to the new place, together with the timber.
Besides being removed when changing a guardian, the kuala
may also be taken away for some other reason. Thiis, for in-
stance, it once happened that a sacrificial bull, when about to
be killed, broke loose and ran away from a “ great kuala**
the sacrificers, in the midst of their devotions, having to leave
off and pursue it. The place where the animal was at last
caught, was considered to be so pleasing to the kuala spirit
that the whole building was removed there.“ If, from any
cause, people are obliged to destroy a kuala, the sacrifice case
and the stones of the hearth may not on any account be lost.
As an instance of the superstition of the Votiaks the following


126 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

legend is mentioned: A man destroyed his kmla and built in
its stead a barn, leaving the sacrifice case and the stones under
the hearth. Once, some young men who had gone there to
sleep were awakened suddenly by groans from under the barn,
like the wailing of a sick man. The next night the same wail-
ing was heard. At last, the master himself went to sleep there,
and found that it was none other than the Vorsud who was
moaning. He then promised to remove the stones and the
case into a new kudckf which he did, and thenceforward there
was silence in the barn.^*

Considering that the name of Vorsud, at the sacrifice meet-
ings of the Votiaks, is generally used in the singular, most
frequently in connection with the kmla family’s name, as
“ mozga Vorsud,” “ utsa Vorsud,” etc., it would seem as if
every Votiak kmla had possessed only one family spirit. This
was, however, not so in olden times, as is proved by the cir-
cumstance that the Votiaks consider themselves able to dis-
tribute them among their descendants. In one prayer the
name of Vorsud is also used in the plural.” The idea of
several spirits in one kmla appears, moreover, in the follow-
ing legend: A certain Votiak became a Christian and re-
nounced the ancient customs of sacrifice, but did not destroy
his kmla. After some time the spirits began annoying himj
when lying in bed, he seemed to feel a heavy stone pressing
on his breast j when he went to the barn to sleep, the spirits
came there, too, to annoy him. At last, the man made up his
mind to shoot them, and one night he walked about, gun in
hand, waiting for them. At midnight three persons in white
came out of the kmla, the first a beardless youth, the second
also young but with the beginnings of a beard, the third, a
woman. The man fired, and the vision vanished at once.
After that they did not show themselves any more, but re-
moved to another place, sending the man a severe illness as a
punishment.”

The above story, showing that in one and the same kmla


FAMILY GODS


127

there were several family spirits, points also to their human
origin. According to the belief of the Votiaks, the kuala
spirits generally appear as human beings. At times, however,
though rarely, the VorSud may reveal itself in some other
form. In a story of the Votiaks in the District of Glazov, a
kmla sanctuary is mentioned as having been on the site where
the present town of Vyatka is situated. It is related that
when the Russian settlers, after having driven out the Votiaks
from their then dwelling-places, began puUing down the kuda^
a bird flew out of the sanctuary, meeting its death beside the
church just erected, as if stricken by an invisible power.^^
The Votiak, having founded for himself a kmla of his
own, still visits the old kmla, and sometimes even the still
older mother kmla. The first, in comparison with the second,
is a “ little kuala^' likewise the second in comparison with the
third, while the second, compared with the first, is a “great
kmla” and in the same way, the third in comparison with
the second. According to their kmla worship the Votiaks are
commonly divided into two groups, to both of which the same
person may belong — the family of the “great kmla” and
the family of the “little kmla.” To illustrate the present
kmla cult of the Votiaks and the relations of the different
family groups with each other, it may be mentioned that the
same Votiak in the village of Ostorma-Yumya in the District
of Mamadysh, besides visiting the “little kmla,” which is
tituated in his own yard and in whose sacrifices, besides himself,
the families of his three younger brothers take part, also fre-
quents the “great kmla” situated in the same village and
visited by seventy-three families in all. The other families in
the village, belonging to other clans, go each their own way to
sacrifice. The above mentioned seventy-three families visit
also the kmla in the neighbouring village or Staraya-Yumya,
from which Ostorma-Yumya and certain other villages were
originally formed. The “ great kmla ” of Staraya-Yumya is
visited, not only by its own villages, but by the seventy-three


128


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


families of Ostorma-Yumya, and, also, by all the persons liv-
ing in the neighbouring villages who belong to the same tribe.
In later days, however, people have more and more ceased
coming from strange villages with their offerings to the “ great
kuala ” of the mother village.

The relationships among the family groups are, of course,
not the same in every Votiak village. Sometimes a "little
kuala. ” may be visited by quite a number of families, up to
several score, this depending wholly on the zeal of the Votiak
families in founding new kmla sanctuaries for themselves.

Those Votiaks, who have removed as settlers, and even
those who now remove far from their native place, and who,
therefore, cannot take part in the sacrifices of their native
village, remember, however, the kmla of their ancestors in
their own kudas. Thus for instance, a Votiak family living
in the village of Mozga in the District of Birsk, remembers the
“ great kmla ” in the native village of the same name in the
district of Yelabuga, because their ancestors had removed
thence, bringing with them rmdor. A remarkable feature of
the kmla cult of the Eastern Votiaks is, further, the circum-
stance that the so-called "little kmlas** have come to be
neglected; relatives perform their sacrifices only in the mutual
family sanctuary, several of which may be found in one
village, depending on the number of different families. Un-
der such circumstances, mudor weddings take place only when
Votiaks remove as settlers from the old village to a new
one.

Reverence for the old home has been best preserved in the
oldest native districts of the Votiaks, where, in certain neigh-
bourhoods at present uninhabited, we may see remains of
crumbling huts, which are sometimes visited at the command
of the sorcerer, for the purpose of sacrificing in cases of severe
illnesses. A hut of this nature, which is called “ the utter-
most kmla,'* is most probably the oldest home of the family
that has been retained in memory.


FAMILY GODS


129

General, regular kuala sacrifices are performed by the
Votiaks at somewhat different times in different places, but,
according to the most widespread custom, three times a year
— in the spring, in summer, and in autumn. Later, it has
become customary to sacrifice much oftener in the family kuala,
in some places on every Christian holy day.

On regular holy days, the Votiaks sacrifice in the “ little ”
as well as in the “ great ” kuala, representatives being some-
times sent also to the greater sanctuary of the mother village.
The sacrificial ceremonies in the different sanctuaries resemble
each other very much, with the exception of unimportant de-
viations. On the other hand, the times and order of sacrificing
in the kualas of different rank vary, sacrifices being sometimes
carried out first in the “ little kuala ” and then in the “ great
kuala^* and vice versa. In some places the sacrificial cere-
monies are held late in the evening, in others in the daytime.
At times the festivity lasts for two or three days.

The oldest account of a kuala sacrifice originates from the
province of Ufa and was published by Ryckov in the eight-
eenth century. The author relates that the Votiaks sacrifice,
“ near certain branches of fir regarded by them as representing
the family god,” a young calf, whose ears they then place on
the shelf on which the fir branches lie. The sacrificial animal
they kill in the sanctuary itself.^®

Of the same period is the description by Georgi, who gives
a more detailed accoxmt of the sacrifice performed at Easter.
The author states that both men and women partake in the
ceremony, having cleansed themselves first by taking a bath
in the bathhouse. Each one brings with him to the kuala
guardian the objects necessary for the sacrifice. When the
meat is cooked, the officiating priest places a portion from
every dish and also some beer on a table opposite the door.
On the shelf above the table some fir-twigs are laid, and on
these he puts a dish with morsels from the sacrifice. These
he takes after a while, together with the drinking vessel, in


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


130

his hand, asking from the Vorsud happiness, health, children,
cattle, bread, honey, etc.“

A later, but much more complete account (1838) describes
a sacrifice in the village of Multan. In this account it is stated
that the guests bring with them to the sanctuary, bread, cakes,
boiled eggs, and, for drink, home-made spirits and beer. Hav-
ing accompanied the sacrificial animal to the middle of the
kmla in front of the “ image,” they place beside it loaves of
bread with eggs on them. If very many loaves have been
brought, those officiating select three whole ones, but of the
others they cut only a piece, placing these slices together with
the eggs on the whole loaves. At the same time, one of the
Votiaks recites prayers over the victim, and another pours
water on it. The prayer done, they begin killing the animal,
letting the blood flow into a cup or a trough} the skin is
stripped off, the entrails cleaned and the worthless parts buried
. in a pit. The sacrificial animal is then cut up, its different
members being severed so that a piece is obtained from each,
the head, the breast, the legs, etc. The meat is boiled in a
pan, into which the blood is also poured. When everything is
ready, the Votiaks begin drinking the gin and tasting the sacri-
ficial food. At the same time, they sacrifice, three times, food
and meat in the fire, pouring into it, also three times, gin
and beer from every vessel. Further, all the bones of the
sacrificial animal are gathered and put into the fire, only those
that will not burn being buried in a pit. The prayer read
during the sacrifice contains invocations to the god to protect
the family, to multiply the cattle and cause the vegetation
to prosper.***

In the southern and eastern Votiak Districts, women gener-
ally do not appear at the saaifices, and even when allowed to
come, they stop outside the door with their children. This
does not seem to have been the original custom. Among the
Votiaks of the northern parts, where the ancient original cus-
toms have been partly better preserved, women are always


FAMILY GODS


131

present when sacrificing at home. At times they have a rep-
resentative of their own even at the kmla festivals, such
representatives, besides the ordinary kuala guardian, being
chosen from each sex for the purpose of arranging the festival
ceremonies. These become the host {tbro) of the festival and
his wife, who sit each at a diflFerent table in different corners.
While officiating, the host keeps his cap on. The guests arrive
in white holiday costume at the sanctuary, where the men take
their places to the left of the fireplace, the women to the right.
Amusements very often follow the sacrifice: music, singing, etc.
The sacrificial priest sings sacrifice songs improvised on the
occasion in question.*^

In our days blood sacrifices at the kmla festivals have
begun to be scarce. When sacrificing for some special reason
they are still necessary, but at the regular festivals it has be-
come customary to sacrifice only bread or porridge. Even if
bread only be sacrificed, the Votiaks, in remembrance of the
older custom, must still light the sacrifidal fire. Once a year
however, at least, they must still carry out a blood sacrifice
with materials mutually contributed.

At the sacrifices, the Votiaks place one part of the sacrificial
gifts on the shelf, while another part is burnt in the fire. When
sacrificing bread, they always place it on the shelf in the corner,
on which a white cloth is laid for the purpose. Sometimes
there is placed on the regular sacrifice bread, which the wife of
the kmla guardian makes of spring corn, other little pieces of
bread from all the other families taking part in the sacrifice.
Besides bread, the Votiaks also sometimes put butter, honey,
and drink on the Vorsud shelf. On the occasion of the blood
sacrifice, a little meat porridge, or, when the beast is a big
domestic animal, portions of its most important organs, gener-
ally boUed in different pans, are placed there. In most Dis-
tricts it is customary to place the above named offerings on
the shelf only as long as the prayer is being said. There are
circumstances, however, which indicate that formerly the offer-


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


132

ings were also left in their place for a longer time. Thus,
for instance, it is customary in the District of Mamadysh, when
sacrificing a duck, to leave its head on the sacrifice shelf until
after the second or third day after the kuda festival, when it
is eaten up by the priest. At Easter, a cake or a cup of water
is placed on the shelf for the night, sometimes for a whole
week, after which period persons belonging to the family eat
up the offerings. The women, in general, are not in the habit
of eating of the food placed on the sacrifice shelf.

Such portions of the sacrifice as the Votiaks place on the shelf,
have also been sacrificed in the fire. Is this dual sacrificial
custom of the kmla cult to be considered as the original, or
are there two different stages of development reflected in these
customs? Aminoff considers that the placing on the shelf is an
older form of the kuda sacrifice, and the throwing into the
fire a more recent one.^* That the fire sacrifice in general is of
later date among the Finno-Ugric races is seen clearly from the
sacrificial customs of the Lapps.

Besides the blood sacrifices, the purpose of which was prin-
cipally the feasting of the family gods, the Votiaks, in former
times, also carried gifts to their kuala sanctuaries which were in-
tended to serve the spirits as clothing, ornaments, or other holy
property. We have already mentioned that in the ancient sacri-
fice cases of the Votiaks, all kinds of objects, such as skins,
feathers, coins, etc., have been found, which most likely had
been placed there as offerings. In former times, sacrifices of
this kind were of course much more abundant and of more
value, so that many “ great kualas became quite remarkable
treasuries. For this reason their doors were well closed in un-
settled times, and the services of a special “ guardian ” were
necessary.

Besides the gift offerings, sacrificial coins are kept in the kmla
sanctuary of the Votiaks, a collection of money being, indeed,
embodied in the sacrificial ceremonies, and generally carried out
after the feast. This is done in such a manner that every guest


FAMILY GODS


133

either puts his mite into the money box or presses it into the
cake that the kuala guardian carries in his hands, after the sacri-
fice. Sometimes the guests bring their money stuck into the
sacrificial bread. This common money, of which much more
was collected formerly than nowadays, is used only for sacred
purposes. With this money they pay for the repair of the
sanctuary and for things necessary at the performance of the
sacrifices, and in addition for the sacrificial animals.

Besides the above mentioned regular sacrificial festivals,
there are others, more or less accidental, celebrated only under
certain circumstances, sometimes in the “great kuala*’ and
sometimes in the “ little kuala.” Occasional sacrifice festivals
are celebrated by the Votiaks when such illnesses or other mis-
fortunes have occurred, as are declared by the sorcerer to origi-
nate from the spirits living in the kuala. The sacrifice is not
killed immediately, but a “ sacrificial vow ” is made first, which,
in case of lack of means, may still be “ renewed,” before the
true sacrifice is offered up. But on no account may it be for-
gotten or put off to an indefinite future. Particularly is it
obligatory to sacrifice when a young girl in the family is to be
married. It is related that, in the District Sarapul, when a
bride removes to her new home, she is first taken round the
fireplace in her old home, the while her father prays, with a
measure of gin and another of beer in his hand, promising to
sacrifice an ox, a calf, or some other animal to the family
spirit.®* In the District Mamadysh it is customary that, on the
wedding day, the young wife makes a sacrificial vow, but the
sacrifice itself generally takes place first in the following
autumn, when she arrives at her native village with a duck
under her arm. The bird is killed and boiled in the “ great
kuala” the sacrifice prayer being said by the guardian,” who
points out to the Vorsud which of the daughters of the family,
having married, has now removed to another family and is
therefore bringing an offering to the family spirits of her native
home. No other person than the sacrificing priest and the


134 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

sacrificer herself may take part in the performance. Only after
this sacrifice may the wife perform sacrifices in her husband’s
family kuala. In case of illness, however, or some other mis-
fortune, she must, on the advice of the sorcerer, sacrifice to the
kmla of her family.

We have earlier pointed out similarities between some fea-
tures of the Vorsud cult and those of the worship of the spirits
of the deceased. The worship of departed ancestors is, above
all, recalled by the close relationship of the Vorsud to the
family worshipping the same, in whose name it is often ad-
dressed in prayer. It is to be noted, also, that the Votiaks turn
to the Vorsud and to the deceased in exactly the same matters,
chiefly in cases of illness, the Vorsud and the deceased members
of the family being sometimes named side by side in the
same prayer.

In comparing the kmla sacrifices and the order in which
they are performed, with the general memorial festivals of
the Votiaks, celebrated in the dwelling-house, we notice that in
these, customs are observed that resemble the kmla ceremonies.
Thus the Votiaks celebrate memorial festivals, besides those
at home, within a greater family circle, or at the home of the
ancestors of the family, on which occasion they recall together
the memory of the deceased members of the f amil y^ in particu-
lar that of the most important. This corresponds to the
Votiaks’ curious fashion of distinguishing between the f amily
of the " IMe kmla^* and that of the “ great kmla?^ Thus,
it is no accident that the time of celebrating the reg ular kuala
festivals and that of the regular memorial festivals fall so nea**
each other. Evidently, the kuala festivals are only a more an-
cient form of the memorial festivals, in which, instead of
poultry, larger domestic animals were used for the sacrifice.
As the ceremonies at a later time have become altered to some
e^ent from their earlier form, both have been retained side by
fflde with each other until our days.

Among other Finno-Ugric peoples, the kmla cult has not


FAMILY GODS


135

been preserved to the same extent as among the Votiaks. Many
of them do not even use the old building, although it bears a
name common among all the tribes of these peoples. Remains
of the kuala cult, have, however, been preserved among the
Cheremiss, amongst whom we may stiU see, in some parts, in
the background of the hut {kudo) a time-darkened case which
these, like the Votiaks, regard as the dwelling of the kudo-
spirit. Nowadays we see there, besides offerings, only dried
birch leaves which are not even always renewed on the occasion
of sacrificing. Most frequently, however, we no longer find
a sacrifice case in a Cheremiss kudo, but in its former place,
the corner shelf continues to be held sacred. No stranger is
allowed to approach the sacrifice shelf, as the kudo-sp\nt
{kudo-^o6yx) may take it amiss, nor does it befit women to
approach it, and even the children are afraid of it and avoid
it. In order to shield the sacred back part of the sanctuary
from injm-ious contact, the Cheremiss in some parts of the
country used to divide the house by a partition.®* In the Dis-
trict of Urzhum I heard the back part called “ the little kudoP
At times only one or the other bac^-comer is separated by
means of a partition of boards. The “ little kudo** which is
reached from the “ great ” one through a small door, is, ac-
cording to the Cheremiss, more sacred than the other parts of
the building. Only grown up men may enter there, and not
even these unnecessarily. In bygone days there were kept in
“ the little kudo** besides the sacrificial objects necessary at
divine service, also arms and implements of the chase. Here
were made, besides, their vows of sacrifice, by bringing in the
firewood necessary when sacrificing in the forest, and the pan
in which the victim was to be boiled. Where there is no
longer any kudo, the sacrifice case is kept in the storehouse in
the entrance to the bathhouse.

The ^«^^o-Vodyz of the Cheremiss, when requiring sacrifice,
also appears in human form in the dreams of the family mem-
bers. The offering is then placed in the above named case.


136 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

or on the sacred corner shelf. According to the earliest ac-
counts, the Cheremiss slaughtered a black sheep for their god.®'
Nowadays they bring for the most part only small sacrifices,
such as hens and ducks, for occasional reasons, mostly on ac-
covmt of a certain eye disease (trachoma) . At first the sacrificial
vow is fulfilled in such manner that a little meal, some honey,
and cakes or other eatables, are placed on the sacrifice shelf.
The sacrifice itself is not executed until after the lapse of some
time. Then the flour and honey used at the sacrificial vow
are mixed into a dough, of which sacrificial bread is made for
all the members of the family. In the sacrificial meal, which
is prepared and consumed in the kudoy only members of the
family partake, strangers not being allowed the tiniest bit.
When beginning the meal, pieces of food are placed on the
sacrifice shelf, near which the head of the family prays, asking
for forgiveness on behalf of the sinner and on that of the
whole family, should any one, unconsciously, in one way or
another, have happened to oflFend the >^«^io-spirit, and implor-
ing him to protect and keep the family and home. In some dis-
tricts it is customary to offer up a sacrifice to him at a fixed time,
in the autumn. The bones of the victim are not burnt, but
buried in the earth under the building} a portion from every
part of the body of the sheep used for this being placed on the
sacrifice shelf. In the District of Urzhum a curious custom has
been retained of taking the household god to one^s neighbours,
when the spirit, by sending an illness, seems to require a sacrifice.
When not inclined to sacrifice to it, they say: “ Do not require
any thing of us, we have boiled the last already; we will take
thee to our neighbour’s; there is a silver-horned bull and a fine
woolly sheep, there thou shalt have a treat.” Thus speaking,
the Cheremiss takes dust from the “ kudo-sgm'i^s ” case and
sets out for his neighbour’s. If he is asked to take a seat there,
and is offered bread and salt, all is well, as then “ the spirit ”
has been kindly received. Unnoticed, the guest throws the
dust from his hand into the corner and goes away without


FAMILY GODS


137

saying good-bye or asking his neighbour to come and see him.
Also among the Hill Cheremiss, amongst whom one very rarely
comes across a kudo^ the belief has been preserved that the
kudo-Y odyz continues to live in the place of the former kudo^
and that he who quarrels in the said place or besmirches it, will
undoubtedly fall ill.’'®

After marriage, the Cheremiss woman still goes at first for
some time to the kudo of her old home to sacrifice, should she
meet with illness or any other misfortune declared by the sor-
cerer to have been caused by the spirits of the “ old place.”
Similarly the scattered younger families turn when necessary to
the spirits of older kudo. Thus, the “ little family ” remains
always dependent on the “ great family ” in some way or
other.®^

Georgi speaks also about a material image of the family god,
stating that “ in many houses, perhaps in every house, there is
in a corner in a case, a coarse little doll of wood, dressed in
male attire.” When describing the wedding ceremonies of the
Cheremiss, he further relates that “ when everything is ready
in the wedding house, the family god is placed on the table
and the sacrificing priest {kart) of the village prays in front
of it.” Considering that the Cheremiss have not been in the
habit of keeping the sacrifice case in the dwelling-house, there
is reason to suppose that the family god mentioned by Georgi
is the kudo-Yody%j‘’^

A similar family cult doubtless existed among the Mordvins,
and even among the Baltic Firms. Among the Esthonians,
remains of it seem to have been preserved, through alien in-
fluence, until modern times. The Vorsud case of the Votiaks
corresponds, with them, to the “Tonni vakk” {vakk —
“case”). On Tonni or Antony’s-day (January seventeenth)
one must brew beer or slaughter some animal — the latter
being generally a sheep, though a bull is sometimes mentioned.
At nightfall, the T5imi vakk was taken from its recess, candles
were lighted on the rims of the case, and it was carried all


138 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

round the dwelling house, the cattle sheds, and the yard.
From each part of the carcase of the sacrificial animal a piece
of meat was cut as a sacrifice to Tonni, and of the gravy a little
was also sprinkled on the nearest paths. Lastly the people
sat down to eat.

Tonni’s case, which had to be made by the sorcerer, was kept
in a place known only by the master, generally in the attic of
the storehouse. In this were placed all the year round, for one
reason or another, various offerings: — when the corn was
threshed, when beer was brewed, when milking a cow that had
lately calved, when shearing the sheep, and when spinning yarn
or weaving cloth. When slaughtering, they sacrificed meat,
blood or fat. The case had to be particularly remembered on
the occasion of illness among either human beings or animals.
Falling ill was considered to be a consequence of the case hav-
ing been damaged or of some one, when passing, having made
a noise, or because the people had forgotten to sacrifice to it.
There is a report even, that the case used to contain a doll-like
image. That the Esthonians also had known both a lesser
family spirit and a greater one, is shown by a tradition, accord-
ing to which not only every family but also every village had its
common sacrifice case.®®

There are no reliable statements regarding the corresponding
family worship of the Finns. Yet, in the social life of the
Karelians there are indications that these belonged to two dif-
ferent families, a smaller and a larger one, the chieftainship
of the last named — where its head was not chosen by election
— descending from a father to the eldest son of the eldest
branch of the family. A result of the worship of the fore-
fathers of the family was most likely the alien position of the
wife in her husband’s home, for, as with the Votiaks, the women
in Finnish Karelia kept their own family name even after
their marriage.®®


CHAPTER IX
HEROES


T here is every reason to believe that those Lapp Seides,
which were worshipped by a larger following, were dedi-
cated to the spirit of some more famous man, the founder of a
family, a shaman, etc. Such people were worshipped also
among other Finno-Ugric peoples and the Samoyeds. Ven-
iamin relates of the Yuraks that certain of their stone or
wooden gods, the latter having a head coming to a point, were
worshipped by a great tribe, spread over a wide area, others
again by only a very scant congregation. The former are
generally situated in the neighbourhood of such places as the
Yuraks are accustomed to gather at, to hunt or fish or to seek
food for their reindeer. He mentions two such ancient sacred
places, visited by great numbers, of which one was situated
on the holy island Vajgats. At these meetings the Samoyeds
sacrifice reindeer and dogs to their tutelary spirits, besmearing
the mouths of the idols with the blood and fat of the sacrifice,
and having eaten the flesh, hanging up the head, and even
at times, the hide, on a holy tree.^ Of later origin is possibly
a custom of the Eastern Samoyeds of throwing pieces of the
flesh of the sacrifice into the fire. Bloodless sacrifices are per-
formed among the Ostiak Samoyeds. These sometimes do
not slaughter the sacrificial deer, but content themselves with
cutting out the face of the god or other strange figures on its
back. After a ceremony of this description the animal is re-
garded as holy, and may not be used for any purpose or
eaten.®

The “sacred places” of the Yuraks are not fenced in,
neither are buildings to be found on them, the idols standing al-


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


140

ways under the open sky.® On the other hand, special buildings
for their idols are met with among the Ostiak Samoyeds. A
building of this kind, hidden away in the forest, is described
by Donner in the following words: “As the dwelling-place
of the gods they use here a building standing on four high
supports, resembling greatly the average barns by the River
Ob. In the fore-wall there was a little opening and against
the back wall stood the god, made of wood and resembling
a human being, together with his marital partner. The face
was very clumsily carved, the eyes formed of two large blue
glass-pearls, imparting a very quaint expression to the old
man. The images were dressed in fine furs and had around
them a number of weapons made of pewter with which to
protect themselves; and, fashioned of the same material,
swans, geese, snakes, reindeer and other animals, by the help
of which they were supposed to be able to flee on the approach
of an unconquerable enemy. Near the door was posted a
little man dressed as a Russian policeman, holding a wooden
sabre in one hand, while in the other he swung a great sword.
The dwelling-place of the gods was furnished with gaudy
cloths and expensive furs, and before the image of the ancestor
the most varying objects lay on the floor, among other things
a great deal of money, of which many coins were a couple of
hundred years old. In the branches of the holy trees sur-
rounding the building garments, horns of animals, hides, etc.,
were hung.”*

Similar spirits, bound to certain fixed places, are also pos-
sessed by the Ostiaks and Voguls in great numbers. The
mightiest of these are honoured by a great circle extended
over a wide area, others again only by a small one, or merely
by the population of a single village. “ All places dedicated
to idols,” says Pallas, “ the boundaries of which are exactly
defined by rivers, brooks, or other marks, are spared by the
Ostial, who neither cut down trees nor mow grass, neither
hunt nor fish, abstaining even from drinking the water within


HEROES


141

their boundaries, for fear of offending the gods. Should they
be obliged to traverse these waters by boat, they are careful
not to approach too closely to the shores or to touch them
with their oars, and if the way through them is very long,
they supply themselves with water before reaching the holy
place, as they would sooner suffer the worst tortures from
thirst than drink of the holy water,” ® These holy places,
however, have not definite boundaries, still less are they fenced
in, but especially in the southern districts there is a little build-
ing resembling a storehouse, intended for the preservation of
offerings and the images. Like their house gods, the spirits
living at fixed holy places of the Ostiaks and Voguls have all
been materialised into images. Most often they have been
shaped as wooden figures resembling human beings, at times
as rag-dolls made out of stuffed sacks or natural stones j fur-
ther, they have also been formed of bronze, copper, lead, or
even of bones. As assistants these have often images resem-
bling various animals. The storehouses for offerings are gen-
erally under the care of a special person, who then also
carries out the sacrifidal ceremonies and receives the offerings,
money, skins, etc. Very often this occupation is hereditary in
the same family.®

That these powerful and dreaded spirits, regarded as being
able to visit people with sickness, were originally human,
has not been forgotten by the people. A part of them are said
to have been former rulers or heroes, whose mighty deeds
are extolled in songs, others are expressly said to be the
founders of the clans. Those again that are furnished with
images of animals were probably famous shamans. An example
of how a powerful spirit is believed to develop out of a man
of mark after death is given by an Ostiak folk-poem, in
which a Vasyugan hero displays an uncommon nobility of
character by burying the body of a dead enemy-hero, erecting
his sword on the grave, and consoling him by saying: “ In
the times of commg daughters, in the times of coming sons.


14a FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

thou shalt be called to life, and thou shalt become an ofFering-
spirit accepting offerings.” ^

At times one may see many images in the same offering-
house. Two hundred years ago, Novitskiy visited a “ great ”
god-house, containing five wooden images resembling human
beings wrapped roxind with “clothes.” Around this chief
buildmg were smaller square store-rooms on posts about the
height of a manj in these were preserved the objects used at
the slaughter of a sacrifice} axes, knives, etc. Separated from
these was another little store-room filled with bones.®

The sacrifices of the Ostiaks and Voguls, which may be
either annual or occasional, do not materially differ from the
corresponding uses of the Samoyeds. According to the oldest
sources, the mouths of the images were besmeared with blood
and fat, and the hides of the animals, with horns and hoofs
attached, hung up in trees. The use of fire as a means of
transmitting the offerings, met with also among the Ostiak
Samoyeds, is most probably of later origin. Like these last
mentioned, the more Eastern, Ostiaks have the custom of occa-
sionally offering up so-called bloodless sacrifices, that is to
say, sacrifices in which the animal is not killed, its “ soul ”
only being made over to the god. Even children may thus
be consecrated to some spirit} the child thus consecrated has
to fulfil certain duties during his lifetime, as, for example,
to marry a wife, or a husband, from the direction of the com-
pass in which the spirit dwells.®

The worshipping of heroes among the Siryans, at the pres-
ent time totally forgotten by them, is described in the Life of
St. Stephen (d. 1396) in the following words: “ In Perm
many kinds of idols were to be found: some large, some small,
others again, of medium size} some were famous and very
fine, others were legion} a part were worshipped only by
few and were shown little honour, but others again were wor-
shipped by people dwelling far and wide. They have certain
idols to whom they travel long distances, bringing them gifts


HEROES


143

from afar, even from districts three or four days* or a week*s
journey away.*’*'’

The brother-tribe of the Siryans, the Votiaks, have even
today forest copses, consecrated to their ancient heroes, and
called lud by them. In earlier times these holy places were
hidden in the forests. The oldest authors to mention the
Votiaks say that these lud were generally in forests of fir.“
Nowadays, as the forests in East Russia have diminished to a
very great degree, having even become quite scarce in some
districts, these consecrated groves have become visible, standing
out on the open plains as memorials of the former forests.
Thus, in the vicinity of the pagan Votiak villages flourish
luxurious sacrificial groves, the tall trees of which have been
held sacred from generation to generation.

Wherever these lud may happen to be, in the forests or
open plains, they are always fenced in. In this respect they
differ from the holy places of the Samoyeds and the other
northern peoples. But common to them all is the super-
stitious fear felt by the people for them. The Votiaks have
nothing else that they hold so sacred as these lud. No one
enters them without due reason, not even on holy days, with-
out taking an offering there. Cattle may not enter them,
branches may not be broken off, not even a stick may be
taken awayj all disturbance is forbidden, and game seeking
shelter there may not be shot at by the hunters. Women and
children avoid them altogether} in passing them , they turn
their heads aside, still less would they ever set foot in them.
Neither may a stranger enter the sacred area. The spirit,
when angered, vents its wrath relentlessly by causing a severe
sickness. Most fear-inspiring, however, is the lud in the
twilight.

The fence surrounding the sacred grove is either of sticks
or boards, or sometimes of plaited branches. As in appear-
ance, so also in height, do they vary in the different districts.
A little gate of boards, swinging on wooden hinges, generally


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


144-

leads to the sanctuary, being open only during the performance
of sacrifices. The direction of these gates varies so much that
it is impossible to conclude that they have been placed to point
to any special point of the compass. Wichmann saw in the
Elabuga District (Bussurman Mozhga) a lud that was divided
into two by a fence j into the inner part only the guardian of
the lud and his assistants were allowed to enter. In this part
was the fireplace and a table for the flesh of the sacrifice.
In the front part, to which the congregation also were ad-
mitted, there was a table for the mutual meal.’^^

In most of the lud which the author was able to see during
his travels, there was, with the exception of the fence, nothing
that might specially draw attention to it. Only in a few
sanctuaries was there a rotted bench, a moss-grown stool, or
a narrow table, used by the Votiaks as an altar on which to
offer up their sacrifices. The offering-table is often placed at
the foot of some thick, centuries-old tree, under which the
sacrificing priest reads out his prayers. It would appear that
the sacrificial ceremonies of the Votiaks were particularly
centred round some old tree. Of this, Buch relates also, from
the Sarapul District, that in the centre of the lud there was
an old tree, the lower branches of which were lopped away to
allow of a freer approach.^

In the larger and much visited groves there was also a
store-like building, without a fireplace, called the lud-kmla
by the Votiaks.^* One of these the author saw in the Mama-
dysh District. It was a small hut, unfitted for a dwelling-
place, with a roof sloping backwards, and a small door, which,
like the gate of the grove, opened towards the west, that is
to say, towards the village. Nothing was to be seen in the hut,
except a shelf of board in the right-hand back corner. The
fireplace was outside the building, between it and the gate.
The old inhabitants relate that the kuda was not as empty in
earlier times as it was then, but was used as a store-place for
offemgs, sacrificial vessels, towels, coins, etc.


HEROES


145

The Votiaks worship in families at the lud; the members of
one family never come to worship in the lui of another
family. Should several /«^-families live in the same village,
just as many groves will be found in its vicinity. A grove in
which a great clan, i.e., many villages, gathers for a mutual
sacrifice, is called a “ great Every lud has its separate

“ guardian,” the post passing down from father to son. Only
when a “ guardian ” is childless, is another member of the
family or clan chosen at a meeting of its members to be a
sacrificing priest. Sometimes, the magician (tuno) chooses a
guardian for the sacred grove.

The guardian has no special ceremonial dress at the sacrifices,
but it is demanded of him that his apparel shall be neat and
clean. Where possible, he must wear a white coat, on his
head a white hat, and white wrappings round his feet, and new
bark-shoes. Cleanliness is also demanded of the congrega-
tion visiting the grove. No one is allowed to enter who has
not bathed beforehand.

The Votiaks make a lad for themselves for many difiterent
reasons. They begin to worship the lad spirit, for example,
in the hope of being delivered from some serious illness, or,
again, they build a fence round a grove, the spirit of which
has revealed itself in a dream, giving the exact situation of
the same. It is the duty of the dreamer to set out at once to
fence in the place shown him in his dream. When the Votiaks
move as settlers to a new neighbourhood, too far away for the
old kid to be conveniently visited, they prepare a new one
for themselves. This may not be done in any place without
calling upon the services of the magician, who bestrides a
young foal that has never been ridden before, and rides with-
out a bit or reins into the forest. The place where the foal
stops is the site of the grove. The Votiaks, however, take care
that the grove is not situated too far from the village.’^'

Sacrifices are not offered up in a new sacred grove until the
“ spirit ” has been brought from the old place. The “ bring-


146 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

ing of the spirit ” is carried out in the same manner as the
mudor-yrtddiing. The Eastern Votiaks relate that their fore-
fathers, for the inauguration of sacred groves in strange neigh-
bourhoods, brought with them ashes from the grove of their
native village. In the same manner Bogayevskiy says of the
Sarapul District, that when the tuno has decided on a site for
a new grove, the sanctuary is removed there with solemn
ceremonies, in which the most important act is the bringing
over of ashes from the old place to be placed on the site of
the fireplace of the new.“

As soon as the lud has been inaugurated for its mission, it
becomes a sanctuary in which yearly sacrifices must be offered
up. This is not only the sacred duty of the founder, but of all
his descendants. Miropolskiy says that though the Russians
may have laid waste a lud, the Votiaks continue to worship
the spirit at the site of the former grove.” Anyone omitting
the proscribed sacrifices is sure to be punished severely by the
/«<^-spirit, who is regarded by the Votiaks as stern and exacting.

Doubtless, the Votiaks formerly had images within their
sacred groves, although we can no longer determine the ap-
pearance of these. The difficulty, for a child of nature, of
grasping the idea of a spiritual being when he has nothing
material to lay hold of, is shown by a fable of the Votiaks
in which it is told how they were at one time so crushed be-
neath material adversities that the duty of sacrificing lay too
heavily upon them and they .decided to abolish this rite. A
Tatar offered to take away the by collecting all the

objects gathered together as offerings in the grove. The
hopes of the Votiaks were, however, dashed again by their
being continuously punished by the spirit. The people be-
lieved this to be due to the fact that the Tatar had not taken
the offerings far enough away, but had cast them on to the
tallage fields.”

Besides occasional offerings, annual saaifices are offered up
by the Votiaks in the Ittd. The annual sacrifices appear to


HEROES


147

have been made chiefly in the summer before hay-making
time, and in the autumn after the conclusion of work in the
fields. The ceremony itself was performed, according to the
most ancient custom, in the evening. Occasional offerings are
made by the Votiaks after every misfortune, especially during
a severe illness, said by the magician {timo) to be a sign that
the demands a sacrifice. It is the magician’s duty to

find out what the spirit wishes as a sacrifice on the varying
occasions. To begin with, however, a promise of sacrifice is
regarded as sufficient. Thus, a few copper coins are bound
up in a rag, with the words: “ With this money, /«<^-spirit, I
buy thee a horse, let the sick not lose his life.” Silver coins
are then placed in the rag, with the words: “ With silver I
deck the mane of thy horse.” Further, a little meal is strewn
there, with the words added: “ Besides which I will bake thee a
loaf, if thou wilt give health to the sick.” The rag bundle is
then hung up in some secret place. Should the sickness not
improve after this, it is regarded as a sign that the spirit wishes
the actual sacrifice immediately.’®

This promise to the lud-s^int is often made by the guardian,
who, as soon as he is informed of the matter, goes out into his
yard or even into the sanctuary with a loaf of bread or a dish
of porridge in his hand, praying in the name of the sick per-
son, that the Z«^^-spirit may be appeased and wait until the
sick person is himself in a condition to offer up his sacrifice.
Sometimes, the promise is again “ renewed ” before the actual
sacrifice. When the /«<^-guardian prays in his own yard, he
keeps his face always turned in the direction in which the
sanctuary is situated.

The day on which an annual sacrifice is to be performed,
is determined by the Z»i-family or lud-dsa. Before the cere-
mony, the participants must all cleanse themselves and put on
clean apparel. To the preparations belong also the collecting
of sacrifice-money by cutting the family-mark of each family
on a stick, the marked lines indicating the amount given.*®


148 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

The lud-spmt always demanding blood-offerings, a foal is
generally used as the victim, but also, at times, a black sheep.

After the conclusion of all these preparations, the actual
ceremony is begun. Only the older males go into the sanc-
tuary, carrying with them the vessels, cauldrons, dishes, pro-
visions, and the sacrificial animal. When the crowd arrives
at the gate of the sanctuary, they greet the spirit by taking off
their head-dress, the guardian himself opening the door and,
as the leading person, going first into the grove, the others
following silently after. As a beginning fire must be made on
the site of the old fires, fallen trees, stumps, or fallen branches
being used for fuel. Towels for the wiping of hands are
brought with them also and hung up in the branches of the
tree. On the altar-table, decked with green boughs and
white cloths, the accompanying loaves and pancakes are piled
up. When the number of worshippers is very great, the food-
offerings are placed on the ground, a white cloth being laid
under the wooden bowl of each family.

Before commencing the sacrifice it must be ascertained
whether the lud-s^mt will accept the offering. This is done
by pouring fresh spring-water by means of a bundle of twigs,
over the saaificial animal, which must be flawless and of one
colour. This ceremony is repeated several times, the lud-
guardian reading softly a prayer the while, until the animal
shivers, which, according to the Votiaks, Chuvashes and Chere-
miss, is a sign that the sacrifice is pleasing to the god.

After the “ sign ” the sacrificing priests begin the slaughter-
ing. Its feet having been bound together, the animal is
turned over on to its left side and the blood allowed to run
dry from the veins in its throat without any previous stunning
of the victim. A few drops of the warm blood are thrown
by means of the sacrifice ladle into the fire. During the
slaughtering, the /«i^-guardian reads out a prayer, holding the
sacrificial bread in his hand. As soon as the animal has been
killed, the hide is flayed from it and the carcase divided in a


HEROES


149

particular way. The chief organs of the body, the heart,
lungs, liver, etc., are cooked separately and when prepared
are set in a special dish. Later, two small fragments are cut
from each quarter of the carcase, from the tongue, lungs,
heart, liver, etc., one of which is placed in a dish on the table,
the other thrown into the fire. During an earlier period, the
pieces now set on the altar-table were hung up in the tree
itself, and in some places it is still said to be usual to thread
them on to a little twig, to the end of which a strip of lime-
bark is bound, probably for hanging up in the tree.®*^ As
other peoples also, including the Lapps, have been in the
habit of cutting small slices from the most important organs of
the sacrificed animal, which were then threaded on to a pole
and fastened to the holy tree, it is apparent that this must
have been an ancient Finno-Ugric custom.

In sanctuaries possessing a building, the offerings are placed
on the corner shelf. This is quite to be expected, for if the
^»^^-spirits, as may be supposed, were at one time materialised
in the form of images, they were certainly situated in the
lud-kual&y together with the offering vessels and the money.
This is further pointed to by the fact that the Votiaks regard
the lud-kuala as being so sacred, that only the /«^^-guardian
may enter it.

From the Life of St. Stephen we may obtain a graphic view
of the ancient lud-kuala sacrifices. Incidentally, the image-
house of the Siryans is mentioned, which was also watched over
by a special “ guardian.” The actual appearance of the build-
ing is not described j it is only stated that within were images,
sacrificmg tables and a great amount of valuables. The saint
is praised for the fact, that out of all that was hung up round
the gods, either as clothing for them, or for their bedecking
themselves, or merely as gifts of sacrifice — skins of sable,
ermine, skunk, beaver, fox, bear, lynx, and squirrel — all these
he gathered together into a pile, and burnt them, smote the
images with an axe on their foreheads and hewed them into


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


150

small pieces, throwing these on the fire, and burning up every-
thing together, the pile with the skins and the images at the
same time. This caused great surprise among the Siryans, who
said: “ Why did he not take all this as booty for himself? ”
In another place we read: “ In the same manner he forbade
his disciples to take away anything from the houses of the idols,
neither gold, silver, copper, iron, pewter, nor any of the objects
mentioned earlier.” ^

When the /«^-spirit has received his share of the sacrifice,
the food is divided according to the number of families taking
part in the sacrifice. Following a very old custom, the whole
of the food must be consumed within the sanctuary and at the
same time. The hide and the larger bones are, following an-
other old custom, hung up in the holy tree.”® Nowadays, hides
are not seen in the groves of the Votiaks, as not even the fact
of their being cut into pieces has been able to protect them from
thieves. On the other hand, one can see among the Eastern
Votiaks whole skeletons of animals hung up with ropes of
bark on the tree. The extreme care with which the flesh of
the sacrifice is carved by the Votiaks, who avoid fracturing any
bone whatever, and the care with which they join these together
in their natural order, appear to be a result of a belief, said by
Bechterev to be prevalent among them, that the sacrificed
animal does not die, but passes living to the Z«i-spirit.”*

A noticeable feature in the lud worship of the Votiaks is,
further, the use of wax candles, not found among the more
northern peoples. These candles are often prepared first in the
grove, where the wax obtained in bee-keeping is kneaded be-
tween the hands rovmd strands of flax.

After the meal, the congregation form up in long rows
while the /»^-guardian prays in a low voice. According to the
oldest custom the prayers, like the slaughtering also, should be
read with the face turned to the west or the north. The con-
tents of the prayer vary in different districts, depending chiefly
on the accidental needs of the sacrificers. The lud-'spint is first


HEROES


151

asked to protect human beings and animals against sickness and
all other evils, and the fields from hail and storms, etc. After
each prayer, read by the guardian, the kneeling congregation
touch the ground with their foreheads. Sometimes the minds
of the worshippers are uplifted by the tones of stringed in-
struments. While the people are leaving the sanctuary, they
bow low to the lud and say: “ Live happily and protect us.”

At times the festival is prolonged in the village at the house of
the “guardian,” where the men and women of the village
gather, and where feast-songs are sxmg in these words: “ The
hid-sgmt has wished us peace and given his blessing.” The
festival may even be prolonged for two or three days.®®

What the origin of this ^«^-spirit was, the Votiaks themselves
do not always know. Many features of the ceremony point,
however, to the worship of the dead. Such features are, e.g.,
the fact that the /«i-spirit, often called the “ ruler ” or “ lord ”
{lud-kuzo, lud-asaha^ or merely lud, appears in dreams in hu-
man shape, that he is fixed to a certain place, and that he is
worshipped by families and is sacrificed to in the evenings with
the face turned to the west or the north. The black sacrificial
animals are also a sign pointing to the worship of the deceased.

As Georgi already relates, the Votiaks sometimes worship in
their lud a spirit called Sulton (=Arabo-Turkish Sultan).®®
The same epithet is applied by the Chuvashes to a spirit dwell-
ing in their sanctuaries, which is called by them kkdmat (?an
Arabo-Turkish word meaning “holy”). To Turco-Tatar
influence points also the belief of the Votiaks that the ludy
when desiring a sacrifice, appears in dreams in the guise of a
Tatar. The lud sacrifices of the Votiaks are, however, not
entirely of foreign origin, for signs that these also worshipped
their ancestors and heroes are not wanting even in our day.
As an example may be mentioned that in Bussurman-Mozhga
(Elabuga District) eleven villages celebrate the memory of the
founder of their line, Mardan. The brave Mardan had in
bygone times come from the north and chosen this village as


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


152

his dwelling-place. Every third year they sacrifice a horse to
him and a cow to his wife, and annually, in addition, a sheep is
sacrificed. The words of thanksgiving uttered during the sacri-
fice to Mardan, are as follows: “Together we sacrifice a horse
to thee. For the fine children and the fine harvest thou hast
given us, we thank thee. Father Mai-dan.”

Further light is thrown upon the Ittd cult of the Votiaks by
the corresponding sacrificial cult of the Cheremiss. Like the
Chuvashes, the Cheremiss call their fenced-in sanctuaries
keremet. Contrary to their attitude towards the groves of the
Nature gods, in which they say sacrifices are made “ upward,”
or “ towards the sun,” sacrifices are here made “ downward,”
or “ towards the night.” The Cheremiss display great dread of
the groves of the “ lower spirits,” in which, where possible,
coniferous trees must grow. A peculiar feature is that in the
keremet no foreign tongue may be spoken, as the spirit dwelling
there “hates foreign tongues.” They often give to their
sanctuaries names such as “ the keremet of our clan.” The
same person may, however, belong to two diflFerent kereniet-
clans. In such cases, the keremet groves are generally con-
secrated to different spirits. At Kurmanaeva (Birsk District)
there is a so-called Svlta-n-keremet, in the sacrifices of which
the people of about twenty-five villages take part. Some vil-
lages have no keremet at all, while in some places a keremet
may belong to a few separate families only. In the Urzhum
District, where this cult has better preserved its original fea-
tures than among the Eastern Cheremiss, one may see several
sacrifice-trees in the same gloomy fir forest, by each of which
the different families offer up their sacrifices.

Where there is only one keremet in a village this is generally
called after the village. At times, the keremet may be called
after its founder, or after the place in which it is situated.
Every clan takes care of its sanctuary, where the collective
sacrifices are offered up by a member of the clan chosen for
the purpose, but where any single member also may make offer-


HEROES


153

ings on his own account. The Cheremiss make their ofiferings
late in the evenings, as after a sacrifice one may neither go out
to visit anyone, nor receive visitors. On the way to the grove,
one must, as far as possible, avoid meeting people. The most
usual sacrifice nowadays is a foal or a black sheep, but earlier
it was very often a black bull.

Like the Votiaks, the Cheremiss at times make only a
promise of sacrifice. The usual method is that money, flour,
honey, or a little loaf prepared specially for the occasion, are
placed in a little bundle, and the worshipper prays to the
keremet-%'^\nt to be appeased and to soothe the agony of the
sick 5 binding himself to carry out the offering on a suitable
occasion. The bundle may be hung up either at home on the
wall of the storeroom, or in the k&remet on the branches of the
sacrifice-tree 5 when the promise is redeemed, the bundle is
burned up. Often the promise is accompanied by the hang-
ing-up of the garments of the sick, or the thrusting in of
some iron implement, an axe, a sickle, or a knife in the wall
of the storeroom, from which they are removed after the
promised animal has been sacrificed. When the Cheremiss
promise a sheep or a bull, they take a little wool or hair from
the promised animal into the grove. If a horse has been
promised, they prepare harness of bai'k, and hang this on the
sacrifice tree as a guarantee to the spirit. At the same time
a few sticks of wood are piled against the tree. Some who
make promises of sacrifice hang up a wax candle with the
objects already mentioned. The promised sacrifice is
slaughtered, like the others, in the evening, as “ should anyone
meet the sacrificer, he would immediately fall ill.” By
means of all the objects that follow the making of a promise
of sacrifice, the Cheremiss attempt to assure the spirit that he
need not wait very long for the redemption of the promise.*’

Where a poorer Cheremiss cannot in due time fulfil his
promise of sacrifice, he must “ renew ” the promise by sacri-
ficing some lesser object. Very usual is the sacrifidng of a


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


154

goose, a duck, or a hare, in the place of a horse. In the Birsk
District the author had the opportunity of seeing how the
population of a village offered up a smaller sacrifice to the
keremet on account of a cattle-plague. Into the sanctuary
only the sacrificing priest and three assistants entered. These
had first to take a bath and clothe themselves in clean garments.
Immediately when they had arrived at the grove, the assist-
ants made a fire, using for this purpose glowing cinders brought
in a pan from the village. Sacrifice bread was kneaded on
the spot and baked on a wooden fork over this fire. When
the loaf, on which two “ noses ” had been impressed by three
fingers held together, was ready, it was placed at the root of
the sacrifice tree. The candles were then made and placed in
hollows in the bark of the tree. The actual sacrifice, a duck,
lay with feet bound together near the tree. Swinging a burn-
ing branch and striking the knife against the blade of the axe,
the “priests” prayed side by side, while the others killed
the duck by cutting its throat. The sacrificing priest poured
a little of the warm blood into the fire, imploring the keremet
to accept the sacrifice, free the cattle from the plague, and
wait until the autumn for the promised horse. When the
flesh of the duck was cooked the sacrificing priest carried it
to the tree, where he cut off small pieces of the heart, liver,
windpipe, neck, breast, back, wings and feet into two bowls,
the contents of one being given through the fire to the kere-
met, of the other to the medium of the saanfice, “ the Fire-
mother.” In each bowl was also laid one of the cut-off
“ noses ” of the sacrifice bread. Before this ceremony, more
prayers had been read before the tree, accompanied by the
swinging of torches and the clang of the knife against the
axe. After the sacrifice of the contents of the bowls, the rest
of the meat was eaten; the remnants were thrown into the fire.

At the sacrifices, one hears the Cheremiss in the Urzhum
District refer to the keref/fet-spirit as the “Old man,” the
“ Great man,” or the “ Prince.” The best known is a spirit


HEROES


155

called the “ Old Man of the Hill ” or as he is also called,
after his dwelling-place, Nemda, “ the Old man of the Nemda
Hill ” or “ the Prince of the Nemda Hill.” Of this worship,
Olearius relates in the first half of the seventeenth century
that the Cheremiss made pilgrimages to the Nemda brook
and sacrificed there. This holy place, he says, is feared greatly
by them: “Any one going there without an offering, perishes,
as the devil is believed to have his habitation there.”

The sacred place mentioned by Olearius, situated in the
Yaransk District, is spoken of also in certain accounts dating
from the former half of the last century. As the Russian
priests exerted much pressure on the Cheremiss at that time
on account of their pagan religion, they knew that these were
in the habit of making sacrifices at a stone, lying on the bank
of the Nemda near the village Tshembulatova, and, therefore,
they destroyed the stone. The spirit worshipped by the Chere-
miss at the stone, was called by them Tshembulat, from which
the village had derived its name.

Nowadays the people no longer gather at the actual dwell-
ing-place of this spirit, but have prepared groves in his name
at different places. Thus, the same spirit may be worshipped
in the groves of many villages. In the neighbourhoods where
tales of the “ Nemda Old man ” have been best preserved,
it is said that he lived by the Nemda brook over which a
“ bridge ” led. Besides a wife he had also officials: a “ book-
keeper,” an “interpreter,” a “guardian of the gate,” and a
“ bridge man,” whose office it was to watch over the bridge.
To each of these it was usual to make a separate offering, a
horse to the Prince himself, a cow to his wife, and to the
others some smaller animal.

Many tales go to prove that this “ great man ” was a former
Cheremiss chief. He is said to have ridden a white stallion
and fought against enemies: “ When he finally succeeded
in re-establishing peace on earth, he called together the Chere-
miss to a stone, and proclaimed the peace to them. He then


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


156

lifted up the stone, and placed himself under it, saying to his
people: ‘ Should war break out again, some one must bestride
a white stallion, and ride three times round the stone, shout-
ing: “ Arise, Chief, there is war on the earth! ” ’ A Cheremiss
did this once out of curiosity, shouted out the necessary words,
and immediately the chief arose, sat himself on his horse and
rode out to the east and west, to the north and the south,
but nowhere could he see signs of war. Then, calling the
Cheremiss together again, he said: ‘As you have fooled me
and called me without cause, you are hereafter my slaves,
and must sacrifice a foal to me annually.’ ”

In some districts he is called “ the Northern Ruler ” and
is said to have command over an invisible army. When sick-
ness is rife among the cattle, the people say: “The Northern
Ruler has sent his warriors to cut down our cattle.” Even
now he is said to ride through the land of the Cheremiss at
times, to see how these are progressing. Should anyone meet
him without knowing who he is, and thus not get out of his
way, an immediate illness is the result, and a horse must be
sacrificed to the spirit. The people even speak of his green
cloak and his red head-dress. He is specially sacrificed to in
times of war.

Besides the widely-known and everywhere highly respected
“ Nemda Prince ” the Cheremiss have other local keremet-
spirits, the fame of which is not so widely spread. The ma-
jority of these have become the objects of worship through
their heroic deeds. The Cheremiss remember their feats even
today. There are many local heroes, especially in the old
dwelling-places of the people. Thus, they make offerings to
“ the Old man of the castle-hill ” and to the “ Hero Aren,”
who fought against the Tatars, but met his death before a
gate, ever afterwards called the “ Hero gate.” At his death
the hero said: “ Remember me, give me a good horse with me
in the grave, and continue the war by slinging stones! ” The
Cheremiss did as their leader had advised. The stones, di-


PLATE XIX

1. The image of the Samoyed, “ Master of the
Forest,” cax’ved on a tree-trunk, (See page 178.)

After photograph by K. Donner.

2. Chcremiss horse-sacrifice to the koremet-spirit
in time of sickness. (See page 1 57.)

After photograph by U. Hohnberg.


HEROES


IS7

rected by the dead hero himself through the air, whistled in
a peculiar manner and destroyed the enemy. On the place
where the hero had died, a keremet was established, in which
the Cheremiss sacrifice a foal in cases of sickness, even today.
A strange inherited custom is connected with this sacrifice as
a memory of those times of war: a stone is cast in the air in
the name of the sick person, and by the whining sound it
makes, the possibilities of recovery are made known.

Together with their own heroes, who ‘‘hate foreign
tongues,” the Cheremiss, like the Votiaks, sacrifice to a spirit
called Sultan. The last named has his own special sanctuaries,
as according to the people’s view, he cannot be worshipped in
the same place as a Cheremiss chief. This may be a relic
from the period of power of the Bolgars, when the independ-
ence of the Cheremiss first began to waver. In any case the
keremet cult already described, corresponding with the ludr-
sacrifices of the Votiaks, proves that the Finnish stocks on the
Volga have had their own princes at one time in history, the
memory of whom they have been able to preserve through
the centuries.

Under the alien name of keremet the Mordvins also wor-
shipped their heroes and the dwelling-places of these. Their
keremet also seems to have been a fenced-in forest-grove.
Even sacrifice store-houses {kudo) and probably also images
were kept by them in their sacred places."

That the Mordvins, like the Votiaks and Cheremiss, sacri-
ficed also to the spirits of alien rulers, is shown by the name
mentioned earlier, Soltan, or Salhta. The hero cult of the
Mordvins is further described by Paasonen as follows:
“ Among the Erza in the Kazan and Samara Governments,
we find a deity called Staka Pas (“ the heavy god ”), who is
honoured with special sacrifices, and entreated not to launch
“ his heaviness ” (evil generally) upon the people. In some
parts, a divine couple, popularly supposed to be husband and
wife, and bearing many names — e.g., Onto and Bonto —


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


158

are invoked by the epithet of Staka Pas, while elsewhere the
“heavy god” is addressed in sacrificial prayers as Kan Pas,
Kuvan Pas, and regarded as living “ in the black earth.”
The word Kan^ the signification of which is now unknown to
the people themselves, is simply the Tatar Kan (“ prince ”),
so that Kan Pas means “god-prince”; Kuvan again is most
probably derived from the Turkish title kagan, which in Chu-
vash or Bolgar would be pronounced kugany and in Mordvin
may easily have become kuvan. The Mordvins having been
at one time under the rule of the Volga Bolgars, of whom the
present day Chuvash are a descendant people, it is quite prob-
able that “ the heavy god ” was originally the spirit of some
Turkish ruler. Similarly, the other heavy gods. Onto and
Bonto, etc., are perhaps the rulers of an earlier age.'*®

Of a corresponding sacrificial cult among the Baltic Finns
we have no reliable information. We need not doubt, how-
ever, that they also had their heroes whom they worshipped.
The Esthonians and the Finns have preserved a common name
hiisi^ which originally meant “ forest ” but later also “ sacri-
ficial grove.” Hiisi, as the spirit dwelling within these was
also called, is generally regarded as an evil spirit, like the Ivd
of the Votiaks. An old tale has been recorded in Esthonia,
according to which the “Thunder god” thrived best in a
forest of leaf-trees, but Hiisi best among coniferous trees.
Here the same difference is made between the worship of
the Nature god and the underground spirits, as the Cheremiss
observe today. The old folk-traditions relate further, that
groves of this description among the Baltic Finns were fenced
in. That they even possessed sacrifice buildings in their sanc-
tuaries, is shown by the Papal Bull of Pope Gregory IX in
the year 1229, in which he allows Bishop Thomas to accept
the sacrificial groves and image-houses (lucos et delubra^y
presented to him by the converted heathen.®”

Doubtless also among the ancient heroes of Finnish song
were many who at one time were worshipped.


CHAPTER X

HOUSEHOLD SPIRITS


T he anthropomorphic household spirit of many Euro-
• pean peoples was unknown to the forefathers of the
Finno-Ugric race. Even now it is rare or unknown among the
Ostiaks and Voguls. A later spirit is the Russian Lapland
Kyode jielle (“the One who dwells in the tent”) or P6rt
hozjin (“Household ruler”). Of this latter, it is related
that he lives under the fireplace, and may sometimes appear
in the shape of a dog. To appease him the Lapps offer up
sacrifices to him and are glad when he leaves the house. By
the fireside where he dwells, there is a spot where women ate
afraid to go or to step over. This household spirit is without
doubt borrowed from the Russians (Aorz/m— Russian Aoz-
yaln). Through the Finns, the Lapps have made the ac-
quaintance of the Tonto (Finnish Tonttu = Swedish Tomte). ^
The spirit dwelling in the house is called by the Votiaks
Korka-murt (“ House man ”) or Korka-kuzo (“ House
ruler ”). His chief dwelling-place is under the floor, for which
reason he is sometimes called “the Ruler dwelling under
the floor.” As may be concluded already from the word mart
(“ man ”) this spirit has the outward form of a man. The
“ House man ” shows himself very seldom} when this happens,
it is a forewarning of death or other misfortunes. When he
does appear he resembles sometimes the master of the house.
Generally speaking, he is a kindly and useful spirit, pro-
tecting the inhabitants of the house from strange spirits and in
every way looking after the interests of the house. He may
even at times take part in the household duties. The Votiaks


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


i6o

relate that he sometimes spins in the night, if for some reason
or other, the womenfolk have been hindered from finishing
their day’s task. When the “ House man ” is given cause
for anger, he annoys sleepers in the form of the nightmare,
tangles hair and beards in the night, and hinders the success-
ful conclusion of tasks. Little children are never left alone in
the house, as it is believed that the “ House man ” can substitute
changelings for them.“‘

Whenever the “ House man ” in one way or another shows
signs of being offended, he must be appeased by sacrifices.
The sacrifice, which with the Votiaks generally takes the form
of a black sheep, must be killed under the floor, where the
spirit dwells. In the ceremony, in which the master of the
house plays the part of the sacrificing priest, only members of
the family may take part, as the flesh of a sacrifice may not
be offered to strangers. Pieces of the meat and the bones
of the sacrificed animal are buried in a hole dug under the
floor, into which the victim’s blood is also allowed to run
during the slaughtering. The flesh of the sacrifice is cooked
and eaten, as a rule, in the house itself. Besides occasional
offerings, regular sacrifices are made at certain times to the
“ House man.” Usually, the Votiaks sacrifice to him in the
autumn, after the conclusion of agricultural work, a goose or
duck and also porridge} the bones of the bird together with
the porridge and a spoon are placed under the floor. The
person carrying out the sacrifice reads out the following prayer:
“Thus do I sacrifice to Thee, O Spirit dwelling under the
floor, a goose. Do not frighten us. Be pleased to accept the
sacrifice offered. Give to me and my family and dependants
peace and happiness.” In some places offerings are also made
during the summer, at the time when the sheep are driven in
to be clipped. Where a suitable victim is not to be found in
the flock, the ceremony is postponed to a later date, and at
the time a promise only is given along with the porridge,
part of which must be buried under the floor.®


HOUSEHOLD SPIRITS i6i

Above all, the Votiaks regard it as a duty to sacrifice to the
“ House man ” when they first establish themselves in a new
house. We find Georgi already relating that the Votiaks, on
moving into a new house, sacrifice a black sheep.* The re-
moval into a new house has in certain Votiak territory acquired
a festival character — the “house-wedding” {korka^suan).
All the relatives and friends gather in the house, bringing
gifts. The most important ceremony is the killing of the
sacrifice under the floor of the new dwelling. In the Sarapul
District it is the custom for the master of the house, accom-
panied by his wife, to step under the floor, bearing pancakes
and home-distilled spirits and a young fir about a yard high,
and there deliver a promise of sacrifice. The master of the
house sets up the green fir tree in a corner, takes a branch of
the tree in his hand and kneels down beside it. His wife
spreads a tablecloth before him on which she places a pancake.
She then pours spirits into a goblet and offers it to her hus-
band. The latter, with the goblet in his right hand and the
branch in his left, reads out a prayer, in which he prays that
the dwelling now completed may be comfortable to live in
even until old age and death, and he promises to sacrifice
a black sheep. After the prayer he drinks up the spirits and
tastes also of the pancake. The promised sacrifice is made
later. While its flesh is being cooked, the master of the
house prays on his knees for happiness, riches, and everything
that is good for the new home, pointing out that he is now
fulfilling the promise given. At times even a bull may be
sacrificed. On the day of the sacrifice, nothing may be given
away from the homestead, and the animal to be sacrificed may
not be killed on the bare earth, but on twigs of fir.®

Besides the “ House man,” the Votiaks sacrifice also to the
“ Cattleyard man ” (Gid-kuzo). This also is an anthropomor-
phic, kindly spirit, which, in the sheds, looks after the cattle
and sees that they duly increase, protecting them from beasts
of prey and sickness. The “ Cattleyard man ” also looks after


i 62


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


the provender of the cattle, as the Votiaks believe that he
drives away strange spirits of like kind, when these come to
their neighbours’ sheds to steal provender. He dwells chiefly
in the stables. The horses that please him are cured for and
fed by himj he will even, at times, plait their manes and
tails j but others which he hates, he tortures by riding them to
exhaustion during the night. A folk-tale relates how a farmer
spread resin on his horse’s back, and in the morning, coming
into the stable, saw a little old man, about half-a-yard long,
sitting stuck fast there.® As in the case of the “ House man,”
both occasional and regular sacrifices are offered up to the
“Cattleyard man.” The Eastern Votiaks are in the habit
of sacrificing a capercailzie in the cattle sheds when a cow is
sick, and a brace of pike for horses. In some districts it is
customary to offer up once for each foal the above fish-sacri-
fice, so that these may, as horses, shine like the pike. The fish,
however, is not cooked, but burned as it is in the cattleyard.

The yearly sacrifices in honour of the “ Cattleyard man ”
occur both in the spring, when the cattle are let loose to pas-
ture, and in the autumn, when they are shut up in the cattle-
folds again. In most places, it has now become the rule to
give only a promise of sacrifice together with bread or porridge
in the spring, the promise being fulfilled in the autumn if the
cattle have been healthy out in the pastures and have in-
creased. The sacrificial ceremony, in which only members
of the family may take part, greatly resembles the ceremony
under the floor, described earlier, the only difference being
that the sacrifice intended for the “ Cattleyard man ” is burned
in the cattleyard. Even the animals used are the same as in
the sacrifice under the floor. In the prayers, the appeal is
for fat horses and milch-cows, enough to fill the whole yard,
or one may also say: “ Be vigorous and strong, drive out the
strange spirit, protect the cattle and banish all evil from the
yard! ” ^

The bath-house spirit is called the “Bath-house man”


HOUSEHOLD SPIRITS


1^3

(Munt'so-murt) or the “ Bath-house ruler ” (Munt'so-kuzo).
He lives in a dark corner of the bath-house and resembles
in appearance a tall, middle-aged man, dad in a white shirt
and shoes of lime-bark, or he may also be tall and have only
one eye. Sometimes this being speaks and cries like a suckling
babe. He appears to human beings only before some mis-
fortune.

The “Bath-house man” plays pranks with the bathers,
sometimes hiding their underdothing, at times binding together
the sleeves of their shirts or turning them inside out, in this
way hindering their dressing. His nature is more evil than
that of the spirits described above. It is not advisable to go
alone into the bath-house, neither is it wise to quarrel there or
speak loudly. Like the “ House man,” the “ Bath-house man ”
can also substitute changelings in the place of rightful infants.
In both the foregoing cases, a piece of iron or some other
metal is used as an amulet. This spirit is rarely sacrificed to.®

In the threshing-barn lives the “ Threshing-barn man ”
(Obiri-murt). Sacrifices are offered up to him in the autumn,
. so that he may refrain from becoming angry and frightening
folk, but instead protect the threshing-barn from fire and
storm. For these sacrifices a goose or a duck is chosen, or,
at times, a sheep, which is killed by the head of the family in
the threshing-barn, or on the threshing-floor, on to which the
blood is also allowed to drip. The flesh of the sacrifice is
cooked at home, after which all return to the scene of the kill-
ing for prayers, the food being also brought there. In the
end, the remains of the sacrifice and the bones are buried under
the threshing-barn. Besides blood-offerings a sheaf of grain
is often left on the beams of the threshing-barn after the
conclusion of the threshing, for the use of the “ Threshing-
barn man.” *

If one compares the household spirits of the Votiaks with
the corresponding ones of the Russians, one cannot detect any
difference even in the nature of the sacrifices. The “ Korka-


1 64 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

murt ” of the Votiaks is identical with the Domovoy of the
Russians. Sometimes he is also given the Russian name
Susetka, which is used especially by the Siryans, whose folk-
lore has generally adapted itself to the Russian. The Siryan
Susetka dwells under the floor, like the Votiak “ House man,”
where sacrifices in his honour must be placed. Like these he
is a kindly spirit, which looks after and protects the prosperity
of the house. If he becomes angry, all kinds of misfortunes
are met with, manual labour turns out badly and the cattle
grow thin, as the Susetka neglects to feed them. Sometimes
he attacks human beings in the shape of a nightmare or kisses
them in their sleep so that painful blisters appear on their lips.
At times, he spins and makes a noise as though he were building
something, but this is never a good sign, being followed by
death, fire, or other misfortunes. When the Siryans remove
into a new house, they also endeavour to appease the house spirit
with sacrifices. Rogov relates that at a removal, the master
of the house takes a picture of a saint from the corner of his
old dwelling, goes down with this under the floor and calls
to the house spirit in the following words: “ Susetka, my
brother, let us dwell also in the new. Love my cattle and my
family.” 'In the new home, the picture is placed in a corner,
and the house spirit is bidden to take up its dwelling under
the floor. According to a general belief among the Siryans,
the household spirit does not move into the new house until
the fireplace is ready.

As with the Votiaks’ “ House man,” foreign models are
to be found for their “ Cattleyard man,” “ Bath-house man ”
and “ Threshing-barn man ” among the Russians, from whom
the Siryans also here have borrowed their spirits. The
“ Threshing-barn man ” of the Votiaks corresponds with the
Siryan Rynys olysa (‘*thc one who lives in the threshing-
barn ”) or the Rynys-aika (“ Threshing-barn man ” ), the
“Bath-house man” of the former with the Pyvian oly4a
(“ The one who dwells in the bath-house ”) or the Pyv^an-


HOUSEHOLD SPIRITS 165

aika (“ Bath-house man ” ) of the latter/^ As the buildings
themselves inhabited by these spirits are not originally Finno-
Ugric, the spirits also must be of later origin. The dwelling-
place of the “ House man ” under the floor points to the
assumption that the Votiaks cannot have worshipped this spirit
at the time when they still lived in the old >^««Z«-dwellings,
where there was no floor. It is worth mentioning in this
connection, that the “ House man ” has never had the kmla,
in which the Finno-Ugric family gods are considered to dwell,
ascribed to it as a dwelling-place.

The anthropomorphic spirit dwelling in the house is called
Port-oza (“ House ruler ”) by the Cheremiss, but when pray-
ing to it, two names are used, Port-kuguza (“ House man ”)
and Port-kuva (“House woman”). The spirit appears at
times, especially before some important event, in the form of
a man or woman clad in the old Cheremiss fashion. If, for
some reason, it becomes angry, it can bring about many kinds
of misfortune among the family or in the home; thus it may
cause illness. The Cheremiss sacrifice to it, so that it will
not be angry or bring troubles upon the house. When ap-
peased, or otherwise contented, it protects the home from
robbers, fire, and spirits of sickness, and brings happiness and
prosperity to the family. For this reason the Cheremiss pray
very often to it. Every evening, when their women retire
for the night, they oflFer up, in the name of the family, the
prayer: “ ‘ House man,’ ‘ House woman,’ give success and
health! ” Besides those made for accidental reasons, annual
sacrifices are olfered up to the household spirit. In some dis-
tricts it is the custom to go under the floor every autumn, bear-
ing beer, porridge, bread or pancakes, to beg for happiness
for the home from the spirit, or a sheep may also be annually
sacrificed. Sometimes, a black ram is sacrificed to the male
spirit, and a black sheep to the female.

Above all, the “ House man ” and “ House woman ” are
worshipped with bread and pancakes at the removal into a


i66


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


new house, when they are implored to make the new house
happy, to give children, and to bring riches and other good
things. They are also often prayed to for happiness when the
first layer of logs is laid in its place. Even at the grove-
sacrifices, when all the gods and spirits are remembered, a
drink-offering is presented to the household spirits.

An evil household spirit of Tatar origin is the Suksendal,
which is believed to disturb the peace of the people of the
house. It creates disturbances in the night, troubles people in
the guise of nightmares, and has sexual intercourse with people
in their sleep, appearing in the form of a man to women, and
in the form of a woman to the men. Further, it deposits
changelings in the place of children left alone in the house.
To protect the latter from harm, the Cheremiss mother places
a pair of scissors or some other iron object in the cradle. The
SukSendal can not only do harm in the house, but can also
molest human beings in the bath-house, where it may even kill
a person paying a late visit there.

The cattleyard spirits are the Vit'sa-kuguza (“ Cattleyard
man ”), the Vit'sa-kuva (“ Cattleyard woman ”), believed
by the Cheremiss to protect the cattleyard. They can appear
to the inhabitants of the house in human form. If the
“ Cattleyard woman ” likes the cattle, she causes them to in-
crease, but where the cattle are displeasing to her, she refuses to
protect them, neither does she cause their increase, but is instead
cruel to them in many ways during the night. Thus, she
drives them from place to place and prevents them from
grazing in peace. In order to cause her to care for the herds,
and refrain from molesting them, the Cheremiss offer up a
hen to her. According to their statements, the cattleyard spirit
is an old woman, who appears clad in white in the folds among
the cattle in the evenings,

A spirit who feeds some animals and worries others —
especially horses — by riding on them the whole night
through, so that these appear quite worn-out and limp in the


HOUSEHOLD SPIRITS 167

morning, is called by the Cheremiss generally Vit'sa-oza
(“Cattleyard ruler”). The name is, however, never men-
tioned by the Cheremiss in their prayers, who turn instead to
the “ man ” and “ woman'.”

The “ Bath-house spirit ” (Mot'sa-oza), most often re-
garded as an evil spirit which disturbs the bathers, is not wor-
shipped by the Cheremiss. Only when a new bath-house is
heated for the first time, do they set a little butter on the
benches, “ so that the bath shall be good.” The person ofFer-
ing up the butter utters during the ceremony; ‘“Bath-house
man,’ eat up the butter! ”

The watermill spirit is the Vaks-oza (“ Mill ruler ”), which
has also the power to appear in human form, sometimes as a
man, at others as a woman. This last is decorated over the
breast with silver coins. The mill spirit lives in the mill under
the floor, or behind the water-wheel, and is friendly to the
miller, whom it helps. Old millers, notably, are in league
with the mill spirit. When the mill spirit is angry and the
grinding goes badly, the miller sets out a dish of porridge as
a sacrifice under the floor of the mill or in some other suitable
spot. In the porridge-offering a pat of butter must be placed
and a spoon given along with it. The Cheremiss declare that
from the nature of the difficulties that beset him, the miller
can interpret the present needs of the mill spirit.

A spirit in the shape of a human being dwells also in the
threshing-bam. The “ Threshing-barn man ” (Idem-kuguza)
or “woman ” (Idem-kuva) shows itself early in the morning,
disappearing when one approaches it. In the ritual in the
sacred grove a drink-offering is made to the “ Threshing-barn
man” and “woman,” and they are remembered also in the
harvest-festival ceremonies. A blood-offering may even be
made to them at the threshing-barn.“

These Cheremiss household spirits bear also plain marks of
Russian influence, which is equally evident in the correspond-
ing beliefs of the Turco-Tatars in East Europe. Another


i68


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


anthropomorphic spirit is the Kardas-sarko (“ Yai'd-sarko ”) of
the Erza Mordvins, which lives beneath a stone situated in the
courtyard and is generally represented as a male, though some-
times also as a female. But coincidently with these beings who
clearly possess human characteristics, certain more primitive
beliefs are found among both the Chcremiss and the Mord-
vins, which may perhaps throw some light on the origin of the
household spirits. These peoples had animated the buildings
themselves. This appears plainly in Mordvinian folklore j
while the parting words of a newly-married girl are: “ Dear
house, I have sojourned long in thy warm shelter.” The
household spirit Kud-ava (“ House mother ”) or Kud-
azerava (“House mistress”) is originally the house itself,
although these terms may at times be also used with a similar
meaning to that of the Russian Domovoy. The more primitive
meaning is discernible in the following examples: In a Mok-
sha magic prayer the passage occurs: “ House mistress, pardon
him who built thee and heats thee.” And in an Erza petition
of a similar character we read: “House mother, above
is thy lime-bark (the roof is thatched with this material),
beneath arc thy beams.” The dwelling-place as a whole, i.e.,
with the adjoining buildings, designated as jurt by the Mord-
vins, has a special spirit of its own, the Jurt-ava (“ Dwelling-
place mother”), known also among the Moksha as Jurt-
azerava (“Dwelling-place mistress”). In addition, they
speak of the “ Bath-house mother,” the “ Mill mother,” etc.
The protectress of a whole village is the Vel'-ava (“ Village
mother”).^* The Cheremiss, amongst whom the dwelling-
place and all objects connected with it are also regarded as
animated beings, impressionable and capable of feeling, believe
that the kudo^ their ancient dwelling-house, and the more
modern fort^ are fitted like human beings with a “soul”
{prt) which can depart from its habitation. If one quarrels,
shouts, smokes too much tobacco in the house, or keeps the
place untidy, the “ soul ” disappears. “ You drive away the


HOUSEHOLD SPIRITS 169

soul from my house,” say the Cheremiss when anyone disturbs
the peace of their homes. Has the soul departed, then the
house is no longer “ happy,” “ life begins to be wearisome in
it,” and “ the building has received hvirt.” When the building
creaks in the night, the Cheremiss say “ the building’s ‘ soul ’
moves.” In empty dwellings, which have been deserted for
some time, there is no “ soul,” as they no longer “ live.” The
soul of the building cannot in this primitive state take on any
definite appearance, but is, as the Cheremiss say, merely
the “ prosperity,” the “ happiness,” or the “ comfort ” of the
house. An equally indefinite soul have the cattleyard, the
threshing-barn, etc. As the “ soul ” of buildings was believed
to be able to deliver itself from its material dwelling-place,
it is hardly to be wondered at that gradually the thought
arose, that these, like other souls, might at times become
visible, e.g., in the shape of some domestic animal, a cat or a
dog.” Later, the “ soul ” of buildings may have become
identifiable with those of departed human beings or family
gods, and thus have borrowed from these last also their human
characteristics.

Among the Cheremiss and the Mordvins the bee-garden has
also its special tutelary genius. The former call this the
Miiks-ort (“ Bee-soul ”). The Moksha Mordvins worship
the Neskeper-ava (“ Bee-garden mother ”) as the protective
spirit of the bees; the Erza Mordvins use the name Neske-pas
(“ Beehive god ”).“

The Baltic Finns, who form a group by themselves, call
the household spirit “the Ruler” (Finnish Haltia, Esthonian
Haldja). Without doubt, this “ Haltia,” which according to
the Ingrians was “not made nor brought, but was in and
through itself,” has the same origin as the ort of the Chere-
miss.” Like this last, the Finnish Haltia needs no food. But
one must do honour to him in every way. When settling in
a new dwelling, and even when staying anywhere for the night,
permission must first be begged of this “ Ruler.” If ^ny


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


170

rapping sound be heard in the house, it is regarded as a sign
o£ permission to do so. Similarly, when entering a room for
the first time that day, one must always remember to say:
“ Good morning. Ruler,” In this case, also, the answer is
a rap.^’

Every room with a roof-tree had its own Haltia, as this
last was supposed to live in the roof-tree. According to
another report, he took possession of the house as soon as
three logs had been crossed, and when the building was de-
molished and the logs laid in a pile, the Haltia cried with
fear lest he became homeless. But if even one log was taken
into use, he removed with this into the new house. “ In order
that the Haltia should not feel lonely in the new house,”
the ashes from all the hearths were taken over to the new
fireplaces.^

According to the prevalent view, the Haltia could become
visible at limes, but he appeared only before some misfortune.
In Ingria the Haltia is said to have appeared at such times in
the shape of a dog or a mottled or striped cat. This was a
sign of fire.^® The Haltia of a house was also pictured as a
human being. According to a belief prevalent in Finland,
the person who died first in the house, or the one who lit the
first fire there, became the Haltia of the house. Especially
was it supposed to appear in the shape of the first departed
master or mistress of the house. As such, it was generally
kind to everyone, and had special care, in particular, of the
provisions. The male Haltia was of higher rank than the
female, just as in life the master had stood above the mistress}
but children grew up better where the Haltia was a woman.
Both the male and female Haltia were better at the tasks
which they had carried out while alive} under the care of a
male Haltia the horses flourished, and similarly, cows, sheep,
pigs and poultry under that of the female. Other buildings
also, and even vessels, had their Haltia. That of the latter
was intimately connected with the keel of the vessel. The


HOUSEHOLD SPIRITS


171

Haltia of a church was sometimes regarded as being of equal
height with the church.^®

The Baltic Finns have to a very great extent been under
the influence of the Scandinavians. The Finnish Haltia and
all the beliefs now connected therewith find their counterpart
in the Swedish Ra or Radare (“ ruler”). Of Swedish origin,
as may be seen from its name, is the Finnish Tonttu (Swedish
Tomte) with human characteristics, concerning which Bishop
Agricola says, that he “ guided the house.” In some districts
a special, clean room was furnished for the Tonttu. The
room had to contain a table laid with untouched food, which
was renewed a few times each week. With the exception of
the person who looked after the food, no one was allowed to
live in this room.®^

Of the outhouses, the Tonttu occupied the bathhouse,
stables, mill, and above all, the threshing-barn. Every thresh-
ing-barn had its Riihitonttu (= Swedish Ritomte) who stole
grain from the neighbours* fields and carried it to his own
threshing-barn. The threshing-barn Tonttu looked after the
threshing-barn, but if he was offended, he began to carry away
grain from the house or would soon burn up the whole thresh-
ing-barn. He was wished a good-morning in the mornings,
and in the evenings, when the fires were lit there, the Tonttu
was begged to keep an eye on them, and wished good-night.
Should one desire to stay overnight in the threshing-bam, one
had to request permission of the Tonttu, and on no account
could one lie down near the hearth. He appeared sometimes
in grey clothes and wearing a grey hat on his head. Porridge
and milk were offered up to him behind the threshing-barn
fireplace.

According to some beliefs, the threshing-barn Tonttu was
born of the last sheaf of grain that was cut in the fields. The
sheaf was placed on the rafters of the barn for the whole
year. At times, it was left for many years; and “ during this
period the spirit was supposed to come forth.” When it was


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


172

desired to ask on Christmas Eve what the next year’s harvest
would be like, the master of the house had to proceed to the
threshing-barn and ask: “ Good Tonttu, say what kind of year
we may expect.” If the threshing-barn creaked in reply, a
good year might be hoped for.““

Among the household spirits may also be included a being,
which gathers all kinds of good things from other places for its
owner. The Votiaks, who perhaps have appropriated this spirit
from the Russians, call it the “ Bearer.” It is said to resemble
a cat, and assists its owner by bearing grain to him from other
people’s granaries. The animistic chai’acter of this being is
shewn by the belief that if the “ cat ” is killed, the owner of
the same dies likewise.^*

The Finns call this spirit the Para, after the Swedish Bjara
or Bara (“Bearer”). In Ingria there are Money-, Bread-,
and Milk-Paras. In some districts in Finland also, the Para
has brought its owner money and rye, and even, at times,
manure from the fields of neighbours. Generally, however,
the Para is regarded as the bearer of milk, cream and butter.
As such, it was usually believed to have the shape of a cat.®*
The “ Butter-cat ” of the Scandinavians is identical with the
Smierragatto of the Lapps.®® Anyone who desired to own
such a spirit, could, according to the Finns, create one for
himself. Its material body was fashioned, for example, out
of cast-ofiF female garments, the head of a thread-ball, and the
foot of a spindle. Each of these objects had to be stolen.
The milk, or other commodities brought by the Para to the
house, was carried by it either in its mouth or in its intestines.
If the door of the milk-closet was left open during the night,
empty milk and butter dishes would be found full in the
morning. The Seed-Para left a narrow track through the
fields from which it had stolen grain.®®

The same spirit is called Puuk by the Esthonians (Platt-
deutsch Puk; Latvian Puhkis). The Money-Para of the
Ingrians, which flies through the air like a meteor, is identical


HOUSEHOLD SPIRITS 173

with the Esthonian’s Tulihand fire-tail ”)? or Kratt (ancient
Scandinavian skratti, “ ghost”). The Esthonian Kratt, which,
like the Finnish Para, could be manufactured of certain ma-
terials, carried money, etc., in a sack. Food was offered up to
it — generally porridge and milk. If, during its flight through
the air, one succeeded in unloosing all the bindings and buttons
of one’s garments, the Kratt fell down upon the ground with
all its treasures.®’ In Finland also the Kratti was known,
where, as Bishop Agricola relates, it “ had the care over
property.”

A spirit flying through the air like a “ fire-worm ” — a
meteor — the Votiaks call by a Tatar name, Ubyr. It is en-
tirely evil in its ways, drinking the blood of sleeping persons}
where this has happened blue marks are left on the body.
The Ubyr may be either the soul of a living sorcerer, or that
of an evil dead person. It can be brought to the ground in
the same way as the Kratt of the Esthonians.®®

On the boundary between the property of two neighbours,
dwelt, according to the Finns, Raja-aija Boundary man ”).
In West Finland they have a saying: “ shouts like the Bound-
ary man.” It is believed that when the “ Boundary man ”
shouts, there is no echo in response, and that he appears when
boundary lines are dishonestly moved. In East Finland, ac-
cording to ancient report, the people sacrificed on the boundary
stones.®"

The treasures hidden away in the earth had also their
“ Ruler ” (Finnish Aarnion Haltia), and over them, on cer-
tain holyday nights. Midsummer’s Eve in particular, one
could see blue flames.®"

All the above mentioned beliefs have their counterpart
among the Teutons and Slavs.

The Esthonians in Krasna, who have continuously wor-
shipped their old “ land gods,” sacrifice to the “ Father of
the home ” (Kodojeza) in a corner of their orchards. This
holy or “purified” spot could be entered by women once


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


174

only in their lives, i.e., after their wedding ceremony. It
was the duty of the master of the house to look after the place
and offer up sacrifices there, choosing as assistant a “pure”
person. Besides occasional offerings for some reason or other,
the ceremony of the “family-beer” {perekahi) was per-
formed every autumn. A portion of all the flesh cooked in
the house from sacrifices, would be taken over to the “ puri-
fied spot.”

In order to understand the genesis of the “ pure spot ” of
the Esthonians, it is necessary to glance at a similar custom
among peoples related to them. The Votiaks, who no longer
possess their older dwelling-house, kuala, have the same sacri-
fices in a corner of their yards as the other Votiaks in their
kuala. The site of the old kudo is also regarded as “holy”
by the Hill Chcremiss.®“ May one assume that the family-
sacrifice of the Krasna Esthonians to the “ father of the
home” (a “village god,” Kiilajumal, is also known) is
identical with the autumn sacrifices of the Volga Finns to their
family gods? In that case one could understand also the Finns’
habit of offering up all kinds of first-fruits at the root of a
holy tree or a holy stone in the vicinity of the home. Old
sacrificial ceremonies often continue to exist under changed
circumstances.

In the offerings to household spirits by the Finno-Ugric
peoples it would appear that they, most of all felt the need of
appeasing the underground spirits. Traces of an old Indo-
European custom of sacrificing a human victim under certain
buildings, are to be found among the Volga Finns, who sacri-
ficed children under a new watermill.®* The Mordvins are
said to have expressed the following wish at this ceremony:
“ Be the Ruler of the mill, the Mill mother! ” ®* But from
this the conclusion can by no means be drawn that the house-
hold spirits of the Finno-Ugric peoples, the majority of which
spirits are direct loans from neighbouring peoples, were
originally human beings sacrificed under their buildings.


CHAPTER XI
FOREST SPIRITS

A S IN olden days, hunting was one of the chief means
of existence of the Finno-Ugrian tribes, it is but natu-
ral that they should have peopled the forests with all kinds of
spirits.

Missionaries relate that the Scandinavian Lapps worshipped
a Forest spirit, which was called Leib-olmai (“ Alder man ”).
The Lapps honoured him “ in order that he might give them
luck in hunting.” The following description by Randulf
shows that the above mentioned spirit was especially the pro-
tector of bears; “ Leib-olmai is a bear-man or bear-god, who
protects the bear, the holy animal, and who also presents it
to the Lapps when they pray and call to him for it.” He re-
lates further that where the Lapps had not asked for the as-
sistance of Leib-olmai, they not only lost their prey, but in
addition the god might help the bear, when it would rush
upon its assailants. Therefore the Lapps consult their magic
dnuns before himting the bear and pray the spirit not to
take the bear’s part.^

The older sources of information do not mention actual
ofiFerings to Leib-olmai nor anything about the manner of
offering. Randulf only states that hunting equipment, bows
and arrows, were offered up to him. According to J. Kildal,
Leib-olmai looks down on the female sex. A woman may not
walk round a tent where there is a gun, this being regarded
as in some way connected with the Forest spirit. Forbus says
further, that the custom of sprinkling extract of alder-bark
on the hunters’ faces at the bear-feasts, was carried out in
Leib-olmai’s honour.* The name of the Forest god, “the


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


176

Alder man,” has probably been derived from this magic cus-
tom. Judging by this, “ Leib-olmai ” would seem to be neither
more nor less than the genius or race-soul of the bear.

According to Charuzin the Russian I^apps woi'ship a Forest
spirit which they call Luot-hozjilc = Russian choz-

yaikuy “hostess”). She looks after the reindeer when
they wander in freedom in the forests in the summer, keeping
them together, showing them good pastures, and protecting
them from beasts of prey. From human beings she cannot,
however, protect the flocks. She helps the hunters to catch
the wild reindeer and the Lapps are not afraid of her. When
they drive their reindeer out to pasture in the spring, they
pray to this Forest spirit — “ Luot-hozjik, protect our rein-
deer.” And in the autumn, should they recover all their
flock, they say: “We thank thee, Luot-hozjik for protecting
our reindeer.” This Forest spirit, which lives on a mountain
covered with lichen, resembles a human being in having a
human face and walking on human feet, but the body is htury
all over like a reindeer’s.*

The same Forest spirit may be the one spoken of by Genetz,
Mintys. In one tale a being named Mientus appears which
at times is like a male reindeer, but by casting off its horns is
turned into a human being.* Originally Mientus meant
“ wild reindeer,” and is probably their genius as Leib-olmai
is that of the bear. Their reindeer spirit the Russian Lapps
call Pots-hozjin (“Reindeer-master”) and Pots-hozjik
(“ Remdeer-mistress ”), who have the same duties as Luot-
hozjik.®

The Russian Lapps also speak about the tutelary genius of
the wolf} by treating a wolf very roughly, one could scare
this spirit into keeping its wards in check.

Among the Western I.,apps the tutelary genius of the migra-
tory birds is the Barbmo-akka («M« = “old woman”} cf.
harbmolodde^ “migratory bird”), who brings back the birds
to the northern countries from the warm south. Further, the


FOREST SPIRITS


177

protecting spirit of birds is called “ Loddis-edne (“ Bird-
mother ”).®

A Forest spirit resembling the Russian Lesiy is the Eastern
Lapps’ Miehts-hozjin (“ the Master of the forest ”) who
according to Genetz is also called Vare-jielle (“Forest-
dweller ”). He is a black being with a tail, and does not do
any harm to human beings unless provoked. When anyone
shouts, sings or makes a noise in the forest, he becomes of-
fended, and bewilders the culprit so that he cannot find his
way out of the forest. The “ Master of the forest ” loves
silence above all.’

The Western Lapps’ belief in “ Forest people ” has been
influenced by that of the Scandinavians. Leem mentions a
Ganis (according to Friis, Lexicon Lapponica, — “ echo,”
“ daemon montanus ”) which is probably the same being whom
Randulf, in his records, names Gidne (Pite Lapp Kine; Lule
Lapp Kani). This appears in the forest, and seen from the
front resembles a beautiful maiden, but has a long tail behind.
The Forest maiden serves the Lapps, bringing the reindeer
together when they are spread among the hills and assisting
in the milking of reindeer-cows. Sometimes she will even
wish for sexual intercourse with a Lapp.® In appearance and
conduct she reminds one of the Scandinavian “ Forest maiden.”

Alien already in name is the Gufittar of the Scandinavian
Lapps, an underground dwarfish being, who lives in the forest
or on the mountains. At times he appears on the earth with
fine herds of cattle. He will at such times hang a bell round
the necks of the cattle, when one can easily hear where he
wanders. One must then go boldly towards him without
glancing to either side and show him a piece of iron, or else
throw the iron over the cattle, when the Forest spirit will at
once disappear under the earth and the cattle become the
property of the enterprising person. The Lapp Gufittar
corresponds to the Norwegian Go(d)vetter (“ a good spirit ”).*

The Uldda of the Scandinavian Lapps is a similar un-


178 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

derground being, which also appears on the earth with its
cattle. It is said to change children left alone and in va-
rious ways to disturb people who have settled on its ter-
ritory. The Lapps generally pour a drink-offering on the
ground for it, either coffee or spirits. The name Uldda shows
it to be identical with the Swedish Huldra.'"

It is uncertain whether the Forest spirits of the Lapps were
the object of a special sacrificial cult. Their custom of pre-
serving the bones of certain kinds of game by burying them
in the earth or hanging them in trees, cannot ti'uly be de-
scribed as being of the nature of an offering. On the other
hand the Lapps made offerings to their Seides to secure good
luck in hunting.

All the Samoyed stocks also know of a Forest spirit, gen-
erally called “ the Master of the forest.” According to Don-
ner the Ostiak Samoyeds sacrifice, among other things,
peculiarly shaped arrows to the Forest spirit. A human-like
image, often carved on an old tree, is made of the “ Master
of the forest.” When an offering of anything eatable is made,
the food is rubbed into the mouth of this image.”’ That there
was some connection between the “ Master of the forest ” and
the spirit of the “ holy places ” appears from the notes made
by Lehtisalo among the .Yuraks. “ The Samoyed may wander
freely in the forest, but when passing a holy place, he must
sacrifice something, as otherwise the ‘ Master of the forest ’
will be offended.”

The Ostiaks call the Forest spirit Unt-tongk (“Wood
spirit”), which resembles a human being but is said to be
hairy like a wild animal. A spirit of this kind lives in every
forest. He gives game to those who remember him with
offerings. The usual time for these is in the autumn or in
the early spring, at the beginning of the two hunting periods.
At Vasyugan an image of the Wood spirit is made. The
Northern Ostiaks do not seem to have made offerings to him.
In tales the family and daughters of the Forest spirit are


FOREST SPIRITS


179

spoken of, the latter being able to marry human beings.“ The
Mis-khum {khwm, “man”) of the Voguls can appear as tall
as a treej he leads wanderers astray in the forest.^® A more
evil spirit is Mengk, known to both these related stocks. Of
these there are many, both male and female, in the forests.
Their way of living resembles ours, and they are often re-
garded as people from older times, while tales are told of
their strength.®* Over a wide territory and also among the
Yuraks the evil Fame is known, dwelling deep in the fast-
nesses of the forest, and said to have three fingers on each
hand, and on each foot three toes with sharp nails.®®

The Votiaks call the Forest spirit l^ules-murt (“ Forest
man ”). In appearance and customs he is like a human being,
but he is often imagined as one-eyed, and is believed to have
the power of lengthening or shortening his body at will.
Generally he holds his head on a level with the highest tree,
and on account of his great height he is called “ Great uncle ”
in the Glazov district. In the forest where he lives he has
his household and family, and many treasures — gold, silver
and cattle. He moves from place to place in the guise of a
whirlwind. Forest spirits also celebrate weddings, which are
held twice a year, in the summer and in the winter, the Forest
spirits moving then as whirlwinds so that great trees are up-
rooted. The Forest spirit entices people, more especially
children, into his power. Sometimes he will also entice cattle
to become lost in the forest, or drag them long distances in
the whirlwinds. He is enormously strong, but being a stupid
spirit, he is neither dangerous nor dreaded. Very often he
is even of great help to people, giving game to hunters and
protecting the cattle in the forest.

The Votiaks make offerings to the Forest spirit in the
forest during the autumn, preferably under a fir-tree. All the
hunters take part in the ceremony. As offerings, brandy,
bread, and a bull or a goat are used. In some districts bread
is placed on the branch of a tree for the “ Forest man.*’ ®* A


i8o FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

prayer to the Forest spirit discovered by Aminoff runs: " Give
me, ‘ Forest man,’ of thy forest-animals, squirrels, wolves,
bears. Give also of thy bees, drive them into my bee-hives.
If thou doest this we shall give thee gifts.” ”

The Votiaks also sacrifice to the Forest spirit in order that
their cattle may thrive and increase. In the spring when the
cattle are driven out to pasture, the head of the family prays
to him: “ Great uncle. Forest uncle, now drive we our cattle
out to pasture and begin our ploughing. Therefore, we sacri-
fice to thee. Accept our offering. Protect the cattle from
beasts of prey and evil people. Our cattle go over twelve
rivers, behind twelve meadows. Save and protect them from
disease and from all evil.” The porridge prepared as an
offering for the P’orest spirit is taken to him in the forest in a
basket made of birch-bark. Also in the autumn when the
cattle return home, another offering is prepared, viz., a goose.
The Forest spirit is thanked for having taken such good care
of the cattle in the forest during the summer.”'

Occasional offerings are also made to the Forest spirit,
as when the foresters go out hunting. In the district of Sai-a-
pul, offerings are sometimes made during stormy weather.
At these times the offering is an animal, generally a duck.
Offerings are further made in cases of sudden illness, accord-
ing to the directions of the magicians. This last reminds one
of the worship of the dead. The number of pancakes, made
specially by the hostess for the occasion, must absolutely be
an odd number, three, five or seven. When going to perform
the offering, it is regarded as a bad omen to meet anyone,
for which reason great care is taken to avoid this. After
the person making the sacrifice has returned from the place
of offering, he must go direct, without speaking, to the fire-
place, where he washes his hands in the ashes, after which
he may approach his family.’"

Besides the above mentioned Forest spirits, which are wor-
shipped by the Votiaks, these have still many others to whom


FOREST SPIRITS


i8i

ofFerings are not made. One of this latter kind is the Pales-
murt (“ Half-man ”) known to all the Votiaks. It resembles
a human being, but has only half of a human body. Thus,
it has only one eye, one foot, one hand and one breast, which is
so large that it can sufFocate people with it by pressing it into
their mouths. In the twilight it frightens the lonely wanderer
in the forest with its shrieks.*®

More evil than the former is a spirit known in the South-
ern Votiak area, called Surali, which is also anthropomorphic,
but naked and hairy. It has only three long fingers on its
hand (cf. Ostiak Parne). It calls all night in the forest,
causes people to lose their way, and entices them to itself.
At times it rushes suddenly upon people, tickles them or dances
with them until they are completely exhausted. Often it will
mount a horse in the meadows and ride it madly round the
fields until the horse nearly falls.”

The Yskal-pydo-murt (“ Cowfooted man ”) belongs also to
the evil Forest spirits, and from its name one can imagine its
appearance. To the waist from above it is dressed in ordi-
nary peasant costume, but from there downwards the legs,
which are hairy and end in hoofs, are naked.**

Fully coinciding with the Forest spirit of the Votiaks is
the V8rys-mort (“ Forest man ”) of the Siryans. The Siryans
fear to call him by his correct name, and so all kinds of mysT
terious names are used for him. Generally, like the Russians,
they call him Dyadya (“ Uncle”). Like that of the Votiaks,
the Siryan Forest spirit also resembles a human being, having
his house and family in the forest. He is large in size and
taller than the highest tree, for which reason the Siryans often
call him “ Tall uncle.” He rushes from place to place like a
whirlwind and sometimes carries both people and cattle with
him. Women fear him greatly, as he is believed to seek
amorous adventures with them. The Forest spirits of the
Siryans celebrate weddings, gathering then, as at human wed-
dings, in great companies. On the whole the “ Forest man ”


i 82


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


is a good spirit, being often of great use. To huntsmen,
especially, who live on good terms with him, he shows the way
through the wilds, sits by their camp-fires to warm himself,
and drives game into their snares. Wherefore the hunters
now and then make small offerings to himj sometimes a little
tobacco, which they place on a stump in the forest, as “ Forest
uncle ” is known to like tobacco. But other offerings are also
made to him, such as squirrel-skins and bread and salt, when
the cattle have happened to go astray in the forest.®’

On making comparisons, one notices that the Siryan and
North Votiak ideas of the Forest spirits have been borrowed
from the Russians to a very great extent, and resemble the
popular beliefs of these dow'n to details, the Russian names
being also the local ones. Similaidy, Tatar influence is per-
ceptible in the Southern Votiak area. As appears already
from the name, the evil SuraJi is a loan from foreign sources.
The “ Half -man,” who seems to have been known also among
the Ostiaks, corresponds to the Chuvash Ar iori, which has
the same meaning, and the “ Cowfooted man ” to the Tatar
Syiyr-ajak (“ Cow-foot

An anthropomorphic Forest spirit, who can change his height,
so that he can be as tall as a pine, is also the Cheremiss Kozla-ia
(“ Forest spirit ”) or as he is sometimes called Targeldes. In
some districts he is said to have only one eye in the centre
of his forehead. Sometimes he appears as a forest-animal, a
dog, an owl, or also as a hay-stack, a stump, etc. He moves
from place to place as a whirlwind. The usual abode of the
Forest spirit is the forest, but often he visits the fields and
meadows. In the forest he shrieks, or roars with laughter,
so that the cattle become frightened. He can speak human
languages and call the traveller by his name, and by pretend-
ing to be his friend, entice him into his power. People be-
lieve him and follow him until they can no longer find their
way again. Thus the Forest spirit causes people to become lost.
When lost in this way in the forest, one must change the right


FOREST SPIRITS


183

boot on to the left foot, and vice versa, to find one’s way
home. To fall into the power of the Forest spirit is danger-
ous, as he tickles people to death. When in a good mood he
will go to the huntsmen’s log-fires to warm himself, but when
angry he puts the fires out. Often he rides full gallop on
a horse, frightening people who are picking berries or mush-
rooms. In stories we are told that the Forest spirit also goes
to the villages, where he sits down with the people and takes
part in their feasts. He also arranges feasts and weddings
in the forests, where he has a magnificent home and a large
family, servants and cattle. To see the Forest-people is not
a good sign, as very often some accident, sickness, or death
follows.*®

Ovda is another evil Forest spirit who has descended from
the Chuvash to the Volga Finns. Besides living in the forest
it is said to dwell in chasms in the rocks and in the ruins of
old castles. These last named, one often hears called “ Ovda’s
village.” Ovda wanders in the forest in the shape of a hu-
man being, but its feet are turned backwards. It is naked,
with long hair and large breasts which it sometimes throws
over its shoulders, and it is also covered with hair. Sometimes
it appears as a man, sometimes as a woman. It has a home and
property in the forest. In the same way as Targeldes cele-
brates a marriage, Ovda also moves then as a whirlwind, so
that the trees bend to the ground. Often one may hear it
laugh and clap its hands in the forest. Ovda is feared be-
cause it approaches people, enticing them to dance or wrestle
with it, when it tickles or dances them to death. A human
being can overpower the Forest spirit if he knows how to
touch it on the left armpit, where there is a hole, the Forest
spirit becommg powerless immediately when touched there.
Ovda tortures animals out at pasture, as well as people, some-
times mounting a horse and racing it nearly to death. In some
places the people say that Ovda will mount a horse and make
the poor animal run backwards. The Cheremiss call this


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


184

spirit also by the Tatar name Surali. A foreign name for an
evil Forest spirit is Alvasta.'"

When a Cheremiss makes offerings to the Jmrest spirits he
addresses them mostly by the names Kosla-Kuguza and Kosla-
Kuva (“ Old man ” and “ Old woman of the forest ”)• He
asks them for protection in the spring when.he sends his cattle
out into the forest. When a hunter goes out hunting he cuts
a little opening in a ti’ce and puts in a piece of bread for the
Forest man, in the hope that the latter will help him by
driving game into his path. The “ Old man and Old woman
of the forest ” are further appealed to when a person is lost
in the forest or wishes to spend the night there, and in the
sacred groves, the people never omit to pour a drink-offering
on the ground for the “ Forest man and Forest woman.”

To the Mordvin Vir-ava Forest mother ”) alien features
have also become attached later, which are obviously loans from
the Forest spirits of the Russians. More especially in tales,
the “ Forest mother ” is a humanlike being as high as a tree.
She has a particular habit of sometimes slinging her large
hanging breasts over her shoulders. She has long, freely
flowing hair and her legs are as thick as logs. Besides appear-
ing in human guise the “ Forest mother ” shows herself also
in other forms, e.g., as a flame burning on the ground, as a
whirlwind, or as any of the forest animals. She visits the
villages in the form of a dog, a cat, or a wolf. A general
belief is further that the Forest spirit appears at times as a
horse flying at full speed through the forest. In stories it
is said that the Forest spirit comes to the log fires to warm her
long hands.®*

Among the Baltic Finns also, a Forest spirit resembling a
human being is met with. Usually the Finns call the Forest
spirit Metsanhaltia (“Forest ruler”), every forest possess-
ing one of these beings. In some places he is believed to be
an old grey-bearded man with a coat of lichen. Here also
the Forest spirit can lengthen his body so that his head is on


FOREST SPIRITS


185

a level with the highest tree. When seen, he is of the height
of an average human being but on being approached he be-
came longer, so that at a distance of nine paces, he was six
yards in height, and at six paces nine yards in height. Accord-
ing to other reports the Forest spirit grew smaller on approach.

Sometimes the Forest spirit appears as a woman. In West
Finland the Mets'^neits)^ (“ Forest virgin ”) is said to look
like a very beautiful, well-dressed woman, but from behind
she is like a stump, a bundle of twigs, a pole or a trough.
Sometimes she is fitted with a tail like an animal. The Forest
virgin is in love with men, and entices them to cohabit with
her.*®

The Finnish Metsanhaltia has its counterpart in the Skogs-
radare of the Swedish Finns, and likewise their Metsanneitsyt
in the Skogsjungfru of the latter. The Mets-haldijas
(“ Forest ruler ”) is known also among the North Esthonians,
his cry in the forest meaning that something special is about
to happen, — a death, — for example.*®

Bishop Agricola mentions two Karelian Forest or Game
spirits — Nyrckes (in folk-poetry, Nyyrikki, “Tapio’s son”),
who “ gave squirrels from the forest,” and Hittavainen, who
“ brought hares from the bushes.” The latter is even today
known in East Finland j the people say, for example, of a good
hunter that: “ Hittavainen will bring him game even if he set
his traps in the stable-loft.” Etymologically these names are
not clear.

A peculiar idea of the Finns is that one must make offerings
to the Forest spirit at some ant-hill. Here, however, one can
note traces of the former belief in certain small anthropo-
morphic beings, who were supposed to live under the earth
(Maahiset, Esthonian Maa-alused, Swedish Alva). It is be-
lieved that “ those who live under the earth,” and who can
cause skin-diseases in one who sits down near their abode, are
small ant-like beings. Similar beliefs are also met with in
Sweden, where such ant spirits are called Alv-myror.®* Un-


i86


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


derground people and Forest spirits often play similar parts
in folk-belief.

If the forest people were angered, they could keep one in
the forest, so that it became impossible to find one’s way any-
where. Especially if, when wandering in the forest, one hap-
pened to hit on the Forest spirit’s track, one was sui-e to be-
come lost. Those who had thus been bewildered by the
Forest spirit were called “ forest-bewitched.” To find one’s
way out of the forest the reversmg of one’s garments was
employed. Cattle which had become lost in the forest, were
said to be “hidden by the forest” {metsan feitossa). The
Swedes in Finland called this skogen halier (“ the forest
keeps ”).

According to the Cheremiss the anthropomorphic Forest
spirits were originally human beings. It is believed that those
who die in the forest become Forest spirits or their assistants.
When anyone dies in the forest, he becomes a Forest spirit,
who on the site of his death frightens people and causes
them to lose their way so that they too may die.”* Even a
horse that dies in the forest is believed to move in the night
and to attack wanderers. The Cheremiss call it “horse-
Targeldes.”

The ceremonies attached to the making of offerings to the
Forest spirit by the Votiaks also bring into mind the cult of
the dead. In certain districts it is an old custom at the worship
of the Forest spirit to remember the dead. Aminoff relates
that in the District Vjatka, where hunting still plays an im-
portant part in the nourishing of the tribe, offerings are made
at the beginning of the autumn hunt to the dead, coincidentally
with those to the Forest spirits.”^ It is hardly to be wondered
at that the dead should gradually have changed into Forest
spirits, when one remembers that burials took place in the
forest at an earlier time. A relic of this old custom can still
be traced among the Votiaks, who believe the dead to in-
habit willingly the depths of the forest. And further, it is


FOREST SPIRITS


187

only "natural that those who have found an unknown grave
in the forest should remain there as feared, ghostly beings.

One must, however, also recollect that the ceremonies in
honour of the fallen bear and other more remarkable forest
animals are of a similar character. That among the Forest
spirits there should actually be found the race-so\ils of tutelary
genii of animals appears, e.g,, from the beliefs of the Lapps,
Originally these animal spirits moved in the material shape
of the animal they represented} little by little they became,
in the imagination of these people, more humanlike. But
even thus changed, they cannot hide their origin — they are
hairy, like animals, they have the feet or tails of beasts, etc.
The Ingrian wolf -spirit is described in the followmg tale:
" To a village tavern in Sombra there once came a being, who
was in all else like a man except that he had a wolf’s head,
and asked for spirits to drink. He was offered a small bottle
which, in the host’s opinion, was quite enough for a man.
The guest was, however, unsatisfied, and drank first a whole
can, and then several small bottles in addition. When he was
about to leave, the host, wondering greatly, asked him who
he was. The guest answered that he was one who would lead
all the wolves out of their country.”

But the forest itself and the separate trees contained therein
were also regarded as animated among the Finno-Ugric
peoples. Charuzin relates that when the Lapp goes to the
forest to fell trees, he strikes the trunks first wth the back
of the axe before beginning to chop them down, or, as the
Lapps themselves say, “kills the tree first.” Should they
omit to do this, they believe that the wood from these trees
will crackle and throw out sparks when burning.®* Mrs. De-
mant-Hatt, during her travels among the Lapps, observed
that the Lapp girls, when returning from the heights to the
forest districts, hurried to embrace and greet the trees. Ac-
cording to the missionary Lundius, the Lapps also worshipped
trees, as when they had shot down game from a tree, they


i88 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

laid the feet of the animal in the ti-ce, smearing it also with
the blood.®*^

In the same way the Cheremiss also regard the foi-cst in
animistic fashion. When they go into it, they greet the trees,
ask them the way, and pray to them for a peaceful resting-
place for the night. In the morning they give thanks and
offer their hands to the tree under which they have spent
the night. “The ti-ee understands what men say, and the
forest listens to the song of the hunter.” The trees are afraid
of the lumbermen and tremble when one of these goes by with
his axe on his shoulder. When felled, the tree attempts to
kill its murderer by falling on him. It is even believed that
trees can change their sites. As elsewhere in nature, one may
not use ugly or rough words in the forest. The Cheremiss
speak also of the tree’s “soul” {art). While the soul is in
the tree, it is glad and prospers, but when the “ soul ” moves
away, the tree withers. At festivals for the furthering of
bee cultivation, an offering of a duck is even made to the
“tree-soul.” When haiiging up a bee-hive in a tree, they
say: “ Tree-soul (Pu-6rt), give luck to the bees,” or: “ Gather
the bees around thee.”

Whether the Finno-Ugric peoples worshipped special kinds
of trees as such is uncertain. The Baltic Finns, however, seem
to have known tutelary genii for the different trees. The
Esthonians believe that the spirit of the birchwood never goes
into a forest of alder or oak.“® Milkovic relates of the Erza
Mordvins that when they prayed for rain, they turned towards
an oak, saying: “ Oak god (Tumo-pas), give rain.” While
doing so, a man would conceal himself in the foliage, whence
he would sprinkle those praying with a drink made from
honey. The food-offering was hung in a vessel of bark on a
branch of the sacred oak.^“ It is possible, however, that not
the oak itself, but the Thunder god in the shape of the oak
was the object of worship at these ceremonies. The rowan also
played a prominent part in the beliefs of the people. Both


FOREST SPIRITS


189

the Baltic and the Volga Finns believed in its protective
powers, though oflFerings were not made to this tree. Accord-
ing to the Hill Cheremiss evil spirits covild not approach the
rowan, and for this reason, when anyone was obliged to spend
the night in the forest, branches of rowan were placed under
the head, and if one were even then afraid of ghosts, one
could run to the shelter of a rowan.^^ The same idea is met
with also among the Russians, etc.

The common representative of all the trees is the forest
itself j when worshipping it the Mordvins call it Vir-ava
(“ Forest mother ” or " Mother forest ”). The Tapio of the
Finns, of whom Agricola says: “he gave game from the
forest,” and who in folk-poetry appears in anthropomorphic
guise, meant originally merely “ forest,” as may be seen even
today from countless expressions in folk-songs, e.g., “ the
twig-filled Tapio,” or “ oak Tapio.” This would seem to have
been taken over by the Russian Lapps, whose Tava or Tava-ajk
(“ Tava mother ”) is a Forest spirit.*® Originally, the Hiisi
of the Finns, who, according to Agricola, “ gave victory over
the forest dwellers,” meant also “ forest ” 3 but, in a more
restricted sense, hmi also signified a sacred grove. Often in
magic prayers and songs, the forest itself is appealed to:

“ Good forest, pure forest,

Watch over my herds of cattle.”

Like the animal spirits dwelling in the forests, the animated
forest itself aspires to anthropomorphic features. In attempt-
ing to simulate a human being, however, it cannot hide its
original self. Standing among tall pines, the Forest spirit
is as long as these, and moving in the underbrush it again
shrinks to the height of this. The Mordvin Forest mother,
when in the shape of a human being, has still feet as clumsy
and thick as logs, and the Forest virgin of the Finns, beautiful
from a front view, appears from behind as a rotted stump or
a bushy tree. In the folk-poetry of the Finns, “the King


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


190

or Lord or Mistress of the forest” has “a hat of pine-
needles,” a “ blue mantle,” and a “ beard of leaves.”

An extremely wide-spread belief is that the Forest spirit,
having bewildered human beings and enticed them into its
power, tickles, dances, or smothers them to death. The ex-
planation of this curious idea is to be found in the psychic
state that overwhelms the individual, when lost in the forest,
and, in desperation, he sees no chance of ever finding his way
out.


CHAPTER XII
WATER SPIRITS

C OMPARATIVE research shows that the ideas of the
Finno-Ugric peoples regarding Water spirits have to a
large extent been influenced by impressions from other sources.

In remote times, the Lapps, for success in fishing, seem to
have ofltered chiefly to their gods of stone or Seides, which
the Fisher Lapps always put up on the coasts of rivers and
seas. Such a Seide stone was called also a “ Fish-god.” The
spirits living in the water itself have never had sacrifices
offered up to them to the same degree.

A god, known only at the coasts, is Akkruva, the upper part
of whose body the Lapps imagine to be human, the head
covered with long hair, the lower part of the body that of a
fish. She rises at times from the sea and, sitting upon the
water, rinses and combs her hair. Sometimes Akkruva walks
up to the mouths of the rivers taking fishes with her, and at
such times the catch is excellent. What this sea-spirit, called
by Friis Avfruwa, really is, is shown above all by her name
— a distortion of the “ Havfru ” of the Scandinavians, which,
like the above mentioned being, had a human upper body
whilst the lower body was fishlike.^

Limited also to Scandinavian Lapland is the Ravgga,
which lives in the water mostly in human shape, its appearance
or voice predicting misfortune, tempest or shipwredc. Meri-
lainen, who calls it in Finnish, Meriraukka, tells that it ap-
pears on the shore examining the accessories of a boat, from
which, later, somebody will be drowned. When it is seen
walking on the shore, the duty of the beholder is to walk
round it with a firesteel, when it will stop, or, if it disappears


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


192

on approach, to wait for its reappearance. It should then
be asked why it has appeared, who will be drowned and when.
That the Meriraukka is the spirit of a drowned person, is
shown by the fact that it keeps in the neighbourhood of the
body, the boat, the clothes, etc., of the drowned.®

As already pointed out by Fritzner the Ravgga of the Lapps
is the same being as the Old Norse dremgr^

As will be seen from the name, the Lapps have also re-
ceived from the Scandinavians the evil Nekke or Nik (Swedish
Nacken), which is known also in Finnish Lapland, and is fur-
ther met with among the Finns and the Esthonians.*

A Water spirit with a Lapp name, to whom offerings are
sometimes made, is the Cacce-olmai (“ the Water man ”).
He is the god of fishing, who brings fish to the hooks or in
the nets and lines. In the notes made by S. Kildal we read
that at sacrifices men made an image of the Water man and
put it into a crevice so that he might give them more luck.
On the other hand they sacrificed to the “Water man” so
that he should not do them any harm on the water.®

The Cacce-olmai of the Scandinavian Lapps corresponds
to the Cacce-jielle (“ Water dweller ”) of the Russian Lapps.
This is a dangerous spirit who calls upon and then tries to
drag people into the water. The sight of it predicts disaster.
A woman who saw this spirit while fetching water from the
sea asked him whether his appearance predicted good or bad.
She was told that her son would die, which happened also
within three days.

Cacce-jielle presents itself to people in different shapes;
as an old man, a pretty woman, a naked child, or often also
as a fish, which somehow differs from other fishes. It is
considered dangerous to kill such a fish. When seeing it
one has to sacrifice something, a piece of bread, a coin or
brandy. Strange fish are said to be the children of the water
spirit.®

The “ Water dweller ” of the Russian Lapps corresponds


PLATE XX

The Amo Episode in Kaeevai.a (V. 45-1:33)
(See page a 10.)

Illustrated by Akseli Gallen-Kallela.


WATER SPIRITS


193

completely to the Vodyanoy of the Russians, whose Water-
Nymph, the Rusalka, is called by the Kola-Lapps Cacce-
jienne (“Water mother”). In the shape of a naked woman
she emerges from the water at dawn to comb her long black
hair. When frightened, she throws herself into the water
so quickly, that she leaves her comb on the shore in the
place where she was sitting. She loves men and entices them
to her. The Saiva-neida (“ Sea maid ”) of the Western Lapps
is a loan from Scandinavia.

A Water spirit is also found amongst the Samoyeds, who
call it the “ Master of the water.” Generally he is looked
upon as a dangerous spirit, sometimes bringing disease. Ac-
cording to Donner they sacrifice money, etc., to him, espe-
cially at the mouths of rivers. In cases of illness they hang
clothes on bushes near the water for him. During certain
seasons the “ Master of the water ” is offered sacrifices that
he may give fish.® As a rule, images are not made of him,
only the lYuraks worshipping him in the form of a fishlike
image of wood, or choosing a specially shaped dried fish to
represent him.®

The Ostiaks call the Water spirit Jengk-tongk (“Water
spirit ”)• Patkanov tells that sacrificial feasts are held on the
shore, before the beginning of the fishing, to honour the
Water spirit and to influence him in the fishermen’s favour.
Although their Water spirit has no image, almost all the
usual sacrificial ceremonies are gone through. For the spirit
itself the blood of bigger animals and of cocks is poured into
the water. Polyakov says that the spirit was offered brandy
and a cock, a lamb or a calf, and that only some drops of the
blood of the victim were poured into the water. Also in the
autumn, as soon as the rivers are frozen, the Ostiaks sacrifice
to the Jengk-tongk on the ice.“

Like the Lapps, the Ostiaks sacrificed in older times for
luck in fishing chiefly to the spirits of the dead, which are
believed to live in certain holy places. Karjalainen points


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


194

out that the Forest spirit as well as the Water spirit is sacri-
ficed to chiefly in such districts where foreign influences may
be noticed. Except in tales, where the Water spirit has been
given special features, the idea entertained regarding it, espe-
cially in more remote territories, is very vague.” At Vasyugan
they sacrifice to a certain Fish spirit, Kul jungk (“ Fish
spirit ”), that lives in the water and is said to give fish to its
favourites. When the ice has broken up, a fish-like image
is made of wood or birch-bark and taken along to the fishing
place. Especially of the first catch is the Fish spirit given
its share.^®

The Water spirit of the Voguls, Vit-khan (“ Water Khan ”),
appears to be still less than that of the Ostiaks an object of
sacrificial worship, although it is mentioned in folk-lore, e.g.,
that the spirit or his daughter may marry human beings.**

A loan from the Siryans is the Water spirit Kul, an evil
being living in deep watere and known both in the western
districts of the Ostiaks and in the northern part of the Vogul
territory. It has a human shape.*'*

In leaving the Lapps and Ugrians and turning to the other
tribes, we pass at the same time from hunting and fishing
peoples to agricultural ones. Fishing is no longer of the same
importance, although it is in places pursued next to the chief
occupation as a good second industry. The importance of the
water is nevertheless not diminished by the development of
agriculture. The villages are still, as far as possible, situated
near to the waters, which besides ways of communication are
used also to afford power for mills. Agriculture, moreover,
has drawn the attention of man to an important feature of
water, namely its secret power of fertilization, without which
no vegetation can exist. Man being thus in many respects
dependent upon this important element of nature, the result
is that the water itself becomes an object of sacrificial cult.

Before considering the animated water itself, we will first
glance at those Water spirits, found amongst other Finno-


WATER SPIRITS


195

Ugrian tribes, to which the imagination of the people has
given distinct features.

The Votiaks call their Water spirit Vu-murt (“ Water
man ”). In some places he is also called Vu-kuzo (“ Water
master ”). He is a human-like, often naked being, with very
big eyes and long black hair. They speak also of the fingers
of the “ Water man ” } these are stones resembling thunder-
bolts which they believe to be found on the shores of rivers.
Usually, the “ Water man ” lives in deep waters, such as the
big rivers and seas, but he also likes to dwell in little brooks
and especially in mill ponds. The “ Water man ” has a house
and a family in the water. According to folk-tales he may
also seek the company of people, especially at the time of the
great fairs. The “ Water man ” then appears dressed as a
peasant, but is easily recognized by the left side of his coat
being always damp. Often the “ Water man ” is an invisible
being, and woe to the unfortunate person to whom he then
appears, as this is a foreboding of death or other misfortune.

Like the male Water spirit, the female has also features
which betray her foreign origin. She is beautiful and her
naked body is glistening white. Sometimes in the twilight
the wife or daughter of the “ Water man ” will emerge on
the shore to comb her long black hair. In some places she is
said to have breasts as big as buckets. The male spirit, like
the female one, is a shy being, who immecEately throws him-
self into the water on being observed by a human eye.

Besides appearing generally in human form, the “Water
man ” may sometimes become visible in the shape of a fish.
Fishermen have seen him as a pike, differing from other
pikes by his enormous size and by his sleeping with his head
in the opposite direction to that of other pikes.

Twice a year, in the spring and in the autumn, the Water
spirits have weddings, during which they move in the water
merrily and noisily, causing inundations, so that the mill
sluices break. The Northern Votiaks have, further, the idea


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


196

that they come during the winter before Christmas to the vil-
lages and occupy the bath-houses j one may sometimes meet
them in the twilight on the village street. For this reason
the Votiaks are afraid to go out alone without a light. It is
also dangerous at these times to make a noise near the water,
to rinse dirty clothes, or to ferry singing people over any
river. While they are thus on the move they are called the
“ evil spirits.” When Twelfth Day is over, the Votiaks
accompany the Water spirits back to the water where they
live. On account of this the feast of Epiphany is also called
“ the following of the Water spirit.” During Twelfth Night
the young people wander with torches from bath-house to bath-
house, to hear their fate and to call to the “ Water man ” —
“Leave us! ” The following morning men supplied with
axes, sticks, or branches go down to the river, where they knock
on the ice saying: “ Go away from us.” On this occasion they
turn to the river itself with offerings: “Preserve us from all
disease and accidents.” A piece of bread, a spoonful of por-
ridge and a piece of meat arc thrown into the water. In some
districts it was the custom to sacrifice a duck to the “ Water
man ” through an ice-hole.

The Votiaks’ impression of the “ Water man ” is more that
of an evil than a good spirit. He brings ruin to both people
and animals, and is dangerous in the winter, because he breaks
the ice under the feet of the wanderers so that these sink
helplessly into the depths. The “ Water man ” can also send
sickness. If appeased he can, however, be of very great use.
For example, he helps the miller in his work, and fishermen
by driving fish into their nets. He is also believed to protect
and inaease the water birds.

Sacrifices arc made to the “ Water man ” for accidental
reasons, but also at fixed times. In the autumn the Votiaks
sacrifice a duck or a goose in the river, so that no one will
drown or be taken ill with ague. At the same time the “ Water
naan” is prayed to, to protect the geese and ducks, and to


WATER SPIRITS


197

increase their number. The blood of the bird, its bones and
a piece of the meat are thrown into the water, along with
bread. Sacrifices are made in addition when sickness occurs,
a bird often sufficing for this offering. If the mill sluice is
out of order, or if there is fear of a flood, offerings are made
to the “ Water man,”

Among the Siryans the usual name of the Water spirit is
Kul, but it is also called Vasa (“ Water dweller ”). As
among the Votiaks the Water spirit possesses here distinct
features that hint at a longer period of development. This
is true of both the male and the female spirit. The male one
is a black, hairy and wet being, who at times sits on the shore
shaking himself and sometimes seizing the mill-wheel. Some-
times the people imagine him to be a being with a big head
and big round eyes, who at times emerges from the water and
comes ashore to comb his dark green hair. He is dressed in a
green robe or his body is naked. When he throws himself
from the shore into the water a tempest arises and the waves
rise high. He swims thus, especially in bad weather, in the
water, but at other moments he has been seen rocking on the
water or on fishing nets or standing on some pier. Sometimes
the water spirit haunts the night, slapping the washing hung
out to dry, or crying loudly on the river-bank. He has also
been seen at the fish-spearing and recognised by the sudden
disappearance of his boat and torch.

As with the male Water spirit, the characteristics of the
female one differ in different districts. She is also a long-
haired being, who combs her hair with her big paws. There
is a tale about a peasant, who found a Water maid sitting
naked on a hill, combing her hair, and frightened her so that
she threw herself into the water, leaving her comb on the hill.
The peasant took the comb to his house, but in the night the
Water maid came to claim it back.

The Water spirit may also appear in the shape of a small
child, according to the Siryans. The children of the Water


198 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

spirit are, while young, hairy and of a peculiar appearance,
often like fishes, but become later more human in shape.
Now and then a child of the Water spirit may stray into the
net of a fisherman.

Like the Votiaks the Siryans also know the stony fingers of
the Water spirit. These arc belemnites, found near the beaches
in the land of the Siryans.

At times the Water spirit takes another shape than that of
a human bemg. Thus it may appear, as among the Votiaks,
in the shape of a big pike. In the collected works of Nalimov
the Water spirit is mentioned as a pike that could speak and
had long white hair on its head. By mistake it had gone into
the net of a fisherman.

The Siryans also believe the Water spirits to have weddings,
when they make much noise and break down the sluices of mills,
and that they go and dwell amongst human beings at Epiphany,

The Water spirit of the Siryans is a being much feared.
The mere sight of him means tempest, death or other dis-
aster. He entices both mankind and animals to his home.

From the notes of Wichmann it appears that the Siryans
offered the “ Sea spirit ” butter and bread in order that he
might give them fish. When fishing one had to be careful
not to use bad words, as this incensed the Water spirit, who
in his anger would seize the net so firmly, that the fisherman
could not move it. Like the fisherman, the miller also has
to keep on good terms with the Water spirit. For other pur-
poses also, the Water spirit is sometimes given small offerings.
No Siryan will go over water without giving the Water
spirit a gift: if nothing else he throws at least a thread from
his belt into the water

According to the Siryans the Water spirits have their origin
in the spirits of the drowned, which continue living in the
water, where they have entered the service of the Water spirit.
Even the name Kul is, as is proved by Set'dlS, the old name of
a Finno-Ugric god who lived under the earth, the cult of


WATER SPIRITS


199

which was obviously connected with the cult of the dead/^
When comparing the present highly developed characteris-
tics of the spirit Kul, which the similarly-named spirit of the
Ob peoples, borrowed from the Siryans, does not possess, with
the corresponding features of the Water spirit of the Great
Russians, it is evident that the first mentioned, even to its de-
tails, is a copy of the latter. The name Vasa seems to be only
a translation of the Russian Vodyanoy.

A fully corresponding Water spirit of the Cheremiss is their
“ Water master ” (Viit-oza). He is said to dwell in such
waters as do not dry up during the hot season. Usually the
Water spirit is here also an evil and feared being. Especially
is it dangerous to swim at midday. Where he does not
succeed in kidnapping a man, he will take cattle. The male
Water spirit appears usually as an old man who is often seen
before dawn on the surface of the water near the shore. He
is dressed sometimes in rags, and sometimes in splendid
clothes j his chest being, for example, sometimes covered with
silver coins, but at times he is also naked. The Cheremiss
say that the greater a river is in which a Water spirit lives,
the richer it is. Should a human being cast his eye on him,
he throws himself immediately into the water. Besides his
human form, the Water spirit can also show himself in the
form of a horse or a bullock. The Water spirits living in the
sea show themselves mainly as bulls, and the bellowing of
the “ water bidl ” has often been heard from the sea. But
the Water spirit can also take the form of a fish, or of other
miscellaneous objects. But in whatever form he shows him-
self, the sight denotes disaster — often death — to the one
who has seen him, or to some one belonging to him.

The female Water spirit, “ Water master’s daughter,” has
been seen on the shore combing her long hair with a gold
or silver comb. Sometimes she becomes entangled in a fisher-
man’s fishing-tackle. Once some fishers foxmd a great being
in their net, which dragged it here and there. With great


200 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

labour they managed to keep hold of their net, and when they
finally succeeded in dragging it nearer to the boat, they saw
a pretty dark maid, who, however, disappeared immediately
from sight. The net became at once lighter and was found
to contain no fish at all. Sometimes people are fortunate
enough to get a “ Water master’s daughter ” into their power.
This happens only when they throw a piece of iron at her or
touch her with their hands, as then the water-maid cannot
move an inch.

In prayers, the Water spirit is often referred to as “ Water
old man ” (Viit-kuguza) and “ Water old woman ” (Vut-
kuva). The Cheremiss worship the “ Old man ” and the
“ Old woman ” of the water when they go swimming or fish-
ing. The fishermen offer up to these spirits bread or brandy,
sometimes even a duck, a goose, or a hen, as they are supposed
to drive fish into the fishermen’s tackle. In the spring, when
the first fish has been caught, the Eastern Cheremiss generally
boil it immediately, and eat it without breaking the bones,
the latter being thrown back into the water with the following
words: “‘Water man,’ come and eat fishj I have tasted it
already, give us still more fresh fish.”

Similar beliefs in human-like Water spirits are met with
among the Mordvins. The spirits living in the water are
here called Ved-eraj (“ Water dweller ”) or Vetsa-erSj (“ He
who inhabits the water ”). There are many such spirits, and
they are malignant beings, who, like Vampire spirits, lie in
wait for newly born children, and devour grain that has been
cursed by an enemy.’®

The Baltic Finns have been under Germanic influence.
The Nacken of the Swedes is called Nakk by the Esthonians,
and they believe it to live in all deeper waters, such as the
sea, rivers, lakes and wells. The deepest spot in the water
is particularly its dwelling-place, and also any whirlpool.

The Nakk presents itself in different shapes, as a human
being, an animal, or even some inanimate object. Neverthe-


PLATE XXI


Votiak sacrifice to the River Buj after the break-
ing-up of the ice. (See pages 214-15.)

(Government permission, )

After photograpli by U. Holmberg.


WATER SPIRITS


201


less, it lives in the imagination of the people mostly as a
human being. In this shape, according to the idea of the
Esthonians, it is both male and female, and may appear full
grown or as a child. The people believe the male spirit to be
a grey old man, who at times swims in the water with his
enormous, widely opened maw, swallowing everybody who
comes in his path, sometimes lifting his head above the water,
sometimes seating himself on the shore of a river, lake or
sea, or on the cover of a well to watch for people. When ap-
pearing in human shape he executes human work. Now and
then he is found by night at the fish-spearing places and is
recognized by having his torch not in a boat but on a stone
slab. One of the most remarkable features of the Nakk is
his song, by which he bewitches his hearers, who in this way
become his prisoners. In the neighbourhood of Hapsal the
belief prevails that when the Nakk sings or plays, men and
animals begin to dance in gradually increasing tempo until
they at last fall into the sea. Although the Nakk appears in
human shape, he has, in the tales of the people, fish teeth.

Like the male spirit, the female human-like Water spirit
has also the pronounced character that proves development.
To distinguish her from the male, the Esthonians call her
Nakineiu or Nakineitsi (“ NaJck’s maid ”), Veeneiu (“ Water
maid”) or Mereneiu (“Sea maid”). Usually, Nakineitsi
is a pretty young girl, who sits on the surface of the water,
or on a stone on the shore, or in the shadow of a tree growing
near to the water, combing her long hair with a golden comb.
Her hair is wonderfully pretty, now golden yellow, now
grass-green. Occasionally she appears naked, at other times
dressed. In some districts the Nakineitsi has a human body
and a fish tail.

As with the Nakk, one of the most important features of
the Nakineitsi is her song and her music. On the coasts they
speak also of the cattle of the water-maid, which are beautiful
and fat. The colour of the animals is usually grey, like the


202


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


sea. Suddenly emerging from the sea, the cattle come ashore,
where they are tended by the Nakineitsi until she again dis-
appears with them after awhile. The Livonians tell of blue
sea-cowsj some of these sometimes go astray from the other
cattle and remain on the shore, falling thus into the hands of
men.

Besides his human form, the Nakk of the Esthonians also
appears in the shape of a young, usually grey horse, sometimes
also as a white foal. This emerges from the water, runs all
round the shore, approaches children and entices them to sit
on its back, whereupon it immediately rushes back into the sea at
a gallop. At times it can also appear as an ox, now black, now
brown or grey, or as a white calf. The Nakk that has changed
himself into an animal, is recognized by his coming from the
sea and disappearing into the water. Sometimes he even
changes himself into a startled hare, which by running to
and fro on a pier tries to entice its pursuer so far, that the
latter is in danger of falling into the water. He may also
appear as a waterbird, a swan, a goose or a duck. Further,
the Nakk is seen in the shape of a fish, which at times comes
ashore, winds its tail round a fisherman, and drags him into
the water. Often the Water spirit appears also as a big
strange-looking or one-eyed fish. Two fisherman had once
fished a long time without catching anything when one of
them saw two strangely shaped gold-glittering fishes in the
water. Neglecting the warning of his comrade he set about
catching these fish and got one in his net, but as he was about
to lift it from the water there suddenly arose a strong tempest
and snowstorm, and at the same moment the fish disappeared
from the net. The Nakk can also take the shape of a lifeless
object.

In whatever shape the Nakk appears, he is always a danger-
ous and feared being, whose mere appeai-ance predicts drown-
ing or other disaster. Even if the one who sees him is not
himself doomed, one of his relatives will perish in the water.


WATER SPIRITS


203

Some people believe that in all waters where a Nakk dwells,
a man will be drowned every summer. When the time for
this approaches, a voice is heard from the water: “The hour
has struck, a man is wanted.” Against his will somebody
will then go and bathe and lose his life in the water. Be-
fore he drowns, the water becomes agitated, boils and seethes,
but calms down as soon as it has got its victim. The Nakk
can drown people not only in deep but in shallow places, where
the water is only a foot deep.

The Nakk takes his victim either by enticement, by be-
witching songs, or by appearing in the shape of the animals
or object that a man desires. At times he bewitches the eyes
of people so that they no longer recognize their surroundings,
but lose themselves and at last are at his mercy. The cattle
he entices by changing himself into an animal, mingling with
them on their pasture ground, and, on his return into the
water, enticing the other animals to follow him.

One who notices the danger in time, may protect himself
against the menace of the Nakk. An effective remedy is to
mention his name, as on hearing this he flees at once and throws
himself into the water. To protect themselves, the inhabitants
of the island Mohn, before going into the sea, take a stone
from the beach, spit on it and throw it into the sea, saying:
“ A cake to th.e Nakk.” Women also do this when they go
to the sea-shore to watch the sheep, as they believe that the
Nakk will not touch them or their cattle if they throw him a
cake into the water.*®

The Nakki of the Finns closely resembles the Nakk of the
Esthonians, only a few new features being met with in the
former. In West Finland the Water spirit is represented as
a man of unusual size. He has been seen in the shape of an
immense, long and stout old man standing over the water,
so that one foot was on the one shore and the other foot on
the other shore of the sea. A miller saw him thus standing
over a waterfall, like an unusually big, grey man. Probably


204


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


this latter type of the Water spirit has been influenced by the
traits of the Forest spirit, which appears in mythology more
regularly than the Water spirit as a lone being. At times the
Water spirit also appears as a dwarf. So he was once seen
by fishermen : “ in the bag of the net was a small human-like
old man, not longer than two spans, with long hair reaching
to his throat.”

Sometimes he is half -man, half-animal; the upper part
hiunan, with horse-feet. He does not seem to appear in com-
plete horse form in the imagination of the Finns. On the
other hand he has been seen as a dog with a long beard j some-
times as an enormous buck, which wears net-pouches on its
horns. Often Nakki appears also in the shape of an object,
at times as a big balk or log, which differs from an ordinary
one by, having an eye as big as a plate and a mane on its back, or
as a tree, fallen into the water, which sinks when one tries to
sit on it.

The female Nakki has also many other names such as
Nakinneito, Nakinpiika (“ Niikki maid ”), Vedenneito (“ Water
maid”), Merenneito (“Sea maid”), Vedenemanta (“Water
mistress”). According to the ideas of the people this Water
spirit is a pretty being. In Osterbotten they believe that the
female Nakki is a beautiful woman with glittering white body
and very long curly hair. On the coast of Osterbotten and in
Nyland the Water maid is further known by her breasts as big
as buckets, which are thrown over the shoulder when bathing.

When the Water maid appears, she is always busy in some
way. Now she washes her face or her breasts, now she combs
her hair, splashes gaily in the water, washes her clothes on
a stone on the shore or on a rock in the sea, or goes sometimes
on land to watch the water cattle in the grass on the beach.

The idea that the Water spirit possesses magnificent cattle
in the water is very general in Finland. Often it has been
noticed how stately cows emerge from the sea, which on the
approach of a man go back into the water and dive down.


1


PLATE XXII

The Sacrificing “Upward”

The Eastern Votiaks sacrifice a white goose to the
Heaven god. (See page 220.)

Water-colour by U. Soldan-Brofoldt*


¥*\ »


WATER SPIRITS


205

When the Water spirit disappears with his cattle at sun-
rise, it may happen that an animal is left on the shore. Ac-
cording to the general belief of the people, this can be seized
by walking round it once or thrice with a piece of iron in the
hand, as then it can return no more to the water, but belongs
to man. In vain the spirit cries from the water for his lost
animal. It is very advantageous to possess a cow of the Water
spirit, not only because it is pretty, but also because it gives
much milkj it is however to be noted, that it always gives
only the same quantity that was milked the first time.

At times the cow of the Water maid is like a fish. Once in
Karelia a fish with horns and feet was caught in the net of a
fisherman, who, after some wondering at its appearance, threw
it ashore, with the result that in the night the plaintive cries
of the Water woman were heard.

According to the Scandinavian Finns, besides the Water
spirits, the Maahiset (“ those living under the earth ”) also
possess big cattle that man may seize, if he throws something
made of steel upon them. As the Water spirits rise from the
water, so the “ Undergrounders ” emerge from the earth and
disappear therein. In North Finland and in Russian Karelia
the same power is given to the cows of the Manalaiset (“ the
deceased”).

Now and then the Water spirit also appears in the shape of
a big fish of unusual species or strange shape. Once some
boys caught a big salmon-trout, which had lost itself on a low
river-bank. At home they were told, however, that the fish
was a Marras, and they were instructed to take it back to the
water, because they would otherwise drown on the same spot
where they had caught the trout. Lencqvist already mentions
the Marta as an omen of death.

The Finnish NSkki is, like the Esthonian Nakk and the
Swedish Nacken, always an evil and feared being. That
children may take care when near the water, they are fright-
ened by words such as “ NSkki comes.” A usual means of


206


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


protection against Nakki when bathing is a form of witch-
craft in connection with certain words. On stepping into the
water the bather once, thrice, or even nine times, scoops water
on to the beach with his hand or throws a stone, taken from
the water, or earth from the sea-,bottom, on the shore, saying:
“Nakki ashore, I into the water.” After bathing the pro-
ceeding is reversed, the water or the object used previously
is now thrown back in the river or the sea, with the saying:
“ Nakki into the water, I on land.” Another means of pro-
tection against Nakki is to put into the water a piece of metal
or a metal object while one is bathing. Similarly, animals
also have to be protected against the evil caused by Nakki.
When bathing a horse they used to put into the water some
one of the above-mentioned metal objects or bind a fire-steel
to the tail, or hang a bell on the neck of the horse. More
particularly had this to be done with an unshod horse, be-
cause Nakki is believed not to seize a shod horse.

Similar ideas and means of protection are general also
amongst the Swedes.

Of foreign origin is also an idea of the Finns, that the
Water spirit is a musician, whose wonderful music anybody
can learn. The proper moment to approach it for this purpose
is Midsummer Night, or before the Eves of Lent and Easter.
The spirit may be seen on a rock in a waterfall, on one that
has never been under water, or on one that is always sur-
rounded by water. The person wishing to learn has to take
a violin with him. When the Water spirit has emerged from
the waterfall, he will seat himself on the same stone as the
man, turning his back to him, and start to teach him. As a
reward the man has to promise himself to the Water spirit
and during the lesson bind himself fast to the master, but with
caution, so that the ties break or become undone when the
spirit suddenly precipitates himself into the water. Should
the fetters not loosen, the pupil falls into the power of the
Water spirit. The one who succeeds in passing through the


WATER SPIRITS


<2xyj

trial becomes a great player, who can make people dance even
against their will. Sometimes his violin develops the wonder-
ful quality of playing by itself and even its pieces will play
when the violin is at last broken.

The wonderful music to be learnt from the Water spirit is
known round all the Scandinavian countries.

Corresponding to Nakki is the Vetehinen (“ Water
dweller”), known originally only in Russian Karelia, Ingria,
and East Finland, who in the imagination of the people ap-
pears as a human-like being with marked characteristics.
Vetehinen is also regarded as a malignant being. He causes
a disease (eruption) and, like Nakki, seizes people and
animals as sacrifices. Protection against him, as against Nakki,
is found in metal objects. The idea of Vetehinen does not
however completely cover that of Nakki, which latter is ex-
clusively the cause of drowning, because the Karelians worship
the former also as the giver of luck in fishing.”^ Foreign in-
fluence is to be noted already in the name of Vetehinen, of
which Castren says that both in idea and etymologically there
is a correspondence to the Water spirit, which the Russians call
Vodyanoy.*®

The Mordvinian Ved- or Vetsa-eraj corresponds in name to
the Water spirit of the Votes, the Jarv-elaj (“ Sea dweller ”).**
Only through their literature do the Finns know anything now
of the old Water spirit of the Tavasdanders, Ahti, about
whom Agricola says, that he “ brought fishes from the water.”
In the old popular poetry he appears as a water dweller, and
in a song about the origin of frost, the following description
occurs: “ then thou caused a strong frost, when thou made Ahti
freeze in the sea.” The etymology of the name is not
clear. According to Daniel Juslenius (1745) Wainamoinen
was also a Water spirit; Agricola does not, however, mention
him thus, but says only that he “ composed songs.” Both Ahti
and Wainamoinen appear in folk-poetry as mighty heroes.

Over all Finland and also amongst the Finnish Lapps and


208


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


Northern Esthonians the dark Vedenhaltija (“ Water ruler ”)
is known. He is supposed to appear before a disaster in hu-
man shape, and he corresponds completely to the Swedish
Sjora, Sjoradare, etc.

The belief that the drowned are transformed into Water
spirits is genei-al among most of the Finno-Ugric peoples.
The Esthonians, for instance, believe that the size and shape
of a Nakk depend upon the person drowned. If an adult
had fallen victim to the water, his Nakk would appear as a
full-grown person} if a child, the spirit would appear as a
child. When swimming in places where people had been
drowned, one might easily get cramp, because the spirits of
the dead seized the living by their feet and dragged them
down. Like the Siryans, the Esthonians sometimes call the
water spirit by a name that originally meant the spirit of the
dead: Kull or Koll (cf. the Lapp Ravgga). The spirit living
in a river is called Joe Kull (“ River Kull ”).®°

A similar being, although not originally of Cheremiss origin,
is their Pele kolese (“ Half-dead ”), which floats on the sur-
face of the water with its face turned upwards like someone
drowned. A person who tries to save it falls a victim himself
to the water. The Cheremiss have a general idea that where
a corpse lies, there its “ soul ” (6>/) remains. The fishermen
at Belaya told me how a young Cheremiss mother, who, on
her way back from a feast, had been drowned by falling
through thin ice, rises early in the morning on the beach to
express her sorrow for the babe she had left. The fishermen
had heard her plaints: “ My breasts are filled with milk, my
little child cries at home! ”

Further evidence of the transformation of drowned people
into Water spirits, to whom one sacrifices for luck in fishing,
are the Soiem tongk (“ River spirits ”) of the Konda Ostiaks,
** which are drowned people.” According to Paasonen, every
family has a common idol-house for its members lost thus,
where they are given offerings twice a year, in spring and in


PLATE XXIII


Ostiak sacrifice of a white animal, or of one cov-
ered with a white cloth, to the Heaven-god. (See
page 220.)

After photograph by K. F. Karjalainen,


WATER SPIRITS


209

autumn, before the beginning of the fishing season j the latest
of the deceased receiving a cock, while to those transformed
earlier, clothes are given. The drowned appear during the
course of the year following their death to the priest and
are then escorted to the god-house, receiving at the same time
a shirt or a kerchief as an offering.®’^ But from the examples
given it becomes evident that the “souls” of the different
species of fish, or their tutelary genii are also contained in the
Finno-Ugric Water spirits. The Yurak Samoyeds make an
image of a fish-like “ Water master ” or they choose as such a
dried fish of peculiar appearance. The Ostiaks make an image
of a fish when they worship their “ Fish spirit,” and with other
peoples also the Water spirit often appears in the form of a
rare fish. The Pite Lapps speak of a Water spirit with horns.“
Sometimes these “ spirit-fish ” can be detected only by their
position. The Water spirit of the Permian tribes appears as
a large pike which is recognised by the fact that it is larger
than others, and that when sleeping it holds its head against
the current of the water, or towards the shore, or contrary
to the other fish. The “ Water dweller ” of the Russian
Lapps often appears as a turbot or a flounder, which contrary
to the habit of these fish comes inshore. Sometimes the Fish
spirit strives after more human-like features.

The Siryans say that the “Water dweller” when young
resembles a fish, but as it grows begins to resemble a human
being. A “ spirit-pike ” could speak and had long light hair
on its head.®® In Pite Lapland a white fish was caught that
had scales all over its body, except on its breast, which re-
minded one of a woman’s breast.*® In a tale from the Finnish
coast, a Water spirit was found by the people, which from the
front was like a most beautifvil young maiden, but on its back
was covered with scales and had also fins. It is believed in ad-
dition that in the Baltic there are water-dwellers with a human
body and a fish-tail. Even when a spirit appears altogether
as a human being, it has generally some fish-like feature.


aio


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


such as the large maw of a fish, fish-teeth and round eyes.
Another significant fact is that it moves with the other fish,
taking them with it from the sea to the rivers, and also that it
wanders into the fishers’ traps. There is a story of such a half-
fish, half -female being in the Karelian folk-songs which Lonn-
rot uses in the Aino episode in Kalevala (viii. 45—133).

The Finno-Ugric peoples also envisage the water itself
animistically. The Cheremiss say that the “ water lives,” it
moves from one place to another, serves people and carries
their boats. • Donner relates, that the Samoyeds, when they
are out in their boats and come to a new river, wash their
heads with its water. A large river they call Mother.” "
This custom is met with also among the Siryans, who, when
they go out fishing, sacrifice bread to the Vorikva River say-
ing: “ Vorikva-mother, carry us without danger, protect us,
and give us a whole boatful of fish.”““ The Votiaks and
Mordvins, when praying, use also the name “ Mother ” to
their rivers and brooks as the Russians speak of the “ Volga-
mother,” etc.

The Volga and Baltic Finns have the same belief, i.e.,
that lakes can move from one place to another. This may
happen as a consequence of someone offending the water by
polluting it. They say that when the sea wanders, a black
bull goes bellowing before it, so that people may know to
get out of its way.®'

In a little village in the District of Birsk there is a lake
that has the same name as the village, Cherlak. The people
say it has two sisters, Azelekel and Kandralekel, which are
also two lakes in the District of Belebey. Cherlak Lake is
the youngest sister and is called the “ Cherlak girl.” Some-
times it is asked to visit the older sisters, and to take with it
water, fish and sea birds. Some time ago it paid a visit to
them, the lake being in the meanwhile so dry that cattle were
able to pasture on its bed, the only water being in a hole.
The village was quite unhappy over the shortage of water and


WATER SPIRITS


2II


decided to o£Fer up a sacrifice to the “ Cherlak girl.” They
thought first of ofiFering her a blade bull, but this did not
please the lake as the animal did not shudder when water
was poured over it. In the end they offered a black heifer,
which she accepted with pleasure. Clad in clean clothes,
the people around sprinkled water on one another from the
water that was left in the hole, praying to the “ Cherlak girl ”
to return to its old place. The heifer’s bones and pieces of
its flesh were wrapped in its hide and hidden in the water
hole. On this occasion the following prayer was read : “ Water-
mother, protect the water, give the Cherlak girl good
health, bring her and all kinds of fish back to her place,
bring her with all kinds of sea-birds, give the water good
health. Make Azelekel and Kandralekel return her former
riches to the Cherlak girl! ” When it had received the sacri-
fice, the water began to return, but in the beginning it was
muddy and foul. The village sacrificed a black lamb for the
health of the water, and then “the water became clean and
even fish and sea-birds began to appear.” Sometimes, the
elder sisters also come from Belebey to visit the “ Cherlak
girl,” when it becomes flooded. An old Cheremiss related that
during his lifetime it has happened twice that a strange lake
has visited another.

The Cheremiss and Mordvins generally call the animated
water “ Water mother.” Probably the Esthonians’ Vete-ema
(“ Water mother ”) and Mere-ema (“ Sea mother ”) have the
same origin, although the ideas connected with them are now
in close relation to the Wasser-mutter of the Teutons. The
Livonians’ Mier-iema (“ Sea mother ”) is a similar goddess.®*
Agricola says that the Karelians worshipped Veden ema, who
“drove fish into their nets.”

In the magic prayers of the Mordvins the “ Water mother ”
has already certain anthropomorphic features; silky hair, and
a plait decorated with silver wire, at times also her children
and family are mentioned. One finds, however, in some


212


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


prayers words like these: “ Water mother, Boyar mistress, thou
comest from the sea and spreadest thyself over the whole
country, thou wanderest over thine own land, thou floatest
over thine own ways, thou doest much good, thou receivest
many genuflexions, thou flowest glowing like gold, shining
like silver.”

It is quite evident that the “ Water mother ” in the votive
prayers is the animated water itself. As an example one might
give the following prayer written down by Melnikov among
the Christian Mordvins. “ Water mother, give all Christian
people good health. Give health to those who eat thee and
those who drink thee, to those who bathe in thee a light and
merry heart j give the cattle also who drink thee good
health.”

Smaller offerings arc also made to the water when going
out to fish, or in sickness, i.e., ordinary skin diseases which are
believed to come from the offended water. The real water-
cult is, however, connected with agriculture. Mutual sacri-
fices have been made to the Water mother, chiefly to obtain
fruitful rains. Like the earth, the water is given a black
sacrificial animal, generally a bull or a sheep. The Cheremiss
have a custom of sprinkling water on one another at such
ceremonies. Black sheep, or hens that happen to be near the
water, are also sprinkled with it. A part of all the sacrificial
food is thrown into the water, in addition to the bones and a
portion of each part of the carcase, which, wrapped in the
hide, are also thrown in. At the close everything used at the
saaifice is rinsed in the water. If a sacrifice should bring too
much rain, the offerings that have been thrown into the water
must be taken up again, and buried in the earth to make the
rain cease.®^

A water cult of this description was known among the Vo-
tiaks, Mordvins and Baltic Finns, J. Gutslaff (1644) relates
about the Esthonians that they worshipped a brook (Woh-
handa), which they believed could produce a fertilising rain.


PLATE XXIV

The World-pillar ” of the Lapps, consisting of
two high stones and a squared log of wood. (See
page 222.)

According to Lccnis.


WATER SPIRITS


213

or when the brook so desired, torrential rains, hail, or frost.
An old man said that the weather covild be arranged with the
brook’s help; If one wished for rain and stormy weather,
one threw something into the water, but if one wished for fine
weather, one cleaned out the brook. An example was given of
a pair of oxen which, while out at pasture, fell into the water
and were drowned, with the result that a terrible rainstorm
arose and only ceased when the carcases were dragged out of
the water.”® Often, “ rain is made ” without sacrifice, by
wetting people, the walls of houses, cattle, and the fields.
Among the Votiaks, the “ Thunder mother ” has in many
districts usurped the place of “ the Water ” at the large com-
mon sacrifices. Among the Mordvins it has been noted that
in some places they had a custom, when sacrificing for rain,
of going round a little lake three times, carrying a duck, which
was afterwards cooked and eaten in honour of the water.
Sometimes the finding of rain-giving springs is difficult. But
if rain comes soon after a sacrifice to a spring or brook, one
can be certain of having found a good sacrificing-place.
Droughts are often caused by rain-giving springs becoming
choked. These have then to be cleaned out in order to obtain
rain.®®

When the fructifying powers of rain were noticed, the
belief arose that rain could also fructify human beings and
animals. To the general custom of taking a newly married
woman to* the brook near her husband’s home, in order to
conciliate the strange water, the rite of sprinkling her with
water has been added. This custom can be explained partly
by the belief that one must come into contact with the new
water oneself in order to become acquainted with it. The
Siryans have a custom according to which a newly married
pair should go to the nearest stream three days after their
wedding, when the wife sacrifices money and pieces of cloth
and thread, or bread and cheese to the “ mother ” river, after
which she washes her hands and face in the water. With


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


214

most of the agi'icultural Finnish races it is regarded as neces-
sary to drench the bride completely with water. If weddings
are celebrated in the winter, when it is of course too cold to
do this, the Votiaks and Ingrians consider it their duty to
drench all the winter’s brides together in the spring. It is
not quite clear why this wetting is done, but some light may
perhaps be thrown on the matter by a Mordvinian custom.
According to this the bride goes the day after the wedding to
the stream or well, not only to pour water over herself, but
to beg the “Water mother” to give her children. Bishop
Makariy says that when the bride sacrifices money, linseed,
bread and salt to the water, che begs it to wash her clothes
and give her children. The same author says that barren
Mordvin women also pray to the “ Water mother ” for her
assistance. Usually such sacrifices were made at midnight,
when both husband and wife went together in secret to the
shore. According to Butuzov the Erza woman also prayed
in the following words: “ Water mother, pardon me, if I have
ofFended thee and therefore cannot give birth to children.”
The German belief that children come fi’om the water
(“ Kinder-brunnen ”) is also explained by the above.*®

Rivers and seas were also prayed to for an increase of water-
birds. AminoflF says that the Votiaks sacrificed a duck to the
water, so that it might richly increase their geese and ducks.**
Wichmann has discovered the following prayer: “To Mother
Ybyt (a river) I give a goose. Produce many geese when
their time comes.” The Mordvins also pray to the “ Water
mother ” to increase their cattle.

The Votiaks and Mordvins, like the Russians earlier, each
spring when the ice begins to break up, celebrate great festi-
vals with sacrifices of horses in honour of the water. Among
the Votiaks this feast is called “ to follow the ice.” In 1911
the author had the opportunity of being present at one of these
feasts at the river Buy, one of the tributaries of the Kama.
After a young foal had been killed and cooked on the shore


WATER SPIRITS


215

of the stream, the people knelt down with their faces towards
the water, while the officiating priest read out a long prayer,
begging prosperity from the river. During the prayer the
bones, hide, and small pieces of the different parts of the
carcase were thrown into the water, together with the animal’s
new halter, the blood having been already di-ained there by
means of a channel dug into the bank. The animal sacrificed
is changed each year, being one year a brown foal, the next
year a black bull. The people believe firmly that if they do
not sacrifice to the river, it will flood their corn-fields, or make
great gaps in the banks, or cause fogs, storms and disastrous
hail-storms. In one village this same spring, the sacrifice
had been neglected, and in pvmishment hail had ruined the
corn-fields.

The Cheremiss believe that the water has also a “ soul ”
(ort) that can depart to other places. They say that when
the water’s “ soul ” disappears, the water becomes muddy and
foul. Illness follows from drinking such water. The close
relation between the Water spirit and the water itself with its
“ soul,” is shown by the belief that if the Water master ”
leaves, the water dries up, and that a spirit can rule over two
different waters, causing each to fill or dry up as it removes
from one to the other. The undefined Pamas-oza (“ the
Spring’s master”) of the District Ursum is also apparently
a nature-soul. It becomes angry if anyone comes to take
water from the spring with imclean vessels, or if any one
shouts, quarrels, speaks indecently or spills water over his
clothes. It pixnishes such people by giving them boils or
some other skin disease 5 and they must then cook porridge
at the edge of the spring and ask for pardon.*’

Doubtless the imdefined Veden Haltia (“ Water ruler ”) of
the Finns is of the same origin. An indication of this is the
strange magic custom, that when the water in a well is spoilt
or run dry, fresh water is brought from another well, in the
belief that by thus renewing the water in the well, a new


2j6 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

Haltia is secured. To lakes also in which the fishing water
is spoilt or where the Haltia is not good, “ new water ” and a
“ new Haltia ” are brought. Considering that in the above-
mentioned proceeding, which is also known among other tribes,
e.g., among the Chuvashes, the water, by the addition of new
and better water, is provided with new soul-power, we may
assume that the Haltia here is to be understood in the sense
of the nature-soul. It is further to be observed that origi-
nally each sea, lake or river had only one Haltia.

These examples should show, that besides the spirits of
those drowned and the tutelary genii of the fish, the water
itself, furnished with a soul, is included among the Water
gods of the Finno-Ugric stocks.


PLATE XXV

Sacrificial Meal Among the Russian
Karelians

(See page 229.)

After photograph by 1 . K. Inha.


CHAPTER XIII

GODS OF SKY AND AIR

T he supreme deity among the Finno-Ugric stocks
is the Heaven god, who is called by different names,
the original signification of which is the same among all the
peoples.

In the Finnish language there are two words, Jumala and
Ilmarinen, both of which were originally names for the god of
the sky. The former, which is found in Icelandic literature
as early as 1026 (Jomali), has in our time come to denote
“god” in general {dens') ^ like the loan-word Jubmel or Ibmel
in the Lapp tongue, except among the Cheremiss, where in
its present form of Jumo it has preserved its original meaning.
In this last language the word has also a third meaning which
may be taken to be the very oldest, i.e., the “sky” or the
“ air.” A similar example of a word meaning “ heaven ” or
“the Heaven god” gradually coming to denote generally
“ god,” is provided by the Turco-Tatar T^gere. The second
Finnish word also, Ilmarinen (diminutive of ilman), which
later became the name of a hero in the Kalevda, comes from
a word originally meaning “sky” or “air” {ilma). The
word Ilmari formed by adding a suffix, is met with also among
the Votiaks, Inmar (the god of the sky), and originates there-
fore from the Finno-Permian period, over a thousand years
before the birth of Christ. Contemporaneously, and with the
same meaning as the word Inmar, there is another word in the
Votiak, In(m) (= Finnish lima) 5 the same word being also
fotmd among the Siryans, Jen (now meaning the Christian
God), and among the Ostiaks, Hem or Item. These last-named


2i8 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

have also other names for this god, such as Num-Turem
(Turem = “ sky,” “air,” “world,” etc.), which has its
counterpart in the Vogul Numi-Torem. The word Turem
has been compared by Castren with the Lapp Tiermes (the
god of thunder). Both the sky and the Heaven god are called
Num by the Samoyeds.

Knowing that the highest god, as appears already from his
names, was at one time merely the animated sky, it is not sur-
prising that, especially in earlier times, the people’s ideas of
him were dim and vincertain. The most usual qualities at-
tributed to him are “ great,” “ high,” “ good ” j in the south-
ern districts the Ostiaks call him Sangke (“ light ”), prob-
ably a shortening of Sangke-Turem. As there was no actual
conception of his being, there were no attempts to materialise
him. Characteristic for all the above-mentioned peoples is
the following description of the Samoyeds: “They never
make images of Num, 'therefore they do not know how to
sculpture him.” ^

Only in folk-poetry do we find the Sky god anthropo-
morphised. Here, we find the Cheremiss relating that he is
a man-like being, living in the sky. Like the people down
below, he practises agriculture, he has green pastures and much
excellent cattle. As befits a good Cheremiss farmer, he even
keeps bees. In the sacrificial prayers he appears as a worldly
ruler with a large train of lesser deities, to whom at times
sacrifices are also made. Like a rich and powerful ruler, the
god of the Ostiaks and Voguls dwells in the highest story of
heaven in a house glittering with gold and silver j he is said
to have seven sons and many assistant spirits, some of which
have wings. The idea of a heavenly suite is, however, of
later origin, a fact that appears also from the names borrowed
from the Turco-Tatar.®

It is quite natural that the sky with its light and rains, and
other wondrous forces and phenomena affecting so closely
the whole of our earthly existence, should have early become


GODS OF SKY AND AIR


219

the object of the curiosity of primitive peoples. It would
seem, nevertheless, that however animated the sky was re-
garded as being, no sacrifices were originally offered up to it.
This is witnessed to by the fact that even today, sacrifices to the
Heaven god are extremely rare among the more northern
peoples, e.g., the Eastern Samoyeds and the Northern Ostiaks,
for whom the god himself is too far away to be at all interested
in human life.®

The worship of the Heaven god is more closely connected
with agriculture, which, more often than any other occupation,
raises its glance to the sky. That he is a god of agriculture,
is shown plainly by the fact that sacrifices are made to him
chiefly that the fields may become fruitful. According to cer-
tain peoples, his period of worship is the summer months
onlyj as the Votiaks, for example, believe that Inmar may be
sacrificed to, like the “ Earth mother,” only up to the begin-
ning of winter, after which it is regarded as unsuitable to do
so.^ Quite apparent is the opinion that the sky is a pro-
creative power. In their prayers, the Votiaks call Inmar,
“ the procreator and nourisher,” the Mordvins address their
“god dwelling on high” (Erza: Vere-pas) generally by the
name “procreator,” Moksha: Shkaj or Shka(j)-bavas, Erza:
Shki-pas (from skcMnSy “ to procreate,” “ to give birth to,”
words to be found now only in folklore} havas or fasy “ god,”
an Indo-Iranian loan-word). The word skaj may at times
denote only and solely “ the sky,” as in the phrase, skajs
mazems (“the sky reddens”)*' The Voguls believed that
the Heaven god “ sends down ” even animals} in a prayer
to Numi-Torem occur the words: “ Send down, our father,
the fishes of the sea, let down the game of the forest! ” *

In later times the Heaven god among the Volga Finns has,
under the influence of Christianity and Islam, become a much
more powerful god, to be worshipped in all the necessities
imposed by life. Even now, however, he is turned to solely
in the case of material needs. Extremely characteristic is the


220


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


belief of the Votiaks as described by an xmknown author:
“ Inmar is, according to them, only a good spirit, who pro-
tects their lives and gives them food and clothing, having
nothing whatever to do with the mutual relations between
mankind.” ^ Thus, the Heaven god did not originally, in the
view of the Finno-Ugric stocks, watch over the morality
of the people, as the spirits of the dead were supposed
to do.

By the side of the male Heaven god, generally termed the
“ Father,” the peoples by the Volga and the Ob speak in their
sacrificial prayers of a female deity, the “ Mother of heaven,”
regarded as the guardian-spirit of child-birth and as such
later merged into the Virgin Mary. This “ Mother of heaven,”
pictured in folk-tales at times as the wife of the Heaven god,
and met with also among the Turco-Tatars, originates from
pagan times.®

In saaificing to the Heaven god, the peoples by the Volga
and the Ob follow similar customs, previously common also to
the surrounding peoples, of keeping the faces, both of the
sacrificing priests and the sacrificial animal, turned in the direc-
tion of the rising sun, contrary to the custom in the worship of
the dead of turning in the opposite direction} the Cheremiss
and the Votiaks having also different expressions for the two
ceremonies, i.e., “ sacrificing upward ” and “ sacrificing down-
ward.” The sacrifice to the Heaven god must, as far as possi-
ble, consist of a white animal. Where this is not possible, the
Ostiaks place a white cloth over the animal’s back. A feature
of note is also that the sacrificial-tree of the Heaven god,
must, as with other Nature gods, be a leaf or “ white ” tree,
those of the dead being invariably coniferous, or “dark”
trees.® Most often burnt offerings are offered up to the
Heaven god, but there are traces of other methods having been
used. As the smoke from the sacrifice could not reach the
sky from the plains, the sacrifice was performed on a hill or
other high place. In the oldest accounts of the Samoyed re-


PLATE XXVI


Old Sacrificial Grotto of the Thunder-
God Among the Finnish Lapps

(See pages 230-1.)

After photograph by T. I. Itkonen.


GODS OF SKY AND AIR


221


ligion it is stated that the Yuraks offered up white reindeer
to Num on the highest mountains. When the animal was
slaughtered, it was held, as during the rest of the ceremony,
with its head turned to the east. The flesh was eaten uncooked.
The skull, together with all other bones, was left on the place
of sacrifice} the first-named being generally stuck on a pole
with its nose towards the east.‘®

In looking at the night sky, the attention of people was
drawn to a certain fixed point, round which the heavens, as
seen from the earth, seemed to revolve. This regular motion
of the sky, which we know to be due to the movement of the
earth round its axis in the opposite direction, awakened among
primitive peoples the idea that the sky at this point, i.e., at the
North Star, is affixed to some object bearing or supporting the
heavens. For this reason, the Samoyeds (Turuhansk District)
call the North Star the “ nail of the sky,” “ round which the
heavens revolve.” The ancient Finns had also a correspond-
ing but now forgotten term, as proved by the name of the
North Star, borrowed by the Lapps from the Finns, Bohi-
navlle (“ the nail of the north ”) } its counterpart among the
Esthonians being the Pohjanael. The connection of these
beliefs with the sky is described by Holzmayer in the follow-
ing words: “ In the middle of the sky, or in the north, the
heavens are affixed to a nail in such a manner that they are
able to revolve round the nail, the revolving causing the
movement of the stars. As the North Star is situated in the
very centre, it is called the * n^l of the north.’ This nail
is, at the same time, regarded as supporting the sky. Turi
relates that the Lapps believe the Boahje-naste (“north
nail,” “ north star ”) to support the sky, and that when Arc-
turus, supposed to be an archer, shoots down the Boahje-naste
with his arrow on the last day, the heavens will fall, crushing
the earth and setting fire to everything,’®

The Lapps believed also, however, in a more reliable sup-
port for the sky than a nail. Missionaries relate that the


222


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


Lapps sacrificed to their highest god Veralden rade (“ Ruler
of the world”) so that “he should not let fall the sky,”
erecting at the altars a tree either split in two or forked nat-
urally, or also, at times, a high pillar, called the “ pillar of
the world ” (Veralden tshuold) for the god to “ suppoi-t the
world with, and keep it in its present form and condition,
that it might not grow old and fall from its former nature.”
The tree was besmeared with blood from the sacrifice.^^ A
“p illar of the world” of this description was seen by Leem
in the vicinity of the Porsanger Fjord at an old site of sacri-
fice, where there were two great stones and, on their eastern
side, a very high square log with its lower end stuck in the
ground. In the top of the log there was an iron nail.“ That
these pillars of the Lapps had a heavenly covmterpart is
shown by the fact that in some places, the name of the North
Star is “pillar of the world” (Veralden tshuold).^” It is
probable that the Lapps obtained both their ideas and their
sacrificial customs from the Scandinavians (Cf. Teutonic Ir-
minsQl, “ world-pillar ”) j the “ nail ” may be compared with
the Scandinavian Veraldar nagli, the “ world-nail.” The
corresponding belief of the ancient Finns is found nowadays
only in the phrase, known also to the Esthonians, and used
of people living to a very old age, that these live “ to be a
pillar of the world ” (Finnish Maailmanpatsas or Maasampa,
Esthonian Ilmasamba). The Ostiaks, amongst whom this
“pillar” was also known, and who even worshipped it as a
deity, have, as we shall see, in this respect been xxnder Turco-
Tatar influence.”

Like the sky itself, the heavenly bodies and certain
phenomena in the air were regarded as animated beings, al-
though not all of them were the objects of worship. In Ostiak
poetry “ the Sun mother ” and the “ Moon old man ” are
often mentioned, but sacrifices to them are rare; only at
Vasyugan was a piece of cloth with a ring attached oflFered up
to the sun, when the latter had caused a sudden fainting fit.^*


GODS OF SKY AND AIR


223

Among the Samoyeds, only the Yuraks, according to Lehtisalo,
worship the sun, “ the kindly eye of the heavens,” and the
moon, “the evil eye of the heavens,” to which they even
sacrifice at the New Year’s Festival in July, “when the
wild geese arrive again.” A “ shadow ” (image) is made of
them, similar in form to these bodies. Besmeared with
the blood of the sacrifice, these images are set up on long
poles.'®

Much more general is the worship of the sun and the
moon amongst the agricultural peoples. The Cheremiss and
the Votiaks sacrifice white animals to the sun (“ the Sxm
mother ”), both at annually recurring ceremonies, and also for
occasional reasons, e.g., when a long drought dries up the
grass and ruins the harvest, or for certain sicknesses. During
the prayers, the priest keeps his face towards the sun.®’ Why
the Eastern Cheremiss should sacrifice animals to the moon
(“ the Moon mother ”) is uncertain.®* A very important part
is also played by “ the rising and setting Sun god ” and “ the
wandering Moon god ” in the religion of the Mordvins. In
honour of the former, public sacrificial festivals were held,
but the Mordvins worshipped it at other times also, bowing
whenever a ray of sunlight fell on the window. Sacrifices to
the sun were set up in high places, so that the sun on rising
could take possession of them. The Mordvins also took oath
before the sun.®® Of sun-worship by the Finns, there are no
reliable accounts. The custom of the East Karelians of going
at dawn to the eastward slopes of their fields, to a “ purified
place,” where they bowed three times, saying: “ My dear sun,
my provider, give peace, health, look over everj^hing, watch
over ever3^ing,” may, however, be mentioned.®* The new
moon was also accorded a welcome by many Finno-Ugric
peoples. The Mordvins say, like the Russians: “Be greeted,
new moon 5 to me health, to thee a whole loaf.” The silver
and golden horns of the Moon god are also spoken of.®® Ac-
cording to Agricola, the Finns believed that at eclipses, the


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


S24

“ animals ” {Jta'peet) ‘‘ ate up the moon,” and lunar markings
were explained by saying that Rahkoi “ makes the moon black
in parts.” In Northern Finland “ the man in the moon ” is
called Rahkonen.

More apparent is the worship of sun and moon among the
Scandinavian Lapps, on whose magic drums they are often
pictured. When the Lapps sacrificed to the sun they made a
wooden image, one end of which they formed like a globe
and furnished with thorns, or they used only a large, wooden
ring decorated with figures} these objects were besmeared
with the blood of the sacrifice. The animals ofltered up to the
“ Sun virgin,” were always female, and where possible, white.
At the very least, a white thread had to be sewn through the
right ear of the sacrificial reindeer. When the sacrifice had
been killed, the Lapps cut a piece from all its quarters, thread-
ing them on to a switch bent into a ring. This object they then
hung up on a high sacrificial-board behind the tent. The
Lapps also sacrificed to the sun by taking three switches of
birch, plaiting them together up to about half-way, where
they bound a tape. These switches they besmeared with blood
from the sacrifice. Afterwards a ring was made of a birch-
bough and laid in the middle of the board as an image of the
sun, and inside this a small piece of the lungs, heart, tongue
and lips of the sacrifice. On the ring they set up the blood-
smeared switches. The bones of the sacrifice were also often
placed within a ring on the offering-board.*®

Like the Norwegian peasants, the Lapps living in Norway
had a custom of besmearing their doors with butter when the
sun, after the darkness of winter, first threw its rays on
from the horizon.” Another annual sacrifice was performed
at the lightest period of the summer. On Midsummer’s Eve
the Norwegian Lapps hung up a ring of leaves or grass,
called the “ sxm-ring,” in honour of the “ Sun virgin.” A
porridge of meal, mixed with butter, ‘‘ sun-porridge,” was
also cooked and eaten. On beginning this sacrificial meal,


PLATE XXVII


Drawings on a Lapp Drum According to
Randulf^s Description

I. The Thunder-god, Hora-galles. 2. “Man of
the world.” 3. Wind-old-man. 4. The shaman
of the heaven. 5. Rutu, disease-god. 6-7. Sac-
rificial animals. 8. The bear of the heaven. 9.
Two lines separating heaven from earth. 10-12.
The festival men. 13. The sun. 14. The Chris-
tian’s road with church, house, cow and goat. 15.
Sacrificial horse. 16. The shaman of the under-
world. 17. Underworld with a church and a house.
18. Juksakka. 19. Sarakka. 20. Madderakka. 21.
Sea with fish. 22. Lapp village. 23. Leibolmai. 24.
The bear. (See page 230.)


GODS OF SKY AND AIR


225

eaten by the men together with their wives, the Lapps bowed
their knees and prayed the sun to “pour its merciful rays
over the reindeer, and everything else they needed to live on.”
After the meal, they did the same, praying for “ a merry
milking-summer and good luck for the reindeer herds.”*®
Besides reindeer, sheep and goats could be used for sun-
sacrifices. At times even a spinning-wheel and flax were set
up on the altar to the Sm goddess.*®

Magic acts were also at times connected with the prayers.
Missionaries relate that Lapps who had gone astray during the
day among the mountains, would go on their
knees and call to the svm not to set, using at the
same time a wooden object with a handle, in
which a round hole had been cut. This object
they held up in their hands against the sim, so
that it might shine through it.®®

Without doubt, much in the sun-worship of ^

the Lapps may be referred to the corresponding
customs of their Scandinavian neighbours. Thus,
for example, the “ sun-porridge ” and the spinning-wheel
and the flax are certain proofs of foreign influence.

The Lapps turned to the moon as well as to the sun with
worship. The Christmas new moon, in especial, called “the
holy moon,” was worshipped with separate ceremonies. Im-
mediately the new moon had risen, complete silence was ob-
served in the Lapp home, the women being forbidden to spin,
the men to perform any noisy labour. As an offering to the
moon a ring of copper was placed in the roof-hole of the tent
so that the moon could shine through this into the tent. If
for any reason this old custom was broken, it was believed that
the moon became angry, and had then to be placated by sacri-
fices.®^ In some districts it was the custom to sacrifice a half-
year-old reindeer calf, the hide of which was hung up in the
tent in honour of the moon. Of the reasons for this worship,
an unknown author writes the following: “ The Lapps hang


226


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


up a ring of copper tied to a copper chain in the roofs of their
tents before the door, in such a manner that the rays of the
moon can fall on the ring of copperj believing, i.e., that the
moon can help the reindeer-cows to give birth easily to calves
and also protect them from all injuries during the time they
are with calf.”

Besides the Christmas new moon, the Scandinavian Lapps
formerly worshipped with special ceremonies the February-
moon also, which they called Kuova-manno. Hogstrom re-
lates how he heard from an old Lapp woman in Swedish
Lapmark that in earlier days it had been the custom at a
certain time in February (probably the time of the new moon)
to bind hay, used by the Lapps in their foot-wear and mittens,
to the horns of the reindeer. The Kuova-manno was then
adjured with alarm and din to eat.““ Certain marks of honour
have also in other districts in the northern lands fallen to the
first two months in the year, e.g., in Iceland the first {thorn)
and the second {goa^ Lapp kuova) new moons were wor-
shipped.®*

These, the coldest months of the year, are also mentioned
in a Finnish tale, in which January is called Iso tammi (“the
great oak ”) and February Pikku tammi (“ the little oak ”),
the latter saying to the former: “ If I were in thy place I
would freeze the foal in its mother’s womb, the hands of
the housewife to the dough, and the feet of the swine to the
ground, but though I freeze in the night, water runs from my
eye durmg the day.” A similar myth seems to have existed
among the Teutons. In one of their proverbs “ the little
Horn” (das kleine Horn = February) says to the “great”
(das grosse Horn = January) : “ hatt ich die Macht wie du,
liess ich erfrieren das Kalb in der Kuh.”

When the Scandinavian Lapps sacrificed to the moon, they
acted in the same manner as when sacrificing to the sun 5 the
sacrificial animals were also similar, never black and never
males. The magic act mentioned earlier, appeared also in


GODS OF SKY AND AIR


227

their moon-cult, the wooden object, however, being furnished
with a smaller hole for the moon to shine through, for the
purpose of preventing the moon from withdrawing
its light during the long, dark winter-time.“

Among the Baltic Finns and the Lapps, the
Thunder god had waxed more and more power-
ful, until at the close of the pagan period in Fin-
land he had pushed aside even the Heaven god;
this development has, however, in the light of
comparative research, taken place under foreign
influences.

Like the North Siberian peoples in general, the Samoyeds
regard the Thunderer as a great bird, in the company of which
the soul of the shaman can travel over sea and water. Sacri-
fices to this Thunder bird have not been noted, excepting
among the Yuraks, who sacrifice to it during the before-men-
tioned New Year’s Festival at about the time of the first
thunderstorms, making then out of birch-wood, a goose-like im-
age of the Thunder god.“’ In some districts the Ostiaks also
believe the Thunderer to be a “ black, loudly-screaming bird,”
but call it also “ the winged old man,” to the honour of whom,
in the more southern districts, they devour “ thunder-por-
ridge,” when the first thunder is heard, bowing in the direction
in which the thunder travelled.®® We know also the Siryans
to have greeted the first thunder of the Spring.®® The Vo-
tiaks call thunder “ the Thunder mother,” but have no definite
idea of its form. In their sacred groves, they sacrifice horses,
as the Cheremiss do, in order that the Thunderer may spare
their fields from hail and give fruitful rains. The last-named
speak of two separate beings: the “Lightning god” and the
“ Thunder god a common sacrifice is, however, made to
them. The so-called “summer lightning” they believe to
ripen the crops. A magic means of stilling a thunderstorm is
used by the Eastern Cheremiss, who, during the storm, throw
an axe into the yard, sacrificing at the same time the wool of


Fig. 7.
Moon Ring


aa8 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

a white sheep in the fire, and praying that the thunder should
pass by/®

The Mordvins have a Thunder god with anthropomorphic
characteristics. The Moksha call him, like the phenomenon
itself, At'am (a derivative of at' a, “grandfather,” “old
man”), the rainbow At'amjonks {jonks, “bow,” “cross-
bow ”). The Erza, who worshipped thunder in the communal
sacrificial feasts, and at oaks or other trees struck by lightning,
call the Thunderer Pur'gine, a word derived from the Lithu-
anian Perkunas.*^ Probably through the Letts this word has
travelled also to the Esthonians, who called the thunderbolt,
according to an old lexicon of the year 1660, fercktm nohl.
Together with the old name of the Scandinavian Thunder god
Fjorgynn, the Finnish Perkele (“ devil ”) comes from the
same root. The Esthonians’ kotty kouk (“ thunder ”) must be
regarded as cognate with the Lithuanian kaukas (“ghost”)
and kmks-pemis (“thunderbolt”). The Norse Thor has
been recognized in the battle-cry of the Esthonians about
1200 A.D.: “Tar abitha! ” (“Tar help! ”) and in the name
Tuuri, which appears in a Karelian magic song. It is uncertain
whether Turisas (? “father Tur”), who, according to
Agricola, “ conferred victory in war,” is also the same god.

Like all the other peoples dwelling around, the Esthonians
(Ai, “old man”} Aia-hoog, “thunder-shower”} Aikene,
“ the little old man,” “ thunder ”) and the Finns (Isanen,
“ the little father ”} Ukko, Ukkonen, “ grandfather,” “ thun-
der ”) have regarded the Thunderer as an old man. Descrip-
tive names are the Finnish Pitkainen, PitkS.m6inen (from
fitkay “long”), the Esthonian Pitkne, Piker, etc.*®

The cult of the Thunder god played so important a part
m the life of the Finns, that we find Agricola describing it as
follows: “ Ukko’s goblet was drunk at the sowing of the spring
seed} Ukko’s chest was also brought, and then maid and wife
drank to excess, and, moreover, many shameful things were
done there, as was both heard and seen.” This god was wor-


PLATE XXVIII

Drawings on a Torne-Lapp Drum


I. Ilmaris. 2. Diermes. 3. Reindeer, 4, The
sun« 5. The son of God. 6. God-Father. 7, The
cathedral, 8. The angel. 9. St. Anne, lo, St.
Mary. 11-13* The lords of Christmas, 14. The
moon. 15—17* Peasants go to church. 18. The
church. 19. The wife of devil. 20. Disease-devil.
21. The loose-going devil. 22. The fire of hell.
23. The tar-kettle of hell. 24. The grave, 25.
The devil in chains. (See page 232.)


GODS OF SKY AND AIR 229

shipped because it “ brought thunder showers and the year’s
harvest.” Dating from Agricola’s time (c. 1550) is a petition
still preserved, written in Swedish by peasants from the east
of Finland, in which the fine for drinking “ Thordns gilde ”
is described. “ Ukko’s chests ” (Ukon vakat) are also men-
tioned in the report of an ecclesiastical inspection held in
1670. Vestiges of the sacrificial feast connected with the
same, described by Agricola, have been noted in quite recent
times. The “ chests ” were made of birch-bark, and sacrifices
of food intended for Ukko were placed in them and carried
to “ Ukko’s mountain.” For the sacrifice itself the best sheep
in the flock was taken and slaughtered on a given day. Its
flesh was boiled and portions of the meat, together with other
victuals, were put into the chests, and along with a large quan-
tity of beer and spirits, taken to the holy mountain, where they
were left untouched until the next day. Ukko was supposed
to eat his share during the night, and in the morning what
remained of the victuals was eaten by the worshippers, part
of the liquors, however, being poured on to the ground to
ensure a summer free from drought.^* These festivals have
been held in Finland very nearly to our time. The most
detailed accounts come from Ingria, where the Ukko festival
was held on the days of St. Peter and St. Elias (twenty-ninth
June, twentieth July, old style). Sacrificial beer was poured
on to the ground to Ukko to invoke fruit-giving rains, or the
ground was sprinkled with water with magic ceremonies."
Sacrifices of bulls are reported from Esthonia in an account
of the year 1644, which contains the following prayer: “ Piker,
we, praying, give a bull, two-horned, four-footed, for the
sake of the ploughing and the sowing: stalks of brass, ears
of gold. Push elsewhere the blade clouds, over the great
swamp, the high forest, the wide plain} air of mead, rains of
honey to our ploughmen, sowers! Holy Piker, look after
our fields: fine straw beneath, fine ears above, fine grain
within!


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


230

Agricola mentions also the wife of the Thunder god,
Rauni, whose name occurs in a song as Roonikka, and was also
known to the Finnish Lapps as Ravdna. In the same manner
as to the Thunder god himself, the Lapps sacrificed reindeer
to Ravdna, most often in grottoes in the mountain consecrated
to her. Just as, among many peoples, the oak was the favour-
ite tree of the Thunder god, the rowan was Ravdna’s
favourite, growing in her grottoes.^® In Finnish folk-poetry
also the rowan and its berries are described as being “ holy.”
The name of the Thunder goddess seems originally to have
applied to the tree, being, as such, a loan-word, from the
Scandinavian (Icelandic reynir, Swedish ronn).^'’


Fig, 8. Lapp Sacrificial Board of the Thunder-God
According to Rheen


In the Finnish magic songs the Thunder god, like the
Scandina'wan Thor, is given a hammer as a weapon. Armed
in the same manner was the Tora-galles or Hora-galles
(“Thor-man”) of the Scandinavian Lapps, who was pic-
tured on the magic drums with one or two hammers in his
hand. In their own language, the Lapps called the Thunder
god Tiermes, who had a “ bow ” {tiermaz-juksy “ rainbow ”)


GODS OF SKY AND AIR


231

and an “ arrow ” as arms. With either his hammer, or with
his bow and arrow, the Thunder god was regarded as driving
away evil spirits who everywhere hide themselves at his ap-
proach. When the Lapps, to frighten away these beings, in-
voked thunder, they beat on their drums and shouted. At
times, Hora-galles had as assistant a man-servant.^®

The missionary Rheen describes how the Swedish Lapps
sacrificed to the Thunder god: “When the magic drum has
indicated that a sacrifice to Thor must be made, the reindeer-
bull chosen as a sacrifice is bound fast behind the tent, where
the women are not allowed to go. The animal is killed by
being stabbed with a knife in its heart. The blood is pre-
served to be smeared on the image of Thor. As many rein-
deer as the Lapp sacrifices, so many images of Thor does he set
up. The images are prepared out of the stumps of birch trees,
the root being made into the head, the trunk into the rest of the
body} a hammer is placed in its hand. After the slaughtering
of the votive reindeer, the Lapps build up behind their tents
an offering-board, about three yards high, setting pretty birch
branches around it. These are also strewn on the ground from
the tent to the board. On this board the blood-besmeared
images of Thor are set up, certain marks resembling crosses
being also made on the latter. Behind the images, the horns
and skull and the feet are set up. At the same time a small
piece of flesh is cut from each quarter and placed in a little
wooden case, into which also a little fat is poured, on the dais
before the image. In the right ear of the reindeer chosen for
sacrifice to Thor, a grey woollen thread must be sewn as a
mark.”

At times the Lapps offered up, besides reindeer, large
wooden hanuners to the Thunder god. Forbus says that a
hammer, two fathoms long and beautifully carved, was made
in his honour and smeared with blood from the sacrifice}

S. Kildal relates that such hammers were laid in mountain
grottoes.®^ The Finnish Lapps regarded clefts in the moun-


232 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

tains as suitable places in which to sacrifice to the Thun-
derer.*®

The Wind god is called by the Votiaks in their prayers,
simply “the Wind.” A goose is sacrificed to it in the sown
fields at the time of the general field-sacrifices, and it is ap-
pealed to not to blow overmuch, spoiling in that way the
seed, but to blow mildly over the sown fields. The colour of
the votive goose is not particularized, but it is not seemly to
sacrifice to the wind anything black or white. In some places
it is the practice to sprinkle blood in the air. Occasional sacri-
fices are also made to the wind, particularly during storms.
Besides this cult in the fields for the sake of the seed, it is
worshipped at times in the stock-yards, to the intent that the
violent autumn storms of the steppes should not destroy
the straw-roofed cattle-sheds or do injury to the cattle.**
For similar purposes, the Cheremiss and the Mordvins sacri-
fice to the “ Mother wind ” or “ Wind mother.” The last-
mentioned say: “When the children of Wind mother are
noisy, the storm begins.” ®*

The Esthonians say that the Wind god dwells in the forest
on a shaded branch, whence it sets the wind blowing j accord-
ing to its dwelling-place, it is called Metsmees (“Forest
man ”). A more general name is, however, “ Wind mother,”
who “weeps” when the rain falls during a storm, and
“ dances ” in whirlwinds.®* At the sowing of flax, doves or
a cock are sacrificed to the “Wind mother.”*® In Finnish
magic prayers the appeal is to the wind itself, though, some-
times, also to the “ Wind woman,” etc. According to Agri-
cola, Ilmarinen was, later, worshipped as the Wind god,
“giving calm and bad weather, and furthering travellers.”
A figure of Ilmaris, “the ruler of the storm, and of bad
weather,” has been found also on the magic drum of a Finnish
Lapp.*® Usually, the Lapps called the Wind god the “ Wind
man,” in the cult of whom one can discern Scandinavian in-
fluence. The misMonary Randulf describes the Wind god


PLATE XXIX

OsTiAK Sacrifice
(See page 233.)

After photograph by K. F. Karjalainen.


GODS OF SKY AND AIR


233


of the Lapps as follows: “Their third great god the Lapps
call the ‘Wind man,’ who is identical with Aeolus. They
picture him (on their magic drums) with a spade in his right
hand, with which spade he shovels back the wind to blow.
This god they call on both when out with their reindeer on
the mountains for the stilling of a wind harmful to their herds,
and when, while fishing out at sea, a storm arises that places
them in danger of their lives. They promise then to lay
sacrifices on his altar.”

At the sacrifices to the Wind god, a peculiar bundle of
twigs, sometimes formed of birch (Finnish timletvpes'dy “ the
nest of wind ”), had to be set up at the sacrificial altar, and
smeared with blood from the sacrifice. Boats and spades were
also offered up to him.®®

Randulf speaks of a kind of wind-magic, formerly invoked
very often by the Lapps: “ When they are angered with any-
one, they call to the Wind god to blow, binding this appeal
by incantations into three bundles. On opening the first of
these, a moderate storm arises} with the second, a storm strong
enough to make sailing dangerous even for a vessel with a
main-sail reefed half-way} but when they open the third, a
shipwreck is the inevitable result.” This ma^c means of in-
voking wind, reports of which are foxind as early as the thir-
teenth century, and which was used both by the Finns and the
Esthonians, is obviously adopted from the Scandinavians.*®

The wind is personified also among the Ugrians, the Ostiaks
calling it the “ Wind old man,” to whom huntsmen saaifice
at Vasyugan a small piece of white cloth at a birch-tree, to
secure good luck for themselves in hunting,*’

The agricultural peoples sacrifice also to the Frost god.
The Votiaks* sacrifice a grey lamb or a duck to the “rime-
frost,” when during the cold spring nights the rime appears
on the fields. In some districts, an annual sacrifice is even
made at Easter-time,*® In their prayers, the Cheremiss speak
of the “ Frost man ” and the “ Frost woman.” But despite


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


234

these names, they are not regarded as anthropomorphic beings.
Some districts call the morning-frost the “ Frost man,” and
the evening-frost the “ Frost woman.” They sacrifice a grey
ram to the “ man,” and a grey sheep to the “ woman.” Sacri-
fices are made to them both annually and also at other times
for accidental reasons. The appeal in the prayers is for the
frost to refrain from spoiling the seed.®®

The Mordvins had a custom of placing porridge for the
“ Frost man ” in the smoke-outlet on the Thursday before
Easter. The prayer recited on this occasion runs: “ For thee
have we prepared porridge, protect our spring-sowings! ”
The Russians had an absolutely identical custom.®*

There are no reliable accounts of sacrifices to the Frost god
among the Baltic Finns, although the frost is personified in
the Finnish magic songs. But the most Southern Lapps in
Scandinavia worshipped the “ Frost man,” who is said to be
“ the god of weather, snow and ice,” and to whom they sacri-
ficed, so that “ the ice should not harm the reindeer and that
the blizzard should cease.” ®® The word, recurring in the
name, which means “ rime-frost in the grass ” and is found
only in the more southern dialects, points to a connection with
the customs of the agricultural peoples.

With the gods of the air, the “ Cloud mother ” of the
Cheremiss should also be reckoned, being remembered at the
great sacrificial feasts with a drink-offering, which is poured
into the fire. The clouds are living beings, according to the
Cheremiss. “ If they were not alive, how could they move
about and wander whither they will? ” they say. “ One can
call them towards oneself, or beg them to travel away to
other neighbourhoods.” ®“ The “ twilight ” they worshipped
only by not performing any work, or at least any work that
causes a din, after sunset, lest the “ twilight ” should punish
them. A similar belief exists among the Volga Tatars.®’^


CHAPTER XIV
FIRE


F ire is the friend of man,’* say the Cheremiss, “ it warms
the house and cooks the food, but if it has reason to be
angered, it jumps from the fireplace and burns up the house
and the village.” One cause for the fire’s anger, is the spitting
into it by any person, another the “ wounding ” of it by any
sharp instrument, another the stirring of it with an “ unclean ”
stick. Further, if one throws the wood on to the hearth, or
addresses the fire with evil words, it may become vexed.
Probably, from the very earliest times, fire was regarded as
something pure that cannot endure defilement. The most
common punishment to befall the culprit is a kind of skin-
disease. The fire must then be appeased by small sacrifices.
The Cheremiss use the following words: “ Forgive me, ‘ Fire
mother,’ perhaps I have spat in thee or wounded or defiled
thee. Make me well again.” The worst punishment the fire
is capable of is the breaking loose of fire. At such times,
the Cheremiss go round the fire, sacrificing to the “Fire
mother ” a black hen, or milk from a black cow. During this,
the “ Fire mother ” is prayed to not to destroy the village, and
also in the future to protect the people from loss through its
agency.’

The Ostiaks call the fire “ Fire girl ” or “ Fire woman ”
in their prayers, this deity being as easily wounded as the
Fire god of the Cheremiss and the other Volga peoples. To
appease it, the Ostiaks sacrifice to the fire victuals, cloths of
red or a fire-like colovir, and pieces of stuff. Despite these
sacrifices, intended as clothing for the “Fire girl” or the
“ Fire mother,” it is merely the animated fire itself that is


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


236

the object of worship,® The Mordvins say: “ the Fire mother
‘ flames,’ ” the Ostiaks speak of “ the many-tongued Fire
mother,” and in a Cheremiss prayer the passage occurs: “ Fire
mother, thou whose smoke is long and whose tongue is sharp.” ®

The Cheremiss speak also, at times, of the soul (ort) of
the fire, which disappears if water is poured over the fire, a
method of putting it out which is regarded as unseemly,
among them the wood being merely drawn to one side so
that the fire goes out of its own accord.^ This “ soul ” of the
fire can appear to men in some shape or other. According to
the Finns, the “ Ruler ” of the fire appeared in the night as
glittering sparks before some accident. The Esthonians be-
lieve that the “Fire mother” appears in the shape of an
animal as a warning of a coming fire 5 a “ Fire cock ” or “ Fire
cat ” has been seen to move over the roof of a house shortly
before a destructive fire.'

In the tales of the Ostiaks, the “ Fire spirit ” can even take
on human form. A man who had used the fire badly, saw
the “ Fire girl ” sitting naked and covered with wounds on a
stone. According to another tale, every hearth has its own
“ Fire maiden ”5 these can visit one another, tell each other
their experiences and ask advice of one another.* Similar
tales are met with among the Turco-Tatars.

The holiness of the domestic hearth is seen from the custom
of bearing fire, burning brands, or ashes from the old home to
the new. According to an earlier view, the fire should never
be allowed to go out, and even today the Cheremiss light
their sacrificial fires with brands from the hearth. Were the
fire to go out of its own accord, it was deemed an omen of
misfortvme. The people seem, however, to have believed
that the power of the fire diminishes, if it is allowed to burn
too long. The Volga Finns had therefore a habit of renewing
their fires once a year by lighting a “ new fire,” or a “ wood
fire,” by rubbing two dry sticks against one another. The
“ new fiire ”. is supposed to contain a specially purifying magic


FIRE


237

power. For this reason, the Cheremiss extinguish all their
village hearth fires on an agreed date in the hottest part of the
svunmer, at the close of the " evil time,” draw forth a “ new
fire,” and make a fire of logs somewhere on the edge of the
village, over which the people have to jumpj the cattle, even,
are driven through it. To render this last more easy, the site
for the fire is chosen at the gateway to some meadow, the
gate itself, having for reasons of magic, branches of rowan
bound to it. From this log-fire, which generally burns for
two or three days, every householder carries home “ new
fire ” to his hearth, smoking out his stockyard at the same
time/

For occasional reasons also a similar fire may be made.
The Mordvins sometimes lit such fires even at the forty days*
feast for the dead, at which those present cleansed themselves
by jumping over the fire.® A more widespread custom is to
use this method of purification during the course of some
epidemic in the neighbourhood. At such times a furrow is
also ploughed round the village, or a plough carried round
it. That also the Spring and Midsummer-Eve bonfires of
the Finns originally possessed a prophylactic significance ap-
pears from an account from Ingria, according to which the bon-
fires were intended to be made on the pasture land visited by
the cows.®

The stocks living along the Volga have further a custom
of worshipping fire as an intermediary between the gods
and men. Sacrifices thrown into the fire are not always in-
tended for the “ Fire mother,” but it is intended that she
should hand on these offerings to their true recipients. In the
sacred groves of the Cheremiss one can hear the priests say to
the fire: " Bear with thy smoke our sacrifices to God, and re-
cite to him our prayers! ” As a reward, a sacrifice is then
given to the fire also.“ These beliefs and customs are un-
doubtedly, however, like so much else in the fire cult of the
Finno-Ugric peoples, of foreign origin, probably, Iranian. A


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


238

more original custom is that o£ the Lapps, as described by
Randulf: “To none of their idols do the Lapps offer up
burnt sacrifices, i.e., they do not destroy their sacrifices by fire,
excepting those to the sun, which are burnt up to show the
heat and fire of the sun, and are made on a particular stone,
consecrated for the purpose.”

In their magic songs the Finns describe how mankind came
to obtain fire. In some, the origin of fire is said to be from
heaven, as appears from the following words: “Where has
fire been cradled, where rocked the flame? — Over there on
the navel of the sky, on the peak of the famous mountain.”
Its birth there is also pictured in the following: “ Fire struck
Ismaroinen (Ilmarinen), fire flashed Vainamoinen, he struck
fire without a flint, tinderlesss he secured it, struck it with a
black snake, with a mottled serpent, on the open plain of
water, on the wide-spread waves.” In a variation the Thun-
derer appears as the giver of fire: “ Pitkamoinen struck fire,
among the rocks of the sea, from a many coloured serpent.”
That the serpent here is the lightning is obvious.

In another song it is described how a net is woven to catch
a “ red salmon ” in the bowels of which fire is bound. That
this tale is very old is shown by the method of preparing
the net as described in the Finnish song: “ A net was made of
lime-bark, it was woven of heather,” or “ the net was woven of
bast, of juniper threads was it spun.”‘® An interesting
counterpart to this tale is to be found among certain North
American tribes on the North-West coast in which fire is also
found in the bowels of a salmon.^'* The colour of the salmon
has perhaps, in the fantasy of these people, awakened
the idea of connecting it with fire.


CHAPTER XV


DEITIES OF THE EARTH AND
VEGETATION

A mong the non-agncultural Finno-Ugric peoples, of-
ferings to the earth are rare. The Ugrians often men-
tion in their folk-poetry “ the black or hairy Earth mother,”
but sacrifice to her only when suffering from certain sicknesses,
believed to come from the earth.’^ Much more important
is the “ Earth mother ” among the stocks living along the
Volga} these sacrifice to her black animals, most often cows and
sheep, the bones of which are carefully buried in the earth
“ so that the earth shall be able to produce corn and grass.”
The blood is also allowed to run into the earth. Besides
annual sacrifices, additional ones are performed when, for
example, the fields do not grow in spite of rain. When sacri-
ficing to the earth, the Cheremiss say: “ Eat, Earth mother,
and give us com.”® The following prayer has been taken
down among the Votiaks: “O Earth mother, we thank thee
for that thou hast nourished us during the past year, be not
grudging now either with thy gifts, produce com for us also
during this summer.” These last also pray that the earth
might not be offended, when men are obliged to wound her
with their ploughs. Very late in the autumn, sacrifices may
not be made to the earth, as then, the Votiaks say: “ the earth
sleeps.” * Equally primitive is the “ Earth mother ” of the
Mordvins, who is turned to in the following words: “ That
which we sow in thee, allow to come up.” * The Mountain
Cheremiss worship also the “ Yard mother ” and the Mordvins
the “ Field mother ” and the “ Meadow mother.” ®


240 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

" Earth-luck or field-luck ” can be stolen from another by-
bearing to one’s own field a sod or a little earth from the field
of some one more fortunate. When the Siryans do this, they
say: “ Good luck, follow me, give me a good subsistence.” ®
As soon as the Cheremiss sees that his “ field-luck ” has been
stolen, he finds out who has robbed him of this. Should he
discover that a field which formerly produced a scanty harvest
has improved, he believes he has found the culprit and goes in
the dusk to carry the lost “ field-luck ” back with him in a
bark-shoe, saying to it: “ Let the corn grow, do not go away
if someone tries to steal thee, but remain always in my fields.” ^
The Chuvashes “ steal earth ” with wedding-like ceremonies,
choosing even a living “ bridegroom ” for the Earth mother.®
This custom would seem to have been known also among the
Votiaks.® According to Mordvinian folk-lore, these were afraid
that even in the hoof of a horse, the “ Field mother ” might
be taken to a strange field.“

Coincidently with these material views, the Cheremiss talk
also of the “ ‘ soul ’ {ort) of the earth,” which may disappear
from the tilled earth, taking the fruitfulness of this away
with it.^^ Like the Votiaks, they believe this also of the
“ field-soul.” When this happens, it is essential to discover
whither the “ field-soul ” has gone, and if possible, procure
its return. The Votiaks also call the productive power of the
field, which can free itself from the latter, the “corn-soul,”
and they believe that this can, like the soul of a human being,
become visible in the shape of a little, grey butterfly

In the course of the author’s sojourn among the Eastern
Votiaks, he had the opportunity of hearing how the vanished
“soul” of a cornfield is sought after. Besides the actual
“seer,” six other persons are chosen for this purpose, three
youths and three maidens, who, clad in white, ride round the
■village fields on white horses, to seek the above-mentioned
butterfly. Having found this, the whole suite returns well-
pleased, singing and playing a song special to this occasion, to


DEITIES OF THE EARTH


241

the sacrificial site on the edge of the field, where the oldest
men in the village have, meanwhile, slaughtered a white
sheep as a sacrifice. After the completion of the sacrificial
meal, during which the soul-butterfly is kept enclosed in a
white cloth, the one whom the butterfly had most obviously
neared during the search, receives the “ corn-soul ” into his
care, taking it to his granary for a time, after which the butter-
fly is again ceremoniously escorted to the cornfield and there
set free. After the recovery of the “ corn-soul,” it is believed
that the badly-grown com will improve.^®

The " soul ” of the corn can easily develop into a separate
deity of corn. In the “ Corn mother ” of the Mordvins, to
whom a duck of a yellow, or corn-resembling, colour is sacri-
ficed, there are already noticeable signs of a change into an
anthropomorphic goddess. But in no case need one be un-
certain as to the origin of this goddess, for though the “ Corn
mother ” appears in a popular lyric as singing songs in the
festive attire of a Mordvin woman, she goes on to speak of
herself thus: “ I was sown in the morning twilight, reaped in
the evening twilight, thrown into the granary in order to be
brewed into small beer at Easter, and baked into pastries at
Christmas.”

That the corn-seed as such was worshipped appears from a
Votiak custom connected with the feast of the spring seed.
After having sowed the first measure of oats in his field, the
Votiak farmer fills his measure again, sets it on the ground
before him, and, addressing the measure of seed, prays, with
a loaf in his hand, for a good harvest. To assist the growth
of the crops, magic is also used in this ceremony. Into the
first measure, besides the seed, hard-boiled eggs are placed.
Whilst sowing, the farmer flings these also into the air, where
they are caught amid much competition by young girls.
Lucky the one who gathers most in her lap, as this is regarded
as a good omen. Should the gatherers of the eggs often trip
or fall, it is regarded as a sign that the grain will also bend


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


242

over during the summer on account of the heaviness of the ears.
The sowing of eggs in this manner is an old custom common to
all the East European and many other peoples, and one can
discern in it a wish expressed in terms of magic, that the seed
sown should give grain of the size and the agreeable taste of
hen’s eggs, a wish often expressed also in prayers."

Other means of magic, for the growth of the corn and the
bringing forth of fruitful rains, are connected also with the
spring seed festival of the Cheremiss. After the ofiFering up
of sacrifices at a “ pure spot ” in the fields, the people gather
closely together, holding their shirts or their blouses stretched
out before them, while the sacrificing priest sows oats over
them. The one who receives the biggest share of the seed
as his part will reap the biggest harvest in the autumn. It
is, further, customary to sprinkle water over the crowd “in
order to ensure warm and refreshing rains during the
summer.”

The Votiaks sacrifice early in the spring “to the honour
of the grass.” At a spot where the bare earth first showed
through the melting snow of the past winter, porridge in a
dish is laid on three such places. In these porridge-dishes hay
and a spoon are placed. During the ceremony prayer is made
to Inmar for a good harvest of hay. The Votiaks living in
the Glazov District sacrifice at the same time a white bull, the
tail of which is cleaned of hair and soaked in water until it
becomes tough. It is then taken by one of the young men
who, pressing his chin on his breast, waves it behind him, bel-
lowing meanwhile like a bull. This youth, who is called the
“ bull-calf,” is offered home-distilled spirits to drink by some
of the surrounding crowd, while others again try to prevent
him from drinking it. The “ bull-calf ” becomes incensed at
this and charges at the crowd, waving the tail behind him,
pursuing the flying people.”

A perfect counterpart to the Russian Polevik (field-spirit)
is the anthropomorphic “ Meadow man ” of the Votiaks, who


PLATE XXX

Cheremiss Sacrifice to the Field-Gods

Ufa Government. (See page 242.)

After photograph by U. Holmberg.


DEITIES OF THE EARTH


H3

is supposed to be of the size of a child, but has the power, like
the forest spirit, of becoming longer or shorter according to
the length of the grass. For this reason it is difficult to see
the spirit. It is said to be clad in a white garment, and to
live chiefly in the pastures, where it looks after and protects
the animals. The only sacrifice to this spirit is one when the
cattle are first let out to pasture, offered up with the words:
“ Protect the cattle well, follow them nicely to the meadow,
do not give them into the power of the beasts of prey.” “

The Baltic Finns doubtless also, as an agricultural people,
worshipped the “ Earth mother,” who appears in the folklore
of both the Finns and the Esthonians. In the Finnish ma^c
songs, the “ Field old woman,” the “ Meadow old woman,”
and others, are spoken of. That the “ Earth mother ” re-
ceived here a black sheep as sacrifice, is indicated by the belief,
that, if a field produces too little, the milk of a black sheep
must be sacrificed to it.‘® The “Earth bridegroom” men-
tioned in many poems may be a relic of some ancient ceremony
in which the “ Earth mother ” was honoured with a wedding.
At the Ingrian festival of the Thunder god, a song was sung of
some deity of vegetation, called Sampsa or Pellervo (from
“ field ”), in the absence of whom nothing could grow.
The “ Winter son ” was first sent after him, who driving with
his wind-horse, caused only disaster, and was, therefore,
killed} the “Summer son” finally succeeding in bringing
Sampsa. In Finland this god was represented as being con-
veyed from an island, sleeping upon a corn-ship, with his
mother as his wife. These ideas seem to emanate from the
Scandinavian cult of Frey. The name Sampsa (a Teutonic
loan-word, German Simse or Semse, “bulrush”) signifies a
species of fodder-grass (Scirpus sylvatimsy the wood dub-
rush), one of the earliest products of the spring, which is
gathered for the cattle when the snow melts, and the roots of
which are readily eaten by children.*®

According to Agricola, the Karelians worshipped deities of


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


244

the difFerent kinds of grain: Rongoteus who “gave rye”j
Pellon Pekko (the “Pekko of the fields”) who “furthered
the growth of barley Virankannos who “ tended the oats ”}
Egres who “created peas, beans, and turnips, and brought
forth cabbages, flax and hemp Kondos who “ reclaimed land
and tilled fields.” Of these names, the first is to be found in
several old songs, as Runkateivas or Rukotivo, the name being
regarded as a Teutonic loan-word (cf. Icelandic rugr, “ rye ”}
tivar, “gods”). Later the Rye god is associated with St.
Stephen (Ruki-tehvana or -tahvana, “ rye-Stephen ”) j in
a magic prayer Rukotivo appears beside St. Stephen as the
“ ruler of horses ” (cf. Halmstaffan, “ straw-Stephen ” in the
Christmas customs among the Swedes) Agras or AgrSi is
known even today to the people, who call by that name two
turnips growing together. When a double turnip was found,
it had to be carried by itself, on the shoulders, or in a basket
of bark, to the turnip-cellar. On the way, one had to fall
three, or in places, even nine times on one’s knees or flat on
to the ground, as though one were tottering under the weight
of some too heavy burden, and each time one had to shout:
“I cannot bear it, holy Agroi, oh, how heavy it is! ” In the
prayers recited at the turnip-cellar, a good turnip year was
asked for.”

Originally, Agroi was not only the deity of turnips, but the
god of twins in general. Ceremonies resembling the above
are also performed by the Votiaks when they find a double
ear of grain in the fields. Gavrilov relates that the custom was
to hang the ear over a stick, round which clean, white linen
was wound, and then bear it by two men to an empty chest
in the granary, the men acting during the journey as though
they bore something heavy. Spectators and passers-by had to
be avoided on the way. If this was done, one became rich
little by little, said the Votiaks.’*

Pekko, the god of barley, was worshipped by the orthodox
Esthonians under the name of Peko, his image being prepared


DEITIES OF THE EARTH


245

in wax and preserved as the common property of the village,
in each farm in turn for the duration of a year. The feast
of Peko was held in the spring, when vegetation awakes to
life. Before Whitsuntide, each worshipper of Peko had to
bring corn, from which Peko’s host prepared festival-beer.
On the eve of Whitsuntide, after sunset, the worshippers
gathered, bringing food with them, in a room, in the corner of
which Peko stood on a beer-barrel surrounded by burning wax
candles. On separate sides of the corner beer-vessels and
loaves of bread were spread in rows along the walls. In the
front row of the kneeling congregation the host of the feast
and his assistants grouped themselves. After all had prayed,
each for himself, the host took a little beer in a cup from each
vessel, pouring it back again with a prayer of blessing for its
owner and his family. Afterwards the congregation ate and
drank to the honour of the god. A mutual prayer against
hail was finally sung at dawn. The remains of the feast were
divided amongst the poor. The wax remaining in the candles
was added to Peko’s headj the greater the amount of wax
gathered there, the more prosperous the summer became.

According to another report the worshippers of Peko
gathered together after sunset with their food-knapsacks on
their backs at the house of Peko’s guardian, who had previously
carefully closed all the windows and lit the roof-lamp. The
guardian, followed by two men, went to bring in Peko with a
sheet in his hand, Peko being kept in the granary. The god
was wrapped up in the sheet, brought into the house, and
placed under the hanging-lamp. Everyone sat down with
his back to Peko and began to eat out of his food-sack. Hav-
ing finished, all rose up without even then turning towards
Peko, and made fast their food-sacks again. They then
marched nine times round Peko, singing: “Peko, our god,
shepherd our herds, look after our horses, protect also our
corn from snow, from hail! ” Leaving Peko in the room,
they then went on to wrestle. The one receiving the first


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


246

bruise cried out with a loud voice that blood was shed, on
which all hurried to acclaim him as the guardian of Peko for
the next year. The image of Peko was taken the same night
in the dark to the new guardian’s granary.^*

The name Pekko or Peko is to be traced to the same Scan-
dinavian word from which Beyggvir or Byggvir, the name
of Frey’s servant, and the Swedish bjugg (“barley”) are
derived.

In North Tavastland in Finland, it was believed that the
hop-field also had its own “ruler ”} the Esthonians calling it
the “ Hop king ” or the “ Hop-field master.” This last
people still speak of the “ Flax mother,” preserved in the
linen-chest “ in order that the linen should flourish well.”
Counterparts to these deities of particular kinds of plants of
the Baltic Finns are met with among the Teutons.

A very general belief amongst the majority of European
peoples is that the cornfield is protected by its tutelary spirit,
especially during the period of ripening. During the ripen-
ing-time of the rye, the Volga Finns say that one may not
dig in the earth or go into the rye-fields, and that one must
avoid all noisy work and work causing evil smells, such as,
for example, the carting of manure or the making of tar.
Neither may one dress in startling colours. The most
exacting time is noon, when one may. even not talk aloud.
As a punishment for unseemly behaviour, hailstorms and
thunder, which ruin the crops, are dreaded. The hot
“ evil time,” said to last a couple of weeks, is concluded
among the Cheremiss (Kazan Government) by so-called
w^w-ceremonies, in which occurs an odd custom of blow-
ing long horns of wood made specially for the occasion.
These are taken later to a tree, round which one goes in a
procession with the horns held in the hand, and where the
sacrificing priest with cakes in his right hand and a vessel of
beer in his left, recites a prayer. Should one of the horns
break during the ceremony, it is regarded as a sign of hail.


DEITIES OF THE EARTH


H7

The more Northern Cheremiss blow these horns later in
the autumn after the conclusion of field-labour, keeping them
for the next year in a secret place. During the “ dangerous
time ” one may not blow them. It is further related that the
members of a wedding-procession, when escorting the bride
to the village of the bridegroom, attempt to steal these horns
from her home, believing that they carry with them “ corn-
luck.” ""

The Mordvins believe that if absolute silence is observed
during the flowering of the rye, one can hear from the “ corn-
mother ” what kind of a harvest to expect. One has only to
go out in the stillness of the night and listen j should one hear
whistling from the field, then a good year may be expected,
but if one hears weeping and wailing, it is a sign of a year of
famine.®’^

According to the Siryans a female spirit dwells in the rye-
fields, called Poloznitsa (from Russian Poludnitsa, “ Mid-
day-goddess ”) and punishes all who in any way. harm the
rye during the time of flowering. A blue flower {Centawea
cyanus) which grows among the corn, is called “ Poloznitsa’s
eye.” The Esthonians speak of the spiteful “ Corn vir^ns ”
who wander in the fields, and of a " Corn wolf ” (also “ Pea
wolf ” and “ Bean wolf ”), with which they frighten the
children.*® The Finns also represented the corn-spirit in the
form of an animal} in Osterbotten, they say that the person
to cut the last stalk of the crop on the rye-field or oat-field
“ catches a hare.” *® Among the Esthonians the animated •
last sheaf goes by the name of “ rye-pig.”

Like the Teutons and Slavs, the Baltic Finns have retained
a habit of preserving the last sheaf of the corn-field, regarding
this as a kind of corn-deity. The Finns are said to have
placed a sheaf left from the previous autumn on the rafters
of the threshing-shed whence it was brought at Christmas-
time into the dwelling-house. There the grain was separated
from the ears and the straw thrown up to the ceiling, where


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


248

part of it remained clinging to the rafters. The spring sow-
ings were begun with the grain obtained in this wayj the
straw which adhered to the ceiling being also hidden in the
corn-field.®* A more widespread custom found also among the
Volga Finns, was to preserve the last sheaf undisturbed till
the next year, in order that the corn should thrive. Among
the Esthonians such a sheaf was called “threshing-shed
father.” ®® The Swedes in Finland constructed a human-like
“ Christmas old man ” (Jul-gubbe) of straw at Christmas-
time, which was then put in the place of honour at the head
of the table and was treated with drink.®* A corresponding
straw doll was prepared by the Finns on Kekri or Keyri (All
Saints’ Day) and was called the “ Keyri old man ” (Keyri
ukko).®“ At both festivals there was further a custom of
placing straw on the floor of the dwelling-room and of baking
of new flour an especially large cake, sometimes faintly re-
sembling an animal (Esthonian “ Christmas pig ” or “ Christ-
mas bull”)j the cake being kept on the table during the
holiday, but afterwards taken to the granary, where it was
preserved among the grain until sowing-time. According to
an older custom this loaf was baked from grain dried in the
open air.®® Compared with Christmas, the Kekri of the Finns
represents an older festival of new bread and a new year, as
the agricultural peoples, also of Finnish stock, earlier cele-
brated this festival as the time for the baking of the fruits
of the new harvest (Finnish vuodmalkajaiset, “ the beginning
of the year”} Votiak, vil'ar, “New Year”). A straw doll
is known also among the Esthonians. According to a state-
ment made in 1694 the peasants on Shrove Tuesday evening
made of straw a human-like figure, metsik, dressed as a man
or a woman, which was put upon a stick and carried to the
wood, where it was bound on the tip of a bush in order “ that
the com and flax should grow well.” The custom was in
some districts connected also with New Year and other times.®’^
The Cheremiss conclude their harvest with a ceremony,


PLATE XXXI

The “ Feeding ” op the Sickle Among the
Cheremiss

(See page 249.)

Water-colour by V. Soldan-Brofeldt.


VS.-'’4.e,


DEITIES OF THE EARTH 249

called “ the feeding of the sickle.” The people of the farm
take bread, cheese, etc., out with them to the field, and kneel
down before a few remaining stalks of oats, the master of
the house reading a prayer in which a good harvest is prayed
for from the gods. After this, the food brought out is tasted,
and then all kneel down again. The master of the house
now collects all the sickles used in the harvest, piles them up
on the imreaped stalks, which he thus presses to the ground
and then, beginning at the point, winds them round the sickles
down to the root. Finally, by lifting the sickles he pulls out
the oat-stalks by the roots, saying meanwhile: “Sickles, the
whole summer have you laboured, may the food you now
have eaten bring strength to you,” or “ Sickle, take strength,
the whole svunmer hast thou laboured, take strength. Thy
share have we spread out, our share mayest thou not touch! ”
The master of the house, followed by the family, then takes
the sickles, wrapped in oat-straw, to some attic in the house or
a barn, whence they are taken out first at the next summer.
The last stalks are called “ the sickle’s share.”

It is quite natural that among the more northern peoples,
who exist chiefly, by hunting and fishing, deities of vegetation
are not found. The “ grass mother ” of the Russian Lapps,
seeing that grass is of very little consequence even to the
reindeer, who live on moss, is probably of late origin. This
may also be true regarding the Rana-neidda (“ Rana virgin ”)
of the Lapps, who lived in heaven and ruled over the moun-
tains which first became green in the spring. When sacrificing
to her “ in order that the reindeer should get grass in time,” a
spinning-wheel or a spindle was placed against her altar, both
of which were besmeared with sacrificial blood. The spin-
ning-wheel sacrifice, which cannot originally have been a Lapp
custom, shows that “the greatest of all goddesses,” who be-
sides the grass, called forth also the leaves in the spring, is a
Scandinavian goddess (Frigg).*®

The Norse Frey can be recognised in the Scandinavian


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


250

Lapps’ Veralden-olmai (“World’s man”). The missionary
Randulf compares him with Saturn and says that the Lapps
“paint him on their magic drums in such a manner that a
curved line with many little outspringing thorns is drawn
over his head} this symbolizes the fruitfulness of sea, land
and cattle. They pray to him to make the earth fruitful with
corn, that they might on reasonable terms brew beer and


Fig. 9. Drawings of Heaven on Shaman Drums

Left; c and e, Thunder-gods; d, God of Fertility; f, Wind-god.

Right: d and f, Thunder-gods; b, God of Feitility; e. Wind-god.

From Sudbeck’s Atlanttca.

spirits and everything prepared from corn. This is indicated
by the hoe which they fit into his hand. At the same time they
pray that he would render the sea bounteous in order that they
might procure much fish (this is done especially by the Sea
Lapps), and that he would make their reindeer fruitful, so
that they might bear many calves, and that he would make
the moss of the uplands, which is eaten by their reindeer,
grow richly, that they might obtain much reindeer butter,
cheese, etc. Altogether they pray to Veralden-olmai or Saturn,
for everything that grows or is born.”

In the cult of this god of fruitfulness the sexual organs
played an important part. Noraeus relates that the Swedish
Lapps sacrificed to it on St. Matthew’s Day in the following
manner: “They gathered together the horns of the reindeer
they had slaughtered, but the bones of one reindeer, from
the smallest to the biggest, were extracted and the blood of
the same reindeer sprinkled over these bones, which were then
buried in the earth} erecting thereafter amongst them an


DEITIES OF THE EARTH


a5i

image made of birch-wood, also sprinkled with blood, on the
breast of which, under the face, the memhrwn genitale was
attached.” When the Lapps were asked why they did this,
they answered that they were following the ancient habits of
their forefathers and sacrificing to the earth, firstly, because
the earth kept alive their reindeer} secondly, that it might
not send diseases that hurt the feet of the reindeer in summer}
and thirdly, that the earth, besides nutrition, would give their
reindeer a powerful pairing-lust, sacrificing for this purpose
the above-mentioned organ, in order that the number of rein-
deer might increase greatly, as the time of the feast of St.
Matthew was the best pairing-time of the reindeer.^’^

Besides reindeer, in the ear of which a red thread was tied,
the Scandinavian Lapps sacrificed also the implements needed
in agriculture — hoes and spades, to the “ World’s man.”
Even without these customs, one can see from the name of the
god that he is none other than the Scandinavian Frey, who is
also called “ Veraldar god ” by Snorri Sturlason.


CHAPTER XVI
DEITIES OF BIRTH

T he deities of birth among the Lapps were Madder-
akka and her three daughters Sarakka, Juksakka and
Uksakka.

Madderakka {akka, “ old woman ”) although called the
mother of other deities, seems at least in later times to have
been regarded as of less importance than these others. Si-
denius says that the Lapps sacrificed to her only “ so that she
would allow her daughters to serve women.” He points out,
however, that among some she was believed to help her
daughters herself in their duties.^ Jessen relates that she
creates the body of the child,® and Randulf tells that she
renders both women and cattle fruitful.®

On certain magic drums appears also a male counterpart to
Madderakka, the so-called Madderatshe Madder fa-
ther”), who is, however, little known and has most probably
only later appeared at the side of the female Madderakka.*
This latter — the first part of whose name, according to
Setala, corresponds to the Finnish word mantere (“the
earth ”) — lived, according to the Lapps, together with her
three daughters, in the earth beneath the Lapp tent. For this
reason, sacrifices to them were placed in the ground.®

At the birth Sarakka of Saredne (“ Sar mother ”) seems
to have played the most important part. Her name may
possibly be derived from the Lapp word saret (“ to cleave ”).
Skanke ^ves Sarakka another significant name, Sadsta-akka,
in which the word sadsta is said to be identical in meaning with
the Lapp word suorek-mmra (a piece of wood split at one
end into two parts).* Both names of this deity remind one of


DEITIES OF BIRTH


253

a magic method of assisting childbirth and rendering it easier,
a method palpably touched on by Forbus when he puts the
following question to the Lapps: “Have you not chopped
wood in honour of Sarakka in time of birth? ” ^

From the questions by Forbus it is further apparent that
these pieces of wood, cleft in honour of Sarakka, were re-
garded as holy} they were not used as fuel, and were not
even allowed to be touched.

Sarakka was worshipped chiefly in childbed. Besides
women, she helped also reindeer at the birth of their calves,
assuaging their pains. For this reason the Lapps endeavoured
to stand well in the favour of the deity. How intimately
Sarakka followed the course of the birth-pangs of her wards
is seen from the belief of the Lapps that she felt the same
agony as the one in childbed. Like Madderakka, Sarakka was
also believed to create the body of the infant.®

The protection of Sarakka was sought by the Lapp women
also during menstruation. According to Forbus the women
took oflF their collars and belts at such times “ in honour of
Sarakka.” This custom is unquestionably derived from the
magic belief that during these periods, as also during child-
birth, nothing knotted may be worn on the body. During
menstruation women were regarded as unclean and were not
allowed to move about freely. When the said period was
over, a woman would wash her head in water, in a pan which
she then scoured with meal and used for the baking of a cake
which women only were allowed to eat.®

A purification-meal in honour of Sarakka was eaten also
after the successful birth of a child. Jessen relates that women
in childbed drank “ Sarakka’s brandy ” before deliverance and,
together with other women, ate “ Sarakka’s porridge ” after
giving birth. In the porridge three sticks were placed} the
first one was cleft and had three rings hanging from it, the
second was black, and the third white. These were all laid
for three days at the door of the tent. If it were found that


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


254

the black stick had disappeared, it was believed to indicate that
either the mother or the child would die. If, on the other
hand, the white one was lost, both would live.^® S. Kildal
relates that in some districts a miniature bow and arrow were
placed in the porridge so that the child, if a boy, would be-
come a good hunter when grown up.^^ Forbus explains that
the weapons were placed in the porridge in three different
parts, the shaft, the bow, and the arrow. The accident of
lifting out any of these parts with the spoon while eating was
fraught with significance. The bow was hung later on the
child’s cradle; but if the pieces placed in the porridge had
unluckily not been fished out in the spoons, they were thrown
away. Among the questions written by Forbus is the follow-
ing: “ Have you still the little bow that you had to bear on
thy body? ” “

Just as the cleft stick seems to be connected with the name of
Sarakka, the bow placed in the porridge is connected with an-
other name, Juksakka (“Bow old woman”). Of this last-
named deity Solander says that she helps women at the pro-
duction and birth of children. The most important duty of
Juksakka was to change the girl-child m the womb to a boy-
child.’® To gain her help in this, sacrifices had to be offered
up to her. According to Leem the Lapps sacrificed contin-
ually to her because they desired boys rather than girls, as
these last were of no use in the chase. Juksakka, who is some-
times pictured on the magic drums with a bow in her hand,
seems to have taken care that the Lapp boy became a good
hunter,’*

The third of Madderakfca’s daughters was Uksakka (“ Door
woman ”), who was believed to live in the ground under the
door of the tent. As a watchman at the door she protected
people at their goings in or out. At childbirth she received
the newcomer on his arrival in the world. Later she watched
over the first steps of the child to prevent its falling and
hurting itself. The Lapps sacrificed drink to her in the


DEITIES OF BIRTH 255

ground at the door of the tent, where she was supposed to
dwell.^®

Jessen adds that a special, consecrated building was erected
for Madderakka and Sarakka. On some magic drums Sar-
akka’s tent can be seen.^® As the Lapps do not customarily
erect special dwelling-houses for their deities, there is reason
to believe that the so-called “ tent of Sarakka ” is a relic of
the times when a woman in childbirth was not allowed to stay
in the common tent, but had a special tent erected for her.
Such, for example, is the custom among the Samoyeds and
Ostiaks even today.

When the Lapps sacrificed to the deities of birth, they did
this in a manner differing from the ordinary sacrifices. Olsen
tells us that the Lapp mother, when convinced that she was
with child, secured beforehand a little dog, which she kept
by her until the time of giving birth had come. A little while
before lying down for the approaching birth this dog had to
be sacrificed “ in order that God might help her and every-
thing go well, and that both she and the child would preserve
their lives and health, and live merrily, and well afterwards.”
After the birth a reindeer or some other domestic animal
bought from the neighbouring peasants was sacrificed. Among
such animals, goats, calves, sheep, lambs, pigs, cats and
cockerels are mentioned.^ On the head of the sacrificial
animal “ a linen kerchief or a woman’s linen hat ” had to be
bound.’® Jessen points out that the sacrificial priest also wore
on these occasions a white linen hat, besides the linen apparel
usually worn at votive ceremonies in Norwegian Lapland.®*
The dog, together with the other animals, had to be buried
alive in the ground, only the cock being shut in in a grotto of
stone, where it could live and crow for a time, before dying
of hunger.®’ With the exception of the cock, male animals
were never sacrificed to the deities of birth.®® From RandulPs
notes it appears that the Lapps also sacrificed spinning-wheels
and spindles to them.®®


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


256

Certain customs had also to be observed after the calving
of a cow. According to Leem, the “ first milk ” had to be
milked on to the ground. In the purification ceremonies flour
was used, being scattered over both the cow and the calf,
and flour had to be added also to the milk, before a male
person might partake of it.*^ Doubtless, the flour was here
of the same significance as at the ceremony for women. The
custom here pictured by Leem can only have prevailed among
the more Southern Lapps, who had, in places, begun to keep
cows.

Many features in the above beliefs and customs show plainly
that they cannot have been of Lapp origin, for instance, the
special dress of the sacrificial priest, but, above all, the use
of flour in so important a degree, points to derivation from an
agricultural people. There would seem to be, therefore, good
grounds for comparing Sarakka’s porridge with the Old-
Scandinavic “Norna porridge” (Norna greytur), the first
meal eaten after childbirth by the women of the F’dro-Islands.
Troels Lund shows that among the Scandinavians also it was
the custom to place in the porridge for women in childbed,
“ three sticks,” with which the luck of the child was supposed
to be intimately connected.®* The sacrifice of spinning-wheels
and animals bought from the neighbouring peasants, and clad
with linen kerchiefs, points, too, with certainty to the fact
that these customs have been borrowed by the Lapps. On
several of the Lapp magic drums the deities of birth are seen
pictured as three females, their number corresponding with
that of the Scandinavian Norns. It should be observed also
that Madderakka’s three daughters are known only among
the Scandinavian Lapps. One of the daughters, Uksakka, has
a counterpart in the Swedish Dorr-Karing (“ Door old
woman”), who even to our times lives in the beliefs of the
people in Vasterbotten, as “a light-fearing spirit, dwelling
near the door.” One had to be careful of her in going out
with a lighted candle, as she would blow it out.®*


DEITIES OF BIRTH


257

More widely known also among the Finnish Lapps, is the
mother, Madderakka.®^ She might also find her covinterpart
in the Swedish Jordegumma (“Old woman of the earth”),
which word now means “ midwife,” but in earlier times may
well have been the name of a deity who, dwelling in the
earth, assisted at childbirth- Similar changes in the meaning
of a term may be observed in the Lapp tongue. At Gellivara
the word sarak has been noted as meaning also “ midwife.”

It is not, however, necessary in aU the Lapp customs connected
with birth to see only borrowed beliefs. The Yurak Samoyeds
also worship a deity living in the earth and assisting at births,
and, like the Lapps, they bury a dog alive to secure her help
at the said event.*®

Among the ancient Finns the deities of birth were called
Luonnotar {luonto, “ nature ”) or SynnytUr i^synty, “ birth ”),
and were three in number, corresponding thus with the Scandi-
navic Norns and the Roman Parcae. In a magic song a man
says: “ I am created by three Luonnotars.” These three deities
appear also in the songs on the origin of iron, in which it is
described how their milk was allowed by them to run into
the earth, one dripping forth black milk, the second white,
the third blood-red 5 the first giving birth to smithy-iron, the
second to steel, and the third to refuse iron.*® Often, the
Virgin Mary, who in the Catholic period has played an im-
portant part in the beliefs of the people, is also in the magic
songs given the name Luonnotar and Luojatar (Z,«o;«,
“Creator”), and is appealed to in childbirth} the “sweet
milk of Mary ” is supposed to cure all kinds of sickness. At
times she is imagined to have many breasts, like her prototype,
the Epheaan Artemis, and is said to have “ a hundred horns
on her forehead, a thousand nipples to her breast.” In magic
songs she “ spins a blue thread with a blue spindle.” It is
difficult to distinguish how much in the above beliefs is from
an older time, and how much from the Catholic period (“ the
three Maries”). Both the origin and the name of the


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


258

Esthonian Rougutaja, of which all that is known is that she
was believed to help at births, are uncertain.’®

The Cheremiss and the Votiaks have a custom of sacrificing
a white sheep at the birth of a child to the deity of birth,
called Kugu shotshen-ava (the “ Great birthgiving mother ”)
by the former, by the latter Kildisin {kildini, “procreate,”
“ give birth to in, “ heaven, god ”), or Kildisin-mumy,
(“Kildisin mother”). According to an account from the
eighteenth century, the Votiak women prayed to the goddess,
Kaldyni-mumas, for children, and virgins for a happy mar-
riage.®® Another account from the same period states that
this deity was the fructifier of women and animals.®^ Gen-
erally, however, the Votiaks speak of special deities of fruit-
fulness, the Kildisin of the earth, of the corn, and of children,
who receive their own special sacrifices. Similarly, the Chere-
miss worship the Shotshen of children, animals, corn, bees,
etc., as separate deities. In the place of Shotshen (=Hill
Cheremiss Shatshektshe), the Turco-Tatar loan-words Puir^
sho (“ procreator ”) and Perke (Kazan Tatar, b'dr'dg'dt, “ suc-
cess ”) are used with the same meaning.®'

From the sacrifice of the white sheep, one may, conclude
that both the Cheremiss and the Votiak deities of birth, who
“ carried the soul to the child,” were deities of Heaven. The
word Kildisin means also literally the “ procreating Heaven.”
According to Ryckov the female Kildisin was the mother or
wife of the Heaven god, Inmar. In their folklore mention
may also be found of “ Inmar mother.” ®® The Jumon-ava
of the Cheremiss {jmno, “ Heaven,” “ Heaven god ”} ava,
“ mother,” “ wife”), to whom female animals were sacrificed
in the sacred groves, was worshipped also as the deity of
childbirth and marriage.®® Another heavenly deity was the
Nishke-ava (properly, Ine-shki-ava, “the Great birth-giving
mother ”), probably identical with the little-known Azer-ava
(“ Mistress ”) of the Moksha Mordvins, who was, according


DEITIES OF BIRTH


259

to an old account, a “ corn-begetter ” and “ a dweller in the
high place, in the upper parts of the atmosphere.”

The other deities of fruitfulness were sacrificed to in the
same manner as to the “ souls ” of the things they were sup-
posed to fructify, thus, for example, a black sheep to the
“ Earth-fructifier,” the bones being buried in the earth. The
“ Cattle-fructifier ” was worshipped by the Cheremiss espe-
cially when the cows had borne calves j friends and neighbours
being invited to a “ cow’s-milk feast.” The host poured water
on the oven and prayed that the calf might grow to be the size
of the oven. The bystanders were also sprinkled with water
with an accompanying prayer that god would let the cow give
much milk. At the sacrifice-porridge, which was mixed with
butter, the host prayed that the “Cattle-fructifier” would
give “ as much cattle as there are hairs on the cow, so that one
end of the herd might be still on the village-road when the
other end had entered the cowsheds.”

Other magic ceremonies are also connected with the cult
of procreation. As an example of these, the following custom
of the Eastern Cheremiss may be described. When the sheep
have not increased satisfactorily, a festival is proclaimed, to
which boys and girls are invited. As a sacrifice a wild bird
is shot, but for lack of this a hen may be used. The host
takes the bird and the hostess the implements necessary at the
sacrifice, and a journey to the sheepfolds is made, the boys and
girls following them, creeping on all fours. The hostess
induces the children to keep after her, enticing them like
sheep, the movements and voices of which the children seek
to imitate. The boys butt at the girls, imitating rams. Ar-
rived at the sheepfold the host makes a fire, round which
the so-called sheep crawl baa-ing three times, following the
hostess. They, then rise, and the bird is cooked and eaten in
the sheepfold, the bones being thrown on to the roof of the
fold and prayers offered up to the “ Sheep-fructifier.” The


26 o


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


Cheremiss, from whom the author took down the above ac-
count, remarked that is not customary to invite many boys to
this ceremony, but chiefly girls, lest too many rams be born in
the flock.

A being dwelling in Heaven is also the deity to whom the
Ostiaks and the Voguls pray for children, and who gives aid
to their wives in childbed. At Vasyugan she is called Puges,
“ daughter of the Heaven god,” and is said to live in the heights
in a golden house, in the roof of which hang seven cradles.
When she rocks one of these seven times a “ soul ” is created,
but if the cradle should overturn during its movements, a
“ soul ” is born that will not live long. The road to this
dwelling goes over seven seas to a mountain consisting of
seven stories. In the districts around Surgut, this deity with
the seven cradles is called Vagneg-imi (imr, “ old woman ”),
said in the old stories to be “the mother of the seven sons
of the Heaven god.” In her hand she holds a wooden staflF,
from which hang threads for each person born. When a
child is born the goddess makes a knot in one of the threads,
the distance between this and the staff indicating the length
of the child’s life, a matter not to be altered whatever sacrifices
are offered up to the deity. The “ Kaltas mother ” of the
Northern Ostiaks and the “Kaltes mother” of the Voguls,
who protects both the one giving birth and the child, and
who is said at a birth to “ write down in a golden book,” or
on a “gold-embroidered seven-forked tree,” the fate of
the child just born and the length of his life, reminds one,
as far as the name is concerned, of the Kildisin of the Votiaks.
In folklore, the “ Kaltes mother,” often furnished with the
epithet “ the golden,” appears as the daughter or wife of the
Heaven god Torem, and as the mother of his children. Un-
der the name of “ Turem mother,” the Northern Ostiaks also
worship their great soul-giving deity."

In certain districts images are made of this deity of child-
birth. Possibly an idol of this description, worshipped for


DEITIES OF BIRTH


261

long distances around, has given rise to many exaggerated
tales of the “ Golden old woman,” mentioned for the first
time in an old Russian Chronicle, and afterwards, often under
the name of Zlota baba, in the older geographical accounts.
In the seventeenth century she is seen pictured, sometimes
with a child in her arms, on many maps, on which she repre-
sented the districts round the Northern Ural, little known at
that time."

Of the ceremonies observed by the Ostiaks at the birth of a
child, only the fact that special consideration is attached to
the placenta need be mentioned. We find Pallas already re-
lating that it was laid in a basket of birch-bark, together with
fish and meat, as a sacrifice, and carried to the forests where
it was hung up in a tree. This custom survives today. Kar-
jalainen says that the Ostiaks around Tremyugan call the pla-
centa, in which they believe they can make out human features,
" the nourishing-mother of the child,” and, before the birth,
sew a little shirt for it, to which is further attached a kind of
belt and a headdress, the whole being placed together with
the placenta in the above mentioned basket. Before the bas-
ket is carried into the forest, fish, meat, and other victuals are
set before it, and the women bow, saying: “Nourishing-
mother of the child, eat! ” The food used at this ceremony
may only be eaten by women. At Vasyugan, if the newly-bom
is a boy, a little bow with two tiny arrows is tied to the
basket."

Similar beliefs about the placenta were prevalent also among
the Slavs, and are met with even today among many primitive
peoples.


CHAPTER XVII


SACRIFICES TO NATURE GODS AMONG
THE VOLGA FINNS

A lthough sacrifices to Nature gods are not bound
to be made at particular holy places, but may be per-
formed anywhere, in the farm-yard, or at a “ pure ” spot in
the fields, generally certain sacred groves are kept also for
them. These groves resemble very much the already, described
keremet-^ovt&, though they are not always fenced in like
these last. Among the Cheremiss, who call them kus-oto
(“sacrifice-grove”), they are often very large in area. As
far as possible, groves to the Nature gods consist of leafy
trees; the Cheremiss say that the most suitable tree is the lime,
though oak and birch will do at a pinch. Sacrifices are made
with the face turned to the east, or “ upward.”

Often, each village has its separate grove, called “ the vil-
lage-grove.” In addition, the Volga Finns have had more im-
portant groves, in which the villages of a whole district offered
up mutual sacrifices. Both the Votiaks and the Cheremiss call
a district, bound in this way to sacrifice together, by, a loan-
word msr (Russian mir, “ village-community ”), but the
latter (Urzhum District) also by their own word ttste-kerge
{tistey “ownership-mark,” kerge^ “district”), probably from
the fact that the villages connected therewith have had a
common ownership-mark. From this, one may conclude that
the greater sacrifice-district originally consisted of villages and
families belonging to the same clan. Even today, one may
observe in certain neighbourhoods, that although the villages
belonging to one of these sacrifice-areas may be relatively
distant from one another, similar usages and customs are ob-


PLATE XXXII


The Sacrifice-Grove (KUs-Oto) Among

THE ChEREMISS

(See page 263.)

According to A. Reinholm.


SACRIFICES TO NATURE GODS 263

served, while in a much nearer village belonging to another
sacrifice-area, widely differing customs are followed. Each
iTter has its special name, often after the village near which
the grove is situated. It is possible that these villages were
the mother-villages of the clan. Besides its connection with
sacrifices, the term tiste-kerge has also a communal significa-
tion among the Cheremiss. During periods of great trouble,
war, or famine, several mer raa-Y^ according to the directions
of a “ seer,” assemble to still greater mutual sacrificial feasts,
lasting sometimes for a week or two, in some very old grove,
where the number of animals sacrificed may rise to a hundred
and the sacrificing congregation to a thousand or so. It is
obvious, that such great gatherings have great significance
politically j even today the often very widely-scattered vil-
lages are bound together and prevented from being assimi-
lated into the foreign tribes living around them by these
gatherings.

In the groves sacred to Nature gods there are no buildings
for the preservation of sacrificial offerings or idols. It is
probable that these peoples never made images of their Nature
gods.

The great festivals in honour of the Nature gods are gen-
erally held during the most beautiful time in the summer,
before the hay-making, or also after the harvest. Often the
«wr-festivals are not annual like the village-festivals, but are
celebrated after the lapse of a longer period, e.g., after three
or five years.

When intending to hold a mutual sacrificial festival, the
different villages belonging to the area send representatives,
i.e., priests, to a meeting, at which the precise day for its
celebration is fixed upon, as well as the animals to be sacrificed
and the procuring of these. The animals must be of one
colour, healthy, and not too old, at the most in their second
year. Moreover, they must be “untainted” animals, i.e.,
animals that have not been used for labour or for procreation.


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


264

According to the Cheremiss, not even a goose or duck may be
used that has sat on eggs. Should an animal shiver when it
is looked at, this is regarded as a good omen. When the
sacrificial animal has been decided on, a long, narrow towel
is bound round its neck, as a sign that it has been set aside for
a sacred purpose. The towel is not taken away until the
sacrifice begins, when it is hung up in the sacrifice tree for
the period of the ceremony.

Funds for the procuring of the victim are collected from
all the farmers belonging to the area, regardless of whether
these intend to be present at the festival or no. Although
there is no question here of an obligatory tax, but of voluntary
gifts, each head of a family deems it his duty to subscribe to
the mutual sacrifice, according to his means and present con-
dition. The handling of and accounting for the funds is en-
trusted to a special functionary, the so-called “ cashier.” The
nmnber of sacrifices depends on the prosperity of the people j
the sacrificing priests discuss together and decide which of the
gods is to be sacrificed to in each separate case.

In every village there are one or more priests, called among
the Cheremiss kart (“old man”). In the choice of these
kart^ who keep their positions until their death, or until the
weakness of old age, the trustworthiness of the candidate, his
knowledge of the sacrificial ceremonies, and his ability, to
recite prayers are taken into consideration. Often, a former
assistant to some karty who has already filled a lower position
in the priesthood, is chosen to be the follower of one of these.
Where there are several priests, the Cheremiss call the oldest
or most capable of these the “ great kart^* the others being
“ small kart** At the sacrifices of several villages, the many
priests of the area are, without further choosing, participators
in the ceremony, discussing among themselves the order of
the same and which god each separate priest shall pray to.
When one of these priests, who in the sacred grove stand in
line, each under his own sacrifice tree, resigns, the new-comer


SACRIFICES TO NATURE GODS 265

does not take his place, but instead the neighbour to the one
leaving moves up one place in his holy office, followed by
those coming after him, so that the newcomer may step into
the place at the end of the line. Each priest has the right
to choose his own assistant.

To obtain a clear and complete view of the ceremonies at
a great festival in honour of the Nature gods among the agri-
cultural Volga Finns, we should follow closely, the programme
of one of these festivals at any one place. As the old heathen
customs have best been preserved among the unbaptized Chere-
miss, we shall consider a great w^r-festival among these
(Birsk District, Tsherlak village) at which the author was
present in 1913.^

On the morning of the festival the functionaries concerned
in the same go earlier than the rest of the congregation to
the grove. They do not, as yet, step right into the sanctuary,
but remain at first in a kind of forepart to the grove itself,
where a provisional little tent-like hut has been erected.
Here the treasurer accounts for the means collected during the
festival. This forepart is chiefly intended for the congrega-
tion, who remain here during the holy ceremonies, discussing
the news of the day, telling fairy-tales, enjoying refreshments,
etc., or drying their garments, washed in the brook in the
vicinity of the grove. Into the sanctuary itself no one may
go who has not previously bathed in this brook and clothed
himself in clean, preferably white, holiday garments. This
is a daily duty to each participator in the festival for the
whole period of the same. In the forepart may also be seen
the sacrificial animals and the sacrificial objects awaiting their
turn to be put into use.

In a Cheremiss grove, in which several gods are offered up
to, each god has his own “ sacrifice tree these trees stand
in a row a few paces distant from each other. On the extreme
east is the tree of “the great Jumo,” at which the ceremonies
are begun. As the ceremonies at each tree resemble one an-


266 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

other closely, we shall follow only the one at the tree of the
Heaven god.

Having bathed in the brook, the sacrificing priests bear all
the objects needed at the ceremony to the foot of the tree of
the Jumo. Every one has his own particular duty, one bring-
ing water from the brook, another chopping down old stumps
and gathering fallen branches for fuel. Others prepare from
lime-bark sacred objects necessary at the sacrifice, a girdle, a
bridle, a peculiar “ tassel,” etc. At the beginning a fire must
be made on the site of former fires. Fire must be brought
from the village in a pot, as the Cheremiss believe that one
may not light a sacrificial fire with a match. Over the fire-
place an erection of young limes is set up, on which in earlier
times, as one may judge from the name “cauldron-holder,”
cauldrons for sacrifice were hung, but in the present time it
is generally so weak that it can hardly, bear a small pan for
porridge j the meat-cauldrons are placed on a foundation of
birch-logs. The trunks of both the above-mentioned trees
must be laid so that the thick end is towards the sacrifice tree.

The chief priest now digs up the copper coins, buried during
the foregoing festival in the ground at the foot of the tree.
To the left, before the tree, a candlestick of wood (“ silver
candlestick ”) is stuck into the ground, in which a little yellow
candle, formed in the grove, is placed. Although this candle
is thin and unpretentious, it is called in the prayers “the
great silver candle.” To the right of the sacrifice tree, a little
round pillar is also stuck into the ground, and a little wooden
bowl placed on it. Into this, a drink made of honey is poured,
but, judging from the name “resin-bowl,” it must formerly
have contained resin. Further, against the living “ great ”
sacrifice tree, a “ little ” one is set up, which is bound to the
former with bast} the “ little ” tree is a young lime chopped
ofF at the root. If the “ great ” sacrifice tree is an oak or a
birch, the “ little ” tree should also be an oak or a birch.

Before the great sacrificial cauldrons are l^d on the fire.


SACRIFICES TO NATURE GODS 267

porridge is cooked in a smaller vessel, which is then lifted
on to the roots of the sacrifice tree, being placed next to the
“ resin-bowl.” In the vessel a small spoon like a shaving of
lime-bark is placed, called, despite its unpretentiousness, “ the
silver spoon,” Before all this, white cloths are spread on the
ground bestrewed with lime-branches, and on these, in rows,
the sacrificial butter and milk” loaves are placed touching
one another. Of the sacrificial bread, baked by the priest
himself early in the morning at the
village, there must be nine loaves,
one “ large ” and eight “ small.”

In the middle and at the edge these
loaves have a mark made by the
three finger-tips j the mark on the
edge is called the “ nose ” {ner)
and the one in the middle “the
body” {kaf). On the “large”

loaf there are also lines, those Sacrificiai. Bread

on the sides being called “wings,”

and those on the opposite end to the “ nose ” the “ (bird’s)
tail.” On this loaf, therefore, a bird is formed. The
loaves are placed on the doth with the “ noses ” towards
the tree, the “ large ” loaf on the extreme right. Behind the
loaves, nine wooden bowls are laid parallel with these. Later,
a drink made of honey is poured into them, the drink being
prepared for the festival by young maidens. Sometimes the
loaves and the bowls are arranged in two rows. Both are dedi-
cated to certain deities: the “ large ” loaf and the bowl behind
it to the “ great Jumo,” the others to other gods who do not
seem to be exacdy defined, but vary, even at different festivals
in the same grove.

The candle is now lit with a brand from the fire and a
young foal is led into the sanctuary. To the right of the
fire, about ten paces away from this, a post of birch-wood is
driven into the ground and to this the sacrificial horse is


268


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


bound fast with a bridle made solely of lime-bark (“the
silver bridle”)* To this ceremony belong also a footsnare
of plaited lime-bark with which the forefeet of the sacrifice
are bound during the sacrifice.

The first sacred act is the casting of pewter. The kart
places himself to the left of the fire, holds the blade of an
axe vertically over a vessel of water and says: “ O bless and
protect us, great god, give us health, prosperity and riches!
We on our side brought and set up for thee a sacrifice} if thou
on thy side wilt accept a horse with shining hair and gleaming
mane, with silver tail and silver hoofs, may its head and
feet be formed in the cast pewter! ” Here the assistant
pours the molten metal on the blade of the axe, having heated
the former, praying as he did so, in a little iron ladle. With
great curiosity, the priest examines the shape formed by the
metal as it fell into the water. Should there be nothing in
its shape that resembles the sacrifice it is thrown into the fire
and a new lot melted} but if there is, this shows, as the Chere-
miss believe, that the god is willing to accept the animal.
The pewter figure which is called the “ picture ” or “ shadow ”
of the sacrifice is set for the while on the “ large ” sacrificial
loaf.

The axe is now laid on the ground before the sacrifice tree.
The kart takes a knife in his right hand and a burning brand
in his left, and places himself by the axe with his face towards
the tree. Swinging the brand in the air, he speaks now also
of the shining sacrificial horse, adding: “With the scent of
smoke and the clang of iron, we call thee to our feast, thou
merdfvil! ” When he has finished this prayer, he rings three
times on the axe with the knife. Thereafter he goes to the
horse and touches its forehead and neck three times with
the brand, saying: “ Accept a good foal, with shining hmr and
silver tail! ”

He then takes the knife and a green lime-branch and stands
to the left of the fire, where he whittles a little of the thick


PLATE XXXIII

Cheremiss Sacrificial Loaves, Bowls and-
Coins at the Festival to Nature-
Gods

Ufa Government. (Sec page 267.)

After photograph by U. Holmberg.


SACRIFICES TO NATURE GODS 269

end of the branch, after which he moves over to the sacrifice
tree where, with the knife in his right hand and the branch
in his left, he recites the following prayer: “ O bless and
protect us, great god! With a large sacrifice loaf and with
a great vessel filled with honey-drink, with a great silver
candle, with a great resin-bowl, with a great sacrifice tree,
with a great sacrifice girdle, with a great ‘ tassel ’ and with
a great sacrifice pewter we approach thee. If thou art satisfied
with thy people and the priests, let the shaving of lime-wood
fall right.” As he says this, he shaves off a piece from the
branch, the position of which on the ground is then closely
examined by the priests together. Should the thicker end be
towards the sacrifice tree or to the east, it signifies that the
god is kindly disposed and satisfied with the people and
the priests} in the opposite case, the sacrificing priest, follow-
ing the direction of the sun, goes roimd the fire, placing
himself again to the left of it, where he whitdes the branch
again and, standing before the sacrifice tree, does as before.

Where the first shaving has signified good luck, it is placed
in the porridge-pan, to the right of the “ silver spoon.” As
the whittles the second he pronoimces a prayer, the be-
ginning of which is the same as in the foregoing, but finishes
with a new wish: “ If thou art pleased with the work of our
hands (i.e., with the objects needed at the ceremony) let the
shaving fall right! ” Its position is examined again, and if
a lucky omen is now also discovered in it, it is laid beside
the other in the porridge-pan. A third shaving must still
be whittled. With the help of this the sacrificial foal, which
has to shiver when sprinkled with water, is examined to see
whether it is acceptable to the god. The prayer accompanying
this begins also like the former, but ends with the words:
“ If thou art satisfied with the shivering horse with shining
hair and gleaming mane, with the silver tail and silver hoofs,
let the shaving fall right.” The third shaving also is laid in
the porridge-pan.


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


270

The assistant of the sacrificing priest now pours fresh water
into a wooden bowl, takes this in his right hand and green
lime-branches in his left and goes to the foal, after having en-
circled the fire in the direction of the sun. The head of this,
on which the “ silver bridle ” has been set, should be turned
towards the sacrifice tree. The kart himself stands before the
tree and prays again: “ O bless and protect us, great god! We
on our side have brought and set up a sacrificial horse, with
shining hair and gleaming mane and silver tail, accept it on thy
side with good feeling, and shake from it the touch of human
hands! ” During the prayer the assistant pours water on the
animal’s back through the lime-branches, beginning from the
head. That the purpose of this is to purify the animal appears
from the accompanying prayer. During this ceremony, as
during aU others, the other participants kneel with bared heads
and wait reverently for the shudder which the touch of the
water is bound to cause in the animal, and which is regarded as
a sign of acceptance of the sacrifice by the god. Should the
desired result not be accomplished at the first attempt, it is
repeated a second, third, or even more times. Each time the
kaa-t redtes the same prayer before the tree. While waiting
for the sign, the reasons why the god will not accept the
offering are examined. The assisting priests look to see that
the fire is made on exactly the site of former fires, that the
erection over the fire is rightly placed, so that the saplings
have their thin ends upward, and the horizontal ones their
roots towards the sacrifice tree. The positions of the objects
on the altar are also looked to. Finally, the bridle is set
right on the foal’s head. If the candle has gone out, it is
lighted anew. The assistants of the offidating priests try
their luck at sprinkling, one after another, even attempting to
obtain the desired result by sprinkling in the animal’s ear.
While the kart prays, the person from whom the animal was
brought, kneels also before the tree. While waiting the result,
all present, kneeling, pray half -aloud: “ O good, great god,


SACRIFICES TO NATURE GODS 271

let the sacrifice shake and shiver! ” The sprinkling may not,
however, be repeated an unlimited number of times, but the
animal, after a ninth attempt, is taken out of the grove and
a new one procured in its place. When the victim, some-
times at the first attempt, does shiver, all rise from their knees,
thanking the god, and the slaughterers begin their work imme-
diately. The animal’s feet are bound together with a rope
of lime-bark, and it is then thrown over on to its left side; the
head must also now be in the direction of the tree. A smaller
hole is dug in the ground at the head, and, in order that the
blood shall not flow on the ground, is covered with lime-
branches. The kart now places himself before the tree and
says: “ We on our side have brought and set up a sacrifice for
thee, accept thou it on thy side and let the rising ‘soul ’
{tson) be a foal with shining hair, etc.” Meanwhile the
slaughterer cuts the veins of the neck open, with an old-
fashioned knife used only at sacrifices, so that the blood
streams through the lime-branches into the hole. The first
warm drops are taken by the kart in a little wooden spoon,
after which he goes as before rotmd the fire to the tree and
prays: “ O good, great god, with fresh blood we turn to thee.
Send peace and justice to all peoples living under the sky! ”
Having said which, he throws the blood up into the tree,
goes agdn to the foal and fills the spoon with blood as this
continues to flow out of the wound. This time he steps to
the left of the fire and with his face to it says: “ Thou, ‘Fire-
mother,’ with fire and steam, with thy sharp tongue carry
up the sacrifice to the great god! ” At the same time he
throws the blood into the fire. Afterwards, the offering-girdle,
intended later to be placed round the tree, is drenched with
blood; both sides of the girdle are drawn over the wound.
The “ bridle ” and the “ footsnare ” are taken off and for the
time hung up on the post to which the foal had been tied,
and the flaying of the foal, in which four men take part,
begins. Now also, the head of the victim must be kept towards


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


272

the tree. The candle at the foot of the tree burns all this
time, a new one being used to replace the old one as soon as
needed.

Immediately the flaying is begun, the nose or the part con-
taining the lips is cut off as a special sacrifice, and purified by
being scorched in the fire. The head, from which the lower
jaw has been removed, is similarly scorched. The flesh is
cut from the limbs without damaging the bones. Regarding
the different parts of the meat, the Cheremiss follow a certain
order. The so-called fai-yo-pieces are placed separately in the
cauldron at the cauldron-stand which is nearest to the sacrifice
tree. These are the nose, or the parts around the mouth, the
tongue, the brain, the throat, the back of the neck, the breast-
bone, the heart, five ribs from the right and three from the left
side, a piece from each hip, the knees of the hind legs, the
stomach, liver, kidneys, and the intestines. The remainder
is boiled in two cauldrons behind this first. When the flesh
has been divided among the cauldrons, the hide is spread on
the ground to the right of the sacrificial altar, with the head
towards the tree. Spread on the gro\md, the hide resembles
a horse, thrown over on its left side. The parts unfit to eat
are placed in the hole with the blood. Later, the contents
of this hole are burned up in a fire which is built over it.
While the flesh is being cooked, this taking about two or three
hours to do, the people remain in the forepart of the grove,
to which new people continue to come from the surroimding
villages. Only the kart with his assistants remrins at the
sacrificial fire. This is the time to gird round the “ little ”
tree with the sacrificial “ girdle,” which must be twisted three,
five, seven, or nine times (an odd number) round the tree.
Between the tree and the girdle a bunch of green twigs is
placed and the above-mentioned “ tassel ” is attached to the
same, the pewter figure being made fast to this.

A separate sacrifice must now be made to the “ messenger
of Jumo.” A white sheep is led into the grove and bound


PLATE XXXIV

Cheremiss Sacrificial Prayer

Ufa Government. (See page 276.)
After photograph by U. Holmberg.


SACRIFICES TO NATURE GODS


273

fast to another post. The sacrifice of this is made before the
same tree and is performed by the same kart. The ceremonies
are also the same as with the foal, except for the casting of
the pewter, the clinking of the knife against the axe, and the
whittling. At the slaughtering the blood is thrown into the
tree and fire. For the flesh of the sheep a fourth cauldron
is laid further behind on the stand. The skin is stretched
out against that of the foal, with the head towards the tree
and the legs stretched out to the right. At this time the kart
pours the honey-drink in the wooden bowls on the altar and
cuts out from the loaves the marks made on them by three
fingers, leaving them still, however, in their places.

When the sacrifice flesh is at last ready, the j»‘yo-pieces are
laid in a row in a special trough. From each piece of flesh a
piece is cut out and placed in a round wooden dish, which is
then placed at the foot of the tree. The pieces laid in the dish
are called orolek. In addition, quite small pieces are cut from
these parts of the flesh, and laid in two small wooden bowls
(suvo-korka) of which one is dedicated to the accepter of the
sacrifice, Jumo, and the other to the intermediary, the Fire
god. Pieces are cut from the tongue at its root and from its
apex, from the head at several different places, such as the
upper and lower jaws, the parts round the eyes, and from the
gullet. In each of the bowls the loosened pieces of bread
are also placed, the ^^-parts in the first, and the »^-parts in
the second. A little porridge is also placed in each. Small
slices are also cut from the following parts in this order and
threaded on to a thin pointed stick of lime-wood: the after-
intestine, the right and left hips, the kidneys, the middle of
the breast, the heart, the aorta, the back of the neck, the
throat, the tongue, the lips, and from the liver. On examining
more closely the order of these twelve parts one notices that
they stand towards each other pretty much in the same rela-
tion as in the body of the animal. This stick with meat-
slices, called sofsar, the kart places in the sacrifidal girdle with


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


274


these words: “ O, bless and protect us, great god! The shining
sacrificial horse, etc., etc. — accept it with good feeling} with
the great sofsar-meai we approach thee, give us health, pros-
perity, riches, and peace! ” The flesh remaining in the trough
from the first cauldron, together with the left part of the
“ large ” loaf and five small ones, is cut up at once to be eaten.


Fig. II. Sacrificial Accessories


a, Silver Candlestick, b, Silver Spoon, c, Sacrificial Tassels, d, Sopsar.

e, Suldes.


The right-hand part of the “ large ” loaf and three small ones
are placed in the oro/(?^-piece dish. When the sheep’s flesh is
ready, pieces are cut from it as in the foregoing and placed
in two /«‘yo-ladles. No flesh-stick is made from them, nor is
orolek-^e&h. divided from the rest.

The sacrificing priest begins again to recite a prayer, holding
a knife in his right and a burning brand in his left hand, at
the close of the prayer ringing three times with the knife
against the axe, which lies on the ground before him, and
saying: “ O bless and protect us, great god! With the large
sacrifidal loaf, with the great mead-dish, with the great silver
candle, with the great candlestick, with the great resin-bowl,
with the great sacrificial tree, with the great sacrificial girdle,
with the great ‘ tassel,’ and with the ‘ great pewter,’ we ap-


SACRIFICES TO NATURE GODS


275

proach theej grant to us health, happiness, riches and peace.
Give family-happiness in the house, catde-luck in the stock-
yards, grain-luck in the threshing-barn, bee-luck in the hives,
money-luck in the money-chest, give all kinds of luck and
progress! ” After which he throws the brand into the fire
and seizing the lime-branch which he had earlier whittled,
goes as usual round the fire, whittles a little from the end,
and placing himself before the tree, says: “ If thou wilt grant
family-luck in the house, let the shavmg fall right.” As he
says this, he lets fall a shaving, the position of which is then
examined as before. The fifth shaving is whittled to a ques-
tion regarding cattle-luck. The sixth for the threshing-bam,
the seventh for the bee-hives, the eighth for the money-chest;
whereafter the kart whittles a ninth, saying: “If thou, like
the rising morning mist, wilt give all kinds of blessings to us,
likewise long life, let the shaving fall right! ” These six
shavings are also laid by the others in the porridge-pan with
the bark upward.

The bough from which the shavings have been pared is
taken by the kart a third time round the fire, after which he
stands to the left of the fire, saying as he stares into the fire:
“ O great, good god! As the lime-bush in the meadows is
glad, grant to us health, happiness, wealth and peace! But
to those who regard not god as a god, the Czar as a Czar, a
man as a man, and to the one who says he can work evil to
others, give not, O god, to him that which he prays for. They
who pluck ears of rye (for magical reasons), they who pluck
out hairs from the cattle, they who ‘ cut the heart and liver,’
hound them from one end of the world to the other. Health,
happiness, give; peace and riches present to all the peoples
living under the air! ”

Having said this he strikes ofF with the knife the top of
the bough, so that it falls into the fire. Thereafter he splits
both branches of the bough, threading on them (see Fig. 1 1, e)
the afore-mentioned shavings in the order m which they were


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


276

whittled. The object thus obtained, snides, is besmeared with
the porridge and placed in the girdle next to the meat stick.
As he fastens it to the tree, he says: “ With the sacrificial por-
ridge, with the great stddes, vre approach thee.”

When both the meat and the shavings have been placed in
the girdle, the congregation is called into the grove itself. In
front of the altar, a great white cloth is spread on the ground,
before which four assisting priests place themselves to pray
for every person, who, with his sleeve over his hand, brings a
sacrifice coin. While praying the priest also keeps the coin on
the sleeve drawn over his hand, as the Cheremiss believe the
naked hand defiles the coin. In these prayers, in which the
donor is always named and kneels behind the priest, the words
are as follows: “ Good, great god! (then the person’s name)
comes with a sacrifice coin to the great sacrifice tree to worship,
give him health, happiness and wealth, let him live happily
in his house with his playful family! Give him family-luck
— and all the different lucks up to money-luck — protect the
cattle in the pastures from wolves, bears, evil sicknesses, and
from the thieves who move in the night. Protect the seed
from destructive frosts, from heat that might wither it, from
heavy storms, from violent thunder-storms, and from all
insects, that he might have bread to give also to the needy.
Give all kinds of blessings to him! ” As he finishes the prayer,
the priest allows the coin to fall from his sleeve to the cloth.
Those who have been hindered from coming to the festival
send money by others, and prayers are read for them also.
When each donor has been prayed for, which, although there
are four priests, takes some time, the congregation fall on
their knees in parallel rows behind the sacrificing priest. The
essential festival-prayer of the day, often lasting half an hour,
is now begun, the kart praying for all that is good in the eyes
of the Cheremiss, chiefly for children in the house, cattle in
the yard, but mostly for great stacks in the threshing-barn.
Having prayed for all blessings, he prays to the god for


PLATE XXXV


In Government Vyatka the Cheremiss priest prays
to god with accompaniment of a stringed instrument
(kiisle). (See page 277.)

Water-colour by V, Soldan-Brofeldt


<!•

/i4»


f/


f


- » r' »


■>


. .v,*j^ jrLr


‘V‘


•'»#'-


•■"tk >


\


SACRIFICES TO NATURE GODS


277

many kinds of protection. Further, he thanks the god for
having attended the sacrifices with fortune and accepted the
offerings in good feeling. Finally he prays for pardon,
should he have said last that which should come first, or vice
versa. After each prayer the congregation bow their fore-
heads to the ground. The kart then makes a speech to the
people, urging them to live in harmony, to avoid quarrels,
not to take another’s property, also not to lie, not to bear false
witness, not to drink too much spirits, etc. The congregation
then rises and the elder people go to shake the kart^s hand in
thanks.

Soon the congregation go on their knees again. The kart
takes Jumo’s drinking-bowl and two assistants the r«w-bowls,
after which they follow one another, keeping to the right,
round the fire, stopping on the left side of the same, where the
contents of the bowls are thrown into the fire. The kart pours
twice from his bowl, the first time to Jumo, the second to the
Fire god, to whom also the /«w-bowls are sacrificed. As he
sacrifices to Jumo he says: “ O great, good god! the great
sacrificial drinking-bowl, the great /«‘i;o-bowls have we
brought. Accept them with good feeling! ” To the Fire god
he says: “ Fire god, thy smoke is high, and thy tongue sharp,
take the sacrifice up with the smoke and steam and bear it
to the great god! ” Immediately afterwards a drink-offering
and a j«Vo-sacrifice is made in the same way, to “ Jumo’s mes-
senger,” and the Fire god. From the great meat-trough, an
assisting priest takes a piece also to the fire built on the place
where the foal was slaughtered, and sheep’s flesh to the fire
on the place of the sheep’s slaughtering. In both cases he
turns to the Fire god and prays that the last drop of blood
might be burned up, those also that possibly have spattered
further.

The kart now gives to eight assisting persons (“ goblet-
bearers ”) each his bowl, saying in which god’s honour each
shall cast the contents into the fire. The “goblet-bearers”


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


278

pass round the fire in the direction of the sun, stopping to the
left of the same. This round is made several times, the sacri-
ficing priest refilling the bowls each time and naming new gods
to be remembered. Thus, all the Cheremiss gods and spirits,
from the highest to the lowest, obtain their share of this sacri-
fice. After this drink-sacrifice the bowls are replaced in their
former order.

The kart now prays alone, with a bowl in his hand, casting
three times from it also on to the sacred tree, saying: “ Accept
our prayer, give justice and peace to all the peoples under the
heavens! ” Repeating this prayer he throws soup from the
trough on to the tree with a ladle. The assisting priest does
the same also once.

The congregation then seat themselves on the grass. Two
assisting priests go three times in the direction of the sun
round the fire, shaking heartily all the sacrificial objects on the
trough, the bowls, the dishes, the cloths, the “little ” sacrifice
tree, the animaPs skin, etc., saying: “ This is for thee.”

It is nearly evening when the sacrificial meal is begun.
First, the porridge and the honey-drink are tasted, everyone
wishing each other happiness and prosperity. After this the
bread and meat in the jitw-dishes are shared out, and lastly
the rest of the food, excepting the orolek, the people sitting
on the ground and eating greedily after nearly a day’s fast.
All the remains and the bones are gathered together. When
the meat from the head has been eaten, the kart places the
bones in their natural order in the fire. The “ little ” sac-
rifice tree .with the objects attached to it is also burnt up.
More wood is then laid on the fire, and over the crackling
flames assistants hold the skin by sticks fastened to the head,
the tail and the feet. The kart goes round the burning sKn
with a fire-brand in his left, and a “ resin-bowl ” in his right,
and stands to the left of the fire, saying, as he pours the con-
tents of the bowl into the fire: “ Say not, that we burned an
empty hides a great resih-bowl we set up on it.” The already,


SACRIFICES TO NATURE GODS 279

mentioned “ silver bridle ” is also thrown upon the burning
skin. Finally, the “ stand ” for the resin-bowls is also burnt
up. The sheep-skin is^not burnt by the Cheremiss, but given
to the karty who receives no other honorarium for his services}
or it may be sold for the benefit of the sacrifice fund, or some-
times, the former owner of the animal may have reserved the
right to it.

Together with the oro/.?^-pieces, the candlestick, the other
half of the “ large ” loaf, and three small ones without
“ noses ” are left at the foot of the tree, as sacrifices have still
to be made on the following morning. Neither is the fire ex-
tinguished with the fall of evening, but allowed to illuminate
the grove through the night. Early in the morning, at sun-
rise, the so-called oro/e^-sacrifice is carried out, in which those
who have passed the night in the grove, take part. From the
pieces of meat left over to this day, a small piece is cut again
into two bowls as on the preceding day. The rest is sliced
into a larger dish. From the large half-loaf a piece is also
added to each smaller bowl. Besides these a bowl of drink is
placed on the cloth before the tree, together with three small
loaves, and the coins which were dug up on the day before.

The candle is lit. The kart takes a brand in his left and a
knife in his right hand, ringing as before three times on the
axe, and reminding the god again of the shining sacrifice foal.
Having encircled the fire and thrown in the brand, he stands
before the tree and reads a prayer nearly as long as that said
on the preceding day. After the prayer everyone shakes his
hand in thanks. The priest himself now sacrifices the drinking-
bowl, and two assistants the meat-bowls as on the day before,
the prayers also being the same. The presenting of the sacri-
ficial objects and the eating of the orolek-^t^sx follows, with
the former expressions of good wishes. All remains, even the
candlestidk, are thrown into the fire. The coins dug up
{pnapu-oksay “ the sacrifice tree coins ”) to which a few copper
coins have been added, are hidden again in the earth. While


28 o


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


doing this, the kart says: “ Sacrifice tree, do not say we left
thee empty! ”

The ceremonies at the other trees are similar, the gods of
the sun, thunder, wind, or some other god being the object
of worship to be sacrificed to either on the same day or later
in the festival. The tokens of honour to the difFerent gods
do not end, however, with the sacrifices, but during the whole
of the festival, the fires burn before the different trees, as
well as those lit quite early, a long prayer being read at them
each day. Sometimes the “ messenger of Jumo ” is not sacri-
ficed to until the close of the festival. Then, from all the
priests standing under the sacrifice tree, a peculiar murmur
of prayer is heard, the echo of which in the centuries-old grove
cannot but awaken reverence.

When the sacrificial fire, after the finish of the festival, is
allowed to go out, the priest who has sacrificed at the same,
sweeps together the ashes, saying: “ Should a man blunder
on to thee, may he become happy; if a dog, may he obtain
a good weather-sense; if cattle, may they increase greatly.”
Those who wish, may still go to a specially reserved room in
the village, where pancakes are eaten and mead and beer
drunk, and the deities, to whom sacrifices have been made,
are remembered.

It is only natural that divergences may occur in the dif-
ferent mer. This need not, however, depend on the distance
between them; among the Western Cheremiss the same cus-
toms as were described in the foregoing are followed. As an
example of different usages, it may be mentioned that in some
places, the “girdle” is bound fast, together with the objects
attached to it, to the living sacrifice tree, on which it remains as
a pledge until the following festival. The number of shav-
ings inserted in the /W<isj-branches also varies (cf. the Scan-
dinavian blots fan). While the shavings are being whittled, it
is noted in some places which side of them falls upward.
Likewise the number of slices of meat and their order on the


PLATE XXXVI


Cheremiss Priests at the Festival
Nature-Gods

Vyatka Government, (See page 280.)
After photograph by U. Holmberg.


SACRIFICES TO NATURE GODS 281

stick vary. Why the piece of liver should be placed on the
point of the stick, while the others are placed in some kind of
natural order, the Cheremiss could not explain. Could it be
connected with the custom in some places of commencing the
eating of sacrificial flesh with the liver? The most important
incident in all sacrifices among the Volga peoples, as among
the ancient Greeks, was the trial by water of the sacrificial
animal.


CHAPTER XVIII
THE SHAMAN

I N THE earlier beliefs of the Lapps, the shaman {noidde)
played a part important enough to justify the application
of the term “ shaman religion.” Everywhere, and in every-
thing where the wishes of the spirits had to be consulted,
the shaman was a necessary medium. In addition, he filled
at times the post of sacrificing priest. His fame was therefore
great and his position among the people a leading one. The
more powerful shamans possessed titles such as “the ruler
of the mountains ” or “ the king of the mountains.” Their
fame spread wide among the Lapp villages and their names
were preserved from generation to generation.

The high reputation and position of the shaman among
the Lapps appear also in an account from the beginning of the
eighteenth century, in which it is stated that the shaman, on
arriving at the tent of the Lapp, was met by the members of
the family who, with heads bared, came out to meet him and
thank him for the help he had already given them. He was
given a new reindeer-skin to sit on, the best available food and
drink were set before him, and when he remained overnight,
the best sleeping-place was given up to him. It is further re-
lated that the shaman received a tax, paid biannually. Be-
sides this, he received a special reward for each service, its
size depending on whether his aid had been requested for the
finding of some lost object, for the curing of the sick, or to
offer up sacrifice. In addition to money, articles of silver,
or clothes, he was also given reindeer. Were he not served
and looked after in every way, it was believed he could bring
about many kinds of misfortune.^


THE SHAMAN


283

But though the office of shaman brought thus both honour
and riches, it was not open to everybody to take up this pro-
fession, certain psychic qualities being necessary in its service.
The gifts essential for a shaman often ran in the same family,
appearing either early in childhood or also after some severe
illness.® The Arctic peoples would seem to be specially; in-
clined to nervous diseases. The merest trifle scares them,
they faint on the slightest provocation or become furious,
when they act like maniacs.® The shaman uses at times arti-
ficial stimulants to assist the coming of a trance. The Lapp
shaman-drink was prepared of soda boiled from birch-wood
ash, or of seal-fat, or from many other materials. By drink-
ing such liquids it was believed that the shaman could harden
his body so that not even the sharpest knife could penetrate
it. Neither could fire or water destroy a great shaman. He
could even seat himself naked on a glowing fireplace and
scatter fire and burning cinders over his body without the
least danger.*

People with shamanistic talent were believed to be able to
converse with the spirits living under the ground, these last
appearing also in material form to them, in particular on the
occasion of their being first called to the office of shaman.
When these spirits, called noidde-gadse (“ shaman people ”)
by the Lapps, ofFered their help to a yovmg shaman, they
laid stress on the fact of having served also his father and his
forefathers. Should he evince disinclination to accept their
services, they would use threats and even force, stories being
related in which spirits pressed the persons in questions to such
an extent that an early decay and even death resulted. Where
the Lapp listened to their call, the spirits were extremely
devoted to him, helping him and teaching him the arts of
shamanism. This schooling generally took place either on
the ground in some lonely place, or the pupil was led to the
underworld to imbibe there the vfisdom of former shamans.
At the first call of the spirits, the misaonaries relate that the


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


284

Lapp behaved like one mentally afflicted, was unable to bear
his wife, his children, or his servants, but forsaking these
wandered around in the forests or on the mountains.®

The shaman could not, however, keep up his practice for
the whole of his life. Generally he became unfit for office in
his fiftieth year and was never employed afterwards in any
important task. But he might lose his position even earlier,
as a body free from any disfigurement was demanded of a
shaman as sacrificer, even the losing of a tooth disqualifying
him for office.®

As soon as a shaman had begun to practise, the spirits began
to live more freely in his company. That these were the
spirits of the dead is shown by the fact that they lived in the
“ holy mountains,” from which the shaman could at will call
them to his service. When travelling in strange districts they
formed reliable guides. On hunting or fishing trips they were
his trusty protectors, proving their allegiance by giving him
rich hauls. Even his property, and herds of reindeer were
looked after by these willing servants. In addition, the shaman
would seem to have possessed a special tutelary genius, as it
is said that when about to proceed to a distant market-place, he
would send a spirit to see whether the buyer had arrived.
After a while this spirit would return and relate the circvim-
stances there. In the same way, when the shaman was away,
the spirit would bring news of his family and herds. Coming
events were also foretold by it to its owner. This spirit, which
procured all manner of news for the shaman, was obviously
the shaman’s own mobile “ soul.” ’

This tutelary spirit the shaman could also use against his
enemies. When two shamans quarrelled, e.g., at some fair
when both were drunk, they would attempt to show one an-
other which of them owned the more powerful spirit. They
sat down opposite one another and began their arts. It was
believed that their spirits fought with one another in the guise
of reindeer-bulls. The one possessing the strongest “rein-


PLATE XXXVII

1. Lapp shaman^s bowl-drum. Front, back and
side views,

2. Lapp shaman^s sieve-drum. Front, back and
side views.

The drum was used as a medium of excitation by
the shaman or of invoking a trance, and also for
divination. (See page 287.)


THE SHAMAN 285

deer-bull ” emerged from the contest as the winner. “ Sha-
man-birds ” were also used in these contests.*

The spirit of the shaman was called sueje (originally
“ shadow ”) by the Scandinavian Lapps.® The fact that this
is supposed to be able to take on the shape of a reindeer, a fish,
a bird, or a snake shows that the sueje-Bmrasl in Northern Lap-
mark, corresponds with the shaman-animals which, according
to the Southern Lapps, assist the shaman when, during a period
of unconsciousness, he visits the underworld. Such animals
were the “ jaivo-reindeer-bull,” the “ j<?n;o-bird,” the " saho~
fish” and the j^/w-snake.” “ The missionary J. Kildal,
who assumes that these animals lived in the holy mountains,
points out how they differed from the other inhabitants of the
moimtain, the shaman possessing several of the latter, but
only, one “ holy mountain bird,” one “ holy mountain fish ”
and one “holy mountain reindeer.” “ Another missionary
draws attention to the fact that “ the ‘ j^wo-fish ’ is not one
of the gods of the underworld, although its services are called
into accoimt when journeying there.” One can plainly see
that these animals were soul-animals, in the shape of which
the shaman^s soul moved during its separation from the body.
Like a reindeer-bull it hurried over the land, like a bird it
flew through the air, like a fish it swam through the water, and
like a snake it wriggled into the earth. The same idea is con-
tained in the following account by J. Kildal: “When two
shamans send their ‘ reindeer-bulls * to fight together, the re-
sult is that according as the competing * reindeer ’ win or lose,
the shaman owning the same wins or loses} should one ‘ rein-
deer ’ break off a horn from the other, the shaman owning the
injured one becomes ill} should one ‘ reindeer ’ kill another,
the shaman, whose ‘ reindeer ’ is killed, dies. In these combats
it occurs also, that the shamans owning the ‘ reindeer * become
as tired and exhausted as their ‘ reindeer.’ ” The same author
relates also that when the shaman falls into a trance, “he
journeyed in his ‘jawo-fish’ to the underworld, and when


a86 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

he wakes from his tiance, the ^fish’ has bought him back
uninjured to his body, again ” ” Jessen is able further to affirm
that the louder a shaman can sing, the longer is his snake **
The Finns also relate in their tales how the Lapps fly in the
shape of birds thiough the air, when one of these is shot
down, the Lapp tumbles to the ground These soul-animals
weie sometimes pictured on the magic diums

The power of thus taking on different forms is essential for
the shaman’s soul to overcome difficulties particularly in the
underworld, and especially when bringing back the soul of
someone sick, which during the time it moved about without
a body has been earned off to the underworld by the spirits
These last give back with gieat reluctance the souls falling
into then powei The Lapps believed them to know befoie-
hand when the shaman had decided to visit them On such
occasions they bolted then doors well, but a clever shaman
could always hit upon some little crevice thiough which his
soul could aeep in Often a severe fight was waged between
the inhabitants of the underwoild and the shaman, until the
formei, against a fixed saciifice, weie willing to compiomise
When the bargain had been concluded, the shaman’s soul
brought the soul in question back to its home ‘‘ over mountains
and valleys, with such speed that the stones and sand flew
about ” “

The shaman must also go to the undei world when aexom-
panyjng the soul of some dead person, and when he had to
bung thence the soul of some departed relative, eg, to herd
the cattle “

Resides taking the form of the above mentioned animals,
believed also by the Samoyeds to be the method of super-
natural jouineying adopted by their shaman, the Lapps be-
lieved that the soul of the shaman could fly in the fotm of a
whiilwind, relics of a similai belief having also been noted
in Finland

Of flying m the form of fire, an inteiesting repot t comes


THE SHAMAN


287

from the Norwegian Lapp tenitory When two Lapps quar-
relled, they sat down on the ground and began to sing that
their saivo would send them their “ light,” which was believed
to be a dame of the Aurora Borealis When these “ lights ”
met in the sky, they fought with one another, during which
battle the shamans lay on the giound, practising intensely their
ait A terrible noise and crackling in the sky accompanied
these duels The one whose “ light ” gradually faded, fell
ill, weie It totally extinguished, the shaman died ” From this
method of dying thiough the air like a dame, the Finnish
term “ Fire-Lapp ” is derived

The most important instrument of the shaman was his drum,
the skin of which during the close of the heathen period was
always furnished with numerous drawmgs and figures, painted
on with the juice from alder-baik or with reindeer blood
Often, the heaven with the sun and moon and other gods,
the eaith with tents and storehouses, foiest and domestic
animals, fishing-wateis, etc, and the undeiwoild with its in-
habitants were pictured on the drum The pictures were not
always alike, neither was their older the same on all diums
In the shape of the drum, not only in regard to size, but also
to construction, dissimilarities may be found G Hallstiom,
who has studied Lapp drums m many museums, classifies them
accoidmg to their construction mto two chief gioups, of which
one may be called sieve-shaped, and the other bowl-shaped ”

The sieve-shaped dium, which seems to have been much
more widely used than the bowl-drum, was prepared by
sti etching the skin over a band of wood of about the width
of the palm of the hand The wood had, if possible, to be
without knots, and the ends were bent together and fastened
with wooden plugs or twisted twigs The foim of the sieve-
drum was geneially oval, one end being seldom bioader than
the other. The handle was a naiiow cross-piece of wood
fastened to the back

The bowl-drum was fashioned out of a hollowed piece of


288


FINNO-U&RIC MYTHOLOGY


wood so that this formed a lounded bowl, over the open
mouth of which the skin was stretched Two long, narrow
holes were cut in the bottom, leaving a handle between It
was further decorated with carved figures and small holes,
which strengthened the sound The body was oval in shape,
of an egg<-f orm The size of the bowl-drum varied little, as
It was always made of one tree, while the siev^-shaped drums
weie at times extremely laige
The variety of these drums appears also m the pictures on
the skin. On the sieve-drum these usually formed a common
circle in the midst of which the sun was placed The latter
18 generally square, four fine rays reaching out from each
coinei, only seldom is its shape round The surface of the
bowl-drum is again divided by horizontal lines into two or
more parts Over these lines figures stand in a row, the uppei
being the Heaven gods On these diums the sun does not
take a dominating position as it does on the sieve-diums.
Mixed forms are also to be found
Further, the drums vary in their ornamentation. The sieve-
drum, which resembles the Siberian drums, is, like the latter,
often furnished with small metal-wire belts oi chains, on
which various silver, brass, and iron jingles are hung These
belts and chains are fastened to the back of the drums either
to the wooden band oi the handle The ornaments fastened
to the bowl-drum are generally the claws of wdd animals, the
ears or haii of foiest animals, etc Often these decorations
are missing, when they are replaced by the figuies cut in the
handle This last-named drum would seem to be a Lapp
original, and according to our piesent knowledge, was known
chiefly in Lule and Tome Lapmark
Besides ornaments and beUs, a beautifully carved hammer
With two blanches, made of leindeer-horn and often covered
With skin, belonged with the drum, and at least in latei times,
also a ring oi bunch of lings or another metal object called
(“ die ”) by the Finnish Lapps


PLATE XXXVIII


In some places among the Cbercmiss the sacrifice
girdle IS bound fast^ together with the objects attached
to It, to the living sicnfice tree, on which it lemains
as a pledge until the following festival (See page
2io)

According to water-colour by A Remholm,


THE SHAMAN


289

The shaman held his drum in great respect, to prevent it
being looked on by anybody, it was often kept in a case of skin
in the inner part of the tent According to the Lapps, the
drum was desecrated should a woman touch
It These last were not even allowed to go
over a road, along which a drum had been
transported, for the next thiee days Were
a woman to do this, the Lapps believed death
or some other misfortune would follow.

But, if for some reason or other, a crossing
could not be prevented, the woman must
sacrifice a ring of brass to the drum As a ShamIm’hammer
mattei of precaution, the drum was taken out
through the backdoor and, m removal, it was placed in the last
sleigh Where possible it was taken along roads never trav-
elled before by anybody Were the sanctity of the drum
violated in any way, it was regarded as useless Were it
angered, it was believed to be able to express its dissatisfaction
by weeping or threats The older a drum handed down fiom
one geneiation to another became, the greater the honour ac-
corded it

At the dose of the heathen period, the magic drum became
general m use As Christians with the Bible, says Fnis, so
neaily every Lapp family possessed a drum From the Lapps
converted by him, von Westen received over a hundred magic
drums Yet every Lapp who owned a drum was not actually
a shaman, but used it for purposes of divination, for his own
benefit. Whatever the Lapp was about to engage in, removal,
hunting, fishing, or if he desited to know the whereabouts of
his reindeer lost in the mountains, or the source of some trouble
In his life, or whenever he wished to appease his gods by
sacrifice, he turned always to his drum, asking its advice

When a Lapp thus wished to divine the future in some mat-
ter or other, he dad himself as for a feast. He washed,
combed his hair, and put on his best dothes The same was


290 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

done also by the otheis taking pait in this holy act The
neighbours came in then red and blue jackets, ornamented with
lings, gleaming neck-cbains, etc When beginning the act
the questioner knelt down on his left knee, holding the drum
hoiizontally in his left hand, and placed the above mentioned
ring first on the picture of the sun, beginning then to tap
carefully round it with the hammei so that the ring danced
gently up and down At the same time he sang a song If
the ring now moved round m the direcbon of the sun, it was
regarded as a good sign, the opposite foreboding on accident,
sickness, or othei misfoitune Fiom the figure on which the
ring remained for a longer period towards the end, the answer
to the question adced of the spirits was deaded On hunting
or fishing tups a good haul was assured if the ring paused at
the figures of a foiest animal or a fishing-watei Where the
ring paused at the drawing of a god, it was a sign that this god
wished a saaihce In asking whether a sacrifiaal animal was
pleasing to a god, a hair from the animal’s neck was wound
round the ring Should the ling not pause now at the figure
of the god in question, it was believed that the god would not
accept the animal Another was then chosen, and still otheis,
the same procedure being gone through until the ring showed
the sacrifice to be pleasing When the ring moved over to
the figures reptesenting the underworld or jumped o£F the
drum, it meant death or some other great misfoitune
The abo\e was not, howevei, the original puipose of the
drum Certain of the missionaries relate that when the sha-
man earlier acted as above, he excited himself by banging
violently on the drum with the hammer to such an extent that
at last he would fall into a tiance In a desciiption written
down in Swedish Lapmaik it is stated that when a L.app
wished to know of something happening m a distant neigh-
bourhood, he laid the brass ring on the figure of the sun and
commenced beating the drum with the forked drumstick. As
the ring jumped from one figure to another, backwards and


THE SHAMAN


291

forwards, the shaman sang a peculiar song in which all the
other Lapps present, male or female, joined m The men
had, however, to sing louder than the women In the song,
the name of the mountain in which the spit its capable of giving
the desired infoimation were supposed to dwell, was lepeated
eveiy now and then, similarly, the name of the district from
which news was desued As the shaman beat longer on his
drum and sang louder and loudei, he became more and more
elated until the ring paused at one spot, the face of the drum-*
mer darkened, and he sank on his knees still increasing the
volume of his song, until finally he dropped to the ground
like one dead At this point care had to be taken that no
article touched the shaman^s unconsuous body, as, if this
happened, the Lapps believed that the spirit would no longer
leturn to it The men and women present had to continue
singing until the shaman returned to consciousness He was
then lemmded of the case in question and the matter concern-
ing which knowledge was required The shaman was at this
time tired out and perspiring, as though he had performed
some heavy task, and he now began to relate all he had dis-
covered during his trance “

Accordmg to this last description, the Lapps used the dium
for two different purposes at the same time, but genet ally
the two uses were kept separate As an instrument of divina-
tion, the drum was used only for unimportant questions, e g ,
success on hunting or Ashing trips For these, any male
pel son could make use of his drum, without being an actual
shaman But in the case of serious misfortunes, such as severe
sickness, the cause of these was sought in an unconscious con-
dition, in the attaining of which the drum was used as an
exatant Here a leal shaman had to be applied to, as he
only could visit the spirits dwelling under the earth, ftom
whom sickness and misfortunes m general weie supposed to
emanate The cause of an illness was either the desire of
some earlier departed person for the company of a relative.


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


292

or a punishment for some misdemeanour 01 the omitting of a
duty The collapse of the sick person was due to the stp-almg
of his soul by the undeigiound spiiits, 01 the caiiying away
of some aiticle m close contact with him, e g , a shoe, headgear,
01 a mitten It was the duty of the shaman to discovei what
the spiiits of the departed lequired, why they weie angrv,
and by what means they could be appeased, so that the sick
would be left m peace ”

When, in cases of sickness, the shaman was about to under-
take a voyage to the undei world, he called together, according
to Leem, his helping spirits, which lattei arrived invisible to
otheis It was necessary that two women should be present
in holiday costume, with kei chiefs over their heads but with-
out belts, a man without cap and belt, and a half-grown girl
When all these were assembled, the shaman bared his head,
opened his belt and unfastened his shoe-strings, covered his
face, and placuig his hands by his sides bent his body backward
and f 01 ward, shouting “Harness the reindeer' — Push out
the boat' ” Intoxicated with gin he began theieafter to pluck
biands out of the file with his naked hands, strike himself on
the legs with an axe and swmg the latter with both hands
ovei his shoulders, then lunning three times lound the as-
sisting females with the axe, he sank unconsaous to the floor
In this state, no one might touch him, and he must be watched
ovet so closely that not even a fly could settle on him The
soul was believed to be wandering in the underworld, some-
where 111 the holy mountains, while the body lay unconscious
The women piesent whispeied togethei, trying to guess wheie
the spirit at that moment was Should they hit on the exact
place while going through the names of the holy places, the
shaman moved either an arm or a leg At the same time they
tried by intensive concentiadon to follow all that the shaman
might hear or see When the latter at last began to awaken
to life and with a weak voice faltered the beginning of the
song, the women also raised their voices and joined in Ft-


THE SHAMAN


293

nally, the shaman dedaied the cause of the sickness, and the
deity to whom saaihce had to be made, and informed them
of the nature of the animal and the place for the saciihce,
guaranteeing that the sick would recover within a certain
period ”

Leem does not, however, make any mention of the magic
drum, whereas Jessen expressly says that the shaman used this
instrument as a means of invoking the trance ” In this way,
the missionary Olsen also desaibes the Lapp shaman’s falling
into a trance, or "diving,” as they themselves call it The
latter further points out that the shaman had always to have
as assistant another person to awaken him out of the trance
This assistant was a woman, wheie possible, a viigin The
duty of the woman was to seek out the soul of the shaman
as It wandered in the interior of the mountains or under the
lakes, and lead it back to the body Should the awakener be
incapable of fulfilling this duty, the shaman would never
wake again from his trance Other antagonistic shamans
could also lead the shaman’s soul astray during its vranderings
in the underworld and in this way prevent it from returning
Many shamans are said to have remained on their dangerous
journey It is not therefore surprising that the shaman, on
his retuin to life, praised his awakener with many flattermg
teims **

Like the Sibenan shaman, the Lapp notdde used his drum
oiiginally only as a medium of excitation The use of the
magic drum as a method of divination is obviously of later
ongin

In the oldest accounts of the shamamzing of the Lapps
which have been preserved, dating from the thirteenth century,
the magic drum is spoken of solely as a means of exotation.
In these accounts the wonderful manner of the Lapps of
prophesymg coming events, of following events in distant
places of finding hidden treasures, of resisting sickness —
even, at times, death, are all described The following in-


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


294

cident IS related as an example Certain Norwegian merchants
had once visited the Lapps and weie sitting at table when the
hostess was suddenly stiicken by illness and died While the
guests were expiessing then fear that some envious shaman
had caused het death, and even the Lapps in their confusion
did not know what to do, a shaman rose, spiead out a cloth
under which he placed himself, and began to shamanise
Soon he lifted up an object like a sieve on which was poitrayed
a whale, a reindeer with a sleigh, and a boat with oars, these
being the means used by the shaman’s soul in hurrying over
the high snow-clad mountains and the deep seas Having
sung and danced a long time on the floor, he finally fell down,
becoming black in the face Foam‘ appealed on his lips, his
stomach burst open, and, with a fearful ay, life left him
The visitors then tuined to anothei shaman for knowledge
of the fate of the two lying dead This shaman accomplished
his task with such success that the hostess aiose quite whole
and related the fate of the fiist shaman When the first
shaman, in the shape of a whale, had hurried over a lake,
an antagonistic shaman had seized the opportunity to lie m
wait for his enemy in the form of a sharp post, with the result
that the belly of the whale was split This acadent had
shown Itself on the body of the shaman ”

The objects mentioned in the above as being portiayed on
the drum aie probably the very earliest pictures on the Lapp
drum, their object being oiiginally, like the pictmes on the
Siberian drum, to give wmgs to the shaman’s fantasy by re-
minding him of the means of locomotion which his soul was
believed to need, and the forms of the animals m whose
shape he was supposed to make the jouiney to the underworld
On some of the Lapp drums, these pictuies may be seen to
occupy a central position, round whi^, during the develop-
ment of the drum as an instiument of divination, later draw-
ings have gradually been giouped
Shamans, who with the help of magic drums have fallen


PLATE XXXIX

Samoyed Shaman

(See ch iptei XVIII )
After photogiaph by K Danner


THE SHAMAN


295

into trances, have been met with also among the Ugrian
peoples Here also the shaman possesses a speaal protecting
spiiit, “head spiiit,” said to protect him on his journeys to
the other world In tales, the “bear-like spirit” of the
shaman is often mentioned, this being doubtless a metamoi
phosis of his soul Images of sudi “soul-animals” are vetv
likely the ammal-like objects of wood or metal found in the
graves of shamans The Ostiak shaman, like those of the
Samoyeds and of the majority of the Siberian peoples, seems,
at least in the more noithein districts, to have attired himself
for his functions in speaal apparel, a fact unknown in the very
oldest accounts of the Lapp shaman From the scanty existing
accounts of the earlier Ostiak shamans it would seem that
they, in general, and even in the matter of then diums, wae
nearly 1 elated to those of the Samoyeds and the othei Sibeiian
peoples **

The othei Fmno-Ugiic peoples who possibly possessed
shamans at an eailier date have for a long period used more
modern methods of prophesying then fate Not even the
eailiei accounts contain any mention of the use of magic diums
among them And yet, the author of the “Life of St
Stephen ” (d 1396) mentions that the Siryan magicians could
“ on that same day, and at the very moment ” know “what was
happening in a distant neighbourhood, in another town, m the
ninth land”” Most probably this happened in an ecstatic
state A similar condition is peihaps mtended by the phrase
m a Russian Chionicle, in which it is related how a Nov-
goiodian visited a Chudic magician m 1071, the latter “ lying
dumb” while he invoked the spirits to his aid*® For the
shaman’s falling into a tiance, the Finns have to this day a
special expiession {Imgeta loveen, “ fall into trance ”) which
may, however, have been used origmally with regard to the
Lapp shaman Further it may be pomted out that the Lapp
name notdde (“ shaman ”) occuis also ui the Finnish notta.


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


BY

UNO HOLMBERG

PH D

DOCENT OF THE UNIVERSITY OP FINLAND* HELSINGFORS


INTRODUCTION

M ost dominant among the Siberian peoples is the great
Altaic race, the original dwelling-place of which ap-
pears to have been m the vicinity of the Altai Mountains, but
which at the present time is distributed over an enormous
stretch of territory in Central and Noith Asia, the Near East
and Eastern Europe The languages spoken by these scattered
peoples are divided into three large gtoups Turco-Tatar,
Mongolian, and Mandshu-Tungus
Besides the Tuiks proper, or Osmans, the closely related
Turkomans to the east of the Caspian Sea and m the Stavropol
Government, and the Eastern Turkish tubes in East Turkes-
tan, the Turco-Tatar gioup comprises further, the Tatars
around the Volga, whence pioneeis have migiated as far as
to Western Sibeiia, the Tatars in the Crimea and other dis-
tricts m Eussia, the Bashkirs in the central Ural districts, the
Nogaiyes in the Crimea and Northern Caucasia and other Tatar
tribes up to south of the Caspian Sea, the Kirghis m Russia
and Tuikestan, the Altai Tatais in the neighbourhood of the
Altai, where they form a number of smallei groups with dif-
ferent dialects, — Soyots, Karagass, the Abakan, Cholym, and
Baraba Tatars, — the Tdeuts, the Lebed Tatars and the Ku-
mandines, and also the .Yakuts by the River L.ena in North
Siberia, and the Chuvash from the bend of the Vol^ m
Russia

The Mongolians, whose original home was by Lake Baikal,
and from whom Mongolia derives its name, have assimilated
different Turkish tribes, which have appropriated the Mongo-
ban language In the course of raids of conquest the Mon-
golians have also overflowed to other districts, amongst others,


INTRODUCTION


300

to Afghanistan, where they are now termed Moghols Closely
related to the Mongolians aie the Kalmucks to the south of
the Altai, in the southern sti etches of the Tientshan Mountains
and by the Volga in Russia, whither inner disturbances caused
them to wander in the seventeenth century Further, the
Buriats around the Caspian Sea belong to the Mongolian group

The Mandshu-Tungus stocks, which are composed of many
closely related lesser groups with different languages, appear
to have migrated from the distiicts around the Amur River
At the present time tribes belonging to these stocks dwell over
wide stretches in North-East Sibeiia, reaching from the Yenisei
Valley to the Pacific Ocean, and from Northern China and
Lake Baikal to the Aictic Ocean The Tungus stocks dwelling
in the Amur Valley include the Goldes, the Oiotchones, the
Manegies, etc , and also the more distantly related Solones,
Mandshus and Dahurs, of which the last-named have f 01 the
most part appropiiated the Mongolian language The Tungus
dwelling on the shores of the Northern Arctic Ocean and the
Paaiic are called Lamutes The Dolgans dwelling around the
Khatanga Rivei, and at present wholly undei the influence of
the Yakut language and culture, appear also to have been
originally Tungus

The primal y cause of the present widely scatteied state of
the Altaic race would seem to be found in their restless, migra-
tory mode of life, and then lust for wai Tribes belonging to
this race first appeared in Europe with the gieat migiation of
the Huns, whose barbaric advance-guards aie described al-
ready by Ptolemaios in the second centuiy When these le-
turned to Asia after their martial exploits, certain Tuikish
tribes remained behind, the remains of which aie the Bolgais,
or, to call them by their present name, the Chuvashes by the
Volga. Early in history, Tuikish peoples m Asia have built
up powerful empires, attaining a certain, though shoit-lived,
prosperity Their chiefs have ruled eveiy where in Asia
An important centre of development seems to have existed


INTRODUCTION


301

at some penod south of Lake Baikal on the Selenga River and
Its ti ibutary, the Orkhon, where a number of ancient Turkish
inscriptions on the gravestones of departed chiefs have been
discoveied These inscriptions, translated in 1893 ^ J’rof
Vilhelm Thomsen, originate from the Turk dynasty (Chinese,
Tu-kiu, 680-745 AD) and the subsequent period of pros-
peiity among the Uigurs (745-840) The Uigurs came at
that time into contact with missionaries from Syria, who
preached the Nestorian and Mamchean doctrines, and also
with Buddhist missionaries from China When, later, a part
of the Uigurs moved to the districts around the Tientshan,
where they took up agriculture and commerce, an important
centre of cultuie aiose in East Turkestan (900-1200 ad )
Through the Uigurs other Mongolian tribes came into con-
tact with the Chiistian Faith The influence of Syrian culture
18 evident in the Syiian characters of Uigurean literature, re-
mains of which were dug up in excai^tions commenced in 1905
at the town of Tuifan in East Tuikestan During the period
of Manicheanism, and probably dm mg a still earlier period,
ancient Persian culture affected the religious views of the Mon-
golians and the Turco-Tatars dwelling at Sajan and the Altai,
as will be seen from certain mythological names (1 e , Mon-
golian Hormusda, Kalmuck Hormustan — Persian Ahura-
Mazda, Buriat Anma = Pei8ian Ahnman, Altai-Tatar and
Kirghis Kudai ("God”) = Persian Hudai, Altai-Tatar Aina
("an evil spirit dwelling under the earth ”)= Pei sian
A8nanh)

Gieat upheavals and new groupings of tribes took place
when the great Mongolian ruler Temudjin, or as he is more
often called, Jenghiz Khan or Chingiskan (1162-1227), ac-
complished his ambitious schemes of conquest These migra-
tions of tribes pressed also the Turks farther west, gradually
even to Em ope. After the Mongolian conquest, different
Tatar tribes remained behind m Russia, represented by the
Tatars at present dwelling there Jenghiz Khan himself was


INTRODUCTION


302

extremely liberal 111 leligious matters, tolerating all the dif-
feient religious sects His successors, notably Kubilai (1260-
1294), whose capital became Pekm, weie, howevei, more in-
clined towaids Buddhism, which seems also to have exercised
a great influence over the Mongolians But with the fall of
the Mongol dynasty in China in 1368, Buddhism appeals to
have gone out of fashion, and paganism blossomed anew, until
Buddhism again, in the shape of Lamaism, won over in the
seventeenth century feivent disaples among both Mongolians
and Kalmucks, the last-named setting up dm mg their war in
Thibet the Dalai Lama as their spiritual leadei Eagci mis-
sionaries arose also in the ranks of the people, and giadually,
by flnes and other punishments, the pagan sacrifices were over-
come Foi political reasons, howevei, many old folk-customs
wei e toleiated by giving them a new meaning At the present
day, the orthodox people abhor then old shamanistic religion,
the Black Religion,” which has almost entnely been sup-
planted by Lamaism, the “ Yellow Religion,” with Thibetan
books of devotion Since the beginning of the nineteenth
centuiy, the Buiiats south and east of the Baikal, and a part of
the Tungus dwelling there, have also been led to accept the
"Yellow Religion” The older Buddhistic cultme, which
penetrated from China, has left among the Central Asian
tribes a number of myths, m which the Buddhist names of the
gods appear boi lowed fiom the Sansci it and not fiom the
Thibetan

Of the tubes belonging to the Tui co-Tatar gioup, the ma-
joiity. have giadually declaied for Islam, which had alieady
in the eighth centuiy penetrated to a Turbsh tribe, forcing its
way vta Tuian into the Near East Only the Soyotes in Mon-
golia and the Uigurs, the lattei lapsing little by little into
Chinamen, are Buddhists, the Yakuts, part of the Tungus in
Tians-Baikal and the Chuvashes, being, like many of the
Tatois m the Minusinsk Distiict and on the Volga, members of
the Russian Orthodox Church


PLATE XL


An Old Turkish Imagd and Memorial
S roNE WITH Inscription in North
Mongolia

(Sec page 301 )

After photograph by S Pfilsi


INTRODUCTION 303

Traces of the religion conformed to at one time by the whole
of the Altaic race, shamanism, have adhered to many of the
converted tribes, such as the Yakuts, Buriats, part of the
ICirghis, etc In its primitive state, this religion still flourishes
among the Tungus and the tubes related to them among the
moie Noithein Yakuts, among the Buiiats west of the Baikal,
and among a few small Tatar tribes at the Altai

An important field of investigation is moreovei found
among all the peoples who, in different ways, have been in close
contact with the Altaic race The peoples, related to the Finns,
on the River Ob, the Osbaks and Voguls, have been at least
in their southern districts influenced by the Tatars. The
Tungus, again, have transmitted many of their beliefs and
customs to the eastern Samoyeds and to some Old Asian tnbes,
such as, foi example, the neatly extinct Yenisei Ostiaks and
the Yukagiies Asiatic shamanism exists still among the
Chukchee, Koiiaks and the Kamchadales The Kamchadales
have, however, to a great part become Russiamsed m recent
times Among the Tungus tubes by the Amur River, and
equally among the East Mongolians, Chinese cultme also has
m some degiee left traces

Concerning the means of existence of the Altaic races, with
which the religious beliefs stand m connection, the tribe most
completely adheiuig to its primitive mode of life is the Tungus
They exist in the great pnmeval forests by hunting, or wander
about with reindeei, riding on the backs of these, on the banks
of rivers and on the sea-coasts, fishing is also an important
means of existence On the same plane of civilization are also
the other North Siberian peoples. The tnbes dwelling on the
gieat steppes of Central Asia have from prehistoric tunes been
nomads, part of the Soyots near the Altai are leindeer-nomads
For the majority the horse and the sheep are the domestic
animals of most importonce In some distiicts, chiefly in the
south, agriculture has recently been taken up

The oldest information conceinmg the Mongolian and


INTRODUCTION


104.

Tatai leligions, is found in accounts of tiavels by certain Euio-
peans, sent out in the thirteenth century to Central Asia One
of these was the Franciscan monk, Johannes de Plano Caipini,
sent by Pope Innocent IV to the land of the Mongolians He
journeyed ovei the Volga as fat as to Karakoium on the
Orkhon, the capital founded by Ogcdei, the son of Jenghiz
Khan, in which town he remained over one winter His
experiences he desaibes m his Htstorta Mongolorum An-
other impoitant book of tiavel of the same period was written
by the Fianciscan Vilhelm Rubruquis (Ruysbroetk), who
travelled in 1253-1255 as the ambassadoi of the French King,
Louis IX, in nearly, the same districts as did Carpini Of
the accounts mentioned above, a critical edition appeared in
Recue$l de voyages et de memon'es pihltS far la soetetS de
Geografhte^ tome IV, Palis, 1839 The well-known tiavel-
ler, Mai CO Polo, sojourned also for a longei period among
the Mongolians, going out m 1271 as the Pope’s ambassador to
visit Kubilai-Khan, set vmg the latter at one time in the capacity
of go vernoi, until m 1292 he was accorded permission to return
to his native country His De regiombas otientahhuSi touch-
ing in some degree also on the religion of the Mongolians,
has been translated into many languages A few older frag-
ments of knowledge conceining Mongolian religious beliefs are
to be found in certain Chinese, Mohammedan, and Mongolian
sources, amongst others, in the Mongolian Chronicle of
Ssanang Ssetsen, tianslated into Gu'man by the Academician
I J, Schmidt {Geschscfue der Ost^Mongolen imd ifites Fwr-
stenhauses, 1829).

The oldest repoits are, however, so few and insignificant,
that It IS not possible to build up any clear representation of the
anaent religion of the Altaic race by then aid alone But as
the majority of the scatteied peoples have retained the old
traditions handed down by their ancestors neaily to the piesent
day, even m many cases right on to oui time, it has still been
possible to gather together an imposing mass of mateiial for


INTRODUCTION


305


investigation The foundation of these, at present compara'
tively large, collections, was already laid in the seventeenth
century, and later, after the Russian migration to Siberia
Among some of the tribes, notably the Buriats and Yakuts,
native investigators have played an impoitant pait in this work
Some of the northern tribes, in particular the Tungus living in
their inaccessible primeval forests, are, howevei, up to the
piesent day, still very little known


l


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


CHAPTER I

WORLD PICTURES

T he various streams of civilization, coming at dif-
ferent times and from different sources, which have
ciossed and lecrossed Central Asia, have brought with them
differing conceptions of the world we live in and the universe
The newest arrivals, usurping as they do the supreme authority,
have eithei altogether brushed aside the old beliefs, or, finding
in them some point of contact, have assimilated them Matters
being thus, it is often extremely difficult to decide which fea-
tuies lepresent older views, and what the original world pic-
ture of the Altaic race was like
To obtain some idea of how piimitive peoples form their
idea of the world, we will examine the strange, but to them
quite natural, conception of the world of the Yenisei Ostiaks
According to then ideas, the woild is divided into three parts
Above, the sky, in the middle, the eaith peopled by men,
below, the kingdom of the dead, but all these paits are united
by the “Holy Water,” which, beginmng in Heaven, flows
across the eiwth to Hades This water is the great Yenisei
Rivei ^ The Samoyeds also, who have learned to speak of
diffeient storeys in the sky, declare the Yenisei River to flow
fiom the lake m the sixth stoiev of Heaven In their tales,
the Yenisei Ostiaks describe how the shaman lows his boat m
Heaven and how he leturns along the river at such terrific
speed that the wind whistles through him ’ It may. be diffi-
cult for us to understand these pictures, but to the Yenisei


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


308

Ostiak nothing cun be moie natuial Do they not know from
eYpeiience that the eaith is Ranting, that the rushing river
which IS the dwelling-place of this fisher tube comes from
“ above ” and flows “ down ” into the depths of Hades ^ The
south, like many othei North Sibeiian peoples, they call “ that
above,” the noith “that below” The Yenisei is to them
the centie of the woild, as on its banks 01 tiibutaries they place
all the peoples known to them, and thus would they draw a
map of the woild, had they a Ptolemy, amongst them

The peoples living in Central Asia imagine the woild some-
times as a circular disc, sometimes as a square In an Altaic
tale in which a Lama creates the eaith with his staff, the world
is said to have been originally circular but latei to have altered,
so that It IS now square * Thus do the Yakuts also imagine
the woild In their folk-poetiy the four coiners of both
Heaven and Earth aie often mentioned The winds, for ex-
ample, aie said to aiise in the four coineis of the sky * Georgi
1 elates how the Tungus made a picture of the eaith which
vms in the foim of a little squat e of iron plate ” This idea,
common to many peoples, is closely connected with the four
cardinal points Even m the world pictuies of the civilized
peoples of Southei n Asia it is quite general In a certain Yakut
tale, which speaks of the octagonal eaith, the points of the
compass have been doubled *

Side by side with this idea of a square world, the idea
of a ciicular one is equally, common It is often pictured
as round, and as such it appears also to the eye Similarly
shaped is the sky stietchmg over the earth. In the hero
tales of the Yakuts the outei edge of the earth is said to
touch the 11m of a hemispherical sky A ceitain hero rode
out once to the place where eaith and sky touched Simi-
larly, in some districts, the Buriats conceive the sky to be
shaped like a gieat ovei turned cauldton, rising and falling m
constant motion In rising, an opening foims between the
sky and the edge of the earth, A heio, who happened at such


PLATE XLI

Boat-Gods and Boats or the Yenisei

OSTIAKS
(See page 308 )

After photograph by U Holmberg


WORLD PICTURES 309

a time to place his airow between the edge of the earth and
the nm of the sky was enabled thus to penetiate outside the
world ’

Between Heaven and Hades, the earth peopled by men
foims the centre of the univeise Often the earth is called
“ The Middle Place ** Sometimes this “ Middle Place ” is,
in a more confined sense, the country of the people using the
teim Mongolia, among other regions, is a woi Id-centre of
this description The Chinese also call their countiy “the
Central Empire ” Examples of this belief, born in the begin-
ning from the anthropocentric view of the world peculiar to
man, are to be found also among the ancient avilized peoples

Fiom the fact that Mongolia is a plateau in which number-
less rivers flowing in difleient duections have their souices,
the Mongols derive their belief that they live on the peak of a
world, imagined to be like a great mound, othei peoples liv-
ing on Its sides below them

In addition to the simplified idea that the world is three-
storeyed Heaven, Eaith and Hades, Altaic folk-poetry
speaks often of a many-storeyed world Especially is the
sky believed to contain hemispheres, one higher than another,
generally three, seven, or nine are spoken of, but sometimes
even more Most common is the conception of a seven-
storeyed Heaven, obviously derived from the Babylonian pic-
ture of Heaven, in which the sun and the moon and five planets
are situated in hemispheres placed one over the other As
the complement to these seven heavens, an equal number of
stoieys are pictured down below Wheie the sky is regarded
as nine-storeyed, Hades is also divided into nine gradually de-
scending parts That a belief of this description has actually
sprung from a belief in layers of stais, appears from an Altai
Tatar tale, in which the sun and moon are placed in different
storeys of the sky The Moon old man lives in the sixth and
the Sun mother m the seventh Heaven* The primitive
peoples of Siberia do not, howevei, know the reasons for this


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


310

division, neither can they explain the significance of any
Heaven The most not them peoples place in the diifeient
stoieys of Heaven, landscapes fiom the earth — mountains,
lakes, tundias, snowfields, etc The Samoyeds 1 elate in then
shaman tales that theie is a lake in the first storey of Heaven,
a fiat plain in the second, the thud is coveted with numeiouii
heights like little volcanoes, the fouith is formed like a loof
of little icicles, the sixth contains a gieat lake, fiom which
spiings the Yenisei Of the remaining stoieys, of which theie
aie 111 some districts altogethei nine, they have very little
knowledge " The Yakuts believe that m the lower regions of
the sky theie are also animals, kept by the inhabitant spirits
as food

Although the conception of fixed stoieys in the sky, among
the piimitive peoples of Sibein, beais without doubt the im-
piess of foicign infiuence, we cannot with any ceitainty declare
that the conception of highei and lowei stoieys in the sky
might not also originate amongst a people living in a state
of natuie The Chukchee speak of seveial Heavens, placed
one above the othei, so that the flooi of the highest is the
1 oof of the next All these woi Ids aie joined by holes situated
under the Polai Stai

Whatever the oiiginal idea of the edge of the eailh may
have been, latei the idea became geneial that the eaith is sui-
rounded on all sides by an ocean This is an essential featuie
m all the world pictures of the Asiatic peoples The Gieek
Oceanos coi responds to it, and in Snorri’s Edda we 1 ead “ The
earth is circulai in shape and outside it is the deep sea ”

But if the fiat earth has atound and under it the deep,
mysterious, piimoidial ocean, what is it that pi events the eaith
from sinking into the depths^ To this question also, the folk-
tales attempt to give an answer

When the mighty Olgen, so say the Altaic peoples, cieated
the earth on the waters, he placed undti the disc of the eaith,
in ordei to support it, three great fish, one in the centie and


WORLD PICTURES 31 1

one at each side The head of the middle fish is directed
towards the north and thus, when it presses its head down,
fioods occui in the north Should the fish sink too low, the
whole eaith will be inundated A lope is attached to the gills
of the fish, the end reaching to Heaven, wheie it is attached
to three posts In this way, whenevei desiied, the head of the
fish can be loweied or raised This is the special duty of
the Bodhisattva Mandishire When he takes the 1 ope f i om the
fiist post, the eaith slants towards the north, causing fioods
there, but were he to slip the lope ftom the third post, the
flood would leach over all the earth “

In certain Buiiat districts, one large fish only is mentioned
as the suppoi ter of the earth 'When foi any reason it changes
Its position, eaithquakes occur

The idea of one or more giant fish as supporters of the
eaith IS general also in East European legends,” while in
Jewish myths the fish-shaped Leviathan bears the foundations
of the earth This belief, as the name Mandishire ( = Man-
jucri) hints at, has come to Central Asia fiom India, where a
similar belief has prevailed for ages

Piobably with a curient of avilization from India through
China, tales have leached Cential Asia of a world-supporting
flog, which animal here takes the place of the unknown turtle
If Its " fingei ” even moves the eaith quakes This belief has
spiead even to the Tungus beyond the Baikal ”

In the tales of the Kirghis, and among the West Siberian,
Volga, and Caucasian Tatars, it is related that the woi Id is sup-
ported by a gieat bull This idea has spread even among the
Finnish tribes along the Volga Under this bull there is often
a suppoi t on which the bull stands The Crimean Tatais say
that in the world-ocean theie is a gieat fish, and on the fish
a bull which carries the earth on its horns ” A similai behef
IS found among the Votiaks of the Jelabuga Distiict^* The
world-bull IS known also to the Votiaks of the Sarapul Dis-
tiict, who believe that earthquakes aie caused by the bull some-


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


31a

times starting to move It is said to be aft aid of sunlight, as
the light lays kill it ” The Kirghis relate that the woi Id-bull
stands on a stone aiistng out of the dense fog on the cosmic
ocean ” According to the Cheremiss at Ufa, thei e is a giant
crab m the ocean on which stands the bull, supporting the earth
on Its horns Eaithquakes aie believed to occur when the bull
shakes its head The Cheiemiss say that on account of the
weight of the wot Id, one of the bulPs hoi ns is bioken and that
when the other breaks, the end of the world will come

It IS extremely probable that the idea of this world-support-
ing bull has reached the Tatais with Islam In the tales of
the Jews a bull-shaped Prince of the Depths is also spoken of

The primitive peoples of Noith-East Siberia believe the
undergiound mammoth to cause eaithquakes and landslides
In the wintei it is even supposed to break the ice of the riveis *®
The local Tatais say that as the earth was not strong enough
to bear the mammoth, God ordered this animal to bear the
earth** Possibly the *^bull*’ has heie changed into the
“ horned ” mammoth

For the sake of comparison it may be mentioned how the
inhabitants of North-East Siberia, where earthquakes are com-
mon, explain these phenonema The Kamchadales say that
the dog of Tuila, on which this spirit rides under the ground,
makes the earth tiemble when it shakes the snow off its back **
According to this view, theiefore, the actual supporter of the
eartli is not the causer of earthquakes

In Central Asia the idea of a world-supporting being is gen-
erally connected with the belief in a cosmic ocean Those tales,
which seek to explain in a popular manner the oiigin of the
earth, seem also to have been formed out of a similar world
picture.


CHAPTER II

THE ORIGIN OF THE EARTH

^ j '^OSCANSKIY says that, accoidmg to the original con-
X ception of the Yakuts, the earth has always existed, and
that the question of its creation does not interest them ’’ Stories
have, however, been gathered among all the Altaic peoples,
the Yakuts also included, which tell that m the beginning
there was no earth, only a deep and shoreless primoidial ocean
This idea of a primordial ocean is common to most Asiatic
creation myths, although the forming of a flat earth on the
suiface of the great water is described m different ways
The most prolific cycle, possessing many variants, is that
of the tales which relate how some being, diving into the
water, brings up earth-matter from the depths of the ocean
When the great Yryn-Ajy-Tojon (“ White Creator
Lord ” ), so runs a Yakut tale, moved in the beginning above
the boundless ocean, he saw a bladder floatmg on the waters
and inquiied “Who and whence^” The bladder replied
that it was Satan and lived on the earth hidden under the
water God said “ If there really is earth under the water,
then bring me a piece of it ” Satan dived undei the water
and returned after a while with a morsel of earth Having
leceived it, God blessed it, placed it on the surface of the
water and seated himself on it Then Satan resolved to drown
God by stretching out the land, but the more he stretched,
the stronger it grew, covering soon a great part of the ocean’s
surface *

The sharp dualism appearing in this tale, God and Satan
as opposites, cannot represent the oiigmal behefs of a primitive
people Clues showing which way to turn in traang the on-


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


314-

gin of this myth aie found m the name “ Satan ” and in the
following valiant noted down among this people Satan
was the elder bi other of Christ, but the formei was wicked, the
latter good When God wished to cieate the eaith he said to
Satan ‘ Thou boastest of being able to do eveiythmg and sayest
thou art mightiei than I Good, bung me sand fiom the
bottom of the ocean * Satan dived immediately to the bottom
of the ocean, but when he arrived again at the surface he saw
that the watei washed the sand out of his hand Twice the
devil dived without succeeding, but the thud time he changed
himself into a swallow and managed to bung up a little mud
in his beak Christ blessed the moisel of mud, which then
became the earth, at first flat and smooth as a plate Intend-
ing to aeate for himself a world of his own, Satan deceitfully
hid a pai t of the mud in his throat But Chi 1st undei stood the
wile of the devil and struck him on the back of the neck so that
the mud squiited out of his mouth and foimed the mountains
on the oiiginally smooth surface of the eai th ” *

When compaimg these Yakut tales, in which the names
“ Christ ” and “ Satan ” especially attract attention, with the
apocryphal creation tales of Eastern Europe we see that they
comade in eveiy detail Knowing, besides, that exactly the
same tales aie to be found among the Russians who have
migrated to Sibeiia, it seems piobable that the Yakuts, who
accoiding to statistics are Christians, have learned at least the
above mentioned tales diiect from the Russians Befoie be-
ginning to prove the fact in detail, we will examine a few
more Cential Asian tales belonging to the same cycle, which
contain interesting additions

When theie was no earth and no Heaven, but only water,
Ulgen (" the Great ”)» accoiding to an Altai Tatar tale, de-
scended upon the watei to aeate the earth, He thought and
thought but could not conceive how to begin Then “ Man ”
came to him Olgen asked “Who ait thou^ ” “I also
came to aeate land,” answered Man. God became angry and


THE ORIGIN OF THE EARTH 315

said ** Even I cannot create, how couldst then thou? ” Man
remarked “ But I know where to get earth-matter from ”
God urged him to get some, whereupon Man dived imme-
diately into the water, finding at the bottom of the ocean a
mountain, from which he wrenched a piece and put it in his
mouth Aniving again on the suiface Man gave God a part
of It The other part remained in his mouth between his
teeth When at last he spat it out, the swamps and bogs ap-
peared on the face of the earth *

A aeation tale in which God and the devil work together is
met with among the Alarsk Buriats When Bui khan
(= Buddha) came down from Heaven to create the eaith,
the devil (Sholmo) appeared beside him to give advice how
the earth was to be made from the earth-matter and stones
under the water, offering at the same time to fetch the earth-
matter God scattered the eaith-matter, which the devil had
bought him, on the surface of the ocean and said ^‘Let the
woild be born' ” As a reward for his trouble the devil begged
for a part of the land, receiving enough to plant his staff on
The devil at once pushed his staff mto this, and from the hole
there crept forth all manner of leptiles, snakes, etc Thus
he created the harmful aeatures of the world “

In all the above tales, even before the aeation of the world,
we meet with two beings of whom one was good, the other
wicked This dualistic conception reaches its height in the
teachings of the Feisian Zarathustra, in which Ahuia Mazda,
the god of light and truth, is the promoter of all good and
happiness, and the devil, Angra Mainyu, of the evil and misery
which mar the good earth aeated by Ahuia Thus fai back
must we trace the dualistic features of our tales But foi com-
plete coinadence with these we search the sacred books of the
Mazda religion in vain

Later, we meet with the same antagonistic oiiginal beings in
the teachings of the Persian Mam and in the legends of other
semi-Chnstian sects which have made their influence felt in


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


316

Not them Syiia, Palestine and Caucasia, and m which, besides
Iranian, old Babylonian fancies and beliefs aie also mingled

In a Yakut tale, Satan, appealing before God, declares that
he lives under the water This idea also seems to be of gieat
age among the people of Caucasia and Asia Minor With
Zarathustra also the Evil One ** aiose fiom the depths ”

According to the aeation tales of a later period, in which the
conception of a primoidial ocean has become fixed, the devil
appears on the surface of the water, sometimes m thick foam,
as in a Galiaan tale, sometimes in a floating bubble, as in the
Yakut. The Voguls explain that this bubble was formed by
God spitting into the water while coughing The bubble grew
and grew until God heard the voice of Satanael inside it The
same story is told of the devil m a White Russian creation
tale,*

An Altaic story relates in addition how Glgen saw some mud
with human featuies floating on the ocean God gave a spirit
to it, and to the being thus born he gave the name Erlik In
the beginning, Erlik was God’s friend and brother, but be-
came later his enemy Mostly, the Altai Tatais call the being
who helps God m creating the world “Man” or "Fust
Man,” but always, this Man develops into the devil, Erlik *
The reasons for his fall are his most obvious qualities, pride
and boastfulness On account of these God drives him down
into the depths, where he now lives as the luler of the spirits
in the kingdom of death This reflects the old Iranian con-
ception of the fiist man, who, by falling into sin, was the first
to die, and thus became leader of the spiiits of the dead
In Caucasian tales also, the devil chooses the dead for his
property, and in a Bulgarian creation story he says to God
“The living be thy property, the dead mine ” *

In the legends of the Bogomil sect, formed in Bulgaria
about the year 1000, God is said to have had two sons, of
whom the elder was Satanael, the younger Christ It is owing
to this conception, which is met with already among earlier


THE ORIGIN OF IHE EARTH 317

sects, that m Yakut tales Satan is called the elder brother of
Christ In the corresponding Votiak, as also m many Russian
tales, God and the devil, Keremet, are brothers A sect of the
Iranians, the Zervanists, believed that Ormard and Ahriman
were boin of the same mother, m whose womb they took shape
at the same time, but that the latter was bought forth first *

In all the above creation tales the devil appears m human
shape, only in the Yakut variant he takes on the shape of a
swallow in order to be able to hold mud in his mouth In an
Altaic tale the swallow is also the carth-biinger Mostly,
however, the devil, m changing his shape, takes on the form
of a water-fowl A water-fowl is actually better adapted both
for diving and for seeking earth on the bottom of the deep
ocean Again, in Eastern Europe the devil helps God both in
hiunan shape and as a divei-bird, loon, goose, or some other
water-fowl He appears m the form of a goose, as does God
himself, in the following Altaic tale

In the beginning when theie was nothing but water, God
and the “ First Man ” moved about m the shape of two black
geese over the wateis of the primordial ocean The devil,
however, could not hide his nature, but endeavoured ever to
rise higher, until he finally sank down into the depths Nearly
suffocating, he was forced to call to God for help, and God
raised him again into the air with the power of his word God
then spoke “ Let a stone rise from the bottom of the ocean > ”
When the stone appeared, “Man” seated himself upon it,
but God asked him to dive under the water and bring land.
Man brought earth in his hand and God scattered it on the
surface of the water saying “Let the world take shape* ”
Once more God asked Man to fetch earth But Man then
decided to take some for himself and brought a moisel m each
hand One handful he gave to God but the other he hid m
his mouth, intending to cieate a world of his own God threw
the earth which the devil had brought him beside the rest on
the water, and the world at once began to expand and grow


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


318

haidei, but with the gi owing of the world the piece of earth
in Man’s mouth also swelled until he was about to suffocate so
that he was again compelled to seek God’s help God inquii ed
“What was thy intention^ Didst thou think thou couldst
hide earth from me m thy mouth? ” Man now told his seciet
intentions and at God’s lequest spat the eaith out of his
mouth Thus weie foimed the boggy places upon the earth

This story, in which God and the devil appeal as buds, may
be compaied with a North Russian creation tale, in which God
and the devil are in co-opeiation, the foimei as a white, the
later as a black pochaid ”

Even when appearing in the shape of a water-fowl, the
devil does not quite lose his human features Thus, among
other things, his hands aie spoken of In the aeation tales
of the Voguls also it is often mentioned that the fetcher of
earth, sometimes the devil, sometimes the son of the hist
people, dresses himself for the occasion in water-fowl’s gaib
When in one tale the devil makes thiee unsuccessful attempts
to reach the bottom of the sea in a duck’s skm, he winds a
goose’s skin about him and at last succeeds in bunging earth ”
The Voguls, like the East Europeans, often imagine the earth-
f etchei to be a real water-fowl, for which the bnnging of earth
in Its mouth is much more natuial than for a human-like being
But mostly, this bud is the antagonist of God, Satanael, who
endeavoms to deceive God by hidmg a pait of the eaith in
his mouth, wheie, like the earth of God’s aeation, it swells
so terubly that the devil is forced to spit it out, thus foiming
sometimes mountains and hills, sometimes swamps and bogs
on the smooth suiface of the eaith

When the devil acts altogethei in a human-like mannei,
the tales sometimes describe the hiding of the earth in a way
more suited to men Thus m a Buriat stoiy. the devil hides it
under his heel and thence scatters it as mountains on the smooth
earth cieated by Burkhan To God’s question, why the devil
wished to spoil his eaith, the latter leplies' “When man de-


THE ORIGIN OF THE EARTH 319

scends a mountain he is afraid and calls upon Thy name, but
when he ascends he swears in my name Thus he is ever
mindful of us both ” “ Similar words are uttered by the
devil in both a Mordvin and a Russian creation tale
The devil mars the eaith m a human-like manner in the
following Yakut tale In the beginning, God cieated a small,
smooth and even earth, but the devil injured it sadly by kicking
It With his feet and tearing it God urged the earth to grow in
spite of this and so the unevennesses caused by the devil be-
came great mountains, valleys and lakes ”

In the £rst of the aeation tales given, it is said that the
devil intended to drown God, who had seated himself on the
litde earth-disc just formed upon the suiface of the watei
In a coriesponding Bulgatian tale the devil has the same idea
He tries to coax God to lie down and sleep upon the earth-
disc in order to be able to push him into the sea, and to become
supieme in the woild Although God well knows the inten-
tions of his enemy, he lays himself down and pretends to sleep
The devil then seizes him and begins to carry him to the edge
of the earth in ordet to pitch him into the depths But
when he approaches the shore the earth begins to expand so
that he is unable to leach its edge He turns towards the other
side but even theie he can no longer see the ocean The third
and the fourth duection give the same result "

This same story, has been added to an entirely difFeient
aeation tale in Cential Asia Here the earth is also brought
from undei the water and placed on the surface of the ocean,
but the devil takes no pait m the creation The cieator is
Otshirvani (=the Buddhist Bodhisattva Vaiiapani) and his
assistant Chagan-Shufcuty When these mighty beings de-
scended fiom heaven they saw a frog (= turtle) diving in
the water Otshirvani’s companion raised it from the depths
and placed it on its back on the water ** 1 shall sit on the
stomach of the fiog,’* said Otshirvani, “dive thou to the
bottom and bring up what thy hand finife ” Chagan-Shukuty


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


3ao

dived twice, and the second time he succeeded in bringing up
some earth Then Otshirvani told him to spi inkle it on the
stomach of the fiog (turtle), on which they sat The frog
Itself sank out of sight and only, the earth lemained visible
above the surface of the watei Resting theie, the gods fell
asleep and while they were sleeping, Shulmus, the devil, st-
rived and saw the two fi tends lying on the earth which they
had just aeated and which was yet so small that there was
scarcely room foi a thud on it The devil deaded to make use
of his chance and drown these beings together with their eaith
But when he attempted to seize hold of the edge of the earth,
he no longer saw the ocean He took the sleeping friends undei
his arm and began to run towaids the shore with them But
while he ran the earth grew When he saw that his attempt
was vain he dropped his but den and baiely succeeded in escap-
ing when Otshirvani awoke The latter then explained to his
companion how the devil had meant to destroy them but how
the eaith had saved them

But although the devil did not succeed in destroying God,
he was able to mai the eaith, as we have seen, and, according
to the Buiiats, to create many useless and haimful animals on
It. This last tale has also been recorded in other parts of
Siberia, eg, among the Voguls Heie the devil makes a
hole in the earth with his staff, from which frogs, lizards,
woims, beetles, gnats, wasps, mice, etc, arise, until God closes
the hole with a fieiy stoppei The same desctiption is found
even in East European creation tales ^

There would thus seem to be no doubt that these Asiatic
stories of the origin of the earth, which coi respond in all their
details to the East European aeation tales, are closely con-
nected wnth a common cyde of tales, rich m variants. Outside
the boundaries of the formei Russian Empire, with the excep-
tion of certain Balkan States and the Gypsies who have been
influenced by the Slavs of Austria, we do not meet in the west
with this myth, which is unknown on Roman Catholic territory


THE ORIGIN OF THE EARTH


321

In the Greek Catholic Church, on the contrary, and especially
among certain sects, it has been greatly, favoured This fact
can also be proved, in Finland, which has been a meeting-
point for the currents of both Western and Eastern culture
Tales have been recorded only in Eastern Finland, in which
the devil, sometimes with the aid of a diver-bird, fetches earth
from the bottom of the sea, hides a part of it m his mouth,
and adds the stones, rocks and mountains to the surface of the
earth by being compelled to spit it out when it swells between
his jaws In one variant, wheie God sat in the beginning on
a golden pillar in the middle of the sea, the devil is said to
have appeared in the world when God told his reflection, which
he saw in the water, to arise Bulgarian legends also relate
that the devil was born of God’s shadow *’

Veselovskiy, who has made comparative researches on a large
scale into the legends of the last-named church, is of the
camion that this tale is a creation of the Bogomil sect in Bul-
garia We do not, however, meet with the story of the
fetching of the earth in either the Bogomil liteiature or in the
teachings of those Armenian Gnostics from whom the Bogomils
inherited their dualistic conception This tale of the ongm
of the earth appears first in a Russian manuscript of the
fifteenth century, but seems already at that time to have been
very widespread Schiefner, who is acquainted with the stories
of the Russian sectaries, assumes that our duabstic tale has
wandered into Northern and Central Asia with Russian fugi-
tives and settlers from Europe ” Sumcov doubts, however,
whether the Russian newcomers could have implanted their
tale so deeply into the beliefs of the Central Asian peoples in
such a comparatively short time He assumes, therefore,
Nestonan influence, this sect having won much territory in
Central Asia before Islam *’ To Persian influence points the
fact that God in one Altaic creation tale calls himself the
true Kurbystan ” (= Ahura Mazda) ” But m districts where
Buddhism is common, names derived from this religion, such


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


321

as Burkhan, etc, axe also met with, although the appeal ance
of the devil here hints at liaman influence Might it theiefoi e
be assumed, as Dahnhaidt also supposes, that the dualistic tale
of the biinging-up of earth has its oiigin somewhere in the
vicinity of the lianuns, e g , among the Syiian Gnostics, whence
It has wandered both to Russia and Bulgaria and thiough
Persia to Central Asia!* As no ptoof for this assumption can
be found in the liter aiy souices on the subject, we should have
to add a furthei supposition, i e , that in addition to the written
teachings, verbal stories corresponding with oui tale have also
been handed down Howevei this may be, it is at least cer-
tain, as we have shown, that many features in this tale have
then origin in the Neai E^t It is also probable that this
cycle of tales is no single aeation, but a collection of ideas
and stones of different content and gathered fiom various
places

Especially mteiesting is the bud which fetches the earth
from the bottom of the piimoidial ocean Whence has this
peculiar feature come into our tales and how shall we account
foi it?

In some Russian legends and also m North-West Sibenan
tales the fetching of the piece of eaith is spoken of in con-
nection with the stoiy of the flood The Samoyeds in the
District of Tuiukhan^ relate the following Seven people had
been saved in a boat and, when they saw that the water rose
and rose and that there was no help, they begged the diver-
bud to fly into the water and seek land there After seven
days the diver-bird returned bunging a giassy piece of turf
m Its beak, and of this they asked God to aeate foi them an
eaith ” Also in a Russian variant God sends the devil to bung
sand from the water when he wishes to make a new eai th after
the flood

In the flood story of the Samoyeds, the diver-biid reminds
one of the bird sent by Noah fiom his aik, which brought him
news of the appearance of land m its beak, but fiom this we


THE ORIGIN OF THE EARTH


343

cannot yet be certain that Noah’s bird has been the original
of the water-fowl appearing in our tales For quite simple
reasons, two myths, both treating of great floods and of a bird,
may have become confounded

In a Vogul creation tale, which mentions several bn ds, these
have woik of two kinds to perform The red- and the black-
throated diver fetch earth, but the raven is sent out to see how
large the earth has grown On the first day the bird is away
but a shoit time, on the second it returns toward midday, on
the third not until the evening Every day its journey takes a
longer time and from this it may be guessed how the earth
grows from day to day ” The raven in this tale has thus in
some degree the same duty as the dove in the flood story of
the Bible, but this featuie can hardly be traced back to the
Bible

It is to be noted, in addition, that stories of the creation and
of the flood are often met with separately among the same
people

Besides the preceding versions, in which God and the earth-
bringer are antagonists, a creation tale without this dualistic
idea is met with in Asia In this the Creator uses quite simply
an oidinaiy watei-fowl in ordei to bring up earth from the
wateis

The Yenisei Ostiaks related to me that in the beginning the
water flowed eveiywhere The Great Shaman Doh hovered
over the waters m the company of swans, looms, and other
water-fowl As he could nowhere find a resting-place he
asked the diver-bird to bung him a piece of earth fiom under
the sea The diver tried twice befoie it succeeded in bnng-
ing up some earth in its beak Of this Boh made an island
in the sea **

Accoiding to Buriat tales, at the bottom of the shoreless
primordial ocean, there wete black earth and led clay When
Burkhan deaded to dreate an eaith he asked the white diver
to fetch him eat th-matter from under the water4 The diver


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


3H

brought both eaith and clay m his beak and spnnkled them on
the water Thus was created a world floating on the waves,
on which trees and grass soon began to glow ”

The Buiiats of the Distiict of Balagan have the same story
m the following form In the beginning when there was yet
no land, Sombol-Buikhan moved ovei the wateis, where he
saw a water-fowl swimming with its twelve young God then
said “Water-bud, dive down and bung me earth — black
soil in thy beak and on thy feet led day* ** Having thus ob-
tained earth-matter, God scattered the red clay on the water,
and upon it the black soil Thus was made the earth which
soon became coveied with beautiful vegetation Thankful,
God blessed the water-bud saying “Thou shall have many
young and shall ever swim and dive in the water ” That is
how this bud has such a wondeiful ability to dive deep and
temain long undei the watei

In these tales we And no being akin to the devil appearing as
God^s opponent We cannot, however, conclude fiom this,
as Dahnhardt, who knows only the (itst mentioned Buiiat tale,
does, that this form of creation tale is only a defoimed variant
of the dualistic stones Hardly, again, has the devil any part
in the following story, which was recoided among the North-
ern Yakuts, although the “ Mothei of God ” is mentioned in
It The Mother of God decided to aeate a woild, but having
no material she fiist created a diver-biid and a duck, both of
which she commanded to dive undei the ocean and fetch
earth The fiist to appear was the duck who brought some
mud in hei mouth Then the diver came up, but without
mud, explaining that it was impossible to find earth in the
watei The Mother of God became angiy and said “Thou
deceitful bud, have I not given thee moie stiength and a
longei beak than the duck^ But thou deceivest me and pitiest
the ocean For this thou shall never live on the sacred sur-
face of the earth, but shall evei dive ui the waters and seek
all manner of lefuse theie for thy nouiishment ” Then the


THE ORIGIN OF THE EARTH 325

Mother of God created the earth from the mud the diver had
brought, and placed it upon the surface of the ocean The
earth did not sink under the water, nor could the waves move
It or wash it asunder, but it remained fixed m a certain place
like a floating island and grew gradually into a gieat world

In the tales of the Voguls also, we sometimes find two
water-birds, the black- and the red-throated diver, acting as
earth-fetchers

A Buriat variant tells in addition how the water-fowl, which
Sombol-Buikhan sent to fetch earth, met the “crab” in the
depths The latter inquired of the bird where it was going
The bird answered that it was diving for earth from the bot-
tom of the sea Then the “crab” became angry and re-
marked “ 1 am always in the water and have never yet seen
Its bottom, turn back quickly 01 I shall cut thee in two with my
sassorsi ” The bird was forced to return to the surface See-
ing It, Sombol-Burkhan inquired why the bud had not brought
him earth On hearing how the crab had threatened it, he
gave the bud magic words, by the help of which it at last
succeeded in reaching the bottom **

This interlude in the diving is mentioned also in the tales
of the Votiaks of the District of Sarapul God’s assistant
meets a crab in the water, who inquires where he is going and
tells him that he, the crab, though a sea-dweller for one
hundred and twenty years, has never yet met with land in
the ocean The stoiy continues with the fetching of earth, and
how an evil being hides sand in its mouth and then creates the
mountains ”

Comparing these latter tales, we can scarcely remain in
doubt as to which of them represents a more original stage
The crab as fnghtener in the dualistic story of the Votiaks is
as unnatural and unnecessary as it is natural in the Burnt tale
This additional feature, which to the author’s knowledge has
not been met with further west, may have been added later
to the dualistic creation story from a simpler and more primi-


346 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY

tive aeation tale, which has perhaps been known also among
the Votiaks

If we assume, therefore, that the tales in which a natural
watei 'fowl and not the Satanael of the Bogomils acts as earth'
f etcher, aie more piimitive, we can easily, explain the bird-like
features of the devil, often appealing even m stones where
the devil dives into the water ui human shape In this way, the
pioblem of the fetching of earth, which can be explained in
no other way, would be solved an old pi imitive tale has later
become embellished with the dualistic ideas of the sectarians
of the Eastein Chuich

All depends thus on whether we can take for gi anted that
those Asiatic tales in which the devil is unknown, repiesent
an eailier stage

A proof of the fact, that the creation tales in this simpler
form are both popular and original, is given by the innumera-
ble stones of similai content gatheied among the Indian tubes
of North Ameiica In these it is sometimes a watei-fowl,
sometimes a fish oi some amphibian that brings up mud f i om
the bottom of the pnmordial ocean, which mud is then placed
on the sui face of the water and soon gro\ra mto a big woild for
people to live in “

Sometimes this eaith-f etching tale is intertwined with the
flood story even in America, where it is usually a mu^-rat
that saves the people floating on the ocean in a boat, on a raft,
or on a tree-tiunk, by bringing them mud fiom the bottom of
the sea, fiom which mud a new earth then glows Like the
raven in the Vogul tale given eailier, so in the similar North
American stones some animal, a fox or a wolf, is used for the
purpose of reporting on the growth of the eaith When
Nanabozhu, according to the Winnebago Indians, could no
longei follow the growth of the land with his eyes, he sent a
wolf to lull round the eaith in older to know its size The
first time the wolf soon returned, the second journey, took him
two years, the thud time he returned no more "


THE ORIGIN OF THE EARTH 327

Noticeable, further, is the part played by the turtle in the
tales of the Noith American Indians There is a story among
the Sioux Indians of how the turtle and some water-bird swam
about in the pnmordial ocean with earth-mattei m their
mouths, the one with mud, the other with grass The grassy
earth formed by these was placed on the back of the turtle
The Huions also say that m the beginning there was nothing
but water, until from the depths a turtle appealed and sent,
one after the other, the otter, the musk-iat, the diver, and
other water-dwellers to fetch eaith-matter But only in the
mouth of the fiog, the last to be sent, could the turtle find
mud This was then sprinkled round the edges of the turtle’s
shell, and before long formed the earth When the earth
grew, the turtle remained as its supporter, a duty it carries
out even today ”

The part of the turtle m creatmg the world is especially
interesting on account of the corresponding idea in the Central
Asian stones

In the beginning of time, so say the Buriats, there was noth-
mg but watei, and a great turtle who looked into the water
God turned this animal on its back and built the world on its
stomach In another connection we have already mentioned
how, according to an Altaic story, the heavenly Otshirvani and
Chagan-Shukuty notice a turtle divmg in the waters, and how
the latter dives down for earth while the former sits upon the
animal’s stomach, and how Otshirvani then sprinkled the earth
on the frog*’ In Central Asian tales we find in addition
Mandishire (—the Buddhist Bodhisattva Manjucri) as
creator of the earth, who changes himself into a large turtle
and supports the earth he has made on the surface of the
water"

In these Central Asian tales we find an ancient Indian story
in a form coloured by Buddhism. As is known, the Creator
appears already in the ancient Indian tales in the shape of a
turtle In this form he fetches mud from the bottom of the


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


328

primordial ocean and makes of it a rapidly expanding earth,
which he supports on the surface of the vast surrounding
ocean In latei Buddhist tales a Bodhisattva, mostly Manjucri,
takes the place of the old and more primitive deity

In Indian tales the earth-fetcher sometimes takes the shape
of some other animal As the supporter of the eaith, as we
have seen, a fish is also mentioned
Our comparative research has thus at last brought us to
India This is actually the only country in Asia where the
bringing of the earth from the bottom of the ocean is con-
nected already with the beliefs of an unknown, far-distant
past The literatuies of other ancient cultured Asiatic peoples
do not possess a similar tale It is also impossible to assume
that the idea of a primordial ocean could have been born
among the Central Asian praine-dwelleis Although it is
true that we can find among the infoimation relating to India,
no mention of a water-fowl as the biinger of eaith, we aie
forced in the end to believe that this feature of our tales has
Its roots also in that land of countless stories
Besides the above tales about the origin of the earth, m
which the fetching of earth-matter from under the water is a
common feature, stories have been recorded among the peoples
of the Altaic race, which explain the appearance of the earth
on the surface of the ocean m a different manner
The following Mongolian story is probably a product of
Lamaism In the beginning, when theie was yet no earth, but
water covered everything, a Lama came down from Heaven,
and began to stir the water with an iron rod. By the influence
of the wind and fire thus brought about, the water on the
surface in the middle of the ocean thickened and coagulated
into land “ Certain syncretiste of Nearer Asia also describe
how the earth was formed when God caused the cosmic foam
on the surface of the ocean to coagulate Closely coi respond-
mg to the Mongolian story is a Japanese tale In the beginning
one of the seven gods of Heaven stirred the chaotic waters


THE ORIGIN OF THE EARTH 329

with his staff When he raised his staff, muddy foam dripped
from It and, expanding and thickening, formed the islands of
Japan "

More than a hundred years ago a tale was written down
among the Tungus beyond the Baikal, describing how God
sent fire into the primordial ocean In the course of tune the
fire vanquished the power of the water and burnt up a part of
the ocean, so that it became quite hard Thus the present land
and sea were formed With this tale is connected a dualistic
conception of two antagonistic primitive beings When God
stepped down upon the earth he met the devil, Buninka, who
also desired to create a world Thus a dispute arose between
God and the devil The devil wished to destroy God^s earth
and broke the latter’s twelve-stringed musical instrument
Then God was angry and said If thou canst command a
pine-tree to glow out of the lake I will recognize thy power,
but if I can do It, thou must admit that I am omnipotent ”
The devil agreed to God’s proposal At once, when God com-
manded, a tree arose from the water and began to grow, but
the devil’s pine would not stand erect but tottered from one
side to the other Thus the devil saw that God was mightier
than he "

In this story, which concludes with the creation of man,
God and the devil as rivals, the stringed instrument, etc , are
features which can by no means be reconciled with the original
arcumstanoes and bebefs of the Timgus A feature corre-
sponding to the tree-growing competition may be found in the
Central Asian creation tale in which Otshirvani and his com-
panion, Chagan-Shufcuty, pour water into a vessel and wait
to see on whose side a plant shall appear Similarly in the
Buriat tale, three Burkhans try which of them is to piocure a
spirit foi the people whom they had created

The Tungus believe that fire played a great part in the
creation of the world This conception appears already among
the syncretistic Mandaean sect, the influence of which was felt


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


330

111 Mesopotamia in the fiist centunes of oui era Then tale
had possibly been accepted by the Manicheans It tells how
file 18 slung into the watet and how, with the ensuing steam,
dust uses into the an and in sinking again to the suiface of the
watei foims into solid land

The presence of oriental learning is to be discerned also
in a conception met with in Cential Asia of a piimi-
tive chaos consisting of fii^ watei and wind Burkhan-
bakshi (= Buddha-mastei , =s Mandshu fakshy

“ master,” Chinese fasht, “ teachei ”) separated them and
scatteied the dust thus formed on the suiface of the water,
wheie it gradually grew mto an earth coveted with glass and
trees “

In some Mongolian distiicts we meet also with an idea,
common in China and Japan, that heaven and eaith weie
joined togethei in the beginmng, but latei sepaialed At the
patting of earth and sky file appealed, or, according to some
i^iants, the constellations in the sky ” This belief evidently
oiiginates in the Indian tale, which has spiead espeaally to the
eastward of India, of a woi Id-egg, fiom whose halves earth
and heaven have been foimed

Some of the most 1101 them peoples of Sibeiia believe
further that the eaith came down ftom Heaven Stones re-
feiring to this have been recorded both in the west, in the
Vogul distncts, and in the fat east, among the Kamchadales
The Voguls tell that Numi-T 5 iem let down an earth-disc
from heaven as a dwelling-place for the people he had made **
The Kamchadales say that the god of Heaven, Kutku, bi ought
the eaith down from the sky and placed it on the suiface of the
ocean The latter also relate how the wife of the god of
Heaven bore a son whde moving on the ocean, and that Kutku
aeated an eaith out of his body

The idea that the earth has come down fiom Heaven is
closely connected with those tales m which sometimes fire,
sometimes some animal, object, etc , is dropped or let down


THE ORIGIN OF THE EARTH 331

from the upper spheres We may theiefore assume that the
letting down of the earth f 1 om Heaven is of the same origin
It IS, however, to be noted that these tales take for granted
the existence of a primordial ocean

Just as the idea of a vast ocean surrounding the earth is
natural to coast-^lweUers, and the conception of the gi owing
of the earth, 1 e , the shore, is founded on the actual experi-
ence of yeais, so these same ideas seem unnatural and unex-
pected in the central paits of a great continent How entirely
different the conceptions of the nomads of the Altaic race have
been, is to be seen from a story of the Kirghis, in which it is
declared that m the beginning there was no water at all Two
people tended a gieat ox, but having long been without drink
they were dying of thirst The ox then determined to get
them watei by digging into the earth with his great horns
Thus were foimed the lakes and the rivers on the surface of
the earth **

We cannot, then, consider any of the above mentioned crea-
tion tales to be the invention of the Altaic race Without
doubt the idea of the Yakuts “The world has always been,”
piobably represents the original belief of the whole Altaic
lace By this we do not mean to say that the peoples of this
lace have not also had their own local myths, which try to
explain the causes of certain changes on the surface of the
earth An example of this is the Kirghis tale already men-
tioned The most northern peoples of Siberia, such as the
Tungus, Samoyeds, Ostiaks, etc , who often find, in the neigh-
bourhood of then homes, bones and teeth of the mammoth
in the ground, say that this beast made the originally smooth
earth uneven with his horns The mountains and chasms at
least are said to have been thus formed The valleys and de-
pressions were caused by the quaking of the earth under the
weight of this former giant animal when it miked The
water, gathering into these depiessions, afteiwaids formed the
lakes and iivers God is said to have at last become angry


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


33 *

and to have drowned the mammoth in a lake where it still lives
under the ground **

Local also is another North-East Sibeiian tale of the origin
of mountains and valleys God lived in Heaven oiiginally,
but settled later upon tlie earth When he then travelled,
moving on skis, the thin eaith bent undei him like new, pliant
ice That is the reason why the suiface of the earth is
uneven ”


CHAPTER III

THE PILLAR OF THE WORLD

T he regular dmrnal movement of the stars round
an axis at the Notth Star, the reasons for which never--
ending rotation weie earlier unknown, gave birth to an idea
that this apparent centre of the universe was formed by some
object which could be represented m concrete form, and which
was, in addition, believed to support the roof of the sky This
belief we have seen to be held by the Lapps, etc , and relics of
a similai belief are to be found among most of the peoples of
the Northern Hemispheie

From this belief spring the curious names given by the Altaic
stodcs to the North Star The Mongols, Buriats, Kalmucks,
and the Altai Tatars and Uigurs call the stai in question " The
golden pillar ”, the Kirghis, Bashkirs and certain other Siberian
Tatar tribes call it **The iron pillar”, the Teleuts “The
lone post,” and the Tungus-Orotshons “ The golden post ”
From the similarity of the names given it by these widely
separated peoples we may conclude that the conception of a
sky-suppoiting pillar reaches back among the Altaic race to a
comparatively early period * In a tale of the Yakuts in which
the world is regarded as having gradually developed from a
small beginning, this “ iron tree ” boasts “ When the heavens
and the earth commenced to grow, I grew with them ” *
Although none of the available sources mention directly
that the peoples of the Altaic race made images of this great
WQrld-piUar, we can still be reasonably certain that they did
so from the fact that several of the more northern peoples
have kept up this custom even to our days These peoples
were under Tui co-Tatar influence, and even offered up blood-


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


334

saaifices to these pillars The Ostiaks call these wooden
images of the pillar, town-pillais ” or “ the stiong pillars of
the town’s centre” Those moie simple m constiuction aie
erected by being slightly sunk into the earth, and are hardly
ever obseived to be shaped at all in any way The pillai of
the village of Tsingala is about two fathoms m height, a
squared, slender log, not veiy old Nowadays these pillars,
as the objects of reveiential ceremonies, ate here met with
only m a few of the coast villages of Iitysh, those of the other
villages having been swept along with landslides into the river
The “town pillar” of the village of Tsingala, although it
stands among the buildings on a site incapable of awakening
lespect, IS worshipped with ofFeiings like a god Karjalainen
relates that “ the inhabitants of this and other villages of the
same distiict, gathered together foi the paying of taxes, buy
mutually a cow or a bull and sacrifice it at the foot of the
pillai in ordei to obtain piosperity in their woik and additions
to their families ” This pillai of Tsingala, which the Ostiaks
of that place regaid as a deity, is called by them “ The non


Pio 13 Dolgan Shauan nuAM WITH Ficvru 01 Birds


pillar man,” a similar name being given to the post of another
village of Irtysh, resembling gieatly the afoie-mentioned
“ Iron pillai ” of the Tatais It is theiefore obvious that


THE PILLAR OF THE WORLD


335

“ the strong pillar of the town’s centre” of the Ostiaks, which
a certain tale describes as “ the tree planted by God,” cannot
be, as Karjalainen assumes, intended merely for the tying of
saaihcial animals and the hangtng-up of offerings, but is a
lepresentation of the pillar supporting the sky * This appears
also from the prayers read at the post

Some peoples in North-West Siberia, who have a similar
custom, place on the world-pdlar a wooden figure of a bird,
which sometimes has two heads What this bird, which is
spoken of by the Dolgans as the ** lord of the birds,” and which
hangs on the breast of the Yenisei Ostiak shaman-dress, is


Fig 14 Two headed Birds or Iron which bang on the
Prcm and Drum of the Yeniiei-Ostiak Shaman


intended to represent, the people themselves do not know, but
it IS probable that this bird has flown here from the mythology
of the ancient peoples The pillars, on which these birds are
placed and which have sometimes cross-pieces like branches,
are, aarording to the Dolgans, a symbol of the “never falling
props” before the dwelling of the Supreme God On the
cross-pieces, so it is said, dwell the sons of God *

It would be mteiesting to know what the sky, which this
wonderful pillar was supposed to support, was originally be-
lieved to be We can haidly be mistaken if we suppose it to
have been pictured as some kmd of a roof, the purpose of


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


336

which was to piotect the eaith and life on the eatth. To this
points also the view still pievalent in some places, viz , that
the sky is a kind of gieat tent-roof sti etched over the earth.
The Yakuts say that the sky consists of seveial overlapping
tightly sti etched skins The Bui lats see m the Milky Way “ a
stitched seam,” and a certain being says with piide “Long,
long ago, when I was young, I sewed the sky together”*
Sometimes tlie gods open slightly the sky-c.ovei to see what is
happening on the eaith In this way the Chuvash, among
others, explain the flight of meteois Lucky the one who sees
this “aack in the sky,” as he obtains what he at that moment
wishes or begs of God * Similarly, the Ostiaks believe that
God grants everything desired of him while “the door of
Heaven ” is open ^ The same phenonemon is also meant by
the Buiiats when they speak of the “ dooi of Heaven,” which
the gods sometimes open foi an instant. When this “ door ”
IS open, which lasts only for <i second, “a wonderful light
shines from the sky, which makes the whole world glow m a
stiange fashion ” * This childish idea of the light-phenome-
non which follows the flight of a meteoi thiough the belt of
air, has eailier been veiy geneial both in Asia and Euiope
Quite as general has been the habit of expressing at such times
some wish, which it is believed will be fulfilled

The sky having thus been legarded as a kind of tent-roof,
which, sti etched fiom a great post 01 pillar, covered the earth,
It is comprehensible that the stais should then have been only
a kind of hole in this covei The worst hole was the Pleiades,
from which winds and cold weie believed to stream over the
earth*

This conception of the sky as a kind of roof, is, without
doubt, of extreme age and the pioduct of an extremely early
culture Obviously, the primitive dwelling-house of man him-
self gave direction to his imagination, when he attempted to
cieate foi himself a pictuie of the suiiounding woild. In
some of the descriptions in the Old Testament the sky appeals


THE PILLAR OF THE WORLD


337

tent 4 ike, e g , m the 40th chapter of Isaiah, in which God is
desciibed as “ He who stietclieth out the heavens as a curtain
and spreadeth them out as a tent to dwell m ”

Besides the above conception, in which the woild-pillar ap-
pears as the supporter of the sky, anothei is met with, accord-
ing to which It IS the tethering-post of the stars wandering in
the sky The fact that, seen from the earth, the stars seem
to be eternally revolving round the sky-post, awakened the
idea of bonds attaching these to one another As the peoples
related to the Turks sometimes imagined the stars to be a
great drove of horses, we can understand why, in the tales of
these people, the world-pillar is often called a mighty tether-
ing-post for horses As such the Yakuts call it the horse-
post ruler ” ** The Buriats have tales of the nine sons of a
spirit named Boshintoi, living in the sky, these sons, as sblful
blacksmiths, taught men to prepaie iron, and are theiefoie
worshipped and praised in the following woids “The nine
white smiths of Boshintoi made of the North Star a horse-
post and of the golden lake a race course In the same
way as the Nomads of Central Asia have a post foi the tethei-
ing of their steeds before their buildings, the gods ate said
to fasten theirs to the heaven-post Certain Siberian Tatar
tribes believe the gods to live m a tent m the sky, in front of
which is a “ golden horse-post ” As Karjalamen remarks,
the Ostiaks of Vasyugan, in their tales, have also adopted
from the Tatars “ the Iron post, the Stone post, on the side of
the sun, created by Torero (the god of Heaven), m which there
IS an iron ring laige enough to admit a sleeved arm,” and to
which the driving-reindeer is bound Similarly, the Voguls
speak of “ The holy iron pillar of God erected for the tether-
ing of the holy animal with manyrcoloured thighs,” erected
before the dwelling of the god of Heaven ”

In the folk-loie of the Ostiaks, as seen from the above,
a “ stone ” pillar is also mentioned A strange, rectangular,
transparent pillar of stone, three fathoms m height, appears


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


338

in the centre of an aita of non in the talcs of the Yakuts “
Piobably such 'woild-pillais die hidden also among
the stone pillais on the piaiiies of Cential Asia At any
late, traces have been found of high foui -sided monu-
ments which weie elected upon the back of the woild-beaiing
toitoise

But especially inteiesting is the fact that many of these holy
pillais of the Ugiians weie imagined to be seven-stoieyed
This was also tiue of the pillai at Tsu\gala, as although the
object Itself had no signs pointing to the fact, the woi ds in the
prayer, in which the god of Heaven is closely connected with
the pillar god, lun as follows ^ My seven-divided high man-
father thou ait, a six-divided high man thou ait My iron
pillai man-fathei, to the foot of the holy tiee, my metal
pillai man-father, to the foot of the holy tiee, to paitake of a
geneious dish of head-meat, to paitake of a geneious dish of
bi east-meat, we called thee” The woid “ six-divided ”
or “six-raaiked” is hcie only a poetic leiteintion Another
prayer noted down in which a Heaven god called SAnke is
addressed in addition to the post luns Seven-divisioned high
man, Sanke, my father, my in-three-diiections-watchmg man-
fathei, my in-thiee-diiections-piotecting man-fathei. To the
holy giound of my iron pdlar man-fathei, to the innocent
ground, at the foot of the holy tree erected by him, I stand my
blood-animal blood-saciifice ”

The significance of the numbei seven in the beliefs connected
with the pillai s of the Ugiians is especially appaient. The
Ostiak tales relate how a person setting out on a courtship has
to sacrifice at the foot of this “ God-faced holy tiee,” 01 “ to
hold up there the saciifice of seven leindeei -bulls tied to one
rope,” and to make “ seven good bows of the head at the foot
of the god-faced holy tree.” The seven animals ai e mentioned
also in ceitain advice given to a heio setting out on a danger-
ous joutney. “Call together the village full of thy many
men, the town full of thy many men, bring the seven animals


PLATE XLII

Toi toisi~shLU shaped stoiiL itpicscnting the wotld-
bcnimg toitoiSL and used as a foundation lot an old
1 ui kish monuincnt (Sec p tgt 338 )

Aftci photogtaph by S. Pidiii.


THE PILLAR OF THE WORLD


339

bound to one rope and tie them to thestiong town-pillar
In the Yakut tales the seven reindeer at the “ iron tree ”
aie also mentioned” Most probably these seven ani-
mals” bound to one lope, like the pillai itself, have then
counterpait in the sky, and m this connection our thoughts
tuin to the Gieat Beai, the “seven animals” of which are
imagined as being bound to the North Star “by one
rope ”

But the number seven appears also in the names of the god
— “ the seven-divisioned or seven-marked man,” which points
possibly to the fact that the pillar itself was imagined to be
seven-storeyed And examples for this ai e not lacking Thus,
m saciihcing to a spirit called “the Roach lake old man” at
the sources of the Salym, the Ostiaks of that district erect on
the lake a pillar of hr-wood about a fathom in height, on
which they cut with a knife ** seven marks at seven places ”
To the head of the post they fix colouied cloths and place the
sactificial lunes befoie it, the sactifiaal animal being also bound
to It foi the duration of the prayeis and genuflexions In
slaughteiing, a stream of blood has to be diiected on to the
post” Similar pillais weie elected m earliei times by the
Yenisei Ostiaks on the banks of their livers to give luck m
fishing Nowadays, to our knowledge, none are met with in
piactice, although the older people still speak about them In
the museum at Kiasnoyaisk several aie preserved, these being
thin posts about two fathoms in height, on which seven deep
cuts have been made one above the other In the place of
these cuts, it was the custom in some districts to ^eave the
stumps of seven branches In the same way it is related of the
Irtysh Ostiaks that when saaificing at a hole in the ice they
elected a post beside it on which seven branches had been left ”
Kaijalainen assumes this to have been only an artifiaal saai-
fice tiee, but even these tempoiaiily elected posts can piobably
not be separated fiom the woild-pillars. In any. case, the
seven-divisioned “ iron pillat man ” has a heavenly counter-


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


3+0

pait) as the Vogul tales tell of a “ seven-divtded pure silver
holy pillar" to which the son of God ties his steed when
visiting his fathei ^

On studying the Asian cosmography we find no difficulty in
explaining what these seven divisions oi stumps of blanches
signify Without doubt, they lepiesent the seven stoieys of
the sky, an idea geneial also among the Ostiaks The divi-
sions" appeal also m the shaman rites of the Altai Tatais,
although heie the stoieys of Heaven are legaided as being
nine in number When about to shamanize, a speaal tent is
erected on the Altai, in the ccntie of which a birch is erected
so that the crown of the tree sticks out of the air-hole m the
middle of the roof Nine divisions ate cut into the trunk of
the biich, and aie desciibcd as being the symbols of the nine-
stoned heavens Rising by means of the tree into the highest
Heaven the shaman lias to tiavel thiough all the different
stoieys This is done m such a mannei that while exerasing
his magic the shaman dimbs division by division upwaids
When he places his foot on the lowest notch he has reached
the first Heaven, and so on until he uses into the ninth

The tiee, along which the Altai shaman uses into Heaven,
though furnished with divisions, is not leally a post, but a leaf-
crowned biich-tree Thus, we find here an intermediate stage
between the above mentioned woild-pillais and the blanched
world-tiee supposed to use fiom the centie of the eaith As
the holy pillais of the Ostiaks had eithei seven divisions or
seven branches, so an Abakan Tatai heio-poetn tells of *^the
white, seven-bianched birch-tiee on an non mountain in the
centre of the eaith"” But befoie desciibmg m detail this
mighty tiee reigning over the eaith’s oentie, we must first
turn our attention to the mountain in this same region, from the
summit of which, accoiding to many tales, the tiee aiises


CHAPTER IV

THE WORLD-MOUNTAIN

T he majority of the peoples of Central Asia have
tales of a mighty world-mountain, which the Mongols
and Kalmucks call Sumui or Sumer, and the Buiiats Sumbur
In whatevei form this mountain is imagined, it is connected
always with the cosmography, of these peoples, forming its
centre. Assuming that the world was formerly small and has
gradually giown to its piesent size, the folk-tales tell of a
distant time, when Sumur was only a very little hill ^ Now
Its summit aspires to heights unattainable by man, ofFering
thus to the gods a dwelling-place worthy of them
Although the Altai peoples have worshipped their moun-
tains, especially the Altai, adoied in many tales, which they
called the piince,” ” the conception of a central mountain of
the earth-disc was not bound to any of the Central Asian
mountains, but came from abroad, ready-shaped to a paiticular
cosmography It is worthy of note that this mythical mountain
IS often placed in Heaven itself Thus, the Over-god Bai-
Ylgon (“ nch-gieat ”) lives m Heaven “ on a golden moun-
tain ” • Similarly, the tales of the Yakuts tell of the “ milky-
white stone mountain ” of Heaven * Often this mountain is
described as rising in storeys, the number of which varies, but
IS geneially the same as the number of storeys into which
Heaven is divided amoi^ that particular people A certain
Central Asian tale describes the central mountain of the earth-
disc as ** three-stepped ” * The Ostiaks speak of the “ seven-
stoned mountain ” of Heaven * Even Heaven itself is some-
times imagined as a mountam of tbs description, its underside,
which we mortals see, is like a rounded arch An Altaic crea-


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


342

tion tdle 1 elates how tJlgen when ci eating the eaith, sat on a
“ golden mountain ” wheic the sun and the moon always shine,
and how this mountain lalei descended, hiding the eaith, the
edges of the sky did not, howevei, leach to the eaith itself

The idea of a heavenly mountain appeals also in the follow-
ing tale of the Goldes livuig in Noilh-East Sibeiia “When
the gods built Heaven, they made it of stone, but when it was
leady the people below began to be afiaid that it would fall
down on them, whciefoie the gods blew undei the aich so
that the air thus foimed hid the aich fiom the sight of men ” *
Without doubt, this pictuie of Heaven is closely connected with
“the mountain” and has developed from it This idea of
the stone aich cannot have aiisen among the Goldes, as this
stiuctuie IS quite unknown to them, as it is to all other North
Sibuian tubes

In the talcs of the Mongols, Buiiats, and Kalmucks the
woi Id-mountain — Sumbui, Sumui, 01 Sumei — has a name in
which the cential mountain of tlie inhabitants of India, Sumei u,
lb easily iccognized> and the beliefs connected with the same
have spicad leady-formed along with a stieam of civilization
fiom India to the peoples of Cential Asia Whelhei this
mountain Sumei u 01 Meiu originated in India, in connection
With some actual mountain theie, is difficult to say As far
back as can be traced it has been a cosmologic belief

Where then, is the summit of this earth-mountain? We
might suppose it to be at the summit of Heaven, directly above
us, and, as such, the apex of a hollow sky It was not, how-
evei, envisaged thus, but instead, its peak uses to the sky at
the Noith Star wheie the axis of the sky is situated, and wheie,
on the peak, the dwelling of the Ovei-god and his “golden
throne ” aie situated. To this idea points also the assumption,
met with eveiy wheie in Asia, that the woild-mountam is in
the noi th This appeal s quite cleai ly in a Bui lal tale 1 ejecting
Indian views of life “ In the beginning was only walei and a
flog (turtle), which gazed mto the watei God turned this


THE WORLD-MOUNTAIN


343

animal over and created the world on its belly On eadi foot
he built a continent^ but on the navel of the frog he founded
the Sumbur-mountain On the summit of this mountain is the
Noith Star ^ In another tale m which a temple is placed on
the summit of Sumbui, the North Stai is the golden spire of
the tower of this temple ®

The cosmic mountain rising in this part of the sky was known
long ago to the great civilized peoples of Nearei Asia This
idea appears also in the Bible In the i/j.th chaptei of Isaiah
a proud being, who wished to ‘‘be like the most high,” is
described in the following words “ Foi thou hast said in thy
heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above
the stars of God I will sit also upon the mount of the congre-
gation, in the sides of the north ” As the throne of God is
believed to be on the summit of the world-mountain in the
north, this point of the compass was the direction of the prayers
of the Mandeans

Although the idea of this wonderful, cosmic mountain, as
Its name denotes, aiose m India and travelled with a stieam of
avilization to the Mongol tubes, the same belief reached the
Tui co-Tatar peoples by other roads The Suro (“ Majesty ”)
mountain, appearing in the tales of the Altai Tatars, has doubt-
less oiiginated m Persia, as also the seven gods, who aie be-
lieved to dwell on this heavenly mountain and whose name
Kudai is a loan-word from the Persian That the idea of
the heavenly mountain was known also far away in Europe,
IS shown by the Himinbjorg (heaven-mountain) of Scandi-
navian tales and by a Finnish poem on the origin of fire, in'
which It 18 asked where fire was born, the answer being
“ There on the navel of the sky, on the peak of the famous
mountain.” “

In comparing the above tiaditions we notice in them two
leading ideas, one m which this world-mountain is merely
a giant mountain in the centie of the eaith-disc with a summit
touching the sky, another in which the mountain itself is situ-


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


34 +

ated m the sky, or the whole of the sky is imagined to be a
mountain Unless these ideas have a sepaiate oiigin, the
lattei has m all piobability developed fiom the foimei. The
world-<mountains of the ancient peoples — at least the Sumeru
of India and the Hau Berezaiti of the Iianians — were cosmic,
cential mountains of the eaith-disc The Bimdahtsh explains
how all the stais, both fixed stais and planets, move round the
mountain, to which they aie bound as to the woi Id-post. In
a very mteiesling mannei, both ideas aie joined in the Sumeiu
of Chinese pictures, the mountain heie resembling an houi-
glass, compaiatively naiiow at its centre and widening both
upwards and downwards, the uppei pait widens to a sky cover-
ing the earth Still stiangei foims can be seen in Japanese
ait, where this rathei naiiow cential mountain widens at meas-
ured inteivals to represent the different storeys of Heaven”
In this shape Sumctu resembles a tiee lathei than a mountain,
and IS well designed to threw light on the mannei in which
the blanched world-tree may have developed fiom the world-
pillar.

A Cential Asian tale places on this high, three-stepped cen-
tial mountain a still greater woi Id-tree That this mountain,
imagined as being three great steps, was rectangular, is shown
by the fact that the summit, on which the woild-tiee stood,
was a square-shaped area ” In addition, on each side of the
mountain, there are said to be foui mounds, which are called
the foui continents, believed by the inhabitants of India to be
situated t ound Sumeru, one at each point of the compass How
impressive the view fiom the a own of the woild-tiee on the
summit of the mountain is, appears fiom the fact, that looking
fiom there, according to the tale, the eaith Boating m the
ocean is no laigei than the hoof of a hoise The height of the
tree is pictured furthei by the idea that if a stone of the size
of a bull is thiown down fiom thcie, it will leach the earth
after the lapse of fifty yeais and then be no laigei than a
lamb”


THE WORLD-MOUNTAIN


345

To this heaven-mountain idea, there is thus also connected
the idea of a woi Id-ocean In an Altaic ci eation tale the moun-
tain and the ocean are said to have existed before the earth
peopled by men was cieated **

The same mountain and ocean appeal in the tales of the
Mongols, m which an evil giant snake called Losy is spoken of,
the home of which is in the ocean under the earth By squirt-
ing poison on the eaith, this being attempts to ciush out life
by killing men and animals At the lequest of God the hero
Otshirvani engaged this sea-monstei in battle, but his powers
were not sufficient to overcome it, and he nearly fell victim
himself to the monster Seeing this he fled from the earth and
ascended the Sumer mountain where he changed himself to the
mighty Gaiide bud In this form he attacked the monstei
again, seized its head with his claws, dtagging it thiee times
round the world-mountain, and finally smashed in its head
with a gieat lock This gifint snake is said to be so large that
though Its head is on the summit of the world-mountain, i ound
which Its body is wound thiee times, its tail is still in the
ocean “

This sea-monstei, appealing in Cential Asian tales also
under the name of Abyrga, was known already among the
ancient peoples of Asia Along with Eastern myths and beliefs
It wandered to Euiope In Scandinavia there aie tales of the
dreaded “ Midgaid snake,” which ** squirts poison ” "scattei-
ing this over an and land ” At the end of the world, “ when
the sea will use over the land ” and " the giant snake squirms
m Its wrath and crawls on to the earth,” Thor will at last
succeed in killing it, falling dead himself from the poison
which the snake will have ejected against him

As alien as the snake itself, is its vanquisher, the Garide
bit d, which IS said to live on Sumei u mountain and thus repre-
sents the heavenly poweis m the tales of the Mongols Its
name is identifiable with that of the Indian bird Garuda The
hero Otshirvani, who changes himself into a bird, is the Bud-


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


346

dhist Bodhisattva Vaiiapani> and is only an addition, taken
fiom legends, to thib anaent tale

Furthest developed is the cosmogiaphy with the Sumeiu
mountain in its centic, found at the picsent time m the teach-
ings bi ought by Lamaism into CenLial and Eastei n Asia Ac-
coiding to notes made among the Kalmucks the whole of the
piopoitions of the universe is stiictly fixed The height of
the ccnttal mountain is 80,000 leagues above the surface of the
ocean, and at the same distance is its foundation m the world-
ocean, whcie It lests on a stiatum of gold, home in its tuin
by a tui tie Round Sumei u theie aie seven cuculai “ golden ”
mountain chains, divided fiom this and from each other by
seven seas Natutally these seas also are iing-bhaped The
neaici a mountain chain is to the cential mountain, the highei
It 18 The hi bl lb 40,000 leagues, the second 20,000, the thud
10,000, the fouith 5,000, the fifth 2,500, the sixth 1,250,
and the seventh, 01 last, 625 leagues above the ocean As
with the hughl, the distance between these mountain chains
lb also exactly defined The highei the mountamb become,
the fuUhet they aie fiom each othei The distance of
each fiom the cential mountain is the same as then height
The watei of each of these inland seas is fiesh, but the
kbt mountain chain is buiiounded by a salt ocean, which in
Its tuin is iinged in with an “non” mountain chain 312^
leagues high. This uon chain, the aicumfeience of which
IS 3,602,625 leagues and which is situated 322,000 leagues
distant fiom the neatest mountain cliain, foims the outei edge
of the world The ui cumf ei ence of the salt ocean is 3,600,750
leagues

Sumeiu Itself is shaped like a pyiamid slightly broken-oflF
at the top. Its arcumfeience at the surface of the sea is 2000
leagues and at its summit 3^ leagues The bides of the
pyiamid facing the diffeient points of the compass glow with
different colouis The southern side is blue, the weslcin red,
the northern yellow, and the eastern white These different


THE WORLB-MOUNTAIN 347

colouis are said to come from the jewel 01 metal coverings
of the diffeient sides On the south side there is> a blue-gleam-
ing and on the west a led-glowmg jewel covering, the north
side IS golden and the east silver These four colours aie
reflected in the paits of the world facing them, and for this
leason the south is called the blue, the west the red, the noith
the yellow, and the east the white point of the compass

In each direction there is a continent in the salt ocean, or as
many as in ceitain tales already related These continents are
pictured as gieat islands, beside which theie is on each side a
smaller island, so that the total number of the islands sur-
rounding the centre of the world is twelve Without doubt,
this conception, fiee fiom all geographical facts, reflects the
beliefs connected with the twelve pictures of the cosmologic
Zodiac The Zodiac was alteady imagined by the ancient
Babylonians as the land of Heaven ” As above, so are there
twelve lands below

The people dwelling m these foui continents differ from
one anothei, above all, in the shape of their faces The
dwelleis m the southern, or
the continent in which India,

China, Mongolia and many
other lands are situated, have
oval faces, those of the west
round, those of the north
squaie, and those of the east
crescent-moon shaped faces
The continents themselves, as
may be seen from the accom-
panying illustration, are of
the same shapes/^

This cosmography, which
prevails in Tibet and m othei Buddhistic districts, has its roots
in the mists of antiquity It is stiange to And this coloui idea
connected with the four caidinal points also among certain


Fic 15 A Kalmuck World vicruRB


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


348

Noith Ameiicaa Indian tubes Nairn ally, the colouia o£ the
diffeient points vaiy among different peoples The Chinese
legard the east as blue, the south as led, the west as white, and
the north as black The colouis of the caidmal points m
Ameiica aie black, white, yellow and blue, 01, black, white,
ted and blue (gieen) That these coloui ideas have also had
then counteipaits in the souices of civilization m Neaiei Asia
IS shown, e g , by the belief, that when God ct eated man he
gatheied difteiently coloured materials fiom the four quaiters
of the eaith i e , red, black, white and blown


CHAPTER V

THE TREE OF LIFE


A t THE navel of the earth, in the centre of the universe,
accoidmg to Altaic tales, the highest tiee on earth, a
giant silver^iii, raises its crown to the dwelling of Bai-Ylgon ^
Here we find the world-tree, situated in the earlier tales on
the Sumeru mountain, lemoved to the navel or centre of the
earth Generally this tree is also imagined to grow on a high
hill or mountain, especially on the central mountain of the
earth, as appeals from the woids of a folk-poem already cited
** In the centie of the eaith theie is an non mountain and on
this non mountain a white, seven-branched buch ” But as
this cential mountain of the eaith-disc is geneially; believed
to hide its summit among the storeys of the sky, the tiee itself,
for veiy obvious reasons, has been laised mto the sky, where,
according to different beliefs and tales it continues to exist
In the beliefs of the peoples i elated to the Turks this tree,
which with the growth of the universe has grown from a small
sapling to its piesent height, is intimately connected, like the
world-mountain, with the construction of the universe * And
independently of whether it rises from the earth, a high moun-
tain, 01 some storey in the sky, its position always lesembles
that of the world-pillar, like the former, the gods use this
also to tether their hoises to In the fact, also, that it is often
pictured as many-storeyed, it resembles the world-pillar
Thus, for example, in the shaman songs of the Vasyugan
Ostiaks, which contain images obviously boi rowed from the
Tatais, this tiee, like the heavens themselves, is said to be
seven-storeyed * Moie often, howevet, it is legatded as pierc-
ing the different floois of the sky, thrusting at the same time.


350 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY

like the cential mounUin which is its foundation, its loots deep
into the undcigiQund depths

This cosmic tiee dificrs fiom the woild-pillai chiefly in the
fact that It lb always legaided as a branched, living tiec, an es-
sential and at the same time most pecultai fcatuie of which is
Its fieshness and sappiness In most of the tales it is situated
on the blink of some spiing, lake oi sea, even at times in the
watci itself The Ostiaks speak of ** the watery sea of the
heaven-ccnti e ” beside which this ti ee gi o ws * The watei f i om
which the tiee nouiishes itself is desciibed m a Minusinsk
Tatai poem as follows

“Pieicing twfclve heavens
On the summit of a mountain
A bitch m the misty depths of air.

Golden lie the hitch’s leaves,

Golden lb bilk,

In the gi ound at its foot a basin
Full of the witt.1 of life,

In tht b ism i golden hdlt

In the poem it is mentioned fuither that this “ biich ” is
watched ovci by the foiefathei of the Tatais, the old Tata,
who was given this post by the Qeator himself *

The same wondeiful biich is met with m the tales of East
Euiopean people Thus, the Moidvins tell of n giant biich
glowing on a hill in the depths of the foiest, the loots of which
ling lound the caith and whose bianchcs sui round the heavens
Its leaves aic of the size of the palm of a hand, and its buds
as long as the lash of a whip At the loot of the biich is a
spiing, loofed over with catved boaids and while sheets, on
its edge a led wooden can, in the can a sweet honey-dunk, and
in the liquid a silvei ladle, the bottom of which is decoiated
with the sun and the moon, the handle with the smaller stais
Ab the sun moves m the heavens, the handle of the ladle turns
with Jt *

Mole interesting is this tree glowing with life in the folk-
lore of the Yakuts


THE TREE OF LIFE


351

On the yellow navel of the eight-edged earth, according to
one of then tales, theie is a dense, eight-branched tree Its
balk and knots aie silver, its sap golden, its cones like nine-
corneied goblets, and its leaves wide as the hide of a horse
Fi om the ci own of the tree runs foaming a heavenly, yellowish
liquid When passeis-by drink of this, the tired among them
are refieshed and the hungry become satisfied ’

This life-giving tiee is, according to the Yakut tales, the
dwelling-place of “ the First Man ”, and theiefore some soit
of paiadise When “the First Man,” on appearing on the
earth, wished to know why he had been cieated, he appi cached
this giant tree, the crown of which “ pierces through the thiee-
storeyed Heaven ” and “ along the branches of which a light-
coloured liquid flows ” bringing blessedness to the one tasting
it, and saw an opening appear in the trunk, from which opening
a female, visible only to the waist, infoitned him that he had
been created to become the father of the human lace *

A variant of this same tale desciibes “the First Man” as
“ the White Youth ” “ Above the wide motionless depths,
below the seven stoieys, the tune discs of heaven, in the cential
place, on the navel of the eai th, m the quietest place, where
the moon does not decline, nor the sun sink, wheie theie is
summer without winter and the cuckoo sings eteinally, was
the White Youth ” He set out to walk to see where he had
appealed, and what his dwelling-place was like In the east
he saw a wide, lightish plain, on the plain a mighty hill and
on the hill a giant tiee The resin of the tree was transparent
and sweetly perfumed, its baik never dried or cracked, its
sap was silvery, its leaves nevei withered and its cxines were
like a row of reveised goblets The crown of the tiee rose
over the seven stoieys of Heaven, being the tethering-post of
the Over-god Yiyn-ai-tojon, and its loots went deep down
into the undergiound depths wheie they weie the dwelling-
pillars of the stiange mythical beings theie By means of its
leaves the tree talked with the dwellers in Heaven


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


354

Walking southwaid the White Youth saw a calm “lake of
milk” in the ccntie of a giecn, glassy plain, which lake
nevei iippled by a bieath of wind and on the shores of which
weie cuidled sw<iinps In the noith was a dark forest, whete
the tiees lustled day and night and wheie all manner of
animals moved Behind the forest lose high mountains, beai-
ing caps that resembled white labbit-skin, the mountains
leaned against the heavens, piotccting these from cold winds
In the west giew a low tangle of bushes, behind these a high
foiest of his, and behind the f 01 cat solitniy blunt-headed
mountams were just discernible

Such was the woild, in which the White Youth saw the
light of day Tiled of his londy existence he appi cached the
tiee of life and said “ Honoui ed High Misti ess. Spit it of my
tree and my dwelling-place, everything living moves m couples
and gives bn th to descendants, but 1 am alone I wish to tiavel
and seek a pai tnei woi thy of me, X wish to know othu people
and mcasuic my stiength agauist them, 1 wish to live as a man
should Do not lefuse thy blessing, 1 pi ay to thee with
humbled, bowed head and with bent knees ”

Then the leaves of the tiee commenced to lustle and a fine
milk-white lain diippcd fiom them upon the White Youth
A waim zephyi was felt, the tiee creaked, and fiom undei its
roots a female being aiose up to hci waist This spiiit of the
tiee and of the place is desciibcd by the tale as a grave-eyed,
middle-aged woman with flowing locks and naked bosom The
goddess offeied the Youth milk fiom hei swelling breasts, and
having diunk, he felt how his poweis had giown a hundred-
fold At the same time the goddess piomised him every
happiness and blessed him so that ncithei watei, fire, iron not
anything else could haim him

It IS obvious that this tale cannot have otiginated among the
Yakuts in the cold atmosphere of Noith-East Sibciia, but, as
the glowing desaiption of Paiadise hints at, m the lap of a
much richer and moie fertile natuie. With the help of the


PLATE XLIII

Old TuRKisti Memorial Image in North
Mongolia

(Sec p.\ge 301 )

Aftci phologinph by S Palst


THE TREE OF LIFE


353

description of nature in the tale, m which the mountains with
white caps resembling rabbit-skin appearing in the north are
obviously snow-clad mountains, we can endeavour to find the
birthplace of this story, which pre-supposes the knowledge both
of a fertile vegetation and of snow-clad mountains We turn
naturally then either to India or Neaier Asia But the paia-
dise landscape cannot, however, as such be used as a guide, as
the “ lake of milk ” and other details belong to the beliefs
connected with the navel of the earth In addition the land-
scape differs somewhat in the different valiants
Before examining the above tale more minutely, we will
glance at a few additional details thi owing more light on the
tree of life, these details being contained in the examples of
the Yakut language published by Middendorff In these the
first man, " the ancestor of the Yakuts,” is called Ar-soghotocb
(“ the Lonely Man ”) His dwelling also is spoken of, which
IS in the centre of the plain and has four silver-gleammg
corners, foity windows, fifty pillais, and thirty roof-tiees,
the walls and the golden floor are fourfold and the silver roof
threefold Altogethei this dwelling would theiefore seem to
have possessed seven storeys The tiee of life itself is de-
sciibed in the following words "When he comes out of
his dwelling on to the balcony towards the east to see the land-
scape, he has before him the king of trees, which grows among
the grass. This tree over which swings the blue air, is so old
that its age cannot be reckoned m centuries Its roots stretch
through Hades and its crown pierces the nine heavens The
length of each leaf is seven fathoms and that of the cones
nine fathoms Fi om under its roots foams the ‘ eternal watei *
When Its aged, starved and weaiy, white or daik cattle, its
flying or running game, drink oi lidk the sap and resin which
drip from this tree’s branches and cones, gathering and form-
ing a brawling stream, they acquire again their foimer youth
and overflowingness ” It is further related that when the
spirit of the tiee, " a white-haired aged goddess,” mottled of


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


354

body like a woodcock and with bi casts as Uige as “leather-
bags,” appeals, the tiee aeaks and gioaiis, glowing smaller,
until with the ic-cntiancc of the goddess it icgains its foimei
size From this spiiit of the tiee the Lonely Man leceives
the knowledge that his fathci is the Heaven god Ar-tojon
(" The High Loid ”) and his mothei Kybai-Khotun (“ Kybai
Mistress ”), who had immediately aftei his biith loweied him
fiom the thud heaven to the caith so that he might become
the foiefather of the human lace At the same time the spiiit
takes watei from undei the loots of the tiee and poms it into
a bladder, which she gives to hei waid, saying “ Fasten this
under thy left atm, in the utteimost danger it will save thee ”
Later, accoiding to the tale, the heio fights a duel on a couit-
ship jouiney with a wicked diagon, leceiving a blow in the
heart, but the bladdci but sting at the same time and its con-
tents flowing on to the wound, his heait bceomes immediately
whole, giving him in addition his powets back ninefold ^
Wheie and how the tiee of life ideas in this Yakut tale
may have originated in the mists of antiquity, i elated tales aie
alicady met with among the ancient peoples in India, in Iian,
in Mesopotamia, and in Egypt As is well known, the coiie-
sponding beliefs of the ancient Semites aie leflected in the
, Bible “ And out of the ground made the Lord God to giow
eveiy tiee that is pleasant to the sight and good foi food, the
tree of life also in the midst of the gaiden ” As in the
Yakut tale the fiist man dwells here beside the tiee of life.
Similarly the nouiishment afFoided by the tiee gives eternal
life The same conceptions appeal from the following woids
from the Book of Revehtton “ To him that oveicometh will
1 give to eat of the tiee of life, which is in the midst of the
paradise of God ” And foi the belief that the watei of life
flows under the roots of the tree we find a countcipait in other
woids from the same book “ And he shewed me a pure itver
of water of life , and on elthei side of the iivcr was theie
the tiee of life which bare twelve mannei of fruits and yielded


THE TREE OF LIFE


355

her fruit every month and the leaves of the tree were for the
healing of the nations ” Here we find also the health-giving
pioperties of the tiee of life mentioned It is thus obvious
that the Yakut tale and the images in the Bible are denved
fiom a common foundation idea In the formei theie are
several additional details, such as the milk-breasted goddess,
which aie unknown to the Bible and cannot be regarded as hav-
ing sprung fiom legends formed on the Bible stones, but must
have had some other tale related to this as model
Just as many of the Central and Noithein Asian tales place
the tree of life on a high hill or mountain, even in Heaven it-
self, so the Semitic paradise was imagined to be, sometimes on
the central mountain of the eat th, sometimes m Heaven From
the fact that the anaent Babylonians already m olden times
knew of the paiadise-mountam of the gods, the tree, and the
watei of life, we may conclude that this belief, leltcs of which
have come down to us from ancient times, is of extreme age
among the civilized peoples of Nearei Asia

The coiiesponding beliefs in Indian mythology aie pointed
to fuithei by the above mentioned Central Asian tale in which
the mighty world-tiee is situated on the Sumeru mountain
That this tiee was the tree of life, the folbwing tale, likewise
from Central Asia, shows ^^In the beginning was no land,
only watei out of which rose two great mountains On the
summit of one weie three temples, haibouring thirty-three
Tengeii or gods At the foot of the mountain was a triangular
plain, from which rose the extremely high Zambu tree, with
Its crown higher than the mountain The Tengen ate of its
fruit, but the beings living vuider the tree, the Asuras, shouted
to the Tengen ‘Why do you eat fiom the tree growing on
oui land? * The Asui as became at last so inflamed that they
commenced to war against the Tengen, in this wat, however,
they lost and were vanquished The gods then thiew down
sand from the mountain, and even gold, and in this way
the eaith was created, on to which two gods, male and


356 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY

female, dc<sccnded m oidci lo people the eaith with then
descendants.”

In the beginning of the tale, two eteinal mountains are thus
mentioned, which appeal thousands of yeats eailiei in the cos-
mology of the anuent avilized peoples of Neater Asia, but
only one is desctibed in detail, the Tengcii dwelling on the
summit of which aie the thiity-thiec gods of the Sumeru
mountain of Indian mythology Similarly, the beings dwell-
ing at the foot of the mountain aie the Asuia giants of
India, who wete believed to dwell m the bottomlesb chasms
of Meru, and from theie waned against India and other gods
The Zambu tiee also, ftom which the gods were nouiished is,
as the name shows, the Indian tiee of life, Jambu Accoidmg
to Buddhistic mythology this tiee has sixteen laige blanches
but a multitude of smallet ones Its luddyrgrey leaves ate as
fine as the puicst silk and its floweis glowing like gold In
Its fiuit Ihcie ate hundieds of sweet lumps, of the size of
goose-eggs, which diive away all diseases The golden-yellow
sap of the tiee diips like melting buttei The beings living
around piocuie then noiuishment fiom this tiee of life'*

It IS ptobable that the idea of a tiee of life among the
Indians has its loots in distant ages, as alicady in the poems of
the Veda the immoitality-pioduang nouiishment of Soma,
which giew on a mountain, is mentioned Coiicsponding to
this 18 the Haoma of Iianian mythology, imagined as a feitile,
golden-flowered tiee of life and as such placed on the central
mountain of the world, Haia Beiezaiti The Rauhina tree
of the Indian poem Supoimdhyayay fi om which a mythological
eagle, the Garuda, known as the lobbei of Soma, breaks off
a blanch, is piobably also a idic of a tiee of life, in which the
said bud, accoidmg to eatliei ideas, Tims believed to live In
the folk-poetiy of the Iianians we meet with this mythological
bud in the ciown of the tiee of life

The Indian tales cannot, howevei, be legaided as the model
for the Yakut tale mentioned Then tiee of life lesembles


THE TREE OF LIFE


357

moie the ancient Egyptian pictuies, in which a date-palm de-
scribed as being paitly a tiee and partly a woman, gives to its
ward nouiishment pioduang eternal life Sometimes this
tree is seen pictured on the brink of the spiing of the water of
hfe^*

The tiee of life of the Yakuts with its goddess appearing
from the roots resembles also the Yggdiasil of the Icelandic
Edda^ “Which is the greatest and best of all tiees,” whose
“ branches cover the whole earth and rise ovei the heavens,
whose “ tall trunk is hidden by a white fluid ” and which will
“ stagger first when the world ends ” Under this “ openly
flourishing tree, diipping honey-dew” is a wonderful spring,
Urdarbrunn, beside which under the roots of the tree live the
three deities of birth and fate, the Norns If we compare
Y gg diasil with the Yakut tree of life, it becomes obvious that
they are identical, even to then details, with the exception that
under the tree of life of the Scanchnavian poem there are three,
and undei the Yakut, only one goddess

The eagle also of the Edda^ which sits in the crown of the
tiee, and the Nidhugg snake undei its loots aie details closely
connected with the tree of life of Centi al Asia The Kalmucks
relate how a dragon m the sea at the foot of the Zambu tree
lay in wait for the leaves dropping from Zambu The leaves
which It failed to catch, sinking to the bottom, turned into gold
there In the Buriat poems a mythological snake called
Abyrga is said to dwell at the foot of the tree in a “ lake of
milk ” In certain Central Asian tales the Abyrga snake
twines round the tree itself, while at the same time the Gaiide
eagle living in the crown attacks and pecks at it** This
Gaiide, which when flying furiously causes storms, is, as the
name mdicates, the Indian Gaiuda, the well-known tobbei of
Soma

The piecursors of the Yakut tales have probably been the
paradise ideas of the ancient Iranians, like the beliefs of
the West Siberian peoples, who place this mighty tree on “ the


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


3S8

u on mountain ” i ising f i om the centi c of the eai th-disc From
ancient Peisian liteiatuie wc see that they .Uso colled the cen-
ti al mountain of the eaith Haio Beicaaiti, “the non moun-
tain,” on the summit of which they believed the tiee of life to
be On this mountain wheit, undu the tiee of life, is the
spiing of the watei of life, Aidvisuia, and the paiadise of the
Iianians, dwells the hist man, Gajomaitan, as in the Yakut
paiadise Like the Uttei the Iiamans also pictured him as a
“ white ” being ” With the help of these facts we can assume
that the talc in question has spiead along with a cuiient of
avilization from the Iranians to the Tui co-Tatar peoples, and
with the Yakuts wandeied to the distant Rivci Lena, where
their folk-loic was able to pieseive it <is neai the oiiginal
as has been shown, and thus to hand down to the piesent
generation a valuable iclic of the paiadise ideas of the lumans
and the whole East, of which ideas only scanty and scatteied
fiagments aic to be found in ancient liteiature.

With the gi cater reason, thcrefoie, do we turn our attention
to the Yakut conception of the tice of life Ftom the pie-
ceding tales we have seen that besides “the Fust Man,” the
whole of the animals of cieation dwell ncai the ticc, and that
It 18 regal ded as the nouiishei of them alb But m the begin-
ning the tiee would seem to have had a still moic maivellous
significance A vaiiant of the tale describes how the Over-god
and the goddess of Biith and Fate, Kybai-Khotun, the name
also of the spirit dwelling in the tiee, gave biith to the first
man in the thud heaven, fiom which he was loweied down to
the eaith, but despite this^ the other veision goes on to details
showing how the ancestoi of the human lace leally appealed
in his life-giving sunoondmgs His cuiiosity as to whete he
has come fiom leads him to the conclusion that he has been
boin in those veiy surioundings This appeals, e.g , fiom his
woids! “If I had diop|icd down fiom heaven, I should be
coveted with snow and hoai-fiost, if I had come from the
south ot the north, from the east or the west of the centi al


THE TREE OF LIFE 359

place (the earth), 1 should bear marks of trees and grass and
I should give out the scent of the wind, if I had risen fiom the
bowels of the earth, 1 should have the dust of the earth on
me ” ” It appears probable, theiefoie, that the milk-breasted
goddess of the wonderful tiee has given birth to him and that
“the Fust Man ” is right m saying to her “ Be my mother,
as though thou hadst given birth to me, be my creatoi, as
though thou hadst created me ” Motherly caie is also defined
m the woids “ Thou hast brought up me, an orphan, to raan^s
estate, thou hast suffered me, the little one, to glow up ’’ **

Further, we can hardly be mistaken in assuming that all
the living beings crowded round this tree have the spirit to
thank foi then existence Man at least confesses “ Thou hast
brought up my white cattle, for my blade beasts hast thou
cared, protected my birds and my game, and kept together the
fishes of my black wateis ” “

With the Central Asian ideas of the tree of life, as an essen-
tial featuie, we have seen the belief connected that under the
roots of the tree is a spring containing the water of life In
the tales of the Yakuts the tree itself is sometimes said to drip
a sap-like fluid so copiously, that a foaming brook is formed
Under the Iranian tree of life there is a spi ing in which all the
rivers of the eaith have their source Even the belief that
the tree of life rises out of a lake or sea of wonderful water
IS met with

Thus, e g , the Kalmucks tell how the Zambu tiee rises out
of the Marvo Sea, which is as deep as it is broad and contains
water of eight different elements From this sea run four
great rivers These are said to flow towards the different
points of the compass and, aftei having made seven turnings,
to return to their source of origin On then journey, each
river receives the waters of flve himdred tributaries The sea
itself IS regarded as a mountain-lake, as each river pieices a
rock, said to resemble some animal The rivers flowing towards
the east, south, west, and north emerge from rocks which are


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


3<5o

respectively like the mouths of .in elephant, a bull, a hoise,
and a lion The animals in this tale icpiescnt the points of
the compass, a belief extiemely, old among the civilized peoples
of Asia, though the animals themselves may vaiy Thus,
m the Chinese tale the east is lepiesented by a blue diagon,
the south by a ted bud, the west by a white tiget, and the
north by a black tuitle To pi event diseases the Mongols
aie said to have built on the site of an old Chinese town a sanc-
tuary (oio), at the foui sides of which they erected wooden
images of the points of the compass, i e , a tiger, a lion, an
eagle, and a diagon

That these foiu iiveis of the Kalmuck tales have their
source at the veiy centie of the eaith, js shown by the
fact that they ate believed to cairy with them the mateiials
decorating the sides of the cential mountain The eastern
river contains silvei sand, the southern blue jewel sand, the
westein led jewel sand and the noithcin gold sand

There can be no doubt of the fact that these ideas of the
Kalmudcs have come down to them fiom India along with
the cuiients of civilization, tven though these foui livers of
patadise have, as the Bible shows, been known also to the
Semitic race


CHAPTER VI

DESTRUCTION OF THE WORLD

B esides the destruction caused by the subsidence of the
pillar supporting the sky, othei dangers also are be-
lieved to threaten the earth peopled by men To the idea that
the earth is situated on the bosom of a great cosmic ocean is at-
tached the fear that the foundations of the earth may give way
or that It may become inundated The Asian tales of the dif-
ferent peiiods of the eaith i elute how a great flood once de-
stroyed all life on it, and how a human being who escaped
became the ancestoi of a new lace of men Tales of this
desaiption are met with also among the Altaic peoples
Whethei these aie founded on ancient boriowings, and whether
they contain any direct remamdeis of such loans, is difficult to
conclude, m their present state, as known to us, they would
seem to lepresent later currents of civilization One may as-
sume, however, that later ariiving legends have been prone to
sweep aside the moie anaent forms of this tale

A very common modern foim is found in the following
Buriat tale Befoie the flood arrived, Burkhan advised a cer-
tain man to build himself a gieut ship Following the advice
of God, the man went to the foiest, where he worked thiough-
out the days At last his wife, becoming curious, wished to
know what hei husband woiked at so industriously in the
forest To keep his intention secret, the man replied that he
chopped wood there While the man was away, the devil,
Shitkur, came to the woman explaining that her husband had
deceived her and that he was building a gi eat ship in the foiest
And in the end the devil begged the woman to help him,
saying The ship will soon be ready and thy husband will


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


362

invite thee to cntci it, but do thou lefusc, and when he be^-
comes angiy and stukeb thee, say to him ^Whyi dost thou
stake me, Shitlcui > ’ When thou enterest the ship .iftei this, I
slwll accompany thee ” The woman promised to follow the
advice of the devil Soon a gieal flood thicatened to dcstioy
the whole eaith and the buildci of the ship exhoited his
family to enter his vessel, but the wife lesisted '*0 long that
the man became angiy and began to beat her The wife then
said, as the devil had taught hei “ Why. dost thou stake me,
Shitkui > ” When she Anally went on boaid, the devd was
enabled to accompany hei The tale tells in addition how,
with the help of Bui khan, the man gathered specimens of all
the animals into his ship with the exception of the Pi nice of
animals (Aigalan-Zon), which deemed itself so large that no
flood could diowA it Having entcicd the vessel, the devil
changed him'ielf into a mouse and began to gnaw holes m the
bottom of the vessel, until Bui khan cieated the cat to catch
the mouse As the flood was so gicat that it dcstioyed all the
animals left on the eaith, the Pimcc of animals, whose bones
may be found in the eaith today, was also di owned Ac-
coiding to othei tales the animal whicli failed to suivive the
flood was the mammoth ®

In a tale rccoided among the Sagaiyes, m which the builder
of the ship IS Ciilled Noj, the devil tempts his wife to inquire
what he is building in the foiest, and having found out, begins
to destioy by night what Noj builds duimg the day Thus,
when the flood begins, the vessel is not y<.t completed, and
God is foiced to send down to the man a vessel of iron, in
which Noj with his wife and family and all kinds of animals
are saved *

In both tales, ovur attention is called to the pait played by
the devil, otherwise they resemble the Bible stoiy of the flood
The Noj of these tales is unquestionably the Noah of the
Bible.

The corresponding tales of the Ii tysh Ostiaks and the South-


DESTRUCTION OP THE WORLD 363

ern Voguls make the devil give the wife of the hero of the
flood a strong drink, by the help of which she entices her
husband to relate his secret The Ostiaks call the man by a
name borrowed from the Tatars, Pairekse *

A legend corresponding m all its details is known also to
the peoples of East Europe, where it is piobably of literary
origin It IS to be found at least in the Russun veiston of the
Revelations of Pseudo-Methodius With Russian settleis it
may possibly have migrated in this form to Siberia, where told
by these, it has been written down, e g , in the teriitory behind
the Baikal In its chief points, this Russian legend is as
follows In order to And out why Noah is building his ark,
the devil advises his wife to prepare a stiong dunk, having
drunk of which Noah, in a state of intoxication, informs his
wife of the secret entrusted to him by God The devil dis-
turbs Noah in his work, and when the ark is at last completed,
he aeeps into it m the company of Noah’s wife, who has
tempted hei husband into pronounang the devil’s name Ar-
rived in the ark, m the guise of a mouse, he gnaws holes m the
bottom of the ark ”

The flood tale of Pseudo-Methodius is without doubt a late
Eastern apocryphal legend founded on. the Bible story. That
the wife of Noah, who is not espeaally mentioned in the Bible,
was also the subject of tales among the Arabians, is suggested
by the passage in the Koran, in which Noah’s wife is mentioned,
together with the wife of Lot, as being among the damned
Further, the manner in which the devil succeeds in entering
the ark in the company of Noah’s wife, greatly lesembles the
following Islamic tale, as already pointed out by Dahnhardt
When the ark was completed and all the animals hurried there
m pairs, Noah saw that the ass lingered behind, annoyed, he
shouted to it “Come m, thou accursed^ ” This moment
was taken advantage of by the evil Iblis, who answered, when
the astonished Noah asked him how he had come into the
ark “1 came at thme mvitation, there being among the


364 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY

cieations of God none .icaiiscd but I”" Theie aie, how-
ever, no indications that the alicady cited tiles could have
spiead into Siberia fiom Islam

Neaiei the Bible btoiy than any othei ancient flood tale
known to us, is the following Altaic tale “ Up to the time
when the flood ijatK) hid all the caith, Tengys (Sea) was
loid over the earth Duiing his lule thcie lived a man called
Nama, a good man, whom Olgen commanded to build an aik
i^keref) Nama, who had thiee sons, Sozun-uul, Sai-uul, and
Balyks, was alicady failing of Mght and theiefoie left the
building of the atk to his sons When the aik, which was built
on a mountain, was completed, Nama told his sons to hang
from Its coineis and walls eight cables of eighty fathoms each,
by the help of which he could latei deteimme ^ how many days
It takes fot the watei to use eighty fathoms ’ After this had
been done, Nama enteicd the atk, taking with him his family
and the vauoub animals and biidb which, threatened by the us-
ing watets, gatheied aiound him Seven days latei the cables
attached to the eailh gave way and the aifc diifted fiec This
showed that the watei had alieady iiscn eighty fathoms
When seven days had elapsed agam, Nama told his eldest son
to open the window of the aik and to look aiound Sozun-uul
looked in all directions and then said * Eveiylhing ha& sunk
under the waters, only the summits of the mountains aie in
sight ’ Latei, when ordeied by his fathei to look out again,
he was able to answei * Nothing is to be seen, only the sky
and the waters * At la&t the atk stopped on eight closely
situated mountains. Then Nama himself opened the window
and set free the raven, which, howevei , did not retui ii. On the
second day he lelcased the aow, and on the thud the lOok,
but neilhei of these leluined On the fouilh day he sent out
the dove, which letuined with a twig of bneh in its beak.
Fiom this bird Nama also hcaid why the othei buds had not
returned The laven had found the cat case of a deci, the
ciow that of a dog, and the rook that of a hoise, which they liad


DESTRUCTION OF THE WORLD 365

stayed behind to devout Hearing thi^ Kama became eniaged
and laid a curse on these buds, saying ‘ What they ate doing
now, let them continue with to the end of the woildl ’ ” The
tale goes on to 1 elate that when Nama had become very old,
his wife exhorted him to kill all the men and animals he had
saved fiom the flood, so that, being transferred to the other
woild, they would be undei his power there also Under the
ceaseless exhoitations of his wife, Nama became lestless and
did not know what to do Then his son Sozun-uul, who knew
the intentions of his mother but did not daie to oppose her
openly, i elated to his father the following incident " I saw
a blue-black cow devourmg a human being so that only the
legs were any longer to be seen ” Having understood this
fable, Nama seized his sword and cleft his wife in two, begin-
ning at the head Finally Nama lemoved to heaven, taking
his son Sozun-uul with him, and changing the lattei into a
constellation of five stars *

Thus, in this tale also, the wife of the heio of the flood
IS pictuied as a wicked person Otheiwise, the tale differs
greatly from the preceding dualistic tales and has obviously
leached Cential Asia apait from these. Among some of the
Altaic peoples the hero of the flood has also become the object
of certain beliefs As such he is often called Jaik-Khan the
Flood Prince”) and is prayed to as the inteivener between
the Over-god and man, and as the protector of man In some
places a white lamb is sacrificed to him annually in the spring
The saaifice is earned out on a high mountain He is also
supposed to be the ruler of the dead, and as such is invited
to the house-purification ceremonies forty days after a death,
and begged to return the domestic animals, which the dead,
accoiding to the people, sometimes take with them In the
shaman rites also he is often spoken with and desired to con-
vey the pi ayei s of the people to the Over-god “ His dwellmg-
place IS situated in the thud heaven, where the paradise of the
blessed is, and from theie, at smtable times, he sends his mes-


366 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY

sengei with a soul for a child bom on the earth In this
capacity he is called Jajut&hi (‘* the Oideiei ”)•*

These ideas of the Altai Tatois coiiespond to those which
the Iitysh Ostiaks have botiowed foi then Paiiclcse fiom the
TatMb As we have olieady seen^ the latter altio is icgaided
as the hcio of the flood, appealing besides in some tales as
the “ Writei man,” who wiites in heaven, m the Book of Fate,
accoiding to the dictation of God, how long and m what cii-
cumstances a human being is to live on the eaith

Not only as the ancestoi of the piesent human lace, but
also as a kind of Cieatoi does the heio of the flood appeal in
the flood tales of the Soyots When the giant fiog (tuitle)
suppotting the eaith happened to move once, the cosmic ocean
began to flood the eaith A certain old man who had guessed
that something of the kind would happen, built a laft
stiengthened with non, placed himself upon it with his family,
and v^s saved With the decline of the wateis the laft
giounded on a high wooded mountain, where it is said to be
still. Aftei the flood, this Kezei-Tshmgis»Kaira'Khan re-
created eveiything we now see aiound us He is especially
mentioned as having taught people how to piepaie strong
drinks, an invention accredited also to the heio of the Bible
story

How deeply the stoiy of the flood has taken loot in the
beliefs of the peoples aiound the Altai, is shown by their
obstinate belief that the raft oi tlie aik is still today on the
summit of one of the local mountains, wheie, however, it is
not good for man to search foi it, as none have leturned from
the spot alive In other places, tiadition tells that on the site
of the grounding of the ark, gieat nails have been found,
believed to be lemains of the vessel of the flood

But in what manner can the heio of the flood have iisen to
godlike eminence, to be the object of woiship, lUid have had
asciibed to him so wide a field of action as he actually has
among the Altaic peoples? Without doubt, the beliefs of the


DESTRUCTION OF THE WORLD 367

Iiamans may be legaided as havmg brought this about Their
“ First Man,” Yima, who was worshipped as the ruler over
souls, was at the same time the hero of the flood This rulei
IS met with m Altai Tatar tales as Schal-Jime, the first part of
the name being a deformation of a Thibetan woid meaning
“Prince of Death” In one Altaic creation-tale God says
“ Thou art my man, Schal-Jime, look well after the man who
has tasted stiong drink, and little children, foals, calves and
lambs, those dying happily take to theel ” ” According to the
preceding, Schal-June, like Jaik-Khan, is the ruler over m-
fants and those dying happily

Some of the more northern peoples of Siberia tell how the
flood brought about the oiigin of many races and many lan-
guages, a question dealt with in the Bible in connection with
the tower of Babel The Ugrians tell how the people saved
on then lafts diifted in difleient dnections, settling aftei the
flood m different paits of the earth ” In the same way, with-
out mentioning any special hero, the Yenisei Ostiaks relate
When the water rose continuously during seven days, part of
the people and animals were saved by climbing on to the logs
and rafters floating on the water But a strong north wind,
which blew without ceasing for seven days, scattered the people
far from one another And for this teason they began, after
the flood, to speak different languages and to form different
peoples/*

Original and unaffected as these tales appeal to be, especially
in the frequently flooded Yenisei distnct, where the hated
north wind often causes trouble, we cannot even heie, in this
primitive state, assume the story to have originated in North
Siberia Above all, the influence of foreign flood tales seems
to be apparent in the seven-day periods of time Compared
with the former tales, however, these latter would seem to
lepiesent a new type,

Far away in the north, on the tundras of the Samoyeds,
a flood tale has also been recorded, in which, as in the anaent


SIBERIAN MYPHOLOGY


368

Indian tales, seven pusons ate said lo have been saved m a
boat The Samoyeds go on to 1 elate how, aftci the flood, a
teiiible dt ought followed, so that these suivivois wcie neaily
dying of thiist Fiom this disastei, howevti, they wcic saved
by digging a deep hole in the giound, in which watei foimed
Moi e diflicult was the hnding of noui ishment This caused all
but one young man and one maid to die of hungei, these two
having staitcd to eat the mice whicli came out of the giound
From this couple the present human lacc is descended **

Fot the sake of comp<uison a flood tale fiom Noith-East
Sibeiia may be given, accoiding to which people weie saved
by binding togethei tiunks of tiees into gieat lafts Establish-
ing themselves on these, they took with them sufllcient provi-
sions foi the duration of the flood To pi event the rafts fiom
diifting out to sea, the people fastened locks to long lopcs
which weic then diopped to the bottom as anchois Finally,
these log-rafts giounded on a high mountain *® In the above
foim this stoiy is told, e g , by the ICamchadales
Besides a dcstiuctive flood, some of the Noith Sibetian
peoples speak also of a gieat conflagiation, which once de-
stroyed all life on the eoith. The Tungus fiiom behind the
Baikal describe it as follows In the beginning was the eaith,
but then a gieat fiie laged for seven ycais and the eaith was
buined up Eveiything became sea All the Tungus weie
consumed except a boy and a giil who lose up with an eagle
into the sky Having wandeied foi a time in the an, they
descended to a place wheic the water had dried up With
them tlie eagle also descended to the eaith "

Of an all-devourtng conflagiation the Voguls also speak,
telling how God sent a sea of file upon the eaith m ordei to
destroy the devil The cause of the file they call the fiie-
watei ** In the destiuction of all cieation, only the gods and
a few moitals succeeded in saving themselves. The fotmer
placed themselves on an “ non ship,” the. lattei on a “ seven-
bottomed beech-raft,” which was piovided in addition with


DESTRUCTION OF THE WORLD 369

a fireproof, sevenfold cover of sturgeon-skin The tale
gives thus the same means of escape os the oidinaiy flood
tales, 'which the conflagration tales of the Voguls otherwise
resemble

The tales of the Voguls also tell of a lecuning conflagiation,
the fearful thundei of which the “ Earth-watching man ” hears
from afar This hero decides to ride through the fire, “ one
side of which glows in the heights of the sky, the othei burning
at both corners of the sky ” With the help of his magic horse
he succeeds also in his attempt Munkacsi believes the Aurora
Borealis to have been the original souice of these ideas This
he assumes is meant by the “ sea of fire ” thi ough which the
hero rides for seven days Obviously, this great phenomenon
of North Siberia has played a great part m awakening the
imagination of the people, the white streaks appearing among
the Northern Lights being sometimes called “The track of
the white horse of the Earth-watching man,” but even then
this tale can hardly have been bom among the Ugrians A
heio tiding aaoss a sea of file on a magic steed is a story-
theme met with over a wide aiea Neither can the steed be
identified with the eagle of the Tungus tale, although the con-
flagration tales of the two peoples seem to have much in
common As mentioned befoie, the fire in the Tungus tale
lasts for seven years, conesponding to the desciiption in the
Vogul tale “Already for seven winters and summers the
fire has raged, alieady for seven winters and summers it has
burnt up the eaith ” “

Conflagiation tales have also been noted down elsewhere m
Asia Thus, for instance, in East India it is told how God, as
mankind sank deeper into sin, sent a flood of fiie on to the
eaith, here also called “water of file” Two people only,
bi other and sister, were saved by. hiding themselves The
anaent avilized peoples of Nearer Asia would also seem to
have known these conflagiation tales

Quite obvious is the alien influence m such Central Asian


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


370

tales which tell how a gicat file will occur at the end of the
woi Id and burn up the whole c<u tli

The Altai Tataib say that when Olgcn sends Maiderc (a
Buddhist Bodhibattm) fiom the sky, who will teach people
the feai of God and convcit the gieatei pait of mankind, the
evil Erlik will become angiy and say to Maidcic "1 am
strong enough to kill thee with my swoid” At the same
time the devil will attack Maideie and fulfil his tin cat The
blood of Maideie, said to tuin the whole woild led, will take
fire, the fiames suriounding the eaith and using to the heavens
Then Olgen will aiiive and clapping his hands togethei shout

Ye dead, arisel ” And at once these will aiise fiom then
hiding-places, some out of the eaith and some fiom the sea,
others fiom the file 01 the places in which they had hidden
when ovei taken by; death In the woild-conflagiation Eilik
and all wicked people will be desti oyed

This mighty diaraa of the end of the woild, in which the
poweis of good and evil engage in a final contest and in which
evil is completely desti oyed, is probably Iianian eschatology,
pleached peihaps in Cential Asia by the apostles of Monicheism
in their time

Gimpaiable with the eschatology of the Bible is also the
belief of the Buriats, that at the end of the woild a gieat
river of fiie will flow from the east to the west, thi owing its
spaiks everywheie so that the whole of aeation will be set
alight In the place of this old eaith it is believed, howevei,
that a new one will appeal with new inhabitants ”


CHAPTER VII

THE CREATION OF MAN

T he TRANS-BAIKAL Tungus relate how Buga (the
Heaven god) made the first two people out of various
materials which he gathered from the foui quarters of the
earth From the east he brought iron, from the south fire,
fiom the west water, and from the north earth Out of the
eaith he aeated the flesh and the bones, out of the iron the
heart, out of the water blood, and out of the fire warmth
Aocoiding to a Yeside aeation story God made the body
of Adam by mixing the f oui elements, fire, watei , air and earth.
Old Jewish, Aiabian and Syiian tales describe also how God,
when creating the first man, gathered material from the four
coineis of the earth* Accoiding to the Jewish story, these
matenals of which God made the body of Adam m the centre
of the earth, weie of different colouis, red, black, white and
brown, from which we may assume that, as in the Tungus’ tale,
each contained some element connected with some quartei of
the earth Thus the first man xras a kmd of microcosmos,
closely 1 elated to the macrocosmos

This anaent fancy is to be found also in Russian tales of
aeation In one manuscript from the twelfth century the four
quarters of the earth have been doubled, the story relating
that God gathered material from eight directions In later
tales, of which one is from the sixteenth centuiy, it is said
that Adam’s body, i e , the flesh, was made of earth, his bones
of stone, his ligaments of roots, his blood of water, his eyes
of the sun, his thoughts of douds, his spiiit of wind and his
warmth of fire According to another tale God made the body
of earth, the bones of stone, the ligaments of roots, the blood


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


37a

of watei, the h.iu of gidbs, the thoughts of wind (clouds)
and the spa it of clouds (wind) '

How dose the connection ib between man and natuie accoid-
mg to this Asiatic conception appeals also in Feisian litciature
30) in whidi the icsuiiection is deset ibed 111 the
following woids ** At that time the bones will be demanded
bade ftom the eaith, the blood fiom watci, the hair fiom
plants, and life fiom fire, all these having been at the time of
creation oidcied to letuin to theii lespective souices after
death ”

But this relation of man with natuic appeals also fiom a
contiary conception, accoiding to which the maaocosmos itself
IS boin of man, the miciocosmos Accotdmg to a tale of the
Kalmucks the woild was foimed flora the body of Manza-
shiti (=the Buddhibt Bodhisittva Manjuai), the tices fiom
his blood-vessels, fire from the waimth of his inteiioi oigans,
caith fiom his body, iron from his bones, watci fi om his blood,
glass fiom his haii, the bun and the moon fiom hts eyes,
the seven planets fiom his teeth, imd the othei stais from his
back ‘ In the same way is the cosmos foi med when the Chinese
dcmiuige Pan-ku expiies fiom his spiiit is bom the wind,
from his voice the thundei, flora his left eye the sun and his
right eye the moon, fiom his blood the iivus, fiom his halts
the plants, fiom his saliva the latn, and fiom his veimin man-
kind * Alieady the Vedic litciatuie of India (^Rgveda, X 90)
tells how the woild was foimed fiom the body of a human-
shaped piiraoidial being, Puiusa The Mamcheans have a
similar tale,® and even far in Europe, in Scandinavia, we find
a valiant of it In the Edda of Snoiii it ib told how the sons
of Bor slew the giant Yrau, and of his flesh cieated the earth,
of his blood the watei, of his bones the stones and locks, of
his skull the sky, of his biains the clouds, and of his eyebrows
the ciicle suiiounding Midgaid Doubtless all the above
stones have some connection with each othci and have not
arisen separately.


PLATE XLIV

OiD Turkish MrMORiAL Image in North
Mon&oiia

(See page 301 )

Aftci photogiaph by S PSlsu


THE CREATION OF MAN 373

In the tales of the Central and North Asian peoples the
matenals of which the fiist man’s body was made, vary The
most common conception among the Buriats is that the flesh was
made of led clay, the bones of stone, and the blood of water'
The Altaic peoples believe that bones were aeated fiom reeds
and the rest of the body fiom clay * The Noi th-West Sibeiian
peoples, like the Voguls, relate how God “ took wiUow-twigs,
bound them into skeletons, coveied them with a layei of clay,
set them before him and blew into them” In other tales
they tell how God created man and animals fiom earth and
snow ** The Yenisei Ostiaks relate how God rubbed a piece of
earth in each hand fot a long time and at last threw them
away The piece thi own by the 1 ight hand became a man, that
fiom the left hand, a woman “

Although some Sibeiian peoples seem to have paidy shaped
then own aeation beliefs, we can m nowise decide from
this that the idea of aeation itself was then own The tales
themselves, to which these oiiginal fanaes are connected
as sepal ate details, aie the best proof of then being of foreign
oiigin

As in the stones about the origin of the earth, so aUo in tales
telling of the creation of man we find two antagonistic beings,
God and the devil, the latter in some way mat ring the woik of
the foimer In most instances the devil succeeds in approach-
ing man before God has had time to give him life The dog,
whom God sets to watch over man, has a veiy, important part
in these tales.

Among the Black Tatais there is the following stoiy When
the great Pajana foimed the first people from a piece of earth,
he could not give them life He was therefore compelled to
go to Heaven to Kudai to seek a Iife-giving spirit foi them
When going he left a dog to guaid the people While he was
away the devil Eilik arrived and said to the yet naked dog
“Thou hast no fur-covering, I will give thee golden hairs,
give thou to me those soulless people ” The dog was delighted


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


374

with Eilik’b piopobftl aiid gave the people whom he wa& to
guaid into the keeping of the devil Having thus come near
the people the devil defiled them by spitting on them, but
fled when he saw Kudai appioaching to give them life When
God Siiw that the devil had befouled the bodies of the people
and that it was impossible to make them clean again he luined
them inside out Fiom that time the inlerioi of man is full
of filth and spittle “

A similai explanation of the oiigin of the filth inside man is
given by a Yakut tale When God had cieated the woild he
built a gieat stone house in which he placed seven stone images
and “ Man ” to guard them Day by day the devil begged
for enhance into the house, endeavouring to biibe the guaidian
without success, until he piomised “Man” an mdeshuctible
gaiment, v(hich he need nevei take off He was then allowed
to approach the images and to soil them with his evacuations
When God came to look at his images and saw what the devil
had done in his absence he giew angiy, lepioachcd the
guardian, and fulfilled his wish by changing him into a dog
The images he turned inside out and blew a spiiit into them
For that leasoii the inteiioi of man is full of filth

Coi responding tales are met with among the Volga Finns,
the Cheremiss, Votiaks and Moidvins The puipoit of these
tales also is to explain why the mteiior of God-cicatcd man is
unclean The Mordvin tale tells in addition that internal
diseases are caused by the spittle of the devil.“ Ccitain
diseases, a cough in paiticulai, aie given a similai origin in
Russian tales In the Samoyed tale which does not contain
the tutnmg inside out of man, seiious eiuptions, pox, and
gatheiings are the lesult of the deviFs saliva In this tale
also appeals a dog, naked as man himself, on whose body
the devil causes haii to grow by. sticking it,“

In anothei cycle of tales, in which the devil soils the people
whom God had created by spitting on them, these people had
originally some covering, haii oi nail-matter.


THE CREATION OF MAN 375

The Buiiats of the Balagaa District tell how three aeatois,
Shibegeni-Buikhan, Madaii-Buikhaiij and Esege-Burkhan
made the fiist pair of human, beings, using ted clay for the
flesh, stone foi bones and water for blood Doubtful as to
which of them should proem e a spirit foi these as yet soulless
beings, they determined to find out by placing a torch and a
vessel of water before each and going to sleep beside them.
The one whose torch took file during the night and in whose
watei -vessel a plant appeared should have the honour of giving
life to man and of being his tutehiry genius Shibegeni-
Burkhan awoke m the night before the others and seemg that
the burning torch and the plant were in front of Madari-
Buikhan he stealthily lighted his own candle, putting out that
of the othei, and lemoved the plant into his own vessel In
the morning, when the Buikhans awoke and saw that the fire
and the plant had appeared before Shibegem-Buikhan they
decided that fate had determined him to be the life-giver
and the guaidian of man But Madari-Buikhan suspected
Shibegeni-Burkhan of having acted deceitfully, and said
" Thou hast stolen the file and the plant fiom me, therefoie
the people thou givest life to will ever steal from one another
and quarrel together””

This stoiy, a pioduct of Buddhism, which evidently en-
deavouis to explain the origin of quarielling and robbery in
the world, is in itself a complete tole, although in this Bunat
tale It appears only as a preface to another story The tale
tells further how Madan-Burkhan and Esege-Burkhan de-
paited to heaven, leaving these eaith-created beings, which at
that time were covered with hairs, m the keepmg of Shibegeni-
Buikhan When the latter also had to visit heaven to bring
a spirit for man, he set a dog, which had then no hair, to guard
the sleeping people. While he was away the devil Shiktur
bribed the dog with a promise of hair resembling that of
mortals, and ms allowed to defile them by spitting on them
When Shibegeni-Buikhan came down from heaven and saw


376 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY

that the devil had succeeded m soiling the bodies of the people,
he became angiy and cuised the dog on whose body he saw the
deviPs haii-coveimg, saying “ Thou shall evei suffei hungei,
gnaw cold bones and nouiish thyself with lemains fiom man’s
lepasts, and man shall beat thee " Then Shibegeni-Burkhan
cleaned the peoples’ bodies of the bans which the devil had
soiled, and they became naked except in those paits which the
devil’s saliva had not touched, such as the head, which they
in sleeping had happened to covet with then hands
A cot responding tale of the Buiiats of Alaisk, in which we
do not meet with the pieface mentioned above, also tells how
Bui khan created a haii -coveted man out of vaiious mateiials,
set the dog to guaid him and went to heaven to fetch a spiiit for
him, and how the wicked Sholmo, having deceived the dog, de-
piived man of his haii, leaving only a lemnant in some paits
of the body The tale tells at its close that had the devil nevet
succeeded in touching man, man would ncvei have known
sickness oi death ” In a tale lecoidcd among the Voguls of
the Losva, the coveiing of the hist man was luil-mattcr or
horn^mattei But while God was absent, seeking a spiiit foi
man, the devil (Kul-oter) managed to spoil his body so that
the nail-matter lemained only on the ends of his hngeis and
toes The surface of the body having thus become tender man
was an easy piey foi sickness and death

In this form the tale is known also to the Mordvins By
giving the dog a hait -covering the devil secuies the oppoi tunity
of spoiling the hist hoin-coveied man so that only the ends
of the fingeis and toes keep tlieii coverings
This original hair-coveiing oi hoin-coveimg of the human
body IS met with even in other tales which remind one of the
Biblical story of the fall of man. Seeing that the last men-
tioned covering is compaiatively raie in cieation tales, but in
paradise-stones quite common, we may conclude that it has been
taken from the latter into the former.

In some Central Asian aeation tales in which the dog also


THE CREATION OF MAN


377

appears, the devil, during God’s absence, blows a spirit into
the man whom God has created
The following Altaic tale relates that Olgen cieated the
hist man, using earth foi flesh and stone for bones, and made
a woman of the man’s rib But he had no spiiit to give them
and was foiced to go in seaich of one On starting he created
a hail less dog to guard the pair This time the dog received
Its hail -covering by eating the excrement of the devil The
latter then blew a spirit mto the people with a reed, which he
inserted in the rectum of the sleeping bodies When Olgen
returned and saw his people alive he was doubtful as to what
he should do, whether to create new human beings or not
While he was considering, the frog came up to him and said
"Why shouldest thou destroy these beings Let them exist
for themselves Who dies, let him die, who lives, let him
live ” And so Olgen let the people live

In anothei tale two creators, Otshirvam and Chagan-
Shukuty, built togethei a human body The latter said to the
foimer "We have created a man, we must yet find him a
spirit to make him alive ” Otshirvam remarked that the devil
might steal the body in their absence, and therefore they de-
aded to set a naked dog to guard it While they were away the
devil arrived, bribed the dog by ptomising him hair, and light-
ing some flax blew the smoke into man’s nostrils. Then man
arose and began to walk To their surprise the gods on re-
turning saw that man had alieady begun to live “

We find thus that in Central and Northern Asia two cycles
of tales are known, m one of which the devil soils the human
body which God has created, while m the other the devil gives
life to a God-created man The purpose of both these cycles
of tales IS to explain the unexpected deficienoes in a being
of God’s creation The former tales lepresent perhaps a more
materialistic conception, dwelling as they do on the weaknesses
of the human body, and chiefly on the filth inside it and the
diseases caused by this, although in certain East European


378 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY

variants wicked, unful tendenaes also aie the lesult of the
devil’s touch The latter cycle of tales endeavouis to explain
man’s mental defiaenaes This appeals even fiom the fol-
lowing Altaic stoiy, in which, howevei, only the capiicious
chaiacter of woman is undei consideiation
When Olgen had created the eaith he made seven masculine
beings upon it and seven tiees, one tiee foi each man Aftei
that he aeated yet an eighth man named Maideie and a tiee
*^upon the golden mountain” Having aeated these beings
God left them to then own lesources and departed Aftei
seven yeais he letuined and saw that each tiee had gi own seven
branches, one branch each year, but the number of men had
not ina eased God said ^What is the meaning of this?
The tiees bring foith new branches but the numbei of men
does not inaease?” Then Maideie leplied "How could
they inaease when there is none able to piocieate? ” God
now g^ve Maidere the powei to lule fieely ovei men and to
take caie that they increased, and so Maideie stepped down
from the golden mountain, went to the men and began to create
a woman, just as Olgen had aeated him On the thud day,
when he had finished, the woman was leady, but without a
spiiit, so Maideie went out to meet Olgen and left the dog
to guaid the being he h<id made The wicked Etlik, bv biib-
ing the dog, succeeded in appi caching the woman He blew at
once into her nostrils with a seven-toned flute and played into
hei ear with a nine-strmged instrument, woman thus receiving
a spirit and an intellect But for this leason woman has seven
tempers and nine moods When Maideie huiiied back, he
saw the living woman and said to the dog " Why didst thou
let Erlik come so neai, how did he deceive thee? ” The dog
leplied' "El Ilk promised me a fui-coat which should last
unto my death and be neither hot in summer nor cold m
wintei.” Then Maidere said to him: " The gaiment promised
thee shall be a haiiy coveitng which shall glow fast on to thy
body ” At the same time he cuised the dog, prophesying that


THE CREATION OF MAN 379

people should al\ra.ys treat him ill, that he should be compelled
to live under the sky, etc “

Thus, even in this tale, the originally naked dog has an
important pait The existence of this common featuie m all
the creation tales gives us reason to assume that they all have
a common loot, in whatevei variants they may appeal To
this common 1 oot both the devil as spoiler of the people whom
God had cieated, and the dog which guards them, have be-
longed The strictly dualistic conception of this oiiginal root,
a conception which appeals early in the leligion of the Iranians,
wheie also the dog, that originally sacred animal, the expeller
of evil beings, and the creation of Ahura Mazda, had a very
important place, laises the assumption that our tale, as Dahn-
hardt has indicated, is the outcome of an lianian mental at-
mospheie, oiiginating piobably among the Syiian Chiistians,
and fiom them wandering both to Eastern Europe and to
Central and North Asia The access into Western Euiope
foi this, as foi latei onental-syncretistic legends, was moie
difficult

Our tale about the seven men continues by 1 elating how
Maideie inquiies of these, which of them will take the woman
to whom the devil has given life foi his paitner Three of
them at once refuse absolutely and escape to the golden moun-
tain wheie they become assistant spirits to God, or Burkhans
The other four remain on the earth, and Olgen takes two ribs
from each side of one of them, Targyn-nama, and of them
makes him a wife ”

An eailier mentioned Yakut tale also tells of the seven first
men whom the devil maned befoie God had given them life
This tale also has a continuation in which the numbeis thiee
and foui aie specially noticeable It tells how God gave a
wife to foui only, wherefore the other thiee were dissatisfied
They complained to God and, as he took no notice, adultery
came into the woild These thiee got wives in the end when
the daughteis of the first four women grew up One of the


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


380

daughteis, lioweverj could find no husband and became there-
fore A prostitute

Moic ancient than the fanoes m these creation tales of the
origin of man’s defioenacs are those tales in which man first
succumbs to evil suggestions af tei God has given him life


CHAPTER VIII
THE FALL OF MAN

I N CONNECTION with the creation myths we have
touched on many tales, in which already at his creation,
man was corrupted by the devil and, therefore, never attained
the peifection which God had intended for him In the fol-
lowing we shall see how man, after his creation by God, has
of his own accord drawn disaster on himself

In most of the tales of this series, man was originally en-
dowed with a special covering, which piotected him from cold,
moisture, wind and other matters liable to affect his health
Some of the tales provide him with a coat of fur, others with
a nail-substance oi horn covering With the eating of the
forbidden fiuit man loses hib natural, protective covering
Very mteiestmg is the following Altaic tale
A lonely tree grew without branches God saw it and said
^*A single, branchless tree is not pleasant to look upon, let
nine blanches gtow on it’’ The nine branches grew on the
tree God continued " Let nine human beings appear under
the nine branches, from the nine human beings nine races,”
Further on m this tale only two people aie spoken of, man and
wife, who were at first covered with fur The name of the
man was Torongoi and of the wife Edji (“ Mother ”) God
said to these people " Do not eat of the fruit of the four
branches growing towaids the sunset, but eat of the five towards
the sunrise,” And God placed a dog undei the tree as its
guatdian, sajnng ^ If the devil comes, seize him ” In addi-
tion he stationed the snake there, saying to it If the devil
comes, bite him ” Further, he said to both dog and snake
" If man comes to eat of the fruit towards the sunrise, let him


382 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY

apptoach the tiee, but if he wi&hcii to cat of the fiuit of the
foibiddeii blanches, do not let him come neai ” Having said
which God t etui lied to Heaven

The devil then ai lived at the tice, wheie he saw the snake,
which had just happened to £.U1 asleep He ciept cunningly
into the snake and with its help climbed the tiee, fiom whcie
he tempted hist the woman and then, thiough hci agency, the
man, to eat of the fiuit of the foi bidden blanches Having
eaten, the couple see to then astonishment how the haii begins
to fall fiom their bodies Ashamed, they hide fiightcncd
behind the ti ee

When God came on to the earth and saw what had happened
In his absence, he said to the man “ How is it with thee? ”
The man icplicd “ The woman has pushed into my mouth
the fot bidden fiuit” God turned admonishingly to the
woman “ Why, hast thou done this? ” The woman answcied
“ The snake tempted me to eat ” God said to the snake
" Snake, what hast thou done? ” It lepUed “ Not I, but
the devil who had aept into me tempted hei ” God said
“ How did the devil aecp into thee? ” The snake leplied
“ As I slept, the devil aiiived ” God turned then to the dog,
saying “How was it with thee, why didst thou not diive
away the devil? ” The dog answered “ Mine eyes saw him
not ” ^

The intioduction to this tale, m which nine people aie men-
tioned, mystically connected with the nine blanches of the
tree, lesembles gieatly an eatliei i elated talc of seven tiees
and seven men In both tales these tiees were at iiist bianch-
less The latei tale goes on to i elate that the fitst woman gave
biith to nine sons and nine daugliteis, destined aftetwaids to
become the ancestoi s of nine i aces A few North Sibei lan tales
speak of the seven anccslots of tlic human tacc “ The numbeis
seven and nine would seem, thciefoic, to have alternated in
these tales.

In the Central Asian tales, our attention is drawn to the


THE FALL OF MAN


383

fact that as the guardians, of the foi bidden fiuiC both the
snake and the dog aie mentioned The latter^ which is no
longei mentioned in the punishments following on the dis-
obedience, would seem to have been introduced only tem-
poiaiily into this tale fiom the earliei related aeation-tales

Otheiwise, the tale Is veiy similai to the anoent Semitic
btoiy of the fall as known to us fiom the Bible Only m
details does it diffei fiom the lattei In the paradise of the
Bible, two trees aie mentioned, the tree of life and the tree
of knowledge of good and evil, both growing in the centre
of patadise, the fruit of the latter being forbidden to man
The Central Asian tale mentions only one tree, the ftuit of
the five eastwaid branches of which weie intended as nourish-
ment for man, but the fiuit of the four westward-gi owing
blanches of whicli was ftaug^t with misfoitune This tree
was at the same time the tree of life and death, in the Bible
stoiy life and death weie lepiesented by separate trees The
littu difius also fiom the former m the fact that it attempts
to explain the oiigin of death spiiitually, as a consequence
of disobedience 01 the fall The Cential Asian tale would
seem to lepiesent a more piimitive state by connecting the
misfortune with the fruit itself Starting from this, we may
pel haps assume that the original foim of the so-called story
of the fall has come into being merely to explain how man,
believed to have oiigmoUy been cieated for eternity, could
die Death was thus not origmally regarded in the light of
a punishment, but as the natuial consequence of eating of the
fateful fruit, as, having lost its original covering, the power
of lesistance of the human body declined and diseases fol-
lowed Generally, pnmitive peoples tell how sickness and
death, non-existent in the beginning, have since become the
scouige of mankind

The idea of an original coveting of hair on tlie human
body IS widely-spread m Central and Northern Asia The
Voguls relate that In the beginning God created human beings


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


384

coveted altogethci with hait, and that they wcie allowed to
move cveiywheie and eat of cvciything but the “forest-
spiiit-berry ” (yacemmn uhginostfifn, gi owing in bwamps)
God then went off to Heaven, but returning to look at hib
aeatures, he had gieat difficulty in hnding these at all In
the end God found them hidden beneath some bushes When
they aept out at God’s command, he saw that the human
beings whom he had cicated had lost then coveting of han
and shiveied naked befoie him This had come about by their
eating of the fateful beriies, against the expiess command of
God, and thus becoming a prey to cold and moistuie ’

In this tale of the Voguls, the mighty and beautiful tree
of paiadise of the ancient Semitic race has been tiansformed
to a modest plant growing in the baiien unfruitful noith
Besides the coveting of haii, we have in the cieation-tales
met with anothei piotcctive covenng of the human body, 1 e.,
the horn-coveiing, lost so completely by moitals that the only
reminder of this primitive stale is the substance of which
out hnget -nails and toe-nails are made
This form of the tale, common also in Eastern Europe,
appears alteadv in old Jewisli and Atabian tales, in which it
IS related how the bodies of Adam and Eve m paradise were
covered with a homy substance so that they did not need
clothes Not until the fall did they, with the exception of
the hngei -nails and toe-nails, lose their coveting *

The idea of the halt -coveting of the first human beings is
also piobably ftom Ncaiei Asia It is 1 elated in an Arabian
tale, how, on the diamond mountain of paiadise, Adam and
Eve had long han reaching to the giound, pi electing the
whole body, and how this fell off when they had eaten of the
forbidden fiuit, so that then unpiotccled bodies darkened in
the sun The Bible story also obviously piesupposes the exist-
ence of some coveting, as it is cxpiessly stated that when the
first people had eaten of the f 01 bidden fiuit they saw them-
selves to be naked and m need of some gaiment.


THE FALL OF MAN


385

The Astiachan Kalmucks 1 elate further that during the
time of paradise the first people were some kind of illuminated
beings At this time theie was neither sun nor moon, these
being unnecessary^, as human beings then lighted up their
sui roundings themselves The eating of the fiuit extin-
guished then light altogether, all nature became dark, and
God was obliged to give mankind the sun and the moon.”
This belief is also founded on Neater Asian tales

Anothei consequence of the fall, according to the Kal-
mucks, was the shortening of the age of man and a 1 eduction
in his size In the beginning men had been immortal or
could at least live thiough a world-epoch, eighty thousand
years, but giadually their age decreased, one year each cen-
tury, so that their present average age is only sixty This
shortening will continue with the giowth of sin until people
will live to be only ten years of age At the same time, after
having originally been giants, they will decline to the length
of a thumb Then the messenger of the Bodhisattva Maidere
and his apparition Berde-Gabat will arrive on the eaith, and
begin to better the state of men, increasing their age and size,
until they have again attained their former age ”

With these Lamaistic beliefs may be compared the ideas of
the modern Jews, leflected in the following words taken from
a collection of their tales "When Adam was created, his
enormous volume filled all the earth, but when he fell into
sin, he became very small” Ginoermng the shortening of
the age of man we find comments m the Bible itself


CHAPTER IX

THE ORIGIN OF THE MOSQUITO

A QUESTION of special inteiest to the Noithein Sibeuan
peoples IS the oiigm of the myitadb of mosquitoes,
which duiing the light summer of the iioith are an unbearable
plague foi both men and animals.

The Yenisei Ostiaks declare that a cannibalistic demon
Woman, Khosadam, living in the faithest noilh, cieated the
mosquitoes.^ Many other Sibeiian peoples have a special
myth to explain then origin

The Ostiak Samoyeds tell of a. heio named Itje, whose
parents had been devoured by4 a man-eating giant named
Fttnegusse He himself succeeded in escaping and making his
way to a deseit, whcte he was bi ought up by his lelations.
When he had giown to be a strong and heroic youth, he
deaded to fiec his people fiom this demon fiom the north.
He succeeded m killing it, but the demon kept on being born
again He resolved theiefoie to bum up the caicase of the
man-eatei, but even m the file the demon continued to exist
Its jaws ground against each othei when the file had burnt
out, and its voice cried out that even when burnt up it would
continue to plague mankind The wind would scattei its
ashes into the air, whence they would eveiywheie suck the
blood of men. From these ashes the innumerable mosquitoes
of Siberia aiise each summer*

In a Samoyed variant a small black bud is boin of the
flesh of Ffinegusse. This bud is called "a bit of Filnegussc’s
flesh.” •

Among the Ostiaks of the iivei Vach this stoiy runs buefly
as follows A great bird once caught a gieat pike and gave
it to its sister to cook. The lattei prepared instead a meal


THE ORIGIN OF THE MOSQUITO 387

of dog’s offal, which so emaged the bud that it flew away
until at last it came to the man-eater Finding the hut empty,
the bird ate its fill out of a large kettle of fat, but was
caught by the man-eater To save its own life the bird prom-
ised Its sistei in maniage to the giant and was set free It
then hull led home and to save its sistei, fastened the dooi
so that only, a small hole was left The man-eater, coming
foi his biide, tiled to get thiough this hole, but stuck fast
there. The bird then killed him with a great knife and set
fire to the house The body of the man-eater was burnt to
ashes, but here also the spiiit spoke, foretelling that its ashes
would each summer be born anew as mosquitoes and would
continue to live on the flesh of men *

Coiiespondmg myths, apparently of Indian oitgin, are to
be found among the Altai Tatais The evil Erlik created a
water-giant named Andalma-Muus, who put out his long
tongue to seize men, whom he then swallowed. Three of
Olgen’s heioes, Mandyshire, Tyurun-Muzykay, and Maidere,
dcaded to kill this demon Tyuiun-Muzykay declaied him-
self to be the strongest giant-killei Having said this, he
came down fiom heaven, was given buth to by. a vugin, and
became a man While he was still qiute young he was run-
ning about once on the searehore when he saw the giant stick
out his long tongue to seize him and diag him into the depths
The young hero, however, was not helpless 111 this danger,
but grasped the demon’s tongue and pulled so mightily that
the eaith was in danger of sinking under the water To
avoid this the heio drank so much of the sea that the water
sank until he could see the feet of the demon The youth
then giasped his feel, pulled the giant out of the sea and
beat him against the locks so that his blood squuted out
and his entiails were scattered ovei the rocks From this
oiiginates the mixed colouring of locks After this, the hero
cut the body into little pieces, out of which certain insects,
including also mosquiloes, weie boin"


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


388

According to a Yakut cannibal myth, the man-eating giant
was burnt up, and fiom the fiagmcnts of his bones all kinds
of destructive insects, cUid also frogs and snails weie born*
Similaily, in Mongol talcs it is related how a hero named
Kaiaty-Khan vanquishes a demon, giinds it into fiagments
and throws these into the air, thus giving biith to mosquitoes
and othei insects ^

Fai away to the east, among the Goldes, tales of a similai
character are met with These tell of two sisters who lived
in the same hut While one of them was away, the man-
eater came to the other, enticed hei fiom hei hiding-place and
tucked her into putting out her tongue, which the man-eater
at once plucked out of hei mouth When the othei sistei
came home, she found out what had happened in her absence
and decided to avenge her sister’s death. She sought a long
time foi the home of the man-eatei, and at last she found
four stoie-houscs, of which one was full of human hands,
anothei of humim feet, a third of heads, and in the fouith
numerous human tongues hung ftom the loof Among these
she discovered the still waim tongue of het sister She
wrapped this in a clean cloth and went on, until, in the depths
of the foiest, she found tlie man-eater’s dwelling hidden
away The demon was away, but his sistei, who was a good
person, was at home and piomised to help in killing him
In the evening he came home, bunging a human body with
him and devouting this for suppei, aftci which he went to
sleep. The women now came forward and bioke the demon
into pieces with hammeis, scatteiing the pieces in all direc-
tions While doing so, they said ^*Man-eatei, thou fedst
thyself on human flesh, may the pieces of thy flesh and thy
bones change into small insects, which like thee shall eat
human blood. Of the smallest fiagmcnts may gnats be bom,
of those a little laigei mosquitoes, and of the laigest flics,
beetles, etc.” Immediately gieat clouds of insects arose, which
spread over the eaith *


THE ORIGIN OF THE MOSQUITO 389

The Goldes have still anothei tale related to this A
brothel and sister lived m a hut in peace Once when the
bi other came home from the foiest, he noticed that his sister
had altered considerably He began to suspect that some one
kept company with her For this leason, he strewed ashes
outside the hut when setting off again on a hunting-tiip
Returning the next morning, he was astounded to see the
foot-prints of a tiger in the ashes He hid his suspicions,
however, until it became apparent that his sister was eticetnte
Then he decided to thrust a knife into hei breast as she lay
murmuring shaman songs to herself. While singing she said
*^I have lived with the tiger, he is my husband, his spirit
IS in me, thou canst not kill me, but if thou wilt cut off my
little ffngei, I shall die” The biothei cut off his sister’s
little finger and when she was dead, built a large log-fire and
threw the body on to it While the body was burning, instead
of spaiks, all kinds of evil spiiits in the foim of birds and
insects flew out of the file *

Cannibal myths of this description, which are to be found
also among the Tungus, and aie extremely chaiacteiistic of
the more northern peoples of Sibeiia, have been noted down
also on the other side of the Faafic Ocean As in Siberia,
North American Indian myths tell of the birth of blood-suck-
ing insects from the ashes of a man-eatei It seems prob-
able, therefore, that these primitive tales have a common
origin.


CHAPTER X

THE HEAVEN GOD

A S FAR back ns the thuteenth centuiy, Plano Cnipim
relates in his Htstorta Mongolotum that ** The Mongols
believe in one God, whom they legaid as the cieatoi of all
things visible and invisible’’ Rubiuquis also lemaiks that
the Mongols acknowledge the existence of one God, but
that despite this they piepaie idols foi themselves Similaily,
the Atabian histoiians mention the " one ” God of the Mon-
gols, whom, accoiding to a deace of Jcnghi^ Khan, all the
subjects of the Gieat Khan had to honour and wot ship
We might pel haps assume the above icpoils of “one”
God to have been colouicd in some way oi othei, but on
closer acquaintance with the beliefs of the Cential Asian
peoples, we find that the Heaven god has actually had an
exceptional position vanong them These lepoits ate, fuithei,
of such late date, that alien, and, moie paiticulaily, Feisian
cuuents of civilization have long befote then time cxciased
a consideiable influence on them As a relic of Maadaism
we find in the folk-loie of both the Mongols and the Tatais
the name of Ahuta-Mazda (Mongol Hoimusda, Altaic
Tatar Khiubystan) It is also a well-known fact that Mani-
cheism and Nestoiianism had by then spiead then doctiines
into this teiritoiy, the wife of Jenghiz Khan himself would
seem to have been a Nestoiian Chiistian. Mattel s being thus,
we have no reason to doubt these old lepoits, they aie tiust-
woithy at least legardmg the time of which they speak. An-
other question is whether they may be legaidcd ns expiessing
the oldest beliefs of the Central Asian peoples concermng
the god of Heaven.


THE HEAVEN GOD


39 ^

A woid of then own language, used by the Mongols as
a name foi then “ one ” god, is Tengii, a name used for the
Heaven god m many othei Altaic languages (Kalmuck Tengi t,
Buriat Tengeri, Tatai Tangere, Yakut and Dolgan Tangara,
Chuvash Tuia) This woid meant oiiginally, “Heaven”
Among the Chuvash the meaning Heaven ” foi Tuia seems
to have become extinct, and among the Yakuts also, Tangara
appeals only, in folk-lore as meaning “the sky” Having
acquiied the meaning of a god hving m Heaven, this word
began to be used m many languages for “god” in genet al
(= Latin daus) The Yakuts use it when speaking of their
idols, le, wood, stone oi biich-baik Tangara The disap-
peaiing significance of the word, a *‘sky” appreciable by the
senses, shows plainly, that in the beginning the “ Heaven god ”
of the peoples i elated to the Tuiks was the animated sky
Itself with Its wonderful, mystical poweis At this stage,
when as yet no humanlike oi othei wise specially shaped being
IS thought of, with the sky merely as his dwelling-place, the
heavens and the Heaven god do not lequiie separate names
as they did latei An iriefutable proof of this original point
of view IS the old title given by the Mongols to the Heaven
god when woi shipping him “Blue Tengi i ”

Ebcamples of the deification of the heavens themselves are
met with among the other surrounding peoples Herodotus
alieady tells how the anaent Feisians worshipped as their
god (2eus) “ the whole area of the sky ” The name Tien
of the Chinese Heaven god meant originally “ the sky ” The
Finnish races also used the word “sky” when speaking of
their Heaven gods without any lesulting confusion of thought
Similar examples aie ofifeied by the most noithein peoples
of Asia, the Samoyeds and the Yenisei Ostiaks

In Mongolian folk-loie two expiessions are met with
“ Blue Tengri ” and “ Eternal Tengri,” which, according to
Banzai ov, denote two different stages of development. The
most common name, “Blue Tengri,” for the power behind


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


39 «

all the different phenomena of the bkjr, which gives to the
eatth fruitfulne% and piodiictivity, amnot, accoiding to this
investigatoi, apply to a spnitiul being, but the “Eternal
Tengri ” who lules the woild and dcciecs the fates of peoples
and individuals, docs seem to be a spiiitual entity.* We can-
not on oui pait, howevei, discern any such shaip division in
the vise of these qualifying teims, both being often used
simultaneously.

In the beliefs of the Mongols the detei mining activities
of the sky aie extiemely conspicuous They speak frequently
of the “Fate” (D7ajaga) of the heavens In the Chionicle
of Ssanang Ssetsen it is said that Jenghi^ Khan, “ that lion
among men,” appealed on the earth thiough “ the Pi evidence
(Fate) of the blue, eteinal sky” But not only lulets and
princes, “sons of Heaven” m a special meaning, but also
ordinary mortals weie boin into the world thiough the agency
of the same “Fiovidence” Eveiythmg that happens was
believed to have been deaeed by. the sky When the Mongol
princes published their laws, tliey added to their authoii4ation
the woids “By the Pi evidence of the eteinal sky,” in the
same way as Chiistian monarchs exeicise their powei “by the
grace of God ”

As this Pi evidence belief is not met with among the moie
northern peoples of the Altaic lace, at least not in any such
developed form, oui attention is diawn to the Indo-Ii anians,
the ptoximity of whom to the Mongols cannot but have left
some tiace. The Dzajaga idea of the Mongols coi responds
in fact with the Rita of the anaent Vedic poems and the Asha
of the Avesta, by which a powei watching over the world was
meant This Pi evidence docs not seem to have been pei-
sonified, neithei weie sacrifices offered up to it in the begin-
ning The relations of men towatds it may be compated with
those of the Gieeks of Homei’s time towatds Moiia, under
whose laws even the gods existed But it is to be noted that
this Providence or Fate, the decrees of which weie unrecall*


THE HEAVEN GOD


393

able, was always connected with the sky, according to the
ideas of the Central Asian peoples In a similar way Fate
was regarded by the Chinese, who call Fate Tien-ming (“ the
sky«-ordei ”) being in this lespect entirely of the same opinion
as the Mongols Both these peoples see in the complete sub-
oidination of Heaven to its own laws an example for all earthly
01 del

In the list of gods of the Chuvash living in Russia, a spirit
named Kaba (“Fate,” “Providence”) coiiesponds to the
Dzajaga of the Mongols, fiom the former the Cheremiss
have taken it as Kava-Jumo and the Votiaks as Kaba-Immai,
and unaware of its origin, sacrifice nowadays to it as to a
Heaven god Among the Eastern Cheremiss even sacred
gloves {Kawalm 'pmtm) weie consecrated to Fate*

Obviously, Dzajaga, Kaba, Rita, Asha, Tien-mmg and
Moira, called Fatum by the Romans, are closely related to
one anothei in their meaning The question aiises, therefore,
as to whether this fatalistic belief is a geneial pioduct of the
human intellect, born among each of the separate peoples,
01 whether wc have heie a result of the so-called “ migration
theoiy ” The dependence of fate on the heavenlv rules pre-
supposes so natuially a certain stage of development that we
cannot avoid turning oui glance to the cosmology of the
ancient Babylonians Nowhere else, in this early period, do
we meet with such admiration of the constant ordei of the
sky and such blind belief in its mechanically working powers,
the lattei affecting all life down to the smallest details Here
the sky has tiuly been “a Book of Fate” in which the wise
can read future events For this reason it is more than
piobable that just this star fatalism of the Babylonians has
been the model and the source of the Providence beliefs of
all the above mentioned peoples.

As the fate of eveiything is thus dependent on the sky.
It IS natuial that one should say, like the Mongols “The sky
decrees ” oi “ the sky commands ” In the same way as the


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


394

Vedic poems speak of the “ diicctoi of liita,” so the lulct of
Piovidcnce, I)/.ijdg.itsi {dzaja = “to dccite,” “allow,”
“ordei,” 01 “command”), appeals simultaneoubly with
D/ajagd in the beliefs of the Mongols, meaning the god of
Heaven The qualifying attiibutc of the sky is often
“Dzajagatsi Tengii” In the insciiptions of Oikhon, whcie
the “ heavens” aic mentioned also as the god of aiinies, wc
meet with the woid dzaja with the meaning of “to com
mand” “The sky commanded oui aimics in the wai and
we weie victoiious”

The DzajagatSi of the Mongols h,is a counteipait in the
JajutSi of the Altaic lacc, the Dzajan of the Minusinsk Tatais^
and the Buiiat Zajan (Mongol dzaja — Altaic Tatai jaja
t=Buiiat zajd) The Buriats by Khudmsk call the Over^'
god of the heavens Zajan-Sagan-Tengeii “white”).

Anothei qualification of the Heaven god with the same mean-
ing IS the Tatai Bujuiuktsi {bitjur, “ to deciee,” oi “ oidci ”),
loaned also by the Ugiians (Ostyak Paireksc) The Voguls
append to the name of then god in then own language,
“ Num-Toi em-paii eks ” The same woi d is fui Lhcr met with
in the god-name of the Chuvash, Puidan-Tuia, and in that of
the Clieiemiss, PuiiSo-Jumo (Cheicmiss = Chuvash

Kazan Tatai iojot-)

We see thus how this idea of a Fate bound up with the
heavens is common to all the Tuik-i elated peoples In addi-
tion to all the moie fateful ocusions of life, biith in especial
IS dependent on the pi evidence of Heaven Dzajagatsi,
JajutSi, Bujuruktsi, etc, aic often spoken of as the dcciecis
of biith, and at the same tune as a kind of gods of biith
Sometunes some othei than the actual Heaven god is given
this title. The Altai Tatai s, who speak of sevcial stoieys in
the heavens, believe JajutSi to live in the fifth of these.'
Here he is thus a being apait fiom the Ovei-god. Each
mortal having his own fate, each has been given a special
ruler of fate, which follows him faitlifully from the moment


THE HEAVEN GOD


395

of biith The Mongols call this spirit, which does not desert
man as long as he is in favour with the heavens, Dzol- (“ hap-
piness ”) DzajagatSi * It is said to watch over the health of
Its ward, his piopeity and his prospeiity in general, protecting
him at the same time fiom all dangers Similarly, each
moital has, according to the Altai Tatais, his own JajutSi,
which, having received oideis fiom above, bungs down life-
force fi om the wonderful “ lake of milk ” m the third storey
of Heaven, then brings the embryo alive into the world, and
follows the man thus born fiom his infancy onward as a kind
of good spirit Besides this, each mortal is supposed to have a
lifelong evil companion, Kormos, which from his birth tries
to harm him The former, which writes down the good deeds
done in life, is said to be on man’s right shoulder, the latter,
which notes down his evil deeds, at his left These JajutSi,
like the blessed dead, live in the lands of paiadise in the third
stoiey of Heaven * It is haidly necessary to point out that
these beliefs in good and bad angels leached the Tatars from
the Iianians

The belief that each mortal has a special ai biter of his fate
m Heaven, seems to be closely i elated to the idea that each
mortal has his own stai in the sky The appeal ance of a new
star signifies biith, the “ falling” of a star, death When the
Chuv^ see a shooting-star they shout at once " My star is
still up above I ” “ Several North Siberian peoples also, e g ,
the Tungus, speak of the stars of each mortal '

Plano Carpini says that the Heaven god, accoiding to the
Mongols, IS also the “ avenger ” This punishing activity of
Heaven is closely related to its “ providence ” or “ decreeing ”
When once Heaven has deaeed anything, it is not good for
men to show resistance The Mongols believe that Heaven
«8ees ” eveiythmg, and that therefore no one can conceal his
actions from it In taking an oath, the Mongols say May
Heaven knowl ” oi May Heaven judge! » The levenge of
the heavens has not, howevei, been regarded as something


396 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY

occurring beyond the giave, but is believed to fall on the
guilty alieody m this life. In its judgments Heaven is com-
pletely neutial, punishing piinces as effectually as peasants
Punishment is believed to follow ciime as a kind of innu
necessity ®

Without being in any way. inconstant the sky can sometimes
make troublesome demonstiations, leflecting in its own way
disturbances on the eaith Ncithci wcie the ancient Baby-
lonians unfailingly logical in their conception of the unwavei-
ing laws of Heaven, but saw at times “signs” in the sky,
which weie inteipieted as showing the dissatisfaction of the
gods Heavenly demonstrations of this desaiption were, ac-
cording to the Mongols, comets, meteois, years of famine,
floods, etc , at the thieatemng of which luleis and subjects had
to leview then plans and intentions and humbly submit to the
Will of the “ eteinal sky ”

The Chionicles containing the histoiy of the Mongols men-
tion many illuminative examples. It is i elated in them how
Mogaii-Khan (duiing the Tukiu dynasty) having held am-
bassadors from China foi a long time in captivity, fiecd them
and made peace with then luler after Heaven had by long
storms shown its dissatisfaction at the tyiannous acts of the
Khan. In the fifteenth centuiy the Mongols seiaed the luler
of China and sentenced him to a long tetm of hatd laboui,
but noticing once how the cup fiom which the empeioi had
drunk, glowed with a puiple light, they sent him with all
honouis back to China, as they believed this to be the will of
Heaven. Especially have the leadeis of the people to follow
closely all the “signs” of the sky The Mongols legaid
Jenghiz Khan as having taught them the following wisdom
“ The highest happiness, with which nothing can be compared,
is for the ruler of a land to be in the favout of the eternal
heavens.” '

In crossing over to the most northern peoples of Sibeiia,
we no longer find this deep belief in the Providence of Heaven.


PLATE XLV

PlIAIIUS EftrCiLD Beiorl a Monooi Mon-

ASIIRY 10 FrIOUIIN AWA\ A FeMAIE
Dl MON

(ScL pngi 598 )

Aftci photogt iph by S Ptisu


THE HEAVEN GOD 397

The Heaven god of the Tungus, Samoyeds and Yenisei
Ostiab lb gencially legaided as a being so apart, that he m
no way diiects towaids men any action of a commanding or
avenging chainctei It ib theiefoie unnecessary to fear the
heavenb It ib also exptessly said, concerning the Heaven god
of the Yakuts, that he does not concein himself with doings
on earth 01 the fates of men A certain tale shows God as
saying of moi tals “ In letting them down upon the earth I
did not say to them * Come bacfcl ’ If they increase, let
them inaease, if they die, let them die ” “ In other places,
however, conceptions difFeung from the foiegoing appear

Extiemely widespiead among the peoples of Central Asia
18, furthei, the belief that Heaven is some kind of a giver of
life As a life-ci eating god of this desaiption the dey is
imagined os male, though not anthiopomoiphic, with the earth,
as Its opposite, female Both are then gods of birth, the
foimer acting the pait of fathei, the lattei that of mother
the sky piocieatcs, the earth gives birth Doubtless, this con-
ception is founded on obbeivations made in nature The effects
of light, waimth, lain and wind on vegetation in particular,
awakened m the mind of primitive man the idea of similar
effects on all that has life Thus the thought arose that the
sky gives the spiiit, the Earth Mother the material body.

In this same connection there is perhaps reason to point out
that certain Central Asian peoples, as, for instance, the Buriats,
have for the sake of fiuitfulness worshipped a certain kind of
stone, said to have dropped down from the sky A very
famous " fallen btone is near the town of Balagansk Dur-
ing a long di ought the Buriats sacrifice to it in order to obtain
refreshing rams The stone, which is white m cobur, is said
by the people to have originally fallen on a mountain, whence
It has later removed to several different places. Among the
Buriats by Khudinsk, each village is said to possess a smaUer
" fallen stone,*’ kept m the middle of the village in a trunk
attached to a post. In the Balagansk District, where these


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


398

stones lUe largei, they aic genet ally placed on a platform sup-*
ported by foui posts In the hope of a lainy and fruitful
summer they aie wetted m the spting and off u mgs ate made
to them Piobably, these stones dropped ft om Heaven, which
in shape often lescmble the longish weapons of the Stone Age,
ate, as Agapitov assumes, lelics of a Mongol phallus cult.'^^

The belief m the pioacative poweis of the sky is 1 effected
in numbeiless tales, m which it is explained how the cliildten
of men and the young of animals have come f 1 om Heaven to
the earth Geneially, howevei, it is believed that only the
souls of these come fiom Heaven. The Yakuts believe that
the soul of a child comes down to its mothei m the shape of a
bird ” Accotdmg to a Mongol tale the soul of the founder
of the powei of the Sjanb tube, Tanshikai, came down fiom
above as hail, which fell on the lips of his mothei A ceitain
ancestoi of the Mongols was boin in such a manner that a
descending ray of light fiuctiffcd his mothei. Jenghi£ Khan
IS said by the tales to have been bom of a viigin, whetefoie he
could call the sky ** father ” Ail these ideas spi mg from the
same oiiginal idea, viz, that the sky is the givei of the spiiit
and life

Whethei the name of the Yakut Heaven god, Ajy-tangaia
(“Citator god,” leally “Cieativc Heaven”), spiings fiom
the piecedmg belief, which is doubtless extiemely. old, we do
not know for ceitain. The Chuvash, howcvei, seem to
possess a countcipait, Suiatan-Tuia (really “Biith-givmg
Heaven”), a name connected also with the Auroia Boiealis
They believe that the sky, duiing this phenomenon, “gives
birth to a son ” Suiatan-Tuia is said to amelioiate the agonies
of a woman in child-biith Otheiwise, the idea of this deity
Is somewhat confused Among the Yakut gods we find also
other names foi the Cieatoi god, Ajy (“Cieator”), ,Yiyn-
Ajy (“ White Ciealor ”) 01 Yiyn-Ajy-Tojon (tojon “ loid ”)
and Aihyt-Aga (“Cicatoi Fathei ”). Although the same
names may be used foi the Qeatoi of the Chiistian teachings,


THE HEAVEN GOD 399

the ideas ta question cannot be said to liave arisen horn these
teachings By the bide of Ajy-Tojon, appears a special deity
of biith, Ajysit, the name, like Ajy, being derived fiom the
veib at (“ to give biith to,” “ to create ”) Ajysit, of whom
we shall speak later, is geneially regal ded as a feminine being
(Ajysit-Khotun, “ Ajysit-mistress ”), and brings the soul fiom
heaven to the child while being born, helping also the woman
in the pains of child-bu-th In piayers this deity is often le-
feried to as Ajysit-Ijaksit (“Piocreating-Nouiishing ”), a
term corresponding to the qualifying teim of the Votiak
Heaven god, Kildis-Voidis Possibly fiom the Turco-Tatar
peoples the Volga Finns obtained then Creatoi-god (Votiak
Kil^sin, Cheremiss SatSektSe 01 Sotsen, Mordvin Skaj),
names deiived from verbs denoting proaeation and birth>
giving

It is ceitain that the conception of the cieative power of the
heavens of the Central Asian peoples is extiemely old Among
the moi e not them tubes the conception does not appear quite as
clearly, although they also, like the Yenisei Ostiaks, believe
that not only men, but animals also, have the sky to thank
foi then existence Heaven (Es) “ gives,” Heaven “ sends,”
even “lets fall,” what the eaith needs “ A similar giver of
everything good is the Buga 01 Savokt of the Tungus, abo
called “ the Lord ” (Amaka)

The close connection between the Heaven god and light
and the sun, appears fiom the saciificial rites Saciifices to
the Heaven god are ofFered always towaids the direction of the
“ day ” 01 the dawn, and at the same time the votive animal,
when such is used, has to be white in colour Saciifices to the
Heaven god among the most northern peoples are, howevei ,
comparatively laie. In some places it has been the custom to
conseaate some live domestic animal, a hoise 01 a leindeer,
which IS then nevei woiked and is looked after well In
oldei times a consecrated animal of this description was driven
far to the eastward


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


400

A cuiious cu&tom, whiUi occuib among the Yakuts, is that
seveial tiecs aie eiected before the victim, of which seven
bear leaves and a few have figiucs of birds upon them. All
these ticcs, which art langed in a low, icpitstiit the diifeient
sloteys of heaven, thiough which the victim is to wandei to
the Supiemc God in the highest Heaven A coiiesponding
custom exists among the Dolgans, who, at the shaman ceie->
mony set up, one behind the othei, nine stumps, on which aie
iiguics of buds Theie also these stumps icpicsent the nine
storeys of Heaven thiough which the shaman, with the help
of these buds, will fly to God “

The idea of the puiity of Heaven would also seem to be of
great antiquity Moic even than the lest of nature, the sky
loves cleanliness Very widespiead is a tale of how the clouds
wete at an eailici tunc lowet down, but, aflci being soiled by
the people, lose higher An example of the puiity of the sky,
fiom which latei spiang the belief 111 the holiness of God, is
given by the Tungus of the Noith Sibeiian piimeval foiests.
According to them, a woman, during hei pciiod of unclean-
nesa, should not look up at the sky Common also is the belief
that the lightning stiikes places where something evil 01 filthy
IS hidden

Whcie the Heaven god has begun to be icgaided as a kind
of anthiopomoiphic being, the heavens have become metely
the dwelling-place of this being Countless tales 1 elate how
God has a magnificent home in the sky, sometimes also a wife
and children, seivants, cattle, and othei piopeity. In the
brilliant palace of God a Tatai heio was once on a visit, and
was received well and entei tamed with food, etc ” The special
characteristics of these talcs have, however, haidly been in-
corporated with the beliefs conceining heaven.

The old Babylonian idea of the seven 01 moie stoieys of
Heaven gave rise to the thought that the Over-god dwells in
the topmost storey of Heaven The Yiyn-Ajy-Tojon of the
Yakuts dwells sometimes in the seventh, sometimes m the


PLATE XLVI

1 Dolgu) shninin-pillnis itpiLsditiag the nine
Sitottys of hcivcn, with wondin iiguits of buds
With tiu help oi ihisi buds thi shiiuan will Ay
thiuiigh tlw. liLivdis (Sit pigt j.00 )

2 V ikut lustom oi Liceting nets, icpiescnting the
stoiiys oi hitvcn, biioii the victim ol^Lied to the
god d willing in the highest stony of hcavin (See
pigt 401 )


THE HEAVEN GOD 401

ninth storey of Heaven, depending on the number of storeys
believed to be in the sky l^he Es of the Yenisei Ostiaks lives
in a tianspaient palace over the seventh Heaven, and accord-
ing to the Ugiians the dwelling-place of God is in the seventh
Heaven ** We see thus, that this belief has spiead also among
the most noithein of the Siberian peoples

In the same way as the anaent Babylonians regarded the
navel of the sky. as the throne of Anu, whence he ruled over
the eaith, the Central Asian peoples place the abode of the
Over-god somewhere aiound the North Star ” Wherever
the belief in a Heaven-mountain has spread, God is legarded
as dwelling on the summit of this mountain, which touches the
North Star In connection with the world-pillar it has already
been mentioned how some of the Not th Sibei lan peoples wor-
ship the Heaven god in connection with this pillar, as shown,
e g , by the “ seven-divisioned Sanke ” of the Ostiaks A more
suitable thione in the sky than the stationary, changeless region
of the sky-navel neat the Noith Star, whence he can best
diiect the countless, vaiying activities of the earth, can hardly
be imagined for the Ovei-god

Many flatteiing attributes arc given to their Over-god by
the Cential Asian peoples The Altai Tatais call him
“ Great ” (Olgon, Olgen), or “ Rich and Great ” (Bai-
Glgon) “Meraful Khan” (Kaira-Khan) and other general
names are also given to him The term Burkhan-BakSi (really
“ Buddha-master ”), which the Mongols, Bunats and Soyots
have begun to use for their highest god, was brought by Bud-
dhists from China.


CHAPTER XI
THE SONS OF GOD

C LOSELY connected with the PIe.ivtn god, accoiding to
the Sibeiian peoples, die ceitun othci gods living m
the sky, the uumbu of which is piecisdy fixed Extiemely
common is a gioup of seven gods, said to act as the assistants
of the Ovei-god

Moie especially in the beliefs of the Knghis and the Sibciian
Tatais, do these gods play an impoitant pat I In the Altaic
tales mention is made of seven beings named Kudai Q* god ”)>
situated in the thud stoiey of Heaven on the Suio (“Maj-
esty ”) mountain * The Yakuts call this gi oup of seven gods,
which they deelaie foims “the suite of the Ovei-god Ai-
Tojon,” Satt.irKuio-D)ftis.ig4i-Ai {shtta, “seven”), they are
supposed to be the tutelary genii of hoises, and a saciifice of
kumiss IS pouted into the file foi them at the spiing festivals.*
Often these giouped spii its oie ulled the sons of the Ovei-god
Certain of the Altaic tribes can lecount the names of these
“seven sons” Jashignn, Kaishit, Bakhtagan, Kaia, Kushkan,
Kanym and Jaik* Much cannot, howevci, be gioundcd on
these names, as they vaiy gieatly in the difFeient distiicts
As little known as the names of this gioup aie the spheics of
activity asciibed to each In the coiiesponding list of the
Lebed Tatais, Kanym appeals as the wife of Olgen Kaia
(“Black”), also Kaia-Khan, accoidiiig to these last, has left
his father and, instead of the bght-filled abodes of Heaven, has
chosen the daik holes of the undei world as his lot Jaik oi
Jaik-Khan 1$ the prince of the flood and at the same time a
kind of escort to the souls bound foi Hades ‘

Names for the seven “ sons of the Heaven god have also
been invented by the Yoguls and the Ostiaks> although these


THE SONS OF GOD 403

aie for the most patt the names of their own district gods.
The list of the Voguls comprises, according to Gondatti, the
following spiiits the god of Pelym, the god of the upper field
of the Ob, the god of the Holy Ural, the Pimce of the river
Aut, the god of the Little Ob, the god of the Sosva centre,
and the “ Earth-watching Man ” In the information ob-
tained by Munkacsi fiom Sygva the following aie named
the god of Pelym, the Old Man of the village Tek, the Holy
Piince of the Lozva-watei, the god of the Sosva centre, the
god of the Little Ob, the Old Man of the village Lopmus,
and the ^'Eaith-watching man ** Part of the corresponding
catalogue of the Ostiaks by Tremyugan deserves mention
“ The Foiest-game-sharing man ” and the “ youngest son ” of
the Heaven god, Khan-Iki (“ Prince old man ”) The formei
IS a deity living in the sky, fiom whom game is prayed foi,
and to whom, as to a Heaven god, a white animal has to be
saciificed® The gieatest mteiest is, however, awakened by
the “youngest son” among this group, the Vogul “Earth-
watching man,” the Khan-Iki of the Ostiaks, to whom many
tales aie attached and who is ceitainly not an original Ugiian
god

The fact that these seven gods aie but little known to the
Siberian peoples, as is often tiue of then names also, draws
our attention to then number We know the Iranians to have
had a gioup of gods of the same number, Amesha Spentas,
and similaily the Adityas of the Rgvada were originally seven
gods, the duties of whom, like that of the Siberian sons of
God, was the watching ovet and the contiol of the heavenly
laws of natuie We airive thus at the assumption that these
Asiatic gods, wherevei they may be met with, have the same
origin But wheie and how did this heavenly gtoup first take
shape?

Light is thrown on the problem by the picture of Heaven
of the Vasyugan Ostiaks, seen by, the “ eyes of the soul ” of
the shamans, and described by them in songs From these we


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


404

leain that the hcaveiib aic seven-slot eyed, in the topmost of
which the Ovci-god Num-Toiem hinibelf lives, and in the
Jowei ones his sons The dwcllets in these stoicys of the sky
.ue called also by names bot rowed from the Tatais, Toiem-
Talinas (“Heaven mteipiettr”, /almas = Tiitat tolmati) 01
Toiem-Kaievel (“Heaven watchci ”, ka>evd=iT 9 }[SA kara^
vel). The names of the sepaiatc “ Interpieters ” aie unknown
to the Vasyugans, neithci can then aclivitics be explained, but
they aie believed to live one 111 each stoiey of the heavens
Usually, they ate called aftei ihe sactificcs offered up to each.
I, “The arrow-saciificc Toiem” leceivcs aiiows shot any-
wheic into the sky, a “ The cloth-sacrifice Torem,” who le-
ceives a cloak of while doth, which is hung up on foiest
expeditions in some bitch m a piimitive foiest; 3 “ The sable-
sacrifice Totem,” who is given a sablc-skin, kept in a box taken
on foiest expeditions, 4 “ The cup-fl«iciifice Toiem,” foi whom
a spedal lin cup is kept in the stoieroom, 5 “The hoined-
dcei-saaihce Toiem,” foi whom the hide of a deer killed in
the forest is left, wiih hoi ns and hoofs attached, hanging on a
birch This spnit is believed to let down game and fish upon
the eailh foi men, and is the same being as the previously
mentioned “ Foiest-game-sharmg man ” As the sixth a
Russian saint, Nikolai the miracle-makei, is mentioned, ihe
lattei being the protective spa it of tiavellei s by watci, to whom
the Ostiaks hang up the i^m of a maitcn in then sloie-iooms
as a saciifice.*’

As Kaijalainen points out, this Katcvel aiiangement is not
an invention of the Ostiaks, but has leachcd them in Ihe first
instance fiom the Tatais It is unfortunate that we should
know so little of the beliefs of the pagan peiiod of the Tatar
tribe geogiaphically neatest to the Ugiians, a tube from which
these have acquit cd much inteicsting cultuic, but among the
tubes fuither south, which have bettei ptcsci ved the beliefs of
then foiefalheis wc find a cot responding idea to the Ostiak
Karevel arrangement, appearing m such a mannci that each


THE SONS OF GOD


40s

son of the Over-god is given a different storey of the heavens
as dwelling-place RadlofF relates that he obtained from the
Lebed Tatais on his travels the following description of their
heaven “The original Father, the Cieator of everything, is
Kudai Bai-t)lgon, he has foui sons Fyrshak-Khan, Tos-Khan,
Kaia-Khan and Suilap The son of Suilap is Sary-Khan, and
the son of Pyishak-Khan is Kyrgys-Khan, the protective spirit
of the local Tatars All of these gods except K^ra-Khan bung
happiness to men They give food and protection against
dangers To the highest god, Olgon, white horses are sact 1-
ficed, to Fyrshak and his descendant brown ones, to all the
gods, gram is fuither sacrificed The gods live in Heaven,
which according to these Tatars, is seven-storeyed In the top-
most lives Olgon and his wife Kanym, m the next Pyrshak-
Khan, in the thud Tos-Khan, in the fouith Kyrgys-Khan, in
the fifth Suilap, in the sixth Sai y-Khan, and in the seventh the
messengets sent by the gods down to men Kara-Khan
(“ Black Prince ”) is said to have deserted his fathei and re-
moved from the light-filled dwellings of Heaven to the under-
woild ” '

It IS to be understood that this heavenly order is not an
invention of the Turco-Tatai peoples, but has come to them
fiom elsewheie. For this reason the signification of the dif-
ferent gods 18 so vague to the people, fiom the investigator,
however, these gods dwelling in the seven stoieys of the
heavens cannot hide their origin, pointing plainly as they do to
the Babylonian Planet gods, which, m their distant fatherland,
ruled over seven discs of the sky situated one above the other

In another description recorded by RadlofiF, m which seven-
teen storeys of heaven aie spoken of, a detail that is only an
accidental transformation found amongst a certain Altaic tribe,
the sun is mentioned as dwelling In the seventh, and the moon
in the sixth storey of Heaven * Thus the sun and the moon
govern two sky-discs situated one above the other. In the
seventh storey, together with the sun, lives an omniscient


SIBERIAN MYTHOIOGY


406

Mcrgcn-Tcngcie (‘* Shaipshootei-god ”), who icminds one of
the Obtinlc “ Atiow-viuihct Toicin” Date one assume this
deity to icflect an ancient god of lightning?

As the spiiit of the ninth HCiiven, RadlolT mentions Kysa~
gan-Ttngeit The coiics|>onding Kisagan-Tengi 1 of the
Mongols was the god of wai, believed to piotect the aimy, to
direct It m dangcioub and difhailt plates, and to piotuic victoiy
fot It by vnnquislimg the enemy In the hi th stoiey lived
Kudai Jajutshi. If these, as 5 >eenis piobablc, weic oiiginally
Stai gods, the counteipait of the f 01 met would be the Babylo-
nian Nugal (Mais) Of the spiiits of the uppet stoieys of
heaven only Kaiia-Khan (“meiaful khan”) and Bai-Olgon
(“Rich and Gicat”) aie mentioned, the foimei being placed
in the seventeenth and the littei in the sixteenth stoiey of
Heaven, accotdtng to the most gcncial belief, howevet, these
names apply to the same Ovei-god The “black” Kaia oi
Kaia-Khan of the t.uliei lists, who descended fiom Heaven to
Hades, being doubtless a Stat god, descivcs special attention,
on account of his coloui and othei atliibules he may possibly
coiicspond to Satuin, called “ the black stai ” by the ancient
Babylonians

Instead of the mote onginal gioup of seven, a gioup of
nine “sons” 01 “scivants” of God appeals in some distiicts
Thus, in the tales of the Mongols we often meet with “ nine
Tengen, piotectois and bi othei s,” these woidb denoting attii-
butes often asci ibed to them * The Buiiats can give the nanus
of the “nine sons” of the Ovei-god These ate, howevei,
exceedingly, ai tificial and vai y in the diftei ent disti icts Doubt-
less, these “ nine sons ” 01 bi othei s ” oiiginally signified the
Planet gods, fiom whom the names of the days of the week
have been taken, although othei s have come later to join them
as the stoieys in Heaven were mci cased to nine Banvaiov
says expiessly that the Mongols woi shipped “ nine gicat stais,
which coiiespondcd to nine Tcngeii ” The gioup of nine
has not been as common in Asia as the gioup of seven, which is


THE SONS OF GOD


407

knowa also m Eastern Asia In anaent times the Chinese
woi shipped the “ seven ruleis ” 01 “ diiectors” of the sky, by
which they aie said to have meant the sun, the moon and live
planets Where the numbers seven and nine have stalled to
compete among themselves, one notices that the former has
often given way to the lattei

These sacred numbeis of the gods have in places left their
maik on the sacrificial cults The descriptions of the sacrifices
among the Chuvash living on the Volga often mention nine
sacrifiaal piiests, nine sacrificial animals, nine cauldions, etc^^
Natuially the leapients of these saciifices were foimerly as
numerous, theiefoie the people even now try to arrange their
gods in a series of nine Built on a similar foundation is the
custom of the Finnish tubes in East Russia, especially of the
pagan Cheiemiss, of placing m some districts, when sacrificing
to the Heaven god, nine saciificial loaves and as many bowls
of honey-drink on then altais On the saciifice platfoim of
the Yakuts one may also see nine small bowls ”

But let us letuin again to the older gioup of seven gods,
the membeis of which the Ostiaks call “the Intel pi eters” or
“ the Watchmen of Heaven ” The conception of the Planet
gods as a kind of interpreters seems to be of great antiquity
Diodorus alieady speaks of it m describing the Chaldean fore-
casting fiom the stars in the following woids “ Most impor-
tant to them 18 the examination of the movements of those
five stars, which are called planets They call them the ^ In-
terpreters ’ (ipfMipas ) , to the one we call Saturn they give a
special name, ^ Sun-star,* as they have it to thank for their
newest and most important foiecasts They call the planets
Hnteipieteis’ because, while the othei stais never deviate
from their routes, these go then own ways and thus interpret
the future and leveal to men the mercy of the gods **

The duties of these heavenly “ Intel pi eters ** is thus made
clear by Diodoius Accotding to the Chaldeans the starry
heavens aie a book of fate, leflecting the path of life on earth,


SIBRHIAN MYTHOLOGY


408

and also afiFording to the wise an oppoitunity of leading the
futuic That the aneiciit Babylonians alicndy knew the
** Tables of Fate ” and the ** Book of Life ” is known to us
fiom the Bible Founded on theiic ancient modcle is the belief
of the Obtiakb, that the helpeis of God wiite 111 the ** Book
of Fate,’’ accotding to his dictation, each time a child is bom,
the length and all the vai ying f ot tunes of its life ’ * That these
helpcis 01 assistants aie the picvtously dcsuibcd seven gods
appeals from the old talcs of the western Tatai tubes of
Stbeiia, in which seven Kudai live in a tent in the sky, befoie
which IS the "golden tetheiing-post ” Heic the gods sit m
then abode behind a curtain, with the gieat " Book of Life ”
befoie them, mat king down biiths and deaths and deciding
the fate of men

Though these fatalistic beliefs may have spiead with Islam
whetevei this tcltgion obtained foothold, and thus among the
Tuico-Tatai peoples also, it is still evident that, even much
earlier, they had taken deep toot in the conception of life
current among the Cential Asian peoples. It is to be noted
that the " Intel pi eters ” and the "Sons of God” alieady
appear in the pagan beliefs The Kudai of the Tatai tubes
already leferied to have cleat ly come fiom Petsia, as then
name, a Persian loan-word, shows

The most interesting of all the assistants of the Heaven
god is a certain being, who, thiough the Turco-Talai peoples,
has reached the distant Ostiak teiiitoiy This being has a
special duty to peifoim, as the name " Writei man” shows
On the Demyanka he is regarded as the " hist assistant of the
Heaven god ” and is believed to live in heaven, a little lowei
than the Over-god himself. Hts duty is said to be " to wiite
in the Book of Fate, according to the dictation of the Over-
god, how long and in what dicumstances a mortal may live
on the earth,” When a peison dies, the Ostiaks say "His
days written by the * Wiitei man ’ have finished ” In othci
Ostiak districts a deity of this name is unknown, and for this


THE SONS OF GOD


409

reason Kaijalainen assumes him to be of late origin and to
have sprung fiom the Heaven god himself, in other words,
he IS a being developed from one of the Heaven god’s attri-
butes, as, according to an explanation lecorded by the author
m question at Tsingala, the name " Life-time writing man ”
IS one of the names of the Heaven god “ This assumption is
haidly collect, since besides being the wiiter of the Book of
Fate, this deity appeals also as the bearer of God’s commands
The litysh Ostiaks call him by a name borrowed from the
Tatais, Fairekse, and believe that his duties are to come down
to the eaith on reconnaissances as the messenger of the heavens,
and to write in the Book of Fate the length and circumstances
of the life of each pel son being boin As the messenger and
spy of the Over-god he has been given the attribute “ the Man
of many lands,” “ the Travelling man ” According to the
Ostiaks these jouineys aie often made m the shape of some
animal, occasionally as a goose As such he 1 esembles more the
" youngei son ” of God, ** the world-watching man ” 01 Ort-
iki, who 111 the shape of a goose 01 ** sitting on the wings of ft
goose goes to the place he dcsues,” and who, in tales, is called
the ** goose spiitl” Fuithei, the winged steed of the deity
under discussion, on wbch as the mediatoi between God and
man he flies through the an, and from one nostril of which
file dai ts out, fiom the olhei smoke,” is spoken of ” However
great the numbei of tales mixed up with these names may be.
It IS piobable that this messengei of God, the “ Man of many
lands,” the ^‘Tiavelling man,” did not originate among the
Ostiaks Still less can a “wilting” god have had his birth
among people who have never been able to write
The same being was known to the Chuvash living on the
Volga, in then belief that the god of Fate, Kabh, sends to the
earth at the biith of each child a being called Puleh, who
decrees the fate of the child and notes down its name Having
accomplished his task, he 1 etui ns to heaven and relates the
matter to the god of Fate.’* Possibly, the same being is to be


SIBKRIAN MYTHOLOGY


410

found in the Chcicmiw “ Piopoundei of God,” to whom, when
wicuficmg to the Heaven god, a bpecuil offeiing is piepared,
in 01 del that he may lay bcfoie hts nustci the tioubles of the
Cheiemi&s people*** The Votiitks also, at then hoise-sacii->
files, have a custom of s<iciificiiig a goose, without knowing
any longei to which deity it is intended, icmatkmg only that
the goose escoits the saciificial hoise to heaven.

In scaiching foi the oiigin of the Wilting god, we must
tuin again to the land of the twin iiveis, wheic the ait of
writing was known earliei than elsewheic in Asia, and wheie,
fiom ancient times, the T.iblcs of Fate and the Book of Life
were known A god coriesponding to the "Wilting man”
of the Ostiaks is also to be found among the ancient Babylo-
nians, who call this sctibe of the gods Nabu As the wiitei of
the Book of F.ite he is pictuicd with an object lescmbling a
pen in his hand and the ait of wilting is itself called "the
wisdom of Nabu ” Among the planets he appeal s as Mei cut y.
The same being is met with m nnothei land whete the art
of wilting was known, Egypt, wheie Thout is the counterpait
of the Babylonian sciibe This ibis-hoadcd deity is often
pictuied, like Nabu, with a tablet and wilting mateiials in his
hand ”

In addition to the gtoups of gods just mentioned, we meet
in the mythology of Cential Asia with moie numeious groups,
these forming also a closed iing, tlic otigin of which the people
can no longei explain As ui the Altaic talc of the Sumcru
mountain, the thiity-thicc gods (Tengeii) believed to live
on this woi Id-mountain have come ftom India Most piob-
ably connected with these gods is the infoimation given by
Veibitskiy legaiding the cosmos of the Altaic peoples, that
“in Heaven thcic aic thiity-thiee discs, one highci than the
othci ” “

Three times gieatci is the ciowd of Tcngeii in the Buimt
Heaven. These were divided cithci .laoiding to then disposi-
tions into good and csdl, 01 accoi ding to wheie their habitations


PLATK XT.VII
Hiuls 01 Buriai OiriRiNos
(Sti pigt 10-1.)


THE SONS OF GOD


41 1

weie supposed to be, into “western” and “eastern” The
“ western,” friendly to man, weie called “ white ”, the eastern,
bringing all kinds of evil, fogs, diseases, and other misfortunes,
were called “black” Tengeri, Of the formet theie are
fifty-five, of the lattei forty-foui. The Mongols have also
known these ninety-nine Tengeii of Heaven The Buriats
relate how these gods, who formerly lived in peace together,
quarrelled among themselves In the beginning there were
then fifty-foui western, good Tengeri and foity-four eastern,
evil ones, one being on the border of each group but belonging
to neither Being m the minority, the “ easterns ” begged
this solitaiy god, the name of whom is said to have been Segen-
Sebdek-Tengeri, to join their side, but the “ westerns ” put
up a resistance and tempted this god to their own side In some
distiicts the souice of the disagreement, and even of the war
among the gods, is mentioned as being the beautiful daughter
of Segen-Sebdtk-Tengeri, whom both groups passionately
wished to own **

That these ninety-nine gods aie not the invention of either
Buiiats 01 Mongols, appeals alteady fiom the fact that these
peoples do not know the grounds for the above division, nor
do the names given by the Buiiats to these gods throw light
on the question To judge from all the data, this idea has
arrived complete from elsewheie

More difficult is the explanation as to how this fancy has
originated An idea has spiead among the Altai Tatars, that
besides this earth of ouis, the smallest and lowest, there are
nmety-nme other woilds” It is further related that when
Olgen thrust out the devil Erhk and his company from
Heaven, Erlik pronounced the following words “ Thou hast
cast out my servants and myself from Heaven to the earth,
these falling in forty-three different places Therefore shall
I send out these forty-three kinds of servants (stMer) and these
shall work evil each in the place wheie he has fallen from
Heaven, and trouble men up to their death.” Counting Erlik


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


41a

himself thue .11 c thus foity-foui of these Altai Tatai evil
spirits, 01 as many as the cvilly^disposed rengcii of the Buii-
ats."^ The placing of the evil spiiits m the east and the good
m the west by tfie lattci is peculiai, all othci peoples having
a contraiy opinion Most piobably some stai-myth is at the
back of these beliefs also Foi the sake of compaiison it may
be mentioned that the Chinese know of seventy-two good and
thiity-six evil Stai gods,


CHAPTER XII

THE GREAT MOTHER


A mong the eastern Fmno-Ugiic peoples we have already
met with a mighty goddess of bitth, called by the Chere-
miss and the Mordvins the "Great birth-mother/' whose
dwellmg-place these peoples^ like the Votmks and the Ugnans
living on the Ob| believe to be in the sky The same goddess
18 known to ceitain peoples of the Altaic race. When cele-
brating their spring-festival at the time when the flowers
break forth, the Altai Tatars, among other deities, lemember
a goddess called The Lake of Milk ” In many pi ayeis she
18 refen ed to as the " Milk Lake mothei ” and worshipped as
the givei of all life^ That this great goddess was known
earlier ovei a comparatively wide area among the Turco-Tatar
peoples, 18 proved by the fact that the “ Milk Lake mother ”
appears also in the list of deities of the Chuvash living by the
Volga ■ But according to the ideas of the peoples mentioned,
this mythical, deified lake is situated, as we have seen earlier,
beside the tiee of life in the centre of the earth Certain
Altaic tribes, who believe paradise to be situated in the third
Heaven, speak of the "milk lake” to be found there, from
which the god of birth, JajutSi (“ the decreer ”), takes “ life-
force each time a child is bom mto the world ” *

A Central Asian tale would also seem to place the fabled
lake in Heaven, describing as it does how a certain mighty Khan
had promised his daughter in marriage to him who would pro-
cure him a wing of the Garuda eagle To the heroes partaking
in this quest, a youth joins himself, who wishes to know where
this mythical bird dwells. When the hetoes have arrived at a
high mountain, they notice how the sky above them begins to


bIBliRIAN MYTHOLOGY


414

glow white The youth then fibks “What is behind that
sky? ” The otheis explain that it is the lake of milk
“But what IS the daik thing in its centie? ” the youth asks
again, and is told that it is the foicst, in which the bud dwells *
Quite plainly, thcicfoic, the “milk lake” of the stoiy has
been imagined as situated on a mountain 1 caching to the
heavenb, up which mountain the heiocs have to climb The
foicbt in the cciitic of the lake of milk an&weis to the ttce of
life. 111 the uown of which othei tales also declate the fabled
bud to dwell

The conception of a lake of milk, believed to be the source of
all life, and woi shipped as a female deity, is not a pioduct of
Turco-Tatai mythology, but has diiftcd theie fiom elsewheie.
A paiallcl to this belief is to be found in the ancient Iianian
paiadise myths, whcie the lake of milk is lepiesentcd bv the
lake Aidvisuia Anahtla, which gleams fiom undei the tiee of
life on the Haia Bcievaiti mountain, the said lake being le-
gal ded by the lianians as a goddess of biith, to whom, in their
poet! y, they asci ibe anthi opomoi phic f eatui eS. Without doubt,
the Yakut Kubai-Khotun, dwelling m the ti ce of life 01 undei
Its roots, 18 the same deity, and was legarded by them as the
gieat mother of both men and animals As such she has
“breasts as laige iis Icathci sacks”” Sometimes she is men-
tioned as the wife of the Heaven god, the plentcousncss of hei
milk being desciibcd in a Buiiat tale about the oiigiii of the
Milky Way. This phenomenon is explained by them as having
been caused by the oveiflow of milk fiom the bi casts of the
Heaven goddess (Manzan Goimo) ” A coiicspondmg myth
was known to the ancient Gieeks, who declaied the Milky
Way to have been formed when Heia snatched her bicast
from the mouth of the infant Heiaclcs, whom she hated, so
that drops of milk wcic scatteicd ovci the sky Fiom this,
the name met with in many Eui opean languages — the Milky
Way (cf anaent Indian Soma-Dhaia, “ Soma Way ”) — has
obviously been deiived.


THE GREAT MOTHER


4tS

In Yakut piaycis^ the above-mentioned goddess of buth has
most often the name Ajysyt (“ Biithgiver,” “ Proacator ”) or
Ajy-Khotun (“ Birth-giving mistiess”), and children ate
prayed foi fiom hei, whom she ts believed to piesent at her
fancy to the woman who has gained her favout As she is
regal ded at the same time as biith-giving and nourishing, she is
lefeiied to by a name with these significations, Birthgiving
Nourishing mothei ” (Ajysyt-Ijaksit-Khotun) ^ In some dis-
tricts the great mothei is believed to pour down from Heaven
a white elixir of life to one who is in the throes of death *
Tales 1 elate how a woman dunng severe biith-cramp directs a
piayer to the Heavens and how, shoitly afterwards, two Ajysyts
sink down to the earth, and coming to the woman, give their
assistance, after which she gives biith to a son * Generally,
howevei, the people speak only of one goddess, who is said to
bung the soul of the child from Heaven, as accoidmg to the
pievalent belief, mortals give birth to the embryo only, life
being furnished by Ajysyt In one player the child-beaiing
woman say^ to hei protective genius “ Thou, my mild Crea-
tiess, the fiist day on which thou didst let down me to the
* centi al place * — i e , the eai th — thou didst say * Be pro-
vided with a ceaseless breathing, with an eternal life May
the cattle brought up by thee flout ish, may the children borne
by thee be many * ” Probably connected with this belief is
the conception that the souls of animals also are let down, from
tlie heavens

Furthei light is thrown on the foregoing by the belief of
the Ostiaks, that the gieat Birth-giving mothei dwells in
Heaven on a mountain with seven stoieys, where she fixes the
fate of all, by wilting at the birth of each child in a golden
book 01 on a “gold-oinamented seven-branch,” le, the tree
of life, the forthcoming events of its life ^

The Siberian peoples, aftei a successful delivery, have been
in the habit of preparing a feast to the goddess of birth, in
which only women may take part The Yakuts usually cele-


4i6 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY

biate this feast thiee days after a birth, at which time the
goddess of birth is believed to depart Flesh of the votive
animal is placed foi the deity at the head of the bed, and
especially buttei, a little of which each one present throws
laughing merrily into the fire, at the same time the women rub
their hands and faces with butter oidei to become fruit-
ful In some districts, after the birth of a boy, a small tent
of birch-bark is made by the fireside, and hoises and cows and
a bow and arrows made of the same material placed within it
The intention of this magic ceremony is the developing of the
boy as a capable member of the community.^’


CHAPTER XIII
THE STARS


T he nomads of the Altaic lace, like most other peoples
of the earth, early turned their attention to the stars and
believed that they, m some mysterious way, occasioned the
changes of season and weather The stars were also most im-
portant guides for travelleis on the prairies, m the forests, and
on the tundra For a thousand years the Gieat Bear, regularly
moving round the Pole Star, that ever-stationary “ pole ” of
the sky, and never disappeaiing below the horizon, has played
an important part in the lives of all the peoples of the Noithern
Hemisphere Not only the Altaic race but innumerable other
peoples have used it, in addition to the sun and the moon, for
measuring time The anoent Finns aie also said to have gone
to “ see the moon, to learn of the Gieat Bear ” In Central
and East Asia the Great Bear even determined the seasons
“ When the tail of the Great Beai points eastwaid it is spring
over all the world, when it points southward it is summer,
when westward, autumn, but when it turns to the north it is
winter over all the world ” Some peoples foretell changes in
the weather by this constellation The Ostiaks on the Ob,
who call It “ the stag,” say that when the stag shrinks,” i e ,
when the stars of the Great Bear seem to draw together, there
will be frost, but contraiiwise, or when ‘Uhe stag expands,”
mild weather and snowfalls may be expected ^

The greatest changes m the weather are believed, however,
to be the work of the Pleiades Even in other countries, such
as America and the South Sea Islands, the rising and the
setting of this constellation are considered as signs of the com-
ing of cold or warm weather, a rainy or a dry period In the


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


418

beliefs of European peoples also, the influence of the Pleiades
on the climate plays a certain pait In the question-forms
which were used by Forbus as guides in gathering Lapp folk-
lore there is a question ^ Have you worshipped the Pleiades
that they might give warm weather? ” “ The Turkish peoples
believe the Pleiades to be chiefly the causers of cold The
Yakuts say that they “ bring the winter ” ' The foundation
of this thought IS naturally to be found m the fact that a colder
period follows the appearance of the Pleiades, whereas their
setting takes place at the beginning of the warm season The
Yakuts say that the wintei in former days was much colder
and drearier than it is now, but since a shaman hacked in twain
the binding-rod of the Pleiades, they have been able to move
more quickly and thus the wmtet has become shorter When
the shaman shuck, splinters flew into the air, which aie now the
innumerable stars *

The idea of the Pleiades as the cause of cold weathei is fur-
ther leflected in the old name of this constellation, which is
the same in several languages of Turkish origin Urker, Orgel,
etc Gorochov says that in Yakut Grgel means " air-hole ” '
Fuither weight is given to this idea by a Y akut tale This tells
how a hero once gathered together thirty wolf-leg hides and
from them made himself a pair of gloves with which to stop
the 01 gel, as it “blew upon him endless frost and wind”*
The Votiaks and even the Lithuanians and the Baltic Finns
called this constellation “ the sieve ”

The Siberian peoples seem to have considered it impossible
to solve the question of what the innumerable stars of the sky
really are. The belief of the Yakuts that they are small holes
through which heavenly light shines is easy to understand
In other places they are declared to be “ the reflection of the
heavenly ocean.” *


THE STARS


419


THE SUN AND THE MOON

The Altaic peoples speak of a tune when there was no sun
and no moon They say that people, who then flew m the air,
gave out light and warmed their surroundings themselves, so
that they did not even miss the heat of the sun But when one
of them fell ill God sent a spirit to help these people This
spirit commenced by stirring the primeval ocean with a pole
10,000 fathoms long, when suddenly two goddesses flew into
the sky He also found two metal mirrois which he

placed in the sky Since then there has been light on the
earth *

This tale is doubtless grounded on a previously-mentioned
conception, that people living befoie the fall in paradise were
a kind of luminous beings The Kalmucks distinctly say that
at the time of paradise there ms yet no sun and no moon
It was only when the people, by eating of the forbidden
fruit, fell into sin, and the world around them became dark,
that the sun and moon were created *

The idea of the sun and moon as metal mirrors in the above
tale IS also to be found in beliefs and customs connected with
the prophesymgs of Cential Asian shamans It is commonly
supposed that everything that takes place on the earth is re-
flected m the sun and the moon and from these again in the
magic mirrors of the shamans There is a story of how a cer-
tain hero holds his magic mirror toward the sun and the moon
in ordei to see in their leflections where the colt which he is
seeking has disappeared ” This manner of finding out things
has spread among the peoples of North Siberia Even in
Ostiak countries the sun is an important means of prophesying
by sight, by watching it the magiaan can tell the life and the
fate of a person far away Possibly the Siberian shaman’s
custom of fixing metal objects representing the sun and the
moon on his dress originates in this belief It is another ques-
tion whether this belief and this custom aie original with the


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


4.20

Altaic race, or whethei they have wandered there from lands
where ptophesying ftom the stais has long been known and
common

Besides those tales which say that the sun and the moon
weie created compaiatively late, theie aie others according to
which the lights of the sky alteady existed when the vast
primeval ocean yet covered all In Mongolian tales the sun
and the moon are called sisters, of whom the former says to
the latter “ Ti avel thou in the day, I will travel m the night ”
The moon lemaiked “ There will be so many people about
in the day, I shall be ashamed to walk abroad then ” The
sisters finally agreed, but the sun regretted that the earth was
so smooth and that there were no hillocks or mounds above
the water for the people to live on The tale does not go on
to tell how the earth on which the people dwell came to exist
We might suppose the moon to have had her share m its
aeation, the ebb and flow of the tide which she causes having
early attracted the attention at least of coast-dwellers A tale
of the Votiaks says that the god of Heaven, Inmar, sent two
people out during the flood to And earth and to scatter it on
the surface of the ocean The first went out in the day, where-
fore he made the eaith smooth, but the second, going out in
the night, sowed the mountains and valleys on the earth

In Central Asia tales have been taken down accoidmg to
which there were thiee 01 foui suns in piimeval times At
that time it was unbeaiably hot upon the earth The Buriats
tell how a hero named Eikhe-Meigen shot thiee suns down
into the sea with his bow so that only one remained to light
and warm the earth In a legendary tale of the Toi gouts
It IS said that the devil (Shulman) aeated three suns in ordei
to burn the earth made by God (Burkhan-Bakshi) In answer,
God covered the eaith, on which there were as yet no dwellers,
with a flood, so that the devil was forced to submit Only one
sun remained in the sky, the others God plunged later into
the bottomless pit given to the devil for his dwelling-place.”


THE STARS 421

The following Buriat tale gives a description of the con-
fining and liberating of the heavenly lights, a theme greatly
favoured in the stories of many peoples When Heaven and
earth through the intermarriage of their children became re-
lated to one anothei, the *^Lord of the Earth ” once made a
visit to the god of Heaven On leaving he begged foi the
sun and the inoon as presents The god of Heaven, who
wished to observe the sacred customs of hospitality, dared not
refuse, and the ^'Loid of the Earth ’’ took the lights of the
sky with him and shut them mto a box Then all nature be-
came dark The god of Heaven had no othei resource than
to turn to the poicupine, asking him to help by. bringing back
the sun and the moon The porcupine agreed to try and made
a visit to the “Lord of the Earth” When the guest was
about to depart, the host asked him what gift he wished as
a token of hospitality “ Give me the mirage-horse and the
echo-speai,” answeied the poicupine, and as the “ Lord of
Earth ” could not fulfil so difficult a wish he gave his
guest the sun and the moon The porcupine put the lights
back in their former orbits and the world became bright
again “

In the tales of Turco-Tatar peoples the porcupine appears as
a wise and wily creature, sometimes as the inventor of file, or
the originator and teacher of agriculture” Seeing that this
animal also occupies an important position m the beliefs of the
anaent Iranians, one might assume that the above mentioned
tales have come to Central Asia from them.

The Altaic Tatars desaibe the nature of the sun and the
moon by relating how Otshirvani took fire, placed it on his
sword and slung it in the sky, and thus created the sun, and
how he made the moon by stnking the vrater with his sword
The reason why daylight is burning hot, say the people, is that
the sun is made of fire, whereas moonlight is cold because this
star came out of the water ” The Dolgans say that the sun
Was created in the day, the moon m the night.”


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


422

Most of the peoples of Turkish origin living in Siberia
imagine, when addressing these heavenly lights, the sun to be
feminine (Mother sun) and the moon masculine (Fathei moon,
Old man moon) Often, especially in tale^ we also hear
of the Sun Khan and the Moon Khan According to Chinese
sources the Mongolian and the Old Turkish lulers used to
worship the sun in the morning and the moon in the evening
The Chuvash until quite lately brought the Sun god white
sacnfices Concerning moon-worship we have not much other
information than that it has been a custom to greet the new
moon and to uttei a wish that he would bring good luck and
prosperity The most northern peoples of Turkish oiigin, who
have eagerly retained then old aistoms, do not sacrifice to
the sun or the moon, although these orbs seem to have played
an important part in the utes of the shamans Yet both are
considered by them to be living beings They believe that the
sun sees all that people do, and therefore often appeal to it
“ May the sun see* ” or “ May the sun know! ” In swearing,
the Yakut turns towards the sun and says “ If I have made a
wrong oath may the sun lefuse me light and waimth ” It is
said that the Tungus believe the sun to watch their conduct
and to pimish their wicked actions

As is natural, the tribes of Turkish ongin, like all other
nations, keep account of time by the cycles of the sun and the
changes of the moon Plano Carpini says that the Mongolians
never undertook a war expedition 01 any other important
work except at the time of the new 01 the full moon Weather
piophesying by the sun is the same m Central and Northern
Asia as in Euiope The Tungus and the Yenesei Ostiaks
consider a ring round the moon in winter to be an omen of cold,
in summer of rain, saying that the moon protects himself from
the weather by making him^f a tent. The Ostiaks on the Ob
also know this saying ***

The spots on the sun and the moon, espeaally those on the
latter, have always been interesting themes for tales among all


THE STARS


423

peoples The Yakuts tell of a poor orphan girl for whom life
was so hard that the moon pitied her and detei mined to take
her to him One frosty night when the girl had gone out to
get water the moon descended, laised the child to his breast,
and ascended again to the heavens Wherefoie, we now see
in the moon a girl bearing a yoke with two buckets on her
shoulder In other places theie is a story of two children, a
brother and a sister, who, having gone out to fetch water,
stayed to watch the moon until he became angiy and snatched
them to him The Yakuts never allow their children to watch
the full moon ”

The Buriats see more than a girl with her yoke and buckets
in the moon They see also a willow-bush The girl had had
a strict and hard-hearted step-mother, who once when the child
was a long time fetching water cned to hei in anger “ Oh,
that the sun and the moon took theet ” When she was beaiing
water the gii 1 saw the sun and the moon descending towards
her In her flight she grasped a willow-bush When the sun
was about to take hei the moon said Thou walkest in the
day and I in the night Give the girl to me ” The sun agi eed
to the moon’s request, who immediately lifted up the child
with buckets, bush and all The Yakuts also know this tale
in the same form **

This tale about the water-fetcher, of which we find a variant
in the Edda of Snorri, is very widely known in Asia and in
Europe

The Altai Tatars tell of the old man of the moon, who in
former times lived on the earth and caused great havoc as a
man-eater The dwellers of Heaven wished to save the people
and gathered togethei to take counsel The sun said ** I
would willingly descend to free the poor people from that
monster were not my heat harmful to them ” On heanng this
the moon remarked that they could well stand his coldness,
and he descended to the earth, wheie he found the man-eater
picking berries from a hawthoin The moon at once seized


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


424

the wretch and hts tree and returned to the sky, where the
raan-eatei and the hawthorn can still be seen in the moon ”
The primitive peoples of the Distiict of Tuiukhansk see a
shaman with his drum in the moon This foimerly mighty
man undertook to fight against the moon, but scarcely, had he
drawn near it befoie the moon made him its piisoner **

The Mongolians and the peoples of the Altai imagined also
that a haie dwelt in the moon ”

The waning of the moon is said by the Yakuts to be caused
by wolves and bears eating its disc Eveiy time the moon has
grown to Its ordinal y size the beasts again attack it

According to Buriat tales an eclipse of the sun or the moon
takes place when a certain beast, which is ever peisecuting the
lights of the sky, swallows the sun and the moon Once when
this monster, Alkha, again darkened the woild, the gods be>
came so angry that they cut his body in two The hind part
fell down, but the living forepait still haunts the sky Eveiy
time Alkha now swallows stais they soon appear again, as the
beast 18 unable to letain them m his body The Buriats say
that when Alkha is troubling the sun and the moon they pray
for help, and the people have a custom of screaming and
making a noise, throwing stones and even shooting up into the
sky in order to diive away the monster
A tale recorded in another Buiiat district relates that Arakho,
as the beast is here called, foimerly lived upon the earth and
consumed the hairs off the people’s bodies, which at that time
were quite hairy Seeing this, God became angry and inquired
of the moon Arakho’s hiding-place On finding the beast he
struck It in two, and the living forepart is forever eating the
moon in consequence "

It 18 also told that Otshirvani, wishing to sweeten life for
people and animals, let the sun and the moon prepare water
of life, but Arakho drank it up and soiled the cup Having
inquired the beast’s dwelling-place from the moon, God
hurried there and cut him in two The forepart, having thus


THE STARS 425

become immortal, pui sues the moon Some see the “ body ** of
the monster in the moon-spots “

The Atakho who causes eclipses of the sun and moon, and
who has only a head but no body, is known to the Mongols
also The tale originates m India where the monster’s name is
R^u Arakho and Alkha are corrupt variants of this name

The conception prevalent among the peoples of North-East
Asia that the persecutor of the lights of heaven is a dragon has
come from China The Altai Tatars say that the eclipse of
the moon is the work of a man-eater living in a star The
Russian Tatais and the Chuvash speak of a vampire which
sometimes swallows the sun and the moon but soon leaves them
in peace again, as the ftars begin to bum his mouth

THE POLE STAR AND THE LITTLE BEAR

The significance of the Pole Stai in the universe has al-
ready been mentioned The fact that other surrounding stars
seem to circle round that “ golden ” or **iron pole ” has given
rise to a fancy that bonds exist between them The Kirghis
call the three stais of the Little Beai nearest the Pole Star,
which form an aich, a “rope” to which the two laiger stars
of the same constellation, the two horses, are fastened One
of the horses is white, the other bluish-grey The seven stars
of the Great Beai they call the seven watchmen, whose duty
It IS to guard the horses from the lurking wolf When once
the wolf succeeds ui killing the hoises the end of the world
will come*' In other tales the stars of the Great Bear are
“seven wolves” who puisue those horses Just before the
end of the world they will succeed in catching them " Some
even fancy that the Great Bear is also tied to the Pole Star
When once all the bonds are bioken there will be great dis-
turbances in the sky The Tatars by Minusinsk say that when
the “seven dogs” aie let loose the end of the woild will
come”


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


42 ^

The numeious tales about the one or moie bound beasts,
which are to be set free before the end of the world, were
possibly Qt iginally similai star-myths The Slavs have a story
about a bound dog whose non chains foim the Little Bear
When the dog, who is evei endeavouring to bite his chains in
two, once gets loose, the end of the world will be at hand ”

THE GREAT BEAR

Many North Siberian primitive peoples and even the
Russians living in those paits call the Great Bear a "stag”
The Samoyeds of the District of Tuiukhansk fancy that the
Pole Star is a hunter chasing the stag*and trying to kill it **
The Yenisei Ostiaks see a stag and thiee hunters in this con-
stellation The stars forming the square are the stag, those
in the arch the hunters, the hist of these being a Tungus, the
second a Yenesei Ostiak and the little stai, Alcot, glimmeiing
by. his side, his kettle, the thud a Russian In addition, the
three stars forming the forepart of the stag are also speaally
explained one is the beasPs nose, the othei two its ears ” This
same tale is known among the Tungus of that district and it is
possible that even the following Yakut variant, which is said
in different places to refer to different stais, eg, to Onon,
also belongs to the same senes The Yakut variant is as fol-
lows Once upon a time thiee Tungus chased a stag up into
the sky, where they wandeied long in hunger In the end one
of the hunters died, but the other two, together with the stag
and the dog, were changed mto stars (the stag-star) ”

For the sake of comparison it may be mentioned that even
the Indians of North America see an animal in the Great Beai,
usually a bear, with three hunters at his heels "

The Buriats call the seven stars of the Great Bear " seven
old men ” According to one tale they aie the skulls of seven
smiths. A hero once killed "seven bladcsmiths” and pre-
pared from their skulls seven cups, out of which he gave his


THE STARS


427

wife to drink until she was intoxicated When she had drunk
she thiew the cups into the sky ^here they formed, the seven
stars of the Great Bear All blacksmiths are said to be under
the protection of these stars ”

The Mongols, who also call this constellation ^‘the seven
old men ” or “ the seven Burkhans,” sacrificed milk and kumiss
and even devoted some domestic animals to it **

Very widespread is a tale in which the ** seven old men ^
or the seven Khans ” as they are also called, are accused of
theft The Mongols tell that ** the seven Burkhans ” stole a
star from the Pleiades, which numbered seven before but are
now only six This little stolen star (Alcor) is to be seen close
to the central star of the arch of the Gieat Bear With the
Mongols It has developed into the god of thieves, to whom
these always call on then predatory excursions to give luck
in their wickedness*® It is m order to be revenged on the
Great Bear, so say the Altai Tatars, that the Pleiades pursue
the “ seven Khans ” although they never overtake them."
The Kirghis also call the Great Bear the seven thieves,’’ and
accuse them of having stolen one of the two daughters of the
Pleiades" In Northern Caucasia there is a tale of how a
certain Khan left his child in the keeping of “ seven brothers ”
and how they were already on theu* homeward journey when
the Pleiades attacked them, wishing to kill the child, but the
“ seven brothers ” succeeded in saving it "

The tales about the “seven brothers” and their “little
sister” who was taken up into the sky, belong to the same
senes That the “ seven old men ” of the Buriats also are
originally robbers of a star-maiden appears from the following
story, which has been recorded among them There was once
upon a time a poor man who received the gift of understand-
ing the speech of birds One day when he was resting under
a tree he heard two ravens discussing how to heal the son of a
Khan who had long lam ill On hearing the method agreed
upon by the ravens, he at once hurried to the Khan and healed


428 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY

his son Greatly thankful, the Khan presented him with seven
steeds On his homewatd journey he met six men, each of
whom attracted his attention m a peculiar way The first was
so strong that he could lift a mountain from the giound The
second had so keen a sense of heaiing that he could tell what
was happening under the earth The third was an aicher of
such power that with his bow he could bung down a piece of
the “ heavenly mountain ” The fourth was so clevei with his
hands that he easily tiansplanted the featheis from one kind
of bud to another The fifth was able to suck a whole river
into his mouth and squirt it out again The sixth was so
nimble of foot that he outran a wild-goat on the prairie These
heroes now joined the pooi man who undei stood the language
of birds Then the one who had the keen sense of hearing
happened to hear how a certain Khan, wishing to choose a
husband for his daughter, set all the suitors-elect three diffi-
cult conditions to fulfill The heroes, detei mining to try their
luck, went to the Khan and asked him fot his daughter’s hand
Having easily fulfilled the most difficult tasks they took the
maiden with them The servants of the Khan put sued them,
but the seven heroes escaped with their booty In the end God
took them up into the sky where they were changed into the
Great Bear The little star Alcot by the arch is the maiden
whom they won ** The same stoiy-motif would seem to have
been known to the ancient Greeks also They told how Elek-
tra, one of the seven Pleiades, who is said to have been the an-
cestress of the Trojans, took the fall of Troy so much to heart
that she left her original place in the Pleiades Hence, ac-
cording to them, this constellation now has only six stars
Elektra is said to have moved to the Great Beat wheie she
now glimmers as a little star beside the central star of the arch
It IS possible that the ancient Gieeks had mixed up two tales,
VIZ , that of the robbing of the maid who caused the Trojan
war^ and that of the robbing of the star, belonging to an earliei
period


THE STARS


429


ORION

As with the Gieat Bear, a hunting-myth is also connected
with Orion Once upon a time, according to the Bui lats, there
lived a famous aicher who hunted “ three stags ” and was just
about to overtake them when the animals suddenly rose into
the sky The huntei had time, however, to send an arrow
after them The stags then suddenly changed into the three
stars of Orion (“ the three stags ”), and a little lower down
one can see the hunter’s arrow as a star m the sky **

In the district of the Altai this tale has been taken down in
various other forms also The Teleuts tell of a hero named
Kuguldei-Matyr who chased three stags on horseback Hav~
mg speeded to and fro ovei the earth m all directions without
finding a lesting-place, the animals at last spiang into the sky
But the heio followed at theu heels, shooting at them with
two arrows His steed appears as a great star in the east, near
the “ thiee stags ” (the belt of Orion), and there also are his
two ariows, the one white, the other led The latter, having
passed through the bodies of the stags, is bloody The hero
himself has also become a laige star **

Another tale tells how God cursed this hunter, who had m~
tended to kill all the stags on the earth, and therefore changed
the three stags ” into the belt of Onon, around which hunter,
steed, hound and arrows now twinkle as stars. Some see in
Orion, besides the stags, a hunter, a hound, a hunting-hawk and
arrows Some speak of two hounds Hunters are said to
worship this archer-hero and to pi ay, to him for good luck in
hunting

The Mongols also call the belt of Onon the three stags ”
They see m addition, an archer, a horse, a hound and an arrow
in this constellation Accoi ding to a Buriat tale this hero was
born of a cow, and had a human head and a horse’s body**
The Kirghis see in the belt of Onon three deer, the sur-
rounding stais being the “ thiee hunters ” and their “ arrow ”


430 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY

These hunters are said to have lived on the earth in foimei
times, but as no animal could escape their well-aimed arrows
God took the deer mto the sky "

The centaur of the Buriats brings into mind the ancient
Greek tales m which Oiion appeals as a heio who was legarded
as an exceedingly mighty huntei The ancient Gteeks be-
lieved, like the Siberian Tatais, that this heio intended to de-
stroy all the animals on the eaitb **The hunt of Oiion”
was 1 ejected in the sky, wheie the hunter had even a hound
(Sinus) with him

The Yenisei Ostiaks call Onon “ stag’s head ” Their ideas
do not, howevei, appeal to be connected with the senes of
myths just referred to Thus they tell how this stag carried
off a bride for the hero Alba “ For the Yenisei Ostiaks, Orion,
and not the Great Bear, is the maiden-robber. Ideas corre-
sponding to this aie found among other peoples

Oiion has also many names taken ftom objects The most
common of these aie "the scales” oi "the hand-scales”
(Turkish, Kirghis, Tatar, Votiak, etc ) and " the yoke ” (for
buckets) (Volga Tatar, Cherenuss, Vogul, etc ).


THE PLEIADES

We have mentioned before that some peoples imagine the
Pleiades to be air holes, a ventilator, or a sieve through which
streams a cold draught fiom the uppet air With others this
constellation has suggested a group of animals The most
northern peoples of Siberia call it a bud’s nest, oi a duck’s nest
(Yakuts, Voguls, Koriaks, etc ) Some Central Asian peoples
call the Pleiades " monkeys ** {metshtt) or " monkey ” {jmet-
shm) With this unexpected fancyi in a district where monkeys
are unknown, stories are also connected
The Altai Tatais relate that in olden times Metshin lived
upon the earth It was then terribly cold on the earth, and f oi
this reason the camel and the cow determined to bll him.


THE STARS


431

Once, when he was hiding in the ashes of a log-fire and the
camel had lifted his foot to crush him, the cow lematked
“ Thy foot IS too soft, let me try with my hard hoof ” The
camel stepped aside and let the cow stamp with its hoof into
the ashes Metshm was tiodden in pieces, but through the
cleft of the cow^s hoof the pieces escaped and flew into the
sky, where they now twinkle as six little stars “*

A valiant of the tale is that as long as Metshm was on the
earth it was exceedingly, hot, but since the Pleiades rose into
the sky the weather on the eai th has grow n colder ”

In connection with this tale, the Pleiades are mostly imagined
to be a great insect The Kiighis say that Urker was a great
green insect that lived in the grass and ate cattle, especially
sheep, foi which it had a gieat liking The camel and the
cow grew angiy and determined to kill it, but it escaped
thiough the cleft of the cow’s hoof into the sky In the
summer, when Urker cannot be seen in the sky, it is said to
have come on the earth If it alights in a watery district, the
winter will be bad, but if m a diy spot, the Kirghis expect a
good wintei

In the district of the Altai the carrying-oflF of a star is con-
nected with this tale The Gieat Bear, which heie appears as
a mighty Khan, could not endure that Metshm should live on
the earth as a gieat and wicked insect which ate up human
beings and animals Not knowing how he could destroy the
monster, he asked his horse for advice The horse lephed
“ I will aush him to powdei with my hoof ” The cow, hap-
pening to heat this, hurried to the ice where the insect was
resting and stamped it into pieces with her foot When the
pieces escaped through the hoof to the sky the Khan managed
to catch only one which he took with him Metshm, which is
now bereft of one of its stars, ever angrily puisues the Gieat
Beai”

A belief that the Pleiades originally foimed one star, which
aftei wards was parted into many pieces, is suggested by many


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


432

of the tales connected with tins constellation from different
parts of the globe, in which some cieatuie is crushed into
pieces The idea, also, that the Pleiades formeily consisted
of seven stais but now number only si^ is compaiativcly
common


VENUS

Of the planets Solbon (Tui co-Tatar, Tt.holbon=ss: Venus),
which “ can be seen m the morning and m the evening,” plays
in the tales of the Buriats a consideiable part This star is
said to be a famous hoise-lover, who rides over the sky lasso
in hand He has in his possession a gieat tioop of horses,
watched over by a horse-herd named Dogedoi 01 Toklok The
Buriats consider Solbon to be the pati on-god of their own
hotses, and foi this reason they pi ay to and woiship him In
the spring, when they cut the manes and tails of then hoises
and set the maik of the ownei on the colts, they prepare a
sacrifice for Solbon, cooking meat and cream-poiiidge {sala^
nuu) and making home-distilled spirits {tarasm) in his
honour. The wine they throw into the air foi Solbon and his
groom Toklok, but the meat and the porridge they put into
the fire They then begin then own meal In addition they
have a custom of dedicating live hoises to Solbon, as to many
other gods, which hoises aie then no longei used in human
service*” Geoigi says the Buiiats believe “that the gods
and especially the shepherd-god Sulbundu (sicl) ride on
these in the night when watching over the other horses, and
for this leason they aie believed to be covered with perspira-
tion in the mornings ” ” Tales also tell how Solbon’s groom
teaches people to tend their horses well Sometimes he in-
forms them beforehand which persons will prosper with their
hoises dunng theii lifetime The Buriats legaid as a good
omen the birth of a colt m the autumn after Solbon has ap-
peared in the sky, believing such a colt to become a very good
horse afterwards *”


PLATE XLVIII

Shaman Drums from the Minusinsk
Disirict

Both the outei and mnei sides mc shown They
arc fuinishccl with dtawings and fi^uics on the skm
of the drum, and with h'ind<-gnp, bells and metal
symbols on the innei side (See pages 287, 520 )


THE STARS 433

A certain tale relates how once when Solbon travelled to the
western sky, his gioom Dogedoi left the horses untended for
three days, going out for a walk with his dog Burto. On re-
turning, the groom saw to his surprise that the wolves had
scattered his horses and even devoured some of them Just as
he was about to gather them together Solbon retuined from
the western sky and seeing the disorder punished his groom
severely

It IS easy to understand how Venus, as the morning and eve-
ning star, should have suggested the idea of a shepherd tending
the flocks of stars As a luler over the stars, this planet ap-
pears also in the tales of the North American Indians The
Yenisei Ostiaks imagine Venus to be the oldest among the
stars, and to guaid them from dangers and watch that they
do not disappear before then time For this reason it is first
and last ’’ in the sky *** Even the ancient Babylonians speak of
the heavenly " sheep ” that IStar tended

But whence have the Mongols obtained their horseman and
his groom? One might assume that this hoise-loving nomad
tribe had of itself begun to imagine the stars to be a great
flock of hoises And yet the Indo-Iranian peoples also seem
to have had the same idea Probably, as Oldenberg says, the
twin gods Asvin (“the horsemen”) of the Veda were origi-
nally the morning and the evening stars The gods Asvin were
wot shipped together with the god of dawn in the early morn-
ing and they are mentioned also as “ the givers of horses ”
With this same star the Buriats connect a tale of the robbing
of a bride Solbon is said to have thiee wives, the thud being
a former Buriat girl, whom the hero earned off just as she
was about to celebrate her wedding Solbon descended to the
earth, seized the girl, who was far-famed for her beauty,
from the midst of the wedding-guests and took het with him
to the sky. By his two first wives Solbon had no children, but
the maid whom he carried off from the earth bore him a son “
With the Yakuts Venus is feminine They 1 elate that she


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


434

IS a beautiful maiden whom Urgel (the Pleiades) loves
When these two meet in the sky it is a bad omen, foretelling
storm and violent weather

The Kirghis say that “ tlie Pleiades aie the moon’s son, and
the evening star the moon’s daughter ”


THE MILKY WAY

The imagination of the child of nature was early exerased
also by the distant spectacle of the Milky Way The most com-
mon name for it in the Turco-Tatar languages is “ the birds’
way” (Turkoman, Kiighis, etc) or *‘the wild ducks’ way”
(Volga-Tatar, Chuvash, Votiak and Cheremiss), to which the
conesponding teim m Finnish and Esthonian is “the birds’
1 oad ” and in Lapp “ the bii ds’ stair ” {loddetatddaras) What
the oiigin of this comparatively old name is, appears from the
beliefs of the Ostiaks and the Voguls these say that the Milky
Way, which they also name “ the ducks’ road ” oi “ the south-
ern birds’ load,” is the guide of birds of passage m the night-
time The Esthonians explain the oiigin of this name in the
same manner “

Many other fancies have also been awakened by the Milky
Way We have already remarked that the Buiiats and the
Yakuts call it “ the seam of the sky ” The Samoyeds of the
District of Turukhansk call it the “ back of the sky ” ** These
names evidently result from a conception of the sky as a kind
of tent-roof

In some Buriat districts, as mentioned, a tale has been
recorded in which the Milky Way is said to have come into
being when Manaaii-Goimo milked herself and then threw
away the milk

In North-East Siberia the Milky Way is imagined to be a
large river flowing across the sky “ This idea has perhaps its
Oiigin in China, wheie the idea of a “ heavenly river ” is also
met with Like the Japanese, the Koreans tell of two stars who


THE STARS


435

loved one another and whom God, because they neglected their
duties for the sake of their love, {.eparated by placing the one
in the uttermost east, the other in the uttermost west In
addition the broad heavenly, tiver flows between them Once
a yeat, in the seventh month, these lovers ate said to meet,
the buds building a bridge for them over the i iver "

With the Caucasian TaUtrs, the Turks, and many of the
Balkan peoples, a tale of Persian origin is connected with the
Milky Way, the tale telling of a man who stole straw or hay,
intending to hide his booty m the sky, but, as he journeyed,
sprinkled so much on the way that his path can yet be traced
m the sky For this reason these stars are also called " the
straw-thief *8 trade ” “

Names of later oiigin are the “ pilgrims* way to Mecca ** of
the Mohammedan Tatars, and the Burkhans* road ’* of the
Mongols The Yakuts call the Milky Way. “God’s foot-
prints ” He 18 said to have walked across the sky in creating
the eaith" More common is “the ski-track of the son of
God,”” behind which name there is perhaps hidden some
hunting-story like the one written down among the Ostiaks
and the Voguls When God (Numi-Torem), as the Voguls
relate, had created the earth, he sent a six-footed stag upon it
An ordinary human being could not hunt this quick-footed
animal, and so he begged the Foiest spirit to pursue it But
even for this being, who glided at a terriflc rate on his sbs,
It was not easy to ovei take his six-legged prey When at last
he succeeded in killing the animal, which was so big that its
body “ reached over thirty rivers,” the Forest qjirit broke off
the two additional feet, saying to his father Numi-Torem’
“ Change this animal with the powei of thy word into a four-
footed beast, as, seeing that the work of chasing and killing it
has been difficult even foi me, how should an oidinary human
being have the strength necessary for it ” This hunt was re-
flected in the sky The stag became the Great Bear, in which
aie to be seen the beast’s head, its two eyes, its forefeet and


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


436

hindfeet, and in addition tlie chopped-o£F stumps of the other
two feet The Milky Way is “the ski-track of the Forest
spiiit ” Even the Forest spirit’s house can be seen in the sky in
a shape which the Voguls call “the complete house of the
Forest spiiit,” (1 e , the Pleiades) In this stoiy also, the hero
who attacks the Gieat Bear is fiom the Pleiades ”

The Ostiaks on the Irtysh River tell of a man named
Tungk-Pok who once when he was in the sky imdertook to
hunt this six-footed stag Having chased it acioss the sky on
his magic skis the heio overtook it at the mouth of the Irtysh,
where the stag threw itself on to the earth The hunter did
not succeed in killing it, but could only cut off its two hind-
most feet He therefore declared “ Men will become more
and moie small and weak, how can they then overthiow a six-
footed beast, which even foi me is very difficult? May stags
and other animals fiom this day onwards have only four
feet I ” The stag continued its flight towards the noith until
the hero again leached it near Obdorsk The animal being
then dead-tned, it begged God to save it from the hands of the
hunter God took pity on the stag and changed it into a great
stone, but, as a memento of this heavenly, chase, the Ost^ks
see in the Milky Way two parallel ski-tracks (“ the ski-track
of Tungk-Pok” 01 “the way of Tungk-Pok”) and in the
Gieat Bear a “ stag ”

The Ostiaks of Vasyugan call this hunter “ the son of the
god of Heaven ”


THE SIGNS OF A TWELVE-DIVISIONED PERIOD

111 connection with fancies relating to the stars it may be
mentioned that the peoples of Central Asia divide time into
periods of twelve, usually callmg each of these units of time
by the following animal names mouse, cow, tiger, hare,
dragon, snake, horse, sheep, monkey, cock, dog and sow”
Images of these animals in lelief can often be seen decorating


THE STARS


437


Signs or a Twflve>Diti.
siovro Friuoo


the edges of the arculai metal mirrors {toU) hanging with
other magic objects on the costume of the shamans and used
as instruments of sorcery Other objects, also decorated with
the same images, for reckoning time can be seen here, most
of which have been brought
from China where, as in other
pai ts of East Asia, this method
of keepmg account of time still
prevails From the Chinese
pictures It will be seen that the
animal-images there are the
same as those of the Mongols
Only the dgn of the mouse is
called a rat by the Chinese, and
that of the hare a rabbit Al-
though these animal signs are
mainly the same with the dif-
ferent peoples of Central Asia, their order varies somewhat
Thus the Eastern Soyots are said to leckon the years in the
following order — dragon, tiger, cow, sow, monkey, mouse,
dog, frog, snake, cock, horse and hare
The Buriats, who begin their twelve-yeai and twelve-month
periods with the mouse, say that they really ought to begin with
the camel, but that the camel has lost this honour Light is
thrown on the subject by the following tale The camel and
the mouse quarrelled over which of them should rule over the
first year of a peiiod or the fimt month of a year In the end
they decided to solve the dispute m such a way that the one
who first saw the rays of the rising sun should call the year or
month in question by his name The camel took his stand
looking towards the east, but the mouse climbed on his hump
and from there watched the west At dawn the camel’s eye
had not yet caught the sun when the mouse had already seen
the reflection of its rays on the western mountains Foi this
reason the first year and also the fiist month of the year aie


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


438

called after the mouse From this tale the Buriats have a
provei b “ In believing himself gi eat the camel lost a year ” ”
Signs of animals lepresentmg a peiiod of time divisible by
twelve arc already to be found side by side with the signs of
the Zodiac on the marble tablets of the ancient Egyptians,
found in the beginning of the kst centuiy A period of twelve
hours, which were represented by animal figuies of the same
description, was called Dodekaoios by the anaent Gieeks
These pictures, which to some extent resemble the time-marks
of the Mongols, are mentioned in the following ordei cat,
dog, snake, crab, ass, lion, goat, ox, hawk, monkey, ibis and
crocodile Thei e can be no doubt that these time-marks, which,
like the twelve-divisioned pieiiod itself, seem to have spread
into East Asia from the west, aie closely connected with the
coriesponding ideas of these civilized peoples Latei Greek
texts call this method of reckoning time “Chaldean,” which
points to Babylonian astrology The signs of the twdve-
divisioned petiod aie thus most piobably explained by the
twelve signs of the Zodiac.


CHAPTER XIV
THUNDER

L ike most of the North American Indian tribes, the
peoples in the faithest north of Siberia imagine thunder
to be something resembling a large and mighty bud The
Forest Tungus speak of it as such and explain that the rustle of
this mighty bird’s wings is heard on the
eaith, when it flies, as the ternflc tumbling
of thunder The Tungus never offer up
saciiflces to this being, nor do they wor-
ship It in any other way, but when weav-
ing a magic spell they make a wooden
image of a bird to represent it, fixing this
outside their tent at the head of a long
pole The Thunder bird is believed to
protect the soul of the shaman, who in
his flight thiough the an may encounter
many dangets The shaman can even
send the Thundei bird against his enemies
should he deem it necessary The Tungus see a proof of the
gigantic powers of this bud of the upper air m tiees struck by
lighting, which it has torn to shreds with its " claws of stone ” *
A similar conception of the nature of thunder is found
among the Chukchee and all the primitive peoples of the Dis-
trict of Tuiukhansk The Eastern Samoyeds liken the
Thundei bird to a duck, whose sneezing is the cause of ram
It IS also imagined as the Iron bird, piobably on account of the
din It can create * The Yurak Samoyeds of Noithein Russia,
who make themselves an image of thunder m the form of a
goose, fancy, like the Tungus, that the Thunder bird attends


Fic 17 The Tun-
cub Thunder-bird


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


440

and protects the soul of the shaman A ceitain shaman is even
said to have wandered two ot thiee yeats in the air accompanied
by this giant bird '* The hero m a Yakut tale says " Why
should 1 not change myself into a bud and pietend to be the
ruler of lain and thunder”*

In the beliefs of the Tiemyugan Ostiaks, thundei appeals
as a black bird lesembling a gt ouse and screaming vei y loudly *

The Mongol tribes, many Altai peoples, and some Eastern
Tungus tubes, such as the Goldes, believe that the phenomenon
of thunder is caused by a laige flying dragon The Mongols
say that this diagon has wings and a body covered With flsh
scales At times it lives m the water, at times flies in the air
When it moves in the sky the rumbling of thunder follows.
In some places the rumbling is explained to be the dragon’s
voice and every movement of its tail to be a flash of lightning
It never comes sufficiently near to the earth for people to see
It, and in the winter it hides in lofty mountains wheie the
hoar-frost on the crags is caused by its bi eath Othei s say that
It winteis in dense foiests, ovei which a peipetual mist then
hoveis, and a thud opimon is that it spends the winter in the
sea*

The peoples of the Altai say that lightning and thunder
follow when the dragon stiikes two stones against each othei,
of which one is in its mouth, the other in its hand It is also
told that a certain Tengeri iides on the back of this monster,
chasing a stuped oi flying squirrel’ The Tengeii desiies to
wreak vengeance on the squuiel, which, while in Heaven, toie
out the eye of God’s youngest son It is dangeious during a
thundei -storm to stand undei a tree m which a squuiel is
hiding, as the lightning always strikes such trees This belief
IS also common among the Buiiats * The Goldes say that the
dragon pursues evil spiiits who will hide any wheie when a
thundei -storm arises *

This conception, in which the Creatoi of thundei is intro-
duced in an exceedingly mythological shape, is not an original


THUNDER


441

Altaic one, but, as its geographical area alieady denotes, comes
from China As we know, the Chinese and, following their
example, the Japanese, imagined the Thunder god to have the
shape of a peculiai diagon, which is lepresented in their art
in many different ways

Both the above mentioned conceptions, the bird and the
winged diagon, are evidently boin of the swift movement of a
thunder-storm and especially of the sudden fash of the light-
ning Even where human features aie attributed to the
Thunder god, he is often regai ded as a being with wings The
Ostiaks of Demyanka call him " the Winged old man ”

Among the Buriats a numbei of tales have been found
relating how some human hero becomes transformed into a
Thundei god by dressing himself in winged garments One
of these tales tells of a clever archer who came to heaven alive
On the eaith he had had a wife and thiee sons with whom he
lived happily until he became old One day he told his sons
that his days weie numbered and asked them to prepare him
a gaiment and saddle a hoise Aftei wishing good-bye to
his family he mounted the hotse and depaited Coming to
the meeting of three loads he chose the middle one, which led
to the sky There he ai rived at an empty house where he was
soon joined by four young men These feasted the old man
and asked him to lemain there as guaidian of that heavenly
abode, at the same time they forbade him to open a chest which
stood in the room or to put on a winged garment hanging on
the wall When he was alone, howevei, the man became so
curious that he once opened the mystic chest and saw there
strange, different-coloured stones shaped like anow-pomts
Happening at the same time to turn his eves to the earth,
where at that moment a pet son was stealing vegetables fiom his
neighboui’s garden, he became so angry that he thiew a red
stone at the thief A little latei the four masters of the house
returned home and scolded the old man for having set a whole
village on file because of one wicked man Still later on,


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


441

the old man conceived a desue to tty on the winged clothes
When he had dressed himself in them he acquired a magic
power of flying and thus he became the god of Thunder “

There is another version of the same tale in a slightly dif^
ferent form A man who had lost his way while wandering in
great forests came to a place whet e a flight of staiis led up fiom
the earth to the sky Ascending the stairs he arrived at a fine
house glittering and shimmeiing with gold and silver, where
the old god of Heaven, Esege-Malan-<Tengeri, was sitting
Hearing how the man had come to Heaven, God was delighted
and begged him to be his seivant, the man consenting to his
request One day God urged him to look down and see hoW
people weie living on the earth On doing so, he saw a man
leading a sheep stolen fiom another’s flock, and he became so
angry that he seized one of the stones which God kept in a
chest and threw it on the earth Instantly, God sent him down
after his stone, so that he could see it fall on the eaith as a.
great flash of lightnmg that slew the thief From that day he
remained with the god of Heaven and served him as the
Thunderer “

Notwithstanding all these tales, which evidently belong to
a world-wide group of myths, the Buriats have no cleaily-
defined, anthiopomorphic god of Thundei They often call
the tumble of thunder “ the song of heaven ” ” As they have
now, as mentioned eailier, a gieat numbei of difFeient Ten-
geris, they cannot tell which of them is at the prease time the
Thunderer Therefoie, when necessaiy, they consult a magi-
cian, sometimes even nine shamans, who endeavour to find out
which god, one belonging to the eastern or one belonging to the
western group, is the laiser of the particulai stoim One of
the mightiest Thunder gods is Asan-Sagan-Tengeii, who fights
evil spirits with his fiery aiiow “

Tlie Yakuts, on the contrary, have quite a distinct Thunder
god whom they call Ulu-Tojon (“ Great Lord ”) or Syga-
Tojon (" Loid with the axe ’*) Frequently he is only named


THUNDER


443

" the Thunderer ” Accoiding to one source " the Lord with
the axe” lives in the eighth heaven Othei sources speak
separately of the gods of Thundei and of Lightning In such
cases the Yakuts call the Thundei er Bold Screamei ” and the
Lightning-raakei “the Lord with the axe” Both are sup-
posed to pursue demons and evil spiiits In order to rid
then homes of the evil spiiits which endeavout to hide
themselves theie when a thunder-storm threatens, the
Yakuts smoke them out by burning pieces of a tiee struck
by lightning, aying at the same time “The Bold Screamer
shrieked, the Lord with the axe moved! Away, away! ” They
then throw the bits of wood far out on the meadow Thunder-
bolts, which the people believe they find in the earth, are
treasured in the houses as important talismans against light-
ning^" The Goldes call old stone weapons found in the
ground “ thunder-axes ” ”

The Yakut “ Loid with the axe,” who pursues demons, is
most probably, like the corresponding figures in European
myths, deiived fiom the anaent civilized peoples of Asia

Of another origin also is the other conception of the god
of Thundei, met with alieady among the Finns, according to
which the Thunder god is a skilful archer The Altai Tatars
tell of a mighty heio whose bow is the rainbow and whose
anow the lightning ” In some Ostiak distiicts the rainbow is
explained to be the Thunder god^s bow and ancient stone
weapons found m the ground his arrows, which he shoots in
Older to kill the Forest spurt hidmg m the trees “

Generally the peoples of the Altaic race do not speak of
the lainbow as the Thunder god’s weapon, nor do they call
It the thunder-bow Very common is the fancy that the
rainbow is a kind of being that drinks water The Tatars
have probably transmitted this idea to the Yenisei Ostiaks,
who call the rainbow “The thunder drinks water”**
What this animated water-drinker, as the Votiaks also call it,
really is, does not appear from the beliefs of the Turco-Tatar


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


44 +

peoples On the other hand the East Eutopean peoples, ac-
cording to whom the lainbow sucks watei fiom seas, lakes and
rivets, sprinkling it anew on the eaith as lain, imagine it to
be a kind of giant snake The Esthonians say that it has the
head of an ox, which it loweis down to a nvei, emptying it
of watei Could this be the Vitra oi Ahi (" snake ”) of the
Veda, fiom whose power the Thundei god India releases the
waters?

The Yakuts believe that the rainbow can also raise people
from the ground A tale i elates how it once lifted up a giil
in the District of Verchoyansk and set hei down again near
Irkutsk ”

Both the Yakuts and Buriats call the rainbow also "the
uime of the she-fox”** The southern Tatar tribes have
several names for it, such as " rambelt,” “ the half -bow of the
pot,” "God’s sword” (Caucasus) The Kiighis name, “the
old woman’s sheep-halter,” is explained by the following tale
A certain man had two wives who weie always quarrelling
The mother-in-law cuised the oldei, who had thiee sons, so
that she fled to the heavens with her sons and her cattle, and
now tethers her sheep to the rainbow ”

The conception of the lainbow as the weapon of the Thunder
god seems thus to be quite local to Middle and Northern Asia,
where it occurs sporadically Anothei tale wiittcn down some-
where in the district of the Altai belongs to a still more limited
area It tells of a camel moving in the sky with three persons
on its back The first beats a drum, whence the lumbling of
thunder, the second waves a scarf, whence the lightning, the
third pulls at the leins, causing watei to lun from the camel’s
mouth, whence the ram ** In other places it is said that a gieat
shaman beats a drum m the sky when it thunders The latter
opinion, though only occasionally met with, belongs natuially
to Siberia, the land of shamanism

The Tatais, like many other of the peoples of the world,
imagine the lightning, which for a moment draws a livid.


PLATE XLIX

Shaman Drums from the Minusinsk.

DisrRicr

(See pages 287, 530 )


THUNDER


445

winding streak of light across the sky, to be a fiery snake fall-
ing down fiom Heaven “ The same idea has been earlier met
with in a Finnish poem on the origin of fire
The most noitheily peoples of Siberia, with the exception of
The Yakuts, do not sacrifice to the Thunder god Some, e g ,
the Yenisei Ostiaks, bid him during a storm pass by quietly
without laising a tempest Records of Thunder worship aie
found moie among other Sibeiian peoples Old Chinese
chronicles i elate that the Northern Uigurs fear the thundei,
and cry out and shoot towards the sky at eveiy clash They
then leave the place and separate The following spiing they
assemble again at the spot where the lightning struck and
slaughter a ram theie A certain Persian historian mentions
that the Mongolians were greatly afraid of thundei and pouied
milk and kumiss on the ground, begging it not to hurt then
dwellings or their cattle It has been a custom with the Tatars
of the Altai to assemble village by village on high mountains,
when the first i oil of thunder is heard m spi mg, and to sprinkle
milk towards the four points of the sky **

Speaal attention is awakened by the thundei when it hap-
pens to kill a human being or a domestic animal Such victuns
of the lightning aie regarded as sacred and so too is the spot
where the lightning has struck Accoiding to the Buriat^
people and animals slain by lightning must always be buried
in the air upon a platform built on four posts If the light-
ning stakes a house, the house must at once be removed to
another place, or certain rites, called the raising,” have to be
observed, the intention of which is the sending of the thundei-
bolt back into the sky Unless this be done danger is be-
lieved to threaten, These rites, which must take place on the
thud day after the thunder-atoim, are conducted by a magician
and his eight assistants, who ride on horseback three times
lound the dwelling m question, stopping before the door at
eveiy round The magician has a bianch of a silver-fir in
his hand, the otheis a dnnking-cup While the magician re-


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


446

peats a piayer his assistants spnnkle liquid iiom then cups
The most impoitant of these rites seems to be the raising of a
felt carpet spread before the tent, on which some aiticle le-
sembling or intended to lepresent a thundeibolt has been laid
"The raising,” from which the iitual gets its name, is pei-
foimed by the eight assistants Finally, molten tin is diopped
into a liquid to test by the shapes thus obtained whether the
laising has been successful If the tin, 011 falling into a basin
containing wine 01 milk, foims into a single lump, the sign
IS favourable ”

Exceedingly strange is the fancy of the Buiiats that the
Tengeris who are mentioned as the senders of thundei bolts
sometimes poui down from the sky wrak (the "fiist-milk,”
differing in colour from other milk given by a cow aftei
calving) Although many such Tengeiis are mentioned, e g ,
KKan-Budal-Tengeri, Urak-Sagan-Tengeii, Khaian-Budal-
Tengeii {hudal, “ to let down ”), of which the last mentioned
IS fanaed to belong to the black, 1 e , the eastern Tengeiis, it
IS probable that all these names originally meant one and the
same being According to tales, the mtA diopped down from
the sky is a thick yellowish-white liquid The person who le-
ceives some of this "first milk” duiing a thunder-storm is
deemed veiy foitimate and is believed to lemain rich foi ever
It IS, however, an extremely laie event for a peison to leceive
urak When a Buiiat petceives that he has been the recipient
of speaal heavenly favour, wak appealing sometimes in his
milk-foods, he turns to the magician, who witnesses the fact
and examines from which Tengeri the urak has come The
liquid is then poured mto a vessel made of biich-bark and
placed on a high place, to prevent it from becoming defiled on
the earth The Buriats believe that the can use into the
sky again According to the common custom, it must always,
bke a thunderbolt, be leturned to heaven ”

This utakf which falls fiom the sky duiing a thunder-storm
and must immediately be saciificed to its sender again, reminds


THUNDER


447

one of the Indo-Iianian tales about Haoma or Soma which an
eagle bi mgs down from the sky The Soma, sometimes called

fit St milk ” in the Rgveda, was oiiginally the favourite drink
of India, the god of Thunder It provides the “Bearer of
thundei bolts ” with giant poweis for his great deeds Doubt-
less, the eagle itself, which, according to tales, procured this
dunk for its master, was the bird of Indra Compared with
Indo-Iianian legends, the beliefs of the Buiiats seem to repre-
sent a moie primitive standpoint On the ground of these
tales we may conjecture that the Indo-Iianians, like the peoples
of Noithern Siberia, oiginally regarded thunder as a giant
bird lesemblmg an eagle The fact that the liquid brought
down fiom the sky by the Thunder bud is sacrificed to the
Thundei god, may easily have given use to an idea that there
are two separate beings, of which the one brings and the other
receives the Soma

In a Yakut tale about how the son of Ulu-Tojon fought
with a giant, even the thunder-bolt seems to appear personi-
fied The tale begins with the description of a terrible storm
and then goes on to i elate how “ suddenly pitch-black darkness
coveied the earth, a frightful roar, louder than the strongest
peal of thundei, was heaid, and at the same time a man three
fathoms long, made half of file, half of iron, came flying and
twirling down in a mighty whirlwind He sank over a yard
deep into the earth, but bounced up again and stepped before
the giant “

That the Thundei god has not so prominent a place among
the nomads, hunteis, and fishers of Northein Sibeiia as in the
mythology of the agricultural peoples of Nearer Asia, India
and Euiope is explained by the fact that the life of the farmers
18 in a much .greatei degree dependent on weather and lain
Theie are, it is tiue, even m the distiicts of the Altai, ceitain
persons and even families, whose duty it is to bring about ram
01 di ought as necessaiy, but these rainmakers (Jadatshy) do
not seem to appeal to any special Thunder god, but to the god


448 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY

of Heaveii in geneui (Kaua-Khan), oi to sundry gods living
at the spiings of ceitain nveis, who aie believed to cause rain.
Extiemely famous in this respect are Mordo-Khan and Abakan-
Khan, who aie said to live at the spimg of the Abakan rivei ‘'®
The Buriats also speak of a sepaiate Rain-god, Khuran-
Nojon (“the Lord of Rain”), who is believed to have nine
water-barrels in heaven When he opens only one of them,
a thiee dajfs’ lam ensues” Thete is no infoimation, how-
evei, as to whether this god has ever been worshipped with
sacrifices


CHAPTER XV
FIRE


W IERE did fire first appear to me, what is its purpose
and Its power, who has given it birth ^ ” So cries in a
Yakut tale a hero, supposed to be the ancestor of this tribe,
arriving at last at the conclusion that fire is the son of ,Yryn-
Ai-Tojon who sits on a milk-white throne to which thiee flights
of silver stairs lead up ^ The belief that the first fire came
down from heaven is very common among the peoples of the
Altaic race

Tales gathered from different peoples show the origin of
this belief The Tungus told me that the Thunder bud
brought down fire from the sky to earth A file caused by
lightning IS considered sacred by them and they dare not put
out a forest-fire which has been lighted from Heaven Among
the Yakuts also the fancy is most common that the Thunder
god Ulu-Tojon gave people the first fire ’ The Buriats call
the god of Fire, who was also the first sender of fire, Galta-
Ulan-Tengeri, he is further the god of heat and drought, who
dries up the growing grass to the roots and the runnmg
rivers with their springs,” and the sender of the lightning,
who sets on fire all that he strikes * The Altai Tatars declare
that mankind originally lived on vegetables and fruits and
therefore neither needed fire nor missed it, but with the
change in their manner of nounshing themselves fire became
necessary for the preparing of food It was then that Clgen
took two stones, a white one and a black one, and struck them
together so that the spark which flew from the sky to the earth
set fire to the dry grass From this man learned to strike
fire * Through the mouth of the Buriat shaman, fire declares


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


450

Itself to be “ the middle son of the day-sky, the youngest son
of the njght-sky ” *

Certain othei Noith Sibeiian peoples explain the oiigin of
Ure in the same way The Ostiaks on the Yenisei give a moie
detailed account of how their ancestois leceivcd fiie ftom
lightning The lightning kindled a tree, and some gieat
shaman taught the people to make use of the hie At hist a
great hre was kept burning, fiom which eveiyone could boiiow
a hame Later on, hre-steel and tindei were placed beside it,
and hre \tos thus tiansfeiied to these objects “

In some tales about the origin of hre there hguies also an
inventor of hie, often an animal In Buriat tales this wise
animal is the porcupine, which has also in other ways alteady
hgured as an mventoi In the beginning, it is told, neithei
gods noi men could make hi e, with one exception — the Porcu-
pine, which was then a human being One day a ciowd had
gatheied lound the Porcupine to heai the seciet of hre-makuig
But the young maidens, seeing the stiange shape of Poicupine,
began to laugh, and this angered him so much that he decided
to tell his secret only to his own wife, and even to her only
against a promise of silence But the hawk, whom the gods
had sent out to steal his secret, happened to heai Porcupine
explaining to his wife where flmtstone was to be found and
how steel could be made, with which two ai tides it was easy
to strike file, and the hawk told the secret to the gods From
these men learned the art of making fire Latei, the descen-
dants of Porcupine became potcupmes^

In the tales of the Altai Tatais the fiog advises Olgen, who
is in perplexity as to where men could get the necessities foi
striking fire, that " the mountains contain stones and the birch
tinder ” * The Mongols say “ lion is the father of fiie and
stone Its mother,** " The above tales give thus two diffeient
explanations fire has come down fiom heaven with the light-
ning, or Its spark has sprung fiom a stone Both fancies are
also met with in Finnish poems on the oiigin of fire


FIRE


451

In Mongolian prayeiSj in which the birth of fire is related in
many diffeient ways, it is said that file came from a tree or
that It was born when in anaent times Heaven and Earth
sepal ated “

Whether fires of different origin have been consideted to be
of unequal value does not appeal from the sources at hand
Besides fire caused by lightning, which is esteemed holier than
other fires, wood-fire or friction-fire has played an important
part in the expelling of diseases The Yakuts are said to have
a custom, during an epidemic, of making a fire by rubbing two
pieces of dry wood together, this sort of fire being supposed
to have speaal protecting powers The people, however, de-
clare that they have learned this custom from the Russians,
with whom epidemic diseases are also supposed to have come
into their country “ The Tatars of Eastern Russia and the
Chuvash also use friction-fire as a kind of purifying remedy
during certain plagues either among people or cattle, and even
at other times in the hot summer On some previously fixed
day the old fire in every home is put out and a great bonfire
IS lighted by friction outside the village Over this the people
spring in order to purify themselves and drive their cattle
through It Thus cleansed, each peasant cairies a brand of
" new fire ” home “

One might suppose this custom, known also to the Finno-
Ugiic peoples of the Volga, to have been learned from the
Russians, as the Yakuts declare But it appeals fiom old
sources that certain Turco-Tatar peoples already in ancient
times used file as a magic purifier Byzantine Chionicles tell
that when the messengers of the Emperor Justinian arrived at
the court of the Turkish Gieat Khan at the springs of the
Irtysh river, the Khan could not receive them until they had
passed between two fires The Tatars still observed this cus-
tom at the time when the Russians paid taxes to them All
people, animals, 01 objects that in some way, e g , by touching
some dead body, had become unclean, were thus purified


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


4.52

Whatevei the origin of the&e customs may have been, the
mystic, and moie especially the heavenly birth of fire, its
wonderful powei and the part which it plays in the domestic
life of the most piimitive peoples, resulted in the fact that
fire in geneial is esteemed holy Many, of the peoples of
Cential and Not them Asia have indeed wot shipped file

When worshipping the file burning on the health the Mon-
gols call It “Mother fiie” According to their ideas the
health is the sanctuary of the home and may on no account
be desecrated The Altaic tubes, the Kiighis, the Yakuts and
other Tui co-Tatar peoples also woi shipped file The idea
that fire must be kept pure and adored as a deity is common
to all these and even to other North Sibeiian peoples
Nothing unclean or evil-smelling may be thiown into it, and
nothing which could weaken its power 01 dim its brightness
For this leason it is wiong to spit into the fire 01 to extinguish
It with water. It is also inadvisable to step ovei it unneces-
sanly or to huit it with any shaip weapon. Plano Carpini
tells how the Mongolians deemed it a sin to hew wood in the
vianity of a file, or to take meat with a knife from a pot
under which a fire was burning, still more to put the knife
into the fire The Yakuts believe that the file, which “ takes
as a gift the pine foiest, consumes the damp wilderness, and
spends the night in diy trees,” understands speech and that it
is theiefore not well to scold 01 speak ill of it

Fire IS believed to need nourishment as well as tender care.
The pious mastei and mistress feed the fire on the hearth
every time they begin a meal The first morsels of food, the
first spoonful of soup, the fiist aip of dunk belong to the
Fire god Especially at family festivals must the file on the
hearth be remembered A fiie-sacnfice is a speaai pait of
the wedding rites with most peoples of the Altaic laoe “ The
Chuvash bride bungs ashes or a fiagment of stone fiom her
parents’ hearth to her new home, this custom doubtless express-
ing the thought that the fire on the health is to go in heiitage


PLATE L

Mongol Shaman with His Drum

(See chaptei XXI )

Aftei photograph by S Pfilsi.


FIRE


453

fiom parents to children” We have already seen that the
Finno-Ugric peoples on the Volga observe ntes akin to these
In worshipping the fire in their new home, a young Mongol
couple saaifice to it some yellow butter and a yellow-headed
sheep Yellow as well as led, in saciifices to the Fire god, is
intended to imitate the hue of the fire itself The best sacri-
fices are those which intensify the burning of the fire, viz ,
butter, laid, gin, etc.”

A ceitain wedding-prayer, said beside the hearth, to some
degree explains the beliefs of the Mongols It begins with
the following words “ Mothei Ut (Turco-Tatar word,
"fire’*), Mistiess of the fire, descended from the elms on
the tops of the Khangai-Khan and the Burkhatu-Khan moun-
tains Thou, who wast born when Heaven and Earth parted,
who earnest forth from the foot-prints of Mother Otygen
(" Mother eaith ”), thou creation of Tengeri-Khan Mother
Ut, thy fathei is the hard steel, thy mother the flint, thy
ancestors the elm-trees Thy brightness reaches the heavens
and spreads over the earth Fire, struck by the Heaven-
dweller, nursed by the Mistress Uluken Goddess Ut, we
offer thee yellow butter and a yellow-headed white sheep
Thine are this biave boy and the beautiful bride, the slender
daughter To thee. Mother Ut, who art always looking up-
ward, we offer cups full of wine and handfuls of fat. Give
lude to the son of the ruler (the bridegroom) and the daugh-
ter of the ruler (the bnde) and all the wedding-folk For this
we pray ” ”

If fire is treated in an improper manner or left without food
it IS believed to take vengeance by sending a kind of skm-
disease In the worst case it burns the whole building

There is no doubtmg the fact that the peoples of the Altaic
race worship fire in itself " Mother ” and other such words
are only names for the fire itself Because of its numerous
flames the Altaic shaman calls it the " Thirty-headed mother,
the Forty-headed virgin-mother”” In the prayers of the


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


+54

Chuvash theie appeals beside the “Mothei fiic ” a “Father
file ” The Yakuts and the Buiiats also worship both a mascu-
line and a feminine Fire god The f oi mei name them “ Old
Man Ulakhany and Misti ess Sabaga,” the kttei “Loid Sa-
khadai and Mistress Sakhala ” Poetic denominations aie fui-
ther “ the White-bearded Loid ** and “ White-haiied Lady ”
of the Yakuts ”

Most Central and Noith iWn peoples speak in addition of
the Ruler or Master of fire, who, accoiding to the Yakuts,
“ lives right m the flames ” What they imagine him to be
like appears fiom then legends which tell that the master of
fire “ eats raw wood," that he has “ an ashen bed " where “ the
pillow IS a glowing coal and the coverlet fine ashes " and that
“ the smoke is his breath " ” They believe, howevei, that the
Master of fire can extricate himself fiom the file and appeal
in human shape The Yakuts say that in a home wheie he
IS often remembeied with saciifices, the Mastei of file is fat
and thtiving, but the Fire god of a mean and parsimonious
household is thin and withered ” A Bui lat legend relates how
a man who had the power of seeing gods and understanding
their speech once encounteied two Mastcis of file One of
them, though the god of a poor house, was well fed and
dressed, but the other, the Fiie mastei of a well-to-do house,
looked very poor and wi etched The lattei complained of
having to live without food in the power of a mean master
and mistress who at times even pieiced his eyes by. poking the
fire with shaip iions Because of this he threatened to punish
his master, and very soon the grand house of the iich man
was burnt down to the ground “

Such tales, m which the Fire gods of diffeient homes con-
vet se together and tell each othei of their life, aie quite com-
mon In the tales of the Ugrian Ostiaks every health has its
own “ File maid,” her outwaid appearance being said to show
how the fire has been treated m that home " Doubtless, these
tales, some of which have been lecorded even in Eastern


FIRE


455

Europe, ongmate from the conception that the hre on the
hearth must be tended and fed like a living being

The Master of the fire may also appear to people before
a disastrous fire or any other catastrophe which threatens the
home. Then, also, the Fire god often takes on human shape
The Yakuts see him in the form of a “ grey old man ” ” To
a ceitain Buriat he appeared as a great, red, and therefore
fiame-coloured, man'^ The Buriats even make themselves
images of the Master of fire and keep them in a box near the
hearth In homes in the Balagansk District one may some-
times see two human-shaped figures coveied with red cloth,
of which the one represents the Master,” the other the
** Mistress ” of the fire Two glass beads form their eyes,
the headdiess, the hands and the hem of the gaiment are
covered with black sheepskin The "Mistress” has beads
foi nipples and a tin ornament on her breast The led and
the black in the image of the Fire god represent the colours
of the glowing coal and the soot

Besides the part played by fire m domestic life, most peoples
of the Altaic race have given it anothei important duty to ful-
fil — the conveying to the vaiious gods of the sacrifices des-
tined for each Thus every offeiing which is put m the file is
not intended to paafy the fire itself. More espeaally when a
sacrifice is intended for some god of the upper spheres is fire
used as the medium It is in this capaaty of mediator between
man and the gods that file is considered the most sacred, and
for this reason it is espeaally worshipped at sacrificial festivals
The Finnish peoples of Eastern Russia also have this concep-
tion and the rites connected with it are met with among them
If finally we attempt to compare the beliefs and customs
prevailing in the different districts peopled by the large Altaic
race, we find that these have not developed equally, being
richer and more various in some distiicts than in others The
Tungus of the pnmeval forests of Noith Siberia are the most
backward in this respect It is true that these also worship


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


456

fire after a fashion, keeping it clean and refraining fiom hutt-
ing It, but the offering up of sacrifices to the fire is not deemed
so necessary by them as it is m Central Asia, and its use in
wedding rites, equally with the idea of file as a conveyei of
sacrifices, is uncommon We aie theiefoie led to think that
the mighty and much adored File god of the other peoples
related to the Tui ks has developed undei foi eign influence and
if we further remembei that the Indo-lranian peoples from
ancient times have been zealous fite-woishippeis and that then
beliefs and customs coincide exactly with those of the Cential
Asian tribes, we cannot be utuwaie fiom whom the peoples
of the Altaic race have, at least in its moie developed form,
inherited their fire-worship Seeing that the Mongols, who in
their own language call the Fiie god Galai-Khan (“ Rulei of
the fire”), or, like their kinsfolk the Buiiats, Gali-Edzin
(“ Mastei of the file ”), use in their piayeis the Tuico-Tatai
name for fire, Ut, we can agree with Banzai ov m his supposi-
tion that the Mongols learned to woiship fiie fiom the Iianians
through the Turkish tubes This Iianian influence can also
be traced in the fire-worship of the Finno-Ugrians m their idea
of fire as a mediator of saaifices, which conception does not
seem originally to have been general among the Ugiians 01 the
peoples of the Altaic lace Even at the present day, side by
side with the later sacrifices by file we find the oldei custom,
known almost solely among the Northern peoples, of giving
sacrifices to the gods untouched


CHAPTER XVI


THE WIND

L ike other phenomena of nature, the wind also was re>
garded as animated Following the points of the com-
pass, the Central Asian peoples speak of four winds, which
arise at the "four orneis of the earth A stranger idea
IS that the mountains are the home of the wind The Yakuts
say the winds " sleep ” on the mountains, whence they can be
called when needed by whistling* The Yakuts and the
Lamutes aie said to have avoided loud conversation when pass<
mg by a high mountain, in order that the " Master ** of the
mountain might not become incensed and send a stoim to
hinder their jouiney * The Goldes believe the winds to come
from caves in the mountains, where the Wind spirit holds them
captive A shaman can peisuade this spirit either to open
these chasms, oi keep them closed, according to whether wind
is needed or not * The Mongols call storms " runmng-days,"
as they believe the Mountain spirit runs from mountain to
mountain during these times *

Elsewhere than in Siberia, this belief is met with in moun-
tainous districts, having probably its oiigin in obsei vations made
fiom nature The Lapps also believe windy and stormy
weather to aiise out of the chasms in the fells A certain fell
at Inan is called Piegga-oaivi (“ wind fell ”) Possibly, also,
the Finnish “birth of the wind” originates from the same
idea, the wind being said in this poem to have been born
" between two rocks ” "

Among the Southern Turkish peoples a mythical idea of a
grey bull has been recorded, the breath of which gives birth


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


458

to the wind’ The majonty of peoples believe some spirit
to wander in the whirlwind

Differing from oidinaty winds, according to the Buriats, is
the Zada, which has its own spiiit, Zada-Sagan-Tengcri By
Zada they mean a shoit, inteimittent wind, occuiiing seveial
times on the same day Often, it bungs with it lain or snow
Generally, the Zada blows m the spiing and the autumn
Zada-weather may be brought about by men with the help of
a certain root, the Buuats believing that if one of these loots
IS pulled or dug up out of the ground, the weathei will begin
to change lapidly Certain hunters, to whom this magic
method is known, make Zada assist them in their himting
Certain birds, also, such as hawks and swans, aie said to know
the properties of the said root and to conjure foith a so-called
*^bitd-Zada” when migiating southwaid in the autumn
Similarly, some of the biggei inhabitants of the foiest, notably
the deei and the fawn, use this means foi then own benefit
(‘* deei-Zada ”) It may also be brought about by the help
of a special led stone, called “ Zadan-ulan-shulun " by the
Buriats Fuither, Zada is sometimes born when a thundeibolt
falls into the water, when nine days of this wind follow ”
This peculiar belief, met with also among the Kalmudcs
and the Turkomans, has spread to the Yakuts They say that
among the entrails of an animal a stone is sometimes found,
which possesses the magic powei, if taken into the yaid on a
calm summer day, of awakening a cold and seveie wind.
These stones the Yakuts call Sata (=Buriat Zada) '


PLATE LI

Mongol stone>he«p on which each passei*by must
throw 1 stone as in offering m ordei to have a lucky
journey (Sec page 470 )

Aftei photogiaph by S PSlsi.


t » I


CHAPTER Xyil
THE EARTH


ALTAIC peoples early regarded the earth as being
JL an animated, conscious and compiehendmg being Even
now the Central Asian peoples are afraid of being punished
if they offend the earth According to the Soyots the digging
or the wounding of the eai th with sharp instruments is a great
sin ^ The Altai Tatars declare the pulling up of plants out
of the earth to be as improper as the pulling out of the hair or
beaid of a human being would be ’ With ideas such as these,
It IS not to be wondeied at that the nomads did not look with
a favomable eye on the pioneers of agiiculture The agri-
cultuiist Cam, according to the Semites, was also less pleasing
to God than the nomad Abel Similar ideas were held, fur-
ther, by the Ameiican Indians when the first whites penetrated
into their temtory

As the pioducer of vegetation, etc, the earth was regarded
as a female being As the sky, which renders the earth fruit-
ful, was called “ the Father,’^ the earth, which gives birth, was
called " Mother" Already in the Orkhon stone inscnptions
it 18 written “ The sky above is our &ther, the earth beneath
IS our mother, man is the child of both " In the ancient tales
of the Mongols, the “ Blue sky ” and the ** Brown earth ” are
two of the chief deities ‘ The Yakuts believe that the « Earth
mother,” also called "Mistress” (An-Darkhan-Khotun or
An-Alai-Khotun) acts both as the producer of vegetation and
as the birth-giver of children * The Tungus lay to the merit
of the earth, as Geoigi points out, "all that it brings forth ” *
The Mongols say that the sky gives life to beings, but that the
earth gives them their form * Thus the Earth mother becomes


46 o SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY

also the deity of duld-birth Asi ib well known, the anaent
peoples of Asia had this same idea

Concerning sacrifices to the eaith there exist veiy old le-
ports The Chronicles of the Chinese relate that the Hunnii
and Tukiu peoples saaificed to the eaith ^ Maico Polo tells
us that the chief object of Mongolian worship was the Eaith
god Natigai, to whom milk, kumiss and tea were saciihced
When sacrificing, the people prayed to this deity foi fiuitful-
ness The name Natigai mentioned by Marco Polo is prob-
ably a corrupted form of the name Otukan, which appeals in
the Orkhon inscriptions as meaning the countiy of the old
Turks, worshipped by them as a speaal deity *

Even to-day the agricultural peoples, such as the Buriats,
Tatars and Chuvashes, saciifice to the Earth goddess Gen-
erally, earth worship would seem to have gained in impoitance
in places where agiiculture had obtained foothold The
Buiiats offer up a blood-sacrifice to the Eaith spirit in the
autumn when held-work is over.* The Chuvashes, like the
Volga Finns, sacrificed blade, earth-colouied ” animals to the
Earth mother at their agricultural festivals The most Noi th-
em Sibeiian peoples, however, buch as the Tungus, do not
see the necessity of sacrificing to the earth, as in the life of this
hunting and fishing people the earth has not the same noui ish-
ing value as among these others

Doubtless the eaith as such was worshipped, as the Mongol
prayei-name Brown earth shows Illuminative are also
the following words in the Yakut sacrifice ceremonies "Ruler
of vegetation (literally * grass-tree^), earth moistuie, eat, en-
joy (Ot-mas itJoa, str-datdy stga^ asm^ mn) ” Later, the
imagination of the people, especially in tales, cieated certain
anthropomorphic featuies for the Earth mother Chuvash
fancy created an Earth old man to accompany the Earth
mother The Buriats imagine the spiiit of the earth as a
whole (Daida-Delkhe-Edidun) to be an old giey-beaided man,
and his wife a white-haued old woman Generally, it seems


IHE EARTH 461

to have been exceedingly dii£cult to give anthropomorphic
featuies to the Eaith mother

The agricultural Chuvashes, when a field has lost its pro-
ductive poweis, cairy out speaal ceremonies, called ^^The
stealing of earth ” The mtention of these ceremonies is to
proem e productive eaith from a field owned by someone else,
in which the grain flourishes A living “ suitor ” is chosen for
the Earth mother, and arrayed precisely as foi a real courtship,
this suitor goes out to seek a bride The suitor has to be young
and strongly»built, as a marriage with the Earth mother,
according to the Chuvashes, is so exhausting that in spite of his
staying powers, the bridegroom haidly ever lives to a ripe old
age Although the wedding procession sets oflF with much
Jingling of bells and singing of wedding-songs and music, the
participants all quiet down as the place whence the bride has
to be fetched is reached In the silence of the night the pro-
cession drives into the field, where the bridegroom, sitting in
the first wagon, is lifted to the ground The oldest man in the
piocession now acts as the agent for the biidegroom, saying,
with glance fixed on the earth " We have come to thee, rich
and dear bride, with a young and beautiful bridegroom We
know that thy riches are endless, but undescribable is also the
burning love of our biidegroom for thee ^ At this, the bride-
groom bows down to the giound The agent goes on '*Do
thou also, dear bride, love our bridegroom, and refuse not to
comply with our lequest” The bridegioom bows again
“ Take with thee, dear bride, all thy property from the fields
and meadows, the forests and rivers” Aftei further deep
bows, shovelsful of earth are lifted into all the wagons The
bridegroom is lifted into the first vehicle When at last, with
singing and music, clapping of hands and cries of delight, the
home-village is reached, the “bridegioom,” with a spade in
his hand, goes first to his own and then to the other vehides
to welcome his “ bride,” saying “ Be welcome, my dear bnde,

1 love thee more than gold, more, even, than my life For


46 a SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY

the sake o£ my love, spiead out thy property on our fields and
pastures, our forests and uveis ” Having said this, he takes
eaith ftom all the waggons with his spade, which also the
other participants m the ceiemoay cany to then patches of
field «

Relics of similai weddings for the amusement and the en-
ticing of the Earth mothei, ceremonies alien to the nomad-
culture of the Altaic peoples, ate met with among certain
othei agricultutal peoples The “ biidegroom ” of the Earth
mothei IS mentioned also in old Finnish poems

Another Earth deity of whose origin theie can be no doubt,
IS the Jar-Sub (*' Land-watei ’*) mentioned alieady in the
Orkhon inscuptions “Fiom the oldest times,” say the
Teleuts, " we have woi shipped oui Land-watei and oui Sky ” “
The “Land-watei spiiit” (Sii-Syv-Kudegen oi -Kten) ap-
peals also in the list of deities of the Chuvashes »de by side
with the “Eaith mothei” and “Eailh fathei.”‘* The
“ Man of Land-watei ” is also known among the Voguls
“Land and watei ” as a name foi one’s fatheiland may, how-
ever, be originally an Iranian phrase As VambSi y points out,
the Persians are still in the habit of saying, for example,
ab-t-chak-t Isfahan (“ Isfahan’s distnct,” liteially “Land and
water of Isfahan ”) ” It is theiefore easy to understand
what Xerxes meant in demanding from the Greeks, as a sign
of submission, “ land and water.”


PLATE LII

Diess with metal oinamcnts and symbols, and
drum of a Mongol shaman 1 he inner side of tlie
dium IS shown with hnnd-giip with bells.

(See chaptei XXI )

After photogtaph by S. Palsi.


CHAPTER XVIII

THE “MASTERS” OF NATURE

C onnected with the animating of natural objects and
phenomena among the Altaic race, there is a conception
that a soul,” corresponding to the soul of man, lies hidden
within them, the name given to this being the same as that for
the human soul Thus, the Altai Tatars use the word kut,
which appears in many Turco-Tatar languages, as signifying
the soul of both human beings and natural objects Just as
the Aut of the foimer leaves its dwelling for one reason or an-
other, causing decline and sickness, so the earth, a tree, etc ,
wither when their kut leaves them When expi essing the fact
that a field has lost its fertility, the people say The grovind
has lost Its kut ” (far kudun pardy ) Similarly, the kiU of a
dwelling-place may depart, taking with it the feeling of home-
liness In cases like this last, kut is often translated as mean-
ing “ happmess,” “ health,” “ homeliness,” etc ^ A word with
a similar signification in the Turco-Tatar language is sdr
(“appearance,” “beauty,” “comfort,” “power,” “soul”),
used when speabng of the human soul, the haunting spirit of
the dead, the health of cattle, the power of an army, the
nourishing propeities of bread, etc Thus, for example, it is
said that “when an aimy loses its iwr, it cannot defeat its
enemy ” When food has lost its nomishing power, it is said
that “ Its sur has departed ” A soul of this description is be-
lieved to ammate and to govern all the phenomena of nature
and Its parts, and thus a conception arises that these invisible
souls, to use the words of M A Castr^n, are “ in respect of
all visible nature, in a position of power lesembling that of a
master towards his property ” *


464 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY

That the metaphoi “ Mastei ” used by Caslr 6 n is correct, is
best proved by the names of like signification given by the
peoples of the Altaic race to the invisible Nature gods
" Master,” “ Loid,” 01 “Rulei ” is expiessed in the diffeient
Tatai dialects by the woids Ea 01 Oja, in Chuvash Hoza,
Yakut Itshi and Buiiat Edzhi An invisible Rulei of this
description is to be found m the sky and its phenomena, the
stars, file, land and forest, tiees and glass, livers and lakes,
mountains and rocks, the different animals, and even in objects
made by man, buildings, weapons, tools, vessels, etc Espe-
cially m shaip or “living ” weapons, with which it is easy to
harm oneself, such as knives or axes, do the Yakuts see a Ruler
(Itshi), and similaily in objects capable of motion, such as a
spinning-wheel, 01 of noise, such as a magic dium or a musical
instrument The Yakuts even speak of a Ruler in the bundle
of biich-bianches with which they, beat themselves in their
baths ' The tiade of blacksmith is held in gieat respect by
both Yakuts and Buiials, and a Ruler is believed to dwell m
all the tools needed for this woik. TioSSanskiy points out
that each blacksmith’s tool not bought fiom the Russians has
its Itshi the anvil and stiiking-hamraei have theirs m common,
the tongs and the foige have each their own, but the “ Head-
Itshi ” is in the bellows * Pi ipuzov speaks of a special tutelary
genius of blacksmiths, called Kudai>Bakshy by the Yakuts, and
whose dwelling-place is in the underwoild The smiths
slaughter a brown cow in its honoui and anoint themselves and
their tools with the animal’s blood, but the heart and the liver
they roast in the foige and place them on the anvil, where
they are beaten until nothing remains of them *

The Buriats of the Balagan District worship a deity of
blacksmiths called Boshintoi, with nine sons and one daugh-
ter, who are said to have taught the blacksmith’s ciaft to men
In sacrificing to these, the smiths pour kumiss and othei sacri-
ficial liquids on to the glowing forge A lamb is also some-
times slaughtered to them. Iron images are made of the


THE “MASTERS” OF NATURE 465

aforesaid sons and the daughter, each with some blacksmith’s
tool m Its hand, a hammer, tongs, an anvil, bellows, chaicoal,
etc , these are called the corresponding “ Masters ” of these
objects *

The Master of a musical instrument (Khun Edzhin) is said
by the Buriats to teach people to become skilful musicians
The neophyte has to go out on a moonless night to the junction
of three loads and there sit down on the skull of a horse fitted
with silken reins At midnight the skull is said to try to
unseat its rider Should the latter fall he loses his life, but
if, bemg on his guard, he remains seated and continues to play,
he becomes a very skilful player ’

Most often, the said “Masteis” are believed to dwell m
the phenomena or objects they represent, the Master of file
in the fire, the Master of water in the water, the Master of a
tree in the tiee, etc, although at times they can separate from
these How dose the connection between these Masters and
their visible incai nations has actually been, appears from the
habit of making images of the Masters of the sun and moon
in the shape of these heavenly bodies The Masters of ani-
mals appear to men m the shape of the lespective animals
The Tungus make an image of the reindeer to represent the
Reindeer’s Master, and similarly certain North-East Siberian
tribes make an image of a fish to represent the Fish Master
The Buriats speak of a Master-tiee, which is recognized by
the fact that its pith is blood-red, the tree is thus the body of
the Master dwelling in it, from which, as from a human body,
the blood can run * This conception of Masters animating
nature is not confined only to the Altaic race, but the same
belief IS met with among other Siberian peoples, the Yukagirs,
the Chukchee, etc ®

The anthropomorphism of certain Masters, such as those
of dwelling-places, forests and water would seem to have been
helped by the spirits of the dead, who are said to dwell in
these places Often the dead can be seen to have become


466 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY

diiectly assimilated into these Masteu Thus the Master of
the Yakut dwelling-place (Bakgan Ifohita) sometimes appears
in the shape of fotmer dwelleis in the place Middendorif
says that the oldest inhabitant becomes aftei his death the
Mastei of a home “ The ancient Finns had the same belief
The Masters of forests and water ate also said by the people
to have originated in the spirits of those lost oi di owned
there Buriat tales relate how a hunter was once lost in the
forest, dying finally theie of hunger, and how this imfot-
tunate man became the Forest Master'^ Similai tales aie
told of the origin of the Watei Mastei These tales make
clear why the Mastei s of foiests and watei seek the company
of men, and in tales aspire to marriage and other ties with
them We must not, however, from tales like those described,
draw tht conclusion that the Mastei s of natmal phenomena
and objects are geneially the spiiits of the dead.

The trees of the forest itself aie imaged in the conception
which causes the Master of the forest to be seen as a being
of the height of a tree As in Euiope, this conception is
general among the Asiatic peoples The Mongols’ Khan of
the forest and of forest animals (Mani«Khan) is a being like
a man of more than ordinary size A long, dark, human-like
being 18 also the Forest Mastei of the Buriats, who halloes
and weeps m the forest, leads wandeiers astiay, but gives also
game to the huntei ” The large-sized Forest Mastei of the
Tungus can at times take on the shape of a strange rock,
resembbng a man or an animal, the foiest dwellers fearing to
approach such locks A similar spirit is the Yakut Bajanai,
who, as the owner of the valuable game of the forests, is
called rich,” Bai-Bajanai As the Master of forest animals
It 18 ako conceived as shaped like an smtmal In the lattei
shape It has been seen by hunters and gatherers of berries.
Sometimes, it is of the size of a year-old calf, with the muzzle
of a dog, little moist eyes, long whiskers, a grey coat and
foiked hoofs. In some districts the Forest Master is said to


PLATE LIII


Shattered Tomb or a Yaku r Shaman with
Drum Hanging on an Adjacent Tree

(See page 481 )


THE "MASTERS” OF NATURE 467

have two sons, one living in the depths of the primeval forests
and giving valuable game to the hunter, such as sable foxes,
blue foxes, etc., the other dwelling on heaths and giving brown
foxes, squiirels, and other animals of smaller value

Many North Sibeiian tribes, for whom huntmg is an im-
portant means of subsistence, have a habit, at the beginning
of the autumn hunting season, of sacrifiang a part of the first
"bag” to the Foiest Master The Yakuts aie even said to
have sacrificed black bulls to Bajanai In sacrificing, the
Tungus, the Yakuts, and other northern peoples make an
image of the Forest Mastei, either by carving human features
on the trunk of a living tree or by shaping a billet of wood
roughly into a human-like shape The mouth of the image
IS smeaied with the blood of the sacrifice At each sacrifice,
a new image is made ”

Compaiing the Yakut Forest Master with the coiiespondmg
Russian spirit, S^osevskiy points out that beliefs brought by
the Russians have become connected with the former Ao*
coiding to his view, the Yakuts did not originally possess a
single spiiit, compiising all foiests, but each forest and thicket,
each separate tree even, had its own Master” It is also
related of the Buriats, that they do not beg for game from
one general Foiest spirit, but separately, from each local
Foiest Master

Among the European Tatars and Chuvashes the Forest
spirit has already received a strictly defined appearance, which
proves a more developed, more stable plane of thought Heie
the Forest Master, corresponding to Russian spirits, is chiefiy
an evil being, which is seldom woi shipped In this respect
it difFeis from the Forest spirits of the most northern primeval
forests of Siberia

The evil Shuiale of the Volga Tatais, which can increase or
dimmish its height, has exceedingly large nipples on its
breasts, and kills its victims by tickling them, we have already
met with among the Volga Fmns ”


468 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY

A coiiespondmg evil Foiest spiiit is the Chuvash Obyda>
which wanders m the forest as a human beings but naked, long-
hailed, with laige nipples, and with feet turned in the wiong
diiection Having caused a man to lose his way, it tickles oi
dances its victim to death The pooi animal on whose back
Obyda seats himself begins to run backward Accoiding to
folk-tales this spii it itself wandei s backwai ds The evil Foi est
spiiit 18 also called the “Half-human” (Ai-soii) by the
Chuvash ” Possibly this name signifies a being known also
to the Votiaks, which has only half of a human body, viz , one
eye, one aim, and one leg The Yakuts speak also of an evil
being with the same name, declaimg it to live in an icy. mound
with a door-opening at the top “

Wotse than Shuiale is the Tatar Albasta, which they believe
to dwell in desei t spaces, bogs and chasms This also is human
in shape but takes on the form of many objects belonging to
the forests or fields It is said to kill people by suffocating
them *** The Kiighis imagine Albasta as a gieat woman, with
a huge head, and bi easts reochmg to the knee She has long
and shaip nails on hei fingeis The Kiighis believe her to
attack chiefly women who aie enceinte, killing her victims by
suffocation They relate tales of how a certain Kirghis once
saw her iinsmg in a biook the lungs of a woman, whom she
had dcpiived of these “

Like the Forest Master, the Steppe Master also tires to
lead tiavelleis astray The Mongols say that the Steppe
Master Albin lights wilW-the-wisps by the wajrside. When
the traveller, believing these to be the lights of dwellings,
steps aside from the road, he finds that he has been deceived
by Albin, who wishes him to lose his way ”

To the Forest spirits, the spiiits of the forest animals are
closely related The latter, and even each species of animal,
have, as has been said, their Masters or Khans, whom it is not
always easy to separate from the lespective animals Sacri-
fices are even made to these Masteis The Tungus sacrifice


THE “MASTERS” OF NATURE 469

to the Mammoth Master m order to find mammoth’s teeth
The Reindeer Master is said to have received blood-sacrifices
Espeaally do the people fear to offend the Bear Master, for
which leason this animal must not be called by its proper name
Women are afraid to touch bear-flesh with their naked hands
and even the men have to treat the carcase of the bear with
due respect, its skeleton being preserved on an erection of wood
or blanches, or, at least, its skull having to be hung up in a
tree’*

The peoples living on the banks of nveis or lakes speak
also of the Water Master Each river, each lake, and each
water has its Master, say the Yakuts Most often this is
imagined to be an anthropomorphic being, although it can also
take on other shapes The fishers of Noith Siberia sacrifice
to It at the beginning of the fishing season in the spring The
Yakuts are said to have then offered up, through the agency
of their shamans, a black bull, in order that the water-spint
(Ukulan Tojon) might give fish in plenty Moie often, fish
IS sacrificed to the Water Master, sometimes also biead, salt or
gin ** The Yenisei Ostiaks, who as a river and fisher people
are dependent in a gieat degree on the bounty of the water,
make images of the Water spirit ”

Although the spirits of the northern waters of Siberia are
anthropomorphic beings, whom the shaman can visit and who
choose wives and sen^ts for themselves, from those drowned
in the water, they have yet no stnctly defined, unchangeable
features In many districts, however, the Russian Water
spirit and Rusalka, as among the Volga Turks, have had time
to settle in the rivers and lakes of Siberia Especially among
the Yakuts does one meet with purely Russian ideas They
believe the Water spirits to rise on to the land in the time
between New Year’s Eve and Twelfth Night, when they
wandei along the roads, beating on the backs of oxen their
small children, of whom the Water spirits have many While
wandei ing fiom place to place the Water spirits make different


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


470

noises, the people gathering to listen to these at cioss-'toads,
openings in the loe, and near deserted huts From what they
heat, they decide on the events of the ensuing yeai

As we have seen earliei, the Russians also believe the Watei
spirits to wandet on land at Chiistmas-time, until Twelfth
Night, when accoidmg to the Orthodox Church ceremonies
the Cross is lowered into the water, and they then retuin to
their homes Probably, theiefoie, the belief in the wandeiing
aboad of the spirits of the di owned at Chi istmas-time has
reached the Yakuts together with these holy-days themselves

Over a large aiea m Cential and Northern Asia a belief
has been recorded, that m the lakes a bull dwells, which begins
to roai befoie a storm or any other gieat event When on
frosty nights the ice begins to crack and 1 ise, the water-bull is
said to be bi eaking it ” Like the East Eui opean peoples, the
Yakuts and Yukagiis celeb ate the depaiting of the ice with a
special ceiemony At such times they saciifice food to the
water, sometimes hung then guns With then offerings they
try to appease the Mother or Old Woman, as they call the
stream, that it may refrain from doing damage to their lands
during the spring floods

Once the belief in Natuie spirits has originated, the number
of these may easily become legion Wheievei a human being
moves, some spirit accompanies him Should an accident occur
on a journey, eg, a horse take flight or a cait break down,
the Yakuts believe the Master of the spot to have occasioned
the misfortune ” Especially m places tiaversed with difficulty,
where the road runs along a steep mountain-ridge or pieapi-
tous pass, something, a piece of cloth or wool or a hair of the
horse, is sacrificed to the Mastei of the place The Mongols,
Altai Tatars, etc , when crossing over a mountain, are m the
habit of plaang a stone at a certain spot, so that gieat heaps of
stones ipboy “heap”) have accumulated at such places"
Similarly, on journeys by watei, the Sibeiian peoples, after
safely passing a difficult stictch of watei, offei up some small


PLATE LIV

Mongol Seer. Prophesying from a
Shoulder-blade

(Sec page 488 )


THE “MASTERS” OF NATURE 471

sacrifice On the Yenisei Rivet, the author has even heard
Russians speak of “ the boiling of porridge ” when a danger-
ous, swift lapid was being passed with gieat difficulty, the
place being called the “ bull ” by the rowers. To deceive
the Master of the place, the Yakuts, when making long jour-
neys, speak in a seaet language, in which the words have
meanings diifeiing fiom those of their eveiyday use, like the
hunteis and fisheis, who also on then expeditions twist the
significations of their Words


CHAPTER XIX

DREAMS, SICKNESS AND DEATH

N atural causes of di earns, sickness and death, as with
most of the peoples of the earth, weie unknown to the
Altaic race The most usual idea is that man, in these states,
has lost his ^'shadow” Of the vaiied souls that aie com-
monly believed to be contained in man, it is just this shadow ”
(Altai Tatai ^u/, suf and sw/a, Mongol Burut suna^»f Yakut
kutf etc ), which is the most important in myths
A shadow-soul ” of this desciiption, as already, mentioned,
18 owned also by animals, plants and lifeless objects
The close connection between this soul and the shadow ap-
peals, e g , from the idea that when a human being loses his
soul, he loses also his shadow According to the Yakuts men
have thiee shadows, when all of these have disappeared, the
one who loses them dies ^iiits aie said to be beings without
shadows ^

That the shadow-soul is received by a child at its birth fiom
outside would seem to be a geneial belief The idea of the
Yenisei Ostiaks that all human beings born into the world re-
ceive, instead of new souls {ulvet, “ shadow,” “leflection m
water”), such souls as have existed before, is enlightening
in this reject The shadow-soul is said to enter the sexual
organs of a woman with child a little befoie confinement, the
other life-spirits, on the other hand, which ate believed to
dwell m the heait, head, etc , aie received by the child m the
womb through its mothei’ls food. From the moment of entry
of the shadow-soul, birth pangs begin, as the soul {nlvei) is
uncomfortable m the womb, where it is hot and suJffocatmg.
During life this shadow-soul is the faithful companion of man.


DREAMS, SICKNESS AND DEATH 473

The Yenisei Ostiak^ like the Yakuts and Buiiats, imagine
It to be a little being which can be seen more espeaally by
shamans *

Among the Buiiats, this belief m a previous existence of
souls appears in a more developed foim, of Indian origin.
They explain that when the Tengeiis lay themselves down to
sleep (a slumber that may sometimes last a hundred years),
their souls appear on the earth and aie born here as human
beings If the soul of a Tengeri comes down a long time
after the god has slept, the peison within whom the soul has
taken up its abode soon dies, as the soul has to leturn to its
owner in heaven before the latter awakens from his sleep
Where the soul of the Tengeii comes down soon after its
ownei has fallen asleep, the peison in question lives to old
age*

As has been said, the sliadow-soul of a human being can
leave its dwelling-place during life In dreams it wanders
unfettered by material means, visits distant places, stiange
laces, passes through locked doors, and even keeps company
with deceased companions The Buiiats say that what the
soul has seen or heard during its jouineys, remains in its
memoiy, so that a person, when the soul has returned and
awakened its ownei, can relate to others the experiences of his
soul Dreams ate thus believed to be actual truths, and for
this reason are regarded as impoitant* But the wandering,
released soul is also an actual and in some degiee material
being, which, e g , may be both visible and audible to others
Besides its human foim the soul of a sleeper can also take on
the foim of some animal The Yakuts say that it wanders
in space as a little bud or butterfly. In a Buriat tale the soul
issued from the mouth of a sleeper in the form of a bee or a
wasp Such soul-animals must be left strictly m peace.*

Like dreams, sickness is caused also by the temporary absence
of the soul from the body But during sickness, the soul is
believed to have been driven out of the body against its will


474 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY

Often a malicious spirit, foi some reason or other, geneially
to obtain a sacrifice, carries off the soul This may happen in
different citcumstances, and the soul is exposed to this danger,
espeaally during its nocturnal jouineys. In the stillness and
darkness of the night all evil spiiits aie in motion and on the
hunt for souls To obtain help, the soul has to seek its
deceased friends or othei protecting spirits Thoughtful souls
can also help themselves by skilfully hiding, e g , in the fut of
animals, in leafy trees, or in other objects Should a poor
soul be puisued too long it loses itself in deep forests or other
places strange to it, so that it can no longei find its way home
When a soul is seized by an evil spirit, one can sometimes heat
Its weeping and aies °

Anothet vety common belief is that the soul, against its
will, may be driven by a shodc from the body The Buriats
believe that the homeless soul then lemains for some time at
the place where this misfoitune happens Unless attention is
given at once to this acadent, the soul begins to wander about
and flies further and further away, with the result that the
victim becomes more and more seriously ill and in the end dies.
The souls of little children can eauly be driven away in this
manner if they aie frightened The consequences of the
absence of the soul soon show themselves as fatigue, paleness,
tears, and restlessness during sleep, etc One has then to seek
out the place wheie the soul left its dwelling-place, where it
may still possibly be found Should one succeed in winning
the soul back again by special ceremonies, the sick one becomes
well again Often, however, the soul may, disappear without
Its ownei being aware of the fact, and when he or she grad-
ually begins to feel apathetic, weak, and in a decline, it is
too late to find the soul again The help of a shaman, who
has the power of finding all lost and wandering souls, is then
necessary.’

At times a side person may recover his soul himself He
must recall to memory the place where his soul left him, dress


DREAMS, SICKNESS AND DEATH 475

m the clothes he woie on that occasion, and visit the scene of
the disaster at a time corresponding to the time of his loss,
VIZ , in the evening if his soul left him in the evening, and so
on The person seeking his soul has further to take with him
such delicaaes as his soul delights in, and call his soul to par-
take of them If the soul happens to be still in the viamty.
It will return to its owner, who is said to feel the reunion by
a violent shivering in the back It is important to remember
the exact time, as then the soul is most certainly to be met with,
at first every day, later at ever-increasing inteivals, until it
comes at last only once a year to the place of its liberation
During a long absence from the body, a soul, however, seldom
Wins thiough all the dangeis threatening it ftom the many
malicious and cunning spirits *

A further means of dtiving a soul from its home, said to be
used by. the spirits, is a tickling of the nose, which induces
sneezing This appears from the following Burnt tale, which
in many other respects also thiows light on the beliefs of the
Mongols regarding souls

Once, a man who had the power of seeing spirits and talking
with them went on a journey Meeting three spirits on the
way he went on m their company As they journeyed he
ascertained that these spirits had formed wicked plans, intend-
ing to steal away the soul of a nch man’s son The man tried
to worm himself into the spirits’ favour by piomising to help
in the captuie of the soul, and thus obtained an opportunity
of accompanying them This man, who wished to play the
part of a spirit, could not, however, but awaken the attention
of the spirits. When they had tiavelled awhile togethei, the
spirits asked in astomshment Why dost thou walk so that the
grass falls down and the dry leaves rustle under thy steps? ”
The man replied cunningly that he had died so recently that
he had not yet learned to walk silently and without leaving a
track as a spirit should The spirits believed this When
they arrived at the nch man’s house, one of the spirits placed


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


47d

Itself at the dooi, the othei at the chimney, the third went to
the unlucky son, and by pioducing an untation in his nose,
caused him to sneeze violently Dui mg the sneeze the son’s
soul jumped out of his body and tiled to escape by the door,
but the spii It watching theie seized it at once and held it tight,
although the wjul wept bitteily. The spiiits then took the
captured soul away with them On the way back, the man
who had joined the spiiits asked them if they had anything in
the world to feai The spiiits answeicd that they were very
much afraid of thistles and thoins ^‘But what art thou
afraid of? ” asked the spirits “ I,” said the man, ** am most
afraid of fat meat” The spiiits, unawaie that the man in-
tended to deceive them, travelled fuither and further On
the vray the man begged to be allowed to help by cariying the
soul, which was also gt anted But just then they happened
to come to a plaa wheie thoiny bushes and thistles giew
The man jumped with the soul m his aims among the piickly
bushes, wheie the spiiits were afiaid to come Remembering
that the man had expressed his dread for fat meat, they began
to throw pieces of meat among the bushes to diive him out
But the man, who was very fond of meat, ate them without
danget to himself, on seeing which, the spirits lealized that
they had been tricked and went their way The man then
hurried back to the iich man’s house, taking the soul with him
so that the son lecoveied "

Sickness may also be caused by the soul injuring itself in
some way on its travels Accoiding to the Yenisei Ostiaks
bodily pain is often closely connected with damage to the soul
(shadow) Should the soul, e g , huit its foot, its ownei will
limp, should the soul catch cold, its ownei begins to shivei,
etc , etc. Similar ideas are met with among the Tungus, and
are reflected in the general belief that eveiything done to the
image of a person affects the peison himself. The word
**8oul ” originally meant both shadow and image.”

Should the shadow-soul have left its dwelling-place for


PLATE LV

Yenisei Oshak Shaman with Drum


Fiont and back views
(See chapter XXI )

After photogiapb by U Holmberg


DREAMS) SICKNESS AND DEATH 477

good, death follows, when also the spnit-soul (Altai Tatar /u»,
Mongol and Bui lat amm, “ bi eath ”) disappears Among cer-
tain peoples, the Buriats and Altai Tatars, the belief prevails
that when the soul of a sick person comes into the hands of the
Piince of Death, fate has decreed that the peison in question
shall die, and then even the shaman can no longer be of any
assistance The Buriats relate how Erlen-Khan (“Death-
kingdom’s Piince ”) sends out his servants to capture waiidci-
ing souls Without caiing for the aies for help and the
prayeis of the souls, these servants put them into sacks and
Wr them to their hard mastei, who places the souls m cap-
tivity “ In a tale about the hist shaman, Meigen-khara, it is
said that he possessed the power of fieeing souls even from the
piisons of the Prince of Death, wheie these sit with strong
chains round then necks, hands and feet The Prince of
Death complained to the Heaven god Esege-Malan-Tengeri,
who decided to test the powei of the shaman by taking a soul
up to the heavens and hiding it theie in a bottle, the mouth of
which he stopped up with his thumb. The person whose soul
had been taken became now dangeiously ill and the shaman,
according to his wont, burned to seek the soul. He went
down to the kingdom of the Pnnce of Death, but failed to
find the soul there He then journeyed eveiywhere undei
the earth and the sea, in chasms in the mountains and deep
forests, but without lesult Then he “sat himself on his
drum,” flew up to heaven and after much diflicult searching
found the soul of the sick one in the bottle But how to free
It, as God kept his Anger on the mouth of the bottle? The
shaman was equal to the task He changed himself into a
trasp and stung God violently on the foiehead, and as God
tried to protect himself with his light hand the soul escaped
fiom the bottle Aftei a while God noticed that the bottle
was empty and that the shaman, sitting on the drum with his
pi ize, was already sinking towards the earth God then be-
came veiy angiy and decreased the power of the shamans, and


478 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY

now no shaman can save a soul which has come into the hands
of the Pnnce of Death

Aftei death, the soul is said to lemam foi a few days in the
home Accoiding to the Altai Tatais, Buriats, Yakuts, and
otheis, the soul of a peison lecently dead cannot undei stand
at once that it has left the body, but wandeis for thiee days
yet in its old home Not until the soul notices that it leaves
no trace m the ashes of the health, does it realize that it now
belongs to the woild of spuits Despite the last fact, how-
ever, the soul appeals m stones with a mateiial body The
Yakuts believe it can burn or wound itself and that blood runs
from Its wounds By means of sharpened objects the soul of
a dead peison can easily be prevented fiom returning to its
home If the soul does not receive sufficient food, it feels
huiigiy, without the necess.uy clothing it feels cold“ The
soul can even die, accoidmg to a populai belief Of latei
origin IS piobably the belief held by the Yakuts, that the soul
IS taken round by spiiits on the night of buiial, to the places
where its foimer owner sojourned during life, and punished
foi misdeeds on the spot where these occuired, so that one can
hear its cues and plaints

According to a moie noithern idea, the soul remains among
the relatives for some time aftei death During this period
the property of the deceased may not be touched, but the soul,
like a living person, must be piovided with food and dunk
Many peoples, such as the Yakuts, Dolgans, Goldes, and, at
an earlier time, the Mongols, Kirghis, etc , who prepaie images
of their deceased, or foi longer oi shoitei periods look
well after and piovide for the soul in connection with some
object owned by the deceased, believe that only at the end
of these periods does the soul remove to the kingdom of the
dead”

Besides the souls living m peace and lest m the land of the
dead, theie are also otheis, which wandei lestlessly around,
disturbing the living with all kinds of misfortunes, espeaally


DREAMS, SICKNESS AND DEATH 479

sickness A very common view is that the souls of childless
or unman led women, together with those whose owneis either
met with a violent death 01 died before their time, haunt their
old homes, causing much trouble toitheii relations Only a
veiy clever shaman can diive out these spiiits, which aie
especially dangerous for infants The Yakuts call them Ooi,
the Buriats Anakhai According to the Yenisei Ostiaks the
spirits of little children and unmarried women wander irri-
tated aiound their graves for a whole yeai after death The
longer a soul has been among the other dead, the more it
begins to acquire the characteristics of an evil spirit Such
spirits of the long-ago deceased are the Abasy among the
Yakuts, Buriat Bokholdoi, Altai Tatar Aina, Ozut, etc Be-
sides graves, certain deserted places, e g , the deserts of Tuian
and Gobi, are the dwelling-places of these evil spirits, who
from these centres set out on then destructive excursions In
mountainous districts places difficult of reach, the summits,
etc , are the homes of all manner of spirits The Mongols
believe fuither that the souls of wicked people stop halfway
between this and the next world, floating in the air and causing
many kinds of misfortune ** The Buriats relate that the
wandering spirits make flies at night in deserted huts These
fires are pale and bluish in coloui This fire can be stolen,
the person succeeding in doing this becoming vei y 1 ich When
the spirits gather round their fires to sit or dance, they never
form a complete iing as human beings would Men can
sometimes see such spirits, and if they succeed in glanang at
them befoie being noticed, the spirits become frightened and
take to flight The living are also said to be able to hear
the song of these spiiits ”

Like Odin of the Scandinavians, the luler over the dead is
said by the Buriats to have one eye m the middle of his fore-
head In one of the tales of the latter, a man who had the
power of seeing spirits kept watch while the spirits gatheied
at a deseited hut There he happened to see also the rulei


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


480

of the spints Thib wab a loughly-built big man, with one
eye in his foiehead The lulet seated himself in the place of
honoui and now and then amiounced which souls should be
bought befoie him Each time, ceitain of the spiiits went to
fulhl his command The man appi cached the lulei of the
dead and shot him m the centre of his foiehead so tliat he fell
down and was changed mto a hip-bone^*

The idea that the soul of man is mtimately connected with
the bone-constiuction of the body, would seem to be a piimi-
tive belief among the Sibetian peoples Just as the pieseiv-
ing of the bones of animals — beais, leindeei, etc — is said to


Fie iS MoRTit-SierRiAH Tomb


be founded on the hope tliat these animals can preseive their
lives as long as the skeleton is uninjuied, so a similar belief
was applied to the remains of human beings In eailier times
the dead were buiied ovei the eaith Accoiding to Stiahlen-
beig the Yakuts often left the body in the hut, lemoving
themselves elsewheie ” Among nearly all the more northern


DREAMS, SICKNESS AND DEATH 481

peoples, the custom of placing the bodies of childien, some-
times also of adults, in hollow trees or on the branches of a
growing tree, has been preserved down to oui day At the
present time burial-erections are mostly made of wood The
body of a shaman m patticulai, may not, among the Tungus,
Yakuts and otheis, be buried m the eaith For this leason it
is generally laid in a wooden box, home on two or four posts
“Shamans,” says Geoigi, “will mostly dissolve in the free
air, as the devil lives in the eaith ” ” A Tungus assured the
author that if a shaman is buiied in the earth, his soul-bird
will never retuin again to a new shaman of the same family
The following tale lecorded among the Yenisei Ostiaks is
instructive When the fiist man died, his relatives believed him
to be asleep, but when they were unable to awaken him they
became afiaid and started to ay The Heaven god, Es, then
sent down a dog to tell them that they had no leason to be
afiaid, but that they should bind up the body with glass and
hang It in a tree, when the body would come to life within
seven days But the dog deceived the people into burying
the body in the ground The lesult was that afterwards men
began to die

Cremation, which occurs among certain peoples in the north-
east corner of Siberia (the Chukchee and Koriaks) and also
among the Buriats, cannot have been one of the earlier methods
of disposal of the dead among the Altaic peoples A later
custom IS probably also the Mongol method of thi owing a
body into the fields as food foi the dogs

Side by side with the thought that the soul wanders after
death in the other world, the idea appears that the souls of the
dead may after a time be born again on the earth in a child
of the same family The Yenisei Ostiaks believe that the
soul can take up its dwelling, or live again in some animal,
especially in bears, and also vica versa This belief is not to
be confounded with that according to which the souls of the
dead aie inclined to many temporary metamorphoses A cer-


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


482

Uin gi oping aftei explanations is alieady appaient in the view
laid down by a Biuiat, according to which human beings have
thiee souls One is token captive by the Piince of Death,
the second lemains as a ghost in this world, continuing to live
ab before, the third is boin again as a living peison


PLATE LVI

The illustration at the top (left) shows the tomb
of *1 Buriat shiman, eiectcd on posts. The othets
depict ongons oi images of Buiiat shamans.

(See page 499 )


I


CHAPTER XX

THE REALM OF THE DEAD

T he manner m which life beyond the grave is im-
agined appeals plainly from the burial ceremonies, in
which the dead are furnished with food, clothes, implements
of labour, weapons and domestic animals The most northern
peoples of Sib^ia have a custom of stabbmg to death oi bmd-
ing reindeer and dogs alive to the grave The rulers of the
Yakuts in earlier times leceived with them on their last jour-
ney, besides their horse, one of their slaves to serve his master
in the other world “His servant followed him,” say the
Yakuts even now, when a poor peison dies soon after the death
of a wealthy man ^ And even now saa ifices of slaves are said
to occur among certain Tungus tubes
“ In the other world,” the Altai Tatais say, “we shall sow
our seed, herd our cattle, dunk kumiss and eat beef, with this
difFerence only, that we shall live better there, as we shall
enjoy not only the possession of the cattle we owned on the
earth, but also of all the domestic animals that have died
eailiei ” * According to the tales of the Buriats, the dead have
food, raiment, etc , to the degiee m which they were supplied
with these on their burial-day Thus, depending on the prop-
erty the lelatives were able to present to the deceased, some
souls have to walk on foot, others to iide on horsebadc, the
most fortunate in carnages The celebrating of weddings and
other meiry festivals among the dead is also spoken of The
dead shaman, who is supplied with his costume, his dtum and
other sacred implements, continues his impoitant callmg in
the other world In general, the dead aie regarded as going
on with the work which each had done m this world. The


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


484

Buiiat “ manual labourei docs not aftci death forget his skdl,
the scnbe lives by hib pen, and a woman who has been a
skilful sempstiess on eaith, continues to woik with hei
needle ’’ Specially skilful woikeis aie said to be shoit-lived,
because the lulei ovei the dead needs then help ' The
noithern peoples, like the Tungus hcie, live in the woild
beyond the grave in tents of biich-baik, hunt and hsh, and
piactise teindeei "keeping m the gieat, undei woild, piimeval
forests

That the world of the dead was oiigmally a leflection of the
eaithly one is shown, fuithei, by the scenes m the shaman
ceiemonies, when the lattei escoit the soul to the undei woild
The Tvmgus believe this last jouiney to lescmble in detail the
difficult journeys of these nomads over mountains and valleys
in then gieat forests Those who dtive hete with lemdeei,
iide also to the undci woild on the back of a icindeci, those,
again, who use dogs, tiavel theic behind dogs

The shaman’b business is to know the difficult path, the soul
itself finds it difficult to leach its goal Many dangeis also
thi eaten it on the way Evilly-disposed spiiits aie often m
motion, seeking to tempt the soul fiom its path, cannibol-
spiiits lie 111 wait to devoui it The Goldts say. that the load
to the undei world goes thiough ceitam paiticular places, which
are many in numbei At the commencement, the road is the
same foi all the dead, but latei a point is leached wheie as
many roads bianch o£F as theie aie families among the Goldes
Fiom heie the 1 oad leads to the “ steep slope ” and then to the
"rivet’s crossing-place” This crossing is said to be so diffi-
cult, that the soul neatly falls down with exhaustion Still
a few moie places, and then fiom tracks and newly-chopped
living blanches and the barking of dogs one may conclude that
the village of the dead is near In the undei woild each
family has its own village, wheie the membeis of the
family dwell togethei, continuing to live as on the earth.
Life m the underwoild is said, however, to be bettci and


THE REALM OF THE DEAD 485

happier than heie All the dangets and difficulties of the
joutney end at the village Should the soul go under on its
last journey, the fault lies with the shaman, who has not been
clevei enough in his calling, and then the sei vices of a better
shaman must be called in, the latter, by his shamanizing, find-
ing the point where the soul has succumbed, waking it to life
again, and escorting it to the village of its earliei deceased
relations For some families the last journey is said to be
more difficult than f 01 others
Such of the Goldes as live by keepmg reindeei, are escorted
to the underworld by nine reindeer, eight of which bear the
property of the deceased, the deceased himself riding on the
ninth The saddle is constructed so that the soul cannot fall off
though the reindeer moves rapidly As the shaman is said
to take the form of this leindeer, or to repiesent its soul, he
can cany the dead safely by avoiding and going round danger-
ous places All the districts passed during the journey are
desciibed by the shaman in his songs and ceremonies He
leads the soul hist to the source of the rivei, by which the don
m question dwells, then to the high lange of mountains, and
down this again into a primeval forest until another high
mountain is reached Beyond this comes a great swamp which
has to be crossed Further the load leads to a mountain tor-
rent, on the open banks of which a level and beautiful foiest
glows Gradually, one begins to notice that the surroundings
are populated, as the forest has been felled and theie aie
marks of newly-timbered boats Finally one ai rives in the vil-
lage of the dead, wheie smoke uses, tents stand in lows, and
leindeer feed as among the living Reindeei -Tungus *

Such also the Yakut realm of the dead would seem to have
been originally The spa its living theie in similar arcum-
stances to those of their earthly life aie divided into six clans,
accoiding to information fiom one district. In ceitain tales,
the way to this realm is descnbed as exceedingly difficult to
travel The soul has to go in at the throat of a snake-like


486 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY

monster, pass through its body, and come out from its tail,
thus leaching the othei woild The way is both painful and
dangeious, as the gullet and the intestines of the monster aie
said to be coveied with gicat, shnip spikes Foi this leason
the soul has to be piovided with clothes and shoes, othei wise
It would bleed to death The custom of supplying the dead
With a hoise is said to have oiigiiuted in the wish to make the
journey thiough tins daiigeious pass as swift as possible.
Ebpecially in the shaman songs the way to the undei world is
said to go thiough many dangeis, ovei “stoimy iiveis” or
“bloody sti earns,” thiough “bunung foiests” oi “icy
winds”*

A veiy common idea among the Yakuts is that “the othei
world ” lies beyond the “ death-sea ” * Most of the peoples
of North Sibeiia considei the realm of the dead to lie some-
wheie m the noith, most often at the mouths of iiveis flowing
into the Aictic Ocean The point of the compass of the dead
IS said to be “towaids the lught ” oi “downwaids” Down
in the noith, according to Yakut tales, lives the stein rulci ovei
the dead, Aisan-Duolai, in a gieat chasm with wintei frozen
fields and cold summet -dwellings, wheie black chimneys arise
from gloomy huts This dreaded lulei is said to have his
mouth in the middle of his foiehead and eyes at his temples
The spiiits saving him (Abasy) come sometimes to the vil-
lages of the living on depiedatoiy raids, carrying off oi
swallowing people’s souls, spreading sickness, etc. By appeas-
ing them with bloody saaiflces, the shamans cause them to
return, to their dismal dwelling-place ’

Like the Yakuts, the Ugrians and the Yenisei Ostiaks speak
also of an evil Punce of the dead living in the noith, who
cairies off or devours souls Accoiding to the lattei, ceitam
naked rocks In the Aicbc Ocean are the dwelling-place of the
dead Side by side vdth this, anothei belief is met with
among them, viz , that undei the earth theie is a great giotto,
or seven grottoes under one another, in which the souls of the


THE REALM OF THE DEAD 487

dead dwell, and where m the place of the sun and moon, only
rotted trees give out a dim light Strange fishes live in the
undei ground riveis ® A third description noted down by the
author among them relates how the underworld is a complete
reflection of the Yenisei Distiict The undei ground Yenisei
IS said however to flow in the opposite direction
The above seven grottoes are obviously closely connected
with the seven 01 nine underground stoieys, which according
to the Altai Tatais and otheis are situated horizontally under
the “ middle place or the earth and correspond to a similai
number of planes of Heaven above " The Central Asian
people geneially regard the underworld as populated by evil
beings, ruled over by the stern Erlik-Khan, who is said to sit
on his blade throne, surrounded by a court consisting of evil
spiiits At the command of their loid these spirits often make
eiKursions, moie especially in the night-time, to the world of
tlie living, wheie they seize some poor soul and carry it o£F
with them to their home Extremely common is also the idea
that this luler over the dead has power only over those who
weie wicked in this life Those moi tals again, who have done

more good than evil, are taken aftei death to the heavenly
dwelling-places ” The path to both the undei ground dwell-
ings and those above is believed to go through a hole m the
middle of each plane, and accoidmg to this idea the Ostiaks
call the seven-stoieyed sky “ seven-holed,” ” the Chukchee ex-
plaining that each hole is perpendicularly under the North
Star ” As the hole leading to the underworld, which is often
used by the shaman, is, of course, also in the centre of the
eaith, one may often see among his magic things a disc lepre-
senting the earth, m the midst of which is a round hole. In
travelling to the heavens, the Altai shamans use also a woi Id-
tree furnished with divisions, the Dolgans explaining that the
shamans escort the souls of the dead to the tiee in question,
where they continue then life in the shape of a little bird ”

In Heaven also, life 1 esembles that on the earth According


PLATE LVII

I Buriat shaman with his hobby>hoibe5 (See
page 522 )

3 Hides of Buriat shaman-anlmab used in place
of wooden images in shimanming (See page 522«)


THE REALM OF THE DEAD 489

has lifted up this and shouted “ Come here,” a fox appears
in the opening under the stone and says “ Hold fast to my
tail.” If one then obeys this request, the fox ^vlll lead him
into the land of the dead Mu'-monto, travelling further and
further with the help of the fox, saw many mysterious things
First he saw horses that were very fat on a naked lock Then
he met veiy thin and miseiable cattle on a rich meadow. In
another place he met women with their mouths sewn up. In
a great cauldion full of boiling pitch he saw officials and
shamans writhmg ceaselessly On his way he saw, further,
men whose hands and feet were bound fast, and women who,
although naked, embraced thorn-bushes In one place he saw
a woman who, although she appeared to be poor, lived luxu-
riously, and anothei, who, although rich, suffered from hunger
Mu-monto soon learned the reasons for the fates of these
people The pool woman had been good during hei life, and
out of hei little had shared with the needy, theiefore she had
everything in plenty now, but the other, albeit i ich, had been
hard-hearted and paisimonious, and had therefore now to
starve The naked who embraced the thoin-bushes had been
frivolous and betrayed their husbands The bound men. had
been thieves Those who were boiled m pitch had been false
in their professions Those whose mouths were sewn fast had
been liars during life and spread calumnies. The thm and
miserable hoises on the nch meadow had been so ill-treated by
their masters during life that they, could not even now become
fatter, while the fat horses on the naked rock had been so
well-fed that even without food they weie still flourishing”
In a Tatai tale, recorded by M A Castrdn from the neigh-
bourhood of the Sayan steppes, life under the earth is described
in a somewhat similar manner The daughter of the ruler of
the dead, Irlek-Khan, once came to the eaith in the shape of a
black fox and did all kinds of harm to human bemgs A hero
named Komdei-Mirgan persuaded to hunt the fox, which,
however, ambushed him so that his leg was broken Shortly


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


490

theieaftei, a monstci (Yelbegen) with nine heads and riding
on a foity-hoined ox, arose out of the eaith This monblet
cut off the heio’b head <md earned it oft to the undeiwoild.
When the hcio^s sistci Kubaiko came to weep at hei bi other’s
coi pse and saw that the head was lacking, she decided to go to
the lealm of the dead and seek the head theie The hacks
of the ox of Yelbegen showed hei the way These led to an
undeigiound opening, thiough which she descended into lilek-<
Khan’s kingdom Here she met with many marvellous
things. By the wayside she saw seven clay vessels and an old
woman who pouied milk fiom one vessel to anothei without
ceasing Fuithei on, a hoise fastened with a long haltei
stood on a plain of band wheie theie was neithei glass iioi
watei, but in spite of this the hoi sc was fat and in good con-
dition Not fai off anothei hoise, bound in the same mannei,
stood in a giecn field with lunmng water, but this hoise was
lean and wasted In anothei place she saw half of a human
body forming a dam foi a biook, while in another place a
whole body was not buiHcient to dam a similar bi ook Kubaiko
rode astonished past all these ihingb and came deepei into the
eaith Giadually she began to hear moie and moie distinctly
the clang of hammers, and soon she saw foity men beating out
hammeis, anothei foity making saws, and a similai number
making tongs Following the tiacks of Yelbegen’s ox she
travelled on without feat, until she reached the bank of a
iivei running along the foot of a mountain On the bank she
saw Irlek-Khan’s dwelling, a building of stone with forty coi-
neis Befoie the entrance stood nine latches, all glowing
fiom the same lOot To this tiee the hoises of the nine
Pnnees of death were bound, one to each blanch, and Kubaiko
also bound hei hoise to it While doing this she saw the fol-
lowing inscription on the tice “When Kudai (God) created
heaven and eatlh, this tree was also bought forth, and to this
day no man and no animal has come living to the ti ee ” Hav-
ing lead this Kubaiko entered the dwelling of the Piinces of


THE REALM OF THE DEAD 491

death and closed the dooi after her It was dark inside and
Kubaiko was soon lost in the room She felt invisible hands
take hold of her, her clothes were torn, she was dragged about
and tormented, but when she tried to grasp hei tormentors,
she could not, as they were without bodies In hei dread she
shouted And then the dooi opened, the room became light
and the Head (Ataman) of the Pimces of death came m He
noticed Kubaiko, but turned again and went out without a
word Kubaiko followed closely at his heels She went first
through many rooms that were empty and waited inhabitants,
but aftei wards came many rooms filled with human beings In
one of them she saw old women sit and spin linen with great
energy In another room also she saw old women, but these
were without any occupation, except that they appeared to be
continually, swallowing something that would not go down
their throats In a third 100m were middle-aged women, with
great stones, which they were unable to move, lound then
arms and necks A fouith room was filled with men who had
nooses round their necks fastened to great logs In a fifth
room she saw aimed men who had been shot through, and who
sprang about shouting and gioaning The same shi leking and
groaning was heaid from a sixth room where theie were badly
wounded men armed with knives Coming to the seventh
room, she saw mad dogs and people bitten by them, mad and
raving like the dogs This was followed by an eighth room
in which husbands and wives lay in couples under then covet-
lets, but although these coverlets had been sewn together of
mne sheepskins, they would only covei one member of each
of the sleeping couples, and husbands and wives quarrelled
unceasingly ovei the coverlets The nmth room also con-
tained husbands and wives undei coverlets, made of one sheep-
skin only, which weie, however, sufficient to cover both
Finally, she entered a tenth room, large as a steppe In this
room sat eight Princes of death and, in the midst of these,
then Chief, lilek-Khan Kubaiko bowed to them and asked


492 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY

why then seivant Yelbt-gen had cut oS and earned away her
brothel’s bead Ihe Fimccs leplied that this had been done
at then ordeis, but piomised to give back the head if she could
pull up a goat with seven hot ns which had grown fast m the
eaith and lay so deep that only the horns showed, Otheiwise,
she would lose hei own head Kubaiko, who was a heioine,
did not hesitate to accept the pioposal The Piinces then took
hei through nine othei looms, filled with human heads,
Kubaiko burst into teais when she lecogmzed her bi other’s
head In a tenth room the goat lay embedded in the eaith
Kubaiko had now to show hei strength and, at the thud
attempt, lifted the goat on to hei shouldei When the Princes
saw that she was a mighty heiome, they gave her hei bi other’s
head and escorted hei back to the laich Heie Kubaiko
mounted het horse, but befoie riding oif she compelled the
Princes to show hei the way back to the eaith Duiing the
journey she enquned about cveiythmg she had seen The
Piinces gave hei all paiticulais, saying “The old woman
whom thou sawest pouiing milk, mixed watei with the milk
she gave to hei guests on eai th, and as a punishment f oi this
bad deed has now to sepaiate water fiom milk, a task she
must keep on doing thi ough all etei nity The half-body thou
sawest damming a biook is not undei going any punishment, but
belonged instead to a wise nmn on the eaith who could dam
rivers and do anything he wished Now, half of his body lies
as a reminder to the passei-by that a wise man, even though
bereft of his limbs, can accomplish great things with his will,
while on the othei hand, the complete body ovei which the
brook flows serves to remind one that by stiength alone man
can do lilde. This body belonged foimerly to a physically
strong, but stupid man, As the water now luns ovei his body,
so ran every mattci past his undei standing, without either
being comprehended or turned to account thiough intelligence.
The fat horse on the diy sand is a pi oof that a thoughtful
man can keep his horse in condition even with poor foddei,


THE REALM OF THE DEAD 493

while the thin hoise on the iich pasture shows that cattle can-
not thrive on the best pastures unless well cai ed for ” There-
after Kubaiko asked ** Who were the beings that seized me
in the daik room, toie my clothes and toimented me, but were
without bodies? ” The Piinces leplied “They were our in-
visible serving-spiiits that can injure and kill all wicked people,
but can do nothing to the good ” Kubaiko continued to in-
quiie into the sins of the people held captive in the dwelling
of the Piinces, receiving the following answer “The women
thou sawest spinning m the first room have been given this
work as a punishment foi having spun during their lives after
sunset, when it is forbidden to work Those again who sat
in the second 100m had been given thieads to wind on spindles,
but had left the spindles hollow in the centre and hidden the
thiead in then own bosoms The spmdleful which they thus
gathered of stolen wool, they are now doomed to swallow,
which IS impossible, so that they must keep the spindle in their
throats through eternity The younger women in the third
loom had sold butter, in which they had hidden stones to
inciease the weight The men in the foui th room have nooses
lound their necks, which are continually threatening to choke
them, because they hanged themselves on earth for weariness
of life The men with shot-wounds are suicides, who shot
themselves on account of quarrels with their wives Similarly,
the men in the sixth room are suiades, who cut themselves with
knives while drunk The inhabitants of the seventh room
brought on then punishments by teasing mad dogs in life and
being bitten by them. In the eighth room were married
people who had quarrelled through their lives and looked only
to their own advantage, now they are doomed to bicker eter-
nally over a covering which by good will and harmony would
be mote than enough foi both The mariied people, on the
other hand, in the ninth room are there only as an example
of how even a little property can be sufficient for a family, if
there is harmony between the n^ned couple. They are not


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


4-94

undergoing any putuahmetiC} but have been brought aolely
that the wicked, by seeing them, should feel then punishment
moie ”

Having received all this mfoimation fiom the Piinces of
death Kubaiko sepainted ftom them, lelui ned to the body of
hei biothei with the head, and with watci of life, piocuied
fiom God, awakened hei dead biothei to life again

Alien iiiBucnce can also be detected in an idea of the Tungus
living near the Baikal, that each moital will be weighed after
death with a white and a black stone If the white stone
weighs less than the soul, the lattei goes up to heaven, but if
the black one is lighter than the soul, the soul goes to the
undeiwoild The punishment theie is that the soul is fiist
thiown into a daik pit, wheie it is toimented by, ten iblc cold,
and afteiwatda roasted in nevei -ending flames" The idea,
met with among ceitain Tatai tubes, of a vety nattow punish-
ment-budge, fiom which the soul ovei laden with sms falls
into the depths below, has obviously tome fiom Peisia

To tiue shamanism these ideas of lestitution are completely
alien Ceitain teuible places are, however, met with m the
cannibal-myths of the Noithein peoples, into which the soul,
tegaidless of its fotmet life, may fall against its will

111 the cannibal myths of the Goldes, a gloomy place by a
rivei IS mentioned, on the sand-coveitd bank of which glows
an enormously high poplai The leaves of the tiee prevent
the rays of the sun by day and of the moon by night from fall-
ing on this deseited place The spint-biids, which fly about
111 the service of widced shamans to toi ment and ti ouble poor
souls, gather mostly in this tiee On the giound loutid about
lie countless human bones. Accoiding to a tale, a giil who
had happened to come theie one evening saw two flies m the
sky and heaid the rustle of the wings of a great bud The
bird, which lesembled a ctane, boie a poor human being on its
back, who pleaded the whole time “ Kill me Quickly, why dost
thou toiment me” ‘‘Soon, soon,” answered the bud, “see,


PLATE LVIII

Die<s of a Yakut shaman (bud type), back view,
with feathcis ” ot fiingcs Dicsscd in this costume
the sliaman received the pnwci of flying whcicver he
desired to go (Set pages $14) 519O


THE REALM OF THE DEAD 495

there is my tieel ” It then sat m the crown of the tiee and
slung the man on to a branch^ where he remained hanging
Again and again he begged Kill me quickly, do not torture
me I When the girl, who was a heioine, saw how the bud
began to tear off the man’s gaiments with its beak, she became
angiy, aimed her bow at the bird and said “ If thou dost not
take on thy shaman costume, I will kill thee” “Wait a
little,” said the bud, shaking its wings, which then became
changed into iron feathers “ Shoot now,” it said, “ now thou
canst not kill me, but thine own hours aie counted ” The
heroine saw, however, a naked place in the evil bemg’s breast
between the feathers, and aiming her arrow at this shot the
bud, which, falling to the ground, became a flame of fire’^
In Its dteam-voyages the soul may sometimes happen on
such nests of evil spirits, an idea, the reason for which is piob-
ably to be found in the horiible nightmares and fever-visions
of hysterical persons.


CHAPTER XXI

SHAMANISM AND TOTEMISM


A mong neaily all pnmitive peoples, it is held that the
chief cause of sickness is a temporal y absence of the soul
from its mateiial envelope and that the only cuie is the success-
ful lecovering of the soul Connected with this is a bebef
in the existence of persons furmshed with certain extraoidinaiy
powers, who, by difFeient means and in diffeient wa)^, gen-
erally, howevei, in a condition of ecstasy, can come into imme-
diate touch with the spirit-world Such peibons aie given
diffei ent names by the separate peoples of Sibeiia The Mon-
gols and the Buiiats ueaily related to thes>c, call them ‘<bo,”
the Yakuts “ojun,” the Altai Tatais " kam,” and the Tungus
shaman.” Through Russian ethnogiaphy the Tungusian
name has been adopted by the liteiatuie of the science of reli-
gion As the shaman is of the greatest impoitance in the
nature-1 eligion of the Sibeiian peoples, this form of religion
has generally begun to be called shamanism
It is not possible to become a shaman only by education or
practice, a shaman having to possess speaal shamanic talents,
which appeal in vaiying forms with different individuals, often
in early youth The Tungus say no one can “ take ” this talent,
but that It IS “leceived” oi, in othei woids, that “one is
called ” to the profession of shaman A common idea is that
a shamanic talent is “ a difficult burden ” foi a beginner
Dr Sternbeig, who, during his stay in East Siberia, made
many interesting obseivations among the Giliak shamans, says
that the pieparation foi the office of shaman foims a cn^is in
the life of the chosen, a aisis followed by extiemely compli-
cated psychic manifestations. A shaman of his acquaintance


SHAMANISM AND TOTEMISM


497

related that before he became a shaman he was ill for over
two months, lying motionless and unconscious for this period
He was convinced that he would have died if he had not be-
come a shaman Aftei the severe trials of these months he
was reduced to complete exhaustion During the nights, he
started to dream that he sang shaman songs Once a white
owl appeared to him and placed itself dose behind him, while
a human being stood a little furthei off and said “ Make
thyself a drum and everything a shaman needs, and sing songs
Thou wilt nevet more succeed in being an ordinal y individual,
but if thou acceptest the calling of shaman, thou wilt become
a real shaman ” He was unawaie how long he had slept, but
when he awoke, he saw that he was being held over a lire,
his relatives believing that the spirit had killed him He then
commanded his telations to give him a drum and started to
sing Duiing this singing he felt intoxicated but not as one
dead‘

Accoiding to the Tungus a deceased shaman appears to the
member of his own family whom he has chosen as his successor
This visit may take place m a dteam, or during a severe ill-
ness. Anyone lef using to follow this call is toi mented by the
spirit to the verge of death When the spirit has appeared to
a shaman candidate, the latter begins to withdraw from the
company of his fellows, has difHcult nerve-attacks and fits of
hysteria and epilepsy, behaving at times as though his mmd
were unhinged The Tungus of the Turukhansk Distiict call
a shaman-spirit Khaigi *

A Yakut shaman desaibes his expeiiences as follows “ At
the age of twenty I became ill and began to see and hear what
other people do not see or hear For nine yeats I resisted
the spuit and told no one what was happening, for fear of
being misundei stood or insulted Finally, 1 became so ill
that death was very near It was then that I began to
shamanize, recovering immediately Even now, if I refrain
from shamanizing for a long time, I become indisposed and


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


498

fall ill The spiiit, which Appe.us to the chosen, is said to
be the soul of <i dead shaman, and is called Amagat by the
Yakuts The Amagat of the shaman, which advises and pro-
tects him thiough life, is pictuied in metiil on his costume as
a little man-likc figuie®

Common to all the Sibeiian peoples is the view that only a
member of a family 01 clan that has eailier contained shamans
can become a shaman The calling goes thus in inheiitance
But individuals with shamanic talents do not appeal in eveiy
generation The Tungus at the Yenisei eicplained to the
author, that if a shaman is buiied in the earth and not on an
erection m the an, the ^‘loom ” (CavM Utmma, a soul-biid of
the shaman) of the deceased will letuin no moie to his family
Often the 'Uoom** appeals fiist aftei a longci petiod. It is
held that this ** loom,” the leappeaunce of which in the family
is legatded as a gie.it honoui, is the wandeimg soul of the
deceased shaman When tlie ** loom ” has appeal ed to anyone,
that IS to say, when shamanic gifts become appaient in any
individual, a wooden image is made of the bud and a leindeei
irfiaificed to it This “loom ” becomes the piotective spit it of
the new shaman Heie we meet with a conception, peculiai to
bhamanism, that besides the oidinaiy souls common to all men,
the shaman possesses a special shaman-soul, lacking to otheis
Fiom the beliefs connected with dc.ith it appeals that this
shaman-soul is immortal in a much highei degiee than othei
souls, Foi this leason, special cetemonies are necessaiy at the
burial of a shaman Not even a chief, howevei many heids
of reindeer he possesses, can compare in matteis of religion
with the poorest shaman, who, on account of his “loom ” is
honoui ed and feaied already during his life, but still more
after his death.

The Yakuts sometimes call the shaman-soul which in
other Turkish languages signifes soul m general Its seat is
said to be in the head of the shaman. It is 1 elated in a tale,
how a great shaman received his head “ in the Heaven of


SHAMANISM AND TOTEMISM


499

Manariks” {inaimtky “nervy,” “insane”, mamtny “ to lose
one’s sense ”) * According to the Buriats, a person who has
been scared out of his wits by violent thunder receives a speaal
shamanic talent ” The Yakuts say such peisons have received
5 w from Ulu-Tojon, the god of thunder *

Besides male shamans, female shamans ate also met with,
though these can in no way be compaied with the male m
power and importance Geneially, they aie called also by a
different name from the male shamans (Yakut, Altai-Tatai ,
Buriat, Mongol, “ udagan,” “ uUgan,” etc ) There have
been, however, espeaally among the Buriats, many famous
female shamans, worshipped after their death by their rela-
tives Each place, each family, and each tribe has, according
to the Buriats, its individual Zajans oi protective spirits of
deceased shamans, both male and female, who after death
were buried on adjoining heights, wheie their images (<wgo»)
were also placed At times even ordinal y Buriat men or
women become Zajans aftei death, and special ceremonies are
gone thiough in then honoui, but these are said to become
Zajans “ by. the power of then sliamanic origin and the pro-
tective poweis spiinging therefiom for the survivois”’'

It IS extiemely impoitant for each peison to remember bis
shamanic origin, called Utkha by the Buiiats Each family,
or clan, has its own Utkha, which imposes speaal duties on its
members It is said of the family Sartul, which dwells east
of the Baikal, “ that they, do not devour the blood of animals,
as their shaman-Utkha forbids this, and espeaally must they
refrain fiom devouring the blood of the Saitul-familj^s
shaman animals” An animal or a bird, legarded as pro-
tecting the shaman, is called khubilgm by the Buriats In
tHeir opinion, each shaman has his own protectors, some a
snake, some a vultuie, some a frog, etc ‘

Closely connected with the family Utkha are also the house-
hold spirits 01 household Ongons These household spirits,
wot shipped by the members of the family and ptesei ved in the


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


500

tent, generally consist of a slieepskin on which tinplate figuies
of human beings and other things aie fastened, 01 these iiguies
may also be painted on the sheepskin ot on a cloth. These
Ongoiis aie inheiited with the talcs and tiaditions attached to
them Among the Buiiats of the Klungin clan one may see
an Ojigon, called Boito, in neaily eveiy dwelling, and of this
It IS said that the foiefathei of the clan, Khoiton, a gieat
shaman, had boine it on his back fiom Mongolia Piayeis
to this Ongon begin “ Utkha of the thousands of Khangins,
Seii-Seiel bird {sen, a Sibeiian swan), Utkha of the Set cl Mon-
gols, Khun-Khoiel bud {khm, a Sibeiian swan)

Animals, and especially buds, which play some pait in
shamanic beliefs, may not be killed or even molested, other-
wise sickness 01 some other misfortune will icsult Among
the Tungus, as among many othei Noith Sibeiian peoples,
certain buds, watei-biids in particulai, such as the loom, sea-
gull, swan, ciane, etc, are sacied. One may not even point
a fingei at them Fuither, one tiies to avoid mentioning then
names A Buiiat tale tells how a swan, whose nest had been
damaged, flew with a buining band in its beak and diopped
It on a house, so that the whole village was burnt up Among
the Yakuts and Buiiats, the eagle is tieated with extiooidinaiy
lespect and dread The Yakuts say that it is not a sign of
good luck if an eagle flies ovei a village The Buiiats round
the Baikal call the eagle Olkhon island’s mastei ” 01 the
son of the god living on Olkhon island” Often the gieat
shamanic poweis of the eagle aie praised, some myths calling
It “the fiist shaman” There aie countless tales of misfor-
tunes which befell people who ill-treated this bird. A man
once saw how an eagle plucked at the caicase of his cow, which
had been killed on the steppes by a wolf The man became
angry and stai ted to di ive away the bn d with a bough. Shoi tly
afterwaids he became seriously lU, and leceived the knowledge
in a dieam that his illness had been caused by his treatment
of the eagle The Buiiats throw milk or kumiss into the air


SHAMANISM AND TOTEMISM


501

each time a swan or an eagle flies ovei their village If a
Yakut finds a dead eagle or the ^eleton of one, he regards it
as his duty to bury the bird on a speaal erection of wood, or
in a tree, in the manner in which human beings, particularly
shamans, were earlier buried While doing this, he utters
the following words “Lift up thyself, fly to thy birthplace,
come not down on the earth Thy bones of copper 1 have
placed on the grave-erection, thy bones of silver have I lifted
up ” “ With similai respect do the Tungus also treat shaman
animals

It IS not always easy to define the difference between shaman
animals and such as are regarded as the forefather or mother
of a clan or a people The myths of the Altaic peoples tell
also of the latter Among the Bui lats tales have been recorded
of three swans which once came down from the sky to bathe
in a lake They took off their swan-garments and became
changed into three fan women A hunter, who had hidden
himself on the shore, took one of these swan-garments and
hid it When the swan-women had bathed foi a time, they
hurried to the shoi e to clothe themselves again, and when the
others weie leady to fly away the one who had lost hei gai-
ment had to remain behind on the eaith The hunter mai-
ried her latei and she boie him eleven sons and six daughteis
Once, after a long time, the wife remembeied her former
garment and inquired of her husband wheie he had left it
The man was so certain that she would not now leave him and
her children that he decided to return the wonderful garment
to her With his consent, the woman then pul it on to see
how she would look m it But no sooner had she got the
swan-garment on, than she flew up through the smoke-hole
and, floating high above her home, shouted to those left be-
hmd “Ye are earthly beings and remain on the earth, I am
from Heaven and fly bade to my home ” She added “ Each
spring and autumn, when the swans fly nortbwaid and return,
ye must carry out certain ceremonies in my honour,” She then


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


502

blessed hei childien, hoping that they would live happily on
the earth, and disappcaied in the sky It is fuither 1 elated
how one of the swan-woman’s daughteis tiled to hindei hei
mother from flying by giasping hei feet, which, as the daugh-
ter had duty hands, became black and have lemained so to
this day

Tales related to the above, aie met with also in Euiope,
having probably come there fiom Asia, but it should be noted
that among the Buiiats, ceitam ceiemomes aie connected with
this belief Genet ally speaking, tales of the supei natural
origin of certain tubes and clans are not scaice among the
Altaic peoples Accoiding to the notes made by Potanin in
the Altai teintoiy the foiefathei of the Beisit clan was a wolf,
which lived m the foiest neai a laketogcthei with a deei
(Cenm elafhus) Of these a son was born who became the
ancestoi of the said clan ” Rtgaiding the oiigin of the Mon-
gols theie aie sevetal myths In some it is 1 dated that then
ancestoi was a dog, 01 that he was given buth to by a tiee and
nourished by a dog It is also 1 elated how two Khans waned
togethei and destioyed all the people until only one woman
was left This last woman met with a bull by whom she had
two childien Fi om these the whole lace of the Mongols was
born A variant of this tale desaibes how a woman gave
birth to the son of a bull, the child walking on all fouis
When the forefeet had been cut oflF this ancestoi of the Mon-
gols began to live like a human being, and ate meat in the
place of grass’^ The Kiighis believe themselves to be de-
rived from a wild boat, and foi this leason do not eat pork
According to one tale Jenghiz Khan’s son lived at Gobi to-
gether With a wild boar, the lattei beating him seveial sons.
Thus arose a gi eat people, 1 e , the Ktrghis “ ,

Several myths have been recorded among the Buiiats re-
garding their ancestoi Bukha-Nojon (“ Bull Lord ”) South
of the Baikal lived a king, Taizhi-Khan, who had a mottled
bull This, an exceptionally large and poweiful animal, once


SHAMANISM AND TOTEMISM 503

\

said in its pride “Whoever in the wot Id dates to measure
his stiength against mute, may come and try ” Then Bukha-
Nojon was changed to a blue-giey bull and went to the king-
dom of Taizhi-'Khan to wrestle with the mottled bull Dui"
mg the day-time he wrestled as a bull, but m the night he
kept company as a fair youth with Taizhi-Khan’s daughter.
After a time the latter became enceinte and told Bukha-Nojon
that she would soon give birth to a child Then Bukha-
Nojon ripped the child from, her stomach and cast it with his
horns over the Baikal After he had vanquished the mottled
bull, Bukha-Nojon swam over the lake, found the child on
the shore and began to nouiish it A shaman woman found
the child later sucking at a blue-giey bull, adopted it and
called It Bulagat This Bulagat, who had two sons, the an-
cestors of two clans, Khori and Buiiat, of which the shamans
sing that they are derived from “the lesting-place of the
blue-giey bull,” found a playmate on the shoie of the Baikal,
Ekeiit, also an ancestoi, of whom it is said that “the buibot
{Lota lota) was his father, the dvore his mothei ” “
Accoiding to anothei myth, the foiefathers of the Buiiats
came down from Heaven and were nouiished by a wild boar.
It is fuither related that Khurmusta’s daughter, who became
enceinte fiom some unknown cause, came down to the eaith in
the form of a goat and gave bii th to two sons and a daughter
What appear to be relics of totemism were found in Sibeiia
among the Yakuts in the eighteenth century Stiahlenbeig
say^ “Otherwise, each family regards a |»iticular cieature
as sacred, such as the swan, the goose, the laven, etc , and such
animals as are held sacred by a family not eaten among
Its membeis, though others are free to do so ” ” Similarly, in
an appendix “ Concerning the Yakuts,” which is said to be taken
from “ two old manuscripts ” and which appealed in a Russian
book published in 1844, A Jomney to Yakutsk, each clan has
its own paiticulai piotector or mediator, repiesented by an
image of a stallion with white lips, a laven, a swan, etc


504 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY

These animals were nevei used as food** According to a
third souice such animals are the eagle and the crane**

Ptobably; the family-names deiived from the animal king^
dom and the ownership-maiks of ceitain Noith Siberian
peoples denoting animals, aie connected with these totemistic
ideas But duiing the centuties and thousands of yeais of
their use, the original significance of these matteis has faded
from the consaousness of the people

Get tain investigators have attempted to tiace the rise of
totemism fiom an old custom, known ovet neaily the whole
world, of giving names taken from nature to childien, often
from the animal kingdom. The most not them peoples of
Siberia give then children even today names taken from some
object which, at the moment when the soul was believed to
have taken possession of the child, awakened the interest of
the mothei oi those around her The Yenisei Ostiaks give
their children the name of the object ** on which the shadow
of the child fell fiist”**

Further, it has been pointed out that in early times the
difference between man and the animals was not regatded
as unsurmountable In countless Sibeiian tales it is related
how certain animals were once men and vica versa The
Buriats say of the bear that it was foimetlyi a hunter or a
shaman, which was later changed into a bear Should the
animal so wish, it could itgain its human foim The Tungus
say that when the beavei was a human being, it was a skilful
archer According to the Altai Tatars the owl was a great
shaman The Yenisei Ostialm told me that the swan was
originally a woman, and from that time the bird has letained
menstruation Even certain fish, such as the biubot, aie, ac-
coiding to the Buiiats, human beings drowned m the water.
The Buriats tell of a land in the noi th-east, wheie the men ai e
born as dogs, largei, however, than oidlnary dogs, while the
opposite sex are born as ordinal y women*®

Just as there are tales describing the origin of ancestois


PLATE LIX

Left Bicast-clotli of i Yakut shaman with mefril
objects attached

Cetaet Lebcd-Tatar shaman
Rtghi Drum of Lcbed-Tatat shaman.

(See page 514,)


SHAMANISM AND TOTEMISM 505

from oeitain animals, so it is 1 elated that the power’* of
the first female shamans was deiived from an anim^ ot a bird
Accoidmg to a Buriat myth the gods, when they created the
fiist people, sent a vulture to protect them against evil spirits
But when the people did not understand its sacred mission,
and started to shoot at it, it letuined to the gods complain-
ing "1 cannot piotect mankind as they wish to kill me”
The gods then answered “ Go back and give thy wonder-
ful power to some one of the earth’s inhabitants” The
vulture flew down and saw a giil herding sheep The bird
enticed her at once into a forest where it gave hei its magic
poweis. After this the giil began to see spirits and to keep
company with them. She received also a marvellous power
of foretelling both good and evil When, after a time, she
ictuined home, her biothei scolded hei foi having been out
so long with the sheep The girl became angry and threatened
her biothei, who shoitly aftei wards fell ill The sister, who
had become a great shaman, was able, however, to cure him
Accoidmg to another Buriat tale men knew nothing of sick-
ness 01 death in the beginning, but were liable to these mis-
fortunes through evil spirits The gods then sent down an
eagle from heaven to piotect the people The eagle was
thus " the fiist shaman ” The people did not, however,
understand the duty of the bird, so that it was foiced to
leturn to heaven. The gods told the eagle to give its shaman
natuie to the fiist peison it should meet on the eaith The
eagle then appioadied a woman sleeping under a hee, who
had left her husband, and she became enceinte by the eagle
The woman now leturned to her husband, lived in complete
harmony with him, and gave birth to a son, who became later
"the first shaman.” A valiant of the same tale gives the
woman as " the fii st shaman ” By receiving the eagle’s powers,
she could see spirits and piactise the piofession of shaman”
Among the Buiiats one meets thus with two conceptions,
which might possibly throw light on the pioblem of toteraism._


So6 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY

One IS that the forefather of a cUn oiiginated fiom an animal,
the othei, that the magic powers of the hist shaman woman
or ancestiess of the clan wcie obtained from some animal
Which of these should be legaided as the oldei conception ?
Judging fiom the Buriat myths, both aie closely i elated
The ‘‘animal” which inspiies the “hist shaman woman”
of the clan is also looked upon as a possible cause of her
pregnancy In this mannei tales might aiise of the animal-
like ancestois of a clan As the “animal’s poweis,” accord-
ing to an old belief, then go down in inheritance in the “ hist
shaman woman’s” clan (Yakut ija-tisOy “mother-clan ”), oi,
m other words, lie dormant within the family, appealing only
m Its shamans, it becomes obvious that knowledge of then
Utkha (“ oiigin”) is of impoitance to each clan and that it
imposes ceitain duties on the clan The animal whose
“powers” or natuie lie latent in a shaman clan becomes a
speaal soul foi the shaman The Tungus conception of the
“ leturn of the ‘ loom ’ ” pomts to a kind of migiation of the
soul The Buriats call an animal of this dcsaiption khuhd^an
(“metamoiphosis,” fiom khuhtlkhu^ “to change oneself,”
“ to take on anothei form ”) In a vaiiant of the myth of
the “ancestoi ” of the Buiiats, Bukha-Nojon (“Bull
Master ”), it is i elated that when this people still dwelt in
the land of the Khalkha Mongols, a veiy large blue-giey ox
appeared in then midst, the people accepting it as then klmbtl-
gan “ The conceptions of an “ ancestoi ” and a kJnubtlgm
have thus been united in this myth

One of the shaman’s protective spiiits in animal fotm is
commonly regarded as being intimately connected with the
shaman himself Among ceitam Samoyeds in the Tuiukhansk
District the shaman spirit has the shape of a reindeer which is
bound by an invisible leather band to the shaman This
leather band can stretch to any length when the reindeer is
sent out on a journey It may happen, sometimes, that the
spirit-reindeer of two shamans engage in waifaie together


SHAMANISM AND TOTEMISM 507

(cf the bull-fightmg in the Buriat myth) Should one o£
the remdeei be killed in the conflict, the shaman owning the
same dies*® That the “reindeer” is here a transfoimation
of the shaman’s soul, appears from a custom of the Yuiak
Samoyeds, aftei the death of a shaman, of prepaiiiig a wooden
image of a lemdeer, which is kept by the lelatives wiapped up
in the hide of a reindeer calf

The Yakuts call a shaman animal of this description ija-
k^l (“mother-animal”) These may be of vatying species
The mightiest shaman animals are said to be the stag, the
stallion, the bear, the eagle, etc Unlucky the shaman whose
tja^kyl IS a wolf 01 a dog The dog, it is said, never leaves the
shaman in peace, but “ gnaws with its teeth at his heart and
tortures his body ” When a new shaman has appeared, the
otheis know this through having noticed the appearance of
a new ija-kyl Only shamans can see these animals When
they quail el, then “animals” fight togethei An “animal
war ” may go on foi seveial months or yeais The one whose
“animal” wins the fight emeiges whole fiom the struggle,
but, as said befoie, if one of the “ animals ” dies, its shaman
ownei dies too The sickness of a shaman is often said to
depend on a grave battle between shamans

Among the Dolgans standmg under the influence of the
Yakuts the same shaman spirit is met with under the same
name Although the shamans have many helping spirits in
the shapes of different animals, each shaman has only one
tja-kyl upon which his life and death depend This spint-
animal is said to appear to the shaman at the most three
times in his life, viz , at his call to the office of shaman, in
the middle of his shaman activity, and immediately befoie his
death, when the spiiit dies also Should the animal die of
any accidental cause, the death of the shaman follows soon
aftei The “ mother animal ” keeps always to the same place,
foi which reason it may happen that a strange ^aman sees it
while shamanizing If the latter is an enemy of the animal’s


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


508

owner^ he f lightens the animal so that it dies, with fatal
consequences to its ownei (cf sunilai beliefs of the Scandi-
navian Lapps)

A fuithei pi oof that the shaman’s “animal,” which is
legarded as his necessaiy escoit and means of conveyance to
the other woild, is intimately connected with his soul, is to be
found in the desaiption of the last joui ney of the Goldes,
wheie the “leindeei ” iidden by the soul of the deceased is
the shaman himself

The forbidding of the killing of ceitain animals and the
custom of burying them with aremony wheie the body, of
one is found, would seem to depend on the fact that the
animals in question are soul-animals of the types desciibed
above Foi though soul-animals aie often regarded as being
invisible to the ordinal y eye, they aie most often connected
with the corresponding mateiial animals This appeals also
from a Buriat tale about a gieat shaman and his nine sons
The fathei, who was blind, once sent his sons to a iiver to
fish. “Ye will see there,” he said, “ seven fish, one of which
IS blind and is not to be touched, as it is my soul.” The sons
caught all the fish, howevei, but when they leturned home,
their father was dead ”

That all the “animals” legaided as helping the shaman
are not khuh$lgans, but that there aie numeious othei help-
ing-spirits is shown, furthei, by the following Buiiat piayer
“ Grey hare our lunnei, giey wolf our ambassadoi, bird Khon
our Khubilgm, eagle Khoto oui messengei ”

Some light is thrown on the ideas of the dilfeient peoples
regal ding then shaman animals by the images piepaied by
them, those cut out of wood 01, latei, hammeied also of non,
aie more common than those which aie dtawn 01 painted In
the museum at Krasnoyarsk theie is a Tungus bhamanic object
— a long chain of non — the end of which is attached to a
reindeei or deer made of ironplate, with buds’ wings sticking
out of Its sides On this animal sits a human being lepresent-


>


PLATE LX

Dress of a Yakut shainin (bird type). Front and
back views (See page 514 )


SHAMANISM AND TOTEMISM


509

ing a shaman, with a square non plate on his head, over which
d bud sui rounded by nine small human-like objects is fastened
The iron chain, to which, m addition, a bud and a reindeer
arc attached, and which blanches out into three thinner chains
with bells at then end, repiesents the spiiit-journey of the
shaman

When a Golde shaman intends to travel to the other world,
he must have the assistance of a mystic bird Koori and his
piotectmg spirit BuZu The bud resembles a ciane, its image


Fic 19 Koori and BdZu, Sfirit-biroi or a Goldi Shaman


of wood being coveied with the skin of a wild goat so that
only the head is uncovered. BuZu is a human-like image with
a crooked leg and wings The body and the wings of this
also Bie coveied with wild-goat skin Both these objects are
hung by the shaman in a shed erected specially foi the occa-
sion, the foimer m a horizontal, the latter in a vertical posi-
tion. In these positions the spirit-animals are supposed to
make their joui neys when they travel with the shaman Koori
is said to can y the shaman’s soul, while BuZu is only an escort
Even if the shaman could reach the world of the dead with-


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


Jio

out Kooii} tt would, as the people point out, be impossible
for him to return without it

The Dolgans and the Tungus use a gieat many wooden
images when shamanizing, which aie prepaicd foi one occasion
only and which aie legarded as being necessaiy hclpets and
protectors on the, shaman’s difHcull spiiit-<joutneys Accotd-
ing to the task and plans of the shaman, diffeient images aie
made When the Tungus on the Yenisei begin then shaman
ceremonies, they always eiect a speaal tent, in the middle of
which a hre is lit The shaman with his dium then takes up
his position at the back of the tent, his face towaids the fire,
and befoie him, on the ground, a low of wooden objects is
placed, on the tight side a hsh {Stenodus leuctchthm nelma)^
a snake, a snail, and a beat , on the othei side a fish {Hucfto
an ottei, a wolf, and still another Hbh {Lota lota).
The heads of these aie pointed towaids the hie In addition,
a snail is placed befoie him with its head towaids the left
Outside the tent, on long poles elected tound it, similar
wooden figures are placed in the following oidei fiom the
light “the sun,” a bud intended to lepiesent the thunder,
a cudcoo, and a swan Fiom the door opening to the left a
crane, “ the moon,” a loom and a duck Each object has its
special duty and all ate necessaiy foi each appeal ance of the
shaman Duiing his song he lifts up in oidei the animals laid
on the giound befoie him, drawing ceitain conclusions fiom
the weight of each Foi special tasks othei images aie also
used, e g , when the shaman has to cscoi t the soul of some one
deceased to the other woild, he binds the “ soul,” that is to
say, the image of a man, to a cuiious erection which would
seem to be fitted with wings, and is elected behind the tent
The Dolgan shaman sometimes makes an image of his
“ mothei -animal,” ija-hyl Even at the saciifices a wooden
image is made both of the leindeei and the saciificing shaman,
who IS to lead the sacrificed animal’s soul to the gods On
the graves also of the Tungus, Dolgans and Yakuts, one


SHAMANISM AND TOTEMISM


S


Fig 20 POLGAN SllAMAH-ATIRIBinTS AND THF WORl OCTREE WITH THE
TWO-HEADED LORD OF THF BIRDS


512 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY

may see images of buds, looms, etc, on long poles, set up,
piobably, as tefuges for the homeless soul It is, howcvei,
a great pity that the varied shamamc beliefs of Noith Sibeiia
and the countless ethnogiaphic objects connected with these
are almost wholly unexploicd

In the place of wooden images the Buiiat shaman has many
little ammal-hides in his house The animals said to help
him m his shamanizing vaiy m the diffeient tubes Often
they are small foiest animals, such as the fox, the hate, the
ermine, marten, sable, etc These helping or serving spiiits
m the shapes of diffeient animals aie not to be confused with
the khuhdgan of the shaman

When a shaman intends to make a spiiit-journey aftei sun-
set, he must, as a rule, accoiding to a geneial idea, be futnished
with a special costume and a dium The Black Tatais in
the Minusinsk District sometimes use masks of biich-baik on
their eyebiows and moustaches of squiiicl tails." Shaman
objects aie regarded as so sacied that they aie tiansporled
during removals among the moie noithein peoples by a sepa-
rate reindeer, which is never used for piofane pui poses The
Buriats conseciate the person called by the spiuts to the ofEce
of shaman with special ceremonies, befoie he is regaided as
being worthy to take charge of shamamc instiuments In
addition he must have undetgone a special tiainiiig with some
older shaman, and have taken pait, as the assistant of the
lattei, in shamamc seances and ceremonies "

Shaman costumes aie to be found even to-day among most
of the Altaic peoples dwelling in Siberia, although in many
places they no longei enjoy their foimei reputation Even
amongst peoples, with whom the shaman continues his activity,
the costumes aie nowadays often extiemely incomplete At
times one sees shamans cariymg out theii duties in otdinaty
peasant dress, decoiated perhaps fot the occasion with a few
ribbons ot other objects fiom the real shaman costume Some-
times only the shaman head-dtess has been letoined. The


PLATE LXl

Dicss of a Tungus shatndn (bud type) with metal
d(.corntioi» and fi ingts, Fi ont and back views (See
page 514)


SHAMANISM AND TOTEMISM


513


Fio a I HcADDRrw op a Yenhbi- F’® »3 ^noub 8k^

OsTiAK Shaman (Rbindecr or man-boot (Bird typp)

SrAO TYPp)


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


514

complete costumes, best pieservcd among the most noithein
peoples, consist o£ stvcial g«ument 8 , viz , a bng frock or tunic
hanging down below the knees, a smallei bieast-coveimg
fastened undei the chin, a cap 01 a ciown, top-boots and
gloves. All these gaiments aie piepaied of softened lein-
deei or othei skin, and aie geueially piofusely dccoiated with
objects made of coppei or non Besides a ^‘sun” and <i
“ moon,” which m most costumes hang on the back, a numbei
of human-like and biid-like spirit images aie used Furthei,
in all the garments composing the costume, cuiious objects in
beaten metal aie sewn fast, coiiesponding in foim and 111 the
ideas of the people to the diffeient paits of the skeleton If
one compaies the shaman costumes fiom different distiicts,
valuable collections of which aie to be found in the museums
of Sibeiia (Kiasnoyaisk, Minusinsk, likutsk and Yakutsk)
and, above all, in Pctiogiad (Academy of Science and Alex-
andei 111 museums), it will be noticed that the costume, if
complete, foims, fiom head-diess to boots, a whole, 01 in
other words, lepresents some animal, mostly either a bid or
a homed animal (a deei or a lemdeei) Costumes repre-
senting both these types have been obtained in plenty fiom the
Tungus The bud type is most common among the Yakuts
and many of the peoples at the Altai The Buiiats, who no
longer seem to use shaman costumes of this desaiplion, pos-
sessed them at an earliei time, a fact pioved by giaves opened
m their region, in which metal objects belonging to the deer
type of shaman costume weie found
The costumes of the bird type differ fiom those of the deer
type partly in the long fringes, the so-called “feathers,”
which are much longer on the back of the costume than on the
front. Similai leathei fiinges hanging from the aims ate
said to repiesent “ wings ” Small, long, sliaip-ended and also
pipe-foimed metal objects hanging in several lows on the
back, aie explained to be “biid^s feathers” Natuially, the
headrdress also is fiinged with these In the head-diess of


SHAMANISM AND TOTEMISM


515


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


516

this type m the Altai distiict one may at times even see the
head of a bird The lound biass buttons on the fiont of the
head-diess are “ bud’s eyes ” The boots bear the same signs
Tungus shaman boots of this type aie decoiated with bird’s
feet sewn with yellow glass peat Is, and having thiee or five
toes

Specially chaiactenstic of the deci or remdeei type is the
head-dress or a own with its high, uptight, non horns The
fringes on the tunic aie missing, 01 wheie these occui, are
shorter, the arms aie altogethei without them Among the
Yenisei Ostiaks and the Dolgans the tail of the tunic ends
behind in a shaip point Little pieces of iron sewn on to the
costume are called “ hairs ”

In the gaiments of each type, as may be seen from the
illustrations, there are numeious bones” beaten in metal.
The skeleton plays, as is known, an impoitant pait in the
piimitive soul-beliefs On both sides of the fiont of the
tunic are seen ^^iibs” and, undei the thioat, collar-bones ”
Along the gloves, arms and boots the paits of the skeleton
belonging heie are sewn. Naturally, the bird-tjrpe costume is
fitted with “bird’s bones,” the deei type with the deer
skeleton

Moie difficult is the question, what bird the diffeient bird-
costumes attempt to repiesent It appeals piobable that al-
though the dress represents an invisible spiiit-biid, the people
see in it the counterfeit of some actual, living bird. A Yakut
shaman costume, described by Priklonskiy, is said to lepre-
sent a vulture*” A Teleut shaman head-dress was covered
by the skin of an owl on which the head, wings and feathers
had been left intact ” Certain costumes beat also the identi-
fication marks of the hawk, eagle, etc

Among the Yenisei Ostiaks, the shaman boots, the long
uppers of which leach over the thighs, aie furnished with the
complete “ bones ” of the bear. This would seem to point to
a shaman costume representing a beat ** The crowns, how-


SIBtRIAN MYTHOLOGY


^i8

evei, whcie such die found, die gcncially fitted with “ hoi ns ”
Aie we to assume that difteient types of costume have be-
come mixed, 01 did the cobtume oiigindlly consibt of a mixtuie
of bear and leindeei ^ The complete shaman costumes lepre-
sent as a lule one single animal That all mannei of alteia-
tions might have aiiscn at a latei time, espcaally as the
oiiginal significance of the costume has been foi gotten by the
people in many places, is dear without fuithei aigument
Often, one may notice, for example, that ceitain paits of the
skeleton have been sewn on in the wiong place Wheie the
iron objects, which aie genet ally taken away foi futuie use
fiom the costume at the death of the shaman, aie pieseivcd
for a longei pet tod by the survivois, il is easy foi even the
objects belonging to diffeient types to be put wiongly together
It sliould be obscived fuithei that, accoiding to Schienk, the
head of a beat was sometimes placed upon the head-diess
of the Sibeiian shaman ” It must, howevei, be lemembeied
that the spiiit-animal of the shaman, in the fancy of the
people, may also have taken on a foim which did not coi re-
spond to any actual animal

A comparative examination of the shaman costumes among
different Siberian peoples will show that, foi the most pait,
and espeaally m the metal objects sewn on to the costume,
they aie extiemely like one anothei It is theiefoie beyond
doubt that at least the Buiiats, Yakuts, Tungus, Dolgans,
Yenisei Ostiaks, Samoyeds and ceitam Tatai tubes around
the Altai, have in this respect been undei the influence of a
common shamanic culture The influence of this culture can
be seen even among the Ugiian Ostiaks m the west and as
far away as the Giliaks m the east Fiobably, the shaman
costumes of the Mongols and of othei Tuikish peoples weie
earliei of a similar chaiactei Among the Finno-Ugric stocks,
archaeological finds have not been able to show metal objects
whidi could piove the existence of similai shaman costumes
among these peoples Even in Sibetio, howevei, shaman


PLATE LXII

Dic<ii of a Yenisei Ostialc shaman (animal type).
Back View (Stc page 514 )


SHAMANISM AND TOTEMISM


519

costumes seem to have existed at an earliei time, which in place
of the metal objects were decoiated with natural objects from
the animal world Thus, for example, among the Tatars of
Minusinsk the wings of the owl have been seen on the back
of a shaman costume and on the head-dress, and among the
Yenisei Ostiaks the shamans formerly bore on then top-boots
the natural paws of a bear instead of iron claws, and on their
head-diess real hoi ns*** Furthei, among the older types one
may find costumes with “images” prepared m part from
leather and bones It would therefore seem probable that the
shaman costumes of the Altaic race had practically the same
form and purpose in a more prirmtive period

But why should the shaman dress himself in the form of an
animal foi his mysteries? The answer to this question is given
by the primitive peoples themselves The Yakuts say that
when the shaman takes on his bird-costume he himself re-
ceives the power of flying every wheie in the world. Accord-
ing to the TUngus, the costume of the shaman is his “ shadow,”
or in othei words, in this shape his soul travels on its spirit-
jouineys Golde myths 1 elate how a great bud came flying
and alighted on a tree, and how by shaking its wings these
became transformed into the iron feathers of the shaman
costume The Yenisei Ostiaks call the shaman costume and
the objects hanging on it, the “ power ” of the shaman When
the shaman puts on the long boots representing the feet of the
' bear, he believes himself to have acquired the “power” of
the bear While shamanizing he sometimes imitates the bear,
regarded by the people in question as an extremely sacred
animal.

It IS probable that the shaman costume, which, at least re-
garding its form, goes in inheritance m the shaman’s family
and which is sometimes called “god” (Tangara) by the
Yakuts, originally represented the shaman’s soul-animal or ffa~
hyl

In his songs the shaman oftmi calls his drum some animal,


520 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY

on which he says he is travelling Some call it their “ horse ”
or their “ deer,” some then “ loom ” or then " eagle ” The
Karagass shaman from the Sayan mountain, who covers his
drum with the skin of the Siberian deei, sings "I am a

shaman and nde on the wild
deer ” In certain myths it is
said that the shaman ** flies on
his drum ” or iides ” on it
The Yenisei Ostiaks, who use
reindeei-calf skin for the
cover of their drums, fasten
iron “reindeer iibs” to the
open side, adding to these
each time a new cover has to
be procured for the drum In
the inside of the wooden
frame of the drum one may
often See a picture of a rein-
deer, painted in alderbark
juice, 01 carved with a knife
It IS on the whole an interesting feature of the ait of the
Siberian peoples, that objects in which the hide of some ani-
mal has been used, are often decorated with pictuies of the
same animal Thus, for example, the end of a drumstidc or
the handle of a shaman hammer is engraved with the nose
of the forest animal whose skin has been used for the cover
of the hammer

Like the shaman costume the inside of the drum is furnished
with all kinds of spint-pictures, among others, with small
human- or blrd-like images of metal, the number of which
depends on the visions of its owner, becoming moie numerous
as the shaman becomes older. Certain peoples, such as the
Abakan and Altai Tatars, also paint pictures, intended to rep-
resent the Heaven and the underground, with shaman animals,
hunting trips, etc, on the skin of the drum" The Bunat


Fio aS Shaman-toum with Bird*
SHAPED Hand omp


57.1 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY

shamans, who no longer use drums, make use of two sticks
instead, the upper end of which is formed into a horse’s head
and the lower into a horse’s hoof At times one may also
make out a “ knee ” m the middle of a stick The sticks of
the shaman, called his horses,” aie decorated With small
skins, metal bells, etc ** The shamans of the peoples dwelling
on the Yenisei sometimes use, besides the drum, a staff made
of iron and furnished with cross^branches on which the spa its
called by the shaman to his assistance are believed to alight **
It seems probable that this object was originally a symbol of
the world>tree, in which all manner of spirits dwell and to
which the shaman, according to the Dolgans, escorts the souls
of the dead As related earher the Altaic shaman nses by
means of this tree up to the Heavens.

The shaman’b implements are thus regarded as mysteiious
means of communication, which, by stimulating his fancy,
make it possible for him to ** fly and travel ” by their help
A long iron chain hanging from the a own of the deer type
costume and a leather l^nd on the back of the bird costume are
explained as being necessary for the shaman soul to grasp on
Its rapid flights so that it may feel itself safe on the " animal’s
back ” " The Tungus on the Yenisei have an image cut out of
leather on the point of the skirt of the shaman costume, which
image represents the shaman’s soul A similar image of thin
copper-plate can be seen on the same place in the Yenisei
Ostiak shaman costume The significance of this human-like
figure, called the shaman’s "shadow” by the last-named
people, becomes apparent ft om a tale of their " first shaman,”
Doh Once when Doh shamanized, flying high towards the
sky, he had the misfortune to let fall his " shadow ” (uhet)
fiom Its place on the skirt of the tunic The evil spiiits
captured it at once and took it to the land of the dead There
the female ruler of the dead, Khosadam, attempted to devour
the soul according to her custom, but the soul of the great
shaman was not so easy to destroy, and Khosadam broke a


PLATE LXIII


Drum of a Yakut shaman, showing inner and outer
sides (See page 523 )


SHAMANISM AND TOTEMISM


5^3

tooth m trying This made her angry and from spite she
nailed the soul by its hands and feet to a tree, making it
thus impossible for it to return to the shaman’s body"

With the assistance of the many objects ali eady described,
the shaman’s soul is legaided as being able to move with the
greatest ease anywhere on the earth, m heaven, and m the
vuidei world By its rapid jouineys, it can procure super-
natuial knowledge, hidden to ordinary moitals The latter
are, therefore, in a very great degree dependent on the knowl-
edge and power of the shaman When they are going out to
hunt or fish, the shaman has to find out what the weather will
be like and where the fish or game aie hiding just then
When an enemy draws near, he must discover befoiehand the
intentions of the latter One of his most difficult tasks, how-
ever, IS said to be the seeking after and recoveiy of the souls
of the sick, which have too early left their sufFering bodies
He must then undertake the difficult jomney to the under-
woild, in 01 del to piopitiate the spirits and save the soul
Thithei he must also, when fate has so decreed, escort the
soul of the dead to the circle of those who have died at an
earlia time

In his songs, of which up to the present too few have been
recorded, the shaman describes to those present the strange
«ghts and adventures, the trials and dangers which he must
experience and wm through on his difficult journeys in the
world of spirits* With tense attention the spectators follow
his wild, fantastic song, when, as though drunk with the in-
termittent rattle and thundei of the drum, he dances and hops
in the flickeimg light of a hearth-fire m the dark and mystic
night of the primeval forest These wild ceremonies, stimu-
lated by a diseased imagination, form the most characteristic,
though at the same time the least known and the most sub-
jective part, of the mythology of these primitive peoples.


NOTES


FINNO-UGRIC


Citation by author’s name or by title of a work refers to the same
in the vanous sections of the Bibliography Where an author has
written several works, they are distinguished as [a], [b], etc Where
Roman numerals piecede these letters they refer to the sections of the
Bibliography

Chapter I

1 Reuterskiold [b], pp 36, 59

2 Charuzin, “Medv pnsyaga,” pp 32-'3

3 Graan, p 19

4 Bartenev, p 86

5 Lankela, pp 274-5

0 Donner [b], pp 140-1

7 Holmberg [v b], p II

8 Gondatti t^], p 64

9 Paasonen, Uber die uispr seelenvorst,” pp 2, 27

10 Novitskiy, p 106, Karjalainen [c], p 323

1 1 Lundius, p 7

12 Holmberg [v b], p li,

13 Holmberg [vi a], pp 14-15

14 Patkanov, 1 148—9, 11 32

15 Munch, pp 4-5

16 Holmberg [iv b}, p 14

17 Nalimov’s Collections in the Archives of the Finno-Ugric
Society

18 Holfflbeig [vi a], pp 14—16, cf Gavrilov [b], pp 124-5

19 Holmberg [vb], pp 29-30

20 Tun, p 150

21 Nalimov [bl, pp 4, 8, 13-141 Popov, “Zyryane,” p 59,
Kandinskiy, “Iz matcrialov,” p 107-8, Fuchs, p 239

22 Piasonen, “ Uber die urspr seelenvorst ,” pp 19-20, 25

23 Krohn [iii g], pp 164-6

24 Qvigstad [a],i 49-50

25 Cf Wasiljev, “ Ubeisicht,” p 102

26 lessen, pp 34-9, Leem, p 417, Holmbeig [iv b], pp 19-20

27 Karjalainen [c], pp 45-6

28 Mainov[c], pp 12-4, Wasiljev, ” Ubers pp I01--2,
Patkanov, 1 152


528 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

Chapter II

1. Hayha, p i6, Varonen, Vatnajamfalv ^ p 57, Wiedemann,
P 309-

2 Nahmov’s Collections

3 Holtnberg [v b], pp ia-13

4 Lukkannen [c], p i , Nikolskiy, p 64

5 Magnitskiy, p 159, Nikolskiy^ p 65, Holmbei^ [v b], p 15

6 Varonen, Vgttut} , p 77

7 Rolmberg [v b}, p 14

8 Varonen, Vmnaj,f 93, Lukkannen [c], p 2

9 Reuterskiold [b], p 36

10 Karjalainen [c], p 64

11 Nikolskiy, p 65

12 Hogstrom, p 207

13 Molyarov [c], p 741

14 V<ironen, Vainaj , pp 59-60

15 Rheen, p 46

16 Charuzin [iv b], p 324

17 According to T Lehtisalo

18 Wiedemann, p 310, Varonen, Vmnaf^p 68

19 Holmberg [vi aj, p ao, [v b], p, 13, Varonen, Vamaj , p 68
29 Tun, p 150

21 Karjalainen [c], p 77

22 Holmberg [vi a], p 26

23 Gavrilov [b], p 184, Holmberg [vi a], p 26, Varonen,
Vatnaf , p 93

24 Helland [a], n 315, Varonen, Vainaf,p 90

25 Varonen, p 96

a6 Smirnov [v b], xi 538, Holmbcig fv b], p 1 7, Varonen,
Vatnoffp 93, ct Kaijalainen, [c], pp 85-7
27 Varonen, Vmtutj , pp 92-3, 94
z8 Charuzin [ivb],pp 323-4, Leem,p 499

29 Karjalainen [c], pp 84-6, Holmberg [vi a], p 27

30 Tun,p 195

31 Kolmodin, “Folktro,” in 111 16

32 Karjalainen [c], p 78

33 Smirnov [vb], xi 541, Varonen, Vmmj, p 94, Holmberg
[vb],pp 15-16

34 Holmberg [v b], p 16

35 According to Lehtisalo’s Collections

36 Holmberg [vi a], p 27

37 Smirnov [vb], xi 544, Holmberg [vi a], p 27, [vbj.p 17,

Varonen, Vamaf , pp 88-9 ,


NOTES


529


38 Holmberg [v bji p

39 Mignitskiy, p 166

40 Holmberg [vi a], pp 25-6, 45

41 Varonen, I^ffi««;,pp 97-101

42 Holzmayer, “Osilnna,” in VGEG vii 8a, Vironen, Vamaj ^
pp 101-2 A corresponding custom is known among the Swedes (Nils
Lithberg, Allmogeforskningen och etnologin,” Eatahuren^ 1919*
Stockholm)

43 Hornborg, ** Karsikoita,” m Vu , 11 93-7, Htdmbtrg [111 b],
pp 8-34

44 Karjalatnen [c], pp 85, 89

45 Gondatti [b], p 67, Karjahinen [c], pp 89-90

46 Novitskiy, p 45

47 According to Prof H Paasont-n

48 Karjalainen [c], p 65, Patkanov, 1 144

49 Cf Molyarov [c], p 744

50 Varonen, Pamui; , p 90

51 >b,P 94

5a Karjalatnen [c], pp 70-1

53 Vnronen, Vainaj , p 61, Holmberg [v b], p 13, Smirnov
[vb],» 538

54 Holmberg [v b], p 14

55 Molyarov [c], pp 742-3, Holmberg [vb],p 14

56 Semenov, p 34

57 Holmberg [vi a], pp 22-3

58 Kirjnlainen [c], p 65, Yakovlev, p 66

59 Folklore Collections in the Archives of the Kalevala-Society

60 Holmberg [v b], p 16

61 lb , p 16

6a Karjalainen [c], pp 74 *“^

63 Holmberg [lyb], p 15

64 Varonen, Vmtutj , pp 62-3

65 Schwindt, pp 185-8

66 Karjalainen [c], pp 66-7, 104-6

67 Varonen, Vmnaj , p 64

68 Tun, p i49,VaH, p 134

69 Niurenius, p 27, Tornaeus, p 40, Aspelin, Stdom’^pni
mmnmtt tdhetia,'p 242, Patkanov, 1 142

70 Setala [bj, p 96

71 Varonen, Voimr; , pp 103-7

72 Holmberg [vi a], p 24

73 Ryikov, p 90

74 Holmberg [v b], p 16

75 Leem, p 407, Tornaeus, pp 40-1, Charuzin [iv b], o 323


530


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


Chafier III

1 Holzmay«,pp 8i-a, Varonen, pp 34-5

2 Lundius, pp 34-40

3 Qvigstad [al,i 56-7

4 Rhecn.p 47

5 Graan, pp 72-3
b Rhecn, p 47

7 Lundius, p 21

8 Reuterskiold [b], p 91

9 Qvigstad [n], 1 59

10 Lundius, p 39

1 1 According to Lehtisalo

1 2 Muller, T)as Lebetiy p 203

13 Psllas, 111 55

14 Karjilunen [c], p 81

1 5 Gondatti [b] , p 67

16 Karjilainen [cl, pp 90-1

17 Munkicsi [viidl,p 95

18 Karjahinen [cl, p 92

1 9 Novitskiy, Kratk opr , p 46 , cf Muller, Das Leben, p 204

20 CiBti^n, Rmen, t 296, Pallas, Rrire^ui 59*^0

21 Finsch, p 547, Kirjalaincn [c],p 92

22 According to Lehtisalo

23 Cf Chapter xviii

24 Ksrjahinen [c],pp 116-8

25 Rheen, p 47

26 Vsroncn, Vmstaj , p 100

27 Holmberg [vi 1], p 31

28 Smiinov [vii b], p 181

29 Wasiljev, ” Obenicht,” p 104

30 Varonen, Vmnof , pp 8 1-2

3 1 Nalimov’s Collections

32 Olearius, pp 344-5

33 Muller, Sammlungy in I 44

34 Varonen, , pp 77-81

35 Georgi [bl, p 57

36 Dobrotvorskiy, pp S 77“8

37 Holmberg [v bl, p 19

38 Holmberg [vi a], p 34

39 Nalimov’s Collections

40 Smirnov [v b], xi 545-6

41 Graundstroem, p 318, cf Varonen, Vmmpt pp. 109-11,
Lukkannen [c], p 7


NOTES


531


42 Krohn [m g], p 51

43 Molyarov [c], pp 745-7, Yakovlev, p 72,

44 Holmbeig [vb],p 25

45 Gorodskoy, p 33

46 Smirnov [v b], xi 545-8

47 Smirnov [vja],pp 243-4, Nalimov [b],p 6, Rogov, p 127

48 Lukkarinen [c], pp 9-10

49 Forstrom, pp 401-2

50 Holmberg [vi a], p 36

51 Wichmann [a], p 42

52 Holmbeig [v b], p 26

53 Wichmann [a], pp 42-4, Gavrilov [a], pp 40-1

54 Smirnov [v b], xi 550-1

55 Nalimov [b], p 5

56 According to Paasonen

57 Holmberg [vi a], pp 50, 53-4

58 Holmbeig [v b], pp 28-9

Chapter IV

1 Holmberg fvi a], pp 32-3

2 Gavrilov [a], pp 42-6, Holmbeig [vi a], pp 46-7, [v b],
pp 26-7

3 Peivuchin, 11 113-7

4 Nurmmskiy, p 269

5 Killas, pp 91-2

6 Castr£n, £ , Besknfmngf p 76

7 Varonen, Vatmj , pp 140-167

8 Fellman, J , » 43, 1 13

9 Tun, pp 134-5, Holland [a], 11 294, Jessen, p 81.

10 Graan, pp 67-8, cf Rheen, pp 27-8

1 1 Fellman, I , t 404

12 Hogstrom, pp 188-9, Leem, p 482

13 Fntzner, p 157

14 Kiohn [ill g], p 52

15 Paasonen [vd],p 843

16 Holmberg [v b] , pp 29-30,

Qvigstad [a], 11 27


Chapter V

1 Charuzin [ivb], p 324

2 Holmberg [v b], p 12

3 Karjalainen [c], p 124


534 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

4 Paasoncn [vdl.p 843, Smirnov [va],pp 117--21

5 Karjalimen [c],p 123

6 According to Lehtisalo

7 Karjalainen [c], pp 130-1

8 Smirnov [v b] , xt 550-1

9 Faasonen [v d], p 843, Holmberg [vi a], p 19

10 Karjilainen [c], pp 121-2

11 Lukkannen [c], p 17

12 Holmberg [v b], p 12

13 Reuterskiold [b], pp 35-6, 67 etc, Jesscn, pp 29-30, 71,
Leem, p 418

14 Unwerth [c], pp 29-36

15 Reuterskiold [b] , p 37
]6 Leem, p 477

17 Qvigstad [a], 1 49

18 Wiklund, “ &IVO,” pp 59-74

19 Kaijilainen [c], pp 123-4

20 Krohn [111 g], pp 273-5, cf Eiscn [b], pp 34-5

21 Accoidmg to Collections in the Archives of the Kalevala
Society

22 Vasilyev [b], x 16

23 Strahlenberg, p 76

24 Kaijalainen [c], pp 126-7

25 Charuzin [iv b], pp 197-8

26 Holzmayer, pp 48-9, Eisen [v b], pp 32-3

27 Brummer, “Uber die Bannungsorte,” MSFO, pp 43, 44,
45 ff and “ Veisverzeichmsse,” lA, pp 19-20, 22-3

28 Suamm kansan vanhat tunot, 1 4, n 870, {Bop 11 37)

29 Stadling, p 26

30 Veniaminov, I, Zapiskt ob atchtpiskich Aleutach t KoloJlaeh
(1840), 111 56-60, cf The Mythology of All Races^ x 249

Chapter VI

1 Nalimov [c], pp 5, ii

2 Karjalainen [b],p 83

3 According to Lehtisalo’s Collections

4 Genetz, Woprtepbuch^ p 156

5 Rheen, p 15, Giaan, p 40

6 Karjalainen [b], pp 85-6

7 Krohn [iiig],p 147

8 Tuderus, p 12

9 Lundius, p 18

10 Tun, p 138, Kolmodin, p 3,


NOTES


533


U Charuzin, “Medv prisyaga,” pp 30 if,

12 Wiklund [iva], pp 27-46

13 Wiklundi lb , p 30

14 Qvigstad [a], 1 28

15 Reuteiskiold [b], p 37

16 Wiklund [iva],p 46

17 Rheen, p 44

18 Wiklund [iv a], p 45

19 Hogstrom, p 208, Wiklund [iv a], p 39

20 Niurenius, p 18

21 Reuteiskiold [b], p 36

22 Wiklund [iv a], p 38

23 lb pp 31-2

24 Hogstrom, p 210

25 Wiklund [iv a], p 44

26 Hogstrom, p 210

27 Graan, p 67, n

28 Cf Wiklund [iva],p 45.

29 Rheen, p 46

30 Lutidius, p 28

31 Chiruzin [ivb], p 204

32 Krohn [in g], p 163

33 Karjalainen [b], pp 85-7, cf Pitkanov, 1 125 IF

34 Gondatti [a], pp 74-87, Kinnisto [a], pp 213-37.

35 Karjalainen [b], pp 86-7

36 lb p 86, n 2

37 Krohn [in g], p J49 ff

38 According to Lehtisalo’s Collections

39 Karjalainen [b],p 88

40 Fellman, I , i 392

41 Kolmodm, p 5

42 Niuremus, p 19

43 According to Lehtisalo’s Collections

44 Kolmodm, p 4

45 Hogstrom, p 183

46 Wiklund [iva],p 37

Chapter VII


1 Rosen, pp 177-9

2 Andersson, p 31

3 Tornaeus, pp 26-7, Hogstrom, p 193, Rheen, p 42

4 Tudeius, p 14

5 Graan, p 10


; 34 . FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

6 Lcem, p 443

7 Hogstrom, p 194

8 Fellman, I , i 405—6

9 Holmbeig [iv bj,p 33.

10 Andersson, p 44

ij YiSjSenko, p 31
I a Fellman, J , i» 146

13 Scheffeius, p lOO

14 Hogstrom, pp 183, 197 n

15 Tornaciis, p 36

16 Kildal, p 455

17 Jesaen, p 48

18 Rheen, p 39

19 Holmberg [iv b], p 35

30 Qvjgstad [a], 11 89

31 Tornaeus, p 38
33 Fellman, J , 11 66

33 Andelin, p 374

34 ViSienko, pp 31-3

35 Chnruam [iv b], pp 186-8, YaSCenko, p 33

36 Holmberg [iv b], p 36, Graan, p 63

37 Rheen, p 43

38 Fellman, J , 11 19-30

39 Andersson, p 44

30 Tornaeus, pp 36-7

31 Appelgrc,n,p 50

32 /iTPSy xvn, 4 25, Fellmin, I, 1 34°* 34*> Hogstrom,
pp 190-1

33 Hogstrom, p 192

34 Rheen, pp 39-40, Niurenms, p 3i

35 Tudcjus, pp 14-5

36 Qvigshd [a], 11 9, 12, 34, 88-9

37 Genetz, Worteilwchypp xliv-xlv, 113

38 Holmbeig [iv b], pp 41-3

39 Rheen, p 59, Jessen, p 45, Duben, p 260, Kolmodin, p 27,
Qvigstad [a], 11 8 n , Tuderus, p 17

40 Leemp 441, Holmbeig [ivb],pp 42-3

Chapter VIII

1 Donner [b], pp 134-5

2 Kaijalamen [c],pp 1 39-53 > Patkanov, 1 iq6-8«

3 Chiruzin, “ Oterki,” p 262

4 Hamalainen, Eptf Viis tied pp 39-40


NOTES


535


5 Ryckov, p 158

6 Ghvrilov [t]ipp 61-2, Wjchmann [a],p 25

7 Aminoif, “ Reseber p 236

8 Nalimov [b], pp 4-5

9 Lukkaimen [a], p 6

10 Wichmuin [a], p 25

11 Bogaye\skiy [b], p 79

12 Givnlov, [a], p 62

13 Peivuchm, ji 7-9, cf VereScigin [d], pp 94--S

14 Micheyev, p 899

15 Wichmmn [1], p 25

16 VereiScigin [c], pp 175-6

17 Gaviilov [b], p 152

18 Ryckov, p 160

19 Gcorgi [b], pp 60-1

20 Luppov fb], pp 536-7

21 Wasiljcv, pp 52-3, Bog^yevskiy [a], p 29

22 Ammoff, “ Resebei p 236

23 Bogiytvskiy [aj, p 107

24 Molyaiov [ai, p 256

25 RySkov, p 160

26 Rimstfdt, p 206

27 Visilycv [bj, pp 5-6

28 Georg! [a], 11 846, 843

29 Buch, “ Obei den Tonnis-cultus,” pp 5-13. Jurgens, pp I-9

30 Voionmai, p 504


Chapter IX

1 Vemaniin, [b"), pp 116, 122-6

2 Donnei [d].

3 Accoiding to Lehtisalo

4 Donnei fb],pp 61-3

5 Pilhs, Retse, 111 6 1

6 Kirjilamen [c], pp 158—207

7 jb p 132

8 Novitskiy, pp 51,83-5

9 Xai (iNmen [c], pp 214-36

10 Hanniainen, “ Epif Viis tied p 40

11 Muller, in 345, Pallas, Reue,Tn 480, Georgi fb], p 58

12 Wichminn [a], p 18

13 Buch, “ Die Wotjnken,” p 588, cf Bogiyevskiy [a], p 25

14 Givnlov fa], pp 3»-3

15 Buch, p 588


536 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

1 6 Bogayevskiy, OcerUtf p ibi

17 Miropolskiy, p 362

18 Bogaycvskiy, Oeerh, p 161,

19 Bechterev, VE ix 158

20 Wanljev, pp 30-2

21 lb pp 24, 121

22 Hamalainen, “ £pif Viis tied.,” p 40

23 Ostrovskiy, p 37

24 Bechterev, VE ix 157

25 Georgi [b], p 59

26 Wasiljev, p 32

27 Georgi [b], p 59

28 Wichmann [a], p 16

29 Cf Hamalainen, “ ri^er uhntap pp 4~^

30 Ku«necov [e]

31 Paasonen [v d], p 847

32 lb pp 843-4

33 Krobn, I , suv fak jumalanf 28-31 p

Chapter X

1 Genetz, Worterb , p xli, Charuzin [iv b], pp 152, 240,
Reutenkiold [b], pp 25, 107-8

2 Pervuchm 1 89-91, Wichmann [a], p 3 *» Miropolstay,
P 353

3 Holmbei^ [vi a], pp 146-8

4 Georgi [b], p 62, cf Gavnlov [a], pp 58“'9

5 Wwiljev, pp 77-80

6 Pervuchm, 1 92-4, Wichmann [a], p 3 *» Miropolskiy,

PP 354 . 36* „

7 VercS&gin [c], p 85

8 Gavnlov [a], p 63, Pervuchm, 1 96

9 Satrapmskiy, p ai, Wichmann [a], pp 29-30, Holmberg

[vi al, p 150 „ «

10 Kandinskiy, pp 108-9, YanoviC, pp 54 “ 5 »™®S®^»P * 0 **

11 FuUis, p 24a, Popov, p 59, Smirnov [via],p 281

12 Holmberg [vb], pp 34-6

13 Paasonen [v d], p 845

14 Holmberg [vb], pp 58-9

15 Paasonen [v d], p. 845

16 Lukkarinen faitP 4

17 lb. pp 1-2

18 Krohn [in gl, pp 86-7

19 Lukkannen [a], pp 3-4


NOTES


537


20 Krohn [ui g], pp 86->7

21 lb p. 95

22 ib pp 95-6.

23 Holmberg [vi a]* p 151

24 Lukkarmen [a], pp 19-23

25 Helland [a], 11 304, Fellinan, J , n 158-9

26 Krohn [iiig],p 97

27 Eisen [b], pp 133-43, Holmaycr, pp 11-14, 16-17, 48

28 Gavrilov [a], p 45

29 Krohn [111 g], p loO

30 lb p 99, corresponding beliefs are known also among the
Volga'Finns

31 Kallas, p 82, cf pp 73,80

32 Ramstedt, p 206

33 Butuzov [b], p 486, Yanovid, p 55

34 Sachmatov, p 146


Chapter XI

1 Reuterskiold [b], pp 14, 33, Qvigstad [a], p 27.

2 Reuterskiold [b], pp 89, 37

3 Charuzin [ivb], p 152

4 Genetz, IVorteri , pp xxxix-xl, 175

5 Charuzm [iv b], p 152

6 Friis [c], P 95 » Reuterskiold [b], p 99, Helland [a],
11. 230

7. Charuzin [iv b], p 152, Genetz, Worterb ^ p xli

8 Qvigstad [a], 1 46, Wiklund, “Saivo,” pp 49-50, 51-3

9 Helland [a], 11 261, 318, Wiklund, “Saivo,” pp 50-1,

10 Tun, pp 210-2, Wiklund, *‘Saivo,”pp 51, 59

11 Donner [d]

12 Karjalainen [c], pp 282—3

13 '6 PP 376-7
M >b pp 373-6

15 lb pp 377 -S

16 Pervudim, i 76-86, VereSSagin Jd], p 80, [c], p, 86.

17 Wichmann [a], p 31

18 VereS(!agin [d], p 53 and [a], pp 48-51.

19 lb pp 45-7, [d], p 80

20 Pervuchm, j, 88-9

21 Wichmann [a], pp ll-2

22 Pervuchm, 1 88

23 Smirnov [vi a], pp 268-272, 276-281, 2 a 1 cov, pp. 70-I,
Fuchs, pp 236-8, Yanovid, pp 53-5.


538 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

24 Holmberg [vi a], p 157

25 Vasilyev [b], pp 16-18

26 Holmberg [v b], pp 37-8

27 lb pp 38-9

28 Sn£znitskiy [a], p 631

29 Krohn [in g], pp 72-4

30 Eisen [b], pp 78-80

31 Holmberg [11 b], p 238 n

32 Ramstedt, Bergtscher Sprachst p 206

33 Holmbei^ [v b], p 39

34 Aminoff, ” Reseber p 231

35 Lukkannen [d],p 142-3

36 Charuzin [iv b], p 208

37 Lundius, p 18

38 Holmberg [v b], pp 54, 57

39 Krohn [in g], p 130

40 Milkovic, “ Byt 1 vZrov p $

41 Sctala [i],pp 46-7, n I, Yakovlev, p 48

42 Genetz, Wotterb , p xl

Chafter XII

1 Andelin, p 275, Lcem, pp 333-4, Pins, Lex lafp, p 39,
and [bl,pp 33-4

2 Holmberg [11 b], pp 36-7, Helland [a], n 29 1

3 Fritzner, p 159

4 Fellman, J, 11 1 25, I/indnhl-Ohrlmg, p 285

5 Kildal, p 458, Reuterskiold [b], pp 57,98

6 Genetz, Wartetb,pp xli-xlii, Holmbeig [n b], pp 88-9

7 Chantzm [ivb],p 152, Kildal, p 458

8 Donner [b], p r30, and [d]

9 Accoiding to Lehtisalo’s Collections

10 Patkanov, 1 11 1, Polyakov [a], p 38

11 Karjalainen [c], pp 291-2

12 ib pp 290-1

13 Gondstti [b], p 63, Holmberg [n b], p 60

14 ib pp 58-9

15 ib pp 64-74, Peiviichin, 1 72-6

16 Fuchs, pp 234-s, 2 akov, pp 72-3, Popov, p 58, Yanovic,
P 55

17 Setala [a], pp 10-23

18 Holmberg [v b], pp 39-42

19 Smirnov [v b], p 278, 282

20 Eisen [g], Holmberg [11 b], 160-73


NOTES


539


21 Holmberg, ib pp I9i-~2ii, 217-8

22 Castren, 'Nord Reuen, 111 85

23 Lukkarinen [b], p 49

24 Krohn [in e], p 132

25 Wiedemann, p 419

26 Holmberg [v b] , pp 41—2

27 Paasonen, “ tJbei d urspr Seelen-vorst,” p 13

28 Kolmodin, p 5

29 Holmberg [u b], p 99

30 Kolmodin, p 32

31 Donncr [b],p 95

32 Zakov, p 72

33 Holmberg [11 b], pp 189-90

34 Snarimaa, p 92

35 Holmberg [ii b], p 196

36 Melnikov [c], x 411

37 Holmberg [vb],pp 49-50

38 Gutslaff, pp 24-^, 32 a

39 Smiinov [vb], p 322

40 Holmberg [11 b], pp 112—3, I49”52, 230-2

41 Aminoff, “ Reseb p 234

42 Wichmaiin, [i], p 31

43 Holmbeig [v b], pp 41, 58

Chapter XHI

1 Veniamin [b], p It6 n , 50

2 Holmbeig [vb], pp 43-4, Kmjalainen [vii c], pp 296-306

3 Donnei [vii b], p 129, Karjalainen [vii c], pp 315-21

4 Holmberg [vi a], p 170

5 Paasonen [v d], p 844

6 Karjalainen [c], p 299

7 Holmbeig [vi a], p 171

8 Holmbeig [v b], p 44, Znamenskiy, p 44, Karjalainen [c],
p 306

9 Holmberg [vi a], p 168, and [v b], pp 43, 68, Karjalainen
[c]i P 312

10 Veniamin, [b], pp 120-1

11 Tretyakov, p 201

12 Holzmayer, p 266

13 Tun, p 266

14 Reuteiskiold [b], pp 37, 94, Kildal, p 47 ^

15 Leem, pp 437-8

16 Reuterskiold [b], p 112.


540 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

17 Oink [a], pp 1-9, Holmberg [11 d], pp 15-18

18 Holmberg [>id],pp 9-21

19 Karjalainen [c],p 416

20 According to Lehtisalo’s Collections

21 Holmberg [vi a], pp 172-3

22 Holmberg [v b], pp 46-7

23 Paasonen [v f], p 19, cf pp 157, 165, and [v d], p 846.

24 Krolin [m g] , p 115

25 According to Paasonen

26 Jessen, p 47, Reuterskiold [b], p 23, Rheen, pp 42-3

27 Leem, p 506

28 Jessen, pp 18-9, Leem, p 41 1, Kildal, pp 452-3.

29 Kildal, p 472, Jessen, p 49

30 Qvigatad [a], i 51

31 Jessen, p 81 , Kildal, p 452, Fellman, I , Hand , i 394

32 AfO (1912), p 43

33 Hogstrom, pp 179-80,188

34 Oink, Wettermachen und Neujahrsmond im Norden’*
{ZetUthrift des Varetru fur Volkskundr, l 9 lo)> PP 57 ” 6 *

35 Holmberg, “Pakkasen synty,” Vtr, 1919, pp 73“4«

36 Qvigstad [a],i 51

37 According to Lehtisalo’s Collections

38 Karjalainen [c],pp 327-8

39 Yanovii, p 123

40 Holmberg [vi b], pp 175-7, ^ 3 * PP 45'"6.

41 Paasonen [v d], p 844

42 Krohn [ill g], pp 117-8
43. Salmelainen, p 130

44 Lukkarinen [b], pp 39-47,

45 Gutslaff, pp 362-4

46 Fellman, J , ii 79, 147

47 Setala [a], pp 39-48

48 Reuterskiold [b], pp 23, 33, 81, Hogstrom, pp 177-8,
Qvigstad [a], I 7, Jessen, pp 19-20

49. Rheen, pp 35-7
50 Reuterskiold [b], p 81
51, Kildal, p 453
52 Fellman, J , 11 84-5.

53, Holmberg [vi a], pp 186-7, Arainoff, “ Reseberatt p, 232.

54 According to Paasonen,

55 Risen [b], pp 109-10, Boeder, p 146,

56 Rantasalo [a], in, 48

57, Qvigstad [a], i 73

58. lb, i, 13, Holmberg [iv b], pp 74-5.


NOTES


541


59 Qvigstad [a],] 36, Reuterskiold [b],p 33

60 Qvigstad [a], 1 13, Fritzner, pp 201-2

61 Karjalamen [c], pp 419-20

62 Holmbei^ [vi a], p 187

63 Holmberg [v b], pp 64-5, Paasonen [v a], pp 201-2

64 According to Paasonen

65 Reuterskiold [b], pp 23, 33, 113

66 Holtnberg [v b], pp 47-8

67 Pervuchin, 1 56, VerelSagin [d], p 30

Chatter XIV

1 Holmberg [vb], pp 53-4

2 Karjalamen [c], pp 420-2

3 Paasonen [v d], p 846, Karjalamcn [c], p 422, Yakovlevi
P 38

4 Holmberg [v b], p 58

5 Krohn [m g], p 88, Risen [b], p 119

6 Karjalainen [c], pp 421-2

7 Holmberg [v b], p 117, and [vi a], pp 173-41 VereSSagm,
[d], P 78

8 Smirnov [v bj, p 549

9 Lukkarinen [b], p 8a

10 Holmbeig [v b], pp 85, 104, 128, Karjalamen [c], p 423

11 Qvigstad [a], i 39

12 Krobn [m e], pp 101-2

13 Holmberg, “ Nykyaikainen tutkimus ja kansamme vanhat

runot,” 1918, pp 29-31 '

14. See The Mythol of AU Rjtees^ x 256

Chapter XV

1 Karjalainen [c], pp 335-6
a Holmberg [vb], pp 48-9

3 Satnpinskiy, p 30, Holmberg [vi a], pp 177-8

4 Paasonen [v d], p 846

5 Znamenskiy, p 44, Paasonen [vd], p 845

6 Nalimov [b], p 16, Holmbeig [vi a], p 179

7 Holmberg [v b], pp 59-60

8 Magnitskiy, pp 40-3

9 Ostrovskiy, pp 37-8

10 Paasonen, ** Mika on juinala>sanan alkumerkiQis,” Atka^ 1907,
p 190

II. Holmberg [vb],p 58


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


54a

la Holmbeig [vi a],p 180

13 lb p 180

14 Paasonen <^]> P ^ 4 ^

15 Holnnberg [vi “il, p 190, Magnitskiy, pp 19, 25

16 Holnnberg [v b], p 116

17 Pcrvuchin, 11 29-41

18 lb 1 87, cf Wichinmn fa], pp 25-6

19 Ganandei, pp 54, 97, Kiohn [m g], pp 80-1, 139-40

20 lb pp 137-9, lirohn, “ Finns,” VI 25

21 Suomen k m lotUm yip i6<;, Hallstrom, G , “ Hnlmstiffan,”
Einol Studtft ulUgnade N E Bammarstedt (Stockholm, I9^t),
PP 227-31

22 Krohn [ill g], pp 136-7

23 Gavrilov [a], p 71

24 Eisen[h],pp 104-III, [b], pp 128-32

25 Kiohn [ill g], pp 137, 138 n

26 Holmbeig [vi a], p 174, [v b], pp u6-8, Magnitskiy,
PP 34-40

27 Accoiding to Paasonen

28 Nalimov [c], pp 13-4, Kandinskiy, p no, Holmbeig
[iiic],pp 1-12

29 Holztn-iyer, pp 19,113

30 Reinholm’s Collections (Nat Museum at Helsingfors)

31 Holzinayei, p 107

32 Rantnsalo [a], in 54, cf p 33

33 Holzimyer.pp 73-4

34 Nikander, G, “Fruktbaihctsiiter, uig av Sv Litte-

tatutsaUskapit t Finland, cxxvin FoUdomtuha oeh otnogiapka
tiudttt, 1 220-2 (Helsingfors, 1916)

35 Yaronen, , p 165

36 Rantasalo [a], 111 86—109

37 Eisen [b],pp 121-2, cf Holzmayei, pp lo-ii

38 Holmberg [vb], pp 56-7

39 Kildal, p 452, Reuteiskiold [b], pp 32, 56, 78, 95, 97,
Jessen, p 63

40 Qvigstad [a], 1 lo-i

41 Graan, pp 65-6, cf Scheffeius, p 113

42 Rheen, pp 39-40, Qvigstad [a], 1 36.

Chapter XVI

1 Reuteiskiold [b],p 57

2 Jessen, p 14

3 Qvigstad [a], 1 25


NOTES


543


4 Jessen, pp 14, 19, Reuterskjold [b], pp 8, 12, 103

5 lb p 88, Setala [a], pp 49-50

6 Reutersktold [b], pp 24-5, 33-4, 105

7 lb p 7a

8 Qvigstad [a], i 24-5, Jessen, pp 21-2, Reuterskiold [b],
PP 24. 34

9 lb p 72, Leem,pp 493-5

10 Jessen, p 22

1 1 Kildal, S , p 470

12 Reuterskiold [b], pp 37,7a

13 lb p 25, etc , Leem, pp 414-5

14 Lcem, pp 414-5, Qvigstad [a], 1 23-4

15 Reutersktold [b], pp 25, 27, 88-9, Jessen, p 21

16 Jessen, p 22

17 Qvigstad [a], 11 11-3

18 Reuterskiold [b], p 96

19 Qvigstad [s], 11 12—3

20 Jessen, pp 50-I

21 Leem, p 429

22 Jessen, p 48

23 Qvigstad |;a],p 1 36

24 Leem, p 500

25 Lund, Troels, DagUgt hv t Norden t det 16 da Amhundiede,
viii (Copenhagen, 1903), pp 38-9

26 Samfundet fot Notd Mtiseets ftamjande, (Stockholm, 1889),
P 38

27 Fcllmnn, J,ii 119-21

28 Reuterskiold [b], p 114

29 According to Lehtisilo’s Collecboiis

30 Kiohn [.111 e], p 77

31 Kiohn [ill g], pp 221, 232

32 Boeder, p 43, Eisen [b], pp 200-1

33 Rvekov, p 157

34 Georgi [b], p 58

35 Holmberg [vi a], p 165, and [v b], pp 6o-2, Znamenskiy,
pp 13-14

36 Holmbeig [vi a], p 171

37 Znimenskiy, p 44

38 Paasonen [ve], pp 1-6, [vd],p 844

39 Znimenskiy, pp 43-4

40 Kaijalainen [c], pp 38, 248-9

41 Krohn, J , [11], pp 72-3, Karjalainen [c], pp 243-7

42 lb p 43


544


FINNO-UGRIC MYIHOLOGY


Chapter XVII

1 Cf Yakovlev, p. 31 ff, Paasonen [v a], Kuznecov [a],
Filonenko [b]

Chapter XVIII

1 Qvigstad [a], u 83, 89-90, 92-3

2 Scheffenis, p 121, Tornaeus, p 31, Hogstrom, p 156

3 Lundius, p 14

4 Qvigstad [a], II 29

5 lb 11 30-3, 1 43-5, Reuterskiold [b], p 2, Lundius, p 7

6 Jessen, p 00, Fellman, J, ii 27, Tun, p 196

7 Jessen, p 55, Lundius, p 6, Reuterskiold [b], p 90, Niure-
nius, p 22

8 Leem, pp 415-6, Jessen, p 26 Reuterskiold [b], pp 92,67

9 Lundius, pp 6-9
10 Leem, pp 416-7

j I Reuterslaold [bj, pp 90-I

12 lb p 65

13 ib pp 92-3, cf Leem, p 416.

14 Jessen, p 26

15 Leem, pp 416-7, Jessen, pp 31-2, Lundius, p 7

16 Reuterskiold [bj, p 35

17 Qvigstad [a],i 52.

18 Halktrom [b]

19 Jessen, p 21, Rheen, pp 18, 35, Lundius, pp 22, 26, Fell*
man, 1 , 1 396

20. Fnis [c],p 23, Qvigstad [a], 1 29

21 lb 11 43, Fellman, 1, 1 396, Rheen, pp 31-2, 34, Graan,
P 60, Tornaeus, pp 30-1

22 Graan, pp 59-60

23 Lundius, pp 6-7

24 Leem, pp 475-8

25 Jessen, p 31

26 Qvigstad [a], it. 43-7.

27, Munch, pp 4-5

28 Karjalamen [c] , pp 546-601.

29 Hamalamen, " £pif. Viis. tied p 45,

30 Akiander,p ai.«


SIBERIAN


Chapter I

1 According to author*s Collections

2 Tre^skov, pp 200,217-8

3 Potanin [b], 11 160

4 TroSiisnskijr, pp 67-8

5 Georgi, Bemarktmgenf 1 276

6 Chudyakov, pp 112, 132

7 “Skaz bur p 18

8 Verbitskiy, pp 73-4, Radloff [a], 11 6

9 Tretyakov, p 200

10 Bogoras, pp 307, 330-1

1 1 Verbitskiy, p 90

12 “Bur skazki,” p i^S, Sa<lkav,p 30

13 Afanasyev, Poehlesktya vozxrlmya tlavyan na frtrodu (Mos*
cow, 1868), 11 162

14 “Slaz bur,” p 72, Potanin [b], iv. 208, 221, Spasskiy,
P 36

15 Potanin [b], iv 799

16 Holmberg [vi a], p 179

17 lb pp. 179-80.

18 Potanin [b], 11 153—4.

19 ib IV. 799, Holmberg [v b], p 49 n

20 Potanin [b], IV 799, cf Middendorif, iv. 2 1602.

21 Potanin [bj, iv. 709-10, Munkasci, KSx, ix 3, 293
22. KraSeninnikov, 11 106

Ckaftbr II

I Tro8&nskiy, pp, 22-3
a Pnklonskiy [a], iv 66

3 SSroSevskiy, p 653

4 Potanin [b], iv 218-9

5 “Skaz bui pp 69-71

6 Veselovskiy [b], v $4, 65, Munkasa, KSx lx. 3, 21a S ,
Dahnhaidt, I 66

7 Veselovskiy [a], pp 34-5


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


546

8 Dahnh-udt, i 3, 32, 44

9 jb pp lO-II

10 Potsinm [b], IV 219

11 Radloff[c],i 175 £r

12 Veselovskiy [b], v 68

13 Munkisci, KSZf ix 3 212 ff

14 “SInz bur,”p 69

15 Veselovskiy [b], V 13

16 MiddcndoifF, iv 2 p i6o2

17 Dahnhaidt, 1 2

18 Potanin [b], iv 221-2

19 lb p 219, Munkasci KSz, ix 3 219

20 Anteto Vifunen, (Helsingfors, 1908), pp 25-6

21 Dahnhardt, i 44

22 Radloff [c],i, Introd p x

23 Sumcov, p 5

24 Rsdloff [c], 1 177

25 Trctyikov, pp 201— 2

26 Veselovskiy [b], v 67

27 Dahnhnrdt, 1 63-4

28 Cf AnuLin, p 14

29 Saskov, p 30

30 “ Slo7 bur pp 65-6

31 Tretyskov, p 207

32 “ Skaz bur pp 66-7

33 Bogsyevskiy, [ 1 990] IV 143

34 See The Mythology of AU Races, x 279, and leff there

35 Dahnhiidt, 1 74 £F

36 lb pp 79, 77-8

37 Potanin [b], iv 220 if

38 lb p 224

39 ib II 166

40 Dahnhaidt, 1 19 n , 30

41 lb p 19 n

42 Spasskiy, pp 33-4

43 Dahnhardt, 1 23

44 Potanin [b], iv 268

45 TroSl!anskiy, p 43

46 MunkHsci, IX 3 209

47 KraSeninmkov, 11 100

48 Potanin [b], 11 153

49 TreQrakov, p 202, Munlcasci, KSz, ix 3 293

50 Kraieninmlrav, 11 loi


NOTES


547


Chapter III

r Potanin [b], IV 137-8, 734-5, Vambery [a], p 154

2 Chudyakov, p 127

3 Karjd'iincn [c], pp 162 S

4 Vasilyev [a] , PP 285-7

5 Gorochov [aj, p 37, “Skaz bur,”p 6

6 Magnitskiy, p 63 n

7 Karjalamen [c],p 303

8 Changalov [a], p 18

9 Gorochov [a] , p 36

10 Chudyakov, pp 135, 153

11 Changalov [a], p 40

12 Katanov, “ Skaz 1 leg ,” p 223 n 6

13 Karjalamen [c], p 164

14 Chudyakov, p 202

15 Karjalamen [c], pp 162 ft

16 lb p 163

17 Chudyakov, p 127

18 Kaijalamen [c], p 165

19 lb p 295

20 lb p 164

21 Radloft [a], 11 20 ft , Verbitakiy, pp 46, 63 If

22 Radloff [c] , II 602


Chapter IV


1 “ Skaz bur ,” p i

2 Verbitskiy, p 168

3 Radloff [a], 11 6

4 Chudyakov, p 84

5 Potanin [b], iv 555

6 Karjalamen [c], p 332

7 LandvSev, p 7 , Verbitskiy, p 90

8 KotviS, p 217

9 “Skaz bur ,”p 140

10 Radloff [a], 11 6

11 Krohn [hi e], p 106

12 Giunwedel, AltbuddhtsUsche Kultstaften, (Beilin, 1912), fig
343 > 48a, 590, 604

13 Smidt, “ Der TamamiKhischrein,” OZ, 19^41 P 4 ^ 0 *

14 Potanin [bl.iv 555-6

15 lb pp 223-4


548 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY

17 2 itetskiy, pp 65 S

18 The Myliuilogy of All Races fX 286, and raff there

Cmaptfr V

1 Radloff [a], 11 7

2 Potanin [b] , iv 226

3 Karjalainen [c], p 305
4. lb p 30s

5 Schiefner, pp 62 ff

6 Ahlqvist, A , Versueh ettter mohseha-mordwimehen Gram^
tmttk (Petrograd, 1861), p 133

7 Chudyakov, pp 112 ff

8 “ Skaz bur p 149

9 Gorochov [b], pp 43 ff

10 Middendorff, in 79 ff

11 Potanin [b],iv 223—4

12 Schott [c], p 9, Grunwedel, AfytAyP 50

13 See The Mythology of AU RjoceSf xit 36, iig 23

14 2itetakiy, p 66

15 Changalov [a] , p 42

16 Potanin [b], iv 188

17 See The Mythology of All Races, vi 298-9

18 Middendorff, iii i 87-8, Gorochov [a], p 43

19 Middendorff, in i 87

20 lb p 87

21 iitetskiy, p 66

22 Potanin [b], ir 217


Chapter VI

1 **Skaz 1 jur,”pp 71-2

2 lb p 79

3 lb pp 140-1

4 Munkfisci, KSz, ix 3 262 f , Patkanov, 1 134 f.

5 Dahnhardt, 1 258 ff

6 lb p 266

7 Verbitskiy, pp 102-3

8 lb pp 76, 103 n

9 Radloff [a],n 6, ii
10 Potanin [b], iv 208
II, lb p 208

12 Radloff [c], I 183.

13 Munkisci, KSz, ix 3 268

14 Anu&n, pp 14-5


NOTES


54-9


15 Tretyakov, pp 20i'-2,

16 Steller, p 273

17 Pekarskiy, p 114

18 Munkasct, KSz^ ix 3 258 ff

19 lb p 260

20 Andree, R , Dte Fluttagen^ (Braunschweig, 1891), pp 25-6

21 Verbitskiy, pp 113-4

22 Skaz bur p 78


Ckaftbr VII

1 Spasskiy, p 34

2 Dahnhardt, 1 1 1 1-3 , bin Gorton, M J , Die Sagen dei Judtn,
Du IJrzett, (Frankfurt a M 1913), p 101

3 SaSkov, p 33, Dahnhardt, I ill

4 2itet8kiy, p 67

5 Grube, W., Religion und Kultus der Chinesen (Leipzig,
1910), p lOI

6 Dahnhardt, p 1 1 1 n

7 “ Skiz bur ,” p 67

8 Verbitskiy, p 91

9 Karjalainen, p 19, Munkasa, /iTSs, ix 3 227-8

10 Anu2in, p 9

11 Radloff [c], 1 285

12 Middendorff, iv 2 1602

13 Veselovskiy [b], v 10

14 lb p 18

15. ‘*Skaz bur,”pp 67-8

16 lb pp 68-9

17 lb pp 69-70

18 Munkasci, IX 3 228 fF,

19 Veselovskiy [b], v 12

20 Potanin [b], IV 219-220

21 lb pp 222-3*

22 Verbitskiy, pp 91-2
23. lb p 93.


Chapter VIII

1 Radloff [c],Prob,l 177 ff

2 Middendorff, iv. 2. 1602

3 Munkfisci, JIlSz, IX 3 231 ff, Karjalainen [c], p 19.
4. Veselovskiy [b], v 12, bin Gonon, p 95

5 2 itetskiy, p 68, cf bin Gonon, p, 105

6 2itetskiy, p 68


550


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


Chafier IX

1 Anucm, p 17

2 Donner [i], pp 6—7

3 lb p 8 n I

4 lb p 12

5 Veibitskiy, p lOl

6 Cbudyikov, pp 107> J24

7 Potnnm [b], IV 373 ff

8 Simkevid, pp 128-30

9 ih pp 126-7

10 The Mythology of All Races^x 2541291
Chafier X

1 Banzirov, p 6

2 Magnttskiv, pp 64, 85

3 Rddloff [a], II 6

4 Binzarov, p 27

5 Rtdloff [a], II U

6 Magnitskiy, p 64 n l

7 StSkov, p 18

8 lb pp 8, 10, Banzarov, p 10

9 Sa^kov, p 10, Banzarov, p 10

10 Tioscanskiy, pp 32—3

11 Changalov [a], pp 45-6, Baskov, pp 24-5, Agapitov-Chan-
galov, p 23

12 PriUonskiy [a], 111 65

13 SaSkov, p 9, Banzarov, p 9

14 Nikolskiy, pp 71-2

15 Anudin, p 9

16 S^roSevskiy, p 645, Vasilyev [a], pp 279-82

17 Katanov, p 233

18 SaSkov, p 11, Tictyakov, p 200, Aniitin, p 3, Kaijalainen
[c].P 303

19 Cf Bogoras, p 319


Chapter XI

1 RadlofF [a*!, 11 6

2 Pripuzov [a], p 48

3 Potanin [b], iv 218, RadloH [a], i« 36i-2«

4 Veibitskiy, p 103 n

5 Karjalamen [c], p 276 n

6 lb p 331


NOTES

7 Radloff [a], i. 361-2, cf Holmberg [a], pp 121-126

8 lb n 6

9 Binzarov, pp 14, 28 f

10 lb p 14

1 1 Magnitskiy, pp 48, 62, 93 etc

12 Holmberg [v b], iig 25

13 SSroSevskiy, p 647, iig 161

14 Karjalainen [c], p 304

15 Katanov, p 223 n 6

16 Karjalainen [cj, p 326

17 ib pp 325, 25J ff

18 Nikolskiy, pp 71, 72-3

19 Holmberg [v b], p 86

20 See The Mythology of All Racet, xii iig 16 and 51.

21 Verbitskiy, p 91

22 Changalov [a],pp 1 £F

23 Verbitskiy, pp 90-1

24 lb p 100

Chapier xii

1 Potanin [b], iv 70,825, **Ska7 bur,”p 98

2 Magninkiy, p 01, cf p 64

3 Radloff [i], 11 II

4 Potanin [b], iv 389

5 Middendorf, 111 i 87

6 " Bur skazki,” p 127

7 TioSSanskiy, pp 83 ff

8 Chudyakov, pp 194-5, cf P * 0 *

9 lb pp 197-8

10 lb p 194

11 Karjalamen [c],pp 38, 249

12 Pnpuzov [b], pp 59-60, Pnklonsby [a], 111 63 ff,

Chai>tbr XIII

1 Potanin [b], iv 712

2 Reuterskiold [b], p 72

3 Pnpuzov [b], p 63

4 >b p 63

5 Gorochov [a], p, 36.

6 lb p 36

7 SHroSevskiy, p 667

8 Potanin [b], iv 191

9 2itet$kiy, p 68


551


SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY


10 ICatanov, p 227 n 4

11 Karjahmen [c], p 416

12 “Skaz bur ”p 151, cf Potanin [b], iv 179

13 Ivanovskiy, p 263, cf Potanin [b], iv 179

14 Agapitov-Changalov, p 22 n

15 Magnitskiy, p 18

16 Potanin [bjjiv 225-6

17 Tretyakov, p 209

18 8aSkov, p 12

19 Georgi [a],i 275

20 Anu&n, p 15, Ejirjalainen [c], p 415

21 SSroScvskiy, p 667, Pnpuzov [b], p 62, cf Tretyakov,
p 209

22 Potanin [b], iv 191, SaSkov, pp 14-5, “Bui skazki,”
p 128, Gorochov [a], p 39

23 Potanin [b], iv 190-1

24 Tretyakov, p 201

25 Verbitskiy, pp 73-4, Bergmann, in 40, 204, Potanin [b],
iv 270

26 SSroSevskiy, p 668

27 “Bur skazki,” pp 127-8

28 Potanin [b], iv 191-3

29 lb pp 209-10

30 Afanasyev, A , Poettieskiya vozzrimya tlmytm na fttrodu
(Moscow, 1865), 1 609, Vambery [a], p 154,

31 Afanasyev, 0^ c$t,\ 762

32 Potanin [b], iv 736

33 Afanasyev, of at , 1 763

34 Tretyakov, p aoi

35 Anu 2 in, p 15

36 SSroSevskiy, p 660

37 Cf The Mythology of All Racety x 278

38 "Bur skazb,” pp 126-7

39 Banzarov, p 14, cf Agapitov-Changalov, p 18

40 Potanin [b],ii 125, iv 193

41 lb IV 194

42 ib p 200

43 Afanasyev, of at , 1 763

44 Potanin [b], iv 200-3

45 “ Bur skazki,” p 126

46 Potanin [b], iv 204

47 lb lY 204 fF

48 lb 11 124

49 lb iv 206


NOTES


553


50 lb u 124

51 Anucin, p 16

52 Potanin [b],]ir 203

53 lb pp 203-4

54 lb 11 125

55 Jv 194

56 “ Bur skazki,’' pp 125-6

57 Georgi [a],i 321

58 “ Bur skazki,” p 126

59 “Skaz bur pp 122-3

60 Anucin, pp 15-6

61 Changalov [a] , p 7

62 SeroSevskiy, p 668

63 Potanin [b], 11 124-5

64 Vanjbeiy [a],pp 55-6, Potanin [bj, iv 740-I

65 SeroSevskiy, p 667, Agapitov-Changalov, p 18, Tretyakov,
201

66 Bogoras, p 309, Jochclson [b], p 123

67 Dahnhardt, ni l 13

68 Vambery [a], p 156

69 SeroSev^iy, p 667

70 Pnpuzov [b], p 62

71 MunkSsci, /irfz, IX 3 251

72 lb p 253 f

73 Potanin [b], IV 143,11 83

74 Olsen, p 47

75 Potanin [b], iv 143-4

Chaftsr XIV

1 According to author’s Collections

2 Bogoras, p 322, Tretyakov, p 20i

3 Accoiding to T Lehtisalo

4 TroSSanskiy, p 26

5 Karjalainen [cj, p 327

6 Banzarov, p 15, Potanin [b],iv 138—42

7 Potanin [b], iv 141

8 “Skaz bur,”p 76, Potanin [b], iv 139, 141-a.

9 Simkevie, p 127

10 Kaijalainen [c], p 327

11 Agapitov-Changalov, p 7

12 “Bur skazki,” p 129

13 AgapitoV'Changalov, p 6

14 Changalov [a], p 7


554 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY

15 Pripuzov [b], pp 61-2, Tro 85 anskiy, p 48

16 Simkevi^, p 128

17 Potanin [b], iv 207

18 Karjalamen [c], p 327

19 Anufin, p 16, Potanin [b], iv 742

20 Holzmaycr, p $0

21 Gorochov [a], p 39

22 Pripuzov [b], p 62

23 Potanin [b],n 172

24 lb IV 139

25 Afanasyev, Poettces/uya voxssremya slevyan na fruodu (Mos-
cow, 1868), 11 51 1

26 TroS6tnskiy, p 165, SSroSevskiy, p 655, Banzaiov, p 15,
SiSkov, p 94, Potinin [b], 11 91-2

27 ''Bur skazkij^’ p 130, Zatoplyayev, pp 7-8, Changalov [a],
P 7

28 Changalov, pp 3-5

29 Chudyakov, p 213

30 SaSkov, p 27, Radloff [1], 11 7

31 AgapitoV'Changalov, p 8

Chapter XV


1 Chudyakov, p 135

2 SSrosevskiy, p 655, cf Potanin [b], iv 332

3 Changalov [a] , p 8

4 Verbitskiy, p 97

5 Agapitov-Changalov, p 5

6 AnuSin, p 16

7 “ Bur skazki,** pp 130— i

8 Potanin fb], iv 220, cf p 331

9 lb p 262

10 SaSkov, p 37, TioSianskiy, p 43

11 TroS&mskiy, p 51

12 Mngnitskiy, pp 136-7

13 SaSkov, pp 36-8, Banzarov, pp 22,24

14 SSroSev^iy, p 665, Pripuzov [b], p 61, Olsen, p 141,
B’tnzarov, pp 23-4, Chudyakov, p 135

15 TioScanskiy, pp 52, 178, S&roScvskiy, p. 665, Nikolskiy,
PP 73 ~ 4 > Agapitov-Changalov, p 6

16 Magnitskiy, p 203

17 Banvarov, p 23, cf Saikov, p 37.

18 Banziiov, p 25

19 Radloff [a], 11 29


NOTES


55 S


20 Chudyikov, p 135, Agapitov-Changalor, pp 4, 29

2 1 TroScanskiy, p 28

22 Gorochov [b], p 44

23 Pnpuzov [b], p 61

24 Agapttov-Changalov, pp 5-6

25 Karjalainen, [c], p 422

26 Pnpuzov [b], p 61, Priklonskiy [a]) iv 61

27 Agapitov-Changalov, p 30

28 lb pp 29-30

29 Banzarov, pp 22—3


Chapter XVI

1 Chudyakov, p 213, cf pp 113,198-9

2 SSroSevskiy, p 667

3 Trc^fanskiy, p 4

4 Simkevic, p 57

5 According to Prof G J R’lmstedt

6 Krohn [in e] , p 138

7 Ivmovskiy, p 263

8 Changalov [1], p 6

9 Sir<^ev8kiy, pp 668-9, Pnpuzov [b], p 62, Potanin [b],
IV 189-90,773-4


Chapter XVII


1 Olsen, p 143

2 Potanin [b], 11 98

3 According to Prof Ramstedt

4 TroS 2 anskiy, p 47, Pnpuzov [b], p 62.

5 Georgi [a],i 276

6 Banvarov, p 8 ,

7 lb p 16

8 Thomsen, pp 20, 152, 167

9 Changalov [a], p 44, SaSkov, p 20

10 TioScansfciy, p 29

1 1 Magnitskiy, pp 29, 48, 62 etc

12 Changalov [a] , p 44

13 Magnitskiy, pp 40-3

14 Thomsen, pp 144, 150

15 Radloff[c],i 139

16 Magnitskiy, pp 30, 48, 88

17 Kannisto [b]

18 Varabfiry [b], p 36


556 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY

Chapier xvni

1 Verbitski]^, p 78
1 Castrcn, 2 ^oi<^ Rei(«M>iti 160

3 SJrogcvskiy, pp 651, 667, TroSJanskiy, pp 27 f , 47, 53,
Gorochov [a], p 39, V-skiy, p 36

4 TroSjSaJiskiy, p 53

5 Pnpu*ov [b], p 62

6 Changalov [ilipp 38, 145

7 “Skaa bur ”p 85

8 lb pp 83-4

9 Jochelson [b], p II9, Bogom, pp 285-6,*

10 Middendorff, iii l 36

11 Skaa bur,”p 84, cf Sa^koVt p 56

12 Banzarov, pp 21-2

13 “ Skaa burjat p 84

14 Pnpueov[b],p 63, V-skiy, pp 38,40

15 TroS^anskiy, p 53, Pnpuzov, p 63

16 S8ro8cvskiy, pp 669-70

17 Koblov, pp 3, 1 1 ff, Maksimov, pp 580-1, 607-9

18 Magnitskiy, pp 112,247

19 Gorochov [a], p 39

20 Kablov, pp t8 ff , Maksimov, p 615

21 Poyarkov, pp 41-3

22 Banzarov, p 30

23 Sndling, p 18, Pekarskiy'CvJtkov, p 113, Jochelson [a],
pp 120, 122-4, Maak [b], p iio, Middendorf, iv 2 1610,
Pnpuzov rb],p 6a, SSrdievskiy, p 658

24 TroSfanskiv, p 178

25 According to author’s Collections

26 SSroSevskiy, pp 670 f

27 Gorochov [a], p 39, Potanin [b], 11 98, iv 186

28 TioSJanskiy, p 178, Jochelson [a*], pp 120-2, 124

29 TroS{snskiy, p 54, cf Middendoif, iv 2 1568-9

30 Banzarov, pp 18-20, Hilden, p 129, Verbitskiy, pp 43-7

31 TroSSanskiy, p 54


Chapter XIX

I SSrolevdoy, p 666, TroScanskiy, p 75

2. Aiiu&n, p 10, Podgorbunskiy, p 18

3. Changalov [b],pp 13—4

4. Agapitov-Changalov, p 58, Podgorbunskiy, pp 19-20.

5. Pnpuzov [bj, p 64, Agapitov-Changilov, p 58


NOTES


557


6 Agapitov-Changalor, p 59

7 Changalov [a],pp 135-7

8 »t> p 137

9 Podgorbunskiy, p 20

10 Anucin, p 1 1

1 1 Podgofbunskiy, p 20

12 “Perv bur S'un,” pp 87 S, “Perv 5 am,”pp 89-90

13 Potdnm [bj, IV 134, cf Podgorbunskijr, p 19

14 TroSSinskiy, p 2

15 Pnpuzov [bj, p 64

16 Simkevic, p 36, Binzarov, pp 30-1, Potanin [bj, iv 699

17 SJSroSevskiy, p 623, Vasilyev [b], pp 34-5, Pnpuzov [bJ,
p 64, Zitoplyayev, p 3, Batarav, pp 10 ff

18 Anucin, p 13

19 Troitanskiy, p 85, Batarov, pp lo ff, Castren, Reuettf
111 230, Potinin [b],i\ 63

20 Banzai ov, p 32

21 Agapitov^Changalov, p 61

22 ib p 61

23 Strahlcnbet g, p 377

24 SnSkov, pp 58 ft, Anucin, p 12, SSroSevskiy, p 619, Prik-*
lonskiy [*1], pp 76 ff, TroScanskiVi pp 88—92, Potanin [b], 11 88,
iv 36-8 , Pnpuzov [bj , p 65 , ct Verbitskiy, p 86

25 Gcorgi [*»] > J 266

26 A.nu£m, pp 1I-2

27 SaSkov, p 59, Stadlmg, pp 28 ff , Podgorbunskiy, p 27

28 Anu&n, p 12

29 Batarov, p 13

Chapter XX

1 Tro 82 anskiy, p 3

2 Potanin [bj, iv 133-4

3 Agapitov-Changalov, p 60

4 SimkeviS, pp 15 ff

5 TroS&nskiy, pp 2-3, 63

6 Pnpuzov [b], p 64

7 TroScanskiy, pp 62-3, 68-9

8 Anu&n, p 12

9 Ridloff [ij, 11 3

10 Hilden, pp 127-8

11 Kiijalainen [cj,p 313

12 Bogons PP 307,33*

13 Vasilyev [a], p 286


558 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY

14 Tretynkov, p 200

15 Podgorbunskiy, p 27

16 Stadlmg, p 25

17 Bogoras, p 334

18 Podgoibunskiy, pp 23 if

19 Castren, 111 148 ff , SaSkov, pp 68-73, Potanin [b], iv
287-8

20 Spasskiy, p 35

21 Sunkevic, pp 62-3


Chaptek XXI


1 Stadling, pp 56-7

2 Tretyakov, p 21 1

3 Stadling, p 63, SSn^evskiy, pp 625 ff

4 TroSSanskiy, pp 76, 78, 119-20

5 AgapitoV'Changalov, p 45

6 Trc^lEanskiy, pp 66, 76

7 Changilov [a], pp 83 ff, Agapitov-Chingalov, pp 27 ff

8 Chang-ilov [b], p 2i, Potanin [b], iv S7n , Batarov, p 10,
Zatoplyayev, p 9

9 Georgi [a], 1 314, Agapitov-Changalov, pp 32-3, Potanin
[b], IV 93 ff, Changalov [a],pp 74-6,0! p 90

10 “Skiz bur,”pp 80-1, Changalov [c], pp 15-6

1 1 SSn^evskiy, pp 656-8 , Trdlianskiy, p 56

12 “Skiz bur,”pp 1 14— 7, 125-6, cf p 81

13 PoMnin [b], 11 161

14 ib,pp 161-2

15 ib,pp 164-s

16 “SLaz bur,” pp 94 ff, Potanin [b], iv 264 ff, O pou”
choidemty pp 187 ff

17 “SIaz bur,”pp 97-8

18 Stnhlenbeig, p 378

19 Scukin, p 276

20 SaSkov, p 43

21 AnuSin, p 10

22 Potanin tb],ii 151, iv 168, 183, “Skaz bur,** pp 80, 82,
Changalov [b], p 19, “Bur skazki ,** p 119, cf Pripuzov [a],
P SO

23 “ Skaz bur ,** pp 123—4

24 Agapitov-Changalov, pp 41-2

25 “ 0 proischoidenii,** p 188, cf SaSkov, pp 42-3.

26 Tre^akov, p 212

27 SimSevskiy, p 626, Ti^Sanskiy, p 138


NOTES


559


28 Vasilyev [a], p 277

29 Simkevic, p 18

30 Zatoplyiyev, p 9

31 Changalov [a], p 95

32 Simkevic, pp 15, 17

33 Vasilyev [1], pp 271 if , Priklonskiy [a], iv 88-9, Tro-
bcanskiy, p 14 1

34 Potanin [b], n 54

35 Agapitov-Changalov, pp 44

36 Piiklonskiy [i], iv 54, cf Tro8tanskiy, fig i-'3, Vasilyev
[b] , pp 1 ff , Pekardny, PlaSct pp 93 ff

37 Potinin [b], IV 53, cf Lankenau, p 279

38 Cf Holmberg [b], pp i2*-zo, Anucin, pp 44 &

39 Schrcnk, 1 408, cf Kulikovskiy, “O kultS mcdvedya,” hO,
1890, no I, p 110

40 Tretyakov, p 214, Mordvinov, p 64, cf Sirokogorov, p 33,
n 2

41 Simkevic, p 63

42 Klemenc, pp 25 ff

43 “ Perv bur sam p 88 n , Agapitov-Changalov, pp 42-3

44 Anucin, pp 60 ff

45 Tretyakov, p 214, Pekarskiy, ‘*FlaSS,” p 112

46 Anu£in, pp 7-8.


BIBLIOGRAPHY


ASSF

AASF

ATPS

DNR

EMV

EO

ERE

ES

FFC

FVF

GJ

lAOm

IKE

10

lOAIE

lOLEAB


lOORGO

IRGO

JSFO

KGV

KSx

KV

MO

MSFO

NGV

m

PEV

PS

RV

S

SEV


FINNO-UGRIC

I ABBREVIATIONS

Acta Societitis Scientiarum Fennicae
Annales Acadcmiae Sciential um Fennicae
Archives des Traditions Populaires Sufdoises
Drevnaya i Novaya Rossia
Ethnologische Mitteilungen aus Ungatn
Etnograficeskoe ObozrSnic
Encyclopsedii of Religion and Ethics
Etnograficcskiy Sbornik
Folklore Fellow Communicitions
Finnisch-Ugnsche Forschungen
GeogiafiSeskiya IzvSstiya

Izvistiya Archangelskago ObScestva Izu&nie Riis^
skago SSvera

Izvestiya no Kizinskoy Eparchii
Inorodfeskoe ObozrSnie

Izvistiya Obicestva Archcologii, Istorii i Etnografit
pri Razanskom Univeisitete
Izvistiya ObScestva Lyubiteley Estestvoznaniya,
Antiopologii 1 Etnografii pn Mosfcovskom Uni'>
veisitete

Izvistiyi Orenburskago OtdSla Russkago Geogra-
iiceskago ObScestva

Izvestiya Russkago Geograii&skago ObScestva
Journal de la Socidte Fmno-Ougrienne
Kazanskiya Gubeinskiyn VSdomosti
Keleti Szemle
Kalevahseuian Vuosikirja
Le Monde Oriental

Memoires de la Soci£t£ Finno-Ougrienne
Ni2egoiodskiya Gubernskiya VSdomosti
Novoe Slovo

Penzenskiya Epaichialnyja VSdomosti
Piavoslavnyj SobesSnik
Russkiy ySstnik
Suomi

Samarskiya Eparchialnyja VSdomosti


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


564

SGEG

SGV

SM

SMA

SSU

TEV

TOBA

TOEKU

VE

VEV

VGEG

VGV

Vtr

vouo

VRGO

2AN

ZRGO

ZMVD

iST

ZZrSORGO


Schnftcn der Gelchrtcn Estnischen Gcscllschaft
Simbirskiya Gubetnskiya VSdomosti
Suotnen Museo

Suotnen Muinaismuistoyhdis^kscn Aikakauskiija
Suotnen Suvun Uskonnot
Tambovskiya Epatchialnyja VSdomosti
Tooiskiya Eparchialnyja V£domosti ,

Trudy ObScestva Estcstvoispytaleley pn Kazanskom
UmversitetS
VSstnik Europy

Vyatskiya Eparchialnyja VSdomosti
Verhandlungen der Gelehrten Ehstnischen Gcsell>i
schaft

Vologodskiya Guberskiya VSdomosti
Vinttaja

Vistnik Orenburskago USebnago Okruga
Vestnik Russkago Imperatoiskago Geogradceskago
Ob^cestva

Zapiski Akadetnii Nauk
Zapiski Russkago GeograiiSeskago Ob 32 cstva
Zurnal Ministerstva vnutrennich dSl
Ztvaya Stanna

Zapiski Zivero-Sibirskago OtdSla Russkago Geo>
graficeskago ObSSestva


ir GENERAL SOURCES AND TREATISES

Abercromby, J , The Pie- and Piotohtstoric Finns both Eastein and
Western with the Magtc Songs of the West Finns London,
1898

Ahlqvist, a, Mutstehma matkodta Venajalla vuosma 1854-1858,
Helsingfors, 1859

Akiandbr, M , “ Utdrag ur ryska annaler,*’ in S , 1848 Helsingfors.

Aspelin, J R , Stfomalais-ugrtlatsen muiniaituthinnon alketta Hel-
singfors, 1875

Ca8Tr£n, M a, Not dacha Reuen und Forschungen^ 5 vols Pelio-
grad, 1853-1862

Erdmamn, I F , Betttage our Kennimts des Innern von Rtasland
1 volb Riga, 1822-26

Ermam, G a , Rette um die Brde ditreh Nord-Aaen und the betien
Oceane m dan Jahren x8a8y r8ap und 1830, / Historischer
Beneht 3 vols Berlin, 1833

Gboroi, j G, [a] Bemerkungen auf emet Retsa im Russtsehen
Reieha in dan Jahren tyj3 and lyfd 2 vols Petrograd, 1775


BIBLIOGRAPHY 565

^ [b] Beichreibung alter NaUonen det Rusnschen Reichs

Petrograd, 1776

GmeliW) J G, Retse durch &%btr%en von dem Jah 17S3 bu 17^3
4 Yols Gottingeiij 1751-2

GtJAGinNo, A , SmmaUae Eurofeae descitpUo Spii ae, 1581 (Editio
pnnceps Cracow, 1578 )

Herbersteik, S voiii Moscouuuer wunderbare Htstorten B'lsel,
1567

Holmbcrq, TJno, [’ll Gttdstrons ufpkomst Uppsali, 19^7

[b] “ Die Wassergottheiten der iinnisch-ugrischin Volkcr,”

in MSFO XXXII, Helsingfors, 1913

[c] “ Suomalais-ugriUisten kansain pikanallmen uskonto,” in

TietosanaAtrfa, ix Helsingfors, 1917

■ ■ [d] " Der Baum des Lebens,” A ASF xvi Helsingfors,

1922-23

Krohn, Julius, Suomen suvtm fakanallinen fumalanpalvelm Hel-
singfors, 1894 (The Hungarian tnnslation, with further
additions by A Ban, appeared m Budapest, 1908)

Lcpcchin, I, Tagebuch uber seme Retse dutch versehtedette Pro^
viteten des Russtsehen Retehs sn den Jahren 1768 und 17^^

3 vols Tianshtcd into Geim by C H Hase Altenburg,
1774-83

Muller, G F, Sammlung Russtschet Geschtehte 5 Petro-

grad, 1732-60

Olearius, a , Ausfuhrltche Besehtetbung der kundbmen Reyse naeh
MuscovitmdPetsien Schleswig, 1646
Paasoncn, H , “ Ober die urspiunglichen seelenvorstellungen bci den
iinnisch-ugnschen volkcrn und die benennungen der seele m
ihren sprachen,” in JSFO, xxvi 4 Helsingfors, 1909
Pallas, P S, Retee durch versehtedette Provtmten des Russtsehen
Retehs 3 vols Petrograd, 1771-6
Ryjkov, N , Zutnal th dnevnyja zapsM fuiestvtya fo resenym fro-
vmetyam Rosstyshego gosudorsiva 176^ 1 1770 Petrograd, 1 770
(Translated into German by C H Hase, Riga, 1774 )

ScTALA, E N, [a] “Studien aus dem gebiet der lehnbcaaehungen,’*
off-pnnt of FXJF xii Helsingfors, 191a
■ ■■ [b] “Zur frage nach der verwandtschaft der Bnnisch-

ugrischen und samojedischen sprachen,” off-pnnt of JFSO xxx
Helsingfors, 1915

SirAhlenbero, Ph J von, Das Notd- und osdtehe Thetl von
BurofaundAsta Stockholm, 1730
Varonen, M , Vainefotnpalvelus muttunstlla suonuUmstUa Hel-
singfors, 1898

WrrsEN, N , tfoord en Oost Tartarye a vols Amsterdam, 1 705


$66 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

III BALTIC FINNS

Asfblin, J R , “ Kalevalan sankinkuvaston aihejM,” m SM xxiii
He^ngfors, 1916

Blomsttedt, y, “Venijan Karjalin kalmistoista ja hautipylvaista/*
tn SM 11 Helsingfors, 1895

Bobcler, J W , Det Ehsten glaubisehe Gebrouetie, Wetsen und
GevuohtiketUn Mit auf die gegenwart bezuglidien Anmer-
kungen beleuchtet von Fr R Kreutzwald Petrogiad, 1854
(Editio princeps, 1685 )

Boubrig, j S , [a] “ Voll^agen und Tradjtionen aus dem eigent-
lichen EsUande, besonders aus Harnen und der Wieck,” in
VGEG, II 3 Dorpit, 1850

[b] “ Zur nahern Kenntniss der Volkss-igen und dcs Aber>

glaubens der Ehsten aus dem Kirchspiele Odenpa,” m VGEG,
1. a Dorpat, 1843

Brummer, O j , Uber die Bannungsortc der finnischeji Zauber-
heder” Helsingfors (JIdSfO xxvm 1909)

Buck, M , “ Ueber den Tonnis-cultus und andere Opfei-gebrauche
der Esthen,” m /SFO xv Helsingfors, 1897
Ca8Tr£n, E , Besknfnmg ofvet Cajanebmgs Ian Abo, 1754
CoMFARETTi, D , Der Kalewala oder die tradtUonelle Poeste der
Fennen Halle, 189a

Eisen, M I , [a] Eesti mutitsed jumalad ja wagimehed Doipat,
1913

■ ■ [b] EesU mutoloogia Reval, 19ZO

[c] Esvaanemate ohveidamtsed Dorpat, 1920

■■ [d] “ H^ldijad,” in Eestt Vlioflaite Seltn Album, m

Dorpat, 1895

[e] Kodukfujat Reral, 1897

[f] Kratiraamat Dorpat, 1895

[gj Haki taamat Reval, 1 897

[h] “Cber den Pekokultus bei den Setukesen,*’ in FUF vi

Helsingfors, 1906

Fahlmann, Dr , Wie war der heidmsche Glaube der altcn Ehsten
beschaffen? ”in VGEG 11 2 Doipit, 1852
Forstrom, O a, *'KuvaeImia Ita-Karjalasta,” in Vahoja, 1886
Helsingfors

Ganander, Chr , Mythologia fenntea Abo, 1822
Groundsttroem, O, “Beiattelse ofver en under sommaren 1861
gjord runosamlmgsvandnng mom en del af Ingermanhnd,” in
S II Helsingfors, 1 866

Gutslapf, j , Kutizer Berteht und Vntentcht von der Faheh-hetlig
gemndten Bache m Lteffltmd Wohhanda Dorpat, 1644


BIBLIOGRAPHY


5^7

Hayha, J , Kuvaeltiua ItaSuomalauten vm^otsta imoutn, II
lHaaltanfaHiatset (Ktmsmvalistusseuian toimttuksta, gS) Hel-
singfors, 1894

Henricus Lettus, Ottgttus Ltvotuae {Serif tores Reium Ltvotu-
carum^ 1) Riga and Leipzig, 1853
Hertzbbrg, R , VtdskefeUen 1 Finland fa 1600-talet Helsingfors,
1889

Holmberg, Uno, [a] Suomalaisten haltioisti,” m KV 1 Hel-
singfois, 1921

[b] “ Suomalaisten Ivarsikoisti,” in KV iv Helsingfors,

1924

[c] “ Suomalaisten muinaisuskosta,” in Ttetosanakn ja, ix

Helsingfors, 1917

[d] " Virolaisten viljaneitsyet,” in M&FO xxxv Helsing-
fors, 1914

Hqlzmayer, J B , “ Ostlnna,” m VGEG vii Doipit, 1873
Hornborg, K H ** Karsikoista,” in VinttajUf 11 Helsingfors, 1 886
Huri, J, [al “Beitnge zur Kenntnis estnischcr Sagen und tJbei-
licferungen,” in SGEG 11 Dorpat, 1863

[b] Uber estmscJie RmmeUkunde Petrograd, 1900

IlKOKEN, T, Suomalaisia mytologisia sanoja Inarista,*’ in Virtttajttf

1912 Helsingfors

Jurgens, £, *'£in weiterei beitiig zum Tonnis-cultus dei Esten,*’
mJSFOxnn 3 Helsingfois, 1900
Kali AS, O , “Kraisna rn'i’iiahvis,** in 5 iv 10 Helsingfors, 1903
Kreutzwalp, £r R, [a] EesUtahwa ennemmstsed jutud Hel-
singfors, 1866

[b] “ Beitrag zur Mythologie dei Esthen,” in Inland ^ *838,

no 9 Borpat

[c] " Esthnische Gebrauche bei Sterbenden und Todten,”

lb 1837, no 18

[dl " Ueber den Character der Estnischen Mythologie,” in

VGEG n 3 Dorpat, 1850

[e] “ Ueber einige fesdtche Gebrauche bei den Esthen,” in

Inland^ 1837, nos I2, 25 and 27 Boipat
Kreutzwald und Neus, H, Mythtsche und magtscke Ltedtr der
Ehsten Petiograd, 1854

Krohn, Julius, SuomalaUen hnjalhsuuden histoiia t 2 Kalevalan
synty Helsingfors, 1884

Krohn, Kaarle, [a] ” Finns,” in ERE vi 23 ff Edinburgh,

1913

■■ ■ - fb] " Kalevalankysymyksia,” in JSFO wtv-xxxvi Hel-
singfors, 1918

[c] kalevalan tuna jen hutoita Helsingfors, 1902-10


568


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


[d] “ Kaleva und seine sippe,” in JSFO xxx 35 Helsing-

fore, 1915

[c] syHtyloiUta Helsingfors, 1917 Trans*

lated into Gerni in FFC no 51-52 Helsingfors, 1923

[f] “ Suomaliisten pakanalliset jumalat,” in Oma Maoy 1

Borga, 1907 md 1920

[g] “ Suomaliisten runojen uskonto,” in SVXJ 1 Borga,

1914

Kundcr, J , EesU mmnasjutud Rakwere, 1885
Lankcla, J , ** Mitkakertomus,” in S i860 Helsingfors
Lbncqvist, H G, De »ifersUUone vetetum fennontm theorettca
et frachea (Porthan, Ofem sehcUty iv) Helsingfors, 1870
Luce, J W L von, Wahrheit und Muthmassung Berniu, 1827
Lukkarinen, j , [a] “ Inkerilaisten kotijumahsta,” m SMA xxvi
Helsingfors, 1912

■ - [b] " Inkerilaisten praasnikoisti,” in 5 iv 1 1 Helsingfors,

1912

- ■ ■■ - [c] “ Inkerilaisten vninajunpilveluksesta,” in MSFO xxxv
Helsingfors, 1914

— — [d] “Tietoja susi-ihmisista Inkenssa,” in VttiUaja, 1914
Helsingfors

Mansikka, V J, “Taikojen aarrenitasta,’* in Vinttajay 1914
Helsingfors

Murman, j W, “Nagra upplysningar om Finnarnes foidni vid-
skepligi bruk och tiollkonstei,” in 5 1854 Helsingfors
Rantasalo, a V, [a] “Der Ackerbau im Volksaberghuben der
Finnen und Esten mit cntsprechenden Gebrauchen der Ger-
ttianen verglichen, I-III,” in FFCy no 30-32 Helsingfors,
1919-20

• [b] Suomen kamaa mumatsia tmkofa, m Mmmviljelystmioja

Helsingfors, 1912

Russwurm, C , Etbofolke oder die Sohweden an den Kusten BhsU
lands und auf Runo 2 vols Revil, 1855
Saarimaa, E a, “LiiviUisten mytologisia uskomuksia,” in VtrtU
taja, 1914 Helsingfors

Salmblainen, E , ** Valianen kertoelma Muinois-Suomalaisten pyhista
menoista,” in S 1852 Helsingfors
Sax£n, Ralf, FukA guda- och hjalUUo Helsingfors, I9i6i
ScHWiNDT, Th , Ttetoja Karjalm tautakaudesta Helsingfors, 1898
Sbtala, E N , “ Wainamoinen und Joukahainen,” m MSFO xxxv
Helsingfors, 1914

Skooman, D, **Kertomus matkoiltnni Satakunnissa muistojuttuja
keraamassa,** in 5 11 2 Helsingfors, 1862
Suomen Aansan mutnatsia lottsusunoja Helsingfois, 1880.


BIBLIOGRAPHY 569

Suomenka^isan vanhat funot Hckmgfors, 1908 ft

TunkelOi E a, *^Eraista ^ainajainpalvonti^n In tty vista suomilai-
sist'i nimityksisti,” tti M&FO xxxv Helsingfors, 1914

Varonen, M , Suomen kansmi mmnmsia tatioja 2 vols Hclsing^
fors, 1891-1892

VoioNMAA, V , Suomen kat^nlatsen heitnofi historic HelsingforSj
1915

Wiedemann, F J , Am dem mneren und ausseien Leben der Ehsten
Pctiograd, 1876

WiKLUND, K B , » Mytologi (Finsk) ” in Nordtsk Fmmljeboky xix
Stockholm, 1913


IV LAPPS

Acerbi, T j Travels thfough &wedin^ Finland and Lapmark to the
North-cape 2 vols London, 1902
Aima, Fr , Miiutamia muistotietoj'i In inn hpp'ihisten vanhoista
uhrimenoista,’’ in Vnitta^Oy 1903 Helsingfors
Andflin, a, “ Kertomus Utsjoen pitnjasta,” in S 1858 Hel-
singfois

Andersson, G a , Tietoja Sodankylan ja KtttUan fitajten aikatsem^
vusta ja myohemmssta vaiheista Kemi, 1914
Afpelgrck, Hj , “ Muinaisjaannoksia ji t^irinoiti Kemin kihlakun-
nan itaisissa osissa,” m SMA v Helsingfors, 1882
B[brgman], E W, Anteckningnr om Lappmarken, sarskildt med
hanscendc till knstendomcns infoiande darstades,’’ in HistotisA
Tidsknfty XI Stockholm, 1891

CharuziNj N , [a] " O noydach u drevnich 1 sovremennych loparey,”
in EQ 1 1889 Moscow

[b] ” Russkie lopan,” in lOLEAE Ixvi Moscow, 1890

Drake, Sigrid, “ V^isteibottens-lapparna under forra halften av
1800-talct,” m Lafparna och deras landj vii Uppsala, 1918
Duben, Gust von, Om Lappland och Lapfanie Stockholm, 1873
Fellman, Isak, Handlmgas och ufpsattser angaende Fmska Lapp-
marken och Lafparney \ Helsingfors, 1910
Fellman, Jacob, Anteckmngar undet mm vistelse t Lappmmkm
2 vols Helsmgfois, 1903

Fjellstrom, P , Betaitelse om Lafpatnes bjornafange samt deras
dervtd brukade vtdskefehu Stockholm, 1755
Friib, j a , [a] En sommer t Finmaihen^ Russish Lapland og Nord^
Karelen Chnstiania, 1871

[b] Lappsske Eventyr og Folhetagn Christiania, 1871

[c] L^isk Mythologi Christiania, 1871


FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY


510

FKn2NER, J , “L<ippernes hedcnskap og ttoldUomskunst samtnenholdt
med andre folln isier noidmaennenes tro och oveitio,” in Hts-
tomk I 4 Christiania, 1877

Genetz, a , Worterbueh der kolo'lapptschin Dtalekie Helsingfors,
1891

Geaah, O , “ Relation Eller En Fnlkomblig Besknfning oni Lap-
parnas Vrspiung, sa wahl som om heela dheras Lefwernes
Forehallandc/* in ATPS xvii 2 Uppsala, 1899
Hallstrom, G, [aj Giavplatser och ofierplatser 1 lyska Lapp->
marken,” in Eittologtska sUuber Ullagnade N E Uammemtedt
Stockholm, 1921

— [fa] ” Lapptrumman,” in Fataburen, 1910 Stockholm
Hammond, Hans, Den Notdtske Mtistont-Histone Ci^enhagen,
1787

HstiAND, A , [a] Notges Land og Folk TofogtaJisk-sUittsHsk
beshtvelse over Fmmarkens amt 2 vols Chnstiinia, 1906

[fa] liorges Land og Folk Topografisk-statistisk betkrtvelsa

over Notdlands ami 2 voU Christiania, 1 908
Hoostrom, Pehr, BesAnfntng ofver de til Stvertges Ktona lydande
Lofmat ket Stockholm [1747]

Hoimberc, Uno, [a] “De fomnordiska nornorna 1 lapparnas re-
ligion,” in Atgus, 1915 Helsingfors
■ ■ [fa] ” Lappalaisten uskontn,” m SSUy u Borga, 1915

— [c] “ Lapps,” in ERE^ vii. 797 ff Edinburgh

Jessen, E J , if f handling om de Nors^ Fmnerr eg Lafpers Hedenske
Rebgton (Printed m Lcem’s work) Copenhagen, 1767
Kildal, S , “Efterretning om Finners og Lappers hedenske religion,”
in Det rkandinavtske Lttiet otw selskabs Shifter^ in 2 Copen-
hagen, 1807

Kolmodin, T , “ Folktro, seder och sagner frJn Pite Lappmark,”
in Lafpame och derat land, iii Stockholm, 19^4
Krohn, Kaarle, “Lappische beitrage zur gcrmanischen mythologie,”
m FVF VI HeUingfors, 1906

Leem, Knud, Sesknvelte over Finmariem Lapfer Copenhagen,
1767

Lindahl, E , and Ohruno, J., Lemcon Lapfomeum Stockholm,
1780

Lundius, N,, “ Descnptio Lapponwe,” m ATPS xvn 4 Uppsala,
1 90s

Munch, T A , Symbolae ad Htstonam antiqmorem rertm Norvegr-
eartitn Christiania, 1850

Niurenius, O, “ Lappland,” in ATPS xvn 4 Uppsala, 1905
Olrik, Axel, [a] “ Irmensul og gudestdtter,” in Maal og mnne ,
1910 Christiania


BIBLIOGRAPHY 571

— ' [b] “ Nordjsk og hppisk gud!>dyrkelse/* m Damke StudteTf
1905 Copenhagen

■ [c] " Tojdengudcn og hans drcng,” ib 1905-6

■ [d] “ The sign of the de-id,” in FUF lai Helsingfors,
1912

Qvigstad, J , [a] ^'Kildeskiifter til den Uppiske mythologi, i-ii,” in
Det kgl Noitke Vtdenskabets Sekkabs Shifter, nos i and 4
Trondhjcm, 1903 and 1910

” Lappischer Aberglaube,” in Ktishanta Btnografiske
Museums Sknfter, 1 2 Christiania, 1920
RcurSRSKiOLD, E, [a] “De nordiska lapparnis religion,” in
Poftdeta etnolopska shtftet, 8 Stockholm, 1912

— [b] “ Kallski if ter till lapparnas mytologi,” in Btdrag ttU

v&r odlings ha f det utgiftutaf Nordtska Museet, 10 Stockholm,
1910

Reutcrskiold, E, and Wiklund, KB, “Linncs lappska troll-
trumma,” in Fatabuten, 1912 Stockholm
Rheen, S , “En kortt Relntion om L<ipparnes Lcfwaine och Sedhcr,
wijdskicpellscr, sampt 1 manga Stycken Grofwe wildfarellscr,”
inyfTPSxvii I Uppsah, 1897

Rosen, Epk von, “ En nyupptackt lappsk offerplats vtd Vidjakuoika,”
m Yma, 1911 Stockholm

Rosen, Helge, **Om hpparnas dodsiikcsforestallnmgar,” in Fata-
buten, 1919 Stockholm

Samzelius, H , “ Sigor och sagner, skrock och ofvertro fran 8nn-
bygdcr och Inppmtrker, 1-11,’* in Meddelanden fra« 'Nordtska
Museet, 1902-3 Stockholm
ScHEFFBRUs, J , Lappofua Fiankfurt, 1673
Tornaeus, j , ** Berattelse om Lapmarckei na och Deras Tillstftnd,”
in ATPS xvii 3 Uppsala, 1900

Tuoerus, G , ** En kort underrattelse om the osterbothniske lappar,
som under Kicmi gebit lyda,” tn ATPS xvii 6 Uppsala, 1905
Turi, j , MutUalm samid hitra Copenhagen, 1910
Unwerth, W von, [a] "Namensgebtmg wtd Wiedetgebutttglmsie
bet Notdgermanen und Lappen Off-pimt of Festschrift fur
Alfred Htllebrandt

[b] “ 6dinn und Rotn ” OflF-pnnt of Bettrage *tir Ge»

sehschte der deutschen Sptaehe und Lsttetafui Published by W
Btaune 1913

[c] Vntet suchungen ubet Totet^ih und ddmut/erehrung
bet Notdgetmanen und Lappen Breslau, 1911
Vahl, j , Lappet ne og den lapske nmston Copenhagen, 1866
Wiklund, K B , [a] En nyfunnen skildiing af lapparnas bjorn-
fest,” m ikTO 1912 Uppsala


572 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

— [b] **Siivo Till fragan om de nordiska bcstindsdehina i

lipparnas religion,” in ib 1916 (Translated into Germ in
BetUage xur Religionswissemehaftf 11 1918 )

— [c] “Mytologi (Lapsk),” in Nortitsk Fatmlj/bol, xix

Stockholm, 1913

Yju£enk.o, a , “ NSskolko slov o Russkoy Liplandiy,” in EO xii
Moscow, 1892


V VOLGA FINNS

Andrievskit, a a, “D 81 i o soverSenii yazyceckich obiyador 1
ieitvoprinoScmy kreSHenymi morodcami Vyatskoy gubernii,”
in Stole ite Vyatskoy gubettu, 1780-1880 11 Vyatka,

1880

AvNOvsKir, V , “ Etnogiaficeskiy ocerk Moidvy MokSi,” in Pamyat-
naya kntga Smboskoy gubemn na 1869 Simbirsk

Bacin, S a, “Gadateli i zit'ichan u carevokokliyskich £eremis,” in
lOAlE XXVI 3 Kazan, 1910

Benevolenskiy, G, “ Mordovskiyi molyany,” in SEV 1868, no 21
Samara

Btn uzov, F , [1] ** Iz byta mordvy sela 2 ivaykina 2 adovskoy volosti,
Kaisunslngo uyezda Simbirskoy gubernn,” in lOAIE xi 5
Kazan, 1893

[^] " VSrovaniya 1 kult mordvy (Erzi) sela SabanSeyeva
Alatyiskago uyezda Simbirskoy gubernn,” in lOAIE xi 4
ICazan, 1893

DtJBAsov, I , Oietkt IZ istotu Tambovskago haya^ i Tambow,
1890

Eruslanov, P , [a] “ 0£erk byta 1 predaiiiy vostoenych deremis," in
lOORGO IV 1894 Orenburg!!

' — [b] '* 2 ertvoprinoSeRiya 2 crtmis Birskago uyezda po slulSayu

neuroiaya,” in ib

Evsevyev, M E, “BraSnyj 1 drugic leligioznye obiyady mordvy
Fenzenskoy gubemn,” in 2 S xxm Petrograd, 1914

Filimonov, A , " O relign nekreSSennych ceremis i votyakov Vyatskoy
gubernn,” m VEV 1868, no 8, and 1869, nos 7-8 and 2i
Vyatka

Filonenxo, V, [a] “Pogiebalnye 1 svadebnye obiyady ccicmis
Uiimskoy gubernn,” m VOUO 1912, no 2 Ufa

— [^>] “Prazdnik ‘Kyso* u vosto&iych &iemis,” in ib 1912,

nos 7-8

Fuks, Aleksandra, Zofiski o cttwiach t ceremtsach Kaxamkoy
gubetmi Kazan, 1840

Fuks, K , “ Poyezdka iz Kazani k Mordve Kazanskoy gubernn v
1839 >n ZMVD 1839, X Petiogiad


BIBLIOGRAPHY 573

Genetz, a , “ Ost-tscherenusstsche sprachstudicn,’* in JSFO \ii
Helsingfors, 1889

GoRODSKor, G , “ 0 Scremisach proiivayuicich v Kransnouflinskom
uyezds Permskoy gubernn,” in E& 1864, vi Petrograd
Hamalainen, a , “ TScremissien uhntapoja,” in JSFO xxv 3 Hel-
singfors, 1908

Holmberg, Uno, [a] “ Tsheremissien mytologia,” m Ttetosanaka-ja,
IX Helsingfors, 1917

— — [b] Tsheremissien uskonto,” in SSXJ v Borgi, 1914

Ilexwirov, N, “Obryady mordvy pn pogrebcnii 1 pominovenii
umeiSich” in 1868, no 3 Penza
Ivancbv, S , “ Iz byta mordvy derevni Dyurki ParanSevskoy volosti
Ala^rskago uyezda Simbirskoy gubernii,’* in lOAJE xi 6
Kazan, 1894

Kuznecov, S K , [1] '' Cctyre dnya u ccremis vo vremya Surema,*’
in IRGO XV 2-3 Petiogrid, 1879

[b] " Kult umerSich 1 zagrobnyja ySroviniya lugovych

Seicmis,” in EO 1904 Moscow

■ [c] “Oierki iz byta ceiemis, ii Ceremisskie prazdniki,” in
DNR It Petrograd, 1879

■ [d] “ Ostatki yizySestva u ceremis,” in IRGO xxi 6
Petiograd, 1885

— - ■ [e] “Poyczdka k drevney ceremisskoy svyatyne, izvyectnoy

so vremen Oleaiiyi,” in EO liv Moscow, 1905

— [f] Zagrobnyja vitovomya ceterms Kazan, 1884
Mainov, W, [a] “Les lestes de la mythologie Mordvinc,” in

JSFO V Helsingfors, 1889

— [b] “ Mordvankansan haatapoja,” in S 11 16 Helsingfors,
1883

' [c] “ Mordvankansan lakitapoja,** in ib 111 3 Helsingfon,
1888

Melnikov, P J, [a] “Niicgoiodskaya Mordva,” in SGV 1851,
nos 25-6 Simbirsk

[b] “ ObSSestvennoe molenye Erzyan,” in SGF 1851, no

31 Simbirsk

[c] “ 02 erki mordvy,” in RV 1867, n-x Moscow

Mendiarov, V , O ceremisach Ufimskoy gubernii,” in EO xxii
Moscow, 1894

Milkovic, “ Byt 1 virovaniya mordvy Simbirskoy gubernii v koncS
xviii-stolitiya,” SGV 1851, no 32 Simbirsk
Minch, A , “ Narodnye obySay, obryady, suevirii i predrazsudki
krestyan Saratovskoy gubernii,” in ZRGO xix 2 Petrograd,
188^0

MriROPOLSKn, K, “Moidva Religioznyja vozzi^niya ich, npavy
1 obycay,” in TBV 1876, nos 12-13 Tambow


J74 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

M0X.YAR0V, I , [i] “ BtsSdy k teremisam Kuznccovskago prichoda,”
m IKE iSy 3, nos 7-9 Kazan

tb] “Nnrodnyja vSiovanyi lugo^ych ceiemis Kazanskoy

gubcrnii,” in ib 18771 9 Kazan

— [c^ Pochoionnye obycay 1 povciya gorn^cb icrtmis,*’ m

lb 1876, pp 740-747

Mo^arovskiy, a, *'Mordovskoe selo Kakmo, Scrgactkago uyezda
Niiegorodskoy eparthii,*’ in NEV 1890, no 24 Nizni-
Novgoiod

Nurminskiy, S, “ 0 €eik religtoznych vJiovaniy ct.i«mis,” in PS
1862 Kizan

Obtaze^ ■motdmtkot natodnoy slovettiosit, 1 Ktzan, 1882

Paasongh, H , [a] “ Beitrage zur Kenntnis der Religion und des
Cultus dor Tscheremissen,” oif-piint of KSz 11 pp 30-8,
and 198-axo Budapest, 1901

' ■ [b] “ Mitkikertomus mordvilaistcn miilta,” in JSFO viii
Helsingfors, 1800

[c] ** Mordvaltisten mytologii,” in Tietosanabitja, vi Hel-
singfors, 1914

[d] ** Moidvms,” in ERE vui Edinburgh

[e] “ Mythologisches, etymologisches,” in MSFO xxxv

Hclsingfois, 1914

[f] “ Probcn der mordwmischen Volkslitteiatur,” in JSFO

nc and xn Helsingfors, 1891 and 1894

Prtrov, a a , “ ZimEtki po etnografii Eercmis Krasnougmskago
uyezda, Permskoy gubcrnii,‘* in lOORGO 1895, vi Oren-
buigh

Porkka, V, “ Tscheremissischc texte mit uberset/ung,” in JSFO
Mil Helsingfors, 1895

Pmm£rov, a, “Religioznye obryady 1 sucvErnyja oby&y mord-
vov KraMioslobodsktgo uyezds,” in PEV 1870, no i6
Penzi

Ramstedp, G J, "Bergtscheicmissischc sprachstudien," in MSFO
xvii Helsingfors, 1902

RYABiNSKir, K, *‘Aidinskiy pnchod Kozmodemyanskago uyezda,”
in lOAJE XVI Kazan, 1900

Sachmatov, a , Motdowkty etnopafiSeskty sbormk Petrograd,
« *910

Semenov, T, ** Ceremisy,” in Ptoaoslwtny Blagowstmkt 1893
Moscow

ScsTAKor, “Byt Seremis Ui£umskago uyezda,” in Cttiulynf tto
Kazatttkotnu ZJeeb»otnu Oitupt Kazan 1866

Smirnov, I, [a] "Ceremisy,” in lOAlE vii Kazan, 1889

— — > [b] ** Mordva,” m ib x--xii ECazan, 1892-5


BIBLIOGRAPHY


575

Smirnov, N, Mordovskoe naselcnie Pcnzenskoy gubernn,” in PEV
1874, nos 1-24 Penzn

SmolcncoVj O I, “YazyJeskiya zeitvoprinostniya 1 obycai u pn-
voslavnych ieiemisov,” m Ogoneky 1914, no 19 Petrograd

Sneznitskiy, I, [i] “Moido\skiy piazdniic •Vermavy* (Verbnoe
voskreseme) 1 ‘Viiyavy,^” in PEV 1871, nos 19--20

~ [b] Piazdnik ‘Pctrooskos^ — Petrov moly^in v dyen s\
apostolov Petn 1 Pavla v Mordoyskom selS m ib 1870,

no 22

Troitskaya, N, “Ceremisy Arbanskoy volosti,^* in 10 A IE xi i
Kazan, 1893

Troitbkiy, S, “ZamStki 0 vetluikich ccicmis'ich,” in HGY 1863,
nos 19-20 Nizhm-Novgorod

Vasilyev, V M , [a] ” Ceremisy-yazycniki,” oiF-print of lO xii
1915 Kazan

■ - [b] M-iterniy dlya izuccniya veiovaniy i obry^idov ccremis,”

ofl-pnnt of 10 X 1915 Kazan

[c] “ Mattiialy dlyi iznccniya vcrovaniy 1 obryadov &remis/*

off-pimt of 10 V 1915 Kazan

Yakovlev, G, Reltgtoznye obtyady Cetemts Kizin, 1887

Znamenskiy, P , Goinye Sercmisy Kazanskago kray a,” in VE w
1867 Petrogiid

ZoLoiNiCKn, N , fmr fo samamktm vozremyam oerems

K'lZ'in, 1877


VI PERMIANS

Aminoff, T G , “ Reseberattclse/’ in Ofvmigt af Fimka Veisfx^
skapssoctetetens FaihandUngm y xxi Helsingfors, 1879
Aftiev, G a , " Iz religioznvch obyCaev votynkov Ufimskoy gubernu
Bir^jkago uyezda,” in lOAIE ix 3 Kazin, 1891
Bechterev, V , “ Voty^ki, ich istoriya 1 sovremennoe sostoyamc,” in
VE vni-ix petrograd, 1880
Blinov, N, Ya%ycesktt kult votyaKov Vyatka, 1898
Bogayevskiy, P, [a] “OCerk byta Sarapulskich votyakov,” in
Sbointk natenalov fo etnogtafit tzd ff% Dask&oskom etnograf
7 nu%eSyW\ Moscow, 1888

“Oceiki leligioznych prcdstavleniy votyakov,” m EOy

1890 Moscow

Buck, Max, “ Die Wotjaken,” in ASSF xii Helsingfors, 1883
Charuzjn, M, “O&rki yuridiicsUgo bytn nnrodnostey saiapul-
skago uyezda Vyatskoy gubernii,” m Yuridtctshi Vhiniky 1883
Petiograd

Charuzxna, Vera, “ K voprosy o po6tami ognya,” in EO Ixx-lxxi
Moscow, 1906


576 FINNO--UGRIC MYTHOLOGY
ChlopiNj V , “ NSskolko slov o Permyakach,*^ in GI Petrogradi

1849

Dobroi voRSKiYj N , “ Pcrmyaki,” in VE iv Petrograd, 1883
Dfevme Akiy otnosyaHtesya h utorn Vyatskago haya Vyatka^ 1881
Frolov, A , “ Svadehnye 1 pochoronnye obyiay ziteley sela Ustnem^
skago, Ustsysolskigo Uyezda/’ in no 21 Vologda, 1885
Fuchs, D R , £inc Studicnreise zu den Syrjanen,” in K^% xii 3
Budapest, 1911

Fuks, a a , "Poyezdk-i k votyakam Kazanskoy gubernii,” in KGV
no 14 ff Kazan, 1844

Gavriiov, B , [a] “PovSiya, obryady 1 oby&y votyikov Mamady-
Skago uyczda, Uryasucinskago pnchoda,’’ in T^ydy IV ariheo^
logtceskago sezda ^ Rossn, 11 Kazan, 1891

■ [b] Protxvedemya narodnoy slovemosUy obtyady 1 foverya
Votyakov Kaxamkoy 1 Vyatskoy gubefmt Kazan, 1880

Hamalainen, a , Epifanij Vnsaan ticdot Pyhasta Tapanista ja
syrjaaneistV' in Vahatsta kif^elmtay xli Helsingfors, 1908
Holmberg, UnOj [a] "Peimalaisten uskonto,^* in SSC 7 iv Borg&,
1914

[b] "Syrjaanicn muinaisuskonto,” m Ttetosatiakit jOy ix

Helsingfors, 1917

[c] ** Votjankkien mytologia,” in ib x 1919

Kakdinskut, V , Iz matenalov po ethnograhi sysolskich i vy&god-
skich zyryan,” in £ 0 , 111 Moscow, 1889
Luppov, P N, [a] ChrtsUansivo u votyakov so vremem fmvych
tstoficeskich tzvisUy o mch do XIX v$ka Petrograd, 1899

[b] ChiiUansivo u votyakov v pervoy folovmS XIX veka

Petiograd, 1911

Lytkin, G, Zyryanskty hay frt eptskopach fermsktch t zyfyamktt
yazyk Petrograd, 1889

Micheyev, I, “ Iz leligioznoy iizni kaznnskich votjakov/^ in IKE
1900 Kazan

Miropolskiy, a , ^ KreScenye votyiki kizanskago uyezdn, ich
yazyceskie povJrya, obiyidy 1 obycai,” in PS 1876 Kazan
MunkXcsi, B , [a] Lexicon linguae votiauorutn Budapest, 1896

[b] Vot)ak nefkoUesxeU hagyomanyok Budapest, 1887

[c] “ Votjik nyelvtanulmnnyok,” in Nyelvtudomanyi oz-

lemenyehy xviii Budapest, 1884

Nalimov, V, [a] **N^kotoryn 2eiti iz yazyScskago mirosozercaniyi
zyryan,” in EO Ivii Moscow, 1903

■ [b] “ Zagrobniy mir po ySrovaniym zyryan,” in ib Ixxii-

Ixxiii Moscow, 1907

[c] “ Ziir Frage nach den uisprunghchen Beziehungen dei

Geschlechter bei den Syrjanen,’’ m /SPO xxv 4 Helsmgfois,
2908


BIBLIOGRAPHY


577

OsTROVSKiYj D , " Votyaki Kazanskoy guberniii” in Trudy Obicestva
BstesPuoisfytateley fn Kazanskom Umversitetiy iv Kazan,
1874

Pervuchin, N , Es^zy fredam t byta marodcev Glazovskago uyezda,
i-v* Vyatka, 1888-90

Popov, N, “Zyryane 1 zyryanskiy kray,” in lOLEAE xiii 2
Moscow, 1874

Potanin, G , “ U vo^akov Elaburakago uyczda,” jn lOAlE 111
Kazan, 1884

Rooov, N , “ Matenaly dlya opisaniya byta Permyakov,” m iMVD
XXIX Petrograd, 1858

Satrapinskh, K a , Votyakt t Beset mane (Manuscript in Archives
of Geogr Society in Petrograd x 49)

Smirnov, I , [a] “Permyaki,” in lOAIE ix 2 Kazan, 1891

[b] ” Votyaki,” in ib viii a Kazan, 1890

Tezvakov, I , Prazdniki 1 2crtvoprinoSeniya u votyakov yazycnikov,”
iniVSl896 Pettograd

VbreScagin, Gr , [a]“ Starye obySai 1 vSrovaniya \otyakov,” in EO
Ixxxiii Moscow, 1910

■■■ [b] "Votskie bogi,” in lAOIRS 1911, no 7 Archangelsk

[c] “ Votyaki Sai ipulskago uyczda Vyatskoy gubernii,” in

ZRGO XIV 3 Pctrogiad, 1889

[d] “ Votyaki Sosnovskago kraya,” in ib xiv 2 Petrograd,

1886

Wasiljev, J , “ Obeisicht uher die heidnischen Gebiauche, Abcr-
glauben und Religion der Wot)akcn,” m MSFO xviii Hel-
singfors, 1902

WicHMANN, Yrjo, [a] “Tictoja votjaakkien mytologiiasta,” in
Vahmsta Kttjelnuoy xvii Helsingfors, 1893

[b] ” Wotjakische sprachproben,” i-ii, in JSFO xi and xix

Helsingfois, 1893 and 1901

Zakov, K, “Yavyieskoc mirosozeicanie zyryan,” in Naueitoe
Obozr/ntoy vin 3 Petiograd, 1901
YanoviS, M , “ Permyaki,” in ZSt 1903 Petrograd

VII UGRIANS AND SAMOYEDS

Abramov, N A, “Opisanie Beiezowkago kiaya,” in ZRGO xii
1857 Petiograd

Ahiqvisi, a , “ Untei Wogulen und Ostjaken,” tn ASSF xiv Hel-
singfors, 1885

Barna, F, Osvallasutik fotstenet Budapest, 1881
Bartenev, V , Na ktaynem sivero^xafadS Stbtrt OSerkt obdor-
skago ktaya Petrograd, 1896

B£lvav8KIV, F, Poyexdka k Ledovttomu moryu Moscow, 1833


578 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

^KOtaSy^ ,De tehgione sibatenaum Uppsala, 1728
Bucinskiy, P , KteUente Ostyakov t VogtUov fn Petri Veltkom
Harkow, 1893

Charuzin, N, “MedvSYy'i piisyagi i totemicicskiya osnovy kulta
rnedvedya u Ostyakov > Vogulov,** in EO 1898 Moscow
Donner, Kat, [a] “ A Samoycde epic,*’ in JSFO tool 26 Helsing-
fors, 1914

- ■■■ [b] Stpeium stmojedten heskuudessa vuostna xgii—igi^ ja

1914 Helsingfors, 1915 (PubI also in Swed 1915 )

■■■ ■ [c] “ Etelaisten ostjakki-samojedien luona,” in Joukahatneny

XIV Helsingfors, 1913

[d] “ Samojedien mytologia,” in TteiosanaktP /», viii Hel-
singfors, 1916

Dunin-Gorgavic, a A, Tobolskty sivet Etnogt afiieskty oierh

mistnyeh morodeev Tobolsk, 1904-11
Finsch, O , Rette naeh Wcst-S$bitten tm Jahre 1876 Berlin, 1879
GluSkov, I, “Cerdynskie voguly,” in EO xlv Moscow, 1900
Gondatii, N, [a] “Knit medvedya u morodeev sSveto-zapadnoy
Sibin,” in xhaii 2 Moscow, 1888

• [b] ** SlSdy yazyceskich vSiovaniy u Mansov ” in lOLEAE

xlvni 2 Moscow, 1888

Gorodkov, N , “ Religioznyja yazyccskiya vozzrSniya Ostyakov,” in
TOEA i8go, no 2 Tomsk

Grigorovski, N , “ Opisanie Vasyuganskoy tundry,” in 7 fL- 80 RGO
VI Fetiograd, 1884

Hofmann, £ , Der notdUehe Utal und das Kustengebtrge Pae-Ckoi
Petrograd, 1853

IsLAViN, V, Samoyedy v donudnetn s obscestvennom bytu Petro-
grad, 1847

Jackson, F j, “Notes on the Samoyeds of the Gieat Tundra,” m
Joutttal of the Anthrop InstiUtte of Gteot Btti xxiv London,
1908

Kandra, K , ilfngyw mythologia £get, 1897
Kannisto, a , [a] " Cber die wogulische scbauspielkunst,” in FJ 3 F
vi Helsingfors, 1906

[b] “ Vogulien mytologia,” in Ttetosamhirjay x Helsingfors,

1919

Karjalainen, K F , [a] “ Altc bilder zur Ob-ugrischen mytho-
logie,” in MSFO xxxv Helsingfors, 1914

[b] “ Etelaostiakkicn karhumcnoista,” in Vtttttaja. 1914

Helsingfon

* '[c] “ Jugialaisten uskonto,” in SUU 111 Borg&, 1918

[d] “Ostjaakkien mytologia,” in Ttetosattakrfa, vi Hel-
singfors, 1914


BIBLIOGRAPHY 579

j.e] " Ostjakkcja oppimassn,” in JSFO xvii Helsingfors,

1900

Kaiona, L , " Allgetneine Chaiaktenstik des magyanschen Folklore,”
in BMV j Budapest, 1887-8

KusELBVSKir^ Y I , Sivemyj folyus $ zemlya Yalmal Petrograd,
1868

Kuznecov, N N, “Pnroda 1 £iteh vostodnigo sklona sSveinago
Uiala,” in IRGO xxn 6 Petrogrid, 1887
Lehibalo, T , “ Entwurf ciner Mythologie der Jurak^mojeden,”
in M&PO liii Htlsmgfors, 1924
Lyadov, V , “Ziuialskie finny,” in Razstiet^ vii i860 Petrograd
Miechov, M von, DesonpUo Satmaitarutii Krakow, 1521
Muller, J B , iDas Leben und die Gewohnhetten det Ostjaeken
Berlin, 1720

Munkacsi, B , [a] “ Altere Benchte uber dis Heidenthutn

der Wogulen and Ostjaken,” 1— v, in KSz in— v Budapest,

1902-4

[b] " Die Weltgottheiten der wogulischen Mythologie,” in

lb vii-x Budapest, 1906-9

[c] ** Gotzcnbildei und Gotzengeistei im VolksgKuben der

Vogulen,” in ib vn Budapest, 1906

— [d] “ Scelenglaube und Totenkult der Wogulen,” in ib vi

Budapest, 1905

[e] “ (Jber die heidnischt Religion der Wogulen,” in EMU

HI Budapest, 1893

^[.f] Vogul n6pkoltesi gyujtemeny, i-iv Budapest, 1892-

1902

NovrrsKir, Gr, Krat^oe opsame o mtodS ostyatskom Petrograd,
1884

PXfay, j , Osvtyak nifholteti gyujtemeny Buiafestf 1 905 *

Patkanov, S , Dte Irtysch-Ostjeken und thre Volkspiette 2 vols
Petrograd, 1897 ^9°*^

Pavlovskiy, V , Voguly Kazan, 1 906

Polyakov, I , [a] “ Ostyaki 1 ryboprom)^ennost v dolini r Obi,”
in Pmoda t Ochota, 11 Petiograd, 1878

[b] “ Pisms 1 otiety 0 puteSe,tvii v dolinu 1 Obi,” in ZAN

XXX 2 petiograd, 1877

Ramsay, W, ”£in Besuch bei den Samojeden auf der Halbinsel
Kanin,” in JSFO xxin Helsingfon, 1906
Savrov, V, ”0 SaiKianach ostyatskich,” in Moskvttamn, 1844
Moscow

ScHRENCK, A G , Retse nach dem Nordotten des eutopusehen Russ-
lands m lahre i 8 gy 2 vols Dorpat, 1848 and 1854
SiRELius, U T, **Ostjakkten ja vogulien hautaustavoista ja heidan


580 FINNO-UGRIC MYTHOLOGY

kasityksesUan clamuti kuolemnn jtlkc.cn,** in SM 1 902-3
Helsmglois

SoMMIBR, S , Un* estifU m Stberta Firenze, 1885

Sorokin, N , “ Putescstvie k voguhm,” in 1 OEKU in 4 Ktzan,

1873

Trubetskoy, N , " K voprosu o zolotoy babS,” m EO Ixviii-lxix
Moscow^ 1906

Veniamin, [a] “ O obiaScenii v christianstvo mesenskicli simojedov,”
in Chfisttanskoe Ctente Petrogiid, 1850

[b] “Samoyedy Mezenskie,*^ m VRGO xiv Petrogrid,

1855

Wlislocki, H von, [aj Aut dem VolktUben dor Magyaren Mun-
chen, 1893

- ■ [b] Volksglaube und rehgioset Btauch dot Magyaren Mun-

ster, 1896

iZiTKOV, B M, “Poluostiov Yamal,*’ in ZRGO fo ObUey Geo-
^/Sijxlix Petrogiad, 1913


SIBERIAN


I ABBREVIATIONS


(See also Abbreviations under Finno-Ugnc)


IVSORGO

MBR

02

SMAEAH

SS

SF

TIVAS

VO

ZAO

ZMm

2 P 0 RG 0

ZRAO

ZVORAO

ZV^ORGO


Izv&tiya Vostocno-Sibuskago OtdSla Russkago
GeograSieskago Obicestva
Matenaly po Etnogrniit Rossii
Ostisiatische Zcitschnft

Sbornik Muzeyi po Antropologn i Etnografii pri
Akademn Nauk
Sibirskiy Sbornik
Sibirskiy VSstnik

Trudy IV Archeologi^eskago SSzda v Rossii
VostoSnoe OboziSnie
Zapiski Archeologiceskago ObSLesm
Zurnal Ministerstva Naiodnago ProsYisceniyi
Zapiski Priamurskago OtdSh Russkago Geo-
grafideskago Oblfestvi

2^piski Russkago Archeologiceskago ObScestva
Zapiski Vosto£nago Otdeleniya Russkago Archeo-
logiSeskago ObS£estva

Zapiski VostoSno-Sibiiskago OtdSla Russkago
GeograliSeskago ObScestva


H BIBLIOGRAPHY

Agapitov, N N , and Changalov, M N , “ Samamtvo u buryat
Irkutskoy gubernii,” in IV^SORGO xiv 1-2 Iikutsk, 1883
Altayskaya cakowtaya misaya Petiogiad, 1865
Aifu£iN, V r, “OCerk iamanstva u yeniseyskich ostyakov,” in
SMABAN n 2 Petrogiad, 1914
Banzarov, D , Cetnaya vSra tU iamansivo u mongolov Petrograd,
1891

Batarov, P P , “ Buryatskiya povioa 0 bocholdoyach 1 anachayach,”
in 2 V-nSORGO 11 2 Irkutsk, 1890
Bbrceron, Pn^RRE, Voyages feats ^tnctfaletnent en A see dans Us
Xllf XIII f XIV at XV steeUs fm Benjamtn da Tudele, Jean du
PlanrCarftn^ N Aseehn, GutUaume da RubruqusSf Mare Paul
Vemtien, Heaton, Jem de Mandevtlle at Ambrvtse Contanm
2 vols La Haye, 1735


582 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY

Bercmann, B , Nomadtsehe Suetfertien unter den Kalmucken Riga,
1804-5

Bogqras, W , The Chttkcltec {The Jisuf Notth Pacific ExpedtUonf
vn ) New York, 1904

Braic, C , “ £me mongolische Kosmologic,” in Phihsoph Jahrbuch,
11 1890

“ Buiyatskiya skazki 1 poverya,” in ZVSORGO, 1 i Irkutsk,
1889

Chanoalqv, M N, [a] **Novye matenaly 0 SamanstvS u biiiyat,”
m ZV’-iORGO n i Iikutsk, 1890

[b] “ Predaniyi 1 povCiya ungmskich buiyat,” m ZV—

SORGO 11 2 Iikutsk, 1890

[c] “ Sud zaynnov nad lyudmi,” m ZVSORGO 11 2

Irkutsk, 1890

Chudyakov, I A, “ Vcrchoyanskijr sbornik,” in ZVSORGO 1 3
Iikutsk, 1890

Dahnhardt, O , Naiutsagen 3 vols Leipzig and Berlin, 1907— lO
Fraehn, Ch M, “Die altesten atabischen Nachiichtcn uber die
Wolgt-Bulgaren, aus Ibn Foszlan’s Reisebenchten,” in Me-
mottes de PAcademte Imp des Scienets, vi Sc politiques, his-
toire et philologie, 1 St Petersbuig, 18 J2
Galsan-Gomboyev, “O dievnich mongokkich obyfayach 1 suevSn-
yach,” in ZAOxm Petrogiad, 1859
Gilmour, J , Among the Mongols London, 1883
Gorochoy, N , [1] “ Matenaly dlya isuCeniyi Samanstva v Sibiri,”
in IVSORGO xiii 3 Irkutsk, 1882

[b] “ Yuiyung-Uolan Jakutskay’i skiaks,” in IVSORGO

XV 5-6 Irkutsk, 1885

Grunwedel, a , Mythologte des Buddhtsmus m Tibet und der
Mongolet Leipzig, 1900

Harlez de, Ch , L,a Religion naUonale des Tartaies oiientaux
Mandehous et Mongols Pans, 1887
Helmersen, G von, Retsc nach dem Altai tm Jahte 183 f ausge-
fuhtt Pctiograd, 1848

Hild£n, Kaarlo, “ Om shamanismen i Alt*ii, speciellt bland lebed-
tataierna,” in Tena, 1916 Helsingfors, 1916
Sistana Onentahs Haythom Aimenu et hvts svbiectmn Mmet Pavlt
veneti lUneranum Helmaestadii, 1635
Holmbbrg, Uho, [a] “Der Baum des Lebens,” in A ASF xvi
Helsingfon, 1922-1923

■■■ — ■ [b] “ The shaman costume and its significance,” in Annates

Umvetsitatis Fetmeae Aboensu, 1 no 2 Tuiku, 1922
Hue, E R , Souvemts d^un voyage dans la Tariatie, le Thibet et la
Chine Pans, 1850


BIBLIOGRAPHY 583

Ionov, V M , " Duch-chozyim ISsa u yakutov,” in SMAEAN iv i
Petrogiad, 1916

IvANOVbMY, A, Dyivol-tvorec solnca,” in EO no 4 Moscow,
1890

JocHELsoNj W , [a] Materialy po t%uiemyu yukagtrskago yazyka i
folklotayi (Tfudy Yaiutskoy EAsfedttntjiu 9 j) Petrogr-idj
J900

[^] The Koryak (Tfe Jesi*p Notih Pacific ExpedtUoity vi )
New Yoik, 1905

Kamenskiy, N , Soviemennyya osiatki yazyiesktch ohyadov t reU-^
gioznych ^rovamy u cumi Kazan, 1869
Kaianov, N , ^^Skazaniya 1 Icgendy mmusmskich tatar/* in SS 1887
Petrograd

Kllmenc, D , “ NEskolko obnzcov bubnov mmusinskjch morodc-ev,’*
in 7 iV-^ORGO n 2 Irkutsk, 1890
Kobeov, Y , “ Mifologia kazanskich tatai/^ m lOIAE xxvi 5
Kazan, 1910

' • Reltgioznye ohyady i obycai iatat magometan Kazan,
1908

Konvic, V, “Materialy dlya izuSeniya timgusskich nareciy/* in ZS^
1909* Petiognd

KkaScninnikov, S, Ofuame Zemlt Knvicatki Petrognd, 1819
Lanoy^v, S, Kosmologiya 1 Feogoniya altaycev >azy£nikov” in
PS 1886 Kazan

Lankenau, H V “ Die Schamanen und das Schamanenwesen/’ in
Globus y xxii Braunschweig, 1872
Lassy, Ivar, The Muhmam mysteties among the Azetbeijan Turks
of Caucasia Helsingfors, 1916

Ledebour, C F yon, Keise durch das Altat^Gehii ge und Soongo'*
risohe Kit gisen-Stepfe^ 2 vols Berlin, 1829-30
Maak, R , [a] Puteiestvie na Amir Petrograd, 1889

[b] Vtlyujskty oktug yakutskoy oblasU Petrograd, 1887

^vIaonitskiy, V, Matersdy h obyasnentyu^ staroy luvaiskoy vSry
Kazan, 1881

Maynagasev, S D , ZertvopniioSenie nebu u beltsrov,” in
SMAEAU \\\ Petiograd, 1916

Maksimov, S, “Ostatki drevnich narodno tatarskich fyazy&skich)
vSrovaniy u nynSSnich krcSCenych tator Kazanskoy gubermi,^* in
IKE 1876 Kazan

M£sZi(R08, Gyula, a cstsvas osvallas emlekes Budapest, T909
Meszaros, J , “ Osmamsch-turkischer Volksglaube,'*’ m KSz vn
Budapest, 1906

Michailov, V I, ^^Obryady 1 obyfai SuvaS,” m ZRGO xvji 2
Petrograd, 1891


SU SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY

Michaylovskiy, V M, “ Saraanstvo,” in lOLEAE Ixxv Ttudy
etno^ajiceskago otdela, xii Moscow, 1892
MiDDENOORrF, A Th V , Rt.tse tn den aussetsten Not den und Osten
StbmetUtm i and iy 2 Petrograd, 1851 ind 1875
Miikovxc, “Byt 1 vSiovaniya dyvaS Simbnskoy gubcinii v 1783
godu,” in SGV 1851, no 42 Simbiisk
Mordvinov, a, “Inoiodcy obytayuScie v Tuiuchanskom knS,” in
VRGO i860, 11 Petrograd
Nansen, F , Ct^ienhagcn, 1915

Nasyroy, K , " Povdrya 1 pnmcty kazanskich tntar,” in ZRGO vi
Petrograd, 1880

Nikoukiy, N, Kratkn konsfekt fo etnogtafit euvai Kazan,
1911

Nordbnskiold, a £ , Vegas ford kttng Asten och Eutopa Stock-
holm, 1880-81

Olsen, 0 rjan, Et fnmUvt folk De mongohke tennotnadet
Chvistiama, 1915

“O proischoSdenii sdveio-baykilskith buiyat” Pamyatnaya kn&ka
Irkutskoy gubernu «a j 88 i g Itkutsk, 1881
Pallas, P S , Sammlungen htstoruthet Naehitchten uber die mongo-
ksohen V olkerschaften 2 voh Petiognd, 1776-1801
Parker, E H , “ Mongols,” m ERE viii 806 f
Pekarskiy, £ , PlaSd 1 buben yakutskago Samana,” in MER 1
Petrogiad, 1910

Pekarskiy, E K and Cvetkov, V P , “ Oceiki byta priayanskich
tungusov,” in SMAEAN 11 i Petrograd, 1913
“ Pervyi buryatskiy Saman * Moigan Chara,’ ” in IVSORGO xi 1-2
Iikiitsk, 1880

“Pervyj Samnn Bocholi-Chaia,” in IVSORGO xi 1-2 Irkutsk,
1880

P0DGORBUN8KIY, S I, “Idei buryit siministov o dusS, smerti,
zagrobnom miie 1 zagrobnoy iizni,” in IVSORGO xxii no i
Irkutsk, 1891

Potanin, G N, [a] “Giomovnik po povSiiyam yiiznoy Sibin 1
sdvcrnoy Mongolii,” in ZMNP i 882, no 1 Petrograd

[b] Oletki slveto-mtpadnoy Mongoltiy vols 11 and iv
Petrograd, 1881 and 1883

PoYARKOV, F , ” Iz oblasu kiigizskich veiovaniy,” m EO 1891, no 4
Moscow

Pozdn£ybv, a, [a] ” Kalmytskiya skazki,” in ZVORAO vols 111,
IV, VI, vii, IX and x Petrogiad, 1889-1897

[b] Mongoltya t mongoly Petiograd, 1896

Priklonskiy, V £,[81 “ Tn goda v Yakutskoy oblasti,” in ZSt
1891, 111-iv Petrograd


BIBLIOGRAPHY 585

— [b] “ Yikutskiya n«rodnyja poverya i skazki,” m ZSt 1891

Petiogiad

Pripozov, N P| I'l] “Melkiya zamStki o yakutich,” in ZV—
SORGO It 2 Iikutsk, 1890

[b] " Sved^inya dlya izuceniya Samanstva u yakutov Yakut-

skago okiuga,” in IV-SORGO xv 3-4 Irkutsk, 1885
Prokofyev, K , “ Pochorony i pominki u cuval,” m lOABI xix 5
Klazan, 1903

Radloff, W , La] Aiu Stbtrun 2 vols Leipzig, 1884

[b] “ Mifologia \ mitosozcicame ziteley Altaya,** m VO

1882, no 7

" — [c] Ptoben der VolksUttetaiur der tmktschen Stamme Sud-

Stbutms 3 vols Petfogracl, 1866, 1868 and 1870
ReeueU de Voyages et de Hemovresy pub! par la Socictc de Geog-
raphic, i~iv Pans, 1824-1836

Sasrov, S, "Samanstvo v Sibiri,” in ZRGO 1864, 2 Petrognd,
1864

Sboycv, V, Cuvah V bytmiomy tstotteeskom t reUgtoznom otnosem^
yach Moscow, 1865

ScHlBFNER, A , Hetdensagen det mtnustnsktsclten Tataren Pctro-
giad, 1859

Schmidt, I J , [a] Fotschtusgen tm Gebtete dcr alteten teltgtoseny
foltUschen und Utetanschen Btldungsgeschichu der Volker
MtUeUAstenSy voizugltch det Mangolen und Ttbetet Pttro-
grad and Leipzig, 1824

. — — [b] Geseluehte det Ost-Mongolen und thtes Futstenhausesy
von Ssanang Ssetsen Petrograd, 1829
Schott, W, [a] Altauche Studien Berlin, i86o
— [b] Akeste Nachrtehten von Mongolen und TaUtrets
Berlin, 1845

[c] tJber den BuddJtatsmus m Hoehasien und In China

Berlin, 1846

ScHRENK, L V, Die Volker des Amw-Landes {Retten und Fot-
schungen tm Amm^Landey iii 2, 3 ) Petrograd, 1891-95
SfiuKiN, N , Poyezdho v Jakutsk Petrograd, 1844
SSrosevskiy, V TiyYahuty Petrograd, 1896
S1MKBV16, P P , “ Matenaly dlya izuceniya ^amanstva u goldov,” in
ZPORGO 1 2 Chabaiovsk, 1896
SiROKoGOROV, S M , Opy« fXslSdovamya osmv samanstm u tungusov
Vladivostok, 1919

*‘Skazaniya buryat, zapisannyja raznymi sobiratelyami,’ in Zk—
SORGOy I 2. Iikutsk, 1890

SoFlYsKiY, / My kiremetyach kreScenych tatar, in TIVAS
Kazan, 1891


S86 SIBERIAN MYTHOLOGY

SoZiOvrar, F, “Ostatki yizyiestvi u yakulov,” jij Shomth gazaty
Petiogiad, 1876

Spasskiy, G , “Zabaykalskie tungusjr,” in 5 F xix-x\ 1822 Petio-
gnd

Spicyk, a a, Sam'inizm v otnoScnii k iiisskoi aicheologii,” in
2 RAOjo Petfognd, 1899

Stadling, J , “ Shamanismen 1 non a Asien,” in Populata etnologtska
shifUty 7 Stockholm, 1912

SiilLLCR, G W, Beschetbung von Kamtschatko Fimkfuit *ind
Leipzig, 1774

SuMcoY, N f , “Otg;oloski chnstianskich piedanty v mongolskich
skazkach,” in EO no 3 Moscow, 1890
TcHiHAiCHErr, Pierre db. Voyage setenttfique datu PAltm ortenial
et les farius adjaeenUs de la ftonithr de Chtne Pai is, 1845
Thomsen, Vu-h , " Inscriptions de I’Orkon,” in MSFO Helsing-
fons, 1896

Tretyakov, P, I, Turuchanskty hay, ego ftuoda s ztteli Petio-
grad, 1871

Troscanskiy, V F, EvoluUtya let Hoy very u yaiutov Eazin,
1902

Vambery, H , [a] Dte ftmitive CuHut dtt tm ko^tatatnehen Volkes
Leipzig, 1879

— [b] “Noten zu den alttuikischcn Inschiiftcn der Mongolei

und Sibinens,” in M&FO xn Helsingfors, 1899
Vasilyev, V N , [a] “ Izobiazeniyi dolgano-yakiitskich duchov kak
atnbuty iammstva,” in 2St 1909 Petiogiad

— [b] “Simanskiy kostyum 1 buben u jakutov,” in SMAEAN

VIII Petrognd, 1910

Verbitskiy, V I, AUmtkte motodey Sbotnik etnogiafilesktch
siatey t tzsledovamy Moscow, 1893
Veselovskiy, A, [a] "K vopiosu 0 du’ilisticeskicJi kosmogoniyach,**
in EO 1890, no 2 Moscow, 1890

[b] Razyshamya v oblatU tusikago duchovnago sUcha (xi-

xvii), Y Petiogiad, 1889

V-SKiY, N , “ Mateiialy dlya izu 2 eniya Samanstva u yakutov,” in
2V-SORGO 11 2 Irkutsk, 1890

ZAroPLYAYEV, N, “ NSkotoiyja povSrya alarskicb buiyat,” in ZF-
SORGO 11 2 Irkutsk, 1890

ZiTETSKiY, I A , “ Ocerki byta Astrachanskich Kalmykov,” m
lOLEAE Ixxvii I Tiudy einogtafileskago otASla, xiii i«
Moscow, 1893.

ZoLOTMnsKiY, N. I , Komevoy luvalsio^utsity slovat Kazan,

1875


BIBLIOGRAPHY


587


PRINCIPAL ARTICLES ON FINNO-UGRIANS AND SI-
BERIANS IN THE ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF RELIGION
AND ETHICS

Beveridge, J , “ Kalevala,” vh 641-2
Billson, C J , “ Names (I/app),” ix 270-1

“Pnyer (Finns md Lapps),” x 181-2

CzAPLiCKAj M A, “Ostyiks,” IX 575-81

“ Samoyed,” xi 17 2-7

“ Siberia, Sibinaks, Siberians,” xi 488-96

■ “ Tungus,” xii 473-6

“Turks,” XU 476-83

“Yakut,” XU 826-9

Holmberg, U , “ Lapps,” vii 797-800
———“Priest, Priesthood (Ugro-Finmsh),” x 335~6
Klementz, D , “ Buriats,” 111 1-17

Krohn, K, “Ancestor-Worship and Cult of the Dead (Ugro-
Finnish),” 1 467

“Biith (Finns and Lspps),” II 647-8

“ Finno-Ugnans,” vi 22—3

“Finns (Ancient),” vi 23-6

“Kalevah,” vii 639-41

MacColloch, J a , “ Shaman,” xi

MacRitchis, D , “ Images and Idols (Lapps and Samoyeds),” vii
148-50

Paasonen, H , “ Mordvins,” vm 842-7
