D. D. Home: His Life and Mission (Mme. Dunglas Home, 1888)
==========================================================
Mme. Dunglas Home — Home's widow's authorized biography with Doyle's introduction — the definitive life of D. D. Home. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (ddhomehislifemis00homeiala) — 1921 reprint of 1888 first edition.

LIBRARY 

UHtVERSlTY  Of 
CALIFORNIA 
SAN  OIEGO 

6, 

Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2007  with  funding  from 

IVIicrosoft  Corporation 

http://www.archive.org/details/ddhomehislifemisOOhomeiala 

D.  D.  HOME 

HIS    LIFE    AND    MISSION 

D.  D.  HOME 

HIS   LIFE  AND   MISSION 

BY 

mme.  dunglas  home 

Edited,     with    an     Introducticm,     by 

Sir  ARTHUR  CONAN  DOYLE 

"  La    raiBOD    ne   presorit   jamais ;   elle    telaire." 

LONDON 

KEGAN     PAUL,     TRENCH,     TRUBNER     &     CO.,     LTD., 

MANCHESTEB:   THE  TWO  WORLDS  PUBLISHING  CO.,    LTD. 

NEW   YORK:    E.  P.  BUTTON  k  CO. 

1921 

INTRODUCTION 

BY 

Sir  ARTHUR  CON  AN  DOYLE 

I  have  felt  it  to  be  an  honour  to  be  allowed  to  edit 
this  new  Edition  of  the  Life  of  D.  D.  Home.  The 
book  is  so  vital  that  it  went  much  against  the  grain  to 
excise  any  part  of  it,  but  our  first  task  is  to  make  it  easy 
for  the  public  to  get  the  information  which  they  need, 
and  in  its  original  form  the  book  was  a  little  difficult 
on  account  of  occasional  redundancy  and  repetition. 
This  I  have  endeavoured  to  correct,  but  I  foresee  the 
time  when  the  full  text  will  be  restored  and  I  censured 
for  having  tampered  with  what  is  a  very  valuable  record. 
Meanwhile  this  shorter  version  gives  the  reader  all  that 
is  essential. 

Home  has  himself  left  three  books  to  the  world,  the 
first  and  second  series  of  Incidents  of  my  Life  and 
Lights  and  Shadows  of  S-piritualisyn.  The  latter  contains 
the  most  earnest  protest  against  the  abuse  either  of 
mediumship  or  of  Spiritualism  which  the  most 
conservative  critic  could  utter.  Personally  I  am  of 
opinion  that  Home  took  a  somewhat  narrow  view  of 
mediumship,  failing  to  realise  its  protean  aspects,  so 
that  when  he  found  any  which  differed  from  his  own  he 
was  inclined  to  put  it  down  to  bad  observation  or  to 
fraud.  At  the  same  time  he  sets  us  an  example  of  that 
alert  and  critical  intelligence  which  every  spiritualist 
should  cultivate.  In  Incidents  of  my  Life  will  be 
found  a  most  interesting  autobiography  including  his 
controversy  with  Sir  David  Brewster  from  which  the 
man  of  Science  emerged  so  badly.  Very  especially  the 
second  series  is  commended  to  the  student  of  Home, 
because  in  it  will  be  found  all  the  actual  papers  dealing 
with  the  Home- Lyon  lawsuit,  showing  conclusively  how 
honourable  was  the  action  of  Home,  in  spite  of  the 
severe  remarks  by  Lord  Gifford,  which  were  the  result 
of  his  own  ignorance  and  prejudice.  To  quote  them 
against  Home's  character  is  like  quoting  the  remarks 

iv  INTRODUCTION 

of  a  Roman  judge  upon  an  early  Christian.  A  spectator 
has  told  me  that  Gifford  asked  Home's  counsel  :  "  Do 
I  understand  that  your  client  claims  to  have  been 
levitated  ?"  Upon  the  counsel  assenting,  Lord  Gifford 
made  a  wild  gesture  of  his  arms,  very  much  as  the  High 
Priest  rent  his  garment  of  old.  The  reader  who 
consults  the  evidence  for  levitation  given  in  this  volume 
will  certainly  have  no  doubt  as  to  Home's  power  or  as 
to  Gifford's  bumptious  ignorance. 

Home  is  a  man  to  whom  the  human  race,  and 
especially  the  British  public,  owes  a  deep  apology.  He 
was  most  shamefully  used  by  them.  He  came  as  one 
of  the  first  and  most  powerful  missionaries  who  have  set 
forth  upon  the  greatest  of  human  tasks,  to  prove 
immortality,  to  do  away  with  the  awful  mystery  of  death, 
to  found  religion  upon  positive  knowledge,  and  to  break 
down  the  dense  materialism  which  was  as  great  within 
the  Christian  Churches  as  outside  them.  All  this  he 
felt  that  he  could  do  by  those  same  personal  demonstra- 
tions of  spiritual  power  which  were  used  for  the  same 
ends  in  the  early  age  of  the  Church,  before  form  and 
ritual  smothered  the  living  reality.  He  devoted  his  life 
to  this  end  in  spite  of  failing  health  and  comparative 
poverty.  Never  did  he  receive  any  reward  for  his 
splendid,  self-sacrificing  work — save  indeed  those 
personal  souvenirs  from  Royalties  which  were  given  not 
in  payment  but  in  friendship.  He  left  a  trail  of 
religious  conviction  and  of  human  consolation  behind 
him  wherever  he  went.  He  was  admirable  in  every 
relation  of  life,  a  good  husband,  a  devoted  father,  a 
beloved  friend,  a  charitable  helper,  a  worker  upon  the 
battle-fields,  a  lover  of  art  and  of  all  that  is  beautiful. 
And  yet  when  he  died  worn  out  at  the  age  of  51  there 
was  hardly  a  paper  in  Great  Britain  which  did  not  speak 
of  him  as  if  he  had  been  a  Cagliostro,  who  had  spent  a 
life  of  intrigue  and  deception.  Those  who  read  this  life 
will  surely  echo  my  words  that  we  owe  him  a  deep 
apology,  and  recognise  that  in  this  Spiritual  tide  which 
flows  so  strongly  to-day  we  find  much  which  un- 
doubtedly found  its  spring  in  his  unselfish  labours.  His 
influence  was  admirably  summed  up  by  Mrs.  Webster,  a 

INTRODUCTION  v 

well-known  resident  of  Florence,  when  she  wrote  :  "  He 
is  the  most  marvellous  missionary  of  modern  times,  and 
the  good  that  he  has  done  cannot  be  reckoned.  Where 
Mr.  Home  passes  he  bestows  around  him  the  greatest  of 
all  blessings,  the  certainty  of  a  future  life." 

One  or  two  of  Home's  aphorisms  may  be  quoted  to 
show  the  mind  of  this  man  who  is  even  now  hounded 
down  by  ignorant  traducers,  especially  Materialists  who 
cannot  forgive  the  shattering  blow  which  he  inflicted 
upon  their  whole  philosophy — a  death-blow,  as  it  will 
prove.  "  Follow  Christ's  teaching  and  carry  out  His 
mission."  "  Religion  is  to  worship  something  outside 
and  beyond  yourself."  "  Try  all  communications  by 
the  help  of  your  conscience  and  your  reason."  The 
sanity  as  well  as  the  essential  piety  of  the  man  shines 
through  such  sayings.  Surely  it  is  the  outworn  case 
of  a  beautiful  soul  which  lies  under  the  slab  in  Paris  on 
which  is  carved  the  words  :  "  To  another,  discerning  of 
spirits." — Cor.  xii.   lo. 

A.  C.  D. 

March,  192 1. 

NOTE. — In  reading  this  edition  of  "  D.  D.  Home^"- 
His  Life  and  Mission^''  it  is  necessary  to  remember  that 
the  book  was  originally  written  nearly  forty  years  ago. 
It  is  thus  necessary  to  make  allowance  for  dates  and 
occurrences  referred  to  as  of  comparatively  recent 
occurrence — the  original  language  being  retained. 

PROLOGUE 

In  the  realm  of  Spirit  as  well  as  in  the  exact  sciences,  our 
age  demands  facts  that  can  be  verified.  I  reproduce,  in  all  its 
authenticity,  as  much  as  possible  of  the  testimony  that  has 
been  borne  to  the  phenomena  investigated  in  the  presence  of  D. 
D.  Home.  A  crowd  of  theories,  more  or  less  ingenious  but 
none  satisfactory,  have  been  created  to  explain  away  the 
facts,  without  explaining  them  in  the  least.  The  perverted 
understanding  which  takes  that  which  is  not  for  the  reality, 
and  the  reality  for  a  chimera,  can  alone  lead  men  into  this 
singular  denial  of  the  possibility  of  a  truth  that,  by  their  own 
avowal,  it  would  give  them  the  greatest  happiness  to  recog- 
nise. Undoubtedly  the  most  hideous  cancer  of  our  age  is  its 
materialism,  that,  eating  constantly  deeper,  leads  men  more 
and  more  into  the  denial  of  their  immortality.  Spiritualism 
was  not  regarded  by  Home  as  a  fantastic  or  poetic  reverie. 
He  suffered  cruelly  for  his  mission,  without  having  any  other 
object  in  view  than  to  give  an  irresistible  impulse  to  the 
consoling  belief  in  a  future  life.  A  multitude  of  irrefutable 
facts  were  demonstrated  in  his  presence  which  science  tested 
and  admitted.  By  sacrificing  himself  to  every  description  of 
research,  he  enabled  scientific  investigators  to  establish  the 
existence  of  forces  that  until  his  day  had  remained  unknown ; 
and  he  founded  belief  in  a  spirit-world  on  those  remarkable 
evidences  of  identity  that  will  remain  the  bases  of  the  true 
modern  Spiritualism.  No  sophistry  can  avail  to  show  that 
the  well-established  and  well-attested  facts  contained  in  this 
work  have  had  no  existence.  It  will  be  seen  how  great  a 
number  of  well-known  personages  have  investigated  the  sub- 
ject, and  have  been  convinced.  The  fact  that  many  of  these 
names  are  now  for  the  first  time  published,  will  prove  to  what 
degree  Home  carried  his  consideration  for  others,  suppress- 
ing their  names  in  order  to  spare  them  from  ignorant  abuse, 
and  tranquilly  encountering  the  host  of  calumnies  that  were 
<lirected  against  him  in  consequence.  Where  is  there  another 
man,  who,  with  the  means  in  his  possession  of  proving  how 
false  were  the  assertions  made  concerning  him,  would  have 
thought  of  others,  rather  than  of  himself?  There  are  very 
few  celebrated  men  whose  real  character  has  been  so  strangely 
misunderstood,  and  concerning  whom  false  reports  have  more 
persistently  been  spread  abroad.  The  extensive  correspond- 
ence he  has  left — even  the  small  portion  of  it  I  have  found 
space  to  print — proves  how  blameless  his  life  must  have  been, 
how  irreproachable  his  honour,  and  how  elevated  his  sentiments. 
No  one  was  ever  more  happy  in  doing  good,  or  was  more 
beloved.     In  every  coimtry  persons  who  were  not  Spiritualists 

PROLOGUE  viii 

pronounced  his  name  with  respect;  and  the  social  position  he 
occupied  in  the  world  is  the  best  proof  of  the  estimation  in 
which  he  was  held. 

Spiritualism,  as  demonstrated  by  Home,  gives  a  serenity 
of  mind  that  death  cannot  destroy.  The  edifying  proofs  of 
identity  contained  in  the  communications  received  through 
him  tend  to  change  our  life  and  modify  our  actions,  by  giving 
fresh  strength  to  love  and  charity.  The  Spiritualism  which 
is  incapable  of  being  investigated  under  scientific,  or,  at  least, 
trustworthy  conditions,  and  confers  no  moral  benefit,  is  not 
Spiritualism.  If  tokens  of  spirit-identity  and  phenomena 
established  under  such  conditions  as  are  described  in  this 
volume  can  rarely  be  met  with,  and  the  truth  is,  in  conse- 
quence, derided  as  fiction,  this  only  illustrates  a  fact  estab- 
lished by  the  history  of  humanity  in  every  age — that  the 
possessors  of  such  a  diversity  of  gifts  as  were  bestowed  on 
Hc«ne  are  makers  of  epochs.  Home  never  had  the  ambition  to 
create  a  sect,  although  nothing  would  have  been  easier  to  him. 
For  him  who  understood  the  teaching  of  the  Saviour,  there 
could  be  no  question  of  honour  and  prominence ;  and  the  acts 
of  his  life  show  that  he  was  a  Christian  in  the  full  acceptation 
of  the  word.  His  aim  was  the  propagation  of  Spiritualism, 
especially  among  those  who  have  lost  the  innate  perception  of 
spiritual  things,  that  inner  light  whose  revelations  all  Nature 
confirms.  He  sought  to  save  us  from  the  emptiness  of  a  selfish 
life,  and  to  give  us  in  this  world  less  of  suffering  and  more  of 
joy. 

D.  D.  Home  did  not  teach;  he  proved. 

CONTENTS 

CHAP. 

PAGE 

I. 

— Scotland  and  America     ... 

I 

II. 

— England  and  Italy            

23 

III. 

— Italy  and  France  ... 

40 

IV. 

— France  and  Russia            

56 

V. 

— England 

69 

VI. 

— England       

91 

VII. 

— England,  Rome,  and  Paris 

107 

VIII. 

— America,  Russia,  and  England 

129 

IX. 

— England       ...         ...         

152 

X. 

— Public  Readings — Scotland — France 

173 

XI. 

— England — Spiritualism  and  Science  ... 

...            185 

XII. 

— Russia,  Geneva,  Florence,  Nice 

206 

XIII. 

— 1876-1886      

216 

D.     D.     HOME 
HIS    LIFE    AND    MISSION 

CHAPTER   I 

SCOTLAND    AND    AMERICA 

Daniel  Dunglas  Home  was  born  near  Edinburgh,  March  20,  1833. 
His  parents  both  came  of  ancient  Scottish  famihes.  Through  his 
mother,  whose  maiden  name  was  McNeill,  he  was  descended  from  a 
Highland  family  in  which  the  traditionary  Scottish  gift  of  the 
"  second-sight  "  had  been  preserved.  Mrs.  Home  possessed  it 
herself;  and  while  her  son  was  still  an  infant  she  had  a  vision  con- 
cerning him  that  found  fulfilment  more  than  twenty  years  later  at 
Fontainebleau. 

An  aunt,  who  had  no  children  of  her  own,  adopted  Home ;  and  his 
infancy  was  passed  in  her  care  at  Portobello.  When  he  was  nine 
years  old,  she  and  her  husband  emigrated  to  America,  and  took  with 
them  the  boy  whose  life  was  destined  to  be  so  wonderful.  He  was  a 
sensitive,  delicate  child,  of  a  highly  nervous  temperament,  and"  of  such 
weaJk  health  from  his  infancy  that  he  had  not  been  expected  to  live. 
His  frail  health,  however,  no  more  affected  his  natural  sweetness  of 
temper  and  gaiety  of  spirits  than  did  the  bitter  trials  of  after  years. 
"  I  remember  him,"  writes  to  me  a  schoolfellow  of  his,  Mr.  J.  W. 
Carpenter,  Mayor  of  Norwich,  Connecticut,  "  as  one  of  the  most 
joyous,  affectionate,  and  whole-souled  boys  among  my  whole  circle 
of  acquaintances,  always  ready  to  do  a  kind  act.  He  was  fond  of 
his  studies ;  but  when  out  of  the  schoolroom  spent  all  his  time  in  the 
wood  and  beside  the  streams,  with  one  or  two  chosen  companions. 
His  nature  was  very  sensitive,  and  he  was  easily  grieved  at  any  act  of 
unkindness  done  to  others  or  to  himself. 

"  I  never  saw  anything  of  Spiritualism,"  adds  Mr.  Carpenter, 
"  and  am  therefore  a  disbeliever  myself;  but  I  know  that  my  old 
friend  was  thoroughly  honest  and  sincere  in  his  belief.  I  know  of 
no  one  of  my  many  schoolmates  whose  career  I  have  more  carefully 
followed,  and  whom  I  have  been  more  proud  to  call  my  friend,  than 
D.  D.  Home." 

Greeneville,  Connecticut,  where  Home  received  his  first  impressions 
of  America,  has  been  swallowed  up  in  the  growth  of  the  adjoining 
city  of  Norwich.  Forty  years  ago,  when  he  lived  there  with  his 
uncle  and  aunt,  Greeneville  existed  as  a  separate  village;  and  close 
at  hand  were  the  woods  to  which  he  escaped  at  every  opportunity, 
spending  there  hours  in  that  study  of  nature  which  alwa}^  charmed 

2  LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF   HOME 

him.  Nothing  escaped  his  observation  and  his  prodigious  memory. 
He  always  looked  back  on  those  days  as  the  happiest  of  his  boyhood. 
His  studious  and  dreamy  habits  separated  him  from  most  other  children 
of  his  age ;  but  he  had  a  chosen  companion  in  these  rambles,  a  school- 
tellow  a  little  older  than  himself,  of  the  name  of  Edwin.  A  strong 
friendship  grew  up  between  the  two;  and  they  were  always  together, 
until  Home  went  with  his  relatives  to  live  at  Troy,  in  the  State  of  New 
York,  some  three  hundred  miles  from  Norwich. 

A  few  weeks  before  this  separation.  Home  was,  as  usual,  with  his 
friend  Edwin  in  the  woods.  The  two  boys  were  both  great  readers ; 
and  when  either  of  them  had  found  anything  in  a  book  that  interested 
him,  it  was  sure  to  be  communicated  to  the  other.  On  this  occasion 
— it  was  in  April,  1845  or  1846 — Edwin  was  full  of  a  ghost-story 
that  he  had  just  read.  The  event  it  related  to  is  associated  with  the 
history  ot  a  noble)  English  family ;  and  I  am  told  that  it  furnished  Sir 
Walter  Scott  with  the  groundwork  of  one  of  his  ballads.  A  lady 
and  her  lover  had  mutually  agreed  that,  if  there  were  a  life  beyond 
this,  the  one  who  died  first  should  appear  to  the  survivor.  In 
pursuance  of  his  vow,  the  lover,  withm  a  few  days  of  his  death, 
presented  himself  to  his  mistress.  She  treated  the  vision  as  a 
delusion  of  her  senses;  on  which  the  spirit  stretched  forth  his  hand 
and  laid  it  on  hers,  leaving  there  a  mark  that  was  ineffaceable. 
Many  years  after  lie  had  listened  to  this  legend  in  the  woods  of 
Norwich,  Home  met  in  England  a  member  of  the  family  to  which 
it  related ;  and  was  assured  that  the  history  was  well  authenticated, 
and  that  a  portrait  of  its  heroine  still  existed,  known  in  the  family 
as  "  the  lady  with  the  black  ribbon,"  from  a  covering  she  had  always 
worn  on  her  wrist,  to  conceal  the  mark. 

When  Edwin's  story  was  told,  the  two  boys  set  themselves  to  discuss 
it,  and  also  the  possibility  of  such  apparitions  of  departed  spirits 
appearing  to  those  whom  they  had  loved  on  earth.  With  the  romance 
of  their  age,  they  ended  by  agreeing  to  bind  themselves  by  the  same 
promise  that  the  two  lovers  in  the  legend  liad  taken ;  and  exchanged 
vows  on  the  spot,  in  the  most  solemn  manner  they  could  devise.  A 
few  weeks  later,  Hcxne  went  to  live  at  Troy.  He  was  then  about 
thirteen  years  of  age. 

In  the  month  of  June  following,  he  had  been  spending  the  evening 
at  a  friend's  house,  and  on  returning  to  that  of  his  aunt,  found  that 
she  had  already  retired  to  rest.  Fearing  to  be  scolded  for  being  late, 
her  nephew  hastened  to  follow  her  example.  It  was  a  lovely 
summer's  night,  and  the  moon,  shining  through  the  curtainless  window 
of  his  room,  rendered  a  candle  unnecessary ;  but  at  the  moment  when 
the  boy,  having  finished  his  prayers,  was  slipping  into  bed,  her  light 
was  suddenly  darkened.  Startled  by  the  phenomenon.  Home  looked 
up,  and  beheld  a  vision  that  he  has  described  in  the  opening  chapter 
of  his  Incidents  in  My  Life,  published  in  the  year  1863  by  Messrs. 
Longman : — 

"  I  was  about  to  draw  the  sheet  over  me,"  he  writes,  "  when  a  sudden 
darkness  seemed  to  pervade  the  room.  This  surprised  me,  inasmuch  as  I  had 
not  seen  a  cloud  in  the  sky ;  and  on  looking  up  I  saw  the  moon  still  shining. 

SCOTLAND  AND  AMERICA  3 

but  it  was  on  the  other  side  of  the  darkness,  which  still  grew  more  dense 
until  through  the  darkness  there  seemed  to  be  a  gleam  of  light,  which  I  cannot 
describe;  but  it  was  similar  to  those  which  I  and  many  others  have  since 
seen  when  the  room  has  been  illuminated  by  spiritual  presence.  This  light 
increased  ;  and  my  attention  was  drawn  to  the  foot  of  my  bed,  where  stood  my 
friend  Kdwin.  He  appeared  as  in  a  cloud  of  brightness,  illuminating  his  face 
with  a  distinctness  more  than  mortal.  ...  He  looked  on  me  with  a  smile  of 
ineffable  sweetness,  then,  slowly  raising  the  right  arm,  he  pointed  upward; 
and  making  with  it  three  circles  in  the  air,  the  hand  began  slowly  to  disappear. 
Then  the  arm,  and  finally  the  whole  body,  melted  away.  The  natural  liglit 
of  the  room  was  then  again  apparent.  I  was  speechless,  and  could  not  move, 
though  I  retained  all  my  reasoning  faculties.  As  soon  as  the  power  of  movement 
was  restored  I  rang  the  bell,  and  the  family,  thinking  I  was  ill,  came  to  my 
room,  when  my  first  words  were — '  I  have  seen  Edwin — he  died  three  days 
ago.'  " 

A  day  or  two  afterwards  a  letter  was  received,  announcing  the  death 
of  Edwin  after  a  very  short  illness. 

The  second  such  vision  that  befell  Home  was  in  the  year  1850.  By 
this  time  his  aunt  had  returned  to  Norwich ;  and  at  Waterford,  some 
twelve  miles  off,  were  settled  his  father  and  mother,  who  had  followed 
their  relatives  to  America.  One  day  Mrs.  Home,  when  alone  with 
her  son,  told  him  that  she  would  leave  him  in  four  months'  time. 
"  Your  little  sister  Mary,"  she  went  on,  "  came  to  me  in  a  vision, 
holding  four  lilies  in  her  hand ;  and  allowing  them  to  slip  through  her 
lingers  one  after  the  other,  till  the  last  one  had  fallen,  she  said — 
'  And  then  you  will  come  to  me.'  I  asked  her  whether  the  four 
lilies  signified  years,  months,  weeks,  or  days,  and  she  told  me 
'months.'  " 

Ihe  death  of  little  Maxy  had  taken  place  under  the  saddest  of 
circumstances.  The  mother  went  out  for  a  few  hours,  leaving  the 
child  at  home.  On  returning,  she  had  to  cross  a  small  stream  near 
the  house;  and  while  on  the  bridge,  saw  what  seemed  to  be  some 
loose  clothes  floating  in  the  stream.  She  ran  down  the  bank,  aiKl 
drew  from  the  water  the  body  of  her  child. 

In  the  fourth  month  after  her  vision,  Mrs.  Home  was  called  away 
to  visit  some  persons  at  a  distance ;  and  when  her  family  were  expecting 
her  return,  they  received  instead  a  telegram  announcing  her  serious 
illness.  Her  husband  started  at  once  on  its  receipt ;  her  son  could 
not  accompany  his  father,  for  he  was  himself  confined  to  bed  in  the 
house  of  his  adopted  parents  by  an  affection  of  the  lungs.  The  same 
evening,  nis  aunt  heard  the  boy  calling  loudly  for  her ;  and  on  hurrying 
to  his  sickroom,  found  him  in  the  greatest  distress  and  agitation. 
"  Auntie,"  he  said,  "  mother  died  to-day  at  twelve  o'clock,  because 
I  have  seen  lier,  and  she  told  me  so." 

His  aunt,  as  most  persons  would  have  done  in  her  place,  thought 
her  nephew  delirious.  "  Nonsense,  child,"  she  said,  "  you  are  in, 
and  this  is  the  effect  of  a  fevered  brain." 

It  proved  to  be  sad  reality.  Mrs.  Home  had  died  that  day  at 
twelve  o'clock,  without  one  of  her  family  near  her — even  as  she 
had  predicted  to  her  son  four  months  before. 

After  the  loss  of  his  mother,  Home's  thoughts  occupied  themselves 

4  LIFE  AND  MISSION   OF   HOME 

more  and  more  with  the  life  beyond  this;  and  he  was  constant  in 
attending  the  religious  exercises  of  the  body  to  which  he  belonged. 
Much  to  the  displeasure  of  his  aunt,  who  was  a  member  of  the 
Kirk  of  Scotland,  he  had  joined  the  Wesleyan  communion;  but  her 
opposition  to  this  step  was  so  persistent  and  violent,  that  her  nephew 
finally  compromised  matters  by  leaving  the  Wesleyans  for  the  Con- 
gregationalists,  whom  she  regarded  with  less  dislike. 

One  night,  on  going  to  bed,  he  heard  three  loud  blows  struck  at  the 
head  of  the  bedstead.  Thinking  some  one  was  hidden  there  and 
trying  to  frighten  him,  he  rose  and  searched,  but  found  nobody. 
While  he  could  still  hardly  realise  that  he  was  actually  the  only  person 
in  the  room,  the  three  blows  sounded  again  in  the  same  place, 
and  then,  after  a  moment's  pause,  they  came  a  third  time. 
The  listener  spent  a  sleepless  night  in  watching  for  their  recurrence 
and  in  repeating  to  himself  that  the  phenomenon  was  a  something 
not  of  earth ;  but  the  strange  sounds  were  heard  no  more  by  him. 
In  the  morning  he  came  down  to  breakfast  pale  and  fatigued ;  and 
'his  tired  looks  were  noticed  by  his  aunt,  who  set  them  down  to 
the  account  ot  a  prayer-meeting  he  had  attended  the  evening  betore, 
and  began  to  lecture  on  the  evil  results  of  religious  excitement.  She 
was  interrupted  by  a  volley  of  raps  on  the  table  at  which  the  two  were 
seated. 

"  What  is  this?  "  was  her  astonished  demand. 
Her  nephew,  almost  as  startled  as  herself,  could  not  answer;  but 
if  he  had  no  interpretation  of  the  marvel  to  furnish,  his  aunt  soon 
found  one.  "  So,"  she  exclaimed,  drawing  away  from  him  in  horror, 
"  you  have  the  devil  in  you  too,  have  you?  and  you  have  brought 
him  to  my  house  !  '" 

About  two  years  earlier,  the  knockings  at  Rochester  had  attracted 
public  attention.  Home's  aunt  had  heard  of  them  from  some  of  her 
neighbours,  and  believed  them  to  be  works  of  the  Evil  One.  She 
put  the  same  construction  on  the  strange  sounds  now  heard  in  her 
own  presence,  and  considered  her  nephew  to  be  possessed.  It  was 
some  hours  before  she  could  get  over  the  shock  of  having,  as  she 
fancied,  entertained  one  or  more  fallen  angels  unawares ;  but  in  the 
afternoon  she  began  taking  steps  to  drive  the  visitors  from  her  house. 
There  were  three  pastors  in  the  village  of  Greeneville,  a  Congrega- 
tionalist,  a  Baptist,  and  a  Wesleyan.  Forgetting  for  the  moment 
her  prejudices  against  one  and  the  other  persuasion,  she  sent  for 
all  three,  and  requested  their  advice  and  ministrations.  Two  of  the 
three  were  perfectly  of  her  opinion  as  to  the  source  of  the  phenomena ; 
and  one  of  these  two,  the  Baptist,  proceeded  to  question  Home. 

"It  is  Satan  who  possesses  you,"  he  began.  "  What  have  you 
done  to  bring  him  to  you  ?  ' ' 

His  catachumen  could  only  protest  that  it  was  out  of  his  power 
to  give  any  explanation  of  tlie  mysterious  sounds;  arnl  seeing  his 
agitation,  the  Congregationalist  minister  interposed.  "Don't  be 
frightened,"  he  said  kindly;  "  if  this  is  the  work  of  Satan,  it  is  your 
misfortune  and  not  your  fault." 

'■  In  any  case,"  said  the  Baptist,  "  let  us  seek  to  drive  him  forth  by 

SCOTLAND  AND  AMERICA  5 

our  prayers  "  ;  and  he  proceeded  to  offer  up  a  supplication  in  which 
he  desired  Home  to  join. 

"  Whilst  we  were  thus  engaged  in  prayer,"  writes  Home,  "  there  came 
gentle  taps  on  his  chair  and  in  different  parts  of  the  room  ;  while  at  every 
expression  of  a  wish  for  God's  loving  mercy  to  be  shown  to  us  and  our  fellow- 
creatures,  there  were  loud  rappings  as  if  joining  in  our  heartfelt  prayers.  4 
was  so  struck  and  so  impressed  by  this,  that  there  and  then,  upon  my  knees, 
1  resolved  to  place  myself  entirely  at  God's  disposal,  and  to  follow  the  leadings 
of  that  which  I  then  felt  must  be  only  good  and  true,  else  why  should  it  have 
signified  its  joy  at  those  special  portions  of  the  prayer?  This  was,  in  fact, 
the  turning-point  of  my  life  ;  and  I  have  never  had  cause  to  regret  for  one 
instant  my  determination,  though  I  have  been  called  on  for  many  years  to 
suffer  deeply  in  carrying   it  out." 

Astonished  and  perplexed  by  the  result  of  their  prayers,  the  three 
ministers  departed.  The  Congregationalist  offered  no  opinion  as  to 
the  origin  of  the  phenomena ;  saying  only  that  he  did  not  see  why  this 
young  member  of  his  flock  should  be  persecuted  for  what  he  was 
unable  either  to  prevent  or  cause.  The  Baptist — a  Mr.  Mussey — 
shook  his  head,  but  was  so  bewildered  by  the  thoug;ht  that  his 
prayers  had  seemed  to  call  forth  the  sounds,  instead  of  silencing 
them,  that  he  had  little  to  say ;  and  only  the  Methodist  remained  firm 
in  his  first  belief,  declaring  that  these  wonders  were  the  work  of 
Satan,  and  telling  Mrs.  McNeill  Cook  that  her  nephew  was  a  lost 
sheep.  "  He  was  so  unkind,"  says  Home  simply,  "  that  I  derived 
no  comfort  from  him." 

From  that  day  the  rappings  were  heard  frequently ;  but  familiarity 
with  the  sounds  had  no  effect  in  diminishing  the  terror  with  which  the 
aunt  of  Home  regarded  them.  After  a  time  the  furniture  began  to 
be  moved  about  without  visible  agency.  On  one  occasion,  when 
a  table  was  moving  across  the  room  with  no  one  near  it,  the  aunt  ran 
tor  the  family  Bible,  and  placed  it  on  the  table  with  the  triumphant 
exclamation,  "  There  !  that  will  drive  the  devils  away  !  "  "  To  her 
astonishment, ' '  writes  Home,  ' '  the  table  only  moved  in  a  more  lively 
manner." 

As  yet,  no  one  seems  to  have  thought  of  trying  to  ascertain  whether 
the  sounds  heard  were  controlled  by  intelligence.  The  first  experi- 
ment in  this  direction  was  made  at  the  house  of  another  relation  of 
Home's,  a  widow  who  lived  near  the  aunt  who  had  adopted  him.  One 
evening,  while  with  this  second  relative,  raps  were  heard,  and  the 
alphabet  was  called  over.  The  letters  indicated  by  the  raps  were 
written  down;  and  in  this  way  intelligent  communications  were 
received,  and  replies  obtained  to  questions  put. 

The  people  of  Greeneville  had  heard  by  this  time  of  what  was 
occurring.  "  They  took  to  besieging  the  house,"  says  Home,  "  in 
a  way  that  did  not  tend  to  soothe  the  religious  susceptibilities  of  my 
aunt."  Among  them  came  a  Mrs.  Force,  in  whose  presence  the 
name  of  her  mother  was  spelt  out  by  the  raps.  A  message  followed, 
reproaching  her  with  having  forgotten  a  sister  who  had  gone  West 
with  her  husband  some  thirty  years  before,  and  had  not  since  been 
heard  of.       The  name  of  the  town  where  this  long-lost  relative  lived 

6  LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF   HOME 

was    added;   and   on  the   astonished    Mrs.    Force  writing  there,  she 
received  a  letter  from  her  sister  in  reply. 

It  has  been  objected  ad  nauseam  that  it  is  ridiculous  to  suppose  that 
a  disembodied  spirit  would  seek  to  communicate  with  us  by  sounds 
made  on  a  table  or  a  wall.  Why  ridiculous  ?  Contrary  to  the  pre- 
conceived opinions  of  many,  it  may  be ;  but  then,  those  opinions  are 
themselves  based  on  no  grounds  but  prejudice  and  sentiment,  while 
the  assertion  that  spirits  do  thus  seek  to  communicate  is  based  on 
evidence.  The  question  was  ably  discussed  in  the  year  1863,  in  a 
preface  contributed  to  Mr.  Home's  Incidents  in  My  Life,  by  a  dis- 
tinguished man  of  letters,  who,  as  a  result  of  his  investigations  with 
Home,  had  become  a  Spiritualist — the  late  Dr.  Robert  Chambers. 
It  was  in  no  credulous  spirit  that  this  well-known  writer  had  com- 
menced his  inquiry.  For  a  great  part  of  his  life  Dr.  Chambers  was  a 
materialist  of  materialists,  and  was  known  among  his  friends  to  have 
been  the  joint  author  with  Leitch  Ritchie  of  one  of  the  most  sceptical 
works  of  the  day,  The  Vestiges  of  Creation. 

"  There  remains  a  great  stumbling-block  to  many,"  wrote  Chambers  in  his 
anonymous  preface  to  Home's  book,  "  in  the  manner  in  which  the 
communications  are  most  frequently  made.  It  seems  below  the  dignity  of 
a  disembodied  spirit  to  announce  itself  and  speak  by  little  pulsatory  noises  on 
a  table,  or  wainscot.  It  might,  however,  be  asked  if  it  be  not  a  mere  prejudice 
which  leads  us  to  expect  that  the  spirit,  on  being  disembodied,  suddenly,  and  of 
necessity,  experiences  a  great  exaltation.  .  .  .  We  must,  moreover,  remember 
that  we  know  nothing  of  Uie  conditions  under  which  spirits  can  communicate. 
This  may  be  the  most  readily  available  mode  in  most  instances.  Beyond  doubt, 
in  certain  circumstances  of  difficulty,  the  most  exalted  of  living  persons  might 
be  glad  to  resort  to  such  a  mode  of  telegraphy." 

Home's  aunt  did  not  treat  the  phenomena  in  the  spirit  of  those 
critics  to  whom  the  remarks  of  Dr.  Chambers  were  addressed.  She  saw 
them  to  be  real,  she  feared  them  to  be  unholy ;  and,  far  from  finding 
in  the  sounds  heard  in  the  house  and  the  sights  seen  there  a  matter 
of  ridicule,  they  distressed  her  mind  beyond  endurance.  The  siege 
laid  to  her  house  by  her  neighbours  was  the  last  straw ;  and  declaring 
that,  since  the  spirits  of  which  she  had  such  a  horror  would  not  go, 
her  nephew  must,  she  turned  him  out  of  doors. 

Home  found  a  temporary  refuge  in  the  house  of  a  friend  in  the 
neighbouring  town  of  Willimantic.  In  most  natures,  the  cruelty  of 
such  treatment  as  his  aunt  had  dealt  out  to  him  under  the  impulse  of 
perverted  religious  feelings  would  have  excited  abiding  resentment ; 
but  Home's  temper  was  too  sweet  and  generous  not  to  forgive  and 
forget.  He  remembered  only  her  kindness  of  former  years ;  and  the 
old  age  of  his  aunt  was  passed  in  a  cottage  that  he  bought  for  her. 
btie  died  in  1876,  of  the  shock  caused  to  her  by  reading  in  the 
American  papers  a  false  report  of  his  death. 

While  Home  was  at  Willimantic,  he  was  constantly  beset  by  curious 
intruders ;  and  offers  of  money  were  made  to  ham,  which  he  refused. 
He  felt  that  his  mysterious  gift  was  not  a  thing  to  be  trafficked  in, 
and  had  already  laid  down  the  rule  to  which  he  adhered  all  his  life, 
that  he  would  never  take  payment  for  a  seance. 

SCOTLAND  AND  AMERICA  7 

Much  against  his  will,  an  account  of  some  extraordinary  phenomena 
witnessed  at  Willimantic  was  contributed  to  the  local  newspaper. 
Shrinking  from  the  publicity  thus  forced  on  him,  he  cut  short  his 
visit  and  went  to  Lebanon.  "  There,"  he  writes  in  his  Incidents 
in  Aly  Lije,  "  I  was  received  in  the  family  of  an  old  resident." 

Very  few  names  are  given  in  the  Incidenis,  for  Home's  chivalrous 
delicacy  towards  others  made  him  prefer  to  suffer  from  the  misconcep- 
tion of  the  world  himself,  rather  than  e.xpose  a  friend  to  ridicule  or 
abuse.  This  consideration  for  the  feelings  of  others  sometimes 
led  him  to  refrain  from  availing  himself  of  the  permission  when  granted, 
especially  in  the  case  of  ladies.  His  generosity  was,  as  a  rule,  its 
own  reward.  When  a  cry  for  more  names  of  witnesses  was  raised  by 
the  press  on  the  publication  of  the  Incidents,  very  few  of  those 
Nvitnesses  had  the  courage  of  their  opinions. 

'I'he  results  of  numerous  applications  made  to  the  friends  of  Mr. 
Home  in  both  the  Old  and  New  Worlds,  together  with  the  corre- 
spondence preserved  by  him,  enable  me  to  supply  most  of  the  names 
omitted  in  the  Incidenis,  and  in  various  cases  to  add  the  personal 
testimony  of  investigators  concerning  their  experiences.  In  this 
way  I  shall  be  able  to  render  these  pages  a  record  of  attested  facts. 
My  only  difficulty  will  be  to  contain  the  record  of  a  life  so  full  of 
wonderful  and  varied  incident  within  the  limits  of  a  single  volume. 

It  was  in  the  spring  of  1851  that  Home  left  Willimantic  for 
Lebanon,  where  he  became  the  guest  of  a  family  named  Ely,  who  had 
a  farm  in  the  neighbourhood.  Hisi  health  was  in  a  most  delicate 
state,  and  trying  scenes  through  which  he  had  just  passed  had  inten- 
sified the  symptoms  of  lung  disease;  but  quiet  and  the  healthy 
influences  of  a  country  life  wrought  a  change  for  the  better.  More 
unselfish  and  considerate  than  some  of  his  friends  of  later  years,  the 
Ely  family  discouraged  their  young  visitor  from  holding  seances  too 
frequently.  It  was  a  fact  of  which  Home  soon  became  conscious, 
that  some  power  or  force  passed  from  him  during  the  occurrence  of 
the  phenomena  ;  or,  as  MV.  Crookes  put  it  in  187 1,  "  The  evolution  of 
psychic  force  is  accompanied  by  a  corresponding  drain  on  vital  force." 
Repeated  seances  meant  the  serious  injury  of  Home's  health  ;  but  for 
that  health  the  majority  of  his  friends  had  very  little  consideration ; 
and  his  unselfish  good  nature  again  and  again  led  him  to  comply  with 
their  entreaties  for  seances,  when  his  vital  force  was  already  at  the 
lowest  ebb  from  previous  sittings.  "Were  I  in  Springfield,  I  should  be 
a  very  discordant  element,"  writes  one  of  the  Ely  family  to  him  in 
March,  1852,  "  if  you  continued  verv  long  to  sit  in  six  circles  a  day, 
you  invanably  pay  the  penalty — fainting — when  you  do  so,  and  why 
can  you  not  say  '  No  '  ?  " 

Near  Lebanon,  in  1851,  the  first  of  many  remarkable  cures  was 
wrought  through  the  agency  of  Home,  the  life  saved  being  that  of  a 
Mrs.  Bill.  The  facts  of  this  case  are  recorded  in  the  Incidents, 
without  names  being  given. 

In  June,  1851,  Home  accepted  the  invitation  to  pay  him  a  visit,  of 
Mr.  W.  Green,  living  at  Boonton,  New  Jersey.  WhiJe  there,  he  had 
frequent  visions  and  trances,  at  which  times  he  beheldi  the  lost  friends 

8  LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF   HOME 

of  many  persons  who  were  perfect  strangers  to  him,  and  described 
them  with  such  accuracy  that  they  were  immediately  recognised. 

From  ±5oonton,  Home,  about  the  middle  of  July,  1851,  went  on  a 
visit  to  Mr.  J.  W.  Carrington,  a  resident  (then  and  now)  of  Brooklyn, 
New  York.  During  this  visit  he  met  Professor  George  Bush,  a 
distinguished  theologian  and  Oriental  scholar.  Mr.  Bush,  who  had 
been  educated  with  a  view  to  taking  orders  in  the  Episcopal  Church, 
but  had  abandoned  the  design  in  consequence  of  the  change  wrought 
in  his  views  by  an  acquaintance  with  the  works  of  Swedenborg,  took 
deep  interest  in  observing  the  phenomena  connected  with  Home.  The 
communications  he  received  were  of  such  a  nature  as  to  render  him 
assured  that  they  proceeded  from  friends  who  had  passed  from  earth. 
I  will  give  an  instance  of  their  character. 

Home  had  one  evening  fallen  into  a  trance.  In  this  condition  he 
saw  one  who  had  been  the  schoolfellow  of  Professor  Bush  forty  years 
before.  The  name  was  given  through  Home,  and  the  Professor 
was  reminded  of  a  strange  dream  that  he  had  had  on  the  very  night  his 
friend  passed  from  earth. 

"  The  spirit,"  writes  Home,  "  now  told  through  me  the  whole  of  the 
Professor's  dream,  which  was  that,  whilst  they  were  playing  together,  he 
suddenly  saw  his  schoolfellow  taken  from  him,  and  heard  his  voice  saying, 
'  I  leave  you,  George,  but  not  for  ever.'  A  dream  of  forty  years  previously  was 
thus  brought  to  his  remembrance.  The  Professor  was  so  strongly  impressed 
with  this  that  he  called  on  me  next  day,  and  wished  to  have  me  reside  with 
him  for  the  purpose  of  studying  for  the  Swedenborgian  ministry.  I  went  to 
his  house  with  the  intention  of  so  doing  ;  but  within  forty-eight  hours  I  saw 
in  my  waking  state  the  spirit  of  my  mother,  who  said  to  me,  '  My  son,  you 
must  not  accept  this  kind  offer,  as  your  mission  is  a  more  extended  one  than 
pulpit  preaching.'  On  seeing  the  good  Professor,  I  told  him  of  this  spirit 
message.     He  expressed  regret,  but  no  surprise  ;  so  I  returned  to  my  friend  Mr. 

C "   (Carrington),    "  and   remained    with    him  till  the  end  of  August.        1 

frequently  afterwards  saw  Professor  Bush,  with  whom  the  most  kindly  inter- 
course was  interchanged." 

From  Brooklyn,  Home  returned  to  Lebanon.  The  youngest  of  his 
trrends  there,  the  Ely  family,  was  a  boy  of  about  his  own  age,  named 
Ezra.  In  September,  185 1,  Ezra  fell  ill.  The  family  were  under  no- 
alarm,  the  illness  appeared  so  slight ;  but  Home  had  a  vision  that 
forewarned  him  his  friend  would  be  gone  within  three  weeks.  On 
the  nineteenth  day  of  his  illness  Ezra  passed  from  earth — tranquilly 
and  happily. 

"  His  extraordinary'  composure,"  records  Home,  "  remained  with  him 
throughout.  I  had  told  the  family  of  my  vision,  which  prepared  them  for 
the  coming  change.  About  two  days  before  his  leaving  us,  the  doctor  asked 
me  to  break  it  to  him,  when  I  informed  him  that  Ezra  had  long  been  aware 
of  it.  He  doubted  this,  from  seeing  him  so  composed  ;  and  I  desired  him  to 
stand  at  the  door  and  hear  what  I  would  say  to  Ezra.  I  then  went  to  his  bed, 
and  told  him  that  the  doctor  had  left  some  news  for  him.  He  laughingly  said, 
'  I  suppose  it  is  to  tell  me  that  I  am  going.  Little  does  he  imagine  that  I 
have  already  decided  who  my  bearers  are  to  be.'  The  doctor  now  came  into 
the  room,  and  taking  his  hand,  said,  '  My  dear  boy,  if  I  had  not  heard  this, 
I  could  not  have  believed  it.  You  have  everything  to  make  life  happy, 
and  yet  you  are  so  willing  to  leave  it.'  A  few  hours  after  this  a  deacon  of 
the  church  visited  him.  He  argued  with  the  dying  boy,  trying  to  take  away 
his  happy  belief,  but  fortunately  without  the  slightest  success." 

SCOTLAND  AND  AMERICA  9 

Home  remained  at  Lebanon  till  the  end  of  January,  1852,  and  then 
went  to  Springfield,  Massachusetts,  where  he  became  the  guest  of 
one  of  the  best  known  residents,  Mr.  Rufus  Elmer.  The  Ehners, 
unUke  the  Elys,  took  no  account  of  the  drain  on  the  vital  force  of 
Home  that  went  on  during  seances.  They  threw  open  their  house 
to  all  inquirers,  and  urged  him  to  sit  morning,  noon,  and  night.  A 
passage  in  Incidents  in  My  Life  indicates  the  exhausting  and  hurtful 
nature  of  Home's  surroundings  at  Springfield: — 

•'  I  stayed  with  therh  "  (Mr.  and  Mrs.  Elmer)  "  for  some  time," 
he  writes,  "  and  great  interest  was  excited  by  the  accounts  given  by 
the  very  numerous  witnesses  who  came  to  see  the  manifestations. 
Whilst  here  the  power  was  very  strong,  and  frequently  1  had  seances 
six  or  seven  times  a  day.  .  .  .  1  he  house  was  besieged  by  visitors, 
and  often  outside  in  the  street  there  was  a  concourse  of  anxious 
inquirers.  People  came  from  a  distance,  even  from  the  extreme  west 
and  south  of  America,  having  seen  the  accounts  given  of  me  in  the 
newspapers  of  the  previous  year." 

Among  them  came  the  celebrated  American  poet,  Bryant,  accom- 
panied by  Professor  Wells  of  the  University  of  Harvard,  and  two  other 
persons.  They  were,  one  and  all,  thorough  sceptics  as  to  the  reality 
of  tae  phenomena ;  and  their  investigations,  which  extended  over 
several  sittings  with  Home,  were  as  searching  as  a  determined  in- 
credulity could  render  them.  Constrained  at  length  to  yield  to  the 
testimony  of  their  senses,  Messrs.  Bryant,  Wells,  and  their  coadjutors 
had  not  only  the  candour  to  own  that  they  had  witnessed  phenomena 
which  could  not  have  been  produced  by  trickery,  but  the  fairness 
to  state  so  publicly.  Their  conduct  might  have  been  imitated  with 
advanta'ie  by  Lord  Brougham,  Mr.  Ruskin,  and  many  other  subsequent 
investigators,  on  whose  lips  timidity  set  a  seal. 

The  narrative  published  by  Bryant  and  his  friends  restricted  itself 
to  the  phenomena  witnessed  at  a  single  seance  with  Home,  the  most 
remarkable.  I  append  it,  with  the  exception  of  a  passage  I  reserve 
for  another  chapter,  in  which  I  shall  have  occasion  to  cite  instances 
of  the  particular  phenomenon  this  passage  attests : — 

"  The  undersigned,  from  a  sense  of  justice  to  the  parties  referred  to, 
rery  cordially  bear  testimony  to  the  occurrence  of  the  following  facts, 
which   we  severally  witnessed  at  the  house  of  Rufus  Elmer,   in  Springfield  : — 

"  The  table  was  moved  in  every  possible  direction,  and  with  great  force, 
when  we  could  not  perceive  any  cause  of  motion. 

"  It  (the  table)  was  forced  against  each  one  of  us  so  powerfully  as  to  move 
us  from  our  positions — together  with  the  chairs  we  occupied — in  all  several 
feet. 

"  Mr.  Wells  and  Mr.  Edwards  took  hold  of  the  table  in  such  a  manner  as  to 
exert  their  strength  to  the  best  advantage,  but  found  the  invisible  power, 
exercised  in  an  opposite  direction,  to  be  quite  equal  to  their  utmost  efforts.  .  .  . 

'•  Mr.  Wells  seated  himself  on  the  table,  which  was  rocked  for  some  time 
with  great  violence,  and  at  length  it  poised  itself  on  two  legs,  and  remained 
in  this  position  for  some  thirty  seconds,  when  no  other  person  was  in  contact 
with  it. 

"  Three  persons,  Messrs.  Wells,  Bliss,  and  Edwards,  assumed  positions 
on  the  table  at  the  same  time,  and  while  thus  seated,  the  table  was  moved 
in  various  directions. 

"  Occasionally   we    were    made   conscious  of   the  occurrence  of   a    powerful 

B 

lo  LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF   HOME 

shock,  which  produced  a  vibratory  motion  of  the  floor  of  the  apartment  in 
which  we  were  seated — it  seemed  like  the  motion  occasioned  by  distant  thunder, 
or  the  firing  of  ordnance  far  away — causing  the  table,  chairs,  and  other 
inanimate  objects,  and  all  of  us  to  tremble  in  such  a  manner  that  the  effects 
were   both  seen    and   felt. 

"  In  the  whole  exhibition,  which  was  far  more  diversified  than  the  fore- 
going specification  would  indicate,  we  were  constrained  to  admit  that  there 
was  an  almost  constant  manifestation  of  some  intelligence  which  seemed,  at 
least,  to  be  independent  of  the  circle. 

"  In  conclusion,  we  may  observe  that  Mr.  D.  D.  Home  frequently  urged 
us  to  hold  his  hands  and  feet.  During  these  occurrences  the  room  was  well 
lighted,  the  lamp  was  frequently  placed  on  and  under  the  table,  and  every 
possible  opportunity  was  afforded  ug  for  the  closest  inspection,  and  we  admit 
this  one  emphatic  declaration — We  know  that  we  were  not  imposed  upon  nor 
deceived.^ 

"  Wm.    Bryant, 
B.   K.    Bliss, 
Wm.   Edwards, 
David  A.  Wklls." 

Similar,  but  still  more  striking  phenomena  were  witnessed  on  the 
28tni  of  February,  1852,  at  the  house  of  the  Elmers,  and  attested  in  a 
declaration  signed  by  John  D.  Lord,  Rufus  Ekner,  Henry  Foulds,  and 
eight  other  persons. 

One  evening  a  visitor  from  New  York,  Mr.  S.  B.  Brittan,  was  at  the 
Elmer's  residence.  There  was  no  thought  of  a  seance,  the  party 
were  sitting  talking  to  each  other,  when  their  conversation  was 
interrupted  by  a  startling  incident.  The  person  most  intimately  coai- 
cerned,  Mr.  Brittan,  subsequently  published  the  following  account  of 
his  memorable  experiences  at  Springfield : — 

"  While  spending  a  few  days  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Rufus  Elmer,  Springfield, 
I  became  acquainted  with  Mr.  Home.  One  evening  Mr.  Home,  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Elmer,  and  I  were  engaged  in  general  conversation,  when  suddenly,  and  most 
unexpectedly  to  us  all,  Mr.  Home  was  deeply  entranced.  A  momentary  silence 
ensued,  when  he  said,  '  Hannah  Brittan  is  here,'  I  was  surprised  at  the 
announcement ;  for  I  had  not  even  thought  of  the  person  indicated  for  many 
days,  or  perhaps  months,  and  we  parted  for  all  time  when  I  was  but  a  little 
child.  I  remained  silent,  but  mentally  inquired  how  1  might  be  assured  of 
her  actual   presence. 

''  Immediately  Mr.  Home  began  to  exhibit  signs  of  the  deepest  anguish. 
Rising  from  his  seat,  he  walked  to  and  fro  in  the  apartment,  wringing  his 
hands  and  exhibiting  a  wild  and  frantic  manner  and  expression.  He  groaned 
audibly,  and  often  smote  his  forehead  and  uttered  incoherent  words  of 
prayer.  .  .  .  Ever  and  anon  he  gave  utterance  to  expressions  like  the 
following  : — 

"  'Oh,  how  dark!  What  dismal  clouds!  What  a  frightful  chasm!  Deep 
down — far,  far  down,  I  see  the  fiery  flood.  Save  them  from  the  pit !  .  .  .  I 
set  no  way  out.  There's  no  light !  The  clouds  roll  in  upon  me,  the  darkness 
deepens!     My   head  is   wHirling  !'  .  .  . 

"  During  this  exciting  scene,  which  lasted  perhaps  half  an  hour,  I  remained 
a  silent  spectator,  Mr.  Home  was  unconscious,  and  the  whole  was  inexplicable 
to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Elmer.  The  circumstances  occurred  some  twelve  years  before 
the  birth  of  Mr.  Home.  No  person  in  all  that  region  knew  aught  of  the 
history  of  Hannah  Brittan,  or  that  such  a  person  ever  existed.  But  to  me  the 
scene  was  one  of  peculiar  and  painful  significance.  She  was  highly  gifted  by 
nature,    and   endowed    with    the    tenderest   sensibilities.      She    became    insane 

'  Similarly  italicised   in    the  original. 

SCOTLAND  AND  AMERICA  ii 

from  believing  in  the  doctrine  of  endless  punishment ;  and  when  I  last  saw 
her  the  terrible  reality,  so  graphically  depicted  in  the  scene  I  have  attempted 
to  describe,  was  present  in  all   its  mournful  details   before  me. 

*'  Ihirty  years  have  scarcely  dimmed  the  recollection  of  the  scene  which  was 
thus  re-enacted  to  assure  me  of  the  actual  presence  of  the  spirit.  That  spirit 
has  since  informed  me  that  her  present  life  is  calm,  peaceful,  and  beautiful, 
and  that  the  burning  gulf,  with  all  its  horrible  imagery,  existed  only  in  the 
traditions  of  men,  and  in  the  fitful  wanderings  of  her  distracted  brain." 

Home  was  now  nineteen  years  of  age.  Since  quitting  his  aunt's 
house,  he  had  been  the  guest  of  one  or  other  friend ;  but  from  the 
suggestion  of  seeking  to  turn  his  gift  to  pecuniary  account  he  invariably 
recoiled,  and  was  as  poor  as  on  the  day  when  he  began  his  wanderings. 
Some  extraordinary  cures  wrought  through  him  at  Springfield  turned 
his  mind  towards  the  medical  profession.  If  he  were  to  train  himself 
lor  that  profession  by  the  usual  course  of  study,  the  beings  who  guided 
him  would  surely,  he  reasoned,  be  able  to  turn  his  training  to  account. 

He  spoke  of  his  plan  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Elmer,  who,  without  entirely 
<lisapproving  of  it,  responded  by  an  unexpected  proposal.  They  had 
learned  to  feel  a  great  affection  for  their  young  guest,  and  they  were 
rich  and  childless.  They  offered  to  adopt  Home  and  make  him  their 
heir,  on  condition  of  his  changing  his  name  to  that  of  Elmer. 

It  was  a  tempting  prospect  to  be  held  forth  to  one  who  had  neither 
home  nor  means,  but  after  anxious  thought  he  decided  to  decline  it. 
Betore  doing  so,  he  wrote  to  ask  the  advice  of  his  friends,  the  Ely 
family,  who  replied  in  a  letter  now  before  me :  ' '  You  can  never  feel 
anything  but  unbounded  gratitude  for  Mr.  Elmer's  kindness — still  it 
would  be  a  pity  to  do  anything  hastily  which  might  eventually  become 
irksome  to  either  party.  Your  name  is  a  very  good  one  as  it  is,  and 
why  not  be  distinguished  by  it?  "  The  words  echoed  Home's  own 
thoughts.  He  was  unwilling  to  change  his  name,  and  his  sensitive 
and  independent  nature  had  already  pictured  the  offer  of  adoption  as 
an  impulse  of  which  the  Elmers  might  afterwards  repent.  The  result 
was  that  he  gratefully  refused  the  proffered  adoption,  and  soon  after- 
wards left  Springfield  for  New  York.  There  was  no  break  of  friend- 
ship between  him  and  the  Elmers ;  he  spent  a  few  days  with  them  the 
following  autumn,  and,  at  their  pressing  invitation,  paid  them  a  long 
visit  in  the  spring  of  1854. 

In  New  York,  Home  met,  among  other  distinguished  Americans,  Pro- 
fessor Hare,  the  eminent  chemist  and  electrician,  inventor  of  the  oxy- 
hydrogen  blowpipe;  Professor  Mapes,  noted  for  his  researches  in 
connection  with  the  application  of  chemistry  to  agriculture ;  and  Judge 
lEdtaonds,  of  the  United  States  Supreme  Court.  AH  three  investigated 
the  phenomena  that  occurred  in  Home's  presence,  and  all  three  became 
fully  satisfied,  not  only  of  their  genuineness,  but  of  their  spiritual 
origin.  Y'et  they  had  approached  the  subject  as  utter  sceptics. 
Judge  Edmonds,  who  devoted  three  years  to  a  painstaking 
series  of  researches  into  Spiritualism,  wrote  in  the  New  York  Herald^ 
August  6,  1853 :  "  I  went  into  the  investigation  originally  thinking  it  a 
deception,  and  intending  to  make  public  my  exposure  of  it.  Having 
from  my  researches  come  to  a  different  conclusion,  I  feel  that  the 
obligation  to  make  known  the  result  is  just  as  strong." 

12  LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF   HOME 

Professor  Hare  had  accepted  the  experiments  of  Faraday  as  con- 
clusive; but  meeting  with  facts  for  which  the  explanations  of  the 
English  philosopher  would  not  account,  he  set  himself  to  devise  more 
ingenious  apparatus  than  Faraday's,  that  should,  as  he  expected,  con- 
clusively establish  that  no  force  was  exerted  during  a  seance  but  that  of 
the  sitters  present.  The  results  of  his  manifold  experiments  he  published 
in  a  volume  that  passed  through  five  editions.  Vary  the  experiments 
and  apparatus  as  he  might,  he  found  it  demonstrated  that  there  was  a 
poiwer  at  work  not  that  of  the  human  beings  present,  and  that  this 
power  was  governed  by  intelligence. 

Another  inquirer  who  sought  Mr.  Home's  acquaintance  at  New  York 
in  1852  was  Dr.  John  Ciray,  a  leading  American  physician.  "  For 
Dr.  Gray,"  wrote  Home  in  his  autobiography,  "  I  have  ever  had  the 
deepest  affection  and  esteem.  He  and  his  kind  wife  have  given  me 
counsel  and  befriended  me  at  all  times  and  under  all  circumstances. 
From  his  character  and  attainments  he  was  eminently  suitable  as  an 
investigator  of  phenomena  requiring  a  calm,  dispassionate  judgment." 

Dr.  Gray  encouraged  his  young  friend  to  carry  out  his  plan  of 
entering  on  a  course  of  medical  study,  but  a  chain  of  unforeseen  cir- 
cumstances for  some  time  prevented  Home  from  following  the  adyice. 
The  first  was  a  pressing  invitation  from  a  Dr.  Hull,  who  had  been 
present  at  a  seance  in  New  York,  to  visit  him  at  his  residence  on  the 
Hudson.  Home  accepted,  and  did  not  see  New  York  again  till  the 
autumn  of  1853. 

Dr.  Hull  lived  at  Newburgh  on  the  Hudson.  He  had  offered  Mr. 
Home  a  considerable  remuneration  in  proposing  the  visit,  which  was, 
of  course,  declined ;  Home  informing  him  that  he  had  never  been  paid 
and  never  would  be,  but  that  he  should  be  happy  to  pay  a  visit  to 
Newburgh  if  all  suggestions  of  payment  were  dropped.  Some  very 
interesting  seances  were  held  there ;  and  the  result  was  that  Dr.  Hull 
and  others  of  Home's  new  friends  united  in  a  kindly -meant  project. 
They  proposed  that,  as  his  education  had  naturally  been  somewhat 
neglected,  he  should  place  himself  in  their  hands  to  go  through  a  course 
of  ordinary  study,  before  entering  on  the  medical  training  that  he  had 
in  view.  Home  accepted  the  offer ;  but  having  made  promises  to  visit 
numerous  persons  during  that  autumn  and  winter,  he  was  obliged  to 
defer  availing  himself  of  it  till  the  following  year. 

In  August,  1852,  after  spending  a  week  at  Springfield,  where  he  was 
prostrated  by  severe  illness,  he  went  on  a  visit  to  Mr.  Ward  Cheney 
of  South  Manchester,  near  Hartford,  Connecticut,  one  of  the  most 
eminent  of  American  manufacturers.  The  Cheney  family  were  soon 
numbered  among  his  fastest  friends  in  America ;  and  when  Home  left 
the  States,  one  or  other  of  its  members  was  always  among  his  corres- 
pondents. In  1869,  Ward  Cheney,  then  a  friend  of  seventeen  years' 
standing,  visited  him  in  England ;  and  manifestations  occurred  that 
were  recorded  by  Lord  Dunraven.  Those  attending  Home's  intro- 
duction to  the  Cheneys  were  somewhat  remarkable. 

As  he  entered  the  hall  of  their  residence  at  South  Manchester,  a 
sound  resembling  the  rustling  of  a  heavy  silk  dress  attracted  his  atten- 
tion.      He  looked  round,  and  was  surprised  to  see  no  one.       A  few 

SCOTLAND  AND  AMERICA  13 

minutes  later,  when  talking  to  Mr.  Cheney  in  one  of  the  sitting  rooms, 
Home  again  heard  the  rustling  of  the  dress,  and  again  sought  in  vain 
tor  anything  that  might  account  for  such  a  sound.  His  host  noticed 
his  startled  look,  and  naturally  asked  him  the  reason  of  it.  Home, 
unwilling  to  make  much  of  the  matter,  only  replied  that  he  had  been 
very  ill,  and  his  nervous  system  was  probably  out  of  order.  He  had 
hardly  spoken  the  words,  when  looking  through  the  open  door  into  the 
hall,  he  saw  standing  there  a  little,  active-looking  elderly  lady,  clad  in 
a  heavy  dress  of  grey  silk.  The  apparent  mystery  was  explained ; 
and  as  the  thought  passed  through  his  mind,  the  dress  again  rustled. 

'ihis  time  Mr.  Cheney  also  heard  the  sound.  "  What  is  that?  " 
he  asked,  looking  towards  the  hall.  "  Oh,"  said  Home,  who,  from 
the  life-like  distinctness  of  the  figure,  had  not  the  slightest  thought 
tnat  it  could  be  other  than  of  flesh  and  blood,  ' '  only  the  dress  of  that 
elderly  lady  in  the  grey  silk  rustling." 

Mr.  Cheney  made  no  response ;  and  his  guest's  thoughts  were 
diverted  from  the  subject  by  the  entrance  of  the  other  members  of  the 
family.  The  lady  of  the  grey  silk  was  not  among  them;  nor,  to  his 
surprise,  did  she  appear  at  dinner.  He  expected  that  his  host  would 
make  some  remark  about  her,  but  nothing  was  said ;  and  this  singular 
reserve  naturally  set  the  visitor  wondering  who  she  might  be. 

As  he  was  leaving  the  dining-room,  the  dress  again  rustled,  close  to 
him;  and  he  heard  a  voice  say  very  distinctly,  "  I  am  annoyed  that 
a  coffin  should  have  been  placed  above  mine." 

Astonished  beyond  expression,  Home  repeated  this  strange  message 
to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Cheney,  and  related  what  he  had  previously  seen  and 
heard.  His  listeners  stared  at  him  and  at  each  other  in  mute  astonisb- 
naent,  till  finally  Mr.  Cheney  broke  silence. 

"  The  style  of  dress,"  he  said,  "  we  perfectly  recognise,  even  to  the 
peculiar  colour  and  heavy  texture;  but  as  for  this  story  of  a  coffin 
having  been  placed  on  hers,  it  is  as  incorrect  as  it's  ridiculous." 

Home  did  not  know  what  to  answer.  Till  he  heard  the  words, 
he  nad  not  for  a  moment  suspected  the  visionary  character  of  the 
figure;  and  even  now  he  was  not  aware  what  relationship  existed 
between  the  mysterious  visitant  and  his  hosts.  He  waited  to  see  what 
would  happen  next;  and  what  happened  was  that,  an  hour  later,  the 
voice  again  sounded  in  his  ear,  uttering  the  self -same  words.  This 
time,  however,  it  added:  "  What  is  more,  Seth  had  no  right  to  cut 
that  tree  down." 

Home  repeated  the  message  from  first  to  last.  Mr.  Cheney  seemed 
greatly  perplexed.  "  Certainly,"  he  said,  "  this  is  very  strange.  My 
brother  Seth  did  cut  down  a  tree  that  rather  obstructed  the  view  from 
the  old  homestead ;  and  we  all  said  at  the  time  that  the  one  who 
claims  to  speak  to  you  would  not  have  consented  to  his  felling  it  had 
she  been  on  earth.  As  for  the  rest  of  the  message,  it  is  sheer 
nonsense." 

Just  before  the  party  separated  for  the  night,  the  message  was  again 
given,  and  again  met  by  a  point-blank  contradiction.  "  I  went  to  my 
room,"  writes  Home,  "  feeling  greatly  depressed.  It  was  the  first 
time  an  untrue  message  had  been  received  through  me ;  and  even  were 

14  LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF   HOME 

it  correct,  it  astonished  me  that  a  Hberated  spirit  should  occupy  itself 
with  such  a  matter.  I  could  not  sleep  for  thinking  of  the  occurrence. ' ' 
In  the  morning  he  made  known  to  his  host  how  much  the  matter 
had  troubled  him.  "  I  am  just  as  sorry  about  it,"  answered  Mr. 
Cheney ;  and  resumed — ' '  I  am  now  going  to  demonstrate  to  you  that, 
if  it  were  the  spirit  it  purports  to  be,  it  is  sadly  mistaken.  We  will 
go  together  to  the  family  vault,  and  you  shall  see  for  yourself  that, 
even  had  we  desired  to  do  so,  it  would  be  impossible  to  place  another 
coflttn  above  hers." 

llie  two  went  at  once  to  the  burying-ground.  The  person  who  had 
the  care  of  the  vault  was  sent  for,  and  its  owner  desired  him  to  open 
it.  As  he  placed  the  key  in  the  lock,  the  man  seemed  to  recollect 
something ;  and  turning,  said  in  a  half-apologetic  tone,  ' '  By  the  way, 
Mr.  Cheney,  as  there  was  just  a  little  room  above  the  cofBn  of  Mrs. 

"  (the  old  lady  in  the  grey  silk),  "  I  have  placed  the  coffin  of 

Mrs.  L 's  baby  there.       I  suppose  it's  all  right,  but  perhaps  I 

ought  to  have  asked  you  first  about  it.    I  only  did  it  yesterday." 

Mr.  Cheney  turned  on  his  companion  a  look  that  Home  could  never 
forget.  "  It's  all  true,  then — it's  all  true!  "  were  the  only  words 
he  could  utter. 

Home  related  this  strange  incident  in  his  Lights  and  Shadows  of 
Sfiriiualtsm,  published  in  1877.  He  gave  the  scene  of  its  occurrence, 
Hartford,  Conn.,  but  ommitted  naming  the  Cheney  family. 

"  The  same  evening,"  he  writes,  "  the  spirit  once  more  made 
known  her  presence.  '  Think  not,'  ran  the  message  now  delivered, 
'  that  I  would  care  were  a  pyramid  of  coffins  to  be  piled  on  mine.  I 
was  anxious  to  convince  you  of  my  identity,  once  and  for  ever. '  ' ' 

Ward  Cheney,  Home's  host  of  1852,  died  at  South  Manchester  in 
1876.  Shortly  after  his  departure  from  earth,  Home  received  a  com- 
munication that  I  shall  give  in  a  future  chapter. 

While  staying  with  the  Cheneys  in  1852,  the  first  instance  of  Home 
bemg  lifted  in  the  air  occurred. 

"  During  these  elevations  or  levitatlons,"  he  wrote,  "  I  feel  no 
hands  supporting  me,  and  since  the  first  time,  I  have  never  felt  fear ; 
though,  should  I  have  fallen  from  the  ceiling  of  some  rooms  in  which 
1  have  been  raised,  I  could  not  have  escaped  serious  injury.  I  am 
generally  lifted  up  perpendicularly ;  my  arms  frequently  become  rigid, 
and  are  drawn  above  my  head,  as  if  I  were  grasping  the  unseen  power 
which  slowly  raises  me  from  the  floor. ' ' 

On  taking  leave  of  his  new  friends  at  South  Manchester,  Home 
passed  the  remainder  of  the  year  1852  in  paying  various  visits  he  had 
promised.  It  was  at  this  time  that  he  first  saw  Boston,  where  converts 
to  Spiritualism  were  becoming  numerous.  The  manifestations 
witnessed  there  were  similar  to  those  already  recorded,  with  the 
addition  that  on  more  than  one  occasion  strains  of  music  were  heard 
during  a  seance  when  no  instrument  was  near,  a  phenomenon  often 
subsequently  attested. 

Early  in  the  year  1853,  Home  returned  to  Newburgh  to  commence 
the  course  of  study  proposed  to  him  by  Dr.  Hull  and  his  other  friends 
there.       In  thi^  retired  and  beautiful  spot,   which  hes  among  the 

SCOTLAND  AND  AMERICA  15 

highlands  of  the  Hudson  and  not  far  from  West  Point,  the  spring  and 
summer  were  tranquilly  but  laboriously  spent.  He  had  entered  the 
Theological  Institute  as  a  boarder,  though  he  did  not  attend  the 
classes;  and,  imder  the  direction  of  Dr.  Hull,  was  commencing  the 
acquirement  of  the  French  and  German  languages. 

"  While  here,"  wrote  Home  in  1863,  "  I  had  an  extraordinary  vision,  which 
is  still  so  vivid  that  I  remember  it  in  all  its  details. 

"  The  Institute  was  built  on  an  eminence  commanding  a  view  of  peculiar 
beauty;  below  lay  the  city;  on  the  right  the  river  was  lost  in  its  windings 
among  the  rocky  hills  surrounding  West  Point ;  on  the  left  it  lay  in  expanse, 
and  could  be  traced  for  a  distance  of  many  miles ;  behind  spread  out  the 
country,  with  its  pretty  little  farmhouses  dotted  here  and  there.  I  have  sat 
for  hours  of  an  evening  watching  their  lights,  and  endeavouring  to  picture 
the  lives  and  emotions  that  crossed  those  thresholds. 

"  One  evening  1  had  been  pondering  deeply  on  that  change  which  the  world 
calls  death,  and  on  the  eternity  that  lies  beyond,  until,  wearied,  I  found  relief 
in  prayer,  and  then  in  sleep.  It  appeared  to  me  that,  as  I  closed  my  eyes 
to  earthly  things,  an  inner  perception  was  quickened  within  me,  till  at  last 
reason  was  as  active  as '  when  I  was  awake.  I,  with  vivid  distinctness, 
remember  asking  myself  the  question  whether  I  were  asleep  or  not?  when, 
to  my  amazement,  1  heard  a  voice'  which  seemed  so  natural  that  my  heart 
bounded  with  joy  as  I  recognised  it  for  the  voice  of  one  who,  while 
on  earth,  was  far  too  pure  for  such  a  world  as  ours,  and  who,  in  passing  to 
that  brighter  home,  had  promised  to  watch  over  and  protect  me.  And, 
although  I  well  knew  she  would  do  so,  it  was  the  first  time  I  had  heard 
her  voice  with  that  nearness  and  natural  tone.  She  said,  '  Fear  not,  Daniel ; 
I  am  near  you  :  the  vision  you  are  about  to  have  is  that  of  death,  yet  you  will 
not  die.' 

"  The  voice  became  lost ;  and  I  felt  as  one  who  at  noonday  is  struck 
blind.  As  he  would  cling  even  to  the  last  memories  of  the  sunlight,  so  I  would 
fain  have  clung  to  material  existence — not  that  I  felt  any  dread  of  passing 
away,  nor  that  I  doubted  for  an  instant  the  words  of  my  guardian  angel ;  but 
I  feared  I  had  been  over-presumptuous  in  desiring  knowledge,  the  very 
memory  of  which  might  disturb  my  future  life.  This  was  but  momentary,  for 
almost  instantaneously  came  rushing  with  a  fearful  rapidity  memories  of  the 
past ;  my  thoughts  bore  the  semblance  of  realities,  and  every  action  appeared 
as  an  eternity  of  existence.  During  the  whole  time  I  was  aware  of  a 
."benumbing  and  chilling  sensation  which  stole  over  my  body ;  but  the  more 
inactive  my  nervous  system  became,  the  more  active  was  my  mind,  till  at 
length  I  felt  as  if  I  had  fallen  from  the  brink  of  some  fearful  precipice  ;  and 
as  I  fell,  all  became  obscure,  and  my  whole  body  one  dizzy  mass,  only  kept 
alive  by  a  feeling  of  terror,  until  sensation  and  thought  simultaneously  ceased, 
and  I  knew   no  more. 

"  How  long  I  had  lain  thus  I  know  not;  but  soon  I  felt  that  I  was  about 
to  awaken  in  a  most  dense  obscurity.  Terror  had  given  place  to  a  pleasurable 
feeling,  accompanied  by  a  certitude  of  some  one  dearly  loved  being  near  me, 
yet  invisible.  Instinctively  I  realised  that  beyond  the  surrounding  obscurity 
lay  an  ocean  of  silver-toned  light.  .   .  . 

"  I  felt  that  thought  and  action  were  no  longer  connected  with  the  earthly 
tenement,  but  that  they  were  in  a  spirit-body  in  every  respect  similar  to  the 
body  which  I  knew  to  have  been  mine,  and  which  I  now  saw  lying  motionless 
before  me  on  the  bed.  The  only  link  which  held  the  two  forms  together  seemed 
to  be  a  silvery  light,  which  proceeded  from  the  brain.  As  if  it  were  a  response 
to  my  earlier  waking  thoughts,  the  same  voice,  only  that  it  was  now  more 
musical  than  before,  said  :  *  Death  is  but  a  second  birth,  corresponding  in 
every  respect  to  the  natural  birth  ;  and  should  the  uniting  link  now  be  severed, 
you  could  never  again  enter  the  body.  As  I  told  you,  however,  this  will  not 
be.  You  did  wrong  to  doubt,  even  for  an  instant,  for  this  was  the  cause 
of  your  having  suffered  ;  and  this  very   want  of  faith  is  the  source  of  every 

i6  LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF  HOME 

evil  on  your  earth.  ...  Be  very  calm,  for  in  a  few  moments  you  will  see  us 
all ;  but  do  not  touch  us.  Be  guided  by  the  one  who  is  appointed  to  go  with 
you,  for  I  must  remain  near  your  body.' 

"  It  now  appeared  to  me  that  1  was  waking  from  a  dream  of  darkness 
to  a  sense  of  light,  but  such  a  glorious  light !  Never  did  earthly  sun  shed  such 
rays,  strong  in  beauty,  soft  in  love.  This  heavenly  light  came  from  those  I 
saw  standing  about  me.  Yet  the  light  was  not  of  their  creating,  but  was 
shed  on  them  from  a  higher  and  purer  source,  which  only  seemed  the  more 
adorably  beautiful  in  the  invisibility  of  its  holy  love  and  mercy — thus  to 
shower  every  blessing  on  the  creatures  of  its  creation.  And  now  I  was  bathed 
in  light,  and  about  me  were  those  for  whom  I  had  sorrowed.  One  that  I  had 
never  known  on  earth  then  drew  near,  and  said,  '  You  will  come  with  me, 
Daniel?  '  I  could  only  reply  that  it  was  impossible  to  move,  inasmuch  as  I 
could  not  feel  that  my  nature  had  a  power  over  my  new  spirit-body.  .  .  . 

"I  was  wafted  upward,  until  I  saw  the  earth,  as  a  vision,  far,  far  below 
us.  Soon  I  found  that  we  had  drawn  nearer,  and  were  just  hovering  over  a 
cottage  that  I  had  ne*er  seen  ;  and  I  also  saw  the  inmates,  but  had  never  met 
them  in  life.  The  walls  of  the  cottage  were  not  the  least  obstruction  to  my 
sight ;  they  were  only  as  if  constructed  of  a  dense  body  of  air,  yet  perfectly 
transparent ;  and  the  same  might  be  said  of  every  article  of  furniture.  I 
perceived  that  the  inmates  were  asleep ;  and  I  saw  the  various  Spirits  who  were 
watching  over   the   sleepers.  .  .  . 

"  I  was  most  deeply  interested  in  all  this,  when  my  guide  said,  '  We  must 
now  return.'  When  I  found  myself  near  the  body,  I  turned  to  the  one  who 
had  remained  near  my  bed,  and  said,  '  Why  must  I  return  so  soon?  for  it  can 
be  but  a  few  moments  I  have  been  with  3'ou  ;  and  I  would  fain  see  more, 
and  remain  near  you  longer.'  She  replied,  '  It  is  now  many  hours  since  you 
came  to  us  ;  but  here  we  take  no  cognisance  of  time,  and  as  you  are  here  in 
spirit,  you,  too,  have  lost  this  knowledge ;  we  would  have  you  with  us,  but 
this  must  not  be  at  present.'  .  .  . 

"  I  heard  no  more,  but  seemed  to  sink  as  in  a  swoon,  until  consciousness 
was  merged  into  a  feeling  that  earth  with  its  trials  lay  before  me,  and  that  I, 
as  well  as  every  human  being,  must  bear  my  cross.  And  when  I  opened  my 
eyes  to  material  things,  I  found  that  the  little  star  I  had  lain  watching  had 
given  way  to  the  sun,  which  had  been  above  the  horizon  about  four  hours  ; 
making  in  all  some  eleven  hours  that  this  vision  had  lasted.  My  limbs  were 
so  dead  that  at  least  half  an  hour  elapsed  before  I  could  reach  the  bell-rope 
to  bring  anyone  40  my  assistance,  and  it  was  only  by  continued  friction  that, 
at  the  end  of  an   hour,   I   had  sufficient  force  to  enable  me  to  stand  upright. 

"  I  merely  give  these  facts  as  they  occurred  ;  let  others  comment  on  them  as 
they  may.  I  have  only  to  add  that  nothing  could  ever  convince  me  that  this 
was  an  illusion  or  a  delusion  ;  and  the  remembrance  of  those  hours  is  as  fresh 
in  my  mind  now  as  at  the  moment  they  took  place." 

In  the  autumn  of  1853,  Home  quitted  Newburgh  for  New  York,  with 
the  intention  of  beginning  a  course  of  medical  study.  One  after  the 
other,  various  hindrances  linked  themselves  together  into  a  chain  of 
circumstances  opposing  the  fulfilment  of  his  wish;  until,  convinced 
that  another  career  was  destined  for  him,  he  began  to  feel  the  necessity 
ot  abandoning  his  cherished  plan. 

His  friends  at  Newburgh  had  wished  him  to  promise  that,  during 
his  residence  in  New  York,  he  would  give  no  seances  without  their 
express  consent.  Impressed  by  the  cures  already  wrought  through 
him,  they  were  eager  to  see  him  become,  as  Dr.  Hull  expresses  it  in 
one  of  his  letters,  "a  physician  who  would  do  honour  to  his  race;" 
and  in  the  hope  of  developing  speedily  and  remarkably  his  gift  of 
healing,  they  insisted  on  his  pursuing  a  course  of  severe  and  solitary 
study.       But  of  all  natures,  the  joyous,  affectionate,  social  tempera- 

SCOTLAND  AND  AMERICA  17 

ment  of  Home  was  most  unfit  for  solitude,  and  suffered  most  from  the 
effect!  of  a  life  unhealthy  to  all,  and  to  him  repulsive.  In  January, 
1654,  he  tell  ill.  "  I  had  been  so  left  to  myself  in  solitude  and  study 
the  whole  winter,"  he  records  in  the  Incidents,  "  that  mind  and  body 
were  alike  disturbed.  I  wrote  to  my  friends  saying  that  I  could  not 
think  of  continuing  the  life  I  then  led;  and  after  many  letters  had 
passed  between  us,  I  was  again  left  to  myself  to  decide  as  to  my  future 
course.  I  had  friends  in  Boston,  who,  as  soon  as  they  knew  what  my 
intentions  were,  generously  offered  to  do  all  that  my  other  friend*  had 
been  doing,,  and  to  allow  me  perfect  liberty  to  see  whom  I  might 
please." 

On  recovering  his  liberty  of  action,  he  stayed  for  some  time  with 
the  Elmers  at  Springfield,  where  manifestations  occurred  of  which  an 
account  was  published  by  one  of  the  witnesses.  Dr.  Gardner,  of 
Bostoni.  "  With  the  room  well  lighted,"  he  wrote,  "  we  were  many 
times  touched  more  or  less  forcibly,  producing  a  peculiar  and  indescrib- 
able sensation.  Some  of  us  distinctly 'felt  the  form  of  the  spirit  hand, 
a  soft,  delicate,  elastic,  yet  powerful  touch,  which  cannot  be  described, 
but  must  be  felt  to  be  appreciated.  The  reader,"  added  Dr. 
Gardner,  "  will  bear  in  mind  that  the  hands  of  every  person  present 
were  in  plain  view  on  the  top  of  the  table." 

Home  passed  much  of  the  spring  and  sunmier  of  1854  in 
Boston,  where  frequent  and  remarkable  seances  took  place,  the  rare 
phenomenon  of  the  apparition  of  a  phantom  form  being  observed  on 
more  than  one  occasion.  For  part  of  the  summer  he  lived  at 
Roxbury;  and  as  his  health  seemed  gradually  improving,  he  rererted, 
in  spite  of  former  obstacles  and  disappointments,  to  his  wish  of 
studying  for  a  medical  diploma.  Among  his  correspondents  at  this 
time  and  subsequently,  was  one  of  the  most  distinguished  of  American 
preachers  and  theologians,  Dr.  T.  M.  Clark,  now  Bishop  of  Rhode 
Island,  who,  in  the  years  1853  and  1854,  was  residing  at  Hartford, 
Connecticut.  South  Manchester,  the  home  of  the  Cheney  family,  is 
not  far  distant ;  and  Dr.  Clark  was  a  friend  of  the  Cheneys,  in  whose 
views  a  revolution  had  been  wrought  by  their  experiences  with  Home. 
The  wonderful  particulars  communicated  to  him  determined  Dr.  Clark 
to  inquire  into  the  subject ;  and  he  availed  himself  of  the  various  visits 
of  Mr.  Home  to  Hartford  and  its  neighbourhood:  to  carry  on  in  his 
own  house  a  patient  and  searching  investigation  of  the  phenomena. 
As  to  the  results  of  that  inquiry,  I  may  leave  the  following  letter  from 
Bishop  Clark  to  Home  to  speak  for  itself : — 

"  Hartford,  /u««  2,  1854. 

"  My  dear  Daniel, — It  is  a  glorious  June  morning,  and  I  think  that  I  will 
have  a  little  chat  with  you.  I  can  imagine  you  looking  out  from  your  elevation 
in  Ro.xbury  upon  the  distant  sea,  and  then  up  into  the  more  distant  heavens, 
to  see  who  are  looking  down  upon  you  from  above.  I  can  also  imagine  you 
squaring  away  at  your  table,  digging  into  French  and  German.  .  .   . 

"  One  law,  if  I  were  you,  should  be  as  the  laws  of  the  Medes  and  Persians — 
I  would  not  '  sit  '  but  twice  a  week  for  anybody.  You  have  been  over  excited 
of  late,   and  now  '  thf  grasshopper  is  a  burden.' 

"  Don't  allow  yourself  to  be  too  sensitive  as  to  the  opinions  and  notions 
of  other  people.     I   think    that   this    is    perhaps  the  source  of   your   greatest 

i8  LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF  HOME 

trouble.  \  ou  have  the  consciousness  of  integrity :  let  that  suffice  for  the 
present — the  future  will  settle  the  rest.  You  have  the  pleasant  assurance  of 
having  been  the  instrument  of  conveying  incalculable  joy  and  comforc  to  th" 
hearts  of  m?ny  people  .  in  the  case  of  some  you  have  changed  the  whole  aspect 
of  their  existence  ;  you  have  made  dwelling-places  light  that  were  dark  before ; 
you  have,  then,  a  right  to  be  happy  yourself. 

"  And  again,  you  never  ought  to  feel  that  you  are  living  in  a  state  of 
dependence  upon  others.  For  you  give  infinitely  more  than  you  receive. 
Never  have  one  distrustful  thought  as  to  the  future.  You  will  see  bright 
sunshine  yet. 

Every  evening,  as  we  sit  down  in  our  snug  parlour,  we  say  as  a  regular 
chorus,  '  Oh,  if  Dan  were  only  here  !  '  We  intend  to  drive  to  Manchester  in 
a  day  or  two.  My  book  is  posted  up  to  that  last  night  in  your  chamber. 
Those  tangible  demonstrations  cannot  be  recorded  on  paper.  Write  me  as  soon 
as  you  can.' — Very  affectionately  yours, 

"Thomas  M.  Clark." 

The  excellent  advice  of  Dr.  Clark,  that  he  should  lay  down  a  law 
to  hold  at  most  two  seances  a  week,  Home  could  not  act  upon.  He 
was  surrounded  by  eager  inquirers,  who  were  determinal  that  he 
should  not  act  upon  it.  As  for  that  sensitiveness  in  which  his 
correspondent  justly  discerned  a  source  of  trouble  to  him,  it  was  one.  of 
the  conditions  of  his  phenomenal  Ufe — a  hard  condition,  but  one  of 
which  no  effort  would  have  enabled  him  to  divest  himself.  He 
was  created  to  feel  both  joy  and  sorrow  more  keenly  than  other  men, 
and  his  life  was  so  ordained  that  the  sorrow  should  largely  predominate 
over  the  joy. 

A  few  weeks  later.  Dr.  Clark  wntes  to  Home  again : — 

"  Hartford,  June  25,  1854. 

"  Mt  DBAS  Daniel, — I  expect  to  be  in  Newburyport  on  the  Fourth  of  July, 
and  shall  return  here  on  the  5th,  by  way  of  Boston.  Please  to  let  me  know 
whether  I  shall  find  you  home  on  Wednesday,  the  5th.  How  I  wish  that  you 
could  only  drop  in  upon  us  this  quiet  Sunday  evening  1  It  seems  hardly 
possible  that  we  can  ever  have  any  more  of  those  wonderful  scenes  which 
we  passed  through  with  you.  When  I  recall  the  incidents  as  they  occurred, 
they  appear  too  great  to  be  believed.  Do  you  get  anything  new — that  is, 
anything  different  in  kind  from  what  we  have  experienced?  It  is  rather  hard 
for  us  to  be  deprived  of  all  that  is  going  on  in  Boston  and  Brooklyn.  I 
have  been  so  occupied  with  other  matters,  that  I  have  now  a  strong  appetite 
for  something  a   little  spiritual." 

What  were  the  wonderful  scenes,  it  will  be  asked,  to  which  the 
Bishop  refers  ?  Dr.  Clark  does  not  afford  me  any  information  ;  not 
that  he  denies  the  evidence  of  his  sensesi  any  more  than  he  did  in 
1854,  but  that  those  who  were  tooi  timid  to  give  their  naimes  to  the 
world,  when  the  impression  made  by  the  phenomena  was  fresh,  are  still 
more  unwilling  now.  I  will  relate  briefly  the  remaining  events  of 
Home's  life  in  America,  and  then  conclude  this  chapter  with  an  extract 
from  the  scanty  information  in  my  possession  concerning  the  seances 
at  Hartford.  Home  kept  no  record  of  those  seances  or  of  any  others ; 
ha  left  the  phenomena  to  speak  to  the  beholders,  and  the  beholders  to 
speak  in  their  turn  to  the  world,  if  they  had  the  oooirage.  Not  very 
many  displayed  that  courage;  and  with  regard  to  the  Harford  mani- 
festations, there  are  few  now  left  on  earth  to  speak  of  what  they  saw 
and  tested!  in  Home's  presence  more  than  thirty  years  ago.. 

SCOTLAND  AND  AMERICA  19 

Home  spent  the  winter  at  New  York,  going  much  among  the  poorer 
classes,  and  holding  seances  with  tliem.  He  had  again  entered  on  his 
medical  studies,  and  again  they  were  interrupted  by  the  failure  of  his 
health.  The  winter  that  year  was  unusually  bitter;  and  by  January, 
1855,  the  symptoms  had  grown  so  alarming  that  all  thought  of  continu- 
ing his  studies  had  to  be  abandoned.  A  year  previously,  his  left  lung 
Ixad  been  pronounced  diseased.  Dr.  Gray  of  New  York,  and  other 
eminent  medical  friends  whom  he  now  consulted,  united  in  declaring 
that  the  malady  had  made  such  progress  as  to  render  his  condition 
one  of  grave  danger,  and  in  recommending,  as  the  best  hope  of  pro- 
longing his  life,  a  voyage  to  Europe. 

That  recommendation  was  the  sole  and  sufficient  reason  why  Home 
quitted  America.  It  cost  him  a  hard  struggle  to  follow  the  advice  so 
pressingly  tendered.  "  I  was  to  be  separated  from  those  who  would 
have  tended  me  with  every  affection, ' '  he  writes,  * '  and  to  be  thrown 
as  it  were  a  stranger  in  a  strange  land.  My  family  had  by  this  time 
all  been  residents  of  America  for  some  time,  and  I  knew  no  one 
friend  in  all  England." 

His  many  friends  in  the  States  wrote,  as  soon  as  the  verdict  and 
advice  of  the  physicians  became  known  to  them,  to  express  their  deep 
grief  at  the  news  and  press  him  to  pay  them  parting  visits  before  he 
sailed.  I  quote  a  few  words  from  a  letter  in  my  jxjssession  written 
to  Home  early  in  1855  by  Mrs.  Clark: — 

"  I  am  grieved  at  the  result  of  Dr.  Gray's  examination,  for  I  had 
always  tried  to  persuade  myself  that  no  serious  difficulty  existed.  But 
oh,  it  cannot  be  that  you  are  to  pass  away  from  us  soon.  I  will  not 
think  of  it.  I  am  sure  that,  with  care  and  a  quiet  course  of  life, 
you  may  be  spared  to  us  many  years  yet,  and  enjoy  a  good  degree  of 
health,  as  many  do  under  such  circumstances." 

February  and  March,  1855,  were  passed  by  Home  in  paying  farewell 
visits  to  his  friends ;  they  and  he  both  thinking  it  was  the  last  time 
they  should  meet  on  earth.  In  March  he  was  at  Hartford,  Conn.,  and 
held  one  or  two  last  seances  there.  Three  years  later  a  lengthy 
narrative  of  one  of  these  seances  was  published  in  the  Hartford 
Courant  (March  6th,  1858),  but  as  the  writer  only  signs  himself 
"  D."  I  l-iave  been  unable  identify  him.  The  editor  of  the 
Courant  prefixed  to  "  D.'s  "  narrative  the  following  introductory 
remarks.  Perhaps  they  may  enable  some  American  readers  to 
identify  the  "  D."  to  whom  they  refer: — 

"  The  gentleman  who  signs  the  subjoined  communication  was 
appointed  by  the  Secretary  of  War  a  member  of  the  Board  of 
Examiners  of  the  national  military  school  at  West  Point  last  summer  " 
(1857).  "  At  West  Point  he  was  selected  by  the  Board  of 
Examiners  from  their  number  to  deliver  the  parting  address  to  the 
cadets.  We  mention  these  facts  as  significant  of  the  mental  calibre 
and  culture  of  the  writer. ' ' 

"  The  friend  to  whom  I  was  indebted  for  an  introduction  to  Home,"  writes 
"  D.,"  "  being  well  acquainted  with  my  scepticism  upon  these  matters, 
arranged  that  the  '  circle  '  should  sit  in  my  own  house,  that  all  suspicion  of 
machinery    or    any   other   underhanded    contrivance  might  be  removed    at    the 

ao  LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF  HOME 

outset.  It  was  also  left  for  me  to  determine  who  should  compose  the  circle. 
1  selected  a  party  of  ladies  and  gentlemen  of  whom  it  was  presumed  that 
two,  from  previous  investigations  with  Mr.  Home,  admitted  the  reality  of 
these  phenomena,  and  were  inclined  to  believe  in  the  spiritualistic  solution. 
The  remaining  eight  scouted  Both  the  theory  and  the  facts.  .  .  . 

"  I  could  not  help  compassionating  Home  when  I  saw  him,  a  youth  tl  twenty, 
pale,  emaciated,  and  suffering  from  consumption,  confronted  by  such  aa  array 
of  mature,  hard-headed  scoffers  at  his  pretensions." 

The  seance,  relates  "  D.,"  was  held  in  a  rcxxn  "  lighted  by  a  gas 
chandelier  with  four  burners ;  "  and  the  party  sat  at  a  large  oral  table, 
seven  feet  eight  inches  in  length.  The  table  vibrated,  loud  rapi  were 
heaxd,  and  various  phenomena  succeeded,  which  "  D."  minutely 
describes.  Among  them,  an  accordion  played  in  "D.'s"  hand,  he 
holding  the  instrument  by  the  end  farthest  from  the  keys.  "  Home 
was  seven  feet  eight  inches  from  me."  "  D."  writes,  "  and  could  not 
have  reached  me  even  if  his  entire  body  had  been  extended  in  my 
direction." 

"  These  spiritual  phenomena,"  continues  "  D.,"  "  had  so  repeatedly  refused 
to  appear  in  my  presence  and  respond  to  my  wooing,  that  in  regard  to  theai 
I  was  inclined  to  reject  all  testimony.  One  sitting  with  Mr.  Home  disabused 
me  of  this  incredulity,  and  convinced  me,  not  of  the  alleged  spiritual  agency, 
but  that  the  marvels  which  attend  him  are  genuine,  and  cannot  be  explained 
by  jugglery,  collusion,  deception,  or  hallucination,  but  must  be  solved,  if 
solved  at  all,  by  some  law  of  nature  or  of  mind  as  yet  undiscovered.  I  affirm 
this  of  no  other  medium  but  Home,  for  my  attempts  to  extract  miraclea  from 
other  professors   of   this  art  have  proved  most  signal  failures. 

■'  Home  spurns  every  inducement  to  invest  his  wonderful  power  in  business, 
and  engage  in  rapping  as  a  trade.  He  is  rather  too  chary  of  his  rare  gift,  and 
displays  it  only  on  urgent  solicitation,  as  a  favour  to  those  he  likes,  or  as  a 
grace  to  the  psychological  inquirer. 

'■'  It  is  less  preposterous  to  my  mind,"  declares  "  D.,"  in  terminating  his 
account  of  the  seance,  "  to  adopt  even  the  spiritual  hypothesis  than  to  believe 
that  Home  could  accomplish  all  this  by  his  feet,  while  twenty  suspicious  eyes 
were  fastened  upon  him." 

Throughout  this  narrative,  Home's  name  is  spelt  "  Hume  " — a 
mistaJce  made  by  many  persons  besides  the  writer  in  the  Hartford 
Courant.  Home  always  wrote  his  name  "  Home,"  but  he  retained 
the  ancient  Scottish  pronunciation  of  that  name,  "  Hume;  "  hence 
the  difference  between  his  own  mode  of  spelling  it  and  that  sometimes 
mistaJcenly  adopted  by  others.  He  was  much  amused  when,  on  one 
occasion,  a  very  oracular  acquaintance  wrote  to  some  American  news- 
pai>eT  to  settle,  once  and  for  ever,  the  question  whether  the  name  were 
Home  or  Hume,  by  announcing  that  with  his  own  ears  he  had  heard 
the  bearer  of  that  name  pronounce  it  H«me,  and  that  those  persons 
who  spelt  it  H^me,  only  showed  that  they  had  never  met  its  owner. 

In  Mr.  Home's  Incidents  in  My  Life,  published  in  1863,  is  contained 
(pp.  56 — 61)  the  narrative  of  a  seance  that  took  place  at  Hartford, 
Connecticut,  on  March  14,  1855,  within  a  few  days  of  the  other  seance 
described  by  the  West  Point  Examiner  "  D."  The  name  of  the 
witness  who  furnished  this  narrative  was  not  published  in  the  Incidents. 
He  was  Mr.  Frank  L.  Burr,  editor  of  the  Hartford  Times,  and  has 
kindly  sent  me  a  letter  attesting  the  facts  narrated  in  the  Incidents, 

SCOTLAND  AND  AMERICA  21 

and  adding  some  further  particulars  to  the  description  there  giren 
bf  him. 

This  Hartford  seance  of  March  14th,  1855,  was  one  of  the  last — 
perhaps  the  very  last — held  by  Mr.  Home  in  the  States  before  he 
sailed.  I  extract  a  portion  of  Mr.  Burr's  narrative  as  published  in 
the  Incidents.  The  sitters  on  this  occasion  consisted  of  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Burr,  and  Mr.   Home: — 

"A  paper  was  taken  from  the  floor,  slowly  lifted  up,  and  placed  upoa 
tke  table,  as  1  can  affirm,  without  the  aid  of  a  human  hand.  Sitting  at  the 
end  of  the  table  where  this  was  done,  I  was  enabled  to  see  the  whole  of  this 
proceeding.  The  paper  was  placed  upon  the  edge  of  the  table,  and  so  near  my 
hand  as  to  touch  it.  I  saw  plainly  and  clearly  the  hand  that  held  the  paper. 
It  was  evidently  a  lady's  hand — very  thin,  very  pale,  ind  remarkably  attenuated. 
Ihe  conformation  of  this  hand  was  peculiar.  The  fingers  were  of  an  almost 
preternatural  length,  and  seemed  to  be  set  wide  apart.  The  extreme  pallor 
of  the  entire  hand  was  also  remarkable.  But  perhaps  the  most  noticeable  thing 
about  it  was  the  shape  of  the  fingers,  which,  in  addition  to  their  length  and 
thinness,  were  unusally  pointed  at  the  ends  ;  they  tapered  rapidly  and  evenly 
towards  the  tips.  The  hand  also  narrowed  from  Ihe  lower  knuckles  to  the 
wrist,  where  it  ended.  All  this  could  be  seen  by  such  light  as  was  in  the 
r»om,  while  the  hand  was  for  a  few  moments  holding  the  paper  upon  the 
ed^s  of  the  table.  .  .  . 

"  Tke  hand,"  continues  Mr.  Burr,  "  presently  took  a  pencil  and  began  to 
write.  This  was  in  plain  sight,  being  only  shaded  by  one  of  the  circle  who 
was  sitting  between  the  paper  on  the  table,  and  the  fire.  The  hands  of  each 
one  present  were  upon  the  table,  in  full  view,  so  that  it  could  not  have 
been  one  of  the  party  who  was  thus  writing.  Being  the  nearest  one  to  the 
hand,  I  bent  down  close  to  it  as  it  wrote,  to  see  the  whole  of  it.  It  extended 
■•  further  than  the  wrist.  With  a  feeling  of  curiosity  natural  under  the 
circumstances,  I  brought  my  face  close  to  it  in  the  endeavour  to  see  exactly 
what  it  was,  and,  in  so  doing,  probably  destroyed  the  electrical  or  magnetic 
influence  by  which  it  was  working ;  for  the  pencil  dropped,  and  the  hand 
vanished.  The  writing  was  afterwards  examined,  and  proved  to  be  tke 
n»me,  in  her  own  proper  handwriting,  of  a  relative  and  intimate  friend  of  one 
of  the  circle,  who  passed  away  some  years  since."  ("  My  wife's  cousin — a 
lady  who  died  some  five  years  before,"  says  Mr.  Burr  in  a  letter  to  me  of 
.\pril,  1887.)  "Other  marks  were  also  made,  and  the  word  'Dear'  had  been 
written  just  as  the  pencil  dropped.  This  writing  has  been  preserved,  and 
remains  as  an  evidence  of  the  reality  of  the  fact.  That  it  was  produced  by  no 
hand  of  any  one  bodily  in  that  room  I  know  and  affirm." 

A  daguerreotype  portrait  of  Mrs.  Burr's  cousin,  taken  shortly  before  her 
death  (from  consumption)  was  presented  to  Mr.  Home  subsequently  to  the 
siance.  It  has  been  preserved,  and  is  now  in  my  possession.  The  hands  and 
fingers  in  the  daguerreotype  have  the  very  same  wasted  look  and  singular 
conformation   so  minutely  described  by  Mr.   Burr. 

The  hand,"  says  Mr.  Burr  in  concluding  his  narrative  published  in  the 
Incidents,  "  afterwards  came  and  shook  hands  with  each  one  present.  I  felt 
it  minutely.  It  was  tolerably  well  and  symmetrically  made,  though  not 
^rfect ;  and  it  was  soft  and  slightly  warm.     It  ended  at  the  wrist." 

In  his  letter  to  me  of  April  6,  1887,  Mr.  Burr  gives  some  additional 
particulars  concerning  the  seance,  and  relates  in  detail  the  examina- 
tion he  made  of  the  spirit-hand  when  it  grasped  his. 

"  Mr.  Home  came  to  our  house  rather  late  in  the  evening,"  he 
writes,  "  having  been  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Day,  then  the  editor  of 
the  Hartford  Courant,  all  the  evening.  I  invited  him  into  the  parlour 
for  a  seance.  Nobody  was  present  but  Mrs.  Burr  and  myself  and 
Mr.  Home." 

22  LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF  HOME 

Mr.  Burr  then  details  the  phenomena  of  the  seance  as  in  his  des- 
cription written  thirty  years  before;  and)  on  arriving  at  the  point 
where  the  narrative  given  in  the  Incidents  concludes,  he  subjoins  the 
following  particulars : — 

"  The  hand — white  as  marble,  and  not  visibly  attached  to  any  arm 
— reached  out  to  my  hand,  and  shook  hands  with  me ;  a  hearty  human 
shake.  Then  the  hand!  sought  to  withdraw  from  mine.  I  would 
not  let  it.  Then  it  -pulled  to  get  away,  with  a  good  deal  of  strength. 
But  I  held  it  fimily,  resolved  to  see  what  it  was.  (All  this  time 
Mr.  Home  did  not  move,  more  than  a  dead  man.  He  was  too  far 
back  in  his  chair  to  reach  me,  without  bending  over  forward.) 
When  the  hand  found  it  could  not  get  away,  it  yielded  itself  up  to  me 
for  my  examination ;  turned  itself  over  anid  back,  shut  up  its  fingers 
and  opened  them;  let  me  examine  the  finger-nails,  the  joints,  the 
creases.  It  was  a  perfect  human  hand,  but  white  as  snow,  and 
ENDED  AT  THE  WRIST.  I  was  not  Satisfied  with  the  sense  of  sight  to 
prove  this — I  wanted  the  concurrent  testimony  of  other  senses;  and 
I  swung  my  hand  and  arm  up  and  down,  where  the  arm  belonging 
to  this  hand  should  have  been  had  it  been  of  flesh  and  bone,  but 
no  arm  was  there.  Even  then  I  was  not  satisfied.  Turning  this 
strange  hand  palm  towards  me,  /  fushed  my  right  forefinger  entirely 
through  the  falm,  till  it  came  out  an  inch  or  more  visibly, 
from  the  back  of  the  hand.  In  other  words.  I  pushed  my  finger 
clear  through  that  mysterious  hand.  When  I  withdrew  it,  the  place 
closed'  up,  much  as  a  piece  of  putty  would  close  under  such  circum- 
stances— leaving  a  visible  mark  or  scar,  where  the  wound  was,  but 
not  a  hole. 

"  While  I  was  still  looking  at  it  the  hand  vanished  quick  as  a 
lightning-flash.         It  was  gone!" 

The  above  remarkable  seance  was  also  described  by  Mr.  Burr,  in 
1875,  i"  the  Neiv  York  Sun;  his  narrative  being  headed  "  A  Strange 
and  Startling  Story." 

CHAPTER  II 

ENGLAND  AND  ITALY 

Arrival  in  England.  Stance  at  Cox's  Hotel.  Controversy  with 
Sir  David  Brewster.  Damaging  testimony  against  Sir  David. 
Lord  Brougham.  Lord  Dunraven's  testimony.  Browning  and 
Sludge.  Lord  Lytton's  experience.  Thompson's  opinion. 
Experience  of  the  Trollopes,  mother  and  son.  Journey  to 
Florence.     Attempted  assassination. 

In  April,  1855,  Home  landed  in  England.  "  I  never  can  forget 
my  feelings,"  he  writes  in  his  first  volume  of  Incidents,  "  as  I  looked 
around  me,  and  saw  only  joy  beaming  on  the  faces  of  my  fellow- 
passengers;  some  there  were  who  were  about  to  reach  their  home, 
and  the  thought  of  kind  friends  waiting  to  welcome  them  brought  the 
smile  of  joy  to  their  countenances.  ...  I  stood  there  alone, 
with  not  one  friend  to  welcome  me,  broken  down  in  health,  and  my 
hopes  and  the  fairest  dreams  of  youth  all,  as  I  thought,  for  ever 
fled  The  only  prospect  I  had  was  that  of  a  few  months'  suffering, 
and  then  to  pass  from  earth.  I  had  this  strange  power  also 
which  made  a  few  look  with  pity  on  me  as  a  poor  deluded  being, 
devil-sent  to  lure  souls  to  destruction,  while  others  were  not  chary  in 
treating  me  as  a  base  impostor.  I  stood  there  on  the  ship's  deck 
amongst  the  crowd  of  passengers,  and  a  sense  of  utter  loneliness  crept 
over  me,  until  my  very  heart  seemed  too  heavy  for  pie  to  bear  up 
against  it.  I  sought  my  cabin,  and  prayed  to  God  to  vouchsafe  one 
ray  of  hope  to  cheer  me.  In  a  few  moments  I  felt  a  sense  of 
joy  come  over  me,  and  when  I  rose  I  was  as  happy  as  the  happiest 
of  the  throng." 

Home's  presence  in  London  soon  became  known,  and  without 
having  courted  it,  he  found  the  notice  of  English  society  attracted  to 
him.  More  requests  for  seances  were  pressed  upon  him  than  he 
could  gratify ;  and  among  other  noted  personages  of  the  day,  Lord 
Brougham  expressed  a  desire  to  investigate  the  phenomena.  An 
afternoon  seance  was  appointed,  and  Brougham  reque.sted  and 
received  permission  to  bring  with  him  a  scientific  friend,  Sir  David 
Brewster.  In  full  daylight,  these  two  shrewd  inquirers  sat  with 
Home;  the  proprietor  of  the  hotel  in  Jermyn  Street  where  he  was 
staying  being  also  present.  This  was  Mr.  W.  Cox,  a  most  worthy 
and  excellent  man,  who  had  speedily  become,  and  remained  till  the 
day  of  his  death,  the  fast  friend  of  Mr.  Home.  The  effect  pro- 
duced on  the  minds  of  the  two  investigators  by  what  they  witnessed 
was  subsequently  attested  by  Mr.  Cox  in  a  letter  to  the  Morning 
Advertiser,  dated  October  15,   1855. 

"  I  assert,"  he  wrote,  "  that  both  Sir  David  and  Lord  Brougham 
were  astonished  at  what  they  heard,  saw,  and  felt.  I  assert  that 
Sir   David,    in   the  fulness  of  his   astonishment,   made  use  of   the 

23 

24  LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF  HOME 

expression,  '  This  upsets  the  philosophy  of  fifty  years.'  ...  I 
assert  that  Lord  Brougham  was  so  much  interested  that  he  begged  me 
to  arrange  for  him  another  sitting,  and  said  he  would  put  off  erery 
engagement  for  the  purpose  of  further  investigation." 

After  the  seance,  Mr.  Home  wrote  to  a  friend  in  America  a  des- 
cription of  his  English  experiences,  in  the  course  of  which  he  very 
naturally  and  truly  stated  of  Lord  Brougham  and  Sir  D.  Brewster, 
that  both  had  brought  the  whole  force  of  their  keen  discernment  to 
bear  upon  the  phenomena  with  a  view  to  accounting  for  them  by 
natural  means,  and  had  been  unable  to  so.  The  letter  was 
published  ajid  commented  upon  in  America,  and  the  statements  of 
the  American  press  presently  found  their  way  into  English  journals. 
Long  before  they  did  so,  Home  had  left  Jermyn  Street  on  a  visit 
to  Mr.  Rymer  of  Ealing,  a  London  solicitor  in  large  practice;  and 
at  Ealing,  Sir  D.  Brewster  was  present  at  a  second  seance.  A  few 
days  later  Mr.  Rymer  received  a  letter,  of  which  the  following  are 
the  first  few  lines  : — 

"  Sir, — In  consequence  of  a  very  remarkable  account  given  by  Sir 
David  Brewster  of  the  extraordinary  powers  of  Mr.  Home,  together 
with  two  or  three  friends  I  am  anxious  to  have  an  interview  with  him. 
If  he  can  make  it  convenient  to  come  to  my  house.  No.  80,  Eaton 
Square,  on  Thursday  or  Saturday  next,  at  two  o'clock,  I  should  be 
glad  to  make  an  appointment  for  either  of  those  days.  .  .  . 
Your  obedient  servant, 

"Edward  Buller." 

A  still  more-  decisive  testimony  to  the  effect  produced  on  Sir 
David's  mind  is  on  record. 

"  I  was  so  struck,"  wrote  the  late  Earl  of  Dunraven,  "  with  what 
Sir  David  Brewster — with  whom  I  was  well  acquainted — had  himself 
told  me,  that  it  materially  influenced  me  in  determining  to  examine 
thoroughly  into  the  reality  of  the  phenomena.  I  met  him  one  day 
on  the  steps  of  the  Athenseum ;  we  got  upon  the  subject  of  table 
turning,  &c.  ;  he  spoke  most  earnestly,  stating  that  the  impression 
left  on  his  mind  from  what  he  had  seen  was  that  the  manifestations 
were  to  him  quite  inexplicable  by  fraud,  or  by  any  physical  laws 
with  which  we  were  acquainted,  and  that  they  ought  to  be  fully  and 
carefully  examined  into." 

As  yet,  the  assertion  that  Sir  David  had  been  converted  to  a  belief 
in  Spiritualism  had  not  been  copied  from  the  American  press  by  the 
English ;  and  the  philosopher,  with  the  first  feeling  of  wonder  and 
bewilderment  strong  in  his  mind,  had  the  frankness,  as  the  words  of 
Lord  Dunraven  and  Mr.  Buller  show,  to  confess  to  his  friends  that 
the  phenomena  he  had  witnessed  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Home  were 
inexplicable  by  the  theory  of  fraud.  At  last,  in  September,  1855, 
the  Morning  Advertiser  reproduced  the  American  statements;  and 
Sir  David  at  once  wrote  to  that  paper  to  disclaim  all  belief  in 
Spiritualism,  and  to  set  down  to  imposture  the  very  phenomena  that 
be  had  assured  Lord  Dunraven  could  not  have  been  produced 
by  trickery  and  were  inexplicable  by  any  physical  laws  with  which  he 
was  acquainted. 

ENGLAND  AND  ITALY 

'5 

A  lengthy  correspondence  followed.  Sir  David,  in  a  second  letter, 
declared  that,  had  he  been  allowed  to  look  under  the  table,  he  might 
perhaps  have  been  able  to  expound  the  riddle  of  the  phenomena. 

"  I  assert,"  replied  Mr.  Cox  of  Jermyn  Street,  "  that  no  hindrance 
existed  to  Sir  David  looking  under  the  drapery  of  the  table;  on  the 
contrary,  he  was  so  frequently  invited  to  do  so  by  Mr.  Home,  that 
I  felt  annoyed  at  Mr.  Home's  supposing  that  either  he  or  I  could  be 
suspected  of  any  imposition." 

So  much  for  the  seance  in  Jermyn  Street.  Sir  David  was 
requested  to  verify  the  absence  of  concealed  mechanism,  but  declined 
— a  curious  mode  of  conducting  a  scientific  investigation.  Yet  he 
afterwards  assumed  its  presence.  Was  it  honest  of  him  to  do  so  in 
view  of  his  refusal  to  examine,  and  still  more  in  view  of  the  fact  that 
at  Ealing  he  actually  did  examine?  Invited  by  Mr.  Rymer  to  give 
his  testimony  to  facts,  the  well-known  author,  Mr.  T.  A.  TroUope, 
responded  as  follows,  in  a  letter  written  for  publication: — 

'*  I  declare  that  at  your  house  at  Ealing,  on  an  evening  subsequent  to  Sir 
David  Brewster's  meeting  with  Mr.  Home  at  Cox's  Hotel,  in  the  presence 
of  Sir  David,  of  myself,  and  of  other  persons,  a  large  and  very  heavy  dining- 
table  was  moved  about  in  a  most  extraordinary  manner  ;  that  Sir  David  was 
urged,  both  by  Mr.  Home  and  by  yourself,  to  look  under  the  cloth  and  under 
the  table  ;  that  he  did  look  under  it ;  and  that  while  he  was  so  looking,  the 
table  was  much  moved  ;  and  that  while  he  was  looking,  and  while  the  table 
was  moving,   he  avowed  that  he  saw  the  movement. 

"  I  should  not,  my  dear  sir,"  ends  Mr.  Trollope,  "  do  all  that  duty,  I  think, 
requires  of  me  in  this  case,  were  I  to  conclude  without  stating  very  solemnly 
that,  after  very  many  opportunities  of  witnessing  and  investigating  the 
phenomena  caused  by,  or  happening  to  Mr.  Home,  I  am  wholly  convinced  that, 
be  what  may  their  origin,  and  cause,  and  nature,  they  are  not  produced  by 
any  fraud,  machinery,  juggling,  illusion,  or  trickery  on  his  part." 

Sir  David  was  as  fully  convinced  of  that,  in  his  secret  soul,  as  Mr. 
Trollope,  but  he  had  a  scientific  reputation  to  lose,  and  he  feared 
ridicule;  so,  after  declaring  in  private  that  the  manifestations  could 
not  have  been  produced  by  jugglery,  he  declared  in  public  that  they 
could,  and  wrote,  "  Were  Mr.  Home  to  assume  the  character  of  the 
Wizard  of  the  West,  I  would  enjoy  tiis  exhibition  as  much  as  that 
of  other  conjurors." 

On  which  Mr.  B.  Coleman  of  Bayswater  wrote  to  the  Morning 
Advertiser: — 

"  I  was  as  much  astonished  at  what  I  saw,  felt,  and  heard  in  the  presence 
of  Mr.  Home  as  any  man  ;  and  when  I  found  that  Sir  David  Brewster  had 
been  a  witness  of  similar  phenomena  at  the  house  of  my  friend,  I  called  upon 
Sir  David,  accompanied  by  my  neighbour  ;  and  in  the  course  of  conversation 
Sir  David  said,  that  what  he  and  Lord  Brougham  saw  '  was  marvellous — 
quite  unaccountable.' 

"  I  then  asked  him,  '  Do  you,  Sir  David,  think  these  things  were  produced 
by  trick?  ' 

"  '  No,  certainly  not,'  was  his  reply. 

"  '  Is  it  delusion,    think  you?  ' 

"  '  No,  that  is  out  of  the  question.' 

"  '  Then   what  is  it?  ' 

To   which  he  replied,  '  I  don't  know;   but  spirit  is  the  last  thing  I    will 
give   in   to.'  " 

C 

36  LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF  HOME 

The  publication  of  this  letter  naturally  made  Sir  David  very  angr)', 
and  he  wrote  to  contradict  it  in  part,  not  denying  the  substantial 
accuracy  of  the  above  statements,  but  challenging  the  writer's  repro- 
duction of  the  description  that  Sir  David  had  given  him  of  the 
phenomena  in  Jermyn  Street.       Brewster  then  continued: — 

"  In  reply  to  Mr.  Cox,  I  may  take  this  opportunity  to  answer  his  request 
by  telling  him  what  I  have  seen,  and  what  I  think  of  it.  At  Mr.  Cox's 
house,  Mr.  Home,  Lord  Brougham,  and  myself,  sat  down  to  a  small  table, 
Mr.  Home  having  previously  requested  us  to  examine  if  there  was  any 
machinery  about  his  person,  an  examination,  however,  which  we  declined  to 
make.  When  all  our  hands  were  upon  the  table,  noises  were  heard — rappings 
in  abundance ;  and,  finally,  when  we  rose  up,  the  table  actually  rose,  as 
appeared  to  me,  from  the  ground.  This  result  I  do  not  pretend  to  explain  ;  but 
rather  than  believe  that  spirits  made  the  noise,  I  will  conjecture  that  the 
raps  were  produced  by  Mr.  Home's  toes,  .  .  .  and  rather  than  believe  that 
spirits  raised  the  table,  I  will  conjecture  that  it  was  done  by  the  agency  of 
Mr.  Home's  feet." 

This  from  the  man  who  had  declared  so  emphatically  to  Lord 
Dunraven  and  Mr.  Coleman  that  he  could  not  suppose  the  phenomena 
were  produced  by  trickery  ! 

bir  David  then  described,  with  more  than  one  suf-pressio  veri,  the 
remaining  phenomena  that  he  had  witnessed  in  Jermyn  Street,  and 
continued:  "  How  these  effects  were  produced  neither  Lord 
Brougham  nor  I  could  say,  but  I  conjecture  that  they  may  be  pro- 
duced by  machinery  attached  to  the  lower  extremities  of  Mr.  Home." 

Which  machinery  a  keen  and  sceptical  observer  like  Brewster  could 
not  detect  in  broad  daylight !  Nor  could  he  say,  in  full  daylight, 
whether  a  table  rose  m  the  air  or  not,  but  only  that  it  "  appeared  " 
to  him  to  rise. 

All  through  this  newspaper  warfare  Lord  Brougham  preserved  an 
inflexible  silence;  and  Sir  David  Brewster  did  not  venture  to  appeal 
to  him.  Is  not  the  inference  certain  that  Sir  David  dared  not  and 
that  his  lordship  would  not  speak,  though  requested  by  Mr.  Home  to 
do  so,  and  though  he  had  half -promised  to  publish  an  account  of  the 
seance,  because  his  testimony  must  have  been  unfavourable  to  his 
friend  ?  That  Lord  Brougham's  views  were  not  in  accordance  with 
those  of  Brewster  may  be  inferred  from  the  fact  that  in  i860  or  1861 
Brougham  was  again  present  at  seances  with  Home,  and  from  his 
remarkable  declaration  made  in  a  preface  written  by  him  for  Mr. 
Groom  Napier's  work,  The  Book  of  Nature: — "In  the  most  cloud- 
less skies  of  scepticism,  I  see  a  rain-cloud — if  it  be  no  bigger  than  a 
man's  hand:  it  is  Modern  Spiritualism." 

Said  the  Spectator,  when  the  whole  correspondence  was 
republished  by  Mr.  Home  in  his  first  volume  of  Incidents:  "  It  seems 
established  by  the  clearest  evidence  that  he"  (Sir  David)  "  felt  and 
expressed,  at  and  immediately  after  his  seances  with  Mr.  Home,  a 
wonder  and  almost  awe,  which  he  afterwards  wished  to  explain 
away.  .  .  .  The  suppression  of  Lord  Brougham's  half-promised 
testimony,  though  challenged  by  Mr.  Home,  is  on  the  whole  un- 
favourable to  Sir  David,  as  it  might  be  presumed  that  Lotd  Brougham 
would  support  his  friend's  testimony  as  far  as  possible.       Nor  does 

ENGLAND  AND  ITALY  27 

the  passage-at-arms  between  Sir  David  and  Mr.  T.  A.  Trollope  con- 
ceming  the  subsequent  seance  at  EaUng,  seem  to  us  quite  creditable 
to  Sir  David.  .  .  .  The  hero  of  science  does  not  acquit  himself 
as  we  could  wish  or  expect." 

How  could  he?  Sir  David  was  not  conducting  the  controversy  in 
the  interests  of  truth,  but  in  the  interests  of  David  Brewster.  When 
compelled  to  decide  whether  he  would  tell  the  truth  and  be  laughed 
at,  or  prevaricate  and  have  the  world  on  his  side,  the  philosopher  did 
not  hesitate  for  a  moment.  But  it  so  happened  that  he  had  already 
placed  his  honest  opinion  of  the  Jermyn  Street  seance  on  record ;  and 
the  letter  that  contains  it  was  published  by  his  daughter,  Mrs. 
Gordon,  in  her  Home  Life  of  Sir  David  Bremster.  As  there  could 
not  be  a  better  witness  against  Sir  David  than  himself,  I  append  the 
words  in  which  he  contradicts  the  statements  he  had  made  in  the 
Morning  Advertiser . 

"  Last  of  all,  I  went  with  Lord  Brougham  to  a  siance  of  the  new  spirit- 
rapper,  Mr.  Home,  a  lad  of  twenty.  .  .  .  Mr.  Home  lives  in  Coxe's  Hotel, 
Jermyn  Street,  and  Mr.  Coxe,  who  knows  Lord  Brougham,  wished  him  to  have 
a  siance,  and  his  lordship  invited  me  to  accompany  him  in  order  to  assist  in 
finding  out  the  trick.  We  four  sat  down  at  a  moderately-sized  table,  the 
structure  of  which  we  were  invited  to  examine.  In  a  short  time  the  table 
shuddered,  and  a  tremulous  motion  ran  up  all  our  arms  ;  at  our  bidding  these 
motions  ceased  and  returned.  1  he  most  unaccountable  rappings  were  produced 
in  various  parts  of  the  table  ;  and  the  table  actually  rose  from  the  ground  when 
no  hand  was  upon  it.  A  larger  table  was  produced,  and  exhibited  similar 
movements.  ...  A  small  hand-bell  was  laid  down  with  its  mouth  on  the 
carpet ;  and  after  lying  for  some  time,  it  actually  rang,  when  nothing  could 
have  touched  it.  The  bell  was  then  placed  on  the  other  side,  still  upon  the 
carpet,  and  it  came  over  to  me  and  placed  itself  in  my  hand.  It  did  the  same 
to    Lord    Brougham. 

"  These  were  the  principal  experiments.  We  could  give  no  explanation  of 
them,  and  could  not  conjecture  how  they  could  be  produced  by  any  kind  of 
mechanism." 

Written  with  no  idea  that  it  would  ever  see  the  light,  this  letter 
imdoubtedly  contains  Sir  David  Brewster's  true  impression  of  the 
phenomena  he  had  witnessed.  He  could  not  explain  them  :  he  could 
only  see  that  they  were  not,  as  he  subsequently  and  dishonestly 
suggested,  due  to  trickery  on  the  part  of  Mr.  Home. 

It  should  be  added,  with  regard  to  Sir  David's  "  conjecture"  that 
the  table  might  have  been  lifted  by  the  feet  of  Mr.  Home,  that  at 
the  Ealing  seance  the  table  used  was  a  dining-table  twelve  feet 
long;  that  Sir  David  Brewster,  Mr.  T.  A.  Trollope,  and  Mr.  Rymer 
did,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  experiment  on  it  after  the  seance  to  see 
whether  it  were  possible  to  move  the  table  or  to  raise  it  with  their  feet, 
and  that  it  could  not  be  stirred  by  the  united  efforts  of  the  feet  of 
all  three. 

No  doubt  thousands  of  tables  have  been  tilted  by  human  feet  and 
hands,  and  Faraday's  famous  theory  of  the  action,  unconscious  oi 
conscious,  of  the  sitters,  was  applicable  to  many  seances,  but  never  to 
those  of  Mr.  Home.  Only  those  who  have  witnessed  the  phenomena 
can  realise  how  startling  and  peculiai  they  were  in  his  presence. 
Many   persons    have  attested  the     facts   <ietailed   in  the    following 

28  LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF  HOME 

description,  and  many  more  could  bear  witness  to  its  exactitude  had 
they  the  courage  to  come  forward. 

The  phenomena  that  marked  the  commencement  of  a  successful 
seance  were,  as  a  rule,  as  follows : — 

While  the  hands  of  Mr.  Home  and  the  other  persons  present 
rested  on  the  table,  a  curious  phenomenon  would  fix  the  attention  of 
the  circle.  The  table  did  not  move,  it  was  neither  tilted  nor  raised ; 
but  the  hands  resting  on  it  felt  it  quiver  and  tremble  as  if  instinct 
with  life.  When  the  power  was  strong,  these  vibrations  affected 
not  only  the  table  but  everything  in  the  room,  and  often  the  floor 
and  walls  also  shook.  Some  have  compared  the  vibrations  to  the 
beating  of  a  pulse;  others  to  the  ripples  that  pass  over  a  sheet  ot 
water  when  its  surface  is  lightly  stirred  by  the  wind.,  The 
phenomenon  was  well  described  by  Dr.  J.  Garth  Wilkinson,  or  rather 
by  his  daughter,  in  his  Evenings  with  Mr.  Home  and  the  Spirits, 
published  at  the  time  of  the  Brewster  controversy. 

"  In  a  minute  or  two  the  same  inward  thrill  went  through  the  table 
as  I  have  described  in  the  first  seance,  and  the  chairs  also,  as  before, 
thrilled  under  us  so  vividly  that  my  youngest  daughter  jumped  up 
from  hers,  exclaiming,  'Oh,  papa,  there's  a  heart  in  my  chair!' 
which  we  all  felt  to  be  a  correct  expression  of  the  sensation 
conveyed." 

Presently  the  tremors  would  cease,  and  raps  were  forthwith  heard, 
as  if  the  vibrations  that  passed  through  the  table  had  marked  the 
period  occupied  in  charging  it  with  some  subtle  force,  electrical  or 
otherwise,  that  was  now  given  off  in  these  tiny  detonations.  The 
raps  were  as  varied  in  their  character  as  human  nature  is  varied, 
timid,  bold,  clear,  muffled,  changing  with  every  intelligence  that 
produced  them ;  just  as  in  this  world  no  two  persons  will  knock  at  a 
door  in  a  manner  exactly  similar.  "  I  have  heard,"  wrote  Mr.  W. 
Crookes,  F.R.S.,  "  delicate  ticks,  as  with  the  point  of  a  pin;  a 
cascade  of  sharp  soimds  as  from  an  induction  coil  in  full  work ; 
detonation  in  the  air;  sharp,  metallic  taps;  a  cracking  like  that 
heard  when  a  f rictional  machine  is  at  work ;  sounds  like  scratching ; 
the  twittering  as  of  a  bird,  &c." 

When  the  power  was  present  in  great  force,  not  only  did  the  largest 
and  heaviest  tables  repeatedly  rise  from  the  ground  when  the  hands 
of  the  sitters  were  on  them ;  but  a  mass  of  evidence  is  on  record  that 
at  seances  with  Mr.  Home  tables,  chairs,  and  many  other  objects  have 
been  seen  in  strong  light  to  move  about  the  room  or  to  rise  in  the  air, 
when  neither  Home  nor  any  other  of  the  human  beings  present  was 
touching  them.  The  wodd  is  slow  to  attach  credence  to  such  a 
fact,  but  a  fact  it  is,  if  human  eyesight  and  human  testimony  count 
for  anything.  Sir  David  Brewster,  one  of  the  most  hostile  and 
sceptical  of  inquirers,  attests  the  phenomenon  in  the  letter  published 
by  his  daughter;  and  Mr.  Crookes  wrote:  "  I  have  had  several 
repetitions  of  the  experiment  considered  as  conclusive  by  the  cc«n- 
mittee  of  the  Dialectical  Society,  that  is  to  say,  the  movement  of  a 
heavy  table,  in  full  light,  the  backs  of  the  chairs  being  turned  towards 
the  table,  at  about  a  foot  away  from  it,  and  each  person  kneeling  on 

ENGLAND  AND  ITALY  29 

his  chair,  his  hands  placed  on  the  back,  above  the  table,  but  without 
touching  it." 

Means  were  often  adopted  by  inquirers  to  test  the  correctness  of 
Professor  Faraday's  theory  in  the  case  of  Mr.  Home.  For  instance, 
in  1868,  Mr.  J.  H.  Simpson  of  Campden  Grove,  Kemsington,  a 
gentleman  of  considerable  scientific  attainments  and  a  disbeliever  in 
Spiritualism,  placed  rollers  on  the  table,  and  on  these  a  large  flat 
music-book.  ITie  fingers  of  Mr.  Home  and  the  other  sitters  rested 
lightly  on  the  music-book,  and  while  the  result  of  this  experiment 
was  watched  above,  Mr.  Simpson  lay  down  on  the  floor  to  see  that 
no  foot  touched  the  table  below.  The  table  moved  more  violently 
than  before,  and  Mr.  Simpson  quite  satisfied  himself  that  the  move- 
ment, to  whatever  cause  due,  was  independent  of  any  person  present. 
This  experiment,  it  will  be  seen,  was  made  three  years  before  Mr. 
Crookes  employed  a  different  apparatus  with  similar  results. 

At  seances  with  Mr.  Home,  when  the  table  tilted,  the  tilting 
was  almost  always  accompanied  by  a  very  startling  phenomenon.  No 
matter  how  acute  the  angle,  the  various  articles  on  the  table,  such 
as  pens,  p>encils,  paper,  lamps,  candlesticks,  etc.,  would  remain  in 
their  place  as  if  glued  to  it.  This  has  been  seen  to  occur  again  and 
agam  in  the  strongest  light;  and  at  the  demand  of  persons  present 
the  force  retaining  the  article  in  its  place  has  been  instantaneously  re- 
la.xed,  and  the  substance  so  released  has  slipped  from  the  inclined 
surface  of  the  table.  Sometimes  it  would  be  requested  that  a  particular 
article  might  thus  slide  down,  while  others  on  the  table  kept  their 
places;  and  the  invisible  forces  at  work  always  complied  with  the 
request. 

'I'he  Earl  of  Dunraven  wrote,  in  describing  a  seance  in  1867,  at 
which  he,  Mrs.  Thayer,  and  Mr.  Earl,  the  latter  a  total  disbeliever 
in  the  phenomena,  were  present  with  Mr.  Home: — "  The  room  was 
lighted  by  a  fire,  a  large  lamp  standing  on  the  piano,  and  two  wax 
candles  on  the  table.  The  table  was  repeatedly  tilted  up  at  an  angle, 
I  should  say,  greater  than  45°.  The  surface  was  smooth,  polished 
mahogany,  yet  the  candles,  paper,  and  pencil  did  not  move.'  Home 
asked  that  the  candles  might  slip  (as  they  naturally  would),  and  they 
did  slide  down  the  table  until  near  the  edge,  when  at  his  request  they 
remained  stationary." 

In  i860,  Robert  Bell  wrote  in  his  famous  article  "  Stranger  than 
Fiction,"  contributed  to  the  Cornhill  Magazine  while  Thackeray 
was  editor: — 

"  Of  a  somewhat  similar  character  is  another  movement,  in  some  respects 
more  curious,  and  certainly  opening  a  stranger  field  for  speculation.  The 
table  rears  itself  up  on  one  side,  until  the  surface  forms  an  inclined  plane, 
at  an  angle  of  about  45°.  In  this  attitude  it  stops.  According  to  ordinary 
experience  everything  on  the  table  must  slide  off,  or  topple  over  ;  but  nothing 
stirs.  The  vase  of  flowers,  the  books,  the  little  ornaments  are  as  motionless 
as  if  they  were  fixed  in  their  places.  We  agree  to  take  away  our  hands,  to 
throw  up  the  ends  of  the  cover,  so  as  to  leave  the  entire  round  pillar  and 
claws  exposed,  and  to  remove  our  chairs  to  a  little  distance,  that  we  may  have 
a  more  complete  command  of  a  phenomenon  which,  in  its  marvellous  develop- 
ment at  least,  is,  I  believe,  new  to  us  all.  Our  withdrawal  makes  no 
difference  whatever  ;  and  now  we  see  distinctly  on  all  sides  the  precise  pose 
of  the  table,    which   looks  like   the  Tower  of   Pisa,   as   if   it   must   inevitably 

3©  LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF  HOME 

tumble  over.  With  a  view  to  urge  the  investigation  as  far  as  it  can  be  carried, 
a  wish  is  whispered  for  a  still  more  conclusive  display  of  the  power  by  which 
this  most  extraordinary  result  has  been  accomplished.  The  desire  is  at  once 
complied  with.  The  table  leans  more  and  more  towards  the  perpendicular ; 
two  of  the  three  claws  are  high  above  the  ground ;  and  finally  the  whole 
structure  stands  on  the  extreme  tip  of  a  single  claw,  fearfully  overbalanced, 
but  maintaining  itself  as  if  it  were  all  one  solid  mass,  instead  of  being 
freighted  with  a  number  of  loose  articles,  and  as  if  the  position  had  been 
planned  in  strict  accordance  with  the  laws  of  equilibrium  and  attraction 
instead  of  involving  an  inexplicable  violation  of  both." 

The  evidence  of  various  other  witnesses  of  this  phenomenon  will  be 
found  in  subsequent  chapters. 

Before  the  Brewster  controversy  begun,  Mr.  Home  had  left 
England,  and  was  passing  the  autumn  of  1855  at  Florence,  while  bis 
assailants  and  defenders  were  filling  the  columns  of  the  Morning 
Advertiser.  After  leaving  Cox's  Hotel,  he  had  spent  the  summer 
with  the  Rymer  family  at  Eahng,  and  the  warm  affection  with  which 
these  new  English  friends  soon  learnt  to  regard  their  yoimg  guest  is 
repeatedly,  expressed  in  their  letters  subsequently  written  to  him. 
Many  years  later  one  of  those  pitiful  creatures  who  invent  and  publish 
falsehood,  but  forget  to  sign  their  names  to  them,  set  afloat  a  story 
that  soon  went  the  round  of  the  American  press.  It  was  said  that 
Mr.  Hom«  had  ordered  in  the  name  of  Mr.  Rymer  a  fur-coat,  value 
^^"50,  and  had  left  his  generous  host  to  pay  for  it. 

"A  lie  that  is  all  a  lie  may  be  met  and  fought  with  outright, 
But  a  lie  that  is  half  a  truth  is  a  harder  matter  to  fight." 

And  so  Mr.  Home  found.  The  half-truth  in  this  particular  slander 
was  that  a  gift  of  ;^5o  had  entered  into  his  relations  with  the  Rymer 
family.  But  it  was  not  the  value  of  the  apocryphal  fur-coat,  and  so 
far  from  having  received  a  gift  of  £,$0,  Mr.  Home  had  made  it,  under 
the  following  circumstances: — 

A  few  years  after  the  seances  at  Ealing,  business  embarrassments 
and  the  conduct  of  others  involved  Mr.  Rymer  in  absolute  ruin.  His 
being  a  declared  Spiritualist  was  against  him  in  England;  and 
despairing  of  finding  an  opening  at  home,  he  went  to  Australia  to  try 
his  fortune  there.  His  wife  and  children  were  longing  to  join  him, 
but  had  not  the  means.  In  her  distress  Mrs.  Rymer  wrote  to  Mr.  Home, 
recalling  old  days  at  Ealing,  and  entreating  him  in  memor)-  of  them 
to  aid  her.  This  was  in  the  autumn  of  1859,  and  on  November 
ist  of  that  year  Mrs.  Rymer  was  able  to  write  to  Mr.  Home  a  letter 
now  before  me.  I  quote  only  as  much  of  it  as  is  necessary  for  my 
purpose : — 

"  My  Dear  Dan, — I  cannot  in  words  express  my  thanks  for  your 
affectionate  liberality,  which  enables  me  to  follow  my  beloved  husband 
to  the  new  country.  .  .  .  Most  heartily,  most  sincerely  do  I  thank 
you  for  what  you  have  given ;  also,  Dan,  for  your  prayers  and  good 
wishes.  BeUeve,  with  affectionate  greetings  and  many  prayers,  how 
truly  I  am  always,  dear  Dan,  in  this  or  a  far-off  country,  your  sincere 
and  grateful  friend, 

"  Emma  Rymer." 

ENGLAND  AND  ITALY  $1 

The  sum  that  Mr.  Home  sent  was  ;£5o.  This  gift  of  ;^5o  to  Mrs. 
Rymer  is  the  only  traceable  foundation  for  the  falsehood  that  he  had 
wronged  her  husband.  It  was  but  one  of  a  thousand  slanders 
circulated  concerning  him. 

During  his  stay  at  Ealing,  frequent  seances  were  held,  and  remark- 
able manifestations  occurred.  It  was  at  this  time  that  he  made  the 
acquaintance  of  Dr.  Garth  Wilkinson,  who  published  in  a  very 
interesting  pamphlet,  Evenings  with  Mr.  Home  and  the  Spirits,  an 
account  of  the  phenomena  he  had  witnessed  and  the  striking  com- 
munications he  had  received.  Dr.  Wilkinson  gave  no  names  in  his 
pamphlet,  and  at  the  distance  of  thirty  years  it  is  impossible  to 
recover  them,  or  I  would  have  supplied  them  in  the  following 
extract : — 

Dr.  Wilkinson  relates  that  he  was  present  at  the  seance  with  Mr. 
Home,  where  there  was  spelled  out  by  touches  on  his  knee,  a  message 
from  "  an  intimate  friend  of  mine,  once  a  Member  of  Parliament,  and 
as  much  before  the  public  as  any  man  in  his  generation,  who  died 
on  the  30th  of  June  last  "  (1855).  "I  said,  '  Have  you  any  message 
to  your  wife,  whom  I  shall  probably  see  in  a  few  days?  '  Again 
affirmative  touches,  five  in  number,  therefore  calling  for  the  alphabet. 
Mr.  Home  now  called  over  the  alphabet,  and  this  was  spelled  out: 
'  The  Immortal  Loves. '     I  remember  at  the  time  thinking  that  this 

was  rather  a  thin  message;  but  the  next  time  I  saw  Mrs.  I  told 

her  the  circumstances,  and  gave  hex  the  words.  Her  son  was  sitting 
with  her,  and  said,  '  That  is  very  characteristic  of  my  father,  for  it 
was  a  favourite  subject  of  speculation  with,  him  whether  or  not  the 
affections  survive  the  body;  of  the  immorality  of  the  soul  itself  he 
never  doubted ;  but  the  words,  the  inmiortal  loves,  show  that  he  has 
settled  the  problem  of  his  life.'  Such  was  the  import  which  the 
family  of  the  deceased  quite  unexpectedly  to  me  conferred  upon  the 
phrase." 

Lord  Lytton,  then  Sir  E.  B.  Lytton,  was  perfectly  convinced  of  the 
genuineness  of  the  phenomena  he  witnessed  in  Mr.  Home's  presence, 
and  even  of  their  spiritual  origin,  but  too  timid  to  avow  his  convic- 
tions publicly.  Mr.  Home  was  his  guest  for  a  short  time  at  Kneb- 
worth  in  1855;  and  several  seances  took  place  there,  no  record  of 
which  is  available.  Home  never  wrote  down  an  account  of  a  seance, 
but  left  it  to  others  to  speak ;  and  when,  from  fear  of  the  world 
or  fear  of  ridicule,  they  preferred  to  remam  silent,  he  acquiesced  in 
their  silence  with  the  easy  good-nature  that  characterised  him.  His 
mission,  as  he  understood  it,  was  to  convince  people  of  the  facts:  if 
they  were  bold  and  honest  enough  afterwards  to  declare  what  they 
had  witnessed,  that  was  as  it  should  be  ;  if  they  kept  silence,  it  was 
their  affair,  not  his.  Almost  any  other  man  in  his  place  would  have 
laboured  to  accumulate  all  the  names  and  data  possible ;  not  perhaps 
for  publication  in  his  lifetime,  but  at  any  rate  that  the  full  story  of 
his  Ufe  might  he  told  when  he  had  quitted  earth.  Home  collected 
nothing,  published  in  his  two  volumes  of  Incidents  such  seances 
as  friends  chose  to  give  him,  or  had  already  made  public;  and  let 
the  memory  of  the  rest  perish,  many  of  them  more  remarkable  than 

3*  LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF  HOME 

those  given  to  the  world.  These  facts  explain  why  nothing  can  be 
said  here  of  the  seances  at  Knebworth.  Mr.  Home  kept  no  record 
of  them;  and  Lord  Lytton,  though  he  probably  preserved  one,  ne\er 
published  it. 

In  the  years  i860  and  1861,  Lord  Lytton  was  again  present  at  many 
seances  with  Mr.  Home,  both  at  Knebworth  and  in  London.  Of 
the  latter  I  can  give  some  details,  obtained  from  other  persons  who 
were  present ;  and  shall  do  so  in  the  proper  place. 

At  Ealing,  Sir  E.  B.  Lytton  took  part  in  at  least  one  seance  at  the 
house  of  the  Rymers.  During  the  lifetime  of  this  celebrated  man, 
Mr.  Home  published  in  his  first  volume  of  Incidents  the  following 
description  of  what  occurred ;  and  as  Lytton  remained  silent — though 
the  press  at  once  detected  his  identity,  and  called  on  him  either  to 
deny  or  affirm — it  may  be  presumed  that  the  account  was  absolutely 
correct.  In  a  mattter  of  this  kind  to  be  silent  was  to  affirm,  and 
that  Lord  Lytton  could  not  but  know. 

"  Whilst  I  was  at  Ealing,"  says  Mr.  Home,  "  a  distinguished 
novelist,  accompanied  by  his  son,  attended  a  seance,  at  which  some 
very  remarkable  manifestations  occurred  that  were  chiefly  directed  to 
him.  I'he  rappings  on  the  table  suddenly  became  unusually  firm 
and  loud.  He  asked,  '  What  spirit  is  present?  '  The  alphabet  was 
called  over,  and  the  response  was,  *  I  am  the  spirit  who  influenced 

you    to  write  Z '  (Zanoni).        '  Indeed,'  said    he,  '  I  wish    you 

would  give  me  some  tangible  proof  of  your  presence.'  '  What 
proof? — Will  you  take  my  hand?'  'Yes,' — and  putting  his  hand 
beneath  the  surface  of  the  table,  it  was  immediately  seized  by  a 
powerful  grasp,  which  made  him  start  to  his  feet  in  evident  trepida- 
tion, exhibiting  a  momentary  suspicion  that  a  trick  had  been  played' 
upon  him.  Seeing,  however,  that  all  the  persons  around  him  were 
sitting  with  their  hands  quietly  reposing  on  the  table,  he  recovered 
his  composure,  and  offering  an  apology  for  the  uncontrollable  excite- 
ment caused  by  such  an  unexpected  demonstration,  he  resumed  his 
seat." 

Immediately  after  the  above  phenomenon,  another  equally  remark- 
able occurred.        "  We  wish  you  to  believe  in  the "  was  spelt 

out,  and  there  the  message  stopped. 

"  In  what  am  I  to  believe?  "  asked  Lytton.      "  In  the  medium?  " 

"  No." 

"  In  the  manifestations?  " 

"  No." 

As  this  second  negative  was  returned,  Sir  Edward  felt  himself 
gently  touched  on  the  knee,  and  en  putting  down  his  hand  a  cross 
was  placed  on  it,  by  way  of  finishing  the  sentence.  The  cross,  which 
was  of  cardboard,  had  been  lying  with  other  articles  on  a  table  at  the 
end  of  the  large  room  in  which  the  party  were  seated.  Lytton, 
apparently  much  impressed,  turned  to  Mrs.  Rymer,  and  asked  her, 
permission  to  retain  the  cross  as  a  souvenir. 

"  She  assented,  saying  that  its  only  value  to  her  was  that  it  had 
been  made  by  her  boy,  then  recently  deceased ;  but  she  oould  have 
no  objection  to  him  keeping  it,  if  he  would  remember  the  injunction. 

ENGLAND  AND  ITALY  33 

He  bowed  his  assent,  and  placing  the  souvenier  in  his  breast-pocket, 
carried  the  cross  away  with  hdm  "  {Incidents  In  My  Life,  vol.  i.). 

I'he  following  undated  note — preserved  by  no  process  of  selection, 
but  at  random,  as  the  mass  of  Mr.  Home's  corresp)ondence  was  pre- 
served or  destroyed — belongs  evidently  to  this  period: — 

"   I   Park  Lane,    Wednesday. 
"  Dear  Sir, — I  am  very  anxious  to  see  you  for  half  an  hour.       li 
would  be  very  kind  of  you  so  to  favour  me. 

"  You  said  you  would  try  and  see  if  you  got  en  rapport  with  me. 
Has  any  such  been  established?  I  would  come  to  you  at  Ealing  if 
more  convenient,  whenever  you  like  to  appoint.     Yours  truly, 

"E.  B.  Lytton." 

Perhaps  none  of  the  thousand  falsehoods  circulated  concerning  Mr. 
Home  has  been  more  persistently  repeated  than  the  assertion  that  he 
was  found  cheating  by  Mr.  Robert  Browning.  Mr.  Browning  himself, 
in  his  unpoetic  eflfusion,  "  Mr.  Sludge,  the  Medium,"  appeared  to 
lend  a  certain  colour  to  the  fable,  or  it  would  probably  soon  have  died 
the  death  natural  to  slanders  that  have  not  a  grain  of  fact  in  their 
composition.  The  press,  on  the  appearance  of  "  Mr.  Sludge," 
insisted  that  he  was  meant  for  Home.  Had  this  been  an  error,  Mr 
Browning,  as  an  honourable  man,  would  of  course  have  written  to 
some  leading  English  journal  to  correct  it. 

"  It  is  '  a  blot  on  the  'scutcheon,'  "  wrote  the  American  authoress, 
Mrs.  Whitman,  on  the  publication  of  Mr.  Browning's  prose-verse, 
and  a  harsher  term  might  with  justice  have  been  used  of  the 
incoherent  attack  that  was  declared  by  the  English  journals  of  the 
time  to  be  directed  against  Mr.  Home  as  the  foremost  living  exponent 
of  Spiritualism.  Flattered  into  an  opinion  of  his  own  infallibility 
by  hds  admirers,  Mr.  Browning  has  probably  long  been  in  the  habit 
of  considering  that  the  truth  of  any  proposition  which  he  niay 
advance  is  self-evident,  or  he  would  have  felt  that  even  the  angriest 
poet  who  chooses  to  write  as  follows,  should  have  been  prepared  to 
back  up  his  poetical  flights,  when  challenged  to  do  so,  with  the 
plain  prose  of  facts  : — 

"  Now  don't,  sir!     Don't  expose  me!     Just  this  once! 
This  was  the  first  and  only  time,   I'll  swear, — 
Look   at  me, — see,   I  kneel, — the  only  time, 
I   swear,   I  ever  cheated.  .  .  . 

"  Well,  sir,  since  you  press — 
(How  you  do  tease  the  whole  thing  out  of  me  !) 
Now  for  it,  then  !  .  .  . 

"  I  cheated   when    I  could. 
Rapped  with  my  toe-joints,  set  sham  hands  at  work, 
Wrote  down  names  weak  in  sympathetic  ink. 
Rubbed  odic   lights  with   ends  of  phosphor-match. 
And  all  the  rest " 

Mr.  Browning's  poetic  eye,  in  its  "  fine  frenzy  rolling,"  saw,  in 
the  retirement  of  his  study,  more  than  the  thousands  of  keen 
inquirers  who  so  narrowly,   aixi   in  many  cases  so  sceptically,    in- 

34  LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF  HOME 

vestigated  the  phenomena  during  a  period  of  thirty  years  in  the 
presence  of  Mr.  Home.  In  all  that  time,  no  person  present  at  a 
seance  with  Mr.  Home,  sceptic  or  Spiritualist,  ever  found  him 
rapping  with  his  toe- joints,  or  setting  sham  hands  at  work,  or  writing 
names  in  sympathetic  ink,  or  rubbing  odic  lights  with  phosphor-match, 
' '  and  all  the  rest  of  it. ' '  Let  any  reader,  however  stubborn  his 
incredulity  as  to  the  reality  of  the  phenomena,  trv  to  consider  calmly 
what  is  involved  in  the  proposition  that,  year  after  year,  Mr.  Home 
continued  to  manufacture  sham  hands  and  set  them  to  work,  but  that 
none  of  the  thousands  of  persons  who  both  saw  and  touched  these 
hands  ever  detected  them  to  be  an  imposture  !  !  I  shall  speak 
more  fully  of  these  spirit-hands  in  other  chapters  :  here  it  is  enough 
to  say  that  they  have  again  and  again  appeared  under  circumstances 
that  made  detection  an  absolue  certainty,  had  they  been,  as  some 
ingenious  theorists  have  surmised,  wax  casts,  or  stuffed  gloves  mani- 
pulated with  wires,  or,  in  fact,  anything  but  what  they  were,  a 
marvellous  phenomenon,  inexplicable  by  any  known  physical  laws. 

The  late  Robert  Bell  was  quite  as  shrewd,  intelligent,  and  honest 
a  man  as  Mr.  Browning.  He  described  in  the  Cornhill  his  experi- 
ences with  Mr.  Home ;  and  his  friend,  Thackeray,  a  keen  and  intensely 
sceptical  observer,  who  had  also  witnessed  various  phenomena  in 
Home's  presence,  indorsed  his  declarations  by  publishing  with  them 
the  note  :  "  As  editor  of  this  magazine,  we  can  vouch  for  the  good 
faith  and  honourable  character  of  our  correspondent,  a  friend  of 
twenty-five  years'  standing." 

Says  Mr.  Bell :  ' '  Soon  after,  what  seemed  to  be  a  large  hand 
came  under  the  table-cover,  and  with  the  fingers  clustered  io  a  point, 
raised  it  between  me  and  the  table.  Somewhat  too  eager  to  satisfy 
my  curiosity,  I  seized  it,  felt  it  very  sensibly,  but  it  went  out  like  air 
in  my  grasp.  I  know  of  no  analogy  in  connection  with  the  sense  of 
touch  by  which  I  could  make  the  nature  of  that  feeling  intelligible. 
It  was  as  palpable  as  any  soft  substance,  velvet  or  pulp;  and  at  the 
touch  it  seemed  as  solid,  but  pressure  reduced  it  to  air." 

Would  that  Mr.  Browning  had  seized  the  hands  he  saw  at  Ealing, 
whose  action,  in  placing  a  wreath  on  the  brow  of  his  wife  and 
omitting  to  crown  his  own,  may  possibly  have  given  him  deep 
offence  !  Had  the  poet  been  a  man  of  large  and  liberal  nature,  he 
would  have  forgiven  the  want  of  discernment  the  spirits  showed — 
reflecting  that,  while  all  the  world  does  homage  to  thte  genius  of  his 
wife,  the  larger  half  of  it  fails  to  comprehend  his  own. 

Mrs.  Browning,  it  is  well  known,  accepted  Spiritualism  as  a  fact. 
In  her  Notes  on  England  and  Italy,  Mrs.  Hawthorne,  the  wife  of 
Nathaniel  Hawthorne,  writes :  "  Mrs.  Browning  introduced  the 
subject  of  spiritism,  and  there  was  an  animated  talk.  Mr.  Browning 
cannot  believe,  and  Mrs.  Browning  cannot  help  believing." 

When  the  Browning  Society  has  succeeded  in  explaining  the  other 
poems  of  Mr.  Browning  to  the  world — if  it  ever  accomplishes  that 
herculean  task — perhaps  it  will  be  bold  enough  to  take  the  poem  (or 
prose)  of  "  Mr.  Sludge,  the  Medium,"  in  hand,  and  explain  why 
Mr.  Browning  had  the  bad  taste  to  write  it.       There  is  nothing  in 

ENGLAND  AND  ITALY  35 

the  account  of  the  single  seance  at  which  Mrs.  and  Mr.  Browning 
were  present  at  Ealing,  given  by  Mr.  Home  in  his  second  volume  of 
Incidettts,  vouched  for  by  Mr.  W.  M.  Wilkinson,  and  never 
challenged  by  the  poet,  to  explain  either  Mr.  Browning's  conduct  or 
his  motives. 

"  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Rymer  and  their  family,"  writes  Mr.  Home,  "  were 
present  at  the  stance,  which  began  by  several  of  the  ordinary  manifestations. 
Mr.  Browning  was  requested  to  investigate  everything  as  it  occurred,  and  he 
availed  himself  freely  of  the  invitation.  Several  times  during  the  evening,  he 
voluntarily  and  earnestly  declared  that  anything  like  imposture  was  out  of 
the  question.  Previously  to  the  arrival  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Browning,  some  of 
the  children  had  been  gathering  flowers  in  the  garden,  and  Miss  Rymer  and 
I  had  made  a  wreath  of  clematis.  .  .  .  During  the  siance  this  wreath  was 
raised  from  the  table  by  supernatural  power  in  the  presence  of  us  all,  and 
whilst  we  were  watching  it,  Mr.  Browning,  who  was  seated  at  the  opposite 
side  of  the  table,  left  his  place,  and  came  and  stood  behind  his  wife,  towards 
whom  the  wreath  was  being  slowly  carried,  and  upon  whose  head  it  was 
placed  in  full  sight  of  us  all,  and  whilst  he  was  standing  close  behind  her. 
He  expressed  no  disbelief ;  as,  indeed,  it  was  impossible  for  any  one  to  have 
any  of  what  was  passing  under  his  eyes  ;  whilst  Mrs.  Browning  was  much 
moved,  and  she,  not  only  then  but  ever  since,  expressed  her  entire  belief  and 
pleasure  in  what  then  occurred.  .  .  .  All  that  was  done  in  the  presence  of 
eight  persons  besides  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Browning,  all  of  whom  are  still  living, 
and  are  ready  to  testify  to  the  truth  of  every  word  here  written,  if  it  should  be 
gainsaid  by    Mr.    Browning." 

Was  Mr.  Browning  annoyed  that  to  him  there  came  no  crown? 
All  the  Rymer  family  thought  so,  at  least.  Yet  the  invisible  wreath- 
bringers  were  probably  only  anticipating  the  verdict  of  posterity,  both 
in  their  neglect  of  him  and  in  crowning  his  gifted  wife. 

At  any  rate,  Mr.  Browning  subsequently  elaborated  a  theory  to 
account  for  the  manifestations;  and,  forgetting  that  he  had 
"  voluntarily  and  earnestly  declared  that  anything  like  imposture  was 
out  of  the  question,"  his  theory,  if  Mrs.  Hawthorne  and  the  Notes  on 
England  and  Italy  may  be  trusted,  was  that  the  hands  were  in  some 
way  "affixed  in  Mr.  Home's  chair,  with  his  legs  stretched  far  under 
the  table."  It  was  natural  to  some  minds,  as  Sir  David  Brewster 
had  already  shown,  to  grasp  eagerly,  when  the  first  sensation  of 
wonder  had  passed  away,  at  any  explanation  of  the  phenomena, 
however  ridiculous  and  futile,  that  did  not  involve  a  belief  in  the 
spiritual. 

It  would  be  the  merest  waste  of  time  and  labour  to  contradict  one 
by  one  the  many  calumnies  that  have  been  circulated  concerning  Mr. 
Home ;  and  I  dwell  on  the  above  incidents  only  because  so  many 
fabulous  versions  of  the  single  siance  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Browning 
have  been  circulated,  both  in  England  and  America.  It  may  be 
interesting  to  quote  here  the  following  extract  from  a  letter  written 
to  Mr.  Home  by  an  old  friend,  a  well-known  English  medical  man,  so 
long  after  the  Ealing  seance  in  1870: — 

"  Since  I  saw  you  I  have  been  in  the  Isle  of  Wight.  I  went  to 
lunch  with  Alfred  Tennyson,  and  had  two  or  three  hours'  talk  with 
him.  ...  He  says  that  if  he  and  you  and  I  could  have  a  sitting 
or  two  in  daylight,  or  in  a  strong  artificial  light,  and  he  convinced 
himself  of  the  facts,  he  should  have  no  hesitation  in  proclaiming  his 

36  LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF  HOME 

belief  in  any  way.  Meantime  he  says  that  he  is  much  more  inclined 
to  believe  than  to  disbelieve.  He  had  all  those  tales  about  you  from 
Browning,  including  one  that  you  went  on  your  knees,  wept,  and 
confessed  your  imposture  in  a  certain  thing.  I  told  him  Browning 
was  mad  about  the  matter,  and  he  admitted  that  B's  manner  led  him 
to  credit  his  prejudices  more  than  his  statement." 

I  do  not  know  what  prevented  Mr.  Home  from  gratifying  Lord 
Tennyson's  wish  to  investigate,  but  probably  the  fact  that  in  1870 
his  time  was  much  occupied  and  he  was  absent  more  than  half  the 
year  from  England.  I  pass  now  from  the  subject  of  the  calumnies 
that  have  been  invented  and  circulated  concerning  Mr.  Home,  with 
the  determination  not  to  recur  to  it,  but  to  relate  simply  the  facts  of  his 
life,  and  leave  them  to  speak  for  themselves. 

In  the  pamphlet  of  Dr.  Garth  Wilkinson,  already  referred  to,  the 
doctor,  like  Robert  Bell,  relates  how  he,  on  one  occasion,  grasped 
a  spirit-hand.       The  result  was  the  same  as  in  the  case  of  Mr.  Bell. 

"  Every  hand  but  my  own  being  on  the  table,  I  distinctly  felt  the 
fingers,  up  to  the  palm,  of  a  hand  holding  the  bell.  It  was  a  soft, 
warm,  fleshy,  substantial  hand,  such  as  I  should  be  glad  to  feel 
at  the  extremity  cf  the  friendship  of  my  best  friends.  But  I  had 
no  sooner  gasped  it  momentarily  than  it  melted  away,  leaving  my 
hand  void,  with  the  bell  only  in  it.  .  .  .  As  a  point  of  observa- 
tion, I  will  remark  that  I  should  feel  no  more  difficulty  in  swearing 
that  the  member  I  felt  was  a  human  hand'  of  extraordinary  life,  and 
not  Mr.  Home's  foot,  than  that  the  nose  of  the  Apollo  Belvidere  is 
not  a  horse's  ear." 

In  the  early  autumn  of  1855,  Mr.  Home  went  to  Florence  on  a 
visit  to  the  well-known  writer,  Mrs.  Trbllope,  accompanied  by  the 
son  of  his  Ealing  host,  Mr.  Rymer.  The  invitation  had  been  given 
by  Mrs.  Trollope  during  her  stay  at  Ealing ;  she  and  her  son,  Mr.  T. 
A.  Trollope,  having  come  from  Italy  to  London  that  summer  expressly 
to  investigate  the  phenomena  occurring  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Home. 
She  left  England  convinced  of  their  genuineness ;  and  Mr.  T.  A. 
Trollope,  as  I  have  already  shown,  shared  her  certainty.  As  to 
the  theory  that  the  manifestations  might  be  produced  by  trickery, 
that  accomplished  gentleman  wrote,  at  a  period  subsequent  to  the 
manifestations  at  Ealing  and  Florence:  "  I  may  also  mention  that 
Bosco,  one  of  the  greatest  professors  of  legerdemain  ever  known,  in 
a  conversation  with  me  upon  the  subject,  utterly  scouted  the  idea  of 
the  possibility  of  such  phenomena  as  I  saw  produced  by  Mr.  Home 
being  performed  by  any  of  the  resources  of  his  art."  And  in  a 
letter  to  the  Atkenceum,  written  from  Florence  eight  years  later 
(March  21,  1863),  Mr.  T.  A.  Trollope  said  :  "  I  have  been  present 
at  very  many  '  sittings  '  of  Mr.  Home  in  England,  many  in  my  own 
house  in  Florence,  some  in  the  house  of  a  friend  in  Florence.  .  .  . 
My  testimony  is  this  :  I  have  seen  and  felt  physical  facts  wholly  and 
utterly  inexplicable,  as  I  believe,  by  any  known  and  generally 
received  physical  laws.  I  unhesitatingly  reject  the  theory  which 
considers  such  facts  to  be  produced  by  means  familiar  to  the  best 
professors  of  legerdemain." 

ENGLAND  AND  ITALY  37 

In  Florence  the  interest  aroused  by  the  arrival  of  such  a  visitor 
was  even  greater  than  in  London.  Society  talked  of  nothing  but  his 
wonderful  powers  ;  and  though  some  shunned  him  in  the  fear  that 
they  were  of  demoniac  origin,  the  great  majority  eagerly  sought  the 
acquaintance  of  Mr.  Home,  and  made  every  effort  to  be  admitted  to 
his  seances. 

Mt.  Hiram  Powers,  the  celebrated  sculptor,  writes  as  follows  con- 
cerning the  seances  held  in  Florence : — 

"  I  recollect  we  had  many  stances  at  my  house  and  others,  when  Home 
was  there.  I  certainly  saw,  under  circumstances  where  fraud,  or  collusion, 
or  prearrangement  of  machinery  was  impossible — in  my  own  house,  and 
among  friends  incapable  of  lending  themselves  to  imposture — very  curious 
things.  That  hand  floating  in  the  air,  of  which  all  the  world  has 
heard,  I  have  seen.  There  was  nothing  but  moonlight  in  the  room,  it  is 
true ;  and  there  is  every  presumption  against  such  phenomena,  under  such 
circumstances.  But  what  you  see,  you  see ;  and  must  believe,  however  difBcult 
to  account  for  it. 

"  I  recollect  that  Mr.  Home  sat  on  my  right  hand ;  and  besides  him  there 
were  six  others,  round  one  half  of  a  circular  table,  the  empty  half  towards 
the   window   and  the  moonlight. 

"  All  our  fourteen  hands  were  on  the  table,  when  a  hand,  delicate  and 
shadowy,  yet  defined,  appeared,  dancing  slowly  just  to  the  other  side  of  the 
table,  and  gradually  creeping  up  higher,  until,  above  the  elbow,  it  terminated 

in  a    mist.      The  hand  slowly   came    nearer   to    Mrs.    ,    at  the  right   side 

of  the  table,  and  seemed  to  pat  her  face.  '  Could  it  take  a  fan?  '  cried  her 
husband.  Three  raps  responded  '  Yes,'  and  the  lady  put  her  fan  near  it, 
which  it  seemed  trying  to  take.  '  Give  it  the  handle,'  said  her  husband. 
The  wife  obeyed  ;  and  it  commenced  fanning  her  with  much  grace.  '  Could 
it  fan  the  rest  of  the  company?  '  some  one  exclaimed;  when  three  raps 
signified  assent,  and  the  hand,  passing  round,  fanned  each  of  the  company, 
and  then  slowly  was  lost  to  view. 

"  I  felt,  on  another  occasion,  a  little  hand — it  was  pronounced  that  of  a 
lost  child — patting  my  cheek  and  arm.  I  took  hold  of  it ;  it  was  warm,  and 
evidently  a  child's  hand.  /  did  not  loosen  my  hold,  but  it  seemed  to  melt 
out   of  my   clutch."  * 

Powers'  testimony  corroborates  that  of  Robert  Bell  and  Dr. 
Wilkinson.  In  1871  the  experience  of  Mr.  William  Crookes,  F.R.S., 
was  exactly  similar.  I  shall  refer  in  another  chapter  to  the 
researches  of  Mr.  Crookes ;  here  I  content  myself  with  citing  a  few 
words  from  his  narrative.  The  phenomena  that  he  describes  are 
attested  by  him  to  have  occurred  in  a  strong  light. 

"  I  have  retained  one  of  these  hands  in  my  own,"  writes  Mr. 
Crookes,  "  firmly  resolved  not  to  let  it  escape.  There  was  no 
struggle  or  effort  to  get  loose,  but  it  gradually  seemed  to  resolve  itself 
into  vapour,  and  faded  in  that  manner  from  my  grasp."  ' 

Dr.  Wilkinson  (of  whom  the  Spectator  said,  March  14,  1863,  "  In 
the  honour  of  his  personal  character  we  have  good  reason  to  believe  ") 
grasped  one  of  these  hands  in  1855,  Hiram  Powers  in  the  same  year, 
Robert  Bell  in  i860,  Mr.  Crookes  in  187 1.  In  each  of  the  four  cases 
the  result  was  the  same  :  there  was  no  effort  at  withdrawal,  but  the 
warm,  life-like  hand  that  had  been  seized  melted  in  the  grasp.  Set 
against  these  facts  the  contradictory  declarations  of  Mr.  Browning, 
during  and  after  the  single  seance  he  attended,  and  to  which  side 
does  the  balance  of  testimony  incline?  If  still  further  evidence  be 
'  "  Researches  in  the  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism." 

38  LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF  HOME 

asked  for,  let  the  reader  turn  to  the  narratives  in  subsequent  chapters 
of  this  work,  and  read  the  accounts  furnished)  to  me  of  these  unearthly 
hands  by  observers  quite  as  sceptical  as  Browning,  but  more  reason- 
able and  less  prejudiced.  If  he  wishes  to  balance  fX)et  against 
poet,  let  him  turn  to  the  letter  in  which  the  distinguished  Russian 
poet.  Count  Alexis  Tolstoy,  relates  how  he  travelled  to  London  in 
the  year  i860  expressly  to  meet  Mr.  Home;  how,  at  a  seance  at  Mrs. 
Milner  Gibson's,  he  seized  a  hand  that  appeared  and  touched  him, 
and  what  was  the  result  of  this  decisive  method  of  verifying  the 
phenomenon. 

Whatever  the  Italian  peasant  may  have  become  since  the  political 
redemption  of  Italy,  he  was  in  1855  an  extremely  bigoted  and 
superstitious  creature.  At  Florence  in  that  year  his  fears  and 
passions  were  worked  on  to  the  prejudice  of  Mr.  Home.  He  was 
told — perhaps  by  the  priesthood — that  Home  was  a  vile  necromancer, 
who  administered  the  sacraments  of  the  Church  to  toads,  in  order, 
by  spells  and  incantations,  to  raise  the  dead.  In  January,  1856, 
Signor  Landucci,  Minister  of  the  Interior  to  the  Grand  Duke  of 
Tuscany,  warned  Home  of  these  reports  and  the  excitement  they  had 
created  among  the  peasantry ;  but  he  had  already  received  a  terrible 
proof  of  the  fact  that  his  life  was  in  danger  in  Florence. 

The  wmter  of  1855  was  very  severe  there.  Late  one  bitter  night 
— that  of  the  5th  of  December — Mr.  Home  was  returning  to  his 
rooms  alone  through  the  deserted  streets,  when,  just  as  he  reached  the 
house  where  he  was  staying,  a  man  stepped  from  the  adjoining 
doorway.        In  the  Incidents,    Home  describes  what   ensued  : — 

"  I  was  on  the  step  leading  to  my  own  door,  and  was  looking  up  at  the 
window  to  see  if  the  servant  was  still  up,  when  I  received  a  violent  blow  on 
my  left  side,  the  force  of  which,  and  the  emotion  caused  by  it,  threw  me 
forward  breathless  in  the  corner  of  the  doorway.  The  blow  was  again  repeated 
on  my  stomach,  and  then  another  blow  on  the  same  place ;  and  the  attempted 
assassin  cried  out,  '  Dio  mio,  Dio  mio  !  '  and  turning  with  his  arm  outstretched, 
he  ran.  I  distinctly  saw  the  gleam  of  his  poignard ;  and  as  he  turned,  the 
light  of  the  lamp  also  fell  full  on  his  face,  but  I  did  not  recognise 
his  features.  I  was  perfectly  powerless,  and  could  not  cry  out  or  make  any 
alarm  ;  and  I  stood  thus  for  at  least  two  minutes  ;  after  which  I  groped  my 
way  along  the  wall  to  the  door  of  a  neighbour,  where  I  was  admitted.  I 
thought  I  must  have  received  some  serious  injury  ;  but  on  examining  myself  I 
found  that  the  first  blow  had  struck  the  door  key,  which  I  happened  to  have  in 
my  breast  pocket,  immediately  over  the  region  of  my  heart.  I  wore  a  fur 
coat,  and  this  had  chanced  to  be  twice  doubled  in  front.  The  second  blow 
had  gone  through  the  four  folds  of  it,  through  a  corner  of  my  dress  coat,  my 
waistcoat,  and  the  band  of  my  trousers,  without  inflicting  any  wound.  The 
third  blow  had  penetrated  the  four  folds  of  my  coat,  and  also  my  trousers  and 
linen,  and  made  a  slight  incision,  which  bled,  but  not  freely." 

It  appears  by  the  following  letter  that  an  accident  to  an 
acquaintance  was  the  cause  of  Mr.  Home  being  alone  on  the  night 
in  question  : 

"  Casa  Salviata,   Via  Chiara, 
"  Friday,  December  7,  1855. 

"  My  Dear  Home, — I  should  have  certainly  have  gone  to  see  you, 
were  I  not  laid  up  with  a  sprained  ankle,  which  prevented  my 
meeting  you  at  the  Colombaia  on  Wednesday  evening,  and  coming 

ENGLAND  AND  ITALY  39 

home  with  you  that  evening.  Perhaps  there  being  two  might  have 
prevented  the  accident  which  happened  to  you.  I  am  delighted  to 
hear  you  came  almost  miraculously  out  of  it ;  and  though  I  do  not 
think  that  I  am  of  a  revengeful  nature,  still  I  sincerely  wish  the 
cowardly  scoundrel  to  get  what  he  deserves ;  and,  could  I  in  any  way 
be  of  use  to  you,  pray  disfxjse  of  me.  Believe  me  to  be,  dear  Home, 
yours  very  truly.  "  C.  T.  Fuller." 

The  attempted  murderer  was  never  arrested.  Probably  super- 
stitious bigotry  was  the  passion  that  inflamed  him;  though  some 
persons  thought  robbery  to  have  been  the  motive  of  the  crime; 
and  it  was  even  suggested  that  Mr.  Home  might  have  been  mistaken 
for  another  man. 

\ 

CHAPTER  III 

ITALY  AND  FRANCE 

Temporary  cessation  of  Home's  powers.  Conversion  to  RcKnan 
Catholicism.  Napoleon  III.  Return  of  his  powers.  Seance 
with  the  Empress  Eugene.  Fontainebleau.  Refusal  of 
j£^2,ooo  for  a  sitting.       Cure  of  a  deaf  boy. 

Early  in  1856,  Home,  who  was  then  suffering  severely  in  health 
from  the  trying  winter  and  the  shock  to  his  sensitive  temperament  of 
the  dastardly  crime  from  which  he  had  so  narrowly  escaped,  made 
the  ^acquaintance  at  Florence  of  a  Polish  nobleman.  Count  Branicka, 
and  of  his  mother,  the  niece  of  the  famous  Potemikin.  The  Count, 
/  with  his  family,  was  about  to  visit  Naples  and  Rome,  and  invited  his 
/  new  friend  to  accompany  him.  Hardly  had  the  invitation  been 
given  and  accepted,  when  Home's  power  left  him.  His  conduct 
under  the^e  unexpected  circumstances  was  characteristic  of  the  self- 
respect  and  delicacy  of  his  nature,  and  met  with  a  worthy  response 
from  Count  Branica. 

"  The  spirits,"  writes  Mr.  Home  in  the  Incidents,  "told  me  that 
my  power  would  leave  me  for  a  year.  This  was  on  the  evening 
of  the  loth  of  February,  1856.  Feeling  that  the  Count  and  his 
family  must  have  felt  an  interest  in  me  arising  only  from  the 
singular  phenomena  which  they  had  witnessed  in  my  presence,  and 
that  this  cause  being  removed,  their  interest  in  me  would  have 
diminished,  I  wrote  the  following  morning  to  inform  them  of  what 
I  was  told,  and  to  say  that  I  could  no  longer  entertain  the  idea  of 
joining  them.  They  at  once  told  me  that  it  was  for  myself,  even 
more  than  for  the  strange  gift  I  possessed,  that  they  had  become 
interested  in  me.  I  went  to  them;  and  in  a  day  or  two  we  left 
Florence  for  Naples." 

Either  there  or  previously  at  Florence,  Mr.  Home  made  the 
acquaintance  of  Prince  Luigi,  the  brother  of  the  King  of  Naples,  who 
presented  to  him  one  of  the  numerous  souvenirs  that  he  was  destined 
to  receive  from  royal  personages,  in  token  of  their  esteem  and 
friendship.  It  was  a  ring  set  with  a  ruby  shaped  in  the  form  of  a 
horseshoe ;  and  his  Highness  at  the  same  time  had  a  second  ring 
exactly  similar  wrought  for  himself,  and  always  wore  it.  The  ruby 
is  a  brittle  gem ;  and  it  was  so  difficult  to  shape  two  horseshoes  from 
it,  that,  before  the  Prince's  orders  could  be  carried  out,  seven  stones 
were  broken. 

These  presents  from  crowned  heads  and  members  of  royal  families 
had  no  other  value  in  Home's  eyes  than  the  memories  attached  to 
them.  They  were  marks  of  gratitude  and  esteem ;  and  as  such  he 
cherished  them,  preferring,  in  the  moments  of  his  greatest  poverty, 
to  support  any  hardships  rather  than  part  with  a  single  stone.  It 
is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  these  jewels  were  an  indirect  reccnnpense 

40 

IT.\LY  AND  FRANCE  41 

for  seances.  He  never  accepted  recompense  for  a  seance,  direct  or 
indirect.  The  three  most  valuable  rings  that  Home  possessed  were 
presented  to  him  by  the  Emperor  Alexander  II. ;  and  in  each  case 
the  circumstances  under  which  the  gift  was  made  rendered  it  doubly 
precious.  One  ring  was  the  wedding-gift  sent  by  the  Czar  in  1858, 
at  the  time  of  Home's  first  marriage.  The  following  year,  on  the 
birth  of  a  son,  his  Majesty  presented  an  emerald  set  with  diamonds ; 
and  thirteen  years  later,  in  187 1,  the  Emperor,  on  the  occasion  of  our 
marriage,  sent  to  Mr  Home  a  ring  set  with  a  sapphire  of  great  size, 
surrounded  with  diamonds.  The  sapphire  Home  retained  in  the 
ring ;  the  diamonds  he  caused  to  be  set  in  an  exquisite  ornament  of  his 
own  design,  and  presented  this  to  me  as  a  marriage  gift. 

Nothing  could  have  been  more  gracious  and  delicate  than  the  Czar's 
behaviour  to  Home  on  every  occasion  when  the  latter  was  his  Majesty's 
guest.  I  relate  in  another  chapter  an  incident  connected  with  Mr. 
Home's  presentation  to  the  Emperor  of  Russia  in  1858,  which  not 
only  does  honour  to  both  the  Czar  and  himself,  but  would  alone 
explain  why  Home  always  remembered  Alexander  II.  with  peculiar 
esteem  and  gratitude,  and  received  with  the  profoundest  grief  and 
liorror  the  news  of  the  hideous  crime  that  in  1881  deprived  Russia  of 
her  beloved  sovereign. 

Naples,  so  beautiful  to  look  on  and  so  unpleasant  to  live  in,  was 
Home's  residence  for  six  weeks  in  the  early  spring  of  1856.  In 
addition  to  Prince  Luigi,  he  became  intimate  with  the  Hon.  Robert 
Dale  Owen,  American  Minister  at  the  Neapolitan  Court;  tor  whom 
he  had  a  letter  of  introduction  from  Owen's  father,  whose  life  was 
consumed  in  the  heroic  attempt  to  prove  that  in  England  Socialism 
is  possible.  The  elder  Robert  Owen,  then  almost  a  dying  man,  had 
been  staymg  at  Cox's  Hotel  when  Home  was  there;  and  in  his  letter 
to  his  son  he  speaks  very  warmly  of  the  kind  attentions  his  young 
acquaintance  had  shown  him. 

I  have  not  Mr.  Dale  Owen's  work.  Footfalls,  before  me,  and 
cannot  say  with  certainty  whether  the  manifestations  he  describes 
himself  as  having  witnessed  in  Mr.  Home's  presence  occurred  in 
1856,  or  two  years  later,  when  Home  returned  to  Italy.  More 
than  probably  the  latter,  as  his  power  had  quitted  him  at  the  time 
of  the  earlier  visit ;  though  it  may  be  remarked  that  there  were  a  few 
detached  phenomena  during  the  twelvemonth  of  its  absence,  notably 
the  "  Gregoire  "  manifestation  that  summer  at  Paris,  which  Home 
recorded  in  the  Incidents,   but  mistakenly  gave  the  date  as  1857. 

From  Naples,  the  Branica  family  and  their  guest  went  to  Rome, 
where  the  Catholic  influences  that  surrounded  him  exerted  themselves 
constantly  and  eff^ectively  to  turn  his  thoughts  towards  seeking  refuge 
in  the  Church.  They  were  aided  by  the  cruel  experiences  he  had 
recently  suffered.  The  falsehood  of  friends  to  whom  he  was  much 
attached  had  wounded  him  keenly,  the  occurrences  that  closed  his 
stay  at  Florence  had  profoundly  saddened  him ;  and  while  these 
clouds  darkened  the  natural  sunshine  of  his  spirit  a  veil  had  been 
suddenly  dropped  between  him  and  the  world  beyond,  and  all  counsel 
and  comfort    from  it   was    withdrawn.       In  this    gloomy    moment, 

D 

42  LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF  HOME 

Catholic  advisers  suggested  to  him  that  the  peace  of  mind  be  longed 
for  might  perhaps  be  found  in  the  Church  of  Rome,  and  he  sought 
and  read    with  intense  eagerness    works   relating  to  her    doctrines. 

Finding  them  expressive  of  so  many  facts  coincident  with  my  own 
experiences,"  he  writes,  "  I  thought  that  all  contending  and  con- 
tradictory beliefs  would  be  for  ever  set  at  rest,  could  I  but  be  received 
as  a  member  of  that  body.  My  experiences  of  life  and  its  falsity 
had  already  left  so  indelible  a  mark  on  my  soul,  from  my  recent 
experiences  of  it  at  Florence,  that  I  wished  to  shun  everything  which 
pertained  to  this  world,  and  I  determined  to  enter  a  monastery. 
After  two  or  three  weeks  of  seriousi  deliberation  on  the  part  of  the 
authorities,  it  was  decided  that  I  should  be  received  as  a  inember  of 
the  Church,  and  I  was  confirmed." 

Pius  IX.  gave  an  audience  to  the  young  convert,  and  received  him 
wim  the  most  benign  favour.  An  English  prelate,  Monsignore  Talbot, 
accompanied  Home  to  the  Vatican.  "The  Pope  questioned  me 
much  regarding  my  past  life,"  writes  the  neophyte.  "  He  pointed 
to  a  crucifix  which'  stood  near  to  us,  and  said  :  '  My  child  it  is 
upon  what  is  on  that  table  that  we  place  our  faith. '  ' ' 

There  was  nothing  said  of  demoniacal  possession.  Possibly,  in 
welcoming  her  new  son,  the  Church  had  hopes  that  she  might  one  day 
canonise  in  him  a  worker  of  miracles. 

It  was  Monsignore  Talbot  to  whose  counsels  Home  had  chiefly 
recourse  in  this  important  moment  of  his  life;  and  I  find  among  his 
papers  a  letter  from  that  prelate,  dated  on  the  eve  of  his  confirmation, 
and  giving  directions  to  him  concerning  it. 

Not  only  did  Pius  IX.  favour  Mr.  Home  with  an  audience,  and 
converse  with  him  ir  the  most  benignant  manner,  but  he  subsequently 
sent  him  his  special  blessing,  guaranteeing  to  Home  and  to  his 
relatives  an  entry  into  Paradise.  Home  preserved  this  interesting 
document,  and  it  is  now  in  my  possession. 

Whom  the  king  smiles  on,  courtiers  smile  on ;  and  the  gracious 
bearing  of  the  Pope  was  imitated  by  all  the  hierarchy  of  Rome, 
from  cardinals  downwards.  The  path  that  led  the  young  convert 
up  to  the  monastery  gates  was  strewed  with  roses,  and,  amidst  the 
applause  and  encouragement  of  all  round  him,  he  might  have  finally 
seen  those  gates  close  on  him,  but  that — 

But  that  the  nearer  he  drew  to  the  monastic  life  the  less  that  life 
allured  him,  and  the  stronger  became  his  misgivings.  He  had  hoped 
to  find  peace  in  it ;  but  his  hopes  soon  changed  to  fears  that  peace 
very  rarely  inhabits  the  cell  of  the  monk.  Did  not  Christ  set  the 
example  of  living  in  the  midst  of  the  world  ?  and  is  not  the  task  of 
following  that  example  less  agreeable  and  more  difficult.?  Convinced 
that  to  shut  himself  in  a  monastic  cell  would  be  a  fatal  error,  he  drew 
back  and  refused  to  enter.  This  determination  was  no  sooner 
arrived  at  than  he  quitted  Italy ;  and  in  company  with  the  Branica 
family,  betook  himself  to  Paris,  in  June,  1856. 

Although  Home  had  renounced  his  purpose  of  entering  a  monastery, 
the  Pope's  interest  in  him  did  not  cease.  Perhaps  his  Holiness 
hoped  that  he  might  yet  be  persuaded  to  take  the  vows ;  what  is 

ITALY  AND  FRANCE  43 

certain  is  that,  before  Home  left  Rome  for  Paris,  Pius  IX.  had  per- 
sonally counselled  him  to  select  for  his  confessor  there  one  of  the 
most  excellent  and  eloquent  of  French  priests,  the  celebrated  Pere 
de  Ravignan.  In  him  Home  found  a  kind  friend,  whose  lofty  piety 
delighted  him  and  in  whose  society  he  took  great  pleasure.  There 
was  but  one  point  on  which  he  and  the  good  Father  differed.  It 
had  been  foretold  to  Home  when  his  power  left  him,  that  it  would 
return  exactly  a  twelvemonth  later,  on  the  loth  of  February,  1857, 
and  he  was  convinced  that  the  promise  would  be  kept;  but  when  he 
said  so  to  Pere  de  Ravignan,  the  priest  always  confidently  replied  : 
"  Have  no  fear  of  that,  my  child — so  long  as  you  go  on  as  you  are 
now  doing,  observing  carefully  all  the  precepts  of  our  holy  Church, 
they  will  not  be  allowed  to  return." 

During  the  winter  Home  again  fell  ill;  and  Dr.  Louis,  one 
of  the  most  celebrated  physicians  in  France  for  consumptive  cases, 
decided  on  auscultation  that  the  left  lung  was  diseased,  and  advised 
a  more  genial  climate.  His  patient  was  without  the  means  of  acting 
on  his  advice,  and  remained  in  Paris,  where  for  some  time  he  was 
confined  to  his  bed. 

"  On  the  night  of  the  loth  of  February,  1857,"  he  writes,  "  as 
the  clock  struck  twelve,  I  was  in  bed,  to  which  I  had  been  confined ; 
when  there  came  loud  rappings  in  my  room,  a  hand  was  placed  gently 
upon  my  brow,  and  a  voice  said,  '  Be  of  good  cheer,  Daniel ;  you 
will  soon  be  well.'  But  a  few  minutes  had  elapsed  before  I  sank 
into  a  quiet  sleep,  and  I  awakened  in  the  morning  feeling  more 
refreshed  than  I  had  done  for  a  long  time.  I  wrote  to  the  Pere  de 
Ravignan,  telling  him  what  had  occurred ;  and  the  same  aftemocm 
he  came  to  see  me.  During  the  conservation,  loud  rappings  were 
heard  on  the  ceiling  and  on  the  floor ;  and,  as  he  was  about  to  give 
me  his  benediction  before  leaving,  loud  raps  came  on  the  bedstead. 
He  left  me  without  expressing  any  opinion  whatever  on  the  subject 
of  the  phenomena." 

The  predicted  return  of  Home's  power  on  the  loth  of  February, 
1857,  was  known  at  the  French  Court;  and  the  following  day  the 
Marquis  de  Belmont,  chamberlain  of  the  Emperor,  presented  himself 
to  inquire  if  he  had  regained  it.  An  Imperial  invitation  to  the 
Tuileries  followed ;  and  he  was  presented  to  the  Emperor  and 
Empress.  This  was  on  the  13th  of  February;  and  certain 
personages  of  the  Court  were  selected  by  their  Majesties  to  be 
present  at  a  seance  held  the  same  evening. 

No  account  was  published  of  this  or  any  seance  at  the  Tuileries ; 
but  a  few  of  the  particulars  became  known  in  the  Parisian  world ; 
and  as  they  passed  from  lip  to  lip  a  thousand  fabulous  details  were 
added,  until,  in  the  imagination  of  French  society.  Home  assumed 
the  proportions  of  a  necromancer  with  a  host  of  familiar  spirits  at  his 
command,  over  whom  he  exercised  the  authority  of  a  Manfred  or  a 
Faust.  It  was  in  vain  for  him  to  make  known  again  and  agam, 
in  the  most  emphatic  terms,  the  fact  that  he  was  nothing  but  the 
instrument  of  the  phenomena,  and  had  never  pretended  to  evoke 
spirits  or  exercise  any  influence  over  them ;  the  world  of  Paris  would 

44  LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF  HOME 

have  its  way;  and  in  the  journals  and  caricatures  of  1857,  Home, 
who  was  perfectly  unable  to  say  at  the  commencement  of  a  seance 
whether  there  would  be  manifestations  or  not,  figures  always  as  the 
imperious  summoner  of  a  legion  of  familiars,  who  are  his  very  humble 
servants.  Now  he  is  evoking  Caesar  in  a  Parisian  salon,  and  startled 
society  looks  on  while  he  sets  the  august  shade  to  brush  his  boots; 
in  another  caricature  he  directs  with  a  wave  of  his  magic  wand  the 
operations  of  a  number  of  detached  hands  that  act  as  barbers  and 
hairdressers  to  the  company.  In  a  third,  the  wizard  is  packing  to 
quit  Paris.  A  number  of  little  imps  stand  meekly  around,  waiting 
their  turn  to  be  popped  into  the  box  where  their  fellows  are  already 
imprisoned ;  but  the  master  goblin  of  the  party,  a  fiend  with  the  most 
imposing  of  tails  and  horns,  is  on  his  knees  before  the  magician, 
begging  for  a  longer  stay.  ' '  Ah,  my  dear  master, ' '  remonstrates  the 
poor  demon,  "  If  you  would  but  consider  how  much  I  like  Paris, 
and  how  perfectly  the  society  suits  me  here?  " 

The  pictures  that  caricaturists  drew  in  sport  presented  themselves 
to  the  imagination  of  the  excellent  Pere  de  Ravignan  in  grim  earnest. 
In  his  eyes  the  spirits  were  demons,  and  he  who  communed  with  them 
was  a  lost  soul.  Again  and  again  he  had  assured  Home  that  these  evil 
beings  would  not  be  permitted  to  return  to  him;  that  the  spirits 
must  perforce  keep  their  distance  now  he  was  a  son  of  the  Roman 
Church  and  specially  blessed  by  the  Pope.  The  night  of  February 
loth  falsified  his  prediction  ;  but  in  spite  of  this  proof  that  the 
invisibles  actually  could  approach  a  son  of  thte  Church,  though 
specially  fortified  by  the  Papal  blessing,  Pere  de  Ravignan  clung 
stubbornly  to  the  belief  that  the  forces  at  work  were  those  of  evil. 
The  morning  after  the  first  visit  to  the  Tuileries,  Home  called  on  him 
to  tell  him  of  the  seance  there. 

"  He  expressed  great  dissatisfaction  at  my  being  the  subject  of 
such  visitations ;  and  said  that  he  would  not  give  me  absolution  unless 
I  should  at  once  return  to  my  room,  shut  myself  up  there,  and  not 
listen  to  any  rappings,  or  pay  the  slightest  attention  to  whatever 
phenomena  might  occur  in  my  presence." 

Home  attempted  to  reason  with  his  confessor.  He  represented 
that  the  strain  on  his  nervous  system  of  the  solitary  confinement  pre- 
scribed to  him  would  be  too  great  for  endurance.  As  for  paying  no 
attention  to  the  phenomena — 

"  How  can  I  help  it?  "  said  Home.  "If  I  were  to  strike  on 
this  table  with  my  hand,  could  you  avoid  hearing  ? 

"  Yes,"  said  the  Father,  stubbornly  faithful  to  the  traditions  of  his 
order  :  "  I  only  hear  when  I  wish  to  hear,  and  see  when  I  wish  to 
see." 

"  But,  my  Father,  if  you  would  listen  to  reason " 

"  You  have  no  right  to  reason  with  me,"  replied  the  priest.  "  Do 
as  I  bid  you,  or  bear  the  consequences." 

"  I  left  him,"  writes  Home,  "  in  great  distress  of  mind.     On  reaching  my 

room,    I   found  there   a  very    dear    and  valued    friend,    the    Count  de    K " 

(de  Komar).     "  He  observed  my  agitation,  and  questioned  me  as  to  the  cause. 
I  told  him  all,  and  he  said,  '  There  is  but  one  thing  to  do  ;  come  home  with 

ITALY  AND  FRANCE  45 

me,    and   we     will   send    for     the     Abb^     de    C ,     and     consult     him.*  " 

(Abb^  Deguery  of  the  Madeleine;  murdered  by  the  Communists  in  1871.) 
"  The  Abb6  came;  and,  after  hearing  my  story,  he  said,  '  That  they  might 
as  well  put  me  in  my  grave  alive  as  to  try  to  carry  out  what  had  been  ordered ;' 
adding,  '  I  would  like  very  much  to  witness  some  of  these  wonderful  things.' 
Most  fortunately  my  emotion  had  not  destroyed  the  power,  as  is  usually  the 
case  when  I  am  agitated,  for  while  we  were  together  several  interesting 
phenomena  occurred.  His  words  were  :  '  Let  this  power  be  what  it  will,  it 
is  in  no  way  of  your  making.'  He  recommended  me  to  seek  another  spiritual 
adviser,  and  added,  '  I  myself  would  gladly  be  your  adviser,  but,  as  it  would 
be  known,  I  should  only  be  persecuted.'  He  gave  me  the  name  of  one  of  the 
most  eloquent  preachers  of  the  day,  and  I  introduced  myself  to  him,  and 
remained  under  his  guidance  during  the  few  weeks  of  my  stay  in  Paris, 
previous  to  my  going  to  America  to  bring  back  my  sister." 

There  was  great  curiosity  in  Paris  to  find  out  Mr.   Home's  new 

confessor.       "  The  Countess  L "  (Lubinski),  he  writes,  "  having 

heard  that  he  was  a  distinguished  man,  called  upon  several  of  the 
most  noted  in  Paris ;  and  after  a  short  conversation,  she  abruptly 
said  to  each,  '  So  you  are  Atr.  Home's  confessor.'  Most  naturally, 
on  one  such  occasion  she  chanced  to  find  the  right  one,  and  his  look 
of  surprise  betrayed  him." 

"  M.  Deguery,"  said  Mr.  Home  in  a  letter  published  many  years 
afterwards,  "  was  ever  a  very  kind  friend  to  me,  and  he  did  not 
believe  the  manifestations  to  come  from  an  evil  source."  As  for 
Pere  de  Ravignan,  Home  always  cherished  an  affectionate  memory  of 
him ;  and  that  the  good  father  had  felt  a  more  than  common  interest 
in  Home,  is  sufficiently  shown  by  his  letters  written  before  the  return 
of  the  power  caused  the  rupture  of  their  relations.  The  following 
was  one  of  the  last  that  Home  received  from  him : — 

"  MoN  BEiN  CHER  ENFANT, — Etes-vous  malade  ?  Faites-le  moi 
savoir.  J'irai  pres  de  vous;  cai  11  y  a  trop  longtemps  que  je  ne 
vous  ai  vu.  .  .  .  Vous  sa  vez  que  je  vous  aime  tendrement  en 
N.  S.  X.  DE  Ravignan,  S.  J. 

"  Paris,  28  Janvier,    1857." 

Six  weeks  after  the  return  of  his  power.  Home  sailed  for 
America.  Of  the  seances  that  he  had  held  in  the  interval,  several 
were  at  the  Tuileries  ;  and  though  no  details  of  these  had  been  made 
public,  a  thousand  partially  or  wholly  untrue  narratives  circulated 
in  Parisian  society.  Here  is  the  true  description  of  the  first 
seance. 

Although  Home  sometimes  sat  with  as  few  as  one  or  two,  or  as 
many  as  twelve  or  fourteen  people  present,  his  preference  was  to  fix 
the  number  of  sitters  at  seven  or  eight,  both  to  prevent  confusion, 
and  because  he  had  found  that  the  manifestations  were  of  more 
frequent  occurrence  with  a  moderate-sized  circle.  On  his  first  visit 
to  the  Tuileries,  he  informed  their  French  Majesties  that  he  should 
be  able  to  admit  to  the  seance  eight  persons  at  the  most.  The 
Empress  was  very  vexed  at  this,  having  intended  to  bring  her  whole 
suite  to  the  table  with  her ;  and  declared  that  if  Mr.  Home  persisted 
in   his  intention  she   should  refuse  to  be  present.        Knowing  that 

46  LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF  HOME 

the  presence  of  so  many  sitters  would  probably  spoil  the  seance. 
Home  could  only  express  his  profound  regret  that  it  was  impossible  for 
him  to  accept  the  conditions  her  Majesty  insisted  on.  The  Empress 
adhered  to  her  resolve,  and  withdrew  in  displeasure ;  but  the 
Emperor  remained. 

"  I  consent  to  your  proposition,  Mr.  Home,"  said  Napoleon.  "  Is 
there  any  other  condition  that  you  wish  to  be  observed  ?  ' ' 

"  None,  Sire,"  said  Home,  "  and  with  your  permission  we  will 
take  our  places  at  any  table  that  your  Majesty  may  indicate.  I 
promise  nothing,  for  I  have  no  power  over  the  manifestations;  but 
should  any  occur,  the  first  party  of  sitters  may  be  replaced  whenever 
your  Majesty  chooses  by  an  equal  number  of  other  persons.  I  make 
this  suggestion  to  prove  my  great  desire  to  comply  as  far  as  possible 
with  the  wish  of  the  Empress,  although  it  is  always  a  pity  to 
interrupt  a  good  seance  J  ^ 

Five  personages  of  the  Court  were  selected  by  the  Emperor,  and 
with  his  Majesty  and  Home  took  their  places  at  the  table,  which, 
although  large  and  massive,  soon  began  to  vibrate  and  tremble 
under  the  hands  placed  on  it,  then  to  move,  and  presently  to  be  lifted 
from  the  ground.  At  last  came  rapsi  on  the  table,  and  on  the 
alphabet  being  called  over,  responses  were  given,  not  only  to  the 
spoken  queries  of  the  Emperor,  but  to  questions  he  put  mentally. 
Napoleon  followed  every  manifestation  with  keen  and  sceptical 
attention,  and  satisfied  himself  by  the  closest  scrutiny  that  neither 
deception  nor  delusion  was  possible.  The  replies  to  the  Emperor's 
unspoken  thoughts  completed  the  impression  made  on  him;  and  it 
was  with  a  marked  affability  that  he  now  addressed  himself  to  Mr. 
Home,  saying  : — 

"  I  should  very  much  like  the  Empress  to  see  something  of  this. 
Will  you  consent  to  my  going  myself  to  seek  her?  " 

"  Certainly,  Sire,"  said  Home;  "  and  if  you  desire,  we  will 
change  the  circle." 

"  No,  no,"  said  the  Emperor,  "  I  am  much  too  anxious  to  see 
all  that  is  possible  of  the  manifestations,  and  will  follow  your 
counsels  in  every  particular." 

With  these  words  Napoleon  rose,  and  went  to  seek  the  Empress, 
who  accompanied  him  on  his  return  ;  but  in  taking  her  place  in  the 
circle,  her  Majesty  said  to  Home,  with  a  half -annoyed  air,  "  I  am 
only  here  on  condition  that  next  time  all  my  party  shall  be  present 
too;  (toute  ma  clique  y  sera)."  The  manifestations  were  not  long  in 
recommencing ;  and  Home  once  more  desired  the  Emperor  to  investi- 
gate as  closely  as  his  Majesty  pleased.  Napoleon,  extremely 
sceptical  by  nature,  readily  complied  ;  looking  under  the  table  him- 
self when  raps  came  on  it,  and  watching  Home  with  the  keenest 
scrutiny. 

The  Empress,  in  her  turn,  received  through  the  rappings  a  reply  to 
her  unspoken  thought;  and  presently  feeling  her  robe  pulled,  started, 
and  uttered  a  slight  cry.  Mr.  Home  sought  to  calm  her  agitation ; 
and  at  his  request  she  consented  to  place  her  hand  below  the  table, 
Home  saying,  "  If  a  hand  takes  that  of  your  Majesty,  I  am  confident 

ITALY  AND  FRANCE  47 

that  the  touch  will  cause  you  no  alarm."  The  Emperor  and  the 
other  sitters  looked  on  ;  Home's  hands  resting  on  the  table.  Immedi- 
ately the  look  of  the  Empress  took  an  expression  of  joy,  but  at  the 
same  time  tears  trembled  in  her  eyes.  When  the  Emperor  asked  the 
cause,  she  replied,  "  I  felt  the  hand  of  my  father  in  mine." 

"  How  could  you  distinguish  it?  "  asked  the  Emperor,  incredulous. 

"  I  would  distinguish  it  among  a  thousand,"  answered  the 
Empress,  "  from  a  defect  in  one  of  the  fingers — just  as  it  was  in 
life.  As  it  lay  in  mine,  I  satisfied  myself  of  this  defect."  The 
Emperor,  in  his  turn,  was  touched  by  the  hand,  and  verified  the 
fact  of  the  defect  referred  to  by  the  Empress. 

When  the  seance  ended,  her  Majesty,  still  much  moved,  held  out 
her  hand  to  Home.  "  You  will  never  again  have  reason  to  complain 
of  me,"  she  said  ;  "  and  from  this  moment  there  shall  only  be  present 
the  number  of  sitters  you  prefer,  and  always  the  same  persons." 

Mr.  Home  quitted  the  Tuileries,  leaving  on  the  mind  of  the 
Empress  an  impression  very  different  from  that  which  he  had  pro- 
duced before  the  seance. 

Four  personages  of  the  Court  were  selected  by  their  Majesties 
to  be  present  at  the  second  seance;  the  Duchess  de  Bassano  and  the 
Duchess  de  Montebello,  with  Count  Tascher  de  la  Pagerie  and  the 
Marquis  de  Belmont,  Chamberlains  of  the  Emperor.  The  evidences 
of  the  presence  of  an  invisible  but  not  the  less  real  power  caused 
a  lively  emotion  to  those  who  took  part  in  the  seance.  The  table 
rose  to  a  height  of  several  feet ;  then,  to  the  astonishment  of  the 
beholders,  descended  gently  and  settled  in  its  place  again,  light  as  a 
feather  falling  to  the  ground.  An  unseen  force  shook  the  apartment, 
till  the  crystal  pendants  of  the  lustre  suspended  in  the  middle  rattled 
loudly  against  each  other.  A  bell  placed  on  the  table  was  lifted 
by  invisible  hands  and  carried  some  distance ;  and  a  handkerchief 
that  the  Empress  held  in  her  hand  was  softly  taken  from  her  b|y 
invisible  means  and  seen  to  rise  and  float  in  the  air. 

While  the  hands  of  all  present  rested  on  the  table,  other  hands 
appeared.  One  of  these,  the  small  hand  of  a  child,  approached  the 
Duchess  de  Montebello,  who  started  back  from  it.  The  Empress 
was  seated  next  to  her.  No  longer  susceptible  of  similar  terror  since 
she  had  held  in  hers  the  hand  she  recognised,  she  cried,  "  For  my 
part,  I  am  not  afraid  !  (Moi,  je  n'ai  pas  peur  !);"  and  caught  the 
little  hand  in  hers,  where  she  felt  it  gradually  melt  back  into  air. 

At  this  second  seance  at  the  Tuileries,  the  phenomenon  of  a  massive 
table  becoming  light  or  heavy  at  desire  exhibited  itself  in  a  marked 
degree,  and  greatly  interested  the  Emperor,  who  assured  himself  of 
the  fact  by  repeated  trials,  one  moment  easily  moving  the  table  with 
a  couple  of  fingers,  and  the  next,  on  the  expression  of  his  wish  tlmt 
it  should  become  heavy;  trying  in  vain  to  stir  it  with  his  whole 
strength.  As  this  is  one  of  the  phenomena  that  have  been  attributed 
to  delusion,  it  may  be  well  to  refer  here  to  the  experiments  of  Mr. 
Crookes. 

"  I  had  seen  on  five  separate  occasions,"  he  writes,  "  objects  varying  in 
weight  from   25  to   100   lbs.  temporarily  influenced   in   such  a  manner  that  I 

48  LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF  HOME 

and  others  present  could  with  difficulty  lift  them  from  the  floor.  Wishing  to 
ascertain  whether  this  was  a  physical  fact,  or  merely  due  to  a  variation  in  the 
power  of  our  own  strength  under  the  influence  of  imagination,  I  tested  with 
a  weighing  machine  the  phenomenon  on  two  subsequent  occasions  when  I 
had  an  opportunity  of  meeting  Mr.  Home  at  the  house  of  a  friend.  On  the 
first  occasion,  the  increase  of  weight  was  from  8  lbs.,  normally,  to  36  lbs., 
48  Ibs^,  and  46  lbs.,  in  three  successive  experiments  tried  under  strict  scrutiny. 
On  the  second  occasion,  tried  about  a  fortnight  after,  in  the  presence  of 
other  observers,  I  found  the  increase  of  weight  to  be  from  8  lbs.  to  23  lbs., 
43  lbs.,  and  27  lbs.,  in  three  successive  trials,  varying  the  conditions." — 
(Quarterly  Journal  of  Science,   October  1871.) 

In  the  Salon  Louis  Quinze,  at  one  of  the  Tuileries  seances  (I  believe, 
the  third),  the  hand  of  a  man  appeared  above  the  table,  on  which  a 
sheet  of  paper  and  a  pencil  were  lying,  placed  there  that  any  com- 
munications received  might  be  written  down.  The  hand  moved 
a<:ross  the  table,  lifted  the  pencil,  and  wrote  on  the  paper  the  single 
word,  "  Napoleon."  The  writing  was  the  autograph  of  the  Emperor 
Napoleon  I. ;  the  hand  small  and  beautifully  formed,  as  his  is 
recorded  to  have  been. 

The  Empress,  moved  by  the  sight  of  this  hand,  requested  per- 
missdon  to  kiss  it ;  and  it  placed  itself  to  her  lips,  then  to  the  lips  of 
the  Emperor.  The  hand  was  distinctly  seen;  this  seance,  like  all 
others  at  the  Tuileries,  being  held  in  a  good  light. 

In  accordance  with  the  promise  of  the  Empress  to  Home,  the 
same  persons  were  usually  present  at  each  seance ;  but  occasionally 
one  or  two  of  the  number  were  changed.  I  am  not  sure,  however, 
that  the  four  personages  selected  to  be  present  at  the  Imperial  seances, 
whom  I  Rave  already  named,  were  varied  in  any  way  until  after  the 
return  of  Home  from  America.  After  (or  before)  that  short  absence 
of  Mr.  Home,  the  Duchess  of  Hamilton  wasi  present  at  seances,  as 
was  also  Prince  Murat,  of  whom  I  have  an  anecdote  to  relate, 
interesting  in  view  of  the  assertion  sometimes  made  that  Napoleon 
III.  remained  always  sceptical  concerning  the  manifestations. 

Some  years  after  the  seances  at  the  Tuileries,  Home  was  in 
London ;  and  there  was  a  seance  one  evening  at  the  house  of  Lady 
Dunsany.  Mrs.  A.  Senior,  sister-in-law  of  the  late  Nassau  Senior, 
was  present,  and  a  witness,  after  the  seance,  of  the  following 
occurrence,  which  I  leave  her  to  relate. 

"  Just  as  we  were  seated  round  the  supper  tray,"  writes  Mrs.  Senior,  "  a 
loud  ring  sounded  from  the  door  bell ;  and  a  servant  came  to  say  that  two 
gentlemen  were  in  the  hall  asking  for  Mr.  Home,  who  immediately  stood  up 
and  begged  Lady  Dunsany's  permission  to  go  down  to  them,  when  she  most 
kindly  said:  '  Pray  bring  them  up:  any  friends  of  yours  will  be  welcome.' 
He  quickly  returned,  introducing  Prince  Murat  and  Lord  Adare  (now  Lord 
Dunraven).  They  had  called  hoping  to  catch  Mr.  Home  at  the  end  of  his 
sdance.  After  some  very  agreeable  chit-chat.  Prince  Murat  asked  Mr.  Home 
whether  he  remembered  the  first  evening  he  met  him  at  the  Tuileries,  and 
how  very  ill  he  had  behaved,  going  under  the  table  and  laying  hold  of  his  feet, 
and  declaring* that  he  would  '  find  out  his  tricks.'  '  Was  I  not  a  saucy  dog?  ' 
he  said,  to  which  Mr.  Home  laughingly  agreed  ;  and  we  were  all  much  amused 
by  the  Prince's  lively  taie,  which  ended  by  his  saying,  turning  to  Mr.  Home, 
'  When  you  left  the  room,  the  Emperor  leant  forward,  with  his  arms  on  the 
table,  and  said,  in  the  most  impressive  manner  :  "  Whoever  says  that  Home 
is  a  charlatan  is  a  liar."  '  This  we  felt  was  information  from  the  fountain- 
head." 

ITALY  AND  FRANCE  49 

"  They  say,  Sire,  you  believe  in  these  things,"  said  the  Duke  de 
Morny  to  the  Emperor  one  day,  when  the  talk  was  of  the  seances 
with  Home. 

"  Whoever  has  said  so  is  much  deceived,"  replied  Napoleon  III. 

"  I  was  sure  of  it,  Sire,"  said  the  Duke  delighted;  "  and  felt  it 
my  duty  to  contradict  the  report." 

"  Quite  right,"  said  the  Emperor;  "  but  you  may  add,  when  you 
speak  on  the  subject  again,  that  there  is  a  difference  between  believing 
a  thing  and  having  proof  of  it,  and  that  I  am  certain  of  what  I  have 
seen." 

I  have  mentioned  that  the  Duchess  de  Bassano  was  one  of  the  four 
personages  of  the  Court  selected  by  their  Majesties  to  assist  habitually 
at  the  Tuileries  seances.  The  Duchess  arrived  one  evening, 
wearing  on  her  fingers  rings  that  had  been  blessed  at  Rome,  and 
having  divers  other  consecrated  objects  attached  to  her  bracelets. 
Curious  to  see  what  would  happen,  she  said  nothing  of  these  saintly 
influences ;  but  took  her  place  as  usual  in  the  circle.  Her  new 
fashion  of  jewellery  made  no  difference;  or,  if  any,  it  seemed  to 
encourage  the  manifestations ;  for  the  seance  was  very  successful. 
The  Duchess,  astonished,  demanded  of  the  spirits  if  the  neighbour- 
hood of  these  consecrated  objects  was  not  disagreeable  to  them.  "  Not 
in  the  least, ' '  was  the  reply ;  and  as  a  proof  of  the  fact  several  mani- 
festations were  addressed  to  her  personally. 

An  empty  chair,  at  this  seance,  was  seen  to  advance  slowly  from 
the  end  of  the  apartment,  and  to  stop  before  the  seat  of  the 
Empress.  She  made  a  gesture  of  surprise ;  and  the  chair  recoiled  to 
a  little  distance ;  then,  as  it  halted,  a  motion  was  communicated  to  it 
that  made  it  sway  backward  and  forward.  The  Empress,  as  she 
watched  the  movement,  recollected  that  it  had  been  a  habit  with  her 
father  to  balance  himself  thus  in  his  chair ;  and  inquired  of  Home, 
if  he,  the  seer,  could  perceive  any  figure  in  the  apparently  empty 
chair  before  her. 

"  Yes,"  he  replied,  "  it  is  that  of  a  soldier." 

"  Give  me  a  description  of  him,"  demanded  the  Empress. 

Home  obeyed,  and  drew  the  portrait  of  her  Majesty's  father,  whom 
he  had  not  known,  and  of  whom  there  existed  but  a  single  portrait, 
which  the  Empress,  in  whose  possession  it  was,  knew  that  Home 
had  never  seen. 

The  departure  of  Home  from  Paris  in  March,  1857,  astonished  the 
Parisian  world ;  and  the  press  was  at  once  filled  with  absurd  and 
scandalous  stories,  to  some  of  which  I  have  referred  in  another 
chapter.  In  one  thing  the  authors  of  these  different  falsehoods  were 
agreed  :  Mr.  Home's  departure  was  compulsory,  and  he  would  never 
be  seen  in  France  again.  In  the  meantime  the  subject  of  these 
calumnies  was  crossing  the  Atlantic,  his  sole  errand  being  to  bring  to 
France  his  young  sister,  whom  the  Empress  had  offered  to  take  under 
her  protection  and  educate  at  her  expense.  As  solicitous  for  the 
welfare  of  those  whom  he  loved  as  he  was  negligent  of  his  own. 
Home  had  accepted  with  much  gratitude  the  kind  and  gracious  pro- 
posal by  which  her  Majesty  proved  how  deep  was  the  interest  she 
felt  in  him. 

50  LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF  HOME 

The  day  before  he  sailed  a  wonderful  case  of  healing  occurred 
through  his  means,  of  which  particulais  are  given  in  the  Incidents, 
vol.  i.  Supplying  the  names  of  the  witnesses,  which  Mr.  Home 
indicated  only  by  initials,   I  reprint  the  circumstances  here. 

"  On  the  19th  of  March,  1857,  when  I  was  residing  at  13  Rue  des  Champs 
Elys^es,  I  received  a  letter  from  a  stranger  to  me,  Madame  A.  de  Cardonne, 
of  233  Rue  St.  Dominique,  St.  Germain,  stating  that  she  had  had  a  dream, 
in  which  she  had  seen  her  own  mother  and  mine,  and  that  the  latter  had 
told  her  to  seek  me  at  once,  in  order  that  her  son,  who  had  been  deaf  for  four 
years  from  the  effects  of  typhoid  fever,  might  be  cured.  This  was  so  strongly 
impressed  upon  her  mind,  that  she  wrote  to  me  to  say  that  she  would  call  upon 
me  with  her  son,  the  following  morning  at  ten. 

"  Accordingly,  the   next  morning  she  presented  herself   with   her  son  at  my 

rooms,    there    being   present   the  Princess  de    B "  (Princess   de    Beauveau), 

"  and  Miss  E "  (Miss  Ellice),  "  who  were  with  me  previous  to  my  leaving 

Paris  that  very  day,  to  proceed  on  my  voyage  to  America.  I  had  been  so 
overwhelmed  by  persons  wishing  to  see  me  that  I  had  uniformly  refused  such 
visits ;  but  on  this  occasion  I  had  been  so  much  pre-occupied  by  my  engagements 
in  preparing  for  my  voyage,  that  I  had  not  been  able  to  acknowledge  her 
letter.  I  therefore  received  her  with  considerable  embarrassmjent,  which  was 
fully  reciprocated  on  her  part.  It  was  indeed  an  embarrassing  meeting  for 
both  of  us,  the  mother  yearning  for  her  son's  recovery,  and  I  not  knowing 
how  I  was  expected  to  be  instrumental  in  healing  this  long  total  deafness,  the 
more  so  that  operations  had  been  performed  on  the  boy,  as  I  afterwards  found, 
by  eminent  surgeons  of  Paris,  who  had  said  that  it  was  impossible  he  should 
ever    be  restored    to    hearing. 

"  She  sat  down  on  a  chair  near  a  sofa,  I  taking  a  seat  on  the  sofa  and 
beckoning  the  son  to  be  seated  on  my  left.  He  was  in  his  fifteenth  year, 
tail  for  his  age,  of  a  delicate  complexion,  with  large  dreamy  blue  eyes  that 
looked  as  if  they  would  supply  the  place  of  hearing  with  their  deep,  thoughtful 
inquiring  gaze.  The  mother  began  her  description  of  the  boy's  illness, 
commencing  with  the  attack  of  the  fever,  and  ending  in  the  entire  loss  of 
hearing.  During  the  recital,  told  with  all  the  warmth  and  tenderness  of  a 
mother's  heart,  and  describing  the  various  surgical  operations  to  which  he  had 
been  subjected,  my  sympathies  were  deeply  moved,  and  I  had  unwittingly 
thrown  my  left  arm  about  the  boy  and  drawn  him  towards  me,  so  that  the 
boy's  head  rested  upon  my  shoulder.  Whilst  in  this  position,  and  as  Madame 
de  Cardonne  was  telling  some  of  the  most  painful  particulars,  I  passed  my 
hand  caressingly  over  the  boy's  head,  upon  which  he,  partly  lifting  his  head, 
suddenly  exclaimed  in  a  voice  trembling  with  emotion,  '  Maman,  je  t'entends!' 
(Mamma,  I  hear  you  !)  The  mother  fixed  on  him  a  look  of  astonishment,  and 
said,  '  Eniile!'  (the  boy's  name);  and  he  at  once  replied,  '  Quoi?  '  (What?). 
She  then,  seeing  that  the  child  had  heard  her  question,  fainted  with  emotion  ; 
and  on  her  recovery  the  scene  was  a  most  thrilling  one — the  poor  mother  ask- 
ing continually  questions  for  the  mere  pleasure  of  hearing  her  child  reply. 
The  boy  was  able  to  resume  his  studies,  and  has  continued  to  hear  perfectly 
up   to  the  present  time  "  (1863.) 

It  was  characteristic  of  Home  that,  as  soon  as  Madame  de 
Cardonne  had  left  him,  he  quietly  finished  his  preparations  and 
started  for  America,  without  troubling  himself  in  the  least  to  make 
public  the  particulars  of  this  wonderful  cure,  or  to  obtain  the 
attestations  of  the  mother  and  the  witnesses.  It  was  not  till  his 
return  from  America  with  his  sister  that  Madame  de  Cardonne  could 
write  to  him  the  grateful  letter  from  which  I  extract  the  following 
passages  : — 

ITALY  AND  FRANCE  51 

"  May  20th.    1857. 

"  Let  me  add  myself  to  the  number  of  those  who  love  you,  and 
who  welcome  your  return. 

"  Messenger  of  Divine  Providence  !  I  bless  you,  for  you  have 
wrought  a  miracle  for  my  son.  I  have  inspired  in  all  around  me  a 
sentiment  of  veneration  for  you,  whose  mbsion  enlarges  from  hour  to 
hour  {grandit  d^heure  en  heure).^' 

Madame  de  Cardonne  then  asks  permission  to  introduce  to  Mr. 
H<Mne  her  friend  M.  Sardou — a  name  that  has  since  become  well 
known  in  P'rance.  I  find  among  Home's  papers  a  letter  from  Sardou, 
of  nearly  the  same  date  as  that  of  Madame  de  Cardonne,  and 
expressing  a  hope  that  Home  will  name  a  day  for  the  writer  to 
call  on  him.  It  may  be  presumed,  therefore,  that  the  celebrated 
dramatist,  among  other  persons,  is  able  to  testify  to  the  fact  that 
neither  Madame  de  Cardonne  nor  the  strange  and  sudden  restoration 
of  her  son's  hearing  is  a  myth. 

The  mother's  letter  ends  : — "  My  son  joins  himself  to  me  in 
offering  you  his  tenderest  regards.  The  kind  caresses  you  bestowed 
on  my  poor  child  have  resulted  in  so  much  good  to  me  that  the  sweet 
memory  of  them  will  never  leave  me." 

Again,  on  June  17th,  1857,  she  wrote: 

"  Dear,  very  dear  Mr.  Home, — My  son,  who  never  ceases  to 
bless  you,  begs  me  every  day  to  take  him  to  see  you.  He  is  so 
happy  to  have  recovered  his  hearing  that'  he  cannot  rest  till  h» 
expresses  to  you  his  gratitude.  Will  you  be  able  to  receive  me 
to-morrow,   Thursday,   between  10  and   11?     . 

"  I  renew  to  you,  my  very  dear  sir,  the  assurance  of  a  devotion 
that  I  shall  carry  with  me  to  the  grave. 

"  A  Mauvoisin  de  Cardonne." 

During  Mr.  Home's  absence  from  France,  Madame  de  Cardonne, 
the  Princess  de  Beauveau,  and  Miss  Ellice  had  all  spoken  to  their 
friends  of  the  miraculous  cure ;  and  the  history  was  soon  well  known 
m  Paris  and  eagerly  discussed  there.  Many  doubted,  others 
credited ;  numbers  carried  their  enthusiasm  so  far  as  to  visit  the 
house  in  the  Rue  des  Champs  Elysees,  and  entreat  to  see  the 
chamber  where  the  wonderful  event  had  taken  place.  Some  of 
these  persons  wrote  to  Home  in  a  manner  that  was,  of  the  many 
misconceptions  concerning  his  mission,  the  most  vexatious  and  intoler- 
able to  him.  They  addressed  him  in  a  language  of  worship,  and 
exalted  him  to  the  height  of  a  supernatural  being.  Home  carried 
his  repugnance  to  all  such  adulation,  and  his  wish  to  be  regarded  as 
merely  the  instrument  of  the  manifestations,  to  such  a  length  that, 
after  his  seances,  he  was  accustomed  to  reject  even  a  simple  expression 
of  thanks  from  the  persons  present.  "  How  can  we  thank  you 
enough,  Mr.  Home,  for  the  opportunity  of  witnessing  such  wonder- 
ful things  !  "  was  a  frequent  cry;  and  the  invariable  response  was, 
"  You  will  have  thanked  me  sufficiently  in  not  thanking  me  at  all." 

52  LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF  HOME 

Neither  apgel,  demon,  nor  charlatan,  he  wished  it  to  be  clearly 
understood  that,  apart  from  his  extraordinary  gift,  he  was  a  man 
like  other  men. 

The  restoration  of  hearing  to  the  son  of  Madame  de  Cardonne  was 
not  the  only  extraordinary  cure  performed  in  France  through  the 
instrumentality  of  Mr.  Home.  I  have  selected  it  as  one  of  the  best 
known  and  best  accredited  instances  of  healing ;  but  among  his 
correspondence  are  preserved  letters  that  testify  to  other  cures 
wrought  through  him.  Of  similar  manifestations  in  America  and 
England,  I  have  given  details  under  the  date  of  their  occurrence. 

"When  Home  returned  from  America  with  his  sister,  the  Empress 
graciously  redeemed  her  promise  by  placing  Christine  Home  in  the 
celebrated  convent  of  the  Sacred  Heart,  where  the  daughters  of  the 
noblest  families  of  France  were  educated.  The  Court  was  then 
at  Fontainebleau ;  and  Home  was  speedily  summoned  there,  as  a 
royal  visitor  had  delayed  his  departure  expressly  that  he  might  have 
the  opportunity  of  seeing  something  of  the  phenomena  on  Home's 
return.  This  was  the  old  King  of  Bavaria,  predecessor  of  the 
sovereign  whose  melancholy  fate  is  fresh  in  the  recollection  of  the 
world.  The  seance  was  a  successful  one ;  and  the  Bavarian  monarch, 
being  new  to  the  manifestations,  was  not  only  interested  but  startled 
by  them;  and  overwhelmed  Home  with  questions,  much  to  the 
amusement  of  their  French  Majesties. 

As  various  of  the  manifestations  at  Fontainebleau  were  of  the 
same  description  as  those  witnessed  at  the  Tuileries,  I  pass  over 
them.     A  striking  incident  of  the  evening  was  the  following  : — 

An  accordion  was  brought  to  Home  that  one  of  the  Court  servants 
had  been  sent  to  buy  in  the  first  shop  in  Fontainebleau.  It  was 
perfectly  new,  and  Home  had  not  even  seen  it  before  the  seance. 
He  held  it  in  one  hand,  and  it  played;  then  Home  withdrew  his 
hand,  and  the  instrument,  without  mortal  fingers  touching  it, 
executed  a  charming  air,  which  voices  were  distinctly  hjeard 
accompanying.  All  present  listened  spell-bound ;  and  littk  by  little 
these  aerial  voices  seemed  to  recede  into  the  distance,  and 
were  heard  mone  faintly,  till,  as  the  music  ceased,  they  died  away, 
too,  like  an  echo. 

The  next  day  was  a  Sunday.  There  was  no  seance  in  the  morning, 
but  in  the  midst  of  a  conversation  raps  were  heard.  One  of  the 

ladies  of  the  Court  touched  in  succession  the  letters  of  a  written 
alphabet,  while  another  wrote  down  the  letters  the  raps  indicated. 
In  this  way  the  message  "  etlam  "  was  received,  a  word  incompre- 
hensible to  all  present.  The  rappings  began  again,  and  added  the 
letters  "  es  "  ;  but  eilames  was  as  unintelligible  as  the  first  communi- 
cation. A  third  time  raps  were  heard,  and  gave  the  key  to  the 
enigma  by  the  addition  of  the  letters  ''  se,"  ''  Et  la  messe  ?  "  It 
was  the  hour  for  attending  mass;  but  every  one  had  forgotten  the 
fact,  until  reminded  of  their  religious  duties  by  some  invisible  who 
perhaps  wished  to  remove  the  fear  always  lurking  in  some  mmds  that 
the  phenomena  were  the  work  of  the  Evil  One. 

The  same    afternoon,   there  was    an  excursion    on     the  lake    at 

ITALY  AND  FRANCE  53 

Fontainebleau.  Their  Imperial  Majesties  had  the  King  of  Bavaria 
with  them  in  their  boat,  and  invited  Home  to  be  the  fourth  in  the 
party.  Arriving  at  a  little  isle  on  which  there  was  a  kiosk,  the 
three  crowned  heads  and  Home  landed.  There  was  no  thought  of  a 
seance ;  but  as  they  entered  the  kiosk  raps  sounded  loudly ;  and  on 
the  alphabet  being  called  over,  a  communication  was  addressed  to 
the  Empress. 

Such  were  a  few  of  the  manifestations  witnessed  at  the  Tuileries 
and  Fontainebleau.  I  have  omitted  various  details,  where  the 
phenomena  resembled  those  already  described;  and  undoubtedly 
much  occurred  in  the  presence  of  the  Emperor  and  Empress  of  the 
French  of  which  I  have  no  knowledge,  and  therefore  cannot  record. 

Home  returned  from  Fontainbleau  to  Paris  in  the  Imperial  train, 
and  in  the  same  carriage  with  their  Majesties.  During  the  journey 
various  phenomena  were  witnessed ;  and  their  unexpected  occurrence 
greatly  startled  the  King  of  Bavaria,  who  fairly  fled  from  one 
moving  object  when  he  saw  it  advance  towards  him  in  broad  daylight, 
untouched. 

Home  now  remained  in  Paris  till  July,  1857,  and  held  many 
seances.  He  was  in  great  power  at  this  time ;  and  extraordinary 
manifestations  were  witnessed,  not  only  in  fashionable  salons,  but 
by  sitters  of  every  class  in  life.  Had  he  complied  with  half  of 

the  requests  pressed  on  him  for  seances  in  Paris  in  the  summer  of 
1857,  and  on  his  return  there  the  winter  following,  he  would  have 
needed  to  sit  for  the  whole  of  the  twenty-four  hours,  and  change 
the  sitters  every  hour.  Had  he  allowed  himself  to  be  tempted  by 
the  demon  of  cupidity  into  selling  a  gift  which  was  beyond  price, 
he  could  have  rapidly  piled  up  a  splendid  fortune — always  suppos- 
ing that  his  power  had  not  abandoned  him  the  moment  he  began  to 
traffic  in  it.  Again  and  again  large  sums  were  offered  to  him  for 
seances  by  persons  whose  eager  curiosity  his  refusal  to  sit  had 
disappointed,  and  they  were  invariably  offered  in  vain.  I  will 
cite  but  a  single  instance. 

There  was  in  Paris  a  society  of  certain  of  the  jeunesse  doree, 
called  the  Union  Club,  among  whose  members  there  had  been  much 
talk  of  Home  and  his  seances.  It  was  known  that  he  had 
repeatedly  refused  large  offers  of  money ;  but  the  club  probably 
thought,  like  the  English  Sir  Robert  Walpole,  that  every  man  has 
his  price,  and  if  Home  had  not  yet  been  tempted,  it  was  because  his 
was  an  exorbitant  one.  They  talked  the  matter  over,  and  deter- 
mined to  bid  high.  Home  was  offered  50,000  francs  for  a  single 
seance,  and  astonished  the  club  by  returning  a  prompt  and  decided 
refusal 

These  facts  were  made  known  to  the  De  Komar  family,  whose 
guest  Home  was  at  the  time,  by  the  younger  of  the  two  Counts  de 
Komar,  who  happened  to  be  a  member  of  the  Union  Club.  Friends 
of  Count  Branicka,  with  whom  Home  came  to  Paris  in  1856,  the  De 
Komars  speedily  became  the  most  prized  and  intimate  of  all  his 
friends  m  France.  There  were  two  brothers,  Alexander  and 
Waldimir,   the  former  much  the  elder  of  the  two;  and  with  them 

54  LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF  HOME 

and  their  sisters,  the  Princess  de  Beauveau  and  the  Countess  Potocka, 
Home  had  many  remarkable  seances. 

Long  afterwards,  Mr.  Home  happened  to  meet  one  evening  in 
society  the  son-in-law  of  Count  Alexander  de  Komar,  who  recalled  to 
him  the  offer  in  Paris  of  ^{^2,000  for  a  seance,  and  the  surprise  of 
the  bidders  when  their  proposal  was  rejected  as  an  insult.  Home 
at  once  took  out  a  pencil,  and  sought  a  sheet  of  paper.  "  I  have 
told  that  story,  my  dear  Bodisl  a,"  he  said,  "  and  have  had  it  treated 
as  a  fable — put  down  your  attestation  of  the  fact  on  the  spot.  As 
justice  is  very  seldom  done  to  me,  and  the  falsehood  is  constantly 
repeated  that  I  am  paid  for  my  seances,  it  will  probably  be  said 
of  me,  when  I  leave  this  world,  that  I  accepted  the  50,000  francs 
offered  me  for  this  seance — or  perhaps  even  double  the  amount." 
Bodiska  complied ;  and  added  other  incidents  concerning  Home  that 
came  within  his  knowledge.  I  have  the  paper  before  me  at  this 
moment,  and  will  give  it  in  the  English  of  the  writer,  who  was  son 
of  the  Russian  consul  at  New  York  : 

"  I  first  met  Mr.  D.  Dunglas  Home  at  the  Hotel  de  Vouillemont, 
Paris,  where  my  father-in-law,  Count  Alexander  Komar,  resided. 
He  resided  in  the  family  of  my  father-in-law ;  and  1  myself  had 
ample  opportunity  of  studying  his  private  life  and  character,  as  well 
as  the  extraordinary  phenomena  occurring  in  his  presence ;  and  I 
can  frankly  state  that  nothing  in  natural  principles  can  explain 
what  I  and  others  witnessed,  not  only  once  but  surely  a  hundred  of 
times.  There  was  never  any  mercenary  motive  to  incite  him  to 
call  attention  to  his  wonderful  gift,  for  to  my  knowledge  he  refused 
many  proposals,  amongst  which  was  one  from  the  Union  Club,  that 
offered  him  francs  50,000,  for  a  seance.  A  relative  of  my  wife 
even  offered  him  adoption,  and  to  settle  a  life  annuity  on  him,  which 
likewise  he  refused.  "  B.  Bodiska." 

One  of  the  celebrities  who  sought  and  made  Home's  acquaintance 
at  Paris  in  1857  was  Madame  Grisi,  another  was  Mario,  a  third  was 
Francis  Mahoney  ("  Father  Prout  ").  A  letter  from  Grisi  to  Home, 
dated  December  8,  1857,  is  sufficiently  interesting  to  translate 
here  : — 

"  Your  extraordinary  and  mysterious  power  has  continued  during 
the  whole  night  to  exercise  its  influence  over  my  astonished  imagina- 
tion. I  am  charmed  to  be  able  to  express  to  you  all  the  pleasure  I 
have  found  in  making  your  acquaintance ;  and  I  hope  to  see  you 
again  on  my  return  from  England.  M.  Mario  desires  me  to  present 
his  best  compliments  to  you,  and  he  will  be  delighted  to  have  a 
call  from  you.       Receive — &c.,  "  Giulia  Grisi." 

Another  celebrated  person  who  made  Home's  acquaintance  at  this 
time  was  Marchioness  de  Boissy,  who,  thirty  years  earlier,  as  the 
Countess  Guiccioli,  had  published  her  recollections  of  Byron. 
Madame  de  Boissy  was  present  in  1857,  and  again  in  1865,  at  several 
seances  with  Home,   and  beheld  phenomena  that  deeply  impressed 

ITALY  AND  FRANCE  55 

her.  There  are  several  letters  from  her  among  Home's  corres- 
pondence; but  they  give  no  details  of  the  manifestations  witnessed 
by  her. 

If  only  half  of  those  who  believed  had  had  the  courage  of  their 
belief  !  if  they  had  published  their  testimony  to  their  experiences ; 
or,  too  timid  for  that,  had  at  least  written  it  down,  and  left  it  to  be 
made  public  when  they  were  beyond  the  reach  of  incredulity.  But 
the  silence  they  have  preserved,  the  secrecy  in  which  they  have 
enshrouded  their  knowledge  of  the  facts,  are  so  many  unspoken 
falsehoods  that  hinder  the  progress  of  a  consoling  verity.  Believers, 
no  less  than  scoffers,  look  first  of  all  to  their  own  interests  in  these 
days,  when  all  that  remain  of  Christianity  are  its  temples  and  its 
ceremonies.       Each  is  for  himself,  and  all  are  for  the  world. 

When  Home  passed  from  earth,  the  press  proved  how  much  the 
intellect  may  be  degraded  by  the  moral  nature  associated  with  it, 
and  hatred  availed  itself  of  the  silence  of  death  to  exhaust  itself  in 
invectives  accompanied  by  the  insinuations  that  are  worse  than  out- 
spoken calumnies.  Invective  is  the  natural  weapon  to  which  such 
enemies  have  recourse  when  proofs  are  wanting  to  them.  But 
the  name  of  Home  is  pronounced  with  respect  by  all  whose  opinion 
deserves  attention  and  who  have  had  means  of  forming  it ;  and  as 
for  the  honours  or  the  reproaches  that  the  mob  decree  to  us,  they 
ought  to  be  regarded  with  equal  indifference — the  one  should  cause 
no  joy  and  the  other  no  sorrow.  He  who  had  so  many  friends 
could  not  fail  to  have  enemies — even  without  knowing  of  them ;  for 
one  may  justly  apply  to  Home  these  lines  of  Victor  Hugo : — 

"  Ces  ennemis  qu'il  a — s'il  faut  qu'il  s'en  souvicnne, 
Lui  viennent  de  leur  haine,  et  non  pas  de  la  sienne." 

CHAPTER  IV 

FRANCE  AND  RUSSIA 

Meetings  with  the  King  of  Wurtemberg  and  the  Emperor  William  of 
Germany.  Remark  of  the  latter  at  Versailles.  The  Duke  of 
Parma  and  the  vision.  Seance  with  the  Queen  of  Holland. 
Adventures  in  Russia.  Anecdotes  of  Alexandre  Dumas. 
Spiritism  and  Spiritualism.  Second  loss  of  his  powers.  Marriage 
in  St.  Petersburg.  Strange  cure.  His  critics.  Wild  theories  as 
to  his  powers. 

Home  guided  himself  in  numerous  actions  of  life  by  spirit-counsels; 
and,  influenced  by  these,  he  took  a  resolution  in  1857  to  visit  Turkey. 
Among  his  acquaintances  in  Paris  was  Lord  Howden,  for  some  years 
British  Minister  at  Madrid.  Lord  Howden,  attracted  by  simple 
curiosity,  came  to  a  seance,  and  was  startled  by  the  phenomena  he 
witnessed  out  of  his  preconceived  notions  concerning  them.  He  saw 
a  great  deal  of  Home  during  the  next  few  weeks,  inviting  him  fre- 
quently to  dinner  and  taking  every  opportunity  of  being  present  at 
seances;  and  when  Home  was  on  the  point  of  starting  for  the  East, 
Lord  Howden  furnished  him  with  introductions  to  the  British 
Ambassadors  at  Vienna  and  Constantinople.  I  quote  the  letter  that 
enclosed  them : — 

"  Rue  d'Antin,  Monday. 

"  My  dear  Home, — Here  are  letters  for  our  ambassadors  at  Vienna  and 
Constantinople.  If  I  can  do  anything  else  for  you  in  the  limited  circle  of  my 
capabilities,  freely  command  me.  Will  you  come  and  eat  a  bad  dinner  at  my 
Hotel  at  7  o'clock  on  Saturday  next,  with  only  our  friend  Denys  and  my 
attach^   Middleton  ? 

"  //  you  feel  inclined  afterwards,  and  will  accompany  me  to  Passy,  to  my 
friends  the  Delesserts  and  her  sister,  Madame  Odier,  you  will  please  me, 
please  them,  and,  I  hope,  please  yourself,  for  they  have  a  sympathy  for  you, 
as  I  have — but  do  not  consider  yourself  the  least  bound  to  me  on   this  head. 

"  Yours  with  truth,  Howdkm." 

At  the  very  moment  of  departure,  Home's  journey  to  Vienna  and 
the  East  was  abandoned  as  suddenly  as  it  had  been  resolved  upon. 
"  My  trunks  were  packed,"  he  writes,  "my  passport  sent  for  visa. 

I  was  making  a  farewell  call  on  the  Duchess  d'A ,  and  while  in 

conversation  with  her,  the  drawing-room  seemed  filled  with  rappings, 
the  alphabet  was  called  for,  and  I  was  told  that  my  journey  must  be 
postponed,  as  some  political  troubles  were  just  about  to  occur. 
Instead,  therefore,  of  going  to  Turkey,  I  went  to  Baden-Baden." 

The  "  Duchess  d'A "  was  the  Duchess  of  Hamilton,  daughter 

of  the  Grand  Duke  of  Baden,  and  the  incognito  "d'A "  was 

probably  suggested  to  Home  by  the  fact  that  the  occurrence  took 
place  in  the  Hotel  d'Albe,  where  the  Duchess  was  then  residing. 

Home  was  at  Baden  during  August  and  part  of  September,  1857. 
His  health  was  again  failing;  and  his  power,   as  was  ordinarily  the 

56 

FRANCE    AND    RUSSIA  57 

case  when  his  health  failed,  had  grown  weaker.  "  I  met,  however," 
he  writes,  "  the  King  of  Wurtemberg  and  the  then  Prince,  now 
King  of  Prussia,  both  of  whom  investigated  the  phenomena." 

A  letter  with  an  almost  illegible  signature  throws  some  light  on  the 
circumstances  of  Home's  introduction  to  the  King  of  Wurtemberg.  It 
is  addressed  to  him  at  the  Hotel  d'Angleterre,  Baden,  and  was 
written  by  the  physician  to  the  King,  Dr.  Guggert.  Other  letters 
identify  this  correspondent  with  a  physician  who  had  been  present  in 
France  at  some  of  Home's  seances,  and  whose  obstinate  scepticism 
was  conquered  by  what  he  witnessed. 

"  My  dear  Mr.  Home, — I  spoke  yesterday  to  H.M.  the  King  of 
Wurtemberg  of  your  good  disposition,  and  of  your  extraordinary  aiKi 
miraculous  qualities.  His  Majesty  would  like  to  see  you  at  noon 
to-day,  as  he  will  probably  leave  to-morrow  morning  for  Stuttgart. 
If  you  should  be  disposed  to  accept  the  high  invitation,  you  must  be 
kind  enough  to  call  on  me  at  twelve  o'clock,  and  I  will  take  you 
with  me." 

Home  has  himself  described,  in  a  letter  published  in  1883,  his 
meeting  at  Baden-Baden  with  the  then  Prince  Regent  of  Prussia,  the 
late  Emperor  of  Germany,  and  with  his  Majesty's  son,  the  present 
Emperor.  "  My  first  meeting  with  the  Prince  of  Prussia,"  he  wrote, 
"  was  at  once  amusing  and  interesting.  The  Emperor  William  of 
to-day,  then  Prince  Regent,  sent  one  of  his  aides-de-camp  to  ask  me 
to  call  on  him.  I  went  as  desired,  and  on  entering  the  drawing-room, 
I  was  received  by  a  gentleman  whose  commanding  presence  agreeably 
impressed  me;  but  as  he  began  a  series  of  questions  more  or  less 
personal  and  pointed,  I  became  reticent,  and  rephed  rather  coldly. 
It  was  a  relief  when  the  door  opened,  and  the  Prince  Regent  came  in. 
I  was  taken  aback  when  he  laughingly  said,  '  I  see  that  I  do  not 
require  to  present  you  to  my  son,  for  you  already  know  him.'  "  Three 
seances  with  the  Prince  Regent  of  Prussia  followed  this  interview. 

Thirteen  years  later,  at  Versailles,  Mr.  Home  again  saw  the 
King  of  Prussia,  not  yet  crowned  Emperor.  Home  was  with  a  party 
of  Prussian  officers  and  English  newspaper  correspondents ;  and  one 
of  the  latter,  Mr.  Kingston,  correspondent  of  the  Daily  Telegraph, 
thus  described  the  incident,  in  a  letter  published  in  that  journal, 
October  31st,  1870: — 

"  A  staff-officer  put  his  head  in  at  the  door,  and  exclaimed,  '  The 
King!  The  King!'  disappearing  as  he  uttered  the  words.  We 
hurried  after  him ;  and,  sure  enough,  there  in  the  dining-room  stood 
the  venerable  monarch,  who  had  improvised  a  visit  to  the  chateau 
during  his  afternoon  drive,  surrounded  by  the  members  of  his  personal 
staff.  I  never  saw  the  King  in  better  health  or  spirits.  Among  our 
party  was  an  American  General,  with  whom  his  Majesty  conversed 
for  some  time.  Another  was  Mr.  Daniel  Home,  the  celebrated 
Spiritualist,  whom  the  King  promptly  recognised  and  addressed  very 
kindly — reminding  him  of  the  wonders  that  he  (Mr.  Home)  had  been 
the  means  of  imparting  to  him,  and  inquiring  about  '  the  spirits  '  in 
by  no  means  a  sceptical  tone." 

£ 

58  LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF  HOME 

As  the  Daily  Telegraph  correspondent,  an  almost  total  stranger  to 
Home,  is  an  unexceptionable  witness  to  the  fact  of  this  conversation, 
I  have  preferred  to  cite  his  account  of  it,  although  somewhat  meagre. 
He  might  have  added  that  the  exact  words  King  William  addressed 
to  Home  were:  "  Ah,  Mr.  Home,  when  I  relate  the  strange  things 
I  witnessed  in  your  presence,  they  laugh  at  me ;  but  the  facts  are  true 
for  all  that." 

It  was  late  in  August  or  early  in  September,  1857,  that  Mr.  Home's 
presence  at  Baden  afforded  the  late  Emperor  of  Germany  the  oppor- 
tunity of  investigating  the  phenomena,  an  investigation  renewed  by 
his  Majesty  in  subsequent  years.  Another  seance  at  Baden  was  with 
the  Prince  of  Nassau,  whose  interest  had  been  excited  by  the  account 
that  the  Princess  had  written  to  him  of  a  seance  with  Home  at  Paris 
a  few  weeks  before,  at  which  her  Highness  and  the  Princess 
Mentchikoff  were  present. 

The  Court  of  France  was  at  Biarritz  in  September,  1857  ;  and  an 
Imperial  invitation  telegraphed  to  Mr.  Home  at  Baden  cut  short  his 
stay  there.  He  had  hardly  arrived  at  Biarritz  when  his  health  failed 
him  still  more ;  and,  hearing  of  his  illness,  various  priests  made  per- 
severing attempts  to  penetrate  to  his  sick-room.  The  Church  had 
not  yet  lost  hope  of  reclaiming  the  wanderer  from  her  fold,  and  setting 
on  his  woriderful  life  the  seal  of  the  monastery. 

In  parting  with  the  year  1857,  I  may  add  to  the  particulars  already 
given  the  remark  that  I  have  named  only  a  very  few  of  the  persons  of 
intellectual  and  social  distinction  who  were  present  at  seances  given 
by  Mr.  Home  in  France.  Many  names  are  unknown  to  me;  for  Home 
kept  no  record  of  the  persons  present  at  seances,  and  destroyed  nine- 
tenths  of  the  countless  letters  he  received.  As  tor  the  correspondence 
that  remains,  it  is  not  always  dated ;  and  the  higher  the  rank  of  the 
writer,  the  more  common  this  omission.  Various  of  these  undated 
letters  evidently  belong  to  the  year  1857,  but  to  what  month  it  is 
impossible  to  say.  Among  these  correspondents  are  celebrities  of 
every  description,  the  aristocracy  of  talent  as  well  as  that  of  birth. 
There  are  letters  from  Princess  Murat,  Princess  OrlofF,  Lacordaire 
(brother  of  the  celebrated  preacher),  Madame  de  Balzac  (widow  of 
the  great  novelist  and  a  life-long  friend  of  Home),  the  Prince  and 
Princess  Metternich,  Count  de  Sancillon,  Count  de  Villiers,  Madame 
de  Girardin,  the  Duchess  de  Tascher,  the  Turkish  Ambassador  at 
Paris,  the  Duchess  de  Medina-Celi,  the  Countess  de  Lourmel,  the 
Princess  de  Montleart,  the  Count  de  Riancourt,  the  Marquis  Duplanti, 
the  Marquis  Strachan  de  Salza,  the  Duchess  de  Valmy,  Baron  de 
Retz,  Baron  de  Stakelberg,  Dos.sini  the  composer,  and  Hebert  the 
painter.  A  note  written  by  this  last-named  celebrated  artist  after  a 
seance  deserves  quotation : — 

"  Grand  Home, — Mes  felicitations  et  mes  remerciments  les  plus 
chaudes  jxvur  les  hautes  emotions  que  je  vous  dois. 

"E.   Hebert." 

I  have  omitted  from  the  above  list  the  name  of  one  of  the  most 
remarkable  personages  with  whom  Mr.  Home  became  acquainted  in 

FRANCE    AND    RUSSIA  59 

France  in  1857.  I  speak  of  the  last  Duke  of  Parma,  who  had  abdi- 
cated scxne  time  previously,  and  was  living  at  Paris  in  1857  under  the 
incognito  of  Count  de  Villafranca.  The  strange  carcumstances 
attending  the  commencement  of  the  Duke's  friendship  with  Home  are 
related  without  names  in  the  Incidents.  Briefly  summarised,  the 
story  is  as  follows : — 

In  the  early  summer  of  1857,  the  Count  de  Villafranca,  a  stranger 
to  Home,  called  on  him  one  morning  and  sent  up  a  pressing  request 
to  see  him: — 

"  He  advanced  to  where  I  stood,"  writes  Mr.  Home,  "  and,  taking 
roe  kindly  by  the  hand,  he  said  to  me,  '  I  have  been  sent  to  you,  and 
you  will  yet  know  the  reason  why,  though  you  do  not  even  know  who 

I  am.     r  live  at  No.  4,  Rue ,  and  you  will  be  obliged  to  come 

to  me. '  I  shook  my  head  at  this  incredulously,  and  told  him  my  time 
was  so  taken  up  that  I  had  scarcely  time  even  to  call  on  my  friends. 
He  smiled,  and  said,  '  You  will  see,  you  will  see.'  The  conversation 
then  changed;  and  he  left  me  after  having  written  his  address." 

Home  dined  the  same  evening  with  the  Baroness  de  Meyendorf, 
and,  on  entering  the  dra\\'ing-room,  saw  a  young  man  standing  there. 
"  I  was  surprised  at  this,"  he  writes,  "  expecting  to  have  met  no 
stranger.  With  his  eyes  fixed  upon  me,  he  said,  '  I  am  glad  you  have 
come,  for  we  will  go  together  tO'  see  my  father  ' ;  and  he  then  suddenly 
disappeared.  I  had  thought  till  then  he  was  a  guest,  so  real  was  the 
vision." 

Later  in  the  evening  the  apparition  again  presented  himself;  and 
Home  then  delayed  no  longer,  but  went  to  the  residence  of  his  visitor 

cf  the  morning.     "  On  reaching  No.  4,  Rue ,  I  was  directed 

to  the  rooms  of  the  Count ;  and  his  valet  told  me  that  his  master  was 
preparing  to  retire,  and  in  all  probability  could  not  see  me.  Again 
the  voice  told  me  to  announce  myself;  and  at  that  very  moment  a 
door  was  opened,  and  the  Count  came  towards  me,  and  said,  *  I 
have  been  waiting  for  you — I  knew  you  would  come.'  I  described  to 
him  the  young  man  I  had  seen,  and  all  that  had  happened ;  and  he 
at  once  recognised  him  as  his  son.  He  showed  me  a  portrait  of  him, 
which  exactly  corresponded  with  my  vision  of  him." 

The  tragic  story  of  the  death  of  the  Duke  of  Parma's  son  need  not 
be  related  here.  It  is  enough  to  add  that  the  Count — or,  rather,  the 
Duke — told  Home  in  what  manner  he  had  been  impressed  to  seek  him ; 
and  that  the  morning  visit  and  evening  vision  were  the  commencement 
of  a  friendship  that  Home  valued  greatly.  The  Duke  of  Parma,  a 
brother  of  the  Celebrated  Duchess  of  Berry,  was  one  of  the  most 
finished  and  noble  representatives  of  manners  and  traditions  that  are 
almost  extinct  in  Europe.  He  had  outlived  his  world  and  resigned 
his  duchy ;  but  he  preserved  that  union  of  perfect  simplicity  with 
perfect  dignity  which  constitutes  the  true   grand  seigneur.  The 

exquisite  charm  of  such  manner  is  seldom  felt  now ;  but  it  will  be 
remembered  by  a:ll  who  were  honoured  with  the  society  of  the  Count 
de  Villafranca. 

In  his  journey  to  Holland  in  January,  1858,  Mr.  Home  was  accom- 
panied by  his  friend   Mons.   Tiedemann,   a  Dutch  gentleman   then 

6o  LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF  HOME 

residing  at  the  Chateau  de  Cergay,  not  far  from  Paris,  where,  two 
yeajs  later,  Home's  remarkable  preservation  from  death  occurred.  I 
have  no  details  of  the  seances  at  the  Hague;  but  a  circumstance  con- 
nected with  them  left  a  profound  impression  on  the  mind  of  the  Queen 
of  Holland.  The  first  took  place  in  one  of  the  grand  apartments  of 
the  palace,  among  surroundings  of  a  somewhat  cheerless  and  sombre 
magnificence ;  and  little  or  nothing  occurred.  On  the  occasion  of  the 
following  seance,  the  Queen  invited  Home  to  choose  for  himself  the 
room  in  which  he  would  prefer  to  hold  it ;  and  her  emotion  was  great 
on  seeing  him,  after  having  traversed  the  whole  length  of  the  state 
apartments,  pause  in  front  of  a  locked  door.  None  entered  this 
chamber  save  the  Queen.  It  was  the  chamber  of  her  child,  whose 
loss  she  had)  never  ceased  lamenting.  The  manifestations  that  took 
place  there  left  in  the  mind  of  this  gifted  and  amiable  sovereign  a 
vivid  remembrance,  that  was  attested  by  the  action  of  her  Majesty. 
On  the  eve  of  Home's  departure  from  the  Hague,  she  drew  from  her 
finger  a  ring  of  which  the  chief  value  consisted  in  the  fact  that  she 
had  long  worn  it,  and  sent  it  to  him  with  the  following  holograph 
note : — 

"  February   ^th,   1858. 

"I  send  you  a  grateful  (reconnaissant)  souvenir  of  our  seances." 

"Sophie." 

At  the  wish  of  Mons.  Tiedemann,  Home  accompanied  him  from 
the  Hague  to  Amsterdam,  and  held  there  a  seance  vrith  a  party  of 
very  pronounced  sceptics,  the  proprietors  and  staff  of  a  Dutch  journal. 
His  power  was  now  weakening,  and  a  few  days  later  wholly  left  him. 
He  returned  to  Paris  suffering  from  the  effects  of  a  severe  chill  he 
had  taken  in  Holland ;  and  was  ordered  by  his  doctor  to  leave  for 
Italy. 

While  he  was  living  quietly  in  Italy,  Paris  and  the  Parisian  journals 
were  lending  ready  credence  to  an  infamous  falsehood  concerning  him. 
He  had  not  left  Paris,  after  all,  ran  this  new  slander.  He  had  been 
arrested  on — the  scandal-mongers  knew  not  what  charge — and  was  in 
the  prison  of  Mazas.  "  Persons  in  official  positions  even  told  my 
friends  that  they  had  seen  and  spoken  to  me  in  that  prison ;  and  one, 
an  oflScer,  went  so  far  as  to  state  that  he  had  accompanied  me  there 
in  the  carriage"  {Incidents  in  My  Life,  vol.  i.,  p.  106). 

Home,  without  knowing  anything  of  the  slanders  that  were  in 
circulation,  had  already  written  from  Rome  to  several  friends  in  Paris. 
The  recipient  of  one  of  his  letters,  the  well-known  author,  Henri 
Delaage,  showed  it  to  the  Paris  correspondent  of  Le  Nord,  who,  on 
March  17th,  wrote  to  that  journal:  "Allow  me  to  begin  by  a  good 
action ;  it  is  to  free  an  honourable  man  from  calumnies,  arising  from 
what  source  I  know  not,  but  which  for  the  past  few  days  have  been 
rapidly  spreading.  I  speak  of  Mr.  Home,  who  is  for  the  moment  in 
Italy,  whereas  it  is  whispered  both  secretly  and  openly  that  he  is  in 
the  prison  of  Mazas,  for  we  know  not  what  crimes.  The  letter  here 
given,  dated  Rome,  7th  of  March,  was  received  yesterday  by  M. 
Henri  Delaage,  an  intimate  friend  of  Mr.  Home.  The  letter  is  there 
before  me  with  the  postal  mark." 

FRANCE    AND    RUSSIA  6i 

On  the  publication  of  this  paragraph  in  Le  Nord,  accompanied  by 
Home's  letter  from  Rome  to  Uelaage,  the  spread  of  the  Mazas  slander 
was  stopped.  It  had  already  travelled  from  Paris  into  Belgium  and 
Holland ;  a  delay  of  a  week  or  two  more  in  disproving  it,  and  the  lie 
would  no  doubt  have  made  the  round  of  the  civilised  world. 

There  was  at  Rome,  in  March,  1858,  a  young  Russian  nobleman, 
Count  Koucheleff-Besborodka,  who,  as  well  as  the  Countess  his  wife, 
so  celebrated  for  her  beauty,  had  a  lively  curiosity  concerning  Home 
and  a  great  desire  to  make  his  acquaintance.  As  he  refused  all 
invitations  to  go  into  Roman  society,  the  Koucheleffs  ended  by 
pressing  into  their  service  one  of  the  few  friends  he  saw,  who  promised 
to  gratify  their  wish  for  an  introduction,  and  arranged  the  matter  in 
the  fashion  related  by  Mr.  Home  in  the  Incidents : — 

"  He  mentioned  one  afternoon,  while  we  were  walking  together  on 
the  Pincian,  the  name  of  a  Russian  family  of  distinction  then  in 
Rome,  and  added  that  they  were  anxious  to  make  my  acquaintance. 
I  excused  myself  on  the  ground  of  my  health.  At  this  moment  a 
carriage  was  passing  us  and  stopped ;  and  my  friend,  before  I  was 
aware  of  what  he  was  doing,  introduced  me  to  the  Countess  de 
Koucheleff,  who  asked  me  to  come  and  sup  with  them  that  evening, 
adding  that  they  kept  very  late  hours." 

The  evening  was  destined  to  be  a  memorable  one  in  Home's  life. 
"  I  went  about  ten,"  he  writes,  "  and  found  a  large  party  assembled. 
At  twelve,  as  we  entered  the  supper-room,  the  Countess  introduced 
to  me  a  young  lady,  whom  I  then  observed  for  the  first  time,  as  her 
sister.  A  strange  impression  came  over  me  at  once,  and  I  knew  she 
was  to  be  my  wife.  When  we  were  seated  at  table,  the  young  lady 
turned  to  me,  and  laughingly  said,  '  Mr.  Home,  you  will  be  married 
before  the  year  is  ended.'  I  asked  her  why  she  said  so;  and  she 
replied  that  there  was  such  a  superstition  in  Russia  when  a  person  was 
at  table  between  two  sisters.  I  made  no  reply.  It  was  true.  In 
twelve  days  we  were  partially  engaged,  and  waiting  only  the  consent 
of  her  mother." 

' '  Home  had  lost  the  power  of  making  himself  feared,  but  had  pre- 
served that  of  making  himself  loved,"  wrote  Alexander  Dumas  in 
allusion  to  the  fact  that  his  friend's  power  had  not  yet  returned  to 
him.  Mademoiselle  de  KroU  had  seen  nothing  whatever  of  the 
phenomena,  and  was  incredulous  as  to  the  possibility  of  communica- 
tions with  another  world,  at  the  time  of  her  engagement  to  Home. 

"  The  evening  of  the  day  of  our  engagement,"  continues  Home  in  the 
Incidents,  "  a  small  party  had  assembled,  and  were  dancing.  I  was  seated 
on  a  sofa  by  my  fiancee,  when  she  turned  to  me  and  sj.id  abruptly  :  '  Do  tell 
me  all  about  spirit-rapping,  for  you  know  I  don't  believe  in  it.'  I  said  to  her 
'  Mademoiselle,  I  trust  you  will  ever  bear  in  mind  that  I  have  a  mission 
intrusted  to  me.  It  is  a  great  and  holy  one.  I  cannot  speak  with  you  about 
a  thing  which  you  have  not  seen,  and  therefore  cannot  understand.  I  can 
only  say  that  it  is  a  great  truth."  The  tears  came  welling  into  her  eyes;  and 
laying  her  hand  in  mine,  she  said,  '  If  your  mission  can  bring  comfort  to  those 
less  happy  than  ourselves,  or  be  in  any  way  a  consolation  to  mankind,  you  will 
ever  find  me  ready  and  willing  to  do  all  I  can  to  aid  you  in  it.'  She  was 
true  to  this  noble  sentiment  to  the  last  moment  of  her  short  life ;  and  she  is  still 
my  great  comfort  and  sustainer  since  we  have  separated  in  this  earthly 
sphere." 

62  LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF  HOME 

The  acquaintance  of  the  Koucheleffs  with  Dumas  resulted  in  an 
invitation  to  the  author  of  Monte  Cristo  to  accompany  them  to  Russia, 
and  be  present  at  the  marriage  of  Home.  Dumas  accepted ;  and  in 
the  month  of  June  the  party  left  for  St.  Petersburg.  On  the  eve  of 
Home's  departure,  a  banquet  was  given  to  him  by  his  friends  in  Paris 
to  celebrate  his  marriage ;  and  a  distinguished  and  numerous  company 
of  various  nationalities  assembled,  including  many  of  the  names  men- 
tioned a  few  pages  back,  all,  or  nearly  all,  of  them  men  who  had  been 
present  at  seances  with  Home. 

Dumas  insisted,  like  almost  every  other  Frenchman,  on  regarding 
Home  as  a  magician.  At  his  pressing  request.  Home  had  given  him 
a  sketch  of  his  life  up  to  the  year  1858,  and  this  Dumas  reproduced  in 
his  work,  but  could  not  resist  the  temptation  to  re-touch  it.  There 
are  natures  to  wMch  veracity  is  impossible,  and  history  as  treated  by 
Dumas  becomes  fiction,  biography  becomes  romance.  Home,  who  had 
expected  nothing  else,  laughed  heartily  over  his  metamorphosed 
biography  when  he  read  it;  and  Dumas  responded  to  his  laugh  by 
another,  that  seemed  to  say,  ' '  Does  the  world  ever  take  me 
seriously?" 

Probably  not ;  but  the  Paris  correspondent  of  the  Daily  News  would 
seem  to  have  done  so,  when,  in  June,  1886,  she  sent  to  that  journal 
her  ridiculous  biographical  sketch  of  Home. 

Count  KouchelefT-Besborodka  possessed  a  fine  estate  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  St.  Petersburg  that  had  been  bestowed  on  his  grandfather 
by  Catherine  II.  Here  the  festivities  took  place  that  accompanied  the 
marriage  of  Home ;  and  here,  on  arriving  in  Russia,  Dumas  enjoyed 
the  lavish  hospitality  of  the  Count.  Within  a  few  days  of  Home's 
arrival,  the  Emperor  Alexander  II.  sent  to  request  that  he  would 
present  himself  at  Peterhoff,  the  summer  residence  of  the  Court. 
Dumas  was  something  more  than  disappointed  at  not  receiving  a 
similar  invitation ;  but  affected  to  consider  that  the  loss  was  the 
Emperor's — not  his.  "There  are  many  crowned  heads  in  Europe," 
he  grandiosely  remarked;  "  but  there  is  only  one  Alexander  Dumas." 

At  the  marriage  of  Home,  it  was  necessary  for  Dumas  to  give  his 
name;  and  on  being  asked  for  it,  he  responded  briefly,  "  Dumas." 
The  official  repeated  the  question. 

"  Dumas!"  replied  the  illustrious  owner  of  that  name,  more  loudly 
than  before. 

"  But  your  Christian  name,  Monsieur  Dumas?  " 

"Alexander — Is  there  another  Alexander  Dumas  in  the  world?" 
demanded  the  outraged  author. 

A  dozen  such  anecdotes  might  be  told  of  Dumas  in  Russia.  He 
was  certainly  one  of  the  vainest  of  men ;  but  his  vanity  was  so  naive  in 
its  display  that  it  amused  much  more  than  offended.  So  long  as 
sufficient  incense  was  burnt  in  his  honour,  Dumas  was  the  pleasantest 
companion  in  the  world,  and  as  entertaining  as  one  of  his  own  novels ; 
but  he  lived  in  purgatory  when  he  saw  another  excite  more  interest 
than  himself.  If  he  hardly  did  justice  in  Russia  to  his  reputation  of 
"  hon  enfant,''^  it  was  because  of  his  ill-humour  at  attracting  less 
attention  than  he  had  anticipated. 

FRANCE    AND    RUSSIA  63 

Dumas,  who  never  took  life  seriously,  could  not  accept  the  mani- 
festations as  matter  for  serious  consideration.  This  truly  French 
fashion  of  looking  at  the  subject  was  more  disagreeable  to  Home  than 
any  scepticism,  and  explains  the  statement  made  by  Dumas  that 
Home  accused  him  of  putting  the  spirits  to  flight. 

A  Paris  anecdote  of  1857  deserves  a  passing  mention.  It  may  be 
true  or  not — probably  not — but  at  least  it  is  ben  irovato.  A  Parisian 
journalist,  so  the  story  runs,  came  to  a  seance ;  and  on  seeing  a  heavy 
table  rise  to  the  ceiling  when  no  person  was  touching  it,  was  so 
startled  that  he  rushed  out  of  the  house  without  his  hat. 
"Frightened!"  said  the  witty  fugitive,  when  joked  with  on  his 
escapade;  "  no,  not  at  all.  Why  did  I  leave  my  hat,  then?  What 
did  I  want  with  a  hat  when  I  had  lost  my  head  ?  ' ' 
Dumas  relates  how  at  Polonstrava,  the  residence  of  Count 
Koucheleff-Besborodka,  a  spirit  entered  into  a  round  table.  In  his 
fantastic  narrative,  the  table  is  no  longer  a  table;  it  has  become  an 
intelligence  itself,  instead  of  being  merely  the  means  of  communica- 
tion between  one  intelligence  and  another.  In  this  confusion  of 
things  material  with  things  spiritual,  Dumas  was  a  type  of  his  nation. 
When,  as  so  often  happened  at  the  seances  cf  Home,  a  piece  of  furni- 
ture was  seen  to  move  without  any  person  touching  it,  the  French 
mind  commonly  grasped  at  the  explanation  that  the  spirit  had  entered 
into  the  table  or  chair,  and  animated  it.  In  other  countries,  the 
belief  of  an  invisible  force  acting  from  without  on  a  visible  object 
might  be  understood  and  accepted ;  but  the  French  mind  was  seldom 
able  to  separate  the  spirits  from  the  chairs  and  tables.  In  the  pages 
of  one  of  the  many  writers  who  have  charged  their  own  aberrations 
on  the  world  of  spirits.  Count  Theobald  Walsh,  we  even  find  tables, 
footstools,  and  baskets  animated  at  his  bidding  with  the  various 
passions  of  humanity,  and  representing  anger,  gluttony,  pride,  etc. 

In  no  country  were  more  extraordinary  requests  addresed  to  Home 
than  in  France.  He  received,  for  instance,  a  letter  from  a  French 
officer  quartered  at  Algiers,  who  was  possessed  with  the  belief  that 
treasure  had  been  buried  somewhere  under  an  old  Moorish  dwelling 
there,  and  was  ready  to  share  it  with  Home,  if  the  wizard  would  tell 
him  the  exact  spot.  Another  writer  cherishes  the  memory  of  a  friend- 
ship formed  with  Home  during  a  previous  existence  in  some  other 
planet  than  the  earth,  and  longs  to  know  if  on  Home's  part  a  similar 
recollection  has  been  preserved. 

Spiritualism  does  not  exist  in  France ;  its  place  has  been  taken  by    ,^ 
Spiritism,  a  very  different  thing.      The  fundamental  conceptions  of  ;  V' 
Spiritualism  are  the  individual  immortality  of  the  soul,  and  the  reality  •  I 
of  the  invisible  world.     Home  proved  that  death  is  a  second  birth. 
The  facts  collected  in  this  volume  show  that  there  is  no  interruption 
in  the  existence  of  those  who  have  passed  from  earth.     What  can  be 
more  comforting  than  such  a  belief?     The  certitude  of  immortality 
transfigures  lives  that  were  formerly  filled  with  despair  and  the  shadow 
of  death,  and  inspires  us  with  a  keener  sentiment  of  submission  and 
gratitude  to  the  Creator.     There  is  nothing  in  this  antagonistic  to  the 
Christian  faith;  but  "  Spiritism  "  (as  its  inventor  named  it)  professes 

64  LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF  HOME 

to  be  an  anti-Christian  religion  taught  by  spirits — if  the  name 
"  religion  "  can  be  applied  to  so  gross  a  superstition.  It  is  not  even 
a  new  heresy ;  it  is  merely  a  nineteenth-century  application  of  the  very 
ancient  superstition  of  the  transmigration  of  spirits.  Revel,  who  first 
taught  the  doctrines  of  Spiritism  in  France,  took  the  name  of  "  Allan 
Kardec,"  asserting  himself  to  have  borne  it  in  a  former  existence  as 
a  Breton  Druid.  Those  who  accept  this  doctrine  do  so  entirely  on  the 
faith  of  pretended  revelations  made  by  spirits.  Reason  is  set  aside, 
and  proofs  of  identity  are  replaced  by  the  flights  of  an  imagination 
more  conspicuous  for  incoherence  than  for  grandeur.  If  this  super- 
stition attracts  in  France — and  only  in  France — people  of  no  intellect 
or  education,  it  does  not  include  a  single  intellectual  celebrity  among 
its  adepts. 

When  Home,  at  St.  Petersburg,  received  the  Imperial  command  so 
much  envied  him  by  Dumas,  his  power  had  been  absent  for  nearly 
three  months ;  and  he  replied  to  the  invitation  by  acquainting  the 
Emperor  with  the  fact,  and  added  that,  at  the  earliest  indication  of 
its  return,  he  would  hold  himself  entirely  at  the  disposition  of  his 
Majesty. 

The  marriage  of  Mr.  Home  and  Mademoiselle  Alexandrina  de 
Kroll,  sister  of  the  Countess  Koucheleff,  took  place  on  the  ist  of 
August,  1858,  new  style,  or  the  20th  of  July  by  the  Russian  calendar. 
The  ceremony  was  first  performed  according  to  the  rites  of  the  Greek 
Church  in  the  private  chapel  of  Count  Koucheleff,  and  again  in  the 
Church  of  St.  Catherine  by  a  priest  of  thfi  Roman  Catholic  Church. 
Three  days  before  the  marriage,  the  Emperor  Alexander  II.  sent  to 
the  bridegroom  the  wedding-gift  of  which  I  have  spoken  in  a  previous 
chapter.  It  was  transmitted  to  Mr.  Home  by  Count  SchouvalofF, 
together  with  the  following  letter: — 

"  Peterhof,  le  17/29  juillet,  1858. 

"Monsieur, — Le  Ministre  de  la  Maison  de  I'Empereur  m'a  fait 
parvenir  une  bague  enrichie  de  diamants  que  Sa  Majeste  vous  a 
destin^e  comme  une  marque  de  Sa  bienveillance. 

"  Ayant  I'honneur  de  vous  la  transmettre  ci-joint,  je  vous  prie, 
Monsieur,  de  recevoir  I'assurance  de  ma  consideration  tres  distinguee. 

"  ScHOUVALOFF. " 

A  comparison  of  the  date  of  Count  SchouvalofiF's  letter  with  that 
of  Mr.  Home's  marriage  would  alone  sufficiently  establish  the  fact 
that  the  Emperor's  gracious  token  of  his  interest  in  the  bridegroom 
took  the  form  of  a  wedding-gift. 

Besides  the  letter  ]ust  given,  several  others  from  Count  SchouvalofF 
have  been  preserved.  They  convey,  for  the  most  part,  the  Imperial 
invitations  to  Mr.  Home ;  but  in  one  of  those  written  in  July  the  Count 
gladly  accepts  Home's  offer  to  give  him  a  special  seance.  "  Discre- 
tion prevented  me  asking  you,"  he  writes;  "but  since  you  have  the 
kindness  to  propose  it  to  me,  I  will  be  with  you  any  day  and  any  hour 
that  you  can  receive  me." 

Leaving  St.  Petersburg  shortly  after  their  marriage,  Mr.  Home  and 
his  bride  spent  the  autumn  in  visits  to  the  various  estates  of  their 

FRANCE    AND    RUSSIA  65 

brother-in-law,  Count  Koucheleff,  some  of  which  were  situated  in  the 
farthest  south  of  Russia ;  and  it  was  November  before  they  were  back 
in  St.  Petersburg.  On  his  return,  Home,  as  the  letters  of  Count 
Schouvaloff  and  Count  Bobrinsky  show,  was  several  times  summoned 
to  the  Palace  of  Tsarskoe-Selo,  where  the  Emperor  was  just  then 
residing.  The  social  consideration  that  Mr.  Home  enjoyed  in  Russia 
does  not  need  attesting,  but  such  letters  as  the  following  sufficiently 
establish  it: — 

"  S.  M.  I'Empereur  desire,  cher  Home,  vous  voir  a  Tsarskoe,  lundi 

soir.  Veuillez  avoir  la  bonte  de  m'informer  par  le  porteur  si  Ton  peut 
compter  sur  vous  ce  jour-la.  Une  voiture  vous  attendra  a  la  gare  de 
Tsarskoe.    Tout  a  vous,  "  Comte  A.  Bobrinsky." 

In  January,  1859,  Home  fell  ill,  and  was  soon  in  great  danger.  The 
malady  that  had  attacked  him  baffled  his  physicians,  but  was  expelled 
in  the  manner  he  has  narrated  in  the  Incidents : — 

"  The  dangerous  symptoms  were  greatly  increased  by  my  usual  nervous 
debility.  Friction  was  recommended,  but  the  extreme  pain  which  it  caused 
precluded  its  use.     I  was  in  this  state  when  one  evening  my  wife  and  a  friend, 

the  Baron  de  M "  (Baron  de  MeyendorfT),   "  were  present,   and  my  hands 

were  suddenly  seized  by  spirit-influence,  and  I  was  made  to  beat  them  with 
extreme  violence  upon  the  part  which  was  so  extremely  sensitive  and  tender. 
My  wife  was  frightened,  and  would  have  endeavoured  to  hold  my  hands  ;  but 
my  friend,  who  had  sufficient  knowledge  of  spirit-manifestations,  prevented  her. 
I    felt    no   pain,    though    the  violence  of    the   blows  which   I  continued   giving 

myself  made  the  bed  and  the  whole  room  shake In   an   hour   I    was   in 

a  quiet  sleep  ;  and  on  awaking  the  next  morning,  I  found  the  disease  had  left 
me,  and  only  a  weakness  remained.  The  expression  of  the  doctor's  face  baffles 
my  description,  when  he  visited  me  early  that  morning,  expecting  to  have  found 
me  worse,  and  felt  my  pulse  and  saw  that  a  great  change  must  have  occurred, 
beyond  his  skill  to  account  for." 

In  all  countries — but  especially  in  France  and  America — ^the  ntmi- 
ber  of  persons  who  claimed  Home's  acquaintance  without  ever  having 
met  him  was  legion.  He  had  several  amusing  rencontres  with 
imaginative  beings  of  this  class,  and  often  told  in  his  own  inimitable 
fashion  the  story  of  these  meetings.  One  of  the  most  amusing  took 
place  in  a  railway-carriage  in  which  he  was  travelling  to  Fontaine- 
bleau,  in  May,  1857. 

In  early  summer  there  are  few  pleasanter  places  in  France  than 
Fontainebleau ;  and  under  the  Empire  that  was  the  time  of  year 
usually  selected  for  an  Imperial  visit  to  the  beautiful  old  forest  and 
chateau.  The  Court  was  there  in  May,  1857  ;  and  on  the  23rd,  a  few 
days  after  his  return  from  America,  Home  received  a  telegram  con- 
veying an  invitation  from  the  Empress  to  present  himself  at  the 
chateau,  ajid  left  Paris  by  the  evening  train.  Three  gentlemen,  all 
strangers  to  him,  were  his  companions  on  the  journey ;  and  their  talk 
fell  on  the  news  of  the  day. 

"  Home  is  back  with  us,  it  seems,"  said  one.  "  I  am  told  that  the 
fact  is  he  had  never  left  Paris." 

'  '  So  far  from  that  being  the  case,"  repHed  oracle  number  two, 
"  he  will  never  be  seen  in  Paris  again.     The  journals  may  atuiounce 

66  LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF  HOME 

what  they  like ;  but,  take  my  word  for  it,  Home  is  far  enough  from 
Paris  at  this  moment." 

"  Is  it  true,  then,  that  the  Emperor  had  him  sent  away?" 

"  Quite  true.  The  Empress  was  so  alarmed  by  what  she  saw  at  a 
certain  seance — I  have  my  information  from  those  who  ought  to  know 
— that  the  Emperor  determined  to  allow  no  more  of  these  diabolical 
scenes;  and  our  sorcerer  was  ordered  to  leave  France  the  next  day." 

"It  is  said  he  had  received  enormous  sums." 

"  He  was  paid  at  the  rate  of  a  million  francs  a  year,"  replied  the 
other,  with  the  air  of  a  man  who  knows  of  what  he  speaks. 

Home  joined  in  the  conversation  at  this  point,  and  his  gay  and 
pleasant  manner  soon  put  him  on  the  best  of  terms  with  his  three 
travelling  companions.  A  number  of  interesting  particulars  in  his 
own  history,  all  quite  novel  to  him,  were  communicated  by  one  or  the 
other;  and  in  the  midst  of  these  piquant  anecdotes  the  train  reached 
Fontainebleau.  There  was  a  servant  in  the  Imperial  livery  on  the 
platform,  and  Home  beckoned  to  him. 

"  You  are  waiting  for ?" 

"For  Mr.  Home,  sir." 

"  I  am  Mr.  Home." 

Home  stepped  from  the  carriage,  and  took  the  politest  of  farewells 
of  the  blank  and  silent  three  within. 

They  were  neither  the  first  nor  the  last  of  the  Munchausen  tribe  in 
whose  company  he  had  the  amusement  of  travelling  incognito,  and  of 
listening  to  imaginary  incidents  in  his  history,  sometimes  recounted 
by  romancers  who  claimed  to  know  him  personally.  The  same  year, 
1857,  he  happened  to  be  the  third  occupant  of  a  coupe  on  a  French 
railway ;  the  other  two  being  an  elderly  man  and  a  young  man.  The 
former  mentioned  the  name  of  Home,  and  the  young  man  at  once 
claimed  it  as  that  of  an  acquaintance. 

"  Not  that  I  know  him  well,"  he  explained;  "  but  I  have  met  him 
occasionally  at  the  house  of  my  friend,  the  Princess  de  Beauveau,  who 
amuses  herself  sometimes  by  witnessing  his  feats  of  legerdemain." 

"  They  are  well  managed?"  asked  Home. 

"  Oh,  very  clever  !" 

"  But  Madame  la  Princesse  has  the  reputation  of  believing  in  his 
spiritual  claims." 

' '  If  one  believes  all  one  hears !  She  has  no  more  faith  in  them 
than  I  have  myself,  and  recognises  Home  for  what  he  is." 

Home  took  a  letter  from  his  pocket.  "  You  have  interested  me  in 
mentioning  a  name  very  well  known  to  me,"  he  said;  "since  the 
Princess  de  Beauveau  is  a  lady  who  honours  me  with  her  friendship. 
I  have  heard  her  speak  of  Mr.  Home,  but  not  as  a  charlatan." 

"Pardon,  monsieur;  but  I  can  affirm  that  such  is  her  opinion  of 
him." 

"  You  have  seen  him — and  would,  of  course,  recognise  him,  if  you 
were  to  meet  him  again,"  Home  continued. 

"Without  dotjbt." 

"  And  this  letter,"  said  Home,  drawing  it  from  the  envelope  and 
holding  it  out;  "  do  you  know  the  writing?  " 

FRATsXE    AND    RUSSIA  6r 

No,  the  young  Frenchman  did  not. 

"  It  is,  however,  from  the  Princess  de  Beauveau  to  me.  Will  you 
do  me  the  favour  of  reading  it?  You  will  find  that  she  has  consider- 
able faith  in  the  spiritual  pretensions  of  Mr.  Home." 

But  the  young  man,  much  embarrassed,  declined  to  take  the  letter, 
and  protested  that  he  quite  accepted  the  speaker's  word. 

"  At  least  do  me  the  favour  to  look  at  the  envelope,"  said  Home, 
presenting  it,  "  that  you  may  see  to  whom  the  letter  is  addressed." 

The  other  did  so;  and  said  not  another  word,  but  at  the  next  station 
he  hurriedly  left  the  carriage. 

His  exit  was  not  so  dramatic  as  that  which  another  French  railway- 
companion  of  Mr.  Home  proposed  for  himself.  This  gentleman, 
equally  unconscious  to  whom  he  was  speaking,  confided  to  Home  his 
terror  of  Home.  "  I  have  never  seen  him — I  should  be  afraid  to  see 
him.  If  I  were  to  meet  him  near  a  cemetery  at  midnight,  it  would 
cause  me — I  cannot  describe  the  feeling  it  would  cause  me." 

' '  They  say  there  is  nothing  very  frightful  in  his  appearance.  If 
you  were  to  meet  him  out  of  a  cemetery  in  the  day-time,  you  might 
take  a  liking  to  him,"  said  Home. 

"  Impossible." 

The  journey  was  long,  and  the  two  had  become  excellent  friends 
before  it  ended.  As  Home  drew  near  the  station  where  he  was  to 
alight,  he  said  to  his  companion:  "  So  you  have  never  seen  Home. 
What  if  I  were  to  present  him  to  you?" 

"  I  would  jump  out  of  the  window." 

"  Bon  voyage,''  said  Home,  lowering  it. 

But  the  other,  though  he  realised  the  situation  with  French  quick- 
ness, did  not  jump. 

These  men  were  types  of  the  greater  portion  of  the  world  that  had 
heard  of  Home  without  having  seen  him.  The  most  outrageous 
falsehoods  were  told  of  him  by  one  class  of  calumniators,  the  most 
absurd  and  fantastic  legends  invented  by  those  who  believed  him  a 
necromancer.  A  romancer  who  chose  for  a  subject  either  of  the  two 
imaginary  Homes  would  be  spared  the  trouble  of  inventing ;  he  would 
only  have  to  collect  enough  falsehoods  to  fill  his  volumes,  and  arrange 
them  with  an  eye  to  effect. 

A  very  common  report  about  Home  in  Paris  was  that  he  carried  in 
his  pocket  a  tame,  trained  monkey,  which  was  let  out  during  a  seance 
to  twitch  dresses  and  shake  hands.  As  for  the  raps,  he  had  "an 
electrical  quality  that  he  could  throw  off  at  command  of  the  will." 
A  method  of  explanation  much  favoured  by  scientists  and  pseudo- 
scientists  was  to  alter  the  facts  of  seamces  in  accordance  with  their 
preconceived  theories;  and  then,  on  such  basis  of  omission  and  addi- 
tion, to  proceed  to  demonstrate  the  theories  in  question.  This 
disingenuous  and  unscientific  method  was  largely  employed,  as  a 
subsequent  chapter  of  this  work  will  show,  by  Dr.  W.  B 
Carpenter,  V.P.R.S. 

Medical  men  have  been  found  who  could  gravely  conjecture  that 
Home  administered  "a  thimble-full  of  chloroform"  to  each  of  the 
sitters  before  the  seance  began.     Others  declared  that  he  magnetised 

68  LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF  HOME 

or  biologised  his  audience ;  and  the  things  that  they  said  they  saw  the 
poor  mesmerised  dupes  only  imagined  they  had  seen.  Mr.  Crookes, 
F.R.S.,  employed  instruments  to  record  the  phenomena,  and  again 
and  again  the  instruments  recorded  them.  It  seemed  a  bold  theory  to 
suggest  that  Mr.  Crookes'  instruments  were  capable  of  being 
mesmerised ;  but,  since  the  biological  explanation  was  advanced  as  a 
triumphant  disproof  of  his  experiments,  it  must  be  concluded  that 
they  were,  and  that  Home  somehow  found  out  the  fact,  and  turned 
it  to  account. 

Of  all  phenomena,  that  of  rising  in  the  air  has  had  the  most  ridicu- 
lous explanations  adduced  concerning  it.  The  mesmeric  theory  is 
naturally  a  favourite  here;  and  when  the  present  Earl  of  Crawford, 
for  instance,  saw  Home,  in  full  light,  rise  from  the  ground,  he  was 
of  course  biologised.  Some  theorists  have  conjectured  that  Home 
carried  with  him  a  magic  lantern — truly  deserving  of  the  name ! 

The  one  really  simple,  scientific,  and  satisfactory  explanation  ever 
advanced  to  account  for  the  phenomena  from  a  non-spiritual  point  of 
view  was  that  of  an  old  woman  in  America.  Asked  if  she  could  explain 
what  she  had  seen,  she  replied,  "  Lor',  sirs,  it's  easy  enough  !  He 
only  rubs  himself  all  over  with  a  gold  pencil  first." 

"A  general  belief,"  writes  Mr.  Home  in  the  Incidents,  "  is  that  I 
bribe  the  servants  at  whatever  house  I  visit,  that  they  may  assist  me 
in  concealing  my  machinery.  The  intelligence  displayed  in  obtaining 
names,  dates,  and  other  circumstances  is  previously  communicated  to 
me,  either  by  my  own  inquiry  from  servants,  or  by  visiting  the  tomb- 
stones of  the  relatives,  or  even  by  a  body  of  secret  police  who  are  in 
my  pay." 

'"If  such  statements  are  circulated  during  my  lifetime,"  wrote 
Home  in  1883,  "  I  often  wonder  what  will  be  said  of  me  when  I  shall 
liave  passed  to  spirit-life." 

CHAPTER    V 

ENGLAND 

Second  English  campaign.  Faraday's  dictum.  Conversion  of  Dr. 
ElUottson.  Stir  in  London  Society.  The  Cornhill  Article. 
Thackeray's  position.  Robert  Chambers.  His  remarkable 
conversion.  Convincing  evidence  to  Mrs.  Senior.  Conversion 
of  Lady  Shelley,  and  of  Dr.  Lockhart  Robertson,  the  alienist. 
Opinion  of  Professor  Challis. 

The  second  residence  of  Mr.  Home  in  England  lasted  from  November, 
1859,  until  the  last  week  of  July,  i860.  He  returned  a  third  time  in 
the  following  winter,  and  was  in  England  during  the  whole  of  1861. 

Coming  events  often  cast  their  prophetic  shadows  on  the  mind  of 
Home ;  but  when  he  brought  his  young  wife  to  London  in  the  winter 
of  1859,  and  introduced  her  to  his  English  friends,  he  had  as  yet 
received  no  impression  of  the  parting  that  was  already  so  near  at  hand. 
She  was  destined,  it  might  have  been  reasonably  thought,  to  outlive 
her  husband,  whose  hold  on  life  had  more  than  once  seemed  so  frail. 
Apart  from  the  messages  conveyed  through  him  and  the  impressions 
granted  to  him,  Home  was  no  more  capable  of  looking  into  the  future 
than  other  men ;  nor  could  he  command  those  messages  and  impres- 
sions at  will ;  they  were  communicated  or  withheld  as  other  intelli- 
gences than  his  own  saw  fit.  He  exercised  no  more  volition  in  the 
matter  than  a  wire,  designed  to  convey  the  electric  current,  exercises 
with  regard  to  the  messages  that  travel  over  it. 

The  year  i860  was  remarkable  for  the  number  of  seances  that  Home 
gave,  and  for  the  variety  of  persons  who  investigated  the  phenomena. 
His  power  had  returned  to  him  very  strongly,  and  was  especially  great 
during  the  early  summer  of  i860,  when  many  very  remarkable  seances 
took  place.  I  say  "  power,"  in  default  of  a  better  word  by  which  to 
describe  Home's  gift.  His  part  was  to  be  a  passive  agent;  and  the 
more  he  could  detach  his  mind  from  the  subject,  the  better  were  the 
results.  Home's  gift  appeared  to  obey  somewhat  the  same  laws  as 
the  inspirations  of  a  great  poet  or  painter,  concerning  which  the  artist 
only  knows  that  he  cannot  compel  his  power  into  his  service,  and  that 
his  inspiration  is  often  absent  when  he  would  most  desire  its  presence. 
No  great  writer  or  painter  was  ever  yet  able  to  declare  with  certainty 
in  commencing  a  work  that  it  would  be  a  masterpiece ;  and  Home,  the 
manifestations  of  whose  strange  power  were  more  capricious,  as  they 
were  more  wonderful,  than  the  inspiration  of  any  poet  or  painter, 
could  never  foretell  at  the  commencement  of  a  seance  what  would 
happen,  or  whether  anything  would  happen  at  all.  Yet  such  is  the 
temper  of  the  nineteenth  century,  that  men  distinguished  for  their 
intelligence  and  attainments  considered  Home's  declaration  of  his 
inability  to  obtain  manifestations  at  will  a  sufficient  reason  for  declin- 
ing to  investigate  the  subject. 

Among  the  letters  of  the  English  acquaintances  of  Mr.  Home  is  one 
that  throws  an  amusing  light  on  the  spirit  in  which  some  leaders  of 

69 

70  ^LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF  HOME 

public  opinion  approached  the  question  of  Spiritualism,  when  they 
consented  to  approach  it  at  all.  A  well-known  scientific  man  had 
been,  pressed  by  Mrs.  Parkes,  the  widow  of  an  Indian  judge,  to  come 
to  a  seance  at  her  house  with  Mr.  Home,  and  had  ended  by  accepting 
the  invitation.  He  duly  appeared  on  the  evening  appointed ;  but 
demanded,  as  an  indispensable  preliminary  to  sitting,  that  he  should 
be  furnished  with  "  a  programme  of  the  seance."  It  was  in  vain  that 
his  hostess  represented  to  him  that  seances  had  no  programmes,  and 
there  were  no  earthly  means  of  arranging  beforehand  what  should 
happen ;  he  only  replied  that  he  was  determined  not  to  investigate  at 
all,  unless  he  knew  exactly  what  he  was  investigating;  and,  refusing 
to  sit,  departed  in  much  ill-humour. 

His  attitude  was  a  caricature  of  that  of  Faraday,  at  whose  feet  he 
had  probably  sat.  Faraday  is  deservedly  a  great  name;  but  he  was 
emphatically  a  thinker  of  the  nineteenth  century,  and  the  thinkers  of 
the  nineteenth  century  are  sp>ecialists,  not  philosophers.  England  is 
little  likely  ever  to  produce  another  Bacon,  to  take  all  knowledge  for 
his  province;  or  another  Newton,  whose  great  intellect,  dimly  appre- 
hending the  secrets  of  the  universe  and  its  own  ignorance  of  them, 
could  humbly  compare  its  discoveries  to  the  action  of  a  child  who 
walks  on  the  sea-shore,  and  brings  away  a  few  shells  and  pebbles  as 
indications  of  the  treasures  of  the  ocean.  The  modem  scientist  has 
no  such  overwhelming  conviction  of  the  vastness  of  that  ocean,  and 
of  his  own  inability  to  penetrate  its  depths.  He  is  a  child  who  picks 
up  one  particular  pebble,  and,  after  close  inspection  of  it,  declares 
that  the  sea  has  nothing  in  it  but  pebbles,  and  they  are  all  like  his. 

Faraday  wrote,  with  reference  to  the  phenomena  of  Spiritualism: 
"  Before  we  proceed  to  consider  any  questions  involving  physical 
principles,  we  should  set  out  with  clear  ideas  of  the  naturally  possible 
and  impossible."  He  forgot  that  even  the  nineteenth  century  is  not 
omniscient,  that  its  ideas  of  the  naturally  possible  and  impossible  are 
not  those  of  the  eighteenth,  and  will  not  be  those  of  the  twentieth. 
Man's  knowledge  of  the  possible  never  was  and  never  will  be  final ; 
though  in  every  age  humanity  has  repeated  Faraday's  mistake  of 
supposing  it  to  be  so.  The  scientific  critics  of  Stephenson  had  very 
clear  ideas  of  the  naturally  possible  when  they  proceeded  to  the  con- 
sideration of  the  physical  principles  involved  in  the  question  of  the 
locomotive ;  and  their  ideas  led  them  to  declare  that  it  was  impossible 
to  run  engines  at  the  rate  of  thirty  miles  an  hour.  If  we  could 
resuscitate  the  Royal  Society  of  1787,  and  submit  to  its  consideration 
inventions  like  the  telegraph  and  the  telephone,  the  ideas  of  a  hundred 
years  ago  concerning  the  naturally  possible  would  lead  the  Society  to 
ridicule  as  chimerical  such  propositions  for  annihilating  distance. 
Human  conceptions  of  what  is  possible  and  impossible  have  been 
subjected  to  a  thousand  corrections  since  this  world  began,  and  are 
likely  to  be  subjected  to  many  more  before  it  ends. 

As  Mr.  A.  R.  Wallace  ably  wrote,  in  criticising  Faraday's  dictum: 
"  No  man  can  be  sure  that,  however  '  clear '  his  ideas  may  be  in  this 
matter,  they  will  be  equally  true  ones.  It  was  very  '  clearly  impossible' 
to  the  minds  of  the  philosophers  at  Pisa  that  a  great  and  a  small 

ENGLAND  71 

weight  could  fall  from  the  top  of  the  tower  in  the  same  time;  and  if 
this  principle"  (Faraday's)  "  is  of  any  use,  they  were  right  in  dis- 
believing the  evidence  of  their  senses,  which  assured  them  that  they 
did;  and  Galileo,  who  accepted  that  evidence,  was,  to  use  the  words 
of  the  same  eminent  authority,  '  not  only  ignorant  as  respects  the 
education  of  the  judgment,  but  ignorant  of  his  ignorance.'  " 

De  Morgan,  the  celebrated  mathematician,  answered  Faraday,  and 
pointed  out,  with  equal  truth  and  force,  that  the  object  of  all  investi- 
gation is  to  arrive  at  those  very  same  "  clear  ideas,"  on  the  possession 
of  which  Faraday  insisted  as  a  preliminary.  "  Set  out  in  physical 
investigation  with  a  clear  idea  of  the  naturally  possible  and  imposs- 
ible!" exclaimed  De  Morgan,  repeating  his  contemporary's  words. 
"  We  thought  the  world  had  struggled  forward  to  the  knowledge  that 
a  ciear  idea  of  this  was  the  last  attainment  of  study  and  reflection, 
combined  with  observation ;  not  the  possession  of  our  intellect  at 
starting." 

De  Morgan's  own  opinion  concerning  Spiritualism  had  been  "the 
last  attainment  of  study  and  reflection,  combined  with  observation." 
After  investigating  the  subject  for  many  years,  he  wrote  in  1869:  "  I 
retain  my  suspense  as  to  what  the  phenomena  mean,  but  I  am  as  fully 
persuaded  as  ever  of  their  reality." 

Mr.  Faraday's  dictum,  if  it  meant  anything  with  regard  to 
Spiritualism,  meant  that  the  subject  was  to  be  dismissed  without 
investigation,  on  the  plea  that  it  conflicted  with  existing  ideas  of  the 
possible.  This  frame  of  mind,  however,  did  not  prevent  Faraday 
from  investigating  the  phenomenon  (if  it  deserve  the  name)  of  table- 
tilting  ;  and  he  was  easily  able  to  show  that  tables  were  often  tilted, 
consciously  or  unconsciously,  by  the  sitters  themselves.  Mr.  Home 
was  the  last  person  to  doubt  the  fact,  and  in  the  Lights  and  Shadows 
of  Spiritualism  has  declared  his  conviction  of  the  accuracy  of 
Faraday's  observations. 

None  of  Faraday's  experiments  had  been  made  with  Home;  and  it 
was  obvious  to  all  men  who  knew  anything  of  the  seances  of  the  latter, 
and  were  not  blinded  by  prejudice,  that  here  Faraday's  theory  of 
"  involuntary  muscular  action  "  would  not  apply.  Accordingly,  in 
1861,  Sir  Emerson  Tennant  endeavoured,  with  the  help  of  Mr.  Robert 
Bell,  to  bring  about  a  meeting  between  Home  and  Faraday.  Sir 
Emerson  acted  on  his  own  responsibility,  and  without  any  authority 
from  Mr.  Home,  who,  as  the  Morning  Star  had  the  candour  to  admit 
when  discussing  the  incident  some  years  later,  "  did  not  appear  to 
have  been  particularly  consulted  in  the  matter  at  all."  As  the  writer 
in  the  Morning  Star  (May  12th,  1868)  was  hostile  to  Home  and 
friendly  to  Faraday,  his  description  of  the  attitude  assumed  by  the 
man  of  science  will  carry  more  weight  than  any  words  of  mine  would ; 
and  I  will  therefore  give  it : — 

"  He  "  (Faraday)  "  prescribed  certain  conditions  which  it  would 
have  been  utterly  impossible  for  Mr.  Home,  whether  that  gentleman 
be  the  apostle  of  a  new  science  or  a  mere  pretender  and  humbug,  to 
accept.  In  fact,  Mr.  Home  was  invited,  as  a  condition  precedent  to 
Faraday's  entering   on   the   investigation,   to   acknowledge  that  the 

72  LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF  HOME 

phenomena,  however  produced,  were  ridiculous  and  contemptible." 
Faxaday  may  have  been  right  as  regards  what  he  had  seen,  but  to 
judge  before  examining  it  of  what  he  had  not  seen  impHed  a  confidence 
in  his  own  infallibility  as  conceited  as  it  was  dogmatic. 

Faraday's  second  condition,  of  open  and  complete  examination. 
Home  would  as  readily  have  accepted  as  he  afterwards  did  in  the 
case  of  Crookes ;  but  was  it  conceivable  he  should  accept  this  ?  Mr. 
Robert  Bell  was  so  assured  he  would  not,  that  he  did  not  think  it  worth 
while  even  to  transmit  to  Mr.  Home  a  proposal  so  insulting;  and 
accordingly  the  negotiations  between  Bell,  Sir  Emerson,  and  Faraday 
were  dropped  and  never  resumed. 

Seven  years  later,  at  the  close  of  the  Lyon  suit.  Professor  Tyndall 
published  a  letter  in  which  he  intimated  his  willingness  to  be  present 
at  a  seance  with  Mr.  Home,  but  expressly  declared  that  he  made  the 
offer  "  in  the  spirit  of  Faraday's  letter."  In  putting  forth  such  a 
challenge.  Professor  Tyndall  was  only  making  a  cheap  vaunt  of  his 
prejudices.  What  did  it  matter  to  Home,  who  never  sought  to  impose 
his  own  principles  on  anyone,  whether  Tyndall  were  of  Faraday's 
opinion  or  not? 

There  is  one  aspect  of  the  manifestations  that  probably  even  Pro- 
fessor Tyndall  would  approach  in  a  serious  mood,  and  would  abstain 
from  qualifying  with  such  adjectives  as  "  ridiculous  "  and  "  con- 
temptible"  ;  however  emphatically  he  might  express  his  denial  and 
disbelief.  I  refer  to  the  evidence  afforded  in  the  seances  of  Mr.  Home 
of  the  identity  of  the  beings  communicating.  It  is  only  to  those  who 
have  been  fully  convinced  of  that  identity  that  Spiritualism  can  ever 
be  Spiritualism. 

If  gratitude  and  the  courage  of  one's  convictions  were  virtues 
common  among  men,  the  recipients  of  incontrovertible  proofs  of 
identity  would  have  more  frequently  placed  their  testimony  on  record. 
Unhappily,  there  are  few  who  can  face  abuse,  fewer  still  who  do  not 
fear  ridicule ;  and  the  knowledge  of  what  awaited  them  if  they  spoke 
outweighed  with  the  majority  every  other  consideration,  and  caused 
them  to  remain  silent.  Home  never  complained  of  this  conduct ;  on 
the  contrary,  he  was  only  too  unselfishly  ready  to  excuse  it ;  and  in 
Incidents  of  My  Life  (vol.  i.  p.  204),  he  even  constituted  himself  the 
apologist  of  the  timid  many,  and  stated  with  generous  candour  the 
best  defence  that  can  be  offered  for  their  discreditable  silence: — 

"  I  am  sorry  that  in  so  many  instances  I  am  obliged  to  conceal  the  names 
of  my  friends  who  have  witnessed  wonderful  things,"  he  wrote  ;  "  but  if  the 
reader  is  disposed  to  complain  of  this,  let  him  remember  the  reason,  and  take 
the  greater  part  of  the  blame  on  himself.  No  sooner  is  the  name  of  some  honest 
and  courageous  person  given,  in  obedience  to  the  call  for  testimony,  than  it 
becomes  a  target  for  all  the  ridicule,  jests,  and  abuse  of  the  unscrupulous,  the 
sceptical,  the  orthodox,  and  the  scientific ;  in  fact,  of  all  who  are  not  wise 
enough  to  think  and  observe,  and  weigh  and  judge  before  they  decide.  There 
is  small  encouragement  for  men,  and  still  less  for  ladies,  to  come  forward  and 
stand  in  front  of  all  this  obloquy.  If  an  example  be  needed  of  the  truth  of  this, 
if  it  be  not  an  obvious  fact  already  in  this  uncharitable  day,  let  my  adventurous 
fiiends  watch  the  extent  to  which  I  shall  be  abused,  and  called  bad  names,  and 
given  to  the  devil,  for  simply  and  truthfully  writing  in  this  little  book  a  few  of 
the  incidents  of  my  life,  with  the  production  of  which  I  have  had  nothing  to 
do."  J'  .  H  B 

ENGLAND  73 

Many  of  those  who  had  wonderful  and  convincing  experiences  at 
the  seances  of  Mr.  Home  in  England  have  quitted  the  world,  and 
have  carried  their  knowledge  with  them.  As  for  the  survivors,  it  may 
readily  be  conceived  that  few  of  those  who  shrank  from  publicity  when 
the  impression  made  on  them  was  fresh  and  vivid  are  inclined  to  come 
forward  now.  I  am  the  more  thankful  that  there  are  a  courageous 
minority  who  have  not  feared  to  speak.  Some  of  these,  too,  are  now 
in  another  life,  but  their  witness  remains;  others  are  still  on  earth, 
and  I  gratefully  acknowledge  the  assistance  they  have  afforded  me. 
The  life  of  Home  and  its  marvellous  phenomena  are  sufficient  to  prove 
that  God  rendered  worthy  of  this  gift,  the  man  on  whom  it  was 
bestowed. 

All  the  facts  I  can  give  I  shall  dve ;  my  care  is  not  to  respect  the 
scruples  of  the  timorous,  but  to  render  justice  to  the  truth.  If  the 
publication  of  names  causes  pain,  I  can  only  say  that  I  am  sorry ;  but 
that  the  timid  portion  of  his  friends  must  be  content  with  having 
sacrificed  him  during  his  lifetime  to  their  anxiety  not  to  compromise 
themselves  in  the  eyes  of  the  world.  I  cannot  imitate  Mr.  Home's 
generosity  on  this  point;  my  duty  forbids  me,  on  account  of  the 
honour  of  a  truth  that  was  sacred  to  him,  and  for  the  future  of  which 
I  write  this  book.  I  only  regret  that  my  want  of  full  information  must 
necessarily  render  my  narrative  incomplete,  and  that  the  history  of 
many  remarkable  seances  will  never  be  known,  unless  such  of  the 
persons  present  at  them  as  still  survive  will  summon  up  courage  enou^ 
to  remember  the  duty  they  owe  to  the  truth,  and  will  put  it  in  practice 
by  giving  the  facts  of  those  seances  to  the  world. 

During  the  years  i860  and  1861,  the  manifestations  in  England 
were,  as  I  have  said,  of  a  very  wonderful  character.  The  mere  list 
of  the  persons  present  at  Mr.  Home's  seances  would  furnish  sufficient 
testimony  to  the  interest  he  excited  in  English  society.  He  sought 
none  of  those  persons ;  all  his  life  his  rule  was  to  allow  events  to  take 
their  course  with  him ;  and  his  acquaintance  extended  itself  without 
any  efforts  of  his  own. 

On  his  arrival  in  England  in  November,  1859,  he  received  a  warm 
welcome  from  the  friends  whom  he  had  made  during  his  visit  in  1855  ; 
and  various  men  of  note  who  had  then  been  present  at  his  seances 
took  the  opportunity  of  renewing  their  acquaintance  with  him.  Two 
of  the  earliest  of  these  were  Sir  E.  B.  Lytton  and  Dr.  Ashburner;  the 
former  of  whom  writes  to  Mr.  Home,  January  10,  i860,  pressing  him 
to  pay  a  visit  for  two  or  three  days  to  Knebworth.  Home  was  unable 
to  accept  the  invitation ;  but  later  in  the  year  Lytton  came  to  London, 
and  then,  and  again  in  1861,  was  present  at  various  seances,  of  which 
I  shall  presently  speak. 

Dr.  Ashburner  had  become  a  firm  believer  in  Spiritualism ;  and  his 
belief  had  estranged  from  him  his  old  friend  and  colleague,  Dr. 
Elliottson,  whose  portrait  Thackeray  drew  in  Pendennis  as  Dr. 
Goodenough,  and  to  whom  the  great  writer  affectionately  dedicated 
that  work.  Elliottson  and  Ashburner  had  co-operated  in  investigating 
the  phenomena  of  mesmerism ;  but  after  being  present  at  one  or  two 
seances  with  so-called  mediums,  the  former  contemptuously  refused  to 

F 

74  LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF  HOME 

make  further  inquiry  into  Spiritualism,  and  lost  all  patience  with  what 
be  regarded  as  his  old  friend's  delusions  on  the  subject.  Elliottson 
was  a  man  whose  noble  and  upright  character  was  worthy  of  all 
esteem  ;  but,  like  many  other  great  physiologists,  he  rejected  absolutely 
the  doctrine  of  a  future  life. 

On  Dr.  Ashbumer  becoming  an  avowed  Spiritualist,  Elliottson 
broke  off  all  intercourse  with  his  old  friend,  and  publicly  charged  him 
with  worse  than  folly  in  assisting  to  promote  the  spread  of  so  gross 
a  delusion;  nor  did  "Dr.  Goodenough "  hesitate  to  inveigh  in 
unmeasured  terms  against  Home,  whom  he  had  never  seen.  He  was 
destined,  however,  to  make  Home's  acquaintance,  and  under  dramatic 
circumstances.  The  most  placable  of  mankind.  Home  had  never  for 
a  moment  thought  of  resenting  the  conduct  of  Elliottson,  whose  pre- 
judice he  felt  to  be  as  honest  as  it  was  unreasoning  and  violent,  and  of 
whose  estimable  character  he  was  well  aware.  The  circumstances 
under  which  the  two  men  at  last  met  were  related  by  Mr.  Home  in  his 
second  volume  of  Incidents,  published  after  Dr.  Elliottson 's  death, 
but  during  the  lifetime  of  the  lady  who  was  the  agent  of  the  intro- 
duction. 

"  In  the  autumn  of  1863,  while  at  Dieppe,"  wrote  Home,  "  I  met  my  friend, 
Mrs.  Milner  Gibson,  one  afternoon  on  the  parade  there.  In  the  course  of 
conversation,  she  said  :  '  Do  you  know  that  Dr.  Elliottson  is  in  Dieppe  at 
present?  '  '  Is  he?  '  I  replied;  '  I  should  like  to  be  introduced  to  him.'  Mrs. 
Milner  Gibson  expressed  surprise,  but  undertook  to  introduce  me  ;  and  a  few 
minutes  afterwards  we  observed  him  on  a  seat.  I  was  introduced  to  him,  and 
said,  '  Dr.  Elliottson,  you  have  said  and  written  very  hard  things  of  me.  Now, 
don't  you  think  it  was  very  wrong  for  an  old  man  like  you  to  make  such 
accusations  as  you  have  done  against  me,  and  call  a  man  an  impostor  of 
whom  you  know  nothing  whatever?  If  you  like  to  know  something  of  me, 
and  to  investigate  the  subject  of  Spiritualism,  I  shall  be  happy  to  see  you  at 
Mrs.  Milner  Gibson's  this  evening,  and  to  give  you  every  opportunity  of  testing 
what  you  see.'  He  came;  and  saw  so  much  that  he  was  convinced  of  the 
truth  of  Spiritualism.  The  next  day  he  called  on  me,  and  said  :  '  What  I 
witnessed  last  evening  was  wonderful  and  convincing,  but  it  is  too  much  for 
me  to  change  suddenly  the  convictions  of  seventy  years.  T  must  ask  you  to  let 
me  come  again,  and  bring  a  young  friend  with  me.'  I  agreed  readily  ;  and  that 
evening  he  came  accompanied  by  the  two  young  Messrs.  Symes.  The  fullest 
use  was  made  by  the  three  gentlemen  of  their  power  of  observing  and  testing 
what  they  witnessed,  and  the  result  was  that  Dr.  Elliottson  was  perfectlv 
convinced." 

On  returning  to  London,  Elliottson  hastened  to  seek  a  reconcilia- 
tion with  his  old  friend,  Dr.  Ashbumer,  and  during  the  few 
remaining  years  of  his  life  made  no  secret  of  the  change  in  his 
convictions,  nor  of  the  manner  in  which  it  had  been  wrought.  Yet 
the  old  incredulity  struggled  at  times  to  reassert  itself;  and  to 
strengthen  his  new  belief,  he  wished  to  obtain  communications 
himself.  He  applied  accordingly  to  Mrs.  Milner  Gibson  for  instruc- 
tions as  to  the  most  favourable  conditions  under  which  to  hold 
seances;  and  followed  them  carefully,  but  without  effect.  Dis- 
appointed by  his  failure,  he  wrote  the  following  note  to  Mr.  Home  : — 

"  Conduit  St.  37,   Oct.  30,    1863. 
"  My  dear  Sir, — I  have  sat  regularly  accordingly  to  the  instructions 
I  received  from  Mrs.  M.  G.,  but  with  no  result.       When  shall  you 
be   here?       Yours  sincerely,  "  J.    Elliottson." 

ENGLAND 

75 

Eiliottson  was  still  only  on  the  threshold  of  the  subject.  He 
Lad  not  yet  learned  that  a  gift  of  the  nature  of  Home's  can  never 
be  acquired.  A  man  is  born  witn  or  without  it;  and  the  vast 
majoritv  without. 

In  the  following  year,  1864,  Mr.  B.  Coleman,  of  Bayswater, 
received  from  Eiliottson  an  account  of  the  revolution  wrought  in  his 
views  by  the  seances  with  Home  at  Dieppe,  and  published  it,  with 
the  full  approval  of  the  giver,  in  the  Spiritual  Magazine.  This 
authorised  version  of  the  conclusion  that  Eiliottson  had  arrived  at 
is  as  follows  : — 

"  '  I  am,'  Dr.  Eiliottson  said  to  me,  and  it  is  with  his  sanction 
that  I  make  the  announcement,  '■  now  quite  satisfied  of  the  reality  of 
the  phenomena.  I  am  not  yet  prepared  to  admit  that  they  are 
produced  by  the  agency  of  spirits.  I  do  not  deny  this,  as  I  am 
unable  to  satisfactorily  account  tor  what  I  have  seen  on  any  other 
hypothesis.  The  explanations  which  have  been  made  to  account  for 
the  phenomena  do  not 'satisfy  me,  but  I  desire  to  reserve  my  opinion 
on  that  point  at  present.  I  am  free,  however,  to  say  that  I  regret 
the  opportunity  was  not  afforded  me  at  an  earlier  period.  What  I 
have  seen  lately  has  made  a  deep  impression  on  my  mind ;  and  the 
recognition  of  the  reality  of  these  manifestations,  from  whatever 
cause,  is  tending  to  revolutionise  my  thoughts  and  feelings  on  almost 
every  subject." 

Dr.  EJIiottson  died  in  1868.  The  Morning  Post  in  the  course 
of  its  obituary  notice,  related  the  story  of  his  meeting  with  Mr. 
Home  at  Dieppe,  which,  it  must  be  noted,  Home  had  not  yet 
published  ;  and  continued  : — 

"  He  then  spent  some  time  in  investigating  the  phenomena  of 
Spiritualism,  aided  by  the  sons  of  his  friend.  Dr.  Symes.  The 
result  was  that  he  expressed  his  conviction  of  the  truth  of  the 
phenomena,  and  became  a  sincere  Christian,  whose  handbook 
henceforth  was  his  Bible.  Some  time  after  this  he  said  he  had 
been  living  all  his  life  in  darkness,  and  had  thought  there  was 
nothing  in  existence  but  the  material ;  but  he  now  had  a  firm  hope 
which  he  trusted  he  would  hold  while  on  earth."  ' 

"  In  one  of  my  latest  interviews  with  him,"  a  friend  of  Elliott- 
son's  wrote  in  1870,  "  he  expressed  the  great  happiness  his  later 
convictions  had  brought  him,  and  looked  forward  to  the  life  hereafter 
with  calm  confidence.  The  leading  characteristic  of  his  mind,  in 
addition  to  his  high  intellectual  development,  was  the  perfectly  honest 
search  after  truth." 

The  same  description  might  with'  equal  justice  be  applied  to 
Elliotson's  friend  Ashburner,  who  besides,  possessed  a  virtue  that 
Eiliottson,  with  all  his  great  qualities,  lacked — that  of  a  well- 
governed  spirit.  Ashburner's  numerous  letters  to  Home  pleasantly 
illustrate  the  tranquil  goodness  of  his  character.       I  would  like  to 

'  Note  by  Mr.  H.  T.  Humphreys  :  "  It  was  to  me  that  Dr.  Eiliottson  made 
the  remark  quoted  in  the  biography  of  him  which  I  wrote  for  the  Morning 
Post;  and  it  was  made  at  Mrs.  Milner  Gibson's,  on  the  only  occasion  on  which 
1  had  the  pleasure  of  meeting  him." 

76  LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF  HOME 

give  some  of  the  pictures  of  a  happy,  religious,  and  tranquil  old 
age  these  letters  afford ;  but  other  demands  on  my  space  forbid  it. 
Home  had  several  seances  with  him,  of  which  one  that  took  place 
in  May,   i860,  was  perhaps  the  most  remarkable. 

No  one  in  England  saw  more  of  the  manifestations  during  the 
years  i860  and  1861  than  the  lady  who  introduced  Mr.  Home  to  Dr. 
Elliottson  at  Dieppe — Mrs.  Milner  Gibson.  She  was  almost  as 
familiar  a  figure  in  French  and  Italian  society  as  in  English;  and 
it  was  in  Paris  that  Mr.   Home  first  met  her. 

During  Home's  stay  in  London,  it  was  customary  for  him  to  hold  a 
seance  once  a  week  at  Mrs.  Gibson's  residence  in  Hyde  Park  Place, 
a  few  doors  from  Dr.  Ashburner.  The  lady's  husband,  a  well- 
known  Member  of  Parliament,  who,  then  or  subsequently,  held  the 
position  of  President  of  the  Board  of  Trade,  uniformly  declined  to 
be  present  at  these  seances.  Mr.  Gibson  was  willing  to  extend  a 
courteous  tolerance  to  his  wife's  belief ;  but  he  did  not  share  it,  and 
did  not  wish  to  share  it ;  not  from  any  deep-rooted  incredulity  as  to 
the  verity  of  the  facts,  but  from  the  fear  that  his  presence  at  seances 
might  tend  to  compromise  that  which  was  everything  to  such  a  man 
— his  political  and  social  position. 

At  these  seances  in  Hyde  Park  Place,  and  at  others  that  Home 
held  in  London  during  i860  and  thfe  years  following,  many  of  the 
best-known  figures  in  English  society  were  present.  The  effect  on 
some  was  to  convert  them  to  a  belief  in  the  spiritual  origin  of  the 
manifestations ;  others  preserved  a  suspense  of  judgment  as  to  their 
origin,  while  admitting  the  facts.  In  attempting  to  distinguish 
between  these  two  classes,  my  chief,  almost  my  only  guide,  has  been 
the  letters  from  English  friends  and  acquaintances  preserved  by  Mr. 
Home. 

The  witnesses  whom  letters  to  Mr.  Home,  or  their  published 
testimony,  show  to  have  not  only  recognised  the  manifestations  as 
genuine  but  to  have  been  convinced  of  their  spiritual  origin,  included, 
between  the  years  1859 — 1866,  the  Duchess  of  Sutherland,  Lady 
Shelley,  Lady  Gomm,  Dr.  Robert  Chambers,  Lady  Otway,  Miss 
Catherine  Sinclair,  Mrs.  Milner  Gibson,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  William 
Howitt,  Mrs.  De  Burgh,  Dr.  Gully  of  Malvern,  Sir  Charles 
Nicholson,  Lady  Dunsany,  Sir  Daniel  Cooper,  Mrs.  Adelaide  Senior, 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall,  Mrs.  Makdougall  Gregory,  Miss  Douglas, 
Mr.  Pickersgill,  R.A.,  Mr.  E.  L.  Blanchard,  and  many  others.  No 
letters  from  Mr.  Robert  Bell  remain  ;  but  his  article,  "  Stranger  than 
Fiction,"  in  the  Cornhill  Magazine,  constitutes  sufficent  proof  that 
he  is  to  be  added  to  the  list. 

I  am  fully  aware  that  I  have  named  but  a  small  number  of  the 
Englishmen  and  Englishwomen  of  high  intellectual  or  social  jX)sition 
who  became  convinced  of  the  spiritual  origin  of  the  manifestations 
witnessed  by  them  in  presence  of  Mr.  Home.  The  merit  I  claim 
for  my  list  of  believers  is  that,  while  very  far  from  being  exhaustive, 
it  is  of  indisputable  accuracy,  as  I  have  included  in  it  only  those 
present  at  the  seances  of  Mr.  Home,  concerning  whom  I  have  written 
or  printed  evidence  of  the  fact  that  they  became  Spiritualists.       Scnne 

ENGLAND  77 

of  them,  as  the  Howitts  and  the  Halls,  had  the  courage  to  proclaim 
their  belief  openly ;  others  shrank  from  such  a  course. 

After  the  convinced,  the  half -convinced.  I  mean  by  this,  that 
among  the  investigators  present  at  seances  of  Mr.  Home  in  England 
were  certain  distinguished  persons,  of  whom  I  have  warrant  for 
stating  that  they  acknowledged  the  phenomena  they  had  witnessed 
at  those  seances  to  be  inexplicable  on  the  theory  of  imposture,  but  of 
whose  beliefs  or  opinions — if  they  formed  any — I  cannot  with  cer- 
tainty speak.  I  refer,  among  others,  to  Mr.  Ruskin  (one  or  two  of 
whose  letters  to  Mr.  Home  will  be  found  in  another  chapter),  Mr. 
Thackeray,  Mr.  John  Bright,  Lord  Dufferin,  Sir  Edwin  Arnold, 
Mr.  Edmond  Beales,  Mr.  Heaphy,  Mr.  Durham,  the  sculptor;  Mr. 
Nassau  Senior,  the  distinguished  political  economist,  who  secured 
the  publication  by  Messrs.  Longmans  of  Mr.  Home's  Incidents; 
Lord  Lyndhurst,  Mr.  J.  Hutchinson,  ex-chairman  of  the  Stock 
Exchange ;  Dr.  Lockhart  Robertson,  &c.  This  short  list,  it  will 
be  observed,  includes  men  whose  habits  of  thought  were  as  wide 
asunder  as  the  poles ;  but  on  each  the  impression  produced  was  the 
same — that  the  theory  of  imposture  was  untenable.  No  man  who 
impartially  and  honestly  investigated  the  manifestations  that 
occurred  at  the  seances  of  Home  ever  failed  to  arrive  at  a  similar 
opinion.  The  loudest  declarations  to  the  contrary  have  always  pro- 
ceeded from  those  who  knew  least  of  him,  and  their  only  importance 
has  been  to  furnish  an  illustration  of  the  hopeless  incapacity  of  the 
mass  of  mankind  to  distinguish  between  prejudices  and  facts.  A 
remarkable  instance  of  this  unhappy  tendency  of  human  nature  to 
confound  assertion  with  fact  occurred  in  the  year  1864,  the  details  of 
which  I  shall  briefly  relate  in  an  ensuing  chapter. 

Besides  the  Spiritualists  and  investigators  already  named,  very 
many  persons  came  to  the  seances  of  Mr.  Home  in  London,  of  whom 
I  know  only  this  one  fact — that  they  were  present  at  seances.  The 
names  of  Mr.  Buckle,  Lord  Clarence  Paget,  Lord  Houghton,  the 
Marchioness  of  Hastings,  Lady  Londonderry,  Miss  Geraldine 
Jewsbury,  and  Mr.  Hain  Friswell,  author  of  The  Gentle  Life,  may 
be  of  interest ;  but  of  the  experiences  and  opinions  of  these  inquirers 
I  can  say  nothing  with  certainty ;  though  it  is  evident  from  the  letters 
of  Lady  Londonderry  to  Mr.  Home  that  she  was  present  at  several 
seances,  and  that  a  considerable  impression  had  been  made  on  her. 

During  the  early  months  of  i860  the  circle  of  Mr.  Home's 
English  acquaintances  continued  to  widen  steadily,  but  as  yet  his 
name  had  not  Ijeen  brought  prominently  before  the  public.  In 
August,  i860,  however,  a  startling  impression  was  produced  by  the 
appearance  of  the  article  "  Stranger  than  Fiction  "  in  the  CornMll 
Magazine,  then  at  the  height  of  its  popularity,  and  edited  by  Mr. 
Thackeray.  As  the  article  was  unsigned,  it  lost  the  weight  that 
the  name  of  Mr.  Robert  Bell  would  otherwise  have  given  to  it;  and 
Thackeray  was  bitterly  attacked  for  having  permitted  the  publica- 
tion of  statements  which  his  hasty  and  ignorant  critics  set  down  as 
pure  invention. 

To  be  reproached     with   over-credulity    was    the   fate    of  every 

78  LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF  HOME 

intelligent  and  honest  inquirer  into  the  phenomena  of  Spiritualism 
whose  experiences  conflicted  with  the  prejudices  of  the  public,  but 
the  accusation  was  especially  unjust  as  regarded  Thackeray,  and 
must  have  galled  him  deeply.  As  the  verses  attributed  to  Dickens 
say  of  him,  he  was  emphatically  "  the  man,  of  all  his  time,  who 
knew  the  most  of  men  ";  and  that  knowledge,  combined  with  his 
great  natural  shrewdness,  had  rendered  him  the  most  wary  and 
sceptical  of  mankind.  He  had  had  opportunities  of  testing  the 
phenomena  that  occurred  in  Mr.  Home's  presence,  and  had  availed 
himself  of  them  in  the  most  incredulous  spirit.  Many  years  after- 
wards a  friend  asked  Home,  "  Who  was  the  most  sceptical  inquirer 
you  have  ever  met?  "  and  Home,  without  any  hesitation,  answered, 
"  Thackeray."  Thackeray's  first  introduction  to  Home  took  place, 
I  believe,  during  the  great  writer's  lecturing  tour  in  America.  My 
reason  for  thinking  so  is  that  I  well  remember  a  description  given 
by  an  American  lady  of  a  seance  at  which  she  was  present  in  the 
States  with  Home,  Thackeray  being  also  present,  and,  of  the 
amusements  caused  to  her  by  Thackeray's  minute  examinations  of 
floor,  table,  and  everything  in  the  room,  in  his  persistent  determina- 
tion to  unearth  the  trickery  that  he  supposed  to  be  at  the  bottom  of 
the  wonders  he  was  witnessing.  The  character  of  a  credulous 
dup>e  was  the  very  last  that  would  have  been  attributed  to  the  author 
of  Vanity  Fair  by  any  one  iwho  knew  him  intimately  ;  and  his  honest 
and  fearless  action  in  publishing  Bell's  testimony  was  the  more 
commendable  because  of  the  fact  that  he  had  himself  been  convinced 
entirely  in  spite  of  himself.  I  do  not  say  that  Thackeray  ever  got 
so  far  as  ito  entertain  the  belief  that  the  manifestations  were  pro- 
duced by  disembodied  spirits.  Most  probably  he  did  not ;  but  when 
be  published  the  Cornhill  article,  and  vouched  for  his  old  friend 
Bell's  good  faith  in  an  editorial  note,  he  had  certainly  abandoned 
as  incredible  the  supposition  that  they  could  be  attributed  to  either 
delusion  or  imposture.  I  have  only  been  able  to  identify  one  of  the 
seances  at  which  he  was  present  in  London  with  Home.  It  took 
place  towards  the  end  of  December,  1862,  at  the  residence  in  Park 
Lane  of  (Mrs.  or  Miss?)  M.  G.  Hope,  the  sister  of  Lady  Home. 

Robert  Bell  was  less  profoundly  sceptical  by  nature  than  his 
friend  Thackeray,  but  as  frank  and  candid,  and  a  close,  intelligent, 
and  dispassionate  observer.  No  better  account  of  the  physical 
manifestations  has  ever  been  given  than  his  lucid  and  unbiassed 
narrative  in  the  Cornhill^  written  by  him  with  no  other  aim  than  to 
place  on  record,  as  befitted  a  candid  inquirer,  the  results  of  a  series 
of  investigations  conducted  in  a  temper  equally  remote  from 
unreasoning  prejudice  and  foolish  credulity.  As  for  the  reception 
accorded  his  testimony  by  the  mass  of  the  public,  Bell  had  fully 
anticipated  that  storm  of  angry  incredulity  and  ignorant  derision. 
Quoting  the  reply  of  Dr.  Treviranus  to  Coleridge,  when  the  poet 
questioned  the  savant  as  to  the  reality  of  certain  magnetic  phenomena, 
Bell  told  his  readers  in  the  very  first  lines  of  his  article  :  "  I  have 
ieen  what  I  would  not  have  believed  on  your  testimony,  and  what  I 
cannot,  therefore,  expect  you  to  believe  upon  mine." 

ENGLAND  79 

'■  It  is  not  to  be  expected,"  he  writes,  later  on,  "  that  any  person 
who  is  a  stranger  to  these  phenomena,  should  read  such  a  story  as  this 
with  complacency.  Yet  here  is  a  fact  which  undoubtedly  took 
place,  and  which  cannot  be  referred  to  any  known  physical  or 
mechanical  forces.  It  is  not  a  satisfactory  answer  to  those  who 
have  seen  such  things,  to  say  that  they  are  impossible ;  since,  in  such 
cases,  it  is  evident  that  the  impossibility  of  a  thing  does  not  prevent 
it  from  happening." 

In  the  words  I  have  italicised,  Robert  Bell  anticipated  by  eleven 
years  the  conclusion  arrived  at  by  Mr.  Crookes  after  repeated  and 
exhaustive  experiments,  and  expressed  by  him  in  his  reply  to  Sir 
Charles  Wheatstone.  Wheatstone  had  written,  with  regard  to  one 
of  Crookes'  experiments  with  Home:  "It  appears  to  me  contrar)- 
to  all  analogy  that  a  force  acting  according  to  physical  laws  should 
produce  the  motion  of  a  lever  by  acting  on  its  fulcrum. ' ' 

"  In  this,"  replied  Mr.  Crookes,  "  I  entirely  agree.  I,  too, 
cannot  trace  the  analogy  between  the  psychic  force  and  a  force 
acting  according  to  known  physical  laws.  Yet  the  facts  recorded 
in  my  papers  are  true  for  all  that." 

In  the  presence  of  such  experiences  as  those  of  Mr.  Crookes  and 
Mr.  Bell,  Science  had  but  two  courses  open  to  it — to  carefully 
investigate  the  subject,  or  to  deny  its  title  to  investigation.  Science 
was  content  to  adopt  the  latter  course,  as  the  easier  and  sp)eedier 
way  of  arriving  at  a  conclusion ;  but  in  so  doing  it  ceased  to  be 
science. 

I  have  not  space  to  give  in  extenso  Robert  Bell's  long  and 
interesting  narrative.  In  a  former  chapter  I  quoted  his  testimony 
concerning  the  detached  hand  that  he  seized,  and  that,  without  any 
effort  at  withdrawal,  melted  into  air.  His  evidence  as  to  another 
phenomenon  repeatedly  witnessed  at  the  secmces  of  Mr.  Home,  the 
playing  of  an  instrument  without  the  contact  of  mortal  hand,  is  no 
less  conclusive  and  emphatic  : — 

"   We  heard  the  accordion  begining  to  play  where  it   lay  on   the  ground. 

"  Apart  from  the  wonderful  consideration  of  its  being  played  without  hands — 
no  less  wonderful  was  the  fact  of  its  being  played  in  a  narrow  space  which 
would  not  admit  of  its  being  drawn  out  with  the  requisite  freedom  to  its  full 
extent.  We  listened  with  suspended  breath.  The  air  was  wild,  and  full  of 
strange  transitions,  with  a  wail  of  the  most  pathetic  sweetness  running  through 
it.  'fhe  execution  was  no  less  remarkable  for  its  delicacy  than  its  power. 
When  the  notes  swelled  in  some  of  the  bold  passages,  the  sound  rolled  through 
the  room  with  an  astounding  reverberation  ;  then  gently  subsiding,  sank  into 
a  strain  of  divine  tenderness. 

"  That  an  instrument  should  be  played  without  hands  is  a  proposition 
which  nobody  can  be  expected  to  accept.  The  whole  story  will  be  referred 
to  one  of  the  categories  under,  which  the  whole  of  these  phenomena  are 
consigned  by  '  common  sense.'  It  will  be  discarded  as  a  delusion  or  a  fraud. 
Either  we  imagined  we  heard  it,  and  really  did  not  hear  it,  or  there  was  some 
one  under  the  table,  or  some  mechanism  was  set  in  motion  to  produce  the 
result. 

Upon  the  likelihood  of  delusion  my  testimony  is  obviously  worth  nothing. 
With  respect  to  fraud  I  can  speak  more  confidently.  It  is  scarcely  necessary  to 
say  that  in  so  small  a  circle,  occupied  by  so  many  persons  who  were 
inconveniently  packed  together,  there  was  not  room  for  a  child  of  the  size  of 
a  doll,  or  for  the  smallest  piece  of  machinery  to  operate. 

8o  LIFE  AND  MISSION  OF  HOME 

"  But  we  need  not  speculate  on  what  might  be  done  by  skilful  contrivances 
in  confines  so  narrow,  since  the  question  is  removed  out  of  the  region  of 
conjecture  by  the  fact  that,  upon  holding  up  the  instrument  myself  in  one 
hand,  in  the  open  room,  with  the  full  light  upon  it.  similar  strains  were 
emitted,  the  regular  action  of  the  accordion  going  on  without  any  visible 
agency.  And  I  should  add  that,  during  the  loud  and  vehement  passages,  it 
became  so  difficult  to  hold,  in  consequence  of  the  extraordinary  power  -with 
which  it  was  played  from  below,  that  I  was  obliged  to  grasp  the  top  with 
both  hands.  This  experience  was  not  a  solitary  one.  I  witnessed  the  same 
result  on  different  occasions,  when  the  instrument  was  held  by  others." 

Bell  was  a  sane  man,  and  widely  respected  as  an  honest  one.  Did 
the  accordion  play  in  his  hands  under  the  circumstances  he  describes ; 
or  was  he  deliberately  writing  a  falsehood,  thq  only  result  of  which, 
as  he  well  knew,  would  be  to  bring  upon  him  a  storm  of  obloquy  ? 
Were  the  many  other  credible  witnesses  equally  telling  falsehoods, 
who  have  recorded  a  similar  experience?  The  intellect  that  answers 
"  Yes  "  cannot  be  reasoned  with;  and  unfortunately  there  are  only 
too  many  who  will  answer  "  Yes." 

In  the  Morning  Star,  in  October,  i860,  appeared  a  letter  from 
Dr.  Gully,  of  Malvern,  who  had  been  present  at  the  seance  when 
the  accordion  was  played,  and  who  fully  confirmed  Bell's  testimony. 

*•  I  held  it  myself  for  a  short  time,"  he  wrote,  "  and  had  good  reason 
to  know  that  it  was  vehemently  pulled  at  the  other  end,  and  not  by  Mr. 
Home's  toes,  as  has  been  wisely  surmised  ;  unless  that  gentleman  has  legs  three 
yards  in  length,  with  toes  at  the  end  of  them  quite  as  marvellous  as  any 
legion  of  spirits.  For,  be  it  stated,  that  such  music  as  we  heard  was  no 
ordinary  strain  ;  it  was  grand  at  times,  at  others  pathetic,  at  others  distant 
and  long-drawn,  to  a  degree  which  no  one  can  imagine  who  has  not  heard  it. 
I  have  heard  Blagrove  repeatedly ;  but  it  is  no  libel  on  that  master  of  the 
instrument  to  say  that  he  never  did  produce  such  exquisite  distant  and  echo 
notes  as  those  which  delighted  our  ears.  The  instrument  played,  too,  at 
distant  parts  of  the  room,  many  yards  away  from  Home  and  from  all  of  us." 

One  of  the  phenomena  at  the  same  remarkable  seance  that  most 
impressed  and  startled  the  persons  present  was  the  levitation  of  Mr. 
Home.  The  lights  had  then  been  put  out,  but  the  sitters  were 
not  in  absolute  darkness ;  they  could  still  distinguish  objects  with  the 
help  of  what  light  came  through  the  windows  from  a  gas-lamp 
outside,  and  of  t"he  fire  that  was  dying  in  the  grate. 

"  Mr.  Home,"  writes  Bell,  "  was  seated  next  the  window.  Through  the 
semi-darkness  his  head  was  dimly  visible  against  the  curtains,  and  his  hands 
might  be  seen  in  a  faint  white  heap  before  him.  Presently  he  said  in  a  quiet 
voice,  '  My  chair  is  moving — I  am  off  the  ground — don't  notice  me — talk  of 
something  else;  '  or  words  to  that  effect."  (In  explanation  of  these  words, 
it  may  be  remarked  that  Home's  experience  of  the  phenomenon  of  levitation 
was  that,  until  he  had  risen  above  the  heads  of  the  circle,  any  movement 
or  excitement  on  the  part  of  the  persons  present  appeared  to  have  the  effect 
of  checking  the  force  at  work  to  produce  the  manifestation.) 

"  It  was  very  difficult,"  continues  Bell,  "  to  restrain  the  curiosity,  not 
unmixed  with  a  more  serious  feeling,  which  these  few  words  awakened  ;  but  we 
talked,  incoherently  enough,  upon  some  indifferent  topic.  I  was  sitting  nearly 
opposite  Mr.  Home ;  and  I  saw  his  hands  disappear  from  the  table,  and 
his  head  vanish  into  the  deep  shadow  beyond.  In  a  moment  or  two  more 
he  spoke  again.  This  time  his  voice  was  in  the  air  above  our  heads.  He 
had  risen  from  his  chair  to  a  height  of  four  or  five  feet  from  the  ground. 
As  he  ascended  higher  he  described  his  position,  which  at  first  was  perpen- 
dicular, and  afterwards  became  horizontal.      He  said  he  felt  as  if  he  had  been 

ENGLAND  81 

turned  in  the  gentlest  manner,  as  a  child  is  turned  in  the  arms  of  a  nurse. 
In  a  moment  or  two  more  he  told  us  that  he  was  going  to  pass  across  the 
window,  against  the  grey,  silvery  light  of  which  he  would  be  visible.  We 
watched  in  profound  stillness,  and  saw  his  figure  pass  from  one  side  of  the 
window  to  the  other,  feet  foremost,  lying  horizontally  in  the  air.  He  spoke 
to  us  as  he  passed,  and  told  us  that  he  would  turn  the  reverse  way  and  recross 
the  window,  which  he  did.  .  .  .  He  hovered  round  the  circle  for  several 
minutes,   and  passed — this  time  perpendicularly — over  our  heads." 

As  Home  passed  him,  Bell  touched  his  foot,  and  relates  that  it 
was  *'  withdrawn  quickly,  with  a  palpable  shudder.  It  was 
evidently  not  restir  g  on  the  chair,  but  floating ;  and  it  sprang  from 
the  touch  as  a  bird  would." 

"  He  now,"  ends  Bell,  "  passed  over  to  the  farthest  extremity  of 
the  room  ;  and  we  could  judge  by  his  voice  of  the  altitude  and 
distance  he  had  attained.  He  had  reached  the  ceiling,  upon  which 
he  made  a  slight  mark,  and  soon  afterwards  descended  and  resumed 
his  place  at  the  table." 

If  nine  hundred  and  ninety-nine  men  who  had  seen  them  united  in 
testifying  to  such  facts,  would  the  thousandth  man  who  had  rxDt  seen 
believe  their  testimony  ?  Probably  not ;  but,  in  the  words  of  Mr. 
Crookes,  "  the  facts  are  true,  for  all  that." 

"  You  can  have  but  a  limited  idea,"  wrote  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall  to  Mr. 
Home,  "  of  the  sensation  created  by  the  article  in  the  Cornhill 
Magazine.  It  was  a  bold,  noble,  and  honest  act  in  Robert  Bell. 
Mrs.  Hall  wrote  to  thank  him  in  our  names.  It  was  so  well  done 
— so  calmly  yet  so  eloquently  written  ;  so  judicious  while  so  earnest ; 
and  so  effectually  redeeming  your  character — of  which  the  gaping 
crowd  may  have  doubts,  but  which  all  who  know  you  respect  and 
esteem — and  regard  you  with  something  warmer  than  either  respect 
or  esteem. 

"  I  need  not  add  I  have  taken  all  opportunities  to  say  I  endorse 
(and  so  does  Mrs.   Hall)  every  sentence  in  the  article." 

The  seance  during  which  the  accordion  played  without  human 
hand  touching  it,  and  Mr.  Home  was  lifted  in  the  air,  was  the 
most  remarkable  of  several  seances  at  which  Bell  had  been  present ; 
and  a  large  portion  of  his  article  in  the  Cornhill  is  naturally  devoted 
to  a  description  of  its  various  incidents.  Besides  Mr.  Robert  Bell 
and  Dr.  Gully,  the  sitters  present  on  that  occasion  included  a  solicitor 
whom  I  have  been  unable  positively  to  identify,  and  the  well-known 
writer,  Dr.  Robert  Chambers.  Dr.  Chambers  had  a  remarkable 
experience  in  the  course  of  the  evening,  which  Dr.  Gully  related  in 
his  letter  to  the  Morning  Star. 

"  I  may  add,"  wrote  Dr.  Gully,  "  that  the  writer  in  the  Comkill 
Magazine  omits  to  mention  several  curious  phenomena  which  were 
witnessed  that  evening.  Here  is  one  of  them.  A  distinguished 
litter atuer  who  was  present  "  (Robert  Chambers)  "  asked  the 
.supposed  spirit  of  his  father  whether  he  would  play  his  favourite 
ballad  for  us ;  and  addressing  us,  he  added  :  '  The  accordion  was 
not  invented  at  the  time  of  my  father's  death,  so  I  cannot  conceive 
how  it  will  be  affected;  but  if  his  favourite  air  is  not  played,  I 
pledge  myself  to  tell  you  so.'       Almost  immediately  the  flute  notes 

82  LIFE     AND     MISSION     OF    HOME 

of  the  accordion  (which  was  upon  the  floor)  played  through  '  Ye  banks 
and  braes  o'  Bonnie  Doon,'  which  the  gentleman  alluded  to  assured 
us  was  his  father's  favourite  air,  whilst  the  flute  was  his  father's 
favourite  instrument.  He  then  asked  for  another  favourite  air  of 
his  father's  '  which  was  not  Scotch,'  and  '  The  Last  Rose  of 
Summer  '  was  played  in  the  same  note.  This,  the  gentleman  told  us, 
was  the  air  to  which  he  had  alluded." 

Dr.  Gully  had  been  introduced  to  Mr.  Home  by  Lady  Shelley. 
He  was  not  as  yet  a  Spiritualist  when  he  attended  this  seance. 
"  I  have  endeavoured,"  he  wrote  in  the  same  letter  to  the  Morning 
Star,  "  to  show  that,  as  regards  the  principal  and  most  wonderful 
phenomena,  there  could  have  been  no  contrivance  by  trick  or 
machinery  adequate  to  produce  or  account  for  their  existence.  How, 
then,  were  they  produced  ?  I  know  not ;  and  I  believe  that  we  are 
very — very  far  from  having  accumulated  facts  enough  upon  which  to 
frame  any  laws  or  build  any  theory  regarding  the  agent  at  work  in 
their  production." 

If  ever  a  conversion  to  Spiritualism  was  remarkable,  it  was  that  of 
Robert  Chambers.  The  fact  that  he  was  one  of  the  most  kindly  and 
genial  of  men  did  not  prevent  him  from  being  at  the  same  time  one  of 
the  hardest  and  most  dogmatic  of  materialists ;  and  he  was  known  by 
his  intimate  friends  to  have  been  the  joint-author,  together  with  Leitch 
Ritchie,  of  a  work  that  had  startled  the  public  by  its  outspoken 
scepticism,  The  Vestiges  of  Creation.  Chambers  published  it 
anonymously,  from  a  care  of  his  reputation ;  and  from  the  same  motive 
he  was  unwilling,  after  becoming  a  Spiritualist,  to  let  his  name  be 
mentioned  in  connection  with  Bell's  Cornhill  article,  or  to  sign  it  to 
the  Introduction  and  Appendix  which  he  kindly  wrote  in  1863  for  Mr. 
Home's  first  volume  of  autobiography.  It  was  not  until  1867  that 
Robert  Chambers  abandoned  this  attitude  of  reserve.  In  that  year 
he  was  asked  by  Home  to  give  an  affidavit  in  connection  with  the 
Lyon  lawsuit,  and  honourably  consented. 

Robert  Chambers  did  not  become  a  Spiritualist  in  a  day,  but  in  the 
er>d  he  did  become  one.  His  acquaintance  with  Home  began  in  1859, 
and  was  continued  in  i860  and  the  years  following.  It  is  much  to  he 
regretted  that  he  never  had  the  courage  to  publish  the  experiences 
that  were  the  means  of  converting  him ;  for  few  men  could  have  borne 
more  remarkable  testimony  on  the  subject  of  identity,  as  established 
by  the  knowledge  displayed,  on  the  part  of  the  intelligences  communi- 
cating, of  matters  that  Chambers  was  well  assured  were  unknown  to 
Home. 

The  first  conviction  at  which  intelligent  and  impartial  observers 
present  at  the  seances  of  Home  axrived  was  that  imposture  had  no  part 
in  the  manifestations ;  the  second  fact  demonstrated  to  them  was  that 
those  manifestations  were  governed  by  intelligence.  But  by  what 
intelligence?  Was  it  that  of  Home  or  of  the  other  persons  present, 
acting  in  an  unexplained  manner  and  under  unknown  conditions  ?  Or 
were  the  intelligences  that  produced  the  phenomena  separate  entities 
from  the  human  beings  present;  and,  if  so,  were  they  disembodied 
spirits  ? 

ENGLAND  8j 

What  amount  of  proof  could  answer  the  last  question  in  the  affirma- 
tive ?  Each  inquirer  had  to  decide  for  himself ;  but  it  was  obvious 
that  only  one  class  of  proofs  could  be  conclusive.  If  we  find  that  an 
intelligence  communicating  with  ours  claims  to  be  that  of  a  friend 
whom  death  has  separated  from  us,  we  may  reasonably 
expect  the  spirit  to  remember  something  of  the  facts  of  his  life 
on  earth. 

In  the  case  of  one  investigator  present  at  the  seances  of  Home, 
messages  from  lost  friends  would  be  frequent,  and  the  most  remarkable 
proofs  of  identity  would  be  given :  another  person  might  be  present  at 
seance  after  seance,  and  never  receive  a  message  of  the  kind.  Why 
not  ?  The  question  was  often  asketl ;  and  the  reply  the  spirits  gave 
was  that  the  life  beyond  is,  like  our  own,  subject  to  conditions  and 
restraints,  diflfering  indeed  from  earthly  restraints  and  conditions,  but 
often  debarring  spirits  from  communicating,  just  as  we  are  often 
unable  to  carry  out  our  wishes  here  below. 

Robert  Chambers  was  one  of  the  former  and  more  fortunate  class 
of  investigators,  the  recipients  of  evidences  of  identity  that  were  con- 
clusive to  them.  "  Evidences  that  may  be  accounted  for  by  the 
theory  of  thought-reading,"  some  objectors  will  answer.  If  that 
theory  be  held  sufficient  to  account  for  the  knowledge  shown  at  the 
CoTfihill  seance  of  the  two  airs  that  Chambers  was  thinking  of  when 
he  put  his  question,  it  still  remains  to  be  demonstrated  how  an 
accordion  that  Home  was  not  touching  could  be  induced  to  play  those 
airs.  But  can  thought  read  thought  at  a  distance  of  four  hundred 
miles  ? 

In  the  latter  part  of  1866,  Dr.  Robert  Chambers  was  in  Scotland, 
and  Mr.  Home  in  London.  One  day,  at  the  rooms  of  the  Spiritual 
Athenaeum  in  Sloane  Street,  where  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall,  Mr.  Humphreys, 
Mr.  Jencken,  Mr.  Perdicaris,  and  Mr.  Home  had  met  for  the  dis- 
cussion of  some  matters  of  business,  a  message  was  rapped  out  that 
claimed  to  emanate  from  a  daughter  of  Dr.  Chambers.  Her  name 
was  given ;  and  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall,  who  had  been  for  many  years 
acquainted  with  the  family,  declared  his  disbelief  that  Dr.  Chambers 
had  ever  had  a  daughter  of  that  name.  For  the  sequel  of  the  incident, 
my  authority  is  Mr.  Hall  himself,  together  with  letters  written  by  jJr. 
Chambers  on  the  subject,  and  quoted  from  by  Mr.  Home  in  his  second 
volume  of  Incidents,  page  143. 

Mr.  Hall  relates  that,  as  the  message  received  had  reference  to 
certain  very  private  matters,  he  was  most  reluctant  to  communicate  it 
to  Chambers  under  the  circumstances ;  and,  although  he  unwillingly 
undertook  to  write  to  the  latter,  neglected  to  fulfil  his  promise.  Some 
weeks  passed ;  and  one  evening,  at  a  seance  at  the  residence  of  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Hall,  in  Essex  Villas,  Campden  Hill,  another  message  was 
received,  declaring  the  regret  of  the  spirit  that  Dr.  Chambers  had  not 
been  communicated  with.  She  described  herself  as  being  accompanied 
on  this  occasion  by  the  spirit  of  a  sister  who  had  died  at  an  early  age ; 
and  in  reply  to  Mr.  Hall's  request  for  some  token  of  identity  that  he 

84  LIFE    AND    .MISSION    OF    HOME 

might  furnish  to  Dr.  Chambers,  the  words,  "  Tell  him,  Pa,  love,'' 
were  spelt  out.^ 

Mr.  Hall  sent  this  message  to  Dr.  Chambers,  with  a  letter  explain- 
ing the  circumstances  under  which  it  had  been  received,  and  added 
that  he  thought  it  best  to  withhold  the  former  communication  made, 
until  he  had  obtaineii  Chambers'  opinion  of  the  test  of  identity.  Dr. 
Chambers  wrote  back  that  it  was  a  most  remarkable  one.  "  The 
whole  of  the  communications,"  said  his  letter  to  Mr.  Hall,  "  accord 
with  actual  facts.  The  words,  'Pa,  love,'  were  the  last  words  she 
pronounced  in  life." 

Mr.  Hall  had  now  no  scruple  in  forwarding  the  other  message, 
which  related  to  private  affairs  of  the  Chambers'  family  and  entreated 
Dr.  Chambers  to  adopt  a  particular  course  of  action  with  reference 
to  certain  family  matters.  Chambers  did  as  the  spirit  advised ;  and 
in  a  letter  that  he  wrote  to  Home  a  short  time  afterwards  he  related 
the  result  of  his  action;  adding,  "  You  see,  she  was  right  about  the 
imminence  of  that  step,  of  which  I  Knew  nothing." 

I  have  dwelt  on  this  incident  at  some  length,  because  the  theory  of 
thought-reading  is  clearly  quite  inapplicable  here.  In  the  narrative  1 
am  now  about  to  give,  such  an  explanation  is,  to  say  the  least,  very 
far-fetched;  for  it  is  evident  that  the  recipient  of  the  communication 
was  not  at  the  moment  thinking  of  the  person  it  referred  to. 

One  of  the  friends  of  Dr.  Chambers  was  the  late  Miss  Catherine 
Sinclair,  a  well-known  writer  in  her  day,  and  a  lady  much  beloved  for 
the  beauty  and  amiability  of  her  character.  She,  like  Chambers, 
became  a  Spiritualist ;  and  one  of  the  experiences  that  were  the  means 
of  convincing  her  is  thus  narrated  by  Mrs.  Adelaide  Senior,  sister-in- 
law  of  the  late  Nassau  Senior.  The  seance  in  question  took  place  in 
the  summer  of  1861 ;  and  Mrs.  Senior,  who  was  present  at  it,  writes : — 

"  We  were  all  assembled  in  the  summer  twilight  in  a  large  drawing-room  in 
one  of  those  immense  houses  in  the  Regent's  Park,  where  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Home  were  staying  with  the  widow  of  an  Indian  judge.  Miss  Catherine 
Sinclair  was  seated  next  me  ;  we  were  not  at  a  table,  nor  in  a  circle.  Mr. 
Home  went  into  a  trance ;  and  coming  up  suddenly  to  Miss  Sinclair,  he 
said — in  that  peculiar  trance  voice  — '  You  knew  James  Ferguson,'  when  she 
actually  bounded  up  from  her  chair,  and  said,  '  Yes,  I  did  !  '  He  went  on 
in  the  same  voice :  '  He  was  called  Sir  James  in  life — he  wishes  to 
communicate  with  you,  but  cannot  do  so — you  are  so  surrounded  by  your 
friends ;  '  and  she  answered  bitterly,  '  Aye,  I  daresay  !  '  Upon  which  I 
conjured  up  a  love  story  in  my  mind,  and  I  believe  that  I  was  perfectly 
right.  Mr.  Home  meanwhile  went  on,  '  He  wants  you  to  do  something  for 
him.'  *  Oh  I  what  is  it?  '  she  interrupted;  '  there  is  nothing  that  I  would  not 
do  for   him.'  " 

Mrs.  Senior  then  narrates  a  communication  that  was  made  relative 
to  a  son  of  Sir  James  Ferguson,  to  whom  Miss  Sinclair  was  requested 
to  write ;  and  continues : — 

'  Note  by  Mr.  H.  T.  Humphreys  : — "  I  was  also  present  at  the  siance  at 
Essex  Villas,  Campden  Hill,  where  Mary  Edwards  (formerly  Chambers)  came 
accompanied  by  her  little  sister,  and  recollect  how  the  window  curtains  were 
moved  into  something  like  a  canopy  on  the  occasion.  We  asked  for  an 
explanation  of  '  Pa,  love,'  and  were  told  it  was  a  test." 

ENGLAND  85 

"  '  But  I  do  not  know  where  he  is,'  Miss  Sinclair  answered;  '  can  you 
tell  me?  *  Mr.  Home  paused  a  moment,  and  said,  '  I  will  try  and  find  out.' 
When  he  turned  to  walk  away  from  us,  I  saw  a  bright  star  glittering  in  the 
centre  of  his  forehead,  and  said  impulsively,  '  Oh,  look  at  the  star  1  '  but 
no  one  saw  it  except  myself.  He  walked  to  the  other  end  of  the  room,  i8 
to  20  feet,  where  there  were  folding  doors,  leading  to  another  room  ;  they  were 
closed,  and  he  began  to  walk  up  and  down  in  front  of  them  like  a  sentry  on 
his  post ;  and,  as  he  did  so,  we  all  saw  seven  stars  sparkling  round  his  head, 
as  they  do  in  the  sky  on  a  frosty  night.  In  a  few  minutes  Mr.  Home  came 
over  to  us  again,  and  walking  close  to  me,  said,  '  No  one  saw  the  first  star 
in  my  forehead  but  you — that  was  Henry's  star.'  Then,  turning  to  Miss 
Sinclair,  he  mentioned  some  foreign  baths — Baden-Baden,  I  think,  and  I 
afterwards  saw  a  notice  of  the  death  of  Sir  J.  Ferguson's  son  at  the  same 
place. 

"  I  ought  to  have  mentioned  that  when  Mr.  Home  walked  away  from  us 
in  the  first  instance.  Miss  Sinclair  turned  to  me,  and  said,  in  the  lowest 
whisper  :  '  How  very  wonderful !  he  has  been  dead  these  thirty  years  ;'  when 
Mr.  Home  instantly  called  out  in  a  tone  that  thrilled  us:  '  Don't  say  dead 
— nothing  kills  but  sin — sin  kills  through  the  devil ;  but  those  who  live  in 
Christ  never  die.'  This  was  said  from  the  far  side  of  the  room,  where  no 
human  ears  could  have  heard  Miss  Sinclair's  words. 

"  I  had  never  met  her  before,  nor  did  I  ever  see  her  again  ;  but  on  that 
night  we  had  a  great  deal  of  talk,  and  hoped  to  meet  again.  I  have  often 
wondered  whether  Miss  Sinclair  had  left  any  record  of  her  experience.  She 
seemed  very  much  impressed,  and  to  believe  fully  all  she  heard  and  saw." 

When  he  was  thrown  into  the  trance-condition  referred  to  by  Mrs. 
Senior,  Home's  identity  became  merged  in  that  of  the  intelligences 
communicating,  and  he  described  the  spirits  he  saw,  and  spoke  in 
their  words ;  but,  on  awaking  from  the  vision,  remembered  nothing  of 
what  had  passed.  I  shall  write  more  fully  on  this  subject  in  another 
chapter. 

From  one  of  the  letters  of  Robert  Chambers,  it  appears  that  he  was 
in  London  late  in  April  or  early  in  May,  i860;  this,  therefore,  must 
have  been  the  visit  during  which  Chambers  was  present  at  the  seance 
described  a  few  months  later  in  the  Cornhill. 

If  any  further  evidence  be  asked  that  Chambers  in  the  last  years 
of  his  life  was  a  Spiritualist  in  the  full  sense  of  the  term,  I  may  cite 
some  words  of  his  with  reference  to  a  pamphlet  on  the  subject  of 
Spiritualism,  of  which  his  friend  Miss  Douglas  (another  of  Home's 
converts)  was  the  author.  "These  twenty-four  pages,"  he  wrote, 
"in  my  opinion  contain  the  germ  of  the  greatest  discovery  and  the 
greatest  revolution  of  human  thought  that  the  world  has  witnessed." 
The  same  recognition  of  the  spiritual  origin  of  the  manifestations  is 
apparent  in  the  following  extract  from  a  letter  written  by  Dr.  Chambers 
to  Mrs.  S.C.  Hall,  on  hearing  of  Mr.  Home's  adoption  by  Mrs.  Lyon  : 

"  I  need  not  say  how  delighted  I  am,  in  common  with  all  his  well- 
wishers,  with  the  good  fortune  that  has  befallen  him.  Such  is  my 
opinion  of  him  that  not  only  do  I  think  him  deserving  of  it  but  that  he 
will  make  good  use  of  it.  We  may,  I  think,  trust  to  see  him  pro- 
pagating Spiritualism  from  the  independent  point  he  has  reached, 
with  power  only  bounded  by  the  needful  regard  to  his  health." 

Several  of  the  letters  of  Dr.  Robert  Chambers  and  Miss  Sinclair 
were  printed  by  Mr.  Home  in  his  second  volume  of  Incidents.  A 
passage  from  one  of  Miss  Sinclair's  may  be  quoted  here,  as  indicative 
of  her  convictions : — 

86  LIFE    AND    MISSION     OF    HOME 

"  The  message  of  last  night  was  most  marvellous.  ...  I  live 
•with  those  who  have  heard,  from  my  near  relative  Mrs.  Hope 
Johnstone,  a  very  detailed  account  of  her  experience  and  also  Mr. 
Grant's  of  the  Advertiser ;  but  people  cannot  long  resist  conviction, 
seconded  by  manifestations  so  pleasing  and  elevating  as  those  of  last 
night.  I  merely  relate  what  I  have  myself  witnessed,  and  all  become 
at  once  desirous  to  share  in  such  revelations." 

In  an  unpublished  letter  from  Miss  Sinclair  to  Mr.  Home,  I  find 
the  following  grateful  reference  tc  her  experiences: — • 

"  My  brother  and  I  would  much  like  to  be  present  at  the  seance,  if 
you  could  obtain  Mrs.  Edgeworth's  leave  to  allow  us  to  accompany 
Lady  Hesketh.  I  hear  from  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall  that  you  are  now  in  great 
power;  and  I  am  so  deeply  interested  in  the  subject  of  Spiritualism, 
and  have  had  such  experience  of  its  truth  and  usefulness,  that  it 
interests  me  of  all  things.  I  have  never  forgotten  the  beautiful 
manifestations  we  had  at  your  house  in  Sloane  Street." 

The  seance  at  which  Miss  Sinclair  was  so  startled  by  hearing  the 
name  of  Sir  James  Ferguson,  was  the  second  that  the  narrator  of  the 
incident,  Mrs.  A.  Senior,  had  ever  attended.  Her  own  experiences 
on  that  and  the  previous  occasion  were  still  more  impressive  than 
those  she  relates  in  connection  with  Miss  Sinclair.  I  give  them  in 
Mrs.  Senior's  own  words,  written  in  1862,  and  published  under  the 

initial  "S "  in  Mr.  Home's  first  volume  of  Incidents  (pp.  206- 

208):— 

"  I  first  attended  a  seance  of  Mr.  Home's  in  the  summer  of  1861,  when  I 
was  in  very  deep  affliction.  I  had  never  seen  anything  of  Spiritualism  before, 
but  had  heard  a  good  deal  of  it  from  a  dear  old  friend  who  introduced  me  to 
Mr.  Home.  My  own  experiences  that  night  were  far  more  wonderful  than 
anything  I  had  ever  heard  or  read  of,  and  were  to  me  most  convincing. 
After  many  raps,  movements  of  the  table,  &c.,  Mr.  Home  fell  into  a  trance, 
and  described  my  dear  husband  most  accurately,  said  how  noble  he  was  in 
mind  and  body,  and  how  he  should  have  loved  him  had  he  known  him  in 
life;  and  then  said,  '  But  who  is  that  Mary  standing  by  his  side?  What  a 
noble  woman,  and  how  she  loves  him — and  how  happy  they  are  together — 
and  how  they  both  love  you  ;  you  were  his  star  in  life.  But  what  was  that 
misery  about  his  watch?  You  forgot  to  wind  his  watch,  and  how  miserable 
it  made  you.'  Now  this  was  a  fact  known  to  no  living  being  but  myself. 
I  had  wound  the  watch  the  night  I  lost  my  husband,  and  resolved  nr-ver  to 
let  it  go  down  again  ;  but  more  than  a  month  afterwards,  when  I  returned  to 
our  old  home,  I  forgot  to  wind  it  one  night ;  and  my  agony  was  great  when  I 
discovered  it  in  the  morning,  but  I  never  mentioned  it  even  to  my  husband's 
sister,    who   was  in   the   house   with  me. 

A  month  later  I  attended  a  second  stance.  Some  remarkable  things  were 
told  by  Mr.  Home,  who  was  in  a  state  of  trance,  to  a  lady  present  "  (Miss 
Sinclair)  "  of  her  departed  friend.  .  .  .  Mr.  Home  came  soon  afterwards  to 
me ;  and  said  that  my  dear  husband  and  his  mother — the  Mary  spoken 
of  before — were  behind  my  chair,  and  that  both  longed  to  comfort  me. 

He  then  went  on  to  say  that  I  had  had  a  conversation  with  my  husband 
eight  months  before,  and  that  he  blessed  me  for  that  conversation  now  ;  that 
we  were  sitting  in  our  drawing-room  at  home,  he  in  his  arm-chair  and  I  in 
mine,  with  the  little  round  table  between  us,  and  that  I  had  just  been  reading 
a  chapter  in  the  New  Testament.  ...  I  remember  perfectly  the  conversation 
alluded  to,  and  it  was  a  very  remarkable  one. 

"  These  are  facts  for  which  I  can  vouch.  To  me  the  comfort  has  been 
unspeakable." 

ENGLAND  87 

"  I  do  hope,"  wrote  Mrs.  Senior  to  Mr.  Home  in  November,  i866, 
with  reference  to  one  of  her  friends,  "  that  Spiritualism  may  be  the 
same  comfort  to  her  that  it  has  been  to  me — more  I  cannot  wish  her. 

For  one  who  has  had,  Hke  Mrs.  Senior,  the  courage  to  speak,  a 
hundred  have  been  silent  concerning  their  experiences  with  Mr.  Home. 
Their  letters  often  make  allusions  to  wonderful  seances  at  which  the 
writers  had  been  present,  but  the  story  of  those  seances  remains 
untold.  For  instance,  a  lady  who  was  a  distinguished  ornament  of 
English  society  a  quarter  of  a  century  ago,  Mrs.  G.  Cowper,  saw  a 
great  deal  of  the  manifestations  in  1861.  "I  was  up  till  very  late, 
thinking  over  and  writing  an  account  of  the  wonders  of  the  evening," 
she  tells  Mr.  Home  in  a  letter  written  in  the  summer  of  that  year 
But  if  Mrs.  Cowper's  account  ever  found  its  way  into  print,  it  did  so 
anonymously,  and  cannot  now  be  identified. 

Again,  there  are  several  letters  from  Miss  Sophia  Hope-Vere.  A 
very  interesting  one,  written  in  i860,  describes  the  impression  made 
on  the  writer  by  the  first  seance  at  which  she  was  present. 

"  20  Park  Lane,  July  i-jth. 

"  DiiAR  Mr.  Home, — Ere  you  leave  London,  I  feel  it  due  to  you  to  thanU 
you  for  admitting  me  to  your  stance.  I  feel  I  cannot,  and  never  shall,  forget 
what  I  have  felt  and  heard.  I  am  thankful  for  the  opportunity  I  had  of 
witnessing  what  I  must  honestly  own  I  not  only  doubted — but  scouted.  I 
fear,  at  the  outset  of  anything  so  strange  and  mysterious,  to  express  all  I 
feel — for  I  know  not  how  far  my  present  feelings  on  the  subject  may  last. 
I  shall  ever  hail  with  joy  an  opportunity  of  another  such  meeting.  I  am  happy 
to  say  that  what  1  narrated  to  ihy  family  has  not  been  sceptically  received. 
I  prefaced  my  communications  to  them  by  saying  :  '  I  do  not  give  you  my 
views  or  ideas — in  what  I  am  about  to  tell  I  confine  myself  to  facts  ;  draw  your 
own  impressions,  and  make  what  comments  you  like.'  They  have  paid  me 
the  compliment  of  not  doubting  one  word  of  what  I  told  them  ;  and  one  and 
all  are  anxious  to  have  a  seance.  I  saw  Ladj'  P.  yesterday  ;  her  feelings  are 
quite  in  unison  with  mine  on  the  point.  .  .  .  Sincerely  yours, 

"  Sophia   J.    Hope-Vere." 

What  were  the  experiences  that  drew  from  one  who  "not  only 
doubted  but  scouted  "  the  manifestations,  such  a  letter  as  the  above, 
after  a  single  seance  ?  What  did  the  writer  witness  at  the  seances  she 
subsequently  attended?  I  cannot  say:  her  letters  are  eloquent  of  the 
effect  produced  on  her;  but  the  history  of  the  experiences  that  con- 
verted her  scorn  into  belief  is  unwritten,  and  must  remain  unwritten. 

The  same  blank  exists  in  the  case  of  Lady  Shelley,  who  was  present 
at  numbers  of  Mr.  Home's  seances  in  London,  including  several  at 
Mrs.  Milner  Gibson's ;  and  who,  with  her  husband,  frequently  invited 
him  to  Boscombe.  I  have  no  matf^rials  for  writing  the  narrative  of 
her  conversion  to  Spiritualism;  but  of  the  fact  that  Lady  Shelley 
became  a  Spiritualist  her  letters  leave  no  question. 

"  We  have  been  thinking  and  talking  of  you  for  many  days  past,"  she 
writes  to  Mr.  Home  in  1863.  "  All  the  world  has  read  your  book  ;  and  it  has, 
1  believe,  done  much  good.  The  next  best  thing,  you  know,  to  seeing  you  was 
to  hear  from  you,  and  to  know  that  your  heart  yearns  towards  our  little,  dark, 
foggy  island.  The  idea  that  you  might  have  really  been  established  at  the 
cottage  this  winter,  had  we  not  pulled  it  down,  is  tantalising  ;  but  you  must  let 
me   know   as  soon  as  you  return  to   England,   and  Sir   Percy   joins  with  me 

88  LIFE     AND    MISSION     OF    HOME 

in  hoping  that  you  will  come  and  spend  a  fortnight  with  us.  We  are  in  all 
the  confusion  at  Boscombe  of  building  new  kitchens  and  offices,  but  we  shall 
always  be  able  nevertheless  to  give  you   a  mutton-chop.  ... 

*'  You  know  I  am  always  living  in  hopes  that  some  day  my  husband  will 
have  all  the  comfort  from  Spiritualism  that  I  have  had  myself — and  if  that 
knowledge  is  to  come  to  him,  it  will  certainly  be  through  you. 

"  Direct  to  Boscombe,  and  say  that  we  are  to  see  you  there  before  long." 

The  letters  of  I^ady  Shelley  convey  the  impression  of  a  nature  at 
once  intellectual  and  amiable.  I  may  cite,  as  an  instance,  a  letter 
written  by  her  in  1862,  on  learning  of  the  death  of  Mrs.  Home: — 

"  Boscombe,   July   i-jth. 

"  Dear  Mr.  Home, — Just  before  leaving  town,  I  received  from  our 
friend  Mrs.  Milner  Gibson  the  sad  news  of  your  loss.  Accept  my 
warmest  and  most  heartfelt  sympa>thy — for  whenever  this  parting; 
comes,  it  must  be  a  sorrow  for  a  time ;  though  to  us  Spiritualists,  who 
know  that  our  beloved  ones  are  not  separated  from  us,  but  have  merely 
put  off  the  earth-worn  garment  to  enter  into  a  more  glorious  life,  it  is 
indeed  a  far  different  sorrow  to  that  which  sees  nothing  beyond  the 
grave.  I  trust  you  will  not  deem  these  few  lines  an  intrusion  at  such  a 
time — but  the  warm  interest  I  must  ever  take  in  all  that  concerns  you 
must  plead  my  excuse." 

This  chapter  has  already  grown  to  such  length  that  I  had  intended 
to  close  it  here ;  but  another  name  suggests  itself  in  connection  with 
Mr.  Home  and  the  year  i860,  that  I  cannot  pass  without  remark. 
Dr.  Lockhart  Robertson,  long  editor  of  the  Journal  of  Mental  Science, 
had  been  one  of  the  most  derisive  critics  of  the  new  belief.  When 
Mr.  Rymer  published  a  pamphlet  on  the  sittings  with  Mr.  Home  at 
Ealing,  this  distinguished  physician  replied  to  it  with  an  essay  of 
thirty-six  pages,  wherein  he  demonstrated  according  to  the  most 
approved  logical  methods  the  inherent  impossibility  of  the  asserted 
facts.  His  witticisms  on  Mr.  Home  and  the  believers  in  Mr.  Home 
would  have  done  honour  to  the  Saturday  Review.  Dr.  Robertson 
declared  himself  especially  anxious  that  Mr.  Rymer  should  "  catch 
a  sense  of  the  pitying  scorn  with  which  those  nurtured  on  the  strong 
meat  of  the  inductive  philosophy  within  the  very  courts  and  halls  that 
Newton  trod,  view  these  sickly  Spiritualist  dreamers,  thus  drunk  with 
the  new  wine  of  folly  and  credulity." 

These  words  were  written  in  1857.  In  i860,  Dr.  Robertson  was 
a  convert.  Of  the  spiritual  origin  of  the  phenomena  he  remained 
unconvinced  ;  but  the  very  manifestations  that  he  had  declared  to  be 
imix>ssible,  investigation  compelled  him  to  accept  as  facts  ;  and  he 
rery  honestly  published  his  recantations  of  former  denials  in  the 
Spiritual  Magazine  for  April  and  August,  i860.  He  had  the  courage 
to  wish  to  append  his  name  to  his  testimony ;  but  the  editor  strongly 
dissuaded  him  from  doing  so,  on  the  ground  that  injury,  and  possibly 
ruin,  to  his  professional  reputation  would  be  the  result.  Some  years 
later,  however,  on  the  occasion  of  the  inquiry  by  the  Dialectical 
Society  into  Spiritualism,  Dr.  Robertson  came'  publicly  forward  to 
re-state  his  experiences. 

ENGLAND  89 

His  testimony  is  that  the  most  remarkable  phenomena  he  witnessed 
were  at  a  seance  with  Mr.  Home,  eight  persons  in  all  being  present. 

"  Ihe  raps  came  on  the  table — on  the  floor — about  the  room — the  whole 
floor  vibrated  with  a  tremor,"  wrote  Dr.  Lockhart  Robertson  in  the  Spiritual 
Magazine.  "  The  table  was  then  lifted  from  the  ground  about  two  feet,  ail 
our  hands  being  placed  on  the  surface,  we  standing  the  while  ;  and  one  of  the 
circle  knelt  on  the  ground,  and  saw  it  so  suspended.  .  .  .  The  accordion  played 
the  most  beautiful  music  in  the  hand  of  Mr.  Home,  and  also  while  suspended 
alone,  as  verified  by  one  of  the  circle,  under  the  table.  I  never  heard  anything 
more  wondrous  or  unearthly  than   that  music. 

"  During  all  these  phenomena  "  (the  italics  are  Dr.  Robertson's)  "  six 
wax  lights  were  burning  in  the  room. 

"  It  was  then  intimated  by  raps  that  the  lights  were  to  be  put  out,  and 
the  table  moved  into  the  window.  There  was  the  light  of  a  summer  night 
mixed  with  the  street  gas,  and  enough  to  enable  us  distinctly  to  distinguish 
objects  in  the  room,  each  other's  faces,  &c.  .  .  . 

"  In  a  few  minutes  X.  and  I  both  distinctly  twice  saw,  as  did  every  one  else 
present,  a  hand  like  that  of  a  dark  mulatto  woman's  rise  up  to  the  level  of  the 
table,  in  the  open,  unoccupied  space  between  the  table  and  the  window,  and 
take  up  a  pencil  laid  on  a  piece  of  paper,  and  draw  on  it  what  afterwards  we 
found  to  t)e  a  leaf  and  an  eagle's  head.  I  am  most  positive,  and  so  is  X.,  that 
this  hand  belonged  to  no  one  in  the  room,  that  it  could  not  by  any  possibility  so 
belong.     Whether  owned  by  angel,   spirit,  or  demon  I  know   not." 

The  silliest  of  many  things  said  concerning  Mr.  Home  was  the 
frequently-repeated  assertion  that  he  avoided  meeting  sceptics,  that 
wonders  only  happened  in  the  presence  of  Spiritualists,  and  so  on. 
Except  Dr.  Ashburner,  not  one  of  the  persons  whose  experiences  are 
described  or  referred  to  in  the  present  chapter: — Dr.  Elliottson,  Dr. 
Robert  Chambers,  Mr.  Robert  Bell,  Dr.  Gully,  Miss  C.  Sinclair,  Mrs. 
Senior,  Miss  Hope-Vere,  Dr.  Lockhart  Robertson,  etc.,  was  a 
Spiritualist  at  the  time  of  his  or  her  first  seance  with  Mr.  Home. 
Certainly  wonders  happened  in  their  presence  after  they  became 
believers ;  but  what  had  induced  their  belief  ?  The  wonders  they  wit- 
nessed and  tested  in  Home's  presence  while  the>'  w^ere  still  sceptics. 

I  will  quote  a  portion  of  the  testimony  of  one  more  sceptic  concern- 
ing his  first  seance  with  Mr.  Home.  This  was  a  Mr.  Pears,  a  friend 
of  Mr.  Cox  of  Jermyn  Street,  who  came  to  a  seance  in  the  early  part 
of  i860,  and  whose  letter  to  a  friend  on  the  subject  was  published, 
with  its  writer's  permission,  in  the  first  volume  of  the  Incidents 
(p.  134):— 

"  I  said,  half  laughing,  which  you  might  expect  from  my  scepticism,"  wrote 
Mr.  Pears,  "  that  I  should  not  wonder  if  there  were  some  one  for  me  also. 
Immediately  there  were  raps  under  my  hand,  strong  enough  to  shake  the  table. 

"  Perhaps  I  looked  dubiously  at  a  phenomenon  so  unexpected ;  for  Mr. 
Home  said,  '  I  should  like  Mr.  Pears  to  be  convinced  that  we  do  not  make 
these  sounds;  perhaps  he  would  get  under  the  table  and  observe.'  I  did  so; 
and  while  I  saw  that  they  were  not  produced  by  any  visible  agency  beneath, 
they  were  sounding  as  vigorously  as  ever ;  Mrs.  P.  being  witness  to  their 
not  being  produced  by  the  hands,  or  any  visible  means  aboveboard.  .  .  . 

"  There  was  one  part  of  the  siance  which  forcibly  struck  me,  and 
which  I  must  relate."  Having  explained  that  the  raps  under  his  hand 
"  purported  to  come  "   from  his  grandfather's  spirit,   Mr.    Pears  continues  : — 

"  Mr.  Home  soon  after  passed  into  a  singular  state — half-unconscious  as 
it  were — and  said  :  '  Here's  a  tall,  old,  upright,  Quaker-like  man,  yet  not 
a  Quaker ;  '  then  he  seemed  to  take  on   the  manner  and  gesture,   as  closely 

G 

90  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

as  a  young  man  can,  of  those  of  an  old  one — held  out  his  hand  to  me,  and 
grasped  mine  in  a  way  that  further  reminded  me  of  my  grandfather,  and 
addressed  me  in  words  somewhat  characteristic  of  him  ;  and  went  on  to  speak 
of  one  whom  he  had  held  very  dear,  but  from  whom  he  had  long  been 
separated,  to  his  great  grief ;  but  that  they  had  happily  met  in  the  other  world, 
and  were  reconciled.  All  upon  this  point  was  said  in  a  broken  way,  but  with 
gestures  and  allusions  which  were  intelligible  solely  to  myself  ;  as  the  person 
and  events  so  alluded  to  touched  closely  upon  my  grandfather's  history  in 
conjunction  with  my  own.  My  astonishment  was  increased  when  from  Mr. 
Home's  lips  fell  the  name  of  her  to  whom  the  allusion  had  been  made  !  my 
grandfather's  daughter.  Both  died  when  Mr.  Home  must  have  been  a  boy 
in  America.  Long  as  I  have  known  you,  friend  Dixon,  I  think  I  never  told 
you  that  my  grandfather  was  of  a  Quaker  family,  which  was  the  case. 

"  I  was  by  this  incident  astonished  beyond  expression  ;  and  acknowledged 
to  Mr.  Cox  that  the  history  which  had  been  sketched,  and  the  reflections  upon 
it,  were  just  what  I  should  have  expected  might  have  been  made  by  my 
grandfather.  I  have  not  yet  found  a  place  in  my  system  for  these  phenomena, 
but  that  they  are  genuine  phenomena  is  settled  in  my  mind." 

That  a  single-  observer,  however  acute  and  sceptical,  might  be 
deceived  is  very  possible.  That  a  dozen  such  observers,  whose 
investigations  were  independently  conducted,  should  all  be  deceived 
is  highly  improbable.  That  hundreds — nay,  thousands  of  sane  and 
able  investigators,  of  every  country  and  condition  of  life,  who  had 
never  seen  each  other,  and  whose  habits  of  thought  were  as  diverse  as 
nationalities,  should  have,  one  and  all,  been  deluded  by  a  single  man 
into  the  conviction  that  they  witnessed  phenomena  which  never  took 
place  is  impossible.  Were  it  possible,  there  would  be  an  end  of  the 
value  of  human  testimony ;  and  the  only  reasonable  being  in  the  world 
would  be  the  sceptic  who  endorsed  unconditionally  the  Psalmist's 
hasty  declaration,  "All  men  are  liars,"  and  was  even  prepared  to 
include  himself,  if  his  senses  testified  to  facts  that  his  prejudices 
rejected. 

To  the  rash  denials  of  those  who  have  not  seen,  those  who  have 
seen  cam  only  respond  in  the  words  which  Mr.  Weld,  in  his  Last 
Winter  in  Rome,  tells  us  were  uttered  by  Thackeray  shortly  after  the 
publication  of  Bell's  article,  "Stranger  than  Fiction."  On  being 
reproached,  at  a  dinner  in  London,  for  having  permitted  such  an 
article  to  appear  in  the  Cornkill  Magazine,  Thackeray,  says  Mr. 
Weld,  tranquilly  listened  to  all  that  his  critics  had  to  say ;  and  then 
replied  :  "  It  is  all  very  well  for  you,  who  have  probably  never  seen 
any  spiritual  manifestations,  to  talk  as  you  do;  but  had  you  seen 
what  I  have  witnesed,   you  would  hold  a  different  opinion." 

Professor  Challis,  the  Plumierian  Professor  of  Astronomy  at  Cam- 
bridge, had  never  been  present  at  a  seance;  but  a  careful  and  unpre- 
judiced examination  of  the  evidence  given  by  those  who  had, 
compelled  him  to  write  in  1862:  "  In  short,  the  testimony  has  been 
so  abundant  and  consentaneous,  that  either  the  facts  must  be  admitted 
to  be  such  as  are  reported,  or  the  possibility  of  certifying  facts  by 
human  testimony  must  be  given  up." 

CHAPTER    VI 

ENGLAND 

Experiences-  of  Count  Tolstoy.  Mrs.  Milner  Gibson.  Miraculous 
Escape  of  D.  D.  Home.  Evidence  of  Dr.  Hoefer.  Evidence 
of  the  Ex-Chairman,  London  Stock  Exchange.  Lord  Lytton  as 
Nicodemus.     Home's  Sunny  Nature.     Death  of  Mrs.  Home. 

Friends  in  Russia  had  been  urging  Mr.  Home  to  re-visit  them;  but 
finding  that  there  was  no  immediate  prospect  of  his  making  the 
journey,  two  of  their  number.  Count  Alexis  Tolstoy  and  Count 
Steinbock-Fermor,  determined  to  go  to  him  instead;  and  he  had 
accordingly  the  pleasure  of  welcoming  them  to  London  about  the 
middle  of  June,  i860.  These  accomplished  gentlemen  spoke  English 
remarkably  well ;  and  were  soon  at  home  in  English  society.  In  the 
case  of  Tolstoy,  his  letters  to  Home  are  as  often  written  in  English 
as  in  French. 

Mr.  Home's  weekly  seance  at  Mrs.  Milner  Gibson's  was  often 
supplemented  by  others;  and  in  June,  i860,  he  was  holding  two, 
three,  and  sometimes  four  seances  in  the  week  at  Hyde  Park  Place. 
The  requests  for  invitations  were  more  than  numerous;  and  the 
eagerness  of  well-known  personages  in  London  society  to  be  present 
was  only  equalled  by  the  timidity  with  which  they  insisted  on  con- 
cealing their  experiences  from  the  world.  Tolstoy's  letters  to  his 
wife  contain  the  description  of  two  seances,  both  at  Mrs.  Milner 
Gibson's.  The  first  was  given  to  himself  and  Fermor,  and  to  a  third 
Russian,  an  entire  sceptic,  who  had  accompanied  them  to  England  ; 
at  the  other  the  investigators  present  comprised  Lord  Dufferin  and 
Lord  Clarence  Paget,  neither  of  whom  had  previously  seen  anything 
of  the  phenomena.  The  first  seance  was  the  more  remarkable  of  the 
two ;  and  Botkine,  the  materialist  companion  of  Fermor  and  Tolstoy, 
who  had  come  to  it  incredulous,  went  away  convinced.  I  translate 
the  interesting  record  of  the  evening  preserved  in-  Count  Tolstoy's 
first  letter  from  London  to  his  wife. 

"/«»«  »7''».  i860. 

"  It  is  two  o'clock  in  the  morning  ;  I  have  just  left  Home  ;  and  in  spite 
of  the  pain  it  gives  mc  to  be  away  from  you  I  don't  regret  my  journey  to 
London,  for  this  sdatice  has  been  overwhelming  (cette  seance  a  ^te 
renversatite).  Botkine — brother  of  the  doctor — is  converted ;  and  wishes  to 
shut  himself  up  to-morrow  and  stay  the  whole  day  indoors,  to  meditate  over 
what  he  has  seen.  Nicholas — the  donkey  ! — being  rather  unwell,  did  not 
choose  to  be  present  at  the  siance.  There  were  myself,  Botkine,  Mrs.  Home, 
Mrs.  Milner  Gibson  (wife  of  the  President  of  the  Board  of  Trade),  Count 
Alexander  Steinbock-Fermor,  and  a  dame  de  compagnie.  First  there  occurred 
all  the  manifestations  you  have  witnessed  ;  then,  on  the  light  being  reduced, 
every  article  of  furniture  in  the  room  took  to  moving  of  its  own  accord.  A 
table  placed  itself  on  another  table  ;  a  sofa  moved  into  the  middle  of  the  room  ; 
a  bell  rose  in  the  air  and  went  all  round  the  apartment,  ringing  as  it  floated. 

"  Finally  the  remaining  lights  were  put  out,  and  we  sat  almost  in  darkness ; 
there  was  only  the  faint  light  that  came  through  the  window  from  a  gas-lamp 

9» 

92  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

outside.  The  piano  played  with  no  one  near  it ;  a  bracelet  unclasped  itself  from 
the  arm  of  Mrs.  Milner  Gibson,  and  fell  on  the  table,  where  it  lay  surrounded 
by  a  luminous  appearance.  Home  was  raised  from  the  ground  ;  and  I  clasped 
his  feet  while  he  floated  in  the  air  above  our  heads.  Hands  touched  my  knees 
and  laid  themselves  in  my  hands  ;  and  when  I  sought  to  retain  one  it  dissolved 
in  my  grasp.  There  were  paper  and  pencils  on  the  table.  A  sheet  of  paper 
came  thrusting  itself  into  my  hand,  and  through  the  alphabet  I  was  told  to 
give  it  to  Home.  There  was  written  upon  it,  '  Love  her  always.  N.  Kroll.' 
The  writing  exactly  resembled  that  of  the  mother  of  Mrs.  Home ;  we  have 
compared  it  with  that  of  her  letters.  A  very  faint  voice  was  heard 
accompanying  the  piano  while  it  played.  Raps  as  loud  as  if  made  with  a 
hammer  were  struck  on  the  table  under  the  hands  of  Botkine. 

"  What  would  have,  above  all,  convinced  me,  were  I  a  sceptic,  are  the 
hands  I  have  felt,  which  were  placed  in  mine  and  melted  when  I  tried  to  retain 
them.  A  cold  wind  passed  round  the  circle  very  distinctly,  and  perfumes  were 
wafted  to  us.  After  the  siance  Home's  hands  were  burning  hot,  and  the 
tears  were  in  his  eyes.  His  wife  and  he  saw  constantly  a  star  on  one  of  the 
chairs,  but  I  did  not  see  it.  The  curtains  of  the  windows  were  drawn  back, 
and  hands  were  visible  passing  before  the  window  faintly  lit  by  the  gas  outside. 
Mrs.  Milner  Gibson  made  me  promise  to  come  to-morrow  evening  to  a  fresb 
stance,  but  unfortunately  Botkine  this  time  was  not  invited,  as  there  will  be 
so  many   without  him." 

Two  days  later  another  letter  was  written  to  the  Countess  Tolstoy 
by  her  husband  to  describe  the  second  seance  : — 

"  London,  igth  June,  i860. 

'*  I  had  a  headache  of  the  worst  sort  yesterday ;  however,  I  put  on  my  dress- 
coat  and  white  tie,  and  went  to  the  seance  at  Mrs.  Milner  Gibson's.  I  would 
have  gone  a  thousand  leagues  to  see  these  things.  There  were  present  Lord 
and  Lady  Clarence  Paget,  Lord  Dufferin,  Lord  de  Tablet,  Dr.  Ashburner,  a 
celebrated  physician  ;  Miss  Alice,  daughter  of  Mrs.  Milner  Gibson  ;  her  brother, 
a  very  nice  boy  of  the  age  of  George,  and  Mrs.  Home.  The  two  children  and 
Mrs.  Home  were  in  the  room,  but  not  at  the  table,  where  there  was  not  room 
enough  for  every  one.  The  sdance  was  by  no  means  so  good  as  the  first,  but 
there  was  a  new  phenomenon.  I  saw  the  accordion  play  without  being  held ; 
and  after  each  note  there  was  an  echo — very  distant,  but  very  distinct  and 
agreeable — which  repeated  it.  Lord  Clarence,  feeling  his  knee  clasped,  wished 
me  to  touch  the  hand  that  was  holding  it ;  and  when  I  placed  my  hand  on 
his  knee  without  finding  anything,  he  still  felt,  besides  my  hand,  another  that 
was  touching  him.  This  time  Home  did  not  float  in  the  air — in  my  presence. 
The  three  lords  were  present  at  a  sdance  for  the  first  time  ;  and  did  not  fail, 
at  the  invitation  of  Home,  to  make  a  search  under  the  table,  while  the  rest 
of  us  were  observing  what  went  on  above." 

Count  Tolstoy's  words  "  in  my  presence,"  are  explained  by  a  note 
added  by  Mr.  Home  : — 

The  apartment  was  lighted  by  two  lamps  and  several  wax  candles  ;  and 
when  the  stance  was  over,  the  company  passed  into  another  room,  except  Lord 
and  Lady  Clarence  Paget  and  myself,  who  stayed  behind  conversing.  Suddenly, 
I  felt  myself  raised  from  the  ground  ;  and  said  so  to  Lord  Clarence,  who  knelt 
down  and  passed  his  hands  between  my  feet  and  the  carpet,  to  satisfy  himself 
of  the  fact." 

Tolstoy  and  Home  did  not  meet  again  till  the  year  1865,  when,  to 
the  great  joy  of  the  Count,  his  friend  at  last  consented  to  pay  a  second 
visit  to  Russia.  The  former  had  never  written  without  a  pressing 
invitation  ;  and  on  arriving  from  America  in  the  spring  of  1865,  Home 
found  a  charming  kind  of  round-robin  from  the  members  of  the 
Tolstoy  family, awaiting  him  at  Cox's  Hotel,  and  intended  to  second 

ENGLAND  93 

the  following  letter  from  the  Count.     If  there  are  flaws  in  the  English 
of  the  writer,  there  were  none  in  his  good  heart. 

"  16/4  December,  1864. 
"  My  dear  Friend  Daniel, — I  am  afraid  you  have  not  received  my  letter 
from  Poustineka,  which  I  sent  to  you  three  months  ago.  I,  and  all  the 
persons  living  with  me,  required  your  presence,  and  expected  that  you  would 
perhaps  agree  with  our  desire,  and  come  here  to  pass  the  winter  with  us.  .  .  . 
Now  I  write  you  again,  and  tell  you  once  more  how  happy  I,  my  wife,  and 
we  all  would  be  if  you  come  to  visit  us  and  remain  with  us  till  summer.  Come, 
my  dear  friend,  it  will  be  a  good  distraction  for  your  sorrows." 

To  enforce  the  invitation,  every  member  of  the  household  has 
penned  a  few  words.  "  I  hope  we  shall  see  you,  dear  Mr.  Daniel," 
writes  the  Countess.  "  Please  come — we  shall  be  so  glad  to  see  you 
again,"  another  of  the  family  adds.  "  Come — come — come,"  write 
friends  four,  five,  and  six;  and  "  Venez,  mon  cher  Home,"  is  the 
concluding  appeal  addressed  to  him  by  a  correspondent  who  has  no 
English.  It  was  impossible  not  to  yield ;  and  Home  started  for 
Russia  forthwith. 

Count  Steinbock-Fermor  must  either  have  remained  in  London  in 
i860  after  Tolstoy's  departure,  or  have  returned  the  following  year; 
for  I  find  him  present  at  a  seance  in  1861,  at  7,  Cornwall  Terrace, 
Regent's  Park,  the  residence  of  a  Mrs.  Parkes,  with  whom  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Home  were  then  staying.  Besides  Count  Steinbock-Fermor, 
the  circle  included  Mr.  and  Mrs.  William  Howitt  (the  well-known 
authors),  and  Mr.  and  Mrs.  W.  M.  Wilkinson.  The  phenomena  of 
this  seance  were  described  in  the  Incidents  (vol.  i.,  pp.  183  et  seq.) 
both  by  Mr.  Howitt  and  Mr.  Wilkinson. 

"  Mr.  Home,"  wrote  the  letter,  "  now  held  the  accordion  in  his  right  hand 
beside  his  chair,  and  it  at  once  began  to  play.  He  held  it  by  the  bottom, 
the  keys  being  on  the  top,  and  therefore  out  of  his  reach.  It  was  impossible 
that  he  could  touch  them.  I  carefully  examined  the  instrument,  opening  the  slide 
beneath  the  keys,  and  I  found  it  to  be  a  common  instrument  with  only  the 
usual  mechanism  of  the  keys.  There  was  nothing  inside  it.  I  looked  steadily  at 
it,  and  at  the  hand  and  fingers  with  which  he  held  it.  There  it  was,  being 
pulled  yp  and  down,  and  discoursing  sweet  sounds ;  whilst  his  hand  was 
stationary  and  tjis  fingers  motionless.  I  could  see  above  and  beneath  the 
instrument,  but  there  was  no  visible  cause  for  its  motion,  nor  for  the  opening 
and  shutting  of  the  keys  which  caused  the  music. 

"  When  it  ceased,  my  wife  asked  if  it  could  not  be  played  in  her  hand, 
and  immediately  the  instrument  emitted  three  sounds,  which  we  took  to 
mean  that  it  would  have  much  pleasure  in  trying.  It  was  accordingly  given 
to  her,  and  whilst  in  her  right  hand  it  began  to  play.  She  felt  it  distinctly 
lifted  up  and  drawn  forcibly  down  ;  and  she  did  not  and  could  not  touch  the 
keys,  which  however,  must  necessarily  have  been  touched  and  opened  to  make 
the  sounds.  ...  I  have  once  had  an  accordion  play  in  my  own  hand,  when 
I  know  that  I  did  not  do  it.  I  also  know  that  Lord  Lyndhurst  and  many  other 
public  men  whom  I  could  name  have  had  a  similar  experience." 

"There  were,  besides  Mrs.  Howitt  and  myself,"  writes  Mr. 
William  Howitt  of  the  same  seance,  "a.  Russian,  Count  Steinbock, 
and  several  others.  We  had  beautiful  music  played  on  the  accordion, 
when  held  in  one  band  by  Mr  Home,  who  cannot  play  a  note ;  and 
the    same    when    held    by    a    lady  "    (Mrs.    W.    M.     Wilkinson). 

Flowers  were  taken  from  a  bouquet  on  a  chiffonier  at  a  distance, 
and  handed  to  each  of  us.  .  .  .  I  saw  a  spirit  hand  as  distinctly 
as  I  ever  saw  my  own.     I  touched  one  several  times." 

94  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

The  Howitts  were  at  this  time  living  near  Hampstead ;  and  their 
house  was  the  resort  of  half  the  authors  and  artists  of  London. 
Several  of  Mr.  Home's  seances  were  held  there  in  1861  and  subse- 
quent years ;  and  he  met  a  number  of  new  investigators  on  these 
occasions. 

The  letters  of  Count  Steinbock-Fermor  to  his  friend  are  numerous 
and  interesting.  One  of  them,  belonging  to  the  year  1861,  discusses 
the  philosophy  of  Spiritualism  as  the  writer  viewed  it,  and  is  anno- 
tated with  a  few  remarks  by  Mr.  Home — some  endorsing,  others 
rejecting  the  propositions  it  contains.  I  give  part  of  this  long  letter, 
bracketing  Home's  annotations  with  the  statements  they  refer  to  : — 

"  Spirits,"  writes  Steinbock-Fermor,  "never  wholly  cease  to  be 
linked  with  matter."  (Certainly  not.)  "  In  continually  progressing, 
they  put  more  distance — or,  more  correctly,  difference — between 
them  and  their  first  state  of  being.  (Through  refinement.)  "They 
attain  a  nearer  resemblance  to  the  One  Spirit  who  is  God ;  but  it  is 
comparable  to  geometrical  proportion,  which  removes  farther  and 
farther  from  i  without  approaching  infinitude."  (Yes.)  "Spirits 
can  advance  until  they  at  last  attain  to  their  perfection — the  perfec- 
tion of  the  created."  (We  can  never  arrive  at  absolute  perfection, 
and  there  is  no  arbitrary  limit  set.) 

In  the  months  of  May  and  June,  i860,  hardly  a  day  passed  without 
a  seance;  and  the  constant  drain  on  his  vital  force  had  most  injurious 
effects  on  Home's  health.  The  experience  of  years  had  taught  him 
that,  in  the  words  of  Mr.  Crookes,  "  the  evolution  of  psychic  force 
is  accompanied  by  a  corresponding  drain  on  vital  force;"  and  he  well 
knew  that  after  a  seance  he  required  a  period  of  repose  during  which 
his  exceptional  organisation  might  recruit  its  exhausted  energies,  and 
that  the  interval  of  a  day  only  was  not  long  enough.  While  holding 
daily  seances,  he  saw  his  health  grow  rapidly  worse;  but  all  that 
others  regarded  was  their  eager  desire  to  see  as  much  as  possible  of 
the  manifestations.  Had  he  remained  a  few  months  longer  in 
London,  he  would  probably  have  prostrated  himself  utterly ;  for  he 
could  not  say  "  No  "  to  a  friend  who  pressed  him  to  sit,  and  believers, 
inquirers  and  sceptics  by  the  hundred  were  besieging  him  for  seances. 
There  was  nothing  for  it  but  to  escape  from  his  surroundings  for  a 
time;  and  towards  the  end  of  July,  i860,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Home  went 
on  a  visit  to  friends  in  France. 

Mr.  Wason  was  invited  by  Mrs.  Milner  Gibson  to  a  seance,  at 
which,  among  numerous  manifestations,  an  accordion  played  in  his 
own  hand.  He  also  witnessed  on  this  occasion  the  phenomenon  of 
Home's  levitation,  the  room  being  faintly  lit  from  the  outside  in 
the  manner  already  described  by  Count  Tolstoy. 

"  Mr.  Home  crossed  the  table  over  the  heads  of  the  persons  sitting 
around  it,"  said  Mr.  Wason.  "  By  standing  and  stretching  upwards 
I  was  enabled  to  reach  his  hand,  about  seven  feet  distant  from  the 
floor ;  and  laying  hold  and  keeping  hold  of  his  hand,  I  moved  along 
with  him  five  or  six  paces  as  he  floated  above  me  in  the  air,  and  I  only 
let  go  bis  hand  when  I  stumbled  against  a  stool.  ...  I  saw  his  body 
eclipse  two  lines  of  light  of  issuing  from  between  the  top  of  a  door  and 

ENGLAND  95 

its  architrave — such  door  leading  into  an   adjoining  room  that  was 
brilliantly  lighted. 

"  I  make  no  comments  on  the  above,  and  advance  no  theory  or 
hypothesis  :  I  have  confined  myself  simply  to  facts,"  adds  Mr. 
Wason,  who  was  at  this  time  a  sceptic,  but,  as  the  result  of  continued 
investigation  with  Mr.  Home,  became  a  Spiritualist,  and  was  sub- 
sequently Home's  host  at  Liverpool. 

Mrs.  Milner  Gibson  had  narrated  to  numbers  of  her  friends  the 
wonderful  phenomena  of  the  seances  in  Hyde  Park  Place;  and  as 
Mrs.  Gibson,  in  society  phrase,  "  knew  every  one  worth  knowing," 
the  natural  consequence  of  the  curiosity  excited  was  that  her  letters 
to  Mr.  Home  are  filled  with  well-known  names,  the  owners  of  which 
were  pressing  her  for  invitations  to  a  seance.  She  gives  a  long  list 
on  one  occasion  of  those  who  had  been  invited  by  her  and  were 
waiting  their  turn ;  including  Lord  Dufferin,  Sir  Emerson  Tennant, 
Lady  Trelawney,  Mdlle.  Tietjens,  Mr.  Lawrence  Oliphant,  Sir 
Fitzroy  Kelly,  Mrs.  Grote,  Mr.  Stirling,  Mr.  Higgins,  and  Mr. 
Hay  ward.  "  Fancy  my  joy  on  Saturday  night  at  Lady  Palmer- 
ston's,"  writes  Mrs.  Gibson,  "  when  Higgins  (Jacob  Omnium)  and 
Hayward  boi/i  asked  me  to  be  permitted  to  come  to  a  seance.  I 
told  Robert  Chambers,  who  called  on  Sunday,  and  he  was  greatly 
astonished  and  pleased.  I  had  a  conversation  with  Lord  Dufferin, 
and  promised  to  let  him  know  as  soon  as  you  return." 

Mrs.  Milner  Gibson  went  often  to  Dieppe.  "  There  is  a  ludicrous 
story  here  about  you  and  le  Pere  Ravignan,"  she  tells  Mr.  Home 
during  one  of  her  visits ;  "  how  the  Father  persuaded  you  to  give  up 
Spiritualism,  and  the  Evil  One  seized  you  and  threw  you  down,  and 
forced  you   to  continue!        I   was  very   amused." 

In  November,  1862,  when  Mr.  Home  was  preparing  his  first  volume 
of  Incidents  for  publication,  he  discussed  with  a  friend  of  Mrs. 
Milner  Gibson's  the  propriety  of  asking  that  lady  to  write  a  narrative 
of  some  of  the  seances  at  Hyde  Park  Place,  and  authenticate  it  with 
her  name.  On  hearing  of  this,  Mrs.  Gibson,  who  was  abroad  at  the 
time,  wrote  to  him  to  say  that  her  testimony  was  at  his  service ;  all 
she  asked  was  that  a  declaration  of  her  religious  views  should  accom- 
pany the  publication  of  the  fact  that  she  was  a  Spiritualist.  I  copy 
her  letter  : — 

"  November    15th. 

"  Dear  Daniel, — I  have  just  received  a  letter  from  Witch,  wherein  she 
says  that  you  want  an  account  of  the  siance  in  which  you  placed  your  head 
on  the  fire  and  took  up  a  burning  coal  in  your  hand.  I  regret  to  say  that  I 
have  no  detailed  account  of  that  siance,  though  I  have  of  many  others.  I 
think  Robert  Bell  was  present ;  and  I  can,  of  course,  give  my  testimony. 
Witch  says  that  you  mentioned  something  about  my  name.  My  name  is  quite 
at  your  service — you  have  never  found  me  shirk  from  declaring  the  truth,  and 
all  who  know  me  know  that  I  am  a  Spiritualist.  There  is  only  one  point 
which  I  wish  to  be  clear  upon,  and  that  is  a  religious  one.  I  attack  no  one's 
creed  :  I  sit  with  all  creeds  :  I  go  side  by  side  with  many  who  hold  different 
opinions  from  mine  ;  but  I  am  very  firm  in  my  opinions,  and  very  anxious  that 
it  should  be  distinctly  understood  that  I  am  wholly  and  entirely  apart  from 
those  who  in  any  way  question  the  New  Testament.  I  see  with  fear  and 
horror  that  some  Spiritualists  are  making  a  weapon  of  Spiritualism  to  attack 

96  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

what  is  divine,  instead  of  upholding  it.  I  abominate  discussion,  and  never 
enter  into  it ;  I  therefore  rarely  mention  my  fears,  unless  I  see  danger  of 
being  supposed  to  belong  to  those  who  deny  the  Divinity  of  our  Saviour. 
Therefore,  my  dear  friend,  I  give  you  my  credo." 

In  spite  of  the  generous  readiness  of  Milner  Gibson  to  give  her 
name,  Mr.  Home,  with  equal  generosity,  finally  determined  to  omit  it 
frcwn  his  book.  Not  only  did  he  shrink  from  allowing  so  dear  a 
friend  to  expose  herself  to  the  ridicule  and  insult  that  she  was  willing 
to  brave,  but  the  delicacy  of  the  situation  was  increased  by  the  fact 
that  her  husband  did  not  share  her  beliefs,  and  was  nervously  anxious 
to  shun  all  appearance  of  identifying  himself  with  them.  I  have 
already  said  that  Mr.  Milner  Gibson  had  never  been  present  at  a 
seance  ;  and  it  may  be  added  that  he  took  every  opportunity  of  making 
that  fact  as  public  as  possible.  None  the  less,  many  people  annoyed 
him  by  insisting  on  associating  his  name  with  Spiritualism;  and  in 
1864,  when  Mr.  Roebuck  brought  the  question  of  Mr.  Home's  expul- 
sion from  Rome  before  Parliament,  an  appeal  that  he  addressed  to 
Mr.  Milner  Gibson,  under  the  misconception  of  his  being  a  Spiritualist 
fairly  drove  the  President  of  the  Board  of  Trade  out  of  the  House. ^ 

Mrs.  Gibson  was  no  less  provoked,  and  writes  to  Home : — 

"  I  suppose  in  this  stupid  country  they  so  idiotically  mix  up  husband  and 
wife  that  they  seem  never  to  dream  of  or  allow  a  woman  to  hold  independent 
ideas  ;  and  as  I  am  well  known  to  be  a  Spiritualist,  I  fancy  that  they  torment 
the  poor  man  out  of  his  mind  by  asking  him  about  the  manifestations — 
thinking  that  he  must  believe  or  that  I  should  never  have  dared  to  do  so.  How 
Roebuck  made  the  blunder  of  fancying  him  one  I  cannot  conceive ;  you  see,  it 
drove  him  out  of  the  House.  He  says  he  denies  loudly  to  all  that  he  knows 
anything  about  it ;  and  we  must  excuse  the  irritation  caused  by  their  stupidity. 

He  said  to   M that  he   had   nothing  to   say   against   you,   that  you   might 

be  an  angel — all  he  wanted  was  to  be  able  to  say  that  he  knew  nothing  of 
Spiritualism." 

When  Mr.  Home's  book  appeared,  it  did  not  contain  the  name  of 
Mrs.  Milner  Gibson,  though  one,  and  probably  more,  of  the 
anonymous  records  of  seances  included  in  it  was  written  by  her. 
Anonymous  evidence  is  no  evidence,  as  Home  well  knew ;  and  in 
commenting  on  his  book,  a  portion  of  the  press  even  delicately 
insinuated  that  such  narratives  as  were  unsigned  were  fictitious,  and 
hlad  been  written  by  Home  himself  to  fill  his  pages.  I  hope  I  have 
made  it  clear  by  the  evidence  of  Mrs.  Milner  Gibson's  letters  (which 
I  need  hardly  say  are  in  my  possession)  that  Mr.  Home  had  the  full 
permission  of  that  lady  to  publish  her  name,  and  was  only  deterred 
from  doing  so  by  motives  which  all  will  admit  to  have  been  as  un- 
selfish as  honourable. 

Leaving  London  towards  the  end  of  July,  i860,  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Home  went  to  stay  at  the  Chateau  de  Cergay,  near  Paris,  the  residence 
of  Mons.  Tiedemann,  who  has  been  already  mentioned  in  connection 
with  seances  in  Holland.     At  his  beautiful  French  country-seat,  on 

'  Note  by  Mr.  H.  T.  Humphreys  : — "  Mr.  Milner  Gibson  at  one  time  rose 
in  the  House,  and  in  his  speech  said,  '  I  have  been  a  medium,'  when  he  was 
interrupted  with  cheers  and  laughter.  He  meant  to  add,  '  of  communicating 
between   So-and-so  and  the  Government.'  " 

ENGLAND  97 

the  1 6th  of  September,  Home's  life  was  wonderfully  preserved  in 
the  manner  he  has  described  in  the  Incidents  : — 

"  Being  recommended  to  take  much  out-door  exercise  during  my  stay  at 
the  Chateau  de  Cercay,"  he  writes,  "  I  used  to  take  with  me  my  gun — more 
that  it  might  be  said  I  was  out  shooting  than  for  any  great  attraction  the 
sport  has  for  me.  The  Chateau  de  Cercay,  distant  half  an  hour  by  railway 
from  Paris,  stands  in  a  beautiful  old  park.  Some  of  the  trees  are  of  very 
great  height ;  one  of  the  largest,  a  northern  poplar,  stands  a  quarter  of  a 
mile  from  the  Chateau  at  an  angle  of  the  park,  where  it  is  separated  from  the 
outer  grounds  by  a  hedge.  To  this  spot,  when  there  was  much  shooting 
going  on  in  the  neighbourhood,  the  game  used  to  come  for  shelter;  and  I, 
who  am  but  an  indifferent  marksman,  could  get  easy  shots  by  planting 
myself   by   the  hedge. 

"I  had  been  walking  with  my  friend,  Mons.  T "   (Tiedemann),   "and  on 

his  leaving  me  I  bent  my  steps  to  this  favourite  corner,  wishing  to  take  home  a 
partridge.  As  I  neared  the  hedge,  1  stooped  and  advanced  cautiously. 
When  close  up  to  it,  I  was  raising  my  head  to  look  for  my  game  ;  when, 
on  my  right,  I  heard  some  one  call  out,  '  Here,  here !  *  My  only  feeling 
was  surprise  at  being  thus  suddenly  addressed  in  English.  The  desire  to 
have  a  good  look  out  for  my  game  overruled  my  curiosity  as  to  whom 
the  exclamation  had  come  from ;  and  I  was  continuing  to  raise  my  head 
to  the  level  of  the  hedge,  when  suddenly  I  was  seized  by  the  collar  of  my 
coat  and  vest,  and  lifted  off  the  ground.  At  the  same  instant  I  heard  a 
crashing  sound,  and  then  all  was  quiet.  I  felt  neither  fear  nor  wonder.  My 
first  thought  was  that  by  some  accident  my  gun  had  exploded,  and  that  I  was 
in  the  spirit-land  ;  but  looking  about  I  saw  that  I  was  still  in  the  material 
world,  and  there  was  the  gun  still  in  my  hands.  My  attention  was  then  drawn 
to  what  appeared  to  be  a  tree  immediately  before  me,  where  no  tree  had  been. 
On  examination,  this  proved  to  be  the  fallen  limb  of  the  high  tree  under  which 
I  was  standing.  I  then  saw  that  I  had  been  drawn  aside  from  this  falleri 
limb  a  distance  of  six  or  seven  feet.  I  ran,  in  my  excitement,  as  fast  as  I 
could  to  the  chateau.     .     . 

"  The  limb  which  had  thus  fallen  measured  sixteen  yards  and  a  half  in 
length,  and  where  it  had  broken  from  the  trunk  it  was  one  yard  in  circum- 
ference. It  fell  from  a  height  of  forty-five  feet.  The  part  of  the  limb  which 
etruck  the  very  spot  where  I  had  been  standing  measured  twenty-four  inches 
in  circumference,  and  penetrated  the  earth  at  least  a  foot.  The  next  day  a 
friend  made  a  sketch  of  the  tree  and  branch. 

"  We  speculated  as  to  how  it  could  have  happened.  The  tree  is  not  a  dead 
one,  nor  was  the  branch  at  all  decayed  ;  and  there  was  scarcely  wind  enough 
to  stir  the  leaves.  The  branch  was  so  clearly  reft  from  the  trunk  that  one 
might  think  at  first  it  had  been  sawn  off,  and  the  bark  was  not  in  the  least 
torn  about  it.  I  have  been  informed  since  that  such  accidents  are  not  uncom- 
mon with  trees  of  this  species  of  poplar,  and  that  there  are  trees  of  a  similar 
quality  in  Australia,  under  which  settlers  will  not  remain  for  fear  of  such 
sudden  breakages." 

A  day  or  two  later  the  well-known  Dr.  Hoefer,  editor  of  the 
BiograpJde  Generale — a  complete  sceptic  as  to  the  manifestations — 
paid  a  visit  to  Mons.  Tiedemann,  and  asked  for  a  seance.  The 
seance  was  held ;  and  the  sequel  to  it  is  best  related  in  the  published 
words  of  one  of  the  persons  present,   Mons.  Pierart  : — 

Dr.  Hoefer  declared  himself  satisfied  with  the  answers,  and  wished  to 
continue  the  conversation  ;  but  the  spirits  proposed  that  all  should  now  proceed 
to.  the  tree  where  Mr.  Home  had  escaped  being  crushed.  Dr.  Hoefer  still 
urged  his  questions  ;  but  there  being  no  response,  we  agreed  to  proceed  to  the 
tree.  The  arm  still  remained  as  it  had  fallen,  one  end  resting  against  the 
trunk,  the  other  imbedded  in  the  earth,  so  that  to  detach  it  from  its  place 
would  have  required  all  the  strength  of  a  man's  two  arms.  Moved  by  some 
secret  impulse,  Dr.  Hoefer  proposed  that  Mr.  Home  should  touch  with  a  finger 

98  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

the  end  of  one  of  the  small  branches.  He  did  so  ;  and  immediately  the  enor- 
mous arm,  13  metres  in  length  and  95  centimetres  in  circumference,  moved 
from  its  point  of  support  and  fell.  I  had  had  only  the  testimony  of  Mr.  Home 
himself  as  to  the  previous  occurrence  at  this  spot ;  but  this  strengthened  it,  and 
showed  the  operation  of  something  beyond  chance." 

Dr.  Hoefer  remained  some  days  at  the  Chateau  de  Cergay,  and 
took  part  in  other  seances  there.  "  Will  you  not  pay  another  visit 
soon  to  your  friends  in  France?  "  he  writes  to  Home  the  following 
year.  "  All  my  leisure  moments  are  devoted  to  meditating  on  the 
immensity  of  the  horizon  of  which  those  wonderful  evenings  at 
Cer9ay  gave  me  a  glimpse  {m^ont  laisse  entre-voir).  I  try  all  I  can 
to  lift  a  corner  of  the  veil  that  hides  such  great  mysteries  from  us; 
perhaps  I  shall  succeed  one  day,  especially  if  the  intelligent  powers 
that  surround  us  are  kind  enough  to  aid  me." 

The  winter  of  i860  was  quietly  passed  in  London.  Mrs.  Home's 
health  was  very  delicate ;  and  she  and  her  husband  did  not  go  so 
much  into  society  as  during  their  previous  visit. 

I  find  among  the  letters  of  this  period  one  giving  news  to  Home 
in  London  of  his  friends  at  Florence,  and  written  to  him  by  a 
celebrity  of  the  day,  whose  acquaintance  he  had  made  a  few  years 
previously,  the  musician  Blumenthal.  Blumenthal,  who  subsequently 
came  to  stay  with  Home  in  Sloane  Street,  was  an  ardent  Spiritualist 
twenty-five  years  ago — but  on  that  point  I  may  leave  his  letter  to 
speak  for  itself.  Like  Mons.  Tiedemann — with  whom,  by  the  way, 
he  was  acquainted — Blumenthal  writes  in  English,  and  writes  it  well. 

"  Florence,   c,th  December,  i860. 

"  My  dear  Dan, — We  are  both  very  anxious  to  have  some  news  of  you  and 
dear  Sacha  "  (Mrs.  Home).  "  I  had  written  you  some  time  ago  a  little  letter 
through  Mr.  Tiedemann  ;  but  as  I  have  not  heard  from  you,  I  suppose  it  has 
never  reached  you.  I  send  this  one  to  Cox's  Hotel,  as  you  told  me  once  that 
they  always  knew  your  address.  In  a  letter  from  England  which  I  received  a 
few  days  ago,  there  was  even  a  rumour  as  if  you  were  there  yourself. 
If  you  are  not  there  now,  I  hope,  at  all  events,  you  will  come  there  in  spring, 
when  we  return.  We  want  to  know  all  you  have  done  since  we  saw  you,  as 
well  as  some  particulars  as  to  the  manifestations  at  Tiedemann 's  in  presence 
of  Mr.  Hoeffer.     Was  Mr.  Hoefler  convinced,  and  what  did  he  say? 

"  As  for  us,  we  have  settled  for  the  winter  in  Florence.  You  must  not  think 
that  we  forget  for  a  moment  Spiritualism  ;  and  as  you  are  in  our  eyes  its 
personification,  we  think  and  talk  a  great  deal  about  you.  There  is  much 
occasion  for  it  here  ;  as  you  have  so  long  lived  here  and  we  see  often  people 
who  have  known  you  at  the  Crossmans',  the  Trollopes',  &c.  Your  dear 
portrait  is  always  on  our  drawing-room  table,  and  I  wish  we  had  Sacha's  as 
well.  I  wish  you  were  all  here — wouldn't  we  enjoy  it?  However,  one  must 
not  be  egotistical ;  and  I  suppose  you  can  do  more  good  for  the  promotion  of 
spiritual  ideas  where  you  are  than  you  could  here.  The  other  day  we  tried  to 
sit  with  Miss  Grossman  and  Mrs.  Baker  round  a  table,  but  with  no  result. 
I  wish  I  could  be  a  medium  of  some  sort  or  other  some  day. 

"  If  you  are  in  London,  I  suppose  you  have  resumed  your  Monday  sittings 
at  Mrs.  Milner  Gibson's — tell  me  when  something  particular  happens.  .  .  . 
If  you  were  here,  we  could  see  each  other  much  oftener  than  in  London,  where 
life  is  too  busy  for  friends.  Good-bye,  dear  Dan,  and  don't  forget  your 
affectionate  "J.   Blumenthal." 

Another  acquaintance  of  this  period  was  Herzen,  the  banished 
Russian  political  writer  whose  wild  theories  had  inflamed  so  many 
minds.     Home  met  him  in  London  early  in  1861,  an  old  man,  but 

ENGLAND  99 

still  as  enthusiastic  in  labouring  to  disseminate  his  insane  ideas  as  he 
had  been  in  youth.  Herzen  seems  to  have  established  a  printing- 
press  in  London  for  their  propagation  ;  for  he  writes  to  Home  in 
April,  1861  :  "  We  make  a  fete  and  illuminate  the  printing-office  on 
the  loth  to  celebrate  the  Emancipation"  (of  the  serfs);  "come  in 
the  evening  and  take  a  look  at  us." 

Still  another  Russian  acquaintance  made  in  London  (I  forget  in 
what  year)  was  Tourgenieff — a  nature  that  attracted  Home ;  for  in 
the  famous  writer  there  was  much  of  the  naive,  child-like  joyousness, 
beneath  which  lay  sadness,  that  characterised  his  own  temperament. 
Tourgenieff  would  seem  to  have  also  resembled  him  in  taking  delight 
in  the  society  of  children,  and  was  in  the  habit  of  spending  a  good 
deal  of  his  time  in  playing  with  Home's  baby  son,  of  whom  the  great 
novelist  made  a  great  pet,  as  did  also  another  literary  giant  of  Home's 
acquaintance — Thackeray. 

In  January,  1861,  Mr.  James  Hutchinson,  for  many  years  Chair- 
man of  the  London  Stock  Exchange,  was  present  at  a  seance  with  Mr. 
Home,  and  wrote  and  published  an  account  of  it.  Having  heard 
from  friends  of  what  they  had  witnessed,  says  Mr.  Hutchinson,  and 
being  unable  to  believe  what  he  heard,  he  determined  to  see  for 
himself. 

"  I  feel  it  a  duty,"  he  wrote,  January  26,  1861,  "  to  openly  bear  my 
testimony  to  the  facts,  leaving  others  to  theorise  on  the  causes  and  tendency  of 
these  remarkable  phenomena. 

"  Recently  introduced  by  a  friend  to  Mr.  D.  D.  Home,  a  siance  was 
arranged  for  the  23rd  instant ;  and,  together  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Coleman,  Mr. 
G.  S.  Clarke,  Mr.  T.  Clarke,  Mr.  Gilbert  Davidson,  and  another  lady  and 
gentleman  unknown  to  me,  we  formed  a  party  of  nine.  Shortly  after  sitting 
dow^n,  we  all  felt  a  tremulous  motion  in  our  chairs  and  in  the  table,  which 
was  a  very  heavy  circular  drawing-room  table.     .     . 

"  The  rapping  sounds  on  the  table  and  floor  were  constant ;  the  heavy  table 
was  raised  up  repeatedly  ;  and  these  manifestations  were  continued  whilst  my 
friend,  Mr.  Clarke,  and  another  were  seated,  at  the  request  of  Mr.  Home, 
under  the  table. 

"  Two  hand-bells,  one  weighing  at  least  a  pound  and  a  half,  were  passed 
from  one  to  another  of  the  party  by  unseen  agencies.  All  of  us  in  turn  felt 
the  touch  and  pressure  of  a  soft  and  fleshy  life-like  hand.  I  saw  the  full- 
formed  hand  as  it  rested  on  my  knee.  The  accordion,  whilst  held  by  Mr. 
Home  in  one  hand,  discoursed  most  eloquent  music ;  and  then,  to  our  great 
astonishment,  it  was  taken  from  him,  and  whilst  both  his  hands,  and  those 
of  all  the  party,  were  visibly  imposed  on  the  surface  of  the  table,  the 
accordion,  suspended  from  the  centre  of  the  table,  gave  out  an  exquisite  air, 
no  human  hand  touching  it ! 

"  These,  and  many  other  incidents  of  a  seriously  impressive  but  private 
character,  of  which  I  do  not  hesitate  to  speak  among  my  friends,  occupied 
about  four  hours  of  what  I  must  admit  to  be  one  of  the  most  interesting 
evenings  I  have  ever  spent.  .  .  .  Contrary  to  the  assertions  so  constantly 
made  that  the  manifestations  are  always  in  the  dark,  the  -whole  of  the  pheno- 
mena of  which  I  have  spoken  were  manifested  in  a  room  lighted  with  gas.  and 
a  bright  fire  burning.  "  Jas.  Hutchinson." 

Mr.  Hutchinson,  it  will  be  seen  from  a  passage  in  his  letter,  was 
one  of  the  many  who  kept  to  themselves  the  tokens  of  spirit  identity 
that  were  communicated  to  them.  The  Mr.  B.  Coleman  who  was 
present  with  him  at  the  above  seance,  gave  evidence  in  1869  before 
a  committee  of  the  Dialectical   Society  concerning  similar    tokens 

loo  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

received  by»him  at  his  own  first  seance  with  Mr.  Home  in  the  year 

1855- 

"  At  the  first  siance  which  I  attended,"  stated  Mr.  Coleman,  "  there  were 
fourteen  persons  in  the  room,  seated  round  a  long  dinner-table.  Mr.  Home 
sat  at  one  end,  and  I  at  the  other.  Through  the  rapping  sounds  several 
messages  were  given  to  different  individuals  of  the  party.  One  purported  to 
be  from  the  spirit  of  an  aunt  of  mine,  who  gave  me  her  name  as  Elizabeth  ; 
and  another  spirit,  also  an  aunt  of  mine,  gave  the  name  of  Hannah.  I  did 
not  recognise  the  names — I  had  never  known  of  any  aunts  of  those  names  ; 
but  subsequently  I  wrote  to  my  mother,  and  asked  whether  she  recognised 
them  as  family  names  ;  and  she  then  told  me  what  was  quite  new  to  me,  that 
two  sisters  of  my  father  were  named  EUzabeth  and  Hannah,  who  died  before 
I  was  born." 

Confronted  with  evidence  of  this  kind,  the  ingenious  philosophers 
who  trim  the  facts  of  Home's  life  into  accordance  with  their  pet 
theories  of  "  throught-reading,"  "unconscious  cerebration,"  and 
so  forth,  have  but  one  course  open  to  them — to  declare  boldly  that 
they  do  not  believe  the  witness,  and  would  not  believe  ten  thousand 
witnesses  if  they  swore  to  similar  occurrences. 

The  letters  of  Mrs.  Milner  Gibson  to  Mr.  Home  in  the  spring  of 
1861  show  that  the  seances  at  Hyde  Park  Place  had  been  resumed; 
and  among  the  new  names  mentioned  in  connection  with  them  is  that 
of  Mrs.  F.  C.  Parkes,  of  7,  Cornwall  Terrace,  Regent's  Park,  a 
lady  who  had  been  long  resident  in  India.  Her  introduction  to 
Home  and  Spiritualism  was  mi.de  through  Mrs.  Milner  Gibson  in 
December,  i860.  "  I  returned  home  from  this  my  first  seance  with 
Mr.  Home,"  she  noted  in  her  journal,  "convinced  of  the  truth  of 
our  being  permitted  to  hold  intercourse  with  those  who  have  passed 
to  the  spirit-land." 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Home  were  for  some  time  the  guests  of  Mrs.  Parkes ; 
and  before  and  during  their  visit  numerous  seances  were  held  at  7, 
Cornwall  Terrace.  A  diary  of  the  manifestations  witnessed  was 
kept  by  Mrs.  Parkes ;  and  having  been  placed  by  her  at  the  disposal 
of  Mr.  Home,  he  published  large  portions  in  the  Incidents  (vol.  i.), 
the  identity  of  the  writer  being  veiled,  at  her  desire,  under  the  initial, 
"Mrs.  P ." 

Sir  E.  B.  Lytton  was  a  good  deal  in  London  in  1861 ;  and  besides 
seances  at  his  house  in  Park  Lane  when  Home  dined  there  (Mrs. 
Milner  Gibson  being  sometimes  one  of  the  party),  the  distinguished 
litterateur  frequently  came  to  seances  at  Mrs.  Gibson's  and  with  Mrs. 
Parkes  in  Cornwall  Terrace.  I  find  in  one  of  Mrs.  Milner  Gibson's 
letters  an  interesting  account  of  attempts  made  by  Lytton  and  herself 
to  obtain  manifestations  at  Nice  in  1863,  at  a  time  when  Home  was 
in  London.     "  There  was  not  much,"  she  adds. 

Lytton  was  a  typical  example  of  the  weak  man  who,  above  all 
things,  fears  ridicule.  In  public  he  was  an  investigator  of 
Spiritualism,  in  private  a  believer.  Not  long  before  his  death  he 
wrote  to  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall  to  inquire  if  the  latter  could  give  him  the 
name  of  "  .some  reliable  medium  "  in  London,  with  whom  he  might 
put  a  friend  of  his  in  communication  who  had  just  lost  a  near  and 
dear  relative ;  a  strange  thing  to  do,  if  hie  were  quite  candid  in  his 

ENGLAND  loi 

published  declaration:  "So  far  as  my  experience  goes,  the  pheno- 
mena, when  freed  from  the  impostures  with  which  their  exhibition 
abounds,  and  examined  rationally,  are  traceable  to  material  influences 
of  the  nature  of  which  we  are  ignorant.  They  require  certain 
physical  organisations  or  temperaments  to  produce  them,  and  vary 
according  to  those  organisations  and  temperaments."  (Letters  of 
Lord  Lytton  to  the  secretary  of  the  Dialectical  Society,  February, 
1869). 

From  a  man  so  timid  and  so  sensitive  to  ridicule,  even  this 
cautiously-weighed  testimony  is  remarkable.  Lytton  refers  to  the 
abundant  impostures  that  simulate  the  phenomena;  but  he  admits 
that  his  experiences  have  satisfied  him  of  the  existence  of  the  pheno- 
mena themselves.  It  was  the  least  he  could  honestly  do,  after  the 
remarkable  seances  at  which  he  had  been  present  with  Home ;  and  if 
his  numerous  letters  to  Home  are  of  no  great  interest  in  themselves, 
they  at  least  demonstrate  by  their  friendly  tone  that  their  writer  did 
not  do  his  correspondent  the  injustice  of  classing  him  with  the 
charlatans  of  whose  trickery  Lord  Lytton  had  only  too  abundant 
evidence.  It  was  his  own  fault  that  he  received  so  many  proofs  of 
it.  The  wonderful  things  he  had  seen  with  Home  had  excited  in 
him,  as  in  many  others,  an  eager  desire  for  more  and  more  wonders ; 
and,  like  subsequent  inquirers  whom  I  could  name,  he  sought  out 
persons  calling  themselves  "mediums,"  with  the  result,  in  his  case 
as  in  theirs,  that  where  he  had  hoped  to  see  marvels  he  ended  by 
detecting  imposture.  Such  disappointments  taught  at  least  one 
lesson  to  those  who  encountered  them — how  more  than  rare  was  the 
marvellous  gift  of   Home. 

That  Lord  Lytton  should  never  have  publicly  declared  his  know- 
ledge of  the  genuineness  of  that  gift  was  only  to  be  expected  from 
him.  All  the  days  of  his  life  he  was  constantly  giving  proofs  of  his 
excessive  sensitiveness  to  ridicule ;  and  what  could  have  brought  more 
ridicule  on  him  than  a  fearless,  candid  statement  of  the  convictions 
impressed  on  him  by  his  investigations  of  Spiritualism  with  Mr. 
Home  in  London,  and  on  occasions  when  the  latter  was  his  guest  at 
Knebworth?  Lytton 's  intimate  friends  knew  the  truth;  but  the 
public  who  wish  to  arrive  at  the  real  sentiments  of  this  talented  man 
with  regard  to  Home  and  Spiritualism  must  read  between  the  lines. 
It  is  for  that  reason  I  pause  here  to  say  a  few  words  concerning  the 
fragments  in  my  possession  of  Lord  Lytton 's  correspondence  with  his 
frequent  guest,  Mr.  Home. 

The  letters  range  from  1855  over  a  period  of  ten  years  subsequent. 
As,  during  those  ten  years,  Lytton's  tone  is  unchanged  and  cordial — 
as  he  is  constantly  pressing  Home  with  invitations  to  dine  in  Park 
Lane  or  run  down  for  a  few  days  to  Knebworth — the  obvious  inference 
is  that,  whatever  his  reasons  for  associating  imposture  with  the  word 
"  Spiritualism,"  he  had  never  seen  cause  to  associate  imposture  with 
the  name  of  Home.  A  man  of  Lytton's  position  and  celebrity  would 
not  have  continued  year  after  year  on  intimate  terms  with  another 
who  had  given  him  reasons  for  even  a  suspicion  of  charlatanism. 

Mrs.    Home  passed  away  from  earth  on  the  3rd  of  July,   1862  ; 

I02  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME  - 

and  Lytton  writes  to  Home  from  Spa  towards  the  end  of  the  same 
month  : — 

"  I  condole  with  you  most  sincerely  on  the  sad  loss  of  your  amiable  and 
interesting  wife.  The  intelligence  pained  me  much.  It  is  indeed  a  consolation 
to  you  to  know  that  she  looked  so  serenely  on  quitting  this  world,  and  with  sc 
intense  a  faith  in  that  happier  world  which  was  familiar  to  her  thoughts. 

"  I  certainly  did  not  think  her  dying  when  I  saw  her,  nor  was  she  so  then. 
It  affected  me  greatly  to  receive  her  touching  remembrances  from  you,  and  I 
shall  mournfully  treasure  the  photograph  you  so  kindly  promise. 

"  Perhaps  I,  too,  may  winter  in  Italy.  I  find  no  climate  worth  the  winter 
change  except  Nice  and  Naples.  Wishing  you  a  complete  restoration  to  health, 
and  assuring  you  of  my  sympathy  in  your  bereavement,  believe  me,  truly 
yours,  "  E.  B.  Lytton." 

I  have  said  that  Lord  Lytton  was  probably  present  at  7,  Cornwall 
Terrace  when  Mrs.  Home's  approaching  departure  from  earth  was 
referred  to  in  the  touching  and  beautiful  words  already  quoted.  That 
Lytton  had  been  one  of  the  five  persons  who  formed  the  circle  of  the 
previous  evening,  June  2nd,  1861,  I  know  from  the  testimony  of  the 
single  survivor  of  the  five,  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall,  whose  recollections  have 
enabled  me  to  identify  the  seance  in  question  among  those  recorded 
in  the  diary  of  Mrs.  Parkes. 

The  five  sitters  present  that  evening  were  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Home, 
Mrs.  Parkes,  Sir  E.  B.  Lytton,  and  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall.  Mr.  Hall 
relates  that  he  had  brought  with  him  to  Cornwall  Terrace  a  large 
hand-bell,  which  he  placed  on  the  centre  of  the  table  to  try  if  it  would 
be  rung  there,  and  that  he  distinctly  saw  a  hand  appear  above  the 
table,  grasp  the  bell,  and  ring  it  violently  ;  Mr.  Home's  hands  resting 
quietly  on  the  table  the  while  in  full  view,  and  the  light  being  quite 
sufficient  to  enable  Sir  E.  B.  Lytton  and  Mr.  Hall  to  satisfy  them- 
selves that  no  machinery  of  any  kind  was  connected  with  the 
apparition  of  the  mysterious  hand.  Mr.  Hall  adds  that  he  perfectly 
remembers  the  impression  produced  on  Lytton  and  himself  by  the 
noisy  displacement  of  the  idols  in  the  Hindoo  shrine  at  the  end  of 
the  large  drawing-room,  while  all  five  persons  present  were  quietly 
seated  in  the  summer  twilight  at  the  table. 

The  diary  of  Mrs.  Parkes  contains  an  account  of  the  same  seance, 
written  by  her  at  the  time. 

June  2nd,"  she  writes.  "  A  siance  of  five  persons.  As  twilight  came  on, 
c  pleasant  dimness  fell  over  the  room.  .  .  .  The  spirits  moved  the  table 
with  violence  up  to  the  window,  near  the  Hindoo  shrine  ;  and  the  accordion, 
no  human  hand  touching  it,  played  in  the  most  charming  manner,  exquisitely 
and  with  great  power.  There  was  much  noise  at  the  Hindoo  shrine ;  the 
images  of  Vishnu  and  the  Holy  Bull  were  brought,  and  put  on  the  top  of  the 
table ;  then  a  large  hand,  which  appeared  dark,  being  between  us  and  the* 
light,  put  up  the  accordion  entirely  above  the  top  of  the  table.  Another  hand 
took  a  bell  off  the  table,  and  rang  it.  Mr.  Home  was  raised  from  his  chair 
erect  into  the  air.  Then  he  was  drawn  to  the  other  end  of  the  room,  and 
raised  in  the  air  until  his  hand  was  on  the  top  of  the  door ;  thence  he  floated 
horizontally  forward,  and  descended.  I  saw  a  bright  star  constantly  flashing 
forth  ;  the  raps  died  away  in  the  distance,  and  the  siance  ended."  ("  Extracts 
from  the  diary  of  Mrs.  P :"  Incidents  of  My  Life,  vol.  i.,  p.   196.) 

Lord  Lytton  bad  many  seances  with  Mr.  Home  more  remarkable 
than  the  above;  but  I  have  preferred  to  narrate  this  one,  because  T 

ENGLAND  103 

have  the  attestation  of  Mr.  Hall  to  the  fact  that  Lytton  and  himself 
were  both  present  and  witnessed  the  phenomena  described. 

It  is  not  generally  known  that,  when  Lytton  commenced  that 
wildest  of  all  his  romances,  A  Strange  Story  (which  was  written, 
I  believe,  in  1859  or  i860),  he  had  intended  making  an  attempt  to 
portray  Home  in  its  pages ;  but  speedily  abandoned  the  design,  and 
substituted  for  it  the  fantastic  conception  of  Margrave.  So,  at  least, 
Lytton  told  Home;  adding  that  the  original  plan  of  A  Strange 
Story  differed  almost  as  materially  from  the  course  the  story 
actually  took  as  Home's  portrait  would  have  differed  from  that  of 
Margrave.  "  Of  all  I  have  written,"  said  the  celebrated  romancer, 
' '  A  Strange  Story  satisfies  me  the  least. ' ' 

In  forsaking  his  design  of  attempting  to  picture  Home,  Lytton 
took  from  him  a  single  hint — not  for  the  character  of  Margrave,  but 
for  the  impression  that  abnormal  being  is  represented  as  making  on 
the  ordinary  mortals  who  encountered  him.  All  who  knew  Home 
were  struck  by  the  joyousness  of  his  nature,  and  the  gaietv  and  sweet- 
ness of  a  temper  that  no  wrong  could  embitter  and'  no  sufferings  sour. 
In  his  happy  moments  of  freedom  from  pain  he  had  the  bright  cheer- 
fulness of  a  child,  and  that  keen  joy  in  living  which  charms  us  in 
young  children,  and  makes  us  look  back  regretfully  with  Wordsworth 
to  the  lost  days  when — 

"  The  earth  and  every  common  sight 
To  us  did  seem 
Apparelled  in  celestial  light, 

The  glory  and  the  freshness  of  a  dream." 

Home's  gaiety  and  cheerfulness  in  his  moments  of  respite  from 
suffering  exercised  an  irresistible  spell  on  all  around  him,  that  won 
for  him  in  Russia  and  France  the  sobriquet  of  "  Le  Charmeur. " 
Lytton,  like  others,  had  remarked  this  trait;  and  he  attached  it  to 
the  outward  man  of  Margrave  in  A  Strange  Story,  exaggerating  it 
somewhat  in  his  description,  as  it  was  the  habit  of  Bulwer  Lytton  to 
exaggerate. 

As  I  probably  shall  not  again  have  occasion  to  allude  to  Lord 
Lytton  in  these  pages,  I  will  give  here  two  letters  written  by  him  to 
Mr.  Home  in  the  year  1864.  They  are  not  of  very  great  importance ; 
but  they  show  that  his  relations  with  Home  and  interest  in  Spiritualism 
remained  unchanged ;  and  the  second  contains,  in  as  explicit  a  manner 
as  coiild  be  expected  from  so  timid  a  Spiritualist,  Lytton's  recognition 
of  the  fact  that  Home  was  a  man  phenomenally  gifted. 

Both  letters  are  addressed  from  2 1 ,  Park  Lane,  and  the  earlier  is 
dated  April  27th,  1864.  "  I  hear  you  are  in  town — how  long  do  you 
stay?  "  Lytton  asks.  "  I  am  still  suffering  under  a  severe  attack  of 
bronchitis,  and  unable  as  yet  to  call  on  any  one  or  see  any  one  here. 
But  my  doctor  promises  me  I  shall  be  much  better  the  moment  the 
weather  becomes  more  genial,  and  in  that  case  I  shall  hope  for  the 
pleasure  of  seeing  you." 

The  second  note,  dated  July  i8tb.  1864.  is  still  shorter,  but  of  more 
interest.   "  Let  me  introduce  to  you  my  eldest  brother,  Mr.  Bulwer,'* 

I04  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

Lytton  writes.  "  He  is  seriously  interestedi  in  the  extraordinary 
phenomena  which  are  elicited  by  your  powers — and  you  will  thank 
me  for  presenting  to  you  so  intelligent  and  unprejudiced  an  examiner." 

Not  much;  but  at  least  evidence  from  Lytton  himself  that  an 
acquaintance  extending  over  nine  years  had  left  unchaniged — or, 
rather,  bad  confirmed  the  conviction  impressed  on  hdm  in  1855  of  the 
extraordinary  nature  of  the  phenomena  "  elicited  "  (to  put  it  in  his 
own  phrase)  "  by  the  powers  of  Home." 

Till  the  middle  of  July,  1861,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Home  remained  in 
London.  "  During  our  stay,"  writes  the  former  in  the  Incidents, 
"  I  had  a  seance  almost  every  night,  my  wife  feeling  that  they  did 
her  good,  both  physically  and  spiritually."  The  fatal  malady  had 
not  yet  developed  itself  sufficiently  to  prostrate  the  sufferer;  and  so 
long  as  his  wife  could  be  present  at  seances  and  took  joy 
at  being  present.  Home  was  happy  to  hold  them.  A  few  months 
later  she  had  become  too  ill  to  sit,  and  her  husband's  every 
thought  was  asborbed  in  caring  for  her.  At  the  same  time  his 
power  had  left  him,  or  nearly  so;  but  it  was  by  reason  of  his  wife's 
illness,  even  more  than  of  his  weakened  power,  that  he  declined  to 
hold  seances,  and  in  so  doing  gave  great  offence,  both  to  Spiritualists 
and  inquiring  sceptics. 

A  well-known  Spiritualist,  whose  name  I  naturally  withhold,  was 
anxious  that  some  friends  should  witness  the  manifestations;  and 
pressed  Home  for  a  seance,  which  was  refused.  More  than  a  year 
later,  and  some  months  after  Mrs.  Home  had  passed  away,  Home 
wrote  to  his  acquaintance  to  express  a  hope  that  the  other  had  got 
over  the  annoyance  his  refusal  to  sit  bad  caused ;  and  received  a  reply 
from  which  I  extract  a  few  lines : — 

"  My  Dear  Mr.  Home, — I  am  sorry  you  continue  to  think  of  the 
little  contretemps  of  some  time  ago.     I  was  certainly  very  much  vexed 

at  the  time ;  however,  I  have  long  ceased  to  think  of  it I  can 

only  hope  the  good  angels  will  in  future  do  their  best  to  arrange 
matters  between  seances  and  sick-beds." 

Such  was  the  feeling  and  considerate  manner  in  which  some  who 
called,  and  perhaps  thought  themselves  his  friends,  behaved  to  Home. 
It  was  nothing  to  the  writer  of  these  almost  brutal  words — a  man  very 
estimable  in  many  respects — that  Home  had  refused  him  a  seance 
because  be  was  absorbed  in  attendance  on  a  dying  wife:  all  lie  could 
think  of  was  that  his  sceptical  friends  had  been  disappointed  of  their 
feance ;  and,  from  the  tone  of  his  letter,  he  evidently  felt  that  he  had 
just  ground  for  complaint  against  Home  and  the  "  good  angels  "  both. 

I  have  already  given  in  the  words  of  Mr.  W.  Howitt,  Mr.  Wilkinson, 
and  Mrs.  Parkes,  their  description  of  manifestations  witnessed  at  the 
residence  of  the  latter  in  the  summer  of  1861.  The  portions  of  the 
diary  of  Mrs.  Parkes  that  are  published  in  the  Incidents  narrate 
the  events  of  more  than  twenty  seances ;  and  a  brief  extract  or  two 
may  be  of  interest. 

"  On  July  7th,"  writes  Mrs.  Parkes,  "  we  (four  persons)  were  sitting  at  the 
centre  window  in  the  front  drawing-room,  talking  together,   when  the  spirits 

ENGLAND  105 

began  to  rap  on  the  floor.  ...  It  was  a  fine  summer  evening,  and  the 
room  was  perfectly  light.  Mr.  Home  fell  back  in  his  chair,  and  went  into  the 
deep  sleep  for  some  time  ;  then  he  walked  about  the  room,  led  apparently  by  a 
spirit ;  a  very  large  bright  star  shone  on  his  forehead,  several  clustered  on  his 
hair  and  on  the  tips  of  his  fingers.     .     .  Mr.   Home  passed  in  front  of  a 

very  large  mirror — a  sea  of  glass.  I  saw  a  form  leading  him,  over  the  head 
of  which  was  thrown  a  tinted  robe  flowing  to  the  ground,  marking  the  shape 
of  the  head  and  shoulders.  He  followed  close  upon  it  :  I  saw  them  both  in  the 
mirror  ;  his  features,  face,  and  hair  perfectly  distinct ;  but  the  features  of  the 
form  that  led  him  were  not  visible  beneath  the  dark,  blue-tinted  robe  that 
covered  them.  They  passed  from  before  the  glass  ;  and  then  we  all  saw  a 
female  figure  with  a  white  veil  thrown  over  her  head  which  fell  to  the  ground  ; 
at  the  same  time,  but  rather  higher,  the  form  of  a  man  in  Oriental  costume. 
The  startling  vision  faded  away  ;  and  the  great  mirror  remained  with  only  the 
light  from  the  window,  which  streamed  in  upon  it. 

"  July  i2th.  En  sdance  six  persons.  Stars  appeared  above  Mrs.  Home's 
head  ;  and  a  light  was  seen,  with  fingers  passing  over  it  as  it  floated  above  our 
heads.  It  was  the  Veiled  Spirit.  I  saw  the  hand  that  held  the  veil,  which 
■was  spangled  with  stars  ;  and  the  fingers  moved  distinctly  as  it  floated  just 
in  front  of  us." 

The  note  appended  by  Mr.  Home  to  the  extracts  from  Mrs.  Parkes' 
■diary  furnishes  a  clue  to  the  probable  origin  of  a  mendacious  story 
published  in  America  by  a  certain  Celia  Logan,  who  untruly  asserted 
Home  to  have  stated  that  his  wife  changed  visibly  into  an  angel  as 
^he  died. 

' '  In  thds  diary, ' '  wrote  Home,  ' '  there  are  several  remarkable 
manifestations,  and  amongst  them  that  of  the  presence  of  the  veiled 
spirit,  who  thenceforth  was  frequently  seen  by  my  wife  and  by  m€, 
as  will  be  read  in  the  beautiful  memoir  of  my  wife  written  by  that  most 
estimable  type  of  womanhood,  Mrs.  Mary  Howitt.  The  veil  of  that 
spirit  kept  gradually  being  raised  through  the  successive  stages  of  my 
dear  wife's  painful  illness,  and  became  almost  an  index  of  the  insidious 
advances  of  her  disease." 

The  silver  cord  was  loosed  on  July  3rd,  1862.  There  was  no  priest 
of  her  own  Russian  Church  within  many  miles  of  Chateau  Laroche; 
and  the  last  consolations  of  religion  were  received  by  Mrs.  Home  at 
the  hands  of  the  Catholic  prelate  whose  visits  had  been  so  kind  and 
constant.  Mrs.  Howitt,  in  the  pages  already  quoted  from,  gives  an 
•exact  and  touching  account  of  the  emotions  her  beautiful  resignation 
stirred  in  him: — 

"  The  last  sacraments  were  administered  to  her  by  the  Bishop  of 
Perigueux,  who  wept  like  a  child,  and  who  remarked  that,  '  though 
he  had  been  present  at  many  a  death-bed  for  Heaven,  he  had  never 
seen  one  equal  to  hers.' 

"At  her  funeral,"  continues  Mrs.  Howitt,  "four  of  the  men- 
servants  of  her  sister  asked  each  to  lead  a  horse  of  the  hearse  to  the 
burial-ground,  saying  that  they  could  not  allow  hired  persons  to  be 
near  the  dead  body  of  her  who  had  ever  had  a  kind  word  and  a  loving 
look  for  all.  The  peasantry,  instead  of,  as  is  customary,  throwing 
earth  upon  the  coffin,  first  covered  it  with  flowers — fittest  for  her  last 
garment,  and  fittest  for  the  expression  of  their  love." 

Soon  after  the  parting,  Mr.  Home  returned  to  London.  There, 
•many  tokens  of  the  nearness  of  the  spirit  that  had  just  departed  were 

io6  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

received,  one  of  the  most  remarkable  being  given  at  a  seance  at 
Bannow  Lodge,  West  Brompton,  then  the  residence  of  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
S.  C.  Hall.  It  is  related  by  Mrs.  Hall  in  her  memories  of  Mrs.  Home, 
published  the  following  year,  1863,  with  those  of  Mrs.  HoAntt,  in  tlie 
Incidents. 

"  More  than  the  usual  manifestations  came  that  night,"  writes  Mrs. 
Hall ;  ' '  not  only  the  table,  but  our  chairs  and  the  very  room  shook, 
and  the  *  raps  '  were  everywhere  around  us.  ...  A  very  eminent 
sculptor,  whose  engagements  on  public  works  are  unceasing,  had 
been  rising  before  day  to  finish  a  bust  of  Sacha  "  (Mrs.  Home), 
"  which  he  desired  to  present  to  her  husband — this  fact  was  not  even 
known  in  his  07vn  household.  He  received  a  message  thus : 
*  Thanks  for  your  early  morning  labour:  I  have  often  been  near 
you.'" 

The  eminent  sculptor  of  whom  Mrs.  Hall  speaks — and  to  whom 
frequent  references  are  made  in  her  letters  to  Mr.  Home — was  Mr. 
Durham, 

CHAPTER  VII 

ENGLAND,   ROME,    AND   PARIS 

Breakdown  of  Home's  Health  and  Powers.  "  Incidents  in  My 
Life."  Works  as  a  Sculptor.  Expulsion  from  the  Papal 
States.  Investigation  by  Mr.  Ruskin.  By  John  Bright.  False 
Accusations  and  Apologies.  The  "  Evil  Spirit  "  Hypothesis. 
Conversion  of  Varley  the  Electrician.     Dr.  Carpenter's  Blunder. 

All  who  had  known  the  spirit  now  gone  from  earth  had  loved  her; 
and  the  letters  in  which  friends  spoke  of  their  affection  for  her  and 
mourned  her  loss  were  treasured  as  precious  by  Mr.  Home.  Out  of 
many  that  lie  before  me,  I  select  one  or  two  passages — the  first  frcwn 
the  letter  of  a  friend  to  whcxn  she  had  been  very  dear,  Mrs.  Milner 
Gibson. 

"  We  have  received  the  news.  Our  darling  Sacha  is  happy  now.  May  He 
permit  me  so  to  live  here  that  I  may  meet  the  dear  child  in  that  happier  state. 
.  .  We  weep  for  you  and  with  you,  but  yet  with  a  feeling  of  gladness  that 
she  is  happy — very,  very  happy,  I  know." 

"  Robert  Bell  came  to  see  me  to-day,"  says  Mrs.  Gibson  in  another  letter. 
"  He  will  have  written  to  you,  and  told  you  that  poor  Mrs.  Bell  knows  nothing 
of  your  sorrow  ;  for  her  husband  had  carefully  hidden  it  from  her,  fearing  the 
shock  for  her  in  her  delicate  state  of  health.  Grattan,'  too,  came,  with  tears 
in  his  eyes,  begging  me — me,  of  all  people  ! — to  write  a  short  notice  of  dear 
Sacha.  I,  who  have  never  written  for  the  press  and  cannot  write  of  her.  for  1 
feel  too  much  to  write." 

In  a  former  chapter  some  of  the  early  Spiritual  experiences  are 
given  of  one  who  became  a  very  dear  friend  of  Mr.  Home — Mrs. 
Adelaide  Senior.  "  I  am  so  pleased,"  she  now  wrote,  "to  think 
that  your  sweet  wife  spoke  of  me  before  her  departure — and  so  very 
grateful  to  her  for  wishing  me  to  have  her  picture,  which  I  shall 
indeed  beyond  price.  I  have  the  unspeakable  comfort  of  knowing 
of  comfort  in  knowing  that  your  darling  is  watching  over  you — it  is 
indeed  beyond  price.  I  have  *he  unspeakable  comfort  of  knowing 
that  my  darling  husband  is  ever  near  me.  I  feel  that  is  so;  and  I 
am  so  very  grateful  to  God  that  He  has,  through  you,  given  me 
this  comfort." 

A  touching  letter  is  that  of  Mrs.  De  Burgh,  a  friend  of  Mrs. 
Milner  Gibson,  who  had  been  present  at  many  of  the  seances  in 
Hyde  Park  Place:— 

"  My  dear  Daniel, — Mrs.  Milner  Gibson  has  told  me  that  the  blow  so  long 
pending  over  you  has  fallen,  and  that  you  are  left  alone.  I  must  write, 
although  you  will  probably  not  read  my  letter ;  but  I  feel  so  truly  and  so 
deeply  for  you  in  your  heavy  sorrow  that  I  cannot  resist  writing.     .     .  She 

was  so  charming  and  irresistibly  attractive  that  all  who  knew  her  loved  her, 
and  many,  many  will  mourn  sincerely  for  her.  I  never  heard  anyone  speak 
of  her  but  with  the  warmest  interest  and  affection.  She  was  so  winning — so 
bright  and  loving — I  can  hardly  realise  that  she  is  gone. 

'  Mr.   Colley  Grattan,   M.P. 
i07 

io8  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

"  I  am  writing  strange  comfort,  but  I  feel  there  is  none  for  such  sorrow  as 
yours — at  least,  none  that  any  friend  can  offer.  .  .  .  But  you  will  not  give 
way  to  sorrow,  as  one  who  mourns  without  hope  ;  for  Spiritualism  will  suffer, 
if  it  is  found  to  fail  you  now  in  your  strong  need.  You  must  think  of  this, 
and  prove  that  the  practical  good  it  supplies  takes  the  sting  from  death,  and 
enables  the  one  left  to  rejoice  in  its  consolations.  I  pray  that  that  blessed 
spirit  may  be  permitted  soon  to  communicate,  and  thus  make  you  share  her 
happiness. 

"  You  soothed  her  months  of  trial,  and  were  the  tenderest  and  best  of  nurses 
— ^you  must  now  take  care  of  your  shattered  health  for  the  sake  of  her  child." 

Mr,  Home's  health  was  indeed  shattered  by  the  racking  anxiety 
and  limitless  devotion  of  the  many  months  during  which  he  had 
watched  so  lovingly  and  constantly  over  her  who  was  gone.  How 
much  his  most  sensitive  nature  had  suffered  in  seeing  her  suffer, 
none  but  himself  could  know ;  but  the  strength  which  unselfish 
affection  bestows  had  never  failed  him,  and  he  had  soothed  and  tended 
her  to  the  last.  It  was  not  till  his  cares  were  no  more  needed  that 
strength  and!  cheerfulness  both  forsook  him,  and  breaking  Idown 
terribly,  he  paid  the  penalty  of  an  overtaxed  nervous  system  and 
week  after  week  passed  almost  without  food  or  sleep. 

I  will  not  dwell  on  these  dark  and  bitter  moments  of  a^  life  that 
was  filled  with  trial.  As  soon  as  some  return  of  health  permitted, 
Home  occupied  himself  in  the  completion  of  his  first  volume  of 
autobiography,  whch  he  had  begun  writing  nearly  three  years  before. 
In  January,  1863,  he  paid  a  short  visit  to  his  friend  Waldimir  de 
Komar,  at  Paris ;  held  seances  at  the  Tuileries,  in  obedience  to  a 
summons)  from  the  Empress ;  and  then,  returning  to  London,  pre- 
pared for  the  press,  with  the  kind  assistance  of  Dr.  Robert  Chambers, 
his  now  completed  work.  It  was  published,  under  the  title  of 
Incidents  in  My  Life,  in  the  spring  of  1863,  the  introduction  and 
concluding  chapter  being  from  the  pen  of  Robert  Chambers. 

Through  Mrs.  Senior,  Home  had  made  the  acquaintance  of  her 
brother-in-law,  Nassau  Senior,  the  noted  political  economist,  twice 
Professor  of  Political  Economy  in  the  University  of  Oxford.  Mr. 
Nassau  Senior  investigated  the  phenomena  at  various  seances  with 
Mr.  Home,  was  convinced  of  the  impossibility  of  attributing  them 
to  imposture;  and  on  the  completion  of  the  Incidents,  obtained  the 
publication  of  the  work  by  Messrs.  Longmans  and  Co. 

An  early  copy  of  the  work  was  sent  by  Mr.  Home  to  the  Empress 
of  the  French.  I  find  among  his  papers  a  letter  from  the  Secretary 
to  the  Empress,  conveying  her  acknowledgments,  and  translate  it : — 

"  12th  March,   1863. 

' '  Sir, — I  hastened  to  place  in  the  hjands  of  the  Empress  the 
work  that  you  did  me  the  honour  of  entrusting  to  my  care. 

"  Her  Majesty  has  charged  me  to  thank  you  for  your  attention, 
and'  to  say  to  you  that  she  will  read  this  work  with  interest. 
Receive,  etc.,      '  "  Damas  Hinard, 

Le  Secretaire  des   Commandentents." 

The  Incidents  attracted  widespread  notice ;  and  were  criticised 
in  every  spirit,  from  fair  and  unprejudiced  inquiry  to  dishonest  mis- 

ENGLAND,   ROME,    AND    PARIS  109 

representation  and  ignorant  abuse.  True  to  the  traditions  of  a 
certain  class  of  journalism,  some  critics  reviewed  the  book  without 
reading  it;  described  Mrs.  Home  as  "an  ardent  Spiritualist  and 
medium  "  when  Home  first  met  her,  and  turned  her  husband  into  an 
American,  although  the  first  words  of  his  first  chapter  were,  "  I 
was  bom  near  Edinburgh. 

"  I  had  no  reason  to  complain  of  the  neglect  of  the  press,"  wrote 
Mr.  Home;  "for  several  journals  fell  foul  of  me  with  commend- 
able speed.  I  have,  however,  to  thank  some  of  those  who  reviewed 
my  book  for  the  fair  and  candid  tone  in  which  they  treated  the 
subject.  The  Spectator,  the  Times,  and  the  Morning  Herald  call 
for  special  mention  in  this  respect." 

The  Times  review  I  have  not  seen.  Those  of  the  other  two 
journals  named  certainly  deserve  the  character  of  "  fair  and 
candid  "  that  Mr.  Home  bestows  on  them.  I  quote  a  portion  of 
the  remarks  of  the  writers  in  the  Morning  Herald  : 

"  The  more  a  man  learns,  the  more  wary  he  is  as  to  this  word  '  impossible.' 
Mr.  Grove  shows  us  in  his  book  on  the  Correlation  of  Forces  how  little  we 
know  as  to  physical  laws ;  on  the  relations  of  matter  and  spirit  we  know 
hardly  anything.  All  we  can  say  is,  that  these  manifestations  appear  to  us 
to  be  in  the  highest  degree  improbable.  But  here  we  are  met  by  evidence  that, 
improbable  or  not,  they  have  taken  place.  .  .  .  We  are  narrowed  to  the 
alternative,  that  either  Mr.  Home  is  an  impostor,  or  that  Spiritualism  is  true. 

"  Now  as  to  imposture.  Assuredly  Mr.  Home  is  very  different  from  the 
ordinary  type  of  an  impostor.  When  only  eighteen  years  old,  he  began  his 
career  of  mediumship  by  doing,  or  appearing  to  do,  things  so  difficult  as  to 
involve  almost  a  certainty  of  the  early  detection  of  any  sort  of  deceit.  In  1852, 
Mr.  Bryant,  the  American  poet,  joined  with  three  others  in  a  declaration  that 
closed  by  saying,  '  We  know  that  we  were  not  imposed  upon  nor 
deceived.'  Again,  we  cannot  but  remark  that  the  manifestations  are  not  now 
more  elaborate  than  they  were  twelve  years  ago.  We  might  expect  a  successful 
impostor  to  use  his  advantages  of  experiences  and  wealth  to  produce  new  and 
stronger  effects  ;  but  this  has  not  been  the  case  with  Mr.  Home.  The  spirit 
hands  (by  far  the  most  difficult  manifestation  for  an  impostor  to  produce)  are 
said  to  have  been  seen  at  a  very  early  period  of  his  mediumship.  Again,  an 
impostor  always  tries  to  weave  his  deceptions  into  a  system  ;  generally  to  form 
some  sort  of  sect.  Now,  Mr.  Home,  with  every  temptation  to  do  this,  in  that 
he  has  persuaded  so  many  of  the  truth  of  the  manifestations,  not  only  does  not 
try  to  establish  any  great  position  for  himself  as  the  high  priest  of  Spiritualism, 
but  he  constantly  denies  that  he  has  any  power  in  the  matter.     .  .     Mr. 

Home  speaks  of  his  book  as  a  collection  of  facts,  which  are  worthy  of 
investigation,  and  may  be  found  useful  in  revealing  some  of  the  yet  hidden 
laws  of  creation. 

"  We  must  note  also  the  strangeness  of  the  fact  that  Mr.  Home  has  never 
been  detected,  if  indeed  he  is  an  impostor.  To  move  heavy  tables,  to  raise 
himself  to  a  horizontal  position  near  the  ceiling,  to  play  tunes  upon  guitars, 
&c.,  would  require  elaborate  machinery.  But  these  things  have  been  done  in 
palaces  and  in  private  houses,  in  every  part  of  Europe." 

In  July,  1863,  the  Quarterly  Review  noticed  the  book;  and  after 
commenting  on  the  a  friori  improbability  of  the  narratives  contained 
in  it  continued:  "  But  on  the  other  hand  we  are  bound  in  justice 
to  Mr.  Home,  to  admit  that  this  internal  evidence  against  his  state- 
ments has  to  be  weighed  against  a  very  respectable  amount  of  external 
evidence  in  their  favour  ;  that  his  own  character,  so  far  as  we  have 
been  able  to  ascertain,  offers  no  ground  for  suspecting  his  integrity ; 

no  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

and  that  the  authorities  whom  he  brings  forward,  both  as  vouchers 
for  his  own  trustworthiness  and  as  eye-witnesses  of  the  marvels 
which  he  exhibits,  are  such  as  would  probably  be  sufficient  to  ensure 
belief  in  any  story  less  intrinsically  incredible." 

The  Quarterly  reviewer  (evidently  not  Dr.  Carpenter)  deserves 
credit  for  having  had  the  fairness  to  deal  with  the  names  given, 
instead  of  following  the  unfair  line  adopted  by  some  other  writers ; 
who  confined  their  attention  to  the  fact  that  many  names  of 
witnesses  were  suppressed,  and  pretended  to  disbelieve  Home's 
statement  that  he  withheld  those  names  from  consideration  for  their 
owners,  who  feared  thfe  ridicule  and  obloquy  that  awaited  them  if 
they  came  forward  to  bear  witness.  Certainly,  his  consideration  io: 
timid  friends  was  carried  to  the  verge  of  Quixotism ;  but  if  a  mis- 
take, it  was  a  very  unselfish  and  generous  one.  In  these  pages 
I  have  filled  in  the  blanks  he  left  as  far  as  lies  in  my  power,  and 
will  cite  now  the  testimony  of  two  other  English  witnesses  of  the 
phenomena — called  forth  by  the  publication  of  thie  Incidents. 
Both  of  these  gentlemen  had  been  present  at  numerous  seances  with 
Mr.  Home  in  London,   in  the  years  immediately  preceding   1863. 

The  first  was  the  Hon.  Colonel  Wilbraham,  who  had  the  courage 
to  allow  his  letter  to  Mr.  Home  to  be  published.       It  was  as  follows  : 

"  46,  Brook  Street,  A.pril  i^th,  1863. 

"  My  Dear  Mr.  Home, — I  have  much  pleasure  in  stating  that  1 
have  attended  several  seances,  in  your  presence,  at  the  houses  of  two 
of  my  intimate  friends  and  at  my  own  when  I  have  witnessed 
phenomena  similar  to  those  described  in  your  book  which  I  feel 
certain  could  not  have  been  produced  by  any  trick  or  collusion  what- 
ever. The  rooms  in  which;  they  occurred  were  always  perfectly 
lighted ;  and  it  was  impossible  for  me  to  disbelieve  the  evidence  of 
my  own  senses.       Believe  me,  yours  very  truly,  E.  B.  Wilbraham.'' 

The  second  witness  to  facts  recounted  in  Incidents  in  My  Life 
was  not  as  courageous  as  Colonel  Wilbraham ;  and  his  letter  to  Mr. 
Home  now  sees  the  light  for  the  first  time.  Its  writer  had  been 
present  at  some  very  remarkable  seances  at  Mrs.  Milner  Gibson's  : — 

"  46,  Sussex  Gardens,  Hyde  Park,  W., 
"  April  gth,  1863. 

"  My  dear  Mr.  Home, — I  have  just  finished  reading  your  book,  and  have 
been  very  much  interested  in  it.  Having  witnessed  so  much  of  what  you  and 
others  have  narrated,  every  page  brought  back  to  me  those  evenings  which 
never  can  be  forgotten. 

"  I  very  much  like  the  quiet  manner  in  which  you  have  mentioned  scenes 
and  events  which,  almost  word  for  word,  I  perfectly  remember  witnessing  and 
hearing  ;  and  I  think  you  hare  given  much  value  to  your  book  by  keeping  so 
well  and  clearly  to  the  original  incidents. 

"  I  hope  you  are  better  in  health.  Blumenthal  and  Madame  Loeser  come 
over  from  Paris  at  the  end  of  this  week  to  pay  a  visit  to  us.  Mrs.  Kater 
unites  with  me  in  kind  remembrances  ;  and  believe  me,  yours  faithfully, 

"  Edward  Kater." 

As  Mr.  Kater  justly  remarks,  the  great  value  of  the  book  consists 
in  its  fidelity  to   facts.       Nothing   is  added,  nothing  taken  away ; 

ENGLAND,   ROME,   AND    PARIS  iii 

Home  relates  the  events  of  his  life  exactly  as  they  occurred,  and 
leaves  the  final  judgment  on  them  to  be  passed  by  future  ages. 
That  of  his  own  generation  was  the  verdict  of  the  blind  and  deaf 
on  a  man  who  could  see  and  hear. 

The  unpretentious  candour  of  the  Incidents  impressed  many 
besides  Mr.  Kater — among  them  that  gifted  writer  and  charming 
woman,  Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall.  "I  do  not  know  which  most  to  admire 
in  your  book,"  she  writes  to  Mr.  Home;  "its  simplicity,  so  per- 
fectly free  from  every  taint  of  self-glorification,  or  the  facts  that 
speak  trumpet-tongued."  Then,  referring  to  that  prudent  timidity 
of  friends  for  which  Mr.  Home  had  so  Quixotic  a  consideration, 
Mrs.  Hall,  who  had  courageously  allowed  her  name  to  appear  in  the 
Incidents,  continues  :  "  I  only  wish  that  more  names  had  been  given 
— Robert  Chambers',  for  instance,  and  Sir  Edward  Lytton's,  and 
Mr.  Bell's.  I  have  no  patience  with  the  cowardice  that  withholds 
testimony  from  truth." 

A  month  or  two  after  the  appeariance  of  the  Incidents,  and)  when 
the  first  edition  was  nearly  exhausted,  the  publishers  were  threatened 
with  an  action  for  libel.  In  the  portion  of  his  book  where  hp 
dealt  with  the  Brewster  controversy,  Home  had  brought  forward  the 
published  evidence  of  Dr.  Carpenter,  F.R.S.,  and  Messrs.  Steven- 
son, to  show  that  Sir  David  Brewster  had  treated  certain  of  his 
scientific  contemporaries  even  worse  than  he  had  treated  Home. 
Brewster  now  threatened  (June,  1863)  a  libel  action;  and  Messrs. 
lyOngmans,  alarmed,  terminated  their  connection  with  the  work. 

Home  promptly  sought  another  publisher;,  and  a  few  months  later 
a  second  edition  of  his  book  appeared.  Not  a  word  was  erased  or 
changed  of  the  chapter  dealing  with  Brewster;  on  the  contrary, 
Home  wrote  a  preface  for  the  new  edition,  in  which  he  added 
Arago,  the  Edinburgh  Review,  and  the  Westminster  Review  to  his 
list  of  the  authorities  that  had  exposed  Brewster's  mendacity. 

"It  appears,"  said  Home,  "that,  in  addition  to  his  other 
claims,  Sir  David  Brewster  sets  up  a  claim  that  he  alone  is  gifted 
with  the  power  of  feeling.  To  me  he  denies  all  feeling,  and  has 
coarsely  and  untruly  held  me  up  to  the  public  as  a  cheat  and  an 
impostor.  But  when  I  prove  by  documents  and  independent  wit- 
nesses his  true  character,  he  actually  feels  it,  and  complains." 

Sir  David  Brewster  did  not  bring  a  libel  action.  Perhaps  he  felt 
the  force  of  Home's  remark,  when,  after  citing  the  authorities  for 
his  statements,  he  added :  "It  is  a  great  pity  that  Sir  David 
Brewster  did  not  bring  actions  to  vindicate  his  character  against  the 
authors  of  some  of  these  books,  or  against  Dr.  Carpenter,  against 
whom  he  made  an  abortive  threat,  instead  of  attacking  me." 

This  preface  to  the  second  edition  was  written  at  Rome  in  Decem- 
ber, 1863,  where  Mr.  Home  had  gone  to  study  art.  For  some 
months  past  the  longing  had  possessed  him  to  attempt  turning  to 
account  the  keen  artistic  perceptions  he  possessed ;  and  the  career  in 
which  he  believed  himself  most  likely  to  succeed  was  that  of  the 
sculptor.  It  was  in  vain  that  friends,  especially  medical  friends, 
remonstrated  with  him,  and  warned  him  that  such  a  career  was  of  all 

112  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

others  most  unsuited  to  him,  who  had  twice  already  been  at  the 
point  of  death  from  affections  of  the  lungs.  Home  was  determined 
to  gratify  his  longing ;  the  more  so  that  pecuniary  difficulties  were 
threatening  him,  as  his  right  to  the  inheritance  of  his  wife's  little 
fortune  was  very  unjustly  disputed  by  her  relatives.  He  had  made 
the  acquaintance  in  London  of  some  eminent  sculptors,  Mr.  Durham, 
Mr.  Boehm,  and  others;  and  before  going  txa  Rome,  he  consulted 
with  some  of  these,  and  took  lessons  in  the  art. 

In  the  year  1863  he  was  often  a  visitor  at  two  houses  where  artists 
of  every  description  congregated — those  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Howitt 
and  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hall.  I  need  not  bring  forward  evidence  of  the 
faith  of  the  Halls  and  the  Howitts  in  Spiritualism — all  four  de- 
clared it  publicly;  and  all  four,  be  it  marked,  had  commenced  the 
investigation  of  the  subject  as  absolute  sceptics.  "  I  laughed," 

wrote  Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall,  "  at  the  idea  of  a  spirit  giving  a  message 
by  raps  on  a  table.  I  did  worse,  I  became  angry."  Her  husband 
has  borne  equally  emphatic  testimony  to  his  original  incredulity. 

How  Mr.  and  Mrs.  William  Howitt  were  led  to  investigate  I  do 
not  know,  but  by  the  year  i86i  they  had  both  become  zealous 
Spiritualists. 

Mr.  Home's  acquaintance  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall  com- 
menced in  i860.  Among  the  various  inquirers,  more  honest  and 
candid  than  Brewster,  who  were  present  in  1855  at  seances  with 
Home  at  Ealing,  were  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Newton  Crossland.  They 
became  firm  Spiritualists,  declared  their  convictions ;  and  Mr.  Cross- 
land  suffered  much  loss  and  persecution  in  consequence.  They  were 
acquainted  with  S,  C.  Hall,  then  a  sceptic  concerning  the  manifesta- 
tions. He  only  laughed  at  his  friends'  accounts  of  what  they  had 
seen  at  Ealing  and  elsewhere ;  but  on  making  in  his  turn  the  acquain- 
tance of  Mr  Home,  the  incredulity  of  a  lifetime  was  vanquished. 

Mr.  Hall  has  frequently  related  to  his  friends  one  of  his  earliest 
experiences  with  Mr.  Home;  and  in  1884  he  made  the  incident  public. 
I  copy  his  narrative  : — 

"  In  i860,  sitting  with  Daniel  Home  (some  persons  of  distinction  being 
present),  the  spirit  of  my  father  came  to  us.  When  the  name  '  Robert  Hall  ' 
was  announced,  I  asked  if  he  were  my  father  or  my  brother — the  answer 
being,  '  Your  father.  Colonel  Hall.'  I  requested  some  test  to  make  me  sure. 
The  answer  given  was  this  (it  excited  laughter  among  the  party,  by  whom  it 
was  not  understood  ;  but  I  knew  that  a  more  conclusive  and  convincing  test 
could  not  have  been  given  to  me)  :  '  The  last  time  we  met  in  Cork  you  pulled 
my  tail.'  Like  all  military  officers  of  his  time,  he  wore  the  queue  ;  he  wore  it, 
indeed,  up  to  his  death,  and  was  buried  in  it.  Few  persons  living  can  remem- 
ber the  queue  :  the  hair  behind  was  suffered  to  grow  long,  and  was  tied  with 
black  ribbon  up  to  nearly  the  end." 

All  who  knew  Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall  remember  her  as  one  of  the  most 
gifted,  charming,  and  warm-hearted  of  women.  It  was  a  privilege 
to  call  her  friend  ;  and  Home  was  one  of  her  dearest  friends ;  the 
difference  in  their  ages  enabling  her  to  counsel  and  encourage  him 
in  something  of  the  spirit  of  a  mother  speaking  to  a  son.  Letters 
from  very  dear  friends,  Mr.    Home  carefully  preserved ;  and  there 

ENGLAND,   ROME,    AND    PARIS  113 

remain  hundreds  of  Mrs.  Hall's  extending  over  a  period  of  twenty 
years,  and  as  interesting  as  they  are  outspoken  and  affectionate. 

The  letters  of  the  years  1863  and  4  show  Mrs.  Hall  as  interesting 
herself  cordially  in  Home's  project  of  becoming  a  sculptor. 

"I  received  your  letter  late  on  Saturday,"  she  writes  on  first 
learning  of  that  project;  "  and  wrote  at  once  to  Mr.  Durham.  I 
am  sure  you  have  the  corner  in  his  heart,  and  will  have  one  in  his 
studio,  if  there  is  one  to  spare." 

It  seems  that  there  was  not;  and  so  Mr.  Home's  first  essays  in 
the  art  were  made  at  Dieppe  in  the  autumn  of  1863.  It  was  there 
and  then  that  the  angry  incredulity  of  Dr.  Elliottson  was  shattered 
in  the  manner  already  described ;  Mrs.  Milner  Gibson  being  one  of 
the  witnesses  of  the  wonderful  change  wrought  in  his  sentiments  by 
his  two  seances  with  Home.  A  letter  of  February,  1864,  shows 
Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall  to  have  also  been  at  Dieppe  when  Elliottson  was 
there : — 

"  Mr.  Dallas  of  the  Times  was  opposite  me  at  dinner  at  Mr. 
Warde's  yesterday,"  writes  Mrs.  Hall.  "  He  said  across  the  table, 
'  Dr.  Elliottson  is  attending  me — do  you  know  he  is  almost  a  believer 
in  Spiritualism  ?  '  '  Almost !  '  I  repeated ;  '  he  was  altogether  so,  when 
I  saw  him  at  Dieppe.'  " 

In  November,  1863,  the  intending  sculptor  went  to  Rome  to  study 
his  art.  For  six  weeks  he  quietly  pursued  it  among  the  artist  colony 
there,  with  several  of  whom  he  was  acquainted ;  but  on  the  2nd  of 
January,  1864,  he  received  a  proof  that  the  Papal  Government  had 
neither  forgotten  nor  forgiven  his  refusal,  eight  years  before,  to  let 
the  monastery  gates  close  upon  him.  He  was  summoned  before  the 
chief  of  the  Roman  police,  subjected  to  a  long  interrogatory,  and 
finally  ordered,  on  the  ground  of  sorcery,  to  quit  Rome  within  three 
days. 

Mr.  Home  at  once  claimed  the  protection  of  the  English  Consul ; 
the  result  of  whose  intervention,  joined  with  that  of  a  distinguished 
personage  friendly  to  Homs,  was  somewhat  incorrectly  related  by 
the  Times  correspondent  in  w/iting  to  that  journal  : — 

"  On  Monday  morning,"  said  the  correspondent,  "  the  British  Consul  saw 
Monsignor  Matteucci,  the  Governor  of  Rome,  and  complained  that  any  British 
subject  should  be  interfered  with  in  consequence  of  his  opinions.  He  stated 
that  Mr.  Home  had  conducted  himself  during  his  residence  in  Rome  in  a 
strictly  legal  and  gentlemanly  manner ;  and  demanded  that  the  obnoxious  order 
should  be  rescinded.  Monsignor  spoke  of  dangerous  powers  of  fascination,  of 
the  prohibition  by  the  Government  of  all  the  practices  of  the  black  art ;  and 
finally  assented  to  Mr.  Home's  remaining,  on  condition  of  his  entering  into  an 
^"g^gement,  through  Mr.  Severn,  that  he  would  desist  from  all  communica- 
tions with  the  spiritual  world  during  his  stay  in  Rome." 

Mr.  Home  entered  into  no  such  engagement.  He  could  not. 
Nothing  was  more  common  with  him  than  for  manifestations  to  occur 
unexpectedly,  and  he  could  do  nothing  to  prevent  their  happening. 
The  actual  written  promise  that  he  gave,  at  the  request  of  the 
Governor  of  Rome,  was  word  for  word  as  follows : — 

"  I  give  my  word  as  a  gentleman  that  during  my  stay  in  Rome  I 

114  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

will  have  no  seance,  and  that  I  will  avoid,  as  much  as  possible,  all 
conversations  upon  Spdritualism. " 

No  seance  was  held ;  but  behind  the  Governor  of  Rome  there  were 
higher  powers  still,  who  were  determined  that,  seances  or  no 
seances,  Home  should  leave  the  city.  The  British  Consul  was  falsely 
informed  that  Home  had  broken  his  promise,  and  Home  himself  was 
once  more  ordered  to  quit  the  Papal  territory,  the  excuse  made  being 
that,  since  he  could  only  promise  to  hold  no  seance,  and  was  unable 
to  say  that  manifestations  would  not  occur  in  spite  of  such  abstention, 
it  was  impossible  to  allow  him  to  remain.  It  deserves  to  be  added, 
as  characteristic  of  the  methods  of  the  defunct  Papal  Government, 
that  for  the  four  weeks  preceding  the  expulsion  none  of  Home's  letters 
had  been  delivered  to  hdm,  the  authorities  retaining  them  to  study 
their  contents  at  leisure. 

"  Is  there  anything  against  Mr.  Home's  character?  "  asked  a  high 
personage  who  interviewed  the  Governor  of  Rome  on  his  behalf. 
"No,"  replied  Monsignor  Matteucci,  "nothing.  During  the  two 
months  he  has  been  in  Rome  we  have  had  him  watched,  and  we 
believe  that  his  character  is  without  blemish.  But  he  is  a  sorcerer, 
and  cannot  be  permitted  in  Rome;  and  he  must  go." 

Home  left  for  Naples;  and  was  escorted  to  the  railway  station  by 
a  number  of  his  friends  in  Rome,  as  a  mark  of  sympathy  and  a  public 
protest  against  his  expulsion.  The  present  King  of  Italy,  then  Prince 
Humbert,  was  at  Naples  at  the  time ;  and  by  his  Highness's  command 
Mr.  Home  was  presented  to  him,  and  favoured  with  an  invitation  to  a 
Court  ball.  A  short  but  pleasant  stay  in  Naples  was  followed  by  a 
few  weeks  at  Nice,  where  Mrs.  Milner  Gibson  was  then  among  the 
winter  residents,  as  was  also,  it  would  seem,  Sir  E.  B.  Lytton.  Several 
seances  were  held  at  Nice;  and  about  the  beginning  of  April,  1864, 
Home  returned  to  London.  He  addressed  the  Foreign  Secretary 
on  the  subject  of  his  expulsion  from  Rome;  and  on  Earl  Russell 
declining  to  make  any  representations  to  the  Papal  Government,  Mr. 
Home  brought  the  matter  before  the  House  of  Commons,  through  the 
instrumentality  of  Mr.  Roebuck.  He  did  this  in  no  expectation  ot 
obtaining  redress,  but  it  concerned  him  to  make  as  widely  known  as 
possible  that  the  reasons  of  his  expulsion  from  Rome  in  no  way 
affected  his  character. 

It  was  on  this  occasion  that  Mr.  Milner  Gibson  was  driven  out 
of  the  House  by  the  jocose  appeal  of  Mr.  Roebuck  to  the  President 
of  the  Board  of  Trade,  whom  Roebuck  mistakenly  assumed  to  be  a 
Spiritualist.  Nothing  came  of  the  question  in  the  House  of  Commons 
beyond  the  discussion  that  ensued ;  but  the  correct  facts  concerning 
Mr.  Home's  expulsion  from  Rome  were  reported  next  morning  in  the 
leading  English  journals,  which  was  all  that  he  had  expected  or 
sought. 

Between  his  departure  from  Nice  and  return  to  London  he  had  spent 
a  week  or  two  in  Paris,  where  the  Empress  com'manded  bis  presence 
at  the  Tuileries.  Among  the  celebrities  then  in  Paris  was  Nubar 
Pasha.     The  Egyptian  statesman  was  present  at  one  or  more  seances. 

ENGLAND,   ROME,   AND    PARIS  115 

was  greatly  impressed  and  startled  by  the  manifestations;  and  on 
writing  to  express  his  sentiments  to  Mr.  Home,  he  sent  him  a  souvenir 
in  the  form  of  a  small  chain — a  trifle  that  it  would  have  been  un- 
gracious to  refuse. 

The  letter  that  accompanied  the  chain  is  dated  March  22nd,  1864. 

"  You  are  leaving  to-day,"  writes  Nubar  Pasha;  "  and  I  expect  to  have 
quitted  Paris  myself  before  your  return  from  London. 

"  I  take  the  liberty  of  sending  you  a  small  chain  ;  it  is  a  souvenir,  a 
memento ;  for  truly  I  should  be  happy  to  know  that  you  will  think  of  me 
occasionally.  As  for  me,  you  may  believe  me  I  carry  away  a  recollection  of 
you  that  will  never  be  effaced.     Your  very  devoted  servant  and  friend, 

"  M.   Nubar." 

In  writing  the  narrative  of  a  life  so  full  of  incident  as  that  of  Home, 
I  find  myself  compelled  sometimes  to  group  together  the  events  of 
different  years.  Were  I  to  preserve  strict  chronological  sequence,  and 
to  accompany  Mr.  Home  step  by  step  in  his  thousand  and  one 
journeys,  these  chapters  would  read  rather  like  a  record  of  travel  than 
a  biography. 

I  am  now  about  to  group  together  the  incidents  of  the  years  1863 
and  1864  so  far  as  they  relate  to  London.  Home  was  much  in  the 
English  Metropolis  during  those  two  years,  and  held  frequent  seances. 
At  these  various  English  celebrities  were  present,  including  Mr.  John 
Bright,  Mr.  Ruskin,  Sir  Charles  Nicholson,  and  Sir  Daniel  Cooper. 
All  four  were  deeply  impressed  by  the  manifestations  they  witnessed ; 
of  Mr.  Ruskin  and  Sir  Charles  Nicholson  I  have  reasons  for  saying 
that  the  effect  on  them  was  to  render  them  unavowed  Spiritualists — 
reasons  that  I  shall  presently  put  before  the  reader.  Sir  D.  Cooper 
made  no  scruple  among  his  friends  of  avowing  his  belief,  but  he 
shrank  from  proclaiming  it  to  the  world. 

In  Mr.  Home's  second  volume  of  Incidents,  published  in  1872, 
he  passes  over  that  interesting  period  of  his  life,  the  early  summer  of 
1864,  with  the  brief  remark,  ''  I  returned  to  England,  and  then 
crossed  the  Atlantic,  to  revisit  my  old  friends  in  America."  Con- 
sideration for  the  feelings  of  timid  inquirers  could  hardly  be  carried 
to  a  higher  pitch. 

It  was  through  Mr.  and  Mrs.  S.  C.  rfall  that  Mr.  Ruskin,  Mr. 
Bright,  and  Sir  D.  Cooper  made  the  acquaintance  of  Mr.  Home.  The 
letters  of  Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall  during  the  years  1861,  2,  3,  and  4,  are 
fortunately  very  numerous ;  and  they  have  materially  assisted  me  in 
arriving  at  the  facts  of  that  portion  of  Mr.  Home's  English  experiences 
I  am  now  dealing  with. 

Before  speaking  of  Mr.  Bright  and  Mr.  Ruskin,  I  may  take  the 
opportimity  those  letters  give  me  to  say  a  few  words  of  a  man  less  in- 
tellectually distinguished,  but  who  was,  I  believe,  in  some  sort  a  social, 
artistic,  and  literary  celebrity  in  London  a  quarter  ot  a  century  ago^ 
Mr.  Heaphy. 

To  begin  with,  he  is  the  hero  of  an  amusing  anecdote  related  by 
Mrs.  Hall.  "  Mr.  Heaphy  looked  in  on  Sunday  evening,"  she  writes 
in  February,  1864;  "  and  we  are  so  amused.     Old  Lady  P.,  we  hear, 

ii6  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

has  been  carried  up  to  the  ceiling  and  has  writ'ten  on  it — she  told  this 
to  Mr.  Heaphy,  saying,  '  Do  you  know,  I  am  a  -floater  I '  Now  Mr. 
Heaphy's  deafness  played  him  a  bad  trick,  and  he  thought  she  had 
said,  '  Do  you  know,  I  am  a  bloater  I '  So  Mr.  Heaphy  went  about 
telling  how  Spiritualism  had  changed  poor  Lady  P.  into  a  Yarmouth 
bloater." 

A  cool-headed,  clever  man  of  the  world,  Heaphy  could  joke  at  a 
Spiritualist  like  "  old  Lady  P.,"  but  he  was  very  differently  impressed 
by  the  mysterious  gift  of  Home.  "  Mr.  Heaphy  called  here  last 
night,"  writes  Mrs.  Hall  in  1861  ;  "  and  I  do  rejoice  at  the  change 
wrought  in  his  mind  through  your  means.  Sometimes,  even  now,  his 
spirit  rises  against  conviction;  and  then  again  it  is  brought  right  by 
the  wonders  he  has  seen,  the  marvellous  information  you  gave  him. 
He  tells  me  darling  Sacha's  portrait  is  greatly  improved.  It  is  such 
a  blessing  he  has  been  brought  to  you." 

As  a  reference  in  Mrs.  Hall's  letter  indicates,  Mr.  Heaphy,  whose 
genius  was  of  a  versatile  order,  painted  a  portrait  of  Mrs.  Home.  He 
had  never  the  courage  to  make  his  convictions  public ;  but  in  private 
he  showed  himself  an  attached  and  sincere  friend  ;  and  when  Home 
formed  the  design  of  studying  sculpture  at  Rome,  it  was  Heaphy  who 
sent  him  an  introduction  to  one  of  the  most  eminent  of  the  artist 
colony  there,  the  sculptor  Gibson. 

"  My  dear  Dan,"  writes  Heaphy,  "'I  am  glad  for  many  reasons 
that  you  are  back  in  the  old  place  at  last ;  though  I  could  have  wished 
that  you  were  at  Paris  instead,  that  I  might  have  a  better  chance  of 
coming  to  see  you.  My  wife  tells  me  you  wish  for  an  introduction  to 
Gibson — I  enclose  one.   .   .   . 

"  You  will  find  many  of  our  London  friends  at  Rome,  Edward 
Stirling  among  the  number.  Possibly  I  may  be  in  Rome  by  the  Holy 
week.  Adieu  !  When  you  have  an  opportunity  let  us  hear  how  you 
are  getting  on.     Yours  ever  truly,  "  Thos.  Heaphy." 

Mr.  Raskin's  investigations  of  Spiritualism  appear  to  have  com- 
menced in  the  year  1863,  when  he  accepted  tlio  invitation  of  a  well- 
known  English,  or,  rather,  Scottish  Spiritualist,  Mrs.  Makdougall 
Gregory,  widow  of  Professor  Gregory,  to  be  present  at  a  seance.  The 
medium  was  not  Mr.  Home,  who  was  at  the  time  absent  from  Eng- 
land; and  a  letter  of  Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall's  declares  the  distinguished 
investigator  to  have  been  very  unfavourably  impressed. 

Some  little  time  afterwards,  Mr.  Ruskin  was  one  evening  at  the 
house  of  a  Mr.  Bertolacd,  who  was  a  Spiritualist,  and  an  acquaintance 
of  Mr.  Home.  The  topic  of  Spiritualism  came  up  for  discussion; 
and  Mr.  Ruskin  appears  to  have  said  something  of  the  unfavourable 
impression  made  on  him  by  the  mediums-s-pretended  or  real — ■ 
that  he  had  seen. 

"  Mr.  Bertolacci  told  him,"  writes  Mrs.  Hall,  "  that  he  ought  to 
see  your  mediumship.  He  asked  if  you  were  a  true  man — to  be 
depended  on  as  a  man;  and  added,  '  Of  your  wonderful  gifts  there 
could  be  no  doubt. '    Upon  this,  the  whole  family  burst  out  into  their 

ENGLAND,   ROME,   AND    PARIS  117 

belief  in  all  your  goodness — that  wc  "  (Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hall)  "  knew 
you  so  well,  etc.,  etc.    And  then  the  rest  came  about." 

The  "rest"  to  which  Mrs.  Hall  refers  was  the  fact  that  Mr.  Ruskin 
had  ended  by  expressing  a  desire  to  meet  Mr.  Home  at  a  seance.  The 
Bertolacds  conununicated  his  wish  to  Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall ;  and,  delighted 
with  the  hope  of  so  eminent  a  convert  to  Spiritualism,  she  at  once 
penned  the  letter  to  Home  just  quoted  from.  He  willingly  promised 
the  seance ;  and  the  Halls,  who  had  been  on  the  point  of  starting  for 
Ireland,  deferred  their  journey  for  a  few  days  to  be  present.  In  her 
next  letter  Mrs.  Hall  writes: — 

"My  Dear  Friend, — Mr.  Ruskin  comes  on  Monday  evening — he 
asks  if  he  may  bring  a  friend  who  is  coming  to  stay  with  ham — a 
clergyman:  'that  is,'  he  adds,  'if  his  friend  wishes  it.'  There 
will  be  you,  the  three  Bertolaccis — our  two  selves,  Mr.  R.  and  his 
friend;  that  is  all  we  have  thought  about — exactly  eight." 

Either  the  Halls  were  finally  obliged  to  leave  for  Ireland  on  the 
eve  of  the  seance,  or  it  was  followed  by  a  second  seance  that  fhey 
could  not  wait  for;  for  on  the  14th  of  June,  1864,  Mrs.  Hall 
writes  :  "  We  greatly  regret  leaving  town  just  now.  I  am  so 
interested  about  Mr.  Ruskin — do  let  me  know  if  anything  to  catch 
hold  of  his  apathetic  yet  energetic  nature  occurs  to-morrow  evening ; 
and  do,  dear  friend,  go  to  him  in  his  own  home." 

What  occurred  ?  The  Halls  were  in  Ireland  most  of  the  summer ; 
Mr.  Ruskin  has  never  spoken.  I  do  not  know  if  he  had  two  seances 
with  Mr.  Home  or  twenty  ;  but  thai,  whatever  their  number,  those 
seances  had,  in  Mrs.  Hall's  phrase,  "caught  hold"  of  him,  the 
friendly,  and  even  affectionate  tone  of  his  subsequent  letters  to  Home 
sufficiently  demonstrates. 

"  Only  fancy  Ruskin  being  convinced  !  "  Mrs.  Hall  writes  some 
months  later,  when  Home  had  again  left  England.  "  Bui  he  does 
not  wish  it  talked  about,"  she  adds,  underlining  the  words  emphati- 
cally. 

In  the  early  autumn  of  1864,  Mr.  Home  sailed  for  America. 
Evidently  he  had  written  to  Mr.  Ruskin  on  the  eve  of  his  departure, 
and  the  subjoined  letter — from  which  I  omit  some  confidences  of 
Mr.  Ruskin  concerning  himself — was  the  answer  to  his  own  : — 

"  Denmark  Hill,  ^th  September,  1864. 

"  Dear  Mr.  Home, — It  is  so  nice  of  you  to  like  me  !  I  believe  you  are  truly 
doing  me  the  greatest  service  and  help  that  one  human  being  can  do  anothef 
in  trusting  me  in  this  way,  and  indeed  I  hope  I  so  far  deserve  your  trust,  that 
I  can  understand  noble  and  right  feeling  and  affection — though  I  have  myself 
little  feeling  or  affection  left,  being  worn  out  with  indignation  as  far  as  regards 
the  general  world.     .     . 

"  Till  March  is  long  to  wait — and  it  really  isn't  all  my  fault.  I  did  not 
write  that  week — for  I  was  not  sure  if  I  could  get  into  town  for  you  on  Mon- 
day— but  you  never  told  me  you  were  going  away  before  Monday,  and  I 
thought  my  Saturday's  letter  quite  safe. 

"  Well— do,  please,  write  me  a  line  to  say  you  are  safe  in  America.  And 
come  to  see  me  the  moment  you  come  back.  I  shall  be  every  way,  I  hope, 
then  more  at  leisure  and  peace.  May  you  be  preserved  in  that  wild  country,* 
and  brought  back  to  us  better  in  health  and  happier.  Ever  affectionately 
yours,  "  J.  Ruskin." 

'  The  Civil  War  was  then  raging 

ii8  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

In  this  pleasant  letter,  Mr.  Ruskin  would  seem  to  say  in  effect : 
"  Do  not  expect  too  much  from  a  man  worn  out  by  his  warfare  with 
the  spirit  of  the  time,  but  as  far  as  I  have  feeling  and  affection  left, 
I  feel  for  and  sympathise  with  you,  my  new  friend."  Sympathy 
and  liking  were  precious  to  Home,  than  whose  nature  none  was  ever 
more  sensitive,  and  who  all  his  life  stood  as  a  target  for  the  shafts  of 
abuse  and  calumny  loosed  against  him  by  men  who  knew  nothing  of 
him  but  his  name. 

Mr.  Home  returned  from  America  in  May,  1865,  but  spent  only  a 
day  or  two  in  London,  before  leaving  for  France  and  Russia.  It 
seems  to  have  been  at  this  time  that  the  following  undated  letter 
of  Mrs.  Hall's  was  written. 

"  Saturday  Night. 

"  Dear  Friend, — I  have  just  received  such  a  charming  note  from  Mr 
Ruskin — I  cannot  even  '  lend  you  the  loan  '  of  it  for  a  single  look,  I  am  so 
proud  of  it — but  I  can  quote  :  '  I'm  coming  at  one  o'clock  on  Monday  to  take 
possession  of  Mr.  Home,  to  drive  him  over  to  Denmark  Hill ;  and  so  we  shall 
have  all  the  drive  time  besides — so  please  tell  him  this,  and  hold  him  fast  on 
Monday  morning  till  I  come.' 

"  I  have  written  to  Mr.  Ruskin  to  say  that  you  have  escaped — that  I  write 
by  to-night's  post  to  catch  you  at  Cox's  Hotel — that  I  am  sure  you  would 
forego  any  engagement  to  spend  a  few  hours  with  him  (who  would  not?)  and — 

"  Well,  that  was  all  I  could  say.  Nothing  can  exceed  the  cordiality  of  his 
letter." 

The  winter  of  1865  brought  Home  back  from  Russia  to  England, 
and  while  on  a  visit  to  Dr.  Gully  at  Malvern,  he  received  a  letter 
written  by  Mr.  Ruskin  by  way  of  New  Year's  greeting  : — 

"  Denmark  Hill,  2gth  December,  1865. 
"  Dear  Mr.  Home, — This  is  only  to  thank  you  for  your  kind  letter, 
and  to  wish  you  a  happy  new  year.  Your  letter  from  America 
stayed  by  me  reproachfully  day  by  day — it  was  the  deep  summer 
time,  and  I  was  out  all  day  long,  and  came  in  at  night  too  tired  to 
write,  and  at  last  it  was"  too  late.  But  now  I  hope  I  may  soon 
see  you.      Please  say  that  I  may,  and  believe  me  affectionately  yours, 

"  J.  Ruskin." 

As  Mr.  Home  was  much  in  London  during  1866,  Mr.  Ruskin 's 
desire  that  he  might  soon  meet  again  was  probably  gratified ;  but  on 
this  point  I  have  no  means  of  speaking  positively.  Passing  over 
nine  months,  I  find,  from  a  letter  of  Mrs.  Hall,  dated  October  i6th, 
1866,  that  Mr.  Ruskin  was  then  wishing  for  a  seance  on  a  friend's 
account : — 

"  My  dear  Daniel, — All  the  town  is  ringing  with  the  story' — giving  it,  of 
course,  various  readings — but   all  your  old  friends   are  full  of  rejoicing. 

"  Mr.  Ruskin  called  here  to-day.  Carter  desires  me  to  enclose  you  a  note 
he  received  from  him.  I  wish,  my  dear  Daniel,  you  could  fix  an  evening  to 
receive  his  friend.  If  you  could  meet  him  here? — or  at  the  Athenaeum?"  (the 
Spiritual  Athenaeum  in  Sloane  Street),  "  only  please  do  attend  to  it,  and  write 
to  me — and  to  Mr.  Ruskin.  He  rejoiced  for  you — but,  oh  !  he  is  looking  so 
worn  and  ill.     We  had  such  a  long  talk  on  Spiritualism." 

*  The  adoption  of  Mr.   Home  by  Mrs.   Lyon. 

ENGLAND,   ROME,    AND    PARIS  119 

As  I  am  unable  to  give  the  particulars  of  that  talk  or  of  the 
seances  that  had  preceded  it,  I  have  printed  here  instead  the  indirect, 
but  none  the  less  conclusive  testimony  that  such  letters  from  Mr. 
Ruskin  as  have  been  preserved  afford  of  the  deep  and  favourable  im- 
pression made  on  him  by  his  experiences  with  Mr.  Home ;  and  leave  it 
now  to  the  judgment  of  the  reader,  together  with  the  corroborative 
evidence  of  Mrs.  Hall.  Other  portions  of  her  letters  also  refer  to 
Mr.  Ruskin  in  connection  with  Spiritualism;  but  as  the  statements 
are  hearsay,  I  have  confined  myself  to  the  passages  where  she 
speaks  from  personal  knowledge. 

Mr.  John  Bright's  introduction  to  Mr.  Home  also  took  place 
through  the  Halls,  and  at  an  earlier  date  than  that  of  Mr.  Ruskin. 
The  Mr.  Wason,  of  Liverpool,  whose  description  of  his  first  seance  has 
already  been  given,  was  an  intimate  friend  of  a  once-noted  politician, 
Mr.  E.  Beales ;  and  his  relation  of  the  wonderful  phenomena  he  had 
witnessed  excited  the  interest  and  curiosity  of  Mr.  Beales,  who, 
through  Wason,  obtained  an  introduction  to  Home.  Mr.  Beales,  like 
his  friend,  was  vividly  impressed  by  the  manifestations  he  beheld  ; 
and  it  was  his  influence  that  induced  the  Morning  Star  newspaper  to 
open  its  columns  to  letters  on  the  subject  of  Spiritualism.  "  As 

regards  my  having  been  instrumental  in  throwing  open  the  columns  of 
the  Star  to  the  discussion  of  Spiritualism,"  Mr.  Beales  writes  to  Mr. 
Home,  October  i6th,  1862,  "  I  very  unfeignedly  assure  you  that  it 
was  to  my  mind  both  a  pleasure  and  a  duty." 

In  his  turn,  Mr.  Beales,  by  his  narrative,  of  the  seances  at  which  he 
had  been  present,  inspired  his  friend,  Mr.  John  Bright,  with  the 
desire  to  witness  and  investigate  the  phenomena.  Being  an 
acquaintance  and  near  neighbour  of  the  Halls,  with  whom  Home 
was  holding  frequent  seances  in  the  winter  of  1862 — 3,  Mr.  Beales 
communicated  Bright's  wish  to  them,  and  a  seance  at  their  house 
was  appointed.  Mr.  John  Bright  came  accordingly,  bringing  with 
him  Mr.  Lucas,  managing  editor  of  the  Morning  Star.  Among  the 
other  sitters  present  was  a  lady  whose  narrative  of  her  own  early 
experiences  with  Mr.  Home  has  already  been  given,  Mrs.  Adelaide 
Senior.  The  little  I  know  of  the  occurrences  of  the  evening  is 
from  her. 

"  In  November,  1862,"  writes  Mrs.  Senior,  "  I  was  present  at  one  of  Mr. 
D.  D.  Home's  stances  in  the  house  of  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall,  to  which  Mr.  John 
Bright  had  been  invited,  he  having  expressed  a  strong  wish  to  see  something 
of  Spiritualism.  On  the  day  of  the  siance,  Mr.  Hall  received  a  note  from 
Mr.  Bright,  asking  to  be  allowed  to  bring  a  friend,  Mr.  Lucas,  editor  of  the 
Star  newspaper." 

Mrs.  Senior  describes  the  manifestations  of  the  evening  as  numerous 
and  remarkable,  and  gives  the  following  narrative  of  one  of  the  early 
incidents  of  the  seance : — 

Not  many  minutes  after  we  were  seated  at  the  large,  heavy  round  table, 
knocks  were  given  for  the  alphabet,  and  the  words  given  were  :  '  You  are 
trying  to  prevent  our  raising  the  table.'  Mr.  Hall  asked,  '  Who  is  trying?* 
and  pointed  to  each  in  succession,  when  three  knocks  for  '  Yes  '  were  given  in 
front  of  Mr.  Lucas,  who  at  once  said,  '  Yes,  I  was  putting  my  whole  weight 
upon  it  '     I,   sitting  next  but  one  to  him,   then   asked,  '  Do  you   think  that 

I20  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

right?*  '  Oh,  yes,'  he  answered,  '  I  came  here  to  investigate.'  '  Certainly,' 
I   said ;  '  but  neither  to  assist  nor  retard  the  movements. '      A   message   then 

came,  desiring  Mr.  to  sit  upon  the  table  ;  this  was  a  stout  gentleman  who 

was  present.  The  desire  was  complied  with  ;  and  instantly  the  table  was  not 
only  raised,  but  tossed  up,  as  you  would  toss  a  baby  in  your  arms — saying, 
as  plainly  as  words  could  have  done,  '  You  tried  to  prevent  our  raising  the 
table  with  nothing  upon  it,  and  we  will  prove  to  you  that  we  can  do  it  with 
this  additional  weight.'  " 

Laughable  as  this  incident  may  seem  to  some  sceptical  readers,  it 
could  not  but  impress  the  two  shrewd  and  incredulous  inquirers 
present  that  evening.  The  room  was  fully  lighted;  Mr.  Bright  and 
Mr.  Lucas  had  satisfied  themselves  that  no  machinery  was  concealed 
under  the  table  or  connected  with  it.  There  sat  Mr.  Home,  his  fingers 
lightly  resting  on  the  table ;  and  again  and  again  the  heavy  table  rose 
clear  of  the  ground,  with  the  weight  of  a  heavy  man  upon  it  in 
addition. 

As  Mrs.  Senior  cannot  furnish  me  a  precise  account  of  the  numerous 
other  phenomena  of  the  seance,  I  refrain  from  describing  them. 

"  I  asked  Mr.  Bright,  on  his  leaving,"  says  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall,  "  what 
he  thought  of  the  manifestations  he  had  witnessed  that  evening. 
'  They  are  very  wonderful,'  he  replied;  adding,  '  I  know,  Mr.  Hall, 
you  would  not  lend  yourself  to  any  trickery.    It  is  very  remarkable. '  " 

"  Mr.  Beales  is  just  gone,"  wrote  Mrs.  Hall  a  day  or  two  after  the 
seance  to  Mr.  Home.  ' '  I  am  most  thankful  for  the  impression  which 
he  assured  me  had  been  made  both  on  Mr.  Lucas  and  John  Bright. 
Both  are  most  wishful  to  meet  you  again." 

An  invitation  to  a  second  seance  was  given  and  accepted;  but  on 
the  eve  of  the  day  appointed  Mrs.  Hall  writes :  ' '  Carter  has  had  a 
most  melancholy  note  from  Bright,  saying  he  cannot  come  on  Friday. 
He  goes  out  of  town,  but  hopes  the  week  or  so  after  next  to  be 
fortunate.     He  is  evidently  deeply  impressed." 

Probably  Mr.  Bright  was  ultimately  present  at  a  second  seance. 
I  find  the  following  letter  from  him  to  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall  among  Mr. 
Home's  papers: — 

"  4,  Hanover  Street,  May  6,  '64. 

"  My  DEAR  Mr.  Hall, — Would  Wednesday  next,  the  nth  inst.,  suit  you  for 
another  sitting  with  Mr.  Home?  Mr.  Tite,  M.P.,  whom  I  think  you  know, 
has  several  times  expressed  to  me  his  great  wish  to  be  present  on  an  occasion 
when  manifestations  may  be  expected ;  and  it  would  gratify  him  very  much  if 
he  could  come.     .     .     . 

"  Wednesday  will  suit  me  best,  but  if  some  other  evening,  Saturday  excepted, 
can  only  be  set  apart  for  it,  I  will  try  to  come. 

"  I  hope  you  will  not  think  me  troublesome.  You  were  kind  enough  to  ask 
me  to  come  again,  and  to  propose  a  day.  I  hope  you  may  be  able  to  arrange 
-with  Mr.  Home,  and  that  he  will  not  think  me  intrusive.     Very  truly  yours, 

"  John  Bright." 

I  believe  Mr.  Bright  has  never  made  public  any  account  of  his 
experiences  with  Mr.  Home;  but  in  conversing  on  the  subject,  the 
testimony  of  Mr.  Hall  and  that  of  Mr.  Beales,  as  reported  by  Mrs. 
Hall,  showed  that  he  declared  freely  the  impression  made  on  him. 
I  have  the  evidence  of  another  person  to  add  to  theirs.     Mr.  J.  M. 

ENGLAND,   ROME,    AND    PARIS  121 

Peebles,  a  United  States  consul,  was  in  England  about  this  time,  and 
had  a  talk  with  Mr.  Bright  on  Spiritualism.  Lecturing  in  America, 
September  3,  1870,  on  his  travels  in  Europe,  Mr.  Peebles  stated: — 

"  While  in  England  I  dined  with  John  Bright,  when  transpired 
quite  an  earnest  conversation  upon  the  subject  of  Spiritualism.  He 
said  he  had  witnessed  some  of  D.  D.  Home's  manifestations.  They 
were  wonderful.  He  could  attribute  them  to  no  cause  except  it  be  the 
one  alleged,  that  of  intelligent,  disembodied  spirits.  '  But,'  he  added, 
with  due  caution,  '  I  do  not  say  that  this  is  so ;  but  if  it  be  true,  it  is 
the  strongest  tangible  proof  we  have  of  immortality.'  " 

Sir  Charles  Nicholson,  to  whom  I  have  referred  a  few  pages  back, 
seems  to  have  been  a  very  amiable  man,  and,  like  many  amiable  men, 
a  very  timid  one.  He  had  been  present  at  a  number  of  seances  with 
Home,  was  entirely  convinced  of  the  genuineness  of  the  manifestations 
and  probably  satisfied  of  their  spiritual  origin;  but  he  could  not 
summon  up  courage  to  make  his  convictions  public.  In  1864,  after  Mr. 
Home's  expulsion  from  Rome,  some  of  his  English  friends  planned 
an  address  to  him,  that  should  be  at  once  a  declaration  of  sympathy 
and  a  testimony  of  their  belief  in  Spiritualism.  The  wish  of  the  pro- 
moters of  tlie  address  naturally  was  to  obtain  the  signatures  of  various 
distinguished  Englishmen  who  had  privately  expressed  their  conviction 
of  the  genuineness  of  the  phenomena  witnessed  by  them  in  Home's 
presence ;  but  it  was  found  that  nearly  all  were  too  timid  to  let  their 
names  go  forth  to  the  world. 

"  Of  course  I  am  ready  to  be  a  witness  either  in  private  or  in 
public,"  wrote  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall  to  Mr.  Home;  "but  will  others — 
will  Robert  Chambers,  Sir  E.  B.  Lytton,  Sir  Charles  Nicholson  and 
others  be  both?" 

It  was  found  that  they  would  not,  and  the  testimonial  ultimately 
took  a  private,  instead  of  a  public  form.  But  if  timorous  of  publishing 
his  faith  to  the  world.  Sir  Charles  Nicholson  would  seem  to  have 
declared  it  freely  to  his  friends. 

' '  At  dinner  at  the  Larnocks  in  Kensington  Palace  Gardens, ' '  writes 
Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall  to  Mr.  Home,  "  Sir  Charles  Nicholson  began  about 
Spiritualism — he  is  now  a  perfect  believer.  Carter  and  be  fought  it 
out  bravely  with  the  Larnocks." 

And  again,  writing  to  Mr.  Home  in  America,  March,  1865:  "  Sir 
Charles  Nicholson  told  Mr.  Durham  that  he  had  been  informed  you 
had  renounced  Spiritualism.  Both  friends  were  in  great  anxiety  and 
distress  at  such  a  report;  so  I  sent  Sir  Charles  your  last  letter,  and 
had  such  a  very  nice  reply.     I  think  he  is  a  very  sincere  Spiritualist." 

Sincere  in  secret,  that  is.  Of  what  avail  to  any  cause  is  such 
sincerity? 

Sir  Charles  Nicholson's  letters  to  Mr.  Home  are  hardly  of  sufficient 
interest  to  print  here ;  except  perhaps  the  following,  which  slightly 
bears  on  the  testimony  of  Mrs.  Hall  concerning  his  convictions : — 

*'My  Dear  Mr.  Home, — Many  thanks  for  your  kind  note. 
Be  assured  that  the  pleasure  of  cultivating  social  intercourse,  and  of 

J- 

122  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

enjoying  your  society,  will  always  be  regarded  as  a  privilege  by  me, 
irrespective  of  curiosity  regarding  the  wonderful  phenomena  whdch  I 
may  have  an  opportunity  of  witnessing  in  your  presence.  Ever  most 
faithfully  yours,  "  Charles  Nicholson." 

That  Sir  C.  Nicholson  had  seances  at  his  own  residence  with  Mr. 
Home,  I  learn  from  a  letter  written  by  Sir  Daniel  Cooper : — 

"  20,  Prince's  Gardens,  9th  ]uly,  1864. 
"  My  dear  Home, — Lady  Cooper  desires  me  to  say  that  we  shall  be  very 
happy  to  see  your  friend,  Captain  Pemberton,  at  \  past  8  o'clock.  Our  party 
will  consist  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Witt,  Admiral  and  Mrs.  Denham,  Dr.  Barrett, 
and  our  two  selves.  Admiral  Denham  has  met  you  at  Sir  Chas.  Nicholson's — 
the  others  have  never  seen  any  manifestations,  and  are  very  anxious  to  see 
you  at  a  stance.  Lady  Cooper  joins  me  in  kind  regards.  Believe  me,  yours 
very  faithfully,  "  Daniel  Cooper." 

I  do  not  know  that  Sir  D.  Cooper,  any  more  than  Sir  Charles 
Nicholson,  ever  made  his  convictions  public;  but  in  private  both  Lady 
Cooper  and  himself  were  converts. 

"  I  heard  last  night,"  writes  Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall,  "  that  Sir  D.  Cooper  was  ill, 
so  I  called  there  en  route  to  Mrs.  Milner  Gibson's,  and  found  him  better. 
Lady  C.  said,  '  I  fear  your  maid  never  gave  Sir  Daniel's  card  to  Mr.  Home — 
I  left  it  for  him  expressly,  and  hoped  he  might  have  called  here  before  his 
return  to  Paris.'  '  Paris!'  I  repeated;  '  he  is  in  London.'  I  wish  you  had 
seen  the  expression  of  pleasure  that  lit  up  her  serious  face.  Then  she  told  me 
of  the  battles  she  and  Sir  Daniel  had  fought,  both  here  and  at  Brussels,  about 
Spiritualism  since  that  stance — how  deeply  they  are  impressed,  how  impossible 
they  find  it  to  reconcile  the  manifestations  they  saw  with  any  human  power, 
and  how  eager  they  are  to  see  more.  Do,  dear  friend,  call  on  them.  Sarah 
says  she  gave  you  Sir  D.'s  card,  but  I  daresay  you  forgot  all  about  it.  In 
their  quiet  way  they  are  as  much  impressed  as  Pickersgill.^  I  had  no  idea 
they  were  so  deeply  impressed." 

The  above  letter  was  written  early  in  1863,  and,  during  that  and 
the  following  year,  fresh  seances  with  Home  deepened  and 
strengthened  the  Spiritual  convictions  of  Sir  Daniel  and  Lady 
Cooper.  I  understand  that  some  of  the  manifestations  were  des- 
cribed in  the  Spiritual  Magazine;  but  if  so,  the  testimony  was  of 
that  anonymous  kind  which  timid  friends  of  Home  were  so  fond  of 
furnishing,  and  consequently  valueless. 

If  friends  were  timid  of  telling  the  truth  they  knew  of  him,  foes 
were  always  ready  to  make  reckless  statements  based  on  hearsay  or 
sheer  malice,  I  have  remarked  in  another  chapter  that  a  striking 
illustration  of  the  tendency  of  human  nature  to  confound  assertion 
with  fact  was  given  in  the  year  1864. 

A  Captain  Noble,  a  scientific  man  of  some  small  note,  wrote  a 
letter  to  the  Sussex  Advertiser  in  March,  1864,  on  the  subject  of 
Spiritualism,  with  especial  reference  to  the  seances  of  Mr.  Home. 
He  had  never  been  present  at  one ;  but  the  unimportant  fact  that  he 
had  no  materials  for  arriving  at  a  judgment  did  not  prevent  him  from 
forming  one ;  and  he  summed  it  up  in  the  words :  ' '  Home  is  as  rank 
an  impostor,  I  verily  believe,  as  ever  lived." 

*  Mr.  Pickersgill,  R.A.,  who  was  present  at  several  sdances  with  Mr.  Home 
about  1862-3. 

ENGLAND,   ROME,    AND    PARIS  123 

A  few  weeks  later  Mr.  Home  arrived  in  England ;  and  his  atten- 
tion was  called  to  the  letter  in  the  Sussex  Advertiser.  He  at  once 
gave  instructions  on  the  subject  to  his  solicitors,  who  wrote  to 
Captain  Noble  : — 

"  Mr.  Home  is  astonished  at  this  public  and  gratuitous  attack 
•which  you  have  nfiade  upon  his  personal  character,  and  he  is  deter- 
mined to  have  a  public  investigation,  in  which  you  will  have  an 
opportunity  if  you  can  of  proving  your  charge  against  him.  We  are 
t:herefore  instructed  to  ask  " — &c. 

Captain  Noble  responded  to  the  application  for  the  name  of  his 
solicitor  6y  writing  as  follows  to  Mr.  Home : — 

"  Forest  Lodge,  Maresfield,  14th  April,   1864. 

*'  Sir, — My  attention  having  just  been  directed  to  a  passage  in  a  long  letter 
.addressed  by  me  to  the  Sussex  Advertiser,  reflecting  strongly  on  your  character, 
I  take  the  earliest  opportunity  of  withdrawing  the  charge  therein  implied,  and 
of  offering  you,  with  all  frankness  and  unreserve,  the  fullest  apology  for  having 
made  what  a  moment's  reflection  tells  me  to  have  been  an  unjustifiable  asser- 
tion on  my  part. 

"  In  affirming  the  grounds  of  my  disbelief  and  in  attributing  Spiritual 
manifestations  to  natural  causes,  I  was  inadvertently  led  to  make  the  allusion 
to  yourself  which  I  so  much  regret.  You  will,  I  feel  assured,  acquit  me  of 
having  entertained  an)  malevolent  feeling  against  one  of  whom  I  had  no 
personal  knowledge,  and  will  readily  perceive  that  I  spoke  only  from  general 
conclusions  hastily,  and,  I  freely  admit,  unfairly  formed.  Under  these  circum- 
stances, I  feel  it  alike  due  to  you  and  to  myself  to  offer  you  every  apology 
which  one  gentleman  is  entitled  to  from  another  ;  and,  inasmuch  as  my  attack 
was  a  public  one,  I  now  express  my  readiness  to  make  my  retractation  equally 
.public,  and  shall  with  pleasure  clothe  it  in  any  appropriate  form  which  you 
may  deem  satisfactory  to  your  own  honour." 

\ 

In  making  this  amende  honorable,  it  does  not  seem  to  have 
<x:curred  to  the  writer  that  the  want  of  all  knowledge  of  Mr.  Home  to 
which  he  confesses,  instead  of  being,  as  he  implies,  a  mitigation  of 
his  offence,  greatly  aggravated  it.  It  was  the  way  of  the  world, 
however,  to  fling  random  slanders  at  Home;  and  probably  nine- 
tenths  of  his  maligners,  if  brought  to  book,  would  have  hastened  to 
plead,  like  this  Sussex  country  gentleman,  that  they  had  acted  more 
in  heedlessness  than  in  malice.  Then  and  always  the  most  placable 
■of  mankind.  Home,  whose  desire  was  to  vindicate  himself,  not  to 
punish  others,  very  readily  accepted  the  reparation  offered ;  and  the 
incident  was  terminated  by  Cap'^ain  Noble  publishing  in  the  journal 
that  had  contained  the  libel  an  unreserved  withdrawal  of  his  state- 
ments and  apology  for  having  made  them. 

I  forget  what  celebrity  described  himself,  or  was  described,  as  the 
best  abused  man  of  his  day.  Mr.  Home  was  unquestionably  the  best 
(or  worst)  calumniated  of  his.  The  most  harmless  and  meaningless 
word  dropped  by  one  of  his  acquaintances  was  enough :  some  listening 
ear  picked  it  up,  and  in  twenty-four  hours  the  most  astonishing 
fictions  had  been  built  upon  it.  For  instance,  the  distinguished 
sculptor  Mr.  J.  E.  Boehm  pointed  out  in  a  statuette  made  by  him 
of  Mr.   Home  the  well-formed  harids  and  feet.     Some    one    present 

124  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

repeated  the  compliment — ^with  distortions ;  and  in  a  few  days  the 
most  extraordinary  stories  were  circulated  in  London  of  what  the 
sculptor  had  said.  Home  wrote  to  inform  him  of  these  wild  fables, 
and  Mr.  Eoehm  wrote  in  return : — 

"  Dear  Mr.  Home, — With  astonishment  I  received  your  letter  yesterday,  and 
hasten  to  reply.  I  cannot  understand  who  can  possibly  be  ill-natured  enough 
to  spread  such  reports,  and  though  I  try  to  remember  what  could  have  given 
cause  to  the  origin  of  it,  I  cannot  think  that  it  was  anything  else  but  my 
pointing  out  on  your  statuette  your  delicately-formed  hands,  feet,  and  limbs  in 
general.  If  such  remarks  raise  such  interpretations,  I  may  as  well  give  up 
priding  myself  in  that  which  I  consider  the  only  merit  in  my  humble  works — 
viz.,  that  I  pay  just  as  much  attention  to  the  characteristics  of  the  tip  of  the 
fingers  as  the  tip  of  the  nose.  I  need  not  say  more,  as  I  know  that  these 
things  occur  often  to  you,  and  that  you  would  not  really  attach  any  importance 
to  them  ;  and  I  beg  you  to  believe  me,  dear  Mr.  Home,  truly  yours, 

"  J.    E.    BOEHM." 

The  most  sensitive  of  all  men,  past  or  present,  Home  could  not  but 
sometimes  feel  the  annoyance  of  the  untruthful  and  malignant  chatter 
of  the  world,  heartily  though  he  despised  it.  On  the  ears  of  all  who 
really  knew  him  it  fell  unheeded — a  fact  well  pointed  out  in  the  follow- 
ing letter  to  him,  which  needs  no  other  comment: — 

"  Hotel  de  Rome,  12th  Dec,  '63. 
'~'  Dear  Sir, — I  cannot  conceive  why  you  give  the  slightest  attention 
to  the  circumstances  you  mentioned  to  me  this  morning. 

"  Your  numerous  friends  in  England,  France,  and  Russia  will 
certainly  not  be  influenced  by  idle  gossip,  and  a  man  who  holds  so 
prominent  a  position  in  European  society  as  you  do  is  inevitably 
exposed  to  attacks  of  all  kinds.     Believe  me,  dear  sir,  yours  truly, 

"  Odo  Russell." 

About  the  time  when  he  accepted  Captain  Noble's  apology,  Mr. 
Home  received  a  letter  that  took  the  form  of  a  solemn  warning  to 
cease  dealing  with  familiar  spirits.  Its  writer  was  especially  earnest 
in  counselling  him  to  read  his  Bible.  Here  again,  as  in  Captain 
Noble's  case,  a  total  lack  of  information  is  apparent;  for  few  men 
have  ever  searched  the  Scriptures  more  attentively  and  constantly 
than  Home. 

Evidently  the  writer  of  this  letter  was  actuated  by  the  belief,  so 
common  among  pious,  narrow-minded  people,  that  the  phenomena  of 
Spiritualism  were  the  work  of  the  Arch-Fiend.  Home  often  met  with 
such  persons :  he  met  with  some  of  them  in  this  same  year,  1864. 

He  had  made  the  acquaintance  of  a  Captain  Chawner,  and  went 
on  a  visit  to  him  for  a  few  days  at  Newton  Vallence,  Hampshire. 
Several  people  were  staying  in  the  house;  and  on  Home's  coming 
seances  were  held,  of  which  a  startling  account  was  subsequently  cir- 
culated. It  was  said  that  the  Fiend  himself  had  visibly  appeared  in 
the  form  of  a  radiant  angel,  but  had  been  put  to  flight  at  once  by  the 
exorcisms  of  a  lady  who  was  present. 

This  story  was  so  frequently  repeated  in  society  that  some  friends 
of  Home  ended  by  trying  to  trace  it  to  its  source,  and  had  the  fortune 
to  arrive  at  the  facts  on  which  it  was  based.    They  found  that  at  one 

ENGLAND,   ROME,   AND    PARIS  125 

of  the  seances  with  the  Chawner  family  a  lady  had  been  present  who 
believed  the  manifestations  to  be  the  work  of  demons.  She  came  to 
the  seance  accordingly  with  the  Lord's  prayer  and  various  texts  written 
on  small  slips  of  paper,  that  she  had  placed  inside  her  rings  and 
within  the  pockets  of  her  dress.  None  the  less,  manifestations 
occurred ;  and  some  of  them  were  addressed  particularly  to  her.  If 
I  interpret  correctly  the  narrative  of  the  seance  furnished  by  one  of 
the  Chawner  family,  Mr.  Home,  in  the  trance-state,  was  controlled 
by  a  lost  friend  of  the  believer  in  demon-wrought  miracles,  who  gave 
striking  tokens  of  his  identity.  With  this  explanation,  I  may  leave 
the  following  extract  from  a  letter  written  in  March,  1866,  to  speak 
for  itself : — 

"  My  dear  Miss  Cameron, — I  am  very  much  obliged  to  you  for  telling  me 
of  Mr.  Home's  answer  to  my  story.  The  lady  who  told  it  is  the  wife  of 
General  Brounker,  who  has  just  got  an  appointment  of  consequence  in  India. 
I  will  try  to  get  the  relation  of  the  stance  written  down — it  took  place  when 
Mr.  Home  was  staying  with  the  Chawner  family  at  Newton,  near  Selbourne, 
in  Hampshire.  .     . 

"  There  can  be  no  doubt  as  to  the  reality  of  the  phenomena  in  the  minds  of 
those  who  have  fairly  inquired  into  them.  I  believe  the  true  difficulty  to  be 
that  the  whole  of  the  religious  world,  of  every  denomination,  is  strongly 
opposed  to  Spiritualism — the  scientific  opposition  is  nothing  in  comparison. 
.     .     .     Very  truly  yours,  "  Jane  Alexander." 

The  writer  of  the  above  letter  obtained  from  a  member  of  the 
Chawner  family  a  written  narrative  of  the  seance  at  which  Mrs. 
Brounker  had  been  present,  and  had  it  forwarded  to  Mr.  Home.  I 
extract  a  portion  : — 

"  The  manifestations  were  not  prevented  from  continuing  with  the  general 
circle  ;  only,  as  Mrs.  Brounker  supposed,  the  bad  spirits  could  not  come  to  her. 
She  had  texts  and  the  Lord's  Prayer  about  her,  and  inside  her  rings,  written 
on  a  tiny  piece  of  paper,  was  the  Lord's  Prayer,  slipped  between  her  rings 
and  her  fingers.  Several  things  about  one  who  was  dear  to  her  came  out  at 
this  sdance — indeed,  he  appeared  himself ;  and  this  brings  me  to  the  real  point 
of  Mrs.  B.'s  ideas  on  the  subject.  She  and  her  sister  feel  convinced  that, 
though,  to  all  appearance,  it  was  this  gentleman — there  was  even  his  peculiar 
shake  of  the  hand,  also  a  phrase  quite  peculiar  to  himself  was  used — yet,  with 
all  this,  thev  feel  convinced  that  it  was  not  he  himself,  but  an  Evil  Spirit 
personating  him  with  his  peculiarities.  I  said,  '  Why  should  an  evil  spirit 
know  his  ways  and  phrases,  &c.  ?'  She  answered,  '  That  is  the  argument  used, 
but  very  easily  met.  The  Arch  Fiend  knows  all  about  us  and  all  our  peculiari- 
ties, and  makes  use  of  that  knowledge  in  his  temptations — and  so,  for  his' 
purpose,  he  can  tell  all  his  emissaries.  I  believe,  in  every  case,  it  is  an  evil 
spirit  that  personates  our  dear  lost  friends.'  " 

Of  such  reasoning,  one  can  only  remark  that  it  is  curious  how 
much  stronger  a  faith  very  orthodox  people  seem,  as  a  rule,  to  have 
in  the  power  of  Satan  than  in  that  of  God.  Such  being  their  faith, 
it  is  inevitable  that,  of  all  prejudices  hostile  to  Spiritualism,  that 
which  sees  in  every  manifestation  a  deceit  of  the  Fiend  should  be 
the  most  inveterate.  What  token  of  identity  can  convince  a  person 
who  meets  every  proof  with  the  objection:  "  Yes,  yes,  to  others  that 
may  seem  convincing,  but  not  to  me.  who  know  that  the  Evil  One  is 
omniscient    and  omnipotent." 

126  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

I  have  not  space  to  do  more  than  allude  to  various  persons  who 
investigated  the  phenomena  in  the  years  from  which  I  am  now 
passing.  Among  them  was  George,  Prince  of  Solntis,  who  was  con- 
verted to  Spiritualism  by  his  seances  with  Mr.  Home  at  Ryde,  in 
1862,  and  tried,  on  Bis  return  to  Hanover,  to  convert  the  King.  I 
quote  a  portion  of  one  of  his  numerous  letters — in  the  English  of  ths- 
writer  : — 

"  My  Dear  Mr.  Home, — I  can  give  you  good  news,  because  I 
found  an  occasion  to  speak  with  my  dear  King  of  all  I  know  about 
Spiritualism.  He  was  very  interested,  but  has  still  an  objection — 
if  we  are  right  to  communicate  in  this  way  with  spirits  in  the  other 
world.  He  only  believes  a  part  of  that  which  I  believe,  but  1  am 
yet  happy  that  he  has  got  an  interest,  and  that  is  enough  for  me — 
I  am  not  so  alone  in  H mover  as  I  expected." 

No  allusion  to  the  seances  at  Ryde  with  the  Prince  of  Solms  was 
made  by  Mr  Home  in  the  Incidents.  The  following  extract  from  a. 
letter  that  the  Prince  wrote  to  him  in  1862  will  explain  why  : — 

"  I  beg  of  you  not  to  speak  of  my  knowledge  of  Spiritualism  and 
interest  in  you,  because  it  might  be  bad  for  my  King.  My 
relations,  to  whom  I  told  about  this,  asked  me  not  to  speak  of  it, 
because  I  was  so  near  to  the  royal  family,  that  if  the  people  knew 
the  King  had  a  Spiritualist  in  his  house,  they  would  profit  of  it  to 
speak  against  him.  My  dear  Mr.  Home,  promise  me  your  discre- 
tion, and  I  will  never  forget  you.  Believe  me,  for  ever,  yours  very 
truly,  *  George,    Prince  of  Solms.  '  " 

Two  other  inquirers — the  date  of  whose  experiences  I  can  only  fix 
as  antecedent  to  1864 — were  the  Marchioness  of  Hastings  and  Lady 
Combermere.  In  a  letter  written  after  her  first  seance,  the  former 
tells  Mr.  Home  that  she  "was  so  surprised  and  startled  by  what  she 
saw  as  to  feel  it  irap>ossible  to  come  to  any  conclusion,  tilil  she  had 
seen  it  several  times." 

In  1864,  the  distinguished  electrician,  Cromwell  Varley,  F.R.S., 
had  a  seance  in  his  own  house  at  Beckenham  with  Mr.  Home.  In 
his  letter  to  Professor  Tyndall  (May  19th,  1868)  on  the  subject  of 
spiritual  manifestations,  Mr.  Varley  describes  phenomena  (the  move- 
ments of  a  table,  a  large  sofa,  &c.,  untouched  by  any  person  present) 
that  took  place  while  the  room  was  brilliantly  lit.  "Deception," 
he  wrote,  "  was  impossible." 

The  introduction  of  Cromwell  Varley  to  the-  phenomena  of 
Spiritualism  took  place  in  i860,  at  a  seance  with  Home.  The 
manifestations  he  witnessed  that  evening  were  described  by  him  in 
his  letter  to  Tyndall,  and  again  in  his  evidence  given  before  the 
Dialectical  Society  in  1869. 

Varley,  who,  before  seeing  anything  of  the  manifestations,  seems 
to  have  been  inclined  to  attribute  them  to  known  forces,  presented 
himself  to  Mr.  Home  in  the  spring  of  i860.  "  I  am."  he  said  to 
Home,  "  the  electrician  of  the  International  and  Atlantic  Telegraph 
Companies;  and,  therefore,  have  considerable  knowledge  of 
electricity,  magnetism,   and  other  physical  forces.        I    have   heard 

ENGLAND,   ROME,    AND    PARIS  127 

speak  of  the  extraordinary  phenomena  which  are  produced  in  your 
presence,  and  am  very  desirous  to  see  them  and  search  into  their 
cause.  Are  you  willing  to  allow  me  to  be  a  witness  of  these  pheno- 
mena? " 

"With  great  pleasure,"  replied  Home;  and  after  warning  his 
new  acquaintance  that  he  could  not  promise  him  manifestations 
would  take  place,  and  that  sometimes  several  seances  in  succession 
were  held  without  anything  particular  happening,  he  invited  Mr. 
Varley  to  come  to  a  seance  and  bring  his  wife  with  him. 

Varley  minutely  describes  the  occurrences  of  that  seance.  The 
room,  he  told  Professor  Tyndall  and  the  Dialectical  Society,  was 
lighted  by  four  gas-burners  ;  and  when  raps  began  to  sound  on  the 
table  he  carefully  searched  beneath  it,  while  Mrs.  Varley  kept  watch 
above.  Later  in  the  seance  the  sitters  felt  themselves  touched. 
Varley  mentally  asked  that  his  coat-collar  might  be  pulled  on  the 
left  side,  and  had  hardly  shaped  the  thought  in  his  mind  when  three 
pulls  were  given  to  the  collar,  on  the  side  he  desired,  by  an  invisible 
hand.  He  then  mentally  requested  that  his  right  knee  might  be 
touched  three  times,  and  instantly  the  unuttered  wish  was  complied 
with. 

"  Now  my  left  knee,"  desired  Varley,  still  without  speaking.  It 
was  touched  three  times  without  an  instant's  delay. 

*'  My  right  shoulder,"  continued  the  investigator  always  mentally. 

"On  the  instant  it  was  touched,"  he  writes,  "without  my  being 
able  to  see  anything."  Varley  adds  that,  as  he  had  neither  spoken 
nor  stirred,  no  one  present  had  any  idea  of  what  had  taken  place 
until  he  informed  them. 

As  for  the  conjecture  of  Mr.  Home  having  been  able  to  read  his 
guest's  thoughts  and  produce  the  touches  that  responded  to  them, 
Varley  disposes  of  it  by  stating  the  two  facts  that  the  room  was 
brightly  lit,  and  that  a  lady  whom  he  designates  as  "  Mrs.  A."  was 
seated  between  himself  and   Home. 

But,  remarkable  as  was  the  seance,  it  was  destined  to  be  followed 
by  an  incident  that  impressed  Varley  with  more  decisive  conviction 
than  all  the  wonders  that  had  gone  before.  He  lived,  he  relates, 
some  five  or  six  miles  from  the  scene  of  the  seance,  and  reached  home 
that  night  between  twelve  and  one.  I  copy  from  the  published 
report  of  the  evidence  that  he  gave  before  the  Dialectical  Society 
his  account  of  what  ensued  : — 

"These,"  said  Mr.  Varley,  "were  the  first  physical  phenomena 
I  saw,  and  they  impressed  me;  but  still  I  was  too  much  astonislied 
to  be  able  to  feel  satisfied.  Fortunately,  when  I  got  home,  a  cir- 
cumstance occurred  which  got  rid  of  the  element  of  doubt.  While 
alone  'n  the  drawing-room,  thinking  intently  on  what  I  had  witnessed, 
there  were  raps.  The  next  morning  I  received  a  letter  from  Mr. 
Home,  in  which  he  said.  '  When  alone  in  your  room  last  night,  you 
heard  sounds.  I  am  so  pleased.'  He  stated  the  spirits  had  told 
him  they  followed  me,  and  were  enabled  to  produce  sounds.  I  have 
the  letter  in  my  possession  now,  to  show  that  imagination  had 
nothing  to  do  with  the  matter." 

128  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

Here  again  is  testimony  so  decisive  that  it  can  only  be  attacked 
by  impugning  the  sanity  or  the  credibility  of  the  witness.  But  it 
was  never  so  much  as  hinted  by  Mr.  Var ley's  bitterest  critics  that  he 
was  insane;  and  those  scientific  brethem  who  passed  to  the  other 
side  of  the  way  from  him  when  he  declared  himself  a  Spiritualist 
never  ventured  to  impugn  his  honesty.  Of  his  scientific  ability 
there  can  be  no  doubt;  though,  in  October,  1871,  Dr.  Carpenter 
assured  the  readers  of  the  Quarterly  Review  that  there  were  grave 
doubts  of  it,  and  that  these  misgivings  of  the  learned  world  had  kept 
Mr.  Varley  out  of  the  Royal  Society.  "  His  scientific  attainments," 
said  the  reviewer  amiably,  "are  so  cheaply  estimated  by  those  who 
are  best  qualified  to  judge  of  them,  that  he  has  never  been  admitted 
to  the  Royal  Society."  Unfortunately  for  Dr.  Carpenter,  Mr. 
Varley  had  been  more  than  three  months  a  Fellow  of  the  Royal 
Society  when  this  Quarterly  article  was  published.  Yet  its  in- 
accurate and  pretentious  author,  who  could  blunder  so  grossly  and 
spitefully  about  a  fact  that  ought  to  have  been  well  within  his 
knowledge,  is  supposed  by  some  simple  people  to  have  been  an 
impartial   and  painstaking  investigator  of   Spiritualism  ! 

CHAPTER   VIII 

AMERICA,  RUSSIA,  AND  ENGLAND 

Invitation  to  Cambridge. — Recitations  in  America. — Home's  Personal 
Appearance. — Second  Visit  to  the  French  Court. — Lecture  in 
London. —  Baseless  Attacks. —  Fraudulent  Imitators. —  The 
Spiritual  Athenaium. — The  Lyon  Case. — A  Perjured  Plaintiff. — 
A  Legal  Dilemma. — Robert  Chambers'  Affidavit. — A  Miscarriage 
of  Justice. — Moral  Victory  of  Home. — Posthumous  Libels  in  the 
Times  and  Daily  News. 

Among  Mr.  Home's  correspondence  are  many  letters  hinting  at 
remarkable  experiences  the  writers  have  had  with  him,  but  giving  no 
details.  For  instance,  in  the  year  1864,  a  Mr.  J.  M.  Bellew,  writing 
from  Portsdown  Gardens,  Maida  Hill,  is  anxious  that  his  friend  Mr. 
Frith,  R.A.,  should  be  impressed  as  he  himself  has  been.  Again, 
there  are  numerous  letters  in  the  same  year  from  a  Mr.  Jermyn  Cowell, 
establishing  two  facts— first,  that  their  writer  had  seen  at  seances  with 
Home  sufficient  to  impress  and  interest  him  deeply ;  secondly,  that 
Mr.  Cowell  was  well  acquainted  with  distinguished  men  at  Cambridge 
— Professor  Sidgwick  amongst  others — and  was  very  desirous  to  have 
Home  make  a  visit  to  some  of  his  friends  at  the  University.  Another 
correspondent  associated  with  Cambridge  is  a  clergyman,  the  Rev. 
A.  W.  Hobson,  who  writes  in  May,  1864,  that  his  friend,  the  famous 
astronomer  Adams,  is  very  much  interested  by  what  he,  Mr.  Hobson, 
has  had  to  tell  him,  and  would  like  to  meet  Mr.  Home,  if  the  latter 
could  conveniently  come  to  Cambridge. 

Probably  Home  was  unable  to  accept  the  invitation,  or  there  would 
remain  some  record  of  the  visit.  It  is  evident,  however,  from  their 
letters  that  Messrs.  Bellew,  Cowell,  and  Hobson  all  belonged  to  the 
too-numerous  class  of  inquirers  who  had  seen  enough  to  convince 
them  that  the  phenomena  could  not  be  accounted  for  by  the  easy 
hypothesis  of  imposture,  but  who  shrank  from  making  their  convictions 
public. 

The  testimony  given  and  letters  quoted  from  in  preceding  chapters 
sufficiently  indicate  how  varied  and  extensive  would  be  the  full  list  of 
the  English  investigators  present  at  seances  with  Mr.  Home.  A  full 
list  I  could  not  give ;  for  many  names  are  unknown  to  me,  and  others 
I  have  omitted  because  I  had  no  particulars  of  the  experiences  con- 
nected with  those  names ;  but  the  incomplete  record  these  pages  con- 
tain will  at  least  dispose  of  the  untnie  statement  so  frequently  made, 
that  miracles  were  to  be  seen  only  by  the  faithful,   and  that  Home 

129 

I30  LIP^E    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

avoided  meeting  sceptics.  On  the  contrary,  he  seldom  held  a  seance 
in  England  at  which  there  were  not  one  or  more  sceptics  present,  and 
often  the  sitters  wholly  consisted  of  disbelievers  in  the  phenomena. 
That  many  of  these  sceptics  became  Spiritualists  through  their  seances 
with  him  is  true,  but  surely  that  fact  will  not  be  urged  in  disproof  of  the 
manifestations ! 

Sailing  for  America  in  the  early  autumn  of  1864,  Mr.  Home 
remained  six  or  seven  months  in  the  States,  renewing  his  acquaintance 
with  all  the  old  friends  of  ten  years  earlier  who  were  still  on  earth,  and. 
adding  new  friends  to  their  number.  Among  the  latter  was  Mrs. 
Sarah  Helen  Whitman,  herself  a  poetess  of  some  merit,  but  more  cele- 
brated from  having  charmed  the  fancy  of  that  strangest  of  beings  and 
weirdest  of  geniuses,  Edgar  Poe,  who  addressed  to  her  some  of  his 
most  exquisite  verses.  Mrs.  Whitman  was  present  at  seances  with 
Home ;  and  it  was  she  who  wrote  to  the  editor  of  an  American  journal, 
apropos  of  Browning's  doggerel  on  Spiritualism:  "  If  you  will  take 
the  trouble  to  read  the  poem  of  Mr.  Browning  to  which  I  have  re- 
ferred, you  will  understand  why  it  is  regarded  by  some  of  Mr.  Brown- 
mg's  warmest  admirers  as  '  a  blot  on  the  'scutcheon.'  " 

The  name  of  Henry  Howard  Brownell  is  almost  unknown  in 
England.  It  is  that  of  a  young  American  of  rare  gifts  who  wrote  two 
poems,  "The  River  Fight"  and  -"The  Bay  Fight,"  in  which  he 
described  two  of  the  most  stirring  naval  operations  of  the  Civil  War — 
Farragut's  dash  past  the  forts  at  the  mouth  of  the  Mississippi  and 
capture  of  New  Orleans,  and  secondly,  the  defeat  by  the  same  com- 
mander of  the  Confederate  squadron  in  Mobile  Bay,  when  wooden 
Federal  vessels  surrounded  and  captured  a  Southern  ironclad. 
Brownell,  who  died  young,  was  present  at  both  engagements ;  being, 
I  think,  secretary  to  Admiral  Farragut ;  and  the  battle-fever  has  surely 
never  been  more  wonderfully  breathed  into  words  than  in  a  verse  of 
"The  Bay  Fight:"— 

"  Fear  ! — A   forgotten    form  : 

Death  ! — A  dream  of  the  eyes  : 
We  were  atoms  in  God's  great  storm 
That  roared  through  the  angry  skies." 

Both  poems  were  favourites  with  Home,  and  none  who  heard  his 
magnificent  and  fiery  rendering  of  them  will  ever  forget  it.  It  was 
during  this  visit  to  America  that  he  first  gave  public  expression  to  his 
genius  as  a  reader;  and  he  several  times  recited  the  two  poems  of 
Brownell,  who  had  recently  made  his  acquaintance.  A  notice  of  one 
of  these  readings  from  the  pen  of  Mrs.  WTiitman,  records  that  Admiral 
Farragut  was  among  the  audience,  and  was  delighted  with  Home's 
"  masterly  and  daringly  original  rendering  of  the  Bay  Fight." 

At  a  private  party  in  New  York  just  after  the  close  of  the  war, 
Home  read  the  same  poem ;  and  on  this  occasion  a  strange  tribute  to 
the  author's  genius  and  bis  own  was  paid.  One  of  the  most  telling 
portions  of  the  "  Bay  Fight  "  describes  the  action  of  the  commander 
of  the  Confederate  ironclad,  when  his  consorts  had  fled  or  were  taken. 

AMERICA,    RUSSIA,    AND     ENGLAND  131 

and  nothing  remained  to  him  but  the  choice  between  sinking  and 
surrender : — 

"  Haughty,  cruel,  and  cold, 
He  ever  was  strong  and  bold  : 

Shall  he  shrink  from  a  wooden  stem  .•' 
He  will  think  of  that  brave  band 
He  sank  in  the  Cumberland  : 

Aye  !  he  will  sink  like  them. 

"  Nothing  left  but  to  fight 
Boldly  his  last  sea-fight  : 
Can  he  strike? — By  heaven  !   'tis  true, 
Down  comes  the  traitor  blue. 
And     .     .     ." 

The  verse  was  never  fininshed ;  Home's  voice  and  play  of  feature 
had  put  such  life  into  the  stinging  words,  that,  at  the  reference  to  the 
"  traitor  blue,"  a  young  Southerner  present  was  maddened  out  of  all 
self-control,  and  sprang  at  the  reader  like  a  wild  beast.  He  was 
mastered  before  he  could  do  any  mischief;  but  this  dramatic  incident 
abruptly  terminated  the  reading.  The  occurrence  was  noticed  in 
American  papers  of  the  time. 

Brownell,  in  whom  Home  felt  a  deep  interest,  became  a  Spiritualist. 
He  gave  his  friend  a  copy  of  his  poems ;  and  Home  in  return  sent  him. 
a  copy  of  tlie  Incidents,  after  reading  which  Brownell  writes  to  him: — 

"  I  have  read  your  book  with  the  greatest  interest.  Heretofore,  I 
had  only  known  you  as  a  vehicle  for  the  most  wonderful  communica- 
tions which  we  have  had  with  the  next  world ;  but  now  I  am  beginning 
to  be  acquainted  with  you  mentally  and  morally.  I  can  only  say  that 
this  acquaintance  gives  me  high  pleasure,  and  that  I  hope  to  improve- 
it  personally  at  some  future  time. ' ' 

"  I  had  heard  of  the  great  sensation  produced  by  your  reading  in 
Paris,"  he  says  in  another  letter,  "  and  feel  indebted  to  you  for 
presenting  my  poem  so  nobly."  Then,  in  words  that  have  a  pathetic 
interest  in  view  of  the  early  death  of  their  writer,  Brownell  adds  : 
"  If  I  live,  I  will  devote  something  of  my  poor  verses  to  advocating; 
the  truths  of  Spiritualism." 

At  Norwich,  Connecticut,  Mr.  Home  gave  a  reading  for  the  benefit 
of  the  Soldiers'  Aid  Society.  On  the  announcement  of  this  charit- 
able intention  in  the  local  journal,  a  young  clergyman  wrote  to  the- 
latter,  "craving  permission,  as  a  Christian  man,  to  say  a  few  words 
to  the  Christians  in  Norwich."  It  was  kind  and  courteous  of  Mr. 
Home,  he  admitted,  to  assent  to  the  request  of  the  Soldiers'  Aid 
Society  that  he  would  give  a  reading  on  its  behalf. 

"  I  have  no  doubt  he  is  sincere  in  his  spirtualistic  belief.  I  have 
no  quarrel  with  him.  But  are  the  Christian  men  and  women  of 
Norwich  reduced  to  such  extremities  that  thev  must  resort  to  a  re- 
presentative and  exponent  of  Spiritualism  for 'aid  in  their  Christiai> 
and  patnotic  work  ?  Is  it  seemlv  that  Christians  should  patronise 
such  an  entertainment  ?  ' ' 

And  so  on,  through  half  a  column  of  the  Norwich  Bulletin.  Mr. 
Home  and  some  of  his  friends  replied,  pointing  out  to  this  curious 

132  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

bigot  that  charity  is  of  no  creed,  and  that  it  must  require  a  very 
Jesuitical  eye  to  detect  the  wickedness  of  allowing  Home  by  his 
genius  as  a  reader  to  benefit  the  victims  of  the  Civil  War.  Had  he 
been  a  wounded  soldier  in  need  of  aid,  the  justice  of  this  reasoning 
would  probably  have  commended  itself  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  Lewis ;  but  as 
he  was  only  a  very  young  clergyman  aping  the  authority  of  a  Pope, 
he  replied,  as  hotly  as  inconsequently  : — 

"  My  own  private  opinion  of  Spiritualism  is  that  it  is  of  the  devil 
from  beginning  to  end."  Then,  with  a  triumphant  effort  of  charity: 
' '  It  does  not  necessarily  follow  that  every  one  who  professes 
Spiritualism  is  consciously  in  league  with  the  devil.  And  I  gave 
Mr.  H.  the  benefit  of  the  doubt  when  I  said  that  I  conceded  his 
honesty  and   sincerity." 

Much  to  the  mortification  of  the  reverend  casuist,  his  appeal  only 
served  to  advertise  the  reading  more  widely ;  and  the  room  was 
crowded  with  an  enthusiastic  audience,  from  whose  numbers  the 
Soldiers'  Aid  Fund  reaped  substantial  benefit.  "  Possibly."  wrote 
a  correspondent  of  the  Bulletin,  "  the  author  of  this  last  encyclical, 
with  deep  insight  into  human  nature,  may  have  seen  that  in  no  other 
way  could  he  ensure  so  large  an  af-endance  upon  the  occasion  of  Mr. 
Home's  reading,  as  by  an  apparent  effort  to  dragoon  the  public  away 
from  the  reading.  Looked  ati  in  that  light,  the  letter  has  been  a 
grand  success." 

It  was  not  only  by  Ms  reading  at  Norwich  that  Home  gave  practi- 
cal proofs  of  his  sympathy  with  those  victims  of  the  Civil  War,  who, 
in  1864  and  5,  were  so  numerous  in  every  town  and  village  of  the 
Union.  Out  of  his  small  means — very  small  at  that  time,  he  contri- 
buted freely  to  funds  for  the  relief  of  such  sufferers ;  and  at 
Philadelphia,  which  city  was  just  then  crowded  with  human  wrecks 
that  the  war  had  made,  he  brightened  the  wards  of  the  hospitals  by 
giving  readings  there,  "  to  the  great  delight  of  the  sick  and  wounded 
soldiers,"  says  the  Philadelphia  newspaper  which  informs  me  of  the 
fact.  He,  whose  own  life  was  so  full  of  suffering,  had  the  keenest 
symi>athy  with  the  pain  of  others — a  practical  sympathy  that  found 
expression  in  deeds;  and  in  America  in  1864-5,  and  again  in  France 
in  1870,  the  sight  of  the  terrible  suffering  caused  by  war  stirred  him 
to  do  many  acts  of  kindness  and  devotion  of  which  the  world  never 
heard,  nor  did  he  wish  that  it  should  hear. 

Mr.  Home  gave  several  readings,  public  and  private,  in  New  York  ; 
and  among  his  clippings  from  newspapers  of  that  date,  I  find  the 
following  description  of  the  first  by  some  reporter  present — a  lady,  if 
one  may  judge  by  the  writer's  eye  for  personal  advantages  : — 

"  I  really  have  had  a  sensation.  I  have  heard  Home,  the  great  medium, 
read.  The  programme  did  not  appear  attractive,  and  I  had  made  every  pre- 
paration to  be  disappointed.  When  Home  entered  the  room,  a  change  came 
o'er  the  spirit  of  my  dream,  for  Home's  personality  alone  is  sufficient  to 
absorb  a  physiognomist's  attention  for  hours.  Fancy,  my  dear  Republican,  the 
most  distingud  man  you  have  seen  for  years,  and  then  you  will  not  have' 
reached  the  plane  on  which  Home  stands.  .  .  .  His  figure  is  singularly 
fine  and  graceful,  his  hands  and  feet  beautiful,  the  former  being  the  embodi- 
ment of  artistic  genius.     '  Show  me  a  man's  hand,   and  I   will  tell  vou  what 

AMERICA,    RUSSIA,    AND     ENGLAND  135 

he  is.'  Then  Home's  head,  excellently  shaped,  is  marvellous  in  expression. 
He  is  of  the  blonde  type,  with  beautiful  hair,  fine  teeth,  a  good  mouth,  and 
eyes  that  really  look  as  though  they  saw  things  in  heaven  and  earth  not 
dreamed  of  in  our  philosophy. 

"  And  now,  how  does  he  read?  Beautifully,  wonderfully.  His  pathos  is 
exquisite,  his  humour  perfect.  Why  the  audience  did  not  go  frantic  with 
delight  is  because  the  audience  did  not  appreciate  the  genius  of  the  reader. 
His  rendering  of  Brownell's  stirring  poem,  '  On  the  Hartford  in  Mobile  Bay,* 
was  superb.  Home  would  make  a  great  actor.  He  is  grace  itself ;  his  manner 
is  thoroughly  refined,  his  voice  rich  and  of  large  compass,  his  facial  expression 
unequalled.  Home  is  a  marvel.  He  is  one  of  those  gifted  creatures  that 
nature  makes  every  now  and  then,  to  show  what  she  can  do  when  in  the 
mood. ' ' 

And  such  Home  was.  It  was  impossible  to  be  long  in  his  society 
without  yielding  to  its  spell.  Prejudices  the  most  inveterate  melted 
away  before  that  irresistible  charm  of  manner,  coupled  withi  his 
joyousness  of  nature  and  kindliness  of  heart.  It  was  always  those 
who  knew  least  of  him  who  libelled  him  most  flagrantly,  the  outer  man 
no  less  than  the  inner.  No  portraits  could  bear  less  resemblance  to 
the  original  than  those  drawn  from  time  to  time  in  pen  and  ink  of 
Home.  Were  it  worth  while  a  dozen  such  flights  of  journalistic 
fancy  might  be  cited  here.  Those  who  took  their  notion  of  Home 
from  pictures  so  unlike  him  had  a  wide  choice  ofi'ered  them — every 
possible  colour  of  eyes,  hair,  and  complexion,  a  figure  now  tall,  now 
short,  at  one  time  slender  at  another  robust ;  in  short  every  variety  of 
counterfeit,  the  two  opposed  extremes  of  which  were  the  haggard 
spectre  invented  by  All  the  Year  Round  in  1866  and  the  "  dark-com- 
plexioned person,  with  quick,  shifting  eyes,  curly  black  hair,  and  a 
nose  which  seemed  to  vouch  for  a  purely  Caucasian  descent  "  of 
Echoes   from  the  Clubs,   April  29th,    1868. 

Robert  Bell  sketched  slightly  the  actual  Home  in  his  Cornhill 
article,   the   Home  of   i860  : — 

' '  The  expression  of  his  face  in  repose  is  that  of  physical  suff^ering ; 
but  it  quickly  lights  up  when  you  address  him,  and  his  natural  cheer- 
fulness colours  his  whole  manner.  There  is  more  kindliness  and 
gentleness  than  vigour  in  the  character  of  his  features ;  and  the  same 
easy-natured  disposition  may  be  traced  in  his  unrestrained  inter- 
course. He  is  yet  so  young,  that  the  playfulness  of  boyhood  has  not 
passed  away,  and  he  never  seems  so  thoroughly  at  ease  with  him- 
self and  others  as  when  he  is  enjoying  some  light  and  temperate 
amusement." 

Bell  thus  refers  to  the  emphatic  disclaimer  by  Home  of  that 
power  of  evocation  foolishly  attributed  to  him  : — 

"  Mr.  Home's  supernatural  power  is  a  current  topic  in  all  circles 
where  these  phenomena  are  talked  of  by  people  who  have  never 
witnessed  them.  But  the  truth  is,  he  neither  possesses  such  power 
nor  pretends  to  it.  .  .  .  He  not  only  cannot  call  up  spirits,  as 
we  hear  on  all  sides,  but  he  will  tell  you  that  he  considers  such 
invocations  to  be  blasphemous." 

As  a  pendant  to  Robert  Bell's  sketch  of  Home,  I  translate  from 

134  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

•'  Le  Monde  Elegant  a  Nice '  a   description  written  seventeen  years 
later  by  M.   Fabre  des  Essarts  : — 

"  I  must  tell  you  frankly  that  Home  was  not  at  all  like  what  I  had 
imagined  he  would  be.  To  begin  with,  he  is  a  perfect  man  of  the  world,  with 
a  most  refined  and  winning  aspect.  Then,  there  is  absolutely  nothing  in  his 
appearance  to  suggest  the  necromancer. 

"  Instead  of  that  bat's  claw,  which  certain  English  reporters  give  him.  he 
held  out  to  me  with  perfect  affability  a  hand  quite  aristocratic.  .  .  .  One 
'Of  those  Olympian  foreheads,  which  seem  to  have  been  moulded  by  Nature  as 
the  temple  of  thought :  an  eye  of  an  intense  blue,  that  looks  as  if  formed  to 
sound  the  depths  of  the  unknown  ;  such  are  the  details  that  complete  this  noble 
jind  intelligent  figure." 

Saddened  as  it  as  by  the  sight  of  the  widespread  and  terrible 
suffering  caused  by  war,  the  visit  to  America  that  ended  in  May, 
1865,  could  not  have  been  a  very  happy  time  to  Home,  in  spite  of  the 
•numerous  friends  who  welcomed  him.  On  his  return  to  London,  he 
stayed  there  only  two  or  three  days ;  and  then  left  for  Paris  to  take 
charge  of  the  young  sister  who  had  grown  up  to  womanhood  under 
the  gracious  protection  of  the   Empress  of  the  French. 

It  has  been  frequently  asserted,  in  print  and  out  of  it,  that  long 
before  1865  Mr.  Home  had  lost  the  favour  he  formerly  enjoyed  at 
the  Court  of  France.  He  never  took  the  trouble  to  disprove  this 
falsehood,  which  he  mightly  easily  have  done  by  publishing  half  a 
dozen  letters  in  his  possession,  such  as  the  following  : — 

"  ^th  July,  1864. 
"  My  Dear  Mr.  Home, — I  lose  no  time  in  answering  your  letter, 
as  I  am  sure  that  you  are  awaiting  with  anxiety  the  result  of  my 
communication  with  the  Empress  "  (a  communication  respecting  Miss 
C.  Home).  "I  was  at  Fontainebleau  on  Saturday,  and  have  the  most 
gracious  acquiescence  in  your  request.  So  that  you  may  make  your 
.arrangements  accordingly.   .   .   .  Yours  truly, 

'  Caroline,  Princess  Murat.  '  " 

"  June  10th,   1865. 
"  My  Dear  Mr.  Home,— The  Empress  told  me  last  night  to  write 
to  you  and  say  that  she  would  receive  you   to-morrow  at  half-past 
three.       Yours  truly,  'Caroline,   Princess  Murat.'" 

July  saw  Mr.  Home  in  Russia,  he  having  at  last  yielded  to  the 
repeated  invitations  that  Tolstoy  and  other  friends  there  had  been 
pressing  on  him  for  years. 

After  a  pleasant  visit  to  one  of  the  country-seats  of  his  friend. 
Count  Alexis  Tolstoy,  Home  returned  to  St.  Petersburg,  and  from 
there  went  to  London  where  he  passed  the  winter  of  1865-6,  a  dreary 
winter  to  him,  for  ill-health  was  aggravated  by  anxiety  about  the 
future.  Had  he  sought  to  profit  by  the  exercise  of  his  wonderful 
gift,  that  anxiety  would  soon  have  been  at  an  end ;  but  then,  as  ever, 
he  preferred  the  care  and  struggles  of  poverty.  He  had  other 
gifts,  however,  that  he  could  honourably  turn  to  account ;  and  after 
takmg  counsel  with  his  friends  in  London,  he  conquered  the  repug- 

AMERICA,    RUSSIA,    AND     ENGLAND  135 

nance  he  had  felt  to  appear  on  an  English  platform,  and  decided  to 
become  a  public  reader. 

Before  carrying  out  the  resolve,  he  gave  a  lecture  upon  Spiritualism, 
at  Willis's  Rooms,  in  February,   1866;  a  portion  of  which  I  quote: — 

"  There  is  in  Spiritualism,"  said  Home,  "  a  wide  field  for  profitable 
research,  if  only  it  be  conducted  in  the  true  spirit  of  inquiry — the  spirit  that  is 
willing  to  study  and  learn  of  facts,  however  strange  they  may  seem,  however 
counter  to  the  prejudices  of  philosophy  ;  for  philosophy,  as  well  as  ignorance, 
has  its  prejudices,  and  sometimes  those  of  philosophy  are  the  most 
inveterate. 

"  I  would  not  have  you  think  for  a  moment  that  I  am  not  aware  of  the 
many  abuses  which  may  arise  from  this  contact  with  the  spirit  world.  But 
God  gives  to  every  man  the  power  of  reason,  and  this  it  is  in  no  way  the 
province  of  Spiritualism  to  supersede.  If  a  spirit  were  to  give  advice  which 
our  reason  told  us  should  not  be  followed,  why  should  we  pay  more  attention 
to  him,  now  that  he  is  freed  from  the  body,  than  if  he  were  still  moving 
among  us  on  earth,  as  formerly?" 

Speaking  of  the  many  iraposters  who  counterfeit  the  genuine 
phenomena  of  Spiritualism,  and  trade  in  pretended  wonders  for  a 
living,  he  said  : — 

"  I  have  known  of  the  most  gross  impostures  being  carried  on,  and  in  every 
•case  have  exposed  them  ;  and,  God  being  my  helper,  ever  will  do  so.  Of 
course,  in  cases  like  these,  I  have  much  to  contend  with,  even  from  my  best 
friends.  They  say,  '  It  is  not  your  place;  let  others  do  it.'  I  feel  it  to  be  my 
place  ;  and  when  I  see  the  pure  and  glorious  truths  I  advocate  drawn  down 
and  made  a  mockery  of  by  the  mob,  I  will  lift  up  my  voice  and  say,  '  This  is 
not  Spiritualism?'  If  they  will  prove  it  to  be  so,  then  I  wish  to  have  nothing 
to  do  with  it ;  for  it  is  a  dark  and  damning  error,  and  the  sooner  pure  truth- 
seekers  leave  it,  the  better.  But  there  is  no  doctrine  which  is  without  its 
abuses,  and  which  is  not  abused  by  outsiders." 

After  rebutting  the  assertion  that  insanity  is  a  frequent  conse- 
quence of  the  belief,  Mr.  Home  adverted  to  the  various  "  explana- 
tions "  of  the  phenomena. 

"  When  in  Russia  this  autumn,  on  a  visit  to  his  Majesty,  it  was  told  for  a 
fact  that  I  had  a  great  number  of  cats  to  sleep  with  me,  and  by  this  means 
became  so  charged  with  electricity  that  the  rappings  were  heard  in  my  pre- 
sence. Another  story  was  that  I  held  my  feet  a  long  time  in  ice-water,  and 
then  ran  and  sat  by  the  Emperor,  putting  my  feet  in  his  hands  ;  and  so  he 
thought  he  touched  a  corpse-like  hand.  It  is  currently  reported  that  my  feet 
are  like  monkeys'  feet,  and  that  I  can  do  as  I  please  with  them.  Some  of 
my  friends  have  even  asked  to  see  my  feet  without  shoes  or  stockings,  that 
they  might  contradict  this.  These,  and  many  other  fantastic,  far-fetched,  and 
inadequate  explanations,  which  in  turn  need  explaining,  have  been  from  time 
to  time  put  forth  ;  each  new  hypothesis  unkindly  exploding  its  predecessors, 
and  being  in  its  turn  exploded.     .     .     . 

"  Those  tyros  who,  with  little  or  no  knowledge  of  the  subject,  think  them- 
selves justified  in  denouncing  the  whole  thing  as  imposture,  ought  surely  (if 
not  wholly  deficient  in  modesty  and  common-sense)  to  be  arrested  by  the 
circumstance  that  scientific  and  learned  men,  sceptical  as  themselves  as  to  the 
•supra-mundane  origin  of  the  facts,  have  yet,  after  the  fullest  investigation, 
been  constrained  to  concede  their  reality  and  genuineness." 

The  distinguished  and  numerous  company  that  had  assembled  to 
listen  to  the  lecture  were  derided  by  a  writer  in  All  the  Year  Round 
as  "fools."  They  might,  in  view  of  the  untruths  and  misstate- 
ments of  fact  that  abounded  in  his  article,  have  replied  that  there 

136  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

are  much  worse  things  than  a  iool  in  the  world,  if  the  fool  is  only- 
honest. 

Mr.  S.  C.  Hall  wrote  to  the  editor  of  All  the  Year  Round  to  con- 
tradict from  his  personal  knowledge  two  of  the  many  untrue  state- 
ments concerning   Mr.   Home  that  the  article  contained  : — 

"  In  reference  to  the  first  of  these  two  untruths,"  wrote  Mr.  Hall, 
"  I  can  only  give  you  now  my  own  assurance — that  Home  distrij- 
buted  no  bills,  having  none  to  distribute.  In  regard  to  the  second 
falsehood,  I  sent  you  a  copy  of  the  only  circular'  he  issued.  You 
will  see  for  yourself  how  dishonourable  and  disgraceful  has  been  the 
change  of  a  word  to  give  a  totally  different  meaning  to  the  sentence. 
The  writer  of  that  article,  be  he  who  he  m'ay,  is  a  dishonest  man, 
to  say  the  least." 

As  the  editor  of  All  the  Year  Round  had  nothing  to  say  in  defence 
of  his  contributor  he  returned  no  answer.  It  is  needless  to  add  that  he 
did  not  publish  Mr.  Hall's  letter  in  his  columns. 

Wonderful  and  beautiful  manifestations  were  witnessed  at  the 
residence  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall  on  Easter  Eve,  1866.  Five 
persons  composed  the  circle ;  the  host  and  hostess.  Lady  Dunsany, 
Mrs.  Adelaide  Senior,  and  Mr.  Home.  A  narrative  of  the 
occurrence  was  drawn  up  a  few  days  later  by  Mrs.  Senior,  was 
submitted  in  turn  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hall  and  Lady  Dunsany  for  their 
endorsement,  and  subsequently,  with  the  consent  of  all  four  wit- 
nesses, was  pubHshed  by  Mr.  Home  in  his  second  volume  of  Incidents 
(pp.   120-122). 

After  naming  the  persons  present  at  the  seance  Mrs.  Senior  writes  : 

"  When  Mr.  Home  arrived  he  was  pale  and  worn,  and  we  feared  that  we 
should  have  few  manifestations.  He  sat  down  to  the  piano,  and  played  and 
sang  for  some  time  ;  and  on  his  beginning  a  little  Russian  air,  a  favourite  of 
his  late  wife's,  a  chair  which  was  at  some  distance  from  the  piano  slid  up  and 
placed  itself  beside  him.  I  was  sitting  close  to  the  piano  on  the  other  side, 
and  I  first  saw  the  chair  move. 

"  We  sat  down  at  the  table,  which  at  once  began  to  vibrate  and  tremble, 
and  was  raised  off  the  floor  to  a  considerable  height.  Very  loud  and  heavy 
knocks  were  heard  on  the  table,  the  floor,  and  the  furniture  round  the  room  ; 
presently  the  accordion  was  touched,  the  alphabet  was  asked  for,  and  it  was 
spelt  out — '  We  will  play  the  earth-life  of  One  Who  was  not  of  earth.' 

"  First  we  had  simple,  sweet,  soft  music  for  some  minutes  ;  then  it  became 
intensely  sad ;  then  the  tramp,  tramp,  as  of  a  body  of  men  marching  mingled 
with  the  music,  and  I  exclaimed,  '  The  march  to  Calvary!'  Then  three  times 
the  tap-tapping  sound  of  a  hammer  on  a  nail  (like  two  metals  meeting).  A 
crash,  and  a  burst  of  wailing  which  seemed  to  fill  the  room,  followed ;  then 
there  came  a  burst  of  glorious  triumphal  music,  more  grand  than  any  of  us 
had  ever  listened  to,  and  we  exclaimed,  '  The  Resurrection  !'  It  thrilled  to  all 
our  hearts." 

Thus  far  the  manifestations,  including  that  wonderful  music  played 
by  no  earthly  hands,  had  taken  place  in  a  brilliantly  lit  room.  The 
circle  kept  their  places  at  the  table  for  a  while  longer;  but  with  the 
last  thrilling  chords  of  the  triumphal  harmony  that  had  symbolised 
the   Resurrection  all   manifestations  ceased. 

*  A  private  circular,  sent  only  to  Mr.   Home's  friends. 

AMERICA,    RUSSIA,    AND     ENGLAND  137 

"  Nothing  more  was  done  for  some  time,"  writes  Mrs.  Senior,  "  and  we 
decided  upon  putting  out  the  lights  in  the  rooms,  so  as  only  to  have  that  from 
the  outside  which  came  through  the  conservatory  "  (from  a  hanging  lamp 
there,  explains  Mr.  Hall).  ..."  Soon  after  this,  we  observed  the  face  of 
Mr.  S.  C.  Hall  shining  as  if  covered  with  silver  light ;  we  all  remarked  it  and 
commented  upon  it.  The  accordion  was  carried  round  the  circle,  playing 
beautifully  ;  it  rested  on  the  head  of  our  host,  then  on  my  shoulder,  and  then 
went  on  to  Mrs.  Hall,'  who  was  next  to  me."  ("  Mr.  Home's  hand  never 
being  near  the  instrument,"  adds  Mrs.  Senior  in  a  subsequent  letter.) 

"  Mr.  Home  was  then  raised  up  to  the  ceiling,  which  he  touched,  and 
regretted  not  having  a  pencil  to  make  a  mark  there.  When  he  came  down, 
Mr.  Hall  gave  him  one,  hoping  that  he  might  be  again  raised  ;  and  in  five 
minutes  after  he  was  so,  and  left  a  cross  on  the  ceiling.  Just  before  this  took 
place  we  saw  his  whole  face  and  chest  covered  with  the  same  silvery  light 
which  we  had  observed  on  our  host's  face.  We  had  been  sitting  all  this  time 
at  the  table ;  and  soon  after  our  hands  were  touched  and  patted  by  other 
hands,  and  our  brows  touched  by  loved  hands  whose  touch  we  knew.  Shortly 
afterwards  we  heard  the  knocks  and  sounds  die  away  in  the  distance  out  of 
doors,  and  we  felt  that  it  was  all  over. 

"  That  burst  of  music  was  still  thrilling  on  our  hearts.  Nothing  of  mortal 
composition  could  equal  it,  and  its  sound  was  that  of  a  fine  organ.  We  greatly 
regretted  that  no  one  in  the  room  could  take  down  the  notes.  The  wondrous 
effect  of  the  sound  of  feet,  and  the  sound  of  the  hammer  and  nails  running 
like  a  thread  through  the  music,  it  is  impossible  that  those  who  have  not 
listened  to  it  could  understand  ;  in  the  music  itself  also  there  was  a  mixture  of 
tones  out  of  my  power  to  describe." 

Lady  Dunsany,  who  was  present  with  Mrs.  Senior  at  this  seance, 
will  be  remembered  for  her  amiable  and  charming  disposition  by  all 
who  knew  ber.  She  was  already  advanced  in  years  in  1866,  and, 
I  believe,  passed  from  earth  no  long  time  afterwards;  but  her 
letters  to  Mr.  Home  show  that  to  ber  last  day  she  preserved  an 
esteem  and  affection  for  him,  and  was  a  steadfast  Spiritualist. 

Like  all  other  years,  1865  and  6  offer  for  my  inspection  letters 
written  by  persons  who  had  evidently  had  numerous  opportunities 
of  investigating  the  phenomena,  but  whose  experiences  appear  never 
to  have  been  published.  Some  of  the  writers  are  Spiritualists,  others 
form  extraordinary  theories  to  account  for  the  manifestations,  others 
again  express  no  theory  at  all,  but  content  themselves  with  admitting 
the  reality  of  the  facts.  I  select  a  letter  from  a  correspondent  of 
the  later  class  : — 

"  7,  Prince  of  Wales  Terrace,  Kensington, 
"  26th  December.   1865. 

It  was  a  real  pleasure,  my  dear  Daniel,  to  see  your  '  fist  '  again.  I 
thought  you  had  quite  given  me  up  as  an  unbeliever,  because,  while  admitting 
the  extraordinary  character  of  the  phenomena  that  occur  when  you  are  pre- 
sent, I  never  could  feel  convinced  that  they  emanated  from  the  volition  of  the 
spirits  of  those  who  had  once  enjoyed,  or  rather  passed  through,  the  life  of 
this  earth.  I  have,  I  fancy,  examined  you  more  closely  than  many  of  those 
who  have  no  doubt  at  all,  than  many  of  those  who  say,  '  It's  all  humbug; 
and  he  must  have  some  secret  machinery  or  electrical  apparatus  about  him.' 
The  result  has  been  what  I  told  you  the  last  time  we  met — I  believe  you.  but 
as  to  your  theory,  I  am  as  yet,  so  far  as  I  know  it,  a  doubter.  It  is  quite 
possible  that  a  man  with  a  wonderful  attribute  may  not  know  exactly  whence 
his  peculiar  quality  springs. 

"  There!  I  don't  pretend  to  be  a  philosopher;  but  I  do  pretend  to  be  a 
friend,  and  I  shall  be  very  glad  to  see  you  here.  There  are  a  great  many 
things  and  a  great  many  persons  I  want  to  talk  to  you  about,  besides  hearing 

K 

138  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

all  your  travels  and  experiences.  ...  I  beg  to  ask  you  to  dine  here  the 
first  Sunday  you  come  to  London.  Are  you  aware  that  I  am  now  an  under- 
paid, overworked  Government  official,  and  not  any  longer,  like  O'Connell's 
Ireland,  '  great,  glorious,  and  free  '?     .     .     .  Yours  very  truly, 

"  W.     H.    ASHURST." 

The  letter  is  valuable  for  the  evidence  it  affords  that  Home  was 
tolerant  of  honest  doubt  of  the  spiritual  origin  of  the  phencsnena, 
however  obstinate.  As  for  the  long  silence  on  which  the  writer  had 
placed  the  mistaken  interpretation  that  was  removed  by  the  receipt 
of  Home's  letter,  Mr.  Ashurst,  like  hundreds  of  other  people,  had 
forgotten  to  consider  that  probably  no  man  ever  lived  who  had  so  ex- 
tensive an  acquaintance  as  Home.  It  was  easy  for  his  friends  to 
write  to  him,  but  the  vast  mass  of  his  correspondence  rendered  it 
sometimes  simply  impossible  for  him  to  answer  their  letters.  His 
whole  time  would  have  been  swallowed  up  in  the  task,  and  often 
half  his  means  in  paper  and  postage. 

"Do  find  time  to  send  me  a  few  lines,"  writes  from  Vichy  in 
June,  1866,  a  lady  signing  herself  "P.  M.  Lockhart  " — "I  hav^s 
had  no  direct  communication  with  you  since  we  had  the  pleasure  of 
seeing  you  in  town  in  January  last.  Mrs.  Anfrere  has  felt  greatly 
interested  and  bewildered  ever  since  she  saw  those  comparatively 
slight  manifestations  in  London ;  and  I  unluckily  should  never  have 
confidence  in  any  medium  but  you,  so  how  can  I  persuade  her  to 
see  Spiritualism  in  any  other  form?  " 

This  declaration  that  the  seances  of  Home  alone  brought  convic- 
tion is  explicit  in  many  letters,  and  implied  in  others ;  and  in  the 
later  years  of  his  life  Mr.  Home  frequently  received  assurances  from 
has  friends — from  Mr.  William  Howitt  and  Mr.  Crookes,  for 
example — that,  had  it  not  been  for  their  recollection  of  seances  with 
him,  disgust  with  the  impostures  that  usurped  the  name  of 
Spiritualism  would  have  utterly  shattered  their   belief. 

"  Lady  Helena  Newenham,"  writes  from  14,  Wilton  Place,  S.W.,  in 
December,  1864,  a  correspondent  whose  signature,  if  I  decipher  it  correctly,  is 
"  G.  M.  Edgeworth,"  "  spent  ten  days  here,  and  she  often  spoke  of  you  and 
the  comfort  which  she  had  derived  from  the  stances  which  she  and  her  husband 
had  had  with  you.  I  wish  much  you  were  near  us  all  now,  and  that  your 
good  influence  was  in  the  atmosphere.  I  am  so  disgusted  by  amateur  would-be 
Spiritualists,  who  pretend  to  be  mediums.  When  I  say  that  I  see  people 
kicking  the  tables  and  lifting  them,  they  are  so  angry,  and  wish  to  put  it 
down  that  I  believe  nothing.  I  say,  *  Yes,  I  do  :  I  believe  in  Dan,  and  I  do 
believe  he  has  wonderful  power.'     .     .     .     Your  affectionate  friend, 

"  G.  M.  Edgeworth." 

In  February,  1866,  some  long-past  scenes  of  Home's  life  were 
unexpectedly  recalled  to  his  mind.  Twelve  or  thirteen  years  before, 
he  had  been  the  guest  of  Mr.  Ogden,  a  resident  of  Long  Island,  U.S. ; 
one  of  whose  daughters  had  subsequently  lost  her  husband,  and  her 
fortune  before  him;  and  with  brave  spirit  had  then  set  herself  to 
turn  to  account  the  great  talent  for  the  stage  with  which  she  was 
endowed.  As  an  actress,  Mrs.  Cora  Mowatt  Ritchie  will  be  better 
remembered  in  America  than  England,  where  she  only  took  up  her 
residence,   I    think,    on     retiring    from    the    boards ;  but    in  both 

AMERICA,    RUSSIA,    AND     ENGLAND  139 

countries  she  was  endeared  to  her  friends  by  her  attractive  and 
lovable  qualities  as  a  woman.  It  happened,  in  February,  1866, 
that  a  lady  very  intimate  with  her  was  seeking  a  seance  with  Mr. 
Home;  and  this' fact  led  to  the  two  old  acquaintances  meeting  again. 
Mutual  liking  and  esteem  soon  grew  into  friendship ;  and  during  the 
few  years  that  remained  to  her  on  earth,  Mrs.  Ritchie  was  a 
Spiritualist,  and  one  of  the  most  prized  and  cordial  of  Home's 
friends.  When  the  Lyon  lawsuit  closed,  she  instantly  took  steps  for 
furnishing  to  American  newspapers  the  true  facts  of  the  case,  before 
any  garbled  account  should  have  reached  the  States. 

During  the  whole  of  1866,  Mr.  Home's  health  was  very  feeble. 
The  anxieties  of  the  mind  were  reacting  on  the  body.  In  the 
summer  of  that  year  an  alternative  to  the  reader's  platform  was 
suggested.  It  had  occurred  to  various  English  Spiritualists  and 
inquirers  that  the  establishment  of  a  kind  of  headquarters  in  London 
would  be  of  great  advantage  to  the  movement.  Some  of  their  number 
interested  themselves  in  carrying  out  the  suggestion,  which,  it  must 
be  noted,  did  not  in  any  way  originate  with  Mr.  Home.  Premises 
were  taken  in  Sloane  Street;  and,  under  the  name  of  "  The  Spiritual 
Athenceum,"  an  institution  was  opened  there,  intended,  as  the 
circular  of  the  promoters  stated,  to  be  "  a  rallying  point  for 
Spiritualists  and  their  friends."  The  post  of  resident  secretary 
■was  offered  to  Mr.  Home,  and  accepted  by  him.  In  the  list  of  the 
Council  of  the  Spiritual  Athenaeum  occurs  the  name  of  Dr. 
Elliottson,  a  fact  that  bears  convincing  testimony  of  the  great  change 
the  Dieppe  seances  had  wrought  in  his  views.  Among  the  remain- 
ing members  were  Captain  Drayson,  R.A.,  and  the  popular  writer 
on  natural  history,  the  Rev.  J.  G.  Wood.  The  former  had  been 
present  at  several  seances  with  Mr.  Home.  Of  Mr.  Wood's  experi- 
ences in  Spiritualism  I  am  ignorant. 

Hardly  had  the  Athenseum  been  brought  into  working  order,  when 
increasing  ill-health  and  the  circumstances  connected  with  his.  tem- 
porary change  of  name  and  fortune  compelled  Mr.  Home  to  resign 
his  appointment  as  secretary.  With  him  the  life  of  the  institu- 
tion went ;  and  after  languishing  a  short  time,  the  Spiritual 
Athenseum  died  a  very  natural  death. 

The  story  of  the  Lyon  lawsuit  has  often  been  told  by  writers  whose 
object  was  to  cast  a  slur  on  Mr.  Home.  It  served  the  purpose  of 
these  dishonest  controversialists  to  affect  credence  of  the  numberless 
perjuries  sworn  to  by  the  plaintiff  in  that  suit — a  person  of  whom 
even  so  prejudiced  a  critic  of  Spiritualism  and  Spiritualists  as 
Vice-Chancellor  GifFard  said,  when  delivering  judgment  against  Mr. 
Home  (I  quote  from  the  report  of  the  Vicei-Chancel'lor's  judgment 
in  the  Vail  Mall  Gazette):  "  The  expenses  "  (of  the  suit)  "  have  been 
very  seriously  increased,  first  by  the  unwarrantable  attack  in  the 
plaintiff's  affidavits  on  Mr.  Wilkinson ;  and,  secondly,  by  her 
innumerable  misstatements  in  many  important  particulars — misstate- 
ments on  oath  so  perversely  untrue  thai  they  have  embarrassed  ike 
Court  to  a  great  degree  and  quite  discredited  the  flainiijf^s  testi- 
tnony.^' 

I40  LIFE   AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

"  You  are  of  course  pained,  my  dear  Daniel,"  wrote  Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall 
to  Mr.  Home,  "  that  the  Vice-Chancellor  did  not  clear  you  by  a  few 
words  from  all  suspicion  of  fraud  as  a  Spiritualist — but  how  would 
you  have  felt  if  he  had  blasted  your  character,  as  he  has  that  of  Mrs. 
Lyon,  by  being  the  first  to  accuse  her  of  perjury?  " 

On  what  grounds,  then,  the  reader  unfamiliar  with  English  law  will 
ask,  did  the  Vice-Chancellor  order  the  restitution  of  Mrs.  Lyon's  gifts, 
when  he  so  emphatically  declared  that  her  story  of  the  circumstances 
under  which  those  gifts  were  made  bad  been  utterly  discredited  ?  On 
two  grounds,  the  one  of  law — the  other  of  prejudice.  In  a  suit  like 
that  of  Lyon  v.  Home  English  law  throws  the  onus  of  proof  on  the 
defendant.  It  mattered  nothing  that  Mrs.  Lyon  had  signally  Tailed  in 
seeking  to  show  that  the  gifts  were  made  in  consequence  of  com- 
munications claimed  to  be  from  her  deceased  husband,  and  had 
established  only  her  own  total  disregard  of  truth  by  the  ' '  innumerable 
and  perversely  untrue  misstatements  on  oath ' '  to  which  the  Vice- 
Chancellor  referred  in  such  severe  terms.  English  law,  as  interpreted 
— and  no  doubt  correctly  interpreted — by  Vice-Chancellor  Giffard,  did 
not  require  the  plaintiff  to  prove  the  affirmative,  that  influence  had 
been  exercised  on  ber  mind.  It  required  the  defendant  to  prove  the 
negative,  that  be  had  exercised  no  influence  over  the  mind  of  Mrs. 
Lyon.  Clean  as  were  the  hands  of  Mr.  Home  in  this  matter,  how 
was  he  to  establish  his  uprightness  to  the  satisfaction  of  a  judge  who 
shared  the  common  prejudices  against  Spiritualism  to  such  an  extent 
that  he  travelled  out  of  his  way  to  denounce  that  belief  as 
"mischievous  nonsense,  well  calculated  on  the  one  band  to  delude 
the  vain,  the  weak,  the  foolish,  and  the  superstitious,  and  on  the  other 
to  assist  the  projects  of  the  needy  and  of  the  adventurer?  "  To  put 
the  matter  in  a  nutshell,  Vice-Chancellor  Giffai'd  propounded  to  the 
unfortunate  defendant  the  following  dilemma: — "  If  you  are  to  retain 
these  gifts,  you  must  prove  to  my  satisfaction  that  you  exercised  no 
influence  over  the  plaintiff  when  she  made  them;  but  no  amount  of 
evidence  you  can  bring  forward  will  satisfy  me  that  you  are  innocent 
of  having  exercised  such  influence." 

Lest  I  be  suspected  of  misstating  the  grounds  of  the  Vice- 
Chancellor's  decision,  I  extract  from  the  "  Equity  Series  of  the  Law 
Reports  ' '  a  portion  of  the  note  summarising  the  suit  of  Lyon  v. 
Home  — 

"  Held,  that  the  relation  proved  to  have  existed  between  them 
implied  the  exercise  of  dominion  and  influence  by  B.  over  A.'s  mind, 
and  consequently  that,  as  B.  had  failed  to  prove  that  these  voluntary 
gifts  were  the  pure,  voluntary,  well-understood  acts  of  A.'s  mind, 
they  must  be  set  aside. ' ' 

Coming  from  law  to  justice — a  very  different  matter — an  impartial 
critic  will  be  of  opinion  that,  if  Mr.  Home  failed  to  prove  to  the 
satisfaction  of  the  judge  that  the  gifts  were  voluntary  it  was 
simply  because  no  amount  of  proof  to  that  effect  would  have  convinced 
the  Vice-Chancellor  of  the  defendant's  uprightness.  "  Be  thou  pure 
as  snow,  thou  shalt  not  'scape  calumny  " — if  thou  art  a  Spiritualist. 

AMERICA,    RUSSIA,    AND     ENGLAND  141 

Except  as  complicated  by  the  false  witness  of  the  plaintifiF,  the  facts 
relating  to  Mr.  Home's  adoption  by  Mrs.  Lyon  were  sufficiently 
simple.  She    was    an   old    and   rich   widow,    and   a  believer  in 

Spiritualism  long  before  she  sought  the  acquaintance  of  Mr.  Home. 
Not  only  was  she  a  believer  long  before  she  met  him,  but,  according 
10  lier  own  account,  a  seer,  who  communed  in  vision  with  the  world  of 
spirits.  After  her  adoption  of  Mr.  Home,  she  told  many  persons  that 
on  first  meeting  him  she  had  immediately  recognised  him  as  the  figure 
that  she  had  often  seen  in  vision,  and  that  her  own  visions,  and  not 
spirit  communications  made  through  Mr.  Home,  had  inspired  the 
thought  of  adopting  him.  Witness,  for  instance,  the  late  Dr.  Robert 
Chambers,  from  whose  affidavit  I  shall  presently  quote. 

Happening  to  hear  of  the  Spiritual  Athenseum  and  its  secretary  Mr. 
Home,  "  I  wrote  on  the  30th  of  September,  1866,"  says  Mrs.  Lyon 
in  her  affidavit,  ' '  that  I  was  anxious  to  become  a  subscriber,  and 
asking  for  a  prospectus  and  particulars.       Not  having  received  any 

reply  from  the  said  defendant,  I  called,  and  asked  to  see  him 

I  had  never  before  seen  the  said  defendant." 

At  this  visit,  Mrs.  Lyon,  an  absolute  stranger  to  Mr.  Home,  entered 
into  conversation  with  him  concerning  bis  work,  Incidents  of  My  Life, 
which  she  declared  herself  to  have  read  with  much  interest.  She 
informed  him  that  she  had  been  a  believer  in  the  occurrence  of 
spiritual  manifestations  from  her  childhood,  and  that  she  was  herself 
a  medium  and  saw  visions.  Her  chief  interest,  however,  appeared 
to  be  centred  in  the  royal  and  aristocratic  personages  mentioned  in  the 
Incidents  of  My  Life,  and  she  asked  Mr.  Home  many  questions  con- 
cerning them  and  his  intimacy  with  them.  A  day  or  two  afterwards 
she  made  a  gift  of  jQ^o  to  the  funds  of  the  Athenaeum,  and  followed 
this  act  by  astounding  Mr.  Home  with  the  declaration  that  she  had 
taken  a  great  fancy  to  him,  and  was  determined  to  adopt  him  as  her 
son,  and  settle  a  handsome  fortune  upon  him.  She  was  rich,  she 
explained,  was  without  children  or  relatives  of  her  own,  and  her 
husband's  relatives  she  detested.  He  would  add  her  name  of  Lyon 
to  bis  own;  they  would  keep  house  together  as  mother  and  son; 
and  two  people  would  be  made  happy,  he  in  becoming  rich 
through  her  means,  she  in  being  introduced  through  his  to  the 
fashionable  world.  "  She  told  me,"  said  Mr.  Home  in  his  affidavit, 
"  that  she  w^as  the  illegitimate  daughter  of  a  tradesman  in  Newcastle, 
that  her  late  husband  was  of  good  family,  and  his  family  always  held 
aloof  from  herself  and  husband."  This  passed  at  his  second  inter- 
view with  Mrs.  Lyon. 

Bewildered  by  an  incident  so  extraordinary  even  in  a  life  that  had 
been  full  of  facts  stranger  than  any  fictions,  Mr.  Home  at  first  treated 
her  offer  of  adoption  as  a  jest,  but  finding  that  she  was  perfectly 
serious,  began  to  think  that  she  could  not  be  in  her  right  mind.  Yet 
to  all  appearance  she  was  a  sane,  shrewd  woman.  Uncertain  how  to 
regard  the  affair,  he  did  not  call  on  her  again  for  some  days.  When 
he  at  last  went,  she  greeted  him  most  warmly  and  affectionately, 
repeated  that  she  had  made  up  her  mind  to  adopt  him,  and  inquired 

142  LIFE   AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

if  he  had  acted  on  her  wish  that  he  should  consult  a  lawyer  about 
the  adoption.  Mr.  Home  replied  that  he  had  not,  and  did  not  like 
her  to  act  so  hastily  in  a  matter  of  such  importance.  She  again 
assured  him  that  her  mind  was  fully  made  up,  and  added :  ' '  Whether 
you  will  or  not,  I  shall  settle  a  fortune  on  you,  and  you  will  be 
obliged  to  accept  it.  You  are  a  gentleman,  and  have  friends  in  the 
best  society.  I  shall  go  out  with  you,  and  your  friends  will  come  to 
us;  and  my  old  age  will  become  a  joy  instead  of  a  burden." 

He  told  her  that  he  feared  she  sought  him  for  the  strange  gift  he 
I>ossessed.  Her  answer,  as  given  in  his  affidavit,  was:  "  Why,  you 
foolish  fellow,  I've  seen  nothing  of  your  strange  gift,  as  you  call  it; 
and  though  it  is  through  your  being  celebrated  for  that  that  I  first 
beard  of  you,  now  tliat  I  know  you  I  love  you  for  yourself,  and  should 
not  care  if  you  never  had  anything  singular  occur  to  you  again."  As 
no  third  pyerson  was  present  at  the  interview,  it  was  impK)ssible  for  Mr. 
Home  to  demonstrate  that  Mrs.  Lyon's  subsequent  denial  of  having 
spoken  these  words  was  but  one  more  addition  to  the  many  false  oaths 
which  the  Vice-Chancellor  declared  her  to  stand  convicted  of  having 
taken. 

He  took  twenty-four  hours  more  to  consider  the  proposed  adoption, 
and  then  called  on  Mrs.  Lyon  and  told  her  that  he  was  unable  to 
accept  her  proflFered  kindness.  She  urged  him  earnestly  to  reconsider 
his  determination,  and  repeated  her  entreaties  at  a  subsequent  inter- 
view. Finally,  he  consented  to  take  counsel  with  his  friends,  and 
began  with  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall,  who  called  by  his  request  on  Mrs.  Lyon, 
Home  not  accompanying  him. 

After  the  visit,  Mr.  Hall  related  to  Mr.  Home  what  had  passed. 
Mrs.  Lyon  said  nothing  on  the  subject  of  Spiritualism,  but  declared 
her  intention  of  adopting  Mr.  Home,  and  asked  her  visitor  what  he 
thought  she  should  settle  on  him.  "I  suggested,"  said  Mr.  Hall, 
"  that  two  or  three  hundred  a  year  would  suffice,"  on  which  she  said, 
"  Oh,  that's  not  enough." 

"Finding  from  Mr.  Hall's  conversation,"  says  Mr.  Home  in  his 
affidavit,  ' '  that  he  thought  her  not  only  sane  and  in  her  right  mind, 
but  a  very  sharp  business  woman,  who  gave  efficient  reasons  for  what 
she  had  contemplated  doing,  I  decided  to  accept  what  she  offered 
me. 

The  day  following,  October  loth,  Mr.  Home  and  Mr.  Hall  called 
on  Mrs.  Lyon  to  suggest  that  she  should  delay  executing  her  intention 
until  she  had  considered  it  further.  She  refused,  and  said  that  she 
had  determined  to  transfer  at  once  to  her  adopted  son  a  sum  of 
;;^24,ooo.  "  When  she  said  that  she  would  give  me  ;^24,ooo,  Mr. 
Hall  said,  '  Do,  you  good  lady,  take  time  and  think  this  well  over. 
Do  not  act  so  hastily.'  And  I  joined  with  him  in  saying  so ;  but  she 
only  said,  '  What  is  ;^24,ooo  to  me  in  comparison  with  having  a  son 
that  I  can  love,  and  who  will  be  kind  to  me?'  "  (Affidavit  of  Mr. 
Home. ) 

On  the  day  of  this  interview,  but  a  few  hours  pre\aous  to  it,  Mrs. 
Lyon  had  written  to  Mr.    Home  naming  ;^24,ooo  as  the  sum  she 

AMERICA,    RUSSIA,    AND     ENGLAND  143 

intended  to  settle  on  him.  He  found  her  letter  wairing  for  him  on 
his  return— as  follows.  The  italics  and  small  capitals  represent  the 
single  and  double  underlinations  of  the  writer: — 

My  Dear  Mr.  Home,— I  have  a  desire  to  render  you  indepen- 
dent of  the  world,  and  having  amfh  means  for  the  purpose  without 
abstracting  from  any  needs  or  comforts  of  ray  own,  I  have  the 
greatest  satisfaction  in  now  presenting  you  with  and  as  ^n  entirely 
Free  Gift  from  me  the  sum  of  ;£24,ooo,  and  am,  my  dear  sir,  yours 
very  truly  and   res-pectfully,  'Jane  Lyon.'  " 

Mr.  Home  accepted  the  gift  of  ^^24,000,  and  changed  his  name 
to  Home-Lyon.  In  spite  of  the  unanimous  approval  th'at  his 
friends  bestowed  on  the  course  he  had  taken,  he  sometimes  doubted 
its  wisdom.  His  advisers,  one  and  all,  looked  on  the  impulsive 
action  of  Mrs.  Lyon  as  a  signal  favour  of  Providence,  that  it  would 
have  been  not  only  foolish  but  wrong  to  reject.  But  he  could  not 
forget  that,  in  America,  in  Italy,  and  in  France,  offers  of  adoption 
had  been  made  to  him  by  persons  who  were  all  of  them  better-bred 
and  more  amiable  than  Mrs.  Lyon,  and  some  of  them  as  wealthy  or 
wealthier  ;  and  that  he  had  never  regretted  his  grateful  refusal  of 
those  offers.  All  his  life  he  had  studied  to  preserve  an  absolute 
independence  of  thought  and  action.  He  soon  found  reason  to 
fear  that,  in  becoming  the  adopted  son  of  Mrs.  Lyon,  he  had 
sacrificed  that   independence. 

On  becoming  the  possessor  of  the  ;^24,ooo,  his  first  thought  was 
of  others.  The  aunt  who  had  adopted  him  as  a  child  passed  the 
last  years  of  her  life  in  the  house  her  nephew  bought  for  her. 

In  November,  1866,  Mrs.  Lyon  unexpectedly  asked  her  adopted 
son  for  the  name  of  his  solicitor;  and  a  few  days  later  Mr.  Home 
was  astonished  to  find  that,  without  giving  him  any  hint  of  her 
intention,  she  had  ordered  a  will  to  be  drawn  up  constituting  him 
heir  to  her  fortune. 

The  lawyer  who  received  her  instruction,  Mr.  W.  M.  Wilkinson, 
remonstrated  strongly  against  them. 

"  I  reminded  her,"  he  stated  in  his  affidavit,  "  of  what  she  had  already 
done  for  Mr.  Home,  and  that  she  might  be  disappointed  with  him,  or  he  with 
her.  ...  I  asked  her  in  the  most  pointed  way  if  what  she  was  doing  was 
in  consequence  of  any  spiritual  control  or  orders,  and  she  said  it  was  not,  but 
was  her  own  unbiassed  wish  and  determination.  .  .  .  She  assured  me  in 
the  most  positive  manner  that  in  what  she  was  doing  she  was  not  influenced 
by  any  such  reasons,  but  that  she  had  taken  the  greatest  liking  to  Mr.  Home, 
and  found  him  all  that  she  could  wish  ;  and  it  was  a  delight  to  her  to  find  that 
she  could  make  such  a  good  use  of  her  money.  ...  I  told  her  that,  as  I 
was  a  friend  of  Mr.  Home,  it  would  be  much  more  satisfactory  to  me  if  she 
would  advise  with  some  other  solicitor ;  but  she  said  she  was  perfectly  satisfied 
with  me  and  would  not  go  to  anyone  else,  that  I  had  cautioned  her  in  every 
way  that  anyone  else  could,  and  she  quite  understood  what  she  was  about,  and 
was  a  good  woman  of  business." 

Dr.  Hawksley  and  Mr.  Rudall,  two  gentlemen  of  high  standing  and 
unimpeachable  character,  were  the  witnesses  to  the  will.  In  their 
presence  Mr.  Wilkinson  repeated  all  his  former  cautions  to  Mrs. 
Lyon.  ST>e  again  replied  that  she  was  influenced  by  no  spirit 
communications,  and  insisted  on  signing  the  will. 

144  LIFE   AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

Early  in  Deoemtjer,  1866,  Mr.  Home  formally  assmned  the  name 
of  Home-Lyon.  Without  saying  anything  to  him,  Mrs.  Lyon  wrote 
on  this  occasion  to  the  same  solicitor : — 

"  Jth  December,   1866. 

' '  My  DEAR  Mr.  Wilkinson, — On  the  occasion  of  my  adopted  son 
taking  the  name  of  Lyon,  I  wish  to  give  him  a  little  surprise.  I 
intend  to  add  six  thousand  pounds  to  the  twenty-four  I  have  already 
given  him,  making  a  sum  total  of  thirty  thousand.  .  .  .  Yours  very 
truly,  "Jane  Lyon." 

Mr.  Wilkinson  in  reply  once  more  suggested  that,  as  he  had  known 
Mr.  Home  long  and  intimately,  she  should  employ  another  solicitor 
to  transact  the  business.  Mrs.  Lyon  refused.  "  I  am  perfectly 
satisfied  with  your  legal  advice,"  she  wrote,  "  and  wish  for  no  other 
adviser;  "  and  very  soon  afterwards  informed  him  of  her  desire  to 
transfer  a  further  sum  of  ;£3o,ooo  to  Mr.  Home. 

The  solicitor  not  only  wrote  but  called  on  her  to  remonstrate.  She 
explained  that  she  wished  to  save  legacy  duty  by  transferring  this 
large  portion  of  her  fortune  to  her  adopted  son  during  her  lifetime. 

"  I  told  her,"  says  Mr.  Wilkinson  in  his  affidavit,  "  that  the  mere  question 
of  saving  legacy  duty  was  not  to  be  considered  against  the  all-important 
question  of  divesting  herself  of  her  property,  and  that  it  was  impossible  to 
say  that  she  might  not  afterwards  regret  giving  so  large  a  sum  to  one  whom 
she  had  known  so  short  a  time.  .  .  .  She  said  she  would  do  it,  and 
desired  me  to  have  the  deed  made  out  in  his  name.  I  asked  her  if  she  were 
desirous  of  doing  this  in  consequence  of  any  spirit-communications,  for  that,  if 
so,  I  could  have  nothing  to  do  with  it  on  any  such  ground.  She  said  that  she 
was  not  influenced  by  anything  but  the  intention  of  placing  him  in  an  inde- 
pendent position  and  saving  the  legacy  duty,  as  she  was  satisfied  she  should 
never  change  her  mind." 

On  Monday,  January  7,  1867,  Mr.  Wilkinson  again  called  on  Mrs. 

Lyon. 

"  I  saw  her,"  he  stated,"  and  had  a  long  conversation  with  her  as  to  her 
intended  gift  to  the  defendant  Home.  She  expressed  the  greatest  affection  for 
him,  and  said  that  she  was  determined  to  carry  it  out  in  the  way  proposed. 
I  reiterated  to  her  all  the  old  arguments.  I  again  warned  her  against  being 
in  any  way  influenced  by  any  spirit-communications,  or  by  anything  but  her 
unbiassed  reason,  and  she  assured  me  that  she  was  not.  On  this  occasion  she 
told  me  that  she  had  received  the  same  advice  from  Lady  Dunsany,  who  had 
told  her  not  to  be  guided  in  any  worldly  matters  by  any  communications,  and 
she  did  not  intend  to  be.  She  said,  whatever  happened,  she  had  more  money 
than  she  could  want,  and  she  was  only  too  glad  to  make  Daniel  independent 
after  all  the  obloquy  he  had  suffered." 

The  winter  of  1866  was  very  severe  in  England,  and  Mr.  Home's 
health  grew  worse  and  worse.  Under  the  advice  of  his  physicians, 
he  tried  frequent  change  of  air,  and  visited  Brighton,  Malvern, 
Hastings,  Torquay,  and  other  health-resorts.  All  this  while  Mrs. 
Lyon  remained  in  London,  and  he  saw  her  only  during  lus 
occasional  residences  there. 

The  will  that  Mrs.  Lyon  had  made  in  favour  of  Mr.  Home  was 
far  from  being  her  first  testament.  He  discovered  that  she  had 
executed  and  revoked  at  least  five  wills,  in  favour  of  different  persons. 

\ 

AMERICA,    RUSSIA,    AND     ENGLAND  145 

He  found  her  untruthful,  ignorant,  violent,  capricious — one  day 
testifying  the  warmest  affection  for  him,  the  next  loading  him  with 
abuse.  A  feeling  of  aversion  gradually  began  to  contend  with  the 
affectionate  gratitude  that  had  at  first  been  his  only  sentiment  towards 
her.  On  her  side,  Mrs.  Lyon  wearied  of  her  caprice  as  she  had 
wearied  of  twenty  others  that  had  preceded  it ;  and  the  more  speedily 
because  she  found  herself,  in  her  own  brutal  phrase,  "  tied  to  a 
dying  man."  She  had  taken  a  violent  dislike  to  Home's  Httle  son; 
and  the  thought  that,  if  she  and  Mr.  Home  died,  the  boy  would 
inherit  her  property  made  her  talk  of  changing  her  will.  She  was 
grievously  disappointed  with  her  reception  in  the  society  where  Home 
moved,  and  to  which  he  had  introduced  her.  His  friends  saw  as 
little  as  possible  of  her;  for  she  was  as  ignorant  of  the  ways  and 
habits  of  well-bred  people,  as  destitute  of  their  breeding.  With  this 
disappointment  working  on  her  violent  temper,  and  surrounded  by 
persons  who  had  sought  her  acquaintance  in  the  hope  of  diverting  her 
wealth  from  Mr.  Home  to  themselves,  she  determined  to  recall  a 
portion  at  least  of  her  gifts;  and  in  May,  1867,  consulted  a  retired 
barrister  who  was  acquainted  both  with  Home  and  herself,  as  to  the 
means  she  should  adopt  to  recover  the  second  sum  of  ;^30,ooo  that 
she  had  forced  upon  her  adopted  son.  "  She  told  him,"  says  Mr. 
Home  in  his  affidavit,  "  that  she  did  not  wish  to  disturb  the  gifts  of 
;;^24,ooo  and  j£,6,ooo  to  me,  but  thought  she  had  been  too  lavish 
in  bestowing  on  me  the  subsequent  gift." 

Home,  who  was  at  Malvern,  knew  nothing  of  these  proceedings. 
He  returned  to  London  early  in  June;  and  his  doctor  having 
prescribed  a  visit  to  some  of  the  German  baths,  he  informed  Mrs. 
Lyon  of  the  fact,  and  invited  her  to  accompany  him.  "  I  wisfi  you 
would  go  with  me,"  he  wrote.  "  I  have  been  out  of  London  more 
than  I  wished,  but  I  have  ever  asked  you  to  join  me." 

"  My  dear  Daniel,"  wrote  Mrs.  Lyon  in  reply:  "  I  have  this  instant 
got  a  letter  from  you  that  you  are  packing  up  to  go  away.  I 
perfectly  approve  of  your  determination.  I  think  it  \vill  do  you  good; 
and  be  assured  I  wish  you  every  enjoyment,  and  that  of  health  in 
particular." 

The  letter  closed  with  a  request  that  Home  would  call  on  her. 
He  went  at  once :  and  throwing  aside  the  pretended  affection  of  her 
letter,  she  demanded,  in  language  of  outrageous  abuse  and  insult, 
the  return  of  the  trust-deed  that  had  conveyed  the  second  ;^30,ooo 
to  Mr.  Home. 

No  situation  could  be  more  painful  and  perplexincr  than  that  in 
which  be  found   himself  suddenly  placed.  He  knew   that,  if  he 

surrendered  the  trust-deed  thus  insultinsrlv  demanded  of  him.  the 
world  would  declare  that  he  had  yielded  to  Mrs.  Lvon's  threats 
because  he  fen  red  to  stand  a  lawsuit.  He  consulted  his  friends  in 
London.  One  and  all  advised  him  not  to  give  up  the  deed.  In 
spite,  however,  of  their  opinion  that  he  could  both  leeallv  and 
honourably  retain  the  whole  _:^6o,ooo  bestowed  on  him.  Mr.  Home 
finally    determined    to   return    that   second    ;^_^o,ooo    to   which   he 

146  LIFE   AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

supposed  Mrs.  Lyon's  demand  to  be  still  limited;  but  only  on 
condition  that  he  received  from  her  a  written  retractation  of  the 
charges  she  had  made  against  his  lionesty  and  that  of  his  friends.  He 
wrote  to  make  this  offer.  "  I  was  wholly  ignorant  at  the  time,"  he 
explained  in  his  affidavit,  ' '  that  she  had  filed  her  Bill  ih  Chancery, 
making  charges  against  me  and  my  friends.  I  was  in  very  feeble 
liealth  at  the  time,  and  required  rest  and  freedom  from  anxiety.  I 
had  no  ill-feeling  towards  the  plaintiff;  and  I  wrote  without  taking 
advice  of  any  one,  and  for  the  sake  of  peace  and  quiet.  Had  I 
been  aware  of  such  Bill  having  been  filed,  I  most  certainly  would 
have  scorned  to  make  or  accept  any  offer  of  compromise." 

Dishonestly  suppressing  the  facts  that  Mr.  Home's  intended  journey 
to  Germany  was  prescribed  by  his  medical  adviser,  that  he  had 
requested  her  to  accompany  him,  and  that  she  had  expressed  entire 
approval  of  his  intention,  Mrs.  Lyon  obtained  a  writ  of  Ne  exeat 
regno,  upon  which  Mr.  Home  was  arrested  on  the  i8th  of  June,  1867. 
He  was  hberated  the  following  day,  on  depositing  in  the  Court  of 
Chancery  the  deeds  of  gift  relating  to  the  ;^6o,ooo;  and  from  the 
moment  of  his  arrest  his  friends  Lord  Adare  and  Lord  Lindsay  had 
never  left  him.  Their  generous  sympathy  and  companionship 
lightened  the  trial  of  these  twenty-four  hours  to  Mr.  Home;  but 
coming  at  a  time  when  he  was  already  prostrated  by  illness,  the 
shock  to  his  sensitive  nature  bad  all  but  proved  fatal.  It  was  three 
months  before  he  had  sufficiently  recovered  to  give  any  instructions 
to  his  legal  advisers. 

On  adopting  Mr.  Home,  Mrs.  Lyon  had  taken  possession  of  the 
jewellery,  lace,  &c.,  that  had  belonged  to  his  wife.  She  retained 
them  even  after  the  close  of  the  lawsuit,  and  some  of  the  most 
valuable  objects  were  never  restored. 

In  April,  1868,  the  cause  of  "  Lyon  against  Home"  came  on  for 
hearing    before    Vice-Chancellor    Giffard    without    a    jury.  The 

plaintiff  declared  that  she  had  been  influenced  to  adopt  Mr.  Home 
as  her  son  by  communications  which  she  had  believed  to  proceed 
from  the  spirit  of  her  late  husband.  She  asserted  that  during  her 
first  visit  to  the  Spiritual  Athensum  the  following  words  were  spelt 
out  by  rappings  on  the  table:  "My  beloved  Jane,  I  am  Charles, 
your  own  beloved  husband.  I  live  to  bless  you."  Yet  by  her  own 
sworn  statement,  she  was  an  entire  stranger  to  Mr.  Home  when  that 
interview  took  place,  and  be  had  no  means  of  knowing  that  her 
husband's  name  had  been  Charles. 

Here  I  may  state  a  fact,  known  to  others  besides  myself.  When 
Mrs.  Lyon  first  manifested  the  intention  of  reclaiming  part  of  her  gifts, 
Mr.  Homie  was  recommended  by  at  least  one  of  the  friends  whom  he 
consulted  to  place  the  money  where  it  would  be  out  of  the  reach  of 
any  English  Court,  but  his  honourable  nature  rejected  the  advice. 

The  proof  of  mevs  conscia  recti  that  he  frave  in  investing  the  whole 
of  the  fortune  bestowed  on  him  in  English  securities,  puzzled  even 
the  most  prejudiced  and  hostile  of  his  critics.  "It  is  difficult  to 
understand,"  said  the  Daily  News  of  May  2,  1868,  "  why  the  object 

AMERICA,    RUSSIA,    AND     ENGLAND  147 

of  the  widow's  motherly  bounty,  and  more  than  motherly  affection, 
should  have  invested  the  large  sums  so  prodigally  cast  at  his  feet  in 
securities  within  the  reach  of  a  widow's  second  thoughts  and  of  the 
Court  of  Chancery.     These  mysteries  are  beyond  our  ken." 

In  his  answer  to  the  plaintiff's  affidavit,  Mr.  Home  absolutely 
denied  that  any  allusion  to  the  late  Charles  Lyon  had  been  made  when 
Mrs.  Lyon  called  on  him  at  the  Spiritual  Athenaeum,  or  that  any 
spiritual  manifestations  whatever  took  place.  With  regard  to  the 
second  interview,  he  similarly  swore  that  no  spirit-communications 
were  received.  At  the  third  interview,  and  after  she  had  declared 
her  intention  to  adopt  him,  a  manifestation  took  place  which  Mr. 
Home  fully  described  in  his  affidavit.  It  did  not  refer  to  the  proposed 
adoption. 

Such  are  the  prejudice  and  dishonesty  of  the  world  that  the 
English  press  in  general  treated  Mrs.  Lyon's  account  of  what  passed 
on  these  occasions  as  if  it  had  been  worthy  of  credence — conveniently 
ignoring  the  fact  that  the  witnesses  called  by  Mr.  Home  had 
convicted  her  of  false  swearing  in  very  many  other  particulars  of 
her  evidence,  and  that  the  Vice-Chancellor  had  declared  it  to  be 
impossible  to  believe  her  on  her  oath.  In  order  to  fling  a  stone — 
liowever  muddy — at  Mr.  Home,  the  press  calmly  assumed  that, 
although  the  plaintiff  stood  convicted  of  falsehood  in  almost  every 
other  particular  of  her  evidence,  she  was  telling  the  truth  as  to  those 
interviews  at  which  only  herself  and  the  defendant  had  been  present. 

Mr.  Home  could  call  no  witnesses  to  what  had  passed  at  interviews 
where  no  witnesses  had  been.  All  he  could  do,  he  did ;  he  brought 
forward  witness  after  witness  to  prove  that  she  had  never  attributed 
her  adoption  of  him  to  the  communications  she  now  pretended  to 
have  received,  and  had  uniformly  declared  that  she  was  influenced 
only  by  her  affection  for  him  in  the  course  she  had  taken. 

Take,  for  instance,  the  evidence  of  Mr.  Home's  lawyer,  Mr. 
Wflkinson,  a  solicitor  in  large  practice,  whose  bona  fides  the  Vice- 
Chancellor  held  to  be  fully  established,  and  whose  costs  be  ordered 
Mrs.  Lyon  to  pay  as  be  ordered  her  to  pay  her  own  costs. 

"  So  far  as  it  relates  to  matters  within  my  own  knowledge,"  said  Mr. 
Wilkinson  in  his  affidavit,  "  the  plaintiff's  affidavit  is  almost  wholly  untrue, 
and  is  at  variance  with  the  facts,  or  with  her  own  previous  and  repeated 
statements  to  me.  ...  I  was  the  friend  of  the  defendant  Home,  though  I 
seldom  saw  him.  I  have  always  found  him  a  person  of  honour  and  integrity ; 
and  when  I  heard  that  he  had  been  adopted  by  the  plaintiff,  and  that  she  had 
given  him  ;^24,ooo,  I  was  very  glad  of  it,  as  a  compensation  for  the  unmerited 
abuse  to  which  he  has  been  subjected.  When,  however,  that  munificent  gift 
had  been  made  to  him,  I  thought  it  was  enough  for  all  purposes,  and  any 
further  gifts  I  considered  quite  unnecessary.  This  made  me  very  independent 
in  advising  her,  and  very  determined  that  she  should  do  nothing  more  for  him 
upon  my  advice.  I  never  told  Mr.  Home  or  any  other  person  what  I  intended 
to  do  in  the  way  of  questioning  her  when  I  took  her  will,  but  I  questioned  her 
in  the  strictest  way.  .  .  .  H  she  had  at  the  time  she  signed  her  will  the 
conviction  that  she  was  influenced  by  any  spiritual  cause,  she  not  only  con- 
cealed it  from  me,  but  resolutely  denied  it,  and  gave  as  her  reason  that  she  did 
it  out  of  her  liking  for  Mr.  Home,  and  to  make  him  independent. 

"  She  assured  me  repeatedly  that  she  was   not  influenced   in   any   way  by 

148  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

spirit-communications,  but  only  by  her  liking  for  him,  and  that  if  he  were  not 
a  medium  at  all,  she  should  have  the  same  affection  for  him.  If  it  were 
otherwise,  she  is  alone  to  blame  for  concealing  it  from  me  and  constantly 
denying  it,  but  I  spoke  to  her  so  often  against  being  led  away  by  communica- 
tions that  the  subject  got  quite  threadbare  between  us.  ...  I  have  given 
her  the  same  advice,  both  when  by  ourselves  and  in  the  presence  of  the. 
defendant  Home  ;  and  on  such  occasions  he  has  always  said  the  same  to  her. 
I  could  have  done  nothing  more  than  I  did,  except  refusing  altogether  to  carry 
out  her  strict  orders  ;  and  had  I  done  so,  and  she  had  gone  to  another  solicitor, 
and  had  told  him  the  same  as  she  told  me,  he  would  have  had  no  alternative 
but  to  act  on  her  instructions. 

"  The  plaintiff  has  repeatedly  told  me  that  she  acted  altogether  on  her  own 
judgment  in  what  she  was  doing,  and  that  it  was  the  greatest  pleasure  to  her 
to  have  made  such  a  use  of  her  money,  and  to  have  found  one  who  was  such 
a  comfort  to  her." 

How  are  these  sworn  statements  of  Mr.  Wilkinson  to  be  reccnciled 
with  the  plaintiff's  assertion  that  spirit-communications  had  led  her 
to  adopt  Mr.    Home? 

What  she  had  stated  to  Mr.  Wilkinson  concerning  the  motives  of 
the  adoption,  she  stated  to  many  besides ;  some  of  whom  came  for- 
ward in  Court  to  swear  to  the  fact,  while  others,  residing  at  a  dis- 
tance from  London,  sent  affidavits.  She  had  told  Lady  Dunsany, 
for  mstance,  that  she  was  not  influenced  by  any  spirit-cormnunica- 
tions  and  did  not  intend  to  be.  She  had  made  declarations  of  a 
similar  nature  to  Mr.  Gerald  Massey  the  poet  and  to  numerous  other 
persons  whose  names  are  not  before  me. 

Among  the  papers  in  my  possession  that  relate  to  the  Lyon  law- 
suit is  an  affidavit  made  by  Dr.  Robert  Chambers,  whom,  on  one  of 
his  visits  to  London,  Mr.  Home  had  introduced  to  Mrs.  Lyon.  I 
copy  this  interesting  document.  It  will  be  seen  that  Mrs.  Lyon 
spoice  to  Dr.  Chambers,  as  she  had  spoken  to  others,  of  her  own 
visions  -previous  to  her  acquaintance  with  Mr.  Home,  and  added 
that  he  identified  him  with  the  person  she  had  seen  in  those  visions. 
A  very  different  story  this  from  the  one  she  afterwards  told  in  Court, 
when  all  mention  of  her  visions  was  suppressed,  and  in  their  place 
imaginary  communications  made  at  her  first  interviews  with  Mr. 
Home  were  substituted. 

"I,  Robert  Chambers,  LL.D.,  make  oath  and  say  as  follows  : — I  was 
introduced  by  Mr.  Home-Lyon  to  Mrs.  Lyon,  the  plaintiff,  at  her  house  in 
Albert  Terrace,  on  the  4th  of  December  last.  I  congratulated  her  on  her 
recent  act  of  adopting  Mr.  Home  as  her  son,  as  I  knew  him  to  be  worthy  of 
her  affection,  as  well  as  the  fortune  she  had  conferred  upon  him.  She  entered 
into  a  recital  of  what  had  led  her  to  do  so.  Mr.  Home  was  a  recent  acquaint- 
ance, and  on  seeing  him  she  had  recognised  him  as  the  person  pointed  out  by 
her  husband  in  vision.  .  .  .  Her  motives  had  sprung  solely  from  her  own 
visions.  Both  on  this  occasion,  and  when  I  met  Mrs.  Lyon  with  her  adopted 
son  at  the  house  of  a  lady  of  rank  in  Onslow  Square  "  (Lady  Dunsany), 
"  Mrs.  Lyon  spoke  of  and  to  Mr.  Home  entirely  as  an  affectionate  mother. 

"  I  have  known  Mr.  Home  for  many  years,  and  believe  him  to  be  of 
irreproachable  character.  "  Robert  Cn.iMBr.RS. 

"  Sworn  at  St.  Andrews,  the  fifth  day  of  September,  1867." 

In  a  letter  written  to  Mr.  Home  shortly  before  making  this 
affidavit,  Dr.  Chambers  says:  "She"  (Mrs.  Lyon)  "mentioned  a 
habit  of  visions  from  her  youth."       But  surely  for  such  a  habit  even 

AMERICA,    RUSSIA,    AND     ENGLAND  149 

English  law  could  not  hold  Mr.  Home  responsible?  It  was  his 
misfortune,  not  his  fault,  that  on  seeing  him  Mrs.  Lyon  should  have 
identified  him  with  the  figure  seen  in  her  visions,  on  whom  her 
ancient   affections  were   to  be   lavished. 

The  pleadings  in  the  suit  of  Lyon  v.  Home  closed  on  May  ist, 
1868,  and  the  Vice-Chancel  lor  reserved  judgment.  The  trial  had, 
in  his  own  words,  "  quite  discredited  the  plaintiff's  testimony  "  ;  and 
the  one  or  two  persons  who  in  some  degree  supported  her  statements 
consisted  of  those  very  people  who  were  most  deeply  interested  in 
seeing  her  gifts  to  Mr.  Home  revoked.  His  testimony,  on  the  other 
hand,  was  unshaken  ;  and  his  witnesses  consisted  of  persons  of  rank 
and  character,  unbiassed  by  those  interested  motives  of  which  the 
plaintiff's  witnesses  might  very  reasonably  Ije  suspected.  At  the 
close  of  the  case,  those  of  his  friends  who  knew  little  of  law  and 
were  sanguine  enough  to  suppose  that  equity  would  rule  a  Court  of 
Equity,  even  when  Spiritualism  was  in  question,  predicted  con- 
fidently that  he  would  win.  Their  expectation  was  shared — 
mirabile  dictu! — by  an  authority  so  learned  in  the  law  as  the  Law 
Times.      In  its  issue  of  May  2,  1868,  that  journal  said  : — 

"  Does  she  "  (Mrs.  Lyon)  "  show  that  she  was  imposed  upon  by  the 
defendant?  Was  it  not  rather  that  she  imposed  upon  herself.  .  .  .  This  is 
not  the  common  case  of  a  weak  mind  enthralled  by  a  strong  one — of  advantage 
taken  of  ignorance.  .  .  .  When  feeling  is  put  aside,  and  the  strangeness 
of  the  Spiritualists*  creed  forgotten,  and  we  look  only  at  the  fact,  that  a 
woman  of  more  than  common  sagacity  gave  to  a  man,  whom  she  believed  to 
possess  certain  miraculous  powers,  a  large  sum  of  money,  from  a  desire,  then 
sincerely  entertained  by  her,  to  benefit  the  object  of  her  admiration,  we  shall 
probably  come  to  the  conclusion  that  no  sufficient  case  has  been  shown  for  the 
interference  of  the  law  to  undo  the  act  of  benevolence,  now  that  her  feelings 
towards  the  object  of  it  have  changed,  and  she  repents  of  her  generosity. 
Such  a  principle  so  established  would  be  applicable  to  cases  far  beyond  th^ 
range  of  Spiritualism.  It  would  affect  many  religious  and  not  a  few  charitable 
gifts." 

On  the  other  hand,  Mr.  Home's  counsel,  Mr.  Henry  Matthews, 
Q.C.,  had  warned  him  to  be  prepared  for  an  adverse  judgment;  and 
one  of  his  friends,  a  medical  man  in  large  practice,  wrote  to  him  : — 

"  B.  said  last  autumn  to  me,  '  They  will  give  it  against  Home, 
whatever  the  evidence  be.  ...  '  Sir  W.  Bovill  told  me  a  week  ago, 
*  The  precedents  are  against  Home,  though  the  evidence  is  for  him.' 
Lawyers  go  all  by  precedent,  I  find." 

Delivered  towards  the  end  of  May,  1868,  the  Vice-Chancellor's 
judgment  was  adverse  to  Mr.  Home  on  the  grounds  I  have  already 
stated  : — that  the  proved  false  swearing  of  the  plaintiff  was  im- 
material, and  that  English  law  in  a  suit  like  this  reversed  the 
ordinary  maxims  of  jurisprudence,  and  held  a  defendant  guilty  unless 
he  could  prove  himself  innocent.  But,  to  the  mind  of  every  un- 
prejudiced critic  the  evidence  called  for  Mr.  Home  had  established 
his  innocence.  The  Vice-Chancellor  seems  to  have  felt  that 
awkward  fact,  or  why,  besides  ordering  Mrs.  Lyon  to  pav  her  own 
costs,  did  he  seek  to  give  a  colour  of  reason  to  his  judgment  by  de- 
nouncing Spiritualism  in  general  terms,  as   "  well  calculated  to  de- 

I50  LIFE    Ax\D    MISSION    OF    HOME 

lude  the  vain,  the  weak,  the  foolish,  and  the  superstitious."  Had 
his  candour  been  equal  to  his  prejudices,  Vice-Chancellor  Giffard 
would  have  said  in  so  many  words:  "  The  law  requires  the  defend- 
ant to  prove  that  he  did  not  exercise  undue  influence  over  the 
plaintiff.  He  has  called  evidence  to  show  that  he  did  not,  and  the 
evidence  is  undisproved.  Nevertheless,  I  decide  against  him ;  for, 
as  I  hold  Spiritualism  to  be  a  delusion,  I  must  necessarily  hold  the 
plaintiff  to  be  the  victim  of  a  delusion,  and  no  amount  of  evidence 
will  convince  me  to  the  contrary." 

The  reductio  ad  absurdum  of  the  Vice-Chancellor's  reasoning  (?) 
was  wittily  set  forth  in  the  Malvern  News  of  June  6th,  1868  : 

"  We  do  not  see  how  poor  Mr.  Home  is  henceforth  ever  to  retain  a  bequest 
or  gift  from  anjone  with  whom  he  has  ever  sat  at  a  table,  for  that  may  be 
construed  into  a  siance,  and  that  again  into  an  influence  destructive  of  the 
validity  of  the  gift." 

"  The  woman  Lyon,"  says  the  same  article  in  the  Malvern  News,  "  again 
and  again  stated  that  she  had  believed  in  Spiritualism  long  before  she  knew 
of  Home's  existence.  She  swore  that  he  persuaded  her  to  give  the  money,  but 
offered  not  a  tittle  of  evidence  to  rebut  the  mass  of  written  and  oral  evidence 
that  he  had  never  attempted  to  persuade  her.  .  .  .  From  beginning  to  end 
of  the  trial  there  was  not  a  particle  of  evidence  to  show  that  Home  had  used 
direct  influence,  based  on  spirit-communication,  to  cause  the  old  woman  to 
give  her  money  in  the  deliberate  yet  speedy  way  in  which  she  did.  Even  the 
judge  admitted  that  there  was  no  such  evidence." 

Mr.  Home  was  subsequently  taunted  by  the  multitude  of  his  pre- 
judiced critics  with  not  having  prosecuted  an  appeal  against  the 
judgment.  Why  should  he  have  done  so?  His  object  in  defending 
the  suit  had  been  to  vindicate  his  character,  and  that  he  had  done 
in  the  eyes  of  all  whose  opinion  he  valued.  His  friends  did  not 
fall  from  him;  on  the  contrary,  they  crowded  the  court  during  the 
ten  days  the  suit  lasted,  welcomed  him  when  he  entered  and  left 
the  building ;  and  both  before  and  after  the  judgment  was  delivered, 
those  friends,  who  included  persons  of  the  highest  standing  in 
English  society,  gave  generous  and  open  testimony  that  their  esteem 
for  him  remained  unchanged,  because  in  the  evidence  given  during 
the  suit  of  Lyon  v.  Home  there  was  nothing  that  should  cause  him 
to  forfeit  it. 

English  law  being  what  it  was,  and  popular  prejudices  against 
Spiritualism  what  they  were,  it  would  have  been  useless  for  Mr. 
Home  to  appeal.  Any  fresh  judges  before  whom  the  suit  came 
would  almost  certainly  have  shared  the  prejudices  of  the  Vice- 
Chancellor  against  Spiritualism;  and  sharing  his  prejudices,  they 
would  have  confirmed  his  judgment.  Against  a  foregone  conclusion 
facts  fight  in  vain. 

The  brief  and  imperfect  outline  of  the  suit  Lyon  v.  Home  that  I 
have  given  in  the  foregoing  pages  will  prove  to  any  impartial  reader 
that,  if  Mr.  Home  lost  his  case,  he  vindicated  his  character.  As  to 
what  passed  during  his  first  two  or  three  interviews  with  the  plaintiff, 
he  could  but  set  his  oath  against  hers;  and  her  oath,  on  the 
declaration  of  the  Vice-Chancellor  himself,  was  that  of  a  person  who 
could   not   be  believed.       She   pretended   that   on   those   occasions 

AMERICA,    RUSSIA,    AND    ENGLAND  151 

messages  had  been  rapped  out  in  which  she  was  told  to  adopt  him  as 
her  son.  Mr.  Home  conclusively  established  that  at  the  time  of  the 
adoption,  and  for  several  months  afterwards,  not  only  had  she  made 
no  mention  of  such  messages — she  had,  times  without  number, 
emphatically  denied  being  influenced  by  any  spirit-communications. 
On  that  head,  the  evidence  of  Mr.  Wilkinson  would  alone  be 
conclusive,  but  it  was  confirmed  by  a  number  of  other  witnesses. 

When  Home  passed  from  earth,  various  leading  English  journals 
in  their  notices  of  his  death  grossly  misstated  the  grounds  on  which 
judgment  was  delivered  against  him  in  the  suit  of  Lyon  v.  Home. 
Vice-Chancellor  Giffard,  with  all  his  prejudices,  had  gone  no  further 
than  to  declare  that — putting  the  plaintiff's  evidence  aside 
as  worthless — the  defendant  had  failed  to  show  to  the 
Vice-Chancellor's  satisfaction  that  the  gifts  of  Mrs.  Lyon  were  the 
well-understood  acts  of  a  reasonable  being.  Yet  the  Times  of  June 
24,  1886,  could  state:  "  By  '  messages  '  which  were  rapped  out  on 
tables,  she  was  induced  to  execute  deeds  of  gift  to  him  covering 
sums  of  money  amounting  in  all  to  about  thirty  thousand  pounds." 
Had  the  writer  of  these  words  taken  the  trouble  to  consult  the  records 
of  the  Chancery  suit,  he  would  have  found  that  the  only  evidence  as 
to  these  pretended  messages  was  contained  in  the  statements  of  the 
pl."intiff,and  that  her  testimony  was  discredited  as  perjured  by  the  judge. 

"  Mr.  Home,"  said  a  discreditable  article  in  the  Daily  News  of 
the  same  date  as  the  Times  leader,  "  explained  the  meaning  of  this 
utterance  from  another  world  to  be  that  twenty-four  thousand 
pounds'  worth  of  stock  should  be  invested  for  him  in  the  Bank  of 
England.  Soon  afterwards  he  declared  it  to  be  the  spirit's  will  that 
Mrs.  Lyon  should  leave  him  everything  she  possessed." 

Compare  these  statements — not  with  the  actual  facts  on  record — 
but  simply  with  the  less  garbled  account  published  by  the  same 
journal  in  May,  1868,  immediately  after  the  Vice-Chancellor  had 
delivered  judgment.  "  Mrs.  Lyon,"  said  the  Daily  News  of  that 
earlier  date,  "proposed  to  be  Mr.  Home's  mother.  .  .  .  She 
insisted  on  his  acceptance  of  ;^30,ooo  as  a  free  and  absolute  gift 
and  of  an  equal  sum  in  reversion,  subject  to  her  life  interest.  .  .  . 
Mr.  Home  had  the  necessary  deeds  prepared  with  no  undue  haste, 
and  with  reasonable  caution." 

How  account  for  this  extraordinary  difference  between  two  versions 
of  the  Lyon  lawsuit  published  at  different  times  by  the  same  journal  ? 
Probably  by  the  fact  that  when  the  first  version  was  published  Mr. 
Home  was  still  within  the  protection  of  the  law  of  libel.  English 
law,  I  am  told,  does  not  account  it  any  offence  to  libel  those  who 
have  passed  from  earth. 

"There  is  no  such  thing  as  fair  play  in  this  world,"  says  Mr. 
Serjeant  Cox  in  one  of  his  letters  to  Mr.  Home;  "  at  least,  I  have 
never  met  with  it."  Home  might  justly  have  echoed  the  words  after 
the  Lyon  lawsuit.  I  will  only  add  that  the  resignation  with  which 
Home  supported  every  trial  of  has  life  is  perhaps  an  even  rarer  virtue 
than  fair-play  and  justice. 

CHAPTER  IX 

ENGLAND 

Evidence  of  the  Earl  of  Dunraven  and  Lord  Adare.  The 
Dialectical  Society.  Evidential  seances.  Insensibility  to  heat. 
The  effects  of  faith.  Light  and  dark  mediumship.  Spirit 
music.  ' '  A     hundred     instances     of     levitation. ' '  The 

Levitation  at  Ashley  House.  Dr.  Carpenter's  misstatement. 
Captain  Wynne's  evidence.  Dr.  Carpenter  as  a  Universal 
Spiritualist. 

Comparatively  full  records  have  been  preserved  of  seances  with  Mr. 
Home  during  the  years  1867-8-9.  The  phenomena  witnessed  were 
remarkable  both  for  their  nature  and  their  variety.  One  of  their 
frequent  investigators  at  this  time  was  the  present  Earl  of  Crawford,* 
then  Lord  Lindsay,  whose  scientific  attainments  might  have  been 
expected  to  secure  for  his  evidence  the  impartial  consideration  of  the 
scientific  world ;  but  the  reception  accorded  to  it  only  demonstrated 
how  very  timid,  prejudiced,  and  unfair  that  world  can  be. 

A  record  of  eighty  seances  with  Mr.  Home  was  preserved  by  the 
Earl  of  Dunraven  and  his  son,  then  Lord  Adare,  in  a  volume  printed 
for  private  circulation.  In  the  preface  the  writers  relate  that  the 
occurrences  of  each  day  were  noted  down  at  the  time,  that  when  both 
had  been  present  at  a  seance  both  drew  up  an  account  of  the 
manifestations,  and  insured  accuracy  by  comparing  them;  and  that, 
still  further  to  test  the  correctness  of  the  narrative,  the  record  of  every 
seance  was  sent  to  the  remaining  persons  who  had  been  present,  with 
the  request  that  they  would  state  whether  it  coincided  with  their  own 
recollections.  Every  answer  was  in  the  affirmative.  It  is  added 
that,  while  nothing  bad  been  inserted  that  did  not  occur,  or  bad  been 
exaggerated  that  did,  it  was  found  necessary  to  omit  a  great  deal — 
a  very  important  fact  to  bear  in  mind.  In  all  such  narratives  it  is 
precisely  the  most  vital  part  of  the  tale  that  is  left  untold,  the 
communication  of  private  matters  to  the  persons  present  at  the  seance, 
and  unknown  to  Home. 

"  Even  in  the  original  letters  to  my  father,"  said  Lord  Adare,  "  I 
was  obliged  to  omit  a  few  circumstances  of  great  interest ;  in  some 
cases  on  account  of  their  having  reference  to  persons  who  did  not 
wish  those  circumstances  to  be  mentioned." 

It  was  always  so,  or  almost  always.  Sometimes  the  witness  would 
not  speak,  because  the  communications  he  had  received  so  intimately- 
concerned  himself ;  sometimes  he  could  not,  because  the  startling 
facts  with  which  he  was  conversant  had  reference  to  other  persons, 
who  declined  to  make  them  public  to  the  world.  It  is  thus  that  much 
remarkable  evidence  received  and  verified  at  seances  with  Home  has 
*  The  late  Earl  of  Crawford  and  Balcarres. — [Ed.] 
152 

ENGLAND 

153 

been  lost  to  the  world.  There  are  very  few  wlio,  like  Lords  Lindsay 
and  Dunraven,  liave  placed  tlie  history  of  their  investigations  on 
recx>rd. 

An  inquiry  into  the  phenomena  of  Spiritualism  was  conducted  by 
the  Dialectical  Society  in  1869 ;  evidence,  both  oral  and  written,  being 
received,  while  various  sub-committees  were  appointed  to  hold 
seances.  The  committee  appointed  to  meet  Mr.  Home  contained  some 
of  the  most  incredulous  members  of  the  Society,  among  others  Mr. 
Bradlaugh   and    Dr.    Edmonds.  Lord  Adare  and  Lord   Lindsay 

attended  the  seances,  which,  to  the  number  of  four,  were  held  in  a 
fully-lighted  room.  The  manifestations  did  not  extend  beyond 
slight  raps  and  movements  of  the  table ;  and  the  illness  of  Mr.  Home 
preventing  an  extension  of  the  inquiry,  the  committee  were  only  able 
to  report  that  nothing  material  had  occurred;  adding  that  "during 
the  inquiry  Mr.   Home  afforded  every  facility  for  examination." 

It  is  a  pity  that  circumstances  prevented  the  Society's  committee 
from  holding  fourteen  or  twenty  seances  with  Mr.  Home  instead  of 
four.  In  such  a  case  numerous  seances  might  be  necessary  to  enable 
the  spirits  to  establish  conditions  rendering  manifestations  possible. 
In  what  the  difficulty  of  establishing  such  conditions  consisted  it 
would  be  impossible  to  say,  but  that  the  mere  fact  of  scepticism  did 
not  constitute  it  was  a  hundred  times  proved.  No  scepticism  could 
have  been  more  thorough  or  aggressive  than  that  of  Dr.  Elliottson 
when  he  came  to  his  first  seance  with  Home  at  Dieppe,  but  the 
invisible   forces  went   to    work   at   once.  Similarly,    Thackeray, 

Chambers,  Mr.  John  Bright,  Mr.  Crookes,  Dr.  Huggins,  and  very 
many  others  that  I  might  name — for  instance,  the  Emperors  of 
Russia,  France,  and  Germany — were  completely  incredulous 
concerning  the  phenomena  when  they  first  sat  with  Mr.  Home;  but 
in  none  of  these  cases  did  the  scepticism  of  the  investigator  paralyse 
the    manifestations.  When   Mr.    Home    sat  with  the  Dialectical 

Society's  committee,  either  his  variable  power  was  almost  absent  at 
the  time,'  or  his  state  of  health  was  such  that  the  power,  although 
present,  could  not  venture  to  manifest  itself. 

It  is  curious  to  notice  mth  what  ardour  certain  zealots  of  disbelief 
maintain  that  the  negative  results  of  one  or  t"wo  seances  constitute  an 
affirmative  of  their  incredulity.  If  men  of  science  are  forced  to  avow 
how  little  they  comprehend  of  the  nature  of  the  visible 
universe  what  must  be  their  ignorance  of  the  nature  of  a  gift  so 
mysterious  as  that  of  Home,  which  passed  the  limits  of  human 
experience,  and  whose  source  was  connected  with  the  origin  and 
mysteries  of  our  spiritual  being. 

In  a  previous  chapter  I  have  collected  instances  of  the  proofs  of 
identity  received  at  the  seances  of  Home.  The  smallness  of  their 
number,  as  I  have  already  explained,  is  not  due  to  the  fact  that  these 
convincing  tokens  were  seldom  forthcoming;  on  the  contrary,  they 

*  "  Whatever  the  nature  of  Mr.  Home's  power,  it  is  very  variable,  and  at 
times  entirely  absent." — Mr.  Crookes:  Experimental  Investigation  of  a  Neiu 
Force. 

L 

154  LIFE   AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

were  the  invariable  characteristics  of  his  seances,  and  referred 
constantly  to  matters  of  the  most  intimate  and  remarkable  nature. 
In  the  present  chapter  I  shall  deal  cliiefly  with  physical 
manifestations;  but  first  I  am  enabled  to  add  one  or  two  interesting 
items  to  the  facts  establishing  identity  that  have  been  already  given. 
Several  of  the  seances  described  by  Lord  Adare  took  place  at  the 
house  of  Mrs.  Hennings,  a  lady  residing  in  Thicket  Road,  Anerley, 
who  became  a  dearly  valued  friend  of  Mr.  Home.  She  has  very 
kindly  written  for  me  a  narrative  of  some  of  the  experiences  that 
made  her  a  Spiritualist,  from  which  I  extract  the  following  details : — 

"At  a  stance  in  1869,  Mrs.  Jencken,  senior,  Lord  Adare,  Mrs.  Scott  Russell, 
and  Mr.  Bergheim  being  also  present,  Mr.  Home  fell  into  the  trance  condition, 
rose  from  his  seat,  paced  the  room,  and  then  knelt  down  by  me,  saying, 
'  George  is  here  '  (meaning  my  nephew,  whom  he  had  never  met,  and  who 
had  recently  passed  away,  in  consequence  of  being  thrown  from  his  horse. 
He  had  held  a  high  legal  position,  and  was  employed  against  Mr.  Home  in  the 
Lyon  trial).  '  He  wants  to  say  something,  but  will  not  say  it  through  me, 
from  prejudice;  therefore  I  have  it  from  other  spirits.' 

"  Home  then  said  to  me  :  '  Do  you  remember  that  George,  as  a  boy,  had 
an  accident  at  your  house  in  Dulwich,  where,  having  teased  a  dog,  the  animal 
flew  at  him,  threw  him  down,  and  bit  him  severely  in  the  groin?'  I  did 
remember  the  occurrence  perfectly,  though  it  had  occurred  many  years  before ; 
for  the  severe  nature  of  the  wound  had  caused  us  great  alarm." 

Of  another  communication  Mrs.  Hennings  writes:  "As  a  proof  ot 
recognised  identity  this  case  stands  unrivalled."  Her  narrative  ot 
the  incident  is  as  follows: — 

"  Siance  of  October  26th,  1867.  Present,  Mrs.  Jencken,  senior,  Mrs. 
Hennings,  and  Mr.  Percival.  The  second  of  the  stances  especially  addressed 
to  me,  for  the  purpose  of  establishing  the  identity  of  communicant  spirit 
friends.     The  following  circumstances  occurred  : — 

"  D.  D.  Home  fell  inio  the  trance  state  ;  and  after  giving  a  few  words  to 
each  of  the  party  from,  or  relating  to,  departed  spirit  friends,  drew  a  chair 
close  to  me,  took  both  my  hands  in  his,  and  addressed  me  in  the  following 
words  : — 

"  '  The  night  before  your  father  passed  away,  you  played  whist  with  him. 
When  it  was  his  turn  to  play,  he  hesitated,  and  looked  upwards  with  a  smile, 
as  if  entranced  -that  was  the  first  glimpse  he  had  of  the  spirit  sphere.  With 
the  dawn,  he  passed  away  without  pain. 

"  '  He  had  previously  communicated  with  Mr.  Hennings,  who  told  him 
"  that  he  had  taken  care  of  Mary,"  in  consequence  of  which  your  father  left 
you  but  little  in  comparison  with  the  others.  Now,  through  me,  he  wishes  to 
assure  you  this  did  not  arise  from  any  want  of  affection,  but  only  from  a 
misapprehension  of  the  state  of  affairs.' 

"  Home  then  returned  to  his  former  seat ;  but,  looking  across  the  room,  his 
face  became  radiant  with  smiles,  as  he  repeated :  '  He  is  so  pleased — so 
pleased.' 

"  Mr.  Home  had  never  seen  my  father,  nor  heard  anything  about  him  ;  and 
most  wonderful  to  me  was  this  detail  of  such  long-past  events,  known  only  to 
myself.  "  M.   Hennings." 

Mrs.  Scott  Russell,  who  was  one  of  the  circle  when  Mrs.  Hennings 
received  the  remarkable  proof  of  her  nephew's  identity  narrated  by 
her  above,  was  the  wife  of  the  eminent  engineer  of  that  name.  She 
was  present  at  numerous  seances  with  Mr.  Home,  and  the 
communications  she  received  entirely  convinced  her  of  the  reality  of 
spirit-communion.         When  he  was  about  to  bring  out  his  second 

ENGLAND 

155 

volume  of  autobiography,  Home  consulted  Mrs.  Russell  with  regard 
to  the  publication  of  her  name  as  a  witness  to  some  of  the  facts 
narrated,  and  received  the  following  reply: — 

"  West  WOOD  Lodge,  Sydenham. 
"  My  DEAR  Friend, — Certainly  I  liave  no  objection  to  my  name 
being  inserted  as  present  at  your  seances.     I  thank  God  for  it,  and 
shall  always  gratefully  bear  witness  to  what  I  have  been  permitted  to 
see.   .   .   .  Always  affectionately  yours, 

"  Harriette  Scott  Russelx." 

In  spite  of  this  kind  and  brave  permission,  Mr.  Home,  with  his 
invariable  delicate  consideration  for  his  friends,  omitted  Mrs.  Scott 
Russell's  name  from  his  book. 

"  I  never  forget,"  writes  Mrs.  Scott  Russell  to  Mr.  Home  in 
1 880,  "  my  deep  debt  of  gratitude  to  you  for  the  faith  which  I  beUeve 
I  never  should  have  received  through  any  other  channel." 

A  number  of  English  ladies  and  gentlemen  who  had  been  present 
at  Seances  with  Mr.  Home  gave  evidence  of  their  experiences  before 
the  committee  of  the  Dialectical  Society.  Among  them  was  a  much 
esteemed  friend,  Mrs.  Honywood,  who,  like  Mrs.  Hennings,  hac^ 
been  present  at  various  of  the  seances  recorded  by  Lord 
Adare,  including  some  of  the  most  remarkable.  I  have  received 
narratives  of  manifestations  witnessed  at  the  seances  in  question  from 
two  or  three  of  the  most  frequent  sitters,  and  have  compared  them 
with  the  records  contained  in  Lord  Dunraven's  book.  In  every  case 
the  various  accounts  agree  perfectly;  and  therefore  in  describing  the 
manifestations  that  Mrs.  Honywood,  Mrs.  Heimings,  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall,  the  Earls  of  Dunraven  and 
Crawford,  Captain  C.  Wynne,  and  some  fifty  or  sixty  other  persons 
witnessed  during  the  years  of  1867-8-9,  I  shall  generally  be  enabled 
to  do  so  on  the  authority  of  more  than  one  of  the  beholders  who  were 
present.  Sometimes  I  have  two  or  three  records  by  different  sitters 
of  the  phenomena  of  the  same  seance.  It  is  obvious  that,  within  the 
limits  of  a  single  volume  intended  to  include  the  whole  range  of  Mr. 
Home's  life  on  earth,  I  cannot  print  them  all  textually. 

In  their  evidence  given  before  the  Dialectical  Society,  Mrs. 
Honywood  and  the  Earl  of  Crawford  described  the  very  startling 
phenomena  that  occurred  at  a  seance  held  on  the  17th  of  March,  1869, 

at  the  residence  of  a  Mrs.  E — ,  who  did  not  permit  her  name 

to  be  published.     I  extract  some  of  the  most  interesting  particulars. 

There  were  present  Mrs.  Honywood,  Mrs.   E ,  the  Earl  of 

Crawford  (then  Lord  Lindsay),  Captain  Gerard  Smith,  of  the  Scots 
Fusilier  Guards,  and  Mr.  Home.  The  room  was  well  lighted  all  the 
time  of  the  seance: — 

"  Mr.  Home,"  deposed  Mrs.  Honywood  and  Lord  Lindsay,  "  passed  into  a 
trance,  and  went  to  the  table,  on  which  stood  a  moderator  lamo.  Taking  off 
the  globe,  he  placed  it  on  the  table,  and  deliberately  clasped  the  chimney  of 
the  lamp  with  both  hands  ;  then,  advancing  to  the  lady  of  the  house,  he  asked 

156  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

her  to  touch  it ;  but  she  refused,  knowing  it  was  hot.  Mr.  Home  said,  '  Have 
you  no  faith?  Will  you  not  trust  in  Dan  if  he  says  it  is  cool?'  She  replied, 
'  Certainly  ' ;  and,  placing  her  fingers  on  the  glass,  exclaimed,  '  Oh,  it  is  not 
at  all  hot!'  This  was  corroborated  by  Lord  Lindsay  and  myself,  who,  in 
turn,  laid  our  finger  on  the  glass  several  times,  to  test  it.     .     .     .     Holding  it 

towards    Mr.    ,    Mr.    Home    turned,    apparently    addressing    someone,    and 

said:  '  It  is  necessary,  to  confirm  the  faith  of  others,  that  it  should  be  made 

hot  for  him.'     Mr.   now  touched   it;  and  exclaimed,   '  You   have   indeed 

made  it  hot!'  shaking  his  hand  and  showing  me  a  red  mark.  So  hot  was 
the  glass  when  the  fourth  person  touched  it,  that  it  raised  a  blister,  which  I 
saw  some  days  subsequently  peeling." 

The  "  Mr.  "  who  suffered  to  confirm  the  faith  of  others 

was  Captain  Smith,  of  the  Scots  Fusilier  Guards.  A  letter  from  Mrs. 
Honywood  to  me  relates  this  remarkable  incident  as  follows.  Mr. 
Home,  be  it  remembered,  was  holding  all  the  while,  in  a  well-lighted 
room,  the  large  glass  chimney  that  Mrs.  Honywood  and  Lord  Lindsay 
had  just  touched  and  found  cool: — 

"  I  placed  my  linger  on  the  top  part  of  the  glass  several  times  to  test  it. 
Each  time  the  heat  appeared  to  recede  like  a  wave  of  the  sea.  I  cannot 
describe  the  sensation  in  any  other  words,  but  the  heat  seemed  to  be  with- 
drawn each  time.  Mr.  Home  then  laughed,  and  said,  turning  to  Captain  S., 
'  We  will  make  it  hot  for  you  !'  Turning  his  head,  he  appeared  to  listen,  and 
his  expression  changed  ;  then,  speaking  in  a  sad  tone  of  voice,  he  said  :  '  It  is 
necessary,  to  confirm  the  faith  of  others,  that  the  glass  should  be  made  hot 
for  you.'  Captain  Smith  now  touched  it,  and  cried  out,  '  By  Jove  !  you  have,' 
— shaking  his  finger,  and  showing  a  red  mark.  He  had  a  blister  which  lasted 
several  days." 

I  resume  the  joint  narrative  of  Mrs.  Honywood  and  Lord 
Lindsay : — 

"  Mr.  Home  then  walked  to  the  fireplace,  and  thrust  the  chimney  among 
the  red-hot  coals,  where  he  left  it  for  four  or  five  minutes,  then  took  it  in  both 
hands.  He  went  to  the  table,  took  a  lucifer  match  from  a  box,  and,  handing 
it  to  the  lady  of  the  house,  desired  her  to  touch  the  glass  with  it.  The  match 
instantly  ignited ;  and  having  called  our  attention  to  this  fact,  he  observed  : 
'  The  tongue  and  lips  are  the  most  sensitive  parts  of  the  body,'  and  thrust  the 
heated  glass  into  his  mouth,  applying  especially  his  tongue  to  it.     .     .     . 

"  Going  to  the  fire,  Mr.  Home  moved  the  red  embers  about  with  his  hand, 
and  selected  a  small  red-hot  coal,  which  he  placed  in  the  glass  chimney.  He 
approached  Mrs.  E.  ;  and  saying,  '  I  have  a  present  for  you,'  shook  it  out  on 
her  white  muslin  dress.  Catching  up  the  coal  in  dismay,  Mrs.  E.  tossed  it  to 
Lord  Lindsay,  who,  unable  to  retain  it  in  his  hand,  threw  it  from  palm  to 
palm,  till  he  reached  the  grate  and  flung  it  in.  While  we  were  all  looking  at 
the  white  muslin  dress  and  wondering  that  it  was  not  singed  or  soiled,  Mr. 
Home  approached,  and,  in  a  hurt  tone  of  voice,  said  :  *  No,  no,  you  will  not 
find  a  mark — did  you  think  that  we  would  injure  your  dress.'  " 

This  wonderful  phenomenon  of  preservation  from  fire  was  repeated 
with  a  spray  of  white  flowers,  taken  from  a  vase  on  the  table,  which 
flowers  were  held  by  Mr.  Home  in  the  fire  of  the  grate  and  then  in 
the  smoke  rising  from  the  coals,  without  their  being  injured  or  their 
pure  white  colour  so  much  as  dimmed.  Shortly  afterwards  Mr. 
Hcmae  awoke  from  his  trance,  and  the  seance  closed. 

Again  and  again  was  the  phenomenon  of  the  instantaneous  with- 
drawal of  intense  heat  from  burning  coals  and  other  objects,  and  its 

ENGLAND  157 

equally  instantaneous  restoration,  witnessed  at  seances  with  Home.  I 
could  fill  many  pages  with  the  names  and  narratives  of  those  who 
beheld  and  tested  the  facts;  but  must  limit  myself  to  two  or  three 
extracts  from  the  mass  of  testimony.  In  the  narrative  just  given,  it 
will  be  observed  that  the  intensely  l>ot  lamp-glass  was  handled  without 
harm  by  Mrs.  Honywood  and  Lord  Lindsay,  as  well  as 
by  Mr.  Home ;  and  the  same  innocuous  contact  with  an  intense 
heat  was  experienced  by  persons  whose  testimony  is  equally  above 
suspicion,  on  each  of  the  occasions  about  to  be  described.  In  all 
these  cases  it  was  declared  by  the  spirits  that,  to  prevent  harm  from 
happening,  it  was  necessary  for  the  person  experimenting  to  have 
a  perfect  faith  that  no  injur)'  would  be  received. 

The  present  Earl  of  Dunraven,  while  Lord  Adare,  was  among 
those  who  had  the  opportunity  of  personally  satisfying  themselves 
that  the  invisibles  at  work  could  so  deal  with  fire  that  it  would  not 
burn.  In  the  winter  of  1868,  there  was  a  seance  at  Mrs.  Hennings' 
house  at  Anerley.  The  sitters  consisted  of  Mrs.  Hennings,  Mrs. 
Jencken,  senior,  Lord  Adare,  Mr.  Jencken,  Mr.  Saal,  Mr.  Hurt,  and 
Mr.  Home.  A  full  relation  of  the  seance  was  written  by  Lord  Adare, 
and  the  most  remarkable  manifestation  of  the  evening  was  also 
described  by  Mr.   Jencken  in  one  of  the  Spiritualist  journals. 

Mr.  Home,  in  the  trance-state,  went  to  the  fire,  and  with  his  hand 
stirred  the  red  embers  into  flame.  "  Then,  kneeling  down,"  records 
Lord  Adare,  "  he  placed  bis  face  right  among  the  burning  coals, 
moving  it  about  as  though  bathing  it  in  water." 

' '  He  placed  his  hands  and  then  his  face  in  the  flames  and  on  the 
burning  coals,"  says  Mr.  Jencken.  "  I  had  the  amplest  opportunity 
of  watching  the  exact  movements,  and  quite  satisfied  myself  of  the 
fact  that  Mr.  Home  touched  the  burning  coals." 

Taking  from  the  fire  a  burning  ember,  * '  about  twice  the  size  of  an 
orange,"  Mr.  Home  carried  it  to  the  sitters. 

"  Home  held  it  within  four  or  five  inches  of  Mr.  Saal's  and  Mr. 
Hurt's  hands,"  relates  Lord  Adare.  "They  could  not  endure  the 
heat.  He  came  to  me,  and  said :  *  Now,  if  you  are  not  afraid,  hold 
out  your  hand.'  I  did  so;  and  having  made  two  rapid  passes  over  my 
hand,  lie  placed  the  coal  in  it.  I  must  have  held  it  for  half  a 
minute,  long  enough  to  have  burned  my  hand  fearfully:  the  coal  felt 
scarcely  warm.  Home  then  took  it  away,  laughed,  and  seemed  much 
pleased." 

At  some  of  the  seances  at  Anerley  with  Mrs.  Hennings  and  her 
neighbours,  the  Jencken  family,  there  was  present  Mr.  J.  H.  Simpson, 
of  10,  Campden  Grove,  Kensington,  a  gentleman  of  considerable 
scientific  attainments  and  a  total  disbeliever  in  Spiritualism.  I  do  not 
know  that  Mr.  Simpson  ever  succeeded  in  convincing  himself  of  the 
spiritual  origin  of  the  manifestations ;  but,  after  having  submitted  the 
phenomena  witnessed  by  him  at  Anerley  to  every  test  he  could  con- 
trive, he  was  compelled  to  admit  that  they  were  real  and  occurred 
independently  of  Mr.  Home.  That  Mr.  Simpson  was  a  very  keen 
and  sceptical  inquirer,  the  following  fact  may  help  to  attest.  He 
went  to  a  "  dark  seance  "  in  January,  1868,  with  a  "  mediimi  "  who 

158  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

need  not  be  named  here;  and,  in  spite  of  the  obscurity,  succeeded  in 
demonstrating  so  plainly  both  the  fact  of  fraud  and  the  modus 
operandi  that  the  proceedings  came  to  an  abrupt  end.  The  letter  to 
Mr.  Home  in  which  he  narrates  the  whole  occurrence  concludes  with 
the  following  words : — 

"  There  could  be  no  greater  contrast  than  that  of  the  disgusting 
dark  affair  of  last  night  with  the  beautiful,  light-loving  series  ot 
phenomena  which  I  had  the  privilege  of  witnessing  the  previous  night, 
thanks  to  yourself.     Your  sincerely  obliged  J.  H.  Simpson." 

In  a  paper  read  before  the  Dialectical  Society  in  July,  1869,  Lord 
Lindsay  thus  narrates  his  night  vision  at  Norwood  and  the  proof 
afforded  next  morning  that  the  form  be  had  seen  was  no  creation  of 
his  fancy: — 

"  I  first  met  Mr.  Home  at  the  house  of  a  friend  of  his  and  mine,  Mrs. 
Gregory ;  and  when  we  left  the  party  I  asked  him  to  come  into  my  rooms  in 
Grosvenor  Square  to  smoke  a  cigar.  I  heard  a  shower  of  raps  run  along  a 
beam  that  crosses  the  ceiling.  This  was  the  first  thing  of  the  sort  I  had  ever 
heard ;  and  naturally  I  was  interested,  and  wished  for  more,  but  in  vain  : 
nothing  more  happened ;  and  soon  after  he  went  away. 

"  On  the  Sunday  following,  I  was  asked  by  Mr.  Jencken  to  come  to  his 
house  in  Norwood  to  dine,  and  afterwards  to  have  a  seance.  I  went, 
and  that  evening  I  missed  the  last  train  to  Crystal  Palace,  and  had  to  stay  at 
Norwood.  I  got  a  shake-down  on  a  sofa  in  Home's  room.  I  was  just  going 
to  sleep,  when  I  was  roused  by  feeling  my  pillow  slipping  from  under  my 
head,  and  I  could  also  feel  what  seemed  to  be  a  hand  under  it,  which  was 
pulling  it  away.     Soon  after  this  ceased. 

"  Then  I  saw  at  the  foot  of  my  sofa  a  female  figure  standing  in  profile  to 
me,  and  asked  Home  if  he  saw  anything.  He  answered,  '  A  woman,  looking 
at  me.'  Our  beds  were  at  right  angles  to  one  another,  and  about  twelve  feet 
apart.  I  saw  the  features  perfectly,  and  impressed  them  upon  my  memory. 
She  seemed  to  be  dressed  in  a  long  wrap,  going  down  from  the  shoulders,  and 
not  gathered  in  at  the  waist.  Home  then  said  :  '  It  is  my  wife  ;  she  often 
comes  to  me.'     And  then  she  seemed  to  fade  away.     .     .     . 

"  The  next  morning,  before  I  went  to  London,  I  was  looking  at  some 
photographs,  and  I  recognised  the  face  I  had  seen  in  the  room  upstairs  over- 
night.    I  asked  Mrs.  Jencken  who  it  was,  and  she  said  it  was  Home's  wife." 

Lord  Lindsay  also  described  in  his  paper  various  phenomena  that 
he  beheld  after  the  disapj>earance  of  the  figure;  the  following  being 
one  of  the  most  striking: — 

"  I  saw  on  my  knee  a  flame  of  fire  about  nine  inches  high.  I  passed  my 
hand  through  it,  but  it  burnt  on,  above  and  below.  .  .  .  The  flame,  which 
had  been  flitting  about  me,  now  left  me,  and  crossed  the  room  about  four  feet 
from  the  ground,  and  reached  the  curtains  of  Home's  bed.  These  proved  no 
obstruction  ;  for  the  light  went  right  through  them,  settled  on  his  head,  and 
then  went  out." 

Lord  Lindsay  was  another  of  the  numerous  witnesses  whose 
experiences  enabled  them  to  testify  that  they  had  not  only  seen  Mr. 
Home  expose  himself  for  minutes  at  a  time  to  the  contact  of  fire 
without  being  burned,  but  had  experienced  a  similar  protection  in 
their  own  persons.  "  Eight  times,"  he  told  the  Dialectical  Society, 
"  I  myself  have  held  a  red-hot  coal  in  my  hands  without  injury,  when 
it  scorched  my  face  on  raising  my  hand.  Once  I  wished  to  see  if 
they  really  would  bum;  and  I  said  so,  and  touched  a  coal  with  the 

ENGLAND  159 

middle  finger  of  my  right  hand.  I  got  a  blister  as  large  as  a  sixpence. 
I  instantly  asked  Home  to  give  me  the  coal ;  and  I  held  the  part  that 
had  burnt  me  for  three  or  four  minutes  in  the  middle  of  my  hand 
without  the  least  inconvenience." 

Both  Lord  Lindsay  and  Lord  Adare  witnessed  more  than  once  the 
strange  phenomenon  of  the  alternate  elongation  and  shrinking  of  the 
form  of  Mr.  Home.  It  is  my  belief  that  this  manifestation  did  great 
physical  harm  to  him ;  fortunately,  it  was  of  rare  occurrence.  One  of 
the  most  remarkable  instances  was  witnessed  in  the  year  1868  at  the 
house  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hall.  Among  the  persons  present  at  the 
time  was  Mr.  H.  T.  Humphreys,  a  journalist,  who  subsequently 
published  an  account  of  the  occurrence,  as  follows: — 

"  I  formed  one  of  a  party  of  nine  or  ten.  We  sat  in  a  room  well  lighted 
with  gas.  .  .  .  Mr.  Home  was  seen  by  all  of  us  to  increase  in  height  to 
the  extent  of  some  eight  or  ten  inches,  and  then  sank  to  some  six  or  eight 
inches  below  his  normal  stature.  Having  returned  to  his  usual  height,  he 
took  Lord  Adare  (now  the  Earl  of  Dunraven)  and  the  Master  of  Lindsay  (now 
the  Earl  of  Crawford  and  Balcarres),  and,  placing  one  beside  each  post  of  the 
folding  doors,  lay  down  on  the  floor,  touching  the  feet  of  one  with  his  head 
and  the  feet  of  the  other  with  his  feet.  He  was  then  again  elongated,  and 
pushed  both  Lord  Adare  and  the  Master  of  Lindsay  backward  along  the  floor 
with  his  head  and  feet  as  he  was  stretched  out,  his  arms  and  hands  remaining 
motionless  by  his  side." 

Mr.  S.  C.  Hall  says  that  he  measured  the  extent  of  this  elongation, 
and  found  that  Lord  Lindsay  and  Lord  Adare  were  pushed  to  a 
distance  of  more  than  seven  feet  apart,  Mr.  Home's  head  still 
touching  the  one,  his  feet  the  other. 

The  form  seen  by  Lord  Lindsay  at  Nor^vood,  when  he  shared 
Home's  room,  was  again  seen  on  the  evening  of  February  9th,  1869, 
by  Viscount  Adare,  Captain  Gerard  Smith,  and  Dr.  Gully,  of 
^Ialvem,  at  the  rooms  of  the  first-named  in  London.  The  three 
were  sitting  with  Mr.  Home  in  a  small  room,  the  objects  in  which 
were  dimly  visible  by  the  faint  light  that  came  in  from  the  window, 
when  Home  was  impressed  to  rise  and  place  himself  near  the  latter. 
Another  form  slowly  revealed  itself  beside  his — that  of  Mrs.  Home. 

"  Her  form,"  wrote  Lord  Adare  the  next  day,  "  gradually  became  apparent 
to  us ;  she  moved  close  to  Home  and  kissed  him.  She  stood  beside  him 
against  the  window,  intercepting  the  light  as  a  solid  body,  and  appeared  fully 
as  material  as  Home  himself  ;  no  one  could  have  told  which  was  the  mortal 
body  and  which  the  spirit.  It  was  too  dark,  however,  to  distinguish  features. 
I  could  see  that  she  had  her  full  face  turned  towards  us,  and  either  that  her' 
hair  was  parted  in  the  middle  and  flowed  down  over  her  shoulders,  or  that 
she  had  on  what  appeared  to  be  a  veil." 

This  was  witnessed,  be  it  noted,  in  Lord  Adare's  own  rooms  in 
London.  At  his  request,  Captain  Gerard  Smith  wrote  to  him  attesting 
the  fact  that  he  had  equally  beheld  the  form,  and  furnished  his 
observations  of  the  apparition  in  the  following  words: — 

' '  Home  rose,  and  stood  at  the  window  with  his  right  arm  extended ; 
and  the  spirit  seemed  to  sweep  down  until  it  rested  both  hands  on  his 
outstretched  arm,  looking  up  into  his  face.  From  the  position  in 
which  I  sat  the  profile  of  the  face  was  perfectly  visible  to  me,  and 

i6o  LIFE   AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

when  the  two  faces  approached  each  other  to  kiss,  there  was  no 
apparent  difference  in  the  density  of  the  two  figures." 

Apparitions  of  other  persons  than  Mrs.  Home  are  also  related  by 
Lord  Adare  to  have  been  seen  by  him  at  different  times.     In  August, 

1868,  he  beheld  a  luminous  form  standing  at  the  foot  of  Home's  bed; 
and  at  Adare  Manor,  in  March,  1869,  a  figure  that  was  white  and 
slightly  luminous  appeared  to  him.  He  approached  it,  and  it 
vanished. 

Mr.  Home  spent  some  weeks  at  Adare  Manor  in  the  early  spring  of 

1869.  On  the  night  of  the  4tb  of  March,  Lord  Dunraven,  Lord 
Adaxe,  Captain  C.  Wynne,  and  Mr.  Home  visited  the  ruins  of  the 
Abbey  of  Adare,  and  startling  phenomena  occurred.  On  March 
1 2th,  a  remarkable  seance  was  held  at  Garinish,  a  cottage  of  Lord 
Dunraven's  on  the  Kerry  coast.  There  were  present  Lord  Dunraven, 
Lord  Adare,  Major  Blackburn,  and  Mr.  Home.  After  twice  forming 
a  circle  without  result,  the  sitters  were  about  to  give  up  the  hope  dL 
manifestations  for  that  evening,  when  Lord  Adare  felt  the  cold  air 
blowing  over  him,  the  presence  of  which  always  heralded  further 
phenomena.  Manifestations  sometimes  occurred  at  seances  when  no 
such  chill  current  had  been  noticed  to  pass  round  the  circle ;  but  I  do 
not  think  there  was  ever  an  instance  of  its  presence  being  remarked 
when  it  was  not  the  precursor  of  other  phenomena. 

On  this  night  at  Garinish  it  heralded  a  seance  full  of  interest.  Home 
went  into  a  trance,  arranged  the  position  of  the  chairs  and  tables  in 
the  room,  as  if  for  unseen  guests,  placed  the  miniature  portrait  of  Mrs. 
Home  on  one  table,  and  on  another  the  photograph  of  a  little  friend 
of  his  who  had  lately  passed  away;  all  the  while,  says  Lord  Adare, 
appearing  to  consult  with  some  presence  invisible  to  the  other  sitters. 
He  then  put  out  the  candles,  leaving  the  little  room  (all  the  rooms 
at  Garinish  are  very  small)  illuminated  by  the  glow  of  the  firelight; 
and  taking  his  seat  with  the  rest  of  the  party,  arranged  two  vases  of 
flowers  on  the  table,  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  with  Pressense's  "  Life 
of  Christ,"  which  he  had  placed  between  them,  the  figure  of  a  cross. 
Almost  immediately  aferwards  he  awoke  from  his  trance. 

Currents  of  cold  air  then  blew  round  the  circle  very  strongly,  the 
table  vibrated,  rose  clear  of  the  ground,  and  remained  for  some  time 
poised  in  the  air.  A  hand  formed  itself  above  one  of  the  vases  of 
flowers  placed  on  the  small  table  round  which  the  party  of  four  were 
grouped,  and  carried  a  flower  to  Lord  Dunraven.  Lord  Adare  and 
Mr.  Home  saw  the  hand ;  the  other  two  sitters  only  the  flower  moving 
through  the  air;  whereupon  Lord  Dunraven  remarked  that  he  was 
very  desirous  also  to  see  a  hand.  Presently  one  became  distinctly 
visible  to  him  just  above  the  vase  of  flowers.  The  miniature  of  Mrs. 
Home  was  now  brought  from  the  other  table.  None  but  Home  saw 
the  hand  that  held  it — they  could  see  only  the  miniature  approach 
them  and  place  itself  gently  upon  Home's  hands,  as  they  rested  on  the 
table  in  full  view.  The  photograph  above  referred  to  was  next 
carried  to  the  sitters  in  the  same  way;  but  this  time  Lord  Adare 
distinctly  saw  a  hand  holding  it,  and  soon  afterwards  a  whole  h^nd 

ENGLAND  i6i 

and  arm,  white  and  slightly  luminous,  that  hovered  in  the  air  between 
the  sitters  and  the  window. 

Again  flowers  were  carried  to  the  sitters ;  but  the  recipients  saw  rx) 
hand  holding  them,  only  the  blossoms  moving  through  the  air.  A 
book  that  lay  on  the  other  table,  six  or  eight  feet  away  from  the 
circle,  rose,  floated  through  the  air,  and  placed  itself  on  the  seance 
table.  Hands  were  again  seen,  and  the  flowers  tliat  remained  in  the 
vases  were  stirred ;  then  the  round  table  from  which  Mrs.  Home's 
miniature  had  been  brought  rose  into  the  air,  no  one  touching  it  and 
none  of  the  sitters  being  near  it,  and  placed  itself  gently  on  the 
larger  oblong  table  at  which  the  four  p>ersons  present  were  seated. 
Immediately  afterwards  loud  sounds  like  high-pitched  voices  were 
heard  at  a  little  distance.  The  suspicion  of  ventriloquism  was 
impossible ;  for  Lord  Adare  relates  that  Mr.  Home  continued  speaking 
during  the  whole  time  that  these  voices  were  heard,  and  that  the 
louder  he  spoke  the  louder  the  sounds  became.  A  lady  who  had 
retired  to  rest  in  the  room  beneath — Mrs.  Blackburn — told  the  others 
of  the  party  at  Garinish  next  day  that  she  had  heard  strange  sounds, 
and  imitated  them  so  well,  that,  says  Lord  Dunraven,  we  at  once 
recognised  that  she  had  really  heard  the  voices.  No  articulate  words 
were  distinguished,  but  the  eff'ect  is  described  as  having  been  most 
weird. 

Manifestations  similar  to  the  wonderful  phenomenon  recorded  at 
Garinish  of  spirit-voices  sounding  in  the  air,  while  Mr.  Home,  by 
talking  incessantly,  negatived  the  theory  of  ventriloquism,  were  ot 
rare,  but  not  very  rare  occurrence.  In  August,  1868,  Lord  Adare 
and  Mr.  Home  were  about  to  start  for  the  Continent  together ;  and  on 
the  eve  of  their  departure  Home  came  to  stay  at  his  friend's  rooms 
in  London.  They  had  just  retired  for  the  night  when  a  phenomenon 
attracted  their  attention,  of  which,  to  obviate  any  suspicion  ot 
exaggeration,  I  \n\\  cite  Lord  Adare's  own  description,  written  at  the 
time : — 

"  We  both  heard  music,  much  the  same  as  at  Norwood,  but  more  powerful 
and  distinct.  Home  said  that  the  music  formed  words  ;  that,  in  fact,  it  was 
a  voice  speaking,  and  not  instrumental  music.  I  could  hear  nothing  but  the 
chords  like  an  organ  or  harmonium  played  at  a  distance.  Home  became 
quite  excited  because  I  could  not  distinguish  the  words,  thinking  that,  if  I 
could  not  hear  them,  it  must  have  been  his  imagination.  He  asked  the  spirits, 
if  possible,  to  make  the  words  sufficiently  clear  for  me  also  to  hear  them. 
They  said  '  Yes  '  (by  raps)  ;  and  the  music  became  louder  and  louder,  until  I 
distinctly  heard  the  words,  "  Hallelujah,  praise  the  Lord,  praise  the  Lord  God 
Almighty.'  It  was  no  imagination,  or  the  result  of  anxiety  on  my  part  to 
hear  the  same  as  Home  did.  Every  now  and  then  I  could  not  distinguish 
words,  although  he  said  he  could ;  but  I  repeatedly  heard  the  words  above 
mentioned  as  plainly  as  possible.  I  cannot  in  the  least  e.xplain  to  you  how 
the  voice  articulated ;  the  words  were  not  separately  spoken,  neither  did  it 
resemble  a  human  voice.  The  sound  was  slightly  reedy  and  metallic,  not  verv 
unlike  the  vox  hutnana  on  an  organ.  H  you  can  imagine  an  organ  pipe  of 
some  rather  reedy  stop  speaking  to  you,  it  will  be  as  near  it  as  anything  I 
can  describe." 

Of  a  similar,  but  less  remarkable  manifestation,  that  occurred 
during  the  third  seance  at  which  he  was  present,  Lord  Adare  says: 

i62  LIFE   AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

"  During  the  time  the  sounds  were  heard  Home  was  talking,  which 
I  was  glad  of,  as  I  wished  to  feel  sure  the  sounds  were  not  the  result 
of  ventriloquism  on  his  part." 

As  already  mentioned,  the  records  of  seances  made  by  Lord  Adaxe, 
Lord  Lindsay,  and  others  are  chiefly  confined  to  the  physical 
manifestations  witnessed.  These  embraced  every  variety  ot 
phenomena.  Tables  were  raised  in  the  air  when  neither  Home  nor 
any  other  person  was  touching  them ;  chairs  and  sofas  moved  across 
the  floor  in  full  light  when  no  one  was  near  them ;  flowers,  books,  and 
other  objects  were  carried  to  the  sitters  by  hands  that  they  sometimes 
saw  distinctly,  and  that  on  other  occasions  were  invisible  to  them; 
music  was  played  ^vithout  the  touch  of  any  mortal  hand  on  the 
instrument,  and  was  frequently  heard  when  no  instrument  of  any  sort 
was  there.  It  need  hardly  be  remarked  that  at  those  seances  to  which 
accordions  were  brought  to  see  if  they  would  be  played  upon,  it  was 
always  one  or  more  of  the  sitters  wlio  brought  the  accordions,  and 
never  Mr.  Home.  At  Malvern,  for  instance,  in  November,  1867 
(present  an  American  lady,  Mrs.  Thayer,  Lord  Adare,  whose  first 
seance  it  was;  and  a  total  disbeliever  in  Spiritualism,  Mr.  Earl),  Mrs. 
Thayer  sent  out  a  servant  to  borrow  an  accordion  from  a  friend,  and 
it  played,  first  an  air  resembling  a  voluntary  on  the  organ,  and  then 
an  air  asked  for  by  Mr.  Earl.  At  Adare  Manor,  on  March  4th, 
1869,  Captain  Wynne  fetched  an  accordion.  It  played  very 
beautifully,  both  while  held  by  Mr.  Home  with  one  hand  and  when 
bis  hand  was  withdrawn.  The  air,  "  Oft  in  the  Stilly  Night,"  was 
softly  played ;  and  the  late  Earl  of  Dunraven,  who  was  one  of  the 
sitters,  records  that  this  air  had  many  years  before  been  one  of  his 
greatest  favourites.  The  room  in  which  the  seance  was  held  was  lighted 
by  one  candle  and  a  fire. 

No  seance  with  Mr.  Home  was  ever  held  in  total  darkness;  but 
occasionally  messages  were  rapped  out,  desiring  the  lights  to  be 
momentarily  extinguished,  in  order  that  the  phenomenon  of  the 
production  of  other  lights  by  the  spirits  might  be  witnessed  to 
advantage.  These  evanescent,  but  wonderful  manifestations,  were  ot 
a  very  varied  character.  Sometimes  a  white,  pure  light  would  fill  the 
room,  rendering  every  object  distinctly  visible;  sometimes  vivid 
meteors  darted  through  the  air,  or  rested  on  the  heads  and  hands  of 
the  sitters.  The  ridiculous  theories  thrown  out  by  persons  who  were 
never  present  at  a  seance  with  Mr.  Home  did  not  suggest  themselves 
to  the  minds  of  the  investigators  who  beheld  and  were  impressed  by 
these  strange  phenomena.  "  I  have  taken  precautions  to  avoid  being 
imposed  upon  by  phosphorised  oil,  or  other  means,"  wrote  Mr. 
Crookes,  in  the  Quarterly  Journal  of  Science  for  January,  1874. 
"  Moreover,  many  of  these  lights  are  such  as  I  have  tried  to  imitate 
artificially,  but  cannot."  Yet  Mr.  Crookes,  who  could  not  in  his 
laboratory  imitate  these  lights  that  were  beheld  in  the  houses  of  a 
hundred  different  people  during  seances  with  Mr.  Home,  is  one  of  the 
most  distinguished  of  modern  chemists. 

The  notes  of  Mr.    Crookes  on   ' '  Luminous  Appearances  ' '  refer 

ENGLAND  163 

principally,  but  not  entirely,  to  his  experiences  with  Mr.  Home.     The 
following  describe  phenomena  witnessed  at  seances  with  Home. 

"  I  have  seen,"  says  Mr.  Crookes,  "  luminous  points  of  light 
darting  about  and  settling  on  the  heads  of  different  persons ;  I  have 
had  questions  answered  by  the  flashing  of  a  bright  light  a  desired 
number  of  times  in  front  of  my  face.  ...  I  have  had  an  alphabetic 
conmiunication  given  by  luminous  flashes  occurring  before  me  in  the 
air,  whilst  my  hand  was  moving  about  amongst  them.  .  .  .  In  the 
light,  I  have  seen  a  luminous  cloud  hover  over  a  heliotrope  on  a  side 
table,  break  a  sprig  off,  and  carry  the  sprig  to  a  lady." 

These  luminous  appearances  were  sometimes  perceptible  to  the 
touch  as  well  as  to  the  sight.  On  November  24th,  1868,  Lord 
Lindsay  and  Mr.  Home  returned  from  Norwood  about  11  p.m.  to  the 
rooms  of  Lord  Adare  in  London;  and,  together  with  the  latter,  sat 
down  at  a  table,  the  room  being  nearly  dark.  It  may  be  noted  here 
that  the  few  seances  that  Mr.  Home  held  in  a  dim  light  (never  in  total 
darkness)  were  with  friends  who  had  already  seen  much  of  the 
phenomena  in  strong  light,  and  were  convinced  of  their  reality.  On 
this  occasion  a  variety  of  manifestations  occurred,  one  of  which  was 
that  luminous  bodies,  described  by  Lord  Adare  as  "balls  of  light," 
ffitted  about  the  room,  and  sometimes  touched  the  sitters,  feeling  to 
the  latter  "  like  a  material  substance  and  highly  electricaJ." 

Lord  Adare,  Lord  Lindsay,  &c. ,  were  frequently  witnesses  of  that 
singular  manifestation  described  in  an  early  chapter,  the  retention  on 
the  surface  of  a  table  inclined  at  an  angle  not  far  from  the 
perpendicular  of  the  various  objects  that  had  been  lying  there  before 
the  table  was  tilted.  During  a  seance  at  Mrs.  Hennings'  house  at 
Anerley,  Home,  in  a  trance,  brought  a  book  to  Lord  Adare,  and 
placed  the  hand  of  the  latter  flat  upon  the  cover  that  was  uppermost. 
Raps  came  on  the  volume ;  and  Home  then  withdrew  his  own  hand 
from  it,  leaving  the  book  suspended  in  air  beneath  Lord  Adare's  open 
band.  "  My  fingers,"  says  Lord  Adare,  "  were  not  near  the  edges, 
my  hand  was  extended  flat  upon  the  cover.  I  could  not  have  grasped 
and  retained  the  book  in  any  way ;  it  simply  adhered  to  my  hand 
....  The  book  felt  to  me  as  though  supported  irora.  beneath  by  a 
cushion  or  column  of  air." 

The  most  startling  of  the  hundred  or  more  recorded  instances  of  the 
levitation  of  Mr.  Home  was  witnessed  by  Lord  Lindsay,  Lord  Adare, 
and  Captain  C.  Wynne.  Before  turning  to  it,  I  may  add  to  the 
numerous  instances  already  given  of  the  more  frequent  physical 
phenomena,  the  following  narrative  of  a  seance  in  London.  Mrs. 
Honywood,  who  was  present,  has  kindly  furnished  it  to  me  from  her 
notes  made  at  the  time. 

"  On  the  23rd  of  June,  1869,"  writes  Mrs.  Honywood,  "  I  was  invited  by 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall  to  meet  Mr.  Home  for  a  seance.  We  sat  at  a  heavy 
round  table,  seven  in  number  ;  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hall,  Mrs.  Senior,  Lord  Louth, 
Mr.  Musgrave,  Mr.  Home,  and  myself.  After  quietly  talking  for  a  little  while, 
raps  were  heard  and  vibrations  felt  in  the  table  and  floor.  Before  a  stance 
Mr.  Home  always  took  off  all  his  rings,  lest  inadvertently  they  might  make 
any  sound. 

"  Mr.  Home  held  the  accordion  in  one  hand,  and  notes  were  sounded  upon 

i64  LIFE   AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

the  instrument  to  indicate  the  letters  of  the  alphabet  in  various  messages  given. 
The  air  '  Auld  Lang  Syne  '  was  then  most  beautifully  and  touchingly  played. 

"  A  small,  but  very  solid  table  upon  castors,  with  a  heavy  stereoscope  resting 
on  it,  containing  50  glass  slides,  moved  across  the  floor  from  the  window 
where  it  stood,  and  placed  itself  between  Mr.  Home  and  myself,  having  glided 
about  six  or  seven  feet.  Mr.  Home  requested  Lord  Louth  to  come  and  place 
his  hand  on  this  table.  Raps  sounded  distinctly  on  it,  and  the  vibration  was 
felt  very  strongly  by  Lord  L.  We  all  heard  a  strange  noise  inside  the  camera, 
and  thought  the  slides  were  breaking ;  but,  although  shaken  violently,  none 
were  cracked  or  broken.     .     .     . 

"  A  chair  now  moved  up  between  Mr.  Home  and  Mr.  Hall,  a  second  chair 
followed,  a  third,  and  then  a  fourth,  also  a  very  large  arm-chair.  A  small 
chair  rose  from  the  floor,  and  moved  up  and  down  close  to  Mr.  Hall,  appearing 
to  float  in  the  air. 

"  After  the  seance.  Lord  Louth  measured  the  distance  each  chair  had 
traversed,  and  found  it  to  range  from  six  to  nine  feet.  The  little  table  had 
moved  seven  feet  from  the  window  to  Mr.  Home.  This  was  the  first  seance 
at  which  Lord  Louth  had  ever  been  present." 

Of  the  many  wonderful  phenomena  witnessed  in  connection  with 
Mr.  Home,  none  has  been  the  subject  of  more  discussion  than  that  of 
his  levitation,  and  none  is  established  by  more  conclusive  testimony. 
After  having  carefully  considered  that  testimony,  Mr.  Crookes  wrote, 
in  the  Quarterly  Journal  of  Science  for  January,  1874: — 

"  There  are  at  least  a  hundred  recorded  instances  of  Mr.  Home's  rising  from 
the  ground,  in  the  presence  of  as  many  separate  persons ;  and  I  have  heard 
from  the  lips  of  the  three  v/itnesses  to  the  most  striking  occurrence  of  this 
kind — the  Earl  of  Dunraven,  Lord  Lindsay,  and  Captain  C.  Wynne — their 
own  most  minute  accounts  of  what  took  place.  To  reject  the  recorded  evidence 
on  this  subject  is  to  reject  all  human  testimony  whatever  ;  for  no  fact  in  sacred 
or  profane  history  is  supported  by  a  stronger  array  of  proofs. 

"  The  accumulated  testimony  establishing  Mr.  Home's  levitations  is  over- 
whelming. It  is  greatly  to  be  desired  that  some  person,  whose  evidence  would 
be  accepted  as  conclusive  by  the  scientific  world — if  indeed  there  lives  a  person 
■whose  testimony  in  favour  of  such  phenomena  would  be  taken — would  seriously 
and  patiently  examine  these  alleged  facts." 

The  desire  expressed  by  Mr.  Crookes  was  not  responded  to  by  has 
scientific  brethren. 

Mr.  Crookes  was  enabled  by  his  seances  with  Mr.  Home  to  add  his 
own  testimony  to  that  already  in  existence  concerning  the  phenomenon 
of  levitation.  "On  three  separate  occasions,"  he  writes,  "have  I 
seen  Mr.  Home  raised  completely  from  the  floor  of  the  room.  Once 
sitting  on  an  easy  chair,  once  kneeling  on  his  chair,  and  once 
standing  up.  On  each  occasion  I  had  full  opportunity  of  watching 
the  occurrence  as  it  was  taking  place."  ("  Notes  of  an  Inquiry  into 
the  Phenomena  called  Spiritual.") 

The  present  Earl  of  Crawford,  when  giving  his  testimony  before  the 
Dialectical  Society  concerning  the  strange  things  he  had  seen  in 
Home's  presence,  was  questioned  as  to  the  possibility  of  explaining 
the  phenomena  by  contrivance.  "  The  more  I  studied  them,"  he 
answered,  "  the  more  satisfied  was  I  that  they  could  not  be  explained 
by  mere  mechanical  trick.  I  have  had  the  fullest  opportunity  for 
investigation. ' ' 

It  was  asked  if  the  phenomenon  of  levitation  did  not  invariably 
occur  in  semi-darkness.     "  No,"  replied  Lord  Crawford  (then  Lord 

ENGLAND  165 

Lindsay),  "/  once  saw  Home  in  full  light  standing  in  the 
air  seventeen  inches  from  the  grovnd." 

In  November,  1868,  Lord  Adare  and  Lord  Lindsay  saw  Mr.  Home 
raised  in  the  air  about  four  or  five  feet.  On  December  20th  of  the 
same  year,  Lords  Adare  and  Lindsay,  Captain  C.  Wynne,  and  Mr. 
Arthur  Smith  Barry  were  present  when  he  again  rose  from  the  ground. 
During  the  manifestations  in  the  ruined  abbey  at  Adare,  Home  was 
seen  by  Lord  Dunraven,  Lord  Adare,  and  Captain  Wynne  to  float 
above  the  ground  for  a  distance  of  ten  or  twelve  yards  at  a  height  that 
carried  him  over  a  broken  wall  two  feet  high.  He  passed  close  by 
the  three  watchers  during  this  aerial  journey. 

Of  another  instance  of  levitation  Lord  Lindsay  gave  the  following 
description:  "Home  floated  round  the  room,  pushing  the  pictures 
out  of  their  places  as  he  passed  along  the  walls.  They  were  far 
beyond  the  reach  of  a  person  standing  on  the  ground.  The  light  was 
sufficient  to  enable  me  to  see  clearly."  (Evidence  given  before  the 
Dialectical  Society.) 

But  the  most  striking  of  the  many  occasions  on  wliich  Home  was 
seen  to  float  in  the  air  was  that  to  which  Mr.  Crookes  so  particularly 
alludes  in  the  passage  I  have  quoted  from  him.  This  event  occurred 
in  London,  on  December  i6th  1868,  in  the  presence  of  three 
unimpeachable  witnesses,  Lord  Lindsay,  Lord  Adare,  and  Captain 
Charles  Wynne,  a  cousin  of  the  latter. 

A  seance  was  in  progress ;  and  Home,  who  had  been  in  the  trance 
state  for  some  time,  began  to  walk  about  uneasily,  and  finally  went 
into  the  adjoining  room.  At  that  moment  a  startling  communication 
was  made  to  Lord  Lindsay.  "  I  heard,"  he  related  in  his  evidence 
before  the  Dialectical  Society,  "  a  voice  whisper  in  my  ear,  '  He  will 
go  out  of  one  window  and  in  at  another. '  I  was  alarmed  and  shocked 
at  the  thought  of  so  dangerous  an  experiment.  I  told  the  company 
what  I  had  heard,  and  we  then  waited  for  Home's  return." 

Mr.  Home  was  at  the  moment  in  the  room  adjoining  that  where  the 
three  sitters  waited.  Besides  his  evidence  given  before  the  Dialectical 
Society,  Lord  Lindsay  published  a  second  and  more  minute 
description  of  the  levitation,  in  which  he  thus  narrated  the  events  that 
immediately  followed  the  spirit-intimation  he  had  received,  and  had 
communicated  to  Lord  Adare  and  Captain  Wynne: — 

"  We  heard,"  writes  Lord  Lindsay,  "  the  window  in  the  next  room  lifted 
up,  and  almost  immediately  afterwards  we  saw  Home  floating  in  the  air 
outside  our  window. 

"  The  moon  was  shining  full  into  the  room.  My  back  was  to  the  light ; 
and  I  saw  the  shadow  on  the  wall  of  the  window-sill,  and  Home's  feet  about 
six  inches  above  it.  He  remained  in  this  position  for  a  few  seconds,  then 
raised  the  window  and  glided  into  the  room  feet  foremost,  and  sat  down. 

"  Lord  Adare  then  went  into  the  next  room  to  look  at  the  window  from 
which  he  had  been  carried.  It  was  raised  about  eighteen  inches,  and  he 
expressed  his  wonder  how  Mr.  Home  had  been  taken  through  so  narrow  an 
aperture. 

"  Home  said  (still  in  a  trance),  '  I  will  show  you  ' ;  and  then,  with  his  back 
to  the  window,  he  leaned  back  and  was  shot  out  of  the  aperture  head  first, 
with  the  body  rigid,  and  then  returned  quite  quietly. 

"  The  window  is  about  seventy  feet  from  the  ground.     I  very  much  doubt 

i66  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

whether  any  skilful  rope-dancer  would  like  to  attempt  a  feat  of  this  descrip- 
tion, where  the  only  means  of  crossing  would  be  a  perilous  leap. 

"  The  distance  between  the  windows  was  about  seven  feet  six  inches,  and 
there  was  not  more  than  a  twelve-inch  projection  to  each  window,  which 
served  as  a  ledge  to  put  flowers  on." 

One  of  the  other  two  witnesses  of  the  scene,  Lord  Adare,  had  the 
distances  between  the  windows  and  other  details  measured,  and 
included  them  in  the  record  written  by  him  of  the  occurrence.  Lord 
Adare's  testimony  is  as  follows: — 

"  Wynne  and  I  went  over  to  Ashley  House  after  dinner.  There  we  found 
Home  and  the  Master  of  Lindsay.  Home  proposed  a  sitting.  We  accordingly 
sat  round  a  table  in  the  small  room.  There  was  no  light  in  the  room,  but  the 
light  from  the  window  was  sufficient  to  enable  us  to  distinguish  each  other, 
and  to  see  the  diff^erent  articles  of  furniture.     Home  went  into  a  trance.     .     .     . 

"  Lindsay  suddenly  said  :  'Oh,  good  heavens!  I  know  what  he  is  going  to 
do  ;  it  is  too  fearful. ' 

"  Adare  :  '  What  is  it?' 

"  Lindsay  :  '  I  cannot  tell  you  ;  it  is  too  horrible. — A  spirit  says  that  I  must 
tell  you.  He  is  going  out  of  the  window  in  the  other  room,  and  coming  in  at 
this  window.' 

"  We  heard  Home  go  into  the  next  room,  heard  the  window  thrown  up,  and 
presently  Home  appeared  standing  upright  outside  our  window.  He  opened 
the  window,  and  walked  in  quite  coolly.  '  Ah,'  he  said,  '  you  were  good  this 
time  ' ;  referring  to  our  having  sat  still  and  not  wished  to  prevent  him.  .  .  . 
*  Adare,  shut  the  window  in  the  ne.xt  room.' 

"  I  got  up,  shut  the  window,  and  in  coming  back  remarked  that  the  window 
was  not  raised  a  foot,  and  that  I  could  not  think  how  he  had  managed  to 
squeeze  through.  He  arose,  and  said,  '  Come  and  see.'  I  went  with  him: 
he  told  me  to  open  the  window  as  it  was  before.  I  did  so  :  he  told  me  to 
stand  a  little  distance  off ;  he  then  went  through  the  open  space,  head  first, 
quite  rapidly,  his  body  being  nearly  horizontal  and  apparently  rigid.  He  came 
in  again,  feet  foremost ;  and  we  returned  to  the  other  room.  It  was  so  dark 
I  could  not  see  clearly  how  he  was  supported  outside.  He  did  not  appear  to 
grasp,  or  rest  upon,  the  balustrade,  but  rather  to  be  swung  out  and  in.  Out- 
side each  window  is  a  small  balcony  or  ledge,  nineteen  inches  deep,  bounded 
by  stone  balustrades,  eighteen  inches  high.  The  balustrades  of  the  two 
windows  are  seven  feet  four  inches  apart,  measuring  from  the  nearest  point. 
A  string-course,  four  inches  wide,  runs  between  the  windows  at  the  level  of 
the  bottom  of  the  balustrade  ;  another,  three  inches  wide,  at  the  level  of  the 
top.  Between  the  window  at  which  Home  went  out  and  that  at  which  he 
came  in  the  wall  recedes  six  inches.     The  rooms  are  on  the  third  floor. 

"  I  asked  Lindsay  how  the  spirit  had  spoken  to  him.  He  could  scarcely 
explain  ;  but  said  it  did  not  sound  like  an  audible  human  voice,  but  rather  as 
if  the  tones  were  whispered  or  impressed  inside  his  ear.  When  Home  awoke, 
he  was  much  agitated  ;  he  said  he  felt  as  if  he  had  gone  through  some  fearful 
peril,  and  that  he  had  a  most  horrible  desire  to  throw  himself  out  of  window. 
He  remained  in  a  very  nervous  condition  for  a  short  time,  then  gradually 
became  quiet. 

"  We  now  had  a  series  of  very  curious  manifestations.  Lindsay  and  Wynne 
saw  tongues  or  jets  or  flames  proceeding  from  Home's  head.  We  then  all 
distinctly  heard,  as  it  were,  a  bird  flying  round  the  room,  whistling  and 
chirping,  but  saw  nothing ;  except  Lindsay,  who  perceived  an  indistinct  form 
resembling  a  bird.  There  then  came  a  sound  as  of  a  great  wind  rushing 
through  the  room ;  we  also  felt  the  wind  strongly :  the  moaning,  rushing 
sound  was  the  most  weird  thing  I  ever  heard." 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  testimony  of  the  two  observers  is  in  perfect 
agreement.  Lord  Adare's  narrative  was  written  quite  independently 
of  that  of  Lord  Lindsay,  but  precisely  the  same  facts  are  recorded  in 

ENGLAND  167 

each.  It  is  clearly  establislned  that  Lord  Lindsay,  as  Home  left  the 
room,  received  an  intimation  of  what  was  about  to  happen,  and 
communicated  it  to  his  two  companions,  that  Mr.  Home  was  carried 
out  of  one  window  and  in  at  another,  at  a  height  of  seventy  feet  frc«n 
the  ground;  that,  on  Lord  Adare  expressing  surprise  at  his  having 
been  carried  through  the  aperture  of  a  window  only  raised  a  foot, 
Home,  before  his  eyes,  was  a  second  time  floated  through  that  opening 
into  the  space  outside,  and  back  again.  As  Lord  Adare  gives  the 
measurements  between  the  windows,  &c.,  his  figures  are  naturally  more 
precise  than  those  of  Lord  Lindsay,  who  judged  by  the  eye.  They 
establish  that  the  ledges  of  the  two  windows  were  seven  feet  four 
inches  apart,  between  the  nearest  points.  Along  the  wall  ran  two 
string-courses,  the  lower  of  these  four  inches  wide,  the  upper  three. 
It  was  obviously  impracticable  that  anyone  could  walk  along  the 
lower  of  these  two  very  narrow  shelves,  as  the  space 
between  it  and  the  upper  ledge  was  only  eighteen  inches.  The 
sceptic  as  to  the  phenomenon  of  levitation  is  reduced  therefore  to  two 
alternatives — either  to  accept  the  testimony  of  Lords  Adare  and 
Lindsay  as  an  exact  narrative  of  facts,  or  to  suppose  that  Mr.  Home 
chose  to  attempt,  late  at  night,  the  impossible  feat  of  walking  along  a 
ledge  three  inches  wide,  at  a  height  of  seventy  feet  from  the  ground, 
and  successfully  accomplished  the  impossible.  Yet  even  this  theorj' 
would  not  explain  the  second  levitation  of  which  Lord  Adare  was  the 
witness,  when  Home,  before  his  eyes,  was  floated  out  of  the  partly- 
opened  window  into  the  empty  air  beyond. 

Dr.  W.  B.  Carpenter,  V.P.R.S.,  imagined,  indeed,  another  theory, 
and  communicated  his  imaginations  to  the  public  under  circumstances 
more  daring  than  honest.  The  narrative  of  Lord  Lindsay  informed 
him  that  there  had  been  a  third  sitter  present  when  the  levitation 
occurred — Captain  Wynne,  the  cousin  of  Lord  Adare.  In  the 
absence  of  any  detailed  testimony  from  this  gentleman,  Dr.  Carpenter 
chose  to  assume  that  his  evidence,  if  made  public,  would  have 
contradicted  that  of  Lords  Lindsay  and  Adare.  A  little  inquiry  would 
have  informed  Dr.  Carpenter  that  Captain  Wynne  had  narrated  to  Mr. 
Crookes,  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall,  and  others  what  he  saw,  and  that  his 
evidence  exactly  corresponded  with  that  of  Lord  Adare  and  Lord 
Lindsay.  This  trained  man  of  science,  this  exact  investigator  made 
no  inquir}',  however.  He  took  his  hypothesis  concerning  Captain 
Wynne  for  granted — singular  conduct  on  the  part  of  the  very  man 
■who  had  always  been  loudest  in  accusing  Spiritualists  and  inquirers 
into  Sniritualism  of  basing  their  conclusions  on  insuflficient  evidence, 
but  quite  consistent  with  the  whole  method  of  Dr.  Carpenter's  warfare 
against  Spiritualism.  The  temper  in  which  he  conducted  his  assaults 
was  not  that  of  a  philosopher  desirous  to  arrive  at  the 
truth  and  nothing  but  the  truth,  but  of  a  theorist  w^ho  thought  no 
sacrifice  of  the  truth  too  great  to  make  in  the  interests  of  his  favourite 
doctrine  of  "unconscious  cerebration."  To  throw  doubt  on  the 
phenomenon  of  the  levitation  of  Mr.  Home,  he  ventured  on  one  of 
the  boldest  of  those  sacrifices.  Knowing  all  the  while  that  his 
assumption   concerning  Captain    Wynne   was   sheer  supposition,    he 

i68  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

deliberately  stated  it  to  the  world  as  a  fact.  Of  course,  no  names  were 
mentioned;  that  would  have  been  to  court  investigation,  and  Dr. 
Carpenter  was  aware  that  his  statements  would  not  bear  it.  It  was 
sufficient  for  him  to  tell  the  public,  in  an  article  published  in  the 
Contempary  Review  of  January,  1867  : — 

"  The  most  diverse  accounts  of  the  facts  of  a  sdance  will  be  given  by  a 
believer  and  a  sceptic.  ...  A  whole  party  of  believers  will  affirm  that 
they  saw  Mr.  Home  float  out  of  one  window  and  in  at  another,  whilst  a  single 
honest  sceptic  declares  that  Mr.  Home  was  sitting  in  his  chair  all  the  time. 
And  in  this  last  case  we  have  an  example  of  a  fact,  of  which  there  is  ample 
illustration,  that,  during  the  prevalence  of  an  epidemic  delusion,  the  honest 
testimony  of  any  number  of  individuals,  on  one  side,  if  given  under  a  pre- 
possession, is  of  no  more  weight  than  that  of  a  single  adverse  witness — if  sa 
much." 

It  seems  to  me  that,  written  under  the  circumstances  I  have  just 
detailed,  nothing  could  well  be  more  discreditable  to  Dr.  Carpenter 
than  this  passage.  Published  in  a  widely-circulated  organ  of  opinion, 
it  could  not  but  leave,  and  was  evidently  intended  to  leave,  on  the 
minds  of  all  who  read  it  the  impression  that  Dr.  Carpenter's  "  honest 
sceptic  ' '  had  actually  been  present  with  Lords  Adare  and  Lindsay  on 
the  only  occasion  when  Home  ever  floated  out  of  one  window  and  in 
at  another,  and  had,  to  the  knowledge  of  Dr.  Carpenter,  declared 
"  that  Mr.  Home  was  quietly  sitting  in  his  chair  all  the  while."  If 
so,  this  "  single  adverse  witness  "  could  be  no  other  than  Captain 
Wynne.  Only  once  had  Mr.  Home  been  seen  to  float  out  of  a  window 
and  in  at  another — in  Ashley  Place,  S.W.,  on  the  i6th  of  December, 
1868.  Three  persons  in  all  had  observed  the  phenomenon:  two  of 
them,  Lords  Lindsay  and  Adare,  had  printed  their  testimony  to  the 
occurrence.  They  were,  therefore,  Dr.  Carpenter's  "party  of 
believers  " — Lord  Lindsay,  who  told  the  Dialectical  Society,  "  I  have 
no  theory  to  explain  these  things ;  "  and  Lord  Adare,  who  wrote:  "  1 
make  no  attempt  to  offer  any  explanation  of  the  phenomena,  or  to 
build  up  any  theory  upon  them  ;  I  only  say  that  they  have  occurred  as 
I  have  stated  them."  The  third  and  last  sitter  present  when  Mr. 
Home  was  carried  out  of  one  window  of  Ashley  House  and  in  at 
another  more  than  seven  feet  distant  was  Captain  Charles  Wynne.  To 
him,  therefore,  Dr.  Carpenter's  statements  concerning  the  "honest 
sceptic"  referred.  Every  one  understood  them  so  to  refer.  Captain 
Wynne  included ;  and  his  answer  to  them  is  contained  in  a  letter 
written  by  him  to  Mr.  Home  under  the  following  circumstances. 

In  or  about  the  year  1876,  an  American  of  the  name  of  Hammond 
published  a  foolish  book  wherein  he  gave  Dr.  Carpenter's  fable  of  the 
"honest  sceptic"  a  niche  among  numerous  fables  of  his  own 
concerning  the  experiments  of  Mr.  Crookes ;  his  ingenuous  method  ot 
dealing  with  the  latter  being  to  pass  over  the  most  conclusive  in 
silence,  substitute  for  the  remainder  dummy  experiments  that  in  no 
way  resembled  them,  and  then  proceed  to  triumphantly  demolish  the- 
shams  he  had  himself  created.  In  retailing  as  fact  the  fictions  of  Dr. 
Carpenter,  Dr.  Hammond  took  occasion  to  find  for  those  airy  nothings; 
' '  a    local    habitation    and    a   name, ' '    and   boldly    stated    that    the 

ENGLAND  169 

levitation  referred  to  was  that  in  Ashley  Place,  and  that  Dr. 
Carpenter's  "  honest  sceptic  "  was  the  cousin  of  Lord  Dunraven.  His 
book  came  under  the  notice  of  Mr.  Home,  who  wrote  to  Captain 
Wynne  as  follows: — 

"  Nice,  January  ^th,  1877. 

"  My  dear  Wynne, — I  have  been  reading  a  book — intensely  stupid  and 
absurd — called  Spiritualism  and  Nervous  Derangement :  by  W.  A.  Hammond, 
M.D.  On  page  81  of  his  book  I  found  the  following  question  regarding  the 
very  extraordinary  manifestation  you  witnessed  in  Ashley  Place,  when  I  was 
brought  in  at  a  window  eighty  feet  from  the  ground,  in  the  presence  of  your 
cousin.  Viscount  Adare  (now  Earl  of  Dunraven),  Lord  Lindsay,  and  yourself; — 

"  '  There  were  three  gentlemen  present  in  the  room  besides  Mr.  Home. 
Lord  Adare,  we  may  admit,  accepts  the  account  given  by  Lord  Lindsay. 
Indeed,  he  may  be  said  to  be  the  father  of  it.  But  why  have  we  no  word 
from  the  "  cousin  of  his  "  who  formed  one  of  the  company?  There  cannot 
be  too  much  evidence  on  so  important  a  point  as  this.' 

"  I  would  have  paid  no  attentioin  to  this  question,  but  on  the  same  page  I 
found  the  following  reply,  which  perfectly  suited  this  Dr.  Hammond  ;  and  he 
has  either  arranged  it  so  as  to  be  a  reply  to  the  above  question,  or  it  may  be 
that  it  is  an  arrangement  of  Dr.  Carpenter's.  I  am  sorry  to  say  that  Dr. 
Carpenter  is  not  innocent,  as  regards  these  little  arrangements  to  suit  his  own 
convenience.     Hammond  says  : — 

"  '  But,  as  these  lines  are  being  written,  the  true  '  (save  the  mark  I) 
'  explanation  comes  to  hand,  showing  that  both  Lord  Lindsay  and  Lord  Adare 
suffered  from  a  hallucination.  In  an  interesting  paper.  Dr.  Carpenter, 
evidently  referring  to  the  account  of  Lord  Lindsay,  says,  "  A  whole  party  of 
believers  will  affirm  that  they  saw  Mr.  Home  float  out  of  one  window  and  in 
at  another,  while  a  single  honest  sceptic  declares  that  Mr.  Home  was  sitting 
in  his  chair  all  the  time."  This  "  honest  sceptic  "  is  probably  the  cousin 
incidentally  mentioned  by  Lord  Lindsay.  It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  pursue  the 
inquiry  further.' 

"  Under  ordinary  circumstances,  I  would  have  paid  no  attention  even  to 
this,  but  in  December,  1876,  Dr.  Carpenter,  at  the  London  Institution,  made  a 
statement  so  utterly  at  variance  with  the  truth  that  it  is  just  as  well  to  remind 
him  that,  whatever  his  peculiar  prejudices  may  be,  he  does  wrong  in  stooping 
to  falsehoods.  I  give  you  his  words,  as  reported  in  the  public  prints  :  '  Mr. 
Crookes  had  admitted  that  .  .  .  Mr.  Home  having  exhibited  marvels,  Mr, 
Crookes  afterwards  devised  scientific  tests,  but  the  marvels  were  no  longer 
shown.  That  was  Mr.  Crookes'  statement.'  Mr.  Crookes  never  made  such  a 
statement,'  and  it  is  a  most  audacious  and  wilful  falsehood  on  the  part  of  Dr. 
Carpenter  to  have  said  so. 

"  You  will  fully  understand  why  I  wish  a  reply  to  this.  You  have  read  the 
statement  as  given  to  the  world  by  Lord  Lindsay  and  Lord  Adare.  Is  it,  or 
is  it  not,  a  simple  and  concise  statement  of  the  facts  just  as  they  took  place? 

"  I  am  well  pleased  that  this  question  should  have  been  asked  while  you 
were  here  to  give  your  testimony.  Else  these  would-be  great  men  who 
condescend  to  untruthful  statements  might  have  found  those  capable  of  giving 
credence  to  their  inventions.     Ever  yours,  "  D.   D.   Home." 

Captain  Wynne's  reply  to  the  above  letter  of  Mr.  Home  is  before 
me  as  I  write.  It  will  be  observed  from  it  that  he  had  already  publicly 
contradicted  Dr.  Carpenter's  mendacious  reference  to  him: — 

"  Feb.  2,  '77. 

"  Dear  Dan, — Your  letter  has  just  come  before  me.     I  remember  that  Dr. 

Carpenter  wrote  some  nonsense  about  that  trip  of  yours  along  the  side  of  the 

house  in  Ashley  Place.     I  wrote  to  the  Medium  to  say  that  I  was  present  and 

a  witness.     Now,   I  don't  think  that  anyone   who  knows  me  would  for  one 

'  For  proofs  of  the  absolute  untruth  of  this  assertion  of  Dr.  Carpenter's,  see 
the  chapter  of  this  work  that  treats  of  the  experiments  of  Mr.  Crookes. 

M 

I70  LIFE   AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

moment  say  that  I  was  a  victim  to  hallucination  or  any  other  humbug  of  the 
kind.  The  fact  of  your  having  gone  out  of  the  window  and  in  at  the  other  I 
can  swear  to ;  but  what  is  the  use  of  trying  to  convince  men  who  won't 
believe  anything — not  even  if  they  see  it.  I  don't  care  a  straw  whether  Dr. 
Carpenter  or  Mr.  Hammond  believe  me  or  not — it  does  not  prevent  the  fact 
having  occurred.  But  this  I  will  say,  that  if  you  are  not  to  believe  the* 
corroborative  evidence  of  three  unimpeached  witnesses,  there  would  be  an  end 
to  all  justice  and  courts  of  law.     .     .     .     Ever  yours,  "  C.  Wynne. 

"  P.S. — Honest,  but  not  a  sceptic." 

By  which  postscript  Captain  Wynne  meant  that,  like  Lord  Adare 
and  Lord  Lindsay,  he  believed  the  testimony  of  his  eyesight.  He  was 
precisely  the  kind  of  witness  whose  testimony  Dr.  Cai^penter  would 
have  accepted  with  rapture,  had  it  been  unfavourable  to  Mr.  Home — 
a  frank  soldier  and  gentleman,  with  no  bias  towards  Spiritualism,  but 
who,  happening  to  have  been  present  with  Lords  Adare  and  Lindsay 
on  the  occasion  of  Home's  remarkable  levitation,  candidly  added  his 
testimony  to  theirs. 

In  face  of  his  letter,  what  becomes  of  the  reputation  of  the  Vice- 
President  of  the  Royal  Society  for  common  candour?  Dr. 
Carpenter  had  a  perfect  right,  if  he  thought  it  consistent  with  has 
reputation  as  a  man  of  intellect,  to  propound  the  astonishing  dicttun 
that,  given  a  hundred  persons  equally  honest,  of  whom  ninety-nine 
testified  that  Mr.  Home  had  risen  in  the  air,  while  the  hundredth 
declared  he  had  not,  the  testimony  of  the  one  ought  to  outweigh  that 
of  the  ninety-nine.  But  what  of  his  conduct  in  inventing  the 
"  honest  sceptic  who  declares  that  Mr.  Home  was  sitting  in  his  chair 
all  the  time,"  and  his  presentation  of  this  fiction  to  the  readers  of  the 
Contemporary  Review  as  a  fact,  when  all  the  while  Dr.  Carpenter  was 
aware  that  the  anonymous  "  honest  sceptic,"  on  whose  authority  he 
dismissed  the  evidence  of  Lords  Lindsay  and  Adare  as  hallucination, 
was  himself  a  hallucination,  and  the  coinage  of  his  own  brain  ? 

In  parting  with  Dr.  Carpenter,  let  me  remark  that  the  tone  which 
unbounded  egotism,  and  the  eagerness  of  a  timid  man  to  stand  well 
with  the  world,  induced  him  to  take  publicly  on  the  subject  of 
Spiritualism  and  the  phenomena  associated  with  Mr.  Home  was  some- 
what modified  in  private.  It  will  perhaps  be  news  to  those  who  have 
"  read,  marked,  and  inwardly  digested  "  Dr.  Carpenter's  various 
onslaughts  on  Spiritualism  in  the  Quarterly  Review,  the  Contemporary 
Review,  &c. ,  to  learn  that  he  regarded  Mr.  Home  as  an  honest  man, 
and  that  he  not  only  believed  in  the  continued  existence  of  the 
departed,  but  thought  it  possible — nay,  probable  that  spirits  influence 
the  minds  of  the  dwellers  on  earth. 

A  letter  has  been  sent  to  me  that  was  written  by  Dr.  Carpenter 
under  the  following  circumstances.  In  November,  1877,  a  young 
journalist,  who  was  acquainted  with  Mr.  Home,  wrote  to  Dr. 
Carpenter  apropos  of  the  lectures  on  "  Spiritualism,  Mesmerism, 
&c.,"  that  the  latter  had  recently  republished  in  book  form.  Two  or 
three  letters  followed ;  and  finally,  at  the  invitation  of  Dr.  Carpenter, 
his  correspondent  called  on  him  with  a  view  to  further  discussion.  He 
found  Dr.  Carpenter's  private  views  somewhat  inconsistent  with  his 

ENGLAND  171 

published  utterances,   as,  indeed,  had  been  already  demonstrated  to 
him  by  the  letter  he  has  placed  in  my  possession.       Mr.  Home  never 
saw  this  letter,    and  was  wholly  ignorant  that  any  correspondence 
between  Dr.  Carpenter  and  its  recipient  had  taken  place. 
Dr.  Carpenter  writes  as  follows: — 

"  56,  Regent's  Park  Road,  N.W.,  Nov.  27,  1877. 

"  Dear  Sir, — I  am  greatly  obliged  to  you  for  your  letter,  and  shall  be  very 
glad  to  communicate  further  with  you  on  the  subject  of  it.  You  will  have 
observed  that  I  do  not  anywhere  call  in  question  the  continued  existence  of 
departed  spirits,  or  their  influence  over  living  minds.  This  is  a  matter 
altogether  distinct  from  that  of  the  reality  of  the  '  physical  manifestations  ' ; 
and  there  seems  to  me  nothing  inconsistent  with  possibility — or  even  with 
probability — in  such  spiritual  influence.  For,  altho'  Mr.  Home  and  a  great 
many  other  persons  rank  me  as  a  Materialist,  my  philosophy  (as  my  British 
Association  Address  would  show)  is  much  more — like  Priestley's — a  universal 
Spiritualism. 

"  I  hold  myself  open  to  new  evidence  in  favour  of  the  existence  in  particular 
individuals  of  a  power  of  direct  communication  of  mind  with  mind,  which 
would  solve  many  difficulties  and  clear  up  many  obscurities.  But  ail  my 
experience  has  led  me  to  see  such  an  amount  of  self-deception  and  unconscious 
fitting-together  in  such  revelations,  that  I  distrust  all  stories  that  I  have  not 
the  power  of  myself  verifying. 

"  I  always  used  to  regard  Mr.  Home  as  an  honest  man,  believing  in  him- 
self ;  but  1  must  own  that  my  faith  was  shaken  by  the  Lyon  trial.  The 
publication  of  this  book  "  (Lights  and  Shadows  of  Spiritualism),  "  on  the 
other  hand,  has  given  me  a  more  favourable  opinion  of  him  ;  and  you  will 
have  remarked  that  the  only  thing  I  have  said  in  depreciation  of  him  has  been 
in  regard  to  the  '  physical  manifestations.' 

"  Should  you  be  able  to  call  upon  me  here  on  any  morning  this  week  before 
II  a.m.,  I  shall  be  glad  to  see  you.  .  Yours  truly, 

"  WiLUAM  B.  Carpenter." 

Cwning  from  the  author  of  the  bitter  attack  on  Mr.  Crookes  and 
others  that  appeared  in  the  Quarterly  Review  for  October,  187 1,  this 
letter  is  a  very  curious  production.  In  public,  Dr.  Carpenter  imputed 
the  physical  phenomena  of  Spiritualism  to  fraud,  and  explained  the 
mental  by  his  pet  theory  of  "  unconscious  cerebration;  "  in  private,  he 
sees  "  nothing  inconsistent  with  possibility — or  even  with  probability  " 
in  the  exercise  by  the  spirits  of  the  departed  of  an  influence  over  us 
who  are  still  on  earth. 

In  private,  Dr.  Carpenter  ' '  used  always  to  regard  Mr.  Home  as  an 
honest  man,  believing  in  himself."  It  would  be  easy  to  collect  from 
his  published  writings  a  dozen  passages  that  impute  or  hint  the 
contrary.  On  bis  own  confession,  then,  Dr.  Carpenter  could  think  one 
thing  and  say  another. 

Not  only  does  his  letter  contradict  has  published  statements,  but  one 
part  of  it  contradicts  another.  He  holds  Mr.  Home  honest,  yet  he 
considers  the  physical  manifestarions  witnessed  at  Home's  seances  to 
have  been  imposture.  It  would  seem,  therefore,  that  Mr.  Home  was, 
in  his  opinion,  an  honest  man  who  spent  his  life  in  deceiving  others. 
It  is  fortunate  for  Dr.  Carpenter's  reputation  that  he  went  with  the 
world  of  his  day  on  the  question  of  Spiritualism.  Had  he  been  a 
Spiritualist,  what  severe  things  would  that  worid  have  said  of  him 
and  of  his  muddled,  illogical  habits  of  thought ! 

172  LIFE   AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

As  Dr.  Carpenter  never  was  present  at  a  seance  with  Mr.  Home,  it  is 
obvious  that  he  was  incapable  of  expressing  an  opinion  of  any  value 
on  the  phenomena,  whether  mental  or  physical,  that  were  witnessed  at 
the  seances  of  the  latter.  The  intelligent  reader  who  has  impartially 
considered  the  facts  I  have  here  published,  will  perhaps  share  my 
conclusion  that  the  opinions  of  such  a  thinker  as  Dr.  Carpenter  on  such 
a  subject  as  Spiritualism  would  have  been  of  no  great  value  in  any 
case. 

Mr.  Home,  who,  in  1868,  had  readily  engaged  in  controversy  with 
such  an  antagonist  as  Professor  Tyndall,  never  took  the  trouble  to 
contradict  publicly  the  false  statements  of  Dr.  W.  B.  Carpenter 
concerning  the  levitation  in  Ashley  Place.  He  considered  the  inventor 
of  the  "  honest  sceptic  "  a  foeman  somewhat  unworthy  of  his  steel. 

In  concluding  this  chapter,  let  me  ask  the  reader,  sceptical  or 
otherwise,  what  proof  of  a  fact  could  be  more  complete  than  the  proof 
here  given  that,  on  December  i6th,  1868,  Mr.  Home  was  floated  out 
of  one  window  of  Ashley  House  and  in  at  another  window  nearly  seven 
and  a  half  feet  distant?  There  were  three  witnesses  of  the 
occurrence — Lord  Adare,  Lord  Lindsay,  and  Captain  Charles  Wynne. 
I  have  printed  here  the  testimony  of  all  three  in  their  own  words.  If, 
on  comparing  the  evidence  of  these  three  unimpeachable  witnesses  and 
finding  it  identical,  the  reader  still  objects :  ' '  For  all  that,  I  decline  to 
believe  the  impossible, ' '  I  can  only  answer :  ' '  The  thing  would  have 
seemed  equally  impossible  to  Viscount  Adare,  the  Master  of  Lindsay, 
and  Captain  Wynne,  if  their  eyesight  had  not  assured  them  that  it  was 
a  fact." 

CHAPTER  X 
PUBLIC  READINGS— SCOTLAND— FRANCE 

Home  as  a  public  reader.  Seance  at  Edinburgh.  Mr.  Alexander's 
narrative.  Enormous  correspondence.  Home's  benefactions. 
Franco-German  War  of  1870.  His  experience  at  Versailles. 
On  tlie  Battlefield.  Saving  a  German  officer.  Story  of  the 
German  Sergeant. 

There  is  no  branch  of  the  dramatic  art  in  which  failures  are  more 
numerous  and  triumph  more  difficult  than  the  career  of  the  public 
reader.  In  the  theatre,  scenery  and  costumes  count  for  much  of  the 
effect  produced  on  the  spectator,  and  often  render  him  indulgent  to 
indifferent  acting.  The  reader  has  no  such  ready-painted  pictures  to 
offer;  and,  as  a  consequence,  he  finds  his  audience  colder  and  more 
exacting  than  that  of  the/  actor.  When  the  curtain  rises  on  the  first 
scene  of  a  play,  the  interest  of  the  house  is  already  evoked  before  a 
word  has  been  spoken ;  but  the  platform-reader  must  speak,  and  speak 
to  some  purpose,  if  he  is  to  carry  his  hearers  with  him.  In  nine  cases 
out  of  ten  he  fails  to  do  so.  The  number  of  readers  who  weary  their 
hearers  is  legion,  and,  even  of  those  who  really  succeed  in  interesting 
an  audience,  how  few  can  carry  that  interest  to  the  pitch  that  Home 
did.  He  could  not  only  convulse  his  hearers  with  laughter  by  his  fun 
and  humour,  but  he  had  the  much  rarer  faculty  of  touching  them  by 
his  pathos  so  deeply  as  to  call  forth  tears.  None  who  heard  them 
could  readily  forget  his  renderings  of  such  pieces  as  The  Vagabonds, 
Jane  Conquest,  The  Death  0'  th'  Owd  Squire,  and  Mr.  Hamilton 
Aidl's  Lost  and  Found.  I  may  quote  one  or  two  of  many  press 
tributes  to  his  powers  of  pathos  : — "His  pathetic  yet  forcible  rendering 
of  The  Death  of  the  Old  Squire  won  for  the  reciter  the  honour  of  a 
double  recall,"  says  the  Era  of  March  20th,  1870.  "Mr.  D.  D. 
Home,  who  is  now  established  as  one  of  our  best  readers,  caused  a 
marked  sensation  amongst  the  audience — ^many  of  whom  were  melted 
to  tears — by  his  admirable  recital  of  The  Vagabond"  (Court  Circular, 
Aug.  14,  1869). 

Besides  his  wonderful  pathos  and  humour,  he  had  a  fire  such  as  few 
readers  possess,  and  his  rendering  of  battle  pieces  was  stirring  to  the 
last  degree.  The  usual  resource  of  the  reader  who  attempts  martial 
poetry  is  to  stun  his  listeners  by  the  noise  he  makes ;  with  Home  there 
was  no  noisy  rendering,  but  the  power  and  fire  of  the  reader  held  his 
audience  breathless.  I  have  already  related  the  singular  tribute  paid 
to  his  genius  in  New  York,  by  the  Southerner  whose  feelings  his 
impassioned  recitation  of  the  Bay  Fight  had  wrought  beyond 
control.  "  I  don't  see  how  he  could  help  flying^  at  you,"  wrote  an 
American  friend  to  Home,  on  reading  a  notice  of  the  incident  in  the 

173 

174  LIFE   AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

newspapers;  "  for  your  rendering  brings  the  scene  to  life.  We  see  it 
with  our  eyes;  and  to  that  Southerner  it  must  have  been  like  going 
through  it  all  again." 

It  was  constantly  remarked  by  his  press  critics — sometimes  with 
approbation,  at  other  times  with  astonishment — that  Mr.  Home's 
readings  were  ''thoroughly  natural."  They  could  not  be  otherwise; 
for  his  good  taste  and  his  exquisite  sense  of  the  ludicrous  gave  him  a 
horror  of  anything  ' '  stagy  ' ' ;  and  he  would  rather  have  missed  an 
effect  than  have  obtained  it  by  the  means  some  readers  do  not  scruple 
to  employ.  It  is,  above  all,  the  amateur  of  the  Penny  Reading  who 
revels  in  a  superabundance  of  such  sham  effect ;  and  it  was  the  fortune 
of  Home  on  one  occasion  to  be  present  at  a  recitation  by  one  of  the 
most  melodramatic  of  the  species.  He  added  A  Penny  Reader's 
Charge  of  the  Light  Brigade  to  his  repertory  from  that  evening;  and 
there  are  none  of  his  humorous  pieces  over  which  his  auditors  have 
laughed  more  heartily. 

It  was  a  common  thing  for  him  to  be  made  to  deliver  a  reading 
twice,  and  even  a  third  time.  "  Though  only  down  in  the  programme 
three  times,  he  had  to  appear  on  six  occasions  "  {Glasgow  Herald). 
' '  He  was  recalled  every  time  he  read ;  once  he  had  to  appear  a  third 
time"  {Ladies'  Own  Journal).  Home  was  fond  of  relating  an 
incident  that  occurred  to  him  in  connection  with  Tennyson's 
Grandmother,  a  poem  that  was  an  especial  favourite  of  his,  and  the 
homely  pathos  of  which  he  rendered  with  inimitable  effect.  He  read 
The  Grandmother  to  a  North  of  England  audience,  and  was 
enthusiastically  recalled.  The  poem  is  long,  and  the  programme  of 
the  evening  was  long,  too;  and  Home,  having  made  his  acknowledg- 
ments, was  pleading  the  latter  fact,  when  a  man  in  one  of  the  back 

seats  jumped  up.     "  The  programme  be ,"  he  interrupted; 

"  cut  all  the  rest  of  it  out,  and  give  us  the  old  lady  again." 

A  master  of  the  pathetic,  the  humorous,  and  the  stirring,  Home  was 
no  less  successful  in  the  weird.  His  Raven  was  a  memory  to  haunt 
for  days  those  who  listened  breathless  to  his  dialogue  with  the  ' '  grim, 
ungainly,  ghastly"  bird  of  Poe's  conception;  and  the  music  of  the 
same  poet's  Bells  could  not  be  more  perfectly  rendered  than  it  was  by 
Home.  In  his  last  illness  he  often  passed  hours  in  repeating  the 
poems  that  had  been  his  favourites ;  and  only  a  day  or  two  before  the 
end  came,  his  doctor,  visiting  him  one  morning,  found  him  reciting 
The  Bells,  and  rendering  their  melody  with  an  effect  as  exquisite  as 
any  that  had  ever  delighted  the  hearers  of  former  years. 

When  in  the  vein,  he  improvised  additions  to  a  narrative  with 
irresistible  effect.  The  reading  that  lent  itself  the  most  readily  to 
such  treatment  was  The  Widow  Bedott,  a  rambling  monologue  that,  1 
forget  what  American  writer,  has  placed  in  the  mouth  of  a  Yankee 
Mrs.  Gamp,  as  she  sits  by  her  fireside  relating  the  history  of  her 
courtship  to  a  neighbour,  and  wandering  continually  from  her 
narrative  to  discuss  matters  and  people  that  have  no  relation  to  it. 
When  he  had  ceased  to  read  in  public,  Home  conrinued  to  charm  his 
friends  with  his  readings ;  and  on  such  occasions  it  was  his  custom, 
when  he  impersonated  The  Widow  Bedott,  to  make  her  introduce  on 

PUBLIC    READINGS,     SCOTLAND,    FRANCE         175 

the  spur  of  the  moment  references  to  various  of  the  party  assembled. 
One  evening  Ihs  guests  included  a  clergyman — I  will  name  him  Smith 
— who  had  never  heard  Widow  Bedott  before,  and  who,  unluckily  for 
both  himself  and  the  reader,  was  innocent  of  any  sense  of  humour. 
Home  did  not  know  this,  or  the  Widow  would  hardly  have  included 
the  divine  among  those  of  her  auditors  of  whom  she  had  something  to 
say;  but,  in  the  belief  that  he  would  see  the  joke,  she  presently 
wandered  away  from  her  narrative  in  his  direction,  with  the  remark : 
"  Phineas,"  ses  I,  "  thet  reminds  me  of  our  parson.  '  Mr.  Smith,' 
ses  I  to  him  the  other  day " 

"  Me!  "  said  the  worthy  man,  astonished.  "  I  beg  Mr.  Home's 
pardon  for  interrupting  him,  but  surely  he  must  be  mistaking  me  for 
some  one  else." 

Home,  much  tempted  to  laugh,  but  thinking  that  this  time,  at  any 
rate,  the  reverend  gentleman  would  see  the  joke,  answered,  as 
Widow  Bedott:  "Ah,  deary  me! — it's  them  learned  men  as  have 
short  memories.  The  many  times  I've  listened  to  Mr.  Smith  telling 
us  we're  all  poor  sinners,  and  now  he  ses  to  me — ses  he " 

But  Mr.  Smith,  more  bewildered  than  ever,  had  turned  to  his  wife, 
who  was  sitting  next  him.  "  Have  you  any  recollection,  my  dear,  of 
hearing  me  say  to  Mr.  Home  that  we  are  all  poor  sinners?  "  he  asked, 
solemnly. 

Widow  Bedott  got  no  further  with  her  gossip  that  evening. 

Even  under  the  most  favourable  circumstances,  the  readings  that 
Mr.  Home  gave  during  the  years  1869  and  1870  in  London,  Edinburgh, 
Glasgow,  Liverpool,  and  fifty  other  places  in  England  and  Scotland, 
would  have  been  an  exhausting  drain  on  the  energies  of  a  nature  so 
nervous  and  sensitive.  To  the  last  he  retained  a  horror  of  the  trying 
hour  that  preceded  Ws  appearance  and  his  successes ;  and  those  who 
saw  him  agitated  by  the  fear  of  failure,  and  distrustful  both  of  his 
ability  and  his  memory,  were  astonished  when,  a  few  minutes  later,  he 
presented  himself  before  the  audience  another  being,  and  entered  on 
the  task  before  him  with  the  happiest  ease  and  self-possession.  But 
the  emotions  natural  to  his  highly-strung  temperament  were  not  all  he 
had  to  contend  against.  The  events  of  the  year  1868  had  not  only 
injured  his  health,  but  had  burdened  him  with  heavy  debts  that  he 
was  anxious  to  discharge  as  speedily  as  possible.  He  had  a  young 
son  to  provide  for;  and  there  were  numerous  relatives  and  friends  who 
looked  to  him  for  a  continuation  of  the  assistance  he  had  generously 
afforded  them,  and  was  desirous  still  to  give.  Such  anxieties  would 
have  preyed  on  any  man  ;  on  Home  they  preyed  tenfold,  for  he  had 
been  constituted  to  feel  both  sorrow  and  joy  more  keenly  than  his 
fellows.  It  was,  therefore,  under  conditions  the  most  discouraging 
that  he  commenced  bis  career  as  a  reader;  and  what  efforts  it  cost 
him  to  present  himself  night  after  niglit  to  his  audiences,  and  lavish 
all  his  rich  resources  of  humour  and  pathos  for  their  amusement,  only 
be  could  know.  But  he  always  faced  his  trying  task  bravely,  and 
went  through  it  with  brilliant  success. 

Among  the  letters  of  Mr.  Home  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall  that 
have  been  placed  at  my  disposal,  there  are  several  belonging  to  this 

176  LIFE   AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

trying  time.  Written  with  the  perfect  simplicity  and  unreserve  that 
mark  all  his  letters  to  his  friends,  they  form  a  journal  of  his  daily  life 
that  tells,  better  than  any  words  of  mine  can,  how  full  it  was  of  care 
and  struggle.  A  brief  extract  or  two  is  all  with  wKch  I  shall 
supplement  my  narrative. 

From  Edinburgh,  on  January  30th,  1870,  Home  writes: — 

"  Dear  Friends, — The  agent  here  was  very  unwilling  to  engage  me,  and 

told  me  that  readings  '  did  not  take  ' — that  '  Miss  was  a  dead  failure, 

and  that had  been  hissed  off  the  platform.'     At  last  he  engaged  me  for  a 

merely  nominal  sum.  ...  Of  course,  knowing  that  others  had  been  hissed 
off,  I  went  on  with  fear  and  trembling.  I  had  six  or  seven  friends  in  the 
house,  and  I  truly  believe  that  these  were  the  only  ones  who  applauded  when 
I  came  on.  Oh,  the  silence  was  fearful !  I  began  my  piece  '  Scotch  Words,' 
and  before  it  was  half  over  I  had  round  after  round  of  applause,  and  such  an 
encore.  My  every  piece  was  encored,  and  at  the  termination  of  the  last  they 
would  not  have  the  singers,  and  I  had  to  go  on  three  times.  I  am  curious  to 
see  what  the  papers  will  say  to-morrow. 

"  I  have  just  learnt  such  a  poem  /'  It  is  beautiful ;  above  all  where  he 
speaks  of  the  light  from  a  burning  ship  as  it  enters  the  cottage-window  in  the 
dark  night : 

'*  '  It  shone  with  a  radiant  glory  on  the  face  of  the  dying  child. 

Like  a  fair  first  ray  of  the  shadowless  day  in  the  land  of  the  undefiled.' 
I  will  not  tell  you  the  story,  but  I  know  the  poem  will  deeply  touch  you.     I 
am  far  from  being  well,  but  the  result  of  last  night  has  cheered  me." 

Either  during  this  or  a  subsequent  visit  to  Scotland  for  the  purpose 
of  giving  public  readings,  Mr.  Home  became  acquainted  with  a  well- 
known  E(inburgh  medical  man,  a  relative  of  Sir  James  Simpson.  Dr. 
Doun  was  an  entire  sceptic  on  the  subject  of  Spiritualism.  Home  had 
not  intended  to  hold  any  seances  in  Edinburgh;  he  went  there  as 
a  reader ;  but  a  train  of  circumstances  too  long  to  detail  here  led  to  his 
becoming  the  guest  of  Dr.  Doun,  and  by  the  doctor's  wish  he  held 
several  seances  in  the  doctor's  house.  The  result  was  that  the  beliefs 
of  the  doctor  were  revolutionised  in  spite  of  himself ;  and  he  became 
convinced  of  the  continued  existence  of  the  so-called  dead,  and  of 
their  ability  under  exceptional  circumstances  to  hold  communion  with 
us. 

I  could  have  wished  to  narrate  here  some  of  the  experiences  that 
made  the  doctor  a  Spiritualist,  were  it  in  my  power;  but  my 
knowledge  of  the  facts  is  limited  to  the  information  contained  in  a 
small  volume,  entitled,  Spiritualism:  A  Narrative  with  a  Discussion. 
By  Patrick  Proctor  Alexander,  M.A.,  Author  of  Mill  and  Carlyle, 
Moral  Causation,  &c.  Edinburgh:  W.  P.  Nimmo:  1871.  This  little 
book  is  ably  written,  and  evidently  the  work  of  a  candid,  clear-headed 
man — a  sceptic,  but  a  sceptic  who  investigated,  instead  of  prejudging. 
Mr.  Alexander,  an  old  friend  of  Dr.  Doun,  attended  a  seance  with  Mr. 
Home  at  the  doctor's  house.  He  obtained  permission  to  bring  with 
him  his  friend.  Dr.  Findlater,  as  a  fellow-observer.  Neither  had 
previously  attended  any  seance ;  both  were  educated,  intelligent,  hard- 
headed  Scotchmen,  entirely  incredulous  on  the  subject  of  Spiritualism, 
and  much  astonished  that  what  they  conceived  to  be  hallucinations 
should  have  taken  such  hold  of  such  a  man. 

*  "  Jane  Conquest." 

PUBLIC    READINGS,     SCOTLAND,    FRANCE  177 

"  On  an  evening  fixed,"  writes  Mr.  Alexander,  "  I  presented  myself  at  Ihe 
house,  taking  with  me  (by  permission)  Dr.  Findlater,  a  man  very  well  known 
in  Edinburgh  intellectual  circles — not  hitherto  suspected  by  his  friends  of  a 
tendency  to  undue  credulity  in  any  matter ;  a  friend,  and  in  some  sense  disciple, 
of  Mr.  John  Stuart  Mill ;  with  a  couple  of  good  sharp  eyes  in  his  head,  and 
perhaps  as  accurate  notions  as  most  men  as  to  what  may  constitute  Evidence, 
and  the  conditions  of  scientific  inquiry.  We  found  a  small  party  assembled, 
and  to  Mr.  Home  we  were,  of  course,  introduced.  .  .  .  His  manners  were 
simple  and  quiet,  and  very  much  those  of  a  gentleman.  There  was  no  trace 
in  him  whatever  of  the  charlatan  ;  and,  except  for  an  occasional  wildness  in 
his  eye — so  slight  that  I  may  have  merely  imagined  it — none  of  the  Magus,  or 
seer,  accustomed  to  hold  awful  commune  with  spirits,  either  evil  or  good.  .  .  . 

"  I  may  premise  that  I  cannot  readily  conceive  conditions  much  more 
favourable  to  Dr.  Findlater  and  myself,  as  regards  the  interest  of  truth,  than 
those  under  which  this  little  experiment  was  made — more  unfavourable  to  Mr. 
Home,  presumed  a  mere  juggler  and  impostor.  Had  Mr.  Home  advertised  an 
entertainment  to  take  place  in  a  hired  apartment  of  his  own,  I  don't  think  I 
should  have  cared  to  go  to  see  him,  any  more  than  I  ever  cared  to  go  to  see 
Professor  Anderson  bring  puddings  out  of  a  hat,  or  pour  liquors  from  his  magic 
bottle.  But  the  room  was  Mrs.  Doun's  drawing-room,  and  could  scarce  in  any 
way  have  been  prepared  by  Mr.  Home  without  her  or  Dr.  Doun's  connivance 
— a  theory  of  the  matter,  in  my  own  mind,  and,  I  venture  to  say,  that  of 
every  one  who  has  ever  had  the  pleasure  of  their  acquaintance,  disposed  of  as 
utterly  inadmissible,  in  virtue  of  the  known  and  high  character  of  both. 
Further,  it  is  certified  to  me  beyond  question,  that  the  '  manifestations,'  as 
they  are  termed,  took  place  indifferently  in  any  or  every  room  in  the  house,, 
and  most  particularly  in  Dr.  Doun's  bedroom,  which  could  scarce  have  been 
tampered  with  by  Mr.  Home  without  his  becoming  aware  of  it.  None  of  the 
company  had  any  relations  with  Mr.  Home,  excepting  as  we  ourselves  had, 
per  favour  of  our  host  and  hostess  ;  or  could  thus,  any  more  than  we,  be 
suspected  of  complicity  with  Mr.  Home.  The  drawing-room  was  fully  and 
brightly  lit  with  gas^  ;  and  the  table,  which  was  good  enough  to  vouchsafe  us 
intelligence  from  the  Spirit-world,  an  old  acquaintance,  at  which  I  had  afore- 
time taken  tea,  undreaming  of  Mr.  Home  or  of  Spirits.  If  conditions  more 
favourable  can  be  suggested  by  any  scientific  gentleman,  I  shall  be  glad  to 
have  the  benefit  of  his  wisdom." 

For  a  detailed  description  of  the  phenomena  witnessed  and 
searchingly  investigated  by  Mr.  Alexander  and  Dr.  Findlater,  I  must 
refer  the  reader  to  the  interesting  brochure  of  the  former.  *  *  Both  of 
us  were  a  good  deal  perplexed,"  says  Mr.  Alexander,  "  and  remain 
so — as  quite  unable  to  suggest  any  plausible  explanation  of  the 
wonders  we  witnessed.  As  to  the  obvious  explanation  of  mala  -fides 
and  jugglery  on  Mr.  Home's  part,  the  only  little  objection  to  it  is  (and 
perhaps  may  be  thought  but  a  little  one),  that,  with  our  very  best  will 
and  care  to  that  effect,  and  the  best  opportunities  for  doing  so,  we 
utterly  failed  to  detect  any  trace  of  these  whatever.'' 

The  host  and  hostess  (Dr.  and  Mrs.  Doun),  Mr.  Alexander,  Dr. 
Findlater,  and  other  Edinburgh  ladies  and  gentlemen  to  the  number 
of  nine,  formed,  with  Mr.  Home,  a  circle  about  "an  ordinary  round 
drawing-room  tea-table,  solidly  built,  and  thus  of  considerable 
weight ;  ' '  and  waited  some  time  without  any  manifestations  occurring. 
' '  The  first  hint  or  f oreshine  we  had  of  the  '  phenomena, '  ' '  writes  Mr. 
Alexander,  "  came  in  the  form  of  certain  tremors  which  began  to 
pervade  the  apartment.  These  were  of  a  somewhat  peculiar  kind; 
and  tbey  gradually  increased  till  they  became  of  considerable  violence. 

'  Italicised  thus  by  Mr.  Alexander. 

178  LIFE   AND    MISSION   OF    HOME 

Not  only  did  the  floor  tremble,  but  the  chair  of  each  person,  as  distinct 
from  it,  was  felt  to  rock  and — as  we  Scots  say — dirl  under  him." 

Ice-cold  blasts  of  air  were  felt  by  some  of  the  sitters  drifting  across 
their  hands.  Mr.  Alexander  and  Dr.  Findlater  did  riot  experience  this 
sensation — so  frequent  a  forerunner  of  other  phenomena;  but,  in 
common  with  the  remaining  sitters,  they  heard  the  rappings  that 
followed.  "  Presently,  as  to  the  ear  it  seemed,  exactly  in  the  centre 
of  the  table, ' '  says  the  former — 

"  Came  a  tap,  tap,  tapping,  regular,  continuous,  and  prolonged;  on  hearing 
which  Mr.  Home  announced  that  he  was  now  nearly  sure  we  should  have 
'  manifestations  '  of  some  sort ;  and,  turning  to  me,  he  suggested  that,  a9 
naturally  I  might  wish  to  test  the  thing  a  little  curiously,  I  had  better  go 
under  the  table,  and  satisfy  myself  as  to  whether  there  was  anything  there  to 
account  for  what  would  probably  take  place.  Accordingly — though  a  little 
loth,  as  suspecting  a  slight  degradation  in  it — I  performed  what  Mr.  Darwin 
would  call  an  act  of  '  reversion  * ;  and,  in  the  enthusiasm  of  scientific  inquiry, 
was  content,  for  the  nonce,  to  relapse  into  the  condition  of  an  '  ape-like 
progenitor  '  or  member  of  the  genus  Quadrumana.  As  such,  I  crept  quietly 
under  the  table,  and  kept  steady  watch  there  for  the  space  of  ten  minutes  or 
so  ;  Dr.  Findlater,  as  an  observer  of  the  genus  Homo,  keeping  the  like  steady 
watch  above.  I  may  remark  that  the  I'ght  under  the  table,  though  necessarily 
dimmer  than  above,  was  yet  amply  sufficient  for  purposes  of  clear  observation. 
For  a  good  while  nothing  took  place  but  raps,  which  flew  about  all  over  the 
table  ;  and  I  could  indicate,  when  desired  by  Mr.  Home  to  do  so,  the  precise 
locale  upon  the  table  of  each  rap  as  it  occurred.  Meantime,  by  anything 
beneath  the  table,  the  raps  were  entirely  unaccounted  for  ;  and  Mr.  Home,  in 
particular,  had  his  feet  steadily  at  rest  beneath  his  chair :  his  hands,  as 
observed  by  Dr.  Findlater,  were  quietly  before  him  on  the  table." 

Various  movements  of  the  table  followed.  During  their  occurrence, 
it  was  certified  by  Mr.  Alexander  that  Mr.  Home's  feet  were  motionless 
beneath  his  chair,  by  Dr.  Findlater  that  his  hands  were  at  rest  above. 
The  former  resumed  his  seat;  and  the  sitters  proceeded  to  try  if  the 
table  would  become  light  and  heavy  at  command.  Mr.  Alexander 
describes  the  result  of  the  experiment: — 

"  '  Be  light,'  said  the  operator;  and  the  table,  when  softly  solicited,  moved 
readily  from  beneath  his  fingers.  '  Be  heavy  I'  and  the  table  seemed  weighted 
to  the  floor  with  lead,  and  could  only  at  all  be  moved  by  a  great  expenditure 
of  force.  Every  one  of  the  party  in  succession  tried  this  :  Dr.  Findlater  care- 
fully twice ;  I  twice,  with  scrupulous  care,  and  invariably  with  the  above 
results.  On  my  trying  the  experiment  the  second  time — of  course,  if  possible, 
with  some  additional  care  and  scruple — it  actually  seemed  to  me  that  the  table 
sprang  from  under  my  fingers,  almost  before  the  initial  touch  could  take  the 
form  of  distinct  pressure — the  difficulty  of  moving  it  afterwards  being  well- 
nigh,  in  proportion,  great.  These  results  certainly  seemed  curious,  as  to 
every  one  present  quite  unaccountable." 

Five  raps  presently  called  for  the  alphabet;  and  various 
communications  were  spelt  out,  one  of  them  being  from  a  departed 
friend  of  certain  of  the  sitters  present.  Other  manifestations  occurred, 
which  I  pass  over,  and  quote  Mr.  Alexander's  account  of  the 
phenomenon  that  seems  to  have  impressed  him  the  most : — 

"  Two  accordions,"  he  writes,  "  were  on  the  table,  one  of  which  Mr.  Home 
selected.     The  instrument,  he  explained,  was  not  his,  but  the  property  of  Dr. 

G (a  gentleman  present  I  had  not  before  met,  but  very  well  known  to  me 

by  reputation),  who  had  been  good  enough  to  bring  it  with  him.     This  Dr. 

PUBLIC    READINGS,    SCOTLAND,    FRANCE         179 

G confirmed ;    and   it    is    to    be   in    fairness   supposed   he   could   scarce   be 

mistaken  as  to  its  being  his  own  accordion.  .  .  .  Taking  the  instrument 
in  one  hand  by  the  end  unfurnished  with  keys,  Mr.  Home  put  it  under  the 
table.  It  almost  immediately  began  to  emit  sounds  ;  and,  having  begun,  went 
on  to  play  pretty  briskly.  Guiding  the  instrument  in  his  direction,  Mr.  Home 
then  desired  Dr.  Findlater  to  go  under  the  table,  and,  after  careful  examina- 
tion, return  and  give  an  account  of  what  he  saw  there.  Dr.  Findlater  did  so. 
He  remained  some  little  time  under  the  table,  the  accordion  the  while  con- 
tinuing to  sound  as  before  ;  and  then,  resuming  his  chair,  he  reported  that  the 
instrument  held  motionless  in  Mr.  Home's  one  hand — his  other  hand  being, 
of  course,  all  the  time  on  the  table — was  moving  and  giving  out  sound, 
precisely  as  if  it  were  worked  by  a  hand  at  the  other  end  of  it ;  whilst,  to 
account  for  this  phenomenon,  not  to  be  questioned,  except  in  so  far  as  his 
eyesight  might  be,  nothing  whatever  was  visible.  .  .  .  Going  down  to 
make  strict  examination,  I  came  up  in  a  little  to  report  precisely  as  Dr. 
Findlater  had  before  done.  The  accordion,  held  motionless  in  Mr.  Home's 
one  hand  at  an  angle  of  about  forty-five  degrees,  was  moving  backward  and 
forward,  and  continuing  to  play,  just  as  if  a  couple  of  hands  had  been 
manipulating  it ;  and  to  account  for  this  nothing  was  visible.  Meantime  there 
was  no  hint  of  a  tune  in  the  sounds  produced  ;  they  made  just  such  an  aimless 
monotony  as  a  child,  let  us  say,  might  produce,  amusing  itself  with  the 
instrument." 

It  was  at  this  instant  that  raps  came  again  on  the  table,  and  the 
message  already  referred  to  was  spelt  out. 

"It  appeared,"  writes  Mr.  Alexander,  "  that  this  deceased  Colin  Campbell, 
a  gentleman  of  Aberdeenshire,  had  been  intimately  known  to  two  or  three  of 
the  party.  .  .  .  Almost  instantly  after,  the  five  raps  were  again  heard  ; 
'  He  does  not  forget ' — was  rapped  out  by  the  spirit  of  the  faithful  though 
defunct  Colin  ;  and — odd  as  it  may  seem — the  accordion  under  the  table,  still 
held  in  Mr.  Home's  one  hand,  played  distinctly  '  Auld  Lang  Syne  I' — (the 
reader  may  laugh  if  he  likes,  as  indeed  to  myself,  had  I  not  been  present  t<j 
witness  it,  such  a  thing  must  needs  have  seemed  at  once  ludicrous  and 
incredible).  The  tune  was  played  distinctly,  recognisably,  and  yet  withal  a 
little  bunglingly  ;  and  then,  as  if  Colin  had  suspected  a  certain  deficiency  in 
his  own  performance,  it  was  played  over  again,  this  time  in  tones  of  exquisite 
modulation,  which  moved  the  admiration  of  all  present." 

Public  readings  and  the  seances  that,  wherever  he  went,  he  was 
pressed  to  hold,  filled  up  Home's  time  so  largely  that  he  had  less  of 
it  than  ever  to  bestow  on  those  thousands  of  voluminous  corresporuients 
who,  by  the  number  and  merciless  length  of  their  letters,  must  have 
made  the  postman's  knock  a  horror  to  him.  "  I  am  behind  again 
with  all  my  correspondence,"  he  writes  to  a  friend.  "  My  head  is  in 
a  whirl.     This  morning  brought  me  in  a  mass  of  letters.     One  is  from 

Mrs.  ,  who  writes  that  '  the  Dublin  doctors  are  killing  her,'  and 

she  sends  me  wliat  she  calls  a  statement  of  her  case.  You  will  imagine 
my  feelings  when  I  tell  you  it  consists  of  sixty  pages  of  letter  paper 
crossed.     Not  being  very  well,  I  get  so  dreadfully  nervous  with  these 

things  that  I  know  not  what  to  do.       G declares  that  he  will 

bum  all  my  letter  paper,  and  allow  me  to  write  only  to  you  and  a  very 
few  others." 

"  I  know,"  writes  Mr.  Home  another  time  to  Mrs.  Hall,  "  you  will 
feel  for  me,  and  that  in  your  prayers  I  shall  not  be  forgotten.  My 
sister  is  in  a  very  delicate  state  of  health — her  lungs  are  very  weak. 
....  Does  it  not  seem  strange  that  I,  who  am  young  myself, 
should  thus  be  called  upon  to  see  the  nearest  and  dearest  pass  to  the 
summer  land  before  me  ?  ' ' 

i8o  LIFE   AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

The  Russian  lawsuit  still  dragged  on,  and  was  likely  to  do  so  for 
several  years  more.  With  the  utmost  exertions  and  economy,  Mr. 
Home  could  only  pay  ofiF  very  slowly  the  sums  he  had  borrowed  to 
defray  the  heavy  legal  expenses  that  had  been  forced  on  him  in 
England.  Some  of  his  friends  advised  him  to  sell  his  jewels,  but  he 
would  not  part  with  them.  It  was  not  their  value  or  beauty  that 
influenced  him  in  this  determination,  but  the  associations  connected 
with  these  stones.  Every  ring  or  other  jewel  was  a  testimony  to  the 
fact  that  the  royal  donor  had  learned  to  regard  Home  with  goodwill 
and  esteem.  Whatever  the  original  scepticism  of  these  high 
personages — and  it  is  an  idle  fancy  to  suppose  that  their  investigations 
of  the  phenomena  were  entered  on  in  a  credulous  spirit — they  bad 
ended  by  being  convinced  of  the  reality  of  the  manifestations,  and  had 
also  recognised  that  Mr.  Home's  other  qualities  worthily  accorded 
with  his  wondrous  gifts. 

I  have  said  enough  to  show  that  the  years  1869  and  1870  were  not 
among  the  happiest  of  a  life  that  had  more  cloud  than  sunshine  in  it. 
But,  whatever  the  accumulated  cares  and  difficulties  of  his  own 
existence,  Home  had  always  a  heart  to  feel  for  others,  and  a  brain  and 
hand  active  to  relieve  their  distresses.  The  world  knew  nothing  of 
his  many  deeds  of  kindness;  even  those  nearest  and  dearest  to  him 
often  knew  nothing;  for  it  was  his  choice  to  do  good  unseen,  and  to 
keep  silence  afterwards  concerning  it.  But  among  his  papers  I  find 
many  letters  filled  with  expressions  of  gratitude  and  thankfulness. 
Now  it  is  a  young  and  unknown  artist,  for  whose  brush  Home's 
generous  efforts  have  found  employment;  now  a  distressed  working 
man  writes  of  his  sick  wife's  life  saved  by  comforts  and  medical  help 
that  Home  had  provided ;  now  a  mother  thanks  him  for  the  start  in 
life  that  be  has  secured  for  her  son. 

Home's  charity  was  not  the  cheap  kindness  that  begins  and  ends 
with  the  giving  of  money.  That  he  gave  freely  of  his  scanty  means, 
the  letters  before  me  show ;  but  they  bear  witness  also  to  many  acts  of 
a  rarer  and  higher  benevolence,  they  prove  how  much  time  and  thought 
he  devoted  to  helping  others,  when  the  circumstances  of  his  life  would 
have  led  most  men  to  think  only  of  their  own  needs  and  cares.  There 
is,  for  instance,  a  letter  written  to  Mr.  Home  about  the  date  when  his 
pressing  difficulties  led  certain  friends  to  recommend  him  to  sell  his 
jewels,  and  others  to  offer  him  aid  that  was  gratefully  declined. 
The  first  few  words  are  all  I  need  quote : — ' '  Dear  Sir, — 
You  must  allow  me  to  express  how  exceedingly  kind  I  feel  it  for  you  to 
take  so  much  trouble  in  introducing  my  work."  How  many  of  the 
Brewsters  and  Brownings  who  misrepresented  Home  would  have  been 
capable  of  a  benevolence  so  real,  unpretending,  and  self  sacrificing  as 
this,  in  the  midst  of  such  depressing  anxieties  as  then  beset  him? 

I  need  hardly  say  that  I  have  no  thought  of  printing  here  the 
numerous  letters  in  my  possession  that  testify  to  the  active  and 
constant  benevolence  of  Mr.  Home.  It  would  give  pain  to  those  of 
the  writers  who  are  still  on  earth;  and  he  himself  would  be  the  last  to 
desire  that  the  details  of  kindness  so  modest  should  be  vaunted  before 
the  world.     These  letters  must  remain  in  the  same  obscurity  as  the 

PUBLIC    READINGS,    SCOTLAND,    FRANCE         i8i 

generous  actions  that  led  to  their  being  written;  but  there  is  one — 
written  to  him  in  the  summer  of  1870 — from  which  I  cannot  help 
copying  a  few  lines.  Probably  they  will  not  seem  so  touching  to  the 
reader  as  to  me,  who  know  the  circumstances  that  called  them  forth: — 

"  Sir, — I  have  learnt  from  day  to  day  through  my  son  in  London  with  what 
fatherly  goodness  you  have  come  to  our  rescue,  and  proved  a  saviour  to  my 
poor  son,  whose  sad  case  is  so  distressing.  No  words  of  mine  can  convey 
sufficiently  the  gratitude  which  I  feel  I  owe  you  for  that  pure  goodness  of 
heart  alone  which  could  have  prompted  you  to  it.  The  future  of  my  poor 
son's  life  will  be  devoted  to  rewarding  you  ;  and  time,  I  am  sure,  will  prove 
that  he  is  worthy  of  what  you  have  done  for  him. 

"  Again  I  pray  you  accept  the  heartfelt  gratitude  of  an  afflicted  father,  who 
can  never  reward  you  for  your  charitable  goodness,  and  but  for  which  the 
poor  boy  could  never  have  been  rescued." 

The  writer  of  this  letter  was  then  ill  in  the  country ;  and,  I  believe, 
passed  from  earth  without  ever  having  met  his  son's  preserver.  If  I 
were  to  relate  that  son's  story,  it  would  furnish  one  proof  more  that 
the  realities  of  Home's  life  were  stranger  than  any  fiction.  But  the 
fact  has  already  been  sufficiently  demonstrated  in  these  pages;  and, 
except  to  illustrate  it,  the  history  could  serve  no  useful  purpose.  I 
leave  it  untold,  therefore,  and  pass  to  other  events  of  the  year  to  wluch 
it  belongs — 1870. 

Very  soon  after  a  kindness  beyond  all  price  had  been  acknowledged 
in  the  touching  letter  to  Mr.  Home,  of  which  I  have  quoted  a  part,  he 
left  England,  in  company  with  a  friend,  for  the  theatre  of  the  great 
war  then  raging.  They  reached  the  German  headquarters  withan  a 
few  hours  of  the  battle  of  Sedan ;  and  next  day  Home  went  over  the 
field.  The  sight  would  have  tried  any  nerves;  to  a  nature  so  sensitive 
and  keenly  compassionate  of  suffering  as  his  it  was  agonising.  He  was 
able,  while  he  followed  the  operations  of  the  German  armies,  to  be  of 
frequent  service  to  victims  of  the  war;  but  the  months  of  September, 
October,  and  November,  1870,  did  irreparable  damage  to  his  health. 
The  spectator  of  a  great  war  needs  a  heart  of  steel  and  nerves  of  iron, 
and  Home  had  neither. 

He  witnessed  the  investment  of  Paris  and  the  greater  part  of  the 
siege,  including  more  than  one  of  the  sorties  attempted  by  the 
garrison.  During  his  stay  at  Versailles,  he  acted  as  correspondent  of 
an  English  newspaper — I  believe  of  more  than  one;  but  my 
information  on  this  head  is  scanty,  and  I  have  only  in  my  possession 
one  of  the  letters  that  he  wrote — the  last  of  the  series,  dated  November 
23rd.  "  We  are  told  at  least  twenty  times  a  day,"  it  begins,  "  that 
we  are  about  to  witness  one  of  the  greatest  events  in  history — the 
capitulation  of  Paris ;  and  for  a  few  minutes  we  reconcile  ourselves  to 
this  dreadful  monotony.  The  very  sight  of  these  spiked  helmets 
begins  to  weary  one.  I  am  half-inclined  to  think  that  there  is  a  strcmg 
undercurrent  of  sympathy  for  France,  at  least  in  the  outer  circle ;  and 
though  it  would  be  akin  to  treason  to  repeat  such  a  thought,  yet  I  am 
convinced  that  the  greater  part  of  the  men  would  be  rejoiced  to 
terminate  this  starving-out  process.  .  .  . 

i82  LIFE   AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

"  I  send  you  the  menu  of  a  dinner  given  to  an  English  diplomatist, 
to  wWch  I  had  the  honour  of  being  invited.  When  we  sit  down  to  a 
dinner  like  this,  the  thought  of  so  many  within  a  few  miles  of  us,  who 
are  actually  suffering  for  the  necessities  of  Ufe,  rises  like  an  unbidden 
Banquo  to  the  feast.  I  know  it  does  so  in  my  own  case,  and  am 
equally  certain  of  its  so  doing  with  the  rest  of  the  guests." 

The  remainder  of  the  long  letter  consists  of  anecdotes  relating  to 
the  siege.  The  most  interesting  of  them  has  often  been  narrated; 
how  a  German  officer  with  his  men  visited  a  chateau  on  which  they 
were  not  quartered ;  how  they  destroyed  furniture  and  pictures,  drank 
the  best  of  the  wine  in  the  cellar  and  spilled  the  rest ;  and  how  finally 
the  Prussian  officer  turned  the  mistress  of  the  chateau  out  of  her  room, 
and  occupied  it;  taking  his  leave  afterwards  with  the  explanation, 
"  Madam,  when  I  was  a  little  boy,  I  have  often  heard  my  mother  relate 
the  cruel  treatment  she  had  to  endure  at  the  hands  of  a  French  officer 
and  his  men.  I  took  an  oath,  even  when  a  boy,  that  I  would  take 
revenge;  and  I  have  now  done  so.  It  is  unfortunate  that  you  should 
have  been  the  victim,  but  so  it  had  to  be. "  "Si  non  e  vero  e  ben 
trovato,"  says  Home,  in  telling  the  story. 

Furnished  with  a  safe-conduct  from  the  German  headquarters, 
Home  came  and  went  freely.  I  have  related  in  an  earlier  chapter  the 
circumstances  of  his  meeting  with  King  William  (a  few  months  later 
Ena^eror  of  Germany),  at  Versailles,  in  October,  1870;  when,  as  the 
Daily  Telegraph  correspondent,  who  was  present,  wrote  to  that 
journal:  "  The  King  promptly  recognised  Mr.  Home,  and  addressed 
him  very  kindly — reminding  him  of  the  wonders  that  he  (Mr.  Home) 
had  been  the  means  of  imparting  to  him,  and  inquiring  about  the  spirits 
in  by  no  means  a  sceptical  tone."  It  was  a  dramatic  incident,  that 
few  minutes'  conversation  of  the  crowned  representative  of  force 
triumphant  with  the  man  who  had  been  so  wonderfully  made  the  means 
of  proving  to  his  contemporaries  that  around  them  were  forces  of 
whose  existence  they  had  little  dreamed. 

On  two  occasions  during  the  siege  of  Paris — probably  on  more — 
Home,  found  himself  under  fire.  The  second  time,  he  went  under  the 
fire  oi  the  forts  after  a  sortie  to  assist  in  removing  the  wounded.  He 
came  on  a  young  German  officer,  who  had  received  a  bullet  in  the 
thigh  and  was  in  imminent  danger  of  bleeding  to  death.  Home  bound 
up  the  wound  to  the  best  of  his  ability ;  and  there  being  no  assistance 
at  hand,  lifted  the  sufferer  and  carried  him  to  the  ambulance— an 
exertion  that  threatened  to  have  cost  him  his  own  life  from  the  effect 
it  had  on  his  lungs,  which  just  then  were  in  a  condition  more  than 
weak.  His  kindness  did  not  end  here.  He  visited  his  protege 
constantly  while  the  wounded  man  remained  in  hospital  at  Versailles, 
cheering  him  and  alleviating  his  sufferings  by  every  comfort  in  his 
power;  and,  finally,  took  a  cordial  leave  of  him  when  the  young  officer 
was  included  in  a  party  of  disabled  Germans  who  were  sent  back  to  the 
Fatherland.  The  two  never  met  again;  but  a  year  later  Home 
received  a  long  letter  from  Beyrout  in  Syria,  in  which  Lieutenant 
Sauer  related  all  his  fortunes  since  their  parting.     I  append  an  exact 

PUBLIC    READINGS,     SCOTLAND,    FRANCE         183 

translation  of  as  much  of  this  interesting  document  as  I  have  space  to 
quote : — 

"  Beyrout,  Syria.   November  21st,   1871. 

"  Honoured  Sir, — More  than  a  year  has  passed  since  I  left  Versailles  and 
saw  you  no  more  ;  and  although  I  have  so  long  remained  silent  to  one  who 
alleviated  the  most  dreadful  moments  of  my  existence,  I  now  offer  my  sincerest 
thanks  for  all  the  bountiful  aid  you  rendered  to  a  poor  victim  of  war,  who 
was  on  the  point  of  perishing  but  for  your  assistance.  Perhaps  you  will  accuse 
me  of  ingratitude  for  not  having  written  ere  this,  but  sad  events  have  trans- 
pired to  hinder  my  good  intentions.  I  trust,  however,  you  will  excuse  my 
neglect  when  I  relate  the  following  events.  You  may  remember  the  transport 
party  to  which  I  belonged  left  Versailles  the  8th  November,  1870.  Although 
fearful  weather  prevailed,  five  days  later  we  arrived  at  Nanteuil,  where  our 
privations  partially  ceased.  You  can  form  some  idea  of  the  discomfort  such 
a  journey  upon  rough  waggons  would  entail  even  upon  healthy  persons,  how 
much  more  to  those  whose  sad  condition  was  aggravated  by  continual  rain 
and  snow,  falling  upon  partially  frozen  limbs?  Our  joy  was  unbounded  on 
reaching  Nanteuil  at  finding  a  Wurtemberg  train  prepared  for  the  comfortable 
reception  of  poor  suffering  creatures,  who  hailed  the  succour  as  just  in  time 
to  save  them.     .     . 

"  Towards  Christmas  I  was  able  to  walk  with  the  support  of  a  stick, 
although  the  ball  could  not  be  extracted  from  my  leg ;  so  I  carry  it  even  now 
in  sad  remembrance  of  that  memorable  day  for  us  Germans.  I  must  here 
remark  that  after  a  few  days'  sojourn  in  Gorlitz,  I  received  the  cross  which 
his  Majesty  had  hitherto  only  lent  me.  .     . 

"  When  I  again  sought  my  regiment,  I  heard  from  the  doctor  that  I  was 
totally  unfitted  for  further  duty,  and  applied  for  permission  to  quit  the  service. 
I  could  have  wished  to  remain  an  officer,  though  no  doubt  my  wound  would 
have  proved  a  serious  obstacle  to  my  progress.  Upon  casting  aside  my  regi- 
mentals, it  became  necessary  to  seek  some  occupation  for  my  future  existence  ; 
and  on  application  I  received  offers  from  Beyrout,  where  I  formerly  resided. 
These  I  accepted  ;  so  at  present  I  am  surrounded  by  loving  friends,  who  had 
anxiously  followed  my  career  on  French  territory. 

"  Should  these  lines  reach  you,  be  assured  that  one  being  on  earth  is 
indebted  to  you  for  his  preservation,  and  only  longs  for  an  opportunity  to  prove 
his  gratitude  to  one  he  must  ever  remember  with  intense  thankfulness.  May 
I  ask  you  to  complete  your  kindness  by  letting  me  know  that  these  lines  have 
reached  you?  Hoping  some  day  to  thank  you  personally,  I  remain,  your  ever 
grateful,  "  R.  Sauer, 

"  Lieutenant  of  the  Reserve,  ist   Westphalian  Grenadier  Regiment." 

The  "  memorable  day  for  us  Germans  "  of  which  the  writer  speaks 
was  one  of  the  struggles  that  took  place  in  the  direction  of  Bougival, 
when  the  besiegers  of  Paris  were  attacked  by  the  besieged.  In  the 
same  month — October,  1870 — another  sortie  of  the  French  led  to  an 
occurrence  that  Home  could  never  speak  of  without  emotion. 

The  morning  of  the  sortie,  he  had  left  his  lodging  with  his  pocket 
filled  with  cigars,  many  hundreds  of  which  he  distributed  at  this  time 
among  the  troops  and  the  wounded,  though  I  doubt  if  he  ever  smoked 
a  cigar  himself.  As  he  passed  along  a  boulevard  where  some  French 
children  were  playing — it  was  at  Versailles — be  noticed  a  non- 
commissioned officer  sitting  on  a  bench  near  them,  who  seemed  to  be 
talking  to  one  of  the  smallest.  Home,  interested  by  the  scene, 
stopped  as  be  came  near;  and  was  astonished  and  amused  to  hear  the 
grizzled  Prussian  sergeant  chatting  away  amicably  to  his  small  com- 
panion in  the  best  of  German. 

"  But,  my  friend,"  he  said  to  the  soldier,  "  the  boy  doesn't  under- 
stand a  word  you're  saying  to  him." 

i84  LIFE   AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

"  Ja,  ja,"  answered  the  Prussian  seriously,  "he  understands  me 
well  enough;  "  and  then,  patting  the  cliild's  head  and  smiling  at 
Home's  look  of  astonishment:  "  I  have  eight  of  them  at  home,"  he 
said  simply,  "  the  big  and  the  little — waiting  for  the  old  father  to 
come  back  to  them." 

The  words,  and  something  in  the  way  they  were  spoken,  brought 
the  tears  to  Home's  eyes.  He  sat  down  and  talked  with  the  soldier; 
and  when  in  a  few  minutes  the  veteran  rose  to  go: — "  Stop,"  said 
Home,  pulling  out  a  handful  of  cigars;  "  here  is  something  to  help 
you  to  pass  the  time,  sergeant." 

The  same  day  the  besieged  attacked  the  German  positions  near 
Buzenval.  When  the  skirmish  was  over,  and  the  French  columns 
were  retreating  on  Paris,  Home  joined  a  party  that  went  out  to  seek 
the  wounded.  On  the  battlefield,  they  came  on  his  acquaintance  the 
sergeant  again — dead.  The  cigars  were  in  his  pocket  still.  But  the 
hand  that  had  placed  them  there  was  already  cold  ;  and  as  the  search- 
ing party  turned  away  to  look  for  those  who  were  not  past  help.  Home 
thought  of  the  bench  where  he  had  sat  only  a  few  hours  before  with 
the  brave  sergeant  at  Versailles,  and  seemed  still  to  hear  him  speaking 
of  his  German  home  and  the  children  who  were  waiting  his  return. 

Of  the  many  miseries  of  war  that  he  witnessed  during  the  great 
siege,  there  was  none  that  he  remembered  with  a  sadder  heart. 

CHAPTER  XI 

ENGLAND:  SPIRITUALISM   AND  SCIENCE 

The  Investigation  of  Professor  Crookes.  Rigid  tests.  Wild  theory 
of  Professor  Balfour  Stewart.  The  evidence  of  recording 
instruments.  Matter  through  matter.  Materialised  hands.  A 
reversal  of  the  law  of  gravity.  Refusal  of  organised  Science  to 
investigate.  Their  mediaeval  attitude.  Dr.  Higgins  in  public 
and  in  private.  Sergeant  Cox,  O.C.  Dr.  Carpenter  in  the 
Quarterly  Review. 

"  Views  or  opinions  I  cannot  be  said  to  possess  on  a  subject  I  do  not 
pretend  to  understand." 

Mr.  W.  Crookes,  F.R.S.,  published  this  declaration  in  July,  1870, 
shortly  after  the  announcement  had  been  made  in  the  Athenctum  that 
he  was  commencing  a  scientific  investigation  of  Spiritualism.  As 
nineteen-twentieths  of  mankind  come  by  their  opinions  in  the  manner 
of  the  historic  jury  that  proposed  to  return  its  verdict  without  hearing 
the  evidence,  the  public  naturally  concluded  that  Mr.  Crookes  shared 
this  common  weakness  of  humanity,  and  he  was  deluged  with  letters 
inquiring  what  his  opinions  of  Spiritualism  were.  By  way  of  general 
response,  he  published  a  short  article,  Spiritualism  Viewed  hy  the 
Light  of  Modern  Science,  that  opens  with  the  explanation  above 
quoted. 

"  I  consider  it  the  duty  of  scientific  men  who  have  learnt  exact  modes  of 
working,"  Mr.  Crookes  continued,  "  to  examine  phenomena  which  attract  the 
attention  of  the  public,  in  order  to  confirm  their  genuineness,  or  to  explain,  if 
possible,  the  delusions  of  the  honest,  and  to  expose  the  tricks  of  deceivers.  .  .  . 

"  In  the  present  case,  I  prefer  to  enter  upon  the  inquiry  with  no  preconceived 
notions  whatever  as  to  what  can  or  cannot  be,  but  with  all  my  senses  alert 
and  ready  to  convey  information  to  the  brain  ;  believing,  as  I  do,  that  we  have 
by  no  means  exhausted  all  human  knowledge  or  fathomed  the  depths  of  all  the 
physical  forces.     .     .     . 

*'  The  modes  of  reasoning  of  scientific  men  appear  to  be  generally  misunder- 
stood by  Spiritualists  with  whom  I  have  conversed  ;  and  the  reluctance  of  the 
trained  scientific  mind  to  investigate  this  subject  is  frequently  ascribed  to 
unworthy  motives.  I  think  it  will  be  of  service  if  I  illustrate  the  modes  of 
thought  current  amongst  those  who  investigate  science,  and  say  what  kind  of 
experimental  proof  science  has  a  right  to  demand  before  admitting  a  new 
department  of  knowledge  into  her  ranks.  We  must  not  mix  up  the  exact  and 
the  inexact.     The  supremacy  of  accuracy  must  be  absolute." 

After  passing  some  very  severe  reflections  on  "  pseudo-scientific 
spiritualists,"  Mr.  Crookes  declares  that:  "  In  investigations  which  so 
completely  baffle  the  ordinary  observer,  the  thorough  scientific  man 
has  a  great  advantage."  The  nature  of  that  advantage  he  indicates 
as  follows: — 

"  The  Spiritualist  tells  of  bodies  weighing  50  or  100  lbs.  being  lifted  up  into 
the  air  without  the  intervention  of  any  known  force  ;  but  the  scientific  chemist 
is  accustomed  to  use  a  balance  which  will  render  sensible  a  weight  so  small 
that  it  would  take  ten  thousand  of  them  to  weigh  one  grain  ;  he  is  therefore 

185  N 

i86  LIFE   AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

justified  in  asking  that  a  power,  professing  to  be  guided  by  intelligence,  which 
will  toss  a  heavy  body  up  to  the  ceiling,  shall  also  cause  his  delicately-poised 
balance  to  move  under  test  conditions. 

"  The  Spiritualist  tells  of  tapping  sounds  which  are  produced  in  different 
parts  of  a  room  when  two  or  more  persons  sit  quietly  round  a  table.  The 
scientific  experimenter  is  entitled  to  ask  that  these  taps  shall  be  produced  on 
the  stretched  membrane  of  his  phonautograph. 

"  The  Spiritualist  tells  of  rooms  and  houses  being  shaken,  even  to  injury, 
by  superhuman  power.  The  man  of  science  merely  asks  for  a  pendulum  to  be 
set  vibrating  when  it  is  in  a  glass  case  and  supported  on  solid  masonry. 

"  The  Spiritualist  tells  of  heavy  articles  of  furniture  moving  from  one  room 
to  another  without  human  agency.  But  the  man  of  science  has  made  instru- 
ments which  will  divide  an  inch  into  a  million  parts  ;  and  he  is  justified  in 
doubting  the  accuracy  of  the  former  observations,  if  the  same  force  is  powerless 
to  move  the  index  of  his  instrument  one  poor  degree." 

I  omit  from  my  quotation  the  last  of  the  tasks  that  Mr.  Crookes,  in 
the  name  of  science,  requested  the  spirits  to  perform — an  important 
exception.  Later  in  this  chapter  I  will  explain  what  the  demand  was, 
and  what  the  answer  he  received. 

It  will  be  by  this  time  plain  to  the  reader,  I  hope,  that  Mr.  Crookes 
did  not  approach  in  anything  like  a  credulous  frame  of  mind  an 
investigation  which  he  states,  in  the  same  preliminary  paper,  to  have 
been  suggested  to  him  ' '  by  eminent  men  exercising  great  influence  on 
the  thought  of  the  country."  His  attitude  towards  Spiritualism  was 
absolutely  neutral  and  impartial — an  attitude  that  science  ought  surely 
to  maintam  in  investigating  any  subject  whatever,  but  that  Faraday 
and  Tyndall  had  failed  to  preserve.  Of  Dr.  Carpenter's  attitude 
towards  Spiritualism  I  say  nothing.  I  think  I  have  already  proved  in 
these  pages  that  he  had  at  least  two  sets  of  opinions — one  for  the 
public,  another  for  himself — but  both  of  them  contradictory  and 
illogical. 

An  often-quoted  passage  from  Lord  Lytton's  Strange  Story  seems 
to  express  exactly  the  temper  in  which  Mr.  Crookes  began  his  inquiry. 
•'I  have  no  belief,"  Lytton  makes  the  hero  of  his  romance  say. 
"  True  science  has  none.  True  science  questions  all  things,  takes 
nothing  upon  credit.  It  knows  but  three  states  of  the  mind — denial, 
conviction,  and  that  vast  interval  between  the  two,  which  is  not  belief, 
but  suspense  of  judgment." 

Mr.  Crookes,  then,  until  his  investigations  were  completed,  had 
suspended  judgment.  Like  everybody  else  who  had  heard  the  subject 
of  Spiritualism  discussed,  he  had  his  impressions;  but  unlike  the 
great  body  of  the  world — especially  of  the  scientific  world — he  was 
able  to  distinguish  those  impressions  from  convictions,  and  to  banish 
them  from  his  mind  in  entering  on  his  task.  What  they  were,  he  has 
plainly  stated  in  the  paper  from  which  I  have  already  quoted :  ' '  Like 
other  men  who  thought  little  of  the  matter  and  saw  little,  I  believed 
that  the  whole  affair  was  a  superstition,  or  at  least  an  unexplained 
trick."  And  that  his  expectation  in  July,  1870,  was  to  be  able  to  refer 
the  phenomena  to  natural  causes,  and  demonstrate  those  causes,  the 
concluding  words  of  the  same  paper  prove: — "  The  increased 
employment  of  scientific  methods.  .  .  .  will  produce  a  race  of 
observers  who  will  drive  the  worthless  residuum  of  spiritualism  hence 
into  the  unknown  limbo  of  magic  and  necromancy." 

ENGLAND  :    SPIRITUALISM    AND     SCIENCE        187 

The  announcement  of  Mr.  Crookes'  investigation,  and  his  statement 
of  its  aim  and  methods,  were  received  by  the  English  press  with  high 
favour.  At  last  tHe  scientific  St.  George  had  stepped  into  the  lists 
who  was  to  slay  the  dragon  of  Spiritualism.  The  press  was  jubilant, 
and  had  notliing  but  compliments  for  Mr.  Crookes.  His  proved 
ability  and  his  high  standing  in  the  scientific  world  were  loudly — but  a 
little  too  hastily — extolled  by  writers  who  were  confident  that  their 
accepted  prophet  would  prophesy  as  they  wished.  One  leading 
journal  expressed  "  profound  satisfaction  that  the  subject  was  about  to 
be  investigated  by  a  man  so  thoroughly  qualified ; ' '  another  was 
"  gratified  to  learn  that  the  matter  was  now  receiving  the  attention  of 
cool  and  clear-headed  men  of  recognised  position  in  science;  "  a  third 
declared  that  "  no  one  could  doubt  Mr.  Crookes'  ability  to  conduct 
the  investigation  with  rigid  philosophical  impartiality;"  and  the 
proclamation  of  a  fourth  to  its  readers  ran  in  these  words:  "  If  men 
like  Mr.  Crookes  grapple  with  the  subject,  taking  nothing  for 
granted  until  it  is  proved,  we  shall  soon  know  how  much  to  believe." 

The  history  of  Balaam  often  repeats  itself;  but  the  world  of  our 
days  is  not  so  clear-sighted  as  the  ass  of  the  prophet,  and  has  much 
to  learn  from  her.  Prolonged  and  rigid  investigation  compelled  Mr. 
Crookes  to  bless  where  he  should  have  cursed  ;  and  his  late  panegyrists 
united  heartily  in  a  chorus  of  invective  when  that  eminently  respectable 
authority,  Dr.  Carpenter,  came  forward  to  deride  and  calumniate  Mr. 
Crookes  and  all  who  had  shared  his  labours. 

For  the  phenomena,  it  need  hardly  be  said,  had  not  been  witnessed 
and  tested  by  Mr.  Crookes  alone.  Often  the  experiments  were  of  such 
a  character  that  at  least  two  observers  were  necessary  to  ensure  the 
scientific  accuracy  which  the  principal  investigator  desiderated.  His 
chemical  assistant  took  part  m  the  researches;  his  brother,  Mr. 
Walter  Crookes,  was  also  present  at  several  seances;  and  from  time  to 
time  Mr.  Crookes  invited  various  of  his  scientific  brethren  to  witness 
his  investigations  and  assist  in  them.  The  two  secretaries  of  the  Royal 
Society  were  asked  by  him  to  meet  Mr.  Home  at  his  house.  Both  of 
them  declined  the  invitation.  It  was  quite  within  their  right  to  do  so; 
but  really,  after  these  and  other  refusals,  the  uncandid  assertion  that 
Mr.  Home  shunned  meeting  scientific  observers  might  with  decency 
have  been  abandoned — at  least  in  England. 

Of  the  various  well  known  men  who  accepted  the  invitation  of  Mr. 
Crookes,  two  names  came  prominently  before  the  public,  those  of  Dr. 
Huggins,  F.R.S.,  the  eminent  physicist  and  astronomer,  and  Mr. 
Serjeant  Cox.  Both  the  distinguished  man  of  science  and  the  shrewd 
lawyer  attested  publicly  the  accuracy  of  a  narrative  contributed  by  Mr. 
Crookes  to  the  Quarterly  Journal  of  Science  for  July,  187 1. 

This  record  dealt  only  with  the  phenomena  witnessed  and  the  tests 
applied  at  one  particular  seance.  It  was  far  from  being  the  most 
remarkable  of  the  series  that  took  place  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Crookes ; 
but  he  was  influenced  by  weighty  reasons  in  selecting  it  for  publication. 
Not  only  had  Dr.  Huggins  and  Serjeant  Cox  been  present,  but  Mr. 
Crookes  had  contrived  for  the  occasion  special  apparatus  to  be 
employed  in  testing^  two  of  the  most  frequent  physical  phenomena, 

i88  LIFE   AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

should  they  occur;  the  alteration  in  the  weight  of  bodies  and  the 
playing  of  an  accordion  when  no  human  hand  was  touching  the  keys. 
In  the  course  of  the  evening  both  phenomena  were  searchingly  and 
satisfactorily  tested. 

In  dealing  with  the  subject  of  Spiritualism,  scientific  critics 
repeatedly  showed  themselves  as  unfair  and  hasty  as  the  rest  of  man- 
kind. They  did  so  on  the  publication  of  the  results  of  this  seance.  Mr. 
Crookes  had  taken  care  to  state  that  numerous  other  seances  and 
experiments  had  preceded  it;  but  his  critics  either  did  not  notice  the 
declaration  or  did  not  choose  to  notice  it.  They  accused  him  of 
having  rashly  arrived  at  a  conclusion  on  the  strength  of  one  or  two 
experiments  hastily  performed.  How  thoroughly  baseless  was  the 
charge  even  a  sketch  of  Mr.  Crookes'  preceding  investigations  will 
show. 

In  July,  1870,  he  published  the  explanation  of  the  nature  and  aims 
of  his  inquiry  from  which  I  have  quoted.  Mr.  Home  returned  from 
Russia  at  the  end  of  March,  1871;  and  immediately  afterwards  the 
series  of  experiments  commenced  that  enabled  Mr.  Crookes  ' '  to 
affirm  conclusively  the  existence  of  a  new  force." 

The  investigation  had  neither  been  avoided  nor  courted  by  Mr. 
Home.  I  repeat  what  I  have  already  said,  that  he  was  indifferent 
whether  Science  concerned  herself  with  his  strange  gift  or  not.  He 
was  perfectly  ready  to  meet  scientific  men  if  they  wished  it;  but  he 
was  by  no  means  disposed  to  admit  that  either  Spiritualism  or  himself 
was  honoured  by  their  attentions,  and  considered  that  he  best  main- 
tained the  dignity  of  his  cause  by  preserving  an  absolutely  passive 
attitude  in  the  matter,  and  neither  seeking  the  notice  of  the  scientific 
world  nor  shunning  it.  He  rightly  felt,  too,  that,  if  the  manifestations 
were  expenmented  upon,  the  experimenters  ought  to  be  men  who 
showed  themselves  capable  of  approaching  the  subject  in  an  unbiassed 
and  impartial  manner.  Faraday  and  Tyndall  had  prefaced  their 
condescending  intimation  that  they  were  willing  to  come  to  a  seance 
by  prejudging  the  question  of  the  phenomena  and  insulting  himself. 
I  have  in  my  possession  a  letter  to  Home  written  in  the  year  1868,  at 
the  time  of  his  controversy  with  Professor  Tyndall,  the  writer  of  which 
(Mr.  Bertolacci)  tells  him  that  Tyndall  had  declared  that  ' '  if  his  own 
senses  were  convinced  of  the  reality  of  Spiritualism,  he  would  deny  his 
own  senses."  Was  Mr.  Home  to  go  out  of  his  way  to  court  "  with 
bated  breath  and  whispering  humbleness "  the  notice  of  such 
philosophy  ? 

Unlike  Professor  Tyndall,  Mr.  Crookes  had  the  courtesy  to  approach 
Mr.  Home  as  one  gentleman  usually  approaches  another — by  obtaining 
an  introduction.  The  acquaintance  who  gave  it  was  Lady  Burton,  wife 
of  the  distinguished  traveller  and  Orientalist.  Home's  absence  at 
the  scene  of  war,  and  afterwards  in  Russia,  delayed  the  proposed  series 
of  experiments  for  some  months,  but  on  his  return  from  St.  Petersburg 
the  sittings  began. 

In  addition  to  this  main  series  of  experiments,  Mr.  Crookes 
investigated  the  pretensions  of  various  persons  claiming  to  be  endowed 
with  a  gift  akin  to  that  of  Home.       With  these  researches  I  have  no 

ENGLAND  :    SPIRITUALISM    AND     SCIENCE        189 

concern,  nor  am  I  called  upon  to  offer  an  opinion  as  to  their  value. 
I  am  writing  only  of  Mr.  Home,  on  whom  the  gift  that  St.  Paul  terms 
"  discerning  of  spirits/'  and  that  Serjeant  Cox  and  Mr.  Crookes 
termed  "  the  development  of  psychic  force,"  was  conferred  in  greater 
measure  than  on  any  other  man  or  woman  of  his  time. 

Home  imposed  no  conditions  whatever  on  the  investigator,  but 
placed  himself  unreservedly  in  the  hands  of  Mr.  Crookes.  The 
seances  that  ensued  were  held  m  a  strong  light.  Here  are  the  words 
of  Mr.  Crookes: — 

"  Of  all  persons  endowed  with  a  powerful  development  of  this  Psychic  Force, 
Mr.  Daniel  Dunglas  Home  is  the  most  remarkable,  and  it  is  mainly  owing  to 
the  many  opportunities  I  have  had  of  carrying  on  my  investigation  in  his 
presence  that  I  am  enabled  to  affirm  so  conclusively  the  existence  of  this 
Force.     .     .     . 

"  It  is  a  well-ascertained  fact  that  when  the  force  is  weak  a  bright  light 
exerts  an  interfering  action  on  some  of  the  phenomena.  The  power  possessed 
by  Mr.  Home  is  sufficiently  strong  to  withstand  this  antagonistic  influence ; 
consequently,  he  always  objects  to  darkness  at  his  seances.  Except  on  two 
occasions,  when,  for  some  particular  experiments  of  my  own,  light  was 
excluded,  everything  which  I  have  witnessed  with  him  has  taken  place  in  the 
light.     .     .  . 

"  There  is  a  wide  difference  between  the  tricks  of  a  professional  conjuror, 
surrounded  by  his  apparatus  and  aided  by  any  number  of  concealed  assistants 
and  confederates,  deceiving  the  senses  by  clever  sleight-of-hand  on  his  own 
platform,  and  the  phqpomena  occurring  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Home,  which 
take  place  in  the  light,  in  a  private  room  that  almost  up  to  the  commencement 
of  the  seance  has  been  occupied  as  a  living  room,  and  surrounded  by  private 
friends  of  my  own,  who  not  only  will  not  countenance  the  slightest  deception, 
but  who  are  watching  narrowly  everything  that  takes  place.  Moreover,  Mr. 
Home  has  frequently  been  searched  before  and  after  the  stances,  and  he  always 
offers  to  allow  it.  During  the  most  remarkable  occurrences,  I  have  occasion- 
ally held  both  his  hands,  and  placed  my  feet  on  his  feet.  On  no  single  occasion 
have  I  proposed  a  modification  of  arrangements  for  the  purpose  of  rendering 
trickery  less  possible  which  he  has  not  at  once  assented  to,  and  frequently  he 
has  himself  drawn  attention  to  tests  which  might  be  tried."  (Quarterly 
Journal  of  Science,   1871   and  1874.) 

What  could  investigator  ask  more  than  to  conduct  bis  inquiry  under 
circumstances  so  favourable  to  exact  research?  Here  were  no 
darkened  cabinets,  rendering  necessary  the  invention  of  a  phosphorus 
lamp  to  bring  the  eyesight  into  play  at  all.  The  room  was  always 
fully  lighted ;  Mr.  Home  imposed  no  conditions,  and  objected  to  no 
tests.  The  seances  were  held  in  Mr.  Crookes'  house,  the  sitters  were 
selected  by  himsself.  "  With  the  exception  of  cases  specially 
mentioned,"  he  writes,  "  the  occurrences  have  taken  place  in  my  own 
house,  in  the  light,  and  with  only  private  friends  present  besides  the 
medium."  ("  Notes  of  an  Enquiry  into  the  Phenomena  called 
Spiritual.")     The  italics  are  Mr.  Crookes'  own. 

Of  the  ability  of  Mr.  Crookes  to  conduct  an  inquiry,  especially 
scientific  in  its  character,  no  fair-minded  man  could  have  a  doubt. 
His  scientific  training  had  commenced  before  he  was  sixteen,  and  at 
tha  time  of  his  seances  with  Mr.  Home  had  continued  during  a  quarter 
of  a  century.  "  My  scientific  education,"  he  declared  in  his  reply  to 
the  spiteful  calumnies  of  Dr.  Carpenter,  "  has  been  one  continuous 
lesson  in  exactness  of  observation."     His  labours  have  extended  over 

/ 

I90  LIFE   AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

a  wide  field  of  science ;  and  their  valuable  nature  has  been  repeatedly 
recognised  by  various  scientific  bodies,  including  the  Royal  Society, 
of  which  he  was  elected  a  Fellow  so  long  ago  as  1863.  Recent 
honours  conferred  upon  liim  by  that  body  will  be  fresh  in  the  minds 
of  English  scientific  readers.  The  reception  accorded  by  the  Royal 
Society  to  the  papers  in  which  he  detailed  some  of  his  experiments 
with  Mr.  Home  only  demonstrated  that  scientific  men  in  general  are 
creatures  of  their  age  and  share  its  prejudices. 

Not  till  June  15th,  187 1,  did  Mr.  Crookes  submit  to  the  Royal 
Society  a  description  of  certain  of  the  phenomena  he  had  witnessed 
in  Mr.  Home's  presence,  and  of  the  scientific  tests  he  had  applied  to 
them.  By  that  time  a  great  number  of  seances  had  been  held.  Mr. 
Crookes  had  keenly  scrutinised  the  phenomena  witnessed,  and  had 
called  in  the  help  of  other  scientific  men  to  aid  him  in  scrutinising 
them.  Unsatisfied  with  tlie  testimony  of  their  senses  and  his  own,  he 
had  proceeded  to  call  in  better  witnesses  still,  witnesses  that  could  not 
exaggerate  or  be  mistaken.  Various  of  the  phenomena  he  had 
witnessed  seemd  to  negative  that  cardinal  article  of  scientific  faith, 
the  invariable  action  of  the  force  of  gravitation.  Mr.  Crookes  accord- 
ingly proceeded  to  construct  instruments  capable  of  registering  this 
fact,  if  a  fact  it  were.  Having  perfected  his  apparatus,  he  employed  it 
again  and  again;  and  on  every  occasion  it  recorded  the  fact  that 
appeared  so  incredible  to  him.  How  incredible  it  had  appeared,  let 
has  own  words  testify: — 

"  The  phenomena  I  am  prepared  to  attest  are  so  extraordinary,  and  so 
directly  oppose  the  most  firmly-rooted  articles  of  scientific  belief — amongst 
others,  the  ubiquity  and  invariable  action  of  the  force  of  gravitation — that, 
even  now,  on  recalling  the  details  of  what  I  witnessed,  there  is  an  antagonism 
in  my  mind  between  reason,  which  pronounces  it  to  be  scientifically  impossible, 
and  the  consciousness  that  my  senses,  both  of  touch  and  sight — and  these 
corroborated,  as  they  were,  by  the  senses  of  all  who  were  present — are  not 
lying  witnesses  when  they  testify  against  my  preconceptions." 

Lying  witnesses,  however,  some  of  the  scientific  brethren  of  Mr. 
Crookes  insisted  them  to  have  been.  Professor  Balfour  Stewart,  for 
instance,  hazarded  the  theory  that  Mr.  Home  was  simply  a  man 
possessed  of  great  "  electro-biological  power,"  by  means  of  which  he 
influenced  those  present  at  his  seances — in  plain  words  that  he  was  a 
mesmeriser  who  could  mesmerise  at  once  a  whole  room-full  of 
j)eople.  In  reply,  Mr.  Crookes  pointed  to  the  apparatus  that  he  had 
invented  and  the  results  that  it  had  recorded.  "  However  susceptible 
the  persons  in  the  room  might  have  been  to  that  assumed  influence," 
he  wrote,  "  it  will  hardly  be  contended  that  Mr.  Home  biologised  the 
recording  instruments." 

Probably  Professor  Stewart,  if  reduced  to  select  between  this 
hypothesis  and  a  confession  that  the  evidence  adduced  by  Mr. 
Crookes  could  not  be  overset,  would  have  boldly  pronounced  for  the 
former,  and  have  declared  that  he  saw  no  reason  why  instruments 
might  not  be  susceptible  to  mesmeric  influences  as  well  as  human 
beings. 

It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  Mr.  Crookes  has  never  published  an 
exhaustive  account  of   his  experiences  with  Mr.   Home.       He  had 

ENGLAND  :    SPIRITUALISM    AND     SCIENCE        191 

intended,  he  wrote  in  January,  1874,  to  embody  the  results  of  his 
lengthy  investigations  of  Spiritualism,  or,  as  he  preferred  to  term  it, 
of  "  Psychic  Force,"  in  the  form  of  one  or  two  articles 
supplementary  to  those  he  had  already  published  in  the 
Quarterly  Journal  of  Science.  "  However,  on  going  over  my  notes," 
he  adds,  "  I  find  such  a  wealth  of  facts,  such  a  superabundance  of 
evidence,  so  overwhelming  a  mass  of  testimony,  all  of  which  will  have 
to  be  marshalled  in  order,  that  I  could  fill  several  numbers  of  the 
Quarterly.  I  must  therefore  be  content  on  this  occasion  with  an 
outline  only  of  my  labours." 

It  may  be  asked  what  origin  Mr.  Crookes  attributed  to  the 
phenomena  of  which  he  so  emphatically  attested  the  existence.  He 
hesitated  to  propound  a  theory — at  least  to  propound  it  publicly.  "  I 
have  desired,"  he  wrote  in  December,  1871,  "to  examine  the 
phenomena  from  a  point  of  view  as  strictly  physical  as  their  nature 
will  permit.  I  \vish  to  ascertain  the  laws  governing  the  appearance  of 
very  remarkable  phenomena.  .  .  .  That  a  hitherto  unrecognised 
form  of  Force — whether  it  be  called  psychic  force  or  x  force  is  of  little 
consequence — is  involved  in  this  occurrence,  is  not  with  me  a  matter 
of  opinion,  but  of  absolute  knowledge ;  but  the  nature  of  that  force, 
or  the  cause  which  immediately  excites  its  activity,  forms  a  subject 
on  which  I  do  not  at  present  feel  competent  to  offer  an  opinion." 

And  again,  in  January,  1874:  "It  is  obvious  that  a  'medium' 
possesses  a  something  which  is  not  possessed  by  an  ordinary  being. 
Give  this  something  a  name.  Call  it  '  .x  '  if  you  like.  Mr.  Serjeant 
Cox  calls  it  Psychic  Force." 

This  last  passage  occurs  in  a  paper  entitled  "  Notes  of  an  Enquiry 
into  the  Phenomena  called  Spiritual."  By  far  the  greater  portion  of 
the  notes  refer  to  phenomena  observed  at  seances  with  Home.  "  1 
speak  chiefly  of  Mr.  Home,  "writes  Mr.  Crookes,  "  as  he  is  so  much 
more  powerful  than  most  of  the  other,  mediums  I  have  experimented 
with."  A  few  extracts  from  these  interesting  and  valuable  notes  will 
convey  some  idea  of  the  number  and  variety  of  the  phenomena 
witnessed  and  tested  by  Mr.  Crookes  in  Mr.  Home's  presence  during 
an  inquiry  extending  over  several  months  of  187 1. 

Mr.  Crookes  classifies  the  phenomena  in  question  under  thirteen 
different  headings.  The  first  treats  of  the  movements  of  tables  and 
other  heavy  bodies  when  the  hands  of  the  sitters  were  laid  on  them. 
This  manifestation  he  dismisses  with  brief  remark. 

"  It  varies  in  degree,"  he  writes,  "  from  a  quivering  or  vibration  of  the 
room  and  its  contents,  to  the  actual  rising  into  the  air  of  a  heavy  body  when 
the  hand  is  placed  on  it.  The  retort  is  obvious  that  if  people  are  touching  a 
thing  when  it  moves,  they  push  it,  or  pull  it,  or  lift  it ;  I  have  proved  experi- 
mentally that  this  is  not  the  case  in  numerous  instances,  but  as  a  matter  of 
evidence  I  attach  little  importance  to  this  class  of  phenomena  by  itself,  and 
only  mention  them  as  a  preliminary  to  other  movements  of  the  same  kind, 
but  without  contact." 

More  interesting  to  Mr.  Crookes  was  the  remarkable  phenomenon 
that  thousands  before  him  had  noted  at  seances  with  Mr.  Home. 

"  These  movements,"  he  continues,  "  and,  indeed,  I  may  say  the  same  of 
every  kind  of  phenomenon,  are  generally  preceded  by  a  peculiar  cold  air, 
sometimes  amounting  to  a  decided  wind.     I  have  had  sheets  of  paper  blown 

192  LIFE   AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

about  by  it,  and  a  thermometer  lowered  several  degrees.  On  some  occasions 
I  have  not  detected  any  actual  movements  of  the  air,  but  the  cold  has  been  so 
intense  that  I  could  only  compare  it  to  that  felt  when  the  hand  has  been  within 
a  few  inches  of  frozen  mercury." 

Passing  to  that  means  of  communication  with  the  sitters  ordinarily 
employed  by  the  intelligences  at  work,  the  manifestation  popularly 
termed  "tappings,"  and  by  Mr.  Crookes  "percussive  and  other 
allied  sounds,"  he  says:  "The  popular  name  of  'raps'  conveys  a 
very  erroneous  impression  of  this  class  of  phenomena."  I  have 
quoted  in  an  early  chapter  his  description  of  their  varied  nature. 
"  With  a  full  knowledge,"  he  adds,  "  of  the  numerous  theories  which 
have  been  started,  chiefly  in  America,  to  explain  these  sounds,  I  have 
tested  them  in  every  way  that  I  could  devise,  until  there  has  been  no 
escape  from  the  conviction  that  they  were  true  objective  occurrences 
not  produced  by  trickery  or  mechanical  means." 

Concerning  the  messages  conveyed  by  means  of  these  "  percussive 
sounds,"  Mr.  Crookes  says  very  little.  A  discussion  of  this  most 
important  subject  of  all  would  have  led  him  beyond  the  scope  of  has 
inquiry,  which  he  wished  to  limit  as  much  as  possible  to  phenomena 
that  he  could  make  the  subject  of  scientific  experiment.  In  other 
words,  he  devoted  his  attention  to  the  physical  phenomena  of 
Spiritualism,  passing  over  the  psychicaJ  with  the  remark: — 

"  At  a  very  early  stage  of  the  inquiry,  it  was  seen  that  the  power  producing 
the  phenomena  was  not  merely  a  blind  force,  but  was  associated  with  or 
governed  by  intelligence  :  thus  the  sounds  to  which  I  have  just  alluded  will  be 
repeated  a  definite  number  of  times,  they  will  come  loud  or  faint,  and  in 
different  places  at  request ;  and,  by  a  pre-arranged  code  of  signals,  questions 
are  answered,  and  messages  given  with  more  or  less  accuracy.  .  .  .  The 
intelligence  is  sometimes  of  such  a  character  as  to  lead  to  the  belief  that  it 
does  not  emanate  from  any  person  present." 

Towards  the  close  of  his  article,  Mr.  Crookes  reverts  to  the  question 
of  the  intelligence  directing  the  phenomena,  and  narrates  the 
following  occurrence,  among  others,  in  support  of  his  testimony  that 
he  had  "observed  some  circumstances  which  seem  conclusively  to 
point  to  the  agency  of  an  outside  intelligence,  not  belonging  to  any 
human  being  in  the  room  ' ' : — 

"  During  a  stance  with  Mr.  Home,  a  small  lath,  which  I  have  before 
mentioned,  moved  across  the  table  to  me,  in  the  light,  and  delivered  a  message 
to  me  by  tapping  my  hand  ;  I  repeating  the  alphabet,  and  the  lath  tapping  me 
at  the  right  letters.  The  other  end  of  the  lath  was  resting  on  the  table,  some 
distance  from  Mr.   Home's  hands. 

"  The  taps  were  so  sharp  and  clear,  and  the  lath  was  evidently  so  well 
under  control  of  the  invisible  power  which  was  governing  its  movements,  that 
I  said,  '  Can  the  intelligence  governing  the  motion  of  this  lath  change  the 
character  of  the  movements,  and  give  me  a  telegraphic  message  through  the 
Morse  alphabet  by  taps  on  my  hand?'  (I  have  every  reason  to  believe  that  the 
Morse  code  was  quite  unknown  to  any  other  person  present,  and  it  was  only 
imperfectly  known  to  me.)  Immediately  I  said  this,  the  character  of  the  taps 
changed,  and  the  message  was  continued  in  the  way  I  had  requested.  The 
letters  were  given  too  rapidly  for  me  to  do  more  than  catch  a  word  here  and 
there,  and  consequently  I  lost  the  message  ;  but  I  heard  sufficient  to  convince 
me  that  there  was  a  good  Morse  operator  at  the  other  end  of  the  line,  wherever 
that  might  be." 

ENGLAND  :    SPIRITUALISM    AND     SCIENCE        193 

Under  his  third  h^eading,  Mr.  Crookes  deals  with  the  alteration  of 
the  weight  of  bodies.  For  particulars  he  refers  to  former  papers 
published  by  him,  of  which  I  shall  presently  speak,  including  the 
experiments  witnessed  by  Dr.  Huggins  and  Serjeant  Cox. 

The  fourth  and  fifth  sections  treat  of  a  phenomenon  that  has  been 
witnessed  on  thousands  of  occasions  at  seances  with  Home,  and  that 
always  startled  those  who  observed  it  for  the  first  time — the  movement 
of  articles  of  furniture  when  no  person  was  near  them.  Sometimes 
these  bodies  glided  across  the  floor  towards  the  sitters,  at  other  times 
they  rose  clear  of  the  ground ;  the  one  and  the  other  manifestation, 
let  it  be  remembered,  taking  place  in  full  light. 

"  A  chair,"  writes  Mr.  Crookes,  "  was  seen  by  all  present  to  move  slowly 
up  to  the  table  from  a  far  corner,  when  all  were  watching  it ;  on  another 
occasion  an  arm-chair  moved  to  where  we  were  sitting,  and  then  moved  slowly 
back  again  (a  distance  of  about  three  feet)  at  my  request.  On  three  successive 
evenings  a  small  table  moved  slowly  acro.^s  the  room,  under  conditions  which 
I  had  specially  pre-arranged,  so  as  to  answer  any  objection  which  might  be 
raised  to  the  evidence.  I  have  had  several  repetitions  of  the  experiment  con- 
sidered by  the  Committee  of  the  Dialectical  Society  to  be  conclusive,  viz.,  the 
movement  of  a  heavy  table  in  full  light,  the  chairs  turned  with  their  backs  to 
the  table  about  a  foot  off,  and  each  person  kneeling  on  his  chair,  with  hands 
resting  over  the  backs  of  the  chairs,  but  not  touching  the  table. 

"  On  five  separate  occasions  a  heavy  dining-table  rose  between  a  few  inches 
and  ij  feet  off  the  floor,  under  special  circumstances,  which  rendered  trickery 
impossible.  .  .  .  On  another  occasion  the  table  rose  from  the  floor,  not 
only  when  no  person  was  touching  it,  but  under  conditions  which  I  had  pre- 
arranged so  as  to  assure  unquestionable  proof  of  the  fact. 

"  A  remark,"  adds  Mr.  Crookes,  "  is  generally  made  when  occurrences  of 
this  kind  are  mentioned.  Why  is  it  only  tables  and  chairs  which  do  these 
things?  Why  is  this  property  peculiar  to  furniture?  I  might  reply  that  I 
only  observe  and  record  facts,  and  do  not  profess  to  enter  into  the  Why  and 
Wherefore  ;  but,  indeed,  it  will  be  obvious  that  if  a  heavy  inanimate  body  in 
an  ordinary  dining-room  has  to  rise  off  the  floor  it  cannot  very  well  be  any- 
thing else  but  a  table  or  a  chair.  That  this  propensity  is  not  specially  attached 
to  furniture,  I  have  had  abundant  evidence ;  but,  like  other  experimental 
demonstrators,  the  intelligence  or  power,  whatever  it  may  be,  which  produces 
these  phenomena  can  only  work  with  the  materials  which  are  available." 

On  three  separate  occasions  Mr.  Crookes  saw  Mr.  Home  in  full  light 
rise  clear  of  the  floor  of  the  room  and  float  in  the  air.  I  have  already 
quoted  his  description  of  these  levitations. 

Besides  the  movements  of  heavy  bodies,  such  as  tables  and  chair-,  at 
a  distance  from  the  sitters,  Mr.  Crookes  witnessed  similar  phenomena 
in  connection  with  smaller  articles,  the  room  being  always  fully  lighted. 
"It  is  idle,"  he  wrote,  "  to  attribute  these  results  to  trickery,  for  I 
would  again  remind  my  readers  that  what  I  relate  has  not  been 
accomplished  at  the  house  of  a  medium,  but  in  my  own  house,  where 
preparations  have  been  quite  impossible.  A  medium,  walking  into  my 
dining-room,  cannot,  while  seated  in  one  part  of  the  room  with  a 
number  of  persons  keenly  watching  him,  by  trickery  make  an  accordion 
play  in  my  own  hand  when  1  hold  it  keys  downwards,  or  cause  the 
same  accordion  to  float  about  the  room  playing  all  the  time.  He 
cannot  introduce  machinery  which  will  wave  window-curtains  or  pull 
up  Venetian  blinds  eight  feet  off,  tie  a  knot  in  a  handkerchief  and 

194  LIFE   AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

place  it  in  a  far  corner  of  the  room,  sound  notes  on  a  distant  piano 

cause  a  fan  to  move  about  and  fan  the  company,  or  set  in 

motion  a  pendulum  when  enclosed  in  a  glass  case  firmly  cemented  to 
the  wall." 

The  last  of  these  phenomena,  it  will  be  remembered,  was  among 
the  demands  that  Mr.  Crookes,  in  the  name  of  science,  had  put  forth 
in  his  preliminary  paper.  The  remaining  tests  there  indicated  by  him 
as  satisfactory  were  all  furnished  to  him  at  one  time  or  another  during 
his  seances  with  Home,  with  the  exception  of  the  last.  I  designedly 
omitted  that  concluding  demand  in  quoting  the  others:  it  was  as 
follows : — 

"  The  Spiritualist,"  wrote  Mr.  Crookes  in  July,  1870,  "  tells  of  flowers  with 
the  fresh  dew  on  them,  of  fruit,  and  living  objects  being  carried  through  closed 
windows,  and  even  solid  brick-walls.  The  scientific  investigator  naturally 
asks  that  an  additional  weight  (if  it  be  only  the  1,000th  part  of  a  grain)  be 
deposited  on  one  pan  of  his  balance  when  the  case  is  locked.  And  the  chemist 
asks  for  the  i,oooth  part  of  a  grain  of  arsenic  to  be  carried  through  the  sides 
of  a  glass  tube  in  which  pure   water  is  hermetically  sealed." 

No  "  flowers  with  the  dew  on  them,"  &c.,  had  ever  been  brought 
through  closed  windows  or  solid  brick  walls  at  seances  with  Home. 
Such  phenomena  generally  occur  only  in  absolute  darkness.  Tha 
answer  made  by  the  spirits  to  the  last  of  Mr.  Crookes'  demands  was 
that  the  passage  of  matter  through  matter  was  impossible ;  and  some 
manifestations  having  occurred  at  his  house  that  seemed  to  contravert 
this  statement,  it  was  affirmed  in  the  following  manner  : — 

"  The  circumstance  I  will  relate,"  says  Mr.  Crookes,  "  occurred  in  the  light 
one  Sunday  evening,  only  Mr.  Home  and  members  of  my  family  being  present. 
My  wife  and  I  had  been  spending  the  day  in  the  country,  and  had  brought 
home  a  few  flowers  we  had  gathered.  On  reaching  home  we  gave  them  to  a 
servant  to  put  in  water.  Mr.  Home  came  soon  after ;  and  we  at  once  pro- 
ceeded to  the  dining-room.  As  we  were  sitting  down,  a  servant  brought  in  the 
flowers,  which  she  had  arranged  in  a  vase.  I  placed  it  in  the  centre  of  the 
dining-table,  which  was  without  a  cloth.  This  was  the  first  time  Mr.  Home 
had  seen  these  flowers. 

"  After  several  phenomena  had  occurred,  the  conversation  turned  upon  some 
circumstances  which  seemed  only  explicable  on  the  assumption  that  matter 
had  actually  passed  through  a  solid  substance.  Thereupon  a  message  was 
given  by  means  of  the  alphabet :  '  It  is  impossible  for  matter  to  pass  through 
matter,  but  we  will  show  you  what  we  can  do.'  We  waited  in  silence. 
Presently  a  luminous  appearance  was  seen  hovering  over  the  bouquet  of 
flowers,  and  then  in  full  view  of  all  present,  a  piece  of  china-grass,  15  inches 
long,  which  formed  the  centre  ornament  of  the  bouquet,  slowly  rose  from  the 
other  flowers,  and  then  descended  to  the  table  in  front  of  the  vase  between  it 
and  Mr.  Home.  It  did  not  stop  on  reaching  the  table,  but  went  straight 
through  it,  and  we  all  watched  it  till  it  had  entirely  passed  through.  Imme- 
diately on  the  disappearance  of  the  grass,  my  wife,  who  was  sitting  near  Mr. 
Home,  saw  a  hand  come  up  from  under  the  table  between  them,  holding  the 
piece  of  grass.  It  tapped  her  on  the  shoulder  two  or  three  times  with  a  sound 
audible  to  all,  then  laid  the  grass  on  the  floor,  and  disappeared.  Only  two 
persons  saw  the  hand,  but  all  in  the  room  saw  the  piece  of  grass  moving 
about  as  I  have  described.  During  the  time  this  was  taking  place,  Mr. 
Home's  hands  were  seen  by  all  to  be  quietly  resting  on  the  table  in  front  of 
him.  The  place  where  the  grass  disappeared  was  18  inches  from  his  hands. 
The  table  was  a  telescope  dining-table,  opening  with  a  screw  ;  there  was  no 

ENGLAND  :    SPIRITUALISM    AND     SCIENCE        195 

leaf  in  it,  and  the  junction  of  the  two  sides  formed  a  narrow  crack  down  the 
middle.  The  grass  had  passed  through  this  chink,  which  I  measured,  and 
found  to  be  barely  Jth  inch  wide.  The  stem  of  the  piece  of  grass  was  far  too 
thick  to  enable  me  to  force  it  through  this  crack  without  injuring  it,  yet  we 
fiad  all  seen  it  pass  through  quietly  and  smoothly  ;  and,  on  examination,  it  did 
not  show  the  slightest  signs  of  pressure  or  abrasion." 

With  such  phenomena  and  others  still  more  marvellous  constantly 
occurring  under  the  circumstances  that  he,  Mr.  Home,  had  arranged,  it 
was  impossible  for  Mr.  Crookes  to  resist  conviction.  And  I  cannot 
too  often  repeat,  for  the  benefit  of  the  reader  who  is  accustomed  to 
jissociate  Spiritualism  with  the  idea  of  darkness,  that  Mr.  Crookes 
carried  on  his  investigations  with  Mr.  Home  in  strong  light — ^trj'ing 
now  one  kind  of  light,  now  another,  with  a  view  to  observing  the  effect 
of  each.  ''  I  have  had  many  opportunities,"  he  wrote,  "  of  testing 
the  action  of  light  of  different  sources  and  colours,  such  as  sunlight, 
diffused  daylight,  moonlight,  gas,  lamp,  and  candle  Ught,  electric  light 
from  a  vacuum  tube,  homogeneous  yellow  light,  &c.  The  interfering 
rays  appear  to  be  those  at  the  extreme  end  of  the  spectrum." 

In  the  narrative  just  quoted,  Mr.  Crookes  speaks  of  a  luminous 
appearance  that  was  seen  by  all  present  to  hover  over  the  vase  of 
flowers,  and  of  a  hand  that  subsequently  became  visible  of  Mrs. 
Crookes  and  another  of  the  sitters.  In  various  portions  of  this  work 
I  have  quoted  testimony  showing  that  these  apparitions  were  seldom 
visible  to  all  the  persons  present  at  a  seance.  Lord  Dunraven 
repeatedly  records  this  fact,  so  does  Mr.  Crookes.  "  The  hands  and 
fingers,"  he  wrote,  "  do  not  always  appear  to  me  to  be  solid  and  life- 
like. Sometimes,  indeed,  they  present  more  the  appearance  of  a 
nebulous  cloud  partly  condensed  into  the  form  of  a  hand.  This  is  not 
equally  visible  to  all  present.  For  instance,  a  flower  or  other  small 
object  is  seen  to  move ;  one  person  present  will  see  a  luminous  cloud 
hovering  over  it,  another  will  detect  a  nebulous  looking  hand,  whilst 
others  will  see  nothing  but  the  moving  flower.  I  have  more  than 
once  seen,  first  an  object  move,  then  a  luminous  cloud  appear  to  form 
about  it,  and  lastly,  the  cloud  condense  into  shape  and  become  a 
perfectly  formed  hand." 

In  view  of  these  facts,  attested  by  Mr.  Crookes,  Lord  Dunraven,  and 
many  other  observers,  what  becomes  of  the  silly  fable  of  mechanical 
contrivances?  Will  any  reasoning  being  maintain  that  this  theory  is 
tenable  in  face  of  such  evidence;  and  that,  when  Mr.  Crookes  and  his 
friends  were  observing  the  phenomena  in  full  light,  it  would  have 
been  possible  for  one  to  mistake  a  wax  cast,  glove  at  the  end  of  a  mre, 
or  other  contrivance  for  a  hand ;  for  another  to  fail  to  see  anything, 
and  for  a  third  to  behold  the  contrivance  as  a  luminous  cloud  con- 
densing gradually  into  a  perfectly  formed  hand  7 

Only  when  fully  formed,  says  Mr.  Crookes,  did  the  spirit-hand 
become  visible  to  all  present.  "It  is  not  always  a  mere  form,"  he 
writes,  "but  sometimes  appears  perfectly  life  like  and  graceful,  the 
fingers  moving  and  the  flesh  apparently  as  human  as  that  of  any  in  the 
room.  At  the  wrist,  or  arm,  it  becomes  hazy,  and  fades  off  into  a 
luminous  cloud." 

tg6  LIFE   AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

Here  is  his  further  testimony  to  these  appearances : 

"  In  the  light  I  have  seen  a  luminous  cloud  hover  over  a  heliotrope  on  a  side 
table,  break  a  sprig  off,  and  carry  the  sprig  to  a  lady  ;  and  on  some  occasions 
I  have  seen  a  similar  luminous  cloud  visibly  condense  to  the  form  of  a  hand 
and  carry  small  objects  about.     .     .     . 

"  A  beautifully-formed  small  hand  rose  up  from  an  opening  in  a  dining-table 
and  gave  me  a  flower  ;  it  appeared  and  then  disappeared  three  times  at  inter- 
vals, affording  me  ample  opportunity  of  satisfying  myself  that  it  was  as  real 
in  appearance  as  my  own.  This  occurred  in  the  light  in  my  own  room,  whilst 
I  was  holding  the  medium's  hands  and  feet. 

"  At  another  time  a  finger  and  thumb  were  seen  to  pick  the  petals  from  a 
flower  in  Mr.  Home's  button-hole,  and  lay  them  in  front  of  several  persons 
who  were  sitting  near  him. 

"  A  hand  has  repeatedly  been  seen  by  myself  and  others  playing  the  keys  of 
an  accordion,  both  of  the  medium's  hands  being  visible  at  the  same  time,  and 
sometimes  being  held  by  those  near  him.     .     .     . 

"  To  the  touch,  the  hand  sometimes  appears  icy-cold  and  dead,  at  other 
times  warm  and  life-like,  grasping  my  own  with  the  firm  pressure  of  an  old 
friend." 

Did  Mr.  Crookes,  it  will  be  asked,  resort  to  no  decisive  means  to 
assure  himself  of  the  unearthly  nature  of  these  apparitions  ?     Yes. 

"  I  have  retained  one  of  these  hands  in  my  own,"  he  wrote, 
"  firmly  resolved  not  to  let  it  escape.  There  was  no  struggle  or  effort 
made  to  get  loose,  but  it  gradually  seemed  to  resolve  itself  into  vapour, 
and  faded  in  that  manner  from  my  grasp." 

At  the  Tuileries  in  1857  a  spirit-hand,  as  I  have  already  related, 
lifted  a  pencil  that  was  lying  on  the  table,  and,  in  presence  of  the 
Emperor  and  Empress,  wrote  on  a  sheet  of  paper  the  single  word 
^'Napoleon."  Mr.  Crookes,  during  a  seance  in  1871,  expressed  the 
desire  to  witness  a  similar  phenomenon.  The  result  was  the 
manifestation  thus  described  by  him : — 

"  *  A  good  failure,'  "  he  writes,  "  '  often  teaches  more  than  the  most  suc- 
cessful experiment.'  It  took  place  in  the  light,  in  my  own  room,  with  only  a 
few  private  friends  and  Mr.  Home  present.  Several  circumstances,  to  which  I 
need  not  further  allude,  had  shown  that  the  power  that  evening  was  strong. 
I  therefore  expressed  a  wish  to  witness  the  actual  production  of  a  written 
message  such  as  I  had  heard  described  a  short  time  before  by  a  friend. 
Immediately  an  alphabetic  communication  was  made  as  follows  : — '  We  will 
try.'  A  pencil  and  some  sheets  of  paper  had  been  lying  on  the  centre  of  the 
table ;  presently  the  pencil  rose  up  on  its  point,  and,  after  advancing  by  hesitat- 
ing jerks  to  the  paper,  fell  down.  It  then  rose,  and  again  fell.  A  third  time 
it  tried,  but  .with  no  better  result.  After  three  unsuccessful  attempts,  a  small 
wooden  lath  which  was  lying  near  upon  the  table  slid  towards  the  pencil,  and 
rose  a  few  inches  from  the  table  ;  the  pencil  rose  again,  and  propping  itself 
against  the  lath,  the  two  together  made  an  effort  to  mark  the  paper.  It  fell, 
and  then  a  joint  effort  was  again  made.  After  a  third  trial  the  lath  gave  it 
up  and  moved  back  to  its  place,  the  pencil  lay  as  it  fell  across  the  paper,  and 
an  alphabetic  message  told  us — '  We  have  tried  to  do  as  you  asked,  but  our 
power  is  exhausted.'  " 

The  appearance  of  the  full  human  figure  was  as  rare  as  apparitions 
of  hands  were  frequent.  The  Why  is  easy  to  indicate.  By  whatever 
means  spirits  produced  these  impressions  on  the  senses  of  sight  and 
touch,  it  is  obvious  that  to  make  a  hand  visible  would  be  a  work  of  less 
difficulty  to  the  intelligences  operating  than  to  render  manifest  the  full 
form.         When  the  latter  did  appear,  it  was  under  conditions  that 

ENGLAND  :    SPIRITUALISM    AND     SCIENCE        197 

rendered  the  thought  of  trickery  impossible.  There  was  no  darkened 
recess  with  a  "  medium  "  shut  inside  to  operate  the  production  of  a 
"materialised  spirit  "  at  his  leisure.  There  among  the  observers  sai 
Home ;  and  there,  distinct  and  separate  from  him,  stood  the  phantom. 
Mr.  Crookes'  testimony  concerning  the  phantom  forms  beheld  by 
him  is  as  follows : — 

"  These  are  the  rarest  of  the  phenomena  I  have  witnessed.  The  conditions 
requisite  for  their  appearance  appear  to  be  so  delicate,  and  such  trifles  inter- 
fere with  their  production,  that  only  on  very  few  occasions  have  I  witnessed 
them   under    satisfactory   test  conditions.     I    will  mention   two  of    these  cases. 

"  In  the  dusk  of  the  evening,  during  a  seance  with  Mr.  Home  at  my  house, 
the  curtains  of  a  window  about  eight  feet  from  Mr.  Home  were  seen'  to  move. 
A  dark,  shadowy,  semi-transparent  form,  like  that  of  a  man,  was  then  seen 
by  all  present  standing  near  the  window,  waving  the  curtain  with  his  hand. 
As  we  looked,  the  form  faded  away  and  the  curtains  ceased  to  move. 

"  The  following  is  a  still  more  striking  instance.  A  phantom  form  came 
from  the  corner  of  the  room,  took  an  accordion  in  its  hand,  and  then  glided 
about  the  room  playing  the  instrument.  The  form  was  visible  to  all  present 
for  many  minutes,  Mr.  Home  also  being  seen  at  the  same  time.  Coming 
rather  close  to  a  lady  who  was  sitting  apart  from  the  rest  of  the  company, 
she  gave   a  slight  cry,   upon   which   it  vanished." 

I  have  now  summarised  a  few — and  only  a  few — of  the  experiences 
of  Mr.  Crookes,  as  related  by  himself.  In  view  of  them,  it  was  not 
surprising  that  he  should  write  to  Mr.  Home  on  April  12th,  187 1 : — 

* '  What  a  wonderful  seance  it  was  last  night !  The  more  I  think  of 
it,  the  more  impressed  I  am  with  its  extraordinary  character.  Pray  do 
not  hesitate  to  mention  me  as  one  of  the  firmest  believers  in  you.  Half 
a  dozen  such  seances  as  that,  with  a  few  picked  scientific  men  (I  have 
the  list  of  eligibles  already  drawn  out),  and  the  scientific  recognition  of 
these  truths  would  be  as  undoubted  as  are  the  facts  of  electricity." 

The  "  eligibles,"  with  hardly  an  exception,  declined  the  invitation 
of  Mr.  Crookes  to  co-operate  in  his  researches. 

"  I  confess,"  he  told  the  readers  of  the  Quarterly  Journal  of  Science,  in 
July,  1871,  "  I  am  surprised  and  pained  at  the  timidity  or  apathy  shown  by 
scientific  men  in  reference  to  this  subject.  Some  Httle  time  ago,  when  an 
opportunity  for  examination  was  first  presented  to  me,  I  invited  the  co-opera- 
tion of  seme  scientific  friends  in  a  systematic  investigation  ;  but  I  soon  found 
that  to  obtain  a  scientific  committee  for  the  investigation  of  this  class  of  facts 
was  out  of  the  question,  and  that  I  must  be  content  to  rely  on  my  own- 
endeavours,  aided  by  the  co-operation  from  time  to  time  of  a  few  scientific 
and  learned  friends  who  were  willing  to  join  in  the  inquiry.  I  still  feel  that 
it  would  be  better  were  such  a  committee  of  known  men  to  be  formed,  who 
would  meet  Mr.  Home  in  a  fair  and  unbiassed  manner,  and  I  would  gladly 
assist  in  its  formation;  but  the  difficulties  in  the  way  are  great." 

They  proved  Insuperable,  but  they  were  raised  by  Science,  not  by 
Mr.  Home.  In  default  of  a  regular  committee,  Mr.  Crookes  called 
to  nis  aid  the  scientific  and  learned  friends  to  whom  he  refers.  Only 
the  names  of  Dr.  Huggins  and  Mr.  Serjeant  Cox  came  before  the 
public,  and  these  in  connection  with  only  a  single  seance  of  several  at 
which  these  two  well-known  men  had  been  present.  That  seance  was, 
as  I  have  said,  selected  for  publication  because  of  the  searching  tests 
that  had  been  applied  to  the  phencmiena  observed. 

198  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

"  In  the  afternoon,"  wrote  Mr.  Crookes,  "  I  called  for  Mr.  Home 
at  his  apartments,  and  when  there  he  suggested  that,  as  he  had  to 
change  his  dress,  perhaps  I  should  not  object  to  continue  our 
conversation  in  his  bedroom.  I  am  therefore  enabled  to  state 
positively  that  no  machinery,  apparatus,  or  contrivance  of  any  sort  was 
secreted  about  his  person." 

The  two  then  proceeded  to  the  house  of  Mr.  Crookes.  The 
investigators  who  were  present  that  evening  consisted  of  Dr.  Huggins, 
F.R.S.,  Mr.  Serjeant  Cox,  Mr.  William  Crookes,  F.R.S.,  his  brother 
Mr.  Walter  Crookes,  and  his  chemical  assistant. 

To  test  the  playing  of  the  accordion,  should  that  phenomenon 
occur,  Mr.  Crookes  had  prepared  a  cage  consisting  of  a  drum-shaped 
wooden  frame,  with  insulated  copper  wire  wound  round  it.  The  strands 
of  wire  were  then  firmly  netted  together  with  string,  "  so  as  to  form," 
says  Mr.  Crookes,  "  meshes  rather  less  than  two  inches  long  by  one 
inch  high.  The  height  of  this  cage  was  such  that  it  would  just  slip 
under  my  dining  table,  but  be  too  close  to  the  top  to  allow  of  the  hand 
being  introduced  into  the  interior,  or  to  admit  of  a  foot  being  pushed 
underneath  it.  In  another  room  were  two  Grove's  cells,  wires  being 
led  from  them  into  the  dining-room  for  connection,  if  desirable,  with 
the  wire  surrounding  the  cage." 

The  accordion  had  been  provided  by  Mr.  Crookes.  "  It  was  a. 
new  one,"  he  writes,  "  having  been  purchased  by  myself  for  the 
purpose  of  these  experiments.  Mr.  Home  had  neither  handled  nor 
seen  the  instrument  before  the  commencement  of  the  test-experi- 
ments." 

To  test  another  frequent  phenomenon,  the  alteration  of  the  weight 
of  bodies,  Mr.  Crookes  had  fitted  up  an  apparatus  the  salient  feature 
of  which  was  a  mahogany  board  three  feet  long. 

"  At  each  end  a  strip  of  mahogany  ij  inches  wide  was  screwed  on,  forming 
feet.  One  end  of  the  board  rested  on  a  firm  table,  whilst  the  other  end  was 
supported  by  a  spring  balance  hanging  from  a  substantial  tripod  stand.  The 
balance  was  fitted  with  a  self-registering  index,  in  such  a  manner  that  it  would 
record  the  maximum  weight  indicated  by  the  pointer.  The  apparatus  was 
adjusted  so  that  the  mahogany  board  was  horizontal,  its  foot  resting  flat  on 
the  support.  In  this  position  its  weight  was  3  lbs.,  as  marked  by  the  pointer 
of  the  balance."      (Quarterly  Journal  of  Science,  July,  1871.) 

.  It  was  designed  by  the  constructor  of  this  apparatus  that  Mr.  Home 
should  place  his  finger-tips  on  that  end  of  the  mahogany  board  which 
rested  on  the  table.  If  the  index  of  the  balance  then  descended,  it 
would  be  conclusively  demonstrated  that  muscular  force  was  not  the 
agent  at  work,  since  no  pressure  applied  by  Mr.  Home's  fingers  to  the 
end  of  the  board  farthest  from  the  balance  could  cause  the  index  to 
descend. 

Both  the  cage  and  the  other  apparatus  had  been  constructed  without 
any  intimation  of  their  nature  being  communicated  to  Mr.  Home 
"Before  Mr.  Home  entered  the  room,"  says  Mr.  Crookes,  "the 
apparatus  had  been  arranged  in  position,  and  he  had  not  even  the 
object  of  some  parts  of  it  explained  before  sitting  down." 

The  experiment  with  the  accordion  was  first  tried.     The  room  was 

ENGLAND  :    SPIRITUALISM    AND     SCIENCE        199 

fully  lighted  with  gas.     Mr.  Home  sat  in  a  low  easy  chair  at  the  side 
of  the  table. 

"  In  front  of  him  under  the  table,"  says  Mr.  Crookes,  "  was  the  aforesaid 
cage,  one  of  his  legs  being  on  each  side  of  it.  I  sat  close  to  him  on  his  left, 
and  another  observer  sat  close  to  him  on  his  right.  .  .  .  When  anything 
of  importance  was  occurring,  the  observers  on  each  side  of  Mr.  Home  kept 
their  feet  respectively  on  his  feet,  so  as  to  be  able  to  detect  the  slightest  move- 
ment. 

"  Mr.  Home  took  the  accordion  between  the  thumb  and  middle  finger  of 
one  hand  at  the  opposite  end  to  the  keys.  Having  previously  opened  the  bass 
key  myself,  and  the  cage  being  drawn  from  under  the  table  so  as  just  to  allow 
the  accordion  to  be  passed  in  with  its  keys  downwards,  it  was  pushed  back 
as  close  as  Mr.  Home's  arm  would  permit,  but  without  hiding  his  hand  from 
those  next  to  him." 

Presently  the  accordion  played. 

"  Dr.  Huggins  now  looked  under  the  table,  and  said  that  Mr.  Home's  hand 
appeared  quite  still,  whilst  the  accordion  was  moving  about  emitting  distinct 
sounds. 

"  Mr.  Home  still  holding  the  accordion  in  the  usual  manner  in  the  cage, 
his  feet  being  held  by  those  next  him,  and  his  other  hand  resting  on  the  table, 
we  heard  distinct  and  separate  notes  sounded  in  succession,  and  then  a  simple 
air  was  played.  As  such  a  result  could  only  have  been  produced  by  the  various 
keys  of  the  instrument  being  acted  upon  in  harmonious  succession,  this  was 
considered  by  those  present  to  be  a  crucial  experiment.  But  the  sequel  was 
still  more  striking. 

"  Mr.  Home  removed  his  hand  altogether  from  the  accordion,  and  taking 
his  hand  quite  out  of  the  cage,  placed  it  in  the  hand  of  the  person  next  to 
him."  His  other  hand  remained  on  the  table.  "  The  instrument,"  writes 
Mr.  Crookes,  "  then  continued  to  play,  no  person  touching  it  and  no  hand 
being  near  it." 

The  current  from  the  battery  was  now  passed  round  the  insulated 
wire  of  the  cage.  The  accordion  again  played.  Mr.  Home  a  second 
time  removed  his  hand  from  it,  and  laid  that  hand  upon  the  table, 
where  it  was  taken  by  the  observer  next  to  him. 

"  Both  his  hands,"  says  Mr.  Crookes,  "  were  now  seen  by  all  present.  I 
and  two  of  the  others  present  saw  the  accordion  distyictly  floating  about  inside 
the  cage  with  no  visible  support. 

"  Mr.  Home  presently  re-inserted  his  hand  in  the  cage  and  again  took  hold 
of  the  accordion.  It  then  commenced  to  play,  at  first  chords  and  runs,  and 
afterwards  a  well-known  sweet  and  plaintive  melody,  which  it  executed  per- 
fectly in  a  very  beautiful  manner.  Whilst  this  tune  was  being  played,  I 
grasped  Mr.  Home's  arm,  below  the  elbow,  and  gently  slid  my  hand  down  it 
until  I  touched  the  top  of  the  accordion.  He  was  not  moving  a  muscle.  His 
other  hand  was  on  the  table,  visible  to  all,  and  his  feet  were  under  the  feet 
of  those  next  to  him. 

"  Having  met  with  such  striking  results  in  the  experiments  with  the 
accordion  in  the  cage,  we  turned  to  the  balance  apparatus." 

I  have  already  quoted  Mr.  Crookes'  description  of  that  apparatus. 
It  is  figured  by  woodcuts  in  his  pages,  as  also  are  the  experiments 
with  the  accordion. 

"  Mr.  Home,"  writes  Mr.  Crookes,  "  placed  the  tips  of  his  fingers  lightly 
on  the  extreme  end  of  the  mahogany  board  which  was  resting  on  the  support, 
whilst  Dr.  Huggins  and  myself  sat,  one  on  each  side  of  it,  watching  for  any 
effect  which  might  be  produced.  Almost  immediately  the  pointer  of  the 
balance  was  seen  to  descend.  After  a  few  seconds  it  rose  again.  This  move- 
ment was  repeated  several  times,  as  if  by  successive  waves  of  the  Psychic 
Force." 

200  LIFE   AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

Only  the  scientific  reader  can  fully  appreciate  the  impression  made 
by  this  phenomenon  on  the  little  party  of  scientific  men  observing  it. 
Here  was  a  downward  pull  applied  to  the  balance  before  their  eyes, 
when  the  conditions  rendered  it  impossible  for  Mr.  Home  to  make  the 
index  of  that  balance  descend. 

The  board  was  arranged  perfectly  horizontally.  The  wooden  foot 
screwed  beneath  it  and  resting  on  the  table  was  i^  inches  wide. 
Across  the  upper  surface  of  the  board,  at  the  same  distance  of  i^ 
inches  from  the  end,  Mr.  Crookes,  with  the  acquiescence  of  Dr. 
Huggins,  drew  a  line  in  pencil.  Beyond  this  line  Mr.  Home's  fingers 
were  not  at  any  time  advanced. 

"  Now,  the  wooden  foot,"  writes  Mr.  Crookes,  "  being  also  i^  inches  wide, 
and  resting  flat  on  the  table,  it  is  evident  that  no  amount  of  pressure  exerted 
within  this  space  of  ij  inches  could  produce  any  action  on  the  balance. 

"  Again,  it  is  also  evident  that  when  the  end  furthest  from  Mr.  Home  sank, 
the  board  would  turn  on  the  further  edge  of  this  foot  as  on  a  fulcrum.  The 
arrangement  was  consequently  that  of  a  see-saw,  36  inches  in  length,  the 
fulcrum  being  i^  inches  from  one  end  ;  were  he,  therefore,  to  have  exerted  a 
downward  pressure,  it  would  have  been  in  opposition  to  the  force  which  was 
causing  the  other  end  of  the  board  to  move  down." 

In  other  words,  it  would  have  been  as  easy  for  Mr.  Home  to  have 
caused  his  chair  to  rise  into  the  air  by  sitting  on  it,  as  to  have  caused 
the  index  of  the  balance  to  descend  by  pressing  on  that  end  of  the 
board  where  his  fingers  rested. 

When  the  descent  of  the  balance  was  noted, 

"  Mr.  Home  of  his  own  accord  took,"  writes  Mr.  Crookes,  "  a  small  hand- 
bell and  a  little  card  match-box,  which  happened  to  be  near,  and  placed  one 
under  each  hand,  to  satisfy  us,  as  he  said,  that  he  was  not  producing  the 
downward  pressure.  The  very  slow  oscillation  of  the  spring  balance  became 
more  marked,  and  Dr.  Huggins,  watching  the  index,  said  that  he  saw  it 
descend  to  65  lbs.  The  normal  weight  of  the  board  as  so  suspended  being 
3  lbs.,  the  additional  downward  pull  was  therefore  35  lbs.  On  looking  imme- 
diately afterwards  at  the  automatic  register,  we  saw  that  the  index  had  at 
one  time  descended  as  low  as  9  lbs.,  showing  a  maximum  pull  of  6  lbs.  upon 
a  board  whose  normal  weight  was  3  lbs." 

Wishing  to  try  whether  it  were  possible  to  produce  much  effect  on 
the  spring  balance  by  pressure  on  that  end  of  the  board  where  Mr. 
Home's  fingers  had  rested,  Mr.  Crookes  stood  on  one  foot  at  the  end 
of  the  board.  Dr.  Huggins  watched  the  index  of  the  balance,  and 
recorded  that  the  whole  weight  of  Mr.  Crookes'  body  (140  lb.)  when 
thus  applied  only  sank  the  index  i^  lb.,  and  when  be  jerked  up  and 
down  2lb.  And  this  result  was  only  obtained  because  the  foot  of  Mr. 
Crookes  extended  beyond  the  fulcrum,  which  the  fingers  of  Mr.  Home 
had  never  passed. 

' '  Mr.  Home  had  been  sitting  in  a  low  easy  chair, ' '  adds  Mr. 
Crookes,  "  and  could  not,  had  he  tried  his  utmost,  have  exerted  any 
material  influence  on  the  results.  I  need  scarcely  add  that  his  feet 
as  well  as  his  hands  were  closely  guarded  by  all  in  the  room.  This 
experiment  appears  to  me  more  striking,  if  possible,  than  the  one  with 
the  accordion." 

ENGLAND  :    SPIRITUALISM    AND    SCIENCE         201 

On  putting  into  the  form  of  an  article  the  notes  of  these  facts  made 
at  the  time,  Mr.  Crookes  sent  proofs  of  his  paper  to  Dr.  Huggins  and 
Mr.  Serjeant  Cox.  The  former  attested  as  follows  the  correctness  of 
the  statements  it  contained : — 

"  ]une  9,   1871. 

"  Dear  Mr.  Crookes, — Your  proof  appears  to  me  to  contain  a  correct 
statement  of  what  took  place  in  my  presence  at  your  house.  My  position  at 
the  table  did  not  permit  me  to  be  a  witness  to  the  withdrawal  of  Mr.  Home's 
hand  from  the  accordion,  but  such  was  stated  to  be  the  case  at  the  time  by 
yourself  and  by  the  person  sitting  on  the  other  side  of  Mr.  Home. 

"  The  experiments  appear  to  me  to  show  the  importance  of  further  investiga- 
tion, but  I  wish  it  to  be  understood  that  I  express  no  opinion  as  to  the  cause 
of  the  phenomena  which  took  place.     Yours  very  truly, 

"  William  Huggins." 

Being  intended  for  publication,  the  expressions  of  Dr.  Huggins 
were  naturally  weighed  by  liim  with  the  utmost  caution.  He  wished, 
if  possible,  to  give  his  testimony  to  facts  without  offending  the  in- 
grained prejudices  of  the  scientific  world.  But  "  no  man  can  serve 
two  masters  ";  and  Dr.  Carpenter,  in  the  name  of  the  world  of 
science,  attacked  his  brother  F.R.S.  as  venomously  as  if  Dr.  Huggins 
had  stated  a  belief  that  the  phenomena  were  the  work  of  disem- 
bodied spirits. 

In  private,  Dr.  Huggins  was  more  outspoken.  "  I  saw  Huggins 
yesterday,"  writes  Mr.  Crookes  to  Mr.  Home  on  July  i8th,  187 1. 
"  He  has  been  doing  good  work  with  his  tongue.  Although  a 
coward  with  his  pen,  he  is  as  bold  as  a  lion  in  talking." 

In  a  lengthy  letter  to  Mr.  Crookes,  Mr.  Serjeant  Cox  not  only 
attested  in  his  turn  the  exactitude  of  the  account  of  the  experiments 
furnished  by  the  principal  investigator,  but  proceeded  to  theorise  as 
to  the  origin  of  the  phenomena — which  neither  of  the  two  scientific 
observers  had  done.  I  extract  a  portion  of  the  learned  Serjeant's 
testimony  : — 

"  June  8,    1871. 

"  My  dear  Sir, — Having  been  present,  for  the  purpose  of  scrutiny,  at  the 
trial  of  the  experiments  reported  in  this  paper,  I  readily  bear  my  testimony  to 
the  perfect  accuracy  of  your  description  of  them,  and  to  the  care  and  caution 
with  which  the  various  crucial  tests  were  applied. 

"  The  results  appear  to  me  conclusively  to  establish  the  important  fact  that 
there  is  a  force  proceeding  from  the  nerve-system  capable  of  imparting  motion 
and  weight  to  solid  bodies  within  the  sphere  of  its  influence.     .     .     . 

"  I  venture  to  suggest  that  the  force  be  termed  the  Psychic  Force;  and  the 
persons  in  whom  it  is  manifested  in  extraordinary  power  Psychics. 

"  Permit  me,  also,  to  propose  the  early  formation  of  a  Psychological  Society, 
purposely  for  the  promotion  of  the  study  of  that  hitherto  neglected  Science. 
I  am,  &c.,  "  Edwd.  Wm.  Cox." 

I  believe  the  Society  now  flourishing  under  the  name  suggested  by 
Serjeant  Cox  owes  its  origin  to  his  efforts.  He  devoted  much  time 
to  the  investigation  of  the  phenomena,  and  Mr.  Home,  at  his 
entreaty,  held  several  seances  at  the  learned  Serjeant's  residence. 

At  one  of  these  a  person  of  the  name  of  Spiller  was  present,  who, 
on  the  publication  of  Mr.  Crooiccs'  papers,  darkly  intimated  in  the 
columns  of  the  Echo  that    "an'    he    would  " — etc.       Pressed     by 

o 

202  LIFE   AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

Mr,  Crookes  to  explain,  Mr.  Spiller  made  several  assertions  concern- 
ing the  seance  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Serjeant  Cox.  Not  only  did 
they  furnish  no  explanation  of  tlie  phenomena,  but  one  and  all  were 
easily  proved  by  Mr.  Crookes  to  be  direct  misstatements  of  fact, 
conflicting  with  Mr.  Spiller's  own  declaration  at  the  time  of  the 
seance.  The  most  important  was  that  a  light,  assumed  to  be  a 
spirit-light,  had  been  seen  playing  about  Mr.  Home's  hands.  It 
was  a  reflection,  said  the  veracious  Mr.  Spiller,  "  from  the  shining 
surface  of  Mr.  H.'s  monster  locket."  In  reply,  Mr.  Crookes 
showed  that  no  one  but  Mr.  Spiller  himself  had  spoken  of  having 
seen  this  light.  It  would  have  been  strange  indeed  if  more  candid 
inquirers  had  seen  it ;  for  the  locket  (which  still  exists)  is  not  only 
small,  but  is  of  dull  flatinum.  It  is  so  covered  on  both  sides 
with  ornamental  engraving,  "  that,"  writes  Mr.  Crookes,  in  dis- 
cussing Mr.  Spiller's  statements,  "  there  is  not  a  particle  of  polished 
platinum  about  it.  I  have,"  he  adds,  "  carefully  examined  the 
optical  properties  of  this  locket.  Tested  in  an  accurate  photometer, 
the  reflecting  power  of  each  side  is  found  to  be  equal  to  that  of  a 
silvered  glass  speculum  less  than  one-tenth  of  an  inch  square.^' 

Such  were  the  weapons  with  which  an  attack  on  the  testimony  of 
Mr.  Crookes  was  conducted  by  a  person  professing  to  be  a  scientific 
controversialist ! 

Were  it  worth  while,  I  might  here  show,  from  the  letters  of  Ser- 
jeant Cox  to  Mr.  Home,  that  the  former  had  many  experiences  at 
seances  with  Home  which  he  found  his  theory  of  "psychic  force" 
quite  insufficient  to  explain.  Always,  when  this  was  the  case,  the 
learned  Serjeant  proceeded  to  supplement  his  pet  hypothesis  by  other 
theories,  some  sober,  a  few  wild.  He  was  a  typical  representative 
of  a  class  of  persons  not  uncommon,  who  are  better  fitted  to  observe 
facts  than  to  deduce  inferences  from  them.  Mr.  Serjeant  Cox,  un- 
truly styled  by  Dr.  Carpenter  in  the  Quarterly  Review  an  infatuated 
Spiritualist,  conducted  his  researches  with  Mr.  Home  in  a  spirit  of 
keen  and  sceptical  inquiry.  He  was  slow  in  arriving  at  conviction — 
nay,  even  when  convinced,  the  antagonism  between  reason  and  the 
evidence  of  his  senses  that  Mr.  Crookes  found  in  his  own  mind  was 
equally  present  in  the  mind  of  Serjeant  Cox.  Under  its  influence, 
he  submitted  for  Home's  consideration  one  conjecture  after  another 
respecting  the  origin  of  the  phenomena,  constructing  them  with  a 
rashness  in  inverse  proportion  to  the  wary  scepticism  with  which  he 
had  investigated  the  phenomena  themselves. 

I  may  here  mention  that  Serjeant  Cox  was  present  at  some  of  the 
manifestations  recorded  by  Lords  Dunraven  and  Adare.  "I  re- 
member' once  with  you  at  Sydenham,"  he  writes  to  Mr.  Home  in 
1878,  "  seeing  a  hand  in  the  daylight  come  over  the  table  and  hand 
a  flower  to  Lord  Dunraven.  ...  I  have  never  seen  any  pheno- 
mena to  compare  with  yours."  Under  the  date  of  1876,  I  shall 
quote  an  interesting  letter  written  in  that  year  by  Serjeant  Cox  to  Mr. 
Home,  in  which  the  Serjeant  avows  how  entirely  opposed  to  his  pre- 
judices and  preconceptions  were  the  convictions  impressed  on  him  by 
his  seances  with  Home. 

ENGLAND:    SPIRITUALISM    AND    SCIENCE         203 

Desiring  to  experiment  still  further  with  the  phenomenon  of  altera- 
tions in  the  weight  of  bodies,  Mr.  Crookes  planned  an  addition  to 
his  apparatus.  "  On  trying  these  experiments  for  the  first  time," 
he  explains,  "  I  thought  that  actual  contact  between  Mr.  Home's 
hands  and  the  suspended  body  whose  weight  was  to  be  altered  was 
ess'ential  to  the  exhibition  of  the  force;  but  I  found  afterwards  that 
this  was  not  a  necessary  condition." 

Mr.  Crookes  had  already  sent  to  the  Royal  Society  a  paper  con- 
taining an  account  of  his  experiments  made  in  the  presence  of  Dr. 
Huggins  and  Serjeant  Cox ;  at  the  same  time  inviting  the  two 
secretaries,  Professors  Sharpey  and  Stokes,  to  meet  Mr.  Home  at  his 
house.  Both  declined  the  invitation.  Professor  Stokes  also  formu- 
lated objections  to  the  experiment  made  with  the  mahogany  board 
and  the  balance,  based  on  the  assumption  that  Mr.  Home  might 
have  exercised  a  pressure  on  the  board  beyond  the  fulcrum.  In 
reply  Mr.  Crookes  showed  that,  granting  all  the  hypotheses  of  Pro- 
fessor Stokes,  a  simple  mathematical  formula  gave  the  amount  of 
force  necessary  to  have  been  exerted  by  Mr.  Home  as  74^1bs. 
"  Considering  that  he  was  sitting  in  a  low  easy  chair,"  continued 
Mr.  Crookes,  "  and  that  four  pair  of  sharp,  suspicious  eyes  were 
watching  to  see  that  he  exerted  no  force  at  all,  but  kept  the  tips 
of  his  fingers  lightly  on  the  instrument,  it  is  sufficiently  evident  that 
an  exertion  of  this  pressure  was  impossible." 

In  another  letter  to  Professor  Stokes,  Mr.  Crookes  wrote  : — "  I 
am  now  fitting  up  apparatus  in  which  contact  is  made  through  water 
only,  in  such  a  way  that  transmission  of  mechanical  movement  to  the 
board  is  impossible ;  and  I  am  also  arranging  an  experiment  in  which 
Mr.  Home  will  not  touch  the  apparatus  at  all.  This  will  only  work 
when  the  power  is  very  strong ;  but  last  night  I  tried  an  experiment 
of  this  kind,  and  obtained  a  considerable  increase  of  tension  on  the 
spring  balance  when  Mr.  Home's  hands  were  thrjee  inches  off." 

The  apparatus  in  which  the  intervention  of  water  was  employed  by 
Mr.  Crookes  consisted  of  the  same  mahogany  board  and  spring 
balance,  a  large  glass  vessel  filled  with  water  being  placed  on  the 
board,  exactly  over  the  fulcrum.  A  massive  iron  stand,  separated 
by  a  distance  of  two  inches  from  the  mahogany  board,  was  furnished 
with  an  arm  and  a  ring.  In  the  latter  rested  a  wide,  shallow  copper 
vessel,  perforated  beneath  with  several  holes.  This  vessel  was  so 
adjusted  as  to  dip  i^  inches  into  the  water  of  the  larger  glass  vessel. 

"  Shaking  or  striking  the  arm  or  the  copper  vessel,"  wrote  Mr.  Crookes, 
"  produces  no  appreciable  mechanical  effect  on  the  board,  capable  of  affecting 
the  balance.  Dipping  the  hand  to  the  fullest  extent  into  the  water  in  the 
copper  vessel  does  not  produce  the  least  appreciable  action  on  the  balance. 

"  As  the  mechanical  transmission  of  power  is  by  this  means  entirely  cut  off 
between  the  copper  vessel  and  the  board,  the  power  of  muscular  control  is 
thereby  completely  eliminated." 

To  the  index  of  the  balance  Mr.  Crookes  had  soldered  a  fine 
steel  point.  In  front  of  this  a  sheet  of  plate-glass  smoked  over  a 
flame  was  made  to  travel  by  clockwork.  The  mark  impressed  on 
this  smoked  surface  by  the  steel  point  registered  the  results  of  the 

204  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

exj)eriment.  The  balance  being  at  rest,  the  result  was  a  perfectly 
straight  horizontal  line.  The  tension  on  the  balance  varying,  the 
result  was  a  curved  tracing. 

"  The  apparatus  having  been  properly  adjusted  before  Mr.  Home  entered 
the  room,"  wrote  Mr.  Crookes,  "  he  was  brought  in,  and  asked  to  place  his 
fingers  in  the  water  in  the  copper  vessel.  He  stood  up  and  dipped  the  tips  of 
the  fingers  of  his  right  hand  in  the  water,  his  other  hand  and  his  feet  being 
held.  When  he  said  he  felt  a  power,  force,  or  influence  proceeding  from  his 
hand,  I  set  the  clock  going,  and  almost  immediately  the  end  of  the  board 
attached  to  the  balance  was  seen  to  descend  slowly  and  remain  down  for  about 
ten  seconds ;  it  then  descended  a  little  further,  and  afterwards  rose  to  its 
normal  height.  .  .  .  The  lowest  point  marked  on  the  glass  was  equivalent 
to  a  direct  pull  of  about  S,ooo  grains." 

In  a  subsequent  experiment,  Mr.  Crookes  removed  the  glass  vessel, 
iron  stand,  and  copper  vessel,  and  -placed,  Mr.  Home  at  a  distance 
of  one  foot  from  the  remaining  apparatus,  his  hands  and  feet  being 
held.  The  force  proceeding  from  him  still  acted  on  the  apparatus, 
and  the  index  registered  an  increase  of  weight.  On  another 
occasion,  when  the  power  appeared  to  be  very  strong,  Mr.  Home  was 
placed  at  a  distance  of  no  less  than  three  feet  from  the  apparatus, 
his  hands  and  feet  being  again  held.  Even  at  this  distance  the 
power  showed  itself  capable  of  causing  a  marked  increase  of  weight. 
"The  clock,"  writes  Mr.  Crookes,  "  was  set  going  when  he  gave 
the  word,  and  the  end  of  the  board  attached  to  the  balance  soon 
descended  and  again  rose  in  an  irregular  manner."  Calculating  by 
the  diagram  that  Mr.  Crookes  appends  of  the  line  traced  on  the 
smoked  glass,  the  maximum  increase  of  weight  recorded  during  this 
remarkable  experiment  was,  as  nearly  as  possible,  ilb.  8oz.  Troy. 
This  when  Mr.  Home  was  three  feet  away  from  the  portion  of  the 
mahogany  board  nearest  to  him.  Could  experiment  be  more 
conclusive  ! 

Papers  detailing  these  and  other  experiments  were  sent  in  by  Mr. 
Crookes  to  the  Royal  Society.  They  were  declined  without  any 
reason  being  assigned  for  the  course  taken. 

Early  in  1872  Dr.  Carpenter  exhibited  to  a  public  audience  in 
London  an  experiment  which  he  pretended  to  be  a  reproduction  of 
that  conducted  by  Mr.  Crookes  with  the  glass  vessel  of  water  and 
the  copper  vessel  suspended  above.  Dr.  Carpenter's  design  was  to 
show  that,  in  the  words  of  Mr.  Crookes  himself,  the  latter  "  was 
ignorant  of  the  merest  rudiments  of  mechanics,  and  was  deluded  by 
an  experiment  the  fallacy  of  which  any  intelligent  schoolboy  could 
have  pointed  out."  A  published  protest  followed  from  Mr.  Crookes, 
who  conclusively  established  the  correctness  of  his  statement  : 
"  Dr.  Carpenter's  experiment  was  not  my  experiment,  but  an  un- 
justifiable misrepresentation  of  it." 

"  Called  upon  to  apologise  for  the  wrong  he  had  thus  publicly 
done  to  me,"  wrote  Mr.  Crookes,  "  Dr.  Carpenter  threw  the  res- 
fKDnsibility  from  himself  upon  others  whom  he  stated  to  have  been 
his  informants.  I  print  the  coriespondence,  and  leave  it  to  the 
judgment  of  the  scientific  world." 

ENGLAND:    SPIRITUALISM    AND     SCIENCE       205 

That  judgment  must  be  taken  to  have  been  unfavourable  to  Dr. 
Carpenter,  whom  even  so  friendly  a  critic  as  Professor  Stokes  ad- 
mitted to  have  wholly  misrepresented  the  experiment  conducted  by 
Mr.   Crookes  with  the  vessel  of  water. 

The  crowning  and  most  convincing  experiments  of  the  series — those 
in  which  an  increase  of  weight  was  recorded  by  the  apparatus  when 
Mr.  Home  stood  at  a  distance  from  it,  Dr.  Carpenter  and  other 
Royal  Society  critics  passed  over  in  silence.  It  surpassed  even 
their  facility  of  invention  to  suggest  how  Mr.  Home  could  possibly 
have  influenced  an  apparatus  that  he  had  not  touched. 

In  the  Quarterly  Review  for  October,  187 1,  appeared  the  article 
entitled  "  Spiritualism  and  its  Recent  Converts"  to  which  I  have 
already  referred.  An  edifying  illustration  of  the  candour  and  fair- 
mindedness  of  its  author,  Dr.  Carpenter,  was  furnished  by  the  fact 
that,  for  simply  writing  the  letter  quoted  a  few  pages  back,  his 
scientific  superior,  Dr.  Huggins,  was  designated  by  him  **  a  convert 
to  Spiritualism." 

One  would  almost  suspect,  in  reading  this  Quarterly  Review 
article,  that  Dr.  Carpenter's  anger  arose  from  his  looking  on  Mr. 
Crookes  in  the  light  of  an  interloper  who  had  usurped  an  inquiry  that 
ought  to  have  been  conducted  by  himself.  What  is  certain  is  that 
his  criticisms  took  the  form  of  a  gross  personal  attack  on  Mr. 
Crookes,  Dr.  Huggins,  and  Mr.  Serjeant  Cox,  to  which  the  former 
felt  himself  constrained  to  reply  publicly. 

To  the  facts  recorded  by  Mr.  Crookes,  and  attested  by  Dr. 
Huggins  and  Serjeant  Cox,  the  Quarterly  reviewer  had  no  reply  to 
make,  and  attempted  none.  His  plan  of  warfare  was  to  attack  the 
experimenters,  and  not  the  experiments.  "No  case:  abuse  the 
plaintifi^'s  witnesses,"  is,  I  believe,  a  time-honoured  maxim  at  the 
bar;  but  whether  Dr.  Carpenter  advanced  his  reputation  by  import- 
ing such  tactics  into  scientific  controversy,  I  leave  it  to  impartial 
judges  to  decide. 

CHAPTER   XII 

RUSSIA,  GENEVA    FLORENCE   NICE 

Last  Journey  to  Russia.  Second  Marriage.  Testimony  of  Pro- 
fessor Boutlerow.  Failure  of  Power.  Second  Series  of 
Incidents.  Death  of  Daughter.  Failing  Health.  The 
Artist  Waiter.  "Most  Marvellous  of  Missionaries." 
Seance  at  Nice. 

Early  in  1871,  Mr.  Home  visited  Russia.  During  his  stay  at  St. 
Petersburg  he  enjoyed  the  friendly  hospitality  of  Baron  Meyendorff, 
the  father  of  his  old  friend,  and  one  of  the  principal  officers  of  the 
Court.  He  was  summoned  by  the  Emperor  as  soon  as  his  arrival 
became  known.  His  Majesty  welcomed  him  with  his  accustomed 
kindness,  the  remembrance  of  which  was  so  prized  by  Home.  Several 
seances  were  held  at  the  Winter  Palace;  but  Home  followed  his  in- 
variable custom  on  such  occasions,  and  preserved  strict  silence  as 
to  the  manifestations.  A  person  ge  of  the  Court  who  look  part  in 
the  seances  was  subsequently  more  communicative,  and  related  two 
incidents  that  had  reference  to  the  Emperor  Alexander  II,  and  to 
her  Majesty,  the  present  Empress.  During  a  seance  and  in  full 
light,  a  spirit-hand  opened  a  locket  contrived  in  one  of  the  buttons 
of  the  uniform  that  the  Emperor  wore,  and  containing  the  portrait 
of  the  defunct  heir  to  the  throne.  This  manifestation  was  followed 
by  tiny  raps  struck  on  the  button  itself,  that  spelt  out  a  communica- 
tion confirming  his  Majesty's  belief  as  to  their  author. 

In  another  seance  the  present  Empress  received  a  token  of 
identity  not  less  striking,  by  means  of  a  message  in  Danish  from  her 
grandfather,  who  addressed  her  Majesty  by  a  pet  name  that  he  had 
given  hex  in  her  childhood,  and  no  one  had  ever  employed  but 
himself. 

The  Emperor  Alexander  II.  more  than  one  signalised  the  favour 
with  which  he  regarded  Home  by  authorising  him  to  request  some 
mark  of  the  Imperial  good-will.  The  only  supplication  that  he 
ever  addressed  to  his  Majesty — and  that  was  granted  on  the  spot — 
was  for  the  pardon  of  a  culprit,  one  of  whose  relatives,  knowing 
Home's  interest  with  the  Emperor,  had  entreated  him  to  exert  it  on 
behalf  of  the  condemned. 

On  the  eve  of  this  journey  to  Russia,  a  forecast  of  the  future  had 
been  made  to  Home  by  the  spirits.  Our  marriage  realised  it ;  and 
the  object  of  his  journey  was  attained  by  his  gaining  the  lawsuit  in 
which  he  had  been  involved  concerning  the  little  fortune  of  his 
first  wife,  unjustly  disputed  with  him  by  the  Countess  Pouchkine, 
the  rich  heiress  of  his  late  brother-in-law.  Count  Koucheleff- 
Besborodkai. 

I  first  saw  Mr.  Home  in  February,  1871.  Expecting  to  find  a 
personage  occupied  with  his  own  celebrity,  I  was  agreeably  surprised 

206 

RUSSIA,    GENEVA,    FLORENCE,    NICE  207 

to  meet,  on  the  contrary,  a  man  in  whom  there  was  no  trace  of  pre- 
tension. A  smile  of  seductive  good-humour  reflected  a  winning 
nature,  and  gave  a  marked  charm  to  his  expressive  features.  His 
form  and  bearing  both  denoted  race.  His  affable  disposition  in- 
dicated that  Scottish  nationality  of  which  he  was  justly  proud. 
Such  was  the  impression  I  retained  of  him  after  our  conversation ; 
but  at  the  moment  of  his  being  presented  to  me,  I  had  no  power  to 
analyse  my  sentiments  :  I  heard  only  a  voice  saying  to  me,  "  Here  is 
your  husband."  Home  at  the  same  instant  received  the  same  im- 
pression. It  was  so  real,  so  instantaneous,  that  it  did  not  even 
come  on  me  with  a  feeling  of  surprise ;  and  a  mutual  accord  was 
established  at  once  between  us.  The  evening  closed  with  a  very 
interesting  seance ;  and  all  that  passed  at  it  seemed  as  familiar  and 
sympathetic  to  me  as  if  I  had  been  habituated  to  these  manifestations 
of  the  invisible  watchers  over  us. 

It  was  nearly  six  years  since  Mr.  Home  had  been  in  Russia,  and 
the  society  of  St.  Petersburg  besieged  him  for  seances.  He  held 
many — too  many,  for  his  nervous  system  had  recently  suffered  terribly 
from  the  scenes  through  which  he  had  passed  as  a  spectator  of  the 
Franco-German  war. 

I  might  fill  pages  with  extracts  from  letters  written  to  Hcxne  by  his 
friends  in  Russia ;  but  a  series  of  proofs  of  the  friendship  and 
gratitude  he  inspired  would  probably  have  little  interest  for  the 
reader.  I  will  give,  as  a  single  example  of  this  correspondence,  a 
portion  of  one  of  the  numerous  letters  of  a  valued  friend,  the 
Baroness  de  Lieven  : — 

"  St.  Petersburg,  March  JJJ,  '75. 
"  My  dearest  Friend, — The  blossoms  you  sent  me  were  yet  in  full  scent, 
and  I  kept  them  for  many  days  in  my  room,  enjoying  their  delightful  perfume, 
that  spoke  of  a  better  and  happier  land,  where  flowers  and  young  lives  do  not 
shiver  and  fade,  deprived  of  the  blessed  influence  of  the  sunshine.  ...  I 
was  deeply  touched  by  your  sending  me  these  flowers  for  his  birthday,  my 
very  dear  Daniel ;  and  I  repeat  I  cannot  thank  you  enough  for  them.  Your 
letters  are  full  of  such  words  as  nobody  but  yourself  can  find  for  a  soul  full 
of  anguish  and  sorrow.  You  feel  so  keenly  all  that  the  spirit  goes  through 
in  its  most  cruel  sufferings,  that  your  words  go  to  the  heart's  deepest  feelings. 
God  bless  you  for  it,  and  make  your  own  sufferings  lighter  for  the  sympathy 
that  you  bear  to  others.  How  very  much  struck  I  was  with  the  vision  you 
had  so  many  months  before  the  unhappy  day  that  bereaved  us  of  our  own 
beloved  angel !  How  miraculous  that  you  should  have  so  well  understood  the 
meaning  of  all  you  saw  and  heard — one  more  proof  that  it  was  so  ordained 
long  before  the  doom  was  fulfilled.  .  .  .  Believe  me,  ever  most  affection- 
ately,   your  true  friend,  "  M.    Libvkn.'" 

The  Baroness  de  Lieven 's  touching  letter  may  acquire  some  ad- 
ditional interest  to  English  readers  when  they  learn  that  it  is  not  a 
translation  but  a  transcript  of  the  original,  and  a  proof  of  the  in- 
telligence with  which  its  amiable  and  gifted  writer  had  studied  the 
English  tongue. 

On  the  24th  of  February,  187 1,  Mr.  Home  gave  a  lecture  on 
Spiritualism.  The  hall  could  scarcely  contain  the  audience.  At 
the  close  of  his  address,  he  related  some  particulars  of  a  seance 
that  he  had  recently  held  in  presence  of  a  distinguished  savant  of 

2o8  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

the  University  of  St.  Petersburg,  whose  investigations  of  the  pheno- 
mena had  resulted  in  a  recognition  of  their  genuineness.  Home, 
with  his  habitual  delicacy,  refrained  f ram  naming  the  inquirer ;  and 
only  added  that,  if  it  should  prove  agreeable  to  other  scientific  men 
to  investigate  the  phenomena,  he  would  place  himself  at  their  dis- 
position ;  it  being  of  course  understood  that  he  was  unable  to  promise 
that  manifestations  should  occur.  On  this  Professor  von  Boutlerow 
(of  the  Academy  of  Science  in  St.  Petersburg)  rose  from  his  place 
among  the  audience,  and  announced  himself  as  the  investigator  to 
whom  the  lecturer  had  just  referred,  adding  that  he  wished  to  attest 
the  exactitude  of  the  account  of  the  seance  given  by  Mr.  Home, 
whose  discretion  concerning  himself  he  fully  appreciated.  This 
action  on  the  part  of  a  well-known  scientific  man,  with  regard  to  a 
subject  so  little  understood  in  Russia,  was  an  honourable  proof  that 
Boutlerow  possessed  the  courage  of  his  opinions,  and  the  more 
deserving  of  appreciation  from  the  fact  that  such  courage  is  very 
rare — in  Russia,  as  in  other  countries. 

A  committee  of  five  scientific  men  of  the  University,  including 
Boutlerow,  was  forthwith  constituted,  and  a  seance  appointed  for 
March  19th.  The  committee  stipulated  that  it  should  take  place  in 
one  of  the  rooms  of  the  University,  and  that  a  table  with  a  glass  top 
should  be  provided  by  the  investigators.  This  was  a  novel  experi- 
ment, but  Home  raised  no  objection.  Unfortunately,  in  the 
interval  occupied  by  the  formation  of  the  committee  and  its  prepara- 
tions for  the  seance,  he  fell  ill,  and  his  power  diminished.  Frequjent 
seances  had  exhausted  him,  and  the  severity  of  a  Russian  winter 
always  tried  him  terribly.  Unwilling  to  expose  himself  to  the  re- 
marks that  an  abandonment  of  the  seance  would  have  called  forth, 
he  kept  his  appointment  with  the  committee,  who  were  enabled  to 
verify  the  fact  of  his  illness.  Slight  oscillations'  of  the  table 
were  tbe  only  manifestations  observed,  and  the  investigators,  over- 
joyed at  the  failure  of  the  seance,  proclaimed  the  fact  to  the 
world.  These  grave  and  learned  men  were  confounded  when  a 
colleague  in  science  gave  them  the  following  lesson  : — 

"  The  explanation  of  this  failure,"  wrote  Mr.  Crookes  in  the 
July  following,  "  which  is  all  that  they  have  accused  him  of,^  appyears 
to  me  quite  simple.  Whatever  the  nature  of  Mr.  Home's  power,  it  is 
very  variable,  and  at  times  entirely  absent.  It  is  obvious  that  the 
Russian  experiment  was  tried  when  the  force  was  at  a  minimum. 
The  same  thing  has  frequently  happened  within  my  own  experience. 
A  party  of  scientific  men  met  Mr.  Hom.e  at  my  house,  and  the  results 
were  as  negative  as  those  at  St.  Petersburg.  Instead,  however,  of 
throwing  up  the  inquiry,  we  patiently  repeated  the  trial  a  second 
and  third  time,  when  we  met  with  results  which  were  positive." 

A  second  seance  was  appointed  with  the  St.  Petersburg  committee 
which  the  continued  illness  of  Mr.  Home  prevented  from  taking 
place.  The  date  of  his  departure  from  Russia  had  been  fixed 
some  weeks  before  ;  and  he  was  unable  to  delay  it.  It  was  his  in- 
tention to  have  placed  himself  again  at  the  disposal  of  the  Russian 

'  The  italics  are  Mr.   Crookes'  own. 

RUSSIA,    GENEVA,     FLORENCE,    NICE  209 

committee  in  the  following  winter ;  but  before  then  our  marriage  had 
taken  place ;  and  as  I  did  not  cire  at  all  whether  the  scientific  world 
was  converted  or  not,  and  felt  very  anxious  about  Home's  health, 
which  over-frequent  seances  fatigued,  I  entreated  him  not  to  carry 
out  his  intention. 

When  Mr.  Home  saw  the  Emperor  Alexander  II.  for  the  last 
time  in  March,  187 1,  his  Majesty  congratulated  him  on  his  approach- 
ing marriage,  and  sent  to  him  a  ring  consisting  of  a  magnificent 
sapphire  surrounded  with  diamonds.  We  had  agreed  that  the 
wedding  should  take  place  quietly  in  Paris;  and  in  October,  187 1, 
we  were  married  there  at  the  Russian  Church  and  afterwards  at  the 
English  Embassy.  We  visited  England ;  and  in  December  re- 
turned to  St.  Petersburg,  where  the  number  of  fetes  that  were  given 
to  us  on  our  arrival  compeletely  exhausted  Mr.  Home. 

Professor  von  Boutlerow  sought  and  obtained  numerous  oppor- 
tunities of  resuming  his  experiments  with  Home  during  the  visit 
that,  after  our  marriage,  we  paid  to  Russia,  and  on  the  occasions  of 
subsequent  visits.  "  I  am  informed  by  my  friend  Professor  von 
Boutlerow,"  wrote  Mr.  Crookes  in  his  papers  on  the  phenomenon  of 
increase  of  weight,  "  that  he  tried  almost  the  same  experiments  as 
those  here  detailed,  and  with  still  more  striking  results.  The  nor- 
mal tension  on  the  dynamo-meter  being  100  lbs.,  it  was  increased 
to  about  150  lbs.,  Mr.  Home's  hands  being  placed  in  contact  with 
the  apparatus  in  such  a  manner  that  any  exertion  of  power  on  his 
part  would  diminish,   instead  of  increase,  the   tension." 

The  result  of  a  long  and  scientifically-conducted  series  of  experi- 
ments was  that  Boutlerow  in  Russia  fully  endorsed  the  conclusions 
at  which  another  distinguished  chemist,  Crookes,  had  arrived  in 
England. 

Because  the  single  seance  that  the  St.  Petersburg  University  com- 
mittee held  was  without  result,  the  majority  of  that  ccMnmittee 
assumed  that  thousands  of  previous  inquirers — many  of  them  far 
above  their  own  intellectual  standard — had  been  the  victims  of  a 
delusion.  \Vhen  men  of  science  venture  to  set  up  such  a  colossus 
of  a  presumption,  the  sight  of  it  may  well  astonish  the  world. 

But  the  curious  thing  with  certain  of  this  class  of  inquirers  was, 
that  when  their  senses  testified  to  facts  that  their  prejudices  denied, 
they  meekly  proceeded  to  class  themselves  with  those  very  victims  of 
hallucination  at  whom  they  had  lately  sneered.  Rather  than  own 
themselves  convinced,  they  accused  their  senses  of  being  liars.  The 
only  credit  they  took  to  themselves  was  that  they  had  not  believed 
their  own  eyes,  and  were,  therefore,  still  philosophically  superior 
to  the  foolish  people  who  had  taken  a  fact  for  a  fact.  "  In 
ordinary  investigations,"  ran  the  creed  of  these  invulnerable  sceptics, 
"  a  fact  is  a  fact;  but  the  facts  of  Spiritualism  are  hallucinations. 
I  did  not  accept  them  on  your  testimony — shall  I  now  believe  them 
because  my  own  senses  have  turned  traitors  ?  No  !  I  am  hallucina- 
ted— thou  art  hallucinated — he  is  hallucinated — we  are  hallucinated 
all." 

On  December  26th,   1872,    the    Times    published   a    four-column 

2IO  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

article  headed  "  Spiritualism  and  Science."  Its  author  (unnamed) 
had  been  present  at  two  seances  with  Mr.  Home  in  London.*  The 
first  was  the  counterpart  of  that  at  St.  Petersburg;  "  nothing  what- 
ever occurred  "  is  the  concise  summary  of  the  writer  in  the  Times. 
On  the  second  occasion  he  was  more  fortunate — a  sufficient  reply  to 
the  hypothesis  of  those  who  would  attribute  the  former  negative 
result  to  the  presence  of  such  a  sceptical  and  shrewd  investigator. 
It  is  to  be  presumed  that  he  had  not  parted  with  his  shrewdness  in 
the  interval  between  the  two  seances  and  he  furnishes  emphatic 
evidence  that  he  had  not  lost  any  of  his  scepticism.  I  extract  a 
portion  of  his  narrative  : — 

"  The  room  was  at  first  well-lighted  from  a  gas-burner  overhead. 
To  give  a  detailed  account  of  everything  which  occurred  would  need  more 
space  than  we  can  now  spare.  Suffice  it  to  say,  that  the  table  was  made  light 
and  heavy  at  our  wish,  that  it  moved  in  every  direction,  that  there  were 
vibrations  of  the  floor  and  of  our  chairs,  that  on  Mr.  Home  holding  the 
accordion  (which  we  took  to  pieces  and  tried,  and  found  to  be  in  every  respect 
an  ordinary  instrument)  under  the  table  in  his  right  hand  and  by  the  end 
farthest  from  the  keys,  it  played  a  distinct  tune,  Mr.  Home's  left  hand  being 
on  the  table  and  his  feet  so  raised  as  to  be  visible.  All  other  hands  were  on 
the  table.  At  the  same  time,  and  under  the  same  conditions,  a  small  hand-bell 
was  rung  in  different  parts  of  the  space  beneath  the  table.  The  gas  was  now 
turned  out  and  the  two  spirit-lamps  lit ;  these  gave  a  fair  light.  The  raps 
became  louder,  and  in  the  usual  method  directed  us  to  take  a  leaf  out  of  the 
table.  This  was  done,  when  the  table  appeared  to  float  up  about  eight  inches 
off  the  floor,  settling  down  again  in  a  gentle  swaying  manner.  The  thin 
wooden  lath  lying  on  the  cloth  was  seen  by  the  whole  party  to  be  in  motion. 
It  tilted  up  sideways  and  endways,  and  then  seemed  to  float  backwards  and 
forwards.  Holding  our  hand  three  inches,  as  near  as  we  could  guess,  above 
the  cloth,  the  lath  rose  three  times  ;  the  last  time  it  touched  our  hand,  and 
directly  afterwards  the  table  jumped  and  shook  violently,  and  loud  raps  seemed 
to  come  from  all  parts  of  it  and  of  the  floor." 

The  Times  writer  describes  other  phenomena ;  the  most  notable 
of  which  was  the  fact  that  the  accordion  played  when  he  held  it 
himself.  "  We  held  it  with  the  keys  downward,"  he  relates;  "  it 
seemed  to  be  pushed  up  towards  our  hand,  and  played  a  few  bars. 

"We  tried,"  continues  the  Times  narrative,  "every  test  we  could 
think  of.  A  subdued  light,  darkened  as  the  evening  went  on,  was 
one  of  the  conditions  we  were  obliged  to  comply  with." 

Hardly  so,  I  may  point  out,  for,  on  the  evidence  of  the  writer 
himself,  the  room  was  "  at  first  well-lighted  from  a  gas-burner 
overhead,"  and  the  movements  of  the  table,  vibrations  of  the  floor 
and  chairs,  increase  and  lessening  of  the  weight  of  the  table,  play- 
ing of  a  tune  on  the  accordion,  &c.,  took  place  while  the  room  was 
thus  lighted. 

'  Note  by  Mr.  H.  T.  Humphreys  : — "  The  writer  of  the  article  in  the  Times 
was  Mr.  Broome,  and  it  was  not  till  it  had  been  in  the  office  for  several 
months  that  it  appeared,  and  in  criticising  his  language  it  is  but  fair  to  say 
that  it  was  much  altered,  or  we  should  say,  '  toned  down  '  in  the  office  before 
it  was  allowed  to  appear.  It  did  much  good,  however,  for  a  long  correspondence 
afterwards  appeared  in  the  Times  in  which  A.  R.  Wallace  and  others  took  part. 
This  was  suddenly  put  an  end  to  on  account,  it  is  said,  of  strong  remonstrances 
to  Mr.  Delane  (then  editor  of  the  Times)  by  certain  of  the  higher  clergy  of 
the  Church  of  England." 

RUSSIA,    GENEVA,     FLORENCE,    NICE  211 

It  would  seem  that  in  his  secret  heart  the  Titnes  investigator  felt 
that  his  determination  not  to  accept  the  evidence  of  his  own  senses 
had  much  more  to  do  with  his  incredulity  than  the  fact  of  the  light 
having  been  subdued  as  the  evening  went  on,  for  he  had  the  fairness 
to  add  :  "  Mr.  Home  seemed  to  wish  to  conceal  nothing,  and  gave 
us    every    opportunity,    consistent    with    the    above    conditions    for 

satisfying  our  scepticism By  his  request,  we  got  under 

the  table  with  a  lamp  a  great  many  times,  and  insisted  always  on 
seeing  his  hands  and  feet,  or  on  having  them  held  firmly.  As  to 
the  hand  with  which  Mr.  Home  held  the  accordion  under  the  table, 
all  we  know  is  that  on  one  of  our  sub-mahogany  expeditions  with 
the  spirit-lamp,  we  saw  that  hand  quite  still,  and  saw  the  accordion 
moving  up  and  down  and  playing  music.  .  .  .  There  was  nothing 
during  the  whole  evening  except  the  phenomena  themselves  to  suggest 
imposture.  We  tried  our  best  to  detect  it,  but  could  find  no  trace 
of  it.  We  searched  Mr.  Home,  and  found  nothing  whatever  upon 
him  but   his  clothes. 

'■  Yet  even  with  all  this,"  concludes  the  sceptic  of  the  Times 
triumphantly,  "  we  are  not  a  Spiritualist,  and  do  not  even  believe  in 
a  '  Psychic  Force.'  "  Of  course  not.  The  writer  gives  a  fair  and 
candid  account  of  what  he  saw,  with  the  exception  of  the  somewhat 
misleading  reference  to  the  light ;  but  he  had  evidently  made  his  mind 
up,  once  and  for  ever,  that  facts  can  be  disputed,  when  they  relate  to 
the  phenomena  of  Spiritualism.  The  warfare  between  his  senses  and 
his  prepossessions  is  amusingly  illustrated  in  two  passages  of  his 
article.  In  the  first  he  writes,  ' '  The  table  appeared  to  float  up  off 
the  floor."  When  he  penned  the  words,  prejudice  had  evidently  got 
the  upper  hand ;  the  writer  distrusted  the  testimony  of  his  eyesight. 
Towards  the  close  of  his  narrative  he  reverts  to  this  same  occurrence, 
and  says:  "We  are  certain  that  tlie  table  rose  from  the  ground." 
For  the  moment,  reason  had  resumed  her  sway;  and  while  writing 
this  second  passage  the  investigator  believed,  if  but  for  an  instant, 
that  what  his  eyes  had  seen  they  had  seen. 

Early  in  1872,  Mr.  Home  published  that  second  volume  of 
Incidents  in  My  Life  to  which  I  have  made  occasional  reference. 
He  included  in  it  the  principal  affidavits  sworn  on  both  sides  during 
the  progress  of  the  Lyon  lawsuit ;  and  would  have  published  the 
remainder  in  a  third  volume,  had  his  health  allowed  him  to  carry  out 
his  intention  of  continuing  his  autobiography ;  but  during  the  years 
1872  and  1873  he  passed  few  days  that  were  free  from  suffering. 

In  April,  1872,  we  installed  ourselves  at  Paris,  hoping  to  enjoy 
there  a  calmer  life  than  we  had  led  in  Russia ;  but  our  hope  was 
slmttered  by  a  bitter  trial.  In  the  autumn  we  lost  our  child.  Home, 
who  adored  our  little  daughter,  was  heart-broken  by  the  blow ;  and  his 
health  failed  more  and  more.  At  the  moment  of  her  parting  from 
this  world,  we,  and  all  the  others  who  were  present,  heard  as  it  were 
a  hail  of  tiny  sounds  on  the  pillow  where  the  beautiful  little  head 
rested,  and  in  every  part  of  the  room:  we  heard  also  the  sounds  of 
music  and  of  voices.  The  little  coffin  was  laid  in  a  vault  at  St. 
Germain,  and  Home  expressed  the  desire  that  he  might  be  buried  there 
himself. 

212  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

Following  the  counsels  given  to  us,  we  passed  the  winter  at  Nice. 
From  this  moment,  the  health  of  Home  became  my  sole  care.  A 
complete  repose  was  necessary  to  him,  and  I  entreated  that  he  would 
hold  seances  very  seldom.  Change  of  air  and  scene  were  ahvays  of 
benefit  to  him:  and  in  June,  1873,  he  went  to  visit  his  friends  in 
England ;  on  his  return  we  took  refuge  from  the  summer  heats  in 
Switzerland. 

In  November,  1873,  Home  received  news  of  a  young  friend  whose 
acquaintance  he  had  made  two  years  earlier  under  interesting 
circumstances. 

Shortly  after  the  fall  of  the  Commune,  Home  was  in  Paris;  and 
while  one  day  dining  alone  at  a  restaurant,  he  was  waited  on  by  a  young 
man  who  seemed  very  little  accustomed  to  the  calling  he  was  exercising. 
One  of  the  impressions  that  Home  so  often  received  came  to  him  at 
this  moment,  and  he  said  suddenly  to  the  young  Frenchman,  "  You  are 
not  a  waiter — what  are  you  doing  here  ?  ' ' 

Seeing  the  embarrassment  that  the  question  caused  him,  Home 
hastened  to  set  him  at  his  ease.  His  evident  interest  soon  gained  him 
the  confidence  of  the  other,  who  ended  by  relating  his  history.  He 
was  a  young  painter  whom  the  siege  and  the  Commune  between  them 
had  ruined.  Reduced  at  last  to  the  greatest  distress,  he  had  preferred 
becoming  a  garcon  de  cafe  to  dying  of  hunger ;  and  had  only  been  exer- 
cising his  new  calling  for  three  or  four  days  when  Home's  notice  was 
attracted  to  him. 

Such  a  story  awoke  all  the  generous  sympathies  of  the  listener.  He 
exerted  himself  so  effectually  to  be  of  benefit  to  his  new  acquaintance, 
that  he  ended  by  finding  him  artistic  employnjent  in  England.  I  have 
in  my  possession  several  letters  to  Home  from  his  protege,  all  of  them 
written  in  a  strain  of  enthusiastic  affection  and  gratitude.  "  I  ask 
myself  every  day,"  he  writes  in  his  first  letter  after  crossing  the  Channel, 
"  if  I  shall  ever  have  talent  enough  to  prove  myself  worthy  of  all  the 
good  you  have  done  me — morally  even  more  than  materially — when  my 
heart  was  full  of  bitterness  and  discouragement.  I  thank  God  every 
day  for  the  friend  He  has  given  me,  and  pray  Him  to  bless  you — 
Alexis." 

In  November,  1873,  the  writer  of  these  words  returned  to  Paris. 
Home  had  just  before  written  to  him,  and  received  in  reply  the  letter 
of  which  I  translate  a  portion. 

"  Paris,   \^th  November,  1873. 

"  My  dear  Daniel, — The  years  change  you  in  nothing — you  are  always  the 
same  generous  heart,  on  which  it  is  so  good  to  lean.  I  cannot  tell  30U  how 
sad  it  has  made  me  to  learn  the  state  of  your  health,  and  now  I  hope  for 
better  news.  Send  me  a  word  from  the  heart  that  has  known  so  often  how  to 
cheer  a  friend,  who  always  blesses  God  for  having  known  you. 

"  Alexis." 

The  untiring  kindness  of  Home  did  not  always  select  its  objects  so 
happily.  He  could  not  resist  a  tale  of  distress  ;  his  only  impulse  was 
to  relieve.  Ingratitude  that  would  have  hardened  any  ordinary  heart 
had  no  effect  on  him. 

We  left  Switzerland  late  in  December,  1873,  and  went  to  Nice.  The 
following  summer  found   us   in   Florence,    where   Home  found,    as 

RUSSIA,    GENEVA,     FLORENCE,    NICE  215 

everywhere,  old  friends  who  welcomed  his  coming,  and  added  new  ones 
to  their  number.  He  could  not  refuse  the  requests  for  seances  pressed 
on  him;  and  several  took  place  while  we  were  at  Florence. 

Mrs.  Webster  (an  English  lady  residing  at  Florence)  was  one  of 
the  sitters.  I  extract  a  few  lines  from  a  letter  written  by  Mrs. 
Webster  to  me  after  these   seances  : — 

"  I  cannot  tell  how  to  express  to  you  how  much  the  two  seances  at  which 
I  have  had  the  happiness  to  be  present  have  interested  me,  how  deeply  I  am 
moved  by  what  I  have  seen  and  experienced,  and  how  grateful  I  am  to  Mr. 
Home,  as  well  as  to  yourself,  for  having  had  the  kindness  to  accord  us  these 
seances  in  spite  of  the  critical  state  of  his  health. 

"  He  is  the  most  marvellous  missionary  of  modern  times  in  the  greatest  of 
all  causes,  and  the  good  that  he  has  done  cannot  be  reckoned.  .  .  Believe 
me,  I  am  not  seeking  to  say  flattering  things  to  him,  but  I  speak  from  the 
depths  of  my  soul  and  express  my  profound  convictions.  Where  Mr.  Home 
passes,  he  bestows  around  him  the  greatest  of  all  blessings,  the  certainty  of  a 
future  life." 

We  Spent  the  winter  of  1874  at  Nice,  and  most  of  the  ten  winters 
following.  The  blue  sky  and  brilliant  sunshine  of  the  Riviera  did 
something  to  lighten  for  Home  the  burden  of  almost  ceaseless  physical 
suffering ;  and  it  was  pleasant  to  him  to  meet  many  of  the  friends  of 
former  years.  Among  those  whom  we  found  at  Nice  in  the  winter 
of  '74-5,  was  his  old  and  prized  friend  Count  Alexander  de  Komar. 
Count  de  Komar  welcomed  his  arrival  with  joy,  sought  every  oppor- 
tunity of  being  in  his  society,  and  took  the  greatest  pleasure  in 
recalling  the  memories  of  long-past  days  in  Paris.  There  was  also 
in  Nice  at  the  time  another  of  Home's  friends  of  1857,  the  Countess 
Potocka,  who  often  joined  in  these  conversations,  and  added  her  own 
memories  of  remarkable  manifestations  that  she  had  witnessed.  One 
evening,  when  the  talk  thus  ran  on  the  seances  of  1857,  Countess 
Potocka  earnestly  entreated  Mr.  Home  to  hold  at  least  one  seance 
that  winter  at  Nice.  A  few  days  later,  on  December  23rd,  we  met 
to  the  nimiber  of  seven  at  her  residence.     The  circle  was  composed 

of  the  Countess  Potocka,  Count  de  Komar,  the  Countess  de  M , 

Mdlle.  de  Komar,  Mons.  d'Attainville,  Mr.  Home  and  myself.  The 
salon  was  brilliantly  lit ;  and  on  the  chimney-piece  there  were  placed, 
in  addition,  two  large  candelabra.  We  had  no  sooner  taken  our 
places  round  a  large  table  than  we  all  felt  a  distinct  vibration,  which 
was  communicated  to  our  chairs  and  the  floor  of  the  apartment.  Five 
raps  were  struck  on  the  table — a  call  for  the  alphabet;  and  com- 
munications to  several  of  the  sitters  were  spelt  out.  A  small  hand 
caressed  Count  de  Komar,  and  rested  a  little  while  in  his- 

I  will  not  describe  in  detail  the  manifestations  we  witnessed,  but 
will  pass  at  once  to  the  startling  phenomenon  with  the  interruption  of 
which  the  seance  closed. 

Mr.  Home  had  passed  into  a  trance ;  he  walked  about  the  room 
with  closed  eyes,  then  approached  the  fireplace — an  open  fireplace. 
A  large  fire  was  burning  brightly  on  the  hearth ;  and  kneeling  down, 
Home  bathed  his  face  and  hands  in  the  flames,  as  if  in  water.  We 
saw  his  head  encircled  by  the  flame  in  which  it  was  plunged;  and 
at  the  sight  Count  de  Komar  started  from  his  chair,  crying  "  Daniel ! 

214  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

Daniel  !  "  At  the  cry,  Home  recoiled  brusquely  from  his  position; 
and  after  some  instants,  during  which  none  of  us  ventured  to  address 
him,  he  said,  in  the  low,  clear  voice  with  which  he  always  spoke  when 
in  a  trance  :  "  You  might  have  caused  great  harm  to  Daniel  by  your 
want  of  faith ;  and  now  we  can  do  nothing  more. ' '  We  were  not 
told  what  other  manifestations  the  spirits  had  intended  to  produce. 
This  remarkable  phenomenon  of  bathing  his  face  without  injury  in 
flames  had  been  witnessed  more  than  once  previously  in  England. 

During  this  stay  at  Nice  in  1874,  Home  one  morning  received  a 
letter  written  in  a  hand  evidently  disguised.  "  I  am  here  in 
passing,"  it  ran;  "  and  if  you  have  not  forgotten  me,  your  heart  will 
tell  you  what  friend  has  the  same  affection  for  you  always."  There 
was  neither  address  nor  signature.  Home  puzzled  over  the  enigma ; 
and  at  last :  "  It  is  he — it  is  he  !  "  he  exclaimed,  delighted ;  and  on 
my  asking  who: — "Alexis  Tolstoy, — and  if  it  is  really  Alexis,  we 

shall  find  him  at  the  Hotel ."     We  went  there  at  once ;  and  there 

we  found  the  Count,  imprisoned  to  his  room  by  illness  and  suffering 
severely ;  but  always  the  same  noble,  frank,  loyal,  affectionate  nature 
that  Home  had  now  known  for  so  many  years.  I  shall  never  forget 
Tolstoy's  delight  at  seeing  his  friend,  and  at  Home's  having  divined 
from  whom  the  mysterious  note  proceeded.  He  was  passing  through 
Nice  to  Mentone,  and  insisted  on  our  visiting  him  there.  We  did 
not  fail  to  pay  this  visit ;  and  on  our  departure,  it  was  agreed  that 
we  should  pass  the  following  winter  together  at  Florence-  The  project 
was  never  realised ;  for  when  the  time  came  that  should  have  brought 
Tolstoy  to  us,  the  Count  had  passed  from  this  world.  There 
remained  of  him  here  the  memory  of  a  noble  nature,  and  the  fame 
of  a  true  poet. 

In  the  spring  of  1875,  Home's  spirit-guides  prescribed  to  him  a 
course  to  be  followed  for  the  improvement  of  his  health ;  and  in 
pursuance  of  these  counsels  we  passed  some  months  in  Italy,  where 
he  experienced  much  relief  from  the  remedies  he  had  been  directed 
to  employ.  We  wintered  again  at  Nice;  and  there  met  the  Countess 
Sant'  Ainaro,  whom  Mr.  Home  had  known  twenty  years  before,  as 
well  as  her  husband.  Time  had  not  weakened  or  changed  her  friendly 
sentiments ;  and  we  passed  some  agreeable  evenings  at  her  house, 
where  in  February  a  seance  was  held.  The  circle  consisted  of  the 
Countess  Sant'  Amaro,  three  of  her  friends,  Mr.  Home  and  myself. 
The  Countess,  who  had  long  been  widowed,  was  deeply  touched  by 
the  manifestations  of  the  evening,  which  were  principally  addressed 
to  her.  Her  husband  communicated  several  proofs  of  his  identity ; 
and  among  them  there  were  rappings  that  spelt  out  in  Portuguese  a  word 
none  of  the  other  sitters  comprehended,  but  that  the  Countess  at  once 
and  joyfully  recognised ;  for  it  was  the  name  by  which  he  had  been 
accustomed  familiarly  to  call  her.  We  all  heard  a  noise  as  of  some- 
thing being  torn ;  and  at  the  same  instant  five  raps  demanded  the 
alphabet.  "There  is  no  death,"  was  spelt  out;  "therefore,  no 
mourning."  The  Countess  had  never  laid  black  aside  since  her 
husband's  death.  Before  she  could  well  grasp  the  meaning  of  the 
message,  she  felt  some  object  placed  in  her  lap ;  and  on  lifting  this, 

RUSSIA,    GENEVA,     FLORENCE,    NICE  215 

it  proved,  to  her  great  astonishment,  to  be  her  handkerchief,  from 
which  the  black  border  had  been  torn.  After  that  evening,  the 
Countess  laid  aside  her  mourning. 

This  winter  of  1875,  Mr.  Home  saw  pass  from  earth  his  friend 
Count  Alexander  de  Komar,  who  came  to  him  three  days  afterwards, 
and  gave  him  the  simple  and  touching  message,  "  Console  my 
children." 

Numerous  as  are  the  witnesses  whose  testimony  I  have  gathered 
together  in  these  pages,  they  do  not  attest  the  twentieth  part  of  the 
facts,  as  true  as  strange,  that  were  the  means  of  convincing  thousands 
that— 

"  There  is  no  death — what  seems  so  is  transition  : 
This  life  of  mortal  breath 
Is  but  the  suburb  of  the  life  Elysian, 
Whose  portal  we  call  Death." 

CHAPTER  XIII 

i8y6—i886 

"  Lights  and  Shadows  of  Spiritualism."  Home  a  stern  critic.  Dark 
days  of  Spiritualism.  Serjeant  Cox.  Disappointment  of  Crookes. 
Home  and  Mark  Twain.  A  dishonest  friend.  Return  of  N. 
Aksakoff.  Spiritual  messages.  The  transcendental  philosophy. 
Cruel  sufferings.     Joyful  and  beautiful  end. 

During  the  whole  of  1876,  Mr.  Home  was  occupied  with  the  work 
that  he  published  the  following  year  under  the  title  of  "  Lights  and 
Shadows  of  Sfiritualism.'^  He  passed  in  review  in  those  pages  the 
phenomena  both  of  ancient  and  of  modern  times.  A  large  portion 
of  the  volume  was  devoted  to  an  exposure  of  the  noxious  abuses  that 
every  day  were  making  Spiritualism  more  and  more  of  a  byword  and 
reproach.  Home  had  long  watched  with  pain  and  indignation  the 
growth  of  those  abuses ;  and  the  conviction  was  forced  upon  him  that 
it  was  his  duty  to  speak  out  in  earnest  protest.  The  task  was  neither 
a  light  nor  a  pleasant  one.  He  well  knew  what  would  be  the  fury 
of  the  impostors  who  traded  in  sham  spiritual  phenomena ;  and  that 
even  a  louder  outcry  would  come  from  the  enthusiasts  whose  self-love 
he  wounded. 

With  his  accustomed  frankness,  he  made  publicly  known  his  inten- 
tion of  exposing  the  impostures  that  usurped  the  name  of  Spiritualism 
— the  impostures,  not  the  impostors,  be  it  noted ;  for  it  was  not  his 
intention  to  sully  his  pages  by  compiling  a  list  of  detected  cheats, 
but  simply  to  put  too  credulous  persons  on  their  guard.  The  manner 
in  which  his  advertisement  was  received  by  some  persons  professing 
to  be  Spiritualists,  he  described  in  the  chapter  introductory  to  that 
portion  of  his  work  which  dealt  with  the  shadows — the  very  dark 
shadows  of  Spiritualism  : — 

"  I  was  assailed,  both  openly  and  anonymously,  with  slander,  lying  charges, 
foul  personalities,  venomous  abuse, — in  short,  with  every  weapon  which  the 
inost  unscrupulous  partisan  hatred  can  direct  against  the  object  of  its  hostility. 
It  was  what  I  expected,  and  what  I  had  been  forewarned  of.  If  the  attacks 
made  on  me  have  moved  me  at  moments,  the  support  I  have  received  from 
within  and  without,  and  the  consciousness  of  the  rectitude  of  my  intentions, 
have  made  the  effect  but  that  of  a  moment." 

The  book  appeared.  It  made  no  attacks  on  individual  impostors; 
and  the  persons  who  had  feared  to  find  their  names  in  its  pages 
breathed  again.  Each  could  proclaim  with  reference  to  the  facts 
compiled  from  a  hundred  different  sources,  that  they  concerned  his 
neighbours — not  himself. 

While  the  book  was  in  progress,  and  after  its  publication,  Home 
received  numerous  letters  from  friends  in  England  concerning  the 
very  dark  shadows  that  rested  upon  Spiritualism  there.  Among  these 
correspondents,  Serjeant  Cox  was  one  of   the  most  frequent.     The 

216 

1876— 1886  217 

burden  of  the  learned  Serjeant's  complaint  was  always  the  same — 
that  he  could  find  nowhere  else  the  opportunities  for  thorough  and 
systematic  investigation  of  the  phenomena  that  he  had  enjoyed  a  few 
years  earlier  with  Mr.  Home. 

"  In  the  investigations  in  which  you  so  kindly  assisted  me,"  wrote  Serjeant 
Cox  on  March  8th,  1876,  "  there  was  nothing  of  this  precaution  and  mystery. 
You  sat  with  me  anywhere,  at  any  time  ;  in  my  garden,  and  in  my  house ;  by 
day  and  by  night ;  but  always,  with  one  memorable  exception,  in  full  light. 
You  objected  to  no  tests  ;  on  the  contrary,  you  invited  them.  I  was  permitted 
the  full  use  of  all  my  senses.  The  experiments  were  made  in  every  form  that 
ingenuity  could  devise  ;  and  you  were  as  desirous  to  learn  the  truth  and  the 
meaning  of  it  as  I  was.  You  sat  alone  with  me,  and  things  were  done  which, 
if  four  confederates  had  been  present,  their  united  efforts  could  not  have 
accomplished.  Sometimes  there  were  phenomena,  sometimes  there  were  none. 
When  they  occurred  they  were  often  such  as  no  human  hand  could  have  pro- 
duced without  the  machinery  of  the  Egyptian  Hall.  But  these  were  in  my 
own  drawing-room,  and  library,  and  garden,  where  no  mechanism  was  possible. 
In  this  manner  it  was  that  I  arrived  at  the  conviction — opposed  to  all  my 
prejudices  and  preconceptions — that  there  are  forces  about  us  of  some  kind, 
having  both  power  and  intelligence,  but  imperceptible  to  our  senses,  except 
under  some  imperfectly-known  conditions.  I  did  not,  and  with  subsequent 
extended  inquiry  I  cannot  now,  arrive  at  the  conclusion  you  have  come  to  that 
these  invisible  agents  are  spirits  of  the  dead." 

As  a  pendant  to  the  epistle  of  Serjeant  Cox,  the  following  letter 
may  find  a  place  here.  It  was  written  by  a  gentleman  who  is  a 
relative  of  Lord  Dunraven,  and  who  had  shared  in  a  portion  of  his 
investigations  of  the  phenomena  : — 

"  Athen^um  Club,  nth  Oct.,  1875. 

"  My  DEAR  Home, —  ...  I  feel  more  than  half  inclined  to  run  over  to 
Paris,  merely  to  have  a  talk  with  you. 

"  The  phenomena  I  have  witnessed  through  your  kindness  are  the  only 
things  left  to  which  I  attach  any  hope.  All  the  other  phenomena  of  so-called 
Spiritualism  of  which  I  have  been  a  witness — except  those  accruing  through 
you — have  been  in  the  last  degree  unsatisfactory  ;  and  altho'  I  could  offer  no 
explanation  of  them,  they  seemed  to  me  more  likely  to  be  the  result  of  trick 
than  of  the  action  of  disembodied  spirits.  Are  you  yourself  absolutely  and  fully 
certain  that  the  phenomena  which  undoubtedly  occur  thro'  your  mediumship 
are  the  acts  of  the  spirits  of  those  who  have  already  lived,  and  that  there  is  no 
other  explanation  possible  of  these  phenomena?     .     .     .     Very  truly  yours, 

"  B.  Nixon." 

In  January,  1877,  Mr.  Nixon  writes  :  "  While  what  I  have  seen 
when  you  were  present,  and  what  I  have  heard  of  as  vouched  for 
by  men  like  Crookes,  Serjeant  Cox  and  others,  thoroughly  accustomed 
to  the  investigation  of  physical  phenomena  and  the  value  of  evidence, 
seem  to  me  to  place  the  reality  of  the  phenomena  beyond  all  doubt  or 
question — whenever  I  have  tried  lately  to  acquire  personally  any 
fresh  light  or  evidence,  I  have  always  been  placed  under  circumstances 
and  conditions  of  the  most  unsatisfactory  and  suspicious  character." 

"  If  anything  can  kill  Spiritualism,  it  will  be  the  follies  and  con- 
temptible meannesses  of  the  Spiritualists  themselevs.  As  to  the  fact 
of  Spiritualism,  and  the  grand  importance  of  the  establishment  of  the 
reality  of  spirit-life,  there  can  be  no  question  about  them,  and  they 
must  be  the  solid  comfort  of  every  thinking  man  ;  but  what  ridiculous 
and  mischievous  stuff  we  see  imported  into  the  movement  every  day  ! ' ' 

p 

2i8  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

These  words  were  written  from  Italy  to  Home,  in  the  spring  of  1876, 
by  a  very  old  friend  whom  he  had  not  seen  for  years,  the  well-known 
author,  William  Howitt.  Mr.  Howitt's  convictions — impressed  on 
him  by  his  seances  with  Mr.  Home  some  fifteen  years  earlier — were 
unchanged ;  but  he  had  long  watched  with  despair  the  condition  into 
which  English  Spiritualism  was  sinking,  and  had  withdrawn  from 
all  connection  with  the  movement. 

Another  of  Home's  correspondents  of  1876  was  a  still  older  friend, 
an  Englishman  by  birth,  an  Italian  by  long  residence — the  celebrated 
artist,  Seymour  Kirkup,  of  Florence,  on  whom  the  title  of  Baron 
had  been  conferred ;  a  recognition  by  Italy,  I  believe,  of  his  labours 
in  connection  with  the  poems  of  Dante. 

"  Dearest  old  friend,"  writes  Baron  Kirkup  in  April,  1876:  "  You  were  very 
young  when  you  knew  me  in  Florence  ;  and  it  is  impossible  for  me  ever  to 
forget  you.  .  .  .  How  I  long  for  your  new  book  !  I  never  trusted  these 
dark  seances  :  I  could  have  done  by  trick  all  I  saw  accomplished.  But  to  deny 
the  true  because  of  the  false  is  like  saying  there  is  no  good  coin  because  one 
has  met  with  a  bad  shilling.  I  have  seen  much,  and  so  have  thousands  of 
competent  witnesses.     Yours  for  ever,  "  Seymour  Kirkup." 

"  In  a  letter  from  Wilkinson  lately,"  writes  Mr.  William  Howitt 
to  Mr.  Home  in  February,  1876,  "he  said  he  had  seen  Crookes, 
who  said  he  could  not  get  on  with  his  experiments  on  Spiritualism 
because  the  mediums  in  London  are  such  cheats."  Mr.  Howitt's 
testimony  to  the  more  than  unfavourable  opinion  of  Mr.  Crookes 
concerning  the  materials  with  which  he  had  endeavoured  to  carry  on 
his  experiments  after  the  departure  of  Mr.  Home  from  England  is 
given  at  third-hand,  it  will  be  noticed.  None  the  less,  it  was  abso- 
lutely correct.  "  I  am  so  disgusted  with  the  whole  thing,"  wrote 
Mr.  Crookes  to  Mr.  Home  on  November  24th,  1875,  "  that,  were 
it  not  for  the  regard  we  bear  to  you,  I  would  cut  the  whole  Spiritual 
connection,  and  never  read,  speak,  or  think  of  the  subject  again." 
And  writing  to  Mr.  Home  nine  years  later,  in  1884,  Mr.  Crookes 
says  :  "  My  belief  is  the  same  as  ever,  but  opportunities  are  wanting." 

I  might  multiply  such  plaints  by  the  dozen  from  letters  written 
about  this  time  to  Mr.  Home.  It  never  seemed  to  occur  to  the  writers 
that  their  misfortunes  were  very  much  their  fault.  The  phenomena 
they  had  witnessed  and  tested  at  seances  with  Home  were  "  light- 
loving  phenomena,"  as  one  scientific  investigator,  Mr.  Simpson, 
justly  styled  them.  The  light  might  be  daylight  or  artificial  light, 
but  there  was  always  light.  Home  imposed  no  conditions  on  the 
investigator.  So  far  from  avoiding  tests,  he  welcomed  them ;  and 
the  more  stringent  they  were,  the  better  they  pleased  him.  Let  the 
sceptic  be  never  so  sceptical  (and  I  have  surely  accumulated  in  these 
pages  sufficient  testimony  to  the  original  incredulity  of  Robert 
Chambers,  Dr.  Elliottson,  Mr.  Serjeant  Cox,  Mr.  Crookes,  and  a 
hundred  other  inquirers  named  by  me),  a  candid,  careful  investigation 
of  the  phenomena  always  resulted  in  his  acceptance  of  them  as  facts. 
He  might,  with  Mr.  Serjeant  Cox,  attribute  the  marvels  he  had  seen 
and  tested  to  "  psychic  force;"  or,  with  Lord  Lytton,  conjecture 
the  existence  of  a  race  of  beings  alien  to  mankind ;  or,  with  Robert 

1876 — 1886  219 

Chambers,  Robert  Bell,  and  many  others,  feel  it  impossible  to  doubt 
longer  of  the  continued  existence  of  our  lost  friends  and  their  nearness 
to  us;  but  if  he  were  honest,  and  honestly  spoke  out  his  mind,  he 
invariably  admitted  that  it  was  impossible  to  conceive  of  the  mani- 
festations as  otherwise  than  genuine. 

I  have  shown  by  tlie  evidence  of  hundreds  of  witnesses  that  Mr. 
Home  had  no  concealments,  but  always  urged  the  observers  present 
to  scrutinise  in  the  most  rigid  manner  every  phenomenon  that 
occurred.  Thousands  in  every  country  did  so;  and  the  accumulation 
of  proof  upon  proof  forced  them  to  recognise,  that  the  phenomena 
were  neither  delusions  nor  deceptions,  but  facts.  Like  Serjeant  Cox, 
the  inquirer  might  find  this  conviction  "  opposed  to  all  his  prejudices 
and  preconceptions;  "  but  he  could  only  add,  with  Mr.  Crookes,  "  I 
am  conscious  that  my  senses,  both  of  touch  and  sight — and  these 
corroborated,  as  they  were,  by  the  senses  of  all  who  were  present — 
are  not  lying  witnesses  when  they  testify  against  my  preconceptions." 

Once  convinced  of  the  existence  of  the  phenomena,  investigators 
commonly  began  to  ask  themselves:  "If  they  occur  in  Home's 
presence,  why  not  in  the  presence  of  others?  It  is  improbable  that 
he  is  the  sole  f>erson  in  the  world  who  possesses  this  marvellous  gift. ' ' 
It  was  natural  that  they  should  so  reason,  and  that  they  should  seek 
to  test  their  conjectures  by  experiment.  What  was  their  plain  duty 
in  conducting  these  researches  for  new  marvels?  Surely  to 
experiment  as  they  had  experimented  with  Mr.  Home ;  to  investigate 
only  in  the  light,  and  if  phenomena  occurred,  to  subject  them  to  a 
rigid  scrutiny.  "  Where  the  conditions  imposed  are  just  such  as  are 
calculated  to  prevent  detection  if  trickery  is  designed,"  says  Serjeant 
Cox  in  one  of  his  letters  to  Home,  "  we  are  bound  to  look  with  the 
Titmost  suspicion  upon  all  that  is  done;  and,  indeed,  we  should  refuse 
to  take  part  in  any  such  unsatisfactory  experiment." 

An  excellent  precept,  but  did  the  learned  Serjeant  and  others  act 
upon  it?  On  the  contrary,  their  eagerness  to  experiment  further 
was  such,  that  \vhen  they  were  unable  to  do  so  under  conditions 
favourable  to  the  interests  of  truth,  they  resigned  themselves  to 
conditions  that  bore  a  suspicious  air  of  having  been  imposed  to 
prevent  the  detection  of  trickery.  With  Mr.  Home  they  had 
investigated  in  full  light;  but  the  persons  with  whom  they  afterwards 
sat  insisted  on  a  darkness  that  would  have  discouraged  owls.  With 
Mr.  Home  they  had  subjected  the  phenomena  to  the  strictest  scrutiny 
and  the  most  searching  tests  ;  but  these  new  phenomena  were  too  coy 
for  either  scrutiny  or  tests.  What  could  result  from  "  investigations  " 
so  conducted  but  loss  of  time  and  temper?  Either  the  inquiry  was 
abandoned  in  disgust  when  it  was  found  that  the  "manifestations" 
obstinately  persisted  in  refusing  to  occur  in  the  light  or  the  inquirer 
persisted  in  his  discouraging  task  till,  emboldened  by  previous 
impunity,  the  exhibitor  of  the  spurious  phenomena  ventured  on  more 
open  trickery  and  was  convicted  of  imposture. 

"  Light,"  wrote  Mr.  Home  in  The  Lights  and  Shadmvs  of 
Spiritualism,  "  is  the  single  test  necessary,  and  it  is  a  test  which  can 
and  must  be  given.     By  no  other  means  are  scientific  inquirers  to  be 

220  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

convinced.        Where   there    is    darkness,   there  is  the  possibility   of 
imposture,  and  the  certainty  of  suspicion." 

It  was  retorted  on  Mr.  Home  by  certain  Spiritualists  that 
occasionally  his  own  seances  had  been  held  in  a  very  feeble  light. 
"Every  form  of  phenomena,"  he  replied  {Lights  and  Shadows,  p. 
333),  "ever  occurring  through  me  at  the  few  dark  seances  has  been 
repeated  over  and  over  again  in  the  light,  and  I  now  deeply  regret 
ever  having  had  other  than  light  seances.  What  we  used  to  term 
darkness  consisted  in  extinguishing  the  lights  in  the  room,  and  then 
we  used  to  open  the  curtains,  or,  in  very  many  instances,  have  the  fire 
lit  (which,  if  burning,  was  never  extinguished),  when  we  could  with 
perfect  ease  distinguish  the  outline  form  of  everyone  in  the  room. 

"Of  another  class,"  he  justly  added,  "are  the  dark  seances  at 
present  held." 

Home  might  have  also  replied  that  the  seances  he  held  in  a  feeble 
light  had  been  with  friends  who  had  previously  tested  the  phenomena 
in  a  strong  light  and  satisfied  themselves  of  their  genuineness. 
Those  who  are  already  convinced  do  not  need  to  be  a  second  time 
converted.  Nor,  I  repeat,  were  his  seances  ever  dark  seances.  The 
light  might  be  dim — ^but  still  it  was  light,  not  darkness. 

The  disappointing  results  of  subsequent  investigations  undertaken 
by  Mr.  Crookes,  Serjeant  Cox,  &c.,  so  far  from  detracting  from  the 
value  of  those  made  with  Home,  added  one  more  proof  of  the 
convincing  nature  of  the  phenomena  witnessed  in  his  presence.  That 
they  did  so  may  easily  be  made  clear  to  the  candid  reader,  whether 
Spiritualist  or  sceptic. 

A  hundred  English  inquirers  whom  I  might  name  began  their 
investigations  with  Mr.  Home  as  sceptics.  They  confidently 
expected  to  be  able  to  attribute  the  phenomena  to  deception  or 
delusion.  They  were  compelled  by  overwhelming  proof  to  recognise 
them  as  facts. 

No  longer  sceptics  but  believers,  they  sought  elsewhere  for  new 
marvels — with  what  result?  That  they  met  with  imposture,  and 
discovered  it  to  be  imposture.  Yet  they  were  now  convinced  of  the 
existence  of  the  phenomena ;  whereas  when,  according  to  their  shallow 
critics,  they  had  been  deceived  by  Mr.  Home,  they  were 
as  sceptical  concerning  the  phenomena  as  any  of  those  critics. 
Imposture  failed  to  dupe  them  when  they  became  believers; 
yet  the  assertion  is  loudly  advanced  that  these  very  same  observers 
were  duped  while  they  were  still  sceptics.  A  candid  thinker  will 
scarcely  find  the  theory  plausible. 

Lights  and  Shadows  had  many  readers  in  England  and  very  many 
in  America.  The  book  was  abused  by  the  foolish  and  welcomed  by 
the  sensible.  "  I  cannot  understand,"  wrote  to  Mr.  Home  an 
esteemed  American  Spiritualist,  Mr.  Hudson  Tuttle,  "  why 
Spiritualists  so  oppose  your  book.  It  only  tells  the  truth.  I  said  in 
my  review  of  your  Lights  and  Shadows  that  it  was  the  beginning  of  a 

new  era Spiritualism   here  is  now   slowly    approaching   the 

scientific  plane   that  I  have   laboured    for  twenty   years  to  have  it 

1876— 1886  221 

reach.     I  regard  your  Lights  and  Shadows  as  the  opening  cannonade 
of  the  battle. " 

"  The  book  made  you  sad!"  wrote  Home  to  Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall.  "  So  it  did 
me,  and  doubly  so  does  the  so-called  Spiritualism  of  the  day.  Right-minded 
people  have  left  and  are  every  day  leaving  the  movement.  ...  I  see  just 
such  rays  of  '  Light  '  as  are  granted  to  you,  but  I  also  see  '  Shadows,'  which 
when  they  began  to  form  were  no  bigger  than  a  man's  hand,  but  they  have 
increased  with  a  most  alarming  rapidity,  and  at  last  are  to  be  found  intercept- 
ing the  very  light  we  are  praying  and  hoping  for.  My  work  is  not  written  to 
obtain  the  praise  of  men  ;  it  is  written  to  expose  the  falsehoods  which  are  fast 
obscuring  a  truth  which  is  all-important  to  mankind.  If  I  had  a  thousand 
years  to  live  on  earth,  I  would  rather  speak  out,  and  bear  the  heavy  burden 
of  blame  which  I  know  will  be  cast  upon  me,  than  remain  silent,  and  feel  the 
certitude  that  I,  too,  was  playing  a  dishonest  part  in  keeping  silence." 

The  years  with  which  I  am  dealing  were  years  of  much  suffering  to 
Mr.  Home;  but  from  time  to  time  it  was  relieved  in  a  way  that 
surprised  his  medical  advisers,  who  did  not  know  to  what  to  attribute 
these  unexpected  improvements  in  his  health.  They  were  still  more 
astonished  by  the  manner  in  which  our  spirit  guardians  sustained  his 
physical  forces  beneath  the  burden  laid  on  them.  Again  and  again 
celebrated  physicians  declared  his  case  to  be  hopeless;  and  in  1877 
one  of  the  most  eminent  of  French  medical  authorities  predicted  that 
he  had  not  three  months  to  live.  Yet  he  lived  on,  and  was  supported 
through  all.  I  have  often  seen  during  the  night  a  light  shine  round 
him,  while  a  hand  issuing  from  a  luminous  cloud  made  passes  over  his 
face,  as  if  blessing  him,  and  ended  by  making  on  his  forehead  the  sign 
of  the  cross.  Often  the  spirits  dictated  long  communications  to  him ; 
cheering  him  with  words  of  encouragement  and  love — that,  above  all, 
were  needed  while  he  was  busy  with  his  task  of  exposing  the  abuses 
of  Spiritualism ;  for  no  effort  was  spared  by  those  hostile  to  that  task 
to  make  him  renounce  it.  Take,  for  example,  a  sentence  in  a  letter 
written  from  St.  Petersburg  in  March,  1876,  which  went  so  far  as  to 
say  that  it  was  improper  for  him  to  write  this  book — "  even  if  he  had 
at  his  disposal  the  most  convincing  evidence."  Nothing  could  be 
more  dishonourable  than  the  duplicity  of  such  principles  to  the  truth 
that  it  was  Home's  mission  to  proclaim.  "  No  man  can  serve  two 
masters  ;  "  and  Home  was  not  able  to  range  himself  on  the  side  of  such 
a  conscience.  Nor  could  he  think,  with  his  correspondent,  that  it  is 
ever  unbecoming  to  speak  the  truth.  It  is  not  astonishing  that 
Spiritualism  should  sink  very  low  in  Russia,  when  the  truth  has  such 
pioneers  as  this  Russian  champion  to  sustain  it. 

In  April,  1876,  a  leading  French  journal  published  a  telegram 
announcing  Home's  sudden  death.  The  news  was  speedily  telegraphed 
to  the  chief  newspapers  in  Europe  and  America,  and  the  whole 
civilised  worlrkwas  thus  informed  that  "  D.  D.  Home  had  been  found 
dead  in  a  railway  carriage  while  travelling  between  Berlin  and  St. 
Petersburg."  The  exact  origin  of  the  first  false  telegram  was  never 
traced  ;  but  it  is  significant  that  in  certain  quarters  dark  hints  had  been 
thrown  out  that  Home  would  not  live  to  complete  his  work.  If  some 
of  the  silliest  of  the  Theosophists  spoke  the  tnith,  he  had  been  solemnly 
cursed  by  the  high  priestess  of  their  superstition;  and  her  curses,  it  was 

222  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

added,  always  slew.  Others  of  his  ill-wishers  were  either  ignorant  of 
these  baleful  curses,  or  doubted  their  efficacy ;  for  Home  received  more 
than  one  anonymous  letter  threatening  his  life,  if  he  persisted  in  his 
task.  As  he  paid  no  attention  to  the  threats,  his  enemies  took  his 
life — by  means  of  the  newspapers. 

Day  after  day  during  the  month  of  April,  1876,  he  continued  to 
receive  from  all  quarters  obituary  notices  of  himself,  in  a  dozen 
different  languages — a  class  of  reading  that  it  has  fallen  to  the  lot 
of  few  men, besides  Home  to  enjoy.  Some  of  these  biographers  re- 
lated the  facts  of  his  life  with  no  more  distortion  than  was  inevitable 
to  a  hasty  and  badly-informed  writer ;  others,  French  journalists 
especially,  indulged  in  an  unblushing  license  of  romance  that  outdid 
anything  ever  published  in  England.  It  is  not  every  day  that  this 
peculiar  kind  of  genius  obtains  such  scope  for  its  exercise  as  the 
author  of  the  false  report  of  Home's  death  had  afforded  to  it. 

In  May  we  left  Nice  for  the  baths  of  La  Malou.  "  Alexander 
Dumas  Ms  is  here,"  wrote  Home  to  a  friend  in  England;  "  and  I 
went  to  call  on  him  yesterday.  You  would  have  laughed  to  see  the 
way  he  stared  at  me,  and  said  :  '  In  the  first  place,  you  died  a  month 
or  two  ago;  and  in  the  next  place  you  look  positively  younger  than 
when  I  last  saw  you  seventeen  years  ago.'  These  baths  are  doing 
wonders  for  me,  and  I  walk  now  without  a  stick." 

Among  the  American  readers  of  the  report  of  Home's  death  was 
the  aunt  who  had  adopted  him  in  his  infancy  and  whose  old  age  he 
had  provided  for.  The  following  extract  from  a  newspaper  of 
May,  1876,  tells  the  effect  on  her  of  the  cruel  falsehood  : — 

"  At  Elwood,  on  the  6th  of  May,  passed  from  earth  Mrs.  Mary 
McNeil  Cook,  aged  70,  the  aunt,  and  mother  by  adoption,  of  D.  D. 
Home,  Esq.  Our  readers  will  be  pained  to  hear  that  her  departure 
was  caused  by  the  shock  of  hearing  the  false  intelligence  of  Mr. 
Home's  sudden  death.  A  paralytic  seizure  was  the  result,  and 
the  poor  lady  never  rallied." 

Probably  this  announcement  never  reached  the  eyes  of  the  inventor 
of  the  story  of  Home's  death,  and  the  worthy  being  in  question  may 
thus  have  been  deprived  of  the  gratification  of  learning  what  bitter 
pain  his  lie  had  given. 

I  may  relate  here  an  incident  in  Home's  life  of  a  date  six  years 
later.  One  of  his  friends  in  France  was  the  author  and  journalist 
Henri  Delaage,  whose  acquaintance  with  Home  dated  back  to  1857. 
Delaage  died  at  Paris  on  the  15th  of  July,  1882.  We  were  then 
travelling  in  Switzerland;  and  on  July  17th  arrived  at  Mornex,  a 
little  village  near  Armegy,  in  Savoy.  Fatigued  with  the  journey, 
Home  had  sat  down  to  rest  himself ;  but  on  entering  the  room  a  few 
minutes  afterwards,  I  was  surprised  to  see  him  standing  at  the  open 
window  looking  fixedly  into  a  large  garden  outside.  "  Look,"  he 
said,  "there  is  Delaage;"  and  then  added,  "No,  I  see  nothing 
now;  and  yet  a  moment  ago  he  was  there." 

It  was  some  months  since  we  had  received  any  news  of  Delaage, 
but  the  last  had  left  him  in  his  usual  health.     Home  felt  sure,  how- 

1876 — i886  223 

ever,  that  his  friend  had  quitted  earth ;  he  had  seen  the  form  too 
distinctly  to  doubt  of  its  identity ;  and  to  make  certainty  more  certain, 
a  few  hours  later  we  heard  rappings,  and  the  following  message 
was  spelt  out :  "  I  keep  my  word.     H.  D." 

"  If  it  was  an  illusion,"  wrote  Home,  the  next  day  to  Paris,  in  describing 
his  vision,  "  I  shall  be  much  astonished ;  for  we  had  made  each  other  a 
promise  on  this  subject,  and  I  remember  very  well  that  when  the  report  of  my 
death  was  spread  some  years  ago,  Delaage  said  to  whoever  would  listen  to 
him  :  '  What  nonsense  !  If  Home  were  dead,  he  would  have  come  to  tell  me 
so.'  ...  I  await  with  impatience  the  Figaro,  to  which  I  subscribe,  and 
which  will  certainly  speak  of  him  if  he  is  no  more  of  this  world.  Unfor- 
tunately, the  numbers  addressed  to  me  go  first  to  Louche,  so  that  the  date  of 
the  last  received  by  me  is  the  13th.  ...  If  the  good  fellow  is  as  usual, 
say  nothing  to  him  of  what  I  have  told  you." 

The  recipient  of  Home's  letter  carried  it  at  once  to  the  Paris 
Figaro ;  and  the  whole  story  was  related  in  that  journal  on  July  22nd, 
under  the  heading,  "  Home  et  Delaage." 

During  the  years  that  followed  the  publication  of  "  Lights  and 
Shadows, ^^  Home's  spirit-guides  enjoined  on  him  complete  repose 
from  all  occupation  involving  mental  labour  or  anxiety.  We  travelled 
constantly ;  for  change  of  scene  and  climate  were  among  the  necessary 
conditions  of  his  life.  The  summers  of  1877  and  1878  saw  us  in 
Russia  ;  and  part  of  each  was  passed  in  the  far  south-east,  on  an 
estate  in  the  Government  of  Samara.  The  scenery  is  among  the  most 
charming  in  Russia;  and  Home  was  enchanted  with  it.  "I  have 
just  accomplished  a  journey  of  250  miles  in  a  posting  carriage," 
he  writes  to  a  friend  in  England.  "  Such  a  lovely  country,  my  dear 
John.  Hill  and  dale,  forest  and  field,  river  and  rivulet  and  lake, 
and  in  the  dim  distance  the  Ural  Mountains.  I  am  trying  the  cele- 
brated cure  of  '  Koumis  ' — ^mare's  milk  prepared  in  a  certain  way.  I 
have  a  Tartar  who  has  been  on  the  steppes  many  years,  and  nine 
mares  are  milked  twice  a  day  for  me." 

At  Paris  in  1879,  Home  saw  a  good  deal  of  the  first  of  American 
humourists,  who  came  to  one  or  two  of  the  private  readings  to  which 
he  from  time  to  time  invited  his  friends,  and  was  charmed,  like  all 
other  listeners,  by  the  alternate  humour  and  pathos  of  the  narrator. 
Home  enjoyed  greatly  the  work  that  Mr.  Clemens  had  just  com- 
pleted, "  A  Tramp  Abroad  "  ;  and  wishing  to  give  an  idea  of  it  to 
friends  at  St.  Petersburg,  had  one  of  its  most  laughable  episodes, 
the  famous  "Modern  French  Duel,"  translated  into  Russian  with 
the  author's  permission.  Mark  Twain's  remark  on  receiving  a  copy 
of  the  translation  (of  which  he  could  not  read  a  word)  was  charac- 
teristic. "  It  seems  an  excellent  translation,"  he  wrote  to  Home; 
"  at  any  rate  it  looks  funnier  than  it  does  in  English.  If  it  has  a 
defect,  it  has  escaped  me." 

Year  after  year  Mr.  Home  continued  to  be  oppressed  by  the  burden 
of  an  enormous  correspondence.  To  whatever  corner  of  Europe  we 
fled,  hundreds  of  letters  pursued  ;  and  it  was  often  physically  iin- 
possible  for  him,  a  constant  invalid,  to  reply  to  one  half  of  his 
correspondents.  Spiritualists  in  Spain,  Holland,  Italy,  and  other 
countries   wrote  entreating   him  to  visit   them  and   found  societies. 

224  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

or  stimulate  with  his  presence  the  vitality  of  a  languishing  cause. 
Inquirers  sent  requests  for  seances  or  for  information ;  and  correspon- 
dents by  the  score  inflicted  on  him  at  merciless  length  their  particular 
opinions  concerning  Spiritualism.  It  was  happy  for  him  that  his 
indifference  to  the  small  troubles  of  life  was  so  great  and  his  temper 
so  sweet,  or  he  would  have  lost  the  latter  almost  every  time  a  fresh 
batch  of  letters  reached  us. 

His  patience,  and  that  generous  belief  in  others  which  no  dis- 
appointments could  kill  in  him,  were  destined  to  be  severely  tried. 
A  blind  and  absolute  confidence  had  led  him  to  deposit  on  a  simple 
acknowledgment  (and  even  for  that  Home  did  not  ask)  a  large  sum 
of  money  in  the  hands  of  one  whom  he  believed  to  be  a  friend ;  and 
this  person  now  refused  to  render  up  the  charge  confided  to  him. 
Home  would  not  take  legal  proceedings  to  punish  this  breach  of  trust, 
more  painful  morally  than  materially ;  although  his  Russian  advocate 
wrote  to  him  :  "  You  have  a  full  right  to  reclaim  this  deposit,  and 
there  is  no  doubt  that  the  tribunal  would  decide  in  your  favour." 
In  the  end  restitution  of  the  money  was  made  without  a  lawsuit ;  but 
this  cruel  affair  gave  a  shock  to  Home's  nervous  system  from  which 
he  never  recovered.  His  sufferings  became  still  more  acute,  his 
strength  diminished  more  and  more;  and  in  the  end  this  event  cost 
him  his  life. 

In  September,  1881,  we  received  at  Geneva  a  letter  from  my 
uncle.  His  Excellency  N.  Aksakoff,  who  was  neither  a  Spiritualist 
nor  a  believer  in  the  life  after  this.  Its  writer  spoke  of  the  interest 
with  which  he  had  read  reviews  of  "  Lights  and  Shadows  of 
Spiritualism,^'  and  of  his  great  desire  to  read  the  book  itself.  He 
urged  Home  to  have  so  interesting  and  valuable  a  work  translated  into 
French  without  further  delay.  "  I  wish  to  read  your  book  as  soon 
as  possible,"  he  wrote.  "  Have  it  translated  and  printed,  and  send 
me  a  copy  of  so  honourable  and  interesting  a  work.  Your  affectionate 
friend. — N.  Aksakoff." 

My  uncle  quitted  this  life  before  the  translation  of  "  Lights  and 
Shadows  "  was  ready;  and  Mr.  Home  dedicated  the  book  to  his 
beloved  memory.  "As  a  feeble  tribute,"  ran  the  inscription,  "  in 
return  for  the  proofs  of  esteem  and  affection  that  he  constantly  gave 
me.  I  was  the  prouder  of  his  friendship  in  that  he  united  to  the 
nobleness  of  his  name  that  other  nobleness  which  comes  of  greatness 
of  soul  and  goodness  of  heart. 

In  April,  1882,  some  weeks  after  his  departure  from  this  world, 
we  received  at  St.  Petersburg  the  following  communication  : — 

"  He  begins  to  believe  that  he  lives,  but  he  often  fears  that  it  is 
a  dream." 

Hardly  had  these  words  been  spelt  out  when  we  heard  sounds 
resembling  footsteps — the  very  step  of  my  uncle — in  the  apartment 
adjoining  that  in  which  we  were ;  and  the  portiere  between  the  two 
was  drawn  back.  We  saw  a  hand  separate  the  curtains  and  then 
let  them  fall  into  their  place.  I  distinctly  saw  the  full  form  of  the 
spirit  as  he  approached  us.  The  rappings,  which  had  been  silent  for 
a  moment,  recommenced.     "  It  is  true — it  is  true,"  was  spelt  out; 

1876 — 1886  225 

"and  there  is  my  shadow  "  (at  that  instant  I  felt  something  placed 
in  my  hand),  "  the  shadow  of  him  who  loved  you  dearly.  The 
shadow  of  the  past  in  no  way  resembles  the  being  of  the  present; 
but  affection  has  not  changed — rather,  it  has  augmented.  Take  it; 
it  is  I  who  give  it  to  you.  You  have  touched  my  hand — I  have,  then, 
a  hand.  I  live:  God  Is."  These  last  words  were  spelt  out  by 
louder  sounds,  more  slowly  struck ;  as  if  wishing  to  make  us  feel  all 
the  reverence  they  expressed.  Then  the  message  recommenced  :  "  My 
beloved  Daniel,  I  love  you  more  than  ever — We  must  go;  "  and  the 
rappings  ceased.  We  heard  again  the  sound  of  the  well-known  step — 
growing  gradually  more  distant.  I  lit  a  candle,  to  see  what  object 
had  been  placed  in  my  hand ;  and  found  it  to  be  a  framed  photograph 
of  my  uncle,  that  had  been  taken  from  the  adjoining  drawing-room. 
It  was  indeed  his  shadow ;  and  the  phrase  was  characteristic,  for  in 
this  world,  when  jesting  at  the  notion  of  a  future  life,  his  habitual 
sarcasm  had  been  :  "  You  will  see  my  shade  appear  to  you  by  and 
by." 

From  that  night  he  was  often  with  us,  and  gave  us  the  most  con- 
vincing proofs  of  his  identity,  and  of  his  continued  affection. 

To  relate  in  detail  Home's  life  during  these  last  years  on  earth 
would  be  simply  to  tell  a  story  of  great  suffering  patiently  and 
cheerfully  borne.  In  place  of  this,  let  me,  now  that  I  approach  the 
close  of  my  work,  state  briefly  the  substance  of  many  conununications 
made  concerning  the  life  beyond  this. 

The  greater  part  of  such  communications  were  given  through  Home 
while  he  was  in  a  state  of  trance.  When  he  passed  into  this  condi- 
tion, the  expression  of  his  countenance  became  singularly  sweet; 
"  angelic,"  writes  one  who  had  seen  him  many  times  in  the  trance, 
Mr.  S.  C.  Hall.  There  was  nothing  resembling  excitement  in  these 
trances;  look,  manner,  and  voice  were  calm.  "  The  change  which 
takes  place  in  him,"  wrote  Lord  Dunraven,  "  is  very  striking;  he 
becomes  as  it  were  a  being  of  a  higher  type.  There  is  a  union  of 
sweetness,  tenderness,  and  earnestness  in  his  voice  and  manner  which 
is  very  attractive."  As  a  rule,  Home's  eyes  were  fast  closed  in  the 
trance;  but  he  moved  about  the  room  as  readily  and  naturally  as  if 
they  had  been  open,  appearing  to  follow  some  unseen  guide. 

The  communications  already  detailed  as  having  been  made  in  1876 
by  Home's  old  American  friend,  Ward  Cheney,  and  in  1882  con- 
cerning my  uncle,  show  that  the  spirit,  on  passing  from  earth,  had 
often  the  greatest  difficulty  in  realising  the  new  conditions  of  his 
being;  that  the  change  seemed  to  him  a  dream.  The  world  in  which 
he  found  himself  was  so  like  this — spiritually  like  this,  not  materi- 
ally ;  himself  was  so  thoroughly  himself,  that  he  refused  to  believe 
he  had  quitted  earth ;  and  the  greater  his  attachment  to  earth  had 
been,  the  more  obstinate  was  his  incredulity.  Hundreds  of  com- 
munications given  through  Home  refer  to  this  gradual  wakening  of 
the  spirit  to  the  consciousness  that  the  second  birth  called  death  was 
an  accomplished  fact.  To  some  that  awakening  comes  swiftly,  to 
others  slowly ;  but  it  does  not  seem  that  it  is  ever  instantaneous. 

One  very  noticeable  fact  with  regard  to  these  messages  is  that  in 

226  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

the  spirit-world  the  idea  of  good  is  so  intimately  associated  with 
light,  that  of  evil  with  darkness,  that  the  spirits  employ  '  light  '  and 
'  good  '  as  synonymous  terms,  '  darkness  '  and  '  evil  '  as  also 
synonymous.  "  We  can  see  all  light,"  was  said  in  the  course  of  one 
of  the  trance-communications,  "  the  most  beautiful  combinations  of 
light.  We  see  the  progress  either  of  growth  or  decay,  that  is  taking 
place  in  everything."  "  To  us,"  another  message  ran,  "  the  spirit- 
land  of  higher  spheres  is  like  a  beautiful  planet,  luminous,  shining 
forth  as  our  goal — and  spheres  higher  and  higher  still  brighten  as 
we  advance  in  the  vista  of  everlasting  progress." 

This  last  word  -progress  is  the  keynote  of  the  messages,  one  and  all. 
I  would  have  written  *'  of  the  teachings,"  but  the  expression  would 
be  misunderstood.  Home's  mission  was  to  teach  by  facts,  not  by 
words.  He  was  passive  with  regard  to  the  words  spoken  through 
him  in  the  trance,  as  passive  as  the  wire  that  conveys  the  electric 
current.  When  he  woke,  he  had  no  more  consciousness  of  that  which 
he  had  uttered  than  has  the  wire  of  the  message  that  has  just  passed 
over  it.  To  those  who  questioned  him  whether  these  supramundane 
declarations  were  to  be  regarded  as  worthy  of  credence  or  not,  he 
responded  invariably:  "  Do  as  I  do;  try  all  communications  by 
the  help  of  your  conscience  and  your  reason." 

Mrs.  Hennings,  some  of  whose  experiences  have  been  narrated  in 
a  former  chapter,  relates  that  she  had  often  begun  to  speak  to  Mr. 
Home  concerning  messages  given  through  him  in  the  trance,  and  that 
he  had  always  stopped  her.  At  last,  she  asked  him  why  he  did  so. 
Home  thereupon  explained  that,  as  he  had  not  the  faintest  recollec- 
tion of  anything  which  occurred  in  the  trance,  he  preferred  not  to 
receive  particulars ;  for  they  mixed  themselves  up  in  his  memory  with 
the  facts  of  his  waking  life,  until  he  became  imable  to  separate  one 
from  the  other. 

It  has  been  often  objected  that  the  wide-spread  acceptance  by 
humanity  of  the  noble  conception  of  a  life  of  infinite  progress,  in 
place  of  the  fancies  of  heaven  and  hell,  would  encourage  the  sinful 
to  put  off,  with  Felix,  their  reformation  to  "a  more  convenient 
season  " — that,  in  fact,  men  would  abandon  themselves  to  a  life  of 
vice  here  on  earth,  with  the  convenient  resolution  of  leading  a  life  of 
virtue  in  the  world  to  come.  One  might  ask  in  reply  what  the 
accepted  teachings  of  heaven  and  hell  have  done  for  the  world  at 
large?  Is  its  condition  of  to-day  an  outcome  of  those  teach- 
ings? And,  if  so,  is  that  outcome  one  to  be  regarded  with 
satisfaction?  But  the  true  answer  to  such  an  objection  is  that  the 
same  revelations  which  speak  of  orogress  as  an  eternal  condition 
of  our  being,  speak  of  punishment  as  an  eternal  condition 
of  our  sins.  There  is  no  escape,  say  the  spirit-messages.  Evil  and 
misery  are  one;  and  they  who  miss  the  knowledge  of  that  truth  on 
earth  are  preparing  for  themselves  a  terrible  awakening  to  it  hereafter. 
In  all  these  communications  it  is  earnestly  inculcated  that  "  Now  is 
the  appointed  time."  "  If  you  strive  earnestly  and  prayerfully  here, 
you  enter  your  true  life  in  a  state  fitted  for  it."  "  Only  a  perfect 
submission  to  the  crosses  of  earth  can  work  out  for  you  a  higher  and 

1876— 1886  227 

purer  life."  "  Follow  Christ's  teaching,  and  carry  out  His  mission." 
"  We  know  all  your  sufferings  and  shortcomings,  and  what  you  have 
to  contend  w  ith ;  for  have  not  we,  too,  been  mortals,  have  we  not 
wearied  on  the  roadside,  and  had  our  times  of  agony  and  doubt." 
I  might  go  on  to  make  scores  of  such  extracts  from  even  the  few 
fragments  that  have  been  preserved  of  the  trance-communications 
spoken  through  Home.  The  vast  majority  of  those  communications 
were  never  written  down,  and  live  only  in  the  minds  of  the  hearers. 

"  I  shall  never  forget,"  writes  one  of  those  hearers,  "  the  awfully 

thrilling  way  in  which  M spoke  through   Home,  the  desolation 

of  the  picture  she  drew  of  her  feelings.  The  words  I  do  not  recollect 
— the  effect  of  them  I  shall  always  remember." 

Why,  it  was  asked  at  one  seance,  do  not  spirits  manifest  their 
presence  frequently  to  us,  and  aid  us  to  shun  the  wrong  and  seek 
the  right? — as  if  we  can  judge  how  far  spirits  do  actually  influence 
us.  or  can  form  any  conception  of  the  difficulties  under  which  they 
labour  in  seeking  to  make  their  presence  known.  The  answer  given 
through  Home  in  a  trance  is  well  worthy  of  attention. 

"  You  should  take  a  higher  view  of  it  than  that.  You  wonder  why  spirits 
do  not  help  you.  Are  you  not  a  spirit?  You  only  have  the  earthly  envelope 
about  you.  Rouse  yourself,  and  help  yourself ;  do  not  expect  others  to  help 
you  if  you  do  not  act  yourself.  Yet  do  spirits  interfere  in  a  thousand  ways 
that  you  little  dream  of,  and  never  notice.  It  is  a  common  thing  for  people 
to  say,  '  If  spirits  are  about  us,  why  don't  they  manifest  themselves?'  Is  not 
God  everywhere?  Is  He  not  about  you?  Why,  then,  does  He  not  manifest 
Himself?  God  has  so  ordained  that,  though  many  of  you  spend  your  lives 
looking  for  evidence  of  His  existence,  yet  every  day  you  pass  by  unnoticed  the 
most  wonderful  and  beautiful  evidences." 

A  circumstance  of  these  communications  not  always  suflSiciently 
borne  in  mind  by  the  recipients  was  that  their  makers  experienced 
great  difficulty  in  endeavouring  to  convey  to  men  still  in  the  material 
body  an  idea  of  the  life  of  man  in  the  spiritual  body.  They  could 
say,  for  instance,  that  such  a  spiritual  body  clothed  them,  that  it 
was  "exactly  like  the  material  body,  only  isHghtly  smaller"; 
but  the  impression  the  words  left  was  frequently  either  vague  or 
erroneous.  It  was  hard  for  the  hearers  of  those  words  to  conceive 
of  a  spiritual  body,  that  took  form  from  the  spirit  itself,  and  was 
beautiful  or  hideous  as  the  spirit  was  good  or  evil.  Our  beauty  or 
deformity  in  the  world  beyond  this  is  of  our  own  making ;  and  it  is 
here  on  earth  that  we  mould  our  souls  into  one  or  the  other  form. 
At  the  touch  of  Death  the  veil  of  clay  drops  from  us,  and  shows  us 
as  we  are. 

"  How  do  you  make  us  see  you?  "  a  sitter  asked  of  the  spirits 
while  Home  was  in  the  trance.  "  Sometimes,"  was  the  answer, 
"  we  make  the  actual  resemblance  of  what  we  were,  so  that  we 
appear  exactly  as  we  were  known  to  you  on  earth ;  sometimes  we  pro- 
ject an  image  that  you  see,  sometimes  we  cause  it  to  be  produced 
upon  your  brain ;  .sometimes  you  see  us  as  we  are,  with  a  cloud-like 
aura  of  light  around  iBs." 

In  the  spirit-world,  as  in  this,  likeness  attracts,  unlikeness  repels; 
but   far  more  strongly  than  on  earth.       This  declaration   was   re- 

228  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

peated  and  emphatic  in  the  trance-mesisages  given  through  Home.  It 
is  the  key  to  some  of  the  most  difficult  problems  of  Spiritualism. 
The  popular  conception  of  the  happiness  of  hereafter  is  a  state  in 
■which  spirits  can  commune  at  will  with  each  other.  The  spirits 
say  that  no  such  illimitable  communion  exists ;  that  in  the  next 
world,  as  in  this,  there  are  difficulties  of  intercourse.  Here  the 
great  obstacle  is  distance  from  those  we  love.  We  seek  at  will  the 
society  of  a  friend  in  the  next  street ;  we  communicate  less  freely 
with  one  a  hundred  miles  off ;  we  may  hear  nothing  for  years  of  a 
third  in  the  interior  of  Africa.  These  earthly  obstacles  to  inter- 
change of  thought  and  sympathy  have  their  spiritual  counterparts. 
Distance  in  the  next  world  is  the  distance  of  soul  from  soul ;  and  it 
is  sometimes  so  great  as  to  render  communion  impossible.  "  Between 
us  there  is  a  great  gulf  fixed,"  are  words  that  take  a  very  solemn 
meaning  in  view  of  those  declarations  from  the  ispirit- world.  Con- 
sciously or  unconsciously,  we  are  working  to  widen  that  gulf  every 
day  that  we  live  on  earth ;  and  according  to  our  works  we  shall  find 
it  set  hereafter  between  us  and  the  evil,  or  between  us  and  the 
good.  In  the  latter  event,  declares  Spiritualism,  it  may  be  bridged  : 
but  how  slowly  and  how  painfully  ! 

Spirits  tell  us  that  the  peace  of  the  life  to  come  is  peace  from  the 
doubts,  sorrows,  and  struggles  of  earth ;  that  the  adoration  they  offer 
to  the  Creator  is  obedience  to  His  will ;  that  their  joys,  the  joys  we 
cannot  conceive  or  measure  are  found  in  forgetfulness  of  self  and 
love  of  others.  They  tell  us  that  to  live  for  others  is  to  draw  nearer 
to  God.  "  From  the  Eternal  Source,"  says  a  trance-message 
spoken  through  Home,  "  goes  forth  the  Eternal  Light  to  which  we 
aspire."  Light — Love — Good;  in  the  comprehension  of  the  spirits 
of  the  blest,  these  three  are  one. 

When  the  human  mind  tries  to  conceive  of  Eternity,  it  commonly 
falls  into  the  error  of  figuring  it  ais  endless  Time.  In  these  trance 
conmiunications,  the  spirits  invariably  declare  that  the  word  time 
had  lost  its  meaning  for  them.  "  We  know  not  of  time,"  says  a 
message  now  before  me;  "  to  us  yesterday,  to-day,  to-morrow  are 
all  one.  Had  we  houijs,  days,  yea.rs,  even  ages,  like  you,  we 
should  say  time  passes  slowly  or  time  passes  fast.  We  never  tire ; 
we  are  eternity."  That  is  to  say,  eternity  does  not  present  itself 
to  us  after  death  as  endless  Time,  the  passage  of  which  we  mark, 
but  as  an  infinite  State,  wherein  we  progress. 

A  question  was  once  asked  at  a  seance  concerning  the  compara- 
tive truth  of  different  religions.  The  answer — given  through  Home 
in  the  trance — was  :  "  Even  the  poor  Pagan  who  bows  down  before 
his  idol  possesses  the  germ  of  truth,  inasmuch  as  he  worships  some- 
thing outside  and  beyond  himself."  It  seems  to  me  that  there  is  a 
whole  sermon  in  these  words. 

In  March,  1883,  Mr.  Home  passed  at  Nice  his  fiftieth  birthday. 
His  health  had  been  too  feeble  all  winter  for  him  to  go  much  into 
society ;  but  he  received  his  friends  as  often  as  possible — friends 
whose  number  was  constantly  being  added  to.  On  his  birthday, 
the  20th  of  March,  a  crowd  of  the  foreign  colony  of  Nice  assembled 

1876 — 1886  229 

to  fete  the  invalid,  whom  they  surrounded  with  a  prodigious  heap  of 
baskets  and  bouquets  of  flowers.  Home,  although  a  prisoner  to 
his  arm-chair  and  suffering  severely,  preserved  all  his  accustomed 
exquisite  affability  in  welcoming  and  thanking  his  friendly  visitors ; 
and  complied  with  the  general  desire  by  reciting  to  them  several 
pieces  in  French  and  English,  among  them  a  poem  that  I  have 
already  referred  to  as  being  one  of  his  favourites,  the  "  Grand- 
mother "  of  Tennyson.  He  never  rendered  it  with  more  effect; 
and  the  same  was  the  case  with  the  little  piece  that  followed — 
"  Carcassonne,"  the  masterpiece  of  Nadaud. 

We  passed  the  following  winter  in  Russia,  part  of  it  at  Moscow. 
While  we  were  there,  the  Countess  Tolstoy  arranged  an  amateur 
performance  in  aid  of  the  poor,  and  Mr.  Home  took  part  in  it ; 
so  did  my  cousin  John  Aksakoff,  the  well-known  Slavophil  leader, 
not  less  celebrated  as  a  poet.  He  had  not  heard  Home  recite 
before ;  and,  the  reading  over,  ran  up  to  him  in  a  transport  of 
enthusiasm.  "  It  was  perfect — it  was  perfect!  "  he  exclaimed; 
"  I  never  before  heard  anything  so  perfect." 

Towards  the  close  of  1884,  Home  predicted  to  me  that  his  malady 
was  approaching  a  crisis,  and  that  it  would  be  long  and  painful. 
He  described  minutely  all  that  would  happen ;  and,  in  speaking  of 
the  increased  sufferings  through  which  he  foresaw  that  he  was  about 
to  pass,  said,  "  God,  who  sends  the  trial,  knows  better  than  we  why 
He  sends  it :  I  trust  myself  wholly  in  His  hands.  I  shall  recover 
if  no  complication  supervenes  :  if  it  does,  His  will  be  done.  I 
am  not  anxious  for  you — God  will  support  you.  I  shall  not  suffer 
at  the  last." 

All  that  he  had  predicted  was  realised  even  to  the  superhuman 
force  God  sent  me.  He  suffered  cruelly — long  and  cruelly. 
-There  were  intervals  of  ref)Ose  from  pain,  then  increased  suffering. 
These  few  words  tell  all  that  need  be  told  of  the  story  of  eighteen 
months. 

In  June,  1886,  the  complication  of  which  he  had  foretold  the 
danger  supervened,  and  attacking  the  lungs,  proved  quickly  fatal. 
The  last  three  days  we  both  knew  that  all  was  ended  for  us  on  earth. 
He  retained  full  consciousness  to  the  last;  and  resignation — an 
ineffable  resignation — illumined  his  features,  as  the  thin  thread  that 
held  the  spirit  to  the  body  slowly  parted.  His  one  thought  was 
to  inspire  me  with  strength  to  survive  him,  and  to  make  me  feel  that 
he  was  but  gone  a  little  way  before  me ;  and  he  spoke  to  me  much  of 
God's  great  goodness  to  us,  and  of  friends  m  heaven.  They  were 
around  him ;  he  saw  them,  named  them,  and  stretched  forth  his  hands 
to  them  with  joy.  He  had  ceased  to  suffer ;  death  came  to  him,  as  he 
had  predicted  it  would  come,  without  a  pang.  During  these  last 
hours,  he  seemed  no  more  of  this  world ;  the  soul,  disengaged  from 
all  that  was  material,  already  anticipated  its  union  with  the  Supreme 
Being  and  the  life  eternal.  It  was  no  dream,  no  hope  to  him,  that 
life ;  he  had  prepared  himself  for  it  by  his  life  on  earth ;  and  now, 
in  this  moment  of  a  sublime  and  tranquil  death,  he  saw  it  open 
bright  before  him,  while  slowly,  painlessly,  the  last  ties  of  spirit 
and  body  were  gently  loosed. 

230  LIFE    AND    MISSION    OF    HOME 

It  was  his  desire,  as  I  have  elsewhere  said,  to  be  buried  in  the 
same  vault  with  our  little  daughter.  As  she  was  laid  in  the  Russian 
cemetery  near  Paris,  it  was  necessary,  I  learned,  for  the  interment  to 
be  conducted  according  to  the  ritual  of  the  Greek  Church.  Our  Lord 
pays  no  heed  to  forms,  but  judges  each  according  to  his  works;  and 
I  had  no  hesitation  in  complying.  Home  had  received  the  sacrament 
some  days  before  with  a  devotion  that  deeply  touched  the  priest, 
who  said,  in  leaving  him,  that  we  should  rejoice  and  not  mourn  when 
God  finds  a  soul  so  ready  to  be  called  to  Him. 

In  quitting  its  earthly  envelope,  the  spirit  had  left  imprinted  on 
the  face  an  expression  of  celestial  happiness ;  a  peace  neither  of  sleep 
nor  of  death,  but  of  immortality,  that  seemed  to  say,  with  the 
Apostle,  "O  death,  where  is  thy  sting!  O  grave,  where  is  thy 
victory  !"  That  tranquil  happiness  did  not  pass  from  his  features; 
and  I  had  a  photograph  taken  of  them,  in  which  the  shadow  of  its 
beauty  is  preserved. 

Home  wished,  and  had  always  wished,  that  his  interment  should 
be  simply  conducted,  and  should  be  without  show  of  mourning.  "  I 
desire  my  funeral  to  be  as  simple  as  possible,"  he  wrote  in  his  will, 
"  and  that  all  tokens  and  signs  known  as  mourning  may  be  entirely 
discarded."  In  accordance  with  his  injunctions,  the  vanities  of 
funereal  pomp  were  absent  from  the  interment ;  and  when  the  service 
in  the  Russian  church  was  performed,  the  priests,  instead  of  being 
robed  in  black,  wore  their  festival  attire  of  white  and  gold.  No 
shadow  darkened  that  mystic  and  imposing  service,  the  noble  chants 
of  which  were  admirably  rendered.  The  coffin,  buried  in  flowers 
and  raised  on  a  brilliantly-lit  dais,  had  nothing  dismal  in  its  aspect ; 
it  became  a  simple  token  of  our  loving  farewell  to  the  mortal  garment 
of  him  whom  God  had  called  from  earth  before  us. 

The  sentiment  of  all  who  were  present  at  the  church  found  expres- 
sion in  the  words  of  a  friend  : — "  The  whole  effect  was  grand, 
solemn,  and  suggestive,  as  the  full  voices  of  the  choir  rose  and  fell 
in  solemn  cadence,  and  the  rich  soft  strains  of  swelling  harmony 
filled  the  building,  dying  away  in  distant  echoes  repeated  from  dome 
to  dome." 

Home's  grave  is  at  St.  Germain.  A  plain  cross  of  white  marble 
rises  from  a  Calvary,  on  which  is  engraved  :  "  Daniel  Dunglas  Home. 
Born  to  earth-life  near  Edinburgh  (Scotland),  March  20th,  1833. 
Bom  to  spirit-life  :  '  To  another  discerning  of  spirits'  (ist  Corinthians, 
I2th  chapter,  loth  verse) :  June  21st,  1886." 

THE  END. 

St.  Stephen's  Printing  Works, 
Bristol. 

^IcS 

University  of  California 

SOUTHERN  REGiONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 

405  Hilgard  Avenue,  Los  Angeles,  CA  90024-1388 

Return  this  material  to  tfie  library 

from  whicli  it  was  borrowed. 

^AL  UNI  VERS  A    000  669  104    2 

''  '^f  California,  San  Diego 

"'"-  DUE
