Incidents in My Life (Daniel Dunglas Home, 1863)
================================================
Daniel Dunglas Home — The century's most famous medium's own account — the primary source on Victorian physical mediumship. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (incidentsinmyli00homegoog) — First Series. Scan via Internet Archive (incidentsinmylif00homeuoft) — Second Series, 1872.

This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http : //books . google . com/ 

^. 

/ i-'u /a ^i/, ^s. li/ 

^ 

* 

^^/ 

INCIDENTS IN MY LIFE. 

BY 

D. D. HOME. 

WITH ATT TNTBODUCTION BY JUUQB EDMONDS, 

miB^TJEI KIDIXION". 

NEW YORK: 

A. J. DAVIS & CO., 274 CANAL STREET. 

1864. 

•f-ei-C: V' C^(-. MT'.IM- 

mm*oeoiimiiw«iv 
noH 

TMC KQIKST W 

Entered according to Act of Congress, in the vear 186.i, 

Br GEO. W. CARLETON, 

In tlie Clerk's Office of the Ujptnct Court tor the Southern District of Kew 
York. 

;\.^^ 

CONTENTS. 

Paoi 
Introduotion vii 

CHAPTER I. 
Early Life: I become a Medium • 17 

CHAPTER II. 
Before the World 83 

CHAPTER in. 
Further Manifestation* in America 70 

CHAPTER IV. 
In England 86 

CHAPTER V. 
At Florence, Naple , Rome and Paris 136 

CHAPTER VI. 
In Amerioa. The Pressgaug 149 

TT CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER VII. 

Paoi 
1867-8— Prance. Italy, and Russia— Marriage 164 

CHAPTER VIII. 
Russia, Paris and England 188 

CHAPTER IX. 
The "Cornhill" and other Narratives 318 

CHAPTER X. 
Miraoulous Preservation. France and England S90 

CHAPTER XI. 
A Diary and Letter 5261 

CHAPTER Xn. 
In Memoriam 386 

INTEODUCTION 

TO THE AMEBIOAN EDITION. 

It is now about fifteen years since there occurred at Bo- 
cliester, in the State of New York, some incidents of so 
nnnsnal a character as to excite a very lively attention. 

These incidents were, the locomotion of ponderable objects 
without any perceptible mortal agency, and the creation of 
sounds without any discoverable human origin ; and through 
their instrumentality, such an intelligence displayed as ena- 
bled conversation to be carried on with the unseen power 
that was acting thus strangely in their midst. 

Through the conversation thus opened, it was professed 
that these things were done by the spirits of those who had 
once lived on the earth, and that the object was to open a 
communication between the living and the dead. 

Such a claim was received by an almost universal disbe- 
lief — ^by vehement condemnation of the impiety, or unspar- 
ing ridicule of the credulity which could receive or avow it. 

Still the thing went on, and impelled by curiosity or the 
love of the marvelous, people began to investigate — ^and as 
investigation progressed, the belief in the spiritual origin of 
the phenomena spread, until in a short time, people of all 
classes and positions in society, and of all conditions of in- 

; 

Viil JNTRODUOTION TO THE AMERICAN EDITION. 

telligence and education, inquired — ^and most of those who 
inquired, believed. 

Confined originally to one locality, it soon spread to other 
parts of that State and to adjoining States. Limited, at first, 
to three young girls as the " mediums " through whom 
these things were* done, the power was soon manifested 
through others, of different sexes and ages. 

The ordinary newspaper press of the day was alive with 
the details and discussion of the incidents and their origin 
Periodical papers were established, devoted to the topic 
and numerous volumes were published with the same pur 
pose. The whole matter wa? subjected, both as to the facts 
and their sources, to the severest scrutiny which ingenuity 
and acuteness could devise. Solutions of the mystery, pro- 
fessing to be satisfactory, put forth even under the auspices 
of such men as Sir David Brewster, and Professors Faraday 
and Agassiz, were of frequent occurrence, and the press and 
the pulpit seemed to unite in one voice of denunciation of 
the monstrous fraud and delusion. 

Still the thing moved steadily on, until before the expira- 
tion of the first decade after its advent, the instruments 
through whom the things were done were counted by thous- 
ands in this country, and the believers by millions, and kin- 
dred manifestations were breaking out throughout the world, 
and appearing on different continents, among people of di- 
verse nationalities and language, simultaneously, without 
any missionary effort on our part, and apparently without 
preconcert with us or between themselves. 

Thus at length — through this instrumentality and by the 
testimony of these hosts of witnesses — was established in 
this country the marvelous fact of ifiammate matter moving 
toithotU mortal cofUact, and displaying intelligence, and 
thaZ intelligence so great as to " speak in many tongues,'* 
and to read the inmost unuttered thoughts of man. 

Among the early instruments used to bring about such a 
result in this country, was D. D. Home, whose experience 
is given in the ensuing pages. He was of a mild and gen- 
tle disposition, sincere and simple-minded, yet of a passive 
rather than an affirmative character, with a strong devotional 
tendency. - 

He was never known much in this country as a medium. — 

INl'BODUOnON TO THE AMERICAN EDITION. IX 

His powers were not more remarkable than those of many 
others who were in daily use at the time, and during a good 
part of the time that elapsed between the development of 
his powers and his departure for Europe, his mediumship 
was confined to a very small circle, consisting of gentlemen 
of education and of means, who were, through him, thorough 
ly investigating the subject. 

Such an investigation, by men of science, of learning, of 
intelligence, and of standing, was earnestly sought and re- 
peatedly urged by the educated ones of those who, on wit- 
nessing the phenomena, found in it, a profound mystery. It 
was often said to that class of men, whom we were wont to 
regard as our teachers and leaders in knowledge, " Here is 
something that we cannot fathom. Come you to our aid ! 
Here are incidents for which we can find no origin in the laws . 
of nature known to us, which we are told are not supernatu- 
ral, but in conformity with nature. Come ye and discover 
this unknown and extraordinary power which thus tends to 
lead us into the domain of the magical and the miraculous ! 
Here is an intelligence displayed by inanimate matter which 
professes to be that of the dead. Come ye to our rescue, 
and unfold to us, if it is possible, some other theory than 
the spiritual, as explanatory of these uncommon events. — 
For if that cannot be done, and this thing is what it pro- 
esses to be — a communion with the spirits of the departed 
—the importance of this new phase of human life cannot be 
exaggerated " 

To such appeals the response was often favorable, and 
such investigations were had in different parts of the coun- 
try ; which resulted, not so much in the discovery of the 
nature of this new power, as in establishing to all who 
would expend a thought on the subject, the reality of its 
existence, and in some degree, what it was capable of 
achieving. 

As soon as this end was attained in this country, demon- 
strations of that character almost wholly ceased among us, 
and spirit communion assumed a new and most interesting 

Meanwhile Europe lagged behind the celerity of our 
movement, and as we were beginning to read in this New 

X INTBODUOnON TO THE AMEBIOAN BDITIOK. 

TeHtament from God to man, we could occasionally hear that 
her people were just entering on their A, B, C. 

So that when Home arrived in England, in the possession 
of a power then quite common in this country, but almost 
anknown there, he at once attracted great attention — and it 
will be seen in the following pages, how wide-spread and 
earnest was that att<^ntion among the higher classes, as well 
on the Continent as in England. The same lively interest 
in these, the primary steps of the Communion, was displayed 
there that had been seen here, some ten years before. That 
interest still continues there. I will mention as an instance 
of this, that some time ago 1 received a letter from Home, 
requesting leave to send me the advanced sheets of his 
forthcoming work, in order to their publication here ; and 
when I received those sheets, they came to me, not from 
him, but from a friend, because he had been sent for by the 
Emperor of the French and had departed for Paris. • 

The office which his book will perform in Europe will be 
somewhat different from what it will perform with us. There, 
it will be mainly to establish the fact of spiritual inter- 
course. With us, we have an abundance of testimony on 
that point, not only in the oft recorded experience of the 
past, but in the great number of private Circles, now scat- 
tered all over our land, where every one may see and judge 
for himself. 

To some in this country too that will be the office of his 
book, but to very many it will be different, and the book 
will find its chief interest in the plain, simple detail of fact, 
and the great accumulation of testimony in support of that 
detail, and in the fact that it is a clear delineation of the 
first step of many which have been taken within the last 
fifteen years. 

That first sfep has been pretty thoroughly investigated in 
America, until a great revolution has been wrought in the 
public mind as to its actuality. 

The next thing — and we are prepared for that now in this 
country — is to obtain for the subsequent steps the same tho- 
rough and searching scrutiny. 

And it is the object of this introduction to bespeak for 
those subsequent steps the closest investigation that science, 
education and acuteness can give. It is impossible for any 

INTRODUCTION TO THE AMKBIOAN EDITION. XI 

one mind or any small number of minds to do that wisely 
and well. It requires very many minds and numerous ob- 
servations and a gathering together of the results of very 
many inquiries, before a satisfactory conclusion can be ar- 
rived at, and every possible objection be foreclosed. Just 
as in astronomy, the discoveries of the last hundred years 
have exceeded those of any prior equal period, because of 
the largely increased number of observers and improved 
means of observation. It may be the same in spiritual in- 
tercourse. Many things now obscure may be rendered 
clear ; many things deemed impossible may be shown to be 
possible ; and many things which to the uninstructed mind 
may be terrifying, may be rendered at once attractive and 
salutary. All that is wanted is patient, persistent investi- 
gation. 

This appeal of mine would however be incomplete, if I 
should omit to define more particularly what are the topics 
for which I supplicate a scrutiny, and so I proceed to mefi* 
tion them. 

First. If it be true that the spirits of the dead can com- 
mune with us, then it must be, that they can reveal to us 
what is the state of existence into which they were ushered 
on dying, and what is the mode of life they are leading 
there. This they profess to do, and this seems to me to be 
the primary and main object of this whole movement. I 
have myself received a great deal of information on this 
subject. Some I have already given to the world, but 
there is a great deal more that I have not. I am ready to 
give it as soon as I find the world ready to receive it — not 
amid the furor if superabundant wealth, with all the selfish* 
ness, luxuiy and extravagance whi<3h follow in its train, nor 
amid the evil passions which civil war engenders — ^but bye 
and bye, when the afflictions which God is bringing upon us 
shall have performed their destined office of softening our 
hearts, and opening them to the entrance of the gentle voice 
which is now coming to us in ever-increasing tones from 
beyond the grave. 

As the life on earth is never exactly alike in any two 
persons, so life in the spirit world is never alike to 4iny 
two immortals. Behold then ! How many spirits must 
commune with us, and how many mortals must engage in 

Xll INTEODCOTION TO THE AMEBIOAK EDITIOK. 

that commumon before enougli can be obtained for us to be 
able to say and to feel that we know what is the life beyond 
the grave. As in astronomy it took the observations of 
many, many persons for several thousand years, to enable 
us to arrive at the truth in regard to our planetary system^ 
so this far more momentous truth must come to us in the 
same way, as the result of many observations by many per- 
sons. What can one man, or even a score do in this res- 
pect ? The question is easily answered. How few have 
ever read or believed what I have published in regard to 
the spirit world ! Yet let the inquirer be convinced of what 
this book of Home's teaches, namely, that there is such a 
thing as direct communication with departed spirits, and he 
can himself make his own inquiries, and receive direct an- 
swers to himself, and thus from personal observation may 
come to believe that which he finds it so hard to receive 
through me. Others and others again doing the same thing, 
the result would be such an accumulation of testimony that 
there would be as little doubt upon this subject as there is 
now of the actual existence of spiritual intercourse. 

And when that time shall come, when a rational know- 
ledge of what the great change — the mortal putting on im- 
mortality — actually is, shall be substituted for the dreadful 
fear of death which now so often frightens man from his 
propriety, and enslaves his mind with a worse than Egypt- 
ian bondage, what imagination can picture the vast increase 
that will flow to the happiness, the wisdom, and the purity 
of man ! 

Secofid, Another topic, on which much evidence has al 
ready been received, but much more is necessary to a full 
understanding, is involved in the question in what manner, 
and to what extent are we, in the mortal life, surrounded 
and affected by the spirits of the departed ? 

There is abundant evidence to show that we are ever sur- 
rounded by them, and much to induce us to believe that 
every mood of mind has its kindred spirit ; whence it 
would seem to follow that we are ever liable to be influenc- 
ed for good or evil by our unseen companions. But many 
important questions arising out of these facts are yet un- 
solved. For instance : To what extent and under what 
circmnstances can the attendant spirits influence us ? And 

INTRODtTCnON TO THR AMERIOAN BDITION. Xlll 

what is onr protection against the evil of this influence ?— 
Can we ourselves control it by control ing our mood of 
mind ? And if we need help, can we obtain it, and how ? 
Here perhaps will be found the solution of the oft disputed 
proposition of the efiicacy of prayer. Here, perchance, we 
may l^yn that as Grod always works through his instru- 
ments, 80 the mood of mind which prompts us to pray, may 
drive evil far from us, and draw closely around us the min- 
istering spirits who may be charged with the function of 
answering our petitions, and who might not otherwise be 
able to approach and do for us that which they see, as well 
as we do, is needful for us. 

And here too, perchance, may be found the solution of 
many mental conditions which ignorant doctors are apt to 
treat as incurable insanity. I have seen a good many 
cases, and myself cured several, where the physicians had 
been appealed to in vain. 

It is not long since that I was invited by one of our 
Medical Societies to attend the reading of a paper on Insan- 
ity by aJJ^erman Doctor. In some remarks I made on that 
paper, I took occasion to call the attention of the faculty to 
this subject, and detailed to them several of the cases in 
which I had cured, and I did so in the hope that they would 
investigate for themselves, and see whether there was not 
something in that. Unhappily, in their publication of my 
remarks, they omitted this part, and with it an inquiry, 
which I cannot but think highly pertinent — " Whether the 
medical profession might not find in these and cognate cases 
something worthy of their most careful investigation ?" 

And now in this connexion I may repeat the question 
already asked — If the inquirer believe in the communion 
announced in these pages of Home, and he can, by availing 
himself of that communion, learn the cause and the cure of 
any number of cases of Insanity, be they many or few, why 
not investigate ? Does mere investigation hurt ? It never 
hurts any thing but error, and sometimes perchance the 
first propounder of the truth — but the truth itself it never 
hurts. 

Third, Another deeply interesting topic, on which some 
revelation has been had and more may be, is What is the 
soul ? And how is it connected with the body ? Whdt form 

XIV IKTEODTTOnON TO THE AMEBIOAN EDITIOK. 

or covering does it assume, when corruption puts on incor- 
ruption ? And what are its relative powers before or after 
death ? 

In this topic are embraced the phenomena of sleep and 
dreams — of clairvoyance (long a subject of dispute, but now 
received as a fact, though involved in profound myi^ry)— 
of the spirit photographs — of a spiritual telegraph, and the 
philosophy and explanation of spirit communion. 

On all these subjects many facts and principles have al- 
ready been learned, and many more may be. Enough has 
been learned to show us that we need not remain in ignor- 
ance any longer. 

For instance : One winter, four or five years ago, I 
tried some very interesting experiments. Two seances were 
held at the same time, (allowing ten minutes for the differ- 
ence of longitude) in New York and Boston. Careful rec- 
ords of what occurred at both places were preserved — and 
upon comparing them it was found that the two parties, 
though two hundred and fifty miles asunder, conversed with 
each other as if present face to face. The modus operandi 
was shown to me, and many explanations given. The ex- 
periments were continued for several weeks, but it was 
found that they were attended with danger, and they were 
abandoned. The cause of that danger was discovered, and 
it was found that in due time it could be obviated. 

Since these experiments, I have made no continued ef- 
forts in that direction, but I have experienced many inci- 
dents calculated to show the practicability of such a com- 
munion among us even in this earth life. 

Another instance will be found to be in the spirit photo- 
graphs, which profess to be likenesses of the departed as 
they now live in the spirit life. Several years ago I re- 
ceived from the far West — Illinois I think^some crude 
specimens of this phenomenon, and was informed of what 
was intended and what it was hoped would be attained. Now 
a more matured form of it has appeared in Boston, and 
many pictures have been taken, which there is every reason 
to believe are likenesses of the departed as they exist now. 
Time and repeated observations will show how this is. And 
if it should become a well established fact, surely every one 

INTBODUCTION TO THE AMERICAN EDITION. XV 

will see at a glance how powerful is the evidence thus given 
of an existence beyond the grave. 

Connected with this subject is the power of seeing and 
delineating scenes and objects in the spirit land. I have 
received much evidence in this regard, and have in my 
colleqtion some interesting specimens, all of which tend to 
show feasibility and the need of further investigation to de 
velope the power. 

Fourth, I will refer to one other topip and close, and 
that is the power of foretelling future events. 

I have in my library a book published in London in 1707 
in which is detailed a prophecy, given through just such a 
spiritual intercourse as we are now experiencing, that the 
Bourbon family would be expelled from the throne of 
France, and the reason was given, viz. its general profligacy 
and its pejsecution of the freedom of religious opinion. 

The last time I lectured to the Spiritualists in New 
York, which was in May, 1861, I read two papers, one . 
given about eleven years and the other about five years ago, 
in which our present civil war was foretold — in one of the 
papers somewhat blindly, until the events made it clear — 
but in the other most explicit and distinct. 

These all related to public events, where the prophecies ' 
were published to the world before the events happened, 
but I have had a great many instances within my own ob- 
servation where private events were truly foretold. 

Five years ago, I published a tract on this subject, with 
a view to calling attention to it. I have seen nothing since 
to change my views, but much, very much to confirm them, \ 
and to show me that here is a power capable of being under- \ 
stood and improved by us, and of being made available i 
to us. 

These four topics are all that I deem it advisable to refer 
to now. But they are by no means all that are connected 
with Spiritual Intercourse that are of deep and abiding in- 
terest, on which some knowledge has already been obtained 
and more may be Dy proper inquiries. 

It is, as I understand it, only through the instrumentality 
of Spiritual Intercourse that that knowledge can be ob- 
tained. No man certainly will use that instrumentality who 
does not believe in its reality, or who regards it as a fraud 

XVI INTEODUOnON TO THE AMERICAN EDlTION.x 

or a delusion. And in this, it seems to me, lies the chief 
value of Home's book, and the lesson which it teaches. 

Tf the Book does no more than merely work conviction 
in some minds, of the reality of communion with the Depart- 
ed, it will be of some value, for it will carry consolation to 
many a heart now suffering under a load of doubt or afflic- 
tion. But if it goes farther, and leads intelligent and in- 
structed minds into an investigation of the higher truths 
connected with the subject, it will be a great good indeed. 
For my gart, T do not believe that we have yet '* attained 
the end of knowledge of either the works or the word of 
God." 

J. W. EDMONDS. 

Nbw York, March 29, 1863. 

INCIDENTS IN MY LIFE. 

CHAPTEE I. 

EAELY LIFE : I BECOME A MEDIUM. 

I WAS born near Edinburgh, in March, 1833. When 
I was about a year old, I was adopted by an aunt, and 
I accompanied her and her husband to America when 
I was about nine years old. I was very delicate as a 
child, and of a highly nervous tempcFament ; so much 
so that it was not thought that I could be reared. I 
cannot remember when I first became subject to the 
curious phenomena which have now for so long atten- 
ded nie, but my aunt and others have told me that 
when I was a baby my cradle was frequently rocked, 
as if some kind guardian spirit was tending me in ray 
slumbers. My aunt has also told me that when I was 
about four years old, I had a vision of the circumstan- 
ces attending the passing from earth of a little cousin, 
I being at Portobello, near Edinburgh, and she at Lin- 
lithgow, all which proved to be entirely correct, though 
I had mentioned persons as being present about her, 
who it is thought could not have been there, and had 
noticed the absence of her father on the water, at a 

18 BAELT LIFE. 

time when it was thought that he mnst be with her at 
home. 

When about thirteen years of age, the first vision 
which I distinctly remember occurred. I was, from my 
delicate health, unable to join the sports of other boys 
of my own age. I had, a few months before the vis- 
ion which I am about to relate, made the acquaint- 
ance of a boy two or three years my senior, and some- 
what similar to myself both in character and organiza- 
tion. We were in the habit -of reading the Bible to- 
gether, and upon one occasion, in the month of April, 
as we had been reading it in the woods, and we were 
both of us silently contemplating the beauties of the 
(springing vegetation, he turned to me and said, " Oh, 
I have been reading such a strange story 1" and he 
told me a ghost story connected witli the family* of 

Lord , and which I have since found to be well 

authenticated. A portrait of the lady to whom it oc- 
curred still exists in the family, and is known as the 
lady with the black ribbon. The present Lord —A — , 
who is of the same family, has told me that he was 
born in the chamber where the spirit appeared. My 
friend Edwin asked me if I thought the story could be 
true, and I said I did not know, but that I had heard 
strange things of that kind. We then agreed that 
whichever one of us should first be called from earth, 
would, if God permitted it, appear to the other the 
third day afterwards. We read another chapter of the 
Bible together, and we prayed that so it might be to us. 
About a month from this time, I went with my family 
to reside at Troy in the State of New York, a distance 
from Norwich, where Edwin lived, of nearly three 

^<^^w*^^ )^e.^ci^ 

EABLT LIFE. 19 

hundred miles. I had been to spend the evening at 
the latter end of June with some friends, and nothing 
had occurred during the evening to excite mj imagin- 
ation, or to agitate my mind ; on the contrary, I was 
in a calm state. The family had retired to rest, and I 
at once went to my room, which was so completely 
filled with the moonlight as to render a candle unnec- 
essary. After saying my prayers, I was seated on the 
hed, and about to draw the sheet over me, when a sud- 
den darkness seemed to pervade the room. This sur- 
prised me, inasmuch as I had not seen a cloud in the 
sky ; and on looking up I saw the moon still shining, 
but it was on the other side of the darkness, which 
still grew more dense, until through the darkness 
there seemed to be a gleam of light, which I cannot 
describe, but it was similar to those which I and many 
others have since seen when the- room has been illu- 
minated by spiritual presence. Tliis light increased, 
and my attention was drawn to the foot of my bed, 
where stood my friend Edwin. He appeared as in a 
cloud of brightness, illuminating his face with a dis- 
tinctness more than mortal. His features were un- 
changed except in brightness, and the only diflFerence 
I saw was that his hair was long, and that it fell in 
wavy ringlets upon his shoulders. He looked on me 
with a smile of ineffable sweetness, then slowly raising 
the right arm, he pointed upward, and making with it 
three circles in the air, the hand began slowly to dis- 
appear, and then the arm, and iBnally the whole body 
melted away. The natural light of the room was then 
again apparent. I was speechless and could not move, 
tliough I retained all my reasoning faculties. As soon 

20 EAELY LIFE. 

as the power of movement was restored, I rang the 
bell, and the family, thinking I was ill, came to my 
room, when my fii-st words were, "I have seen Edwin 
— he died three days ago at this very hour." This 
was found to be perfectly correct by a letter which 
came a few days afterwards, announcing that after 
only a few hours' illness, he had died of malignant 
dysentery. 

My mother was a seer throughout her life. She 
passed from earth in the year 1850, at the age of for- 
ty-two. She had what is known in Scotland as the se- 
cond sight, and. in many instances she saw things 
which were afterwards found to have occurred at a 
distance, just as she had described them. She also 
foresaw many events which occurred in the family, 
and foretold the passing away of relatives, ana lastly, 
she foretold her own four months previously. 

I was then seventeen, and was residing at Norwich, 
Connecticut, and my mother was living at Waterford, 
near New London, twelve miles distant. One day I 
suddenly felt a strong impulse that she wished to see 
me, and I walked all the way in consequence of this 
impression. When I got home, 1 felt an impression 
that she had something particular to commtinicate to 
me that evening. When we were alone I turned to 
her and said, '' What have you to say to me, mother?" 
She looked at me with intense surprise, and then a 
smile came over her face, and she said, " Well, dear, 
it was only to tell you that four months from this time 
I shall leave you." I asked incredulously how she 
knew, and she said, " Your little sister, Mary, came 
to me in a vision, holding four lilies in her hand, and 

KARLY LIFE. 21 

allowing thetn to slip through her fingers one after 
the other, till the last one had fallen, she said, ' And 
then you will come to me.' I asked her whether the 
four lilies signified years, months, weeks, or days, 
and she told me 'months.'" I had been quite im- 
pressed by this narration, when my mother added — 
" and I shall be quite alone when I die, and there will 
not be a relative near to close my eyes." This ap- 
peared to me to be so improbable, not to say impossi- 
ble, inasmuch as the family was a large one, and we 
had many relatives, that I said to her, " Oh, mother, 
I am so delighred you have told me this, because it 
shows that if must be a false vision." She shook her 
head. Mary was a little sister who had been taken 
from earth under most trying circumstances about four 
years previously. My mother was out for a walk, 
leaving the child at home, and on returning, having 
to cross a runtiing stream, and whilst she was on the 
bridge ov^r it, she saw what appeared to be some 
loose clothes fioating on the water, and hastening to 
the side to see what it was, she drew out the body of 
her child. 

The apparently impossible prophecy was literally 
fulfilled, for by a strange complication of circumstan- 
ces, my mother was taken ill amongst strangers, and a 
telegram which they sent on the last day of the fourth 
month, announcing her serious illness, only reached us 
about half-past eleven in the morning. Being myself 
confined to bed by illness at the house of my aunt, and 
she being unable to leave me, the telegram was sent 
on to my father. That same evening, about twilight, 
being alone in my room, I heard a voice at the head 

RARLT LIFE. 

of my bed which I did not recognize, saying to me bo- 
lemnly, " Dan^ twel/ve dclockP I turned my head, 
and between the window and my bed I saw what ap- 
peared to be tlie bust of my mother. I saw her lips 
move, and again I heard the same words, " Dan^ 
twelve o^clockP A third time she repeated this, and 
disappeared from my sight. I was extremely agitated, 
and rang the bell hastily to summon my aunt ; and 
when she came I said, " Aunty, mother died to day at 
twelve 0^ clocks because I have seen her, and she told 
me." She said, " Nonsense, child, you are ill, and 
this is the eifect of a fevered brain." It was, however, 
too true, as my father found on going to see her, that 
she had died at twelve o'clock, and without tlie pres- 
ence of a relative to close her eyes. 

My motl^er has also told me that her great uncle, 
Colin Urquhart, and her uncle, Mr. Mackenzie, were 
also seers, and gitted witli the second sight. 

A few mouths after my mother had passed from 
earth, one night on going to bed, I heard three loud 
blows on the head of my bed, as if struck by a ham- 
mer. My first impression was that some one must be 
concealed in my room to frighten me. They were 
again repeated, and as they were sounding in my ears, 
the impression first came on me that they were some- 
thing not of earth. After a few moments' silence they 
were again heard, and although I spent a sleepless 
night, I no longer felt or heard any repetition of them. 
My aunt was a member of the Kirk of Scotland, and I 
had some two years previously, to her great disap- 
probation, become a member of the Wesleyan body — 
but her opposition was so violent that I left them to 

EABLT LIFE. 23 

join tlie Congregationalists. On going down to break' 
fast in tlie morning, she noticed my wan appearance, 
and taunted me with having been agitated by some 
of my prayer meetings. I was about to seat myself at 
the breakfast table, when our ears were assailed by a 
perfect shower of raps all over the table. I stopped 
almost terror-stricken to hear again such sounds com- 
ing with no visible cause ; but I was soon brought 
back to the realities of life by my aunt's exclamation 
of horror, " So you've brought the devil to my house, 
have you ?" I ought here to state that there had then 
been some talk of the so-called Eochester knockings 
through the Fox family, but apart from casually hear- 
ing of them, i had paid no attention to them ; I did 
not know even what they meant. My aunt, on the 
contrary, had heard of them from some of the neigh- 
bors, and considered them as some of the works of the 
Evil One. In her uncontrollable anger, she seized a 
chair and threw it at me. Knowing how entirely in- 
nocent I was of the cause of her unfortunate anger, my 
feelings were deeply injured by lier violence, and at 
the same time I was strengthened in a determination 
to find out what might be the cause of these disturb- 
ances of our morning meal. There were in the village 
three ministers, one a Congregationalist, one a Baptist, 
and the other a Wesleyan. In the afternoon, my 
aunt, her anger at me having for the moment caused 
her to lose sight of her prejudices against these rival 
persuasions, sent for them to consult with her, and to 
pray for me, that I might be freed from such visita- 
tions. The Baptist minister, Mr. Mussey, came first, 
and alter having: questioned me as to how I had 

34 BARLT LIFE. 

brought these things about me, and finding that I 
could give him no explanation, he desired that we 
might pray together for a cessation of them. Whilst 
we were thus engaged in prayer, at every mention of 
the Holy names of God and Jesus^ there came gentle 
taps on his chair, and in different parts of the room ; 
whilst at every expression of a wish for God's loving 
mercy to be shown to us and our fellow-creatures, 
there were loud rappings, as if joining in our heartfelt 
prayers. I was so struck, and so impressed by this, 
that there and then, upon my knees, I resolved to 
place myself entirely at God's disposal, and to follow 
the leadings of that which I then felt must be only 
good and true, else why should it have signified its joy 
at those special portions of the prayer ? This was, in 
fact, the turning point of my life, and I have never 
had cause to regret for one instant my determination, 
though I have been called on for many years to suffer 
deeply in carrying it out. My honor has been called 
in question, my pride wounded, my early prospects 
blighted, and I was turned out of house and home at 
the age of eighteen, though still a child in body from 
the delicacy of my health, without a friend, and with 
three younger children dependent on me for support. 
Of the other two clergymen, the Congregationalist 
would not enter into the subject, saying that he saw no 
reason why a pure-minded boy should be persecuted 
for what he was not responsible to prevent or cause, 
and the Methodist was so unkind, attributing it to the 
devil, that I derived no comfort from him. 

Notwithstanding the visits of these ministers, and 
the continued horror of my aunt, which only increas- 

BABLT LIFB. 9S 

ed as each manifestation was developed, the rappings 
continued, and tlie furniture now began to be moved 
about without any visible agency, Tlie fii-st time this 
occurred I was in my room, and was brushing my hair 
before the looking-glass. In the glass I saw a chair 
that stood between ine and the door, moving slowly 
towards me. My first feeling was one of intense fear, 
and I looked round to see if there were no escape ; but 
there was the chair between me and the door, and 
still it moved towards me as I continued looking at it. 
Wlien within about a foot of me it stopped, wliereup- 
on I jumped past it, rushed down stairs, seized my hat 
in the hail, and went out to wonder on this wonderful 
phenomenon* 

After this, when sitting quietly in the room with 
my aunt and uncle, the table, and sometimes the 
chairs, and other furniture, were moved about by 
themselves in a singular way, to the great disgust aud 
surprise of my relations. Upon one occasion, as the 
table was being thus moved about of itself, my aunt 
brought the family Bible, and placing it on the table, 
said, " There, that will soon drive the devils away ;" 
but to her astonishment the table only moved in a 
more lively manner, as if pleased to bear such a bur- 
den. Seeing this, she was greatly incensed, and de- 
termining to stop it, she angrily placed her whole 
weight on the table, and was actually lifted up with 
it bodily from the floor. My only consolation at this 
time was from another aunt, a widow, who lived near, 
whose heartfelt sympathy did much to cheer and con- 
sole me. At her house, when I visited her, the same 
phenomena occurred ; and we there first began to ask 

S6 XASLT LIFB. 

qaeetions, to which we received intelligent replies.— 
The spirit of my mother at her house in this waj' com- 
municated the following : " Daniel, fear not, my child. \ 
God is with you, and who shall be against you ? Seek 
to do good : be truthful and truth-loving, and you will \ 
prosper, my child. Yours is a glorious mission — ^you ■ 
will convince the infidel, cure the sick, and console^ 
the weeping." This was the first communication I 
ever received, and it came within the first week of 
these visitations. I remember it well. I have never 
forgotten it, and can never forget it while reason and 
life shall last. I have reason to remember it too, be- 
cause this was the last week I passed in the house of 
the aunt, who had adopted me, for she was unable to 
bear the continuance of the phenomena, which so dis- 
tressed her religious convictions, and she felt it a duty 
that I should leave her house, and wliich I did. 

One of the singular manifestations which occurred 
during this first week, was in connexion with Mrs. 
Force, a neighbor. I should mention that by this time, 
the neighbors had heard of what was occurring in my 
presence, and were beseiging the house in a way that 
did not tend to sooth the religious susceptibilities of 
my aunt. Being one evening at the house of Mre. 
Force, the raps were heard, and the alphabet was used 
in the way that has now become familiar to many. 
The name of her mother was in this way given, an, 
nouncing her presence, and words were spelt out, re- 
proaching her with having so long forgotten her half- 
sister, who had been married some thirty years previ- 
ously to a farmer, who removed to the far west, and 
had not since been heard of. Her mother went on by 

SABLY UFS. S7 

means of the alphabet and the raps, to state the name 
of the town where this daughter by a former husband 
lived, the namb^l: of their children, and each of their 
names. Mrs. Force wrote to the address thus given, 
and received a letter in reply confirming every partic- 
ular; and the family was in this way again brought to- 
gether, and mutual sympathies were interchanged. On 
visiting Mrs. Force the following year, I found that 
she had had one of her newly found nephews to visit 
her tlie previous autumn. 

I go into these particulars not to revive or to cause 
painful recollections to any one, but merely to show 
the history of my mediumship, and the mysterious 
working of Providence in thus throwing me before 
the public. Had it not been for this chain of circum- 
stances, these truths might have remained unknown 
so widely as they now are. 

Although the manifestations had only lasted a week, 
they had become known not only to the town, but 
through the newspapers they were becoming public 
all over the New England States ; and when I left my 
aunt's house, I went to a neighboring town, Williman- 
tic, and was received at the house of a friend there. 
Whilst I was with him, these phenomena were repeat- 
ed, and those present investigated them in the most 
determined manner. I find the following account of 
what occurred stated in a newspaper of March, 1851 : 

"At request, the table was moved repeatedly, and in 
any direction that we asked to have it. All the circle, 
the Medium included, had their hands flat upon the 
table, and we looked several times under the table 
while it was in the most rapid motion, and saw that 

St BABLT UFE. 

no legs or feet Imd anj agency in the moyemeni The 
table was a large and heavy one, without castors, and 
could not be moved by Mr. Hayden in the same man- 
ner by all his exertion with his Imnds laid open upon 
the table. At one time, too, the table was moved 
withatU the McdiurrCs hands or feet touching U at al . 
At our request, the table was turned over into our lap. 
The table was moved, too, while Mr. Hayden was try" 
ing to hold it still ! Mr. Hayden took hold of the top 
at first, and failing that way, he grasped the leg, and 
held it with all his strength. The table did not move 
BO freely as before. It wonld move a-little way from 
Mr. Hayden, and then the invisible power wonld sud- 
denly relax its effort, when it would spring back with' 
the exertion of Mr, Haydeiu" 

I was then eighteen years old, and on seeing this 
article which made me so public, I shrank from so 
prominent a position with all the earnestness of a sen- 
sitive mind ; but I now found myself finally embarked 
without any volition of my own, and, indeed, greatly 
against my will, upon the tempestuous sea of a public 
life. From this time I never had a moment to call 
my own. In sickness or in health, by day or night, 
my privacy was intruded on by all comers, some from 
curiosity, and some from higher motives. Men and 
women of all classes, and all countries ; physicians 
and men of science, ministers of all persuasions, and 
men of literature and of art, all have eagerly sought 
for the proofs of this great and absorbing question of 
the possibility of spiritual causes acting on this world 
of nature. For myself, I have no apology to offer for 
the occurrence of these unwonted manifestations in 

EARLY hWE. :S9 

my own case. As will hare been seen, they came to 
me quite unsought, and with all the unpleasant and 
painful accompaniments which I have described. I 
have not, and never had the slightest power over 
them, either to bring them on, or to send them away, 
or to increase, or to lessen them. What may be the 
peculiar laws under which they have become devel- 
oped in my person, I know no more than others. 
Whilst they occur I am not conscious of the mode 
by which tliey are produced, nor of the sort of 
manifestation that is about to occur. Any peculiar 
sensations that I may experience during certain of the 
manifestations, I will describe as far as I can, while 
mentioning the visions or external phenomena. Beyond 
being of a highly nervous organization, there is nothing 
peculiar about me that I am aware of; but I continue 
to have delicate health, and I firmly believe that had 
it not been for these phenomena, I could not have 
lived till now. In this belief many physicians of high 
standing have given their testimony to bear me out. 
Frequently during the most severe visitations of ill- 
ness, my pains have been suddenly soothed in a mys-» 
terions way, and many times when it would have been 
impossible to have moved me in bed, for fear of in 
creased hsemorrhage from the lungs, my head has been 
slowly lifted, and my pillow has been turned by un- 
seen hands. This has' been repeatedly witnessed by 
many persons. Especially, I would say, that I do not 
on thif account or on any other, consider myself mor- 
ally superior to others, nor should any one believe that 
these phenomena come to me, or to others, on account 
of moral or immoral qualities. On the contrary, with 

30 RABLT LIFE. 

tlie great blessings which have been showered on me, 
and the ineffable proofs which I have received of God's 
providence and goodness to me, I feel nayself only 
worse than others that I should have made so little 
progress in the path of good. I have to thank God for 
many kind friends, not less than for many bitter ene- 
mies, since they keep my mind in an equilibrium, and 
do not suffer me to feel any pride, at what is no doubt 
but an accident, so to speak, of my organization. 

These extraordinary occurrences have, with some 
exceptions, continued with me ever since the time I 
stated as their commencement, and they have extend- 
ed their range, to my astonishment not less than to 
that of others, in the most striking manner. They 
have proved to me and to thousands of careful and 
able investigators, the existence of spiritual forces 
which are calculated to revolutionize the current igno- 
rance both of philosophy and of theology, as men have 
made them. The exceptions to which 1 refer have 
been of periods during which the power has left me 
entirely ; for instance, from the 10th of February, 1856, 
to the 10th of February, 1857, during which time I had 
no external token of spirit power, though I on several 
occasions had visions, one of which was my seeing the 
manner in which a brother passed from earth. He 
was frozen in the Polar Seas whilst out bear-shooting 
witli the captain and officers of* his ship. Falling into 
a fissure of the ice, he was not found till the following 
morning. I saw all this in a vision at the very time 
of its occurrence, and informed my family of it five 
months before the confirmation of the intelligence ar- 
rived. On several other occasions, the power hae 

BABLY I.IFB. 81 

ceased for shorter periods, and generally I have been 
told beforehand, both of the times of its cessation and 
return. I could never detect any physical cause for 
such cessation, nor any difference in my general feel 
ings of health, although the reason given for the with- 
drawal has commonly been on the ground of health. 
Upon several occasions, however, the reason given was 
that it was withdrawn from me as a reproof for having 
done that which I knew to be wrong. 

CHAPTER n. 

BEFORE THE WOBLD. 

I BEMAiNED in Willimantic but a short time, and then 
I went to Lebanon, a few miles off. Thei^ I was re- 
ceived in the family of an old resident. After I had 
been with them a few days, I saw a spirit who called 
himself Uncle Tilden. I asked a lady, a member of 
the family, if she recognized the name, but before she 
had time to make answer, the spirit made signs to mc 
that he did not wish the lady to tell the name, and that 
he would come on another occasion to me, when he 
could have more perfect control. In the course of a 
few days he came whilst I was entranced, and signified 
that certain papers wliicli his family had been seeking 
for years, and for which they had given up the search 
as hopeless, would be found in a house which he de- 
scribed as situate near Cleveland, Ohio. They were 
the title-deeds of some land which had- become valua- 
ble for building purposes, and out of which a lady was 
entitled to her thirds, but which by reason of the loss 
of the deeds, were withlield from lier, and she was in 
consequence living in very straitened circumstances. 
He described to them minutely through me the part 

BEFOKE THE WORLD. 33 

of the garret, and the form of the box in which they 
would be found. Her son was written to with these 
particulars ; the search wajs made, and the deeds were 
found as described. 

The second week of my stay at Lebanon, I had been 
to pass a day or two with an English family residing 
about three miles oflf. One afternoon 1 suddenly be- 
came unconscious or entranced, and on awaking, the 
l^dy of the house told me that I had been speaking 
with some spirit, who directed me to proceed at once 
to the house of a Mr. B— 5^. I had seen two brothers 
of this name one evening a week previously, and no 
interchange of visits had been made or proposed, and 
I felt that it would be most awkward for me to call on 
them, saying only that I had been sent bj'^ my unseen 
friends. The distance was also six miles from where I 
then was, and three miles of the journey I would have 
to walk. I knew that when I returned to my friends 
at Lebanon, I could have their conveyance ; but still I 
had not any inclination to pay the visit. As soon as 
this was fully decided in my mind, I was again made 
uiicouBcious, and on recovering, I was told that I had 
received strict injunctions to leave at once, though no 
reason was assigned why I should go. I then felt, 
however, that the order ouglit to be obeyed, and I 
went to my room for the purpose of dressing for the 
'ouniey. Wliile there, my reasoning faculties again 
iissumed the ascendancy, and I thought that if I were 
thus sent, I ought at least to know for what purpose. 
However, I soon again felt myself impelled by a force 
fiw superior to mine, and which to have even attempted 
to resist would have been folly. On leaving the house, 

2* 

^aM 

84 BRFOBB THB WOBLD. 

all this left me, and I walked the three miles to Le- 
banon, wondering what conld be the caase of this sin- 
gular errand. On arriving, I stated to my friends 
there all that had occurred, and they also thought it 
would have been quite as well to have ascertained why 
I had been sent. Finding that they agreed with me 
in tliis, I now again fully determined to proceed no 
farther, but I was quickly made insensible, and on 
awaking 1 found that orders had been given by tj;ie 
family to have a horse saddled, and*that I was adnion- ' 
ished in a gentle but firm 'Jnanner, for my want of 
Faith and overweening curiosity, whereas I ought, I 
was told, to have followed as a child would its teacher, 
or an indulgent parent. 

Before I left the house to complete the journey, the 
snn had set, and- now rain laden clouds were fast over- 
shadowing the sky. The road was lonely, and for the 
month of April the weather was uncommonly chill. I 
had agreed in my mind that my guardians had been 
teaching me a useful lesson, and I resolved that thence*, 
forward I would not seek to know their purposes. In 
this frame of mind 1 reached what I knew from descrip- 
tion must be the house of Mr. B , and as I was 

about to dismount, the first rain drop fell on my un ^ 
gloved hand, and with the contact came the most vivid 

impression that Mr. B 's mother was dangerously . 

ill. I rang the bell, and Mr. B having seen me, 

came himself to open the door. As he did so, I said, 
*• Your mother is ill, and I have been sent to say what 
will relieve her." His look of intense surprise baffles 
description, as he said, " How on earth could you have 
known of her illness, as it is only an hour since she fell 

BEFOSB THE WOBLD. 85 

ill, and we have sent in another direction for a medi- 
cal man, but 1 fear he will not arrive in timfe to save 
my poor mother, as she seems sinking so rapidly." On 
entering the house, I stood waiting to see what im- 
pression I might receive. Whilst I was standing, I 
was thrown suddenly into a trance, and I was told by 

Mr. B that in that state I led the way to his 

mother's bed room, and that after making a few passes 
over her with my hands, the acute pains left her, and 
that in a few minutes' time she was in a quiet sleep. 
Whilst in the trance, I also mentioned simple reme- 
dies of herbs for immediate use, and others for contin- 
ued use. I was then led by the unseen power into the 
sitting-room, and there returned to my normal state, 
greatly surprised when these things were related to me. 
The doctor arrived in about an hour, to find his pa- 
tient quite out of danger, and on examining her, he 
said that from the nature and violence of the attack, it 
would in all probability have been fatal, had steps not 
been taken at once to alleviate the symptoms. A let- 
ter written a few weeks after to a friend by Mr. B ^ 

says that his " mother has not had such health for eigh- 
teen years past, as she now enjoys ; she follows impli- 
citly all the instructions given though Daniel, and the 
effect is magical." 

I remained in Lebanon till the month of June, hav- 
ing stances neai'ly every day, my mediumship princi- 
pally consisting of visions, movements of the table and 
furniture without my touching them, and of the rapping 
sounds through which intelligent messages were re- 
ceived. Whilst there, in the beginning of June, all 
these external manifestations ceased entirely, and I 

90 BBVOBB THE WOBLD. 

left Lebanoi) about the middle of June on a yisit to 
Mr. Q ^M^^ at Boonton, New Jersey. I had still vis- 
ions frequently of tlie spirit friends of persons who were 
perfect strangers to me, describing their appearance; 
and the spirits gave me their names, and dates of their 
departure from eartli, with answers to other questions 
of a test nature which their relatives asked. Tliese 
came to me whilst I was in an abnormal or trance 
state, and in which I was unconscious of natural sni> 
round ings, but ^vith a facility of speech far superior, as 
I was told, to that of my ordinary condition, and 
through which I transmitted with readiness the replies 
of the spirits to the questions asked of them. I was so 
exceedingly sensitive at this time, that the playing of 
sacred music would frequently throw me into a trance 
state, in which I am always in companionship with 
spirit friends, and that in as perfect and palpable a 
manner, as in my ordinary external state I am witii 
mv friends of this world. Through tliese means hun- 
dreds of persons became convinced of the truth of spir- 
itual communion, and found their sceptical tenets no 
longer available. I then found, as I still find, that all 
honest, deep-rooted scepticism rather mjt- calls out 
than prevents the proofs of which it stands so much in 
need ; and atheists, deists, and infidels were thus often 
brought to a belief in Providence and direct spirit gui(* 
ance. 

About the middle of July 1851, I went to Brooklyn, 
New York, on a visit to Mr. C-^M^. Whilst here I 
had the pleasure of first meeting the learned and good 
George Bush, an eminent theologian and Professor of 
Hebrew and Oriental languages at New York. Profes 

^^t/O^^^W^^^'*'^ 

• BEFORE THE WORLD. 37 

sor Bosh was quite prepared to acknowedge the pos- 
sibility of such phenomena from his acquaintance with 
the writings of Swedenborg, and with the subject of 
Mesmerism, and the spiritual experiences of Jung Stil- 
ling and others. He was also a profoundly learned 
man, with a more open and child-like mind than often 
falls to the lot of those with so much worldly knowl- 
edge. He had made, morever, the greatest sacrifices, 
by giving up his worldly prospects in the Churcli, in 
avowing his belief in Swedenborg's works. Professor 
Bush took a deep interest in observing the mental phe. 
i]||>mena which occurred through me, though there were 
no external manifestations. The communications he 
received were of such a nature as to leave no manner 
of doubt on his mind, as to the real presence with us of 
those who had gone before. Amongst otlier names, he 
told me that I had given him that of an old school-fel- 
,3W, whom he had forgotten for many years, and that 
this school-fellow referred to a dream which the Pro- 
fessor had had on the very night on which the boy had 
passed from earth, although he was not then aware 
even of the boy's illness. The spirit of the boy now 
told through me the whole of the Professor's dream, 
which was that whilst they were playing together, he 
suddenly saw his school fellow taken from him, and 
heard his voice saying, " I leave you, George, but not 
for ever." A dream of forty years previously, was 
thus brought to his remembrance. The Professor was 
so strongly impressed with this, that he called on me 
the next day, and wished to have me reside with him 
for the purpose of studying for the Swedenborgian min- 
istry. I went to the house with the intention of so do- 

88 BEFOSE THX WOSLD. , 

ing, but within forty-eight honrs I saw in my waking 
state the spirit of my mother, who said to mr), " My^ 
son, you must not accept this kind offer, as your mis- 
sion is a more extended one than pulpit preaching." 
On seeing the good Profe:>sor, I told him of this spirit 
message. He expressed regret, but nojsurprise, and 
so I returned to my friend, Mr. C ^"-^ "^ * and remnined 
with him till the end of August. I frequently after- 
wards saw Professor Bush, with whom the most kindly 
intercourse was interchanged. Here again in New 
York many were convinced. 

I returned to Lebanon, but I was not able to s^ 
any strangers on account of my very delicate health, 
and in the moath of September my young friend, the 
son of Mi-s. E-^^, fell ill, and I paw the spirit of his 
father, whom I fiad not known on earth, though I had 
frequently seen him, and received communications 
from him both in the trance and waking state, on my 
former visit to Lebanon. He came to me whilst I was 
alone in my room, and standing near me, said, "Ezra 
will be with me within three weeks — go to him." I 
was then staying with a Mr. F-^^^ — , about three miles 
from the boy. I obeyed the spirit message, and went 
at once, and fv)und Ezra ill. He wished me to stay 
with him, but the family thought it was a passing 
iUness, and that I might prolong ray visit for a few 
clays to Mr. F. I did not tell them what I had seen, 
and in about four days afterwards they sent for me to 
come to them, as Ezra was worse. I went, and with 
liis sister I took care of him, till his departure, which 
occurred on the nineteenth day of his illness. He was 
about eighteen, and had become conversant with the 

'fAjJUzy. 

BEFORE THE WORLD. 

facts of spirit intercourse through me a lew months 
before, and had himself become a partial medium, 
receiving occasional communications, principally from 
his father, by means of the rapping and the alphabet. 
Soon after my first visiting him in his illness, on his 
sister leaving the room for a moment, he took the op- 
portunity of telling me with perfect composure, that 
he knew he should not recover, as he had been told by 
raps on his pillow, by his father, that this was his last 
illness. This extraordinary composure remained with 
him throughout, and I had told the family ten days 
oefore of my vision, which prepared them for the com- 
ing change. About two days before his leaving us, 
the doctor asked me to break it to him, when I in- 
formed him that Ezra had been long aware of it. He 
doubted this from seeing him so composed, and I de- 
sired him to stand at the door and hear what I would 
say to Ezra. I then went to his bed, and told him 
that the doctor had left some news for him. He 
laughingly said, '*I suppose it is to tell me that I am 
going. Little does he imagine that I have already 
decided who my bearers are to be." The doctor now 
came into the room, and taking his hand, said, " My 
dear boy, if I had not heard this, I could not have be- 
lieved it. You have everything to make life happy, 
and yet you are so willing to leave it." A few hours 
after this, a deacon of the church visited him, who 
was much opposed to these things, to the extent even 
of telling untruths and misrepresentations, fle argu- 
ed with the dying boy, trying to take away Jiis happy 
belief, but fortunately without the slightest success. 
The boy told him that he willingly placed all his hope 

M BEFOBB THE WORLD. 

in the hands of an allwise God, and that Le felt that 
the change would bu most happy for him. * The last 
evening of his stay on earth, severaf persons came to 
the house, and I was told by one of them that it was 
for the purpose of watching to see if he did not recant 
or turn coward at the last. I told this to Ezra, and he 
requested that they should be brought into his room, 
where I left them for a few hours' rest. At half-past 
one in the morning, Ezra sent for me, and I found 
them still there, he having been speaking with them 
great part of the time. In speaking to his mother, he 
said, "Only think, dear mother, I shan^t be lame 
there." He had been lame since he was six months old. 
He asked, me to look out of the window, and to tell 
him what kind of morning it was. I told him it was 
bright moonlight, and he recalled to me a conversation 
we had some months previously, in which he said he 
should like to pass away in the moonlight, whilst I had 
said I should wish to go at sunset. He expressed a 
wish that no one should wear mourning for him. He 
asked me to take his hand, and whilst I held it, his 
face suddenly assumed a beatified expression, and he 
pronounced my name, as if calling me to witness some 
happy vision passing before his eyes, and the breath- 
ing ceased. 

This is one of the many happy death-beds which I 
have witnessed, and such consolation given at a time 
like this is sufficient proof of the loving wisdom of 
our Heavenly Father in allowing such things to take 
place. Some may be surprised to find an apparent 
pro])hecy in this case given both to the boy and to nie, 
but perhaps a larger view of spiritual insight may 

BSFOKE THB WORLD. 41 

teach US that such is only apparent to ns in this natur- 
al sphere, and that to those who have spiritual insight 
and perceptions, there probably was some bodily 
change in his organism which made clear to those in 
the spiritual state the mortal character of his disease. 
Since his departure, he has been frequently present 
^th me, impressing me to write messages to bis mo- 
ther and sister. Sometimes my hand has been taken 
possession of apparently by him, and used in writing 
his own autograph. In a letter received from his sis- 
ter dated the 9th of February, 1852, she says, " Ezra was 
with you to a certainty when you were writing, for 
that is his autograph and chirography ; the kindness 
of the advice almost overwhelms me, when I think how 
spirits watch over and comfort us." 

The following is an account taken from a newspaper 
of other manifestations at this time. 

" After several communications had been spelled 
out, a request was made that the table might be mov- 
ed, in order to convince some present who were scep- 
tical. Accordingly very soon slight movements were 
perceptible, which soon became very rapid. A light 
was placed upon the floor under the table, and one re- 
mained on the table. Our hands were raised so that 
the ends of our fingers only touched. One end was 
then moved up so that it was poised on the two oppo- 
site legs upon an elevation in the floor, and in this po- 
sition it remained for awhile, keeping time with mu- 
sic, by rocking ; and in the same way questions were 
answered, three movements being considered an atBr- 
mative, and one a negative ; and after numerous ques- 
tions were given and as many satisfactory answers re- 

42 BEFORE THB WORLD. 

ceived, three gentle rai>8 were heard at the door by f. 
part of the company, and the question was asked if 
any one was rapping at the door ? and immediately 
three decided movements of the table were made, and 
accompanying them were three more decided raps at 
the door. 

" An emphatic call for the alphabet followed, and 
spelled out, ' Spirits — Uoor ;' the question was asked 
if tliere were spirits at the door who wished to come 
in ? Three raps. 

" It was suggested that they were to help in moving 
the table, and an affirmative reply immediately fol- 
lowed. Then commenced larger and more decided 
movements — the table being slid freely about the floor, 
and raised alternately one side and then the other se- 
veral inches ; and at one time it was raised nearly to 
an angle of forty-five degrees, poised on two side legs, 
and then by oscillating movements the time was cor- 
rectly kept to several tunes sung by the company. 

" Several unsuccessful attempts were made to bring 
the table to the floor, which were relinquished for the 
fear of breaking the leaves. By request it was care- 
fully let down on to one side, and in a moment raised 
again to its proper position. One of the company then 
seated himself upon the table, and it was moved about 
and raised up so as to render it necessary for him to 
hold on, and this, too, with as much ease apparently as 
before. Again, by request, it was slid while one was 
pushing against it in an opposite direction to the utter- 
most of his strength." 

1 remained in Lebanon up to the end of January, 
1852 ; the physical manifestations having spontaneously 

BEFORE THE WORLD. 48 

returned in October previously, and with increased 
power, and with the new phase of unseen hands touch- 
ing me and others with whom I was sitting. We fre- 
quently were touched by them, and on some occasions 
a spirit hand was placed within our hands as palpably 
as if it were a real living hand, though invisible to us. 
It would remain quietly in our hands until we tried to 
close them upon it, and even then it was not withdrawn, 
but as it were melted away in our grasp. 

I went to Springfield, Massachusetts, an entire stran- 
ger, but having heard of Mr. Henry Gordon, a medium 
there, I asked for and was directed to his house. He 
received me most kindly, and said that he was about 
to have a stance that evening, requesting me to join 
them. I did so, but the contending influences pre- 
vented the occurrence of manifestations. Those who 
were there assembled had to leave at an early hour, 
and Mr. Gordon accompanied them, leaving me with 
five or six of his friends who had come in in the mean- 
time. Among these were Mr. and Mrs. Elmer, the 
former being a believer, but Mrs. Elmer having vio- 
lently opposed it. I was thrown into a trance, made 
to sit near her, telling her the names of her mother, 
father, brothers, and sisters ; then of her children, all 
of whom were in the spirit world ; and I repeated to 
her the last words of two of her children. Turning to 
an older lady in the room, I did the same and so on 
through all those who were present. Mr. and Mrs. 
Elmer have since been my friends, and at their house 
some most remarkable manifestations occurred. I 
stayed with them for some time, and great interest was 
excited- by the accounts given by the very niimerons 

44 BBFOSB THS WORLD. 

witnesses who came to see the manifestations. Whilst 
here the power was very strong, and frequently I had 
stances six or seven times a day, at each of which as 
many were present as could be accommodated. Their 
house was besieged by visitors, and often outside in the 
street there was a concoui-se of anxious inquirei-s 
People came from a distance, even from the extreme 
west and south of America, having seen the accounts 
given of me in the newsp/ipers of the previous year. 
It was here that one of the Professors of the Univer- 
sity of Harvard came and joined some friends in a rigid 
investio^ation of the plienomena, and after several sit- 
tings they published the following statement of the re- 
sult of their investigation!, 

THE MODERN WONDER — A MANIFESTO. 

The undersigned, from a sense of justice to the parties 
referred to, very cordially bear testimony to the occur- 
rence of the following facts, which we severally wit- 
nessed at the house of Ilufus Elmer, in Springfield, on 
the evening of the 6th inst : — 

1. The table was movea in every possible direction, 
and with great force, when we could not perceive any 
cause of motion. 

2. It (the table) was forced against each one of us 
so powerfully as to move us from our positions — to- 
gether with the chairs we occupied — in all, several 
feet. 

3. Mr. Wells and Mr. Edwards took hold of the ta- 
ble in such a manner as to exert their strengtli to the 
best advantage, but found the invisible power, exer- 

BEFOBB THK WOBLD. 45 

fised in an opposite direction^ to be quite equal t^ their 
MtmoBt efforts. 

4. In two instances, at least, while the hands of all 
the members of the circle were placed on the top 
of the table — and while no visible power was em- 
ployed to raise the table, or otherwise to move it 
from its position — U was seefi to rise clear of thefioor^ 
and to float in the atmosphere for sef&eral seconds^ as if 
sustained by some denser medium than air, 

5. Mr. Wells seated himself o^i the table, which was 
rocked for some time with great violence, and at 
length, it poised itself on the two legs, and remained 
in this position for some thirty seconds, when no other 
person was in contact with it. 

6. Three persons — Messrs. Wells, Bliss, and Edwards 
— assumed positions on the table at the same time, and 
while thus seated, the table was moved in varions di- 
i^ections. 

7. Occasionally we were made conscious of the oc- 
currence of a powerful shock, which produced a vibra- 
tory motion of the floor of the apartment in which we 
were seated — ^it seemed like the motion occasioned by 
distant thunder or the firing of ordnance far away — 
causing the table, chairs, and other inanimate objects, 
and all of us to tremble in such a manner that the ef- 
fects were both seen and felt. 

8. In the whole exhibition, which was far more 
diversified than the foregoing specification would indi- 
cate, we were constrained to admit that there was an 
almost constant manifestation of some intelligence 
which seemed, at least, to be independent of the 
circle. 

i6 B£FOBK THU WOULD. 

9. In conclusion, we may observe, that Mr. D. ]3|l. 
Home frequently urged us to hold his hands and fait 
During these occurrences the room was well lightaL 
the lamp was frequently placed on and under tl 
table, and every possible opportunity was aiforded . 
for the closest inspection, and we admit this one 6: 
phatic declaration : We know that we were not itnpoi, 
upon nor decewed. 

Wm. Bryant, 

B. K. Bliss, 

Wm. Edwasds, 
David A. Wbllb. 

The following account also is given in the "SI 
nah" of 1852, of manifestations occurring at this t 
which will show the power which they had the! 
quired. 

«' On the 28th day of February, 1852, while th 
dersigned were assembled at the residence of Mr. 
Elmer, Springfield, Mass., for the purpose of nj 
critical experiments in the so-called spiritual m; 
tations, the following, among other remarkable <1 
strations of power, occurred in a room thor* 
illuminated. The table, around which we were : 
was moved by an invisible and unknown agenc 
such irresistible force that no one in the circl 
hold it. Two men — standing on opposite si' 
grasping it at the same time, and in such a nii 
to have the greatest possible advantage— cr 
by the utmost exercise of their powers, restrain 
tion. In spite of their exertions, the table wii 
from one to three feet. Mr. Elmer inquire 

BEFORE THE WORLD. 47' 

Spirits could disengage or relax the hold of Mr. Henry 
Foulds ; when suddenly, and in a manner wholly un- 
accountable by us, Mr. Foulds was seated on the floor,| 
at a distance of several feet from the table, having' 
been moved so gently, and yet so instantaneously, as 
scarcely to be conscious of the fact. It was proposed 
to further test this invisible power, and accordingly 
five men, whose united weight was eight hundred and 
fifty-five povrnds^ stood on a table (without castors), 
and the table, while the men were so situated, was re- 
peatedly moved a distance of from four to eight inches. 
The undersigned further say that they were not con- 
scious of exerting any power of will at the time, or 
during any part of the exhibition ; on the contrary, 
they are quite sure that the exercise of the will is a 
serious impediment to such manifestations. 

** At the close of these experiments it was perceived, 
on lifting one end of the table, that its weight would 
increase or diminish, in accordance with our request. 
Apprehending that the supposed diflFerence might be 
justly attributable to fancy, or to some unconscious 
variation in the manner of applying the motive power, 
it was proposed to settle the question by weighing the 
end of the table. At the first experiment it required 
a force equal to nineteen pounds to raise the end of 
the table. This was fairly tested to the entire satis- 
faction of all present. The spirits were then requested 
to apply the invisible power. The balance was now 
applied in precisely the same manner as before, when 
the weight was found to have been suddenly increased 
from six to twelve pounds, varying as the mysterious 
force was increased and diminished, so that it now re* 

48 BEFOBB THE WOBIJ>. 

quired a force of from twenty-five to thirty-one ponndt 
to separate the legs of the table from the floor. Mr. 
Daniel D. Home was the medium on this occasion, 
and it is worthy of remark that during the perform- 
ance of the last experiment, he was out of the room, 
and in the second story ot the house, while the experi- 
ment was conducted in tlie back parlor below. 

" The undersigned are ready and willing, if required, 
to make oath to the entire correctness of the foregoing 
statement." 

The original paper was signed by John D. Lord, 
Rufus Elmer, and nine others, living at Springfield, 
Mass. 

The account proceeds: *' Lights are produced in 
dark rooms. Sometimes there appears a gradual illu- 
mination, sufficient to disclose very minute objectB| 
and at others, a tremulous phosphorescent light gleams 
over the walls, and odic emanations proceed from hu- 
man bodies, or shoot meteor-like through the apart* 
ment. These phenomena are of frequent occurrence, 
and are not accounted for by any material hypothesis, 
unless, indeed, they could be comprehended under the 
popular generalization which ascribes the whole to 
human fraud and delusion. I have seen these lights 
in all tlieir variety. On one occasion, when a number 
of friends were assembled at my house, there occurred 
a gradual illumination of tlie apartment. It appeared 
like the twilight half an hour after the dawn. The 
light continued to increase for about fifteen minutes, 
and then it; gradually diminished. 

'' On the 30th of March, I chanced to be one of a 
company convened at the house of Mr. Elmer, in 

BSFOBB THS WORLD. 49 

Springfield; Mase., Mr. Home being present, when the 
room was darkened, to see if the mysterious illumina- 
tion would occur. Immediately the gross darkness 
began to be dissipated, and in a few minutes the forms 
of all the persons in the room were distinctly visible 
Without disclosiqg her purpose to any one, Mrs. Elmer 
mentally requested that the spirits would restore the 
darkness, and, almost instantly, the change was per- 
ceived by the whole company, and soon every form 
was lost in the deepening gloom." 

This was the first appearance of these spirit lights 
that I had seen when others were present, though I had 
several times seen them when by myself, since their 
appearance on my first vision of Edwin as before de- 
scribed. Although the physical manifestations had 
increased, and were so continuous, yet the internal 
power of vision had not left me, as will be seen from 
the following, which was published and signed by Mr. 
8. B. Brittan of New York, to whom occurred flie fact 
which he describes. 

"Last winter, while spending a few days at the 
house of Mr. Eufus Elmer, Springfield, I became ac- 
quainted with Mr. Home. One evening, Mr. Home, 
Mr. and Mrs. Elmer, and I were engaged in general 
convei'sation, when suddenly, and most unexpectedly 
to us all, Mr. Home was deeply entranced. A mo- 
mentary silence ensued, when the medium said 
< Hannah Brittan is here I' I was surprised at the 
announcement, for I had not even thought of the per- 
son indicated for many days, or perhaps months, and 
we parted for alltime when I was but a little child. 
I remained silent, but mentally inquired how I might 

60 BSFOBE THB WORLD. 

he assured of her actnal presence. Immediatelj Mr. 
Iloine began to exhibit signs of the deepest angnish. 
Rising from his seat he walked to and fro in the apart- 
ment, wringing his hands, and exhibiting a wild and 
frantic manner and expression. He groaned in spirit, 
and audibly, and often smote his forehead and uttered 
incoherent words of prayer. He addressed me in terms 
of tenderness, and sighed and uttered bitter lamenta 
tions. Ever and anon, he gave utterance to expres 
sions like the following: 

** 'Oh, how dark ! What dismal clouds I What a 
frightful chasm ! Deep — down — far down ! — I see the 
fiery flood I Hold 1 Stay 1 — Save them from the pit I 
I'm in a terrible labyrinth I I see no way out I There's 
no light ! How wild ! — gloomy ! The clouds roll in 
upon me ! The darkness deepens 1 My head is whirl- 
ing ! Where am I ? — ' 

" During this Q^citing scene, which lasted perhaps 
half an hour, I remained a silent spectator, the medium 
was unconscious, and the whole was inexplicable to Mr. 
and Mrs. Elmer. The circumstances occurred some 
twelve years before the birth of Mr. Home. No per- 
son in all that region knew aught of the history of 
Hannah Brittan, or that such a person over existed 
But to me the scene was one of peculiar and painful 
signitLcance. She was highly gifted by nature, and 
endowed with the tenderest sensibilities. She became 
insane from believing in the doctrine of endless pun- 
ishment ; and when 1 last saw her, the terrible reality, 
so graphically depicted in the scene I have attempted 
to describe, was present, in all its mournful details, 
betbre me I 

BEFOBB THE WOBLD. fil 

** Thirty years have scarcely dimmed the recollec* 
tion of the scene which was thus re-enacted to assnre 
me of the actual presence of the spirit. That spirit 
has since informed me that her present life is calm, 
peaceful and beautiful, and that the burning gulf, 
with all its horrible imagery, existed only in the tradi- 
tions of men, and in the fitful wanderings of her dis- 
tracted brain." 

At Springfield, also, there were many instances of 
the sick being healed. I was so sensitive to any one 
who came near nie in a diseased state, that I not only 
myself felt but accurately described their symptoms, 
and the seat and causes of the disease. One case which 
I remember was that of a person who had been ill for 
many years with no apparent cause. 1 brought to his 
mind an accident which had occurred to him some 
years previously, and which I was impressed to tell 
him was the cause of his suffering. When he applied 
to a surgeon and related the circumstance, the surgeon 
told him tliat I had been no doubt correct in attrib- 
uting his illness to that accident. My own suffering 
in sympathy with other people's illne^S was often so 
greaty and was indeed was so frequent, that I was often 
warned by my spirit friends against coming in contact 
with sick persons. 

In May, 1852, 1 went to New York, and was at once 
received by investigators of the phenomena, mediums 
liaving increased largely in numbor, both in public 
and private circles. My days and nights were fully 
occupied by investigators of all classes and conditions. 
The fallowing account of what he witnessed is given 
in the words of Dr. Hallock, a physician of New York 

58 BlCrORB THS WOBLD. 

^^Two cominanicatioDS, spoken through Mr. Home 
as a medium, were read bj the Secretary. They were 
given on the lOtli inst., at the house of Mr. Partridge. 
The first was preceded by physical manifestations, in- 
tended to identity the spirit about to communicate. 
The second embraces several topics. 

'^ Mr. Home said, a male and female were present, 
who wished to commune with Mr. P. 

'^ Directly, sounds and motions were made as of a 
violent storm — the roaring and whistling of the wind, 
the rushing of water, and the breaking of waves — 
sounds as if a vessel was straining at her anchor and 
laboring in a heavy sea, amid which she was held by 
^her chain cables — her joints creaking, and she rolling 
from side to side. The picture of a shipwreck was so 
true, that it made the cold chills run over me. The 
medium spoke of a boat with machinery in it, and 
went through the motions of dying 'mid the raging 
waters and a dark storm. The Spirit making these 
demonstrations to identify her presence, is one whose 
life was lost by the wreck of the steamer Atlantic, in 
November, 1849. She gave the following communi- 
cation : 

" * But, oh 1 it was not death 1 Bright spirits were 
hovering around, and bore me to their happy home ; 
but it would be no home to us, if we were not permit- 
ted to return and watch over our dear friends we have 
left behind. 

" *To me, the storm has passed and gone, and with 
it went all the storms of life- From that breaking 
barque, I passed to one the winds could not beat. It 
was anchored home in the heavens, and my spirit was 

BEFOBE THE WOBLD. ^ 68 

nearer God — more easily developed, and was amid 
influences more pure and holy, just what they ought 
to be for man's advancement. 

** * Kindness never goes unrewarded ; and for yours, 
she wishes to express her deep obligation, not thanks 
merely, but a deep and abiding sense of it. 

" * Be upright and kind, and it will prepare you for 
brighter spheres. 

" ' Be patient, as God is. Think of His forbearance, 
for ages past, with the blindness, the hardness, the per- 
versity of man. If man had possessed His power, he 
would, in his impatience, long since have annihilated 
earth and all that inhabit it. 

" * Think not of the grave. To us, it is past and for- 
gotten. To you, it is but an entrance into a new and 
more glorious existence. 

" * Oft in the silent night, when the busy toils of life 
are hushed and the mind is at rest from its cares, we 
hover around and. watch over you, happy, indeed, at 
being able then to impress our presence upon you.' 

" The question is often asked, Why have not these 
manifestations occurred before ? Why has not God 
illumined ages past with these wonderful manifesta- 
tions of His providence ? The reason is obvious. 
When a little light has been from time to time thrown 
down, like the feeble rays of a far-off star across the 
^loom of night, men have shut it up in darkness 1 They 
have been enveloped in self and shrouded in scepti- 
cism I They think the age of miracles has ceased 1 
Another cause why these things have not occurred in 
past ages was, the persecution of mediums — ^it was 
perceived that men would torture them. It alarmed 

S4 MMrOBM THB WOBLDl 

the superstitions fears of the commanity. The medi* 
nms were charged with being witches, and in league 
with the Devil ! I see them on trial, then taken to the 
scaffold and the stake, and I hear spirit fi>ot-8ounds 
accompanying them. The younger, more vigorous 
and more positive state of their accusers, under zea^ 
for God and the good of his church, has made them 
admit themselves to be wh€U they were not. Their 
defenceless, negative condition, makes them an easy 
prey to the will-power of their judges and accusers. 
Now, I perceive the sorrow of those spirits who were 
not sufficiently developed to foresee the catastrophe as 
the higher spirits did. They are comforting them in 
their last eartlxly agony ; and, seeing the sad results 
#f their attempt to communicate through physical 
manifestations, they have suspended the effort till a 
more favorable epoch. 

" When men are toM that spirits watch over them, 
it is not uncommon for them to say, ' Spirits should be 
in l>ottor business.' The truth is, that many men are 
so hvA that they do not want their minds inspected ; 
tlioy do not wish to have it known how gross they are. 

"A spirit wishes to express his idea of a hell. I see 
a tnotlior with her children. She is training them in 
the jmth she herself has trodden. As she was ignorant 
and foolish, so are they. As her path has been beset 
with the briars and thorns which ignorance and folly 
engender, so is theirs. Now, I see her leave them and 
piiHH Jiito the Spirit-world ; but, impelled by the eter- 
nal and universal law of affinity, she still watches over 
thum. Oh, the pangs of her spirit, for the wrong she 
hiM done, for the misery she has caused I Yet she fol 

/ 

BEFOBU THE VVOBUX fi5 

lows them through all their devious windings through 
darkness and through crime, and is it not hell enough ! 
Oh, is it not hell enough ! 

" Again the scene changes, and I see what caused 
the sin of the mother : A drunken man presents him- 
self — ^his children, comparatively pure and unsullied, 
seek associates ; for all roust have such ; they would 
gladly choose the pure and the good, but they are the 
drunkard's children, and are spurned from the doors 
of the intelligent and cultivated. So they are driven 
back to darkness and ignorance, to glean from the 
great law of association the happiness for which every 
human being pants. They could not seek it where 
they wovM^ they irmst get it where they can. Thus, 
with minds soured by the repulse they have met with, 
and tlieir darker passions stimulated by the desire or 
revenge for injuries received, they plod along cheir 
devious and uncert in way — the prison their asylum— 
the halter their inheritance — the constable and sherift* 
their administering angels. They asked society foi 
meat ; it gave them a SGorpion — for bread ; they got 
a stone. Oh, that men could see the cause of crime I — 
they would love and pity. 

" If one tree is blighted so that it cannot beai 
•wholesome fruit, should tho other trees call it evil i 
That which is evil cannot become good, but the unde- 
Teloped may progress to development. The tree whose 
root is rotten cannot grow ; but if it has been merely 
scathed, it may. So with the spirit — though a long 
time may elapse. The bud, placed in the sunlight, 
does not blossom in a day — if placed in darkness, not 
for weeks. A spirit, after it has left the body, will 

66 B1EF0RB THE WOBLD. 

have to throw off all the perversion that remains. Af- 
ter that is done, progression goes on withoat hinder- 
ance. 

" Be not wise in your own conceit. Let him th«t 
standeth in the light of truth, take heed lest he fall 
through the darkness of his own wisdom." 

^' Dr. Hallock related some remarkable personal de- 
scriptions of spirits through Mr. Home, occurring on 
the same evening. One spirit was described as hav- 
ing been known here by the name of * Elizabeth.' 
Her person was described, and her prominent traits of 
character as well as the disease of which she died, 
with such accuracy, that a gentleman present knew 
her at once from the description. The only inaccuracy 
that he could point out, being the color of her hair, 
which had been described as brown, when in fact it 
was rather a light auburn. In explanation of which 
Mr. Home said, ' When I look at the forehead, which 
is very white, (which was the fact,) the hair looks 
brown to me.' 

" The gentleman (a clergyman) declared that he was 
not thinking of her at all, and she was brought to his 
recollection solely by the accuracy of the description 
given. 

" Mr. Home then said, ' 1 see an old woman, and 
her name is Abigail ; they called her * Aunt Abby.' 
. To the question how did she look ? he commenced by 
compressing the lips and cheeks in such a way as to 
indicate a person who had lost her teeth. This at 
once brought to his mind an old lady of that name, 
called by the whole family, * Aunt Abby,' who died 
in the spring of 1817, when he was some eleven years 

BEFORE THE WORLD. S7 

of age. The appearance assumed by the medium was 
that of the last impression left upon his mind. She 
was an old woman ; had prominent features, had lost 
her teeth for many years, was much emaciated by her 
last illness, and as her body lay in its grave-clothes, 
the thought of his young mind, as he stood gazing 
upon it, was that very peculiarity first indicated by 
the medium. Her nose and chin nearly met, so acute 
was the an^le formed by her attenuated gums and 
shrunken lips. 

'* Many other facts were given, going to show the 
identity of the two individuals in question. But one 
gi*eat object seemed to be to teach us, by taking per 
sons not thought of at the time, (in the last case not 
thought of for many years), that it was no psycholog- 
ical impression from our own minds, as some have sup- 
posed ; for there was no known impression of the kind 
existing at the time, and the memory was only awak- 
ened by the accuracy of tlie pictures which the me- 
dium had presented. 

" Another equally interesting and accurate descrip- 
tion of a spirit, who said his name was William, was 
given. Previous to the announcement of his presence 
and name by Mr. Home, and while he was engaged in 
the other delineation, a lady of high clairvoyant pow- 
ers, through whose mediumship some of the most sub- 
lime lessons of truth and wisdom have been from time 
to time communicated, had written and shown to a 
gentleman sitting by her, the following sentence : ' I 
am impressed that my father is here and standing by 
my side ; I feel his presence distinctly.' When Mr, 
Home had said, ^ there is a spirit present and his name 

08 BKFOBB THB WORLD. 

k William,' he asked, as it* to gratify his own curioeityi 
* Who is William V and then immediately said, * O, 
he says, Eliza knows me.' The lady's name was Eliza, 
and the spirit was her father. His appearance and 
prominent traits of character were delineated with 
great accuracy." Here at New York I made the ac- 
quaintance of Dr. Oray, one of tlie most eminent phy- 
sicians there, and for whom I have ever had the deep- 
est affection and esteem. He and his kind wife have 
given me counsel, and befriended me at all times, and 
under all circumstances. From his character and at 
tainments, he was eminently suitable as an investiga- 
tor of phenomena, requiring a calm dispassionate 
judgment, and the testimony of such a man is, in it- 
self, a sufficient answer to all the doubts of unthink- 
ing pei-sons. I had also the pleasure of meeting Judge 
Edmonds, so well known as one of the judges of the 
Supreme Court. He investigated this subject in the 
most painstaking manner for three yeare, and was ful- 
ly convinced, not only through the mediumship of 
otliers, but through his own and that of his daughter, 
a lady well known for her purity of mind and truthful 
nature. He was a frequent visitor to me, and saw all 
the phenomena which occurred in my presence. I 
was also acquainted with the late Professor Hare, the 
eminent chemist and electrician, and with Professor 
Mapes, so well known in agricultural chemistry, and 
for his acquaintance with this subject. A conference 
was formed at New York, which has met weekly for 
many years for the investit^ation of spiritual phenome- 
na, and from its recorded transactions, I make the fol- 
Ift wing extract: 

BSFOBE THB WOBLD. 59 

" Friday Evening, June 18, 1852. 
" Dr. Hallock related a case of physical manifesta- 
tions which took place on the Friday evening previous 
at the house of Mi\ Partridge, after the conference had 
adjourned. Mr. D. D. Home was the medium, and 
the circle consisted of Mr. Partridge, and his wife and 
dangliter, Mr. W. Taylor and wife, Mr. S. B. Brittan, 
and himself. On the table around which we were 
seated, were loose papers, a lead pencil, two candles, 
and a glass of water. The table was used by the spi- 
rits in responding to our questions, and the first pecu- 
liarity we observed was, that however violently the 
table was moved, everything on it retained its posi- 
tion. Wiien we had duly observed this, the table, 
which was mahogany and perfectly smooth, was ele- 
vated to an angle of thirty degrees, and held there, 
with every thing remaining on it. as before. It was 
interesting to see a lead pencil retaining a position 
of perfect rest, on a polished surface inclined at such 
an angle. It remained as if glued to the table, aiyi so 
of every thing else on it. Th^ table was repeatedly 
made to resume its ordinary position, and then again 
its inclination as before, as if to fasten upon us the 
conviction that what we saw was no deception of the 
senses, but a veritable manifestation of spirit presence, 
and of spirit power. They were then requested to ele- 
vate the table to the same angle as before, and to de- 
tach tlie pencil, retaining every thing else in their 
stationary positions. This was complied with. The 
table was elevated, the pencil rolled off, and every 
thing else remained. They were then asked to repeat 
the experiment, retaining the pencil and every thing 

60 BBVOBB THB W0BLD. 

else npon the table etationary, except the glass tamb* 
ler, and to let that slide otL This also was assented to 
with the like result. All the articles retained their 
])08itions but the tumbler, which slid off and was 
caught in the hands of one of tlie party, as it fell from 
the lower edge of the table. Tlien the table, after 
being restored to tlie natural position, was moved 
strongly to and from Mr. Home, and to and from dif- 
ferent individuals in the circle, as they requested. 

" After this had been repeated several times, and 
while a corner of the table was inclined into his lap, 
Mr. Taylor asked if the spirits would lift it clear of the 
floor while it was in that inclined position. Assent 
was signified, and the table, after much apparent ef- 
fort, was lifted clear of the floor as requested. Dr. 
Hallock said he was led to the conclusion that the 
effort was only apparent, because, while we were 
watching it closely, with a light upon the floor so as 
to Bee the slightest motion, the table in the meantime 
I'esting upon one castor on the floor and one corner of 
the leaf in Mr. Taylor's lap, was raised perhaps about 
one inch, after having been literally tumbled about 
the circle, sometimes upon one castor and sometimes 
upon two, the leaf resting fii*8t in one person's lap, and 
then in another. But when the foot of the table was 
finally raised, as described, he, to make sure that they 
were not mistaken in the fact, got down upon the floor 
to observe more closely. While looking, the foot of 
the table, instead of being raised a doubtful inch or 
so, was thrown up, dear of the floor, six or eight 
inches, as if all former attempts had been mere play- 
ful efforts. We then asked if they could move the ta- 

BEPOBB THB WORLD. 01 

We with a man on it. They replied, * Yes, with twc 
men on it.' Mr. Partridge and myself then seated our- 
selves back to back upon the table. Our combined 
weight is a little over 350 pounds ; but notwithstand- 
ing, the table was moved as easily as when nothing 
but the candlesticks and the other things were upon it. 
We were rocked backward and forward, to and from 
Mr. Home; the table was tipped from the medium.aud 
held stationary in that position, with us upon it — and 
finally we said playfully, * when you get tired of rock- 
ing us, throw us oflF.' It was done — the table was 
tipped strongly and rapidly from Mr. Home, and we 
were thrown on the floor." 

At the end of June I received the following letter 
from Dr. Hull : — 

" Nbwbubgh, Orange Co. 
*' On the Hudson. 
" My dear Sir, 

^^ I am desirous that you should make me a visit 
for myself and some intimate friends, at your first lei 
Bure, or freedom from present engagements. 

"I will meet ail your expenses from your place du- 
ring your stay here, and for your return ; and five dol- 
lars a day for ten days, i.e. fifty dollars. 

" I do sincerely trust you will answer me promptly 
as to the time you can make me the desired visit ; and 
if my proposition as to terms be not satisfactory, state 
what your terms are. All shall be made satisfactory 
to yourself. 

** By addressing a letter to my direction — ^New- 
bnrgh, N. Y., it will soon reach me. 

63 BEFOSB THB WOBLD 

** I regretted I did not see more of yon in New 
York, but I hope to have the pleasure fully made up 
here. 

" Mr. Edward Fowler has promised to come up 
when you visit me. 

" Very truly yours, &c., 

**A. Gbbald Hull. 
"D.D. Home, Esq." 

In reply to tliis, I informed him that I was not a 
paid medium, but that I should be happy to visit him, 
as requested. I did so, and whilst with him manifes- 
tations of a very interesting character appeared to a 
family who had been deeply afflicted in the loss of 
their children. They and Dr. Hull took a great in- 
terest in my welfare — and feeling the importance of 
my completing my education, which from ill health 
had been much neglected, and of preserving me from 
the wearing excitement of the life I was tiien leading, 
they kindly proposed a home for me in their midst. I 
could not then avail myself of tlieir offer, having pro- 
mised to visit many friends during the autumn, but in 
the following year, as will be seen, I placed myself 
under their guidance. 

In August, I went on a visit to Mr. Cheney, at 
South Manchester, Connecticut, and it was at his 
house that I was tirst lifted in the air, a manifestation 
which has since frequently occurred to me both in En- 
gland and France. 

The following is the description of the evening, in 
the words of a gentleman who was present. 

" On the 8th instant, in company with three gen- 

BEFOSB THB WOBSJD* 68 

tlemen from this city, the writer paid a visit to Ward 
Cheney, residing in Manchester, at whose house Mr. 
Daniel D. Home was temporarily stopping. A circle 
was formed, and the well-known vibrations on the ta- 
ble were soon loud and distinct. One of my friends 
had never seen any thing of the kind, and he accord- 
ing y looked onder the table to make sure that no 
one touched it. Answers of a personal character, such 
as tests of identity, were given very freely. Mr. Home 
was tlien thrown into a spiritually magnetic state, dis- 
covering great rigidity of muscle, and the ordinary 
]>henomena of tlie psycho-magnetic condition, includ- 
ing a magnetic locking of the jaws, in which an iron- 
like hardness of the muscles was apparent. He then 
spelt out (with his eyes closely bandaged) some re- 
niarkable and interesting messages to one or two of 
the company, the personal nature of which precludes 
tlieir publication, but which were declared by those 
interested to be perfect tests. He did this by pointing 
with almost incredible rapidity to the different letters 
of an alphabet arranged on a seven by nine card — and 
tliiis spelling out the necessary words. A rapid wri- 
ter had difficulty in keeping up with him, and when a 
word or a sentence was partially finished, a suggestion 
from any of the company as to what was intended to 
be spelt, would, if correct, be answered by eagei 
and vehement rappings in various parts of the table. 
Among others, (all remarkable,) came a message from 
two sailors lost at sea, relatives of one of the company 
— a stranger to most of the company. These spirits 
announced themselves, somewhat unexpectedly^, by 
canting over the solid and ponderous table, and roll 

64 BXFOBB THB WORLD. 

iTig it in the manner of a vessel in a violent tempest. 
Accompanying this demonstration came a violent 
creaking as of the cables of a ship in a storm at sea — 
and the creaking of the timbers and masts as the 
vessel sur*]jed to one side or the other, was distinctly 
heard by all. Next came the regular, sullen shocks 
of the waves as they struck the bows of tlie doomed 
vessel. All this time the table kept up the rocking 
motion. And now the large table was oapsiaed on 
the floor I All this was done with no one touching 
the table, as a close and constant scrutiny was kept 
up by two, at leas^ of our party. These two sailors, 
whose names and ages were given, it seems lost their 
lives by the capsizing of a vessel as represented, al- 
though tliis fact, I have the best of reasons for know- 
ing, could not previously be known to Mr. Home, or 
to any of the company excepting myself. 

" Demonstrations now increased in force and num- 
ber. Several tunes were rocked out by the table 
when no one touched it, the circle being seated a cou- 
ple of feet, at least, from it. The swing or motion of 
the table was full three feet from the floor at each 
elevation, and the tune was kept with singular accu- 
racy. A simultaneous expression from ail the mem- 
bers of the circle attested their recognition of the 
several tunes as they were thus performed for our sat- 
isfaction. 

"The table was actually lifted up from the floor, 
without the application of a human hand or foot I — 
A table weighing, I should judge, one hundi-ed 
pounds, was lifted up a foot from the floor, the legs 
touching nothing. I jumped upon it, and it came up 

B1EF0BB THE VTOKLD, 66 

f^in ! It then commenced rocking, without, how- 
ever, allowing me to slide off, although it canted at 
least to an angle of forty-five degrees I Finally, an 
almost perpendicular inclination slid me off, and ano- 
ther of the cotnpany tried it with the same results. — 
These things all happened in a room which was light 
enough to allow of our seeing under and over, and all 
around the table, which was touched by no one ex- 
cept the two persons who respectively got upon it to 
keep it down I 

" We went into a darkened room to see the spiritual 
flashes of light said to have been vouchsafed to some 
investigators. Instead of this we were greeted with 
tremendous rappings all around us. Some of the blows 
on the walls, floor, and table, within three inches of 
myself, were astounding. I could hardly produce 
snch violent demonstrations with my fist, though I 
struck with all my might. The very walls shook. — 
Answers to questions were given by concussions of 
varying force and intonation, according to the charac- 
ter of the spirits communicating. A favorite little 
daughter of one of the gentlemen present, a stranger 
from a remote State, who had left the earth almost in 
infancy, announced her presence by a thick-pattering 
rain of eager and joyful little raps ; and in answer to 
an inward request of her father, she laid her baby 
hand upon his forehead! This was a man who was 
not a believer in these things — he had never before 
Been them* but he could not mistake the thrilling feel- 
ing of that spirit touch. I also had a similar manifes- 
tation, in the character of which I am not deceived. 

"Suddenly, and without any expectation on the 

68 BEFORE THE WOBLD. 

part of the company, Mr. Home was taken np in the 
air! I bad hold of his hand at the time, and I and 
otliers felt his feet — ^they were lifted a foot from the 
floor 1 He palpitated from head to foot apparently 
with the contending emotions of joy and fear which 
choked his ntterance. Again and again he was taken 
from tlie floor, and the third time he was carried to 
the lofty ceiling of tlie apartment, with which his 
liand and head came in gentle contact 

'' I omitted to state that these latter demonstrations 
were made in response to a request of mine that ihe 
spirits would give us something that would satisfy er- 
ery one in the room of their presence. The mediom 
was much astonished, and more alarmed than any of 
the rest, who, I may add, took tlie matter calmly, 
though they wore inter sely interested." 

Durini^ these elevations, or levitations, I usually ex- 
poricuieo in my body no particular sensations than 
what I can only describe as an electrical fullness about 
the feet. I feel no hands supporting me, and since 
the first time, above described, I have never felt fear, 
though should I have fallen from the ceiling of some 
rooms in which I have been raised, I could not have 
escaped serious injury. I am generally lifted up per- 
pendicularly ; my arms frequently become rigid and 
drawn above my head, as if I were grasping the un- 
seen power which slowly raises me from the floor. At 
times when I reach the ceiling, my feet are brought on 
a level with my face, and 1 am as it were in a reclin- 
ing position. I have frequently been kept so suspend- 
ed four or five minutes, an instance of which will be 

BEFORE THE WORLD. 6i 

leen in an account which is given of occurrences in 
the year 1867, at a chateau near Bordeaux. I have 
been lifted in the light of day upon only one occasion, 
and that was in America. I have been lifted in a room 
in Sloane Street, London, with four gas-lights brightly 
burning, with live gentlemen present, who are willing 
to testify to what they saw, if need bo, beyond the 
many testimonies which 1 sliall hereafter adduce. On 
some occasions the rigidity of my arms relaxes, and I 
have with a pencil made letters and signs on the ceil- 
ing, some of which now exist in London. 

During this autumn and winter, I visited private 
families with whom I had become acquainted, — and 
never a day passed without some manifestations oc- 
curring. These are for the greater part of a private 
nature, appealing to the sympathies of relatives and 
friends, and could not properly be given to the world. 
They are to me, however, as to them, a dear remin- 
iscence of the loving guidance of departed friends, 
who find their highest happiness in ministering to and 
consoling those who remain to fulfil their pilgrimage 
here. They ever say that God in his loving-kindness 
allows this, and that as he is an everywhere present 
God, and can bear with our shortcomings, they having 
been mortals like ourselves, can tlie more readily un- 
desstand the weaknesses of our human nature. Dur- 
ing the time I have already spoken of as my public 
life, I have met with thousands, many of whom dis- 
believed even the existence of the soul after death, and 
' Bome who denied the existence of a God. Amongst 
these were even clergymen, who told me that though 
they had preached the Gospel, they themselves had 

68 BEFORE THE WOBLD. 

never been fully convinced of existence in an after 
life. From the letters of a friend, an Episcopal bishop, 
I make the following extract. " You have die pleas- 
ant assurance of having been the instrument of con- 
veying incalculable joy and comfort to the hearts of 
many people ; in the case of sorrow you have changed 
the whole aspect of their existence, and you have made 
dwelling places light, that were dark before." 

I went from Hartford to Springfield, to spend a few 
days with Mr. Elmer, and although at this time I did 
not hold stances, still the power was constantly with 
me in some form or other, as will be seen from the 
following. 

"While Mr. Alderson was at my house, Mr. Home 
called to see us, having been absent a long time. — 
Soon after he arrived, he was taken with severe sick- 
ness, from which A. attempted relief by bathing his 
head. During the process, Mr. Home was thrown in- 
to the spiritual condition, and described Mr. A.'s fa- 
ther and sister ; spoke their names and that of his mo- 
ther ; and the spirit of the father, while addressing his 
son, called him correctly by his christian name, which 
Mr. Home had no means of knowmg — ^neither did he 
know the names of Mr. A.'8 parents, which, he assured 
us, were known only to himself, as he had not men- 
tioned them this side of Baltimore !" 

On going to Boston my power returned, and with 
it the more impressive manifestations of music, with- 
out any earthly instrument At night, when I was 

BBFOBE THB WORLD. 69 

*«leep, my room would be filled as it were, with 
fiOTinds of harmony, and these gradually grew louder, 
®1 persons in other parts of the house could hear 
ftem distinctly. If by chance I awakened, the music 
^oald instantaneously cease. 

•••■•■ . M 

CHAPTER m. 

FUBTHEB MANIFESTATIONS IN AMERICA. 

The year 1863 was spent under the guidance of 
•^ three friends, and during the summer months I resided 
at Newburgh, on the Hudson river, where my time 
was passed in the completion of my studies. I was at 
the Theological Institute, but only as a boarder, and 
in no way included in the theological classes. While 
here, I had an extraordinary vision, which is still so 
vivid that I remember it in all its details. 

The institute was built on an eminence, command- 
ing a view of peculiar beauty. Below lay the city ; 
on the right, the river was lost in its windings among 
the rocky hills surrounding West Point; on the left, it 
lay in expanse, and could be traced for a distance of 
many miles ; behind, spread out the country, with its 
pretty little farm-houses dotted here and there. I have 
sat for hours of an evening, watching the feeble flick- 
ering lights, and endeavoring to picture in my imagin- 
ation the life emotions which must from time to time 
have crossed those thresholds. Now, fancy pictured to 
me a young girl, on whose form time and care had 
passed but as an evening breeze ; and* a little further 
off it was, perchance, a mother whose little one was 

MANTFE8TATI0NB IN AMERICA. 71 

offering, and every beat of whose feeble pulse she had 

ionnted, with that hope which only a mother may 

enow, as she prays God to spare the pure, gentle, and 

oving little one, whom He has given her. Anon, it 

was one bowed down with age and sorrow ; all that he 

liad loved had gone to their rest, and he was alone in 

the world. Bright pictures <>f his youth flitted before 

him, but these only augmented his loneliness, for the 

light- of the past had brought out in deeper contrast 

the shadows of the present. 

These and similar trains of thought often occupied 
my idle hours; and, at times, these fancied scenes be- 
came as it were real, and furnished amf)le resource to 
a mind naturally inclined to dwell on subjects beyond 
the little narrow circle of every-day life. 

One evening, I had been pondering deeply on that 
change which the world calls death, and on the eter- 
nity that lies beyond, until, wearied, I found relief in 
prayer, and then in sleep. My last waking conscions- 
Dess had been that of perfect trust in God, and a sense 
of gratitude to Him for the enjoyment I received from 
contemplating the beauties of tlie material creation. 
It might have been that my mind was led to this by 
the fact of my having watched a beautiful star as it 
shone and twinkled in the profound stillness of the 
night. Be this as it may, it appeared to me that, as I 
closed my eyes to earthly things, an inner perception 
was quickened within me, till at last reason was as act- 
ive as when I was awake. I, with vivid distinctness, 
remember asking myself the question, whether I was 
asleep or no? when, to my amazement, I heard a voice 
which seemed so natural, that my heart bounded with 

73 MANIFESTATIONB IN AHfiBIOA. 

joy as I recognized it as the voice of one who, whife 
on earth, was far too pure for such a world as onrs, and 
who, iu passing to that brighter home, had promised 
to watch over and protect me. And, although I well 
knew she would do so, it was the first time I had heard 
her voice, with that nearness and natural tone. She 
said, " Fear not, Daniel, I am near you ; the vision 
you are about to have is that of death, yet you will not 
die. Your spirit must again return to the body in a 
few hours. Trust in God and his good angels : all will 
be well." Here the voice became lost, and I felt as 
one who at noonday is struck blind; as he woutd cling 
even to the last memories of the sunlight, so I would 
fain have clung to material existence — not that I felt 
any dread of passing away, nor that I doubted for an 
instant the words of my guardian angel, but I feared I 
had been over-presumptuous in desiring knowledge, 
the very memory of which might disturb my future 
life. This was but momentary, for almost instanta- 
neously came rushing with a fearful rapidity memo- 
ries of the past ; my thoughts bore the semblance of 
realities, and every action appeared as an eternity of 
existence. During the whole time, I was aware of a 
benumbing and chilling sensation which stole over my 
body, but the more inactive my nervous system be- 
came, the more active was my mind, till at length I 
felt as if I had fallen from the brink of some fearful 
precipice, and as I fell, all became obscure, and my 
whole body became one dizzy mass, only kept alive 
by a feeling of terror, until sensation and thought 
simultaneously ceased, and I knew no more. How 
long I had lain thus I know not, but soon I felt that I 

KANIFBSTATIONS IN AHKRIOiu 

h 

"- was about to awaken in a most dense obscurity ; terror 
bad now given place to a pleasurable feeling, accom- 
panied by a certitude of some one dearly loved being 
near me, yet invisible : it then occurred to me that the 
light of the spheres must necessarily be more effulgent 
than our own, and I pondered whether or not the sud- 
den change from darkness to light might not prove 
painful, for instinctively I realized that beyond the 
surrounding obscurity lay an ocean of silver-toned 
light. 1 was at this instant brought to a consciousness 
of light, by seeing the whole of my nervous system, 
as it were, composed of thousands of electrical scintil- 
lations, which here and there, as in the created nerve, 
took the form of currents, darting their rayons over 
the whole body in a manner most marvellous ; stilL 
this was but a cold electrical light, and besides, it was 
external. Gradually, however, I saw that the extrem- 
ities were less luminous, and the finer membranes 
surronnding the brain became as it were glowing, 
and I felt that tliought and action were no longer 
connected with the earthly tenement, but that they 
were in a spirit-body in every respect similar to the 
body which I knew to have been mine, and which 
1 now saw lying motionless before me on the bed. 
The only link which held the two forms together 
soemed to be a silvery-like light, whixjh proceeded from 
the brain ; and, as if it were a response to my earlier 
waking thoughts, the same voice, only that it was now 
zaore musical than before, said, " Death is but a second 
birth, corresponding in every respect to the natural 
biilih, and should the uniting link now be severed, you 
could never again enter the body. As I told you., how 

74 MAKimTATIOlfB IN AMKBRU. 

ever, this will not be. Yon did wrong to donbt, eveft 
for an inetant, for this was the cause of 3'onr having 
Biiifered, and this very want of faith is the source of 
every evil on your earth. God is love ; and still His 
children ever doubt Ilim. Has He not said, ^ Knock, 
and it sliall be opened unto yon : seek, and ye shall 
tindr His words must be taken as they were spoken. 
It is not for men to give any interpretation they may 
believe, or desire to believe, to what God has said. Be 
very calm, for in a few moments you will see ns all, 
but do not touch us ; be guided by the one who is 
appointed to go with vou, for I must remain near your, 
body." 

It now appeared to me that I was waking from a 
dream of darkness to a sense of light ; but such a glo- 
rious light! Never did earthly sun shed such rays, 
strong in beauty, soft in love, warm in life-giving glow, 
and as my last ideaof earthly liirht. luid been the reflex 
of my own body, so now this heavenly light came 
from those I saw standing about me. Yet the light 
was not of their creating, but was shed on them from 
a higher and purer source, which only seemed the 
more adorably beautiful in the invisibility of its holy 
love and mercy, — thus to shower every blessing on the 
creatures of its creation ; and now I was bathed in light, 
and about me were those for whom I had sorrowed, 
tor although I well knew that they existed, and loved 
and cared for me, nevertheless their earthly presence 
W41S not visible. One that I had never known on earth 
then drew near and said, 'You will come with me, 
Daniel.' I could only reply, that it was impossible to 
move inasmuch as I could not feel that my iiature had 

]IANIFE8TATIO>T8 IN ▲MEBIO^. 76 

a power over my new spirit-body. To this he replied, 
'Desire and you will accomplish your desires which 
are not sinful, desires being as prayers to the Divinity, 
and He answereth the every prayer of His children.' 

For the first time I now looked to see what sustain- 
ed my body, and I found that it was but a purple tinted 
cloud, and that as I desired to go onward with my 
guide, the cloud appeared as if disturbed by a gentle 
breeze, and in its movements I found I was wafted up- 
ward until I saw the earth, as a vision, far, far below 
ns. Soon I found that we had drawn nearer, and were 
just hovering over a cottage that I had never seen; 
and I also saw the inmates, but had never met them 
in life. The walls of the cottage were not the least 
obstruction to my sight, they were only as if construct- 
ed of a dense body of air, yet perfectly transparent, 
and the same might be said of every ariicle of furni- 
ture. I perceived that the inmates were asleep, and I 
"saw the various spirits who were watching over the 
sleepers. One of these was endeavoring to impress 
his son where to find a lost relic of him which the son 
much prized, and the loss of which had greatly grieved 
him. And 1 saw that the son awoke and thought it but 
an idle dream, and three times this impression was re- 
peated by the spirit; and I knew that when morning 
came, the young man would go, out of curiosity where 
he had been impressed to go, and that he would there 
find what he sought tor. In an adjoining room I saw 
one who was tormented by dreams, but they were but 
the production of a diseased body. 

1 was most deeply interested in all this, when my 
gnide said, "We must now return." When I found 

76 XAVirarrATioffs ni ^^^wmTi 

myself near my body, I tarned to tlie one who bad re* 
mained near my bed, and said, ^^ Why must I return 
80 soon, for it can be bat a few moments I have been 
with you, and I wonld fain see more, and remain near 
you longer?'' She replied, ^^It is now many hours 
since yon came to us ; but here we take no cognizance 
of time, and as yon are here in spirit, you too have lost 
this knowledge ; we would haye you with us, but this 
must not be at present. Betum to earth, love your-^ 
fellow-creatures, love truth, and in so doing, you will- 
serve the God of infinite love, who careth for and lovetfaL 
all. May the Father of mercies bless you, Daniel T' 

I heard no more, but seemed to sink as in a 8Wo<Hiy 
until consciousness was merged into a feeling that earth, 
with its ti-ials lay before me — and that I, as well as 
every human being, must bear my cross. And when 
I opened my eyes to material things, I found that the 
little star had given way to the sun, which had been 
above tlie horizon about four hours; making in all 
about eleven hours that this vision had lasted. My 
limbs were so dead,, that at least half an hour elapsed 
before I could reach the bell rope, to bring any one to 
my assistance, and it was only by continued friction 
that, at the end of an hour, I had sufficient force to 
enable me to stand upright. 

I merely give these facts as they occurred ; let oth- 
ers comment on them as they may. I have only to 
add, that nothing could ever convince me that this 
was an illusion or a delusion ; and the remembrance 
of those hours is as fresh in my mind now, as at the 
moment they took place. 

In the autumn I returned to New York, with the in- 

MASIFB8TATI0N8 IN AMEBIOA. " 77 

ition of beginning a course of medical studies, bat a 
ain of untoward circumstances seemed strangely to 
ik themselves together, and to prevent my carrying 
It my intention. At that time I could not well com- 
rehend why this should be ; but since tlien I have 
)ften had occasion to thank God that it was so or- 
dered. The kind friends who were doing what they 
thought to be best, in preventing others from seeing 
the manifestations, did not take into consideration that 
the phenomena which had been a source of informa* 
tion and consolation to them, were God-given, and 
that we had no right to conceal the light from any. 
As what was intended for me could only be brought 
about by my own decision, I acted as I felt would be 
tor the best, and so it afterwards proved to be. 

Previous, however, to my taking the step, I had an- 
other vision of great distinctness. I had been with 
8ome friends to dine at the house of a mutual acquaint- 
ance, and on returning, it was necessary to cross from 
Brooklyn to New York in the ferry-boat. The gate- 
keeper allowed our carriage to enter, and we were go- 
ing down the inclined plane which led to the boat, 
wiien one of the men caught the horses by the bit, tell- 
ing the coachman as he did so, that there was no room 
for as on the ferry-boat. Not only was this so, but the 
chains were already down, and the boat was in the act 
of leaving. There we were on a steep inclined plane, 
with restive iiorses, and the deep watera within a foot 
of them, the only barrier being a chain not over strong. 

Mrs. O- begged to alight, and I jumped from the 

carriage and gave her my hand to assist her. As her 
band touched mine, with the ilistantaneons sensatioc 

78 * ICAHmSTATTOHB IN AXBSIOA. 

of contact, I 8aw with most perfect distinctneee, that i 
little sieter of mine had passed from earth. I was not 
aware that the child had been ill, and her illness being 
apparently but slight, my relatives had not thonght it 
necessary to write to me abont her. It was a strange 
transition ; there I stood in the cold night air, and I 
heard the impatient pawing of the horses on the worn 
deal boards ; I heard the waters as they broke against 
the side piles of the ferry ; I felt a life- warm hand in 
mine, yet there, shielding her from the cold, beyond 
all fear, and where harm conld not come, I saw my 
mother, with one of the three children she had left 
me to care for on earth. The child was close pressed 
to her heart, and her long silky hair lay scattered in 
profusion over my mother's shoulder. I saw also my 
spirit-sister Mary, who seemed anxious to soothe the 
child-like wonderment of her newly arrived sister. It 
was but for a moment, yet I saw it all, and I knew 
that God had given me another guardian angel. The 
next day letters came to announce what I thus already 
knew. 

January of 1854 was the beginning of severer trials^ 
for I had been so left to myself in solitude and study 
the whole winter, that mind aud body were alike dis- 
turbed, and I wrote to my friends saying that I could 
not thiuk of continuing the life I then led ; and after 
many letters had passed between us, I was again leit 
to myself to decide as to my future course. I had 
friends in Boston, who as soon as they knew what my 
intentions were, generously offered to do all that my 
other friends had been doing, and to allow me perfect 
liberty to see whom I 'might please. My health had 

\ 

MANIFESTATIONS IN AM£BK3A. 79 

Biiffured from the nervous anxiety of my solitary life 
and studies, and now tlie medical men wliom I con- 
sulted, pronounced my left lung to be diseased. My 
spirit friends said that they were correct in their diag- 
nosis, but that I would not yet pass from earth, as my 
mission was incomplete, and there was much yet for 
me to do. 

I went from New York to Hartford, but I saw no 
strangers for a few weeks. From here I again went 
to Springfield, and Dr. Gardner of Boston, in a letter, 
dated March 1st, 1854, describes what he saw at this 
time, and thongli in some respects similar to what has 
been already described, wiFl help to show the character 
of the manifestations at different periods of my life. 

Dr. Gardner says, '' 1 am induced to offer you the 
following facts, which I in company with several other 
persons witnessed at the house of Mr. liufus Elmer in 
this city, on the evening of the 28th of February, 1854. 
Nine persons besides Mr. Home, were seated round a 
common cherry table, when the following phenomena 
occurred : The table commenced a trembling, vibra- 
tory motion, sounds were heard on the floor and table, 
sooie of which were very loud, then the table was 
rocked witii great force, then raised nearly if not quite 
two feet from the floor, and it was held supported in 
mid air with a waving motion, as if floating on the agi- 
tated waters of the sea, for considerable time. This 
was repeated for several times. Then we were directed 
to place the dinner-bell (weighingone lb. oneoz.) under 
the table on the floor, where it was rung with great 
violence many times ; questions were answered by the 
raps upon it, and with it every individual in the circle 

80 MAinrEerrATioifB ni ambbku. 

tonched in Bach a manner that there could could 
be no mistake about it. We then requested the Apirits 
to pass the bell from the floor, and to place it into our 
hands, whieh was done to each individual separately ; 
and, again at our request, it was taken from our hands, 
and carefully deposited on the floor. Again, iKrhile we 
sung the hymn, * Whilst shepherds watch,' the bell 
was raised from the floor, and rung in perfect time 
with the measure of the tune sung, after which another 
tune was drammed out by the bell against the under- 
side of the table, the sound resembling the roll of 
drum-sticks in the hands of a skilful performer upon a 
tenor drum. This was continued for several minutes. 

" All the above I know was performed without hu- 
man agency ; the hands of each person present during 
the whole performance above described being on the 
top of the table, with the room well lighted, and in full 
view of every person present ; and this was also the 
case during the whole performance. During the whole 
of the various performances with the bell, as well as 
before and after it, our clothes were pulled almost con- 
stantly, two handkerchiefs were firmly knotted together 
while lying in the laps of the owners, we were many 
times touched more or less forcibly, producing a pe- 
culiar and indescribable sensation, some of us had our 
limbs grasped with considerable force, and distinctly 
felt the form of the spirit hand, a soft, delicate, elastic, 
yet powerful touch, which cannot be described, but 
must be felt to be appreciated. The reader will bear 
in mind that the hands of every person present were 
in plain view on the top of the table. 

" During the evening, responses to questions asked, 

XAHIKBSTATIOHB IN AlfSBIQA. 81 

were made by the invisible intelligence with the bell- 
handle, so heavy as to leave indentations on the table, 
which may be seen by any person who doubts. Many 
other manifestations were made, but the above are snf- 
ficsent to convey some idea of the wonderful invisible 
power there manifested ; and the many beautiful and 
sublime moral teachings there given by our heavenly 
visitants, through the medium while entranced, I trust 
will long be remembered and made a rule of life by 
those who heard them." 

I next went to Boston, and while here the power 
seemed to increase in a manner, which surprised me 
not less than other witnesses of it. On several occas- 
ions spirits were seen distinctly by all present in the 
room, and more than once they kissed persons present 
so as to be both felt and heard. During the summer 
months my health gradually improved, and I once 
more thought that I would now be enabled to pursue 
a course of studies which would enable me to take my 
diploma as a medical man. But no I again a series of 
unforeseen circumstances combined to prevent me. In 
September, I returned to Springiield, and the letter I 
here insert is taken from '* The Bepubliccii " and des- 
cribes some phenomena witnessed by Mr. F. C. 
Ajidrne. 

" On Monday last, September 25, 1854, 1 called af- 
icr tea at the house of my friend, Mr. Elmer, for the 
purpose of returning a book which I had borrowed. 
Unexpectedly, I met there Mr. D. D. Home, who had 
just arrived from Boston. After conversing an hour 
or two, Mr. Elmer having to leave on the morrow on 
business, proposed a * circle' that evening. We ac- 

8S MANIFB8TATIONB HT AMBBKSA. 

cordingly sat down — Mr. Elmer's family, Mr. Home 
and I being the only persons present. The occnrren 
ces, though very extraordinary, were similar to those 
already published. We were all touched by unseen 
hands, the room being well lighted with gas, a large 
bell was passed into our hands, &c. These things 
were not new to me, and are not to the public. I will 
therefore pass them by. 

*' Knowing that still more extraordinary ^manifesta- 
tions' at times occurred to Mr. Home during the night, 
I mentioned that I would like to witness some of them. 
They urged me to stay and spend the night, and I did 
so. 

" After leisurely undressing, putting out the light 
and retiring to bed, we soon began to hear faint raps, 
which rapidly increased in power and number, till the 
walls, floor, ani bedstead fairly shook with strokes. 
They came like a shower. Soon came other noises, 
and then tho bed began to move across the floor. 
This seemed rather dangerous locomotion. It was the 
only thing that gave me any uneasiness. Having be« 
fore witnessed so many wondei*s, I was not frightened, 
though Mr. Home seemed to be so, holding on to me 
with both hands, and begging with all his might that 
the bedstead should be stopped. They complied with 
his request, but only to come in a more tangible form. 

Soon I began to feel some one stepping on my feet 
and ancles, over the bed-clothes, but with a pressure 
diflFerent from that produced by any hard substance. 
Directly at\er there came a hand on my head and fore- 
head, as much like flesh and hlood as any 1 ever felt, 
only somewhat cold. 1 began to ask questions, tht* 

MANIFESTATIONS IN AMRRTOA> 83 

fmgers patting me on my forehead in answer. Sever- 
al hands, touching me at the same time, claimed to be 
those of relatives of mine. 

"A strong hand came, stated to be that of my 
grandfather. I asked, liow am I to know that this is 
my grandfather? The hand moved from my forehead 
to my temple, over my eyebrow and eye, and then 
passed down over my face — the fingere patting me in 
the most gentle manner possible. At another time, at 
my request, hands patted my forehead with such force 
that the sound could be heard, I am confident, in any 
part of the room, 

" I wish, before I close, to add a few words. To re- 
ligious minds (which are strangely the most sceptical 
in this matter) I have this to say : By what process of 
reasoning can you bring yourselves to disbelieve, my 
testimony of what I know and ha^)e seen^ and to be- 
lieve the testimony of what John, Peter or Paul saw ? 
I speak with all reverence — I doubt not their testi- 
mony; on the contrary I believe it now more than 
ever. But I know of no reason, (my veracity being 
unimpeached) why my testimony of what I know and 
see is not as good as that of any other man, living or 
dead. And there are thousands who know these 
things to be so, as well as I. • 

''To our wise men, whose hobby is scientific investi- 
gation, I would say : Of what use is it to those who have 
gone through what I have, to read Dr. Dodd's book. 
Dr. Rogers' theory, or to marvel over Professor Fara- 
day's discoveries ? who only proved that when he push- 
ed, he pushed." 

Early in November, I returned to New York, and 

84 ICAHIFBSTATIONB IS AlflfcBIOA, 

resnmed my medical studies. I held stances two of 
three times a week, at my own rooms, and was in the 
habit of going amongst the poorer classes for the pur- 
pose of speaking to them of this most cheering trntb. 
I have alwayf found them to be the most candid and 
thorough in their investigations ; and when they were 
in reality convinced, they were the most thankful to 
God in allowing such proofs of spiritual beings and 
forces to exist. I have seen many a poor heart-broken 
mother consoled with the thought that the fair young 
child, given her by Gk)d as a hope-star to cheer her as 
she toiled for her daily bread, but who had pined and 
gone for ever from her sight, was still living and lov- 
ing her and her God-sent ministering angel. I well 
remember a poor man being present one evening, and 
the spirit of a little girl coming with the following 
message. *' Father, dear, your little Mary was pre- 
sent last Wednesday, and God gave her power to pre- 
vent you from doing what you wished. If you were 
ever to do that, you could not come where your own 
Mary and her mother are. Promise me you will ne- ^ 
ver think of such an awful thing again." We all- 
looked astonished, but conld not understand to what 
she alhided. Still it was evident the poor father knew 
too well, for throwing himself on his knees, he said, 
as the tears rolled down his cheeks, "Indeed, it is but 
too true, that on Wednesday last I decided to cut my 
throat ; but as I took the razor to do it, I felt that had 
my child been alive, she would have shrunk from me 
wi/^h horror, and this very thought was the saving oi 
me." 
My frequent seances were attended by persons who 

iriaA^dbu-^ 

XAinFBSTATIONS IN AMBBIOA. 85 

were introduced to me by friends, and I met at this 
time many hundreds. One of these stances is spoken 
of in the " New York Conference," of December 26, 
1854, and may serve to give an idea of my mediumsliip 
at this time. 

"A gentleman present related the facts of a circle 
wliich met on Wednesday evening last. Mr. Home 
was the medium. When seated, the first thing noticed 
was an undulating motion on the table, which was fol- 
lowed by its being lifted entirely clear off the floor. 
This was repeated several times. Once or twice it was 
raised as high as the chins of the party sitting at it, 
the hands of every person in the room being upon the 
table. A guitar in its case standing in one corner of 
the room was heard to move, and on examination, the 
end resting upon the floor was found to have moved 
several inches. Loud raps were heard in its vicinity 
while this was being done, and a closet door opening 
upon the room in which they. were seated, was shut 
with considerable force. The circle during these oc- 
c^irrences remained seated at the table, and some six 
or eight feet from where they took place. The guitar 
case was then unlocked, and the instrument placed un- 
der the table. In this position it was played upon re- 
peatedly, not, to be sure, in the highest grade of the 
art, but with very fair average skill. The hands of 
the party during this performance were all upon the 
table in plain sight of every one. There was no chance 
for trick, the room being sufliciently light for all to see 
the exact position of every person and thing in the 
room. The guitar was then placed in the lap of each 
member of the circle in rotation. Each one took hold 

86 MANIFESTATIOirB ^T JJCXBHU. 

of the end presented, and held on iintil the instrament 
was removed by the invisible agency. The table, the 
chair, in which they were seated, and the floor of the 
room itself, were made each in tarn to exhibit a trem- 
ulous motion sensible to all. The lai-ge rocking-chair 
in which Mr. Ilome was seated, was next rocked for- 
cibly. Then, by direction through the alphabet, the 
whole party of ten persons, in rotation, took the same 
chair, and were rocked in the same way. The applica- 
tion of the power was as though a person liad hold of 
the upper part of the back of the chair with one hand, 
and the other on its arm The application of the force 
at these points could be felt distinctly at every vibrar 
tion ; and the force necessary to produce them may 
be appreciated by stating that the feet of the sitter 
were held out straight, and were frequently made to 
strike the under side of the top of the table. Every 
one was touched in turn as by human hands, some 
large and some small. A lady present who had been 
touched with what purported to be the hands of her 
little daughtei, asked if she could take the handke|^ 
chief out of her lap ? Very soon it was seen to move 
slowly from her lap, and disappear beneath the table. 
In a few minutes, raps indicating the alphabet were 
heard, and this sentence was received : " Mother, now 
look and see what we have done." On looking, the 
handkerchief was found knotted and twisted into the 
form of a doll-hahy^ not very symmetrical, but suffi- 
ciently like to show the evident design, as well as in- 
genuity and power to execute. Several other interest- 
mg facts occurred during the evening. 
"Dr. Hallock said he was present when the facte 

MANTFE&TATIONS IN AMUiBIOA. 87 

just narrated occurred. The point wliich he particu- 
larly wished to illustrate was the open chai'acter, so to 
Bpeak, of these manifestations. When an important 
fact is stated, accompanied with the explanation that 
it occurred in a dark room, it naturally raises the ques- 
tion of deception in the mind of the hearer, which the 
moot elaborate statement of particulars cannot eradi- 
cate. From beginning to end these manifestations 
were free from that objection. Every person in the 
circle, Mr. Home included, was in full view. When 
the guitar was played, all our hands were seen to be 
on the table. A man could not have touched the strings 
of that instrument with the toe of his boot even, much 
less with his hand, without detection. So of all the 
other facts of the evening. In one instance, after sev- 
eral unsuccessful attempts to retain a sheet of paper 
apou the smooth surface of the taLle when elevated 
to a considerable angle, the table with the sheet of 
paper on it was turned so as to rest on its edge^ the top 
being vertical, and the paper still retaining its position, 
\intil it was suffered to fall at the request of one of the 
gentlemen present. The exhibition of power and in- 
telligence manifested on that evening, were Aomq for 
w, and not hy us — if ten pairs of eyes, with the re- 
muning complement of senses, are to be taken as evi- 
dence." 

In January, 1851, the weather was more than usually 
cold and severe, and my cough had so increased, with 
other symptoms of a more alarming nature,' that all 
idea of completing my medical studies had to be aban- 
doned entirely. The medical men whom I consulted, 
lU coincided in saying that my only hope of having 

88 MA9in>STATION8 IN AMBBIOA. 

my life prolonged, was to visit Europe. This was to 
me a hard struggle, in being thus separated from those 
who would have tended me with every affectioni and 
to be thrown as it were a stranger in what was now to 
me a Btrange land. My family had by this time all 
been residents of America for some time, and I knew 
no friend in all England. I would not have heeded the 
advice of my medical men, and I shoald have remain- 
ed where I was to pass from earth ; bnt my spirit 
friends told me that I must go, and their counsels could 
not be unheeded. I accordingly went to pay a series 
of farewell visits to those friends who had been so 
kind to me ; they as well as I feeling that in all proba- 
bility it was the last time we should meet '^ in the 
flesh." While at Hartford in March, on one of these* 
visits the stance here alluded to took place. 

" The following occurrences transpired in this city 
on the evening of the 14:th ultimo : A small party were 
seated with Mr. D. D. Home, who is probably the most 
remarkable of modern mediums for spirit-manifesta- 
tions of a physical or tangible order. It was intimated 
that if we would procure a table-cloth and place ii 
upon the table, the unseen presences would manifest 
themselves by lifting up the cloth. The cover was 
accordingly procured, when we placed it upon the 
table, put the lamp upon it, and drew back far enough 
to prevent the possibility of any one of the party touch- 
ing it, unless by stretching forward ; and the slightest 
movement of the kind by any one present would have 
been instantly detected. In a moment more the table- 
cloth was plainly lifted up, on the side opposite to the 
medium, and in the full light of the lamp. It present 

MAMIFBSTATIONS IN aMEBIOA. 89 

ed the appearance of something under it, for it moved 
about under the cloth, going first to one side of the 
table and then to the other. Presently it reached out^ 
lifting the sides of the cloth, towards each onepresentj 
in succession. In this manner the force, or substance 
(for it was a substantial thing, resembling a hand), 
reached out and shook hands with the company. It 
felt, through the cloth, like a hand ; but on retaining, 
it for a closer inspection, it seemed to evaporate or dis- 
sotvcj and was rapidly lost. In its nature and compo- 
sition it resembled, apparently, the hand and arm seen 
on a previous occasion by a party of iK, and described 
in a former article. 

" Soon after this, the thing (whatever it was), again 
lifted up the table-cloth, moving apparently all about 
the table, and raising the cloth as it moved. In a mo- 
ment more it reached forward and touched one of the 
party ; then drew back and again reached out and 
touched another. Different parts of the person were 
thus touched ; and presently the hand, if it was a hand, 
left its protection of the table-cloth, and commenced 
touehing the party in succession, some in one place, 
and othera in another. But nothing could be seen I 
If requested to touch, for instance, the right shoulder, 
the hand would unexpectedly respond by touching the 
left} or if asked to touch the leg, perhaps the breast 
or hand of the one asking would be touched — seem- 
iiigly with a view to indicate in the clearest manner 
that the power and the intelligence was separate from 
the mind of the party. The invisible agency thus 
operating touched the writer at first on the knee, and, 
gradually advancing upwards, finally took him by the 

90 MAHinCBTATiaHt DT AmnHJOA. 

hand ; but, althongli this wa8 in a pretty good light 
(a little below the edge of the table), no traces of tlie 
hand that was palpably touching mine coald be seen. 

^' A guitar, of a size and weight somewhat unasnal, 
had been placed beneath the table, in the hope of get- 
ting some tn/usic from the spiiits. I placed also a 
quire of letter paper and a pencil upon the instrument, 
that they might, if able and so disposed, give us a sam* 
pie of writing without mortal hands. (Both of these 
performances have been witnessed at circles in New 
York, and elsewhere.) As soon as we were again 
seated and qui^ the guitar was sounded, and then 
played upouy evidently by real, substantial fingers, for 
the touches on the strings were strong and distinct 
Presently tlie quire of paper was thrown from the in- 
strument upon the floor, a distance of some three or 
four feet, and the music was again produced, louder 
than before. Next, the guitar, large and heavy as it 
was, was dragged out from its place, and carriM away 
to a dooT^ a distance of five feet from the table, and 
there the music recommenced, stronger and clearer 
than ever. This had all been done while the party sat 
quietly at the table. At this juncture, in order to see 
the performance going on at that distance, tlie writer 
leaned forward towards it, and in so doing, accident- 
ally extinguished the lamp on the table; but as a good 
light was reflected uj^on all of us from a grate of glow- 
ing coals directly in front of tlie party, it was decided 
not to break the circle to relight the lamp, and the 
manifestations went on. 

" While we sat thus, the guitar^ at the distanee of 
Jice or six feet from the party ^ was played ^cpon exqui 

r 

MAHUfEBTATIONB IN AlfKRTOA. 91 

wUdy^ and for several minutes, by some power other 
than that of any one bodily present. Tlie instrument 
was partially in shadow, aud the hand that swept its 
strings conld not be seen ; but the music was surpass- 
ingly beantifuL It was of a character entirely new to 
those who listened, and was sweeter, softer, and more 
harmonioas than anything I have ever heard. Por- 
tions of it were filled with a certain soft and wild mel- 
ody that seemed to be the echo of other music far 
away, and for the exquisite sweetness of which there 
are no words. It was of that 

* Music that softer falls 

Than petals from blown roses on the grass, 
Or night dews on still waters between walls 
Of ^adowy granite in a gleaming pass.' 

Anon it changed, and rose to a ' full orb ' of strong, 
tempestuous melody, filling the house with its sounds. 
It was heard by a lady residing in another part of the 
house, who inquired about it the next day ; thus prov- 
ing the strength and the reality of this immortal 
music. ^ 

" It was asked by one of the circle, ' Can you strike 
on all the chords at once V Ana. (by responses on the 
strings) — * Yes,' and this was actually done. 

" The guitar was then removed to a corner of the 
room, still farther off; and as soon as all were seated, 
it was again played upon, at that distance, for some 
time; then it was brought back by invisible means 
and placed near the table. Mr. Home remarked, that 
all this transcended anything of the kind in his pre- 
vious experience, and he proposed to ' see what they 

93 MANIFXSTATIOHB IN AMSSI0I4. 

eould do,' taking the gaitar to the moat distant corner 
of the room. It was suggested to him by ns that thii 
would be useless, as they could do nothing at that dis- 
tance from liimself ; but upon his taking his seat agaia 
the spirits began playing the instrument in that fiEU> 
thest comer I — ^at a distance (as ascertained by subse- 
quent measurement) of nearly eleven feet from circle or 
the medium I Then the guitar was moved from its plaoe 
by the spirits and brought towards the circle ; but, en- 
countering a heavy mahogany chair on the way, Mtf 
instrument was laid down and the chair dragged aavt^ 
eral feet out of the way ; after which the guitar was 
taken up and carried all around the circle by the in- 
visibles, and at length deposited in the opposite comer 1 
In a few moments more the writer saw \i poised in the 
air, to{) upwards, and nearly over his head ! The re- 
mark was made, " Well, if I did not see this myself, I 
wouldn't believe it on other testimony" — whereupon 
the instrument reached forward and playfuUy tapped 
the speaker three times upon the shoulder. Then it 
was passed across the table (over his head) towards 
Jir. Home, whom it lightly touched several times upon 
the head 1 Being close to it during this performance, 
I watched it narrowly by the aid of the fire-light. 
The bottom end of the instrument was very near my 
face, while the opposite end was thus being used ; it 
was not, in fact, six inches above my head, and just in 
front of me. The indistinct outline of a hv/man hani 
could he seen grasping the instrument just helow its 
centre. 

" Reaching up, I grasped the instrument firmly in 
both hands and held it above my head, requesting at 

MAHIFESTATION8 IN AHEKIOA. 93 

the same time that the one who had been perform- 
ing would now play it if possible. Ijnmediately the 
strings were touched as if by human fingers, though 
now invisible, and the guitar was played as well wliilo 
thus held in the air as it had been while on the floor I 
^TUhfy quire of paper before spoken of was taken 
front the floor^ slowly lifted up^ and placed upon the 
taUe, as I can affirm, without the aid of a human 
hand.- Sitting at that end of the table where this was 
done, I was enabled to see the whole of this proceed- 
ing. The quire of paper was placed upon the edge of 
the table, and so near my hand as to touch it. This 
was done slowly and deliberately, and this time at 
least I was permitted to see plainly and clearly the 
hand that had hold of it. It was evidently a lady^s 
hand — very thin, very pale, and remarkably attenuat- 
ed. The conformation of this hand was peculiar. 
The fingers were of an almost preternatural length, 
ftnd seemed to be set wide apart The extreme ^^Z^or 
of the entire hand was also remarkable. But perhaps 
the most noticeable thing about it was the shape of the 
fingers, which, in addition to their length and thinness, 
were unusually j^otTi^rf at the ends; they tapered ra- 
pidly and evenly toward the tips.* The hand also 
narrowed from the lower knuckles to the wrist, where 
it ended. All this could be seen by such light as was 
in the room, while the hand was for a few moments 
holding the paper upon the edge of the table. It sud- 

• The writer hu since been shown a dagnerreotype taken from a picture of 
the lady whose name was written as above described, and whose disease was 
eoiisiimi»tion. The portrait was taken Just before her death, and the hands 
and flngen in the daguerreotype, although rather indistinct, bear a most close 
•nd remsricable resemblance to the hand described above. 

94 MANIFE8TA'I IONS IN AMERICA. 

(Icniy disappeared, and in a moment tlie pencil 
thrown from some quarter, and fell upon the table, 
where the hand again appeared, took it, and hpgcun to 
wHte, This was in plain sight, being only shaded by 
one of the circle who was sitting between the paper on 
he table and the lire. The hands of each one present 
were upon the table, in full view, so that it could not 
have been one of the party who was thus writing. 
Being the nearest one to the hand, I bent down close 
to it as it wrote, to see the whole of it. It extended 
no farther than the wrist. With a feeling of curiosity 
natural under the circumstances, I brought my face 
close to it in the endeavor to see exactly what it was, 
and, in so doing, probably destroyed the electric or 
magnetic influence by which it was working ; for tlie 
pencil dropped and the hand vanished. The wridug 
Wii8 afterwards examined, and proved to be the namej 
in her own proper handwHting^ of a relative and inti- 
mate lady friend of one in the circle, who passed away 
some years t^ince. Other marks were also made, and 
the word 'Dear' had been written just as the pencil 
dropped. Tliis writing has been preserved, and re- 
mains as an evidence of the reality of the fact. That 
it was produced by no hand of any one bodily in that 
room I know and affirm. 

" The hand afterwards came and shook hands with 
each one present. I felt it minut3ly. It was tolerably 
well and symmetrically made, though not perfect ; and 
it was soft and slightly warm. It ended at thk 

CHAPTEE IV. 

IN ENGLAND. 

On the 3l8t of March, 1855, I sailed from Boston for 
England in the ' Africa,' the late Captain Harrison be- 
ing the captain of the ship. On tlie ninth day of our 
voyage we neared England, and the signal cannon was 
fired. I never can forget my feelings as I looked 
around me, and saw only joy beaming on the faces of 
my fellow-passengers ; some there were who were 
about to reach their home, and the thought of kind 
friends waiting to welcome thetn brought the smile of 
joy on their countenances. Others were travellers who 
saw the Old World with all her art treasures spread 
before them, and the monotony of a sea voyage so near 
ita termination. I stood there alone, with not one 
friend to welcome me, broken down in health, and my 
hopes and fairest dreams of youth, all, as I thought, 
for ever fled. The only prospect I had was that of a 
few months' sufl'ering, and then to pass from earth. I 
h*id this strange power also, which made a few look 
with pity on me as a poor deluded beinir, oijy devil- 
sent, to lure souls to destruction, while others were not 
chary in treating me as a base impostor. I stood there 
oil the ship's deck amongst the crowd of pasBongei's, 

96 IN ENGLAim. 

and a sense of utter loneliness crept over me, nntil my 
very Iieart seemed too heavy for me to bear np against 
it. I sought my cabin, and prayed to Ood to vouch- 
safe one ray of hope to cheer me. In a few moments 
I felt a sense of joy come over ane and when I rose, 
was as happy as the happiest of the throng. 

I reached Cox's Ilotel in Jermyn Street on the even- 
ing of the 9th of Ai)ril ; and as soon as Mr. Cox knew 
who I was, he welcomed lue more as a father would 
welcome a son, than as a stranger whom he had never 
seen, and from that time to this he has been to me the 
most sincere and generous friend. 

It soon became known that I was in England, and 
in less than a month I had more engagements than I 
could well fulfil. While at Cox's Hotel, Lord Broug- 
ham expressed a desire to see me for the purpose of in- 
vestigating the piienomena, and as his lordship's even- 
ings were fully occupied, I appointed an early after- 
noon. Accordingly his Lordship came accompanied 
by Sir David Brewster, with whom and Mr. Cox I had 
a seance, which slioi tly afterwards, in consequence of 
the misrepresentations and evasions of Sir David Brew- 
ster, became of considerable public interest, inasmuch 
as it was made the means of a general discussion in the 
newspapers on the subject of the spiritual phenomena. 
There are few mattei*8 in which Sir David Brewster 
has come before the public which have brought more 
shame upon him, than his conduct and assertions on 
this occasion, in which he manifested not only a disre- 
gard for truth, but also a disloyalty to scientific obser- 
vation, and to the use of his own eyesight and natural 
faculties. In order that L )rd Brougham might not be 

IN BNGLAND, 97 

compelled to deny Sir David^s statements, he found it 
necessary that he shonld be silent, and I have some 
reason to complain that his Lordship preferred sacri- 
ficing me to his desire not to immolate his friend, since 
his silence was by many misconstrued to my disadvan- 
tage. The correspondenae which ensued was so inter- 
esting and characteristic, and is moreover so useful as 
being the first great occasion on which one of the pre- 
tended magnates of science has come forward on the 
subject of these phenomena, that I have thought it well 
to give the substance of it, with some pertinent re- 
marks on Sir David Brewster's conduct in an Appen- 
dix. It will be a means whereby his character may be 
the better known, not only for his untruthful dealing 
with this subject, but also in his own domain of science 
in which the same unfaithfulness to truth will be seen 
to be the characteristic of his mind. 

The immediate effect, however, of this ventilation 
of the subject was, as I have- invariably found it, to ex- 
cite only the greater interest in the phenomena, and it 
was thereby the means of convincing numbers of all 
classes who visited me. My time was fully occupied, 
notwithstanding my delicate health, in giving stances 
to anxions enquirers of all ranks and classes, from the 
peer to the artizan, and including men of all the profes- 
sions high in art, science, and literature, who were 
both more competent and truthful than I found Sir 
David Brewster to be to form a correct conclusion. 

After some time in Jermyn Street, I went to stay 
with a friend at Ealing, who was deeply interested in 
the subject, and his house was, during thegreaterpartof 
my stay, almost besieged by persons wishing to witness 

!• • " '^ 

98 IH BNOLAND. 

the phen<>mena. Hnndreds had their wishes gratified, 
and saw what has proved enough to be the turning 
point of their lives, and what rendered no longer pos^ 
sible those materialistic and sceptical notions, which 
are still unliappily so rife amongst the most highly ed- 
ucated classes at this day. Many interesting incidents 
occurred during my stay at Ealing, and the hands and 
once or twice the head of the spirit form were repeat- 
edly seen by many, who publicly testified to the fact. 
But although I was apparently wearing out my life by 
the fatigue and excitement wliich these constant stan- 
ces caused to me, I was not allowed to become proud 
of my position, for the good clergyman of Ealing found 

it his duty to publicly preach against me, and to at- 

tribute the manifestations to the devil. The position ^^n 
whicli is taken up by many of the clergy, is to me, in -^m 
itself, an extraordinary manifestation, for certainl y " ^^ 
these phenomena, whether from God or from tbedevil^ J» 
have in ten years caused more converts to the great:#*«-^t 
truths of immortality and angel communion, with all' j' 
that flows from these great facts, than all the sects inrrz^ 
Christendom have made during the same period. In -^ 
deied, whilst the churclies are* losing their adherents -^, 
the belief in spiritual laws caused by these externa" ' 
manifestations, is becoming widely spread through th^^s 
sceptical masses. It is not at all improbable that iirr^ 
pursuing their new studies, these last may be the mean^^ 
in their turn of converting the clergy to a belief ir"^^ 
spiritual laws. 

Wliilst I was at Ealing, a distinguished novelist, a(^ — 
compaaied by his son attended a stance, at whick^^^- 
some very remarkable manifestations occurred, anc 

^^ ik^M^ '^^U^VOA ^Tf^^i^ 

IN ENGLAND. 99 

which were chiefly directed to iiim. The rappings on 
the table snddenly became unusually firm and loud. 
He asked "what spirit is present?" the alphabet 
was called over, and the response was. *" I am the 
spirit who influenced you to write 'lfii±!:f?^ « Indeed," 
said he, " I wish you would give me some tangible 
proof of your presence." " What proof? will you take 
my hand !" " Yes," and putting his hand beneath the 
surface of the table, it was immediately ijeized by a 
powerful grasp, which made him start to his feet in ev- 
ident trepidation, exhibiting a momentary suspicion 
that a trick had been played upon him ; seeing, how- 
ever, that all tlie persons around him were sitting with 
their hands quietly reposing on the table, he recovered 
liis composure, and offering an apology for the uncon- 
trollable excitement caused by such an unexpected de- 
monstration, he resumed his seat. 

The following words were then spelt out, " We wish 

j^ou to believe in the " and then stopped. It was 

asked of the spirit : " In what am I to believe % in the 
medium ?" " No." " In the manifestations ?" " No." 
At that moment he was gently tapped on the knee, and 
putting his hand down, a cross was placed there by the 
spirit, which significantly finished the sentence. 

The cross was made of card-board, and had been ly- 
ing on a small table with other ornamenjbal articles in 
« distant part of the large room in which the party 
Were seated. The investigator, apparently much im- 
Pi^essed with the incident, turned to Mrs. Byner, and 
^^Ved permission to retain the cross as a souvenir, to 
^'''liich she assented, saying that its only value to her 
^'^^tt that it had been made by her boy, then recentlj 

100 nr ENGLAND. 

deceased, bnt she eonld have no objections to him keep- 
ing it, if he would remember the injanction. He 
bowed his assent, and placing the souvenir in his 
breast pocket, carried the cross away with him. 

On another occasion the children had been playing 
in the garden with some fresh-gathered flowers, ont of 
whicl) they had former a wreath. A stance wae pro- 
posed. It was a calm summer's evening, with the full 
moon just ijsing. A. large circular-shaped table was 
selected in the drawing room, which room was on a 
level with the garden lawn, the French windows ex- 
tending to the ground, and the moonlight-twilight 
shone through them sufficiently to make everything in 
the room visible. 

Tlie party seated themselves around the half cirele 
of the table, leaving the other half nearest to the gar- 
den window vacant After several minor incidents 
had occcnred, the table rose slowly from the ground, 
and ascended to the ceiling of the room, out of the 
reach of all but Mr. Coleman, who was tall enough to 
just touch its rim. It then descended steadily and 
settled on the floor with no more sound than if it had 
been a feather's weight. 

Having taken their seats again, a beautifully-formed 
feminine hand became distinctly visible to all the 
party present. It came up from the vacant side of the 
table, and made an unavailing effort, at first, to reach 
a hand-bell which had been placed there. In a short 
time, the fleshy and delicately-formed arm became 
visible up to the elbow, and was enveloped in what 
appeared to be a gauze sleeve, tlirough which it was 
transparently seen. The fingers then took up the bell, 

IN SNGLAND. 101 

held it suspended for a moment, rung it, and slowly 
carried it, ringing, beneath the table. Mr. Coleman 
finding the bell jingling against his knee, put down 
his hand, received it, and placed it on the table. He 
then asked if he might feel the hand, which was nei- 
ther warm nor cold, but of velvety softness, and it was 
placed with a gentle pressure in his. 

When the hand first appeared, all in the circle had 
hold of each other's hand, I having, at Mr. Coleman's 
request, placed both my hands in Mr. Coleman's grasp. 

Whilst seated in this position, the wreath of fiow- 
ers, which hnd been made by the children, was seen 
by all to be lifted from my head, where it had been 
playfully placed a short time previously. No hand 
was visible. The wreath then descended to within an 
inch of the surface of the table. It then slowly trav- 
ersed round the circle and back again to Mr. Coleman, 
who took it, and retained it at home until the flowers 
withered. 

At another sitting, each person in the circle who 
wore a ring had it gently removed by a spirit hand, 
the hand being seen afterwards with all the rings on 
its fingers, and after displaying itself by turning about, 
showing the back and palm two or three times, in- 
verted itself, and cast the rings upon the table. 

One evening at Ealing, Sir David Brewster, Mrs. 
TroUope the authoress, and her son Mr. Thomas Trol- 
lope, and several others were present. The table at 
which the party sat was a long telescopic dining table, 
having two legs at each end and none in the centre. — 
One end of it was occupied by Mr. TroUope, Sir David 
Brewster, and a lady. I sat about the centre of one 

109 m KNOLAim. 

Bide, having Mrs. TroIIope on my left ; the others pre^ 
ent occupying tlie remainder of the table. There was 
no cloth or drapery of any kind. Sir David was invit- 
ed to look under tlie table and make every investiga- 
tion, and he did most properly avail himself of the op- 
portunity afforded him by carefully looking under tlie 
table, both before sounds were heard and during the 
time they were being made. On this occasion Sir 
David tried to lift the table — sometimes he could not, 
at other times he could— or, as Sir David said, ^' the 
table was made light and heavy at command." 

An accordeon was called for — ^hymns and tunes 
were played, and without any visible agency. After 
the party broke up, Sir David, in the course of con- 
versation, said, " I should have liked if we had been 
all standing when the table lifted." Sir David, Mr. 
Trollope, and Mr. Rymer then sat down to see if it 
were possible to move the table or to raise it by their 
feet, but it could not be raised by the united efforts of 
the feet of all three. Sir David was. invited to come 
the next evening for the purpose of complying with 
his i*eque8t of standing at the table, but he could not 
come, liaving a pre-engagement. 

This table, which was twelve feet long, has been 
sometimes co:npletely turned over, replaced, and again 
turned over, all our hands being on the surface. Occa- 
sionally it has been moved while we were all standing 
— without any one touching it, even with their hands. 

Mr. Trollope came on the following evening — we sat 

round the same table as on the previous evening 

the alphabet was called for, and three of us were - 
told to go into another room, to get a smaller table, 

IN ENGLAND. * 103 

and stand. We were not to sit, but to stand. We 
*did so— and a heavy card table, on pillar and claws, 
and which was biought from another room, and at 
which we had never sat before, was repeatedly lifted 
off the ground, at least twenty inches. 

One evening a gentleman was present when it was 
intimated to him through the alphabet by knocks on 
the table that his aunt Dorothy was present ; he was 
eui-prised, and assured us that could not be so, for he 
never had an aunt ; he afterwards wrote to his sister, 
who was residing in the north of England, and this 
was her reply : — 

" I never lieard of our father having a sister — there 
wer^ four sons, and their father died when they were 
all very young ; but I expect to see my elder sister, 
who knows more of our family, and I will ask lier. 

" P.S. — She has jnst come, and I find our father had 
a sister — our grandfather was twice married ; by his 
first wife he had one daughter, whose name was Doro- 
thy, and who died an infant — and who, of cour.^e, was 
our aunt." 

One evening as Mr. Kymer was passing through the 
room he stood for a few moments at the end of the 
table. His attention was arrested by the sounds, and 
it was stated to be his little boy, who had passed away 
some years before. He asked if he recollected how 
pleased he was when on earth to place him a chair on 
his return home — tJie chair was immediattiy moved 
round the corner of the table, by no visible agency. — 
It was placed behind him, and he sat down npon it. 

This was in the presence of five persons, one of 

IM nr svoLAHD. 

whom was the editor of a well-known work on the 
** Ocenlt Sciences." All at the table saw the chair 
moved to wliere tlie father was standing. The hands 
of all were on tlie table — no one knew that he intend- 
ed to ask for a chair, and until that instant, he 
said, that he did not know it himself. 

Another evening we were told through the alpha-^"- 
bet that the same litttle boy was present in spirit. It 
was asked if he conld write as on earth, and he answer- 
ed that he would try. A sh^et of note paper, clean, 
and withnnt any writing of any description was taken, 
and placed on the cloth. The brass fastenings of the 
table were then displaced one by one and fell to the 

ground ; the table was opened or pulled out hy no -• 

human agency — every one in the room was seated at -^i: 
the table and had their hands on its surface. It wau ^ n 
then asked if the paper and pencil should be placed..^B. 
on the table near the opening of the cloth; three^^^^ 
sounds, " Yes." Immediately the form of a smalLBI^-1 
hand was seen under the cloth. It was felt by some^^:^* 

who placed their hands upon it. The paper and pen ^- 

cil wore then removed, the form of the hand disap — -^ 
peariutr at the same time. In a few minutes the same^^^e 
form of hand was again seen replacing the paper andfc:^ 
the pencil, the alphabet was called for : " Dear papa^ ^ 
/ have really done my best.^^ The father removed t'hes^^^* 

paper and pencil, and on that paper was written — ■ 

"Dear papa, dear mannna," and signed "Wat.'' 
Watty w#8 the name of tlie child. No one was 
viously aware that it was intended to ask for this to be 
done. 

At Sandgate in Kent, where I stayed for some time. 

I 

IN ENGLAND. 106 

Rt a Stance, we numbered thirteen. Tiie table was 
elevated at least two feet, and the accordeon was 
played. The tune was not known to any of us. We 
asked the name, and were told that it was the " Song 
SI the Sea." A hand and arm in white drapery ap 
peared — it was seen by all at the table on several oc- 
casions during the evening, and they had every op- 
portunity of carefuU}^ examining it. 

A few evenings afterwards tlie table was near the 
window. It was twilight. Songs were heard on the 
accordeon. The tune was new to us, and we were 
told that it was the " Song of the Angels to the 
Mourners." It was followed by a hymn . whict had 
been frequently played before. It was spelt out by 
sonnds on the table, some will show ycni their hands 
to-night. The table was gently raised and lifted up 
several times, a hand appeared above the table, and 
took from the dress of one of the party a miniature 
brooch, and handed it to several at the table. Hands 
and arms were then distinctly seen by all at the table 
of different forms and sizes — sometimes crossed as in 
prayer, and at others pointing upwards. On another 
occasion sounds were heard, communications were 
made, and hands and arms in white drapery were 
again seen. A spirit hand took up a Bible which 
was on the table, and opened it. This was seen by 
all, and a leaf was folded down, the hand took a pen- 
cil and marked the two verses sixteen and seventeen 
of the thirteenth chapter of St. Matthew — " But bless 
ed are your eyes, for tUey see : and your ears, for 
they bear. For I say unto you that many prophets 
and righteous men have desired to see things which 

lOA Itf EBIGLAHDL 

je see, and Iiave not seen them ; and to hear dieie 
things wiiicli ye hear, and have not heard them." 

At this time liands and arms were freqnently seen 
and the J were repeatedly felt by all at the table &£ 
distinctly as tliough tliey were the hands and arms #f 
living mortals, and frequently they shook hands with 
them as really and substantially as one man shakes 
hands with another. 

Of all the accounts which have been given of the 
phenomena there has been none so good as tliatof Dr. 
J. J. G. Wilkinson, who towards the close of tlie 
Brewster controversy, wrote a letter to the ** Morning 
Advertiser," under the signature of Verax. He had 
been frequently present at stances, and was eminent- 
ly quulified not only for the investigation, but for a 
philoKopiiical expression of their results and conse- 
quences — and I need oflFer no apology for giving at 
length his eloquent narration, which was entitled 
*' Evenings with Mr. Home and the Spirits." 

** 1 he ' Great W izard of the North ' has roused atten- 
tion to the subject of spiritual manifestations in such 
a manner that everybody is talking about them ; and, 
moreover, the country papei-s are the battle-ground of 
letters ^t> and con^ which debate the subject with some 
warmtJi ; and, wherever a name can be got at, witli a 
little personality. But, hitherto, I have seen no state- 
ment of ihe experience of any of the writers in regard 
to these uninifcBtations. This is to be regretted, per- 
luipH, because by bringing forward experiences and 
explanations, the subject might have been divested of 
some of that lieat which is so bad a scientific medium. 
I will now endeavor, with your permission, to tell wh^r 

JN ENGLAND. 107 

I saw and felt on three separate evenings, stating them 
in their order. 

" It was late in the spring of this year that I was 
invited by a friend, well known in the literary world, 
to pay a visit to the lodgings of Mr. Daniel Dunglas 
Home, then recently arrived from America, for the pur- 
pose of witnessing certain remarkable phenomena al- 
leged to be from supernatural causes. Many feelings 
prompted me to accept the invitation ; as, also, did the 
knowledge that Mr. Home was familiarly known, as a 
plain, honest man, to Dr. Gray, the first homoeopathic 
physician in New York, and for whose character I have 
the highest esteem. 

"I^went to his house in Jermyn-street, and intro- 
duced myself on the appointed evening to Mr. Home, 
who, I found, was a modest, intelligent youth of about 
twenty, in ill-health ; and, indeed, as he himself inform- 
ed me, and as, on inspection, I found to be the case, 
with the marks of consumption legible upon his frame. 
My wife accompanied me, and I met in Mr. H.'s rooms 
three friends, all of them men of talent and integrity. 
Bent upon narrative, and not upon defense or hostility, 
I will omit nothing ; and so I liere observe that we 
were, all of us, believers, beforehand, in the possibility 
of spiritual manifestations. • 

" Before sitting down in * the circle,' I asked Mr. 
Home for some account of his antecedents. To the best 
of my recollection he gave the following particulars. 
He was born in Scotland, and was taken to America 
-when a child. Very early in life he used to surprise 
those with \\ hom he was, by spontaneously narrating, 
as scenes passing before his eyes, distant events, such 

108 IK ENGLAND. 

as the death of friends and elatives ; and these instan- 
ces of second sight were found to be true telegraphy. 
It was not his fault — he could not help seeing them. 
Later on in his career, various noises were heard in the 
room beside him. This was about the time when the 
spiritual 'rapping' became known in America. 

" He lived with an aunt, who was greatly scandal- 
ized at these circumstances. A member of the Pres- 
byterian Church, these knockings even accompanied 
him to Divine worsliip ; and, coming to the knowledge 
of his ecclesiastical overmen, he was adjudged to be 
the victim of satanic influences, and either excommn- 
nicated, or otherwise banished from the <^ongregation. 
Afterwards he became a medical student; but ill-health 
forced him to abandon the idea of pursuing medicine 
as a calling. Such were the heads of what he told us, 
in answer to our enquiries, about himself. 

" We were in a large ui)per room, rather bare of fur- 
niture ; a sofa, a large round table, and a little buffet, 
together with a few chaira, were the fittings-up. One 
of the party had brought with him a hand- bell and an 
accordeon. We sat around the table, with the hands 
resting upon it. In a few minutes the table vibrated, or 
shuddered, as though actuated from within ; it then 
became still, and instantly every one of us shook in his 
chair, not violently, but intimately, and like a jelly, so 
thatobjects'dotherod' before us. This eftect ceased; and 
now the heavy table, with all our hands upon it, raised it- 
self high up on its side, and rocked up and down ; the rais- 
ingproceeding from all different quarters, Mr. Home and 
all the rest of us (excepting our hands and arms, which 
were necessarily moved) 8itting<leath still. The lamp on 

IN ENGLAND. 109 

the table seemed as if it must tumble oflF; but he assured 
us there was no danger of t/iat — that it was held safely 
in its place. The hand-bell had been placed upon the 
wooden rim round the pedestal of the table, and it now 
began fb ring, ajjparently under different parts of the 
circle. Mr. Home said that the spirits were carrying 
it to one of the party, and suggested myself. I was 
sitting nearly opposite to liim, at about three feet dis- 
tance. I put ray hand down under the margin of tlie 
table, and, in perhaps a minute's time, I felt the lip of 
the bell poked up gently against the tips of my fingers, 
as if to say, ' I am here, take me.' This palpitation of 
the bell continued until I moved my fingei*s up its side 
to grasp it. When I came to the handle, I slid my 
fingers on rapidly, and now, every hand but my own 
being on the table, I distinctly felt the fingers, up to 
the palm, of a hand holding the bell. It was a soft, 
warm, fleshy, substantial hand, such as I should be 
glad to feel at the extremity of the friendship of my 
best friends. But I had no sooner grasped it moment- 
arily, than it melted away, leaving my hand void, with 
the bell only in it. I now held the bell lightly, with 
the clapper downwards, and while it remained per- 
fectly still, I could plainly feel fingers ringing it by 
the clapper. As a point of observation I will remark, 
that I should feel no more diflBculty in swearing that 
the member I felt was a human hand of extraordinary 
life, and not Mr. Home's foot, than that the nose of 
the Apollo Belvidere is not a horse's ear. I dwell 
chiefly, because I can speak surely, on what happened 
to mvself, though every one round the table had some- 
what similar experiences. The bell was carried undei 

no IN RMOLAHD. 

the table to each, and rung in the hand of each. He 
accordeon was now placed beneath the table, and 
presently we heard it moving along. Mr. Home pnt 
down his hand to the margin, and the instmment was 
given to him. With one hand upon the table, and 
with the other grasping the white wood at tlic bottom 
of the accordeon, he held it bottom upwards, the keys 
hanging down over, and the instrument resting for sup- 
port on his right knee. It played * Home, sweet home,' 
and ' God save the Queen,' with a delicacy of tone 
which struck every one present : I never heard silence 
threaded with such silver lines. Afterwards, in the 
same way, we were favored with * The Last Bose of 
Summer.' The accordeon was then taken to each 
member of the party in succession ; we could hear it 
rustling on its way between our knees and the pedestal 
of the table ; and in tlie hand of each pei-son, a few 
notes, but no whole tunes were played. When in my 
own hand, I particularly noticed the great amount of 
force which was exerted by the player. It was diffi- 
cult to hold the instrument from the strong downward 
pull, and had I not been somewhat prepared for this, 
the accordeon would have fallen upon the floor. In 
the course of the evening we all felt either a finger, 
fingers, or a whole hand, placed upon our knees, 
always with a pleasant impression at the time. A 
white cambric handkerchief was drawn slowly under 
the table, and in the course of a few minutes handed to 
another peison, tied in two knots, and put as a boquet 
into the bell. And this experiment also was repeated 
for nearly all present. While these things were going 
on, rappings were heard in all parts of the room, in the 

m ENGLAND. Ill 

table, in the floor, and the ceiling; and sometimes 
they were so loud that the medium requested the spirits 
to remember that he was only a lodger, and that these 
noises might disturb the people in the rooms above and 
below. They were very unlike the ' Great Wizard's' 
raps, and occurred indifferently, as I said before, in all 
places and corners of the chamber. Towards the end 
of the stance, five distinct raps were heard under the 
table, which number, Mr. Home said, was a call for 
the alphabet. Accordingly, an alphabiet was made; 
and on Mr. Home iisking if any spirit was present who 
wished to speak to one of the party, the following sen- 
tence was given by the alphabetic telegraph : — ' My 
dear E — , Imortality is a great truth. Oh ! how I 
wish my dear wife could have been present. — D.C 
It purported to be a near relation of one of those pres- 
ent, who died last year. The spelling ' imortality' 
surprised me at first ; but I recollected that the de- 
ceased, whom I knew well, was constantly versed in 
black letter writing, which makes elisions in that way. 
This ended, the medium fell into an apparently mes- 
meric trance, from which he addressed some good 
words of exhortation to each of us ; and told one of the 
party in. particular, several details about deceased 
members of the family, which were not known in the 
circle at the time, but verified to the letter afterwards. 
These I forbear to mention, because they were of a 
strictly private nature. In his address, Mr. Home 
spoke, not as from himself, but as from the spirit as- 
sembly which was present ; and he ended with a cour- 
teous * Good night,' from them. 

"Considering that it requites a large apparatus of 

n2 IN BNGLAND. 

preparation for the greatest of wizards to e£fect the 
smallest part of what we saw on this evening, namely, 
a few raps, one might liave suspected that Mr. Home 
would have had rather bulging pockets, to do what I 
have related, but I can assure your readers, that he 
was as meagre and unencumbered as the scantiest 
dresser need be : he had no assistants, and no screens. 
When, during the evening, I asked if the jngglers did 
their tricks by means similar to the agencies there 
present, the raps said ' No :' but in a pronounced man* 
ner they said ' Yes,' when the same question waa put 
with regard to the ' Indian Jugglers.' We also asked 
Mr. Home why the effects generally took place under 
the table, and not upon it. He said that in habituated 
circles the results were easily obtained above board, 
visibly to all, but that at a iirst sitting it was not so. 
That scepticism was almost universal in men's intel- 
lects, and marred the forces at work ; that the spirits 
accomplish what they do through our life-sphere, or 
atmosphere, which was permeated by our wills; and if 
the will was contrary, the sphere was unfit for being 
operated upon. 

" It was perhaps a fortnight after this that Mr. Home 
came by invitation, to my own house, to sit in the cir- 
cle of my family. He was brought to the door in a 
carriage by some friends, with whom he was staying, 
without any paraphernalia which would characterize a 
wizard's art. I watched him walk up the garden, and 
can aver that he had no magic wand up his trouser 
leg, nor any hunch in his dress that could betoken ma- 
chinery or apparatus of any kind whatever. Arrived 
in the drawing-room, the ' raps ' immediately com- 

IN KBTOLAND. 113 

menced in all parts of it, and were also heard in the 
back drawing-room, which opens into the front by fold- 
ing doors. The party assembled to constitute the * cir- 
cle ' consibted of Mr. Home, my wife, my four chil- 
dren, and myself, and two domestics. We sat round 
a large and heavy loo table, which occupied the centre 
of the room. In a minute or two the same inward 
thrill went through the table as I have described in the 
first stance ; and the chairs also, as before, thrilled un- 
der us so vividly, that my youngest daughter jumped 
np from hers, exclaiming, * Oh ! Papa, there's a heart 
in my chair,' which we all felt to be a correct expres- 
sion of the sensation conveyed. From time to time 
the table manifested considerable movements, and after 
cracking, and apparently undulating in its place, with 
all our hands upon it, it suddenly rose from its place 
bodily some eight inches into the air, and floated wav- 
ing in the atmosphere, maintaining its position above 
the ground for half a minute, or while we slowly 
counted twenty-nine. Its oscillations during this time 
were very beautiful, reminding us all of a flat disc of 
deal on an agitated surface of water. It then de- 
scended as rapidly as it rose, and so nicely was the de- 
scent managed, that it met the floor with no noise, and 
as though it would scarcely have broken an egg in its 
contact Three times did it leave the floor of the room, 
and poise itself in mid air, always in the same manner. 
During these intervals the medium was in a state of 
the completest muscular repose ; nor, indeed, had he 
the toe of Hercules for a lever could he have managed 
this eflEect, for he and all of us stood up each time, 
to follow the mounting table, and he stood with as 

114 IN EHOLAND. 

complete absence of strain as the rest of us. It re- 
quires two strong men to lift the table to that height; 
one person might throw it over, but could by no mean? 
raise it from the floor. 

"The travelling of the hand-bell under the table 
was also repeated for every one present, and this 
time they all felt the hand, or hands, either upon their 
knees, or other portions of their limbs. I put my 
liand down as previously, and was regularly Btroked 
on the back of it by a soft palpable hand as before. 
Kay, I distinctly felt the whole against mine^ audonoe 
giasped the hand, but it melted as on the iirat oc- 
casion ; and immediately a call was made for the al- 
phabet, there being something to communicate. The 
* spirits' now spelt out through Mr. Home, who had 
known nothing of what I had done under the table, 
'Do not grasp our hands.' I asked why, and Mr. 
Home said tliat they had great difficulty in presenting, 
and thus rapidly incarnating tliese hanJs out of the 
vital atmosphere of those present, and that their work 
was spoilt, and had to be recommenced, when they 
were interfered with, perhaps as a thought is some- 
times broken in twain, and cannot easily be resumed 
on the irruption of a stranger. During the stance I 
had the border of a white cambric handkerchief just 
appearing out of the side pocket of my paletot, which 
was open ; and though I could see no agency, I felt 
something twitching at the handkerchief, and very 
gradually drawing it from my pocket. Simultaneously 
with this, my eldest daughter, who sat opposite to me, 
exclaimed, ' Oh ! I see phosphoric fingers . at papa's 
pocket !' and, now visibly to all, the handkerchief was 

IN ENGLAND. 116 

elowlj pulled out, and drawn under the table ; whilst, 
at the same time, I felt an arm that was doing it, but 
which was invisible to me. At this time I was at least 
three feet from Mr. Home, with a person between us, 
and he was absolutely passive. The feeling I had was 
of nndgea, as distinct as ever I felt from a mortal limb, 
and that on my breast and arm, which were above the 
table ; and yet, though the operation of abstracting 
my handkerchief was going on visibly to all, the rest 
of the circle, as well as myself, (all except my eldest 
daughter), could see nothing. I can swear that there 
was no machinery, unless the skin, bone, muscle, and 
tendons of an unseen hand, forearm and elbow deserve 
the name. 

" While this was going on, and for about ten mi- 
nutes, more or less, my wife felt the sleeve of her dress 
pulled frequently, and as she was sitting with her 
£nger ends clasped and hands open, with palms semi- 
prone upon the table, she suddenly laughed involun- 
tarily, and said, ' Oh ! see, there is a little hand lying 
between mine ; and, now, a larger hand has come be- 
Bide it. The little hand is smaller than any baby's, 
and exquisitly perfect.' Our domestics, and two of 
the children, as well as my wife, all saw these hands, 
and watched them for between one and two minutes, 
when they disappeared. I now held my watch at the 
table side, the key in my hand, the chain and watch 
dangling from it, and I felt the weight of the watch 
gradually taken off, the chain being raised horizontal- 
ly to my hand, and then the key, which I retained, 
was pulled laterally, and I let it go. It was taken un- 
der the table to my youngest daughter, and put on her 

116 IN ENGLAND. 

knee. Whenever objects were thus remoyed from the 
hand, they were taken with a degree of physical pow- 
er sufficient to suggest tliat the agent was capable of 
holding the object without letting it fall. An hour 
and three-quarters were occupied in these and similar 
manifestations, of which I have mentioned only the 
most striking, or those personal to myself; and now 
Mr. Home passed into the trance state, spoke of the 
spirit life, and the coming knowledge of it on earth, 
and said a few words apposite to each person present ;; 
dwelling also upon the spiritual attendants who were ' 
standing beside each. When he came to my wife he 
lifted up his hands in an ecstacy, and described a spi- 
rit with her, most tiny, but beautiful. He said it was 
a little sister who had gone away a long time* ^ But,' 
she said, ' I never had such a sister.' ' Yes, you had, 
though she had no name on earth.' On inquiry in the 
family, an event, such as he alluded to, had happened. 
This is the chief part of what struck me in Seance 
No. 2. 

" At 10 p.m., Mr. Home went away on his own legs, 
so limber Uiat I never so much as thought of any expla- 
nation of pasteboard arms or electric batteries conceal- 
ed about his person. 

"The next stance which I shall describe took place 
about the third week in July, at the house of a valued 
fiiend in Ealing, who had become convinced of the 
genuineness of thephenomena which accompanied Mr. 
Home, and with whom that gentleman was now stay^ 
iug. The party sat down to the table with Mr. Home, 
in the dusk of a fine evening, and were nine or ten 
in number. Here again I am forced to chronicle- 

IN KNOLAND. 117 

diieflj what befel myself, in order tliat I may be 
no second-hand witness. The first thing I remarked 
was a gentle tremulous flash of light through the room, 
bnt what was the cause of it I am unable to determine. 
When we had sat a few minutes I felt a decided but 
gentle grasp of a large man's hand upon my right 
knee, and I said to Mr. H., ^ There is a man's hand 
upon my knee.' * Who is it?' he said. ' How should 
I know f was my reply. ' Ask,' said he. * Bnt how 
shall I ask f ' * Think of somebody,' was his answer. 
I thought involuntarily of an intimate friend, once a 
Member of Parliment, and as much before the public 
as any man in his generation, and who died on the 30th 

of Jnne last. And I said aloud, * Is it V Hearty 

affirmative slaps on the knee from the same hand which 
lifid remained fixed till then, were the reply to my 
question * I am glad to be again in the same room 
with you,' said I. Again the same hearty greeting was 
repeated. * Are you better V I inquired. A still more 
joyous succession of slaps, or rather, if I may coin a 
word, of accussions ; for the hand was cupped to fit my 
bent knee, and gently struck me in that form. ' Have 
you any message to your wife, whom 1 shall probably 
see in a few days?' Again, affirmative touches, five in 
number, therefore calling for the alphabet. Mr. Home 
now called over the alphabet. A B D, and when he 
called T, my knee was struck ; again when he said H 
and E, and so on, until this was spelled out : ' thb im- 
KORTAL LOVES.' I remember at the time thinking that 
this was rather a thin message ; but the next time I 
saw Mrs. ^ — I told lier the circumstances, and gave 
her the words. Her son was sitting with her, and 

118 IN KNOLAND. 

said, * That is very charactoristic of my fatlier, for iti 
a favorite subject with liim, whether or not the o^atf* 
turns survive the body ; of the immortality of the soni 
itself he never doubted; but the words, the immortill 
loves, show that he has settled the problem of his life/ 
Suoh was the import which. the family of the deceased 
quite unexpectedly to me conferred upon the phrase. 
To return to Ealing, and that evening, after the last 
stroke of the hand indicated the 6nd of the sentence, I 
said, ' If it is really you, will you shake hands with 
nic V and I put my hand under the table, and now the 
same soft and capacious hand was placed in mine, and 
gave it a cordial shaking. I could not help exclaim- 
ing, 'This hand is a portrait. I know it from five 
years' constant intercourse, and from the daily grasp 
and holding of the last several months !' After this 
it left my knee ; and when I asked if there was any- 
tliing more, there was no response, and the agent ap- 
peared to be gone. But in two or three minutes more 
another hand, evidently also a man's, but small, thin, 
firm, and lively, was placed in the same position which 
the former liad occupied ; and after some preliminary 

questioning with Mr. Home, I said, 'Is it Mr. V 

naming another valued friend, who, after twenty years 
of suftering, had departed this life almost on the same 

day as Mr. . With liveliest finger tips, the afiirm* 

ing hand danced up and down my leg, and upon my 
knee. I said, ' I am glad to find you so much better.' 
The playful hand beat 'yes ' again. And this, in re- 
ply to renewed questions, for two or three minutefl. 
Then I said, ' Have you any communication for yonr 
wife when I see her ?' There was no response, and thft»^ 

IN ENGLAND. 119 

Agent then ceased to manifest himself. After another 
short panse, a totally different hand, a lady's, came to 
me, rested in my hand under the table, rubbed my 
hand, and allowed me at leisure to examine the deli 
cate, beantiful, and warmth-raying fingers. It was 
signified that it was Mrs. —. — , whom I had known in 
h'fe, and who wished to greet me. Between and dur- 
ing what happened to myself, many of the rest of the 
circle were touched ; and described their impressions 
much as I have described mine. Some had merely a 
single finger put upon their knees. Mr. Home said 
that the presenting spirits could often make one finger 
where they could not make two : and two, where tliey 
could not form an entire hand ; just as they could form 
a hand where they could not realize a whole human 
figure ; and he also said that this was one reason why 
they did not show themselves aboveboard, because 
tbey did not like imperfect members to be seen. 

" These phenomena occupied less than an hour ; and 
now the circle was broken up, and reconstituted, nine 
persons, to the best of my recollection, being arranged 
at the table. The table was placed opposite a win- 
dow, and the bright moonbeams streamed down upon 
ts side. There was no candle in the apartment. The 
sj^ace of table which fronted the window was not occu- 
pied by sitters ; but the company sat round about 
three-fourths of it, leaving the rest vacant. The right 
wing of the party was terminated by Mr. Home ; the 
left by the son of the host. In a few minutes' time, 
close beside the latter gentleman, there emerged into 
Bight above the rim of the table, in the vacant space, a 
delicately beantiful female hand and part of the fore* 

180 IN ENGLAND. 

arm, apparently of ghostly tenuity. As I was sitting 
exactly opposite the vacant space, I had a fair oppor 
tunity of watching this hand as it projected against the 
moonlight ; it was a filmy-looking woman's hand, with 
the liugers drooping forwards from left to right as I 
sat. The hand, curved up over the table margin, de- 
liberately grasped a hand-bell placed near, and carry- 
ing it partly down, let it drop upon the floor. It then 
rose to sight again, and took away a cambric handker- 
chief also placed near, which was tied in two knots 
under the table, and presented to one of the company, 
wlio had been strongly moved from the time that this 
hand was first seen. I forbear to give the further de- 
tails of this hand, because they seemed to be of a pri- 
vate nature ; suffice it to say, that it caused no little 
emotion to a gentleman who seemed concerned. On 
its disappearance, anotlier hand, large, strong, and 
with the fingers extended, and pushed bolt up in the, 
moonlight, rose above the table near to Mr. Home. 
He cried out, ' Oh ! keep me from that hand ! it is so 
cold! Do not let it touch me!' Shortly it also 'van- 
ished, ana a third hand was seen at the other side of 
the vacant table edge: this hand was in a glove. 
Tlien, presently, a fourth hand ascended on the extreme 
left — a lady's hand, of beautiful proportions — and 
traversed the entire vacant space from left to rignt, 
rising, and displaying the forearm ; and then, as it 
neared Mr. Home, the entire arm. When it reached 
him, the hand was level with his forehead, upon which 
it laid its palm, and with its fingers put his hair back, 
and played upon his brow for perhaps half a minute. 
I was sitting next but one to him, and leant forward 

IN ENGLAND. 191 

past my intermediate neighbor, at tlie same time re- 
questing that if the hand belonged to my friend Mrs. 

J it might also be laid on ray forehead. This was 

• deliberately done ; and I felt its thrilling impression as 
the palm was laid flat upon my brow, where it re- 
mained for several seconds. It was warm and human, 
and made of no material but softest flesh. During the 
interval in which I felt it, I had abundant opportunity 
of examining most closely the arm and forearm. The 
forearm sleeve appeared to be of white cambric, plain 
and neat, and it shone like biscuit porcelain in the 
moonlight. The sleeve of the dress up the arm was 
darker, but I do not remember the color. And bend- 
ing over, as I did, to the vacant rim of the table, I saw 
how the arm terminated — apparently in a graceful cas- 
cade of drapery ; much as though an arm were put 
but through the peak of a snowy tent, the apex of 
which thus fell around the shoulder on every side. On 
leaving my forehead, the arm at once disappeared, and 
I w-atched it go. It was drawn into the same drapery ; 
but so naturally, that I can only liken it to a fountain 
falling down again, and ceasing into the bosom of the 
water from which it rose. And I also saw the drapery 
itself vanish, apparently by the same dissipativo pro- 
cess. And now the spirits spelt out ' Good night.' 

"These events occurred in the house of one of my 
oldest friends, whose superior in integrity I have never 
known, and of whose talent and sagacity I never heard 
a doubt entertained until he endorsed these unpopular 
wanifestations. 

'Such is my experience. One hope I have in put- 
ting it forward is, that others who have seen Mr. Home 

192 IN KNOLAND. 

may do the like, and thus make. their coutribatioa to 
tlie facts <»f the case. 

'' In conclusion, I will observe, that Sir David Brew- 
ster, and others almost as eminent, appear to me to . 
make a scientific error in one respect — viz., in their 
estimate of the value of a man's character. They seem 
to think that charging a man of good antecedents, and 
with every appearance of a blameless life, with lyinj^ 
and imposture of the most systematic kind, is posi- 
tively the easiest account that can be given of any 
rare phenomenon out of the pale of their own previous 
philosophy. I submit that this is not, for their own 
credit, the very first hypothesis of the case that ought 
to rush into their minds. Neither, parallel with this, 
is the other hypothesis that men of ability in all other 
things, and till then known to be shrewd and search- 
ing, are infatuated dupes, to be commended as a 
proper valuation of what is rare and valuable in the 
human species. The rule of law, that ' a man must 
be supposed innocent till proved guilty,' is also the 
rule in such scientific explorations. This ^-nle loves 
facts, and hates slander. I differ, therefore, with Sir 
David Brewster in his mode of exploration, and also 
in his valuation of presumptive honesty and human 
testimony, which always hitherto has been the most 
substantial word in the world, and a pillar which 
Divine Providence has not disdained to use in sup- 
porting the canopy of his Revelations. 

'' This rule I would especially press upon the great 
Sir David Brewster, a man of position, wealth, worldly^ 

repute, great talents, a name no one dare assail, and 

withal, responsibility to Heaven and his generation.—^ 

IN ENGLAND. 123 

when he is dei^ing with the orphan, Home, a man ap 
parently as blameless as himself, but with neither 
riches, nor health, nor station, nor any possession if 
not honesty, and a ruinous peculiarity of gift. It is 
not, I sayj the easiest way out of a difficulty to call 
this yputli a cheat. There are cheats of our own house- 
hold, cheats in oiir own heads, sometimes called preju- 
dices, which; might be suspected j^r^^, without violat- 
ing any rule of scientific inquest, or humane valuation, 

" The experience of others in these matters has, per- 
haps, differed very widely from my own, and I desire 
to bee this experience al^so brought forward. At other 
stances I have seen only a part of the phenomena which 
I have described as taking place on tlie three evenings 
which I have selected as being the fullest and best. 
And once or twice, when persons were sent whom it 
was most desirable to convince, almost nothing occur- 
red. This, I submit, is one of the strongest arguments 
in Mr. Home's favor. Were the phenomena a trick, 
.they might always be produced to order without varia- 
tion. *The Great Wizard' never fails'. But as he him- 
self says, th^ spiritualists always fail in his company- 
liet this suggest that there is a total difference between 
him and them. It does not surprise me that spirits 
and their gifts should retire to a great gulf distance 
■from where tlie ' Great Wizard' is. 

" It seems probable from experience as well as rea- 
son that,, gi'anting the phenomena to be spiritual, the 
presence of determined scoffers at, and disbelievers in 
theoL, should,, in case the said persons be preponderant 
in their influence in the circle, render the manifesta' 
tions imperfect or perhaps null. The known laws of 

124 IN RMOLAVD. 

hnmai) Kyinpathy, and the operations of our own spir- 
its when antipathetic persons are near ns, may also be 
cited in proof of this. I conclude, then, that to the 
BcoflFer an<l the strongly prejudiced, who want no evi- 
dence, and to whom evidence has no appeal, evidence 
is, for the most part, not forthcoming. This simplifies 
the position ; but what sjtill remains is the peculiar 
Christian politesse of this century, viz., the necessity 
of good manners and the agreeing to diifer. On the - 
part of those who believe, this may be best secured by 
letting the other party be. Providence can convince 
them^ too, as Ciisily as ourselves, when the time and 
their function comes, but by snatching at them prema- 
turely before they are ripe, we may evoke, on a great 
scale, two of the most formidable spirits of this world 
— Wbath ani> Fear. 

"As a final remark, let me caution the public against 
being led by Sir David Brewster, Mr. Faraday, and 
other men of great names in their own departments, 
in this matter which is obviously not within their field. 
We hear much of not choosing Crimean generals on 
old Peninsular qualifications. But to select a Faraday 
or a Br«>vster for opinion on this case, is a far worse 
error ; for all generals, past, present, and to come, are 
in the military line ; but these great men are not, and 
never were, in the line upon which they have professed , 
to decide. They are so alien to the subject, that they 
do not know the first condition of prosecuting it, 
namely, a gift of sympathy, and openness to convic- 
tion. Th^ir very specialty of excellence in physical 
explorations, is against them in this new walk, which 
is comMred spiritual and physical. The common ob 

IN ENGLAND. 125 

seryer with little in his mind, with no repute to suj - 
port, and no case to uphold, may perchance be equip- 
ped by nature for these revolutionary sciences where 
the savcms are stupid upon them. Twelve fishermen, 
and not the High Priests, are the everlasting resource 
of Providence. I therefore invite the unattached laity 
of all descriptions, the willing fishermen, to remember 
that they have no overmen in this department ; that 
it is an untrodden field ; and that by the grace of God, 
there is at least a freedom for us all from tlie pressure 
of big names ; because * the race is not to the swift, nor 
the battle to the strong.' " 

The admirable narrative and reasoning of this letter 
leave nothing further to be said as to the manifesta- 
tions during the remainder of my stay in England 
during the year, as I found it desirable to change the 
climate for that of Italy in the autumn. But I did not 
leave England without the satisfaction of having given 
opportunities to many hundreds of persons to investi- 
gate the phenomena for themselves, and through them 
the subject began to assume a form and importance 
"which have made i: the fear and the bugbear of those 
who had completed their circle of knowledge, and have 
no room in their philosophy for further facts. They 
are unfortunately many, whose minds have been in 
early life stereotyped in too hard and unyielding a 
material, to admit of either corrections or additions. 

f )^ 

CHAPTER V. 

AT FLOBENOE, NAPLES, SOME, AND PABI8. 

Early in the autnmn of 1855 I went to Flareace 
accompanied by the son of the gentleman with wh6m 
I had been residing at Ealing. I remained in Florence 
till the month of February, 1856, and although aorne 
persons there did all they could to injure me by false 
statements, I was only the more cherished by those 
who best knew me. I met there many distinguished 
men and women, and a Prince of one of the Boyal 
Houses became deeply interested in what he witness- 
ed. The manifestations while I was at Florence were 
very strong. I remember on one occasion while the 
Countess 0-=^— was seated at one of Erard'a grand 
action pianos, it rose and balanced itself in the air 
during the whole time she was playing. She alsO| 
whilst we were seated at a table in the room, took up 
an album which ciianced to be lying there, and said, 
"Now if this is in reality the spirit of my dear father, 
I know you would wish to convince me, you can do 
so if you will, write your name on this page." She 
opened the book and placed it on her knees, and held 
a lead pencil in her hand. In a moment the pencil 

AT FLORENCE, NAPLKS, ROME, AND PARSB. 127 

was taken out of her hand, and the name of her father, 
the Count O-^^, was written. On examination she 
said, " There is a slight resemblance to your writing, 
but I would wish it to be more distinct." She placed 
the open book again on her knees, and again the 
wi'iting came in the same way, and also the words, 

" My dear daughter ." This last writing she cut 

from mj album, leaving in it the words iBrst written, 
where they still are ; and on going home she showed 
it to an old friend of her father's, saying, " Do you 
know whose writing that is ?" " Of course," he said, 
"it is your father's." When the Countess told him it 
had been written that very evening, he thought that 
to a certainty she had lost her senses, and on appeal- 
ing to her husband, and finding that he corroborated 
her statement, he was equally alarmed for them both. 

At the house of an English resident at Florence, I 
bad many stances at which the power was very great, 
and she wrote a private account of some of the phe- 
nomena, which will show the reader the nature and ex- 
tent of the manifestations at that time. I am very glad 
that I am able thus to give the results of the observa- 
tions of others rather than my own unsupported state- 
ments. The lady says : 

" The liouse in which I at present reside, and which, 
for some years past, has been my home, is a large, 
rambling, old-fashioned villa in the neighborhood of 
Florence, whose internal architecture gives evidence 
of its having been built at diflferent periods — those pe- 
riods probably distant from each other. 

" The oldest parts of the house, judging from the 
ornaments of a chapel wliich forms pai't of it, must, I 

138 * AT rijyaxscEj hafleb, 

should saj, have been constmcted in the early part of 
the sixteenth century. The rooms whidh I occupy are 
almost immediately above the chapel, and communi- 
cate on one side with the lower part of the house by a 
narrow stone staircase. On first coming to reside here 
we Icanied that the villa had, in common with many 
others of the same description, the reputation of being 
haunted. Strange lights it was said had been issuing 
from the chapel windows, and unearthly noises heard 
in that part of tlie house to which I have alluded. 
Some friends passed the winter with us some five or 
six years since, and their servant occupied a small 
room on an entresol between the chapel and my rooms, 
but his rest became so broken, and he described the 
noises he heard as so peculiar, that he requested to be 
allowed to sleep elsewhere. I was formerly much in 
the habit of dismissing my maid early, and sitting up 
either reading or writing until a late hour. At such 
times I have been suddenly seized with a strange fear- 
fulnosfl, a kind of nervous dread, more easily imagined 
than described. In fact, it would be impossible to de- 
scribe my sensations at those moments, further than by 
Buying that I felt I was no longer alone. This feeling 
uHually lasted from five to ten minntes, and invariably 
left a painful iinj^ression on my spirits. I ^Iso often 
heard a peculiar rustling sound in my room, and around 
my bed, as though some one were agitating the bed 
curfniiiH, and this sound was invariably accompanied 
by a chillincfis, as if a door had been suddenly opened, 
and n strong current of cold wind had rushed with vio- 
lence into the room. 

♦'These sounds and the other painful sensations 

BOME, AND PABIS. 129 

which 1 have described, and which I was totally una- 
ble to explain, continued at intervals with greater or 
lesser degrees of intensity until the month of October, 
1855, when much sensation was created in Florence by 
the arrival of Mr. Home, wliose reputation as a spirit 
medium had rendered him celebrated. A short time 
after his arrival*in Florence, the sounds in my room 
became more distinct and more frequent, and tlie very 
peculiar nervous feelings of which I have spoken, 
were not confined so exclusively to myself, but were 
frequently shared by my sister, if she remained any 
time in my room. My rest at length became so bro- 
ken, and in consequence my health so impaired, that I 
had my bed moved into a room adjoining the one in . 
which* I had been in the habit of sleeping, hoping that. 
the change would bring me quiet. 

" Tlie first night was undisturljed, but the next and 
succeeding nights were so painful that 1 frequently lay 
awake until morning. In the meantime, we made Mr. 
Home's acquaintance, and having been a witness of 
effects so wonderful as only to be ascribed to a super- 
natural cause, I determined to discover, if possible, 
the real secret of my haunted rooms. 

" Mr. Home having been invited to make a stay of 
a few days in our house, was on the first day of his ar- 
rival made acquainted with the mystery of my rooms, 
nd he proposed that a stance should be held in them 
for the purpose of endeavoring to ascertain whether or 
not the strange sounds which disturbed me were to be 
attributed to supernatural agency. Accordingly about 
eleven o'clock on that same evening, my sister, Mr. 
Some and myself repaired to mv room, and placed 

6* 

180 AT FI.OKEN0E, NAPLES, 

onrsclves at a small round table in front of, and very 
near tlie fire-place. We were warmly covered, and 
the tire was blazing brightly ; yet the told that per- 
vaded the room was intense, penetrating to the very 
bones. I should mention that for many previous days, 
I had suftered from what appeared to be a 6old *air, 
which was quite independent of the atmospheric tem- 
perature, blowing over my body, especially the lower 
limbs. This feeling never left me, and all artificial 
means failed in destroying the sensation of chilliness. 
Tliis same cold air was now felt by both my sister and 
Mr. Home to such a degree as to be painful to them 
also. I have since found that it is a frequent accom- 
paniment of the manifestations. 

• " Previously to placing himself at the table,' *Mr. 
Home had descended to the chap/sl, where, however, 
all was quiet. On reascending the stairs, he heard a 
sound as of a muffled bell tolling in the chapel. We 
had scarcely sat a moment at the table, when it began 
slowly to move about in diflferent directions, generally 
inclining towards the side on which I sat. Presently 
the movements became more violent, and assumed, if 
I may be allowed the expression, an angry appear- 
ance. We asked if a spirit were present, and the table 
replied by making the three usual affirmative move- 
ments. 

" We then further inquired whether the spirit pres- _ 

ent was a good one, and were answered in the nega- . 

tive. We spoke in harsh terms, which seemed to ir-- 

ritate the spirit, for the demonstrations became very 
angry. A high backed old fashioned chair, which 
stood at a little distance from the table was suddenh 

BOMB, AND FABIS. 181 

and without human contact, drawn close to it, ae 
though some one, in sitting down, had so drawn it. 
Nothing was, however, visible. Mr. Home proposed 
that we should move into the next room, my bed-room, 
and try whether any further manifestations would be 
n^de there. We did so : but all remained quiet. We 
then returned to the room we had just quitted, and sat 
at another table covered with a cloth. We had pre- 
viously heard a rustling sound about, and under the 
tables, such a sound as would be made by a person 
moving about in a heavy garment. This noise was 
accompanied by a scratching on the wood of the table, 
as though some one were scraping it with his nails. 
We then distinctly saw the cloth on the side of the ta- 
ble next to me move up, as though a hand raised it 
from beneath. The hand appoared to be in a mena- 
cing attitude. Mr. Home was also often touched on 
the knee, and he described the touch as peculiarly 
strong and disagreeable. 

" We then entreated the spirit to leave us, requiring 
it should return on the following evening, and declare 
its purpose in thus tormenting us. Tliis it promised, 
and on being further adjured in the name of the Holy 
Trinity to leave us, the demonstrations ceased. 

" Tlie night was very unquiet. The sensation of 
cold, of which I have before spoken, accompanied mo 
ijvery where, and I lieard a frequent scratching under 
my pillow, and oh my bed. On the next evening we 
met again in my room, and were joined by two other 
persons, one a member of our family, the other, a gen- 
tleman known to Mr. Home, and who was then inves 
tigating this phenomenon, both men of strong a^rve 

182 AT FLOBRNGS, NAPLES, 

and dispassionate judgment. The usual cold was felt, 
and the table became much agitated. A small stiletto, 
which I use as a paper-knife, was taken from the table 
as by an invisible hand, and drawn from the sheath. 
The table was then lifted from the ground, and was 
violently pushed across the room. It stopped opposite 
a door leading to the staircase, and we resumed -our 

'* A small hand-bell was taken from off the table, 
and violently rung in different directions. The dagger 
was thrown about under the table, and rubbed against 
*Mr. Home's knees. My elbow was violently grasped 
by a hand, the fingers of which 1 distinctly saw — they 
were long, yellow and shining. Other persons present, 
who felt its grasp, described its touch as clammy and 
horrible. I spoke gently to the spirit, who, in answer 
to ray questions, said he was unhappy, and that per- 
haps I might be of some use to him. He promised to 
return and speak farther on the following evening, and 
after lifting the table several times high above onr 
heads, he left us. 

" The whole of the next day I was more or less tor- 
mented by the cold air, which blew over my face and 
limbs, especially in the evening, a short time before 
the hour appointed for the seance. This wind then 
became very strong, and again a hand raised the cloth 
of the table on which I was leaning, and touched my 
arm as if to remind me of ray engagement. We re- 
paired to my room, one member only of my family 
being present, ray sister having suffered too much from 
alarm on the previous evening to join us. 

" The demonstrations of the table immediately be* 

ROME, AND PABIS. 138 

gan, but in a quieter manner than on former occasions. 
I immediately spoke (I should say that Italian was the 
only language used*), in a soothing manner. In reply 
to many questions the spirit told me he was unhappy, 
and had wandered about the house for many many 
y^ars, that his name was Giannana, that he had been 
a mt)nk, and had died in the room which I then occu- 
pied. I desired to know whether I should have mass- 
es said for the peace of his soul. He answered in tlie 
negative, but requested that I should pray that it 
might tind some repose. I further begged him to tell 
me why on the previous evening he. liad made so much 
use of the little dagger, and he answered that in life 
lie had but too well known how to employ it. He 
then promised me never again to return to my rooms ; 
and since that evening those painful sensations and 
strange noises, of which I have spoken so much, have 
left me, and never have returned. Frequent seances, 
where good and loving spirits have given us comfort- 
ing communications, have been since held by their 
own special request in my room. Tlie dagger has by 
them been drawn from its sheath, and the bell rung, 
as though the touch of holy hands were needful in or- 
der to destroy any ])ainful recollections in my mind 
connected with tliese articles, or any reluctance I 
might feel to again make use of them. In fact -my 
rooms seem to have undergone a complete purification^ 
and I feel that whatever painful influence did once ex- 

t Here tlie writer omits a rather cnrlous ciroumstance. The Italian, she ob« 
Mrred w»8 inooireotly spelled ; but, on afterwards comparing it with the statt 
of the language in the aizteenth oenttuy, it was fbund to be correct. 

134 AT FLOBEHCR, KAPUEB, 

J8t there, it has di8api>eared wholly, and I troBt foi 
evef." 

The above was written shortly after the strange 
event it records. On the 3d of April, 1860, being then 
in London, I received a letter from the same lady, 
dated Florence, 27th March, of which the fol' owing is 
an extract : 

" I beh'eve I told you that the noises at the Villa are 
worse than ever, and the new proprietor is dreadfully 
disturbed by them. The house has been exorcised, 
but without effect. My own rooms are the most dis* 
turbed." 

On the 6th of December, 1855, whilst I was return- 
ing to my rooms late at night in Florence, the streets 
being deserted, I observed a man stepping from the 
doorway of the adjoining house. I was on the step 
leading to my own door, and was looking up at the 
window to see if the servant was still up, when I re- 
ceived a violent blow on my left side, tlie force of 
which a?id the emotion caused by it, threw me forward 
breathless in the corner of the doorway. The blow 
was again repeated on my stomach, and then another 
blow on the same place, and the attempted assassin 
cried out, " bio mio, Dio mio," and turning with his 
arm outstretched, he ran. 1 distinctly saw the gleam 
of iiis poignard, and as he turned, the light of the 
latnp also fell full on his face, but I did not recognize 
his features. I was perfectly powerless, a id could not 
cry out or make any alarm, and I stood thus for at 
least two minutes, after which I groped n)y way along 
the wall to the door of a neighbor, where 1 was admit- 
ted. I thought I must have received some sei-ious in 

BOMB, AND PARIS. 18S 

jnry, but on examining myself I found that the first 
blow had struck the door key, which I happened to 
have in my breast pocket, immediately over the region 
of my heart. I wore a fur coat, and this had chanced 
to be twice doubled in front. The second blow had 
gone through the four folds of it, through a corner of 
my dress coat, my waistcoat, and the band of mj 
trousers, without inflicting any wound. The third 
blow had penetrated the four folds of my coat, and al 
BO my trousers and linen, and made a slight incision, 
which bled, but not freely. 

I had that morninc^ received from a dear friend, 
who had in his house a clairvoyant of remarkable 
powers, a letter begging me not to go out that even- 
ing, as she had received a warning of impending dan- 
ger — but to this I paid no attention. I never discov 
ered the pei'petrator, nor the cause of mj life being 
attacked. Many reasons were assigned — amongst 
them robbery, mistaken identity, and religious intol- 
erance. 

In the month of January, Signer Landncci, then 
Minister of the Interior to the Grand Duke of Tusca- 
ny, sent to me to request that I would not walk about 
the house at night between the lights and the window, 
or go out in the streets in the daytime, giving as a 
reason that some of my enemies had been playing up- 
on the superstitions of the peasantry, and telling them 
that it was my practice to administer the seven sacra- 
ments of the Catholic church to toads, in order by 
spells and incantations to raise the dead. This had so 
enraged and excited them that they were fully bent on 

r*^ 

136 AT FLOBRNOB, NAPLES, 

taking my life, and for tlftt purpose were concealed 
about the neighborhood with fire arnr)8. 

I met at this time a Polish nobleman, who with his 
family was about to visit Naples and Rome, and who 
most kindly pressed mo to accompany them. I was 
left in Florence without money, and my friends in En- 
gland having their credulity imposed upon by some 
scandalmongers, and thinking me to be leading a most 
dissolute life, refused to send me even money of my 
own which had been entrusted to their care. I told 
the Count B — ^ — that I would travel with him, and 
the very day I gave this assent, the spirits told me 
that my power would leave me for a year. This was 
on the evening of the 10th of February, 1856. Feel- 
ing that the Count and his family must have felt an in- 
terest in me, arising only from the singular phenom- 
ena which they had witnessed in my presence, and 
that this cause .being removed, their interest in me 
would have diminished, I wrt»te the following morn- 
ing to inform them of what I was told, and say that 1 
could no longer entertain the idea of joining them. 
They at once told me that it was for myself, even more 
than for the strange gift I possessed, that they had be- 
come interested in me. 1 went to them, and in a day 
or two we left Florence for Naples. While here, al- 
though my powers had left me, still my presence seem- 
ed to develope the power in others; f«»r I met, at his 
own residence, the Hon. Robert Dale Owen, who was 
the American Minister to the Court of Naples, and it 
was in the presence of one of the Royal Princes of that 
family, himself a medium, that he was first convinced. 
Mr. Owen has since written a most able and carefully 

BOMB, AND FABI8. 137 

arranged book of authentic facts, entitled, " Footfalls 
on the Bonndaries of another World," in which he has 
brought together both the facts and the philosophy of 
this great subject. We remained in Naples nearly six 
weeks, and then proceeded to Home. Here in the 
absence of the power, my mind sought in the natural 
world for that consolation which it had hitherto found 
in the spiritual, and now this being withdrawn, life 
seemed to me a blank. I read with intense eagerness 
all the books I could find relating to the doctrines of ^ 
the Komish church, and finding them expressive of so 
many facts which I had found coincident in my ow^n 
experience, I thought that all contending and contra- 
dictory beliefs would be for ever set at rest, could I 
but be received as a member of that body. My expe- 
riences of life and its falsity had already left so indeli- 
ble a mark on my soul, from my recent experiences of 
it at Florence, that I wished to shun everything wliich 
pertained to this world, and I determined to enter a 
monastery. 

After two or three weeks of serious deliberations on 
the part of the authorities, it was decided tliat I should 
be received as a member of the church, and I was con- 
firmed. The Princess O-^ — was my godmother, and 

the Count B my godfather on the occasion. I was 

most kindly received by the Pope, who questioned me 
much regarding my past life. He pointed to a cruci- 
fix which stood near to us, and said, ''My child, it is 
upon what is on that table that we place our faith." 
He also gave me a large silver medal, which it has 
since been my misfortune to lose. 

It has since beeiu frequently said of me that at this 

1S8 AT TL0nKB€5Rj ITAPLBS, 

interview with the Pope, I had promised him that 1 
would not have any more manifestations ; but it ie 
hardly necessary, after what I have narrated, to say 
that I could not have made any such promise, nor did 
he ask any such promise to be made. 

In June, 1866, 1 went to Paris, and, as I had been 
advised to do by the Pope, I sought the counsel of the 
Pere de Ravignan, one of the most learned and excel- 
lent men of the day. The purpose of my remaining in 
Jrance was to acquire a facility in the language. 
During the winter I again fell ill, and Dr. Louis, pne 
>f the most celebrated physicians in France for con- 
sumptive cases, decided on anscultation that ray left 
lung was diseased, and advised a more genial climate. 
This could not, however, be accomplished, and for some 
time I was confined to njy bed. The time was fast 
drawing nigh when the year would expire, during 
whicli my power was to be suspended. The P^re de 
Ravignan always assured me that as 1 was now a mem- 
ber of the Catholic Church it would not return to me. 
For myself I had no opinion on the subject, as I was 
quite without data except his assurance on the point. 

On tlie niglit of the 10th of February, 1857, as the 
clock struck twelve, 1 was in bed, to which I had been 
confined, when there came loud rappings in my room, 
a hand was placed gently upon my brow, and a voice 
said, " Be of good cheer, Daniel, you will soon be 
well." But a few minutes had elapsed before I sank 
into a quiet sleep, and I awakened in the morning feel 
ing more refreshed than I had done for a long time. 
1 wTote to the Pere de Ravignan, telling him what had 
occurred, and the same afternoon he ca.iie to see me 

BOMS, AND PARIS. 139 

During the conversation loud rappiugs were heard 
on the ceiling and on the floor, and as he was about 
to give me his benediction before leaving, loud raps 
came on the bedstead. He left ine without expressing 
any opinion whatever on the snbjoct of tlie pheno- 
mena. 

The following day I had. sufficiently recovered to take 
a drive, and on Friday the 13th, 1 was presented to their 
Majesties at the Tuileries, where manifestations of an 
extraordinary nature occnrred. The following morn- 
ing, I called on the P6re de Kavignan to inform him 
of this. He expressed great dissatisfaction at ray being 
the subject of such visitations, and said that he would 
not give me absolution unless 1 should at once return 
to my room, shut myself up there, and not listen to 
any rappings, or pay the slightest attention to what- 
ever phenomena might occur in my presence. I wish- 
ed to reason with him, and to explain that I could not 
prevent myself from hearing and seeing, for that God 
having blessed me with the two faculties, it was not in 
my power to ignore them. As for shutting myself up, 
I did not think, from having before tried the experi- 
ment, that it was consistent with my nervous tempera- 
ment, and that the strain on my system would be too 
great if I were thus isolated. He would not listen to 
me, and told me I had no right to reason, " Do as I bid 
you, otherwise bear the consequences." I left him in 
great distress of mind. I wished not to be disobedient, 
and yet I felt that God is greater than man, and that 
He having bestowed the power of reason on me, I could 
not see why I should be thus deprived of it. On reach- 
ing my room, I found there a very dear and valued 

140 AT FLOREETOB, HAPLKB, 

friend, the Count de E-^ — . He observed mj agita 
tion, and questioned me as to the cause. I told him 
all, and he said, " There is but one thing to do, come 
home with me, and we will send for the Abb4 de 

C , and consult him." The Abb6 came, and aftei 

hearing my story, he said, "That they might as wel 
put me in my grave alive, as to carry out what had 
been ordered," adding, " I would like very much to 
witness some of these wonderful things." Most fortu- 
nately my emotion had not destroyed the power, as is 
usually the case when I am agitated, for while we were 
together several interesting phenomena occurred. His 
words were, '' Let this power be what it will, it is in 
no way of your making." He recommended me to 
seek another spiritual adviser, and added, " I myself 
would gladly be your adviser, but as it would be 
known, I should only be persecuted." He gave me 
the name of one of the most eloquent preachei-s of the 
day, and I introduced myself to him, and remained 
under his guidance during the few weeks of my stay 
in Paris previous to my going to America to bring back 
my sister. During my absence, the curiosity had be- 
come very great to find out who was my confessor, 

and the Countess L , having heard that he was a 

distinguished man, called upon several of the' most 
noted in Paris, and after a short conversation, she ab- 
ruptly said to each, " So you are Mr. Home's confess- 
or." Most naturally on one such occasion, she chanced 
to find the right one, and his look of surprise betrayed 
him. His surprise was that I should have revealed 
his name, and this he expressed to the Countess, who 
told him that I had not betrayed him, but that she had 

BOME, AND PASIS. Ikl 

used that artifice to ascertain the fact. This was the 
eause of my not continuing with him longer as my 
confessor. 

The extract I here give is one from tlie recently pub- 
lished life of tlie great confessor, the P6re de Ravig- 
iian, who had been recommended to me by the Pope, 
and I can only regret he is no longer here to contra- 
dict, with his own pen, the false statements concern- 
ing me, made by his biographer, the Jesuit, Father A. 
de Poulevoy. At che termination of Chapter XXIV, 
this person says, " We could not close this chapter 
without making mention of that famous American me- 
dium, who had the sad talent of turning other things 
than the tables, and invoking the dead to amuse the 
living. A great deal has been said, even in the pa- 
pers, of his acquaintance, religiously and intimately, 
with Father de Ravignan, and they have seemed to 
wish, under the passport of a creditable name, to intro- 
duce and establish in France these fine discoveries of 
the New "World. Here is the fact in all its simplicity. 
It is very true, that the young foreigner, after his con- 
version in Italy, was recorpmended from Rome to the 
Father de Ravignan, but at that period, in abjuring 
Protestantism, he also repudiated magic, and he was 
received with that interest that a priest owes to every 
soul ransomed by the blood of Jesus Christ, and more, 
perhaps, to a soul which has been converted, and 
brought to the bosom of the church. On his arriva 
jn Paris, all his old practices were again absolutely 
forbidden. The Father de Ravignac, according to all 
the principles of the faith, which forbids superstition, 
forbade, under the most severe penalties he could in- 

142 AT FLOKSNOK, NAPLES, 

flict, that he ehoald be an actor in, or eyen witness o^ 
these dangerous scenes, which are sometimes criminal 
One day the unhappy medium, tempted by I know not 
what, man or demon, violated his promise ; he was re 
taken with a rigor which overwhelmed him. Coming 
in thou by chance, I saw him rolling on the ground, 
and drawing himself like a worm to the feet of the 
priest, who was in saintly anger. The Father, how- 
ever, touched by his convulsive repentance, lifted him 
up, forgave him, and sent him away, after having ex- 
acted, by writing this time^ a promise under oath. 
But soon there was backsliding which made mach 
noise {rechute &clatante)j and the servant of God, break- 
ing off with this slave of the spirits, had him told never 
again to appear in his presence.". 

If the rest of the book be no more truthful than this 
statement, it is certainly not worth reading. The good 
Father de Ravignan well knew that I was not an Am- 
erican, and that this power had began with ine before 
I ever saw America, fori had told him all my history. 
He also knew that I never invoked the spirits. No 
good name is, or ever will be, required to introduce 
or accredit a God-given truth, and I knew far too well 
the power of facts to think that they required the pass- 
port of even Father Ravignan's name. His biogra- 
pher must have had a limited education too, both reli- 
gious and historical, to write of these things being the 
" fine discoveries" of the New World, for they are to 
be readily traced in every age and country of the 
world of which we have any record or history pre 
served to us. It is perfectly untrue tliat I ever abjured 
any magical or other processes, for I never knew any* 

BOMB, AND PARIS. 148 

tiling of sach, and therefore I could not abjure them. 
The Father de Kavignan used to say to me, when I 
told him that the spirits had said they would return 
to me on the 10th of Eebruary, 1857, " There is no fear 
of that, my child, so. long as you go on as you are now 
doing, observing carefully all the sacraments of our 
holy church ; they will not be allowed to return." I 
fol owed out his injunctions most conscientiously ; but 
on the very day promised, they came as I have de- 
scribed, and told me they were glad to find me in so 
pure a state of mind, as it greatly facilitated their ap- 
proach. I never yet violated ^y promise, to my 
knowledge : and as to the biographer coming in and 
finding me rolling on the ground, and crawling like a 
worm, it is an entire falsehood. But had it even been 
trne, it would not have been the place of a priest to 
make such a thing public. If I took an oath, and 
wrote it down as alleged, that writing will have been 
kept. Let it be forthcoming, to save the character of 
this Father A. de Ponlevoy, that he may prove the 
truth of the statement he makes. In the meantime, I 
say that it is without even any foundation of truth. 
The last time I saw the good Father de Ravignan, I 
would only reason with him, for as I then said to him, 
no man had a right to forbid that which God gave. I 
left him without confessing, even — so I had not been 
on my knees at all, much less crawling like a worm. 

As I have said, when the Abbe C came to see 

me, the conversation I had with him only tended to 
strengthen me in my opinion of what was right, for 
when priests are not agreed us touching such a matter, 
whom or what are we to rely on, if not on the reason 

144 AT FLOBBNCK, NAPLB8, 

Ood has given as. The Father de Savignan nevei 
had me informed that he would not see me again. On 
the contrary, it was I who said I would not go to him till 
he would reason with me. I have letters of his to me 
in my possession, which will show the kind feeling he 
ever had for me previous to this period, and I am well 
assured in my own mind, that he never said aught 
against me, even when I no longer saw him. He was 
so good, so pure, and so high minded, that I would 
that he had had a more truthful and honest chronicler 
to write his life. 

Tlie Countess L / was herself a firm believer in 
the manifestations which she had frequently witnessed 
in my presence, and she was also present when I had 
a vision which is described in one of the Paris papers 
in the following words : 

" The recent failure of Mr. Thumeyssen recalls to us 
a strange fact that signalized the sojourn of Mr. Home 

in Paris during the last winter. The Countess had 

a dozen years ago a strange hallucination. One even- 
ing being busy with some embroidery, alone with her 
brother, he was reading to her one of the most irre- 
ligious books of the eighteenth century. As she list- 
ened mechanically to his reading, she raised her head, 
and looking at her brother she was struck with terror 
at the sight of the strange expression of his face. He 
was ordinarily a most gentle, benevolent, and sympa- 
thetic young man, with calm, quiet features, but at 
that moment they were frightfully contracted, the eye- 
brows singularly convulsed, the eyes wide open, the 
corners of the mouth distorted by a bitter and despair- 
ing smile, and altogether he had the peculiar expres- 

BOME, AND PABIS. 145 

Bion wliich painters would give to a fallen angel. The 
frightened Countess had immediately, as it were a 
thought revealed to her, (for slie never previously 
dreamed of the possibility of such a thing), she was 
convinced that her brother was possessed by a demon. 
Frequently afterwards she saw the same infernal ex* 
pression on the face of her brother, even when he was 
most calm and happy ; but the idea was so horrible to 
her that she never mentioned the circumstance. Last 
winter Mr. Home was introduced to ihc Countess. 
Being at her house one evening, and in his usual quiet 
frame of mind, his attention was drawn to a beautiful 
marble bust. He was not aware of its being that of 
the brother of the Countess, but immediately his 
whole visage changed, and he became in a state of 
most violent agitation. The Countess much alarmed, 
inquired why he was so aflfected, when Mr. Home re- 
plied, ^Madame, the man whose bust this is, is possess- 
ed with a demon.' One may judge of the astonish- ' 
ment of the Couuntess on hearing Mr. Home say what 
she had thought twelve years before. She pressed 
him with questions, and he, recovering from his emo- 
tion, rose and went to examine the bust more closely, 
then turning to the Countess he said, ' In a short time 
your brother will have a great misfortune, and this 
misfortune will deliver him from his enemies.' 

" And so it has occurred, the Count de P-^^ has 
lost in the bankruptcy of M. Thurneyssen a consid- 
erable part of his fortune. The prophecy came four 
months previous to the failure. Could it have been 
that the spirits saw the dishonesty of Thurneyssen ; if 
BO this might ac coim t why certainu)ersj^s are ^9^^j^^J ^^^^ 

A»*M1| X' 

146 AT WLOKESCEy NAPUB, 

to oppose all communication with the other world, 
jnoferring tlie diirkuess to the light." 

The day previous to my leaving Paris, a wonderful 
case of healing occurred through me in the manner 
which I will now relate. 

On the 19th of March, 1857, when I was residing at 
13, Rue des Champs Elys^es, I received a letter from 
a stranger to me, Madame A. Mavoisin de Cardonne, 
of 233, Rue St. Dominique, St. Germain, stating that 
she had hal a dream, in which she had seen her own 
mother and mine, and that the latter had told her to 
seek me at once, in order that her son, who had been 
deaf for four years from the effects of typhoid feven 
might be cured. This was so strongly impressed upon 
her mind, that she wrote to me to say that she would 
call upon me with her son, the following morning at 
ten. 

Accordingly the next morning she presented herself 
with her son at my rooms, there being present the 

rrincess de H and Miss E , wlio were with 

me, previous to my leaving Pnris that very day, to 
proceed on my voyage to America. I had been so 
overwhelmed by persons wishing to see me that 1 had 
uniformly refused such visits ; buc on this occasion I 
had been so much pre-occupied by my engagements 
in preparing for my voyage, that I had not been able 
to ack^wledge her letter, or to write to lier either in 
the aflSrinative or negative. I therefore received her 
with considerable embarrassment, which was fully re- 
ciprocated on her part. It was indeed an embarrass- 
ing meeting for both of us, the mother yearning for 

JL^ t^^^ 

S^ 

ROME, AKD PABIS. 147 

her son's recovery, and I, not knowing how I was ex- 
pected to be instrumental in healing this long total 
deafness ; the more so that operations had been per- 
formed on the boy, as I afterwards found, by eminent 
surgeons of Paris, who had said that it was impossible 
he should ever be restored to hearing. 

She sat down on a chair near a sofa, I taking a seat 
on the sofa, and beckoning the son to be seated on my 
left. The son was in his fifteenth year, tall for his 
age, of a delicate complexion, with large dreamy blue 
eyes that looked as if they would supply the place of 
hearing, with their deep, thoughtful, enquiring gaze. 
The mother began her description of the boy's illness, 
commencing with the attack of the fever, and ending 
with the entire loss of hearing. During the recital, 
told with all the warmth and tenderness of a mother's 
heart, and describing the various surgical operations to 
which he had been subjected, my sympathies were 
deeply moved, and I had unwittingly thrown my left 
arm about the boy and drawn him towards me, so that 
the boy's head rested on my shoulder. Whilst in this 
position, and Madame de Cardonne was telliui^ some 
of the most painful particulars, I passed my hand ca- 
ressingly over the boy's head, upon which he, partly 
lifting his head, suddenly exclaimed in a voice trem- 
bling with emotion, ^'Maynan^jefentendsP (Mamma, 
I liear you !) Tlie mother fixed on him a look of as- 
tonishment, and said " Emile," the boy's name, and he 
at once replied, '' Quoi ?" (^What ?) She then, seeing 
that the child had heard her question, fainted with 
emotion, and on her recovery the scene was a most 

148 AT rLOBXNOB, NAPLES, BOMBi AND PAKDL 

thrilling one — the poor mother asking continually 
questions for the mere pleasure of hearing her 
child reply. The boy was able to resume his studies, 
and has continued to hear perfectly up to the pres- 
ent time. 

CHAPTER VI. 

IN AMEBIOA. THB PBESSGANG. 

Oh reaching America, I found the American press 
.ad been publishing some ridiculous paragraphs about 
me, one of which was of a practical joke said to have 
been perpetrated by General Baraguay d'Hilliers and 
others in the presence of the Emperor, and that I my- 
self had become greatly alarmed, and finally veiy an- 
gry on discovering the trick. The whole was a fabri- 
cation, as will be seen, for at that time I had never 
even seen either of the three gentlemen who were said 
to be actoi*s in it. The following paragraph was, also, 
of the same character, as I had not then met M. Du- 
mas. 

" Home, the table-turner and magnetiser, who has 
of late caused such attention in Paris, has predicted to 
M. Alexandre Dumas that he would live to the age of 
113 years, and be killed in a duel.'* 

The following is another specimen ef a similar kind. 

^^ Mr. Home, the medium who has made such a sen* 
sation in Paris, is on his way to this country, to visil 
his sister. He has been ofifered marriage by a lady of 
immense wealth, but has refused her." 

160 m AMERICA. 

The " New York Herald," a paper better known for 
its nntrathfulness than otherwise, published letters 
from its special correspondents at Paris, stating '^ from 
the most reliable sources,'* that I had stolen £30,000, 
and was now for ever banished from France. 1 had at 
TSiat very moment my return ticket in my pocket, and 
knew that an Imperial Prince, then on a visit to the 
Emperor, was awaiting my return. Indeed, if the pub- 
lic judged of my life from what the newspapers said 
of me, they must have been greatly puzzled by the 
statements and contradictions which successively ap- 
peared. I was quit« content to leave both without no- 
tice, and I have never been at the pains to set them 
right. The following notice is of the same class as the 
preceding. 

"The * Ind^pen dance Beige' states that Napoleon 
sent away Mr. Home, the American spirit-rapper, be- 
cause the Empress was so much affected that the Em- 
peror dreaded the continuance of the diabolical scenes. 
The ladies of honor were equally excited and could 
talk of nothing else. It is said that Home was quar- 
tered in the royal household, and was paid at the rate 
of £40,000 per year." 

The " Hartford Courant" states : 

"The 'Times' says that Daniel Dunglas Home, the 
famous medium, whose performances are so peculiar as 
to utterly baffle the most acute and sagacious minds, 
and who is a gentleman of education and character quite 
out of the range of the common mediums, was in this city 
last Saturday. We regard him as the most remarkable 
man living ; and no man who has not witnessed what 
is done in Mr. Home's presence, can claim a rigcht to 

THK PBESSGANG. ISl 

give an opinion on Spiritualism. Mr. Home says the 
jokes of the newspaper correspondents about him are 
entirely untrue. He had some sittings at the Tuileries, 
but declined conversation on that subject." 

Another paper, " The Springfield Kepublican," no- 
ticed my presence in America as f >llow8 : 

" Home, the distinguished spiritual medium, who 
has recently been raising spirits in the presence of the 
Emperor Napoleon, is in Springfield on a brief visit. 
He will return to France shortly, where his services 
are in great request among the savans." 

A New York paper gave the following account, cor- 
recting some of the misstatements about me : 

" What terrible gossipers some of our letter writers 
are. The New York Editor of the ' London Letter,' in 
the last ' Sunday Times,' has the following paragraph : 
'It is whispered, in Paris, that Home, tlie American 
spirit-rapper, was producing so much mischief in the 
Court that he was ordered off by the alarmed Em- 
peror ; and the fellow who, though playing the part of 
a personage with £40,000 a year, was really penniless, 
has left for the country of the rappers.' 

" Possibly it may interest some of o ir readers to 
know something of Mr. Home, who has lately afforded 
d, prolific subject to paragraph makers. We have noth- 
ing to say as to his ' spiritual ' belongings here, but 
simply speak of the lad — for he is scarcely more, being 
but twenty-two years old now — in reference to such re- 
-ports as the above. Home, the 'American,' is of an 
old Scottish family of standing, and was born in Scot- 
land, but brought very young to this county. Quiet 
and unobtrusive in his manners, he never has thrust 

152 IN AHBRICA. 

himself forward, nor specially sought nor avoided the 
notoriety which attends him ; never has exhibited him- 
self as a public medium J as many suppose, but has 
simply suffered events to take their course with him. 

" As to the above story of his quitting Paris, which 
has gone the rounds, in various shapes, we have only 
to say, that some two Sundays since, while reading 
from the English papers an account of his doings in 
Paris, and supposing him snugly ensconced in the 
Tiiilcries, the door opened, and to our astonishment, in 
walked Mr. Home, to take dinner ' at home ' — ^it being 
under our own roof that, some time since, at the age 
of sixteen, he found his first shelter in New York 
(Brooklyn,) a temporary refuge from horror-stricken 
relatives, who had turned the ' rapper ' adrift as being 
'possessed of a devil ;' thus starting him as a young 
martyr at least, whether deservedly so or not. 

" He told us of his arriving a day or two before, at 
Philadelpliia, and stated what he had come for, and 
when he was going back. He has accomplished his 
errand — part of which was to obtain his sister, with 
whom he had sailed from Boston, a few days since, on 
his return to Paris. 

*' So much for the ' mischief and the ' alarmed Em- 
peror ' who ' ordered him off,' a story made of the same 
bit of cloth as the Socrates joke by Baraguay d'Hil- 
liers and others." 

Whilst on the subject of these newspaper inventions, 
I may as well allude to a curious series of them which 
occurred in 1858. I had then left Paris for Rome, on 
account of my health, and on the 13th of March, the 
following telegraphic dispatch reached me there from 

THE PSESSGANG. 153 

a friend in Paris, " Tell me immediately if you are 
still at Rome. I have a request to make." I replied 
that I was still at Home, and in course of post I re- 
ceived a letter of the 14th March, as follows : 

*' Dear Friend. — I sent you yesterday a telegraphic 
dispatch that you might write to me at once if you 
were at Home. I made pretext of having a commis- 
sion to ask you to do ; but it was in reality only to 
have a letter from you as soon as possible. Scandal 
says you have been arrested, and the Hague papers 

say that you are in prison at Mazas. Monsieur B , 

whose son is a medium, has sent to know the truth, 
and I have authorized him to publish that I have a 
letter from you, bearing date of Eome the 7th of March. 
I have also sent to inform ' La Patrie,' that a stop may 
be put to there base calumnies. I trust you will ap- 
prove of what I have done." 

The Parisian papers took up the report, and it was 
confirmed by them that I was truly in prison at Mazas. 
Persons even in official positions told my friends that 
they had seen and spoken to me in that prison^ and 
one, an officer, went so far as to state that he had ac- 
companied me there in the carriage. 

Being at Rome, and altogether unaware of all this 
scandal which was passing about me, I had felt forcibly 
impressed, I knew not why, to write to M. Henri De- 
lage, the well known mystic writer of Paris. I did so, 
and it will be observed by the following paragraph in- 
troducing my letter, how very opportunely my impres- 

1*- 

164 nr akbrioa. 

fiion had been given, and how well I had acted in fol- 
owing it out. 
Paris correspondent of "Le Nord." 

" Paris, 17th March, 
" Allow me to begin by a good action ; it is to free 
an honorable man from calumnies, arising from what 
source I know not, but which for the past few days 
have been rapidly spreading. I speak of Mr. Home, 
who is, for the moment, in Italy, whereas it is whis- 
pered l>otli secretly an(^ openly that he is in the prison 
at Mazas, for we know not what crimes. Tlie letter 
here given, dated Rome, 7th of March, was received 
yesterday by M. Henri Delage, an intimate friend of 
Mr. Home. The letter is there before me with the 
postal mark, and 1 will give you his literal words : 

" Rome, March 7th, 1858. 
" ' Dear M. Delage, — You were without doubt much 
surprised to hear of my departure for Italy ; but tlie 
truth is I was very ill. I had an impoverishment of 
the blood, so what could I do. My power had quite 
left me. The dear spirits thought me too ill to see 
strangers. Here in Rome I go but little into society, 
a complete rest being necessary. Write to me soon, 

and will you kindly remember me to M. H ; 

you know I like him very nmch. 

" Yours faithfully, 

" ' D. D. Home.' 

" I beg of you to give the publicity of your well-- 
known journal to this letter of Mr. Home. It being 

THS PSESSGANG. 155 

the best reply which can be given to those base calum- 
nies which attack his honor." 

I well know the origin and cause of this intrigue, 
and I have in my possession a friendly letter, bearing 
date the 18th July, 1858, from the Bureau du Ministre 
de rint^rieur, which is a sufficient refutation of the 
wicked calumny. His Highness the Prince Murat alf^o 
made it the occasion of proving to me not only the 
Christian principles which actuated him, but also the 
true nobleness of his heart, in doing for a comparative 
stranger, that which a father alone could be expected 
to do ft)r a son. He, at his own expense, sent per- 
sons to Germany, to Italy, and to England, to ascer- 
tain the foundati(m of such a libel, and generously 
gave me his public and private testimony to its entire 
untruth. 

I have now to present the following letter, and the 
enclosed programme, which I also received while at 
Koine, and which disclose a case of personation, which 
is by no means either the first or the last of that kind 
which I could give. It is, however, an amusing speci- 
men of them. 

" Paris, April 7th. 

"Dear friend, — ^I send you a programme taken from 
one of the Lyons papers, that was sent to M. Allen 
Kardee. What a shame to think such an imposition 
should be allowed in your name. I would advise you 
to write at once to the Prefect of Lyons, or to the po- 
lice, that the villain should be unmasked as soon as 
possible, not only for the wrong he does to your name, 
but also to the cause of spiritualism. Do not allow j» 

156 IN AKSSIOA. 

moment to pass, and we on our side will do all we can. 
Only think of the audacity in daring to say that he 
had been receive<l by the Emperor. 

" I am, &c., &c. 
*' P.S. — I have this moment heard that the imposture 
was at once discovered, and he has fled from Lyons." 

I give the original programme, with an English 
translation. 

" Salle du Qrand Theatre. Jevdiy AvrU 1, 1868, 
d huit heures, SoirSe Americaine ou SSance de Spir- 
iticalism de M. Some. 

" Je ne me guide jamais d'apres la science, mais 
d'apr^s ma conscience ; je crois done fortement anx 
faits magn6tique8, je crois que la force magn6tique 
augmente prodigieusement la force de vision de 
I'homme ; je crois que ces faits sont constates par un 
certain nombre d'hommes tres-sinc^res et tres Chre- 
tiens.' — l'abbe lacordaire. 

" Programme : Experience de vision par M. Home 
et I'Ange miraculeux. — Ob6is8ance a I'ordre du public. 
— Stance de spiritualisme par la sensitive Mme. de Oa- 
banyes. 

" Production des visions demand^es par les specta- 
teurs: Fr6misseraent, Joie, Colere, Idiotisme, Pi6te, 
Multiplication des sens. Augmentation et diminution 
des forces. 

" Reproduction de plusieurs de ces phenomenes sui 
des jeunes gens qu^le public est pri6 de presenter. 

" M. Home, qui a eu I'honneur de faire ses expe- 
riences devantSa Majesty Pempereur, invite MM. lea 

THE PBES86ANG. 157 

mSdecins, doctenrs, chirurgiens, etc., etc., h monter 
prds de lui sur la scene, afin de controler, la v^racite 
des ph6nomene8 curieux qu'il a I'bonneiir d'offrir au 
Public. Des sieges seront disposes a cet effet. 

" Prix des places : Premieres loges, fauteuils et 
Btalles, 6 fr. (sans augmentation pour la location 4 
Favance) ; — premieres galeries, 5 fr. ; — secondes, 3 fr. ; 
— ^parterre, 2 fr. 60 c; — troisiemes, 1 fr. 50 c. ; — qua- 
triemes, 1 fr." 

*^At the Great Theatre, Thursday, 1st of April, 1858, 
commencing at 8 o^ clock, American Soiree or Seam^e 
of Spiritualism, ly Mr. Home. 
'* *I never allow myself to be guided by science, but 
by my conscience. I therefore believe firmly in the 
facts of magnetism. I believe that the magnetic force 
augments prodigiously the power of man's vision. 1 
believe that these facts are certified by a certain num- 
ber of men very sincere and very christian.' — ^the abbe 

ULOOBDAIBB. 

" Programme : The vision experience of Mr. Home, 
and the miraculous angel. — Obedience to the order of 
the public. — Spiritual seance by the sensitive. Mme. de 
Cabanyes. 

"Production of visions asked for by the spectators: 
Tremblings, Joy, Anger, Idiotcy, Keligion, Piety, 
Multiplication of the senses. Augmentation and dimi- 
nution of strength. 

" Eeproduction of several of those phenomena on 
young persons, whom the public are requested to in- 
trodace. 

158 nr amkbioa. 

*^ Mr. Home, who has had the honor to go through 
his experiences before his Mnjestj the Emperor, invites 
tlie Doctors of Philosophy and others, also Sorgeons, 
«V:c., &c., to sit near him on the stage to satisfy them- 
Bel ves as to the truth of the curious phenomena which 
lie has the honor to present to the public. Chairs will 
be aiTanged for that purpose. 

" Price of places : First boxes, fauteuils and stalls, 6 
frs. (no extra charge for booking) ; firet gallery, 5 frs. ; 
second, 3 fi-s. ; pit, 2 frs. 50 c. ; third places, 1 fr. 59 
c. ; fourth, 1 fr." 

This was contradicted by the Paris papers, which 
gave only as a reason that I was in Turin, whilst at 
the time it happened that I was really at Naples. 

But it woi:ld he wrong to confine these falsehoods 
to the press of America or France, when the English 
press vied with them in fabricating and dispensing 
equally false statements about me. Tlie Socrates story 
was from the forge of the *' Court Journal," and was 
disseminated thiough a great part of the English press. 
No wonder that with such teaching there should be 
misconception about me, and about the phenomena. 
I can only say that the whole of the following state- 
ments, names, dates, circumstances and persons are 
false from beginning te end. 

Extraordinary Spirit Affair in Paris, Singular and 

Succesfiful Hoax on tJie Spiritualists. 

" Mr. Home, the all-hearing, all-seeing spirit^rapper, 

is gone suddenly, without warning. Many stories are 

afloat respecting the cause of this abrupt departure. 

THR PBES8GANG. 159 

amid sxich striking success, when Paris was just filled 
with his renown, and even from the pulpit had threats 
and warnings been launched forth against those who 
dared to frequent his company, or believe in his incan- 
tations. Some newspapers have declared that he is 
gone to America in search of his sister, whom he pro- 
nounces a more powerful medium than himself; others 
that, in consequence of some of his tricks having 
assumed the character of toura de passe-pasae^ he had 
been forbidden to practice his deceptive arts upon the 
high personages whom he had chosen, on pain of 
proces-verhal ; and that the metamorphosis of the 
Princess Mathilde's pocket-handkerchief into a living 
Bcarabeus — after which exploit the practitioner had 
fallen into catalepsy, and remained senseless for five 
hours — had awakened certain scruples and suspicions 
in the minds of those who had witnessed the feat, 
wliich had caused his exclusion from that circle of 
society. Nothing of all this is the case, and your 
readers may be assured of the truth of what we are 
about to relate, and of the adventure being the whole 
and sole cause of the abrupt departure of the discom- 
fited wizard. 

'*A few nights ago a grand stance had been prepared 
for him at the house of one of the principal oflScials 
about the Court, who had witnessed the divere experi- 
ments made at the Tuileries, and which, although fail- 
ing to convince liim entirely, had yet not left him 
wholly incredulous. The company was limited, and 
of the first water. The names had all been submitted 
lb the practitioner — those of Eugene Guinot, iliQfeuU 
lekmiHe: Oeueral Baraguay d'Uilliers; and Kadaud, 

160 or AMKBIO^. 

the composer; all of them atrociooB unbelieyers, wretch- 
ed iniidels, aud scoffers, wholly devoid of all sensibility 
r imaginatiou* Numerous were the experiments tried, 
and all, as usual, eminently successful.- The accordeon 
glided, as usual, from knee to knee, all round the cir 
cle, and played the tunes most loved by the inquirers ; 
the bell wandered round the ceiling, and rang its merry 
peal or tolled its doleful note, according to the will of 
any member of the company who chose to command 
it But the wizard had promised that night to evoke 
the spirits and render them visible to the sight, and 
every preliminary experiment was attended to with 
impatience, so great was tlie hurry to witness the 
crowning masterpiece of the performance. At length 
the lights were all extinguished but one, a solitary wax 
taper on the mantel-piece, behind the figure of the 
practitioner, which cast its long, gigantic shadow on 
the walls and ceiling of the room. The silence was 
complete ; some of the ladies crouched behind their 
neighbors, and resisted the temptation to faint only by 
reason of their curiosity; others stared around, hoping, 
yet dreading, to see something awful and terrific, that 
they would be driven to hysterics. The voice of the 
wizard was heard, amid the silence, demanding whose 
spirit should be summoned to appear. A faint whis- 
per, from a distant corner, thrilled through the room 
— " Let it be ISocrates, the greatest of philosophei-s !" 
A pause ensued — no objection or opposition being 
manifested, the wizard raised his arm, and waving it 
towards the door, solemnly bade the spirit of Socrates 
appear and stand before him. Again the silence waa 
resumed, and the wizard remained, with extended arm 

THB PSESSGAKG. 161 

and muttering lips, gazing towards the door. It slowly 
opened ; and, amid the utmost terror, the company 
beheld the entrance of a figure, enveloped in a kind 
of floating drapery, something like a winding-sheet, 
which advanced with noiseless tread over the carpet, 
and stood before the conjuror. The white and flowing 
beard, the bald head and crushed nose were unmis- 
takable — Socrates stood, as in life, in the very midst of 
that gay and frivolous circle, evoked from his slumber 
of centuries to furnish sport for a Parisian sciton ! The 
awe and terror of the company was at its higliest, and 
the figure glided back in silence while yet the eflect 
produced was at its culminating point. When it had 
disappeared, compliments, of course, poured in upon 
the operator, who, shaken to the very fingers' ends, 
could not help expressing his surprise at the unusual 
promptitude with which the summons had been an- 
swered, and, full of the excitement of unlooked for suc- 
cess, yielded to the entreaties of the same voice which 
had spoken before, and which now implored the evo- 
cation of Frederick the Great. The wizard again stretch- 
ed forth his hand towards the door, although doubtful 
if his electric current would be strong enough to ac- 
complish two evocations so rapidly one after the other. 
He was observed, however, even in the dim light of 
the apartment, to turn deadly pale as the door again 
opened at his summons, when he called aloud for Fred- 
erick the Great, King of Prussia, to appear before him. 
The moment's pause was truly awful. By degrees, 
amid the shadows of the room could be seen gliding 
through tlie door-way, a short figure, wrapped, like the 
one which had preceded it, in a kind of winding-sheet 

103 nr AXEBioA. 

clinging to its limbs, and held aroand the waist by Ae 
grasp of the hands. TRe face, however, was unde- 
niably that of the great hero, and the head surmount- 
ed by the little traditional cocked hat which makes 
every Prussian heart beat with gratitude and loyalty 
even to this day. Tlie figure advanced as that of So- 
crates had done before, close up to the magician, and 
there stood still and motionless within a few paces of 
tlie chimney. Presently, the excitement of the magi- 
cian became intense, the perspiration rolled in huge 
drops from his forehead, and the teeth chattered. 
** Enough, enough — begone, depart 1" said he, in a 
hoai'se wliisper, as the eyes of the figure glared upon 
him with a fierce and menacing expression. "Begone, 
I say !" repeated he, in a hollow tone, as the figui-e still 
stood motionless in spite of the command. In another 
monient, however, the spell was troken. Housing himr 
Keif by an efibrt wi»ich, considering the circumstances 
in which he was placed, may be regarded as sublime, 
he suddenly exclaimed, " 1 have been made the dupe 
of some mystification," and stepped close to the figure, 
which had still retained its menacing attitude until that 
.noment, when a loud and uncontrollable laugh buiBt 
from its lips, and it exclaimed : " What ! don't you 
know me? I am Nadaud, and here is my friend So- 
crates, otherwise Marshal Baraguay d'Hilliers, ready 
to appear again w^henevor you choose, and close at hand 
is my comrade, Eugene Guinot in iifc; and Alcibiade^ 
in death, waiting to be summoned after me, as lie 
would most assuredly have been, had I been able tc 
follow up the joke." You can just imagine the effect 
produced by the discovery of the mystification. 5Iiv 

THE FBESSOANG. 163 

Home was struck powerless and dumb ; when he re 
covered, he begged it to be remembered that he had 
been the first to find out the deception, and asserted 
that the spirit summoned would have appeared, for 
that he does possess the facility of raising them. In a 
few moments, however, he disappeared, and the next 
day we heard, without astonishment, of his sudden de- 
parture from Paris. It seems that the three mauvais 
plaisans who had been excluded from the company 
had been determined to revenge themselves ; and, with 
the assistance of a confrere^ aided likewise by tlie false 
white beard of Socrates and the cocked hat of Frede- 
rick the Great, had almost succeeded in duping the 
operator, had it not been for the uncontrollable laugh- 
ter of Nadaud which betrayed the whole conspiracy. 

** This is the story told of the sudden desertion of 
the camp by Mr. Home. Time will show us if it be 
truth, for he has promised to return ; and should we 
not behold him according to his promise in the space 
of three months, we shall know what to believe and 
what to doubt of his mysterious power." 

I could tell much more of a similar kind, but what 
I have already given is sufficient to show the reckless 
invention of those who assume to enlighten the public 
thi'ough the press. I found it the easiest to let them 
have their own way, for if I had begun to contradict 
all the falselioods told about me, my time would have 
beeu fully occupied in vain attempts to stop a torrent, 
which seems as if it would never cease to fi.ow. 

CHAPTER Vn. 

1857-8. — TRASOEj ITALY, AND BU88IA. — ^ICASRIAOS. 

I EETUBNED froiii America to Paris in May, 1857, 
and I remained there till July, having stances every 
day. The power was very great at that time, and the 
phenomena were witnessed and investigated by many 
hundreds of all classes. The spirit hands were fre- 
quently visible, and were seen by many to take pen or 
pencil and write in the autograph of the person whose 
spirit was represented to be present. 

One naorning the concierge came to me saying, 
"Please, Sir, there is an old gentleman here, and' I 
think you must see him, he seems so anxious and care- 
worn." I must mention that I had been so overrun 
by visitors, that I had been obliged to refuse to see 
any strangers, as all my time was taken up by engage- 
ments with my friends. I acceded to his request, and 
he announced the Count de X . At the first mo- 
ment of looking at him, I saw none of the signs of 
anxiety and care which had struck the concierge^ nor 
did he seem to me so very old. He advanced to where 
I stood, and taking me kindly by the hand, he said to 
me, " I liave been sent to you, and you will yet know 

PBANOEj ITALY, AJSTD BUSSIA. 165 

the reason why, thongh you do not even know who I 
am. I live at No. 4, Rue , and you will be oblig- 
ed to come to me." I shook my head at this incredu- 
lously, and told him that my time was so taken up, 
that I had scarcely time even to call on my friends. 
He smiled, and said : " You will see, you will see." 
The conversation then changed, and he left me after 
having written his address. I was to dine that even- 
ing with the Baroness de M , and previous to leav- 
ing the house to go to her, I heard a spirit voice saying 
distinctly to me, *' Tou will go to see my father, won't 
you !" The voice did not seem as if it required an 
answer, for it was said so affirmatively, and I made no 

reply. On reaching the Hotel de M , and entering 

the drawing-room I saw a young man standing there. 
I was surprised at this, expecting to have met no 
stranger. With his eyes fixed upon me, he said, " I 
am glad you have come, for we will go together to see 
my father," and he then suddenly disappeared. I had 
thought till then that he was a guest, so real was the 
vision. The Baroness was in the room, and saw that I 
was agitated, and asked me what had occurred, but I did 
not enter into any explanation. When about to take 
my seat at the dinner table, again I heard the same 
voice, saying, " You will go to my father, won't you ?" 
This so unnerved me that I told the Baroness the cir- 
cumstance, and she kindly advised my going. The 
evening passed on, and after two hours I had nearly 
forgotten the occurrence, and had returned to the 
drawing-room, when suddenly I saw by my side the 
same young man. His face now wore a pained ex- 
pression, and I was horrified to see blood on his breast 

166 FRANCE, ITALY, AND RUSSIA* 

He said to me, " My father is waiting for you ; he bat 
had much sorrow ; it is your mission to console — go to 
him." I told him I wonld on the following day, but 
he replied that I must go then, that very night. H6 
disappeared, and I told the Baroness of what he said, 
'and she allowed me to leave. On reaching No. 4, 

JRne , I was directed to the rooms of the Count, 

and his valet told me that his master was preparing to 
retire, and in all probability could not see me. Again 
the voice told me to announce myself, and at that very 
moment a door was opened, and the Count came to- 
wards me, and said, " I have been waiting for you, I 
knew you would come." I described to him the young 
man I had seen, and all that had happened, and he at 
once recognized him as his son who had been murder- 
ed. He showed me a portrait of him, which exactly 
corresponded with my visions of him, and I have since 
seen him often. He has told me, that on his appea^ 
ance that first day, he showed the blood upon his 
breast, merely to impress me the more deeply with the 
necessity of going to his father. His father told me 
that he had been himself for a long time a partial me- 
dium, and that he had been told to seek me for the 
purpose of having his mediumship increased, in order 
that his son might be able the more easily to impress 
him with his presence. It has since been a great com- 
fort and relief to his mind to have the certainty of his 
son being with him to console him in his affliction. 

About this time my guardian spirits told me that it 
seemed necessary that I should go to Turkey, as a way 
was opening by which I might be the means of bring 
ing light there. I accordingly made all preparation! 

FJELLSCR ITALY, AND BU8SIA. 167 

far my jonrney, and my power left me. I had re- 
ceived letters of introdnetioa to persons h()lding high 
positions at Oonstantuiople. My trunks were packed, 
my passport sent for vise. I was making a farewell 
call on the Duchess de A , and while in conversa- 
tion with her, the drawing-room seemed filled with 
Tappings, the alphabet was called for, and I was told 
that my journey must be postponed, as some political 
troables were just about to occur. Instead, tlxerefore, 
of going to Turkey, I went to Baden-Baden. My 
power while there was not great, as my liealth was 
again failing, but I met the King of Wnrtembnrg, and 
the then Prince, now King of Prussia, both of whom 
investigated the phenomena. 

My guardian spirits continually told me at this time 
that there was trouble in store for me, but that from 
the darkness light would come, and that wliatever 
might seem to be a loss, would in the end prove to be 
a gain, and in all this they were correct. 

I left Baden-Baden sooner than I had expected, and 
went to BiaiTitz. Here I was told that the first dark- 
ening of the cloud would come, and that those who 
might have understood me better, would be led to 
think ill of me by those about them, who, to serve a 
purpose, would farbicate a statement, tlie very ab- 
surdity of which ought to have been its refutation. Tlie 
pre-knowledge of what was to occur to me, combined 
with nervous debility, made me more than usually 
agitated, and whilst at a stance, where almost the only 
manifestation was the taking of a bracelet from the 
lady sitting on my left, and the carrying of it to a lady 
opposite me, the gentleman on my right hand declarcMJ 

168 FBA5CE, ITALY, AND BUB8IA. 

it to have been transported by my feet. If my legi 
were eight feet long it would have still been a mira- 
cle, but in such wonderful occurrences as these we 
must not be surprised at any absurdity that may be in- 
vented, however painful it may be to be charged with 
dishonesty and imposture. 

Some instances of the manner in which it is said 
the phenomena are pr(»duced are sufficiently amusing 
to be repeated. A very popular idea in Paris was 
that I carried in my pocket a tame monkey trained to 
assist me. Another is that my lega are so formed as 
to be capable of elongation, and that my feet are like 
those of a baboon. Many people suppose that when I 
go to a strange house, my tables have to be sent first, 
and that, like Sir David Brewster's " conjectural ^ ta- 
ble, they are always copiously draped, and that I take 
with me wax hands and arms to show at the proper 
moment. Some suppose that I magnetize or biologize 
my audience, and that they only imagine they see 
what they see. Some that 1 carry with me lazy tongs 
and a magic lantern, and others have stated that when 
I am said to rise in the air, it is only a balloon filled 
with gas in the shape of a man. Others again will 
have it that it is done by a magic lantern, whilst some 
doctors declare that I administer "a thimblefuU of 
chloroform to each of the sitters." Sir David Brews- 
ter must have had his thimblefuU when he could only 
say that the table " appeared to rise," and that " spirits 
were the last things he would give into." Some have 
enough spiritual belief to say that I have the devil at 
command. Others that I raise spirits by forms and in- 
cantations. Then we have involuntary muscular mo- 

FRANCE, ITALY, AHT) RUB8IA. 169 

tion to account for the phenomena by the learned Pro- 
fessor Farraday. Dr. Carpenter speaks of their being 
produced by unconscious cerebation, and Mr. Morell, 
the philosopher, tells us that they are caused by " the 
reflex action of the mind." A common explanation is 
ventriloquism. Electricity is another, and it is said 
that I have an electric battery concealed about my per- 
son. Then there are the od force and fluid action, and 
the nervous principle, and collusion, illusion and delu- 
sion. Mechanical contrivances attached to the lower 
extremities are also suggested by Sir David Brewster, 
but without specifying their nature. But the most 
scientific and learned explanation, leaving no room for 
conjectures, was given by an old woman in America, 
who when asked if she could account for what she had 
seen, replied, " Lor, Sirs, it's easy enough, he only rubs 
himself all over with a gold pencil." The rappings 
are produced in many ways, each philosopher having • 
his own theory, beginning low down with the snapping 
of the toe-joints, others getting up to the ancle, whilst 
some maintain it to be in the knees, or thigh bones. 
Professor Huxley has his own " spirit-rapping toe " 
with which he amuses his friends. It has even been 
attributed to a strong beating of my pulse. Some say 
I rub my boots together, others my thumb nails, and 
that springs are concealed in the table and about the 
room. It has been said that I have an electrical qual- 
ity wliich I can throw off at the command of my will. 
A general belief is that I bribe the servants at what- 
ever liouse I visit, that they may aid me in concealing 
my machinery. The intelligence displayed in obtain- 
ing names, dates, and other circumstances, is previously 

170 FBAKOE, ITALY, AVD 

commnnicated to me either bj ray own inquiry, from 
Bcrvants or by visiting the tombstones of the relatives, 
or even by a body of secret police who are in my pay. 
' Others know tliat I am clairvoyant, and that I read the 
thoiiglits of those present. I am an accomplished jug- 
gler according to others, and liave always refused to 
be seen by any others of the craft, although the fact is 
quite the contrary, and the greatest juggler of France 
hue Htated that he could not at all account for what he 
witnessed by any of tlie principles of his art. 

However flattering tliis might be to my vanity, in 
conferring upon nie such astounding qualities and sci- 
entific acquireinenlH which I do not pojisess, it has 
been to me a source chiefly of amusement and wonder, 
to see how learned persons could so widely and ab- 
surdly disagree among themselves, and strain at guatr«, 
though swallowing camels with such surprising greed- 
iness. I have wandered from my narrative to give my 
readers these attempted explanations of mediumship, 
hopitig, however, that they will never try any of the 
experiments suggested by the learned in the presence 
of persons of average understanding. The excellent 
erttablishment at Earls wood, at the head of which is the 
good Dr. Conolly, would be more likely to furnish the 
sort of audience suited to these explanations of the 
men of science. 

My good friends, the Count and Countess de B ^ 

lott Biarritz with me on a visit to the chdteau of a mu- 
tual friend, near Bordeaux ; and here there were sev- 
eral instances of direct spirit- writing on paper placed 
before us on the table in full view. Whilst we were 
sitting one evening, hands appeared distinctly above 

FRANCE, ITALY, AND BUSSIA. 171 

the table, and we saw them successively take np a pen- 
cil and write. One of these hands was a small one, 
apparently of a child, another appeared to be that of 
a full grown man. The hand of the child wrote a lit- 
.Ue message to her mother who was present, and signed 
it with her christian name. There was a striking pe- 
culiarity in this, as the child had always left out the 
last letter of her name, which then, instead of being a 
female name, became a male one. Her name wa» 
Denise, but she wrote it " Denis." Her mother had 
often spoken to her of this, and yet the child had n^t 
corrected herself of the habit during her life, and now 
to prove her identity, the final letter was again left 
out. This was of coui*se unknown to me, and to all 
except her father and mother, both of wliom were there. 
The larger hand wrote several communications in our 
presence, some for his wife, who was at the table, and 
others to persons who were not there present. This 
handwriting was in his peculiar autograph. 

The lady of the house turned to me and said abrupt- 
ly, "Why yon are sitting in the air ;" and on looking we 
found that the chair remained in its place, but that I 
was elevated two or three inches above it; and my feet 
not touching the floor. This may show how utterly 
unconscious I am at times to the sensation of levita- 
tion. As is usual when I have not got above the level 
of the heads of those about me, and when they change 
their positions much, which they frequently do in 
looking wistfully at such a phenomenon, I came down 
again, but not till I had remained so raised about half 
a minute from the time of its being first seen. I was 
DOW impressed to leave the table and was soon carried 

173 FBAHCB, ITALT, AKD BCKIA. 

to tho lolty ceiling. The Connt de B left his 

place at the table, and coining nnder where I was, said, 
** Now, yonng Home, come and let me touch your 
feet.'* I told him I had no volition in the matter, bat 
perhaps the spirits would kindly allow me to come 
down to him. They did so, by floating me down to 
him, and my feet were soon in his outstretched hands. 
He seized my boots, and now I was again elevated, he 
holding tightly, and pulling at my feet till the boots I 
wore, which had elastic sides, came off, and remained 
in his hands. The Coimt has all his life been well 
known, holding an important public position, and as 
truthful as his heart is good. To him and his dear 
wife, who has recently passed from earth, I owe a deep 
debt of gratitude, they having been my firm and faBt 
friends ever since I made their acquaintance, six years 
ago. This was, I believe, the first time of my being 
raised in the air in France, and it has been of very 
seldom occurrence there, though it happened so fi^ 
quently afterwards in England, as will be seen in fu- 
ture pages. Since I wrote the naiTative of this stance, 
I have applied to the Count for his verification of it, 
and 1 have Lis letter stating its correctness. 

Another incident occurred in the presence of the 
Count de B . The Countess X was pres- 
ent for the first time at a seance, when a spirit mani- 
fested himself, purporting to be that of her son. The 
accordeon was being played, and she asked if he could 
remember a piece of music which had particularly 
struck them both whilst they were travelling together 
for his health in Germany. It had escaped her mind, 
she said, but it could be easily recalled to her if he 

FRANCE, ITALY, AND BUSBIA. YlH 

"wonld play it. Upon this the accordeon played some 
intricate passages from the opera of Norma, which she 
at once recognized. 

I now returned to Paris, and went to reside with my 

friend the Count de K , and whilst there I had 

sittings almost every day. I also went on a visit to 

the Chateau de E , to the family of the Marquis 

de . The second evening of my stay, as we 

were about to take tea, a table standing at the further 
end of the large saloon where we were, came up to us 
with extreme violence. We were all rather startled, 
as we were not expecting any manifestations, and for 
the next two hours they were unceasing. The elder 

son of the family, the Count L , came to my 

room when I had wished the family good night, and 
these proofs of a spirit presence were again made 
most evident Amongst others there were the sound 
of heavy footsteps which shook the room. I also saw 
the distinct form of a boy, and described his appear- 
ance to L , adding that I could recognize him 

if I could see his portrait. On meeting the family at 
breakfast the following morning the Marquis said — 

"What time did L leave you last night, and 

what were you both doing jumping about the room?" 
We told nim that we had both of us our slippers on, 
and that he must have heard the noises made by the 
spirits. The chateau, being one of the very oldest in 
France, has the walls in some places nearly twenty 
feet thick — indeed dressing-rooms have been made in 
them, and they are quite spacious. There is a solidity 
to every floor. In order, therefore, to have been heard 
in the room beneath, the manifestations must have 

174 mBANCB, ITALY, AND BUBnA. 

been of very great force. After breakfast the Mar- 
chioness asked me if I would not like to go over ti^e 
chateau, and on my assentiug, she said we will begin 
with my boudoir. We went there, and on reaching 
the centre of the room I looked round, and there I 
saw the very face I had seen the night previous. For 
a moment I conld not bring myself to believe it to be 
other than the spirit himself, but it was only a por- 
trait. My emotion was such that I caught hold of 

L , who stood near me, and said, ^* There, that 

is the boy I saw last night." I was so overcome that 
I had to leave the room, and they then told me that 
L having related what had occurred to his mo- 
ther, they had arranged to put me to the test, and not 
having even told me of the existence of the portrait, 
they wished to see if I could recognize it. 

In an hotel situate on the Boulevard des Italiens in 
Paris, I was introduced to a family, consisting of Mr. 

H , his wife, and their two sons, both of whom 

were at that time in the English army, and had just 
returned from the Crimean campaign. The father, a 
cool-headed, truthful minded man, was a countryman 
of mine, and our conversation soon turned upon the 
wonders of second sight and ghost-seeing. Presently, 
whilst we were talking together, we were istartled at 
hearing loud sounds comino: from a distant part of the 
room, and slowly approaching us. I at once suggested 
to them that some spirit desired to communicate with 
us. 'The unseen one assented to this by making the 
sounds for the alphabet, and the name of " Gregoire'* 
was spelt out, with the additional information that he 
had passed from earth, giving the time of his depart- 

FRANCE, ITALY, ATSTD BU88IA* 175 

ure. This the two young officers at once and strongly 
contradicted, for they recognized in the name a very 
intiniate friend, an officer in the Frencli army in the 
Crimea, whom they had only just left there suffering 
under a slight wound, but so slight that it gave no ap- 
prehensions of an unfavorable kind. He, however, now 
gave tliem other proofs of his identity, and during the 
whole of the remaining hours of the afternoon and 
evening he continued to make his presence manifest. 
Several times things were brought from parts of the 
room distant from us, and there were frequent raps, 
and his friends felt touches. Sounds resembling the 
firin«x of musketry were heard, and indeed so indispu- 
table were some of the signs given, that no one could 
fail to have been convinced of spirit power and pres- 
ence, though having seen him so lately, and having 
since heard nothing to make them think his death 
probable, they could hardly realize the likelihood of it. 
I left the family late in the evening, bidding them 
good-bye, as they were to leave for England the fol- 
lowing day. From a member of the family who re- 
sides in Paris, I ascertained shortly afterwards that 
they had written to ascertain the truth as to what had 
been communicated to them by the spirit calling him- 
self Gregoire, and that in every detail, *tliey were in- 
formed, the spirit had been correct. I ought here to 
state, however, that the eldest son, previous to this 
corroborative testimony reaching his family, had been 
sent with his regiment to Canada, and he was sitting 
in his tent when a letter reached him from his father, 
relating the results of tiieir inquiries from the Crimea. 
While lie was reading his father's letter, informing 

170 fSAVCB, ITALY, AND BU88IA. 

him the details of his friend Gregoire's departnre from* 
earth, he was startled by hearing a niBtling sound 
amongst some loose papers and pens, which were care- 
lessly strewn on his table. Fearing lest his imagina- 
tion might be taking advantage of his reason, he called 
for his servant to come in and look at the table— and, 
to their mntnal astonishment, they saw a pen move it- 
self into an erect position, and deliberately write the 
name of Gregoire on some blank paper. This fact was 
told me by the father of the young man, and I see no 
reason to disbelieve it. What object conld tera]»t the 
young man to tell so deliberate and wilfnl an untruth, 
if it were one, on such a subject ? Other strange oc- 
currences continued with other members of this family 
after their return to England, for many months, and 
then left them in as sudden and unexpected a manner 
as they had made their appearance. 

In January, 1858, I went to Holland, accompanied 

by Mr. T , and was presented to the Queen. The 

manifestations at the Hague were in some instances 
very strong, and again sometimes I had stances at 
wliicli nothing would occur, and this although in the 
presence of ]»ersons who were most desirous of wit- 
nessing them. ^ 

I went to Amsterdam for tlie pui-pose of meeting tlie 
proprietors and writers for a magazine of infidel ten- 
dencies. I well remember it. We were staying at 
a large old-fashioned hotel ; the cheerless cold of the 
rooms with their bleak walls and their beam-bare ceil- 
ings, as I sat before tlie fire, which was but the ghost 
of such as we are accustomed to in England, when 
these eight or ten gentlemen were announced. Kone 

FRANCE, ITALY, AND EUfiSIA. 177 

of them were known to me or to my friend, and I de- 
sired tliem at once to sit down, and see if any manifes- 
tations would occur. They appeared clever, shrewd 
persons, deeply read and thinking men. Cold reason 
had wrapped her chill mantle about their minds, and 
all that was not tangible could have no truth in ii for 
them. The first tremulous sensation in the table and 
floor, which often precedes other manifestations, was 
felt. They delegated two of their number to sit under 
the table to watch me and my movements. Faint 
rappings were heard, and the table legs were examin- 
ed to see that I had no springs concealed there. — 
These manifestations increased in force, and they, aft- 
er the most close and strict scrutiny, were obliged tx) 
acknowledge that they had witnessed that which they 
could in no wise account for. The alphabet was called 
for, and intelligent communications were -received. — 
This was a step in advance of their philosophy, and to 
them most singular, and soon the manifestations ceased 
— ^butnot until they had each expressed their convic- 
tion that there was no imposture. I have since been 
iBtbrmed, by letters from Amsterdam, that one of 
tliem became a medium, and that their general disbe- 
lief in spiritual causation was greatly inodified. I re- 
member as my friend and I sat together after the par- 
ty had left, we expressed a wish that they had seen 
more, and we spoke of ourselves as being sorry pro- 
phets for such a mission. This idea pursued me alter 
I had gone to bed, and the spirit of my mother came 
and comforted me by saying that sufficient had been 
given, and that '' the wind must be tempered to the 
thorn lamb.'' 

8» 

178 yBANCB, ITALY, AND VOmUL. 

We retnrned ut the Hague, and a deputation of 
joiing gentlemen from the University of Leyden call- 
ed to ask me to visit Leyden. My engagements, how- 
ever, were such as to necessitate my departure, and we 
lejft the followintr day for Brussels. There the power 
left me, and I was told by the spirits that it would be 
some tiuje before it would return, and tliat many things 
of tiie utmost importance to me would occur in the 
meantime. I had taken a severe cold while in Hol- 
land, but had intended to have remained some time in 
Brussels to have stances with my young friends there, 
and when I found that my power had gone, I consid- 
ered it better to return to Paris to consult my medical 
adviser there. I accordingly went there, and he pro- 
nounced my disease to be impoverishment of the blood 
and great nervous depression, and advised mv going 
to Italy. I strongly objected to this, inasmuch as eve- 
ry time I leave Paris eome silly stories are put in cir- 
culation, such as my bemg ordered away by the Em- 
peror, or that I go to fly from the law. I remained, 
therefore, growing daily worse for two or three weeks, 
when 1 left, intending to stay at Turin with my friends 
there. On reaching Turin in February, 1 found the 
snow covering the ground to a considerable depth, and 
the cold more intense than it had been in Paris, and 
so I left the same evening for Pisa, to join some friends 
there. I found Pisa very cold, and was advised to 
proceed to Rome. 

I reached Rome in March, and refused nearly all 
invitations out, wishing to be quiet to regain my 
health. A friend mentioned one afternoon, whilst we 
were walking together tatlie Pynchon, the name of a 

FBJLNOB, ITALY, AND BU8SIA. 179 

Russian family of distinction then in Rome, and added 
that they were anxious to make my acquaintance. I 
excused myself on the ground of my health. At this 
moment a carriage was passing us and stopped — and 
my friend, before I was aware of what he was doing, 
introduced me to the Countess de Koucheleff, who 
asked me to come and sup with them that evening, 
adding that they kept very late hours. 

I went about ten in the evening, and found a large 
partj assembled. At twelve as we entered the supper- 
room she introduced to me a young lady, whom I then 
observed for the first time, as her sister. A strange 
impression came over me at once, and I knew she was to 
be my wife. When we were seated at table the young 
lady turned to me and laughingly said, " Mr. Home, 
yon will be married 'before the year is ended." I ask- 
ed why she said so, and she replied, that there was 
such a superstition in Kussia when a person was at 
table between two sisters. 1 made no reply. It was 
true. In twelve days we were partially engaged, and 
waiting only the consent of her mother. The evening 
of the day of our engagement a small party had as- 
sembled, and were dancing. I was seated on a sofa by 
V[ij fiancee^ when she tm*ned to me and abruptly said, 
*' Do tell me all about spirit-rapping, for you know I 
don't believe in it." I said to her, " Mademoiselle, I 
trust you will ever bear in mind that I have a mission 
entrusted to me. It is a great and a holy one. I can- 
not speak with yoii about a thing which you have not 
Been, and therefore cannot underetand. I can only say 
that it is a great truth." The tears came welling into 
lier eyes, and laying her hand in mine she said, " If 

180 FRANOK, ITAIT, AND SU88IA. 

^onr missi'Hj can bring comfort to those less happy than 
oureelve?, or be in any way a consolation to mankind, 
you will ever find me ready and willing to do all I can 
to aid you in it." She was true to this noble senti- 
ment to the last moment of her short life, and she is 
still my great comfort and snstainer since we have se- 
parated in this earthly sphere. She was my own true, 
loving wife for, oh I too short a period for my happi- 
ness here, but for hers I was content to lose her for a 
time, till it shall please God that I too pass away to 
join her I 

Shortly after our engagement the family went to 
Naples, and I with them, and we remained there six 
weeks. Then the family left for Florence, and my 
fjancee was entrusted to the care of a Kussian family 
about to return by Paris to Russid, that she might join 
her mother, and get ready the necessary papers, that 
the marriage might take place as soon as the fixmily 
returned to St. Petersburgh. I accompanied them to 
Paris, and after they had left I went to Scotland for 
my certificate of birth, the parish clerk having sent 
me one with my name written Hume instead of Home. 
Knowing this to be incorrect I was obliged to make a 
journey to have it rectified, and then I returned to Pa- 
ris, and joined the family who had arrived there from 
Italy. 

We left for St. Petersburgh in June, accompanied 
by M. Alexandre Dumas, who was to ofiiciate as god- 
father at my marriage. An amusing account of our 
journey may be read in Dumas' book entitled " De 
Paris a Astrachan." On reaching St. Petersburgh I 
was honored by a most kind invitation to be received 

FBANOE, ITALY, AND EUSSIA. 181 

by the Emperor, but which I was obliged to decline 
not being in power at the time, and his Majesty most 
graciously sent to me to say that nnder any circum- 
stances he would be pleased to see me. I excused my- 
self on the ground of having so much to attend to pre- 
vious to my marriage. A month after this, certain 
difficulties having arisen, and the pai)er8 which were 
necessary not being forthcoming, the marriage seemed 
on the point of being postponed. I had no manifesta- 
tiona for several months, but on this evening I was 
told by the spirit of my mother to inform the Emperor 
the next day that my power had returned. I did so, 
and was received by his Majesty at the Palace of Pe- 
terhoff, where I spent a week, and all the obstacles in 
the way of my marriage were removed by his most 
gracious Majesty, who upon this, as upon every occa- 
sion, has shown to me the greatest kindness. I have 
the highest veneration for liim, not only as a monarch, 
but as a man of the most kind and generous feelings. 
We were married on Sunday the 1st of August, 
1858, or according to the old style, on the 20th of 
July, first in the private cliapel at the country house 
of my brother-in-law, according to the rites of the 
Greek Church, and afterwards at the Church of St. 
Catherine, according to thorites of the Romish churcii. 
A short time after our marriage, my wife being in a 
sound quiet sleep, I saw the spirit of my mother come 
into the room, followed by one, who though I had ne- 
ver known him on earth, I knew to be my wife's fa- 
ther. My impression was one of i-elief that my wife 
was asleep, and thus that she would not see what I 
feared would frighten her. My surprise was tlierefore 

183 TRAXOEj ITALT, AVD SUBBIA. 

very great on hearing her say, " Daniel, there is some 
one in the room with ns. It is your mother, and near 
her stands my father. She is very beantifnl, and I am 
not afraid." Her actions, however, betrayed a certain 
shrinking, for she turned to the side of the bed where 
I lay, trembling violently. The spirits now disappear- 
ed, but lond rappings were heard in and about the 
room, and our questions were answered. This was my 
wife's first introduction to anything of the kind. 

CHAieTER Vin. 

RUSSIA, PABI8 AND ENGLAND. 

In two weeks after our marriage, we left to visit 
some of my brother-in-law's estates, some of which 
were situate on the Criinean coast, and others in the 
interior of Russia. The journey lasted about six weeks, 
and we then returned to a country house of his in the 
neighborhood of Moscow. At the end of November, 
1858, we were at St. Petersburgh, in the house of my 
brother-in-law, the Count Gregoire Koucheleff Besbo- 
rodko, from whom and the Countess I have ever met 
with the readiest sympathy and brotherly welcome, 
and to whom I owe, and ever shall owe, a debt of the 
deepest gratitude. Here from time to time my power 
returned, but generally only faintly. Still a great deal 
of good was done. As an instance, I may mention 
that a young officer, who having been convinced of 
the truths of immortality by what he saw in my pres- 
ence, gave a supper to his friends, at which he publicly 
announced that in place of laughing at religion as he 
had done, he had seen in these phenomena what con- 
vinced him of the reality of a future life, and that 
thenceforward he should lead a different life. 

8t; 

1«S4 BUSSIA, PARTS, AND VNOLAHD. 

In tlio niiddlo of January, 1S59, I fell ill with severe 
internal inflammation. Tiiis lasted some time, and was 
increasing to an alarming extent, and beyond the power 
of the physician who attended me, and the dangerous 
symptoms were greatly increased by my usual nervous 
debility. Friction was recommended, but the extreme 
pain which it caused precluded its use. I was in this 
state when one evening my wife and a friend, the 
aron de M-/ — , were preseflt, and my hands were 
^ Suddenly seized by spirit influence, and I was made to 
beat them with extreme violence upon the part which 
was so extremely sensitive and tender. My wife was 
frightened, and would have endeavored to hold my 
hands, but my friend who had had sufficient kmowl- 
edge of ppirit manifestations prevented her. I felt no 
pain, though the violence of the blows which I con- 
tinued giving to myself made the bed and the whole 
room shake. In Ave minutes' time the swelling had 
visibly decreased, and the movements of the hand be- 
gan to be more gentle. In an hour I was in a quiet 
sleep, and on awaking the next morning I found the 
disease had left me, and only a weakness remained. 
The expression of the doctor's face baffles my descrip- 
tion when he visited me early that morning, expect- 
ing to have found me worse, and felt my pulse and 
saw that a great change must have occurred beyond 
liis skill to account for. 

On the 26th April, old style, or 8th May, according 
t.) our style, at seven in the evening, and as the snow 
was fast falling, our little boy was born at the town 
house, situate on the Gagarines Quay, in St. Peters- 
burgh, where we were still staying. A few hours af- 

BI7B8IA, PABIS, AND ENOLAITD. 185 

ter his birth, his motber, the nurse and 1 heard for 
several hours the warbling of a bird as if singing over 
him. Also that night, and for two or three nights after- 
wards, a bright star like light, which was clearly visi- 
ble from the partial darkness of the room, in which 
there was only a night lamp burning, appeared several 
times directly over its head, where it remained for 
some moments, and then slowly moved in the direction 
of the door, where it disappeared. Tnis was also seen 
by each of us at the same time. The light was more 
condensed than those which have been so often seen in 
my presence upon previous and subsequent occasions. 
It was brighter and more distinctly globular. I do not 
believe that it came through my mediumship, but 
rather through that of the chiM, who has manifested 
on several occasions the presence of the gift. I do not 
like to allude to such a matter, but as there are more 
strange things in Heaven and earth than are dreamt 
of, even in my philosophy, I do not feel myself at lib- 
erty to omit stating, that during the latter part of my 
wife's pregnancy, we thought it better that she should 
not join in stances, because it was found that when- 
ever the rappings occurred in the room, a simultaneous 
movement of the child was distinctly felt, perfectly in 
unison with the sounds. When there were three 
sounds, three movements were felt, and so on, and 
when five sounds were heard, which is generally the 
call for the alphabet, she felt the five internal move- 
ments, and she would frequently, when we were mis- 
taken in the letter, correct us from what the child in 
dicated. 

Our child was christened a fortnight after his birth, 

186 RimiA, PARIS, AKD ENOUOnX 

his godfather being the Marquis de Gh&teaurejnard, 
at present Minister of France at Hesse Cassel, and his 
frodmother his aunt, the Countess^ Lnba. His second 
godfather was his uncle, the Count Gregoire, and his 
second godmother was his relative Sophie. 

A week after the christening, we went to the resi- 
dence of the Count in the immediate environs of St. 
Pctersburgh. Whilst here, there were many striking 
manifestations which were witnessed by many, who in- 
vestigated as others had done before, and with the 
same ref?ult8. One evening I remember, one of my 
friends was converted from his previous unbelief by 
seeing a female hand, which was visible to all of us in 
the room, slowly forming in the air a few inches above 
the table, until it assumed all the apparent materiality 
of a real hand. The hand took up a pencil which was 
on the table, and wrote with it a communication which 
deeply affected my friend, who recognised it as being 
from his mother. The general belief is, that the spirit 
hands always appear from beneath the table, and al- 
ready formed, but this is incorrect, for on many occa- 
sions in the presence of several persons at a time, they 
are seen to be formed in full sight of all, in the man- 
ner I have just described, and to melt away, as it were, 
in the same way. Often, too, they have been seen to 
form themselves high above our heads, and from 
thence to descend upon the table, and then disappear. 

The anniversary of our wedding-day found us on the 
steamer 'Baltic,' bound for Dnnkerque, from whence 
we went to Ostend on a visit to my mother-in-law, who 
was there for her health. On seeing her, at the mo- 
ment of our embracing one another, I had another of* 

BUBSIA, PARIS, AND ENGLAND. . 187 

those singular impressions which s(5 often come to me 
at the moment of external contact. It lias seemed to 
me as if they were caused by the disturbing element 
of a physical substance which causes some secret chord 
of the soul to vibrate and awaken what I may call a 
memory of the Future, or that a flower of the spring- 
time has been shadowed forth among the chill blasts 
of autumn, as a token of the never ceasing care of 
God, our loving father, for His children whether in the 
Past, Present, or Future, all being alike known to 
Hiin. My sensations are so peculiar at the time when 
such foreshadowings are granted me, that words can 
but feebly express them. I distinctly saw at the first 
moment of touching my mother-in-law, that after I 
should leave Ostend, we should meet no more on 
earth. This impressional prediction did, as has ever 
been the case with those which have come to me in 
this way, prove correct. 

We arrived in Paris in August 1859, and whilst 
there, I paid a short visit to a friend then in Switzer- 
land, and there we had one or two sittings. On return- 
ing to Paris, a friend had kindly offered us the Chateau 
de C — , where we remained about two months, at the 
expiration of which time we came to England. This 
was in October. My power had left me for some 
weeks. One evening in November while I was absent, 
my wife being in the room with the child and his 
nui-se, loud raps were heard upon the ceiling. They 
both supposed that the sound proceeded from some one 
walking overhead, when they changed their position, 
and were heard upon the wall of the room, and in 
^a few moments they came on the table. My wife asked 

188 BUSaiA, PARIS, AMD ENOLAHD. 

who was the mediam upon the occasion, and the reply 
was given that it was the sleeping child. It was fur 
ther said, tiiat they had power to manifest through 
him, but that they would not, ^^as the atmosphere 
liihich they made use of was necessary for his physical'^ 
development in the natural world." From this time 
we have but once had any external evidence of any 
spirit presence through him, though he has given us 
many indications of his being a seer. 

In the latter part of November we were in England, 
and the power returned, and 1 began to hold stances 
as usual, and continned to do so until the 24th of Jnly 
in the following year. During this time, the manifes- 
tations were seen and investigated by persons of all 
ranks and classes, from statesmen down to those in 
humble life, and to them again I would rather refer 
for the accounts of what they witnessed, than to give 
my own descriptions. I select, therefore, portions 
of their writings, a few of which have already been 
published in " The Spiritual Magazine " and other 
Journals, and the others now appear for the first time. 
These will give the reader an idea of the nature and 
extent of my raediumship during this period. 

The subjoined is a portion of a letter from Mr. Pears, 
who was accompanied by my friends Mr. and Mrs. 
Cox. lie now saw the manifestations for the first 
time. ''Almost immediately the table tilted towards 
Mr. Home, who, raising his hands from the table, 
which still retained its inclined position, invited me to 
look under it. to see that no material means were used 
to produce this result. I did look, and saw none. On 
resuming my seat, the table returned to its position^ 

BUSSIA, PASI8, AND ENGLAND. 189 

and then it passed into an undulatory movement, as 
if it were in motion on waves ; it seemed, indeed, al- 
most as if the top of the table were flexible : then 
from this movement it passed into a directly horizontal 
state, so that a vessel filled to the brim, would not, I 
think, have spilled a drop, and it rose from eighteen to 
twenty-four inches clear from the floor, all hands at 
the same time continuing on the top of the table ; and 
finally with perfect evemiess it gradually descending 
to its place. 

" Kaps were then heard on the table, in the vicinity 
of Mrs. Cox, which, by reference to the alphabet, pur- 
ported to be produced by a deceased child of hers. 
Then faint deliberate raps came near to Mrs. P., pur- 
porting — by the same mode — to come from Phoebe, 
our deceased little daughter to whom I referred before. - 

"Raps were then heard under my own hands, and 
at the same time the depending cloth covering the 
table seemed to be moved up by something under it, 
and was made thus to strike against my wrist. I call- 
ed my wife's attention to this, and she confirmed the 
fact that it really did seem as if some one's hand was 
under the cloth trying to touch my wrist. I said, half 
laughing, which you might expect from my scepticism, 
that I should not wonder if there were not some one 
for me also. Imipediately there were raps under the 
Banie hand, strong enough to shake the table. 

"Perhaps 1 looked dubiously at a phenomenon so 
unexpected, for Mr. Home said, ' I should like Mr. 
Pears to be convinced that we do not make these 
sounds ; perhaps he would get under the table and 

190 BUBfilA, PARIS, AND ENGLAND. 

observe.' I did so ; and while I saw that they were 
DOt produced by any visible agency beneath, they were 
sounding us vigorously as ever ; Mi*8. P. being witness 
to their not being produced by the hands, or any other 
visible means above board. 

"When I found that the raps under my hand pur- 
ported to come from my grandfather's ' spirits,' I asked 
if he could take the large bell from me if I held it It had 
already been taken out of Mr. Home's hand and ruiig 
under the table. The response to my question was 
given by strong knocks. I held it under the table, 
being careful to iiold it in the direction of my wife, 
whose hands were on the table, and I felt it tugged 
with strength out of my hand; it was rung, and then 
deposited on the floor. 

" Many little things which struck me at the time, 
occurred during our stance, which lasted between two 
and three hours. But there was one part of the seance 
which f'»rcibly struck me, and which 1 must relate. 
Mr. llome, soon after 1 had assumed the presence of 
my grandfather's spirit, [ assed into a singular state — 
half unconscious as it were — and said, 'Here's a tall, 
old, upright, Quaker like man, yet not a Quaker ;' then 
he seemed to take on the manner and gesture, as close- 
ly as a young man can, of those of an old one — held 
out his hand to me, and grasped it in a way that fur- 
tiier reminded me of my grandfather, and addressed 
me in words somewhat characteristic of him, and went 
on to speak of one whom he had held very dear, but 
from whom he had been long separated to his^ great 
grief, but that they had happily met in the other world 
and were reconciled. All upon this point was said in a 

JEKU88IA, PASIS, AND ENGLAim. 191 

broken way, but with gestures and allusions which were 
intelligible solely to myself, as the person and events 
so alluded to touched closely upon my grandfather's 
history in conjunction with my own. My astonishment 
was increased when, from Mr. H.'s lips, fell the name 
of her to whom the allusion had been made — my grand- 
father's daughter! both dead when Mr. Home must 
have been a boy in America ! Long as I have known 
you, friend Dixon, I think I never told you tliat my 
grandfather was of a Quaker family, which was the 
case. 

*'l was by this, incident astonished beyond expres- 
sion, and acknowledged to Mr. Cox that the history 
which had been sketched, and the reflections upon it, 
were just what I should have expected might have 
been made by my grandfather. 

"I have notyettound a place in my system for these 
phenomena, but that they are genuine phenomena is 
settled in my mind." 

Another account is given by Mr. J. G. Crawford, a 
gentleman who had for years resisted all belief in such 
phenomena as being impossible and absurd. It hap- 
pened that a friend of his from Liverpool was coming 
to meet me at the house of Mr. Coleman, in ^ayswa- 
ter, and he induced him to accompany him. He shall 
tell the Btory in his own frank and truthful words : 

" Mr. Home laid his left hand on the table and with 
his right lifted an accordeon, which he held under the 
table. My friend and I were asked to look below, wlicu 

192 BUSBIA, PASIB, AHD XNOLAHD. 

we distinctly Baw it move np and down^ apparently 
held aud touched by one hand only. 

'' We continned to sit roand the table. The room 
was made so dark that we coald not see eaph other. 
The table gave a violent stamp upon the floor ; still we 
kept our hacds upon it. Then it rose in a mass twelve 
or fifteen inches quite off the floor, so far as I could 
judge. 

^^ Mr. Home now said that he held the accordeon 
under the table by one hand only, when it played ooi 
beautiful English tune, ^ Home, sweet Home 1' in a most 
finished style. 

" Shortly after this occurred, a very carious affair 
took place, in explanation of which I cannot hazard a 
conjecture. Mr. Home remarked, ^ 1 feel as if I am 
going to rise.' The room was quite dark. He said, 
' I am getting up,' and as I was only a few feet from 
him, I put out my hand to him; I indubitably felt the 
boles of both his boots, some three feet above the level 
of the floor. On my doing so, he said, ' Don't touch 
me, or I shall come down;' of course I instantly de- 
sisted, but down he came. In less than five minutes 
after this, he remarked, ' I am again ascending,' and 
from the sound of his voice, we could not but infer that 
he was actually rising towards the ceiling of the ante- 
room. 

" He then appeared to float under the archway, then 
to rise to the cornice of the room we were sitting in, 
and we heard him quite distinctly make three cross 
marks on the ceiling, besides doing some other writing. 
Then he came suftly down, and lay stretched out with 
his back upon the table, in which position we found 

BTTPRIA, PABIS, AND BN6LAND. 193 

him when the gas was lighted, and when we distmctlr 
saw the marks on the ceiling, which we had heard him 
make 

" I am well aware there is a ready answer by many 
well-disposed persons to what I have written — that it 
is all done by collusion and trick. In many countries 
at the present time, and in our own not a century back, 
all phenomena of a then ^aj^ra-ordinary kind, were 
quickly put down to the account of the devil. He 
prompted Galileo to the adopted system of astronomy ; 
Harvey to the circulation of the blood; he was the 
cause of witchcraft in Scotland, and had much to di. 
with the wonders of chemistry, before it attained its 
present scientific certainty and value to the arts and 
agriculture. But the testimony of thousands of excel- 
lent witnesses cannot be set aside by any such plea. 
Not many years ago it was fashionable to deny the 
facts and uses of chloroform, homoeopathy, hydropathy, 
magnetism, mesmerism, &c. ; now the 6urative powers 
of these agents are commonly received amongst us as 
^household words.' There appears to be a law of pro- 
gressive development in the universe. Should the sup- 
posed facts of Spiritualism be found to be real, after 
oft-repeated experiments, we cannot doubt but they 
also will have a permanent place with recent discov- 
eries. Ko one, now-a-days, who thinks at all, can be 
so bol4 and unwise as to deny that ' there are more 
things in heaven and earth than are dreamt of in oui 
philosophy.' 

" In the simple statement I have given of what my 
friend and I were satisfied occurred on the evening of 
oar vigit to Villas, I have avoided coloring the 

194 BuaeiA, pabis, A2sn> englabd. 

events, and for the sake of greater definitenesSy have 
given iignres of sizes, which, however, must be taken 
merely as a near approximation to the actual measure- 
ments. 

"J. G. Cbawfokd." 

Mr. Crawford mentions the circumstance of mj im- 
mediately coming to the ground again on his touching 
my feet. I have observed that this is invariably the 
case when I am touched, or even anxiously gazed at, 
until I h.'ive risen above the heads of those who are in 
the room ; but after 1 have attained that height, their 
looking at me, or touching me, has no eifect upon me. 
What the cause may be I cannot explain, but it may 
perhaps be some break in the magnetism which is 
caused in the former case, and which does not occm* 
in the latter. 

On the 3d of April, 18G0, I had been with some 
friends to a lecture given in St. John's Wood, by M. 
Louis Blanc, " On the Mysterious Persons and Agen- 
cies in France towards the end of the eighteenth cen- 
tury." His lecture was a good deal occupied with 
Cagliostro, and during tlie time he was speaking, 1 had 
the strongest impression of the presence of Cagliosiro, 
and the lady who was sitting next me, was also aware 
of some strong spirit presence by having her dress 
pulled, and by other manifestations. 

On returning home, I found that my wife had retir- 
ed earlier than usual in consequence of a severe head- 
ache. In tiie course of conversation together, she hav- 
ing asked how I had liked the lecture, I said, " I have 
been haunted all the evening by Cagliostro," on which 

XUS8IA, PASIS, AND ENGLAND. 195 

jhe exclaimed, " Pray do not use that word haunted, 
it sounds so weird-like, and quite frightens me." I 
had by this time extinguished the light, and was now 
. in bed, when to my amazement the room became as 
light as if the sun had for an instant shone fnily in at 
the window. Thinking that this effect might have 
been only on my spiritual perception, I said, " Sacha, 
did you see anything?" Her reply was, "No, nor 
could I, for luy face was quite buried in mj pillow, 
the pain is so intense."^ I asked her to observe, and I 
then mentally asked that if the light had been exter- 
nal, it might be reproduced. Almost simultaneously 
with the thought, came the light again, so distinct, and 
with such brilliancy, that no noon day w^as ever bright- 
er. My wife asked if this was the spirit of Cagliostro, 
and the affirmative reply was instantly given b}' three 
flashes of light, so vivid as almost to be blinding and 
painful to the sight. Answers were given to various 
qaeetions in the same wonderful manner, and then in 
Answer to a question asked, came a musical tinkle, as 
if a silver bell had been touched directly over our 
heads. In this way our farther answers were now 
^ven, and we then heard a footstep on the floor, fall- 
ing so gently as if it feared to disturb us by its ap- 
prgach* My wife asked that it should come nearer, 
and it approached us till we felt a form leaning over 
the bed. In doing this, it pressed upon the bed-clothes 
lust as, an actual material presence would have done. 
We asked him if he had been a n^edium when on 
earth, and a distinct voice, audible to both of us, said 
in answer, " My power was that of a mesmerist, bur 
jJl-QUSunderstood by those about me, my biographers 

196 BUS8TA, PARIB, AKD VX&LASD. 

have done me injastice^bnt I care not for the nntrnths 
of the earth." Both my wife and myself were by this 
time BO impressed by snch startling and almost terribly 
real evidence of the presence of one who was in no 
way related to ns, that for a few moments all power of 
ntterance seemed to have left ns. We were, however, 
soon recalled to ourselves by a hand being placed on 
onr heads, and she, seizing my hands in hers, held them 
np, saying, " Dear spirit, will you be one of my gaa^ 
dian angels — watch over me with my father, teach me 
what yoa would have me do, and make me thankful 
to God for all his mercies?" Onr hands were clasped 
by a hand, and her left hand was gently separated from 
mine, and a i-ing, which was the signet-ring of my fa- 
ther-in-law, was placed on her third finger. This ring 
was previously in the room, but at a distance of at 
least twelve feet from where the bed stood. " Good 
night, dear ones, and God bless you," was then audi- 
bly spoken, and simultaneously with the sound came 
three wafts of perfume, so delicious that we both ex- 
claimed, " How truly wonderful 1" 

Her headache was perfectly cured, and although our 
nerves had been greatly agitated, we slept soundly. 
The following day, and indeed for several days after- 
wards, my wife had occasional proofs of the presence 
of this spirit, and he remained with her up to the time 
of her passing from earth, and during the last months 
of our stay in England she frequently saw him. 

About the middle ot May, 1860, my mother-in-law 
wrote to us from St. Petersburgh, as follows : — 

" Dear children, — You may not be aware that to- 

BUSSIA, PABIS, AND ENGUUia). 197 

morrow I am to undergo a surgical operation. I have 
seen my confessor ; I have taken the sacrament, and 
I now feel quite happy. Do not be alarmed, but do as 
I do — trust in God." 

On the morning of Monday, the 29th May, my wife 
being then engaged at a bazaar held at the Crystal 
Palace, Sydenham, 1 proposed to visit with a friend 
the establishment of Messrs. Barclay and Perkins. 
We drove there, and had gone over nearly all the es- 
tablishment, when in tHe barrelling-room one of the 
workmen proposed our tasting the porter. My friend 
was tasting it, and the attendant brought me a pot. 
I put out my hand to take it, and as my fingers came 
in contact with the metal, a deep shudder convulsed 
my frame, and I suddenly knew that my dear mother- 
in-law, who had been for many years a patient suflEer- 
er, had been released from her earthly troubles. I re- 
fused the porter, and requested my friend to accom- 
pany me home. In an hoar's time I was calm, and I 
reasoned with myself how I could best conceal the 
painful intelligence from my wife That evening at a 
stance she asked how her mother was. The reply 
given was, " It is well with her now." All present 
but herself understood well to what this alluded, and 
a friend on my left did all she could to conceal her 
tears. 

On the Thursday afterwards I heard my wife run- 
ning up to my room. As she opened the door, and 
before she had time to speak, and indeed before I had 
seen her, I said, ^' Why, Sacha, I knew it last Mon- 
day." She came to my bedside, and gave me a letter 

198 BUB8IA, PARIS, AND SNOLAHD. 

ad(1reP8ol to me fn»m my sister-in-law, containing a 
telegraphic dispatch, announcing that my mother-in- 
law had passed from earth on the Monday, and this 
letter my wife had opened. Two nights after this, at 

a stance where the Count T and an atheist friend 

of his were present, her dear spirit came, and her hands 
were made visible, resting on her daughter's head, and 
afterwards on mine. She wrote in her own peculiar 
handwriting, " You will love her. always, won't yon!" 
and she signed it " Nathalie." He who came an athe- 
ist, was one no longer. 

I take the following account of some new manifest- 
ations from the ^^ Spiritual Magazine." It is called 
"Two Evenings with Mr. Home," and is introduced by 
the editor who says : 

" We have received from two correspondents, well 
known to ns, the following account of manifestations 
on the eveuinii: of the let and 9th of May last, each 
evening in the presence of nine persons whose names 
have been furnished to ns, and which we are permit- 
ted to supply privately to any inquirer who feels that 
the knowledge of the names is necessary for his belief. 
In the meantime ue can vouch publicly for the perfect 
confidence which the narrative inspires us with, hav- 
ing lieard the whole account from the lips of the nar- 
rators, previous to receiving the MS. from them. 

"May J St, 1860. 

"The party whs composed of Mr. and Mrs. Home 
and seven other ladies and gentlemen. We sat at the 
round table in tJje large drawing-room. Mr. Home's 

BUBSIA, PARIS, AND ENGLAND. 199 

hand was moved to write — ' The spirit of John is one 
who was kind ta your father during the voyage to 
America.' No one understood this ; but Mr. — ^ — en- 
tering tlie room a minute afterwarde, expressed his 
conviction that it was intended for him, as his father 
had been to America. Three loud raps gave assent to 
what he said. The table then moved away from us, 
and we inquired if they wished us to draw it to the 
window. It was answered * Yes.' "We accordingly 
did so, leaving a vacant space against the window, un- 
closing the shutters, and by their directions extinguish- 
ing the caudles. The fire burned brightly. It was 
spelled out, * There is a little too much light.' Mr. 

and screened the fire as much as possible, 

and the moon and gaslight from the street then alone 
lighted up the tabK*; but did so completely, as the 
moon was very brigiit. Tiie spirit of Albert then took 
the accordeon, and played a oeautiful air of unearthly 
harmony. Mr. Home and 1 held the accordeon toge- 
ther imder the table, for the power was veiy strong, 
and tlie music loud — and the instrument at times was 
nearly carried away from us. 

" After a short time there rose slowly in the space 
made by the window a most lovely hand of a female— 
we saw also part of the beautifiTl arm as it Tield it uj 
aloft for some time — we were all greatly amazed. — 
This hand was so transparent and luminous, and so un- 
ei\rthly and angelic, that our hearts were filled with 
gratitude towards the Creator for permitting so won- 
derful a manifestation. The hand was visible to us 
more from the internal light which seemed to stream 
as it were out of it, than from tlie external light of the 

'800 BUB8IA, PASIB, AND EMU1.AND. 

moon. As soon as it slowly vanished, Mdlle. ^ 

who sat next to the open space, saw anoUier hand form- 
ing itself close to her ; and a man's hand was raised 
and placed on the table, far more earthly and life-like 
in appearance, and one that I thought I recognized— 
(we were subsequently told that I was right in conjec- 
ture.) Then came a dear baby hand ; then tlie baby 

(Mrs. L 's adopted child) showed its head ; and 

linally, spirit-hands held up the little child, so that all 
nine of us saw her shoulders and waist. After tliis^ a 
hand and arm rose luminous and beautiful, covered 
with a white transparent drapery ; and this hand re- 
mained visible to us all for at least live minutes, and 
made us courteous and graceful gestures. 

^'Tiieu spirit-hands held up to us an exquisite 
wreath of white flowers. I never saw any wreath made 
by human hands so perfect in form and design ; and 
calling for the alphabet said, 'The spirit emblem of 
William's mother.' Then we were told they would 
show us ' The emblem of superstition ;' and a black, 
shrivelled hand arose. On some of ub remarking that 
we could not see it well, the curtains were at once 
moved aside, and the blind drawn away from the top 
of the window. It was beyond the reach of any of us, 
and the}'^ then showed-iis the hand again, so that we 
all could see it. The ' emblem of truth' was then 
shown. Tills was more beautiful than all the rest — a 
fairy-like founfain of apparently clear sparkling water, 
which threw up showers of silvery rays, vanishing 
from our eight like mist, and dwelling on the memo- 
ry as perfection. After this it was rapped out, ' "We 
can do no more.' 

BU8SIA, PABIB, AMD ENGLAND. 201 

" Mr. Home was put into a trance, and as he fell 
back in bis chair a gleam of the most vivid light fell 
upon me. This light fell over my shcnilders, and 
gleamed on my right hand, and came from a direction 
whence no earthly light could have come. It came 
from a part of the room where the spirit of one who 
was a friend of mine when on earth has often stood 
before, and from whence he has communicated to us. 
This light was seen by no one but myself; but as I 
turned round in hope of seeing the spirit, Mr. Home 
said to me, ' Yes, he is there ;' and added a communi- 
cation from him. He then told us that the first hand 
tliat we saw had been that of his own mother ; the se- 
cond was my father's, as I had silently expected ; and 
the hand and arm in drapery that remained so long, 
came for Prudence, and was the same that she had 
Been one night when alone, several years ago, at Paris, 
before she had ever heard of spirit manifestations. He 
also gave us the full name of the 'spirit John,' who 

had gone to America with Mr. A 's father ; and 

added some private information which Mr. A con- 
firmed as true. 

" The events of this evening having been so wonder- 
ful, I have begged my friends present on the occasion 
to read over this account, and to sign it as witnesses 
to the truth of what I have stated." 

'' May 9th, 1860. 
" Mingling with those interested in witnessing evi- 
dences of spirit power, I gladly accepted an invitation 
to meet a few friends on Monday the 9th of May, 1860, 
at a house at the West end. At a quarter after eight 

9* 

203 RUSSIA, PABI8, AND ENGLAND. 

o'clock, we went into tlio adjoining back drawing- 
ro^m, and sat down to a loo table. There were nine 
of us, Mr. Home being one of the number. Immedi- 
ately tlie table commenced vibrating and gently lifting 
itself off the floor. I say lifting itself^ because no hu- 
man beings in human clay were the actors. Nothing 
occurred for a few minutes, during which conversation 
was kept up, and then the table gradually rose up off 
the floor about four feet, or rather more than a foot 
beyond our outstretched arms, the hands of which had 
rested gently on the table before its ascent. It then 
descended. Mr. Home took the accordeon in his right 
hand, by the rim at the bottom of the instrument, 
leaving his left hand on the table, and then were 
played some beautiful voluntaries, exquisitely attenu- 
ated, yet clear and melodious. Tiiey then came out 
gradually fuller, and yet more full, till. the room seem- 
ed filled with the volume of sound like a pealing or- 
gan, and still no false note. A friend, sitting next to 
me, forgetting himself, exclaimed, 'My God, how 
wonderful !' and after a breath, asked ' if they would 
give us some air we knew?' and having asked for 
' God save the Queen,' it was played at once. 

"A lady present, whose little boy had recently 
diftd, had indications of her son being in the room ; 
and the accordeon suddenly commenced playing a 
well known air, which on earth the little boy was very 
fond of, as tallying with his mamma's name. Reader, 
was not there a truth of life and of love in the incident % 
The mother thought so, and her tears betrayed her 
thoughts. 

"The detonations on the table, and sometimes under 

RUSSIA, PABIB, AND SNOLAND. 303 

my hands, were a> sharp, and as clear, and as loud, as 
if strnck viocorously with the edge of a penny-piece. 

" It was then rapped out by the S'»und8 — * Go to the 
window.' Wf rose, and moved the loo table to about 
eighteen inches from the window. We sat down 
again, but more closely, so as to allow a vacant space 
at the side of the table, opposite the window. The 
sounds then gave out, ' Put out the lights,' which was 
done. We found that though the room was dark, yet 
tlie liojht from the window was sufficient for us to 
faintly see each other. The window-blind then com 
menced moving np and down — no one near it — evi- 
dently to tone the liglit; and while we were remarking 
the singularity of the phenomenon, and how high it 
went, all looking at it — suddenly it sprung up to the 
top, and then came gently down to its original position, 
. Mr. Home felt something on his head, and found it 
was a leaf. Suddenly the leaf of a geranium was 
taken and dropped into the lap of a lady sitting at the 
table. We heard the snap as if breaking off the stem 
of a flower, and immediately came down past the ear 
of uiy friend, and on his knee, a sprig of geranium ; 
while he held it up for us to see, I expressed a wish to 
have one, when a sprig came past my right ear on to 
my knee. I picked it up, and while showing it, an- 
other came past my face as if from the ceiling. The 
geranium plant was in the room several feet from any 
of us, and the sprigs came down both on the right and 
left of me. 

'' After a pause, Mr. Home said he felt as if he were 
about to be lifted up ; he moved from the table, and 
shortly he said, ' I am rising' — but we could not see 

304 SUBSIA, PARIS, ASD BNOLAHB. 

him — ' they have pnt me on my back.' I asked, will 
you kindly bring him, as much as possible, towards the 
window, so that we may see him ; and at once he was 
floated with liis feet horizontally into the light of the 
window, so that we all saw liis feet and a part of his 
legs resting or floating on the air like a feather, abont 
six feet from the ground, and three feet above the 
height of the table. He was then floated into the 
dark ; and he exclaimed : ' They have turned me 
round, and I am coming towards yon.' I saw his head 
and face, the same height as before, and as if floating 
on air instead of water. He then floated back, and 
came down and walked up to, and sat on the edge of 
the table we were at, when the table began to rise 
with him on it. Mr. Home was then taken behind to 
the settee next to me, and while there, we heard sounds 
several times as of some one giving utterance to a 
monosyllable in the middle of the room. Feeling a 
pressure against my chair, I looked, and saw that the 
ottoman had been brought along the floor about six 
feet, no one touching it, and close to Mr. Home. He 
said, ' I suppose it is for me to rest on,' — he lay down, 
and the ottoman went back to its original position — 
' Oh! I am getting excited, let some one come and sit 
with me.' I went, and sat beside him ; he took my 
hand ; and in about a minute, and without any muscu- 
lar action, he gently floated away from nie, and was 
lost in the darkness. He kept talking to let us know 
where he was. We heard his voice in various parts 
of the further end of the room, as if near the ceiling. 
He then cried out, ' Oh ! they have brought me a 
cushion to sit upon — I am sitting on it — tliey are tak- 

BU8SIA, PARIS, AND ENGLAND. 205 

ing it away.' Just then the tassel of the cushion of 
another ottoman in the room struck me on my "hair 
and forehead as if coming from the ceiling, and the 
cushion was deposited at my feet on the floor, falling 
as if a snow flake. I next saw the shadow of his body 
on the miiTor as he floated along near the ceiling. He 
said, ' I wish I had a pencil to make a mark on the 
ceiling. I have made a cross with my nail.' He came 
down near the door, and after a pause, he was again 
taken up ; but I did not see him, but heard his voice as 
if near the ceiling. Again he came down, and shortly 
returned to the table we were at ; and the sounds on 
the table bid us ' Good night.' " 

This is an account of " Another evening with Mr. 
Home." It it given us in the words of the lady at 
whose house the manifestations occurred. I have not, 
for good reasons, the liberty to give her name, but I 
can answer for her position and character, and for the 
truthfulness of the narrative. I have, in addition, the 
names of the nine persons who were present. 

" May the Srd^ 1860. — The table was moved away 
from the remaining seven of us, and we followed it ; 
suddenly it rose in the air, and without any help from 
us was placed on a large sofa that stood before the win- 
dow. The spirits told us to move this sofa away which 
we immediately did, and the table then moved of its 
own accord up to the window where the hands had ap- 
peared to us on former occasions. Tlie shutters were 
opened and the candles extinguished by tlieir desire, 
Mr. Home sat next to the window, and I sat next to 

306 BUB8IA, PARIS, AND rCNOLAHDu 

Ilim with Mrs. II. on m}' otlier side. After sitting a 
few minutes quietly I felt a form glide behind me: 
it touched my chair, placed two hands on my should- 
ers, and then drew the heavy silk curtain from a win- 
dow hehind me (we sat in a bow formed by three win- 
dows) and folded the drapery round me like a cloak. 
The hands and arms wliieh enfolded me felt as pal* 
pable as hum:in arms would feel. On one of the party 
guessing the name of the spirit, it was answered by 
three startling raps, which shook tiie table, and felt as 
if produced by a bar of iron — ^no human hand could 
have knocked with such force. As I was intently lis- 
tening to catch any sound, and straining my eyes to 
see any form that could make itself visible, my comb 
was taken out of my hair by a spirit hand, and laid on 
a table at a distance from me. By tiny gentle raps my 
darling spirit child told me that he had taken it. 
Then a hand rose under the window, and pulled down 
the blind. We distinctly saw the fingers clutch the 
string — this is a green transparent blind, through 
wliicli the light can fajl softly. The hand then made 
graceful gestures and pointed upwards, and when it 
disappeared, it was followed by another, and then by 
a child's hand. Suddenly I was touched on the shoul- 
der, as if by some one standing behind me and wish- 
ing to draw my attenHon. I thought it was my daugh^ 
ter, and turned to speak to her, but I found no one. 
I had hardly turned round, when my left shoulder was 
more strongly touched, and on turning my head a 
spirit hand held out to me a box taken from a table at 
tlie other end of the room. I received it with emotion, 
and as a precious gift; •and the sweet hand that gave it 

BTT8SIA., PARIS, AND ENGLAND. 207 

WHS placed on my shoulder with a loving pressure. 
The spirit of A — G — then showed his hand, touched 
his sister with it, and played on the accordeon, which 
by degrees was moved up in Mr. Home's hand over 
his head, the knocks at the same time beating meas- 
ure, like a drum, very loudly on the table. The ac- 
cordeon was finally taken entirely away by the spirits, 
who played on it at a distance from us, the drumming 
continuing all the time on the table, whilst another 
drum accompanied it from the other side of the room. 
As soon as this ceased the table rose up in the air, and 
floated away from us high above our lieads, passing 
over sofas and chaii*s in its way. We were naturally 
greatly interested at this wonderful manifestation, and 
followed it into the darker part of the room, and here 
arose a scene of indescribable confusion, but still pro- 
ducing feelings in no way unpleasant, though we knew 
not when we touched each other, who were spirits, and 
who were fleshy human beings? The four cushions of 
the ottoman were virtually hurled in the air at once, 
and flew to the other side of the room. In answer to 
a remark made, a hand came down on my head, as 
from a spirit floating above me, and pressed my fore- 
head and stroked my hair. As we gathered round the 
table nine or ten chairs flew up like lightning, one 
behind each of us ; the chair next to me was empty (to 
the sight,) but when I tried to move it I could not do 
80, it appeareti as if nailed to the ground, and by raps 
we were told that L— sat there. The united strength 
of several could not move this chair. The heavy sofa 
on which G — sat was moved suddenly to the other 
end of the room, and the spirit of her brother placed 

208 BU881A, PARIS, AJID ENGLAND. 

his hand in her's, and held it for several minutes. Be* 
fore leaving her he gave a most touching manifestation 
Ue blessed lier by making the sign of the cross on her 
forehead. During these manifestations almost every 
article of furniture in the room was moved out of its 
place.'' 

My dearly valued friend, Mr. Wason, who, after 
twenty-nine yeai*s of outer scepticism, takes pride in 
dating his new birth to the belief of a spiritual life and 
a spiritual philosophy, from his observations of the 
phenomena which iie witnessed in my presence, wrote 
at this time the interesting letter which I now give. 

" In July, 1860, 1 was at a stance at the mansion of 
a person of distinction^ in Hyde Park Terrace, London. 

" Two baronets — one an M.P., and the other the heir 
and representative of a deceased M.P. of eminent abil- 
ity; the wife of a distinguished living M.P. ; and 
others, including Mr. Home, making eight in number 
present. Tlie hour was a little after nine, p.m. Nei- 
ther of the tliree first-named parties had ever seen any 
spirit manifestations, and were evidently sceptics : the 
rest of the party were mediums of greater or lesser 
power, and seemed as much interested in watching the 
effects of the spirit manifestations on the three new 
comers, as in the manifestations themselves. We all 
tnade a circle round a heavy loo table, capable of seat 
ing nine persons comfortably (crinoline included). It- 
was covered with an ordinary damask cloth, (a power 
ful non-conductor of electricity, completely negativing 
the theory that spirit manifestations were brought 
about by electricity) ; and we w^ere desired by Mr 

RUSSIA, FABI8, AND ENGLAND. 20d 

Home to chat and talk as naturally and cheerfully as 
we could, and not to be too eager or expectant of spirit 
manifestation, which he stated had a strong tendencjp 
to defeat tlie object. There were six lights burning in 
the room. The floor (a first floor) shook and trembled 
in a manner that all thought resembled the vibrations 
and movement on a small steamer's deck when the pad- 
dles are in full work : some said it nearly resembled 
the tremulous motion on a sci^exo steamer's deck, in 
which I concurred. This tremulous motion ceased at 
intervals and was renewed, and this seemed to strike 
the new comers very forcibly ; it was amusing to notice 
their startled looks, though they said little beyond con- 
curring in the observations as to the tremulous move- 
ments. The walls also shook at times with a tremu- 
lous motion. The table, which was a very large and 
heavy one, was frequently lifted a few inches from the 
ground, and at last it rose from the ground at least 
three feet, and remained tlius*uspeiided 'twixt heaven 
and earth, like Mahomet's coffin, for a minute or there- 
abouts, probably more than less. The gentlemen 
were invited by Mr. Home to ascertain if any machin- 
ery was underneath, and the two gentlemen who were 
new comers swept with their legs under the suspended 
table, to catch any prop or other machinery that might 
be applied to raise the table, and they confessed that 
no such machinery or prop was present. 

"This stance, wonderful as it will appear — 'stranger 
than fiction' — was not considered to be an entirely 
Buccessful one ; and the lady of the house, with char- 
acteristic kindness, after speaking of the meagreness 
of the manifestations, invited me to another seance on 

810 B1T88IA, PARIS, AND ENGLAlrD. 

the following evening, an invitation I most gladly ac- 
cepted, althougli it kept me in London an extra day, 
and overthrew my previously arranged movements. 
At this second se nee we met rather earlier, a little after 
cright o'clock p.m., in the same first-floor room. The 
stance consisted of a barrister of eminence and stand- 
ing at the bar, and well known to the pnblic, a liter- 
ary man — an author of established reputation, and oth- 
ers to the number of eight — all on this occasion being 
believers, except the author. 

'• The same tremulous motion of the floor and walls 
as on the preceding evening, took place ; and the table 
was tilted and turned with even greater power than 
before, and rose perpendicularly from the floor, from 
three to four feet, and remained in this position sus- 
pended (Mahomet's coffin fashion) for about a minute, 
and then descended to its original place as softly and 
gently as the fall of a snow-flake. An accordeon was 
played by an unseen hand, whilst it was held by one 
of the party^ present, and afterwards by myself. I held 
it over the back of the chair on which I was sitting, 
using the back of the chair as a rest to my ana, the 
accordeon hanging over the back of the chair. I sat 
on the opposite side of the table to Mr. Home and the 
lady of the house. The accordeon was also played 
whilst lying on the floor, and also on the table, and was 
lifted without visible means from the floor on to the 
table. The music was of a solemn and impressive 
character. 

"A small spirit-hand, warm and soft like that of a 
child, touched my hand, and placed in it a small hand- 
bell, and, at my request, took the bell from my hand 

BTTS8IA, PARIS, AND ENGLAND. 211 

underneath the table to its mother, who was the lady 
of the house. She seemed perfectly satisfied that it was 
the spirit-haiid of her little boy, who died three or four 
years since, aged about eight years, and she received 
repeated responses, spelt out through the alphabet, 
such as might be expected from the spirit of a deceased 
child to its mother. 

"Tlfie bell was carried to several of the parties presenr 
and placed in their hands ; and lastly, was elevated 
above our heads, and rung in mid-air, revolving round 
and touching our heads (my own included). I could 
see the bell when it passed round my head opposite 
the window. I could see the bell occasionally as it 
passed between me and the window, the blinds of which 
had been drawn down by invisible agency. Pieces of 
mignionette and geranium flowers were placed in my 
hands by spirit hands, and inside my waistcoat. 1 saw 
one of the hands distinctly, which, as it came between 
me and the window, was distinctly visible, as the blinds 
did not altogether exclude the light of a summer even- 
ing and of the gas lights in the street. 

"The curtains at last were drawn by invisible means, 
and then Mr. Home stated he was being lifted up in 
the air, and he crossed the table over the heads of the 
parties sitting around it. I asked him to make a mark 
with his pencil on the ceiling. He said he had no pen 
cil. 1 rose up and said I would lend him mine, and b} 
standing and stretching upwards I was enabled to reach 
his hand, about seven feet distant from tlie floor, and 
I placed therein a pencil, and laying hold and keeping 
hold of his hand, I moved along with him five or six 
paces as he floated above me in the air, and I only let 

212 BUB8IA, PAEI8, AND ENGLAKD. 

go his hand when I stumbled against a stool. Mr. 
Home, as he floated along, kept ringing the small hand- 
bell to indicate his locality in the room, which was 
probably forty by thirty feet, and I saw his body 
eclipse two lines of light issuing from between the top 
of a door and its architrave — such door leading into an 
adjoining room that was brilliantly lighted. Mr. Home 
-was replaced, as lie stated, with the greatest ca^e and 
gentleness in the chair from which he rose, but this I 
could not see. 

"Previously to Mr. Home's being raised up, the 
spirit-hands of two of the barrister's deceased children 
touched him. He did not doubt that the hands were 
the spirit-hands of his children. 

" Questions were asked, and rational answers given 
by means of the alphabet, in one of the ordinary ways 
of communicating with spirits. It is right that I should 
say, that this seance (as in the preceding evening) was 
commenced with prayer, which I understood was the 
usual course. 

'^ I make no comments on the above, and advance 
no theory or hypothesis. I have confined myself sim* 
ply to facts, whicli I can substantiate by legal evidence 
in a court of justice ; and I add my name, address, and 
profession, and have only one desire, and that is — that 
truth may prevail. 

" 1 am, sir, your obedient servant, 

"James Wason, Solicitor. 

"Wason Buildings, Liverpool." 

CHAPTER IX. 

THE "oOBNHILL" and OTHER NARRATIVES. 

It was at this time that the manifestations occurred 
which are described with such accuracy and intelli- 
gence by the eminent literary friend who wrote his 
account of what he saw in the " Comhill Magazine," 
under the title of " Stranger than Fiction." This paper 
travels over nearly the whole ground of the physical 
manifestations, and is written with such masterly ob- 
eervation, and ability of description, tliat I feel it will 
be a boon to the reader to have some few extracts from 
it. He commences by quoting : 

" The reply of Dr. Treviranus to inquiries put to him 
by Coleridge as to the reality of certain magnetic phe- 
nomena which 4hat distinguished savant was reported 
to have witnessed. 'I have seen what I would not 
have believed on your testimony, and what I cannot, 
therefore, expect you to believe upon mine.' " 

For the information of Professor Faraday and other 
each persons whp believe in his foolish theory of in- 
voluntary muscular motion as being the cause of the 
phenomena, he says : " While we were seated at the 

214 THS ^ODRNHILl'' NAttKATIVK. 

table, we barely touched it with the tips of our fingers. 
I was anxious to satisfy myself with respect to the in- 
voluntary pressure which has been attributed to the 
imposition of hands. In this case there was none. My 
friends kindly gratified my request to avoid resting the 
slightest weight on the table ; and we held our hands 
pointing downwards, with merely the nails touching 
the wood. Not only was this light contact inadequate 
to produce tlie violent evolutions that took place, but 
the evolutions were so irregular and perplexing, that 
we could not have produced them by premeditation. 
Presently, however, we had conclusive proofs that the 
vivacity of the table did not require any help from us. 
"Turning suddenly over on one side, it sunk to thr 
floor. In this horizontal position it glided slowly to 
wards a table which stood close to u large ottoman ii. 
the centre of the room. We had much trouble in fol* 
lowing it, the apartment being crowded with furniture, 
and our difficulty was considerably increased by being 
obliged to keep up with it in a stooping attitude. Part 
of the journey it performed alone, and we were never 
able to reach it at any time together. Using the leg 
of the large table as a fulcrum, it directed its clawi^ 
towards the ottoman, which it attempted to ascend, b^ 
inserting one claw in the side, then ti^'ning half way^ 
round to make good another step, and so on. It slip- 
ped down at the tirst attempt, but again quietly re- 
sumed its task. It was exactly like a child trying to 
climb up a height. All this time we hardly touched 
it, being afraid of interfering with its movements, 
and, above all things, determined not to assist them. 
At last, by careful and persevering efforts, it accom 

215 

plislied the top of the Ottoman, and stood on the snin- 
mit of the column in the centre, from whence in a few 
minutes it descended to the floor by a similar process." 
The writer makes the following pertinent reflection 
on what he has just described. " It is not to be ex- 
pected that any person who is a stranger to these phe- 
Domena, should read such a story as this with compla- 
cency. Tet here is a fact which undoubtedly took 
place, and which cannot be referred to any known phy- 
sical or mechanical forces. It is not a satisfactory an- 
swer to those who have seen such things, to say that 
♦hey are impossible : since^ in sueh cases, it is evident 
that the impossibility of a thing does not prevent it 
hiippening. 

Upon many subsequent occasions the writer says 

that he has Witnessed phenomena of a similar nature, 

and others of a much more startling cliaracter. He 

tells us, for instance, " When I saw a. table, ajb which 

two ladies were seated, moving towards me without 

any adequate impulse being imparted to it by visible 

means, I thought the fact sufliciently extraordinary; 

but my wonder abated when, on subsequent occasions, 

I saw tables move apparently of their own volition, 

there being no pereons near them ; large s >fa3 advance 

from the walls against which they stood ; and chnirs, 

sometimes occupied, and sometimes empty, shift their 

places for the distance of a foot or a yard, in some 

cases easily, and in others with a slow, laborious move- 

. ment" 

As to the peculiar trembling of the table and room, ' 
he says, " On the first occasion when I experienced the 
effect I am about to describe, there were five persons 

216 THE 

in the room. In other places, where it occurred sub- 
sequently, there were seven or more. The architecture 
of the houses in each case was wholly dissimilar, both 
as to the area and height of the apartments, and the 
age, size, and strength of the buildings. We were 
seated at a table at which some singular phenomena, 
accompanied by loud knocks on the walls and floorj 
had just occurred, when we became conscious of a 
strange vibration that palpitated through the rooncu 
We listened and watched attentively. The vibration 
grew stronger and stronger. It was palpably under 
our feet Our chairs shook, and the floor trembled 
violently. The effect was exactly like the throbbing 
and heaving which might be supposed to take place in 
a house in the tropics during the moment immediately 
preceding an earthquake. This violent motion con- 
tinued for two or three minutes, then gradually subsid- 
ed and tjeased. Every person present was equally af- 
fected by it on each occasion when it occurred. To 
produce such a result by machinery might be possible 
if the introduction of the machinery itself were pos- 
sible. But the supposition involves a difficulty some- 
what similar to that of Mr. Knickerbocker's theory of 
the earth standing on the back of a tortoise, which 
might be an excellent theory if we could only ascer- 
tain what the tortoise stood upon." 
- He now speaks of the raising of the table altogether 
from the floor, which he repeatedly witnessed. " Pre- 
sently the table rises with a slight jerk, and steadily 
mounts till it attains snch a height as to render it ne- 
cessary for the company to stand up, in order still to 
be able to keep their hands with ease in contact with 

THE "OOBNHILL" NAEBA.TIVE. 217 

the surface, although that is not absolutely necessary. 
As there are some present who have not witnessed this 
movement before, a desire is expressed to examine the 
floor, and a gentleman goes under the table for the pur- 
pose. The whole space, open to the view of the entire 
party, is clear. From the carpet to the foot of the ta- 
ble there is a blank interval of perhaps two feet, per- 
haps three, — for nobody has thought of providing a 
means of measuring it, and we must take it by guess. 
The carpet is examined, and the legs and under surface 
of the table are explored, but without result. There is 
no trace of any connection between the floor and the 
table ; nor can it be conceived how there could be any, 
as the table had shifted to this spot from the place 
where it originally stood a few minutes before. The 
inspection is hurried and brief, but comprehensive 
enough to satisfy us that the table has not been raised 
by mechanical means from below ; and such means 
could not be applied from above without the means of 
immediate detection. In its ascent, the table has 
swung out of its orbit, but it readjusts itself before it be- 
gins to descend, and, resuming its vertical position, it 
comes down on the spot from whence it rose. The 
downward motion is slow, and, if I may use the expres- 
sion, graceful ; and the table reaches the ground with 
a dreamy softness that renders its touch almost imper- 
ceptible. 

" Of a somewhat similar character is another move- 
ment, in some respects more curious, and certainly 
opening a stranger field for speculation. The table 
rears itself up on one side, until the surface forms an 
inclined plane, at an angle of about 45°. In this atti- 

218 

tude it stops. According to ordinary experienco ev- 
erything on tiie table must slide off, or topple over; 
but nothing stirs. The vase of floweij, the books, the 
little ornaments are as motionless as if they were fixed 
in their places. We agree to take away onr hands, to 
throw up the ends of the cover, so as to leave the en- 
tire round pillar and claws exposed, and to remove oar 
chairs to a little distance, that we may have a more 
complete command of a phenomenon, which, in its mar- 
vellous development at least, is, I believe, new to us 
all. Our withdrawal makes no difference whatever; 
and now we see distinctly on all sides the precise pose 
of the table, which looks, like the Tower of Pisa, as if 
it must inevitably tumble over. With a view to 
urge the investigation as far as it can be carried, a 
wish is whispered for a still more conclusive display 
of the power by which this extraordinary result has 
been accomplished. The desire is at one complied 
with. The table leans more and more out of the per- 
pendicular; two of the three claws are liigh above the 
ground ; and finally, the whole structure stands on the 
extreme tip of a single claw, fearfully overbalanced, 
but maintaining itself as steadily as if it were all one 
solid mass, instead of being freighted with a numbei 
of loose articles, and as if the position had been 
planned in strict accordance with the laws of equili- 
brium and attraction, instead of involving an inexpli- 
cable violation of both." 

Of the music from an accordeon playing by itself on 
the fioor, he says : — " Apart from the wonderful con- 
sideration of its being played without hands — uo less 
wonderful was the fact of its being played in a narrow 

THE "oornhill" nabeative. 219 

space which would not admit of its being drawn out 
with the requisite freedom to its full extent. We list- 
ened with suspended breath. The air was wild, and 
fall of strange transitions ; with a wail of the most pa- 
thetic sweetness running' tfirough it. The execution 
was no less remarkable for its delicacy than its power. 
When the notes swelled in some of the bold passages, 
the sound rolled through the room with an astounding 
reverberation ; then, gently subsiding, sank into a strain 
of divine tenderness. But it was the close that touched 
the hearts, and drew the teai-s of the listeners. Mil- 
ton dreamt of this wondrous termination when he 
wrote of ' linked sweetness Yong drawn out.' By what 
art the accordeon was made to yield that dying note, 
let practical musicians determine. Our ears, that 
beard it, had never before been visited by a ' sound so 
fine.\ It continued diminishing ^nd diminishing, and 
stretching far away into distance and darkness, until 
the attenuated thread of sound became so exquisite 
that it was impossible at last to fix the moment when 
it ceased." 

The writer disposes of all questions of fraud or me- 
chanical contrivance, by telling us : — " We need not 
speculate on what might be done by skilful contrivan- 
ces, since the question is removed out of the region of 
conjecture by the fact that, upon holding up the instru- 
ment myself in one hand, in the open room, with the 
full light upon it, similar strains were emitted, the re- 
gular action of the accordeon going on without any 
visible agency. And 1 should add that, during the 
loud and vehement passages, it became so difficult to 
hold, in consequence of the extraordinary power with 

320 TUB ^^OOSNHILl" HAJEUULTiyS. 

which it was played from below, that I was obliged to 
grasp the top with both hands. This experience was 
not H solitary one. I witnessed the same resnlt on dif- 
ferent occasions, when the instrument was held by 
>tliers." 

He also several times was present when I was raised 
from the groand ; and he gives the following descrip- 
tion of what he observed : — " Mr. Home was seated 
next to the window. Through the semi-darkness his 
head was dimly visible against the curtains, and his 
hands might be seen in a faint white heap before him. 
Presently, he said, in a quiet voice, * My chair is mov- 
ing — I am off the ground — don't notice me — talk of 
something else,' or words to that effect. It was very 
difficult to restrain the curiosity, not unmixed with a 
more serious feeling, which these few words awaken- 
ed ; but we talked, incoherently enough, upon some 
indifferent topic. 1 was sitting nearly opposite to Mr. 
Home, and I saw his hands disappear from the table, 
and bis head vanish into the deep shadow beyond. In 
a moment or two more he spoke again. This time his 
voice was in the air above our heads. He had risen 
from his chair to a height of four or five feet from the 
ground. As he ascended higher he described his po- 
sition, as at first perpendicular, and afterwards hori- 
zontal. He said he felt as if he had been turned in 
the gentlest manner, as a child is turned in the arms 
of a nurse. In a moment or two more, he told us that 
he was going to pass across the window, against the 
gray, silvery light of which he would be visible. We 
watched in profound stillness, and saw his figure pass 
from one side of the window to the other, feet fore- 

THE "oOBNHILl" NASRATIVIO. 221 

most, lying horizontally in the air. He spoke to us as 
he passed, and told us that he would turn the reverse 
way, and recross the window ; which he did. His own 
tranquil confidence in the safety of what seemed from 
below a situation of the most novel peril, gave confi- 
dence to everybody else; but, with the strongest 
nerves, it was impossible not to be conscious of a cer- 
tain sensation of fear or awe. He hovered round the 
circle for several minutes, and passed, this time, per- 
pendicularly, over our heads. I heard his voice be- 
hind me in the air, and felt something lightly brush 
my chair. It was his foot, which be gave me leave 
to touch. Turning to the spot where it was on the top 
of the chair, I placed my hand gently upon it, when 
he uttered a cry of pain, and the foot was withdrawn 
quickly, with a palpable shudder. It was evidently 
not resting on the chair, but floating ; and it sprang 
from the touch as a bird would. He now passed over 
to the farthest extremity of the room, and we could 
judge by his voice of the altitude and distance he had 
attained. He had reached the ceiling, upon which he 
made a slight mark, and soon afterwards descended 
and resumed his place at the table. An incident which 
occurred during this aerial passage, and imparted a 
strange solemnity to it, was that the accordeon, which 
we supposed to be on the ground under the window 
close to us, played a strain of wild pathos in the air 
from the most distant corner in the room." 

A most able, quiet, and philosophical description of 
these and others of the phenomena which he witness- 
ed, is closed by some remarks which it is too much to 
hope that many will profit from. There is so much 

238 THB ^^oornhill" kabbathtb. 

unreasoning opposition to the facts, that an appeal 
to reason in favor of them is almost out of place. 
He says : — " To say that certain phenomena are in- 
credible, is merely to say that they are inconsistent 
with the present state of our knowledge ; but know- 
ing how imperfect our knowledge is, we are not, 
therefore, justified in asserting that that they are im- 
possible. The 'failures' which have occurred at 
seances are urged as proofs that the whole thing is a 
cheat. If such an argument be worth noticing, it is 
sufficient to say that ten thousand failures do not dis- 
prove a single fact. But it must be evident that as we 
do not know the conditions of ' success,' we cannot 
draw any argument from ' failures.' We often hear 
people say that they might believe such a thing, if 
such another thing were to happen ; making assent to 
a particular fact, by an odd sort of logic, depend .upon 
the occurrence of something else. ' I will believe,' for 
example, says a philosopher, of this stamp, ' that a ta- 
ble lias risen from the ground, when I see the lamp- 
posts dancing quadrilles. Then, tables? Why do 
these things happen to tables V Why, that is one of 
the very matters which is desirable to investigate, but 
which we shall never know anything about so long as 
we ignore inquiry. And, above all, of what use are 
these wonderful manifestations ? What do they prove ? 
What benefit have thoy conferred on the world? Sir 
John Ilerschel has answered these questions with a 
weight of authority which is final. ' The question, Cui 
1)0710? to what practical end and advantages do your 
researches tend ? — is one which the speculative philos- 
opher, who loves knowledge for its own sake, and en- 

THB 

joys, as a rational being should enjoy, the mere con- 
templation of harmonious and mutually dependent 
traths, can seldom hear without a sense of humiliation. 
He feels that there is a lofty and disinterested pleasure 
in his speculations, which ought to exempt them from 
such questioning. ' But,' adds Sir John, ' if he can 
bring himself to descend from this high but fair ground, 
and justify himself, his pursuits, and his pleasures in 
the eyes of those around him, he has only to point to 
the history of all science, where speculations, ap- 
parently the most unprofitable, have almost invariably 
been those from which the greatest practical applica- 
tions have emanated.'* 

" The first thing to be done is to collect and verify 
facts. But this can never be done if we insist jipou re- 
fusing to receive any facts, except such as shall appear 
to us likely to be true, according to the measure of our 
intelligence and knowledge." 

This article was received by the public in tlie only 
way which was likely, from the novelty to so many of 
the subject of the phenomena; and those who were 
acquainted personally with the marvellous occur-, 
rences so w6ll described in the Magazine, well knew 
their truth, yet the writer and the Editor of the " Corn- 
liill " were severely blamed by many for allowing the 
appearance of what they designated as absurdity. As 
the article was anonymous, the facts stated in it were 
deliberately denied by the press, and to stem the tor- 
rent of abuse and unbelief, a gentleman, who has since 
become my very esteemed friend, wrote, giving his 

« Preliminarj Discourse on the Btudj of Natural Philosophj, p. 10 

334 DB. oullt's letter. 

name, the following letter, which is introdnced by some 
prefatory remarks, in the " Spiritnal Magazine." The 
letter of Dr. Gully, of Malrem, first appeared in the 
" Morning Star," which of all the London papers has 
been the most fair and candid in dealing with the facts 
of Spiritualism : — 

" Sir, — ^In Mr. Coleman's letter of the 11th inst., he 
gives his opinion that the gentlemen who were present 
at the meetings recorded in the ' Gornhill Magazine,' 
under the head of ' Stranger than Fiction,' should con- 
firm or confute the statements made in that article. I 
was one of the persons present at the evening meeting. 
The other gentlemen were a solicitor in extensive prac- 
tice, and two well-known writers of solid instructive 
works — not writers of fiction — who, by-tne-by, appear 
to be so used to inventing that they cannot believe that 
any one else can possibly be employed in stating facts. 
It will be seen that the joke about 'fools of fashion ' 
does not apply to the gentlemen alluded to, but that we 
were all workers in calling^ in which matters of fact, and 
not of fancy, especially come under observation. Fur- 
ther, it may be useful to some persons to know that we 
were neither asleep, nor intoxicated, nor even excited. 
We were complete masters of our senses ; and I submit 
that their evidence is worth a thousand conjectures and 
explanations made by those who were not present. 
Scores of times I have been much more agitated and 
excited in investigating a patient's case, than I was in 
observing what occurred at the evening meeting in 
question. 

With this state of senses at the time, and revolving 
the occurrences in my mind again and again, since 

ML gully's L1<TTER. 225 

that time, I can state with the greatest poeitiveness 
that the record made in the article, ' Stranger than 
Fiction,' is, in every particular, correct ; that the phe- 
nomena therein related actually took place in the even- 
ing meeting ; and, moreover, that no trick, machinery, 
sleight'Of-hand, or other artistic contrivance produced 
what we heard and beheld. I am quite as convinced 
^f this last as I am of the facts themselves. 

" Only consider that here is a man, between ten and 
eleven stone in weight, floating about the room for 
many minutes — in the tomb-like silence which pre- 
vailed, broken only by his voice coming from differ- 
ent quarters of the room, according to his tlien posi- 
tion — ^is it probable, is it possible, that any machinery 
could be devised — not to speak of its being set up and 
previously made ready in a room, which was fixed up- 
on as the place of meeting only five minutes before we 
entered it — capable of carrying sucli a weight about 
without the slightest sound of any description ? Or 
suppose, as has been suggested, that he bestrode an in- 
flated balloon, could a balloon have been introduced 
inflated large enough to hold in mid-air such a weight? 
Or could it have been inflated with hydrogen gas with- 
out being detected by ears, eyes, or nose ? 

" It seems to me a much stronger sign of credulity 
to believe either of these suggestions, with our present 
knowledge, than to adopt the wildest statements or 
dreams of what is called Spiritualism. Let it be re- 
membered, moreover, that the room was, for a good 
part of the evening, in a blaze of light, in which no 
balloon or other machine suflicient for the supposed 
purpose could be introduced ; or, if alreadv introduced, 

10* 

220 DB. gully's letteb. 

cou .d remain unobserved ; and that, even when the 
room was comparatively darkened, light streamed 
tlirough the window from a distant gas-lamp ontsidey 
between which gas-lamp and our eyes Mr. Home's 
form passed, so that we distinctly perceived its trank 
and limbs ; and most assuredly there was no balloon 
near liim, nor any machinery attached to him. His 
foot once touched my head when he was floating 
above. 

''Then the accordeon music. I distinctly saw the 
instrument moving, and heard it playing when held 
only at one end, again and again. I held it myself for 
a short time, and had good reason to know that it was 
vehemently pulled at the other end, and not by Mr. 
Home's toes, as has been wisely surmised, unless that 
gentleman has legs three yards long, with toes at the 
end of them quite as marvellous as any legion of spir- 
its. For, be it stated, that such music as we heard 
was no ordinary strain ; it was j^rand at times, at others 
pathetic, at others distant and long-drawn, to a degree 
which no one can imagine who has not heard it. I 
have heard Blagrove repeatedly, but it is no libel on 
that master of the instrument to say that he never did 
produce such exquisite distant and echo notes as those 
which delighted our ears. The instrument played, too, 
at distant parts of the room, many yards away from 
Mr. Home, and from all of us. 1 believe I am stating 
a fact when I say that not one person in that room 
could play the accordeon at all. Mr. Home cannot 
play a note upon it. 

'' To one whose external senses have witnessed these 
things, it is hard to increase the insuiRciency of those 

DR. gully's letter. 227 

attempted explanations which assert the use of tricks 
and machinery. As I said before, it requires much 
more credulity to believe such explanations than to 
swallow all the ghost stories that ever were related. I 
may add that the writer in the ' Cornhili Magazine ' 
omits to mention several curious phenomena which 
were witnessed that evening. Here is one of them. 
A distinguished litterateur^ who was present, asked the 
supposed spirit of his father, whether he would play 
his favorite ballad for us, and, addressing us, he added, 
' The accordeon was not invented at the time of my fath- 
er's death, so I cannot conceive how it will be effected j 
but if his favorite air is not played, I pledge myself to 
tell you so.' Almost immediately the flute notes of 
the accordeon (which was upon the€oor) played through 
* Ye banks and braes of Bonnie Doon,' which the gen- 
tleman alluded to assured us was his father's favorite 
air, whilst . the flute was his father's favorite instru- 
ment He then asked for another favorite air of his 
father's, * which was not Scotch,' and * The Last Eose 
of Summer ' was played in the same note. This, the 
gentleman told us, was the air to which he had alluded. 
" I have thus borne testimony to the truthfulness of 
the facts related by the writer in the ' Cornhili Maga- 
zine,' whom 1 recognise as having been my neighbor 
during the meeting. And I have endeavored to show 
that, as regards the principal and most wonderful phe- 
nomena, there could have been no contrivance by trick 
or machinery adequate to produce or account for their 
existence. How, then, were they produced ? I know 
not ; and I believe that we are very — very far from hav- 
ing accumulated facts enough upon which to frame 

DB. gully's letter. 

any laws or bnild any theory regarding the agent at 
work in their production. Intelligent phenomena, 
ench as the music played at request, point to intelli- 
gent agents ; and spiritual bodies that have quitted 
fleshly bodies may be at work. I, for one, wish t£at 
it were proved to be po ; for a more solemn discovery 
than that of a means of communication between em- 
bodied and disembodied sentient beings cannot be im- 
agined. It giddies the brain to think of the possible 
result of such a discovery. But, whilst I obstinately 
stand up for the integrity of my senses during my ob- 
servation of the wonders above related, my inner senses 
c mnot but observe many gaps that must be filled up 
before the bridge between the spiritual body's life here 
in the flesh, and its life elsewhere out of the flesh, can 
be finished. Meantime the facts must be patiently 
and honestly accumulated, and enthusiasm must be 
banished from the minds of the enquirers. And as re- 
gards the denials, and abuses, and jests of tlie non-en- 
quirers, let it be remembered that scurillity and laugh- 
ter never discovered or disprove anything in the 
world's history. 

" Kespecting the purely physical phenomena, such 
as the raisinii: of weights whether of human bodies or 
tables, it may he that we are on the verge of discover- 
ing some physical force hitherto undreamed of; who 
shall say that we know all the powers of nature ? Here, 
too, dispassionate inquiry must go on, regardless of 
the noise outside ; regardless, too, of the ignorant and 
malicious prejudice wi)ich would blast the reputation 
of those who enquire in a direction opposite to that 
prejudice. 

< 

DB. gully's letter. 

"Enquirers, unlike routine people, must be pre- 
pared to rough it among tlieir fellow-creatures. And 
I suppose that I, for having asserted that I have five 
senses as yet unimpaired, and for having testified to 
what the majority disbelieve, shall come in for my 
share or abuse. Let it be so, if it helps on a truthful 
search. 

" I am, Sir, 

« Tours faithfully, 

"J. M. Gully, M.D, 

*<]lalyeni, Oct 14.** 

CHAPTER X. 

MIRAOULOnS PBESEBVATION. FRANOE AND ENGLANDw 

We left London the 24tth of July, 1860, for the 

Ch&teau de C , near Paris. One of the most re- 

niaikable interpositions of Providence which have ever 
happened to me occurred at this place. Many doubt 
the possibility of such interpositions, but I have not 
been allowed to doubt them, and I have to thank our 
Heavenly Father that I have so often been made 
aware of His ministering care and kind Providence. 
I do not suppose for a moment because of this, that 
His Providence is more over me than over all His chil- 
dren, and I believe that in looking back over our past 
lives, there are none of us who can fail to recognise the 
finger of God directing and p:otecting them, often in 
some remarkiible and even almost physical way, 
though generally, perhaps, through means apparently 
more remote than those w^hich saved my life on the 
16tii September, 1860. 

I had just returned from Naples, whither I had been 
to visit a friend — but who had passed from earth before 
I had arrived — and I f^nnd my health aflfected by fa- 
tigue of travelling and mental depression. Being re- 
commended to take much out-door exercise, during my 

6tay at the CzAz^lz 5r C . I zhrri - -.li:^ v- v, -:,^ 

my gan — :r.:rr t^.l: :: ziJ^lt. vt sL. - ^ vsi- ■_■ ;.'.vv*- 
ing than ::t kij 2Ti:i: i*T^-i.:t. u 'i.-: ^ ;. - .t- :■ • -- 1., 

The CLfi:ci- ie C . i^i^- -../-uv : : • ; -^ v t; 

from Paris- siti ir .- l ':-:l-> . : :.. : : s.- £_ -, - s. ' 

the tTtrc-s iTr .I "iT^ ^^i»' -- .^"L: I.rr ' ".r.^ t--,-:- i. 

uortherii !•: : liJ. ?iiz. ir i. '^lll^t^- " l ::.'-: - 

chateau a: Li i^iT :-*-i yw^iL v .--^ - -^ :.i.-t. -:'. 
iVom the icTer zt'TZiI-t ';' «. irz'-^", Z . " -^r v -.-r 
there is =.-!•_ il • '^li: j .i_- i : -.i.^ : -: j . - - /. 
the gane z&^l ". 1- ::.r ^ : --.'. :-• i.:.: 1 v ^.■ 
an iiidlz-^rT-i.- :i:l-£:--z^-J ». :.., i-r ^^ ; ... - . .^■.■, 

ing nji<c-: i' tii- i^rij:-- 

Ol :!= ii' rir:- -^l T :..: ^-.. -r ,. ; - ^ ,- :- : - 

frieniXc- 7 :::.: - .. .^. ■ , .. ; ... ^ 

steps :: ii-t ii^r.-r v -i.-:- — . ^ . .... - .. ^ 

parrf:^- j:.r 1 1,^-: :.^ .^ ,- . .. -: , ,-. 
vancoi !:Li.-_i -lii • ^--r. . .- . .. , 

my liTii -'. jj *z 'i ^ z," x^^--^- ~ - - ■ 

hear-i s-i-il** i,- rLi v. ■ ."..-r--. -:• - " 
feelfi^ -i^fc fiir-.i— iT -..^ 

ganTi-Er- f r*.-^...-: r- '.-l- .■■■- - - .. 

atifiL Lti •_• 'Tr-. -' ■' . X . ' ' i. ■ 

ieac :: "-iut rr--r= .■ :> ^^^.^^ ■ _,. 

6eizc»i 17 "lilt •.' .^ - - - . ,j . - 

the gr.'iiii; .i.- : - air-^- ; ■ .. 

iiig 5 iH':- ii:.: 'jrf: . - ^ ..- .^_. 

nor Ts-.oiitT. X- --rr ' j: - . :- 

land: I'U- i^»a-ue fc.--r. ^. - ^ 

MIBAOULOnS FRKBEBVATIOIf. 

bands. My attention was then drawn to what ap« 
peared to be a tree immediately before me, where no 
tree had been. On examination, this proved to be the 
fallen limb of the high tree under which I was stand- 
ing. I then saw that I had been drawn aside from the 
fallen limb" a distance of six or seven feet. I ran, in 
my excitement, as fast as I could to the ch&tean. My 
friends, seeing me running, hastened to the window to 
learn the cause of my disturbance. As soon as I re- 
covered my power of speech, I told them how God, by 
his good angels, had saved mj^life, and they returned 
with me to the scene of what I must call my miracu- 
lous escape. 

I will not attempt to portray the feelings of those 
present, but if ever heartfelt prayer of thankfulness 
ascended to God's holy throne, it was then and there, 
from us all, even to the servants, who broke off twigs 
to keep as mementos of tlie mercy sHown me, 

Tlie limb which had thus fallen measured sixteen 
yards and a half in length, and where it had broken 
from tlie trunk, it was one yard in circumference. It 
fell from a height of forty-five feet. The part of the 
limb, which struck the very spot where I had been 
standing, measured twenty-four inches in circumfer- 
ence, and penetrated tlie earth at least a foot. The 
next day a friend made a sketch of the tree and branch. 
We now speculated as to how it could have happened. 
The tree is not a dead one, nor was the branch at all 
decayed, and there was scarcely wind enough to stir 
the leaves. The branch was so cleanly reft from the 
crunk that one might at first think it had been sawn 
off, and the bark was not in the least torn about it. I 

BflBAOULOUS PBE8EBVATI0N. 233 

have been informed since that such accidents are not 
uncommon with trees of this species of poplar, and 
that there are trees of a similar quality in Australia, 
under which settlers will not remain for fear of such 
sudden breakages. 

A day or two after, Dr. Hoefer, one of the most 
learned men in France, and for whom I have the high- 
est esteem and regard, as a sincere truth-seeker, and a 
friend deserving every confidence, came at about noon 
and requested a stance. We had one, and a very 
good one it was. Answers were given to questions 
of the utmost importance. All at once it was spelled 
out, " Go, see the branch." Dr. Hoefer, impressed as 
it were, withdrew from the table, saying, " Perhaps 
they are going there." I went to the drawing-room, 
and asked the ladies if they would join us — but the 
day being damp and the walking bad, they declined. 

I ought to have said, that the thick end of the 
branch rested, at a height of eight feet from the 
ground, firmly against the trunk of a tree, so much so 
that, the possibility of its coming down* had never for 
an instant occurred to us, but rather that the strength 
of several horses should be required to move it. Our 
surprise, then, may be imagined when we now found 
that it had been moved three or four inches laterally 
from its original point ofsupport. Dr. Hoefer said — 
** I firmly believe that the branch will be pushed down 
before us." I replied, " That seems almost an impos- 
sibility." At the same time I took in iT)y hand one of 
the smaller twii^s and mentally said, " Dear spirits, 
"will you push this branch down ?" I then distinctly 
felt %B if some one gently touched the twig which I 

284 mBAOULOUB frebkbvatiov. 

held ; tnlB was repeated, and at the third tonch, as it 
felt to me, the brancli fell to the ground. 

Four persons witnessed this, and are ready to tes* 
tify to what 1 here relate. 

I had afterwards a piece of the thickest part of the 
fallen tree sawn off, and sent to me in London, where 
it still is — and with it on many occasions, some of 
which will be afterwards mentioned, some very mar- 
vellous manifestations took place. 

One evening, at the chateau, as we were seated 
at the table, tlie spirits having requested that the can- 
dles should be extinguished, the table drawn to the 
window, and the curtains opened to admit the moon- 
light, there had been some striking manifestations, 
and the time had been passing almost imperceptibly to 
ns all, when a gentleman who was present, said that 
he felt very much exhausted, and he asked for a glass 
of brandy and water. It was brought, and he took it 
in his hand, and was about raising it to his mouth — 
when H epiiit hand suddenly appeared, took hold of 
the lower part of the glass, and disappeared with it 
under the table. We laughingly said that our unseen 
friends surely did not believe in the use of stimulants. 
To this they assented by emphatic raps, and at the 
same moment the glass slowly rose again before him 
empty. The windows being closed, we supposed the 
water had been thrown upon the floor, and we arose 
to see where it was. We could discover no trace of 
it. About two minutes hac elapsed, when the same 
glass which was standing empty before him, was seen 
without any visible cause, gradually to approach the 
edge of the table, and to disappear beneath it. I do 

MmAOlILOnS PBE8EBVATI0N. 235 

not believe that above two seconds could have elapsed 
before it again appeared with the brandy and water in 
it, apparently not less in quantity than when first 
brought in, though the quality had certainly under- 
gone some chemical change, as it had now lost much 
of its brown color. By the raps, a warning was given 
to all of us against such indulgence. 

In September we left the chateau to spend a month 
in Paris, and we paid a short visit to our relatives at 
Biarritz, returning to England at the end of Novem- 
ber, 1861. My wife's health being delicate, the med- 
ical men having discovered an internal disease, which, 
though of a serious nature, might yet last for many 
years, we did not during this winter see so many 
friends, but I had stances as often as I could. 

From an esteemed friend, who had been rescued 
from scepticism by the manifestations of spirit power 
which he had so often witnessed, I find a letter des- 
cribing what he saw in London at this time. 

" Seven of us were present in a large drawing-room, 
lighted by a good fire and three gas-burners. The 
accordeon was taken by one of our friends who had 
never been present at any manifestations, and in his 
hands it was forcibly pulled and several chords played 
— ^in my hand also the same was done, but the weight 
of tlie instrument made the holding of it painful to 
me. We then began to be touched — and I felt a soft 
body passing across my knees. A gentleman and I 
wishing our hands to be grasped by a spirit, placed 
our handkerchiefs over our hands, in a single fold. — 
Shortly, the handkerchief was taken off by what seem- 
ed to me like air fingers — so gentle, so soft. It wag 

386 m&ACITLOTTB FREBERVATIDir. 

carried io the gentleman opposite, and by him received 
and lianded to me ; the other was restored to the own- 
er, tied into a cnrious knot. All other hands were on 
the table during the whole of the time. Two of the 
three gas-lights were now put out — and the fire burn- 
ing brightly, gave a subdued light in the room. Mr. 
Home then became cataleptic in his hands and arms : 
he was raised from his seat till he stood upright, and 
then he rose vertically till he was a foot abore the 
floor — his head level with the chandelier — this was 
repeated twice, but he did not rise higher. On sitting 
down again, the table-cloth was several times raised 
up in different parts of the table, and I, with others, 
placed my hand on the substance which so raised it — 
and to my sense of feeling, it was as if a plastic hand 
and fingers touched mine, yielding to my pressure. 
During our conversations, approval or disapproval of 
some things said were given by energetic concussions. 
The loudest affirmatives were when it was said these 
manifestations were by Gud's permission, to prove to 
us the continued existence of our relatives, and of our 
immortality ; also that we could not be alone, as there 
were ever about us unseen active intelligences, who 
saw our actions, heard our words, and discerned our 
thoughts. 

" Tlie lady who was with me had laughed and won- 
dered at my foolishness for these several years past for 
believing in spirit- power manifestations ; but now won- 
der, joyousness, and belief took possession of her, and 
the candid avi>wal of her conviction, and the conse- 
quences to certain materialistic members of her family 

lOEAOULOUS PBE8EEVATI0N. 287 

seemed to be producing a powerful effect upon her 
mind. 

" What is the use of spirits descending to the level 
of our educational obtiiseness, and producing the class 
of phenomena detailed in this rough sketch? The 
question is answered by ray giving a portion of a let- 
ter received on the 6th of this month from one of our 
literary celebrities, whose name has not yet been pro- 
minently before the public in connection with spirit 
manifestations. Having sent to the editors of the 
daily and weekly newspapers and magazines a printed 
letter on spirit manifestations, I had a reply from one 
of the editors, who says — 

" * I know all you have stated, and more — I have 
seen and felt all you have stated, and more. I believe 
I am no ' fool ' — ^I am sure I am no ' rogue.' To me 
the belief has been an unspeakable comfort, thorough- 
ly taking me away from that materialism into which I 
had crept — and I believe that to be the main purpose 
of spiritual teaching, and the reason why the great 
principle is developed in our time.' 

" I have had the same testimony given to me by 
many others. 

"John Jones. 

" Badnghall Street, 14:th January, 1861." 

• The important testimony of my friend Mr. James 
Hutchinson, for many years the chairman of the Stock 
Exchange, is one to which I would draw attention, as 
it appears from his well-known character and sagacity, 
to be just such as ought to be received as conclusive 
evidence of what he relates. Mr. Hutchi«son says : — 

388 MB. HUTCHINSON. 

" I have for some time past felt an interest in the 
subject of Spiritual Manifestations. Like most per- 
sons I had great diflSculty in realizing the statements 
made to me of the wonders which were daily witness- 
ed by others, but the evidence of friends satisfied me 
that there must be something worthy of investigation, 
and I therefore determined to take every opportunity 
of looking into it for myself. I have now done so, and 
I feel it a duty to openly bear my testimony to the 
fiicts^ leaving others to theorise on the causes and ten- 
dency of these remarkable phenomena. 

*' Recently introduced by a friend to Mr. D. D. 
Home, a stance was arranged for the 23rd instant, and 
together with Mr. and Mrs. Coleman, Mr. G. S. Clarke, 
Mr. T. Clarke, Mr. Gilbert Davidson, and another lady 
and gentleman unknown to me, we formed a party of 
nine. Shortly after sitting down we all felt a tremu- 
lous motion in our chairs, and in the table, which was 
a very heavy circular drawing-room table. This move- 
ment of the table increased in power, and at the sug- 
gestion of Mr. Coleman, it imitated the exact action 
and sound of a stroke of a powerful marine engine 
acting on and vibrating the timbers of a weak-framed 
vessel. 

" The rapping sounds on the table and floor were 
constant ; the heav}%table was raised up repeatedly — 
and these manifestations were continued whilst my 
friend, Mr. Clarke, and another were seated, at the re- 
quest of Mr. Home, under the table. 

"Two hand-bells, one weighing at least a pound and 
a half, were passed from one to another of the party 
by the unseen agencies. All of us in turn felt the 

MB. HTIT0HIN80N. 

touch and pressure of a soft and fleshy like-hand. I 
saw the full formed hand as it rested on my knee. 
The accordeon, whilst held by Mr! Home in one hand, 
discoursed most eloquent music, and then to our great 
astonishment it was taken from him, and whilst both 
his hands and those of all of the party were visibly 
imposed on the surface of the table — the accordeon, 
suspended from the centre of the table, gave out an 
exquisite air, no human hand touching it ! 

" These and many other incidents of a seriously im- 
pressive but private character, of which I do not hesi- 
tate to speak among my friends, occupied about four 
hours of what I must admit to be one of the most in- 
teresting I have ever spent. I place the facts as we 
witnessed them at your disposal for publicity, if you 
please, merely adding, that contrary to the assertions 
so constantly made that the manifestations are always 
in the dark, the whole of the phenomena of which I 
have spoken were manifested in a room lighted with 
gas, and a bright fire burning. 

"Yours, &c., 

" James Hutchinson. 

"January 26th, 1861." 

The following editorial remarks, introducing the let- 
ter of "A Plain Man," appeared in the 'Sunday 
Times,' of the 17th Febniary. The "Plain Man" is 
well known to me, and I can personally vouch for his 
high character and intelligence, but he is in a position, 
which makes it a matter of prudence that it should not 
be known publicly that he has seen what he has seen. 
If science and religion are satisfied with this unchari- 

240 A PLAIN MAN. 

table state of things, I confess that I am not, and that 
I sigh for the days when every man and woman will 
be able to tell the truth without being robbed of their 
bread by the calumnies of those who are simply unin- 
formed as to the facts which are observed, llie editor 
of the ' Sunday Times,' says : — 

"In accordance with the pledge we made at the 
time when we inserted a notice of Mr. Novra's lecture, 
we hasten to give publicity to a letter which we have 
received, accompanied by the name and address of 
the writer.. From the high position which that gentle* 
man holds, and the widely-admitted truthfulness of his 
assertions, we cannot do otherwise than believe that he 
personally saw all that he relates, and thus we are 
sigain thrown back on the sea of doubt — anxious to ar- 
rive at the truth, yet unable to do so. Fortunately, it 
is not our duty to decide, or even to give our opinion 
on such matters ; we, therefore, publish the letter hop- 
ing that if a certain enlightening spirit is granted, 
which may clear up the truth, that it may be shed 
upon us, or that if the whole thing is fictitious and im- 
aginary, the delusion may soon be dissipated. Too 
much credulity on the one hand is contemptible. A 
blind obstinacy has often nearly marred the best reve- 
lations which Providence has vouchsafed to science. 

" To the Editor of the ' Sunday Times? 

" Sir, — For some time I have been waiting for a fa- 
vorable opportunity to address you, and to state ce^ 
tain facts connected with Spiritualism, which clearly 
demonstrate the existence of what many persons seem 

A PLAIN HAN. 241 

determined to deny. Such sceptics, by their argu- 
ments, so far from doing any injury to the cause, have 
been the means of inducing many to enquire into the 
phenomena, who otherwise, in all probability, would 
LLSver have thought of doing so, and as a consequence, 
have converted them into thorough believers. Nine 
Buch cases have occurred at my own house. Again, 
throughout all the books and articles I "have read, I 
never have found advanced one single article against 
the jpossibUity of a communication with the spiritual 
world, but merely expositions of the tricks practised by 
some interested persons, thus confirming those who 
were only half convinced, and enabling all who are 
fortunate enough to be present at a bona fide stance, 
more easily to distinguish between reality and deceit. 
Clearly, such persons deserve the thanks of us all. The 
columns of a newspaper could not admit, nor have 1 the 
time to write, the many reasons to be adduced in fa- 
vor of the probability of spiritual manifestations ; all I 
ask of you is to insert a plain statement, from a plain 
man, of certain facts so striking, extraordinary, and 
convincing, that those who have seen them cannot fail 
to believe, and by which not only are the ideas of a 
man's lifetime upset, but the very laws of nature and 
gravitation as hitherto understood, appear to be scat- 
tered to the winds. 

" A few nights since, a party of seven, including Mr. 
Home and two ladies, assembled, en seance round a 
heavy large circular table. For a short time nothing 
extraordinary took place, but at length a convulsive 
throbbing was felt in the table, which shortly began to 
•love, undulating with an easy, graceful movement, 

342 A PLAIN MAN. 

and raising iteelf at times abont a foot off the ground. 
At the same time there were knocks in quick succes- 
sion under the table, on the floor, ceiling, and round 
the room, a gentleman being under the table at tlie 
time, at Mr. Home's request, to guard against the pos- 
sibility of collusion. After some trivial communica- 
tions, a small hand-bell was held by me under the ta- 
ble, and in a few minutes I perceived, on looking 
down, a small white hand (every other hand belonging 
to tlie party assembled, being on the table), whicli 
commenced caressing and playing with mine. After 
ringing tlie bell once or twice (in my hand), I asked 
that it siiould be conveyed to a gentleman opposite, 
and no sooner was my wish expressed than I felt it 
pulled from my hand, and deposited in that of the gen- 
tleman I had indicated. This was done several times. 
Tlie hand was smooth and white as a child's, and was 
quite visible, there being two ^as jets burning in the 
room. An accordeogi was held at the side of the table 
by Mr. Home, when the most lovely, plaintive, and 
melcjdious music was played, and no sooner had I ex- 
pressed a wish to hear the ' Last Rose of Summer,' 
than ihat tune was played, at which moment the ac- 
cordeon was resting on my feet, without a hand of 
earthly description near it, it having been taken out of 
Mr. Home's hand and deposited there. Several hands 
now appeared in quick succession moving different ar- 
ticles of furniture ; and one, a particularly powerful 
one, having touched Mr. Home, he exclaimed thaf 
enormous strength had been given him. It certainly 
had, and he proceeded at once to exercise it. A block 
of wood, from the large arm of the tree of great weight, 

A PLAIN MAN. S4S 

from the falling of which he was . so wonderfully pre- 
Berved, was taken up by Mr. Home as if it were a straw, 
carried round the room under bis arm, and finally de- 
posited near the table. It seemed of no weight to him, 
and yet, when two gentlemen, each of them apparently 
much more powerful than Mr. Home, essayed, tbey 
could hardly move it. A singular circumstance con- 
nected with Mr. Home's receiNang such extraordinary 
strength it is necessary to mention. One of the gen- 
tlemen present had lost a very dear friend in the late 
war in the Crimea, and who, prior to leaving this 
country, gave bim his pbotograph. It was the only 
one he ever sat for, and after the decease tbe family 
asked for it to get it copied, but they had not returned 
it. On several occasions the spirit has manifested him- 
self, and has constantly reproached this gentleman for 
having parted with it. On tliis evening a similar message 
was received, when he mentally asked for such a man- 
ifestation as would fully identify him with the departed 
friend. When in the world, he .was a most powerful 
muscular man ; and to convince this gentleman it was 
he, who enabled Mr. Home, through himself, to lift 
this mass of timber, which at another time he could 
not have moved. Die last words spelt out were, ' Get 
back a copy at least.' 

** Another hand now appeared : and on Mr. Home 
being touched by it, he exclaimed, ' They are raising 
me ; do not look at me till I am above the level of the 
table, as it might have the eflfect of bringing me down.' 
Almost at the same moment Mr. Home was raised up 
and floated in the air at the height of about five feet, 
touching one gentleman on the head slightly as he 

944 A PLArar mah. 

pagsed, baton apprQaching the window became agaii 
^ntly to the ground. He remarked, ' Their streogdi is 
hardly great enough yet, but I feel that it will be 
soon.' The table which for some time had .remained 
passive, now began to heave and throb most violently, 
and finished by moving towards a sofa at the end of 
the room, obliging all sitting round to follow it We 
bad scarcely resumed our seats, when our attention was 
attracted by seeing a small table move across the room; 
and finally, after much difficulty, raise itself, and stand 
in the centre of the large table round which we were 
sitting. ' Less earthly light' was now spelt out, and 
the two gas-lights were turned down, leaving merely a 
bright blazing fire, which clearly illuminated the whole 
room. Tills was scarcely done, when a small baby's 
hand was seen creeping up a gentleman's arm, and al« 
most at the same time he perceived between Mr. Home 
and himself the form of an infant in white. Being 
naturally very fond of children, he thought nothing of 
it, merely imagining that his inclinations were known ; 
but on his wife's asking if it was not the spirit of her 
little child now passed away, a timid answer in the af- 
firmative was given — a bright light appearing close to 
the sofa at the same moment, which, by degrees, faded, 
and at last disappeared. The small table which, it 
must be remembered was still upon the large one, now 
began to move, and at the same moment the same hand 
that before imparted such supernatural strength to Mr. 
Home was again seen grasping him. His arms were 
raised above his head, he was again lifted about two 
feet oif the ground and carried towards the window, 
and when there, he was raised to within about eighteen 

A FLicHsr HAN. 245 

inched of the ceiKng. After remaining floating for 
nhout twd minutes he descended ; but on coming near 
his chair, he was again elevated, and placed in a stand- 
ing position in the centre of the table, together with the 
small one. Qis weight not resting on it, it had no ef- 
fect, nor was. there even a creak heard. In about a 
minute bdth Mr. Home and the small table were ele- 
Tftted for a fourth time in the air, about a foot off the 
surface of the large table, ^id, after remaining in that 
position for about a minute, he descended and resumed 
his seat. 

" Such is a short account of this most remarkable 
and satis&ctoiy stance. I need scarcely add that of 
necessity I have been compelled to omit many, small 
details which, although interesting in themselves, sink 
into insignificance by the side of the wonderful mani- 
festations above described. 

" I remain. Sir, 

" Your obedient servant, 

'' A Plain Man." 

* 

By this time the hej^lth of my wife was failing, and 
she was sometimes confined to bed. One night the 
spirit of her mother came to us, and after making three 
crosses upon Sacha's brow, the hand being invisible 
but still perfectly tangible, my wife said to mo, " Oh, 
mama is blessing me, and I feel sucli a strange thrill 
of joy." I now felt the hand laid upon my brow, and 
again the present was obliterated from my mind, and 
I saw the being so dear to me as passing from earth. 
It was so terrible a reality that I would have given 
Woi^ds to have felt that there could be even the slight* 

S46 A PLAIN MAV. 

est possibility of my having been deceived. Her mo« 
ther told me that the disease which would cause her to 
pass from earth was not the one we had so dreaded, 
bat would be, iu fact, consumption. From that mo- 
ment, every time our kind-hearted and experienced 
doctor came, 1 urged him to see whether or no he could 
detect the slightest change, as indicating disease of the 
lungs ; but he said, though great weakness existed, 
still active disease was not going on, and he thought it 
might be avoided. As soon as the dear one could un- 
dertake the journey, we went to Bournemouth, where 

our friend, Mrs. P , joined us, and we there found 

the symptoms of lung-disease to have increased. Ac: 
cordingly, a medical man was called in, who, with one 
of his colleagues, pronounced the left lung to be un- 
sound. I was alone when they told me this ; and when 
I entered my wife's room, she^wished to know, what 
the result of their diagnosis had been. We had, wheh 
first married, promised to each other that if ever one 
knew the other to be seriously ill, we would not at- 
tempt to conceal it. Still I had never had the courage 
to tell her what her mother had revealed to me ; for to 
one 80 young, and whose life had everything to make 
it desirable, it seemed hard to think that a new exist- 
ence so soon awaited her. I felt, however, that I must 
be true to my promise, and I told her what the doctors 
had said. She smiled, and said, " Do j'ou think I can 
remain on earth ten days ?" I told her that not only 
ten days, but tliat in reality she might live ten years, 
but that still all was uncertain. She took my hand in 
here, and said, " Do you remember, Daniel, when my 
mother blessed me a month ago, and I told you what 

MB. OOX's LETTER. 347 

a thrill of joy I felt ? Well, I feel that she is here now, 
and I feel a continuation of the self-game thrill. I am 
going to her, but God will not separate us. I will ever 
watch over Gricha and you." She asked me for her 
writing desk, and then wrote letters, which she sealed 
and addressed, adding the words, " To be opened after 
I am gone." Just as she was about to finish the last 
letter, our child ran into the room, and sitting on her 
knee, he caressingly stroked her cheek, saying, " Ma- 
ma is too good to be ill." This so affected her that she 
burst into tears, and these were the only tears she ever^ 
shed at the thought of leaving the body. Distinct 
musical sounds were now heard every night in our 
room, and on more than one occasion the singing of a 
bird was heard for more than an hour over her bed. 

We remained at Bournemouth about three weeks, and 
finding the climate very unsuitable, went to the country- 
house of our kind friend, Mr. Cox, in Hampshire, 
where we remained a month. My wife now frequently 
saw both her father and mother, and also j3l little boy 
whom she did not recognize, and her mother told her 
that he was her brother who had passe<J from earth 
when only a few hours old. Here occurred some cu- 
rious phenomena which are described in the letter of 
my friend, Mr. Cox, of Jermyn Street ; 

"The late Eobert Owen, a short time previous to 
his passing from earth, had given me a writing desk 
which had belonged to his wife, and which contained 
amongst other tilings a box of paints. As I had other 
things of his as remembrances, 1 felt it more just after 
his departure, that some member of his family should 

S48 MR. cox's LSTTBB. 

possess the desk, which had helonged to their mother ; 
and I therefore gaVe it to his son, Mr. Robert Dale 
Owen, in order that he might take it with him to 
America. I felt, Jiowever, at the time an almost irre- 
sistible impulse to retain the desk, but the feeling of 
right overcame it. The fact had almost escaped my 
memory, when at nearly the tirst stance I had with 
Mr. Home after his return from Kussia, the spirit of 
my old and valued friend, Mr. Owen, came and said, 
* You must tell Robert to return you that writing desk; 
-and why did you give it to him, for I did all I could to 
impress you not to part with it.' I wrote this to Mr. 
Robert Dale Owen, and in due time the desk was re- 
turned to me. We were then at my house in the 
country, and Mr. and Mrs. Home came to spend a short 
time with us. My little boy was then, and had been for 
some time previously, indisposed, and medical advice 
had been called in, but to little purpose. The spirits 
had previously prescribed for him, and now they said 
they would magnetize some pure spring water, which 
would benefit him. For this purpose a decanter was 
procured, and placed on the middle of the table at 
which we were sitting. I placed it there myself, and 
had taken every precaution that no one should touch it. 
Tlie water in the decanter became agitated after a few 
moments without any visible cause, and a powerful 
aroma came from the bottle. We tasted the water, 
and found it was strongly impregnated with something 
which gave it a decided flavor, but what it was we 
knew not : it was not like anything we had tasted be- 
fore. Mr. Home was then thrown into the trance state, 
and taking the decanter in his right hand, he walked a 

JCB. OOX'S LBTTBB. 24& 

few feet from the table, holding it in fall view all the 
tim3, when, to ray astonishment, I saw another decan- 
ter, apparently precisely similar to the other, in his 
left hand, Thns, in each of his han^s I saw a decan- , 
ter ; and so real was the second that I could not have 
told which of them was the material one. Even if a 
trick had been intended, here was no opportunity for 
it, and as the decanter was a large one, another one 
could not have been concealed up Mr. Home's coat- 
sleeve, or about his person. A. little later, Mr. Owen's 
spirit cafne and desired his wife's writing desk to be 
placed on the tmible ; and now the room w«s darkened 
t^see if we could distinguish spirit lights, which were 
then seen by three of us. Presently we heard the 
writing desk opened, and a hand was placed in mine, 
another in my wife's, and a third in Mr. Home's, each 
hand differing in size from the others. The alphabet 
was called for, and ' I fear I may have spoilt your 
Claude,' was spelt out. We could not understand 
this ; but when the lamp was relighted, we found that 
some paint had been taken from the box from inside 
the desk, and had been freely used on one of my paint- 
ings which hung several feet from where we were sit- 
ting. 

" Wm. Cox." 

We now returned to London ; and the first day of 

our arrival our valued friend. Dr. H , called on us, 

still hoping that the medical men had made a mistake 
in pronouncing the lung to be diseased ; and as he was 
sounding the chest, my dear wife looked up at him 
liuigbingly, and said, '^ You see how very different it 

S50 MB. wii^inson'b aooouht. 

18 now to what it used to be. I myself can distinguish 
the diftijrence in the sound." He sorrowfully shook 
his head, and said, " It is but too true, and with your 
belief I would not attempt to conceal it from you." 
Many times did he reiterate these words during her 
illness, adding, " With my other patients I have to 
give them hopes that they are going to stay, and you 
are ever asking me for hopes that you are to go." 

During our stay in London I had a stance almost 
every night, my wife feeling that they did her good 
both physically and spiritually. The character of the 
manifestations occurring at this time will be seen^in 
the accounts which are given by my two friends. That 
of Mr. W. M. Wilkinson is as follows : — 

My First Seance with Mr . Home . 

" Though I have been on terms of intimacy with 
Mr. Home for some years, and have heard and read of 
all the wonderful things which occur in his presence, 
yet this 19tli June, 1861, is the first time I have come 
to see them for myself. It has not been because I dis- 
belit'ved them, or thought them of no importance ; for 
I quite believed them, and thought them of very great 
importance. Having been, however, in the habit of 
hearing from friends of all that was occurring, I was 
* fully satisfied with their accounts, and did not think 
that they were so much beneath me in observation, 
that it was necessary for my own eyes to convince me. 
I take no credit to myself for this, for it is mainly a 
consequence of my own experience. I remember about 
twenty-five years ago, when I first heard of mesmer 

• 261 

fern, and of its psychological wonders, I committed the 
folly of saying that I did not believe a word of it — and 
since I had on that occasion to surrender at discretion, 
on seeing for myself, I have made much fewer similar 
mistakes. Since that time, I have pursued tliis and 
kindred subjects, and I may fairly say tliat I can now 
readily believe in much more than I once thought pos- 
sible. I have found this, at all events, convenient, — 
for I have not had so often to find myself at variance 
with facts, which is alwaysa painful position to be in ; 
and, besides, it has opened up to me a new world of 
spiritual forces, which, tliough generally ignored, I 
have found to account for many of the strangest, and 
otherwise incomprehensible chapters of human history. 
" I had on two or three occasions, through Mr. Squire 
and other mediums, seen phenomena as wonderful as 
those which I now witnessed in the presence of Mr. 
Home. I had seen nearly all the wonderful things so 
admirably described in the ' Oornhill Magazine,' and 
in the letter of Dr. Gully ; I had also been present 
when others of even a more powerful kind were done, 
and which were ably described by Dr. Blank, at page 
161 of the first volume of the 'Spiritual Magazine.' I 
])ad several times seen, both in London and Paris, di- 
rect writing by invisible power, on paper placed be- 
yond mortal contact, and I was well convinced also of 
the alleged power of mediums to float in the air, by 
having had one come down on my chest, as well as 
having on other occasions had hold of his hand, whilst 
he was floating about the room. I did not, therefore, 
on this evening care to disturb myself and others by 
taking tjiose precautions which would have been ne 

259* MR. Wilkinson's Acoouirr. 

ccssarj if I were the President of the Royal Society, and 
were about to make a conclusive report to that ilhis- 
trions body of inquirers into pliysics. I did not doubt, 
but I sat, and saw, and heard, and felt, and made notes. 
There were eight of ns, all well known to me, and 
some of them known wherever the English language 
is spoken. We were in the drawing-room of a house 
in Cornwall Terrace, Regent's Park, and we sat round 
a large loo table, and commenced talking. Curiously 
enougli, one having said that Professor Faraday was 
coming on the following Monday to a seance, and spec- 
ulating as to his guardian spirit not allowing him to be 
easily convinced, there were at once very loud knocks 
on the table in affirmation of that proposition. I was 
sitting next to my wife on her right hand, and im- 
mediately afterwards I felt my leg gently touched, in 
a position where it was impossible for Mr. Home to 
have reached it. Then there began a gentle but deep 
vibration of the table, chairs, and floor, till all the room 
was shaking violently, during which the table rose 
about ten inches, the trembling continuing all the time. 
The table began to rise on the opposite side to where 
Mr. Home was sitting, and it was clearly out of his 
power to have raised it. Mr Home's chair was quietly 
moved back, away from the table, about three feet, and 
whilst there the dresses of my wife and of the lady 
next to her were both pulled, and so strongly that I 
could see them dragging down. I also felt my wife's 
dress whilst being so pulled, and there was a powerful 
force expended in the act resisting my hand. At this 
time Mr. Home was fully six feet off, and both from 
distance, and from his being in full view, I could see 

MB. Wilkinson's account, 253 

that it was done by no force of his. Hr. Home now 
held the accordeon in his right hand beside his chair, 
and it at once began to play. He held it by the bot- 
tom, the keys being on the top, and they were therefore 
out of his reach. It was impossible that he could touch 
them. I carefully examined the instrument, opening 
the slide beneath the keys, and I found it to be a com- 
mon instrument, with only tlie usual mechanism of the 
keys. There was nothing inside of it. I looked stead- 
ily at it, and at the hand and fingers with which he 
held it. There it was, being pulled up and down, and 
discoursing sweet sounds, whilst his hand was station- 
ary, and his fingers motionless. I could see above and 
beneath the instrument, but there was no visible cause 
for its motion, nor fftr the opening and shutting of the 
keys which caused the music. When it ceased, my wife 
asked if it could not be played in her hand, and im 
mediately the instrument emitted three sounds, which 
we took to mean that it would have much pleasure in 
trying. It was accordingly given to her, and whilst 
she was holding it, she said she felt one of her fingers 
being touched. Immediately afterwards the table was 
raised about a foot steadily from the floor. As there 
was no sound from the accordeon in her hands, she re- 
turned it to Mr. Home, but it was taken from his hand 
immediately, and given back to her,, and whilst in her 
right hand it began to play. She felt it distinctly lifted 
up and drawn forcibly down, and she did not and could 
not touch the keys, which, however, must necessarily 
have been touched and opened to make the sounds. 
In Mr. Home's hands a beautiful tune was now played, 
during which we heard what has been so often des 

254 MB. wii^xinson's aoooumt. 

eribed, the full notes fijradually decreasing until they 
died away into the thinnest streaks of sound. By three 
quickly repeated notes it was promised that the instra- 
nient should play the tune of the other evening, repre- 
senting 'The Two Lives;' the one in this world, the 
other in that which follows. The first, or this world's 
life, was repiesented by discords grating painfully on 
the car, and which I thought did but scant justice to a 
world which, though capable of improvement, still has 
some rich harmonies within its depths. In mercy to 
our ears, the first life did not last long, and was then 
succeeded by the second, which was made up of beau- 
tiful soft angel music, such as I had never heard. It 
played for several minutes, swelling into rich sounds 
of which the sweetness was enchanting to the ear, and 
gradually changed into the dear old tune of * Home 
sweet Home.' 

What more appropriate and happy view of the se3- 
ond life could be given in musical sounds than this of 
its being home ; and what a sweet sermon on the rela- 
tive values of tlie two lives ! I believe it was received 
more solemnly, and yet more thankfully by all who 
were present, from knowing the sickness 'even unto 
death' of one of the party, the youngest and the happi- 
est in her bright longings for tin's second life. It would 
he almost blasphemy to ask in her presence what is 
tiie good of Spiritualism. Such a question would not 
uccur to a good man, and could not be asked -by a 
wise one. The mere man of science who measures hu- 
man souls by mathematics, would be out of place in 
Buch a scene, and had I not been too happily engaged 
with my own thoughts, L should have felt glad that we 

MB. WILKINSfJN'S AOCOUITr. 

255 

( troubled with none such. I did not during this 
formance scrutinize the instrument further than 
f that it was held, bottom upwards, in Mr. Home's 
Bind, his other hand being upon the table, as 
lie hands of all the other persons present, and I 
aware of any natural means by which an accor* 
. be played under such conditions. I do not 
for another reason, however, having once had an 
3n play in my own hands, when I know that I 
I also know that Lord Lyndhurst, and many 
iblic men whom I could name, have had a sim- 

ience. 
; now the table rises again a clear foot from the 
ad there stands, not quietly, but strongly undu- 
^■Btill BO that I was able to make the following 
iny paper resting on the table, whilst it was 
liaW height above the ground : — ' Table rose a 
f.r€)ount 10. I wrote this whilst up and undulat- 
It then gently descended to the floor again. We 
[iged places according to directions, and a gen- 
became my right hand neighbor, who, in a min- 
or, said that he saw a hand which he believed 
1 son's. I did not see it, nor did 1 see three 
I which my wife shortly after saw ; but in answer 
lestion, I had three taps on my knee as from a 
^Atill with no such distinctness as to make me 
^hat it was. At this time, several at once said 
a light cloudy appearance dart across the 
but, being behind me, I saw nothing of it. 
tn one corner of the room, near where we were sit* 
"was a shrine with several Indian idols of bronze. 
nly, there was a commotion amongst them, and 

956 llfB. . WILKINSON^S AOOOUNT. 

a CTHBh, and a large one was thrown down, and brought 
with some violence and noise nnder the table. There 
it appeared as if it was in the hands of some vigorona 
power, and presently we found a jingling of some me 
tallic substance against it, which afterwards proved to 
be a metal ornamental canopy, which had been un- 
screwed from the back of the idol, and with which 
questions were now answered by knocking them together. 
In like manner, loud knocks were made in answer to 
questiotre, by rattling the idol against the floor. A re- 
mark was made as to the want of respect thus indi- 
cated, and at once a number of jubilant raps were pro- 
duced by again knocking the two parts of the idol to- 
gether. Two or three times the idol appeared, push- 
ing up inside of the table cloth, and twice it made its 
appeanmce naked above the table, and gently reached 
the ground again. Some flowers were brought from 
the shrine, and placed in the hand of each person pres- 
ent. Our present consisted of a rose and several pinks. 
I felt the rose placed in my hand under the table, all 
other hands being visible and on the table. 

" Several times during the evening we all perceived 
a cool air pervading the table, and which it was impos- 
sible not to notice. The accordeon was now placed on 
the floor, and all hands on the table, when it was 
heard to sound clearly several times, but no tune was 
played. It then tried to get from the floor to the ta- 
ble, but was not able to accomplish the whole journey, 
and fell gently back to the floor. The table was now 
again raised clear fwra the ground, both my feet being 
on ils pediment, and pressing iieavily downwards the 
whole time. The resistance and upward steadv move- 

MB. Wilkinson's aooount. 257 

ment of the table were strangely cnrious, as was its 
careful quiet descent, my feet still pressing on it, and 
yet it reached the ground without noise. There was 
now a general rattle among the idols, and several very 
loud knocks, and then came an end of a very interest- 
ing evening, during which I have seen and heard what 
was sufficient to convince me that those are wrong who 
deny the possibility of the plienomena. How they are 
to be accounted for is another matter, which may be 
discussed with many honest diflferences of opinion ; but 
that they exist is not a matter of doubt, but of cer- 
tainty. There are some well-meaning persons who say 
that they are done by the devil ; but I saw no signs on 
this evening of any wickedness, either in the work, or 
in the persons who looked on. For myself, I took up 
much the same attitude as 1 should do at a scientific 
lecture, illustrated with experiments and diagrams, and 
I perceived no special influence but that of a strong 
desire to observe the facts. 

" As to the facts being impossible, because they do 
not square with the ideas of spirit and of matter which 
are current in the Koyal Society, that is not my affair, 
for I did not make either the facts, or the opinions 
which make them so inconvenient. I do but state that 
which 1 have seen, and if I have done so clearly, that 
is my only wish. Facts will always take care of them- 
selves, and those are the most wise to whom they ad- 
minister no reproof. There is another reason why I 
hope to have enlarged the circle of observers, by my 
description of this evening's phenomena. It is impos- 
sible for many that they should see what I have seen, 
and so far as they can believe my testimony, the neces 

-68 

eity for their personal seeing is avoided. Many thingi 
must be taken on tlie evidence of others. ' Non cuivis 
contingit adire Corinthnm.' It does not happen to 
every one to go to Corinth, and so they who can't go 
themselves, must take the account of those who have 
been there. A certain few of a peculiar turn of mind, 
common to all ages, cannot accept the testimony of 
others, and they are best left alone, till an opportunity 
offers of convincing them by a mode suitable to their 
peculiar weakness. It is not yet fashionable to believe 
in these impossible things, and as some one must be 
gin and put up with the necessary ridicule, I willingly 
submit my name for as much as can be made to stick 
to it. 

" W. M. Wilkinson. 

" Hampstead.** 

Mr. Tfilliaiu Hewitt, who has made such deep re- 
searches into this subject, and has in his great work 
now ready for the press, brought together the testi- 
monies, ancient and modern, to the supernatural in all 
ages, was present on several occasions to observe and 
investigate the phenomena, and in an eloquent and 
forcible letter which he wrote to Mr. Barkas of New- 
castle, he gives an account of some j>art of what he 
witnessed. 

" I wish some of your negatives could have seen 
«rliat I and Mrs. Howitt, and several others saw at the 
.'lonse of a lady in Regent's Park, about three months 
ago, and the like of which some of our most distin- 
guislied nobility liave seen tliere repeatedly of iate. 
Tiiere were, beside ns. Mr. and Mrs. Home, and a Rus- 

MB. Howrrr's letter. 259 

fiian Count Steinbeck, and several others. We had 
beautiful music played on the accordeon when held in 
one hand by Mr. Home, who cannot play a note, and 
the same when held by a lady. We had the clearest 
and most prompt communications on diflFerent subjects 
through the alphabet, and flowers were taken from a 
bouquet on a cheflFonier at a distance, and brought and 
handed to each of us. Mrs. Howitt had a sprig of gera- 
nium handed to her by an invisible hand, which we have 
planted, and it is growing ; so that it is no delusion, no 
fairy money turned into dross or leaves. I saw a spi- 
rit hand as distinctly as 1 ever saw ray own. I touch- 
ed one several times, once when it was handing me the 
flower. My wife's silk dress was pulled so strongly 
that she thought it would tear out the gathers, and was 
rustled so loudly, that it was not only heard by all of 
us, but might have been heard in another room. My 
wife^s handkerchief was taken from her knee, and 
brought and whisked against my hand at the opposite 
side of the table ; I thought, with the intention of my 
taking it, but the spirit would not allow that, but with- 
drew it a little, then whisked my hand with it anew, 
and then flung it into the middle of the room. The 
dress and the handkerchief were perfectly visible dur- 
ing these operations, but the motive power was invi- 
sible. 

" Then the spirits went to a shrine of bronze idols, 
belonging to the lady of the house, who bought them 
in India. Some of these are very heavy. They pitch- 
ed them down on the floor, and with such violence 
*that the clash might have been heard all over the 
house. The larger of these idols— perhaps all — of 

960 MB* howttt's lbttek. 

that I am not certain — nnscrew, and the screws work 
exactly the opposite way to our screws ; but the spi- 
rits unscrewed them, and pummelled their heads lustily 
on the floor, saying, through the alphabet, ' You must 
all do your best to destroy idolatry, both in India and 
in England, where it prevails in numerous ways. Idol- 
atry of rank, idolatry of wealth, idolatry of self, idol 
atry of mere intellect and learning,' &c., &c. The 
different parts were thrown under the table, that you 
might tread them under foot, and two parts of the idol 
Mahadeo, of heavy bronze, were placed on the table 
by a visible hand. The head of the idol felt to me 
to weigh four or five pounds. 

" Mr. Home was lifted about a foot from the ground, 
but did not float as he frequently does, in the strong- 
est light. The table, a very heavy loo table, was also 
several times lifted a foot or more from the ground, 
and we were invited to look under it and see that there 
was no visible cause. To us, who have seen so much 
of these things, and to whom they are as familiar as the 
sight of a bird flying, and far more familiar than the 
present comet, this was not necessary. , 

*' A few evenings afterwards a lady desiring that the 
* Last Rose of Summer' might be played by a spirit 
on the accordeon, the wish was complied with, but in 
so wretched a style that the company begged that it 
might be discontinued. This was done; but soon af- 
ter, evidently by another spirit, the accordeon was car- 
ried and suspended over the lady's liead, and there, 
without any visible support or action on the instru- 
ment, the air was played through most admirably, in 
the view and hearing of all." 

CHAPTER XI. 

A DIARY AND LETTER. 

Nearly the whole range of the phenomena occur- 
red during our residence with our friend Mrs. P 

in the Regent's Park, and she has been a frequent vi- 
sitor at other stances, and has kept a diary of every 
evening, which she has kindly placed at my disposal. 
I propose therefore to make extracts from it of some of 
the more striking ohenomena both of this and of sub- 
sequent dates. 

Short Extracts from a Diary ^ 1860-61-62. 

J)ecemb6r 16, 1860. — My mental questions were 
answered by raps upon ray dress. I put my right hand 
suddenly upon my lap, and tried to take hold of what- 
ever it was that was touching my dress, but could seize 
nothing. Mr. Home desired me to put a handkerchief 
over my hand. I did so, and immediately on putting 
it down, a hand grasped mine, and I suddenly with- 
drew it. Determined to conquer the nervous feelings 
that overcame me, again I put my hand duw;n, and it 
was taken by another hand, and kisses were imprinted 
on it from the tips of the fingers all over the palm. 

362 ▲ DIA&T AND LETTER. 

An accordeon, held in Mr. Home's right hand, played 
tne most exquisite music, swelling forth in full harmo- 
nious tones, and dying away in notes of tenderness, 
and of exquisite and unearthly music. His left hand 
was all the time on the table. 

A number of manifestations took place, and to men- 
tal questions I received intelligent answers, and I re- 
turned home from this my first stance with Mr. Home 
convinced of the truth of our being permitted to hold 
intercourse with those who have passed to the spirit- 
land. 

December 24<A. — The accordeon played in Mr. 
Home's hand, tlien five raps asked for the alphabet — 
and " Christmas Hymn" was spelled out; again five 
raps, and " less earthly light :" we lowered the flame 
of the four gas jets that were burning over the table, 
and " The Manger, the Life, and the passing away," 
was spelled out. The accordeon played a sweet air 
appropriate to childhood. "The Life" was represent- 
ed by the most harmonious strains intermingled with 
discords at times, as if it were thorny and painful, and 
the passing a/way died on the air with exquisite ten- 
derness. 

January 29tk, — A stance of eight persons. We 
had amused ourselves during the time with the article 
" Spirit-rapping made easy," in the magazine ' Once a 
Week,' wliich we left on the chiffonier. I saw some- 
thing pass from the side of the room with great veloci- 
ty, which vanished under the table. A curious noise 
was heard like the crumpling of paper, a spirit hand 
arose, appeared, and placed in the medium's hand a 
sheet of ' Once a Week,' crumpled up and torn. The 

A DIAEY AND LETTER. 

spirits were at work destroying tlie magazine — they 
rubbed it strongly over Mr. Home's shoe, and then 
placed his foot upon it. The spirits gave each person 
a bit of the mangled magazine, and the remainder wa 
raised up by a large spirit hand, and placed on a va- 
cant chair, which by invisible power had a short time 
before been moved from a distance to the table. The 
table was violently moved up to the centre window, 
before which stood a piece of the bough of the north- 
em poplar which had been sent from the Chateau de 

O , and which was a part of that, from the fall of 

which Mr. Home so miraculously escaped. The height 
of the bough was three feet eight inches, and the cii'- 
cumference three feet. Luminous hands were now 
and then visible, the table rose gently, and tipped ma- 
ny times against the bough ; the spirits threw bits of 
the torn magazine about it, and placed one piece un- 
der it. I asked in Hindostanee, " Are you making 
Mr. Novra do pooja to the branch ?" To which they 
loudly rapped " Yes." The gas lights from the street 
were streaming in, the spirits closed the shutters, and 
we heard a curious tearing noise, a spirit hand came 
across my hands, and placed upon them a bit of the 
bark torn from the poplar, the noise recommenced, 
and to every one of the circle a bit was given. Invisi- 
ble power opened the shutters, the trunk of the tree 
rocked and waved backwards and forwards, and after 
a time it was lifted up by invisible power and laid up- 
on the table. At this time " Oft in the stilly night" 
was played by tlie accordeon which lay on the floor, 
untouched by mortal hands. Mr. Home's arirs were 
raiBed, and he walked to the end of tiie room, where 

964 A DIAST AND LBTTEg. 

he was lifted oS the ground, and raised until hj^ feet 
were on a level with the top of a chiffonier, between 
four and live feet from the groand. I distinctly saw 
his body carried along erect in the air, it then return- 
ed to its former place, where it remained some time— 
at length it floated forward in the air, passed behind 
tlie gas chandelier which was suspended in the centre 
of the apartment, and he descended gently upon the 
floor, close to the chair in which a lady was sitting. — 
She said that when she saw him, he was about four 
feet from the ground. When he had descended his 
arms were paralyzed, but in a short time they returned 
to their natural state. 

March Idth. — The trunk of the tree that stood in 
the window was shaken, the^roll of drums was heard 
on the table, and it was lifted. as before. The tree 
shook again, aiid the accordeon which was on the 
ground, played untouched by mortal hand. Mr. Home 
took it afterwards hi his right hand, and held it upside 
down — it was played upon in the most masterly style, 
the harmony was beautiful. A small chess table from 
a distance, came up of its own accord, and pushing up 
to tJie edge of the loo table, rose and stood upright up- 
on it. Luminous hands often appeared. A beautiful 
little hand arose between the trunk and the curtain, 
the lingers distinctly plain : it rose higher, until it 
showed the arm up to the shoulder, and the little fin- 
gers bending over the top of tlie tree, played with the 
broken points of the wood, the upright splinters, and 
then after we had seen it for some time it vanished. 
Mr. Home was pushed back in his chair a loot or so, 
and a luminous head came up from his right side, 

A DIABY AND UrrfER. 265 

$ 

stopped in front of bis knees, and then coming toward 
me, as I sat on his left hand, it disappeared. 

March Vltk, — En seance five persons at Mr. Home's. 
He fell immediately into the trance, and after a time 
he awoke. I had in my pocket a musket ball, which 
in battle had broken the leg of a beloved relative. My 
dress was pulled, and a spirit hand rapped several 
times on my knee — it was his spirit. I took the bullet 
in my right hand, and put my handkerchief over it ; 
spirit fingers turned the handkerchief over the bullet, 
and took it away. Soon after, my dress was again 
pulled, and the hand put the bullet which had been 
tied up in a handkerchief into my hand. Keeping 
perfectly quiet, I said, "Beloved spirit, will you kiss 
my hand ?*' and immediately my fingers were kissed 
four times. The spirit told me that the bullet now 
possessed talisman ic power, not in cases of sickness, 
but in those of accidents. Natural flowers were taken 
off the table, and given to each person present. Mr. 
Home was now led to the end of the room, which was 
very dark ; he was raised from the ground, a beautiful 
star was visible, and also one like a small comet. He 
said a star was on his forehead, and one on each hand ; 
we saw the three very bright, and many others glanc- 
ing about. He was fixed against the wall. The lumi- 
nous appearance was so distinct as to render the pa- 
pering on the wall perfectly distinct ; and then he 
floated along the room and was placed on his knees on 
the sofa — again he was carried up, and the star on his 
forehead showed where he was — as he floated along 
the room, it floated above his head, and when he de- 
scended the star was quenched. Whilst he was at the 

12 

S66 A DIART AND LETTER. 

• 

table, ft spirit band raised tbe accordeon from tbe floor 
above the table, and when he was borne into the air, 
the accordeon floated above his head, playing beauti- 
fullj all tlie time, and crossed from one end of the 
room to the other. 

March 28/A. — En seance nine persons at Mr. 
Home's house. I had a gilt whistle in my hand, Mr. 
Home took it in his left hand, and put it under the ta- 
ble cloth ; in his right hand was the accordeon. "O !*' 
he exclaimed, " it is so strange — what are they go- 
ing to do with the whistle ? the spirit has turned it 
round in my hand, and I feel a mouth against my fln- 
gers." The whistle was immediately sounded several 
times. This was quite a new manifestation. The spi- 
rit then took the whistle from him, the accordeon be- 
gan to play, and the air was accompanied by the whis- 
tle, which 1 then heard drop upon the floor. 

March ^Ist, — JEn seance seven persons. I put 
down my hand, and held it motionless — it was kissed 
by two spirits, and when the table cloth was lifted oflF 
the bracelet, I felt fingers trying to pull it off my arm, 
but it would not pass over my hand — then the fingere 
turned the bracelet round until they got hold of the 
clasp, which it appeared they found difiicult to unfas- 
ten. At length having succeeded in so doing, they 
carried the bracelet away. Shortly afterwards a hand 
arose near a gentleman opposite, and threw the brace- 
let gently on the centre of the table. 

June 2rf. — A seance of five persons. As twilight 
came on, a pleasant dimness fell over the room, and 
a lady said, " Is the light the spirits love, like the 
odylic ?" to which raps answered " More refined." 

A DIABY AISD LETTER. 267 

The spirits moved the table with violence up to the 
window, near the Hindoo shrine, and the accordeon, 
(no human hand touching it) played in the most char- 
ming manner, exquisitely and with great power — 
There was much noise at the Hindoo shrine, the image 
of Vishnu and the Holy Bull were brought and put 
on the top of the table, then a large hand, which ap- 
peared dark, being between us and the light, put up 
the accordeon entirely above the top of the table — a 
second hand on the other side took it down again, an- 
other hand took a bell off the table and rang it. Mr. 
Home was raised from his chair erect intx) tlie air, and 
descended on a footstool. Then he was drawn to the 
other end of the room, and raised in the air until his 
hand was on the top of the door; thence he floated 
horizontally forward, and descended. I saw a bright 
star constantly flashing forth, the raps died away in 
the distance, and the stance ended. 

June Zrd. — A stance of nine persons. I placed a 
large bouquet of natural flowers on the shoulder of the 
great marble idol Ganesh, The accordeon in Mr. 
JSome's right hand playing most beautifully, harmon- 
ized the circle, and the spirit hands touched almost 
every one present. A rustling sound was heard about 
the idol, and something passed under the table. The 
spirits rapped, "They are not so beautiful as those 
you will find with us," and immediately the bouquet 
was placed in Mrs. Home's hands. Mr. Home, unty- 
ing the bouquet, returned the flowers to Mrs. Home, 
who asked the spirit to give them a talismanic power, 
and take one to each of us. The first flower, a rosebud, 
was carried to a lady, and the spirits rapped, " From 

S68 A DIABY AND LETTEB. 

one who is a morta!, but will ere long be \viih ns— « 
emblem of Sacha/' This announcement drew tears 
from us all ; we were deeply affected, and Mr. Home 
sank back overcome with emotion. A narcissus was 
given to me, and a flower to every one present — also 
some for those who were absent, but who were loved 
by Mrs. Home. She spoke for a length of time conso- 
lations for those whom she was about to quit ; her 
voice was very weak, and I lost the greater part of 
what she said. She shook hands with us all, a fare- 
well we wept, but not a word was uttered. 

Ju7ie 6th. — A stance of four persons. Mr. Home 
immediatelv went into the trance, and after many 
communications said, ^' If you could only see the mass 
of spirits near Sacha I A veiled female is near her — 
when Sacha goes to the spirit land, there she will be, 
her veil off, she will place it on Sacha's brow, heavy 
with its own stars, shimmering, shimmering down. — 
Beautiful features, long flowing hair, her hands 
crossed thus — looks upward — upward — no sorrow, no 
pain ! prayer is carried up by loving hands and placed 
before God's holy throne — they bear His blessings 
clown to earth. A staff is placed in their hands, a 
cloud to shade the heart from the sunbeams — by the 
side is suspended the bread of life — the Hope star 
liigh in the heavens to lead them from earth, and to 
rust only in God." 

June 11th .^-Mi seance seven persons. The spirits 
played beautiful music, and brought to us sprigs 
which they tore oft' a sweet-scented verbena which was 
in the room. They brought the Deir^ a brass idol 
holding a mirror from the shrine, and put it under 

A. DIARY AND LETTBB. 369 

the table. Mr. Home saw a spirit at the shrine ; then 
they rapped, "Faith in God, and the change of world 

will be most glorious, all other " (the idols which 

they had placed under the table were rattled violently) 
*' gods" were rapped out ; again they rapped the idols 
violently, and beat them against one another with 
great noise and force, and spelled " must ;" they raised 
the great idol Mahadeo^ and put it on the table. It 
is the large brass idol overshadowed by the expanded 
hood of the cobra di capeUa. Then they rapped " be 
brought." They took the idol off the table and pitched 
it down violently with a clang and noise, then rapped 
" down low before him." In this manner they eluci- 
dated the words they rapped out, " Faith in God and 
the change of world will be most glorious ; all other 
gods must be brought down low before Him." 

June VMK, — A verbena plant in a flower pot stood 
by the shrine. A hand touched Mrs. Home, and the 
j^erbena plant, with the little sticks that supported it, 
ftaving been broken off at the roots, was thrown by 
the spirits upon the table. Then they rapped, "We 
regret, but in taking the flower, we have also taken 
the earth with it." They shook Mrs. Home's dress 
violently, earth was thrown on Mr. Home's shoulder, 
and over it on the table. He saw a spirit hand which 
was full of earth, and then the remainder which had 
come out of the flower pot in a mass, was placed in his 
hand ; not a bit of the living flower remained in it. — 
•The spirits rapped — " Life-giving — and the casket that 
remains only flt to be broken." Immediately they 
broke the empty flower pot to pieces, as it lay on the 

370 A 1HABY AHD UHTER. 

gronud by the window, emblematic of drawing the 
800I from its earthly tenement. 

Junfi Vith. — Mr. Home went into the trance, and 
said, ^^ There are more spirits around Sacha, and the 
reiled spirit is coming nearer and nearer." Mysterions 
sounds which we had before heard in tlie chamber 
above were repeated. When asked, "How do you 
feel when yon go into a trance !" he said, " At first a 
heaviness in my feet comes on, I feel as if fainting 
away on the brink of a precipice — there is a moment 
of suffering, and then all is agreeable." 

Jurie 22d. — £h seance seven persons. A spirit hand 
arose and came to Mrs. Home — it moved about — she 
was anxions to touch it ; a long finger pointed to and 
motioned her to be quiet. A hand and arm were dis- 
tinctly seen, and a spirit hand closed die shutters. — 
Flowers were given to some, and were placed on the 
heads of other persons. My head was twice touched, 
and twice an arm waved over the table ; three times 
an open hand was strongly pressed on my forehead. 
A spring-bell from the shutters, used as an alarum, 
was rung above our heads, and we saw the hand 
which held it. Mr. Home went into the trance, and 
said, '* Where the eye ought to be are placed two 
crosses ; the Cliristian faith will put the eye out. I 
do not understand what they mean — the spirit is doing 
it 1 Hark 1 hark 1 don't write 1" I ceased writing — 
we listened, and heard a noise like scratching on the 
shrine. Mr. Home woke from the trance, and the 
s6ance ended. On going to the shrine, we saw on the 
forehead of the great white marble image of Gauesh, 
two crosses made in pencil by the spirits, just over the 

A DIAST AND LBTTEB. 371 

^ntre triple eye of the idol, which denotes its having 
all-«eeiiig power. This was the noise alluded to by 
Mr. Home in the trance. 

JuTie 24:th. — Seven persons eft seance. A scientific 
gentleman who had written to disprove spiritual man- 
ifestations, was to have joined the party; however, he 
requested to have a programme I whidli he said is due 
to him as a scientific man, and to his position ! It be- 
ing impossible to give a programme, he declined join- 
ing the stance. 

t/une 26th. — Mi seance eight persons. The accor- 
deon playing of itself, was raised above the table- 
then it was sliown a second time. The spirits rapped 
to a lady whose child had passed away — '' She only 
went to God, she did not die." At the word God the 
most peculiar sounds were made, as if to impress us 
with solemnity. 

June 27. — A stance of eight persons. Numerous 
manifestations took place. Flowers were given, the 
accordeon played, and an American cane chair which 
was at the other side of the room, was moved by un- 
seen power up to the table. A hand touched our 
foreheads, and an arm waved in the air over the table 
several times. Mr. Home was drawn back in his 
chair, and an arm, the hand holding the alarum bell, 
waved over the table ; it rang in the air, and by my 
shoulder, which it touched and then fell to the ground. 
The accordeon, now in the air, untouched by mortal 
hand, played beautifully as it floated round the tiable, 
and touched each person present. 

June 28. — A seance of eight persons. Mr. Home 
was raised from his chair, and carried up a little in an 

S73 A DIART AND LETTEB. 

erect poetore, and then put down again. Music waa 
heard in the air, and then strange sounds — we mar- 
velled what it might be. '^ Is it a spirit ?" " Yes." 
Then the spirit spoke many times, but the words 
were unintelligible. Mrs. Honae was afraid, and beg- 
ged them not to speak ; and Mr. Home said, ^' It is 
their diflSculty to make the material sounds of speech." 
It reminded me of Bournemouth, where in Mr. Home's 
room I liad heard music, the chirping of a bird, and 
spirit voices very distinctly. 

June 30. — A stance of three persons. The table 
trembled and tipped so much, we were surprised the 
decanters did not fall off. Then it was shaken so vio- 
lently that froth was produced, and the wine in the 
decanters splashed up their long necks, whilst the wa- 
ter was scarcely affected. The spirits rapped out their 
dislike to wine. The table was made excessively hea- 
vy — four of lis stood up and tried to lift it with all our 
power; it would not stir, neither could we turn it 
round. Soon after, it was lifted by the spirits a foot 
or more from the ground, with all the things upon it, 
and then it gently descended. One person could now 
lift it, and it was rendered heavy several times. 

July Srd, — Mi seance seven persons. The table 
was shaken, and rose and undulated in the air, whilst 
I counted sixty-two aloud. Mr. Home was lifted up 
a little in his chair, and went into the trance. His 
arms were then raised, and he ascended about a foot 
from the ground, descended, and rose again a couple 
of feet. He leaned over until he touched Mrs. Home, 
and then he was carried up, his body being bent for- 
ward in a circular form, until his head was above the 

A BIABT ANK LETTER. 278 

centre pane in the large window ; he ascended some 
feet, and came down again. It was quite light in the 
window, and we were close to it. He then went to 
the end of the room into the darkness, and we could 
not see him ascend, but three bright stairs were shown 
which denoted where he was. He descended, returned 
to the table quite stiffened, awoke soon afterwards, and 
came out of the trance. 

July ^th. — We, four persons, were sitting at the cen- 
tre window in the front drawing-room, talking togeth- 
er, when the spirits began to rap on the floor. Mr. 
Home brought up a small table, and we had many 
manifestations, in the midst of which a sofa- table at the 
end of the room, on which was a large lamp and two 
flower-pots containing fine lemon-scented verbenas. 
One of them rolled up, untouched by any one, and 
placed itself between Mr. and Mrs. Home. It was a 
fine summer evening, and the room was perfectly light. 
Mr. Home fell back in Bis chair, and went into the 
deep sleep for some time ; then he walked about the 
room, led apparently by a spirit, a very large bright 
star shone on his forehead, several clustered on his 
hair, and on the tips of his fingers. lie made passes 
>ver the verbena plant, but did not touch it. Imme- 
diately the air was filled with the scent which he 
wafted to each of us, and it remained most powerfully 
on his hands. Making more passes, still in the trance, 
he said, *'Thus we extract the essence from the flower; 
in the same manner the soul is taken from the body ; 
to-morrow you will see the lower leaves are withered, 
and the plant will die in a few days." Which fact 
occurred as he had said, yet no apparent cause could 

13* 

974 A DIABY AND LKTTEK. 

be assigned why it should have died. ^ We then went 
into the dining-room below; and after refreshments 
our guests quitted, leaving onlj Mr. Home, who was 
seated in au easy chair by the fire-side, Mrs. Home 
sleeping on the sofa, and I sitting by the table reading 
by lamp-light. Suddenly loud raps were heard on the 
large heavy dinner-table ; it trembled, rose, and bal- 
anced in the air. Mr. Home was led about the room, 
the shutters were closed, I put out the gas-lights, and 
we were in darkness. A spirit touched my fingers as 
they lay on the table, voices were were heard in the 
air, and Mr. Home sa.id, "The spirits are trying to 
talk." ''Yes," then a voice said, "we are trying to 
come." I heard two voices of very different tone, and 
asked, " Who are you, dea^ spirit ?" The name was 
given and repeated several times. Mr. Home was led 
about tlie room, showing stars on his forehead and fin- 
gers as he held his hands up. A cross of stars was 
seen by him and Mrs. Home. I only saw the cross- 
bar of stars, not the uprights. He was led up to the 
shutters, and he opened the lower part ; immediately 
spirit power closed the lower and opened the upper 
part. Mr. Home was now led to the further end of the 
room, and passed in front of a very large mirror — a, sea 
of glass. I saw a form leading him, over the head of 
whicli was thrown a tinted robe flowing to the ground, 
marking 'the shape of the liead and shoulders. He fol- 
lowed close upon it; I saw tlieni both in the mirror, 
his features, face and hair, perfectly distinct, but the 
features of the form that led him were not visible be- 
neath the dark blue tinted robe that covered them. 
Tiiey paj^sed from before the glass, and then we all saw 

A DIARY AND LETTER. 276 

R female figure with a white veil thrown over her 
head, which fell to the ground ; at the same time, but 
rather higher, was the form of a man in oriental cos- 
tume. The startling vision faded away, and the great 
mirror remained with only the light from the window, 
which streamed in upon it. 

July V^th, — En seance six persons. Stars appeared 
above Mi's. Home's head, and a light was seen, with 
fingers passing over it as it floated above our heads. 
It was the veiled spirit. I saw the hand which held 
the veil, which was spangled with stars, and the fingers 
moved distinctly as it floated just in front of us. A 
star was seen on Mr. Home, and flowers were given. 
Mrs. Home's mother made the sign of the cross on her 
brow, and then on Mr. Home's. Two fingers touched 
my forehead, and one all wet made the sign of the 
cross. The tearing of paper was now heard, and soon 
after a spirit hand took hold of my left hand as it lay 
on the table, and put a piece of paper into it. Other 
pieces of paper were torn oflF, and then a pencil was 
thrown to the other end of the room. A bell was rung 
in the air, the accordeon floating above our heads 
played the most joyful and martial music, and Mrs. 
Home saw hei* spirit-father. " God bless you all, good 
night," was now rapped. On looking at the paper that 
had been put into my hand, I found the initials of a 
beloved spirit, beautifully written in pencil, dLfdC'Sifn- 
He of his writing when on earth. A paper had been 
given to Mrs. Home by her father, and on it was a 
cross surmounted by a crown, to show us that we must 
bear tlie cross to wear the crown. 

February 1 8, 1862. — A seance of six persons. After 

S76 A DIABY AND LETTBB. 

various manifestations, Mr. Home went into the trance, 
and addressing a person present said, ^^ You ask what 
good are such trivial manifestations, such as rapping, 
table-moving, &c. ? God is a better judge tlian we are 
what is fitted for humanity, immense results may 
spring from trivial things. The steam from a kettle is 
a small thing, but look at the locomotive I The elec- 
tric spark from the back of a cat is a small thing, but 
see the wonders of electricity I The raps are small 
things, but their results will lead you to the Spirit 
World and to eternity ! Why should great results ' 
spring from euch causes? Christ was born in a man- 
ger, he was not born a King. When you tell me why 
he was born in a manger, I will tell you why these 
manifestations, so trivial, so undignified as they appear 
to you, have been appointed to convince the world of 
the truth of spiritualism." 

The foregoing extracts will be read with interest by 
those persons who were present, and perhaps by a 
larger circle. I give no names, but merely the facts as 
they occurred, because it is impossible for any one to 
give credit to such marvels, until by investigation they 
are forced to believe the truth. 

F. C. P. 

In this diary there are several remarkable manifes- 
tations, and amongst them that of the presence of the 
veiled spirit, who thenceforth was frequently seen by 
my wife and by me, as will be read in the beautiful 
memoir of my wife, written by that most inestimable 
type of womanhood, Mrs. Mary Howitt. The veil of 

A DIAEY AND LETTER. 277 

that spirit kept gradually being raised through the 
successive stages of my dear wife's painful illness, and 
became almost an index of the insidious advances of 
her disease. 

There is one phenomenon, however, which has hap- 
pened to me only on the occasion described in the 
diary. I allude to the wonderful case of the verbena 
plant, and the drawing of its scent, and of its very 
life out of it, by a few passes of my hand, wafting its 
whole perfume in the faces of the sitters, and leaving 
the tree to die for want of the vital principle which had 
been thus extricated from it. I have heard before of 
experiments tried in mesmerism upon plants with some 
apparent results, but never of any so marked as this, 
of the verbena. It is not wise to judge of isolated 
cases, but probably there may occur, or may be found, 
other instances of a similar kind, which may throw 
light upon the power of the human will, over the lower 
forms of life. 

I am sorry that in so many instances I am obliged to 
conceal the names of my friends who have witnessed 
wonderful things ; but if the reader is disposed to com- 
plain of this, let him remember the reason, and take 
the greater part of the blame on himself. No sooner 
is the name of some honest and courageous person giv- 
en in obedience to the call for testimony, than it be- 
comes a target for all the ridicule, jests, and abuse of 
the unscrupulous, the sceptical, the orthodox, and the 
scientific ; in fact, of all who are not wise enough to 
think, and observe, and weigh, and judge, before they 
decide. There is small encouragement for men, and 

278 A DIABY AND LETTEK. 

Still less for ladies, to come forward, and stand in front 
of all this obloquy. If an example be needed of the 
truth of this, if it be not an obvious fact ab-eadj in this 
uncharitable day, let my adventurous friends watch 
the extent to which I shall be abused, and called bad 
names, and given to the devil, for simply and truth- 
fully writing in this little book a few of the incidents 
of my life, with the production of which I have had 
nothing to do. It has been my good fortune never to 
have cared much for bad opinions of me, which have 
been formed in utter and acknowledged ignorance; 
and my silence hitherto when tlie most gross and fool- 
ish statements have been made to my prejudice, and 
when a word from me would have corrected them, is 
sufficient proof of my indiflference to such attacks. 

I am sorry, however, for the want of kindness and the 
folly which so many .exhibit, for their own sakes, more 
than for my own. I do not expect that they will be- 
have differently now in regard to what they see in my 
book, for ill the present state of their minds, the truth 
cannot be received. The facts become to them impos- 
sible, while to me, and many of my friends who have 
been in the habit of seeing them, and watching them, 
studying them and their consequences for so many 
years, their strangeness even has well nigh disappeared. 
We ought certainly to make some allowance for those 
ignorant persons who sit quietly at home, saying that 
such things are impossible, without having ever take i 
the trouble to try to witnesss them, or to get together 
even the first elements for forming a judgment upon 
them. These are not so unjust and dishonest as that 
class, of vvliich Sir David Brewster is the type, who, in 

A DIABY AND LETTER. 279 

the interests of what they consider their position in 
the scientific world, have no scruple in telling false- 
hoods, and in denying what they have seen, and in de- 
ceiving still further the former class of merely ignorant 
persons. 

I hope, therefore, that both I and my friends may be 
in some measure excused for giving their narratives 
without their names. If I were at liberty to make them 
public, they would add greatly to the value of the nar- 
rative, and the public would have an opportunity of 
being greatly surprised at finding out who are the per- 
sons who have investigated the subject and vouch for 
these remarkable facts. In society they are well known 
to many ; and, perhaps, nothing is more strange than 
the entire belief with which these facts are spoken of 
and received in large mixed companies, when compared 
with the expression of entire disbelief with which they 
are accompanied in nearly all notices of the press. Of 
those who will openly coindemn this narrative in their 
journals, hardly one does not reckon amongst his inti- 
mate and valued friends, or relatives, or co-contributors, 
several who are with good reason entire believers. It 
would be curious to contrast the language he holds to 
Buch persons with that he uses in describing my book 
to the ignorant masses, who, he meanly knows expect 
such abuse at his hands he will be pleased to hear it. 
If it were necessary, I could give some names which 
would amply justify what I have said of these poor 
leaders of the blind. 

The testimony which I now give is that of a lady, 
whose word and powers of observation are entitled to 
the most unreserved acceptance, and I am sorry that 

280 ▲ DIABT AND LETTEB. 

I can only give her initial, and call her Mrs. S > 

Bhe had become a widow not long before I had the 
pleasure of making her acquaintance. 

" I first attended a stance at Mr. Home's in the sum- 
mer of 1861, when I was put in verj deep affliction. I 
had never seen anything of Spiritualism before, but had 
heard a good deal of it from a dear old friend who in- 
troduced me to Ml*. Home. My own experiences that 
night were far more wonderful than anything I had 
ever heard or read of, and were to me most convinc- 
ing. After many raps, movements of the table, &c., 
ray handkerchief was dnjwn from my hand, the knocks 
given for the alphabet, and the words * Shed no more 
tears' were spelt out, and my handkerchief came tip of 
itself at the oposite side of the table, moved gently 
across, and settled itself on the table in front of me ; 
this I saw without a possibility of mistake or doubt. 
After this, Mr. Home fell into a trance, and described 
my dear husband most accurately, said how noble he 
was in mind and body, and Iiow he should have loved 
him had he known him in life, and then said, * But who 
is that Mary standing by his side ? What a noble wo- 
man, and how she loves him, and how happy they are 
together, and how they both love you ; you were his 
star in life. But what was that misery about his watch ? 
you forgot to wind his watch, and how miserable it 
made you.' Now this was a fact known to no human 
being but myself. I had wound the watch the night 
I lost my husband, and resolved never to let it go down 
again ; but more than a month afterwards, when I re* 
luriied to our old home I forgot to wind it one night, 

JL DIABY AND LETTZB. 381 

and my agony was great when I discovered it in the 
morning, but I never mentioned it even to my hus- 
band's sister, who was in the house with me. A great 
deal more took place at the stance interesting both to 
myself and others. 

" A month later I attended a second stance. Some 
remarkable things were told by Mr. Home, who was iif 
a state of trance, to a lady present of her departed 
friend. He then went to the opposite end of the room, 
and she remarked to me in a low voice. ' How very 
wonderful, he has been dead these thirty years,' when 
Mr. Home, whom I thought much too distant to hear, 
called out, in a loud thrilling voice, 'Do not say dead ; 
he is not dead, but gone before ; nothing kills but sin, 
sin kills through the devil, but those who live in Christ 
will never die.' Mr. Home came soon afterwards to 
me, and said that my dear husband and his mother (the 
Mary spoken of before) were behind my chair, and that 
both longed to comfort me. He gave me the following 
message : — ' My own Adelaide, all your prayers are 
heard, your pure thoughts seen, your patience and lov- 
ing hope. We are noty nor sU^all we be separated, we 
are one inCnBisT.' 

" He then went on to say that I had had a conversa- 
tion witli my husband eight months before, and that he 
blessed me for that conversation now ; that we were 
sitting in our drawing-room at home, he in his arm- 
chair and I in mine, with the little round table between 
U8y that 1 had just been reading a chapter in the New 
Testament, and that on that night the angel of the Lord 
laid his hand upon my husband's brow, and he had 
faded from that time. I remember jperfecUy the con 

282 ▲ DIABY AND JLETTBB. 

yersation alluded to, and it was a very remarkable one. 
I had been reading prayers to the servants, and we were 
sitting in tlie manner prescribed, and talked for more 
than half an hoar before going to bed. These are facts 
for which I can vouch, and though niy name is not given 
here, Mr. Home will give it to any one wishing to be 
•convinced. To me the comfort has been unspeakable ; 
but did I believe Spiritualism to be sinful or forbidden 
by our Lord, nothing would indace me to have any- 
thing to say to it, but I believe the reverse in this case. 
I have felt more at peace, more perfect trust — uttei 
childlike trust — in my God and Saviour, than I have 
ever done before. Mr, Home told me that my dear 
husband was always with me when I prayed, and I feel 
that he is, through Christ." 

We spent July, August, and September, 1861, at 
Folkestone. My power had left me, but my wife con- 
tinued to see spirits daily. We went to Brighton, ^where 
we remained till the month of December. Late in the 
evening of one day in November, my wife being in 
bed, 1 was in the drawing-room with a friend, when a 
strange chill air seemed to surround us, and creaking 
noises were heard. In fact, a feeling of great discom- 
fort came upon us both, when we heard my wife knock- 
ing on the floor, this being her signal of requiring my 
presence. I ran up stairs, and she said, " Daniel, do 
not leave me ; there is a spirit-presence in my room 
which is strange and unpleasant to me. I feel as if 
something had occurred, or was about to happen." I 
remained with her, but we no longer felt or heard any- 
thing of the kind. In the morning on the breakfast 

A DIABT AND LETTEB. 

table was a letter from a much loved friend, amiounc- 
ing the departure of a son under most painful circum- 
stances. It was evident that it was his spirit who had 
been with us the previous evening. 

We came back to town in December; and in Janu- 
ary, 1862, the power returned, in me but far from 
strongly. On one occasion whilst we were seated, th^ 
strange trembling so often noticed was felt in the ta* 
ble, and almost simultaneously with it I heard the 
nursery-bell ring. I heard the servant go up stairs, 
the nursery being on the third floor, and soon she cam© 
with a message from the nurse requesting my presence 
I went, and found the child sitting in his bed, and a 
look of alarm on his face. He said to me, " Oh, papa, 
I don't like to have my bed rocking." I thought that 
he might have a headache, or some slight indisposi- 
tion, which ij^ight have caused a giddiness, but he said 
he was very well. I remained a short time with him, 
and then joined my friends in the drawing-room. In 
about half an hour the trembling was repeated, and 
again the nursery-bell rang. I had to go him, and I 
found that the rocking had been more violent than be- 
fore, and he begged me to lay down with him till he 
got to sleep. J did so. and in about ten minutes he 
was fast asleep. The spirits then told us that they had 
** accidentally caused his bed to shake." 

Another instance of this trembling being felt outside 
the room has occurred within ten days previous to my 
writing this. A deaf and dumb maid living in a 
house where I was, and knowing nothing either of my 
presence, or of spiritual manifestations, said to the 
joaog lady, her mistress, on her going upstairs to her, 

S86 nr memobiaic 

by one to whom the bright spirit-world has become a 
calm reality, from her frequent intercourse with the 
good angels who had gone before. 

In Memoriam. 

" Madame Alcxandrina Home, the wife of Mr. Dan- 
iel Dunglas Home, passed from earth on the 3d July 
last, at the Gh&teau Laroche, Dordogne, France, the 
residence of her sister, the Cpuntess Luboff Koucheleff 
Besborodka, in the twenty-second year of her age. 

'^ Mrs. Home was the youngest daughter of the Gen- 
eral Count de Ej'oH, of Russia, and she was the god- 
daughter of the late Emperor Nicholas. She was edu- 
cated at the Institute of St. Catherine at the same time 
as tlie present Countess de Morny, of Paris. Mr, 
Home, who had been at several of the Courts of Eu- 
rope, where he was received with much distinction, 
and where the marvellous phenomena which occur in 
his presence excite deep attention, was at Home in the 
spring of 1858 for the benefit of his health, and there 
first saw the lady who became his wife on the 1st of 
f August of that year. The marriage took place at St 
Petei-sburgh, and was celebrated in the presence of M. 
Alexandre Dumas, who went from Paris on purpose to 
be present, and to oflBciate as god-father to Mr. Home, 
according to the custom of the Romish Church. The 
Emperor Alexander also was represented there by two 
of his aides decamp, whom he sent as groomsmen, and 
the Emperor presented to Mr. Home on the happy oc- 
casion a magnificent diamond ring of great valne. On 
the birth of the only child of the marriage, a son, the 

CHAPTER Xn. 

IN MEMOBIAM. 

On the 20th of February, 1862, we left England for 
the ChAteau Laroche, near Perigueux, the residence in 
the south of France of my brother-in-law. I need not 
to go through again the scenes of those last days on 
earth of the dear one whom it has pleased God to take 
away, in the spring time of her life, to the bright morn- 
ing land. It is well with her there, and she is only 
more than ever my hope, and my beaming guiding 
star. My good guardian angel, watching over her 
dear child, and me, her husband — separated, but not 
lost — in spirit more than ever present. In God's lov- 
ing mercy we shall meet again, and find our lasting 
habitation in the eternal inner world. 4 

Let me have the pleasure ot adding the sweet trib- 
ute to her memory of Mrs. Howitt, which gives such 
few facts as may be made public of one who amongst 
her friends required no written words to be embalmed 
in their hearts' best memories. To those who knew 
her not, these words will serve to show the effect of 
spiritual communion during the long stages of disease, 
and the placid contemplation of the passing onwai*d| 

288 IN MEMOBIAM. 

to which He was calling her. Nothing but the deep- 
est religious conviction of the Supreme Wisdom and 
Love can bring the human soul into a state of submis- 
sive obedience to His otherwise apparently severe and 
mysterious decrees. Let us now see how the Divine 
Father had led and schooled His young disciple into 
that highest, that profouudest of all knowledge, the 
firm possession of wliich makes obedience and submis- 
sion easy, and keeps the soul calm and even joyful un- 
der the most startling and adverse circumstances. We 
shall then in part, if not fully understand whence came 
the strange, and apparently most unnatural, willing- 
ness to depart from the earthly life amidst its most at- 
tractive circumstances. She was a deeply-believing 
Spiritualist. God's love bad made known to her the 
reality of the spiritual world ; she had been permitted 
to solve the great, mysterious, and perplexing riddle of 
the Hereafter, and so loyal was she to the knowledge 
which had thus been given her, that she was ready to 
attest it in life or in death. Like all experienced Spi- 
ritualists she knew that the outward life, be its term 
longer or shorter, is but a school in which God wills to 
train the immortal being to a higher knowledge — ^is 
but a pilgrimage, or passage by which he is willing to 
conduct it to another and a still happier home. She 
knew that in that other state of existence, though un- 
clothed by the body, and apparently separated from the 
beloved on earth, she might yet be permitted to watch 
over and love them as their guardian angel, and to be 
in the close companionship of those who had gone be- 
fore — ^of those living and glorified spirits who should 
lead her to the throne of grace and love ineflPable. If 

IN MBMOBTAM. 889 

it be the highest heroism to meet death with unflinch- 
ing courage, this amiable, gentle young woman, this 
child of affluence and fortune, displayed an almost un- 
equalled degree of this noble quality of mind, and so 
doing, proved how strong and all-sustaining in life's 
extremity is the faith of the Christian Spiritualist. 

** The first startling intelligence that her disease was 
mortal came to a mind so prepared with wholly abated 
force. The sting was already taken from death ; nor 
through the whole after trials and sufferings of her phy- 
sical frame did she lose her equanimity or firm confi- 
dence in the future. This calmness, indeed, became 
the most striking feature of her long and painful ill- 
ness. It was so profound and marked as to be almost 
phenomenal, and was noticed as such by the eminent 
physicians who attended her in London, and subse- 
quently in France, as well as by the Bishop of Peri- 
gueux, who frequently visited her during the latter 
part of her earthly life. The last sacraments were ad- 
ministered to her by the Bishop, who wept like a child, 
and who remarked that * though he had been present 
at many a death-bed for Heaven, he had never seen 
one equal to hers.' 

" Whilst residing in London the most remarkable 
spiritual gifts and manifestations exhibited through 
Mr. Home, and the many attractive qualities of his 
young and lovely wife had naturally gathered around 
them a large circle of friends to whom the singular ex- 
hibition of her calmness, her meekness, her playful, 
winning ways, even in the midst of suffering, and the 
joyfulness with which she anticipated her removal, 
were, if possible, a greater anomaly, and almost for 

S90 IN HEMOBIAM. 

the time, cast into the shade the wonderful gifb and 
powers of her Imsband. If Addison called to his death- 
i)ed his infidel son-in-law that, witnessing his coinpo- 
sure, he iniglit learn with how much calmness a Chris- 
tian could die, so here disbelievers in Spiritualism look- 
ing on this gifted young woman, saw with wonder not 
only how calmly, but how joyously the Christian Spi- 
ritualist could face death. Another equally anomalous 
feature to the Protestant Christian was not to find in 
her the self-depreciation of the guilt-awakened sinner ; 
not to hear on her lips the usual phraseology of the dy- 
ing but sufiering saint ; no mention made of the atone- 
ment ; of the works of grace on her soul, of the suflfer- 
ings of a crucified Savior for her sake. Nevertheless, 
with the simplicity of a little child who accepted the 
Divine love as his natural gift, she loved the Savior 
and rejoiced in Him, responding to His unspeakable 
goodness with the whole allegiance of her soul, but 
Gethseiiiaue and the bloody hill of the crucifixion were 
not present to her mind ; the agoiiy and woe had no 
place in her experience. She wae, it must be remem 
bered, the embodiment of her own Greek church ; of 
that church in which she was educated, the most an- 
cient faith of which has ever recognized the Savior lesp 
as the Crucified than the Arisen, the triumphant over 
suliering, sin, and death, as the Victor not the Victim, 
as the Lord who said to his chosen ones, ' Kejoice that 
your names are written in heaven !' Such, it appears 
to ine, who frequently saw her during this portion of 
her short stay on earth, was the fact which made her 
relationship to the Savior so joyous, whilst her own 
single-heartedness left her free from all established 

m MEMORIAM. 391 

phraseology or any wish to prodnce effect, and these 
happily combined with her actual knowledge of spirit- 
ual existence, strengthened that remarkable state of 
calmness and cheerfulness with which she waited the 
close of her outward life. Her Savior had indeed 
risen for her, and with the unquestioning, unreasoning 
faith of a loving, obedient child-like nature, she was 
not only willing to go when He called her, but cheer- 
fully to give up all at His bidding, knowing that a 
more enlarged, a more glorious sphere of usefulness 
and angel ministration would be unfolded to her through 
His love, and that thus she should be enabled more 
tenderly and more effectually to watch over and be- 
come a blessing to the beloved ones whom she left be- 
hind. 

" During that short but interesting time of her de- 
clining health in London, her remarkable unselfishness 
became another endearing characteristic to all her 
friends. SHe made, even amidst her increasing suffer- 
ings, constant exertions to see them, and seances were 
held frequently at the house where she and her hus- 
band were then residing, in which she took a glad part. 
On these occasions many wonderful and touchingly 
beautiful incidents occurred, and few, if «nny, who thus 
met her, but retain with tender and affectionate regard 
some tender flower or fragrant spray — am emblem of 
herself, which was presented to her by spirit-hands, as 
a little memento for each. 

" In the earlier stages of her disease her spiritual 
perception began to open, and she commenced, and 
throughout her illness continued to see and converse 
with the denizens of the spiritual world. Her most 

99f Ur MEMOHTAM, 

frequent Tisitante were her mother and her father, and 
the mother of her hasband. From them she received 
the most loving meseages of endearment, and the most 
cheering words of welcome to her spirit home. She 
was also constantly attended by a veiled female spirit, 
whom she did not know, but whose very presence 
gave her great comfort, though she never spoke, nor 
raised her veil. Mr. Home was told that this kind 
guardian spirit would continue veiled until the last, 
when the veil would be thrown over her own new-born 
spirit, to keep her from the sight of the tears and 
ujourning around the bed where her body would be 
lying. Through the six months ]»revious to her pass- 
ing away, the veil was slowly and gradually gathered 
from the feet of the guardian spirit towards the head, 
until two days before her release, when for the last 
time she saw tlie spirit with the veil gathered in the 
form of a crown about her head, but with one part, 
as a festoon, still concealing her face. 

" On one occasion several persons, who were in the 
room with Mrs. Home, saw the hand and arm of the 
spirit to the shoulder, the appearance being that of a 
Itiminous body, most beautifully perfect in form, and 
jovered as if with a veil of light. 

"The eminent composer, M. Magnus, of Paris, 
.ame to the Chateau Laroche to visit Mrs. Home dur- 
ing the last three weeks of her earthly stay, and al- 
most daily she asked him to play for her, and whilst 
lying placidly listening to his music, her face assumed 
an almost beautiful expression whilst she kept time to 
the music with her hands. On one occasion she aaid^ 

IN HEMOBIAM. 298 

when he had finished playing, ' Those strains are very 
beantifnl, but I shall soon hear more beautiful still.' 

"Frequently also, during the first three months and 
the last two months of her illness, not only she, but all 
those about her, heard delicious strains of spirit mu* 
sic, sounding like a perfect harmony of vocal sounds. 
During the last month, also, the words were most dis- 
tinctly heard, and were recognized as the chants for 
the dying used in the Eussian Church. 

" She departed on Thursday, the 3rd of July, and on 
the Saturday morning following, her little boy, of 
three years old, said to his nurse on awakening, * I 
have seen mamma, and she is quite well now. She is 
with God, and she told me that my nncle Gregoire, 
and my aunt Luba are my godfather and my godmo* 
ther, and that they would be very good to me, and T 
must love them.' 

" At her funeral, the service at which was perform- 
ed by the vicar-general of the diocese, four of the 
men servants of her sister asked each to lead a horse 
of the hearse to the burial ground, saying that they 
could not allow hired persons to be near the dear body 
of her who had ever had a kind word and a loving 
look for all. The peasantry, instead of, as is custom- 
ary, throwing earth upon the coffin, first covered it 
with flowers— fittest for her last garment, and fittest 
for the expression of their love. 

" Such is a brief memorial of a short but lovely life 
on earth. But short as it was, rarely has the oldest 
and most experienced orthodox Christian attained to 
a higher degree of religious consciousness, clearness 
and trust in God, than did this young and attractive 

2M Df MSMOBIAM. 

woman, by tho^e yery moans and teacliiugs which the 

religious world as yet so much ignores and qnestionB. 

" Blessed, however, be God the Savionr for every 

fresh revelation and manifestation of his Divine life, 

• and for every renewed teaching of bis Holy Spirit. 

" MaBY Ho WITT." 

To another esteemed friend, Mrs. S. O. Hall, also 
well known for her true woman's heart, and for her 
power of expressing tlie best feelings of the soul, I am 
indebted for her written impressions of my dear wife, 
and in which she embraces a most interesting account 
of her observations of the phenomena : 

'' It pleased God to remove from this life only a few 
months since, a much beloved lady, who during her 
brief residence among us, entwined herself closely 
round the hearts of her and her husband's many friends 
— I speak of one, dear to us as ' Sacha,' the wife of 
Mr. Daniel Home. 

"Educated as befitted a Russian lady of rank, she 
was still more richly endowed by grace, feeling, a 
peculiar beauty, which I may term loveliness, and a 
sweet simplicity of nature, that rendered her transpa- 
rent and pure as crystal ; she was also gifted with a 
rare appreciation of the beautiful. Her interest in, 
and admiration of wliatever was excellent in art, was 
the result of innate perception, not often met with 
where observation has not been matured by age ; with 
a retinement on the natural quickness of her sex — she 
felt while others reasoned — indeed, all her perceptions 
were vivid, and she was entirely feminine. 

IN MSMOBIAK. 295 

" When first I knew her, she was radiant with life 
and joy — a ])layful ^irl numbering just twenty years, 
and yet in the full tide of her sweet joy — loving her 
husband, lier child, her friends, and feeling keenly 
how much she was beloved. If something touched* 
her quick sympathies, her eyes in a moment grew 
dee)» and dark, her sweet lips quivered, and the girl 
became at once the deep-hearted, tender, earnest wo- 
man. Wise too she was, and in her wildest moods 
somethins: would come of wisdom, a sentence, or even 
a single word, so full and suggestive. 

** Soon, however, it became certain to us that this 
Bweet happy life was not to remain here, and to none 
was this so evident as to herself ; not for a moment 
did she doubt that she had received her warning for 
the ' better land.' She would talk with her husband, 
and with all of us, her friends, of her passing away, 
believing — nay, knowing — that she would be permit- 
ted still to watch over her child, to companion her 
husband, to communicate with her friends ; and this 
in calm, unconstrained cheerfulness, surrounded by 
the happy realities of a loving life, and loving, as he 
deserved, her devoted husband. It was almost impos- 
sible to hear the full sweet tones of her voice, to feel 
the affectionate pressure of lier little hands, observe 
the life-full expression of her £ace, and realise her ap- 
proaching change, when the mortal shall have put on 
immortality. 

" How bitterly hard it is to feel^ however we may 
repeat the words, * Thy will be done !' As the spring 
advanced each time I saw her, I perceived some 
change, and yet the ^ change' could not bo defined — ^it 

996 m MSMOBIAK. 

was more in her spirit than her person. Saffering, 
wearied the yoang fragile form, and she longed to be 
away — she desired freedom from the body's pain, from 
the perpetual endurance of restlessness— she craved to 
- be out of the body that she might be in the spirit. — 
She talked about this change as invalids talk of change 
of air, and with hope in her beaming face. I confess 
that I do not comprehend this phase of mind — I look 
forward with joy to meet those I have loved and lost 
from earth, and I look to the time when those I leave 
behind will, trusting in the same Mediator, bend be- 
fore the dear Kedeemer« and join in His presence, the 
* spirits of just men made perfect,' so that we all shall 
be one in Christ — but this young creature's certainty 
tliat she should return and watch over her husband, 
child, and ail she held in hei: expanding heart, was to 
me incomprehensible ; it was as if she thought that 
after death heaven would descend with her to earth. 
Her faith in her future happiness was fine ; but 
death, like life, was to her a poem, and all her 
thoughts and actions were poetic — ^with all her suffer- 
ing, hers was the poetry of daily life. She enjoyed be- 
yond description a stance with those she loved. One 
of her pleasures was tying up little bouquets of flowers 
with one of her long dark hairs, flinging a bouquet un- 
der or on the table, or into the room, and expressing a 
wish that a spirit would give it to one or other of her 
friends. This was invariably done, and I presej-ve 
these flowers as tokens of her sweet love, and shall 
do so while Hive. These little tender acts of kindness 
were mingled with promises of coming to us when she 
should have no mortal body — suffer no pain. Shenev- 

IN MEMOBIAM. 297 

er doubted that this would be permitted, and she loved 
to dwell upon the delight it would be to her to be with 
us. Tiiere was in her no tanit or tone of sadness. I 
never saw a more joyful, a more perpetual belief in 
the soul's immortality. We could not avoid observing 
at times an occasional abstraction, her eyes — illumina- 
ted by a bright light, wandering round the room, her 
whole face smiling as if recognising some spirit friend. 
Daily — daily was the end, as regarded her earthly ten- 
ement advancing, and still nearer came the angels I 

" At times, her patience under the accumulated suf- 
ferings she was doomed to endure was marvellous; 
and when at last she longed to anticipate our sum- 
mer, so tardy that year in arriving, and when I bade 
her adieu, she pressed her tiny hand into mine, ^ feel 
it — ^feel it well,' she said in her pretty English, nolon« 
ger broken but accented — ' feel it, for when I come to 
you, you must remember it.' Some months passed, 
and then at last came the news, early in last July, she 
was called home. 

" I had several times the full conviction (as I have 
at this moment) that she was with me, but I have no 
medium power, and beyond the cool breeze that passes 
across my hand or brow, ' the air of the angel's wing,' 
I receive no sign of such presence — nor do I need it. 

" Mr. Home returned to England, and after our first 
meeting (those who loved her could not call it sad, for 
he was assured of her happiness) we arranged an eve- 
ning stance in the drawing-room, which was lit as usual 
— only five persons present, five who had known and 
loved Sacha I 

^^ Before what the world calls death, she had asked 

ber hosband to g^Te me a little lace cap, the embrciid- 
ery by her own hands, and I had asked him for a 
braid of her hair ; he brought both, tied in one of her 
white handkerchiefs, and placed them on the table- 
More than the a>«nal manifestations came that night ; 
not only the table bnt onr chairs, and the very room 
shook, and the ^ raps ' were everywhere around ns. A 
lady, whose consolation through spiritualism has been 
indeed blessed, received several messages in answ^to 
her thoughts ; and a very eminent sculptor, whose en- 
giigements on public works are unceasing, had been 
rising before day to finish a bust of Sacha, which he 
desired to preseitt to her hosband — this fact was not 
even known in his own hoitsehold — he received a mes- 
sage thus : ' Thanks for your early morning labor — I 
have been often near you.' While the message was 
rapped out, he felt her little hand repeatedly on his, 
in loving confirmation of her thanks. This was the 
first time he had ever felt the touch of the * spirit- 
hand,' and it aflected liim deeply. Mr. Home then 
placed the embroidery and the hair under the table. 
* Sacha,' he said, * wishes to give them to you her- 
self.' Presently my dress was pulled. I put down 
my hand, and the cap was not only placed in it, but 
my fingers closed over it, hy her hand^ I could not be 
mistaken, I knew that hand so well I My dress was 
again pulled, and I laid my hand in my lap, then I 
felt her liand more distinctly ; it was placed entirely 
in mine, and after a pressure, left me the lock of hair 1 
"Again the alphabet was demanded, and the pas- 
KHire spelt out. ' Give me the handkerchief, I want to 
give it to Mrs. S . Oh, I thank lier for her beau- 

IN MBMOBIAM. S99 

titul flowers,' (flowers she was in the habit of sending 
lier during her illness.) Mr. Home threw the hand- 
kerchief that had contained tlie hair and embroidery 
down. It was rolled up and knotted, and given into 
Mr8. S 's hand. There was much more that even- 
ing, the revealings were all continued evidence of spi- 
ritual power, and spirit presence, such as come to us 
with healing messages on their wings, making us 
thankful that to us Spiritualism has been the handmaid 
of Christianity. 

" But dear Saoha is far from being the only one of 
my beloved Mends, departed, or rather removed, from 
whom I have received sweet, and consoling, and com- 
forting messages. One whom I love and reverence 
beyond all who are gone before, has given me by un- 
mistakeable proof, the blessed certainty of the interest 
&he is permitted to take in our spiritual welfare, and 
has, by her precepts, and apt quotations of holy writ, 
strengthened our armor of faith, and if it be possi- 
ble, brightened the hope of the glory that shall be re- 
vcaled hereafter. Is not this comforting ? I do not 
prolong this brief record of happy memories, but I 
could do so. SpisrruALiSM has been to me a blessing, 
for which I cannot be enough thankful, less for my 
own sake, than for the sake of others who are very 
dear to me ; for though it brought me more sunshine, 
it has given me no new light. I testify here of spirit- 
ualism, as it is known and believed by me and mine : 
1 say KNOWN, for nearly live years we have had abun- 
dant proofs of its reality. I will briefly say how 
this is. I thank God that I never had a doubt as to 
the divine truths of Christianity, neither did I re* 

300 n ^WMOBIAM, 

eeive them ha cold facts. My dear modier was of 
pure Ilngueiiot descent, and would, at any period of 
her lite, have gone calmly to the stake sooner than 
have even seemed to abate one jot of her belief in the 
Existence, Mission, and Miracles of Christ-God. I 
drank at the fonntain of this faith from my earliest 
years, and every night the accustomed *■ chapter ' was 
read, prayed over and discussed ; thus religions faith 
grew to be my enjoyment, as well as my hope and 
trust. Moreover, she held the belief that the spirits 
of those we knew, loved, and reverenced, were per- 
mitted to watch over ns, and it might be to commnni- 
cate with ns — but how such commnnication was to 
take place, was a mystery as much to the parent as 
the child. She believed that our holiest thoughts 
and actions were suggested to us, under Divine per- 
mission, by ministering angels ; and that perseverance 
in prayer would protect us from the evil influences 
that were ever on the watch to whisper, or even to 
inculcate, what was contrary to God's holy law. 

" This was, and is pure Spiritualism — pure Christian 
Spiritualism ! — yet having believed this all my life long, 
believing also that the supernatural was often permit- 
ted as one of the uiissionaries of Christianity, I laughed 
at what was called ' Table-turning.' I liad never seen 
spiritual manifestations, but that did not hinder my 
laughing at the idea of a spirit giving a message by 
raps on a table ; all my belief in the ' Cloud of Wit- 
nesses ' did not prevent ray catching at what seemed 
the absurdity of such a means of coramuuication, and 
instead of investigating, I laughed. I did woree, I be- 
came angry. I said I had all my life believed in su- 

IN MSMOBIAH. 801 

pernaural presences^ I believed that, if necessary ^ 
Chki81-God would give one of His ' Cloud of Witnesses' 
permission to communic'ate with me, but what had that 
to do with raps? I never called to mind that at this 
moment the world is filled with 'Thomases,' who will 
not (if they can avoid it) believe except on the testi- 
mony of their senses. Because I believe in Gospel 
truths, I thought that otliers ought to believe as I did, 
from the testimony which had sufficed me and mine. 1 
did not want to see the Saviour's wounds, I believed in 
them, that was enough for me. I did not think those 
' stiflF-necked and stubborn,' who require, as Thomas 
did, a • sign ;' and we must remember (which I did not) 
that the Master did not refuse him that sign — no. He 
eaUed him, to examine those marks of His suffering. 
He not only permitted the unbeliever to examine for 
himself, but He called upon him to do so. 

" At length we were prevailed on to meet a young 
lady-medium, one in all respects above suspicion ; we 
were a mixed party of twelve or fourteen at that din- 
ner-table : and while questioning myself how it was 
possible that educated and intelligent men could receive 
as testimony of spiritual presence the ' raps ' and * tilts,' 
which though I could not account for, I did not believe 
in, my attention was awakened by the young lady's 
saying that a spirit was present, who desired to com- 
municate with me. She described a presence which I 
recognized, and then gave me a message, a portion of 
wliich could only be intelligible to us two — the spirit 
who gave it, and I who received it. This was so pos- 
itive and conclusive to me^ that believing as I always 
lid that such a power existed, I was forced to believe 

802 IN UBMOXUM. 

that there was trath in medinmship, and that here was 
the means used for communicating from the spirits of 
those gone before to those who still lingered in the 
flesh. 

^^ This was the confirmation of a blessed reality to 
me, but to others, particularly to one other at the table, 
it was thrice blessed; liis past had been clouded with 
doubts as to the existence of spirit-life, he Iiad refused 
to believe what he could not understand ; his lamp of 
reason, trimmed with ever so much care, only made 
tlie darkness, so as to say, more visible. Faith was to 
liim a dead letter. His heart ached to believe, but, 
like Tiiomas, he wanted a ' sign.^ The first ' sign ' was 
given him that night, and since then directed invari- 
ably to THE BOOK which leads to life eternal he goes on 
his way rejoicing. 

" Only those who have stumbled amid the doubts 
and uncertainties of a sadly unsatisfying materialism, 
can comprehend the inspiration wliich the assurance of 
future existence, amended, enlightened, purified, gives. 
I am frequently asked, what is the use of Spiritualism ? 
My answer invariably is, that I believe it is permitted 
to check the growth of materialism. No one. however 
sceptical, can receive messages from the spirit world, 
knowing tkeir truth^ and disbelieve in spirit-life, in a 
immortality I This is the key-stone to a belief in the 
Holy Scriptures. Scores, hundreds, thousands, at this 
day say as I did, ' Why don't people believe? They 
have Moses and the prophets.' I believed on Bible 
testimony. Yes, but those thousands do not be- 
lieve in Bible testimony ; they ask for a sign. Will 
they not seek 'the sign,' and investigate its truth? 

IN MEMOBIAM. 803 

Would not they give all they possess for a ' sign ' prov- 
ing immortality? Dothey not desire intercourse which, 
sanctified by prayer, will, (I have often seen it done) 
direct them to particular passages in Holy Writ, which 
for the first time they comprehended, and which became 
sanctified to them ? And again, there are many who re- 
ceive Spiritualism as a fact; well-minded, timid per- 
sons, who fear that Spiritualism is dangerous. I have 
seen quite enough to convince me that carnal-minded 
people bring their evil angels with tliem into many a 
circle ; and they suggest what is evil more palpably 
than in those silent whispers that lead as surely astray. ' 
' By their fruits ye shall know them.' We know that 
* lying spirits ' endeavor to distil their poison into the 
purest hearts; and be sure they are on the watch 
around the circle assembled for manifestations, and 
can only be ' sent behind ' by faithful prayer ; but ev- 
ery Christian knows that he is perpetually beset by 
SQch like. 

" Spiritualism, as we know it, commences each stance 
with prayer; and usually (though not invariably) has 
reason to finish with praise. I would not join a circle 
where this was neglected. I could name many who 
have been lifted out of the slough of materialism by, 
in the first instance, seeing the marvelous manifesta- 
tions that arise from Mr. Home's mediumship, and the 
mediumship of the young lady I have already men- 
tioned. Ridicule on the one side, and asseverations 
oil the other, cannot RlterJ^aots. There must be a coin 
to create a counterfeit^ and, doubtless, charlatanism has 
found its way into ' circles,' whence it has been driven 
as soon as discovered. 

S04 or mnfowAM, 

^ MsDiUMBHiP is a mysteiy we cannot fathom, nor nn« 
derstand why the power should be delegated to one 
more to another. We have the highest authority for 
the belief that there are ^ diversities of gifts ' all from 
Hhe same spirit ;' and amongst them is specified, ^To 
some the discerning of spirits.' Why should one have 
^the gift of healing/ and not that of ^divers kind of 
tongues,' or ^ the seeing of spirits.' That is one of 
those marvels we shall comprehend when we no longer 
see through a glass darkly. I can only add, with no 
large amount of humility, that ^mediumship' is not 
' the only thing I do not understand. 

^^ But I inu8t cease here. I do not attempt to giv« 
any further description of the * manifestations ' I have 
witnessed, the wonders I haveseen, and examined, and 
qtiestiojiedj and after my examinations and questionings, 
could not doubt their being permitted for the onb pur- 
pose, which I again repeat, is the missiom of high and 
holy Spiritualism. 

" I do not feel called upon to write in defence of 
Spiritualism, nor to quote from the volume of facts by 
which that defence is to be sustained, and its truth 
proved. I have no talent for argument or controversy ; 
there are others who have, and are willing, as well as 
able, to be its defenders. I believe it to be sanctioned 
by God, and that therefore it must be for a good pur- 
pose ; and I content myself, as I must content those 
who may read what I have written, with expressing 
my conviction tliat Spiritualism is Tkdth." 

CHAPTER Xm. 

OONOLTTBION. 

I oAMB to England from Periguenx, and have been 
since engaged, as much as my time and health would 
permit, in having stances, at which most of the mani- 
festations recorded in the previous pages of my work 
have been repeated. I Bave been several times lifted 
a short distance from the ground, but not so high as to 
float above the heads of the persons in the room. 
Many persons have seen and been convinced of the 
occurrence of what they previously deemed impossible, 
and have had their faith in immortality renewed and 
strengthened when all other means had failed in mak- 
ing them believe. On the 20th January, 1863, 1 went 

to Paris on a short visit to my friend, Count de K , 

and there also the same phenomena have occurred in 
the presence of great numbers of persons. I have also 
been frequently received by their Majesties at the 
Tuileries, and by the imperial Princess and the Mobil- 
ity of France, who have shown a great interest in in- 
vestigating the manifestations ; but enough has been 
given of the facts to enable the reader to form an opi- 
nion of them, and there is no need to go into further 

806 00N0LU8IOH. 

details. I have already told the main incidents, and 
must now leave them to be judged and analyzed by 
the various classes of persons who may devote their 
thoughts to the subject. 

It would be hard if I were held answerable for facts 
which occur in connexion with my physical organiza- 
tion, and towards which I am, in mind and intent, 
wholly passive, eren if there were any harm in them. 
As there is no harm in them beyond their disturbing 
certain prepossessions, on the contrary, some likelihood 
of good ; and as they are independent of all moral action 
my feet ; I trust that with the candid and enlightened 
I shall be held, as I am, innocent. 

It will have been observed that they began with me 
when I was an infant in my cradle, and they have since 
with a few exceptions, formed a part of my daify life. 
Their range includes nearly all the phenomena which 
«re known under the incorrect name of Modern Spirit- 
ualism. I say the name is incorrect, because there is 
not one of them which is new, and which may not be' 
traced in every age of which we have any record pre- 
served to U8. The great diflference, however, is, that 
during the last two centuries a great change has come 
over the world, and by a kind of re-action, men have 
reversed the belief which previously existed as to the 
supernatural. Up to two centuries ago, it was not con- 
sidered a point of wisdom to disbelieve in such man 
ifestations and actings from the inner world, but on the 
contrary, such disbelief was reprehended as unscrip- 
tiiral and wrong. 

I am, however, fortunately relieved from the neces- 
sity of showing at great length the prevelance of spir- 

00N0LU8I0K. 807 

itnal action and phenomena in the past ages of the 
world, by the publication of the elaborate and almost 
exhaustive work of Mr. W. Howitt,* to which I refer 
my readers, in full confidence that in his pages they 
will find not only the facts but the arguments neces- 
sary to show that the spiritual has been ever pre8ent*» 
and that nothing had occurred to me but what has been 
frequently observed before. I trust that this work 
will be extensively read, in order that much of the 
piesent ignorance on the subject may be dispelled, and 
that the minds of men may be led to inquire more 
deeply into this great subject. As a brief summary 
of the same subject, I may likewise point to an article 
in the Appendix which has been framed by a friend 
from a series of historical notes, gathered by a literary 
gentleman who has, with great kindness, placed them 
at my friend's disposal. 

It will be readily admitted that such facts as those 
I have described, are calculated to throw great light 
upon the hitherto neglected science of pneumatology 
— and that it is in the direction pointed out by such 
facts that further search is to be made into the hidden 
questions of the soul, and its relations witli the body 
and external things. For such a study, no facts, how- 
ever small or ajJ^arently trivial, can be dispensed 
with. 

Of those which are of a physical kind, such as the 
moving of furniture, the raps, the raising into the 

* " The History of the Supernatural in aU Ages and Nations* in aU 
Churches, Christian and Pagan, demonstrating a Universal Faith.** By 
William Howitt, Author of " Colonization and Christianitj.** Lftndoi^ 
Longman and Co. 

M6 OQHOLUBIOV. 

air, or le^itation, and eimilar classes of phenomena, 
they are to be investigated, and tlieir oses ascertained 
by the man of science and the philosopher. At pres- 
ent such persons have fixed d priori that snch things 
have never occurred, and are impossible and absurd; 
and for this very reason, if for no other, it will be adr 
mitted that they are of the highest use in order to cor- 
rect snch notions of the relations between spiritual 
forces and natural things. There is no study which 
could be of such value to philosophers as that of 
facts now known to tliousands, but which their present 
philosophy deems impossible. For their philosophy 
must be radically defective when that which they say 
is impossible, is nevertheless of daily occurrence. The 
physical side, therefore, of these phenomena is to be 
stndied by students of experimental science, in order 
to enlarge tlieir views of material forces, and if this 
can be eflFected, as it has been in so many instances, 
by the movement of tables, and by the rapping 
sounds, and by the raising of bodies into the air with- 
out touch or contact, they will no longer complain of 
the triviality of snch phenomena. Indeed, already so 
little are they trivial or unimportant, that the noted 
men of science, such as the Faradays and Brewsters, 
have gone out of their way to inveigh against their 
possibility, and to bestow the name of credulous dupes 
upon those who have publicly stated what they have 
seen and heard. The very denial of these things by 
these men, and by the mass of the public, shows that 
they are not trivial to them, but that they are reully 
of the utmost importance . For why are tliey denied 
by the men of science, but that they contradict all 

CK>NOLUSION. 809 

their previous knowledge of the laws of nature, upset- 
tiug " the philosophy of a lifetime," and are therefore 
impossible to them, until they enlarge the present 
boundaries of their knowledge, and find out those high- 
er laws under which these become not only facts, but 
possible facts. 

There is of course no religious revelation, properly 
80 called, in such phenomena, any more than there is 
in the phenomena of gravitation, electricity, or mag- 
netism, but that has not latterly been a reason why 
such laws should be repudiated. At the institntion of 
the present Royal Society, there was a great outcry on 
the part of the religious persons of that day, against the 
formation of such a society, on the ground that it was 
blasphemous and wicked to attempt to inquire into 
what were called God's mysteries ; and it was said that 
men already had their Bibles, and knew enough, and 
ought not to seek to know more. Such is not the gen- 
eral opinion now-a-days, and the time is not far dis- 
tant, I hope, when the manner in which this subject 
has been received, will in the same • way be brought 
forward to prove the same great truth, that all know- 
ledge is to be pursued, and that we need not fear that 
we shall ever have too much of it. God is able to 
preswve His own mysteries, and whatever is possible 
for us, it is our right and duty to search into and fatli- 
om, and to bring forward as a part of the general 
stock of human intelligence. I anticipate, therefore, 
that when the real men of science find these facts not 
to be impossible, they will by their aid, be led into a 
knowledge of higher laws, which at present they con- 
ceal from themselves ; and that at greater discovery 

810 CONCLUSION. 

awaits their research than that which has adorned the 
name of Newton, who did not find it a trivial fact 
when an apple fell before his eyes. 

As to tlie other great division of these phenomena, 
into such as are of a mental kind, and betoken intelli' 
gence, a much larger qnesrion is raised. 

The former class of manifestations we conld only 
commend to the scientific investigator; bnt so soon as 
we are assured of the fact of manifestations directed 
by intelligence, we are put upon an inquiry of another 
kind. We are not aware of any other being but man, 
who is endowed with the kind and amount of intelli- 
gence which is disclosed in many of the manifestations 
and we are at once brought to the inevitable conclu- 
sion that such intelligence is exhibited by human be- 
ings, either in body, or out of the body. Neither the 
od force, nor electricity, nor magnetism, nor any of the 
imponderable forces, has ever yet been detected in be- 
traying intelligence, or in carrying on a conversation 
between themselves, or in taking part in one with oth- 
ers, and thougli they are largely engaged in their prop- 
er offices throughout nature, and in that epitome of it 
which is contained, in a man, yet there is nothing hu- 
man nor intelligent about them in the true sense of the 
words. 

We feel instinctively, therefore, when we meet with 
this intelligence, that we are dealing with a man either 
embodied or disembodied. The wonders of clairvoy- 
ance and internal perception (if we are to consider 
these faculties inherent in the living, independent of 
spiritual aid,) may account for some of the phenom- 
ena ; but there are others which my reader will noi 

CONCLUSION. 3H 

have failed to note, which infallibly point to the intel- 
ligence being that of disembodied human beings. The 
intelligence declares itself to be a human being, and 
gives information known to it alone. It says that it is 
a spirit, and in the spiritual world. It is seen as a 
spirit, and recognised as that of one loved on earth. It 
says that its office is to be onr guardian, and helper, 
afid comforter. It tells us of things that have passed, 
of things that are happening in distant parts, of things 
that are to come. Can this be ourselves, who un- 
knwingly counterfeit such a presentment, and tell this 
false intelligence to ourselves? No such quality or 
power has hitherto been recognised or known to exist 
in the mind of man. No such quality has been recog- 
nized or known to exist in the od force, nor in elec- 
tricity, nor in magnetism, as tlie ability to tell either 
truth or falsehood. Whence is it tlien ? Is the ques- 
tion 80 entirely a new one as to the existence of spirits 
and their power to communicate with man, as that we 
can ignore it or deny its possibility ? Are we inevita- 
bly thrown upon finding some natural hypothesis to 
account for such facts ? and are we as Christians, to 
say like Sir David Brewster, that " Spirit is the last 
thing I'll give in to." I thank God that I have been 
taught otherwise, and I refer to the bible, and to the 
spiritual books, and authorities, and beliefs of all ages 
^nd of all churches, in support of my belief. Let us 
then say at once that there are spirits and a spirit 
world, and see what difficulties are tlirown in their ' 
way by the men of science, who deny them all power 
of communicating with this world. 

It would indeed be a very difficult matter to con- 

81S OOHOLUBION. 

ceire by what possible means a spirit conld satisfy 
some minds of its actual presence. ^' Suppose," says 
the Rev. Charles Beecher, ^^ a departed spirit, the wife 
of Oberlin, for example, were permitted to attempt to 
converse with her husband ; not to establish a new rev* 
elation, not to display divine power, but merely to ex- 
ercise such potentiality as might pertain to a disem- 
bodied spirit, for her own and her husband's edifica- 
tion and satisfaction. How could she do it in the face 
of the apneuraatic theories. She speaks to him, moves 
his furniture, touches his dress, his person ; all auto- 
matic action of some brain en rapport with that local- 
ity. She sings, plays the guitar or piano, takes a pen- 
cil and writes, and he sees tha pencil in free space tra- 
cing his wife's autograph — automatic still. She shows 
him a cloudy hand, nay, a luminous form, and smiles 
and speaks as when in life — that is an optical illusion, 
or hallucination, or a particle exhaled from her body 
has impinged on his sensitive brain, and created a sub- 
jective vision. She communicates facts past, present, 
and future, beyond the scope of his knowledge ; — ^that 
might be clairvoyance or cerebral sensing. Alas, then, 
what could she do more ? She must retire baffled, and 
complaining that he had become so scientific that all 
communication with him was impossihW^ 

It is, therefore, very difficult to influence some minds 
by any proof that conld be brought forward, for want 
of their having any point which such proof can pene- 
trate ; but assuredly such proofs as I have given in my 
book, of the existence of spirits, and of their ability to 
communicate with us, are of the kind most likely to be 
useful to thenu 

OONOLUSIOM. 818 

It is to be observed also, that snch persons, to be 
consistent, must, and too raany of them do, apply the 
same argument to all analogous facts in the past, as 
well as to those occurring at this day. On this all-im- 
portant point the Rev. W. Beecher says truly, " What- 
ever physiological law accounts for these phenomena 
in all ages, will in the end inevitably carry itself 
through the whole bible, where it deals with the phe- 
nomena of soul and body as mutually related, acting 
and re-acting. A large portion of the bible, its pro 
phecles, ecstacies, visions, trances, tlieophanies, augel- 
ophanies, are more or less tinged with odic character- 
istics. The physiology, the anthropology of the bible 
is highly odic, and must be studied as such. As such 
it will be found to harmonize with the general princi- 
ples of human experience in such matters in all ages. 
If a theory be adopted everywhere else but in the bi- 
ble, excluding spiritual intervention in toto^ and ac- 
counting for everything physically, then will the cov- 
ers of the bible prove but pasteboard barriers. Such a 
theory will sweep its way through the bible and its 
authority, and its inspiration will be aimihilated. On 
the other hand, if the theory of spiritual intervention 
be. accepted in the bible, it cannot be shut up there, 
but must sweep its way through the wide domain of 
^ popular superstitions,' as they are called, separating 
the element of truth on which those superstitions are 
based, and asserting its own authoritative supremacy." 

It is on such grounds as these amongst many others, 
that I have found as a fact that these manifestations 
have a religious tendency, and bearing on the subject 
of religion of the most important kind. I do not claim 

14 

814 OOFOLU8IOH. 

for them the character of a new revelation, but that 
tliej are a recurrence in our day of some of the phe- 
nomena of a very old one ; and that it is not a small 
matter to be able to convince many who stand in need 
of snch knowledge and conviction, of the immortality 
of the sonl, of its immediate and contiiuied existence 
in the spiritual world, and of its power of communion 
and communication with us who are lefk behind. 
Tliese are not new doctrines, but old facts, and what- 
ever spirits may tell us, we must judge of, as we judge 
the other affairs of life, by its own intrinsic evidence, 
and nor rely on the infallibility of what comes from 
the other side merely because of its spiritual origin. 
For instance, suppose that if any one of the sceptics of 
the day should go to swell the numbers of the spiritual 
world, and should come to me in vision, or through 
any of the numerous modes which I have narrated in 
the previous pages, and should tell me that there are 
no spiritual laws, and no spiritual world, and no spi- 
ritual beings, and that the many phenomena I have 
experienced throughout my life did not occur to me, 
and that such never occurred to others, and were in 
fact impossible, I should not believe what he said, 
merely because of its spiritual origin, for the reason 
that it would be opposed to the experience and know- 
ledge of myself, and of many others in the present and 
former ages of the world. I should, as I do, on the 
contrary, recognise in the very fact of his being able 
to come and give me this ftilse information, matter of 
the utmost importance to religious truth, directed to a 
point which of all others in this materialistic age, the 
most requires assurance and comfirmation. 

CONCLUSION. 316 

The fact, therefore, of any intelligence whether true 
or false, coming from the inner world, is one from 
which conclusions must be deduced, the value of which 
it is impossible to over estimate. The real and inti- 
mate communion of saints may be difficult to realize, 
on account of our own state being too low for such 
holy communion, but we need not abandon to scepti- 
cism the whole spiritual world, and deny the possibil- 
ity of one of the most glorious tenets of Christendom. ■ 

THE E ir D* 

A. J. DAVIS & CO.'S 

LIST OF PUBLICATIONS, 

A NEW CATALOGUE 
or 

B e e ft 8 

PUBLISHXD AND FOR SALE BT 

Progressive Book Publishers, 
274 Canal Stbeet, New York. 

1864. 

A. J. Davis & Co. mil mail free any of their own PMica- 
tiofu an receipt of the advertised price ; also all Books in the subU' 
quent Hsts where postage is not specified. 

NEW EDITIONS, RECENTLY ISSUED 

AND FOR SALE BT 

A. J. DAVIS & CO., 

BOOKSELLERS & PUBLISHERS 

274 Canal Street, New York. 

New Works. 

BfRS. ElilZA W. FARNHAM. 

Woman and Her Era. 

The most important book on Woman ever written. An 
original, ezhaustive, and fundamental treatise, by a writer 
of great power. A remarkable work — ^learned, thoughtful, 
independent^ full of reflection, full of vigor, full of purpose. 
Broader, deeper, and more comprehensive, than any work 
on Woman that has preceded it. 

Two elegant 12mo volumes, cloth-bound, $3 ; extra gilt, $4 y 
two volumes in one, library sheep, $3 50. 

Eliza Woodson ; 

Or, The Early Days of one of the World's Workers. A Tale 
of American Life. 

A singularly interesting life-history, possessing all the vivid 
charm of the best fiction, yet the veritable Autobiography of the 
author of " Woman and Her Era." An entertaining and help- 
ful book for persons of all ages. .^^ 

One vol., 12mo, 425 pages, cloth, ^1 fi^ 

LIST OP PUBLICATIONS. 8 

ANDREW JACKSON DAVIS. 

The Harbinger of Health. 

Containing Medical Prescriptions for the Human Mind and 
Body. 

A book for family use, comprising more than three hundred 
Medical Prescriptions, given in the light of the author's Clair- 
Yoyant or ** Superior'^ condition^ with practical hints and sug- 
gestions. A popular hand-book of health. 
12mo, 420 pages, cloth, $1 25. 

The Magic Staff. (An Antobiography.) 

A well-authenticated history of the domestic, social, psychical, 
and literary career of the author, with his remarkable 
experiences as a Clairvoyant and ** Seer." 

A book of great interest to old and young, containing one of 
the most singular and touching child-histories ever recorded. It 
is unlike any of the author's other works, and peculiarly adapted 
to interest, and at the same time instruct, those unacquainted with 
his peculiar Philosophy. 

l2mo, 500 pages, cloth, |1 50. 

Morning Lectures. (In Press.) 

A volume of Phonographic Reports of Discourses upon a 

variety of important topics. 
12mo, 420 pages, $1 50. 

MISCEI1I.ANEOUS. 

The Children's Frogressiye Lyceum. 

A Report of its Origin, Rise, Proceedings, Conduct, 

Recitadons, and Songs. 
12mo, doth, 144 pages, 35 cents. $22 per 100. 

The Frogressiye Annual 

Comprising an Almanac, a Spiritual Register, and a Geneva] 
Calendar of Reform. For 1862, 1863, and 1864. 

Published annually, with corrected lists of Writers, Speakers, 
and Workers in the different fields of Human Progress. 15 
cents. 

[mffBeaHam of Tnidi; 

mmmfmttj; not givem to one 

flf aUe wnten.) «2 50 

Hew Editions of BodkB, 

BT 

AHDRBW JACK80H DAVIS 

TW Prifiplw of Xame; hat Dmae BerelAlioiM^ and a 

TW u&oHt im •md Mit eo^rnhflMiTe woriL. 

EfitioafroBlke Cas^ HeveoCjpa plmtes. 
Luge ifro» 782 iMgw» $S. 

THB 6BSAT HAXMOSIA. 

Being a P kU omp kic f d Revdatum of tke Naturaly Spirituut^ and 
Celt thai Universe. In Jive distina volumes (12iiioJ as 
follows: 

L— The Phjiieian. 

ConUining the Philoeophj of Hemlth, of DioeeBe, of Sleep, of 

Death, Psjchologj, and Healing. 
454 pages, $1 25. 

H— The Teacher. 

CoDtaining ardcles upon Mj Early Experience, The Tme 
Reformer, Philoeophj of Charity, Individual Coltiyation, 
The Misrion of Woman, Philoeophj of Immortalitj, The 
Spirit's Destinj, and Concerning the Deitj. 

396 pages, |1 25. 

ni— The Seer. 

Containing twentj-seven Lectures upon the seven mental 
states : The Rudimental, Psychological, Sjmpathetio, 
Transition, Somnambulic, Clairvojant, and Spiritual. 

400 pagen, $1 2.'>. 

LIST OP PUBLICATIONS. 5 

rv— The Befonner. 

Containing Discourses upon Physiological Vices and Virtues, 
and the Seven Phases of Marriage— embracing practical 
discussions of the causes of Extremism and Inversionism ; 
Thoughts on Woman's Kights and Wrongs; Marriage and 
Divorce, &c., with a Psychometrical Reading of Ralph 
Waldo Emerson's Character. 

446 pages, $1 25. 

v.— The Thinker. 

Embracing three parts : The Truthful Thinker, The Pantheon 
of Progress, and The Origin of Life and the Law of Immor- 
tality, with a Voice from the Spirit-Land. 

420 pages, $1 25. 

rhe Penetralia. 

Being Harmonial Answers to Important Questions. 

The contents embrace The Assembly's Shorter Catechism, 
revised and corrected, with Questions and Answers on Life, 
Immortality, Individualism, &c., &c. ] also a Psychometrical 
Examination of Wm. Lloyd Garrison. 

328 pages 8vo, $1 25. 

Answers to Questions. 

Answers to Ever-Recurring Questions from the People. (A 
Sequel to the "Penetralia.") Embracing well-considered 
replies to more than two hundred important questions. 

12mo, 420 pages, $1 25. 

Spiritual Interconrse. 

The Philosophy of Spiritual Intercourse. Being an Explana- 
tion of Modem Mysteries. 

Embracing Truth and Mystery, The Miracles of this Age, 
The Guardianship of Spirits, The Formation of Circles, &c., &c. 
8vo, 176 pages ; paper, 50 cents ; cloth, 75 cents. 

The Harmonial Man. 

Or, Thoughts for the Age. Comprehending articles upon 
Mankind's Natural Needs, The Influence of Churches, The 

O LIST OF PUBLICATIONS. 

PhiloBophj of Prodaoing and Controlling Rain, The Phi- 
loflophy of Wearing the Beard, &c., &c. 
129 pageo, 8yo, paper, 40 cents. 

The History and Philosophy of EviL 

With suggestionB for more ennobling Institations and Philo- 
sophical Systems of Education. 

The five theories of Evil: The Ante-Human, Inter-Human, 
Super-Human, Spiritual, and Ilarmonial. 

118 pages, 8yo, paper, 40 cents ; cloth, 60 cents. 

The Philosophy of Special Providences. 

A Vision. A pamphlet of fifty-five pages, containing two 

Visions and an Argument, living vnth thought. 
Paper, 15 cents. 

Free Thoughts Concerning Eeligion. 

Or Nature versus Theology. The remarks of the author at 

the Hartford Bible Convention. 
Paper, 38 pages, 15 cents. 

Valuable Eecent Publications. 

W. and E. M. P. DENTON. 

The Sonl of Things. 

Or Psychometric Researches and Discoveries. By William 
and Elizabeth M. F. Denton. 

An important volume upon a new and most interesting field 
of inquiry. 

366 pages, 12mo, $1 25. Postage, 20 cents. 

HUDSON TUTTLE. 

The Arcana of Nature. 

VOL. I. — The History and Laws of Creation. 

Comprising The Origin of Worlds, The History of the Earth, 
The Formative Periods, Origin of Men, Human Brain, &c. 

305 pages, 12mo, $1 25. Postage 20 cents 

LIST OF PUBLICATIONS. 7 

VOL. II.— The Philosophy of Spirit-Existence and of the 
Spirit-World. 

Comprehending Proofs of Immortality, The Objects of Mod- 
em Spiritualism, Philosophy of Imponderable Agents, Philosophy 
of Change and Death, Spirit, The Spirit- World, &o. 

260 pages, $1. Postage 16 cents. 

filossoms of Onr Spring. 

A Poetical Work, by Hudson and Emma Tuttle. 
328 pages, $1. Postage 20 cents. 

ROBERT DALE OWEN. 

EootfEklls on the Bonndary of Another World. 
With Narrative Illustrations. 

A standard preliminary work upon Spiritual Phenomena. 
520 pages, 12mo, $1 50. Postage 24 cents. 

WHiLIAM HOWITT. 

The History of the Snpematoral. 

In all ages and nations, and in all Churches, Christian and 

Pagan, demonstrating a universal faith. 
2 vols., 12mo, 500 and 519 pages, $3. Postage 50 cents. 

EPES SARGENT. 

Peculiar. 

A Tale of the Great Transition. 

A new American Novel, distinctly recognizing and affirming 
the truths of modern Spiritualism. 
504 pages, $1 50. 

LIZZIE DOTEN. 

Poems from the Inner life. 

Containing thirty Poems inspired (as alleged,) by the spirits 

of Bums, Shakspeare, Poe, and others. 
12mo, clotii, $1. Postage, 16 cents. Gilt, $1 75, paid. 

8 LIST OF PUBLICATIONS. 

HORACE WraUBY. 

Mysteries of Life, Death, and Fatnrity. 

Illtutrated from the best and latest authoritieB. 

Containing a liberal compilation of the beet thoughts of the 
best writers upon Life and Time, The Nature of the Soul, Spir- 
itual Life, Death, Resurrection, Man after Death, The Future 
States, Spiritual Recognition, &c. 

351 pages, $1 50. 

HENRY C. WRIGHT. 

■arriage and Parentage. 

Or the Reproductive Element in Man as a means to his Ele- 
yation and Happiness. 

Physiological department with plates and statements, and a 
correspondence between Ernest and Mina, an ideal husband and 
wife. 

324 pages, $1 25. 

The TJnwelooine Child. 

Or the Crime of an Undesigned and Undesired Maternity. 

119 pages, paper, 25 cents, postage 4 cents ; cloth, 40 cents, 
postage, 8 cents. 

The Empire of the Mother 

Over the Character and Destiny of the Race. 

*« The Health of Woman the Hope of the world." 

132 pages ; paper 35 cents, postage 4 cents ; cloth, 50 cents, 
postage, 8 cents. 

The Self-Abnegationist 

Or the True King and Queen. 

" Suffer rather than inflict suffering ; die rather than kill." 

156 pages ; paper, 40 cents, postage, 4 cents ; cloth, 55 cents, 
postage, 8 cents. 

The Errors of the Bible, 

Demonstrated by the Truths of Nature ; or Man's only Infal- 
lible Rule of Faith and Practice. 
118 pages, 25 cents; postage 4 cents. 

25 

This book should be returned to 
the Library on or before the last date 
stamped below- 

A fine of five cents a day is incurred 
by retaining It beyond the specified 
time. 

Please return promptly, 

;^^ — 

I 

0So^


**********************************************************************
END OF FIRST SERIES — SECOND SERIES, 1872 FOLLOWS
**********************************************************************


INCIDENTS    IN   MY    LIFE. 

SECOND   SKHTE8 

INCIDENTS  IN  MY  LIFE 

BY 

D.   D.   HOME 

"  Instead  of  being  a  superstition  itself,  as  they  may  be  disposed  tw 
think  it,  they  would  find  it  the  explanation  and  the  extinguisher  of  ail 
superstition."— DR.  R.  CHAMUEU.S. 

cy 

~ 

NE\V    YOKK 

HOLT     &     WILLIAMS 
1872 

Entered  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1872,  by 

DANIEL   DOUGLAS  HOME, 
In  the  office  of  the  Librarian  of  Congress,  at  Washington. 

CONTENTS. 

Preface 
Introduction 

Page 
vii 

1 

CHAPTER  I. 
Reviews  and  Roplies.— Letter  to  "Times"        ...      21 

CHAPTER  II. 

Sir  David  Brewster. — Lord  Brougham. — Letters  and  Testi- 
mony.— Dr.  Eiliottson.— Prophetic  Incidents  .         .       44 

CHAPTER  III. 
Expulsion  from  Rome.— Discussion  in  House  of  Commons        70 

CHAPTER  IV. 

Sludge,  the  Medium.— Mr.  Robert  Browning.— Fancy  Por- 
traits      95 

CHAPTER  V. 
Nice,  America,  Russia. — The  Double  Seances  in  London    .     112 

CHAPTER  VI. 

Lecture.— Notice  in  "  Star.'' — Falsehoods  in  "  All  the  Year 
Round" .        .         .123 

CHAPTER  VII. 

Spiritual  Athena?nm. — Identity .—  Guardians  of  Strength. — 
Spirit  Mesmerism  .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .140 

CHAPTER  VIII. 
New  Manifestations.— Elongation. — Voices.— Perfumes     .     156 

CHAPTER  IX. 
Elongation  and  Compression. — Handling  of  Fire        .        .175 

CHANCERY  SUIT. 

Mrs.  Lyon's  Affidavit  in  support  of  the  Bill         .         .         .  10:1 

My  Answer  to  the  Suit lio'J 

Mr.  \V.  M.  Wilkinson's  Answer  to  the  Suit  .  oU9 

PREFACE. 

[BOUT  nine  years  since  I  presented  to 
the  public  a  volume  entitled  "  In- 
cidents of  my  Life,"  the  first  edition 
of  which  was  speedily  exhausted,  and 
a  second  was  issued  in  1863.  During  the  years 
that  have  since  elapsed,  although  many  attacks 
have  been  made  upon  me,  and  upon  the  truths  of 
Spiritualism,  its  opponents  have  not  succeeded  in 
producing  one  word  of  evidence  to  discredit  the 
truth  of  my  statements,  which  have  remained  un- 
contradicted .  Meantime  the  truths  of  Spiritualism 
have  become  more  widely  known,  and  the  subject 
has  been  forced  upon  public  attention  in  a  re- 
markable manner.  This  was  especially  the  case 
in  the  years  1867,  1868,  in  consequence  of  the  suit 
"  Lyon  v.  Home,"  which  most  probably  was  the 
indirect  cause  of  the  examination  into  Spiritualism 
by  the  Committee  of  the  Dialectical  Society,  whose 
report  has  recently  been  published.  Coincident 
with  and  subsequent  to  their  examination,  a 
series  of  investigations  was  carried  on  in  my  pre- 
sence, by  Lord  Adare,  now  Earl  of  Dunraven,  an 

viii  PREFACE. 

account  of  which  has  been  privately  printed ; 
an  examination,  especially  scientific  in  its  cha- 
racter, was  also  conducted  by  Professor  Crookes, 
who  has  published  his  conclusions  in  the  ' '  Journal 
of  Science." 

I  now  present  the  public  with  the  second 
volume  of  "  Incidents  of  my  Life,"  which  con- 
tinues my  narrative  to  the  period  of  the  com- 
mencement of  the  Chancery  suit.  In  the  third 
volume,  which  I  expect  to  issue  in  June  next,  I 
purpose  to  complete  the  account  of  the  suit  and 
give  the  subsequent  investigations  above  alluded 
to. 

D.  D.  H. 

London,  November,  1871. 

INTRODUCTION. 

IIE  following  introductory  remarks  which 
I  here  republish,  were  written  for  my  first 
volume,  by  the  late  Dr.  Robert  Chambers, 
of  Edinburgh,  who  also  contributed  to  it  the 
last  chapter  of  the  appendix. 
Mr.  Home's  narrative  is  composed  of  particulars  so 
much  at  issue  with  the  ordinary  ideas  of  mankind,  that  his 
friends  may  well  feel  some  apology  for  it  to  be  necessary. 
Delicate  in  health,  extremely  sensitive  in  spirit,  of  gentle 
and  uncombative  nature,  coming  forward  with  his  narration 
for  no  conceivable  end  but  to  propagate  a  knowledge  of 
what  he  regards  as  important  truths,  it  seems  but  right 
that  he  should  be  spared  as  much  as  possible  of  the  scep- 
tical derision  which  such  novelties  are  sure  in  greater  or 
less  degree  to  evoke.  Hence  the  present  introductory 
remarks. 

Whatever  be  the  preconceptions  of  the  reader  regarding 
Mr.  Home,  he  will  scarcely  fail,  after  reading  this  volume, 
to  acknowledge  that  the  author  writes  as  a  man  thoroughly 
in  earnest,  and  who  has  himself  no  doubts  of  the  phe- 
nomena which  attend  him.  He  tells  how  these  phenomena 
commenced  in  his  childhood,  how  they  have  been  with  him 
B 

2  INTRODUCTION. 

ever  since,  except  during  a  few  brief  intervals ;  how, 
while  bringing  him  public  notice  and  some  valuable  friend- 
ships, they  have  been  in  some  respects  an  inconvenience 
and  a  misfortune,  and  betoken  conditions  that  do  not 
promise  length  of  days ;  all  this  with  an  unargumentative 
simplicity  that  speaks  strongly  of  at  least  sincere  conviction 
on  his  own  part.  He  sustains  the  character  of  the  Mystic 
Sensitive  throughout  his  narration,  as  he  has  done  through- 
out the  first  thirty  years  of  his  actual  life,  without  falter  or 
hesitation  ;  what  he  was  at  the  first  he  is  now.  It  is  for 
those  who  would  attribute  all  to  imposture,  to  show  how  a 
fictitious  character  can  be  so  perfectly  and  so  enduringly 
maintained. 

It  is  also  to  be  remarked  that  the  facts  of  Mr.  Home's 
life  do  not  rest  on  his  own  averments  alone.  Their  ob- 
jective reality  and  their  freedom  from  delusion  and 
imposture,  are  certified  by  an  immense  number  of  persons, 
who  are  here  indicated  by  name  or  otherwise.  Some 
of  these  persons,  and  others  who  remain  uncitcd,  are  of  a 
character  to  forn^  a  strong  guarantee  for  the  truth  of  any- 
thing to  which  they  might  testify.  It  is  often,  indeed, 
remarked,  as  a  marvel  of  a  very  suggestive  kind  in  this 
our  highly  intellectual  age,  that  men  of  knowledge  and  re- 
flection, of  whom  so  much  better  things  might  be  expected, 
are  found  so  weak  as  to  be  imposed  upon  by  such  trans- 
parent deception,  and  so  foolish  as  to  come  forward  and 
bear  witness  in  its  behalf.  But  of  course  this  is  not^ 
reasoning  ;  it  is  only  begging  the  question.  The  remark 
might  be  answered  by  another :  it  is  a  marvel  of  a  highly 
suggestive  nature,  that  men  of  critical  judgment  should  be 
so  far  imposed  upon  by  their  self-esteem,  that  they  can 
calmly  set  down  a  number  of  men  reputedly  as  judicious 
as  themselves,  and  whose  judgment  they  acknowledge, 
as  capable  of  seeing  and  hearing  that  which  is  not,  and 
never  appear  to  suspect  that  these  persons  have  possibly 
some  real  grounds  for  the  faith  that  is  in  them.  A  little 
modesty  would  evidently  go  a  great  way  to  solve  the 

INTRODUCTION.  3 

difficulty  which  tlio  incredulous  pro  foes  to  fed  on  this 
point.  If  thi'y  would  £0  a  little  farther,  and  so  far  yield 
to  the  behests  of  their  favourite  philosophy  as  to  inquire 
before  pronouncing,  it  might  so  chance  that  the  position  of 
a  believer  in  these  phenomena  would  become  more  in- 
telligible to  them.  So  at  least  it  has  already  happened 
with  a  vast  number  of  persons,  equally  positive  at  starting 
that  the  whole  was  a  delusion  ;  and  we  are  entitled  to 
assume  that  what  has  been,  may  be  again.  Nay,  the 
value  of  the  testimony  in  question  in  a  great  measure 
arises  from  the  very  fact,  that  it  has  been  extorted  from 
the  reluctant  convictions  of  a  multitude  of  persons,  at  one 
time  wholly  scornful  and  incredulous  regarding  the  alleged 
facts. 

It  will  be  rather  startling,  but  yet  it  may  be  very 
plausibly  urged,  that  the  phenomena  of  Mr.  Home's 
mediumship  are  not  opposed  to  the  experience  of  mankind. 
On  the  contrary,  facts  of  this  kind  have  been  reported  as 
occurring  in  all  ages  ;  nor  is  it  more  than  two  centuries 
since  they  began  to  be  doubted.  Even  during  the  two 
centuries  of  partial  scepticism,  they  have  continued  to  be 
reported  as  happening  not  less  frequently  than  before.  It 
may  be  replied,  this  sceptical  voice  has  been  the  voice 
of  wisdom  and  truth,  for  the  first  time  heard  in  the  world. 
Is  it  really  so  ?  Is  it  not  rather  a  dictum  expressive  only 
of  an  intellectual  habit — the  result  of  the  kind  of  studies 
during  that  time  chiefly  predominant  ?  Is  it  not  that,  in 
an  exclusive  and  overmastering  devotion  to  material 
philosophy,  men  have  fallen  out  of  the  habit  of  considering 
the  spiritual  part  of  the  world,  retaining  little  more  than  a 
nominal  faith  even  in  those  spiritual  things  which  their 
religious  creed  avouches  ?  Clearly  the  mere  fact  of  two 
centuries  of  partial  scepticism  does  not  go  for  much.  But 
then  this  enlightened  spirit  has  penetrated  the  mystery 
in  so  many  cases,  and  shown  it  to  be  based  in  nothing 
but  vulgar  deception.  Has  it  really  done  so  ?  Has  it 
not  simply  flattered  itself  with  illusive  compliments  to  its 

4  INTRODUCTION.      . 

own  penetration?  One  noted  instance  of  a  person  pro- 
fessedly affected  as  Mr.  Home  has  been,  was  Anne 
Parsons,  a  little  girl  living  in  Cock  Lane,  in  the  City  of 
London,  in  1762.  If  there  is  any  case  in  which  detection 
of  imposture  is  triumphantly  and  unchallengedly  assumed,  it 
is  that  of  the  famous  Cock  Lane  Ghost.  Mark  the  facts  of  the 
detection.  Knockings  and  scratchings  were  for  a  couple  of 
years  heard  in  connection  with  little  Anne  Parsons,  and  at 
length  a  mode  of  conversation  with  the  unseen  agent  was 
hit  upon.  The  so-called  ghost  averred  that  a  woman  who 
recently  lived  in  Parsons'  house,  and  was  since  dead,  had 
been  murdered  by  her  quasi-husband,  a  Mr.  Kent.  It 
was  what  Mr.  Home  would  have  called  a  lying  spirit. 
The  girl  being  taken  to  the  house  of  Mr.  Alrich,  a  clergy- 
man, a  party  was  formed  to  put  to  the  test  a  promise  of 
the  "  ghost,"  that  it  would  knock  upon  the  coffin  of 
the  deceased  in  a  vault  of  St.  John's,  Clerkenwell,  at 
a  certain  hour  in  the  evening.  No  knocks  occurred — lying 
spirit  again.  Then  came  the  grand  stroke  in  the  de- 
tection. The  girl  was  taken  into  a  stranger's  house,  put 
into  a  bed  hung  clear  of  the  floor,  and  watched  for  two 
nights,  during  which  no  noises  were  heard.  A  result, 
which  might  be  owing  merely  to  the  deranged  conditions, 
was  held  by  the  sapient  committee  of  investigation  as  clear 
proof  of  irnposture  ;  but  they  were  yet  to  have  evidence 
more  positive.  Having  become  impatient  with  the  child, 
they  told  her  on  the  third  night,  that  if  the  knockings 
were  not  heard  that  night,  she  and  her  parents  would  be 
taken  to  Newgate  !  Under  this  threat,  the  child  took  a 
board  into  bed  with  her,  was  seen  to  do  so,  (why  was  such 
a  thing  never  seen  before  ?)  and  soon  sounds  admitted  to 
be  different  from  what  happened  before,  were  heard.  The 
bed  was  then  searched,  the  board  found,  and  the  girl  pro- 
claimed as  a  proved  impostor.  In  this  clumsy,  foolish,  and, 
utterly  unsatisfactory  manner,  was  the  Cock  Lane  Ghost 
"  detected."  On  no  other  grounds  has  the  fallacy  of  the 
case  become  the  proverb  it  now  is.  Now,  if  such  be  the 

INTRODUCTION.  5 

ensy  terms  on  which  scepticism  assumes  its  greatest 
triumphs,  what  importance  are  we  to  attach  to  its  pro- 
nouncements on  this  suhject  in  instances  less  important, 
and  where  it  has  put  forth  (as  is  the  general  case)  less  of 
its  strength  ?  Are  they  worth  the  air  they  cost  to  make 
them  audible  ? 

There  is  surely,  after  all,  nothing  like  a  serious  impro- 
bability in  the  spiritual  phenomena.  We,  every  hour  of 
our  lives,  have  occasion  to  acknowledge  that  there  is 
a  spirit,  an  immortal  something,  in  man ;  we  equally 
believe  that  this  spirit,  which  does  such  wonderful  things 
on  earth,  will  survive  in  some  other  sphere  of  existence, 
and  not  in  a  wholly  inactive  state.  Is  there  anything 
a  priori  unlikely  in  the  idea  that  the  spirit,  which  parts 
with  so  much  that  is  dear  to  it  here,  may  linger  in 
the  scenes  of  its  earthly  pilgrimage,  and  desire  to  hold 
intercourse  with  those  remaining  behind  ?  On  the  con- 
trary, it  seems  rather  likely  that  the  "animula  vagula, 
blnndula,"  will  hover  about  its  old  loves,  and  where 
conditions  permit  or  are  favourable,  will  contrive  to  make 
itself  again  seen  or  at  least  heard.  It  may  be  a 
mere  effort  of  the  original  social  nature ;  or  it  may  result 
from  a  benevolent  anxiety  for  the  welfare  of  individuals — 
to  inform,  to  guide,  and  protect  them  ;  or  it  may  be  a 
needful  part  of  the  frame  of  things  in  which  humanity  is 
established  on  earth — something  required  to  keep  us  in 
mind  of  that  world  beyond  the  screen,  out  of  which  we 
have  come,  and  to  which  we  are  to  return.  It  has  often, 
indeed,  been  urged  that  the  spiritual  phenomena  generally 
are  of  a  frivolous  and  useless  character,  doing  little  more 
than  show  that  Spiritualism  is  a  truth.  But  spiritualists 
say,  on  the  other  hand,  that  experimenters  generally  set 
about  their  business  in  a  frivolous  spirit,  and  only  get  com- 
munications from  shades  of  their  own  character.  It  will  he 
found  that,  in  the  case  of  Mr.  Home,  who  is  a  man  of  a 
religious  turn  of  mind,  pure-hearted  and  unworldly,  the 
phenomena  are  of  an  elevated  character,  tending  to  heal 

6  INTRODUCTION. 

sickness,  to  smooth  away  sorrow,  and  to  chasten  and  exalt 
the  minds  of  the  living.  There  is,  indeed,  every  reason  to 
believe  that  if  spiritual  communications  were  now  sought  in 
a  suitable  frame  of  mind,  results  in  the  highest  style 
of  sanctitude,  rivalling  those  of  the  most  famous  devotees, 
wight  be  obtained.  Already,  Spiritualism,  conducted  as  it 
usually  is,  has  had  a  prodigious  effect  throughout  America, 
and  partly  in  the  Old  World  also,  in  redeeming  multitudes 
from  hardened  atheism  and  materialism,  proving  to  them, 
by  the  positive  demonstration  which  their  cast  of  mind  re- 
quires, that  there  is  another  world — that  there  is  a 
non- material  form  of  humanity — and  that  many  mi- 
raculous things  which  they  have  hitherto  scoffed  at,  are 
true. 

There  remains  a  groat  stumbling-block  to  many,  in 
the  manner  in  which  the  communications  are  most  fre- 
quently made.  It  seems  below  the  dignity  of  a  disembodied 
spirit  to  announce  itself  and  speak  by  little  pulsatory  noises 
on  a  table  or  wainscot.  It  might,  however,  be  asked  if  it 
be  not  a  mere  prejudice  which  leads  us  to  expect  that  the 
spirit,  on  being  disembodied,  suddenly,  and  of  necessity, 
experiences  a  great  exaltation.  Take  the  bulk  of  mankind 
as  they  are,  and  can  we  really  say  that  there  is  anything 
derogatory  to  them  in  the  supposition  that,  in  any  cir- 
cumstances, they  would  talk  by  noise-signals  ?  We  must, 
moreover,  remember  that  we  know  nothing  of  the  con- 
ditions under  which  spirits  can  communicate.  This  may 
be  the  most  readily  available  mode  in  most  instances. 
Beyond  doubt,  in  certain  circumstances  of  difficulty,  the 
most  exalted  of  living  persons  might  be  glad  to  resort 
to  such  a  mode  of  telegraphy.  In  1823,  Signor  Andryane, 
the  agent  of  an  Italian  conspiracy  against  Austria,  was 
thrown  into  the  prisons  of  the  police  at  Milan.  lie  tells 
us,  in  his  very  interesting  Memoirs,  how,  being  desirous 
of  communicating  with  the  inmate  of  an  adjoining  cell, 
he  tapped  gently  on  the  wall,  and  after  some  time  had 
his  signal  answered.  "  One,  two,  three — a  pause,  a,  &,  c, 

INTRODUCTION.  7 

— it  was  c.  Still  listening, — one,  two,  three,  four, — eight 
blows, — it  was  h  ;  c.  7i.  Slowly,  but  distinctly,  nine  blows 
were  given:  this  must  mean  the  letter  i,  &c."  After 
some  difficulties,  these  two  unfortunates  succeeded  in 
funning  a  system  of  communication,  in  the  highest  degree 
useful  and  consolatory  to  them,  by  raps  on  the  wall,  ex- 
pressive of  letters  of  the  Italian  alphabet  ' — being  pre- 
cisely the  mode  of  communication  so  largely  (though  not 
exclusively)  adopted  by  the  spirits — the  favourite  subject 
of  ridicule  to  those  who  are  so  unfortunate  as  to  take  only 
a  superficial  view  of  this  subject,  or  so  unfair  as  to  select 
what,  in  their  ignorance,  they  consider  as  the  weakest 
point.  If  the  disembodied  find  a  sort  of  wall  interposed 
between  them  and  the  living  world  with  which  they  desire 
to  communicate,  what  can  be  more  natural  than  to  resort 
to  the  expedient  which  was  embraced  in  analogous  cir- 
cumstances by  these  two  living  prisoners  ?  Short  of  the 
use  o?  actual  language  written  or  spoken,  what  better  pos- 
sible mode  of  communication  can  be  suggested? 

There  are  two  points  of  view  in  which  Mr.  Home's 
publication  of  his  experiences  appears  entitled  to  praise 
us  well  as  sympathy.  Regard  it  simply  as  a  curious  case 
in  pathology — for  himself  to  describe  it  in  detail  may  be 
considered  as  a  useful  service  to  mankind,  just  as  it 
would  be  considered  useful  to  us  to  obtain  the  self-por- 
traiture of  any  other  peculiar  case  of  nervous  derangement. 
As  already  stated,  such  cases  are  far  from  being  un- 
common ;  but  the  intelligence  and  probity  required  to 
apprehend  their  character  truly,  and  describe  it  exactly,  is 
rare.  To  the  psycho-pathologist,  accordingly,  if  he  can 
get  over  the  disposition  to  sneer  and  lau^li,  and  will  con- 
descend to  meet  a  man  as  honest  as  himself  on  his  own 
grounds,  this  detail  may  serve  to  advance  an  important 
scientific  purpose.  Even  more  valuable  is  the  instruction 

1  See  "  Memoirs  of  Alrxan  lor  Andryano,"  translated  by  Frr- 
dinando  Pr.uuli,  2  vols.  Second  Edition.  Newbv.  JLondun,  1848. 

8  INTRODUCTION. 

to  be  derived  from  it  by  the  moralist  and  the  philosophical 
historian.  The  past  is  full  of  such  phenomena.  Wrongly 
apprehended  in  the  first  place  by  their  recipients,  they 
have  been  made  the  bases  of  juggling  arts  ;  of  childish 
mythologies ;  of  superstitious  religions ;  and  the  means 
of  affecting  individuals  and  multitudes  to  most  mischievous 
and  illogical  conclusions  in  a  thousand  different  ways. 
Even  at  the  present  day,  accepted  as  confirmations  of 
sundry  doctrines  arid  pretensions,  they  become  the  means 
of  misleading  a  vast  number  of  well-intending  people. 
While  philosophy  refuses  to  see  them  in  their  true  light, 
it  can  do  nothing  to  abate  or  prevent  the  evil  in  question, 
for  the  victim  knows  too  well  that  the  phenomena  are 
not,  as  philosophy  would  inculcate,  unreal.  Let  philosophy 
see  them  as  they  are — a  part  of  the  universal  frame  of 
things,  liable  like  everything  else  to  law,  and  having  a 
real  bearing  on  the  good  and  evil  fortunes  of  mankind — 
and  the  weakest  would  henceforth  be  safe  from  all  false 
conclusions  to  be  deduced  from  them.  To  this  good  end 
the  "  candid  reader"  may  find  Mr.  Home's  autobiography 
a  valuable  contribution. 

As  an  evidence  of  the  attention  of  Mr.  R.  Chambers 
having  been  turned  to  this  subject  at  an  early  period.  I 
insert  the  following  note  written  by  him  in  1855,  which 
shows  that  it  was  not  upon  a  short  or  slight  acquaintance 
with  me  that  he  wrote  the  above  introduction. 

"  Edinburgh,  July  30,  1855. 
"  DEAB.  MBS.  DE  MORGAN, 

"  I  return  my  warmest  thanks 

for  your  truly  obliging  attention  in  sending  me  these 
additional  notices.  I  have  delayed  writing  on  the  subject 
for  two  or  three  days,  that  I  might  be  able  to  say  your 
wish  regarding  at  least  Professor  Gregory,  had  been  ful- 
filled. I  have  seen  him  this  evening,  and  read  your 
letter  to  him  and  Mrs.  Gregory.  It  is  scarcely  necessary 

INTRODUCTION.  9 

to  sny  that  they  feel  deeply  interested  by  your  notes, 
forming  as  they  do  such  satisfactory  proofs. 

"  Professor  and  Mrs.  (ircgory  had  not  as  yet  heard  of 
Mr.  Hume  and  his  Singular  phenomena,  and  they  are 
much  interested  nhout  him.  As  they  are  to  set  out  on 
Thursday  for  a  German  spa  (on  account  of  Mrs.  Gregory's 
health),  I  have  recommended  them  to  try  to  see  Hume  as 
they  pass  through  London.  They  are  willing,  but  do  not 
know  how  to  proceed.  At  my  suggestion,  they  are  in- 
clined to  wait  upon"  you  on  Friday  at  12  o'clock,  to  see  if 
you  can  give  them  any  information  on  the  subject,  and 
also  to  converse  with  you  about  your  own  domestic  marvels. 
I  have  no  doubt  you  will  be  glad  to  see  this  most  amiable 
and  worthy  professor  and  his  lady,  if  it  be  at  all  convenient 
to  you.  I  believe  they  will  stay  at  the  Euston  Square 
Hotel ;  so,  if  you  be  engaged,  you  may  give  them  a  few 
lines  to  say  so. 

"  There  is  only  one  other  person  in  Scotland  to  whom 
I  care  to  communicate  these  singular  phenomena — a  Miss 
Douglas,  niece  of  the  late  General  Sir  Xeil  Douglas,  our 
commander-in-chief.  With  ordinary  people,  I  scarcely 
can  open  my  mouth  on  such  subjects. 

"  I  beg  to  be  kindly  remembered  to  Mr.  de  Morgan, 
and  am, 

"  Dear  Mrs.  de  Morgan, 

"  Yours  very  respectfully, 

"  E.  CHAMBERS. 
"  This  letter  requires  no  reply.'* 

The  following,  which  was  written  to  me  with  respect  to 
materials  for  my  book,  speaks  for  itself,  as  well  as  that 
which  follows. 

'  1,  Doune  Torrnco,  Edinburgh. 

Dec.  22,  18,39. 
"  MY  DEAR  SIR, 

"  I  have  duly  received  your  letter  of 
Monday,  and  after  some  little  pottering,  have  found  a  book 

10  INTRODUCTION. 

in  my  library  which  gives  the  writings  of  Aubrey,  of 
Martin,  and  of  Theophilus  Nisalenus,  on  second  sight,  all 
in  one — a  great  conveniency ;  so  I  dispatch  it  to  you  to-day 
by  post.  Thus,  with  Fraser's  treatise  formerly  sent,  you 
are  now  pretty  complete  as  to  Scottish  materials  for  your 
proposed  book.  I  may  remark  that  this  volume  is  one  of 
a  set  now  scarce,  and  therefore  I  hope  you  will  excuse  me 
asking  you  to  take  unusual  care  of  it. 

"  It  is  interesting  to  hear  of  your  interview  with  tho 
venerable  Lymlhurst.  I  hope  you  will  oe  able  this  winter 
to  give  a  few  sittings  to  such  persons  and  others,  without 
injury  to  your  health.  What  I  have  had  to  tell  to  Miss 
Douglas,  Miss  Catherine  Sinclair,  and  Mrs.  Gregory,  since 
J  came  home,  has  interested  them  deeply,  and  they  all 
hope  that  you  will  be  in  Edinburgh  next  year. 

"  Mrs.  C.  is  much  gratified  to  receive  the  kind  message 
from  your  wife,  and  desires  me  to  send  her  kind  regards 
in  return.  With  all  good  wishes,  I  am, 

"  My  dear  Sir, 

"  Yours  very  faithfully, 

"  E.  CHAMBERS. 

"  My  compliments  to  Mr.  Cox,  if  you  please." 

"August  1, 1860. 

"  DEAB  MB.  HUME, 

"  The  appearance  of  the  article 

'  Stranger  than  Fiction,'  in  the  *  Cornhill  Magazine,' 
tempted  me  to  trouble  you  with  a  few  lines,  merely  to 
congratulate  you  on  the  good  effect  that  may  be  antici- 
pated in  behalf  of  your  personal  reputation  in  this  country. 
I  was,  I  must  own,  scarcely  prepared  for  so  strong  a 
demonstration  from  a  high  class  periodical  in  favour  of  the 
subject  that  is  stranger  than  fiction.  So  I  am  the  more 
pleased  to  see  it,  and  the  more  gratified  on  your  account. 

"  I  was  very  unlucky  in  the  detention  of  my  dear  and 

INTRODUCTION.  11 

valued  friend,  Mr.  O\vcn, l  till  after  I  had  left  town  :  but 
In-  is  promising  to  be  here  about  the  4th  of  this  month, 
and  Mi-s  Douglas  and  I  arc  looking  forward  with  givat 
pleasure  to  his  visit.  What  of  your  proposed  visit  to 
Scotland  ? 

"  I  am  in  expectation  of  being  in  London  for  some 
time  after  the  autumn,  when  I  may  hope  to  see  you  and 
Mrs.  Hume.  Please,  my  kind  compliments  to  her,  and 
believe  me,  with  all  good  wishes, 

"  Yours  very  sincerely, 

"  K.  CHAMBERS. 

"  My  ordinary  address  continues  to  be  1,  Doune 
Terrace"." 

A  letter  from  Dr.  R.  Chambers,  to  Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall, 
dated  Xov.  1,  1806,  contains  the  following  passage  in 
speaking  of  an  apparent  kindness  that  had  been  bestowed 
on  me.  "  Such  is  my  opinion  of  him  that  not  only  do  I 
think  him  deserving  of  it,  but  that  he  will  make  a  good 
use  of  it.  We  may,  I  think,  trust  to  see  him  propagating 
spiritualism  from  the  independent  point  \ie  has  reached, 
with  power  only  bounded  by  the  needful  regard  to  his 
health." 

I  append  here  extracts  from  a  little  brochure,  by  Miss 
Douglas,  the  lady  who  is  referred  to  in  each  of  the 
foregoing  letters,  with  reference  to  which  Dr.  R.  Cham- 
bers wrote — "  These  twenty-four  pages,  in  my  opinion, 
contain  the  germ  of  the  greatest  discovery,  and  the  greatest 
revolution  of  human  thought  that  any  age  of  the  world 
has  witnessed." 

It  may  .indeed  be  conceded  that  on  the  inquiry  into  a 
future  state  of  existence  no  science  has  yet  thrown  the 
smallest  light— that  natural  theology  has  made  little  ad- 

M  r.  Robert  Dale  Owen,  author  of  "  Footfalls  on  the  Boundary 
of  another  World." 

12  INTRODUCTION, 

vance  since  the  dawn  of  civilization  :  but  it  may  be  asked 
whether  the  time  which  has  elapsed  since  that  period  be 
not  too  brief  to  compel  us  to  despair  of  ultimately  attain- 
ing to  any  knowledge  of  our  future  destinies,  too  brief  to 
warrant  the  conclusion  of  the  inapplicability  to  man's 
highest  quest  of  those  methods  which  have  guided  him 
to  truth  in  other  paths  of  inquiry.  The  idea  is  now 
arising  that  the  cause  of  the  undiminished  darkness  over- 
hanging all  that  relates  to  a  state  of  existence  after  this 
life,  may  be  that  the  right  track  has  never  yet  been 
entered  on,  that  the  facts  really  affording  in  this  direction 
materials  for  induction  have  hitherto  been  disregarded, 
that  they  nevertheless  abound,  that  a  higher  enlighten- 
ment will  cause  attention  to  be  turned  to  them  and  j-eveal 
their  profound  significance.  From  sedulous  observation 
of  the  spiritual  phenomena  in  their  multiform  aspects, 
from  study  of  the  more  subtle  and  recondite  physical  laws 
brought  to  bear  on  those  phenomena,  will,  there  is  reason 
to  believe,  emerge  proof  of  the  existence  within  the  order 
of  nature  of  forces  forming  a  link  and  means  of  inter- 
course between  this  sphere  of  existence  and  the  one  im- 
mediately above,  through  which  proof  may  be  established 
of  the  immortality  of  the  soul.  From  that  very  quarter 
now  most  hostile  to  the  doctrine  of  spiritualism  may  thus 
come  demonstration  of  its  truth:  all  unconsciously  Science 
herself,  it  may  be,  has  led  the  way  to  the  confines  of 
another  world ;  ere  long,  we  may  hope,  will  she  unbar 
the  portals  through  which  light  from  that  world  has 
hitherto  struggled  with  fitful  and  refracted  rays. 

As  to  those  minds  disposed  to  make  light  of  the  reli- 
gious sentiment,  minds  which,  despite  the  enormous  in- 
fluence it  has  ever  exercised  over  human  affairs,  despite 
the  enduring  institutions  to  which  it  has  given  birth, 
despite  its  universality,  the  outward  signs  of  which  in 
every  land  so  forcibly  strike  the  eye,  from  the  dome 
which  is  the  boast  of  the  Eternal  City,  from  the  glittering 
minarets  of  Stamboul,  from  the  fallen  temples  of  a  bygone 

INTRODUCTION.  13 

world,  to  the  village  spire  and  to  the  rude  altar  of  un- 
civilized man,  still  see  in  that  sentiment  hut  a  wi-akiu-ss 
of  human  nature — to  those  minds  proof  may  hi-  aH'onli-d 
that  it  is.  an  essential  element  of  man's  mental  constitu- 
tion, often  indeed  misled,  hut  tending  still  towards  truth, 
having  its  real,  its  lit,  its  correlative  objects  beyond  this 
world  ;  and  thus  may  the  geneial  result  be  that  conflicting 
sects  and  schools  of  religious  opinion,  guided  by  one  com- 
mon and  ever-increasing  light,  may  by  degrees  lay  aside 
their  differences,  and  unite  in  one  harmonious  and  pro- 
gressive movement. 

Those  to  whom  such  views  may  appear  visionary  are 
entreated  to  examine  the  grounds  on  which  they  rest : 
investigation  seriously  and  pcrseveringly  conducted  can 
hardly  fail  to  convince  reflecting  minds  of  at  all  events  the 
reality  of  the  phenomena  called  spiritual,  to  prove  to  them 
(in  the  words  of  a  distinguished  mathematician)  "  that 
they  are  things  which  cannot  be  taken  by  a  rational  being 
to  be  capable  of  explanation  by  imposture,  coincidence,  or 
mistake.  Like  Professor  de  Morgan,  some  may  not  in- 
deed be  able  to  adopt  any  explanation  concerning  them 
which  has  yet  been  given,  but  so  far  they  will  probably 
go  with  him  as  to  recognize  as  their  cause  "  some  combina- 
tion of  will,  intellect,  and  physical  power  \\Jiich  is  not  that 
of  any  of  the  human  beings  present."1 

One  cause  of  incredulity  as  to  manifestations  from 
another  world,  is  the  view  (generally  however  much  mis- 
represented) to  which  they  lead  of  the  future  state  ;  such 
revelations  concerning  it  as  we  have  from  that  source  are 

1  The  researches  of  Baron  Reichenbach  cannot  but  strike  the 
student  of  spiritual  phenomena.  His  experiments  on  the  p-yrho- 
phvsiro  action  of  crystals — of  the  force  emanating  from  them  termed 
odyle  on  sensitives,  have  suggested  the  idea  that  the  proneness  to 
second  siiiht  or  spontaneous  clairvoyance  in  ceitain  regions,  in  the 
western  Highlands  of  Scotland  for  instance,  may  be  owing  to  the 
highly  crystalline  formation  of  the  rocks  from  which  odyle  must 
be  copiously  emitted. 

14  INTRODUCTION. 

no  doubt  at  variance  with  received  ideas,  indicating  as 
they  do,  a  state  similar  in  kind  to  this  present  life,  and 
only  a  step  higher  in  an  ascending  series  of  existences, 
one  into  which  we  carry  our  human  nature,  and  in  which 
progress  is  but  gradual.  This  view,  however  little  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  general  conception  of  a  future  existence, 
derives  nevertheless  support  from  analogy,  harmonising 
as  it  does  with  those  views  of  physical  progress  opened  up 
by  geology,  and  by  the  study  of  organic  forms  from 
primeval  times.  It  is  agreed,  as  well  by  those  who  main- 
tain that  progress  to  be  the  result  of  distinct  acts  of  Omni- 
potence, as  by  those  who  believe  in  a  progressive  principle 
imparted  ab  origine  to  the  works  of  creation,  that  where 
in  their  series  breaks  were  once  supposed  to  occur,  closer 
inspection  has  discovered  links,  carrying  on  the  chain  by 
minute  degrees,  to  borrow  the  fine  imagery  of  a  distin- 
guished naturalist  "  we  learn  from  the  past  history  of  our 
globe  that  Nature  has  advanced  with  slow  and  stately 
steps,  guided  by  the  archetypal  light,  amidst  the  wreck  of 
worlds,  from  the  first  embodiment  of  the  vertebrate  idea 
under  its  old  ichthyic  vestment,  until  it  became  arrayed  in 
the  glorious  garb  of  the  form  of  man." 

The  law  of  gradual  progress  thus  poetically  set  forth 
by  Professor  Oven,  and  which  we  behold  stamped  through 
every  part  of  this  visible  sphere,  may  welt  be  extended  to 
the  invisible,  may  well  exist  for  the  individual  as  for  the 
species ;  nor  would  it  be  less  in  accordance  with  analogy 
to  infer  that  the  beginning  only  of  such  progress  would 
be  slow,  that  the  further  the  advance,  the  more  ethereal 
the  surroundings  the  more  accelerated  it  would  become. 

The  common-place  character  of  a  large  portion  of  the 
spirit-communications,  the  extravagant  character  of  some, 
cease  to  perplex  when  we  come  to  view  them  as  proceed- 
ing from  beings  lately  ordinary  dwellers  upon  earth,  and 
retaining  still  their  earthly  dispositions  and  ideas.  True, 
the  difficulty  remains  as  to  why  some  small  portion  at 
least  of  these  communications  should  not  bear  the  im- 

INTRODUCTION.  15 

press  of  transcendent  wisdom  and  genius;  the  absence 
from  them  of  anything  equalling,  far  less  surpassing  the 
highest  products  of  the  human  mind,  argues,  it  mu>t  he 
admitted;  sonic  hindrance  to  intercourse  with  spiritual 
beings  of  an  exalted  order;  may  sve  not  hope  to  over- 
come it?  .Meantime,  as  a  necessary  consequence  of  the 
unprogressed  condition  of  the  beings  from  whom  a  large 
portion  of  the  communications  proceeds,  many  of  these 
do  but  confirm  the  members  of  each  sect  in  their  own 
views,  while  some  have  given  rise  to  doctrines  (such  as  in 
France,  that  of  re-incarnation)  from  which  Spiritualists 
as  a  body  recoil.  AVe  must  not  indeed  shrink  from  the 
admission  that  intercourse  with  the  invisible  world  has 
been  the  origin  of  all  superstitions,  and  all  erroneous 
theologies  ;  that  to  it  even  may  be  due  their  persistence 
for  a  while  after  they  cease  to  harmonise  with  the  general 
spirit  of  the  society  over  which  they  once  held  dominion. 

To  the  reader  familiar  with  spiritual  phenomena  it  is 
evident  even  from  the  sneering  narrative  of  Gibbon,  that 
the  apostacy  of  Julian,  and  his  intense  enthusiasm  in  the 
cause  of  the  fallen  faith,  was  in  truth  due  to  communica- 
tion with  the  invisible  world  ;  spirits  of  departed  pagans 
still  apparently  clinging  to  their  earthly  creed,  seem  to 
have  impressed  him  powerfully,  visiting  him,  and  con- 
versing with  him  in  the  forms  of  the  Olympian  gods  ; 
"  We  may  learn,"  says  Gibbon,  "  from  his  faithful  friend 
the  orator  Libanius,  that  he  lived  in  a  perpetual  in- 
tercourse with  the  gods  and  goddesses,  that  they 
descended  upon  earth  to  enjoy  the  conversation  of  their 
favourite  hero,  that  they  gently  interrupted  his  slumbers 
by  touching  his  hand  or  his  hair,  that  they  warned  him 
of  every  impending  danger,  and  conducted  him  by  their 
infallible  wisdom  in  every  action  of  his  life." 

That  so  much  that  is  erroneous  should  have  been 
allowed  to  proceed  from  spiritual  sources  on  the  subject 
of  the  highest  import,  is  indeed  an  enigma;  is  it  how- 

16  INTRODUCTION. 

ever  more  than  one  among  the  enigmas  which  in  our  pre- 
sent state  of  knowledge  appear  as  insolvable  as  they  are 
painful,  when  we  survey  the  system  in  which  we  have  our 
being? 

The  claim  to  be  set  off  against  the  admissions  which 
have  been  made,  is  that  every  doctrine  which  has 
^emanated  from  the  spirit  world,  and  has  been  accepted  by 
any  considerable  portion  of  mankind,  has  either  established 
a  moral  code  where  none  had  previously  existed,  or  has 
been  an  improvement  on  the  one  it  superseded. 

If  we  must  not  shut  our  eyes  to  the  dangers  of  com- 
munication with  another  sphere,  on  the  other  hand  we 
may  feel  confident  that  with  the  progress  of  knowledge 
they  will  pass  away;  the  amount  of  light  which  has 
already  been  thrown  on  the  nature  of  spiritual  com- 
munications precludes  their  being  received  henceforth 
with  unquestioning  faith,  precludes  therefore  the  risk  of 
their  giving  rise  to  new  forms  of  religious  error  ;  the 
general  characteristic  moreover  of  the  higher  spiritual 
communications  of  the  present  day  is  the  absence  of  dog- 
matic teaching,  and  the  assertion  that  it  is  only  as  we 
advance  in  virtue  and  in  the  deeper  paths  of  knowledge 
that  we  can  attain  to  further  light  in  the  science  of  things 
divine — to  any  criterion  as  to  truth  in  the  interpretation ' 
of  revealed  doctrine. 

If  the  idea  of  a  'future  life  only  gradually  progressive, 
and  of  which  the  first  phase  will  be  similar  in  kind  to  life 
here  below,  does  not  give  rise  to  the  same  emotions 
which  in  rapt  moments  may  fill  the  soul  in  anticipation 
of  perfect  rest  and  felicity  after  the  ills  of  earth ;  on  the 
other  hand  it  is  a  view  more  fitted  perhaps  to  give  steady 
every- day  support,  to  afford  until  the  last  hour  an  incen- 
tive to  exertion. 

That  "  the  better  world,"  should  be  so  unwillingly 
drawn  near  to,  even  in  advanced  years,  seems  a  strange 
contradiction  in  human  nature  ;  may  not  the  cause  lie  to 

INTRODUCTION.  17 

some  extent  in  the  nature  of  the  pictures  usually,  so  far 
as  they  go,  presented  of  that  world  ?  The  little  relating 
to  it  that  falls  from  the  pulpit,  is  but  cold  and  vague, 
based  upon  some  few  indefinite  scriptural  expressions,  and 
reflecting  generally  the  views  of  that  class  of  minds  in 
which  earthly  aims  and  joys,  if  not  more  or  l^s  associ- 
ated with  sin,  are  at  all  events  considered  incompatible 
with  the  dignity  and  purity  of  life  beyond  the  grave. 

Then  again,  how  full  of  gloom  is  the  language  com- 
monly used  with  respect  to  death ;  such  expressions  as 
the  narrow  home,  the  long  sleep,  implying  as  they  do  an 
intermediate  state  of  indefinite  duration,  of  nothingness, 
offer  the  very  reverse  of  the  picture  which  presents  itself 
to  the  disciple  of  the  new  doctrine  in  connection  with 
departure  from  this  world  ;  like  the  traveller  bound  to 
some  fair  region  yet  unknown,  and 

"  Full  of  wonder,  full  of  hope  as  he," 

he  looks  forward  to  the  new  scene  as  one  immediately  to 
be  entered  into,  as  one  adapted  to  his  present  nature — a 
higher  phase  of  the  eternal  life  begun  on  earth  ;  for  there, 
he  believes,  do  all  human  faculties  find  wider  scope  in  a 
system  purer,  more  refined,  more  plastic  to  progressive 
force,  more  in  harmony  with  the  ideal ;  there,  he  believes, 
does  the  Spirit  of  Truth  guide  her  followers  with  a  brighter 
torch,  the  Spirit  of  Beauty  mould  all  things  nearer  to  the 
archetypal  forms  ;  there  shall  we  taste  in  higher  perfec- 
tion all  that  here  fires  or  charms  the  mind  ;  there  the 
tender  ties  and  sweet  affections  of  our  nature,  not  losing 
their  special  character  will  become  only  deeper  and  more 
intense  ;  there  from  the  supreme  source  will  a  more 
radiant  light  stream  down. 

The  frame  of  mind  to  which  Spiritualism  leads  is  well 
fitted  to  enable  us  to  remain  calm  under  the  attacks  of  its 
opponents ;  to  smile  patiently  while  sensible  people,  in 
entire  ignorance  of  the  subject,  pronounce  it  imposture, 
while  religious  people  condemn  it  as  impious,  while  some 

18  INTRODUCTION. 

silver-tongued  sciolist  utters  to  a  tittering  and  applauding 
audience  ridicule  of  nature's  deepest  and  most  wondrous 
laws. 

Again  we  are  supported  when  we  remember  that  the 
new  doctrine  is  but  undergoing  what  every  great  new 
idea,  what  every  great  discovery,  has  had  to  undergo  ere 
it  triumphed — scorn,  derision,  misrepresentation  ;  error 
is  persistive,  prejudice  hard  to  be  overcome,  the  boast  of 
Csesar  has  never  been  for  Truth. 

The  non-arbitrary  character  of  the  spiritual  pheno- 
mena, their  subjection  to  law,  have  in  these  pages  been 
urged  ;  and  it  may  indeed  be  affirmed  that  independently 
of  spiritual  declarations  there  is  no  uncertain  ground  for 
the  inference  that  they  are  part  of  the  order  of  Xature, 
for  as  all  scientific  research  concurs  in  proving  the 
accidental  or  anomalous  to  have  no  existence  in  the 
visible  universe,  so,  guided  by  analogy,  may  we  conclude 
that  the  same  principle  of  order  is  extended  to  that  more 
mysterious  region  whence  these  phenomena  proceed ;  and 
intimately  connected  as  they  obviously  are  with  subtle 
physical  and  physiological  conditions  belonging  to  this 
sphere,  of  a  nature  not  more  apparently  insolvable  than 
were  at  one  time  other  problems  which  have  received 
solution,  the  conclusion  is  warranted  that  they  are  not 
beyond  the  boundary  of  investigation,  and  that  their  laws 
will  be  ultimately  disclosed. 

In  a  striking  passage  of  his  Essays  the  late  Mr.  Baden 
Powell  seems  to  glance  at  the  spiritual  manifestations 
then  just  beginning  to  attract  attention.  In  the  present 
state  of  science,  he  remarks,  "  of  all  subjects  that  on  which 
we  know  least  is  perhaps  the  connexion  of  our  bodily  and 
mental  nature,  the  action  of  the  one  on  the  other,  and 
all  the  vast  range  of  sensations,  sympathies,  and  influences, 
in  which  those  affections  are  displayed,  and  of  which 
we  have  sometimes  such  extraordinary  manifestations  in 
peculiar  states  of  excited  cerebral  or  nervous  action,  som- 

INTRODUCTION.  10 

nambnlism,  spectral  impressions,  the  phenomena  of  sus- 
pended  animation,  double  consciousness,  and  the  like.  In 
such  cases  science  has  not  vet  advanced  to  any  generalisa- 
tions ;  results  only  are  presented  which  have  not  as  yet 
been  traced  to  laws ;  yet  no  inductive  inquirer  for  a 
moment  doubts  that  these  classes  of  phenomena  are  all 
really  connected  by  some  great  principle  of  order.'' 

"  If,  then,  some  peculiar  manifestations  should  appear 
of  a  more  extraordinary  character,  still  less  apparently 
reducible  to  any  known  principles,  it  could  not  be  doubted 
by  any  philosophic  mind  that  they  were  in  reality  har- 
monious and  conspiring  parts  of  some  higher  series  of 
causes  as  yet  undiscovered.  The  most  formidable  out- 
standing apparent  anomalies  will,  at  some  future  time, 
undoubtedly  be  found  to  merge  in  great  and  harmonious 
laws,  the  connexion  will  be  fully  made  oiTt,  and  the  claims 
of  order,  continuity,  and  analogy,  eventually  vindicated."1 
As  to  the  reality  of  the  data  on  which  these  speculations 
rest,  each  must  examine,  and  judge  for  himself. 

\  Essay  on  the  Spirit  of  the  Iiuluclivc  Philosophy,  p.  109. 

CHAPTER  I. 
REVIEWS  AND  REPLIES. — LETTER  TO  TIMES. 

'N  the  appearance  of  incidents  of  my  life,  I 
had  no  reason  to  complain  of  the  neglect  of 
the  press,  for  several  journals  fell  foul  of 
me  with  commendable  speed.  I  had  been 
thoroughly  prepared  for  abuse  from  the  press  generally, 
and  in  several  instances  was  by  no  means  disappointed. 
I  have  however  to  thank  some  of  those  who  reviewed  my 
book,  for  the  fair  and  candid  tone  in  which  they  treated 
the  subject.  "  The  Spectator/'  "  The  Times,"  and  the 
"  Morning  Herald "  call  for  special  mention  in  this 
respect. 

1  here  give  extracts  from  several  of  these  reviews : — 
The  following  is  extracted  from  a  review  in  the  "  Par- 
thenon." 

"  The  stereotyped  form  of  beginning  these  narratives 
seems  to  run  thus  (we  quote  from  Mr.  Home's  book)  : — 
'  One  evening,  as  we  were  seated  at  the  table,  the  spirits 
requested  that  the  candles  should  be  extinguished,'  or, 
'The  spirits  then  gave  out,  Put  out  the  lights,'  which 
being  done,  the  incantations  begin.  Suspicious,  too,  are 
the  circumstances  that  there  is  (sic)  almost  invariably  a 
handbell  and  an  accordion  concerned,  the  spirits  seemingly 
being  very  partial  to  jingle  one  and  sound  the  other,  or 

22         REVIEWS    AND    REPLIES. 

rather,  as  we  believe,  such  portable  instruments  being 
easily  manipulated  by  Mr.  Home.  Now  if  the  spirit- 
mediums  would  make  the  big  bell  of  St.  Paul's  ring  out, 
or  play  the  large  organ  beneath  the  dome,  we  should  be- 
lieve in  them  ;  but  a  small  hand-bell  tinkled  and  an  ac- 
cordian  played  upon  will  not  convert  us.  It  is  indeed 
most  clear  that  Mr.  Home  and  his  spirit-medium  frater- 
nity are  in  the  most  favourable  possible  conditions  to 
deceive  their  audience.  To  the  question  why  the  effects 
are  not  easily  obtained  above  board  (meaning  the  table) 
at  a  first  sitting,  whereas  they  are  most  easily  obtained 
when  habituated  circles  are  present,  Mr.  Home  answers, 
'  that  scepticism  mars  the  forces  at  work,  that  the  spirits 
accomplish  what  they  do  through  our  life-sphere  or  at- 
mosphere which  is  permeated  by  our  wills,  and  if  the  will 
be  contrary,  the  sphere  is  unfit  for  being  operated  upon.' 
Precisely  so ;  the  habituated  are  those  who  feel  that — 

'The  pleasure  surely  is  as  great 
Of  being  cheated  as  to  cheat/ 

and  are  thus  easily  imposed  upon ;  so  easily,  indeed,  that 
we  question  much  whether  the  dark  room  even  is  neces- 
sary. Now  we  would  ask  in  the  name  of  common  sense, 
what  there  is  in  these  manifestations  one  whit  more  extra- 
ordinary than  the  performance  of  famous  jugglers,  who, 
jy  the  way,  juggle  in  broad  daylight,  and  tell  you  frankly 
that  they  intend  to  cheat  your  senses,  and  do  so  despite  all 
your  power  to  find  out  their  tricks.  We  observe  that  Mr. 
Home  is  very  angry  with  Lord  Brougham  and  Sir  David 
Brewster,  because,  after  certain  performances  by  Mr.  Home 
at  Cox's  Hotel  in  Jermyn  Street,  both  his  Lordship  and 
Sir  David  were  sceptical.  Sir  David  declares  that  neither 
he  nor  Lord  Brougham  were  allowed  to  look  under  the 
table  at  which  they  were  seated ;  to  which  Mr.  Homo 
illogically  replies,  '  If  Mr.  Cox  allowed  me  to  conceal 
machinery  under  the  drapery  of  his  table,  noblemen  and 

REVIEWS    AND    REPLIES.         23 

gentlemen  whom  I  have  visited  in  every  country  must 
have  allowed  me  to  do  the  same  thing.'  " 

To  this  last  remark  I  reply  that  the  reviewer  stops 
short  in  his  quotation,  for  I  go  on  to  say  that  "  I  have  for 
years  met,  and  still  meet  every  day  with  men  of  the 
highest  attainments  in  the  arts  and  sciences  who  havo 
carefully  examined,  and  have  not  rested  satisfied  with  con- 
j"ctures  either  as  to  the  tahle,  or  the  machinery  alleged  to 
be  concealed  about  my  person."  I  also  challenge  the 
writer  of  the  review  to  point  out  in  my  book  the  passage 
which  he  marks  as  a  quotation  beginning  "that  scepticism 
mars,"  &c.  or  to  produce  any  evidence  that  I  ever  made 
such  an  answer  to  account  for  the  absence  of  manifesta- 
tions. Many  remarkable  phenomena  have  been  witnessed 
in  my  pr  sence  by  sceptics,  and  at  their  u  first  sitting." 

The  "  Saturday  Review,"  March  21,  1863,  dwelt  prin- 
cipally on  the  small  number  of  witnesses,  and  in  men- 
tioning, the  seance  at  which  Lord  Brougham  and  Sir  David 
Brewster  were  present,  said  "  Lord  Brougham  has  pre- 
served inflexible  silence  on  the  subject.  Sir  David 
Brewster  has  openly  charged  fraud  on  the  whole  affair. 
Mr.  Trollope's  testimony  is  only  to  his  belief  in  Mr.  Home's 
good  faith."  The  "  Saturday  Review  "  omits  to  notice 
Mr.  Trollope's  testimony  to  the  facts  not  only  that  a  largo 
table  was  moved  about  in  an  extraordinary  manner,  but 
that  while  it  was  being  moved  about,  Sir  David  looked 
under  it  and  saw  it  moving.  After  endeavouring  to  de- 
stroy the  credibility  of  all  the  other  witnesses,  the  "  Satur- 
day Review "  thus  sums  up,  determined  to  accept  no 
testimony  but  that  of  eleven  members  of  one  or  other  of 
the  three  learned  professions. 

"  What  is  wanted,  in  such  a  case  as  that  of  Mr.  Home's 
alleged  prodigies,  is  the  testimony  of  unprejudiced  or 
adverse  witnesses.  It  is  of  the  first  importance  in  testing 
any  prodigy  that  the  persons  by  whom,  the  witnesses 
before  whom,  and  the  circumstances  under  which,  the  ex- 
traordinary events  occurred,  should  be  beyond  suspicion. 

24        REVIEWS   AND    REPLIES. 

Mr.  Home  is,  accordi;  g  to  his  own  account  and  from  the 
testimony  of  his  own  book,  a  weak,  credulous,  half- 
educated,  fanatical  person,  born,  bred,  and  educated  in 
wonderful  stories,  who  has  lived  from  his  earliest  years  in 
a  whole  atmosphere  and  mirage  of  dreaming.  The  wit- 
nesses, few  in  number  and  almost  entirely  unknown,  are 
much  in  the  same  condition.  Mystics,  Theosophists, 
Mesmerists,  S \vedenborgians — fanatics  of  one  sort  or  other, 
educated  and  living  in  an  excited  and  unnatural  state  of 
the  spiritual  faculties — they  are  representatives  of  a  class 
coeval  with  the  existence  of  the  human  mind,  in  which  a 
certain  part  of  the  mental  constitution  is  in  a  diseased 
state,  and  of  which  "  spiritualism  in  all  ages,"  that  is,  the 
Stellings,  the  Bohmes,  the  Paracelsuses,  the  Guyons,  the 
HaufFes,  the  Swedenborgs,  are  the  natural  result.  And 
as  to  the  circumstances  under  which  the  phenomena  oc- 
curred, we  must  say  that  an  event  is  not  likely  to  receive 
credence  when  its  witnesses  are  for  the  most  part  anony- 
mous writers  in  magazines,  when  it  is  done  in  a  chamber 
with  extinguished  lights,  and  under  circumstances  pur- 
posely arranged  to  disturb  the  judgment,  and  only  in  the 
presence  of  favourable  witnesses.  The  alleged  facts  have 
not  as  yet  been  sufficiently  examined  and  tested.  When 
the  spiritualists  are  able  to  produce  the  testimony  of  eleven 
men  of  high  reputation  and  clear  judgment — say  of  eleven 
Judges,  or  eleven  Q.  C.'s,  or  eleven  Fellows  of  the  College 
of  Physicians,  or  even  of  eleven  Bishops — pronouncing, 
after  a  full  and  fair  investigation,  conducted  openly  and  in 
broad  da3T15ght,  that  they  have  seen  Mr.  Home  suspended 
in  mid-air,  '  a  man  between  ten  and  eleven  stone  in  weight 
floating  about  the  room  for  many  minutes,'  to  use  Dr. 
Gully's  explicit  language,  we  should  have  something  else 
to  say.  At  present — with  all  due  respect  to  Dr.  Gully 
and  to  the  other  ten  witnesses,  and  without  charging  him 
or  Mr.  Home  either,  with  conscious  fraud,  imposture,  or 
trickery  of  any  sort,  and  also  not  denying  that  such  im- 
posture may  exist>— we  must  say  that  whatever  the  testi- 

REVIEWS    AND    REPLIES.         25 

:Tiony  hitherto  produced  is  worlh.  it  is  pnlpnl)ly  insufficient. 
Tin-  evidence,  such  as  it  is,  is  deficient  in  quality  and 
quantity;  and  it  c<>mes  before  us  \vitli  an  antecedent  taint. 
It  does  not  meet  the  recognised  tests  of  even  a  common, 
still  less  of  an  exceptional,  fact.  We  do  not  charge  Mr. 
Jlome  with  imposture.  This  is  not  our  argument.  But 
wo  do  say  that  alleged  miracles,  such  as  many  of  those  of 
J'agan  origin,  of  the  mediaeval  church,  and  of  the  Abbe 
Paris — to  take  a  very  familiar  case — are  better  authenticated 
than  those  of  Mr.Uome,or  at  least  are  as  well  authenticated, 
though  they  are  now  known  to  be  fictitious,  partly  arising 
from  delusion,  partly  from  conscious  imposture.  The  spirit- 
ualists seem  to  be  aware  of  the  stress  of  this  argument,  and 
they  answer  it  bv  an  attempt  to  show — which,  if  anything,  is 
the  result  of  Mr.  Ilmvitt's  book — that  all  these  transactions 
are  true  ;  and  their  adoption  of  the  Cock  Lane  Ghost  is  a  re- 
markable instance  of  the  difficulty  which  they  feel.  Butdoes 
not  this  line  of  argument  prove  rather  too  much?  To  hint 
that  there  has  never  been  a  false  miracle  is  at  least  as  mon- 
strous as  Home's  doctrine  that  any  miracle  is  impossible/' 

This  cool  wav  of  characterizing  Mi-.  Cox.  Mr.  Coleman, 
Pr:  Wilkinson,  Mr.  IVars,  Mr.  Crawford.  Mr.  Mason,  Dr. 
Gully,  Mr.  Jones,  Mr.  Hutchinson,  and  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Howitt  as  "fanatics  of  one  sort  or  other/' on  no  other  evidence 
than  that  of  their  believing  in  the  reality  of  the  manifesta- 
tions is  peculiarly  characteristic  of  the  "  Saturday  Review." 
I  cannot  be  surprised  at  their  objecting  to  my  having  in 
so  many  cases  yielded  to  the  desire,  of  the  witnesses  to  re- 
main incognito,  by  giving  only  their  initials.  Their  full 
names  have  been  in  general  made  known  to  all  who  have 
made  private  inquiries,  and  the  veil  under  which  they  re- 
main in  my  book  is  transparent  to  most  of  those  who  take 
such  interest  in  the  subject  as  to  investigate.  The 
la-viewer,  moreover,  wholly  ignores  several  names  which 
were  given  in  full  in  the  book. 

Complaining  of  "anonymous  witnesses,"  "The  Saturday 
Review  "  gives  au  example  of  the  initials  made  use  of: — 

26         REVIEWS    AND    REPLIES. 

"  Dr.  J.  J.  G.  Wilkinson  also  testifies,  both  in  this 
volume  and  in  the  '  Spiritual  Magazine/  to  a  vast  array 
of  manifestations.  But  as  to  what  occurred  in  England  at 
Mr.  Home's  first  visit  to  this  country,  these  three  names — 
viz.  Mr.  Cox,  Mr.  Coleman,  and  Dr.  Wilkinson,  and  these 
alone — are  produced  by  Mr.  Home.  At  Florence  v;e 

admit  that  Countess  O is  said  by  Mr.  Home  to  have 

seen  some  very  marvellous  things ;  but  with  Countess 
0 ,  or  any  other  anonymous  witness,  we  have  no  con- 
cern. We  dismiss  Count  B ,  and  Count  de  K , 

and  Abbe  C ,  Countess  L ,  Princess  de  B , 

and  MissE ,  and  all  the  other  initials  and  anonymous 

witnesses.  Testimony  like  this  is  simply  an  insult  to  the 
court. 

"After  another  visit  to  the  Continent,  in  November  1861 , 
Mr.  Home  returned  to  England,  and  his  manifestations  are 
attested  by  *  an  esteemed  friend '  Mr.  Jones,  of  Ba- 
siughall  Street,  Mr.  Hutchinson,  of  the  Stock  Exchange, 

*  a  Plain  Man/  Mr.  Cox,   and   Mr.  Wilkinson,  Mr.  and 
Mrs.   Howitt,  'Mrs.  P in  the  Regent's  Park/  and 

*  Mrs.  S / — And   these    are  all.     It  comes  then  to 

this — that  '  the  immense  number  of  persons  indicated  by 
name  or  otherwise/  who  bear  personal  testimony  to  the 
spirit  manifestations  in  England,  are  in  almost  every  case 
anonymous,  or  indicated  only  by  initials. 

I  have  much  pleasure  in  giving  the  names  in  full,  and  can 
assure  my  worthy  critic,  that  it  was  only  from  a  feeling  of 
delicacy  I  refrained  from  giving  the  names  at  once.  The 

Countess  O is  the  Countess  Antoinette  Orsini,  nee 

Countess  Orloff.     The  Count  B ,  is   the  Count   de 

Beaumont,  of  No.  12,  Rue  Royale.  The  Count  de  K , 

there  are  in  fact  two  Counts  de  K.,  being  the  Counts  Alex- 
ander and  Waldimir  de  Komar.  The  Abbe  C ,  is  the 

Abbe  Deguery  of  the  Madeleine,  who  was  murdered  by  the 

Communists  this  year.      The  Princess  de  B is  the 

Princess  de  Beaurean,  nee  Countess  de  Komar.  Miss  E — , 
is  Miss  Ellice.  Mrs.  P — • —  is  Mrs.  Cranford  Parks,  of 

REVIEWS    AND    REPLIES.         27 

No.  7,  Cornwall  Terrace,  Regent's  Park.  Mrs.  S ,  is 

Mrs.  Henry  Senior,  sister-in-law  of  the  late  Nassau 
Senior. 

The  writer  says:  "Possibly  Mr.  Home  may  deny  the 
possibility  of  a  miracle,  but  this  in  quite  another  sense  from 
another  famous  Mr.  Huino,  or  Home,  who  also  denied  the 
possibility  of  miracles.  The  present  Mr.  Home  may  say 
that  all  this  is  in  accordance  with  natural  laws,  if  we  only 
knew  the  whole  extent  of  nature  and  nature's  laws.  It  is 
only  a  natural  power  co-ordinate  with  that  of  gravitation, 
which,  in  his  case,  suspends  the  law  of  gravitation.  That 
is  to  say,  there  is  no  miracle  in  the  case,. because  it  is 
equally  a  law  of  nature  that  heavy  bodies  should,  and 
should  not,  fall  to  the  ground.  But  this  is,  of  course, 
mere  trifling.  For  all  practical  purposes,  the  events 
accredited  by  the  testimony  of  the  eleven  witnesses  are 
miracles.  They  are  things  contrary  to  all  known,  and 
firm,  and  unaltered  experience,  and  the  very  nature  of  the 
facts,  whether  we  choose  to  call  them  miracles  or  not, 
is  such  that  the  usual  criteria  of  miracles  maybe  applied  to 
them.  We  admit  with  the  opponents  of  Hume — the 
Scotch  Hume,  not  the  present  American  Home." 

No  one  could,  surely,  in  the  face  of  this,  deny  that  the 
writer  in  the  "  Saturday  Eeview,"  at  least  has  the  power 
of  miracle-working.  I  am  changed  by  his  magic  and 
truthful  pen  into  an  "American."  The  first  line  of 
the  first  chapter  of  my  book  begins  thus:  "I  was  born 
near  Edinburgh."  I  then  proceed  to  state  that  I  went 
to  America  when  I  was  about  nine  years  old.  It  might 
perhaps  be  well  to  tell  the  "  Saturday  Eeview,"  that 
Edinburgh  is  a  goodly  sized  city  of  Scotland,  and  that  I 
am  a  Scotchman. 

The  "Athenaeum."  March  14th,  18G3,  commenced  by 
attacking  the  anonymous  character  of  the  preface  as  follows: 

"  This  impudent  and  foolish  book  criticises  itself.  An 
introduction,  professing  to  be  *  written  bv  a  friend.'  pre- 
sents Mr.  Home  as  'delicate  in  health,  extremely  sensitive 

28         REVIEWS    AND    REPLIES. 

in  spirit,  coming  forward  with  his  narration  for  no  con- 
ceivable end  but  to  propagate  a  knowledge  of  what  he 
regards  as  important  truths ;  ....  a  man  of  a  religious 
turn  of  mind,  pure-hearted  and  unworldly' — in  fact,  as  a 
person  who  is  no  fit  object  for  the  jests  of  railing  Rab- 
shakehs !  Mr.  Home  throughout  his  hook  endorses  this 
sweet  and  saintly  character  of  himself  and  of  his  proceed- 
ings very  much  after  the  fashion  of  Wandering  Willie  in 
Scott's  *  Redgauntlet/  who  modestly  capped  the  pane- 
gyrics of  the  notorious  little  knave  Benjie  by  adding, 
'  All  is  true  that  the  little  boy  says' !  But  we  do  not  know 
the  name  of  the  mystic's  *  little  boy.'  He  is  only  Mr. 
Home's  friend.  Mr.  Home  answers  for  him,  and  he  an- 
swers for  Mr.  Home :  that  is  all  we  learn." 

This  attack  I  have  now  answered  by  reprinting  this 
preface,  with  the  name  of  its  author,  the  late  gifted  Dr. 
Robert  Chambers.  The  Reviewer  thus  disposes  sum- 
marily of  the  evidence : 

"  Three  points  may  be  stated  as  necessary  to  be  taken 
in  conjunction,  even  by  those  disposed  to  admit  the  exist- 
ence of  a  class  of  supernatural  mediators,  and  who  may 
wish  to  judge  how  far  Mr.  Home  is  a  sincere  and  self- 
deluded  member  of  such  priesthood,  how  far  the  reverse. 
First,  it  has  been  again  and  again  urged  that  persons  who 
trafficked  in  awful  mysteries  like  these,  being  commis- 
sioned from  on  high,  were  at  once  vulgarized,  deteriorated, 
handed  over  to  the  counsels  of  evil  spirits,  if  they  spoke 
to  the  dead,  or  made  the  dead  speak,  or  called  them  or  any 
part  of  them  into  visible  presence  for  lucre.  When  one 
wretched  charlatan  after  another  has  been  unmasked,  the 
pure  have  stood  sorrowfully  aloof,  and  repudiated  all  fellow- 
ship with  one  who  tampered  with  his  birthright  for  a  mess 
of  pottage.  *  Medium'  after  '  medium,'  detected  in  impos- 
ture, has.  been  anathematized  or  excused  as  having  handed 
himself  over  to  the  devil  by  the  base  act  of  sale  and  barter 
of  his  gift.  Now  Mr.  Home,  as  Mr.  Howitt,  indeed,  has 
already  told  us,  has  gained  a  competence  by  his  ghastly 

EEVIEWS    AND    REPLIES.        29 

shows.  Rings,  purses  (not  empty)  other  presents  more 
solid  than  praise  have  been  showered  on  him  as  thickly  as 
the  Clippers  with  which  devout  ladies  glorify  their  dear 
favourite  clergyman.  Secondly,  the  Romish  Church  has 
always  held  practices  such  as  those  by  which  Mr.  Home 
has  thriven  to  be  sinful,  heretical,  and  tending  to  damna- 
tion. Those  who  remember  this  canon  are  invited  to  con- 
sider how  Mr.  Home,  after  being  converted  from  Congre- 
gationalism to  Roman  Catholicism,  quarrelled  with  the 
sincere  and  stern  Pure  Ravignan,  who  insisted  on  his 
desisting  from  such  unauthorized  practices ;  also  how  he 
gave  up  his  next  confessor,  who,  it  was  hoped,  might  be 
more  lenient  to  one  who  was  driving  so  brisk  and  profitable 
a  trade,  and  amusing  so  many  great  people  and  crowned 
heads.  So  that  Mr.  Home  floats  strangely,  not  in  the 
air  alone,  but  between  the  two  stools  of  authority  and  pri- 
vate judgment.  Thirdly,  the  witnesses  brought  by  him 
into  the  box  who  answer  to  their  names  are  few.  A  great 
person  has  testified  to  his  marvellous  power  and  un- 
impeachable integrity;  a  sovereign  has  been  as  much 
impressed  for  his  soul's  good  as  the  Emperor  of  Russia 
was  by  William  Allen  the  Quaker,  but  we  do  not  learn 
who  the  great  person  and  the  sovereign  were.  The  god- 
fathers and  godmothers  who  appear  in  these  pages  to 
accredit  these  proceedings  arc  Mr.  Wilkinson  (a  spiritual- 
ist before  he  saw  Mr.  Home),  Mr.  J.  G.  Crawford,  '  a 
gentleman  who  had  for  years  resisted  all  belief  in  such 
phenomena,'  Mr.  T.  A.  Trollope,  Mr.  James  Wason, 
solicitor,  Dr.  Gully  of  Malvern,  Mr.  John  Jones  of  Basing- 
hall  Street,  Mr.  James  Hutchinson  of  the  Stock  Exchange, 
Mr.  Cox  of  the  hotel  in  Jenny n  Street,  Mr.  Coleman  of 
Bayswater,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Howitt,  and  Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall — 
which  last  witness  deposes  to  having  received  the  present  of 
a  lace  cap  from  the  deceased  Mis.  Home,  laid  by  super- 
natural hands  on  her  knee  !"  k 

The  Reviewer  thus  shows  how  carelessly  he  has  glanced 
at  the  book : — 

30         REVIEWS    AND    REPLIES. 

"In  the  course  of  his  foreign  wanderings,  Mr.  Home 
fell  in  with  the  sister  of  Count  Gregoire  Koucheleff  Besbo- 
rodko.  The  lady  was  an  ardent  spiritualist  and  medium, 
like  himself.  They  were  married." 

If  I  were  ever  so  much  a  miracle  worker,  I  would  hide 
my  diminished  head  in  the  presence  of  my  critics.  I  stated 
in  page  126  of  my  first  volume  that  my  wife  was  a  sister 
of  the  Countess  but  here  she  must  needs  be  changed  into 
a  Koucheleff  Besborodko — nay,  more,  I  now  discover  that 
she  "  was  an  ardent  spiritualist  and  medium";  while  on 
page  127  I  give  as  a  quotation  her  conversation  with  me 
when  we  were  already  engaged  to  be  married — the  following : 

"Do  tell  me  all  about  spirit-rapping,  for  you  know 
I  don't  believe  in  it."  I  would  most  earnestly  request  my 
critics  to  do  me  the  honour  of  reading  my  book,  as  Truth 
will  stand  when  Fiction  will  fail. 

After  giving  some  extracts  from  the  book,  the  writer 
thus  concludes : — 

"  Here  is  enough,  and  more  than  enough,  some  readers 
will  say,  of  Mr.  Home's  revelations,  and  of  the  testimonies 
of  his  disciples.  From  first  to  last  there  is  not  a  statement 
in  the  book  so  presented  as  to  warrant  a  sensible  man  in 
paying  attention  to  it.  To  exhibit  such  a  volume  is  to 
expose  it ;  and  we  shall  only  repeat  our  first  remark — the 
book  contains  its  own  criticism." 

The  "  Morning  Herald,"  April  4th,  1863,  approached 
the  subject  in  a  spirit  of  fairness,  commencing  with  one  of 
the  narratives  in  the  early  part  of  the  book,  and  continuing 
as  follows : — 

"  The  general  character  of  the  circumstances  related  in 
this  volume  is  probably  already  well  known  to  most  of  our 
readers.  At  certain  meetings,  usually  in  the  evening, 
almost  always  in  partial  darkness,  knocks  are  heard,  furni- 
ture is  moved  about,  spirit-hands  grasp  the  feet  ov  knees 
of  the  investigators,  accordions  are  played  without  human 
agency,  handkerchiefs  thrown  under  the  table  are  returned 
knotted,  the  medium  is  sometimes  raised  into  the  air,  and 

REVIEWS    AND    REPLIES.         81 

flonts  above  the  liemls  of  the  other  persons  present,  by  rap- 
piiiL>;utthe  mention  of  the  letters  of  the  alphabet  the  tables 
answer  questions  put  to  them,  sometimes  the  investigators 
iverive  messages  from  deceased  friends  written  in  a  hand- 
writ  ino-  they  recognise.  These  are  the  ordinary  manifes- 
tations which  Mr.  Home  describes,  and  he  asserts  that  they 
have  been  often  repeated  in  the  presence  of  many  witnesses. 
How  are  we  to  deal  with  these  assertions  ?  It  is  obvious 
that  the  easiest  way  would  be  to  treat  Mr.  Home  as  an  im- 
postor or  a  lunatic,  and  to  make  fun  of  the  undignified 
tricks  by  which  the  spirits  are  said  to  reveal  their  presence. 
But  though  this  course  would  be  easy,  we  cannot  think  it 
wise.  In  the  first  place,  this  spiritualism  is  to  its  believers 
a  sort  of  religious  faith,  and  faith  is  strengthened,  not 
hurt,  by  ridicule.  But,  besides  this,  the  matter  has  grown 
too  great  for  laughter.  If  it  be  false,  then  the  impostor 
who  has  tampered  with  the  highest  hopes  and  feelings  of 
humanity,  and  has  driven  scores,  perhaps  hundreds,  into 
madness,  is  a  villain  to  be  denounced,  not  laughed  at; 
while  the  imposture  itself  would  be  a  matter  for  tears  rather 
than  mirth.  But  if  these  things  be  true,  we  dare  not  bring 
our  jester's  tinkling  cap  into  the  presence  of  the  awful 
mysteries  of  the  unseen  world.  No ;  spiritualism  is  too 
grave  a  subject  in  itself,  and  it  has  taken  too  firm  a  hold 
upon  men's  minds  for  it  to  be  laughed  out  of  the  world. 
It  is  a  matter  for  serious  investigation,  and  the  appearance 
of  these  volumes  gives  us  a  good  opportunity  for  looking 
closely  into  it. 

"  We  need  hardly  repeat  the  strong  a  priori  arguments 
against  its  truth.  It  is  improbable  that  any  communication 
should  be  established  between  the  living  and  the  spirits  of 
the  dead  ;  still  more  improbable  that  such  communications 
should  take  place  at  times  which  presented  no  special 
reason  for  it,  and  to  persons  so  placed  in  liie  that  the  reve- 
lation produces  the  least  good  to  others  and  the  greatest 
evil  to  themselves.  And  it  seems  most  improbable  that 
the  departed  spirits  should  establish  the  communication  by 

32         REVIEWS    AND    EEPLIES. 

knocking  on  tables,  by  playing  *  Home !  sweet  home*  on 
an  accordion,  or  by  tying  knots  in  a  pocket-handkerchief. 
Any  man  who  enters  on  the  investigation  of  spiritualism  is 
bound,  we  think,  to  keep  these  arguments  constantly  in 
mind,  that  he  may  not  believe  too  easily.  But  if  the 
recorded  phenomena  seem  absurd,  we  cannot  say  that  they 
are  impossible.  Certainly  in  ordinary  phrase  men  would 
say  that  it  was  ' impossible'  for  a  table  to  move  without 
being  pushed,  or  to  rise  without  being  lifted  by  human 
agency.  But  the  more  a  man  learns  the  more  wary  he  is 
as  to  this  word  '  impossible.'  Mr.  Grove  shows  us  in  his 
book  on  the  '  Correlation  of  Forces'  how  little  we  know 
as  to  physical  laws ;  on  the  relations  of  matter  and  spirit 
we  know  hardly  anything.  All  we  can  say  is,  that  these 
manifestations  appear  to  be  to  us  in  the  highest  degree 
improbable.  But  here  we  are  met  by  evidence  that,  im- 
probable or  not,  they  have  taken  place.  Mr.  Home  is  our 
first  witness,  and  we  are  bound  to  say  that  we  cannot  see 
in  this  book  any  marks  of  insanity  or  deceit.  To  think 
him  merely  insane  would  not  be  enough  to  refute  his  state- 
ments, for  he  tells  us  that  the  manifestations  have  been 
seen  by  numbers  of  people  in  different  countries  ;  and  it  is 
plain  that  if  they  have  believed  also,  either  they  must  all 
have  been  insane,  or  he  must  be  an  impostor,  or  the  thing 
must  be  true.  If,  like  Robert  Barclay  or  Pastor  Oberlin, 
or  many  others  mentioned  in  Mr.  Howitt's  book,  he  spoke 
only  of  visions  which  he  himself  had,  we  might  suppose 
him  insane ;  but  when  he  declares,  and  makes  a  dozen 
other  persons  believe,  that  an  accordion  is  played  without 
hands,  unless  we  suppose  that  all  the  witnesses  were  mad 
too,  and  that  the  instrument  did  not  play  at  all,  we  are 
narrowed  to  this  alternative,  that  either  Mr.  Home  is  an 
impostor,  or  that  spiritualism  is  true. 

"  Now  as  to  imposture.  Assuredly  Mr  Home  is  very 
different  from  the  ordinary  type  of  an  impostor.  When 
only  eighteen  years  old  he  began  his  career  of  medium- 
siiip,  by  doing,  or  appearing  to  do,  things  so  difficult  as  to 

REVIEWS    AND    REPLIES.          33 

involve  almost  a  certainty  of  the  early  detection  of  any 
sort  of  deceit.  In  \$~>'2  Mr.  Uryant,  the  American  poet, 
joined  with  three  others  in  a  declaration  that  at  a  t 
when  the  room  was  well  lighted,  the  tahle  ro.-c  clear  of 
the  floor,  and  floated  in  the  atmosphere  tor  Beveral  seconds; 
that  Mr.  Home  frequently  urged  them  to  hold  his  hands 
and  feet,  and  that  every  possible  opportunity  was  afforded 
them  for  the  closest  inspection.  They  closed  the  declara- 
tion hy  saving',  '  We  know  that  we  were  not  imposed  upon 
nor  deceived.'  Again,  we  cannot  but  remark  that  the 
manifestations  are  not  more  elaborate  now  than  they  were 
twelve  years  ago.  We  might  expect  a  successful  im- 
postor to  use  his  advantages  of  experience  and  wealth  to 
produce  new  and  stronger  effects ;  but  this  has  not  been 
the  case  with  Mr.  Home.  The  spirit  hands  (by  far  the 
most  difficult  manifestation  for  an  impostor  to  produce) 
are  said  to  have  been  seen  at  a  very  early  period  of  his 
mediumship.  Again,  an  impostor  always  tries  to  weave 
his  deceptions  into  a  system  ;  generally,  to  form  some 
sort  of  sect.  Now,  Mr.  Home,  with  every  temptation  to 
do  this  in  that  he  has  persuaded  so  many  of  the  truth  of 
the  manifestations,  not  only  does  not  try  to  establish  any 
great  position  for  himself  as  the  high  priest  of  spiritualism, 
but  he  constantly  denies  that  he  ha^  any  power  in  the 
matter.  After  twelve  years  of  mediumship  he  does  not 
propound  any  system  ;  and  he  speaks  of  himself  as  merely 
a  helpless  instrument.  Thus  speaking  of  the  ridicule  and 
obloquy  which  are  cast  upon  those  who  confess  their 
belief  in  spiritualism,  he  says: — *  If  an  example  be  needed 
of  the  truth  of  this,  if  it  be  not  an  obvious  fact  alreadv  in 
tins  uncharitable  day,  let  my  adventurous  friends  watch 
the  extent  to  which  I  shall  be  abused,  and  called  bad 
names,  and  given  to  the  devil,  for  simply  and  truthfully 
writing  in  this  little  book  a  few  of  the  incidents  of  my 
life,  with  the  production  of  which  I  have  had  nothing  to 
do.'  In  fact,  Mr.  Home  speaks  of  his  book  as  a  collec- 
tion of  facts,  which  are  worihy  of  investigation,  and  may 

D 

34         REVIEWS    AND    REPLIES. 

be  found  useful  in  revealing  some  of  the  vet  hidden  laws 
of  creation.  '  It  would  be  hard,'  he  says  in  another  place, 
'  if  I  were  held  answerable  for  facts  which  occur  in  con- 
nection with  my  physical  organization,  and  towards  which 
I  am,  in  mind  and  intent,  wholly  passive,  even  if  there 
were  any  harm  in  them.'  We  must  note  also  the  strange- 
ness of  the  fact  that  Mr.  Home  has  never  been  detected, 
if,  indeed,  he  is  an  impostor.  To  move  heavy  tables,  to 
raise  himself  to  a  horizontal  position  near  the  ceiling,  to 
play  tunes  upon  guitars,  tfec.,  these  would  require  elaborate 
machinery.  But  these  things  have  been  done  in  palaces, 
and  in  private  houses,  in  every  part  of  Europe.  If  we 
believe  Mr.  Home  to  be  an  impostor,  we  shall  have  to 
suppose  that  a  number  of  noblemen  and  gentlemen 
have  knowingly  aided  the  deceit.  But,  turning  to  more 
positive  evidence,  we  will  give  a  list  of  persons  whom  Mr. 
Home  calls  as  witnesses.  "VVe  omit  the  American  names, 
which  are  numerous.  Mrs.  Trollope  and  her  sister  ;  Mr. 
T.  Adolphus  Trollope ;  Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall ;  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
William  Howitt ;  Dr.  J.  M..  Gully,  of  Malvern ;  Mr. 
James  Hutchinso'n,  many  years  chairman  of  the  Stock 
Exchange ;  Mr.  W.  M.  Wilkinson,  of  Harnpstead ;  Mr. 
James  Wason,  solicitor,  of  Wason  Buildings,  Liverpool ; 
Dr.  Hoefer,  *  one  of  the  most  learned  men  -in  France ;' 
Mr.  John  Jones,  of  Basinghall  Street ;  Mr.  J.  G.  Craw- 
ford ;  Mr.  Gilbert  Davidson  ;  Mr.  Cox,  of  Jermyn  Street ; 
Mr.  Benjamin  Coleman,  of  Bayswater ;  Dr.  J.  J.  Wilkin- 
son ;  Madame  de  Cardonne,  of  233,  Eue  St.  Dominique, 
St.  Germain ;  Mr.  T.  S.  Clarke.  Mr.  Home  has  been 
received  by  the  Emperor  of  the  French,  the  Czar  of 
Russia,  the  present  King  of  Prussia,  the  King  of  Wurtem- 
burg,  and  the  Queen  of  Holland. 

"  Mr.  W.  M.  Wilkinson  asserts  that  Lord  L}Tndhurst 
has  witnessed  manifestations.  Mr.  Wason  states  that  the 
seance  at  which  he  was  present  was  at  the  mansion  of  a 
person  of  distinction,  in  Hyde-park  Terrace,  and  that  the 
other  investigators  were  two  baronets,  one  an  M.P.,  and 

REVIEWS    AND    REPLIES.         35 

the  other  the  hoir  and  representative  6f  a  deceased  M.P. 
of  eminent  ability  ;  the  wife  of  a  distinguished  living 
-M.I'.,  and  three  others,  besides  Mr.  Home. 

"  Dr.  Gnllj  was  present  at  the  setincs  described  in  the 
famous  article  called  *  Stranger  than  Fiction/  which 
appeared  in  the  '  Cornhill  Magazine '  for  August,  1860. 
He  fully  corroborates  the  assertions  made  in  that  article, 
and  says  that  the  other  gentlemen  present  were  a  solicitor 
in  large  practice,  and  two  well-known  writers  of  solid 
instructive  works.  Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall  tells  of  a  meeting 
which  she  attended,  where  a  young  lady  was  the  medium, 
and  says,  '  I  was  forced  to  believe  that  there  was  truth 
in  mediumship,  and  that  litre  was  the  means  used  for 
communicating  from  the  spirits  of  those  gone  before  to 
those  who  still  lingered  in  the  flesh.'  At  page  63  of  this 
volume,  a  remarkable  account  is  given  of  certain  spirit 
communications  said  to  have  been  made  at  a  seance  at 
Baling,  to  a  distinguished  novelist,  whom  the  reader  will 
have  no  hesitation  in  recognising  as  Sir  Edward  33ulwcr 
Lytton.  Now,  if  Mr.  Home  be  an  impostor,  the  publica- 
tion of  this  book  is  an  act  of  the  greatest  folly.  Not 
only  are  all  those  we  have  named  pledged  witnesses  to 
the  truth  of  spiritualism ;  but  if  any  man  of  all  the 
hundreds  of  Englishmen  who  have  seen  Mr.  Home  has 
ever  discovered  any  sort  of  machinery  or  trick  by  which 
these  wonderful  results  have  been  obtained,  he  is  bound 
to  speak  out.  However  loth  he  may  be  to  come  forward 
into  public  discussions,  longer  silence  will  be  criminal. 
The  testimony  of  the  persons  named  by  Mr.  Home  will, 
of  course,  have  more  weight  with  their  personal  friends 
than  with  the  general  public ;  instead  of  extracting  their 
narratives,  we  may  perhaps  repeat  a  story  which  we  have 
heard  from  a  friend  on  whose  judgment  and  truthfulness 
we  can  rely,  a  clergyman  of  the  Church  of  England,  who 
has  for  many  years  been  engaged  in  teaching.  He  tells 
us  that  his  wife  was  a  very  sensitive  medium.  One 
night,  when  only  his  brother  was  with  them,  the  three 

36         REVIEWS    AND    REPLIES. 

agreed  to  have  a  seance.  The  wife  sat  at  the  table  ;  he 
in  a  corner  of  the  room  asked  questions  by  writing  them 
on  a  slate.  The  questions  and  answers  were  as  follow  : — 
'Is  there  a  spirit  in  the  room?'  *  Yes.' — 'Whose?' 

1  A B '  (a  name  was  mentioned  which   no  one 

present  recognised). — *  Did  you  see  me  in  life?'     *  Yes/ 

— <  Where?'      <  At  E .' —  <  What  was  I  doing?' 

'  Preaching.'  The  party  were  startled  at  this,  for  our 
friend  had  only  once  in  his  life  visited  the  place  named, 
and  then  he  took  the  Sunday  service.  One  more  ques- 
tion was  put.  '  What  was  my  text?'  A  passage  of 
Scripture  was  named  in  answer ;  the  clergyman  had  for- 
gotten, in  the  lapse  of  several  years,  what  text  he  really 
had  taken,  but  he  went  to  his  sermon  case  and  found  the 
answer  was  correct.  Until  he  told  us  this  story,  we  could 
not  have  supposed  it  possible  that  we  should  doubt  his 
word.  Even  on  this  testimony  we  cannot  fully  believe. 
He  says,  as  said  the  writer  in  the  '  Cornhill  Magazine,' 
'  I  would  not  myself  have  believed  it  on  any  one's  asser- 
tion, I  cannot  expect  you  to  believe  it  on  mine.'  We 
will  not  admit  that  we  are  believers  in  spiritualism,  but 
we  are  compelled  to  own  that  the  evidence  is  too  strong 
to  be  ridiculed  or  disregarded.  We  should  much  like  to 
meet  Mr.  Home,  and  in  company  with  other  gentlemen 
who  have  never  been  witnesses  of  these  manifestations, 
and  with  the  one  desire  of  obtaining  truth,  to  thoroughly 
investigate  the  subject.  Until  then  our  strongly-rooted 
opinions  on  the  one  hand, 'and  the  weight  of  evidence  on 
the  other,  oblige  us  to  hold  our  judgment  in  suspense. 
We  have  only  space  to  add  one  or  two  hints  upon  the 
general  subject.  We  would  strongly  urge  that  it  should 
not  be  discussed  with  children,  or  with  persons  subject  to 
any  of  the  nervous  disorders  which  sometimes  lead  to  in- 
sanity. We  can  think  of  nothing  more  likely  to  drive 
one  mad,  than  the  belief  that  the  barrier  between  the 
living  and  the  dead  is  broken  down,  and  that  those  whom 
we  have  known  and  lost  may  touch  us  and  speak  to  us, 

REVIEWS    AND    REPLIES.         37 

tolling  us  nu's<M'4-t's  of  truth  or  f<tl*,lHnnl.  In  this  last 
word  is  an  awful  thought.  Mr.  Home  and  Mr.  Ilowitt 
both  believe  that  we  inav  have  OOHHDUVlieation  with  evil 
spirits  as  well  as  with  good  ;  and  that  the  former  may  tell 
men  lies  to  deceive  them  to  their  destruction.  It  is  a 
terrible  belief.  If  a  man  were  once  persuaded  that  it 
was  a  supernatural  voice  which  spoke  to  him,  he  would 
be  at  the  mercy  of  every  word  that  voice  might  say. 
"NVhere  are  those — are  there,  indeed,  any — whose  faith  in 
the  God  whom  the  Bible  reveals  to  us  would  be  strong 
enough  to  put  aside  with  disbelief  a  message  which  was 
known  to  come  from  the  world  of  spirits?  Our  clergy 
should  look  to  it,  it  is  no  trilling  matter.  If  this  thing  be 
true,  it  is  a  great  blessing  to  the  world  that  it  has  not 
been  linked  to  false  doctrines.  There  is  a  text  which 
speaks  of  wonders  which,  '  if  it  were  possible  should 
deceive  the  very  elect;'  if  spiritualism  be  true,  may  it 
not  be  sent  to  prepare  the  world  for  those  lying  prophet?, 
working  real  miracles  to  support  false  doctrines,  who  are 
to  be  the  last  trial  of  the  Church's  faith?" 

The  "  Literary  Times,"  March  '2 1 , 1 8(53,  said  :  "  In  con- 
clusion, we  have  but  to  state  that,  should  '  The  Incidents 
in  My  Life,  be  a  true  and  honest  book,  it  is  one  of  the 
most  important  works  ever  presented  to  the  world.  But 
should  the  opposite  be  the  case,  then  Mr.  Home  is  the 
greatest  impostor  that  ever  deluded  mankind.  It  is  in- 
tolerable that  he  and  his  friends  should  occupy  their 
present  equivocal  position.  "NVhy  cannot  society  rouse 
itself,  and  determine  to  turn  out  these  men  as  false 
prophets,  or  acknowledge  them  as  the  apostles  of  a  new 
faith,  however  worthless  that  faith  may  be  to  the  world?" 

I  do  not  consider  "  The  Incidents  in  My  Life"  as 
"  one  of  the  most  important  works  ever  presented  to  the 
world,"  but  I  know  it  to  be  a  "  true  and  honest  book."  It 
may  be  intolerable  to  the  writer  of  the  review  that  wi:h 
•my  friends  I  should  enjoy  any  position  whatever.  1  ,<  ar 
his  power  of  toleration  must  be  further  tested,  •uttuuuch 

38          REVIEWS    AND    REPLIES. 

as  my  present  position  is  a  great  improvement  on  what  it 
was  when  he  wrote,  and  I  only  ask  "  society  to  rouse 
itself"  in  the  form  of  honest  unprejudiced  investigation. 

The  reviewer  in  "  The  Critic,"  April,  1863,  after 
criticising  (?)  Mr.  Hewitt's  "  History  of  the  Supernatural," 
goes  on  thus  :  "  We  now  turn  to  Mr.  D.  D.  Home's  *  In- 
cidents in  My  Life/  and  we  must  frankly  confess  that 
after  the  perusal  of  it,  we  felt  a  great  deal  of  that  Chris- 
tian charity  and  disposition  to  hearken  which  Mr.  Howitt 
had  awakened  in  our  bosom  evaporate  before  the  unpa- 
ralleled impudence  of  this  '  medium.'  *  *  With  him 
(Mr.  Howitt)  we  may  be  perfectly  sure  that  his  faith  is 
genuine.  *  *  He  is  actuated  by  no  other  motive 
than  a  sincere  desire  to  have  the  truth  known.  Can  we 
say  the  same  of  Mr.  Home  ?  *  *  But  it  is  not  by 
any  means  to  the  spiritual  element  in  the  book  that  we 
take  exception,  so  much  as  to  the  bad  taste  exhibited 
throughout."  The  writer  then  takes  me  to  task  for  what 
he  is  pleased  to  term  my  "  impudent  treatment  of  Sir 
David  Brewster,  and  proceeds  to  show  that,  not  only  has 
his  "  bosom"  been  bereft  of  "  Christian  charity,"  but  of 
truth,  for  he  gives  an  anecdote  (?),  invented  apparently 
on  the  spur  of  the  moment.  I  allude  to  it  in  my  letter 
to  "  The  Times  "  of  April  16th. 

The  "  Spectator,"  March  14,  1863,  which  noticed  the 
work  as  by  David  Douglas  Home,  said — "  This  is  a  very 
embarrassing  book  to  review,"  and  proceeded  in  a  strain, 
which  from  an  unbelieving  point  of  view  was  very  fair,  to 
say — "  Xor  do  the  marvels  related  to  us 'rest  by  any 
means  entirely  on  Mr.  Home's  own  testimony.  If  that 
gentleman  be  a  deliberate  deceiver,  it  would  still  be  very 
difficult  to  regard  the  stories  here  related  as  affecting  his 
veracity  alone,  though,  of  course,  we  cannot  tell  how  far 
the  imagination  of  secondary  actors  might  aid  in  the  work 
of  delusion.  The  facts  of  the  book,  whether  false  or  not, 
all  drive  at  one  conclusion,  that  the  gates  between  the 
world  of  the  living  and  the  departed  are  always  open,  and 

REVIEWS    AND    REPLIES.         CO 

that  the  conditions  are  by  no  means  very  rare  which 
enahle  us  to  receive  proof  that  they  are  tln;s  open,  and  to 
profit  by  the  supernatural  experience  of  thosr  who  have 
passed  awav.  *  'i'hese  phenomena  are  th  •  a  b  C  of  life  with 
Mr.  Home,  if  we  may  believe  him  to  be  sincere;  and  yet, 
of  course,  if  we  could  accept  them  as  genuine,  they  ought 
almost  to  absorb  the  attention  of  the  higher  science,  of  the 
deepest  faith,  and  of  the  truest  human  affections.  *  * 

"  Without,  therefore,  any  predisposition  to  accuse  Mr. 
Home  of  dishonesty,  which,  if  it  be  dishonesty,  would 
seem  to  be  shared  by  one  witness,  at  least,  in  the  honour 
of  whose  personal  character  we  have  good  reason  to  be- 
lieve, Dr.  Wilkinson,  the  well  known  biographer  of 
Swedenborg — we  cannot  help  approaching  this  book  in 
the  attitude  of  simple  incredulity.  *  * 

"  On  the  stories  connected  with  Mrs.  Home's  death, 
related  partly  by  her  husband,  and  partly  by  her  friends 
Mrs.  llowitt  and  Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall,  we  have  no  wish  to 
comment.  Almost  more  marvellous  than  the  rest,  it  is 
still  written  with  so  much  feeling  that  it  would  be  brutal 
to  ridicule,  and  yet  is  quite  impossible  to  believe.  We 
should  add,  however,  that  the  absurd  character  of  the 
phenomena  once  granted,  Mr.  Home's  book  is  throughout 
written  with  more  simplicity,  and  less  affectation  of  any 
kind  than  any  other  book  of  its  class.  *  * 

"  This  article  is  not  criticism — for  the  only  true  criti- 
cism on  the  book  is  one  of  three  practical  verdicts, — 
*  Sincere,  but  insane,'  '  sane,  but  mendacious,'  or  *  both 
sane  and  sincere.'  \\  e  see  no  sort  of  indication  at  all 
that  Mr.  Home  is  insane,  and  if  he  is.  he  must  have  made 
so  many  other  people  insane  also  that  the  first  verdict 
would  be  irrational.  Now  we  have  no  right  to  give  the 
second,  and  no  power  to  give  the  third.  Without  personal 
knowledge  of  a  man,  it  is  unjust  to  decide  against  his 
veraeitv  (-specially  when  hacked  by  men  who,  if  enthu- 
siastic, are  at  least  known  to  us  to  be  honourable." 

The  "  Spectator "  further  noticed  an  historical  error, 

40        REVIEWS    AND    REPLIES. 

with  regard  to  a  circumstance  related  in  the  book  at  page 
123,  and  the  same  was  noticed  by  the  "  Times."  This 
I  replied  to  in  my  letter  to  the  "  Times,"  which  will  be 
found  further  on.  In  the  next  chapter  I  also  give  from 
the  review  in  the  "  Spectator  "  an  extract  which  refers  to 
the  controversy  with  Sir  David  Brewster. 

The  review  in  the  "  Times "  commenced  with  the 
remark  : — "  This  volume  in  which  Mr.  Home  recounts 
the  incidents  of  his  life,  or  rather  of  his  communion  with 
the  world  of  spirits,  is  a  very  odd  production  in  this  mate- 
rialistic age."  After  an  analysis  of  the  book,  by  no  means 
unfair,  and  extending  to  nearly  three  columns,  the  article 
concludes  with  an  anecdote  of  Doctor  Johnson,  termi- 
nating with  the  remark,  "  The  story  wants  congruity."  As 
wit  has  been  defined  to  be  "  The  apt  association  of  in- 
congruous ideas,"  this  remark  may  be  witty,  but  I  have 
no  need  to  quarrel  with  it  as  it  contains  no  argument 
against  what  I  had  published.  At  the  time  the  review 
appeared  I  was  in  France,  but  on  its  being  forwarded  to 
me,  I  wrote  at  once  to  the  "  Times"  the  following  letter, 
which  appeared  in  that  paper  on  April  16,  1863 : — 

SIR, — Allow  me  to  thank  you  for  the  generous  criti- 
cism of  my  book  which  appeared  in  your  columns  on  the 
9th  of  April.  I  do  not  censure  any  one  for  a  want  of 
belief  in  the  strange  phenomena  which  occur  in  my  pre- 
sence ;  but  I  do  consider  it  unfair  when  the  critics  write 
to  condemn  a  book  which  they  have  not  even  taken  the 
trouble  to  read.  One  writer  kills  my  child,  another  my 
father,  and  a  third  calls  me  an  American.  The  "  Spec- 
tator'," as  you  justly  say,  discovers  a  mistake  in  the  dates 
as  I  gave  them.  I  at  once  wrote  to  the  editor,  giving 
him  the  name  and  address  of  the  gentleman  to  whom  the 
incident  occurred,  that  he  might  ascertain  how  the  mis- 
take had  arisen.  I  then  wrote  to  say  that  I  had  seen  the 
gentleman,  who  had  just  returned  from  the  continent,  and 
was  ill,  but  at  the  same  time  explained  the  error  as  being 

REVIEWS    AND    REPLIES.        41 

entirely  mine,  inasmuch  as  the  fact  alluded  to  actually 
transpired  in  the  autumn  of  185G,  and  was  all  the  more 
singular,  as  coming  at  a  time  when  the  strange  power 
had  left  me.  This  also  I  explained  hy  saying  that  the 
young  officer  alluded  to  as  "  Gregoire"  became  a  medium, 
and  this  singular  faculty  remained  with  him  many  months. 
I  enclose  you  also  the  name  and  address  of  the  gentleman, 
and  only  request  that  they  may  not  be  published.  Still  I 

know  Mr. will  favour  you  with  any  information 

you  may  require,  and  that  he  will  willingly  testify  to,  not 
only  the  entire  truthfulness  of  what  I  related,  but  will  say 
that  I  did  not  make  the  story  nearly  as  wonderful  as  it 
wus  in  reality. 

As  regards  the  other  story  "  which  requires  explana- 
tion," I  am  in  the  very  same  position  as  yourself,  and  will 
be  only  too  pleased  that  it  should  be  "  verified  or  ex- 
plained." I  have  heard  the  same  story  told  in  so  many 
different  forms,  and  still  always  related  as  having  occurred 
to  Mr.  Monckton  Milnes,  that  I  would  fain  know  where 
such  wilful  misrepresentations  could  commence.  The  in- 
cident was  a  very  simple  one  to  begin  with.  Mr.  Monck- 
ton Milnes  was  present  at  a  seance  where  there  were  seven 
or  eight  ladies  and  gentlemen.  I  was  seated  furthest 
from  him  at  the  table,  and  during  a  part  of  the  seance, 
which  was  in  a  darkened  room,  I  felt  something  tangibly 
material  pass  over  my  face.  I  put  up  my  hand  to  retain 
whatever  it  might  be,  but  it  eluded  my  grasp.  This  I 
told  to  those  who  were  present,  and,  on  some  one  saying, 
"  I  have  just  been  touched  also,"  I  replied,  "  Well,  why 
did  you  not  do  as  I  did,  sir,  and  try  to  retain  it?" 
Mr.  Monckton  Milnes  then  said,  "  I  have  been  touched 
several  times,  and  now  I  have  taken  whatever  it  was. 
Oh,  it  is  a  pocket  handkerchief!"  The  question  then 
became  general  as  to  whose  it  might  be,  there  being  two 
or  three  on  the  laps  of  the  ladies,  or  else  on  the  table  : 
but  we  could  not  then  ascertain  to  whom  the  handkerchief 
belonged.  The  seance  continued  at  least  half-an-hour 

42        REVIEWS    AND    REPLIES. 

after  this,  and  when  the  light  came  the  handkerchief 
chanced  to  be  mine.  !N"ow,  I  would  like  to  have  it  ex- 
plained how,  by  any  possibility,  I  could  have  stretched 
out  my  arms  sufficiently  to  enable  me  to  touch  Mr. 
Moncktou  Milnes,  he  being,  as  I  before  said,  furthest 
from  me  at  the  table ;  and,  even  if  I  did,  why  could  I  not 
as  well  have  taken  one  of  the  handkerchiefs  which  were 
on  the  table,  instead  of  taking  my  own  ?  The  simple  fact 
of  the  handkerchief  being  mine,  proves  nothing  to  my 
way  of  thinking.  How  did  it  get  over  his  head  when  the 
slightest  movement  I  made  would  not  have  failed  to  be 
observed  by  those  seated  next  to  me  ?  It  has  not  been 
my  lot  either  to  have  to  deal  with  fools  or  mad  people, 
and  if  after  thirteen  years  of  public  life,  the  greater  part 
of  which  time  I  have  spent  with  those  who  watched  my 
every  action  suspiciously,  anxiously  hoping  to  discover 
some  material  means  whereby  all  these  things  could  be 
accomplished, — if,  after  all  this,  any  persons  will  come 
forward  and  state  an  instance  where  they,  and  those  pre- 
sent with  them,  proved  me  to  be  an  impostor,  I  will  abide 
by  their  decision.  It  must  not  be  any  one  person,  for  the 
simple  reason  that  my  experience  has  been  peculiar  in 
this  respect.  I  have  found  people  who,  to  sustain  a  pre- 
conceived idea,  would  not  hesitate  at  the  most  gross 
untruths  in  vindication  of  their  ideas.  To  prove  this,  I 
have  only  to  allude  to  a  story  told  in  the  "Critic"  of 
this  month,  where  it  is  related  of  me  as  arguing  that  a 
purported  message  from  a  spirit,  could  not  be  other- 
wise than  true,  as  it  was  my  father's  spirit  who  was 
speaking.  My  father  is  alive  and  well,  and  the  whole 
story  is  without  even  a  syllable  of  truth.  Why  does  not 
the  "  gentleman"  (?)  who  relates  that  story  to  the 
"  Critic"  come  out  and  give  us  his  name? 

These  things  are  too  serious  to  be  treated  otherwise 
than  with  candour.  The  mere  fact  of  calling  a  man  hard 
names  does  not  prove  him  to  be  deserving  of  them.  Let 
every  man  prove  his  position,  and,  if  five  hundred  names  of 

REVIEWS    AND    REPLIES.        43 

men  of  rank,  men  of  good  sound  judgment,  and  men  well- 
known  for  their  truthfulness, — I  say  it'  these  can  be  taken, 
then  is  my  position  proved,  at  least  as  being  guiltless  of 
ever  having  deceived  them.  There  must  be  no  "  con- 
jectural" imposition,  for  these  conjectures  carry  men  too 
far  from  simple  truth.  The  newspaper  reports  of  my 
having  made  a  large  fortune  by  my  powers  are  simple 
fabrications  or  "  conjectures." 

The  only  good  I  have  ever  derived  from  "  the  gift"  is 
the  knowledge  that  many  who  had  never  believed  in  a 
future  existence  are  now  happy  in  the  certitude  of  "  life  to 

me." 

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  sir,  yours  most  obediently, 

D.  D.  HOME. 

"  Chateau  Larocho,  par  St.  Astier,  Derdogne, 
"  France,  April  13." 

CHAPTER  IT. 

SIR  DAVTD  BREWSTER,  LORD  BROUGHAM,  LETTERS 
AND  TESTIMONY,  Da.  ELLIOTTSON,  PEOPHETIC  INCI- 
DENTS. 

IS  the  controversy  with  the  late  Sir  David 
Brewster  was  discussed  at  some  length  in 
the  Appendix  to  my  former  volume,  it  had 
been  my  intention  to  have  let  the  matter 
rest,  and  not  to  allude  to  ifr  further.  But  the 
subject  has  been  revived  by  Brewster' s  daughter  in  the 
"Home  Life"  of  her  father,  and  I  am  compelled  to 
notice  her  statements,  which  were  alluded  to  by  Mr.  Cole- 
man,  in  the  "  Spiritual  Magazine"  for  May,  1870,  in  an 
article  from  which  I  extract  some  passages  as  follows : — 

"  The  conduct  of  the  late  Sir  David  Brewster  in  his 
relations  with  the  celebrated  medium,  Mr.  Daniel  D.  Home, 
and  the  controversy  which  arose  in  the  year  1 85.5,  form  a 
prominent  episode  in  the  history  of  English  Spiritualism. 

"  That  l  dead  men  tell  no  tales'  is  an  adage  which 
spiritualists  cannot  admit.  We  know  that  the  so-called 
dead  do  in  many  instances,  and  under  certain  conditions, 
return  and  tell  us  many  tales. 

"  But  we  who  have  had  much  experience  are  cautious 
in  accepting  all  that  is  revealed  to  us  in  this  way,  and 
were  I  now  dealing  with  a  message  purporting  to  have 
come  from  the  spirit  of  the  departed  philosopher  through 

SIR    DAVID    PREWSTER.          45 

the  onlinary  channels  of  mcdiumship,  I  should  hesitate 
before  venturing  to  make  a  public  announcement  of  the 
fact.  There  arc,  however,  other  means  by  which  the 
voices  of  the  dead  speak  to  us — namely,  by  the  records  of 
their  puhlic  and  private  acts  when  living.  I  have  just 
found  one,  which  coming  as  it  dues  through  the  medium  - 
ship  of  Sir  David  Drewster's  own  daughter,  will  not  he 
disputed  ;  and  as  it  tends  to  justify  the  statements  made 
hv  those  who  stood  forward  in  1857  to  defend  Mr.  Home 
and  the  genuine  character  of  the  manifestations  witnessed 
by  Sir  David  Brewster  and  Lord  Brougham,  it  may,  I 
think  with  propriety,  find  a  place  in  the  pages  of  this 
journal. 

"  The  late  Mr.  William  Cox,  of  Jermyn  Street,  with 
whom  Mr.  Home  was  residing  in  1854-5,  invited  Lord 
"Brougham  and  Sir  David  Brewster1  to  a  private  seance  ; 
and  Mr.  Cox,  who  was  an  intelligent  and  much  respected 
gentleman,  told  me  the  following  day  how  profoundly  im- 
pressed both  of  his  visitors  had  been  with  what  they  had 
witnessed,  and  he  described  minutely  to  me  the  several 
incidents  which  took  place,  of  which  I  made  notes  at  the 
time.  This  information  was  corroborated  in  a  short  con- 
versation which  I  subsequently  had  with  Lord  Brougham, 
and  again  in  a  lengthy  discussion  with  Sir  David  at  the 
Athenaeum  Club ;  when  he  fully  admitted  the  facts  and 
said  that  he  could  neither  attribute  them  to  trickery  nor 
delusion  of  the  senses.  *  But,'  he  very  emphatically  added, 
slapping  his  knee,  '  spirit  is  the  last  thing  I  will  give  in 
to!' 

"  It  will  be  seen  that  when  Sir  David  Brewster  was 
publicly  making  the  most  ungenerous  and  unfounded  im- 
putations upon  Mr.  Home,  and  denying  in  the  most 
unqualified  manner  the  statements  made  by  me  in  October, 
1855,  he  had  privately  recorded,  in  the  month  of  June 
previously,  a  complete  refutation  of  his  own  words  ;  added 

1  A  slight  imccuracy,  soe  note  on  p.'ij;e  51. 

46          SIR    DAVID    BREWSTER. 

to  which  it  is  now  shown  that  Sir  David  was  himself 
A  MEDIUM  !  A  SEEB  in  fact,  with  his  own  special  ex- 
periences. His  daughter's  statement  upon  this  point 
is  sufficiently  distinct  and  conclusive :  her  account  of 
what  she  calls  his  "  dual  nature,"  and  his  ultimate 
convictions  upon  Spiritualism  are  curious  and  instructive. 
Mrs.  Gordon  says : — 

" '  Brewster's  character  was  peculiarly  liable  to  mis- 
construction from  its  distinctly  dual  nature;  it  was  made  up 
of  opposites,  and  his  peculiarly  impulsive  temperament  and 
expressions  laid  him  open  to  the  charge  of  inconsistency, 
although  he  never  recognized  it  in  himself,  conscious 
that  he  spoke  what  was  consistent  with  the  point  of 
view  whence  he  took  his  observations  at  the  time. 
Accustomed  to  look  at  every  subject  with  the  critical 
investigation  of  the  man  of  science,  he  yet  united 
the  feelings  of  the  man  of  impulse,  and  he  spoke  as 
moved  by  either  habit.  Nothing  could  show  this  better 
than  his  views  and  feelings  with  regard  to  clairvoyance 
and  spirit-rapping.  Like  many  Scotchmen  of  genius  and 
intellect  he  had  had  a  strong  leaning  to  the  superstitious 
from  the  days  of  the  steeple-vault  and  the  cottage  under 
the  apple  tree,  balanced,  however,  by  a  scientific  mind 
which  required  proof  and  demonstration  for  whatever  came 
before  it.  His  own  quaint  confession  that  he  was  '  afraid 
of  ghosts,  though  he  did  not  believe  in  them,'  was  as 
near  the  truth  as  possible.  Living  in  an  old  house, 
haunted,  it  was  said,  by  the  learned  shade  of  George 
Buchanan,  in  which  certainly  the  strangest  and  most 
unaccountable  noises  were  frequently  heard,  his  footsteps 
used  sometimes  to  perform  the  transit  from  his  study  to  his 
bedroom  in  the  dead  of  night  in  double-quick  time ;  and 
in  the  morning  he  used  to  confess  that  sitting  up  alone  had 
made  him  feel  quite  eerie.  On  one  of  these  occasions 
when  the  flight  had  been  more  than  usually  rapid,  he 
recounted  having  distinctly  seen  the  form  of  the  late  Kev. 
Charles  Lyon,  then  Episcopal  Clergyman  of  St.  Andrew's, 

Sin    VAVlb    BREWSTER.          47 

i 

and  an  attached  friend  of  his  own,  rising  up  pale  and  grey 
like  a  marble  bust.  He  often  mentioned  his  relief  when 
be  found  that  nothing  had  occurred  to  bis  friend,  and  pointed 
out  what  a  good  ghost  story  had  thus  been  spoiled.  A 
Certain  pleasurable  excitement  was  combined  with  this 
eeriness,  and  many  will  recollect  the  charm  of  his  ghost 
stories,  recounted  with  so  much  simplicity  and  earnest  ne-s 
and  ri'dis.  ,,i!>l'Uice  of  belief,  as  on  one  occasion  to  be 
rewarded  by  the  perplexing  compliment  of  a  fair  young 
listener  at  Kamornie  fainting  dead  away. 

"'  On  the  other  hand  he  was  equally  fond  of  giving  natural 
and  scientific  explanations  of  ghostly  marvels,  and  used  to 
dwell  with  great  interest,  upon  the  difficulties  of  evidence 
in  everything  connected  with  the  supernatural,  pointing  out 
the  unconscious  deviations  from  exact  testimony  given  bv 
persons  of  undoubted  rectitude  under  the  influence  of 
prepossession.  Much  of  this  mingled  feeling  he  carried 
with  him  into  his  investigations  of  clairvoyance  and  its 
kindred  marvels. 

'••He  really  wished  to  believe  in  many  wonders  to 
which  his  constitution  of  mind  utterly  refused  credence  ; 
and  this  feeling  combined  with  a  characteristic  courtesy 
and  wish  to  please,  often  misled  those  into  whose  pre- 
tensions he  was  most  critically  examining. 

"  'On  one  occasion,  when  the  exhibition  of  aladyclair- 
voyante  moved  his  companion  to  an  expression  of  indignant 
unbelief,  which  was  declared  to  be  the  cause  of  failure,  bis 
gentleness  and  courtesy,  smoothing  away  difficulties, 
apologising  for  the  mistakes  of  supernatural  powers,  and 
giving  every  facility  for  greater  success,  prevented  the 
dim-sighted  clairvoyantc  from  recognising  the  equal  but 
far  more  philosophical  unbelief  which  was  brought  to  bear 
upon  her  case.  lie  always  affirmed  that,  of  the  many  cases 
which  had  thus  come  within  his  ken,  he  had  never  seen 
anything  so  wonderful  that  he  could  say  it  could  have  no 
natural  explanation,  though,  of  a  few  he  said  frankly 
that  he  could  neither  see  nor  understand  the  solution. 

48  SIB    DAVID    JSEEWSTEE. 

<* 

He  latterly  took  even  deeper  views  of  this  school  of 
wonders,  searching  the  scriptures  minutely  for  passages 
describing  the  spirits  that  'peeped  and  muttered'  of  old, 
or  those  whose  '  lying  wonders'  are  yet  to  come,  and 
giving  it  as  his  belief  that,  if  modern  spiritualism  with  its 
manifestations  be  a  truth,  it  may  be  a  fulfilment  of 
the  prophesied  work  of  the  Evil  One  and  his  agents.'  " 

Mrs.  Gordon  also  says : — '  Although  his  timidity  had 
the  dual  element,  displayed  long  before  in  the  Grammar 
School  and  playground  of  Jedburgh — of  never  fearing 
the  face  of  man ;  he  exhibited  much  of  it  in  connection 
with  the  lower  creation."  And  she  might  have  added 
that  there  is  a  wide  distinction  between  the  physical 
courage  which  stimulates  a  man  to  do  battle  with  his  fists, 
and  the  moral  courage  requisite  to  declare  truth  boldly, 
no  matter  how  much  danger  there  may  be  that  his  repu- 
tation will  suffer  from  his  so  doing. 

In  order  to  show  the  dual  character  of  Sir  David,  which 
I  have  marked  by  similar  figures  in  each  letter,  I  here 
republish  his  letter  to  Mr.  Coleman  in  October,  so  far  as 
relates  to  the  seance  at  Cox's  Hotel,  beside  that  which  he 
had  written  to  his  daughter  in  June. 

In  October  he  wrote :  The  following  appears 

"  I  may  once  for  all  admit  in    the    "  Home     Life," 

that    both    Lord    Brougham  under  the   date  of  June, 

and    myself   freely   acknow-  1855. 

lodged  that  we  were  puzzled  Last  of  all  I  went  with 

with   Mr.   Home's  perform-  Lord     Brougham     to     a 

ances,  and  could  not  account  seance  of  the  new  spirit- 

for  them.    Neither  of  us  pre-  rapper,  Mr.  Home,  a  lad 

tend    to   be    expounders    of  of  twenty,  the   son   of  a 

conundrums,  whether  verbal  brother  of  the  late  Earl 

or  mechanical ;  but  if  we  had  of  Home.1      He  went  to 

1  I  do  not  think  Sir  David*4iad  any  intention  of  prevaricating 
in  this  letter  to  Mrs.  Gordon,  and  I  can  only  suppose  that  on  this 
point  he  had  been  misinformed.  My  father  is  a  natural  son 

SIR    TfAVID    BREWSTER. 

49 

been  permitted  to  take  a  peep 
(1.)  beneath  the  drapery  of 
Mr.  Cox's  table,  we  should 
have  been  spared  the  mortifi- 
cation of  this  confession.  I 
come  now  to  the  facts  of  the 
case: 

"1.  It  is  not  true,  as  stated 
by  you,  that  a  large  dinner- 
table  was  moved  about  at  Mr. 
Cox's  in  the  most  extra- 
ordinary manner.  (2.) 

"  2.  It  is  not  true,  as  you 
state,  that  a  large  accordion 
*  was  conveyed  by  an  invisible, 
or  any  other,  agency  into  my 
hand.'  I  took  it  up  myself, 
and  it  would  not  utter  a  sound. 

"  3.  It  is  not  true  that  the 
accordion  was  conveyed  into 
Lord  Brougham's  hand.  It 
was  placed  in  it. 

"  4.  It  is  not  true  that 
the  accordion  played  an  air 
throughout,  in  Lord  Broug- 
ham's hands.  It  merely 
squeaked. 

America  at  the  age  of 
seven,  and  though  a 
naturalized  American,  is 
actually  a  Scotchman. 
Mr.  Home  lives  in  Coxe's 
hotel,  Jermyn  Street ;  and 
Mr.  Coxe,  who  knows 
Lord  Brougham,  wished 
him  to  have  a  seance,  and 
his  lordship  invited  me  to 
accompany  him  in  order 
to  assist  in  finding  out  the 
trick.  We  four  sat  down 
at  a  moderately  -  sized 
table,  the  structure  of 
which  we  were  invited  to 
examine.  (1.)  In  a  short 
time  the  table  shuddered, 
and  a  tremulous  motion 
ran  up  all  our  arms ;  at 
our  bidding  these  motions 
ceased  and  returned.  The 
most  unaccountable  rap- 
pings  were  produced  in 
various  parts  of  the  table  ; 
and  the  table  actually  rose 
from  the  ground  when  no 

of  Alexander,  tenth  Earl  of  Home.  Mrs.  Gordon  seems  to  have 
inherited  the  dual  nature  of  her  father,  for  the  present  Karl  of 
Home  having  written  to  her  to  ascertain  on  what  grounds  the 
claim  of  my  heing  a  son  of  a  brother  of  the  late  Karl  was  made 
out,  she  replied  that  they  were  my  own,  and  that  I  had  put  them 
forth  even  in  the  Chancery  suit  of  Lvon  v.  Home.  Lord  II nine- 
wrote  to  a  mutual  friend  to  ascertain  the  truth  of  this,  at  the  same 
time  stating1  ho  had  no  remembrance  of  such  a  thing  a^  my  having 
made  such  a  claim.  I  wrote  a  letter  for  his  lordship  to  see,  in  which 
I  stated  that  I  had  no  desire  to  establish  any  such  claim,  and  stating 
what  my  connection,  with  the  family  was. 

SIR    DAVID    PREWSTER. 

"5.  It  is  not  true,  as  stated 
in  an  article  referred  to  by 
Mr.  Home,  that  Lord  Broug- 
ham's *  watch  was  taken  out 
of  his  pocket,  and  found  in 
the  hands  of  some  other  per- 
son in  the  room.'  No  such 
experiment  was  tried. 

"  6.  It  is  not  true;  as  stated 
by  Mr.  Cox,  that  I  said  that 
Mr.  Home's  experiments  '  up- 
set the  philosophy  of  fifty 
years/  These  are  the  words 
of  Mr.  Coleman,  used,  as  he 
alleges,  by  himself,  and  very 
untruly  put  into  my  mouth 
by  Mr.  Cox. 

"  Although  I  have  not  ap- 
pealed to  Lord  Brougham's 
memory  in  reference  to  these 
statements,  I  have  no  doubt 
that  his  Lordship  would  con- 
firm, were  it  necessary,  all  that 
I  have  said. 

"  In  reply  to  Mr.  Cox,  I 
may  take  this  opportunity  to 
answer  his  request,  by  telling 
him  what  I  have  seen,  and 
what  I  think  of  it.  At  Mr. 
Cox's  house,  Mr.  Home, 
Lord  Brougham,  and  myself, 
sat  down  to  a  small  table, 
Mr.  Home  having  previously 
requested  us  to  examine  if 
there  was  any  machinery  about 
his  person,  an  examination, 
however,  which  we  declined  to 

hand  was  upon  it.  A 
larger  table  was  produced, 
and  exhibited  similar 
movements.  (2.)  An  ac- 
cordion was  held  in  Lord 
Brougham's  hand,  and 
gave  out  a  single  note ; 
but  the  experiment  was  a 
failure ;  it  would  not  play 
either  in  his  hand  or  mine. 
A  small  handbell  was  then 
laid  down  with  its  mouth 
on  the  carpet;  and  after 
lying  for  some  time,  it 
actually  rang,  when  no- 
thing could  have  touched 
it.  (3.)  The  bell  was  then 
placed  on  the  other  side, 
still  upon  the  carpet,  and 
it  came,  over  to  me  and 
placed  itself  in  my  hand. 
It  did  the  same  to  Lord 
Brougham. 

These  were  the  principal 
experiments.  We  could 
give  no  explanation  of 
them,  and  could  not  con- 
jecture how  they  could  be 
produced  by  any  kind  of 
mechanism.  (4.) 

Hands  are  sometimes 
seen  and  felt;  the  hand 
often  grasps  another,  and 
melts  away,  as  it  were, 
under  the  grasp.  The 
object  of  asking  Lord 
Brougham  and  me  seems 

SIR    DAVID    BREWSTER. 

make.  When  .all  our  hands 
were  upon  tin-  table,  noises 
were  heard  —  rappings  in 
abundance ;  and,  linall y,  wlieii 
we  rose  up  the  table  actually 
rose,  as  appeared  to  me,  from 
the  ground.  This  result  I  do 
not  pretend  to  explain  ;  but 
rather  than  believe  that  spirits 
made  the  noise,  I  will  con- 
jecture that  the  raps  were 
produced  by  Air.  Home's 
toes,  which,  as  will  be  seen, 
were  active  on  another  occa- 
sion ;  or,  as  Dr.  Schiff  has 
shown,  «  by  the  repeated  dis- 
placement of  the  tendon  of 
the  peroneus  longus  muscle 
in  the  sheath  in  which  it 
slides  behind  the  external 
malicious  ;'  and  rather  than 
believe  that  spirits  raised  the 
table,  I  will  conjecture  that  it 
was  done  by  the  agency  of 
Air.  Home's  feet,  which  were 
always  below  it. 

"  Some  time  after  this  ex- 
periment, Air.  Home  left  tho 
room  and  returned :  probably 
to  equip  himself  for  the  feats 
which  were  to  be  performed 
by  the  spirits  beneath  a  large 
round  table  covered  with  co- 
pious drapery,  heneath  which 
nobody  was  allowed  to  look. 

'*  The  spirits  are  powerless 
above  board,  besides  the  ex- 

to  have  been  to  get  our 
favourable  opinion  of  tho 
exhibition  ;  but  thou"-!i 
neither  of  us  can  explain 
what  we  saw,  we  do  not 
believe  that  it  was  tho 
work  of  idle  spirits." 

NOTE. 

A  further  evidence  of 
the  duality  of  Sir  David 
Brewstcr  is  displayed  in 
the  course  of  this  single 
short  letter  to  his  daugh- 
ter, for  in  the  comm 
ment  he  says,  "  Lord 
Brougham  invited  me  to 
accompany  him,"  and  at 
the  end  he  speaks  of 
"  the  object  of  asking 
Lord  Brougham  and  me." 
The  fact  being  that  Lord 
Brougham  had  been  in- 
vited, and  about  two  hours 
before  the  seance  sent 
word  that  he  wished  to 
bring  Sir  David  Brewstcr. 
As  I  am  not  in  the  habit 
of  giving  exhibitions,  no 
favourable  opinion  was 
sought  for  from  either 
visitor. 

52  LORD    BROUGHAM. 

periments  Rath  the  accordion, 
already  mentioned,  a  small 
hand-bell  to  be  rung  by  the 
spirits,  was  placed  on  the 
ground,  near  my  feet.  I 
placed  my  feet  round  it  in  the 
form  of  an  angle,  to  catch  any 
intrusive  apparatus.  The 
bell  did  not  ring  (3.)  ;  but 
when  taken  to  a  place  near 
'Mr.  Home's  feet,  it  speedily 
came  across,  and  placed  its 
handle  in  my  hand.  This 
was  amusing. 

"  It  didthesamethingbung- 
lingly,  to  Lord  Brougham, 
by  knocking  itself  against 
his  Lordship's  knuckles,  and, 
after  a  jingle,  it  fell.  How 
these  effects  were  produced 
neither  Lord  Brougham  nor 
I  could  say,  but  I  conjecture 
that  they  may  be  produced 
by  machinery  attached  to  the 
lower  extremities  of  Mr. 
Home.  (4.) 

The  public  and  mendacious  denials  of  Sir  David  Brews- 
ter  in  the  "  Morning  Advertiser,"  elicited  no  confirmation 
from  Lord  Brougham,  though  such  confirmation,  could  he 
have  obtained  it,  would  have  been  most  acceptable  to  Sir 
David.  Lord  Brougham's  final  views  on  spiritualism  are 
indicated  by  himself  in  the  following  passage  which  con- 
cludes his  Lordship's  preface  to  a  work  entitled  "  The 
Book  of  Nature,"  by  Mr.  Charles  0.  Groom  Napier,  F.C.S., 
published  in  1870 : — "  There  is  but  one  question  I  would 
ask  the  author :  Is  the  spiritualism  of  this  work  foreign 

LORD    BROUGHAM.  53 

to  our  materialistic,  manufacturing  ago  ? — Xo  ;  for  amidst 
the  varieties  of  mind  which  divers  eireuinstunces  pio.li-c-c, 
are  found  those  who  cultivate  man's  highest  facilities; — 
to  these  the  author  addresses  himself.  But  even  in  the 
most  cloudless  skies  of  scepticism  I  see  a  rain-cloud, — 
if  it  be  no  bigger  than  a  man's  hand,  it  is  Modern 
Spiritualism." 

I  hope  that  the  Editor  of  Lord  Brougham's  memoirs 
will  fairly  give  to  the  world  his  Lordship's  letters  contain- 
ing the  account  of  the  seance  at  Cox's  Hotel.  Although 
Lord  Brougham,  at  the  special  request  of  Sir  Duvid 
Brcwster,  conveyed  by  telegraph,  abstained  from  publish- 
ing these  letters,  he  was  not  capable  of  yielding  to  his 
further  request  to  come  forward  with  a  confirmation  of  Sir 
David's  mendacious  letter  of  October,  1855. 

I  also  desire  to  add  to  Mr.  Coleman's  remark  that  Mr. 
Cox  was  an  intelligent  and  much  respected  gentleman, 
my  own  grateful  tribute  to  the  memory  of  a  kind  friend, 
and  a  steadfast  and  undaunted  defender  of  the  truth. 
Such  have  I  ever  found  the  late  Mr.  Cox,  not  only  in  his 
relations  towards  myself,  but  towards  all  others  so  far  as 
came  within  the  range  of  my  own  observation. 

The  "  Spectator "  says,  on  the  correspondence  with 
Sir  David,  printed  in  the  appendix  to  my  former 
volume : — 

"  Next  we  must  say  that  the  correspondence  with  Sir 
David  Brewstcr  is  not  decisive  on  either  side,  but  that,  as 
far  as  we  can  see,  there  is  a  certain  amount  of  disin- 
genuousness  in  Sir  David's  letters.  It  seems  established 
by  the  clearest  evidence  that  he  felt  and  expressed,  at 
and  immediately  after  his  seances  with  Mr.  Home,  a 
wonder  and  almost  awe,  which  he  afterwards  wished  to 
explain  away ;  and  the  suppression  of  Lord  Brougham*! 
half-promised  testimony  as  to  the  first  seance  in  qu 
though  challenged  by  Mr.  Home,  is  on  the  whole  un- 
favourable to  Sir  David,  as  it  might  be  presumed  that 
Lord  Brougham  would  support  his  friend's  testimony  as 

54     LETTERS    AND    TESTIMONY 

far  as  possible.  Nor  does  the  passage-at-arms  between 
Sir  David  Brewster  and  Mr.  T.  A.  Trollope  concerning 
the  subsequent  seance  at  Ealing,  seem  to  us  quite  creditable 
to  Sir  David.  If  we  may  trust  Mr.  Trollope  (uncontra- 
dicted  by  Sir  David  Brewster)  there  also  Sir  David  had 
testified  to  facts  which  on  reconsideration,  he  modified  to 
square  with  a  theory  subsequently  elaborated.  We  say 
this,  though  disbelieving  entirely  the  genuineness  of  all 
phenomena  of  this  sort,  simply  on  the  evidence  of  Sir 
David  Brewster's  own  letters  and  that  of  the  other  wit- 
nesses of  two  seances  which  he  criticised.  The  controversy 
is  not  of  any  great  importance  one  way  or  the  other  ;  still 
justice  to  this  celebrated  medium  obliges  us  to  admit  that 
on  the  face  of  published  correspondence,  the  hero  of 
science  docs  not  acquit  himself  as  we  could  wish  or 
expect." 

I  am  now  also  enabled  to  produce  another  independent 
witness  in  this  case,  namely,  the  late  Earl  of  Dunraven, 
who  has  given  me  the  following : — . 

"  I  was  so  struck  with  what  Sir  David  Brewster — with 
whom  I  was  well  acquainted — had  himself  told  me,  that 
it  materially  influenced  me  in  determining  to  examine 
thoroughly  into  the  reality  of  the  phenomena.  I  met  him 
one  day  on  the  steps  of  the  Athena3um ;  we  got  upon  the 
subject  of  table-turning,  &c.  ;  he  spoke  most  earnestly, 
stating  that  the  impression  left  on  his  mind  from  what  he 
had  seen,  was,  that  the  manifestations  were  to  him  quite 
inexplicable  by  fraud,  or  by  any  physical  laws  with  which 
we  were  acquainted,  and  that  they  ought  to  be  fully  and 
carefully  examined  into." 

The  following  letter  which  was  received  by  Mr.  J.  S. 
Eymer,  shows  the  effect  produced  by  Sir  David  Brewster's 
account  at  first. 

"  Sm, 

"  In  consequence  of  a  very  remarkable  account 
given  by  Sir  David  Brewster  of  the  extraordinary  powers 

LETTERS    AND    TESTIMONY.      55 

of  Mr.  Home,  together  with  two  or  three  friends,  I  am 
anxious  to  liavo  an  intervk>w  with  him.  If  he  can  make 
it  convenient  to  come  to  my  house,  No.  80,  Eaton  Square, 
on  Thursday  or  Saturday  next,  at  2  o'clock,  I  should  be 
glad  to  make  an  appointment  for  either  of  those  days.  I 
am  given  to  understand  that  although  Mr.  Home  does 
not  exhibit  his  powers  for  money,  that  he  does  not  refuse 
to  accept  a  moderate  gratuity  from  those  who  have  the 
opportunity  of  witnessing  his  powers;*  this  of  course  I 
and  my  friends  shall  he  happy  to  present  to  him,  and  we 
shall  be  much  obliged  to  you  to  infgrm  us  what  amount  we 
may  offer  him,  and  in  what  way  we  may  do  so  without 
doing  violence  to  his  feelings, 

I  remain,  Sir, 

*'  80,  Eaton  Sq.  "  Your  obedient  servant, 

"  Jub'  2,  1855.'*  «  EDWAED  BULLEB." 

As  Father  A.  de  Ponlevoy,  in  his  biography  of  the  Pere 
de  Kavio-nan,  has  denied  my  having  been  on  intimate 
terms  with  the  good  father,  and  as,  notwithstanding  my 
challenge  to  him  to  produce  evidence,  he  has  never  in  any 
way  justified  his  attack  on  me  by  the  production  of  a  single 
document,  or  of  a  solitary  witness  to  the  truth  of  his  asser- 
tions, I  might  have  left  his  attack  now  untouched  ;  but  as 
he  continues  to  maintain  his  unsupported  assertions,  I  think 
it  advisable  to  print  the  following  letters  from  the  excellent 
Pore  de  Kavignan,  which  fully  testify  to  the  cordial  relations 
that  existed  between  us : — 

"  Mon  bien  cher  Enfant,  Etes  vous  malade  ?  Faites  lo 
moi  savoir.  J'irai  pres  de  vous  ;  car  il  y  a  trop  longtemps 
que  je  ne  vous  ai  vu.  Aujourd'hui,  toute  la  journee,  de- 
main  Jeudi,  et  apres  demain  jusqu'  a  midi,  vous  me  trou- 
veriez  surement. 

"  Vous  savez  que  je  vous  aime  tcndrcment  en  X.  S., 
'•  X.  DE  KAVIGNAN,  S.  J. 
u  Taris,  Mercredi,  28  Janvier,  1857. 

"  Ne  sorte/.-pus  si  vous  etes  souffrant." 
*  An  error;  no  sitting  followed  this  note. 

56      LETTERS    AND    TESTIMONY. 

"  Mon  cher  Enfant,  Je  vous  esperais  hier  matin.  Etes 
vous  plus  souffrant  ?  Aujourd'hui  venez.  Vous  savez  com- 
bien  je  vous  aime  en  N.  S. 

Peut-etre  sortirai-je  pour  un  malade,  du  llh  a  midi. 
"  X.  DE  RAVIGNAN,  S.  J. 
«  Mercredi." 

«  Jeudi. 

"  Mon  bien  cher  Enfant,  J'envoie  savoir  de  vos  nou- 
velles  ;  j'espere  qu'elles  seront  bonnes.  Demain  Vendredi 
venez,  si  vous  pouvez  sortir,  me  voir  avant  llh  du  Matin. 
Si  non  je  vous  attendrai  Samedi. 

"  Je  vous  benis :  soyez  fiddle  et  soumis  a  1'eglise  ;  vivez 
de  la  foi,  et  de  la  grace  de  N.  S.  Tout  le  reste,  oubliez- 

le — adieu.  Tout  a  vous, 

"X.deR." 

In  the  letters  from  Dr.  Robert.  Chambers,  allusion  is 
made  to  the  late  Miss  Catherine  Sinclair,  sister  of  the 
venerable  Archdeacon  Sinclair,  a  lady  with  whom  it  was  a 
privilege  to  be  acquainted.  She  was  one  of  the  early 
witnesses  of  the  phenomena  of  spiritualism,  and  the  fol- 
lowing letters,  addressed  to  me  at  different  times,  show 
what  interest  she  felt  in  the  subject : — 

"  DEAR  SIB,  «  Saturday. 

"  In  my  haste  last  night,  I  left  a  much-valued  ac- 
quisition, which  will  long  and  often  be  seen  in  my  possession 
hereafter.  Pray  give  the  bearer  that  admirable  photo- 
graph, which  you  so  very  kindly  presented  to  me.  The 
message  of  last  night  was  most  marvellous  !  The  tempest- 
tossed  ship  and  the  beautiful  expression  of  thankfulness 
that  the  storms  of  life  are  over — what  consolation  !  I  livS 
with  those  who  have  heard,  from  my  near  relative,  Mrs. 
Hope  Johnstone,  a  very  detailed  account  of  her  experience, 
and  also  Mr.  Grant's,  of  the  "  Advertiser";  but  people 
cannot  long  resist  conviction,  seconded  by  manifestations 
so  pleasing  and  elevating  as  those  of  last  night.  I  merely 
relate  what  I  have  myself  witnessed,  and  all  become  at  once 

LETTERS    AND    TESTIMONY.       57 

desirous  to  share  in  such  revelations.  Our  circle  last 
night,  whfn  i/iiiu'iiis/i,>t.  \\us  very  eU'rciivi- !  I  ought  to 
have  told  von  beforehand  about  Mr.  Howitt,  but  bad  no 
intention  of  trespassing  on  your  kindness  by  bringing  him, 
as  I  believe  be  bud  sailed  in  Lord  Yarbornugh's  yacht  to 
Madeira,  but  he  returned  unexpectedly  for  a  day.  lie  is 
engaged  to  my  niece,  who  accompanied  me,  the  daogbteff 
of  Sir  George  Sinclair,  and  she  entreated  me  to  take  him. 
I  had  therefore  no  time  to  write  and  ask  permission,  lie 
came  so  unexpectedly.  I  never  would  intrude  any  friend 
on  you  without  special  leave,  seeing  how  persecuted  you 
must  be  for  admissions.  With  kind  regards  to  Mrs. 
Home,  Yours  truly, 

"  C.  SINCLAIR." 

"  DEAR  SIB, 

"  It  is  several  years  since  I  saw  Dr.  Bell,  and  then 
only  for  one  short  consultation  ;  therefore  if  he  has  quoted 
me  as  his  friend,  it  must  be  on  very  slight  evidence.  I 
described  one  day  to  a  young  lady  who  is  very  ill,  much 
that  I  had  seen  at  Mrs.  Milner  Gibson's,  and  ex; 
my  interest  in  it.  Having  told  her  that  I  had  been  pre- 
vented accepting  your  kind  invitation  for  Tuesday,  she 
may  probably  have  'mentioned  it  to  Dr.  Bell,  who  is  her 
medical  attendant.  If  I  had  wished  to  present  him  to 
you,  I  should  certainly  have  written  first  to  ask  your 
permission ;  and  should  such  an  imposition  be  again 
attempted  by  any  one,  do  not  sanction  it  without  my  hand 
and  seal.  With  best  regards  to  Mrs.  Home, 

"  Yours  very  truly, 
"  20th  June."  "  CATHERINE  SINCLAIR." 

"  DEAR  SIR, 

"  This  being  Sunday,  T  wttlh'il  from  The  Vicarage, 
Kensington,  leaving  my  young  charge  better,  and  greatly 
do  I  long  to  bring  him  some  day  to  see  you.  I  am 
greatly  embarrassed,  however,  by  the  opposition  of  my 
clerical  brothers,  and  other  relations,  against  all  thoso 

58       LETTERS    AND    TESTIMONY. 

marvellous  manifestations  which  will  one  day  force  them- 
selves on  universal  conviction.  All  my  family  are  behind 
the  age  on  that  mysterious  subject,  but  I  am  glad  to  know 
that  many  talented  men  are  become  candid  inquirers.  As 
I  have  been  long  engaged  to  attend  the  marriage  of  Mr. 
Sandwith,  the  hero  of  Kars,  next  Tuesday,  I  must  arrange 
to  leave  my  patient  ;  and  that  being  your  day  for  receiving 
visitors,  I  hope  to  call  on  Mrs.  Home  and  you  early, 
before  I  go  to  the  wedding.  My  niece,  Mrs.  Hope  John- 
stone,  who  takes  a  deep  interest  in  your  investigations, 
will  accompany  me.  I  enclose  a  note  from  Colonel 
Knight  Erskine,  and  if  you  can  assist  him  —  he  has 
remained  in  London  on  purpose  to  see  you.  I  often  think 
gratefully  of  the  kind  interest  you  take  in  my  young 
nephew.  With  kind  regards,  yours  truly, 

"  27th  May."  "  C.  SINCLAIR/* 

SIB, 

"  The  kind  and  truly  generous  interest  you  felt  in 
my  young  nephew's  sudden  calamity  induces  me  to  men- 
tion that  his  symptoms  are  already  somewhat  alleviated, 
though  his  three  physicians  think  it  may  still  be  some 
time  before  the  final  result  be  certain.  I  sit  for  long 
hours  beside  him,  and  would  have  greatly  wished  to  try 
mesmeric  influence,  but  he  is  in  the  house  of  a  clerical 
uncle,  so  strongly  opposed  to  progress  in  these  respects, 
that  the  subject  cannot  even  be  mentioned.  People's 
minds  are  gradually  opening,  however,  and  a  friend  of 
mine,  deep  in  the  science  of  spiritualism,  is  extremely 
desirous  to  communicate  with  you.  He  is  a  landed  pro- 
prietor in  Scotland,  and  is  in  command  of  a  regiment. 

"  I  think  you  will  find  very  few  men  more  talented  and 
agreeable  than  Major  Knight  Erskine,  and  I  shall  desire 
him,  if  you  do  not  forbid  him,  to  call  on  you  next  Tuesday 
about  one,  in  hopes  of  conferring  a  mutual  pleasure  and 
benefit  by  making  you  acquainted.  I  return  every  night 
to  town,  but  go  early  to  my  invalid  again,  as  he  has  two 

.LETTERS    AND     TESTIMONY.      59 

medical  nurses  who  never  leave  him.  One  of  the  doctors 
says  the  complaint  is  delirium  tremcns,  from  siiu>km<j 
ciyarx  ! 

"With  best  compliments  to  Mrs.  llmnc, 

"  Yours  very  truly, 

«  Thursday."  «  C.   SiNCLAlB." 

"  18,  Chesltnm  Place,  Belgrave  Sq. 
,,-n  "1 3th  July. 

"DEAR  SIR, 

"  Allow  me  to  express  my  most  sorrowful  and 
cordial  sympathy  in  the  loss  of  your  amiable  and  accom- 
plished, and  much-loved  wife,  so  young,  so  good,  and  so 
suited  to  render  you  happy.  I  hope  hereafter  to  hear 
from  you  that  your  own  health  has  not  suffered  by  your 
long  and  anxious  attendance,  as  I  witnessed  your  grief 
while  here,  in  the  apprehension  of  that  sad  event,  which 
has  now  so  mournfully  terminated  all  your  hopes  and 
cares. 

"  Pray  offer  my  sincere  and  respectful  condolences  to 
the  distinguished  relatives  of  my  lamented  young  friend, 
Mrs.  Home. 

"  "With  kindest  regards, 

"  Yours  very  truly, 

"  CATHERINE  SIXCLAIB." 

Another  of  the  early  inquirers,  also  alluded  to  by  the  late 
Dr.  Robert  Chambers  was  the  late  Professor  De  Morgan, 
Concerning  whom  the  following  correspondence  appeared 
in  the  "  Spiritual  Magazine"  for  January,  18G9,  which 
completely  destroys  all  doubt  as  to  his  belief  in  the  reality 
of  the  Phenomena. 

"  To  the  Editor  of  the  '  Spiritual  Magazine.' 
"  Sm, — As  I  am  not  in  the  habit  of  taking  anything  for 
granted,  without  what  appear  to  me  to  be  adequate  reasons 
for  so  doing  ; — and,  as  I  was  not  satisfied  with  the  bare  as- 
sertion that  Professor  De  Morgan,  the  eminent  living  mathe- 

60       LETTERS    AND    TESTIMONY. 

matician,  had  really  lent  the  sanction  of  his  great  name  to 
these  so-called  delusions  (of  modern  spiritualism),  I  some 
months  back  wrote  him  a  letter  on  the  subject  of  the  book 
'  From  Matter  to  Spirit/  published  anonymously  in  1863, 
and  received  from  kirn  the  following  reply ; — 

"*  91,  Adelaide  Eoad.N.  W. 

'April  3rd,  1868. 
" '  A.  B.  TIETKINS,  Esq. 

" (  Sir, — It  never  has  been  any  secret  that  the  book 
'From  Matter  to  Spirit '  was  written  by  my  wife,  and 
the  preface  by  myself. 

•"  '  For  the  last  two  years,  I  think,  Longman  has  adver- 
tized our  names.  I  vouch,  of  course,  for  the  facts  men- 
tioned in  detail  at  the  end  of  the  preface ;  but  there  are 
some  in  the  book  of  the  truth  of  which  my  knowledge  is 
personal.  And  of  nearly  all  I  can  testify  that  I  heard 
them  long  before  they  were  printed,  and  that  they  did  not 
grow.  "  *  Yours  faithfully, 

"  '  A.  DE  MORGAN/ 

"  So  then  here  we  have  a  living  philosopher  who  tells 
us,  after  fifteen  years  of  investigation  of  these  phenomena, 
and  patient  consideration  of  their  bearing, '  I  am  perfectly 
convinced  that  I  have  both  seen  and  heard  in  a  manner, 
which  should  make  unbelief  impossible,  things  called 
spiritual,  which  cannot  be  taken  by  a  rational  being  to  be 
capable  of  explanation  by  imposture,  coincidence,  or  mis- 
take. So  far  I  feel  the  ground  firm  under  me/ 

"  Such  evidence  as  this,  in  connection  with  that  of  Mr. 
Varley,  Mr.  Wallace,  and  a  host  of  other  scientific  wit- 
nesses, is  very  significant  of  the  fact  that  although  Professor 
De  Morgan's  did  not  grow  in  the  telling,  spiritualism  is 
growing  apace. 

"A.  B.  TIETKENS." 

The  following  items  of  evidence  in  my  favour  may  also 

LETTERS    AND    TESTIMONY.      61 

be  given  here  as  they  appeared  in  the  "  Spiritual 
Magazine." 

••  Tin-  War  Correspondent  of  the  '  Daily  Telegraph ' 

(Mr.  Kingston)  in  a  letter  to  that  Journal  of  <  )ctoln-r  :iNt, 
JS7".  writing  from  Versailles,  says: — '  Among  our  party 
was  Mr.  Daniel  Home,  the  c<-lehrated  Spiritualist,  w!mm 
the-  King  promptly  recognized,  and  addiv.-x-d  verv  kindly 
— reminding  him  of  the  wonders  that  he  (Mr.  Home)  had 
been  the  means  of  imparting  to  him,  and  inquiring  ahout 
'the  spirits  '  in  by  no  means  a  sceptical  tone.  We  may 
add  that  the  King  said  to  Mr.  Home  that  '  he  had  told 
many  of  his  friends  of  the  wonderful  manifestations  he  had 
seen  in  Mr.  Home's  presence :  his  friends  did  not  believe 
him  ;  but  the  facts  were  true  for  all  that.'  " 

Mr.  J.  M.  Peebles,  the  United  States  Consul,  in  a 
lecture  on  his  recent  travels  in  Europe,  delivered  at 
Buttle  Breek,  near  Chicago,  and  reported  in  the  "  Present 
Age"  of  September  3rd,  1870,  makes  the  following 
statement  : — 

"  While  in  England  I  dined  with  John  Bright,  when 
transpired  quite  an  earnest  conversation  upon  the  subject 
of  spiritualism.  He  said  he  had  witnessed  some  of  D.  D. 
Home's  manifestations.  They  were  wonderful.  He  could 
attribute  them  to  no  cause  except  it  be  the  one  alleged, 
that  of  intelligent,  disembodied  spirits.  'But,'  he  added, 
with  due  caution,  « I  do  not  say  that  this  is  so,  but  if  it 
be  true,  it  is  the  strongest  tangible  proof  we  have  of  im- 
mortality." 

In  the  autumn  of  18G3,  while  at  Dieppe,  I  met  my 
friend,  Mrs.  Milner  Gibson,  one  afternoon  on  the  parade 
there.  In  the  course  of  conversation  she  said,  "  Do  you 
know  that  Dr.  Elliottson  is  in  Dieppe  at  present?"  "  Is 
he?"  I  replied.  "  I  should  like  to  be  introduced  to  him." 
Mrs.  Milner  Gibson  expressed  surprise,  but  undertook  to 
introduce  me,  and  a  few  minutes  afterwards  we  oh 
him  on  a  seat.  I  was  introduced  to  him,  and  said,  "  Dr. 
Elliottson,  you  have  said  and  written  very  hard  things  of 

G2  DE.    ELLIOTTSON. 

me.  Xow  don't  you  think  it  was  very  wrong  for  an  old 
man  like  you  to  make  such  accusations  as  you  have  done 
against  me,  and  to  call  a  man  an  impostor,  of  whom  you 
knew  nothing  whatever?  If  you  like  to  know  something 
of  me,  and  to  investigate  the  subject  of  spiritualism  I  shall 
be  happy  to  see  you  at  Mrs.  Milner  Gibson's  this  evening, 
and  to  give  you  every  opportunity  of  testing  what  you 
see."  He  came,  and  saw  so  much  that  he  was  convinced 
of  the  truth  of  spiritualism.  On  the  next  day  he  called 
on  me,  and  said,  "  What  I  witnessed  last  evening  was 
wonderful  and  convincing,  but  it  is  too  much  for  me  to 
change  suddenly  the  convictions  of  seventy  years.  I  must 
ask  you  to  let  me  come  again,  and  bring  a  young  friend 
with  me."  I  agreed  readily,  and  that  evening  he  came 
accompanied  by  the  two  young  Messrs.  Symes.  The 
fullest  use  was  made  by  the  gentlemen  of  their  powers  of 
observing  and  testing  what  they  witnessed,  and  the  result 
was  that  Dr.  Elliottson  was  perfectly  convinced.  On  his 
decease  in  the  year  1868,  a  short  memoir  appeared  in  the 
"  Morning  Post,"  from  which  I  give  the  following  : — 

"  We  have  to  record  the  decease,  a  day  or  two  since, 
of  one  of  the  most  remarkable  scientific  men  of  the  century, 
who  attained  to  the  highest  rank  of  the  medical  profession, 
and  who  was  held  in  the  greatest  esteem  for  the  daring 
and  successful  character  of  his  innovations,  and  yet  who, 
after  living  down  and  conquering  aspersions  cast  on  him, 
has  lived  long  enough  to  be  almost  forgotten  in  the  busy 
round  of  life.  Dr.  Elliottson  was  born  somewhere  about 
the  year  1785,  and  studied  at  St.  Thomas's  and  Guy's 
Hospitals.  He  was  one  of  the  first  physicians  to  adopt 
the  stethoscope  in  the  diagnosis  of  lung  and  heart  diseases. 
In  the  course  of  his  practice  at  University  College  Hospital 
certain  phenomena  developed  themselves  in  the  cases  of 
two  young  girls  named  Okey,  and  Elliottson  was  thus  led 
to  investigate  mesmerism,  and  with  his  characteristic 
boldness  and  love  of  truth  he  published  the  results  fear- 
lessly. He  was  at  this  time  enjoying  as  large  a  practice 

DR.    ELLIOTTSON.  63 

at  tlio  "West  End  as  had  ever  been  the  lot  of  any 
dan.  TIic  result  of  liis  hold  utterance  of  the  truth  was 
that  his  learned  hrethren  persecuted  him,  and  his  j 
fell  off  to  the  extent  of  IM.OOO  per  annum,  and  in 
he  was  obliged  to  resign  his  prof.'.s.MM-ship.  His  j.: 
however,  rose  in  time  till  it  was  larger  than  before,  and  he 
became  noted  for  his  mesmeric  knowledge,  which  he  cul- 
tivated assiduously.  lie  continued  through  good  and  evil 
report  to  publish  the  results  of  his  experiments,  and  estab- 
lished the  'Zoist,'  which  he  maintained  for  twelve  years, 
the  volumes  of  which  form  a  history  of  this  branch  of 
science.  He  was  founder  and  president  of  the  Phreno- 
logical Society,  and  was  president  of  the  Royal  Medical 
and  Chirurgical  Society  of  London.  In  1849  he  founded 
the  Mesmeric  Hospital,  which  has  been  a  great  blessing 
to  many.  During  the  greater  part  of  his  life  he  was  an 
unbeliever,  and  while  investigating  mesmerism  sneered  at 
the  accounts  which  he  heard  of  spiritualistic  phenomena, 
and  denounced  all  mediums  as  impostors.  He  also  wrote 
an  elaborate  treatise  denving  the  existence  of  an  immortal 
soul,  and  arguing  that  the  Hebrew  word  '  nephesh,'  trans- 
lated 'soul,'  had  no  other  meaning  than  'life.'  In  the 
year  1863,  he  was  at  Dieppe,  and  was  introduced  to  Mr. 
D.  D.  Home,  who  told  him  he  had  acted  wrongly  in  call- 
ing him  an  impostor  when  he  really  knew  nothing  of  him. 
He  then  spent  some  time  in  investigating  the  phenomena 
of  Spiritualism  aided  by  the  sons  of  his  friend  Dr.  Symes. 
The  result  was  that  he  expressed  his  conviction  of  the 
truth  of  the  phenomena,  and  became  a  sincere  Christian, 
who-e  handbook  henceforth  was  his  I»ihle.  Sometime 
after  this  he  said  he  had  been  living  all  his  life  in  dark- 
ness, and  had  thought  there  was  nothing  in  existence  but 
the  material ;  but  he  now  had  a  firm  hope  which  he  trusted 
he  would  hold  while  on  earth." 

The  "Spiritual  Magazine''  says: — "  We  may  add  to 
the  foregoing  notice,  that  not  only  was  Dr.  Kllinitson  for 
the  greater  part  of  his  life — until  he  became  a  Spiritualist 

64  DE.    ELLIOTTSON. 

— au  unbeliever  in  revelation,  but  a  Materialist  of  the  most 
uncompromising  and  determined  type, — the  acknowledged 
head  of  that  school  of  Physiology  of  which  Lawrence  and 
Engledue  were  the  champions — which  regards  man  as  a 
merely  corporeal  being, — the  faculties  of  the  mind  as 
synonymous  with  functions  of  the  brain,  and  in  what  is 
usually  regarded  as  evidence  of  his  spiritual  nature  sees 
only  the  results  of  cerebral  action.  These  views  he  set 
forth  with  great  force  in  his  elaborate  work  on  "  Human 
Physiology  ;'  and  they  were  eagerly  caught  up  by  the 
atheistic  secular  party  in  this  country,  and  reproduced  in 
lectures,  articles,  and  tracts ;  and  his  name,  (which  since 
he  became  a  spiritualist  they  appear  to  have  almost  for- 
gotten) was  constantly  in  their  mouths  as  that  of  an 
eminent  authority  on  the  subject.  When  modern  spiri- 
tualism was  introduced  into  this  country,  Dr.  Elliottson 
was  one  of  the  sturdiest  and  most  scornful  of  its  opponents. 
Not  only  did  he  denounce  it  in  the  "  Zoist,"  but  he  gave 
a  series  of  wood-cuts  in  that  journal  to  accompany  the 
text,  showing  how  the  Mappings'  were  effected.  On 
this  question  of  spiritualism,  he  joined  issue  with,  and 
separated  himself  from  his  old  friend  and  colleague  in 
mesmerism,  and  in  the  establishment  and  management  of 
the  "  Zoist" — Dr.  Ashburner  ;  to  whom  it  must  have  been 
a  source  of  great  satisfaction  after  years  of  estrangement, 
that  Dr.  Elliottson's  conviction  of  the  truth  of  spiritualism 
was  the  means  of  re-establishing  their  former  intimacy  and 
friendship. 

Spiritualism  was  not  with  Dr.  Elliottson  a  conviction 
barren  of  results.  It  revolutionized  the  philosophy  of  a 
lifetime,  as  he  was  always  ready  to  avow,  bitterly  lament- 
ing the  misdirected  efforts  he  had  made,  however  con- 
scientiously, in  the  promulgation  of  materialistic  principles. 
He  became  a  thoroughly  changed  man,  and  changed  in 
all  respects  for  the  better.  Humbled  by  the  recollection 
of  past  errors,  his  nature  became  softened,  his  demeanour 
more  gentle,  and  he  bore  his  losses  and  sufferings  with 
patience  and  fortitude. 

DR.    ELLIOTTSON.  65 

"  Some  of  our  correspondents  have  expressed  doubts 
of  the  efficacy  of  prayer.  Dr.  Elliottson  affirmed  that  ho 
could  no  longer  entertain  any  question  of  it,  as  he  had 
personal  and  constant  evidence  of  the  efficacy  of  prayer  in 
his  own  experience. 

"  To  those  who  question  as  to  the  strength  of  evidence 
which  spiritualism  presents  to  the  scientific  investigator, 
or  as  to  its  origin  and  effects,  this  brief  record  may  be 
useful.  Let  the  tree  be  judged  by  its  fruits." 

The  following  letter  appeared  in  "Human  Nature," 
November  1,  1870 : — 

"  Sin, — I  have  been  informed  that  doubt  has  been 
expressed  as  to  Dr.  Elliottson  ever  having  become  a 
believer  in  spiritualism ;  and,  as  I  happen  to  be  ac- 
quainted with  certain  circumstances  connected  with  his 
being  so,  I  trespass  on  your  space  in  order  to  remove 
that  doubt. 

*'  I  was  happy  in  seeing  much  of  Dr.  Elliottson  from 
the  commencement  of  and  during  his  brave  combat  in 
defence  of  the  genuineness  of  the  phenomena  of  animal 
magnetism — (I  always  regretted  his  adoption  of  the  term, 
mesmerism,  thinking  the  original  one  so  much  more 
expressive  of  their  nature) — and  I  am  quite  aware  of  his 
utter  inability  to  receive  the  truth  of  the  manifestations 
which  he  witnessed  when  Mrs.  Hayden  was  in  this 
country,  and  which  he  tried  to  account  for  by  one  of  tho 
many  absurd  hypotheses,  rife  then,  but  now  completely 
exploded.  He  consequently  became  violently  opposed  to 
all  those  who  admitted  the  genuineness  of  them,  and 
avowed  their  belief  in  communication  with  the  spirits  of 
the  departed.  So  strong  was  his  honest  disbelief  on  this 
subject  that,  when  his  friend,  Dr.  Ashhurner,  became  ono 
of  the  staunchest  advocates  of  its  truth,  be  broke  olf  all 
intercourse  with  him,  nor  did  he  hesitate  to  write  and 
speak  of  it  and  him  in  severe  terms,  and  on  the  worse 
than  folly  of  uniting  in  such  a  gross  .imposition  on  the 
F 

CG  DU.    ELLIOTT80N. 

gullibility  of  mankind.  This  continued  for  some  years, 
until  being  atDkppe,  Mrs.  Milner  Gibson  induced  him 
to  join  in  a  seance  with  Mr.  Home,  I  believe  in  more 
than  one,  the  result  being  that  he  was  firmly  convinced, 
not  only  of  the  existence  of  the  spiritual  world,  but  of  the 
power  to  communicate  with  the  spirits  of  departed  friends 
therein ;  and,  with  the  perfect  courageous  honesty  of  his 
nature,  promised  to  make  his  convictions  known  on  his 
return  to  London.  This  he  did  ;  and  I  well  remember  a 
conversation  with  him,  in  which  he  said,  'What  shall  I  do 
with  my  books?'  admitting  that  many  of  them  were  of  a 
kind  which  would  promote  a  disbelief  in  the  truth  he  had 
so  happily  attained  to. 

"  When  he  returned  to  London,  one  of  the  first  things 
he  did  was  to  see  a  mutual  friend  of  his  and  I)r.  Ash- 
burner's,  and  to  express  his  regret  that  *  he  should  have 
treated  such  a  man  in  such  a  manner,'  asking  if  the 
friend  thought  Dr.  A.  (  would  ever  forgive  him.' 

"  On  the  same  morning  Dr.  Ashburner  happened  to 
call  on  the  friend,  and,  learning  the  above,  immediately 
went  to  37,  Conduit  Street,  and,  in  Dr.  Elliottson's 
absence,  left  his  card.  He  had  not  been  long  at  home 
when  Dr.  Elliottson  entered  his  room,  with  his  hands 
before  his  face,  saying,  *  Can  you  forgive  me  ?' 

"  This  was  followed,  as  those  who  knew  the  man  may 
well  imagine,  by  a  perfect  reconciliation,  honourable  in 
the  highest  degree  to  both. 

"  In  one  of  my  latest  interviews  with  him,  he  ex- 
pressed the  great  happiness  his  later  convictions  had 
brought  him,  and  looked  forward  to  the  life  hereafter 
with  calm  confidence.  The  leading  characteristic  of  his 
mind,  in  addition  to  his  high  intellectual  development, 
was  the  perfectly  honest  search  after  truth.  This,  when 
it  is  perfect,  is  sure  to  be  rewarded  by  success,  sooner  or 
later. 

"  In  his  case,  on  this  subject,  it  was  late.  May  all 
those,  who  are  equally  honest  searchers,  find  it,  even  if  as 
late  as  he  did.— Yours,  &c.  H.  C." 

A    PROPHETIO    INCIDENT.        67 

A  remarkable  prophetic  incident  came  to  my  know- 
ledge in  lSo:i,  by  the  following  letters,  which  1  leave  to 
tell  their  own  story  : — 

«  Boston,  May  17,  18G3. 

"  MY  DEAR  DANIEL, — T  can. most  fully  sympathize  with 
you  in  your  sorrow,  having  recently  met  with  a 
bereavement  myself.  My  daughter  Mary  (Mrs.  Hi-^in- 
son)  was  taken  with  bleeding  from  the  lungs,  and  in 
eight  weeks  she  passed  from  earth-life  to  the  inner 
world.  She  died  of  rapid  consumption.  While  John 
has  been  ill  for  three  years,  he  is  still  with  us,  awaiting 
humbly  and  patiently  his  summons  and  release,  lie 
looks  like  an  angel,  and  is  like  one  for  his  goodness. 

'•  .Mary  was  my  youngest  daughter,  and  she  had  a  gentle, 
lovely  temper  and  disposition,  that  twined  her  elose  round 
my  heart.  She  was  to  me  all  that  a  daughter  could  be, 
and  my  loss  is  very  great,  but  I  shall  not  have  very  long 
to  stay  away  from  her.  During  your  last  visit  to  us,  at 
one  of  our  seances,  you  asked  me  for  paper  and  pencil. 
I  gave  them  to  you,  and  you  then  asked  for  waters  to 
seal  up  your  writing.  The  paper  was  scaled  up  very 
carefully,  handed  to  me,  and  you  told  me  to  keep  it  till 
the  spirits  made  it  known  that  it  was  to  be  opened.  I 
kept  it  thus  seven  years  or  more,  and  then  having  a  good 
opportunity,  I  inquired  if  I  might  open  it.  The  answer 
was  that  I  had  better  not,  as  the  contents  were  not  what 
I  might  like.  After  a  while  I  asked  again,  and  was  told 
that  if  I  were  so  desirous  I  might  open  it.  I  therefore 
broke  the  seals,  and  found  th"  fnliuwing  words: — '  Mary 
will  be  theirs*  to  leave  earth.  (Jrieve  not.  All  will  be 
well  with  her.  It  may  be  years.' 

'•  You  may  judge  of  my  f.-e!i!:g<  at  this  announcement, 
and  when  she  was  taken  with  the  hemorrhage  I  felt  that 
she-  would  be  the  first,  although  for  weeks  we  had  almost 
been  daily  feeling  that  John  would  leave  us.  We  laid 
her  body  away  last  Tuesday,  just  five  days  ago,  and  John 
breathes  yet.  Yours,  <fec., 

"  D.  D.  Home,  Esq.  A.  S.  JARVES." 

68          PROPHETIC    INCIDENTS. 

•'  Boston,  July  5th. 

"DEAR  DANIEL, — I  have  postponed  writing  you  since 
John  passed  away.  His  spirit  was  released  from  the 
body  on  the  21st  of  May,  just  eleven  days  after  Mary 
had  left  us.  Strange  to  say  John  did  not  ask  to  see  his 
sister  as  we  did  not  tell  him  what  a  surprise  was  awaiting 
him  there.  George  (his  spirit  brother)  told  us  that  he 
had  impressed  John  not  to  think  of  Mary,  and  now  John 
tells  us  that  when  he-  met  his  sister  he  thought  it  must 
only  be  a  vision.  Yours,  <tc., 

"D.  D.  Home,  Esq.  A.  S.  JABVES." 

An  equally  remarkable  prophetic  incident  occurred  to 
me  in  the  autumn  of  1863,  while  at  Dieppe.  A  Russian 
gentleman  asked  me  if  I  ever  saw  a  vision  in  a  crystal,  to 
which  I  replied  no.  He  said,  Look  in  this,  and  tell  me  if 
you  see  anything.  I  took  it  up  ;  and  on  looking  at  it,  to 
my  astonishment,  I  saw  a  crowd,  and  in  the  crowd  a  man 
who  was  assassinated,  in  the  act  of  falling  forward  from 
his  chair.  I  said,  "  That  is  Abraham  Lincoln,  and  within 
the  year  he  will  be  assassinated." 

I  do  not  attempt  to  explain  these  things,  I  can  only 
give  the  facts. 

The  following  incidents  in  my  experience,  I  related 
at  a  conference  in  London  some  time  since,  and  I  give 
them  as  reported  in  the  "  Spiritual  Magazine :" — 

"  At  one  of  the  London  Conferences  on  Spiritualism, 
Mr.  D.  D.  Home  narrated  the  following  experiences : — 
Some  eighteen  years  ago,  when  quite  a  boy,  he  was 
travelling  in  a  railway  carriage,  when  a  gentleman,  son 
of  Professor  Wayland,  of  Brown  University,  asked  if  he 
was  Mr.  Home  ;  on  replying  that  he  was,  the  gentleman 
said  he  owed  him  an  apology ;  on  asking  why,  he  said  he 
had  called  Home  an  impostor,  and  owed  him  an  apology 
for  doing  so.  The  gentleman  said  he  had  occasion  once 
to  call  on  a  friend,  when  he  found  Home  in  his  office  in  a 
trance  and  blindfolded.  As  he  hesitated  about  entering, 

PROPHETIC    INCIDENTS.          (>9 

Homo  pointing  to  the  door  said,  '  That  is  Frank,  tell  him 
to  come,  his  sister  Caroline  is  here.'  He  told  them  ho 
novcM-  had  a  sister  Caroline,  and  that  it  was  all  humbug. 
He  went  home  and  said  to  his  father  that  he  would  be 

sorry  to  hear*  Mr. had  taken  up  with  spiritualism, 

and  had  that  fellow  Home  in  his  office  blindfolded  ;  and, 
only  fancy  !  he  told  me  I  had  had  a  sister  Caroline.'  His 
father  said,  *  And  don't  you  really  know  you  had  a  sister 
of  that  name  ?'  '  No/  he  replied,  *  of  course  not/  '  Then/ 
returned  his  father,  l  you  had  ;  she  was  born  just  before 
yoursclf,»but  only  lived  a  few  hours,  and  during  that  time 
was  christened  Caroline ;  so  Home  was  right.  Mr. 
Home  said  that  everybody  had  their  own  ideas  of  dignity, 
and  sometimes  the  plain  truth  is  withheld  for  the  sake  of 
upholding  it.  An  old  maiden  lady  once  entered  tlio 
house  where  he  was  staying,  while  lie  was  in  a  trance ; 
she  was  persuaded  to  remain,  and  during  the  seance  she 
asked  Home  whilst  in  the  trance  what  were  the  last  words 
her  mother  had  said  on  her  death-bed ;  if  he  could  tell 
her  that  she  would  believe.  Home  replied, '  Puss,  puss, 
poor  pussy/  The  lady  started,  turned  pale,  and  said  he 
was  right ;  those  were  the  very  last  words  used,  but  she 
thought  them  so  undignified,  that  she  had  never  told 
anybody  of  them." 

CHAPTER  III. 

EXPULSION  FROM   HOME.     DISCUSSION  IN  HOUSE 
OF  COMMONS. 

JHILE  at  Dieppe  I  made  some  essays  in 
the  art  of  sculpture  which  led  to  my 
removing  to  Rome,  where  one  of  the  re- 
markable events  of  my  life  occurred.  This 
was  related  in  the  "  Spiritual  Magazine," 
with  the  following  introduction:  — 

"  Another  curious  '  incident  of  his  life  '  has  just  hap- 
pened to  Mr.  Home,  and  is  related  by  the  Times  in  a 
letter  from  l  our  own  correspondent '  at  Home,  where  Mr. 
Home  has  now  been  for  some  time  studying  as  a  sculptor. 
During  his  late  visit  to  Dieppe,  he  had  suddenly  shown 
considerable  talent  as  a  sculptor.  His  first  effort  was 
highly  approved,  and  he  was  advised  to  devote  himself  to 
the  art,  and  for  that  purpose  he  went  to  Eome  in  the 
month  of  October  last,  and  has  since  been  actively  work- 
ing there  as  a  student.  It  is  now  decided  that  he  has 
great  talent,  and  he  is  making  rapid  progress,  with  the 
intention  of  shortly  commencing  the  practice  of  his  new 
profession  at  Paris,  where  he  intends  establishing  a  studio. 
We  give  the  narrative  of  the  little  episode  which  happened 
to  him  in  the  Eternal  City,  as  it  appeared  in  the  •  Times ' 
of  the  12th  of  January.  It  is  quite  a  bijou  in  its  way,  and 
an  instance  of  the  way  in  which  affairs  go  on  under  the 

EXPULSION    FROM    ROME.        71 

guidance    of  '  God's    vicegerent    upon    earth,'   and    the 
precious  gentleman  who  holds  the  keys  of  St.  Peter. 

(From  our  own  Correspondent.) 

"  Rome,  Jan.  6. 

"  Perhaps  the  most  exciting  incident  of  the  week  is 
that  Mr.  Home,  of  spiritualism  notoriety,  has  been 
ordered  to  leave  Home  in  three  days  ;  and  that  I  may  not 
err  in  my  statement  of  the  fact  which  has  occasioned 
great  sensation,  I  give  you  a  report  of  the  proceedings  in 
his  own  words." 

I  give  in  lieu  of  the  "  Times  "  report,  the  full  extract 
from  my  diary. 

I  arrived  at  Rome  on  the  15th  November,  18G3,  for 
the  purpose  of  studying  sculpture. 

On  the  2nd  of  January,  1864, 1  received,  at  five  o'clock 
in  the  evening,  a  letter  requiring  my  attendance  at  the 
office  of  the  chief  Police  Station.  Feeling  sure  that  this 
summons  could  be  connected  with  nothing  but  spiritualism, 
I  could  not  help  thinking  how  sad  it  was  that  men  who 
ought  to  be  more  enlightened  should  treat  as  a  crime  a 
matter  that  the  Church  ought  rather  to  encourage  and 
support.  In  order,  however,  to  avoid  any  disturbance,  I 
determined  to  do  as  was  required  of  me,  and  so,  with  a 
companion  who  kindly  consented  to  accompany  me,  at 
half-past  eleven  on  January  3rd  I  presented  myself  at  the 
Palazzo-Citerio.  We  were  shown  into  an  ante-room, 
where  there  were  some  straw  chairs,  but  no  fire,  and  as 
the  roof  was  covered  with  snow  we  found  it  very  cold. 
After  waiting  for  more  than  half-an-hour,  I  began  to  get 
a  little  impatient,  and,  calling  a  servant,  I  asked  him  if  it 
was  the  custom  to  treat  in  this  manner  people  who  had 
been  summoned;  and  told  him  to  warn  those  who  had 
desired  my  presence  that  I  would  wait  no  longer.  After  a 
short  absence  he  returned  with  rxcuses  for  my  detention, 
and  saying  that  M.  Pasqualonni  was  readv  t»>  receive  me. 
AVe  were  shown  into  a  large  room,  where  that  gentleman 
was  seated  at  an  office  table  with  drawers.  The  apart- 

72       EXPULSION    FROM    EOHE. 

ment  was  scantily  furnished — a  few  chairs,  a  plaster-of- 
paris  bust  of  the  Pope  ;  an  engraving  of  the  Holy  Virgin 
was  suspended  behind  M.  Pasqualonni,  in  the  frame  of 
which  some  visiting  cards  were  placed. 

Upon  my  entrance  Mons.  P.  bowed  to  me,  and  mo- 
tioned me  to  seat  myself  opposite  to  him  ;  the  friend  who 
accompanied  me  sat  at  the  end  of  the  table,  on  the  left  of 
Mons.  P.,  who  commenced  his  remarks  with — 

Q.  You  are  Mr.  D.  Dunglas  Home? — A.  Yes,  sir, 
and  here  is  my  passport. 

Q.  (Without  taking  it)  Very  well,  I  must  ask  you 
some  questions. — A.  For  my  part,  sir,  I  am  ready  to 
answer  you. 

Q.  Were  you  born  in  Scotland  ? — A.  Yes,  sir. 

Q.  Are  you  thirty-seven  years  old? — A.  No,  sir,  I 
am  only  thirty  years  old. 

Q.  But,  sir,  you  are  thirty-seven. — A.  No,  sir  ;  I  was 
born  in  1833 ;  next  March  I  shall  be  in  my  thirty-first 
year. 

Q.  (Taking  a  paper  from  a  drawer,  and  looking  at  it) 
According  to  my  notes  you  ought  to  be  thirty-seven. — A. 
I  am  sorry  that  I  am  unable  to  corroborate  your  informa- 
tion ;  but  I  am  only  thirty  years  old. 

Q.  Your  father's  name  ? — A.  William. 

Q.  Your  mother's? — A.  Elizabeth. 

Q.  Her  maiden  name  ? — A.  McNeil.  (Here  I  inter- 
rupted him  with  a  request  that  I  might  be  furnished  with 
pencil  and  paper.) 

Q.  For  what  purpose  ? — A.  To  write. 

Q.  To  write  what? — A.  I  am  a  free  man,  and  should 
wish  to  preserve  questions  and  answers  of  such  great  im- 
portance. 

Q.  (Handing  me  a  sheet  of  paper  and  a  red  pencil.) 
How  many  times  have  you  been  in  Home? — A.  This  is 
my  third  visit. 

Q.  When  and  of  what  duration  were  the  other  visits  ? — 
A.  In  1856,  I  remained  here  two  months,  then  it  was 

EXPULSION    FROM    ROME.        73 

that  I  became  a  Roman  Catholic;  in  1858,  I  passed 
three  weeks  here ;  and  upon  this  occasion  I  have  been 
here  since  the  15th  November. 

Q.  Nay,  you  have  been  here  since  the  1  st  of  November  ? 
— A.  Here  is  my  passport,  which  will  show  you  that  I 
have  been  here  only  since  the  15th. 

Q.  Is  it  your  intention  to  remain  a  long  time  here  ?— — 
A.  No,  sir,  I  propose  in  April  to  return  to  Paris. 

Q.  Have  you  a  house  there  ? — A .  No,  sir. 

Q.  What  was  your  object  in  coming  to  Rome?— A. 
For  my  health  and  to  study  sculpture. 

Q.  What  was  your  religion  before  1856? — A.  Pro- 
testant. 

Q.  Have  you  published  any  works — how  many — and 
under  what  titles? — A.  "  Incidents  in  My  Life." 

Q.  Was  the  book  published  in  Paris  by  Dentu  ? — A. 
It  was. 

Q.  You  say  that  you  are  a  medium,  that  you  become 
entranced,  and  that  YOU  see  spirits? — A.  Yes,  sir,  I  have 
said  so,  and  it  is  true. 

Q.  And  you  hold  communications  with  spirits? — A. 
When  they  think  proper. 

Q.  How  do  you  summon  them  ? — A.  I  do  not  summon 
them,  they  manifest  themselves  of  their  own  accord. 

Q.  How  do  they  manifest  themselves  ? 

I  was  about  to  answer,  "  Sometimes  in  one  way,  some- 
times in  another,"  when  raps  were  made  upon  the  table 
close  to  him  and  far  from  me ;  he  asked  me  in  a  tone  of 
great  astonishment  the  cause  of  these  noises.  My  com- 
panion answered  him  by  saying :  "  These  are  the  spirits, 
and  it  must  be  evident  to  you  that  Mr.  Home  has  no  voli- 
tion in  the  matter."  "  Spirits!"  replied  M.  Pasqualonni, 
looking  all  about  the  table  more  and  more  astonished : 
then  he  said,  "  Let  us  continue  our  examination.  Pro- 
ceed." 

Q.  So  you  consider  your  gift  as  a  gift  of  nature? — A. 
No,  I  consider  it  a  gift  of  God. 

74        EXPULSION    FROM    ROME. 

Q.  Since  the  year  1856  have  you  never  exercised  your 
power?— A..  Neither  before  nor  since,  seeing  that  I  am 
passive  in  these  manifestations,  which  are  spontaneous. 

Q.  In  your  opinion  what  is  the  object  of  these  manifes- 
tations ? — A.  To  assure  sceptics  of  the  immortality  of  the 
soul,  and  to  afford  heavenly  consolation. 

Q.  You  relate  in  your  work  on  miracles  pel-formed  by 
you,  amongst  others,  cases  of  cure  ? — A.  These  cures  are 
truly  miracles. 

Q-  How  did  you  accomplish  them?  —  A.  I  know 
nothing  about  it.  I  am  but  an  instrument. 

Q.  You  have  given  seances  in  France,  England,  and 
Russia? — A.  At  friendly  assemblies  met  for  the  purpose, 
manifestations  sometimes  occur.  But  why  do  you  ask  me 
all  this  ?  My  book  answers  this  question  in  the  affirma- 
tive ;  all  persons  therein  named  are  prepared  to  corro- 
borate what  I  have  printed,  and  I  will  maintain,  even  at 
the  risk  of  my  life,  the  truth  of  what  my  book  asserts. 

My  friend,  considering  me  a  little  fatigued,  requested 
M.  Pasqualonni  to  postpone  the  examination  to  another 
day,  but  I  replied  that  I  preferred  finishing  it  then. 

Q.  You  say  in  your  work  that  articles  of  furniture 
move;  why  does  not  this  table  start  off  for  a  walk?  Do 
you  see  spirits  when  you  are  awake  or  asleep  ? — A.  In 
both  states.  '  With  regard  to  the  cases  of  locomotion  you 
speak  of,  they  occur  sometimes,  but  not  by  any  will  of 
mine  own.  (As  I  said  this,  a  cracking  noise  was  heard 
on  the  table  which  moved  slightly.  M.  Pasqualonni 
looking  about,  said  in  a  troubled  voice,  "  Let  us  con- 
tinue.") 

Q.  Did  you  not  say  in  your  book  that  your  mother  was 
a  medium  ? — A.  Yes,  sir,  and  my  son  is  also. 

Q.  What  is  the  age  of  your  son  ? — A.  Four  years  and 
a  half. 

Q.  Where  is  he?— A.  At  Malvern. 

Q.  Where  is  Malvern  ? — A.  In  England. 

Q.  Has  he  a  nurse  ? — A,  Yes,  sir. 

EXPULSION    FROM    HOME.         75 

Q.  Is  she  a  Catholic  ? — A.  No,  sir,  she  belongs  to  tho 
Greek  Church. 

Q.  With  whom  is  your  son? — A.  With  Dr.  Gully, 
one  of  my  friends. 

Q.  Is  Dr.  Gully  a  Catholic?— A.  No,  sir. 

At  this  point  my  friend  began  speaking  in  a  low  voice 
with  M.  rusqualonni,  and  I  learned  that  tin;  subject  of 
their  conversation  was  my  expulsion  from  Koine.  Then 
1  demanded  that  the  order  for  it  should  be  made  in 
writing,  whieii  was  done,  and  I  was  told  that  within  three 
davs  1  must  leave  Kume. 

Q.  Do  you  consent  to  do  so? — A.  (Rising  up.)  Cer- 
tainly not,  for,  having  infringed  no  law,  my  consenting  to 
go  would  look  as  if  I  had  committed  something  of  which 
1  was  ashamed.  I  expect  to  find  this  the  cause  of  much 
scandal  lie  fore  I  go.  I  warn  you  beforehand,  and  upon 
my  leaving  you  I  shall  at  once  seek  advice  from  my  consul. 

Then  he  said  to  me,  "  1  hope,  Mr.  Home,  that  you  will 
not  refuse  me  your  hand."  I  gave  him  my  hand,  at  the 
.same  time  saying,  that  I  was  sorry  to  see  him  the  instru- 
ment of  authority  such  as  this.  I  went  to  my  consul  and 
told  him  what  had  happened  ;  it  being  Sunday,  nothing 
could  he  done,  hut  the  next  day  he  promised  to  see  the 
a-overnor  of  Rome.  I  then  betook  myself  to  a  person  of 
considerable  importance,  who  was  kind  enough  to  go 
immediately  to  Monseigneur  Matteuci,  which  cardinal,  in 
a  long  conversation,  told  my  friend  that  he  had  nothing  to 
say  against  me  except  on  the  matter  or  sorcery. 

The  next  day,  at  twelve  o'clock,  the  English  consul 
went  to  see  the  Monseigneur,  who  said  to  him  that  if  I 
was  willing  to  sign  an  engagement,  in  which  I  would 
promise  not  to  give  any  seances,  I  might  remain  in  Rome. 
I  lost  no  time  in  writing  the  following  declaration: — 

"  I  give  my  word  as  a  gentleman  that,  during  my  stay 
in  Rome,  I  will  have  no  setnice,  and  that  1  will  avoid,  as 
much  as  possible,  all  conversations  upon  spiritualism 

"  DANIEL  DUNGLAS  HOME. 

"  Palazzi-Paoli,  4  January,  1864.'' 

76        EXPULSION    FROM    ROME. 

My  consul,  not  satisfied  with  this,  wished  me  to  make 
known  why  I  had  come  to  Eome  and  why  I  was  anxious 
to  remain,  then  I  wrote  on  the  same  paper  : — 

"  I  have  only  come  to  Eome  for  my  health  and  to 
study  art,  therefore  I  should  wish  to  be  left  alone. 

"  D.  D.  HOME." 

This  document  was  despatched  to  Monseigneur  Mat- 
teuci,  and  for  the  remainder  of  the  vweek  I  heard  no  more 
on  the  subject,  until  Saturday  afternoon,  at  5.30,  when  I 
received  the  following  letter : — 

"  M.  Daniel  Dunglas  Home  will  have  the  great  kind- 
ness to  present  himself  at  the  passport  office  between  six 
and  eight  o'clock,  provided  with  his  passport." 

I  begged  of  my  friend,  who  had  accompanied  me  on 
the  previous  occasion,  to  perform  once  more  the  like 
service,  and  we  both  of  us  went  to  the  Palazzo-Citerio  at 
a  quarter  before  six.  I  went  to  the  office  of  M.  Pegallo, 
who,  after  having  taken  and  looked  at  my  passport,  said 
to  me : — "  But,  sir,  you  ought  first  to  have  visited  your 
consul."  "For  what  purpose!"  was  my  reply.  "That 
he  might  viser  your  passport,  as  you  intend  to  go."  I 
answered  that  I  had  no  intention  of  leaving.  Then  he 
said,  looking  at  the  passport,  "  In  that  case  your  passport 
is  quite  correct :  with  such  a  passport  you  can  remain  a 
whole  year."  I  bowed  and  thanked  him.  The  next 
morning,  at  a  quarter  before  ten,  one  of  the  sons  of  the 
mistress  of  the  house  where  I  lodged  entered  my  studio 
in  a  state  of  alarm,  and  said : — "  Sir,  there  is  a  police- 
man awaiting  you  at  your  house."  I  replied  that  he 
might  make  himself  quite  comfortable  at  my  place,  for'  I 
had  no  intention  oi  returning  home  just  yet;  and  that  if 
he  wished  to  see  me  he  must  come  to  my  studio.  Ten 
minutes  afterwards  the  man  came  and  said  that  he  was 
obliged  to  seek  me  in  consequence  of  my  noc  having  the 
preceding  day  appeared  at  the  passport  office,  where  I 

EXPULSION    FROM   ROME.        77 

had  been  summoned.  I  replied  that  not  only  had  I  been 
there,  but  that  I  had  been  accompanied  by  a  friend.  lie 
then  said,  "  Your  friend  had  been,  but  you.  had  not.'* 
Upon  this,  with  difficulty  keeping  my  temper,  I  answered, 
"  Come  along,  the  same  person  will  accompany  me 
again:"  which  he  did.  Going  to  the  same  apartment, 
I  went  to  the  same  desk,  and  gave  my  passport  to 
M.  Pegallo,  who  said,  "  I  was  waiting  for  you  till  eight 
o'clock  yesterday,  and  you  did  not  come."  I  answered 
him  that  I  had  come  at  a  quarter  before  six,  and  that 
having  to  come  twice  I  did  not  find  it  particularly 
gratifying. 

Q.  But  you  did  not  come? — A.  I  tell  you  I  did 
come ;  you  took  my  passport,  and  told  me  that  I  might 
remain  a  year.  Now,  say  no  more  on  that  subject,  don't 
lie  unless  your  position  requires  that  you  should  do  so. 

He  said,  "  At  three  o'clock  to-day  you  must  leave 
Rome."  "  Very  well.  1  have  no  intention,  however,  of 
going,  and  I  do  not  mean  to  go."  He  replied,  "  You 
must  by  three  o'clock  be  outside  of  the  gates  of  Kome." 
I  then  said,  "  Do  your  duty ;  sign  my  passport."  lie 
signed  it,  gave  it  me  back,  and  I  went  out  to  find  my 
consul,  who  received  me  with  feelings  of  suppressed  rage, 
saying,  "  "Wliy  do  you  make  promises  to  break  them  imme- 
diately after?"  I  asked  him  what  he  meant ;  he  replied, 
that  I  had  been  playing  the  fool  with  M.  Pasqualonni.  I 
cried  out  angrily,  "  M.  Severn,  I  have  come  to  you  as  an 
English  subject,  and  not  to  speak  to  you  either  as  to  my 
belief  or  the  phenomena  which  happen  through  me,  and 
if  you  had  examined  the  matter  you  would  know  that  they 
are  independent  of  my  will.  I  only  require  of  you  to  do 
your  duty  as  consul ;  any  other  advice  is  out  of  place, 
the  more  so  that  since  my  promise  no  manifestation  lias 
taken  place,  although  in  undertaking  not  to  give  stances 
I  am  unable  to  promise  that  no  manifestations  shall 
occur."  He  went  to  see  the  Governor  of  Kome,  who 
told  him  that  since  I  was  unable  to  avoid  having  mani- 

78        EXPULSION    FROM    EOME. 

festatlons,  I  must  not  be  allowed  to  remain  longer  in 
Rome.  One  of  my  friends  called  upon  Monseigneur 
Matteuci  (where  I  presented  myself  between  four  and 
five  o'clock,  without  being  received).  He  obtained  per- 
mission for  me  to  remain  till  Wednesday  following. 
Learning  that  I  resolved  to  depart  on  Monday,  a  great 
number  of  friends  conducted  me  to  the  railway  as  a  token 
of  their  sympathy. 

"  Such,"  says  the  "  Times"  correspondent,  "  is  the 
report  of  a  procedure  which  is  eminently  characteristic 
of  the  Pontifical  Government.  On  Monday  morning 
the  British  Consul  saw  Monseigneur  Matteucci,  the 
Governor  of  Rome,  and  complained  that  any  British  sub- 
ject should  be  interfered  with  in  consequence  of  his 
opinions.  He  stated  that  Mr.  Home  had  conducted  him- 
self durihg  his  residence  in  Rome  in  a  strictly  legal  and 
gentlemanly  manner,  and  demanded  that  the  obnoxious 
order  should  be  rescinded.  Monseigneur  spoke  of  dangerous 
powers  of  fascination,  of  the  prohibition  by  the  Government 
of  all  the  practices  of  the  black  art,  and  finally  assented  to 
Mr.  Home's  remaining,  on  condition  of  his  entering  into 
an  engagement,  through  Mr.  Severn,  that  he  would  desist 
from  all  communications  with  the  spiritual  world  during 
his  stay  in  Rome.  An  agreement  to  that  effect  was  drawn 
up  and  signed  by  Mr.  Home,  who  will  henceforward 
abstain  from  all  communication  with  the  upper  or  lower 
world,  as  the  case  may  be,  during  his  residence  in  Rome. 
Less  fortunate  than  Mr.  Home  has  been  a  Dominican 
priest,  who  has  been  deprived  of  his  curacy,  I  hear,  for 
having  read  Mr.  Home's  book." 

The  "  Spiritual  Magazine"  adds  : — "  If  it  were  not 
for  the  refreshing  and  business-like  style  of  the  nar- 
rative, one  could  not  imagine  that  such  a  scene  could 
be  enacted  in  this  new  year  of  our  Lord,  1864,  in  any 
part  of  Europe.  Probably,  perhaps  excepting  Spain, 
there  is  no  country,  excepting  that  governed  by  the  in- 
fallible and  holy  father,  where  such  a  lunatic  act  could  be 
perpetrated,  What  a  laugh  the  holy  father's  patron, 

EXPULSION    FROM    ROME.         70 

Xnpoleon,  and  Mr.  Home  will  have  over  the  old  gentle- 
man when  next  they  meet!  No  wonder  that  French 
Mil.li.Ts  are  required  to  prop  up  such  an  old  fellow  on  both 
side*,  to  keep  him  out  of  the  clutches  of  his  loving  sub- 
jects. The  Pope's  own  recollections  of  having  to  escape 
from  his  own  palace  dressed  up  as  a  flunkey,  behind  one 
of  his  own  carriages,  seem  to  be  quite  lost  upon  him,  and 
we  wonder  that  all  the  Jeameses  do  not  hold  an  indigna- 
tion meeting,  to  protest  against  his  having  disgraced  their 
cloth  on  that  memorable  occasion. 

The  most  amusing  part  of  the  business  is  the  rescind- 
ing of  the  order,  on  condition  of  Mr.  Home  entering  into 
an  engagement,  that  he  would  desist  from  all  communica- 
tions with  the  spiritual  world  during  his  stay  in  Rome  ! 
This  reminds  us  of  what  occurred  during  the  time  that  the 
miracles  of  healing  were  being  carried  out  at  St.  Medard, 
in  Paris,  upon  the  multitudes  who  flocked  to  the  tomb  of 
the  good  Abbe  Francois  Paris.  When  the  numbers  be- 
came so  great  that  the  thoroughfare  was  stopped  by  them, 
some  wag  wrote  upon  the  wall : 

"  De  par  le  roi,  defense  a  Dieu 
De  faire  miracles  en  ce  lieu  !" 

What  was  suggested  as  a  witty  piece  of  blasphemy,  has 
now  been  done  by  the  Pope,  the  Holy  Father  of  the  true 
Faith,  the  infallible  head  of  the  Church,  and  the  lineal 
descendant  of  the  Apostles,  who  preached  and  practised 
tfie  spiritual  religion  which  is  based  upon  that  super- 
nuturalism,  many  instances  of  which  have  been  marvellously 
elucidated  and  proved  to  a  sceptical  age,  by  the  pheno- 
mena which  occur  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Home.  At  Rome 
then  it  is  of  all  places  in  the  world,  where  De  parle  ]> 

//s-  a  D'KII.  df  faire  miracles  en  ce  lieu,  but  perhaps 
it  is  the  place  of  all  others  now  least  likely  for  any 
spiritual  developments.  The  scandalous  frauds,  and  im- 
moralities, impostures,  cruelties,  child  snatching*,  and 
bigotry  of  this  poor  priest-ridden  place,  make  it  little  likely 
that  any  true  spiritual  developments  could  find  favour 

80        EXPULSION    FROM    ROME. 

within  its  walls.  It  is  a  country  where  superstition  is 
made  a  trade  to  bring  pence  to  its  mendicant  priests,  and 
where  a  small  proportion  of  true  spiritual  phenomena  has 
been  eked  out  by  nine-tenths  of  impostures,  in  the  shape 
of  winking  Madonnas,  bleeding  pictures,  and  chapels  of 
our  Lady  of  Loretto,  with  the  Pope  himself  sitting  in  the 
veritable  chair  of  St.  Peter,  which  an  exploring  English- 
man, on  removing  a  part  of  its  covering,  found  to  be  of 
ivory  covered  with  Moorish  characters.  When  a  case  of 
common  mediumship  happens  among  them,  they  are  so 
ignorant  of  its  nature,  that  if  a  young  girl  in  a  trance  or 
magnetic  state  sees  the  \rirgin  Mary,  straightway  Europe 
is  canvassed  for  money  to  raise  a  chapel  on  the  spot. 
Truly  the  days  are  past  for  spiritual  manifestations  in 
Rome,  when  all  the  great  and  good  saints,  as  they  call 
them,  are  disowned  by  a  Pope  who  forbids  God  to  perform 
again  the  miracles  which  were  common  to  all  of  them. 
Mr.  Home  is  raised  in  the  air,  so  were  St.  Francis,  and 
St.  Ignatius  Loyola,  and  so  was  St.  Theresa  in  the  great 
square  of  St.  Peter's  in  the  presence  of  the  Pope  and  as- 
sembled Rome.  There  is  not  one  of  the  manifestations 
common  to  Mr.  Homye,  but  are  to  be  seen  fifty  times  re- 
peated in  the  lives  accredited  by  the  church,  of  nearly  all 
of  its  greatest  saints,  but  now  the  Pope  forbids  that  God 
should  longer  do  miracles  at  Rome.  If  the  Pope  were 
other  than  a  lunatic,  he  would  have  made  Mr.  Home  a 
cardinal,  and  have  retained  him  to  have  sittings  twice  a 
week  at  the  Vatican,  that  by  means  of  his  manifestations, 
the  belief  in  the  possibility  of  the  Romish  miracles,  might 
have  some  chance  of  being  a  little  re-established,  and 
rescued  from  the  mass  of  fraud  in  which  the  true  ones  are 
justly  lost.  If  Protestantism,  which  practically  denies  all 
spirituality  in  religion  and  in  nature,  had  issued  such  au 
order  as  that  of  the  Pope,  we  should  not  have  been  sur- 
prised. Our  men  of  science  and  literature  such  as 
Brewster  and  the  members  of  the  Royal  Society,  will 
hardly  be  proud  of  their  new  coadjutor.  They  would  not 

EXPULSION    FROM  ROME.          81 

agree  on  the  reasons,  but  only  in  the  conclusion  of  iho 
venerable  Father. 

"  We  cannot  hut  he  thankful  that  sucli  an  event  has 
occurred,  as  it  will  excite  increased  interest  in  the  subject, 
and  very  great  contempt  for  Popish  incapacity  and 
bigotry." 

The  following  is  from  the  "  Spiritual  Magazine  "  for 
February  1,  18G4:— 

"  We  have  just  received  information  from  Mr.  Home, 
that,  notwithstanding  the  permission  to  remain  in  Rome 
on  condition  of  having  '  no  connection  with  any  other 
world,'  this  unwonted  leniency  was  more  than  the  authori- 
ties could  bear,  and  a  few  days  after,  Mr.  Home  was 
definitely  informed  that  he  must  quit  the  Holy  City,  on 
the  ground  of  his  being  a  sorcerer.  After  his  first  ex- 
amination by  the  police,  which  was  shortly  reported  in  the 
'  Times,'  the  indignation  of  the  upper  classes  in  Romo 
was  aroused,  and  many  called  upon  him  to  express  their 
sympathy  ;  and  now,  when  he  received  an  order  to  quit 
Rome  at  once,  his  friends  rallied  round  him,  and  with  ex- 
pressions of  detestation  of  the  Government  proceeded  with 
him  to  the  railway  station  by  which  he  left  for  Naples. 
Amongst  those  who  so  accompanied  him  was  His  Royal 
Highness  the  Count  de  Trani.  His  quitting  was  quite  au 
ovation,  and  a  public  protest  against  the  ignorant  and 
pitiable  barbarity  of  the  spiritual  head  of  the  only  true 
church. 

"  The  Governor  of  Rome,  upon  being  remonstrated  with, 
and  asked  if  there  was  anything  against  his  character,  re- 
plied that  there  was  nothing,  and  that  *  during  the  two 
months  Mr.  Home  has  been  in  Rome,  ive  have  had  him, 
walclm!)  and  we  believe  that  his  character  is  without 
blemish.  We  have  also  information  from  elsewhere  to  the 
same  effect;  but  he  is  a  sorcerer  and  cannot  be  permitted 
in  Rome,  and  he  must  go.'  For  four  weeks  previous  to 
his  departure,  the  Roman  Government  kept  hack  all  his 
letters,  and  even  yet  they  have  not  been  delivered  to  him. 
0 

82        EXPULSION    FROM    ROME. 

"  Mr.  Home  is  now  therefore  at  Naples,  where  he  has 
been  received  with  great  distinction.  His  arrival  has  been 
announced  in  the  newspapers,  and  he  has  been  elected  an 
honorary  member  of  the  highest  club  there,  and  feted  by 
the  residents,  both  English  and  native." 

As  bearing  on  this  event  I  may  be  permitted  to  quote 
the  following  letter,  which  speaks  for  itself. 

"  Circular  letter  and  ordinance  of  Monseigneur  the 
Bishop  of  Algiers  on  the  superstition  called  spiritualism. 

"ARTICLE  I. — The  practice  of  spiritualism,  or  the 
evocation  of  the  dead,  is  interdicted  to  all  and  every  one 
in  the  diocese  of  Algiers. 

"  Article  II. — The  confessors  shall  refuse  absolution  to 
every  one  who  does  not  renounce  all  participation,  whether 
as  a  medium,  as  an  adept,  or  as  a  simple  witness,  at 
seances,  private  or  public,  in  short,  at  any  operation  what- 
ever of  spiritualism. 

"  Article  III. — In  all  the  towns  and  all  the  rural 
parishes  of  Algiers,  where  spiritualism  has  been  introduced 
with  some  eclat,  Messieurs  the  cures  shall  read  publicly 
this  letter  from  the  pulpit  the  first  Sunday  after  its  recep- 
tion. Besides  this,  they  shall  communicate  everywhere  in 
particular,  according  to  the  necessity, 

"  Done  at  Algiers,  the  18th  of  August,  1863. 

"  +  Louis  Antoine-Augustine,  Bishop  of  Algiers. 
"  By  command  of  Monseigneur : 

"  A.  ANCELIN,  Canon,  Yicar- General." 

After  my  return  to  England  I  wrote  the  following  letter 
to  Lord  Palmerston  : — 

"My  LORD, 

"  Some  months  since  I  took  up  my  residence  in 
Home  for  the  purpose  of  pursuing  my  studies  as  a 
sculptor.  • 

"  Without  having  in  any  way  infringed  the  laws  of  the 
place,  I  was  expelled  the  territory  at  a  very  short  notice, 

EXPULSION    FROM    ROME.         83 

on  the  pretext  that  I  was  a  sorcerer,  and  that  I  had  pub- 
lished a  hook  in  London. 

u  Having  been  put  to  great  expense  as  well  as  incon- 
venience by  my  expulsion,  I  beg  to  submit  the  facts  to 
your  Lordship's  notice,  as  the  best  means  of  obtaining 
redress. 

"I  have,  &c.,  <fec., 

"  DANIEL  DUNGLASS  HOME." 
"  To  the  Rl^lit  Honorable 

"  Viscount  Palincrston,  K.G.,  &c.,  &c.,  &c. 
"  Treasury." 

Being  referred  to  the  Foreign  Secretary,  further  cor- 
respondence ensued,  which  was  terminated  by  the  follow- 
ing letter : — 

"  Foreign  Office, 

"SlR,  "April  16,  1864. 

"  I  am  directed  by  Earl  Eussell  to  acknowledge  the 
receipt  of  your  letter  of  the  9th  instant,  complaining  of 
your  expulsion  from  the  Roman  Territory ;  and  I  am  to 
state  to  you,  in  reply,  that  his  lordship  is  not  prepared  to 
make  any  representation  to  the  Roman  Gfovernmeiit  on 
the  subject.  "  I  am,  Sir, 

"  Your  most  obedient  humble  Servant, 

"  D.  D.  Horn*,  Esq.  "  A.  H.  LAYABD. 

"  Cox's  Hotel,  Jennyn  Street." 

In  reference  to  this  affair  I  received  a  letter  from 
Monsieur  A.  Gautier,  Consul  for  Greece  in  Rome,  of 
which  the  following  is  a  translation. 

"  Your  departure  hence  has  been  the  subject  of  many 
comments,  which  I  have  carefully  traced,  and  I  think  you 
will  be  pleased  to  have  an  account  of  them  ;  they  will 
afford  you  amusement, 

"  Some  have  given  out  that  you  were  a  secret  agent  of 
England,  others  of  the  Emperor  of  the  French,  and  some 
of  Russia,  but  others  have  asserted  that  you  were  the 
familiar  spy  of  the  Ex-king  of  Xaples,  and  gave  as  proof 

84         EXPULSION    FROM  ROME. 

your  relations  with  Count  de  Trani,  and  M.  Delia  Eocca. 
Hence  you  were  held  to  mix  in  society  only  as  an  un- 
avowed  diplomatist,  a  dangerous  man,  having  intimate 
understanding  with  so  many  courts  ;  and  you  became  pro- 
perly suspected  by  the  governments. 

"  But  as  this  did  not  content  all  those  moral  minds  who 
held  that  every  one  had  a  right  to  become  in  society  an 
agent  for  this  or  that  government,  without  deserving  to 
be  expelled  for  his  opinions,  a  version  of  a  different 
character  has  sprung  up ;  and  it  has  been  said  that  you 
were  compelled  to  leave  for  moral  reasons.  The  book, 
the  true  cause,  has  been  swamped  beneath  all  these  pro- 
ducts of  imagination. 

"  It  is  asserted  that  the  advocate  who  questioned  you 
was  sensible  of  raps  given  while  the  interrogatory  was 
proceeding,  and  that  when  he  was  told  of  this,  he  replied, 
'  Imagination,  excitement ;  he  had  thought  he  heard 
them.' " 

After  a  quotation  from  the  "  Memorial  Diplomatique  " 
of  Paris,  the  letter  concludes — 

"  It  may  be  presumed  that  all  these  rumours  and 
repetitious  will  not  end  here,  but  that  the  apostle  of  truth 
will  one  day  speak  or  write  concerning  the  facts  which 
relate  to  him,  and  in  such  case  he  is  hereby  authorised 
and  recommended  to  make  known,  even  by  means  of  his 
pen,  the  name  of  the  official  interpreter  who  was  present 
at  this  very  occurrence,  and  who  like  himself  professes 
reverence  for  truth.  This  is  a  right  appertaining  to  the 
victim,  and  which  could  not  be  denied  to  him,  any  more 
than  truth  could  be  falsified." 

Having  been  rfecommended  to  follow  up  my  application 
to  the  Foreign  Secretary  by  having  my  case  brought  before 
the  House  of  Commons,  Mr.  J.  A.  Roebuck  kindly  un- 
dertook to  ask  a  question  on  the  subject.  I  wrote  to  him 
as  follows : — 

EXPULSION    FROM  ROME.         85 

"  64,  Jcrmyn  St. 

"  DEAR  Sm,  "  St.  James. 

"  I  do  indeed  ranch  regret  all  the  trouble  I  am 
giving  you  :  but  at  the  same  time  I  feel  assured  that  your 
own  high  sense  of  justice  and  right  is  such  that  you  will, 
I  am  sure,  be  patient  with  me.  I  submit  the  documents 
connected  with  my  expulsion  from  Rome,  and  you  will  see 
that  there  is  question  of  naught  but  my  book  and  my 
belief  as  a  spiritualist. 

"  The  Papal  party  are  now,  as  I  am  aware,  doing  all 
they  can  to  have  it  said,  that  there  were  other  grounds  for 
my  expulsion,  but  not  one  of  them  dares  to  come  forward 
and,  like  a  man,  make  the  charge.  There  is,  to  my  way 
of  thinking,  nothing  so  base  as  a  dastardly  attack  on  a 
man's  moral  character.  I  can  well  comprehend  that  they 
should  feel  heartily  ashamed  of  what  they  term  an  in- 
fallible church  having  to  expel  from  its  states  a  man  whose 
whole  life  is  well  known,  and  against  whom  naught  could 
be  said.  But  then  it  is  a  sad  pity  that  they  should  have 
to  resort  to  falsehood  and  calumny,  to  endeavour  to  palliate 
the  ill  usage  already  received.  Some  of  them  say  that 
I  did  give  seances  in  Rome.  You  will  find  in  the  letter 
marked  No.  4,  which  is  written  to  me  by  my  old  landlady 
with  whom  I  lodged  all  the  time  I  was  in  Rome,  that  she 
was  not  even  aware  of  the  singular  powers  I  possess.  In 
all  common  fairness  I  should  consider  this  a  fair  refutation 
of  the  charge.  Another  charge  is,  that  I  was  expelled  as 
not  an  innocent  character.  1  am  willing  to  have  every  aet 
of  my  life,  not  only  during  my  stay  in  Berne,  but  elsewhere 
brought  before  the  public,  and  will  stand  by  their  candid 
decision.  Letter  No.  1  is  my  first  intimation  to  appear 
before  them  to  be  questioned.  In  No.  2  are  the  questions 
written  by  the  gentleman  who  accompanied  me,  and  you 
will  see  that  there  is  not  even  an  allusion  to  aught  in  my 
personal  character.  In  No.  2,  B.,  are  the  questions  and 
answers  prepared  for  print  as  a  preface  to  the  third  edition 
of  my  book  in  France.  No.  3  is  a  letter  received  from 

86        EXPULSION    FROM    ROME. 

the  gentleman  who  was  with  me  during  my  examination. 
This  letter  was  received  during  my  stay  in  Paris.  No.  4 
is  the  letter  before  alluded  to.  And  now,  dear  sir,  I  can 
assure  you  that  I  feel  very  grateful  for  the  trouble  you 
have  already  taken.  I  only  ask  justice.  I  must  add  to 
all  this,  that  Mr.  Severn  was,  instead  of  being  an  aid  to 
me,  quite  the  contrary,  and  it  is  a  wonder  to  me  that  an 
intelligent  government  could  ever  have  placed  any  one  in 
so  important  a  position  who  is  so  little  qualified  to  fill  it. 
Mr.  Severn  knows  nothing  of  international  law,  and  is 
but  too  apt  to  speak  of  matters  which  do  not  in  the  least 
enter  into  his  position.  He,  in  the  presence  of  Mr. 
"Wreford  the  '  Times  Correspondent,'  said  that  several 
letters  had  been  read  to  him  by  Monsignor  Mattenci  the 
contents  of  which  he  refused  to  divulge,  but  that  the  pur- 
ports were  such  that  he  must  refuse  to  do  anything  more 
for  me.  I  then,  in  the  presence  of  these  two  gentlemen, 
demanded  to  know  if  there  was  aught  in  the  letters  which 
would  prevent  his  taking  my  hand  as  an  Englishman  and 
a  gentleman.  To  this  he  at  once  said,  No.  Two  hours 
after  that  I  was  told  what  the  letters  did  contain,  and  it 
was  only  the  same  absurd  story  which  is  told  every  time  I 
leave  Paris,  i.  e,  that  I  am  sent  away  by  command  of  the 
Einperor.  Such  tittle  tattle  as  this  ought  to  be  avoided 
by  an  English  consul. 

"  Any  information  you  may  require  I  will  be  only  too 
happy  to  give.      Again  thanking  you, 
"  Believe  me,  my  dear  Sir, 

"  Your  most  obedient, 

"  May  24,  1864."  «  D.  D.  HOME." 

"The  Spiritual  Magazine"  for  July,  1864,  contains 
the  following  account  of  the  discussion  in  the  House  : — 
"  As  the  readers  of  this  journal  will  doubtless  have  seen 
that  Mr.  Home's  expulsion  from  Home  has  been  made 
the  subject  of  complaint  and  enquiry  in  the  British  House 
of  Commons,  it  will  not  be  out  of  place  to  make  a  record 

HOUSE    OF    COMMONS.  87 

lion*  <>f  so  interesting  an  episode  in  the  history  of  modern 
spiritualism.  I  extract  the  report  as  published  in  the 
'  Morning  Star,'  of  the  31st  of  May  last: 

ut  Mr.  Roebuck  rose  to  ask  the  Under-Secretary  of 
State  for  Foreign  A  Hairs  whether  any  steps  had  been 
taken  to  obtain  from  the  Pupal  Government  redress  for 
the  injuries  done  to  Mr.  Home  by  that  Government. 
The  lion,  gentleman  said  Mr.  Home  believed  he  had  the 
pmviT  to  call  spirits,  and  he  was  what  was  publicly  called 
a  '  Spiritualist,'  although  he  (Mr.  Roebuck)  did  not 
exactly  know  what  that  meant.  Hexdid  not  believe  in  it, 
but  that  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  present  case.  Mr. 
Home  he  believed  to  be  a  man  of  perfectly  good  be- 
haviour, and  the  question  was  whether  he  was  to  receive 
protection  from  the  Government  of  England.  The  facts 
of  the  ease  were  these.  Mr.  Home  went  to  Borne  to 
siiuly  hi.-  art,  and  he  incurred  considerable  expense  to 
carry  out  this  object.  Some  time  after  he  arrived  there 
he  received  a  notice  from  the  head  of  the  police  requiring 
him  to  attend  at  the  police-office.  Mr.  Home  did  so, 
when  a  number  of  questions  was  asked  him.  In  the  first 
place,  the  police  official  asked  him  his  age,  and  Mr.  Home 
gave  a  reply,  and  he  was  naturally  a  person  that  ought  to 
know  his  own  age.  The  official  told  him  he  was  eight  or 
ten  years  older,  which  Mr.  Home  denied.  The  signor 
then  said,  '  You  have  published  a  book  in  France  and  in 
England  saying  that  certain  spirits  waited  upon  you.' 
Mr.  Home  admitted  that  he  had  done  this.  The  signor 
said,  '  Will  you  undertake  that  no  spirits  shall  come 
to  you  while  you  are  in  Koine?'  (Laughter.)  Mr. 
Home  said,  '  No,  I  cannot  do  that ;  the  spirits  come  to 
me  of  their  own  accord.  1  cannot  answer  for  them  ;  but 
this  I  will  promise,  that  I  will  hold  no  stxaice,  and  I  will 
do  nothing  to  solicit  their  coming  to  me  ;  and  further,  I 
will  do  nothing  contrary  to  the  laws  of  the  city  of  Koine.' 
Upon  this  the  signor  gave  him  to  understand  that  he 
should  not  be  interrupted.  Some  time  after  this,  the 

88  DISCUSSION    IN 

second  in  command  of  the  police  sent  for  Mr.  Home.  Mr. 
Home  went  in  company  with  the  French  Consul,  but  ho 
found  nobody  at  the  police-office.  When  he  got  home, 
there  came  a  peremptory  note  calling  upon  him  to  be  at 
the  police-office.  Mr.  Home  went  the  second  time,  when 
the  official  said,  '  You  were  not  here  yesterday  at  the 
hour  at  which  you  were  required.'  Mr.  Home  said, 
'  Yes,  I  was.'  '  Well,'  said  the  official,  '  you  must  leave 
Kome  in  forty-eight  hours.'  Now  this  was  the  whole  of 
the  matter.  (Hear,  hear.)  He  (Mr.  Roebuck)  wished 
to  know  whether  the  Government  would  protect  a  British 
subject  who  had  been  treated  in  this  way.  Whatever 
might  be  the  wonderful  and  mysterious  power  of  Mr. 
Home,  he  ought  to  be  protected  as  a  British  citizen.  He 
observed  the  President  of  the  Board  of  Trade  in  his  place 
— (much  laughter)  but  he  (Mr.  Roebuck)  had  no  feeling 
for  Mr.  Home's  profession,  further  than  having  a  contempt 
for  the  whole  thing ;  but  still  Mr.  Home,  being  a  British 
citizen,  should  be  protected.  He  had  great  respect  for 
the  old  gentleman  at  the  head  of  the  Papal  Government — 
(a  laugh) — and  he  wished  that  he  might  long  live  to  en- 
joy himself;  but  England  must  protect  her  subjects.  Mr. 
Home  had  been  ignominiously  expelled  from  Rome,  after 
having  incurred  considerable  expenses  there,  and  when 
Earl  Russell  was  asked  what  he  would  do,  he  said  f  I  will 
do  nothing.'  (Much  laughter,  caused  by  Mr.  Roebuck 
imitating  the  voice  and  manner  of  the  noble  lord.)  '  He 
asked  the  noble  lord  at  the  head  of  the  Government  to 
protect  this  unfortunate  gentleman  against  the  tyranny 
of  the  Roman  Government.' 

"  '  Mr.  Layard  regretted  that  Mr.  Home  should  have 
placed  himself  in  a  position  to  lead  the  Papal  Government 
to  call  upon  him  to  leave  Rome,  but  he  .appeared  to  have 
infringed  on  their  rules.  ['  No,  no,'  from  Mr.  Roebuck.] 
Well,  the  Roman  Government  thought  that  he  carried  on 
intercourse  with  spirits,  and  they  called  upon  him  to  leave 
Rome  in  consequence.  He  (Mr.  Layard)  gave  no  opinion 

HOUSE    OF    COMMONS.  80 

as  to  whether  or  not  Mr.  Home  had  intercourse  with 
spirits,  nor  did  he  seek  to  palliate  the  conduct  of  the 
Homan  authorities  ;  but  such  was  the  law  of  Koine,  and 
lie  did  not  think  that  the  Government  could  interfere. 
The  Roman  authorities  feared  that  these  spirits  would 
communicate  with  Mr.  Home  whether  he  wished  it  or  not, 
and  they  objected  to  their  making  Rome  their  dwelling- 
place.  (Laughter.)  All  this  might  be  very  foolish,  but 
he  did  not  see  that  there  was  any  cause  for  the  interference 
of  the  British  Government. 

"  '  Mr.  Hennessy  pointed  out  that  the  stringent  laws 
in  England  against  fortune-telling  and  witchcraft  were 
founded  on  the  same  principle  as  the  laws  of  Rome.  He 
had  always  heard  from  English  visitors  at  Rome  that 
they  received  the  greatest  attention  from  the  Papal  Go- 
vernment/ 

"  '  Mr.  V.  Scully  did  not  see  that  either  the  Roman 
Government  or  Mr.  Home  were  to  blame.  The  real 
parties  against  whom  to  bring  the  complaint  were  those 
unseen  spirits  who  visited  Mr.  Home  whether  he  wished 
it  or  not.  He  complained  that  the  hon.  member  for 
Sheffield  should  have  spoken  of  the  Pope  as  *  the  old 
gentleman'  at  the  head  of  the  Papal  Government.  In 
regard  to  Mr.  Home's  revelations,  he  did  not  believe  in 
any  spirit,  except  the  case  of  the  Witch  of  Endor — (a 
laugh) — but  as  they  had  been  discussing  «  spirits'  all 
night  he  hoped  they  would  have  no  more  on  the  subject 
at  present. 

"  *  The  subject  then  dropped/ 

"  As  I  have  a  great  respect  for  Mr.  Roebuck,  whom  I 
believe  to  be  a  bold  and  honest  politician,  I  regret  that 
he  felt  it  necessary  to  qualify  his  remarks  by  stooping  to 
meet  the  prejudices  of  his  compeers  in  expressing  his 
'  contempt  for  the  wonderful  and  mysterious  power  of 
Mr.  Home.'  If  the  power  be,  as  Mr.  Roebuck  admits, 
'  wonderful  and  mysterious.'  it  is  illogical  and  irrational 
to  contemn  that  which  he  does  not  understand. 

90  REMARKS. 

"  It  is  more  than  ten  years  since  I  first  spoke  to  Mr. 
Roebuck  on  the  subject  of  spiritualism,  and  described  to 
him  the  '  wonderful  and  mysterious'  character  of  the 
phenomena  which  I  had  then  witnessed.  My  statements 
were  corroborated  by  two  or  three  other  persons  present, 
and  as  Mr.  Roebuck  exhibited  a  total  unbelief  in  theso 
statements,  I  asked  him,  as  a  lawyer,  what  amount  of 
human  testimony  it  required  in  his  opinion  to  establish  a 
fact ;  because  I  could,  if  testimony  were  of  any  value, 
obtain  any  reasonable  number  of  witnesses.  He  did  not 
answer  that  question,  but  ended  the  conversation  with  a 
significant  shrug  and  smile,  implying  very  plainly  that  he 
pitied  me,  and  doubtless  had  he  been  presiding  as  a 
Master  in  Lunacy  at  an  investigation  into  my  mental 
condition,  he  would  not  have  hesitated  to  pronounce  me 
incapable  of  the  management  of  my  own  affairs. 

"  Mr.  Roebuck,  since  that  period,  must  be  aware  that 
thousands  of  men  and  women  in  this«country,  his  equals 
in  character  and  intelligence,  have  been  confirmed  in  'the 
delusion'  under  which  he  supposed  I  was  then  labouring ; 
and  therefore  I  repeat  that  it  is  with  feelings  of  surprise 
and  regret  that  I  find  one  who  has  been  in  advance 
of  the  age  on  most  subjects,  venturing  to  sneer  at  a  sub- 
ject upon  which,  if  he  be  closely  questioned,  he  would  be 
forced  to  admit  that  he  is  profoundly  ignorant. 

"The  two  Roman  Catholic  members,  Mr.  Pope  Hennessy 
and  Mr.  Vincent  Scully,  had  better  have  refrained  from 
making  observations  which  lead  us  to  suppose,  contrary  to 
the  feeling  of  every  enlightened  man  in  this  country,  that 
they  approve  and  justify  the  bigoted  fanaticism  which  led 
to  the  expulsion  of  Mr.  Home  from  the  Papal  dominions. 
In  particular  Mr.  V.  Scully  did  not  show  his  docility  as  a 
Roman  Catholic  in  avowing  his  disbelief  in  all  spirits 
excepting  that  of  the  Witch  of  Endor.  Did  he  mean 
thus  publicly  to  brand  all  the  spirits  of  the  Romish  Church, 
and  its  Ladies  of  Salette  as  spurious  and  fraudulent  con- 
coctions of  the  Pope  and  the  priests  ?  I  happen  to  know 

REMARKS.  91 

th.it  if  Mr.  V.  Scully  will  ask  the  opinion  of  the  prince  of 
his  church,  Cardinal  Wiseman,  he  will  find  a  very  different 
measure  of  belief.  It  is  only  a  few  weeks  ago  that  Car- 
dinal Wiseman,  in  Speaking  of  the  modern  spirit  manifes- 
tations to  one  of  his  Hock  who  is  an  occasional  contributor 
to  these  pages,  said  that  he  entirely  believed  in  them,  and 
that  he  could  not  be  a  Catholic  without  doing  so. 

"  If  what  is  said  of  the  Pope  by  his  own  people  be  true, 
Mr.  Home  has  good  reason  to  be  thankful  that  his  Holi- 
ness did  not  give  him  his  blessing  instead  of  giving  him 
his  conge.  From  a  most  interesting  work,  treating  of 
persons  and  things  in  Home,  I  make  the  following  perti- 
nent extract : — 

"  'Even  the  Pope  himself  has  the  reputation  of  possess- 
ing the  Evil  Eye  to  some  extent.  Ask  a  Roman  how 
this  is,  and  he  will  answer  you  as  one  did  me  the  other 
dav,  '  They  say  so;  and  as  for  me,  really  it  seems  to  me 
true.  If  he  have  not  the  jettutura,  it  is  very  odd  that 
everything  lie  hlesses  makes  fiasco.  We  all  did  very  well 
in  the  campaign  of  '48  against  the  Austrians.  We  were 
winning  battle  after  battle,  and  all  was  gaiety  and  hope, 
when  suddenly  he  blesses  the  cause,  and  everything  goes 
to  the  devil  at  once.  Nothing  succeeds  with  anybody  or 
anything  when  he  wishes  well  to  them.  See,  here  the 
oilier  day  he  went  to  Santa  Agnese  to  have  a  great 
fes  iv:il,  and  down  goes  the  floor,  and  the  people  are  all 
smashed  together.  Then  he  visits  the  column  to  the 
Madonna  in  the  Piazza  di  Spagna.  and  hlesses  it  and  the 
workmen,  and,  of  course,  one  falls  from  the  scaffolding  the 
same  day  and  is  killed.  A  week  or  two  ago  he  arranged 
to  meet  the  King  of  Naples  at  Porto  d'Anzo,and  up  comes 
a  violent  storm  and  gale  that  lasts  a  week  ;  then  another 
arrangement  is  made,  and  then  comes  the  fracas  about  the 
ex-Queen  of  Spain.  Then,  again,  here  was  Lord  C.1  — 
came  in  the  other  day  from  Alhano.  being  rather  unwell ; 
BO  the  Pope  sends  him  his  special  blessing,  when  pop  !  he 
dies  right  off  in  a  twinkling.  There  is  nothing  so  fatal 

92  REMARKS. 

as  his  blessing.  For  my  part  I  don't  wonder  that  the 
workmen  at  the  column  refused  to  work  the  other  day  in 
raising  it,  unless  the  Pope  stayed  away.' 

"  In  Mr.  Home's  autobiography  he  recounts  several 
instances,  i  believe,  but  certainly  one  in  particular,  where 
his  life  was  saved  by  the  interposition  of  Providence, 
through  the  recognized  agency,  of  spirits.  As  he  is  him- 
self of  the  Roman  Catholic  faith,  I  assume  that  he  would 
have  been  happy  at  any  time  to  have  secured  the  Pope's 
blessing ;  and,  therefore,  he  may,  on  calm  reflection,  be 
disposed  to  think  that  by  a  special  Providence,  he  has 
been  miraculously  saved  from  the  possible  consequences  of 
such  a  calamity.  [We  are  sorry  to  say  that  Mr.  Home 
already  labours  under  the  infliction  of  the  Pope's  special 
blessing.  We  have  seen  the  original  document,  signed  by 
his  Holiness. — Ed.~] 

The  "Spiritual  Magazine,"  April  1,  1864,  thus  re- 
marked upon  this  affair : — 

"  The  remarks  which  we  recently  made  on  the  violent 
expulsion  by  the  Pope  of  Mr.  Home  from  Rome,  have  been 
seriously  reprobated  by  several  of  our  Roman  Catholic 
friends,  who  complain  of  them  as  being  highly  unjust 
towards  the  Holy  Father,  and  as  showing  an  unreasoning 
hostility  towards  Catholicism.  We  have  everv  desire  to 
be  just  to  Catholicism,  as  to  all  classes  of  religious  thought, 
and  we  are  sorry  to  give  offence  to  any  by  too  severe 
criticisms,  but  we  should  be  more  sorry  if  we  were  to  sa- 
crifice freedom  of  discussion  to  the  natural  tenderness  which 
offenders  have  for  their  own  feelings.  When  we  find  that 
our  Catholic  friends  are  so  sensitive  themselves,  it  does  not 
seem  to  be  out  of  place  to  remind  them  that  others  too 
have  feelings,  which  may  be  outraged  by  offences  which 
may  be  said  to  shock  humanity,  and  the  very  genius  of  the 
time.  We  should  have  thought  much  better  of  our  friends 
if,  in  such  a  case,  they  had  submitted  in  silence  and  in 
sorrow,  to  the  shame  which  their  spiritual  head  had 
brought  upon  all  that  is  good  in  their  religion ;  and  if, 

REMARKS.  93 

instead  of  complaining  of  our  remarks,  they  had  remon- 
strated against  his  conduct.  We  have  heard  nothing  of 
this,  but  only  the  laments  of  children  who  do  not  like  the 
punishment  which  they  deserve.  Even  in  Rome,  and 
amongst  Romanists,  the  barbarous  act  of  the  infallible 
head  of  the  only  true  Church  was  protested  against,  by 
means  of  the  principal  residents  and  visitors,  both  royal 
and  loyal ;  but  to  hear  Englishmen  in  England  refrain 
from  condemning  and  contemning  such  doings  is  to  us  the 
saddest  spectacle  of  all,  for  it  shows  us  how  necessary  it  is 
to  prevent  such  a  class  from  ever  obtaining  temporal 
power.  One  flimsy  excuse  for  the  Pope  is,  that  what  he 
did  was  not  in  the  exercise  of  his  spiritual  power,  in  which 
alone  he  is  infallible,  but  of  his  temporal  power,  which  even 
his  adherents  cannot  stand  up  for  on  all  occasions.  We 
believe,  that  what  he  calls  the  patrimony  of  St.  Peter,  has 
been  his  greatest  curse,  but  there  is  no  part  of  his  alleged 
possessions  to  which  he  clings  more  pertinaciously ;  and  if 
he  will  be  a  temporal  ruler  we  shall  take  the  liberty  of 
blaming  him  when  he  makes  such  an  abuse  of  his  temporal 
power.  Another  friend  complains  of  us  for  hinting  a  dis- 
belief of  the  House  of  our  Lady  of  Loretto  having  been 
removed  bodily  from  Bethlehem  to  Loretto,  making  a 
temporary  sojourn  in  Dalmatia  by  the  way ;  and  he  in- 
forms us,  on  the  testimony  of  a  person  who  has  carefully 
analysed  the  evidence,  and  who  went  purposely  to  Bethle- 
hem, to  Dalmatia,  and  to  Loretto  to  examine  the  remains 
at  the  two  former  places,  and  the  building  itself,  that  there 
is  every  reason  to  believe  that  the  chapel  was  really  so 
removed.  But  surely  if  Mr.  Home's  manifestations  are 
sorcery  for  merely  moving  a  table,  or  for  being  himself 
lifted  in  the  air,  this  moving  of  a  house  bodily  from  the 
Holy  Land  to  Italy  must  have  been  sorcery  on  a  much 
larger  scale.  Oi  course  all  the  world  believes  that  this 
Popish  miracle  is  a  gross  imposture,  and  that,  because  it 
is  so  monstrously  opposed  to  natural  laws  ;  but  if  the  Pope 
could  have  Mr.  Home  raised  in  the  air  at  a  solemn  gather- 
ing in  the  Great  Square  of  St.  Peter's,  like  St.  Theresa, 

P4  REMARKS. 

it  might  give  an  air  of  possibility  at  (ill  events  to  the 
floating  of  the  House  of  our  Lady.  Taking  levitation  or 
the  elevation  of  Mr.  Home  in  the  air  as  a  special  and 
crowning  instance  of  his  sorcery,  what  do  we  find  ?  The 
same  sorcery  is  practised  by  the  great  shining  lights,  the 
very  saints  of  the  Romish  Church  ;  and  there  are  much 
fewer  instances  of  it,  unfortunately,  to  be  found  in  modern 
spiritualism  than  in  the  authorized  records  of  Romanism. 
To  say  nothing  of  the  instances  of  it  given  in  the  Bible,  it 
is  proved  beyond  a  doubt  in  the  cases  of  St.  Theresa,  St. 
Catherine,  St.  Philip  Neri,  Richard  Abbot  of  St.  Yanne 
de  Verdun,  Ignatius  Loyola,  Savonarola,  St.  Dominick, 
St.  Dunstan,  St.  Francis  of  Assissium,  St.  Cajetan,  St. 
Bernard  Ptolcema3i,  St.  Catherine  of  Ricci,  St.  Cupertin, 
and  others  whom  we  could  name  if  this  list  is  not  long 
enough ;  but  to  crown  the  question  of  the  act  of  stupidity 
performed  on  the  2nd  of  January  last,  it  is  only  necessary 
to  state  that,  according  to  the  requirements  of  the  Church 
of  Rome,  the  working  of  miracles,  as  they  call  them,  is  a 
condition  absolutely  necessary  in  the  canonization  of  saints 
— it  being  regarded  as  the  only  assured  proof  of  their 
final  perseverance  in  those  holy  dispositions,  which  entitle 
them  to  that  high  honour.  Hence  the  taking  cognizance 
of  miracles  for  this  end  has  always  been  the  province  of 
the  chief  pastors  of  the  Romish  Church  as. requiring  the 
greatest  circumspection.  It  was  said  of  the  Bourbons, 
that  after  all  their  troubles  they  had  learnt  nothing  and 
forgotten  nothing.  Neither  time,  nor  country,  nor  civili- 
zation, nor  progress,  nor  humanity,  nor  liberty,  nor  even 
gentlemanliness  seem  to  have  any  power  in  moderating 
the  bigotry  and  the  savage  fanaticism  of  the  successor  of 
St.  Peter,  and  the  vicegerent  of  God.  Let  our  Catholic 
friends  join  us  in  expressing  their  disapproval  of  such  dis- 
graceful modes  of  thumb-screwing  thought,  and  of  heretic- 
hunting,  and  we  shall  then  be  able  to  separate  them  from 
the  general  condemnation,  which  otherwise  will  be  pro- 
perly applied  to  the  body  as  well  as  to  the  head  of  their 
seotion  of  religious  opinions." 

CHAPTER  IV. 

SLUDGE,  THE  MEDIUM — MR.  EGBERT  BROWNING — 
FANCY  PORTRAITS. 

'LT I  TOUGH  in  the  gross  attack  on  spir'.t- 
ualism  contained  in  "Mr.  Sludge  die 
medium,"  by  Mr.  Robert  Browning,  there 
is  indeed  nothing  whatever  to  connect  his 
portrait  of  Sludge  with  myself,  for  no  person  who  was 
even  slightly  acquainted  with  me  could  discover*  one  point 
of  resemblance,  nevertheless,  I  have  been  asked  whether 
such  scenes  as  he  describes  in  that  effusion  had  ever 
occurred,  and  the  press  treated  of  the  "poem"  as  meant 
for  me.  In  consequence  of  these  circumstances,  as  \\cll 
as  of  the  whole  production  being  an  offensively  coai>e 
attack  upon  spiritualism  in  general  and  upon  all  mediums 
without  exception;  and  feeling  it  to  be  moreover,  though 
probably  unobserved  by  himself,  an  insult  to  the  memory 
of  his  deceased  wife,  whose  intellect  was  far  above  his  own, 
and  who  lived  and  died  a  believer  in  spiritualism, 
I  find  myself  compelled  to  notice  this  remarkable  j> 
Mr.  Robert  Browning.  Accepting  the  old  and  recognised 
definition  of  the  word  poem  as  from  TTOIEU,  facio,  these 
lines  constitute  a  poem,  for  they  were  made  by  Mr. 
Browning,  but  what  other  characteristic  of  poetry  they 
possess,  1  must  admit  that  I,  in  common  with  many  of 
my  friends,  have  been  unable  to  discover.  Some  of  the 
lines  aie  equal  to  the  productions  pf  the  cook  Close,  others 

96  ME.    SLUDGE, 

suggest  the  licentiousness  of  Don  Juan  divorced  from  its 
poetic  imagery  ;  as  an  example  of  the  first  I  may  quote 
the  two  first  lines  of  Sludge's  confession  : — 

«  Fol-lol-the-rido-liddle-iddle-ol ! 

You  see,  sir,  it's  your  own  fault  more  than  mine." 

The  following  passage,  while  giving  some  evidence  also 
of  writing  like  that  of  the  Poet  Close,  is  an  example  of  the 
latter  :— 

"  I  got  up  from  my  gorge 
On  offal  in  the  gutter,  and  preferred 
Your  canvass  backs  :    I  took  their  carver's  size, 
Measured  his  modicum  of  intelligence, 
Tickled  him  on  the  cockles  of  his  heart 
With  a  raven  feather,  and  next  week  found  myself 
Sweet  and  clean,  dining  daintily,  dizen'd  smart, 
Set  on  a  stool  buttress'd  by  ladies'  knees, 
Every  soft  smiler  calling  me  her  pet, 
Encouraging  my  story  to  uncoil 
And  creep  out  from  its  hole,  inch  after  inch, 
'  How  last  night,  I  no  sooner  snug  in  bed, 
Tuck'd  up,  just  as  they  left  me, — than  came  raps  !' " 

The  delicacy  and  good  taste  of  the  following  also  is 
oeyond  comment : — 

"  Curse  your  superior,  superintending  sort, 
Who,  since  you  hate  smoke,  send  up  boys  that  climb 
To  cure  a  chimney,  bid  a  '  medium '  lie 
To  sweep  your  truth  down  !  curse  your  women  too, 
Your  insolent  wives  and  daughters,  that  fire  up 
Or  faint  away  if  a  male  hand  squeeze  theirs ; 
Yet,  to  encourage  Sludge,  may  play  with  Sludge 
As  only  a  *  medium,'  onlv  the  kind  of  thing 
They  must  humour,  fondle,  .  .  Oh,  to  misconceive 
Were  too  preposterous  !    But  I've  paid  them  out ! 
They've  had  their  wish — call'd  for  the  naked  truth, 
And  in  she  tripp'd,  sat  down  and  bade  them  stare; 
They  had  to  blush  a  little  and  lorgive  •" 

And  again : — 

"  Miss  Stokes  turns — Rahab — nor  a  bad  exchange/' 

TIIE    MEDIUM.  97 

IB  followed  further  on  by  : — 

"  To  hear  your  outcries,  one  would  think  I  caught 

IU  iss  Stokes  by  the  scuff  o'  the  neck,  and  pitchM  her  flat. 

Foolish  face  foremost ! " 

I  have  no  intention  of  criticising  writing  which  is,  like 
not  a  little  of  Mr.  Browning's  work,  either  above  or  below 
criticism,  as  the  author  or  the  reader  may  think,  but  I 
must  allude  to  one  point  which  displays  utter  ignorance  on 
the  subject  of  spiritualism.  Mr.  Sludge  is  supposed  to 
have  been  led  into  his  confession  by  an  over-dose  of 
champagne,  and  to  be  sustained  during  its  continuance  by 
potations  of  egg  nogg,  aided  by  the  soothing  influence  of 
the  Virginian  weed ;  near  the  close  he  becomes  maudling 
drunk  and  breaks  out — 

"  And  I've  lost  you,  lost  myself. 
Lost  all,  1-1-1 " 

He  is  relieved  by  the  substantial  comfort  of  a  goodly 
number  of  five-dollar  notes,  poetically  named  V.  notes, 
and  after  concluding  his  speech  with — 

«  Bl-1-less  you,  sir!" 

he  breaks  out — it  may  be  supposed  when  outside  the 
door  with — 

"  R-r-r,  you  brute  beast  and  blackguard !  cowardly  scamp  I 
I  only  wish  I  dared  burn  down  the  house 
And  spoil  your  sniggering  ! " 

Which  beautiful  poetry  continues  for  fourteen  lines,  and  is 
followed  by  some  regrets  ending  in  the  consoling  re- 
flection : — 

"  Begin  elsewhere  anew ! 
Boston's  a  hole,  the  herring  pond  is  wide, 
V-notes  are  something,  liberty  still  more 
Beside,  is  he  the  only  iool  in  the  world  ?  " 

Had  Mr.    Browning   known    anything   practically  of 
Spiritualism,  he  would  have  been  aware  that  indulgence 
ii 

98  MR.    SLUDGE, 

in  intoxicating  drink  has  a  strong  tendency  to  destroy 
medium  power ;  but  this  kind  of  attack  gives  me  reason 
to  believe  that  Mr.  Browning  did  intend  his  fancy  portrait 
of  Mr.  Sludge  to  represent  me ;  for  I  happen  to  know 
that  he  once  remarked  of  me  that  I  was  in  the  habit  of 
being  assisted  home  drunk  by  the  police  nightly.  The 
idea  is  worthy  of  his  creative  genius,  as  if  there  be  any 
pleasure  in  the  sensation  of  being  drunk,  I  am  as  yet 
ignorant  of  it,  or  of  its  effects,  for  I  never  have  been 
sensibly  affected  by  intoxicating  drink  of  any  kind  in  the 
course  of  my  life,  and  am,  as  all  my  friends  well  know, 
exceedingly  abstemious. 

With  respect  to  this  production  Mrs.  Sarah  Helen 
Whitman,  the  well  known  American  authoress,  charac- 
terized it  as  a  disgrace  to  Mr.  Robert  Browning,  and  in  a 
"letter  to  the  editor  of  an  American  journal,  said,  "  If  you 
will,  moreover,  take  the  trouble  to  read  the  poem  of  Mr. 
Browning  to  which  I  have  referred,  you  will  understand 
why  it  is  regarded  by  some  of  Mr.  Browning's  warmest 
admirers  as  '  a  blot  on  the  'scutcheon.' " 

On  the  appearance  of  Mr.  Browning's  book  the 
"  Spiritual  Magazine,"  on  July,  1864,  gave  the  following 
article  under  the  title  of  "Mr.  Robert  Browning  on 
Spiritualism." — "  The  press  is  quite  alert  and  looking  up 
again  on  the  subject  of  spiritualism,  and  is  loud  in  the 
praises  of  Mr.  Robert  Browning's  latest  effort  in  poetry, 
of  .which  sixty-eight  pages  are  taken  up  with  a  violent 
explosion  of  his  feelings,  under  the  title  of  '  Mr.  Sludge, 
the  Medium.'  It  has  not  been  often,  nor  from  iny 
great  number  of  the  critics  that  Mr.  Browning  has  fc  ind 
hitherto  any  strong  sympathy  for  his  poetry,  nor  has.  he 
taken  it  much  to  heart  that  his  readers  and  &  iraii  *rs  were 
so  few.  It  has  rather  fed  his  vanity  the  fu^lsi,  and  tas 
the  more  convinced  him  of  his  one  idea  that  hs  wa^  a  poet 
before  his  time.  He  has  been  Forstered  into  •;  his  feeling 
by  a  few  earnest  friends  of  the  press,  who  lave  never 
ceased  to  shew  their  friendship  for  the  man,  bj  writing  up 

THE    MEDIUM.  99 

the  poet,  and  assuring  him  that  his  metal  had  the  true 
vino-  in  it.  He  has  never  wavered  in  this  belief  hi  in  self, 
and  he  is  so  sensitive  in  his  vanity,  that  if  he  could  have 
doubted  it  he  would  have  collapsed  at  once  as  poor  Keats 
did,  under  an  adverse  review.  His  overweening  vanity, 
however,  aided  by  his  few  devoted  friends,  has  saved  him 
to  us,  and  lie  is  happy  to  add  still  to  his  posthumous  fame 
by  occasional  essays  of  his  genius.  We  can  only  sit, 
after  vain  attempts  to  follow  his  ideas,  in  wonderment  at 
the  awful  vastness  of  the  human  mind,  which  can  com-4 
placently  give  birth  to  such  red-hot  words  about  some- 
thing that  we  cannot  understand,  and  of  which  we  are 
rather  glad  than  otherwise,  that  we  are  not  the  posterity 
that  will  have  to  decipher  the  meaning.  A  high  priest 
of  nature  is  he,  ministering  in  the  temple  alone,  and  on  a 
pedestal  which  he,  happy  man,  never  feels  to  be  unsteady 
beneath  him.  What  a  striking  wonder  is  this  faculty 
which  some  men  have  of  self-satisfaction,  and  of  living  in 
an  atmosphere  which  they  fancy  to  be  of  serenest  ether. 

"  We  knew  him  well  years  ago,  when  he  was  making  his 
first  soaring  flights,  and  were  almost  frightened  for  him 
when  the  coarse  critics  dealt  with  his  sensitive  nature. 
Then  it  was,  however,  that  he  conquered  them  for  ever  by 
determining  them  to  be  fools,  and  wrapping  himself  in  the 
mantle  of  posterity.  This  was  his  happiest  hit  of  all,  and 
to  give  him  its  full  benefit,  he  only  wanted  the  assistance 
of  a  few  friends,  who  were  in  his  eyes  endued  with  the 
heaven-born  quality  of  understanding  him.  Nothing  after 
this  could  touch  him  more,  or  penetrate  his  armour  ;  ar.d 
the  more  the  critics  have  raved  at  him,  the  more  he  baa 
despised  and  contemned  them  with  words  more  rancorous 
and  violent  than  their  own,  for  daring  to  criticize  the 
prince  of  poets — the  man  who  was  before  his  age. 

"  It  is  necessary  to  go  through  this  little  outline,  in  order 
to  have  some  idea  01  the  mind  01  the  man  who  is  just  now 
condescending  to  give  us  the  overflow  01  his  genius  on  the 
subject  of  spiritualism.  None  but  one  01  such  a  nature, 

100  ME.    SLVDGJEJ, 

and  only  after  he  had  received  a  special  wound,  could  have 
got  up  the  holy  fire  to  such  a  pitch,  as  Mr.  Browning 
warms  himself  by,  in  attacking  Mr.  Sludge  the  medium. 
What  can  poor  Sludge  have  done  to  the  poet,  for  beyond 
the  rancour  which  he  feels  towards  mankind  in  general, 
the  poet  must  surely  have  some  personal  injury  to  resent  ? 
It  is  not  quite  easy  to  see  that  Mr.  Home  is  intended  to 
be  the  victim,  but  whether  it  be  he  or  not,  the  press  has 
at  once  taken  it  as  meant  for  him,  and  has  charged  him 
upon  the  facts  or  fancies  mentioned  in  the  poem.  An 
intimate  friend,  too,  of  Mr.  Browning's  has  been  so  far 
taken  in  by  the  statements,  as  to  find  it  necessary  to  in- 
quire if  such  scenes  ever  happened  as  are  described,  and 
Mr.  Home  has  had  to  say  in  answer  that  the  whole  is 
mere  invention.  It  would  therefore  be  better  to  take  the 
bull  by  the  horns  at  once,  and  to  treat  the  poem  as  a  vio- 
lent, rancorous  attack  upon  Mr.  Home  and  his  private 
character,  intending  to  lead  or  allow  the  public  to  believe 
that  the  scene  depicted  is  taken  from  life,  and  that  the 
poet  has  only  dressed  it  up  in  verse  according  to  his  fancy, 
filling  up  the  interspaces  with  the  usual  spasms  which 
characterize  Mr.  Browning's  effusions. 

"Even  poetry,  where  such  personal  allusions  and  charges 
are  made,  should  preserve  its  basis  of  truth  as  the  apple 
of  its  eye.  The  imaginative  element  should  not  be  applied 
to  facts,  or  the  versifier  degenerates  into  a  slanderer.  A 
kind  friend  of  ours,  when  our  children  tell  fibs,  says  they 
are  only  poets,  but  we  think  he  mistakes  the  word.  We 
liave  therefore  thought  it  best  to  reduce  Mr.  Browning's 
poem,  so  far  as  his  facts  and  narrative  are  concerned,  into 
plain  prose,  and  thus  to  lay  bare  what  was  in  his  mind 
when  he  began  to  write.  As  to  the  rest  of  the  poem, 
there  are  some  good  things  in  it  which  we  could  see  a 
glimmering  of,  and  all  these  we  are  content  to  leave  to 
that  posterity  which  is  the  last  refuge  of  the  author,  as 
patriotism  is  said  to  be  the  last  refuge  of  the  scoundrel. 

"  To  do  this  fairly,  and  to  raise  the  issue  between  Mr. 

TH3    MEDIUM.  101 

Browning  and  his  probable  victim,  Mr.  Home,  wo  have 
very  carefully  gone  through  his  sixty-eight  pages,  and  we 
will  afterwards  give  the  key  to  the  rancour  and  virulence 
which  are  observable  throughout.  It  is  not  often  that  we 
can  hope,  from  personal  knowledge  of  both  parties,  to  get 
to  the  very  pith  of  the  affair,  and  to  shew  the  secret 
springs  of  action,  while  the  poet  for  long  years  is  nursing 
his  wrath  to  keep  it  warm. 

"  The  poem,  then,  of  '  Mr.  Sludge,  the  Medium/  opens 
with  the  heaven-born  poet's  knuckles  in  the  medium's 
windpipe,  consequent  on  his  having  just  caught  him 
cheating  the  poet  by  giving  some  bogus  revelation  from 
his  mother.  Mr.  Sludge  at  once  owns  to  the  cheat,  and, 
on  the  ground  of  its  being  his  first  offence,  he  begs  him 
to  remove  his  knuckles,  and  not  to  expose  him  as  an  im- 
postor. He  protests  that  it  was  the  poet's  champagne 
that  put  the  folly  in  his  head.  The  poet,  however,  is 
relentless,  and  Mr.  Sludge,  not  being  able  to  rid  himself 
of  the  knuckles,  offers  to  tell  him  all  about  the  tricks — he 
makes  a  clean  breast  of  it,  and  confesses  that  the  whole  is 
imposture,  and  that  he  will  change  his  trade  and  cheat  no 
more. 

"  Mr.  Sludge  commences  by  saying  that  it  is  the  fault  of 
the  curious  gentlefolk  more  than  his.  He  hears  them 
talk  of  ghosts,  and  breaks  in  with  the  words  '  I  saw  a 
ghost;'  at  once  finds  sympathy,  and  gets  into  their 
society.  Once  there,  it  is  necessary  to  keep  alive  the 
means  by  which  he  mounted.  He  continues  the  fraud, 
satisfies  one  and  then  another,  till  he  has  many  friends  ; 
and  when  a  sceptic  comes,  they  all  set  at  him,  till  he,  too, 
must  succumb.  At  this  comparatively  early  stage,  while 
Sludge's  conscience  is  yet  tender  and  he  has  some  qualms, 
is  it  to  be  expected  that  he  will  spoil  all  his  good  fortune 
by  confessing.  Having  made  the  first  step,  would  you 
thus  retrace  it  ?  No  !  You  would  go  on  deeper  and 
deeper,  like  Sludge.  It  is  too  late — he  must  go  on. 
Kow  he  makes  raps, shows  stars,  and  succeeds  in  producing 

102  MR.    SLUDGE, 

an  audible  voice.  The  spirits  now  are  at  his  command, 
and  his  delighted  friends  crowd  round  him.  As  he 
receives  them  at  his  own  house,  as  his  guests,  the  poet 
asks  how  guests  can  he  critical  ;  but  if  one  out  of  a  dozen 
should  say  a  word  all  the  eleven  pounce  on  him,  and 
Sludge  waves  his  hat  in  triumph. 

"  Visions  no  longer  suffice  and  the  friends  want  some- 
thing external.  It  is  but  a  step  more.  He  jogs  the 
table  about  and  learns  his  other  tricks  and  sleight-of- 
hand  turns,  shoves,  and  tilts  the  table,  cracks  his  joints, 
manages  his  feet,  works  wires  that  twitch  the  curtains, 
plays  the  glove  at  the  end  of  his  slipper,  puts  out  the 
lights,  and  then — every  one  is  delighted  and  satisfied. 
There  are  sentences  given  by  raps — a  message  from  a 
dear  child  to  its  mother.  Is  that  a  time  for  the  mother 
to  be  critical?  Oh,  no,  poor  thing  ;  she  is  an  easy  dupe. 
It  gives  a  test  answer  that  it  was  six  years  old  and  rode  a 
rocking-horse.  How  could  Sludge  have  known  these 
facts  ?  Oh !  he  makes  it  his  business  to  pick  up  these 
little  particulars  that  your  uncle  was  a  "tailor  and  your  wife 
thought  to  have  married  Miggs  but  missed  him  and  hit  you. 
Then  with  those  who  have  been  duped,  how  are  they  to 
be  undeceived  again  ?  They  won't  believe  it  was  possible 
to  cheat  them,  and  say  that  even  if  Sludge  admitted  that 
he  cheated  them  they  wouldn't  believe  him.  They  prefer 
to  believe  in  a  lie,  and  urge  on  poor  Sludge  to  play  the 
spirit  medium  for  a  livelihood,  rather  than  to  take  him  as 
he  is  and  keep  him  fat.  So  he  excuses  himself,  and  says 
that  he  helps  religion  by  his  tricks,  and  lays  the  Atheist 
sprawling  on  his  back,  and  props  up  St.  Paul  or  Sweden- 
borg  at  least.  It  is  just  the  proper  way  to  baulk  the 
sceptics,  and  no  use  in  being  squeamish  as  to  the  means 
you  use. 

"  Another  excuse  which  Sludge  gives  is,  that  beyond  all 
this  there  is  in  human  nature  a  real  love  of  a  lie  which 
liars  find  ready  made  for  the  lies  they  make,  as  hand  for 
glove,  or  tongue  for  sugar  plum.  It  is  for  them  he 

THE    MEDIUM.  103 

cheated  when  ho  could,  rapped  with  his  toe-joints,  set 
si  mm  hands  at  work,  wrote  down  names  weak  in  sym- 
pathetic ink,  rubbed  odic  lights  with  ends  of  phosphor 
match,  and  all  the  rest. 

"  The  admitting  of  the  supernatural  element  in  the  Bible, 
which  comes  to  us  from  our  mothers,  prepares  us,  or  some 
of  us,  to  see  instances  of  it  still  in  the  world,  and  to 
accept  omens,  prodigies,  and  special  providences.  If  Sludge 
sees  Charles's  Wain  at  twelve  at  night,  it  warns  him  to 
have  his  hair  cut  without  a  day's  delay ;  and  he  spies  a 
providence  in  the  fire's  going  out,  or  the  kettle's  boiling ; 
he  has  presentiments,  his  dreams  come  true,  and  he  itches 
at  the  elbow  when  at  whist  he  ought  to  trump. 

"  After  all  these  his  confessions  are  done,  he  is  foolish 
enough  to  ask  the  poet  to  shake  hands  with  him  and  finds 
it  hard  that  he  refuses.  The  poem  closes  with  a  hearty 
curse  from  Sludge  upon  the  poet. 

"  This  is  not  much  to  get  out  of  nearly  seventy  pages, 
but  it  pretends  to  describe  a  scene  which  so  far  as  it 
relates  to  Mr.  Home  has  no  foundation  in  fact,  and  Mr. 
Browning  has  further  made  the  story  the  vehicle  of  a  dis- 
tinct allegation  that  the  manifestations  of  spiritualism  are 
nothing  but  gross  imposture  from  beginning  to  end,  at  all 
times  and  under  all  circumstances.  This  is  what  it  comes 
to,  and  it  is  unfortunately  only  in  accordance  with  the 
general  turn  of  Mr.  Browning's  mind  to  deny  not 
only  these  things,  but  others  related  to  them  of  much 
more  importance  to  his  own  soul.  There  are  many  in- 
deed who  bear  him  sad  company  in  this  denial  of  all 
supernatural  power  and  providence,  and  he  is  particularly 
unfortunate  in  this  respect  among  his  intimate  friends  ; 
but  it  is  almost  painful,  if  he  be  a  poet,  either  for  us  or 
for  our  posterity,  that  he  should  try  to  infect  his  leaders 
with  the  disease  which  so  maddens  him.  Especially, 
however,  do  we  lament  that  the  man  who  merged  the 
name  of  Miss  Barrett  in  that  of  Browning,  should  come 
forward  now  after  her  departure  to  deny  what  was  the 

104  MR.    SLUDGE, 

very  soul  and  essence  of  one  of  the  best  and  truest  English- 
women who  have  ever  lived ;  and  of  the  greatest  poetess, 
it  has  heen  said,  of  this  or  any  other  age.  It  is  a  shocking 
libel  on  his  wife  and  on  her  dearest  beliefs.  There  are 
many  coarse  jesters,  and  hard  men  of  science  to  whom  it 
is  allowed  to  deny  all  spiritual  action  in  the  affairs  of  men ; 
but  for  the  husband  of  Mrs.  Barrett  Browning  it  was  not 
permitted  to  desecrate  her  memory  and  her  sweet  muse  by 
this  ribald  nonsense. 

"  With  a  man  of  his  vanity,  however,  and  that  wounded, 
as  will  presently  be  seen,  by  Mr.  Home,  in  years  gone  by, 
but  not  forgotten,  everything  must  give  way  to  his  con- 
temptuous rancour  against  the  man,  and  against  a  spiritual 
world,  the  existence  of  which  he  looks  down  upon  from  his 
throne,  as  a  personal  affront  to  himself  and  to  his  poetic 
majesty. 

"  This  is,  perhaps,  not  the  place  to  say  all  that  we  should 
wish,  to  show  our  sense  of  Mrs.  Barrett  Browning's  sweet 
character,  an  1  of  that  depth  and  innocence  of  her  soul 
which  brought  her  at  once  and  by  sympathy  into  com- 
munion with  the  spiritual.  This  was  the  secret  of  her 
power,  however,  as  a  woman  and  as  a  poet.  Every  one 
loved  her,  for  the  love  that  was  in  her  towards  all,  and 
which  made  an  atmosphere  about  her  that  it  was  so 
enchanting  and  pleasant  to  dwell  in.  Happy  was  it  for 
Mr.  Browning  to  have  the  right  to  call  her  wife,  for  it 
gave  him  the  best  chance  he  could  have  in  this  world  of 
becoming  alive  to  the  spiritual  beauties  of  the  vast  inner 
world,  which  he  still  denied.  But  if  he  lost  this  golden 
opportunity,  he  gained  in  more  earthly  advantages,  though 
again  at  the  cost  of  increasing  his  vanity,  for  after  his 
marriage  with  Mrs.  Barrett  Browning,  he  became  in- 
vested, as  her  husband,  with  much  of  the  respect  and 
admiration  which  her  qualities  willingly  drew  from  the 
world,  and  his  critics  became  more  friendly  still  to  him, 
out  of  their  love  to  her.  Even  the  griffins  of  the  press 
could  not  find  heart  to  abuse  the  husband  of  so  dear  a 

THE    MEDIUM.  105 

friend.  So  everything  wo  see  lias  tended  to  blow  him  up 
still  larger,  and  no  one  can  toll  yet  what  will  be  the  end 
of  it.  Should  ho  finally  burst,  '  The  Kxaminer'  and 
othors  of  his  frionds  will  have  niurh  to  answer  for. 

"  As  we  wish  to  inako  this  little  story  complete  in  itself, 
and  not  to  have  again  to  add  to  it,  we  will  now  give  an 
exact  account,  for  the  truth  of  which  we  can  vouch,  of  the 
only  two  interviews  which  Mr.  Browning  and  Mr.  Home 
ever  had.  It  is  given  in  the  shape  of  a  narrative  by  Mr. 
Home,  and  the  reader  will  see  how  the  wine  turned  to 
vinegar  on  the  poet's  stomach,  when  his  vanity  was 
touched,  first  by  the  wrong  direction  of  the  poet's  crown 
and  by  being  asked  to  leave  the  room,  and  next  by  being 
refused  another  seance  when  he  asked  for  one :  Tantcene 
animis  caelestibus  irce  ? 

"  *  I  have  never  seen  Mr.  Browning  but  twice.  The 
first  time  was  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Kymer,  at  Ealing,  at  a 
seance  there.  Mr.  Browning  was  then  married  to  Mrs. 
Barrett  Browning,  whom  I  had  known  by  repute,  and 
through  intimate  mutual  friends,  for  several  years,  and  I 
thus  became  aware  of  her  deep  interest  and  belief  in 
spiritualism,  which  continued  up  to  the  time  of  her  death. 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Rymer  and  their  family  were  present  at  the 
seance,  which  began  by  several  of  the  ordinary  manifesta- 
tions. Mr.  Browning  was  requested  to  investigate  every- 
thing as  it  occurred,  and  he  availed  himself  freely  of  the 
invitation.  Several  times  during  the  evening  he  volun- 
tarily and  earnestly  declared  that  anything  like  imposture 
was  out  of  the  question.  Previously  to  the  arrival  of  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Browning  some  of  the  children  had  been  gather- 
ing flowers  in  the  garden,  and  Miss  Kymer  and  I  had 
made  a  wreath  of  clematis.  This  wreath  was  lying  on  a 
table,  at  a  little  distance  from  that  at  which  we  were  sit- 
ting. The  wreath  was  afterwards  put  on  the  table  at 
which  we  were  sitting,  but  whether  naturally  or  by  spirit 
hands  I  do  not  remember.  During  the  seance  this  wreath 
was  raised  from  the  table  by  supernatural  power  in  the 

106        HE.    ROBERT   BROWNING. 

presence  of  us  all,  and  whilst  we  were  watching  it,  Mi. 
Browning,  who  was  seated  at  the  opposite  side  of  the  table, 
left  his  place  and  came  and  stood  behind  his  wife,  towards 
whom  the  wreath  was  being  slowly  carried,  and  upon 
whose  head  it  was  placed,  in  full  sight  of  us  all,  and  whilst 
he  was  standing  close  behind  her.  He  expressed  no  dis- 
belief; as  indeed,  it  was  impossible  for  any  one  to  have 
any  of  what  was  passing  under  his  eyes,  whilst  Mrs. 
Browning  was  much  moved,  and  she  not  only  then  but 
ever  since  expressed  her  entire  belief  and  pleasure  in  what 
then  occurred.  It  was  the  remark  of  all  the  Rymer 
family,  that  Mr.  Browning  seemed  much  disappointed  that 
the  wreath  was  not  put  upon  his  own  head  instead  of  his 
wife's,  and  that  his  placing  himself  in  the  way  of  where  it 
was  being  carried,  was  for  the  purpose  of  giving  it  an 
opportunity  of  being  placed  upon  his  own  brow. 

"  '  Shortly  after  this  a  communication  was  made,  request- 
ing that  all  would  leave  the  room,  excepting  Mr.  Rymer 
and  me,  as  something  was  to  be  told  of  an  important 
matter  private  to  Mr.  Rymer.  During  Mr.  Browning's 
absence  with  the  rest  of  the  family,  I  was  afterwards  told 
by  them  that  he  seemed  quite  hurt  at  being  sent  out  of 
the  room,  and  said  he  was  not  aware  that  spirits  could 
have  secrets.  Still  he  indicated  no  doubt  of  anything  he 
had  seen.  On  returning  to  the  room  he  appeared  to  be 
very  much  out  of  temper,  but  I  paid  no  attention  to  him, 
as  Mrs.  Browning  was  so  kind  and  attentive  to  me.  All 
that  was  done  was  in  the  presence  of  eight  persons,  besides 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Browning,  all  of  whom  are  still  living,  and 
are  ready  to  testify  to  the  truth  of  every  word  here  written 
if  it  should  be  gainsaid  by  Mr.  Browning. 

"  '  Two  days  afterwards  Mr.  Browning  wrote  to  Mrs. 
Rymer  requesting  that  he  might  be  allowed  another  seance, 
and  to  bring  with  him  his  friend,  Miss  Helen  Faucit. 
Mrs.  Rymer  replied  that  owing  to  my  ill  health,  and  her 
engagements,  and  the  arrangements  previous  to  our  going 
to  the  seaside,  it  would  not  be  possible  to  receive  him 

MR.    ROBERT   BROWNING.       107 

again  before  we  left  town.  A  few  days  subsequently  I 
came  to  town  with  Mrs.  Rymer  and  her  eldest  son,  to 
make  some  farewell  calls,  the  first  of  which  was  to  Mr. 
ami  Mrs.  Browning.  We  were  shown  into  the  drawing- 
room,  and  he,  advancing  to  meet  us,  shook  hands  with 
Mrs.  Rymer ;  then,  passing  by  me  shook  hands  with 
her  son.  As  he  was  repassing  me  I  held  out  my  hand, 
when,  with  a  tragic  air,  he  threw  his  hand  on  his  left 
shoulder,  and  stalked  away.  My  attention  was  now 
drawn  to  Mrs.  Browning,  who  was  standing  nearly  in  the 
centre  of  the  room,  and  looked  very  pale  and  agitated. 
I  approached  and  she  placed  both  her  hands  in  mine,  and 
said,  in  a  voice  of  emotion,  '  Oh,  dear  Mr.  Home,  do  not, 
do  not  blame  me.  I  am  so  sorry,  but  I  am  not  to  blame.' 
I  was  wonder-struck,  not  knowing  in  the  least  what  the 
curious  scene  meant — indeed,  it  would  have  been  comical, 
but  for  the  deep  emotion  from  which  Mrs.  Browning  wa? 
suffering.  For  a  moment  all  was  confusion,  but  at  last 
we  were  seated,  I  scarce  know  how,  when  Mr.  Browning 
began  in  an  excited  manner,  saying, f  Mrs.  Rymer,  I  beg 
to  inform  you  that  I  was  exceedingly  dissatisfied  with 
everything  I  saw  at  your  house  the  other  night,  and  I 
should  like  to  know  why  you  refused  to  receive  me  again 
with  my  friend.'  I  replied  to  this,  '  Mr.  Browning,  that 
was  the  time  and  place  for  you  to  have  made  objections 
regarding  the  manifestations,  and  not  now.  I  gave  you 
every  possible  opportunity,  and  you  availed  yourself  of  it, 
and  expressed  yourself  satisfied.'  He  said,  '  I  am  not 
addressing  myself  to  you,  sir.'  I  said,  '  No ;  but  it  is 
of  me  you  are  speaking,  and  it  would  only  be  fair  and 
gentleman-like  to  allow  me  to  reply/  Mrs.  Rymer  said, 
*  Mr.  Home  is  quite  right,  and  as  regards  not  being  able 
to  receive  you  and  your  friend,  we  could  not  do  so  on 
account  of  our  engagements.'  Mr.  Browning's  face  was 
pallid  with  rage,  and  his  movements,  as  he  swayed  back- 
wards and  forwards  on  his  chair,  were  like  those  of  a 
maniac.  At  this  moment  I  rose  to  leave  the  room,  and, 

108       ME.    ROBERT    BROWNING. 

passing  him,  shook  hands  with  Mrs.  Browning,  who  was 
nearly  ready  to  faint.  As  she  shook  hands  with  me  she  said, 
*  Dear  Mr.  Home,  I  am  not  to  blame.  Oh,  dear!  oh,  dear!" 

"  In  conclusion  we  have  only  to  say  that,  as  this  is  a 
matter  of  fact  and  not  of  opinion,  we  shall  be  quite  willing 
to  give  insertion  to  any  reply,  in  prose,  from  Mr.  Brown- 
ing, if  he  will  write  it  so  as  to  be  intelligible  to  the  present 
generation  of  men  who  compose  our  readers,  and  we  shall 
be  all  the  more  pleased  that  he  should  have  this  oppor- 
tunity of  explaining  himself,  as  it  is  a  pity  he  should  be 
knocking  his  head  against  this  hard  subject,  just  at  the 
time  when  his  contemporaries  of  the  first  rank  are  one  by 
one  publicly  declaring  their  full  belief  and  knowledge  of 
its  truth." 

In  her  "Notes  on  England  and  Italy,"  Mrs.  Haw- 
thorne says,  in  an  account  of  an  evening  at  Casa  Guidi : — 
"  Mr.  Browning  introduced  the  subject  of  spiritism,  and 
there  was  an  animated  talk.  Mr.  Browning  cannot  be- 
lieve, and  Mrs.  Browning  cannot  help  believing." 

Mr.  Kobert  Browning,  however,  is  by  no  means  alone 
in  his  capacity  of  invention,  for  several  paragraphs  have 
appeared  from  time  to  time  testifying  to  all  who  were  in 
the  slightest  degree  acquainted  with  me,  that  the  writers 
had  drawn  upon  their  fertile  imaginations  for  every  detail, 
whether  of  character  or  personal  appearance.  I  here  re- 
produce a  few  which  may  serve  to  amuse  those  who  know 
me.  The  following  which  appeared^ in  "Echoes  from  the 
Clubs,"  for  April  29,  1868,  is  inimitably  absurd ;  it  is 
headed: — "A  Home  Thrust. — Some  two  years  ago  a 
young  gentleman  possessing  that  pleasing  and  ingenuous 
expression  of  countenance  which  the  late  Mr.  Thackeray 
loved  to  ascribe  to  his  heroes,  was  seated  in  the  halls  of 
the — let  us  say,  Generdlife.  To  him  addressed  himself  a 
dark-complexioned  stranger  with  quiet,  shifting  eyes, 
curly  and  oily-looking  black  hair,  and  a  nose  which 
seemed  to  vouch  for  a  purely  Caucasian  descent.  A  brisk 
conversation  ensued.  The  dark-haired  stranger  was  a 

MR.    ROBERT    BROWNING.        109 

man  who  bad  evidently  seen  the  world  ;  he  bad  sat  at  the 
tables  of  the  great  :  princes,  king's,  and  even  emperors, 
were  on  familiar  terms  with  him.  "  This."  s;iid  lie.  ex- 
tending a  hand  on  which  sparkled  tun  splendid  rings, 
and  indicating  a  inagnilieent  diamond,  "  was  the  gift  of 
Louis  Napoleon,  for  a  service  I  rendered  him."  The 
recollection  of  Mr.  Wyndham  Flitter  and  bis  turquoise 
caused  a  smile  to  flit  across  his  companion's  face  as  ho 
continued,  "  and  this  sapphire  was  a  present  from  the 
Czar."  The  smile  was  now  so  palpable  that  the  stranger 
observed  in  a  reproachful  tone,  "  I  suppose  then  that  you 
think  I  am  a  humbug."  "  Think,"  was  the  cutting  reply, 
"  I  don't  think  it ;  I  know  you're  one."  The  stranger 
departed  incontinently,  and  it  was  not  till  many  months 
after  that  he  was  pointed  out  to  his  unappreciative  com- 
panion as  the  celebrated  Mr.  Home." 

My  friends  must  have  wondered  how  they  had  not  seen 
me  on  any  occasion  when  my  naturally  dry  light  hair  had 
become  a  head  of  "curly  and  oily-looking  black  hair." 
As  to  the  "  nose  which  seemed  to  vouch  for  a  purely 
Caucasian  descent,"  this,  of  course,  might  have  been 
managed  by  a  well  adapted  false  feature,  and  it  is  needless 
for  me  to  say  that  the  remainder  of  the  paragraph  is  as 
probable  as  that  these  miraculous  changes  in  my  personal 
appearance  had  occurred. 

In  the  "  Mask,"  of  June,  1868,  an  article  was  devoted 
to  me,  from  which  I  extract  the  following : — 

<4  \Ve  do  not  deny  for  a  moment  that  Mr.  Home  may 
produce  marvels  in  his  own  rooms  in  the  Sloane  Athenjenm, 
or  anywhere  else  where  he  may  have  frequent  access ; 
but  we  challenge  him  to  produce  supernatural  eti 
anv  piece  of  furniture  we  chose,  (sic)  time  and  place  indi- 
cated by  us,  and  before  a  select  tew  chosen  by  ourselves. 

••  We  don't  pretend  to  explain  Mr.  Home's  perform- 
ances, for  we  have  never  seen  them,  though  we  have  met 
that  modern  C'agliostro  several  times  under  not  very  IOC- 
ccssful  circumstances.  Of  course,  we  have  heard  him 

110  FANCY    PORTEAITS. 

relate  his  connection  with  the  court  of  Russia  (who  has 
not?),  and  seen  him  show  his  diamond  ring;  hut  on  one 
occasion  when  we  were  present  he  showed  it,  with  much 
pomposity,  to  his  neighbour,  who  possessed  and  had  on 
his  finger  at  the  time  a  brilliant  of  nearly  double  the 
size,  which,  on  production,  eclipsed  the  czar's  gift,  and 
chagrined  considerably  the  great  spiritualist.  That  he 
has  sharp,  eyes,  a  cunning  wit,  and  quick,  long  fingers, 
there  is  no  denying — so  has  a  fox.  That  he  never 
receives  money  for  his  gifts,  the  present  action  will  entirely 
disprove.  And,  after  all,  diamonds  seldom  fall  in  value. 
Besides,  a  man  of  the  world,  who  has  made  weak  man 
his  study,  knows  well  the  effect  of  refusing.  Anyone 
with  a  belief  in  Mr.  Home  would  feel  that  he  ought  not 
to  employ  his  supernatural  powers  for  nothing  but  another's 
amusement  or  instruction,  and  at  the  same  time  would  be 
touched  by  the  noble  magnanimity  which  was  poor  but 
honest.  Ten  guineas  refused  would  probably  be  altered 
either  to  twenty  guineas,  forwarded  anonymously,  or  take 
the  form  of  a  diamond  worth  five-and-twenty  pounds. 
The  dupe  would  be  always  ready  to  swear  that  money  was 
refused,  and  yet  would  know  that  he  had  amply  repaid 
his  benefactor,  which  would  be,  in  other  words,  le  genereux 
battu  et  Home  content" 

This  sneering  attack  is  as  transparently  imaginative 
as  the  former  one ;  and  though  altogether  ridiculous,  I 
may  ask  the  writer  gravely,  where  and  when  he  has 
heard  and  seen  what  he  so  impudently  declares  he  has 
witnessed  ?  His  acquaintance  with  specialities  in  nature 
is  highly  valuable,  for  he  seems  to  be  familiar  with  long- 
fingered  foxes,  some  of  which  he  ought  to  present  to  the 
Zoological  Society,  as  they  are  as  yet  unknown  to  students 
of  natural  history. 

Shortly  after  I  last  left  America  paragraphs  appeared 
in  the  papers  then,  stating  that  "  Home,  the  Medium,"  or 
"  David  S.  Hume,"  the  celebrated  "  Medium,"  had  sailed 
for  Europe  to  be  married  to  a  rich  Scotch  widow ;  and 

FANCY    PORTRAITS.  Ill 

some  time  later  it  was  announced  in  the  English  papers, 
th:it  1  was  about  to  lead  to  the  hymeneal  altar  no  !<•---  a 
personage  than  Madame  Mort,  \vii.isi-  name  is  well  known 
in  connection  with  her  wine. 

The  following  paragraph,  which  I  cut  from  a  news- 
paper, is  also  thoroughly  ahsurd  to  all  who  know  anything 
of  spiritualism  ;  it  appeared  some  few  years  since  : — 

"Mr.  Home,  the  spiritualist,  is  said  to  have  challenged 
the  medium  malcjre  lui  to  compete  with  him  in  flying 
through  the  air  a  distance  of  two  miles,  the  winner  to 
give  the  stakes  to  any  charity  he  thinks  fit.  Mr.  Add i son 
has  accepted  the  challenge  for  an  early  date,  and  the 
present  odds  are  three  to  two  in  his  favour/' 

CHAPTER  V. 

NICE,  AMERICA,  RUSSIA THE   DOUBLE   SEANCES   IN 

LONDON. 

ROM  Naples  I  went  to  Nice,  and  concerning 
my  stay  there  I  find  the  following  notice  in 
the  "  Spiritual  Magazine,"  giving  as  full  an 
account  as  is  needful. 

"After  Mr.  Home's  expulsion  from  Rome 
he  spent  several  weeks  at  Nice,  where  the  phenomena  were 
examined  and  scrutinised  by  a  great  many  of  the  winter 
residents,  and  many  were  convinced  of  the  facts  of  spiritual 
power.  We  hear  that  these  new  converts  are  now  returning 
with  the  spring  to  England,  and  a  correspondent  writes  us 
that  amongst  his  own  friends  he  numbers  half-a-dozen  of 
them,  and  that  they  are  wonderfully  impressed  with  what 
they  have  seen.  It  appears  that  the  manifestations  were 
not  confined  to  Mr.  Home,  for  that  after  he  had  left  Nice, 
a  party  of  ladies  and  gentlemen  formed  a  circle  to  see  what 
could  be  done  without  him.  They  soon  obtained  very 
striking  results.  The  medium  was  found  to  be  a  Russian 
lady  staying  at  Nice  with  her  family,  and  who,  a  month 
ago,  was  unconscious  of  her  power.  She  speaks  only  a  word 
or  two  of  English,  but  under  her  influence  a  heavy  oval 
table  gives  answers  in  English  and  German.  She  is  also  a 
writing  medium,  and  her  hand  writes,  without  any  play  of 
the  fingers,  intelligible  messages.  A  great  progress  has 
been  made  by  these  occurrences  amongst  the  visitors. 

AMERICA.  113 

From  Nice  I  proceeded  to  Paris,  where  I  remained  for 
some  weeks,  after  which  I  returned  to  England,  and 
then  crossed  the  Atlantic,  to  revisit  my  old  friends  in 
America.  Here  I  decided  on  giving  public  readings,  in 
which  I  succeeded  fairly.  On  one  occasion,  after  having 
given  a  reading  in  Norwich,  Connecticut,  I  gave  a  second 
for  the  benefit  of  the  Soldiers'  Aid  Society,  the  announce- 
ment of  which  led  to  the  appearance  in  the  local  journal 
of  the  following  letter  from  a  clergyman : —  . 

"  MESSRS.  EDITORS  : — I  crave  permission,  as  a  Chris- 
tian man,  to  say  a  word  to  Christians  in  Norwich  concern- 
ing the  lecture  this  evening.  I  was  greatly  surprised  to 
hear  that  the  audience  at  the  first  of  Mr.  Home's  readings 
was  larger  than  had  been  seen  at  any  lecture  in  Breed 
Hall  this  winter.  But  I  supposed  that  the  fact  might  bo 
explained  by  the  natural  curiosity  of  our  citizens  to  hear 
and  see  a  man  who  has  so  distinguished  himself  as  has 
the  gentleman  in  question. 

"  I  must  confess,  however,  that  I  was  not  only  sur-  , 
prised,  but  grieved,  to  see  the  announcement  that  Mr. 
Home  had  consented  to  the  request  of  our  Soldiers'  Aid 
Society,  that  he  should  give  another  reading  for  the  bene- 
fit of  that  institution.  It  was  very  kind  and  courteous  of 
Mr.  Home,  and  I  have  no  doubt  he  is  sincere  in  his 
spiritualistic  belief.  I  have  no  quarrel  with  him.  But 
are  the  Christian  men  and  women  of  Norwich,  who  support 
our  Soldiers'  Aid  Society,  reduced  to  such  extremities  that 
they  must  resort  to  a  representative  and  exponent  of 
spiritualism  for  aid  in  their  Christian  and  patriotic  work  ? 
Is  it  seemly  that  Christians  should  patronize  such  an 
entertainment  ?  Most  of  them  believe  one  of  two  things 
in  regard  to  spiritualism — either  that  it  is  an  arrant  im- 
position and  delusion,  or  that  it  is  ascribable  to  Satanic 
agency.  Probably  no  Christian  worthy  of  the  name  be- 
lieves that  it  is  what  it  professes  to  be,  a  system  of  com- 
munication with  and  revelation  from  the  souls  of  the  de- 
parted. Whoever  believes  this  must  in  honesty  become  a 
I 

AMERICA. 

spiritualist,  and  be  guided  by  spiritualistic  revelations.  I 
care  not  which  of  the  two  theories  named  be  adopted,  it 
seems  to  me  equally  indecorous  for  Christians  to  have 
anything  to  do  directly  or  indirectly  with  spiritualism.  If 
it  be  said  that  Mr.  Home  does  not  bring  forward  his  pecu- 
liar notions  in  these  readings,  I  may  answer  that  even 
admitting  the  statement  to  be  true,  it  is  undeniable  that 
the  crowd  goes  to  hear  him  not  because  he  has  a  fine 
voice  and  is  an  excellent  reader,  but  because  he  is  a 
spiritualist,  a  representative  man,  a  famous  man  in  that 
art  or  science  or  delusion,  whichever  it  may  be.  And 
for  the  public  publicly  to  patronize  him  is  to  endorse,  or, 
at  least,  to  patronize  and  countenance  his  principles. 

"  Eut  I  deny  the  statement.  It  was  publicly  announced 
in  your  paper  after  Mr.  Home's  reading  that  at  least  one 
loud  rap  was  heard  on  the  stage,  and  two  faces,  one  quite 
distinct,  and  the  other  more  shadowy,  were  seen  hovering 
about  the  speaker.  It  seems,  therefore,  that  Mr.  Home 
-cannot  or  will  not  leave  his  spiritualism  behind  him,  and 
probably,  every  candid  person  who  reads  this  communica- 
tion, will  confess  to  himself  that  he  is  vastly  more  attracted 
to  the  Eeading  to-night,  by  the  hope  of  seeing  or  hearing 
something  spiritualistic  in  the  course  of  the  evening,  than 
by  the  charms  of  Mr.  Home's  voice,  and  skill  as  an  elocu- 
tionist. 

"  I  hope,  therefore,  that  for  the  credit  of  Norwich  and 
her  churches,  the  Soldiers'  Aid  Society  will  receive  a  severe 
rebuke  to-night  in  the  absence  of  the  Christian  people  of 
Norwich  from  that  Eeading.  Mr.  Home  will  doubtless 
understand  that  I  have  no  personal  feeling  against  him  ; 
so  far  as  I  know,  he  is  a  most  estimable  gentleman  in 
private  life,  and  his  private  character  has  my  respect. 
But  there  are  thousands  of  republicans  in  this  city,  who 
would  not  go  to  hear  Gov.  Seymour  out  01  principle, 
though  he  spoke  no  politics  ;  and  many  a  democrat  who 
would  not  listen  to  Wendell  Phillips, though  he  talked  poetry 
and  literature — lest  their  act  should  seem  to  endorse  the 

AMERICA.  115 

avowed  principles  of  the  man.  Shall  Christians  be  less 
strict  than  politicians  ?  Shall  they  denounce  and  fight 
against  spiritualism,  and  turn  about  to  countenance  and 
publicly  abet  the  system  in  the  person  of  its  most  promi- 
nciit  exponent  ?  I  hope  not. 

To  this  letter  I  replied,  and  a  somewhat  lengthened 
correspondence  resulted.  One  result  of  Mr.  Lewis's  letter, 
I  may  mention,  was  to  attract  public  attention  to  the  sub- 
ject :  in  so  far  as  concerned  the  reading  for  the  Sol- 
diers' Aid  Society,  he  contributed  largely  to  advertise  it, 
and  the  room  was  crowded,  I  am  happy  to  say,  to  the 
substantial  benefit  of  the  fund. 

I  sailed  from  New  York  in  May,  1835,  for  England, 
and  on  my  return  to  London,  found  letters  waiting  for  me 
which  rendered  it  necessary  that  I  should  go  to  Paris. 
The  following  is  from  a  letter  I  wrote  at  the  time  :  — 

"  The  Empress  was  llegente,  and  I  may  say  that  I  was 
much  pleased  to  note  how  very  general  the  satisfaction  was  - 
to  find  that  instead  of  her  being  a  woman  whose  only 
thought  was  dress  or  frivolity,  she  was  a  true-hearted, 
great-willed  woman,  capable  not  only  of  giving  orders,  but 
of  seeing  that  they  are  executed.  Deep  and  true  in  her 
feelings,  pure  and  unselfish  in  her  actions,  she  is  a  noble 
lady,  an  ornament  to  her  sex  ;  long  may  she  live  !  AVheu 
in  Paris  I  had  the  honour  of  meeting  and  dining  with  His 
Highness  Mustapha  Pacha,  the  brother  of  the  Viceroy  of 
Egypt,  and  heir  to  the  throne.  I  could  only  remain  in 
Paris  three  weeks,  for  I  had  let  tors  necessitating  my  pre- 
sence in  Russia.  On  leaving  Paris  I  went  to  Germany 
on  n  short  visit  to  Her  Highness  the  Princess  of  the  Min- 
grclia.  and  then  I  left  for  .Russia. 

"  I  have  here  to  relate  a  singular  incident  in  connection 
with  my  arrival  at  St.  Petersburg.  1  sent  a  telegram  to 
my  friend  the  Baron  Meyendorfi',  irom  Yergehalova  on  the 
Pviissian  frontier,  telling  him  the  hour  at  which  I  would 
arrive  at  St.  Petersburg.  The  Baron  is  an  officer  in  the 

116  RUSSIA. 

Emperor's  Horse  Guards,  and  was  then  on  duty  at  Peter- 
ho3f,  where  the  Emperor  was.  His  father,  who  is  an  old 
and  favourite  General  and  Master  of  the  Imperial  Horses, 
sent  him  my  telegram.  He  had  just  time  to  take  the 
train  and  come  to  meet  me,  so  that  no  one  knew  of  my 
arrival.  I  reached  St.  Petersburg  at  seven  o'clock  P.M., 
and  went  at  once  to  the  Baron  MeyendorfFs,  where  I 
wrote  a  note  to  my  brother-in-law  the  Count  Koucheleff 
Besborodka,  to  tell  him  I  was  in  the  city,  but  would  not  have 
time  to  see  him  for  a  day  or  two,  having  to  leave  early  the 
following  morning  for  Peterhoff.  Great  was  my  surprise 
when  there  came  a  note  from  one  of  my  dearest  friends, 
the  Count  Tolstoi,  who  is  an  aide-de-camp  of  the  Emperor, 
and  was  my  groomsman  when  I  was  married.  His  letter 
only  said  : — 

"  '  Dear  Daniel,  I  am  so  glad  you  are  here.  Come  at 
any  moment,  day  or  night.  You  know  how  glad  we  are 
to  see  you.  Yours, 

'ALEXIS/ 

"  The  last  letter  I  had  received  from  him  was  three 
months  previously,  and  from  one  of  his  places  in  the  very 
interior  of  Russia — at  which  far  locality  I  supposed  he 
still  was ;  and  that  same  afternoon,  as  we  were  nearing 
St.  Petersburg,  I  was  thinking  of  those  I  would  fain  have 
seen,  and  he  was  more  especially  of  the  number ;  but  I 
thought  him  far  distant.  I  at  once  went  to  his  hotel,  and 
his  wife  said, — 

"  '  Well,  Daniel,  I  would  not  have  thought  it  possible 
for  you  not  to  have  come  at  once  and  spoken  to  me.' 

"  I  replied,  '  "Well,  I  rather  think  /  am  the  one  who 
ought  to  make  the  reproach.  But  where  on  earth  did  you 
see  me?' 

"  '  Why,  at  the  Arcade,  to  be  sure.' 

"  I,  thinking  the  Countess  meant  the  station,  replied, 
'  Well,  you  must  have  seen  that  I  was  weary  with  the 
journey  and  in  a  hurry  to  get  my  luggage.  But  at 
what  hour,  pray,  did  you  see  me?' 

RUSSIA.  117 

" { At  four  o'clock.  But  what  do  you  moan  by  your 
luggage?  You  were  in  the  Arcade  !' 

"  I  told  her  I  had  arrived  that  evening  at  seven.  She 
then  told  me  she  and  her  niece  had  seen  me  at  four,  and 
that  she  had  come  home  and  told  Alexis,  '  Only  imagine ! 
AVe  have  seen  Daniel !  and  he  did  not  seem  to  know  us. 
Do  at  once  send  him  a  note,  to  the  Count  KouchelefFs. ' 

"  Her  niece  confirmed  this  statement,  declaring  posi- 
tively that  she,  too,  had  seen  me. 

"  The  count  had  accordingly  sent  the  note  to  me,  so 
positive  were  the  ladies  that  they  had  met  me  ;  and  the 
servant  took  it  to  a  house  in  town — and  there  the  servants 
told  him  that  I  had  not  been  in  Russia  for  years,  and  was 
not  expected.  Nothing  daunted  by  this,  the  countess 
sent  to  the  country  seat,  and  the  servant  who  took  my 
note  heard  the  other  one  ask  for  me,  and  so  brought  me 
the  note. 

"  To  say  the  least  it  is  a  singular  incident,  and  it  seems 
to  add  another  to  the  list  of  those  mysterious  cases  of 
'  double  '  appearance  which  the  German  writers  call 
doppUganger.  If  the  spirit  of  man  can  thus,  by  the 
more  force  of  friendship  and  attraction,  leave  the  bo:ly 
while  still  hampered  by  the  conditions  of  its  visible  and 
grosser  connections,  why  should  we  wonder  that  such 
marvellous  manifestations  of  spirit-power  are  exhibited  by 
those  who  have  for  ever  cast  off  their  perishing  robes  of 
flesh,  and  entered  upon  the  freer  and  truer  life  of  the 
disembodied  soul  ? 

"  The  singularity  of  the  occurrence  led  to  remark,  and 
the  other  evening  the  emperor  asked  me  'if  that  was 
true?' 

"  I  have  been  staying  at  the  '  English  Palace '  in  Pcter- 
hoff,  and  have  often  seen  the  emperor.  We  have  had 
some  very  beautiful  and  interesting  seances.  I  cannot 

tell  even  you,  my  dear ,  what  manifestations  occurred, 

for  you  know  I  never  relate  what  transpires  where  there 
are  crowned  heads. 

118  RUSSIA. 

"  I  spent  eight  evenings  at  the  place  of  the  Grand  Duke- 
and  Grand  Duchess  Constantine,  at  Strelna.  The  Grand 
Duke  is  now  absent,  but  will  return  before  I  leave  Russia. 
I  had  so  many  visits  to  make  and  receive,  that  at 
last  it  began  to  tell  on  my  nervous  system,  and  one  of 
my  friends  prevailed  on  me  to  accompany  him  to  the 
great  fair  Nijni-Norgorod,  from  which  point  I  write  to 
you.  I  will  remain  here  in  all  probability  three  weeks, 
and  then  return  to  St.  Petersburg  to  take  leave  of  the 
emperor." 

I  returned  from  St.  Petersburg  direct  to  London,  and 
it  was  shortly  after  my  return  that  I  was  at  a  seance,  at 
which  a  peculiar  manifestation  occurred,  of  which  the 
following  account  has  been  printed : — 

"  I  proceed  to  narrate  briefly  a  few  events  which 
occurred  at  a  seance,  on  the  t30th  January,  1866,  given 
by  Mrs.  Macclougall  Gregory,  where  Mr.  Home  was 
present,  and  where  all  the  circle,  if  I  mistake  not,  ac- 
cepted spiritualism  as  a  reality.  One  gentleman,  how- 
ever, while  he  did  so,  had  serious  doubts  as  to  the  source 
of  the  phenomena,  and  as  to  the  propriety  of  courting 
these  developments. 

"  We  had  not  been  long  sitting  at  a  large  table  in  the 
front  drawing-room,  when  the  usual  manifestations  began, 
which  increased  with  such  force  that  the  whole  room  was 
literally  shaken.  While  the  table  palpitated  violently  by 
the  power,  the  words,  '  Take  six  with  you  into  the  other 
room,'  were  addressed  by  raps  to  Mr.  Home,  and  caused 
those  who  were  selected  by  the  spirits  to  adjourn  into  the 
back  drawing-room,  where  they  sat  down  at  a  table, 
having  removed  the  lamp  and  opened  the  window,  as 
desired  by  the  spirit  message.  One  of  the  six  happened 
to  be  a  lady  whose  daughter  had  been  lately  taken  to  the 
spirit-land,  a  girl  who  had  been  known  on  earth  as 
1  Motie,'  the  Ilindostani  name  for  pearl.  To  this  lady 
the  following  message  was  spelled  out,  *  Mother — Sym- 
bol is  under  mother's  hand  for' .  She  immedi* 

SEANCES    IN    LONDON.          110 

ately  told  us  that  she  felt  something  like  a  largo  bead 
under  her  hand,  and  when  the  light  was  brought  in  it  was 
found  to  he  an  unattached  pearl,  which  had  never  been 
bored,  and  that  had  been  brought  to  our  circle  by  no 
earthly  hand.  After  another  message  respecting  the 
future  disposition  of  the  pearl,  they  returned  to  the  other 
room  and  rejoined  the  rest  of  the  party.  A  large  ac- 
cordion was  played  with  more  than  common  skill  while 
Mr.  Home  held  it  with  one  hand;  once  or  twice  wo 
distinctly  perceived  that  two  bands  were  touching  the 
keys,  and  an  air  which  the  young  girl  had  formerly  playrd 
upon  the  harp,  was  now  played  with  variations  upon  tho 
accordion.  '  Answers  were  also  given  by  the  instrument 
instead  of  by  raps. 

"  In  the  midst  of  our  conversation  Mr.  Home  fell  into 
a  trance ;  this  was,  perhaps,  the  most  salient  feature  of 
the  seance,  for  while  in  this  state,  which  must  have  lasted 
about  an  hour,  he  appeared  to  be  influenced  or  po 
by  the  spirit  friends  who  surrounded  us,  personating  in 
manner  those  whom  he  had  never  seen,  but  who  had  been 
known  by  the  several  members  of  our  circle.  This  was 
most  remarkable  in  the  case  of  one  whom  we  will  call  by 
the  name  designated  to  her  by  Mr.  Home,  namely,  that  of 
Margaret,  although  she  had  only  been  known  by  that  of 
Christy,  as  a  servant  in  the  family  of  one  of  the  gentle- 
men present,  and  had  been  drowned  forty  years  ago.  Mr. 
Home  went  through  the  action  of  drowning,  and  gave 
such  proofs  of  the  identity  of  4  Christy,'  that  the  son  of 
her  former  master,  who  was  the  gentleman  present,  was 
fain  to  accept  them  as  unmistakable.  While  entranced, 
Mr.  Home  also  explained  to  us  the  difficulty  that  tho 
spirits  had  experienced  in  bringing  the  pearl :  it  had 
passed  through  no  less  than  three  orders  of  spirits." 

" '  Margaret '  had  not  come  without  an  object  to  our 
seance;  as  there  appeared  to  have  been  a  slight  suspicion 
of  foul  play  in  the  manner  in  which  she  met  her  end,  Ifer 

120  SEANCES    IN    LONDON. 

aim   was   obviously  to  clear  the   character  of  a  fellow- 
servant  who  had  since  joined  her  in  the  spirit-land. 

"  L.  M.  GREGORY." 

The  following  is  an  account  of  a  seance,  on  Easter  Eve, 
Saturday,  March  31, 1866,  written  by  one  of  those  present : 

"  Five  persons  assembled  for  a  seance  at  Mr.  S.  C. 
Hall's  house  at  Campden  Hill :  Mr.  and  Mrs.  S.  C. 
Hall,  Lady  Dunsany,  Mrs.  Henry  Senior,  and  Mr.  D. 
D.  Home.  When  he  arrived  he  was  pale  and  worn,  and 
we  feared  that  we  should  have  few  manifestations.  He 
sat  down  to  the  piano  and  played  and  sang  for  some 
time ;  and  on  his  beginning  a  little  Russian  air,  a 
favourite  of  his  late  wife's,  a  chair  which  was  at  some 
distance  from  the  piano,  slid  up  and  placed  itself  beside 
him.  I  was  sitting  close  to  the  piano  on  the  other  side, 
and  I  first  saw  the  chair  move.  The  others  gathered 
round,  and  he  went  on  playing  some  time,  though  his 
hands  became  perfectly  rigid,  and  it  was  evident  that 
they  were  not  moved  by  his  own  volition.  After  some 
time  his  hands  were  withdrawn  from  the  piano  and  he 
became  entranced,  knelt  down,  and  poured  forth  a 
beautiful  prayer:  then  he  came  out  of  his  trance,  re- 
freshed and  happy.  In  a  few  minutes  we  sat  round  the 
table,  which  at  once  began  to  vibrate  and  tremble,  and 
was  raised  off  the  floor  to  a  considerable  height.  Very 
loud  and  heavy  knocks  were  heard  on  the  table,  the  floor, 
and  the  furniture  round  the  room ;  presently  the  accor- 
dion was  touched ;  the  alphabet  was  asked  for,  and  it  was 
spelt  out — *  We  will  play  the  earth-life  of  One  who  was 
not  of  earth/ 

"  First  we  had  simple,  sweet,  soft  music  for  some 
minutes,  then  it  became  intensely  sad,  then  the  tramp, 
tramp,  as  of  a  body  of  men  marching  mingled  with  the 
music,  and  I  exclaimed,  '  The  march  to  Calvary  !'  Then 
three  times  the  tap-tapping  sound  of  a  hammer  on  a  nail 
(like  two  metals  meeting).  A  crash  and  a  burst  of  wail- 
ing which  seemed  to  till  the  room  followed,  then  there 

7 

SEANOES    IN    LONDON.          121 

came  a  hurst  of  glorious  triumphal  music  more  grand 
than  any  of  us  had  ever  listened  to,  and  we  exclaimed, 
*  The  Resurrection  ! '  It  thrilled  to  all  our  hearts. 

"  Nothing  more  was  done  for  some  time,  and  wo 
decided  upon  putting  out  the  lights  in  the  rooms  so  as 
only  to  have  that  from  the  outside  which  came  through 
the  conservatory.  When  this  was  done  the  muslin  cur- 
tains were  draped  round  Mr.  Home,  a  large  portfolio 
stand  having  first  been  removed  from  the  window  by  the 
spirits.  It  was  moved  some  distance  towards  the  door  of 
the  conservatory,  and  then  laid  down  on  the  floor.  Mr. 
Home  was  then  raised  from  the  ground  enveloped  in  the 
curtains.  We  saw  him  through  them — between  us  and 
the  window  ;  then  it  was  spelled  out '  See  what  earth  does/ 
and  the  silk  curtains  were  all  drawn  close  over  the 
windows  and  round  Mr.  Home,  and  all  was  dark  and 
black  as  night.  After  a  short  time  they  were  drawn 
back  again,  and  Mr.  Home  was  let  down  and  came  back 
to  the  table.  Soon  after  this  we  observed  the  face  of  the 
master  of  the  house,  shining  as  if  covered  with  silver 
light;  after  we  had  all  remarked  it,  and  commented  upon 
it,  the  words  were  spelled  out,  *  He  who  giveth  shall 
receive  light.'  The  accordion  was  carried  round  the 
circle  playing  beautifully  *  The  Last  Hose  of  Summer/ 
and  several  other  airs  ;  it  rested  on  the  head  of  our  host, 
then  on  my  shoulder,  and  went  on  to  our  hostess  next  U> 
me,  and  played  on  her  head.  After  this  several  pieces 
of  martial  music  were  played. 

'*  The  spirit  of  a  child  next  came,  whose  mother  had 
sent  flowers  to  our  hostess  that  morning.  She  gave  us 
each  a  flower,  and  told  Mr.  Home  to  go  and  see  her 
mother.  Mr.  Home  was  then  raised  up  to  the  ceiling, 
which  he  touched,  and  regretted  not  having  a  pencil  Lo 
make  a  mark  there.  When  he  came  down,  our  host 
gave  him  one,  hoping  that  he  might  be  again  raised,  and 
in  five  minutes  after  he  was  so,  and  left  a  cross  on  the 
ceiling ;  but  just  before  this  took  place,  we  saw  his  whole 

122  SEANCES    IN    LONDON. 

face  and  chest  covered  with  the  same  silver  light  which 
we  had  observed  on  our  host's  face.  We  had  heen  sitting 
all  this  time  at  the  table,  and  soon  after  our  hands  were 
touched  and  patted  by  other  hands,  and  our  brows  touched 
by  loved  hands  whose  touch  we  knew.  Shortly  afterwards 
we  heard  the  knocks  and  sounds  die  away  in  the  distance 
out  of  doors,  and  we  felt  that  it  was  all  over.  We  had 
been  sitting  more  than  two  hours.  Our  host  and  hostess 
had  said  repeatedly  to  each  other  during  the  evening, 
'  We  never  have  nad  anything  like  this  before ; '  and  they 
certainly  have  seen  more  wonders  in  spiritualism  than 
most  people. 

"  That  burst  of  music  was  still  thrilling  on  our  hearts. 
Nothing  of  mortal  composition  could  equal  it,  and  its 
sound  was  that  of  a  fine  organ.  We  greatly  regretted 
that  no  one  in  the  room  could  take  down  the  notes.  The 
wondrous  effect  of  the  sound  of  feet,  and  the  sound  of  the 
hammer  and  nails  running  like  a  thread  through  the 
music,  it  is  impossible  that  those  who  have  not  listened  to 
it  could  understand ;  in  the  music  itself  also  there  was  a 
mixture  of  tones  out  of  my  power  to  describe."  *  *  * 

CHAPTER  VI. 

LECTURE. — XOTICE  IN  "  STAR." — FALSEHOODS  IN 
"  ALL  THE  YEAH  HOUND." 

the  15th  February,  1866,  I  delivered  a 
lecture,  in  Willis's  Rooms,  upon  Spiritualism, 
in  which  I  referred  to  the  occurrence  of 
various  phenomena  as  traceable  through  all 
past  history,  and  in  speaking  of  the  present 
time  said : — 

The  question  is  often  asked  me,  Why  do  not  men  of 
science  take  up  the  subject?  To  tell  you  the  candid 
truth  I  have  little  faith  in  electrical  experiments  conducted 
by  a  Professor  of  Greek,  and  I  think  a  Professor  of 
Chemistry  would  smile  at  the  mathematical  Professor's 
endeavours  to  go  through  some  intricate  analysis.  Every 
man  in  his  place.  I  do  not  know  why  I  should  be 
called  upon  to  pin  my  faith  on  what  Mr.  So-aml-So  may 
say  of  the  soul,  for  the  simple  reason  that  he  has  made  a 
discovery  or  two  in  the  laws  of  nature. 

It  is,  however,  maintained  by  some  that  these  wonders 
may  all  be  accounted  for  by  electricity.  I  will  mention 
the  name  of  one  well  known  to  every  scientific  scholar  in 
England  as  well  as  in  America,  the  late  Proiessoi1  Hare 
Qt  Philadelphia,  who  had  devoted  more  than  hah-a-century 
to  scientific  investigation,  and  who  was  perhaps  the  most 
distinguished  electrician  on  the  American  continent. 

121,  LECTURE. 

He  began  a  series  of  experiments  with  a  view  to  corro- 
borate Faraday's  explanations:  to  this  end  he  constructed 
apparatus  of  the  most  ingenious  kind,  of  which  in  his 
book  he  has  given  diagrams,  but  he  soon  found  that  no 
mechanical  or  electrical  theory  could  explain  the  facts ; 
and  that  besides  the  merely  physical  manifestations  an 
intelligence  demonstrated  itself  beyond  that  of  the  medium 
and  circle. 

The  result  of  Professor  Hare's  investigation  was,  that 
from  having  been  all  his  life  a  materialist,  he  became  a 
believer  in  God,  in  a  spiritual  world,  in  the  future  life  of 
man,  and,  before  his  death,  he  openly  proclaimed  himself 
a  Christian. 

Another  distinguished  investigator  was  the  Hon.  John 
\V.  Edmonds,  Judge  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  Appeal  in 
the  United  States,  one  of  the  highest  legal  functionaries 
of  the  State ;  a  man  of  acute  intellect,  cultivated  by  long 
and  extensive  legal  and  judicial  practice.  It  would  take 
too  long  to  detail  ^he  course  of  patient  and  laborious 
investigation  pursued  by  the  Judge,  aided  by  the  circle  of 
scientific  and  shrewd  educated  men,  whom  he  associated 
with  him  in  his  inquiries.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  the 
examination  was  thoroughly  exhaustive,  and  ended  in  the 
Judge  becoming  an  entire  convert.  At  all  risks  to  his 
own  popularity  and  position,  he  at  once  boldly  proclaimed 
his  conviction  to  the  world,  and  on  various  occasions  has 
given  his  experience,  and  defended  with  marked  ability 
the  truth  of  spiritualism. 

I  gave  some  descriptions  of  the  various  forms  of  medium 
development,  continuing  as  follows : — 

It  was  soon  found  that  with  certain  persons  spirits 
could  so  control  the  hand  a,s  to  write  by  it  without  the 
intervention  of  the  mind  of  the  medium.  In  other  cases, 
the  hand  is  used  to  draw  forms  sometimes  of  things  in  the 
natural  world,  at  others  of  things  affirmed  to  be  in  the 
spiritual  world.  Again,  drawings  are  executed  conveying 
some  lesson  by  symbol  and  correspondence.  These  draw- 

LECTURE.  125 

ings  arc  frequently  done  by  the  hands  of  persons  ignorant 
of  drawing,  ami  in  their  normal  state  incapable  of  executing 
them.  Spirit-drawing  and  writing  have  even  been  obtained 
without  the  intervention  of  mortal  agency.  Some  in- 
stances of  this  are  given  by  Baron  Goldcnstubbe,  of  Paris, 
in  his  work  on  "The  Reality  of  Spirits,  and  the  Mar- 
vellous Phenomena  of  their  Direct  Writings  Demonstrated," 
in  which  he  has  furnished  incontestable  evidence  that  by 
this  direct  spirit- writing  messages  in  Greek,  Latin,  Estho- 
nian,  German,  Italian,  English,  and  other  languages, 
ancient  and  modern,  have  been  obtained. 

In  his  book  sixty-seven  fac-simile  copies  of  these 
spirit-writings  are  given.  Other  persons  again  have,  by 
no  visible  agency,  been  thrown  into  an  unconscious  or 
trance  state,  in  which  they  have  personated  departed 
persons,  frequently  unknown  to  them,  but  in  a  way  so 
striking  as  to  be  at  once  recognized  by  friends  or  relatives 
present. 

More  frequently  persons  in  this  unconscious  condition 
of  trance  are  impelled  to  respond  to  inquiries  or  to  deliver 
unpremeditated  discourses,  sometimes  on  abstruse  subjects, 
beyond  the  knowledge  or  normal  capacity  of  the  medium, 
who  may  be,  and  sometimes  is,  illiterate  and  uneducated  ; 
at  other  times  languages  are  spoken  of  which  the  medium 
knows  nothing. 

In  urging  a  calm  and  deliberate  investigation,  I  said  of 
Spiritualism,  There  is  in  it  ample  room  and  verge  for  all, 
a  wide  field  of  profitable  research,  if  only  it  is  con- 
ducted in  the  true  spirit  of  inquiry — the  spirit  that  is 
willing  to  study  and  learn  of  facts,  however  strange  they 
may  seem,  however  counter  to  the  prejudices  of  philo- 
sophy ;  for  philosophy,  as  well  as  ignorance,  has  its 
prejudices,  and  sometimes  those  of  philosophy  are  tho 
most  inveterate. 

To  an  investigation  then  of  the  laws  and  principles  as 
well  as  of  the  phenomena  of  spiritualism,  I  earnestly  invite 
your  serious  attention,  and  ask  that  it  be  conducted  in 

126  LECTURE. 

the  spirit  I  have  indicated.  A  vast  oceau  of  truth,  com- 
paratively unexplored,  lies  before  yon. 

I  also  said,  I  would  not  have  you  think  for  iKtaoment 
that  I  am  not  aware  of  the  many  abuses  which  may  arise 
from  this  contact  with  the  spirit  world.  But  God  gives 
to  every  man  the  power  of  reason,  and  this  it  is  in  no 
way  the  province  of  spiritualism  to  supersede.  So  if  a 
spirit  were  to  give  advice  which  our  reason  told  us  should 
not  be  followed,  why  should  we  pay  any  more  attention  to 
him,  now  that  he  is  freed  from  the  body,  than  we  should 
if  he  were  still  moving  among  us  on  earth  as  formerly? 
All  spirits  are  not  perfect,  and  the  moment  we  give  up 
our  reason  either  to  men  or  spirits,  that  moment  we  wrong 
ourselves  and  insult  our  loving  Father.  I  have  known 
those  who  have  taken  up  spiritualism,  simply  that  they 
might  be  spoken  of;  and  others  that  they  might  use  it 
as  a  stepping-stone  into  society.  I  have  known  of  the 
most  gross  impostures  carried  on,  and  in  every  case  have 
exposed  them ;  and  God  being  my  helper,  ever  will  do  so. 
Of  course,  in  cases  like  these,  I  have  much  to  contend 
with,  even  from  my  best  friends :  they  say,  "  It  is  not 
your  place ;  let  others  do  it/'  I  feel  it  to  be  my  place, 
and  when  I  see  the  pure  and  glorious  truths  I  advocate 
drawn  down,  and  made  a  mockery  of  by  the  mob,  I  will 
lift  up  my  voice,  and  say,  "  This  is  not  spiritualism ;"  and 
if  they  will  prove  it  to  be  so,  then  I  wish  to  have  nothing 
to  do  with  it,  for  it  is  a  dark  and  damning  error,  and  the 
sooner  pure  truth-seekers  leave  it  the  better.  There  is 
no  doctrine  which  is  without  its  abuses,  and  which  is  not 
abused  by  outsiders.  Slander  is  of  earth,  and  will  die ; 
truth  is  of  God,  and  will  live. 

It  has  been  argued  that  insanity  is  a  natural  result  of 
the  belief.  I  have  been  as  much  and  more  in  a  position 
to  deny  this  statement  than  any  man  living.  I  have  had 
repeated  seances  with  various  crowned  heads.  I  have 
been  with  the  peasant  in  his  cabin,  with  the  peer  in  his 
palace.  I  have  travelled  over  a  fair  part  of  Russia, 

LECTURE.  127 

Germany,  Italy,  France,  and  Switzerland.  My  every- 
day life  has  been  with  believers  and  investigators,  and  I 
can  stand  before  you  this  evening,  and  solemnly  declare 
that  I  never  have  seen  any  person  insane  from  its  effects. 
At  the  end  of  the  year  1853,  and  the  beginning  of  1854, 
I  was  on  a  visit  in  Hartford,  Connecticut,  to  a  clergyman 
who  is  now  a  bishop.  The  state  statistics  gave  as  in- 
mates of  the  Hartford  Insane  Eetreat,  thirty-seven  from 
being  spiritualists.  On  the  very  afternoon  in  which  we 
first  saw  this  statement,  my  friend  was  to  read  prayers  at 
the  asylum.  I  accompanied  him,  and  asked  the  super- 
intendent how  many  patients  were  there  \vho  had  been 
rendered  insane  by  spiritualism.  Without  a  moment's 
hesitation  he  replied,  "  ATot  one."  This  little  fact  is.  to 
rny  way  of  thinking,  rather  significant,  showing  to  what 
base  ends  the  opponents  of  spiritualism  may  resort  to 
make  their  story  good. 

I  have  no  wish  to  make  my  lecture  a  ludicrous  one, 
which  if  I  were  to  enter  into  some  of  the  raciest  forms  of 
explaining,  "  how  it's  all  done,"  it  would  most  assuredly 
be.  One  or  two  of  the  last  will  suffice.  When  in 
Russia  this  autumn,  on  a  visit  to  his  majesty,  it  was  told 
for  a  fact,  that  I  had  a  great  number  of  cats  to  sleep  with 
me,  and  by  this  means  became  so  charged  with  electricity, 
that  the  rappings  were  heard  in  my  presence.  Another, 
that  I  held  my  feet  a  long  time  in  ice  water,  and  then 
ran  and  sat  by  the  Emperor,  putting  my  feet  in  his  hands, 
and  so  he  thought  he  touched  a  corpse-like  hand.  It  is 
cuiTcntly  reported  that  my  feet  arc  like  monkey's  feet, 
and  that  I  can  do  as  I  please  with  them.  Some  of  my 
friends  have  even  asked  to  sec  my  feet  without  shoes  or 
stockings,  that  they  might  contradict  this.  Again,  that  it 
is  a  mental  fluid,  consisting  of  emanations  from  the  person 
which  take  on  the  physical  and  mental  characteristics  of 
the  individual  automatic  cerebration,  acting  upon  the  odic 
force  of  the  medium  and  circle.  These  and  many  other 
fantastic,  far-fetched,  and  inadequate  explanations,  which 

128  LECTURE. 

in  turn  need  explaining,  have  been  from  time  to  time  put 
forth  ;  each  new  hypothesis  unkindly  exploding  its  prede- 
cessors, and  being  in  its  turn  exploded  by  a  new  one. 

One  thing  however  is  worth  pointing  out — that  while 
various  able  and  distinguished  men  hitve  written  volumes 
to  account  for  the  phenomena  by  causes  of  purely  mun- 
dane origin,  all  admit  the  reality  of  the  facts.  Those 
tyros  who,  with  little  or  no  knowledge  of  the  subject, 
think  themselves  justified  in  denouncing  the  whole  thing 
as  imposture,  ought  surely  (if  not  wholly  deficient  in 
modesty  and  common  sense)  to  be  arrested  by  the  circum- 
stance that  scientific  and  learned  men,  sceptical  as  them- 
selves, as  to  the  super-mundane  origin  of  the  facts,  have 
yet,  after  the  fullest  investigation,  been  constrained  to 
concede  their  reality  and  genuineness. 

I  trust  no  one  present  will  be  led  to  misunderstand  my 
having  referred  to  the  Bible  to  prove  the  truths  of  my 
belief.  I  have  done  so  in  all  sincerity  and  with  respect. 
I  can  find  nowhere  in  Scripture  that  God's  arm  is 
shortened,  nowhere  that  he  has  left  man  to  his  own 
devices,  and  the  spiritualism  I  have  seen  points  to  Him  the 
source  of  all,  as  the  means  of  salvation.  Why,  if  God 
be  an  everywhere  present  God,  should  not  those  who 
have  loved  us,  and  been  mortals  like  ourselves,  continue 
to  watch  over  and  care  for  us.  Think  again,  that  if 
God,  who  is  all  purity,  can  be  near  us,  why  should 
not  they  ? 

I  believe  in  my  heart,  that  this  power  is  being  spread 
more  and  more  every  day  to  draw  us  nearer  to  God. 
You  ask  if  it  makes  us  purer  ?  My  only  answer  is  that 
we  are  but  mortals,  and  as  such  liable  to  err  ;  but  it  does 
teach,  that  the  pure  in  heart  shall  see  God.  It  teaches 
us  that  He  is  love,  and  that  there  is  no  death.  To  the 
aged  it  comes  as  a  solace,  when  the  storms  of  life  are 
nearly  over  and  rest  cometh.  To  the  young  it  speaks  of 
the  duty  we  owe  to  each  other,  and  that  as  we  sow,  so 
shall  we  reap.  To  all  it  teaches  resignation.  It  cornea 

LECTURE.  129 

to  roll  away  the  clouds  of  error,  and  bring  the  bright 
morning  of  a  never-ending  dav. 

A  writer  in  the  "  Evening  Star"  described  this  lecturo 
under  the  title  of  "  An  Evening  with  tlie  Spiritualists," 
in  which  he  sketched  my  portrait  from  his  own  special 
mirror  as  appeal's  by  the  following  extract: — 

"  On  the  platform  were  a  table  and  desk,  with  a  candle 
on  each  side ;  and  in  front  of  the  platform  were  two  rows 
of  specially  reserved  seats,  in  which  sat,  among  others, ' 
several  ladies  and  gentlemen  well,  and  deservedly  well 
known  in  the  literary  and  dramatic  worlds.  I  am  told 
they  gave  a  convincing  proof  of  their  belief  in  spiritualism 
— they  paid  for  their  entrance  tickets.  Shortly  after 
eight  o'clock  a  slim,  lithe  gentleman,  with  pale  face,  light 
hair,  and  small  dark  eyes,  stepped  upon  the  platform, 
and  we  knew  that  before  us  was  Mr.  D.  D.  Home,  the 
expounder  and  oftentimes  the  subject  of  the  elevating 
influences  of  spiritualism.  With  dainty  white  fingers  he 
spread  out  before  him  certain  pages  of  manuscript,  dis- 
playing as  he  did  so  the  neatest  of  wristbands,  while  on 
his  h-i't  hand  sparkled  a  lustrous  diamond  every  time  he 
lifted  his  pocket-handkerchief.  The  spirits  could  find  no 
fault  with  the  perfectly  respectable  appearance  of  theii 
professional  advocate." 

As  the  article,  though  written,  as  might  be  expected, 
from  a  sceptical  point  of  view,  was  not  unfair,  and  con- 
tained no  other  misrepresentation,  I  am  willing  to  be- 
lieve the  gentleman  who  wrote  it  to  be  short-sighted,  and 
to  have  had  some  mist  on  his  spectacles  when  he  imagined 
he  saw  my  "  sm<tU  <htrl  <\;/<js,"  and  I  have  to  thank  him, 
on  the  whole,  for  the  fairness  of  his  account.  His  narra- 
tion contrasts  strongly  with  a  disgraceful  article  that 
appeared  in  "All  the  Year  Hound"  for  March  :»rd, 
1  866,  entitled  "  At  Homo  with  the  Spirits."  The  writer 
in  "  All  tin1  Year  Jxound ''  says: — 

"  Mr.  Home  did  not  depart  from  England  until  he  had 
appointed  a  band  of  apostles  to  preach  the  gospel  which 

130  FALSEHOODS    IN 

he  came  to  found  and  proclaim.  I  trust  I  am  not  un- 
charitable in  suspecting  that,  in  his  selection  of  persons, 
he  aimed  at  a  sort  of  parody  of  the  original  constitution  of 
the  Christian  Mission.  His  chosen  disc:«ples  were  humble 
folks,  flower-makers,  and  menders  of  shoes.  These  dis- 
ciples, with  the  aid  of  converts  in  a  higher  sphere,  have 
written  his  Testament  in  the  pages  of  two  periodicals  de- 
voted to  spiritualism.  In  these  journals  we  are  presented 
'\vith  a  record  of  Home's  miracles,  and  those  of  his  dis- 
ciples. When  Mr.  Home  took  leave  of  his  disciples,  he 
was  lifted  up  to  the  ceiling  in  their  presence.  Is  this  also 
a  parody  of  a  certain  event  in  sacred  history  ?  When  I 
come  to  notice  the  lecture  which  Mr.  Home  delivered  the 
other  evening  at  Willis's  Eooms,  the  reader  will  be  able 
to  answer  the  question  for  himself. 

"  When  Mr.  Addison,  who  was  said  by  the  spiritualists 
to  be  a  medium  in  spite  of  himself,  offered  Mr.  Home 
fifty  pounds  if  he  could  float  in  the  air  in  his  presence, 
Mr.  Home  escaped  from  the  dilemma  by  declining  the 
challenge  ;  but  the  Davenports,  too  confident  of  their 
skill,  submitted  to  a  test  and  were  found  out.  The  com- 
plete exposure  of  this  last  form  of  spiritualism  has  worked 
a  great  change  in  the  tactics  of  the  apostles.  Finding  it 
no  longer  possible  to  cope  with  the  band  of  detectors,  who 
have  made  it  their  mission  to  meet  and  expose  them  on  all 
occasions,  they  have  dropped  miracle  working,  and  now 
confine  themselves  to  preaching  spiritualism  as  a  new 
faith. 

"  On  Thursday,  the  fifteenth  of  February,  I  attended 
Willis's  Rooms  to  hear  the  apostle  preach ;  but  before  I 
could  bring  myself  under  the  influence  of  the  new  gospel, 
I  was  called  upon  to  pay  ten  shillings  and  sixpence. 
'  Are  there  no  five-shilling  seats  ? '  I  asked.  The 
answer  was  '  No ;  they  are  all  gone  ;  only  a  few  half- 
guinea  seats  left.'  I  paid  my  half-guinea  and  entered 
the  room,  and  found  that  there  were  plenty  of  five-shilling 
seats  vacant,  but  only  a  few  half-guinea  ones.  On  coming 

ALL    THE    YEAR    ROUND.        131 

out  I  accused  the  man  at  the  door  of  having  (to  use  the 
mildest  term)  deceived  me.  He  did  not  deny  it;  but 
said  in  excuse,  that  it  was  not  his  fault;  he  had  been  told 
to  say  there  wore  no  live-shilling  seats. 

"  I  will  relate  briefly  what  1  heard  and  saw,  and  what 
was  the  impression  left  upon  my  mind. 

"  As  Mr.  Home  takes  credit  for  being  a  medium,  with 
extraordinary  powers  of  body  and  mind,  he  can  scarcely 
object  to  a  description  of  his  person.  He  is  a  tall,  thin 
man,  with  broad,  square  shoulders,  suggestive  of  a  suit  of 
clothes  hung  upon  an  iron  cross.  His  hair  is  long  and 
yellow ;  his  teeth  are  large,  glittering,  and  sharp  ;  his 
eyes  are  a  pale  grey,  with  a  redness  about  the  eyelids, 
which  comes  and  goes  in  a  ghostly  manner  as  he  talks. 
AN  hen  he  shows  his  glittering,  sharp  teeth,  and  that  red 
rim  comes  round  his  slowly-rolling  eyes,  he  is  not  a 
pleasant  sight  to  look  upon.  His  hands  were  long,  white 
and  bony,  and  you  knew,  without  touching  them,  that 
they  were  icy  cold.  He  stooped  over  his  paper,  and 
rarely  looked  up,  except  to  turn  his  eyes  towards  heaven 
in  an  appeal  to  the  Deity.  The  first  part  of  the  lecture 
was  very  dull  and  heavy,  being  all  about  the  indestructi- 
bility of  matter.  Before  this  "  head "  was  exhausted  I 
counted  fifteen  members  of  the  congregation  who  were 
fast  asleep.  After  my  experience  at  the  pay-place  it  was 
rather  startling  to  hear  Mr.  Home  disclaiming  all  mer- 
cenary motives,  and  declaring  that  he  had  never  received, 
and  never  would  receive,  money  for  his  work.  In  a 
private  circular  to  his  friends  he  says,  *  I  need  not  tell 
you  how  important  it  is  to  me  to  have  the  support  of  my 
friends,  not  only  as  a  comfort  and  encouragement  to  me, 
but  as  essentially  aiding  the  cause  in  which  they  and  I  are 
deeply  interested.  Much,  indeed,  of  mij  oicn  fortune 
must  depend  on  the  issue  of  this  experiment.'  I  leave 
the  reader  to  reconcile  this  appeal  with  his  disavowal  of 
mercenary  motives  how  he  or  she  can. 

"  It  was  a  contradiction  to  deny  the  truth  of  spirit 

132  FALSEHOODS    IN 

rapping,  when  every  Sunday  in  church  we  declared  our 
belief  in  the  communion  of  saints.  Such  was  the  argu- 
ment. 

"  When  Mr.  Home  was  in  the  middle  of  his  statistics, 
Professor  Anderson,  the  conjuror,  rose  from  a  back  seat 
and  said,  <  That  is  wrong.'  Said  Mr.  Home,  «  When  I 
have  finished  my  lecture,  I  will  hear  what  you  have  to 
say.'  Accordingly,  when  the  lecture  was  finished,  the 
Professor  walked  up  the  room,  ascended  the  platform,  and 
began  deliberately  to  take  off  his  coat.  Mr.  Home,  not 
liking  the  look  of  this  proceeding,  immediately  hopped 
down  from  the  platform  and  began  distributing  bills 
among  his  friends.  But  the  conjuror  had  no  intention  of 
challenging  Mr.  Home  to  fisticuffs.  He  had  merely 
taken  off  his  great  coat  to  give  fuller  play  to  his  lungs  in 
a  meditated  effort  of  oratory.  But  the  congregation 
declined  to  listen  to  him.  His  first  word  was  drowned  in 
hisses  and  cries  of  *  Off,  off.'  He  tried  again  and  again 
to  obtain  a  hearing,  but  in  vain ;  and  shouting  at  the  top 
of  his  voice,  '  Swindle  !  humbug  \  blasphemy  !'  <fcc.,  the 
conjuror  was  obliged  to  resume  his  coat  and  descend.  He 
had  not  one  friend  in  the  room. 

"  Now  what  is  the  doctrine  which  Mr.  Home  propounds, 
and  all  these  people  subscribe  to  as  a  new  article  of  faith  ? 
Boldly ,this — that  spiritualism,  founded  upon  table-rapping, 
rope- tying,  and  banjo-playing  in  a  cupboard,  is  a  means 
of  man's  salvation  !  These  are  Mr.  Home's  own  words." 

From  these  extracts  my  readers  can  judge  how  much 
the  writer  related  of  "  what  he  heard  and  saw,"  and  how 
much  of  "  the  impression  left  on  his  mind."  It  is  quite 
clear  that  by  far  the  greater  part  of  what  he  says  consists 
of  the  impression  left  on  his  mind,  no  doubt,  but  which 
had  existed  there  long  previous  to  the  lecture.  Of  this  I 
should  not  complain,  were  it  not  that  the  "  impression," 
whatever  it  may  have  been,  has  led  him  to  make  asser- 
tions, which,  unfortunately,  I  must  set  down  as  impressions 
of  falsehood.  Perhaps  this  may  be  accounted  for  on  the 

ALL    THE    YEAR    ROUND.        133 

supposition  that  the  writer  is  a  well-known  writer  of 
fiction,  who  naturally  finds  it  not  easy  to  adhere  to  mere 
facts,  and  this  is  very  evident  from  the  imaginative  por«- 
trait  which  he  has  presented  to  his  readers  as  my  likeness, 
as  1  neither  rejoice  in  the  possession  of  yeUow  hair,  pointed 
teeth,  grey  eyes,  nor  icy  cold  hands. 

Can  anything  be  more  false  than  to  say  that  my  own 
words  are  "  that  spiritualism  founded  up  >n  table-rapping, 
rope-tying,  and  banjo-playing  in  a  cupboard,  is  a  means 
'  of  man's  salvation.'  "  I  never  spoke  such  a  sentence  ; 
I  have  never  had  anything  to  do  with  '  rope-tying  and 
banjo-playing  in  a  cupboard,'  be  these  the  tricks  of  spirits 
or  others,  and  least  of  all  have  I  ever  said  that  spiritualism 
was  founded  on  such  manifestations.  I  maintain  that  the 
communion  of  the  spirits  who  have  departed  this  life,  with 
those  who  still  remain  in  their  earthly  bodies,  is  a  most 
important  means  of  man's  salvation,  and  an  agent  of  the 
Bible  Society  might  as  fairly  be  accused  of  stating  that 
Mother  llubbard  and  the  House  that  Jack  built  were  on 
a  par  with  Holy  Writ  because  they  were  issued  from  the 
printing  press,  as  I  have  been  accused  of  the  assertion 
above  quoted. 

With  regard  to  Professor  Anderson  the  writer  says, 
"  His  first  word  was  drowned  in  hisses  and  cries  of  '  Off, 
off.'  "  This  is  totally  untrue,  for  the  '  Professor '  was  not 
interrupted  until  he  had  uttered  a  tolerably  long  tirade  of 
abuse,  unaccompanied  by  a  word  of  argument  or  a  state- 
ment of  fact.  It  was  not  until  it  became  painfully 
evident  to  all  present  that  the  '  Professor  '  was  in  a  con- 
dition which  rendered  him  unfit  to  stand  before  a  public 
meeting  that  steps  were  taken  to  put  an  end  to  his  speech, 
for  which  he  appeared  to  have  been  preparing  by  leaving 
my  lecture  from  time  to  time  and  resorting  to  a  fountain 
of  inspiration  from  which  he  constant! v  returned,  with  a 
flush  on  his  countenance  probably  arising  from  antici- 
pations of  coming  victory  over  me. 

The  following  letter,  of  which  no  notice  whatever  was 

134  FALSEHOODS    IN 

taken,  was  written  to  the  editor  of  "  All  the  Year  Round," 
with  reference  to  this  mendacious  article  : — 

"  MY  DEAR  MR.  WILLS, 

"  Will  you  let  me  enter  my  protest  against  a  very 
false  and  scandalous  libel  which  appears  in  "  All,  the  Year 
Round,"  and  express  my  regret  that  you  should  be  a  party 
to  its  publication — you  who  know  that  such  men  as  Robert 
Chambers,  William  Howitt,  Professor  De  Morgan,  myself, 
and  a  host  of  others,  quite  as  intelligent  and  upright,  are 
firm  believers  in  phenomena  called  '  spiritualism/ 

"  No  doubt  you  are  fully  free  to  cry  such  men  down, 
however  much  you  may  respect  and  regard  them — how- 
ever much  confidence  you  may  have  in  their  integrity  and 
intellectual  faculties — their  capacity  for  judging,  and  their 
honesty  in  arriving  at  conclusions,  but  you  are  not  free  to 
let  any  contributor  in  your  columns  state  that  which  he 
knows  to  be  false,  as  does  the  writer  of  the  article  on  Mr. 
D.  D.  Home. 

"  It  is  a  mass  of  deliberate  falsehood,  and  you  ought  to 
know  it  is  so.  I  will  not  trouble  you  by  going  through  it 
in  proof;  I  will  merely  point  to  two  assertions  : — one, 
that  he  '  distributed  bills  '  after  the  lecture  —  the  other, 
that  his  circular  declared  '  that  much  of  his  own  fortune 
must  depend  on  the  issue  of  this  experiment.' 

"  In  reference  to  the  first  of  these  two  falsehoods  I  can 
only  give  you  now  my  own  assurance  ;  that  Home  distri- 
buted, no  bills,  having  none  to  distribute.  In  regard  to 
the  second  falsehood,  I  send  you  a  copy  of  the  only 
circular  he  issued.  You  will  see  for  yourself  how  dis- 
honourable and  disgraceful  has  been  the  change  of  a  word 
to  give  a  totally  different  meaning  to  the  sentence.  The 
writer  of  that  article,  be  he  who  he  may,  is  a  dishonest 
man,  to  say  the  least.  He  may  have  a  right  to  criticise 
that  of  which  he  knows  nothing,  but  he  has  no  right  to 
describe  as  dupes  of  an  impostor,  men,  who  I  am  very  sure, 
many  of  them,  are  in  all  ways  liis  betters,  and  far  more 
fitted  than  he  is  to  examine  and  judge. 

ALL    THE    YEAU     'ROUND.        135 

"  What  pretence  to  right  can  such  a  man  have  who 
describes  a  pci-son — much  respected,  at  all  events  hy  many 
who  are  thrmselu's  re-peclod — as*  seeking  his  daily  bread 
hy  professions  which  he  knows  to  be  false,  wicked  and 
blasphemous.' 

*'  Of  course  you  liave  shot  the  arrow,  and  will  let  the  barb 
stick ;  you  will  not  show  the  other  side.  Most  probably 
you  will  not  even  correct  the  scandalous  misstatements  to 
which  I  have  drawn  your  attention — one  of  which  is  pal- 
pable, for  here  is  the  proof  in  this  circular. 

"  You  will  not,  I  trust,  be  angry  with  me  for  writing  you. 
Your  contributor  may,  if  he  likes,  think  me  a  fool  or  a 
rogue,  whichever  he  pleases;  but  I  am  sure  you  do  not 
consider  me  one  or  the  other. 

"Ever  faithfully  yours, 

«  S.  C.  HALL/' 

The  following  passages  are  taken  from  a  review  of  this 
article,  which  appeared  in  the  "  Spiritual  Times,"  March 
17,  18G6:— 

"  '  All  the  Year  Round,'  March  3,  contains  an  article, 
'  At  Home  with  the  Spirits,'  written  in  a  free  stylo,  that 
is,  with  a  latitude  which  gives  the  reins  to  fancy  with  a 
reckless  disregard  of  fact.  The  writer  commences  by 
telling  us  that  he  is  disposed  to  '  regard  the  apostles  of 
startling  and  incredible  doctrine  rather  as  fools  than 
rogues,'  and  takes  credit  to  himself  for  impartiality,  and 
assumes  to  have  given  all  who  have  '  promulgated  start- 
ling and  incredible  doctrine'  a  fair  hearing,  and  never 
'  scoffed.'  But  now  he  is  out  of  patience,  evidently,  for  he 
doesn't  scoff,  but  only  calls  us  '  fools.'  How  we  are  to  re- 
ceive '  fair '  treatment  at  his  hands,  being  prejudged  by 
him  as  '  fools,'  we  are  at  a  loss  to  understand  !  We  next 
come  to  a  humourous  anecdote,  detailed,  no  doubt,  in  all 
its  mhwtlfK,  with  exactitude,  in  which  we  are  introduced 
to  a  Scotch  shoemaker  and  his  man,  who  took  to  phren- 
ology and  electro-biology,  and  forsook  the  lapstonc.  The 
shoemaker  gets  the  credit  of  having  been  honest,  but  his 

136  FALSEHOODS    IN 

man  whom  he  took  about  with  him  as  a  subject  is  credited 
with  imposture.  This  anecdote  is  introduced  to  serve  a 
double  purpose — spin  out  the  article,  and  clear  the  way 
for  a  stronger  assault  on  spiritualism.  But  how  can  it 
affect  electro-biology,  which  any  ordinary  person  may 
prove  a  truth  for  himself? 

"  It  is  no  discredit  to  a  shoemaker  to  study  mental 
science,  and  employ  himself  in  its  service ;  but  it  is  dis- 
creditable for  him  to  fabricate  falsehood,  or  do  anything 
that  degrades  his  moral  nature.  We  trust  sincerely  the 
writer  in  '  All  the  Year  Round '  has  not  consciously  been 
guilty  of  this.  That  he  has  fabricated  falsehood  in  dealing 
with  spiritualism  we  shall,  we  think,  be  able  to  show. 
Let  those  who  laugh  with  him  help  him  out  of  it  if  they 
can.  The  *  fools/  we  beg  pardon,  spiritualists,  are  '  trick- 
sters,' but  mostly  '  credulous  persons  '  who  unwittingly 
help  to  practise  the  '  trick  upon  others.' 

"  Thus  this  moderate  and  exemplary  writer  deals  with 
us  as  a  body.  But  he  is  principally  interested  in  Mr. 
Home  and  his  late  lecture  at  Willis's  Rooms.  The 
electro-biology  l  trick '  was  found  to  be  too  mundane,  and 
it  became  an  '  object '  to  introduce  '  a  supra-mundane  ele- 
ment.' Thus  the  writer  in  '  All  the  Year  Round '  per- 
suades himself  and  his  readers  that  a  system  of  concerted 
humbug,  commencing  with  electro-biology  and  ending 
with  spiritualism  was  and  is  at  work ;  and  yet  he  admits 
'  the  believers  were  chiefly  persons  moving  in  the  upper 
circles  of  society,  some  of  them  distinguished  for  their 
high  intellectual  attainments.'  Yet  still  these  are,  in  the 
majority  of  instances,  '  fools ;'  and  what  a  miracle  that 
such  men  as  the  Scotch  shoemaker,  who  was  made  the 
dupe  of  his  man — who  practised  a  hoax  to  get  rid  of  the 
stubborn  necessity  of  lapstoning  leather — could  perform  a 
work  ending  in  making  believers  <  distinguished  for  their 
high  literary  attainments  ! '  It  is  really  surprising  that 
men  can  write  such  twaddle.  If  a  few  charlatans,  too 
lazy  to  '  stick  to  the  last '  can  be  credited  with  the  whole 

ALL    THE    YEAR    ROUND.        137 

spiritualist  '  delusion/  which  numbers  its  adherents  by  mil- 
lions, many  of  whom  are  among  the  upper  and  literary 
classes,  it  would  appoar  that  men  of  'intellectual  and  lite- 
rary attainments'  are  ru>ilv  duped. 

"  Another  anecdote  is  given  of  an  author  who  was  in 
the  habit  of  consulting  the  spirits,  but  who,  like  many  an- 
other author,  went  to  his  account  early  in  life.  Of  course, 
it  is  hinted  that  his  death  was  hurried  through  the  excite- 
ment of  '  spirit-rapping  seances.'  Authors  are  not  gene- 
rally long-lived ;  many  of  them  indulge  too  much  in 
evening  parties — some  of  them  smoke  and  drink  exces- 
sively, almost  all  of  them  live  a  life  of  excitement  of  some 
kind.  Much  of  the  excitement  attendant  upon  authorship 
is  unavoidable.  If  the  author  mentioned  did  indulge  too 
much  in  l  spirit-rapping  seances,1  his  fate  should  be  a 
warning  to  the  intemperate.  Over-indulgence  in  eating, 
drinking,  or  thinking  is  to  be  condemned  and  must  be  ex- 
piated ;  but  it  by  no  means  proves  that  eating,  drinking, 
and  thinking  are  in  themselves  evil. 

'•  Mr.  Home  is  charged  with  appearing  amongst  us 
and  choosing  disciples,  after  the  manner  of  Christ,  from 
persons  of  very  humble  origin ;  and  he  is  further  said  to 
have  taken  leave  of  his  disciples  by  being  lifted  to  the 
ceiling  in  their  presence.  This  may  be  fine  writing,  and 
very  grateful  to  the  majority  of  the  readers  of  '  A 11  the 
Year  Round,'  but  it  is  not  altogether  true.  Mr.  Home 
never  chose  a  disciple  ;  he  had  something  else  to  do.  lie 
was  lifted  to  the  ceiling  in  presence  of  people  of  '  exalted 
position  and  high  literary  attainments,'  and  no  flower- 
makers  and  vendors  of  shoes  that  we  know  of  ever  saw  him 
float.  '  AVhen  Mr.  Addison  offered  Mr.  Home  fifty  pounds 
if  he  could  float  in  the  air  in  his  presence.'  says  this  truth- 
loving  writer,  '  Mr.  Home  escaped  from  the  dilemma  by 
declining  the  challenge.'  This  offer,  we  are  authorised  to 
state,  was  never  made  known  to  Mr.  Home;  in  fact.  .Mr. 
Home  knows  nothing  whatever  of  Mr.  Addison.  Besides, 
had  the  offer  been  made,  Mr.  Home  would  have  acted 

138  FALSEHOODS    IN 

wisely  in  '  declining  the  challenge.'  It  is  one  of  the  most 
convincing  proofs  of  the  spiritual  agencies  at  work  in  the 
process  of  levitation,  that  he  is  only  raised  in  the  air  occa- 
sionally, and  never  at  his  own  dictation. 

"  The  writer  is  not  at  all  particular  in  his  manner 
of  maltreating  Mr.  Home  and  the  spiritualists.  He  pre- 
sents a  word-portrait  of  some  imaginary  monstrosity, 
which  he  desires  his  readers  to  accept  for  Mr.  Home.  He 
tells  us  that  he  was  deceived,  on  entering  Willis's  Kooms, 
by  being  told  that  there  were  no  five-shilling  seats  left 
when  there  were  several.  This  affair  of  the  manager  he 
mildly  charges  upon  Mr.  Home.1  We  can  now  understand 
the  motive  of  the  animus  which  has  set  his  pen  to  work  on 
this  subject.  To  give  a  specimen  of  his  regard  for  the 
truth,  he  declares  that  before  the  first  part  of  Mr.  Home's 
discourse  was  finished,  he  '  counted  fifteen  members  of  the 
congregation  who  were  fast  asleep.'  Is  there  another 
person  besides  this  writer  who  will  state  this  ?  We  think 
not.  The  audience,  according  to  the  writer's  own  admis- 
sions, consisted  almost  entirely  of  Mr.  Home's  friends.  Is 
it  likely  they  would  fall  asleep  in  the  middle  of  his 
lecture  ? 

"  With  a  view  to  make  Mr.  Home  appear  mercenary — al- 
though he  stated  at  the  commencement  of  his  lecture  that  he 
had  never  exercised,  and  he  never  would  exercise,  his  me- 
dium powers  for  money — the  discomfited  writer,  violating 
the  common  rules  of  privacy,  misquotes  Mr.  Home's  cir- 
cular to  his  friends  by  putting  the  word  fortune  for  future. 
'Much,  indeed,  of  my  own  future  must  depend  on  the 
issue  of  this  experiment/*  *  All  the  Year  Hound,'  in 
italics  says,  '  My  own  fortune?  If  fifteen  of  the  congre- 

1  We  have  taken  the  trouble  to  enquire  of  the  manager  about 
this  matter,  and  we  learn  that  all  the  five-shilling  tickets  were 
Bold,  and  that  those  seats  which  (he  writer  sa\v  vacant,  were  half- 
guinea  seats.  And  we  are  assured  that  a  seat  would  have  beea 
offered  him  gratis,  with  the  other  reporters,  had  he  only  shown 
his  card,  and  stated  that  he  was  one  of  the  pi-ess. 

ALL    THE    TEAR    EOUND.        100 

gation  were  not  nslecp,  surely  this  writer  was  nearly  so, 
or  he  must  have  purposely  made  this  alteration. 

"  A  lady  is  said  to  have  gone  up  to  Mr.  Home,  and 
asked  him  to  'settle'  with  her;  was  this  meant  for 
'  sit '  ?  Professor  Anderson  next  appears  on  the  scene, 
and  when  he  is  described  as  mounting  the  platform  and 
pulling  off  his  coat,  Mr.  Home  is  described  as  hopping  off 
the  platform,  and  distributing  bills  amongst  the  audience. 
Surely  the  writer  must  have  been  very  nearly  asleep. 
Mr.  Home  had  no  bills  to  distribute,  and  he  did  not  leave 
the  platform  until  he  had  listened  to  a  tirade  of  abuse 
from  the  Professor.  Such  is  a  very  rapid  glance  at  the 
article  in  '  All  the  Year  Hound.'  When  the  writer  next 
takes  up  his  pen  to  deal  with  spiritualism,  we  trust  he 
will  recollect  the  words,  'A  lying  lip  is  an  abomination  to 
the  Lord.' 

"  Ixarely  has  an  article  been  written  against  spiri- 
tualism which  contained  so  many  glaring  falsehoods  as 
this : — 

" '  Now,  what  is  the  doctrine  which  Mr.  Home  pro- 
pounds, and  all  these  people  subscribe  to  as  a  new  article 
of  faith  ?  Boldly  this — that  spiritualism,  founded  upon 
table-rappings,  rope-tying,  and  banjo-playing  in  a  cup- 
board, is  a  means  of  man's  salvation — these  are  Mr.  Home's 
own  words.'  The  writer  must  have  been  nearly  deaf  as 
well  as  nearly  asleep.  Mr.  Home  said  nothing  of  the 
kind.  He  did  say  that  a  knowledge  of  the  reality  of 
spirit  phenomena  leads  the  atheist  and  materialist  to  the 
higher  knowledge  of  immortal  life,  or  something  of  the 
kind. 

"  Fancy  this  writer  being  consistent,  and  saying  of  the 
Christian  church — baptismal  fonts,  communion  tables, 
surplices,  and  ceremonials,  are  means  of  man's  Migration, 
leaving  out  altogether  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  This  would 
be  doing  by  orthodoxy  what  he  does  by  spiritualism. 

CHAPTER  VII. 

SPIRITUAL  ATHENAEUM — IDENTITY — GUARDIANS  OF 
STRENGTH — SPIRIT  MESMERISM. 

the  latter  part  of  1866,  a  number  of 
gentlemen  interested  in  spiritualism  decided 
upon  the  formation  of  a  limited  society, 
relating  to  which  the  following  circular  was 
printed : — 

"  MANY  spiritualists  and  friends  of  spiritualism,  consider- 
ing that  a  place  in  London  is  greatly  needed  where  they  may 
frequently  meet,  have  resolved  to  establish  a  society  under 
the  name  of  The  Spiritual  Athenaeum,  at  No.  22,  Sloane 
Street,  Knightsbridge.  At  present,  many  persons  who 
have  been  largely  gifted  with  l  spiritual  gifts'  are  without 
the  power  to  make  them  known  for  the  general  good ; 
while  it  is  certain  that  several  distinguished  foreigners, 
thus  gifted,  have  visited  and  left  London  without  making 
the  acquaintance  of  a  single  spiritualist. 

"  The  society  proposes  to  meet  the  difficulties  that  im- 
pede the  progress  of  spiritualism,  by  the  establishment  to 
which  they  draw  your  attention, — where  subscribers  will 
have  the  advantage  of  intercourse  with  mediums  who  may 
either  be  found,  or  who  visit  England  from  America, 
France,  and  other  countries ;  where  books  and  periodical 
works  in  various  languages  may  be  received  and  circu- 
lated; where  occasional  lectures  shall  be  given  (written 

SPIRITUAL    ATHENJEUM.        141 

papers  being  sometimes  printed,  perhaps  quarterly,  as 
*  Transactions') ;  where  a  system  of  useful  correspondence 
may  be  carried  out ;  where  '  experiences'  may  be  com- 
municated and  recorded  ;  where,  in  brief,  there  shall  be 
a  rallying  point  for  spiritualists  and  their  friends  for  the 
interchange  of  information  and  for  consultation  ;  and  where 
'  sittings,'  under  judicious  arrangements,  shall  be  regu- 
larly held  with  Mr.  Home  and  other  mediums. 

"  It  is  proposed  to  appoint  Mr.  D.  D.  Home  as  resi- 
dent Secretary  at  the  Institution.  He  will  act  under  the 
guidance  and  direction  of  a  council  and  an  executive  com- 
mittee, one  of  whom  w  ill  act  as  honorary  treasurer. 

"  \\c  believe  that  Mr.  Home's  mediumship  (free  of  all 
conflicting  influences)  may  thus  be  made  wider  and  more 
practical  in  its  beneficial  effects.  We  believe,  also,  that 
other  mediums  may  be  thus  enabled  essentially  to  eluci- 
date and  advance  spiritualism,  and  that,  hence,  na- 
tions into  the  subject  may  lead  to  convictions  of  its  truth. 

"  It  will  be  a  leading  duty  of  the  executive  committee, 
acting  with  the  council,  to  make  such  arrangements  as  shall 
secure  facilities  for  healthy,  useful,  and  instructive  com- 
munion to  those  who  seek,  as  well  as  those  who  arc  willing 
to  give,  information  'concerning  spiritual  gifts;'  while 
promo! ing  social  intercourse,  aiming  at  loftier  and  holier 
objects,  checking  the  spread  of  materialism,  upholding 
the  truths  and  extending  the  influence  of  Christianity, 
and  bringing  closer  the  bonds  of  peace  and  love  among  man- 
kind, inculcating  by  another  power — acting  in  accordance 
with  Holy  Writ,  and  co-operating  with  the  Christian  teacher 
— duty  to  God  and  to  our  neighbour. 

"  We  therefore  ask  yon  to  give  effect  to  our  plan,  by 
agreeing  to  subscribe  ;"»/.  f>x.  annually,  so  long  as  it  shall 
be  satisfactory  to  you  to  do  so,  in  order  to  establish  the 
Spiritual  Athenaeum.  No  other  responsibility  of  any  kind 
will  be  incurred  by  subscribers.  We  wish  t<>  limit  the 
number  of  subscribers  to  one  hundred,  but  w.-  believe  that 
eighty  will  be  sufficient  to  meet  all  requirements — such 

142        SPIRITUAL    ATHENAEUM. 

as  rent  of  rooms,  the  supply  of  a  library,  moderate  refresh- 
ments at  conversazioni,  and  the  expenses  of  the  secretary. 

"  The  following  gentlemen  have  consented  to  act  as 
the  council ;  those  who  are  thus  indicated  (*)  forming  the 
executive  committee.  It  will  be  observed  that  several  of 
the  members  are  practical  men  of  business,  and  therefore, 
that  a  wise  superintendence  will  be  exercised  over  the  pro- 
ceedings of  the  society.  With  the  council  several  ladies 
of  position  and  influence  will  be  associated. 

"PRESENT   LIST    OF   COUNCIL. 

(To  which  additions  will  be  made.) 

G.  Brocklebank,  Esq.,  Lombard  Street,  and  Greenwich. 

Dr.  Elliotson,  Davies  Street,  Berkeley  Square. 

Capt.  Drayson,  R.A.,  Woolwich. 

Count  P.  de  Gendre,  68,  Westbourne  Terrace, 

H.  G.  Gibson,  Esq.,  33,  Mark  Lane,  and  Mecklenburg 
Square. 

John  Hampden  Gledstanes,  Esq.,  London  and  Paris. 

J.  M.  Gully,  Esq.,  M.D.,  Malvern. 

*S.  C.  Hall,  Esq.,  F.S.A.,  Barrister-at-Law,  8,  Essex 
Villas,  Kensington. 

Henry  T.  Humphreys,  Esq.,  1,  Clifford's  Inn. 

*H.  G.  Jencken,  Esq.,  (Honorary  Treasurer),  Barrister- 
at-Law,  Kilmorey  House,  Norwood. 

Ion  Perdicaris,  Esq.,  Gloucester  Terrace,  Campden  Hill. 

*H.  Eudall,  Esq.,  9,  Great  Tower  Street,  and  the  Grove, 
Camberwell. 

*H.  W.  Spratt,  Esq.,  Wralbrook  Buildings,  and  South 
Villas,  Greenwich. 

*E.  C.  Sterling,  Esq.,  104,  Sloane  Street. 

The  Eev.  J.  G.  Wood,  M.A.,  Belvedere,  Kent. 
22,  Sloane  Street,  Knightsbridge. 

During  the  perfecting  of  arrangements  connected  with 
the  "  Spiritual  Athenaeum,''  some  of  the  members  of  the 
council  met,  from  time  to  time,  in  Sloane  Street,  and  at 

IDENTITY.  143 

times  some  interesting  manifestations  occurred.  Al- 
though each  of  these  possessed  its  special  interest  for 
them  \vho  witnessed  it,  few  of  them  call  for  any  notice. 
I  shall  however  briefly  relate  the  circumstances  connected 
with  one  which  occurred  at  a  preliminary  meeting  of  the 
council. 

On  this  occasion  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall,  Mr.  Jencken,  Mr. 
Perdicaris,  and  Mr.  Humphreys,  with  myself,  had  met, 
and,  after  some  time,  while  they  were  discussing 
matters  of  business,  I  saw  a  spirit  who  gave  me  her 
name,  and  said  she  was  the  daughter  of  Dr.  Robert 
Chambers.  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall,  who  was  acquainted  with 
the  family,  did  not  believe  that  Dr.  Robert  Chambers 
had  had  a  daughter  of  that  name.  I  said  that  we 
might  be  certain  that  he  had,  and  as  I  said  so  three  raps 
sounded  on  the  floor.  As  the  object  of  communication 
was  that  Mr.  Hall  should  write  to  Dr.  R.  Chambers  con- 
cerning certain  matters,  he  undertook  to  do  so,  though 
rather  unwillingly,  and  it  was  not  till  several  weeks  later 
that  he  ascertained  that  the  name  was  correct.  Even 
then  Dr.  R.  Chambers  was  not  communicated  with,  and 
at  a  seance  at  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall's,  at  Essex  Villas,  Campden 
Hill,  this  spirit  came  to  the  circle  and  expressed  to  me 
her  regret  that  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall  had  not  written  to  her 
father  as  requested.  She  detailed  the  fresh  position  of 
affairs  with  respect  to  what  she  desired  to  have  done,  and 
was  accompanied  by  the  spirit  of  a  sister  who  bad  left 
earth  at  an  early  age,  and  gave  the  words  "  Pa,  love." 
Dr.  Robert  Chambers  was  written  to,  and  in  reply  wrote : 
"  The  whole  of  the  communications  accord  with  actual  i'aets. 
The  words,  'Pa,  love,'  were  the  last  words  she  pronounced 
in  life."  In  a  letter  to  myself,  written  also  about  this 
time,  Dr.  R.  Chambers  says,  after  relating  an  event 
which  confirmed  a  message  sent  him,  "  So  you  sec  Mary 
was  right  about  the  imminence  of  that  step,  of  which  I 
knew  nothing." 

The  formal  opening  of  the  Spiritual  Athenaeum  took 

144        SPIRITUAL    ATHENdlUM. 

place  on  the  4th  January,  1867,  and  the  following  notice 
concerning  it  appeared  in  "  The  Spiritual  Magazine  "  : — 

"  OPENING  OF  THE  SPIRITUAL  ATHENAEUM. — The 
opening  meeting  of  the  Spiritual  Athenaeum  took  place  on 
Friday  evening,  January  4.  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall,  F.S.A., 
opened  the  meeting  hy  an  excellent  introductory  address. 
A  brief  paper  by  Dr.  Gully  was  read  ;  and  Mr.  D.  D.  Home 
Lyon  lectured  on,  and  described  '  Spiritual  Drawings/ 
a  number  of  which,  by  various  persons,  were  laid  on  the 
tables.  The  remainder  of  the  evening  was  occupied  by 
conversation  concerning  the  prospects  and  progress  of 
spiritualism.  The  meeting  was  well  attended,  and  highly 
gratifying  to  all  who  took  part  in  it. 

One  result  of  the  establishment  of  the  Spiritual 
Athenaeum  was  to  attract  the  attention  of  spiritualists  in 
various  parts  of  the  kingdom, 'and  I  received  letters  from 
several  quarters  relating  the  progress  which  spiritualism 
was  making,  and  giving  accounts  of  numbers  of  circles 
organised  for  the  purpose  of  investigating  the  subject. 
My  own  loss  of  health  in  1867,  together  with  other  cir- 
cumstances, fully  explained  in  connection  with  the  Lyon 
lawsuit,  led  to  the  Athenaeum  being  closed. 

The  whole  history  of  my  acquaintance  with  Mrs.  Lyon 
being  fully  detailed  in  the  account  of  the  lawsuit  which 
commences  in  a  subsequent  chapter,  I  pass  it  by  for  the 
moment  and  proceed  here  to  give  accounts  of  a  few  seances 
which  occurred  in  1867. 

The  following  account  of  the  appearance  of  '•  Guar- 
dians of  Strength  "  is  worthy  of  being  recorded,  the  mani- 
festation of  such  spirits  being  of  rare  occurrence ;  it 
appeared  in  "  The  Spiritual  Magazine  "  for  March,  1867, 
from  the  pen  of  Dr.  Gully,  Malvern. 

"  About  the  28th  of  last  November,  my  friend  Mr. 
Home,  being  in  a  trance,  was  examining  my  body  with  a 
view  of  ascertaining  the  state  of  health  in  which  it  was. 
All  who  have  seen  Mr.  Home  in  this  state  of  trance,  are 
aware  how  clearly  he  sees  and  communicates  with  spirits 

GUARDIANS    OF    STRENGTH.     145 

that  have  parcel  from  the  body.  And  marvellous  and 
marvellously  beautiful  have  been  the  communications 
made  by  thorn,  through  him,  which  it  has  been  my 
fortune  to  hear.  The  gestures,  the  most  trivial  actions 
of  bodily  life,  the  mode  of  walking-  and  speaking,  the 
voice,  the  infirmities  of  persons  who  have  passed  away 
long  before  he  was  born,  and  concerning  whose  peculi- 
arities in  all  these  particulars  Mr.  Home  had  not  the 
least  possible  means  of  obtaining  any  knowledge,  are  all 
repeated  by  him  when  in  this  state  with  an  accuracy  of 
detail  which  leaves  no  doubt,  either  that  he  is  at  the 
moment  possessed  by  the  spirit  whose  earthly  character- 
istics he  is  delineating,  or  that  he  is  receiving  from  them 
or  from  other  spirits  impressive  communications  which 
enable  him  to  reproduce  them.  On  the  occasion  referred 
to,  Mr.  Home  stated  that  the  spirits  were  saying  that 
there  was  something  wrong  in  the  electrical  state  of  my 
body,  and  he  added,  '  They  seem  to  say  that  glass  cups 
under  your  bed  would  be  of  use/  These  cups  were  pro- 
cured the  very  next  day  by  those  who  were  anxious  about 
my  health  ;  they  were,  in  fact,  very  thick  glass  saltcellars, 
with  a  cup-like  depression  in  the  centre,  just  sufficient  to 
receive  the  end  of  each  post  of  the  bedstead  ;  the  eirele, 
round  this  depression  was  certainly  one  inch  and  a  quarter 
thick.  The  object  of  this  apparently  trivial  detail  will 
appear  afterwards.  The  glasses  were  placed  one  under 
each  post  of  the  bedstead  on  the  30th  of  November  last. 

"  On  the  evening  of  that  day  Mr.  Home,  who  was  my 
visitor,  had  a  seance  at  which  five  of  us  were  present. 
After  some  defective  physical  phenomena  about  the  table, 
the  alphabet  was  called  for,  and  we  were  told,  '  We  an* 
not  able  to  manifest  our  love  to-night.  Come  to-morrow 
night  at  half-past  nine.'  We  therefore  broke  up  the 
seance.  The  real  and  striking  manifestations  were 
destined  to  be  made  in  my  bed-room  that  same  night.1 

1  I  should  say  that  Mr.  Home's  hod-room  was  next  to  mine 
and  separated  by  a  wall  of  only  slight  thickness. 

146     GUARDIANS    OF   STRENGTH. 

"  I  went  to  bed  at  twelve  o'clock,  having  been  writing  up 
to  that  time.  As  I  passed  along  the  corridor  of  the  bed- 
rooms I  had  the  most  distinct  intimations  of  the  presence 
of  spiritual  beings,  and  at  one  moment  felt  as  if  I  were 
jostled  by  a  distinct  bodily  agent.  Something  of  the  kind 
is  frequently  experienced  whilst  Home  is  staying  with  me 
by  more  than  one  member  of  my  household.  I  went  to 
bed ;  but  I  had  just  laid  my  head  on  the  pillow  when 
numerous  and  loud  raps  began  to  be  heard  in  different 
parts  of  the  room,  but  especially  on  the  right  side  of  the 
head  of  the  bed,  where  hung  the  portraits  of  several  of 
those  whom  I  loved  and  have  lost.  I  have  often  had 
trifling  manifestations  of  the  kind  in  my  room  when  Home 
was  asleep  in  the  adjoining  room  ;  but  these  came  with  a 
rapidity,  strength  and  multiplication  far  greater  than  I  had 
ever  experienced.  Still  they  did  not  discompose  me :  I 
knew  the  raps  (all  but  one)  perfectly  well ;  they  were  those 
of  my  father,  brother  and  child  ;  and  they  gave  me  a 
feeling  of  happiness  rather  than  of  agitation.  Under  this 
influence  I  was  sinking  off  into  sleep,  when  all  at  once  I 
was  horribly  roused  by  the  noise  of  two  tremendous  blows 
administered  in  rapid  succession  on  the  left  hand  post  of 
the  head  of  the  bedstead.  They  were  not  raps  ;  they  were 
such  blows,  and  produced  such  noise  as  if  an  iron  poker 
had  been  wielded  by  some  brawny  arms  and  made  to 
descend  with  all  their  force  upon  a  large  table  or  on  the 
sides  of  a  large  tub.  They  shook  the  bedstead  violently  ; 
and,  as  in  all  my  experiences  of  spiritual  phenomena  I 
had  never  heard  anything  which  had  the  smallest  approach 
to  this  exhibition  of  power,  they  shook  my  nerves  also, 
rousing  me  moreover,  as  they  did  suddenly,  from  drowsy 
quietude.  I  started  up  in  bed,  and  shouted  to  Home,  in 
the  next  room,  to  come  and  be  witness  of  what  was  going 
on.  After  four  loud  calls,  he  answered  ;  then  hurriedly 
dressed,  and  came  into  my  room,  which  was  in  profound 
darkness.  In  a  few  words  I  told  him  what  had  happened, 
and  begged  him  to  lie  down  outside  the  bed,  and  remain 

GUARDIANS    OF    STRENGTH.    117 

to  see  what  further  might  happen.  He  hnd  not  dune  so 
longer  than  five  minutes  when  two  more  blows,  exactly 
similar  to  the  former  in  force  and  noise,  were  given  upon 
the  rii/ht  hand  post  of  the  head  of  the  bed.  Upon  hearing 
these.  Home  was,  like  myself,  agitated  ;  but  he  told  me 
that  he  had  no  doubt  that  the  spirit  was  one  of  those  pro- 
tectors of  man  called  '  Guardians  of  Strength  ;'  that  every 
man  had  such  a  guardian  ;  that  their  office  was  to  shield 
the  body  from  destructive  agents,  especially  from  disease  ; 
that  they  were  spirits  of  a  very  elevated  order,  and  never 
manifested  themselves  save  on  occasions  when  something 
threatened  the  life  of  the  body  which  they  protected;  that 
they  never  communicated  messages,  and  that  they  had 
never  been  known  to  give  more  than  five  raps  or  blows. 
Further,  he  said  that  in  all  his  experiences  of  spiritualism 
he  had  only  met  with  this  kind  of  spirit  on  four  occasions. 
When  he  had  told  me  all  this,  all  the  spirits  present  gave 
affirmative  raps.  I  asked, '  Does  that  mean  that  what  Homo 
has  told  me  is  correct?'  Again  affirmative  raps  from  all. 
I  asked  my  father's  spirit,  *  Who  is  this  powerful  spirit  ?' 
Answer  with  the  alphabet,  '  It  is  your  Guardian  of 
Strength.'  Xo  sooner  had  this  reply  been  given,  than 
the  fifth  blow  was  administered  as  before  to  the  left  head- 
post  of  the  bedstead,  making  the  third  blow  at  that  point, 
and  two'Ht  the  right  side.  I  confess  to  having  felt  very 
great  agitation  on  the  occasion  of  this  last  blow  ;  my  legs 
became  cold  up  to  the  hips,  and  my  head  hot  and  throbbing. 
Home  also  was  not  a  little  dismayed,  and  became  presently 
still  more  so  when,  after  a  few  minutes  of  silence,  he  said 
to  me,  '  My  dear  friend,  I  don't  like  these  occurrences  at 
all ;  my  wife's  spirit  has  just  said  to  me,  "  There  is 
danger."  I  immediately  said  to  my  father,  '  Tell  mo 
what  danger  there  is.'  The  reply  was,  '  Danger  to  you/ 
I  a^ked,  'To  body  or  soul?'  «  To  your  body.'  AVhil.st 
all  this  was  going  on,  we  heard  the  spirits  moving  articles 
about  the  room,  and  rustling  the  curtains  of  the  canopy, 
and  the  silk  of  the  duvet  which  covered  the  bed.  In  the 

148      GUARDIANS    OF    STRENGTH. 

thick  darkness  also,  we  both  plainly  saw,  as  it  were,  a  wall 
of  luminous  matter  all  along  the  right  side  of  the  bed- 
stead,  and  I  asked,  *  Are  those  spirits  standing  around  the 
bed  ?'  Answer  from  all,  '  Yes.'  '  Are  you  looking  upon 
us?'  '  Yes,  as  you  are  looking  upon  us.'  They  all 
gave  me  their  names ;  but,  as  I  have  said,  there  was  one 
whose  raps  I  did  not  recognize,  and  these  were  very 
sharp,  quick,  and  merry.  I  asked  this  one  specially  to 

give  me  his  name  ;  the  answer  was  given,  '  M.  L ,' 

and  at  the  same  time  a  large  framed  medallion  cast  of  a 
woman's  profile,  which  for  many  a  year  has  hung  near  the 
head  of  my  bed,  was  rapped  quickly  upon  the  wall. 

Astonished,  I  said,  '  What  ?  is  that  Margaret  L ?  ' 

Answer,  '  Yes  :  I  love  you  always.'  t  All  these  thirty- 
nine  years  ?  '  '  Yes  ;  and  I  must  come  now.'  '  Because 
I  am  in  danger?'  '  Yes.'  Now,  it  is  necessary  that  I 
should  let  the  reader  into  a  private  episode  of  my  life. 

The  Margaret  L here  spoken  of  was  my  first  boyish 

love :  like  most  loves,  ours  '  did  not  run  smooth.'  We 
were  both  eighteen  years  old  when  she  was  taken  ill,  and 
I  went  for  the  first  time  to  the  University.  At  her  urgent 
entreaty  I  was  permitted  to  go  to  her  bedside  to  say 
1  good-bye '  on  leaving.  I  never  saw  her  again  :  a  simple 
illness  became  complicated,  and  she  passed  away  six  weeks 
after  my  last  sight  of  her.  I  have  never  forgotten  the 
love  and  the  distress  of  that  time.  Years  afterwards  I 
visited  her  tomb,  and  found  a  very  accurate  profile  likeness 
of  her  in  a  marble  medallion  on  it :  I  had  a  cast  taken 
from  this,  and  it  has  been  in  my  bedroom  ever  since.  It 
is  thirty-nine  years  since  she  passed  away ;  and,  in  my 
experiences  of  spiritualism  during  the  last  ten  years,  I 
have  often  wondered  that  she  did  not  manifest  herself  to 
me  ;  probably  her  spirit  is  in  higher  spheres,  and  only  be- 
came manifested  to  me  like  that  of  my  Guardian  of  Strength, 
on  an  urgent  occasion.  To  return.  I  have  said  that  the 
spirits  in  the  room  were  moving  about.  After  the  fifth  blow  of 
the  Guardian  of  Strength,  they  became  still  more  restless ; 

GUARDIANS    OF    STRENGTH.     149 

they  pressed  our  anus  and  legs,  and  my  child  stroked  my 
face  lovingly.  Yet  the  air  seemed  to  be  charged  with 
magnetic  fluid  ;  we  could  scarcely  breathe  ;  as  1  have  said, 
my  head  was  full  and  hot,  and  my  lower  extremities  cold. 
"When  the  whole  physical  condition  seemed  to  have  become 
no  longer  tolerable,  the  Guardian  of  Strength  came  upon 
the  bed,  and  I  felt  him,  as  palpably  and  certainly  as  I  ever 
felt  a  flesh  hand,  handle  my  legs  from  hips  to  feet,  pressing 
them  firmly  but  equally  all  down, — a  sort  of  shampooing, 
in  fact.  He  continued  to  do  this  for  nearly  a  quarter  of 
an  hour  (I  feeling  his  general  form  on  the  bed  just 
as  assuredly  as  I  felt  his  hand  on  my  lower  extremities), 
until  the  limbs  became  hot,  and  suddenly  burst  into  a  pro- 
fuse warm  perspiration,  which  immediately  relieved  my 
head.  He  then  passed  across  the  bed,  drew  the  silken 
duvet  after  him,  and  we  heard  it  rustle  as  it  fell  to  the 
ground  on  the  left  hand  side  of  the  bed.  Home  then  said 
to  me,  '  If  it  be  really  your  Guardian  of  Strength,  and  if 
he  will  touch  us  you  will  find  that  his  touch  is  icy  cold : 
they  always  are  cold.'  The  operations  of  this  spirit  had 
completely  restored  my  physical  and  mental  comfort,  so 
that  I  directly  said,  '  If  you  be>  my"  Guardian  of  Strength, 
will  you  touch  Home  and  myself?'  In  a  flash  of  time 
Home  called  out  to  me,  '  Oh,  his  hand  is  on  my  forehead 
like  a  plat  of  ice — how  cold?'  I  said,  « I  hope  that  you 
•will  touch  me  too.'  Immediately  the  points  of  his  fingers 
were  pressed  upon  the  crown  of  my  head,  which  was 
covered  with  a  cotton  nightcap.  I  observed,  "  I  don't 
find  it  so  cold,'  whereupon  the  spirit  placed  the  whole 
inner  side  of  his  hand  along  the  top  of  my  head,  so  that 
the  finger  ends  rested  on  my  bare  forehead,  and  certainly 
no  ice  could  be  colder.  He  rested  his  hand  so,  but  also 
patted  my  head  in  the  most  kindly  manner  repeatedly. 
Upon  this  I  said, '  You  don't  mean  me  any  harm,  do  you  ?' 
The  answer  '  No '  was  given  by  pulling  the  tassel  of  my 
cap  once.  I  then  said,  '  I  dare  say  you  mean  me  good  ?' 
Eeply — '  Yes,'  by  pulling  the  tassel  three  times.  After 

150     GUARDIANS    OF  STRENGTH. 

the  third  pull  he  drew  the  cap  off  my  head  altogether, 
though  my  head  was  resting  heavily  on  the  pillow,  and 
threw  it  on  Home's  face,  from  whence  he  immediately 
withdrew  it,  to  throw  it  at  mine.  I  dare  say  he  thought 
us  very  stupid  not  to  understand  his  meaning  hitherto,  and 
in  all  these  manifestations  ;  but  it  is  certain  that  neither  of 
us  had  the  slightest  idea  what  the  danger  was,  or  whence 
it  was  to  come.  I  may  add  that  after  I  had  been  assured 
by  my  father  that  the  danger  was  not  to  my  soul,  I  ceased 
to  speculate  much  about  it.  At  the  above  point  the  spirit 
pushed  my  left  shoulder  strongly,  so  as  to  make  me  say  to 
Home,  '  He  is  driving  me  towards  you  for  some  purpose 
or  other,'  whereupon  Home  exclaimed,  *  and  he  is  pulling 
me  out  of  bed  by  the  right  shoulder ;'  and  sure  enough, 
when  I  took  hold  of  Home  I  felt  that  something  was 
pulling  him  away  from  me.  These  manifestations  caused 
me  to  say,  '  It  is  plain  now  that  we  are  to  get  off  the  bed 
altogether,  in  which  case  I  will  light  the  candle/  which 
was  done,  and  it  discovered  the  towel  horse  moved  out  of 
its  place,  the  towels  thrown  about,  the  medallion  on  the 
wall  all  awry,  slippers  and  boots  scattered  about  the  room, 
and  the  duvet  lying  on  the  floor,  giving  abundant  expla- 
nation of  the  bustling  sounds  which  we  had  heard  in  the 
darkness. 

"  Still,  where  was  the  danger  ?  We  tried  the  canopy  of 
the  bed,  but  it  was  firm  enough  in  its  place.  At  length  in 
looking  around  and  around,  Home  spied  the  glass  cups 
underneath  the  bedposts,  and  asked  what  they  were  there 
for,  having  no  remembrance  of  course,  of  what  he  had  said 
in  his  trance  two  days  before.  Explaining  to  him  that  he 
had  himself  suggested  them,  he  asked  the  spirits  present, 
'  Are  these  glass  cups  wrong?'  Loud  affirmative  raps 
from  four  or  five  quarters.  '  Shall  we  remove  them  ?' 
The  same  raps  as  before.  We  proceeded  to  remove  them, 
lifting  the  bedstead  with  some  exertion,  but  it  was  readily 
done  for  the  two  lowest  posts  and  the  right  upper  one. 
The  two  glasses  of  the  lower  posts  were  complete,  but  the 

GUARDIANS    OF   STRENGTH.     151 

glass  under  the  right  upper  post,  which  had  received  two 
out  of  t\\Qfive  strong  blows,  was  found  broken  into  three 
pieces.  We  passed  to  the  left  upper  post,  which  had  re- 
ceived three  blows,  but  in  consequence  of  a  heavy  chest  of 
drawers,  whose  proximity  left  only  a  space  of  five  or  six 
inches  between  it  and  the  bedstead,  it  was  impossible  to  do 
more  than  touch  the  glass  under  that  post,  and  quite  im- 
possible to  lift  the  bedstead  therefrom.  As  we  approached 
this  side  of  the  bed,  I  holding  a  lighted  candle,  we  both 
simultaneously  exclaimed,  '  There  is  a  large  luminous  mass 
in  the  corner — that  must  be  the  Guardian  Spirit'  I  saw 
it  as  plainly  and  undoubtedly  as  I  see  the  hand  that  is 
writing  these  words.  That  some  powerful  agent  was  there 
became  evident  from  what  followed.  Home  said,  '  We 
can't  get  near  enough  to  this  glass  to  lift  the  bed  and  re- 
move it,'  when  immediately,  without  our  touching  the  bed 
at  all,  the  whole  mass  was  raised  without  any  touch  of  his 
or  mine,  and  Home  withdrew  the  glass,  which  had  received 
three  blows,  and  which  we  found  to  be  in  four  pieces,  one 
of  which  was  almost  in  a  state  of  powder,  so  thoroughly 
had  it  been  broken.  This  done,  we  heard  and  saw  no 
more  of  the  Guardian  of  Strength  ;  and  when,  on  lying  on 
the  bed  again  to  wait  for  what  might  happen,  we  asked 
about  him,  the  spirits  told  us  that  he  had  gone  away.  And 
certainly  we  might  have  guessed  that  some  potent  agency 
had  left  the  room,  for  the  atmosphere,  from  being  exciting 
and  stifling  (like  the  air  just  before  a  thunder-storm), 
calmed  down,  and  our  physical  sensations  were  totally 
changed  from  tension  to  placidity.  After  which  my  father 
said,  '  Good  night ;  I  must  go.'  '  Are  you  all  going  ? ' 
'  No  ;  Dan  '  (ray  brother)  *  and  Fanny  '  (my  child)  *  will 
remain  with  you.'  And  so,  after  a  little  more  talk  about 
these  strange  occurrences,  Home  went  to  his  own  room 
again,  having  been  in  mine  upwards  of  an  hour  and  a  half. 
When  he  had  gone,  I  picked  up  the  silk  duvet  and  spread 
it  over  the  bed,  into  which  I  got,  with  the  hope  of  sound 
sleep,  after  such  tumult.  It  was  not  yet  to  be.  During  an 

152     GUAEVIANS    OF   STRENGTH. 

hour  and  a  quarter  I  was  dozing  off  repeatedly  ;  but  each 
time  I  was  roused  by  two  or  three,  or  four  loud  raps  on  tbe 
floor  of  the  room.  At  length,  between  three  and  four  A.M., 
worried  and  feverish  with  this  frequent  awakening,  I  im- 
patiently threw  the  duvet  off  the  bed.  The  act  was  fol- 
lowed by  a  shower  of  approving  raps.  Then,  for  the  first 
time,  I  perceived  what  these  awakenings  meant;  and  I 
said,  *  Was  I  to  throw  the  duvet  off  the  bed?'  Answer, 
*  Yes/  and  with  the  alphabet,  *  Good  night.'  In  a  quarter 
of  an  hour  I  was  asleep. 

"  In  subsequent  communication  with  spirits  of  my  own 
family,  I  was  informed  that  had  I  on  that  night  gone  to 
sleep  with  the  electricity  of  my  body  isolated  by  the  glass 
cups  underneath  the  bedstead,  and  the  silk  duvet  above 
me,  I  should  have  had  a  seizure  in  the  head,  and  most 
probably  have  passed  away  in  it :  and  that  the  emergency 
was  very  pressing,  so  as  to  render  the  presence  and  aid  of 
the  Guardian  of  Strength  necessary.  In  answer  to 
questions  they  also  told  me  that  these  guardians  always 
had  strong  sympathy  with  those  over  whom  they  watched : 
that  it  was  not  simply  because  they  were  sympathetic  that 
they  became  guardians  ;  but  that  they  are  specially  chosen 
by  God  for  each  individual.  Further,  I  was  informed 
that  in  a  serious  illness  through  which  I  had  passed  on  a 
former  occasion,  this  same  guardian  had  been  much 
occupied  with  me. 

"  The  question  arises,  How  came  spirits  to  recommend 
these  glass  cups,  when  subsequently  it  became  necessary 
to  rescue  me  from  them  ?  I  never  got  any  decided 
answer  to  this ;  but  one  night,  some  time  afterwards,  my 
friend  Home,  in  a  trance,  exclaimed,  '  Oh,  you  remember 
the  glass  cups  and  that  night  ?  They  say  that  the  whole 
was  contrived  for  your  good,  and  to  impress  upon  you.' 
And  most  assuredly  it  did  impress  upon  me ;  it  is  impos- 
sible to  experience  anything  more  real,  palpable,  visible, 
audible,  than  the  facts  of  that  night !  it  is  impossible, 
without  the  denial  of  all  sense,  external  and  internal,  to 

SPIRIT   MESMERISM.  153 

refuse  belief  in  the  intelligent,  extra-corporeal  agency  at 
work  on  that  occasion.  Of  the  existence  of  such  a-(  n.-y 
I  had  long  ceased  to  have  any  real  doubt;  but  1  may 
have  speculated  and  spun  theories  to  account  for  spiritual 
manifestations  in  some  other  way,  and  it  may  have  been 
to  put  a  stop  to  these  that  this  marvellous  night  was  con- 
trived for  strongly  impressing  me  with  the  reality  of  the 
interference. 

"  Regarding  the  existence,  attributes,  and  duties  of  these 
Guardians  of  Strength,  I  have  been  unable  to  find  any 
account  in  any  works  on  spiritualism  to  which  I  have 
access.  M.  Kardec  has  a  chapter  on  Guardian  Spirits, 
but  nothing  is  said  of  the  special  act  of  guardianship  over 
the  bodily  health  by  a  specially  appointed  spirit." 

The  following  instance  of  direct  spirit  mesmerism  will 
also  be  interesting ;  it  appeared  in  "  Human  Nature,"  for 
September,  1867. 

"  Sm, — The  following  is  an  account  of  some  remarkable 
phenomena  of  Direct  Spirit  Mesmerism,  witnessed  by  my- 
self and  others  at  my  house  early  in  the  evening  of  the 
8th  of  August,  and  I  should  be  glad  if  you  could  give 
publicity  to  my  letter — copy  of  which  I  have  forwarded  to 
the  '  Spiritual  Magazine '  with  a  similar  request. 

"  It  is  necessary  to  premise  that  Mr.  D.  D.  Home,  the 
medium  present,  had  been  staying  with  me  for  some  short 
time,  and  that  owing  to  the  state  of  health  of  .Mrs. 
Jencken,  who  had  been  seized  with  paralysis,  I  had  deter- 
mined not  to  allow  any  seances  to  be  held.  On  the  even- 
ing in  question,  however,  I  yielded  at  the  request  of  my 
mother,  and  we  sat  round  a  small  square  table  in  front  of 
the  sofa,  Mrs.  Hennings,  our  neighbour,  making  up  the 
party  of  four. 

••  \Ve  had  not  been  seated  many  minutes  when  raps  were 
heard  in  different  parts  of  the  room,  the  table  was  tilted 
and  raised  straight  off  the  ground ;  numerous  raps  were 
then  heard  under  the  table,  in  the  drawer — which  was 
pulled  out  and  replaced ;  a  cold  current  of  air  then  passed 

154  SPIRIT    MESMERISM. 

over  our  hands, — spirit  hands  touched  several  of  us  on  our 
hands  and  knees, — a  hand  appeared  between  myself  and 
Mr.  D.  D.  Home,  but  only  for  a  moment.  We  then  ob- 
served the  form  of  a  hand  under  the  shawl  Mrs.  Jencken 
had  drawn  across  her  knees.  A  pause  then  ensued  fol- 
lowed by  the  phenomenon  of  "  Direct  Spirit  Mesmerism," 
and  to  record  which  is  the  special  object  of  my  present 
communication. 

"  At  first  we  heard  the  rustling  of  Mrs.  Jencken's  dress 
as  though  a  hand  was  rudely  moved  over  it ;  we  then 
noticed  a  hand  making  mesmeric  passes  down  the  right 
side  of  Mrs.  Jencken ;  her  knee  was  then  grasped,  and  we 
distinctly  heard  the  tapping,  kneading  sound  of  shampoo- 
ing a  patient.  Mrs.  Jencken,  who  remained  perfectly 
calm  and  composed  throughout  the  process,  described  her 
sensation  with  great  precision,  observing  that  she  felt  as  if 
a  powerful  hand  were  making  passes  down  her  paralysed 
side,  almost  causing  pain.  Her  hand  was  then  seized  by, 
as  she  described  it,  a  soft,  warm  hand,  rubbed  and  stretched 
out  with  sufficient  force  to  leave  a  red  mark  on  her  hand 
and  wrist.  She  farther  said,  that  she  felt  as  if  an  electric 
stream  had  passed  through  her,  causing  every  limb  to 
glow.  The  whole  process  lasted  about  eight  to  ten 
minutes,  and  resulted  in  the  restoration  of  the  use  of  the 
paralysed  limb  and  side  of  Mrs.  Jencken,  who  all  but  im- 
mediately called  our  attention  to  the  fact  of  her  being  able 
to  move  her  right  arm  and  hand,  hitherto  perfectly  para- 
lysed. On  essaying  to  rise  from  her  chair,  she  found  to 
her  great  joy  that  she  could  walk,  and  ever  since  her  con- 
valescence has  steadily  progressed. 

"  Fortunately  during  the  seance,  Mr.  Jones  of  Enmore 
Park,  joined  our  circle,  at  which  I  was  much  pleased,  as  I 
felt  it  desirable  that  a  farther  witness  should  be  present  to 
testify  to  the  truth  of  the  statement  I  am  recording. 

"  Other  and  very  marked  phenomena  were  produced  that 
evening.  Mrs.  Hennings'  hand  was  repeatedly  touched 
and  grasped;  her  chair  seized  and  drawn  back  and  half 

SPIRIT   MESMERISM.  155 

turned  round.  Mr.  Jones  was  also  touched  by  a  hand.  A 
voice  was  distinctly  heard  to  pass  through  the  room,  the 
note  being  not  unlike  the  wail  of  a  female  voice.  But  I 
will  not  burden  you  with  an  account  of  these  phcnonu-na  ; 
my  object  being  to  confine  myself  to  the  description  of  the 
phenomenon  of  Direct  Spirit  Mesmerism. 

"  I  may,  however,  add  that  Mr.  D.  D.  Home  is  in  full 
power,  and  that  during  his  stay  at  my  house  very  remark- 
able phenomenon  occurred. 

"  Mrs.  Jencken  is  now  occupied  in  writing  a  statement 
of  what  took  place,  anxious  that  a  document  should  be  placed 
on  record  to  prove  at  some  future  time  the  possibility  of 
Direct  Spirit  Mesmerism.  "  IL  D.  JENCKEN." 

«  Kilmorey  House,  15th  August,  1867." 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

MANIFESTATIONS  —  ELONGATION  —  VOICES— 
PEEFUMES. 

CUEING  the  latter  part  of  1867,  several  novel 
manifestations  occurred  in  my  presence, 
accounts  of  which  appeared  from  time  to 
time  in  the  "  Spiritual  Magazine,"  "  Human 
Nature,"  *fec.  I  here  give  some  of  these 
with  the  names  of  those  present,  and  those  of  the  writers 
of  the  accounts.  The  first  of  these  which  I  give  occurred  in 
Great  Malvern,  at  Dr.  Gully's,  and  is  recorded  in  a  letter 
from  Mr.  H.  D.  Jencken  to  "Human  Nature,"  for 
November,  1867,  as  follows  :  — 

"The  party  present  had  only  incidentally  met,  and 
owing  to  a  prohibition  being  laid  upon  Mr.  Home  by  his 
medical  man,  against  trying  his  strength,  no  seance  was 
attempted.  I  name  this  as  characteristic.  Spiritual 
presence,  however,  soon  made  itself  heard,  by  raps  in 
different  parts  of  the  room,  and  the  movement  of  the  fur- 
niture told  of  the  presence  of  the  invisibles.  The  library 
in  which  the  party  had  met  communicated  with  the  hall, 
and  the  door  having  been  left  half  open,  a  broad  stream  of 
light  from  the  burners  of  the  gas  lamp  lit  up  the  room. 
At  the  suggestion  of  one  of  the  party,  the  candles  were 
removed.  The  rapping  which  had  till  then  been  heard  in 
different  parts  of  the  room,  suddenly  made  a  pause,  and 

NEW    MANIFESTATIONS.         157 

then  the  unusual  phenomenon  of  the  appearance  of  spirit 
forms  manifested  itself.  The  opening  of  the  lialf-ein.x-d 
door  was  suddenly  darkened  by  an  invisible  agency,  the 
room  becoming  pitch  dark,  Then  the  wall  oppo.-ite  became 
illumined,  the  library  bring  now  lit  up  by  a  luminous 
element,  for  it  cannot  he  described  otherwise.  Between 
those  present  and  the  opposite  and  now  illumined  wall  two 
spirit  forms  were  seen,  their  shadowy  outline  on  the  wall 
well-defined.  The  forms  moved  to  and  fro,  and  they 
made  an  effort  to  speak.  The  articulation,  however,  was 
too  imperfect  to  permit  of  the  meaning  of  the  words  being 
understood.  The  darkening  which  had  obscured  the  half- 
closed  door  was  then  removed,  and  the  broad  light  from 
the  hall  lamp  re-appeared  looking  quite  dim  in  comparison 
with  the  luminous  brilliancy  of  the  light  that  had  passed 
away.  Again  the  room  became  darkened,  then  illumined, 
and  a  colossal  head  and  shoulders  appeared  to  rise  from 
the  floor,  visible  only  by  the  shadow  it  cast  upon  the  illu- 
mined wall.  What  added  to  the  interest,  was  the  apparent 
darkening  and  lighting  up  of  the  room  at  will,  and  that 
repeatedly,  the  library  door  remaining  half  open  all  the 
while.  The  time  occupied  by  these  phenomena  was  per- 
haps five  to  ten  minutes,  the  manifestations  terminating 
quite  abruptly." 

Another  remarkable  seance  took  place  in  Mr.  S.  C. 
Hall's  house,  Essex  Villas,  Campden  Hill,  at  about  the 
same  period,  and  I  give  it  from  the  notes  of  Mr.  II.  T. 
Humphreys,  who  was  present,  as  follows : — 

"  Hearing  from  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall  that  Mr.  Home  was  at 
his  house  for  a  day  or  two  and  wished  to  see  me,  I  went 
out  to  Essex  Villas  in  the  evening,  and  after  having  had 
some  conversation  with  him  and  others  who  bad  al-o 
called,  the  other  visitors  left,  AVe  were  shortly  afterwards 
— that  is  to  say,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall,  Mr.  Home,  and 
myself — standing  in  the  recess  leading  to  the  conservatory, 
whon  Mrs.  Hall  remarked  that  it  was  a  long  time  since 
they  had  had  a  seance.  Mr.  Home  at  once  replied  that  he 

158  ELONGATION. 

was  unwell,  and  had  been  talking  about  matters  which 
excited  him,  and  could  not  sit.  He  then  sat  down  to  the 
piano,  and  was  about  to  open  it  when  a  shower  of  little 
raps  were  heard  inside  the  instrument.  l  Do  you  hear  the 
raps?*  he  said.  '  Come,  we  will  have  a  sitting.'  \Ve  four 
then  sat  down,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall  being  seated 
opposite  each  other,  and  I  opposite  to  Mr.  Home,  round  a 
small  kettle-drum  octagon  table  covered  with  velvet,  the 
legs  being  screwed  into  the  top.  After  a  short  pause  raps 
were  heard  on  the  table,  which  was  tilted  and  raised 
straight  up  in  the  air,  next  rolled  into  the  lap  of  Mrs.  S.  C, 
Hall,  then  into  my  lap ;  after  which  it  was  placed  on  my 
foot,  and  balanced  to  and  fro  whilst  in  that  position  ;  it 
finally  turned  itself  upside  down,  the  top  being  at  about 
the  height  of  our  heads,  and  the  legs  in  the  air  above. 
Raps  wrere  then  heard,  and  a  sentence  was  spelt  out,  to  the 
effect  that  this  was  the  present  condition  of  spiritualism, 
but  that  it  would  soon  come — at  this  word  the  table  was 
again  placed  on  its  legs  in  our  midst,  thus  signifying  the 
word — '  right,'  and  a  guess  as  to  this  meaning  was  an- 
swered by  affirmative  raps.  Mr.  Home  then  rose  from  his 
chair,  impelled  he  said  to  do  so,  and  walked  to  and  fro. 
Then  followed  the  extraordinary  phenomenon  of  the  length- 
ening out  and  shortening  of  the  medium's  body  ;  a  pheno- 
menon not  unknowrn  to  those  who  have  followed  this 
inquiry,  but  nevertheless  very  remarkable,  and  equally  un- 
accountable. Mr.  Home  said  he  felt  as  if  his  hair  was 
being  pulled,  but  without  causing  pain  ;  on  the  contrary, 
he  described  the  sensation  as  pleasant.  At  his  request,  I 
placed  my  feet  on  his  up  to  the  instep,  to  be  satisfied  that 
he  did  not  stand  upon  his  toes ;  and  at  the  same  time 
placed  my  right  hand  on  his  body  horizontally,  partly  on 
his  waistcoat  and  partly  on  his  trousers ;  the  upper  part  of 
his  body  then  rose  to  such  an  extent  that  my  hand  was  in 
a  few  moments  resting  on  his  shirt,  with,  I  should  say, 
about  an  inch  of  space  between  it  and  the  trousers  below, 
and  a  similar  space  between  it  and  the  vest  above.  After 

ELONGATION.  150 

remaining  for  a  few  moments  at  the  stature  of  at  the  least 
seven  feet,  Mr.  Home  xink  quietly  down  to  his  normal 
size,  and  then  appeared  to  be  pressed  down  till  less  than 
five  feet  in  height.  This  remarkahlo  manifestation  was 
repeated  three  or  four  times,  and  we  were  given  to  under- 
stand that  it  would  have  a  curative  effect. 

"  On  Mr.  Home  resuming  his  seat,  raps  were  heard  in 
different  parts  of  the  room.  The  octagon  kettle-drum 
table  was  again  seized  by  an  invisible  power,  raised 
straight  up  into  the  air  and  placed  inverted  upon  the  head 
of  Mr.  Home.  It  is  necessary  to  name  that  Mr.  Home  re- 
mained perfectly  motionless  whilst  the  table  was  being 
held  and  balanced  on  his  head.  Words  were  again  spelt 
out,  significant  of  the  meaning  of  this  droll  procedure, 
such  as,  '  It  is  hard  to  bear,  but  it  is  a  crown'  The  table 
was  then  replaced  in  the  centre  of  the  circle,  and  again 
taken  suddenly  from  our  midst  and  thrown  down  on  the 
floor  at  about  a  distance  of  six  feet.  We  sat  quietly  for  a 
time,  and  as  I  held  both  my  hands  down  between  my 
knees,  I  felt  something  touch  my  knuckles.  I  opened 
my  hand  and  took  hold  of  the  leg  of  the  octagon  table, 
which,  it  now  appeared,  had  been  screwed  off,  and 
brought  to  me.  Sentences  were  then  spelt  out,  '  Let  it 
represent  the  weapon  of  truth  ; '  '  Truth  is  strength  ; ' 
t  We  will  give  you  strength  where  you  most  need  it.' 
After  holding  the  leg  of  the  table  for  some  time  I  felt  that 
something  had  begun  to  pull  it  away  from  me.  I  resisted 
for  some  time,  but  at  length  it  was  dragged  from  me  with 
a  considerable  amount  of  force,  and  was  immediately  stuck 
into  Mr.  Home's  back,  sticking  up  from  his  collar. 
While  in  this  condition,  messages,  somewhat  similar  to 
what  have  been  given  above,  were  given  by  tipping  the 
leg  against  my  hand  which  I  held  up  to  it.  It  was  then 
Worked  about  Mr.  Home's  back,  and  finally  slid  down  it 
beneath  his  coat  and  vanished.  I  had  my  hand  on  the 
end  of  it  as  it  was  sliding  down,  but  failed  in  feeling  it 
underneath  the  coat,  though  I  at  once  left  my  seat  and 

160  TABLE    PHENOMENA. 

went  round  to  feel  for  it.  On  my  return  to  my  seat  T  found 
tins  leg  of  the  table  laid  on  it,  resting  on  the  seat  and  the 
middle  bar  of  the  back  of  the  chair.  During  this  process 
Mr.  Home  described  his  sensations  as  if  under  the  influence 
of  shocks  from  an  electric  battery.  The  octagon  table  now 
with  its  two  legs,  was  replaced  by  the  invisibles,  in  the 
centre  of  the  circle.  While  here,  and  apparently  unsus- 
tained  by  any  of  us,  messages  were  given,  and  at  length 
I  asked  what  was  to  be  done  with  the  leg  of  the  table  ? 
At  the  moment  the  leg  rose  from  its  position  on  my  chair 
beside  me,  upright  in  the  air,  bent  towards  me  and  gently 
touched  me  on  the  eye,  next  bent  towards  and  touched 
Mrs.  Hall,  saluted  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall  in  the  same  manner, 
and  then  rapidly  darted  across  the  table  and  down  to  the 
floor.  We  then  heard  the  sound  of  screwing  it  into  its 
place,  and  I  put  my  hand  under  the  table  to  touch  it. 
This  stopped  the  work,  but  on  my  taking  away  my  hand, 
it  was  resumed,  and  when  completed,  the  table  was  jumped 
upon  this  leg  as  if  to  show  that  it  had  been  firmly  re- 
placed, raps  were  heard  all  over  the  room,  and  sounds 
like  the  laugh  of  a  child  resounded  in  the  air.  A  large 
sofa  which  stood  by  the  wall  at  about  seven  feet  from  us 
was  drawn  quietly  up  so  as  to  touch  the  chair  on  which 
Mr.  S.  C.  Hall  was  seated.  This  occurred  while  we  all 
remained  seated.  Two  large  photograph  albums  were 
also  removed  from  a  shelf  behind  the  sofa. 

"  After  these  manifestations,  the  final  and  culminating 
phenomenon  was  manifested,  which  in  itself  constitutes 
quite  an  epoch  in  the  history  of  spiritual  phenomena, 
replete  as  the  records  of  spiritual  manifestations  are 
with  what,  under  ordinary  circumstances,  would  be  re- 
garded as  impossible.  After  a .  short  pause,  a  luminous 
coronet  of  star-like  light  points  settled  upon  the  head  of 
Mr.  S.  C.  Hall,  and  remained  stationary,  resting  on  his 
head  for  several  minutes.  Then  a  semi-luminous  appear- 
ance was  manifested,  which  assumed  the  outline  of  a  face 
with  two  star-like  eyes.  Mr.  Hall  said  he  felt  as  if  this 

LUMINOUS    CROWN.  161 

« 

form  was  pressing  against  him.  Mr.  Home  then  rose 
from  his  chair,  and  was  walked  to  and  fro  complaining  of 
pressure  on  the  head.  Suddenly  he  said  he  felt  a  weight 
on  his  head.  It  was  then  noticed  that  a  crown  shaped 
like  a  Greek  patera,  the  base  fitting  on  like  a  skull-cap, 
had  been  placed  on  his  head.  Tendrils  and  outlines  of 
leaves  were  plainly  visible,  the  leaves  being  vine-shaped, 
appearing  to  hang  from  the  edges  of  the  broad  patera. 
Mr.  Home  appeared  greatly  agitated,  and  repeated,  *  I 
am  crowned ; '  *  I  am  free  from  pain ; '  *  I  am  receiving 
a  new  mission ; '  '  The  pain  in  my  head  is  gone.' 
He  then  walked  up  and  down  the  room,  the  excite- 
ment all  but  overpowering  him.  Finally  the  crown  was 
removed  from  his  head,  while  sweet-toned  notes  were 
distinctly  heard  proceeding  from  it; -after  which  it  was 
gently  carried  towards  those  present,  as  though  for  their 
inspection,  and  then  removed  into  the  angle  of  the  door, 
where  it  remained  luminously  visible  for  four  or  five 
minutes — visible  as  though  it  were  from  its  own  intrinsic 
light.  The  brilliancy  of  its  star-like  form  had  so  deeply 
impressed  all  present,  that  after  its  disappearance  they 
continued  to  gaze  at  the  place  where  the  beautiful  lumi- 
nous crown  had  once  stood,  unable  to  realise  its  disappear- 
ance. These  notes  are  necessarily  very  imperfect ;  but 
I  have  been  very  careful  to  set  down  nothing  save  what  I 
can  most  clearly  and  distinctly  depose  to." 

This  seance  was  to  myself  remarkable,  as  I  had  been 
very  ill  and  weak  previous  to  it,  and  on  that  evening  was 
restored  to  perfect  health.  It  was  therefore  an  instance 
of  direct  spirit  mesmerism. 

Mr.  Jencken  also  gives  the  following  account  in  "  Hu- 
man Nature,*'  for  November,  1867  : — 

"  In  this  instance  the  seance  was  held  by  appointment 
at  Dr.  Gully's,  Great  Malvern.  Our  object  being  that  of 
investigation,  we  limited  the  number  to  three,  and  I  must 
add,  used  every  precaution  we  could  think  of,  to  preclude 
the  possibility  of  scli'-Ucccptioii ;  we  likewise  guarded 
M 

162  SPECIAL    SEANCE. 

* 

against  any  possible  preparatory  arrangement.  Accord- 
ingly we  changed  from  the  library  to  the  dining-room. 
"We  were  soon  seated  at  a  heavy  square  table.  Twenty 
minutes  passed  without  any  manifestations ;  then  came 
gentle  raps,  followed  by  the  table  being  lifted,  tilted,  and 
gently  vibrated.  Then  simultaneously  raps  were  heard 
in  different  and  opposite  parts  of  the  room.  At  my  sug- 
gestion the  lamp  was  partly  turned  down  ;  when  a  cold 
current  of  air  was  felt  to  pass  over  our  hands  and  faces,  and 
a  pause  ensued.  The  dining-room  table  leaf-stand  in  the 
corner  of  the  room  commenced  to  vibrate,  and  one  of  the 
leaves  being  taken  from  the  stand  was  passed  between 
Mr.  Home  and  the  table  at  which  we  were  seated.  It 
was  then  raised  straight  up,  and  passing  vertically  over 
my  friend,  gently  touched  him;  in  passing  over  me  it 
struck  me  on  the  crown  of  my  head,  so  gently  that  I 
could  hardly  realise  it  to  be  the  heavy  leaf  of  the  dining- 
room  table;-  the  touch  nevertheless  caused  the  leaf  to 
vibrate  all  but  sonorously.  I  name  this  to  prove  how 
delicately-balanced  and  suspended  in  the  air  the  leaf  of 
the  table  must  have  been  to  have  produced  the  sonorous 
vibration.  It  then  passed  to  the  right,  touching  my 
shoulder,  and  finally  was  placed  upon  the  table  at  which 
we  were  seated.  The  distance  the  leaf  was  carried  I 
compute  at  nearly  twelve  yards  (allowing  for  the  circuit 
made)  and  at  an  elevation  of  six  feet.  A  small  round 
table  was  then  moved  from  the  corner  of  the  room,  and 
placed  next  to  my  friend,  and  in  reply  to  his  question 
who  it  was,  he  received  the  answer,  audible  to  us  all, 
'  Pa  ' — '  Pa  dear ' — *  darling  Pa.1  An  arm  chair  be- 
hind my  friend,  and  at  a  distance  of  three  yards,  was 
raised  up  straight  into  the  air,  carried  over  our  heads, 
and  placed  upon  the  dining-room  table  to  my  left — a 
voice  clearly  and  loudly  repeating  the  words,  '  Papa's 
chair/  We  then  observed  the  wooden  box  of  the  ac- 
cordion being  carried  from  the  extreme  corner  of  the 
room,  up  to  my  iricnd.  In  passing  my  right  hand,  I 

ELONGATION.  1G3 

passed  my  hand  under  and  over  the  box,  as  it  travelled 
suspended  in  the  air  to  my  front.  I  did  this  to  make  sure 
of  the  fact  of  its  heing  moved  by  an  invisible  agency,  and 
not  by  means  of  mechanical  aid.  The  box  was  finally 
deposited  on  the  table  in  front  of  my  friend.  Mr.  Home 
had  in  the  meantime  taken  the  accordion  in  his  right 
hand,  giving  me  his  left  hand.  Words  were  spelt  out 
that  the  spirits  would  play  his  life,  from  his  early  infancy 
to  the  final  drama,  *  Daniel  in  the  Lion's  Den/  evidently 
in  allusion  to  his  suit  with  Mrs.  Lyon.  The  accordion 
immediately  commenced  playing,  and  continued  so  for 
fifteen  minutes.  What  added  to  the  interest  was  the 
accompaniment  by  voices  imitating  the  clock  in  the  hall, 
the  rush  of  the  waves,  and  when  the  '  Lion's  Den '  was 
played,  loud  roars  in  imitation  of  lions  were  heard.  I 
counted  three  or  four  voices.  The  accordion  was  then 
taken  from  Mr.  Home,  carried  about  in  the  room  and 
played.  Voices  were  distinctly  heard,  a  low  whispering, 
and  voices  imitating  the  break  of  a  wave  on  a  shore. 
Finally  the  accordion  placed  itself  upon  the  table  we  were 
seated  at,  and  two  luminous  hands  were  distinctly  seen 
resting  on  the  keys  of  the  instrument.  They  remained 
luminously  visible  for  twenty  to  thirty  seconds,  melting 
away.  I  had  in  the  meantime,  and  at  the  request  of  my 
friend,  taken  hold  of  the  accordion  ;  whilst  so  held  by  me, 
an  invisible  hand  laid  hold  of  the  instrument  and  played 
for  two  or  three  minutes  what  appeared  to  me  to  be  sacred 
music.  Voices  were  then  heard,  a  kind  of  murmuring  or 
low  whistling  and  breathing;  at  times  in  imitation  of  the 
murmur  of  the  waves  of  the  sea,  at  other  times  more 
plaintively  melodious.  The  accordion  was  then  ibr  a 
second  time  taken  by  an  invisible  power,  carried  over  our 
and  a  small  piece  of  sacred  music  played — then  a 
hvmn — voices  in  derp  sonorous  notes  singing  the  halle- 
lujah, t  thought  I  could  make  out  three  voices,  but  my 
friend  said  he  could  speak  to  four.  A  jet  or  light  then 
crossed  the  room,  after  which  a  star  or  brilliantly  luminous 

164  VOICES. 

disk,  followed  by  the  appearance  of  a  softly  luminous 
column  of  light,  which  moved  up  between  me  and  my 
friend.  I  cannot  say  that  I  could  discern  any  distinct 
outline.  The  luminous  column  appeared  to  me  to  be 
about  five  to  six  feet  high,  the  subdued  soft  light  mounting 
from  it  half  illumining  the  room.  The  column  or  lumi- 
nous appearance  then  passed  to  my  right ;  and  a  chair 
was  moved  and  placed  next  to  me.  I  distinctly  heard  the 
rustling  of  a  silk  dress.  Instinctively  I  put  my  hand  for- 
ward to  ascertain  the  presence  of  the  guest,  when  a  soft 
hand  seized  my  hand  and  wrist.  I  then  felt  that  the  skirt 
of  a  dress  had  covered  my  knees.  I  grasped  it ;  it  felt 
like  thick  silk,  and  melted  away  as  I  firmly  clenched  my 
hand  on  it.  By  this  time  I  admit  I  shuddered.  A  heavy 
footstep  then  passed  to  my  right,  the  floor  vibrating  to  the 
footfall ;  the  spirit  form  now  walked  up  to  the  fireplace 
clapping  its  hands  as  it  passed  me.  I  then  felt  some- 
thing press  against  the  back  of  my  chair.  The  weight  was 
so  great  that  as -the  form  leaned  on  my  shoulder  I  had  to 
lean  forward  under  the  pressure.  Two  hands  gently 
pressed  my  forehead.  I  noticed  a  luminous  appearance 
at  my  right.  I  was  kissed,  and  what  to  me  at  the  time 
made  my  very  frame  thrill  again,  spoken  to  in  a  sweet, 
low,  melodious  voice.  The  words  uttered  by  the  spirit 
were  distinctly  heard  by  all  present.  As  the  spirit-form 
passed  away,  it  repeated  the  words, '  I  kissed  you,  I  kissed 
you,'  and  I  felt  three  taps  on  each  shoulder,  audible  to  all 
present,  as  if  though  in  parting  to  re-impress  me  with  the 
reality  of  its  presence.  I  shuddered  again,  and  in  spite 
of  all  my  heroism,  felt  very  '  uncanny/  My  friend  now 
called  our  attention  to  his  being  patted  by  a  soft  hand  on 
his  head.  I  heard  a  kiss,  and  then  the  words,  '  Papa/ 
'  Dear  Papa/  He  said  his  left  hand  was  being  kissed, 
and  that  a  soft  child-like  hand  was  caressing  him.  A 
cloud  of  light  appeared  to  be  standing  at  his  left. 

"  Direct  spirit-writing,  which  has  so  often  been  ques- 
tioned, was  also  maniiested  that  evening  in  my  presence* 

SPIRIT    POWER.  1G5 

The  writing  I  have  preserved,  but  cannot,  for  serious 
reasons,  give  its  contents,  startling  and  unusual  as  they 
are.  A  sheet  of  paper  which  had  been  placed  before  me 
at  the  commencement  of  the  seance  was  rolled  up  into  the 
shape  of  a  speaking  trumpet,  the  edge  having  been  torn 
off  and  placed  in  a  wooden  box,  which  the  spirits  had 
placed  in  front  of  my  friend.  Voices,  raps,  soft  breathing, 
music,  were  heard,  and  finally,  after  the  hallelujah  had 
been  sung,  words  were  spelt  out  telling  us  *  they  could  do 
no  more.' 

"  Were  it  not  that  I  feared  I  had  already  trespassed 
too  largely  on  your  valuable  space,  I  would  have  given 
my  narrative  in  greater  defail,  but  I  know  there  is  a  limit 
to  your  space.  So  suffice  it  to  say,  that  every  precaution 
was  taken  to  prevent  mistakes  or  self-deception.  I  do 
not  use  the  word  collusion,  for  from  my  intimate  know- 
ledge of  Mr.  Home,  I  unhesitatingly  aver  his  utter  inca- 
pability of  practising  deception ;  but  we  used  more  than 
ordinary  precaution — first,  because  we  had  met  with 
the  express  object  of  thoroughly  investigating  these  in- 
teresting phenomena ;  and  also,  should  occasion  need,  to 
bo  able  to  answer  to  any  doubt  which  might  be  raised. 
This  much  for  a  statement  of  facts.  I  use  the  word  facts 
advisedly.  The  manifestations  I  have  given  a  record  of 
have  been  witnessed  by  men,  all  of  whom  are,  strange 
enough  to  say,  and  without  exception,  literary,  scientific, 
or  professional,  and  who  would,  if  called  upon,  unhesita- 
tingly testify  to  the  truth  of  that  which  they  have  seen."' 

The  following  is  from  the  pen  of  Mr.  H.  D.  Jencken, 
and  appeared  in  "  Human  Nature  "  for  December,  18(37  : 

"  I  have  again  to  record  some  interesting  facts  in  con- 
nection with  the  subject  of  spiritual  manifestations,  and 
which  have  occurred  since  T  last  addressed  you.  The 
seances  to  which  I  now  allude  were  held  at  my  house  ; 
and  I  need  hardly  add  that  deception,  or  even  self- 
delusion,  are  quite  out  of  all  question.  At  the  first  of 
the  seances,  and  at  which,  as  well  as  at  those  subsequently 

166  SPIRIT  POWER. 

held,  Mr.  D.  D.  Home  was  present,  I  had  invited  a 
friend  of  mine  to  attend,  who  had  to  be  more  than  ordi- 
narily satisfied  of  the  truth  of  the  manifestations,  owing  to 
his  scepticism.  The  manifestations  commenced.  Whilst 
we  were  seated  at  the  tea  table  in  the  dining  room,  the 
table  was  unexpectedly  moved,  and  this  was  followed  by 
loud,  sonorous  raps.  The  fire-screen  behind  Mr.  Home's 
chair  was  removed,  laid  on  the  floor,  and  glided  towards 

Mrs. .     The  sceptical  guest  had  in  the  meantime 

arrived,  and  we  soon  found  ourselves  seated  round  a 
square  table  in  the  drawing-room.  Raps  and  tilting  of 
the  table  soon  manifested  themselves.  Sentences  were 
spelt  out — the  names  of  near  relatives  of  one  of  those 
present.  Mr.  Home  had  now  gone  off  into  a  trance  state. 
Whilst  in  this  condition,  he  said  he  saw  a  spirit  form 
standing  next  to  a  gentleman  present.  The  form, 
character,  and  past  history  were  so  accurately  detailed, 
that  the  identity  was  unmistakably  established — much  to 
the  surprise  of  the  gentleman,  whose  departed  friend  had 
been  quite  unknown  to  Mr.  Home.  A  few  sentences  were 
spelt  out,  and  the  manifestations  thereafter  ceased. 

"At  a  subsequent  seance,  the  physical  demonstrations  of 
spirit  power  were  very  marked.  On  this  occasion  six  in 
all  sat  down  to  a  stance.  Raps,  very  gentle  at  first,  but 
gradually  increasing  in  strength,  were  heard ;  then  the 
table  tilted.  After  a  while  the  curtains  began  to  be 
moved,  as  though  by  a  hand  from  the  window,  pushing 
them  into  the  room.  This  phenomenon  was  repeated 
several  times.  The  semi-grand  now  showed  signs  of 
movement.  On  three  or  four  occasions  this  heavy  piano 
was  bodily  raised  quite  an  inch  oflp  the  ground,  and 
carried  from  the  wall  two  to  three  feet  into  the  room. 
Raps  were  then  heard  in  and  on  the  semi-grand.  The 

table  next  to  Mrs. (not  the  one  we  were  seated  at) 

was  now  gently  and  elegantly  raised,  and  suspended  in 
the  air  irom  eighteen  inches  to  two  ieet  off  the  ground,  as 
far  as  I  could  judge.  It  remained  in  this  position  ior  one 

SPIRIT-SEEING.  1C7 

or  two  minutes. — time  enough  to  allow  one  of  the  party  to 
lie  down  under  the  table,  and  make  certain  that  no 
mechanical  means  had  been  used.  This  manifestation 
was  repeated  three  or  four  times.  The  accordion  v^  as  now 
taken  by  Mr.  Home;  and  whilst  held  by  him  with  one 
hand,  a  very  beautiful  hymn  was  played,  and  some  pieces 
of  sacred  music.  I  noticed  distinctly  the  movement  of 
the  keys  of  the  accordion,  which,  as  the  instrument  was 
now  horizontally  suspended  in  the  air,  with  the  finger- 
board  end  towards  the  lights,  I  was  enabled  to  see.  The 
keys  were  moved  regularly,  as  though  pressed  by  the 
fingers  of  a  hand.  In  answer  to  a  question  how  many 
spirits  were  present,  the  table  tilted  twelve  times.  This 
was  repeated  for  several  minutes,  the  twelfth  tilt  being 
marked  by  a  loud  rap  or  knock.  Finally,  the  sentence 
was  spelt  out  that  they  could  do  no  more — that  they  had 
no  more  power  :  the  word  '  power  '  being  spelt  by  move- 
ment of  the  end  of  the  semi-grand. 

"  SPIRIT-SEEING — SPIRIT   VISIONS. 

"  I  have  also  to  record  several  very  characteristic  in- 
stances of  spirit  visions  of  Mr.  D.  I).  Home's.  On  the 
occasion  I  am  now  narrating  the  friends  present  had  only 
casual! v  met,  and  had  seated  themselves  round  the  draw- 
ing-room table.  Suddenly  Mr.  Home,  who  had  all  the 
while  been  engaged  in  conversing  with  the  ladies,  changed 
the  expression  of  his  face,  rose,  and  having  played  a  ie\v 
chords  on  the  piano,  returned  to  resume  his  seat ;  but  now 
in  a  state  of  trance,  his  face  rigid,  hands  cold,  and  tho 
fingers  extended.  He  steadfastly  looked  across  to  where 
Mrs.  was  seated,  and  said,  '  L S is  stand- 
ing between  you  and  Mr. .  I  see  her  as  she  was  in 

life — mark,  not  as  she  is,  but  as  she  was  when  on  earth.' 
Mr.  Home  accurately  described  the  person  <>i'  the  spirit. 
So  marked  and  clear  were  the  traits  he  delineated,  that 
no  doubt  as  to  identity  was  possible.  He  said  that  a 
child,  which  had  passed  away  in  early  infancy,  was  stand- 

168  SPIRIT   VISIONS. 

ing  next  to  L S ,  adding  that  L S wan 

much  pleased,  and    anxious   to    communicate  with  Mrs. 

,  whom  she  had    loved  on    earth ;     and,   to   prove 

identity,  recalled  a  conversation  that  had  taken  place 
years  ago  between  the  two  friends.  He  then  said  that 

L S wished  to  say  that,  since  passing  away,  her 

views  had  much  changed — that  she  had  first  to  unlearn  in 
order  to  learn.  The  spirit  then  impressed  Mr.  Home  to 

remind  Mrs. of  a  conversation  she  had  recently  held 

with  her  husband.  I  may  state  that  Mr.  Home  was  a 
perfect  stranger  to  the  deceased  person,  whose  name  he 
had  never  even  heard.  We  have  here,  then,  a  proof  of 
the  presence  of  spirits  of  the  departed  ;  for  we  have  name, 
description  of  person,  and  marked  incidents  in  past  life  all 
given,  establishing  an  identity  beyond  dispute  or  cavil. 

"  Visions  of  spirit  forms  I  have  become  tolerably  familiar 
with  since  I  followed  the  inquiry  of  spiritual  phenomena  ; 
and  what  has  added  to  the  deep  interest  in  this  subject,  is 
the  conviction,  confirmed  by  proof,  that  the  departed  again 
visit  us  to  solace,  soothe,  warn,  as  we  travel  onward  to  the 
boundary  line  of  the  unknown  world.  I  could  render 
other  instances  that  have  come  under  my  notice  of  spirit 
visions ;  but,  for  this  time  I  will  not  ask  for  more  space 
in  your  columns.  Possibly,  in  my  next,  I  may  be  able  to 
give  you  some  further  account  of  the  extraordinary  phe- 
nomena we  are  constantly  witnessing.  The  suit  now 
pending  in  the  Courts  of  Chancery  so  completely  occupies 
Mr.  Home,  that,  except  at  friends'  houses,  he  is  rarely  to 
be  seen.  This  suit,  one  of  the  most  interesting  that  has 
for  the  last  century  been  before  the  public,  is  now  rapidly 
coming  on  for  a  hearing.  The  history,  incidents,  the 
course  of  the  proceedings,  are  all  of  an  unusual  character ; 
and  will  form,  when  on  record  and  allowed  to  be  published, 
one  of  the  most  interesting  phases  in  the  history  of 
Spiritualism.  That  all  who  have  investigated  the  question 
of  spiritual  maniiestations  look  torward  to  this  trial  with 
the  utmost  interest,  I  need  hardly  tell  you.  We  teel  that 

SPIRIT    VISIONS.  169 

the  day  has  arrived  for  vigorously  testing  the  truth  of  what 
we  know  to  be  the  fact,  and  applying  the  inexorable  logic 
of  actual  observation.  Testified  to  in  a  court  of  law,  I  reject 
the  word  "belief;"  for  it  is  not  an  acceptance  of  the  existence 
of  the  unseen,  but  the  admission  of  the  seen,  and  heard,  and 
evidence  to  our  external -sensibility  of  an  objective  fact,  that 
we  contend  for.  No  severer  test  can  be  applied  than  that 
brought  in  by  judicial  inquiry,  when  every  statement  will 
have  to  be  proved  and  substantiated.  I  repeat  that  the 
suit  now  to  be  heard  will  indeed  prove  of  a  high  order  of 
interest.  The  mistake  the  public  makes  is  that  of  mixing 
up  some  crotchet  of  a  belief  with  the  inquiry  as  insepa- 
rable from  spiritualism.  Now  nothing  is  more  erroneous. 
All  that  is  contended  for  is,  that  the  fact  of  certain 
physical  phenomena  is  true,  and  that  neither  deceit  nor 
self-deception  have  aught  to  do  with  it.  I  had  intended 
to  add  some  few  remarks  of  my  own,  but  space  will  not 
allow  my  doing  so  this  time.  When  next  I  address  you, 
and  you  will  grant  me  space,  I  will  endeavour  to  render 
my  theory  of  the  cause  of  some  of  the  phenomena  I  have 
been  recording,  more  especially  in  reference  to  the  vision 
power  of  mediums." 

The  following,  which  appeared  in  January,  is  also  by 
Mr.  H.  D.  Jencken : — 

"  I  have  again  to  address  you,  and  would  hesitate,  but 
for  the  very  exceptional  circumstances  of  having  Mr.  Home 
staying  with  me  for  some  weeks,  which  has  given  me  the 
amplest  opportunity  of  investigating  the  truly  remarkable 
phenomena  constantly  occurring  at  my  house.  What  adds 
to  the  interest  of  these  manifestations  is  their  varied  cha- 
racter, not  one  seance  resembling  another.  It  is  from  this 
fact  that  I  am  enabled  to  single  out  instances  from  the 
many  we  have  witnessed,  which  present  the  more  marked 
phases  of  spiritual  manifestations.  The  seances  which  I 
here  render  an  account  of  are  given  in  their  order  of  date. 
On  the  first  of  these  evenings  eight  of  us  met,  two  of 
whom  were  hard-to-be-convinced  sceptics.  We  had  not 

170     SUSPENSION  OF  FTJENITUEE. 

been  seated  many  minutes  when  raps  were  heard,  the 
table  vibrated  and  tilted,  and  pieces  of  furniture  at  distant 
parts  of  the  room  moved ;  a  pause  ensued,  followed  bv  the 
simultaneous  movement  of  two  small  side  tables.  One  of 
these  held  a  work-box  and  a  flower-stand ;  the  other  a 
fern  plant.  The  table  with  the  fern  plant  was  raised  ten 
to  fifteen  inches  off  the  ground,  and  carried  several  feet  at 

an  inclined  plane  of  thirty  degrees  to  Mrs. ;  and 

what  added  to  the  interest,  was  the  fact  of  the  fern  plant 
remaining  firmly  fixed  on  the  table  during  the  whole  of 
the  time.  Whilst  thus  suspended  in  the  air,  the  table 
vibrated,  raps  were  heard  in  and  on  the  table,  and  the 
fern-plant  leaves  pressed  themselves  against  those  whom 
it  was  intended  to  greet  in  the  most  affectionate  manner, 
quite  overshadowing  their  faces.  One  of  the  sceptic 
friends  had  in  the  meantime  lain  down  on  the  floor  to 
make  sure  that  no  deception  was  being  practised,, and  had 
placed  her  hands  under  the  pedestal  of  the  table  whilst  it 
was  suspended  in  the  air.  Passing  Mr.  Home,  the  small 

side-table  crossed  over  to  Mrs. ,  and  the  bowing, 

vibrating,  and  pressing  of  the  fern  leaves  into  her  face 
repeated  themselves.  Simultaneously,  the  other  small 
side-table  was  raised  up  into  the  air  four  to  six  inches 

high,  and  carried  up  to  Mrs. .     These  movements 

took  place  under  circumstances  rendering  deception  im- 
possible ;  the  room  was  well  lighted,  and  the  tables  were 
moved  simultaneously  on  both  sides  at  some  short  distance 
from  Mr.  Home,  and  that  quite  independently  of  each 
other,  being  closely  watched  by  those  present.  After  these 
manifestations  had  ceased,  the  table  we  were  seated  at 
was  raised  straight  up  into  the  air  eighteen  to  twenty-four 
inches  high,  and  whilst  so  suspended,  answered  by  an 
up-and-down  movement  to  any  mental  questions.  The 
charm  of  this  latter  manifestation  consists  in  the  elegance 
of  the  balance  and  the  softness  of  movement,  the  table 
appearing  to  be  resting  on  an  electric  wave.  Cold  cur- 
rents of  air  were  passed  over  our  hands  and  faces.  Voices 
were  heard,  a  low  kind  of  whistling,  and  breathing.  The 

VOICES,    WHISTLING.  171 

accordion  was  then  moved  and  glided  up  to  Mr.  Home. 
"Whilst  held  hy  him  in  one  hand,  the  ting  r-board  end  was 
carried  out  horizontally  into  the  room,  and  a  short  piece 
of  sacred  music  was  played  ;  then  the  following  sentences 
were  spelt  out : — 

"  '  We  would  fain  do  more  to  show  our  love.' 
"  '  The  emhlems  of  God's  love  we  bring  for  you.' 
"  And,  finally,  the  ordinary  message,  *  We  can  do  no 
more,'  warned  us  that  our  evening  had  ended. 

"  A  few  days  later,  we  were  quietly  seated  round  our 
dining-room  table,  reading  and  writing,  when  raps  were 
heard,  first  on  the  side-board,  then  on  the  table.  As 
these  grew  louder  and  more  marked,  we  paused  in  our 
occupations  to  observe  what  might  occur.  The  flower- 
stand  behind  me  moved  and  vibrated  ;  I  heard  a  snap,  a3 
if  a  leaf  or  flower  had  been  broken  off;  the  table  then 
moved  and  trembled.  By  this  time  two  of  our  neigh- 
bours, whom  I  had  sent  for,  arrived.  Almost  as  soon  as 
they  were  seated,  raps,  trembling  of  the  floor  and  room 
occurred,  the  strong  vibratory  motion  quite  unliko  <my 
ordinary  movement,  and  of  power  enough  to  make  the 
house  shake,  so  that  the  servants  in  the  upper  rooms  dis- 
tinctly felt  the  tremor.  Mr.  Home  then  said  he  felt  a 
hand  touching  him,  and  then  his  neighbour  said  she  was 
being  touched,  and  her  dress  pulled  ;  finally,  a  flower,  one 
of  the  fuschia  flowers  from  the  stand  behind  me,  was 
placed  in  her  hand.  As  you  may  imagine,  we  all  grouped 
round  to  examine  the  gift,  and  raps  in  different  parts  of 
the  room,  and  tilting  of  the  table  told  us  who  the  donors 
were.  Mr.  Home  had  now  passed  into  a  trance  state. 
His  appearance  was  singularly  strange,  and  around  his 
head  I  noticed  a  luminous  halo.  Whilst  in  this  condition 
he  recalled  scenes  of  the  past  life  of  departed  friends  so 
graphically,  so  touchingly  true,  that  it  was  hard,  indeed, 
to  repress  emotional  utterance  ;  finally,  raising  his  hands 
towards  heaven,  he  repeated  the  words,  'Light,  glory — 
glory  be  to  our  Father  in  heaven.' 

"  The  trance  state  had   now  passed  away,   and  Mr. 

172  BREATHING,    MUSIC. 

Home  resumed  his  seat.  The  accordion  which  I  had 
placed  near  him  moved  and  pushed  itself  up  to  Mr.  Home. 
He  laid  hold  of  it,  and  a  few  chords  were  played.  The 
instrument  was  then  taken  from  him,  carried  to  the  oppo- 
site side  of  the  table,  and,  raising  itself  about  two  feet  off 
the  ground,  not  touched  by,  nor  near  to  any  one  present, 
played,  resting  horizontally  in  the  air,  a  very  sweet-toned 
piece  of  music.  To  me  this  independent  action,  unaided 
by  any  human  hand,  was  very  interesting,  and  to  make 
certain  of  the  fact,  I  asked  the  lady  next  to  me  to  stoop 
down  and  carefully  observe  the  movements  of  the  instru- 
ment. The  accordion  then  travelled  back  to  Mr.  Home, 
and  a  piece  of  music  was  played,  followed  by  the  melody, 
'  The  last  rose  of  summer."  At  first  only  three  or  four 
notes  were  struck,  but,  on  our  remarking  that  the  performer 
could  not  do  more,  loud  raps  were  heard,  and  the  whole 
piece  was  performed,  though  not  altogether  without  some 

imperfections.  When  this  was  finished,  Mrs. was 

tapped  three  times  on  the  knee,  as  if  to  say,  '  I  have  done 
it.'  The  instrument  then  spelt  out  '  Good  night,'  and  the 
seance  ended. 

"  On  another  occasion,  Mr.  Home  had  gone  off  into  a 

slumber  on  the  sofa  in  my  drawing-room.  Mrs. , 

who  was  sitting  next  to  him,  suddenly  observed  a  black 
object  glide  along  the  floor  towards  her.  On  examination, 
it  proved  to  be  the  footstool  which  had  of  its  own  accord 
moved  across  the  room  placing  itself  at  her  feet.  The 
oval-shaped  drawing-table  now  moved  into  the  centre  of 
the  room,  and  the  arm  chair  at  the  farther  corner  came 

wheeling  up  to  Mrs. ,  balancing  its  broad  back  into 

her  lap.  My  arrival  interrupted  these  manifestations — 
the  displacement  of  the  furniture  only  remaining  to  prove 
what  had  occurred. 

"  At  a  sitting  some  few  days  later  on,  after  the  raps, 
trembling,  and  lifting  of  the  table  which  usually  prelude 
a  seance,  several  very  impressive  messages  were  spelt  out 
— some  of  these  by  the  raising  of  the  table,  at  which  we 

PEEFUMES.  173 

were  seated,  off  the  ground,  and  other  sentences  were 
given  by  the  accordion.  I  will  render  some  few,  that  you 
may  judge  of  their  character  and  bearing: — 

"  «  There  is  but  one  God,  the  Father  of  us  all.' 

" '  God  is  tolerant :  he  bears  with  our  shortcomings.' 

"'Love  and  Charity;  God  gives  the  one,  and  expects 
the  other/ 

"  The  latter  sentence  was  particularly  pertinent,  as  we 
had  been  speaking,  perhaps  not  unkindly,  but  reproach- 
fully, of  some  of  our  neighbours,  whose  derision  at  our 
assent  to  the  belief  of  these  phenomena  had  pained  us. 
The  accordion  had  in  the  meantime  placed  itself  in  Mr. 
Home's  hand  and  played  a  very  fine  piece  of  solemn 
music.  I  noticed  the  keys  as  they  spontaneously  moved, 
the  instrument  being  extended  horizontally  into  the  room ; 
it  then,  extending  itself  across  the  table,  played  in 
sweet,  soft  toned  notes.  This  lasted  quite  three  or  four 
minutes. 

"  A  sentence  was  then  spelt  out — '  You  are  quite  right, 
it  was  A who  touched  the  keys.' 

"  Mr.  Home's  left  hand  had  by  this  time  become  lumi- 
nously white,  and  to  me  it  appeared  to  have  changed  its 
form,  assuming  that  of  a  lady's.  Whilst  thus  luminously 
visible,  it  wafted  the  scent  from  the  flowers  on  the  adjoin- 
ing stand  over  our  faces,  and  into  the  room.  Flowers 
were  now  given  to  every  one  of  those  present ;  a  lady 
seated  near  to  me  had  a  flower  placed  under  her  pocket- 
handkerchief,  and  the  words  were  then  spelt  out : — 

"'We  have  done  as  we  promised;  look  under  the 
handkerchief.' 

"  We  all  expressed  our  satisfaction  at  the  gifts,  thank- 
ing our  donors,  but  were  reminded  by  the  sentence : — 

" '  Our  thanks  are  to  God,  to  Him  praise  is  due ;  Him 
we  must  praise.'  Following  this,  came  a  perfect  outburst 
of  very  solemn  sacred  music  terminating  our  evening.  One 
more  stance,  and  I  shall  have  finished. 

"  The  remarkable  part  of  this  last  evening  was  the 

174  ELONGATION. 

trance  state  of  Mr.  D.  D.  Home,  and  the  elongation  of 
his  body,  already  noticed  in  previous  letters.  Whilst  in 
his  trance  he  established  the  identity  of  two  persons ;  and 
in  commenting  upon  the  future  of  a  friend,  who  was  about 
leaving  for  the  seat  of  war,  Mr.  Home  said — '  The  spirit 
who  is  to  guard  you  is  as  tall  as  this.'  Then  occurred  the 
extraordinary  phenomenon  of  elongation,  Mr.  Home  at- 
taining a  height  of  quite  six  feet  six  inches.  As  I  stood 
next  to  him,  I  only  reached  to  his  shoulder.  His  feet 
were  firmly  planted  on  the  ground,  and  my  friend  placed 
his  hand  upon  them  to  make  certain  that  no  levitation  was 
taking  place.  Twice  Mr.  Home  lengthened  out  to  nearly 
seven  feet  in  height,  and  the  separation  of  his  clothing  at 
the  waist  showed  the  extension.  Whatever  may  be  the 
cause  of  this  extraordinary  phenomenon,  I  cannot  venture 
to  say ;  I  merely  give  the  fact  as  I  witnessed  it,  adding 
that  this  is  the  fourth  time  that  this  phenomenon  has  oc- 
curred. Mr.  Home  then  mesmerised  my  friend,  and,  re- 
turning to  his  seat,  awoke  from  his  trance.  I  have  not 
given  you  the  sublime  prayer  he  uttered  whilst  in  his 
trance :  your  space  will  not  allow  of  this.  We  now,  at 
Mr.  Home's  request,  went  for  a  few  minutes  into  the 
drawing-room.  Whilst  there,  spirit  lights  manifested 
themselves,  like  stars  or  luminous  disks  of  the  size  of  the 
palm  of  the  hand.  The  semi-grand  was  raised,  remain- 
ing horizontal  the  whole  time,  two  feet  off  the  ground ; 
and  to  verify  the  levitation,  I  placed  my  hand  under  the 
castors  of  the  piano !  Very  remarkable  was  the  resting 
of  the  leg  on  my  hand  for  several  seconds,  and  this  with- 
out causing  severe  pressure.  I  fear  being  considered 
prolix  while  detailing  how  I  satisfied  myself  as  to  the  truth 
of  what  was  passing,  but  the  unusual  character  of  the  phe- 
nomena will  warrant  my  repetition  of  the  mode  of  proof. 
Spirit  voices  were  heard,  and  the  strings  of  the  piano  vi- 
brated not  unlike  an  ^olian  harp,  % 

CHAPTER  IX. 

ELONGATION  AND  COMPHESSION — HANDLING  OP  FIRE. 

N  February,  1868,  Mr.  Jencken  says: — 

"  For  brevity's  sake,  I  will  avoid  repeat- 
ing attendant  circumstances,  as  well  as  the 
minuter  description  of  how  those  present 
were  placed,  and  the  mode  employed  to  verify 
the  phenomena.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  the  phenomena 
were  all  carefully  examined  and  tested,  not  because  we 
doubted  Mr.  Home,  but  because  the  wish  to  be  in  a  posi- 
tion to  affirm  positively  as  to  what  we  were  witnessing  has 
become  quite  a  creed  with  us  who  have  followed  this  enquiry. 
"  The  first  evening  of  the  series  of  seances  I  am  about 
to  narrate  commenced  after  some  thirty  minutes'  pause, 
with  the  well-known  raps,  tremblings,  and  movement  of 
the  table.  Then  voices  were  heard  to  repeat  the  words 
'  Holy,  holy,  holy;'  and  then  was  spelt  out,  '  We  will  play 
heavenly  music.' 

"  The  accordion,  which  had  in  the  meantime  been  taken 
hold  of  by  Mr.  Home,  played  a  very  beautiful  piece  of 
sacred  music;  at  times  the  instrument  was  carried  hori- 
zontally out  into  the  room,  then  taken  from  Mr.  Home, 
suspended  in  the  air,  and  played.  The  words,  '  This  is 
earthly  music'  having  been  spelt  out,  discords  were 
sounded  in  rapid  succession,  followed  by  breaks  of  fine 
harmonies.  At  one  time  the  accordion  was  carried  under- 

176  ELONGATION. 

neath  the  table  to  Mr. ,  and,  whilst  thus  separated 

from  Mr.  Home,  the  instrument  played  a  very  soft,  sweet- 
toned  piece  of  music.  Mr.  Home  now  rose,  and,  seating 
himself  at  the  piano,  performed  with  wonderful  execution ; 
then  rising  from  the  piano  he  walked  three  or  four  times 
round  our  circle,  mesmerising  each  in  turn.  Here  the 
exlraordinary  manifestation  of  elongation  and  shortening 
occurred.  The  height  he  attained  must  have  been  quite 
six  feet  nine  inches :  as  he  lengthened  out,  his  clothing 
at  the  waist  separated  fully  six  inches  ;  and  again,  as  he 
became  shorter  and  shorter,  the  waistcoat  descended  quite 
down  to  his  hips — Mrs. holding  the  end  of  his  waist- 
coat to  make  certain  of  the  elongation.  The  trance  state 
in  which  Mr.  Home  had  been  up  to  this  time  now  ceased, 
and  we  were  reminded  by  a  l  Good  night '  that  the  evening 
had  ended. 

**  The  next  day  at  dinner,  whilst  the  servants  were  in 
the  room  waiting  upon  my  guests,  a  chair  moved  spon- 
taneously from  the  corner  of  the  room  right  up  to  Mr. 
Home,  then  another  chair,  then  the  dining-room  table 

tilted  and  moved,  and  trembled  violently.     Mr. ,  who 

was  seated  next  to  me,  said  he  was  being  touched  and 
pulled — at  the  same  time,  a  hand  was  observed  to  lift  the 
table-cloth.  I  need  not  assure  you  how  greatly  the  ser- 
vants were  startled;  and  even  those  who  were  more 
habituated  to  these  phenomena  could  not  refrain  from  ex- 
pressions of  surprise.  Later  in  the  evening,  nine  in  all 
had  assembled  in  the  drawing-room ;  raps,  movements  of 
the  table,  the  lifting  of  the  semigrand  bodily  oif  the  ground, 
and  the  spontaneous  moving  of  a  small  side  table  up  to 
where  we  were  seated,  forewarned  a  very  interesting  seance. 
Several  very  beautiful  sentences  were  then  spelt  out.  I 
will  transcribe  some  few  as  characteristic.  We  had  been 
speaking  of  the  late  Professor  Faraday,  and  his  strong  dis- 
belief of  these  phenomena,  when  the  table  tilted,  and  the 
following  was  spelt  out : — *  He  now  knows  that  our  God  is 
all-powerful  in  very  truth,  and  that  his  ways  are  not  for 
man  to  criticise ' 

AND    COMPRESSION.  177 

"  As  the  word  '  God '  was  spelt  out,  every  letter  was 
given  in  the  most  solemn,  emphatic  manner;  each  letter 
was  differently  spelt — that  is,  the  letter  *  G '  by  the  lilting 
of  the  table  ;  the  letter  '  O  '  by  the  movement  of  the  senii- 
1:1  and  ;  *  D,'  by  loud  raps  at  a  distant  part  of  the  room. 
This  I  have  remarked  on  many  occasions ;  also  that  the 
table  is  generally  bodily  raised  into  the  air,  not  tilted,  and 
I  have  seen  instances  where  the  table  remained  suspended 
in  the  air  three  to  four  minutes.  Then  followed  the  sen- 
tence— '  Thoughts  are  a  part  of  the  divine ;  when  thoughts 
are  pure,  the  soul  is  nearer  God/ 

"  The  invisibles  then  addressed  a  lady  present — '  Trust, 
there  is  a  morning  star:  it  will  surely  rise.'  Another 
sentence,  and  I  must  proceed  with  my  narrative.  A  lady 
present  had  been  repeating  the  following  verse ,  '  And  all 
save  the  spirit  of  man  is  divine.'  The  invisibles  at  once 
responded,  '  He  too  is  divine  when  he  forgets  himself  and 
follows  God/  We  were  so  much  pleased  at  this  taking 
part  in  our  conversation,  that  we  expressed  our  thanks, 
and  asked  if  they,  the  invisibles,  really  sympathised  with 
us :  to  which  the  reply  at  once  came,  spelt  out  by  the 
movement  of  an  adjoining  table,  to  which  no  one  was  even 
near — '  Why  not  ?  we  were  as  you  are — we  sought  for 
light ;  the  morning  came  ;  the  day  is  everlasting/ 

"  Mr.  Home  had  by  this  time  passed  into  a  trance. 
After  making  several  circuits  and  mesmerising  us,  he 

placed  himself  behind  Mrs. ,  whom  he  mesmerised. 

I  have  not  space  to  describe  the  whole  of  the  proceedings, 
though  I  have  kept,  for  my  own  satisfaction,  accurate 
notes  of  what  passed.  Remarkable  was  the  breathing  of 

Mr.  Home  upon  Mrs. 's  spine,  causing  alternately 

a  feeling  of  cold  and  then  of  intense  heat.  Mr.  Home 
said,  "  I  am  now  going  to  grow  taller ;"  and  then  the  re- 
markable phenomenon  of  elongation  was  witnessed.  The 
elongation  repeated  itself  three  times.  The  first  time  Mr. 
Home  lengthened  to  about  6ft.  9in. ;  and  then  he  shortened 
down  below  his  normal  height  to  about  five  feet.  He 

178  ELONGATION 

then  asked  me  to  hold  his  feet,  which  I  did  by  planting 

my  foot  on  his  instep,  whilst  Mr. held  his  head,  his 

left  hand  being  placed  on  his  left  shoulder.  We  carefully 
measured  the  extent  of  elongation  against  the  wall  ;  it 

showed  eight  inches.  Mr. ,  who  had  been  watching 

the  extension  at  the  waist,  measured  six  inches  elongation  ! 

— Mr. ,  who  stood  behind  Mr.  Home,  barely  reaching 

up  to  his  shoulders,  though  himself  six  feet  high.  Mr. 
Home  had  now  seated  himself.  Again  he  said,  '  I  am 
going  to  be  elongated.  Daniel  will  be  elongated  thirty 
times  during  his  life :  this  is  the  sixth  time"  (?)  Mrs. 

,  who  sat  next  to  Mr.  Home,  placed  her  hand  on  his 

head,  and  her  feet  on  his  feet.  Thus  held,  the  elonga- 
tion nevertheless  proceeded,  measuring  six  inches.  I  re- 
peat, Mr.  Home  was  seated  all  the  time,  and  held  by 
those  present,  anxious  to  verify  this  truly  unaccountable 
phenomenon.  By  this  time  Mr.  Home  had  awakened 
from  his  trance.  Shadows  on  the  wall  were  seen,  voices 
heard,  and,  finally,  •'  Good  night,'  spelt  out,  terminating 
the  evening. 

"  During  the  night,  the  manifestations  continued  in  Mr. 

Home's  bed-room.  Mr.  ,  who  slept  in  the  same 

room  with  Mr.  Home,  said  he  repeatedly  saw  spirit  forms 
cross  the  room.  A  spirit  hand  rolled  up  the  blankets  of 
his  bed,  and  a  form  was  felt  to  walk  across  his  mattress, 
the  pressure  of  the  foot,  as  it  stepped  across,  quite  in- 
denting the  bed-clothes. 

"  MORE  FACTS. — At  this  seance,  after  some  consider- 
able lapse  of  time,  three  of  those  present  went  into  the 
adjoining  room.  The  shutter  bell  was  taken  from  under- 
neath the  sofa,  carried  across  to  those  present — the  spring- 
band  resting  for  a  time  on  the  arm  of  Mrs. ,  who 

noticed  a  clear,  brilliant  luminosity  under  the  table.  The 
bell  first  went  under  Mr.  Home's  chair  and  rang,  and  then 
raised  itself  on  to  his  knee,  winding  the  steel-spring  round 

his  arm  ;  then  it  carried  itself  on  to  the  lap  of  Mrs. , 

and  the  spring  suspended  itself  by  the  curve  on  her  arm 

AND    COMPRESSION.  179 

quite  firmly,  and,  disengaging  itself,  went  under  the  table 

to  Mrs. ,  the  luminosity  increasing  in  intensity. 

Mr. had  now  joined  the  party.  The  steel  spring 

had  again  attached  itself  to  Mr.  Home's  arms.  \Vhat 
added  to  the  interest,  was  that  the  end  of  the  .steel  band 
answered  by  taps  to  the  questions  put. 

"  The  four  friends  had  now  rejoined  us.  Movements 
of  the  table  and  loud  raps  at  once  occurred — Mr.  Home 
falling  off  into  a  trance  almost  immediately.  In  his  trance 
state,  he  delivered  a  very  beautiful  address,  too  long  to 
be  copied ;  then  passing  up  to  the  hearth,  placed  his 
hands  and  then  his  face  in  the  flames,  and  on  the  burning 
coals.  This  fire  test  I  have  witnessed  several  times,  and 
particularly  call  attention  to  it,  as  its  interest  is  increased 
if  we  but  look  back  to  the  records  of  religious  persecutions 
of  past  ages.  On  this  evening,  I  had  the  amplest  oppor- 
tunity of  watching  the  exact  movements,  and  quite  satis- 
fied myself  of  the  fact  that  Mr.  Home  touched  the  burning 
coals.  A  lady  present,  unable  to  resist  her  expressions  of 
alarm  as  his  face  neared  and  closed  upon  the  flames,  was 
reproved — Mr.  Home  extending  toward  her  his  right 
hand,  which  had  now  become  white  and  luminous,  in 
reproachful  warning,  saying :  '  Have  you  no  faith,  no 
faith  ?  Daniel  will  take  no  harm.' 

"  The  accordion  was  now  laid  hold  of  by  Mr.  Home,  who 
had  seated  himself  at  the  semigrand  ;  he  attempted  to 
play  both  instruments,  but  the  notes  would  not  tune  to 
accord.  He  then  seated  himself  at  the  harmonium,  and 
played  a  very  beautiful  piece  of  sacred  music  on  both  in- 
struments— the  accordion  being  carried  horizontally  into 
the  room  whilst  held  by  him  with  one  hand,  the  harmo- 
nium being  played  by  his  right  hand.  What  added  to  the 
interest,  was  that  both  instruments  were  in  perfect  accor- 
dance— a  choir  of  voices  accompanying  the  instruments, 
and  giving  fulness  to  the  performance.  Suddenly  the 
music  ceased,  and  the  dying  voices  of  the  choir  appeared 
to  melt  away  into  space.  The  evening  terminated  most 

180  ELONGATION 

pleasantly,  the  spirits  literally  taking  part  in  our  conver- 
sation. I  will  only  instance  one  or  two  of  the  sentences 
they  spelt  out  in  reply  to  our  questions.  We  had  been 
speaking  of  Swedenborg's  dyspeptic  ideas  of  a  future 
state,  and  his  hell  torments,  when  loud  raps  made  us  under- 
stand how  wrong  he  had  been  in  his  descriptions.  Again, 
we  spoke  of  the  demi-obscurity  of  our  churches,  and  the 
magic  of  this  sombreness.  The  sentences  were  spelt  out 
by  loud  raps  at  the  extreme  end  of  the  room — '  The  partial 
obscurity  is  typical  of  earth.'  *  The  soul  longs  to  seek  the 
milder  light.'  '  God  is  light;  God  is  love.'  Eequesting 
us  to  sit  on  a  given  evening,  our  spirit  friends  departed — 
the  words  '  Christmas  Eve'  being  uttered  and  clearly  arti- 
culated three  or  four  times." 

In  the  March  number  of  "  Human  Nature"  Mr. 
Jcncken  thus  describes  what  he  had  witnessed  : — 

"  Sir, — According  to  promise,  I  now  give  you  an  ac- 
count of  the  interesting  seances  alluded  to  in  my  last  letter. 
These  evenings  were  chiefly  occupied  by  the  delivery  of 
some  very  remarkable  addresses,  during  a  trance  state — 
one  of  which  lasted  two  hours.  I  can  only  mention  these 
in  barest  outline ;  to  give  them  in  full  would  occupy  too 
much  space  in  your  journal.  Suffice  it,  if  I  select  from 
the  several  one  as  a  specimen.  Mr.  Home,  who  was  in  a 
trance  the  whole  of  the  time,  after  commenting  upon  the 
great  difficulty  experienced  by  spiritual  beings  in  com- 
municating with  us  on  earth,  continued  to  say,  ( that  the 
spirits  were  watching  their  opportunity ;  that  the  day 
would  come  at  which  a  general  outburst  of  spiritual  mani- 
festations would  occur ;  that  the  most  favourable  time  for 
such  an  inroad  would  be  Christmas,  as  then  family  circles 
had  gathered  home,  and  the  human  race  become  more  fit 
for  intercommunication.'  Then  followed  a  very  learned 
and  philosophical  discourse  ;  the  address  terminating  with 
exhortations  and  moral  teachings. 

At  the  subsequent  seance  a  party  of  us  had  assembled 
in  the  drawing-room,  when  raps  told  us  that  the  invisibles 
were  present.  We  were  soon  seated  round  a  square  table, 

AND    COMPRESSION.  181 

when  the  sentence  was  spelt  out : — '  The  spirit  of  healing 
wishes  you  to  extinguish  the  lights,  and  place  a  bottle  of 
water  on  the  table.  In  five  minutes  let  Lord  Adarc  have 
half,  and  in  ten  minutes  let  him  have  the  other  half.'  I 
accordingly  extinguished  the  lights,  and  placed  a  decanter 
of  water  on  the  table  ;  the  bright  clear  tire  on  the  hearth 
illumining  the  room  enabled  me  to  watch  every  movement. 

"  The  decanter  of  water  was  now  laid  hold  of  by  Mr. 
Home,  and  whirled  about,  inverted ;  no  water  however 
flowed  from  the  open  mouth  of  the  bottle.  A  star-like 
luminous  disc  was  now  seen  in  the  bottle,  and  after  a  short 
time  the  water  became  aromatic,  filling  the  room  with 
perfume. 

"  Mr.  Home,  who  had  by  this  time  passed  into  a  trance, 
asked  me  to  bring  in  another  decanter,  but  empty,  and 
pour  off  half  the  water  from  the  full  bottle.  This  I  did. 
lie  then  ordered  me  to  bring  in  another  decanter  filled. 
Seizing  hold  of  the  full  and  half-full  decanters,  Mr.  Home 
whirled  the  bottles  about,  then,  inverting  them,  shook  them 
violently.  I  again  observed  the  luminous  starlike  point. 
Strange  enough,  though  both  bottles  had  no  neck-stoppers, 
yet  the  water  did  not  flow  out ;  and  on  replacing  the  two 
decanters  on  the  table,  one  was  found  to  be  empty.  How 
emptied  I  cannot  pretend  to  explain — I  merely  give  the 
fact.  Mr.  Home  again  having  laid  hold  of  one  of  the 
decanters  walked  up  to  the  fireplace  and  deliberately 
poured  some  few  drops  of  water  upon  his  finger-points. 
They  literally  hissed,  and  jets  of  steam  arose.  I  noticed 
several  jets  of  electric  light,  not  unlike  those  Reichenbach 
describes  emanating  from  the  fingers  of  sensitives. 

"  As  some  of  us  present  had  not  closely  watched  this 
manifestation,  Mr.  Home  repeated  it  three  times.  The 
perfumes  that  filled  the  room,  Mr.  Home  appeared  to  bo 
able  to  vary  at  will.  At  times  a  powerful  aroma  of  otto 
of  roses,  then  a  perfume  of  millefleurs,  then  that  of 
lavender  water  was  wafted  across  the  room. 

"  The  water  in  the  decanters  was  now  noticed  to  have 
become  strongly  perfumed  ;  and  Mr.  Home,  now  ad- 

182  HANDLING    OF    FIRE. 

dressing  us,  said,  <  That  all  the  phenomena  we  were 
witnessing  were  not  produced  by  supernatural  means ; 
that,  for  instance,  the  perfume  that  filled  the  room  had 
been  abstracted  from  scents  in  the  house ;  that  they  (the 
spirits)  only  possessed  greater  knowledge  of  chemical 
agencies,  and  could  eliminate  the  volatile  substances  from 
the  fluids  which  contained  them.'  And  then  continuing 
to  address  us,  said,  '  The  cures  we  perform  are  only  ef- 
fected by  our  knowledge  of  the  diseases.  We  do  not 
raise  the  dead ;  we  merely  watch  our  opportunity  to  re- 
awaken life.  We  do  not  perform  miracles.' 

"  Mr.  Home  then  continued,  '  We  have  gladly  shown 
you  our  power  over  fluids,  we  will  now  show  you  our 
powers  over  solids/  He  then  knelt  down  before  the 
hearth,  and  deliberately  breaking  up  a  glowing  piece  of 
coal  in  the  fire-place,  took  up  a  largish  lump  of  incan- 
descent coal,  and  placing  the  same  in  his  left  hand,  pro- 
ceeded to  explain  that  the  caloric  had  been  extracted  by  a 
process  known  to  them  (the  spirits),  and  that  the  heat 
could  in  part  be  returned.  This  he  proved  by  alternately 
cooling  and  heating  the  coal ;  and,  to  convince  us  of  the 
fact,  allowed  us  to  handle  the  coal,  which  had  become 
cool,  then  suddenly  resumed  its  heat  sufficient  to  burn  one, 
as  I  again  touched  it.  I  examined  Mr.  Home's  hand, 
and  quite  satisfied  myself  that  no  artificial  means  had 
been  employed  to  protect  the  skin,  which  did  not  even 
retain  the  smell  of  smoke.  Mr.  Home  then  reseated 
himself,  and  having  described  how  the  waters  in  the 
decanters  were  to  be  used,  awoke  from  his  trance  quite 
pale  and  exhausted. 

"  I  have  not  detailed  the  usual  accompaniments  of  a 
seance — raps  and  vibrations,  movements  of  the  furniture 
• — which  also  occurred  during  the  evening.  The  semi-grand 
was  lifted  massively  off  the  ground ;  voices  were  heard  ; 
several  of  us  had  our  hands  pressed  by  spirit-hands  ;  and 
the  lady  next  to  me  was  moved  several  feet  away  from 
the  table,  chair  and  all. 

SPIRITUAL    PHENOMENA.       183 

"  At  a  subsequent  seance,  whieh  was  held  without  any 
preeoneertment,  those  present  having  only  casually  met.  a 
lateral  upward  movement  of  the  semi-grand  warned  us  that 
the  invisihles  were  in  power.  We  had  no  sooner  seated 
ourselves,  than  a  gentleman  present  fell  into  a  tranee.  This 
was  to  me  the  more  interesting,  as  my  friend,  a  prufe.s- 
sional  man  of  some  note,  was  quite  sceptical,  and  had  only 
yielded  a  courteous  tolerance  to  our  operations.  I  ex- 
amined his  arms  and  hands,  which  were  as  rigid  as  iron. 
"Whilst  in  this  state,  he  spoke  of  departed  friends,  accu- 
rately describing  them  ;  and  conversed  with  the  invisihles. 
Mr.  Koine  had  likewise  fallen  into  a  trance;  and  the 
conversation  of  our  two  clairvoyants,  with  one  another  and 
the  invisihles,  was  truly  remarkahle.  After  awakening, 
my  friend  complained  of  pain  in  his  back  and  limbs,  and 
begged  not  to  be  made  to  join  our  circle  again." 

"  Human  Nature  "  for  April,  1868,  has  the  following 
from  Mr.  H.  D.  Jencken  : — "  I  have  again  to  record 
spiritual  manifestations  presenting  another  phase  of  the 
truly  remarkable  phenomena,  and  which  T  have  had  the 
opportunity  of  investigating.  On  the  first  evening  we 
met,  the  tilting  of  the  table,  vibrating  of  the  floor,  and 
raps  in  different  parts  of  the  room  soon  occurred,  and  a 
few  sentences  were  spelt  out,  followed  by  cold  currents  of 
air  passing  from  time  to  time  over  our  hands  and  faees. 
The  table  we  were  seated  at  was  raised  off  the  ground 
twelve  or  fifteen  inches,  and  the  accordion,  which  Mr. 
Home  had  taken  into  his  lap,  was  laid  hold  of  by  an 
invisible  hand,  and  swung  about  and  over  Mr.  Home's 
head,  a  few  chords  being  played.  Mr.  Home  now  took 
his  watch  and  chain  from  his  pocket,  and  swung  them 
over  his  head  and  to  and  fro,  his  arm  and  hand  perfectly 
cataleptic.  The  ring  of  the  watch  handle  appeared  to  he 
attracted  to  his  finger  ends,  and  several  times  we  noticed 
that  a  short  space,  about  half  an  inch,  intervened  between 
the  watch  and  the  tinker-points;  then,  seating  himself, 
the  watch  was  taken  from  his  hand,  and  carried  across 

184     SPIRITUAL    MANIFESTATIONS. 

and  under  the  table  to  each  of  us  in  turn,  and  finally 
placed  in  my  hand.  The  lady  next  to  me  said  she  felt  a 
hand  press  her  own,  describing  the  sensation  as  from  a 
velvet  glove.  Mr.  Home's  hands  were  during  the  whole 
time  on  the  table,  and  catalcptically  rigid. 

"  The  trance  state,  which  I  have  noticed  in  former 
letters,  now  supervened,  and  Mr.  Home,  quite  unconscious 
of  his  movements,  walked  to  and  fro,  then  approached  a 
gentleman  present,  who,  by  this  time,  had  also  fallen  into 
a  trance.  The  evident  struggle  of  my  friend  to  resist  the 
influence  was  extremely  interesting  and  satisfactory,  as  far 
as  the  fact  of  an  independent  agency  was  concerned. 
Both  the  trance  mediums  then  repeated  a  most  beautiful 
prayer,  in  alternate  cadence  and  response.  I  will  select 
a  few  lines  from  the  prayer  and  the  concluding  sentence, 
as  illustrative  of  the  character  of  the  same  : — 

"  '  Blessed  are  those  that  forgive  ;  for  in  them  is  a 
gleam  of  the  divine/ 

"  '  How  comforting  is  the  presence  of  the  departed  ! ' 

"  And,  in  conclusion  — 

" '  We  magnify  thee,  O  Lord,  for  thy  deeds  ;  for  thy 
glory  is  never  ending.' 

"  Mr.  Home  now  took  a  guitar,  and,  placing  it  in  the 
hands  of  my  entranced  friend,  requested  him  to  play. 
At  first  the  guitar  fell  from  my  friend's  hand,  whose  rigid, 
cataleptic  arms  and  hands  were  not  yet  released  from  the 
spiritual  mesmeric  influence  ;  no  sooner  had  the  rigidity 
passed,  than  he  played  two  very  sweet,  full-toned  pieces  of 
music,  representing,  as  Mr.  Home  told  us,  '  doubt  and 
hope/  Both  the  gentlemen  now  awoke — my  friend 
somewhat  bewildered,  and  perfectly  unconscious  of  what 
had  passed.  The  table  now  moved  and  tilted,  and  finally 
turned  upside  down.  My  Mend's  right  arm  was  then 
influenced,  and  made  to  seize  hold  of  the  leg  of  the  table, 
and  aid  in  setting  it  up  again.  This  manifestation  so  far 
interested  me  as  proving  the  presence  of  a  power  capable 
of  acting  upon  a  person  whilst  in  his  waking  state,  and 

MUSIO    AND    PERFUMES.         185 

controlling  his   corporeal   action.     Greetings   and   kind 
touches  lrom  spirit-hands  terminated  the  evening. 

"  The  manifestations  I  have  next  to  give  an  account  of 
are  of  a  very  interesting  character,  as  they  occurred  at  the 
passing  away  of  an  old  and  faithful  attendant  of  our 
household.  On  the  morning  of  the  patient's  decease, 
who  had  been  suffering  from  phthisis,  the  nurse  in  atten- 
dance was  startled  by  a  chant  of  sweet,  solemn  music 
passing  through  the  room  which  the  patient  occupied. 
Raps  were  heard  over  and  near  the  bed;  and,  at  the 
request  of  the  sufferer,  Mr.  Home,  who  was  sleeping  in 
an  upper  room,  was  sent  for.  On  his  entering  the  sick- 
room, the  music  again,  in  mournful  cadences,  swept 
through  the  air — in  all,  the  music  lasted  thirty  minutes. 
Spiritual  raps  on  the  bed,  over  head,  all  round  the  dying 
woman,  spoke  in  unmistakable  language  of  the  presence 
of  kind  attendant  spiritual  beings.  At  two  o'clock  in  the 
afternoon  the  soul  left  the  body.  We,  who  had  witnessed 
the  last  moments  of  a  kind  friend,  sat  silent  and  sorrowful 
in  my  dining-room,  when,  to  our  surprise,  spiritual  mani- 
festations came,  in  raps,  gentle  movements  of  the  furni- 
ture, and  soft,  kind  touches,  all  warning  us  that  friends  do 
not  leave  us,  though  death  may  sever  for  awhile  by 
changing  our  physical  condition.  I  cannot  describe  how 
the  presence  of  spiritual  beings,  so  manifested  as  was 
their  communion,  cheered  and  solaced  us. 

"  A  few  hours  later  in  the  day,  we  entered  the  bed- 
room, and,  to  our  surprise,  found  the  room  perfumed. 
The  perfume  appeared  to  enter  through  the  open  window. 
I  cannot  describe  it  otherwise  than  like  the  finest  incense, 
or  the  scent  of  dried  flowers,  such  as  violets.  The  per- 
fume passed  through  the  house,  not  in  a  steadily-con- 
ducted current,  but,  as  it  were,  capriciously,  in  limited 
bounds,  as  though  restricted  to  the  movements  of  an 
electric  undulation.  Fortunately,  a  friend  called  in  upon 
us  in  the  course  of  the  evening,  and  being  experienced, 
from  his  scientific  pursuits,  in  investigating  physical  facts, 

186    SPIRITUAL    MANIFESTATIONS. 

I  asked  him  to  examine  this  extraordinary  phenomenon 
with  care.  This  he  did,  and  fully  established  the  fol- 
lowing facts : — 

"  1st.  That  the  perfume  did  not  arise  from  any  sub- 
stance in  the  room,  but  appeared  to  be  carried  in  from  the 
outer  atmosphere. 

"  2ndly.  That  the  perfume  was  restricted  to  some  un- 
known but  independent  current,  for,  contrary  to  all  laws 
of  diffusion  of  scents,  the  strong  draught  of  an  open  door 
and  window  did  not  carry  the  perfume  into  the  landing, 
six  inches  of  space  absolutely  intercepting  the  aroma. 

"  3rdly.  Contrary  to  known  laws,  the  aroma  descended 
to  the  rooms  below,  and  even  entered  the  drawing- room 
of  my  neighbour's  house. 

"  4thly.  The  room  felt  dry,  magnetic,  warm.  The 
following  day,  the  medical  gentleman  who  had  attended 
the  patient  noticed  this  phenomenon  of  the  wonderfully 
sweet  perfume  pervading  the  room,  remarking  that  it 
made  the  impression  upon  him  of  something  *  holy/ 

"But  I  must  revert  to  the  manifestations  on  the  day 
the  patient  passed  away.  During  the  whole  of  the  after- 
noon, Mr.  Home  had  been  passing  from  one  trance  into 
another.  In  one  of  these  states  he  proceeded  to  the 
room  of  the  deceased.  Returning  with  her  Bible,  he 
opened  it  at  the  12th  chapter  of  1st  Corinthians,  and 
pointed  to  verses  1  and  30.  The  language  of  the  Bible 
being  in  Esthonian,  made  the  selection  of  this  passage  so 
far  more  remarkable,  as  Mr.  Home  does  not  understand  a 
word  of  this  little-known  language — even  admitting  he 
could  have  read  with  his  eyeballs  turned  up,  and  the  lids 
drawn  spasmodically  down  and  closed.  As  I  tried  to 
understand  which  verses  were  intended,  gentle  raps  at  the 
far  end  of  the  room  guided  me. 

"  In  the  evening,  Mr.  Home  again  fell  into  a  trance, 

and  then  stated  *  that  M had  lived  a  pure  life, 

and  that  her  body  had  been  purified  by  spiritual  agency ; 
and  the  miracle  known  to  have  occurred  with  some  of  the 

PRESENCE    OF  SPIRITS.         187 

saints  of  the  Catholic  church  had  been  repeated  this  day, 
not  as  a  miracle,  but  in  proof  of  the  power  of  spiritual 
influence  and  presence.'  Impressive  beyond  language 
was  the  manifestation  of  gentle,  sonorous  raps  on  every 
side  as  we  stood  grouped  around  the  departed,  wondering 
why  this  strange  phenomenon  of  holy  perfume  should  be 
allowed — the  spiritual  beings  appearing  to  converse  with 
us  by  the  agency  of  the  simple  telegraphy  of  raps,  an- 
swering to  our  prayerful  questions  in  quick  response, '  Yes, 
yes,  yes,  we  are  present.' 

"  Two  evenings  later,  Mr.  Home  was  seated  quietly  at 
the  fireside,  when  raps  came  close  to  me,  and  a  sentence 
was  spelt  out,  that  we,  three  of  us,  should  proceed  to  the 
room  where  the  body  had  now  been  laid  out,  but  not  to 
enter,  only  stand  at  the  door.  This  we  did,  and,  on 
opening  the  door,  a  strong  current  of  perfume  passed  over 
us,  this  time  filling  the  landing,  and  hall,  and  house. 
The  phenomenon  of  perfume  entering  my  house,  con- 
tinued to  the  day  of  the  funeral — at  times  being,  despite 
of  open  windows,  quite  overpowering.  Manifestations  of 
spiritual  presence  during  the  whole  of  the  time  were  con- 
stantly occurring,  and,  even  in  my  bedroom,  I  was 
awakened  l»y  trembling  of  the  floor,  and  raps  against  the 
wall  and  bed  ;  and  a  friend  who  was  staying  with  me  said 
he  had  mental  questions  answered  by  raps  at  the  foot  of 
his  bod.  which  moved  and  vibrated." 

Mr.  Jencken  in  "  Human  Nature,"  May,  1868,  gives 
the  following  account: — "  We  had,  as  u<ual,  seated  our- 
selves round  a  table  in  the  drawing-room,  and  after  the 
lapse  of  a  considerable  time,  the  trembling  of  the  floor, 
movement  of  the  table,  and  vibration  of  the  semi-grand 
commenced.  Mr.  Simpson,  whose  scientific  training  had 
given  him  the  aptitude  for  experiment,  suggested  the 
placing  of  a  large  flat  music-hook  on  rollers  on  the  table, 
and  then  for  us  to  rest  our  fingers  on  the  edge  of  the  hook  ; 
the  object  being  to  check  any  involuntary  movements. 
Much  to  my  satisfaction,  the  table  moved  more  violently 

188     SPIRITUAL    MANIFESTATIONS. 

than  before,  and  Mr.  Simpson,  who  had  lain  down  on  the 
floor  to  observe  the  movement  of  the  table  more  closely, 
quite  satisfied  himself  of  the  independent  motion.  We 
next  suggested  trying  the  alternating  weight  and  light- 
ness of  the  table,  a  manifestation  occasionally  produced. 
Mr.  Simpson  re-examined  the  table  to  satisfy  himself  that 
no  disturbing  cause  could  interfere ;  this  done,  we  made 
the  request  to  have  the  table  '  heavy/  On  attempting 
to  raise  it,  we  could  not  possibly  manage  to  lift  it.  Then 
we  requested  that  the  table  should  be  made  '  light,'  and 
the  table  only  just  before  heavy  and  immovable  could  now 
be  raised  upon  the  slightest  effort.  Mr.  Simpson,  satisfied 
with  this  test,  suggested  repeating  the  experiment  with 
the  music-book,  which  had  been  placed  on  rollers  on  the 
table.  I  at  first  quite  doubted  the  result,  but  on  trying 
to  raise  the  edge  of  the  book  it  felt  as  if  cleaved  to  the 
table,  and  then  on  changing  to, '  Let  it  be  light,'  the  book 
became  as  light  as  a  feather.  Again  and  again  we  re- 
peated the  experiment,  and  finally  satisfied  ourselves  of 
the  reality  of  the  important  fact  of  an  independent  agency, 
guided  by  intelligence,  and  of  the  presence  of  an  invisible 
being,  possessing  the  power  of  reading  our  thoughts,  and 
of  producing  at  will  the  phenomenon  of  alternately  making 
the  book  heavy  or  light.  You  will  think  me  tedious  ior 
dwelling  at  such  length  upon  so  comparatively  insignificant 
a  phenomenon,  but  the  very  simplicity  of  the  manifestation 
gives  interest.  The  phenomenon  was,  so  to  speak,  quite 
within  grasp  ;  and  I  like,  above  all  things,  to  have  a 
manageable  fact  before  me.  The  law  is  the  same ;  the 
raising  of  a  single  pound  weight,  or  of  a  ton,  does  not 
affect  the  principle  :  and  here  I  had  all  I  could  desire, — a 
strong  clear  light ;  our  own  home  for  our  theatre  of  opera- 
tion ;  our  own  friends  with  us  ;  a  scientific  man  at  my  elbow, 
ready  to  catch  at  a  shadow  of  a  doubt,  and  whom  we 
allowed  to  arrange  at  will,  and  place  himself  in  any  posi- 
tion he  chose;  and  Mr.  Home,  th,e  medium — good- 
tempered  in  the  extreme — actuated  only  by  a  sincere 

SPIRIT   MOVEMENTS.  180 

desire  to  aid  the  investigation:  all  gave  additional  in- 
terest to  our  evening.  I  am  now  in  a  position  safely  to 
assert  that  I  have  proved,  beyond  a  doubt,  by  this  simple 
experiment,  the  operation  of  an  unseen  power,  guided 
by  intelligence. 

"  Later  in  the  evening,  the  accordion,  which  had  been 
placed  on  the  table,  spontaneously  moved  six  to  eight 
inches  from  one  side  of  the  table  towards  the  other — not 
a  hand,  not  a  finger  touching  it.  The  semi-grand  was 
raised  off  the  ground,  and  moved  a  foot  from  the  wall 
into  the  room,  no  one  touching  the  piano  at  the  time. 
An  adjoining  oval  walnut-wood  table  trembled,  raised 
itself  first  on  one  leg,  then  on  the  other,  and  glided  up  to 

our  table.  Mr. ,  at  my  request,  placed  himself  on 

the  floor,  to  watch  the  movement,  and,  after  a  rigorous 
examination,  satisfied  himself  that  the  motions  were  pro- 
duced by  an  unseen,  independent  agency. 

"  "We  had  now  reseated  ourselves,  when  we  noticed  the 
curtains  being  pushed  into  the  room  ;  first,  the  curtains 
behind  Mr.  Home,  then  those  of  the  farther  window. 
They  were  then  drawn  aside,  and  I  noticed  a  hand — for  a 
moment  only — between  the  curtain  and  the  table.  As  if 
to  give  us  a  final  proof  of  independent  action,  the  water 
decanter  and  wine  decanter  on  the  tray  with  refreshments, 
which  we  had  placed  on  the  adjoining  table,  moved,  tilted, 
the  water  bottle  placing  itself  at  the  edge  of  the  tray. 
Of  course  my  friend  was  on  the  alert,  re-examined 
curtain,  table,  and  tray,  and  pronounced  the  coast  clear  of 
magnets  or  other  appliances. 

"  Another  test :  I  am  certain  you  will  bear  with  me. 
It  is  so  satisfactory  to  have  done  our  utmost  to  convince 
ourselves,  we  quite  long  to  communicate  the  result  of  our 
inquiry  to  others.  Raps  having  been  heard  under  the 
leaf  of  the  table  we  were  seated  at,  it  was  suggested  to 
pin  a  sheet  of  paper  underneath  the  table,  which  would 
effectually  intercept  the  action  of  any  instrument — such 
as  the  point  of  a  stick  or  finger  point — that  might  bo 

190    SPIRITUAL    MANIFESTATIONS. 

used  to  produce  the  sound.  The  sheet  of  paper,  after 
some  slight  difficulty,  was  pinned  on,  and  then  we  waited 
for  the  result.  After  a  pause,  raps  came,  again  and 
again  ;  some  appeared  to  vibrate  against  the  table,  and 
inside  of  the  paper,  others  sounded  sonorous  and  clear. 
The  fact  was  established,  that  the  placing  of  the  paper 
did  not  interfere  with  the  raps.  But  enough  of  physical 
tests  ;  now  as  to  identity. 

"Mr.  Home  had  laid  hold  of  the  accordion  in  one 
hand,  and  after  waiting  a  few  minutes,  some  chords  were 
played  by  an  invisible  hand,  followed  by  an  air,  which 
was  repeated  three  or  four  times.  I  cannot  say  I  quite 
followed  the  tune  ;  it  appeared  to  me  broken,  and  changed 
from  its  original  melody.  '  What  does  it  mean  ?  '  was 
asked.  The  name  '  John '  was  spelt  out,  and  the  tune 
repeated.  Again  we  asked,  '  To  whom  does  this  apply  ?  ' 
No  answer  ;  and  so  the  matter  was  passed  over.  A  few 
days  afterwards,  I  received  a  letter  from  a  gentleman 
who  had  been  present,  explaining  that  the  air  that  had 
been  played  was  meant  for  him ;  that  at  the  time,  anxious 
not  to  disturb  the  mind  of  the  medium,  and  to  shut  the 
door  even  upon  thought-reading,  he  had  kept  his  counsel ; 
that  the  tune  played  was  one  he  had  himself  altered,  to 
suit  his  voice ;  that  only  two  persons  alive  knew  the  notes 
he  had  changed,  the  third  who  knew  it  was  beyond  the 
grave.  He  writes — 'It  is  an  air  my  wife  particularly 
liked,  and  always  asked  me,  if  alone  with  her,  to  play. 
The  words  are  by  Mrs.  Hemans,  and  the  two  last  lines 
are — 

" '  Yet  would  I  buy  with  life  again 
That  one  dear  dream  of  thee.' 

My  friend  continues  to  say — 'These  are  simple  facts; 
I  give  them  as  such.'  The  accordion,  as  it  played  the 
air  or  melody,  moved  horizontally  towards  Mr.  Simpson, 
who  narrowly  kept  observing  it  all  the  time,  and  to  his 
praise,  be  it  said,  remained  calm  and  watchful  throughout, 
anxious  only  for  the  truth.  Next  to  actual  speech,  to  the 

MR.    HOME'S    ADDRESS.          101 

factual  visible  presence  of  a  spirit  form,  this  test  of  iden- 
tity appears  to  me  most  satisfactory  and  conclusive. 

"  The  other  instance  of  identity  is  of  a  totally  different 
character.  Mr.  Home  had  spontaneously,  whilst  seated 
at  the  fire-side  in  my  drawing-room,  passed  into  a  trance 

state.  We  were  alone,  only  Mrs. being  present. 

I  noticed  the  clairvoyant-expression  of  face  which  charac- 
terises the  trance  medium.  After  a  pause,  Mr.  Homo 
addressed  us,  and  gave  an  account  of  the  passing  away  of 
one  we  all  had  known  in  life.  He  said  the  spirits  em- 
balmed the  body  of  Miss  A — ,  and  the  perfume  that  filled 
the  room  after  her  passing  away  was  created  by  them. 
Then  suddenly  changing  his  discourse,  he  said,  *  Who  is 
Louisa?  she  loves  your  son,  cared  for  him  like  a  mother; ' 
and  then  accurately  described  the  person  and  peculiarities 
of  character  of  a  kind  friend  who  had  passed  away  from 
earth  many  years  ago.  What  added  to  the  interest  was, 
that  none  present  had  even  in  thought  named  the  person 
alluded  to,  so  that  thought-reading  was  not  possible.  I 
carefully  watched  Home's  movements ;  he  evidently  ap- 
peared to  be  seeing  an  object,  and  the  remarks  he  mado 
were  spoken  as  if  prompted  by  an  external  agency. 

"  I  admit  the  great  difficulty  presented  by  visions,  their 
subjective  character  rendering  proof,  if  not  impossible,  at 
all  events  very  difficult ;  and  the  only  mode  of  ascer- 
taining the  truth  is  to  compare  the  accounts  oi  visions  of 
trance  mediums  with  one  another,  group  the  experiences 
together,  and  then  to  generalize. 

"  At  a  subsequent  seance,  Mr.  Home  fell  into  the 
trance  state  almost  as  soon  as  the  circle  had  been  ar- 
ranged ;  then  blindfolding  himself,  he  drew  an  alphabet, 
and  having  finished  this,  commenced  spelling  out  sen- 
tences. The  first  spelt  out  was — '  I  am  not  convinced 
even  now,  but  can  see  that  I  have  much  to  learn. — DAVID 
BREWSTER.' 

"  Sentences  followed  explanatory  of  his  passing  away ; 
then — *  The  earthly  and  spiritual  are  two  distinct  exis- 

192  REV.    MB.    SPEEK 

tences.  It  is  not  to  be  inferred  because  we  say  we  were 
present,  that  we  took  cognizance  of  his  earthly  surroundings. 
We  are  in  no  way  connected.  We  have  our  share  of 
curiosity,  and  we  desire  to  know  many  things  which  are 
forbidden.  We  know,  for  instance,  that  *  Speke '  is  not 
in  spirit  life ;  Doctor  S.,  his  brother,  knows  it ;  the  tra- 
veller knows  it/  Then  followed  the  words,  *  At  lunch — 
Gibson.' 

"  I  had  not  intended  to  publish  these  communications, 
but  for  the  extreme  interest  the  public  have  taken  in  Rev. 
Mr.  Speke's  strange  freak  of  hiding  himself.  The  seance 
took  place  nine  days  before  the  news  of  his  discovery  was 
made  known,  and  this  fact  may  add  interest  to  my  account 
of  the  spirit  communications  I  have  recorded.  I  render 
this  strictly  as  it  occurred,  without  even  hazarding  a 

Between  JANE  LYON      ....  Plaintiff 
and 

DANIEL  DUNGLASS  HOME 
and  WILLIAM  MARTIN 
WILKINSON  ....  Defendants. 

AFFIDAVIT  FILED  ON  THE  PART  OF  THE  PLAIN- 
TIFF, BY  MESSRS.  DRUCE  SONS  &  JACKSON  OF  10 
BILLITER  SQUARE  HER  SOLICITORS. 

Filed  27th  June  1867. 

I  JANE  LYON  of  No  I7a  Albert  Terrace  Albert 
Gate  Hyde  Park  in  the  county  of  Middlesex  widow  the 
above-named  Plaintiff  make  oath  and  say  as  follows : 

1.  Referring  to  the  third  paragraph  of  the  bill  filed  by 
me  in  this  cause  I  say  that  I  sought  and  obtained  an  in- 
terview with  the  above-named  Defendant  Daniel  Dunglas.s 
Home  as  therein  stated  under  the  following  circumstances 
My  late  husband  Charles  Lyon  Esquire  of  Wooth  Grange 
Bridport  Dorset  died  in  the  month  of  August  1859  and  he 
told  me  shortly  before  his  death  that  he  believed  that  a 
change  would  take  place  in  seven  years  after  his  death 
and  that  we  should  meet  and  I  had  in  consequence  an 
impression  that  I  should  not  survive  him  for  a  longer 
period  than  seven  years  In  or  about  the  month  of  July 
in  last  year  I  called  upon  Mrs.  Sims  a  photographer  in 
Westbourne  Grove  to  have  a  photograph  taken  of  a  por- 
trait of  my  husband  and  saw  her  several  times  upon  the 
subject  of  such  photograph  and  in  course  of  conversation 
with  her  I  mentioned  the  above  circumstance  in  connec- 
tion with  my  husband's  death  and  the  impression  which  I 
o 

194  AFFIDAVIT    OF 

had  formed  in  consequence  and  she  told  me  thai  it  wag 
not  necessary  that  I  should  die  in  order  to  meet  my  hus- 
band again  but  that  if  I  were  to  become  a  "  Spiritualist" 
Tie  would  come  to  me  I  had  never  before  heard  of  Spiri- 
tualism Mrs.  Sims  afterwards  lent  me  several  books  upon 
the  subject  which  I  read  and  after  some  little  time  she  told 
me  that  the  head  Spiritualist  Mr  Home  (being  in  fact 
the  said  Defendant  Daniel  Dunglass  Home)  had  opened 
an  "  AthenaBum"  at  22  Sloane  Street  Hyde  Park  and 
she  suggested  that  I  should  write  to  him  to  send  me  a  pro- 
spectus and  particulars  of  it  as  I  wished  after  what  she  had 
told  me  to  become  a  subscriber  Accordingly  on  the  30th 
of  September  last  I  wrote  to  the  said  Defendant  that  I 
was  anxious  to  become  a  subscriber  and  asking  for  a 
prospectus  and  particulars  and  inquiring  when  and  to 
whom  the  money  was  to  be  paid  Not  having  received  any 
reply  from  the  said  Defendant  I  called  on  the  3rd  October 
last  at  No.  22  Sloane  Street  aforesaid  and  asked  to  see 
him  and  I  was  shown  upstairs  to  the  first  floor  where  I 
was  received  by  him  in  the  room  which  he  calls  the 
"  Athenaeum"  I  had  never  before  seen  the  said  Defen- 
dant nor  had  I  ever  even  heard  of  him  until  his  name  was 
mentioned  to  me  by  Mrs.  Sims  as  aforesaid  and  he  is  not 
related  to  or  connected  with  me  or  my  family  or  the  family 
of  my  late  husband  by  birth  marriage  or  otherwise  nor 
did  my  said  late  husband  in  his  lifetime  know  the  said 
Defendant  or  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge  information  and 
belief  ever  hear  of  him. 

2.  The  said  Defendant  (who  was  alone)  then  entered 
into  conversation  with  me  respecting  the  Athena3um  and 
my  aforesaid  letter  to  him  and  my  wish  to  become  a  sub- 
scriber and  the  terms  of  subscription  and  he  then  askek 
me  to  go  with  him  to  see  the  rooms  upstairs  where  as  1 
afterwards  found  he  lived  I  went  with  him  accordingly 
into  his  sitting  room  (on  the  second  floor)  in  which  was 
a  table  with  writing  materials  and  an  accordion  upon  it 
No  one  besides  the  said  Defendant  and  myself  was  pre- 
sent We  sat  down  at  the  table  and  raps  came  to  the 

MRS.    LYON.  195 

tal)1c  almost  immediately  Tlio  said  Defendant  then  said 
"That  is  a  call  for  the  alphabet"  or  words  to  that  effect 
I  was  not  at  that  time  aware  of  the  mode  in  which  the 
so-called  "  spiritual  seances"  are  conducted  but  I  have 
from  subsequent  experience  learnt  that  the  presence  of  a 
so-called  "  medium"  is  considered  necessary  in  order  to 
evoke  what  are  believed  to  be  the  spirits  of  the  doi-ea<e<l 
and  that  the  supposed  spirits  on  being  summoned  signify 
their  presence  by  rapping  and  on  questions  being  put 
respond  to  them  either  by  three  raps  (for  the  affirmative) 
two  (for  doubtful)  one  (for  the  negative)  or  by  five  raps 
which  are  supposed  to  signify  that  the  alphabet  is  required 
In  the  latter  case  the  letters  of  the  alphabet  are  either 
repeated  by  the  medium  or  some  one  else  present  or  a 
printed  or  written  alphabet  is  produced  and  the  letters 
are  pointed  at  by  the  medium  or  some  one  else  present 
and  on  the  letter  desired  to  be  indicated  by  the  supposed 
spirit  being  repeated  or  pointed  at  raps  are  or  a  rap  is 
given  to  signify  that  such  is  the  letter  intended  and  so  on 
until  a  complete  word  or  sentence  as  the  case  may  be  is 
spelt  out  On  the  occasion  of  my  first  interview  with  the 
said  Defendant  as  aforesaid  no  printed  or  written  alphabet 
was  used  but  he  repeated  the  letters  of  the  alphabet  from 
time  to  time  a  rap  being  given  as  he  arrived  each  time 
at  the  letter  intended  to  bo  indicated  In  this  way  tho 
supposed  spirit  on  that  occasion  spelt  out  "  My  own  be- 
loved Jane  I  am  Charles  your  own  beloved  husband  I 
live  to  bless  you  my  own  precious  darling  I  am  with 
you  always  I  Jove  love  Jove  you  as  I  ahvay  did''  or 
words  to  that  effect  and  as  nearly  as  I  can  remember 
those  very  words  I  was  induced  by  the  said  Defendant 
to  believe  and  I  really  believed  at  the  time  that  the  spirit 
of  my  late  husband  was  in  reality  speaking  to  me  to  the 
effect  hereinbefore  mentioned  Nothing  further  material 
to  this  suit  passed  on  that  occasion  and  the  supposed 
spirit  spelt  out  in  the  same  manner  as  before  "  I  have  no 
further  power  at  present  to  speak  but  I  will  not  lea  \ 
my  own  darling"  or  words  to  that  effect  and  as  nearly  as  I 

196  AFFIDAVIT   OF 

can  remember  those  very  words  I  was  very  much  grati- 
fied at  what  I  then  helieved  to  be  a  real  manifestation  of 
the  spirit  of  my  husband  to  me  and  not  having  my  cheque 
book  then  with  me  I  asked  the  said  Defendant  to  call 
upon  me  at  No  18  Westbourne  Place  Hyde  Park  where 
I  was  then  living  in  apartments  and  told  him  I  would 
give  him  a  cheque  for  XI 0  for  my  subscription  to  the 
Athenaeum. 

3.  On  the  following  day  vizt.  the  4th  October  last  the 
said  Defendant  called  upon  me  at  No.  18  Westbourne 
Place  aforesaid  where  I  received  him  alone  in  my  sitting- 
room  and  almost  immediately  raps  came  indicative  as  ho 
induced  me  to  believe  and  as  I  in  fact  believed  of  the  pre- 
sence of  my  husband's  spirit  and  the  following  words  were 
as  nearly  as  I  can  remember  then  spelt  out  in  the  man- 
ner before  referred  to  the  said  Defendant  repeating  as  be- 
fore the  alphabetical  letters  "  My  own  beloved  Jane — I 
am  your  own  Charles  and  I  am  indeed  constantly  with  you 
I  am  so  happy  to  be  with  you    I  love  love  love  you    Be 
very  calm  I   will  touch   you."      I  was  then  repeatedly 
touched  as  I  believed  by  the  spirit  of  my  late  husband 
and  the  said  Defendant  was  at  that  time  seated  close  to 
me  at  the  table     I  then  being  much  gratified  drew  out 
and  gave  to  the  said  Defendant  a  cheque  on  my  bankers 
for  £30  (instead  of  <£10  as  promised)  as  my  subscription 
to  the  AthenaBum    At  this  time  I  became  much  impressed 
with  what  I  believed  to  be  the  power  of  the  said  Defen- 
dant to  evoke  the  spirit  of  my  husband  and  he  soon  ac- 
quired a  great  ascendancy  over  my  mind. 

4.  On  or  about  the  6th  of  October  last  the  said  Defen- 
dant again  called  upon  me  in   Westbourne  Place  afore- 
said and  I  again  received  him  alone  in  my  sitting-room 
and  he  commenced  talking  to  me  on  the  subject  of  his 
marriage  with  his  deceased  wife  and  told  me  how  happy 
he  had  been  with  her  and  he   stated   his   intention  of 
marrying  again  but  said  that  he  should  not  marry  a  young 
lady  as  he  did  not  like  young  ladies  but  was  anxious  to 

MRS.    LTON.  107 

marry  an  elderly  lady  and  that  he  should  make  a  very 
loving  and  affectionate  husband  and  from  those  remarks 
and  others  which  followed  on  the  same  subject  I  then  in- 
ferred and  now  verily  believe  that  he  intended  to  make  to 
me  proposals  of  marriage  but  I  told  him  that  the  subject 
was  distasteful  to  me  and  I  silenced  him  upon  it  at  once 
Almost  immediately  afterwards  raps  came  again  indi- 
cating as  the  said  Defendant  induced  me  to  believe  and 
as  I  in  fact  believed  the  presence  of  my  husband's  spirit 
and  the  following  word  or  words  as  nearly  as  possible 
to  the  following  effect  were  (with  other  words)  then  spelt 
out  in  the  manner  before  referred  to  (the  said  Defendant 
repeating  rapidly  the  letters  of  the  alphabet  and  stopping 
from  time  to  time  as  raps  came  indicating  the  letters  to 
be  used)  "  My  own  darling  Jane —  *****  j  iove 
Daniel"  (meaning  as  I  understood  the  said  Defendant) 
"  he  is  to  be  our  son  he  is  my  son  therefore  yours  Do 
you  remember  before  I  passed  I  said  a  change  would 
take  place  in  seven  years  ?  That  change  has  taken 
place"  The  table  was  then  thrown  up  from  the  floor 
and  the  words  "  I  am  happy  happy  happy"  were  spelt  out 
in  the  same  manner  as  before  I  then  said  to  the  sup- 
posed spirit  "  Do  you  remember  I  said  at  the  time  to  you 
*  Shall  we  then  meet  ?'  "  and  the  answer  spelt  out  in 
the  same  manner  as  before  was  in  the  following  words  or 
to  the  following  effect — "  In  a  little  time  I  will  make 
myself  visible  to  you"  and  the  supposed  spirit  continued 
Do  not  my  own  darling  say  the  light  of  other  days  is 
gone  the  light  is  with  you  Charles  lives  your  own  Charles 
lives  and  loves  you  and  is  near  you  constantly  my  own 
darling  Jane  I  will  have  power  to  come  to  you  entirely 
I  will  be  so  happy  and  so  will  you  my  wife  beloved  of 
God  Now  beloved  I  will  speak  to  you  as  often  as  I  can 
I  will  come  for  your  health  and  Daniel's"  It  was  also 
spelt  out  in  manner  aforesaid  that  he  the  supposed  spirit 
of  my  husband  wished  to  make  Daniel  (meaning  as  I  un- 
derstood the  said  Defendant)  independent  as  he  was  to  be 

198  AFFIDAVIT    OF 

our  son  and  that  he  the  supposed  spirit  would  speak  of 
the  manner  in  which  it  was  to  be  done  another  time  I 
then  drew  out  a  cheque  on  my  bankers  for  .£50  and  gave 
it  to  the  said  Defendant  as  he  was  to  be  (as  I  then  be- 
lieved according  to  the  directions  of  the  spirit  of  my 
husband)  our  son  that  he  might  not  be  without  the  means 
of  living. 

5.  Referring  to  the  three  last  paragraphs  hereof  I  say 
that  the   sentences  spelt  out  as   aforesaid  were   written 
down  by  me  from  memory  shortly  after  the  happening  of 
the  events  hereinbefore  mentioned  in  a  book   now  in  my 
possession  from  which  they  are  respectively  hereinbefore 
quoted  and  I  say  positively  that  whether  the  words  so 
quoted  were  the  exact  words  spelt  out  as  aforesaid  or  not 
words  to  the  same  effect  as  those  so  quoted  were  spelt  out 
as  aforesaid. 

6.  The  said  Defendant  then  commenced  paying  re- 
peated visits  to  me  and  on  or  about  the  8th  day  of  October 
last  and  certainly  either  on  that  day  or  the  day  next  pre- 
ceding or  the  day  next  following  such  8th  day  of  October 
he  called  upon  me  in  Westbourne  Place  aforesaid  and  on 
that  occasion  also  raps  came  indicating  (as  I  was  induced 
by  the  said  Defendant  to  believe  and  did  believe)  the  pre- 
sence of  the  spirit  of  my  said  late  husband  and  it  was  spelt 
out  in  manner  before  mentioned  (the  said  Defendant  re- 
peating the  alphabetical  letters  as  before)     It  was  then 
spelt  out  in  the  manner  before  mentioned  and  as  I  was  in- 
duced to  believe  and  did  believe  by  the  spirit  of  my  late 
husband  that  the  said  Defendant  was  to  be  our  adopted 
son  and  that  I  was  to  make  over  to  him  a  sufficient  sum 
from  my  funded  property  to  bring  him  in  ,£700  a  year. 

7.  On  several  of  the  occasions  referred  to  in  this  my 
affidavit  when  sentences  were  being  spelt  out  as  I  was 
induced  by  the  said  Defendant  to  believe  and  did  believe 
by  the  spirit  of  my  late  husband  I  remonstrated  with  the 
said  Defendant  telling  him  while  he  was  hurriedly  repeat- 
ing tho  letters  of  the  alphabet  that  he  was  "  going  too 

MRS.    LYON.  190 

fast"  and  he  frequently  answered  that  it  was  not  so  as  he 
well  know  beforehand  what  was  coming. 

8.  On  or  about  the  10th  October  last  and  certainly 
within  a  day  or  two  after  the  meeting  referred  to  in  the 
Ctli  paragraph  hereof  the  said  Defendant  Daniel  Dunglass 
Home  called  upon  me  in  Westbourne  Place  aforesaid  and 
took  me  to  the  City  in  a  cab  to  carry  out  the  aforesaid 
transaction  as  to  the  .£24,000  While  we  were  on  the 
road  constant  raps  were  heard  in  and  about  the  cab  which 
the  Defendant  told  me  showed  that  the  spirits  approved  of 
what  I  was  about  to  do  We  drove  straight  to  the  office 
of  Messrs.  Fox  Taylor  &  Company  stockbrokers  employed 
by  the  said  Defendant  and  of  whom  I  knew  nothing  the 
said  Defendant, having  previously  told  me  that  the  tran- 
saction must  not  be  effected  through  the  brokers  employed 
by  my  bankers  Messrs.  Williams  Deacon  &  Co.  as  I  had 
wished  I  then  went  to  the  Bank  of  England  with  the 
said  Defendant  and  one  of  the  said  firm  of  Fox  Taylor  & 
Co.  (at  whose  request  I  was  identified  by  one  of  the  clerks 
employed  by  Messrs.  Williams  Deacon  <fc  Co.)  and  signed 
a  book  at  the  said  Bank  of  England  transferring  as  I 
understood  a  sufficient  amount  of  stock  to  represent  in 
value  .£24,000  sterling  but  whether  to  the  said  Defendant 
or  to  a  purchaser  I  did  not  know  and  no  account  receipt 
or  other  paper  in  connection  with  the  transaction  was  given 
to  me  on  that  occasion  or  subsequently  but  to  the  best  of 
my  knowledge  information  and  belief  such  stock  was  sold 
and  the  proceeds  thereof  were  paid  to  the  said  Defendant 
Daniel  Dunglass  Home  I  was  then  allowed  by  the  said 
Defendant  to  return  to  Westbourne  Place  by  myself  and 
he  went  either  on  that  or  on  or  about  the  following  day  to 
Brighton  and  thence  to  Malvern  where  he  remained  a-  I 
believe  some  few  weeks  and  where  I  sent  to  him  in 
accordance  with  his  request  on  or  about  the  2Sth  day  of 
October  last  a  cheque  for  <£30  for  his  own  use  I  also  on 
other  occasions  paid  other  small  sums  to  him  or  on  his 
account  by  his  request  The  said  Defendant  on  or  about 

200  AFFIDAVIT   OF 

the  5th  clay  of  November  1866  as  appears  by  a  stock 
receipt  (left  by  him  accidentally  as  I  believe  in  my  pos- 
session)  invested  .£23,913  17s.  3d.  cash  being  as  I  verily 
believe  part  of  the  aforesaid  sum  of  .£24,000  so  acquired 
by  him  as  aforesaid  in  the  purchase  in  his  own  name  of 
the  sum  of  c£26,756  15s.  5d.  Consolidated  Bank  Annuities. 
9.  In  or  about  the  beginning  of  November  last  the  said 
Defendant  again  called  upon  me  in  Westbourne  Place  afore- 
said when  I  was  alone  and  he  then  became  as  he  induced  me 
to  believe  and  as  I  did  believe  entranced  and  represented 
in  trance  the  spirit  of  my  said  late  husband  which  he  in- 
duced me  to  believe  then  spoke  through  him  the  said 
Defendant  and  told  me  to  lay  some  sheets  of  note  paper 
on  the  table  with  pens  and  ink  and  I  was  to  write  what  he 
•was  about  to  dictate  He  then  dictated  to  me  word  for 
word  instructions  for  a  will  giving  all  my  property  to  him 
absolutely  and  directing  him  to  take  the  name  and  arms 
of  Lyon  and  at  his  dictation  I  addressed  an  envelope  to 
the  Defendant  William  Martin  Wilkinson  (who  was  as  I 
afterwards  found  out  the  intimate  friend  and  solicitor 
of  the  said  Defendant  Daniel  Dunglass  Home  but  of 
whom  I  then  knew  nothing)  and  inclosed  the  said  in- 
structions therein  with  a  note  to  the  said  Defendant 
William  Martin  Wilkinson  which  I  also  wrote  at  the  dic- 
tation of  the  said  Defendant  Daniel  Dunglass  Home  re- 
questing the  said  William  Martin  Wilkinson  to  prepare 
a  Will  for  me  in  accordance  with  the  aforesaid  instructions 
and  bring  it  for  signature  on  a  certain  evening  therein 
appointed  I  also  wrote  at  the  dictation  of  the  said  De- 
fendant Daniel  Dunglass  Home  letters  to  Dr.  Havvksley 
and  Mr.  Eudall  (who  as  I  afterwards  found  out  were 
also  intimate  friends  of  the  said  last-named  Defendant 
but  of  whom  I  knew  nothing)  requesting  them  to  call 
without  fail  at  No.  18  Westbourne  Place  aforesaid  on  the 
evening  appointed  as  aforesaid  On  the  evening  so 
appointed  which  was  to  the  best  of  my  belief  the  12th  of 
November  last  the  said  last-named  Defendant  and  also  the 
said  Dr.  Hawksley  and  Mr.  Eudall  came  as  arranged  and 

MRS.    LYON.  201 

the  said  Defendant  William  Martin  Wilkinson  also  came 
twinging  with  him  the  will  prepared  hy  him  in  accordance 
with  the  aforesaid  instructions  in  duplicate  The  said 
Defendant  Daniel  Dun  glass  Home  then  left  mo  alone  with 
the  said  Defendant  William  Martin  Wilkinson  the  said  Dr. 
Ilawksley  and  the  said  Mr.  Kudall  and  the  said  William 
Martin  Wilkinson  then  read  over  the  will  to  me  and 
questioned  me  as  to  whether  I  had  fully  considered  the 
terms  of  the  will  and  understood  its  effect  to  which  I  replied 
that  I  had  fully  considered  the  matter  and  understood  the 
effect  of  the  will  and  was  ready  to  sign  it  I  then  signed  it 
in  duplicate  in  the  presence  of  all  the  said  three  persons 
each  of  whom  attested  it  and  the  said  Defendant  William 
Martin  Wilkinson  then  took  away  the  original  and  dupli- 
cate one  of  which  I  have  since  obtained  from  him  being 
the  paper  writing  marked  "A"  produced  and  shown  to 
me  at  the  time  of  swearing  this  my  affidavit  but  my  signa- 
ture at  the  foot  thereof  has  since  been  obliterated  by  me 
and  the  note  at  the  foot  referring  to  revocation  has  been 
since  added  by  me  Before  the  said  will  so  prepared  as 
aforesaid  was  brought  by  the  said  William  Martin  Wilkin- 
son as  aforesaid  the  said  Defendant  Daniel  Dunglass 
Home  informed  me  that  as  a  matter  of  form  he  the  said 
William  Martin  Wilkinson  would  question  me  as  aforesaid 
as  evidence  of  his  having  done  so  might  be.  called  for 
hereafter  in  case  the  will  should  be  disputed  and  the  matter 
should  come  into  court  after  my  death  and  that  therefore 
every  means  must  be  taken  to  show  that  I  was  making 
the  will  of  my  own  free  will  and  not  under  the  dictation 
of  the  spirit  of  my  husband  and  that  all  letters  from  tin- 
said  Defendant  William  Martin  Wilkinson  to  me  would 
be  written  cautiously  in  the  same  view  so  that  I  was  quite 
prepared  for  the  questions  put  to  me  by  him  I  however 
signed  the  said  will  under  the  full  conviction  and  belief 
that  it  was  dictated  by  the  spirit  of  my  late  husband  and 
that  I  was  in  signing  it  complying  with  his  wishes. 

10.  Very  shortly  after  and  to  the  best  of  my  recollec- 
tion on  the  day  after  I  had  signed  the  said  will  as  afore- 

202  AFFIDAVIT    OF 

said  the  said  Defendant  Daniel  Dunglass  Home  alias 
Daniel  Home  Lyon  again  called  on  me  and  when  we  were 
alone  together  became  as  he  induced  me  to  believe  and  as 
I  did  believe  entranced  and  represented  in  trance  the 
spirit  of  my  said  late  husband  which  he  induced  me  to 
believe  then  spoke  to  me  through  him  the  said  Defendant 
and  told  me  to  bring  out  my  will  (made  previously  to  that 
signed  on  or  about  the  12th  day  of  November  last  as 
hereinbefore  appears)  in  duplicate  and  burn  it  which  I 
accordingly  did  in  the  belief  that  in  doing  so  I  was  com- 
plying with  the  wishes  of  my  said  late  husband  On  a  sub- 
sequent occasion  when  the  said  Defendant  called  upon  me 
(though  I  am  unable  to  recollect  the  date  of  his  visit)  he 
told  me  that  my  late  husband's  spirit  had  told  him  that  all 
communications  from  him  the  said  supposed  spirit  on  the 
subject  of  business  transactions  between  the  said  Defen- 
dant and  myself  were  to  be  burnt  and  he  the  said  Defen- 
dant thereupon  looked  out  and  placed  on  the  table  all 
papers  of  that  description  in  my  possession  and  burnt  them. 
11.  In  or  shortly  prior  to  the  month  of  December  last 
at  another  interview  which  I  had  at  my  rooms  with  the 
said  Defendant  Daniel  Dunglass  Home  alone  I  was  in- 
duced by  him  to  believe  and  I  did  believe  that  the  spirit 
of  my  said  late  husband  was  again  present  and  was  speak- 
ing to  me  by  raps  as  aforesaid  and  it  was  then  spelt  out 
by  the  supposed  spirit  in  the  manner  hereinbefore  referred 
to  that  I  was  to  give  to  the  said  Defendant  as  a  present 
for  his  birthday  a  sum  of  .£6,000  more  to  make  up  with 
the  aforesaid  sum  of  ,£24,000  the  aggregate  sum  of 
,£30,000  Accordingly  I  went  on  or  about  the  10th  day 
of  December  1866  (in  the  full  conviction  and  belief  that  I 
was  obeying  the  orders  of  my  said  late  husband)  with  the 
said  Defendant  alone  to  the  Bank  of  England  and  trans- 
ferred into  his  name  as  Daniel  Dunglass  Home  the  sum 
of  £6,798.  17s.  4d.  Consolidated  Bank  Annuities  belong- 
ing to  me  such  sum  being  then  equivalent  in  value  to  the 
sain  of  .£6,000  sterling  or  thereabouts  The  said  Messrs. 

MRS.    LYON.  203 

Fox  Taylor  «fc  Co.  were  the  brokers  employed  on  that 
occasion   and  the  instructions  for  sucli  transfer  wei. 
verily  believe  given  to  them  by  the  said  Defendant. 

1-.  Referring  to  the  eleventh  paragraph  of  the  bill 
filed  by  me  in  this  cause  I  say  that  since  tiling;  my  atHda- 
vit  in  this  cause  on  the  lf>th  day  of  June  instant  my  atten- 
tion has  been  more  particularly  drawn  to  the  date  of  the 
deed  poll  referred  to  in  such  eleventh  paragraph  and  that 
to  the  best  of  my  recollection  such  deed  was  not  nor  was 
any  deed  relating  to  the  subject  matter  of  this  suit 
executed  by  me  on  the  said  12th  day  of  December  or  at 
any  time  other  than  the  occasion  upon  which  I  executed 
the  deeds  in  connection  with  the  security  for  .£30,000  in 
the  said  bill  mentioned  as  hereinafter  more  particularly  re- 
ferred to  but  I  believe  that  on  such  last-mentioned  occa- 
sion a  deed  of  or  to  the  purport  or  effect  mentioned  in 
such  eleventh  paragraph  was  executed  by  me  with  the 
other  deeds  then  executed  by  me  as  hereinafter  appears 
while  my  mind  was  under  the  influence  and  control  gained 
over  it  by  the  said  Defendant  in  manner  aforesaid  and  I 
say  that  the  said  last-mentioned  deed  poll  was  to  the  best 
of  my  belief  prepared  by  the  said  Defendant  William 
Martin  Wilkinson  under  instructions  given  to  him  by  his 
said  co-Defendant  and  not  under  any  instructions  given 
by  me  or  by  my  order  and  without  the  intervention  of  any 
solicitor  or  independent  person  on  my  behalf. 

13.  At  the  interview  referred  to  in  the  eleventh  para- 
graph of  this  my  affidavit  or  at  another  interview  held  by 
me  with  the  said  Defendant  Daniel  Dunglasa  Rome  just 
about  that  time  and  when  1  was  alone  with  tb 
Defendant  and  when  he  had  induced  me  to  believe  that 
the  spirit  of  my  said  late  husband  was  again  present  and 
speaking  to  me  it  was  spelt  out  in  manner  aforesaid  by 
the  safd  supposed  spirit  that  the  said  Defendant  William 
Martin  Wilkinson  was  to  procure  a  mortgage  for  .£30,000 
to  be  advanced  out  of  my  money  which  mortgage  was  to 
be  taken  in  the  name  of  the  said  Defendant  Daniel  Dun- 

204  AFFIDAVIT    OF 

glass  Home  and  I  was  to  have  the  interest  for  my  life  and 
the  principal  was  to  go  to  the  said  Defendant  at  my  death 
The  mortgage  for  .£30,000  referred  to  in  the  indenture  of 
19th  January  1867  mentioned  in  the  thirteenth  paragraph 
of  the  said  bill  was  accordingly  obtained  by  or  through  the 
said  Defendant  William  Martin  Wilkinson  with  my  sanc- 
tion in  the  belief  and  conviction  on  my  part  that  in  giving 
such  sanction  I  was  fulfilling  the  wishes  of  my  said  late 
husband's  spirit  but  I  ultimately  refused  to  consent  to  the 
mortgage  being  taken  in  the  name  of  the  said  Defendant 
Daniel  Dunglass  Home  and  suggested  that  the  arrange- 
ment eventually  carried  into  effect  by  the  said  indenture  of 
the  19th  day  of  January  1867  should  be  made  The  said 
last-mentioned  indenture  and  also  the  indenture  of  transfer 
of  even  date  therein  recited  were  accordingly  prepared  by 
the  said  Defendant  William  Martin  Wilkinson  and  both 
deeds  and  as  I  believe  the  said  deed  poll  of  the  12th  day. 
of  December  1866  were  on  or  about  the  same  19th  day  of 
January  1867  brought  to  me  from  his  office  by  his  son 
and  a  clerk  (Mr.  Hartley  by  name)  for  signature  The 
deeds  were  read  over  to  me  and  the  said  Daniel  Dunglass 
Home  was  then  present  and  sitting  close  to  me  at  the  time 
and  he  kept  touching  me  and  persuading  me  to  sign  and  I 
accordingly  then  signed  the  said  indentures  of  the  19th 
day  of  January  1867  and  as  I  believe  the  said  deed  poll 
of  the  12th  day  of  December  1866  while  my  mind  was 
under  the  control  gained  over  it  by  the  said  last-named 
Defendant  by  the  means  aforesaid  and  without  the  inter- 
vention of  any  independent  solicitor  or  other  person  on  my 
behalf  And  I  say  that  the  suggestion  hereinbefore  re- 
ferred to  as  to  the  arrangement  for  carrying  out  which  the 
said  indentures  of  the  19th  day  of  January  1867  were 
prepared  was  made  by  me  while  under  such  control  and 
influence  as  aforesaid. 

14.  Another  mortgage  for  ,£30,000  was  afterwards  ob- 
tained for  me  by  the  said  Defendant  William  Martin 
Wilkinson  at  my  request  and  on  or  about  the  13th  clay  of 

MRS.    LYON.  205 

February  last  I  sold  out  for  the  purposes  of  such  mortgage 
a  sum  of  stock  which  produced  to  the  lu>t  of  my  informa- 
tion ami  belief  •626,596.  1  •>.-<.  8d.  net  cash  leaving  a  de- 
ficiency of  «£3.403.  (Jx.  4<(.  to  make  up  the  principal  to  be 
advanced  and  the  said  last-mentioned  sum  was  at  the 
request  of  the  said  Defendant  William  Martin  Wilkinson 
provided  by  the  said  Defendant  Daniel  Dunglass  Home  by 
sale  of  part  of  the  stock  which  he  had  acquired  in  manner 
hereinbefore  appearing. 

15.  The  said  Defendant  William  Martin  Wilkinson  at 
that  time  or  shortly  afterwards  told  me  that  I  had  still  a 
sum  of  <£2,290  9s.  5d.  Consolidated  Bank  Annuities  stand- 
ing in  my  name  of  which  I  was  not  aware  and  it  occurred 
to  me  that  I  should  towards  replacement  of  the  stock  so 
sold  out  by  his  said  co-Defendant  as  last  aforesaid  transfer 
to  him  the  said  Defendant  Daniel  Dunglass  Home  the 
said  remaining  stock  so  standing  in  my  name  and  I  ac- 
cordingly on  or  about  the  21st  day  of  February  last  trans- 
ferred such  last-mentioned  sum  into  the  name  of  the  said 
Defendant  Daniel  Dunglass  Home  and  I  say  that  the  last- 
mentioned  transfer  was  made  by  me  while  I  was  still 
under  the  control  and  influence  acquired  over  my  mind  by 
the  said  last-named  Defendant  by  the  means  aforesaid. 

16.  On  or  about  the  13th  day  of  March  1867  (as 
appears  by  an  account  of  the  sale  rendered  to  the  said 
Defendant  Daniel  Dunglass  Home  by  the  said  Messrs. 
Fox  Taylor  &  Co.  which  is  in  my  possession  it  having 
been  accidentally  left  with  me  by  the  said  Defendant  he 
the  said  Defendant  sold  out  the  sum  of  .£21.947  17*.  Gd. 
Consolidated  Bank  Annuities  part  as  I  verily  believe  of 
the  aggregate  sum  of  like  annuities  so  acquired  by  him  as 
hereinbefore  appears  and  the  net  proceeds  of  such  sale 
amounting  to  the  sum  of  .£20.000  sterling  were  as  I  have 
been  informed  by  the  said  Defendant  and  as  I  verily  be- 
lieve lent  and  advanced  by  him  through  the  said  Defen- 
dant William  Martin  Wilkinson  as  mentioned  in  the 
sixteenth  paragraph  of  the  said  bill  and  the  securities  for 

206  AFFIDAVIT    OF 

the  same  sum  of  Twenty  thousand  pounds  have  as  I  am 
informed  by  my  solicitors  and  believe  been  deposited 
together  with  the  securities  for  the  firstly  hereinbefore 
mentioned  principal  sum  of  Thirty  thousand  pounds  with 
the  Clerk  of  Records  and  Writs  in  pursuance  of  the  order 
made  in  this  cause  on  the  1  8th  day  of  June  instant. 

17.  Having*  regard  to  the  sales  of  stock  hereinbefore 
mentioned  to  have  been  made  by  the  said  Defendant 
Daniel  Dunglass  Home  I  say  that  to  the  best  of  my  belief 
there  is  a  sum  of  £3  per  Cent.  Consolidated  Bank  An- 
nuities exceeding  .£9,000  (Stock)  still  standing  in  the  name 
of  the  said  Defendant  in  the  books  of  the  Governor  and 
Company  of  the  Bank  of  England  and  a  distringas  has 
been  placed  by  my  solicitors  on  my  behalf  upon  the  sum 
of  .£9,000  like  annuities  part  of  the  larger  sum  of  like  an- 
nuities so  standing  as  I  believe  in  his  name  as  aforesaid. 

18.  I  have  lately  upon  reflection  become  convinced  that 
I  have  in  the  several  transactions  matters  and  things  here- 
inbefore referred  to  been  altogether  imposed  upon  by  and 
made  the  dupe  of  the  said  Defendant  Daniel  Dunglass 
Home  and  that  the  several  directions  which  at  the  time  I 
believed  to  have  been  given  as  aforesaid  by  the  spirit  of 
my  said  late  husband  were  not  in  reality  so  given  but  that 
they  without  exception  emanated  entirely  from  the  said 
Defendant  and  not  otherwise  and  I  say  that  apart  from  his 
supposed  power  of  putting  my  said  late  husband's  spirit 
into  communication  with  me.  I  had  no  affection  or  even 
respect  for  the  said  Defendant  but  that  the  said  Defendant 
by  the  means  aforesaid  worked  upon  my  belief  in  his  sup- 
posed power  until  he  acquired  almost  unlimited  control  and 
influence  over  my  mind  during  the  continuance  of  which 
control  and  influence  (which  I  felt  utterly  powerless  to 
resist)  the  several  transactions  hereinbefore  referred  to 
took  place. 

19.  The  book  now  produced  to  me  and  marked  with 
the  letter  B  contains  entries  written  by  the  said  Defendant 
of  sentences  spelt  out  as  I  was  induced  by  him  to  believe 

MRS.    LYON.  207 

and  as  I  did  believe  by  the  spirit  of  my  said  late  husband 
in  maniKT  aforesaid  on  various  occasions  and  of  circum- 
stances in  connection  therewith  and  1  refer  particularly 
to  the  following  passages  written  by  tin1  said  Defendant 
on  the  7th  and  1(J:h  pages  of  such  book  and  spelt  out 
as  I  was  induced  by  the  said  Defendant  to  believe  and  did 
believe  by  the  said  supposed  spirit  on  the  22nd  January 
1 867  and  on  another  date  which  I  am  unable  to  recollect 
viz.  :  "  My  darling  Jane — it  would  not  be  pleasing  to  me 
to  have  you  sit  with  any  medium  but  our  son  (meaning 
the  said  Defendant)  at  present  I  have  good  reasons  for 
this  "  "  I  will  tell  you  when  I  wish  another  medium  than 
our  son"  (meaning  the  said  Defendant)  "It  stands  to 
reason  Daniel  is  the  best  medium  on  earth  we  have  chosen 
him  for  you  what  we  have  to  say  and  what  we  have  to  do 
we  can  say  and  do  thro'  him "  which  words  are  con- 
firmatory of  my  present  conviction  and  belief  that  the 
several  directions  supposed  as  hereinbefore  set  forth  to  be 
given  by  the  spirit  of  my  late  husband  emanated  entirely 
from  the  said  Defendant  jand  for  his  own  purposes. 

20.  The  several  paper  writings  marked  respectively  C 
and  D  now  produced  and  shown  to  me  contain  sentences 
written  by  the  said  Defendant  Daniel  Dunglass  Home 
himself  and  spelt  out  on  two  different  occasions  by  (as  he 
induced  me  to  believe  and  as  I  did  believe)  the  spirit  of 
my  said  late  husband  while  the  said  Defendant  was  alone 
with  me  the  first  of  such  paper  writings  (written  entirely 
by  the  said  Defendant)  on  to  the  best  of  my  recollection 
the  2Gth  of  February  last  being  as  follows :— "  2(3th  Feb- 
ruary— Daniel  is  correct  and  if  you  remember  darling  I 
made  sounds  on  the  floor  that  Sunday  a<  you  were  going 
to  bed  Not  that  Tuesday  but  the  following  Monday 
And  well  in  your  senses  but  we  made  you  think  this  to  be 
so  You  longed  for  communications  yet  your  very  anxiety 
pievented  our  approach  We  had  to  get  control  of  //«"/• 
mind"  And  in  explanation  of  such  last-mentioned  paper 
writing  I  say  that  I  had  on  or  previously  to  the  said 

208  AFFIDAVIT    OF 

day  of  February  last  in  conversation  with  the  said  De- 
fendant alluded  to  the  first  and  original  manifestations  of 
the  spirit  of  my  said  late  husband  (as  I  believed  them  to 
be)  particulars  of  which  are  set  forth  in  the  second  and 
following  paragraphs  of  this  my  affidavit  and  that  the  said 
Defendant  then  denied  that  there  had  been  any  such  mani- 
festations during  the  first  seven  days  of  my  aforesaid  ac- 
quaintance with  him  and  in  corroboration  of  his  statement 
appealed  as  he  induced  me  to  believe  and  as  I  believed  to 
the  spirit  of  my  said  late  husband  while  he  the  said  De- 
fendant was  alone  with  me  as  aforesaid  and  that  the  words 
last  above  quoted  or  words  to  precisely  the  same  effect 
were  spelt  out  as  he  induced  me  to  believe  and  as  I  did 
believe  by  the  said  supposed  spirit  in  manner  aforesaid  in 
answer  to  such  appeal. 

21.  I    also    refer  to  the    following    sentence   written 
by  the  said  Defendant  as  aforesafd  on  the  second  occa- 
sion above  referred  to  the  date  of  which  I  am  unable 
to  recollect   and  comprised  in  the  other  of  such  paper 
writings  viz.  "  Only  remember  Daniel  is  our  medium  all 
communications  I  have  to  give  will  be  thro'  him."     And 
with  reference  to  the  sentences   quoted  in  this  and  the 
preceding  paragraph  I  say  that  they  are  corroborative  of 
my  full  conviction  and  belief  that  I  have  in  the  several 
aforesaid  transactions  with  the  said  Defendant  Daniel  Dun- 
glass  Home  been  the  victim  of  gross  and  wilful  imposition. 

22.  On  or  about  the  16th  day  of  June  instant  I  re- 
ceived from  the  said  Defendant  Daniel  Dunglass  Home  a 
letter  written  by  him  to  me  and  dated  June  17th  1867 
which  letter  is  now  produced  and   shown  to  me  and  is 
marked  with  the  letter  E  in  which  letter  the  said  Defen- 
dant offers  to   come  to   an    arrangement  with  me  with 
reference  to  the  subject  matter  of  this  suit  but  to  which 
letter  I  have  not  replied  nor  do  I  intend  to  come  to  any 
arrangement  whatever  with  him  short  of  getting  back  all 
the  property  which  he  has  acquired  from  me  in  manner 
hereinbefore  appearing. 

23.  I  depose   to  the  several  facts  and  circumstances 

MRS.    LYONS.  209 

hereinbefore  set  forth  from  my  own  personal  knowledge 
except  where  it  is  hereinbefore  otlierwi.se  stated. 

Sworn  at  my  Office  No.  33  Mark 
Lane  in  the  City  of  London  on, 
the  26th  day  of  June  1867 
JANE  LYON  Before  me  Hichd.  Cattarns 

A     London     Commissioner     to 
administer  oaths  in  Chancery. 

Tliis  Affidavit  on  behalf  of  the  Plaintiff  is  filed  by  DRTJCE, 
SONS,  &  JACKSON,  Solicitors,  10,  Lilliter  Square,  in 
the  City  of  London. 

Filed  5th  November,  1807, 
Between  JANE  LYON,  Widow     .     .     .     Plaintiff 

AND 

DANIEL  DUNGLASS  HOME, 
and  WILLIAM  MARTIN  WIL- 
KINSON ...:....  Defendants. 

THE  ANSWER  of  DANIEL  DUNGLASS  HOME,  other- 
wise (at  the  Plaintiff's  request)  DANIEL  HOME  LYON, 
one  of  the  above-named    Defendants   to   the  Bill  of 
Complaint  of  the  above-named  Plaintiff. 
IN  ANSWER  to  the  said  Bill,  I,  DANIEL  DUNGLASS 
HOME,  otherwise  DANIEL  HOME  LYON,  say  as  follows : — 
1.  I  was  born  in  Scotland  on  the  20th  March  1833 
and  from  my  earliest  childhood  I  have  been  subject  to  the 
occasional  happening  of  singular  physical  phenomena  in 
my  presence  which  arc  most  certainly  not  produced  by  me 
or  by  any  other  person  in  connection  with  me  I  have  no 
control  over  them  whatever  they  occur  irregularly  and 
even  when  I  am  asleep     Sometimes  I  am  many  months 
and  once  I  have  been  a  year  without  them     They  will  not 
happen  when  I  wish  and  my  will  has  nothing  to  do  with 
them     I  cannot  account  for  them  further  than  by  sup- 
posing them  to  be  effected  by  intelligent  beings  or  spirits 

210  ANSWER    OF 

Similar  phenomena  occur  to  many  other  persons  In  tlie 
United  States  of  America  I  believe  about  eleven  millions 
of  rational  people  as  well  as  a  very  great  number  in  every 
country  in  Europe  believe  as  I  do  that  spiritual  beings  of 
every  grade  good  and  bad  can  and  do  at  times  manifest 
their  presence  to  us  I  invariably  caution  people  against 
being  misled  by  any  apparent  communications  from  them 
These  phenomena  occurring  in  my  presence  have  been 
witnessed  by  thousands  of  intelligent  and  respectable  per- 
sons including  men  of  business  science  and  literature  under 
circumstances  which  would  have  rendered  even  if  I  desired 
it  all  trickery  impossible  They  have  been  witnessed 
repeatedly  and  in  their  own  private  apartments  where  any 
contrivance  of  mine  must  have  been  detected  by  their 
Majesties  the  Emperor  and  Empress  of  the  French  their 
Majesties  the  Emperor  Empress  and  late  Empress  Dow- 
ager of  Russia  their  Imperial  Highnesses  the  Grand 
Duke  and  Duchess  Constantino  of  Russia  and  the  members 
of  their  august  family  their  Majesties  the  King  of  Prussia 
the  late  King  of  Bavaria  the  present  and  late  King  of 
Wurtemberg  the  Queen  of  Holland  and  the  members  of 
the  Royal  family  of  Holland  and  many  of  these  august 
personages  have  honoured  and  I  believe  still  honour  me 
with  their  esteem  and  good  will  as  I  have  resided  in  some 
of  their  palaces  as  a  gentleman  and  their  guest  not  as  a 
paid  or  professional  person  They  have  had  ample  oppor- 
tunities which  they  have  used  of  investigating  these 
phenomena  and  of  enquiring  into  my  character  I  have 
resided  in  America,  England.  France,  Italy,  Germany  and 
Russia  and  in  every  country  I  have  been  received  as  a 
guest  and  friend  by  persons  in  the  highest  position  in 
society  who  were  quite  competent  to  discover  and  expose 
as  they  ought  to  have  done  anything  like  contrivance  on 
my  part  to  produce  these  phenomena  I  do  not  seek  and 
never  have  sought  the  acquaintance  of  anv  of  these  exalted 
personages  They  have  sought  me  and  I  have  thus  had  a 
certain  notoriety  thrust  upon  me  I  do  not  take  money 

MR.    HOME.  211 

and  never  have  taken  it  although  it  has  been  repeatedly 
offered  me  for  or  in  respect  of  these  phenomena  or  tho 

communications  which  sometimes  appear  to  be  made'  by 
them  1  am  not  in  the  habit  of  receiving  those  who  are 
strangers  to  me  and  I  never  force  the  subject  of  Spiritual- 
ism on  any  one's  attention  I  trust  that  I  am  a  sincere 
Christian  I  conscientiously  believe  as  all  the  early 
Christians  did  that  man  is  continually  surrounded  and 
protected  or  tempted  by  good  and  evil  spirits  I  have  in 
my  circle  of  friends  many  who  were  not  only  infidels  but 
atheists  until  they  became  convinced  by  the  study  of  these 
phenomena  of  the  truths  of  immortality  and  their  lives 
have  been  greatly  improved  in  consequence  Some  of  the 
phenomena  in  question  are  noble  and  elevated  others 
appear  to  be  grotesque  and  undignified  For  this  I  am  not 
responsible  any  more  than  I  am  for  the  many  grotesque 
anil  undignilicd  things  which  are  undoubtedly  permitted 
to  exist  in  the  material  world  I  solemnly  swear  that  I  do 
not  produce  the  phenomena  aforesaid  or  in  any  way  what- 
ever aid  in  producing  them  In  1858  I  married  a  Russian 
lady  of  noble  family  who  was  a  god-daughter  of  the  late 
Emperor  Nicholas  and  educated  by  him  She  died  in 
]S(ii>  and  by  her  I  have  one  son  christened  "  ( iivgoiiv'' 
but  alluded  to  in  the  conversations  and  letters  hereinafter 
set  forth  by  the  pet  name  of  "  Sacha"  The  present 
Emperor  of  Russia  has  graciously  consented  to  he  his  imd- 
fntlier  and  the  (irand  Dudiess  Constantino  his  godmother 
on  the  occasion  of  his  being  baptised  into  the  Greek 
Church  which  is  to  take  plan-. 

"2.  Having  met  with  considerable  success  as  a  public 
reader  in  America  in  the  year  lSi5.">  I  determined  hist, 
year  to  go  on  the  stage  but  my  health  which  has  h< .  n 
feeble  for  a  long  time  proved  unequal  to  the  ta>k  and  some 
of  mv  friends  who  were  desirous  of  investigating  the 
phenomena  aforesaid  formed  a  society  with  the  title  of  the 
Spiritual  Athenaeum  taking  rooms  at  No.  l;l'  Sloane- 
strect  London  and  at  their  request  I  accepted  the  position 

212  ANSWER    OF 

of  resident  secretary  with  a  salary  which  post  at  the 
Plaintiff's  desire  I  have  since  resigned  The  members  of 
the  said  society  are  without  exception  persons  of  character 
and  position  who  could  gain  nothing  by  aiding  in  or 
abetting  fraud  or  deception  The  following  extract  is 
taken  from  their  circular  printed  for  distribution  : — 

"  It  will  be  a  leading  duty  of  the  Executive  Committee 
acting  with  the  Council  to  make  such  arrangements  as 
shall  secure  facilities  for  healthy  useful  and  instructive 
communion  to  those  who  seek  as  well  as  those  who  are 
willing  to  give  information  '  concerning  Spiritual  gifts,' 
while  promoting  social  intercourse  aiming  at  loftier  and 
holier  objects,  checking  the  spread  of  Materialism,  up- 
holding the  truths  and  extending  the  influence  of  Chris- 
tianity and  bringing  closer  the  bonds  of  Peace  and  Love 
among  mankind,  inculcating  by  another  Power  acting  in 
accordance  with  Holy  Writ  and  co-operating  with  the 
Christian  teacher — duty  to  God  and  to  Neighbour." 

3.  Under  the  circumstances  hereinbefore  mentioned 
and  not  otherwise  I  believe  I  am  what  is  called  a  spiritual 
medium  but  I  do  not  gain  a  living  by  it  or  make  money 
by  it  I  had  some  private  means  of  my  own  I  made 
some  money  in  America  by  public  readings  unconnected 
with  the  phenomena  aforesaid  I  twice  only  read  a  public 
lecture  on  Spiritualism  which  is  still  in  my  possession  and 
I  was  for  a  short  time  such  secretary  as  aforesaid  Other- 
wise I  do  not  to  use  the  language  of  the  Plaintiff's  Inter- 
rogatory gain  a  living  I  do  not  profess  and  never  did 
profess  to  have  the  power  of  evoking  the  spirits  of  deceased 
persons  or  of  putting  other  persons  in  communication  with 
them  I  have  hereinbefore  truly  stated  what  occurs  to  me 
without  any  volition  whatever  of  my  own  and  I  have  never 
made  any  other  profession  whatever  I  am  and  have  been  for 
a  long  time  as  the  Plaintiff  well  knows  in  feeble  health 
Yet  as  the  Plaintiff  has  thought  fit  to  prefer  against  me 
charges  of  fraud  and  imposture  of  the  basest  character 
which  are  utterly  untrue  I  desire  the  public  cross-exami- 

MR.    HOME.  213 

nation  of  myself  and  the  Plaintiff  as  well  as  of  all  or  such 
of  the  witnesses  on  both  sides  as  the  Court  may  think  fit 
to  allow. 

4.  On  Monday  the  1st  October  18G6  I  received  a 
letter  signed  Jane  Lyon  of  whom  I  had  never  heard  before 
requesting  to  be  furnished  with  the  terms  of  admission  to 
the  said  Spiritual  Athenanim  According  to  the  laws  of 
the  said  society  no  one  could  be  admitted  as  a  member 
except  by  the  "  unanimous  vote  of  the  executive  com- 
mittee." I  laid  her  letter  before  one  of  the  members  of 
the  executive  committee  On  the  next  day  namely  Tues- 
day the  2nd  October  18G6  Mrs.  Jane  Lyon  the  Plaintiff 
called  upon  me  and  stated  that  she  was  the  writer  of  the 
letter  before  mentioned  and  entered  into  conversation  with 
me  respecting  my  book  entitled  "  Incidents  in  my  Life" 
which  she  said  she  had  read  with  much  interest  and  she 
also  said  she  had  been  making  enquiries  about  me  She 
told  me  she  had  been  a  believer  from  her  childhood  in  the 
occurrence  of  such  phenomena  as  are  therein  mentioned 
though  she  did  not  know  them  by  the  name  of  Spiritualism. 
She  also  said  she  was  a  much  more  wonderful  medium 
than  I  was  She  appeared  to  me  however  to  dwell  much 
less  upon  Spiritualism  than  on  the  fact  of  my  knowing 
"  them  high  folks"  as  she  termed  the  royal  and  aristocratic 
personages  mentioned  in  my  book  and  she  asked  me  if 
they  were  still  my  friends  to  which  I  answered  that  having 
done  nothing  to  forfeit  their  esteem  I  believed  they  were 
She  avowed  her  disbelief  in  the  Bible  at  which  I  expressed 
my  regret  and  I  told  her  (as  the  fact  is)  that  there  are 
very  many  Christians  of  all  denominations  and  clergyman 
also  who  are  Spiritualists  In  fact  with  many  thousands  of 
persons  the  Bible  is  the  foundation  of  their  belief  in 
Spiritualism  while  Spiritualism  on  the  other  hand 
strengthens  their  belief  in  the  Bible  as  opposed  to  the 
prevailing  Materialism  of  the  day  She  asked  to  see  my 
private  rooms  and  looked  at  various  pictures  which  I  had 
there  She  was  much  struck  by  a  family  group  of  the 

214  ANSWER    OF 

Grand  Dncliess  Constantine  of  Eussia  and  her  family  and 
asked  bow  it  came  into  my  possession  I  told  her  as  the 
fact  was  that  Her  Imperial  Highness  had  presented  it  to 
me  when  I  was  last  in  Kussia  staying  at  the  palace  of  the 
Grand  Duke  She  said  "  Did  she  really  give  it  to  you 
with  her  own  hand  ?"  I  told  her  as  the  fact  was  that  such 
was  the  case  and  not  only  so  but  that  Her  Highness  had 
even  had  the  kindness  to  send  to  Warsaw  on  purpose  for 
it  The  Plaintiff  seemed  much  astonished  and  said  "  Well 
you  are  a  celebrity"  Then  she  asked  me  if  I  had  ever 
stayed  at  the  palace  of  the  Emperor  I  told  her  as  the 
fact  was  that  I  had  done  so  "  Well"  she  said  "you  are 
indeed  a  celebrity  and  it  is  only  a  pity  you  should  be  poor" 
I  told  her  that  it  was  well  to  be  poor  and  that  I  wanted 
for  nothing  and  also  that  I  should  be  in  a  very  comfortable 
position  as  soon  as  my  affairs  in  Eussia  were  settled  She 
said  "  You  may  be  comfortable  even  before  that"  I  told 
her  I  was  comfortable  even  now  and  had  no  desire  un- 
gratified  She  then  asked  me  about  my  circle  of  friends  in 
London  and  whether  it  included  many  "  great  folk"  I 
told  her  as  the  fact  was  that  I  was  exceedingly  fortunate 
in  my  circle  of  friends  She  then  enquired  the  terms  of  sub- 
scription to  the  AthenaBum  and  I  told  her  it  was  a  large 
sum  namely  five  guineas  She  made  no  reply  but  asked 
me  to  call  on  her  on  the  following  day  to  talk  it  over  I 
told  her  I  could  not  do  so  until  Thursday  the  4th  instant 
I  was  rather  pleased  with  her  homely  kindness  and  as  I 
had  occasion  to  call  in  Westbmirne  Terrace  which  was 
near  her  I  thought  I  would  gratify  my  curiosity  by  going 
to  see  her  at  home  She  enquired  if  she  might  call  on  me 
again  in  the  interval  but  I  told  her  it  would  be  better  to 
wait  till  the  time  fixed  On  leaving  she  said  "  Well  I  had 
expected  to  find  you  proud  and  stuck  up  from  knowing  so 
many  great  folks  but  I  like  you  very  much  and  I  hope  you 
will  like  me  I  think  of  going  to.  Paris  next  year  to  the 
Exhibition  would  you  like  to  go  with  me  ? "  I  laughed 
and  said  "  Yes"  She  said  "  I  hope  we  shall  see  a  great 

MR.    HOME.  215 

deal  of  each  other"  She  said  she  had  one  request  to 
make  namely  that  I  would  give  her  my  portrait  saying 
she  would  prize  it  very  highly  I  gave  her  one  and  thus 
ended  my  first  interview  with  her  She  was  an  utter 
stranger  to  me  I  never  having  heard  of  her  except  from 
her  said  letter  and  from  her  dress  and  manner  and  the 
apparent  relish  she  had  for  my  aristocratic  connexion  I 
thought  she  might  be  a  kind-hearted  housekeeper  but  it 
never  crossed  my  mind  that  she  could  be  rich  No  allusion 
whatever  was  made  to  her  late  husband  Charles  Lyon  and 
no  spiritual  manifestations  whatever  took  place  The 
Plaintiff  did  not  as  she  now  says  offer  to  pay  .£10  nor  any 
other  sum  to  the  Athenaeum. 

5.  On  Thursday  the  4th  October  18GG  I  called  on  the 
Plaintiff  as  requested  by  her  and  found  her  living  in 
indifferent  lodgings  over  a  stationer's  shop  She  asked 
me  many  questions  about  myself  and  told  me  she  won- 
dered at  my  accepting  a  salary  as  monetary  to  the 
Athenaeum  being  such  a  celebrity  that  I  ought  to  be 
rich  and  should  be  and  with  these  words  she  handed  me 
a  cheque  for  «£«30  which  I  immediately  declined  She 
then  said  "  Oh  this  is  nothing  to  me  I  am  very  rich  I 
might  live  in  great  style  but  I  prefer  to  live  as  I  do  I  like 
you  and  will  be  your  friend  "  I  told  her  I  was  not  in  the 
habit  of  taking  presents  from  any  one  Finding  I  would 
not  take  her  money  she  told  me  it  was  for  the  society  of 
which  I  was  secretary  and  not  for  myself  She  then 
questioned  me  again  about  my  past  life  and  enquired 
whether  if  I  were  to  marry  again  my  wife  would  he  re- 
ceived by  the  great  people  I  knew  I  told  her  I  had  not 
the  slightest  intention  of  ever  marrying  again  and  that  I 
certainly  should  marry  no  one  whom  1  could  not  i 
to  my  friends  She  then  asked  me  what  I  would  sav  to 
being  adopted  by  herself  for  she  had  been  thinking  for 
some  time  of  adopting  a  son  who  could  take  care  of  her 
She  added  "  I  will  settle  a  very  handsome  fortune  on  you 
We  will  take  a  house  and  your  son  (whose  name  had  been 

216  ANSWER    OF 

mentioned)  will  live  with  us  and  have  his  tutor  This  will 
be  an  amusement  to  me  You  will  have  a  handsome 
house  to  entertain  your  friends  and  we  will  travel  abroad 
together  when  we  like  "  I  laughed  at  the  scheme  as  a 
mere  romance  and  asked  what  her  relatives  would  say 
She  said  "  Now  I  will  tell  you  a  little  of  my  story  and 
you  will  see  how  free  and  independent  I  am  "  And  then 
she  told  me  as  the  fact  is  that  she  was  the  illegitimate 
daughter  of  a  tradesman  in  Newcastle  who  afterwards 
became  a  farmer  That  she  could  have  no  legal  relations 
and  that  she  did  not  know  any  of  her  father's  family 
That  her  late  husband  was  of  good  family  and  his  family 
always  held  aloof  from  herself  and  husband  and  there 
were  other  reasons  why  she  and  her  husband  took  a 
dislike  to  them  and  that  he  made  over  all  his  property 
which  was  very  considerable  to  her  before  his  death  so 
that  the  probate  of  his  Will  cost  only  .£50  and  that  not 
one  of  his  relatives  were  mentioned  in  his  Will  She  then 
wont  on  to  say  that  previous  to  her  late  husband's  death 
he  told  her  a  change  would  come  over  her  in  seven  years 
and  that  she  thought  it  meant  her  death  but  that  now  she 
thought  the  event  to  occur  was  that  she  was  to  meet  and 
adopt  me  I  said  that  in  that  case  I  should  not  only  have 
an  adopted  mother  but  that  I  would  call  her  husband  my 
spiritual  adopted  father  inasmuch  as  he  had  foretold  such 
a  thing  I  said  this  in  a  laughing  mood  so  much  so  that 
the  Plaintiff  seemed  displeased  and  said  that  I  seemed  to 
take  the  whole  thing  as  a  joke  I  told  her  I  certainly  did 
and  not -a  very  good  one  either  for  I  could  not  conceive 
how  any  one  could  talk  thus  to  a  man  who  was  a  perfect 
stranger  to  her  She  then  said  she  had  not  finished  her 
story  and  that  she  had  lived  such  an  isolated  life  since  the 
death  of  her  husband  and  that  during  the  five  years  she 
had  been  in  London  her  husband's  family  had  shewn  her 
so  little  attention  that  the  previous  winter  she  had  spent 
in  Yarmouth  and  some  of  them  lived  not  far  off  yet  she 
saw  none  of  them  and  wished  to  see  none  of  them  The 

MR.    HOME.  217 

men  she  said  are  parsons  and  my  husband  used  to  call 
them  black  coats  and  when  he  received  letters  from  them 
particularly  from  his  nephew  Charles  who  writes  with  a 
great  flourish  he  used  to  throw  the  letter  from  him  and 
say  it  was  enough  to  make  one  hate  one's  own  name 
"  Now  "  she  added  "  I  have  lived  five  years  in  London 
in  one  lodging-house  not  this  one  and  I  only  know  an  old 
woman  who  sells  mixed  sweets  and  with  whom  I  used  to 
sit  and  chat  a  great  deal  and  a  lodging-house  keeper  a 
Mrs.  Pepper  who  is  a  bad  one  and  a  Mrs.  Sims  whom  I 
have  just  picked  up  as  a  photographer  and  who  has  been 
a  source  of  great  comfort  to  me  for  I  have  been  trying  to 
live  with  a  niece  of  my  husband's  but  I  could  not  do  it  and 
my  comfort  has  been  to  get  out  and  have  a  talk  with  Mrs. 
Sims  Now  you  will  introduce  me  to  your  friends  and 
two  people  will  be  made  happy  one  of  them  myself  the 
other  you "  The  doubt  crossed  me  whether  she  was 
sober  and  in  her  right  mind  I  said  to  her  "  Why  I  may 
be  a  scoundrel  or  an  impostor  for  anything  you  know  " 
"  Oh  dear  no"  she  said  "you're  a  public  man  and  if  you 
had  done  anything  wrong  the  public  would  have  been  too 
glad  to  seize  on  it  and  show  you  up"  Her  reasons  were 
so  much  to  the  point  and  her  manner  was  so  very  earnest 
and  affectionate  that  I  thought  she  must  be  in  her  right 
senses  and  that  she  had  well  calculated  the  step  she  was 
urging  on  me  to  take  but  I  told  her  it  was  all  too  hastily 
done  I  said  "  I  fear  you  seek  me  for  the  strange  gift  I 
po'sscss  and  as  that  is  not  at  my  control  I  might  lose  it  " 
She  said  "  Have  I  ever  alluded  to  that  it  is  true  that  will 
bring  people  about  you  and  that  is  what  I  want  I  always 
select  my  lodgings  in  a  place  where  there  is  bustle  and 
confusion  for  I  like  it  so  I  shall  like  to  see  your  friends  and 
nothing  will  spite  my  husband's  family  more  than  to  see 
me  amongst  great  folks  I  always  swore  I  would  IK-  cv.  u 
with  them  some  day  and  now  I  will  "  I  told  her  that  this 
was  not  the  way  I  liked  to  look  on  the  proceeding  i'«»r  I 
wished  to  harm  no  one  or  stand  in  no  one's  way  She  said 

218  ANSWER    OF 

"  Oh  I'll  tell  that  Mrs.  Fellows  such  a  story  about  it  all 
that  I  shall  allow  you  a  thousand  a  year  it  will  be  such 
fun  "  I  told  her  again  that  I  could  not  like  such  an  idea 
that  I  had  gone  thus  far  through  life  and  no  one  could  say 
ought  against  me  or  that  I  had  ever  sought  to  injure  any 
one  She  rose  and  threw  her  arms  about  me  and  kissed 
me  saying  "  it  shall  be  just  as  you  like  darling  "  I  did 
certainly  think  this  rather  violent  but  her  age  and  the 
conversation  we  had  just  held  seemed  to  be  a  justification 
of  her  conduct.  She  requested  me  as  yet  to  say  nothing 
about  her  to  my  friends  further  than  that  she  had  given 
£30  to  the  Athenaeum. 

6.  There  were  no  spiritual  manifestations  whatever  at 
this  interview     I  wrote  to   several  of  my  friends  at  the 
time  saying  that  a  lady  had  given  thirty  pounds  to  the 
AthenaBum  simply  from  having  read  my  work     I  deter- 
mined not  to  see  her  for  a  da^  or  two  alone  that  she  might 
in  the  meanwhile  ask  about  me  if  her  intention  really  was 
to  do  as  she  said  for  this  reason  I  did  not  again  see  her 
till  the  7th  October  1866. 

7.  During  this  interview  of  the  4th  October  the  Plaintiff 
said  it-  was  not  for  nothing  that  she  was  the  daughter  of  a 
tradesman  for  it  had  made  her  a  ''capital  woman  of  business" 
and  that  she  liked  to  have  everything  well  and  legally  done 
and  wished  me  to  consult  a  lawyer  to  know  whether  or  no 
being  adopted  by  her  and  taking  her  name  gave  me  a 
legal  right  as  heir  to  her  property  and  "  how  the  job  was 
to  be  done." 

8.  From  her  statements  to  me  I  believe  the  Plaintiff  to 
be  a  widow  and  that  she  has  no  child     She  has  varied  in 
the  mention  of  her  age  to  me  sometimes  saying  that  she 
was  fifty-two  at  other  times  different  ages  so  that  I  cannot 
answer  her  Interrogatory  as  to  her  age  further  than  that 
she  is   extremely  robust  and  vigorous  both   in  body  and 
mind  and  she  is  in  the  habit  of  boasting  that  she  has 
never  been  confined  to  her  bed  by  illness     I  believe  that 
exclusive  of  her  gifts  to  me  her  income  is  about  £5,000  a 

ME.    1IOME.  219 

year  arising  from  consols  and  mortgage  securities  She 
has  told  me  but  I  have  no  independent  knowledge  on  the 
subject  that  she  was  originally  possessed  of  some  property 
of  her  own  She  has  also  told  me  and  I  believe  ami 
charge  it  to  be  the  fact  that  her  influence  over  her  hus- 
band the  late  Charles  Lyon  was  so  great  that  she  pre- 
vailed upon  him  to  make  over"  the  bulk  of  his  property 
from  time  to  time  to  her  during  his  life  and  that  he  be- 
queathed the  residue  which  was  of  trifling  amount  to  her 
by  his  Will  During  the  period  of  my  intimacy  with  the 
Plaintiff  she  has  told  me  that  she  used  to  quarrel  with  her 
late  husband  at  times  but  yet  I  think  she  was  attached 
though  I  cannot  say  whether  greatly  attached  to  him 
From  her  statements  to  me  I  believe  that  he  was  greatly 
attached  to  her  and  completely  under  her  power  and 
control. 

9.  Save  as  hereinbefore  mentioned  I  cannot  set  forth 
as  to  my  belief  or  otherwise  whether  she  had  heard  she 
could  be  placed  in  communication  with  his  spirit  through 
the  agency  of  a  spiritual  medium  or  how  otherwise  Under 
the  circumstances  hereinbefore  appearing  and  not  other- 
wise she  did  seek  for  and  obtain  an  interview  with  me  on 
the  2nd  and  not  on  the  3rd  October  1806  at  Sloane-strect 
in  the  said  Bill  mentioned  and  she  did  on  the  2nd  and 
not  on  the  3rd  October  1806  see  me  at  Sloane-street  and 
not  elsewhere  and  I  deny  that  I  did  by  any  means  what- 
ever induce  her  to  believe  nor  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge 
and  belief  did  she  believe  that  a  manifestation  of  the  spirit 
of  her  deceased  husband  took  or  was  taking  place  as 
nothing  of  the  sort  occurred  whether  through  my  instru- 
mentality or  any  otherwise  howsoever  And  in  answer  to 
the  Plaintiff's  further  Interrogatory  I  deny  that  I  did  on 
that  occasion  induce  the  Plaintiff  to  believe  nor  to  the 
best  of  my  knowledgo^and  belief  did  she  believe  that  the 
spirit  of  her  deceased  husband  was  in  communication  with 
her  nor  that  certain  expressions  of  endearment  or  any 
other  expressions  on  the  part  of  the  spirit  of  which  th-.-rc 

220  ANSWEE    OF 

were  in  fact  none  were  conveyed  through  the  medium  of 
me  to  her  and  I  make  out  the  contrary  in  manner  here- 
inbefore appearing  The  Plaintiff  was  not  much  or  in 
fact  gratified  thereby  because  nothing  of  the  sort  hap- 
pened but  she  did  under  the  circumstances  hereinbefore 
stated  and  not  otherwise  desire  me  to  call  upon  her  on  the 
following  day  but  she  did  not  promise  to  give  me  £10  or 
any  other  sum  Under  the  circumstances  hereinbefore 
stated  and  not  otherwise  I  did  in  fact  call  upon  the  Plain- 
tiff at  her  lodgings  in  Westbourne-place  but  not  at  her 
present  lodgings  in  the  said  Bill  mentioned  on  the  4th 
October  1866  and  not  on  the  day  following  the  previous 
day  and  I  deny  that  I  did  again  or  at  all  induce  the 
Plaintiff  to  believe  or  that  she  did  or  could  believe  that 
the  spirit  of  her  deceased  husband  was  manifested  to  her 
through  my  instrumentality  or  that  she  did  thereupon 
though  I  admit  that  she  did  under  the  circumstances 
hereinbefore  stated  and  not  otherwise  in  fact  give  me  the 
sum  of  ,£30. 

10.  On  the  7th  October  1866  I  called  upon  the  Plain- 
tiff and  she  greeted  me  most  warmly  and  affectionately 
and  said  she  had  now  made  up  her  mind  to  adopt  me  and 
asked  me  if  I  had  seen  a  lawyer  about  it  I  said  I  had 
not  and  that  I  did  not  like  her  to  act  thus  hastily  in  a 
matter  of  such  importance  She  told  me  she  had  resolved 
to  pay  to  my  account  £24,000  on  the  llth  of  the  month 
that  she  had  at  first  intended  the  sum  to  be  £30,000  but 
had  now  decided  I  should  have  only  £700  a  year  to 
begin  with  to  see  how  we  got  on  together  and  that  if  she 
found  me  all  she  expected  me  to  be  she  would  give  me 
much  more  afterwards  She  also  told  me  she  had  watched 
with  much  interest  the  trial  which  had  been  going  "on 
relative  to  Bishop  Colenso  and  that  it  had  been  her  in- 
tention had  he  been  deprived  of  hisJncome  to  have  given 
him  a  fortune  adding  "  it  is  lucky  for  you  I  did  not" 
She  told  me  that  her  income  was  more  than  five  thousand 
a  year  and  that  her  husband  saw  none  of  his  family  and 

MR.    HO  HE.  22  L 

that  she  had  no  feeling  but  that  of  distaste  to  thorn  all 
with  the  exception  of  Mrs.  Clutterbuck  who  was  rich  I 
felt  like  one  in  a  dream  at  this  strange  conversation  which 
I  could  not  credit  and  rising  from  where  I  was  seated 
myself  at  the  piano  The  Plaintiff  gave  an  exclamation 
of  surprise  and  said  "  Turn  your  side  face  again  that  I 
may  see  your  profile"  I  did  so  and  the  Plaintiff  came 
where  I  was  seated  and  said  "  Why  I  have  seen  you  in 
visions  these  many  years  and  the  only  difference  was 
that  your  hair  was  lighter  more  of  a  golden  yellow  than 
it  now  is  many  many  years  ago  even  before  you  could 
have  been  born"  She  went  on  to  say  u  Why  even  my 
father  before  he  died  told  me  I  should  adopt  a  soh  and 
I  will  have  no  one  but  you  and  whether  you  will  or  no 
I  shall  settle  a  fortune  on  you  and  you  will  be  obliged  to 
accept  it"  I  told  her  it  was  cruel  to  talk  thus  to  a  man 
who  was  poor  and  she  said  "  It  is  the  only  means  I  have 
of  binding  you  to  me  I  am  alone  I  have  and  can 
have  no  relatives  I  had  a  fortune  of  my  own  of 
.£30,000  so  surely  I  can  do  with  that  as  I  please  My 
husband's  relatives  look  down  on  me  because  I  am  the 
natural  daughter  of  a  Newcastle  tradesman  So  much 
the  worse  for  them  for  I  will  prove  to  them  that  I  may 
sit  up  if  I  please  and  pitch  my  money  pound  after  pound 
out  of  the  window  and  they  and  indeed  no  one  has  a 
right  to  interfere  You  are  a  gentleman  and  have  friends 
in  the  best  society  I  will  shew  them  all  that  I  can  he 
received  as  well  as  they  when  the  fancy  takes  me  for  I 
shall  go  out  with  you  and  your  friends  will  come  to  us 
and  my  old  age  will  become  a  joy  instead  of  a  burthen" 
I  said  "  Well  I  promise  you  I  shall  love  you  as  a  mother 
and  shall  even  call  you  mother  if  you  like  for  there  are 
plenty  of  old  ladies  whom  I  address  and  write  to  as 
mother"  She  replied  in  a  very  hasty  manner  "  Thank 
you  but  the  less  of  that  kind  of  love  the  better  I  shall 
love  your  son  with  a  mother's  love  he  will  be  our  darling" 
She  asked  if  I  would  not  like  to  have  her  see  some  of  my 

222  ANSWER    OF 

friends  or  even  a  legal  man  to  talk  it  over  with  them  and 
I  told  her  I  would  She  said  '*  Very  well  I  will  go  with 
"  you  to-morrow  to  call  on  any  one  you  please  or  you  may 
"  come  here  with  any  one"  I  told  her  that  for  the 
moment  I  thought  of  no  one  but  that  there  was  plenty  of 
time  She  made  a  singular  remark  which  impressed  me 
even  at  the  time  for  she  said  "  I  am  apt  to  change  my 
"  mind  so  you  had  better  catch  me  while  you  can"  I 
told  her  I  had  no  desire  to  catch  her  and  that  the  very 
thing  I  feared  was  that  having  taken  me  up  so  suddenly 
without  cause  she  would  put  me  down  just  the  same. 
She  only  replied  to  this  "  O  dear  no  I  shall  never  tire  of 
"  you"  At  this  moment  she  was  standing  near  me  and  she 
went  and  sat  down  saying  "  I  always  have  had  my  own 
way  and  unless  you  will  promise  to  do  as  I  wish  you  to 
you  will  only  make  me  dislike  you"  She  seemed  to 
think  for  a  moment  and  then  said  "  Now  I  know  what 
I  shall  do  I  shall  give  a  fortune  to  your  son  and  have 
him  take  my  name  I  will  take  a  house  and  have  a  tutor 
for  him  in  fact  I  will  adopt  him  and  then  you  will  have 
to  see  him  and  you  would  not  dare  to  refuse  anything 
for  his  good"  She  then  asked  me  the  day  of  the  month 
and  I  told  her  it  was  the  7th  She  went  to  a  tin  box  and 
brought  out  her  cheque  book  and  turning  it  came  to  a 
blank  on  wliich  was  written  "  Mrs.  J.  Fellowes"  and  to 
the  best  of  my  belief  £5  but  underneath  was  written  "  the 
"  last  to  her  for  ever"  while  I  was  looking  at  it  she  kissed 
me  on  the  brow  and  said  "  Now  for  the  first  to  you  from 
"  your  adopted  mother  who  is  this  day  a  happy  woman" 
she  said  "  I  asked  for  the  day  of  the  month  because  a 
((  Sunday's  date  is  not  legal"  She  then  wrote  out  and 
handed  me  a  cheque  and  on  looking  at  it  I  found  it  to 
be  for  .£50  When  she  saw  my  surprise  she  came  and 
kissed  me  on  the  brow  and  said  "  That  is  only  a  drop  in 
"  the  ocean"  I  placed  the  cheque  on  the  table  and  told 
her  I  must  refuse  it  for  though  I  was  poor  I  was  also 
proud  and  had  always  refused  thus  to  accept  money  I 

MR.    HOME.  223 

told  her  I  was  sensitive  (as  the  fact  is)  that  though  people 
wished  to  pay  me  for  the  strange  gift  I  possessed  that  I 
felt  I  had  no  right  to  obtain  money  from  such  a  source 
She  said  "  Why  you  foolish  fellow  I've  seen  nothing  of 
your  strange  gift  as  you  call  it  and  though  it  is  through 
your  being  celebrated  for  that  that  I  first  heard  of  you. 
now  that  I  know  you  I  love  you  for  yourself  and  should 
not  care  if  you  never  had  anything  singular  occur  to 
you  again"  She  then  took  up  the  cheque  and  folded 
it  with  the  printed  side  out  saying  as  she  did  so  "  You 
must  always  fold  bank  notes  and  cheques  with  the 
printed  side  out  else  you  might  throw  them  away  as 
waste  paper"  I  took  the  cheque  and  put  it  into  my 
pocket  Up  to  this  time  no  phenomena  known  as  spiritual 
manifestations  had  taken  place  at  any  interview  between 
the  Plaintiff  and  myself  but  as  I  rose  to  go  there  came 
sounds  known  as  rapping.  A  call  for  the  alphabet  was 
made  and  the  following  sentence  or  words  nearly  similar 
spelled  out  "  Do  not  my  darling  Jane  say  alas  the  light 
of  other  days  for  ever  fled  the  light  is  with  you  Charles 
lives  and  loves  you"  Whether  these  sounds  were  pro- 
duced by  the  Plaintiff  who  pretends  to  be  a  medium  I 
cannot  say  but  I  solemnly  swear  that  they  were  not 
produced  by  me  I  was  not  near  the  table  when  they 
occurred  The  Plaintiff  alone  was  seated  near  the  table 
She  left  her  place  in  the  most  quiet  manner  and  went 
into  her  bed  room  and  I  heard  her  unlock  a  box  and  she 
then  brought  and  shewed  to  me  a  very  badly  executed 
water  colour  drawing  of  a  house  and  on  the  back  of  the 
picture  was  written  in  the  Plaintiff's  handwriting  ••  Alas 
the  light  of  other  days  for  ever  lied"  or  words  precisely 
similar  and  underneath  •'  Winchester"  She  then  said 
this  was  a  very  favourite1  place  of  her  husband's  but  from 
family  difficulties  which  she  explained  it  was  sold  by 
an  Order  of  Chancery  and  she  also  told  me  that  she  had 
told  her  husband  previous  to  its  beincf  sold  that  she 
had  seen  in  a  vision  it  would  be  sold  She  also  told  me 

224  ANSWER    OF 

that  it  was  In  the  library  of  that  very  house  she  had  first 
seen  me  in  vision  I  was  much  surprised  at  the  perfect 
calmness  of  the  Plaintiff  I  solemnly  swear  that  I  did  not 
seek  to  influence  her  in  any  way  whatever  except  only 
against  her  own  impulse  and  desire  to  force  upon  me  a 
position  of  wealth  also  that  I  did  not  induce  her  to  believe 
she  was  having  communication  with  the  spirit  of  her  hus- 
band I  did  not  know  and  could  have  had  no  means  of 
knowing  the  name  of  his  former  estate  of  Binchester  or  of 
the  words  the  Plaintiff  had  written  on  the  picture  as  she 
had  not  mentioned  Binchester  or  the  picture  to  me  before 
this  I  had  made  no  inquiries  as  to  who  she  was  and  as 
she  told  me  on  the  Thursday  she  was  only  intimate  with 
the  wife  of  a  photographer  and  an  old  woman  who  sells 
mixed  sweets  in  Knightsbridge  and  a  lodging-house  keeper 
and  as  these  persons  were  not  in  my  circle  of  acquaintance 
I  would  not  and  did  not  see  them  I  did  not  induce  the 
Plaintiff  to  believe  but  then  and  repeatedly  afterwards  told 
her  that  the  identity  of  all  spiritual  communications  was 
most  uncertain  and  that  we  must  always  use  our  own 
reason  in  judging  them  I  have  not  been  interrogated  as 
to  the  above  manifestations  which  I  have  related  but  I 
mention  them  because  I  have  no  wish  to  conceal  the 
truth. 

11.  There  were  no  other  manifestations  at  this  inter- 
view than  those  above   stated     The   statements  of  the 
Plaintiff  contained  in  the  2nd  3rd  and  4th  paragraphs  of 
her  affidavit  filed  in  this  suit  on  the  27th  June  1867  as 
to  the  events  therein  alleged  to  have  taken  place  are 
untrue  and  I  believe  and  charge  that  the  book  to  which 
she  refers  as  though  she  had  written  down  what  occurred 
in  it  shortly  after  the  events  was  not  commenced  until  a 
much  later  period  and  after  she  turned  against  me  as 
hereinafter  mentioned  and  had  planned  to  undo  her  gifts 
to  me. 

12.  I  deny  that  the  Plaintiff  did  on  the  day  mentioned 
in  the  Plaintiff's  Interrogatory  as  the  following  day  or  on 

MR.    UOME.  225 

any  other  day  under  the  belief  that  the  spirit  of  her  de- 
ceased husband  bad  again  or  in  fact  at  all  through  my 
agency  been  brought  into  communication  with  her  but  I 
a>scrt  that  sin-  did  lor  the  totally  different  reason  berein- 
bet'ore  mentioned  give  me  the  further  sum  of  .£50. 

13.  I  deny  that  I  did  by  the  means  in  the  said  Bill 
mentioned  or  by  any  other  means  acquire  a  great  or  any 
ascendancy  over  the  mind  of  the  Plaintiff  and  I  did  not 
by  the  exercise  of  what  the  Plaintiff  now  calls  my  alleged 
spiritual  powers  or  in  fact  induce  her  to  believe  that  what 
I  represented  to  be  communications  from  the  spirit  of  her 
deceased  husband  to  her  were  real  communications  as  I 
never  represented  anything  of  the  sort    And  I  shall  make 
out  the  contrary  by  proving  from  independent  testimony 
that  her  charge  of  my  exercising  undue  influence  or  in 
fact  having  any  influence  over  her  is  wholly  untrue     I 
shall  prove  that  it  was  I  who  was  the  victim  and  the  suf- 
ferer that  under  the  influence  of  gratitude  for  her  unsought 
generosity  to  me  and  her  many  acts  of  real  and  unaffected 
kindness  I  put  up  with  much  that  I  felt  to  be  galling  and 
degrading  that  I  made  many  efforts  to  return  her  gifts  and 
sever  the  connection  between  us  but  that  enfeebled  as  .1 
was  from  severe  and  exhausting  attacks  of  illness  I  had 
not  the  energy  to  throw  off  the  dominion  exercised  over 
me  by  her  strong  will  and  her  affectionate  expressions  of 
regret  as  well  as  the  position  I  was  placed  in  by  the  pub- 
licity that  had  been  given  to  my  change  of  fortune. 

14.  I  called  again  on  the  Plaintiff  on  the  Monday  the 
8th  October  1866  a  little  after  eleven  a.  m.  and  putting 
down  the  cheque  for  .£oO  said  I  could  not  and  would  not 
accept  it     The  Plaintiff  burst  into  tears  and  said  she  had 
thought  a  new  and  joyous  life  was  opening  to  her  for  she 
had  no  friends  and  that  it  was  cruel  of  me  to  treat  her  thus 
for  she  bad  been  making  so  many  plans  for  our  future  and 
as  my  health  was  delicate  she  wished  she  bad  not  sold  a 
cottage  she  had  once  possessed  near  the  sea  called   Sea 

226  AN 8  WEB    OF 

View  but  that  she  had  done  so  and  now  she  would  buy  me 
a  place  near  the  sea  where  we  might  go  together. 

15.  She  then  said  that  not  only  was  her  mind  made  up 
to  adopt  me  and  have  me  take  her  name  but  that  it  was 
to  be  done  so  surely  that  nothing  could  undo  it  and  that 
she  would  make  a  new  Will  and  that  if  she  should  by  any 
chance  die  suddenly  that  I  had  her  fortune  contingent  on 
taking  her  name  for  she  was  not  in  the  habit  of  being  in- 
fluenced by  any  one  but  did  as  she  pleased  and  that  was 
why  she  did  not  and  would  not  live  with  Mrs.  Fellowes. 
She  again  entered  into  details  concerning  the  whole  family 
which  would  be*  injurious  to  them,  so  I  omit  them.     She 
requested  me  to  go  to  the  bank  myself  to  get  the  cheque 
cashed  and  said  that  she  would  be  at  my  rooms  at  two 
o'clock  precisely     There  were  no  spiritual  manifestations 
whatever  at  this  interview  nor  was  any  mention  whatever 
made  of  spiritualism. 

16.  I  would  not  go  to  the  bank  alone  but  asked  my 
friend  Mr.  Eudall  to  accompany  me     I  told  him  that  the 
same  lady  who  had  given  the  ,£30  to  the  Society  had  now 
given  me  ,£50  to  myself  and  as  she  lived  in  such  poor 
lodgings  and  dressed  so  wretchedly  I  thought  there  must 
be  something  wrong  about  it  and  that  perhaps  it  was  all 
a  myth  and  that  the  bankers  would  laugh  at  me    It  would 
not  have  surprised  me  in  the  least  if  they  had  told  me  they 
knew  no  such  person.     They  however  cashed  the  cheque. 

17.  The  Plaintiff  was  awaiting  my  return  in  the  shop 
below  my  rooms  and  she  went  first  to  my  bedroom  and 
looked  about     I  shewed  her  a  service  of  silver  which  be- 
longed to  my  late  wife  and  she  said  she  did  not  like  the 
form  of  the  forks  and  that  I  had  better  sell  them  and  put 
all  my  money  in  the  funds  where  I  should  have  plenty 
besides  very  soon     I  told  her  they  were  precious  to  me  as 
a  souvenir    She  again  repeated  her  firm  intention  to  adopt 
me  and  neither  spirits  nor  spiritualism  were  alluded  to 
She  said  she  could  not  love  me  more  if  she  had  been  my 
mother  and  adopt  me  she  would    "  No  no  "  she  said  "  wo 

MR.    UO ME.  227 

will  live  together  and  have  a  nice  house  we  will  make  the 
money  fly  and  nothing  will  spite  my  husband's  family 
more  There  is  no  one  I  care  about  but  Mrs.  Cluttcrbuck 
and  she  is  old  and  sickly  as  well  as  rich  No  I  will  enjoy 
the  days  I  have  to  live."  I  told  her  that  as  I  was  a  well- 
known  man  it  would  be  much  talked  about  "  So  much 
the  better  "  she  said  "  all  your  friends  will  be  able  to  come 
and  see  you  and  you  will  be  able  to  entertain  them  "  I 
told  her  I  must  first  sec  some  of  my  friends  as  she  first 
suggested  to  talk  the  matter  over  with  them  and  begged 
she  would  not  come  to  see  me  the  next  day  and  that  on 
my  side  I  would  not  visit  her  and  that  she  might  give  the 
subject  very  serious  consideration  She  again  asked  me 
who  of  my  friends  "a  clever  business  man"  could  see  her 
that  she  might  talk  it  over  with  him  for  she  added  "  I 
know  no  one  in  London  "  I  told  her  that  the  only  per- 
son whose  name  occurred  to  me  at  that  moment  was  my 
old  friend  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall  who  is  an  author  of  distinction 
and  I  said  that  he  was  sure  to  call  on  me  the  following 
day  and  I  would  ask  him  to  see  her. 

18.  It  was  not  spelt  out  as  the  Plaintiff  now  says  by 
the  spirits  that  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall  was  to  go  to  her  but  the 
Plaintiff  wrote  or  made  me  write  his  name  down  that  she 
might  remember  it  when  he  called  and  be  sure  to  see  him 
She  afterwards  at  a  much  later  period  when  as  I  now  be- 
lieve she  was  bent  on  creating  a  case  against  me  made 
me  write  his  name  in  a  book  as  far  as  I  can  remember  as 
if  it  came  in  a  spiritual  communication  as  she  used  often 
to  dictate  her  pretended  revelations  for  me  to  write  and  I 
did  so  at  her  request  and  under  the  influence  and  control 
she  had  acquired  over  me  by  her  munificent  kindii- 

19.  It  was  not  spelt  out  as  the  Plaintiff  now  says  on 
this  occasion  or  on  any  other  occasion  that  the  Plaintiff 
was  to  adopt  me. 

20.  It  was  now  late  and  I  had  to  dine  out     I  again 
told  her  we  must  not  see  each  other  the  next  day  and  that 
I  would  ask  Mr.  Hall  to  see  her     She  said  "  I  see  you 

228  ANSWER    OF 

wear  a  very  beautiful  ring  Is  that  a  present  from  some 
grand  person  "  I  told  her  as  the  fact  was  that  His  Ma- 
jesty the  Emperor  of  Russia  had  given  it  to  me  on  the 
occasion  of  my  marriage  "  Oh  yes  "  she  said  "  I  read 
of  that  in  your  book  and  he  gave  you  another  jewel  when 
your  child  was  born  "  I  told  her  that  that  had  been  for 
my  wife  and  she  asked  me  if  I  had  it  and  I  told  her  I  had 
I  brought  my  small  jewel  case  and  shewed  her  the  brooch 
which  is  of  great  beauty  being  a  large  emerald  surrounded 
by  sixteen  large  diamonds  I  also  shewed  her  a  beautiful 
large  diamond  in  a  ring  and  told  her  this  was  one  she  had 
not  read  about  inasmuch  as  the  Emperor  had  given  it  to 
me  on  my  last  visit  to  him  when  he  had  graciously  con- 
sented to  become  my  boy's  god-father  my  wife  having 
been  the  god-daughter  of  His  late  Majesty  the  Emperor 
Nicholas  and  that  I  did  not  consider  it  to  be  mine  but 
rather  the  boy's  from  his  god-father  She  said  "  Now  as 
I  am  your  mother  I  shall  take  care  of  these  things  for 
you  "  and  she  accordingly  took  with  her  on  this  the  fourth 
time  I  had  ever  seen  her  in  my  life  these  two  jewels  worth 
several  hundred  pounds  and  at  this  moment  she  still  has 
them  And  in  November  she  took  three  most  valuable 
bracelets  and  all  the  rich  and  valuable  Indian  and  lace 
shawls  and  other  laces  and  under  clothing  belonging  to 
my  late  wife  and  she  still  retains  possession  of  them  She 
has  repeatedly  worn  and  displayed  these  ornaments  in  the 
society  of  my  friends  to  whom  I  introduced  her  and  others 
I  submit  that  she  should  at  least  offer  to  return  them  as 
they  in  fact  belong  to  my  boy  when  she  comes  into  a 
Court  of  Equity  to  demand  the  restitution  of  her  gifts  to 
me  She  said  before  leaving  that  although  I  had  presents 
from  crowned  Jieads  I  would  find  that  an  old  lady  was  the 
best  friend  for  she  would  give  me  a  present  which  would 
put  me  at  ease  for  the  rest  of  my  life  and  that  I  might 
"  snap  my  fingers  "  at  my  Russian  law  suit  for  I  would 
not  require  it  now  She  also  asked  me  at  once  to  attend 
to  what  was  necessary  about  changing  my  name  legally 

MR.    HOME.  229 

and  that  it  was  to  be  Daniel  Dunglass  Home  Lyon  as  she 
liked  tliis  best. 

"2 I .  The  details  of  all  the  circumstances  are  stamped 
in  my  memory  from  their  peculiarity  and  from  having 
had  to  repeat  them  so  very  often  to  my  friends  both  in 
the  presence  and  absence  of  the  Plaintiff  and  on  many 
occasions  when  she  was  present  she  always  assented  and 
would  herself  add  little  details  which  I  had  omitted  to 
complete  the  narrative. 

22.  In  answer  to  the  Plaintiffs  Interrogatory  I  deny 
that  I  did  at  such  meeting  or  at  any  meeting  whatever 
with  the  Plaintiff  allege  or  represent  to  her  or  induce  her 
to  believe  that  the  spirit  of  her  deceased  husband  required 
her  to  adopt  me  as  her  son  or  to  place  me  in  a  position  of 
independence  suitable  to  my  rank  and  position  in  life  as 
her  adopted  son     My  rank  and  position  in  life  were  infi- 
nitely superior  to  hers  at  the  time  for  she  had  not  main- 
tained   the   rank    and   position   to   which    her  husband's 
station  and  her  wealth  might  have  entitled  her     It  was  I 
who  gave  her  rank  and  position  of  which  she  was  entirely 
destitute    She  gave  me  wealth  and  left  me  no  freedom  in 
its  use     Before  I  knew  her  I  could  and  did  give  much 
more  to  charitable  objects  than  she  would  allow  me  to  do 
afterwards     And  save  as  aforesaid  I  made  no  allegation 
to  the  Plaintiff  on  that  occasion  nor  did  I  at  the  same 
time  or  at  any  time  allege  or  represent  to  the  Plaintiff  or 
induce  her  to  believe  nor  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge  and 
belief  did  she  believe  that  the  spirit  of  her  deceased  hus- 
band desired  that  Mr.  1 1  all  (in  the  said  Bill  named)  should 
be  sent  for  nor  did  I  make  any  other  allegation  or  repre- 
sentation to  the  Plaintiff  respecting  the  said  Mr.  Hall  than 
is  hereinbefore  mentioned. 

23.  On  the  next  day  Tuesday  the  9th  October  1866 
the  said  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall  called  on  me  and  I  related  the 
simple  outline  of  the  case  saying  it  was  an  old  lady  with- 
out any  children  or  relations  who  had  taken  a  liking  to 
nie  and  wished  to  adopt  me  as  her  son     Mr.  Hall  in  the 

230  ANSWER    OF 

most  decided  manner  refused  to  go  near  her  and  said 
"  Either  you  are  insane  and  telling  me  a  falsehood  or  she 
is  one  of  the  two  and  I  will  in  no  way  have  my  name 
mixed  up  with  the  affair"  I  recalled  to  him  that  he  had 
known  me  some  years  and  that  he  had  known  my  wife 
and  reproached  him  with  a  want  of  friendly  feeling  in  thus 
refusing  to  see  one  who  wished  to  assist  me  and  after 
nearly  an  hour's  persuading  he  said  "  As  she  wants  to  be 
a  member  of  the  Athena3um  write  me  a  letter  of  introduc- 
tion and  I  will  call  and  speak  to  her  on  that  subject  but 
unless  she  herself  broaches  this  adoption  I  will  not  allude 
to  it." 

24.  He  was  absent  more  than  an  hour  and  was  much 
agitated  on  returning  He  said  "  Why  it  is  the  most 
wonderful  thing  I  ever  heard  of  She  tells  me  she  is 
worth  some  hundreds  of  thousands  and  asked  me  what  I 
thought  she  should  settle  on  you  at  once  which  she  could 
have  the  power  of  adding  to  but  not  of  taking  away  from" 
I  told  hej-  that  two  or  three  hundred  a-year  if  you  lived 
with  her  would  suffice  to  which  she  said  "  Oh  that's  not 
enough  "  He  said  that  she  wouldn't  speak  or  let  him 
speak  about  spiritualism  and  he  brought  back  the  letter 
of  introduction  in  his  pocket  without  having  presented  it 
rinding  from  Mr.  Hall's  conversation  that  he  thought  her 
not  only  sane  and  in  her  right  mind  but  a  very  sharp 
business  woman  who  gave  efficient  reasons  for  what  she 
hful  contemplated  doing  I  decided  to  accept  what  she 
offered  me. 

1:5.  I  did  not  see  the  Plaintiff  all  this  day  but  as  she 
had  told  Mr.  Hall  that  she  wished  him  to  meet  me  the 
next  day  at  twelve  I  went  on  Wednesday  the  10th  Oc- 
tober 1866  at  half-past  eleven  again  to  beg  that  she 
would  at  least  delay  for  a  time  what  she  wished  to  do  I 
told  her  as  the  fact  was  and  as  she  knew  that  I  was  ill 
and  that  a  week  or  two's  absence  "would  do  me  good  She 
said  I  know  that  and  you  shall  go  just  as  soon  as  the 
'•'job  is  done  "  She  then  said  that  she  had  written  to  me 

MR.    HOME.  231 

for  the  last  time  in  my  name  of  Home  and  it  was  a  most 
important  letter  for  she  had  so  fully  decided  on  giving  me 
£700  a-year  that  nothing  would  stop  her  and  the  letter 
was  to  prove  why  she  did  so  "  For  "  she  added  "  I  am 
a  capital  woman  of  business  and  as  my  Will  now  stands  if 
anything  should  happen  to  me  before  I  can  carry  out  a 
deed  of  gift  the  family  would  be  sure  to  be  down  on  you 
and  I  would  rather  see  the  money  in  the  fire  than  they 
should  have  it  I  only  wish  I  had  not  given  my  husband's 
(your  father  as  you  are  to  call  him)  gun  away  for  I  wish 
you  had  it  "  Mr.  Hall  came  at  this  juncture  and  she  at 
once  went  to  her  box  and  produced  a  bundle  of  stock  re- 
ceipts Mr.  Hall  did  not  to  the  best  of  my  belief  touch 
one  of  the  papers  The  Plaintiff  herself  picked  out  tho 
papers  with  the  largest  sums  and  put  a  pin  through  them 
and  handed  them  to  me  It  was  not  spelled  out  as  she 
now  says  that  I  was  to  be  her  adopted  son  or  anything 
about  her  funded  property  or  that  she  was  to  hand  over 
the  stock  receipts  to  the  said  S.  C.  Hall  or  that  he  was  to 
hand  them  over  to  me  or  anything  to  that  or  the  like  effect 
whatsoever  to  the  best  of  my  remembrance  and  belief. 

20.  I  never  caused  any  spiritual  manifestations  or 
communications  to  be  made  to  the  Plaintiff  Whatever 
communications  were  at  any  time  apparently  given  were 
caused  by  the  Plaintiff  herself  if  they  were  caused  by  any- 
body and  were  at  her  request  written  by  me  in  a  book 
narrating  everything  that  occurred  between  us  which  was 
read  over  in  the  presence  of  the  Plaintiff  and  no  paper  or 
papers  were  burnt  by  me  as  the  Plaintiff  untruly  states 
1  do  not  remember  what  the  apparent  communications 
were  but  when  I  sec  the  book  which  I  wrote  I  can  easily 
ascertain  whether  it  has  bivn  altered  since  and  if  not  I  shall 
Bfc  able  to  state  accurately  all  the  circumstances  that 
happened  This  book  was  afterwards  read  through  to  Mr. 
Shorter  in  the  presence  of  the  Plaintiff  and  she  then 
j!--ented  to  its  containing  a  true  and  complete  narrative  of 
the  adoption  as  was  the  fact  Tlie  Plaintiff  took  away  the 

232  ANSWER    OF 

book  and  kept  it  and  I  have  never  seen  it  since  It  is 
still  in  her  possession  unless  she  has  destroyed  it  It  is 
not  the  book  marked  "B"  referred  to  in  her  said  affidavit 
filed  on  the  27th  June  1867. 

27.  When  the  Plaintiff  said  as  she  did  on  this  occasion 
that  she  would  give  me  £24,000  Mr.  Hall  said  "  Do  my 
good  lady  take  time  and  think  this  well  over  Do  not  act 
so  hastily"  And  I  joined  with  him  in  saying  so  but  she 
only  said  "  What  is  24,000  to  me  in  comparison  with 
having  a  son  that  I  can  love  and  who  will  be  kind  to  me" 
It  is  untruly  stated  by  Plaintiff  that  on  this  occasion  a 
gold  snuff  box  was  given  to  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall  She  gave  it 
to  him  about  a  month  later  namely  in  November  1866  It  is 
worth  about  .£3  or  .£4  and  she  has  lately  recalled  it  She 
also  gave  him  at  the  same  time  namely  in  November  1866 
a  silver  pencil  case  which  Mr.  Hall  of  his  own  accord 
returned  when  she  demanded  a  restitution  of  her  other 
gift  to  him  Mr.  Hall  gave  her  from  time  to  time  many 
valuable  books  which  she  has  not  thought  it  necessary  or 
becoming  in  her  to  return  Mr.  Hall  did  not  and  could  not 
have  said  as  the  Plaintiff  now  swears  that  it  was  too  late 
to  go  to  the  bank  for  it  was  then  not  more  than  one 
o'clock  m  The  Plaintiff  wished  to  know  the  name  of  a 
stockbroker  who  could  sell  out  for  her  and  said  it  was 
usual  for  her  own  bankers  to  transact  all  such  business  but 
that  "  till  the  job  was  done  she  did  not  care  about  them 
knowing  it"  I  then  left  her  and  having  ascertained  the 
name  of  the  firm  of  stockbrokers  Fox,  Taylor  and  Back- 
house Tokenhouse-yard  I  returned  to  Mrs.  Lyon  the  same 
day  with  their  names  she  wrote  them  a  letter  and  requested 
f/i  me  to  take  it  to  them  in  the  City  myself  alleging  that  as 
the  sum  was  a  large  one  and  they  did  not  know  her  they 
might  think  it  a  hoax  I  took  the  letter  she  had  written 
to  the  brokers  in  my  hand  and  said  to  her  "  You  have  not 
yet  known  me  ten  days  and  this  is  not  the  tenth  time  you 
have  seen  me  and  you  are  making  me  a  rich  man  Oh 
do  for  heaven's  sake  think  well  of  what  you  are  doing" 
She  caught  me  in  her  arms  and  kissed  me  saying  "  This 

MR.    HOME.  233 

is  only  a  drop  in  the  ocean "  There  were  no  manifesta- 
tions whatever  and  no  mention  made  of  the  subject  of 
spiritualism  on  this  occasion. 

28.  I  took  the  letter  to  Messieurs  Fox,  Taylor  and 
Backhouse   and   the  same  day  I   received   by   post   the 
following  letter  which  must  have  been  written  and  sent 
before  the  interview  between  Mr.  Hall  myself  and  the 
Plaintiff  on  the  same  morning     I  swear  that  I  was  not 
near  Mrs.  Lyon  when  it  was  written  and  not  even  in  the 
house  and  in  nowise  influenced  her  to  write  it  and  except 
for  her  allusion  to  it  as  aforesaid  knew  nothing  of  it  or  its 
contents  before  I  received  it   It  was  her  own  free  action  and 
was  but  a  part  of  the  business  tact  which  she  has  ever  dis- 
played throughout  the  whole  of  her  proceedings  with  me. 

"  18,  Westbourne  Place,  Hyde  Park, 

<<  10th  October,  1866. 

"  My  dear  Mr.  Home, — I  have  a  desire  to  render  you 
independent  of  the  world  and  having  ample  means  for  the 
purpose  without  abstracting  from  any  needs  or  comforts  of 
my  own  I  have  the  greatest  satisfaction  in  now  present- 
ing you  with  and  as  an  entirely  FREE  GIFT  from  me  the 
sum  of  £24,000  &  am 

"  My  dear  Sir,  yours  very  truly  &  respectfully, 

"JANE  LYON. 

The  underlineations1  in  this  and  her  other  letters  herein  set 
forth  were  made  by  herself. 

29.  Either  on  the  evening  of  the  10th  or  the  morning 
of  the  llth  October  I  received  another  letter  from  the 
Plaintiff  beginning  "  My  dear  Daniel,  I  want  you  to  take 
a  nice  mutton  chop  for  your  breakfast  before  you  come. 
I  write  knowing-  you.  timidity  to  come  and  be  made  a  rich 
man"  or  words  to  that  effect  and  signed  "Yours  affec- 
tionately Jane  Lyon"     The  Plaintiff  as  I  believe  after 
she  began  to  fabricate  her  case  against  me  abstracted  this 
last  mentioned  letter  from  amongst  my  papers  as  herein- 

1  Now  printed  in  italics  and  small  capitals. 

234  ANSWER    OF 

after  appears  The  other  letter  set  forth  abovo  escaped 
her  by  happening  not  to  be  amongst  my  other  papers. 

30.  On  the  following  day  namely  Thursday  the  llth 
October  1866  I  called  at  her  request  and  \ve  wont  into  the 
City  in  a  cab  There  were  no  manifestations  in  the  house 
before  leaving  and  none  in  the  cab  while  going  into  the 
City  the  Plaintiff  sat  very  near  me  with  my  hands  in  hers 
under  her  shawl  all  the  way  to  the  City  and  when  we  were 
going  down  Holhorn  Hill  she  turned  and  said  "  This  my 
darling  boy  is  one  of  the  happy  days  in  my  life  and  1  never 
expected  to  be  so  happy  again  The  feeling  that  I  had 
money  and  a  parcel  of  people  for  whom  I  cared  nothing 
mio'ht  think  I  had  made  a  Will  in  their  favour  and  so  be 

O 

looking  out  for  my  death  has  ever  worried  me  for  I  know 
they  all  speak  of  me  as  'the  old  woman'  I  don't  know 
how  many  Wills  I  have  made  Let's  see  one  just  a  month 
or  so  after  my  husband  died  I  left  all  to  one  of  his  sisters 
and  then  I  have  in  others  distributed  it  about  That  horrid 
Mrs.  Pepper's  daughter  was  in  one  and  when  I  was  making 
another  Will  after  her  death  Mrs.  Pepper  had  the  impu- 
dence to  ask  me  to  put  in  Joe  her  son  because  he  was 
Louisa's  favourite  brother  but  I  told  her  I  should  do 
nothing  of  the  sort"  The  Plaintiff  has  in  fact  at  different 
times  made  at  least  five  Wills  that  she  has  told  me  of  In 
one  she  told  me  she  had  largely  benefited  her  adopted 
daughter  Fanny  Hemming  We  drove  straight  to  her 
bankers  and  not  straight  to  the  brokers  as  the  Plaintiff 
untruly  states  and  I  left  her  alone  with  them  while  I  fetched 
the  broker  to  see  her  identified  We  then  went  to  Token- 
house  Yard  and  the  Plaintiff  began  asking  if  the  Back- 
house of  the  firm  was  in  any  way  related  to  Jonathan 
Backhousfc  of  Darlington  (I  shouid  mention  that  the  day 
before  she  had  said  the  same  thing  to  me  and  hoped  they 
were  for  then  they  would  know  her  name  as  Mr.  Lyon 
had  transacted  business  with  Jonathan  Backhouse)  To 
the  best  of  my  remembram  e  she  told  them  that  she  had 
adopted  me  and  she  did  the  same  to  Mr.  Young  at  the 

MR.    UOMZ.  2;;5 

bank  of  Williams,  Deacon  and  Company  in  Birch  in -lane 
who  proved  her  identity  We  then  went  to  the  Bank  of 
England  and  the  sale  was  made  I  did  not  sec  the  cheque 
or  money  for  it  But  the  Plaintiff  directed  the  hrokcrs  to 
lay  it  out  in  the  Mew  Three  per  Cent.  Annuities  which 
was  immediately  done  and  the  brokers  bought  and  sold 
notes  and  the  stock  receipts  were  handed  to  her  and  she 
took  them  away  with  her  On  returning  to  the  office  in 
Tokenhouse  Yard  she  wanted  to  pay  the  broker's  bill  and 
not  having  her  cheque  book  sent  me  to  the  bank  to  buy 
her  one  I  did  so  leaving  her  alone  with  the  brokers  and 
I  have  been  informed  by  them  and  believe  that  she  then 
told  thorn  truly  the  story  of  her  adoption  of  me. 

31.  In  answer  to  the  Plaintiff's  interrogatories  I  say  that 
the  said  Mr.  Hall  was  and  is  a  friend  of  mine  and  save  and 
except  as  hereinbefore  truly  appears  I  deny  that  the  said 
Mr.  Hall  was  accordingly  or  in  fact  sent  for  or  that  any 
other  meeting  at  this  time  than  is  hereinbefore  mentioned 
took  place  between  him  the  Plaintiff  and  myself  And  I 
deny  that  I  or  the  said  Mr.  Hall  or  either  of  us  at  such 
meeting  or  at  any  other  meeting  alleged  or  represented  to 
the  Plaintiff  or  induced  her  to  believe  or  to  the  best  01  my 
knowledge  and  belief  that  she  did  believe  that  the  spirit  of 
her  deceased  husband  required  her  to  produce  her  stock 
receipts  or  any  of  them  or  to  go  to  the  Bank  of  England 
or  to  transfer  stock  equivalent  in  value  to  £24,000  sterling 
or  to  any  other  amount  to  me  or  to  sell  the  same  and  give 
me  the  proceeds  as  a  provision  by  the  Plaintiff  for  me  as 
her  adopted  son  I  deny  that  there  was  any  allegation  or 
representation  then  made  by  me  and  the  said  Mr.  Hall  or 
by  either  of  us  to  the  Plaintiff  And  I  deny  that  the 
Plaintiff  accordingly  or  in  fact  in  the  full  conviction  and 
belief  that  she  was  fulfilling  the  wishes  of  her  deceased 
husband  communicated  to  her  through  the  medium  Oi  me 
or  so  far  as  I  know  tor  any  other  reason  than  is  herein- 
before stated  went  on  or  about  the  10th  October  1866  or 
at  any  other  time  to  the  Bank  of  England  with  me  or  any 

236  ANSWER    OF 

other  pArsons  or  person  and  I  did  not  know  that  she  signed 
a  book  there  but  I  have  since  been  informed  and  believe 
that  it  would  have  been  necessary  for  her  to  do  so  and 
therefore  I  presume  she  did  on  the  occasion  of  the  herein- 
before mentioned  sale  and  purchase  and  under  the  circum- 
stances hereinbefore  stated  and  not  otherwise  I  admit  that 
a  large  sum  of  Bank  £3  per  Cent.  Consolidated  Annuities 
belonging  to  the  Plaintiff  and  representing  in  value  .£24,000 
or  thereabouts  was  sold  and  not  transferred  and  save  and 
except  that  the  proceeds  thereof  were  as  hereinbefore 
stated  invested  for  my  benefit  in  the  purchase  of  £3  per 
Cent.  Reduced  Annuities  and  the  papers  relating  to  the 
same  given  to  the  Plaintiff  I  deny  that  the  proceeds  of 
such  sale  or  of  any  part  thereof  amounting  to  =£24,000 
sterling  or  to  any  other  sum  were  received  by  me  and  I 
make  out  the  contrary  in  manner  aforesaid. 

32.  I  deny  that  the  whole  or  any  part  of  the  said  sum 
of  £24,000  was  obtained  by  me  from  the  Plaintiff  through 
the  alleged  ascendancy  or  power  which  the  Plaintiff  falsely 
alleges  I  had  acquired  over  her  mind  by  the  means  in  the 
said  Bill  mentioned  and  I  make  out  the  contrary  in  man- 
ner herein  appearing. 

33.  I  went  to  Brighton  for  my  health  as  had  been 
previously  arranged   with  the  Plaintiff  on  the  following 
day  namely  the  12th  October  1866  and  1  solemnly  swear 
that  during  the  whole  of  the  day  when  we  went  in  the  cab 
together  as  aforesaid  both  before  and  during  the  comple- 
tion of  the  said  gift  no  mention  was  made  of  spiritualism 
or  of  any  matter  connected  with  it  save  in  the  office  of  the 
said  brokers  when  the  Plaintiff  mentioned  me  to  be  the 
celebrated  Mr.  Home  but  that  I  was  now  to  take  her 
name     I  wrote  to  the  Plaintiff  from  Brighton  and  begged 
she  would  undo  what  she  had  done     She  said  that  she 
would  only  write  to  me  as  Daniel  Dunglass  Home  Lyon 
and  by  so  doing  people  would  see  that  the   celebrated 
Daniel  Dunglass  Home  was  now  in  reality  a  Lyon. 

34.  Much   correspondence  passed  between  us   during 

HE.    HOME.  237 

my  absence  as  I  wrote  every  day  to  her  I  have  not  kept 
copies  of  my  letters  to  her  and  I  saw  them  in  her  posses- 
sion in  the  month  of  March  1867  and  she  has  them  still 
unless  she  has  destroyed  them  They  were  both  affec- 
tionate and  grateful  and  I  told  her  (speaking  relatively) 
that  all  1  had  in  the  world  belonged  to  her  and  that  she 
could  take  back  what  she  had  given  and  I  thanked  God 
and  all  good  angels  for  sending  me  so  kind  a  mother 
There  was  but  little  mention  made  by  either  of  us  of 
spiritualism  and  scarcely  any  allusion  to  her  late  husband 
All  her  letters  to  me  are  addressed  to  "  D.  D.  Home 
Lyon  Esq." 

"35.  On  the  13th  October  1866  she  wrote  and  sent  me 
the  following  letter  addressed  to  Brighton  : — 

"18  Westbourne  Place,  Hyde  Park, 

"Octr.  13/66 

"  My  dear  Son, — T  have  just  received  a  letter  from  you 
this  morning  from  Brighton.  I  like  the  G.  Hotel  tho'  I 
had  never  lived  in  it,  but  have  been  shewn  it  all  over  I 
do  not  know  if  it  is  the  same  manager  he  was  marked 
with  the  small  pox,  but  he  was  most  attentive  to  me  and 
quite  a  gentleman,  also  the  inspectress  a  lady  Miss  Jessie 
Thomas  she  went  up  in  the  lift  with  me  and  shewed  me 
tin'  bedrooms  and  baths,  she  has  left  I  believe  now,  they 
were  the  manager  2  years  ago,  I  was  then  at  Cladding's 
the  silversmith's  -King's  Road  at  Yarmouth  last  year  I 
spent  several  months  Kimberley  Terrace,  Esplanade; 
now,  my  son,  I  must  first  begin  to  get  angry  with  you, 
how  could  you  possibly  take  a  cold  bath,  which  is  I  am 
sure  the  worst  thing  you  could  do  in  your  state,  now  I 
request  you  immediately  to  go  and  consult  a  doctor 
and  have  an  English  prescription  for  me  to  see  I  am 
half  a  doctor  myself  and  am  sure  you  have  inflammation 
of  a  serious  description  let  your  health  be  permanently 
Mtallisked  is  the  first  object  tor  you  to  consider  if  you 
wish  to  add  to  my  comforts,  you  must  excuse  me  if  I  tell 
you  at  our  first  acquaintance  I  rather  felt  a  repugnance 

238  ANSWER    OF 

towards  you  when  you  said  '  Mother  I  shall  so  love  you  ' 
I  said  and  drew  away  from  you,  '  The  less  of  that  the 
better  I  shall  love  your  child/  now  I  am  quite  altered,  I 
feel  so  anxious  on  your  account  and  afraid  you  should  be 
ill  or  anything  should  happen  to  you  that  I  am  sure  it  is 
a  mother's  maternal  love  towards  her  beloved  child  so  now 
if  you  value  my  comfort,  my  dear  son  take  care  of  yourself 
and  attend  to  what  the  doctor  says  and  prescribes  for  you, 
do  not  be  tempted  with  wine  it  is  to  stimulating,  I  shall 
seal  this  letter  with  your  father's  seal  previous  to  his  mar- 
rmge  the  next  after  his  marriage  the  next  with  my  own 
seal  ladies  have  no  motto  or  crests  the  letter  of  your  friend 
I  could  not  well  make  out  and  perhaps  you  cannot  make 
out  mine  I  had  a  bad  day  yesterday  my  cold  was  worse 
to-day  it  is  better  thanks  to  our  Great  God  Your  friend 
knew  a  Jane  Lyon  My  husband's  aunt  Lady  Jane  Lyon 
was  the  sister  of  John  9th  Earl  of  Strathmore  and  aunt  to 
Thomas  the  10th  llth  Earl  of  Strathmore  sister  to  Lady 
Ann  Syman  the  mother  of  Lady  Ravensworth  she  was  a 
dear  good  creature  very  dark  and  shortest  of  the  family 
she  promised  me  an  amber  cabinet  the  notorious  Sir  John 
Dean  Paul  was  her  trustee  and  executor  and  all  her  valu- 
ables disappeared,  her  property  was  divided  amongst  her 
nieces  and  nephews  that  was  secured  on  the  Glamis  and 
Strathmore  Estates  one  of  her  sisters  Lady  Susan  Lyon 
married  General  Lambton  father  of  the  first  Lord  Durham. 
Kow  my  dear  Daniel  I  fear  I  have  tired  you  with  this 
stuff  be  sure  you  attend  to  the  instructions  I  have  given, 
you  respecting  your  health  that  is  the  greatest  consequence 
to  me  I  have  written  to  our  darling  in  answer  to  one  from 
him  and  expect  him  here  to-morrow  if  fine  but  not  to 
come  if  it  rains  to  take  another  opportunity  with  his  friend 
I  have  bought  him  a  pretty  book  suitable  for  his  age  full 
of  pictures  the  lady  you  mentioned  coming  yesterday  never 
came  and  I  was  glad  for  I  was  ill  and  not  quite  well  now 
but  a  great  deal  better  When  you  want  money  you  know 
we  can  coin  it  so  do  not  be  afraid  but  act  cautiously  attend 

MR.    HOME.  239 

to  your  health  and  doctor's  advice  it  is  not  by  acting  for 
the  good  of  an  hotel  that  will  do  you  good — I  must  con- 
clude for  the  post  is  closing, 

"  Your  affectionate  mother, 

"  JANE  LYON." 

"  P.S. — The  post  has  gone  so  I  open  my  letter  to  tell 
you  I  have  read  your  letter  again  and  find  I  have  in  my 
hurry  made  a  mistake  it  is  a  warm  bath  you  have  token 
instead  of  a  cold  bath  and  I  am  so  glad  for  that  will  do 
you  good  Excuse  me  for  being  so  stupid  keep  yourself 
calm  and  know  that  the  great  God  is  working  fur  you. 
"  From  loving  mother, 

"  JANE  LYON." 

I  did  not  at  the  time  understand  her  statement  about 
having  felt  repugnance  to  me  at  first  which  was  entirely 
contrary  to  her  previous  statements  to  me  and  to  others  or 
why  she  should  have  alluded  to  loving  my  child  whom  she 
had  not  yet  seen  but  I  did  not  trouble  myself  about  it. 

36. — On  the  llth  October  she  had  unknown  to  me 
written  and  sent  the  following  letter  to  my  little  boy : — 

"  18,  Westhourne  Place,  ITvcle  Park, 

"llth  October,  1SG6. 

"  My  dear  Sacha, — You  tell  me  your  father  came  to 
you  last  night  and  woke  you  out  of  a  sound  sleep,  did 
you  not  think  that  very  naughty  '  No/  you  say  '  I  was  so 
very  glad  to  see  him  that  I  never  thought  of  sleep  or 
Bedfordshire."  He  comes  my  child  in  joy  to  tell  you 
that  the  great  God  had  found  him  a  mother  who  would 
be  kind  to  him  and  you  his  boy.  You  must  be  good  and 
the  great  God  will  bless  and  love  you  for  ever  God  is  so 
kind  and  loving  to  all  good  people  like  your  father  and  I 
have  heard  you  are  so  good  and  gentle  that  I  am  sure  I 
shall  like  you,  and  if  it  is  a  fine  day  on  Sunday  next  I 
shall  be  glad  to  see  you  but  if  it  rains  I  s^iall  see  you 
with  pleasure  and  your  friend  Mr.  Perdicaris  another 
time  I  hope  your  dear  father  will  receive  benefit  at 

•240  ANSWER    OF 

Brighton  he  is  not  very  well  you  will  pray  for  him  will 
you  not  and  God  will  bless  you. 

"  My  dear  Sacha,  your  affectionate  Grandmother, 

"  JANE  LYON." 

37.— On  the  15th  October  while  I  was  still  at  Brighton 
she  wrote  and  sent  me  the  following  letter : — 

"  18,  Westbourne  Place, 

"  Hyde  Park,  15th  Octr.  /56. 

"  My  dearest  Son, — I  have  just  time  before  the  post 
goes,  to  write  a  few  words,  our  dear  little  Sacha  and  his 
friend  Mr.  Perdicaris  was  here  yesterday,  he  is  a  dear 
boy  I  love  him,  and  kissed  him  many  times,  I  like  your 
friend  very  much  indeed  he  brought  an  umbrella  with  him 
which  a  friend  of  yours  who  last  accompanied  you  to 
Henley  left  behind,  will  you  darling  tell  me  who  is  the 
gentleman  or  his  address  that  it  may  be  sent  to  him.  I 
enclose  you  the  papers  of  your  fund  security  you  will  be 
sure  not  to  lose  it  and  when  you  have  shown  it  to  your 
friend  Dr.  Gully,  some  other  time  when  you  return  I  can 
have  it  to  take  care  of  for  you  I  am  glad  you  are  going 
to  .Malvern  to  your  friend  who  will  care  for  you,  but  how 
will  you  get  oysters  there  they  are  strengthening  and  good 
you  can  take  a  little  barrel  with  you  and  get  strong  and 
well  as  soon  as  you  can  avoid  everything  hurtful  I  think 
the  sea  air  too  strong  for  you  My  cold  is  not  better  but 
progressing.  I  fear  you  cannot  make  this  out  in  such 
haste. 

"  I  am,  my  darling  Son, 

"  Your  affectionate  Mother, 

"  JANE  LYON." 

38.  The  papers  of  my  fund  security  which  the  Plaintiff 
enclosed  as  she  said  in  the  last  letter  were  the  stock 
receipt  and  broker's  note  relating  to  the  transfer  of  stock 
representing  .£24,000  mentioned  in  the  8th  paragraph  of 
her  affidavit  filed  in  this  suit  on  the  27th  June  1867  in 
which  she  swears  that  "  No  account  receipt  or  other  paper 

MR.    HO  ME. 

in  connection  with  the  transaction  was  given  to  her  on 
that  occasion  or  subsequently." 

W.  On  the  16th  October  18G6  the  Plaintiff  wrote  and 
*ent  me  the  following  letter  to  Malvern  where  I  had  gone 
for  my  health  : — 

"  Tuesday  night. 

"  My  dear  Daniel, — I  am  glad  you  feel  better  you  aro 
amongst  your  dear  friends  at  Malvern  that  you  love  so 
well  1  trust  your  health  will  improve  I  sent  a  letter  to 
you  yesterday  which  you  ought  to  have  had  by  1  o'clock 
enclosing  your  security  fund  papers  I  thought  you  would 
like  it  with  you  I  hope  they  will  forward  it  to  you  I 
am  now  quite  annoyed  I  should  have  sent  it  as  I  fear  it 
is  lost,  there  is  two  stamps  on  the  letter  Pray  write  imme- 
diately you  get  and  pray  write  to  the  managers  to  forward 
it  to  you  I  shall  be  quite  uncomfortable  untill  I  hear  you 
have  got  it  you  ought  to  have  had  it  about.  I  have  no 
time  to  say  more. 

"  God  bless  you,  dear  son, 
"  And  believe  me,  your  affectionate  mother, 

"  JANE  LYON." 

40.  On  the  17th  October  18G6  she  wrote  and  sent  me 
the  following  letter:  — 

"18,  Wcstbonrne  Place,  Hyde  Park, 
"  17th  Octr.  /66. 

"  My  dear  Daniel, — I  am  glad  you  got  my  letter  with 
enclosure  I  was  afraid  it  was  entirely  lost  however  all  well 
that  ends  well  present  my  very  kind  love  to  your  dear 
friend  &  Miss  Gully  for  her  very  kind  letter  to  me  with 
their  polite  invitation  to  the  Priory  1  will  with  pleasure 
avail  myself  of  it  another  time  I  have  sent  her  2  photo- 
graphs of  myself  in  lieu  of  three  pivtty  views  she  has  sent 
thanks  for  them  I  have  been  at  Malvern  many  years  ago 
previous  to  my  marriage  with  the  best  of  men  your  spiri- 
tual father  Charles  Lyon  I  went  along  with  my  father 
who  took  me  to  see  England  and  North  Wales  and  Cum- 
berland. 

242  ANSWER    OF 

"  My  dear  Son, — I  am  really  very  much  pleased  to 
hear  you  are  a  little  better  but  it  will  take  time  to  rein- 
state you  in  good  health  I  hope  Dr.  Gully  with  God's 
assistance  will  do  so  in  the  meantime  you  must  not  think 
of  returning  to  London  until  you  are  quite  better  in  2  or 
3  weeks  you  may  be  so  then  drop  me  a  line  to  say  you 
are  but  I  should  not  agree  that  you  should  come  untill  I 
receive  a  note  from  Dr.  Gully  with  his  sanction  and  appro- 
val for  giving  np  the  treatment  you  will  be  subject  to 
under  his  care  He  saved  your  life  5  years  ago  and  I 
think  you  are  in  just  such  a  state  at  death's  door,  there- 
fore do  not  flatter  yourself  before  your  time  comes  for  you 
to  throw  up  your  hat  and  say  thank  God  for  health  and 
wealth  and  a  good  Tcind  doctor  You  do  not  mention  your 
friend's  umbrella,  what  is  his  name,  where  does  he  live, 
and  I  will  send  it  to  him  Dear  little  Sacha  behaved  very 
well  he  was  pleased  with  his  book  I  gave  him  a  guinea 
he  gave  it  to  his  uncle  saying  he  would  lose  it  he  is  very 
fond  of  rowing  a  boat  and  fishing.  I  hope  they  will  soon 
come  to  London  for  I  should  so  like  to  see  the  spiritual 
painting,  how  very  wonderful.  With  kind  love  to  your- 
self and  all  your  dear  kind  friends  in  haste. 

"  My  dear  Daniel,  your  affectionate  mother, 

"  JANE  LYOW." 

She  here  alludes  to  what  I  had  said  that  her  husband 
would  be  my  spiritual  father  as  she  was  my  mother  The 
person  mentioned  as  the  uncle  of  my  boy  is  not  his  uncle 
but  a  friend  We  are  rather  in  the  habit  of  calling  our 
friends  relatives  as  an  affectionate  mode  of  expression. 

41.  I  had  been  desirous  she  should  leave  London  with 
me  but  she  refused  Dr.  Gully  desired  me  to  ask  her  to 
visit  him  and  his  sister  wrote  as  well  as  myself  requesting 
it.      She  refused  to  come  then  so  little  was  my  influence 
over  her  even  at  this  time. 

42.  In  this  letter  she  speaks  of  me  as  "  at  death's 
door  "  and  in  another  letter  written  to  me  on  the  24th 
October  she  fears  I  am  on  the  edge  of  a  precipice  and  the 

ME.    HOME.  213 

least  pitch  will  send  me  headlong-     I  was  indeed  and  had 
been  for  some  time  very  ill. 

43.  About  the  middle  or  end  of  October  1866  I  was 
having  a  miniature  of  her  late  husband  taken  from  a  pho- 
tograph  she  had  given   me  painted  by  Mr.  Eglcy  as  a 
sin-prise  for  her    I  had  it  beautifully  mounted  as  a  brooch 
set   in  diamonds  of  mine  of  great  value  and  afterwards 
gave   it  to  her     I  wrote  to  her  to  ask  the  colour  of  the 
late  Mr.  Lyon's   eyes  to  which  she  replied  in  a  letter 
wrongly  dated  the  9th  October     In  that  letter  she  speaks 
of  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall  whom  she  now  calumniates  in  her  said 
affidavit   "  The    kind    friends    the    Halls    are   going   to 
Brighton  to-morrow  "     And  she  says  to  me  "  If  you  are 
well  enough  to  come  up  the  same  time  and  not  by  any 
means  before  I  shall  be  most  glad  now  recollect  not  be- 
fore if  you  do  my  dear  son  I  will  not  see  you  "  and  she 
gives  me  medical  advice. 

44.  On  Thursday  the  18th  October  1866  I  came  to 
see  Mrs.  Lyon  hoping  to  induce  her  to  return  to  Malvcrn 
with  me  but  I  could  not  persuade  her  to  do  so. 

45.  On  the  19th  October  1866  she  wrote  and  sent  me 
the  following  letter  to  Malvern  : — 

"  18,  West  bourne  Place,  ITycle  Park, 

"  Friday  morning,  October,  1866. 

"  My  dear  Son, — I  hope  you  got  safe  to  the  priory 
without  catching  any  cold  so  miserable  a  night  it  was  I 
was  so  very  vexed  at  myself  for  giving  you  your  father's 
empty  purse  I  should  have  put  some  money  in  it  but 
you  were  in  such  a  hurry  It  quite  escaped  my  memory 
although  I  intended  to  have  offered  you  some  before  you 
left  Now  let  me  know  how  I  can  send  you  some  a  check 
is  of  no  use  but  I  could  send  a  post  office  order  you  must 
cHtjt'ire  at  the  post  office  and  let  me  know  the  particulars 
what  I  am  to  do  and  the  sum  you  want  I  hope  you 
found  dear  little  Sacha  well  Did  he  get  his  little  book  ? 
Did  you  see  the  spiritual  paintiny  ?  Please  to  tell  Dr. 
Gully  with  my  respects  that  I  am  £  a  doctor  and  felt  your 

244  ANSWER    OF 

pulse  and  found  it  very  wiry  and  hard  which  proves  to  me 
that  there  is  some  serious  inflammation  somewhere  ahout 
you  that  must  be  cured  or  otherwise  all  your  baths  will  be 
of  no  avail  I  am  certain  in  your  present  state  all  stimu- 
lants are  poison  though  given  and  taken  with  the  best 
motives  but  we  must  not  kill  with  kindness  which  is  often 
done  with  those  we  best  love  and  best  love  us  Will  the 
baths  you  take  cure  inflammation  without  any  other  mode  ? 
I  fear  not  without  internal  means  however  I  trust  all  will 
be  well  Pray  let  me  know  the  postage  rules  for  Malvern, 
viz.  what  time  letters  should  be  posted  here  for  Malvern. 
"  I  am  with  every  kind  wish  for  your  health  and  comfort, 
'•  Your  affectionate  mother, 

"  JANE  LYON." 

N"ot  only  did  she  urge  this  purse  on  my  acceptance  but 
also  the  watch  of  her  husband  though  I  had  my  own 
watch  and  told  her  I  had  no  less  than  two  others  She  so 
urged  the  acceptance  of  it  that  I  took  it  She  said  she 
wished  me  to  have  something  with  the  family  crest  on  it 
The  watch  was  out  of  repair  and  in  December  I  had  it 
repaired  Two  days  after  it  was  repaired  Mrs.  !Lyon  asked 
me  to  return  it  to  her  I  did  so  with  all  the  pleasure 
imaginable  for  I  had  never  wished  to  have  it. 

46.  From  her  urgent  way  of  forcing  things  on  me  this 
being  only  the  seventh  or  eighth  time  I  had  seen  her  in 
my  life  my  estimate  of  her  character  was  that  if  I  did  not 
accept  I  should  give  offence     As  she  again  alluded  to 
money  I  wrote  and  asked  her  for  twenty  pounds  though  I 
did  not  require  it  for  I  still  had  a  greater  part  of  the  fifty 
pounds  she  had  given  me  on  the  7th  October    In  the  8th 
paragraph  of  her  said  affidavit  she  suppresses  all  mention 
of  her  having  pressed  me  to  accept  money  as  appears  by 
the  lastly-stated  letter  and  says  only  "  I  sent  to  him  in 
accordance  with  his  request  on  or  about  the  28th  October 
last  a  cheque  for  £20  for  his  own  use." 

47.  In  a  letter  which  she  wrote  and  sent  to  me  on  the 
21st  October  1866  addressed  to  Malvern  where  I  was 

ME.    HOME.  245 

staying  after  giving  me  much  medical  advice  and  wishing 
to  get  rid  of  the  inflammation  that  she  says  is  consuming 
me  she  says  "  There  is  a  great  work  for  you  to  do  I 
am  gifted  with  a  knowledge  you  have  not  I  wish  you  to 
be  a  living  worker  not  a  dead  one  "  Hundreds  of  times 
has  she  said  these  words  to  me  "  I  am  gifted  with  a  know- 
ledge you  have  not "  and  would  then  make  me  write  her 
ideas  or  impressions  In  the  same  letter  she  also  says 
"  Dr.  Hawksley  called  but  I  did  not  see  him  Mr.  Hall 
said  he  wished  I  had  but  he  did  not  cure  jour  wife.  He 
would  not  cure  you  "  In  the  9th  paragraph  of  her  affi- 
davit filed  in  this  suit  the  Plaintiff  swears  that  at  some 
period  subsequent  to  the  9th  November  1866  she  found 
out  that  the  said  Dr.  Hawksley  was  an  intimate  friend  of 
mine  but  of  whom  she  knew  nothing  I  had  told  her  that 
he  was  my  medical  adviser  and  friend  and  that  he  as  well 
as  my  other  friends  would  call  upon  her  in  my  absence 
and  introduce  themselves  to  her  as  she  particularly  desired 
And  as  they  in  fact  did  The  said  Dr.  Hawksley  is  one 
of  the  leading  physicians  and  is  on  the  staff  of  the  Mar- 
garet Street  Hospital  for  consumption. 

48.  She  wrote  and  sent  to  me  on  the  24th  October 
1866  the  following  undated  letter  addressed  to  Malvern : — 

"  18,  Westbourne  Place,  Hyde  Park,  London, 

«« October. 

"  My  dear  Daniel, — You  say  do  not  worry  about  my 
health  I  cannot  help  it  God  has  given  me  a  son  and  I 
much  fear  he  is  on  the  edge  of  a  precipice  the  least  pitch 
will  send  him  headlong  You  say  to  me  you  are  better  to 
Mr.  Hall  not  so  well  which  shall  I  believe  I  am  anxious 
to  think  the  best  I  like  you  to  sleep  your  nature  requires 
rest  it  is  almost  worn  out  by  anxious  thoughtful  care  I 
well  know  my  dear  boy  what  you  must  have  suffered  which 
has  added  tenfold  to  your  malady  now  you  have  the 
brightest  of  prospects  before  you  repelling  those  of  dark- 
ness look  forward  with  joy  to  the  bright  union  of  glory 
resplendent  with  happiness  God  your  Father  I  trust  will 

246  AN S WEE    OF 

assist  YOU  and  impart  a  healthy  influence  over  your  frame 
and  enable  you  to  throw  off  the  seeds  of  sickness  and 
disease  which  has  so  long  had  dominion  over  you  Do. 
not  think  of  returning  until  you  are  better  the  air  will  be 
good  for  you  rest  and  kind  friends  I  trust  will  reinstate 
you  My  cold  is  much  better  thank  you  Lemon  juice 
and  sugar  is  good  for  me  also  for  you  it  will  not  turn  acid 
on  the  stomach  but  act  as  a  stimulant  I  have  written  you 
a  long  letter  to  little  purpose  and  heartily  tired  I  conclude 
with  my  best  wishes  for  your  health  and  happiness  and  am, 
"  My  dear  Son,  your  affectionate  mother, 

"  JANE  LYON." 

And  again  on  the  28th  October  1866  she  wrote  and  sent 
to  me  the  following  letter : — 

"  18,  TTestbo-rne  Place,  Hyde  Park, 
"28th  October,  1866. 

"  My  dear  Daniel, — I  herewith  enclose  you  a  cheque 
for  Twenty  pounds  the  sum  required  by  you  You  say 
you  feel  so  much  better  that  you  are  almost  sure  the 
Doctor  will  let  you  come  to  London  on  Thursday  Now 
I  beg  you  will  not  come  unless  the  Dr.  considers  you 
strong  enough  and  not  likely  to  get  any  better  by  re- 
maining longer  where  you  are  Does  he  think  if  you  were 
to  go  to  Torbay  or  Torquay  it  would  be  more  beneficial 
You  believe  you  are  consumptive  and  all  here  think  the 
same  What  does  the  Dr.  say  is  your  complaint  and  what 
the  cure  The  painting  is  over  and  smell  also  I  shall  be 
glad  to  see  Miss  Ellen  Gully  when  in  Town  or  any  friend 
of  yours  and  yourself  when  well  which  I  trust  in  the  great 
God  will  soon  be  is  the  sincere  wish  of  your  Mother  Jane 
Lyon  Now  dear  Daniel  do  not  come  on  Thursday  if  you 
are  not  well  enough  and  the  Doctor  does  not  approve  of 
it.  You  will  be  sure  to  let  me  know  what  he  says. 

"  J.  LYON. 

**  D.  D.  Home  Lyon,  Esq., 
"  Priory,  Malvern." 

49.  Again  in  a  letter  dated  the  29th  October  1866 

MR.    HOME.  217 

which  she  wrote  and  sent  to  my  little  boy  to  whom  she 
liad  given  a  story  book  with  pictures  in  it  she  hopes  he 
will  learn  to  be  clever  and  good  and  grow  to  be  a  great 
and  good  man  that  is  what  his  father  requires  him  to  be 
and  so  does  his  grandmother  and  yet  notwithstanding  the 
expressions  in  these  letters  the  Plaintiff  in  the  18th  para- 
graph of  her  said  affidavit  swears  that  apart  from  my  sup- 
posed power  of  putting  her  said  late  husband's  spirit  into 
communication  with  her  she  had  no  affection  or  even 
respect  for  me  Again  in  the  9th  paragraph  of  her  affi- 
davit filed  on  the  18th  July  1867  she  repeats  that  she  did 
not  care  at  all  for  me  personally  and  that  I  was  nothing 
to  her. 

50.  In  another  letter  which  she  wrote  and  sent  to  me 
about  this  time  she  said  she  would  have  loved  me  just  as 
much  if  I  had  not  been  a  medium  and  that  she  was  only 
too  thankful  to  have  done  for  me  as  she  did  having  made 
two  people  happy  one  of  the  two  being  herself  This  letter 
I  fully  believe  she  has  also  abstracted  from  amongst  my 
papers  which  she  frequently  examined  during  my  absence 
but  I  have  the  envelope  still. 

51.  I   returned   from  Malvcrn  the  1st  of  November 
1866  and  found  the  Plaintiff  most  delighted  to  see  me 
She  told  me  that  I  must  at  once  attend  to  having  my 
change  of  name  made  a  "  legal  job  "  for  the  family  were 
up  in  arms  and  had  been  sending  her  all  the  newspaper 
notices  of  her  having  given  me  money     She  shewed  me  a 
letter  which  she  had  had  from  Mrs.  Clutterbuck  enclosing 
a  notice  from  the  "  Athenaeum  Newspaper  "  where  it  was 
said  the  sum  given  was  ten  thousand  pounds  and  she 
wished  me  to  write  to  the  editor  and  rectify  the  mistake 
and  to  say  that  it  was  twenty-four  "  And  would  soon  be 
fifty  thousand"  again  alleging  that  this  would  spite  tho 
family  and  increase  my  celebrity     On  both  grounds  I  re- 
fused    At  this  very  moment  the  servant  announced  the 
arrival  of  two  of  my  friends  and  I  went  to  the  door  to 
meet  them    She  told  me  she  had  beeu  thinking  a  deed  of 

248  ANSWER    OF 

gift  necessary  and  that  when  I  publicly  took  her  name  she 
would  make  one  out  I  am  so  little  of  a  business  man 
that  I  did  not  know  what  she  meant  I  told  her  there  was 
time  enough  about  the  name  At  six  o'clock  my  friend 
Mr.  Ruclall  came  and  after  spending  the  evening  went 
away  with  me  This  is  the  gentleman  of  whom  the 
Plaintiff  in  the  9th  paragraph  of  her  said  affidavit  filed  on 
the  27th  June  1867  swears  that  she  found  out  at  some 
period  subsequent  to  the  9th  November  1866  he  was  an 
intimate  friend  of  mine  but  of  whom  she  knew  nothing 
There  were  no  spiritual  manifestations  whatever  but  upon 
this  occasion  she  brought  out  a  roll  of  papers  and  laugh- 
ingly shewed  them  to  me  saying  she  either  had  shown  or 
would  shew  them  to  people  as  real  communications  and 
she  thought  them  so  good  that  she  wished  me  to  write 
them  in  a  book  for  her  in  form  of  a  dialogue  purporting 
to  be  from  her  husband  to  herself  I  told  her  I  could  only 
treat  them  as  fictions  In  fact  they  had  little  meaning  in 
them. 

52.  She  made  me  take  the  papers  with  me  to  my  rooms 
that  I  might  copy  them  there  and  shew  them  to  my  friends 
She  also  called  my  attention  to  the  fact  that  there  was  a 
certain  similarity  in    our  hand-writing  which  in  pencil 
writing  is  perhaps  slightly  the  case      I  took  the  papers 
with  me     I  never  destroyed  any  papers  relating  to  any 
business  transactions  with  the  Plaintiff  or  any  real  or  sup- 
posed spiritual  communications  as  she  untruly  states  in 
her  said  affidavit. 

53.  On  1st  November,  1866,  she  wrote  and  sent  me 
the  following  letter : — 

"  1st  Novr.,  /66. 

"  My  dear  Daniel, — Can  you  contrive  to  bring  me 
your  receipts  to  look  at  I  fancy  there  is  a  mistake  in  your 
funds  papers  you  know  the  sum  in  my  papers  was  £28,000 
and  in  your  fund  papers  they  only  make  .£27,566  8s.  3d. 
I  wish  you  had  had  consols  like  what  my  husband  your 
father  and  myself  always  had  I  do  not  like  annuitys  I  wish 

MR.    HO  ME.  219 

my  Bankers  had  done  the  business  the  same  as  mine  bring 
thr  papers  with  you  to  copy  I  have  got  a  book  Take  a 
nice  mutton  chop  for  breakfast  Do  you  like  chocolate  [ 
think  it  is  more  nutritious  than  tea  for  you  I  hope  \<>u 
went  to  bod  soon  but  I  fear  you  did  not  as  you  had  your 
friend  And  I  am  my  dear  Daniel, 

"  Your  affectionate  mother, 

"  JANE  LYON." 

The  above  letter  illustrates  her  rapid  changes  of  mind. 

54.  I   had  on  returning  from  Malvern   given  to  the 
Plaintiff  the  fund  papers  and  kept  the  broker's  note  she 
had  sent  me  I  did  so  because  in  her  letter  she  had  said 
"  You  will  give  them  to  me  to  take  care  of  for  you"  on 
going  to  see  her  on  the  2nd  I  took  the  paper  as  desired 
and  she  told  me  she  did  not  like  "annuities"  I  did  not 
know  to  what  she  alluded  and  she  pointed  out  on  the 
heading  of  the  paper  £3  per  Cent.  Annuities     As  she 
always  kept  my  papers  with  her  own  I  cast  by  chance  my 
eyes  on  one  of  her  papers  and  drew  her  attention  to  the 
fact  that  annuities  were  also  written  thereon     She  read  it 
but  still  she  would  not  acknowledge  she  could  be  in  the 
wrong  and  so  told  me  I  must  put  mine  in  the  same  funds 
as  hers  were     She  made  me  there  and  then  write  to  the 
brokers  to  sell  out   at  once  and  make  the  change  into 
consols  no  delay  allowed     The  following  letter  which  she 
wrote  and  sent  to  me  on  the  2nd  November  1866  will  show 
the  haste  and  determination  of  her  character      She  does 
not  even  wish  to  see  me  unless  all  is  as  she  wishes : — 

«2ndNorr. 

"  My  dear  Daniel, — Do  not  dear  come  over  to-night 
unless  you  have  got  the  funds  settled  Come  to-morrow 
about  12  or  1  o'clock. 

"  Your  affectionate  mother, 

"  JANE  LYON." 

55.  The  Plaintiff  in  the  8th  paragraph  of  the  said 
affidavit  filed  on  the  27th  June  1867  alludes  to  this  trans- 

250  ANSWER    OF 

action  thus  "The  said  Defendant  on  or  about  the  5th 
Novr.  18G6  as  appears  by  a  stock  receipt  (left  by  him 
accidentally  as  I  believe  in  my  possession)  invested 
£23,913  17s.  3d.  cash  being  as  I  verily  believe  part  of 
the  aforesaid  sum  of  £24,000  so  acquired  by  him  as 
aforesaid  in  the  purchase  in  his  own  name  of  the  sum  of 
£26,750  155.  5d.  Consolidated  Bank  Annuities"  The 
Plaintiff  told  me  and  I  believe  that  another  reason  for  her 
wishing  this  change  was  that  the  dividends  might  be  pay- 
able on  the  same  days  as  hers  were  Under  the  circum- 
stances hereinbefore  appearing  and  at  the  Plaintiff's 
request  and  not  otherwise  I  did  on  or  about  the  5th  No- 
vember 1866  invest  the  sum  of  £23,913  17s.  3d.  as  far 
as  I  can  remember  but  the  Plaintiff  had  the  papers  con- 
nected with  the  transaction  aforesaid  delivered  to  her  im- 
mediately after  it  and  has  retained  them  ever  since  I 
never  having  seen  them  subsequently  such  sum  being  the 
whole  of  the  purchase  money  arising  from  the  sale  of  the 
Reduced  Annuities  aforesaid  in  which  the  said  sum  of 
£24,000  had  been  invested  But  I  deny  that  such  sum 
or  any  part  thereof  was  obtained  from  the  Plaintiff  as  in 
the  said  Bill  mentioned  Such  new  investment  was  in  my 
own  name  and  was  in  the  sum  of  £26,756  15s.  5d.  £3 
per  Cent.  Consolidated  Bank  Annuities  I  do  not  know 
to  what  she  alluded  in  the  last  letter  but  one  in  saying  I 
wish  my  bankers  had  done  the  business  for  it  was  her  own 
wish  they  should  not  and  she  did  not  even  like  the  thought 
of  having  to  go  to  be  identified  by  them  "  till  the  job  was 
done"  She  had  not  informed  her  banker  Mr.  Goode  of 
Bridport  and  there  was  a  good  deal  of  difficulty  when  her 
dividends  were  due  and  Mr.  Goode  wrote  to  her  saying  he 
hoped  she  would  inform  him  when  she  made  any  change 
in  relation  to  her  funds  and  that  he  would  transact  even 
for  nothing  the  business  for  her  rather  than  get  into  con- 
fusion in  his  accounts  with  her  affairs  The  papers  she 
alludes  to  are  the  communications  she  pretended  she  had 
received  I  took  them  to  her  and  copied  them  in  her  pre- 

MR.    1IOME.  251 

sence  in  the  book  she  had  which  T  have  before  mentioned 
as  containing  the  history  of  my  adoption  Slie  read  it 
and  liked  it  and  said  it  read  so  well  particularly  the  part 
she  had  made  up  that  it  must  he  printed  some  day. 

56.  The  Plaintiff  now  came  almost  daily  to  my  rooms 
and  I  dined  or  breakfasted  with  her  frequently     I  was 
most  wonderfully  disappointed   in  her  general  character 
1  found  a  most  fearful  want  of  truth  combined  with  a  re- 
vengeful spirit  and  before  I  had  known  her  a  week  I  re- 
gretted having  accepted  her  gift     It  was  this  alone  which 
prevented  me  from  taking  publicly  her  name  which  sho 
now  daily  urged  me  to  do  but  she  had  changed  her  mind 
as  to  what  it  was  to  be  and  resolved  that  it  was  to  be 
Daniel  Lyon     To  this   I  objected   in  the  most  decided 
manner  and  told  her  it  would  look  as  if  I  were  ashamed  of 
my  own  name    She  said  "  Oh  very  well  just  as  you  please 
but  the  day  will  come  when  I  shall  have  my  say  about  it" 
She  was  as  resolute  in  this  as  in  everything  she  desired 
and  I  had  so  little  influence  over  her  that  I  even  had  to 
ask  my  friends  to  intercede  with  her  for  me  on  the  poijit 
which  they  accordingly  did  as  I  shall  prove     At  that  time 
there  were  no  spiritual  communications  given  regarding 
any  change  of  name  or  any  business  and  indeed  we  but 
rarely  had  any  spiritual  manifestations  certainly  not  more 
than  two  or  three  times  when  we  were  alone  together 
The  witnesses  who  were  present  on  the  other  occasions  will 
prove  that  if  there  was  any  fraud  whatever  practised  it  was 
the  Plaintiff  alone  who  practised  it     I  do  not  allege  that 
on  any  occasion  a  manifestation  of  the  spirit  of  the  Plain- 
tiff's deceased  husband  took  place  or  that  his  or  any  spirit 
was  placed  in  communication  with  the  Plaintiff  I  make  no 
allegation  on  the  subject  and  I  am  willing  to  give  the 
Plaintiff  to  the  best  of  my  power  the  names  descriptions 
and  addresses  of  all  and  every  persons  and  person  present 
at  any  interview  between  the  Plaintiff  and  myself  if  she 
will  specify  the  occasion. 

57.  She  used  to  say  she  had  visions  and  extraordinary 

252  ANSWER    OF 

manifestations  and  I  used  to  credit  her  With  all  her 
peculiarities  she  was  sometimes  so  kind  and  thoughtful  to 
me  personally  and  expressed  such  regret  occasionally  for 
her  temper  that  I  at  last  decided  I  would  sacrifice  my  life 
to  her  and  what  finally  decided  my  so  doing  was  the 
interest  she  took  in  my  family  She  arranged  the  sums  I 
was  to  allow  them  yearly  including  my  sister  who  had  been 
living  under  the  gracious  protection  of  the  Empress  of  the 
French  for  the  last  nine  years  About  a  week  after  I  had 
written  to  my  family  at  her  request  she  suggested  I  should 
not  give  quite  so  much  although  in  fact  it  was  my  own 
property  I  was  thus  disposing  of  no  part  of  the  allowance 
being  to  come  from  her. 

58.  About  a  week  after  my  return  from  Malvern  and  I 
think  on  the  8th  November  1866  the  Plaintiff  said  to  me 
"  Who  is  your  legal  man?"    I  told  her  as  the  fact  was 
that  I  had  no  legal  man  as  I  had  no  law  business  to 
transact  and  that  the  only  legal  man  I  knew  well  was  Mr. 
William  Martin  Wilkinson     She  asked  me  if  he  was  an 
honest  man  and  I  told  her  truly  that  I  had  never  heard 
any  one  question  his  honesty       She  asked  me  for  his 
address  and  I  gave  it  her. 

59.  She  then  asked  me  the  address  of  my  friend  who 
had  been  introduced  to  her  by  me  the  day  I  returned  from 
Malvern  namely  the  1st  November  and  I  gave  her  the 
address  of  Mr.  Rudall     She  wrote  these  addresses  down 
on  a  slip  of  paper  and  took  them  to  a  side  table  and  taking 
up  a  card  came  back  and  wrote  on  the  same  bit  of  paper 
what  was  on  the  card  I  asked  why  she  was  copying  a  card 
and  she  said  "  This  is  the  address  of  your  friend  Dr. 
Hawksley  and  I  am  going  to  transact  some  important 
business  and  I  want  the  three  addresses  handy  when  I 
write  I  want  most  particularly  a  medical  man  for  I  wish 
in  case  of  necessity  he  should  be  able  to  swear  to  not  only 
my  sanity  but  general  business  habits  and  clear  judgment 
and  memory"    She  then  asked  me  the  names  of  my  father 
and  mother  I  gave  her  all  then  and  as  I  was  leaving  her 

MR.    HOME.  253 

that  evening  she  said  "  Now  to-morrow  I  am  going  to  bo 
very  much  occupied  in  the  morning  so  do  not  come  to  see 
me  She  said  I  think  to-morrow  is  the  i'th  you  had  lirtti-r 
go  and  see  the  Lord  Mayor's  Show  and  tell  me  all  about 
it  any  way  do  not  come  here  till  the  evening."  I  did  not 
then  know  for  what  purpose  she  had  asked  these  names 
and  addresses  nor  had  any  spiritual  communication  been 
given  nor  had  I  sought  to  influence  her  in  any  way. 

60.  On  the  morning  of  the  9th  I  went  to  Dr.  Hawks- 
ley  and  he  found  it  necessary  to  have  me  submit  to  an 
operation  of  no  great  importance  but  causing  inconvenience 
and  pain  I  did  not  to  the  best  of  my  belief  mention  to 
him  that  he  would  hear  from  Mrs.  Lyon  but  on  Monday 
the  12th  when  I  had  to  see  him  again  professionally  he 
mentioned   having    heard  from    her.       On  leaving   Dr. 
Hawksley  on  the  9th  though  I  was  in  pain  yet  as  I  had 
promised  the  Plaintiff  to  tell  her  about  the  Show  I  went 
to  Charing  Cross  but  was  so  faint  and  ill  I  could  not  stay 
so  I  went  to  Mr.  Wilkinson's  office  and  gave  orders  my 
old  Will  should  be  destroyed. 

61.  Mr.  Wilkinson  did  not  mention  having  heard  from 
Mrs.  Lyon  I  did  not  tell  him  she  was  about  to  make  a 
Will  I   could  not  have  done  so  for  I  did  not  know  it 
myself.     I  did  not  on  that  or  any  other  occasion  give  any 
instructions    whatever   to    the    said    Defendant    William 
Martin  Wilkinson  concerning  the  Plaintiff  or  her  business 
or  even  allude  to  it     In  fact  I  knew  nothing  about  it  as 
she  always  kept  her  business  matters  secret  from  me  and 
even  derided  my  ignorance  of  business     He  never  told 
me  nor  did   I  suggest  to  him  on  that  or  on  any  other 
occasion  that  he  should  ask  her  certain  questions  or  that 
she  must  be  prepared  to  answer  nor  did  I  then  or  at  any 
time  say  so  to  the  Plaintiff  or  say  that  Mr.  Wilkinson's 
letters  to  her  would   be  written   cautiously  or  anything 
whatever  about  his  letters  to  her  or  hers  to  him     The 
Plaintiff's  allegation  to  that  effect  in  the  ninth  paragraph 
of  her  said  affidavit  is  like  the  rest  of  it  infamously  false 
as  will  be  proved. 

254  ANSWER    OF 

62.  The  Plaintiff  was  exceedingly  pleased  with  Mr. 
Wilkinson  and  said  he  had  put  her  so  much  on  her  guard 
that  one  would  think  he  was  more  her  friend  than  mine 
I  crave  leave  to  refer  to  the  whole  of  the  Answer  of  the 
Defendant  Wilkinson  filed  in  this  cause  filed  on  the  20th 
July  1867. 

63.  The  only  thing  I  have  any  remembrance  of  ever 
hearing  Mr.  Wilkinson  say  to  me  on  the  subject  was  that 
it  was  a  pity  the  Plaintiff  would  not  do  something  for  her 
husband's  family  or  be  more  generous  to  public  charities 
not  showering  all  her  munificence  on  me  and  to  this  I 
have  replied  as  I  have  to  all  my  friends  that  I  had  no 
influence  to  stop  her  in  anything  she  undertook  and  that 
I  myself  intended  as  I  in  fact  did  in  case  her  property  came 
to  me  to  share  it  with  her  husband's  relatives  for  I  ever 
thought  and  said  both  to  her  and  to  others  that  it  was  most 
unjust  that  a  part  of  the  property  at  least  should  not  go 
back  to  where  it  came  from  though  I  felt  and  said  that  I 
had  as  good  a  right  to  it  as  the  comparative  strangers  to 
whom  she  had  left  it  in  some  of  her  Wills. 

64.  On  the  evening  of  the  9th  November  1866  I  saw 
her  for  a  very  short  time  I  remember  it  because  she  gave 
me  on  going  in  a  fruit  of  prickly  pear  saying  however 
that  it  was  very  dear  sixpence  I  think.     She  told  me  she 
had  written  some  most  important  letters  concerning  myself 
but  that  she  must  not  tell  me  the  contents  I  was  in  great 
pain  and  left  very  early  that  evening     The  accusation 
that  I  dictated  to  her  the  instructions  for  a  Will  'as  she 
alleges  in  her  said  affidavit  or  the  letters  of  invitation  to 
these  gentlemen  is  wholly  without  a  shadow  of  truth     I 
was  not  in  the  house  when  the  letters  were  written  nor  did 
I  know  their  contents  till  this  suit  was  begun  nor  was  any 
spiritual  communication  whatever  given  on  the  subject  nor 
did  I  seek  to  influence  her  in  any  way  whatever  nor  had  I 
any  power  over  her. 

65.  I    never   dictated  or  wrote  or   gave    instructions 
for  or  suggested  to  her  in  any  way  whatever  any  one  of 

Mil.    IIOME.  255 

the  business  letters  written  by  her  to  the  Defendant 
"Wilkinson  set  forth  in  his  Answer  and  to  which  I  crave 
leave  to  ivi'cr  nor  did  I  know  the  contents  of  any  one  of 
them  until  after  this  suit  was  commenced  1  am  not  a  man  of 
business  knowledge  as  my  friends  will  prove  and  I  do  n.»t 
believe  I  could  have  written  such  letters  had  I  wished  to 
do  so  In  fact  I  do  not  understand  the  meaning  of  some 
of  them. 

66.  The  Will  itself  which  is  set  forth  in  the  3rd  para- 
graph of  the  Defendant  Wilkinson's  Answer  and  to  which 
I  crave  leave  to  refer  bears  internal  evidence  that  I  did 
not  dictate  it  as  the  Plaintiff  untruthfully  swears  In  the 
first  place  she  is  determined  to  make  me  drop  the  name  of 
Home  which  I  had  always  objected  to  do  and  in  the  next 
p!a<v  I  knew  she  had  no  right  to  armorial  bearings  with- 
out a  bar  sinister. 

87.  Save  and  except  as  hereinbefore  appears  the  Plain- 
tiff did  not  to  the  best  of  my  remembrance  and  belief 
shortly  after  the  said  sum  of  £24,000  was  given  to  me  by 
her  in  manner  aforesaid  for  I  deny  that  it  had  been  ob- 
tained by  me  from  the  Plaintiff  by  the  means  or  under  the 
circumstances  in  her  Bill  alleged  in  fact  have  another 
meeting  or  interview  with  me  I  deny  that  I  did  at  such 
meeting  or  interview  allege  or  represent  to  the  Plaintiff  or 
induce  her  to  believe  or  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge  and 
belief  that  she  did  believe  that  she  was  required  by  the 
spirit  of  her  deceased  husband  to  destroy  the  Will  she  had 
then  made  or  to  make  another  Will  in  favour  of  me  or 
that  I  then  made  any  allegation  or  representation  to  the 
Plaintiff  on  the  subject  or  that  I  represented  to  the 
Plaintiff  or  induced  her  to  believe  or  that  she  did  as  far  as 
I  know  believe  that  the  spirit  of  her  said  husband  dictated 
the  terms  of  such  new  Will  under  which  I  was  to  b«-  the 
universal  legatee  of  all  the  Plaintiff's  property  or  that  Dr. 
Ilawksley  and  Mr.  Rudall  or  either  of  them  (in  the  said 
Hill  respectively  named)  were  to  be  sent  for  to  attest  the 
execution  of  such  new  Will  or  that  the  spirit  of  the  Plaintiff's 

256  ANSWER    OF 

said  late  husband  dictated  the  terms  of  the  letters  to  be 
written  to  the  said  Dr.  Hawksley  and  Mr.  Rudall  or  either  of 
them  asking  them  to  attest  the  said  Will  or  that  I  made  any 
allegations  or  representations  then  to  the  Plaintiff  on  the 
subject  The  said  Dr.  Hawksley  and  Mr.  Rudall  were  and 
are  friends  of  mine  I  deny  that  a  Will  purporting  to  be 
the  Will  of  the  Plaintiff  was  accordingly  or  in  fact  prepared 
by  or  for  me  The  Plaintiff  did  as  she  afterwards  informed 
me  cause  a  Will  to  be  prepared  by  the  Defendant  Wilkin- 
son without  any  knowledge  or  suggestion  of  mine  under 
which  but  not  under  such  a  Will  as  is  referred  to  in  the 
Plaintiff's  Interrogatories  as  having  been  prepared  for  me 
I  was  named  as  the  universal  legatee  of  all  the  Plaintiff's 
property  and  such  Will  as  I  have  alleged  was  as  she  after- 
wards informed  me  executed  by  the  Plaintiff  on  or  about 
the  12th  of  November  1866  in  the  presence  of  and 
attested  by  the  said  Dr.  Thomas  Hawksley  of  70  Brook 
Street  Hanover  Square  an  eminent  physician  Mr.  Henry 
Alexander  Rudall  of  8  and  9  Great  Tower  Street  London 
a  merchant  of  good  standing  and  the  Defendant  William 
Martin  Wilkinson  all  three  being  as  I  fully  believe  men  of 
irreproachable  character  I  deny  that  the  said  Will  was  in 
fact  executed  by  the  Plaintiff  at  my  instigation  suggestion 
or  desire  or  was  so  executed  while  as  the  Plaintiff  now  pre- 
tends she  was  under  the  influence  of  the  ascendancy  and 
power  which  she  alleges  I  had  acquired  over  her  mind  by 
the  means  and  under  the  circumstances  in  her  said  Bill 
stated  and  I  shall  make  out  the  contrary  by  proving  that 
I  never  had  any  such  influence  ascendancy  or  power  over 
her. 

68.  I  had  told  her  that  my  presence  might  be  required 
in  Russia  relative  to  my  law  suit.  This  and  the  idea  that 
I  should  ever  marry  again  were  now  the  two  reigning  ones 
in  her  mind  for  she  used  to  say  "  you  would  neglect  the 
old  woman  for  the  young  one  "  Then  she  used  to  talk  to 
me  and  to  my  friends  about  our  future  arrangements  The 
house  was  to  be  taken  in  my  name  and  I  was  to  pay  the 

MR.    HOME.  257 

rent  out  of  my  income  We  were  to  have  two  carriages  I 
was  to  keep  my  own  servant  we  were  to  have  a  house  at 
the  sea-side  she  was  to  pay  for  the  servants  One  of  the 
Carriages  was  to  be  a  landau  and  for  her  sole  use  The 
sea-side  house  was  where  we  were  to  go  with  some  literary 
friends  or  some  persons  of  note  to  enjoy  their  society. 

69.  On  the  12th  of  November  in  the  afternoon  the 
Plaintiff  went  into  her  bedroom   and   brought  out  what 
seemed  to  be  a  document  of  some  kind  and  said  "  Do  you 
see  this  ?     Well  look  well  at  it  for  it  will  soon  be  smoke 
and  ashes     It  is  my  Will  and  I  have  made  many  of  them 
but  I  shall  make  no  more  "  and  she  then  burnt  it     I  say 
that  I  neither  used  any  inducement  or  control  over  nor 
made  any  representation  whatever  to  the  Plaintiff  on  the 
subject  nor  induced  her  to  believe  that  the  spirit  of  the 
late  Charles  Lyon  requested  or  desired  the  Plaintiff  to 
destroy  the  former  Will  or  make  and  substitute  another  in 
its  place  nor  did  I  ever  see  her  new  Will  nor  in  fact  have 
I  ever  known  its  contents  before  the  commencement  of 
this  suit  further  than  that  she  had  told  me  generally  it 
was  in  my  favour. 

70.  I  made  no  effort  or  attempt  whatever  to  keep  her 
from  her  hu  -band's  relatives  or  any  friends  or  connections 
that  she  might  have  but  on  the  contrary  desired  her  to  see 
them  which  she  did  and  often  in  my  absence  as  I  arranged 
and  wished  it  to  be     On  the  13th  November  1866  the 
day  after  the  signing  of  the  Will  she  wrote  and  sent  me 
the  following  note  : — 

"3-past  12  o'clock. 

"  My  dear  Daniel, — I  have  this  moment  received  a 
note  from  my  niece  to  tell  me  she  has  been  prevented 
coming  to  see  us  this  morning  but  will  come  to-morrow 
afternoon  so  I  shall  expect  you  dear  as  usual. 
"  Your  affectionate  mother, 

"JANE  LYON." 

The  niece  mentioned  in  this  note  was  Mrs.  Tom  Follower 
one  of  he*  husband's  relatives.     Mrs.  Lyon  used  after 

258  ANSWER    OF 

this  to  tell  me  "  That  horrid  Plessy"  (meaning  the  said 
Mrs.  Torn  Fellowes)  "  tries  all  she  can  to  put  me  against 
you  and  yet  she  will  not  succeed  Why  she  even  said 
it  would  make  people  talk  if  we  were  to  live  in  the  same 
house  together  To  which  I  replied  evil  to  them  that 
evil  think  and  they  must  be  bad-minded  people  to  think 
of  such  a  thing." 

71.  One  evening  while  we  were  at  dinner  she  said  she 
felt  a  spirit  by  her  chair     This  was  in  the  presence  of  the 
said  Mrs.  Tom  Fellowes  and  as  soon  as  she  was  gone  she 
laughed  and  told  me  it  was  all  made  up  on  her  part  to 
astonish  her  niece. 

72.  On  Mrs.  Fellowes  leaving  London  the  Plaintiff  told 
me  that  she  had  given  .£50  to  her  and  since  then  I  have 
never  seen  her  open  her  cheque  book  but  what  she  would 
say  "  I  wish  I  had  it  back  again." 

73.  One  morning  about  the  10th  November  1866  the 
Plaintiff  showed  me  the  photograph  of  a  little  boy  and 
asked  me  if  I  did  not  think  it  like  my  son     I  told  her 
that  I  could  not  see  that  it  was  in  the  least     She  said 
Mrs.  Sims  had  brought  it  saying  that  the  spirits  must 
have  made  the  photograph  for  she — Mrs.  Sims — did  not 
know  such  a  child     I  said  I  had  no  belief  in  any  such 
thing  and  that  if  the  spirits  had  sent  it  they  might  have 
made  it  less  vulgar  looking     A  day  or  two  after  this  Mrs. 
Tom  Fellowes  asked  me  for  the  portrait  of  my  child  and 
Mrs.  Lyon  jumped  up  and  said  "  Oh  I  have  one  of  him 
I  will  give  it  you  "     I  was  too  much  under  obligation  to 
her  to  expose  her  untruthful  ness  and  therefore  did  not 
contradict  it  and  Mrs.  Fellowes  took  the  said  portrait  and 
so  far  as  I  know  has  it  now     I  give  these  details  in  order 
that  I  may  be  contradicted  if  my  statements  are  false. 

74.  A  similar  act  of  duplicity  on  her  part  took  place  in 
the  month  of  January  1867     An  American  lady  gave  me 
what  is  known  as  a  Ferotype  of  herself    Mrs.  Lyon  said 
the  upper  part  of  the  head  was  like  hers  and  she  put  ink 
on  the  lower  part  of  the  face  and  showed  it  as  a  spiritual 

MR.    HOME.  250 

production  and  even  dictated  to  me  a  communication  to 
give  an  air  of  fact  to  the  same. 

76.  The  Plaintiff  now  used  to  come  to  my  rooms  at 
any  hour  and  she  came  nearly  every  day    On  AVednesday 
the  21st  November  1866  she  wrote  and  sent  to  me  the  fol- 
lowing letter : — 

"Wednesday  Morn. 

"  My  dear  Daniel, — I  shall  expect  you  at  seven  tins 
evening  as  usual.  I  am  going  to  be  engaged  to-dny 
therefore  do  not  expect  me  I  write  in  haste  that  you 
may  get  this  in  time  not  to  keep  you  in  the  house  and 
am 

"  Your  affectionate  mother, 

"  J.  LYON." 

I  introduced  her  to  my  friends  and  took  her  into  their 
society  and  went  with  her  to  dine  and  spend  the  evening 
with  them  and  she  was  very  proud  of  being  introduced  to 
them. 

77.  When  she  wished  to  leave  AVestbourne-place  a  step 
which  I  had  long  requested  her  to  take  for  I  wished  her 
to  have  such  rooms  as  I  could  bring  my  friends  to  she  one 
day  took  me  to  look  at  some  inferior  apartments  where 
she  had  lodged  five  years     This  was  17a  Albert-terrace  a 
house  kept  by  the  said  Mrs.  Pepper  hereinbefore  men- 
tioned as  one  of  her  friends  notwithstanding  her  being  as 
she  said   "  a  bad  woman  who  had  driven  her  daughter 
to    all    sorts    of     extremities     and     when    she    married 
a  valet  would  not  see  her  and  when  on  her  death-bed  sl.o 
sent  to  see  her  mother   the  answer    returned    by   Mrs. 
Pepper  was  that  she  would  see  her  'in   her  coffin"3      I 
did  all  I  could  to  persuade  her  not  to  re>'ule  with  such  a 
woman  whose  apartments  were  even  worse  than  the  others 
But  so  little  was  my  inilnemv  over  her  that  she  actually 
took  the  said  apartments  and  used  to  say  that  she  liked  to 
be  able  when  "  she  and  Mrs.  Pepper  had  their  tiffs  to 
throw  Louisa  in  her  teeth  "     She  has  from  that  time  con- 
tinued to  reside  in  the  said  apartments  for  which  she  pays 

260  ANSWER    OF 

30s.  a-weelt  out  of  the  season  and  two  guineas  during  the 
season. 

78.  One  morning  in  November  and  shortly  after  the 
Plaintiff  had  been  to  look  at  her  old  apartments  in  Albert- 
terrace  the  said  Mrs.  Pepper  came  to  see  me  in  my  rooms 
in  Sloane  street  professing  a  great  interest  in  me  and 
wishing  to  know  if  the  old  lady  had  done  in  a  legal  way 
what  she  had  done  for  she  said  "  If  it  is  not  so  done  in 
a  short  time  she  will  change  her  mind  Why  she  is  always 
changing  her  Will     Once  she  told  me  when  my  daughter 
was  alive  that  she  had  put  her  in  her  Will  so  once  when 
she  was  dead  and  Mrs.  Lyon  was  changing  her  Will  I 
went  to  her  and  said  Joe  (that's  my  son  sir)  was  his 
sister's  favorite  brother  and  as  she  is  dead  why  could  not 
you  put  him  in  your  Will  but  law  sir  she  was  in  such  a 
rage  with  me     Oh  she  is  a  hard-headed  and  as  hard- 
hearted an  old  one."     I  expressed  my  displeasure  at  a 
lodging  house  keeper  or  indeed  any  one  speaking  thus  of 
a  person  who  was  kind  to  me     She  then  said  "  Oh  you 
are  not  the  first  person  she  has  adopted  there  is  such  a 
fine  young  woman  named  Fanny  Hemming  whom  Mrs. 
Lyon  adopted  even  as  a  baby  and  she  just  took  her  up 
and  put  her  down  as  suited  her  fancy     When  she  came 
to  me  she  decided  to  take  her  to  live  with  her  but  she 
would  not  go  to  the  expense  to  have  an  extra  room  and  so 
wished  the  young  woman  to  sleep  with  her     Mrs.  Hem- 
ming refused  to  give  her  daughter  up  to  Mrs.  Lyon  and 
told  her  that  if  the  father  did  give  his  child  to  her  the 
father  was  dead  and  she  would  not  allow  her  daughter  to 
live  with  such  a  woman. 

79.  The  Plaintiff  afterwards  told  me  that  excepting 
the  abuse  of  herself  the  whole  of  the  above  statement  of 
Mrs.  Pepper  was  true  and  the  Plaintiff  also  told  me  she 
had  ascertained  that  Miss  Hemming  had  been  to   her 
friend  who  sells  mixed  sweets  and  said  that  she  Mrs.  Lyon 
was  a  bad  woman  who  did  not  believe  in  God     The 
Plaintiff  also  told  me  and  I  charge  it  to  be  the  lact  that 

MR.    HOME.  201 

she  had  adopted  other  children  but  grew  weary  of  them 
but  she  said  she  would  not  do  so  of  me. 

80.  A  few  mornings  after  this  I  had  a  call  from  Mrs. 
Pepper  before  I  was  out  of  bed  requesting  me  to  lend  her 
£200  I  could  not  do  it  and  told  her  so  She  camo 
many  times  about  it  and  each  time  for  a  less  sum  till  it 
was  .£15  I  told  her  (as  the  fact  was)  that  the  Plaintiff 
had  made  me  promise  not  to  sell  out  the  stock  she  had 
given  me  without  first  informing  her  of  it  and  getting  her 
consent  and  that  she  (Mrs.  Pepper)  had  better  show  the 
Plaintiff  the  letter  which  she  exhibited  to  me  from  a  man 
connected  with  TattcrsalPs  threatening  to  post  her  son 
and  then  I  would  use  all  the  influence  I  had  to  get  it  for 
her  Mrs.  Pepper  came  into  the  Plaintiff's  room  that 
morning  to  clear  away  the  breakfast  things  and  bursting 
into  tears  said  "  Oh  Mrs.  Lyon  you  might  have  saved 
Louisa  but  you  did  not  and  have  regretted  it  save  her 
brother  now  "  She  left  the  letter  and  the  Plaintiff  gave 
me  a  good  scolding  because  I  said  a  few  words  in  favor  of 
the  young  man  observing  that  she  never  allowed  anyone 
not  even  her  father  nor  her  husband  to  interfere  with  her 
in  matters  of  business  which  she  always  arranged  for  both 
of  them. 

81.  The  Plaintiff  refused  to  give  or  allow  me  to  give 
the  required  assistance  and  from  that  day  Mrs.  Pepper 
became  my  enemy  and  the  Plaintiff  who  is  rather  fond  of 
going  to  the  kitchen  used  to  come  up  foaming  with  rage 
and  saying  "  That  beast  Pepper  will  call  you  Home  though 
I  always  tell  her  it  is  Lyon." 

82.  To  the  best  of  my  belief  it  was  Saturday  the  24th 
of  November  the  Plaintiff  went  to  reside  at  Albert-terrace 
Miss   Peel   had   the   first   floor   and   the    Plaintiff    tho 
second.          *          *          * 

83.  I  have  during  the  months  I  was  with  the  Plaintiff 
never  known  hereto  keep  to  the  one  idea  so  long  as  to  the 
change  of  mv  name     And  at  last  for  she  was  again  de- 
termined it  should  only  be  Daniel  Lyon  I  had  my  friends 

2G2  ANSWER    OF 

write  to  me  and  I  showed  her  the  letters  requesting  me  to 
keep  the  name  of  Home  at  least  I  had  three  card  plates 
engraved  to  please  her  for  she  changed  so  often  One  was 
D.  D.  Home  Lyon  one  D.  D.  H.  Lyon  and  the  last  D.  H. 
Lyon  At  last  she  said  we  must  ask  the  spirits  on  this 
occasion  I  said  I  not  only  did  not  wish  so  to  do  but 
would  not  do  it  The  Plaintiff  said  my  friends  would  think 
Ler  so  whimsical  about  my  name  that  we  must  do  some- 
thing to  avoid  this. 

84.  One  evening  while  we  were  seated  together  she  bade 
me  take  paper  and  pencil  and  write  and  she  would  dictate 
The  Plaintiff  then  dictated  as  if  it  were  a  message  from 
some  spirit  who  was  related  to  me  that  the  name  of  Home 
should  be  retained     The  Plaintiff  said  "  This  will  look  all 
right  and  your  friends  will  not  think  me  a  whimsical  old 
woman."     The  name  of  Home  was  accordingly  retained 
and  that  of  Lyon  added  to  it. 

85.  Just  previous  to  her  leaving  Westbourne-place  one 
afternoon  the  servant  brought  up  the  card  of  a  "  Mrs. 
Bailey"    The  name  was  unknown  to  me  and  the  Plaintiff 
said  it  was  to  her  also  but  she  asked  her  to  be  shown  up 
then  she  recognized  a  lady  whom  she  had  known  and  to 
whom  she  introduced  me  as  her  adopted  son    I  went  away 
soon  afterwards  leaving  her  alone  with  the  lady     In  the 
evening  she  told  me  that  the  said  Mrs.  Bailey  was  the 
wife  of  a  lawyer  in  Sloane-street     I  asked  her  why  she 
had  not  employed  him  instead  of  Mr.  Wilkinson  but  she 
said  she  knew  nothing  of  him  further  than  that  he  had 
married  this  lady     I  on  one  or  two  occasions  after  this 
asked  her  why  she  did  not  employ  Mr.  Bailey  but  her 
usual  answer  was  that  Mr.  Wilkinson  was  as  true  as  steel 
and  she  wished  for  no  other     I  swear  that  this  was  her 
expression  and  not  mine   I  called  with  her  on  Mrs.  Bailey 
I  also  called  on  Mrs.  Sims  and  was  very  glad  at  all  times 
to  have  the  Plaintiff  do  what  and  see  whom  she  pleased 
She  was  very  angry  because  I  would  not  go  with  her  to 
see  her  friend  named  Prior  who  sells  mixed  sweets  at 

number  2  Park-side  opposite  Wilton-place  but  I  did  not 
see  the  necessity  of  so  doin-;*. 

8G.  On  the  last  day  of  November  1SGG  Mr.  Wilkinson 
made  a  draft  of  the  deed  poll  for  my  change  of  name  and 
the  Plaintiff  saw  and  approved  of  it  I  executed  it  on  the 
3rd  of  December  18G6  It  bore  date  on  that  day  and  I 
executed  it  at  the  Plaintiff's  request  and  at  her  request  it 
was  afterwards  enrolled  as  of  record  in  Her  Majesty's 
Court  of  Chancery  and  I  did  thereby  declare  as  the 
Plaintiff  well  knew  that  I  had  taken  the  name  of  Lyon  in 
lieu  of  and  in  addition  to  that  of  Home  and  that  in  future 
I  intended  to  be  called  and  known  as  Daniel  Home  Lyon 
A  true  copy  of  such  deed  is  set  forth  in  the  Gth  paragraph 
of  the  Defendant  Wilkinson's  Answer  to  which  I  crave 
leave  to  refer  On  the  evening  of  the  same  day  the  3rd 
December  1SGG  the  Plaintiff  and  I  dined  at  the  house  of 
a  friend  of  mine  named  Mr.  Griffin  of  number  1  Palace- 
gardens  Bavswater  when  we  met  several  people  to  whom 
the  Plaintiff  announced  that  I  had  that  day  signed  my 
name  for  the  last  time  as  Home  I  advertised  my  change 
of  name  and  that  I  intended  thereafter  to  call  myself 
Daniel  Home  Lyon  in  the  "  Times"  "  Morning  Post" 
and  other  papers  at  the  Plaintiff's  request. 

87.  On  Sunday  the  2nd  December  18G6  we  called  at 
the  house  of  a  friend  of  mine  named  Jcnckcn  residing  at 
Kilmory  House,  Thicket  Road,  Norwood,  a  gentleman 
who  was  formerl^callcd  to  the  bar  but  is  not  now  practising 
as  I  had  told  the  Plaintiti'  When  there  she  gave  him  in 
my  presence  the  true  narrative  of  her  adoption  of  me  a>  [ 
have  hereinbefore  stated  and  afterwards  asked  him  to  go 
with  her  into  another  room  alleging  that  she  had  some 
business  to  transact  with  him  and  then  as  I  have  sinco 
learnt  and  charge  enquired  of  him  how  she  could  best 
settle  the  sum  she  had  given  me  with  any  additions  she 
might  please  to  make  in  such  a  way  that  her  husband's 
family  could  not  after  her  death  upset  it  or  that  even  she 
herself  could  have  no  power  over  it  and  he  then  asked  her 

264  ANSWER    OF 

if  spiritualism  had  anything,  to  do  with  it  or  if  I  had  in 
any  way  influenced  her  all  which  she  then  and  there 
indignantly  and  emphatically  denied  but  said  she  had 
wished  for  a  son  and  that  in  him  (meaning  myself)  she 
had  found  all  she  required  and  her  only  dread  was  lest  he 
(meaning  myself)  should  marry  again  He  then  advised 
her  to  see  a  medical  man  that  the  fact  of  her  being  in  her 
right  mind  might  not  be  disputed  She  told  him  that  she 
had  already  had  a  .physician  as  witness  to  her  Will  that 
in  case  of  necessity  he  might  not  only  prove  that  she  was 
sane  but  a  clever  woman  of  business  Mr.  Jencken  then 
advised  her  to  execute  a  deed  confirming  the  gift. 

88.  On  Tuesday  the  4th  December  1866  Dr.  Kobert 
Chambers  the  Editor  of  Chambers'  Edinburgh  Journal 
called  on  me  and  I  took  him  to  call  on  the  Plaintiff  who 
was  very  proud  of  this  as  she  was  of  being  introduced  to 
my  other  friends  of  distinction  literary  or  otherwise  And 
she  has  told  many  of  them  in  my  absence  the  story  of  my 
adoption  as  I  have  given  it  I  allude  particularly  to  Mrs. 
Kicholls  whom  she  told  on  the  10th  January  1867  as  the 
fact  was  that  she  had  to  urge  me  to  take  her  money  and 
that  spiritualism  had  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  it  She 
told  Mr.  Gerald  Massey  the  Poet  in  January  her  delight 
at  seeing  my  astonishment  when  she  made  her  proposals 
her  gifts  being  so  unsought  and  unexpected  She  spoke  to 
Mrs.  Ritchie  to  the  same  effect  in  November  1866  and 
she  told  Mr.  Perdicaris  as  early  as  the  14th  October  1866 
that  she  "  would  have  done  the  same  for  me  if  I  had  not 
been  a  medium"  and  that  she  would  "  Rather  see  her 
money  in  the  fire  than  that  any  of  her  relatives  should 
have  it"  and  "That  what  she  had  done  for  him"  (this 
Defendant)  "  was  not  all  that  she  intended  doing  "  On 
or  about  the  13th  Octobe.  1866  she  told  Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall 
that  she  had  given  me  this  Defendant  £24,000  which 
though  she  could  add  to  she  could  not  diminish  as  she 
wished  me  this  Deiendant  to  leel  psnectly  independent  of 
herself  On  the  llth  December  1866  she  gave  Miss 

MR.    HOME.  265 

Houghton  the  true  narrative  of  my  adoption  as  I  Imvo 
given  it  above  and  said  to  her  that  she  the  Plaintiff  had 
not  given  me  this  Defendant  the  sums  of  £24,000  and 
£6,000  "As  a  Spiritualist  or  in  consideration  of  his'* 
(this  Defendant's)  "  medium  powers  hut  because  she  loved 
him"  In  February  1867  she  told  Mr.  Dyne  (as  the  fact 
was)  that  she  had  to  urge  me  to  take  the  money  and  she 
spoke  to  others  to  the  like  effect  All  the  above  statements 
with  one  exception  were  made  by  the  Plaintiff  in  my 
absence  and  without  my  privity  and  many  of  them  whilst 
I  was  away  from  her  in  the  country. 

89.  On  the  afternoon  of  the  7th  December  1866  I  was 
unwell  and  went  to  my  rooms  before  dinner     I  remember 
it  because  we  were  going  to  the  house  of  a  friend  of  mine 
the  Right  Hon.  Elizabeth  Lady  Dunsany    In  the  evening 
on  my  return  to  the  Plaintiff  she  seemed  elated  at  some- 
thing and  said  "  Such  a  singular  thing  has  occurred  in 
your  absence  "     I  asked  her  to  what  she  alluded  but  she 
only  said  "  It's  a  great  secret  and  you  are  not  to  know " 
I  knew  the  best  w.ay  with  her  was  to  seem  perfectly  in- 
different and  she  would  tell  me     In  the  evening  on  our 
way  out  she  said  "  You  would  be  astonished  if  you  knew 
what  occurred  to-day  when  you  were  out"     Still  she  did 
not  tell  me  that  evening. 

90.  The  following  morning  the  8th  December  1866  at 
breakfast  for  I  lived  entirely  with  the  Plaintiff  and  only 
slept  at  my  rooms  she  said  "  Now  Dan  I  dislike  uneven 
sums"     I  fully  expected  the  Plaintiff  was  going  to  request 
me  to  return  to  her  four  thousand  pounds  which  I  should 
then  most  certainly  have    done  without    any  hesitation 
when  to  my  astonishment  she  said  "  I  am  going  to  have 
a  deed  of  gift  made  out  and  I  am  going  to  a<M    six 
thousand  to  the  sum  already  given "     I  told  her  I  had 
already  more  than  enough  and  did  not  wish  for  more     In 
fact  I  had  so  often  seriously  thought  of  returning  what  I 
had  that  I  did  not  relish  the  new  obligation. 

91.  She  said  it  would  be  burdened  however  with  the 

266  ANSWER    OF 

condition  that  I  should  defray  out  of  the  dividends  or 
interest  derivable  from  the  same  the  outgoings  we  might 
incur  in  wines  sweets  and  fruits  and  travelling  expenses. 

92.  I  have  since  learnt  for  I  knew  nothing  about  it  at 
the  time  and  I  charge  that  the  Plaintiff  on  the  7th  December 
1866  wrote  and  sent  to  the  Defendant  Wilkinson  the 
letter  bearing  that  date  set  forth  in  the  8th  paragraph  of 
his  Answer  to  which  I  crave  leave  to  refer  in  which  she 
says  "  On  the  occasion  of  my  adopted  son  taking  the  name 
of  Lyon  I  wish  to  give  him  a  little  surprise"  and  requests 
him  to  prepare  a  deed  thoroughly  legal  and  that  she  also 
wrote  unknown  to  me  on  the  same  day  a  letter  to  the  said 
stock  brokers  Messieurs  Fox,  Taylor  and  Company  which 
is  as  follows : — 

"  17a,  Albert  Terrace, 

"  Albert  Gate,  Hyde  Park, 

"7th  December,  1866. 

"  Gentlemen, — You  will  have  the  goodness  to  transfer 
consols  standing  in  my  name  Jane  Lyon  of  Bridport 
Dorset  Widow  to  the  amount  of  Six  thousand  pounds  cash 
to  the  account  of  my  adopted  son  D.D.  Home  or  Daniel 
Home  Lyon  as  is  now  his  legal  name  I  will  call  on 
Monday  at  One  o'clock  to  sign  the  transfer. 

*'  I  am,  Gentlemen,  your  most  obedt., 

"  JANE  LYON." 

93.  On  the  10th  December  1866  I  at  the  Plaintiff's 
request  accompanied  her  to  the  Bank  when  she  in  order 
to  carry  out  her  said  intention  voluntarily  and  against  my 
desire  transferred  to  me  the  further  sum  of  (I  believe) 
£6,798  17s.  ±d.  £3  per  Cent.  Consolidated  Bank  Annuities 
into  my  old  name  of  Daniel  Dunglass  Home  that  being 
the  name  in  which  her  original  gift  was  then  standing 
On  this  occasion  she  discussed  with  the  brokers  I  taking 
no  part  in  the  conversation  whether  the  transfer  should  be 
made  in  my  new  or  original  name    They  decided  in  favour 
of  the  latter    The  Plaintiff  took  the  papers  relating  to  the 
said  new  gift  away  with  her  and  I  have  never  seen  them 

ME.    HOME.  207 

It  is  a  new  invention  of  hers  and  entirely  false  that  an  y- 
thing  whatever  with  respect  to  this  new  gift,  was  rapped 
out  or  that  she  thought  the  spirit  of  her  husband  induced 
her  to  do  such  #  thing  as  to  give  me  the  money  as  a  birth- 
day present  my  birthday  being  in  fact  on  the  I'Uth 
March, 

9-i.  In  answer  to  the  Plaintiff's  Interrogatory  I  deny 
that  the  Plaintiff  on  the  10th  December  18G6  or  at  any 
oilier  time  was  at  my  request  or  suggestion  or  while  under 
the  alleged  influence  of  the  ascendancy  and  power  which 
the  Plaintiff  now  alleges  that  I  had  by  the  means  in  the 
said  Bill  mentioned  or  in  fact  acquired  over  her  mind  or 
by  any  other  means  induced  by  me  to  go  again  or  in  fact 
with  me  to  the  Bank  of  England  or  to  transfer  the  sum  of 
£6,798  17s.  4d.  or  any  other  sum  of  £3  per  Cent.  Con- 
solidated Bank  Annuities  in  my  name  as  Daniel  Dunglass 
Home  and  I  make  out  the  contrary  in  manner  hereinbefore 
Appearing  I  believe  that  the  sum  of  bank  annuities  volun- 
tarily transferred  into  my  name  by  the  Plaintiff  as  I  have 
hereinbefore  truly  stated  and  not  otherwise  was  equivalent 
in  value  to  a  sum  of  £6,000  sterling. 

95.  On  the  llth  December  1866  I  was  in  the  house 
when  the  draft  of  the  deed  of  gift  came  to  the  Plaintiff 
and  she  opened  it  and  began  reading  it  to  herself  She 
had  not  done  so  more  than  a  few  minutes  when  she  called 
out  in  a  very  angry  tone  "  Daniel  bring  me  pen  and  ink 
at  once  I  wonder  if  Wilkinson  is  a  fool  or  if  he  thinks  me 
one"  I  handed  her  pen  and  ink  as  she  desired  and  she 
drew  her  pen  across  some  words  and  then  wrote  something 
in  the  margin  She  said  "  Look  at  this  line  '  And  all  my 
husband's  family  and  connexions  are  well  provided  for' 
"Why  they  may  bring  in  some  street ->\veeper  and  say  lie 
was  a  connexion  Even  Mrs.  James  Fellowes  could  claim 
under  that  clause  for  her  boys  are  not  well  provided  for" 
(She  gave  reasons  why  they  were-  not  well  provided  for  but 
as  they  are  most  injurious  to  the  family  I  omit  them)  She 
shewed  me  what  she  had  written  on  the  margin  "  Jane 

2(13  ANSWER    OF 

Lyon  I  have  drawn  my  pen  over  this  I  do  not  approve  of 
such"  I  said  "  Well  mother  I  only  wish  you  did  not 
feel  as  you  do  against  the  family"  SliS  drew  me  towards 
her  in  a  way  which  made  me  angry  saying  "  You  are  my 
family"  I  left  the  room  She  ran  after  me  bidding  me 
to  send  her  Mr.  Phillips  my  secretary  I  did  so  and  later 
in  the  day  he  told  me  as  the  fact  was  that  Mrs.  Lyon  had 
sent  him  with  some  documents  and  a  letter  to  Mr.  Wilkin- 
son I  only  saw  the  Plaintiff  in  the  afternoon  in  the 
presence  of  my  friends  at  my  own  rooms  and  no  allusion 
was  made  to  the  deed  or  anything  else  And  I  did  not 
know  what  was  in  her  said  letter  of  the  llth  December 
1866  which  is  set  forth  in  the  10th  paragraph  of  the 
Defendant  Wilkinson's  Answer. 

96.  The  next  evening  the  12th  of  December  I  came  in 
with  my  little  boy  and  found  Mr.  Wilkinson  with  the 
Plaintiff  She  said  she  had  not  terminated  her  business  with 
Mr.  Wilkinson  and  sent  me  and  my  boy  into  her  bed  room 
When  we  returned  she  showed  my  boy  the  parchment  she 
had  executed  being  the  deed  of  gift  and  he  remembers  it 
well  for  she  kissed  him  and  told  him  that  "  There  was  his 
fortune  when  his  father  died  "  No  influence  of  mine  was 
used  to  cause  such  deed  to  be  made  or  executed  nor  was 
any  spiritual  communication  given  with  respect  to  it  nor 
did  the  Plaintiff  think  that  the  spirit  of  her  husband 
dictated  it  It  was  to  suit  her  own  purposes  and  nought 
else  She  spoke  to  all  my  friends  about  it  immediately 
afterwards  in  the  most  triumphant  manner  and  her  only 
surprise  was  that  it  was  not  in  the  papers  The  Plaintiff's 
deliberate  assertion  in  the  12th  paragraph  of  her  said 
affidavit  filed  in  this  suit  on  the  27th  June  1867  still 
more  deliberately  repeated  in  the  8th  paragraph  of  her 
farther  affidavit  filed  on  the  18th  July  1867  that  she 
did  not  execute  this  deed  of  gift  on  the  12th  December 
nor  till  the  time  when  she  executed  the  mortgage  deed  of 
the  19th  January  1867  is  utterly  untrue  and  will  be  as 
completely  disproved  as  the  rest  of  her  assertions. 

ME.    HOME.  269 

97.  Under  the  circumstances  hereinbefore   appearing 
and  not  otherwise  I  believe  that  such  deed  poll  or  instru- 
ment in  writing  as  in  the  said  Bill  is  mentioned  to  bear 
date  the  12th  December  1866  and  therein  stated  to  be  of 
or  to  the  purport  and  effect  in  the  llth  paragraph  of  the 
said  Bill  set  forth  (so  far  as  the  same  is  thereiu  set  forth) 
was  duly  executed  by  the  Plaintiff. 

98.  The  said  deed  poll  was  prepared  by  the  Defendant 
"William  Martin  Wilkinson  but  not  as  the  Solicitor  for  and 
on  my  behalf  but  as  the  Solicitor  employed  by  and  acting  for 
and  on  behalf  of  the  Plaintiff    I  gave  no  instructions  or 
suggestions  whatever  to  the  said  Defendant  Wilkinson  on 
the  subject  of  the  said  deed  poll   I  have  been  informed  and 
believe  that  the  costs  for  the  same  have  lately  been  paid 
by  the  Plaintiff  without  prejudice     It  is  untrue  that  such 
deed  poll  or  any  other  deed  or  instrument  whatever  was 
executed  by  the  Plaintiff  at  my  request  or  instigation  sug- 
gestion or  desire  or  while  under  the  alleged  influence  of 
the  ascendancy  and  power  which  the  Plaintiff  now  pretends 
I  had  acquired  over  her  as  in  the  said  Bill  mentioned  and 
I  make  out  the  contrary  in  manner  herein  appearing     I 
have  been  informed  by  the  said  Defendant  Wilkinson  and 
I  believe  that  the  Plaintiff  was  repeatedly  requested  by 
him  to  employ  some  other  Solicitor  and  that  she  per- 
sistently refused  to  do  so  and  I  crave  leave  to  refer  to  the 
correspondence  between  the  said  Defendant  and  the  Plain- 
tiff set  forth  in  the  said  Defendant's  Answer     And  save 
her  aforesaid  application  to  Mr.  Jencken  unknown  to  me 
and  his  advice  I  am  unable  to  set  forth  as  to  my  belief  or 
otherwise  whether  such  deed  was  executed  by  the  Plaintiff 
without  the  intervention  of  any  or  if  any  what  other  inde- 
pendent or  other  Solicitor  or  person  for  or  on  her  In-half 
Both  the  said  Defendant  Wilkinson  and    the  said   Mr. 
Jencken  acted  entirely  independently  of  me  and  of  each 
other  in  the  transaction  aforesaid. 

99.  The  Plaintiff  had  told  me  some  weeks  previous  to 
the  12th  December  1866  that  she  wished  Mr.  Wilkinson 

270  ANSWER    OF 

to  find  a  mortgage  for  Thirty  thousand  pounds  for  she 
said  "  I  shall  put  out  Sixty  thousand  at  5  per  cent,  and 
that  will  make  my  income  quite  as  good  as  it  was  "  I 
did  as  she  requested  and  heard  no  more  of  the  affair  till 
about  Christmas  time  when  I  saw  her  receive  a  letter 
which  I  knew  to  be  in  Mr.  Wilkinson's  handwriting  I 
asked  her  what  it  was  about  and  she  said  "  it  was  none  of 
my  business  but  that  I  should  know  when  the  time  came." 

100.  On  the  30th  of  December  1866  we  spent  the  day 
and  evening  at  the  house  of  Mrs.  Henning  a  friend  of 
mine  residing  at  Sunninghill  House  Thicket  Road  Nor- 
wood and  so  absurdly  affectionate  was  the  Plaintiff  towards 
me  and  so  much  did  she  talk   of  her  great  fear  that  I 
should  marry  and  leave  her  that  this  lady  has  since  told 
me  as  the  fact  was  that  she  determined  never  to  ask  her 
again  to  her  house  inasmuch  as  even  the  servants  had 
made  remarks  upon  her  conduct. 

101.  This  was  the  day  of  the  burning  of  the  Crystal 
Palace  and  the  Plaintiff  was  for  a  long  time  in  a  room 
without  any  fire  in  it  watching  the  conflagration  and  she 
took  a  most  severe  cold  from  which  she  did  not  recover 
all  the  winter     From  the  fact  that  the  Plaintiff  had  taken 
cold  and  was  feverish  and  ill  I  remember  distinctly  the 
31st  of  December  and  I  also  remember  her  sending  me  to 
post  a  letter  for  Mr.  Wilkinson  the  contents  of  which  I 
was  entirely  ignorant  of. 

102.  The  Plaintiff  was  feverish  and  ill  and  for  the  only 
time  since  I  had  known  her  she  was  on  the  sofa  almost 
all  the  evening  of  the  31st  December     I  sat  by  her  and 
she  then  told  me  that  she  was  about  to  transact  or  had 
transacted  some  very  important  business  which   greatly 
concerned  me     She  told  me  that  the  letter  I  had  posted 
for  Mr.  Wilkinson  was  respecting  a  mortgage  for  me     As 
she  had  for  some  time  been  speaking  of  my  putting  ray 
money  out   on   mortgage  for  she  never  considered   me 
capable  of  transacting  business  I  thought  she  referred  to 
my  own  money  being  placed  out  on  mortgage  and  that 

MR.    HOME.  271 

slio  had  found  a  good  investment  for  me  through  Mr. 
Wilkinson  so  I  thanked  her  and  begged  she  would  not 
worry  herself  about  it  at  least  while  she  was  ill  She  then 
told  me  that  it  was  a  mortgage  of  her  own  money  which 
she  had  decided  to*  have  in  my  name  reserving  only  a 
lite  interest  for  herself  and  that  her  husband  had  made 
over  his  property  to  her  during  his  life  I  told  her  I  did 
not  see  the  necessity  of  such  a  step  but  she  silenced  me 
by  saying  "  My  first  deed  of  gift  might  at  a  push  perhaps 
be  upset  for  my  love  for  you  was  such  a  sudden  thing  that 
people  may  say  I  acted  without  due  judgment  but  this  is 
an  affair  of  more  mature  consideration  "  and  she  added 
"  my  letters  to  you  will  prove  the  affection  I  have  and  all 
your  friends  will  testify  to  my  solicitude  for  your  welfare 
You  have  taken  my  name  I  am  happy  with  you  and  it  is 
no  one's  business  what  I  do  with  my  money"  Under 
such  circumstances  I  could  but  be  quiet  and  allow  her  to 
do  as  she  wished. 

103.  I  did  not  see  one  of  the  letters  written  by  her  at 
this  time  nor  did  I  know  their  contents  till  this  suit  In  ua:i 
It  was  through  no  belief  in  the  spirit  of  her  husband  or 
any  other  spirit  that  she  acted     She  was  determined  to 
have  her  own  way  in  everything. 

104.  She  was  very  angry  with  me  in  the  early  part  of 
January  because  I  had  asked  her  why  she  would  live  in  so 
wretched  a  way  doing  no  good  to  any  one     She  said  it 
was  ungrateful  in  me  to  talk  as  I  did     I  told  her  it  was 
for  her  own  present  and  future  happiness    I  reminded  her 
as  the  fact  was  that  I  had  obeyed  her  in  everything    That 
she  had  at  the  first  exacted  a  promise  from  me  that  I 
would  never  sell  out  any  stock  without  first  informing  her 
and  she   had  promised  to  pay  some  small  debts   1    had 
And  not  only  did  she  now  refuse  to  pay  these  but  placed 
me  in  a  false  position  in  not  allowing  me  to  sell  out  the 
two  or  three  hundred  pounds  which  would  have  done  it 
and  that  she  would  not  allow  me  to  be  kind  to  the  poor 
That  in  short  I  was  a  mere  toy  for  her  and  was  heartily 

272  ANSWER    OF 

ashamed  of  myself  She  declared  she  would  not  sign  the 
trust  deed  I  told  her  I  was  glad  of  it  for  I  felt  my  own 
degradation  more  and  more  every  day  She  was  ill  and 
she  began  to  cry  I  told  her  what  I  had  said  had  not 
been  meant  in  anger  but  that  my  illness  made  me  irritable 
and  Dr.  Gully  on  the  10th  January  had  found  me  so  ill 
that  he  wondered  I  did  not  go  abroad  And  I  would  not 
do  so  without  her  for  I  felt  I  had  no  right  to  be  enjoying 
myself  while  she  was  ill  and  alone  There  was  nothing 
more  said  at  the  time  about  the  trust  deed  but  a  few  days 
later  she  changed  her  mind  apparently  for  she  told  me 
she  was  going  to  give  me  another  surprise  and  that  after 
due  consideration  she  had  resolved  to  carry  out  her  first 
intention  and  that  all  was  arranged. 

105.  On  the  19th  January  1867  I  was  with  her  as 
usual  and  Mr.  W.  J.  Wilkinson  and  Mr.  Hartley  clerks 
of  Mr.  Wilkinson  came  having  with  them  the  deeds  and 
copies  I  rose  to  leave  the  room  knowing  that  the  Plaintiff 
did  not  like  to  have  me  know  anything  about  her  business 
She  called  me  back  and  I  resumed  my  seat  by  the  fire 
but  she  afterwards  called  me  to  her  and  kicking  a  foot- 
stool from  under  the  table  pointed  for  me  to  kneel  there 
I  did  so  close  to  her  and  she  put  her  left  arm  round  my 
neck  and  fondled  my  cheek  while  they  were  reading  the 
parchments  I  was  mortified  at  her  so  doing  and  when 
they  were  so  reading  the  parchments  I  tried  to  draw  away 
but  the  Plaintiff  held  me  there  She  followed  the  reading 
of  the  deeds  with  great  caution  and  stopped  them  once  or 
twice  to  make  such  remarks  as  "  A  most  clever  deed  " 
"  Quite  right "  I  neither  urged  her  nor  did  I  touch  her 
as  she  now  swears  otherwise  than  the  nearness  with  which 
she  made  me  kneel  would  necessitate  Under  the  circum- 
stances hereinbefore  appearing  the  Plaintiff  was  not  in  the 
month  of  January  1867  or  at  any  other  time  induced  by 
me  to  execute  though  she  did  in  fact  execute  a  deed  pur- 
porting to  be  an  indenture  bearing  date  the  19th  January 
1867  and  made  between  the  parties  and  of  or  to  the  pur- 

MR.    HO  ME.  273 

port  and  effect  in  the  13th  paragraph  of  the  said  Bill  set 
forth  (so  far  as  the  same  is  therein  set  forth)  and  she  was 
not  induced  by  me  to  execute  any  other  indenture  of  such 
or  any  other  date  or  made  between  the  same  or  any  other 
parties  or  of  or  to  such  or  the  like  or  any  other  purport  or 
effect  than  is  hereinbefore  stated  The  indenture  of  the 
19th  January  1867  which  is  hereinbefore  stated  to  have 
been  executed  by  the  Plaintiff  on  that  day  was  prepared 
by  the  Defendant  William  Martin  Wilkinson  as  the  soli- 
citor for  and  on  behalf  of  the  Plaintiff  and  not  of  me  this 
Defendant  and  I  have  been  informed  and  believe  that  the 
costs  for  the  preparation  of  the  same  have  lately  been  paid 
by  the  Plaintiff  without  prejudice  The  said  Defendant 
William  Martin  Wilkinson  acted  in  that  transaction  and 
throughout  all  his  transactions  concerning  the  Plaintiff's 
business  in  entire  independence  of  me  And  save  as 
aforesaid  I  am  unable  to  set  forth  whether  the  said  inden- 
ture was  seen  or  approved  of  by  any  other  independent  or 
other  solicitor  or  person  for  or  on  behalf  of  the  Plaintiff 
The  Plaintiff  also  executed  the  indenture  of  even  date  re- 
cited in  the  said  last-mentioned  indenture  whereby  she 
assigned  the  principal  sum  of  X30,000  and  interest  and 
the  securities  for  the  same  to  the  said  Defendant  William 
Martin  Wilkinson  and  I  believe  that  such  indenture  <>t' 
even  date  was  prepared  by  the  Defendant  William  Martin 
Wilkinson  as  the  solicitor  for  and  on  behalf  of  the  Plaintiff 
and  not  me  this  Defendant  And  the  said  Defendant  Wil- 
liam Martin  Wilkinson  acted  independently  of  me  as  here- 
inbefore mentioned  And  save  as  aforesaid  I  am  unable  to 
set  forth  whether  the  same  indenture  was  seen  or  approved 
of  by  any  and  if  any  what  other  independent  or  other 
solicitor  or  person  for  or  on  behalf  of  the  Plaintiff  And 
I  deny  that  the  Plaintiff  executed  the  said  two  last-men- 
tioned indentures  or  either  of  them  at  rny  request  or  in- 
stigation or  while  she  was  under  the  alleged  influence  of 
the  ascendancy  and  power  over  her  mind  which  the 
Plaintiff  now  pretends  that  I  had  acquired  by  the  means 

T 

274  ANSWER    OF 

and  under  the  circumstances  in  the  said  Bill  mentioned 
and  I  make  out  the  contrary  in  manner  hereinbefore  ap- 
pearing The  said  two  last-mentioned  deeds  were  executed 
by  the  Plaintiff  on  the  19th  January  1867  in  the  afternoon 
at  her  own  lodgings  17A  Albert  Terrace  Knightsbridge  in 
the  presence  of  Mr.  William  J.  Wilkinson  Mr.  Hartley  and 
myself  and  they  were  the  only  deeds  then  executed  by  her. 

106.  A  day  or  two  after  this  I  was  so  much  worse  that 
Dr.  Hawkesley  wished  me  to  try  change  of  air  and  as  I 
did  not  dare  to  ask  such  a  favour  my  friend  Mr.  Kudall 
asked  the  Plaintiff's  permission  for  me  and  she  consented 
I  wished  her  to  go  with  me  urging  her  bad  cold  but  she 
•would  not  do  so  and  would  not  see  a  medical  man. 

107.  I    went   to    Hastings  about  the  26th   January 
1867  apart  from  the  Plaintiff  who  remained  in  London 
and   I  did  not  return  to  town  till  the    13th  February 
1867     Up  to  the  time  I  left  London  the  only  sources  of 
difference  between  the  Plaintiff  and  myself  so  far  as  I 
know  were  her  parsimonious  habits  and  her  embarrassing 
display  of  affection  towards  me  both  when  alone  and  when 
in  the  presence  of  my  friends  who  made  remarks  upon  it 
I  had  introduced  her  to  most  of  my  friends  including 
many  persons  of  rank   and   distinction  who  treated  her 
with  much  attention  as  my  adopted  mother     After  I  left 
town  in  January  as  aforesaid  the  majority  of  them  dis- 
continued their  visits  to  her     There  was  however  one 
great  exception     I  had  introduced  to  her  in  November 
Mr.  Henry  Gould  Gibson  of  No.  33  Mark-lane  wine  mer- 
chant   He  began  from  the  very  first  to  pay  marked  atten- 
tion to  the  Plaintiff    Even  before  I  left  town  he  used  to 
bring  her  frequent  presents  of  such  articles  as  Hungarian 
bread  sardines  vinegar  and  so  forth     After  I  went  away 
he  visited  her  almost  daily  to  the  best  of  my  information  and 
belief   And  on  at  least  one  such  occasion  as  will  be  proved 
he  was  heard  to  suggest  to  the  Plaintiff  that  it  was  a  pity 
she  had  adopted  me     He  also  as  I  am  informed  and  be- 
lieve was  with  the  Plaintiff  present  at  a  seance  of  a  true 
or  pretended  medium  named  Miss  Nicholls  held  at  the 

MR.    HOME.  275 

Plaintiffs  lodgings  early  in  February  1867  The  said 
]\Ir.  1  Inn -y  (imild  Gibson  as  I  am  also  informed  and  be- 
lieve lias  continued  on  very  intimate  terms  with  the 
Plaintiff  «rer  since  and  has  been  and  is  still  in  the  habit 
of  attendin^  •  •fjuther  true  Off  pretended  mediums 

with  the  Plaintiff  notwithstanding  that  she  now  pivu-iids 
to  have  renounced  her  belief  in  Spiritualism  1  am  further 
informed  and  believe  that  the  said  Mr.  Henry  Gould 
Gibson  has  been  mainly  instrumental  in  the  institution  of 
this  suit  After  my  departure  for  Hastings  the  Plaintiff's 
illness  and  comparative  solitude  and  her  resentment  at 
my  having  discouraged  her  advances  enabled  Mrs.  Pepper 
to  gratify  her  feelings  of  revenge  and  envy  towards  me 
by  irritating  the  Plaintiff  against  my  little  boy  and  myself 
She  persuaded  the  Plaintiff  that  my  son  was  taught  to 
look  forward  to  her  death  which  was  entirely  untrue  And 
she  suggested  to  the  Plaintiff  that  it  was  a  pity  she  should 
have  tied  herself  to  a  dying  man.  The  said  Mrs.  Popper. 
also  advised  the  Plaintiff  to  re-adopt  instead  of  me  the 
said  Fanny  Hemming  whom  she  had  cast  off  The  said 
Mrs.  Pepper  was  also  as  I  am  informed  and  believe  pre- 
sent at  the  aforesaid  seance  held  in  February  18G7  and 
has  also  together  with  the  said  Mr.  Henry  Gould  Gibson 
incited  the  Plaintiff  to  take  these  proceedings  in  Chancery 
against  me. 

108.  Several  letters  passed  between  the  Plaintiff  and 
myself  during  my  said  absence     I  have  not  kept  copies  of 
mine  but  the  originals  are  in  the  Plaintiffs  possession  un- 
less she  has  destroyed  them. 

109.  In  a  letter  which  she  wrote  and  sent  to  me  on 
the  28th  January  1867  she  says — "  Enquire  of  the  spirits 
if  you  can  who's  is  the  face  they  have  given   me  now  to 
look  at  instead  of  yours     I  will  not  describe   it  let  the 
fjiii-its  do  so  if  they  can      When  I  was  looking  at  it  they 
touched  me  on  the  leg  it  was  a  most  e*i'ti'u»r>lii\>i,- 

like  no  one  /  ever  saw  I  first  saw  your  profile  tlu-n  it 
vanished  and  the  full  face  of  another  looked  at  me  Would 
it  be ?" 

276  ANSWER    OF 

110.  On  the  5th  February  1867  she  wrote  and  sent 
me  a  letter  wrongly  dated  the  5th  January  1867  in  which 
the  following  passage  occurred — "  Poor  Mr.  Hall  is  very 
ill  he  has  got  erysephelas  in  his  head  if  he  does  not  get 
soon  well  it  is  most  dreadful  it  will  fly  all  over  his  body 
I  trust  he  will  shortly  get  well  poor  dear  fellow  and  poor 
Mrs.  Hall  has  also  been  ill  but  she  has  now  got  pretty 
well  again     Mr.  Gibson  dined  with  me  yesterday  off  the 
turkey  which  kept  quite  well  "     The  turkey  aforesaid  was 
one  of  the  said  Mr.  Henry  Gould  Gibson's  presents  to 
the  Plaintiff. 

111.  On  Monday  the  llth  February  1867  she  wrote 
and  sent  to  me  at  Hastings  the  following  letter : — 

"  I7a,  Albert  Terrace,  Albert  Gate, 
"llth  Feb.,  1867. 

MY  DEAR  DANIEL, — I  am  much  gratified  to  find  you  are 
much  better  I  have  just  had  Mr.  Wilkinson  here  and  he 
says  he  would  be  glad  if  you  would  stay  till  next  Saturday 
He  will  be  with  you  on  Thursday  for  a  couple  of  days 
and  then  you  can  come  up  together  and  it  will  also  do 
you  good  to  stay  till  Saturday. 

"  I  had  Sacha  here  yesterday  he  came  last  Saturday  I 
was  not  at  home  I  think  there  is  no  occasion  for  Mrs. 
Richie  to  send  him  here  not  knowing  whether  I  require 
him  to  come  You  know  little  boys  are  no  amusement  to 
me  a  little  girl  is  different  and  they  are  only  in  the  way 
when  not  required  and  am 

"  Dear  Dan,  your  affectionate  mother, 

"  JANE  LYON." 

This  was  the  first  intimation  I  had  of  a  dislike  taken  to 
iny  child.  From  this  day  she  never  even  asked  me  or  the 
friends  with  whom  he  was  staying  how  he  was  and  in 
April  the  last  and  only  time  she  ever  saw  him  afterwards 
she  did  not  even  kiss  him  After  this  she  told  me  that 
Mrs.  Pepper  did  so  hate  the  child  and  that  she  had  told  the 
Plaintiff  undoubtedly  he  was  looking  forward  to  her  death 
that  he  might  be  rich. 

MR.    UOME.  277 

112.  I    returned   unexpectedly   in   the   afternoon   of 
Wednesday   the    13th   February    18G7    and    found    the 
Plaintiff  at  my  rooms  in   Sloane  Street      She  had  just 
returned  from  the  stockbrokers  and  the  Bank  of  England 
where  she  had  been  with  Mr.  Wilkinson  to  sell  out  stuck 
belonging  to  her  and  partly  to  me  in  order  to  complete 
another  mortgage  transaction  for  .£30,000  of  which    I 
knew  nothing  except  only  that  she  had  asked  me  before  I 
left  town  to  lend  her  the  amount  requisite  to  make  the 
sum  even  as  she  knew  she  had  not  enough  of  her  own  and 
to  this   I   had  gladly  consented     On  going  up  to  shake 
hands  with  her  I  saw  her  give  a  sly  push  to  some  papers 
which  were  near  her  on  the  table  and  she  seemed  confused 
but  I  could  not  tell  why     I  saw  that  they  were  her  pre- 
vious letters  to  me  and  as  after  her  departure  I  for  the 
first  time  missed  it  I  believe  that  she  took  away  with  her 
at  least  one  on  that  occasion  and  then  or  on  some  other 
occasion  another  and  that  these  missing  letters  were  those 
mentioned  in  the  29th  and  50th  paragraphs  of  this  my 
Answer. 

113.  The  evening  I  arrived  from  Hastings  namely  the 
13th  February   1867  Mrs.  Pepper  came  up  and  shook 
hands  with  me     When  she  left  the  room  the  Plaint  iff 
said  "Well  that  is  the  most  wonderful  woman"     She 
then  told  me  that  Mrs.  Pepper    had  brought  the  said 
Fanny  Hemming  to  see  her  and  she  added  "  I  know  well 
enough  what  it  was  for  only  to  get  her  into  your  place     I 
shall  tell  the  old  beast  that  I  have  had  a  communication 
from  Fanny's  father  telling  me  I  am  not  to  take  her  "      I 
implored  of  her  not  to  do  so    The  Plaintiff  went  on  to  say 
"  Mrs.  Pepper  has  been  up  here  every  day  during  your 
absence  trying  to  put  me  against  you  and  here  she  shakes 
hands  with  you." 

114.  I  found  the  Plaintiff  much  changed     She  seemed 
to  watch  my  every  movement  and  I  distinctly  remember 
the  following  incident     The  Plaintiff  used  to  keep  her 
watch  oil  a  stand  on  her  mantelpiece     The  girl  had  only 

273  ANSWER    OF 

just  left  the  room  and  I  by  chance  looked  at  the  watch 
and  saw  it  was  a  quarter  past  twelve  Almost  immediately 
afterwards  the  Plaintiff  said  "  Are  you  awake  dear  "  I 
said  I  was  and  asked  her  what  she  meant  She  said  "  Oh 
you  have  just  been  in  a  long  trance  and  you  have  told  me 
all  about  yourself"  I  said  "Indeed  and  how  long  have 
I  been  in  a  trance  "  She  said  "  At  least  half  an  hour  " 
I  looked  at  the  watch  and  saw  it  was  just  seventeen 
minutes  past  twelve  and  besides  I  had  none  of  the  pecu- 
liar faint  and  cold  feelings  which  I  have  after  having 
been  in  a  trance  I  asked  her  what  I  had  said  She  told 
me  that  I  had  acknowledged  that  I  had  no  property  or 
claims  to  any  in  Russia  at  all  This  was  so  absurdly  false 
and  irritating  that  I  told  her  once  more  I  should  then 
and  there  cease  to  have  anything  more  to  do  with  her  and 
that  I  had  already  for  too  long  a  time  sold  my  soul  to 
such  a  woman  as  she  was  She  answered  with  a  look  of 
the  fiercest  anger  "  I  will  take  it  back  when  the  time 
comes,  I  have  ever  warned  you  not  to  turn  my  love  to 
hate  for  I  will  hunt  you  to  the  death  and  there  is  no  in- 
sult I  will  not  heap  upon  you  You  forget  you  are  but  a 
medium  and  I  will  say  it  was  all  by  undue  influence  you 
got  what  you  have  from  me  I  can  pay  those  I  please  to 
give  evidence  for  me  and  you  and  your  brat  may  go  to 
the  devil  When  the  woman  who  gave  me  birth  lay  on 
her  death-bed  and  her  husband  came  to  say  she  wished  to 
see  me  I  said  she  might  die  like  a  dog  by  the  way  side 
and  I  would  not  move  a  finger  to  save  her  So  beware." 
I  was  so  horror  stricken  at  this  outburst  that  my  mouth 
filled  with  blood,  as  I  am  subject  to  internal  hemorrhage 
and  I  was  too  ill  even  to  go  to  my  rooms  I  must  have 
fainted  for  when  I  recovered  consciousness  the  Plaintiff 
was  sitting  near  me  and  seemed  much  alarmed  She 
kissed  me  and  begged  me  with  the  tears  streaming  down 
her  cheeks  to  forgive  her  She  told  me  that  Mrs.  Pepper 
had  put  her  up  to  it  and  also  that  she  had  been  much 
annoyed  by  Henry  Gibson  having  been  bothering  her  for 

MR.    ItVME.  279 

money  hut  that  I  must  not  think  anything  more  about 
what  had  passed. 

115.  After  this  she  was  "  inspired  "  as  she  said  "  very 
frequently"  and  I  now  believe  and  charge  that  her  so 
called  inspirations  which  she  dictated  to  me  and  made  mo 
write  were  artfully  designed  by  her  for  the  purpose  of 
having  me  in  her  power  I  was  so  ill  and  weak  at  the 
time  that  for  the  sake  of  peace  and  quiet  I  used  to  write 
just  what  she  wished. 

1 10.  From  this  time  I  grew  afraid  of  the  Plaintiff  and 
shrank  from  being  alone  with  her  for  she  would  taunt  me 
one  moment  and  be  too  loving  the  next  and  once  or  twice 
just  before  I  left  for  Torquay  she  told  me  she  had  been 
going  over  and  dating  her  inspirations  and  pretended 
communications. 

117.  On  one  occasion  she  said  she  would  like  to  learn 
French  and  she  requested  me  to  write  in  French  "  Would 
you  like  to  be  President  of  the  United  States  "     I  did  so 
and  was  about  to  throw  it  in  the  fire  when  she  had  read 
it  but  to  my  surprise  she  put  it  into  her  pocket     This  is 
but  one  of  the  many  scraps  of  paper  she  had  in  her  pos- 
session of  that  kind. 

118.  I  had  as  hereinbefore  mentioned  advanced  and 
lent  to  the  Plaintiff  the  sum  requisite   to  make  up  the 
second  sum  of  .£30,000  of  her  own  which  she  had  put  out 
on    mortgage       This    had    been    done   in   the    following 
manner     I  had  when  at  Hastings  in  February  executed  a 
power  of  attorney  to  the  brokers  to  sell  out  of  my  stock 
so  much  as  would  produce  the  sum  of  cash  which  she  re- 
quired as  well  as  the -further  sum  of  .£400  which  I  required 
for  my  own  purposes     The  brokers  accordingly  as  1  have 
been  informed  and   believe  raisVd  .£3,403  6.s.    I  /.  cash  by 
the  sale  of  £3,755  7s.  Sd.  consols  standing  in  my  name 
which  was  advanced  to  the  IMain'iff  and  .C400  cash  by  the 
sale  of  .£441  7s.  7</.  consols  also  standing  in   my  name 
which  was  for  myself     She-  referred  to  this  in  h«-r  letter 
of  the   13th  February  1867  set  forth  in  the  130th  para- 

280  ANSWER    OF 

graph  of  the  Defendant  Wilkinson's  Answer  to  which  I 
crave  leave  to  refer  wherein  she  says  "  If  you  have  sold 
out  from  Daniel's  let  me  have  that  paper  of  exact  amount 
also.  If  you  have  not  I  would  sell  out  the  remainder  of 
my  stock  as  part  and  not  have  so  much  of  his.  J.  L." 

119.  On  the  21st  February  1867  the  Plaintiff  took  me 
with  her  to  the  said  stockbrokers  and  to  the  Bank  of 
England  where  she  of  her  own  accord  and  without  even  a 
request  from  me  transferred  the  sum  of  .£2,290  9s.  5d. 
Bank  £3  per  Cent.   Consolidated  Annuities  which   the 
brokers  had  told  her  were  still  standing  in  her  name  into 
my  name  as  Daniel  Dunglass  Home  that  being  the  name 
in  which  the  other  consols  were  standing     And  Ihis  she 
did  in  part  repayment  of  the  sum  of  .£3,755  7s.  8d.  con- 
sols which  she  had  borrowed  of  me  as  aforesaid  leaving 
her  still  indebted  to  me  in  the  sum  of  .£1,464  18s.  3d. 
Bank  £3  per  Cent.  Consolidated  Annuities     The  Plaintiff 
took  away  with  her  and  kept  the  papers  relating  to  this 
sum  of  £2,290  9s.  5d.  consols  along  with  my  other  papers 
and  I  never  saw  them     The  Plaintiff  charges  in  the  15th 
paragraph  of  her  Bill  of  Complaint  that  she  was  induced 
by  me  to  accompany  me  to  the  Bank  of  England  and  to 
transfer  this  sum  of  £2,290  9s.  5d.  Bank  £3  per  Cent. 
Consolidated  Annuities  into  my  name  as  Daniel  Dunglass 
Home     And  that  this  last  mentioned  transfer  was  also 
made  by  the  Plaintiff  while  under  the  influence  of  the 
ascendancy  and  power  which  she  alleges  I  had  acquired 
over  her  and  was  then  exercising  by  the  means  in  the 
said  Bill  mentioned     And  she  suppresses  all  mention  of 
her  having  borrowed  the  said  sum  and  more  from  me  or 
from  my  stock  a  few  days  previously  as  aforesaid. 

120.  I  deny  that  the  Plaintiff  was  on  the  21st  Feb- 
ruary 1867  or  at  any  other  time  again  or  in  fact  induced 
by  me  to  accompany  me  to  the  Bank  of  England  and 
transfer  the  sum  of  £2,290  9s.  5d.  or  some  other  and 
what  sum  of  Bank  £3  per  Cent.  Consolidated  Annuities 
into  my  name  as  Daniel  Dunglass  Home  and  I  make  out 
the  contrary  in  manner  aforesaid  and  I  deny  that  the  last 

MR.    HOME.  281 

mentioned  transfer  was  also  or  in  fact  made  by  the  Plain  - 
till'  \\hile  under  the  alleged  influence  of  the  ascendancy 
and  power  which  the  Plaintiff  now  pretends  that  I  had  l»y 
the  means  in  the  said  Bill  mentioned  or  in  fact  acquired 
or  was  then  exercising  over  her  mind  and  I  shall  make 
out  the  contrary  hy  shewing  that  this  charge  is  as  utterly 
without  foundation  as  the  rest  of  her  case. 

121.  I  had  been  home  but  a  few  days  from  Hastings 
when  the  Plaintiff  told  me  that  Mrs.  Pepper  had  got  it 
out  of  her  about  making  over  the  last  mortgage  deed  to 
me  arid  that  Mrs.  Pepper  was  in  a  great  rage  about  it 
and  had  said  fearful  things  about  me  and  wondered  she 
was  not  afraid  I  would  kill  her     I  again  tried  as  1  often 
had  done  to  tell  her  that  this  intimacy  with  such  a  woman 
as  she  well  knew  Mrs.  Pepper  to  be  was  unseemly  but  the 
Plaintiff  used  not  only  to  have  Mrs.  Pepper  sit  with  her 
during  my  absence  but  after   I   returned   I  used  often  to 
find  the  Plaintiff  coming  up  from  the   kitchen     She  had 
taken  a  dislike  to   some  of  my  friends  and  used  to  say 
most  horrible  things  of  them     In   short  my  life  was  a 
misery     I  could  do  nothing  to  please  her     She  used  to 
swear  at  me  when    I  was  so  ill  I  scarcely  knew  what  I 
was  doing  or  where  I  was  but  I  felt  that  I  was  bound  to 
her  and  I  had  not  then  the  moral  courage  to  free  in \ self 
I  became  so  ill  that  again  she  seemed  to  pity  me  and 
before  I  left  for  Torquay  which  I  did  on  or  about  the  10th 
March  1867  she  was  quite  herself  again     She  was  most 
unfeeling  at  times  and  one  evening  when   I  was  ill   she 
said  "  She  had  made  a  pretty  bargain  in  tying  herself  to 
a  living  corpse"  and  that  she  had  heen  a  fool  in  not  doing 
as  Mrs.  Pepper  advised  "  to  adopt  her  son  Joe." 

122.  The  Plaintiff  had  in  the  months  of  January  and 
February   repeatedly   desired    me   to  invest   £20,000    or 
.£25,000  upon  some  mortgage  security  so  as  to  increase 
my  income  which  however  she  would  never  let  me  spend 
I  was  too  ill   to  trouble  myself  about  it  and  she  hei>e!f 
spoke  to   Mr.  Wilkinson  and  desired  him  to  get  a  good 
mortgage  security  for  mo     He   accordingly  procured  a 

282  ANSWER    OF 

mortgage  and  while  I  was  ill  at  Torquay  namely  on  the 
13th  March  1867  the  brokers  sold  out  for  me  a  sum  of 
£21,947  175.  Qd.  Bank  .£3  per  Cent.  Consolidated  Annui- 
ties part  of  the  said  sum  of  £26,756  15s.  5d.  like  annui- 
ties and  ,£6,798  17s.  4c?.  like  annuities  less  the  sums  of 
£3,755  7s.  Sd.  and  £441  7s.  Id.  like  annuities  so  sold 
out  as  aforesaid  but  adding  the  sum  of  £2,290  9s.  5cZ. 
like  annuities  replaced  as  aforesaid  The  said  Mr.  Wil- 
kinson received  the  proceeds  of  such  sale  amounting  to 
£20.000  cash  and  on  my  behalf  and  in  my  name  lent  and 
advanced  such  last  mentioned  sum  upon  mortgage  of  pro- 
perty in  Yorkshire  and  such  sum  of  £20,000  has  ever 
since  been  and  is  now  invested  on  the  security  of  the  said 
mortgage  The  said  security  has  since  been  and  is  now 
deposited  in  this  Court  where  the  Plaintiff  can  inspect  it 
No  part  of  the  said  sum  so  lent  and  advanced  has  been 
repaid. 

123.  I  believe  that  a  sum  of  £9,701  9s.  Qd.  and  not  a 
sum  of  £13,898  4s.  Sd.  Bank  £3  per  Cent.  Consolidated 
Annuities  being  the  residue  or  balance  of  the  said  three 
sums  of  £26,756  15s.  5d.,  £6,798  17s.  4d.  and  £2,290 
9s.  od.  like  annuities  after  deducting  from  the  aggregate 
amount  thereof  the  said  sums  of  £3,755  7s.  Sd.    like 
annuities  lent  and  advanced  to  the  Plaintiff  as   aforesaid 
and  £441  7s.  7d.  like  annuities  sold  as  aforesaid  and  also 
the  further  sum  of  £21,947  17s.  Qd.  sold  out  as  aforesaid 
is  still  standing  in  my  name  as  Daniel  Dunglass  Home  in 
the  books  of  the  Governor  and   Company  of  the  Bank  of 
England     I  do   not  threaten  but  I  intend  to  sell    and 
dispose  thereof  or  deal  therewith  when  this  suit  is  termi- 
nated as  it  in  fact  belongs  to  me. 

124.  During  my  absence  from  London  several  letters 
passed  between  us     I  have  not  kept  copies  of  mine  but 
the  originals  are  still  in  the  Plaintiff's  possession  unless 
she  has  destroyed  them. 

125.  In  a  letter  which  she  wrote  and  sent  to  me  on  the 
17th  March  1867  she  says  "  I  have  had  a  letter  from 

ME.  HOME.  283 

clear  cousin  Lady  Shelley  She  has  been  so  very  ill  and 
has  had  rheumatic  levers  and  her  adopted  daughter  Flossie 
has  been  extremely  ill.  She  says  tell  Dan  how  very  sorry 
Me  were  not  to  have  seen  him  in  London  Do  pray  write 
to  her  in  a  few  days  she  says  She  never  knew  so  very 
trying  a  winter"  And  further  on  "  I  am  glad  you  like 
Torquay  and  have  met  with  friends  you  like  and  that  you 
enjoyed  yourself  yesterday  in  the  sunshine  I  hope  you 
will  enjoy  many  such  days  when  you  are  stronger  and  the 
weather  finer  Go  to  the  Land's  End  and  all  the  pretty 
places  it  will  do  you  good  to  go  about  and  make  yourself 
acquainted  with  the  beauties  of  the  finest  counties  we 
have  It  is  an  excellent  chance  you  have  now  and  believe 
me  my  dear  Daniel  your  affectionate  mother 

"  JANE  LYON." 

I  had  known  Lady  Shelley  since  I860  and  in  the  latter 
part  of  November  1866  I  introduced  her  to  the  Plaintiff 
when  in  the  course  of  conversation  it  was  discovered  that 
their  fathers  were  second  or  third  cousins  and  that  Lady 
Shelley  had  the  same  name  as  the  Plaintiff  and  comparing 
notes  they  stated  that  they  had  both  been  from  their 
childhood  very  wonderful  mediums  The  Flossie  alluded 
to  is  also  a  very  wonderful  medium  In  the  month  of 
February  1867  the  Plaintiff  told  me  when  angry  with  me 
on  one  occasion  that  she  intended  to  make  a  new  Will  in 
favour  of  her  new  found  relatives  Lady  Shelley  and  her 
family  To  this  I  answered  that  she  was  quite  welcome 
to  do  so  as  far  as  I  was  concerned  but  that  as  her  money 
came  principally  from  her  husband  I  thought  it  would  be 
just  to  give  his  relatives  some  of  it  This  only  increased 
her  anger  and  she  said  "  Not  one  farthing'*  In  further 
proof  of  her  spite  against  her  husband's  relatives  and 
desire  to  display  to  them  "her  high  folks"  I  insert  an 
extract  from  a  letter  written  by  the  PlaintilF  to  -Mrs.  Tom 
Fellowes  011  the  5th  December  1866 

"  5th  December. 
"  My  dear  Mrs.  Fellowes, — Many  thanks   for  your 

284  ANSWER    OF 

kind  letters  I  am  very  well  The  indisposition  you  allude 
to  was  very  short  indeed  I  send  by  this  post  '  The 
Spiritual  Magazine'  The  article  called  '  The  freed  soul' 
was  written  by  me  and  copied  by  my  husband  in  1826 
You  will  see  by  this  that  I  have  not  in  the  least  changed 
my  belief  My  health  is  very  good  and  I  go  out  to  dine 
quite  often  I  have  been  delighted  to  find  Sir  Percy 
Shelley's  wife  my  cousin  He  is  the  only  son  of  the  poet 
and  I  shall  hope  to  see  a  good  deal  of  her  Her  name 
was  Jane  Gibson  we  were  named  after  the  same  woman 
She  is  very  desirous  we  should  pay  them  a  long  visit  in 
January  and  if  we  can  so  arrange  it  we  will." 

The  Plaintiff  had  in  fact  I  believe  composed  the  article 
alluded  to  in  the  above  letter  in  or  before  the  year  1826 
and  in  the  month  of  November  or  December  1866  she 
without  consulting  me  caused  this  article  to  be  inserted  in 
the  "  Spiritual  Magazine  "  and  was  afterwards  much  vexed 
"  that  she  had  neglected  to  publish  that  the  authoress  was 
the  mother  of  the  celebrated  D.  D.  Home." 

126.  On  the  19th  March  1867  she  wrote  and  sent  to 
me  the  following  letter  addressed  to  Torquay : — 

"  19th  March,  1867. 

"  My  dear  Daniel, — You  say  your  birth-day  is  the  20th 
i.  e.  to-morrow  May  you  see  many  of  them  and  may  they 
be  happy  days  full  of  health  and  joy  Look  forward  to  see 
my  words  verified  for  I  write  with  the  thought  and  pen  of 
inspiration  Your  health  will  flourish  like  the  young  bay 
tree  full  of  life  and  sap  I  will  never  see  those  far  days 
but  you  will  remember  my  prophetic  prognostications 
herein  I  am  glad  you  sleep  well  and  your  cough  is  much 
better  You  will  all  be  well  together  very  soon  think  of 
that  only  The  weather  here  is  most  thoroughly  miserable 
snowing  one  hour  sleeting  the  next  cold  and  comfortless 
we  never  see  the  color  of  the  sky  it  is  so  black  My  cold 
no  better  no  getting  out  no  change  forme  the  sooner  I  am 
off  to  the  sunshine  land  if  such  the  better  You  say  that 
50  miles  from  here  the  ground  is  covered  with  siiow  2  and 

MR.    HOME.  285 

3  feet  illicit  Lut  yon  do  not  say  whether  east  or  west  This 
von  will  sav  in  your  next  God  bless  and  protect  and 
restore  you  to  p •  rfcct  health  and  may  your  birthday  of 
/68  be  more  auspicious  and  am  my  dear  Daniel  your  very 
affectionate  mother 

"  JANE  LYON." 

This  is  the  last  letter  in  which  she  signs  herself  mother 
In  the  llth  paragraph  of  her  said  affidavit  filed  on  the 
i27th  June  1867  the  Plaintiff  swears  that  in  December 
I860  I  induced  her  to  believe  that  the  spirit  of  her  de- 
ceased husband  directed  or  wished  her  to  give  me  a  birth- 
da  v  present  of  £6,000  and  that  she  accordingly  did  so  on 
the  10th  December  1866  in  the  manner  therein  mentioned 
although  she  had  in  a  letter  written  to  the  Defendant 
AVilkinson  on  the  7th  December  1866  without  my  privity 
or  knowledge  said  "On  the  occasion  of  my  adopted  son 
taking  the  name  of  Lyon  I  wish  to  give  him  a  little  sur- 
prise I  intend  to  add  six  thousand  pounds  to  the  twenty- 
four  I  have  already  given  him  making  a  sum  total  of 
thirty  thousand." 

127.  During  my  absence  at  Torquay  the  Plaintiff  not- 
withstanding the  kind  expressions  in  her  letters  towards 
me  was  endeavouring  to  fabricate  evidence  against  me  and 
plie  attempted  to  bribe  amongst  others  as  I  shall  prove 
Eliza  Clymow  the  servant  in  Mrs.  Pepper's  lodgings  to 
.swear  contrary  to  the  truth  that  she  had  never  posted  any 
letters  for  the  Plaintiff  to  Mr.  Wilkinson  and  that  she  had 
heard  me  this  Defendant  dictate  letters  for  the  Plaintiff  to 
write  Finding  that  this  poor  girl's  honesty  was  proof 
against  her  efforts  the  Plaintiff  began  to  abuse  her  in  her 
letters  to  me  and  on  Tuesday  the  2nd  April  1867  the 
Plaintiff  wrote  and  sent  to  me  the  following  letter  ad- 
dressed to  Plymouth  : — 

"Tuesday,  2nd  April,  /07. 

"My  dear  Daniel, — T  hope  you  like  Plimoth  and  the 
Royal  Hotel  You  must  not  come  to  London  so  soon  as 
you  say  You  must  remain  for  two  or  three  weeks  longer 

286  ANSWER    OF 

and  go  to  Penzance  they  say  it  is  equal  to  the  South  of 
France  and  no  doubt  it  will  do  you  good  the  change  of 
air  and  you  are  so  far  on  your  road  I  wish  you  much  to 
see  it  Miss  Peal  is  there  and  this  is  some  inducement  for 
you  to  go  I  want  to  hear  all  about  it  and  the  beauties  of 
Cornwall  I  think  as  your  cough  is  a  good  deal  better 
you  may  venture  in  a  few  days  or  a  week's  time  and 
either  stay  there  or  return  to  Plimoth  if  you  like  it.  I  do 
not  wish  you  to  come  to  this  house  as  I  am  going  to  quit 
'  I  have  been  to  No.  1  where  you  called  once  a  Mrs. 
Loudon  told  me  you  said  it  was  for  a  lady  but  you  did  not 
say  who  or  she  would  have  agreed  to  take  me  and  she  is 
very  sorry  she  did  not  However  she  will  take  me  as  soon 
as  I  can  leave  I  have  said  I  would  not  stay  if  Eliza  re- 
mained she  is  a  very  bad  slut  and  story  teller  I  think  her 
most  dangerous  She  is  not  any  friend  of  yours  or  of  mine 
but  I  do  not  mind  that  she  can  do  us  no  harm  and  it  will 
do  you  good  to  remain  in  the  west  until  towards  the  latter 
end  of  this  month  and  take  great  care  of  yourself  and  you 
will  soon  be  WELL  J.  Fellowes  is  in  the  Koyal  Engineers 
but  I  do  not  wish  you  to  court  his  acquaintance  his  mother 
and  Charlotte  Dennison  was  here  I  did  not  see  them  I  did 
not  wish  to  The  latter  is  to  be  bridesmaid  the  marriage 
is  to  take  place  on  the  7th  of  May  Charlotte  is  on  a 
visit  to  the  intended  at  Plimoth  Miss  Hodges  I  mean 
to  have  my  boxes  away  shortly  but  I  hate  to  go  to  the 
house  of  Mrs.  J.  Fellowes  to  have  them  away  but  I  will 
shortly  I  am  quite  well  and  to-day  I  have  began  to  alter 
some  clothes  and  things  required  and  am 

"  Yours  most  affectionately, 

"JANE  LYON." 

128.  Although  I  have  kept  no  copies  of  my  letters  to 
the  Plaintiff  I  distinctly  remember  writing  to  her  about 
this  time  and  mentioning  that  I  had  heard  there  was  a 
skeleton  hand  in  the  Roman  Catholic  Chapel  belonging  to 
the  Gerrards  near  Warrington  in  Lancashire  which  was 

ME.    HOME.  287 

reputed  to  possess  miraculous  powers  of  healing  and  that 
I  thought  of  trying  it  She  tried  to  take  advantage  of 
this  in  the  following  letters  to  entrap  me  into  some  sort 
of  admission  that  we  ought  to  follow  implicitly  whatever 
spirits  may  dictate  I  believe  that  she  was  incited  to  do 
this  by  the  said  Mr.  Henry  Gould  Gibson  who  at  this 
time  visited  her  almost  daily  and  he  wrote  at  least  one 
letter  to  make  inquiries  about  me  unknown  to  myself  The 
said  Mr.  Henry  Gould  Gibson  also  wrote  a  letter  to  me 
dated  1st  April  1867  in  which  he  asked  me  to  give  him 
permission  to  ask  the  Plaintiff  to  lend  him  £500  at  .£10 
per  cent,  interest  wishing  me  to  "  drop  a  line  "  to  Mrs. 
Lyon  to  inform  her  that  he  would  do  so  I  now  believe 
and  charge  it  to  be  the  fact  that  the  said  Mr.  Henry 
Gould  Gibson  of  number  33  Mark -lane  in  the  City  of 
London  wine  merchant  wrote  this  letter  with  the  full 
knowledge  and  connivance  of  the  Plaintiff  for  the  purpose 
of  inveigling  me  into  some  sort  of  implied  admission  that 
I  had  great  influence  over  the  Plaintiff  and  that  she  could 
not  manage  her  own  business  affairs  without  me  whereas 
in  truth  and  in  fact  I  should  not  have  dared  to  write  nor 
aivordingly  did  I  write  any  such  request  to  the  Plaintiff. 

11*0.  On  the  4th  April  18G7  the  Plaintiff  wrote  and 
sent  me  the  following  letter : — 

"Thursday,  4th  April,  /67. 

"  My  dear  Daniel, — You  would  have  a  letter  from  me 
when  you  got  to  Plymouth  You  wish  to  know  where 
James  Fellowes  is  quartered  it  is  at  PicJclecombe  Fort 
Devonport  I  send  you  his  photograph  I  do  not  dislike 
him  I  think  him  a  very  good  young  fellow  I  know  nothing 
against  him  WHATKVER  /  wish  him  well  with  all  my 

heart     It  is  is  mother  I  dislike  she  is  a  d 1  out  and 

out  You  astonish  me  respecting  the  hand  If  the  spirits 
think  it  will  do  you  good  go  in  God's  name  if  not  stay 
where  you  are  or  go  to  Penzance  Do  the  spirits  com- 
municate with  you  ?  For  my  part  I  shall  let  them  go  to 
sleep  I  never  think  of  them  or  them  of  me  Mr.  Gibson 

288  ANSWER    OF 

was  here  to-day  is  just  left  me     He  said  he  would  write 
to  you  not  to  come  to  the  ameture  performance  and  am  in 

haste  yours  affectionately, 

J  "JANE  LYON. 

130.  Again  on  the  7th  April  1867  the  Plaintiff  wrote 
and  sent  me  the  following  letter : — 

"  Sunday,  7th  April,  /67. 

"My  dear  Daniel, — I  hope  you  feel  better  for  the 
change  you  have  had  so  like  a  weathercock  E.  W.N.  South 
You  mean  to  try  the  spirit-hand  no  doubt  I  am  still  in 
the  same  quarters  for  a  week  or  two  longer  but  have  had 
a  quantum  suf  although  I  do  not  blame  so  much  Mrs. 
Pepper  as  the  good  for  nothing  servant  Would  it  not  be 
better  for  you  to  go  at  once  to  France  as  you  can  now- 
cross  the  Channel?  No  doubt  it  would  do  you  good  the 
change  of  air  suits  you  I  shall  not  quit  London  for  some 
time  yet  and  you  would  return  in  a  month  or  two  and  pack 
up  your  things  at  the  Athenaeum  for  I  do  not  think  it  will 
be  carried  on  much  longer  Then  probably  I  might  go 
but  'tis  quite  uncertain  as  I  think  it  will  be  better  to  leave 
well  alone  but  I  shall  as  usual  go  to  the  sea-side  Mr. 
Harrison  Green  sent  yesterday  a  lot  of  new  laid  eggs  for 
you  but  they  would  not  pay  for  the  carriage  to  Liverpool 
I  have  a  person  working  for  me  in  my  room  and  if  you 
come  to  London  soon  to  pack  up  your  things  previous  to 
your  going  to  Paris  you  can  breakfast  and  dine  at  your 
lodgings  or  at  Michell's  and  come  to  me  at  six  o'clock 
You  will  then  have  the  day  to  yourself  and  so  shall  I  with 
my  workwoman  She  goes  at  six  o'clock  you  can  then  if 
you  chose  have  tea  a  chop  or  steak  with  me  Mr. 
Bernard  the  lame  gentleman  lives  here  and  creates  a  great 
deal  of  additional  work  I  wish  I  were  out  of  it  I  fear 
poor  Jencken  is  very  ill  I  hope  your  are  very  much 
better  although  you  may  not  be  quite  well  I  sincerely 
believe  you  will  after  you  have  been  in  France  a  time 
Then  you  may  say  I  have  been  to  France  and  I  am  so 
well  that  now  I  have  learnt  to  dance  I  understand  the 

MR.    HOME.  289 

private  theatricals  went  off  well  and  your  "boy  SacTia  per- 
formed wonders  that  is  a  piece  of  good  news  for  you  viz. 
that  your  boy  will  be  a  star  May  you  live  to  see  him 
shine  and  am  my  dear  Daniel  your  affectionately 

"JANE  LYON." 

131.  Again  in  another  letter  which  she  wrote  to  me 
about  this  time  but  which  is  merely  dated  Sunday  night 
she  says  : — "  Mr.  Gibson  was  here  last  night." 

132.  Feeling  at  this  time  very  unwell  and  depressed  in 
spirits  with  an  indistinct  foreshadowing  of  the  evil  which 
was  impending  over  me  I  wrote  to  her  to  that  effect     She 
answered  it  in  a  mode  which  from  her  reference  to  my 
boy  whom  I  know  she  by  this  time  hated  was  meant  to  be 
sarcastic. 

«  Thursday. 

"  My  dear  Daniel, — I  am  very  sorry  to  hear  that  you 
feel  yourself  sometimes  so  depressed  in  thought  You 
have  no  reason  to  be  so  Look  forward  to  brighter  days 
when  you  will  as  I  told  you  in  a  former  letter  be  quite 
well  it  will  be  so  Look  forward  to  see  your  son  an  orna- 
ment a  shining  star  as  I  told  you  he  will  in  all  probability 
be  He  is  your  son  the  image  of  yourself  in  every  way 
temper  and  disposition  You  must  be  proud  of  your  son 
Take  care  of  yourself  for  his  sake  that  you  may  live  to 
see  him  grow  up." 

133.  On  the  13th  April  18G7  the  Plaintiff  wrote  and 
sent  me  the  following  letter : — 

"  17a  Albert  Terrace,  Albert  Gate, 

"Hyde  Park,  13th  April, /G7. 

«•  Saturday. 

"  My  dear  Daniel, — T  am  indeed  very  sorry  that  you  do 
not  seem  to  get  much  better  for  the  excursion  and  change 
of  air  You  say  that  3-011  are  going  to  try  the  wonderful 
hand  I  do  not  think  you  will  derive  benefit  therefrom  I 
fear  it  is  an  imposture  like  many  others  However  there 
is  no  proof  like  trial  so  you  mi^ht  regret  you  did  not  make 
that  when  you  quit  Liverpool  so  if  you  get  no  good  i 
u 

290  AN8W23E    OF 

trust  in  God  you  wilt  get  no  harm  but  I  think  yon 
ask  the  spirits  for  their  advice  in  the  matter  but  that  is  too 
late  and  by  this  time  you  will  know  all  about  it  They  say 
the  spirits  are  not  to  be  relied  upon  at  all  times  I 
wish  you  had  gone  to  Penzance  as  I  think  Liverpool  is 
far  too  cold  for  you  however  you  should  keep  up  your 
spirits  There  are  better  clays  in  store  for  you  as  I  know 
by  TRUE  inspiration  that  you  will  get  better  of  this  and  be 
quite  well  it  may  be  a  little  time  first  but  you  must  be 
looking  forward  until  that  good  time  arrives  patience  and 
resignation  A  word  to  the  wise  you  know  may  do  a  little 
good  The  weather  here  is  very  changeable  it  is  to-day 
rainy  cold  and  comfortless  enough  to  drive  one  into  the 
dolefuls  I  wonder  if  the  spirit-land  is  any  better  if  worse 
God  help  them  that  is  there  It  is  all  to  prove  if  we  shall 
be  able  to  do  so  If  I  had  been  the  Great  Giver  of  all 
good  I  think  J  should  have  given  all  good  not  one  particle 
of  evil  no  pain  no  sickness  no  sorrow  no  death  no  dark 
gloomy  weather  all  sunshine  and  joy  no  storms  at  sea  no 
shipwrecks  all  calm  and  beautiful  all  spiritual  no  mortality 
no  flesh  no  decay  the  earth  always  beautiful  growing 
spontaneously  whatever  we  desire  delicate  fruits  and  ever 
shining  flowers  of  exquisite  beauty  birds  of  the  most 
splendid  beauty  ever  singing  chattering  and  amusing  you 
in  fact  angels  themselves  no  labour  but  that  of  tuning 
your  instruments  and  cultivating  your  exquisite  flowers 
and  transporting  yourself  to  ever  varying  endless  scenes  of 
beauty  and  variety  music  and  angelic  musicians  ever 
varying  their  tunes  sitting  on  banks  of  flowers  Oh  !  could 
we  be  assured  of  that  the  sooner  we  are  off  the  better  Heigh 
for  the  spirit-land  lay  down  the  flesh  and  be  off  to  the 
spirit-land  lay  down  your  bones  and  be  off  to  the  spirit- 
land  I  have  no  time  to  say  more. 

"In  haste  my  dear  Daniel  yours  affectionately 

"JANE  LYON." 

134.  I  think  this  is  the  last  letter  I  received  before  I 
returned  to  London  which  I  did  on  the  22nd  April  IS 67 

MR.    ROME.  201 

and  spent  tlie  evening  with  her  T  had  written  to  Mr. 
lludall  to  spend  the  evening  with  us  for  by  this  time  I 
had  a  nervous  dread  of  being  alone  with  the  Plaintiff  Who 
knew  that  for  private  reasons  I  had  a  horror  of  insanity 
which  she  took  advantage  of  to  awe  me  and  have  me  still 
more  under  her  control  She  used  to  feign  in  her  con- 
versation as  she  afterwards  did  in  her  letters  a  singularity 
of  manners  which  had  been  up  to  this  time  or  at  any  rate 
before  February  quite  foreign  to  her. 

135.  On   my  return  Mrs.  Lyon   openly   evinced  her 
dislike  to  me  and  her  hatred  of  my  child  whom  she  would 
never  even  see     She  used  also  when  we  were  alone  to  tell 
me  she  had  me  in  her  power  and  if  I  did  not  take  care 
would  make  me  feel  it     I  was  still  in  a  feeble  state  of 
health  and  her  manner  so  preyed  upon  my  mind  that  I 
was  soon  much  worse  than  when   I  returned  and   Dr. 
Gully  told  the  Plaintiff  that  I  was  in  a  very  dangerous 
way     Then  all  of  a  sudden  her  former  affection  and  kind- 
ness for  a  moment  returned  and  one  morning  she  came 
up  saying  "  Oh  that  horrid  Mrs.  Pepper  how  she  does 
hate  you  I  dare  say  it  is  because  you  would  not  lend  her 
the  money  she  wanted     She  has  just  been   saying  that 
Mr.  Verra  had  told  her  that  I  (the  Plaintiff)  was  a  fool  to 
have  given  my  money  to  a  swindler  like  you  but  I  told 
her  that  I  had  never  made  so  good  an  investment."  I  left 
town  on  the  1st  or  2nd  May  for  Malvern. 

136.  Much  correspondence   passed  again  between  us 
during  my  absence     I  have  not  kept  copies  of  my  letters 
but  the  originals  are  in  the  Plaintiff's  possession  unless  she 
has  destroyed  them     In  the  first  letter  which  she  wrote  to 
me  after  my  departure  she  said  "  Mr.  Gibson  was  here  last 
night  enquiring  after  you     I  hope  you  will  write  two  or 
three  times  a  week  just  to  let  me  know  how  you  progress 
two  or  three  times  will  suffice  unless  you  have  any  subject 
to  communicate  to  me  as  I  do  not  always  expect  a  long 
letter  like  the  last  but  there  is  one  thing  do  not  forget  to 
put  day  of  month  and  residence." 

292  ANSWER    OF 

137.  On  the  4th  May  1867  she  wrote  me  as  follows  :— 

"  Saturday,  4th  May. 

"  My  dear  Daniel, — Please  to  return  my  blank  cheques 
by  return  of  post  You  have  put  me  to  great  incon- 
venience by  taking  my  cheque  book  instead  of  your  own 
which  is  of  no  use  to  me  whatever  You  know  you  got 
the  last  in  my  book  to  change  I  particularly  wanted  to 
make  out  a  cheque  to-day  and  found  I  could  not  as  you 
had  taken  my  book  and  left  yours  Be  sure  you  at  once 
return  mine  or  as  many  as  you  have  and  I  will  imme- 
diately enclose  yours  in  a  letter  Take  off  the  back  I  will 
do  the  same  by  yours  I  cannot  make  a  cheque  until  I 
get  them  In  haste, 

"  Yours  &c. 

"JANE  LYON. 

"  I  hope  you  do  feel  better  let  me  know  Perhaps  it  will 
be  as  well  to  send  three  or  four  complete  with  the  memo- 
randum part  I  will  do  the  same  by  yours  Do  not  use 
any  more  of  mine  which  are  orders  You  recollect  yours 
are  blue — by  bearer — and  in  no  way  proper  for  me 
Therefore  use  no  more  of  them." 

I  had  not  even  seen  her  cheque  book  and  by  this  time 
would  not  have  touched  it  for  the  world  The  cheque 
which  she  mentions  my  having  cashed  was  for  herself. 

138.  On  the  7th  May  1867  she  wrote  me  as  follows  :— 

"  7th  May,  1867. 

"  My  dear  Daniel, — I  am  sorry  I  wrote  to  you  in  such 
a  pet  respecting  the  cheque  book  I  certainly  was  greatly 
annoyed  to  find  I  could  not  make  out  when  I  wanted  one 
so  very  particularly  I  thought  you  had  taken  away  mine 
instead  of  your  own  However  I  have  been  to  the  Bank 
to-day  and  had  it  changed  for  one  as  I  usually  have  I 
know  I  wrote  savagely  I  do  not  recollect  what  I  said 
Destroy  it  You  say  you  are  getting  stronger  I  am  glad 
to  hear  it  but  you  know  you  are  to  get  better  the  spirit 
that  you  rely  on  says  so  therefore  that  is  proof  Your 

MR.    HOME.  293 

sister-in-law  has  as  you  state  gone  to  live  again  with  her 
husband  after  a  trial  to  divorce  her  He  must  be  a  poor 
wretch  to  live  with  her  after  knowing  her  so  well  but  I 
suppose  they  are  both  alike  pot  and  kettle  But  do  not 
imagine  you  will  ever  get  money  from  him  to  found 
promises  upon  an  impossibility  which  you  will  never  suc- 
ceed to  obtain  until  the  moon  is  made  of  cheese  and  comes 
down  upon  earth  to  be  eaten  by  men  therefore  be  at  no 
expense  on  that  business  for  sooner  will  you  get  wings 
yourself  and  fly  to  him  and  bite  off  his  nose  This  is  quite 
as  likely  altho'  they  say  cows  may  fly  but  very  unlikely 
Mr.  Hall  called  yesterday  he  and  his  wife  goes  to  Paris 
Monday  fortnight  I  expect  company  to  spend  the  day 
to-morrow  therefore  I  wrote  to  put  off  Mrs.  Riche  and 
your  boy  until  you  come  home  and  he  will  like  it  quite  as 
well  and  better  I  know  Please  present  my  regards  to  Dr. 
Gully  and  his  sister  Ellen  your  dear  respected  friend  her 
sister  if  at  home  and  believe  me  yours  affectionately 

"JANE  LYON." 

139.  On  the  13th  May  1867  she  wrote  and  sent  to  me 
a  letter  addressed  to  Malvern  where  I  then  was  in  which 
she  says : — "  I  am  heartily  glad  to  hear  you  are  so  much 
better  but  have  little  doubt  of  your  ultimate  recovery  or 
what  would  the  spirits'  word  go  for  ?     We  must  bid  good- 
by  to  them  as  they  have  always  said  you  had  a  great  work 
to  perform  on  earth  before  you  departed      I  wonder  what 
it  is     Are  you  going  to  bring  down  the  moon  to  earth  to 
let  us  see  what  it  is  made  of?     Then  we  shall  see  what 
we  shall  see  as  the  showman  says     With  regard  to  the 
Russian  money  I  am  glad  you  are  so  sure  of  it     All  I 
can  say  I  wish  you  may  get  it"  and  further  on  "  My 
hopes  are  in  eternity     The  spirits  say  I  shall  be  blessed 
in  this  state     They  are  not  to  be  relied  upon     By  tho 
spirits  I  have  been  told  many  things  that  are  far  from 
being  correct  as  yet." 

140.  Again  on  the  21st  May  1867  she  wrote  and  sent 
me  the  following  letter : — 

294  ANSWER    OP 

"  Tnpsdny,  21st  May. 

"My  dear  Daniel, — By  yours  of  this  morning  I  am 
happy  to  find  yon  are  no  worse  also  by  a  nice  letter  from 
your  dear  friend  Miss  E.  Gully  I  had  yesterday  she  gives 
me  great  hopes  that  you  will  soon  be  well  again  so  to 
prove  the  spirits  true  who  always  say  you  will  get  quite 
well  therefore  do  look  forward  and  never  dispond  You 
are  under  the  care  of  God  and  excellent  good  friends  You 
are  a  most  fortunate  fellow  you  have  been  born  under  a 
fortunate  planet  You  were  in  a  bad  way  when  you  left 
London  pale  and  sickly  when  you  return  you  will  not  be 
rosey  for  that  does  not  belong  to  you  but  health  will  I 
have  no  doubt  be  depicted  on  your  countenance  and  many 
years'  duration  thereof." 

She  herself  in  her  letter  to  me  of  the  19th  March  wherein 
she  laid  claim  to  inspiration  had  predicted  that  I  would 
get  quite  well. 

141.  I  had  written  to  tell  her  that  the  doctors  said  I 
would  be  able  to  go  to  town  in  ten  days  and  on  the  27th 
May  1867  she  wrote  to  me  as  follows : — 

"Monday,  27  May, /67. 

"My  dear  Daniel, — I  am  rather  surprised  to  find  that 
you  are  as  you  state  viz.  ( I  am  about  as  I  was '  that  is  to 
say  the  same  as  when  I  left  London  I  am  indeed  very 
sorry  for  that  you  were  much  better  However  I  still  believe 
there  is  a  time  for  all  things  that  you  will  eventually  get 
better  probably  never  quite  well  but  very  different  from 
what  you  are  at  present  and  the  spirits  say  that  you  will 
be  strong  in  ten  days  that  will  soon  be  up  and  then  you 
will  prove  their  power  and  veracity  although  I  think  they 
have  not  such  powers  The  time  is  not  come  for  them  to 
display  it  however  the  great  God's  will  must  be  done  we 
all  must  succumb  to  that  sooner  or  later  and  as  the  world 
goes  there  is  not  much  worth  living  for  and  if  we  have  not 
health  there  is  nothing  if  robbed  of  life's  great  blessing 
we  but  drag  on  our  weary  way  with  pain  distaste  and 
sorrow  but  let  us  look  forward  into  that  mystery  of  mys- 

JlfTJ.    HO  ME.  295 

tones  another  and  a  better  state  another  worW  Oh  had 
«<>me  ]x)\ver  the  giftie  gie  us  to  see  that  world  as  spirits 
see  it  then  would  our  minds  be  set  at  rest  I  hope  with 
sights  to  ma  fee  ns  blest  You  astonished  me  with  the  paper 
houses  and  paper  boats  I  wonder  what  next  flying1  I 
hope  I  shall  see  that  before  I  fly  off  and  be  no  more  seen 
paper  wings  and  paper  houses  to  carry  on  our  backs  and 
set  them  down  where  we  please  Oh  would  not  that  be 
fine  '  Over  the  water  and  over  the  sea  and  over  the  water 
to  Charlie'  '  Oh  for  the  happy  days  of  good  Queen 
Bess '  Mr.  Rimel  sent  the  enclosed  When  you  send  a 
cheque  for  your  subscription  please  put  one  pound  for  me 
as  I  promised  him  to  give  Keep  up  your  heart  Better 
davs  coming  for  you  All  love  to  all  kind  friends  Yours 
affectionately  *  "  JAXE  LYON." 

142.  From  the  6th  May  1867  the  Plaintiff  had  in  fact 
been  taking  final  measures  to  prepare  for  the  Chancery 
suit  against  me  which  by  this  time  at  latest  she  had  re- 
solved on    And  had  been  in  consultation  with  the  said  Mr. 
Bailey  of  Sloane-street  for  that  purpose     Notwithstanding 
which  she  still  wrote  affectionately  to  me     She  had  been 
exceedingly  angry  with  me  before  I  left  town  because  I 
had   been  on  the  Committee  for  the  French  Hospital  to 
which  her  enclosure  in  the  last  letter  had  reference  and 
because  I  had  subscribed  ten  guineas  and  she  then  said  I 
was  very  lavish  "  with  other  people's  money." 

143.  On  the  30th  May  1867  the  Plaintiff  had  an  inter- 
view with  the  said  Mr.  Jenckcn  to  whom  she  had  written 
for  the  purpose      And  she  consulted  him  how  she  should 
recover  from  me  and  the  Defendant  Wilkinson  the  trust 
deed  and  mortgage  security  for  the  £30,000  which  she 
had  settled  upon  me  as  aforesaid  after  her  decease     And 
she  told  him  that  she  did  not  wish  to  disturb  the  gifts  of 
£24.000  and  £6,000  to  me  but  thought  that  she  had  been 
too  lavish  in  bestowing  on  me  the  subsequent  gift  Still  she 
bad  not  asked  me  to  restore  it  or  expressed  a  wish  to  that 
effect  and  I  knew  nothing  of  her  secret  design  to  recover  it. 

296  ANSWER    OF 

144.  On  the  following  day  namely  the  31st  May  1867 
she  wrote  and  sent  to  me  at  Malvern  the  following 
letter : — 

"Thursday,  31st May. 

"  My  dear  Daniel, — I  am  glad  to  hear  you  are  better 
than  I  thought  from  the  wording  of  your  letter  although  I 
think  you  are  not  sufficiently  well  to  quit  the  locality  of  your 
friends  at  Malvern  from  whence  you  will  obtain  if  it  is  to 
be  got  your  permanent  recovery  therefore  I  say  stay  where 
you  are  until  your  throat  is  better  You  remember  I  told 
you  to  when  you  left  do  not  return  until  you  are  quite 
well  you  are  not  required  here  by  anyone  that  I  am  aware 
of  therefore  stay  where  you  are  required  to  perfect  your 
recovery  Mr.  Starling  wishes  he  had  remained  longer 
saying  it  would  have  been  ''better  for  him  then  I  said 
return  again  *  Ah*  said  he  '  But  now  I  am  in  London ' 
therefore  do  not  repent  when  in  London  wishing  you  had 
remained  for  further  improvement  Get  all  the  benefit 
you  can  from  your  good  friends  and  I'am  sure  the  spirits 
wish  you  to  I  saw  Mr.  Jenckin  yesterday  just  returned 
from  Paris  With  kind  regards  to  your  friends  at  Malvern 
yours  affectionately, 

"  JANE  LYON." 

And  on  the  6th  June  1867  she  wrote  and  sent  me  the 
following  letter : — 

"  17a,  Albert  Terrace,  Albert  Gate, 

"  Hyde  Park,  6th  June,  /67, 

"  Thursday. 

"  My  dear  Daniel, — You  say  I  will  be  delighted  to  hear 
you  have  got  a  frightful  cold  I  do  not  see  that  a  frightful 
cold  will  in  the  least  benefit  your  disease  and  you  said  in 
your  last  'A  bad  beginning  makes  a  good  end'  I  think 
the  reverse  I  am  sorry  you  have  got  a  bad  cold  and  am 
sorry  you  had  a  bad  beginning  tor  I  have  always  been 
told  that  makes  a  worse  end  You  have  not  been  well 
since  I  knew  you  More  is  the  pity  for  you  I  do  PITTY 
YOU  The  spirits  instead  of  doing  you  good  does  the 

.    HOME.  297 

reverse  therefore  I  would  cut  them  in  toto  wash  your  hands 
of  them  as  I  mean  to  do  They  are  not  to  be  relied  upon 
I  had  a  book  sent  to  me  last  week  which  has  made  some 
inpression  on  my  mind  /  will  not  at  present  make  any 
comment  or  observation  thereon  but  at  a  future  time  I  will 
tell  you  what  I  think  of  it  May  you  GET  WELL  and  be 
happy  without  spirits  or  spiritual  power  It  tends  to  no 
good  Rather  the  reverse  Mrs.  Pepper  has  desired  me 
often  to  request  you  to  enclose  her  street-door  key  in  a 
letter  to  me  but  I  have  always  forgot  to  name  it  Will 
you  please  to  send  it  me  in  your  next  letter  ?  Then  I  shall 
be  done  with  her  bother  about  it  I  wish  you  had  not 
taken  it  with  you  However  do  send  it  at  once  She  is 
afraid  you  have  lost  it  Then  she-  must  she  says  have  a 
new  lock  to  her  door  I  have  had  a  letter  from  Mrs. 
Senior  who  writes  from  her  bed  I  have  answered  her 
letter  I  like  her  much  I  do  not  see  Mr.  Starling  but 
hope  he  will  go  to  Malvern  My  best  regards  to  Dr.  and 
Miss  Gully  and  am  yours  affectionately, 

"JANE  LYON." 

145.  The  book  referred  to  in  the  last  letter  was  as  the 
Plaintiff  herself  afterwards  informed  me  a  book  written 
upon  spiritualism  by  a  Frenchman  named  Chevalier.  He 
advertised  in  this  work  that  he  had  been  a  member  of  the 
Spiritual  Athenaeum  hereinbefore  mentioned  which  was 
untrue  And  although  he  stated  that  the  phenomena  of 
spiritualism  could  not  be  and  were  not  produced  by  fraud 
or  contrivance  yet  he  attributed  them  to  the  Evil  One 
He  has  lately  I  believe  with  the  Plaintiff's  permission 
added  a  printed  slip  or  notice  to  the  book  to  the  effect  that 
it  was  in  consequence  of  having  read  this  book  that  the 
present  proceedings  in  Chancery  were  commenced  which 
is  also  untrue  as  hereinbefore  appears. 

140.  I  have  been  informed  and  believe  and  I  charge 
that  immediately  before  and  subsequently  to  writing  the 
above  letter  the  Plaintiff  was  having  seances  with  true  or 
pretended  spiritual  mediums. 

298  ANSWER    OF 

147.  On  the  8th  June  1867  she  wrote  and  sent  to  me 
the  following  letter  also  addressed  to  Malvern  where  I 
was: — 

"  Saturday. 

"  My  dear  Daniel, — I  am  sorry  you  have  not  sent  the 
key  as  I  am  sure  I  could  not  write  stronger  on  that  point 
Now  I  request  again  that  I  may  have  the  key  on  Monday 
morning  it  is  particularly  required  hy  Mrs.  Pepper  as  I 
told  you  in  my  last  she  requires  it  for  a  gentleman  who 
sleeps  in  the  house  They  are  she  says  obliged  to  sit  up 
to  let  him  in  therefore  send  it  at  once  and  do  not  come 
here  on  Wednesday  you  will  not  see  or  be  sufficiently  well 
remain  until  you  are  quite  well  Do  not  come  on  my  ac- 
count for  I  mean  carefully  to  avoid  any  more  manifesta- 
tions they  are  not  good  and  do  not  tend  thereto  I  was 
happier  before  I  had  any  of  them  and  am 

"  Yours  affectionately, 

"JANE  LYON." 

148.  As  I  had  used  the  latch  key  of  her  lodgings  to 
which  she  referred  to  let  myself  in  throughout  the  winter 
and  I  knew  as  the  fact  was  that  the  latch  key  was  not 
really  required  by  any  one  else  and  observing  the  angry 
and  impatient  tone  of  her  letters  I  concluded  1  had  better 
at  once  return     I  did  so  on  Sunday  the  9th  June  1867 
And  at  half-past  eleven  o'clock  on  the  following  morning 
(Monday  the  10th  June)  I  went  to  call  on  her     I  found 
the  outer  door  locked  instead  of  being  on  the  latch  as 
usual  and  when  the  servant  had  opened  the  door  I  went 
to  the  Plaintiff's  sitting-room     She  appeared  very  glad  to 
see  me  and  was  extremely  demonstrative  in  her  affection 
She  expressed  sorrow  that  I  was  not  looking  better     I 
said  that  I  was  sorry  that  my  ill  health  had  kept  me  away 
from  her     She  said  "  Yes  poor  fellow  they  may  say  what 
they  like  against  you  but  they  can't  deny  but  that  you 
are  ill  and  a  great  sufferer  "     She  rang  the  bell  and  told 
the  servant  to  bring  another  cup  that  I  might  have  some 
tea    She  then  sat  down  opposite  to  me  and  looking  fixedly 

MR.    HOME.  299 

at  me  said  "  Even  if  you  like  Now  I  have  not  gone  so 
far  but  what  it  can  be  undone  ''  or  words  to  that  effect  I 
said  "  What  do  you  mean  ?  "  She  answered  "  Oh  you 
know  well  enough  what  I  mean  "  I  was  irritated  with 
her  and  remained  silent  and  I  did  not  know  what  she  was 
offering  to  undo  She  then  said  in  a  sneering  manner  that 
she  hn<I  lu'c'ii  seeing  a  great  deal  of  Mrs.  Berry  and  had 
boon  having  a  great  many  wonderful  seances  with  her 
niece  Emma  Berry  whom  Mrs.  Berry  as  she  said  had 
In  'en  urging  her  to  adopt  and  that  she  would  do  so  only 
Mrs.  Berry  rather  stipulated  that  the  girl  should  have  a 
French  governess  She  also  said  "  I  have  been  seeing  a 
great  deal  of  Fred  Kent  lately  He  is  a  darling  boy 
Poor  fellow  he  has  but  'twenty-three  shillings  a-week 
where  he  is  but  never  mind  I  shall  do  something  very 
handsome  for  him  He  is  very  fond  of  me  "  She  then 
went  on  to  say  she  had  also  seen  a  great  deal  lately  of  her 
friend  Mrs.  Sims  the  photographer  and  had  been  having 
seances  with  her  adding  "  I  have  found  out  why  Mrs. 
Sims  hated  you  all  the  winter  Because  you  did  nothing 
for  her  "  I  asked  her  why  I  should  do  so  She  answered 
that  Mrs.  Sims  claimed  to  have  introduced  me  this  De- 
fondant  to  the  Plaintiff  I  said  that  was  not  so  as  the 
3 Mai nt iff  well  knew  that  she  had  herself  made  inquiries 
about  me  of  Mrs.  Burns  and  had  then  introduced  herself 
to  me  She  ordered  me  not  to  come  again  to  the  house  till 
she  sent  for  me  I  told  her  I  hoped  she  would  do  so  the 
next  day  for  breakfast  and  that  then  perhaps  she  would 
be  able  to  tell  me  what  on  earth  I  had  done  to  irritate 
her  For  in  truth  I  could  not  accuse  myself  of  having 
been  wanting  in  gratitude  or  kindness  towards  her  The 
said  Mrs.  Berry  who  lets  furnished  houses  herself  told 
me  on  the  17th  June  1867  that  she  had  urged  the  Plain- 
tiff to  go  into  Chancery  and  that  I  -this  Defendant  had 
better  run  away  to  America  The  said  Mrs.  Berry  claims 
to  be  a  wonderful  medium. 

149.  Not  hearing  from  the  Plaintiff  and  not  having 

300  ANSWER    OF 

any  unkind  feelings  towards  her  I  wrote  and  sent  the 
following  letter  to  her  the  next  morning : — 

"  22,  Sloane  Street, 

"June  llth,  1867. 

"  My  darling  Mother, — I  am  sorry  not  to  have  heard 
from  you  this  morning  I  was  in  hopes  your  better  judg- 
ment would  not  allow  you  to  be  influenced  by  those  about 
you  A  few  months  ago  it  would  not  have  been  so  I 
console  myself  with  the  idea  that  it  is  but  a  momentary 
thing  I  will  not  attempt  to  influence  you  in  the  least  I 
never  have  done  so  and  will  not  now  I  am  packing  up 
as  the  Dr.  intends  to  send  me  abroad  to  some  of  the 
German  baths  I  wish  you  would  go  with  me  I  will  pay 
all  expenses  It  would  be  such  a  deep  pleasure  to  have 
you  with  me  My  health  is  so  delicate  that  ere  long  there 
must  be  a  change  for  the  worse  or  better  And  if  I  should 
pass  from  the  earth  I  know  you  would  be  sorry  to  think 
that  any  want  of  kindness  from  you  did  me  harm  I  will 
not  disguise  from  you  or  from  any  one  that  such  would  be 
the  case  It  is  not  the  simple  fact  of  being  so  generous 
and  noble  in  action  to  me  as  you  have  been  that  consti- 
tutes true  kindness  It  is  more  fully  shown  in  every-day 
life  I  took  your  name  because  I  could  in  no  other  way 
show  my  esteem  and  respect  for  you  I  felt  that  I  was 
taking  upon  myself  a  solemn  undertaking  in  the  sight  of 
God  and  man  when  I  called  you  by  the  sacred  name  of 
mother  My  feelings  are  all  unchanged  and  I  have  done 
my  duty  as  well  as  my  feeble  health  would  allow  I  have 
been  out  of  London  more  than  I  wished  but  I  have  ever 
asked  you  to  join  me  More  I  could  not  do  Praying  God 
to  bless  and  His  good  angels  to  guard  you. 

"  Believe  me  ever  your  affectionate  Son, 

"  D.  H.  LYON." 

150.  On  the  same  day  she  wrote  and  sent  me  the 
following  letter  in  answer  : — 

UU.    HOME.  301 

"  17a,  Albert  Terraco,  TTvdo  Park. 

"  llth  June-,  /f,7. 

"My  dear  Daniel, — I  have  this  instant  got  a  letter 
from  you  viz.  that  you  are  packing  up  to  go  away  I  per- 
fectly approve  of  your  determination  I  think  it  will  do 
you  good  and  be  assured  I  wish  you  every  enjoyment  and 
that  of  health  in  particular  for  without  that  YOU  cannot 
enjoy  anything  and  I  hope  with  the  blessing  of  God  you 
will  perfectly  recover  your  health  and  strength  I  should 
be  glad  to  see  you  ere  you  go  Will  you  appoint  this 
evening  at  8  o'clock  or  to-morrow  at  12  o'clock  I  shall 
be  at  home  and  am  my  dear  Dan 

"  Your's  affectionately, 

"JANE  LYON." 

"D.  H.  Lyon,  Esqr." 

151.  I  wrote  a  few  hurried  words  to  say  I  would  be 
with  her  at  eight  o'clock  arid  went  accordingly  I  found 
her  very  pale  and  she  did  not  shake  hands  with  me  as  I 
went  in  She  said  "Are  you  going  abroad  at  once?"  I 
told  her  I  was  not  as  I  could  not  do  so  before  packing  up 
all  my  pictures  and  things  and  that  would  require  some 
time  even  after  I  heard  from  the  doctor  who  had  not  yet 
given  me  his  permission  She  then  said  "  Now  Daniel  I 
wish  you  to  return  me  that  trust  deed  as  I  wish  to  have 
it "  I  said  "  Certainly  mother  and  you  know  I  never 
asked  you  for  it"  She  said  "  It  is  just  as  well  for  you 
to  do  so  quietly  for  I  have  made  up  my  mind  to  expose 
the  whole  swindle  You  first  sought  me  and  then  sur- 
rounded me  with  a  set  of  people  whom  1  now  find  to  be  a 
pack  of  well-known  swindlers  but  I  intend  to  expose  the 
whole  thing  I  have  written  for  Wilkinson  to  bring  that 
deed  and  I  will  burn  it  before  his  eyes  You  may  come 
with  him  if  you  like  and  I  will  tell  you  both  what  I  think 
of  you  And  you  may  bring  all  your  friends  and  I  will 
tell  them  the  same  Mrs  Pepper  lias  been  right  to  caution 
me  and  to  keep  the  door  locked  lest  I  should  be  killed  in 
my  bed"  I  sat  dumb  with  astonishment  She  then  told 

302  ANSWER    OF 

me  that  Mrs.  Parks  was  her  friend  and  had  seen  her 
almost  every  day  and  did  so  pity  her  for  being  forced  to 
make  her  Will  I  said  "  How  could  that  be  when  I  was 
not  in  the  house  when  you  wrote  the  letter  concerning  it " 
She  said  "  She  had  been  told  to  go  into  Chancery  and 
take  everything  from  me  and  give  it  to  the  others  who  were 
more  deserving  and  that  Fred  Kent  was  an  angel  in  com- 
parison to  a  sickly  man  like  me  "  I  said  "  Now  listen  to 
me  Vituperation  is  quite  unnecessary  I  would  willingly 
have  given  you  all  you  asked  me  as  you  gave  it  me  of  your 
own  free  will  and  accord  but  you  have  closed  my  hands  by 
making  these  vile  charges  against  me  and  my  friends " 
The  Plaintiff  became  still  more  abusive  in  her  language 
and  I  left  her. 

152.  As  she  had  on  previous  occasions  repented  of  her 
ebullitions  of  ungovernable  temper  towards  me  I  wrote  and 
sent  her  the  following  letter  of  which  I  kept  a  copy : — 

"June  12th. 

"  My  darling  Mother, — I  hope  you  are  quite  well  this 
morning  I  have  not  yet  heard  from  Dr.  Gully  to  know 
what  I  ani  to  do  about  going  abroad  I  do  wish  my  health 
could  have  been  stronger  I  am  very  sorry  to  have  been 
away  from  you  so  much  I  hope  the  days  of  sunshine  will 
come  soon. 

"  Your  affectionate  Son, 

"  D.  H.  LYON. 

"  I  am  so  ill  that  I  shall  go  into  the  country  for  a  few 
days  My  address  will  be 

"  Stockton  House, 

"  Fleetponcl,  near  Winchfield, 

«  Hants." 

153.  To  this  I  received  no  reply  and  I  wrote  and  sent 
her  the  following  letter  of  which  I  have  kept  a  copy  on  the 
16th  June   1867  and  she  received  it  on  the  same  day 
although  by  mistake  it  was  dated  the  I7l'h  June     I  should 
most  certainly  not  have  done  so  had  I  known  that  she  was 
really  meditating  hostile  proceedings. 

MR.    HOME.  803 

"  22,  Slonne  Street, 

"June  17th,  1867. 

"  My  dear  Mother, — When  I  left  you  on  Tuesday  last 
I  told  you  1  should  consult  with  my  friends  before  I  took 
any  steps  I  have  now  done  so  and  they  one  and  all 
declare  I  should  do  no  such  thing  as  give  up  a  deed  which 
had  been  signed  by  you  and  could  be  proved  to  have  been 
done  when  you  were  in  a  sane  mind  and  uninfluenced  by 
any  one  Now  dear  mother  comes  for  me  to  have  my  say 
in  the  matter  You  gave  me  the  deed  of  your  own  free 
will  The  letters  you  wrote  to  Mr.  Wilkinson  were  with 
one  or  two  exceptions  written  when  I  was  not  in  the  house 
as  I  can  prove  by  the  servant  who  took  them  to  the  post 
It  was  then  your  own  good  will  and  kindly  feeling  which 
prompted  all  this  Your  mind  is  changed  and  you  wish  it 
back  Nothing  in  the  world  more  natural  Unknown  to 
any  one  I  have  decided  and  now  write  to  say  that  I  will 
give  it  you  on  the  acceptation  of  the  following  conditions : — 

"  Istly — You  will  write  me  a  kind  letter  as  you  have 
ever  done  in  which  you  will  acknowledge  my  personal 
honesty  and  that  of  the  friends  who  have  been  introduced 
to  you  since  I  knew  you  This  is  but  fair  to  me  and  my 
friends  both  ladies  and  gentlemen. 

"  2nd — You  will  give  me  your  written  permission  to 
resume  my  name  of  Home  without  that  of  Lyon. 

"  3rdly — You  will  return  to  me  all  my  valuable  jewels 
laces  <fcc.  with  the  exception  of  the  two  brooches  I  had 
made  for  you  On  my  part  I  will  return  to  you  the  two 
rings  you  gave  me  and  anything  else  I  may  have  of  that 
kind. 

"  4thly — You  will  leave  me  and  mine  in  undisputed 
possession  of  the  thirty  thousand  pounds  you  in  your  noble 
generosity  and  kindness  of  heart  gave  me  I  would  like  to 
have  you  refund  the  sum  you  borrowed  last  winter  but  will 
leave  that  quite  for  you  to  decide  I  have  between  thirty  and 
iorty  letters  of  your  writing  to  me  at  different  intervals  all 
ot  them  breathing  a  spirit  of  perfect  kindness  and  good 

304  ANSWER    OF 

feeling  and  most  decided  in  character  In  some  of  them 
you  call  me  your  '  darling  boy'  and  sign  yourself  'your 
affectionate  mother'  I  have  also  a  list  of  thirty  ladies  and 
gentlemen  of  high  position  both  by  birth  and  breeding  who 
will  come  forward  as  they  already  declare  their  willingness 
to  do  who  will  prove  that  you  were  perfectly  sane  and  also 
the  affectionate  manner  you  ever  spoke  of  me  to  them  as 
indeed  you  had  no  occasion  to  do  otherwise  I  write  this 
letter  at  the  instigation  of  no  one  I  know  indeed  my 
kind  friends  would  rather  prevent  me  from  sending  it  In 
all  human  probability  I  shall  not  have  long  to  remain  on 
earth  and  I  wish  to  have  no  unkind  feelings  towards  any 
one  and  to  you  I  would  not  have  an  unkind  thought  yet  I 
must  act  with  decision  in  a  case  like  this  My  name  in 
every  country  where  I  have  been  stands  high  for  honesty 
and  I  could  not  allow  a  taint  of  that  kind  to  attach  itself 
to  me  now  when  God  knows  I  deserve  it  so  little. 

"  I  will  if  agreeable  to  you  see  your  lawyer  on  Tuesday 
at  12  o'clock  at  my  rooms  22  Sloane-street  when  I  will 
remit  to  him  the  trinkets  you  gave  me  if  the  conditions 
herein  named  are  accepted  Hoping  you  are  well  and 
praying  God  to  bless  and  His  good  angels  to  guard  you 
"  Believe  me  ever  affectionately  and  gratefully  yours, 

"  D.  H.  LYON." 

151.  I  was  wholly  ignorant  at  the  time  when  I  sent 
her  the  above  letter  that  she  had  filed  her  Bill  in  Chan- 
cery making  charges  against  me  and  my  friends     I  was 
in  very  feeble  health  at  the  time  and  required  rest  and 
freedom  from  anxiety     I  had  no  ill-feeling  towards  the 
Plaintiff  and  I   wrote   the   above  letter  without  taking 
advice  of  any  one  and  for  the  sake  of  peace  and  quiet 
Had  I  been  aware  of  such  Bill  having  been  filed  I  most 
certainly  would  have  scorned  to  make  or  accept  any  offer 
oi  compromise  unaccompanied  by  a  complete  withdrawal 
of  every  one  of  such  charges. 

152.  On  the  13th  June  1867  as  I  have  since  been  in- 
formed and  believe  the  said  Mr.  Henry  Gould  Gibson 

MR.    HO  ME.  S05 

introduced  the  Plaintiff  to  her  present  solicitors  On  the 
lf>th  June  the  Plaintiff  filed  her  Bill  and  on  the  17th 
obtained  on  an  ex  parte  application  a  writ  of  Ne  exeat 
regno  against  me  This  was  granted  to  her  upon  two 
affidavits  of  hers  the  one  filed  on  the  15th  June  1867  and 
the  other  on  the  17th  June  18G7  In  the  first  of  these 
she  says  "  I  am  informed  by  the  said  Defendant  in 
private  letters  which  he  has  written  to  me  during  the  last 
three  or  four  days  that  he  has  been  recommended  by  his 
physician  Dr.  Gully  to  go  at  once  to  the  German  Baths 
for  the  benefit  of  his  (the  said  Defendant's)  health  and 
in  one  of  these  letters  (written  to  me  on  the  llth  day  of 
June  instant)  he  says  that  he  is  '  packing  up '  and  I 
verily  believe  that  he  intends  forthwith  to  go  abroad  in 
accordance  with  such  advice  as  aforesaid  "  And  in  the 
other  of  the  said  affidavits  that  was  filed  on  the  17th  Juno 
1867  she  says  "  Referring  to  the  statements  contained  in 
the  Bill  filed  by  me  in  this  cause  I  say  that  the  sum  of 
£20,000  obtained  by  the  Defendant  Daniel  Dunglass 
Home  alias  Daniel  Home  Lyon  under  the  circumstances 
in  the  said  Bill  stated  is  now  justly  due  and  owing  in 
equity  from  the  said  Defendant  to  me  and  is  as  I  verily 
believe  in  danger  of  being  lost  to  me  by  reason  of  the 
intention  of  the  said  Defendant  to  go  abroad"  out  of  the 
jurisdiction  of  this  Honorable  Court  of  which  intention  the 
said  Defendant  has  informed  me  in  his  private  letters  as 
stated  in  the  affidavit  already  made  by  me  in  this  cause 
And  I  say  that  if  the  said  Defendant  is  allowed  to  get  out 
of  the  country  I  verily  believe  I  shall,  lose  the  whole 
of  the  said  debt." 

153.  In  her  said  affidavits  she  suppressed  all  mention 
of  my  having  in  the  letter  from  which  she  quoted  desired 
her  to  accompany  me  She  suppressed  all  mention  of  her 
said  letter  to  me  of  the  llth  June  1867  in  which  she 
had  approved  of  my  determination  to  go  She  suppressed 
all  mention  of  our  conversation  at  our  last  interview  on 
the  same  da^f  in  which  I  had  told  her  that  it  would  take 
x 

30G  ANSWER    OF 

some  time  for  me  to  pack  up  my  pictures  and  things  after 
I  had  heard  from  the  doctor  who  had  not  yet  given  me 
his  permission  She  suppressed  all  mention  of  my  said 
letter  of  the  12th  June  1867  wherein  I  told  her  that  I 
had  not  yet  heard  from  Dr.  Gully  what  I  was  to  do  about 
going  abroad  and  gave  her  my  country  address  And 
finally  she  also  suppressed  all  mention  of  my  letter  re- 
ceived by  her  on  the  16th  June  as  she  has  since  stated  in 
the  22nd  paragraph  of  her  said  affidavit  in  this  suit  filed 
on  the  27th  June  1867  in  which  letter  I  had  told  her 
that  I  was  ready  to  meet  her  lawyer  at  my  rooms  in 
Sloane  Street  on  the  Tuesday  which  would  be  the  18th 
June  1867  And  upon  the  writ  of  Ne  exeat  regno  so 
obtained  upon  such  suppressions  and  misstatement  as 
aforesaid  I  dangerously  ill  as  the  Plaintiff  knew  me  to  be 
was  ignominiously  arrested  at  the  house  of  a  friend  on 
the  18th  June  1867  and  thrown  into  Whitecross  Street 
Prison  whence  I  was  liberated  the  following  day  on  my 
depositing  in  Court  the  deeds  in  my  possession  The 
shock  to  my  system  was  so  great  that  I  became  delirious 
for  four  days  and  I  have  found  it  necessary  to  consult 
with  five  physicians  And  my  state  of  health  was  such 
that  for  nearly  three  months  my  reason  was  tottering  and 
I  was  wholly  unable  to  give  proper  or  in  fact  any  instruc- 
tions to  my  legal  advisers  And  when  I  applied  for  time 
to  answer  I  had  to  bear  the  further  indignity  at  the 
Plaintiff's  instigation  of  being  examined  in  the  presence 
of  a  lawyer's  clerk  by  a  strange  doctor  who  condescended 
to  insult  me  in  his  certificate. 

154.  I  charge  that  the  Plaintiff  in  order  to  have  me 
as  she  fancied  more  completely  in  her  power  has  from 
time  to  time  since  the  month  of  February  1867  in  the 
conversations  and  some  of  the  correspondence  with  me 
feigned  insanity  And  that  on  the  17th  June  1867  she 
told  Mr.  Perdicaris  that  she  had  been  induced  by  spiritual 
communications  given  through  the  said  Mrs.  Berry  her 
niece  Emma  Berry,  Fred.  Kent  and  Mrs.  Sims  at  the 

MR.    HOME.  307 

house  of  the  said  Mrs.  Berry  to  believe  that  she  had  been 
deceived  by  the  familiar  spirit  of  me  this  Defendant  and 
that  she  had  been  advised  at  Mrs.  Berry's  to  go  to  law  at 
once  and  endeavour  to  recover  the  money  she  had  given 
me  And  she  said  to  him  that  she  hated  my  child  and 
that  she  would  rather  be  locked  up  in  a  lunatic  asylum 
than  have  any  of  her  money  go  to  the  child  She  also 
complained  of  her  disappointment  in  me  this  Defen- 
dant on  account  of  my  ill  health  and  frequent  absences 
end  asked  him  whether  it  was  not  outrageous  that  she 
should  be  tied  to  a  dying  man  And  she  asked  him 
further  whether  I  this  Defendant  was  willing  to  com- 
promise the  affair  and  if  so  upon  what  terms  lie  told 
her  as  the  fact  was  that  he  was  not  in  a  position 
to  answer  those  questions  and  that  it  was  as  her  friend 
and  not  mine  that  he  had  called  She  never  men- 
tioned to  the  said  Mr.  Perdicaris  that  she  had  already 
filed  a  Bill  and  obtained  a  writ  for  my  arrest  The  said 
Mr.  Perdicaris  had  much  difficulty  in  seeing-  the  Plaintiff 
as  the  said  Mrs.  Pepper  the  landlady  falsely  told  him  and 
all  those  who  called  upon  the  Plaintiff  at  the  time  to  ask 
the  meaning  of  her  sudden  change  against  me  that  the 
Plaintiff  could  not  or  would  not  see  them. 

155.  If  the  Plaintiff  intends  to  allege  or  pretend  or  in- 
sinuate at  the  hearing  that  she  is  now  really  mad  or  of 
weak  or  of  unsound  mind  let  it  be  plainly  stated  in  her 
Bill  as  well  as  the  time  when  she  became  so  in  order  that 
1  may  he  prepared  with  evidence  on  the  subject  In  that 
event  it  must  be  explained  how  the  infamous  charges  con- 
tained in  her  said  atlMavits  against  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall  Mr. 
WUkinbOD  and  myself  came  to  be  deliberately  inserted  and 
repeated  upon  the  mere  assertion  of  a  woman  alleged  to 
he  mad  or  of  weak  or  of  unsound  mind. 

1  •">(>.  Since  the  institution  of  this  suit  the  Plaintiff  has 
attended  seances  of  real  or  pretended  mediums  and  has 
tried  to  convert  others  to  spiritualism  And  yet  the  Plaintiff 
speaks  in  her  Bill  and  affidavits  as  if  she  treated  the  whole 
of  spiritualism  as  an  imposture. 

308         ANSWER    OF   ME.    HOME. 

157.  I  have  been  informed  and  I  believe  and  charge  it 
to  be  the  fact  that  the  Plaintiff  in  connivance  with  the  said 
Mrs.  Berry  has  caused  Emma  Berry  the  niece  to  leavo 
the  country  in  order  to  prevent  her  being  examined  upon 
the  matters  mentioned  in  this  Answer. 

158.  On  the  23rd  June,  1867  after  the  institution  of 
this  suit  and  my  arrest  under  the  circumstances  herein- 
before described  the  Plaintiff  received  from  the  artist  and 
still  retains  a  miniature  of  herself  wearing  a  lace  shawl  of 
my  late  wife  which  she  had  in  January  ordered  him  to 
paint  as  a  present  for  me    And  on  the  24th  June  she  ac- 
knowledged the  receipt  of  it  and  lest  she  should  be  called 
upon  to  pay  for  it  described  it  as  "  the  miniature  ordered 
by  Daniel"     This  observation  she  interpolated  in  her 
letter  as  an  afterthought     And  the  Bill  for  the  picture 
was  accordingly  sent  in  to  me  on  the  3rd  July  1867. 

159.  I  submit  my  case  with  confidence  to  the  righteous 
judgment  of  the  Court  of  Equity  being  fully  persuaded 
that  here  at  least  no  prejudices  will  be  allowed  to  obstruct 
me  in  the  vindication  of  my  own  character  and  of  the 
honour  of  my  friends  who  have  been  so  wickedly  and  wan- 
tonly assailed. 

F.  KELLY. 

'Sworn  at  No.  32,  Lincoln's  Inn-fields, 
in  the  County  of  Middlesex,  this 
fourth  day  of  November,  1867, 

D.D.HOME. 

Before  me, 

WM.  WILLIAMS, 

A  London  Commissioner  to  admi- 
nister Oaths  in  Chancery, 

ANSWER   OF  MR.    WILKINSON.    309 

Filed  20th  July,  1867. 
Between  JAXE  LYON,  Widow  ....    Plaintiff. 

AND 

DANIEL  DUNGLASS  HOME   and  WIL- 
LIAM MAKTIN  WILKINSON. 

Defendants. 

THE  ANSWER  of  WILLIAM  MABTIN  WILKINSON,  one 
of  the  above-named  Defendants,  to  the  Bill  of  Com- 
plaint of  the  above-named  Plaintiff. 

IN  ANSWER  to  the  said  Bill,  T,  WILLIAM  MARTIN 
WILKINSON,  say  as  follows : — 

1.  I  have  read  with  great  surprise  the  Bill  filed  by  the 
Plaintiff  and  her  two  lirst  affidavits  in  this  suit  I  have 
throughout  my  connection  with  her  business  acted  with 
such  care  and  anxious  endeavours  to  protect  her  against 
injuring  herself  by  giving  away  her  property  without  the 
fullest  determination  on  her  part  and  I  have  remonstrated 
so  fully  with  her  on  many  occasions  and  have  put  before 
her  so  clearly  the  legal  and  other  consequences  of  what 
she  was  doing  that  I  thought  it  impossible  for  her  to  make 
any  charge  against  me  whatever  change  might  come  over 
her  own  mind  as  to  the  propriety  of  the  gifts  she  made 
from  time  to  time  to  the  other  Defendant  The  other 
Defendant  has  a  perfect  right  to  the  name  Home-Lyon 
having  taken  that  name  at  the  request  of  the  Plaintiff  but 
after  the  Plaintiff's  studiously  offensive  conduct  towards 
him  I  prefer  to  describe  him  by  the  name  of  Home. 

The  first  communication  I  had  with  her  was  on  tho  9th 
November  1866  when  I  received  from  her  a  letter  of  that 
date  She  had  at  that  time  on  the  llth  October  previously 
given  to  the  Defendant  Home  £24,000  I  received  the 
letter  from  her  by  post  of  which  the  following  is  a  copy : — 

Strictly  private. 

"  Dear  Sir, — I  wish  you  to  draw  up  a  Will,  in  the 

310  ANSWER    OF 

name  of  Jane  Ljon,  widow  of  Charles  Lyon,  of  Wooth 
Grange,  Bridport,  Dorset,  making  sole  heir,  my  adopted 
son,  Daniel  Dunglass  Home  son  of  William  Home  and 
Elizabeth  Macneil  his  wife,  the  said  Daniel  Dunglass 
Home  who  will  take  the  name  of  Daniel  Lyon  and  the 
arms  of  Lyon,  quartered  with  the  Gibsons  of  Northumber- 
land, being  my  own  armorial  bearings,  the  said  Daniel 
Lyon  my  adopted  son,  to  be  as  I  before  said,  sole  heir, 
residuary  legatee,  of  all  such  estates,  property  real,  and 
personal,  I  may  or  may  become  possessed,  you  will  have 
the  kindness,  dear  sir,  to  make  this  my  last  Will  and 
testament,  so  binding,  and  precise,  in  all  its  legal  forma- 
lities, that  there  cannot  be  any  possibility  of  disputing  the 
claims  of  my  adopted  son,  as  sole  heir  and  executor ;  on 
Monday  next,  at  half-past  four,  Monday  being  the  twelvth 
of  November,  you  will  bring  me  the  Will,  when  after 
reading,  I  will  be  prepared,  to  sign  it  in  the  presence  of 
Witnesses. 

"  I  am,  dear  Sir,  yours  very  faithfully, 

"JANE  LYON." 
"18,  Westbourne  Place, 
«  November  9th,  1866." 

2.  On  the  same  day  I  wrote  her  a  letter  and  received 
an  answer  in  her  handwriting  of  which  the  following  are 
copies : — 

"44,  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields,  London,  W.  C. 

"9th  Novr.,  1866. 

"  Dear  Madam, — I  beg  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of 
your  letter  giving  me  instructions  for  your  Will,  and  I  will 
have  it  prepared,  and  ready  to  submit  to  you  for  your 
approval  on  Monday  at  -i  past  4  as  you  request. 

"  I  should  have  been  glad  to  have  seen  you  before  com- 
pleting the  Will,  in  order  that  I  might  have  enquired  of 
you  the  amount  of  benefit  you  are  giving  by  the  Will,  and 
also  whether  there  are  not  any  relatives  to  whom  you 
might  think  it  right  to  give  legacies. 

MR.    WILKINSON.  311 

"  The  "Will  however  can   at  any  time  be  revoked  or 
added  to  by  a  Codicil. 

"  I  am,  dear  Madam,  yours  faithfy., 

"  W.  M.  WILKINSON." 
"Mrs.  Lyon, 

"18,  U'estbourne  Place,  W." 

"  18,  Westbonme  Place, 

"  lOtli  .November,  '66. 

"  Dear  Sir, — I  beg  to  say  as  my  husband  did    not 
mention   any  of  his  relations   in  his  Will,  I  can  see  no 
plausible  reason  why  I  should  do  so     Please  to  leave  no 
Hanks  in  the  Will  you  make,  it  is  not  requisite. 
"  And  am,  yours  faithfully, 

"  JANE  LYON." 

3.  Upon  this  I  had  the  Will  prepared  as  follows  as 
appears  by  my  draft : — 

WILL  OF  MRS.  JANE  LYON. 
This  is  the  last  Will  and  testament  of  me  Jane  Lyon 
of  18  Westbourne  Place  in  the  county  of  Middlesex  widow  of 
the  late  Charles  Lyon  of  Wooth  Grange  Bridport  Dorset 
esquire  I  devise  and  bequeath  all  the  real  and  personal 
estate  to  which  I  shall  be  entitled  at  the  time  of  my 
decease  or  over  which  I  shall  at  the  time  of  my  decease 
have  a  general  power  of  appointment  or  disposition  by 
Will  unto  my  adopted  son  Daniel  Dunglass  Home  of  22 
Sloane  Street  Chelsea  esquire  his  heirs  executors  admini- 
strators and  assigns  respectively  for  his  and  their  own 
absolute  use  and  benefit  nevertheless  as  to  estates  vested 
in  me  upon  trusts  or  by  way  of  mortgage  subject  to 
the  trusts  and  equities  affecting  the  same  respectively  and 
I  hereby  declare  it  to  be  my  wish  that  the  said  Daniel 
Dunglass  Home  shall  take  upon  himself  and  be  called  by 
the  surname  of  Lyon  [only]  and  shall  thenceforth  style 
and  write  himself  in  all  letters  deeds  and  instruments  and 
upon  all  occasions  whatsoever  by  that  surname  and  shall 

312  ANSWER    OF 

also  use  and  bear  the  arms  of  Lyon  [only]  quartered  as 
the  same  are  now  quartered  with  the  arms  of  the  Gibsons 
of  Northumberland  as  the  same  are  now  used  and  borne 
by  me  I  appoint  the  said  Daniel  Dunglass  Home  sole 
executor  of  this  my  Will  and  thereby  revoke  all  other 
testamentary  writings, 

In  witness  <kc.  November  12th  1866. 
Attested  by  Thos.  HAWKESLEY,  M.D., 

H.  A.  HUD  ALL, 

"W.  M.  WILKINSON. 

4.  On  the  12th  November  I  called  on  her  with  the 
"Will  intending  fully  to  satisfy  myself  as  to  her  competency 
in  the  first  place  to  make  a  Will  at  all  as  I  considered  her 
extraordinary  wish  to  benefit  largely  a  person  who  was  so 
recently  unknown  to  her  required  me  to  act  with  the 
greatest  caution  I  accordingly  began  the  conversation 
with  general  subjects  connected  with  Northumberland  and 
Durham  and  the  families  there  I  found  her  memory 
excellent  and  her  whole  manner  and  conversation  giving 
evidence  of  a  very  strong-minded  woman  She  asked  me 
to  shew  her  the  Will  which  I  did  and  read  over  to  her  one 
copy  whilst  she  read  the  other  I  asked  her  about  her 
family  and  whether  or  not  they  were  dependent  upon  her 
and  she  informed  me  they  were  well  provided  for  that  her 
late  husband's  sister  Mrs.  Clutterbuck  was  of  considerable 
age  and  an  invalid  and  was  wealthy  and  that  all  her 
husband's  relatives  were  well  off  and  did  not  require  her 
assistance  and  that  moreover  neither  she  nor  her  late 
husband  had  ever  cared  much  for  any  of  them  excepting 
his  said  sister  I  asked  her  if  she  had  already  made  any 
Will  and  she  said  she  had,  but  she  did  not  say  to  whom 
she  had  left  her  money  nor  how  much  she  had  but  she 
said  it  was  considerable  I  said  to  her  "  Well  you  must 
before  have  been  satisfied  to  leave  your  property  to  some 
one  or  more  of  your  family  and  now  that  you  have  so 
suddenly  become  acquainted  with  Mr.  Home  who  was  a 

MR.     WILKINSON.  31J 

stranger  to  you  a  month  ago  it  docs  not  seem  right  to  givo 
him  all  and  them  nothing  they  will  be  sure  to  be  greatly 
disappointed  and  it  is  a  pity  to  leave  it  so"  She  repeated 
that  she  did  not  now  intend  to  leave  them  anything  as  she 
had  determined  to  adopt  Mr.  Home  and  it  was  the  happiest 
thing  that  had  ever  happened  to  her  and  that  she  had 
been  living  so  much  by  herself  with  no  one  to  care  for  her 
that  she  now  found  the  greatest  comfort  in  thinking  that 
she  could  have  him  as  her  son  and  have  him  always  with 
her  I  reminded  her  of  what  she  had  already  done  for 
him  which  was  so  much  more  than  enough  and  that  she 
might  be  disappointed  with  him  or  he  with  her  and  that 
as  the  property  had  come  from  her  husband  it  would  not 
be  proper  to  give  it  away  from  his  relatives  She  would 
hardly  let  me  argue  the  case  with  her  and  said  she  was 
quite  able  to  do  as  she  liked  and  she  was  determined  to 
leave  it  to  him  especially  as  she  had  no  injunctions  from 
her  husband  as  to  the  way  she  should  deal  with  her  pro- 
perty I  asked  her  in  the  most  pointed  way  if  what  she 
was  doing  was  in  consequence  of  any  spiritual  control  or 
orders  and  she  said  it  was  not  but  was  her  own  unbiassed 
wish  and  determination  I  mentioned  to  her  that  I  was 
bound  to  ask  her  all  these  questions  and  to  satisfy  myself 
that  she  was  under  no  control  or  improper  influence  She 
told  me  that  she  had  been  a  believer  in  spiritualism  all  her 
life  and  that  she  could  not  remember  a  time  when  she  did 
not  have  wonderful  things  happen  to  herself  of  that  kind 
and  that  the  subject  was  therefore  not  new  to  her  I  told 
her  that  if  she  were  to  act  upon  any  such  reasons  in 
making  her  Will  in  Mr.  Home's  favour  she  would  be 
doing  a  great  injustice  for  that  the  truth  and  identity  of 
spiritual  communications  could  never  be  depended  on  She 
assured  me  in  the  most  positive  manner  that  in  what  she 
was  doing  she  was  not  influenced  by  any  such  reasons  but 
that  she  had  taken  the  greatest  liking  to  Mr.  Home  and 
found  him  all  that  she  could  wish  and  it  was  a  delight  to 
her  to  find  that  she  could  make  such  a  good  use  of  her 

814  ANSWER    OF 

money  I  asked  her  if  she  would  not  wait  but  she  said 
she  had  that  afternoon  destroyed  her  former  Will  and 
pointing  to  the  fire  she  said  It  is  nothing  but  ashes  now 
and  I  must  make  my  Will  now  as  I  wish.  I  told  her 
that  as  I  was  a  friend  of  the  other  Defendant  it  would  be- 
much  more  satisfactory  to  me  if  she  would  advise  with 
some  other  Solicitor  but  she  said  she  was  perfectly  satis- 
fied with  me  and  would  not  go  to  any  one  else  and  that 
I  had  cautioned  her  in  every  way  that  any  one  else  could 
and  she  quite  understood  what  she  was  about  and  was  a 
good  woman  of  business  I  said  everything  I  could  think 
of  to  her  to  put  her  on  her  guard  and  prevent  her  from 
making  the  Will  at  all  in  his  favour  till  she  knew  more 
of  him  and  to  employ  another  Solicitor  but  she  was  so 
energetic  and  determined  that  I  could  make  no  impression 
on  her  Shortly  after  Dr.  Hawkesley  and  Mr.  Rudall 
came  and  I  repeated  the  same  in  their  presence  omitting 
only  the  particulars  as  to  the  Will  she  was  making  Ulti- 
mately she  said  there  was  nothing  more  to  prevent  her 
signing  the  Will  and  it  was  done  in  duplicate.  The  other 
Defendant  was  not  in  the  room  at  any  part  of  the  time 
and  only  came  in  after  the  Will  had  been  signed  and  put 
away  Before  I  left  I  asked  her  what  she  would  do  with 
the  Wills  and  suggested  that  she  might  keep  one  and 
leave  the  other  at  her  bankers  She  hesitated  a  moment 
and  said  "  No  please  to  take  them  both  yourself  and  keep 
them  safely"  1  said  "  I  had  better  take  only  the  copy  at 
all  events  and  you  keep  the  other"  But  she  refused  and 
put  both  copies  into  my  hand  and  I  brought  them  away 
with  me  The  next  morning  I  made  a  memorandum 
which  is  as  follows  : — 

"  13th  Nov.  1866,  10  a.  m. 

MES.  LYON'S  WILL.- — Yesterday  at  £  p.  4  I  called  on 
Mrs.  Lyon  at  18  Westbourne-place  and  had  a  quarter  of 
an  hour's  conversation  with,  her  on  indifferent  subjects 
principally  as  to  her  acquaintance  with  Northumberland 
and  Durham.  Then  she  told  me  that  Dr.  Hawkesley 

MR.     WILKINSON.  315 

and  another  gentleman  were  coming  shortly,  and  I  had 
better  read  over  her  Will.  I  then  produced  the  Will  in 
duplicate  and  read  one  copy.  She  said  she  feared  the 
words  would  not  include  property  she  might  afterward! 
acquire  and  which  might  be  considerable.  She  desired 
me  to  strike  out  the  word  "  only"  twice,  so  that  Mr. 
Home  might  be  Daniel  Home  Lyon.  I  asked  her  again 
if  there  were  no  relatives  or  friends  whom  she  would  like 
to  benefit,  she  said  no.  I  pressed  her  5  or  6  times  on 
this  point,  and  she  refused.  She  said  her  husband  had 
told  her  that  he  would  not  indicate  any  mode  of  dealing 
with  the  property  lie  was  leaving  her  and  that  he  wished 
it  to  be  entirely  her  own  to  do  with  as  she  pleased.  I 
reminded  her  that  she  had  known  Mr.  Home  a  very  short 
time  and  that  she  was  giving  him  a  very  large  benefit, 
and  that  certainly  there  were  some  of  her  connexions  who 
would  be  disappointed.  She  said,  "  Yes,  they  will,  but 
this  is  the  way  in  which  I  choose  to  leave  it." 

Dr.  Hawkesley  shortly  after  came,  and  soon  Mr. 
Kudall.  In  the  presence  of  both  I  repeated  the  sub- 
stance of  the  above  excepting  that  I  did  not  indicate  what 
was  done  for  Mr.  Home,  but  asked  if  she  did  not  wish 
to  include  any  others  than  were  mentioned.  I  also  asked 
if  she  had  any  Solicitor  whom  she  would  consult  as  well 
as  me  She  said  she  had  none,  and  there  was  no  occasion 
for  any  but  me.  The  Will  then  executed  and  attested. 

W.  M.  W. 

5.  A  few  days  afterwards  the  Defendant  Home  desired 
me  to  prepare  a  deed  announcing  his  change  of  name     I 
had  ascertained  at  the  Herald's  College  that  it  could  not 
be  done  by  Royal  Warrant  I  sent  him  a  draft  of  the  deed 
which  the  Plaintiff  informed  me  she  had  read  over  and 
approved  of  and  wished  it  to  be  carried  out  at  once. 

6.  The  following  is  a  copy  of  the  deed  : — t 

DEED  POLL. 
To  all  to  whom  these  presents  may  come  I  Daniel 

316  ANSWER    OF 

Dunglas  Home  of  22  Sloane  Street  in  the  county  of 
Middlesex  esquire  send  greeting  whereas  Mrs  Jane  Lyon 
the  widow  of,  the  late  Charles  Lyon  esquire  of  Wooth 
Grange  Bridport  in  the  county  of  Dorset  has  adopted  me 
as  her  son  and  has  desired  that  I  should  take  and  use  the 
name  of  Lyon  as  my  last  and  principal  surname  in  lieu  of 
or  in  addition  to  the  name  of  Home  and  to  omit  the  name 
of  Dunglas  Now  therefore  know  ye  that  I  the  said 
Daniel  Dunglas  Home  do  hereby  for  myself  and  my  heirs 
publicly  adopt  assume  and  take  for  me  and  them  for  ever 
hereafter  the  name  of  Lyon  as  a  surname  in  lieu  of  and 
in  addition  to  that  of  Home  and  I  do  declare  that  my 
name  from  henceforth  will  be  and  is  DANIEL  HOME  LYON 
and  that  all  and  every  acts  deeds  and  assurances  done 
and  executed  by  me  in  the  name  of  Lyon  shall  be  as  valid 
and  effectual  against  or  for  me  as  if  the  same  had  been 
done  and  executed  in  the  name  of  Daniel  Dunglas  Home. 

IN  WITNESS  whereof  I  the  said  Daniel  Dunglas  Home 
have  hereunto  set  my  hand  and  seal  this  third  day  of 
December  A.D.  1866. 

D.  D.  HOME. 

Signed  sealed  and  delivered  by  the  above  named  Daniel 
Dunglas  Home  in  the  presence  of 
W.  J.  WILKINSON, 

44,  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields. 

7.  Mrs.  Lyon  had  without  any  previous  communication 
with  me  on  the  subject  sent  me  a  message  through  the 
Defendant  Home  soon  after  the  date  of  her  Will  that  she 
would  be  glad  if  I  could  find  a  mortgage  security  for  her 
for  £30,000  She  had  resided  many  years  in  the  north 
of  England  and  I  heard  of  a  security  in  the  neighbour- 
hood she  had  lived  in  and  where  the  family  of  the  principal 
persons  in  the  firm  were  known  to  her  She  wanted  to 
have  £5  per  cent,  for  the  money  Having  been  applied 
to  for  £25,000  I  wrote  her  the  following  letter  omitting 
the  parties'  names  and  particulars  which  might  be  injurious 
to  the  borrowers. 

ME.     WILKINSON.  317 

"44,  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields,  London,  "W.  C. 

"4th  December,  1866. 

"  Dear  Mrs.  Lyon, — I  have  now  been  applied  to  for  a 
sum  of  £25,000  on  mortgage,  upon  a  security  which 
although  not  of  the  usual  marketable  description,  is  yet 
one  which  for  safety,  could  not,  I  believe,  be  improved. 

"  It  consists  of  20  acres  of  land  valued  at  £1,000  an 
acre  at  ...  in  Yorkshire,  upon  which  furnaces  and 
works  have  been  erected,  and  only  one  year  in  operation, 
at  a  cost  of  £75,000 ;  so  that  the  value  of  the  whole  is 
about  £100,000. 

In  addition  to  this  there  is  the  security  of  the  gentle- 
man to  whom  the  property  belongs,  and  whose  security 
alone  would  be  more  than  ten  times  sufficient — 

"  The  interest  to  be  paid  half  yearly  to  the  bankers  ot 
the  lender. 

"  If  you  merely  look  to  the  security  for  the  repayment 
of  the  money,  and  the  punctual  payment  of  interest  in  the 
meantime,  I  believe  this  would  be  certain,  and  I  could 
confidently  recommend  it,  so  far  as  I  have  been  informed 
at  present,  and  if  on  the  necessary  investigation,  it  should 
turn  out  in  all  respects  as  represented  I  shall  be  glad  to 
know  what  you  think  of  it  and  remain, 

"  Dear  Mrs.  Lyon, 

"  Yours  very  truly, 

"  W.  M.  WILKINSON/' 
"Mrs.  Lyon, 

"  17a,  Albert  Terrace,  Knightsbridge." 

8.  The  next  day  the  6th  December  she  called  on  me 
to  speak  about  the  mortgage  and  I  told  her  all  I  could 
about  it  and  she  determined  to  have  it  if  the  title  and 
value  were  satisfactory  but  said  that  if  it  was  good  for 
£30,000  she  would  much  prefer  that  sum  to  a  smaller 
On  the  8th  December  I  received  from  her  the  following 
letter  which  was  the  first  intimation  I  had  received  of  the 
intention  therein  expressed : — 

313  AN S WEE    OF 

"  17 a,  Albert  Terrace,  Albert  Gate,  Hyde  Park, 

"7th  December,  1866. 

"  My  dear  Mr.  Wilkinson, — On  the  occasion  of  my 
adopted  son  taking  the  name  of  Lyon  I  wish  to  give  him 
a  little  surprise.  I  intend  to  add  Six  thousand  pounds  to 
the  Twenty-four  I  have  already  given  him,  making  a  sum 
total  of  Thirty  thousand  ;  will  you  kindly  prepare  a  deed 
thoroughly  legal  in  every  respect  and  let  the  previous  sum 
which  I  gave  him  on  the  llth  October  be  included  so  that 
there  can  be  no  after  difficulty  about  the  whole  proceeding. 
"  I  am,  dear  Mr.  Wilkinson,  yours  very  truly. 

"  JANE  LYON." 

9.  The  same  day  I  wrote  and  sent  her  the  following 
letter : — 

"44,  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields,  London,  W.  C. 

"8th  December,  1866. 

"  Dear  Mrs.  Lyon, — In  carrying  out  your  wishes  as 
expressed  in  your  letter  of  yesterday,  I  shall  be  glad  to 
know  if  it  is  your  desire  to  make  a  transfer  of  Consols  of 
the  value  of  .£6,000  cash,  or  in  what  other  way  do  you 
wish  it  to  be  carried  out.  If  you  wish  to  make  a  transfer, 
it  will  only  be  necessary  to  give  directions  to  the  brokers 
when  it  will  be  convenient  to  you  to  go  to  the  bank,  and  I 
can  prepare  a  deed  expressing  your  intention  of  giving 
him  the  money,  and  include  it  in  the  former  sum  also. 
"  I  remain,  dear  Mrs.  Lyon,  yours  faithfully, 

"  W.  M.  WILKINSON." 
"Mrs.  Lyon, 

"  I7a,  Albert  Terrace,  Albert  Gate,  S.  W." 

I  received  from  her  the  following  letter  which  I  pro- 
ceeded to  act  upon  by  having  the  deed  prepared : — 

"  17a,  Albert  Terrnce,  Albert  Gate,  Hyde  Park, 

"  9th  December,  1866. 

"  Dear  Sir, — It  is  my  intention  to  make  a  transfer  of 
Consols  to  the  value  of  £6,000  cash,  and  you  can  if  you 
please,  prepare  a  Legal  deed,  expressing  my  intention,  of 
giving  him  Daniel  Home  Lyon,  the  money  above,  including 

MR.     WILKINSON.  319 

the  former  sum  of  £24,000  also,  the  .£24,000  was  trans- 
ferred of  the  1 1th  Octotor,  and  the  £6,000  will  be  trans- 
ferred to-morrow,  10th  December,  1866. 

"  I  am,  dear  Sir,  yours  very  truly, 

"  JANE  LYOX." 
"  W.  M.  Wilkinson,  Esqr." 

10.  I  wrote  to  her  on  the  llth  December  with  the  draft 
of  the  deed  the  following  letter : — 

"44,  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields,  London,  W.  C. 

"  llth  December,  1866. 

"  Dear  Mrs.  Lyon, — I  have  now  made  a  draft  of  the 
intended  deed  in  favor  of  Mr.  D.  H.  Lyon  according  to 
the  directions  contained  in  }rour  letter,  and  I  send  it  to 
you  that  you  may  look  it  over,  and  see  that  it  is  according 
to  your  wishes. 

*'  I  wish  to  bring  clearly  before  you  that  in  making  the 
gifts  of  £30,000,  which  you  have  done,  you  have  given  it 
to  him  absolutely,  and  without  power  of  revocation,  and  as 
I  have  known  Mr.  Lyon  so  long  and  so  intimately,  I  shall 
best  do  my  duty  to  you  by  suggesting  that  you  should 
have  some  other  legal  advice  in  carrying  out  the  business, 
if  you  think  it  necessary. 

"  I  remain,  dear  Mrs.  Lyon,  yours  very  truly, 

"  W.  M.  WILKINSON." 
"  Mrs.  Lyon." 

On  the  same  day  she  returned  the  draft  to  me  approved 
and  sent  me  the  following  letter : — 

"  I7a,  Albert  Terrace,  Albert  Gate,  Hyde  Park, 

"llth  December,  1866. 

"  Dear  Mr.  "Wilkinson, — I  am  perfectly  satisfied  with 
your  legal  advice,  and  wish  for  no  other  adviser  in  respect 
to  the  transfer  deed,  of  £30,000  which  I  give  permanently 
to  my  adopted  son,  D.  II.  Lyon,  Esqr. 

"  And  am,  <fec.,  <fcc.,  <tc., 

"JANE  LYON." 

After  the  word  "children"  at  the  end  of  the  9th  line 

320  ANSWER    OF 

of  the  deed  I  had  inserted  in  the  draft  the  words  "And 
all  my  husband's  family  and  connections  are  well  provided 
for."  These  words  she  struck  out  and  put  in  the  margin 
"  I,  Jane  Lyon,  have  drawn  my  pen  over  this ;  I  do  not 
approve  of  such  insertion."  She  afterwards  told  me  that 
she  had  struck  out  the  words  because  she  did  not  know 
but  what  some  one  of  them  might  appear  and  say  he  was 
poor  enough  to  have  some  of  her  money. 

11.  On  the  12th  of  December  I  wrote  to  her  a  letter 
of  which  the  following  is  a  copy : — 

"  44,  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields,  London,  W.  C. 

"  12th  Deer.  1866. 

"  Dear  Mrs.  Lyon, — I  will  call  on  you  if  possible  this 
afternoon  about  £  p.  4,  with  the  deed  for  your  signature. 
"  Yours  faithfully, 

"W.  M.  WILKINSON." 
"Mrs.  Lyon, 

"  17a,  Albert  Terrace." 

I  went  to  her  according  to  this  appointment  and  on  my 
reaching  the  house  she  said  she  was  very  glad  to  see  me 
alone  as  she  wished  to  have  some  important  conversation 
with  me  I  produced  the  deed  of  gift  and  read  the  whole 
over  to  her  she  looking  at  the  deed  and  I  reading  from  tbe 
draft  and  she  then  executed  and  I  attested  it.  Then  she 
commenced  by  saying  that  the  more  she  saw  of  Daniel  the 
more  she  liked  him  and  it  was  the  greatest  happiness  to 
her  to  have  him  about  her — that  there  was  no  chance  of 
her  making  any  alteration  in  her  Will  and  that  she  was 
desirous  of  doing  as  her  husband  had  done  towards  her  all 
she  could  to  save  the  duty  in  case  of  her  death  She  asked 
me  what  the  duty  would  be  and  I  told  her  £10  per  cent. 
She  said  that  her  husband  had  transferred  all  his  mortgages 
to  her  so  that  there  was  hardly  any  probate  duty  to  pay 
and  she  had  determined  to  give  him  the  further  sum  of 
.£30,000  and  to  have  the  mortgage  deed  made  out  in  his 
name  I  told  her  that  the  mere  question  of  saving  legacy 
duty  was  not  to  be  considered  against  the  all  important 

MR.    WILKINSON.  321 

question  of  divesting  herself  of  her  property  and  that  it 
was  impossible  to  say  that  she  might  not  afterwards  regret 
giving  so  large  a  sum  to  one  whom  she  had  known  so 
short  a  time  I  repeated  also  what  I  had  before  said  about 
her  relatives  having  the  first  claim  on  her  and  she  said  she 
was  determined  to  give  nothing  to  them  adding  that 
neither  she  nor  her  husband  had  ever  liked  them  in  con- 
sequence of  some  old  family  quarrel  which  compelled  him 
to  sell  an  estate  to  which  he  was  much  attached  and  that  she 
had  no  sympathy  with  them  except  Mrs.  Clutterbuck. 

I  also  urged  upon  her  that  she  had  already  given  the 
Defendant  Home  so  large  a  sum  and  placed  him  in  such  a 
position  as  was  only  to  be  equalled  in  novels  and  romances 
and  that  a  man  like  him  with  £30,000  had  as  much  as 
he  could  possibly  make  a  good  use  of  That  I  saw  no 
occasion  but  the  contrary  for  increasing  it  and  that  I  would 
rather  give  money  to  hospitals  than  to  make  such  a  gift 
after  what  she  had  already  done  for  him  She  said  she 
would  do  it  and  desired  me  to  have  the  mortgage  deed  made 
out  in  his  name  I  asked  her  if  she  were  desirous  of  doing 
this  in  consequence  of  any  spirit  communications  for  that 
if  so  I  could  have  nothing  to  do  with  it  on  any  such  ground 
She  said  that  she  was  not  influenced  by  anything  but  the 
intention  of  placing  him  in  an  independent  position  and 
saving  the  legacy  duty  as  she  was  satisfied  she  should 
never  change  her  mind  I  told  her  that  the  legacy  duty 
was  not  worth  thinking  of  That  she  ought  to  act  entirely 
and  independently  on  her  own  judgment  and  that  it  was 
never  wise  to  give  away  much  during  one's  life  and  she  had 
already  given  an  unheard-of  sum  which  was  more  than 
enough  for  all  the  Defendant's  wants  She  said  she  had 
considered  it  in  every  way  and  wished  it  to  be  done  and 
that  I  was  very  right  to  give  her  the  warnings  I  had  done 
but  she  would  take  the  consequences  I  then  told  her 
there  was  no  occasion  to  come  to  a  conclusion  now  as  the 
deed  would  not  be  ready  for  some  time  and  she  must  con- 
sider it  in  the  meantime  Soon  afterwards  the  Defendant 

322  ANSWER    OF 

came  in  and  nothing  more  was  said  about  it     We  dined 
and  spent  the  evening  together. 

12.  The  following  is  a  copy  of  the  deed  which  she 
executed  on  that  day  in  my  presence  and  I  attested  her 
execution  of  it : — 

DECLARATION 
As  to  Gift  of  .£24,000  Cash  and  iJie  transfer  of 

.£6,798  17s.  4d.  Consols. 

To  all  to  whom  these  presents  shall  come  I  Jane  Lyon 
of  No.  I7a  Albert-Terrace  Albert-gate  Hyde  Park  in  the 
County  of  Middlesex  the  widow  and  relict  of  Charles 
Lyon  late  of  Wooth  Grange  Bridport  in  the  County  of 
Dorset  Esquire  deceased  Send  greeting  whereas  under 
and  by  virtue  of  the  last  Will  and  testament  of  my  said 
late  husband  Charles  Lyon  Esquire  deceased  I  am  entitled 
to  a  large  fortune  in  money  and  securities  for  my  own 
absolute  use  and  benefit  free  from  any  trust  or  condition 
imposed  thereon  by  his  said  Will  or  otherwise  howsoever 
And  whereas  I  have  no  children  and  whereas  I  have  been 
minded  and  desirous  to  take -and  adopt  Daniel  Dunglas 
Home  of  22  Sloane-street  Hyde  Park  aforesaid  as  my  son 
And  whereas  with  my  sanction  and  at  my  desire  and  re- 
quest the  said  Daniel  Dunglas  Home  has  executed  a  deed 
poll  or  instrument  in  writing  bearing  date  the  third  day  of 
December  instant  and  the  same  is  intended  to  be  enrolled 
as  of  record  in  Her  Majesty's  High  Court  of  Chancery 
whereby  the  said  Daniel  Dunglas  Home  declared  that  he 
had  taken  the  surname  of  "  Lyon  "  in  lieu  and  instead  of 
"  Home"  and  that  in  future  he  intended  to  be  called  and 
known  as  "  Daniel  Home  Lyon"  And  whereas  I  the 
said  Jane  Lyon  being  desirous  of  placing  him  in  a  position 
of  independence  suitable  to  his  rank  and  position  in  life  as 
my  adopted  son  and  with  a  view  to  that  end  on  the  eleventh 
day  of  October  last  I  gave  to  the  said  Daniel  Home  Lyon 
the  sum  of  twenty-four  thousand  pounds  cash  And  whereas 
in  further  pursuance  of  such  desire  and  on  the  occasion  of 

MR.     WILKINSON.  323 

his  having  publicly  taken  my  name  on  the  tenth  day  of 
December  instant  I  caused  to  be  transferred  from  my  own 
name  in  the  books  of  the  Governor  and  Company  of  the 
Bank  of  England  into  the  old  names  of  Daniel  Home 
Lyon  the  sum  of  .£6,708  17s.  4d.  Throe  Pounds  per  Cent. 
Consolidated  Bank  Annuities  equivalent  to  the  further  sum 
of  six  thousand  pounds  cash  And  whereas  it  was  my  in- 
tention in  making  the  said  respective  gift  and  transfer 
as  aforesaid  and  it  is  my  present  wish  and  intention  abso- 
lutely and  irrevocably  to  vest  in  the  said  Daniel  Home 
Lyon  for  himself  his  executors  administrators  and  assigns 
the  absolute  use  and  enjoyment  of  the  moneys  thereby 
respectively  given  and  transferred  as  aforesaid  Now  know 
ye  that  in  further  evidence  of  such  my  desire  and  intention 
and  to  remove  all  doubts  suspicions  and  controversies  in 
that  behalf  I  the  said  Jane  Lyon  do  hereby  for  myself 
my  heirs  executors  and  administrators  freely  absolutely  and 
irrevocably  declare  that  I  have  made  the  said  gift  and 
transfer  of  my  own  will  and  pleasure  only  and  without  any 
influence  control  or  interference  of  the  said  Daniel  Home 
Lyon  or  of  any  other  person  and  that  the  said  Daniel 
Home  Lyon  his  executors  administrators  and  assigns  shall 
stand  possessed  of  and  be  entitled  to  the  said  sums  of 
Twenty-four  thousand  pounds  and  the  said  Three  pounds 
per  Cent.  Consolidated  Bank  Annuities  so  representing 
the  sum  of  six  thousand  pounds  by  me  transferred  as 
aforesaid  for  his  and  their  own  absolute  use  benefit  and 
enjoyment  without  any  reservation  condition  trust  or  pur- 
pose whatsoever  As  witness  my  hand  and  seal  this  twelfth 
day  of  December  One  thousand  eight  hundred  and  sixty- 
six. 

JANE  LYON. 

Signed,  sealed,  and  delivered  by  the  above-named  Jane 
Lyon,  in  the  presence  of  \V.  M.  Wilkinson,  Solicitor,  44, 
Lincoln's  Inn-fields. 

13.  On  the  21st  Deoember  1866  I  wrote  to  her  as  fol- 
lows : — 

324  ANSWER    OF 

"  44,  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields,  London,  W.  C. 
"21  December,  1866. 

"  My  dear  Mrs.  Lyon, — I  have  now  had  the  examina- 
tion of  the  title  to  the  property  at 

together  with  the  plans,  &c.,  and  I  find  all  to  he  satisfac- 
tory. I  have  also  placed  the  plans  and  statement  of  the 
property  to  be  mortgaged  in  the  hands  of  Mr.  May,  of 
Great  George-street,  Westminster,  who  is  I  believe  the 
most  competent  person  as  a  valuer,  and  I  have  his  preli- 
minary valuation  at  above  .£75,000,  so  that  I  consider 
the  value  is  quite  sufficient  for  a  loan  of  .£30,000,  which 
you  told  me  you  would  much  prefer  to  a  less  sum. 

"  I  am  also  preparing  the  mortgage  deed  to  you,  and  I 
am  making  arrangements  to  complete  the  business  on  the 
3rd  or  4th  of  January.  I  shall  be  glad  to  know  if  that 
time  will  be  convenient  to  you  to  sell  out  the  stock. 

"  Be  kind  enough  to  let  me  hear  from  you  here  as  to 
your  wishes. 

"  Yours  very  truly, 

"  W,  M.  WILKINSON. 

"Mrs.  Lyon." 

14.  The  Plaintiff  in  answer  wrote  me  as  follows : — 

"  17a,  Albert  Terrace,  Albert  Gate,  Hyde  Park, 

"21st  December,  '66. 

"  Dear  Mr.  Wilkinson, — I  am  glad  you  find  the  ex- 
amination to  the  title  of  the Property  in 

question  satisfactory,  and  that  the  value  is  sufficient  for 
the  advance  of  £30,000  by  me  as  a  mortgage  thereon, 
and  should  you  have  the  deed  ready  for  completion,  by 
the  time  you  mention  I  have  no  doubt  the  cash  will  be 
comatable.  Of  course  I  must  approve  first,  by  a  meeting 
to  be  arranged  here,  by  you,  there  must  be  a  legal  deed, 
also  respecting  the  interest  to  be  paid  to  me,  and  to  be 
kept  in  my  deed  box,  in  the  Bank,  Birchin  Lane,  and  am, 
4ear  Sir,  with  great  confidence  all  will  be  correct. 

"  Yours  very  truly, 

"  JANE  LYON." 

ME.    WILKINSON.  325 

15.  I  then  went  out  of  town  for  ten  days  and  the  fol- 
lowing correspondence  took  place  between  us  in  the 
interval  :— 

"  44,  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields,  London,  W.  C. 
"23rd  December,  1866. 

"  Dear  Mrs.  Lyon, — I  have  got  the  intended  mortgage 
deed  drawn  by  Counsel,  and  as  you  have  given  me  no  in- 
structions in  writing  to  make  it  out  in  any  other  name 
than  yours,  your  name  is  inserted  in  it  as  the  lender  of 
the  £30,000. 

"  As  the  sum  is  so  large,  and  the  gift  of  it  so  beyond 
experience,  after  what  you  have  so  munificently  given  to 
Mr.  Home  Lyon,  I  ought  in  justice  both  to  you  and  to 
myself  to  have  your  definite  and  well  considered  instruc- 
tions before  I  act  upon  them.  You  have  already  placed 
him  not  only  beyond  want,  but  in  a  position  of  affluence, 
and  so  that  with  whatever  affection  you  may  regard  him, 
there  is  no  reason  why  you  should  not  consider  any  claims 
of  your  connections  to  whatever  extent  you  may  think  de- 
sirable. I  ought  also  to  bring  forcibly  to  your  notice, 
that  if  you  give  Mr.  H.  Lyon  this  further  sum  of  £30,000, 
by  allowing  his  name  to  be  inserted  in  the  mortgage  deed 
instead  of  your  own,  you  are  making  him  an  irrevocable 
gift  which  whatever  may  occur,  you  cannot  recall.  If 
however,  you  wish  to  do  this,  and  with  full  knowledge  of 
its  consequences,  I  shall  be  obliged  by  your  giving  me 
definite  instructions,  to  strike  out  your  own  name  from  the 
draft  and  to  insert  his  as  the  lender. 

"  In  that  case  I  shall  have  no  difficulty  in  securing  you 
by  a  proper  deed  to  be  executed  by  him  the  payment  of 
the  annual  interest  on  the  mortgage  for  your  life  which  is 
what  you  mentioned  to  me  to  be  your  wish  to  reserve  for 
yourself,  giving  him  the  absolute  property  in  the  principal. 
"  I  remain,  dear  Mrs.  Lyon,  yours  faithfully, 

"  W.  M.  WILKIXSOX. 

"  I  write  this  i'rom  the  Country,  but  please  address  mo 
here  as  usual. 

"  Mrs.  Lyon." 

326  ANSWER    OF 

16.  "  I7a,  Albert  Terrace,  Albert  Gate, 

"  Hyde  Park, 
"  26th  December,  '66. 

"Dear  Mr.  Wilkinson, — In  reply  to  jour  favour,  car- 
rying truth,  reason,  and  best  advice,  we  cannot  surely 
foresee  what  time  may  bring  forth,  and  it  is  best  to  be  on 
the  safe  side.  Daniel  is  at  present,  all  that  the  most  fas- 
tidious can  wish  for,  but  there  is  no  knowing  what  time, 
and  an  entire  independence  may  do  ;  he  may  consider  me 
a  bore,  and  cut  me  altogether,  which  may  probably  be 
anything  but  agreeable  to  me  ;  otherwise  he  may  inherit 
all  I  have,  as  I  have  little  love  for  any  of  my  husband  re- 
lations, except  his  favorite  sister,  Mrs.  Clutterbuck,  and 
she  is  not  likely  to  outlive  me.  I  wish  you  to  make  out 
the  mortgage  deed  without  inserting  either  Daniel's  name 
or  mine,  until  you  bring  it  here  for  approval.  I  also  wish 
you  to  make  a  strong  legal  deed,  at  my  expense,  as  to  the 
interest  being  paid  me,  without  any  interference  or  control 
thereof  by  Daniel,  as  I  do  not  like,  or  intend  to  be,  in  any 
way,  an  annuitant,  or  have  the  appearance  of  such.  If 
such  a  legal  deed  can  be  made,  I  should  prefer  it,  and  not 
oihenuise  as  I  pay  for  it,  whichever  way  it  turns. 

"  In  all  my  mortgages.  I  have  a  power  of  receiver,  in 
case  of  the  interest  not  being  paid,  within  6  months  after 
due,  and  a  limited  time  of  21  days,  for  the  interest  to  be 
paid  half-yearly.  If  not  paid  then,  int.  to  be  6  pr.  ct. 
Mine  is  at  5  pr.  ct.  Also  a  power  of  sale,  without  im- 
peachment, but  this  is  all  irrelevant,  you  knowing  much 
better  than  me,  and  remain, 

"  Dear  Sir,  yours  very  respectfully, 

"JANE  LYON." 

17  "Dawlish.  Devon, 

"29th  December,  1866. 

"  Dear  Mrs.  Lyon, — Your  letter  has  been  forwarded 
to  me  here,  and  in  answering  it  I  can  tmly  repeat  what  I 
said  in  my  former  letter,  that  if  you  make  the  gift  of  this 

MR.     WILKINSON.  327 

additional  large  sum  it  will  be  irrevocable,  as  much  as  is 
that  which  you  have  already  given  to  Mr.  Lyon. 

"  You  can  alter  your  Will  whenever  you  please,  but 
not  such  a  matter  as  this.  It  is  my  duty  to  place  this 
before  you  in  the  clearest  way,  in  order  that  you  may  ex- 
ercise your  judgment  upon  it,  and  after  having  done  this, 
I  have  only  to  carry  out  your  determination. 

"If  you  determine  to  keep  the  control  over  the  mort- 
gage-money I  have  only  to  leave  the  deed  as  it  is  drawn, 
but  if  you  choose  to  give  him  the  principal,  you  might  re- 
serve the  interest  to  be  paid  direct  to  yourself  so  long  as 
the  mortgage  lasts  during  your  life,  and  if  it  should  be 
paid  off  then  Mr.  Lyon  should  enter  into  a  deed  for  you 
to  keep,  engaging  that  in  whatever  it  is  invested,  the  in- 
terest shall  be  reserved  to  you. 

"  The  only  inconvenience  to  this  is  that  it  will  disclose 
to  the  borrowers  on  the  face  of  the  deed  the  nature  of  the 
transaction,  but  there  is  no  practical  objection  in  this 
which  should  at  all  weigh  against  the  security  it  would  be 
to  you  to  have  the  interest  paid  direct  to  yourself. 

"  I  shall  provide  in  the  deed  for  the  interest  to  be  G  per 
cent,  but  to  be  reduced  to  5  if  paid  punctually. 

"  With  such  a  security  as  furnaces  <fec.  it  would  be  of 
no  use  to  have  a  receiver,  but  I  have  done  what  is  better 
by  making  the  borrowers  tenants  at  a  rent  to  cover  the 
interest  so  that  you  will  have  a  power  of  distress  and  in. 
addition  a  power  of  sale  of  the  fullest  kind. 

"  If  you  will  kindly  write  me  to  Lincoln's  Inn-fields 
your  well-considered  decision  I  can  have  the  deed  com- 
pleted and  it  can  be  going  on  during  my  absence  but  if 
you  wish  to  see  me  before  you  decide  I  will  come  up  at 
once  and  bring  the  draft  with  me  for  your  approval. 
"  Yours  very  truly, 

"  Wr.  M.  WILKINSON. 

"Mrs.  Lyon.* 

328  ANSWER    OF 

18.  "  1 7a,  Albert  Terrace,  Albert  Gate, 

«  Hyde  Park, 

"29th  Deer.  1866. 

"  Dear  Mr.  Wilkinson, — In  reply  to  yours  of  this  date, 
I  can  only  repeat,  what  I  did  in  my  last,  1st,  that  I  wish 
for  Daniel  to  have  the  principal  at  my  demise ;  that  the 
only  difficulty  is  the  interest,  payable  to  me,  during  my 
life.  Daniel  may  consider  the  principal  so  much  as  his 
own,  that  he  may  in  time  pay  it  with  a  grudge,  and  as  I 
said  before,  think  me  in  the  way.  I  am  sure  I  shall  never 
tuish  to  leave  the  principal  past  him  ;  I  am  decided  upon 
that  point,  very  certainly  ;  so  now  you  know  the  difficulty, 
and  I  now  leave  the  matter  to  you  altogether,  I  have  the 
fullest  confidence  in  your  integrity,  and  your  clear  and 
disinterested  management.  I  shall  keep  your  letters,  with 
the  deed,  for  me  to  keep,  feeling  sure  you  will  do  the  best 
for  me  in  the  concern,  and  am,  dear  Sir,  yours  very  truly, 
with  the  compliments  of  the  season  to  yourself  and  Mrs. 
Wilkinson,  "JANE  LYON." 

19  ««  Dawlish,  Devon, 

•'  30th  December,  1866. 

"  Dear  Mrs.  Lyon, — As  there  is  so  little  time  to  get 
the  mortgage  completed  before  you  leave  town,  and  there 
ought  to  be  no  haste  in  deciding  upon  so  extremely  important 
a  matter  as  whether  you  should  or  not  give  up  .£30,000, 
I  would  suggest  that  it  will  be  better  that  your  name  shall 
be  retained  in  the  mortgage  deed,  and  you  can  at  any 
time  afterwards,  by  a  short  deed,  transfer  the  principal,  if 
you  should  wish  to  do  so,  retaining  the  interest  for  your 
life.  I  think  that  this  would  be  better  than  doing  it  in 
the  mortgage  deed  itself;  and  if  you  approve,  and  will 
kindly  write  me  at  once  to  Lincoln's  Inn-fields,  I  can  have 
the  deed  made  ready  to  send  into  the  country  on  Tuesday 
for  execution,  and  settle  in  London  on  the  4th.  I  shall 
be  back  on  Tuesday  and  at  the  office  on  Wednesday. 
"  Yours  very  truly, 

«  W.  M.  WILKINSON/' 
"  Mrs.  Lyon." 

MR.     WILKINSON.  329 

20.  "  I7a,  Albert  Terrace,  Albert  Gate.  Hyde  Park, 

"31st  December,  1866. 

"  Dear  Mr.  Wilkinson, — I  wish  you  to  make  out  a 
mortgage  deed  for  Thirty  thousand  pounds  in  the  name 
of  my  adopted  son  Daniel  Home  Lyon  and  he  must  make 
out  a  deed  giving  me  a  life  interest  in  the  Thirty  thou- 
sand pounds  reserving  none  of  it  for  himself  viz.  the  inte- 
rest thereof  simply  giving  me  a  life  interest  in  it,  and  the 
power  to  receive  all  interest  accruing  from  the  said  Thirty 
thousand  pounds.  We  are  not  going  out  of  town  on  the 
h'fth,  therefore  it  can  remain  until  you  come  to  town. 

"  And  am,  dear  Mr.  Wilkinson,  yours  most  truly, 
"JANE  LYON." 

"  P.S. — I  consider  the  sooner  the  business  is  done  the 
bettor,  so  that  it  is  well  done,  and  it  is  only  you  can  do 
it  so." 

21.  "  44,  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields,  London,  W.  C. 

"2  Jany.,  1867. 

"  Dear  Mrs.  Lyon,— -I  got  hack  last  night,  and  in 
coming  here  this  morning,  I  have  had  a  fall  and  sprained 
my  ancle,  so  that  I  fear  1  shall  not  he  able  to  get  out  for 
2  or  3  days,  I  intend  therefore  to  stay  with  my  friend 

Mr at  44,  Russell  Square,  so  as  to  he  near 

lu-re,  and  ready  for  business. 

"  I  got  your  letter  last  night,  but  as  it  would  very  much 
complicate  the  mortgage  to  set  out  in  it  the  private 
arrangement  for  giving  the  principal  to  Mr.  Lyon  and 
reserving  the  interest  to  you,  I  have  found  it  far  better  to 
take  the  mortgage  to  yourself  in  the  usual  way,  and  with 
all  the  neee»ary  ]H.W«TS. 

"  You  can  as  soon  as  it  is  signed  and  completed,  by  a 
{separate  deed  assign  the  principal  as  you  wish  to  retain 
the  interest,  so  that  it  shall  be  paid  direct  to  yourself  with- 
out any  interference. 

"  1  dare  say  that  the  mortgage  deed  will  be  signed  by 
all  the  parties  by  Friday,  and  therefore  if  the  weather 

330  ANSWER    OF 

should  allow  your  going  to  the   City  to   sell   out  the 
.£30,000  on  or  before  that  day,  it  can  be  completed  then. 
"  Will  you  write  me  here  as  usual  and  I  shall  get  your 
letter. 

"  Yours  very  truly, 

"  W.  M.  WILKINSON." 
"  Mrs.  Lyon." 

22.  "  17a,  Albert  Terrace,  Albert  Gate,  Hyde  Park, 

••  2nd  January,  1867. 

"  Dear  Mr.  Wilkinson, — There  is  one  other  circum- 
stance in  my  letter  I  forgot,  viz.,  that  in  my  letters  I  do 
not  mention  that  it  is  my  wish  that  I  do  appoint  you  at 
all  times  my  Solicitor  over  the  Thirty  thousand  pounds  as 
long  as  I  do  live,  and  to  receive  my  interest  at  all  times 
from  the  parties  holding  the  said  principal  of  Thirty 
thousand  pounds.  My  receipt  to  you  is  to  be  sufficient 
guarantee  for  the  interest  arising  therefrom.  This  will 
add  to  the  strength  of  the  deed  for  me  to  keep. 
"  And  am,  dear  Sir, 

"  Yours  respectfully, 

"JANE  LYON." 

"  P.  S. — Should  the  present  mortgage  be  paid  off,  I 
must  have  full  power  to  invest  again  through  you,  in 
accordance  to  my  wish  at  all  times  for  my  life.  If  I  have 
not  this  power,  he  might  call  it  in  and  invest  it,  God 
knows  where  or  how,  this  must  not  be,  he  must  not  have 
that  power,  while  I  live,  and  reserve  -the  interest,  I  must 
have  sole  control  over  the  principal. — JANE  LYON. 

"  N.B. — Will  you  please  to  bring  this  letter  when  you 
come.     There  is  no  haste,  we  are  not  going  from  home. 
L." 

23  "  I7a,  Albert  Terrace,  Albert  Gate,  Hyde  Park, 

"  2nd  Jany.  1867. 

"  Dear  Mr.  Wilkinson, — I  certainly  did   think,  that 
my  letter  on  the  subject,  was  very  clear,  viz.,  that  I  by  a 

ME.     WILKINSON.  331 

strong  legal  deed,  give  Thirty  thousand  pounds  to  Daniel 
reserving  to  myself,  all  interest  thereof,  for  the  whole  term 
of  my  natural  life.  Daniel  by  strong  legal  deed,  gives 
me  all  interest  thereof,  taking  none  of  it  for  himself,  so 
long  as  I  live  ;  this  is  I  think  the  purport  of  my  last  letter 
to  you,  and  this  mode  will  obviate  any  difficulty  which 
might  arise,  as  to  any  other  mortgage.  Should  this  be 
paid  off,  there  will  be  no  occasion  to  make  out  another 
deed.  I  think  you  will  see  this,  but  I  know  you  are 
scrupulously  honest,  and  wish  me  to  be  secure,  for  which 
I  thank  you,  but  I  can  as  I  have  said  place  the  greatest 
confidence  in  your  proceedings  in  this  business,  viz.,  make 
out  the  mortgage  deed  entirely  in  Daniel's  name.  I  have 
nothing  to  do  with,  except  the  interest  in  it,  only  the 
Thirty  thousand  pounds,  viz.,  the  interest  thereof,  and 
whichever  way  it  is  invested,  without  having  reference  to 
this  mortgage  or  any  other ;  it  is  simply  the  interest  upon 
the  principal,  for  which  jthe  Legal  deed  must  be  made  by 
Daniel  which  I  know  now,  you  must  perfectly  under- 
stand. 

"  I  am,  dear  Sir,  yours  very  faithfully, 

"  JANE  LYON." 
«« W.  M.  Wilkinson,  Esqr." 

24.  "  17a,  Albert  Terraee,  Albert  Gate, 

"  2nd  January,  1867. 

"  Dear  Mr.  Wilkinson, — Since  I  sent  off  the  letter  to 
you,  I  have  thought  of  the  best  way  to  obviate  all  diffi- 
culties, viz.,  by  appointing  you  my  trustee  over  the  Thirty 
thousand  pounds,  and  by  your  inserting  your  name  with 
Daniel's  in  the  mortgage,  without  reference  to  the  trust, 
the  interest  to  be  paid  to  yourself,  and  my  receipt  to  you 
to  be  sufficient  during  my  life  for  the  interest.  I  think 
this  is  the  best  plan  yet  thought  of,  and  then  I  shall  be 
perfectly  satisfied  with  you  as  trustee  and  receiver,  the 
interest  going  direct  to  you  irom  the  parties  holding 
the  principal,  and  Daniel  having  no  power  over  any  of 

332  ANSWER    OF 

the  property  during  my  life,  neither  to  call  in  or  invest, 
probably  in  America.  The  trust  deed  must  be  made 
strong  and  legal,  giving  myself,  through  you,  my  trustee 
and  receiver,  all  power. 

"  And  am,  dear  Sir, 

"  Yours  faithfully, 

"JANE  LYON." 

25.  "  44,  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields,  London,  W.  C. 

"4th  January,  1867. 

"  Dear  Mrs.  Lyon, — I  got  your  letter  of  the  2nd  last 
evening  and  can  only  say  that  whatever  be  your  wishes  I 
will  carry  them  out  in  the  best  way  I  can  for  your  security. 

"  Your  suggestion  is  a  perfectly  practicable  one,  and 
can  be  substantially  carried  out  by  a  legal  deed.  But  it 
would  be  very  inexpedient  to  make  all  these  private 
arrangements  on  the  face  of  the  mortgage  deed  itself  to 
which  so  many  strangers  are  parties,  and  I  would  re- 
commend for  your  consideration  whether  it  would  not  be 
best  to  do  what  you  want  by  a  separate  deed  with  which 
the  borrowers  will  have  nothing  to  do. 

"  It  is  in  fact  only  another,  arid  in  my  opinion  a  better, 
mode  of  carrying  out  the  same  thing ;  and  if  you  approve 
of  this,  I  will  in  a  few  days  after  the  completion  of  the 
mortgage  submit  to  you  the  draft  of  the  intended  deed. 

"  I  hope  that  I  may  by  that  time  be  sufficiently  re- 
covered to  call  upon  you. 

"  Yours  very  truly, 

"  W.  M.  WILKINSON." 

"  Mrs.  Lyon." 

26.  "  17a,  Albert  Terrace,  Albert  Gate, 

"  Hyde  Park, 

"5  Jan.  1867. 

"  Dear  Mr.  Wilkinson", — I  perfectly  agree  with  you 
that  it  would  be  highly  inju&cious,  to  endeavour  to  carry 
out  my  wishes  in  a  mortgage  deed,  open  to  the  inspection 
oi  so  many  persons. 

MR.     WILKINSON.  333 

"You  can  I  have  no  doubt  do  it  more  effectually, 
carrying  out  my  views  in  a  separate  legal  deed  ;  there- 
foiv,  you  perceive,  I  highly  approve  of  your  making  a 
draft  of  such,  for  my  approval.  I  trust  you  will  be  suffi- 
ciently well  soon  to  see  the  completion  of  the  mortgage. 
Do  pray  take  great  care  of  yourself,  and  have  the  best 
advice ;  an  honest  man  in  the  law  is  worth  jar  more  than 
his  weiylit  in  gold. 

"  And  am,  yours  faithfully, 

"  JANE  LYON." 

"  W.  M.  Wilkinson,  Esq.,  44,  Lincoln's  Inn  1'ields." 

27.  On  Monday  the  7th  day  of  January,  I  saw  "her 
and  had  a  long  conversation  with  her  respecting  the 
completion  of  the  mortgage  and  also  as  to  her  intended 
gift  of  it  to  the  Defendant  Home  She  expressed  the 
greatest  aifection  for  him  and  said  she  was  determined  to 
carry  it  out  in  the  way  proposed  I  reiterated  to  her  all 
the  old  arguments  and  in  addition  I  told  her  that  it 
would  not  now  even  be  the  means  of  saving  the  duty 
inasmuch  as  there  would  be  succession  duty  now  charge- 
able I  again  warned  her  against  being  in  any  way  in- 
fluenced by  any  spirit  communications  or  by  anything 
but  her  unbiassed  reason  and  she  assured  me  she  was 
not  On  this  occasion  she  told  me  that  she  had  received 
the  same  advice  from  Lady  D.  who  had  told  her  not  to 
be  guided  in  any  worldly  matters  by  any  communications 
and  she  did  not" intend  to  be  She  said  whatever  hap- 
pened she  had  more  money  than  she  could  want  and  she 
was  only  too  glad  to  make  Daniel  independent  after  all 
the  obloquy  he  had  suffered. 

28.  The  following  correspondence  then  took  place 
between  us : — 

"44,  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields,  London,  W.  C. 

"  9  January,  1867. 

"  My  dear  Mrs.  Lyon, — I  am  happy  to  inform  you 
that  I  have  to-day  completed  the  mortgage  for  £30,000 
to  you  and  have  paid  over  the  money. 

334  ANSWER    OF 

"  I  will  bring  the  deed  for  jour  signature  in  a  day  or 
two. 

"  I  will  also  now  prepare  for  your  approval  the  draft  of 
the  deed  in  favour  of  Mr.  Lyon  according  to  your  instruc- 
tions in  your  letter,  and  in  the  conversation  I  had  with 
you  on  Monday  last. 

"  I  hope  in  a  day  or  two  to  be  able  to  lay  before  you 
the  proposal  for  another  mortgage  security. 
"  Yours  faithfully, 

W.  M.  WILKINSON." 

"Mrs.  Lyon." 

29.  "44,  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields,  London ,  \V .  C. 

"llth  January,  1867. 

"  My  dear  Mrs.  Lyon, — I  am  still  so  lame  that  I  have 
great  difficulty  in  getting  about,  but  I  hope  in  a  day  or 
two  to  be  better  and  to  see  you. 

"  I  have  now  got  the  particulars  of  the  other  mort- 
gage security,  and  which  I  believe  to  be  as  good  and  safe 
as  the  one  just  completed,  and  that  either  the  property  to 
be  mortgaged,  by  itself,  or  the  personal  security  of  the 
borrowers,  by  itself,  would  be  perfectly  ample ;  but  of 
course  you  would  have  the  security  of  both  in  the  mort- 
gage, should  you  be  willing  to  take  it. 

"  The  parties  wish  to  borrow  £25,000  on  12  acres  of 
freehold  land  valued  at  £1,000  an  acre.  They  have 
recently  had  to  pay  .£12,000  for  an  additional  acre, 
and  on  this  land  there  are  five  first-rate  furnaces  and 
extensive  foundries,  the  whole  being  valued  at  over 
£80,000. 

"  The  borrowers  are  several  of  them  the  same  as  in  the 
last  mortgage,  but  this  business  is  quite  distinct  from  the 
other,  and  the  works  about  one  mile  off. 

"  The  names  are : — 

******** 
****'*«** 

MR.     WILKINSON.  335 

"  I  shall  be  glad  if  you  will  consider  the  question,  and 
let  me  have  your  opinion  upon  it. 

"  Yours  very  truly, 

"  W.  U.  \VlLKINSON." 

"  Mrs.  Lyon." 

30  "  17a,  Albert  Terrace,  Albert  Gate,  Hyde  Park, 

"llth  Jany.  '67. 

"  Dear  Sir, — I  have  always  had,  an  authenticated, 
cxanid.  copy,  of  the  mortgage  deed.  This  is  essential. 
My  husband  was  very  particular,  on  this  point,  he  ex- 
amined it  with  the  deed  itself,  and  saw  that  it  corres- 
ponded in  every  point,  before  he  signed  it,  therefore 
please  when  you  come  to  bring  them  both  with  you,  it  is 
at  the  borrowers'  expense.  Please  to  drop  me  a  line 
previous.  I  hope  your  ancle  is  now  quite  well. 
"  Yours  faithfully, 

"  JANE  LYON." 
"  W.  M.  Wilkinson,  Esq." 

31.  « 1 7a,  Albert  Terrace,  Albert  Gate,  Hyde  Park, 

"13  Jany.  1867. 

"  Dear  Mr.  Wilkinson, — I  am  sorry  to  hear  that  you 
are  still  lame,  you  surely  take  the  best  advice,  there  may 
be  some  small  bone  or  leader  injured,  some  clever  person 
may  detect  ere  it  is  too  late.  The  "present  time"  you 
know.  The  mortgage  you  mention  viz.,  the  12  acres  of 
freehold  land,  the  security  must  depend  upon  the  erections 
thereon,  whether  they  are  of  sufficient  value,  and  the 
permanency  of  their  present  use,  and  whether  they  would 
be  available  for  any  other  purpose  equally  profitable. 
Then  with  the  joint  security  of  the  company  you  mention 
and  their  bond,  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  their  respect- 
ability. I  think  it  would  be  an  eligible  security,  and  you 

336  ANSWER    OF 

will  please  to  give  it  your  attention,  on  my  account  and 
strictest  enquiry. 

"  And  am,  dear  Sir,  yours  respectfully, 

"JANE  LYON." 
"W.  M.  Wilkinson,  Esq." 

"  You  will  be  here  to-morrow  Daniel  tells  me ;  we 
dine  at  i  past  5.  I  hope  you  will  come  to  meet  Dr. 
Mary  Walker." 

32.  On  Monday  the  14th  January,  I  went  to  dine 
with  the  Plaintiff  and  I  took  with  me  the  draft  assign- 
ment of  the  mortgage  and  the  declaration  of  trust  I  left 
them  with  her  for  her  approval     I  was  there  a  quarter  of 
an  hour  before  any  one  else  and  we  had  the  same  sort  of 
conversation  a?  before  and  she  said  she  would  go  through 
the  drafts  by  herself  and  thought  they  might  be  deferred 
as  she  saw  no  reason  for  doing  them  at  once     I  strongly 
advised  her  to  do  nothing  further  in  it  but  to  leave  things 
as  they  were     We  had  no  further  conversation  on  the 
subject  that  evening  as  I  left  early  before  the  others  had 
gone. 

33.  On  the   same   day  I  wrote   to  the   Plaintiff  as 
follows : — 

"  44,  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields,  London,  W.  C. 
"Nth  Jany.  1867. 

"  My  dear  Mrs.  Lyon, — The  land  and  the  premises 
and  other  erections  upon  it  are  valued  at  £80,000,  which 
I  believe  could  not  be  so  reduced  as  not  to  make  a  loan 
of  £25,000  perfectly  safe,  without  taking  into  account 
the  personal  security  of  the  borrowers,  upon  their  covenant 
jointly  and  severally  to  pay  the  whole  of  the  mortgage 
money. 

"  I  consider  that  the  security  therefore  is  ample ;  and 
if  the  title  to  the  property  should  on  investigation  prove 
to  be  equally  good,  I  do  not  think  you  will  run  any  risk, 
whilst  you  will  be  materially  increasing  your  income. 

MR.     WILKINSON.  3C7 

"  When  you  have  fully  considered  the  matter,  I  shall. 
bo  glad  to  have  your  directions, 

"  Yours  faithfully, 

"  W.  M.  WILKINSON." 
"  Mrs.  Lyon, 

U17a,  Albert  Terrace." 

34.  On  the  date  of  the  following  letter  it  was  brought 
to  me  by  the  Defendant  Home  who  said  that  the  Plaintiff 
wished  to  see  me. 

"  17a,  Albert  Terrace,  Albert  Gate,  Hyde  Park, 

"  17  Jany.  1867. 

"  Dear  Mr.  Wilkinson, — Will  you  be  so  good  as  to 
call  in  my  principal  of  ,£31,000  from  the  estate  of  the 
late  Frederick  Drew,  Esq.  ? 

"  Yours  very  truly, 

"JANE  LYON." 
«W.  M.  Wilkinson,  Esq." 

On  the  afternoon  of  that  day  I  called  on  her  and  she 
produced  the  draft  deeds  I  had  left  with  her  on  the  14th 
and  which  she  desired  me  to  read  over  to  her  I  did  so 
and  she  approved  of  them  and  said  she  had  determined 
no\v  to  carry  out  the  gift  I  once  more  went  through  the 
arguments  I  had  before  addressed  to  her  hut  she  said  she 
was  determined  now  to  do  it,  and  desired  me  to  have  them 
ready  for  her  to  sign  on  Saturday. 

The  next  morning  I  received  from  her  the  following 
letter : — 

"  17a,  Albert  Terrace,  Albert  Gate, 
"Hyde  Park, 

"  17th  Jany.  1867. 

"  Dear  Mr.  Wilkinson, — I  have  examined  the  c  jpy 
trust  deed,  to  you,  relating  to  the  mortgage  of  ,£30,000  ; 
and  also,  the  reservation  gift  deed  copy,  to  Daniel,  at  my 
demise,  and  approve  of  both. 

"  And  am,  <fec.,  <fec., 

"  JANE  LYON." 

The  assignment  of  the  mortgage  to  me  as  drawn  arui 
z 

338  ANSWER    OF 

approved  by  her  was  absolute  on  the  face  of  it  and  I  had 
it  re-ingrossed  with  the  alteration  referring  to  the  decla- 
ration of  trust  so  that  my  character  of  trustee  should 
appear  Two  of  my  clerks  my  son  and  Mr.  Hartley  called 
on  her  on  the  Saturday  to  see  her  sign  the  deeds  and  I 
afterwards  signed  in  their  presence  I  was  not  there 
myself  and  did  not  execute  the  deed  till  the  Monday- 
following. 

35.  The  following  is  a  copy  of  the  deed : — 

"DECLARATION  OF  TRUST. 
"  This  Indenture  made  the  19th  day  of  January  One 
thousand  eight  hundred  and  sixty-seven  between  Jane 
Lyon  of  No.  17a  Albert-terrace  Albert-gate  Hyde  Park 
in  the  County  of  Middlesex  widow  of  the  one  part  and 
William  Martin  Wilkinson  of  44  Lincoln's  Iim-fields  in 
the  County  of  Middlesex  gentleman  of  the  other  part 
AVhereas  by  a  deed  poll  or  instrument  in  writing  under 
the  hand  and  seal  of  the  said  Jane  Lyon  bearing  date  the 
12th  day  of  December  1866  After  reciting  that  under 
the  last  Will  and  testament  of  her  late  husband  Charles 
Lyon  Esquire  the  said  Jane  Lyon  was  entitled  to  a  large 
fortune  in  money  and  securities  for  her  own  use  free  from 
any  trusts  or  reservations  imposed  thereon  by  the  said 
Will  or  otherwise  And  reciting  that  the  said  Jane  Lyon 
had  no  children  and  had  been  minded  and  desirous  to  take 
and  adopt  Daniel  Dunglas  Home  of  22  Sloane-street 
Hyde-park  aforesaid  as  her  son  And  reciting  that  with 
her  sanction  and  at  her  request  the  said  Daniel  Dunglas 
Home  had  executed  a  deed  poll  bearing  date  the  3rd  day 
ot  December  then  instant  and  the  same  was  intended  to 
be  enrolled  as  of  record  in  Her  Majesty's  High  Court  of 
Chancery  whereby  the  said  Daniel  Dunglas  Home  de- 
clared that  he  had  taken  the  surname  of  "  Lyon  "  in  He" 
of  m\d  instead  of  "  Home  "  and  that  in  future  he  intended 
to  oe  called  and  known  as  "  Daniel  Home  Lyon  "  And 
reciting  that  the  said  Jane  Lyon  being  desirous  of  placing 

.     WILKINSON.  SCO 

Mm  in  a  position  of  independence  suitable  to  his  rank  and 
position  in  life,  as  her  adopted  son  and  with  a  view  to  that 
end  on  the  10th  day  of  October  then  last  gave  to  the  said 
Daniel  Home  Lyon  the  sum  of  £24,000  cash  and  reciting 
that  in  further  pursuance  of  such  desire  and  on  the  occa- 
sion of  his  publicly  taking  her  name  on  the  10th  day  of 
December  then  instant  the  said  Jane  Lyon  had  caused  to 
hi'  transferred  from  her  own  name  in  the  books  of  the 
r.overnor  and  Company  of  the  Bank  of  England  into  the 
old  name  of  Daniel  Home  Lyon  the  sum  of  =£0,798  17s.  4d. 
£3  per  Cent.  Consolidated  Bank  Annuities  equivalent  to 
a  further  sum  of  £6,000  cash  and  reciting  that  it  was  the 
intention  of  the  said  Jane  Lyon  in  making  the  said  respec- 
tive gift  and  transfer  as  aforesaid  and  it  was  her  then  wish 
find  intention  absolutely  and  irrevocably  to  vest  in  the  said 
Daniel  Home  Lyon  for  himself  his  executors  administra- 
tors and  assigns  the  absolute  use  and  enjoyment  of  the 
moneys  thereby  respectively  given  and  transferred  The 
said  Jane  Lyon  in  further  evidence  of  such  her  desire  and 
intention  and  to  remove  all  doubts  suspicions  and  contro- 
versies in  that  behalf  did  by  the  deed  poll  now  in  recital 
for  herself  her  heirs  executors  and  administrators  absolutely 
find  irrevocably  declare  that  she  had  made  the  said  gift 
nnd  transfer  of  her  own  will  and  pleasure  and  without  any 
influence  control  or  interference  of  the  said  Daniel  Home 
Lyon  or  of  any  other  person  and  that  the  said  Daniel  Homo 
Lyon  his  executors  administrators  and  assigns  do  stand 
possessed  of  and  be  entitled  to  the  said  sums  of  £24.000 
and  the  said  £3  per  Cent.  Consolidated  Bank  Annuities 
so  representing  the  sum  of  £0.000  by  her  transferred  as 
thereinbefore  mentioned  for  his  and  their  own  absolute  use 
and  benefit  without  any  reservation  condition  trust  or  pur- 
pose whatsoever  And  whereas  the  said  Jane  Lyon  is 
entitled  (among  other  property)  to  a  sum  of  £30.000 
secured  on  mortgage  of  certain  leasehold  land  buildings 
machinery  and  hereditaments  situate  at  ....  in 
the  county  of  York  made  by  an  indenture  dated  the  9th 

340  ANSW3R    OF 

day  of  January  1867  and  expressed  to  be  made  between 

of  the  one  part 

and  the  said  Jane  Lyon  of  the  other  part  And  whereas 
the  said  Jane  Lyon  being  minded  and  desirous  to  make  a 
further  provision  for  her  said  adopted  son  the  said  Daniel 
Home  Lyon  in  addition  to  the  said  sums  of  ,£24,000  cash 
and  £6,798  17s.  4d.  £3  per  Cent.  Consolidated  Bank 
Annuities  so  respectively  paid  and  transferred  to  him  as 
aforesaid  has  of  her  own  free  will  and  pleasure  only  and 
without  any  influence  control  or  interference  of  the  said 
Daniel  Home  Lyon  or  of  any  other  person  determined 
absolutely  and  irrevocably  to  settle  the  said  sum  of  £30,000 
secured  on  mortgage  as  aforesaid  for  the  benefit  of  her 
adopted  son  the  said  Daniel  Home  Lyon  reserving  only  to 
herself  the  interest  of  the  same  during  her  life  with  full 
power  to  her  of  calling  in  and  varying  the  investments  of 
the  said  sum  And  whereas  for  effectuating  and  in  part 
performance  of  the  said  will  and  determination  the  said 
Jane  Lyon  has  by  an  indenture  bearing  even  date  with 
but  executed  before  these  presents  and  expressed  to  be 
made  between  the  said  Jane  Lyon  of  the  one  part  and  the 
said  William  Martin  Wilkinson  of  the  other  part  assigned 
the  said  principal  sum  of  £30,000  and  interest  and  the 
securities  for  the  same  to  the  said  William  Martin  Wil- 
kinson his  executors  administrators  and  assigns  to  the 
intent  that  he  and  they  may  stand  possessed  thereof  re- 
spectively upon  the  trusts  and  with  and  subject  to  the 
powers  and  provisoes  thereinafter  declared  Now  this  in- 
denture witnesseth  that  for  effectually  carrying  out  the 
said  determination  and  intent  and  in  consideration  of  the 
premises  it  is  hereby  agreed  and  declared  by  and  between 
the  said  parties  hereto  and  in  particular  the  said  Jane 
Lyon  doth  hereby  for  herself  her  heirs  executors  and  ad- 
ministrators absolutely  and  irrevocably  declare  that  the 
said  William  Martin  Wilkinson  his  executors  administra- 
tors and  assigns  shall  from  the  date  of  these  presents  stand 
possessed  of  and  interested  in  the  said  sum  of  £30,000 

UE.     WILKINSON.  Gil 

and  all  interest  now  due  or  hereafter  to  accrue  due  for 
the  same  and  the  securities  for  the  same  Upon  trust  that 
he  the  said  William  Martin  Wilkinson  his  executors  ad- 
ministrators and  assigns  shall  either  continue  the  said  sum 
of  .£30,000  in  its  present  state  of  investment  if  the  said 
Jane  Lyon  shall  so  desire  or  at  her  request  shall  call  in 
and  compel  payment  of  the  same  sum  or  any  part  thereof 
and  shall  invest  the  moneys  so  called  in  as  aforesaid  in  the 
names  or  name  or  under  the  legal  control  of  him  the  said 
William  Martin  Wilkinson  his  executors  administrators  or 
assigns  in  any  of  the  puhlic  stocks  or  funds  or  Government 
securities  of  the  United  Kingdom  or  freehold  copyhold 
leasehold  or  chattel  real  securities  or  in  the  purchase  of 
real  or  leasehold  estate  or  in  any  other  mode  or  form  which 
the  said  Jane  Lyon  shall  by  writing  under  her  hand  from 
time  to  time  direct  and  appoint  it  being  the  intent  and 
meaning  of  the  said  Jane  Lyon  in  making  such  assign- 
ment and  settlement  as  aforesaid  to  retain  to  herself  the 
exclusive  control  of  the  future  investments  of  the  said  sum 
of  -£30.000  and  every  part  thereof  and  that  the  said  Wil- 
liam Martin  Wilkinson  his  executors  administrators  or 
assigns  shall  pay  the  interest  dividends  and  annual  in- 
come of  the  said  sum  of  .£30,000  and  of  the  stocks  funds 
and  securities  in  or  upon  which  the  same  sum  or  any  part 
thereof  may  for  the  time  being  be  invested  and  the  rents 
and  profits  of  the  real  estate  which  may  he  purchased 
therewith  or  with  any  part  thereof  unto  the  said  Jane 
Lyon  during  her  life  and  subject  thereto  shall  stand  pos- 
sessed of  and  interested  in  the  said  sum  of  .£30,000  and 
the  stocks  funds  shares  and  securities  in  or  upon  which 
the  same  or  any  part  thereof  may  from  time  to  time  be 
invested  and  the  real  estate  which  may  be  purchased  with 
the  said  sum  or  any  part  thereof  and  the  interest  dividends 
and  annual  income  rents  and  profits  thereof  and  of  every 
part  thereof  In  trust  for  the  said  Daniel  Home  Lyon  his 
heirs  executors  administrators  and  assigns  according  to  the 
nature  and  tenure  of  the  said  property  And  it  is  hereby 
agreed  and  declared  that  the  power  of  appointing  a  new 

342  AN S WEE    OF 

trustee  or  new  trustees  who  shall  die  or  desire  to  be  dis- 
charged or  refuse  or  become  unfit  or  incapable  to  act  shall 
be  exercisable  by  the  said  Jane  Lyon  during  her  life  and 
upon  every  or  any  such  appointment  the  number  of  trus- 
tees may  be  augmented  or  reduced  and  in  addition  to  the 
ordinary  indemnity  and  right  to  reimbursement  by  law 
given  to  trustees  the  trustee  or  trustees  for  the  time  being 
of  these  presents  shall  not  be  answerable  for  any  loss 
which  may  be  occasioned  to  the  said  trust  fund  by  invest- 
ing the  same  in  any  manner  which  the  said  Jane  Lyon 
may  in  her  absolute  discretion  think  fit  to  direct  Pro- 
vided  also  and  the  said  Jane  Lyon  doth  hereby  expressly 
declare  that  the  settlement  hereinbefore  expressed  to  bo 
hereby  made  by  her  is  absolute  and  irrevocable  and  shall 
in  no  wise  be  disputed  or  controverted  by  her  heirs  execu- 
tors or  administrators  and  that  the  sum  of  £30,000  therein 
and  the  stocks  funds  securities  and  estate  that  may  be  pur- 
chased with  the  said  sum  or  any  part  thereof  are  (subject 
as  aforesaid)  freely  and  absolutely  given  to  the  said  Daniel 
Home  Lyon  for  his  own  use  and  benefit  without  any  re- 
servation condition  or  trust  whatsoever  and  are  intended 
by  the  said  Jane  Lyon  to  be  in  addition  to  and  not  in 
lieu  of  or  substitution  for  the  said  sums  of  £24,000  and 
£6,798  17s.  4d.  £3  per  Cent.  Consolidated  Bank  Annui- 
ties so  respectively  given  paid  and  transferred  to  her  said 
adopted  son  the  said  Daniel  Home  Lyon  as  aforesaid  In 
witness  whereof  the  said  parties  to  these  presents  have 
hereunto  set  their  hands  and  seals  the  day  and  year  first 
above  written. 

"  JANE  LYON.  W.  M.  WILKINSON. 

Signed  sealed  and  delivered  by  the 
within  named  Jane  Lyon  and 
William  Martin  Wilkinson  in  the 
presence  of 

MR.    WILKINSON.  Cl-3 

36.  Copies  of  the  two  deeds  were  sent  to  her  witli  tho 
following  letter : — 

"  44,  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields,  London,  W.  C. 
"2    January  1 867. 

"  Dear  Madam, — "My  father  desires  me  to  send  you 
the  accompanying  copies  of  the  documents  you  required 
on  Saturday     I  hope  you  will  find  them  all  right. 
"  Yours  faithfully, 

"  \V.  J.  WILKINSON." 
"  Mrs.  Lyon." 

37.  On  the  24th  January  1867  I  directed  the  follow- 
ing letter  to  be  written  and  sent  to  the  Plaintiff : — 

"  44,  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields,  London,  \V.  C. 

"  24  January,  1867. 

"  Dear  Madam, — My  father  desires  me  to  say  that  he 
is  afraid  his  indisposition  will  prevent  him  accepting  your 
kind  invitation  for  Friday  next. 

"  I  'return  you  the  papers  relating   to   the   Wootton 
Estate  which  you  sent  me  according  to  your  request. 
"  Yours  faithfully, 

"  WM.  J.  WILKINSON." 
"  Mrs.  Lyon." 

38.  At   her   request    I   ealleJ    on   her   on   the   25th 
January  with  one  of  the  duplicates  of  her  Will  and  left  ifc 
with  her     I  was  with  her  only  a  few  minutes  and  do  not 
remember  what  passed     On  tho  18th  February  I  went 
with  her  to  the  stockbrokers  and  to  the  Bank  to  sell  out 
stock  for  the  second  mortgage  of  £30,000      She  thought 
that  she  had  only  enough  stock  to  produce  about  .£2(5,500 
and  she  had  arranged  that  the  Defendant  Home  should 
sell  out  of  his  stock  and  lend  to  her  what  was  nec»i--uvy 
1  had  accordingly  got  a  power  of  attorney  from  him  to 
the  brokers  to  sell  out  and  this  was  done  by  them  and 
they  raised  £3,403  6s.  4d.  cash  by  the  sale  of  £3,755 
7s.  Sc/.  Consols   which  was  advanced  to  her  and  £400 
cash  by  sale  of  £411  7s.  Id.  Consols  for  Mr.  Home  him- 
self    When  at   the   Bank   we   discovered   through   the 

344  ANSWER    OF 

brokers  that  the  Plaintiff  had  a  further  sum  left,  in  her 
own  name  of  about  £2,300  and  she  told  me  on  going 
home  that  she  would  at  once  transfer  it  to  the  Defendant 
Home  in  reduction  of  what  she  had  borrowed  and  which 
I  believe  she  afterwards  did. 

39.  The  following  are  copies  of  further  letters  which 
have  passed  between  myself  and  the  Plaintiff: — 

"  17a,  Albert  Terrace.  Albert  Gate,  S.  W. 

"ISthFebry. '67. 

"  Dear  Mr.  Wilkinson, — "Will  you  please  let  me  know 
by  return,  when  I  shall  receive  the  deeds  of  my  new 
mortgage,  being  usual  with  my  husband  to  receive  the 
deeds  when  he  paid  the  money,  which  I  have  done,  and  I 
wish  to  go  to  the  bank,  to  deposit  some  other  documents, 
which  I  mentioned  to  you,  at  the  same  time  I  deposit 
them.  Will  you  please  also,  to  send  the  papers  of  the 
exact  amount  I  sold  out  of  the  funds,  with  price,  &c. 
This  is  usual,  we  always  had  it  from  the  bank,  will  you 
please  procure  it  from  Taylor  and  Fox. 
"  I  hope  you  are  much  better,  and  am, 

"  Yours  very  truly, 

"JANE  LYON." 
"  W.  M.  Wilkinson,  Esq." 

"Daniel  came  home  this  afternoon  quite  well." 
"  P.  S. — Also,  if  you  have  sold  out  from  Daniel's,  let 
me  have  that  paper  of  exact  amount  also,  if  you  have  not, 
I  would  sell  out  the  remainder  of  my  stock  as  part,  and 
not  have  so  much  of  his. — J.  L." 

40  "  44,  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields.  London,  W.  C. 

"14  February,  1867. 

"  Dear  Mrs.  Lyon, — The  mortgage  deed  requires  to 
be  registered  at  Northallerton,  and  immediately  on  its 
return,  which  will  be  about  a  week,  I  will  bring  it  to 
you.  I  shall  have  a  copy  made  for  you  I  hope  by 
Saturday. 

"  The  amount  of  stock  you  sold  yesterday  was  .£29,348 

MB.     W-ILKINSON.  345 

2s.  9d.,  which  produced  .£26,596  13s.  8d.,  for  which  sura 
I  received  the  broker's  cheque  yesterday. 

"  Mr.  D.  II.  Lyon's  stock  was  sold  yesterday  to  make 
up  the  sum  of  £30,000,  which  I  also  received. 

"  I  will  get  the  broker's  note  of  the  amount  for  you, 
and  you  can  when  convenient  replace  his  stock,  and  pay 
him  the  dividend  of  July  next,  in  case  it  should  not  be 
earlier  replaced. 

"  It  will  thus  be  simply  a  loan  of  stock  for  a  short 
time. 

"  I  am  much  better  to-day. 

"  Yours  faithfy., 

"  W.  M.  WILKINSON." 

"  Mrs.  Lyon." 

41.  "  44,  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields,  London,  W.  C. 

"21  February,  1867. 

"  My  Dear  Mrs.  Lyon, — I  send  you  the  last  mortgage 
deed  for  .£30,000,  and  also  an  examined  copy,  which  I 
hope  you  will  find  correct. 

"  Yours  faithfully, 

"  W.  M.  WILKINSON, 

"  per  W.  J.  W." 
"  Mrs.  Lyon, 

"  Albert  Gate." 

42.  The  manner  in  which  the  Plaintiff  had  disposed  of 
her  property  had  always  been  an  uneasy  thought  for  me 
and  I  determined  to  bring  the  question  again  before  her 
and  accordingly  wrote  her  the  following  letter ; — 

"  44,  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields,  London,  W.  C. 

"6  May,  1867. 

"  My  dear  Mrs.  Lyon, — I  am  just  beginning  to  get 
here  again  a  little  after  my  long  illness,  and  am  sorry 
that  I  have  been  so  long  without  being  able  to  call  on  you. 
"  I  have  tor  some  time  been  intending  to  remind  you 
of  the  terms  01  your  Will,  which  has  now  been  made  lor 
some  time,  and  you  have  had  an  opportunity  in  the  in- 

346  ANSWER    OF 

torim  of  fully  considering  whether  you  would  not  wish  to 
benefit  some  of  your  own  or  your  late  husband's  relatives 
by  making  an  alteration  in  their  favour. 

"  I  have  no  right  of  course  to  do  more  than  bring  the 
matter  to  your  notice,  for  of  course  the  decision  must  rest 
with  you  alone,  and  I  will  therefore  say  no  more  than 
that  I  can  now  attend  to  any  directions  you  may  give  me 
on  the  subject. 

"  Yours  very  faithfy, 

"  W.  M.  WILKINSON." 
*'  Mrs.  Lyon. 

"  17a,  Albert  Terrace,  Hyde  Park." 

43.  The  following  is  a  copy  of  her  answer : — 

"  I7a,  Albert  Terrace,  Albert  Gate, 
"  6th  May,  '67. 

"  My  dear  Mr.  Wilkinson, — I  most  sincerely  con- 
gratulate you  upon,  I  hope,  your  restoration  to  permanent 
health,  and  a  good  long  life  to  enjoy  it,  and  your  dear 
good  wife ;  I  also  wish  her  much  joy  upon  that  anticipa- 
tion. May  you  both  together  reap  the  benefits  of  that 
happy  change,  for  health  is  most  assuredly  the  greatest 
blessing  this  world  can  grant.  Have  you  heard  any 
thing  from  the  Wootton  Mortgage?  Will  you  please 
give  me  a  copy  of  your  notice,  for  them  to  pay  in  the 
money?  I  hope  it  will  answer  the  purpose.  Have  you 
got  a  security  for  it  good  to  pay  5  pr.  ct.  ?  Mr.  Jencken 
mentioned  one  that  Spratt  mentioned  to  Daniel,  probably 
he  named  it  to  you,  paying  6  pr.  ct.,  that  was  for  twenty 
thousand.  I  hope  you  will  find  another  good  one,  equal 
to  the  last,  or  better.  I  should  like  to  see  you,  when  you 
can ;  if  you  please,  bring  the  copy  notice  with  you,  and 
am,  with  best  wishes  for  your  health, 

"  Yours  very  truly, 

"JANE  LYON." 

"  Will  you  please  give  me  some  intimation  when  you 
will  be  here,  as  I  wish  to  be  in  the  house ;  and  this  fine 
weather  I  might  be  out  after  one  o'clock,  or  if  not  con- 

MR.     WILKINSON.  347 

voniont  to  call  please  wftte.  I  have  had  a  letter  from 
poor  Dan.,  and  think  he  is  rather  better,  not  so  much 
pain :  he  is  now  taking  wine.  I  think  there  is  hopes  of 
his  recovery. 

"J.  LYON." 

44.  I  afterwards  received  from  the  Plaintiff  a  letter  of 
which  the  following  is  a  copy  := — 

"  17a,  Albert  Terrace.  Albert  Gate,  Hyde  Park, 

"  10th  May,  1867. 

"  Dear  Sir, — Not  having  heard  from  you,  in  answer  to 
my  last,  requesthuj  the  copy  of  the  notice  you  sent  re- 
specting the  WoottOQ  Mortgage,  (it  has  always  been 
usual  with  my  husband  and  self  to  have  such  copy 
notice)  I  have  requested  Daniel  to  desire  you  to  send  or 
give  it  to  him  for  me,  but  I  suppose  he  forgot  it.  As  the 
payment  of  the  interest  was  a  private  transaction,  pro- 
bably a  different  notice  may  have  to  be  given.  If  yours 
is  not  in  conformity  with  the  deeds,  this  must  be  done  at 
once,  May  and  October  were  the  months  the  interest 
was  paid  usually ;  not  January  and  July,  as  last  entered 
upon. 

"  And  am  yours  truly, 

"JANE  LYON." 
«  W.  M.  Wilkinson,  Esq." 

45.  On  Saturday  the  llth   May  I  called  on  her  to 
speak  to  her  about  her  Will   and  the  calling  in  of  the 
Wootton  Mortgage  <fcc.       I   found   her  alone  and  after 
speaking  a  little  on  the  other  matters  I  opened  the  ques- 
tion of  her  Will  and  told  her  that  as  Mr.  Home  had  now 
had  such  a  benefit   from   her   I   wished   to    bring   very 
seriously  before  her  that  she  should  not  exclude  her  rela- 
tions by  her  Will     She  said  that  she  was  just  as  well 
satisfied  with  him  as  ever  and  that  nothing  could  surpass 
his  kindness  to  her   All  that  she  feared  was  that  he  would 
not  live  long  and  if  he  died  she  would  alter  her  Will  for 
she  did  not  wish  that  any  more  of  her  money  should  go  to 
his  little  boy  whom  she  did  not  like     "  Indeed,"  she  said, 

348  ANSWER    OF 

"  I  am  sorry  that  I  gave  him  more  than  a  life  contingency 
in  the  second  £30,000  for  I  think  the  first  £30,000  quite 
enough  to  go  to  the  boy."  I  said  "  Well,  I  am  sorry  if 
you  have  changed  your  mind,  for  I  did  all  I  could  to 
make  you  hesitate,  and  I  am  sorry  that  you  ever  gave 
him  the  second  gift  at  all.  But  now,"  I  said  to  her  "  why 
don't  you  make  your  Will  in  favour  of  your  relations  ? 
If  Mrs.  Clutterbuck  does  not  want  it,  there  is  Mrs.  Deni- 
son,  who,  with  her  husband  incapacitated,  and  her  large 
family  really  wants  it.  Besides  you  have  given  Daniel  more 
than  he  can  ever  want."  She  thought  for  a  moment  and 
said  "  No,  I  don't  care  for  them,  and  neither  did  my  hus- 
band, and  I  will  not  alter  it  as  long  as  Daniel  lives ;  but 
if  he  die,  I  will  alter  it,  for  I  don't  wish  his  son  to  have 
any  more.  And  why  should  I  change  ?  I  am  perfectly 
satisfied  so  long  as  he  lives."  I  again  pressed  her  to 
leave  a  part  to  her  husband's  relatives  and  if  not  to  some 
hospitals  as  it  was  absurd  to  leave  so  much  to  one  person 
and  I  said  "  I  wish  you  would  do  it,  for  I  think  it  is  only 
just."  She  positively  refused  and  said  her  mind  was  made 
up  I  said  to  her  "  Well,  I  only  wish  your  relatives  could 
have  been  within  hearing  of  all  I  have  said  to  you,  that 
they  might  know  how  earnestly  I  have  pleaded  for  them, 
and  I  am  sorry  to  say  how  unsuccessfully  "  We  parted 
on  the  best  terms  and  I  made  the  following  memorandum 
of  the  interview. 

"  Saturday,  11  May,  1867. 

MRS.  LYON, — Attending  you  as  to  altering  your  Will, 
which  you  determined  not  to  do,  or  to  take  anything  away 
during  Mr.  Lyon's  life ;  but  should  he  predecease  you, 
you  would  at  once  make  a  fresh  will. 

46.  The  following  correspondence  then  took  place  : — 

"  17a,  Albert  Terrace,  Albert  Gate, 

"27th  May, '67. 

"  Dear  Mr.  Wilkinson, — You  promised,  when  here,  to 
write  respecting  the  notice,  and  when  they  would  be  ready, 
to  pay  the  mortgage  off,  and  drop  me  a  line  as  soon  as 

MR.    WILKINSON.  349 

you  received  an  answer.     "Will  you  please  let  me  know 
the  reply. 

"  And  am,  dear  Sir,  yours  truly, 

'•JANE  LYON." 

47.  "  44,  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields,  London,  W.  C. 

"  28th  May,  1867. 

"  My  dear  Mrs.  Lyon, — I  wrote  to  the  Solicitors, 
Messrs.  Warden  and  Ponsford  the  day  after  I  saw  you, 
and  not  having  received  any  answer  from  them,  I  wrote 
them  again  yesterday  urging  them  to  let  me  know  if  they 
could  promise  the  money  on  the  day  as  you  were  about 
making  arrangements  for  its  investment. 

"  I  have  not  yet  received  any  answer,  but  the  moment 
I  do  so,  I  will  let  you  know. 

"  I  should  have  called  on  you  long  before  this,  but  I 
have  been  again  unwell,  and  obliged  to  save  myself  as 
much  exertion  as  possible. 

"  I  shall  hope  to  see  you  in  a  day  or  two. 
"  Yours  very  truly, 

"  W.  M.  WILKINSON." 

"  Mrs.  Lyon." 

48.  "  My  dear  Sir, — I  am  sorry  to  find  by  yours  that 
you  have  been  ill  again,  I  think  you  require  change  of  air. 
I  am  much  surprised  you  do  not  hear  from  Ward  and 
Ponsford ;  I  fear  I  am  going  to  have  some  trouble  in  that 
quarter,  I  have  all  the  deeds  belonging  the  estate  at  the 
bank;  will  you  please,  when  you  come  here,  to  bring  me 
the  deeds  belonging  to  the  last  mortgage,  I  have  only  the 
mortgage  deed  to  me,  and  cannot  take  it  to  the  bank 
until  I  have  the  deeds  of  the  property  in  mortgage  as  it 
is  usual  to  have,  it  is  not  complete  without.  In  a  2nd 

350  ANSWER    OF 

mortgage,  they  have  copies  of  them.     I  have  neither.     I 
have  had  a  good  account  of  Daniel. 

"  And  am  yours  respectfully, 

"JANE  LYON." 
"  W.  M.  Wilkinson,  Esq. 

"  44,  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields,  W.  C. 
"  Wednesday,  29th  May,  '67." 

49.  "  44,  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields,  London,  W.  C. 

"  7th  June,  1867. 

"  My  dear  Mrs.  Lyon, — I  have  now  heard  from  Messrs. 
Warden  and  Ponsford  in  answer  to  my  letters,  and  they 
say  that  they  have  not  yet  obtained  the  money  to  pay  you 
off,  but  they  are  still  trying  to  get  it. 

"  There  is  no  doubt  they  find  it  a  more  difficult  task 
than  they  anticipated. 

"  I  will  bring  with  me  the  first  day  I  can  call,  the 
other  deeds  relating  to  your  mortgage  in  the  North. 

"  I  have  been  worse  again  in  health  lately,  or  I  would 
have  brought  them  before  now. 

"  Yours  very  truly, 

"  W.  M.  WILKINSON." 
"Mrs.  Lyon." 

50.  "  17a,  Albert  Terrace,  Albert  Gate,  Hyde  Park, 

"llth  June  1867. 

"  Dear  Sir, — I  am  sorry  to  hear  that  you  have  been 
ill  again,  but  hope  now  you  are  quite  well,  when  you 
come  with  the  deeds  you  name,  will  you  also  please  to 
bring  my  Mortgage  deed  and  Trust  to  Dan.  I  wish  to 
see  them  again  compared  with  my  copies ;  I  fear  I  shall 
have  some  difficulty  with  the  Wootton  Estate  Mortgage, 
I  wrote  to  Mr.  Good,  he  thinks  they  will  get  the  money, 
but  not  so  soon  as  anticipated,  will  you  please  appoint 
Thursday  first,  to  bring  the  above  deed,  mentioned,  or  a 
day  probably  more  convenient  to  you,  say  Friday. 
"  And  am,  dear  Sir,  yours  truly, 

"  JANE  LYON." 
"W.  M.  Wilkinson,  Esqr." 

MR.     WILKINSON.  351 

"  44,  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields.  London,  W.  C. 

"12th  June,  1867. 

"My  dear  Mrs.  Lyon, — I  shall  try  to  call  on  you  at 
2  o'clock  to-morrow  (Thursday)  or  the  same  hour  oil 
Friday,  if  not  inconvenient  to  you. 

"  Yours  very  truly, 

"  VV.  M.  WILKINSON." 
"  Mrs.  Lyon." 

51.  The  next  and  last  time  I  saw  the  Plaintiff  was  on 
the  13th  June  when  I  found  her  in  a  very  excited  state 
She  said  I  ought  to  have  advised  her  to  have  another  soli- 
citor and  to  put  off  giving-  away  the  mortgage  and  when 
I  told  her  I  had  done  so  she  denied  it  and  said  she  should 
try  to  get  the  mortgage  deed  hack  I  told  her  I  was  sorry 
she  had  ever  given  it  at  all  and  it  was  quite  against  my 
wishes  and  advice  and  if  Mr.  Home  had  deceived  her  as 
she  said  she  had  most  effectually  concealed  it  from  me  and 
that  I  could  not  believe  she  had  been  acting  a  part  with 
me  for  so  many  months  for  no  reason  at  all  The  follow- 
ing is  the  memorandum  I  made  immediately  on  my  return. 

"13th  June,  1867. 

"  I  called  on  Mrs.  Lyon  with  the  deeds  belonging  to  her, 
and  she  complained  that  I  had  not  brought  the  trust  deed 
to  compare  with  her  copy.  I  informed  her  that  hers  was 
an  examined  copy.  She  said  she  was  determined  to  have 
it  back,  as  she  had  been  defrauded  of  it  by  Mr.  Lyon  and 
had  not  had  proper  advice  from  me.  That  I  ought  to  have 
asked  her  to  have  another  Solicitor  or  to  have  insisted  on 
her  delaying  for  (5  months.  I  referred  to  my  having 
written  to  her  repeatedly  and  also  spoken  to  her  against 
doing  it  at  all,  and  that  I  could  not  prevent  her  doing  what 
she  did.  She  said  she  had  done  it  under  the  influence  of 
Mr.  Home  in  everything,  and  I  said  that  if  so  she  had 
concealed  it  from  me.  She  said  she  was  determined  to 
set  aside  the  deed,  and  was  saving  she  would  go  into 
Chancery  with  it,  when  a  gentleman  and  lady  called,  and 
she  said  that  the  interview  had  better  terminate. 

352  ANSWER    OF 

52.  The  next  day  I  resigned  my  trusteeship  in  the  fol- 
lowing letter : — 

"  44,  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields,  London,  W.  C. 
"  14th  June,  1867. 

"  Mr.  Wilkinson  presents  his  compliments  to  Mrs. 
Lyon,  and  begs  to  say  that  as  Mrs.  Lyon  named  him  as 
trustee  of  the  .£30,000  mortgage,  and  she  is  now  dis- 
satisfied with  what  she  did,  he  is  desirous  of  retiring 
altogether  from  the  trusteeship. 

"  Mrs.  Lyon  has  the  power  of  nominating  another 
trustee. 

"  Mr.  Wilkinson  throughout  considered  the  further  gift 
unnecessary,  and  has  always  been  sorry  that  Mrs.  Lyon 
persisted  in  making  it." 

53.  I  have  since  deposited  in  Court  the  mortgage  and 
the  assignment  and  declaration  of  trust  and  the  deeds  re- 
lating to  the  mortgage  and  also  the  mortgage  for  .£20,000 
to  Mr.  Home  so  thnt  I  have  no  further  interest  therein 
and  I  am  willing  to  assign  the  first-mentioned  mortgage 
to  a  trustee  to  be  appointed  and  I  submit  I  ought  to  be 
discharged  from  the  suit     I  have  not  been  paid  either  by 
the  Plaintiff  or  the  other  Defendant  for  any  of  the  busi- 
ness I  have  transacted  for  them. 

54.  I  have  now  gone  through  the  only  letters  and 
papers  which  have  passed  on  the  subject  and  I  have  given 
as  nearly  as  I  could  a  true  account  of  the  material  parts 
of  my  interviews  with  the  Plaintiff     She  was  always  till 
the  last  occasion  very  kind  to  me  and  I  had  a  respect  and 
liking  for  her  and  a  determination  to  do  all  I  could  to  pro- 
tect her  more  against  her  own  absurdly  generous  impulses 
than  against  Mr.  Home  for  she  assured  me  repeatedly  that 
she  was  not  influenced  in  any  way  by  spirit  communica- 
tions but  only  by  her  liking  for  him  and  that  if  he  were 
not  a  medium  at  all  she  should  have  the  same  affection  for 
him     It  it  were  otherwise  she  is  alone  to  blanu3  for  con- 
cealing it  from  me  and  constantly  denying  it  but  I  spoke 
to  her  so  often  against  being  led  away  by  communications 

MR.    WILKINSON.  353 

that  the  subject  got  quite  threadbare  between  us  and  she 
from  the  first  told  me  that  she  was  well  acquainted  with 
all  that  I  could  say  on  that  subject  and  she  afterwards  told 
me  on  several  occasions  she  had  received  the  same  caution 
from  others  She  was  principally  anxious  to  have  all  she 
did  for  Mr.  Home  done  in  such  a  manner  as  that  her  hus- 
band's relatives  could  not  dispute  it  after  her  death  and 
she  informed  me  she  could  have  no  next  of  kin  of  her  own 
and  that  her  property  "  would  go  the  Crown"  if  she  did  not 
make  a  Will  anil  her  only  anxiety  was  as  to  Mr.  Home's 
health  and  the  fear  lest  he  might  marry  and  leave  her 
The  first  evening  I  saw  her  she  said  in  the  presence  of 
Mr.  Rudall  after  Dr.  Hawkcsley  had  left  that  Mr.  Home 
had  told  her  he  must  go  to  Russia  to  look  after  a  law  suit 
he  had  pending  there  respecting  his  late  wife's  fortune 
and  she  said  that  now  she  had  given  him  so  much  there 
would  be  no  occasion  for  him  to  go  away  and  he  need  not 
care  whether  he  got  the  money  in  Russia  or  not  as  he  had 
now  enough  of  his  own  and  she  had  plenty  more. 

55.  On  one  occasion  she  shewed  me  a  letter  from  a 
lady  in  which  it  was  said  that  her  husband's  relatives  were 
gathering  evidence  on  which  to  prove  her  insane  and  she 
expressed  great  indignation  against  them     She  also  told 
me  she  had  left  her  last  lodgings  in  Westbourne-street 
because  she  suspected  Mrs.  Fellowes  and  others  of  being 
in  league  \yith  the  landlady  Mrs.  Keys  to  get  evidence  of 
her  insanity. 

56.  I  have  reason  to  complain  of  such  allegations  being 
made  against  me  as  that  I  did  not  advise  her  to  employ 
another  solicitor  nor  fully  cautioned  her  against  giving 
away  her  money  as  they  are  contrary  to  the  fact  and  are 
expressly  contradicted  in  her  own  handwriting  which  I 
suppose  she  has  forgotten     I  did  both  to  the  best  of  my 
ability  and  almost  if  possible  beyond  my  duty  by  my  per- 
sistence against  her  repeated  declarations  of  her  intention 
Her  own  statements  that  she  acted  on  her  own  judgment 
only  and  not  on  any  communications  and  that  her  deter- 

A  A 

354  ANSWER    OF 

initiation  was  to  do  as  she  said  were  if  they  were  not  true 
her  fault  and  not  mine  for  I  quite  believed  what  she  told 
me  I  have  given  her  the  same  advice  both  when  by  our- 
selves and  in  the  presence  of  the  Defendant  Home  and  on 
such  occasions  he  has  always  said  the  same  to  her  I  could 
have  done  nothing  more  than  I  did  except  refusing  alto- 
gether to  carry  out  her  strict  orders  and  had  I  done  so  and 
she  had  gone  to  another  solicitor  and  had  told  him  the 
same  as  she  told  me  he  would  have  had  no  alternative  but 
to  act  on  her  instructions. 

57.  The  Plaintiff  has  repeatedly  told  me  that  she  acted 
altogether  on  her  own  judgment  in  what  she  was  doing 
and  that  it  was  the  greatest  pleasure  to  her  to  have  made 
such  an  use  of  her  money  and  to  have  found  one  who  was 
such  a  comfort  to  her. 

58.  The  foregoing  57  paragraphs  have  been  repeated 
with  a  few  slight  alterations  from  my  affidavit  filed  in  this 
suit  on  the  8th  July  1867     After  my  said  affidavit  up  to 
this  place  was  prepared  and  printed  I  was  furnished  with 
the  copy  of  the  Plaintiff's  further  affidavit  sworn  the  26th 
June  and  filed  the  following  day. 

So  far  as  it  relates  to  matters  within  my  own  knowledge 
it  is  almost  wholly  untrue  and  is  at  variance  with  the  facts 
or  with  her  own  previous  and  repeated  statements  to  me 
and  what  there  is  true  in  it  is  so  mixed  up  with  what  is 
not  so  as  to  give  an  entirely  false  colouring  to  her  state- 
ments From  my  conversations  with  her  during  the  nine 
or  ten  occasions  on  which  I  had  interviews  with  her  of  a 
business  or  a  friendly  nature  I  always  considered  her  to 
have  an  excellent  memory  and  good  business  habits  and 
knowledge  beyond  those  of  most  women  but  from  this 
affidavit  not  only  must  her  memory  bo  most  defective 
but  her  imagination  must  be  very  great  if  she  herself 
really  believes  what  she  has  said  in  it. 

50.  I  was  the  friend  of  the  Defendant  Home  though  I 
seldom  saw  him  but  T  was  scarcely  his  solicitor  for  he  had 
uo  law  business  on  which  to  employ  a  solicitor  and  though 

MR.     WILKINSON.  355 

I  had  made  a  short  will  for  him  I  made  no  charge  for  it 
I  have  alwavs  found  him  a  person  of  honour  and  integrity 
and  when  I  heard  that  he  had  been  adopted  by  the  Plain- 
tiff and  that  she  had  given  him  o£2i,00()  I  was  glad  of  it 
as  a  compensation  for  the  unmerited  abuse  to  which  ho 
has  been  subjected  When  however  that  munificent  gift 
had  been  made  to  him  I  thought  it  was  enough  for  all 
purposes  and  any  further  gifts  I  considered  quite  unneces- 
sary This  made  me  very  independent  in  advising  her  and 
very  determined  that  she  should  do  nothing  more  for  him 
upon  my  advice  I  never  told  Mr.  Home  or  any  other 
person  what  I  intended  to  do  in  the  way  of  questioning 
her  when  I  took  her  Will  but  I  questioned  her  in  the 
strictest  way  and  received  the  most  determined  answers 
from  her  expressing  her  satisfaction  and  her  determination 
to  make  her  Will  in  his  favour  and  for  the  reasons  which 
she  gave  me  for  so  doing  as  I  have  above  set  out  There 
was  no  halting  or  hesitation  on  her  part  in  her  answers  to 
awaken  my  suspicions  or  make  me  think  she  was  not 
speaking  the  truth  I  knew  nothing  of  the  circumstances- 
she  now  alleges  under  which  she  first  wrote  to  me  and 
made  her  first  gift  to  the  Defendant  and  if  she  had  at  the 
time  she  signed  her  Will  the  conviction  that  she  was  in- 
fluenced by  any  spiritual  cause  she  not  only  concealed  it 
from  me  but  resolutely  denied  it  and  gave  as  her  reason 
that  she  did  it  out  of  her  liking  for  Mr.  Home  and  to 
make  him  independent. 

60.  It  is  incorrect  also  that  she  destroyed  her  former 
Will  after  making  that  of  the  ll^th  of  November  last  for 
she  told  me  pointing  to  the  fire  that  she  had  destroyed  it 
that  afternoon  shortly  before  I  came. 

Gl.  It  is  also  entirely  incorrect  what  she  now  alleges  in 
paragraph  11  of  her  lastly-mentioned  affidavit  as  to  the 
gift  of  ^£6,000  and  the  circumstances  under  which  she 
made  it  as  appears  by  the  correspondence  and  documents 
in  the  preceding  8th,  9th,  10th,  llth  and  12th  paragraphs 
of  this  Answer  She  herself  originated  the  correspondence 

356  ANSWER    OF 

with  me  respecting  it  and  says  in  her  first  letter  that  she 
makes  the  gift  "as  a  little  surprise"  to  the  Defendant  on 
the  occasion  of  the  Defendant  taking  her  name  which  he 
did  publicly  and  advertised  it  in  the  "Times"  "Post"  and 
other  papers  and  she  told  me  at  the  time  of  her  having 
got  the  papers  containing  the  announcement  It  is  also 
untrue  that  any  but  the  Plaintiff  herself  gave  the  instruc- 
tions to  the  brokers  The  letter  to  them  is  in  the  Plaintiff's 
own  hand  The  Defendant's  birthday  is  not  in  December 
but  on  the  20th  March  The  following  is  a  copy  of  a  letter 
in  the  handwriting  of  the  Plaintiff  addressed  and  sent  by 
her  to  the  Defendant  Home  the  day  before  his  birthday: — 

"19th  March,  1867. 

"  My  dear  Daniel, — You  say  your  birthday  is  the  20th, 
i.  e.,  to-morrow,  may  you  see  many  of  them,  and  may 
they  be  happy  days,  full  of  health  and  joy  ;  look  forward 
to  see  my  words  verified,  for  I  write  with  thought  and 
pen  of  inspiration :  your  health  will  flourish  like  the  young 
lay  tree,  full  of  life  and  sap.  I  will  never  see  those  far 
days,  but  you  will  remember  my  prophetic  prognostication 
herein.  I  am  glad  you  sleep  well,  and  your  cough  is 
much  better,  you  will  all  be  well  together  very  soon,  think 
of  that  only.  The  weather  here  is  most  thoroughly 
miserable,  snowing  one  hour,  sleeting  the  next ;  cold  and 
comfortless  ;  we  never  see  the  colours  of  the  sky,  it  is  so 
black.  My  cold  no  better,  no  getting  out,  no  change  for 
me,  the  sooner  I  am  off  to  the  sunshine  land,  if  such,  the 
better.  You  say  that  50  miles  from  here  the  ground  is 
covered  with  snow  2  and  3  feet  thick,  but  you  do  not  say 
whether  east  or  west,  this  you  will  say  in  your  next. 

"  God  bless   and  protect  and  restore  you  to  perfect 
health,  and  may  your  birth  day  of  '68  be  more  auspicious. 
"  And  am,  my  dear  Daniel, 

"  Your  very  affectionate  mother, 

"  JANE  LYON." 

62.  What  she  says  in  paragraph   12   of  her  lastly- 

MR.     WILKINSON.  857 

mentioned  Affidavit  is  also  incorrect  as  to  the  time  when 
the  deed  poll  as  to  the  two  gifts  of  £24,000  and  £6,000 
was  executed  The  correspondence  with  her  and  my 
account  of  my  interviews  with  her  in  the  preceding  8th  to 
the  12th  paragraphs  of  this  Answer  clearly  prove  the  time 
of  its  execution  and  the  circumstances  under  which  it  was 
prepared  and  it  is  untrue  that  I  received  any  instructions 
excepting  from  her  It  is  also  untrue  if  she  then  spoke 
the  truth  to  me  that  she  made  the  gifts  or  executed  the 
deed  under  any  spiritual  or  improper  fancies  or  influence 
and  although  she  had  no  other  Solicitor  but  me  on  that 
occasion  her  letter  shews  that  it  was  because  she  refused 
to  act  on  my  advice  to  employ  one  I  submit  that  she 
should  have  been  more  cautious  before  making  such  state- 
ments so  derogatory  to  my  character  as  that  I  had  taken 
instructions  for  such  a  deed  from  any  one  but  herself  and 
had  given  it  a  false  date  whilst  acting  as  the  Solicitor  of 
the  Defendant  instead  of  her  who  was  really  my  client. 

63.  The  circumstances  erroneously  stated  in  the  13th 
paragraph  of  the  Plaintiff's  lastly-mentioned  affidavit  re- 
lative to  the  first  mortgage  for  £30,000  and  her  gift  of 
it  to  the  Defendant  are  sufficiently  explained  and  many 
of  them  distinctly  refuted  by  the  correspondence  and  docu- 
ments   I    have    already  given  and  they  are   directly  at 
variance  with  the  facts  in  several  important  particulars  as 
the  correspondence  and  documents   prove     If  she   exe- 
cuted the  gift  of  the  mortgage  under  the  influence  she 
mentions  she  falsely  stated  the  contrary  to  me  at  the  time 
and  acted  in  defiance  of  my  warnings. 

64.  It  is  incorrect  that  the  deficiency  to  make  up  the 
second  mortgage  was  advanced  by  the  Defendant  Home 
at   my   request     The  mortgage   was   to  have   been  for 
£25,000  only  for  which  she  had  money  enough  of  her  own 
ready  and  I  strongly  advised  her  not  to   lend  more  as  it 
would  be  a  pity  to  leave  herself  without  any  capital  sum 
but  she  so  insisted  that  she  disliked  uneven   sums  and 
would  prefer  £30,000  if  the  security  were  sufficient  that 

358  ANSWER    OF 

afterwards  on  the  parties  applying  that  the  larger  sum  might 
be  advanced  she  asked  Mr.  Home  herself  in  my  presence 
to  let  her  have  the  balance  out  of  his  stock  which  he  did. 

65.  The   circumstances    renting   to   tho   sale    of  the 
Defendant's  stock  to  provide  for  the  £20,000  mortgage 
to  him  are  also  incorrectly  stated  so  far  as  they  give  the 
impression  that  she  only  knew  of  that  mortgage  by  acci- 
dent    The  first  idea  of  it  was  given  by  herself  to  me  and 
she  was  throughout  not  only  aware  of  it  but  desired  it  to 
be  lent  and  she  inquired  the  nature  of  the  security  and 
knew  of  its  being  accepted  and  so  far  from  her  discovering 
it  from  the  sale  note  being  left  accidentally  with  her  not 
only  that  sale  note  but  the  notes  of  the  previous  transac- 
tions in  the  stock  by  the  Defendant,  and  the  coupons  of 
the  stock  were  in  her  own  possession,  and   she  kept  them 
in  the  same  bundle  as  her  own     She  has  several  times 
shewn  them  to  me  along  with  her  own  when  I  was  with 
her  assisting  her  to  calculate  what  she  had  in   the  funds 
and  she  told  me  that  she  kept  them  as  Mr.  Home  did  not 
understand  such  matters  as  well  as  she  did     I  find  that 
in  a  letter  from  the  plaintiff  to  the  other  Defendant  of  the 
15th  October  last  she  says   "  I  enclose  you  the  papers  of 
your  fund  security.     You  will  be  sure  not  to  lose  it,  and 
when  you  have  shown  it  to  your  friend  Dr.  Gully  some 
other  time  when  you  return   I   can  have  to  take  care  of 
for  you."     Her  property  amounted  to  about  £140,000 
before  she  gave  part  of  it  to  the  Defendant. 

66.  If  it  be  true  as  the  Plaintiff  states  that  she  had  no 
affection  or  even  respect  for  the  Defendant  apart  from  the 
peculiar  phenomena  which  occur  in  his  presence  she  has 
repeatedly  and  consistently  assured  me  to  the  exact  con- 
trary and  she  has  also   written  to  the  contrary  in  the 
above  correspondence     And  I  prefer  to  believe  and  do 
believe  what   she  then   told  me  and  my  own  observation 
of  her  affectionate  conduct  to  him  to  what  she  now  says 
The  Defendant  whose  health  is  very  delicate  left  London 
for  Brighton  and  Malvern  on  the   12th  October  and  re- 

MR.     WILKINSON.  850 

turned  on  the  1st  of  November  lie  again  left 
TK-  cud  of  January  for  Hastings  and  stayed  there  till  the 
1'Mi  February  lie  left  London  again  for  Torquay  about 
the  10th  March  and  stayed  there  till  the  22nd  of  April 
and  he  left  London  for  Malvern  on  the  1st  of  May  and 
stayed  there  till  the  9th  of  June  last. 

'i7.  I  believe  that  the  Plaintiff  is  a  widow  lady  Ex- 
cept as  I  am  informed  by  her  affidavit  filed  in  this  suit 
on  the  15th  June  1SG7  and  from  her  correspondence  and 
behaviour  as  hereinbefore  appearing  I  cannot  set  forth  as 
to  my  belief  or  otherwise  whether  she  is  between  sixty  and 
seventy  years  or  of  what  age  she  is  She  has  apparently 
not  outlived  the  caprices  of  her  sex  She  informed  me 
and  1  helieve  that  she  has  about  £140,000  invested  in 
the  funds  and  upon  mortgages. 

68.  The  Defendant  Home  is  a  person  of  very  delicate 
constitution  and  extremely  nervous  sensibility  He  has 
been  I  believe  all  his  life  subject  to  the  occasional  occur- 
rence of  peculiar  phenomena  in  his  presence  Such  phe- 
nomena have  been  carefully  observed  by  several  of  the 
most  powerful  sovereigns  of  Europe  and  by  persons  of 
eminence  in  the  leading  professions  and  in  literature  and 
science  and  by  practical  men  of  business  under  conditions 
when  nnvthing  like  fraud  or  contrivance  were  impossible 
Various  theories  have  been  suggested  by  way  of  explana- 
tion connected  with  the  abstrusest  problems  in  biology 
and  metaphysics  My  own  views  on  this  subject  are  pro- 
bably unimportant  but  as  charges  and  insinuations  are 
made  against  me  and  the  subject  of  Spiritualism  is  so 
misunderstood  by  the  public  I  have  the  right  to  say  that 
having  had  my  attention  drawn  to  certain  remarkable 
occurrences  about  eighteen  years  ago  in  the  house  of  a  re- 
lative and  which  continued  for  nearly  twelve  years  I  have 
since  that  time  occupied  a  portion  of  my  leisure  in  in- 
quiring into  the  subject  and  in  arranging  the  various  phe- 
nomena and  comparing  them  with  historical  statements 
of  similar  occurrences  I  have  very  seldom  been  at  any 

330  ANSWER    OF 

seances  and  that  not  for  many  years  having  entirely  satis- 
fied myself  years  ago  of  the  truth  of  most  of  the  phenomena 
that  is  of  their  actual  happening  and  I  have  at  the  same 
time  and  for  many  years  formed  and  constantly  expressed 
the  opinion  that  it  was  wrong  to  believe  in  or  act  upon 
what  might  appear  to  be  communications  from  the  unseen 
on  their  own  evidence  merely  I  have  invariably  incul- 
cated that  no  such  communication  should  be-received  as 
of  so  much  value  as  if  it  were  told  by  a  friend  in  this 
world  inasmuch  as  you  know  something  of  your  friend 
here  and  cannot  know  the  identity  or  origin  of  the  com- 
municant I  have  frequently  referred  to  the  passage  in 
the  Old  Testament  in  which  it  is  said  that  God  sent  a 
lying  spirit  and  to  the  directions  given  us  in  the  New 
Testament  to  try  or  test  the  spirits  I  have  pursued  the 
enquiry  under  great  misrepresentations  and  obloquy  and  I 
intend  to  continue  it  as  long  as  I  can  and  I  believe  that 
the  subjects  of  spiritual  visions  trances  ecstacies  pro- 
phecies angelic  protection  and  diabolic  possession  anciently 
recorded  have  already  had  light  thrown  upon  them  and 
will  have  much  more  I  submit  that  I  have  a  right  to 
pursue  an  enquiry  into  psychological  laws  without  being 
subjected  to  ridicule  or  abuse  and  that  the  proof  of  super- 
natural occurrences  is  valuable  in  both  a  scientific  and 
religious  point  of  view  The  mere  physical  phenomena 
which  the  public  erroneously  fancies  to  be  the  whole  of 
Spiritualism  and  which  of  course  afford  room  for  spurious 
imitation  and  fraud  are  in  my  belief  the  most  unimportant 
part  of  the  subject  and  have  not  for  years  engaged  my 
attention.  In  this  inquiry  are  also  many  persons  of  all  the 
professions  and  of  the  highest  literary  and  scientific  attain- 
ments. 

69.  The  Plaintiff  told  me  that  she  was  and  I  am  in- 
formed and  believe  that  she  still  is  greatly  interested  in 
this  enquiry  although  it  appears  she  has  conceived  a  dis- 
like to  the  Defendant  Home  and  has  been  as  I  am  in- 
formed and  believe  induced  by  others  to  charge  him  with 

MR.     WILKINSON.  3d 

imposition  in  order  to  get  back  the  money  The  Plaintiff 
told  jne  that  she  was  subject  to  supernatural  occurrences 
herself  and  she  told  me  some  most  interesting  anecdotes 
of  what  had  happened  to  her. 

70.  The  Defendant  Home  has  T  believe  always  stated 
and  I  believe  that  he  has  no  control  over  such  phenomena 
that  he  is  perfectly  passive  when  they  occur  and  does  n..t 
consciously  exercise  any  volition     lie   has  I  believe  and 
so  far  as  I   know  always   repudiated  the  notion  that  he 
possessed  any  power  whatever  of  evoking  the  spirits  of 
deceased  persons  or  of  putting  other  persons  in  communi- 
cation with  them. 

71.  The   said  Defendant  connects  some  of  the  phe- 
nomena which  I   have  mentioned  with    such   communica- 
tions as  aforesaid  and   in    so  far  as   such  phenomena  or 
communications   occur  to   him    more  often    and  in   more 
marked  degree  than  to  the  mnjority  of  persons  as   I  be- 
lieve from  his  bodily  organization  but  not  further  or  other- 
wise he  describes  himself  as  a  spiritual  medium. 

72.  I   have  been  informed   and   believe  that  the  snid 
Defendant  is  entitled  to  considerable  property  in  Rus.sia 
being  the  fortune  of  his   late  wife  and   has   some  small 
private  means  besides  and  that  he  does  not  practise  any 
profession  or   business      And  save   as  aforesaid  and   his 
being  a  highly  accomplished  gentleman  I  cannot  say  what 
if  anything  he  calls  himself  or  by  what  means  if  any  he 
gains  his  living. 

73.  I  am  unable  to  set  forth  as  to  my  belief  or  oth^r- 
wise  whether  or  not  the  Plaintiff  was  greatly  attached  to 
her  late  husband  or  how  otherwise  or  whether  or  not  she 
heard  that  she  could  be  placed  in  communication  with  his 
spirit  through  the  agency  of  a  spiritual    medium  or  how 
otherwise      I  have  been  informed  and  believe  that   of  her 
own  motion  she  did  seek  for  and  obtain  an  interview  with 
the  Defendant  Home  on  or  about  the  2nd  October 

at  Sloane-strect  in  the  said  Bill  mentioned. 

74.  The  Plaintiff  has  always  repeatedly  and  invariably 

C62  ANSWER    OF 

assured  me  that  in  her  adoption  of  the  said  Defendant  and 
the  presents  which  she  has  made  him  she  was  in  nowise 
influenced  by  any  spiritual  communications  whatever  but 
acted  spontaneously  as  she  wished  and  the  said  other 
Defendant  denies  the  charge  made  in  the  Plaintiff's  Bill 
of  Complaint  and  save  as  aforesaid  I  am  unable  to  set  forth 
as  to  my  belief  or  otherwise  whether  or  not  the  Defendant 
Home  by  any  or  what  means  induced  her  to  believe  or 
whether  she  did  believe  that  a  "  manifestation"  of  the 
spirit  of  her  deceased  husband  took  or  was  taking  place  or 
whether  or  not  through  the  instrumentality  of  the  said 
Defendant  or  how  otherwise  or  whether  or  not  the  said 
Defendant  on  that  occasion  induced  the  Plaintiff  to  believe 
or  whether  or  not  she  did  believe  that  the  spirit  of  her 
deceased  husband  was  in  communication  with  her  or 
whether  or  not  that  certain  expressions  of  endearment  or 
some  other  or  what  expressions  on  the  part  of  the  spirit 
were  conveyed  through  the  medium  of  the  Defendant 
Home  to  her  or  how  otherwise  or  whether  or  not  the 
Plaintiff  was  much  or  in  fact  gratified  thereby  or  whether 
or  not  she  desired  the  said  Defendant  to  call  upon  her  or 
whether  or  not  on  the  following  day  or  whether  or  not  she 
promised  to  give  him  .£10  or  some  other  or  what  sum  or 
how  otherwise  or  whether  or  not  the  said  Defendant  accord- 
ingly or  in  fact  called  upon  the  Plaintiff  or  whether  or  not 
at  her  residence  is  the  said  Bill  mentioned  or  at  some 
other  or  what  place  on  the  following  or  on  some  other  or 
what  day  or  whether  or  not  he  did  or  whether  or  not  again 
induce  the  Plaintiff  to  believe  or  whether  or  not  she  did 
believe  that  the  spirit  of  her  deceased  husband  was  mani- 
fested to  her  through  the  instrumentality  of  the  said  De- 
fendant or  how  otherwise  or  whether  or  not  she  thereupon 
or  in  fact  gave  the  said  Defendant  the  sum  of  .£30  or 
some  other  or  what  sum  or  how  otherwise  or  whether 
or  not  the  Plaintiff  on  the  following  day  or  on  some 
other  or  what  day  or  whether  or  not  under  the  belief  that 
)he  spirit  of  her  deceased  husband  had  or  whether  or  not 
again  through  the  agency  of  the  said  Defendant  been 

MR.     WILKINSON.  SCO 

brought  into  communication  with  her  or  for  some  oth.r  or 
what  reason  give  the  said  Defendant  the  further  sum  of 
.£"><>  or  sonic-  other  or  what  sum  or  how  otherwise. 

75.  From  the  statements  made  to  me  by  the  Plaintiff 
from  time  to  time  as  hereinbefore  mentioned  I  believe  that 
the  Defendant  Home  did  not  by  the  means  in  the  said 
13111  mentioned  or  by  any  other  means  acquire  a  great  or 
any  ascendancy  over  the  mind  of  the  Plaintiff  who  has  a 
strong  will  of  her  own  and  is  not  likely  to  yield  such  an 
ascendancy  over  her  to  any  one  and  I  believe  that  the  said 
Defendant  did  not  by  the  exercise  of  his  alleged  spiritual 
powers  or  in  fact  induce  her  to  believe  that  what  the 
Plaintiff  now  alleges  he  represented  to  be  communications 
from  the  spirit  of  her  deceased  husband  to  her  were  real 
communications  But  on  the  contrary  she  always  assured 
me  that  she  was  attached  to  the  said  Defendant  for  his 
own  sake  as  she  might  well  be  wholly  apart  from  any  such 
phenomena  or  communications. 

7(5.  From  the  Plaintiff's  own  statement  I  believe  that 
she  has  no  child. 

77.  I  am  unable  to  set  forth  as  to  my  belief  or  other- 
wise whether  a  meeting  or  another  meeting  took  place 
between  the  Plaintiff  and  the  Defendant  Home  a  day  or 
two  after  the  last  alleged  meeting  or  in  fact  or  save  as 
appears  from  her  own  statements  to  the  contrary  and  the 
other  Defendant's  denial  of  her  present  statements  whether 
or  not  the  said  Defendant  at  such  alleged  or  any  meeting 
alleged  or  represented  to  the  Plaintiff  or  induced  her  to 
believe  or  she  did  believe  that  the  spirit  of  her  deceased 
husband  required  her  to  adopt  the  said  Defendant  as  her 
son  or  to  place  him  in  a  position  of  independence  suitable 
to  his  rank  and  position  in  life  as  her  adopted  son  nor  can 
1  M-t  forth  as  to  my  belief  or  otherwise  what  was  the 
allegation  and  representation  if  any  made  by  the  said 
Defendant  to  the  Plaintiff  on  that  alleged  occasion  or 
whether  or  not  the  said  Defendant  at  the  same  time 
alleged  or  whether  or  not  represented  to  the  Plaintiff  or 
whether  or  not  induced  her  to  believe  or  whether  or  not 

SG4  AKSWER    OF 

she  did  believe  that  the  spirit  of  her  deceased  husband 
desired  that  Mr.  Hall  (in  the  said  Bill  named)  should  be 
sent  for  or  what  allegation  or  representation  if  any  was 
then  made  by  the  said  Defendant  to  the  Plaintiff  respect- 
ing the  said  Mr.  Hall. 

78.  I  believe  that  the  said   Mr.  Hall  was  a  friend  of 
the  Defendant  Home.     The  Plaintitf  has  informed  me 
and   therefore  I  believe  that  she  sent  for  the  said  Mr. 
Hall  because  she  wanted  some  friend  of  the  said  Defend- 
ant's to  talk  with  her  about  her  adoption  of  him  as  her 
son  and  whether  the  mere  adoption  of  him  would  confer 
legal  rights  to  property  and  so  forth  and  that  the  said  Mr. 
Hall  was  accordingly  but  not  otherwise  sent  for  and  that 
a  meeting  took  place  between  him  and  the  Plaintiff  the 
Defendant  Home  not  being  present. 

79.  Save  from  the  Plaintiff's  denial  as  aforesaid  of  her 
having  been  under  any  spiritual  influence  and  the  De- 
fendant's denial  of  her  present  statements  I  am  unable  as 
to  my  belief  or  otherwise  to  set  forth  whether  the  said  last 
named  Defendant  and  the  said  Mr.  Hall  or  one  or  which 
of  them  at  such  meeting  or  at  some  other  or  what  meet- 
ing alleged  or  whether  or  not  represented  to  the  Plaintiff 
or  whether  or  not  induced  her  to  believe  or  whether  or 
not  she  did  believe  that  the  spirit  of  her  deceased  hus- 
band required  her  to  produce  her  stock  receipts  or  some 
or  one  or  which  of  them  or  whether  or  not  to  go  to  the 
Bank  of  England  or  whether  or  not  transfer  stock  equiva- 
lent in  value  to  .£24.000  sterling  or  to  some  other  or  what 
amount  to  the  said  Defendant  or  whether  or  not  to  sell 
the  same  and  give  him  the  proceeds  or  whether  or  not  as 
a  provision  by  the  Plaintiff  for  him  or  whether  or  not  as 
her  adopted  son  or  what  was  the  allegation  or  representa- 
tion if  any  then  made  by  the  said  Defendant  and  the  said 
Mr.  Hall  or  by  one  or  which  of  them  to  the  Plaintiff  or 
whether  or  not  the  Plaintiff  or  whether  or  not  accord- 
ingly or  whether  or  not  in  the  full  conviction  and  belief 
that  she  wTas  fulfilling  the  wishes  of  her  deceased  husband 

MR.    WILKINSON.  CG5 

communicated  to  her  through  the  medium  of  the  De- 
fendant Home  or  for  some  other  or  what  reason  wont  on 
or  about  the  10th  October  1866  to  the  Bank  of  England 
or  whether  or  not  with  the  said  Defendant  or  some  other 
or  what  persons  or  person  or  whether  or  not  the  Plaintiff 
signed  a  book  there  or  how  otherwise  or  whether  or  not 
a  large  or  some  or  what  sum  of  Bank  .£3  per  Cent.  Con- 
solidated Annuities  or  whether  or  not  belonging  to  the 
Plaintiff  was  sold  or  transferred  or  whether  or  not  the 
proceeds  thereof  or  of  any  or  what  part  thereof  or  whether 
or  not  amounting  to  .£24,000  sterling  or  to  some  other  or 
what  sum  were  received  by  the  said  Defendant  The 
Plaintiff  informed  me  and  I  believed  that  she  sponta- 
neously gave  the  said  Defendant  a  sum  of  £24,000 
sterling  because  she  wished  to  make  him  independent  and 
to  prevent  his  having  to  go  to  Russia  to  look  after  his 
property  there  but  she  never  mentioned  a  word  about  her 
husband  but  always  assured  me  she  acted  entirely  of  her 
own  accord  and  of  her  own  will  and  judgment  and  that 
she  had  never  laid  out  any  money  which  gave  so  much 
pleasure  and  happiness  and  that  whatever  happened  the 
sum  was  unimportant  to  her.  The  following  is  a  copy  of 
her  letter  written  to  the  other  Defendant  on  the  occa- 
sion : — 

"  18,  Westbourne  Place,  Hyde  Park, 
"  10th  October,  1866. 

"  My  dear  Mr.  Home, — I  have  a  desire  to  render  you 
independent  of  the  world,  and  having  ample  means  for 
the  purpose  without  abstracting  from  any  needs  or  com- 
forts  of  my  own.  I  have  the  greatest  satisfaction  in  now 
presenting  you  with  it  as  an  entirely  FREE  GIFT  from  me, 
the  sum  of  £24,000,  and  am, 

"  My  dear  Sir, 
"  Yours  very  truly  &  respectfully, 

"  JANE  LYOX." 

«  To  D.  D.  Home,  Esqr. 
22,  Sloane  Street." 

80.  Save  as  aforesaid  I  am  unable  to  set  forth  as  to  my 

3G6  ANSWER    OF 

belief  or  otherwise  whether  or  not  the  whole  or  any  part 
of  the  said  sum  of  £24,000  was  obtained  by  the  De- 
fendant Home  from  the  Plaintiff  through  the  alleged 
ascendancy  or  power  which  the  Plaintiff  now  alleges  he 
had  acquired  over  her  mind  by  the  means  in  the  said  Bill 
mentioned. 

81.  Save  as  aforesaid  I  am  unable  to  set  forth  as  to  my 
belief  or  otherwise  whether  the  Plaintiff  or  whether  or  not 
shortly  after  the  said  sums  of  £24,000  had  been  given  by 
the  Plaintiff  to  the  Defendant  Home  or  as  the  Plaintiff  now 
alleges  had  been  obtained  by  the  said  Defendant  from  the 
Plaintiff  by  the  means  and  under  the  circumstances  in  her 
said  Bill  stated  or  in  fact  had  a  meeting  or  another  meeting 
or  interview  with  the  said  last  named  Defendant  or  how  other- 
wise or  whether  or  not  the  said  Defendant  at  such  meeting 
or  interview  alleged  or  represented  to  the  Plaintiff  or 
whether  or  not  induced  her  to  believe  or  whether  or  not 
she  did  believe  that  she  was  required  by  the  spirit  of  her 
late  husband  to  destroy  the  Will  she  had  then  made  or 
whether  or  not  to  make  another  Will  in  favour  of  the  said 
Defendant  or  what  was  the  allegation  or  representation  if 
any  then  made  by  the  said  Defendant  to  the  Plaintiff  or 
whether  or  not  the  said  last  named  Defendant  -represented 
to  the  Plaintiff  or  whether  or  not  induced  her  to  believe 
or  whether  or  not  she  did  believe  that  the  spirit  of  her 
said  husband  dictated  the  terms  of  such  new  Will  under 
which  he  the  said  Defendant  was  to  be  universal  legatee 
of  all  the  Plaintiff's  property  or  whether  or  not  also  that 
Dr.  Hawksley  and  Mr.  Rudall  in  the  said  Bill  respectively 
named  were  to  be  sent  for  to  attest  the  execution  of  such 
new  Will  or  whether  or  not  that  the  spirit  of  the  Plaintiff's 
said  late  husband  also  dictated  the  terms  of  the  letters  to 
be  written  to  the  said  Dr.  Hawksley  and  Mr.  Kudall 
asking  them  to  attest  the  said  Will  or  what  were  the 
allegations  or  representations  if  any  then  made  by  the 
said  Defendant  to  the  Plaintiff  Both  the  said  Dr. 
Hawksley  and  Mr.  Rudall  were  friends  of  the  Defendant 
Home. 

lilt.    WILKINSON. 

82.  A  Will  purporting  to  be  the  Will  of  the  Plaintiff 
was  p;vparod  by  mo  for  tin-  Plaintiff  at  her  request  in  the 
manner  and  under  the  circumstances  hereinbefore  men- 
tioned and  not  otherwise     I  had  nothing  to  do  with  De- 
fendant Home  in  the  matter  nor  would  I  have  accepted 
any  instructions  from  him     The  said  Defendant  was  un- 
der such  Will  named  as  the  universal  legatee  of  all  the 
Plaintiff's  property  and  such  Will  was  executed  by  the 
Plaintiff  on  the  12th  of  November  1806  in  the  presence  of 
and  attested  by  the  said  Dr.  llawksley,  Mr.  Rudall  and 
myself     Neither  the  Defendant  Home  nor  any  one  else 
was  present  on  the  occasion  except  the  Plaintiff    The 
<lis.(Mii|)tious  of  the  attesting  witnesses  are  given  in  their 
affidavits  already  filed  in  this  suit     The   said   Thomas 
llawksley  is  a  doctor  of  medicine  residing  at  number  70 
Brook-street  Hanover-square  in  the  county  of  Middlesex 
and  the  said  Henry   Alexander   Rudall    is  a   merchant 
carrying  on  business  at  numbers  8  and  9  Great  Tower- 
street  in  the  city  of  London     Save  from  the  Plaintiff's 
and  the  other  Defendant's  statements  to  the  contrary  I 
am  unable  to  set  forth  as  to  my  belief  or  otherwise  whether 
the  said  Will  was  in  fact  executed  by  the  Plaintiff  at  the 
instigation  suggestion  or  desire  of  the  Defendant  Home 
or  was  so  executed  while  the  Plaintiff  was  under  the  in- 
fluence of  the  ascendancy  and  power  which  the  Plaintiff 
now  alleges  he  had  acquired  over  her  mind  by  the  means 
and  under  the  circumstances  in  the  said  Bill  stated. 

83.  I   have  been  informed  and  believe  that  the  De- 
fondant  Home  did  on  or  about  the  5th  November  lv  '•'» 
at   the   Plaintiff's    request  invest  the    sum  of  .£23,91:* 
17$.  3d.  or  thereabouts  being  the  said  sum  of  .£24,000 
l.-ss  brokerage  which  the  Plaintiff  now  alleges  was  ob- 
tained from  the  Plaintiff  as  in  the  said  Bill  mentioned  in 
the  purchase  in  his  then  name  of  Daniel  I  hum-lass  Home 
in  the  sum  of  £2(5,730  15s.  5d   dr  thereabouts  of  £3  per 
Cent.  Consolidated  Bank  Annuities. 

B4.  The  Defendant  Home  did  on  or  about  the  3rd 

368  ANSWER    OF 

December  1866  and  at  the  Plaintiff's  request  execute  a 
deed  poll  of  that  date  Such  deed  has  since  been  at  the 
Plaintiff's  request  and  in  fact  enrolled  as  of  record  in  Her 
Majesty's  Court  of  Chancery  and  the  said  defendant 
thereby  declared  that  he  had  taken  the  name  of  Lyon  in 
lieu  of  and  instead  of  Home  and  that  in  future  he  intended 
to  be  called  and  known  as  Daniel  Home  Lyon  and  she 
ordered  a  frame  in  which  to  have  it  hung  up  in  her 
room. 

85.  I  have  hereinbefore  and  especially  in  the  8th  to 
the  12th  paragraphs  both  inclusive  of  this  my  Answer 
and  in  the  61st  and  62nd  paragraphs  set  forth  all  the 
facts  anu  correspondence  with  which  I  am  acquainted  re- 
lating to  the  gift  of  ,£6,000  cash  from  the  Plaintiff  to  the 
said  Defendant  and  save  as  herein  appears  and  from  the 
Plaintiff's  former  denial  as  aforesaid  and  the  Defendant's 
denial  of  her  present  statements  I  am  unable  to  set  forth 
as  to  my  belief  or  otherwise  whether  the  Plaintiff  on  the 
10th  of  December  1866  or  at  some  other  or  what  time  or 
whether  or  not  at  the  request  or  suggestion  of  the  De- 
fendant Home,  or  whether  or  not  while  under  the  influence 
of  the  alleged  ascendancy  and  power  which  the  Plaintiff 
now  alleges  he  had  by  the  means  in  the  said  Bill  men- 
tioned or  in  fact  acquired  over  her  mind  or  by  some  other 
or  what  means  induced  by  the  said  Defendant  to  go  again 
with  him  to  the  Bank  of  England  or  whether  or  not  to 
transfer  the  sum  of  £6,798  17s.  4d.  or  some  other  or 
what  sum  of  £3  per  Cent.  Consolidated  Bank  Annuities 
into  the  name  of  the  said  Defendant  as  Daniel  Dunglass 
Home  that  being  the  name  in  which  the  aforesaid  sum  of 
£26,756    15s.  3d.   like   annuities    was    then    standing 
having  been  invested  as  aforesaid  prior  to  his  change  of 
name     I  believe  that  such  sum  of  £6,798  17s.  4d.  Bank 
Annuities  was  then  equivalent  in  value  to  a  sum  of  £6,000 
sterling  or  thereabouts.  * 

86.  Such  deed  poll  or  instrument  in  writing  as  in  the 
said  Bill  is  mentioned  to  bear  date  the  12th  December 

MR.    WILKINSON.  853 

1866  and  is  therein  stated  to  be  of  or  to  the  purport 
and  etiect  in  the  llth  paragraph  of  the  said  Bill  set  forth 
BO  far  as  the  same  is  therein  set  forth  being  the  same  in- 
strument as  is  set  forth  verbatim  in  the  12th  paragraph 
of  this  my  Answer  was  in  fact  duly  and  under  the  circum- 
stances hereinbefore  mentioned  executed  by  the  Plaintiff. 

87.  The   said  deed  poll  was  prepared  by  me  as  the 
Solicitor  for  and  at  the  request  of  the  Plaintiff  alone  as 
hereinbefore  appears  but  not  in  any  respect  as  the  Soli- 
citor for  or  on  behalf  of  the  Defendant  Home     The  costs 
for  the  same  were  at  the  time  debited  to  the  Plaintiff  alone 
iu  my  bill  but  they  have  not  yet  been  paid     Save  as 
nppeai-s  from  the  Plaintiff's  statements  and  letters  to  the 
contrary  and  the  Defendant's  denial  of  her  present  allega- 
tions I  am  unable  to  set  forth  as  to  my  belief  or  otherwise 
whether  the  said  deed  was  executed  by  the  Plaintiff  at 
the  request  or  instigation   or  suggestion  or  desire  of  the 
said  Defendant  Home  or  whether  or  not  while  if  she  was 
in  fact  ever  under  the  influence  of  the  ascendancy  or 
power  which  the  Plaintiff  now  alleges  he  had  acquired 
over  her  as  in  the  said  Bill  mentioned  and  I  refer  to  the 
circumstances  hereinbefore  related  in  the  8th  to  the  12th 
paragraphs  both   inclusive  and  the  61st  and  62nd  para- 
graphs  of  this   my  answer     I   repeatedly  and   strongly 
urged  her  to  employ  another  Solicitor  which  she  refused 
to  do  as  hereinbefore  truly  appears     And  under  the  cir- 
cumstances hereinbefore  appearing  and  not  otherwise  it  is 
the  fact  that  she  executed  the  said  deed   without  the  in- 
tervention of  any  other  Solicitor  or  person  as  far  as  I 
know  on  her  behalf     I   acted  as  her  Solicitor  and  with 
entire  independence  of  the  Defendant  Home  from  whom 
I  neither  did  receive  nor  would   I  have  received  any  in- 
structions whatever  on  the  subject. 

88.  I  have  hereinbefore  and  respectively  in  paragraphs 
7  to  41  both  inclusive  and  paragraphs  63  and  64  of  this 
my  Answer  truthfully  set  forth  the  facts  and  correspon- 
dence relating  to  the  indenture  of  the  19th  January  1867 

BB 

C70  ANSWER    OF 

in  the  Plaintiff's  Bill  mentioned  and  save  as  hereinbefore 
appears  and  from  the  Plaintiff's  former  denial  as  afore- 
said and  the  other  Defendants'  denial  of  her  present  state- 
ments I  am  unahle  to  set  forth  as  to  my  belief  or  other- 
wise whether  or  not  the  Plaintiff  in  the  month  of  January 
1867  or  at  some  other  or  what  time  was  induced  by  the 
Defendant  Home  to  execute  a  deed  or  whether  or  not 
purporting  to  be  an  indenture  bearing  date  the  19th 
January  1867  or  made  between  the  parties  or  of  or  to 
the  purport  and  effect  in  the  13th  paragraph  of  the  said 
Bill  set  forth  (so  far  as  the  same  is  therein  set  forth  or 
some  other  or  what  indenture  of  such  or  some  other  or 
what  date  or  made  between  the  same  or  some  other  or  what 
parties  or  of  or  to  such  or  the  like  or  some  other  or  what 
purport  or  effect  or  how  otherwise. 

89.  Under  the  circumstances  hereinbefore  appearing 
and  not  otherwise  the  said  indenture  of  the  19th  January 
1867  was  prepared  by  me  as  the  Solicitor  for  and  on 
behalf  of  the  Plaintiff  and  in  no  respect  as  the  Solicitor 
for  or  on  behalf  of  the  Defendant  Home  The  costs  for 
preparing  the  same  were  at  the  time  duly  debited  to  the 
Plaintiff  alone  in  my  bill  but  such  costs  have  not  yet  been 
paid  I  repeatedly  and  strongly  urged  her  to  employ 
another  Solicitor  which  she  refused  to  do  as  hereinbefore 
truly  appears  and  under  the  circumstances  herein  appearing 
and  not  otherwise  it  is  the  fact  that  the  said  deed  was  not 
as  far  as  I  know  seen  or  approved  of  by  any  other  Solicitor 
or  person  for  or  on  behalf  of  the  Plaintiff  I  acted  as  her 
Solicitor  and  with  entire  independence  of  the  Defendant 
Home  as  hereinbefore  truly  appears  and  I  did  not  receive 
nor  would  I  have  received  any  instructions  from  him  in 
the  matter.  The  Plaintiff  also  executed  the  indenture  of 
even  date  recited  in  the  said  last-mentioned  indenture 
whereby  she  assigned  the  principal  sum  of  .£30,000  and 
interest  and  the  securities  for  the  same  to  me.  Such 
indenture  of  even  date  was  prepared  by  me  as  the  Solicitor 
tor  and  on  behalf  of  the  Plaintiff  alone  and  in  no  respect 

UR.     WILKINSON.  071 

as  the  Solicitor  for  or  on  behalf  of  the  Defendant  Home 
anil  under  the  circumstances  hereinbefore  appearing  and 
not  otherwise  The  same  indenture  was  not  as  far  as  I 
know  seen  or  approved  of  by  any  other  Solicitor  or  person 
for  or  on  behalf  of  the  Plaintiff  I  acted  as  her  Solicitor 
and  with  entire  independence  of  the  Defendant  Home  as 
hereinbefore  truly  appears  and  I  did  not  receive  nor  would 
1  have  received  any  instructions  from  him  in  the  matter 
And  save  from  the  Plaintiff's  former  denial  as  aforesaid 
and  from  the  other  Defendant's  denial  of  her  present 
statements  I  am  unable  to  set  forth  as  to  my  belief  or 
otherwise  whether  the  Plaintiff  executed  the  two  last 
mentioned  indentures  at  the  request  or  instigation  of  the 
Defendant  Home  or  whether  or  not  while  she  was  if  she 
in  fact  was  under  the  influence  of  the  ascendancy  or 
power  over  her  mind  which  the  Plaintiff  now  alleges  the 
said  last  named  Defendant  had  acquired  by  means  or  under 
the  circumstances  in  the  said  Bill  mentioned.  The  said 
two  last  mentioned  deeds  were  executed  by  the  Plaintiff 
on  Saturday  the  19th  January  1807  at  her  own  house  in 
the  presence  of  my  son  and  Mr.  Hartley  two  of  my  clerks 
who  attended  with  the  deeds  for  the  purpose  I  was  not 
there  being  ill  at  home  and  I  afterwards  executed  the 
deed  myself  at  my  office  in  the  presence  of  the  same 
witnesses. 

90.  I  have  hereinbefore  in  paragraphs  38,  39,  40  and 
64  of  this  my  Answer  truthfully  set  forth  the  circumstances 
relating  to  the  transfer  of  £2,290  9s.  5d.  or  thereabouts 
Bank  £3  per  Cent.  Consolidated  Annuities  And  save  as 
therein  appears  and  save  from  the  Plaintiff's  former  denials 
as  aforesaid  and  from  the  other  Defendant's  denial  of  her 
present  statements  I  am  unable  to  set  forth  as  to  my  belief 
or  otherwise  whether  the  Plaintiff  on  the  2 1  st  February  1 8(57 
or  at  any  other  or  what  time  was  or  whether  or  not  again 
induced  by  the  Defendant  Home  to  accompany  him  to  the 
Bank  of  England  or  whether  or  not  to  transfer  the  sum  nf 
£2,290  9s.  5d.  or  some  other  or  what  sum  of  Bank  £3 

372  ANSWER    OF 

per  Cent.  Consolidated  Annuities  into  his  name  as  Daniel 
Dunglass  Home  though  I  believe  that  was  the  name  in 
which  the  large  sums  of  like  annuities  was  standing  the 
first  and  largest  sums  having  been  invested  prior  to  his 
change  of  name  or  whether  or  not  the  last  mentioned 
transfer  was  or  whether  or  not  also  made  by  the  Plaintiff 
while  under  if  she  ever  was  under  the  influence  of  the 
ascendancy  or  power  which  the  Plaintiff  now  alleges  the 
said  Defendant  had  by  the  means  in  the  said  Bill  men- 
tioned or  in  fact  so  acquired  or  was  then  exercising 
over  her  mind  or  how  otherwise. 

91.  The  Defendant  Home  did  on  or  about  the   13th 
March  1867  sell  out  a  sum  of  £21,947  17s.  6d.  Bank 
£3  per  Cent.  Consolidated  Annuities  which  was  I  believe 
part  of  the  said  sum  of  .£26,756  15s.  5d.  like  annuities 
and  of  the  said  sum  of  £6,798  17s.  4d.  and  £2,290  9s.  od. 
like  annuities     On  behalf  of  the  said  Defendant  and  at 
his  request  he  being  then  ill  at  Hastings  I   received  the 
proceeds  of  such  sale  amounting  to  the  sum  of  £20,000 
cash  from  the  brokers  and  the  Defendant  Home  on  or 
about  the  date  last  aforesaid  lent  and  advanced  the  said 
sum  of  £20,000  through  me  upon  mortgage  of  property 
in  Yorkshire  and  such  sum  of  £20,000  has  ever  since  been 
and  is  now  invested  on  the  security  of  the  said  mortgage 
The  said  security  has  since  been  and  is  now  deposited  in 
this  Court  where  the  Plaintiff  can  inspect  it     No  part  of 
the  said  sum  so  lent  and  advanced  has  been  repaid     As 
regards  the  said  advance  of  £20,000  upon  mortgage  I 
refer  to  the  65th  paragraph  of  this  my  Answer. 

92.  I  am  unable  to  set  forth  as  to  my  belief  or  other- 
wise whether  a  sum  of  £13,898  4s.  Sd.  Bank  £3  per 
Cent.  Consolidated  Annuities  or  any  other  or  what  sum  of 
such  annuities  but  I  believe  that  the  residue  of  the  balance 
of  the  said  three  sums  of  £26,756  15s.  5d.  £6,798  17s.  4d. 
and  £2,290  9s.  5d.  like  annuities  after  deducting  from 
the  aggregate  amount  thereof  the  said  sum  of  £21,947 
17s.  6d.  sold  out  as  hereinbefore  mentioned  is  still  standing 

ME.     WILKINSON.  373 

in  the  name  of  the  Defendant  as  Daniel  Douglass  TTomc 
tin-  first  ami  largest  amount  having  been  paid  into  that 
name  before  the  said  Defendant  elianged  his  name  at  the 
request  of  the  Plaintiff  and  the  subsequent  additions  having 
been  made  to  the  same  account  in  the  Books  of  the 
(lovernor  and  Company  of  the  Bank  of  England  lam 
unable  to  set  forth  whether  the  said  last-named  Defendant 
threatens  but  I  believe  that  he  intends  to  sell  and  dispose 
thereof  or  deal  therewith  as  and  when  he  thinks  proper  as 
belonging  to  him. 

93.  1  refer  to  the  52nd  and  53rd  paragraph  of  this  my 
Answer  and  I  am  ready  and  willing  to  do  in  the  premises 
whatever   this  Honourable   Court    shall   think   proper  to 
direct  upon  having  my  reasonable  costs  paid   and  satisfied 
1  claim  a  lien  on  all  deeds  and  documents  in  my  possession 
or  which  I  have  deposited  in  this  Court  for  the  purposes  of 
this  suit  or  otherwise  which  may  belong  to  the  Plaintiff  or 
in  which  she  is  interested  for  all   costs  due  to  me  as  her 
solicitor. 

94.  After  my  Answer  was  prepared  and  printed  to  this 
point  I  have  received  and  read  the  print  of  the  Plaintiffs 
Allidavit  sworn  and  Hied  on   the   18th  July  instant     It  is 
entirely  untrue   as   stated    in  the   6th   paragraph   of  that 
Affidavit  that  the  Plaintiff  ever  informed  me  that  she  was 
oheving  the  dictates    of  her  husband's  spirit     Had  she 
said  so  or  had  I  known  of  it  I  should  at  once  have  refused 
to  proceed  with  the  business     It  is  also  untrue  as  stated 
in  the  7th  paragraph  that  I  was  ever  present  when  anj 
instructions  were  received  from   her   husband's  spirit  with 
reference  to  the  said  deeds     The  only  occasion  on  which 
I    saw  any  phenomena  in  her  presence  was  one  evening 
after  I  had  taken  my  hat  to  leave  she  asked  me  to  remain 
a  tew  minutes  which  I  did    and  there   were    some   move- 
ments of  the  table  and  rapping  but  there  were  no  direc- 
tions  nor  instructions  relating  to  the  said   deeds     It  is 
untrue  that  the  deed  of  the    12th  of  December  last  was 
signed  on  any  other  day  than  that  of  its  date     It  was 

374    ANSWER   OF  MR.    WILKINSON. 

seen  the  next  day  executed  by  the  Plaintiff  by  several  of 
my  clerks  It  is  also  untrue  as  stated  in  the  9th  para- 
graph of  her  Affidavit  that  she  told  me  on  the  occasion 
therein  referred  to  that  she  did  not  care  for  the  Defendant 
Home  personally  nor  that  she  was  obeying  the  orders  of 
her  husband's  spirit  in  what  she  had  done  or  wished  to  do 
I  was  very  unwell  on  that  day  and  have  no  distinct 
memory  of  her  conversation  had  she  told  me  so  I  would 
have  had  nothing  further  to  do  with  the  business  She 
always  expressed  to  me  her  great  affection  for  the  Defen- 
dant Home  I  find  the  following  paragraph  in  one  of 
her  letters  to  him  bearing  out  this  under  her  own  hand 
one  of  which  is  as  follows  "  I  feel  so  anxious  on  your 
account  and  afraid  you  should  be  ill,  or  anything  should 
happen  to  you,  that  I  am  sure  it  is  a  mother's  maternal 
love  towards  her  beloved  child,  so  if  you  value  my  comfort 
my  dear  son  take  care  of  yourself."  She  several  times 
told  me  that  her  only  fear  was  that  the  Defendant  Home 
would  marry  and  that  she  would  lose  his  society  It  would 
be  doing  the  greatest  injustice  to  the  Plaintiff  could  I  be- 
lieve that  she  is  now  expressing  the  truth  in  stating  that 
she  did  not  love  the  Defendant. 

END  or  VOL.  n. 

In   crcry  library,  public,  or  private,  one  of  the  frxt 
^'<fies  is  a  standard  work  on  Literature.     The  critics 
nn  ite  in  giving  the  first  place  to 

TAINE'S  ENGLISH  LITERATURE. 

THE  NATION  *«»/«:"  It  is  the  best  history  of  English  literature  that  has 
yet  been  produced." 

THE  LONDON  SPECTATOR  *ay* :  "No  English  bonk  can   bear  compari- 
son  with  it  for   richness  of  thought,    for   variety,    keenness,   and   sound- 
<>f  critical    judgment,  for  the  brilliancy  with  which  the  material  and 
the  moral  features  of  each  age  are  sketched." 

THE  N.  Y.  TRIBUNE  sat/*:  "It  is  no  less  extraordinary  in  its  style  than 
original  in  its  intention-.  It  is  a  new  phenomenon  in  Knglish  let- 
ters. It  occupies  a  unique  place  in  the  language.  The  works  of  Warton, 
Johnson,  Hallam,  and  other  eminent  writers  on  the  literary  history  of  Eng- 
land have  as  little  with  it  in  common  as  a  museum  of  stuffed  animals  with 
a  forest  of  singing-birds  and  sportful  quadrupeds." 

THE  N.  Y.  WORLD  *ay* :  "It  is  the  only  real  history  of  the  literature 
of  our  mother-tongue." 

THE  N.  Y.  EVENINO  POST  say*:  "No  history  of  our  own  literature, 
equally  learned,  honest,  and  entertaining,  has  ever  been  %vritten." 

SCRIBNER'S  MONTHLY  say* :  "There  can  nowhere  else  be  found  a 
survey  of  English  Literature  so  comprehensive,  so  accurate,  and  always  so 

brilliant." 

TH  E  GALAXY  say*:  "A  mine  of  thought  as  well  as  a  perfect  pnllery  of  literary 
pictures  of  men  and  societies.  No  cultivated  person  can  dispense  with 
reading  it." 

REV.  HENRY  WARD  BEECHER,  in  tfie  CHRISTIAN  UNION,  say*: 
"This  work  ought  to  be  not  only  in  all  public  libraries,  but  in  every  house 
of  culture  throughout  the  land." 

Mr.  GEORGE  WM.  CURTIS  says:  "The  delicate  and  sympathetic  in- 
sight, the  mastery  of  the  subject,  and  the  vivid  and  picturesque  style — 
unparalleled  in  such  a  work — seem  to  me  equally  remarkable." 

Mr.  BAYARD  TAYLOR  says :  "I  consider  it  the  best  history  of  Eng- 
lish Literature  in  existence." 

Mr.  WM.  CULLEN  BRYANT  sav* :  "I  concur  fully  with  the  favor- 
able opinion  expressed  concerning  it  by  Mr.  Taylor." 

REV.  DR.  PRIME,  in  tlm  N.  Y.  ORSEUVKJI.  my* :  "It  is  n  wonderful  work.  Tt 
shows  a  power  of  analysis,  and  a  vivid  delineation  of  scenes  in  past  ayes, 
which  are  almost  unequalled  in  the  range  of  historical  literature." 

PROF.  P.  R.  LOUNSBERY,  OF  YALE  COLLEGE,  says:  "I  wish 
it  could  be  introduced  into  every  household." 

PROF.  L.  CLARK  SEELYE,  OF  AMHERST  COLLEGE,  my*: 
"  It  is  the  best  History  of  English  Literature  that  has  been  written.  Every 
educated  man  ought  to  read  it." 

PROF.  MOSES  COIT  TYLER,  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF 
MICHIGAN,  says:  "It  forms  an  intellectual  era  in  a  man's  life 
to  make  the  acquaintance  of  Tuine — especially  of  his  masterful  and  in- 
spiring work  on  English  Literature.  Of  that  marvellous  book,  it  must  be 
said  that  it  is  henceforth  simply  indispensable  to  the  students  of  our 
Literature." 

THE  BOSTON  ADVERTISER  say*:  "This  grand  work  has  a  glory  of  its 
own,  which  culture  and  taste  will  not  fail  to  discover." 

THE  BOSTON  POST  say*:  "It  is  the  most  readable  history  of  English 
literature  that  has  ever  been  written." 

THE  SPRINGFIELD  REPUBLICAN  say* :  "It  is  the  portrait  of 
the  English  people  from  the  days  of  Hengist  and  Horsa  to  those  of  Gladstone 
and  D' Israeli — a  masterly  work." 

THE  NEW  ORLEANS  TIMES  say* :  "It  is  really  a  history  of  the 
English  people — a  present  face  to  face  amount  with  the  race  standing 
before  you.  Taine  has  the  dramatic  power  of  Charles  Rcade.  wit.h  the  bold- 
ness and  brilliancy  of  Curlyle.  In  his  hands  history  is  made  as  attractive 
as  a  romance."' 

THE  METHODIST  .w?/s.'  "No  well-fnrnishod  library  ran  be  without  these 
volumes.  Beyond  question,  it  is  the  very  best  history  of  English  literature." 

THE  LIBERAL  CHRISTIAN  says:  "We  recommend  it'to  all  serious 
readers  and  thinkers  as  equally  instructive  and  charming." 

TAINE'S  ENGLISH  LITERATURE. 

Complete  in  Two   Volumes  octavo. 
Cloth,  $10 ;    Half  Calf  or  Half  Morocco,  $15. 

HOLT   &  WILLIAMS,   PUBLISHERS, 
25  Bond  Street,  New  York. 

0 

i\    4  \j 

PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SUPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 

Home,  Daniel  Douglas 
Incidents  in  ray  life.
