The Way, the Truth, the Life (F.J.A. Hort, 1893)
==========================================================
Hort's 1893 Hulsean Lectures — the great textual critic's theology of Christ as the way, the truth, and the life. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

ir.  T-


a


EX   UNO   VERBO   OMNIA
ET   UNUM   LOQUUNTUR   OMNIA.

FROM  ONE  WORD    PROCEED   ALL  THINGS:
AND   ONE   IS   THAT   WHICH   IS   SPOKEN   BY   ALL

THINGS.

DE    IMITATIONE   CHRISTI.


THE  WAY  THE  TRUTH  THE  LIFE


MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  Limiteb

LONDON  •  BOMBAY  •  CALCUTTA
MELBOURNS

THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY

NEW   YORK   •   BOSTON   •  CHICAGO
ATLANTA  •  SAN    FRANCISCO

THE   MACMILLAN  CO.   OF   CANADA,   Ltl..

TORONTO


AS"


THE  WAY  THE  TRUTH  THE  LIFE


THE    HULSEAN    LECTURES
FOR    1871


BY


FENTON    JOHN    ANTHONY    HORT    D.D.

SOMETIME   HULSEAN    PROFESSOR    AND    LADY    MARGARET'S    READER
IN   DIVINITY   IN  THE   UNIVERSITY   OF  CAMBRIDGE.


MACMILLAN    AND    CO.,    LIMITED
ST    MARTIN'S    STREET,    LONDON
1908

All  ri>'hts  res'eiTed.


First  Edition  printed  1893.
Second  Edition  1894.
Reprinted  1897,  1908.


PREFATORY    NOTE.

THE  fragmentary  Introduction  which  was  begun
by  Dr  Hort  in  1872,  and  continued  at  two  later
dates,  gives  in  part  the  history  and  scope  of  the
present  volume ;  but  the  revision  indicated  in  the
opening  paragraph  was  not  completely  carried  into
effect.  The  first  two  Lectures  were  set  up  in  slip  in
1872,  and  after  careful  revision  were  passed  for  press
at  the  close  of  1874.  The  first  five  sheets  were
printed  off  (pp.  i — 80),  the  remainder  of  Lecture  II.
remained  in  slip,  and  pencillings  on  the  copy  suggest
that  some  enlargement  of  the  conclusion  was  in  con-
templation. The  third  Lecture  has  been  printed
partly  from  the  original  MS.  (pp.  95 — 107;  146 — 8),
and  partly  (pp.  108 — 146)  from  a  MS.  of  later  date\

^  This  Lecture  was  delivered  on  Sunday,  Dec.  lo,  1871,  the  crisis
of  the  ilhTcss  of  the  Prince  of  Wales,  and  the  following  words  were
added  at  the  close  of  it  :

This  life  of  Christ,  as  manifested  first  through  death  and  then  in
His  Resurrection,  may  well  fill  our  thoughts  to-day,  when  we  have
present  before  us  the  possible  ending  of  a  life  dear  to  us  in  itself,  and
doubly  dear  as  having  bound  up  in  it  much  that  belongs  to  the  inward
life  of  the  nation.  Let  us  earnestly  believe  that  here  too,  whether  by
life  or  by  death,  Christ  the  Saviour  will  save.  If  He  saves  by  life,  let
us  give  Him  thanks.  If  He  suffers  death  to  come  to  pass,  let  us  be
assured  that  He  is  preparing  a  more  glorious  resurrection  in  the  future.


vi  PREFATORY  NOTE

The  fourth  Lecture  has  been  printed  as  it  was  origin-
ally written.  The  MS.  has  not  received  any  later
additions,  but  something  appears  to  be  wanting  on
p.  i66.  The  'Notes  and  Illustrations'  were  taken
from  collections  made  for  the  Lectures  and  for  the
revision  of  them,  and  will  serve  in  some  measure  to
illustrate  the  wider  range  which  was  designed  for
Lectures  III.,  IV.  (p,  xxvli)'.


1  The  MSS.  of  Lectures  III.,  IV.  were  prepared  for  the  press  by
the  Rev.  J.  O.  F.  Murray,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  Emmanuel  College,  who
also  selected  and  arranged  the  Notes  and  Illustrations,  and  provided
the  sections  of  the  analysis  which  are  enclosed  in  square  brackets,  and
passed  the  whole  work  through  the  press.

A  few  words  enclosed  in  square  brackets  ([  ])  have  been  introduced
into  the  Lectures,  but  no  other  changes  have  been  made.  In  the  Notes
some  changes  have  been  made  to  complete  the  form  of  the  sentences  ;
and  one  or  two  phrases  indicated  as  provisional  in  the  MS.  liave  been
enclosed  in  half-brackets  C" '').

Since  I  examined  somewhat  closely  the  materials  available  for  the
volume  before  they  were  placed  in  Mr  Murray's  hands,  I  may  be
allowed  to  express  my  grateful  sense  of  the  care  and  judgment  with
which  he  has  fulfilled  a  difficult  and  delicate  task.  The  debt  which
Dr  Hort's  friends  owe  to  him  is  not  less  because  his  labour  has  been
a  glad  offering  of  reverence  and  affection  to  a  master.

The  title  of  the  Lectures  was  not  finally  determined.  'I  wish'
Dr  Ilort  wrote  to  me  in  1871  'we  could  have  had  some  talk  about  the
title.  I  can  think  of  nothing  better  than  "the  Revelation  of  the  Way".
It  is  not  quite  adequate,  but  it  avoids  some  objections  which  I  should
make  to  others  more  obvious.  No  title  single  in  form  and  simjile  in
language  could  express  the  drift  of  the  whole.  It  seems  impossible  to
go  beyond  slight  indication.'  I  do  not  remember  that  he  ever  recurred
to  the  subject.

The  Ordination  Sermon  referred  to  in  the  Introduction  has  been
reserved  for  a  volume  of  Sermons  for  which  there  is  ample  material.


PREFATORY  NOTE  vii

These  simple  facts  and  dates  tell  their  own  pathetic
story.  The  work,  and  especially  the  latter  part  of  the
work,  was  done  under  great  pressure.  '  I  have  not
'  touched  [Lect.]  III.'  (Dr  Hort  wrote  to  me  on  Dec.  i,
1 871)  'since  I  saw  you... I  have  worked  incessantly,
'despite  less  favourable  health,  and  have  only  this
'  moment  finished  No.  II.  Indeed  I  have  still  to  do
'the  cutting  out... The  result  now  is  go  pp.  and  I
'  fancy  I  must  cut  out  60.'

It  happened  that  Dr  Hort  had  accepted  the  office
of  Examiner  for  the  Natural  Sciences  Tripos  in  the
year  of  his  Lectureship,  and  the  examination  came  at
the  same  time  as  the  delivery  of  the  Lectures.  In  a
postscript  to  the  letter  which  I  have  just  quoted  he
says,  'Natural  Sciences  Tripos  all  next  week ;  Class  list
'on  the  day  after  the  last  Hulsean.'  Meanwhile  also
the  anxious  question  of  a  removal  from  St  Ippolyts
to  Cambridge,  soon  afterwards  most  happily  settled,
was  under  consideration,  and  the  work  of  the  Revision
of  the  N.T.  was  going  on.  It  was  no  wonder  then  that
on  Dec.  28th  Dr  Hort  wrote  to  me  :  '  I  fear  it  will  be
'some  [time]  before  I  get  over  the  pressure  of  these  last
'  weeks.  It  is  unlucky,  for  much  home  work  presses  in
'its  turn.  Yet' — the  qualification  is  most  touching —
'there  is  also  a  satisfaction  in  that  combination  of
'the  Natural  Sciences  Tripos  and  of  Revision  with
'the  Hulseans.'

The  work  was  done  under  great  pressure,  and  the
standard   of   perfection   which   Dr    Hort   set   before

II.  L.  b


viii  PREFATORY  NOTE

himself  made  revision  and  the  writing  of  the  Notes,
which  he  considered  necessary,  more  and  more
difficult.  Yet  the  task  was  never  laid  aside.  As  on
many  former  journeys  the  sheets  and  the  MSS.  were
taken  to  Switzerland  on  his  last  journey  in  1892.

But  while  the  Lectures  in  their  present  form  do
not  represent  completely  the  writer's  ideal  treatment
of  the  subject,  they  are,  1  think,  most  thoroughly
characteristic.  To  many  they  will  be  a  revelation  of
a  new  side  of  a  many-sided  nature.  They  are  chap-
ters in  the  history  of  a  soul  of  singular  sincerity,
subtlety  and  depth.  They  bring  the  reader  who
ponders  their  measured  words  into  living  fellowship
with  one  who  has  known  what  it  is  to  search  for  the
Light  and  to  see  it.  They  become,  like  the  words  of  a
friend,  springs  of  thought.  Every  page  bears  the
impress  of  reality,  of  breadth  of  sympathy,  of  absolute
loyalty  to  truth.

From  first  to  last  the  living  man  speaks  to  us.  He
speaks  'as  a  learner  to  learners'  (p.  xxxiv.),  claiming  no
finality  for  his  own  opinions,  and  desiring  not  so  much
to  convey  conclusions  as  to  invite  fellow-students  to
enter  on  the  paths  which  lead  to  wisdom,  'to  en-
'  courage  and  aid  independent  energy  of  heart  and
'  mind '  (p.  xxxv.).  He  tells  us  from  experience  how
one  inquirer  has  found  the  truth,  and  not  merely
how  he  thinks  it  is  likely  that  others  may  find  it.  He
turns  aside  from  special  kinds  of  evidence  for  the
Faith  to  its  general  correspondence  with  what  we  can


PREFATORY  NOTE  ix

discern  of  human  nature  and  creation.  He  seeks
'  to  confront  the  truth  with  personal  life  and  know-
ledge' (p.  xxxvi.).  He  develops  the  great  saying  of
Tertullian  :  testiinoiiinin  Dens  habet  totian  hoc  quod
sumiis  et  in  g?io  siimns.  He  insists  on  a  principle
which  is  commonly  forgotten,  that  the  evidence  for
the  highest  truth  '  is  to  be  found  in  the  light  which  it
'brings,  far  more  than  in  any  light  which  it  receives'
(p.  1 1  f ).

Dr  Hort  was  better  qualified  than  most  students
to  dwell  on  this  aspect  of  the  Gospel  from  the  variety
and  thoroughness  of  his  own  acquirements.  From
very  early  days  the  keen  pursuit  of  different  branches
of  'humanity',  of  physical  science,  of  history,  of
philosophy  had  familiarised  him  with  a  sense  of  the
interdependence  of  things  and  of  the  unity  of  know-
ledge. A  passage  from  his  earliest  printed  Essay  in
which  he  describes  Coleridge  has  been  most  justly
applied  by  Dr  Moulton  to  himself:  'with  him,  as  with
'every  one  to  whom  truth  is  more  than  a  subject  for
'speculation,  there  is  no  line  of  separation  between
'the  different  subjects  of  his  thoughts,  still  less  be-
'tween  his  thoughts  and  his  life'  {Cambridge  Essays,
1856,  p.  294).  With  this  conviction  he  shews  how  'an
'endless  future  is  opened  for  knowledge  and  devotion'
when  once  'the  truth  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  is  firmly
'grasped  as  truth':  how  the  Christian  faith,  as  founded
on  truth,  is  the  only  sure  protection  against  idolatry :
how  the  knowledge  of  all  things  '  is  folded  up  in  the

b2


X  PREFATORY  NOTE

'  knowledge  of  Christ ',  and  how  Christ  is  '  the  way  of
'  God  in  human  history '.  He  rejoices  in  the  growth
of  knowledge,  and  dwells  on  the  gains  and  perils  of
our  recent  advances  '  in  the  knowledge  of  the  lower
'world'.  He  brings  out  under  many  forms  and
in  many  applications  that  the  primary  message  of
the  Gospel  is  the  message  of  life.  Everywhere  he
points  to  the  Incarnation  as  the  supreme  fact  in  which
development  finds  its  law,  progress  its  goal,  the
individual — the  fragment — consummation  in  a  Divine
unity.

But  the  strength  of  personal  conviction  never
interferes  with  Dr  Hort's  scrupulous  fairness  of
exposition  and  argument.  In  the  boldest  assertion  of
personal  responsibility  he  recognises  a  legitimate  place
for  authority.  In  the  frank  acceptance  of  the  obliga-
tion of  independent  inquiry,  he  leaves  room  for  the
salutary  influence  of  tradition.  He  proposed  to
himself  and  to  others  truth  and  not  victory  as  the
one  satisfying  aim  of  debate.  And  truth  was  some-
thing not  to  be  received  only,  but  mastered  and
known  and  used.  He  reminds  us  that  we  shall  under-
stand better  what  Christianity  is,  when  we  remember
that  in  this  *  the  knowledge  of  truth  was  for  the  first
'time  set  in  its  proper  place  as  necessary  to  sound
'  life  and  rightful  action.'

So  far  I  have  endeavoured  to  speak  of  the
Lectures  as  a  precious  contribution  to  modern  Theo-


PREFATORY  NOTE  xi

logy,  indicating,  as  I  believe,  to  those  who  will
seriously  study  their  lessons,  how  wavering  faith  may
best  be  strengthened  and  every  treasure  of  knowledge
and  wisdom  made  contributory  to  the  interpretation
of  the  Gospel.  But  to  me  they  are  much  more.
They  are  voices  which  speak  to  me  of  an  uninter-
rupted friendship  and  close  intercourse  of  more  than
forty  years,  first  in  the  revision  of  the  Greek  text  of
the  New  Testament,  and  then  in  the  work,  especially
the  Theological  work,  of  the  University.  Such  a
fellowship,  so  long,  and  so  intimate,  involving  from
first  to  last  almost  incessant  discussions  of  principles
and  details  of  criticism,  of  policy,  and  of  teaching,
is,  I  fancy,  without  a  parallel.  I  cannot  attempt  to
measure  or  analyse  what  I  owe  to  it.  It  was  to  me  a
constant  inspiration  and  strength  to  watch  in  my
friend  the  enthusiasm  of  research,  the  dignity  and
power  of  silent  and  sustained  effort;  to  be  constantly
reminded  of  the  necessary  harmony  of  the  greatest  and
least  things ;  to  be  lifted  towards  an  unattainable
ideal,  which  presents  an  exhaustive  investigation  of
the  minutest  details  finally  issuing  in  the  establishment
of  the  most  comprehensive  conception  of  a  whole.
The  strain  of  such  labour  might  indeed  at  times
appear  to  be  too  intense  and  continuous.  No  re-
laxation was  admitted  except  a  change  of  subject.
If  I  not  unfrequently  pleaded  for  what  I  ventured  to
call  proportion  in  the  treatment  of  some  subordinate
point,  Dr  Hort  would  laughingly  reply  that  'all  life


xii  PREFATORY  NOTE

'  was  a  question  of  proportion,'  but  he  remitted  nothing
of  his  almost  microscopic  labour.  Again  and  again
I  have  shrunk  from  asking  his  opinion  on  a  point  of
controversy,  because  I  knew  that  I  should  not  receive
simply  the  unpremeditated  answer  which  I  wanted,
but  should  probably  give  him  occasion  for  a  fresh
and  thorough  investigation  of  all  the  facts  involved  in
the  inquiry.  He  held,  and  he  acted  on  the  con-
viction, that  nothing  was  too  little  to  be  done  as  well
as  it  could  be  done.  No  trouble,  no  postponement
of  his  own  work,  was  reckoned  of  any  account,  if  he
could  help  a  fellow-student.  He  was  instinctively
jealous  to  guard  the  influence  of  others  and  not  to  use
his  own.  He  might  have  produced  more  If  all  this
had  been  otherwise.  But  then  he  would  not  have
been  himself  As  it  is  he  has  revealed  his  power  and
thoughts  to  those  by  whom  he  was  not  personally
known  in  representative  works  on  textual  criticism,
on  historical  theology,  and  in  these  Lectures,  if  I  may
use  the  phrase,  on  divine  philosophy ;  and  those  who
knew  him  best  would,  in  the  words  of  Dr  Phear,  not
'  wish  him  to  have  been  other  than  he  was.'

The  history  of  these  Lectures  will  have  shewn
what  painful  difficulty  Dr  Hort  often  found  in  formal
composition.  It  was  not  so  in  correspondence  or
conversation.  Keen,  fluent,  fertile,  subtle,  he  raised
point  after  point  in  a  discussion,  and  where  he  failed
to  convince,  at  least  quickened  a  fuller  sense  of  the
manifold  bearings  of  the  question  in  debate.


PREFATORY  NOTE  xiii

We  met  for  the  last  time  in  the  summer  of  1890
in  this  house,  dear  to  us  both  alike  as  the  home  for
ten  years  of  our  common  friend  Bishop  Lightfoot,  and
his  last  resting-place.  We  talked  of  what  the  great
scholar  had  done  at  Cambridge  and  the  great  bishop
at  Durham  :  of  the  new  work  which  had  been  most
strangely  committed  to  me  at  the  close  of  life  :  of  the
work  which  remained  to  be  done  at  Cambridge  to-
wards the  fulfilment  of  old  designs  which  we  had
cherished  for  enterprises  at  home  and  in  the  Mission
Field.  And  where  much  seemed  to  be  shadowed
with  anxious  uncertainty,  one  thing  I  recognised  with
unqualified  joy.  Dr  Hort  felt  at  length  that  he  was
truly  known  by  those  among  whom  he  had  laboured
without  one  thought  of  self  for  nearly  twenty  years,
and  looked  forward  to  the  future  with  confident  hope,
conscious  that  he  should  be  strengthened  for  every
duty  by  the  eager  and  reverent  affection  of  younger
men.  The  hope  was  amply  justified  by  two  years  of
happy  and  varied  activity  continued  without  inter-
mission through  failing  health.  One  of  his  last  acts
was  to  accept  from  two  Cambridge  scholars  (the
Rev.  J.  Armitage  Robinson,  B.D.,  Fellow  of  Christ's
College,  and  now  Norrisian  Professor  of  Divinity,  and
Mr  M.  R.  James,  M.A.,  Fellow  of  King's  College)
who  could  speak  as  representatives  of  the  new  gene-
ration, the  dedication  of  an  edition  of  'the  Gospel
'according  to  Peter  and  the  Revelation  of  Peter.'
Before  the  book  was  published  he  had  passed  to  his


xiv  PREFATORY  NOTE

rest ;   and  a  Postscript,  which  I  cannot  refrain  from
quoting,  tells  what  Cambridge  felt :

It  was  not  without  expressions  of  misgiving  that  we  had
asked  to  prefix  to  this  hurried  work  a  name  which  must  always
be  connected  with  the  minutest  accuracy  and  the  most  cautious
utterances.  It  is  quite  unworthy  to  be  dedicated  to  his  memory.
But  we  feel  that  we  cannot  draw  back  or  alter  now.  As  here,
so  there,  his  gentle  spirit  will  '  make  allowance  for  us.'  To  his
voice  we  had  looked  forward  as  the  one  voice  which  should  tell
us,  as  no  other  could,  where  we  were  right  or  wrong.  Now  we
must  learn  it  in  a  harder  school.  But  it  will  remain  a  sacred
duty  to  carry  out  these  investigations  with  the  patience  and
deliberateness  which  his  example  enjoins  and  his  removal  has
made  more  than  ever  necessary.

A  life  so  lived,  however  prolific  in  literary
achievements,  is  more  fruitful  by  what  it  is  than  by
what  it  does.  It  is  not  lost  when  it  ceases  to  be  seen.
It  passes  into  the  spiritual  atmosphere  which  sustains
the  highest  life.  It  confirms  by  a  fresh  testimony
the  belief  in  the  unity  of  truth  and  being  by  which
our  ancient  Universities  are  enabled  to  welcome  and
assimilate  every  increase  of  knowledge  with  un-
troubled joy.  In  times,  when  we  are  distracted  by
rival  cries  or  overwhelmed  by  transitory  sorrows,  it
helps  us  to  '  win  our  souls  by  patience,'  according  to
the  promise  of  Christ  which  reveals  to  us  the  way
and  the  end  of  faithful  service.

B.  F.  DUNELM.

Auckland  Castle.
Sept.   15,   1893.


ANALYSIS.

LECTURE  I.

THE    WAY.

PAGE

The  Gospel  gives  and  records  answers  to  questions  already  asked  .  3
Christ's  answers  most  true  and  apposite  even  though  apparently

digressive  ...........        f

for  they  deal  less  with  the  verbal  question  than  with  the  search

within        ...........      4f

The  Disciples,  followers  of  a  Teacher  and  yet  more  Lord        .         .  sf

The  Twelve  Disciples  also  Apostles,  yet  thereby  yet  more  disciples  6
Discipleship  consecrated  and  interpreted  by  the  Last  Supper  and

its  accompaniments    .........  6f

The  announcement  of  departure     .         .         .         .         ,         .         .  7f

St  Peter's  Whither  and  Why 8

The  departure  explained  as  a  preparation  for  a  higlier  reunion  .  9
St   Thomas's    too  rational  question   answered  by   a   statement   of

universal  truth  ..........  gf

The  threefold  announcement  and  its  steps       .         .         .         -         .  lof

Significance  of  the  four  statements  taken  together  .         .         .         .  rif

Sense  of  the  first  as  interpreted  by  the  preceding  exhortation  .  1 2-20
The   separation   involved   in   the    journey  already  begun,  and    a

passage  from  mansion  to  mansion     .  .  .         .  .         .    fzff

The  change  from  His  presence  with  them  to  their  presence  with

Him , 14


XVI


ANALYSIS


PAGE

St  Thomas  asked  in  a  spirit  of  narrow  literalism,  .  .  .  •  15
but  also  from'  a  deeper  sense  of  perplexity  at  the  thought  of  losing

the  now  necessary  guidance         .         .         .         .         .         .         .16

The  double  doubt  of  the  Disciples,  as  to  the  Lord's  destination  and

as  to   their  own  future  conduct,  was  met  by  an  answer  which

directly  dealt  with  the  unexpressed  doubt  only  .         .         .16

because  the  two  questions  are  inseparable  and  man's  way  is  known

only  through  God's  way       .         .         .         .         .         .         .         •     17

Less  difficult  interpretations  unsufFicing,  such  as

(1)  Way  =  Guide:  for  the  present  form  of  guidance  was  to
come  to  an  end  and  the  Paraclete  had  to  be  revealed  as  Guide     .    lyf

(2)  Way  =  Example :  for  imitation,  subordinate  even  in  the
early  discipleship,  would  become  in  the  strict  sense  impossible
under  the  new  conditions  .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .  tSff

The  conception  of  a  Way,  at  all  times  harder,  implies  empire  over
the  containing  world  as  well  as  over  the  men  contained  in  it         .     20


Verification  in  early  expeiHence  of  these  words  spoken  with  a  view
to  action      ..........         21-31

Without  a  sense  of  a  way  all  who  have  once  been  awakened  are
palsied  for  action  ;  and  so  the  Disciples       .         .         .         .         .    2[f

They  had  inherited  the  Jewish  belief  in  a  Divine  Way    .         .         .    2'2f

but  that  belief  itself  was  dissolving  now  .....    i^{

The  Gospel  restored  the  assurance  by  adding  progressive  know-
ledge of  the  Way,  and  leading  to  the  Christian  Theology       .    24f

The  internal  experience  of  Him  as  a  Way  for  themselves  led  in
like  manner  through  their  work  to  the  recognition  of  Him  as  the
universal  Way    .         .         .  .         .         .         .         .         .         •    i^,^

So  also  Christ's  own  course  as  one  who  lived  for  those  through
whom  He  moved  pointed  from  the  individual  to  the  universal
Way  ...........    27f

The  results  of  the  Apostolic  expeiicnce  seen  in  'the  Way'  of  the
Acts,  and  in  much  other  expanded  language  in  the  Epistles  .    28f

Verification  in  the  power  to  pursue  clear  action  through  failure  and
suffering      ....  ........    29f

The  Spirit  taught  new  ways  of  \Aalking  in  the  Way,  itself  per-
manent       ...........     30

The  variety  of  ways  which  ihey  had  to  pursue  in  conquering  the
world  leaves  the  strongest  impression  of  the  governing  unity        .     31


ANAL  YSIS  xvii

PAGE

Modern  repetitions  of  the  discipular  experience,  both  for  the
Church  and  for  the  Christian    ......        31-40

The  passing  away  of  an  externally  Christian  order  mnl<es  disciple-
ship  a  new  and  difficult  task        .......     32

The  help  comes  from  the  revelation  of  the  Way  as  universal  and
destined  to  more  complete  nile  over  us 33f

Disappearance  of  familiar  signs  of  His  presence  may  be  only  an
opening  of  the  way  to  the  larger  discipleship        .         .         .         '34

A  gain  to  the  Church  to  have  to  study  more  closely  the  Christ  of
the  Gospels  and  the  Way  of  human  affairs 34

Additional  knowledge  of  the  Way  supplied  by  Church  history         .     35

A  gain  to  have  to  advance  in  the  Way  under  the  guidance  of  the
Spirit •         •         •         •         •     35

Individual  discipleship  advancing  from  custom  to  intelligent  service     36
The  youthful  sense  of  freedom  rejoices  in  waylessness  ;    .  .         •     37

but  in  due  time  ways  are  seen  to  be  inevitable,  and  the  choice  to
lie  merely  between  different  ways         ......    37f

Christ  the  Way  alone  gives  an  unity  of  noble  ways  which  may  be
accepted  early  and  followed  under  all  changes  of  outward  cir-
cumstances ..........    38f

The  original  chasm  between  question  and  answer  remains  always,
partially  closing  with  growing  experience  but  not  to  be  com-
pletely closed  till  the  close  of  the  journey         .         »         .         .    39f

LECTURE   II.

THE    TRUTH.

David  the  righteous  succeeded  by  Solomon  the  wise,  and  the
advance  of  righteousness  needed  wisdom  to  sustain  it       .         -41

Heathen  admirers  of  wisdom  learned  the  necessity  of  knowledge  to
sustain  wisdom :  yet  after  a  short  summer  righteousness  and
wisdom  faded  away   .......••     42

In  the  Gospel  'truth',  the  object  of  knowledge,  became  combined
with  the  service  of  God  as  the  condition  of  a  better  righteousness     42

St  John's  contrast  between  the  Law  conveyed  through  Moses  and


xviii  ANAL  VS/S

PAGE

the  Grace  and  Truth  embodied  in  Christ,  needing;  therefore  to  be
perceived  by  men        .........     43

[This  advance  into  knowledge  of  Truth  could  alone  make  a
reconciliation  possible  between  seekers  after  righteousness  and
seekers  after  wisdom,  and  so  heal  the  divisions  of  humanity  •     44

77ie  claim  of  the  Gospel  to  be  a  Kcvelatioii  of  Truth  .         .        46-61

not  prominent  in  the  express  language  of  the  Synoptists  .         .     46

but  implied  in  the  record  of  the  Lord's  words,  especially  of  His
Parables      ...........     47

and  of  His  deeds,  which  are  unintelligiule  except  as  a  revelation
of  the  inner  order  of  the  Universe,  of  the  Laws  of  the  kingdom
of  God 48

The  larger  function  of  all  the  Gospels  is  disclosed  when  St  John
instead  of  essaying  a  formal  harmony  of  the  pre-existing  nar-
ratives expounds  the  relation  .of  the  historic   manifestation    to
Theological  Truth       .........    48f

'  pronouncing  the  word    .........     50

and  recording  the  utterances  which  defined  the  Lord's  relation  to
it  up  to  the  climax  before  Pilate  ......     50

A  closer  relationship  between  Himself  and  the  Truth  indicated  in
the  promise  attached  to  abiding  in  His  Word  through  know-
ledge of  the  Truth     .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         -51

One  who  can  promise  perfect  freedom  in  action  to  those  that  abide
in  His  Word  can  be  nothing  less  than  Himself  the  Truth    .         .     52

This  revelation  was  made  at  last  explicitly  to  tried  disciples    .         .     53
in  preparation  for  the  new  work  at  hand  for  them  .         .         .         -54
and,  in  spite  of  the  mystery  of  the  language,  their  past  experience
enabled  them  to  interpret  it ;       .         .         .         .         .         .         -54

as  supplying  together  with  the  yet  deeper  revelation  'I  am  the
Life '  the  necessary  complement  and  ground  of  the  revelation  of
'the  Way' 55

The  distinctive  character  of  their  Apostleship  is  derived  from  this
revelation  of  Christ  as  '  the  Truth'       ......     56

the  function  of  the  Spirit  of  the  Truth  being  to  enable  them
progressively  to  lay  hold  of  the  Truth  given  once  for  all  in  Christ    57f

and  yet  at  the  same  time  to  show  them  as  He  had  shown  the
Prophets  things  to  come 59


ANALYSIS  xix

PAGE

The  identification  of  'the  eternal  life'  with  the  knowledge  of
the  one  true  God  and  of  Him  Whom  He  sent  reveals  the
true  nature  of  all  knowledge,      .......    59f

while  His  Prayer  for  the  Disciples  that  they  may  be  hallowed  in
the  Truth  reveals  the  nature  of  His  Own  self-hallouing        ,         .    6of

The  actual  experience  of  the  Disciples     .....        62-72

At  first  their  task  was  to  bring  all  nations  to  Discipleship  by
the  ministration  of  'the  Word'  as  embodied  in  the  Life,  Death,
and  Resurrection  of  the  Lord     .......     62

St  Paul's  appearance  at  Athens  marked  a  crisis  in  the  unfolding  of
the  Gospel  in  its  relation  to  knowledge       .  .         .  .         .63

There  the  search  for  novelty  had  superseded  the  search  for  Truth,
and  the  issue  had  been  a  superfluity  of  irrational  awe  .         .    (t^i

St  Paul  declares  at  once  the  highest  object  of  knowledge  and  of
devotion  as  he  expounds  the  relation  of  God  to  the  World  .    64 f

now  at  length  made  known  by  the  Resurrection     ....    Ojf

In  his  Epistles  St  Paul  reserves  the  development  of  this  conception
of  the  Gospel  as  '  the  Truth '  for  the  Churches  that  have  made
some  progress  towards  spiritual  maturity    .         .         .         .         .66

The  simple  creed  of  fact  by  the  preaching  of  which  the  Church  was
spread  throughout  the  empire  is  embodied  in  the  first  tliree
Gospels     ...........     67

but  the  rise  of  dangers  within  the  Church  compelled  Truth  to  put
on  a  new  form  of  sharper  definition    ......     67

These  dangers  were  intensified  when  after  the  Fall  of  Jerusalem  an
attempt  was  made  in  the  name  of  more  refined  knowledge  to  rob
Christianity  alike  of  its  foundation  in  history,  and  of  its  liold  on
conduct 68

St  John  meets  the  danger  by  recalling  men  to  the  knowledge  of
Him  whose  Name  is 'the  True'         ......    68f

A  condensed  summary  of  St  John's  teaching  is  embodied  in  the
closing  statement  of  his  First  Epistle  on  the  contents  of  Christian
knowledge  and  in  its  closing  warning  against  Idols     .         .         .    69f

And  as  the  time  was  now  ripe  his  Gospel  gave  definite  expression
to  the  true  relation  between  Christ  and  the  Truth  as  '  Light '  and
'Word' and 'Life' 7of

embodying  it  in  the  simplest  imagery  in  his  Prologue,  as  the  key
to  the  whole  narrative       .         .         .         .         .         .         ,         .71


XX  ANALYSIS

PAGE

Subsequent  developiiiC7tts  .         .         •         •         •         •         •        7  -  "86

The  various  Gnostic  systems  bore  witness  to  the  conviction  that  the
redemption  in  Christ  was  the  key  to  the  understanding  of  the
Universe — but  they  failed  because  they  scorned  all  connexion
with  a  fixed  base  of  Truth 72

The  same  conviction  was  characteristic  of  the  two  most  creative
periods  in  subsequent  history  only  failing  from  onesidedness,  and
because  no  Truth  other  than  Theological  had  at  the  time  been
clearly  ascertained       .........    72f

The  modern  development  has  been  marked  by  an  increasing
hold  on  Truth  in  many  departments  which  must  in  the  end
reinvigorate  Theology  by  supplying  an  independent  standard  of
Truth  and  restoring  Faith  to  the  Apostolic  type  ....    i^i

For  Truth  revealed  is  not  generically  distinct  from  Truth  discovered
in  the  method  of  its  recognition 75

And  the  limitations  of  which  we  are  conscious  in  our  power  of
apprehending  Theological  Truth  affect  in  fact  our  apprehension
of  Truth  in  any  department  .......     75

Since  all  Truth  is  one,  each  new  world  conquered  for  knowledge
affects  our  whole  view  of  Truth,  and  the  rapid  development  in
our  own  day  of  the  knowledge  of  the  world  of  Nature  is  full  of
important  consequences  for  Theology 7^

A  survey  of  our  own  position  the  best  preparation  for  a  forecast  of
what  these  consequences  may  be 77

The  first  stage  in  the  human  appropriation  of  Trutli,  the  effort  after
the  knowledge  of  man,  incomplete  without  the  knowledge  of
God,  and  of  the  outer  world     .......     7^

The  proper  subject  of  the  Christian  Revelation  was  the  knowledge
of  God 79

Hence  the  office  of  the  ancient  Church  to  work  out  a  Christian
Theology,  a  work  necessarily  incomplete  and  limited  yet  full
of  teaching  for  all  time 79

The  knowledge  of  God  required  to  be  supplemented  by  the  know-
ledge of '  Physics' 80

The  knowledge  of  Physics  has  revealed  our  kinship  with  the
Earth 81

But  the  new  life  infused  by  the  knowledge  of  Physics  into  our  idea
of  Truth  has  a  dangerous  tendency  to  cxclusivencss     .         .         .81


ANAL  YSIS  xxi

PAGE
It  must  crush  man  unless  he  is  supported  by  the  Revelation  of  God

in  Christ     ...........     82

Yet  in  itself  it  is  necessary  to  a  full  knowledge  of  the  Gospel  .         .    %},{

and  of  God  Himself 84f

So  Christ  revealed  Himself  to  the  Apostles  as  the  Truth  not  of

God  only  but  also  of  nature  and  of  man  .         .         .         .85

and  called  on  them  to  study  11  im  as  the  Truth  when  they  could  no

longer  hearken  to  Him  as  a  Teacher 86

So  in  our  own  day  the  Church  is  called  to  know  as  Truth  what  has
been  held  as  sacred  tradition 86

Not  that  the  office  of  tradition  can  become  obsolete        .         .         '87

but  that  we  are  called  to  use  our  stores  of  Truth  for  the  illumina-
tion of  all  worlds  of  knowledge  87f

The  trial  is  severe  and  may  involve  the  surrender  of  some  parts  of
our  heritage — the  loss  of  some  champions  of  the  Truth        .         .     83

But  the  Truth  itself  is  safe      . 89

Similarly  for  (he  individual  ihexe  is  a  crisis  of  emancipation  from

the  fetters  of  an  authoritative  Creed 90

Yet  the  office  of  Authority  is  never  altogether  superseded        .         -91
It  needs  a  perfect  development  of  our  whole  nature  if  we  are  to

perceive  Truth    . 92

And  our  perception  of  it  can  never  displace  Faith  .         .         .         '93
The  true  freedom  which  comes  from  the  knowledge  of  the  Truth  is
the  freedom  of  perfected  discipleship] 93f

LECTURE   III.

THE    LIFE.

The  better  heathenisms  religions  of  life,  though  limited  and  transient

life 95

Its  eventual  decay  giving  place  to  pleasure,  or  to  the  deliberate

foregoing  of  life  . 96

Consequent  failure  of  knowledge     . 96

Israel  shared  the  same  life,  but  as  in  the  presence  of  the  Lord         .     97
And  so  learned  to  regard  communion  with  God  as  itself  a  higher
life 98


xxii  ANALYSIS

PAGE

The  joy  that  is  in  all  life  was  found  also  in  the  higher  life       .         .  98

which  was  also  a  permanent  life  as  from  a  living  fountain  .  .  99
The  decay  of  life  in  Israel,  with  replacement  by  hope  of  future

existence,  or  of  a  Dellv^erer,  or  pursuit  of  wisdom  .         .         .  roc

Restoration  of  all  lost  life  in  Christ,  and  this  under  the  name  of

Salvation,   the  chief  characteristic  of  the  Gospel        .         .  .    too

Contrast  with  John  the  Baptist      .         .         .         .         .         .         .101

The  Saviour  and  His  deliverance  from  usurpations  .         .         .    102

His  miracles,  as  acts  of  salvation,  are  deliverances  or  restorations  of
life  ............    102

The  enemy  and  those  who  follow  him  are  ministers  of  death  .  .    103

Christ  also  provided  support  for  life       ......   104

His  deliverances  of  the  highest  form  of  the  lower  life,  viz.  affection   105
And  so  also  His  gift  of  sustenance  to  the  same       .         .         .         -105
Thus  He  rose  to  the  restoration  of  the  higher  life,  without  detaching
it  from  the  lower       .........    106

It  was  a  life  in  God  through  the  immediate  Lord    .         .         .         .107

[Life  rarely  mentioned  in  the  first  three  Gospels  ....  lojf
But  St  John  writes  expressly  to  bring  his  readers  Life  through  faith

in  the  Name     .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .108

He  records  instances  of  the  use  of  the  word  by  the  Lord  Himself,    109
which  reveal  the  origin  of  Life  in  the  Godhead  and  among  men,         109
and  its  mysterious  identification  with  Himself         ....  loyf

This  Life  He  imparted  especially  through  His  sayings    .         .  .iiof

which,  because  they  were  'spirit',  were  lifegiving,  .  .  .  iiif

'  Words',  as  the  Disciples  knew  and  therefore  could  not  'go  away',

'of  eternal  life'  .         .  .  .         .         .  .  .  .112

Hence  recognising  Him  as  the  Holy  One  of  God  .  .  .  •  nsf
Life  from  the  lips  of  a  teacher,  a  feature  of  all  discipleship  .  .  i  i4r
But  the  Twelve  perceived  the  Universality  of  the  Office  of  their

Teacher    .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .  ii5f

And  this  kept  them  faithful   .  .         .  .         .  .         .  .116

The  Revelation  in  the   Text  prepared   for   by   the   Rc\clalion    to

JNIartha  'as  the  Resurrection  and  the  Life'       .         .         .         .  ii6f

It  gains  force  by  contrast  with  the  anticipated  death        .         .         .  iiyf

Yet  to  be  studied  especially  in  connexion  v>iih  'the  Way'  iiSf

and  '  the  Truth' iiQf


ANALYSIS  xxiii

PAGE

Life  the  hidden  basis  both  of  movement  and  order .         .         .         .120

so  discipleship  to  'the  Way'  and  'the  Truth'  unreal  unless  perfected
in  the  region  of  Life  ........         .  i2of

These  three  stages  of  revelation  and  discipleship  are  mutually  inter-
dependent.         .         . .\i\{

Men  who  know  Christ  as  'the  Way'  and  'the  Truth'  were  pre-
pared to  aclcnowledge  Him  as  '  the  Life      .....  \i2{

And  without  this  crowning  revelation  discipleship  at  the  end  a
mockery     .... I23f

The  Discourses  that  followed  full  of  Teaching  on  Lije  at  its  highest

e.g.  the  conditions  of  coming  to  the  Father  (Jn  xiv  6),        124
the  Revelation  of  the  Father  in  the  Son  (9-14),  i24f

the  guidance  through  the  Spirit  and  restored  com-
munion with  the  Son  promised  to  faithful  love  (15-31)    .  i^sff
Life  in  the  Vine  bearing  fruit  of  obedient  love  (xv  i-io)         .          I27ff
Love  bringing  joy  tried  and  perfected  in  Sacrifice  { 1 1-16)       .         .  129
Strength  to  bear  witness  supplied  by  the  Life-giving  Spirit  of  the

Truth  (xv  17-xvi  15) .         .i3of

The  sorrows  of  the  approaching  separation  the  travail  pangs  of  a
new   birth,    the    entrance   into    abiding    communion   with   the
Father  and  into  peace  in  the  Son  (xvi  16-33)  •         •         •         •  i3if
In  the  concluding  prayer  (xvii)

Eternal  Life  is  defined  by  its  relation  to  the  knowledge  of  the
True  God  involved  in  the  recognition  of  Jesus  as  the  Christ  (1-8)  i32ff

The  mystery  of  Love  is  revealed  as  an  entrance  into  the
mystery  of  Life  (9-26) 134


The  experience  of  the  first  generation  of  heliez'crs     .         ,         .    135 — 146

The  Sacrifice  of  the  Cross  the  revelation  of  perfect  Love  and  so  of
Perfect  Life — healing  the  breach  caused  by  sin,  and  triumphing
over  Death  through  the  Resurrection,  so  making  all  things  new.  i35f

The  coming  of  the  Holy  Spirit  at  Pentecost  marked  by  an  outburst
ot  new  life r36f

recognised  as  such  by  those  who  felt  that  they  held  it  in  trust  for
others,  and  who  showed  the  effect  of  it  in  their  daily  intercourse
with  one  another  and  with  the  world  outside       .         .         .         •  i37f

This  life  tried  in  the  Disciples  as  in  the  Master  by  suffering    .         .138

H.  L.  C


xxiv  ANALYSIS

PAGE
Disciplined  and  purified  by  persecution i^n

In  the  Epistles  this  Life  appears  as  Faith  Hope  and  Love      .         .  139
And  affects  every  pan  of  man's  nature   ......  140

At  the  crisis  marked  by  the  Fall  of  Jerusalem  this  Life  was  brouglu
under  a  definite  pressure  of  Death.  Its  characteristics  at  this  time
most  clearly  expressed  in  the  Revelation  of  Jesus  Christ  given

through  St  John ,40ft

The  P'irst  Epistle  of  St  John  full  from  beginning  to  end  of  the

Revelation  of  Life i^^f

And  the  Prologue  to  his  Gospel  gives  the  final  development  of  his
conception  of  '  the  Life '  in  its  declaration  of  the  relation  of  the
Word  revealed  in  the  Incarnation  to  every  part  of  the  Universe
and  to  God]       .........  14 ^ff

The  call  to  the  Church  to  accept  Ilim  as  the  Life,  not  as  a  single
source  of  life,  loved  alone,  or  itself  detached  from  the  universe
of  life ,^5

The  call  to  the  individual  disciple  in  youth,  when  the  sense  of  the
lower  life  is  strongest,  to  join  it  to  the  Master  Life      .         .         .  147

If  now  harder  to  accept  His  life  as  one  among  many,  better  to  be
driven  to  welcome  Ilim  as  the  Supreme  Life.  Other  lives  rise
in  rebellion  and  look  back  regretfully  to  the  pre-Christian  past :
but  His  life  was  not  destructive,  and  it  will  restore  all  past
forms  of  life i  ,g

Equally  restorative  for  the  individual,  giving  back  life  when  the
natural  life  has  failed,  still  needing  the  preliminary  Baptist,  but
always  near  as  the  Saviour 148


LECTURE   IV.

*N0  MAN  COMETH  TO  THE  FATHER  BUT  BY  ME.'

[The  two  parts  of  Christ's  work,  "the  coming  forth"  and  the
"return"  both  necessary  to  the  complete  Gospel       .         .         -150

The  Cro^s  the  close  of  the  Descent  and  the  beginning  of  the
Ascent  both  for  Christ  and  for  the  world         .         .         .         .  1 5of

During  the  first  period  the  Disciples  are  being  trained  in  personal
attachment  to  the  Lord ,        ,         .  i5if


JINAL  YSIS  XXV

PAGE

During  the  second  they  are  Apostles  to  the  world  in  His  name       .   152

both  the  conditions  and  the  goal  of  their  journey  being  determined
by  His  and  shaping  the  answer  to  St  Thomas     .         .         .         .152

The  threefold  Revelation  already  considered  declares  the  conditions
of  their  journey  .         ....  .         .  ...    153

His  coming  to  the  Father,  the  crown  of  His  Own  work,  is  a  revela-
tion of  their  goal,  and  of  the  means  by  which  they  can  attain  it
in  proportion  as  they  share  His  work  for  the  world  and  so  enter
into  His  joy       ..........  i53f

'Coming  to  the  Father'  either  meaningless  or  terrible  apart  from
submission  to  the  Son        .         .         .         .         ,  .         .         -154

On  the  other  hand  discipleship  to  the  Son  is  incomplete  unless  it
leads  to  the  Father.  Yet  for  us  as  for  St  Philip  there  is  a  con-
stant danger  of  stopping  short    ......         •  i.=  5f

Hence  the  end  is  expressly  declared  to  be  nothing  less  than  the
Father's  immediate  presence      .         .         .         .         .         .         -157

The  negative  form  of  the  utterance,  fixes  our  attention  on  the  true
character  of  the  promised  goal    .......   157

And  on  the  universality  of  the  office  claimed  by  the  Son  as  '///^
Way  "//;.' Truth' and 'i'/^t-IJfe' 158

His  exclusive  mediation  a  revelation  of  the  unity  and  of  the  uni-
versality of  His  Kingdom  .         .  .....         • isSf

'Coming  to  the  Father'  interpreted  by  p;actical  experience  of
the  conflict  between  the  claims  of  God  and  of  the  world         .  160

For  even  if  we  dispense  with  God  we  cannot  escape  from  the  choice
between  a  higher  world  and  a  lower    .         .         .         .         .  .161

And,  while  the  lower  is  unsatisfying,  the  higher  cannot  stand
apart  from  God  .  .  .         .  .         .         .         .  .161

Whereas  if  we  sacrifice  the  world  to  God,  life  withers  and  we  fail
to  gain  God       ..........    162

At  the  same  time  efforts  to  compromise  the  conflicting  claims  end
in  impotent  inconsistency   .         .         .         .         •         .         •         .162

To  this  conflict  the  Son  of  God  brings  peace,  as  the  redeemer  of
the  world,  and  the  revelation  of  the  Father  through  human  flesh
and  blood 163

By  submission  to  Him  we  Icaru  so  to  use  the  world  that  it  brings
us  nearer  to  God .         ........         •  i63f

C  2


xxvi  ANALYSIS

PAGE

The  full  force  of  the  words  interpreted  finally  by  reference  once
more  to  the  original  occasion.  Each  word  raised  to  personality
by  identification  with  the  Lord,  and  proved,  not  falsified,  by  the
Crucifixion  ..........  i64f

Self-surrender  revealed  on  the  Cross  as  the  foundation  of  disciple-
ship  165

As  Apostles  they  were  called,  and  the  Church  after  them,  to  know
and  do  the  will  of  God  revealed  in  the  Son,  and  yet  recognized
that  even  evil  men  were  unconsciously  working  out  the  same
will i65f

These  words  of  Christ  interpreted  by  the  events  that  followed  are
the  secret  of  their  insight,  and  of  our  assurance  that  every
seeming  withdrawal  is  but  the  prelude  to  a  return  in  fuller
power         .         .         -         •         .         .         •         .         .         .         .166

Our  present  trial  to  retain  the  fellowship  to  which  we  were  pledged
in  our  Baptism  in  face  of  changes  which  are  inevitable  in  the
futu'.e i66f

Our  inconsistencies  mark  a  period  of  transition.  The  cure  for
them  lies  in  the  unity  which  is  in  Christ,  and  can  be  attained  by
humble  and  dutiful  discipleship]  .         .         .         .         .         .  16S


INTRODUCTION.


THIS  volume  chiefly  represents  the  Hulsean
Lectures  deHvered  before  the  University  of
Cambridge  in  November  and  December  1871.  The
first  and  second  lectures  are  printed  substantially  as
they  were  first  written,  the  parts  omitted  in  delivery
being  restored,  and  the  whole  being  revised,  with
occasional  expansions.  The  third  and  still  more  the
fourth  lectures  were  originally  written  with  difficulty
under  physical  depression,  and  fell  far  short  of  their
intended  scope :  in  their  present  form  they  are  to  a
considerable  extent  new.  A  vain  hope  of  finding
some  space  of  undistracted  leisure  for  recasting  them
altogether  has  held  back  publication  ;  but  the  delay
has  already  been  too  great.  A  sermon  preached  at
the  Trinity  Ordination  in  Ely  Cathedral  on  June  15,
1873,  is  appended*  to  the  Lectures:  though  addressed
to  a  very  different  congregation,  it  may  illustrate
some  of  the  thoughts  which  they  are  intended  to  set
forth.

According  to  the  design  of  Mr   Hulse  his   Lcc-

■'■  See  Note  on  p.  vi.


xxviii  INTRODUCTION

turer  had  two  duties,  to  be  performed  in  different
courses  of  sermons ;  to  show  "  the  truth  and  excel-
lence of  Christianity",  more  especially  by  "collateral
arguments " ;  and  to  explain  "  some  of  the  more
difficult  texts  or  obscure  parts  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,
such  as  may  appear  to  be  more  generally  useful  or
necessary  to  be  explained."  Recent  legislation,  while
curtailing  the  number  of  lectures,  and  abolishing  the
requirement  of  publication,  has  likewise  removed
these  conditions  of  subject  matter.  But  a  combi-
nation of  the  two  purposes  of  the  founder  was  in
complete  accord  with  what  I  held  to  be  the  true
view  of  Christian  Evidences.  For  the  same  reason
the  restrictions  imposed  by  fitness  for  the  pulpit  had
an  advantage  of  their  own  :  it  is  only  in  speaking
to  Christians  that  a  Christian  can  in  any  measure  set
forth  without  distortion  the  weightier  grounds  of
faith.

The  office  was  undertaken  with  some  hesitation.
Not  to  speak  of  various  doubts  arising  out  of  the
responsibility  incurred,  long  cherished  habits  of  mind
imposed  restraints  which  made  it  impossible  to  desire
unreservedly  the  position  of  an  apologist.  Truthful
and  deliberate  vindication  of  the  greatest  of  all  causes,
itself  truthfully  and  deliberately  espoused,  could  never
be  otherwise  than  honourable,  and  might  in  its  season
be  necessary:  the  flimsy  prejudices  to  the  contrary,
a  word  on  which  may  find  place  further  on,  could
have  no   binding   force   over  conscience.     Yet   there


INTRODUCTION  xxix

was  no  gainsaying  the  often-avowed  experience  that
Christian  truth  never  appears  so  vulnerable  as  after
the  reading  of  treatises  written  expressly  in  its  de-
fence :  and  further,  a  student  accustomed  to  find
truth  oftener  persecuted  than  upheld  by  powerful
majorities,  unable  moreover  to  accept  some  of  the
most  widely  current  modes  of  presenting  Christian
doctrine,  might  reasonably  shrink  from  becoming  a
public  champion  of  a  dominant  and  popular  religion.
On  the  other  hand,  within  the  greater  world  of  pro-
miscuous sentiment  and  opinion  there  is  a  lesser
world,  not  wanting  in  an  imperious  domination  and
popularity  of  its  own,  whose  presence  can  be  as  little
forgotten  by  anyone  who  has  profited,  and  desires
always  to  profit,  by  contemporary  movements  of
knowledge  and  speculation.  The  prevailing  attitude
assumed  of  late  years  by  what  is  called  educated
opinion  towards  the  supernatural  foundation  and  the
practical  authority  of  Christian  faith  has  heightened
the  responsibilities  of  Christians  who  are  thankful  to
live  in  a  time  of  free  mental  activity,  and  rejoice  in
many  of  its  results  to  themselves  and  others.  An
attempt  to  give  expression  to  personal  convictions
through  an  exposition  of  a  comprehensive  passage  of
Scripture  might  be  expected,  it  seemed,  to  escape
some  of  the  dangers  of  a  formal  treatise,  and  to
suggest  thoughts  favourable  to  independent  belief.

The  manner  of  treatment  thus  adopted  has  led  of


XXX  INTRODUCTION

necessity  to  an  appearance  of  indefiniteness  which
may  easily  be  misunderstood.  These  lectures  abound,
1  cannot  but  fear,  in  an  indefiniteness  which  is  pure
loss,  the  result  of  defects  in  my  own  thought  and
speech.  But  they  have  likewise  an  apparent  in-
definiteness which  I  do  not  regret  at  all,  for  it  is
inseparable  from  purposes  distinctly  contemplated
throughout.  Two  of  them  have  been  already  indi-
cated, the  expression  of  personal  conviction  and  the
furtherance  of  independence  in  belief.  A  third,  still
more  essential  to  the  whole  plan,  is  the  appeal  to
the  relations  between  the  Christian  revelation  and
the  sum  of  experience,  rather  than  to  any  separable
and  separated  credentials.  Each  of  these  purposes
requires  some  explanation.

I.  The  impulse  to  give  the  discussion  of  Christian
evidences  an  argumentative  shape  proceeds  from  a
rieht  source,  a  sense  of  the  untrustworthiness  of  beliefs
founded  exclusively  on  cravings  and  sympathies,  and
still  more  of  the  difficulty  of  conveying  these  grounds
of  assurance  to  others.  But  this  well  founded  desire
to  be  rational  leads  easily  to  the  suppression  of  per-
sonality as  inconsistent  with  an  impartial  balance  of
judgement.  Not  to  speak  now  of  the  personal  factor
which  must  enter  into  every  perception  of  compre-
hensive truth,  the  effort  to  be  impersonal  affects
injuriously  the  discussion  of  Christian  evidences  to  at
least  this  extent,  that  it  beguiles  Christians  into
setting   forth    the   considerations   which   ought,   they


INTRODUCTION  xxxi

think,  to  be  convincing  to  others,  with  little  or  no
reference  to  what  has  actually  exerted  power  over
their  own  minds.  This  vicarious  or  dramatic  plead-
ing cannot  escape  unreality,  except  where  either  its
scope  is  negative,  that  is,  the  dialectic  refutation  of
objections,  or  it  is  dealing  with  literary  or  historical
or  physical  phenomena  on  a  purely  literary  or  histori-
cal or  physical  footing :  and  consequently  it  can  have
no  final  persuasiveness  except  towards  those  peculiar
minds  whose  own  beliefs  or  disbeliefs  are  formed  or
retained  exclusively  within  these  same  limits.  With
or  without  good  reason,  most  men  who  seek  founda-
tions on  which  to  build  a  conviction  on  grave  subjects,
not  excuses  for  adhering  to  an  opinion,  find  no  help
in  arguments  which,  however  honestly  urged,  bear  no
trace  of  having  proceeded  from  an  actual  experience
of  help  already  needed  and  found.

And  yet  it  is  no  light  task  for  anyone,  at  least
for  any  defender  of  a  hereditary  creed,  to  follow  con-
sistently the  more  effectual  course.  Many  intelligent
and  accomplished  Christians,  of  whom  it  would  be  a
gross  calumny  to  say  that  they  have  given  no  candid
study  to  the  criticisms  of  adversaries,  have  yet  never
outgrown  the  attitude  of  simple  defence.  They  have,
tried  and  found  wanting  the  floating  arguments  for
disbelieving  the  creed  which  they  have  received :  but
they  have  forborne  to  ask  for  themselves  whether  it
has  a  supreme  intrinsic  claim  to  be  believed.  Again,
this    common   frame   of    mind,  often   justifiable   aiid


xxxii  INTRODUCTION

even  right  in  itself  though  a  source  of  weakness  in
vital  controversies,  is  far  from  being  the  only  obstacle
in  the  way  of  expounding  personal  belief.  The  clear-
est conviction  of  the  need  of  independent  verification
opens  no  royal  road  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  desire.
While  we  are  in  the  region  of  formulated  dogmas,
tradition  and  evidence  may  be  discriminated  with
tolerable  facility :  as  soon  as  we  penetrate  to  the
underlying  region  of  first  principles,  tradition  often
simulates  evidence,  and  evidence  tradition,  because
they  are  closely  intertwined  in  fact.  There  are  but
two  ways  of  avoiding  the  intricacy  of  the  investiga-
tion, both  very  broad  roads,  both  leading  ultimately
to  perdition  ;  the  way  of  openly  or  covertly  renounc-
ing evidence,  and  the  way  of  investing  the  more
palpable  and  tractable  part  of  evidence  with  the
name  and  authority  of  the  whole.  Not  least,  finally,
is  the  difticulty  of  expression.  Everything  personal,
— personal  thought  even  more  than  personal  feeling,
if  the  distinction  is  possible, — is  in  a  measure  abso-
lutely inexpressible;  and  further  is  relatively  inex-
pressible by  reason  of  the  complexities  and  gradations
which  distinguish  vital  from  artificial  structure.  What
can  be  presented  is  after  all  not  so  much  the  personal
conviction  itself  as  a  tentative  exhibition  of  some  of
its  leading  lines,  not  detached  from  the  evidence  but
as  perceptible  through  the  evidence.  Other  modes
of  discussing  these  themes  have  obvious  attractions,
and   have  their   uses  too.     I  wish   only  to    make   it


INTRODUCTION  xxxiii

clear  how  my  own  aim  has  been  to  render  account  of
such  results  as  I  have  myself  been  able  to  attain  ;
and  that,  if  I  have  anywhere  deviated  into  other
courses,  the  deviation  has  been  involuntary.

This  seems  to  be  the  fittest  place  for  one  other
personal  statement.  These  prefatory  remarks,  in-
tended to  elucidate  the  purpose  and  necessary  limi-
tations of  the  lectures  which  succeed,  fall  naturally
into  a  somewhat  neutral  tone,  of  which  the  free  use
of  such  a  word  as  'problem'  may  serve  as  an  example.
The  two  modes  of  speech  are,  it  seems  to  me,  com-
plementary to  each  other ;  and  I  should  have  been
loth  to  put  forth  the  lectures  in  the  new  form  of  a
book  intended  to  be  read,  without  at  the  same  time
forestalling  misconception  by  giving  independently
and  in  contrast  some  clearer  expression  to  antece-
dent processes  of  mind  than  the  proper  character  of
words  preached  would  allow.  Here  therefore  the
language  of  enquiry  is  deliberately  employed,  both
because  it  is  by  contemplating  the  controversy  under
the  form  of  a  problem  that  truth,  whatever  that  truth
may  be,  seems  most  likely  to  be  attained,  and  because
any  essentially  different  language  would  misrepresent
the  manner  in  which,  by  a  habit  which  I  have  neither
the  power  nor  the  wish  to  change,  the  whole  subject
presents  itself  to  my  own  mind.  Experience  fails  to
confirm  the  supposition  that  a  matured  and  assured
belief  on  a  speculative  subject  is  incompatible  with


xxxiv  INTRODUCTION

frequent  and  fresh  reiiitcrrogation  of  the  facts  and
relations  of  facts  which  apparently  sustain  or  contra-
vene it,  under  the  impulse  of  the  new  facts  or  relations
of  facts  which  either  general  or  individual  progress  of
knowledge  and  thought  is  continually  bringing  into
view.  To  have  become  disabled  for  unlearning  is  to
have  become  disabled  for  learning ;  and  when  we
cease  to  learn,  we  let  go  from  us  whatever  of  vivid
and  vivifying  knowledge  we  have  hitherto  possessed.
At  all  events  it  is  only  as  a  learner  to  learners  that
on  these  high  matters  I  can  desire  to  speak.

II.  A  writer  who  endeavours  to  speak  from  his
own  experience  can  have  little  desire  to  affect  his
readers  except  through  the  medium  of  experience
won  in  like  manner  by  and  for  themselves.  He
cannot  pretend  to  minister  to  the  demand  for  trans-
ferable arguments  to  silence  inconvenient  questions
without  or  within.  Impersonality  of  reception  is  for
all  great  issues  as  unprofitable  as  impersonality  of
speech.  In  the  one  case  as  in  the  other  there  is  a
region  within  which  neutrality  and  detachment  are
in  place  :  the  unravelling  of  sophisms  and  the  exhibi-
tion of  misrepresented  or  misinterpreted  external
facts  in  their  true  light  may  render  a  true  and  salu-
tary service  without  the  intervention  of  any  further
exertion  than  what  is  required  for  the  understanding
of  what  is  said.  But  beliefs  worth  calling  beliefs
must  be  purchased  with  the  sweat  of  the  brow.     The


INTRODUCTION  xxxv

easy  conclusions  which  are  accepted  on  borrowed
grounds  in  evasion  of  the  labour  and  responsibility  of
thought  may  or  may  not  be  coincident  with  truth :  in
either  case  they  have  little  or  no  share  in  its  power.

What  is  written  with  a  view  to  being  simply
assented  to  and  adopted  has  advantages  of  definite
form  and  result  denied  to  what  is  written  with  the
hope  of  encouraging  and  aiding  independent  energy
of  heart  and  mind.  This  is  the  hope  which  has
governed  these  lectures ;  and  if  they  do  not  suggest
more  questions  than  they  answer,  their  intention  is
not  fulfilled.  I  could  not  willingly  be  instrumental
in  supplying  ready  nourishment  to  the  credulity
which  is  truly  said  to  be  a  dangerous  disease  of  the
time.  The  vast  multitudes  of  simple  Christian  people
who  know  no  difficulties,  and  need  know  none  for
themselves,  are  of  course  not  in  question  here.  Fun-
damental enquiries  constitute  no  part  of  their  duty;
and  though  the  exemption  disqualifies  them  for  some
among  the  higher  offices  of  service  to  their  fellows,  it
leaves  them  perhaps  the  more  capable  of  others,
according  to  the  Divine  allotment  of  various  responsi-
bility. But  the  easy  belief,  the  easy  disbelief,  the
easy  acquiescence  in  suspense  between  belief  and
disbelief,  which  infect  those  other  multitudes  upon
whom  the  burden  of  asking  themselves  whether  the
faith  of  the  Church  is  true  or  not  true  has  been  laid,
are  manifestations  of  a  single  temper  of  mind  which
ought  to  cause  Christians   more   disquiet   than   thq


xxxvi  INTRO  D  UC  TION

growing  force  of  well  weighed   hostility.     Owing  to
the    deceptiveness    of   words    credulity    is    popularly
imputed  to  those  only  who  land  themselves  on   the
Christian  side ;  though  the  same  impatient  indolence
of  investigation,  the  same  willingness  to  choose  and
espouse  or  neglect  evidence  in  obedience  to  proclivi-
ties   of  outward    association,    may    lead    equally    in
different  temperaments  and  circumstances  to  any  one
of  the  three  positions.     But  it  is  from  the  credulity
of  Christians  that  the  Christian  faith  suffers  most  in
days  of  debate ;  and  it  is  well  when  any  who  might
have    helpfully    maintained    its    cause    among   their
neighbours,  had  they  not  been  disabled  by  too  facile
acquiescence,  are  impelled   to  plunge  into  the   deep
anew.      There    is    not    indeed    and    cannot    be    any
security  that  they  will  emerge  on  the  Christian  side :
in  human  minds  truth  docs  not  always  win  the  pre-
sent victory,  even  when  it  is  faithfully  pursued.     But
whatever  be  the  present   result  to  themselves  or  to
others  through  them,  it  is  not  possible  that  they  or
that  any  should  fall  out  of  the  keeping  of  Him  who
appointed  the  trial :    and  to  the  Church  any  partial
loss  that  may  arise  is  outweighed  by  the  gain  from
those  whose  faith  has  come  to  rest  on  a  firmer  foun-
dation.    Truth  cannot  be  said  to  prevail  where  it  is
assented  to  on  irrelevant  or  insufficient  grounds ;  and
the  surest  way  to  evoke   its   power   is   to   encourage
the  strenuous  confronting  of  it  with  personal  life  and
knowledge.


INTRODUCTION  xxxvii

III.  The  preference  for  personal  efforts  of  appre-
hension as  the  base  alike  of  speech  and  of  reception
of  speech  depends  ultimately  on  the  true  nature  of
Christian  evidences  taken  as  a  whole.  The  problem
of  Christian  evidences  is  immeasurably  simplified  by
neglecting  either  the  credentials  or  the  contents  of
the  Christian  faith  ;  and  thus  it  is  not  surprising  that
controversy  has  for  the  most  part  oscillated  from  the
one  topic  to  the  other,  partly  in  mere  reaction  from
the  preceding  stage  of  controversy,  partly  in  direct
accord  with  the  philosophy  prevailing  at  the  time.
Each  mode  of  simplification  is  however  bought  by
the  suppression  of  essential  fact ;  and  a  clear  recog-
nition of  the  complexity  and  wide  range  of  the
problem    is    the    prime    condition    of  its   successful

solution.

******


BoyAHGe'ic  ATreKYHceN  haaac  AdfW  AAnGeiAC,  eic  to  elwAi

HMAC  AnApXHN   TINA  TOaN  AYTOy  KTICMATCON.

Of  His  own  will  He  engendered  us  by  a  word  of  truth,  that
we  might  be  a  kind  of  firstfruits  of  His  creatures.

ST  JAMES.


XplCTOyOYN   nAOONTOC  CApKI   Ka'i  YMeTc  THN    AYTKN  GNNOIAN

onAicAcOe,  oTi  6  nABooN  CApKi  nenAYTAi  AMApriAic

Christ  therefore  having  suffered  unto  the  flesh,  equip  ye  also
yourselves  with  the  same  mind,  for  he  that  hath  suffered  unto
the  flesh  hath  ceased  unto  sins.

ST    PETER.


In  o)  e'ciM  nANTGC  oi  GHCAYpo'i  THc  co(})iAC  ka'i  pNtoceoac
AnoKpY^oi.

In  whom  are  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge
hidden.

ST    PAUL.


Ae'rei    AYTcp    0OOMAC
Kypie,    ofK    oiAAMeN    noy   YrrA'reic-

nWC     OrAAMGN     THN      OAON  ;

Ae'rei    AYTcp  Mhcoyc

'ErOi      eiMI      H     (3Adc     KAi     H     AAH'GeiA     KAI     A     ZWh''

OYAeic    epxeiAi    rrpdc    ton    nAiepA    ei    mh    Ai    eMo?.


H.  T^

^0


Thomas  saith  to  him
Lord,  we  know   not  whither  thou  goest:

HOW     KNOW     WE     the    WAY?

Jesus   saith   to   him
I   AM   the   Way   and   the   Truth   and   the  Life:

NO  ONE  COMETH  UNTO  THE  FaTHER  SAVE  THROUGH  ME.

John  xiv  5,  6


LECTURE    I

/  AM  THE   Way.

The  Gospel  in  all  its  parts  and  all  its  forms
makes  provision  for  the  infinite  future  by  giving
answer  to  finite  questions  already  asked.  The  same
character  is  stamped  on  the  written  records  in  which
it  is  conveyed.  There  too  human  search  precedes
Divine  revelation.  The  words  of  our  Lord  belong
more  to  dialogue  than  to  discourse ;  and  it  is  seldom
possible  to  arrive  at  their  principal  meaning  while
they  are  treated  as  solitary  aphorisms,  without  a
history,  and  therefore  without  a  purpose.  The
definite  fitness  with  which  they  were  first  spoken
is  the  measure  of  their  lasting  power,  and  even  of
their  universality.

On  the  other  hand  few  if  any  of  the  questions
addressed  to  our  Lord  received  an  answer  in  the
shape  that  was  desired.  It  is  not  enough  to  say
that  His  merciful  wisdom  withheld  such  replies  as
might  have  proved  injurious  to  the  moral   state  of

I — 2


4  THE  WAY

the  questioners.  The  repHes  which  He  gave  were
not  merely  more  profitable  but  more  true,  and  more
apposite  in  their  truth,  than  any  others  could  have
been.  It  is  an  idle  fancy  that  to  what  seems  a  clear
and  positive  question  there  must  needs  be  some-
where a  clear  and  positive  answer  of  pure  truth.
The  necessity  exists  only  for  the  most  abstract  or
the  most  concrete  things.  All  questions  in  which
the  spiritual  realm  has  any  part  contain  within  them
assumptions  in  thought  and  in  word ;  and  these
assumptions  cannot  but  be  more  or  less  affected
by  human  infirmity.  An  answer  which  tacitly
ratified  all  assumptions  would  convey  substantial
falsehood  under  at  best  the  form  of  truth.  Its
barren  show  of  justice  to  the  question  would  involve
injustice  to  the  questioner.

For  every  questioner  who  is  not  the  merest
sophist,  if  indeed  we  dare  make  that  exception,
is  concentrically  manifold,  self  within  self;  and  the
question  which  alone  he  is  able  to  present  in  words  is
but  a  rude  symbol  of  the  question  in  his  mind,  as  this
again  is  but  a  rude  symbol  of  the  whole  search  within.
The  verbal  question  is  not  for  that  reason  slighted
or  condemned  by  the  Divine  answerer.  Its  very
imperfections  belong  to  it  as  a  necessary  part  of
that  perpetual  seeking  which  is  the  condition  of  ail
progress  and  therefore  of  all  spiritual  life.  But  His
constant  aim  is  less  to  give  present  satisfaction  than
to  seize  on  the  present  demand  as  an  opportunity


THE   WA  V


5


for  initiation  into  a  future  and  progressive  satisfaction,
to  be  vouchsafed  to  ripening  powers  and  expanding
knowledge.  Every  question  has  some  relation  to  the
universe  of  truth;  and  the  truest  answer  is  that  which
best  conducts  from  the  one  into  the  other.

Among  the  questioners  in  the  Gospels,  who  stand
in  various  positions  towards  the  Lord  as  He  moves
in  the  midst  of  them,  the  chief  place  is  held  by  those
called  Disciples  or  learners.  They  saw  in  Him,  as
did  others,  both  the  Teacher  or  Rabbi  and  the  Lord
or  Master.  What  distinguished  them  from  others
was  the  clearer,  fuller,  and  so  to  speak  more  personal
sense  which  these  conventional  titles  assumed  in  their
minds  and  on  their  lips.  The  teaching  and  the  ruling
which  they  received  entered  deeply  into  their  hearts,
and  awoke  new  activities  within  them,  which  in  turn
bound  them  faster  to  the  Teacher  and  Lord.  As
discipleship  grew  stronger,  the  personal  and  com-
prehensive relation  almost  absorbed  the  more  ex-
ternal and  partial  relation  ;  the  Teacher  was  for  the
most  part  forgotten  in  the  Lord.  The  single  outward
act  by  which  the  inward  character  of  discipleship  was
signified  is  'following':  the  command  "Follow  me"
included  all  that  came  after.  He  passed  along  the
way  as  the  head  of  a  company :  His  disciples  were
with  Him  and  yet  behind  Him.  There  were  various
degrees  of  adherence  among  those  who  were  thus
attracted    out    of    the    indifferent    multitude.      Some


6  THE  WAY

continued  disciples  for  a  shorter  or  a  longer  time,
and  then  walked  no  more  with  Him.  Others  were
still  holding  fast  to  Him  when  the  last  evening  of
His  earthly  life  closed  in.

The  supper  of  that  last  evening  was  eaten  with  the
twelve  who  were  called  the  Disciples  by  preeminence,
disciples  in  whom  the  character  of  discipleship  was
most  fully  shewn.  The  Lord  had  chosen  them  out  of
the  general  body  of  His  disciples  with  a  double  pur-
pose, as  St  Mark  distinctly  tells  us,  that  they  might
be  specially  attached  to  His  own  person,  and  that  He
might  send  them  forth  out  of  His  immediate  pre-
sence as  heralds  and  envoys  to  distribute  His  word
and  power.  In  this  second  capacity  He  named  them
apostles,  and  sent  them  forth  at  once  on  a  prelusive
apostolic  mission.  But  their  apostleship  was  not  and
could  not  be  a  promotion  out  of  discipleship.  After
their  mission  they  became  disciples  more  than  ever.
They  understood  more  clearly  what  it  was  to  be
disciples,  and  entered  on  a  higher  stage  at  once  of
intimacy  and  of  dependence.  The  accession  of
apostleship  involved  the  perpetuity  and  the  increase
of  discipleship.

From  the  Last  Supper  and  the  incidents  which
accompanied  it  discipleship  to  the  Lord  received  its
permanent  consecration  ;  and  from  the  words  which
were  then  spoken  till  the  departure  into  the  garden
its  articulate  interpretation.  In  the  upper  room  in
the    midst   of  the    crowded    city   the   disciples  were


THE  WAY  7

assembled  together  alone  with  the  Lord,  that  they
might  learn  how  to  find  their  way  in  the  outer
throng.  They  were  lifted  for  a  season  on  high  apart
from  enemies  and  neutrals  and  even  other  disciples,
that  when  they  resumed  their  place  among  their
fellows  they  might  not  be  dragged  down  by  the
world  which  they  were  appointed  to  raise  up.

Judas  had  gone  out.  The  glory  of  the  Son  of
man,  and  of  God  in  Him,  had  been  announced.
Then  the  Lord,  presiding  at  the  table  as  the  head  of
a  family,  recalled  the  affrighted  Eleven  to  themselves:
"Little  children,"  He  said,  "yet  a  little  while  I
am  with  you."  These  first  words  of  tenderness,
reaffirming  the  bond  of  their  life  which  had  seemed  to
be  falling  to  pieces,  prepared  them  at  the  same  time
to  hear  of  that  change  in  the  form  of  their  relations
to  Him  which  was  to  be  the  starting-point  of  His
remaining  teaching.  He  declared  it  in  words  that  for
the  moment  placed  these  His  beloved  disciples  beside
the  hostile  Jews  of  whom  He  had  said  that  they
should  die  in  their  sins  :  "  Ye  shall  seek  me,  and  as  I
said  to  the  Jews,  Whither  I  go,  ye  cannot  come,  I  say
to  you  also  now."  He  passed  on  at  once  to  give
a  new  commandment,  the  foundation  for  which  was
only  now  completely  laid,  but  the  necessity  and
stringency  of  which  would  soon  be  grievously  appa-
rent; the  commandment  to  prove  the  reality  of  their
discipleship  by  bringing  forth  its  proper  fruit,  that  is,
by  loving  one  another.     If  they  had  been  intelligently


8  THE  WAY

receiving  into  themselves  the  love  which  He  had  been
pouring  forth  upon  them  with  this  very  end  in  view,
the  breaking  of  the  bond  hitherto  provided  in  His
visible  presence  would  leave  them  still  endowed  for
holding  together  on  a  common  course,  still  true  repre-
sentatives of  Him  to  mankind.

Here  first  the  disciples  broke  in  with  their  ques-
tions. St  Peter,  foremost  as  usual,  impatient  of  the
unexpected  commandment  which  seemed  to  him  to
be  a  wandering  from  the  engrossing  theme  of  the
discourse,  brought  back  the  naked  fact  of  departure  :
"  Lord,  whither  goest  thou  .?"  He  received  for  answer
the  double  assurance  that  he  could  not  follow  now,
but  that  he  should  follow  afterward.  Again  he
flung  aside  the  promise  of  the  future,  and  demanded
the  reason  of  his  inability  to  follow  instantly,  profess-
ing his  readiness  to  suffer  death  for  his  Lord.  His
dream  was  still  of  an  individual  discipleship  and  an
individual  martyrdom,  in  the  pride  of  which  he  was
too  willing  to  draw  himself  away  from  his  fellow-
disciples,  and  to  forget  altogether  the  world  which
he  had  to  help  to  save.  The  personal  testimony
proffered  after  this  fashion  was  itself  fallacious  :  it
argued  a  self-knowledge  so  slight  and  delusive  that
that  Why  was  of  necessity  asked  in  vain.  One
season  of  probation  was  indeed  over,  but  another
with  sharper  searchings  was  already  coming  into
its  place.  The  sifting  as  wheat  had  as  yet  scarcely
begun.


THE  WAY  9

After  this  first  interruption  the  Lord  took  up  His
discourse  again  in  words  of  peace.  A  distrustful
alarm  had  arisen  at  the  outset  when  it  was  declared
that  one  of  the  disciples  should  deliver  up  the  Lord,
while  each  feared  himself  and  feared  every  neigh-
bour. It  must  have  taken  a  new  but  hardly  less
disturbing  shape  when  the  sop  disclosed  the  mind
of  Judas,  and  the  circle  of  the  Twelve  was  broken.
It  could  hardly  be  dispelled  even  by  the  tenderness
of  the  language  conveying  the  tidings  that  the  Head
Himself  should  presently  depart  from  among  them.
Accordingly  He  now  began  v/ith  bidding  their  heart
not  be  troubled  ;  and  as  He  had  before  taught  love
among  themselves,  so  now  He  taught  faith,  faith
resting  on  God  and  on  Himself.  Then  He  returned
to  the  subject  of  His  departure,  shewing  how  its
nature  and  purpose  justified  the  two-fold  faith,  and
converted  the  seeming  abandonment  into  a  fresh
token  of  attachment.  The  separation.  He  explained,
was  intended  to  lead  to  future  reunion  on  a
higher  stage  ;  and  meanwhile  it  was  no  disappear-
ance into  darkness :  "  Whither  I  go,  ye  know  the
way."

Again  the  question  of  a  disciple  gave  a  new
turn  to  the  discourse.  But  this  time  we  hear  not
personal  impatience  but  calm  sensible  bewilderment.
"Thomas  saith  unto  Him,  Lord,  we  know  not
whither  thou  goest :  how  know  we  the  way  ? "  It
is  almost  as  though  it  were  an  argument  speaking


lo  THE   WA  V

rather  than  a  man.  Yet  the  argument  was  no
mere  sophism :  there  was  a  genuine  perplexity
within,  and  it  arose  out  of  an  existing  difficulty.
The  unwillingness  to  forego  the  use  of  reason,
even  when  it  weighed  in  the  balance  the  Lord's
own  words,  was  not  an  impulse  that  the  Lord
could  simply  rebuke.  The  desire  to  try  the  truth
of  what  had  been  received  was  a  gift  needed  for
His  disciples  no  less  than  the  eagerness  of  St
Peter.  Each  quality  had  to  be  brought  into
subordination  to  the  supreme  faith,  that  it  might
be  purified  from  base  admixtures.  It  needed  to
be  cultivated  and  trained,  but  in  no  wise  to  be
extinguished.  And  so  the  answer  given  to  St
Thomas  in  the  first  instance  was  liot  a  personal
expostulation  but  the  statement  of  an  universal  and
unchanging  truth :  "  I  am  the  Way  and  the  Truth
and  the  Life  ;  no  one  cometh  unto  the  Father  save
through  me."

The  universality  of  announcement  proceeds  here
as  elsewhere  from  fitness  of  answer.  The  discourse
throughout  receives  its  form  from  the  peculiar  cir-
cumstances of  the  hour :  it  looks  back  to  the  last
common  meal  which  has  just  been  eaten,  and  forward
to  the  separation  which  will  have  begun  before  the  sun
rises.  But  the  teaching  demanded  by  the  hour  has
been  leading  the  thoughts  of  the  disciples  downwards
and  inwards  to  a  wider  range  of  contemplation  and
a  truth  which  is  independent  of  times  and  seasons.


THE  WAY  n

"  Whither  1  go  ye  cannot  come,"  Why  ?  Because
"  I  go  my  way  to  make  ready  a  place  for  you."
How  ?  Seeing  that  "  I  am  the  Way  and  the  Truth
and  the  Life " ;  and  that  "  no  one  cometh  unto  the
Father  save  through  me."  Within  the  threefold
saying  itself  there  is  the  same  movement  downwards
and  inwards  towards  what  is  most  fundamental  and
comprehensive  as  in  the  preliminary  steps  which
have  led  to  it :  "  I  am  the  Way  "  as  being  the  Truth  ;
"  I  am  the  Truth "  as  being  the  Life.  Then  in  the
last  clause  there  is  a  return  to  that  idea  of  going,
now  changed  to  coming,  on  which  the  verse  is
founded ;  and  the  three  preceding  announcements
are  gathered  up  in  terms  of  the  first  into  a  single
statement  which  is  in  form  a  negation.  But  a  fur-
ther step  is  simultaneously  taken  :  by  the  culminating
utterance  of  the  Father's  Name  the  one  ultimate
goal  of  the  one  journey  is  announced,  whither  Christ
Himself  goes,  and  whither  He  brings  all  that  has
been  given  into  His  hand.

These  four  declarations  of  Christ  provide  us  with
ample  materials  for  study  on  four  successive  occasions.
Each  has  its  own  distinct  sense,  while  each  would
be  barely  intelligible  without  the  aid  of  the  others.
In  the  four  together  is  expressed  the  Christian  view
of  human  existence  as  beheld  in  one  primary  aspect.
The  truth  which  they  combine  to  set  forth  is  not  one
of  those  lesser  truths  which  can  in  any  sense  be
either   proved    or   disproved.      Its  evidence  is  to  be


12  THE  WAY

found  in  the  light  which  it  brings,  far  more  than  in
any  light  which  it  receives.

Thus  far  we  have  been  endeavouring  to  appre-
hend in  outline  the  historical  position  which  must  be
held  steadily  in  view  in  any  attempt  to  interpret
rightly  the  three-fold  and  four-fold  revelation  of
Christ  and  of  all  things  in  Him.  The  next  step  is
to  consider  the  immediate  sense  of  His  first  word
concerning  Himself:  and  for  this  purpose  we  must
examine  more  closely  the  contents  of  His  preceding
exhortation  to  faith,  which  had  been  interrupted  by
the  question  of  St  Thomas.

The  new  call  for  faith  arose  out  of  the  impending
separation  between  the  Lord  and  the  disciples.  Yet
the  separation  was  in  fact  directly  involved  in
the  journey  or  passage  which  He  was  making
throughout  His  earthly  life.  If  it  was  a  real  journey,
and  not  an  aimless  wandering,  it  must  have  a  definite
beginning  and  a  definite  end.  For  us  this  beginning
and  this  end  are  laid  down  by  the  Evangelist  in
the  weighty  sentences  which  introduce  his  narrative
of  the  last  evening,  when  he  refers  the  Lord's
acts  during  the  supper  to  His  knowledge  that  the
hour  was  come  that  He  should  pass  from  this  world
unto  the  Father,  and  again  to  His  knowledge  that
He  came  out  from  God  and  was  going  unto  God.
But  this  comment  of  the  Evangelist  dates  from  a
later    retrospect.     As   yet    no   such    declaration    had


THE  IV  A  V  13

been  made  by  the  Lord  to  the  disciples,  who  were
desiring  to  keep  Him  with  them  in  the  world.  To
the  unbelieving  Jews  He  had  spoken  of  His  'going';
and  once  to  the  officers  sent  by  the  chief  priests
and  Pharisees  to  catch  Him,  that  they  might  expel
Him  from  the  world,  He  had  said,  "Yet  a  little
while  I  am  with  you,  and  I  go  unto  Him  that  sent
me."  But  this  idea  of  a  return  home  from  a  mission
abroad  is  changed  for  another  now  when  He  is
speaking  peace  to  His  own  disciples.  The  character
in  which  He  speaks  is  not  that  of  an  envoy  but
of  a  Son  ;  and  the  earth  itself  is  no  longer  a  distant
or  foreign  shore,  but  lies  within  the  heavenly  precincts:
the  interval  remains,  but  it  is  subordinated  to  a
mightier  comprehension.  He  calms  the  tumult  of
the  disciples'  hearts  by  pointing  to  the  wide  compass
of  His  Father's  house.  In  one  of  its  'mansions',  its
abiding-places  for  the  stages  of  the  journey,  He  and
they  are  reclining  and  speaking.  His  departure  would
be  only  to  another  abiding-place  within  the  same  vast
house ;  or  at  least  to  what  would  be  to  them  another
abiding-place  though  the  word  should  cease  to  be
appropriate  as  applied  to  Himself.  He  speaks  not  of
another  place  to  which  He  is  going,  but  of  going  His
way  that  He  might  prepare  a  place  for  them,  that
where  He  is  they  also  may  be.  Thus  in  what  He  says
of  His  own  journey  He  keeps  out  of  sight  all  distinct
images  of  locality ;  and  even  when  He  refers  to
their  journey  to  come.  He  at  last  resolves  the  place


14  THE  WAY

to  be  prepared  for  them  into  a  simple  sharing  of  His
presence.

By  these  words,  "  that  where  I  am,  ye  also  may
be",  He  had  led  them  back  at  once  to  the  ground
of  their  dismay  and  to  the  single  sentence  in  which
He  had  first  recalled  them  to  a  true  sense  of  the
crisis ;  "  Little  children,  yet  a  little  while  I  am  with
you."  Their  fear  was  that  they  were  about  to  lose
that  which  as  yet  they  possessed,  that  is,  the  being
with  Him ;  and  so  He  taught  them  that  their  being
with  Him  was  itself  a  purpose  of  His  departure.
As  yet  it  was  hardly  possible  for  them  to  feel  the
difference  between  His  being  with  them  where  they
were,  and  their  being  with  Him  where  He  was.
That  He  should  be  with  them  where  they  were  had
been  the  necessary  commencement  of  His  work ;
and  they  naturally  craved  perpetuity  for  that  state,
the  only  manner  of  His  presence  with  which  they
were  hitherto  acquainted.  But  their  craving,  the
form  of  their  desire,  must  needs  be  disappointed
if  the  substance  of  their  desire  was  to  be  fulfilled,
and  if  Christ's  own  work,  which  coincided  with  the
substance  of  their  desire,  was  to  be  accomplished.
It  was  indispensable  that  He  should  take  them  unto
Himself  that  so  they  might  pass  to  being  where  He
was.  That  was  the  transition  now  coming  into  sight
in  His  person',  the  transition  from  a  presence  taking
its  character  from  their  circumstances  to  a  presence
taking  its  character  from  His.     In  this  thought  the


THE  WAY  15

end  of  His  impending  journey  was  sufficiently  ex-
pressed for  the  immediate  need.  The  particulars  of
its  progress,  more  especially  of  its  later  issues,  must
remain  unknown  to  the  disciples.  But  the  Lord
instantly  reminded  them  that  they  had  by  this  time
the  means  of  ascertaining  the  direction  of  the  journey
from  that  portion  of  the  road  which  was  already
manifest  to  them.  In  all  that  had  met  their  senses
or  minds  or  hearts  during  their  discipleship,  and  in
all  that  was  in  prospect  now,  not  unillumined  by
prophecy  and  vision,  the  requisite  knowledge  was
already  given.     "  Whither  I  go,  ye  know  the  way."

St  Thomas  in  the  question  which  he  interposed
had  clung  literally  to  the  figure.  The  conditions  of
locality  which  the  Lord  used  freely  and  discarded
freely,  as  symbols  of  a  truth  which  could  be  only
symbolically  conveyed,  became  to  the  disciple  the
entire  reality.  In  his  eyes  the  journey  must  be  like
one  from  land  to  land  or,  as  we  might  say,  from
planet  to  planet.  It  was  certain  that  neither  he  nor
his  fellow-disciples  knew  to  what  spot  of  space  the
Lord  was  going:  how  then,  he  asked,  could  he  or
they  know  the  road,  the  way,  by  which  He  would
have  to  travel  t  He  detached  the  single  phrase  from
all  that  led  up  to  it  and  illustrated  it.  The  words  of
encouragement  which  he  had  heard  uttered  in  the
same  breath  went  for  nothing.  He  had  no  ears  for
the  faith  that  was  to  calm  down  the  troubling  of
heart,  or  even  for  the  promise  of  reunion.


l6  THE  WAY

Such  at  least  was  the  character  of  his  verbal
question,  the  question  which  admitted  of  no  answer.
Yet  beneath  this  literalism  of  speech  there  must  have
been,  in  him  and  in  the  others,  a  sincere  perplexity
at  the  readiness  with  which  the  Lord  faced  the
apparent  cutting  off  of  His  work,  while  as  yet  it  was
apparently  little  more  than  begun.  And  again  there
was  evidently  a  still  stronger  perplexity  about  the
future  which  awaited  a  disciple  of  Christ.  He  could
not  forget  that  when  he  followed  Jesus  of  Nazareth
he  had  been  drawn  away  from  his  old  life  and  placed
in  a  new  life.  Probably  there  was  no  wish  to  turn
back  ;  but  there  was  a  helplessness  as  to  what  was  to
be  done  next.  He  had  been  leaning  on  the  personal
direction  of  Jesus ;  and  he  had  no  perception  now
of  what  was  to  come  when  that  personal  direction
should  be  withdrawn.  The  inherited  ways  of  Galilean
custom  had  already  lost  their  sufficiency.  That  im-
palpable but  potent  guidance  which  we  all  derive
from  the  ways  of  men  around  us,  from  their  usual
thoughts  and  feelings  and  habits,  mingling  on  the
one  hand  with  what  he  had  received  from  his  parents
and  forefathers,  and  on  the  other  with  the  lesser
variations  made  by  the  details  of  his  own  individual
life  before  the  preaching  of  John, — all  this  had  ceased
to  be  helpful  now.  The  Master's  voice  had  taken  its
place :  how  was  he  to  shape  his  course  when  the
Master's  voice  could  no  longer  be  heard  .-*

Thus  the  inward  doubts  of  the  disciples,  so  far  as


THE  WAY  17

they  are  represented  in  St  Thomas,  were  at  least
two,  the  announced  separation  being  the  occasion  of
both.  They  desired  to  know  both  whither  their  Lord
was  bound,  and  also  what  they  were  themselves  to  do
when  He  was  gone.  The  former  of  these  questions
alone  found  utterance  in  St  Thomas's  words.  But  the
Lord,  who  perceived  the  current  of  his  thoughts,  met
both  questions  at  once  by  an  answer  which  seemed  to
take  account  only  of  that  which  had  not  been  uttered.
The  way  hitherto  mentioned  was  the  way  which  He
was  Himself  to  go :  the  way  which  He  now  declared
was  the  way  which  His  disciples  were  to  go  :  "I  am
the  Way  "  ; — the  Way  in  every  sense ;  for  thee,  and  for
all  the  Eleven,  and  for  all  my  disciples,  and  for  all
men.

Here  lies  at  once  the  difficulty  of  the  passage  and
the  key  to  its  meaning.  A  true  answer  could  not  in
the  nature  of  things  be  given  to  either  question  with-
out the  other.  On  the  one  hand  the  way  of  Christ
in  His  own  person,  so  far  as  it  can  be  known  to  us,
is  inseparable  from  the  destiny  of  those  whom  He
draws  to  Himself.  On  the  other  hand  no  one  can
discern  a  true  way  for  himself  except  so  far  as  he
discerns  it  in  relation  to  an  universe  of  greater  ways
which  all  meet  in  one  Divine  Way.  The  way  of  man
is  known  only  so  far  as  the  way  of  God  is  known.
To  learn  by  experience  the  identity  of  the  two  ways
is  to  learn  the  supreme  lesson  of  life.

If  this  strict  interpretation  of  Christ's  saying  is
II.  L.  2


i8  THE  WAY

difficult  to  grasp  through  words,  yet  no  other  will
either  account  for  the  association  of  the  Way  with
the  Truth  and  the  Life,  or  accord  with  the  historical
position.  The  inadequacy  of  some  obvious  dilutions
of  the  sense  will  appear  as  soon  as  they  are  examined.
First,  Christ  could  not  mean  "  I  shall  still  and  always
be  your  Guide."  There  were  two  reasons  why  He
should  neither  say  nor  mean  this.  He  would  have
seemed  to  be  promising  a  continuance  of  just  that
order  of  things  which  was  coming  to  an  end  ;  whereas
His  purpose  was  to  wean  the  disciples  from  the  habit
and  need  of  recurring  to  an  external  leader  as  the  sole
director  of  their  motions.  But  further,  He  was  about
to  speak  to  them  of  another  Guide  whom  He  would
send  to  them  from  the  Father,  one  whose  guidance
should  be  after  a  different  manner  from  His  own,
adapted  to  the  new  stage  in  their  training,  while
leading  towards  the  same  end.  He  could  not  promise
still  to  be  their  guide,  without  confusing  their  thoughts
about  that  other  Paraclete,  whom  it  was  needful  that
they  should  recognise  as  clearly  as  they  recognised
Himself

Nor,  secondly,  would  it  have  availed  for  Christ  to
call  Himself  here  the  Example.  The  word  will  bear
a  true  and  innocent  sense ;  but  only  in  proportion  as
it  is  removed  from  the  idea  of  a  model  and  brought
near  to  the  idea  of  a  way.  "  Whither  I  go,"  He  had
assured  St  Peter,  "  thou  canst  not  now  follow  me,
but  thou  shalt  follow  me  afterward."     More  distinctly


THE  WAY  19

on  a  former  occasion  He  had  said,  "Take  up  my
yoke  upon  you," — the  yoke  which  I  carry, — "  and  learn
from  me."  But  passages  hke  these  go  far  beyond
imitation.  Even  under  the  peculiar  circumstances
of  the  previous  discipleship  imitation  had  always
been  subordinate.  In  so  far  as  Christ  had  been  the
Example  to  His  disciples,  this  character  had  been
but  one  part  or  aspect  of  His  relation  to  them  as
Teacher,  and  His  teachership  one  part  or  aspect
of  His  relation  to  them  as  Lord.  In  the  cominsf
time  these  relations  would  continue,  but  transformed
and  on  another  scale.  The  marvellous  expansion
which  Christ's  lordship  would  undergo  would  affect
all  which  it  included.  His  office  as  Teacher  and  as
Example.  The  work  begun  by  Him  was  to  be
carried  on  by  those  who  had  learned  from  Him  ;  but
it  was  to  be  carried  on  under  every  variation  of  time
and  place  and  circumstance.  Each  act  of  true
apostleship  would  lead  further  away  from  the  origi-
nal external  conditions,  and  render  more  indispen-
sable the  interpretative  office  of  the  Spirit.  The
outward  fashion  in  which  the  Lord  had  shewn  Him-
self would  be  profitable  only  according  as  it  was
studied  as  the  means  of  coming  to  know  Himself,
His  work,  purpose,  and  character,  nay  His  nature  and
being.  No  remembered  or  recorded  incident  of  His
life  in  the  flesh  would  be  without  its  store  of  instruc-
tion concerning  His  perpetual  kingdom.  Yet  imita-
tion of  Him  in  the  strict  sense  would  be  always  at


20  THE   WAY

once  a  delusion  and  a  retrogression.  Knowledge  of
Him  after  the  flesh  must  give  way  to  knowledge
of  Him  after  the  Spirit.

It  was  therefore  impossible  that  Christ  should
mean  "I  am  the  Guide"  or  "I  am  the  Example"
when  He  said  "  I  am  the  Way  ".  Those  phrases  may
exact  a  slighter  effort  of  thought ;  but  only  because
they  belong  at  best  to  a  rudimentary  and  transitory
form  of  truth.  It  was  doubtless  hard  for  those  v/ho
reclined  around  that  table  to  understand  in  what
sense  one  in  fashion  like  themselves  could  say  "  I  am
the  Way".  Perhaps  it  is  equally  hard  for  us  who
have  received  Him  through  the  Creeds  in  His  Divine
majesty.  Whether  spoken  from  the  human  lips  of
Jesus  or  from  the  highest  heaven,  the  words  have
a  perplexing  sound  which  no  Jewish  forms  of  speech
suffice  to  make  clear.  They  must  always  remain
unintelligible  as  applied  to  the  function  of  a  simple
Teacher  or  Ruler.  The  claim  which  they  embody
includes  not  merely  a  set  of  men  moving  in  a
world  but  the  world  itself  which  contains  them.  They
convey  a  doctrine  of  Creation  and  Providence,  not
merely  of  historical  mission:  a  claim  on  the  part
of  the  speaker  to  permanent  supremacy  in  the  whole
manifold  economy  of  circumstance.  They  are  the
practical  and  ethical  expression  of  an  all-embracing
truth  which  we  may  perhaps  apprehend  best  in  the
form  of  two  separate  doctrines  ;  first,  that  the  whole
seeming   maze   of  history  in    nature   and   man,   the


THE  WAY  21

tumultuous  movement  of  the  world  in  progress,  has
running  through  it  one  supreme  dominating  Way ;
and  second,  that  He  who  on  earth  was  called  Jesus
the  Nazarene  is  that  Way.

From  the  absolute  meaning  of  the  words  we  pass
on  to  their  verification  in  the  earliest  Christian  ex-
perience. They  were  spoken  in  the  upper  room  at
Jerusalem  to  men  trembling  between  the  old  and
the  new,  overpowered  with  the  mingled  sense  that
they  were  committed  to  something  indefinitely  great,
and  that  He  on  whom  they  depended  for  light  and
for  strength  was  withdrawing  Himself  from  them.
They  were  spoken  by  One  who  knew  alike  the  hearts
of  His  disciples  and  the  mission  on  which  He  was
sending  them.  As  He  knew  the  exact  nature  of  the
need.  His  words  must  have  been  directed  towards
supplying  it.  It  was  to  action  that  He  had  called  the
disciples,  and  so  the  teaching  which  they  needed
now  must  be  helpful  towards  action.  If  they  were
to  receive  and  publish  a  belief,  yet  it  must  be  a
belief  which  should  kindle  to  action  in  themselves,
and  perpetuate  and  multiply  the  impulse  and  the
enablement  to  action  in  those  who  should  receive
it  at  their  lips.

Now  that  which  most  palsies  the  heart  and  the
limbs  for  action  is  the  doubt  whether  there  be  any
true  'Way',  any  line  of  coherent  purpose  designed
and  achieved  either  in  our  own  lives  or  in  the  larger


22  THE  WAY

sphere  of  the  world  without.  No  doubt  this  is  a
palsy  which  implies  some  measure  of  serious  re-
flexion :  it  is  only  too  easy  to  escape  it  by  being
beneath  it,  if  it  is  hard  to  rise  above  it.  A  blind
immersion  in  the  pleasure  or  profit  of  the  hour,  or
even  the  sedulous  pursuit  of  some  private  and  capri-
cious 'way'  which  may  sometimes  be  accomplished
by  reason  of  the  nearness  or  pettiness  of  its  scope,
will  often  be  sufficient  security.  But  it  could  not  be
so  with  the  disciples,  not  even  with  a  Judas.  Their
eyes,  once  partially  opened  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven,
could  never  be  quite  closed  again.  Henceforth  it
must  be  either  believed  or  not  believed  or  both  at
once  :  it  could  not  be  sunk  out  of  remembrance.  A
necessity  lay  upon  them  of  either  seeing  a  divine  way
in  their  own  lives  and  in  the  course  of  things  around,
or  of  being  wretched  and  helpless  because  they  could
not  see  it

The  belief  in  the  existence  of  such  a  'way'
belonged  to  the  disciples  before  the  ministry  of  Jesus
or  the  preaching  of  the  Baptist ;  for  it  had  descended
to  them  by  inheritance  from  their  forefathers.  They
had  received  it  moreover  not  as  an  abstract  propo-
sition about  human  affairs,  from  which  the  existence
of  a  disposing  God  might  be  inferred,  but  rather  con-
versely as  involved  in  the  ancient  faith  in  the  Lord
God  of  Israel.  The  germ  of  it  was  contained  in  the
faith  of  Abraham  :  it  came  to  them  enlarged  by  each
lesson  of  the  ancestral  history.    The  Psalter  instructed


THE  WAY  23

them  for  the  most  part  in  the  way  of  God  as  it  had
become  known  to  many  an  Israelite  in  the  sum  of
his  personal  experience,  that  life  of  his  which  was
entirely  his  own  and  which  gave  him  his  individuality.
The  Prophets  on  the  other  hand,  and  some  of  the
later  Psalmists,  had  discerned  and  depicted  for  them
the  way  of  God  chiefly  in  the  fortunes  of  their  race
and  the  wider  concourse  of  nations.  In  the  past
history  of  mankind  the  way  of  God,  so  far  as  it
was  visible,  was  visible  as  embodied  in  Israel ;  and  so
far  as  it  had  been  recognised,  had  been  recognised  by
Israel.  In  this  as  in  other  respects  the  Twelve  were
endowed  with  the  gifts  of  the  Old  Covenant.

But  if  the  disciples  were  no  strangers  to  the  idea
of  a  way  of  God  in  either  the  inner  or  the  outer
region,  it  may  well  have  been  with  them,  as  with
others,  that  the  faith  accepted  was  fading  into  a
hollow  tradition  of  what  it  was  proper  and  seemly  to
believe.  All  things  within  and  without  were  tending
to  dissolve  the  ancient  faith.  The  thoughts  and  ways
of  other  nations  had  for  a  considerable  while  been
creeping  in  among  the  beliefs  and  customs  of  the
Jewish  past,  and  it  was  vain  to  exclude  them.  There
was  light  of  some  sort  in  them,  and  who  could  refuse
the  light?  Yet  it  proceeded  from  no  potent  and
unwavering  source,  but  from  a  vague  disorganised
decaying  world  of  thought  and  impulse.  It  shewed
that  the  time  was  come  for  new  growths  of  the  old
truth,  but  it  was  destitute  of  power  to  inspire  them


24  THE  WAY

or  to  govern  them.  Even  those  who  came  in  no
direct  contact  with  the  dissolving  influences  pro-
ceeding from  the  Gentile  inundation,  which  was  over-
flowing Israel,  found  it  harder  than  the  men  of  old
time  had  done  to  trace  the  Divine  footsteps  in
themselves  or  their  people  or  the  nations  without.
Individual  devotion  was  no  longer  sustained  by  the
proud  and  joyful  feeling  of  citizenship  in  a  city  at
unity  with  itself  Thrown  back  on  its  own  resources,
it  shrank  and  wasted  and  came  nigh  to  doubting
whether  what  had  once  been  thought  to  be  the  way
of  God  was  more  than  the  figment  of  a  too  ingenious
piety.  The  outward  signs  of  it  in  truth  were  such  as
it  was  difficult  for  a  simple  Jew  to  recognise.  The
course  which  the  world  was  taking,  and,  worst  of  all,
the  increasing  debasement  of  the  chosen  race,  might
well  seem  to  make  a  way  of  God  in  the  destinies  of
mankind  altogether  incredible.

The  needed  assurance  came  at  last  when  the
Gospel  came.  But  if  it  was  to  be  effectual  to  assure,
it  must  needs  do  more  than  assure.  A  late  repetition  of
the  revelation  granted  to  Psalmists  or  Prophets  would
have  been  of  little  avail,  even  for  restoring  that  which
was  decayed ;  and  far  more  than  this  was  needed.
In  order  to  preserve  and  restore,  it  was  necessary
to  advance.  But  the  advance  in  the  knowledge  of
the  Way  of  God  was  itself  at  once  that  for  which
the  wants  of  the  time  most  urgently  cried  out,
and  for  which  the  counsels  of  God  had  hitherto  been


'    THE  WAY  25

preparing.  The  Cross,  the  Tomb,  and  the  Mount
of  Ascension,  taken  in  conjunction  with  the  works
and  words  which  had  preceded  and  accompanied
them  and  the  descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost  which
followed  them,  not  only  lighted  up  the  Way  of
God  on  earth  but  laid  bare  its  foundations  in  the
Way  of  God  in  the  heavens.  The  fixed  relation  and
action  of  different  '  Persons '  within  the  Godhead,
and  the  age-long  working  out  of  creation  and  re-
demption in  accordance  with  that  fixed  relation  of
Divine  '  Persons ',  were  revealed  as  underlying  all
the  movements  of  created  things.  The  Lord  of  the
disciples  was  found  to  be  the  Sole-born  Son  of  the
Father.  That  which  He  was  as  manifested  to  His
chosen,  including  equally  that  which  He  did  and
that  which  befel  Him,  was  at  once  the  perfect  image
of  human  destiny  and  the  perfect  image  of  the  Divine
Counsel ;  the  Way  in  man,  if  there  be  any  Way  in
man,  and  the  Way  of  God.

Again,  as  the  disciples  found  Christ  to  be  indeed
the  Way,  when  they  looked  for  a  Way  in  relation
to  God,  so  they  were  led  by  personal  experience
to  a  like  result  through  recognition  of  Him  as  the
Way  for  themselves,  according  as  they  sought  for
guidance  in  their  own  lives.  While  we  consider  the
subject  only  as  curious  spectators,  students  of  a
world  that  is  not  our  own,  the  idea  of  Christ  as  the
Way  for  a  handful  of  weak  and  shortlived  mortals
will  appear  to  be  separated  from  the  idea  of  Christ


26  THE  WAY

as  the  universal  Way  of  God  by  an  impassable  chasm,
and  each  will  carry  an  air  of  unreality.  But  in
experience  the  one  is  found  to  lead  to  the  other.
When  the  word  was  first  pronounced,  the  disciples
must  have  received  it  chiefly  as  spoken  with  reference
to  their  own  goings  ;  that  is,  as  an  intimation  of  the
manner  in  which  the  Lord  in  the  fixed  past  and  the
unchanging  eternity  and  the  ordained  future  might
to  themselves  take  the  place  of  the  Lord  whom  they
had  hitherto  known  only  in  a  series  of  ever  changing
presents.  But  the  habit  of  believing  in  Him  as  the
Way  laid  down  for  themselves,  and  of  walking  in
Him  accordingly,  would  more  and  more  turn  their
thoughts  from  their  own  feet  to  their  task  itself  and
its  purpose,  and  so  to  the  dealings  of  God  with
mankind,  and  the  part  therein  assigned  to  Christ  and
disciplcship  to  Christ.  Thus,  not  by  a  verbal  fancy
but  by  the  operation  of  the  Divine  order  in  which
human  nature  has  its  being,  the  words  of  Christ
would  by  degrees  be  filled  out  with  the  loftier  sense
suggested  alike  by  the  language  of  the  prophets  and
the  contemplation  of  a  world-wide  mission,  Christ
the  Way  would  now  mean  Christ  the  Way  of  God  in
human  history;  the  Way  sought  after  and  recognised
and  followed,  however  imperfectly,  by  all  who  strive
to  choose  freely  that  which  God  wills ;  and  the  Way
along  which  the  Almighty  leads  His  unwilling  no
less  than  His  willing  hosts  slowly  on  towards  the
distant  end.


THE  WAY


27


This  necessary  expansion  of  the  individual  Way
into  the  universal  Way  was  likewise  involved  in  the
characteristics  of  Christ's  own  earthly  existence.     At
first  sight   the  departure   might  not  unnaturally  be
identified  with  the  whole  journey,  and  the  journey  be
conceived  as  a  simple  transit  from  point  to  point,  in
which  the  way  itself  would  be  of  no  account  except
as  a  means  of  swift  arrival  at  the  end.     This  neea-
tively  individual  conception  of  the  way  as  affecting
only  him  who  moves  along  it,   if  the  disciples  had
been    allowed    to    acquiesce    in    it,    would    have    not
merely  narrowed   but   inverted    their  faith,   and    the
purpose  which  their  faith  was  meant  to  inspire.     Had
they  learned  to  beHeve  that  the  following  of  Christ
which    still    remained   for  them    meant  simply  their
own    arrival  with    more    or   less    ease    and    speed  at
a  distant    haven    of  rest,  the   greater    part    of  their
past  experience  would  have  been  vain.     No  earnest-
ness of  endeavour  to  lead  others  into  the  same  pur-
pose, however  fruitful  in  blessing  to  themselves  and
to    all  who    listened    to    their    message,  would    have
saved  them  from  the  inward  contradiction  which  ac-
companies the  working  out  of  a  conception  in  itself
radically  untrue.    When  Christ  said  "Whither  I  go,  ye
know  the  way,"  He  was  pointing  not  merely  to  the
goal  but  to  the  portion  of  the  way  already  traversed.
The  departure  was  a  critical  stage  of  the  journey,  but
it  was  not  the  whole  of  it,  and  it  could  not  be  under-
stood by  itself.     His  journey  through  human  life,  as


28  THE  WAY

already  known,  was  not  as  that  of  one  who  speeds  on
his  lonely  course  regardless  of  the  land  which  he  is
traversing.    He  passed  on  not  as  through  a  wilderness
where  all  is  ownerless  and  homeless  save  the  thread
of  way  itself,  but  as  through   His  heavenly  Father's
domain  ;  wherever  He  trod,  He  took  possession  and
exercised  sovereignty  in  His  Father's  name.     And  so
the  way  which  He  left  trodden  in  the  earth,  the  way
which  is  Himself,  was  not  a  means  of  flight  from  a
strange   and  hostile  waste,  but  the   token    and  the
instrument  of  universal  Divine  lordship  and  therefore
of   universal  Divine  care  and  use.     It  was  the  high
way,  the  way  which  bore  witness  to  the  King's  autho-
rity, and  gave  free  movement  as  well  as  guidance  to
the  King's  servants  when  they  went  forth  to  do  His
work  or  came  home  to  His  presence.     The  disciples
who  followed  Him  in  such  a  way,  or  walked  in  Him
as  such  a  way,  were  by  it  brought  into  relations  of
intercourse  and   affection   with    all    that    surrounded
them,  while  they  were  at  the  same  time  led  to  see  it
stretching  forth  into  all  ages  and  all  worlds.

Such  was  the  actual  experience  of  the  disciples.
We  do  not  see  it  all  in  process,  but  we  do  see  it  in
result.  The  written  memorials  of  their  faith,  which
they  have  left  behind  from  various  stages  of  its
growth,  bear  unimpeachable  witness.  The  pregnant
use  of  the  single  phrase  "the  Way"  in  the  Acts  of  the
Apostles  cannot  be  adequately  explained  except  by
their  clear  insight  into  this  character  of  the  Lord  and


THE  WAY  29

His  office.  In  the  other  writings  the  phrase  itself
almost  disappears  ;  but  only  because  the  idea  which
it  represents,  in  conjunction  with  other  ideas  of  the
same  order,  has  been  transfused  into  infinite  render-
ings, and  has  determined  the  whole  structure  of
primitive  Christian  thought  and  feeling.  All  later
forms  of  Christian  doctrine,  starting  from  a  more
partial  and  limited  conception  of  Christ's  relation  to
human  action,  while  they  find  in  the  Apostolic  teach-
ing many  echoes  or  reflexions  of  themselves,  find
also  in  perplexing  abundance  unexpected  turns  and
combinations  of  language  which  they  can  interpret
only  by  explaining  them  away.  This  strange  language
is  for  the  most  part  the  expression  of  instructed  faith
in  Christ  as  the  Way,  or  it  may  be  as  the  Truth  or
the  Life.  It  is  the  native  and  proper  language  of  that
part  of  the  Christian  heritage  which  came  neither  from
Jew  nor  from  Gentile  but  from  the  Gospel  alone.  Like
all  other  language  it  may  be  caught  up  and  repeated
with  conscious  or  unconscious  unreality.  But  so  far
as  it  expresses  a  full  and  sincere  conviction,  it  is  the
language  of  consummate  discipleship.

The  Lord  spoke  the  word :  the  disciples  tried  it
and  found  it  true.  In  the  power  of  it  they  discovered
that  decisive  and  resolute  action  was  open  to  them
after  He  had  ceased  to  be  visibly  in  their  midst.
Weakness,  suffering,  shame,  death  abounded  to  them-
selves :  delay,  disappointment,  decay,  failure  abounded
to  their  enterprises.     But  they  came  to  know  that  all


30  THE   WAY

were  merged  in  Christ,  buried  with  Him  in  His  death
that  they  might  rise  to  a  better  hfe.  Every  excuse
for  devotion  to  their  own  lower  or  higher  welfare  was
nullified,  when  they  saw  that  the  ordering  of  all
events  in  heaven  and  earth  was  conformed  to  the
image  of  that  heavenly  Redeemer  who  had  emptied
Himself  for  their  sake.  None  could  serve  His  person
who  yielded  only  an  unwilling  service  to  His  king-
dom. Yet  the  weight  of  the  world's  future  rested  not
on  their  shoulders  but  on  His.  They  had  but  to  be
faithful  to  Him,  to  His  work  and  to  His  mind  ;  and
they  were  rewarded  by  becoming  partakers  of  His
sorrow  at  the  human  sin  which  they  ever  shared,  and
of  His  joy  at  each  human  victory  over  evil,  whether
they  had  themselves  been  agents  in  it  or  not.

He  was  Himself  their  Way :  while  for  their
guidance  for  walking  in  it  they  had  the  promised
Spirit.  He  supplied  in  Himself  the  fixed  plan  ac-
cording to  which  all  right  human  action  must  be
framed  :  the  Spirit  working  with  their  spirit  supplied
the  ever  varying  shapes  in  which  the  one  plan  had
to  be  embodied.  Utter  obedience  to  the  Father's
will,  utter  love  of  the  brethren,  and  the  utter  sacrifice
of  self  which  is  the  constant  inward  condition  of  both,
remained  to  all  eternity  the  substance  of  every  human
greatness,  as  they  had  been  shewn  to  be  the  powers  by
which  the  Son  of  God  fulfilled  the  work  committed
to  Him  alone:  while  the  wisdom  of  the  Spirit's  teach-
ing cast  them  again  and  again  in  ever  new  moulds.


THE  WAY


31


The  way  on  which  the  disciples  went  forth  in
due  season  to  conquer  the  world  has  been  handed
down  to  us  for  our  instruction  as  regards  the  most
essential  points.  During  their  lifetime  the  march  of
events  was  rapid,  and  the  end  might  almost  seem  to
have  broken  away  from  the  beginning.  Not  less
various  among  one  another  were  their  temperaments
and  manners  of  thinking,  or  the  tasks  which  fell
severally  to  their  lot.  At  each  step  they  had  to  deal
at  once  with  the  perishing  ruins  of  local  custom
and  religion,  through  which  the  several  nations  had
unconsciously  performed  their  respective  tasks  in  the
great  preparation,  and  with  the  shamelessness  among
the  evil,  and  the  aimlessness  among  the  good,  which
followed  the  lapsing  of  the  old  ways  into  worse  than
primitive  savagery.  Yet  the  more  deeply  their  acts
and  discourses  and  letters  and  visions  are  investigated,
with  patient  discrimination  and  comparison  of  each
difference  of  work  and  teaching,  the  stronger  grows
the  conviction  that  throughout  they  together  trod  one
way  themselves,  and  by  the  treading  of  their  feet  left
one  way  indestructibly  impressed  on  the  earth  for  the
Church,  and  therefore  at  last  for  mankind,  for  ever-
more ;  and  that  that  one  way  was  no  other  than  the
One  Incarnate  Lord  Himself.


The  experience  of  those  disciples  was  in  one  sense
unique.     That  outward   and   sensible  disciplcship   of


32  THE  WAY

theirs  was  necessary  once  for  all,  to  be  both  the
unfading  image  of  spiritual  discipleship  and  the
foundation  of  the  written  records  which  were  to
make  it  possible  hereafter.  But  the  question  of
Thomas  and  therefore  the  answer  of  the  Lord  repeat
themselves  incessantly  on  the  largest  and  on  the
smallest  scale.  There  is  a  discipleship  of  the  Church
itself,  the  living  representative  of  the  chosen  company
around  the  table  of  whom  St  Thomas  was  but  a
spokesman.  There  is  also  a  discipleship  of  the
individual  Christian,  who  may  find  a  likeness  of
himself  in  one  or  other  of  the  original  disciples.
Both  the  Church  and  the  Christian  have  to  pass
through  seasons  of  crisis  not  unlike  that  evening
spent  in  the  upper  room,  Divine  probations,  in  which
faith  not  seldom  sinks  and  perishes,  but  which  have
been  given  for  the  renewal  and  enlargement  of  its
powers.  By  considering  the  trial  of  these  two  forms
of  perpetual  discipleship  in  turn,  we  may  be  able  to
learn  in  what  manner  Christ's  word  "  I  am  the  Way  "
is  still  and  always  a  revelation  of  vital  truth.

The  eve  of  the  Passion  is  not  the  only  time  when
Christ  has  seemed  to  His  Church  to  be  departing
from  the  earth  of  which  for  a  while  He  had  been  a
denizen,  and  when  those  whose  course  has  been  in
great  part  shaped  by  the  discipleship  to  Christ  which
surrounded  them  have  felt  with  dismay  that  the
sustaining    habitudes  were  passing  away.     His  own


THE  WAY  33

palpable  presence  in  the  flesh  has  its  counterpart,  at
least  as  regards  the  sense  of  security  which  it  afforded,
in  a  'Christian  world',  an  assemblage  of  nations  where
deference  to  His  Name  and  acquiescence  in  His
authority  receive  full  public  and  private  recognition.
When  it  becomes  manifest  that  a  Christian  world  in
this  sense  is  ceasing  to  exist,  either  because  Christ's
authority  is  becoming  limited  to  a  single  narrow  de-
partment of  individual  life,  or  because  His  right  to
authority  is  questioned  altogether  at  its  fountain-head,
then  the  band  of  His  disciples  may  naturally  feel  as
though  He  were  once  more  leaving  them  to  them-
selves. They  cannot  go  backward  :  if  discipleship  has
not  yet  taught  them  the  Way,  it  has  at  least  disabled
them  for  ever  for  resting  contented  without  a  Way
and  convinced  them  no  less  that  elsewhere  it  is  not  to
be  found.  Yet  it  is  hard  to  see  either  whitherward
the  Lord  is  departing  or  after  what  manner  the  original
command  to  follow  Him  is  henceforth  to  be  obeyed.

The  one  sufficing  encouragement,  the  encourage-
ment which  comes  with  clearer  vision  and  surer
guidance,  is  provided  in  the  answer  of  Christ  to
St  Thomas,  illustrated  by  the  primary  experience
of  which  the  books  of  the  New  Testament  are  the
monument.  As  He  who  had  been  leading  a  chosen
few  along  a  way  which  He  shared  with  them  revealed
Himself  in  that  hour  as  the  one  universal  Way,  so
the  same  revelation,  when  understood  and  embraced
in  its  full  breadth,  delivers  His  Church  from  helpless

II-  L.  3


34  THE  WAY

dependence  on  any  partial  tokens  or  recognitions  of
His  guidance.  It  beckons  onward  not  to  some  laxer
and  feebler  form  of  allegiance  to  Him  as  safer  and
more  lasting;  but  to  a  faith  in  Him,  and  in  the  trea-
sures hidden  in  Him,  both  deeper  and  wider  in  itself,
and  more  complete  in  its  mastery  over  our  whole
nature,  than  any  to  which  we  have  yet  attained.

It  is  not  ill  but  well  for  the  Church  that  some
temporal  and  external  characteristics  which  marked
the  time  of  probation  and  apprenticeship  should
vanish,  even  though  we  can  scarcely  distinguish  their
loss  from  the  loss  of  Him  to  whom  for  long  centuries
they  have  borne  witness.  If  He  takes  away  any
familiar  signs  of  His  presence,  it  is  because  they  are
becoming  hindrances  to  the  ripening  of  discipleship.
New  knowledge  of  Him  has  to  be  learned:  new
works  for  Him  have  to  be  undertaken.  It  is  His
own  voice  which  bids  us  '  arise  and  go  hence',  that
we  may  find  Him  and  follow  Him  elsewhere.

It  is  a  progress  and  a  gain  to  the  Church  to  have
to  consider  how  much  is  involved  in  learning  Christ
as  the  one  Way  which  was  from  the  beginning ;  to
have  to  study  therefore  in  the  Gospel  the  lineaments
of  the  Son  of  Man  with  a  care  and  comprehensive-
ness which  were  not  possible  to  earlier  generations  ;
and  on  the  other  hand  to  have  to  discern  and  follow
the  Way  not  only  as  He  is  manifest  in  the  chosen
body  which  bears  His  name,  but  as  He  abides  hidden
in  the  wide  outlying  universe  of  human  action  and


THE  WAY  35

knowledge.     So  only  can  it  fulfil  its  task  of  moulding
in  secret  the  future  of  human  welfare.

Moreover  the  Church  has  for  its  guidance  a  fresh
accession  of  knowledge  of  the  Way  not  shared  by  the
original  disciples.  It  possesses  its  own  experience  as
they  possessed  and  bequeathed  theirs.  The  history
of  the  Church  from  its  foundation  to  the  present  hour
is  hardly  less  necessary  to  the  Church  at  large  than
the  Gospel  itself,  whatever  it  may  be  to  the  individual
disciple.  For  the  Church  now  to  enquire  concerning
a  Way  for  itself,  without  study  of  the  Way  as  revealed
in  its  own  history,  would  be  as  though  the  apostles
had  stripped  themselves  of  the  memories  of  what
they  had  heard  and  seen  and  looked  upon  and
handled,  by  way  of  preparation  for  going  forth  among
the  nations.  "  Have  I  been  so  long  time  v/ith  you
and  yet  hast  thou  not  known  me.?"  Such  is  the
language  in  which  we  may  still  hear  our  Lord
recalling  us  to  an  undervalued  and  imperfectly  used
experience.  Doubtless  for  the  Church,  as  for  the
first  disciples,  what  lies  before  differs  widely  from
what  lies  behind  :  but  that  which  runs  through  both
alike  is  the  One  Way,  the  same  yesterday  today
and  for  ever ;  to  be  traced  alike  in  the  successes
and  in  the  failures  of  the  past,  and  to  be  followed
unflinchingly  through  whatsoever  unlooked-for  wind-
ings it  leads  among  the  unfolding  hopes  or  fears  of
the  ages  yet  to  come.

And  therefore  once  more  it  is  a  progress  and  a

3—2


36  THE  WAY

gain  for  the  Church  to  have  to  go  forward  in  the
Spirit,  making  experience  that  the  Guide  sent  by
the  Son  from  the  Father  will  never  fail  to  hallow,  to
unite,  and  to  enlighten  the  body  which  is  bold  in
faith  to  make  free  use  of  all  its  heavenly  endowments,
and  in  faith  to  draw  supplies  of  needful  material
from  every  quarter,  so  long  as  it  advances  along  the
Way  which  is  Christ.  For  the  dispensation  of  the
glorified  Christ  is  also  the  dispensation  of  the  Holy
Ghost.  The  Way  and  the  Guide  along  the  Way
were  revealed  together.

The  revelation  of  the  Way  to  those  first  disciples
who  were  also  Apostles  retains  its  complete  force  only
for  the  Church  itself,  the  universal  body  to  whose
stewardship  are  committed  the  mysteries  of  the
kingdom  of  heaven.  But  the  faithfulness  with  which  in
each  generation  the  stewardship  is  exercised  depends
at  last  on  the  degree  in  which  its  members  have
severally  received  the  same  revelation  each  into  his
own  heart,  and  governed  themselves  by  obedience  to
its  light.  A  discipleship  of  some  sort,  nearer  or
more  distant,  has  been  upon  us  all  from  the  earliest
years  ;  and  countless  powers  within  and  without  are
ever  at  work  to  dissolve  its  bands.  It  begins,  happily
and  rightly  begins,  in  tradition  and  custom  :  but  the
growth  of  character  demands  an  independent  life,  and
the  inevitable  change  is  a  true  progress  only  when
the  discipleship  of  custom  becomes  converted   into


THE   WAY  37

the  discipleship  of  intelligent  and  willing  service,  the
recognition  of  the  Way  and  the  walking  in  it.

To  us  in  this  place  the  early  years  or  even  months
of  our  stay  here  precipitate  the  change  in  one
direction  or  another.  The  first  long  probation  is
over.  We  stand  in  the  interval  of  freedom  between
the  personal  subjection  of  childhood  and  youth  and
the  fateful  bondage  of  middle  life,  due  partly  to  uni-
versal necessities  but  still  more  to  the  consequences
of  our  own  acts.  The  leading-strings  have  been
severed.  A  wide  and  various  world  lies  before  us,
with  a  seeming  power  in  ourselves  to  turn  whither-
soever we  will.  At  such  a  time  the  new  sense  of
liberty  well-nigh  revolts  at  the  idea  of  a  Way.  The
delightfulness  of  the  opening  world  depends  in  no
small  measure  on  its  semblance  of  waylessness.  To
stray  deviously  at  will  over  hill  and  dale,  sipping  of
every  fountain,  is  the  almost  acknowledged  ideal  to
which  we  rejoice  to  be  able  to  approximate.

But  in  due  time  the  ways  of  nature  and  the  world
disclose  themselves,  and  we  find  ourselves  insensibly
journeying  along  one  or  more  of  them,  bound  by
heavier  chains  of  custom  without  or  habit  within  than
any  of  which  we  had  experience  at  the  outset :  and
sooner  or  later  the  question  is  heard  demanding  an
answer,  what  is  the  end  of  the  journey,  or  whether  it
has  any  end.  The  choice  given  us,  we  then  find,  was
not  between  wandering  or  journeying,  but  between
journeying  this  way  or  journeying  that.     This  is  the


38  THE  WAY

true  meaning  and  purpose  of  our  temporary  freedom,
which  is  no  dekision  but  a  happy  reality.  What  we
have  to  choose  then  in  the  days  of  choice  is  nothing
less  than  the  character  of  the  bond  which  is  to  make
our  actions  coherent.  To  every  one  whose  thoughts
of  life  are  not  wholly  unworthy  it  is  evident  that  some
bonds  of  action,  some  ways,  are  hateful  and  that
others  are  noble.  But  on  the  actual  surface  of  things
the  forms  of  nobleness  and  hatefulness  are  easily  lost
to  view  in  the  mixed  or  neutral  mass  :  and  perplexi-
ties of  various  kinds  press  upon  us  even  when  we
bend  all  powers  of  thought  and  will  to  finding  out
some  one  way  which  shall  as  it  were  include  all
other  right  ways  and  guide  our  lives  towards  the
highest  end.

Here  again  Christ  meets  us  with  His  inexhaustible
answer,  "  I  am  the  Way  "  ;  and  the  answer,  if  it  gives
food  for  lifelong  meditation,  gives  also  sufficient  light
for  immediate  action.  This  power  it  has  wherever
the  energy  of  self-knowledge  and  self-mastery  is  not
wanting:  and  the  power  increases  in  proportion  as  we
learn  to  bear  in  mind  that  we  are  members  of  a  vast
society,  parts  of  a  vast  universe.  Much  may  remain
dark  to  us ;  but  the  purposes  of  life  receive  a  clear
and  powerful  direction  the  moment  we  believe  that
the  one  supreme  Way  of  life  is  that  Jesus  Christ,
God's  Son,  our  Lord,  who  has  been  made  known  to
us  from  the  first  in  the  Creed.  No  other  single  way,
capable  of  uniting  the  whole  nature  and  life  of  man.


THE  WAY  39

has  yet  been  discovered  or  devised  which  does  not
tend  to  draw  us  down  rather  than  Hft  us  up.  But  if
in  Him  is  shewn  at  once  the  Way  of  God,  so  far  as
it  can  be  intelligible  to  man,  and  the  Way  of  man
according  to  God's  purpose,  then  many  a  plausible
and  applauded  way  stands  condemned  at  once  as  of
necessity  leading  nowhither ;  and  many  a  way  which
promises  little  except  to  conscience  is  glorified  with
Him,  and  has  the  assurance  of  His  victory.  Yet,
when  the  primary  choice  has  once  been  made,  the
labour  is  not  ended.  The  Way  is  no  uniform  external
rule.  It  traverses  the  changes  of  all  things  that  God
has  made  and  is  ever  making,  that  we  may  help  to
subdue  all  to  His  use ;  and  so  it  has  to  be  sought  out
again  and  again  with  growing  fitnesses  of  wisdom  and
devotion.  Thus  the  outv/ard  form  of  our  own  ways
is  in  great  part  determined  for  us  from  without,  while
their  inward  coherence  is  committed  to  our  own
keeping ;  and  the  infinite  life  of  the  Son  of  man  can
transmute  them  all  into  ways  of  God.

The  original  chasm  between  the  human  question
and  the  Divine  answer  is  not  and  cannot  yet  be  more
than  partially  filled  up.  The  purpose  of  the  answer
is  not  merely  to  satisfy  our  want,  but  to  raise  the
manner  of  our  thoughts  by  degrees  to  a  higher  level
of  truth.  It  stands  always  above  and  beyond  the
experience  which  it  illumines.  From  the  first  it  sends
forth  a  quickening  light ;  and  the  light  increases  as
we  advance.     At  each  stage  we  see  a  little  beyond


40  THE  WAY

what  we  have  attained,  but  never  more  :  fresh  insight
comes  always  and  only  as  the  reward  of  fresh  attain-
ment. We  can  at  once  believe  that  various  truths
which  we  now  represent  to  ourselves  inadequately  in
other  forms  are  all  comprehended  in  the  one  assurance
that  Christ  is  the  Way.  But  we  shall  never  reach  the
full  measure  of  the  word  till  the  journey  itself  is
ended,  and  with  thankful  wonder  we  find  ourselves
wholly  gathered  to  Him  in  the  place  and  presence
assigned  from  the  beginning  by  the  heavenly  Father's
will.


LECTURE    TI.

/  AM. THE   Truth.

In  the  counsel  of  God  David  the  righteous  was
succeeded  by  Solomon  the  wise ;  for  both  characters
had  to  be  combined  in  the  true  king  of  Israel.  The
kingdom  already  set  up  had  now  to  be  consolidated,
administered,  and  maintained.  While  the  demands
upon  what  the  Bible  calls  righteousness  were  greater
than  before,  righteousness  itself  could  subsist  and  pre-
vail only  by  growing  to  a  higher  type,  and  so  increas-
ing in  subtle  complexity  of  power.  The  time  was  past
when  rude  impulses  could  suffice:  without  the  constant
enlightenment  of  wisdom  the  efforts  of  righteousness
would  be  narrow  in  purpose  and  poor  in  result.  Nor
was  the  highest  sanction  wanting  to  the  advance,  for
both  characters  were  already  embraced  in  the  faith  in
God  himself  As  the  righteous  Lord  loved  righteous-
ness, so  human  wisdom  came  to  be  regarded  as  His
requirement  and  His  gift,  as  soon  as  His  own  wisdom
in  the  creation  of  the  material  world  and  in  the  order-
ing of  the  ways  of  men  received  distinct  homage.


42  THE    TRUTH

Though  Israel  stood  virtually  alone  in  its  emphatic
exaltation  of  wisdom  as  a  divine  virtue,  other  nations
knew  how  to  admire  it  for  its  beauty  or  prize  it
for  its  uses.  After  a  while  their  own  progress  led
them  to  perceive  that  wisdom  has  no  independent
existence,  but  lives  by  knowledge;  and  that  know-
ledge must  become  an  object  of  conscious  and  sedu-
lous pursuit  if  wisdom  is  to  attain  maturity.  During
three  generations  of  the  wisest  of  heathen  nations
that  belief  in  the  intimate  connexion  of  righteousness,
wisdom,  and  knowledge  inspired  meditations  and
researches  within  the  field  of  knowledge  which  no
imperfections  and  contradictions  can  rob  of  the  un-
dying veneration  which  is  their  due.  Yet  for  the
time  the  labour  seemed  to  be  in  vain.  Disbelief  in
the  possibility  of  knowledge  and  limitation  of  wisdom
to  personal  prudence  soon  followed  as  steps  in  a
process  by  which  righteousness  became  reduced  to
an  optional  luxury  of  private  life  for  peculiar  tem-
peraments. The  fruits  of  the  labour  were  not  to
be  enjoyed  by  the  immediate  heirs.  The  power  was
not  yet  born  which  must  sooner  or  later  gather  up
all  the  treasures  of  the  nations  for  the  enrichment  of
mankind.

At  length,  at  the  season  prepared  by  the  Lord
of  the  ages,  the  necessity  and  the  sacredness  of
knowledge  were  manifested  to  those  who  had  in-
herited the  slow  but  irrevocable  stages  of  His  revela-
tion   in    Israel.     'Knowledge'   is   the   word    that   we


THE   TRUTH  43

naturally  use  while  we  are  pausing  on  the  human
faculty.  But  the  books  of  the  New  Testament  carry
us  on  past  knowledge  to  the  object  of  knowledge,
and  prefer  to  speak  to  us  of  'truth'.  The  possession
of  truth  is  one  of  the  distinctive  marks  of  the  new
covenant ;  and  so  the  full  and  careful  use  of  truth
is  the  distinctive  agency  by  which  a  ripe  wisdom  and
therefore  an  effective  righteousness  is  made  attainable
for  Christians.  It  was  no  new  thing  to  desire  and
pursue  and  find  truth.  It  was  no  new  thing  to
aim  at  the  service  of  God  as  the  highest  end  of
action.  But  it  was  an  altogether  new  thing  to  learn
that  the  knowledge  of  truth  is  indispensable  for  the
mature  service  of  God,  and  that  the  desire  and  pur-
suit of  truth  is  an  essential  part  of  a  holy  worship.

By  this  mark  more  perhaps  than  by  any  other
was  it  signified  that  mankind,  as  represented  by  its
foremost  members,  had  passed  from  youth  into  adult
age.  "  The  law  was  given  through  Moses,"  says
St  John  near  the  beginning  of  his  Gospel;  "the  grace
and  the  truth  came  into  being  through  Jesus  Christ."
The  Law  proceeded  from  the  invisible  Lord  whose
character  was  ascertained  by  His  dealings  with  Israel
and  Israel's  ancestors :  but  the  lawgiver  who  pro-
mulged  it  as  a  mediator  between  God  and  Israel
was  a  mere  instrument  for  the  special  purpose,
separate  from  the  Law  itself  The  Law  itself  was
a  code  of  ordinances :  its  revelation  consisted  in
specifying  this  or  that  act  as  good  or  evil  by  means


44  THE   TRUTH

of  individual  rules,  and  these  rules  were  adapted  to
a  temporary  discipline.  On  the  other  hand  that  which
came  through  Jesus  as  Christ  was  not,  strictly  speaking,
a  newer  and  better  law:  it  was  the  grace  and  the  truth
of  the  Divine  order  which  the  Law  had  shadowed
forth  by  its  decrees.  The  relation  of  the  grace
and  the  truth  to  Him,  unlike  the  relation  of  the
Law  to  Moses,  was  one  of  personal  embodiment.  The
grace  and  the  truth  for  man  came  into  being  and
into  manifestation  through  Him,  because  He,  the
Word  become  flesh,  was  Himself  full  of  grace  and  of
truth,  and  we  did  but  receive  out  of  His  fulness.  As
the  power  in  Him  was  the  grace,  so  the  revelation  in
Him  was  the  truth.  God's  people  were  no  longer
merely  to  hearken  and  obey,  but  in  the  fullest  sense
to  look  with  their  own  eyes  and  see  and  understand.
The  new  exercise  of  the  faculties  which  had  been
long  preparing  was  called  forth  by  the  appearance  of
the  one  adequate  object.  When  the  Truth  of  truths
was  shewn,  then  the  study  and  contemplation  of
truth  assumed  its  proper  place  for  the  direction  of
all  human  feeling  and  thought  and  action.

God's  manner  of  speaking  to  Israel  had  never  been
purely  preceptive  or  directive.  It  had  always  asked
for  faith  ;  and  faith  by  its  very  nature  implied  some
tried  experience.  But  the  new  expansion  of  faith
required  a  new  expansion  of  rudimentary  experience
into  knowledge  of  truth.  As  the  experience  which
came  first  was  real,  so  the  knowledge  of  truth  which


THE   TRUTH  45

came  after  was  real  too.  The  experience  was  furnished
by  believed  facts  of  history  :  the  knowledge  of  truth
could  not  be  less  substantial.  To  crown  a  childhood
of  true  if  crude  and  slender  experience  v/ith  a  manhood
of  salutary  illusion  would  be  unworthy  of  a  Divine
education.  The  truth  which  Christians  were  called
to  know  was  not  a  phantom  truth,  a  baseless  contri-
vance for  generating  results  of  conduct  such  as  would
please  God  or  make  men  happy.  The  world  without
had  already  reached  a  stage  in  its  mental  history  in
which  phantoms  of  truth  abounded  ;  and  this  fact  of
itself  was  a  mark  that  the  time  was  come  when  it
was  well  that  the  true  truth  should  be  brought  within
its  reach.  When  men  had  once  begun  to  study  actual
truth  concerning  man  and  nature,  to  have  bestowed
on  mankind  a  merely  economic  truth  concerning  God
would  have  been  to  make  every  advance  in  knowledge
an  advance  towards  godlessness.  If  the  truth  con-
tained in  the  Gospel  were  not  as  solid  veritable  truth
as  any  other  mental  possession  which  we  can  call
truth,  it  must  have  only  widened  the  fatal  breach
in  the  unity  of  human  nature  which  was  making
progress  impossible  for  either  Jew  or  Gentile  when
Christ  came.  The  severed  personality  could  be  re-
united only  by  the  union  of  truth  with  the  service
of  God.  If  Christ  did  not  perfect  the  simple  antique
righteousness  into  a  better  righteousness  founded  on
knowledge  of  truth,  then  righteousness  was  already
outgrown.     If    His   revelation    of    God   was    not    a


46  THE    TRUTH

revelation  of  truth,  then  godh'ness  was  a  step  towards
ignorant  delusion,  and  at  last  towards  contempt  for
righteousness.

It  follows  next  to  enquire  whether  the  Gospel
itself,  as  we  hold  it  in  our  hands,  ratifies  the  claim
made  on  its  behalf  that  it  is  not  merely  a  salutary
announcement  but  in  the  strict  sense  a  revelation  of
truth.  Is  the  claim  to  be  sustained  only  by  con-
straining a  few  obscure  and  isolated  texts  to  bear
unnatural  service  to  a  foreign  teaching;  or  is  it  rather
the  recognition  of  a  dominant  purpose  which  was  from
the  beginning. "^  Was  this  purpose  intimately  involved
either  in  our  Lord's  earthly  life  or  in  the  faith  of  the
Apostles  concerning  Him  ?

The  answer  to  these  enquiries  can  evidently  be
found  only  in  the  letter  and  spirit  of  the  books  of  the
New  Testament  themselves.  In  the  first  three  Gospels
the  word  'truth'  does  not  occur  except  in  a  slight  and
secondary  sense.  Nor  is  the  absence  accidental:  these
Gospels  do  present  Christ  more  expressly  as  the  Way
than  as  the  Truth :  in  outward  form  they  convey
rather  the  disciplinary  nurture  by  which  the  power  of
apprehending  truth  is  called  forth.  No  prominent
place  is  assigned  to  '  knowledge '  by  name,  that  is
to  the  apprehension  of  truth  :  but  its  latent  dignity
and  authority  are  attested  by  some  grave  and  cha-
racteristic passages ;  as  when  the  Lord  tells  His
chosen   disciples   that   to   them   hath    been    given   to


THE   TRUTH  47

take  knowledge  of  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of
God.

But  when,  leaving  words,  we  go  on  to  consider  the
matter  of  the  Gospel  as  it  is  set  forth  by  the  first
three  Evangelists,  and  to  reflect  on  the  meaning  of
the  sights  and  sounds  with  which  they  surround  us,
we  find  that  their  world  is  indeed  a  world  of  know-
ledge, whatever  else  it  may  be,  and  that  to  any  other
view  it  remains  fragmentary  and  incoherent.  Many
scattered  sayings  doubtless  yield  Divine  virtue  and
illumination  to  casual  and  random  use,  though  even
then  they  perplex  by  unlooked-for  manners  of  speech
or  unlooked-for  silences.  But  the  full  light  shines
from  them  only  when  they  are  beheld  as  parts  of  a
whole  which  must  needs  be  diligently  traced  out,
signs  of  a  many-coloured  and  fertile  world  that  lies
beneath.  The  most  characteristic  words  of  the  Lord
in  these  Gospels  are  the  parables ;  and  in  most  cases
it  is  hard  to  feel  the  peculiar  value  either  of  their
teaching  or  of  the  form  in  which  it  is  presented,
except  so  far  as  we  are  able  to  use  them  as  gates  of
entrance  into  a  wider  truth,  suggestions  of  God's
hidden  ways  of  administering  His  creation.  They
touch  all  worlds  of  which  we  have  any  cognisance ;
in  their  language  the  sky,  the  earth,  and  the  doings
of  men ;  in  their  meaning  all  these,  together  with
the  invisible  worlds  above  and  beneath.  And  ever
in  the  midst  is  the  form  of  the  Son  of  man  Himself,
having    His   portion   in   every   world   of   which    He


48  THE   TRUTH

speaks,  and  bearing  witness  to  the  unity  of  each  and
all.

The  evidence  increases  as  we  pass  to  His  acts.
Now  we  lay  stress  on  their  power,  now  on  their
beneficence  or  mercy  or  love ;  now  we  regard  them
as  credentials  of  Himself,  now  as  testimonies  concern-
ing the  Father  above,  whose  true  Son  He  was  declared
to  be  ;  and  in  each  case  with  good  reason.  But  it
is  impossible  to  gain  a  satisfying  view  of  their  fewness
and  their  number,  their  repetition  and  their  variety,
their  intrinsic  mastery  and  their  involution  with
spoken  words,  if  they  do  not  constitute  a  lore  of
positive  truth,  that  is  to  say,  a  setting  forth  of  the  laws
and  constitution  of  that  inner  order  by  which  all
things  are  fixed  in  their  true  places,  '  the  kingdom  of
God '  or  *  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens '.  And  if  we  are
thus  constrained  to  recognise  in  the  simple  recital
of  Christ's  ministry  of  word  and  deed  an  intended
levelation  of  truth,  we  shall  at  least  be  prepared  to
believe  that  the  histories  which  precede  it  from  the
birth  of  John,  and  even  the  unique  and  transcendent
events  which  close  it,  the  Passion  and  the  Resurrec-
tion, partake  of  the  same  character,  though  the  first
three  Gospels  may  not  furnish  conclusive  evidence  to
this  effect.

It  is  only  however  when  we  open  St  John's
Gospel  that  the  larger  function  of  all  the  Gospels  is
disclosed.  Assuming  a  knowledge  of  such  facts  and
words  as  the  others  had  already  recorded,  it  brings  to


THE   TRUTH  49

light  the  hidden  base  which  makes  them  inteUigible
as  objects  and  as  vehicles  of  knowledge.  Each  of  the
three  was  by  itself  a  sufficient  and  satisfying  narrative  of
historical  occurrences,  selected  out  of  existing  material,
expanded  by  new  material,  arranged,  worded,  under
the  guidance  of  a  single  large  but  limited  purpose.
When  however  the  three  met  together  in  combined
use,  it  became  necessary  to  shew  that  they  were
indeed  but  three  different  pictures  of  a  common
object.  Yet  a  mere  recombination  of  their  elements,
with  or  without  additions,  into  a  single  new  whole
would  have  been  a  loss  rather  than  a  gain.  The
result  would  have  been  an  individual  portraiture,  less
instructive  than  any  of  the  preceding  delineations  by
very  reason  of  its  comparative  completeness,  leaving
uncombined  and  unexplained  the  distinct  forms  ot
office  in  which  they  had  severally  depicted  our  Lord,
harmonising  details  at  the  cost  of  a  false  and  decep-
tive simplicity.  Each  separate  exhibition  of  historic
truth  had  been  suggestive  of  an  underlying  universal
truth  which  was  intended  to  be  known.  Their  proper
harmony  could  never  have  been  displayed  in  a  purely
historical  record,  a  biography  of  Jesus  the  Nazarene.
It  could  only  be  reached  by  a  fuller  exposition  of  His
historical  manifestation  as  related  to  theological  truth
in  the  strictest  sense ;  and  such  a  complementary
exposition,  instead  01'  superseding  them,  would  raise
them  to  a  higher  and  a  permanent  function  in  the
service  of  truth.

n.  L.  4


50  THE   TRUTH

This  was  one  of  the  purposes  fulfilled  by  the  Gos-
pel of  St  John,  and  it  is  clearly  denoted  by  changes
of  language.  External  acts  are  called  'signs,'  and
thereby  marked  as  eloquent  of  a  corresponding  matter
of  truth.  Truth  itself  assumes  a  substantive  form
and  is  called  by  its  own  name.  Tho-earlier  Gospels
had  recorded  words  spoken  and  deeds  done,  the  full
significance  of  which  could  not  be  perceived  till  the
experience  of  the  Apostolic  age  was  complete.  There
was  nothing  exceptional  in  the  delay.  Much  is  often
said  and  done  from  a  single  design  which  yet  is  not
at  the  time  expressly  named.  Premature  naming
might  be  fatal  to  sound  action,  and  especially  to
sound  discipleship.  The  lesson  itself  has  to  be  well
learned  in  various  forms  before  the  name  is  given.
But  in  due  time  a  distinct  perception  of  the  common
character  of  what  has  been  learned  is  needed,  at  least
by  those  who  have  in  their  turn  to  lead  and  teach ;
and  so  the  name  itself  is  needed  as  a  bond  of  con-
sistency and  permanence.

Thus  it  was  with  '  truth.'  The  word  had  been
used  by  the  Lord  on  several  occasions  with  striking
vividness  and  yet  plasticity  of  meaning.  The  last
period  of  the  Apostolic  age  brought  into  clear  light
the  danger  of  allowing  this  character  of  the  Gospel  to
be  forgotten  or  thrown  into  the  background :  and
tlius  St  John  was  led  to  place  on  record  the  Lord's
own  utterances  concerning  the  truth,  as  well  as  to  make
it   a  principal   theme   of  his  own    teaching.     In   his


THE   TRUTH


SI


Gospel  '  the  truth '  is  inseparable  from  Christ's  own
work  and  from  the  work  which  He  bequeathed  to
others.  It  is  the  truth  of  God,  which  He  has  heard
from  God  and  speaks  to  men  :  it  is  that  into  which
He  promises  that  the  Spirit  of  the  truth  shall  guide
His  disciples  ;  and  in  which  He  prays  the  Father  to
hallow  them.  When  at  last  He  is  called  before  the
Roman  governor,  the  representative  of  the  victorious
power  which  knew  how  to  use  and  value  almost  every
human  possession  except  truth,  He  sums  up  His
earthly  career  in  words  that  remind  us  how  the  King
of  the  Jews  had  His  title  written  up  over  His  cross  in
Greek  letters  as  well  as  in  Roman  and  in  Hebrew :
"  Thou  sayest  that  I  am  a  king :  I  for  this  cause  am
born,  and  for  this  cause  am  come  into  the  world,
that  I  might  bear  witness  to  the  truth  ;  every  one
that  is  of  the  truth  heareth  my  voice."

Before  the  Roman  He  stood  as  it  were  in  alle-
giance to  the  truth,  chief  among  its  faithful  servants
and  witnesses.  He  had  brought  the  truth  closer  to
Himself  when  He  was  speaking  to  men  who  by
birth  and  education  were  better  fitted  to  understand
Him,  and  had  even  begun  after  a  fashion  to  believe
Him,  though  soon  they  were  to  be  divided  from
Him  by  a  deeper  gulf  than  heathenism  could  make.
They  were  those  Jews  who  are  said  to  have  believed
on  Him  at  the  time  when  He  told  them  that  where
He  was  they  could  not  come.  To  them  He  said,
"  If  ye  shall  abide  in  my  word,  ye  are  truly  disciples

4—2


52  THE   TRUTH

of  mine,  and  ye  shall  know  the  truth,  and  the  truth
shall  make  you  free."  Abiding  or  continuance  in
His  word,  that  is,  in  those  things  which  having  heard
from  the  Father  who  sent  Him  He  spake  into  the
world,  would  be  the  distinguishing  mark  of  true  dis-
cipleship  to  Himself:  personal  adherence  would  be
nothing  without  resolute  acceptance  and  use  of  what
He  revealed.  But  further  that  true  discipleship  would
itself  bear  two  successive  fruits ;  and  these  would  be
two  forms  of  responsive  life  within.  The  privileges  of
true  disciples  of  the  Lord  would  be  first  to  know  the
truth  for  themselves,  and  then  to  have  power  to  act
from  themselves,  that  power  of  freedom  being  be-
stowed by  the  truth  which  they  should  come  to  know.
The  familiarity  of  the  words  hides  from  us  the
singularity  of  the  office  here  assigned  to  the  truth
and  the  knowledge  of  the  truth.  Freedom  of  action,
itself  not  merely  permitted  but  held  forth  as  the  cul-
mination of  a  Divine  promise,  is  made  to  depend  on
knowledge  of  the  truth,  and  knowledge  of  the  truth  is
made  to  depend  on  learning  from  the  Son  of  God.
A  learning  pregnant  with  these  results  could  never
mean  simple  reception  of  enunciated  doctrines  or
simple  execution  of  formulated  commands.  But  as
little  could  it  mean  simple  copying  of  acts ;  for  what
place  would  then  be  left  for  knowledge?  How  wide
soever  be  the  sphere  of  possible  free  action,  so  wide
must  be  the  sphere  of  the  truth  that  has  to  be  known,
and  of  the  knowledge  of  it.     The  range  of  the  truth


THE    TRUTH


53


into  which  the  Lord  here  promises  to  give  His  dis-
ciples entrance  is  limited  only  by  the  necessities  of
their  free  action.  Wheresoever  they  have  need  to
move,  there  they  have  need  to  know,  and  there  He
promises  that  they  shall  know.  But  then  what  can
He  be  whose  disciples  can  draw  such  infinite  re-
sources out  of  their  discipleship }  As  oracle  or  law-
giver or  human  model  He  can  contain  in  Himself  the
fountain-head  of  no  such  various  potency.  His  own
nature  must  be  so  inwardly  at  one  with  the  nature  of
man,  and  of  every  world  in  which  man  can  move,  that
in  the  knowledge  of  Him  must  be  folded  up  the
knowledge  of  all  things.  He  cannot  be  less  than
Himself  the  Truth.

When  Jesus  said  plainly  to  the  Eleven  in  the
upper  chamber  not  only  "I  am  the  Way"  but  "I
am  the  Truth,"  we  can  now  see  that  He  was  con-
densing into  a  word  one  primary  aspect  of  all  that
His  ministry  had  been  implying  and  all  that  His
teaching  had  been  expounding  in  varied  phrase.  The
trial  of  discipleship  had  proceeded  far.  Many  who
had  once  been  attracted  to  His  person  had  fallen
away  by  reason  of  His  teaching.  During  the  last
hour  the  one  traitor  out  of  the  chosen  Twelve  had
gone  into  the  darkness  without.  The  boldest  of  the
Eleven  who  remained  had  just  been  warned  that
before  the  cock  crew  he  should  deny  his  Lord.  Yet
they  are  addressed  as  tried  and  approved  disciples,


54  THE    TRUTH

whose  remembered  past  of  discipleship  has  already
become  a  possession,  which  henceforth  they  will  have
to  explore  and  employ  in  every  kind  of  need.

Moreover  the  apostleship  instituted  and  imper-
fectly exercised  of  old  among  the  villages  of  Galilee
is  now  being  confirmed  as  the  crown  of  discipleship.
The  time  is  fast  approaching  when  the  learners  will
be  brought  into  a  more  perfect  and  yet  a  more
humbling  manner  of  learning,  by  finding  themselves
set  to  teach.  For  this  end  as  well  as  for  their  own
necessities  it  is  no  longer  enough  to  possess  :  they
must  come  to  know  that  which  they  possess,  in  order
that  they  may  be  able  wisely  to  impart.

Hence  the  teaching  of  which  they  are  the  stewards
takes  now  a  more  comprehensive  shape.  That  the
many  single  lessons  already  received  may  not  be  scat-
tered and  lost  for  want  of  insight  into  the  foundation
of  their  unity,  the  full  capacity  of  language  is  put  forth.
Words  are  pronounced  that  would  be  unintelligible  if
there  were  no  recollections  whereby  to  interpret  them,
and  which  can  never  be  perfectly  interpreted  till  the
last  probation  is  complete;  but  which  are  nevertheless
the  indispensable  master-keys  for  the  understanding
of  either  past  or  future,  and  still  more  for  learning
how  the  past  and  the  future  arc  ordained  to  be  one.
To  hear  the  word  spoken  "  I  am  the  Truth "  was
not  to  be  made  the  depositaries  of  a  majestic  but
impracticable  enigma.  It  was  to  receive  at  once
a  fit  reward  of  service  already  rendered  and  an  en-


THE    TRUTH  55

dowment  with  powers  to  render  service  of  a  higher
order.

Thus  all  that  the  Eleven  had  witnessed  and  en-
deavoured since  the  baptism  of  John  bore  its  part
in  enabling  them  to  receive  their  Lord's  identification
of  His  own  person  with  the  Truth.  But  this  revela-
tion had  also  been  immediately  preceded  by  another
identifying  Him  with  the  Way,  which  stood  on  a
precisely  similar  footing  towards  their  experience
hitherto.  It  was  the  question  of  Thomas  concerning
the  way  which  He  was  about  to  take  in  departing
from  them  that  led  Him  to  declare  Himself  to  be
the  Way :  and  on  the  other  hand  the  answer  was
not  merely  incomplete  but  unsustained  till  the  other
and  so  to  speak  deeper  aspects  of  His  character  and
work  had  been  made  known.  The  necessity  for  the
addition  of  a  second  and  a  third  revelation  was  two-
fold. It  was  demanded  alike  for  the  sake  of  human
understanding  and  by  reason  of  essential  fact.  The
Way  itself  could  not  be  clearly  apprehended  unless
the  Truth  and  the  Life  were  held  up  simultaneously
to  view,  so  that  the  contrast  might  aid  in  dispelling
the  vagueness  inseparable  at  first  from  ideas  of  such
magnitude.  But  the  relation  was  onC'-  not  merely  of
contrast  but  of  dependence.  The  place  which  Christ
holds  in  the  movement  of  events  as  the  Way  implies,
if  we  may  venture  to  use  such  language,  that  He  holds
a  corresponding  place  as  the  Truth  in  the  permanent
order  of  all  things  that  exist.     The  Way  lies  most


$6  THE   TRUTH

on  the  surface  as  presented  to  our  faculties  ;  further
down  lies  the  Truth,  and  beneath  the  Truth  the
Life.  It  is  because  the  eternal  Son  of  God  is  the
Life  that  He  is  the  Truth ;  and  it  is  because  He  is
the  Truth  that   He  is  the  Way.

Although,  as  we  have  seen,  Christ's  manifestation
of  Himself  to  His  disciples  had  throughout  been  such
as  could  not  be  consistently  interpreted  unless  He
were  Himself  the  Truth,  yet  their  relation  to  Him
had  belonged  mainly  to  the  sphere  of  action ;  it
had  been  a  following  of  Him  in  the  way.  Their
apprenticeship  within  Israel  had  borne  a  resemblance
to  the  experience  of  Israel  itself.  They  had  been
advancing  from  uncultured  righteousness  towards
righteousness  founded  on  knowledge ;  learning  to
enter  into  truth  but  not  yet  fully  trusted  with  its
administration.  But  in  these  last  discourses  Christ
was  making  known  to  them  the  new  charge  which  He
was  committing  to  them,  and  its  very  nature  pre-
supposed a  setting  forth  of  new  apprehensions  of
Himself  as  the  satisfaction  of  new  needs  of  mankind.
While  therefore  His  answer  was  in  no  word  super-
fluous or  irrelevant  with  reference  to  their  questions,
it  carried  them  swiftly  beyond  the  range  of  their
immediate  thoughts.  Within  the  limits  of  the  pre-
sent there  was  no  solution  to  be  found  for  the  per-
plexity of  the  present :  and  the  perplexity  itself  was
part  of  the  initiation  for  the  coming  form  of  ministry.


THE    TRUTH


57


The  universal  Way  seemed  barely  to  touch  the
single  way  about  which  St  Thomas  had  enquired ;
the  Truth  seemed  to  He  remote  from  it  altosfether.
and  to  intrude  thoughts  congenial  only  to  more
tranquil  hours.  But  the  Divine  breadth  of  true  answer,
the  Divine  gift  exceeding  all  the  human  asking  or
thinking,  went  along  with  the  announcement  of  the
new  contents  of  faith  and  teaching,  by  which  the
distinctive  character  of  Christian  apostleship  should
be  determined.  And  further  instruction  was  im-
mediately to  follow  in  Christ's  promise  that  One  who
would  take  the  place  of  Himself,  a  second  Paraclete
or  Advocate,  should  be  sent  to  their  aid.

The  distinctive  name  by  which  He  denotes  that
other  Advocate  is  "the  Spirit  of  the  Truth."  He
calls  Him  by  this  name  at  the  outset;  and  after
once  identifying  Him  with  'the  Holy  Spirit,'  repeats
it  again  and  yet  again.  He  goes  forth,  Christ  teaches,
from  the  Father,  the  God  who  is  true,  and  bears
witness  to  Christ  as  the  Truth.  This  is  the  service
which  He  renders  to  the  Truth,  as  being  the  Spirit
of  it ;  and  the  witness  which  He  bears  does  not
supersede  but  involves  the  witness  which  the  chosen
disciples  have  likewise  to  bear,  as  having  been  with
Christ  from  the  beginning.  But  further  this  testimony
of  the  Spirit  of  the  Truth  to  Christ  the  Truth  de-
termines the  manner  of  His  guidance  of  the  disciples
in  the  future.  As  He  guides  them  along  the  Way,
so    also    He    guides    them    into    all    the    Truth:    by


58  THE    TRUTH

faithful  following-  along  the  Way,  they  shall  be
brought  within  the  Truth,  and  so  the  Way  itself
shall  take  larger  proportions  as  presented  to  their
eyes,  and  justify  itself  more  clearly  to  their  faith.
The  Spirit  of  the  Truth  shall  take  up  the  office
of  their  Teacher,  yet  not  in  any  wise  without  Him
who  has  been  their  Teacher  hitherto.  Christ  has
yet  many  things  to  say  to  them,  but  they  cannot
bear  them  just  now ;  the  weight  of  the  words  is
too  great  for  them  to  carry.  But  the  Spirit  of  the
Truth  shall  teach  them  by  putting  them  in  mind
of  all  things  which  Christ  has  spoken  to  them.  He
shall  glorify  Christ  by  taking  of  that  which  is  Christ's
and  telling  it  out  to  them  ;  and  as  what  is  Christ's
includes  all  that  is  the  Father's,  so  whatever  can
be  called  the  Father's  must  come  within  the  Spirit's
exposition  of  the  Truth.  The  knowledge  of  Christ
as  the  Truth  shall  constitute  the  substance  of  all
their  future  learning,  while  the  Spirit  of  the  Truth
shall  train  and  enlighten  them  in  the  perception
and  application  of  it.  They  who  follow  the  Spirit's
guidance  will  not  receive  an  illumination  enabling
them  to  dispense  with  truth,  but  the  enablement  to
lay  hold  of  truth :  the  voice  of  the  Spirit  will  be
heard  only  in  the  interpretation  of  truth,  and  specially
of  the  Truth.  For  He  shall  not  speak  from  Himself
He  will  utter  no  independent  oracles,  making  of
none  effect  the  fixed  and  undecaying  teaching  which
is    provided    in    the    incarnate    Son,    or    weakening


THE   TRUTH  59

allegiance  to  the  primary  authority  of  the  Father ;
for  He  too,  Hkc  the  Son,  shall  speak  only  whatsoever
things  He  shall  hear.  Thus  on  the  one  hand  the
Truth  given  in  Christ  will  need  from  age  to  age  His
expounding  to  unlock  its  stores;  and  on  the  other
hand  the  faith  in  Him  and  His  office  in  the  present
shall  never  loosen  men  from  the  Gospel  given  once  for
all,  or  draw  them  away  from  the  eternal  Father,  by
enabling  any  voice  born  only  of  the  present  to  seem
wholly  Divine.  Standing  fast  in  the  unchanging
Truth  and  an  endless  progress  in  taking  knowledge
of  it  shall  be  indissolubly  united.

Yet  in  another  sense  the  future  is  specially  His.
As  He  of  old  had  taught  the  Prophets  to  read
the  future  through  the  past  and  the  present,  so
now  He  shall  tell  out  the  coming  things  to  the
disciples.  By  His  guidance  the  eyes  of  the  disciples
shall  be  fixed  not  so  much  on  what  lies  behind,
though  there  lies  the  embodiment  of  the  Truth,
as  on  the  future :  and  this  very  pointing  to  the
future  will  be  indispensable  to  His  mission  as  the
interpreter  of  the  Truth.  For  the  Way  along  which
Christ's  chosen  are  led  is  always  an  ascent ;  and
it  is  only  in  the  light  of  the  future  that  the  most
essential  truth  can  be  seen  to  be  truth  indeed.

Such  are  the  instructions  concerning  the  truth
and  the  way  of  entering  into  it  which  Christ  ad-
dressed to  the  disciples.  In  His  prayer  to  the  Father
knowledge   and    truth    likewise    find    a   place.      The


6o  THE   TRUTH

opening'  petition  discloses  the  heavenly  and,  so  to
speak,  the  earthly  results  of  His  work;  glory  return-
ing through  the  Son  to  the  Father,  and  eternal  life
given  to  all  which  the  Father  has  given  to  the  Son.
"And  this,"  He  says,  "is  the  eternal  life,  that  they
know  thee  the  only  true  God,  and  him  whom  thou
hast  sent,  Jesus  Christ."  Here  therefore  'the  eternal
life,'  the  highest  form  of  the  highest  gift,  is  made
dependent  on  a  knowledge  ;  the  objects  of  this  know-
ledge being  first  the  Father  of  Jesus,  as  the  only  true
God  among  many  false  and  phantom  gods,  and  next
He  whom  the  true  God  sent,  the  utterance  of  His
truth.  We  rightly  shrink  from  identifying  such  a
knowledge  with  other  forms  of  knowledge  to  which
we  cannot  refuse  the  same  name.  Yet  not  in  vain
was  the  name  chosen  here.  If  this  knowledge  re-
quires the  cooperation  of  faculties  which  we  do  not
usually  associate  with  knowledge,  the  name  is  not
thereby  transferred  to  an  unfitting  use:  as  all  know-
ledge ministers  to  the  knowledge  of  the  highest,  so
yet  more  is  it  in  the  knowledge  of  the  highest  that
the  nature  of  all  knowledge  is  best  to  be  under-
stood.

The  prayer  for  the  disciples  turns  on  their  ap-
pointed relation  to  the  world.  Its  various  thanks-
givings and  petitions  flow  forth  from  the  purpose
declared  in  a  single  sentence:  "as  thou  didst  send
me  into  the  world,  I  also  sent  them  into  the  world."
His  Apostleship  was  to  prescribe  the  function  and


THE    TRUTH  6i

the  conditions  of  theirs.  Like  Him,  they  should  go
forth  into  the  world  to  overcome  it  for  its  own
sake :  like  His,  their  mastery  over  the  world  for  good
would  depend  on  their  inner  separation  from  it,  tran-
scending the  outer  commingling :  without  a  secret
hallowing  like  His  they  would  be  powerless  to  strive
a  {q\n  against  many.  But  the  agency  by  which  Christ
prays  the  Father  to  keep  them  safe  apart  in  holiness
is  the  truth :  "  hallow  them  in  the  truth  ;  thy  word
is  truth."  Even  such,  He  evidently  means  to  say,
was  the  manner  of  His  own  mysterious  self-hallowing
for  their  sakes.  It  was  wrought  by  His  abiding
contemplation  of  the  things  which  He  had  seen
with  the  Father;  and  through  Himself  a  hallowing
like  His,  a  hallowing  in  the  truth,  would  be  possible
for  them.  He  speaks  not  here  of  sanctity  of  life,
or  fervency  of  devotion,  or  unsparingness  of  labour ;
for  though  these  have  a  necessary  part  to  play
in  the  hallowing,  yet  by  themselves  they  are  as  it
were  blind.  The  truth  alone  can  prescribe  the  scope
of  the  hallowing ;  and  the  study  and  pursuit  of  the
truth  alone  can  bring  it  to  pass.  Whatever  is  worth-
less, unclean,  unjust,  unholy,  evil,  is  before  all  un-
true ;  the  pursuit  of  it  is  the  pursuit  of  a  delusion.
Christ's  life  of  deed  and  speech,  which  is  the  Father's
word  as  uttered  under  human  limitations,  alone
is  free  from  all  delusions  :  it  rests  on  the  perfect
recognition  of  truth,  and  truth  for  man  is  perfectly
expressed  in  it.     His  disciples  are  safely  preserved  to


62  THE    TRUTH

do  His  work  by  taking  knowledge  of  the  truth  com-
mitted to  their  keeping  in  His  person.

The  declaration,  "  I  am  the  Truth,"  and  the  suc-
ceeding promises  and  prayer  which  illustrated  it
received  a  further  interpretation  in  the  actual  ex-
perience of  the  disciples.  In  the  narrative  of  what
befel  them,  the  names  of  truth  and  knowledge  are
rarely  heard,  because  their  doings  are  henceforth  'acts
of  apostles.'  It  is  through  their  dealings  with  others
that  they  become  known  to  us ;  and  those  with
whom  for  the  most  part  they  had  to  deal  were  in
a  state  which  called  indeed  for  a  ministration  of
truth,  but  did  not  yet  permit  it  to  be  distinctly  re-
cognised as  truth.  Under  the  primary  Apostolate  of
Christ  they  had  been  themselves  brought  into  disciple-
ship.  Now  that  by  the  Resurrection  and  Ascension
His  Apostleship  had  been  visibly  lost  in  His  Sonship,
the  task  of  their  derivative  apostolate  was  to  bring
all  the  nations  into  discipleship.  It  was  but  a  pre-
paratory discipline  which  they  administered,  analo-
gous to  that  by  which  they  had  been  taught  them-
selves. In  the  final  prayer,  as  already  quoted,  He
had  identified  with  '  truth '  that  word  of  the  Father
of  which  He  had  said  just  before  "  I  have  given  them
Thy  word."  And  so  through  the  book  of  the  Acts,
as  in  the  Gospels  and  of  old  time,  truth  is  presented
in  this  its  simplest  shape  as  involved  in  'the  word
of  God '  or  '  the  word  of  the  Lord.'     The  teaching


THE   TRUTH  63

of  the  apostles  was  founded  on  what  was  to  their
own  minds  the  concrete  presentation  of  essential
truth,  the  Life,  Death,  and  Resurrection  of  the  Lord,
and  the  light  thence  cast  on  God's  eternal  counsel
and  His  plans  of  dealing  with  men.  As  occasion
required,  they  were  led  to  draw  forth  various  infer-
ences :  but  the  truth  itself  they  recognised  as  sub-
sisting in  that  primitive  condensation  of  the  historical
Gospel

On  Jewish  soil  the  function  of  knowledge  under
the  Gospel  could  hardly  be  brought  to  maturity.
That  was  in  the  first  instance  one  of  the  tasks  com-
mitted to  St  Paul,  himself  Jew,  Greek,  and  Roman
at  once.  Divinely  admitted  to  share  the  apostleship,
and  Divinely  set  apart  for  the  extension  of  the
Church  beyond  its  primitive  borders.  The  position
which  he  maintained  at  Athens  in  the  midst  of  the
Areopagus  was  more  than  a  personal  becoming  all
things  to  all  men :  it  was  the  solemn  unfolding  of  the
Gospel  as  the  sanction  and  the  fulfilment  of  knowledge
in  the  metropolis  of  the  human  search  for  truth.

There  as  elsewhere  in  the  Greek  world  the  pro-
fessed study  of  truth  had  withered  into  the  idlest
of  all  imaginable  frivolities.  The  kindred  appetites
for  speaking  only  what  was  new  and  hearing  only
what  was  new  had  replaced  the  old  passion  for  search-
ing into  what  is  true ;  and  as  a  natural  consequence
the  city  was  full  of  idols.  One  of  the  altars  erected
expressly  to  an   unknown   god   supplied   in   the  two


64  THE    TRUTH

words  of  its  inscription  the  fitting  text  for  the  dis-
course in  which  the  apostle  of  Christ  expounded  the
faith  that  was  both  old  and  new.  They  were  the
confession  at  once  of  a  bastard  philosophy  and
of  a  bastard  religion.  The  restless  fear  of  unseen
powers  which  was  characteristic  of  all  idolatry  in  its
decay  reached  its  highest  point  in  this  superfluity
of  irrational  awe.  The  essence  of  what  we  call
superstition  St  Paul  marked  by  two  corresponding
words  of  his  own,  as  reverence  unaccompanied  by
knowledge  :  *  What  ye  with  ignorance  revere,-  as  not
knowing  it  revere,-  that  I  declare  to  you,'  A  religion
which  had  once  possessed  some  power  for  good  had
come  to  these  dregs,  because  it  was  incapable  of  any
genuine  communion  with  knowledge:  it  made  no
pretence  to  rest  on  truth.  So  also  the  pursuit  and
hope  of  knowledge  had  wasted  to  a  phantom,  because
it  could  not  be  at  once  comprehensive  and  consistent
unless  God  had  a  place  in  it ;  and  the  hereditary
religion  gave  no  footing  for  a  Divine  knowledge
to  be  the  crown  of  all  other  knowledge.  If  later
speculation,  by  stretching  forth  an  imagination  where
knowledge  failed,  had  created  for  itself  a  cloudy
monotheism  which  imparted  some  coherence  to  the
contemplation  of  nature,  its  hold  on  the  nobler  world
of  man  was  feeble  and  incoherent :  in  the  face  of  his
sin  and  his  death  it  had  nothing  to  say.

St    Paul    encountered    the  despair  of  knowledge
and   the   abandonment   to   a   reckless   and   baseless


THE    TRUTH  6$

religion  by  declaring  the  highest  object  of  knowledge
and  the  sole  entirely  worthy  object  of  devotion,  both
in  one.  He  spoke  of  God's  initial  and  His  perpetual
relation  to  the  world  of  nature  and  to  man  ;  holding
Him  forth  as  the  original  Maker  who  continues  to
give  life  and  breath  to  all  things  by  which  life  and
breath  are  sustained ;  the  original  Disposer  of  the
many  races  of  the  one  family  of  men  in  space  and
time  according  to  the  various  faces  of  the  earth,
that  so  each  might  after  some  special  manner  seek
the  God  who  is  not  far  from  those  who  seek  Him
after  any  manner,  seeing  we  are  alive  to  Him,  living
in  Him,  not  merely  receivers  of  a  separate  and  neu-
tral life.  But  as  He  made  that  original  disposition
of  long  continued  and  widely  spread  diversity,  so
now,  overlooking  those  times  of  necessary  ignorance,
He  was  delivering,  Paul  taught,  one  common  message
to  mankind,  that  all  everywhere  repent,  change  the
direction  of  their  mind  ;  as  He  in  like  manner  had
fixed  beforehand  a  day  in  which  He  was  about  to
judge  the  world  in  righteousness,  that  righteousness
after  which  once  upon  a  time  so  many  had  toiled
and  enquired  ;  and  this  in  the  person  of  a  man  whom
He  had  signified  by  a  token  wherein  He  provided
assurance  for  all  men,  by  raising  Him  from  the  dead.
The  outcry  which  ensued  broke  off  the  discourse  ;
but  the  substance  was  already  spoken.  In  reaching
the  Resurrection,  St  Paul  had  reached  the  turning
point  for  the  restoration   of   knowledge   and   of  de-

H.  L.  5


66  THE   TRUTH

votion.  No  further  progress  in  knowledge  of  truth,
beyond  what  had  been  ah-eady  gained  and  lost,  was
possible  till  that  contradiction  of  average  sensible
experience  was  freely  admitted.  What  had  been
roughly  explored  already  might  be  explored  afresh
in  all  imaginable  detail,  and  with  new  refinements  of
accuracy.  But  the  results  would  only  reafifirm  the
impotence  of  man  to  justify  to  reason  his  entrance
into  the  higher  levels  of  truth  to  which  he  feels
himself  invited,  so  long  as  he  refuses  to  acknowledge
the  light  which  comes  direct  from  heaven,  and
believes  that  his  life  is  bounded  by  the  range  of
his  bodily  senses.  Nor  again  was  any  restoration
of  healthful  devotion  possible  except  by  belief  in
the  God  whose  will  is  defined  as  a  will  to  give  life,
and  whose  power  is  defined  by  His  giving  back  life
where  death  has  gone  before.  Let  but  that  truth,
the  truth  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  once  be  firmly
grasped  as  truth,  an  endless  future  was  opened  for
all  knowledge  and  all  devotion.

Wise  in  the  execution  of  his  stewardship,  St  Paul
in  his  epistles  kept  back  or  jout  forward  his  own
cherished  contemplation  of  the  Gospel  as  the  perfect
truth  according  to  the  state  of  those  to  whom  he
wrote.  His  contrast  between  the  milk  for  babes  and
the  wisdom  which  he  speaks  to  them  of  full  age  is
indispensable  to  the  understanding  of  his  writings.
The  epistles  written  to  churches  far  advanced  in
Christian  progress,  so  that  he  could  venture  to  name


THE   TRUTH  67

to  them  the  fulfilment  of  all  things  in  Christ,  are
those  which  most  distinctly  bear  witness  to  the
deliberate  method  of  his  teaching.  While  he  looks
back  with  satisfaction  in  his  thanksgivings  on  "the
Gospel "  as  a  received  possession  of  truth,  "  the  word
of  the  truth,"  he  looks  forward  with  equal  eagerness
in.  his  prayers  to  the  multiplication  of  a  spirit  of
knowledge  and  wisdom,  as  that  which  would  unlock
the  as  yet  undiscovered  wealth  buried  in  the  Gospel,
and  thereby  open  out  ever  better  and  more  fruitful
ways  of  walking  worthily  of  the  Lord.

Throughout  the  empire,  as  far  as  we  know,  the
Church  was  enlarged  by  the  preaching  of  the  word
of  the  truth  as  embodied  in  the  story  of  Jesus  of
Nazareth.  As  the  wide  world  to  which  the  nations
belonged  came  more  and  more  within  the  apostles'
ken,  it  is  evident  that  for  some  of  them  at  least
the  conception  of  truth  grew  wider.  Yet  they  did
not  cleave  the  less  earnestly  to  the  simple  creed  of
fact.  The  short  variable  summaries  soon  needed
expansion,  and  long  oral  narratives  arose,  out  of
which,  in  different  places  and  for  special  needs,  our
first  three  Gospels  were  mainly  framed.  But  more-
over in  due  time  truth  itself  was  driven  to  put  on
a  new  form,  by  the  arising  of  definite  error  within
the  Christian  pale.  Truth  could  no  longer  be  only
cherished  and  loved  and  studied :  it  had  to  be
jealously  guarded  against  teaching  which  threatened
to  destroy  it.     In   the  epistles  which  St  Paul  wrote

5—2


68  THE    TRUTH

to  rulers  of  the  Church,  commissioned  by  himself  as
he  had  been  commissioned  by  Christ,  the  necessary
change  of  attitude  is  conspicuous  :  while  the  earlier
language  is  repeated  in  all  its  primitive  force,  it
becomes  intermingled  with  phrases  which  shew  that
a  need  of  sharper  definition  has  arisen.

But  it  is  only  in  the  latest  period  of  the  apostolic
age  that  both  the  positive  and  the  negative  aspects  of
truth  attain  their  full  proportions.  The  swaddling
bands  of  the  old  Law  had  been  burnt  up  for  ever  in
the  flames  that  consumed  Jerusalem,  and  the  Church
was  entering  on  the  independent  course  which  had
been  prefigured  in  St  Paul's  position  at  Rome;  it
lived  on  condition  of  being  Catholic  and  Ecumenical.
Yet  it  was  threatened  by  the  gravest  of  dangers  from
within :  the  invasions  of  falsehood  had  begun  to
banish  from  belief  the  primary  truths  on  which  alone
a  Christian  faith  could  permanently  rest.

St  John's  epistles  shew  the  issue  in  its  true  h'ght.
He  had  to  contend  with  nominal  Christians  who
strove  to  disengage  an  imaginary  Christ  from  the
flesh  and  blood  of  the  historical  Gospel,  and  in  their
practice  professed  in  virtue  of  their  knowledge  to  be
above  morality.  But  he  refuses  to  deal  with  know-
ledge as  if  it  had  some  independent  existence  apart
from  an  object.  To  him  knowledge  means  access  to
truth ;  and  it  is  the  truth  known  that  gives  all  its
value  to  knowledge.  Hence  he  resists  the  movement
which  made  its  boast  in  knowledge  not  by  disparaging


THE    TRUTH  69

knowledge  but  by  laying  stress  on  truth,  and  on  the
foundation  of  truth  which  the  Church  had  received
from  Christ's  witnesses.  Moreover  he  seeks  to  deliver
truth  from  the  unreality  of  abstraction  by  recalling
men's  eyes  to  the  living  Son  of  God.  For  knowledge
itself  never  develops  the  better  part  of  its  own  facul-
ties except  when  it  has  for  its  object  a  living  and
free  being,  one  such  as  we  call  a  person.  And  on
the  other  hand  such  beings  are  the  worthiest  objects
of  knowledge,  affording  the  best  examples  of  what
known  truth  means ;  and  the  higher  the  person,  the
higher  is  the  truth  and  the  knowledge  of  it.  Thus,
according  to  St  John's  teaching,  truth  is  not  perfectly
known  except  in  the  knowledge  of  Him  whose  name
is  the  True:  such  truth  alone  can  entirely  fulfil  the
office  assigned  to  truth  in  the  life  of  men,  and  secure
to  other  truth  its  appropriate  use.

It  is  therefore  no  accident  that  St  John  concludes
his  chief  epistle  by  saying,  "We  know  that  the  Son  of
God  is  come,  and  hath  given  us  an  understanding
that  we  may  take  knowledge  of  Him  that  is  true, —
and  we  are  in  Him  that  is  true, — in  His  Son  Jesus
Christ " ;  so  that  we  now  possess  both  the  truth  itself
and  the  faculty  and  communion  for  interpreting  it :
"this",  the  God  known  in  His  Son  Jesus  Christ  and
lived  in  in  His  Son  Jesus  Christ,  "is  the  true  God
and  life  eternal."  To  the  same  purpose  again  is  the
last  warning  "Little  children,  keep  yourselves  from
idols,"  from  gods,  that  is,  that  are  not  true  but  phan-


^o  THE   TRUTH

toms.  For  the  implicit  teaching  of  the  whole  New
Testament  respecting  idols  was  now  brought  into  clear
light  by  the  efifort  to  create  a  Christian  faith  which
should  need  no  foundation  in  truth.  They  are  not
merely  usurping  deities,  carrying  away  the  homage
due  to  God  alone,  but  false  deities,  unrealities  that
are  not  deities  at  all.  The  claim  of  the  Father  of
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  against  them  is  not  simply
that  He  is  the  rightful  or  legitimate,  or  even  the
efficacious  God,  but  that  He  is  the  true  God.

But  this  rise  of  a  self-poised  knowledge,  floating
away  from  truth,  was  also  a  sign  to  St  John  that  the
time  was  come  when  the  Gospel  itself  must  be  pre-
sented more  clearly  as  a  declaration  of  truth  than  the
earlier   needs   of  the    Church    had   required.     There
were  words  treasured    in   his   memory  of  which   till
then  he  might  have  fitly  said  to  the  Church,  "  I  have
many  things  to  say  to  you,  but  ye  cannot  carry  them
now."     These  words  had  to  be  committed  to  writing
before  he  died,   and   to  be    adjusted    in    their    right
relation  to  the  words  and  deeds  already  familiar  to
all.     When   deceivers   set   up   falsehoods    concerning
Christ,  it  was  necessary  to  insist  on  truths  concerning
Christ.     But  he  would  have  been  leading  the  Church
into  hardly  less  danger  had  he  allowed  its  members
to  identify  any  truth,  any  true  doctrine  as  we    say,
concerning  Christ  with  the  fontal  truth  itself  which
was  given  in  Him,  and  of  which  he  was  one  of  the
original    witnesses.     Lest    this    danger   should    arise.


THE    TRUTH  71

even  the  truth  itself  in  this  its  highest  power  must
find  a  wider  expression,  and  be  called  the  Light.  A
man  sent  from  God  could  bear  witness  to  the  Light :
the  Light  itself  he  could  never  be.  But  St  John  had
come  to  see  what  was  implied  in  the  sum  total  of
things  written  in  his  book  and  other  books  con-
cerning Jesus  of  Nazareth  :  Jesus  was  the  Truth  of
God  and  the  Truth  of  the  Creation  by  reason  of  His
own  primal  relations  to  both.  He  was  the  Word  be-
come flesh,  even  the  Word  who  was  in  the  beginning,
and  who  was  with  God,  and  was  God.  Again,
through  Him  all  things  came  into  being.  He  was
the  Life  in  which  all  created  life  subsisted ;  and
being  the  Life  of  all  created  things,  He  was  moreover
the  Light  of  men,  creatures  whose  prerogative  it  was
to  apprehend  the  light  and  know  the  truth.

This  in  brief  outline  is  St  John's  exposition  of
Jesus  the  Christ  as  the  Truth.  As  his  story  of  the
Gospel  alone  gives  full  sense  and  consistency  to  the
three  other  stories  of  the  Gospel,  so  in  these  few  lines
of  the  purest  and  simplest  imagery  he  states,  as  far
as  human  language  will  permit,  the  truths  which
alone  give  full  sense  and  consistency  to  his  story  of
the  Gospel.  Here  were  some  of  the  things  which
Christ  forbore  to  speak  to  the  Eleven  in  the  days
of  His  flesh,  but  into  which  the  Spirit  of  the  Truth,
taking  of  that  which  was  His,  had  now  conducted
the  last  of  His  apostles.  Hereby  the  full  measure
of  essential  truth  was  at  length  placed  on  record  for


72  THE    TRUTH

the  Church  of  after  ages.     The  secondary  revelation
through  the  apostoHc  experience  was  complete.

The  generations  that  followed  the  writing  of  the
last  Gospel  were  fertile  in  dreams  of  phantasy  in
which  vast  theories  of  the  universe  clothed  them-
selves in  mythological  shapes  plucked  from  incon-
gruous paganisms  as  well  as  from  the  Jewish  and
Christian  Scriptures,  Some  give  signs  of  a  profound
ethical  or  spiritual  seriousness.  Nearly  all  are  per-
vaded with  an  instinct  that  the  redemption  in  Christ
is  in  some  way  the  meeting-point  for  every  age  and
every  world.  Yet  the  soaring  'knowledge'  which
they  claim  scorns  any  fixed  base  of  truth.  The  old
heathen  discords  remain  unresolved.  The  light  newly
come  into  the  world  has  only  made  the  darkness
more  visible.

The  belief  that  the  Gospel  is  a  message  not  merely
of  salvation  but  of  truth,  touching  and  blessing  and
vivifying  all  other  truth,  has  rarely  been  wholly
absent  except  in  the  worst  times.  At  two  periods  in
particular,  the  most  creative  since  the  days  of  the
apostles,  it  has  come  forth  with  unusual  power,  and
left  results  which  cannot  perish.  In  the  early  days
of  the  Alexandrian  Church  it  was  associated  with
a  singularly  devout  and  penetrative  if  also  fanciful
study  of  Scripture.  In  the  Church  of  the  middle
ages  it  was  associated  with  the  most  consistent  and
hopeful  attempt  ever  made  to  set  up  Christian  faith


THE    TRUTH  73

as  the  ruling  principle  in  all  departments  of  human
activity.  Both  attempts  were  one-sided  in  different
ways.  In  the  one  case  the  constituents  of  surround-
ing society  were  too  corrupt  to  become  themselves
quickened  with  a  new  life,  and  so  the  chief  domain
of  truth  remained  unoccupied  ;  while  the  leaders  of
the  Church  were  by  no  means  free  from  a  spurious
and  negative  spiritualism,  not  of  Christian  but  of
secondary  heathen  origin.  In  the  other,  notwith-
standing the  freedom  and  vigour  of  speculation,  the
fixed  standard  of  truth  was  found  less  in  the  original
record  itself  than  in  an  intermediate  tradition,  in
which  but  a  part  of  the  pure  truth  was  represented,
and  that  chiefly  as  selected  and  shaped  by  limited
controversies.  In  both  cases  one  other  fatal  hin-
drance intervened.  In  the  new  world  of  Christendom
no  truth  except  theological  truth  was  clearly  ascer-
tained ;  and  as  theological  truth  comes  easily  to  be
regarded  solely  in  the  light  of  its  obvious  religious
uses,  truth  itself  remained  a  vague  and  unrealised
conception.

The  five  centuries  of  the  modern  period,  diversified
as  they  have  been  by  inward  as  well  as  outward
vicissitude,  display  one  unchanging  characteristic  in
their  results  to  theology  and  its  relations  to  know-
ledge. They  have  brought  successively  into  cultiva-
tion many  departments  of  knowledge,  with  increasing
pursuit  and  attainment  of  truth,  and  also  with  increas-
ing relaxation  of  dependence  on  theology.     The  dis-


74  THE    TRUTH

paragement  and  isolation  of  theology  has  seemed  to
go  hand  in  hand  with  the  clear  appreciation  of  truth.
It  cannot  be  denied  that  in  the  region  of  knowledge
as  elsewhere  there  is  a  possible  rivalry  between  God
and  His  creatures ;  and  that  in  the  first  instance  the
homage  paid  to  them  is  often  subtracted  from  the
homage  paid  to  Him.  But  if  the  Christian  faith  be
true,  His  seeming  loss  is  only  the  condition  of  greater
gains  to  come ;  and  it  is  not  hard  to  discern  by  what
ways  He  is  even  now  preparing  for  Himself  a  more
perfect  sovereignty  in  the  world  of  known  truth.  If
it  was  the  lack  of  independent  standards  of  truth
which  marred  the  work  of  theology  in  former  ages,
it  is  matter  for  thankfulness  that  they  are  no  longer
lacking.  Theology  is  feeble  when  it  attaches  itself
by  preference  to  some  other  base  than  truth,  or
when  '  truth '  becomes  to  it  no  more  than  the  cur-
rent name  for  matter  of  belief  received  only,  not  re-
ceived that  it  may  be  known.  But  every  kind  of
truth  which  is  valued  and  known  is  a  pledge  of  the
place  which  truth  must  hereafter  hold  in  the  estima-
tion of  the  Church,  and  of  the  multiplication  of  all  its
energies  which  the  Church  will  thereby  receive.  If
the  increasing  fear  of  confounding  truth  with  illusion
tends  to  discredit  that  obstinate  mental  disease  by
which  the  pursuit  of  truth  takes  the  form  of  a  wander-
ing self-borne  '  knowledge '  which  is  not  a  knowledge
of  truth,  the  result  can  be  only  favourable  to  a  faith
of  the  apostolic  type,  a  faith  which  finds  the  primary


THE    TRUTH  75

truth  in  One  known  through  a  permanent  history  of
words  and  acts,  and  learns  to  understand  and  employ
the  truth  thus  found  through  a  varied  and  growing
experience.

Nor  is  the  character  of  truth  changed  by  the  form
in  which  it  is  originally  acquired  :  it  is  no  merely
verbal  bond  which  unites  truth  of  revelation  to  truth
of  discovery.  Whether  God  might  be  expected  to
bestow,  and  v/hether  as  a  matter  of  fact  He  has
bestowed,  a  truth  beyond  discovery,  are  legitimate
enquiries ;  though  all  consistent  Christian  faith  im-
plies the  answer.  But  neither  these  enquiries,  nor
any  attempts  to  determine  the  limits  of  a  revelation,
can  alter  the  relations  of  discovered  and  revealed
truth,  supposing  both  to  exist.  Truth  of  discovery  is
received  by  every  one  except  the  discoverer  as  much
from  without  as  if  it  were  revealed.  Truth  of  revela-
tion remains  inert  till  it  has  been  appropriated  by
a  human  working  of  recognition  which  it  is  hard
to  distinguish  from  that  of  discovery.  Its  initial
authority  is  the  first  step  in  a  commendation  of  itself
to  the  conscience  and  reason,  if  not  of  each  and  at
once,  yet  of  many  and  part  by  part ;  in  which  ex-
perience of  what  lies  within  the  domain  of  experience
becomes  in  turn  the  legitimate  assurance  of  what  lies
above  experience.

Once  more,  theological  truth  is  not  divided  from
other  truth  by  the  inscrutable  nature  of  its  subject
matter.     If  the  revealed  knowledge  of  God  receives


76  THE   TRUTH

its  form  from  the  limits  and  peculiarities  of  human
faculty,  yet  no  kind  of  human  knowledge  is  exempt
from  the  same  condition.  Theological  reflexion  does
but  disturb  the  habitual  unconsciousness  which  de-
ludes us  as  to  what  is  involved  in  the  apprehension  of
any  object  whatever  by  finite  beings.  In  like  manner
the  special  contradictions  which  are  found  to  beset  all
thought  on  things  Divine  have  their  counterparts  in
every  province  of  knowledge,  the  moment  we  lift  our
eyes  from  the  ground  which  surrounds  our  own  feet
to  look  into  the  vanishing  distance  before  and  behind.
The  truth  of  God  revealed  in  Christ  calls  not  for  the
separate  exercise  of  an  unique  faculty,  but  for  the
cooperation  of  every  power  by  which  we  can  read
ourselves,  and  hold  converse  with  whatever  is  not
ourselves.  Christian  theology  has  in  it  indeed  an
element  which  other  knowledge  has  not ;  but  it
embraces  all  elements  that  are  scattered  elsewhere.

As  the  progress  in  knowledge  in  the  later  ages
must  ultimately  invigorate  theology  by  throwing  into
stronger  relief  its  character  as  simply  truth,  so  also
the  new  worlds  conquered  for  knowledge  give  pro-
mise to  aid  powerfully  in  bringing  to  light  the  unity
of  all  truth  in  Him  who  said  "  I  am  the  Truth",  and
thus  in  raising  knowledge  of  truth  to  the  place  which
He  marked  out  for  it  in  the  gathering  of  man  to  God.
The  first  new  world,  the  world  of  man  himself,  was  in
part  the  discovery  of  an  old  world  long  buried  out  of


THE    TRUTH  yy

sight :  the  revival  of  the  classical  past  had  no  small
share  in  making  human  life  and  thought  and  lan-
guage the  subject  of  conscious  and  methodical  study.
The  second  new  world,  the  world  of  nature,  was  in
most  respects  altogether  new ;  and  the  rank  which
it  has  vindicated  for  itself  as  an  object  of  serious
and  lofty  knowledge  materially  changes  the  view
which  must  henceforth  be  taken  of  knowledge  as  a
whole,  and  therefore  of  its  primary  structure.  But
how  is  theology  affected  by  the  change  ?  Does  the
knowledge  of  nature  tend,  so  far  as  it  prevails,  to
subvert  the  old  order  of  things  in  the  midst  of  which
the  Christian  revelation  took  its  rise,  and  with  it
to  subvert  the  foundations  of  what  has  heretofore
appeared  to  be  the  knowledge  of  God  ?  Or  is  the
knowledge  of  nature  only  fulfilling  a  function  de-
signed for  it  from  the  first,  bringing  to  light  a  part
of  the  revelation  in  Christ  Himself  which  God  in  His
wisdom  has  hidden  as  it  were  under  a  veil  till  the
fulness  of  time  be  come  .-*

An  attempt  to  give  a  full  answer  to  these  ques-
tions, among  the  gravest  that  can  occupy  us  either
for  present  necessity  or  for  any  forecast  of  the  future,
would  require  the  discussion  of  several  familiar  prob-
lems which  lie  beyond  our  subject,  and  which  cannot
be  rightly  handled  in  a  cursory  manner.  There  are
however  considerations,  arising  out  of  our  own  place
in  the  history  of  the  human  appropriation  of  truth,
which  may  furnish  at  least  a  fitting  preparation  for


78  THE    TRUTH

reflexion  on  these  high  themes;  nay  which  perhaps
carry  us  nearer  to  the  true  central  parting-  of  the
ways  of  belief  than  do  the  controversies  that  seem  in
their  isolation  to  raise  more  definite  issues.

Let  us  then  begin  by  looking  around  and  looking
back.  Man  stands  between  God  above  and  the  world
beneath,  in  intimate  relations  with  each ;  and  even  so
stands  the  knowledge  of  man.  It  is  by  a  true  instinct
that  man  seeks  first  to  know  himself;  and  that,  when
in  pursuing  other  knowledge  he  has  been  led  into
contemplating  its  objects  as  alien  and  distant,  he
presently  returns  eagerly  to  that  which  is  his  own  and
is  near,  and  marvels  why  he  wandered  from  himself.
Yet  strive  as  he  may,  he  cannot  know  himself  while
he  knows  only  himself.  In  making  the  effort,  he
cannot  attain  to  more  than  that  inchoate  wisdom
which  precedes  knowledge  and  is  incessantly  at  fault
for  want  of  knowledge.  God  and  the  outer  world
have  both  so  large  a  portion  in  man  himself  that  in
abjuring  the  knowledge  of  them  he  condemns  the
knowledge  of  himself  to  loss  and  distortion  of  truth.
In  knowledge  as  in  all  else  he  labours  in  vain  to  be
independent :  he  is  most  himself  when  he  receives
most,  and  most  freely  acknowledges  that  he  receives.
But  the  lesson  is  toilsome  to  learn,  and  it  cannot
be  learned  all  at  once.  It  has  been  God's  will  that
man  should  learn  first  the  one  part  of  it,  and  then  the
other.

In  the  Christian  revelation,  as  we  have  already


THE   TRUTH  79

seen,  the  knowledge  of  truth  was  for  the  first  time  set
in  its  proper  place  as  necessary  to  sound  life  and
rightful  action.  But  further  its  own  proper  subject
was  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  this  was  the  know-
ledge which  it  set  before  mankind  to  be  learned  first.
The  whole  range  of  truth  contained  in  Christ  was,  so
to  speak,  opened  from  above :  the  first  truth  disclosed
in  Him  was  the  truth  of  God.  This  truth  alone  was
essential  to  the  most  indispensable  of  the  gifts  given
in  Christ,  the  life  of  the  spirit  in  faith,  hope,  and  love,
and  thus  to  the  constraining  of  all  lower  things  into
the  service  of  life.  As  the  fear  of  God  is  the  be-
ginning of  all  wisdom,  so  the  knowledge  of  God  is
the  surest  entrance  into  all  knowledge.  Through  the
primacy  of  theology  all  the  parts  of  knowledge  are
best  maintained  in  their  true  place,  and  knowledge
itself  holds  its  true  place  amidst  that  which  is  not
knowledge.

Hereby  was  marlccd  out  the  office  of  the  ancient
Church.  In  labouring  to  appropriate  for  its  own
needs  the  original  Gospel  of  truth  under  the  guidance
of  the  Spirit  of  the  truth,  it  wrought  out  a  Christian
theology.  It  was  doubtless  inevitable  that  imper-
fections should  accompany  the  work.  Men  engrossed
with  cultivating  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  seeing
around  them  little  that  was  not  vile  where  the  know-
ledge of  God  was  absent,  might  easily  come  to  speak
as  though  no  other  truth  or  knowledge  of  truth  were
needful   or  even   salutary   for   men.     From    this  and


So  THE    TRUTH

other  historical  causes,  the  work  itself  could  hardly
be  final  within  its  own  limits,  much  less  complete.
Moreover  insuperable  limitations  were  inherent  in  the
nature  of  the  task ;  for  all  communicable  knowledge
is  but  as  the  skeleton  of  the  total  knowledge.  Yet
it  is  through  the  communicable  part  of  knowledge
that  the  perception  of  one  man  is  in  any  measure
imparted  to  many,  or  of  one  generation  to  succeeding
generations.  The  Christian  life  cannot  dispense  with
separate  derivative  Christian  truths,  though  Christ
alone  is  the  Truth.  In  the  unfolding  and  ascer-
tainment of  theological  doctrine  various  ages  have
their  tasks  to  perform,  according  to  their  several
opportunities :  but  the  thoughts  of  the  earliest  ages
exercise  in  all  after  times  a  sway  which  it  would  be
equally  futile  and  mischievous  to  gainsay.  Their
work  was  done  to  good  effect  for  many  centuries  ;
and  the  services  which  it  has  rendered  and  assuredly
has  still  to  render  will  never  be  appreciated  till  it  is
itself  truthfully  and  intelligently  known.

But  if  it  was  necessary  that  man  should  come  to
know  God  above,  it  was  also  necessary  that  he  should
come  to  know  the  world  below.  The  elder  knowledge
was  itself  imperfect,  and  always  tending  to  become
the  shadow  of  a  once  substantial  knowledge,  so  long
as  the  younger  was  unborn  ;  and  it  failed  at  last  to
maintain  that  power  over  life  and  action  without  which
the  conventional  honour  which  it  received  was  vain.
It  is  well  for  other  purposes  than  the  satisfaction  of


THE   TRUTH  8i

curiosity,  or  the  enlargement  of  material  utility,  that
the  earth  and  its  inhabitants  in  all  grades  of  being,
and  the  worlds  of  space  around  it,  are  in  these  later
centuries  increasingly  known ;  and  that  to  these
effective  reforms  and  extensions  of  crude  ancient
knowledge  are  now  yet  later  added  a  knowledge  of
the  constituent  elements  and  forces  of  the  world,  and
of  its  history  in  the  past.

The  legitimate  influence  of  so  vast  a  body  of
more  or  less  ascertained  truth  comes  near  to  us  in
several  ways.  It  is  truth  concerning  a  variety  of
deeply  interesting  objects  presented  incessantly  to
our  senses,  and  rousing  our  senses  from  base  to  noble
use.  It  is  truth  concerning  a  multitude  of  beings  by
means  of  which  we  ourselves  live,  and  by  the  presence
of  which  our  lives  are  incessantly  affected.  Yet  more,
it  is  truth  converging  upon  our  own  bodies,  true  parts
of  ourselves,  yet  sharers  in  countless  structures  and
forces  of  every  grade  beneath  us.  Whether  we  were
moulded  out  of  the  dust  of  the  earth  immediately  or
through  an  ascending  series  of  lower  beings,  the
world  of  nature  can  no  longer  be  an  alien  world.  On
the  strength  of  the  knowledge  already  securely  won,
setting  aside  all  disputed  and  disputable  problems,
we  must  henceforth  as  men  feel  a  true  kinship  to  the
earth  and  to  all  that  lives  upon  it.

Whatever  other  effects  this  advancing  knowledge
may  have  on  the  thoughts  and  ways  of  men  in  after
days,  one  effect  at  least  is  already  manifest.     As  it  is

II.  L.  6


82  THE    TRUTH

chiefly  the  knowledge  of  the  lower  world  which  has
been  instrumental  in  making  the  idea  of  truth  vivid
and  mighty,  so  men's  thoughts  of  truth  in  general
have  come  to  be  mainly  determined  by  this  single
region  of  truth.  It  follows  that  we  are  tempted  to
judge  of  ourselves  and  all  that  is  above  us  by  measures
and  procedures  taken  exclusively  from  things  below
us.  This  view  of  the  universe  cannot  but  strive  more
and  more  to  become  complete,  coherent,  and  exclu-
sive. If  once  we  fully  accept  the  authority  of  the
earth  to  give  the  law  to  all  our  thoughts,  we  cannot
rest  satisfied  with  a  truth  limited  to  the  earth.  The
short-comings  of  actual  knowledge  must  be  eked  out
by  soaring  imaginations  calling  themselves  knowledge,
as  of  old,  but  borrowing  from  ascertained  truth  no
more  than  suggestions ;  while  an  inward  necessity
drives  them  to  exclude  God  from  the  domain  of
knowledge,  and  to  depict  all  in  man  that  seeks  God
or  answers  to  His  seeking  as  exceptional  disease.

For,  as  we  stand  between  things  above  and  things
below,  and  our  knowledge  like  our  nature  partakes  of
both,  the  truth  which  we  recognise  must  lead  us  either
upwards  or  downwards.  It  has  always  been  hard  for
man  to  stand  erect  while  discarding  the  truth  of  God
sent  down  from  heaven.  It  was  hard  of  old,  while  he
seemed  to  himself  to  be  an  independent  being,  severed
by  an  impassable  chasm  from  all  lower  things,  and
therefore  able  to  pursue  a  separate  perfection.  But
now,  as  the  chasm  closes,  and  the  earth's  full  force  is


THE   TRUTH  83

permitted  to  act  on  man,  it  becomes  impossible  for
him  to  lift  up  his  head  in  his  ancient  dignity  unless
there  be  a  countervailing  force  from  on  high.  No
god-like  thoughts  or  feelings  within,  no  conjectured
or  fabricated  divinities  without,  can  restore  him  to
himself,  much  less  raise  him  to  the  better  self  towards
which  he  fain  would  still  aspire.  When  once  he  has
learned  to  know  truth,  he  cannot  be  permanently-
sustained  by  any  power  which  is  separate  from  truth.
Nothing  less  will  avail  than  the  true  God  in  the
heavens,  truly  known,  as  He  is  known  to  His  Church
in  His  Son  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  If  the  children  of
God  find  it  a  hard  struggle  to  resist  the  fostering
earth  when  she  draws  them  down  in  the  might  of  her
own  partial  truth,  yet  He  who  said  "  I  am  the  Truth  "
said  also  "  I  if  I  be  lifted  up  out  of  the  earth  will  draw
all  men  unto  Myself"

On  the  other  hand  we  may  well  believe  that  an
office  of  unmixed  good  is  likewise  reserved  for  the
knowledge  of  the  lower  world.  It  is  not  too  much  to
say  that  the  Gospel  itself  can  never  be  fully  known
till  nature  as  well  as  man  is  fully  known  ;  and  that
the  manifestation  of  nature  as  well  as  man  in  Christ
is  part  of  His  manifestation  of  God.  As  the  Gospel
is  the  perfect  introduction  to  all  truth,  so  on  the  other
hand  it  is  itself  known  only  in  proportion  as  it  is  used
for  the  enlightenment  of  departments  of  truth  which
seem  at  first  sight  to  lie  beyond, its  boundaries.  It
remains  true,  as  of  old,  that  no  adequate  revelation

6—2


84  THE    TRUTH

of  God  to  man  could  take  place  except  in  the  Son  of
man :  the  divinity  whom  man  supposes  himself  to
behold  when  he  confines  his  gaze  to  the  lower  world
is  no  true  God.  But  when  once  the  primary  human
revelation  has  been  given  and  recognised,  then  all
lower  forms  can  bear  their  part  to  make  up  the
fulness  of  truth,  such  truth  as  is  accessible  to  man.
Man  detached  from  the  world  is  not  the  man  whom
fact  and  revelation  make  known.  A  Son  of  man
detached  from  the  world  would  not  be  the  Son  of
man  of  the  Gospel ;  he  would  not  be  the  Word
without  whom  nothing  came  into  being,  or  the  Life
of  all  things  living.  To  deny  the  redemption  of  the
body  is  to  deny  Christ  and  relapse  into  heathen
despair ;  and  the  redemption  of  the  body  carries  with
it  the  redemption  of  the  world  to  which  it  belongs.

As  we  can  seldom  bathe  ourselves  in  the  freshness
of  living  things  without  coming  forth  with  purified
and  brightened  hearts,  even  such  let  us  believe  may
be  the  effect  of  the  truth  of  nature  on  our  thoughts  of
God  Himself  The  substance  of  our  faith  in  Him
can  come  only  from  that  one  Life  and  Death  and
Resurrection  into  the  fellowship  of  which  we  as  men
are  permitted  to  enter;  and  the  primary  lore  through
which  our  faith  is  deepened  and  enlarged  is  always
the  human  lore,  the  knowledge  of  what  men  have
done  and  thought  and  felt,  and  above  all  of  their
words,  the  most  comprehensive  treasure-house  of  their
experience.     But  the  earth  as  well  as  the  heaven  is


THE    TRUTH  85

full  of  God's  glory,  and  His  visible  glory  is  but  the
garment  of  His  truth  ;  so  that  every  addition  to  truth
becomes  a  fresh  opportunity  for  adoration.

Thus  the  strictest  sense  of  Christ's  words  "  I  am
the  Truth  "  is  also  the  most  comprehensive  :  it  answers
alike  to  the  requirements  of  the  hour  when  it  was
spoken,  and  to  the  gradual  fulfilment  of  the  Divine
kingdom.  It  points  first  to  that  manifestation  of  the
unseen  God  of  which  He  spoke  when  He  said  "  He
that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father " ;  while  it
includes  in  its  ultimate  scope  all  creation,  the  world  of
nature  of  which  He  is  the  Life,  and  the  world  of  man
whom  He  redeemed  out  of  nature,  and  of  whom  He
is  both  the  Life  and  the  Light.  This  second  declara-
tion like  the  first  spoke  comfort  and  hope  to  the
faint-hearted  disciples  by  disclosing  to  them  the  depth
and  range  of  the  Lord's  own  permanent  working,  and
therefore  of  the  work  which  they  were  to  carry  for-
ward in  His  name.  It  speaks  comfort  and  hope  in
like  manner  to  all  at  any  time  who  find  themselves
perplexed  by  the  presence  of  truth  not  before  known.
It  warns  of  the  danger  of  suffering  truth  to  lose  its
rightful  place  in  work  and  devotion.  It  marks  every
truth  which  seems  alien  to  Christ  as  a  sign  that  the
time  is  come  for  a  better  knowledge  of  Christ,  since
no  truth  can  be  alien  to  Him  who  is  the  Truth.  It
points  to  Him  in  His  eternal  fulness  as  the  one
sufficient  measure  by  which  all  truth  may  find  its
proper  station.    The  comfort  and  hope  thus  bestowed


86  THE   TRUTH

by  Christ  were  dependent  on  the  demand  which  He
made.  If  it  was  an  arduous  change  after  following
the  Lord  as  a  Guide  to  walk  in  Him  as  the  universal
Way,  it  could  not  be  less  arduous  to  pass  from
hearkening  to  Him  as  a  Teacher  to  studying  Him  as
the  universal  Truth,  The  duly  rendered  service  of
any  truth  is  stern  discipline:  what  then  must  the
service  be  of  Him  who  is  the  Truth  of  truths  ?

Accordingly  the  burden  then  laid  on  the  Eleven
becomes  an  image  of  the  burden  laid  on  the  Church
now.  There  has  perhaps  never  been  a  time  when  the
Church  has  been  absolutely  content  with  accepting
the  body  of  inherited  doctrine  without  any  attempts,
conscious  or  unconscious,  to  verify  its  truth  in  one
mode  or  another.  But  still,  through  the  many  cen-
turies since  the  need  of  security  against  plausible
error  compelled  the  Church  to  press  into  the  moulds
of  the  human  understanding  that  which  can  never  be
so  pressed  without  some  loss  or  even  distortion,  tra-
dition, at  certain  periods  corrected  by  an  appeal  to
Scripture  or  some  intermediate  authority,  has  on  the
whole  been  accepted  as  a  sufficient  guarantee  of  truth.
If  now,  by  a  voice  which  cannot  be  disobeyed,  the
Church  is  summoned  to  know  as  truth  what  it  has
hitherto  chiefly  held  as  sacred  tradition,  the  prospect
may  seem  as  alarming  as  when  the  disciples  learned
that  the  Teacher's  voice  would  soon  be  no  longer
heard  among  them.     We  might  well  be  alarmed  if  we


THE   TRUTH  87

could  believe  that  either  the  former  supremacy  of
authoritative  tradition  or  its  impending  decline  were
without  a  purpose  in  the  counsels  of  God.  Perhaps
we  are  none  of  us  yet  in  a  position  to  estimate  rightly
how  much  we  have  owed  to  that  long-continued
externality  in  the  form  of  truth  which  there  is  a
strong  temptation  to  condemn  as  inherently  vicious.
But  this  much  at  least  we  can  see,  that  it  has  enabled
the  Church  to  be  nourished  by  its  inherited  store
from  age  to  age,  while  it  was  engaged  in  other  tasks
not  less  necessary  for  its  active  work  in  the  world ;
and  that  it  has  deferred  this  more  difficult  task  of
ascertaining  the  full  value  of  the  inheritance  till  the
maturity  procured  by  that  long  and  varied  education.

Nor  must  it  be  supposed  that  tradition  and  au-
thority can  ever  become  useless  in  matters  of  truth.
In  any  state  of  things  which  we  can  at  present
conceive,  a  large  proportion  of  the  members  of  the
Church  must  still  for  the  fundamentals  of  their  belief
be  in  a  state  of  partial  tutelage.  Nay,  perhaps  those
who  are  themselves  best  exercised  in  unwearied  and
courageous  search  will  be  the  readiest  to  profess
how  much  they  have  been  helped  throughout  towards
clear  and  dispassionate  vision  by  the  gracious  pressure
of  some  legitimate  tradition  or  other  authority,  into
the  limits  of  whose  jurisdiction  they  had  seldom
occasion  to  enquire.

But  the  call  to  the  study  of  the  Church's  heritage
of  truth  as  truth  proceeds  also  from  the  call  to  a


88  THE    TRUTH

new  field  of  labour.  The  later  stage  of  discipleship
is  an  apostleship.  Hitherto  the  Church  has  been
mainly  feeding  for  itself  on  the  truth  which  it  pos-
sessed. Now  it  must  learn  to  go  forth  beyond  its
own  borders  and  put  its  truth  to  fresh  uses.  As  the
Apostles  went  forth  to  reduce  all  the  nations  without
to  discipleship,  so  now  it  is  ours  to  carry  that  light
which  alone  is  the  light  of  life  into  all  the  outlying
worlds  of  knowledge  as  of  action  and  of  life.  If
'  because  of  the  time  we  ought  to  be  teachers ',  surely
'  by  reason  of  use '  we  must  now  '  have  our  powers
of  sense  exercised  toward  discernment  of  good  and
evil ',  and  be  able  to  bear  *  the  strong  meat '  of  truth,
the  '  word  '  or  doctrine  or  reason  '  of  righteousness '.

The  enterprise  is  full  of  peril ;  yet  its  peril  is  but
the  inverted  image  of  its  promise.  If  we  accept  the
command  to  '  prove  all  things ',  and  '  hold  fast  that
which  is  good ',  we  must  be  prepared  for  the  possibility
of  having  to  cast  aside  at  last,  after  the  most  patient
and  watchful  trial,  this  or  that  which  we  have  been
accustomed  to  receive  as  true.  How  far  the  loss  if
it  comes  will  be  other  than  a  semblance  of  loss,  or
how  far  it  will  be  outweighed  by  unlooked-for  gains,
we  may  not  know.  Assuredly  many  will  take  part
in  the  trial  unversed  in  all  the  needful  discipline,
enslaved  to  inappropriate  modes  of  investigation,
ignorant  of  what  patience  and  watchfulness  mean,
reckless  meanwhile  in  inflicting  wanton  injury  on  all
forms  of  human  welfare  except  the  one  or  two  which


THE    TRUTH  89

circumstances  have  enabled  them  to  appreciate.  As-
suredly many  a  weak  or  hasty  soul  will  be  stricken
with  spiritual  palsy,  and  many  a  strong  soul  with
sadness,  while  the  work  goes  on.  Yet  so  it  has  been
in  every  great  crisis  of  the  Church  by  which  the
kingdom  of  God  has  made  a  swift  advance.  If  we
stop  to  count  the  falling  or  fallen,  no  battle  will  ever
be  won.

But  do  we  fear  for  the  fate  of  the  costly  truth
itself .''  It  may  be  reasonable  that  we  should  fear,
if  we  have  never  known  it  in  our  inmost  hearts,
shining  upon  us  with  a  vividness  that  makes  the
clearness  of  common  truths  seem  like  a  pallid  mist.
If  we  have,  we  surely  cannot  believe  that  any  multi-
plication of  trials  can  ever  extinguish  its  central
light.  Or  is  it  that  we  fear  so  greatly  the  folly  and
feebleness  of  human  judgement,  that  we  think  the
truth  may  be  driven  by  processes  of  frenzied  ignorance
from  the  belief  and  acceptance  of  man  }  Yes  if  it  be
not  truth  indeed,  and  the  truth  of  God  ;  and  if  Christ
came  not  into  the  world  to  bear  witness  to  the  truth.
This  at  least  let  us  who  have  been  taught  by  the
Gospel  believe,  that  no  faith  founded  on  truth  can
ever  die  except  that  it  may  rise  to  a  better  life.
Believed  or  not  believed,  known  or  not  known,  it
abides  for  ever  in  heaven  till  the  hour  appointed
by  the  Father.  In  so  far  as  we  have  hitherto  been
content  not  to  know  Him  whom  we  have  believed,
let  us  thankfully  learn  to  know  Him  better  now,  for


90  THE    TRUTH

so  only  shall  we  be  persuaded  that  He  is  able  to
guard  that  which  He  has  committed  to  our  charge,
and  committed  it  for  stewardship  and  distribution,
and  not  for  hoard.

But  as  the  relaxation  in  the  stress  exerted  by-
traditional  authority  is  an  occasion  of  troubling  to
the  Church  as  a  body,  so  to  those  whose  eyes  are
now  first  opening  to  the  bright  world  of  knowledge  it
is  an  occasion  of  exulting  joy.  The  past  of  parental
teaching,  or  the  past  of  an  authoritative  creed,  is
looked  back  upon  as  a  bondage  in  the  midst  of  the
air  of  freedom  which  seems  to  waft  truth  gaily  in
upon  the  soul  with  every  wandering  breath.  Truth,
perfect  truth,  seems  always  close  at  hand,  excluded
by  nothing  save  the  restraints  which  men  have
forged  for  sight  and  thought.  We,  who  have  learned
how  much  delusion  there  is  in  these  brilliant  dreams,
ought  never  to  forget  the  power  of  blessing,  nay,  the
truth,  that  is  in  them.  They  are  true  as  to  the  end,
false  only  as  to  the  means  by  which  the  end  can  and
must  be  reached.  Bonds  exist  that  men  may  be
free;  traditions  exist  that  men  may  see  and  know:
but  it  is  very  hard  for  one  and  all  of  us  to  keep  our
eyes  steadily  fixed  on  these  fundamental  truths  in
their  integrity.  Meanwhile  the  unfaltering  faith  in
truth  is,  next  to  the  faith  in  Christ  crucified  and
risen,  perhaps  the  power  in  man  on  which  the  future
of  human  welfare  most  depends,  certainly  that  which


THE   TRUTH  91

in  this  place  most  deserves  to  be  cherished  as  a  holy
fire.  It  is  quenched  only  too  easily  in  after  years  by
a  thousand  elements  of  seeming  experience  without
and  within,  good  as  well  as  evil.  It  dies  out  in
many  who  once  were  inspired  by  it,  choked  by  coarse
interests,  or  suppressed  for  the  sake  of  some  other
spirit  which  it  is  fondly  supposed  must  reign  alone.
Whatever  therefore  gives  it  energy  and  endurance  is
good ;  and  the  time  when  it  springs  up  is  a  time  to
rejoice  in.

Yet  that  its  promise  may  be  fulfilled,  there  are
delusions  to  be  unlearned.  The  subjection  to  early
teaching  was  or  should  have  been  no  bondage  at
all,  but  the  one  indispensable  condition  of  a  strong
and  timely  growth.  Without  the  regimen  of  a  fixed
and  prescribed  form  of  truth  the  faculties  run  riot
in  premature  licence,  and  gain  nothing  but  disable-
ment for  effective  operation  hereafter.  Nor  is  the
influence  of  a  tempered  authority  in  matters  of  truth
less  salutary  after  the  first  or  second  probation  is
over.  The  air  is  thick  with  bastard  traditions  which
carry  us  captive  unawares  while  we  seem  to  ourselves
to  be  exercising  our  freedom  and  our  instinct  for
truth.  The  traditions  of  the  hour  or  the  age  are  as
indubitably  external  to  us,  and  as  little  founded  of
necessity  on  freshly  perceived  truth,  as  any  traditions
of  the  past.  The  danger  of  them  lies  in  their
disguise.  The  single  negative  fact  that  they  make
war  on   some  confessed   tradition   prevents   us   from


92  THE   TRUTH

discovering  that  they  too  draw  their  force  no  less
from  an  authority,  until  it  is  too  late  and  we  have
lost  or  damaged  that  power  of  independent  vision
which  is  but  braced  and  harmonised  by  a  known  and
honoured  tradition.

The  perception  of  truth  depends  as  much  on  the
state  of  him  that  desires  to  perceive  as  on  the  objects
that  are  presented  to  his  view.  No  slight  or  swift  or
uniform  process  will  enable  any  one  to  master  the
mere  art  of  discerning  truth  from  false  appearance.
But,  not  to  speak  of  this  most  needful  and  most
various  mental  preparation,  there  is  another  condition
which  is  never  forgotten  with  impunity.  The  more
we  know  of  truth,  the  more  we  come  to  see  how
manifold  is  the  operation  by  which  we  take  hold  of
it.  It  is  not  reached  through  one  organ  but  through
many.  No  single  faculty,  if  indeed  there  be  any
single  faculties,  can  arrogate  a  right  to  exclude  from
the  domain  of  truth  what  cannot  be  readily  subjected
to  its  own  special  action.  It  may  be  that  no  element
of  our  compound  nature  is  entirely  shut  out  from
taking  part  in  knowledge.  It  is  at  all  events  certain
that  the  specially  mental  powers  will  never  be  able  to
judge  together  in  rightful  relation  when  the  nature  as
a  whole  is  disordered  by  moral  corruption.  There  is
no  evil  passion  cherished,  no  evil  practice  followed,
which  does  not  cloud  or  distort  our  vision  whenever
we  look  beyond  the  merest  abstract  forms  of  things.
There  is  a  truth  within  us,  to  use  the  language  of


THE    TRUTH  93

Scripture,  a  perfect  inward  ordering  as  of  a  trans-
parent crystal,  by  which  alone  the  faithful  image  of
truth  without  us  is  brought  within  our  ken.  Not  in
vain  said  the  Lord  that  it  is  the  pure  in  heart,  they
whose  nature  has  been  subdued  from  distraction  into
singleness,  who  shall  see  God  ;  or,  we  may  add,  who
shall  see  the  steps  of  the  ladder  by  which  we  may
mount  to  God.

The  stedfast  and  prescient  pursuit  of  truth  is
therefore  itself  a  moral  and  spiritual  discipline.  We
cannot  render  it  perfect  service  without  walking  in
the  way  which  is  Christ,  and  living  in  the  life  which
is  Christ.  Every  flaw  and  scar  of  our  nature  will  go
to  mar  the  image  of  truth  which  we  can  attain  to.
Even  if  it  were  not  so,  yet  to  know  in  part  is  a  fixed
condition  of  our  life  here.  There  will  always  be
spots  and  clouds  of  darkness,  difficulties  as  we  call
them,  in  the  midst  of  even  our  brightest  light.  The
knowledge  which  again  and  again  yields  fresh  susten-
ance to  faith  is  not  ordained  to  displace  faith  as  the
moving  power  of  our  lives.

The  pursuit  of  truth  begins  in  a  sense  of  freedom.
We  almost  make  truth  itself  the  symbol  of  freedom
for  the  workings  of  our  minds.  We  are  slow  to  learn
that  truth  is  never  that  which  we  choose  to  believe,
but  always  that  which  we  are  under  a  necessity  to
believe.  In  proportion  to  the  earnestness  of  the
pursuit  we  discover  that  we  must  needs  be  servants
where  we  thought    to    be    masters.     A    life    devoted


94  THE    TRUTH

to  truth  is  a  life  of  vanities  abased  and  ambitions
forsworn.  We  have  to  advance  far  in  the  wilHng
servitude  before  we  recognise  that  it  is  creating  for
us  a  new  and  another  freedom.  Tlie  early  dream
was  not  false :  only  freedom  comes  last,  not  first.
The  order  of  experience  corresponds  with  the  order
of  the  Lord's  promises  which  He  offered  to  those
who  had  begun  to  believe  Him  :  "  If  ye  abide  in  my
word,  yQ  are  truly  disciples  of  mine,  and"  then  "ye
shall  know  the  truth,  and "  then  "  the  truth  shall
make  you  free."


LECTURE    III

/  JM T//£  Life.

The  better  heathenisms  at  their  height  were
religions  of  life.  This  was  the  source  of  their  great-
est power.  The  chief  causes  of  their  fall  proceeded
from  the  inevitable  limitations  of  that  life  which
alone  they  were  able  to  express  and  uphold.  It  was
divided  into  many  separate  and  exclusive  lives.  It
was  a  fluctuating  and  transitory  life,  dependent  solely
on  the  human  emotions  which  it  should  have  sus-
tained, and  therefore  itself  subject  to  the  same
encroachments  from  without  and  from  below  which
struck  them  sick  and  killed  them.  It  was  a  life
confined  within  the  sphere  of  emotion,  and  therefore
incapable  of  progress.  It  was  divided  from  know-
ledge, and  therefore  knowledge  was  able  to  bear  a
part  in  destroying  it.  Its  chief  influence  over  action
was  by  way  of  restraint.  It  was  a  life  which  sought
satisfaction  within  the  confines  of  the  present,  and  so
could  often  dispense  with  hope,  though  it  could  not
annihilate    fear.      But   these    limitations    do    not    set


96  THE  LIFE

aside  the  fact  that  Hfe  itself  was  once  the  glory  of
heathenism.

In  time  the  heathen  world  for  the  most  part
ceased  to  possess  life,  or  to  care  for  it.  The  sense  of
life  had  always  been  accompanied  by  pleasure  and
now,  for  nearly  all,  it  was  only  pleasure  that  remained
behind  in  the  vacant  place  of  life.  Death,  which  it
had  once  been  possible  to  hide  or  forget  in  the
strength  of  life,  refused  to  be  hidden  or  forgotten  any
longer.  The  presence  of  the  threatening  spectre
might  at  last  be  felt  as  a  zest  to  pleasure ;  but  as
against  the  remnants  of  the  antecedent  life  it  was
omnipotent.  Nor  was  life  abandoned  only  by  the
thoughtless.  The  depression  or  abnegation  of  life
became  the  refuge  of  the  wise  and  the  good.  Life,
they  knew,  made  men  vulnerable  in  proportion  to  its
variety  and  intensity.  Whether  their  desire  was  to
ward  off  misery  and  maintain  serenity,  or  to  avoid
wickedness  and  cherish  virtue,  in  either  case  it  was
prudent  not  to  feel  overmuch,  for  so  opportunity
would  be  offered  to  the  enemy.  The  individual  soul
and  body  together,  or  the  individual  soul  fortified
against  its  body  as  the  nearest  camp  of  the  enemy,
could  maintain  independence  only  by  a  lowering  of
life,  a  tempering  of  life  with  death.

Knowledge  had  grown,  or  seemed  to  grow,  after
life  had  begun  to  sink  :  but  as  life  sank  more  and
more,  knowledge  at  length  failed  also.  The  cause  of
failure  lay  not  merely  in  the  intrinsic  difficulty  of  the


THE  LIFE  97

problems  attempted,  or  the  inadequacy  of  the  means
then  within  reach  for  solving  them,  but  in  the  drying
up  of  the  impulse  to  seek  truth,  and  even  of  the  capa-
city for  recognising  it.  For  no  sense  that  knowledge
is  wanted  for  practical  necessities,  much  more  no  rest-
lessness of  neutral  curiosity,  can  give  resolution  or
consistent  clearness  to  enquiry,  if  the  stream  of  life
itself  be  languid.  Enquiry  is  but  a  figure  of  speech
for  men  enquiring:  and  men  cannot  long  enquire  to
any  purpose  concerning  any  great  subject  when  they
have  sunk  to  welcoming  death  within  themselves  as
an  ally  and  friend.

Israel  also  had  a  full  share  of  the  natural  and
spontaneous  life  of  antiquity.  It  lasted  long,  and
it  revived  once  and  again  after  times  of  decline.  But
the  life  of  Israel  was  lived  in  the  presence  of  the
Lord  God  :  it  was  always  subordinate  to  obedience
and  faith  towards  One  above.  He  was  always  known
as  walking  among  the  trees  of  man's  garden,  a  joy
and  glory  to  the  worshipper,  a  terror  to  the  trans-
gressor. His  government  abounded  in  disciplinary
restraints  on  life,  while  it  never  favoured  the  sup-
pression of  life,  or  its  dishonour.  Nor  was  the  provi-
dential teaching  without  lasting  results  in  the  people.
Israel  alone  held  fast  an  ancient  integrity  of  nature,
neither  tolerating,  much  less  glorifying  moral  corrup-
tion on  the  one  hand,  nor  seeking  freedom  from  evil
or  nearness  to  God  in  the  stunting  or  frustration  of
life  on  the  other.

H.  L.  7


98  THE  LIFE

The  sense  of  life  which  Israel  enjoyed  was  how-
ever best  expressed  in  the  choice  of  the  name  'life'
as  a  designation  of  that  higher  communion  with  God
which  grew  forth  in  due  time  as  the  fruit  of  obedience
and  faith.  The  psalmist  or  wise  man  or  prophet,
whose  heart  had  sought  the  face  of  the  Lord,  was
conscious  of  a  second  or  divine  life  of  which  the  first
or  natural  life  was  at  once  the  image  and  the  founda-
tion ;  a  life  not  imprisoned  in  some  secret  recess  of
his  soul,  but  filling  his  whole  self,  and  overflowing
upon  the  earth  around  him.  It  did  not  estrange  him
from  the  natural  life  which  he  shared  with  other  men
or  with  lower  creatures,  and  which  he  was  taught  to
regard  as  proceeding  from  God's  own  breath  or  spirit.
But  it  withheld  him  from  seeking  satisfaction  within
the  lower  life  alone :  and  it  made  itself  known  not  as
a  Divinely  ordained  substitute  for  life,  for  the  sake  of
which  life  must  be  foregone;  but  as  itself  a  life  indeed,
the  crown  of  all  life.

There  is  no  life,  worthy  to  be  called  life,  entirely
separate  from  joy  and  gladness.  The  lower  life
when  it  exists  in  any  strength,  has  in  it  at  once  a
gladness  of  personal  energy  and  a  delight  in  the
gladness  of  all  living  creatures  as  it  is  displayed  in
their  youth  or  comeliness.  The  higher  life  for  Israel
could  never  be  wanting  in  this  characteristic.  It  was
essentially  a  joy  in  the  Lord  ;  not  an  acquiescence  in
His  counsels  but  a  sympathy  with  them.  It  was  par-
tial indeed,  and  sometimes  feeble  and  perplexed,  as


THE  LIFE  99

the  sympathy  of  dwellers  on  the  earth  with  the  Most
High.  It  took  the  form  of  response;  it  was  a  turning
back  to  Him  on  His  seeking.  But  this  recognition
of  its  derivative  nature  did  but  lift  it  the  higher
above  the  perils  of  earthly  vicissitude,  and  bring  a
wider  circle  of  earthly  existence  within  its  scope.

"With  Thee",  says  the  Psalmist,  "is  the  fountain
of  life".  The  perennial  spring  of  water  that  leaps
and  flashes  as  though  it  were  a  living  thing,  breaking
ceaselessly  forth  from  a  hidden  source,  is  the  best
image  of  that  higher  life  bestowed  on  him  to  whom
God  has  unveiled  His  face.  Other  things  that  have
a  brilliant  life  grow  sick  and  waste  and  die  :  but  the
fountain's  life  leaps  on  from  generation  to  generation.
Such,  the  Israelite  felt,  is  the  life  which  man  can  find
provided  for  him  in  God.  The  spontaneous  un-
cultured joy  of  spring  or  of  youth  is  short  lived.  It
dies  out  with  the  mere  lapse  of  time.  In  men  it  is
liable  to  be  prematurely  choked  with  labours  and
cares.  But  he  whose  heart  has  learned  to  make
answer  to  the  Lord  comes  to  find  that  the  power  of
life  and  joy  lives  on  with  him  while  outward  things
are  taking  their  course  of  obstruction  or  decay.  He
has  a  life  exempt  from  being  dried  up,  for  it  flows
not  from  within  himself  or  from  any  part  of  the
perishable  creation  but  from  an  ever  living  fountain
in  the  heavens.

But    in    the    later   days    before   Christ    came   the
honour  of  life  as  the  supreme  good  was  wellnigh  lost

7—2


luo  THE  LIFE

in  Israel.  Life  in  the  lower  sense  had  come  to  mean
little  more  than  existence,  the  bare  continuance  and
working  of  soul  and  body  through  a  term  of  years.
Life  in  the  higher  sense  had  come  to  mean  only  a
future  existence ;  bright  in  contrast  with  the  present,
but  seldom  with  the  brightness  of  life,  and  not  to  be
entered  without  the  extinction  of  the  present  life.
Lofty  thoughts  were  not  wanting  about  the  blessing
that  accompanies  fear  of  God  and  trust  in  Him.
Wisdom  in  particular  as  a  Divine  gift  was  celebrated
not  unworthily  with  exalted  praises.  It  was  no
grovelling  or  trivial  form  of  wisdom  that  was  thus
extolled,  but  one  by  which  '  friends  of  God  and
prophets '  are  created ;  a  wisdom  in  which  God  was
the  Guide,  Himself  'the  corrector  of  the  wise'.  Yet
language  spoke  no  more  of  life  in  the  old  high  sense ;
and  the  silence  was  a  true  token  of  the  loss  which
had  been  suffered  in  thought  and  feeling.  Every  high
aspiration,  whether  it  was  a  hope  of  a  future  exis-
tence, or  a  hope  of  a  coming  deliverer,  or  a  pursuit
of  deep  things  known  only  to  the  sage,  was  a  flight
into  a  distant  region.  In  no  sense  was  life  itself  an
acknowledged  link  either  with  the  world  below  or
with  God  above.

Whatever  life  had  anywhere  been  found  and  lost,
whatever  life  had  never  been  found,  was  given  to  man
in  Christ.  It  may  be  that  this  or  that  portion  of  the
vast  inheritance  of  life  has  never  as  yet  been  claimed,


THE  LIFE  loi

or  nas  been  but  doubtfully  claimed,  because  faith  in
Him  has  been  too  petty  or  wilful  in  its  scope  as  well
as  too  feeble  in  its  energy.  But  in  Christ  life  was
given  in  its  fulness  nevertheless,  and  in  that  due
subordination  which  alone  secures  that  nothing  be
lost.  This  is  the  one  character  of  the  Gospel  which
takes  precedence  of  all  others :  its  many  partial
messages  are  unfoldings  of  its  primary  message  of
life.  Salvation  according  to  Scripture  is  nothing  less
than  the  preservation,  restoration  or  exaltation  of  life  :
while  nothing  that  partakes  or  can  partake  of  life  is
excluded  from  its  scope ;  and  as  is  the  measure,
grade,  and  perfection  of  life,  such  is  the  measure,
grade,  and  perfection  of  salvation.

This  the  true  nature  of  Christ's  work,  as  the
restoration  of  life  in  the  most  comprehensive  sense,
is  conspicuously  shown  from  the  beginning  by  the
contrast  with  John  the  Baptist  which  all  the  Gospels
exhibit.  The  austerity  of  John  himself,  and  the
stern  rigour  with  which  he  preached  purification  and
separation  in  his  war  against  the  evil  deeds  of  Israel,
might  regarded  alone  have  seemed  to  mark  him  as
only  reviving  a  departed  time,  and  making  no  new
step  in  the  history  of  God's  people.  But  this  work  of
his  was  clearly  signified  by  himself  to  be  a  well-
considered  preparation  for  One  whose  office  should
be  different  and  entirely  new.  In  John  the  law  of
Moses  spoke  out  once  more  at  its  highest  force  as  a
law,   uttered    in    the    language    and    depicted   in   the


I02  THE  LIFE

symbolic  acts  of  an  early  prophet.  At  the  dawning
presence  of  Him  who  was  coming  all  the  partial
anticipations  of  Kis  work  disappeared.  The  vague
evangelic  hopes  of  the  later  prophets  were  kept  back.
In  their  place  were  given  the  positive  assertions
relating  to  the  present  and  the  immediate  future  :
"  The  kingdom  of  heaven  hath  drawn  nigh  "  :  "  there
Cometh  he  that  is  stronger  than  I  after  me,  of  whom
I  am  not  meet  to  stoop  and  loose  the  latchet  of  his
shoes ".  The  old  mountain-thunder  of  Sinai  for  the
last  time  uttered  its  voice  in  John,  that  the  voice  of
the  Son  of  man  might  be  heard  in  tones  of  clearer
truth.

The  stronger  than  John  the  Baptist  was  named
Saviour  from  His  mother's  womb,  and  His  saving
was  part  of  His  lordship.  He  came  as  the  Anointed
King's  Son  to  His  own  inheritance,  to  deliver  a  holy
land  and  a  holy  people  from  invaders  and  usurpers,
and  to  bind  up  the  breaches  and  severances  which
they  had  wrought.  Sometimes  the  intruders  are
diseases  or  disablements,  sometimes  they  are  sins,
sometimes  they  are  unclean  spirits  in  whose  working
disease  and  sin  are  inextricably  blended.  But  in  all
cases  the  expulsion  is  called  an  act  of  saving  or
salvation ;  and  it  follows  on  that  homage  to  the
rightful  Sovereign  above,  and  to  Him  whom  He  has
sent,  which  is  called  faith.

And  so  always  the  precious   possession  which  is
rescued  out  of  the  hand  of  the  enemies  is  Life.     That


THE  LIFE  103

one  name  alone  expresses  the  summed  result  of
Christ's  acts  of  various  and  limited  salvation.  The
diseases,  weaknesses,  cripplings,  losses  of  sight  or
speech  or  hearing,  and  losses  of  the  governing  reason,
whether  they  had  but  lately  come  to  pass  or  were  of
long  standing  or  existed  from  birth,  were  only  so
many  inroads  of  death,  partial  assimilations  of  the
living  body  to  the  inert  mimicry  of  the  corpse.  The
healings  and  restorations  were  but  differing  gifts  of
life  that  had  been  lost,  renewals  of  some  one  of  those
forms  or  activities  or  faculties  of  the  united  body  and
soul  which  make  up  the  single  picture  of  life.  Even
the  restoration  of  a  withered  hand  is  spoken  of  as  a
part  of  what  is  emphatically  called  '  saving  a  soul '
as  opposed  to  'slaying' ;  of  saving,  that  is,  the  central
and  supreme  seat  of  life  within  the  body  from  the
death  which  in  slaying  it  would  slay  not  one  member
but  all.  And  conversely  the  raisings  from  the  dead
appear  only  as  undoings  of  a  more  complete  mastery
exercised  by  death.  Concerning  the  daughter  an-
nounced to  lie  dead  it  is  promised  that  "  she  shall  be
saved":  the  father  of  the  dying  boy  is  told  simply
"Thy  son  liveth".

On  the  other  hand  the  adversary,  the  prince  of
the  invading  powers,  is  represented  as  having  his
desires  faithfully  expressed  in  the  will  of  the  mur-
derous Jews.  As  he  was  the  enemy  of  truth,  so  also
of  life:  he  was  a  manslayer  from  the  beginning.
And  the  traitorous  disciple,  who  consents  to  deliver


I04  THE  LIFE

up  his  Lord  to  death,  is  branded  with  the  same
character.  "  None  of  the  disciples  perished  save  the
son  of  perdition ".  He  who  forsook  the  ministry
of  salvation  and  Hfe,  and  gave  himself  up  to  wasting
and  spoiling  and  destroying,  was  by  a  righteous
necessity  compelled  to  waste  and  spoil  and  destroy
himself.  For  the  ministries  of  life  and  of  death  alike
are  the  same  within  that  they  are  without.

As  Christ  expelled  the  enemies  of  life,  so  also
He  provided  for  its  support.  The  lower  and  [seem-
ingly] lifeless  parts  of  creation  subsist  after  a
fashion  without  nourishment:  but  a  living  creature
depends  for  the  continuance  of  its  life  upon  what  it
receives  from  other  creatures,  and  if  the  proper
nourishment  is  withheld,  every  faculty  of  body  and
soul  languishes  and  at  last  dies.  It  was  fitting  that
the  Lord  of  life  should  wonderfully  bestow  not  merely
life  itself  but  that  without  which  life  was  in  the
ordinary  course  of  things  impossible  :  and  this  He
did  when  He  multiplied  food  that  the  hungry  multi-
tude might  be  fed.  Nor  was  His  action  independent
of  the  inferior  life  which  He  found  before  Him  :  His
heavenly  aid  flowed  in  earthly  channels.  He  took  that
which  was  brought  Him,  and  blessed  it,  and  lo  it  was
multiplied  as  it  came  from  the  disciples'  distributing
hands.  Thus  the  renewal  of  life  which  proceeded  from
Him  was  supplied  through  the  medium  of  the  earth's
own  produce,  and  conveyed  through  the  medium  of
men  in  whom  dwelt  no  independent  power.


THE   LIFE


105


By  signs  like  these  Christ  displayed  His  care  for
all  the  lower  life  of  man,  and  His  purpose  and  power
to  reach  and  restore  it.  But  there  is  another  life  in
which  it  culminates,  a  life  rooted  in  that  lower  life
and  fed  from  it,  yet  soaring  above  it,  the  highest
flower  and  fruit  of  man  when  God  is  not  as  yet
known,  the  life  of  the  various  human  affections.  In
the  fervour  of  this  life  gladness  rises  into  joy,  and
pain  into  sorrow.  Both  alike  are  manifestations  of
the  life,  and  exercises  of  it  whereby  it  is  continually
quickened.  Into  both  alike  Christ  entered,  and  by  the
felt  communion  of  His  presence  gave  new  life  to  the
life  within.  Now  to  a  father,  now  to  a  widowed
mother,  now  to  sisters,  now  to  a  master,  He  came
nigh  in  their  trouble  and  sorrow  with  a  threefold
salvation,  life  to  the  object  of  their  love,  life  to  them-
selves in  the  might  of  His  sympathy,  and  perennial
and  unbounded  life  to  all  in  faith  in  the  Father  above
to  whom  He  lifted  up  His  own  eyes.

As  He  gave  food  to  the  lower  life  as  well  as
expelled  its  enemies,  so  also  He  came  not  merely  as
a  healer  to  the  life  of  natural  affection  in  its  sorrow
but  also  as  the  renewer  and  multiplier  of  its  joy.
The  first  of  all  His  miracles,  the  act  which  He  made,
St  John  says,  as  a  beginning  of  His  signs,  a  silent
prophecy  of  His  full  salvation,  took  place  at  a
marriage,  the  highest  festival  of  natural  life  even
when  it  is  nothing  more.  Doubtless  His  own  presence
and  guileless  fellowship  of  joy  gave  much.     But  more


io6  THE   LIFE

was  to  come.  The  first  gift  which  He  gave  as  the
Son  of  God  was  the  wine  of  gladness,  poured  forth  at
the  appointed  hour  from  what  in  its  origin  was  water.
The  first  or  merely  natural  supply  of  wine  had  failed  ;
but  that  which  came  unseen  in  its  place  at  its  Lord's
command  was  the  same  and  yet  better ;  and  so  the
human  joy  received  promise  of  enrichment  and  exal-
tation from  heaven.

By  these  steps  Christ  ascended  to  the  height  of  His
purpose.  For  above  all  He  restored  and  more  than
restored,  the  nobler  life  which  Psalmists  and  other
men  of  old  had  found  in  communion  with  God.  His
lower  works  [would  have  been]  unmeaning  without
this  supreme  purpose ;  while  the  universal  office  and
range  of  the  higher  Life  would  never  have  been  felt
had  He  not  shown  that  all  Life  came  within  His
domain  as  destined  to  be  man's  sphere  and  instru-
ment. But  it  was  only  to  disciples  that  He  could
impart  it,  and  the  progress  of  their  discipleship  was
ever  leading  them  more  deeply  into  it.  But  it  was
not  an  esoteric  entrancement,  beginning  only  when
the  sights  and  sounds  of  daily  intercourse  were  for-
gotten. Every  word  of  His  in  public  or  private,
every  action,  every  look  and  gesture,  was  a  lesson  in
the  life.  His  acts  of  life-giving  in  the  lower  sphere
were  the  foundation  of  His  life-giving  in  the  higher
sphere.  Every  thing  which  entered  into  earthly  life
became  the  image  and  the  vehicle  of  a  Divine  grace,
a  spark  of  the  eternal  life.


THE  LIFE  107

The  life  thus  given  was  a  life  in  God.  It  rested
on  the  feeling  that  the  Father  in  heaven,  who  once
had  seemed  so  distant,  had  now  been  brought  nigh
to  those  who  looked  for  Him.  The  sense  of  this  near-
ness was  the  highest  condition  of  life.  Yet  not  the  less
was  the  life  in  God  dependent  on  discipleship  to  Christ.
We  call  it  a  gift,  but  it  was  a  gift  inseparable  from
the  person  of  the  Giver.  It  was  through  trustful
communion  with  the  Lord  who  walked  in  their  midst
as  one  of  themselves  that  they  learned  the  meaning
of  trustful  communion  with  the  Most  High ;  as  it
was  also  through  participation  in  His  own  life  of
joyful  obedience  that  they  came  to  know  how  the
heavenly  will  can  be  done  on  earth,  and  the  earthly
life  be  quickened  in  the  doing.  On  the  other  hand
this  intimate  communion  was  equally  dependent  on
their  growing  sense  of  His  authority:  in  proportion
as  they  felt  Him  to  be  their  Lord,  they  were  able  to
feel  Him  near  and  to  welcome  His  nearness.


Thus  far  we  have  been  tracing  some  of  the  chief
elements  of  life  as  we  find  them  in  the  records  of  the
earlier  Evangelists  and  also,  somewhat  more  distinctly,
in  narratives  by  St  John  in  which  life  itself  is  not
named.  But  his  office  of  binding  together  the  teach-
ings of  his  predecessors  by  bringing  to  light  and  to
distinct  expression  the  underlying  and  uniting  bases
of  truth  is  perfected  in  his  testimony  concerning  life.


io8  THE  LIFE

The  word  is  not  indeed  absent  from  the  first  three
Gospels,  though  it  is  rarer  there  than  we  might  have
expected  from  its  importance  in  the  Old  Testament.
When  a  ruler  asks  how  he  may  obtain  an  inheritance
of  'eternal  life',  our  Lord  accepts  from  his  lips
the  too  trite  phrase  which,  after  its  first  suggestion
by  the  language  of  the  Psalms,  had  been  brought
mto  general  use  by  its  occurrence  in  a  conspicuous
verse  of  the  book  of  Daniel.  But  at  the  same
time,  partly  by  the  whole  tenour  of  His  answers,
partly  by  bringing  in  the  ideas  of  entrance  into
the  kingdom  of  God  and  entrance  into  the  life.
He  implicitly  restores  to  the  phrase  a  truer  sense
than  that  implied  in  the  question,  and  current  in  the
debased  religion  of  the  time.

In  this  as  in  other  cases  St  John's  Gospel  gives
distinct  verbal  expression  to  what  the  other  Gospels
relate  but  do  not  name.  We  have  already  had
occasion  to  notice  the  character  of  the  first  miracle,
significantly  marked  as  the  first,  which  St  John
records.  Twice  shortly  afterwards  he  digresses  from
his  narrative  to  dwell  on  the  purpose  of  our  Lord's
coming  as  being  to  make  faith  possible,  and  on
eternal  life  as  being  the  work  and  fruit  of  such  faith  :
and  in  like  manner  at  the  original  close  of  the  Gospel
he  declares  himself  to  have  written  to  the  end  that
his  readers  might  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the
Son  of  God,  and  that  believing  they  might  have  life
in  His  name.


THE  LIFE  log

In  more  varied  combinations,  but  not  less  distinctly,
does  the  name  of  '  life '  run  through  our  Lord's  own
words  as  reported  by  St  John.  Beside  Jacob's  well
or  fountain  and  at  the  solemn  water-drawing  in  the
Temple  He  uses  the  familiar  phrase  'living  water'  in
a  sense  of  His  own,  which  had  been  also  the  sense  of
the  prophets.  When  He  had  fed  the  hungry  multi-
tudes, He  calls  Himself  the  Bread  of  God  which
descended  and  giveth  life  to  the  world,  the  very
Bread  of  the  Life.  In  contrast  to  the  destroying
thief  He  proclaims  Himself  to  be  the  Good  Shepherd,
come  that  the  sheep  may  have  life,  and  that  they
may  have  overflowing  abundance.

While  on  the  one  hand  He  speaks  of  this  life  in
language  drawn  from  the  ordinary  life  of  nature  on
which  it  is  in  a  manner  founded,  on  the  other  He
attributes  to  it  a  different  and  more  wondrous  origin.
The  first  stage  of  the  process  of  life  is  within  the
Godhead :  "  As  the  Father  hath  life  in  Himself,  so
also  He  gave  to  the  Son  to  have  life  in  Himself".
The  bestowal  on  man  is  but  another  stage  of  the
same  process :  "  as  the  living  Father  sent  me,  and  I
live  because  of  the  Father,  he  also  that  eateth  me,
even  he  shall  live  because  of  me ".  And  there  is  a
third  stage  in  which  men  become  in  their  turn  sub-
ordinate sources  of  life  :  "  he  that  believeth  on  me,  as
the  Scripture  said,  rivers  out  of  his  belly  shall  flow  of
living  water".

Thus   the   result   of  our    Lord's  varied    teaching


no  THE  LIFE

about  life  is  to  exhibit  it  as  the  ultimate  and  funda-
mental form  of  human  good,  the  highest  and  the
deepest  blessing  which  man  can  in  any  wise  attain  ;
and  that  especially  because  it  is  what  most  closely
links  him  to  God,  and  may  most  truly  be  represented
as  issuing  from  God's  own  being.  But  while  the
disciples  were  being  led  by  this  gradual  and  often
indirect  guidance  to  esteem  rightly  the  preciousness
of  life,  they  were  learning  also  in  like  manner  that
the  life  thus  highly  exalted  was  in  some  sense  em-
bodied in  the  person  of  their  Lord.  After  the  earlier
days  of  intercourse  had  brought  them  to  recognise
Him  as  a  trustworthy  teacher  concerning  life  and  the
way  to  attain  it,  nay  as  Himself  a  giver  of  it,  they
soon  came  to  feel  that  when  He  was  giving  them  life
He  was  giving  them  of  Himself,  for  they  received  it
after  a  fashion  which  the  externality  of  such  terms
as  'given'  and  'gift'  renders  them  incompetent  to
describe.

Life  came  forth  from  the  Lord  to  the  disciples
through  everything  in  Him  which  they  were  able  to
apprehend.  But  the  chief  agency  by  which  it  was
conveyed  was  His  sayings.  The  life  in  them  was  all
the  mightier  because  they  were  charged  with  other
contents  besides  life.  Through  His  sayings  He
guided,  and  through  His  sayings  He  taught.  They
were  lessons  in  the  Way  and  the  Truth,  and  for  that
reason  they  were  able  to  give  articulate  expression  to
the  inarticulate  life  beneath.     It  is  this  quality  in  our


THE  LIFE  iiT

Lord's  sayings  that  accounts  for  the  frequency  with
which  He  refers  to  them,  and  the  substantiaUty  with
which  He  appears  sometimes  to  invest  them  ;  now
laying  stress  on  their  contents  as  the  '  word '  or
declaration  of  truth,  of  which  they  were  at  once  parts
and  expressions ;  now  setting  them  forth  simply  as
utterances,  things  spoken  and  things  heard,  that  is  as
effluxes,  so  to  say,  from  a  personal  speaker.  Here
too  the  process  on  earth  is  represented  as  having  its
beginning  in  heaven :  what  things  soever  the  disciples
hear  the  Lord  speak  are  but  repeated  from  what  He
has  heard  the  Father  speak.  The  sayings  and  the
life  alike  and  together  descend  upon  them  through
the  Son  from  the  Father.

This  intimate  connexion  between  our  Lord's  say-
ings and  the  Divine  life  communicated  to  men  is
brought  into  unusual  prominence  at  the  close  of  that
long  discourse  on  the  Bread  of  the  Life,  which  St  John
represents  as  proving  a  stumbling-block  to  many  of
the  disciples,  and  leading  to  their  departure  from  the
company.  Their  murmuring  was  evidently  an  echo
of  the  murmurings  of  the  Jews  during  the  discourse :
they  could  not  accept  the  announced  descent  of  the
Divine  bread  out  of  the  heaven,  so  unlike  the  descent,
invisible  though  it  was  itself,  of  the  visible  and
tangible  manna.  Our  Lord  in  reply  pointed  onwards
to  a  time  when  the  form  of  the  Son  of  man  might  te
seen  reversing  the  descent  by  ascending  up  on  high,
and  then  exposed  the  unbelief  which  ascribed  a  life-


112  THE   LIFE

giving  power  to  visible  things,  because  it  assumed  the
heaven  and  the  earth  to  be  divided  by  an  impassable
chasm.  "It  is  the  spirit",  He  said,  "that  giveth  life,
the  flesh  profiteth  nothing:  the  sayings  which  I  have
spoken  unto  you  are  spirit  and  are  life  ".  "  But ",  he
added,  "there  are  of  you," — you,  my  disciples, —
"  some  who  believe  not  "  ; — some,  that  is,  who  have  no
sense  of  the  invisible ;  men  to  whom  loaves  of  bread
are  much  but  Divine  sayings  are  nothing,  because
spirit  is  nothing,  and  life  apart  from  its  concrete
manifestations  is  nothing.  The  sayings  which  He
had  been  speaking  to  them  could  not  but  be  unsub-
stantial indeed  in  eyes  to  which  flesh  was  the  standard
of  substance  :  their  true  substance  was  the  substance
of  spirit,  which  is  the  proper  realm  of  life,  and  there-
fore they  too  were  lifegiving  to  eyes  whose  sight  was
the  sight  of  faith.

Here  we  have  the  teaching  of  the  Speaker  of  the
lifegiving  sayings  Himself.  Immediately  afterwards
we  have  the  testimony  of  those  disciples  in  whom
distrust  of  the  unseen  had  failed  at  least  to  obtain
the  mastery.  When  many  of  the  disciples  departed
and  went  back,  and  walked  no  more  with  Jesus,  He
said  to  the  Twelve,  "  Have  ye  also  a  will  to  go  your
way  ?  "  St  Peter  answered,  "  Lord,  unto  whom  shall
we  depart  "i  sayings  hast  thou  of  eternal  life  :  and  we
have  believed  and  come  to  know  that  thou  art  the
Holy  One  of  God  ".  If  we  are  careful  not  to  read
into  this  bold  and  yet  restricted  profession  the  mature


THE  LIFE  113

beliefs  of  a  later  time,  we  may  learn  much  from  it
concerning  tlie  nature  of  the  Hfe  which  was  found  in
the  Lord.  Discipleship  could  no  longer  be  thought
of  as  a  terminable  interruption  to  ordinary  employ-
ments :  for  weal  or  woe,  it  had  become  the  primary
occupation.  And  further  the  present  discipleship
admitted  of  no  other  to  succeed  it.  Some  at  least  of
the  Twelve  had  in  a  manner  '  departed '  from  John
the  Baptist  when  they  came  to  Christ :  but  no  fresh
departure  of  the  same  kind  was  possible.  The  Baptist
himself  had  sanctioned  that  first  departure,  for  he  had
recognised  that  the  new  voice  was  the  voice  of  the
Bridegroom,  the  voice  of  life  and  joy,  the  voice  of
One  who  came  not  v/ith  a  single  rounded  and  com-
pleted office  or  message  external  to  Himself,  but
who  must  needs  go  on  increasing.  Even  such  a  Lord
the  Twelve  had  already  found  their  Lord  to  be,  in
spite  of  the  stumbling-blocks  which  beset  their  feet
as  they  strove  to  walk  with  Him.

The  adherence  of  the  Twelve  rested  on  surer
foundations  than  the  recollection  of  having  been  fed
in  the  wilderness,  or  of  the  miraculous  manner  of  the
feeding,  though  these  had  been  helpful  signs  and
lessons.  The  reason  why  they  could  not  depart  from
the  Lord  was  because  He  had  spoken  to  them  and
His  voice  had  entered  into  them.  His  sayings  had
been  outpourings  of  a  life  which  had  wakened  to
response  the  slumbering  life  within  themselves.  And
the  life  which  they  had  thus  felt  kindling  them  they

il.  L.  8


114  THE  LIFE

had  felt  also  to  have  the  quality  of  eternity :  whether
their  own  hold  on  it  were  fitful  and  fleeting  or  steady
and  sure,  it  issued  forth  itself  from  a  source  too  deep
for  earthly  ebb  and  flow,  even  from  Him  in  whom  all
is  eternal.  And  so  through  this  experience,  hard  to
translate  but  impossible  to  reason  away,  they  had
passed  beyond  the  sense  of  a  benefit,  beyond  grati-
tude to  a  benefactor,  into  a  faith,  at  once  a  vision
and  an  allegiance,  which  had  already  begun  to  unfold
itself  into  a  growing  knowledge.  Already  through
their  Lord  they  had  begun  to  know  God  more  truly,
and  simultaneously  to  know  their  Lord  Himself  in
relation  to  God  as  well  as  to  themselves,  to  know
Him  as  the  Holy  One  of  God,  God's  chosen  repre-
sentative, the  personal  medium  of  a  life  which  not
only  was  mighty  and  inspiring  but  purified  while  it
inspired,  and  tended  ever  upward  and  Godward  in
its  direction.  Departure  from  a  Lord  known  by  such
tokens  to  possess  such  attributes,  however  His  words
and  deeds  might  perplex  them,  and  however  imper-
fectly they  could  formulate  their  own  apprehensions
of  His  person,  would,  they  well  knew,  be  implicitly
nothing  less  than  departure  from  God.

This  submissive  sense  of  personal  life  proceeding
from  the  Teacher  and  Lord,  and  especially  as  im-
parted through  His  sayings,  is  indeed  in  great  measure
by  no  means  peculiar.  Similar  outgoings  of  life  and
receptions  of  life  accompany  the  ordinary  human
disciplcships    of    all    ages,    for   in    this    as    in    other


THE  LIFE  115

respects  the  discipleship  to  Christ  is  the  ratification
and  completion  of  all  discipleships.  Nay  this  is  the
most  precious  element  of  discipleship,  filial  or  other ;
itself,  when  wisely  ordered,  an  almost  indispensable
condition  of  harmony  of  inward  growth.  Beside  the
kindling  of  spirit  at  spirit,  all  efforts  after  indepen-
dent self-stimulation  and  self-culture  are  weak,  and
all  instruments  of  stimulation  and  culture  continued
and  applied  by  others  weaker  still :  and  though  the
kindling  power  is  great  even  when  exerted  by  equals,
it  is  greatest  and  least  liable  to  misuse  when  it  is  in
some  shape  authoritative,  arising  out  of  a  manifest
ascendancy  at  once  functional  and  personal,  to  which
thought  and  feeling  do  grateful  homage  for  the  free
activities  which  they  learn  to  put  forth  in  yielding
to  its  sway.

Thus  the  possession  and  utterance  of  sayings  of
eternal  life  is  in  its  measure  common  to  all  great
spiritual  teachers  of  things  Divine.  The  distinctive
perception  of  the  Twelve  concerning  their  Teacher
and  Lord  consisted  in  this,  that  their  personal  ex-
perience of  Him  as  the  Lord  of  their  own  hearts  and
minds  was  joined  to  a  recognition  of  purposes,  ofKices,
and  powers  in  Him  which  ranged  immeasurably  be-
yond benefits  conferred  on  themselves,  and  gave  the
impression  of  being  coextensive  with  the  Providence
of  God.  The  inward  sense  of  life  imparting  life  was
necessary  probably  to  the  very  existence  of  this  re-
cognition,   certainly    to    its    vividness    and    operative

Z—2


ii6  THE  LIFE

force.  Yet  by  itself  it  could  not  reach  to  discerning
the  uniqueness  of  the  Life-giver :  it  was  through  the
concurring  glimpses  of  His  loftiness  and  His  univer-
sality that  He  could  be  named,  in  such  wise  as  He
then  was  named,  the  Holy  One  of  God.

The  unclean  spirits  had  instantly  called  Him  by
the  same  name,  for  they  too  perceived  that  He  was
come  from  God  to  put  in  force  the  holiness  of  God,
and  this  it  was  that  roused  their  terror  at  His  pre-
sence. The  disciples  learned  its  truth  only  by
degrees ;  but  they  found  in  it  the  sufficient  reason
why  they  should  cleave  to  His  presence  when  others
were  departing,  and  when  the  impulse  to  depart  was
felt  within  themselves  too.  They  could  not  think  of
the  eternal  life  which  they  felt  within  themselves  as
separable  from  Him  who  had  awakened  it,  or  His
uplifting  power  over  themselves  from  His  kingly
representation  of  the  Holy  and  Living  God.

The  departure  which  had  been  spoken  of  at  that
close  of  one  time  of  probation  was  a  departure  of  the
disciples  from  the  Lord.  The  perplexity  which  found
vent  in  St  Thomas's  question  on  the  evening  of  the
Last  Supper  arose  out  of  the  impending  departure
of  the  Lord  from  the  disciples.  In  the  interval  the
sayings  of  eternal  life  had  taken  fuller  possession,
though  not  yet  able  to  banish  doubt  and  misgiving.
Among  them  were  the  words  with  which  He  had
guided   Martha  to  better  thoughts   than   those  with


THE  LIFE


117


which  she  had  met  Him  on  the  way  to  the  grave  of
Lazarus,  saying  to  her  "  I  am  the  Resurrection  and
the  Life  ".  On  the  one  side  were  the  jealous  indivi-
dual attachment  which  claimed  the  Lord  only  for
herself  and  her  brother,  and  the  confidence  in  His
power  to  prevail  with  God  which  assumed  that  His
advocacy  would  be  set  in  motion  in  like  manner  by
individual  friendship  rather  than  by  all-embracing
allegiance  to  the  Father's  will  :  on  the  other  was  the
languid  expectation,  accepted  passively  from  the  pre-
vailing creed,  that  in  some  distant  time  her  brother
should  rise  again,  and  the  inability  to  be  satisfied
with  a  promise  too  widely  detached  from  the  sorrow-
ful present  to  affect  deeply  the  sense  of  death  within.
Both  sets  of  feelings  were  purified  and  enlarged  to-
gether. The  personal  attachment  was  expanded  into
a  faith  which  could  recognise  the  individual  heart's
Lord  as  the  universal  Lord :  the  torpid  expectation
was  quickened  into  a  living  hope  by  becoming  rooted
in  a  personal  faith.  The  truth  of  resurrection  could  be
learned  only  through  the  truth  of  life,  and  the  truth  of
life  could  be  learned  only  in  the  Living  One  in  whom
life  in  all  its  modes  is  summed  up  from  the  beginning.
He  was  the  Resurrection  because  He  was  the  Life.
Faith  in  Him  was  for  men  itself  the  primary  resurrec-
tion, and  in  the  light  of  that  faith  alone  could  the
hope  of  every  other  resurrection  be  true  and  sure.

Thus  when  our  Lord  said  to  the  disciples  in  the
upper  room  "  I   am   the  Life ",  the   designation   ex-


ii8  THE  LIFE

pressed  not  only  the  fundamental  truth  towards  which
many  thoughts  of  theirs  had  under  His  guidance
long  been  tending,  but  had  itself  been  uttered  in
their  hearing  no  long  time  before,  and  that  in  a
combination  which  gave  it  a  peculiar  force  now  that
the  threatenings  of  hostile  Jews,  joined  with  His  own
earlier  predictions  of  His  fate  at  the  hands  of  men
and  His  present  language  about  departure,  were  to
their  eyes  casting  over  Him  a  shadow  too  like  the
shadow  of  death.  As  He  spoke  not  now  of  death
but  of  a  journey,  so  neither  did  He  speak  now  of
resurrection :  nothing  was  allowed  to  disguise  the
continuity  and  the  true  issue  of  the  journey,  coming
to  the  Father;  or  to  impair  by  secondary  applications
the  simple  breadth  of  the  teaching  which  by  means
of  this  crisis  the  chosen  apostles  were  appointed  to
receive.  Yet  though  at  such  a  season  the  word  "  I
am  the  Life "  involved  even  a  greater  paradox  than
its  predecessors,  it  was  also  better  fitted  to  instil
strength  into  the  sinking  hearts  of  disciples  by  the
bare  force  of  its  contrast  with  anticipated  death,  and
still  more  by  its  association  with  the  answer  given  to
Martha,  and  with  the  signs  following  after  by  which
authority  over  the  realm  of  death  had  been  victori-
ously maintained.

The  announcement  came  however  as  the  last  of
three :  we  have  to  read  it  neither  as  a  repetition  of
what  had  been  spoken  to  Martha  nor  yet  absolutely
but   as   the   third  step   in   the  self-revelation  of  our


THE  LIFE  119

Lord  to  St  Thomas  in  response  to  his  anxious  ques-
tioning. The  disciple  had  no  need  to  enquire  by
what  way  the  Lord  was  going,  or  by  what  way  He
might  be  followed  hereafter,  if  only  his  discipleship
had  already  led  him  to  a  true  knowledge  of  his  Lord,
and  especially  prepared  him  to  see  his  Lord  as  the
one  universal  Way  for  all  the  goings  of  man.

Yet  even  this  recognition  would  be  found  in-
sufficient when  brought  face  to  face  with  a  maturer
and  more  reflective  experience.  The  goings  of  men,
the  movements  of  events  within  and  around  men,  are
after  all  in  one  sense  derivative,  not  primary.  They
are  conditioned  by  the  permanent  constitution  and
relations  of  men  without  and  within,  and  after  a
certain  stage  of  growth  men's  goings  need  for  their
regulation  a  knowledge  of  these  relations  and  [this]
constitution.  A  way  presupposes  a  truth,  and  know-
ledge of  truth  sooner  or  later  becomes  indispensable
for  walking  in  a  right  way.  Hence  Christ's  claim  to
be  called  the  Way  required  for  its  substantiation  an
equal  claim  to  be  called  the  Truth.  Discipleship  to
Him  had  throughout  its  course  involved  perpetual
manifestation  of  truth  and  perpetual  education  of  the
power  of  apprehending  truth,  and  that  in  close  rela-
tion to  Himself.  And  so  on  the  one  hand  its  office
in  the  future  would  vitally  depend  on  perpetual  appre-
hension of  truth,  and  on  the  other  Christ  the  Word  of
God,  by  virtue  of  His  primary  relation  to  all  created
things,  would  be  found  to  be  the  Truth  of  truth,  and


I20  THE  LIFE

knowledge  of  Him  to  be  the  keystone  of  all  know-
ledge.

But  again  these  two  responses  to  the  perplexed
disciple  by  no  means  fill  up  the  sum  of  need  of  which
experience  makes  him  conscious.  Man  and  the
universe  surrounding  man  can  by  no  means  be  re-
solved completely  into  a  succession  of  acts  and  events
and  a  constitutive  order  of  permanent  forms.  The  one
most  mysterious  but  most  mighty  factor  of  created
things  remains,  the  link  between  the  two  worlds  of
movement  and  of  order,  even  that  which  generalising
rudely  from  a  single  conspicuous  manifestation  we
call  life,  and  for  which  philosophy  has  found  no
better  name.  It  reaches  in  unbroken  range  from  the
obscurest  marshallings  of  the  inner  substance  of
seemingly  lifeless  things  up  to  the  loftiest  exaltations
of  the  human  spirit.  This  life  as  it  is  in  man,  partly
shared  with  the  lower  animals,  partly  unique,  not
only  is  the  necessary  latent  base  of  human  action  and
knowledge,  but  by  their  side  and  in  their  midst  has
its  own  proper  manifestations  in  what  is  called  in  the
widest  sense  emotion.  Life  is  more  than  emotion,
but  the  special  expression  of  life  is  emotion.

Here  then  was  a  world  within  man,  his  very
innermost  world,  which  had  to  learn  its  own  proper
form  of  discipleship.  If  right  ways  are  hard  to  find,
if  the  truth  of  things  is  hard  to  be  known,  yet  harder
is  it  to  attain  to  an  order  in  the  obscure  chaos  of
feeling,  to  bring  it  into  harmonious  cooperation  with


THE   LIFE  121

the  other  human  energies,  nay  to  keep  it  from  de-
ranging or  subverting  their  work.  And  yet  its  pre-
sence has  no  mere  natural  necessity,  to  be  accepted
but  not  to  be  cherished.  If  it  touched  the  lowest  in
man,  it  was  also  itself  his  highest,  and  a  bond  between
his  highest  and  his  lowest.  The  agencies  that  had
tended  and  were  still  tending  to  estrange  the  Eleven
from  Christ  were  not  merely  rival  ways  in  which  they
were  tempted  to  walk,  or  rival  teachings  which  they
were  tempted  to  accept  as  presentations  of  truth.
More  than  all  these  were  rival  distractions  of  their
life  through  the  witcheries  of  life's  power,  or  even  the
claims  of  its  seeming  authority ;  distractions  belong-
ing partly  to  the  natural  life  of  impulse  found  in  all
the  higher  orders  of  living  creatures,  partly  to  the
life  of  human  relationships,  partly  to  the  life  belong-
ing to  the  recognition  of  God.  And  as  we  have
already  seen,  what  most  enabled  the  Eleven  to  hold
steadfastly  on  in  spite  of  these  distractions  was  the
timid  yet  clear  response  of  the  life  within  them  to  the
commanding  Life  in  their  midst.  Into  this  region
their  questioning  minds  must  now  be  conducted  that
the  final  decision  might  be  securely  made.  The
choice  of  ways  was  arbitrary,  the  problem  of  truth
was  insoluble,  until  council  had  been"  held  in  the
inner  shrine  of  life.

The  three  steps  in  Christ's  self-revelation  to  St
Thomas  correspond  therefore  to  the  three  great  pro-
vinces of  human  energy  generally,  and   likewise  to


122  THE  LIFE

the  three  forms  of  discipleship  which  together  consti-
tuted the  personal  education  of  the  apostles  during
the  Lord's  ministry;  and  in  leading  the  apostles  from
the  way  about  which  they  were  enquiring  to  the
knowledge  of  truth  involved  in  any  trustworthy  ac-
ceptance of  a  way,  and  thence  further  down  to  the
testimony  of  life  concerning  life,  He  was  conforming
to  the  order  of  universal  fact  exemplified  in  their
immature  but  unperverted  natures.  This  ultimate
appeal  however  to  the  voice  of  life  could  be  right,
nay  strictly  speaking  could  be  possible,  only  in  so
far  as  life  was  taught  by  the  Truth,  and  exercised  in
the  Way.  For  it  would  be  a  fatal  error  to  think  of
the  several  characters  which  our  Lord  hereattributes
to  Himself,  or  the  corresponding  departments  of
human  nature  either  in  the  apostles  or  in  any  other
men,  as  separate  and  mutually  exclusive.  Distin-
guish the  parts  of  human  nature  as  we  may,  it
remains  a  living  whole ;  and  thus  its  indestructible
integrity  is  never  inert  in  any  action  of  any  part,
while  neglect  or  attempted  suppression  of  it  always
leads  to  perilous  disaster.  The  higher  the  life  in  man
rises,  the  more  need  it  has  of  knowledge  to  bestow
discrimination  and  proportion,  and  of  ordered  action
to  bestow  inward  discipline  and  outward  direction.

On  the  one  hand  life  in  its  lower  forms  is  the
common  ground  out  of  which  action  and  knowledge
have  sprung,  and  remains  always  their  hidden  con-
dition.    In  its  higher  forms  on   the  other  hand  life


THE   LIFE  123

outreaches  action  and  knowledge.  Yet  all  the  pro-
perly human  ascent  and  progress  of  life  has  been
dependent  on  progress  in  ways  of  action  and  in
knowledge;  and  even  the  highest  life,  when  it  strives
to  be  independent  of  action  and  knowledge,  loses  all
claim  to  have  a  commanding  voice  for  the  will,  and
tends  downwards  towards  the  helpless  elements  of
blind  nature.  The  life  in  the  disciples  would  be  able
to  recognise  Christ  as  the  very  Life,  because  it  was
the  life  of  men  whose  reason  demanded  truth  and
whose  conscience  demanded  a  supreme  way.  What
was  deepest  in  them  could  close  with  what  was
deepest  in  Him,  because  no  conflict  between  different
parts  of  their  true  selves  was  involved,  nay  rather
they  found  a  new  harmony  counteracting  the  solvent
distractions  of  trouble  and  sin.

Thus  the  unity  of  the  Lord's  three  revealed  cha-
racters in  His  own  Person,  was  presented  to  the
disciples  as  the  foundation  for  unity  within  them-
selves, while  in  each  character  He  offered  Himself  as
the  adequate  satisfaction  of  the  corresponding  need.
If  He  were  not  the  Life,  it  was  little  that  He  should
be  the  Way  and  the  Truth.  If  it  was  only  the  outer
circles  of  human  existence  that  found  their  true
purpose  in  His  lordship  and  partook  of  His  unity,
then  the  present  had  no  order  and  the  future  no
promise.  An  independence  of  personality  and  affec-
tions and  desires  in  each  individual  disciple,  beneath
the   common    subjection    to    the    one   Way   and    the


124  THE  LIFE

one  Truth,  would  have  made  discipleship  at  last  a
mockery.  He  as  the  Life  must  rule  their  life  at  its
centre,  if  life  and  knowledge  and  action  were  to  make
one  harmonious  whole.  As  their  life  was  a  life  of
men,  and  was  designed  to  enable  them  to  do  their
part  among  men,  He  must  also  be  the  life  of  mankind.
Once  more,  since  the  life  of  man  is  the  summing  up
of  all  lower  lives,  and  implicitly  includes  them  within
itself,  He  must  be  the  Life  of  all  creatures  that  live,
the  First  and  the  Last  of  all  creation.

In  the  discourses  of  the  last  evening  life  is  named
but  once  after  the  announcement  of  the  Life  to  St
Thomas.  Yet  almost  every  sentence  henceforth  is  a
teaching  concerning  life  as  it  is  at  its  highest.  The
word  which  immediately  gathers  up  the  three  an-
nouncements, "  No  man  cometh  unto  the  Father  save
through  me  ",  though  moulded  by  the  initial  concep-
tion of  the  Way,  in  its  inner  sense  interprets  the  Way
by  the  Life.  Translated  into  any  language  but  that
of  the  aspiring  life  of  love,  'coming  to  the  Father'  is
a  hollow  and  dangerous  phrase :  as  pronounced  by
the  Son,  it  proclaims  the  ultimate  source  of  life  in
the  Father's  eternal  Fatherhood.

St  Philip's  appeal,  "  Lord,  shew  us  the  Father  and
it  sufficeth  us  ",  was  a  response  of  reawakened  though
still  ill-instructed  life ;  and  our  Lord's  answer  to  it
aims  at  drawing  forth  into  clearness  this  its  latent
ground.     He  explains  the  assurance,  "  He  that  hath


THE  LIFE


125


seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father",  by  suggesting  what
manner  of  vision  it  is  that  must  fill  the  eye  of  a
disciple's  heart.     "  Believest  thou  not  that  I  am  in
the  Father  and  the  Father  is  in  me  ? "     Here  is  life
in    its   first   and   eternal    movement,  the   union  and
communion  of  the  Father  and  the  Son.     Hence  flows
in  created  things  all  their  life,  always  resting  on  union
and   communion,   always   tending   upwards   towards
the  perfect  spiritual  union  and  communion  within  the
Godhead.     In  proportion  as  created  things  become
able  to  know  their  life,  and  to  know  it  in  its  divine
fountain,  they  learn  to  recognise  the  manifestations
of  the  Father's  mind  in  the  Son's  words  and  works,
and  in  that  light  to  recognise  them   in   all  things.
"The  sayings  which  I  speak  to  you  I  speak  not  of
mine  own  self,  but  the  Father  abiding  in  me  doeth
His    works ".      Those    very   sayings    which    carried
eternal  life  to  the  disciples'  hearts  were  works  of  the
Father  abiding  and  working  in  the  Son.     Their  ex-
perience of  that  life  was  untrue  to  itself  if  it  failed  to
inspire  faith,  a  faith  not  to  be  quenched  by  aught
that  might  befall  the  outward  form  and  voice  through
which  they  had  known  their  Lord,  but  going  forward
to  rest  through  Him  on  the  living  God.

The  next  portion  of  the  discourse  has  for  its  chief
subject  love,  that  is,  that  joyful  sense  of  recognised
union  and  communion  which  is  the  culmination  of
life.  The  disciples'  genuine  love  to  the  Lord  was  in
danger  of  becoming  the  excuse  for  blank  dismay  at


126  THE  LIFE

His  departure :  it  was  in  danger  also  of  resting  within
itself  instead  of  spending  itself  upon  fit  result.  There-
fore the  homely  warning  came,  "  If  ye  love  me,  ye
will  keep  my  commandments".  Here  was  the  prin-
ciple :  love  to  be  worthy  the  name  must  be  love  at
work,  love  governed  by  duty.  But  the  original  per-
plexity at  once  presented  itself  afresh  in  a  new  shape:
how  was  the  principle  to  be  put  in  force  without
higher  guidance  .-*  "  I  will  ask  the  Father,  and  He
will  give  you  another  Advocate  that  He  may  be  with
you  for  ever,  even  the  Spirit  of  the  Truth".  For  the
moment  it  sufficed  to  announce  this  new  and  inward
Advocate,  Who  was  henceforth  to  teach  the  love  of
the  present  Advocate  how  to  go  forth  into  action  as
the  keeping  of  His  commandments  through  increasing
knowledge  of  His  Truth.  Christ  then  returned  to
the  wound  which  He  seemed  to  be  inflicting  on  the
love  to  Himself.  "  I  will  not  leave  you  bereaved,  I
come  unto  you.  Yet  a  little  while  and  the  world
beholdeth  me  no  more :  but  ye  behold  me,  because  I
live,  and  ye  shall  live.  In  that  day  ye  yourselves
shall  come  to  know  that  I  am  in  my  Father,  and  ye
in  Me,  and  I  in  you  ".  The  departure  was  to  be  real,
but  it  was  not  to  be  the  whole  reality.  In  the  midst
of  their  desolation  they  should  behold  Him  coming
to  them,  and  that  first  new  coming  out  of  the  dark-
ness of  death  should  be  the  pledge  and  type  of
comings  which  should  meet  their  longing  eyes  in
many   a   future   desolation.     These   comings   should


THE  LIFE  127

indeed  be  invisible  to  the  outward  sense,  to  the
powers  of  sight  that  they  possessed  in  common  with
'  the  world ',  and  that  were  compatible  with  that
death  of  the  higher  nature  which  was  characteristic
of  '  the  world '.  The  eyes  which  should  recognise
His  coming  would  be  organs  generated  by  the  growth
of  life  :  Him  the  Living  One  the  disciples  should  see,
because  they  too  should  be  quickened  with  His  own
eternal  and  yet  risen  life.  In  that  day  of  revelation,
no  longer  by  the  hearing  of  the  ear  but  by  the  light
of  a  sympathetic  experience  of  their  own,  they  should
learn  the  hidden  origin  and  course  of  life  and  of  love,
even  the  primary  union  and  communion  of  the  Son
with  the  Father,  and  the  derivative  union  and  com-
munion of  disciples  with  the  Son.

The  second  great  division  of  these  discourses
begins  with  a  longer  and  less  interrupted  withdrawal
from  the  region  of  present  perplexities  into  the  in-
visible and  fixed  personal  relationship  of  which  the
whole  present  trouble  was  an  incident.  Christ  de-
clared Himself  now  to  be  the  true  vine  of  which  His
Father  was  the  husbandman  and  His  disciples  the
branches.  He  imaged  Himself  as  Israel's  own  sacred
tree  of  life,  alike  by  its  glorious  growths  and  by  the
gladdening  energy  of  its  produce  a  true  and  hallowed
type  of  abounding  life.  He  turned  the  disciples
away  from  that  visible  and  obvious  relation  to  each
other  and  to  Him  which  consisted  in  distinctness  and
detachment;  teaching  them  to  recognise  tliat  in  the


128  THE  LIFE

inner  region  of  life  all  several  centres  and  person-
alities find  their  base  and  their  complement  in  an
underlying  unity;  teaching  them  also  in  the  same
breath  that  He  was  not  a  partaker  of  the  unity  but
its  source  and  its  pervading  embodiment.  He  the
Life  was  not  one  among  many  branches  but  the  tree
of  which  all  the  branches  were  subordinate  out-
growths. While  they  were  in  the  vine  their  life
subsisted  :  if  they  suffered  themselves  to  be  detached
from  the  vine,  their  life  must  perish.  To  *  abide '
therefore  in  the  vine  was  their  first  necessity  and
duty  ;  and  the  counterpart  of  it  was  the  fulfilment  of
the  function  of  a  vine-branch,  the  bearing  of  fruit.
A  life  which  bore  no  good  fruit  was  a  perverted  life,
and  barren  branches  would  in  the  Husbandman's  eye
be  excrescences  which  He  must  needs  take  away.
Nay  each  branch  itself  needed  the  cleansing  away  of
its  own  excrescences  that  it  might  bear  more  fruit.
But  beside  this  outer  cleansing  by  trouble,  such  as  it
was  the  Father's  purpose  that  the  disciples  should
now  undergo,  there  was  a  more  effectual  cleansing  by
the  power  of  a  divine  life  within.  Already  that  power
had  wrought  in  them  to  good  effect :  already  the
eternal  life  residing  in  the  Word  which  He  had
spoken  to  them  had  cast  off  many  a  barren  excres-
cence which  had  seemed  part  of  themselves.  What
remained  was  to  suffer  no  detachment  from  the
central  Life,  and  to  treasure  in  the  chambers  of
living  hearts  the  sayings  of   life  which  had  entered


THE  LIFE


129


into  them,  the  many  partial  utterances  of  the  one
word  or  revelation  of  life,  that  they  might  be  always
means  of  fresh  renewal  and  consummation  to  the
lifelong  discipleship.  Yet  it  was  no  ecstasy  of
dreaming  recluses  that  was  enjoined  or  promised,
but  love  and  obedience,  the  simplest  ruling  elements
of  a  true  and  pure  human  life,  consecrated  by  the
revelation  of  their  patterns  in  the  heavens.  "  As  the
Father  loved  me,  I  also  loved  you  :  abide  ye  in  my
love.  If  ye  keep  my  commandments,  ye  shall  abide
in  my  love,  as  I  have  kept  my  Father's  command-
ments, and  abide  in  His  love."

This  is  the  theme  which  under  various  applications,
speaking  much  to  the  present  and  yet  more  to  the
future,  is  pursued  through  many  verses.  With  love,
the  highest  manifestation  of  life,  Christ  now  associates
joy,  its  never-failing  accompaniment,  not  as  a  thing
given  by  His  power  but  as  flowing  from  His  person,
that  it  may  meet  and  complete  and  substantiate  the
incoherent  and  precarious  joy  which  they  had  known
already.  "  These  things  have  I  spoken  to  you  that
my  joy  may  be  in  you,  and  your  joy  may  be  fulfilled."
Then  He  passes  on  at  once  to  the  issue  and  trial  of
love,  which  was  also  a  lesson  in  the  character  and
method  of  His  own  joy.  To  abide  in  His  love  in-
volved the  loving  of  one  another.  As  at  the  beginning
of  the  conversation,  He  treats  this  mutual  love  as  no
ready  product  of  spontaneous  impulse,  but  as  the
fulfilment  of  a  searching  precept  which  needed  to  be

H.  L.  9


I30  THE  LIFE

spoken  with  emphatic  authority  :  "  this  is  my  com-
mandment that  ye  love  one  another  as  I  loved  you."
The  test  of  a  love  having  this  origin  was  self-sacrifice.
In  all  its  grades  it  could  be  tried  by  reference  to  that
perfect  fruit  of  it  which  He  was  shewing  forth  in
laying  down  His  soul  for  their  sake.

The  love  then  from  which  the  promised  joy  was

inseparable  might  lead  of  necessity  to  the  uttermost

suffering.     Hatred  on  the  part  of  the  world  without,

which  had  broken  forth  against  Him  and  His  Father,

would   not    fail    to    pursue,  the    brotherhood    of   His

disciples.    They  must  not  suffer  themselves  to  stumble

at  these  consequences  of  following  Him  in  His  love.

The  already  promised  Advocate,  whose  name  is  the

Spirit  of  the  Truth,  should  by  His  coming  renew  the

presence  of  the  vanished  Advocate  and  Lord  in  deeper

and   ampler  power.     The  witness  which    He   should

bear  to  their  hearts  concerning  Christ  should  enable

them  to  bear  their  own  appointed  witness  of  word  and

act  in  the  face  of  persecution.     Though  they  were  as

yet   unable  to  carry  the  weight  of  the  many  things

which  He  had  still  to  say  to  them,  what  they  had

already  seen    and    heard   in  the  days   during  which

they  had   been  with   Him  would   fully  suffice,  when

wrought  out  for  them  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Truth  in

adaptation    to  -each    several   need.     Though  it  is  of

truth    and    the    knowledge    of  truth    that    our   Lord

speaks  directly  here,  the  context  shews  that  He  had

in  view  an  office  of  the  Spirit  in  regard  to  the  Life


THE  LIFE  131

analogous  to  His  interpretative  office  in  regard  of  the
Truth,  and  indeed  closely  accompanying  it.  It  was
only  through  the  successive  breathings  of  the  Life-
giving  Spirit  of  the  Truth  throughout  the  ages  that
the  Life-giving  Lord  should  yield  for  human  use  the
virtue  of  His  one  and  abiding  life.  Neither  could
that  life  of  His  be  ever  without  His  truth,  nor  His
truth  without  His  life.  He  expands  His  first  words
about  guidance  into  the  Truth,  and  about  the  Spirit
as  speaking  only  what  He  hears,  into  a  promise
inclusive  of  every  thing  Divine  that  is  communicable
to  man.  "He",  the  Spirit  of  the  Truth,  "shall
glorify  me,  for  He  shall  take  of  what  is  mine  and
declare  it  to  you  :  all  things  whatsoever  the  Father
hath  are  mine;  therefore  said  I  that  He  takcth  of
what  is  mine  and  shall  declare  it  to  you."

In  expounding  the  mysterious  trouble  of  the
present,  the  Lord  had  of  necessity  lifted  forward  the
discourse  into  the  high  responsibilities  of  days  to
come.  So  alone  could  He  bring  a  solace  which
should  be  also  a  strengthening,  effectual  at  last,  if
not  at  once,  because  dealing  with  that  life  which  is
also  light.  But  He  would  not  leave  it  possible  for
the  disciples  to  misinterpret  this  deliberate  method
of  His  consolation  as  a  forgetfulness  of  their  distress.
He  returned  therefore  to  the  burden  of  His  first
announcements,  "a  little  while  and  ye  behold  me  no
more,  and  again  a  little  while  and  ye  shall  see  me";
and  when  the  words  were  found  still  hard  to  interpret,

9—2


132  THE  LIFE

He  instructed  the  disciples  to  look  on  their  impending
sorrows   as  the  travail-pangs  of  a  mighty  birth  into
the  world,  and  therefore  the  necessary  prelude  of  a
joy  to   themselves   of  which    no    power    external  to
themselves  could  rob  them.      He    promised    as   the
characteristic  of  that  new  day  an  open  and  trustful
communion    with    the    Father    through    Himself,   a
sharing,  that  is,  in  His  own  inmost  filial  life,  in  which
the  offering  of  prayer  in  His  name  and  the  granting
of  prayer  in  His  name  should  be  the  fulfilment  of  joy.
For  a  moment  He  chastened  the  too  confidently  pro-
fessed faith  in   the  completeness  of  His  knowledge
and   the    Divine    origin    of   His   mission,  in  spite  of
which  the  disciples  would  shortly  suffer  their  present
communion  with  Him  and  with  each  other  to  be  for
the  while  dissolved,  and  would  leave  Him,  as  far  as
act  of  theirs  could  reach,  alone ;   as  nearly  alone  as
was    possible    to    One    whose   communion    with    the
Father  was  unbroken.     But  the  rebuke  of  premature
confidence  that   trusted  in  itself  enforced  yet  more
strongly  the   need   and  the  power  of  the  sustaining
life    to   be   drawn    from    communion    with    His    life.
With  a  promise  of  peace  in  Him  amid  conflict,  of
victory  in  Him  amid  defeat,  as  the  ordained  result  of
receiving  these  His  sayings,  the  discourse  ends.

Within  the  first  petition  of  the  prayer  which  our
Lord  sent  forth  with  uplifted  eyes  into  the  heaven
eternal  life  is  once  more  named  :  "  Father,  the  hour
is  come  :  glorify  Thy  Son,  that  the  Son  may  glorify


THE  LIFE  133

Thee,  as  Thou  gavest  Him  right  over  all  flesh,  that,
every  thing  which  Thou  hast  given  Him,  He  should
give  to  them  eternal  life."  In  perfecting  the  work
which  the  Father  had  given  Him  to  do,  the  Son
already  glorified  the  Father  on  the  earth.  But  a
consummation  of  received  and  reflected  glory  in
death  and  resurrection  was  still  to  come;  and  it  was
measured  by  the  breadth  of  the  heritage  bestowed  on
the  Son  as  the  Son  of  Man.  Not  disciples  only  but
all  flesh,  every  thing  which  the  Father  had  given  as
part  of  the  heritage,  was  destined  to  share  the  Son's
eternal  life,  as  it  already  shared  a  lower  life  in  Him  ;
and  that  gift  of  eternal  life  was  to  grow  out  of  His
own  glorious  perfecting.  "  And  this  ",  He  said,  "  is
the  eternal  life,  that  they  know  Thee,  the  only  true
God,  and  Him  whom  Thou  didst  send,  Jesus  Christ."
The  words  have  already  been  cited  as  implying
certain  characteristics  of  the  Truth :  their  direct
purport  concerns  us  even  more  now  by  what  it
declares  on  the  other  hand  respecting  that  higher
or  spiritual  life  which  decays  not  like  the  life  of  the
grass,  but  has  a  share  in  eternity.  It  is  no  blind
clinging  to  an  unknown  power  in  the  upper  abysses,
but  itself  conditioned  by  knowledge  and  the  abiding
pursuit  of  knowledge.  This  vital  knowledge  stops
not  short  of  the  Highest:  its  supreme  object  is  God  ;
God  ascertained  by  the  light  of  truth  as  against  all
figments  of  the  heart  or  mind  which  usurp  His  awful
Name.     And  the  word  "  Thee  "  determines  this  true


134  THE  LIFE

God  :  the  true  God  is  He  whom  Jesus  called  "  Father  ",
He  therefore  whom  Jesus  was  revealing  by  perfect
sonship  upon  earth.  Thus  the  knowledge  of  God  is
involved  in  the  knowledge  of  Jesus  recognised  as  His
Christ ;  and  the  eternal  life  is  lived  when  every  power
takes  hold  of  the  manifested  Life  who  is  also  the
manifested  Light.

In  the  prayer,  as  in  the  discourse  which  it  crowned,
the  naming  of  life  is  succeeded  by  various  sayings
bearing  on  relations  to  the  Lord  which  can  be
understood  only  as  relations  of  life.  The  most
characteristic  sentences  are  the  petitions,  first  for  the
disciples,  and  then  for  those  who  believe  through  the
disciples'  word,  that  they  may  be  all  one  ;  "one",  He
prays,  "  as  thou,  Father,  in  me  and  I  in  thee,  that
they  themselves  also  may  be  in  us  "  ;  and  again,  "  I
in  them  and  thou  in  me,  that  they  all  may  be  per-
fected into  one,  that  the  world  may  know  that  thou
didst  send  me,  and  didst  love  them  as  thou  didst  love
me."  By  the  conciudmg  words,  as  by  the  words  of
like  import  in  the  similitude  of  the  Vine  and  the
branches,  the  life  to  which  this  unity  and  this  com-
munion belong  is  made  known  through  the  human
experience  of  love :  and  the  same  strain  is  repeated
in  the  last  words  of  the  prayer,  uttered  just  before
the  Lord  went  out  with  the  disciples  towards  the
garden  :  "  I  made  known  to  them  thy  Name  and  will
make  it  known  that  the  love  wherewith  thou  lovedst
me  may  be  in  them  and   I   in  thcin."     Through  the


THE  LIFE  135

mystery  of  love  Christ's  disciples  were  given  an
entrance  into  the  mystery  of  life ;  and  it  was  by  the
present  and  future  knowledge  of  Christ's  love,  not
originating  in  Himself  but  carrying  on  the  Father's
love  to  Him,  that  Christ's  disciples  were  more  and
more  to  know  the  Life,  to  be  filled  with  it,  and  to
manifest  it  themselves  for  the  salvation  of  the  world.

The  discourse  and  the  prayer  were  the  last  prelude
to  that  signal  revelation  of  the  life  of  God  bestowed
on  man  which  is  the  cardinal  event  in  the  history  of
mankind  as  it  was  in  that  of  the  disciples.  Perfect
love,  the  surest  characteristic  of  perfect  life,  was
wrought  and  shewn  in  the  sacrifice  of  the  Cross.
Nothing  less  than  that  consummation  at  once  of  love
and  of  obedience  could  heal  the  inveterate  breach
which  sin  had  made  in  the  life  of  man ;  and  moreover
the  Life  itself  could  not  be  victorious  for  man  till  it
had  gone  down  into  death  and  come  forth  again  as
the  Resurrection.  When  the  Death  in  which  the
Sacrifice  culminated  was  found  to  issue  not  in  the
extinction  of  life  but  in  its  transference  to  an  invisible
sphere  of  existence,  revealed  to  disciples  at  chosen
seasons  of  visibility,  it  was  no  longer  guessed  but
known  that  life  in  man  could  outlive  the  terrestrial
frame  which  had  been  from  birth  at  once  its  product
and  its  mother.  And  since  He  whom  God  had  thus
raised  out  of  the  dead  was  that  very  chosen  Holy
One  of  His  whose  words  and  deeds  had  seemed
pregnant  with  fulfilment  of  all  God's  promises  to  His


136  THE  LIFE

people,  and  whose  grave  had  thus  seemed  to  be  the
grave  of  all  hopes,  every  promise  became  sealed  anew
from  above,  and  every  hope  rose  up  into  an  undying
life  in  indissoluble  union  with  the  risen  Lord.  The
things  of  old  time  had  passed  away :  behold  they
were  become  new.

When  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost  the  external  signs
of  the  Holy  Spirit's  presence  were  followed  by  other
signs  consisting  of  praises  uttered  in  strange  speech
among  the  disciples,  the  bystanders  exclaimed,  "  They
are  filled  with  new  wine".  The  mocking  comment
was  true.  In  the  early  days  of  the  Church  at  Jeru-
salem the  new  wine  of  life  overflows  the  doings  of  the
disciples  and  the  words  of  their  spokesmen.

"I  foresaw  the  Lord  in  my  presence  alway.
How  that  He  is  on  my  right  hand  that  I  may  not  be  shaken  :
Therefore  did  my  heart  rejoice  and  my  tongue  exult ;
Yea  and  my  flesh  also  shall  rest  in  hope ;
For  thou  wilt  not  forsake  my  soul  unto  Hades,
Neither  wilt  thou  give  Thy  Holy  One  to  see  corruption ;
Thou  madest  known  to  me  ways  of  life,
Thou  shalt  fill  me  with  gladness  before  Thy  face."

In  these  measured  strains  of  the  ancient  hymn  the
foremost  of  the  apostles  declares  to  the  men  of  Israel
at  their  Pentecostal  feast  the  new  mind  which  was
entering  into  the  disciples  of  Jesus  now  that  God  had
loosed  the  travail-pangs  of  death.  Every  note  is  a
note  of  exulting  life,  and  this  life  as  of  old, — rather,
far  more  than  of  old, — lives  only  by  its  hold  upon  the
mighty  and  living  God.     What  had  been  hoped  was


THE  LIFE  137

now  known.  God  had  first  revealed  His  Holy  One,
and  then  out  of  the  lowest  depths  had  exalted  Him
by  His  own  right  hand ;  and  the  promise  fulfilled  to
Him  was  pronounced  anew  in  Him  to  His  brethren,
the  partakers  of  His  holiness.

The  circumstances  under  which  the  disciples  re-
ceived the  ancient  life  thus  renewed  and  enlarged
marked  it  out  as  a  distinctive  possession  of  their  own.
As  they  spoke  of  "  this  Way  ",  so  also  they  spoke  of
"  this  Life  ".  So  only  can  we  rightly  understand  the
angel's  words,  "Go  and  stand  and  speak  in  the  temple
to  the  people  all  the  sayings  of  this  life."  His  words
imply  no  less  that  it  was  the  glory  of  the  chosen  few
to  proclaim  this  life  of  theirs  as  held  by  no  private
ownership.  Such  indeed  was  the  tenour  of  St  Peter's
language  from  the  first :  "  to  you  is  the  promise,  and
to  your  children,  and  to  all  that  are  afar  off,  even  as
many  as  the  Lord  our  God  shall  call  to  Him."  On  the
other  hand  the  fruits  of  life  were  shewn  in  the  young
society  of  the  Christian  brotherhood.  Communion
as  a  principle  of  life  was  embodied  in  the  voluntary
community  of  goods,  a  visible  sign  of  the  leaven  with
which  it  was  to  be  the  office  of  the  Church  to  leaven
all  social  relations.  The  temple  and  the  household
were  alike  sacred  places  where  life  was  daily  renewed
for  daily  thoughts  and  words  and  deeds.  Life  in  its
lower  forms  was  gratefully  honoured  as  the  sign  and
foundation  of  life  in  its  higher  forms:  "they  that
believed  partook  of  food  in  exultation  and  simplicit}-


138  THE  LIFE

of  heart,  praising  God  and  having  grace  toward  all
the  people."  The  first  external  act  of  which  we  hear
is  a  continuation  of  Christ's  own  ministration  of
bodily  life :  the  Christian  gift  of  vital  power  was
displayed  in  contrast  to  the  earthly  gift  of  dead
possessions  when  Peter  said  to  the  lame  beggar  at
the  temple  gate  "  Silver  and  gold  have  I  none,  but
what  I  have,  this  give  I  thee",  and  immediately  he
entered  with  the  apostles  into  the  temple  walkmg
and  leaping  and  praising  God.  And  here  and  always
the  ascended  Lord  was  believed  on  as  in  the  midst,
giving  forth  out  of  Himself  every  distributed  portion
of  life :  whatsoever  was  done  was  done  in  the  name
of  Jesus  Christ.

This  was  the  bright  beginning.  But  the  life  of
disciples  of  Jesus  could  not  reach  its  own  perfection
or  fulfil  its  due  tasks  without  the  stress  of  suffering.
Persecutions  quickly  came,  imprisonments  and  scourg-
ing, with  threats  of  death ;  and  thus  arose  a  clear
perception  that  for  the  servants,  as  for  the  Master,
human  enmity  and  resistance  would  be  God's  instru-
ments in  accomplishing  His  counsel,  a  simple  prayer
to  speak  God's  word  with  all  boldness,  and  a  joy
that  they,  witnesses  of  the  Name,  were  counted
worthy  to  suffer  dishonour  for  the  Name.  At  length
the  testimony  had  to  be  perfected  in  blood,  as  the
consistent  result  of  owning  Jesus  the  Crucified  as
Lord  ;  and,  following  Him  by  the  same  way,  Stephen
died  with  words  of  faii-h  and  forgiveness  on  his  lips


THE  LIFE  T39

which   disclose    the   cahn    and    sane    energy    of    his
heart.

Fierce  persecution  and  dispersion  ensued ;  and
from  that  time  forward,  admitted  to  fellowship  with
the  sufferings  of  God's  Christ,  the  disciples  were  en-
abled to  learn  what  they  had  but  imperfectly  known
on  that  last  evening.  They  learned  to  give  their  life
freely  away,  because  this  was  the  ever  present  con-
dition under  which  they  could  fulfil  His  work,  and
because  the  ultimate  future  of  their  life  depended  not
on  any  power  inherent  in  itself,  but  on  Him  who  died
and  rose  again.  Respites  of  comparative  peace  were
accorded  them  from  time  to  time :  but  the  intervals
were  few  when  danger,  suffering,  and  death  were  not
at  work  to  strengthen  and  purify  the  apostolic  life
which  was  to  be  the  human  attestation  of  the  Gospel.

Throughout  the  teaching  of  the  apostles,  as
preserved  in  their  epistles,  life,  named  or  unnamed,
is  found  the  chief  moving  power  and  the  chief  good
that  is  desired.  Its  fervour  and  its  peace  make  up
the  common  element  which  holds  together  the  varied
instructions  and  exhortations  elicited  by  the  various
needs  of  the  Churches,  and  unites  them  all  to  the
personal  experience  of  the  apostles  themselves.  It
sustains  alike  the  doctrine  and  the  ethics  which  were
the  necessary  subjects  of  teaching :  and  in  its  heights
the  doctrine  and  the  ethics  are  merged  at  last.  It
appears  under  three  principal  forms,  as  faith,  as  hope,
and   as   love ; — faith   in   tlie  unseen    God,  creating  a


I40  THE  LIFE

Divine  righteousness  in  the  midst  of  accusing
memories  of  broken  laws  ;  hope  in  tlie  counsel  of
God,  looking  forward  through  present  distresses  and
perplexities  to  the  accomplishment  of  His  glorious
purpose  ;  and  love  answering  the  love  of  God,  out-
glowing  and  dissolving  the  prides  and  hatreds  and
meaner  desires  which  gender  desolation  and  death
without  and  within,  and  finding  the  guiding  principle
of  action  between  man  and  man  in  stewardship  of  the
manifold  grace  of  God  for  the  manifold  service  of  the
Kingdom  of  God.

That  the  teaching  of  the  apostles  should  be
chiefly  concerned  with  life  at  its  highest,  the  eternal
life,  the  life  indeed,  was  a  necessary  result  of  their
special  work.  But  both  the  substance  and  the  form
of  their  moral  exhortations  excludes  its  detachment
from  the  lower  stages  of  life  by  which  ordinary
human  society  is  animated.  They  take  their  stand
on  the  primary  relations  of  mankind,  and  the  emo-
tions which  accompany  their  right  fulfilment.  They
slight  no  part  of  the  composite  nature  of  man,  but
claim  the  whole  for  Divine  use  and  Divine  glory.  If
their  teaching  is  unique  in  its  elevation,  it  is  equally
unique  in  the  compass  of  its  unity.

The  aspects  of  life  under  the  pressure  of  death
became  better  known  to  the  apostles  when  the
trials  and  sufferings  of  the  Church  and  its  leaders
were  gathering  into  one  great  crisis.  At  an  earlier
time  St  Paul  had  already  poured  forth  his  own  recent


THE  LIFE  141

acquaintance  with  that  twofold  lore  in  his  second
epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  the  most  expressive  record
of  a  profoundly  Christian  soul  for  whom  the  middle
world  of  ordinary  thoughts  and  doings  became  for
the  while  well-nigh  invisible  by  the  upsurging  of  the
deeps  of  the  spirit  through  a  tempest  of  affliction.
When  persecution  increased,  other  apostolic  writers
had  each  his  own  word  of  life  through  death  to  speak.
But  when  at  last  the  Day  of  the  Lord  came  in  its
extremest  terrors,  a  yet  clearer  message  was  de-
livered by  the  beloved  disciple  in  the  "  Revelation  of
Jesus  Christ"  with  which  he  taught  and  comforted
the  seven  churches  of  Asia  in  the  strength  of  the
passionate  life  of  martyrdom.  The  voice  of  the
Martyr  Faithful  and  True,  the  Slain  Lamb,  who  is
also  the  First  and  the  Last  and  the  Living  One,  goes
sounding  through  the  book.  To  him  who  conquers,
faithful  in  his  doings  as  well  as  his  sufferings,  is  a
promise  given  that  he  shall  eat  of  the  tree  of  life,
that  tree  whose  leaves  are  for  the  healing  of  the
nations,  and  shall  wear  the  victor's  festive  crown  of
life.  He  whose  blood  had  been  the  ransom  to  loose
His  servants  from  their  sins  was  both  their  power  and
their  pattern  as  they  entered  into  the  depths  of  His
faithful  witnessing :  "  they  themselves  conquered "
the  Accuser  "  because  of  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  and
because  of  the  word  of  their  witnessing,  and  they
loved  not  their  soul  unto  death  ".  Yet  He  who  was
thus  to  His  suffering  witnesses  the  pledge  and  source


142  THE  LIFE

of  life,  to  His  enemies  the  stern  warrior  Judge,  to  all
the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords,  was  called  the
Word  of  God.  In  all  things  He  was  the  Speech  of
God  to  men  ;  no  mere  Giver  or  mere  Gift,  but  the
supreme  Revealer,  the  Way  and  the  Truth,  in  short,
as  well  as  the  Life.

That    Day  of   the   Lord   passed   away ;    and   the

apostle  and    prophet  who    had    been   its    interpreter

lived    on    into    the    next    generation.     No    search    is

needed  to  learn  from  the  epistle  which  he  wrote  to

his  '  children '  towards  the  end  of  his  days  whether

he  had  found  it  true  that  Jesus  Christ  was  the  Life.

He   begins  by   assuming  that  all   his   own  converse

with  His  Lord  in  the  flesh  by  hearing  and  sight  and

touch  was  concerning  the  Word  or  revelation  of  the

Life.     "And  the  Life",  he  proceeds,  "  was  manifested,

and  we  have  seen,  and  we  bear  witness  and  announce

to   you    the    Life,   the    eternal    Life,  even    that   Life

which  was  with  the  Father  and  was   manifested  to

us."     He  declares  the  purpose  of  the  announcement

to  be  communion,  communion  with  the  Father  and

the   Son   through    the   apostolic  witnesses ;    and    the

purpose  of  his  present  writing  he  declares  to  be  the

fulfilment  of  joy.    The  Son  of  God,  come  in  the  flesh,

holds  a  similar  place  in  St  John's  exposition  of  love

the  chief  ethical  theme  of  his  epistle.     He  sets  aside

all  human  pretensions  which  dispense  with  love ;  not

a  nominal  love  of  God  which  bears  no  such  fruit  as

that  by  which  God's  own  love  is  known  to  us,  but  a


THE  LIFE  T43

love  which  goes  forth  upon  men  as  God's  love  went
forth  in  the  life  and  death  of  His  Son  :  and  at  the
same  time  he  represents  this  genuine  love  toward
God  and  men  as  having  no  separate  existence,  but  as
being  simply  the  love  of  the  Father  and  the  Son
entering  into  man  and  abiding  and  working  in  him.
Before  the  epistle  closes,  the  substance  of  the  opening
words  is  repeated  with  graver  emphasis.  "And  this
is  the  witness,  that  God  gave  us  eternal  life,  and  this
life  is  in  His  Son.  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  the
Life,  he  that  hath  not  the  Son  of  God  hath  not  the
Life.  These  things  I  write  to  you  that  ye  may  know
that  ye  have  eternal  life,  even  to  you  that  believe
on  the  name  of  the  Son  of  God."  The  surpassing
preciousness  of  life,  the  fundamental  unity  of  life,  and
the  identity  of  the  incarnate  Son  of  God  with  the
Life  as  One,  these  are  the  crowning  convictions  which
rose  up  for  the  aged  apostle  above  all  the  other
teaching  of  long  and  troubled  years,  and  with  which
he  strove  to  arm  his  '  children '  against  the  keenly
presaged  dangers  of  the  coming  age  in  which  the
last  apostolic  voice  should  be  still.

Yet  more  explicit  evidence  comes  to  us  from  the
book  which  was  to  be  the  vehicle  of  his  witness  con-
cerning what  he  had  seen  and  heard  to  every  generation
which  should  be  willing  to  enter  through  his  witness
into  his  communion  with  the  Father  and  the  Son.
We  have  already  seen  how  emphatically  he  there
pronounces  life  to  be  the  appointed  fruit  of  faith,  and


144  THE  LIFE

faith  to  be  the  appointed  fruit  of  the  Incarnation  ;
and  declares  at   the  close  that  with   a  view  to  this
twofold    end    he    had    written    his    narrative    of    the
Incarnation.      His    Prologue   enables    us    to    see   his
conception  of  h'fe  and  of  the  Life  in  its  full  breadth.
Of  the  Word,  who  was  in  the  beginning  with  GOD,
and  was  God,  he  says,  with  reference  to   the  initial
and  perpetual  coming  of  all  things  into  being  through
Him,  that  in    Him  was   life,  and   the   Life  was  the
Light  of  men.     What  He  specially  was  as  the  Light
to  men,  as  beings  endowed  with  the  power  of  knowing
truth,  had  its  source,  so  to  speak,  in  what  He  was  as
the  Life  not  of  them  only  but   of  all  finite  things.
That  which  gave  to  all  things  whatsoever  they  had  of
form  and  order  and  unity  and  motion  and  function
was  their  life,  and  that  life  was  but  the  multitudinous
efflux  of  Him  the  Life.     This  designation  best  ex-
pressed the  most  comprehensive  relation  in  which  He
stood  to  the  universe  who  is  the  Word  of  GOD,  the
eternal  fundamental  utterance  of  Him  whose  diffracted
and  remoter  utterance  is  the  universe.     In  the  same
breath  with  these  announcements  of  primary  mysteries
St  John  goes  on  to  language  which  shews  how  far  he
had  been  from  forgetting  human  blindness  and  sin
and  their  Divine  remedies.     His  recital  of  the  pro-
gress of  the  Word  through  history  is  interwoven  with
tragic  intimations  how  the  darkness  apprehended  not
the  Light  shining  in  it,  how  the  world  knew  not  the
Word  through  whom  it  came  into  being,  how,  when


THE  LIFE  145

He  came  into  his  own,  they  who  were  His  own
received  Him  not.  The  seemingly  remote  fields  of
view  are  brought  together  when  he  comes  to  speak
of  the  results  of  the  Incarnation.  The  Apostles  had
beheld  His  glory,  a  glory  as  of  an  only-begotten  from
a  father,  the  manifestation  doubtless  of  those  attri-
butes which  the  opening  verses  had  recounted.  As  a
dweller  among  men  He  had  been  recognised  as  full
of  grace  and  truth,  in  such  wise  that  they  who  knew
Him  could  not  doubt  that  His  was  the  fulness  out  of
which  we  all  had  received  whatever  portion  of  grace
and  truth  we  possessed.  Nay,  as  the  Law  was  given
through  Moses,  so  the  Grace  and  the  Truth,  the
human  derivations  from  the  Life  above  and  the  Light
above,  came  into  being  through  Jesus  Christ.  Thus
the  power  of  life  and  the  power  of  truth  which  had
made  themselves  felt  throughout  His  earthly  course,
the  characteristics  which  stamped  Him  as  the  Saviour
and  the  Revealer,  were  antecedent  to  human  sin  and
error;  they  were  involved  in  the  original  relations  of
the  Word  of  God  to  the  universe  of  God.  And  so
the  eternal  life  which  St  John  held  forth  as  generated
by  faith  in  the  Incarnate  Son  was  linked  in  his
teaching  to  the  whole  scale  of  life  in  man  and  in  the
creatures  less  living  than  man,  because  he  knew  that
all  life  is  one  in  Him  whose  word  spoken  originally
to  Thomas  he  had  now  an  enlarged  capacity  to
receive.  The  life-giving  Spirit  had  illumined  for  him
that    once    dark   word,   till    it    had    become    the    last

H.  L.  10


146  THE  LIFE

message  out  of  the  fulness  of  the  apostolic  experience,
the  eagerly  commended  pledge  that  the  communion
vouchsafed  to  apostles  was  open  through  them  to
their  disciples  to  the  end  of  time.


The  call  to  the  disciples  to  receive  Christ  un-
reservedly as  the  Life  is  a  call  which  surely  the
Church  of  later  days  may  well  accept  as  addressed
to  itself.

Not  without  anxious  effort  can  we  learn  that  by
God's  decree  the  first  stage  of  discipleship  is  over,
Christ  Himself  before  long  will  assuredly  cease  to  be
in  any  sense  our  life,  if  we  look  for  His  life  only  in
the  form  of  a  private  affection  or  in  isolation  from  the
lower  life  which  we  share  with  all  living  things  and
the  varied  relationships  by  which  we  are  united  to
our  fellow-men.  It  is  the  glory  of  His  life  to  include
every  life.  We  do  not  purify  it  but  impoverish  it  by
detracting  from  its  fulness.  It  may  be  that  all  lower
forms  of  life  are  rising  and  will  rise  yet  more  in
rebellion  against  the  life  of  Christ  as  though  it  were
only  a  cunningly  disguised  death.  Yet  the  Church
will  be  false  to  herself  and  to  the  universality  of  the
task  committed  to  her  if  she  seeks  to  protect  the  life
of  Christ  by  striving  to  fence  it  round  into  a  little
province  of  peculiar  emotion.  There  is  indeed  that
in  it  which  is  known  only  to  those  who  have  most
communed  with  the  living  Lord   Himself,  and   been


THE  LIFE  147

baptized  by  Him  with  a  holy  spirit  and  with  fire.
Yet  it  ceases  to  be  His  life  when  it  ceases  to  go  forth
and  save.  It  was  ordained  to  purify  and  control
every  lower  life ;  and  therefore  it  must  enter  freely
into  them  all.  If  we  fear  that  it  may  lose  itself  in
the  vast  and  often  lawless  universe  of  life  beneath,
the  danger  is  to  be  averted  not  by  wilfully  con-
tracting it  within  a  narrower  field,  but  by  seeking
greater  intensity  of  life  in  deeper  and  more  sub-
missive communion  with  the  Head  Himself  in  the
heavens.

Again,  there  is  a  season  in  the  lifetime  of  each  of
us  when  all  that  the  word  'life'  expresses  has  a  greater
charm  for  us  than  any  other  good  thing,  though  it  is
then  that  all  good  things  are  poured  out  before  us  in
the  richest  abundance.  Life  seems  to  flow  bounteously
within  us  and  around  us,  and  we  are  slow  to  tolerate
any  restraints  upon  its  exuberance.  Many  things
which  are  then  good  in  our  eyes  are  permitted  to
draw  us  away  from  Him  whom  the  Gospel  calls  our
Life;  and  at  best  we  find  the  stream  of  our  inner
self  divided  into  many  a  mazy  current.  Yet  if  this
inward  distraction  continues,  the  life  which  we  prize
is  condemned  to  be  fleeting  in  duration  and  fruitless
in  result.  Now  more  than  ever  have  we  need  of  the
one  master  Life  to  take  possession  of  us  and  of  all
His  gifts  to  us.  Now  more  than  ever  must  we  hold
fast  the  faith,  which  experience  will  ratify  in  due  time
that  our  own  desires  are  less  the  ministers  than  the

10 — 2


148  THE  LIFE

destroyers  of  life  until  they  are  subdued  into  glad
obedience  to  His  holy  and  hallowing  Will,  the  Will
of  the  Life  that  was  crucified  and  rose  again  from
the  dead.

If  it  is  becoming  harder  than  it  once  was  to
accept  His  life  as  one  life  among  many,  the  change
to  a  clearer  issue  is  one  that  all  who  believe  in  Him
may  welcome.  It  cannot  be  truly  known  as  life  at
all  till  it  is  known  as  the  Supreme  Life.  If  other
lives  will  not  be  ruled  by  His  life,  they  must  presently
seek  to  cast  it  out  as  an  evil  thing.  Wherever  they
for  the  time  prevail,  they  work  perdition  and  destruc-
tion for  a  little  hour,  and  then  they  perish  while  yet
proving  that  life  cannot  be  slighted  or  repudiated
with  impunity.  Wherever  He  prevails,  He  conquers
that  He  may  save.  Could  His  life  be  banished  from
the  life  of  men,  the  bright  heathen  life  that  once
lived  in  ages  long  preceding  His  coming  could  live
no  more  as  it  lived  then.  The  ancient  gods,  the  gods
of  the  earth,  were  not  slain  by  the  Nazarene.  They
were  dead  and  mouldering  long  before  the  Eternal
Son  came  down  from  heaven  and  was  born  of  the
Blessed  Virgin's  womb.  He  destroyed  nothing  that
had  life :  He  lives  that  all  which  once  lived  may  live
again  in  Him.  No  ancient  form  of  life  can  perish  for
ever,  though  it  be  long  before  mankind  are  fitted  to
receive  it  back  at  Christ's  hands,  renewed  and  trans-
figured by  His  resurrection.

As  it  is  with  the  youth  of  mankind,  so  it  is  with


THE  LIFE  149

the  youth  of  each  and  all.  If  the  season  is  past  when
nature  ministers  life  abundantly,  yet  He  who  died  to
nature  that  He  might  live  to  God  has  a  saving  power
in  store  for  every  season.  If  He  is  sought,  not  as  a
residuary  solace  because  life  has  failed,  or  only  as
holding  the  keys  of  a  dim  and  distant  future,  but  as
Himself  the  Life  and  eternal  life,  He  will  open  hidden
springs  of  life  in  the  desert  within  and  the  deserts
around,  that  what  remains  of  the  threescore  years
and  ten  may  be  moulded  into  a  living  form,  fair  in
His  eyes  and  fit  for  His  service.  Old  works  of  death
and  darkness  have  to  be  cut  off;  the  clogged  channels
of  life  have  to  be  sternly  cleansed,  the  Baptist  must
still  prepare  the  way  for  the  Saviour.  But  the
Saviour  Himself  stands  always  nigh  to  transform  by
His  presence  the  purifying  water  without  into  the
water  of  life,  which  is  also  the  wine  of  gladness,
within.  So  He  manifests  His  glory  to  His  disciples.
So  His  disciples  believe  on  Him,  and  live.


LECTURE    IV.

no  man  cometh  unto  the  father  but  by

Me.

The  earthly  life  and  acts  of  the  Lord,  in  Himself
and  in  the  Church  of  His  disciples,  are  divided
according  to  His  own  express  teaching  into  two
parts.  Before  the  discourse  of  the  Last  Supper
reaches  its  close,  He  opposes  them  to  each  other  in
sharp  contrast.  "  I  came  out  from  the  Father  and
am  come  into  the  world  :  again  I  leave  the  world  and
go  unto  the  Father."  When  these  two  words  of  His
are  received  in  their  distinctness  and  their  mutual
necessity,  as  setting  forth  at  once  historical  fact  and
eternal  truth,  then  the  Gospel  is  embraced.  To
refuse  both  is  to  fall  back  into  heathenism.  To
receive  the  first  but  let  go  the  second,  or  to  confuse
the  second  with  the  first,  is  to  retrace  our  steps  and
become  once  more  believing  Jews.  To  hold  fast  both
together  is  to  stand  and  move  in  the  faith  of  Christ.

The  first  period  is  in  its  origin  a  coming  forth,  in
its  progress  a  descent.     The  Father  or  the  Father's


COMING   TO    THE   FATHER  BY  THE  SON  151

presence  is  the  beginning.  The  Son  is  sent  forth
and  Himself  comes  forth  into  the  world  which  He
is  to  redeem.  The  weight  of  the  world's  sin  and
misery  lies  on  Him  more  and  more.  Each  step  in
His  ministry  brings  Him  into  deadlier  conflict  with
the  world ;  and  as  He  goes  steadily  forward,  the
conflict  ends  in  His  death.  The  Death  belongs  to
both  periods.  It  is  the  lowest  point  of  the  descent,
the  testimony  sealed  in  blood,  the  obedience  perfected
in  sacrifice.  But  it  is  also  the  beginning  of  the  ascent.
The  Cross  is  already  a  lifting  up  out  of  the  earth,  a
prophecy  of  the  lifting  up  into  the  heavens.  God
accepts  the  sacrifice,  raises  His  Son  from  the  dead  as
by  a  second  birth,  and  exalts  Him  to  sit  at  His  own
right  hand  till  He  has  put  all  His  enemies  under  His
feet.  By  the  descent  is  closed  the  long  line  of  reve-
lations by  which  God  came  down  and  visited  His
people  Israel ;  by  the  ascent  is  announced  and  begun
the  gathering  of  men  upward  to  God,  accomplished
once  for  all  in  the  person  of  the  Son  of  Man,  and
wrought  out  through  the  ages  in  the  power  of  that
first  accomplishment.

In  each  of  the  two  periods  the  presence  of  the
disciples  is  an  essential  part  of  the  Gospel.  Through-
out the  first  period  they  are  almost  wholly  receivers.
All  elements  of  their  discipleship  are  combined  in
attachment  to  their  Lord's  person.  They  are  being
prepared  for  a  time  when  they  will  have  to  bear
witness  of  what  they  have  seen  and  heard  and  known


152    NO  MAN  COMETH   UNTO   THE  FATHER

of  Him  :  and  while  this  process  is  going  on,  He  is
acquiring  a  mastery  over  their  whole  nature,  which  is
destined  to  disable  them  for  a  purely  independent
life  hereafter.

After  the  Resurrection  the  passive  discipleship
continues  in  both  respects  under  changed  conditions.
But  the  change  is  not  fully  manifest  till  the  day  of
Pentecost,  when  they  finally  enter  into  that  new  stage
of  discipleship  which  is  expounded  throughout  the
discourse  at  the  Last  Supper  on  the  eve  of  the
Passion,  discipleship  being  now  fulfilled  in  apostle-
ship.  From  that  time  forwards  their  work  consists
in  the  appropriation  and  distribution  of  His  work.
As  the  Father  sent  Him  into  the  world,  so  He  sent
them  into  the  world.  Their  destiny  and  their  office
are  fashioned  after  His.

This  double  relation  of  the  Lord's  journey  to  the
journey  of  the  disciples  shapes  both  parts  of  His
answer  to  St  Thomas.  On  the  one  hand  it  is  for  the
sake  of  mankind  that  He  takes  His  journey,  and  it  is
through  men,  learners  from  Him,  that  mankind  are
to  be  blessed  by  it.  On  the  other  hand  it  is  on  His
own  journey  that  both  the  possibility  and  the  efficacy
of  the  disciples'  journey  depends.  Thus  He  first  by
a  threefold  revelation  of  Himself  lays  down  the
conditions  of  their  journey ;  I  am  the  Way,  the  Truth,
and  the  Life :  and  then  He  points  to  the  conditions
and  the  goal  of  their  journey  as  alike  determined  by
His;  No  one  cometh  unto  the  Father  save  through  me.


BUT  BY  ME  153

These  last  words  "through  me"  bind  together
the  three  heads  which  have  preceded.  Christ  is  not
merely  the  Way  and  also  the  Truth  and  also  the
Life;  but  He  is  these  all  at  once.  Each  office  in-
volves the  others.  The  coming  to  the  Father  by
Him  includes  all.  His  hallowing  lordship  over
human  life  demands  the  full  and  harmonious  co-
operation of  its  several  functions.  The  praetermission
of  any  one  function  is  to  that  extent  an  abnegation  of
Him.  The  limitation  of  His  supremacy  to  any  one
function,  while  the  others  are  reserved  for  the  control
of  self  or  of  the  world  without,  is  to  that  extent  a
rebellion  against  Him.  His  discipleship  and  His
apostolate  can  be  duly  executed  in  any  one  sphere
only  when  He  is  recognised  and  diligently  served  as
Lord  of  all.

But  the  Lordship  of  Christ  is  more  than  an
issuing  of  commands  for  His  disciples  to  obey.  His
commandments  are  part  of  His  own  action,  and  His
own  action  is  the  foundation  of  His  disciples'  action.
His  coming  to  the  Father  is  the  prophecy  of  their
coming  to  the  Father,  and  the  power  by  which  they
are  enabled  to  come.  His  coming  to  the  Father
followed  the  close  of  His  work  in  human  flesh,  even
of  that  work  which  the  Father  had  given  Him  to  do.
We  may  have  a  natural  shrinking  from  using  language
of  this  kind  ;  but  it  is  His  own  language,  constantly
repeated  ;  and  it  is  written  for  our  instruction  that  we
niay  know  the  meaning  of  our  own  work  and  our  own


154    NO  MAN  COMETH  UNTO    THE  FATHER

sonship.  It  abounds  in  His  last  prayer:  "  I  glorified
Thee  on  the  earth,  finishing  the  work  which  Thou
hast  given  me  that  I  should  do ;  and  now  glorify  me
thou  Father  with  Thyself  with  the  glory  which  I  had,
before  the  world  was,  with  Thee."  "  I  am  no  longer
in  the  world,  and  they  themselves  are  in  the  world,
and  I  come  unto  Thee."  "And  now  I  come  unto
Thee,  and  these  things  I  speak  in  the  world  that  they
may  have  the  joy  that  is  mine  fulfilled  in  themselves."
The  coming  to  the  Father  therefore  of  which  He
speaks  as  set  before  them  can  in  no  sense  be  an
escape  from  sharing  His  work.  It  is  not  a  private
felicity,  to  be  bought  by  neglect  of  the  wider  fields  of
various  activity  in  the  midst  of  which  the  lot  of  all
men  is  cast,  and  by  concentration  upon  Himself  in
isolation  from  His  kingdom.  Its  joy  is  that  of  the
welcome  given  to  the  good  and  faithful  servant
bidden  to  enter  into  the  joy  of  his  Lord.

Except  as  denoting  the  crown  of  willing  and
intelligent  discipleship,  the  words  "  coming  to  the
Father"  have  in  this  connexion  no  meaning.  They
offer  no  promise  except  to  those  who  have  loved
and  honoured  the  Son.  If  the  responsibility  of
sonship  and  the  subjection  to  the  Son  are  accepted
grudgingly,  still  more  if  they  are  repudiated,  '  coming
to  the  Father'  can  be  only  an  object  of  dread.  Sub-
mission to  the  Son  of  God  as  the  supreme  Way,
Truth,  and  Life  is  the  test  whether  the  sonship  of
men  and  the  fatherhood  of  God  are  more  than  hazy


BUT  BY  ME  155

metaphors    to    be    whispered    in    moods    of    pathetic
languor.

On  the  other  hand  it  was  necessary  for  Christ's
first  disciples  in  prospect  of  His  departure,  and  it  is
necessary  for  all  who  in  any  measure  succeed  to  their
discipleship  now,  that  coming  to  the  Father  should  be
distinctly  pronounced  to  be  the  goal  of  the  journey,
the  completion  of  discipleship  to  the  Son.  The
danger  of  so  cleaving  to  the  Son  as  to  forsake  the
Father  was  always  close  to  the  Eleven;  as  it  is  of
perpetual  recurrence.  The  whole  of  Christ's  own
teaching  had  been  directed  towards  strengthening  no
less  than  widening  the  ancestral  faith  in  the  Lord
God  of  Israel.  The  stronger  the  affirmation  of  His
own  Divine  nature,  the  clearer  became  His  testimony
to  the  Father  who  sent  Him,  When  the  Jews  sought
to  kill  Him  because  He  not  only  loosened  the  sabbath
but  also  called  God  His  own  Father,  making  Himself
equal  to  God,  His  answer  was,  "Verily  verily  I  say
to  you  the  Son  can  of  Himself  do  nothing  unless  He
see  the  Father  doing  it ;  for  what  things  He  doeth
these  the  Son  also  doeth  in  like  manner:  for  the
Father  loveth  the  Son  and  sheweth  Him  all  things
whatsoever  He  doeth  Himself,  and  greater  works
than  these  shall  He  shew  Him,  that  ye  may  marvel."
When  they  murmured  because  He  spoke  of  having
come  down  out  of  the  heaven.  He  answered,  "  No
one  can  come  unto  mie  except  the  Father  which  sent
me   draw  him:"  and    again,   "It    is    written    in    the


156    NO  MAN  COMETH   UNTO    THE  FATHER

prophets,  *  And  they  shall  be  all  taught  of  God  : '
every  one  therefore  who  heareth  from  the  Father  and
learneth  cometh  unto  me."  Yet  the  nature  of  the
personal  devotion  to  Himself  which  went  on  increasing,
necessary  as  it  was  for  the  time  and  the  purpose,
might  well,  if  it  had  continued  longer  in  its  original
shape,  have  imperilled  the  faith  in  the  invisible  Father.
The  danger  lay  not  in  an  increase  of  faith  in  Christ
but  in  an  adhesion  to  Him  which  was  not  faith,  as
walking  with  Him  not  by  faith  but  by  sight.  The
possibility  of  the  danger  lurks  in  St  Philip's  request,
"  Lord,  shew  us  the  Father  and  it  sufficeth  us " :  his
Lord,  he  felt,  was  manifest  to  him  ;  the  Father,  he
supposed,  was  not ;  he  had  no  desire  to  let  go  the
Father,  but  while  the  Lord  on  earth  was  known  to
him  by  flesh  and  blood,  the  God  above  was  becoming
to  him  a  shadowy  name  in  contrast.  Christ's  de-
parture then  came  at  the  right  season  :  it  was  time
not  only  that  the  personal  Guide  should  Himself
become  known  as  the  Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life,
but  that  all  progress  in  Him  should  be  seen  to  conduct
to  the  Father.  This  had  been  the  original  purpose
for  which  the  disciples  had  been  drawn  to  the  Son.
Coming  to  Christ  had  a  separate  meaning  only
while  Christ  was  gone  out  from  the  Father  into  the
world.  To  choose  it  afterwards  as  a  better  and
dearer  privilege  than  coming  to  the  Father  would
have  been  to  return  perversely  to  the  unripe  partial
discipleship  of  the  probationary  period, — discipleship,


BUT  BY  ME  157

that  is,  to  a  Christ  after  the  flesh,  a  Christ  not  glorified,
because  either  not  slain,  or  else  slain  only  but  left
hanging  on  the  Cross, — not  buried,  and  not  raised
from  the  dead.

Thus  the  Lord  taught  His  disciples  that  the  long
and  various  journey  which  was  henceforth  to  con-
stitute the  following  of  Him  was  not  a  random
wandering  but  a  perpetual  progress  towards  a  certain
end.  The  end  was  nothing  less  than  the  Father's
immediate  presence.  While  Christ  as  the  One  Way,
the  One  Truth,  and  the  One  Life  took  up  into  Him-
self the  whole  universe  as  related  to  man,  even  as  it
first  came  into  being  through  Him  the  Eternal  Word,
yet  He  was  not  Himself  the  end.  Those  to  whose
goings  and  knowledge  and  affections  He  gave  at  once
the  master  impulse  and  the  ruling  standard  would  be
thereby  conducted  to  His  Father  and  their  Father,
His  God  and  their  God.  Each  step  in  discipleship
to  Him  would  be  a  step  in  the  perfecting  of  sonship
to  God.  Of  the  Word  become  flesh  it  was  true  as
it  was  in  the  elder  time,  "As  many  as  received
Him,  He  gave  them  authority  to  become  children
of  God."

These  considerations  may  help  us  to  understand
how  it  was  that  the  Lord  was  not  content  with  saying
"Through  me  shall  ye  come  unto  the  Father,"  but
shut  out  all  vaguer  possibilities  by  a  peremptory
negation,    "  No    one    comcth    unto    the    Father   save


158    NO  MAN  COMETH   UNTO    THE  FATHER

through  me."  Part  of  the  undefined  mistrust  with
which  we  all  sometimes  shrink  from  accepting  the
declaration  in  its  full  rigour  arises  from  a  proneness
to  paraphrase  the  words  'cometh  unto  the  Father'  by
some  loose  notion  of  arriving  ultimately  at  happiness.
Yet  they  are  fixed  to  their  strict  sense  by  the  occasion
on  which  they  were  used,  and  by  the  whole  context.
The  human  coming  to  the  Father  derives  its  character
from  the  homeward  return  of  Him  in  whom  the  Father
was  well  pleased.  Such  a  return  implies  of  necessity
the  mind  and  spirit  of  sonship  ;  and  where  these  have
yet  to  be  formed,  discipleship  to  the  Eternal  Son  has
yet  to  begin.

On  another  side  the  exclusiveness  of  Christ's
affirmation  is  inseparable  from  the  nature  of  the
office  which  He  has  been  claiming  for  Himself  Its
effect  is  simply  to  fix  with  absolute  certainty  the
definiteness  and  universality  of  the  preceding  reve-
lation. It  forbids  us  to  understand  Christ  as  saying
no  more  than,  "  I  am  a  way,  I  am  truth,  I  am  life."
On  the  other  hand  it  receives  its  own  interpretation
from  the  threefold  revelation.  "  Through  me  "  cannot
mean  only  "by  my  favour"  or  "  by  my  intercession":
it  cannot  bear  any  sense  limited  by  the  conditions
of  a  single  human  career :  it  is  coextensive  with
the  Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life.

Since  then  these  two  parts  of  the  Lord's  answer
to  St  Thomas  mutually  explain  each  other,  the
exclusiveness  of  the  second  declaration  becomes  an


BUT  BY  ME  159

assurance  that  the  keys  of  all  worlds  with  which  we
have  to  do  are  in  the  hands  of  Him  who  took  our
nature  and  died  for  our  sake.  His  exclusive  media-
tion means  first  the  unity  of  all  things  in  Him,  and
then  the  privilege  bestowed  on  us  as  His  brethren
of  finding  that  when  we  yield  ourselves  to  Him  all
things  whatsoever  that  we  touch  are  bearing  us  onward
to  God.  All  things  lead  to  Him ;  while  through
Him  alone  can  any  one  come  to  the  Father  ;  and  there
is  no  way  that  can  be  walked  in,  no  truth  that  can
be  known,  no  life  that  can  be  felt  and  lived,  which
is  without  access  to  the  Supreme  Way,  the  Supreme
Truth,  the  Supreme  Life.  We  are  taught  by  the
Apostles  to  believe  that  there  is  a  Divine  purpose  in
every  outward  and  inward  movement  of  man  and
of  all  creation.  We  are  taught  that  the  Eternal  Word,
He  who  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  is  the  ex-
pression of  that  purpose  and  the  accomplishment
of  it.  We  are  taught  that  His  Incarnation  was  the
primary  accomplishment  of  it  for  mankind,  and  the
revelation  of  its  full  accomplishment  hereafter.  We
are  taught  that  men,  being  instructed  out  of  the  im-
perishable record  of  His  revelation  by  the  progressive
enlightenment  of  His  Spirit,  are  able  in  part  to
discern  this  purpose,  and  to  yield  willing  service
towards  its  fulfilment.  But  then  if  this  teaching  be
true,  to  suppose  that  any  one  could  come  to  the
Father  except  through  the  Son,  would  involve  the
strangest  contradiction.


i6o    NO  MAN  COMETH  UNTO    THE  FATHER

The  exclusivcness  of  Christ  is  in  truth  but  another
name  for  the  absolute  universaHty  of  His  kingdom
combined  with  its  absohite  unity.

But  what  is  the  meaning  of  this  coming  to  the
Father  by  the  Son  ?  Can  these  theological  mysteries
be  translated  into  common  experience  when  we  close
our  books  and  go  forth  into  the  open  air  ?  It  is  in
the  open  air  that  we  may  best  learn  what  they  mean.
We  know  that  there  is  around  us  what  we  call  the
world  :  we  have  been  told,  and  we  partly  believe,
that  there  is  above  us  One  whom  we  call  God.  We
know  that  at  every  moment  we  are  acted  on  by  the
world  :  we  are  told,  and  we  partly  believe,  that  we
were  created  and  that  we  are  sustained  by  God.  We
know  that  we  cannot  stir  a  finger  without  ourselves
acting  on  some  part  of  the  world :  we  are  told,  and
we  partly  believe,  that  all  we  do  is  marked  and  judged
by  God.  We  know  that  the  world  is  full  of  objects
which  attract  that  which  is  in  us,  drawing  forth  our
desires  and  energies  towards  them.  We  are  told,  and
we  partly  believe,  that  God  claims  the  direction  ot
our  hearts  to  Him.  Our  time,  our  capacity,  our
mental  and  bodily  force  are  limited  :  how  are  we
to  apportion  them  between  the  world  which  we  hear
calling  to  us  from  around  and  from  below,  and  the  God
whom'we  suppose  to  be  calling  to  us  from  above?
Are  the  two  powers  entirely  at  variance,  or  do  they
at  all  coincide  in  their  requirements,  and  if  so,  how  far  ?


BUT  BY  ME  i6i

The  most  obvious  answers  to  these  questions  are
those  which  bid  us  disregard  the  one  power  or  the
other.  The  readiest  expedient  of  course  is  to  dispense
with  God,  as  the  most  distant  and  uncertain  if  not
the  least  substantial  power.  So  we  turn  to  the  world
and  offer  it  our  whole  heart.  But  then  the  world
itself  has  within  it  many  worlds,  and  if  we  are  honest
with  ourselves  the  old  perplexity  starts  up  on  a  fresh
scale.  Everywhere  we  have  offered  to  us  a  higher
world  and  a  lower.  The  lower  world  is  always  the
most  tangible,  obtrusive,  alluring.  The  higher  world
is  always  the  most  impalpable,  secluded,  severe.  We
may  choose  lower  world  after  lower  world  ;  but  we
cannot  find  satisfaction.

But  we  might  have  paused  after  the  first  step.
Though  God  be  shut  out,  there  still  remain  affections,
duties,  philanthropies,  arts,  knowledges,  innumerable
works  and  ways  which  are  not  base  and  which  can
be  pursued  with  an  untroubled  conscience.  They  are
often  invaded  and  corrupted  by  the  earthlier  powers
below  with  which  they  cannot  dispense ;  and  some
of  their  worst  dangers  are  linked  to  their  greatest
necessities;  but  they  can  likewise  often  maintain
themselves,  though  hardly  make  progress,  under  the
protection  of  habits  and  customs  and  institutions.
But  they  live  only  as  long  as  they  are  not  called
on  to  give  account  of  themselves.  If  once  they
become  subjects  of  free  and  energetic  thought,  their
stability  is  sapped.  They  have  no  sufficient  reason
H.  L.  II


i62    ^0  MAN  COMETH   UNTO    THE  FATHER

to  plead  why  they  should  not  be   banished   as  God
was  banished  before  them.

On  the  other  hand  the  effort  to  cleave  to  God  and
dispense  with  the  world,  though  it  proceed  from  the
noblest  impulse,  and  often  is  fruitful  of  precious
results,  is  condemned  to  inconsistency  from  the  first.
The  lowest  necessities  of  human  existence  are  inexor-
able, [and  in  the  endeavour  to  sacrifice  the  world  to
God,]  life  is  consumed  in  a  vain  and  impossible  effort
to  hate  and  despise  all  the  outward  and  inward  works
of  His  hands  except  the  feelings  which  are  directed
exclusively  towards  Himself,  and  the  acts  and  objects
in  which  such  feelings  are  conventionally  expressed ;
while  the  deadly  power  of  spiritual  evil  is  in  danger  of
being  forgotten.  Yet  this  sacrifice  is  fruitless  as  to
its  intended  result,  for  the  God  worshipped  in  wilful
forgetfulness  of  His  creatures  is  a  spectral  idol,  a
figment  of  the  human  heart  or  brain.

All  lower  and  imperfect  forms  of  Christian  faith
are  vain  attempts  to  combine  the  two  antagonistic
views  by  arbitrary  apportionment  of  human  service
between  the  outward  world  and  God.  They  can  never
satisfy  a  fully  awakened  conscience  or  an  instructed
and  unsophisticated  reason.  They  cannot  free  them-
selves from  an  uneasy  sense  of  impotent  inconsistency,
a  consciousness  that  high  purposes  are  being  mutilated
and  deformed  by  reluctant  acquiescences,  and  yet
that  there  is  no  escape  except  by  yet  more  ignoble
compromises.


BUT  BY  ME  163

The  only  peace  which  can  close  this  discord  is
the  peace  of  the  Son  of  God,  His  redemption  of
the  world  which  came  into  being  through  Him,  and
of  which  He  is  the  Life,  the  Truth,  and  the  Way.
All  our  primary  knowledge  of  God  is  through  Him,
the  true  Son  of  the  true  Father.  All  our  primary
knowledge  of  Him,  the  Son,  is  through  His  revelation
in  human  flesh  and  blood  under  the  conditions  of
earthly  life,  and  through  the  testimony  of  those  who
had  conversed  with  Him  by  their  bodily  senses.  All
our  thoughts  of  heavenly  things  are  therefore  shaped
out  of  earthly  images.  All  service  rendered  to  God
is  the  service  of  His  Son's  kingdom,  and  it  is  rendered
in  and  through  and  to  the  work  which  He  is  ever
carrying  on  in  the  world.  All  elements  of  our  being
within,  all  objects  and  forces  over  which  we  can
put  forth  any  influence  without,  are  made  for  His
service,  and  attain  their  own  special  perfection  only
when  they  are  turned  towards  Him,  For  while  all
things  in  their  Divine  order  lead  up  to  Him,  each
separate  thing  in  its  own  form,  function,  and  life  is
contemplated  by  Him,  and  His  delight  and  glory  is
in  all.

To  be  independent  of  the  world  is  impossible  :
to  be  independent  of  God  is  to  lose  the  life  of  life.
We  enter  on  the  freedom  of  God's  children  when  we
learn  so  to  use  the  world  that  it  brings  us  nearer
God  ;  and  that  use  of  it  is  its  own  true  and  proper
use.     The  transformation  is  not  without  but  within,

II — 2


1 64    NO  MAN  COMETH   UNTO    THE  FATHER

or  at  least  it  begins  within.  It  involves  the  subjuga-
tion of  all  lawless  desires  and  covetings,  all  sloths,
all  prides  and  vanities,  all  bitternesses  and  resent-
ments. It  consists  in  the  moulding  of  action  and
thought  and  feeling  by  the  Way,  the  Truth,  and  the
Life  as  set  forth  in  the  Gospel,  and  by  experience
read  according  to  that  standard.  Then  the  love  of
all  things  high  and  low  is  deprived  of  power  to
estrange  from  God,  and  becomes  an  enrichment  of
devotion  to  Him  and  a  means  of  furthering  His
purposes.  He  is  not  to  be  worshipped  in  emptiness.
The  wider  and  fuller  our  communion  with  His  works,
the  closer  and  healthier  will  be  our  communion  with
Him.

It  is  to  the  upper  room  at  Jerusalem  that  we  must
return  at  last  if  we  would  receive  our  Lord's  word
in  its  pure  force.  None  are  present  there  but  Him-
self and  His  chosen,  and  they  too  are  soon  to  be
separated.  Every  word  is  personal :  abstractions  are
far  removed.  The  way  to  be  trodden,  about  which
St  Thomas  had  asked,  is  suddenly  lifted  into  per-
sonality by  identification  with  the  Lord  Himself;
and  then  beneath  the  Way  the  Truth,  and  beneath
the  Truth  the  Life  are  raised  to  the  same  height.
Yet  here  the  personal  mode  of  expression  alone  is
strictly  true  ;  the  impersonal  names  are  dilutions  of
the  truth  meeting  the  weakness  of  human  faculties.
But   the   words,  strange    to   hear   from   human   lips


BUT  BY  ME  ,65

under  any  circumstances,  must  have  been  ''amazing"^
to  the  disciples  in  that  hour.  The  claim  seemed  to
be  made  only  that  the  morrow  might  falsify  it.  But
the  morrow  was  destined  in  truth  to  establish  it
for  ever  by  concentrating  at  once  upon  it  every  power
that  could  destroy.  The  Way,  the  Truth,  the  Life
were  to  be  baptized  at  once  into  death,  sprinkled  with
the  blood  of  the  Cross.  As  the  first  lesson  of  the  new
discipleship  the  disciples  were  to  learn  that  walking  in
the  Way  and  knowing  the  Truth  and  living  in  the
Life  demand  not  exemption  from  self-surrender  but
the  readiest  acceptance  of  it.  All  human  interests
bore  a  part  in  the  agony  of  the  Son  of  Man :  all
had  to  die  that  they  might  live.

The  chief  office  of  the  disciples  as  apostles,  ad- '
mitted  to  know  the  counsel  of  God  as  revealed  in
His  Son,  was  to  work  out  the  purpose  directly  in
virtue  of  their  knowledge  of  it,  and  to  provide  for
its  wider  and  later  working  out  by  transmitting  to
others  their  own  testimony  and  their  own  authority.
Such  also  has  been  the  work  intended  to  be  per-
formed, and  in  part  actually  performed,  by  the  Church
in  all  ages.  But  it  is  a  striking  characteristic  of  the
words  of  the  Apostles  after  the  Ascension  that  they
hold  up  with  equal  force  the  unconscious  working
out  of  God's  counsel  by  evil  men.  "  There  were
gathered  together  of  a  truth  in  this  city  against  Thy
holy  child  Jesus,  whom  Thou  didst  anoint,  both  Herod
and  Pontius  Pilate  with  the  nations  and   peoples  of


i66   NO  MAN  COMETH  UNTO    THE  FATHER

Israel,  to  do  whatsoever  things  Thy  hand  and  counsel
foreordained  to  come  to  pass."

The  faith  and  wisdom  which  they  shewed  by
these  and  the  like  tokens  were  the  fruits  of  the  teach-
ing received  around  the  table  of  the  Last  Supper,
when  it  had  been  illumined  by  the  experiences  of
the  following  days  and  weeks.  Christ's  disciples  in
all  ages  are  tempted  to  think  that  His  operation  is
limited  to  their  own  number,  and  that  He  is  mighty
only  when  they  are  mighty,  weak  when  they  are
weak.  If  then  after  a  time  of  familiar  presence
among  them  He  seems  to  be  taking  His  departure,
this  is  once  more  no  sign  that  He  is  abdicating  His
Lordship,  or  that  obedience  and  faith  in  His  Lordship
are  ceasing  to  be  the  first  condition  of  sure  stability
and  sure  progress  for  mankind,  with  new  power  over
a  wider  field  in  ways  hitherto  unseen.  He  is  break-
ing up  an  immature  discipleship  now  verging  towards
a  custom  only  too  compatible  with  faithlessness
that  He  may  recreate  it  on  a  wider  scale,  with  larger
demands  on  wisdom  and  devotion,  and  greater  and
more  various  work  to  do.  In  so  far  as  He  hides
Himself  as  man,  it  is  that  He  may  manifest  Himself
as  God.

«-         *         *         *****

Once  more  the  hour  of  the  Church's  trial  in  all  its
forms  compels  us  each  and  all  to  see  that  we  too  are
passing  through  an  hour  of  trial,  and  those  of  us  most


BUT  BY  ME  167

whose  manhood  is  now  beginning.  A  future  lies  in
front  which  cannot  possibly  be  the  same  as  the  past :
but  the  past  is  there,  fixed  and  indestructible:  we  can
no  more  strip  it  off  than  we  can  strip  off  body  and
soul.  Not  in  vain  at  the  beginning  of  our  personal
past,  while  the  conscious  recognition  of  self  was  as
yet  unborn,  were  we  washed  with  water  and  marked
with  the  cross  as  members  of  Christ,  children  of  God,
and  heirs  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Not  in  vain
was  our  name,  the  symbol  of  the  personal  unity  in
which  the  various  elements  of  our  nature  are  held
together,  bestowed  solemnly  upon  us  in  the  Name  of
names,  the  name  of  the  Blessed  Trinity.  Not  in  vain
were  we  pledged  to  a  never  ending  discipleship  to
Christ,  and  fellowship  in  the  Church  of  His  disciples.
These  acts  of  consecration,  being  performed  upon  us
from  without,  herein  faithfully  represent  the  greater
part  of  our  present  selves.  By  inheritance  and  by
education  for  the  most  part  we  are  what  we  are :
what  we  have  received  is  the  foundation  of  all  that
we  can  do.  Sonship  to  the  Father,  discipleship  to
the  Son,  fellowship  in  the  Spirit  are  upon  us.  We
can  abjure  them  if  we  will,  but  we  cannot  annihilate
them  :  we  cannot  make  ourselves  as  though  they  had
never  existed.  Yet  neither  can  they  retain  their
accustomed  form.  If  we  do  not  choose  to  go  back-
ward, we  must  go  forward.  We  must  labour  to
accept  them  more  completely  as  determining  the
purpose  of  our  lives.


1 68  COMING   TO   THE  FATHER  BY  THE  SON

We  are  full  of  inconsistencies,  and  so  is  all  around
us.     But  those  inconsistencies  are  the  mark  of  the
passage  from  the  lower  consistency  of   unconscious
animal  life  to  the  higher  consistency  of  spiritual  life,
preserving  and  perfecting  every  element  of  the  animal
life  yet  transforming  it  by  the  new  creation.     To  go
back  now  to  the  lower  consistency  means  to  choose
chaos,   darkness,    death.      Each   noble   inconsistency
results  from  some  one  fragment  of  discipleship,  some
accepted  task  of  sonship.     Yet  we  ought  never  to  be
satisfied  with  inconsistency.     We  must  struggle  for-
ward towards  a  rational  and   effectual   unity.     The
conditions  of  that  unity  are,  the  Gospel  tells  us,  to  be
found  only  in  Christ  the  Son  of  God.     We  want  a
principle  of  conduct,  a  truth  which  will  satisfy  reason,
a  flow  of  inward  life.     We  want  all  these,  each  for  its
own  sake,  and  each  for  the  sake  of  the  others :  yet  for
the  sake  of  one  we  are  constantly  driven  to  sacrifice
the  rest.     There  is  but  one  perfect  unity,  and  that  is
in  the  heavens :  yet  it  came  down  from  the  heavens
that   we    might    be    raised    into    fellowship    with    it.
Daily  taking  up  the  cross  and  following  Jesus  the
Christ  as  Lord,  daily  turning  and  becoming  as  little
children  in  the  Sonship  of  the  Heavenly  Father,  are
the  means  by  which  it  is  attained.     So  with  all  our
own  inconsistencies  and  weaknesses  and  sins  we  are
kept  in  the  one  Way,  the  One  Truth,  and  the  One
Life ;  and  each  step  that  we  take  brings  us  nearer  to
the  One  Father  above.


APPENDIX.


NOTES   AND    ILLUSTRATIONS.


OYTOc  d  AH  ApxHC,  6  KAiNOC  ^ANei'c,  KAi  haAaioc  efpeGeic,

KAI  HANTOTe  NeOC  GN   AflCON    KApAlAlC  YeNNCOMeNOC.       OyTOC  6

Aei',  CHMepoN  Yioc  Aoric9ei'c,  Ai  oy  TiAoyTizeTAi  h  eKKAnciA,
KAI  X<^'P"-  AnAoYMeNH  eN  An'oic  nAHGYNexAi,  nApexoycA  noyn,
(l)ANepoYCA  MYCTHpiA,  AiAfreAAoYCA  KAipoYC,  X'^'i'poYCA  eni
nicToTc  eniZHTOYCi,  AoopoYMeNH  oTc  opKiA  nicreooc  of  epAY-
6TAI  OYAe  opiA  nATe'pcoN  nApopizeTAi...HN  x-^piN  MH  AYno":)N
enifNobcH  A  Aoroc  OMiAeT,  Ai  a>N  BoyAetAi,  oie  GeAei.

THIS  (THE  WORD  OF  THE  FATHER)  IS  HE  WHO  WAS  FROM
THE  BEGINNING,  WHO  APPEARED  AS  NEW,  AND  WAS  FOUND
TO  BE  OLD,  AND  IS  BORN  AT  ALL  TIMES  YOUNG  IN  THE
HEARTS  OF  THE  HOLY.  THIS  IS  HE  WHO  IS  EVERMORE,
TO-DAY  ACCOUNTED  A  SON,  THROUGH  WHOM  THE  CHURCH
IS  ENRICHED,  AND  GRACE  SPREADING  WIDE  IN  THE  HOLY  IS
MULTIPLIED,  PROVIDING  REASON,  MANIFESTING  MYSTERIES,
ANNOUNCING  SEASONS,  REJOICING  OVER  THE  FAITHFUL
WHEN  THEY  SEEK,  BESTOWING  ON  THEM  GIFTS  BY  WHICH
THE  SACRED  BONDS  OF  FAITH  ARE  NOT  WEAKENED  NOR
THE  LANDMARKS  OF  THE  FATHERS  OVERSTEPPED.. ..WHICH
GRACE  IF  THOU  GRIEVE  NOT,  THOU  SHALT  LEARN  TO  KNOW
THOSE  THINGS  WHICH  THE  WORD  DISCOURSES,  BV  WH.AT
MEANS   HE   CHOOSES,   AT  WHAT   TIMES    HE  WILLS.

ANONYMUS    SAEC.    II.


APPENDIX.


NOTES    AND    ILLUSTRATIONS.


ON   THE  ACQUISITION  AND   TRANSAIISSION

OF   TRUTH.

Smooth  ways  of  thought  are  like  smooth  ways  of
action :  truth  is  never  reached  or  held  fast  without
friction  and  grappling.

To  move  in  the  direction  where  movement  is
easiest  is  not  action  or  work :  all  action  involves
struggle  and  conquest.

We  want  not  relaxation  but  bracing  and  binding  :
we  are  all  abroad,  never  at  home.  We  need  to  live
with  girded  loins  and  lamps  burning,  ready  instantly
to  throw  ourselves  on  what  is  needed.  Yet  the  time
is  gone  by  for  gaining  concentration  by  narrowness
of  aim.

We  must  beware  of  a  slavery  of  the  mind  to  its
own  tools,  not  the  less  tools  that  they  arc  part  of
its  furniture  and  frame.


172  NOTES  AND   ILLUSTRATIONS

All  processes  of  logic  and  method  are  only
mechanism,  extending  and  correcting  the  inborn
mechanism  of  the  eye.  Behind,  and  apart  from
all  alike  is  the  power  of  sight.

Vision.

Its  three  qualities  are  clearness,  completeness,
proportion.

Vision  is  essentially  personal  and  individual,  in-
volving selection  and  interpretation.

No  hearsay  can  be  a  substitute.  What  we  have
ourselves  seen  and  learned  and  known  is  the  dominant
and  the  vitalising  factor  in  all  real  belief.

Yet  within  the  narrowest  sphere  v/e  have  to
depend  at  second  hand  on  the  ""vision"^  of  others.

And  the  necessity  increases  with  each  expansion
of  our  own  range  of  vision,  till  personal  experience  is
found  to  be  the  merest  atom  of  the  vital  experience
of  mankind;  and  that  total  experience  (itself  evidently
as  yet  an  imperfect  representation  of  truth,  even  of
truth  in  relation  to  man)  is  needed  to  be  in  some
degree  assimilated  if  our  own  view  of  things  is  to  be
even  approximately  true.  Truth  and  reality  suffer
if  either  factor  is  allowed  to  overpower  the  other.
To  gain  a  true  view  we  must  take  into  account  all
varied  forms  of  contemporary  experience,  and  all  the
experiences  of  different  ages.  He  will  best,  see  the
whole,  and  each  part  in  relation  to  the  whole  most


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS  173

truly,  who  has  the  widest  and  best  proportioned
knowledge  founded  on  the  experience  of  others,  and
at  the  same  time  controls  all  by  his  own  experience.
He  cannot  be  too  conscious  of  its  pettiness,  or  of  its
ultimate  claim  on  his  fidelity.

Our  sight  of  things  unseen  is  now  'through  a
mirror,  in  a  riddle,'  much  more  therefore  the  thought
by  which  we  try  to  conceive,  much  more  again  the
speech  by  which  we  try  to  utter  our  thought.  We
have  to  be  content  with  approximations,  and  also  to
uphold  them  as  worth  having,  fragments  of  substantial
truth,  enveloped  in  wrappings  of  secondary  falsehood
from  which  we  never  can  wholly  disentangle  them,
though  it  is  our  duty  to  be  always  working  towards
that  end.  In  trying  to  escape  from  this  need  of
approximations  we  necessarily  fall  into  one  of  the
twin  forms  of  what  is  the  same  fundamental  error,  by
seeking  refuge  either  in  dogmatic  authority,  or  in
abandoning  the  whole  sphere  of  knowledge  in  which
the  approximations  lie.

It  is  the  special  power  of  poetry  that  it  tells  of  life,
and  therewith  fuses  and  unifies  all  things:  thus  if
merely  articulate,  it  loses  its  living  character ;  if  it
contains  no  truth,  the  life  is  felt  to  be  fleeting  and
can  only  charm  for  an  hour.  The  life  which  is
eternal  must  be  identical  in  substance  with  truth,
truth  itself  presented  under  another  ordering  to
another  order  of  perception.


174  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS

One  power  of  life  is  to  break  down  barriers  and
distinctions  created  for  logic.  Yet  it  is  never  solvent
or  chaos-producing.  It  implies  for  its  continuance
an  infinite  diversity  of  function,  though  with  limited
powers  of  transference.  Not  exclusive  of  truth  but
requiring  a  subtlety  of  gradation,  a  variation  in
continuity,  which  transcends  the  power  of  the  logical
or  scientific  faculty  ;  and  of  which  the  higher  mathe-
matics alone  present  an  image.

There  is  a  tendency  to  deny  all  knowledge  not
manifestly  demanding  sympathy.  Aesthetic  percep-
tion is  part  of  sympathy.  The  highest  art  is  that
which  most  weaves  together  sympathies  of  various
orders,  i.e.  is  in  the  truest  sense  sacramental.  Uni-
versal sympathy  and  universal  knowledge  are  mutually
required.  The  limitations  of  the  knowledge  possible
to  any  man  are  consequent  on  the  limitations  of  his
sympathy.  Knowledge  in  the  narrower  sense  is  the
articulation  of  the  sight  which  accompanies  sympathy.

All  our  knowledge  is  affected  by  our  personality,
and  this  really  makes  it  knowledge.  The  naked
reflexion  of  a  mirror  is  not  knowledge.  Whatever  is
cognized  becomes  knowledge  only  by  combination
either  with  other  cognitions  that  we  possess  or  m^y
possess  or  else  by  combination  with  our  life  or  our
action.

The  vain  effort  to  attain  a  purely  'objective'  or


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS  175

detached  view  implies  the  possibility  of  emancipation
from  ancestry  or  from  past  and  present  environment.


Experience  and  Revelation.

In  human  science  historic  fact,  unique  and  in-
dividual, is  the  base :  in  natural  science  uniform
repetition  of  likenesses,  while  each  is  and  must  be
influenced  by  the  other.

Experience  is  unsafe  only  so  far  as  incomplete ;
false  only  by  false  and  arbitrary  selection  out  of  ex-
perience. No  line  is  possible  between  what  has  come
to  men,  and  their  interpretations  of  what  has  come  to
them.  Dissect  experience  into  its  elements  as  we
may,  each  element  contains  both  factors.  All  that
has  been  thought  and  felt  is  experience,  and  all  but
the  most  elementary  experience  has  no  way  of
finding  expression  and  record  but  in  images.

To  reduce  experience  to  (supposed)  primary
.sensations  or  to  what  can  supply  unchanged  the
materials  for  logical  processes  is  to  destroy  ex-
perience.

Experience  also  gives  but  specimens,  from  which
we  with  greater  or  less  certainty  infer  what  has  not
come  within  our  ken.  The  words  and  facts  of  gospel
history  and  of  apostolic  history  do  not  the  less  belong
to  experience  because  they  have  relations  to  miracle.
The  problem  in  respect  of  then!  is,  are  they  (supposing
them  to  be  truly  recorded)  most  truly  interpreted  by


176  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS

the  supposition  of  miraculous  antecedents  and  con-
comitants or  not?  As  historical  and  literary  phe-
nomena they  demand  to  be  subjected  to  historical
and  literary  criticism.  But  they  do  not  stand  unique
in  a  crowd  of  uniformitarian  experience.  Waiving
miracle,  experience  itself  supplies  every  grade  of
uniqueness,  and  the  uniqueness  of  gospel  miracle  is
but  a  culmination  not  an  isolated  presentation.

Reaso7i.

It  may  be  urged  that  the  right  or  rather  duty  of
personal  verification  of  truth  here  maintained  is  in
effect  to  set  up  the  authority  of  reason  in  matters  of
faith.  So  be  it.  There  can  be  no  surer  sign  of
decrepitude  and  decay  in  faith  than  a  prevalent
nervousness  about  naming  and  commending  reason,
an  unwillingness  to  allude  to  its  existence  except
under  wrappings  of  language  which  suggest  that  it
is  but  a  necessary  evil.  The  fear  of  doing  injury  to
the  unstable  by  a  bolder  policy  is  perversely  fallacious.
The  faith  of  ordinary  people  would  be  far  more  clear
and  sure  if  they  had  been  freely  instructed  in  the
responsibilities  of  reason.  Our  present  cowardice
moreover  is  of  modern  growth.

Fear  of  a  truth  without  can  only  be  cured  by
taking  it  within,  or  rather  accepting  it  as  already
within.

Yet  on  another  ground   the  wisdom  of  uplifting


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS  177

the  banner  of  reason  may  be  justly  questioned,
namely  on  account  of  the  incurable  ambiguity  of  the
term  itself

Criticis7n.

Criticism  is  not  dangerous  except  when,  as  in
so  much  Christian  criticism,  it  is  merely  the  tool
for  reaching  a  result  not  itself  believed  on  that
ground  but  on  the  ground  of  speculative  postulates ;
while  such  postulates  though  they  may  be  suggested
by  a  multitude  of  facts  (sc.  the  irrelevant  facts)  yet
draw  their  strength  rather  from  the  temporary  feeling
of  an  age,  in  other  words  from  a  masked  authority  or
tradition,  or  because  an  individual  mind  feels  them
needed  for  its  own  inner  repose,  and  will  not  be
disturbed  by  new  facts.

ON  APOLOGETICS.
On  the  work  of  an  Apologist.

There  is  an  antithesis  between  preservation  of  old
truth  and  acquisition  of  new.  It  occurs  both  within
the  individual  and  in  his  relations  to  ^the  outer  world"".
At  each  moment  he  has  his  own  convictions,  the  result
of  his  past.  Whether  obtained  by  inheritance,  or  by
repudiation  of  inheritance,  or  by  personal  acquisition,
in  any  case  they  stand  over  against  the  present  and
future  processes  of  his  mind.     He  must  start  from

II.  L.  12


178  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS

them  even  when  he  is  correcting  them.  If  he  cares
for  truth  and  its  reception  he  must  be  their  apologist
and  propagator  no  less  than  their  critic.  To  detach
himself  from  them  for  the  purposes  of  criticism  is  an
impossibility,  and  the  attempt  a  delusion.

The  analogy  holds  for  his  dealings  with  the  truth
of  the  Church  or  of  society  generally.    A  large  part  of
his  duty  to   society  or   to    his    own    special    society
consists  in  the  preservation  and  propagation  of  truth
already  ascertained,  no  matter  from  what  source  and
by  what  means.     It  is  in  danger  of  being  forgotten,
invaded  by  moral  evil,  invaded  by  unconscious   en-
croachment   and    perversion,    invaded    by    deliberate
assault  and  deliberate  unfounded  change.     If  a  teacher
of  others,  he  must  teach  primarily  out  of  ascertained
truth,  and  he  must  in  some  measure  deal  with  current
language    and    notions,   however   conscious    of    their
inadequacy.     Yet  even  without  this  special  responsi-
bility, the  duty  of  preservation  is  always  grave  :  and
there  is  the  added  responsibility  attaching  to  him  as
a  loyal  member  of  a  special  society  endowed  with  a
special  truth.     Yet  equally  clear  is  the  duty  of  per-
petual   correction,    perpetual    progress.      There    is    a
necessary  preservation   which    is    simply  apologetic :
the  more  powerful  preservation  comes  by  perilous  use
and  perilous  reform.


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS  179


T/te   appeal  to    Credentials.

The  most  tempting  form  of  simplification  is  that
which  throws  the  whole  burden  upon  credentials.
This  is  the  contention  which  finds  most  favour  with
those  Christians  who  prize  their  belief  chiefly  as
either  dogma  or  law.

The  exclusive  appeal  to  credentials  is  ultimately
an  appeal  to  external  signs  of  supernatural  power
and  knowledge  in  our  Lord  and  the  apostles.  If
these  can  be  established,  they  seem  to  set  aside  all
necessity  for  calling  in  human  history,  or  authority,
or  conscience,  or  reason.  Such  calling  in  is  manifestly
inconvenient  when  any  particular  doctrine  assumed
to  be  Christian  is  assailed :  the  task  is  much  easier  to
have  only  to  say, — '  This  rests  on  the  direct  authority
of  the  Lord  and  the  apostles,  who  are  proved  to  have
had  supernatural  knowledge. '  But  supposing  the
supernatural  power  and  knowledge  proved,  what  do
they  prove  beyond  themselves  ?

TJie  appeal  to  Contents.

The  unsatisfactorincss  of  Christian  evidences  is
partly  owing  to  the  fact  that  they  necessarily  en-
deavour to  detach  Christianity  from  the  sum  of  objects
of  knowledge  and  belief

The   Christianity  that   can  be  thus    presented    is

12 — 2


i8o  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS

only  a  part  of  the  whole,  and  that  distorted  by  its
detachment.

Christianity  consists  of  the  most  central  and
significant  truth  concerning  the  universe,  intelligible
only  in  connexion  with  other  truth  not  obviously
Christian,  and  accepted  by  many  not  Christians.  If
it  is  assumed  as  true,  the  universe  can  be  beheld  as
subject  to  a  comparatively  worthy  order  which  falls
to  pieces  when  Christianity  is  assumed  to  be  a
delusion.

All  the  great  speculative  questions  are  insoluble
except  on  some  view  which  gives  unity  to  the  uni-
verse. The  desire  of  unity  may  be  stigmatised  as  a
mental  disease ;  but  the  very  notion  of  diseases
assumes  a  kind  of  unity :  and  so  always  the  only
rational  question  is  What  kind  of  unity  .-*  The  unity
given  by  God  in  Christ  alone  preserves  all  things  in
integrity  and  unfrustrated,  it  alone  being  unity  with
universal  comprehension  through  subordination  :  but
this  it  does  by  a  reconstitution,  a  new  creation.

Christianity  is  not  an  uniform  "and  monotonous
tradition,  but  to  be  learned  only  by  successive  steps  of
life.

Two  questions  arise,  whether  belief  in  God  ought  to
be  added  as  a  supplement  to  other  beliefs:  and  whether
belief  in  Christ  ought  to  be  added  as  a  supplement  to
belief  in  God.     Both  alike  are  insoluble.     Belief  in


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS  i8i

Christ  is  not  a  supplement  to  belief  in  God  but  the
only  sure  foundation  of  it.  Belief  in  God  is  not  a
supplement  to  other  beliefs,  but  the  only  bond  of
their  coherence  and  trustworthiness.

If  the  summing  up  of  all  things  has  not  already
come  down  to  meet  us  from  the  heavens,  new
attempts  at  partial  summings  up  will  rise  from  the
earth  like  the  crests  of  surging  waves,  but  rise  only  to
fall.

The  modern  desire  is  for  truth  omnigenous,  but
scattered :  it  must  be  built  up  together  before  it  can
furnish  food  for  wisdom  and  so  for  conduct :  and  we
shall  increasingly  find  the  impossibility  of  so  building
without  the  keystone  which  the  knowledge  of  God
supplies.  The  light  from  above  here  most  of  all —
though  in  its  measure  everywhere — must  meet  the
search  from  below.


Out  of  Christ  all  that  is  behind  is  dead.  We
cannot  legitimately  knit  together  moment  to  moment
or  limb  to  limb.  But  in  Him  the  whole  dead  past
becomes  alive  again  :  it  is  part  of  His  body  and  His
life  flows  through  every  part.

So  also  is  the  dead  universe  of  multitudinous
forces  or  atoms  which  meet  and  part  and  whirl  in
mad  restlessness.


1 82  NOTES  AND   ILLUSTRATIONS

The  experience  of  the  Church  in  all  ages  con-
cerning life  and  concerning  the  relation  of  life  to
Christ,  has  had  the  same  twofold  character  as  the
parallel  experience  concerning  the  Truth  and  the
Way.  From  the  earliest  times  till  now  a  bright  and
fruitful  life  has  been  entering  into  men  from  their
Divine  head  through  devotion  to  His  Person.  From
the  earliest  times  till  now  the  life  descending  from
Christ  has  often  been  defiled  with  corruption,  often
been  stricken  with  barrenness  ;  it  has  often  itself  well-
nigh  succumbed  to  foes  without  or  languors  within ;  and
the  deepest  of  all  causes  of  failure  has  been  imperfect
apprehension  of  the  full  truth  contained  in  the  word
spoken  to  St  Thomas.  Christians  have  looked  up  to
Christ  as  life-giving  and  as  life  ;  in  so  far  as  they
have  not  known  Him  as  'The  Life,'  they  have  fatally
misread  themselves  and  mankind  and  the  world,  and
His  work  in  and  for  all.

The  history  of  the  Church,  if  it  could  ever  be  truly
written,  would  be  the  most  composite  of  all  histories,
since  it  would  have  to  set  forth  the  progress  of  every
element  of  humanity  since  its  invisible  Head  was
revealed.

The  amplest  knowledge  of  human  acts,  or  even
human  beliefs,  without  some  corresponding  know-
ledge of  the  human  vicissitudes  of  the  life  beneath,
could  never  supply  an  answer  to  the  ancient
question,  which  insistently  asks  itself  to-day,  What
new  thing  Christ  brought  into  the  world  ?


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS  1S3

In  the  times  when  Christianity  owed  nothing  to
custom  and  tradition,  and  when  all  the  ways  of
ordinary  society  tended  to  draw  men  away  from  it,
what  drew  them  to  it  and  held  them  to  it  despite  all
persecution  was  the  power  of  its  life.  Naturally  this
was  the  element  which  could  give  least  account  of
itself  Many  were  drawn  by  the  testimony  of  the
moral  power  of  Christianity,  a  few  by  the  satisfaction
which  it  gave  to  reason.  But  life  calling  to  life  was
the  one  victorious  power  which  mastered  men  and
women  of  all  conditions  and  of  all  grades  of
culture.


If  it  be  urged  that  this  defence  of  Christianity,  as
being  dependent  on  its  own  character  and  especially
on  the  widest  view  of  the  province  of  religion,  is
inapplicable  to  most  current  forms  of  Christianity,
the  plea  must  be  acknowledged  as  true.  By  their
limitation  of  its  claims,  and  also  by  their  manner  of
conceiving  some  of  the  Christian  doctrines  (partly
owing  to  the  limitation,  partly  for  other  reasons),  they
fail  to  be  covered  by  what  is  here  said.  Nay,  were
Christianity  such  as  it  is  represented  in  them,  I  could
not  accept  it  myself  Part  only  of  its  evidence  would
remain  valid,  and  there  would  be  more  than  a  mere
diminution  in  its  amount:  there  would  be  insuperable
contradiction  between  (supposed)  actual  Christian
doctrine  and  what  I  could  not  but  believe.


1 84  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS

Most  of  the  distortions  and  contradictions  which
render  some  of  the  best  known  forms  of  Christianity
incredible  as  wholes  are  corollaries  from  a  view  of
God's  counsels  towards  mankind  and  the  universe
which  transposes  the  primary  end  and  the  secondary
means.  Finite  as  we  are,  our  knowledge  of  God's
purposes,  especially  in  our  present  unripened  state,
can  be  only  partial  and  approximative :  the  glory  of
God,  which  stands  in  Scripture  as  the  furthest  goal
in  our  horizon,  is  richly  significant  indeed,  but  yet
transcends  all  conceptions  in  which  finite  things  are
included.  But  still  it  makes  all  the  difference  whether
our  view  of  God's  purposes  does  or  does  not  invert
them  within  the  range  which  it  is  at  all  able  to  cover.
Is  it  the  true  sense  of  Scripture  that  recompense  of
human  deeds,  good  or  evil,  and  not  the  quality  of  the
deeds  or  the  doer,  is  the  prime  motive  of  Divine
dealings  with  mankind  ?  If  so,  then  human  morality
is  better  than  that  which  is  called  Divine.  Yet  this
is  the  latent  premiss  in  the  ordinary  conception  of
salvation.

It  is  impossible  to  accept  the  universal  authority  of
religion  while  it  involves  conceptions  which  poison
and  unrealize  life ;  and  equally  impossible  to  ac-
cept a  partial  authority  for  religion,  though  its
specialities  must  be  partial  by  the  nature  of  the  case.
Its  extension  to  universality  must  go  hand  in  hand
with    its    enrichment    and    restoration  out   of   false


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS  185

negativity.  The  process  is  easily  misrepresented  as  a
hollow  sanctifying  of  the  crude  or  unregenerated
world  (which  hollow  sanctifying  is  indeed  a  true  and
most  serious  peril  on  one  side).  Nevertheless  religion
can  rule  only  in  proportion  as  it  becomes  worthy  to
rule,  and  the  due  honour  which  it  learns  to  pay  to
all  departments  of  human  action  in  their  several
places  is  on  one  side  the  measure  of  its  worthiness.

Ethical  impossibilities.

I.  The  assumed  premiss  that  recompense  of
human  deeds  (not  the  quality  of  the  deeds  or  the
doer)  is  the  prime  motive  of  Divine  dealings  with
mankind.     (Interchange  of  Law  and  Gospel.)

II.  That  even  correction  (to  say  nothing  of
requital)  of  evil  is  the  starting  point  of  God's  dealings
with  man  rather  than  good.     (Creation)(Fall.)

III.  (Corollary  of  I.)  that  this  present  life  is  to  be
disparaged,  and  made  a  mere  antecedent  to  the
future,  not  worthy  of  intrinsic  dignity  and  cultivation.
(Impossibility  of  keeping  this  view  consistently.
Secularism  preferable  to  its  consistent  adoption.)
On  the  other  hand  there  is  a  true  subordination  of
the  present  to  the  future.

In  affecting  to  defend  Christianity  are  yon  not
replacing  Christianity  as  it  is  ly  a  personal  product
of  your  oivn  ?


1 86  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS

Ans.  There  is  no  'Christianity  as  it  is,'  but  a
multitude  of  Christianities  each  of  which  covers  a  small
part  of  what  is  believed  in  the  nineteenth  century,  while
this  as  a  whole  excludes  much  that  has  been  believed
in  past  centuries,  and  the  sum  of  the  whole  covers  but
a  part  of  the  contents  of  the  Bible.  It  is  true  that
certain  modifications  of  doctrine  have  been  much
more  widely  current  in  different  ages,  and  in  different
places  in  the  same  age,  than  others  ;  but,  the  moment
we  study  the  greater  theologians  who  have  done
more  than  reflect  or  even  systematise  current  beliefs,
we  find  the  harmony  broken,  and  we  often  find  also
these  isolated  but  not  isolating  voices  to  reflect  the
inarticulate  feelings  of  the  simply  devout  who  are  not
theologians  and  do  not  think  it  necessary  to  repeat
the  phrases  of  their  friends  or  teachers.

Hence  the  vital  need  of  the  study  of  the  history  of
doctrine.

Linear  progress  means  often  the  neglect  of  such
elements  as  are  not  taken  up  for  development.

But  no  possible  modification  can  be  accepted  as
Christianity  which  contradicts  the  broad  testimony  of
Scripture,  and  requires  the  rewriting  of  its  most
distinctive  passages.

Progress  in  theology  does  not  consist  in  mutilation
but  in  purification.  It  is  not  the  great  facts  or  ideas
that  are  false,  but  the  way  in  which  they  are  conceived,
especially  as  to  the  conditions  of  their  external
manifestation  (false  philosophy  wrongly  supposed  to


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS  187

be  theology).  And  so  in  what  concerns  the  relation
of  things  Divine  to  men,  error  lies  mainly  in  attempts
to  render  wholly  explicable  what  is  but  partly
apprehensible  :  and  especially  in  the  use  of  images
drawn  from  lower  rather  than  from  higher  human
relations  and  transactions.

Nor  does  progress  consist  in  being  less  ecclesi-
astical.

(i)  In  the  past.  Partly,  what  is  corrupt  and
mischievous  has  proceeded  from  the  Church  as  such
only  in  the  same  way  as  what  was  sound  and
beneficial  came  from  the  Church  as  such,  both  being
likely  under  an  unchurchly  state  of  things  to  have
been  much  less.  Partly,  much  of  what  is  evil  arises
from  the  usurpation  of  the  office  of  the  Church  by
the  individual  and  by  mere  public  opinion  &c.

(2)  In  the  future.  The  great  defect  of  present
Christianity  is  its  loss  of  a  social  character,  in  other
words  its  unchurchliness.  Where  powers  and  in-
stitutions survive,  or  even  dominate,  they  have  ceased
to  hold  their  proper  place  as  organs  of  a  living  body,
breathed  into  by  a  Divine  Spirit.

The  Materialist  Controversy.

Two  ultimate  positions,  not  proved,  but  likely  to
be  true.

(i)  In  the  past — Man  with  his  whole  mental  and
spiritual  nature  derived   through  various  steps  from


1 88  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS

lower  beings  having  no  such  nature,  and  those  probably
in  turn  from  inorganic  bodies.

(2)  In  the  present — Man's  whole  mental  and
spiritual  nature  is  conditioned  by  his  physical  nature
and  its  pathological  states,  no  mental  or  spiritual
movement  taking  place  without  a  concomitant
physical  movement.

These  two  positive  afifirmations  leave  untouched
the  invisible  conditions  without  which  the  smallest
change  'continuous'  or  'discontinuous',  cannot  be
accounted  for,  and  therefore  the  invisible  Power
from  which  these  conditions  proceed,  and  from  whom
other  worlds  inaccessible  to  our  present  faculties  with
their  conditions  may  proceed.

They  simply  affirm  two  weighty  truths  about  one
class  of  facts,  implying  by  their  want  of  self-sufficiency
the  existence  of  other  classes  of  facts,  which  we  may
call  physical  if  we  please :  but  affording  no  evidence
positive  or  negative  as  to  the  existence  of  yet  other
facts  ''of  Divine  agency"^  underlying  these.

They  contribute  nothing  to  the  proof  or  disproof
of  God,  merely  extending  to  the  whole  range  of  His
working  within  our  known  world  that  which  every
one  believes  to  be  true  as  to  a  greater  or  less  part  of
His  working.

They  contribute  nothing  to  the  proof  or  disproof

of  immortality.


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS  1S9

LIFE.

Life  and  death  are  perhaps  the  most  pregnant  of
images.  Yet  they  are  used  so  manifoldly  that  their
strictest  sense  is  hard  to  seize.

Even  as  to  physical  life  various  accidents  deter-
mine the  use.  With  their  use  in  imagery  the  multi-
plication of  sense  becomes  still  greater.

Thus  the  mere  fact  of  using  the  words  together
leads  to  opposing  them  to  each  other  as  in  some
sense  equals,  a  sense  not  unknown  in  the  Bible.  But
if  we  desire  to  seize  the  force  of  either  in  cardinal
passages  of  the  N.  T.  we  must  strip  off  all  secondary
and  derivative  associations,  and  all  deductions  from
speculative  theory,  and  go  back  to  the  most  naked
physical  facts  of  primitive  experience.

The  true  primary  contrast  is  one  of  observation,
not  of  reflexion.

Life  is  simply  the  difference  between  a  body  and  a
corpse  ;  between  a  corpse  grown  cold  yet  without  out-
ward sign  of  decay,  and  the  same  body  as  it  would  be
seen  in  a  momentary  gaze  before  the  change.

The  sense  arrived  at  here  derives  its  force  from
the  combination  and  contrast  of  like  and  unlike.  It
rests  on  the  assumed  and  manifest  resemblance  of  the
dead  form  to  the  living  form,  and  even  on  the
completeness  of  the  resemblance.

The  most  exact  memory  of  shape  and  line  can
find  no  difference.


igo  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS

The  difFerence  is  invisible,  but  the  invisible
difiference  cannot  be  forgotten.

It  strikes  the  dullest  savage  as  much  as  ourselves.
To  him  it  is  perhaps  the  clearest  and  strongest
suggestion  of  the  unseen.  He  knows  that  the  body-
can  eat  and  move  and  feel  and  see  or  hear  and  speak,
and  that  the  corpse  can  do  none  of  these  things.  He
is  far  perhaps  from  any  such  wide  conception  as
*  cause '  or  '  power '  but  the  force  of  the  facts  is  all  the
greater.  The  one  form  can  be  made  to  arise  and  eat
and  move  and  see  and  feel  and  speak,  or  if  now
asleep  it  can  be  waked  and  then  it  can  be  made  to
do  these  things.  The  other  cannot :  if  it  is  asleep,  it
is,  with  a  sleep  beyond  waking.  The  one  form  has
somehow  associated  with  it  something  that  the  other
has  not,  and  that  something  is  life.

Decay  and  dissolution  may  enter  as  accessories
into  the  notion  of  death  but  only  remotely,  only
perhaps  as  the  movements  which  the  corpse  can  and
will  take  up  if  it  be  not  embalmed,  but  the  main
feeling  is  of  the  absence  of  what  was  there  before  or
what  is  now  in  some  similar  form.

Here  is  half  of  the  true  notion  of  an  idol  to  the
worshipper  of  Jehovah  (the  other  half  is  its  false-
hood). Its  deadness  is  a  much  more  positive  thing
than  that  which  belongs  to  a  fragment  of  rock  or  the
trunk  of  a  tree.

It  draws  its  deadness  from  its  semblance  of  life.


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS  191

It    is    the    mere    semblance   of    a    man    or   other
creature,    not    even    the    reah'ty    of    a    bull    or    an


eagle.


It  is  a  corpse-god,  not  a  living  God.

This  primitive  mode  of  conceiving  natural  life  is
the  foundation  of  the  secondary  sense  which  comes
at  a  later  time  of  religious  reflexion.

After  the  idea  of  walking  in  righteous  ways  or
'ways  of  the  Lord'  has  long  prevailed,  the  thoughts
turn  inward  and  the  communion  with  God  rises  to  a
higher  level.

Then  a  difference  is  felt  to  exist  among  men
analogous  to  that  which  distinguishes  a  body  from  a
corpse.  Among  those  who  are  engaged  in  every
pursuit  of  life  there  is  felt  to  be  something  in  some
which  is  not  in  others.  The  outward  fashion  of  the
doings  differs  little  or  not  at  all.  All  are  pursuing
the  same  occupations,  meet  with  the  same  accidents
of  life  and  are  subject  to  the  same  cycle  of  change.
Yet  the  psalmist  or  wise  man  or  prophet  whose
heart  has  been  in  the  presence  of  God  feels  that  the
common  busy  life  of  many  is  in  itself  as  the  state  of
a  corpse  in  contrast  with  the  state  of  others  not
outwardly  different  but  who  have  learnt  to  look  up
to  God.

In  these  last  there  is  a  second  life,  a  life  within
and  above  that  universal  life  which  they  share  with
all  that  breathe,  a  life  exempt  from  being  dried  up,


192  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS

for  it  flows  from  an  ever-living  fountain  in  the
heavens.

It  was  apparently  this  thought  of  life  that  gave
rise  to  the  early  foreshadowings  of  personal  im-
mortality.

Two  characteristics  helped  to  this  result.

(i)  The  life  was  marked  by  its  power  of  sur-
viving all  shocks  and  wastings  that  destroyed  the
other  forms  of  life,  and  this  although  it  was  '"doubly'^
invisible.  Why  then  should  it  not  survive  the  last
shock  of  all  ?

(2)  It  was  sustained  by  its  communion  with  God,
and  the  fountain  in  Him  was  certainly  unaffected  by
human  vicissitudes.  He  lived  on  from  lifetime  to
lifetime,  from  generation  to  generation.  Why  then
should  not  the  streams  fed  from  that  fountain  be
equally  free  from  a  destiny  of  exhaustion  .■*


All  life  (0  is  derived  from  life,  (2)  requires
sustenance,  (3)  maintains  an  unity  of  different  func-
tions, (4)  is  generative  of  life.

The  highest  point  of  the  lower  life,  '  sensibility ',
gives  birth  equally  to  thought  and  to  feeling,  both
usually  instinctive  but  capable  of  becoming  individual
and  immediate.

Feeling  is  shaped  by  appetites  and  impulses,  in-
dividual  or   social,  and    so   gives   rise  to  associated


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS  193

aTopyat.  These  aTopyal  remain  isolated,  limited,  and
fugitive,  always  subserving  some  end  of  conservation
or  propagation,  and  nothing  beyond.

When  the  separate  mental  and  affective  actions
come  into  combination,  the  aropyal  become  tinged
with  affections,  and  the  instincts  with  reason.  Then
first  there  is  a  conscious  self  to  be  indulged  or
sacrificed.  The  passage  from  the  partial  human
affections  to  the  generalized  affections  towards  God
or  gods  is  obscure  but  probably  never  purely
affective  or  purely  rational.

Life  is  the  power  of  performing  function.  It  is
the  discharge  of  function  that  converts  labour  into
work.  So  that  the  fulness  of  life  implies  fulness  of
function ;  and  life  becomes  varied  with  variety  of
function.

Life  is  that  which  at  once  reveals  dependence  on
the  medium  and  is  itself  most  central  and  centripetal.
But  the  greater  its  inner  intensity  the  more  can  it
draw  and  subdue  to  itself  the  widest  medium.

The  impulse  from  which  all  action  proceeds  be-
longs to  the  region  of  feeling  and  emotion.

It  may  come  from  one  or  more  appetites  of  the
individual  body  or  mind,  or  from  complex  desires
made  up  of  them  but  all  having  self  as  their  object.

It  may  come  from  affections  directed  towards
persons.

II.  L.  13


194  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS

But  till  it  is  directed  towards  God,  there  is  no
power  which  can  harmonize  these  different  impulses
with  each  other  or  with  the  sense  of  right  or  the  sense
of  wisdom  which  stands  outside  them  all.  Only  when
all  three  meet  in  one  (He  who  is  the  Way  is  the  Truth,
and  He  who  is  the  Truth  is  the  Life)  can  we  escape
making  endless  disorder.

'  Way '  and  '  Truth '  obviously  need  external
objects :  '  Life '  because  inward  seems  self-contained,
but  is  not  so  really.  The  lower  life  of  man  feeds
on  yet  lower  life  partly,  partly  on  life  like  itself,  the
response  to  itself;  and  the  failure  of  response  is
deadening.  The  life  of  affection  feeds  on  affection  :
the  life  of  religion  on  the  sense  of  God's  love  and  care.

All  life  in  the  higher  sense  depends  on  some
fellowship,  an  isolated  life  is  a  contradiction  in  terms.
Fellowship  is  to  the  higher  life  what  food  is  to  the
natural  life — without  it  every  power  flags  and  at  last
perishes.  The  spirit  feeds  on  a  person  "  Except  ye
eat  the  flesh  etc."     (Eucharist  and  Marriage.)

Self-containment  is  abnegation  of  life.  Life  is
only  found  by  being  lost.

Life  involves  multiplicity  and  energy  of  relation.
Absoluteness  is  death.

Sufl"ering  is  proportional  to  life.  Those  who  have
most  life  sufl"er  most,  as  they  have  also  most  power
to  resist  and  overcome  suffering.


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS  195

The  personal  thirst  for  enjoyment  is  always  barren
except  as  the  avvakenment  to  the  consciousness  of
powers  possessed.

Communion  is  the  law  of  all.  The  life  which
strives  to  be  independent  degenerates  towards  lapse
into  its  lower  elements.

But  also  the  '  walking '  which  strives  to  be  inde-
pendent (self-will)  is  the  same ;  and  so  is  self-chosen
belief.

I.  Early  sense  of  freedom,  lost  in  manhood,  is
restored  in  the  new  freedom  of  the  Way,

II.  Early  sense  of  Truth  is  lost  in  manhood
either  through  indifference  to  it,  or  through  devotion
to  the  substitutes  furnished  either  by  our  own  past
imperfect  ascertainment  of  truth,  or  by  what  a
tradition  or  other  external  authority  dictates  to  us
as  truth.     Thought  is  the  active  reception  of  truth.

III.  Early  sense  of  Life  is  lost  in  manhood.
Originally  it  is  neither  selfish  nor  unselfish,  it  joins
the  self  to  what  is  around.  It  branches  off  into  self-
regarding  passions,  but  thereby  loses  its  own  livingness.
When  it  is  lost,  some  or  all  of  these  passions  survive,
robbed  of  their  naturalness  and  instinctiveness  and
become  settled  pursuits  of  selfishness.  The  new  life
comes  by  the  impregnation  of  the  original  life  with
eternity  (itself  not  the  ghastly  spectre  of  endless
duration).  This  eternal  life  in  one  sense  is  religion
(i.e.  emotive  religion),  in  another  sense  the  base  and


196  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS

root  of  religion  in  the  fullest  sense,  including  the
spheres  of  the  Way  and  the  Truth ;  and  in  like
manner  the  Word  is  the  Eternal  Life.

The  life  in  God  is  life  in  Christ  and  this  sustained
by  all  other  affections  and  emotions  and  forms  of
life ;  so  that  he  who  loves  nothing  else  but  God
destroys  the  possibility  of  loving  God.  And  con-
versely, what  gives  all  partial  affections  an  enduring
and  ennobling  character  lifting  them  from  the  natural
life  into  the  eternal  life,  is  the  love  of  God,  in  which
they  meet.  Left  to  themselves  they  fall  back  into
open  or  disguised  selfishness.  The  sense  of  right
above  them  may  save  them  much ;  but  in  itself  it  is
too  alien :  only  the  love  of  Him  who  is  the  Lord  of
our  life  and  the  way  of  our  life  is  itself  at  once  a  life
of  higher  power  and  an  effectual  control.

Christ's  relations  as  the  Life  to  all  Jiuman  emotiofi.

The  limitations  of  fact  were  such  as  were  in-
evitable :  to  exhaust  all  experience  was  impossible.
But,  as  containing  all  human  potentialities,  however
unexercised,  He  came  into  contact  with  all  through
the  plenitude  of  prophetic  sympathy ;  of  which  we
may  form  some  conception  in  the  sympathetic  an-
ticipations of  artists  and  poets.

If  evil  is  negative  (not  mere  absence)  or  dispro-
portion or  displacement,  then  a  participation  in  the


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS  197

pure  roots  of  all  human  impulse  must  be  compatible
with  perfect  sinlessness.


THE    WAY.

EtJiics  and  '  the    1  Vay.*

The  belief  in  '  ways '  belongs  to  common  and
universal  life,  and  could  not  be  wanting  to  heathens.
All  their  morals  were  attempts  to  unify  and  exalt
'ways,'  destroying  the  multitudinous  tyranny  of  im-
pulse and  pleasures.  Thus  they  had  been  working
upwards  towards  a  Way,  and  yet  had  broken  off.
Consider  for  instance  the  Stoic  theory  of  the  Cosmos.

Think  on  the  other  hand  how  the  Caesar  was
stepping  into  the  place  of  the  Way,  the  Truth,  and
the  Life.

No  summing  up  of  all  the  virtues  will  lead  to  the
kingdom  of  God.

All  virtues  imply  relations,  and  all  relations  imply
a  hierarchy  of  functions.

No  one  is  ever  made  happy  or  virtuous  by  what
he  receives  merely,  whether  it  be  knowledge  or
pleasure  or  any  other  outward  good  :  what  he  is  in
himself  and  what  his  work  is  in  relation  to  the
surrounding  world  of  men  and  things  determine  for
him  whether  things  good  in  themselves  shall  be  to
him  food  or  poison.


1 98  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS

Life  sought  apart  from  connexion  with  a  Divine
life  sinks  into  pursuit  of  pleasure.  It  becomes  in-
coherent and  atomic,  a  mere  multitude  of  rapturous
moments.

The  purpose  to  be  aimed  at  is  that  every  thing  in
man  may  uplift  that  which  is  a  little  lower  than  it-
self, as  it  is  itself  uplifted  from  above.  There  are
many  abovcs,  and  the  heavenly  above  can  be  re-
tained only  by  recognition  and  use  of  the  lower
aboves.

Affection  begins  in  duty  and  is  perfected  in  duty.

Affection  without  knowledge  is  a  mere  blind  ad-
hesion, which  debases,  not  exalts,  our  personality,
and  is  always  prone  to  fall  back  into  a  barren  and
enervating  luxury  of  the  senses  and  physical  con-
stitution.

Love  perishes  without  an  accompanying  sense  of
duty  to  visible  and  invisible  Lords.

The  theologies  which  have  sundered  God's  right-
eousness from  His  love  have  done  equal  wrong  to  both.

The  rapture  of  separate  moments  is  only  a  not
yet  extinguished  spark  from  a  fire  which  once  was
continuous  and  might  have  been  continuous  still.

'Conduct'  becomes  ultimately  merely  negative.
It  dispenses  with  an  ideal  for  the  individual  and
leaves  mankind  to  drift  aimless.  The  animal  needs
no  aim:  he  has  to  feed,  propagate,  play:  if  more,
only  as  means  to  these  ends.  But  all  that  makes  up
humanity  is  above  these  things,  and  is  unintelligible


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS  199

without  some  comprehensive  end.  "  The  greatest
happiness  etc."  is  so  far  better  than  a  negative
morality  that  it  is  in  a  manner  comprehensive  arid
looks  beyond  self:  but  it  only  adds  together  the
repetitions  of  the  individual  problem  which  has
already  failed  ;  and  it  makes  that  an  end  which  even
for  the  animal  as  seen  from  without  (as  we  can  see  it)
is  but  a  means,  though  it  may  be  all  that  he  is
conscious  of

If  within  a  subjection  to  a  Way  and  a  Truth  there
were  an  independence  of  personality  and  affections
and  desires,  discipleship  would  destroy  instead  of
creating  unity.

For  all  true  unity  is  from  within :  the  more
coherent  the  purpose  and  passion  of  our  lives,  the
better  our  actions  and  thoughts  will  agree  with  them,
and  with  each  other.

But  there  is  only  one  real  semblance  of  unity
except  the  unity  which  is  through  Christ  with  God,
and  that  is  the  unity  of  self;  the  most  perfect  co-
herence outside  the  Christian  faith  is  that  of  him
who  deliberately  arranges  his  life  so  that  the  world
shall  revolve  round  himself  as  its  central  sun.

He  cannot  escape  arbitrariness  of  choice  in  him-
self between  pleasure,  or  gain,  or  pride,  or  power,  or
he  may  make  a  mixture  of  pleasure  and  pride  and
call  it  self-cultivation  but  he  must  let  much  die  for
the  sake  of  the  rest.


200  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS

It  is  a  vain  dream  that  the  bare  notion  of  the
good  of  mankind  will  make  an  unity.  Whoever
takes  it  up  is  blessed  by  it,  though  he  lays  himself
open  to  endless  self-deceits :  but  he  succeeds  in  pro-
portion to  the  partiality  of  his  aims.  He  must  fail
when  he  tries  to  be  comprehensive.

Christ  the   Way.

The  antithesis  '  I  '  and  'the  Way'  is  the  pregnant
paradox  which  knits  existence  together.  On  the  one
hand  devotion  to  a  person,  human  or  divine,  seems  in
our  best  moments  the  all  in  all  of  life.  Yet  it  fades
and  becomes  an  unreality  or  a  disease  when  it  is  not
translated  into  wide  and  diffusive  operation :  con-
versely all  worlds  of  operation  fatigue  and  desolate
and  come  to  vanity.  In  our  finiteness  we  are  driven
to  oscillate  between  the  person  and  the  world,  what-
ever world  it  may  be.  But  Christ's  word  exhibits
them  as  meeting  in  Him.  He,  the  most  personal  of
persons,  is  also  the  dominating  centre  of  every  world.
Most  of  all  is  this  true  of  Him  as  the  Way,  ap-
parently the  most  impersonal  of  all  conceptions.

See  in  Him  the  world  and  humanity  as  they  are
in  God's  sight,  the  embodiment  of  the  invisible
kingdom  of  which  the  visible  world  is  the  garment.
See  Him  as  the  whole,  not  the  single  part  which  each
one  of  us  is ;  and  it  must  transform  our  conceptions.

The  Way  is  not  the  noble  phrensy  of  a  solitary


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS  201

passionate  philanthropist  but  the  secret  power  by
which  every  higher  step  in  the  scale  of  being  is  won
and  maintained.

Each  sufferer  and  believer  whose  experience  is
recorded  in  the  Psalter  was  a  part  of  Christ,  a  fraction
of  the  Way.

The  word  of  Christ  leads  to  Christ  the  Word,  as
His  footsteps  along  the  way  lead  to  Him  as  the  Way.

The  Way  involves  the  double  office  of  Christ  as
doing  for  us  what  we  cannot  do,  and  as  the  power  in
which  we  do  all  things,  and  it  makes  our  work,  with
all  its  imperfection,  coextensive  with  His,  Whatever
work  He  performs  for  us  we  have  in  union  with  Him
to  do  for  ourselves,  and  for  the  world.  Salvation  (the
supreme  name  including  all  Christ's  work)  is  a  thing
given  us,  but  to  be  worked  out  by  ourselves,  as  a
mine  or  a  field.

The  necessities  of  the  present  and  the  ideals  of
the  future  are  both  related  to  the  past.  An  ideal
shaped  by  present  necessity  alone  is  always  untrue  to
permanent  relations.  An  attempt  to  meet  present
necessities  shaped  only  by  an  ideal  is  always  untrue
to  fact  and  baseless.  The  past  is  at  once  the  cause
of  the  present  and  the  womb  of  the  possibilities  of
the  future.

Christ's  bequest  to  the  Apostles  is  a  continuance  of
His  own  office  as  the  Way  :  the  head  of  the  Way  in
the  heavens  is  represented  by  the  body  of  the  Way
on  earth.


202  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS

"As  my  Father  hath  sent  Me,  so  send  I  you."
The  prerogative  thus  asserted  for  the  Church  is
dependent  on  its  continuity  with  Him  :  so  far  as  the
Church  enters  on  a  separate  way  it  dissevers  itself
from  Him  and  His  authority  :  but  it  can  never  reach
concordance  with  Him  through  assimilation  to  the
region  through  which  it  moves,  through  becoming
itself  a  wilderness,  instead  of  making  known  that  that
region  is  His  possession,  to  be  reclaimed  and  subdued
for  Him  by  virtue  of  the  Way  which  runs  through  it.

The  prerogatives  of  the  Church  involve  no  neglect
of  the  world,  no  contempt,  or  indifference.  They  are
the  one  way  by  which  the  world  can  be  finally  and
permanently  affected.  All  other  good  agencies  sub-
serve temporary  ends  :  their  permanent  work  comes
only  when  their  relation  to  the  Church  is  fixed.

DisciplesJiip.

Discipleship  (with  the  Twelve)  in  its  first  or
probationary  stage,  as  to  One  walking  among  them  a
man  amongst  men,  always  came  near  to  simple
personal  adhesion,  dispensing  with  the  use  of  their
own  faculties  within  and  media  without,  though  Christ
was  always  training  them  to  the  use  of  the  one  and
the  other.

The  new  stage  of  discipleship  was  reached  first  by
the  withdrawal  of  the  bodily  presence.    Henceforward


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS  203

if  discipleship  was   persevered    in,  it  could   only  be
by  faith  and  obedience.

Discipleship  is  nothing  and  means  nothing  except
as  the  response  to  a  pre-existent  and  actual  lordship,
not  right  to  lordship  merely,  but  exercised  lordship,

Discipleship  begins  in  obedience,  and  it  ends  in
obedience,  therefore  we  find  it  hard  to  accept:  we
wish  to  be  mere  receivers  of  good  things,  and  there-
fore we  like  to  think  of  Him  only  as  the  purveyor  of
good  things.

Yet  though  we  speak  of  gifts,  we  take  them  as
rights,  we  do  not  like  the  idea  of  a  giver,  and  of  thanks-
giving, because  it  empties  us  of  ourselves.  And  so
the  lowest  gifts  become  the  type  of  all  gifts,  and  even
the  love  of  God  becomes  the  pleasure  of  giving
pleasure.

We  all  want  to  reverse  "  Ye  have  not  chosen  Me  ".
If  we  care  to  have  Him  for  a  King,  yet  it  must  be  as
a  King  of  our  own  making,  though  He  (Jn.  vi.  15)
"withdrew  again  into  the  mountain  Himself  alone".

Sonship  is  the  true  yoke  of  mankind.  All  civili-
zation is  the  yoking  of  man,  and  the  vicissitudes  of
history  arise  out  of  the  trial  of  various  yokes,  and  the
abuse  of  them  by  lawless  and  unyoked  power,  the
rebellions  against  their  misuse  involving  also  re-
bellion against  yokes  as  such.  We  have  need  of
Law  and  Gospel.  Better  Law  only  than  no  yoke,
and  the  Gospel  is  no  Gospel  if  it  does  not  both
presuppose  and  include  Law.


204  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS

The  foundations  of  mental  and  spiritual  health
are  obedience,  reverence,  loyalty,  gratitude,  in  short,
those  inward  attitudes  of  thought  and  emotion  which
become  beings  who  are  subjects  and  receivers,  and
which  are  the  personal  expression  of  our  true
relations  to  God  and  men  alike.  When  they  are
wanting,  morality  has  ceased  to  be  more  than  a  more
or  less  slowly  dying  custom  and  tradition,  sustained
by  factitious  terrors  upheld  for  the  sake  of  public
convenience.

TJic  '  CitizeiisJiip '.

The  discipleship  in  an  existing  iroklrev^a  was  a
proper  education  for  disciples  who  were  to  constitute
and  then  to  rule  a  TroXiTev/xa  :  their  endurance  of  the
external  authorities  served  a  Divine  purpose.

For  the  education  of  the  disciples  as  belonging  to
a  TToXiTevfia  fitted  them  for  seeing  the  same  character
in  the  faith.  Hence  the  transforming  effect  of  the
Church  on  the  kingdoms  of  the  world.  Christians
were  instructed  to  use  the  temporary  paedagogic  laws
— experimental,  as  7r/309  (TKXrjpoKaphiav — cheerfully
and  willingly,  as  parts  of  the  providential  scheme  by
which  the  perfect  TroXirev/j-a  may  be  prepared.

ExamplesJiip.

*  Exampleship  '  is  either  a  fanaticism  or  a  delusion.
St  Francis  on  the  one  hand ;  on  the  other  the  affec-
tation  of  imitating  Christ  while  all   actions  remain


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS  205

unchanged.  As  the  Way  He  is  meant  to  transform
us :  but  the  transformation  is  not  into  the  fashion  of
Jesus  of  Nazareth,  but  into  a  fashion  shaped  out  of
our  own  materials.

It  was  not  as  an  Example  but  as  a  Master  that
Christ  spell-bound  the  Apostles.

THE    WORDS  OF  CHRIST.

The  Lord  held  the  disciples  fast  to  Himself  by  a
triple  attachment,  the  bond  of  guidance,  the  bond  of
teaching,  the  bond  of  life.  Each  of  these  bonds  was
wrought  by  His  words.

The  power  of  the  Life  that  dwelt  in  Christ  comes
forth  in  His  words.  There  are  hardly  any  precepts
among  them,  nothing  could  be  less  like  the  edicts  of  a
law-giver.  Almost  all  are  calm  affirmations  of  truth,
often  sounding  like  repetition  and  like  vagueness.
Yet  while  the  terms  elude  all  efforts  at  definition  the
sense  of  each  as  a  whole  is  seen  to  be  unutterably
precise  as  we  study  it.

He  speaks  often  of  His  own  words,  summing
them  up  at  times  into  the  word  or  declaration,  of
which  they  are  all  parts,  and  to  which  they  all
contribute.

Their  authority  He  refers  to  God  "the  words  that
I  speak  unto  you,  I  speak  not  from  myself"  (Jn.  xiv.
10) ;  and  they  are  the  immediate  agents  of  His
operation.


2o6  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS

His  acts  are  a  teaching  concerning  life,  His  words
pierce  to  the  centre  of  life  and  call  forth  life.  So  in
His  prayer  He  declares  "the  words  which  Thou
gavest...!  have  given  (not  simply  spoken  but  given)
to  them"  (Jn.  xvii.  8).

These  very  words  had  to  be  withdrawn,  the  very
vehicle  through  which  all  the  life  had  come.  The
stored-up  words  were  then  to  be  the  means  of  reach-
ing beyond  the  one  word  or  declaration  to  the  Lord
Himself  as  the  Life.  This  alone  could  enable  them
to  trust  to  Him  fully  as  the  Truth  and  the  Life,

"Thou  hast  the  words  of  eternal  life."  The  first
impression  was  not  so  much  of  truth  as  of  life  or
rather  of  truth  merged  in  life,  the  two  being  undistin-
guishable.  But  conversely  the  disciples'  expectation
of  life  in  Christ,  so  far  as  it  was  felt  within  (and  life
cannot  be  recognized  except  from  within)  was
through  His  words:  not  His  mere  \a\id,  but  Him-
self speaking :  written  or  repeated  words  have  a
power,  so  has  a  voiceless  presence ;  but  the  power  of
powers  among  men  is  when  both  are  combined  in  the
living  speaker,  who  is  also  a  doer,  when  the  pent-up
life  breaks  forth  into  utterance  and  becomes  articu-
late, while  yet  the  articulate  words  are  full  of  the
power  of  the  unspoken  which  remains  behind,  half
intelligible,  half  not.

The  prj/xara  ^(orj^  were  not  declarations  much  less
promises  of  eternal  life.  They  were  vehicles  of  it.
As  they  entered  into  the  disciples,  eternal  life  entered


NOTES  AND   ILLUSTRATIONS  207

in  with  them.  Their  operation  was  on  the  one  hand
that  of  life,  and  on  the  other  of  Hfe  eternal,  the
life  found  in  communion  with  God.  Every  energy-
was  quickened,  and  was  turned  towards  God  in  the
quickening.

But  further  His  pt]fjiaTa  were  so  completely  parts
and  utterances  of  Himself,  that  they  had  no  meaning
as  abstract  statements  of  truth  uttered  by  Him  as  a
Divine  organ  or  prophet.  Take  away  Himself  as  the
primary  (though  not  the  ultimate)  subject  of  every
statement,  and  they  all  fall  to  pieces.  Take  away
their  cohesion  with  His  acts  and  His  whole  known
person  and  presence,  and  they  lose  their  power.  The
disciples  did  well  to  gather  from  them  that  He  was
the  Holy  One  of  God,  the  chosen  and  heavenly  means
by  which  God  imparts  not  guidance  only,  or  know-
ledge only,  but  the  Life  that  is  above.

THE  EXCLUSIVENESS  OF  CHRIST'S  CLAIM.

Exclusiveness  is  the  outward  expression  of  unity
combined  with  universality,  the  refuge  against  the
Gods  many  and  Lords  many  who  throng  around  our
path.  We  cannot  escape  doing  homage  and  obe-
dience :  the  more  we  rebel,  the  more  abject  is  our
servitude.  But  Christ  leading  to  the  Father  in  the
light  of  the  Spirit  brings  us  into  the  one  service
which  is  in  harmony  with  all  the  laws  of  the  world
and  which  breaks   the   yoke   of  every  other  service.


2o8  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS

Wc  want  to  be  independent  of  God,  and  so  fall  back
into  helpless  dependence  on  the  world.

If  Christ  were  the  chief  deity  of  a  pantheon,  His
exclusive  place  in  the  Divine  economy  would  be  a
robbery  of  mankind,  an  arbitrary  limitation  on
opportunities  they  might  have  possessed.  But  the
many  Gods  of  a  Pantheon  are  of  necessity  all  the
work  of  men's  hearts  and  brains,  whether  they  be  the
work  of  men's  hands  or  not.  "  They  that  make  them
are  like  unto  them,  and  so  are  all  they  that  put  their
trust  in  them."  They  are  thrust  forth  out  of  the  earth,
and  to  the  earth  they  fall  back  again  by  an  inexorable
fate.  They  have  no  power  to  carry  their  worshippers
into  the  presence  of  the  Father  who  is  in  the  heavens,
and  they  are  no  less  powerless  to  confer  any  lasting
dominion  over  the  earth.

Christ  is  the  deliverance  from  idolatry,  because  we
cannot  choose  but  give  devotion  to  near  things  (to
do  otherwise  we  must  strip  ourselves  to  an  abstract
nakedness),  and  if  we  give  devotion  to  God  also,  we
fall  of  necessity  into  a  dualism,  which  we  escape  only
by  making  devotion  to  Him  unreal.  We  choose  the
near,  because  we  cannot  attach  ourselves  to  the
distant.  But  Christ  in  His  fulness  brings  the  distant
near  and  carries  the  near  into  the  presence  of  God.  In
Him  each  near  thing  finds  a  place  as  the  recipient  of  an
immediate  and  relative  devotion,  and  without  the  pre-
paration and  conduction  of  such  devotion  the  supreme
devotion  to  God  becomes  empty  and  unintelligible.


NOTES  AXD  ILLUSTRATIONS  209

What  we  know  of  the  Divine  purpose,  and  what
we  know  of  the  Father  as  welcoming  His  children  to
His  presence  not  only  all  hangs  alike  on  the  Gospel,
but  is  all  part  of  the  same  truth.

In  a  confused  way  we  can  cling  to  the  Father
without  acknowledging  the  Son  :  but  it  is  only  by
abjuring  our  owm  sonship :  we  call  ourselves  children
in  tender  and  pathetic  words  :  but  we  shrink  from
sonship  as  claimed  by  Christ  (Jn.  v.   19  f).

The  'coming  to  the  Father'  includes  and  swallows
up  the  thought  of  forgiveness  in  acceptance,  accept-
ance in  love.  All  points  to  this  ideal ;  but  how  is  it
possible  if  there  be  no  Incarnate  Son  ?  There  are
powers  and  causes  around  us,  but  these,  if  enduring,
are  impersonal,  the  only  powers  to  which  we  can
cleave  are  those  which  swiftest  vanish,  and  seem
the  merest  flashes  of  concurring  chances.

Hence  in  knowledge  there  is  no  coming  without
Him,  yet  not  in  this  only,  but  in  guidance,  and  in  life.

Mediation  seems  unreal,  approached  from  the  side
of  doctrine,  yet  it  is  the  summing  up  of  experience  in
all  highest  human  relations.

It  involves  no  opposition  to  immediateness  of
approach.  It  is  the  condition  of  it.  It  interposes
no  metaphysical  limits  or  courtly  barriers  or  le-
gality of  unforgivingness,  but  both  separation  and
nearness  dissolve  into  unreality  without  Him  in
whom  we  have  '  the  access ',  and  the  culmination  of
all  is  the  atonement  (the  removal  of  the  most  fatal
H.  L.  14


2IO  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS

barrier,  whether  within  ourselves  or  without),  which
seems  so  incredible  while  approached  singly,  rather
than  as  the  perfection  of  the  sacrificing  mediation.

The  fatal  opposition  of  a  monadic  soul  and  a
monadic  God  is  the  inevitable  result  of  rejecting  me-
diation: we  are  driven  to  strive  after  an  imaginary
purity  which  reaches  perfection  only  in  annihilation.

The  word  'Mediator'  as  applied  to  Christ  theo-
logically has  less  and  less  application  the  more  we
study  the  N.T.  (only  i  Tim.  ii.  5):  but  so  much
more  is  the  idea  of  His  mediation  found  to  be
universal,  and  to  prevail  in  it  everywhere.

A  TONEMENT.

Reconciliation  or  atonement  is  one  aspect  of  re-
demption, and  redemption  one  aspect  of  resurrection,
and  resurrection  one  aspect  of  life.  Till  the  whole  is
unrolled,  the  most  comprehensive  idea  remains  empty  :
the  higher  must  never  be  interpreted  by  the  lower,
but  the  lower  by  the  higher  :  otherwise  in  theology
itself  we  fall  into  the  same  vicious  method  which  in
physics  leads  legitimately  to  the  denial  of  God.

Sin  is  a  breach  in  life  because  it  is  a  separation
between  the  derivative  life  and  its  source  :  the  atone-
ment is  the  closing  up  of  this  breach,  and  so  the
restoration  of  life.

"No  man  comcth  etc."  lays  down  the  condition  of


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS  211

fulfilling  "  Except  ye  be  converted  ",  while  assuming
this  and  not  any  happiness  to  be  the  true  aim  for
men.  The  salvation  of  the  rational  creation  consists
in  the  carrying  out  of  this  intention,  however  far  the
greater  part  may  seem  to  be  from  ever  having
dreamed  of  it  as  a  possible  object  of  pursuit.  But
powers  above  them  are  at  work  as  well  as  powers
within  them :  the  stififest  neck  has  to  be  bowed  and
the  hardest  heart  broken.

Salvation  only  by  Christ  is  a  true  deduction,  but
only  when  salvation  is  biblically  interpreted,  viz.  as
the  perfecting  of  human  natures  into  the  mind  and
form  of  Sonship  in  and  through  the  Son.

In  loving  His  children  who  know  Him  not,  God
regards  their  dormant  capacity  and  works  to  awake
it.  Can  that  be  (strictly  speaking)  loved  which  has
no  capacity  of  response  ^

The  coming  to  the  Father  answers  to  the  drawing
by  Him  :  compare  "  I  if  I  be  lifted  up  will  draw"  (no
power  to  draw  except  as  lifted  up)  with  "  No  man
can  come  unto  Me  except  the  Father  draw  him."
This  personal  motion  belongs  to  all  three  regions :
and  it  is  a  motion  of  us  to  God,  not  of  God  to  us.

'Coming  to  the  Father'  may  be  explained  by  'the
Prodigal  Son.'  Departure  in  a  sense  from  the  F"ather
is  perhaps  a  necessity  of  growth,  though  not  as  arising

14 — 2


212  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS

from  a  desire  of  a  separate  portion  of  goods  ;  but
the  return  to  the  Father  expresses  the  true  relation  :
even  as  the  son  who  is  ahvays  with  the  father
may  become  unfilial.  The  ' coming  up '  {livo'ho'i)  to
Jerusalem  at  stated  times  was  a  type,  a  figure  of  true
worshipping:  cf  Jn.  iv.  21  ff.

Note  the  correlation  of  coming  to  the  Father  by
the  Way  and  coming  to  the  fold  of  the  sheep  by  the
Door.

'Working  out'  the  righteousness  and  forgiveness  ot
God,  and  '  revealing '  are  the  same.  Revelation  and
Redemption  are  always  hand  in  hand ;  the  Revelation
is  the  means  by  which  the  Redemption  accomplished
once  for  all  is  made  effectual  through  knowledge.

"  This  is  the  Heir :  come  let  us  slay  Him  and  the
inheritance  shall  be  ours  "  :  the  inheritance  was  theirs
and  in  slaying  the  Heir  they  cast  themselves  out  of
it.

COMMUNION.

Communion  is  permanent,  yet  needs  times  of  re-
vival.

Prayer  is  progressive  and  variable,  drawing  from
the  heavenly  store.

Our  felt  wants  are  of  necessity  the  starting-point
of  our  converse  with  God.  Yet,  till  we  have  some
joyful  apprehension  of  that  in  Him  which  is  above
and  beyond  any  wants  that  we  have  yet  felt,  it  is  not


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS  213

reall)'  converse  with  the  true  and  perfect  God  but
with  a  self-made  idol.  It  is  precisely  the  sense  that
we  are  drawing  but  a  few  drops  from  an  inexhaustible
fountain  that  keeps  faith  progressive  and  makes  it
not  a  luxury  but  an  energy.

All  Christian  life  is  sacramental.  Not  alone  in
our  highest  act  of  Communion  are  we  partaking  of
heavenly  powers  through  earthly  signs  and  vehicles.
This  neglected  faith  may  be  revived  through  in-
creased sympathy  with  the  earth  derived  from  fuller
knowledge,  through  the  fearless  love  of  all  things.

All  things  are  given  by  the  ungrudging  God  ;  freely
and  unreservedly  given:  "with  Him  freely  give  all
things"  :  not  after  Him  or  in  addition  to  Him  or  as
less  than  Him,  but  with  Him.  The  gift  of  Him  is  that
which  makes  all  other  gifts  true  and  effectual  gifts.

Whatever  food  the  nations  enjoy  beyond  the  husks
of  the  swine  consists  of  crumbs  from  the  Master's
bread,  which  was  made  for  His  children  though
they  know  it  not.  At  last  they  sit  at  the  table  as
children  in  His  fatherly  presence,  and  eat  their  por-
tion with  thankfulness,  finding  there  the  assurance
of  His  love,  and  strength  to  do  His  work.

The  Eucharist  is  on  the  one  side  the  ^perfection"^
of  the  sustenance  of  life  in  personal  communion,  on
the  other  a  use  of  the  products  of  the  earth  as
instruments  of  communion,  implying  the  necessity  of


214  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS

taking  the  whole  nature  into  communion  if  it  is  to  be
real,  the  symbols  of  creation  and  of  the  Lord's  body
in  one.

The  life  of  the  disciples  with  Christ  was  ex-
changed for  a  life  in  Christ :  they  abode  as  branches
in  the  Vine  of  which  His  Father  is  the  Husbandman.
The  Bread  of  the  Last  Supper  took  for  them  the
place  of  the  Body  through  which  they  had  first  learnt
to  converse  with  a  living  Lord.  The  Wine  of  the
Last  Supper  took  for  them  the  place  of  the  Blood  in
which  His  life  had  dwelt.  In  that  feast  of  blessing
and  thanksgiving,  that  joyful  participation  of  ac-
cepted sacrifice,  no  life  was  found  too  earthly  to  be
offered  on  the  altar  of  the  Cross,  or  to  become  a
means  of  human  fellowship  and  Divine  Communion.

The  Oblation  preserved  the  connexion  of  life.
The  fictitious  and  constructive  off"ering  up  of  a
phantom  body  and  phantom  blood  is  a  degradation
of  the  Holy  Communion  to  the  unreal  mimicry  of
a  sacrifice,  which  if   real  would  now  be  heathenish.

It  is  the  nemesis  of  destroying  the  relation  be-
tween earthly  elements  and  the  heavenly  life.

THE  DOCTRINE   OF   THE  LOGOS.

The  Word  was  early  perceived  by  that  part  of
the  Church  which  most  fully  comprehended  the  com-
pleteness  of  revelation    and   of   redemption.     There


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS  215

was  danger  on  that  side,  the  danger  of  the  Truth
becoming  no  more  than  a  philosophy,  and  the
faith  in  the  Son  which  was  needed  to  sustain  the
faith  in  the  Word  was  in  the  end  substituted
for  it.

But  the  old  faith  in  the  Word  must  be  revived
if  the  Creed  is  to  stand,  if  Christianity  is  to  be  a
knowledge.  It  was  the  definiteness  and  personality
given  to  the  Word  by  its  identification  with  the  Son,
that  differenced  it  from  previous  doctrines  of  a  word
or  words :  and  now  fifteen  centuries  have  so  firmly
fixed  the  idea  of  Sonship  that  there  can  be  no  risk
that  the  Church  itself  should  ever  merge  Him  in  the
Word.

Truth  at  the  last  is  the  word  or  speech  of  God.

The  truth  of  Christ  may  at  last  restore  the  lost
faith  in  truth.


GOD  AND    THE    WORLD.

When  man  sinks  into  the  world,  God  sinks  into  it
too.

God  is  sacrificed  to  the  world  when  His  holy  Name
is  added  on  to  the  mixed  and  confused  world  as  it  is ;
when  diseases  and  distortions  and  inversions  and  foul-
nesses are  treated  as  parts  of  the  creation  which  He
pronounced  good  ;  and  when  we  are  supposed  to  be
equally  well-pleasing   in    His    sight   whether   we  are


2i6  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS

ruled  by  our  own  desires  from  within  or  the  ways  and
tendencies  of  men  and  things  from  without,  or  whether
we  endeavour  to  bring  ourselves  and  the  world  about
us  into  conformity  with  His  holy  Law.

St  John  and  St  Paul  are  the  great  bulwarks  against
a  negative  Pantheism  by  the  solid  personality  which
they  uphold :  but  it  rests  no  less  on  their  positive
Pantheism.

It  is  vain  to  uphold  either

(i)  a  merely  humanitarian  theology:  all  study  of
nature  dissolves  it :  an  enlarged  study  of  and  care
for  humanity  dissolves  it  hardly  less  : — or

(2)  on  the  other  hand  a  merely  pantheistic  theology
in  combination  with  a  humanitarian  morality  or  an-
thropology. Both  the  Pantheistic  and  the  Humani-
tarian factors  are  needed  in  theology  and  in  morality
alike,  and  for  the  union  of  both.

No  evidences  of  the  supermundane  God  have  any
power  if  we  fail  to  discern  the  radiations  of  trans-
mitted and  derivative  deity  as  the  luminous  and  vital
tissue  of  finite  things.

A  twofold  veil  has  been  withdrawn  from  before
our  eyes  :  the  world  has  been  discovered  to  us  and
God  has  been  discovered  to  us.  Neither  can  now  be
relinquished :  it  is  a  vain  dream  :  account  has  to  be
taken  of  them  in  all  things.  Shut  them  out  of  self
and  self  vanishes.  Shut  out  either  and  it  returns
disguised  and  falsified.  There  is  no  safety  but  in  the
full  accepting  of  both  in  open  daylight.


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS  217

God  and  the  world  are  believed  by  their  partisans  to
be  enemies,  because  undoubtedly  each  can  supplant
the  other  up  to  a  certain  point.

There  is  nothing  beneath  God  which  cannot  be  so
pursued  as  to  injure  His  service.

God  can  be  so  worshipped  in  the  semblance  of
devotion  as  to  destroy  all  interest  in  the  things  and
persons  which  surround  us,  or  to  make  all  devotion
to  them  an  acknowledged  inconsistency,  a  necessary
but  lamentable  sinfulness.

Yet  neither  can  really  be  loved  without  the  other.
Self  is  the  one  rival  of  both,  which  takes  advantage
of  all  exclusive  devotion  to  either.

Yet  the  truth  is  unwelcome,  because  it  demands
conversion  as  little  children  and  refuses  to  accept
current  maxims  of  society  as  having  the  slightest
validity.

The  passage  from  the  one  state  to  the  other  gives
rise  to  inconsistencies  and  inequalities,  to  a  time  of
conflict,  which  can  be  ended  only  by  going  forward
or  backward :  each  inconsistent  nobleness  being  a
fragment  of  discipleship,  an  accepted  task  of  Son-
ship.

Relapse  into  the  conscious  animal  is  impossible.
That  means  to  choose  chaos,  darkness,  death  :  the
life  of  the  self-wrapped  creature  whose  eyes  have  not
been  opened  is  of  God's  appointment  in  its  season.
The  times  of  that  ignorance  He  foreordains,     But  it


2i8  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS

is  gone  ages  ago  past  recall.  The  brighter  and  more
perfect  future,  the  consummation  of  the  kingdom  of
God  is  to  be  reached  only  through  much  tribulation.
God  is  the  Maker  of  it.  He  has  made  it  already  in
His  Son.  We  are  His  fellowworkers  in  bringing  it  to
pass.

The  goal  determines  the  character  of  the  way  :
its  progress  is  always  '"upward"'.  It  leaves  nothing
as  an  end  to  itself,  acquiesces  in  nothing  as  remaining
undirected  to  noble  use.  It  refuses  to  take  the  world
as  it  stands  as  already  good,  but  takes  what  is  as
the  suggestion  of  what  should  be.

Distraction  within  is  the  way  to  make  life  useless
and  barren.

Obedience  is  the  substance  of  all  Sonship  ;  obe-
dience accomplished  in  suffering  is  the  substance  of
all  present  human  sonship.

Abnegation  is  not  itself  the  good,  but  the  most
universal  condition  for  the  human  attainment  of
the  good.

Christ  promises  not  happiness  but  life :  yet
sometimes  life  through  death :  the  right  hand  may
have  to  be  cut  off,  or  the  right  eye  plucked  out.

We  are  slow  to  believe  that  the  Cross  of  ancruish
can  be  a  Tree  of  Life.


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS  219

The  old  world  was  shaped  by  the  intermediate
groupings  of  mankind, — family,  race  and  nation.
Christianity,  taking  up  the  tentative  efforts  of  later
times,  established  the  two  extremes  in  union,  indi-
vidualism and  communism.  Thus  the  single  human
being  for  the  first  time  reaches  his  true  dignity :
but  only  in  relation  to  the  human  race  and  to
the  Church,  which  is  mankind  knowing  and  fulfilling
its  destiny.


UNUS  IGITUR  DEUS  PATER, ...ET  UNUS  CHRISTUS  JESUS  DO-
MINUS  NOSTER,  VENIENS  PER  UNIVERSAM  DISPOSITIONEM,  ET
OMNIA  IN  SEMETIPSUM  RECAPITULANS  ;...UTI,  SICUT  IN  SUPER-
CAELESTIBUS  ET  SPIRITALIBUS  ET  INVISIBILIBUS  PRINCEPS
EST  VERBUM  DEI,  SIC  ET  IN  VISIBILIBUS  ET  CORPORALIBUS
PRINCIPATUM  HABEAT  IN  SEMETIPSUM  PRIMATUxM  ASSUMENS,
ET  APPONENS  SEMETIPSUM  CAPUT  ECCLESIAE  UNIVERSA
ATTRAHAT  AD  SEMETIPSUM  APTO  IN  TEMPORE;  NIHIL  ENIM
INCOMTUM  ATQUE  INTEMPESTIVUM  APUD  EUM,  QUOMODO
NEC  INCONGRUENS  EST  APUD  PATREM.. ..OMNIA  QUAE  PRAE-
COGNITA  ERANT  A  PATRE,  ORDINE  ET  TEMPORE  ET  HORA
PRAECOGNITA  ET  APTA  PERFECIT  DOMINUS  NOSTER,  UNUS
QUIDEM  ET  IDE.M  EXISTENS,  DIVES  AUTEM  ET  MULTUS,
DIVITI   ENIM    ET  MULTAE  VOLUNTATI   PATRIS   DESERVIT.

ONE  THEREFORE  IS  GOD,  THE  FATHER,. ..AND  ONE  IS
CHRIST  JESUS,  OUR  LORD,  COMING  THROUGH  THE  ENTIRE
ECONOMY  OF  THINGS,  AND  GATHERING  UP  THE  SUM  OF
ALL  THINGS  INTO  HIMSELF  (Eph.  i.  io);...THAT,  AS  IN  THINGS
HEAVENLY  AND  SPIRITUAL  AND  INVISIBLE  THE  WORD  OF
GOD  IS  SUPREME,  SO  ALSO  IN  THINGS  VISIBLE  AND  CORPOREAL
HE  MAY  HAVE  SUPREMACY,  TAKING  THE  PRIMACY  INTO  HIM-
SELF (Col.  i.  18),  AND  THAT  PLACING  HIMSELF  AS  HEAD  TO
THE  CHURCH  (Eph.  i.  22;  Col.  i.  i8)  HE  MAY  DRAW  ALL  THINGS
UNTO  HIMSELF  IN  FITTING  SEASON;  FOR  NOTHING  IS  DIS-
ORDERLY AND  UNSEASONABLE  WITH  HIM,  EVEN  AS  NOTHING
IS  INHARMONIOUS  WITH  THE  FATHER....ALL  THINGS  WHICH
HAD  BEEN  FOREKNOWN  BY  THE  FATHER,  OUR  LORD  ACCOM-
PLISHED IN  FOREKNOWN  AND  FITTING  ORDER  AND  SEASON
AND  TIME,  HE  BEING  IN  HIS  NATURE  ONE  AND  THE  SAME,
YET  WITHAL  RICH  AND  MANIFOLD,  FOR  HE  SERVES  THE
RICH   AND   MANIFOLD   WILL  OF  THE   FATHER.

IRENAEUS.


cambkidge:  printed  by  John  clay,  m.a.  at  the  university  press.


A  Catalogue

of

Theological  Works


published  by

Macmillan  &"  Co.,  Ltd.

St.   Martin's  Street
London,  W.C.


CONTENTS


The  Bible —

History  of  the  Bible

Biblical  History     ....

The  Old  Testament

The  New  Testament

History  of  the  Christian  Church

The  Church  of  England

Devotional  Books    ...

The  Fathers     ....

Hymnology        ....

Religious  Teaching

Sermons,   Lectures,  Addresses,   and   Theological
Essays


5

7    ,

14

15

19

20

21

22

22


THEOLOGICAL  CATALOGUE

Zbc  Bible

HISTORY   OF   THE    BIBLE

THE    BIBLE   IN  THE   CHURCH.      By   Right   Rev.    Bishop   West-

COTT.      loth  Edition.      Pott  8vo.      4s.  6d.
A  GENERAL  VIEW  OF  THE    HISTORY    OF   THE    ENGLISH

BIBLE.     By  the    Right    Rev.    Bishop  Westcott.      Revised  by

W.  Alois  Wright,  Litt.D.     8vo.      12s.  6d.

BIBLICAL   HISTORY

THE  HOLY  BIBLE.  (Eversley  Edition.)  Arranged  in  Paragraphs,
with  an  Introduction.  By  J.  W.  Mackail,  M.A.  Vols.  2  to  8.
Globe  8vo.      4s.  net  each.

Vol.  II.  Deuteronomy — 2  Samuel.  HI.  i  Kings — Esther.  IV.
Job — Song  of  Solomon.  V.  Isaiah — Lamentations.  VI.  Ezekiel
— Malachi.  VII.  Matthew — ^John.  VIII.  Acts — Revelation.
THE  MODERN  READER'S  BIBLE.  A  Series  of  Books  from  the
Sacred  Scriptures  presented  in  Modern  Literary  Form.  The  Text
is  that  of  the  Revised  Version.  It  is  used  by  special  permission
of  the  University  Presses  of  Oxford  and  Cambridge.  Edited  by
R.  G.  MouLTON,  M.A.  Pott  8vo.  2s.  6d.  each  volume.
History  Series,   6  volumes. — Genesis,  The  Exodus,   Deuteronomy,

The  Judges,  The  Kings,  The  Chronicles.
Poetry  Series,  3  volumes. — The  Psalms  and  Lamentations,  2  vols.

Biblical  Idylls — Solomon's  Song,  Ruth,  Esther,  Tobit.
Wisdom  Series,  4  volumes. — The  Proverbs,  Ecclesiasticus,  Ecclesiastes

and  the  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  The  Book  of  Job.
Prophecy  Series,  4  volumes. — Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  Ezekiel,  Daniel.
New  Testament  Series,  4  volumes. — St.  Matthew  and  St.  Mark  and
the  General  Epistles ;  The  Gospel,  Epistles,  and  Revelation  of  St.
John.     St.  Luke  and  St.  Paul,  2  vols.
Introductory  Series,  3  volumes. — Bible  Stories  (Old  Testament),
Bible  Stories  (New  Testament),   Select    Masterpieces  of  Biblical
Literature.
Introductory  Series.     C/ieap  Editions,     is.  6d.  each.    Bible  Stories
(Old  Testament),  Bible  Stories  (New  Testament).
THE  MODERN  READER'S  BIBLE.      The  Books  of  the  Bible  with
Three   Books   of   the  Apocrypha    presented  in  Modern   Literary
Form.      Edited  by  R.  G.  Moulton,  M.A.      In  one  vol.      Extra
Crown  Svo.      Cloth,  ids.  net.      Leather,  12s.  6d.  net.
.ST.  JAMES'S  GAZETTE.— "\Vh\\&  the  sacred  text  h.-is  in  no  w,-»y  been  tampered
with,  the  books  are  presented  in  modern  literary  form,  and  are  furnished  with  an  intro-
duction and  notes  by  Professor  Richard  G.  IMoulton.     The  notes  are  scholarly,  and  0(
real  help  to  the  student."

BIBLE  LESSONS.     By  Rev.  E.  A.  Abbott,  D.D.    Crown  8vo.    4s.  6d.
SIDE-LIGHTS  UPON  BIBLE  HISTORY.    By  Mrs.  Sydney  Buxton.

Illustrated.      Crown  Svo.      5s.


4  MACMILLAN  AND  CO.'S

Biblical  History — coniinued.

STORIES  FROM  THE  BIBLE.    First  Series.    By  Rev.  A.  J.  Church.

Illustrated.      Crown  8vo.      3s.  6d.
BIBLE    READINGS    SELECTED    FROM    THE    PENTATEUCH

AND    THE    BOOK    OF    JOSHUA.      By  Rev.  J.    A.   Cross.

2nd  Edition.      Globe  8vo.      2s.  6d.
CHILDREN'S    TREASURY     OF     BIBLE      STORIES.     By    Mrs.

H.  Gaskoin.    Pott  8vo.     is.  each.     Parti.  Old  Testament ;   II.

New  Testament ;  III.  Three  Apostles.
THE  NATIONS  AROUND  ISRAEL.    By  A.  Keary.    Cr.  8vo.   3s.  6d.
VILLAGE  SERMONS.    By  Rev.  F.  J.  A.  Hort,  D.D.    8vo.    6s.

This  Volume  contains  a  Series  of  Sermons  dealing  in  a  popular

way  with  the  successive  Books  of  which  the  Bible  is  made  up.

They  form  an  admirable  introduction  to  the  subject.
SERMONS    ON    THE    BOOKS    OF   THE  BIBLE.      (Selected   from

Village  Sermons.)     Crown  8vo.      3s.  6d.
POLITICS  AND  RELIGION   IN  ANCIENT   ISRAEL.     An   Intro-
duction to  the  Study  of  the  Old  Testament.      By  the  Rev.  J-  C.

Todd,  M.A.  Cantab.,  Canon  of  St.  Saviour's  Cathedral,   Natal.

Crown  8vo.  6s.
The  author  writes  from  the  standpoint  of  a  frank  acceptance  of  the
results  of  Biblical  criticism,  and  the  necessity  of  restating  the  history  in  the
light  of  modern  research.  His  chief  aim  is  to  assist  those  who  have  been
placed  in  a  condition  of  uncertainty  by  the  results  of  criticism,  and  to
iDring  back  the  attention  of  intelligent  men  and  women  to  the  Scriptures
as  a  source  of  spiritual  instruction.  Canon  Todd  in  his  work  has  assumed
the  main  results  of  criticism,  and  while,  for  the  most  part,  he  has  avoided
the  discussion  of  disputed  points,  he  has  in  some  details  advanced  views
which  have  not  hitherto  been  suggested.
CRITICAL   NOTES    ON    OLD    TESTAMENT    HISTORY.       The

Traditions   of  Saul   and   David.      By  Stanley  A.    Cook,  M.A.

8vo.      2s.  6d.  net.
A  COMMENTARY  ON  THE  HOLY  BIBLE.     In  i  vol.     By  Various

Writers.      Edited  by   Rev.  John   R.   Dummelow,   M.A.      8vo.

7s.  6d.  net.
HISTORY,  PROPHECY,  AND  THE  MONUMENTS  ;  or,  ISRAEL

AND  THE  NATIONS.      By  Prof.  J.   F.   M 'Curdy.     3  Vols.

8vo.      Vol.   I.    To  the  Downfall  of  Samaria.      Vol.   11.    To   the

Fall  of  Nineveh.     Vol.  III.   To  the  end  of  Exile  (completing  the

work).      14s.  net  each.
A    CLASS-BOOK  OF    OLD  TESTAMENT    HISTORY.     By  Rev.

Canon  Maclear.     With  Four  Maps.      Pott  8vo.     4s.  6d.
A    CLASS-BOOK    OF    NEW    TESTAMENT    HISTORY.      Includ-
ing the  connection  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments.      By  the  same.

Pott  8vo.      5s.  6d.
A    SHILLING    BOOK    OF    OLD    TESTAMENT    HISTORY.     By

the  same.      Pott  8vo.      is.
A   SHILLING    BOOK  OF  NEW  TESTAMENT    HISTORY.      By

the  same.      Pott  8vo.      is.


THEOLOGICAL  CATALOGUE  5

Biblical  History — continued.

THE  BIBLE  FOR  HOME  READING.  Edited,  with  Comments  and
Reflections  for  the  use  of  Jewish  Parents  and  Children,  by  C.  G.
MoNTEFiORE.  Part  I.  To  the  Second  Visit  of  Nehemiah  to
Jerusalem.  2nd  Edition.  Extra  Crown  8vo.  4s.  6d.  net.
Part  II.  Containing  Selections  from  the  Wisdom  Literature,  the
Prophets,  and  the  Psalter,  together  with  extracts  from  the
Apocrypha.      Extra  Crown  8vo.      5s.  6d.  net.

VOCAL  AND  LITERARY  INTERPRETATION  OF  THE  BIBLE.
By  S.  S.  Curry,  Ph.D.  Introduction  by  Francis  G.  Peabody,
D.D.      Crown  8vo.      6s.  6d.  net.

INTERPRETATION  OF  THE  BIBLE.  A  Short  History.  By
George  H.  Gilbert,  Ph.D.,  D.D.     Extra  crown  Svo.      5s.  net.

THE   OLD   TESTAMENT

SCRIPTURE  READINGS  FOR  SCHOOLS  AND  FAMILIES.
By  C.  M.  YoNGE.  Globe  Svo.  is.  6d.  each  ;  also  with  comments,
3s.  6d.  each. — First  Series  :  Genesis  to  Deuteronomy. — Second
Series  :  Joshua  to  Solomon. — Third  Series:  Kings  and  the
Prophets. — Fourth  Series  :  The  Gospel  Times. — Fifth  Series  :
Apostolic  Times.

THE  DIVINE  LIBRARY  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.  Its
Origin,  Preservation,  Inspiration,  and  Permanent  Value.  By  the
Very  Rev.  Dean  Kirkpatrick,  B.D.      Crown  Svo.      3s.  net.

TIMES. — "  An  eloquent  and  temperate  plea  for  the  critical  study  of  the  Scriptures.

MANCHESTER  GUARDIAN.—"  An  excellent  introduction  to  the  modern  view
of  the  Old  Testament.  .  .  .  The  learned  author  is  a  genuine  critic.  .  .  .  He  expounds
clearly  what  has  been  recently  called  the  '  Analytic'  treatment  of  the  books  of  the  Old
Testament,  and  generally  adopts  its  results.  .  .  .  The  volume  is  admirably  suited  to
fulfil  its  purpose  of  familiarising  the  minds  of  earnest  Bible  readers  with  the  work  which
Biblical  criticism  is  now  doing."

THE   DOCTRINE   OF  THE  PROPHETS.      Warburtonian  Lectures

1 886- 1 890.      By  the  Very  Rev.  Dean  Kirkpatrick,  B.D.     3rd

Edition.      Crown  Svo.     6s.

BOOKMAN. — "As  a  summary  of  the  main  results  of  recent  investigation,  and  as  a
thoughtful  appreciation  of  both  the  human  and  divine  sides  of  the  prophets'  work  and
message,  it  is  worlh  the  attention  of  all  Bible  students."

THE  PATRIARCHS  AND  LAWGIVERS  OF  THE  OLD
TESTAMENT.  By  Frederick  Denison  Maurice.  New
Edition.     Crown  Svo.      3s.  6d.

THE  PROPHETS  AND  KINGS  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.
By  the  same.      New  Edition.      Crown  Svo.      3s.  6d.

THE  CANON  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.  An  Essay  on  the
Growth  and  Formation  of  the  Hebrew  Canon  of  Scripture.  By  the
Right  Rev.  H.  E.  Ryle,  Bishop  ofWinchester.  2nd  Ed.  Cr.  Svo.  6s.

EXPOSITOR. — "  Scholars  are  indebted  to  Professor  Ryle  for  having  given  them  for
the  first  time  a  complete  and  trustworthy  history  of  the  Old  Testament  Canon."

EXPOSITORY  TIMES.— ''\\<t  rightly  claims  that  his  book  possesses  that  most
English  of  virtues — it  may  be  read  throughout.  ...  An  extensive  and  minute  research
lies  concealed  under  a  most  fresh  and  flexible  English  style."

B


6  MACMILLAN  AND  CO.'S

The  Old  Testament — continued.

THE  MYTHS  OF  ISRAEL.  THE  ANCIENT  BOOK  OF  GENESIS.
WITH  ANALYSIS  AND  EXPLANATION  OF  ITS  COM-
POSITION. By  Amos  Kidder  Fiske,  Author  of  "  The  Jewish
Scriptures,"  etc.      Crown  8vo.      6s.

THE  EARLY  NARRATIVES  OF  GENESIS.  By  the  Right  Rev.
H.  E.  Ryle,  Bishop  of  Winchester.      Cr.  8vo.      3s.  net.

PHILO  AND  HOLY  SCRIPTURE  ;  OR,  THE  QUOTATIONS  OF

PHILO  FROM  THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT.

With  Introduction  and  Notes  by  the  Right  Rev.   H.  E.  Ryle,

Bishop  of  Winchester.      Cr.  Svo.      los.  net.

In  the  present  work  the  attempt  has  been  made  to  collect,  arrange  in

order,  and  for  the  first  time  print  in  full  all  the  actual  quotations  from  the

books  of  the  Old  Testament  to  be  found  in  Philo's  writings,  and  a  few  of

his  paraphrases.     For  the  purpose  of  giving  general  assistance  to  students

Dr.  Ryle  has  added  footnotes,  dealing  principally  with  the  text  of  Philo's

quotations  compared  with  that  of  the  Septuagint  ;  and  in  the  introduction

he  has  endeavoured  to  explain  Philo's  attitude   towards   Holy  Scripture,

and  the  character  of  the  variations  of  his  text  from  that  of  the  Septuagint.

TIMES. — "This  book  will  be  found  by  students  to  be  a  ver>'  useful  supplement  and
companion  to  the  learned  Dr.  Drummond's  important  work,  Philo  Judceus."

The  Pentateuch —

AN  HISTORICO-CRITICAL  INQUIRY  INTO  THE  ORIGIN
AND  COMPOSITION  OF  THE  HEXATEUCH  (PENTA-
TEUCH AND  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA).  By  Prof.  A.  Kuenen.
Translated  by  Philip  H.  Wicksteed,  M.A.      Svo.      14s.

The  Psalms —

GOLDEN  TREASURY  PSALTER.  The  Student's  Edition.
Being  an  Edition  with  briefer  Notes  of  "The  Psalms  Chrono-
logically Arranged  by  Four  Friends."     Pott  Svo.      2s.  6d.  net.

THE  PSALMS.  With  Introductions  and  Critical  Notes.  By  A.  C.
Jennings,  M.A.,  and  W.  H.  Lowe,  M.A.  In  2  vols.  2nd
Edition.      Crown  Svo.      IDs.  6d.  each.

TPIE  BOOK  OF  PSALMS.  Edited  with  Comments  and  Reflections
for  the  Use  of  Jewish  Parents  and  Children.  By  C.  G.  MoNTE-
FiORE.      Crown  Svo.      is.  net.

Isaiah —

ISAIAH  XL. — LXVI.  With  the  Shorter  Prophecies  allied  to  it.
By  Matthew  Arnold.     With  Notes.      Crown  Svo.      5s.

A  BIBLE -READING  FOR  SCHOOLS.  The  Great  Prophecy  of
Israel's  Restoration  (Isaiah  xl.-lxvi. )  Arranged  and  Edited  for
Young  Learners.     By  the  same.      4th  Edition.      Pott  Svo.      is.

Zechariah —

THE  HEBREW  STUDENT'S  COMMENTARY  ON  ZECH-
ARIAH,  Hebrew  and  LXX.  By  W.  H.  Lowe,  M.A.  Svo.
los.  6d.


THEOLOGICAL  CATALOGUE  7

THE    NEW  TESTAMENT

THE  AKHMLM  FRAGMENT  OF  THE  APOCRYPHAL
GOSPEL  OF  ST.  PETER.   By  H.  B.  Swete,  D.D.   8vo.   5s.  net.

THE  PROGRESS- OF  DOCTRINE  IN  THE  NEW  TESTA-
MENT:  The  Bampton  Lectures,  1864.  By  Canon  Thomas
Dehany  Bernard,  M.A.      Fifth  Edition.      Crown  Svo.      6s.

HANDBOOK  TO  THE  TEXTUAL  CRITICISM  OF  NEW
TESTAMENT.  By  F.  G.  Kenyon,  D.Litt.,  Assistant  Keeper
of  Manuscripts  in  the  British  Museum.      Svo.      los.  net.

THE  NEW  TESTAMENT  IN  THE  CHRISTIAN  CHURCH.
Eight  Lectures.  By  Professor  E.  C.  Moore  of  Harvard  University.
Crown  Svo.      6s.  6d.  net.

THE  MESSAGES  OF  THE  BOOKS.  Being  Discourses  and  Notes
on  the  Books  of  the  New  Testament.    By  Dean  Farrar,    Svo.    14s.

ON  A  FRESH  REVISION  OF  THE  ENGLISH  NEW  TESTA-
MENT. With  an  Appendix  on  the  last  Petition  of  the  Lord's
Prayer.      By  Bishop  Lightfoot.     Crown  Svo.      7s.  6d.

DISSERTATIONS  ON  THE  APOSTOLIC  AGE.  By  Bishop
Lightfoot.     Svo.      14s.

BIBLICAL  ESSAYS.     By  Bishop  Lightfoot.     Svo.     12s.

THE  UNITY  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.  By  F.  D.  Maurice.
2nd  Edition.     2  vols.      Crown  Svo.      12s.

A  GENERAL  SURVEY  OF  THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  CANON
OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT  DURING  THE  FIRST  FOUR
CENTURIES.  By  Right  Rev.  Bishop  Westcott.  7th  Edition.
Crown  Svo.      los.  6d.

THE  STUDENT'S  LIFE  OF  JESUS.  By  G.  H.  Gilbert,  Ph.D.
Crown  Svo.      5s.  net.

THE  STUDENT'S  LIFE  OF  PAUL.  By  G.  H.  Gilbert,  Ph.D.
Crown  Svo.      5s.  net.

THE  REVELATION  OF  JESUS  :  A  Study  of  the  Primary  Sources
of  Christianity.     By  G.  H.  Gilbert,  Ph.D.     Crown  Svo.     5s.net.

THE  FIRST  INTERPRETERS  OF  JESUS.  By  G.  H.  Gilbert,
Ph.D.      Crown  Svo.      5s.  net.

NEW     TESTAMENT     HANDBOOKS.        Edited     by    Shailer

Mathews,  Professor  of  New  Test.  Hist,  at  the  Universityof  Chicago.

A  HISTORY  OF  NEW  TESTAMENT  TIMES  IN  PALES-
TINE (175  B.C.-70  A.D.).  By  Shailer  Mathews,  A.M.
Crown  Svo.     3s.  6d.  net.

A  HISTORY  OF  THE  TEXTUAL  CRITICISM  OF  THE
NEW  TESTAMENT.  By  Marvin  R.  Vincent,  D.D.
Crown  Svo.      3s.  6d.  net.

THE  BIBLICAL  THEOLOGY  OF  THE  NEW  TE.STA-
MENT.    By  Ezra  P.  Gould,  D.D.    Crown  Svo.    3s.  6d.  net.

A  HISTORY  OF  THE  HIGHER  CRITICISM  OF  THE
NEW  TESTAMENT.     By  Prof.  H.  S.  Nash.     3s.  6d.  net.


8  MACMILLAN  AND  CO.'S

The  New  Testament — continued.

AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.      By

B.  W.  Bacon,  D.D.  Crown  8vo.  3s.  6d.  net.
THE  TEACHING  OF  JESUS.  By  G.  B.  Stevens,  D.D.
Crown  8vo.  3s.  6d.  net.
THE  NEW  TESTAMENT  IN  THE  ORIGINAL  GREEK.  The
Text  revised  by  Bishop  Westcott,  D.D.,  and  Prof.  F.  J.  A.
HoRT,  D.D.  2  vols.  Crown  8vo.  los.  6d.  each. — Vol.  I.
Text ;'  II.   Introduction  and  Appendix.

Library  Edition.    Svo.     lOs.net.     \Text  m  Macmillan  Greek  Type.
School  Edition.      l2mo,    cloth,   4s.   6d. ;   roan,    5s.  6d.  ;    morocco,
6s.  6d.  ;  India  Paper  Edition,  limp  calf,  7s.  6d.  net.
GREEK-ENGLISH  LEXICON  TO  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.
By  W.  J.  HiCKiE,  M.A.     Pott  Svo.     3s.
ACADEMY.— "\^^  can  cordially  recommend  this  as  a  very  handy  little  volume
compiled  on  sound  principles."

GRAMMAR   OF   NEW   TESTAMENT   GREEK.      By  Prof.   F.
Blass,  University  of  Halle.     Auth.  English  Trans.    Svo.     14s.net.
TIMES  —"^\\\  probably  become  the  standard  book  of  reference  for  those  students
who  enter  upon  minute  grammatical  study  of  the  language  of  the  New  Testament."

THE  GOSPELS-
PHILOLOGY  OF  THE  GOSPELS.     By  Prof.  F.  Blass.     Crown
Svo.      4S.  6d.  net.
GUARDIAN. — "On  the  whole,   Professor  Blass's  new  book  seems  to  us  an  im-
portant contribution  to  criticism.   •   •   •    It  will  stimulate  inquiry,  and  will  open  up  fresh
lines  of  thought  to  any  serious  student."

THE  SYRO-LATIN  TEXT  OF  THE  GOSPELS.      By  the  Rev.

Frederic  Henry  Chase,  D.D.     Svo.     7s.  6d.  net.
The  sequel  of  an  essay  by  Dr.  Chase  on  the  old  Syriac  element  in  the
text  of  Codex  Bezae.

TIMES.— "  kn  important  and  scholarly  contribution  to  New  Testament  criticism."

SYNOPTICON  :  An  Exposition  of  the  Common  Matter  of  the  Synop-
tic Gospels.  By  W.  G.  Rushbrooke.  Printed  in  Colours.  4to.
35s.  net.      Indispensable  to  a  Theological  Student.

A  SYNOPSIS  OF  THE  GOSPELS  IN  GREEK.  With  various
Readings  and  Critical  Notes.  By  the  Rev.  Arthur  Wright,
B.D.,  Vice-President  of  Queens'  College,  Cambridge  Third
Edition,  Revised.      Demy  4to.      los.  net.

THE  COMPOSITION  OF  THE  FOUR  GOSPELS.  By  Rev.
Arthur  Wright.     Crown  Svo.     5s.

CAMBRIDGE  RE  FIE  IV.— "The  wonderful  force  and  freshness  which  we  find  on
every  page  of  the  book.  There  is  no  sign  of  hastiness.  All  seems  to  be  the  outcome  of
vears  of  reverent  thought,  now  brought  to  light  in  the  clearest,  most  telhng  way.  .  .  .
The  book  will  hardly  go  unchallenged  by  the  different  schools  of  thought,  but  all  will
agree  in  gratitude  at  least  for  its  vigour  and  reality."

INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY  OF  THE  FOUR  GOSPELS.

By  Ri"ht  Rev.  Bishop  Westcott.     8th  Ed.     Cr.  Svo.      los.  6d.
FOUR  LECTURES   ON   THE   EARLY   HISTORY    OF    THE

GOSPELS.      By  the  Rev.  J.  H.  Wilkinson,  M.A.,  Rector  of

Stock  Gaylard,  Dorset.     Crown  Svo.     3s.  net.


THEOLOGICAL  CATALOGUE  9

The  Gospels — continued.

THE  LEADING  IDEAS  OF  THE  GOSPELS.  By  W.  Alex-
ander, D.D.  Oxon.,  LL.D.  Dublin,  D.C.L.  Oxon.,  Archbishop  of
Armagh,  and  Lord  Primate  of  All  Ireland.  New  Edition,  Revised
and  Enlarged.      Crown  8vo.      6s.

TWO  LECTURES  ON  THE  GOSPELS.  By  F.  Crawford
BURKITT,  M.A.      Crown  8vo.     2S.  6d.  net.

Gospel  of  St.  Matthew—

THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.  Greek  Text
as  Revised  by  Bishop  Westcott  and  Dr.  Hort.  With  Intro-
duction and  Notes  by  Rev.  A.  Sloman,  M.A.    Fcap.  8vo.    2s.  6d.

MANCHESTER  GUARDIAN.—"  It  issound  and  helpful,  and  the  brief  introduc-
tion on  Hellenistic  Greek  is  particularly  good."

Gospel  of  St.  Mark—

THE    GREEK    TEXT.      With   Introduction,   Notes,   and   Indices.
By  Rev.    H.    B.    Swete,    D.D.,    Regius    Professor    of   Divinity
in  the  University  of  Cambridge,      and  Edition.      8vo.      1 5s.
TIMES. — "A  learned  and  scholarly  performance,  up  to  date  with  the  most  recent
advances  in  New  Testament  criticism."

THE  EARLIEST  GOSPEL.  A  Historico-Critical  Commentary  on
the  Gospel  according  to  St.  Mark,  with  Text,  Translation,  and  In-
troduction. By  Allan  Menzies,  Professor  of  Divinity  and  Biblical
Criticism,  St.  Mary's  College,  St.  Andrews.      8vo.      8s.  6d.  net.

SCHOOL  READINGS  IN  THE  GREEK  TESTAMENT.
Being  the  Outlines  of  the  Life  of  our  Lord  as  given  by  St.  Mark,  with
additions  from  the  Text  of  the  other  Evangelists.  Edited,  with  Notes
and  Vocabulary,  by  Rev.  A.  Calvert,  M.A.     Fcap.  Svo.    2s.  6d.

Gospel  of  St.  Luke —

THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  LUKE.     The  Greek  Text

as  Revised  by  Bishop  Westcott  and  Dr.  Hort.   With  Introduction

and  Notes  by  Rev.  J.  Bond,  M.A.      Fcap.  Svo.     2s.  6d.

GLASGOW  HERALD.— "Th^  notes  are  short  and  crisp — suggestive  rather  than
exhaustive."

THE  GOSPEL  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN.     A  Course

of  Lectures   on   the   Gospel   of  St.  Luke.     By  F.  D.   Maurice.

Crown  8vo.      3s.  6d.

THE  GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO  ST.  LUKE  IN  GREEK,
AFTER  THE  WESTCOTT  AND  HORT  TEXT.  Edited,
with  Parallels,  Illustrations,  Various  Readings,  and  Notes,  by  the
Rev.  Arthur  Wright,  M.A.     Demy  410.     7s.  6d.  net.

ST.  LUKE  THE  PROPHET.  By  Edward  Carus  Selwyn,  D.D.
Gospel  of  St.  John—  [Crown  Svo.      Ss.  6d.  net.

THE  CENTRAL  TEACHING  OF  CHRIST.  Being  a  Study  and
Exposition  of  St.  John,  Chapters  XIII.  to  XVII.  By  Rev.  Canon
Bernard,  M.A.     Crown  Svo.      7s.  6d.

EXPOSITOR  Y  TIMES.—"  Quite  recently  we  have  had  an  exposition  by  him  whom
many  call  the  greatest  expositor  living.  But  Canon  }iernard's  work  is  still  the  work  that
will  help  the  preacher  most."

THE  GOSPEL  OF  ST.  JOHN.   ByF. D.Maurice.   Cr.Svo.   3s.  6d.


10  MACMILLAN  AND  CO.'S

THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.

ADDRESSES    ON    THE    ACTS    OF   THE    APOSTLES.      By
the    late    Archbishop    Benson.      With    an    Introduction    by
Adeline,  Duchess  of  Bedford.     Super  Royal  8vo.     21s.  net.
THE    CREDIBILITY    OF   THE    BOOK    OF   THE  ACTS    OF
THE    APOSTLES.      Being  the  Hulsean  Lectures  for    1900-1.
By  the  Rev.  Dr.  Chase,  President  of  Queens'  College,  Cambridge.
Crown  8vo.      6s.
THE  OLD  SYRIAC  ELEMENT  IN  THE  TEXT  OF  THE  CODEX
BEZAE.     By  the  Rev.  F.  H.  Chase,  D.D.      8vo.     7s.  6d.  net.
THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES  IN  GREEK  AND  ENGLISH.
With  Notes  by  Rev.  F.  Rendall,  M.A.     Cr.  8vo.      6s.
SATURDAY  REVIEIV.— "Mr.  Rendall  has  given  us  a  very  useful  as  well  as  a
very  scholarly  book."

MANCHESTER  GUARDIAN:—"  Mr.  Rendall  is  a  careful  scholar  and  a  thought-
ful writer,  and  the  student  may  learn  a  good  deal  from  his  commentary."

THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  By  F.  D.  Maurice.  Cr.
8vo.      3s.  6d.

THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  Being  the  Greek  Text  as
Revised  by  Bisliop  Westcott  and  Dr.  Hort.  With  Explanatory
Notes  by  T.  E.  Page,  M.A.     Fcap.  8vo.      3s.  6d.

ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.  The  Authorised  Version,  with  Intro-
duction and  Notes,  by  T.  E.  Page,  M.A.,  and  Rev.  A.  S.
Walpole,  M.A.      Fcap.  8vo.      2s.  6d.

THE  CHURCH  OF  THE  FIRST  DAYS.  The  Church  of
Jerusalem.  The  Church  of  the  Gentiles.  The  Church
of  the  World.  Lectures  on  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  By
Very  Rev.  C.  J.  Vaughan.      Crown  8vo.      IDs.  6d.

THE  EPISTLES— The  Epistles  of  St.  Paul—

ST.  PAUL'S  EPISTLE  TO  THE  ROMANS.  The  Greek  Text,
with  English  Notes.  By  Very  Rev.  C.  J.  Vaughan.  7th  Edition.
Crown  8vo.      7s.  6d.

ST.  PAUL'S  EPISTLE  TO  THE  ROMANS.  A  New  Transla-
tion by  Rev.  W.  G.  Rutherford.     8vo.     3s.  6d.  net.

PILOT.—"  Small  as  the  volume  is,  it  has  very  much  to  say,  not  only  to  professed
students  of  the  New  Testament,  but  also  to  the  ordinary  reader  of  the  Bible.  .  .  .  The
layman  who  buys  the  book  will  be  grateful  to  one  who  helps  him  to  realise  that  this  per-
plexing Epistle  '  was  once  a  plain  letter  concerned  with  a  theme  which  plain  men  might
understand.' "

PROLEGOMENA    TO     ST.     PAUL'S     EPISTLES     TO     THE
ROMANS  AND  THE  EPHESIANS.     By  Rev.  F.  J.  A.  Hort.
Crown  8vo.     6s.
TIMES. — "Will  be  welcomed  by  all  theologians  as  'an  invaluable  contribution  to  the
study  of  those  Epistles '  as  the  editor  of  the  volume  justly  calls  it. "

DAILY  CHRONICLE.— "The  lectures  are  an  important  contribution  to  the  study
of  the  famous  Epistles  of  which  they  treat."

ST.  PAUL'S  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALATIANS.  An  Essay  on
its  Destination  and  Date.  By  E.  H.  Askwith,  D.D.  Crown
Svo.  3s.  6d.  net.
ST.  PAUL'S  EPISTLE  TO  THE  GALATIANS.  A  Revised
Text,  with  Introduction,  Notes,  and  Dissertations.  By  Bishop
Lightfoot.      loth  Edition.      8vo.      12s.


THEOLOGICAL  CATALOGUE  11

The  Epistles  of  St.  Paul — cofitinued.

SAINT  PAUL'S  EPISTLE  TO  THE  EPHESIANS.  The  Greek
Text  with  Notes  and  Addenda.  By  the  late  Brooke  Foss  West-
COTT,  D.D.,  D.C.L.,  Lord  Bishop  of  Durham.    8vo.     los.  6d.

ST.  PAUL'S  EPISTLE  TO  THE  EPHESIANS.  A  Revised
Text  and  Translation,  with  Exposition  and  Notes.  By  J.  Armitage
Robinson,  D.D.,  Dean  of  Westminster.     2nd  Edition.   8vo.     12s.

G6^v^i?Z)/^jV.—"  Although  we  have  some  good  commentaries  on  Ephesians,  ...  no
one  who  has  studied  this  Epistle  would  say  that  there  was  no  need  for  further  light  and
leading;  and  the  present  volume  covers  a  good  deal  of  ground  which  has  not  been
covered,  or  not  nearly  so  well  covered,  before."

CHURCH  TIMES. — "We  have  no  hesitation  in  saying  that  this  volume  will  at
once  take  its  place  as  the  standard  commentary  upon  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians.
We  earnestly  beg  the  clergy  and  intelligent  laity  to  read  and  ponder  over  this'  most
inspiring  volume."

ST.  PAUL'S  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  A  Revised
Text,  with  Introduction,  Notes,  and  Dissertations.  By  Bishop
LiGHTFOOT.      9th  Edition.      8vo.      12s.

ST.  PAUL'S  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  With  transla-
tion. Paraphrase,  and  Notes  for  English  Readers.  By  Very  Rev.
C.  J.  Vaughan.      Crown  8vo.      5s.

ST.  PAUL'S  EPISTLES  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS  AND  TO
PHILEMON.  A  Revised  Text,  with  Introductions,  etc.  By
Bishop  LiGHTFOOT.      9th  Edition.      8vo.     12s.

THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  Analysis  and  Ex-
amination Notes.    By  Rev.  G.  W.  Garrod.     Crown  8vo.     3s.  net.

AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  THESSALONIAN  EPISTLES.
By  E.  H.  AsKWiTH,  D.D.,  Chaplain  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Crown  8vo.     4s.  net.

ST.    PAUL'S   EPISTLES  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.       The

Greek  Text,  with  Introduction  and  Notes  by  George  Milligan,

D.D.      8vo.      I2S.

GUARDIAN. — "  It  is  thorough  and  scholarly,  and  the  reader,  whether  or  no  he  agrees
with  all  the  conclusions  reached,  will  find  all  the  material  that  is  necessary  for  forming  a
reasonable  opinion  for  himself."

ST.  PAUL'S  EPISTLES  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS  AND
TO  THE  CORINTHIANS.  A  New  Translation  by  Rev.  W.
G.  Rutherford.     8vo.     3s.  6d.  net.

GUARDIAN. — "  Those  who  can  compare  it  not  only  with  other  English  Versions,
but  with  the  Greek,  will  find  that  it  is  an  illuminating  paraphrase,  and  will  often  be
charmed  by  its  felicitous  renderings."

THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  TO  THE  THESSALONIANS.  With
Analysis  and  Notes  by  the  Rev.  G.  W.  Garrod,  B.A.  Crown
8vo.      2s.  6d.  net.

THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  TO  THE  TPIESSALONIANS.  With
Analysis  and  Notes  by  Rev.  G.  W.  Garrod.    Cr.  8vo.    2s.  6d.  net.

THE  EPISTLES  OF  ST,  PAUL  TO  THE  EPHESIANS,  THE
COLOSSIANS,  AND  PHILEMON.  With  Introductions  and
Notes.      By  Rev.  J.  Ll.  Davies.      2nd  Edition.      8vo.      7s.  6d.


12  MACMILLAN   AND  CO.'S

The  Epistles  of  St.  Paul — continued.

THE  EPISTLES  OF  ST.  PAUL.  For  English  Readers.  Part  L  con-
taining the  First  Epistle  to  the  Thessalonians.  By  Very  Rev.  C.
J.  Vaughan.      2nd  Edition.      8vo.      Sewed,      is.  6d.

NOTES  ON  EPISTLES  OF  ST.  PAUL  FROM  UNPUBLISHED
COMMENTARIES.  By  Bishop  Lightfoot,  D.D.  Second
Edition.     8vo.      I2s.

THE  LETTERS  OF  ST.  PAUL  TO  SEVEN  CHURCHES
AND  THREE  FRIENDS.  With  the  Letter  to  the  Hebrews.
Translated  by  ARTHUR  S.  Way,  D.Litt.  Second  Edition.
Crown  8vo.      5s.  net.

ANALYSIS  OF  CERTAIN  OF  ST.  PAUL'S  EPISTLES.  Re-
printed from  Bishop  Lightfoot's  Commentaries.  With  Preface
by  the  Lord  Bishop  of  Durham.     Fcap.  8vo.      is.  net.

The  Epistles  of  St.  Peter —

THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  ST.  PETER,  L  i  to  II.  17.  The  Greek
Text,  with  Introductory  Lecture,  Commentary,  and  additional
Notes.    By  the  late  F.  J.  A.  Hort,  D.  D.  ,  D.  C.  L. ,  LL.  D.    8vo.   6s.

THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  OF  ST.  PETER  (Greek  Text).  By
Canon  J-  Howard  B.  Masterman.     Crown  8vo.     3s.  6d.  net.

The  Epistle  of  St.  Jude  and  the  Second  Epistle  of  St.  Peter—

THE  EPISTLE  OF  ST.  JUDE  AND  THE  SECOND  EPISTLE
OF  ST.  PETER.  Greek  Text,  with  Introduction,  Notes,  and
Comments.    By  Joseph  B.  Mayor,  M. A.,  Litt.D.    8vo.    14s.net.

NATIOX.—"  An  edition  which  will  rank  for  many  years  as  the  most  generous  and
probably  the  most  competent  in  existence  .  .  .  For  its  excellence  the  scholar  will  seek
in  vain  elsewhere."

The  Epistle  of  St.  James —

THE  EPISTLE  OF  ST.  JAMES.  The  Greek  Text,  with  Intro-
duction and  Notes.  By  Rev.  Joseph  B.  Mayor,  M.A.  2nd
Edition.      Svo.      14s.  net.

The  Epistles  of  St.  John —

THE  EPISTLES  OF  ST.  JOHN.      By  F.  D.  Maurice.      Crown

Svo.      3s.  6d.
THE  EPISTLES  OF  ST.  JOHN.      The  Greek  Text,  with  Notes.

By  Right  Rev.  Bishop  Westcott.     4th  Edition.     Svo.     12s.  6d.

GUARDIA  ;V.— "  It  contains  a  new  or  rather  revised  text,  with  careful  critical  remarks
and  helps  ;  very  copious  footnotes  on  the  text  ;  and  after  each  of  the  chapters,
longer  and  more  elaborate  notes  in  treatment  of  leading  or  difficult  questions,  whether  in
respect  of  reading  or  theology.  .  .  .  Dr.  Westcott  has  accumulated  round  them  so  much
matter  that,  if  no't  new,  was  forgotten,  or  generally  unobserved,  and  has  thrown  so  much
light  upon  their  language,  theology,  and  characteristics.  .  .  .  The  notes,  critical,
illustrative,  and  exegetical,  which  are  given  bentath  the  text,  are  extraordinarily  full  and
careful.  .  .  .  They  exhibit  the  same  minute  analysis  of  everj'  phrase  and  word,  the  same
scrupulous  weighing  of  every  inflection  and  variation  that  characterised  Dr.  Westcott' s
commentary  on  the  Gospel.  .  .  .  There  is  scarcely  a  syllable  throughout  the  Epistles
which  is  dismissed  without  having  undergone  the  most  anxious  interrogation."

SATURDAY  REVIEW.— ''1\i^-m.o^e.yie^  examine  this  precious  volume  the  more
its  exceeding  richness  in  spiritual  as  well  as  in  literary  material  grows  upon  the  mind."


THEOLOGICAL  CATALOGUE  13

The  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews —

THE    EPISTLE    TO    THE    HEBREWS    IN    GREEK    AND
ENGLISH.     With  Notes.     By  Rev.  F.  Rendall.    Cr.  Svo.    6s,

THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.     English  Text,  with  Com-
mentary.     By  the  same.      Crown  Svo.      7s.  6d.

THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.      With  Notes.      By  Very

Rev.  C.  J.  Vaughan.      Crown  Svo.      7s.  6d.

TIMES. — "  The  name  and  reputation  of  the  Dean  of  Llandaff  are  a  better  recom-
mendation than  we  can  give  of  the  Epistle  lo  the  Hebrews,  the  Greek  text,  with  notes  ;
an  edition  which  represents  the  results  of  more  than  thirty  years'  experience  in  the  training
of  students  for  ordination."

THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.      The  Greek   Text,  with

Notes  and  Essays.    By  Right  Rev.  Bishop  Westcott.     Svo.     14s.

GUARDIAN. — "  In  form  this  is  a  companion  volume  to  that  upon  the  Epistles  of  St.
John.  The  type  is  excellent,  the  printing  careful,  the  index  thorough  ;  and  the  volume
contains  a  full  introduction,  followed  by  the  Greek  text,  with  a  running  commentary,  and
a  number  of  additional  notes  on  verbal  and  doctrinal  points  which  needed  fuller  discus-
sion. .  .  .  His  conception  of  inspiration  is  further  illustrated  by  the  treatment  of  the  Old
Testament  in  the  Epistle,  and  the  additional  notes  that  bear  on  this  point  deserve  very-
careful  study.  The  spirit  in  which  the  student  should  approach  the  perplexing  questions
of  Old  Testament  criticism  could  not  be  better  described  than  it  is  in  the  last  essay."

The  Book  of  Revelations —

THE    APOCALYPSE    OF    ST.    JOHN.     The   Greek  Text,   with

Introduction,  Notes,  and  Indices.      By  the  Rev.  Professor  H.  B.

SwETE,  D.D.     Second  Edition.      Svo.      15s.

C H  U RC H  TIMES. — "  We  may  at  once  say  that  no  student  of  the  Apocalypse  will
in  the  future  be  able  to  do  without  it.  Dr.  Swete's  treatment  is  exhaustive  and
impartial,  his  personal  modesty  with  regard  to  expressions  of  opinion  is  great,  while  his
knowledge  is  wide  and  varied,  and  his  method  is  characterised  by  intense  reverence.  .  .  .
The  commentary'  is  a  model  of  painstaking  care  and  thought,  and  particularly  strong  on
its  linguistic  side."

THE  APOCALYPSE  OF  ST.  JOHN.      I. -HI.     The  Greek  Text,

w^ith  Introduction,  Commentary,  and  Additional  Notes.      By  the

late  F.  J.  A.  Hcrt,  B.D.      Svo.      5s.

GUARDIAN. — "  It  is  rich  in  thought  and  learning  and  critical  skill,  and  it  is  worthy
of  all  the  praise  that  Dr.  Sanday  bestows  on  it  in  the  Preface  which  he  has  supplied."

THE  APOCALYPSE.  A  Study.  By  Archbishop  Benson,
Svo.      Ss.  6d.  net.

LECTURES  ON  THE  APOCALYPSE,  By  Rev.  Prof.  W,
MiLLiGAX.      Crown  Svo.      5s.

DISCUSSIONS  ON  THE  APOCALYPSE,  By  the  same.  Crown
Svo,     5s,

LECTURES  ON  THE  REVELATION  OF  ST.  JOHN.  By  Very
Rev.  C,  J,  Vaughan.      5th  Edition.      Crown  Svo.      los.  6d.

THE  CHRISTIAN  PROPHETS  AND  THE  PROPHETIC
APOCALYPSE.  By  Edward  Carus  Selwyn,  D.D.  Crown
Svo.      6s.  net.

THE  BIBLE  WORD-BOOK.  By  W.  Alois  Wright,  Litt.D,,
LL.D.      2nd  Edition,      Crown  Svo,      7s.  6d.


14  MACMILLAN  AND  CO.'S

Cbristian  Cburcb,  Ibistor^  of  tbe

Bury  (Professor  J.  B.)— THE  LIFE  OF  ST.  PATRICK,  AND

HIS   PLACE  IN  HISTORY.      Svo.      12s.  net.
Clieetham(Archdeacon).— A  HISTORY  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN

CHURCH  DURING  THE  FIRST  SIX  CENTURIES.      Cr.

Svo.      I  OS.  6d.
A  HISTORY  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  CHURCH   SINCE   THE

REFORMATION.      Crown  Svo.      los.  6d.
Gwatkin(H.  M.)— SELECTIONS  FROM  EARLY  WRITERS

Illustrative  of  Church  History  to  the  Time  of  Constantine.      2nd

Edition.      Revised  and  Enlarged.      Cr.  Svo.      4s.  6d.  net.

To  this  edition  have  been  prefixed  short  accounts  of  the  writers

from  whom  the  passages  are  selected.
EARLY  CHURCH   HISTORY  (TO  A.D.  313).      2  vols.      Svo.
Hardwick  (Archdeacon).— A  HISTORY  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN

CHURCH.  Middle  Age.  Ed.  by  Bishop  Stubbs.  Cr.  Svo.  los.  6d.
A  HISTORY  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  CHURCH  DURING  THE

REFORMATION.  Revised  by  Bishop  Stubbs.  Cr.  Svo.    los.  6d.
Hort    (Dr.    F.    J.    A.)  — TWO     DISSERTATIONS.        I.     On

MONOFENHS  GEOS  in    Scripture    and    Tradition.       II.    On  the

"  Constantinopolitan "    Creed    and    other    Eastern   Creeds   of  the

Fourth  Century.     Svo.     7s.  6d.
JUDAISTIC  CHRISTIANITY.      Crown  Svo.      6s.
THE  CHRISTIAN  ECCLESIA.       A  Course  of  Lectures   on   the

Early  History  and  Early  Conceptions  of  the  Ecclesia,  and  Four

Sermons.      Crown  Svo.      6s.
Kriiger    (Dr.     G.)— HISTORY    OF     EARLY     CHRISTIAN

LITERATURE  IN  THE  FIRST  THREE  CENTURIES.    Cr.

Svo.      Ss.  6d.  net.
Lea  (Dr.  Henry  C.)— A  HISTORY  OF  THE  INQUISITION

OF  SPAIN.      In  4  volumes.      Svo.      los.  6d.  net  each.
THE   INQUISITION   IN   THE   SPANISH   DEPENDENCIES  :

SICILY  —  NAPLES  —  SARDINIA  —  MILAN  —  THE  CAN-
ARIES —  MEXICO  —  PERU  —  NEW    GRANADA.        Svo.

I  OS.  6d.  net.
HISTORY  OF  THE  INQUISITION  OF  THE  MIDDLE  AGES.

3  vols.      Svo.      3 IS.  6d.  net.
Lowrie  (W.)— CHRISTIAN    ART    AND    ARCHEOLOGY:

A  HANDBOOK  TO  THE  MONUMENTS  OF  THE  EARLY

CHURCH.      Crown  Svo.      los.  6d.  [Svo.      21s.  net.

Oliphant  (T.  L.  Kington).— ROME  AND   REFORM.      2  vols.
Simpson  (W.)— AN  EPITOME  OF  THE  HISTORY  OF  THE

CHRISTIAN  CHURCH.      Fcap.  Svo.      3s.  6d.
Sohm     (Prof.)  —  OUTLINES      OF      CHURCH      HISTORY.

Translated  by  Miss  May  Sinclair.      With  a  Preface  by  Prof.  H.

M.  GwATKiN,  M.A.      Crown  Svo.     3s.  6d.


THEOLOGICAL  CATALOGUE  15

Vaughan  (Very  Rev.  C.  J.)— THE  CHURCH  OF  THE  FIRST
DAYS.  The  Church  of  Jerusalem.  The  Church  of  the
Gentiles.    The  Church  of  the  World.    Crown  8vo.    ios.  6d.

Zbc  Cburcb  of  lEncjlanb

Catechism  of —

CATECHISM  AND  CONFIRMATION.  By  Rev.  J.  C.  P.
Aldous.      Pott  8vo.      IS.  net.

THOSE  HOLY  MYSTERIES.  By  Rev.  J.  C.  P.  Aldous.  Pott
8vo.      IS.  net.

A  CLASS-BOOK  OF  THE  CATECHISM  OF  THE  CHURCH
OF  ENGLAND.     By  Rev.  Canon  Maclear.     Pott  Svo.     is.  6d.

A  FIRST  CLASS-BOOK  OF  THE  CATECHISM  OF  THE
CHURCH  OF  ENGLAND,  with  Scripture  Proofs  for  Junior
Classes  and  Schools.      By  the  same.      Pott  Svo.      6d.

THE  ORDER  OF  CONFIRMATION,  with  Prayers  and  Devo-
tions.     By  the  Rev.  Canon  Maclear.      32010.      6d.

NOTES  FOR  LECTURES  ON  CONFIRMATION.  By  the
Rev.  C.  J.  Vaughan,  D.D.     Pott  Svo.      is.  6d.

THE  BAPTISMAL  OFFICE  AND  THE  ORDER  OF  CON-
FIRMATION. By  the  Rev.  F.  Procter  and  the  Rev.  Canon
Maclear.     Pott  8vo.     6d.

Disestablishment —

DISESTABLISHMENT   AND   DISENDOWMENT.      What    are

they?     By  E.  A.  Freeman.      Crown  Svo.      Sewed,  6d.
A  DEFENCE  OF  THE   CHURCH   OF  ENGLAND  AGAINST

DISESTABLISHMENT.     By  Roundell,  Earl  of  Selborne.

Crown  Svo.      2s.  6d.
ANCIENT  FACTS  &  FICTIONS  CONCERNING  CHURCHES

AND  TITHES.   By  the  same.    2nd  Edition.    Crown  Svo.    7s.  6d.
A  HANDBOOK   ON  WELSH  CHURCH   DEFENCE.      By   the

Bishop  of  St.  Asaph.      3rd  Edition.      Fcap.  Svo.      Sewed,  6d.

Dissent  in  its  Relation  to —

DISSENT  IN  ITS  RELATION  TO  THE  CHURCH  OF  ENG-
LAND. By  Rev.  G.  H.  Curteis.  Bampton  Lectures  for  187 1.
Crown  Svo.      7s.  6d.

History  of —

PHSTORY  OF  THE  ENGLISH  CHURCH.  Edited  by  the  late
Dean  Stephens  and  the  Rev.  W.  Hunt,  D.Litt.  In  Eight
Volumes.      Crown  Svo.

Vol.  I.  HISTORY  OF  THE  CHURCH  OF  ENGLAND
FROM  ITS  FOUNDATION  TO  THE  NORMAN  CON-
QUEST {597-1066).  By  the  Rev.  W.  Hunt.  7s.  6d.
Vol.  II.  THE  ENGLISH  CHURCH  FROM  THE  NOR-
MAN CONQUEST  TO  THE  ACCESSION  OF  EDWARD
I.  (1066- 1 272).     By  Dean  Stephens.     7s.  6d.


i6  MACMILLAN  AND  CO.'S

History — contitmed.

Vol.  III.  THE  ENGLISH  CHURCH  IN  THE  FOUR-
TEENTH AND  FIFTEENTH  CENTURIES  (1272-1486).
By  the  Rev.  Canon  Capes,  sometime  Reader  of  Ancient
History  in  the  University  of  Oxford.     7s.  6d.

Vol.  IV.  THE  ENGLISH  CHURCH  IN  THE  SIX-
TEENTH CENTURY,  PT<OM  THE  ACCESSION  OF
HENRY  VIII.  TO  THE  DEATH  OF  MARY  (1509-1558).
By  James  Gairdner,  C.B.,  LL.D.     7s.  6d.

Vol.  V.  THE  ENGLISH  CHURCH  IN  THE  REIGNS  OF
ELIZABETH  AND  JAMES  I.  (1558-1625).  By  the  Rev.
\V.  H.  Frere.     7s.  6d.

Vol.  VI.  THE  ENGLISH  CHURCH  FROM  THE  ACCES-
SION OF  CHARLES  L  TO  THE  DEATH  OF  ANNE
(1625-1714).  By  the  Rev.  W.  H.  Hutton,  B.D.,  Fellow  of
St.  John's  College,  Oxford.      7s.  6d.

Vol.  VH.  THE  ENGLISH  CHURCH  FROM  THE  ACCES-
SION OF  GEORGE  I.  TO  THE  END  OF  THE
EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY  (1714-1800).  By  the  late  Rev.
Canon  Overton,  D.D.,  and  the  Rev.  F.  Relton,  A.K.C.  7s.  6d.

hi  Preparation.
Vol.  Vin.     THE   ENGLISH  CHURCH   IN  THE  NINE-
TEENTH CENTURY.     By  F.  W.  Cornish,  M.A.,  Vice-
I'rovost  of  Eton  College.
THE   STATE   AND   THE  CHURCH.      By  the   Hon.   Arthur

Elliot.     Crown  8vo.     2s.  6d.
LOLLARDY  AND  THE  REFORMATION  IN  ENGLAND.     An
Historical  Survey.     By  James  Gairdner,    C.B. ,    Hon.   LL.D.
Edin.      2  vols.      8vo.
DOCUMENTS    ILLUSTRATIVE    OF    ENGLISH     CHURCH
HISTORY.      Compiled  from  Original  Sources  by  Henry  Gee,
B.D.,  F.S.A.,  and  W.  J.  Hardy,  F.S.A.     Cr.  8vo.      los.  6d.
THE    NATIONAL    CHURCH.      Essays  on   its    History   and    Con-
stitution,   and    Criticisms    of    its     Present    Administration.       By
H.  Hensley  Henson,  B.D.,  Canon  of  Westminster.     AVith  an
Introduction  by  the  Rev.  J.  Llewelyn  Davies,  D.D.      Crown
Svo.      6s.
Holy  Communion —

THE     COMMUNION     SERVICE    FROM     THE     BOOK    OF

COMMON    PRAYER,  with  Select  Readings  from  the  Writings

of  the  Rev.  F.  D.  Maurice.     Edited  by  Bishop  Colenso.     6th

Edition.      i6mo.      2s.  6d.

FIRST  COMMUNION,  with  Prayers  and  Devotions  for  the  newly

Confirmed.      By  Rev.  Canon  Maclear.      32mo.      6d.
A  MANUAL  OF  INSTRUCTION  FOR  CONFIRMATION  AND
FIRST  COMMUNION,   with   Prayers   and    Devotions.      By  the

Liturgy—  f^^""^-     32mo.     2s.

A  COMPANION  TO  THE  LECTIONARY.    By  Rev.  W.  Benham,
B.D.      Crown  8vo.      4s.  6d.


THEOLOGICAL  CATALOGUE  17

Liturgy — continued.

AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  CREEDS.  By  Rev.  Canon
Maclear.     Pott  8vo.     3s.  6d.

CHURCH  QUARTERL  V  REVIEW.—"  Mr.  Maclear's  text-books  of  Bible  history
are  so  well  known  that  to  praise  them  is  unnecessary.  He  has  now  added  to  them  An
Introduction  to  the  Creeds,  which  we  do  not  hesitate  to  call  admirable.  The  book
consists,  first,  of  an  historical  introduction,  occupying  53  pages,  then  an  exposition  of
the  twelve  articles  of  the  Creed  extending  to  page  2gg,  an  appendix  containing  the  texts
of  a  considerable  number  of  Creeds,  and  lastly,  three  indices  which,  as  far  as  we  have
tested  them,  we  must  pronounce  very  good.  .  .  .We  rnay  add  that  we  know  already
that  the  book  has  been  used  with  great  advantage  in  ordinary  parochial  work."

AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  ARTICLES  OF  THE
CHURCH  OF  ENGLAND.  By  Rev.  G.  F.  Maclear,  D.D..
and  Rev.  W.  VV.  Williams.     Crown  8vo.      los.  6d.

The  Bishop  of  Salisbury  at  the  Church  Congress  spoke  of  this  as  "  a  book  which
will  doubtless  h.ave,  as  it  deserves,  large  circulation."

.ST.  y AMES'S  GAZETTE.— "Theological  students  and  others  will  find  this  com-
prehensive yet  concise  volume  most  valuable."

GLASGOW  HERALD.— "  A  valuable  addition  to  the  well-known  series  of  Theo-
logical Manuals  published  by  Messrs.  Macmillan."

CHURCH  TIMES. — "  Those  who  are  in  any  way  responsible  for  the  training  of
candidates  for  Holy  Orders  must  often  have  felt  the  want  of  such  a  book  as  Dr.  Maclear,
with  the  assistance  of  his  colleague,  Mr.  Williams,  has  just  published."

NEW  HISTORY  OF  THE  BOOK  OF  COMMON  PRAYER.
With  a  rationale  of  its  Offices  on  the  basis  of  the  former  Work  by
Francis  Procter,  M.A.  Revised  and  re-written  by  Walter
Howard  Frere,  M.A.,  Priest  of  the  Community  of  the  Resur-
rection.     Second  Impression.      Crown  8vo.      12s.  6d.

AN  ELEMENTARY  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF

COMMON  PRAYER.     By  Rev.  F.  Procter  and  Rev.   Canon

Maclear.     Pott  Svo.     2s.  6d.
THE   ELIZABETHAN   PRAYER-BOOK  AND    ORNAMENTS.

With    an    Appendi.x    of    Documents.       By    Henry    Gee,    D.D.

Crown  Svo.      S^-
TWELVE  DISCOURSES  ON  SUBJECTS  CONNECTED  WITH

THE  LITURGY  AND  WORSHIP  OF  THE  CHURCH  OF

ENGLAND.       By    Very  Rev.   C.  J.  Vaughan.      4th    Edition.

Fcap.  Svo.     6s.

Historical  and  Biographical —

THE    ECCLESIASTICAL    EXPANSION    OF    ENGLAND    IN
THE    GROWTH    OF    THE    ANGLICAN    COMMUNION.
Hulsean  Lectures,  1894-95.     By  Alfred  Barry,  D.D.,  D.C.L.,
formerly  Bishop  of  Sydney  and  Primate  of  Australia  and  Tasmania.
Crown  Svo.      6s.
The  author's  preface  says  :  "  The  one  object  of  these  lectures— delivered
on  the  Hulsean  Foundation  in   1894-95—13  to  make  some  slight  contribu-
tion to  that  awakening  of  interest  in  the  extraordinary  religious  mission  of
England  which  seems  happily  characteristic  of  the  present  time."

DAIL  V  NEWS. — "  These  lectures  are  particularly  interesting  as  containing  the  case
for  the  Christian  missions  at  a  time  when  there  is  a  disposition  to  attack  them  in  some
quarters."


i8  MACMILLAN  AND  CO.'S

Historical  and  Biographical — continued.

LIVES  OF  THE  ARCHBISHOPS  OF  CANTERBURY.  From
St.  Augustine  to  Juxon.  By  the  Very  Rev.  Walter  Farquhar
Hook,  D.D.,  Dean  of  Chichester.  Demy  Svo.  The  volumes  sold
separately  as  follows  :— Vol.  I.,  15s.  ;  Vol.  II.,  15s.  ;  Vol.  V.,
15s.  ;  Vols.  VI.  and  VII.,  30s.  ;  Vol.  VIII.,  15s.  ;  Vol.  X.,
15s.  ;  Vol.  XL,  15s.  ;  Vol,  XIL,  15s.
ATHENMUM.—"T\if^  most  impartial,  the  most  instructive,  and  the  most  interest-
ing of  histories."

THE  LIFE  OF  THE  RIGHT  REVEREND  BROOKE  FOSS
WESTCOTT,  D.D.,  Late  Lord  Bishop  of  Durham.  By  his  Son,
the  Rev.  Arthur  Westcott.  With  Photogravure  Portraits.
2  vols.  Extra  Crown  Svo.  17s.  net.  Abridged  edition  in  One
Vol.      Extra  Crown  Svo.      Ss.  6d.  net.

MEMOIRS  OF  ARCHBISHOP  TEMPLE.  By  Seven  Friends.
Edited  by  E.  G.  Sandford.  With  Photogravure  and  other
Illustrations.      2  vols.      Svo.      36s.  net.

RUGBY  MEMOIR  OF  ARCHBISHOP  TEMPLE,  1S57-1869.
By  F.  E.  Kitchener,  Assistant  Master  at  Rugby  School,  1862-
1875.      With  Portrait.      Svo.      Sewed,  is.  6d.  net.

THE  EXETER  EPISCOPATE  OF  ARCHBISHOP  TEMPLE,
1869-1885.  By  E.  G.  Sandford,  his  sometime  Chaplain,  Arch-
deacon of  Exeter.  With  Photogravure  and  other  Illustrations.
Svo.      3s.  6d.  net.

FREDERICK  TEMPLE.  An  Appreciation.  By  E.  G.  Sandford,
Archdeacon  of  Exeter.  With  a  Biographical  Introduction  by
William  Temple,  Fellow  of  Queen's  College,  Oxford  ;  son  of
the  Archbishop.      With  Frontispiece.      Svo.      4s.  net.

LIFE  AND  LETTERS  OF  ARCHBISHOP  BENSON.  By  his
Son.

Abridged  Edition.      In  one  Vol.     8s.  6d.  net.

CHARLOTTE  MARY  YONGE  :  HER  LIFE  AND  LETTERS.
By  Christabel  Coleridge.    With  Portraits.    Svo.    12s.6d.net.

LIFE  AND  LETTERS  OF  AMBROSE  PHILLIPPS  DE  LISLE.
By  E.  S.  Purcell.     Two  Vols.      Svo.      25s.  net.

THE  OXFORD  MOVEMENT.  Twelve  Years,  1833-45.  By
Dean  Church.     Globe  Svo.     4s.  net.

THE  LIFE  AND  LETTERS  OF  R.  W.  CHURCH,  late  Dean
of  St.  Paul's.      Globe  Svo.     4s.  net.

LIFE  AND  LETTERS  OF  FENTON  JOHN  ANTHONY
HORT,  D.D.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  sometime  Hulsean  Professor  and
Lady  Margaret's  Reader  in  Divinity  in  the  University  of  Cambridge.
By  his  Son,  Arthur  Fenton  Hort,  late  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,
Cambridge.     In  two  Vols.    With  Portrait.     Ex.  Cr.  Svo.     17s.net.

THE  LIFE  OF  FREDERICK  DENISON  MAURICE.  Chiefly
told  in  his  own  letters.  Edited  by  his  Son,  Frederick  Maurice.
With  Portraits.      Two  Vols.      Crown  Svo.      i6s.


THEOLOGICAL  CATALOGUE  19

Historical  and  Biographical — coniimied.

MEMORIALS.  (PART  I.)  FAMILY  AND  PERSONAL,  1766-
1865.  By  RouNDELL,  Earl  of  Selborne.  With  Portraits  and
Illustrations.  Two  Vols.  8vo.  2Ss.net.  (PART  II.)  PERSONAL
AND  POLITICAL,  1865-1895.  Two  Vols.  25s.  net.
LIFE  AND  LETTERS  OF  WILLIAM  JOHN  BUTLER,  late
Dean  of  Lincoln,  sometime  Vicar  of  Wantage.     8vo.     12s.  6d.  net.


IN  THE  COURT  OF  THE  ARCHBISHOP  OF  CANTERBURY.

Read  and   others  v.    The   Lord    Bishop   of    Lincoln.      Judgment,

Nov.  21,  1890.      2nd  Edition.      8vo.      2s.  net.
THE   ARCHBISHOP    OF    CANTERBURY    ON    RESERVATION

OF    THE    SACRAMENT.      Lambeth    Palace,    May    i,    1900.

8vo.      Sewed,      is.  net.
THE     ARCHBISHOP     OF     YORK     ON     RESERVATION     OF

SACRAMENT.     Lambeth  Palace,  May  i,  1900.     8vo.     Sewed.

IS.  net.
CANTERBURY  DIOCESAN   GAZETTE.      Monthly.      8vo.      2d.


devotional  '^oo^q

Cornish  (J.  F.)— WEEK  BY  WEEK.     Fcap.  8vo.      3s.  6d.

Eastlake  (Lady).— FELLOWSHIP:  LETTERS  ADDRESSED
TO  MY  SISTER-MOURNERS.     Crown  8vo.     2s.  6d.

ATHEJVySUM. — "  Tender  and  unobtrusive,  and  the  author  thoroughly  realises  the
sorrow  of  those  she  addresses  ;  it  may  soothe  mourning  readers,  and  can  by  no  means
aggravate  or  jar  upon  their  feelings."

CONTEMPORARY  REVIEW.—"  h\t.ry  touching  and  at  the  same  time  a  very
sensible  book.     It  breathes  throughout  the  truest  Christian  spirit."

NONCONFORMIST.— "  A  beautiful  little  volume,  written  with  genuine  feeling,
good  taste,  and  a  right  appreciation  of  the  teaching  of  Scripture  relative  to  sorrow  and
suffering."

IMITATIO  CHRISTI,  Libri  IV.  Printed  in  Borders  after  Holbein,
Diirer,  and  other  old  Masters,  containing  Dances  of  Death,  Acts  of
Mercy,  Emblems,  etc.      Crown  8vo.     7s.  6d.

Keble   (J.)— THE   CHRISTIAN    YEAR.      Edited  by  C.    M.

YoNGE.     Pott  8vo.     25.  6d.  net.
Kingsley     (Charles).  —  OUT     OF     THE     DEEP:     WORDS

FOR   THE  SORROWFUL.       From    the  writings  of  Charles

Kingsley.      Extra  Fcap.  8vo.     3s.  6d.
DAILY   THOUGHTS.      Selected   from    the   Writings  of  Charles

Kingsley.     By  his  Wife.     Crown  8vo.     6s.
FROM  DEATH   TO   LIFE.     Fragments  of  Teaching  to  a  Village

Congregation.     With  Letters  on  the  "Life  after  Death."     Edited

by  his  Wife.     Fcap.  8vo.     2s.  6d.
Maclear   (Rev.    Canon).— A    MANUAL    OF    INSTRUCTION

FOR  CONFIRMATION  AND  FIRST  COMMUNION,  WITH

PRAYERS  AND  DEVOTIONS.     32mo.     2s,


20  MACMILLAN  AND  CO.'S

Maurice  (Frederick  Denison).— LESSONS  OF  HOPE.  Readings
from  the  Works  of  F.  D.  Maurice.  Selected  by  Rev.  J.  Ll.
Davies,  M.A.     Crown  8vo.     5s.

THE  COMMUNION  SERVICE.  From  the  Book  of  Common
Prayer,  with  select  readings  from  the  writings  of  the  Rev.  F.  D.
Maurice,  M.A.  Edited  by  the  Rev.  John  William  Colenso,
D.D.,  Lord  Bishop  of  Natal.      i6mo.      2s.  6d.

THE  WORSHIP  OF  GOD,  AND  FELLOWSHIP  AMONG  MEN.
By  Frederick  Denison  Maurice  and  others.    Fcap.  8vo.   3s.  6d.

RAYS  OF  SUNLIGHT  FOR  DARK  DAYS.  With  a  Preface  by
Veiy  Rev.  C.  J.  Vaughan,  D.D.   New  Edition.    Pott  8vo.    3s.  6d.

Welby- Gregory  (The  Hon.  Lady).— LINKS  AND  CLUES.
2nd  Edition.      Crown  8vo.     6s.

Westcott  (Bishop).— THOUGHTS  ON  REVELATION  AND
LIFE.  Selections  from  the  Writings  of  Bishop  Westcott.  Edited
by  Rev.  S.  Phillips.     Crown  8vo.     6s.


^be  jfatbers


INDEX  OF  NOTEWORTHY  WORDS  AND  PHRASES  FOUND
IN  THE  CLEMENTINE  WRITINGS,  COMMONLY
CALLED  THE  HOMILIES  OF  CLEMENT.      8vo.      5s.

Benson  (Archbishop).— CYPRIAN  :  HIS  LIFE,  HIS  TIMES,
HIS  WORK.  By  the  late  Edward  White  Benson,  Archbishop
of  Canterbury.      8vo.     21s.net.

TIMES. — "  In  all  essential  respects,  in  sobriety  of  judgment  and  temper,  in  sj'm-
pathetic  insight  into  character,  in  firm  grasp  of  historical  and  ecclesiastical  issues,  in
scholarship  and  erudition,  the  finished  work  is  worthy  of  its  subject  and  worthy  of  its
author.  ...  In  its  main  outlines  full  of  dramatic  insight  and  force,  and  in  its  details  full
of  the  fruits  of  ripe  learning,  sound  judgment,  a  lofty  Christian  temper,  and  a  mature
ecclesiastical  wisdom."

SATURDAY  REVIEW.— "On  the  whole,  and  with  all  reservations  which  can
possibly  be  made,  this  weighty  volume  is  a  contribution  to  criticism  and  learning  on
which  we  can  but  congratulate  the  Anglican  Church.  We  wish  more  of  her  bishops  were
capable  or  desirous  of  descending  into  that  arena  of  pure  intellect  from  which  Dr.  Benson
returns  with  these  posthumous  laurels."

Gwatkin  (H.  M.)— SELECTIONS  FROM  EARLY  WRITERS
ILLUSTRATIVE  OF  CHURCH  HISTORY  TO  THE  TIME
OF  CONSTANTINE.     2nd  Edition.     Crown  Svo.     4s.  6d.  net.

Hort  (Dr.  F.  J.  A.)— SIX  LECTURES  ON  THE  ANTE-
NICENE  FATHERS.      Crown  Svo.      3s.  6d.

TIMES. — "  Though  certainly  popular  in  form  and  treatment  they  are  so  in  the  best
sense  of  the  words,  and  they  bear  throughout  the  impress  of  the  ripe  scholarship,  the
rare  critical  acumen,  and  the  lofty  ethical  temper  which  marked  all  Dr    Hort's  work."

NOTES    ON    CLEMENTINE   RECOGNITIONS.      Crown    8vo.
4s.  6d.


THEOLOGICAL  CATALOGUE  21

Hort  (Dr.  F.  J.  A.)  and  Mayor  (J.  B.)— CLEMENT  OF  ALEX-
ANDRIA-.  MISCELLANIES  (STROMATEIS).  Book  VII.
The  Greek  Text,  with  Introduction,  Translation,  Notes,  Disserta-
tions, and  Indices.      Svo.      15s.  net.

Kriiger  (G.)— HISTORY  OF  EARLY  CHRISTIAN  LITERA-
TURE IN  THE  FIRST  THREE  CENTURIES.  Crown  Svo.
8s.  6d.  net.

Lightfoot  (Bishop).— THE  APOSTOLIC  FATHERS.  Part  I.
St.  Clement  of  Rome.  Revised  Texts,  with  Introductions,
Notes,  Dissertations,  and  Translations.     2  vols.     Svo.      32s.

THE  APOSTOLIC  FATHERS.  Part  II.  St.  Ignatius  to  St.  Poly-
carp.  Revised  Texts,  with  Introductions,  Notes,  Dissertations,  and
Translations.     3  vols.     2nd  Edition.     Demy  Svo.      48s.

THE  APOSTOLIC  FATHERS.  Abridged  Edition.  With  Short
Introductions,  Greek  Text,  and  English  Translation.      Svo.      i6s.

MANCHESTER  GUARDIAN'.— "  h  conspectus  of  these  early  and  intensely  in-
teresting Christian  '  Documents '  such  as  had  not  hitherto  been  attainable,  and  thereby
renders  a  priceless  service  to  all  serious  students  of  Christian  theology,  and  even  of
Roman  history."

NA  TIONAL  OBSERVER.—"  From  the  account  of  its  contents,  the  student  may
appreciate  the  value  of  this  last  work  of  a  great  scholar,  and  its  helpfulness  as  an  aid  to
an  intelligent  examination  of  the  earliest  post-Apostolic  writers.  The  texts  are  con-
structed on  the  most  careful  collation  of  all  the  existing  sources.  The  introductions  are
brief,  lucid,  and  thoroughly  explanatory  of  the  historical  and  critical  questions  related  to
the  texts.  The  introduction  to  the  Didache,  and  the  translation  of  the  '  Church  Manual
of  Early  Christianity,'  are  peculiarly  interesting,  as  giving  at  once  an  admirable  version
of  it,  and  the  opinion  of  the  first  of  English  biblical  critics  on  the  latest  discovery  in
patristic  literature."


Ib^mnolog^


Bernard  (Canon  T.  D.)— THE  SONGS  OF  THE  HOLY
NATIVITY.  Being  Studies  of  the  Benedictus,  Magnificat,
Gloria  in  Excelsis,  and  Nunc  Dimittis.      Crown  Svo.      S^-

Brooke  (Stopford  A.)— CHRISTIAN  HYMNS.  Edited  and
arranged.      Fcap.  Svo.      2s.  6d.  net.

Selborne  (Roundell,  Earl  of) —

THE  BOOK  OF  PRAISE.  From  the  best  English  Hymn  Writers.
Pott  Svo.     2s.  6d.  net.

A  HYMNAL.  Chiefly  from  The  Book  of  Praise.  In  various  sizes.
B.  Pott  Svo,  larger  type.  is. — C.  Same  Edition,  fine  paper,  is.  6d. —
An  Edition  with  Music,  Selected,  Harmonised,  and  Composed  by
John  Hullah.     Pott  Svo.     3s.  6d.

Smith  (Horace).— HYMNS  AND  PSALMS.  Ex.  Crown  Svo.
2s.  6d.

Woods  (M.  A.)  — HYMNS  FOR  SCHOOL  WORSHIP.
Compiled  by  M.  A.  Woods.     Pott  Svo.      is.  6d.


22  MACMILLAN  AND  CO.'S


1ReliCi|iou6  HcacbiuG


Bell  (Rev.  G.  C.)— RELIGIOUS  TEACHING   IN   SECOND-
ARY SCHOOLS.      For  Teachers  and   Parents.      Suggestions  as
to  Lessons  on  the  Bible,  Early  Church  History,  Christian  Evidences,
etc.      By  the  Rev.   G.   C.    Bkll,   M.A.,  Master  of  Marlborough
College.      2nd  Edition.      With  new  chapter  on   Christian   Ethic.
Crown  8vo.      3s.  6d.
GUARDIAN.—"T\\e  hints  and  suggestions  given  are  admirable,  and,  as  far  as  Bible
teaching  or  instruction  in  '  Christian  Evidences  '  is  concerned,  leave  nothing  to  be  desired.
Much  time  and  thought  has  evidently  been  devoted  by  the  writer  to  the  difficulties  which
confront  the  teacher  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  a  large  portion  of  the  volume  is  taken  up
with  the  consideration  of  this  branch  of  his  subject."

EDUCATIONAL  REVIEIV.—"  ¥or  those  teachers  who  are  dissatisfied  with  the
existing  state  of  things,  and  who  are  striving  after  something  better,  this  little  handbook
is  invaluable.  Its  aim  is  'to  map  out  a  course  of  instruction  on  practical  lines,  and  to
suggest  methods  and  books  which  may  point  the  way  to  a  higher  standpoint  and  a  wider
horizon.'  For  the  carrying  out  of  this,  and  also  for  his  criticism  of  prevailing  methods,
all  teachers  owe  Mr.  Bell  a  debt  of  gratitude  ;  and  if  any  are  roused  to  a  due  sense  of
their  responsibility  in  this  matter,  he  will  feel  that  his  book  has  not  been  written  in  vam."

Gilbert    (Dr.   G.   H.)— A    PRIMER    OF    THE    CHRISTIAN

RELIGION.      Based  on  the  Teaching  of  Jesus,  its  Founder  and

Living  Lord.     Crown  8vo.      4s.  6d.  net.
Joseph  (N.  S.)— RELIGION,  NATURAL  AND  REVEALED.

A    Series    of    Progressive    Lessons    for    Jewish    Youth.      Revised

Edition.      Crown  Svo.      is.  net.     Leather,  gilt  edges,  3s.  6d.  net.
Knox      (E.      M.)  — BIBLE     LESSONS      FOR      SCHOOLS.

Globe  Svo.     GENESIS,      is.  6d.     EXODUS,      is.  6d.
Lawson  (H.    N.)  — THE  BIBLE   STORY.      For   Children   of

all   Ages.      Revised   by   Frederick   P.   Lawson,    M.A.,   Hon.

Canon  of  Peterborough.      The  Beginnings  of  the  Jewish  Church.

Illustrated.      Extra  Crown  Svo.      3s.  6d.


Sermons,  Xcctures,  B^brcescs,  an^
^beolooical  i£66av^0

(See  also  'Bible,'  '  Church  of  England,'  'Fathers')

Abrahams  (Israel).~FESTIVAL  STUDIES.     Being  Thoughts
on  the  Jewish  Year.      Crown  Svo.      2S.  6d.

Abrahams  ( I. )—Montefiore  (C.G.)— ASPECTS  OF  JUDAISM.

Being  Eighteen  Sermons.     2nd  Edition.     Fcap.  Svo.     3s.  6d.  net.

TIMES.— '■^  There  is  a  great  deal  in  them  that  does  not  appeal  to  Jews  alone,  for,
especially  in  Mr.  Montefiore's  addresses,  the  doctrines  advocated,  with  much  charm  of
style,  are  often  not  by  any  means  exclusively  Jewish,  but  such  as  are  shared  and
honoured  by  all  who  care  for  religion  and  morality  as  those  terms  are  commonly  under-
stood in  the  western  world."  ,,    ,     ,

GLASGOiV  HERALD.— "'Bo\\i  from  the  homiletic  and  ^yhat  mai^  be  called  the
big-world  point  of  view,  this  little  volume  is  one  of  considerable  interest.  '


THEOLOGICAL  CATALOGUE  23

Ainger  (Rev.  Alfred).— THE  GOSPEL  AND  HUMAN  LIFE.

Edited,  with  Preface,  by  Canon  Bekching.      Cr.  Svo.      6s.

DAILY  NEWS. — "  We  think  we  can  safely  say  that  no  one  commencing  to  read  this
volume  will  leave  any  single  sermon  unread.  Canon  Ainger  was  a  careful  and  conscien-
tious writer,  and  composed  his  sermons  with  a  fidelity  to  literary  form  and  exactness  of
expression  that  will  please  the  most  imperious  critic.  If  we  were  to  single  out  any  one
quality  of  these  discourses,  it  would  be  the  close,  searching  analysis  of  human  nature.
He  was  a  close  observer  of  human  life  in  all  its  strange  inconsistencies  and  varying
moods,  a  shrewd  judge  of  motive  and  disposition."

Allen    (V.   G.)— FREEDOM    IN   THE   CHURCH,   OR  THE
DOCTRINE  OF   CHRIST   AS   THE   LORD   HATH    COM-
MANDED,  AND  AS  THIS  CHURCH  HATH  RECEIVED
THE    SAME  ACCORDING   TO    THE   COMMANDMENTS
OF  GOD.      Crown  Svo.      6s.  6d.  net.
Askwith   (E.    H.)— THE   CHRISTIAN    CONCEPTION    OF
HOLINESS.      Crown  Svo.      6s.
THE  SPECTATOR. — "A  well-reasoned  and  really  noble  view  of  the  essential  pur-
pose of  the  Christian  revelation.   .   .  .   We  hope  that  Mr.  Askwith's  work  will  be  widely
read."

Bather  (Archdeacon).— ON   SOME  MINISTERIAL  DUTIES,
CATECHISING,  PREACHING,  etc.     Edited,  with  a  Preface,
by  Very  Rev.  C.  J.  Vaughan,  D.D.      Fcap.  Svo.      4s.  6d.
Benson  (Archbishop) —

ARCHBISHOP  BENSON  IN   IRELAND.      A  record  of  his  Irish
Sermons   and   Addresses.      Edited   by  J.   H.   Bernard.      Crown
Svo.      3s.  6d.
Benson     (Margaret).  —  THE    VENTURE     OF     RATIONAL

FAITH.      Crown  Svo.
Bernard  (Canon  Ed.  Russell).— GREAT  MORAL  TEACHERS.
Eight  Lectures  on  Confucius,   Buddha,    Socrates,   and   Epictetus
delivered  in  Salisbury  Cathedral.      Crown  Svo.      3s.  6d.  net.
Bernard  (Canon  T.D.)— THE  SONGS  OF  THE  HOLY  NATIV-
ITY CONSIDERED  (i)  AS  RECORDED  IN  SCRIPTURE,
(2)  AS  IN  USE  IN  THE  CHURCH.      Crown  Svo.      5s.
Brastow    (Prof.    L.    O.)  — REPRESENTATIVE     MODERN
PREACHERS.      Crown  Svo.      6s.  6d.  net.
THE    MODERN    PULPIT.       A   Study   of  Homiletic   Sources  and
Characteristics.      Crown  Svo.      6s.  6d.  net.
Brooke  (Rev.  Stopford  A.)— SHORT  SERMONS.    Cr.  Svo.    6s.
Brooks  (Phillips,  late  Bishop  of  Massachusetts) —

THE  CANDLE  OF  THE  LORD,  and  other  Sermons.    Cr.  Svo.    6s.
SERMONS   PREACHED   IN   ENGLISH  CHURCHES.     Crown

Svo.      6s.
TWENTY  SERMONS.      Crown  Svo.      6s.
THE  LIGHT  OF  THE  WORLD.     Crown  Svo.      3s.  6d.
THE  MYSTERY  OF  INIQUITY^      Crown  Svo.      6s.
ESSAYS  AND  ADDRESSES,  RELIGIOUS,  LITERARY,  AND
SOCIAL.      Edited  lay  the  Rev.  John  Cotton  Brooks.      Crown
Svo.      8s.  6d.  net.


24  MACMILLAN  AND  CO.'S

Brooks  (Phillips,  late  Bishop  of  Massachusetts) — continued.

NEW  STARTS   IN   LIFE,   AND  OTHER  SERMONS.      Crown

8vo.      6s.
THE    MORE    ABUNDANT    LIFE.       Lenten    Readings.       Royal

i6mo.      5s.
THE  LAW  OF  GROWTH,  and  other  Sermons.     Crown  8vo.     6s.

SCOTSMAN. — "All  instinct  with  the  piety,  breadth  of  mind,  and  eloquence  which
have  given  Phillips  Brooks'  pulpit  prolocutions  their  rare  distinction  among  productions
of  this  kind,  that  of  being  really  and  truly  suitable  for  more  Sundays  than  one."

GLOBE. — "  So  manly  in  outlook  and  so  fresh  and  suggestive  in  treatment."

SEEKING  LIFE,  AND  OTHER  SERMONS.      Crown  Svo.      6s.

CHRISTIAN  WORLD.  —  "-  It  will,  we  think,  be  generally  agreed  that  the  Iwenty-
one  sermons  in  this  concluding  volume  are  worthy  to  rank  with  the  other  volumes  of  a
notable  series.  There  is  the  wonted  felicity  in  the  choice  of  subjects,  and  the  wonted
combination  of  spiritual  insight  and  practical  force  in  their  treatment."

THE  INFLUENCE  OF  JESUS.  The  Bohlen  Lectures,  1S79.
Crown  Svo.      6s.

LECTURES  ON  PREACHING  DELIVERED  AT  YALE  COL-
LEGE.    Crown  Svo.      6s.

THE  PHILLIPS  BROOKS  YEAR  BOOK.  Selections  from  the
Writings  of  Bishop  Phillips  Brooks.  By  H.  L.  S.  and  L.  II.  S.
Globe  Svo.      3s.  6d.  net.

CHRIST  THE  LIFE  AND  LIGHT.  Lenten  Readings  selected
from  the  Writings  of  the  Rt.  Rev.  Phillips  Brooks,  D.D.
By  W.  M.  L.  Jay.      Crown  Svo.     6s.

Campbell  (Dr.  John  M'Leod) —

THE  NATURE  OF  THE  ATONEMENT.  6th  Ed.  Cr.  Svo.  6s.
THOUGHTS  ON  REVELATION.  2nd  Edition.  Crown  Svo.  5s.
RESPONSIBILITY    FOR    THE    GIFT   OF   ETERNAL  LIFE.

Compiled  from  Sermons  preached   at  Row,  in  the  years  1829-31.

Crown  Svo.      5s.

Carpenter  (W.  Boyd,  Bishop  of  Ripon) —

TRUTH   IN  TALE.     Addresses,  chiefly  to  Children.      Crown  Svo.

4s.  6d.
THE    PERMANENT    ELEMENTS    OF    RELIGION:    Bampton

Lectures,   1SS7.      2nd  Edition.      Crown  Svo.      6s.
TWILIGHT  DREAMS.      Crown  Svo.      4s.  6d.
LECTURES  ON  PREACHING.     Crown  Svo.      3s.  6d.  net.
SOME    THOUGHTS    ON    CHRISTIAN    REUNION.       Being  a
Charge  to  the  Clergy.     Crown  Svo.      3s.  6d.  net.
TIMES. — "  Dr.   Boyd  Carpenter  treats  this  very  difficult  subject  with  moderation
and  good  sense,  and  with  a  clear-headed  perception  of  the  limits  which  inexor.-ibly  cir-
cumscribe the  natural  aspirations  of  Christians  of  different  churches  and  nationalities  for
a  more  intimate  communion  and  fellowship."  _  _

LEEDS  MERCURY.— "Ms  discusses  with  characteristic  vigour  and  felicity  the
claims  which  hinder  reunion,  and  the  true  idea  and  scope  of  catholicity."

Cliarteris  (Prof.  A.  H.)— THE  CHURCH  OF  CHRIST,  ITS
LIFE  AND  WORK.  An  Attempt  to  trace  the  work  of  the
Church  in  some  of  its  Departments  from  the  Earliest  Times  to  the
Present  Day.      Crown  Svo.      6s.


THEOLOGICAL  CATALOGUE  25

CHRISTL\NITY  AND  THE  WORKING  CLASSES.  Edited  by
George  Haw.     Crown  8vo.      3s.  6d.  net.

Church  (Dean)^

HUMAN  LIFE  AND  ITS  CONDITIONS.      Crown  8vo.     6s.

THE  GIFTS  OF  CIVILISATION,  and  other  Sermons  and  Lectures.

2nd  Edition.      Crown  8vo.      7s.  6d.
DISCIPLINE  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  CHARACTER,  and  othei

Sermons.      Crown  Svo.      4s.  6d.

ADVENT  SERMONS.  1885.      Crown  8vo.     4s.  6d.

VILLAGE  SERMONS.  Crown  Svo.      6s.

VILLAGE  SERMONS.  Second  Series.      Crown  Svo.      6s.

VILLAGE  SERMONS.  Third  Series.      Crown  Svo.      6s.

TIMES. — "  In  these  sermons  we  see  how  a  singularly  gifted  and  cultivated  mind  was
able  to  communicate  its  thoughts  on  the  highest  subjects  to  those  with  whom  it  might
be  supposed  to  have  little  in  common.  .  .  .  His  village  sermons  are  not  the  by-work  of
one  whose  interests  were  elsewhere  in  higher  matters.  They  are  the  outcome  of  his
deepest  interests  and  of  the  life  of  his  choice.  .  .  .  These  sermons  are  worth  perusal  if
only  to  show  what  preaching,  even  to  the  humble  and  unlearned  hearers,  may  be  made
in  really  competent  hands."

CATHEDRAL  AND  UNIVERSITY  SERMONS.    Crown  Svo.   6s.

PASCAL  AND  OTHER  SERMONS.      Crown  Svo.      6s.

CLERGYMAN'S    SELF-EXAMINATION    CONCERNING    THE

APOSTLES'  CREED.      Extra  Fcap.  Svo.      is.  6d.

Congreve  (Rev.  John).— HIGH  HOPES  AND  PLEADINGS
FOR  A  REASONABLE  FAITH,  NOBLER  THOUGHTS,
LARGER  CHARITY.      Crown  Svo.      5s.

Davidson  (Archbishop) —

A    CHARGE     DELIVERED    TO    THE    CLERGY    OF    THE

DIOCESE    OF    ROCHESTER,    October  29,    30,    31,     1S94.

Svo.      Sewed.      2s.  net.
A    CPIARGE    DELIVERED    TO    THE    CLERGY    OF    THE

DIOCESE  OF  WINCHESTER,    Sept.   28,   30,   Oct.   2,   3,   4,

and  5,  1899.      Svo.      Sewed.      2s.  6d.  net.
THE  DECEASED  WIFE'S   SISTER   MARRIAGE  ACT,   1907.

A    Letter   to   the  Diocese   of  Canterbury,   October    1907.     Svo.

Sewed.      6d.  net.
THE     CHRISTIAN     OPPORTUNITY.         Being    Sermons    and

Speeches  delivered  in  America.     Crown  Svo.      3s.  6d.  net.

Davies  (Rev.  J.  Llewelyn) —

THE  GOSPEL  AND  MODERN  LIFE.     2nd  Edition,  to  which  is

added  Morality  according  to  the  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper.

Extra  fcap.  Svo.      6s.
SOCIAL   QUESTIONS    FROM    THE    POINT   OF   VIEW   OF

CHRISTIAN  THEOLOGY.      2nd  Edition.     Crown  Svo.      6s.
WARNINGS  AGAINST  SUPERSTITION.  Extra  Fcap. Svo.  2s.6d.


26  MACMILLAN  AND  CO.'S

Davies  (Rev.  J.  Llewelyn) — continued.

THE  CHRISTIAN  CALLING.      Extra  Fcap.  8vo.      6s.
BAPTISM,   CONFIRMATION,   AND  THE  LORD'S  SUPPER,

as  interpreted  by  their  Outward  Signs.     Three  Addresses.      New

Edition.      Pott  8vo.      is.
ORDER  AND  GROWTH  AS  INVOLVED  IN  THE  SPIRITUAL

CONSTITUTION  OF  HUMAN  SOCIETY,  Crown  8vo.   3s.  6d.
SPIRITUAL    APPREHENSION:    Sermons   and    Papers.      Crown

Svo.     6s.

Day    (E.    E.)  — SEEKING    THE     KINGDOM.       A     Study.

Crown  Svo.     6s.  6d.  net.
THE  DIARY  OF  A  CHURCH-GOER.      Second  Impression.      Crown

Svo.      Gilt  top.      3s.  6d.  net.

Canon  Bbeching  in  a  letter  to  the  Editor  of  the  SPECTA  TOR.— "I  should  like  to
draw  the  attention  of  your  readers  to  a  book  recently  published,  The  Diary  of  a  Church-
Goer.  .  .  .  What  in  my  judgment,  gives  the  book  its  value,  and  makes  it  worth  the
attention  of  thoughtful  people,  is  the  glimpse  it  affords  of  a  cultivated  mind  worshipping
and  reflecting  upon  its  religious  experiences.  ...  It  is  this  positive  side  of  the  book  with
which  I  feel  myself  most  in  sympathy  ;  but  its  critical  side  also  is  worth  serious  attention,
especially  from  the  clergy,  because  it  will  show  them  where  at  least  one  thoughtful  man
finds  difficulties."

Donehoo  (J.  de  Quincey).— THE  APOCRYPHAL  AND  LE-
GENDARY LIFE  OF  CHRIST.  Being  the  Whole  Body  of
the  Apocryphal  Gospels  and  other  Extra  Canonical  Literature
which  pretends  to  tell  of  the  Life  and  Words  of  Jesus  Christ,  in-
cluding much  Matter  which  has  not  before  appeared  in  English.
In  continuous  Narrative  Form,  with  Notes,  Scriptural  References,
Prolegomena,  and  Indices.      Svo.      los.  6d.  net.

EdgMll  (Rev.  E.  A.)— AN  ENQUIRY  INTO  THE  EVI-
DENTIAL VALUE  OF  PROPHECY.  Being  the  Hulsean
Prize  Essay  for  1904.      Crown  Svo.      7s.  6d.

Edwards  (Jonathan),  SELECTED  SERMONS  OF.  Edited
by  Prof.  II.  N.  Gardiner.      i6mo.      is.  net.

Ellerton  (Rev.  John).— THE  HOLIEST  MANHOOD,  AND
ITS  LESSONS  FOR  BUSY  LIVES.      Crown  Svo.      6s.

English  Theological  Library.  Edited  by  Rev.  Frederic
Relton.  With  General  Introduction  by  the  late  BiSHOP
Creighton.  a  Series  of  Texts  Annotated  for  the  Use  of
Students,  Candidates  for  Ordination,  etc.      Svo.

Re-issue  at  Reduced  Prices.

I.  HOOKER'S    ECCLESIASTICAL    POLITY,   Book  V.,    Edited
by  Rev.  Ronald  E.  Bayne.      los.  6d.  net.

II.  LAW'S  SERIOUS  CALL,  Edited  by  Rev.  Canon  J.  H.  Overton.

4s.  6d.  net.

DAILY  NEWS.— "  A  well-executed  reprint.  .  .  .  Canon  Overton's  notes  are  not
numerous,  and  are  as  a  rule  very  interesting  and  useful."


THEOLOGICAL  CATALOGUE  27

English  Theological  Library — continued.

in.  WILSON'S  MAXIMS,  Edited  by  Rev.  F.  Relton.      3s.  6d.  net.

G6''^4y^Z)/WiV.— "Many  readers  win  feel  grateful  to  Mr.  Relton  for  this  edition  of
Bishop  Wilson's  'Maxims.'  .  .  .  Mr.  Relton's  edition  will  be  found  well  worth  possess-
ing :  it  is  pleasant  to  the  eye,  and  bears  legible  marks  of  industry  and  study."

IV.  THE  WORKS  OF  BISHOP  BUTLER.  Vol.  I.  Sermons,
Charges,  Fragments,  and  Correspondence.  Vol.  II.  The  Analogy
of  Religion,  and  two  brief  dissertations  :  I.  Of  Personal  Identity.
II.  Of  the  Nature  of  Virtue.  Edited  by  the  Very  Rev.  J.  H.
Bernard,  D.D.,  Dean  of  St.  Patrick's,  Dublin.     4s.  6d.  net  each.

THE  PILOT. — "  One  could  hardly  desire  a  better  working  edition  than  this  which
Dr.  Bernard  has  given  us.  .  .   .   Sure  to  become  the  standard  edition  for  students."
THE  SPECTATOR.— "  An  excellent  piece  of  work."

V.  THE  CONFERENCE  BETWEEN  WILLIAM  LAUD  AND
MR.  FISHER,  THE  JESUIT.  Edited  by  Rev.  C.  H.  Simpkin-
SON,  M.A.      Author  of  The  Life  of  Archbisliop  Laud.      4s.  6d.  net.

ESSAYS  ON  SOME  THEOLOGICAL  QUESTIONS  OF  THE
DAY.  By  Members  of  the  University  of  Cambridge.  Edited  by
H.  B.  SwETE,  D.D.      8vo.      12s.  net.

Everett  (Dr.  C.  C.)— THE  PSYCHOLOGICAL  ELEMENTS

OF  RELIGIOUS  FAITH.      Crown  8vo.      5s.  net.
EVIL  AND  EVOLUTION.      An  attempt  to  turn  the  Light  of  Modern

Science   on    to   the   Ancient   Mystery  of  Evil.      By  the  author   of

Tlie  Social  Horizon.      Crown  8vo.      3s.  6d.  net.
FAITH  AND  CONDUCT  :  An  Essay,  on  Verifiable  Religion.      Crown

Svo.      7s.  6d.

Farrar  (Very  Rev.  F.  W.,  late  Dean  of  Canterbury) — -

Collected  Edition  of  the  Sermons,  etc.    Cr.  8vo.    3s.  6d.  each.

SEEKERS  AFTER  GOD.

ETERNAL  HOPE.     Sermons  Preached  in  Westminster  Abbey.    Also

Svo.     Sewed.     6d.
THE  FALL  OF  MAN,  and  other  Sermons.

THE  WITNESS  OF  HISTORY  TO  CHRIST.     Ilulsean  Lectures.
THE  SILENCE  AND  VOICES  OF  GOD.

IN  THE  DAYS  OF  THY  YOUTH.     Sermons  on  Practical  Subjects.
SAINTLY  WORKERS.     Five  Lenten  Lectures.
EPHPHATHA  :  or,  The  Amelioration  of  the  World.
MERCY  AND  JUDGMENT.   A  few  words  on  Christian  Eschatology.
SERMONS  AND  ADDRESSES  delivered  in  America.

Fiske  (John).— MAN'S  DESTINY  VIEWED  IN  THE  LIGHT
OF  HIS  ORIGIN.      Crown  Svo.      3s.  6d.
LIFE  EVERLASTING.      Globe  Svo.      3s.  6d.
Foxell  (W.  J.)— GOD'S   GARDEN  :    Sunday  Talks  with  Boys.
With  an  Introduction  by  Dean  Farrar.      Globe  Svo.      3s.  6d.
IN  A  PLAIN   PATH.      Addresses  to  Boys.      Globe  Svo.      3s.  6d.


28  MACMILLAN  AND  CO.'S

Fraser  (Bishop).  — UNIVERSITY  SERMONS.  Edited  by
Rev.  John  W.  Diggle.     Crown  8vo.     6s.

Grane   (W.    L.)— THE    WORD    AND    THE   WAY:    or,    The
Light  of  the  Ages  on  the  Path  of  To-Day.      Crown  8vo.      6s.
HARD  SAYINGS  OF  JESUS  CHRIST.     A  Study  in   the  Mind
and  Method  of  the  Master.      Second  Edition.      Crown  Svo.      5s.

GREATHEART.  Some  Talks  with  Him.  By  a  Pilgrim.  Crown
Svo.      3s.  net.

Green  (S.  G.)— THE  CHRISTIAN  CREED  AND  THE
CREEDS  OF  CHRISTENDOM.  Seven  Lectures  delivered
in  1898  at  Regent's  Park  College.      Crown  Svo.      6s.

Griffis  (W.  E.)  — DUX  CHRISTUS  :  An  Outline  Study  of
Japan.      Globe  Svo.      2s.  net.      Sewed.      is.  3d.  net.

Harcourt  (Sir  W.  V.)— LAWLESSNESS  in  the  NATIONAL
CHURCH.     Svo.     Sewed,     is.  net.

Hardwick  (Archdeacon).  —  CHRIST  AND  OTHER  MAS-
TERS.     6th  Edition.      Crown  Svo.      los.  6d.

Hare  (Juhus  Charles).— THE  MISSION  OF  THE  COM-
FORTER. New  Edition.  Edited  by  Dean  Plumptre.  Crown
Svo.      7s.  6d.

Harrison  (F.)— THE  CREED  OF  A  LAYMAN  ;  APOLOGIA
PRO  FIDE  MEA.      Extra  Crown  Svo.      7s.  6d.  net.
TIMES. — "  Mr.  Harrison's  history  of  his  religious  opinions  will  be  followed  with

sustained  interest  by  all  unprejudiced  students  of  philosophical  and  religious  thought."

THE   PHILOSOPHY  OF  COMMON  SENSE.     Extra  Crown  Svo.
7s.  6d  net.
WESTMINSTER  GAZETTE.— "^e.  cannot  imagine  anyone  reading  Mr.  Har-
rison's essays  without  feeling  himself  braced  and  enlightened,  even  if  their  teaching  is
not  accepted  as  a  full  and  sufficient  doctrine."

Headlam  (Rev.  A.  C.)— THE  SOURCES  AND  AUTHORITY

OF  DOGMATIC  THEOLOGY.      Being  an  Inaugural  Lecture

delivered  by  the  Rev.  Arthur  C.  Heaulam,  D.D.    Svo.   Sewed.

IS.  net.

GUARDIAN.^'-'- K   learned   and    valuable   vindication   of   the   place   of  dogmatic

theology  by  a  scholar  trained  in  historical  and  critical  methods."

Henson  (Canon   H.   H.)— SERMON    ON    THE   DEATH  OF

THE  QUEEN.      Svo.      Sewed,      is.  net.
SINCERITY  AND  SUBSCRIPTION.     A  Plea  for  Toleration  in

the  Church  of  England.      Globe  Svo.      is.  net.
THE  VALUE  OF  THE  BIBLE,  AND  OTHER  SERMONS  (1902-

1904).     With  a  letter  to  the  Lord  Bishop  of  London.    Cr.  Svo.    6s.

CHURCH  OF  ENGLAND  PULPIT. — "We  can  recommend  this  work  to  our
readers  with  the  conviction  that  if  more  preachers  were  as  broad-minded  and  as  outspoken
as  the  Rector  of  St.  Margaret's,  Westminster,  there  would  be  no  lack  of  large  congrega-
tions in  our  London  churches."

RELIGION    IN    THE    SCHOOLS.      Addresses    on   Fundamental
Christianity.      Crown  Svo.      2s.  6d.  net.


THEOLOGICAL  CATALOGUE  29

Hicks  (Rev.  Canon  E.  L.)— ADDRESSES  ON  THE  TEMPTA-
TION OF  OUR  LORD.      Crown  8vo.      3s.  net.

Hillis     (N.     D.)  — THE     INFLUENCE     OF     CHRIST     IN
MODERN  LIFE.      A  Study  of  the  New  Problems  of  the  Church
in  American  Society.     Crown  8vo.      6s.
THE  QUEST  OF  HAPPINESS.     A  Study  of  Victory  over  Life's
Troubles.      Extra  Crown  8vo.      6s.  net.

Hilty  (Carl).— HAPPINESS  :   Essays  on  the  Meaning  of  Life.
Translated  by  Professor  F.  G.  Peabody.      Crown  Svo.      5s.  net.
THE  STEPS  OF  LIFE.      Further  Essays  on   Happiness.     Trans-
lated by  Mei.vin  Brandon.      With  an  Introduction  by  Professor
F.  G.  Peabody.      Crown  Svo.      5s.  net.

Hodgkins  (Louise  M.)— VIA  CHRISTI  :  An  Introduction  to  the
Study  of  Missions.      Globe  Svo.      2s.  net.      Sewed,      is.  3d.  net.

Hoffding    (Prof.    Harald.)  — THE    PHILOSOPHY    OF    RE-
LIGION.    Translated  by  Miss  B.  E.  Meyer.      Svo.      12s.  net.

Horder     (Rev.     W.    Garrett).       THE    OTHER-WORLD.     A

Volume  of  Sermons.      Crown  Svo.
Hort  (Dr.  F.  J.  A.)— THE  WAY,  THE  TRUTH,  THE  LIFE.
Huisean  Lectures,  1871.      Crown  Svo.      6s.
JUDAISTIC  CHRISTIANITY.     Crown  Svo.     6s.
VILLAGE  SERMONS.     Crown  Svo.     6s.

Selected  from  the  Sermons  preached  by  Professor  Hort  to  his

village  congregation  at   St.    Ippolyt's,    and   including   a   series   of

Sermons  dealing  in  a  broad  and  suggestive  way  with  the  successive

books  of  the  Bible,  from  Genesis  to  Revelation.

SERMONS   ON  THE   BOOKS  OF  THE  BIBLE  (selected   from

Village  Sermons).      Crown  Svo.      3s.  6d.
VILLAGE  SERMONS.      Second  Series.      Cr.  Svo.     6s.
VILLAGE  SERMONS  IN  OUTLINE.     Crown  Svo.     6s.

Contents  :  I.   The  Prayer  Book,  16  Sermons.      II.   Baptism,

5  Sermons.     III.   Mutual  Subjection  the  Rule  of  Life  (Eph.  v.  21),

6  Sermons.  IV.  The  Sermon  on  the  Mount  (St.  Matt.  v.  i  ;  vii.
29),  II  Sermons.  V.  Advent,  4  Sermons.  VI.  The  Armour  of
the  Cross.     VII.  The  Resurrection,  7  Sermons.

CAMBRIDGE  AND  OTHER  SERMONS.     Crown  Svo.     6s.

Hoyt     (Dr.    Arthur    S.)  — THE    WORK     OF     PREACHING.

A  Book  for  the  Class-room  and  Study.      Crown  Svo.      6s.  6d.  net.
Hughes  (T.)— THE    MANLINESS    OF    CHRIST.      2nd   Ed.
Fcap.  Svo.      3s.  6d.  Also  Medium  Svo,  Sewed,  6d.

Hutton  (R.  H.)—

ESSAYS  ON  SOME  OF  THE   MODERN  GUIDES   OF  ENG-
LISH THOUGHT  IN  MATTERS  OF  FAITH.      Globe  Svo.
4s.  net.
THEOLOGICAL  ESSAYS.      Globe  Svo.     4s.  net.


30  MACMILLAN  AND  CO.'S

Hutton  (R.  H.) — con/ifiued.

ASPECTS  OV  RELIGIOUS  AND  SCIENTIFIC  THOUGHT.
Selected  from  the  Spectator,  and  edited  by  E.  M.  RoscOE.  Globe
8vo.     4s.  net.

Hyde  (W.  De  W.)— OUTLINES  OF  SOCIAL  THEOLOGY.
Crown  8vo.      6s.
TRACTICAL  IDEALISM.      Globe  8vo.      5s.  net.

Illinffworth    (Rev.    J.    R.)— SERMONS    PREACHED    IN    A
COLLEGE  CHAPEL.     Third  Edition.     Crown  Svo.     5s.
UNIVERSITY  AND  CATHEDRAL  SERMONS.    Crown  Svo.    5s.
PERSONALITY,   HUMAN  AND  DIVINE.      Bampton   Lectures,
1894.      Crown  8vo.     6s.      Also  Svo.      Sewed.      6d.
TIMES. — "  Will  take  high  rank  among  the  rare  theological  masterpieces  produced  by
that  celebrated  foundation."

DIVINE  IMMANENCE.     An  Essay  on  the  Spiritual  Significance  of

Matter.      Cr.  Svo.      6s.      Also  Svo.      Sewed.      6d.

CHURCH  QUARTERLY  REVIEW— "  h   very   valuable    book.   .   .  _.   Divine

Immanence  is  likely  to  prove  of  great  service   to  Christian  truth.     It  combines,  to  a

remarkable  extent,  profound  thought  and  clear  expression.      It  is  throughout  written

in  an  interesting  style."

REASON  AND  REVELATION,     An  Essay  in  Christian  Apology,

Third  Edition.      Crown  Svo.      6s.
CHRISTIAN  CHARACTER.    Being  Some  Lectures  on  the  Elements
of  Christian  Ethics.     New  and  Cheaper  Edition.     Crown  Svo.     6s.
Also  Svo,  sewed,  6d.
TIMES. — "We  should  like  to  follow  Dr.  lUingworth  further,  but  we  have  said  enough
to  show  that  these  studies  are  rooted  in  deep  reading  of  things  and  men,  and  the  best
thoughts  of  men,  and  the  fruit  should  be  plentiful  in  proportion."

THE    DOCTRINE    OF   THE    TRINITY   APOLOGETICALLY
CONSIDERED.      Crown  Svo.     6s.

LAYMAN. — "Devoutness,  conviction,  earnest  faith,  intellectual  force  and  keenness,
deep  spirituality — these  qualities  must  always  give  value  and  attractiveness  to  a.  theo-
logian's work  ;  and  they  are  to  be  found  in  this  volume,  as  in  those  which  have  previously
come  from  the  author's  pen."

Inge    (Rev.    Dr.)— ALL    SAINTS'     SERMONS,     1905-1907.
Crown  Svo.      3s.  6d.  net.
SATURDAY  REl'I  EW. — "Those  who  heard  any  of  these  sermons  will  need  no
pressure  from  us  to  get  the  volume  ;  those  who  did  not  hear  them  are  very  earnestly  re-
commended to  buy  it."

Inskip  (Rev.  J.  T.)— THE  PASTORAL  IDEA.  Lectures  in
Pastoral  Theology  delivered  at  the  King's  College,  London,  duiing
the  Lent  term,   1905.      Crown  Svo.      6s.

Jacob  (Rev.    J.  A.)  — BUILDING    IN    SILENCE,    and  other

Sermons.     Extra  Fcap.  Svo.     6s.
Jacob(Rev.  J.  T.)— CHRIST  THE  INDWELLER.   Cr.Svo.    5s.

Jellett  (Rev.  Dr.)— THE  ELDER  SON,  and  other  Sermons.
Crown  Svo.     6s,

JEWISH  QUARTERLY  REVIEW,  Edited  by  I,  Abrahams  and
C,  G,  MONTEFIORE.  Demy  Svo.  3s.  6d.  Vols.  1-7,  I2s.  6d,
each.     Vol.  8  onwards,  iSs.  each,      (Annual  Subscription,  lis,)


THEOLOGICAL  CATALOGUE  31

Joceline  (E.)— THE  MOTHER'S  LEGACIE  TO  HER  UN-
BORN CHILD.     Cr.  i6mo.     4s.  6d.

Jones  (Jenkin  Lloyd).— JESS  :  BITS  OF  WAYSIDE  GOSPEL.
Crown  8vo.      6s.

Joseph  (Rev.  Morris).— JUDAISM  AS  CREED  AND  LIFE.
Extra  Crown  8vo.      5s.  net.

KeUogg  (Rev.  S.  H.)— THE  GENESIS  AND  GROWTH  OF
RELIGION.     Crown  8vo.     6s.

Kingsley  (Charles) —

VILLAGE  AND  TOWN   AND  COUNTRY  SERMONS.     Crown

8vo.     3s.  6d.
THE  WATER  OF  LIFE,  and  other  Sermons.     Crown  8vo.     3s.  6d.
SERMONS  ON  NATIONAL  SUBJECTS,  AND  THE  RING  OF

THE  EARTH.     Crown  8vo.     3s.  6d.
SERMONS  FOR  THE  TIMES.     Crown  8vo.     3s.  6d.
GOOD  NEWS  OF  GOD.     Crown  8vo.     3s.  6d.
THE  GOSPEL  OF  THE  PENTATEUCH,  AND  DAVID.     Crown

8vo.     3s.  6d.
DISCIPLINE,  and  other  Sermons.     Crown  8vo.     3s.  6d.
WESTMINSTER  SERMONS.     Crown  8vo.     3s.  6d.
ALL  SAINTS'  DAY,  and  other  Sermons.     Crown  8vo.     3s.  6d.

Kirkpatrick    (Dean).— THE    DIVINE    LIBRARY   OF   THE
OLD  TESTAMENT.      Its  Origin,  Preservation,  Inspiration,  and
Permanent  VaUie.      down  8vo.      3s.  net.
THE  DOCTRINE  OF  THE  PROPHETS.     Warburtonian  Lectures
1 886- 1 890.     Thud  Edition.     Crown  8vo.     6s.

Knight  (W.  A.)— ASPECTS  OF  THEISM.     8vo.     8s.  6d.

LETTERS  FROM  HELL.  Newly  translated  from  the  Danish.  With
an  Introduction  by  Dr.  George  Macdonald.  Twenty-eighth
Thousand.     Crown  8vo.     2s.  6d.

Leighton  (Prof.  J.  A.)— JESUS  CHRIST  AND  THE  CIVIL-
ISATION OF  TO-DAY.  The  Ethical  Teaching  of  Jesus  con-
sidered in  its  Bearings  on  the  Moral  Foundations  of  Modern  Culture.
Crown  8vo.      6s.  6d.  net.

Lightfoot  (Bishop) —

THE  CHRISTIAN  MINISTRY.     Reprinted  from  Dissertations  on

the  Apostolic  As;e.     Crown  8vo.      3s.  net.
LEADERS  IN  THE  NORTHERN  CHURCH  :  Sermons  Preached

in  the  Diocese  of  Durham.     2nd  Edition.     Crown  8vo.     6s.
ORDINATION  ADDRESSES  AND  COUNSELS  TO  CLERGY.

Crown  8vo.     6s.
CAMBRIDGE  SERMONS.     Crown  8vo.     6s.
SERMONS  PREACHED  IN  ST.  PAUL'S  CATHEDRAL.    Crown

8vo.     6s.  ^

SERMONS   PREACHED  ON   SPECIAL   OCCASION.S.     Crown

8vo.     6s.


32  MACMILLAN  AND  CO.'S

Lightfoot  (Bishop) — continued.

A    CHARGE    DELIVERED    TO    THE    CLERGY    OF    THE

DIOCESE  OF  DURHAM,  25th  Nov.  1886.     Demy  8vo.     2s.
ESSAYS    ON    THE    WORK    ENTITLED    "Supernatural    Reli-
gion."    8vo.      Re-issue  at  6s.  net.
DISSERTATIONS  ON  THE  APOSTOLIC  AGE.     8vo.     14s.
BIBLICAL  ESSAYS.     8vo.     12s.
Lillingston    (Frank,    M.A.)— THE    BRAMO    SAMAJ    AND
ARYA    SAMAJ    IN    THEIR    BEARING    UPON    CHRIS-
TIANITY.     A  Study  in  Indian  Theism.      Cr.  8vo.      2s.  6d.  net.
Lindsay  (A.  R.  B.)— GLORIA   CHRISTL     An  Outhne   Study
of  Missions  and  Social  Progress.      Globe  8vo.      2s.  net.      Sewed.
IS.  3d.  net.
Lloyd    (Rev.    A.)— THE  WHEAT    AMONG    THE   TARES.
Studies  of  Buddhism  in  Japan.      Crown  Svo.      3s.  6d.  net.

Lucas  (Bernard) —

THE   EMPIRE   OF   CHRIST.     Being  a  Study  of  the  Missionary
Enterprise  in   the  Light  of  Modern  Religious  Thought.      Crown

8vo.      2s.  6d.  net.
TIMES.— ^^  It  is  because  we  want  his  ideas  to  be  fairly  considered,  not  because  we
subscribe  to  them  all,  that  we  desire  for  the  book  the  widest  possible  circulation  in  the
right  hands."

THE  FAITH  OF  A  CHRISTIAN,      Svo.      Sewed.     6d.

GUARDIAN.— "'Y\\e.  general   impression   left  upon  our  mind   by  this  book  is  so
good  that  we  wish  to  recommend   it  to  our  readers'  attention,  for  we  believe  that  any
one  who  reads  it  through  will  lay  it  down  with  a  feeling  of  gratitude  to  its  author."
THE  FIFTH  GOSPEL.     Being  the   Pauline  Interpretation  of  tlie
Christ.      Crown  Svo.      3s.  6d.  net.
LAYMAN.— "\\.%   characteristics   are   scholarliness  in  tone,    care   and  lucidity  in
exposition,  a  vigorous  literary  style,  earnest  faith.   .   .   .   Unquestionably  a  noteworthy
volume."

CONVERSATIONS    WITH    CHRIST.       A    Biographical    Study.

Crown  Svo.      3s.  6d.  net.

TIMES.— "Oi  the  author's  first  venture  we  were  able   to   speak  highly,  .ind   his

second  does  nothing  to  tarnish  his  reputation.      Indeed  in  some  ways  the  subject  that  he

has  now  chosen  is  obviously  more  suited   to  his  genius  and   his  capacities  th.-in   the

constructive  philosophy  of  the  former  book."

Luther.— THE  LETTERS  OF  MARTIN  LUTHER.     Selected
and  translated  by  Margaret  A.  Currie.     Svo.     12s.  net.

Oicilook.—"  In  these  five  hundred  letters,  covering  the  whole  period  from  Luther's
ordination  in  1507  to  his  death  thirty-nine  years  later,  we  have  a  study  of  his  hopes,  fears,
affections,  courage,  humours,  and  faults  which  is  of  great  human  interest,  and  enables
theiEnglish  reader  to  form  at  first  hand  a  distinctly  different  estimate  of  Martni  Luther
from  that  which  is  often  offered  in  theological  controversy.  .  .  .  Present  a  remark.able
study  of  the  mind  which  by  native  sincerity  and  hardihood  did  so  much  to  revolutionise
Europe."

M'Connell  (Dr.  S.  D.)— CHRIST.      Crown  Svo.      5s.  net.

Macmillan  (Rev.  Hugh) —

THE  ISLES  AND  THE  GOSPEL,  AND  OTHER  BIBLE
STUDIES.  With  Portrait  and  Prefatory  Memoir.  Crown  Svo.
4s.  6d.


THEOLOGICAL  CATALOGUE  33

Macmillan  (Rev.  Hugh) — continued.

BIBLE  TEACHINGS  IN  NATURE.      15th  Ed.      Globe  8vo.     6s.
THE  TRUE  VINE  ;   OR,  THE  ANALOGIES  OF  OUR  LORD'S

ALLEGORY.      5lh  Edition.      Globe  8vo.     6s.
THE  MINISTRY  OF   NATURE.      8th  Edition.     Globe  Svo.     6s.
THE  SABBATH  OF  THE  FIELDS.    6th  Edition.      Globe  Svo.   6s.
GLEANINGS  IN   HOLY   FIELDS.      Crown  Svo.      3s.  6d.
THE  CORN  OF  HEAVEN.      Crown  Svo.      6s.

Mahaffy  (Rev.  Prof.)— THE  DECAY  OF  MODERN  PREACH-
ING :  AN  ESSAY.     Crown  Svo.     3s.  6d.

Marshall  (H.  Rutgers)— INSTINCT  AND  REASON  :  An
Essay  with  some  Special  Study  of  the  Nature  of  Religion.  Svo.
12s.  6d.  net.

Mason  (Caroline  A.) — LUX  CHRISTI  :  An  Outline  Study  of
India — A  Twilight  Land.     Cr.  Svo.    2s.net.     Sewed,    is.3d.net.

Mathews    (S.)— THE    SOCIAL    TEACHING    OF    JESUS:

AN  ESSAY  IN  CHRISTIAN  SOCIOLOGY.    Crown  Svo.     6s.

THE    CHURCH    AND    THE    CHANGING    ORDER.       Crown

Svo.     6s.  6d.  net.
THE  GOSPEL  AND  THE  MODERN  MAN.      Ciown  Svo.

Maurice  (Frederick  Denison) —

THE  KINGDOM  OF  CHRIST.     3rd  Ed.      2  Vols.     Cr.  Svo.     7s.

THE  CONSCIENCE.  Lectures  on  Casuistry.   3rd  Ed.  Cr.Svo.  4s.  6d.

DIALOGUES  ON  FAMILY  WORSHIP.     Crown  Svo.     4s.  6d.

THE  DOCTRINE  OF  SACRIFICE  DEDUCED  FROM  THE
SCRIPTURES.      2nd  Edition.      Crown  Svo.      6s.

THE  RELIGIONS  OF  THE  WORLD.  6th  Edition.  Cr.  Svo.  4s.  6d.

ON  THE  SABBATH  DAY;  THE  CHARACTER  OF  THE
WARRIOR;  AND  ON  THE  INTERPRETATION  OF
HISTORY.      Fcap.  Svo.      2s.  6d.

LEARNING  AND  WORKING,      Crown  Svo.     4s.  6d.

THE  LORD'S  PRAYER,  THE  CREED,  AND  THE  COM-
MANDMENTS.     Pott  Svo.      IS.

Collected  Works.      Crown  Svo.      3s.  6d.  each.

SERMONS  PREACHED  IN  LINCOLN'S  INN  CHAPEL.  In  Six
Volumes.      3s.  6d.  each.

SERMONS  PREACHED  IN  COUNTRY  CHURCHES.

CHRISTMAS  DAY  AND  OTHER  SERMONS.

THEOLOGICAL  ESSAYS.      (Also  Svo.      Sewed.      6d.)

PROPHETS  AND  KINGS.

PATRIARCHS  AND  LAWGIVERS.

THE  GOSPEL  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN.

GOSPEL  OF  ST.  JOHN.

EPISTLE  OF  ST.   JOHN.

FRIENDSHIP  OF  ROOKS.

PRAYER  BOOK  AND  LORD'S  PRAYER.


34  MACMILLAN  AND  CO.'S

Maurice  (Frederick  Denison) — Collected  Works — continued.
THE  DOCTRINE  OF  SACRIFICE.
THE  ACTS  OF  THE  APOSTLES.
Medley    (Rev.   W.)  — CHRIST    THE    TRUTH.       Being    the

Angus  Lectures  for  the  year  1900.      Crown  8vo.      6s.
Mniigan  (Rev.  Prof.  W.)— THE  RESURRECTION   OF  OUR
LORD.      Fourth  Edition.      Crown  8vo.      5s.
THE    ASCENSION    AND    HEAVENLY    PRIESTHOOD    OF
OUR  LORD.     Baird  Lectures,  1891.      Crown  8vo.      7s.  6d.
MISSIONS— UNITED  STUDY  OF.     ^^^  «/m/^r  Griffis,  Hodgkins,
Mason,     Montgomery,     Parsons,     Smith,     Lindsay,     and
Zavemer.
Montefiore  (Claude  G.)— LIBERAL   JUDAISM.      An   Essay.
Crown  8vo.      3s.  net.
TRUTH    IN    RELIGION,    AND    OTHER   SERMONS.     Crown
8vo.      3s.  6d.  net.

Montgomery  (Helen  Barrett).  — CHRISTUS  REDEMPTOR.
An  Outline  Study  of  the  Island  World  of  the  Pacific.  Globe  8vo.
2s.  net.      Paper,  is.  3d.  net.

Moorhouse  (Bishop) — ■

JACOB  :   Three  Sermons.      Extra  Fcap.  8vo.      3s.  6d.

THE    TEACHING    OF    CHRIST.       Its   Conditions,    Secret,   and

Results.      Crown  Svo.      3s.  net.
DANGERS  OF  THE  APOSTOLIC  AGE.      Crown  Svo.      3s.  net.
CHURCH    WORK:    ITS    MEANS    AND    METHODS.      Crown

8vo.      3s.  net.
Morrison  (Rev.   Dr.)  — NEW  IDEAS   IN   INDIA   DURING

THE  NINETEENTH  CENTURY.     A  Study  of  Social,  Political,

and  Religious  Developments.      Svo.      7s.  6d.  net.

Myers    (F.  W.   H.)— SCIENCE    AND    A    FUTURE    LIFE.

Gl.  Svo.      4s.  net.
Nash  (H.  S.)— GENESIS  OF  THE  SOCIAL  CONSCIENCE.

THE   RELATION    BETWEEN    THE    ESTABLISHMENT

OF   CHRISTIANITY    IN    EUROPE    AND    THE    SOCIAL

QUESTION.      Crown  Svo.      6s.

THE  ATONING   LIFE.      Crown  Svo.      5s.  net.

Nolloth  (Rev.  C.  F.)— THE  PERSON  OF  OUR  LORD  AND
RECENT  THOUGHT.      Crown  Svo.

Parsons  (E.  C.)— CHRISTUS  LIBERATOR  :  An  Outline  Study
of  Africa.  With  an  Introduction  by  Sir  IIakry  H.  Johnston,
K.C.B.  With  Coloured  Map.  Globe  Svo.  2s.  net.  Sewed.
IS.  3d.  net.

Pattison  (Mark).— SERMONS.      Crown  Svo.      6s.

Peabody  (Prof.  F.  G.)— JESUS  CHRIST  AND  THE  SOCIAL
QUESTION.     Crown  Svo.     6s.     Also  Svo.     Sewed.     6d.


THEOLOGICAL  CATALOGUE  35

Peabody  (Prof.  F.  G.) — continued.

JESUS     CHRIST    AND    THE    CHRISTIAN    CHARACTER.

An  Examination  of  the  Teaching  of  Jesus  in  its  relation  to  some

of  the  Moral  Problems  of  Personal  Life.     Crown  8vo.     6s.  6d.  net.

THE    RELIGION    OF    AN    EDUCATED    MAN.      Crown    8vo.

Gilt  top.      4s.  6d.  net.
This  little  volume,  by  the  well-known  Harvard   Professor,  treats  the
subject   under  the  following  main  heads  : — Religion   as  Education  ;   The
Message  of  Christ  to  the  Scholar  ;  and  Knowledge  and  Service.
PEPLOGRAPHIA    DVBLINENSIS.      Memorial  Discourses  Preached
in    the   Chapel    of  Trinity  College,    Dublin,    1895-1902.     With
Preface  by  the  Very  Rev.  J.   H.   Bernard,  D.D.,   Dean  of  St.
Patrick's.      Crown  8vo.      3s.  6d.  net.

Philipson  (D.)— THE  REFORM  MOVEMENT  IN  JUDAISM.

Extra  Crown  8vo.      8s.  6d.  net.
PHILOCHRISTUS.  Memoirs  of  a  Disciple  of  the  Lord.  3rd  Ed.  8vo.  12s.

Picton    (J.    Allanson).— THE     RELIGION     OF    THE    UNI-
VERSE.    8vo.     los.  net.

Pigou    (Prof.  A.    C.)— THE    PROBLEM    OF  THEISM  AND
OTHER  ESSAYS.      Crown  8vo.      3s.  net.

Pike  (G.  R.)— THE  DIVINE  DRAMA  THE  DIVINE  MANI-
FESTATION OF  GOD  IN  THE  UNIVERSE.    Crown  8vo.    6s.

Plumptre       (Dean).  —  MOVEMENTS        IN       RELIGIOUS
THOUGHT.      Fcap.  8vo.      3s.  6d.

PRO   CHRISTO   ET   ECCLESIA.      Third  Impression.      Crown  8vo.
Gilt  top.      4s.  6d.  net.
BOOKMAN. — "It  is  not  only  its  anonymity  which  suggests  comparison  with  Ecce

Ho7no.     The  subject  is  the  same  in  both  books — the  method  and  aim  of  Jesus — though

treated  from  quite  different  points  of  view  ;  and  the  level  of  thought  is  much  the  same  ;

the  easy  originality  that  cuts  a  new  section  through  the  life  of  Christ  and  shows  us  strata

before  unthought  of ;  the  classic  severity  of  the  style,  the  penetrating  knowledge  of  human

nature,  the  catholicity  of  treatment,  all  remind  us  of  Professor  Seeley's  captivating  work."

CHRISTUSFUTURUS.   By  the  Author  of  "Pro  Christo  etEcclesia."
Crown  8vo.      5s.  net.
TIMES. — "As  well  worth  the  attention  of  the   seeker  after  truth  as  Pro  Christo
et  Ecclcsia."

Porter    (Prof.    F.    C.)— THE    SPIRIT    OF   GOD    AND    THE

WORD  OF  GOD  IN  MODERN   THEOLOGY.      Crown  8vo.
Purchas   (Rev.    H.    T.)— JOHANNINE    PROBLEMS    AND

MODERN  NEEDS.      Crown  8vo.      3s.  net.
Eauschenbusch  (W.)— CHRISTIANITY  AND  THE  SOCIAL

CRISIS.      Extra  Crown  8vo.      6s.  6d.  net.
RELIGIOUS     DOUBTS     OF    DEMOCRACY.       Papers   by  Various

Authors.      Edited  by  George  PIaw.      8vo.      Sewed.      6d.

Kendall  (Rev.  F.)— THE  THEOLOGY  OF  THE   HEBREW

CHRISTIANS.      Crown  8vo.      5s.
Ridding  (George,  Bishop  of  Southwell).— THE   REVEL  AND

THE  BATTLE.     Crown  Svo.      6s.


36  MACMILLAN  AND  CO.'S

Robinson  (Prebendary  H.  G.)— MAN  IN  THE  IMAGE  OF
GOD,  and  other  Sermons.      Crown  8vo.      7s.  6d.

Robinson  (Dean  J.  A.)— UNITY  IN  CHRIST  AND  OTHER
SERMONS.     Crown  Svo.      6s.

Rutherford  (Rev.  Dr.  W.  G.)— THE  KEY  OF  KNOWLEDGE.

Sermons  preached  to  Westminster  Boys  in  the  Abbey.    Cr.  Svo    6s.
Ryle  (Rt.    Rev.    H.   E.,   Bishop  of  Winchester).  — ON     HOLY
SCRIPTURE  AND  CRITICISM.      Crown  Svo.     4s.  6d.
ON  THE  CHURCH  OF  ENGLAND.      Crown  Svo.      6s.

Schmidt  (Prof.  N.)— THE  PROPHET  OF  NAZARETH.
Svo.      IDS.  6d.  net.

Schultz  (Dr.  H.)— OUTLINES  OF  CHRISTIAN  APOLOGE-
TICS FOR  USE  IN  LECTURES.      Ex.  Cr.  Svo.     7s.  6d.  net.

Seeley  (Sir  J.  R.)— ECCE   HOMO  :  A  Survey  of  the   Life  and
Work  of  Jesus  Christ.     Globe  Svo.     4s.net.     Globe  Svo.     is.net.
Svo.     Sewed.     6d.
NATURAL  RELIGION.      Globe  Svo.      4s.  net.

Selborne     (Roundell,     Earl    of). —THE     CATHOLIC     AND

APOSTOLIC   CHURCH.      Globe  Svo.      3s.  6d.
Service  (Rev.  John).— SERMONS.  With  Portrait.  Crown  Svo.  6s.

Shepard  (Rev.  J.  W.)— LIGHT  AND  LIFE.  Sermons.  With
a  Prefatory  Memoir  by  the  Ven.  Henry  E.  J.  Bevan,  M.A.,
Archdeacon  of  Middlesex.      With  Portrait.      Crown  Svo.      6s.

Slicer   (T.   R.)  — THE   WAY  TO    HAPPINESS.     Globe  Svo.

5s.  net.
Smith  (A.  H.)— REX  CHRISTUS.    An  Outline  Study  of  China.
Globe  Svo.      2s.  net.      Sewed.      is.  3d.  net.

Stanley    (Dean). —  THE     NATIONAL     THANKSGIVING.

Sermons  preached  in  Westminster  Abbey.    2nd  Ed.    Cr.  Svo.   2s.  6d.

Sterrett  (Dr.  J.   M.)— THE  FREEDOM    OF  AUTHORITY.

Essays  in  Apologetics.      Ex.  Crown  Svo.      8s.  6d.  net.

Stewart  (Prof.  Balfour)  and  Tait  (Prof.  P.  G.)— THE  UNSEEN
UNIVERSE;  OR,  PHYSICAL  SPECULATIONS  ON  A
FUTURE  STATE.     15th  Edition.     Crown  Svo.     6s.

Sturge  (Clement   Y.)— POINTS  OF    CHURCH   LAW    AND

OTHER  WRITINGS  ILLUSTRATIVE  OF  THE  LAW  OF

THE  CHURCH.     Svo.      3s.  6d.  net.
Swete  (Rev.   Prof  H.  B.)— THE  APPEARANCES  OF   OUR

LORD    AFTER  THE    PASSION.     A   Study  in    the    Earliest

Christian  Tradition.      Crown  Svo.      2s.  6d  net.

Talbot  (Bishop).— A  CHARGE  DELIVERED  TO  THE
CLERGY  OF  THE  DIOCESE  OF  ROCHESTER,  October
24,  25,  and  26,  1S99.      Svo.      Sewed.      2s.  net.


THEOLOGICAL  CATALOGUE  37

Talbot  (Bishop) — continued.

THE  CHURCH'S  FAILURES  AND  THE  WORK  OF  CHRIST.

A  Charge  addressed   to  the  Clergy  of  his  Diocese  at  his  Second

Visitation  in  the  Ninth  Year  of  his  Episcopate  and  in  the  Year  of

Our  Lord  1903.      8vo.      Sewed,      is.  net.

DAILY  NEWS.— "A  little  book  that  will  be  read  with  interest  by  all  who  are
concerned  in  the  same  problem  here  considered — the  relation  of  Christianity  as  an  active
inspiration  of  common  life  to  such  masses  of  toiling  populations  as  are  represented  by
the  millions  of  South  London."

THE    CHURCH'S    STRESS.      Primary   Charge  to  the   Clergy  of

the  Diocese  of  Southwark.      8vo.      Sewed,      is.net.

UNIVERSITY  SERMONS.     Crown  8vo.

Temple  (Archbishop) —

SERMONS     PREACHED    IN    THE    CHAPEL     OF     RUGBY

SCHOOL.      Extra  Fcap.  8vo.      4s.  6d.
SECOND  SERIES.      3rd  Edition,      6s.
THIRD  SERIES.     4th  Edition.     6s.
THE  RELATIONS   BETWEEN   RELIGION   AND   SCIENCE.

Bampton  Lectures,  1884.     New  Impression,  1903.     Cr.  8vo.      6s.
CHARGE  DELIVERED  AT  HIS  FIRST  VISITATION.     8vo.

Sewed,      is.  net.
(i)  The  Doctrine  of  the  Eucharist  ;  (2)  The  Practice  of  Confession  ;
(3)  Uniformity  in  Ceremonial ;  (4)  The  Power  of  the  Bishops.

Templeton  (J.  S.).— A  LAYMAN'S  MIND  ON  CREED  AND

CHURCH.      Crown  8vo.      3s.  6d.  net.
TO  THOSE  WHO  SUFFER.      A  Heart  of  Compassion.     Crown  8vo.

Sewed,      is.  net.
PALL  MALL  GAZETTE. — "  We  have  rarely  met  so  slim  a  volume  more  full  of
suggestive  and  helpful  thoughts.  ...  A  true,  a  beautiful  book  ;  and  we  trust  the  modest
way  it  is  ushered  into  the  world  will  not  prevent  it  obtaining  the  attention  and  recognition
it  deserves."

Trench(Archbishop).—HULSEAN  LECTURES.     8vo.     7s.  6d.

Tymms   (Rev.    Dr.    T.    V.)  — THE    CHRISTIAN     IDEA    OF

ATONEMENT.     Angus  Lectures.      Crown  8vo.      7s.  6d,
Vaughan  (Dean) —

MEMORIALS  OF  HARROW  SUNDAYS.     Sth  Edition.     Crown

8vo.      I  OS.  6d.
HEROES  OF  FAITH.      2nd  Edition.      Crown  8vo.      6s.
LIFE'S    WORK    AND    GOD'S    DISCIPLINE.       3rd     Edition.

Extra  Fcap.  8vo.      2s.  6d.
THE   WHOLESOME    WORDS     OF    JESUS    CHRIST.       2nd

Edition.      Fcap.  8vo.      3s.  6d.
FOES  OF  FAITPI.      2nd  Edition.      Fcap.  Svo.      3s.  6d.
COUNSELS  FOR  YOUNG  STUDENTS.      Fcap.  Svo.      2s.  6d.
THE  TWO  GREAT  TEMPTATIONS.    2nd  Ed.    Fcap.  Svo.    3s.  6d.
ADDRESSES  FOR  YOUNG  CLERGYMEN.      Extra  Fcap.  Svo.

4s.  6d.
"  MY  SON,  GIVE  ME  THINE  HEART."     Extra  Fcap.  Svo.      5s.
TEMPLE  SERMONS.     Crown  Svo.      los.  6d.


38  MACMILLAN  AND  CO.'S

Vaughan  (Dean) — co?itmued.

AUTHORISED  OR  REVISED  ?     Sermons  on  some  of  the  Texts  in

which  the  Revised  Version  differs  from  the  Authorised.     Crown

8vo.     7s.  6d.
LESSONS  OF  THE  CROSS  AND  PASSION.     WORDS  FROM

THE    CROSS.      THE   REIGN    OF    SIN.      THE    LORD'S

PRAYER.  Four  Courses  of  Lent  Lectures.  Crown  8vo.  los.  6d.
UNIVERSITY  SERMONS.  NEW  AND  OLD.  Cr.  8vo.  los.  6d.
NOTES   FOR   LECTURES  ON  CONFIRMATION.     Fcap.  8vo.

is.  6d,
DONCASTER   SERMONS.      Lessons   of  Life  and  Godliness,   and

Words  from  the  Gospels.      Cr.  8vo.      los.  6d.
RESTFUL  THOUGHTS  IN  RESTLESS  TIMES.     Cr.  8vo.     5s.
LAST  WORDS  IN  THE  TEMPLE  CHURCH.     Globe  8vo.     55.

SATURDAY  REVIElV.—"ThGss  discourses,  in  thought,  in  style,  have  so  much
that  is  permanent  and  fine  about  them  that  they  will  stand  the  ordeal  of  being  read  by
any  serious  man,  even  though  he  never  heard  Dr.  Vaughan  speak."

UNIVERSITY  AND  OTHER  SERMONS.      Crown  8vo.      6s.

TIMES. — "  As  specimens  of  pure  and  rhythmical  English  prose,  rising  here  and  there
to  flights  of  sober  and  chastened  eloquence,  yet  withal  breathing  throughout  an  earnest
and  devotional  spirit,  these  sermons  would  be  hard  to  match."

SCOTSMAN. — "All  are  marked  by  the  earnestness,  scholarship,  and  strength  of
thought  which  invariably  characterised  the  pulpit  utterances  of  the  preacher."

Vaughan  (Rev.  D.  J.)— THE  PRESENT  TRIAL  OF  FAITH.
Crown  8vo.     5s.
QUESTIONS    OF    THE    DAY,  SOCIAL,    NATIONAL,    AND
RELIGIOUS.      Crown  8vo.      5s.

NATIONAL  OBSERVER.— "In  discussing  Questions  0/  the  Day  Mr.  D.  J.
Vaughan  speaks  with  candour,  ability,  and  common  sense."

SCOTSMAN. — "They  form  an  altogether  admirable  collection  or  vigorous  and
thoughtful  pronouncements  on  a  variety  of  social,  national,  and  religious  topics."

GLASGOW  HERALD.— "  K  volume  such  as  this  is  the  best  reply  to  those  friends
of  the  people  who  are  for  ever  complaining  that  the  clergy  waste  their  time  preaching
antiquated  dogma  and  persona!  salvation,  and  neglect  the  weightier  matters  of  the  law."

MANCHESTER  GUARDIAN.—''  He  speaks  boldly  as  well  as  thoughtfully,  and
what  he  has  to  say  is  alwavs  worthy  of  attention."

EXPOSITOR  Y  TIMES.—"  Most  of  them  are  social,  and  these  are  the  most  interest-
ing. And  one  feature  of  peculiar  interest  is  that  in  those  sermons  which  were  preached
twenty  years  ago  Canon  Vaughan  saw  the  questions  of  to-day,  and  suggested  the  remedies
we  are  beginning  to  apply."

Vaughan  (Canon  E.  T.)— SOME  REASONS  OF  OUR  CHRIS-
TIAN  HOPE.     Hulsean  Lectures  for  1875.     Crown  8vo.    6s.  6d,

Venn  (Dr.  John).— ON  SOME  CHARACTERISTICS  OF
BELIEF,  SCIENTIFIC  AND  RELIGIOUS.     8vo.     6s.  6d.

Welldon     (Bishop).  — THE     SPIRITUAL     LIFE,    and    other

Sermons.     Crown  8vo.     6s.

SCOTTISH  LEADER. — "  In  a  strain  of  quiet,  persuasive  eloquence,  Bishop  Welldon
treats  impressively  of  various  aspects  of  the  higher  life.  His  discourses  cannot  fail  both
to  enrich  the  heart  and  stimulate  the  mind  of  the  earnest  reader."

GLASGOW  HERALD. — "They  are  cultured,  reverent,  and  thoughtful  productions.

THE  REVELATION  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT.    Crown  8vo.    6s.
"I   LIVE":    BEING    HINTS    ON   THE    CHRISTIAN    LIFE.

Crown  8vo.      is.  6d.  net.
THE  CONSECRATION  OF  THE  STATE.     An  Essay.     Crown

8vo.      2s.  net.


THEOLOGICAL  CATALOGUE


39


Westcott  (Bishop) —

ON   THE    RELIGIOUS    OFFICE   OF    THE    UNIVERSITIES.

Sermons.     Crown  8vo.     4s.  6d.
GIFTS  FOR  MINISTRY.     Addresses  to  Candidates  for  Ordination.

Crown  Svo.     is.  6d.
FROM    STRENGTH     TO     STRENGTH.       Three    Sermons    (In

Memoriam  J.  B.  D.)     Crown  Svo.     2s.
THE  REVELATION  OF  THE  RISEN  LORD.     Cr.  Svo.     6s.
THE  HISTORIC  FAITH.     3rd  Edition.     Crown  Svo.     6s.      Also

Svo.     Sewed.     6d.
THE  GOSPEL  OF  THE  RESURRECTION.    6lh  Ed.    Cr.  Svo.    6s.
THE  REVELATION  OF  THE  FATHER.     Crown  Svo.     6s.
CHRISTUS  CONSUMMATOR.     2nd  Edition.     Crown  Svo.     6s.
SOME  THOUGHTS  FROM  THE  ORDINAL.     Cr.  Svo.      is.  6d.
SOCIAL  ASPECTS  OF  CHRISTIANITY.     Crown  Svo.     6s.
ESSAYS  IN  THE  HISTORY  OF  RELIGIOUS  THOUGHT  IN

THE  WEST.     Globe  Svo.     4s.  net.
THE  GOSPEL  OF  LIFE.      Crown  Svo.     6s.      Also  Svo.     Sewed.

6d.

THE  INCARNATION  AND  COMMON  LIFE.      Crown  Svo.     6s.

TIMES. — "A  collection  of  sermons  which  possess,  among  other  merits,  the  rare  one
of  actuality,  reflecting,  as  they  frequently  do,  the  Bishop's  well-known  and  eager  interest
in  social  problems  of  the  day."

CHRISTIAN  ASPECTS  OF  LIFE.      Crown  Svo.      7s.  6d.

CHURCH  TIMES. — "We  heartily  commend  this  volume  to  the  notice  of  our
readers.  .  .  .  The  Church  of  England  is  not  likely  to  lose  touch  with  the  people  of  this
country  so  long  as  she  is  guided  by  Bishops  who  show  such  a  truly  large-hearted
sympathy  with  everything  human  as  is  here  manifested  by  the  present  occupier  of  the
see  of  Durham."

LITER  A  TURE. — "A  sermon  of  the  national  day  of  rest,  and  some  attractive  per-
sonal reminiscences  of  school  days  under  James  Prince  Lee,  are  among  the  choicest  parts
of  the  volume,  if  we  are  to  single  out  any  portions  from  a  work  of  dignified  and  valuable
utterance."

DAILY  NEWS. — "Through  every  page  .  .  .  runs  the  same  enlightened  sympathy
with  the  living  world.  One  forgets  the  Bishop  in  the  Man,  the  Ecclesiastic  in  the  Citizen,
the  Churchman  in  the  Christian."

THE  OBLIGATIONS  OF  EMPIRE.    Cr,  Svo.     Sewed.    3d.  net.

LESSONS  FROM  WORK.     Charges  .^^nd  Addresses.     Second

Impression.      Crown  Svo.     6s.
ADDRESS  DELIVERED  TO  MINERS,  July  1901.      Crown  Svo.

Sewed.      6d.
WORDS  OF  FAITH  AND  HOPE.     Crown  Svo.     4s.  6d.
CHRISTIAN    SOCIAL    UNION    ADDRESSES.       Crown    Svo.

IS.  net.
COMMON  PRAYERS  FOR  FAMILY  USE.    Crown  Svo.     is.  net.
PETERBOROUGH  SERMONS.     Crown  Svo.     6s.

SCOTSMAN. — "  They  are  characteristic  prolocutions  of  an  eminent  Anglican  divine
and  will  be  read  with  interest  both  within  and  without  the  Church  of  England."

VILLAGE  SERMONS.     Crown  Svo.      6s.

White  (A.  D.)— A  HISTORY  OF  THE  WARFARE  OF
SCIENCE  WITH  THEOLOGY  IN  CHRISTENDOM.  In
Two  Vols.     Svo.      2 IS.  net.


40     MACMILLAN  AND  CO.'S  THEOLOGICAL  CATALf      JE
White  (A.  D.) — contifiued.

TIMES. — "  Is  certainly  one  of  the  most  comprehensive,  and,  in  our  judgme  .  one  of
the  most  valuable  historical  works  that  have  appeared  for  many  years.  .  .  .  He  has
chosen  a  large  subject,  but  it  is  at  least  one  which  has  clear  and  definite  limits,  J  nd  he
has  treated  it  very  fully  and  comprehensively  in  two  moderate  volumes.  .  .  .  H!  book
appears  to  us  to  be  based  on  much  original  research,  on  an  enormous  amount  of  ireful,
accurate,  and  varied  reading,  and  his  habit  of  appending  to  each  section  a  list  ti  the
chief  books,  both  ancient  and  modern,  relating  to  it  will  be  very  useful  to  serious  stu  'ents.
He  has  decided  opinions,  but  he  always  writes  temperately,  and  with  transparent  ruth-
fulness  of  intention."

Whiton  (Dr.  J.  M.)— MIRACLES  AND  SUPERNATURAL
RELIGION.      Fcap.  8vo.      3s.  net.

Wllitwortll(Rev.Wm.  Allen).— CHRISTIAN  THOUGHT  Q]^

PRESENT-DAY  QUESTIONS.     Sermons  on  Special  Occasions"

With  a  Preface  by  the  Bishop  of  London.     Cr.  8vo.     4s.  6d.  net.

THE    SANCTUARY    OF    GOD    AND    OTHER    SERMONS.

Crown  8vo.     4s.  6d.  net.

Wickham    (Very    Rev.    Dean).— WELLINGTON    COLLEGE

SERMONS.     Crown  8vo.     6s.
Wilkins  (Prof.  A.  S.)— THE  LIGHT  OF  THE  WORLD  :     an

Essay.      2nd  Edition.      Crown  8vo.      3s.  6d.

Wilson  (Archdeacon).— SERMONS    PREACHED    IN    CLIF-
TON COLLEGE  CHAPEL.   Second  Series.   1888-90.  Cr.Svo.  6s.
ESSAYS  AND  ADDRESSES.     Crown  8vo.     2s.  6d.  net.
GUARDIAN. — "We    heartily   welcome    a    new   edition   of  Archdeacon   Wilson's
Essays  and  A  ddresses. "

SOME  CONTRIBUTIONS  TO  THE  RELIGIOUS  THOUGHT

OF  OUR  TIME.     Crown  8vo.     6s.
HOW    CHRIST    SAVES    US,    OR    THE    GOSPEL   OF   THE
ATONEMENT.      Being    the    Hulsean    Lectures    for    189S-99.
Crown  8vo.     3s.  6d.     Also  8vo.     Sewed.     6d.
OXFORD    MAGAZINE.— -'The-j   contain   a   good   deal  of   strong   thought  and
delicate  expression."

3"/'£Cr^  7  f  7?.—"  A  notable  pronouncement. "

TWO    SERMONS    ON    THE    MUTUAL    INFLUENCES    OF

THEOLOGY    AND    THE    NATURAL    SCIENCES.     8vo.

Sewed.      6d.  net.
SIX    LECTURES    ON    PASTORAL    THEOLOGY.      With   an

Appendix  on  the  Influence  of  Scientific  Training  on  the  Reception

of  Religious  Truth.     Crown  8vo.      3s.  6d.  net.
PROBLEMS  OF  RELIGION  AND  SCIENCE.    8vo.    Sewed.    6d.

Wood(C.J.)— SURVIVALS  IN  CHRISTIANITY.   Cr.Svo.    6s.

Wrixon  (Sir  H.  J.)— THE  RELIGION  OF  THE  COMMON
MAN.      Crown  8vo.

Zwemer  (S.  M.)— Brown  (Dr.  A.  J.)— THE  NEARER  AND
FARTHER  EAST  :  OUTLINE  STUDIES  OF  MOSLEM
LANDS  AND  OF  SIAM,  BURMA,  AND  KOREA.  By
Samuel  M.  Zwemer,  F.R.G.S.,  and  Arthur  Judson  Brown,
D.D.      Globe  8vo.      2s.  net.      Sewed,      is.  3d.  net.

Printed  by  R.  &  R.  Clakk,  Limited,  Edinburgh.
C1..5.9.08.


.H   (D

I—I    00
CDrH


CO
O
CV2


CD
O


s

CO

o


UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO
LIBRARY


Do    not


Acme    Library    Card    Pocket

Under  Pat.  "  Ref.  Index  File."
Made  by  LIBRARY  BUREAU
